EXPLORATIONS AND ADVENTURES IN EQUATORIAL AFRICA
By Paul B. Du Chaillu — London: John Murray, 1861
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text reproduces the 1861 first edition as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier explorationsadv01chaigoog). The 1861 publication is in the public domain. The work is complete, including the gorilla chapters ('The First Gorilla').

========================================================================

Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


EXPLORATIONS    &    ADVENTURES 


EQUATORIAL  AFRICA; 


WITH  ACCODSTS  OF  THE  MAKHEIU  AND  CDSTOMS  OF  THE  PEOPLE,  AVD  OF  THE  CHiCE 

OF  THE  GORILLA.  CROCODILE,  LEOPARD,  ELEPHANT,  HIPPOPOTAMUS. 

ASD  OTHEK  ANIMAIA 


Bt  PAUL  B.  DU  CHAILLU. 


ilBil^  ^Hp  Hnb  lIlDstcatiDiTS. 


LONDON: 
JOHN  MUKBAY,  ALBEMARLE  STREET. 

I8(il. 

/•■   ■     : 


/;•:  ,,  lO.Ed,  l>  SS6 


e    c.  I 


i         V.'      '     ^ 


PREFACE. 


The  singalar  region  c^  Equatorial  Africa^  the  interior  of  which 
it  was  my  fortune  to  be  the  first  to  explore,  and  of  whose  people 
and  strange  animal  and  vegetable  productions  I  give  some  account 
in  the  following  pages,  is  remarkable  chiefly  for  its  fituna,  which 
is,  in  many  respects,  not  only  extraordinary,  but  peculiar.  In 
this  comparatively  narrow  belt,  extending  on  either  side  of  the 
equator,  is  found  that-  monstrous  and  ferocious  ape,  the  gorilla. 
Here,  too,  and  here  only,  is  the  home  of  the  very  remarkable 
nest-buHding  ape,  the  Troglodytes  calvuSy  the  mhiego  mhouvi  of 
the  natives ;  of  the  hitherto  imknown  kooloo-kamba,  another  ape, 
no  less  remarkable  than  the  T.  ecUviis,  and  of  the  chimpanzee. 
North,  south,  and  east  of  this  region,  the  lion  lords  it  in  the 
forests  and  the  desert :  only  in  this  tract  he  is  not  found. 

ThiK  it  will  be  seen  that  this  region  formed  a  peculiarly  rich 
field  for  an  ardent  naturalist.  Glame  is  not  found  in  such 
plenty  as  on  ihe  vast  jdains  of  Southern  AMca ;  there  is  less 
butchering ;  but,  if  the  larder  is  not  so  well  supplied,  the  half*- 
starved  explorer  experiences  many  happy  days,  when  the  dis- 
covery of  a  hitherto  unknown  animal  rewards  him  for  aU  his 
toils,  dangers,  and  sufferings. 

Not  only  does  the  fauna  of  this  r^on  contain  a  very  unusual 
number  of  species  peculiar  to  itself,  but  even  some  of  those 
animals  which  it  has  in  common  with  the  regions  to  the  north 
and  south  seemed  to  me  varieties.  Thus,  I  feel  almost  certain, 
that  the  elephant  of  this  region  is  a  variety,  distinct  in  several 
particulars  from  his  South  African  broUier. 

Doubtless  the  peculiar  formation  of  the  country  causes  this 
exceptional  condition.  Instead  of  the  vast,  thinly-wooded  and  arid 


ly  PREFACE, 

or  sparsely-watered  plains  of  Northern,  Eastern,  and  Southern 
Africa,  the  explorer  finds  here  a  region  very  mountainous,  and 
BO  densely  wooded,  that  the  whole  country  may  be  described  as 
an  impenetrable  jungle,  through  which  man  pushes  on  only  by 
hewing  his  way  with  the  axe.  These  forests,  which  have  been 
resting  probably  for  ages  in  their  gloomy  solitude,  seem  un- 
favourable even  to  the  rapid  increase  of  the  beasts  who  are  their 
chief  denizens.  There  are  no  real  herds  of  game ;  nor  have  the 
people  of  this  region  yet  attained  that  primitive  step  in  the 
upward  march  of  civilization,  the  possession  of  beasts  of  burden. 
Neither  horses  nor  ca,ttle  are  known  here:  man,  or  woman 
rather,  is  the  only  beast  of  burden. 

The  river  system  of  this  region  seems  to  me  well  adapted 
for  the  prosecution  of  commercial  enterprise.  Until  I  explored 
them,  the  rivers  known  to  Europeans  and  Americans  as  the 
Nazareth,  Mexias,  and  Femand  Vaz,  were  supposed  to  be 
three  distinct  streams ;  but  the  reader  will  perceive,  by  refer- 
ence to  the  accompanjring  map,  that  they  are  connected  with 
each  other.  The  Mexias  and  Nazareth  are  only  outlets  of  the 
Ogobai  Elver,  which  also  throws  a  portion  of  its  waters  into  the 
Femand  Vaz,  chiefly  through  the  Npoulounay.  Thus  these 
three  rivers  are,  in  fact,  mouths  of  the  Ogobai ;  and  they  form, 
with  the  intervening  lowlands  (which  are  evidently  alluvial 
deposits),  an  extensive  and  very  complicated  network  of  creeks, 
swamps,  and  dense  forests,  which  I  propose  to  call  the  delta 
of  the  Ogobai.  This  delta  is  bounded  on  the  north  by  the 
Nazareth,  which  enters  the  sea  in  lat.  0°  41'  8.  and  long. 
9^  3'  E.,  and  on  the  south  by  the  Femand  Vaz,  which  falls  into 
the  sea  in  lat  V  17  S.,  and  long.  5°  58'  E.  The  mouth  of  the 
Mexias  lies  between,  in  lat  0°  56'  S.,  and  long.  8^  47'  E. 

I  have  not  given  in  the  narrative  any  account  of  my  explora^ 
tion  of  this  labyrinth,  because  it  was  extremely  barren  of 
incidents  interesting  to  the  reader.  It  was  a  most  tedious 
undertaking,  and  resulted  only  in  the  knowledge  that  this  large 
tract  is  entirely  uninhabited  by  human  beings ;  that  in  the  rainy 


PEEFACE.  V 

season,  when  the  rivers  and  their  divergent  creeks  are  swollen, 
the  whole  country  is  overflowed ;  and  that  the  land  is  covered 
with  immense  forests  of  palm,  there  being  found  none  of  the 
customary  mangrove-swamps.  Land  and  water  are  tenanted 
only  by  wild  beasts,  venomous  reptiles,  and  intolerable  swarms 
of  musquitoes. 

The  entrance  of  the  Femand  Vaz,  which  is  one  of  the  keys  to 
this  region,  is  rendered  intricate  by  shifting  sand-bars  and  a  very 
crooked  channel,  which^  however,  carries  from  fifteen  to  twenty 
feet  of  water  at  all  times.  It,  as  well  as  the  Mexias,  throws  a 
tremendous  quantity  of  fresh  water  into  the  ocean  during  the 
rainy  season.  So  vast  is  this  supply,  and  so  rapid  the  current, 
that,  though  the  mouths  of  these  streams  are  but  half-a-mile 
wide,  the  body  of  fresh  water  launched  from  each,  during  the 
rains,  forces  its  separate  way  through  the  ocean  for  at  least  four 
or  five  miles  before  it  becomes  absorbed ;  and  I  have  known 
times  when  the  tide  had  no  effect  at  all  upon  the  vast  column 
of  water  pushing  seaward. 

Above  Monw6,  for  about  thirty  miles,  the  Femand  Vaz,  which 
here  takes  the  name  of  Jtemho,  flows  through  a  country  so  flat 
that  in  the  rainy  season  its  banks  are  overflowed  for  many  miles, 
and  in  parts  scarce  a  foot  of  dry  land  is  in  sight.  Further  up, 
the  country  becomes  hilly,  and  the  upper  parts  of  the  Kembo 
and  Ovenga  rivers  flow  between  steep  banks,  and  through  a 
decidedly  mountainous  region.  But  even  here  the  magnificent 
mountains  are  divided  by  plains  or  broad  valleys,  which  are 
overflowed  during  the  season  of  rains.  On  the  return  of  the 
dry  season,  these  overflows  leave  great  quantities  of  decayed  or 
decaying  matter,  which,  though  enriching  the  ground,  also 
cause  fevers.  But  the  fevers  of  the  interior  are  not  so  frequent 
nor  so  dangerous  as  those  caused  by  the  mixed  salt  and  fresh 
water  vegetation  of  the  seashore ;  and  when  this  region  becomes 
settled,  the  mountains  will  afford  a  convenient  sanitarium  for 
white  men* 

Leaving  the  Femand  Vaz,  which,  though  partly  fed  by  the 

a2 


VI  PREFACE, 

Ogobai,  is  an  independent  stream^  having  its  source  in  the 
Aahankolo  Mountains^  we  come  to  the  Ogobai,  probably  one  of 
the  largest  rivers  of  Western  Equatorial  Africa.  The  Ogobai 
is  formed  by  the  junction  of  two  considerable  streams  of  the 
interior — ^the  Bembo  Ngouyai  and  the  Bembo  Okanda,  The 
first  I  partly  explored ;  of  the  Eembo  Okanda  I  know  only  by 
report  of  the  natives,  who  state  that  it  is  much  larger  than  the 
Ngouyai,  and  that  its  navigation  is  in  some  places  partly  ob- 
structed by  vast  rocky  boulders,  which,  scattered  about  the  hill- 
sides and  on  the  higher  plains  of  the  interior,  form  a  very 
remarkable  and  peculiar  feature  of  the  landscape.  The  banks 
of  the  Ogobai,  so  far  as  I  have  explored  them,  are  in  many  parts 
subject  to  annual  overflow. 

The  Bembo  Ngouyai  is  a  large  stream,  flowing  through  a 
mountainous  and  splendidly  wooded  country,  and  is  the  most  mag- 
nificent river  I  saw  in  Africa.  It  has  numerous  smaller  feeders. 
Its  navigation  is  unfortunately  interrupted  by  the  great  Eugenie 
or  Samba  Nagoshi  Fall ;  but  it  is  quite  possible  for  steamers  to 
reach  this  fall  from  the  sea ;  and  the  upper  portion,  above  the 
fall,  is  navigable  for  the  largest  class  of  river-steamers  during 
the  greater  part  of  the  year,  and  flows  through  a  region  the 
tropical  magnificence  of  which  is  quite  unrivalled,  and  which 
abounds  in  many  precious  woods,  while  it  is  also  weU  calculated 
for  a  rich  agricultural  country.  I  could  not  help  longing  heartily 
for  the  day  to  come,  when  this  glorious  stream  will  be  alive  with 
the  splash  of  paddlewheels,  and  its  banks  lined  with  trading 
and  missionary  posts.  Ebony,  bar-wood,  and  India-rubber, 
palm-oil,  beeswax,  and  ivory,  are  the  natural  products  of  this 
region,  so  far  as  my  limited  opportunities  allowed  me  to  ascer- 
tain. But  any  tropical  crop  will  grow  in  this  virgin  soil ;  and 
it  needs  only  the  cunning  hand  and  brain  of  the  white  man  to 
render  this  whole  tract  a  great  producing  country. 

My  little  knowledge  of  geology,  and  the  impossibility  of 
carrying  heavy  specimens,  prevented  me  from  making  useful 
observations  on  the  geological  structure  of  this  region.    I  can 


PREFACE.  vii 

only  say  that  micaceous  schist,  talcose  shale,  and  quartz^  are 
found  abundantly  in  the  mountains,  together  with  conglomerates 
and  various  sandstones,  while  a  red  sandstcme  seems  most  to 
abound  in  the  Ashira  country.  Iron  is  plentiful ;  the  ore,  whidi 
is  rich,  is  found  cropping  out  of  the  ground  in  many  parts. 
Copper  I  did  not  meet  with,  though  it  is  brought  by  the  Loando 
negroes  from  the  southern  interior  to  the  seashore,  where  it  is 
purchased  by  Europeans. 

The  mountain-range  which  I  explored  on  my  last  journey,  and 
which  is  laid  down  on  the  map  as  far  as  my  extreme  point,  or 
terminus,  seems  to  me,  beyond  doubt,  to  be  part  of  a  great  chain 
extending  nearly  across  the  continent  without  ever  leaying  the 
line  of  the  equator  more  than  two  degrees.  Not  only  were  the 
appearances  such,  as  far  as  I  was  able  to  penetrate,  but  all 
accounts  of  the  natives  and  of  their  slaves  tend  to  make  this 
certain.  Some  of  the  slaves  of  the  Ap^igi  ^^e  brought  from  a 
distance  to  the  eastward  which  they  counts  as  twenty  days' 
journey ;  and  they  invariably  protested  that  the  mountains  in 
sight  from  their  present  home  continue  in  an  uninterrupted 
chain  far  beyond  their  own  coxmtry — ^in  fEU^t,  as  far  as  they 
knew. 

Judging,  therefore,  from  my  own  examination,  and  from  the 
most  carefdl  inquiries  among  people  of  the  far  interior,  I  think 
there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  an  important  mountain-range 
divides  the  continent  of  Africa  nearly  along  the  line  of  the  egpiator^ 
starting  on  the  west  from  the  range  which  runs  along  the  coast 
north  and  south,  and  ending  in  the  east,  probably,  in  the  country 
south  of  the  mountains  of  Abyssinia,  or  perhaps  terminating 
abruptly  to  the  north  of  the  Lake  Tanganyika  of  Captains  Burton 
and  Speke, 

In  the  northern  slope  of  this  great  range  originate,  probably, 
many  of  the  feeders  of  the  Niger,  Lake  Tchad,  and  the  Nile ; 
while  of  the  strecuns  rising  in  the  southern  slope,  it  is  probable 
that  some  join  their  waters  to  the  Eembo  Okanda,  the  Eembo 
Ngouyai,  and  the  Congo,  and  others  flow  south  into  the  Zambesi, 


viu  PBEFACE. 

and  into  the  great  lake  basin,  or  chain  of  lakes  of  Eastern 
and  Central  Africa;  tending  to  corroborate  the  theory  saga- 
cionsly  laid  down  by  that  eminent  geographer  Sir  Koderick 
Murchison,  as  far  back  as  1852,  and  afterwards  confirmed  by 
the  great  Livingstone.* 

To  this  mountain-range,  so  far  as  I  haye  followed  it  and  ascer- 
tained its  existence,  I  propose  that  the  native  name  Nkoomoo- 
nabouali,  be  given,  from  the  splendid  peak  which  I  discovered, 
and  which  forms  the  western  point  of  the  range.  I  think  it 
probable  that  the  impenetrable  forests  of  this  mountain-range 
and  its  savage  inhabitants  together  put  a  stop  to  the  victorious 
southward  course  of  the  Mohammedan  conquest.  South  of  the 
equator,  at  any  rate,  they  have  never  penetrated. 

Of  the  eight  years  during  which  I  have  visited  this  region  of 
Africa,  the  present  volume  contains  the  record  of  only  the  last 
four — 1856,  '57,  '58,  and  '59 — ^which  alone  were  devoted  to  a 
systematic  exploration  of  the  interior.  The  first  four  years  were 
chiefly  devoted  to  commercial  pursuits  in  which  I  was  engaged 
conjointly  with  my  father.  Thus  when  I  started  as  a  traveller,  I 
had  the  very  great  advantages  of  tolerably  thorough  acclima' 
tion,  and  a  knowledge  of  the  languages  and  habits  of  the  seashore 
tribes,  which  proved  of  infinite  service  to  me  among  the  tribes 
of  the  interior,  with  whom  I  was  in  every  case  able  to  hold  con- 
verse, if  not  by  word  of  mouth,  at  least  by  a  native  interpreter 
with  whose  language  I  was  familiar. 

A  brief  summary  of  the  results  of  my  four  years'  travel  will 
perhaps  interest  the  reader.  I  travelled — ^always  on  foot,  and 
unaccompanied  by  other  white  men — ^about  8000  miles.  I  shot, 
stuffed,  and  brought  home  over  2000  birds,  of  which  more  than 
60  are  new  species,  and  I  killed  upwards  of  1000  quadrupeds,  of 
which  200  were  stuffed  and  brought  home,  with  more  than  80 
skeletons.  Not  less  than  20  of  these  quadrupeds  are  species 
hitherto  unknown  to  science.    I  suffered  fifty  attacks  of  the 

♦  See  *  Journal  of  the  Eoyal  Geographical  Society,*  vol.  xxii.,  1852,  Pre- 
6ident*8  Address,  and  Livingstone's  *  Missionary  Travels,*  p.  500. 


PREFACE.  IX 

Afiican  feyer,  taking,  to  cure  myself,  more  than  fourteen  tmiMes 
of  quinine.  Of  famine,  long-continued  expoeures  to  the  heayy 
tropical  rains,  and  attacks  of  ferocious  ants  and  venomous  flies, 
it  is  not  worth  while  to  speak. 

My  two  most  severe  and  trying  tasks  were  the  transportation 
of  my  numerous  specimens  to  the  seashore,  and  the  keeping  of 
a  daily  journal,  both  of  which  involved  more  painful  care  than 
I  like  even  to  think  o£ 

The  volume  now  respectfully  presented  to  the  public  has  been 
written  out  &om  my  fiedthfully-kept  journals.  I  have  striven 
<Mily  to  give  a  very  plain  account  of  a  region  which  is  yet  virgin 
ground  to  the  missionary  and  the  trader — ^those  twin  pioneers  of 
civilization — ^and  which  affords  a  fertile  field  for  the  operations 
of  both. 

Before  closing,  it  is  my  duty  as  weU  as  pleasure  to  acknow- 
ledge gratefully  very  many  kindnesses  received  ixom  the  ofScers 
and  members  of  the  Boston  Society  of  Natural  History,  whose 
cheerfully-given  aid  greatly  lightened  for  me  the  tedious  task 
of  cataloguing  my  large  collection  of  specimens  of  Natural 
History.  Also  I  owe  especial  thanks  to  my  friend^  Dr.  Jeffiies 
Wyman,  the  eminent  Professor  of  Comparative  Anatomy  in 
Harvard  University,  for  much  valuable  assistance;  to  Dr.  S. 
Kneeland^  the  able  corresponding  secretary  of  the  Boston  Society 
of  Natural  History ;  to  the  Greographical  and  Statistical  Society 
of  New  York,  and  to  the  American  Ethnological  Society ;  and 
lastly  to  the  many  friends  whose  kind  memories  were  proof  against 
my  long  absence  in  Africa,  and  whose  welcome  on  my  return  lent 
additional  force  to  my  gratitude  to  that  Grod  who  so  mercifully 
watched  over  and  preserved  me  in  my  wanderings.  I  should 
not  do  justice  to  my  own  feelings  if  I  did  not  also  acknowledge 
the  many  proo&  of  kindness  that  have  been  bestowed  upon  me 
smce  my  arrival  in  good  old  England ;  especially  the  hearty 
welcome  I  have  received  from  various  learned  Societies,  par- 
ticularly the  Boyal  Geographical  Society,  who,  in  order  to  show 
how  much  interest  they  take  in  zoological  researches,  as  corro- 


X  PREFACE, 

boratiye  illustrations  of  geography,  haye  allowed  the  use  of  their 
rooms  for  the  exhibition  of  my  collection,  in  order  that  the 
public  may  view  some  of  the  q>ecimens  brought  home  by  me 
from  Africa. 

The  long  and  tedious  labour  of  preparing  this  book  for  the 
press  leaves  me  with  the  conviction,  that  it  is  much  easier  to 
hunt  gorillas  than  to  write  about  them — ^to  explore  new  countries 
than  to  describe  them.  During  the  twenty  months  which  I 
have  passed  in  the  process  of  writing  out  my  journals  since  my 
return  to  the  United  States,  I  have  often  wished  myself  back  in 
my  African  wilds.  I  can  only  hope  that  the  reader,  when  he 
closes  the  book,  will  not  think  this  labour  wasted;  and  with 
this  hope  I  bid  him  a  friendly  fareweU. 

London,  AprU  30^,  1861. 


'  * 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  L 

Purpose  of  my  Explorations— Facilities  — Nature  of  the  Country  to  be 
explored  —  The  Gaboon — The  Mpongwe  People  —  Their  Jealousy  of  Tra- 
vellers —  Trade  Peculiarities — Missionaries  —  Baraka — Manner  in  which 
the  Missionaries  teach — A  Day's  Work  on  the  Station       ..     ..  Page  1 

CHAPTER  n. 

The  (Gaboon  People — Mysterious  Disappearai^ce  of  African  Tribes — Mpongwe 
Villages — Houses,  how  built  —  A  Mpongwe  Interior  —  Costume  —  An 
African  Trader  —  Monopolies  —  The  Commission  Business  among  the 
Negroes — "  Trust "  —  Extensive  System  of  Credit — Native  Jealousy  — 
A  Day  with  an  African  Trader — Time  of  no  value— Mpongwe  Coasting- 
trade  —  Their  Vessels — Products  of  the  Gaboon  —  The  Ivory-trade  . .     7 

CHAPTER  in. 

Some  Causes  of  the  Decrease  of  the  Mpongwe — Bestrictions  as  to  Inter- 
marriage—  Last  Days  of  King  Glass  —  Public  Opinion  on  the  Gaboon  — 
Mourning  for  a  King  —  "  Making "  a  new  King  —  Character  of  the 
Mpongwe — An  African  Gentleman  —  Food  —  Agriculture      . .      . .     17 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Corisco  the  Beautiful  —  The  Mbengas — Missionary  Stations  —  Afirican  Wake 
—  Set  out  for  the  Muni  —  An  Explorer's  Outfit  —  Plan  of  Operations  — 
Poor  Debtor  in  Africa — Lynch  Law  —  My  Canoe  —  The  Muni — Man- 
grove Swamps  —  Lost  —  King  Dayoko — Salutations       24 


CHAPTER  V. 

Dayoko — African  Royalty — Foreign  Relations  and  Diplomacy  in  the  Interior 
—  The  Value  of  a  Wife  —  Negotiatiqfls  —  The  Dry  Season  —  The  Mbousha 
Tribe — A  Wizard — A  Fetich  Trial  and  a  Murder — Progress  —  Excite- 
ment of  the  Shekianis  at  my  supposed  Wealth  —  The  Ntambounay  —  The 
Sierra  del  Crystal  —  Lost  again  —  Approaches  of  Interior  Village — Agri- 
cultural Operations  —  F^nine       ..      «•      i*     .«      •«     .4      ..     «.     35 


xu  CONTENTS, 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Hold  of  a  Traveller  on  the  Natives— Fruits  — The  Mbondemo— Their 
Towns  —  Houses — Morals  of  "War — Condition  of  "Women — Women  as 
Bearers  — The  Hills  — A  Caravan  —  Mutiny  —  Rapids  of  the  Ntam- 
bounay  —  Summit  of  the  Sierra — Contemplations  interrupted  by  a  Ser- 
pent —  The  first  Gorilla  —  Appearance  in  Motion  —  Famine  in  the  Camp 
— Native  Stories  of  the  Gorilla  —  Superstitious  Notions  about  the  Animal 
— lifelessnessof  theForest— ABeetrai Page  48 

CHAPTER  Vn. 

Famine — Encounter  with  the  Fan  —  A  Desperate  Situation — Fright  at  my 
Appearance  —  A  Fan  Warrior  —  His  Weapons — Fetiches  —  Women  — 
I  am  closely  examined — Gorilla-hunt — Signs  of  the  Animal's  Presence — 
Appearance  of  the  Male  —  Roar — Conduct — My  first  Gorilla — Division 
of  the  Spoib — Superstitions  —  Wandering  Bakalai — Mournful  Songs — 
Their  Fear  of  Night— Cooking  — Fan  Town  —  Cannibal  Signs  — Pre- 
sented to  his  Cannibal  Majesty  —  The  King  is  scared  at  my  Appearance  — 
Description  of  his  Majesty —Mbene's  Glory — The  King  in  his  Wardress 

—  Arms  of  the  Fan — A  grand  Dance  —  The  Music  ..  ^ ,     65 

CHAPTER  Vm. 

The  grand  Hunt — Fan  Mode  of  capturing  Elephants — A  pitched  Battle — 
Man  killed  by  an  Elephant — Grace  before  Meat  among  the  Fan  —  The 
use  of  a  Dead  Hunter  —  Habits  of  the  Elephant  —  Eanou,  or  Elephant- 
trap  —  Elephant  Meat — Condition  of  Women  —  Marriage  Ceremonies  — 
A  Fan  Wedding — Musical  Instrument — Corpse  brought  in  to  be  eaten 

—  Human  Flesh  prized  —  Stories  of  Fan  Cannibalism — Encroachment* 
Westward  of  the  Fans  —  Their  Origin — Colour  —  Tattooing  —  Trade — 
Iron-smelting  —  Fan  Blacksmiths  —  Bellows  and  other  Tools — Pottery 

—  Agriculture  —  Food  —  Slavery  —  The  Oshebo — Beyond  —  Supersti- 
tions—  Sorcery  —  Charms — Idols       82 

CHAPTER  EL 

The  Return  Trip  —  Climate  of  the  Mountain  Region  —  Native  Courage  — 
Mode  of  Warfiure  —  Heavy  Rains — On  the  Noya— Visits  to  Native 
Chiefs  —  Ezongo  —  Attempt  at  Black-mail  —  Alapay — The  Mbicho — 
Net-hunting — Bad  Shooting  of  the  Negroes  —  Attacked  by  the  Bashi- 
kouay  Ants — Toilet  of  the  Mbicho  —  Superstition  about  the  Moon  — 
Ivory  of  this  District  peculiar — Igouma — Fan  of  the  Country  —  An 
immense  Cavern  —  Crossing  a  Mangrove  Swamp 98 

CHAPTER  X. 

Up  the  Moondah — Vexations  of  a  Traveller  in  Africa  —  Mangrove  Swamps 

—  Mbicho  Men  run  off — Bashikouay  again  —  Missionary  Station — The 
Bar-wood  Trade — Manner  of  gettmg  Bar-wood  —  The  India-rubber  Vine 

—  How  Rubber  is  gathered  —  Torturing  a  Woman — Adventure  with  a 
Wild  Bull  rr  Lying  gut  fyx  Game  —  Bullock  and  Leopard — Birds  ••  .116 


•  t  • 


CONTENTS.  Xiu 


CHAPTEB  XI. 

Creek  Navigation  —  Nocturnal  Habits  of  the  Negroes  —  A  Royal  Farm  — 
Beach-travel  —  Canoe-building  —  Ogoula-Limbai  —  A  great  Elephant- 
hunter  —  In  the  Surf  —  Shark  River  —  Prairies  —  Sangatanga — King 
Bango  —  An  Audience  of  Royalty  —  A  Ball  —  Barraooons  —  Unwelcome 
Guest  — >-  A  Slaver  in  tiie  OfiBng — Decline  of  the  Slave-trade  on  this  Coast 
—Idols Page  127 

CHAPTEB  Xn, 

Set  out  for  the  Interior — Prairies  —  Odd  Mistake — Hippopotami  —  Ngola — 
Negro  Theology — Hunts  —  Torture  of  a  Woman  —  Rum — The  Shekiani 

—  Appearance,  Manners,  and  Customs  —  Polygamy  —  Marriage  —  Super- 
stitions—  Boa  brachicheros  —  Camp  in  the  Woods — African  Humour — 
Solid  Comfort — Hunting  with  a  Leopard  —  Great  Jollification  —  Super- 
stition about  the  Leopard  —  Elephant-shooting  —  Meeting  a  Boa  — 
Stalking  the  Wild  Bull  —  Return  to  Sangatanga  —  I  am  accused  of 
Sorcery  —  Idols  —  Bango's  Treasures  —  Burial-ground  of  the  Barraooons 

—  Disgusting  Sights  —  Status  of  Slaves  in  Africa — Oroungou  Cemetery 
- — An  African  Watering-place  —  Fetich  Point ..  149 

CHAPTEE  Xm. 

The  •'CammaCountry*— Coast— Surf— Trade— The  Caroline— A  mixed 
Crew  —  A  dusky  Bride  —  A  Squall  —  On  her  Beam-ends  —  Native 
Traders  —  Ranpano  —  Sangala  Troubles  —  Nearly  a  Fight — The  City  of 
Washington  —  Attempt  at  Assassination  —  The  Camma  People  —  Ani- 
ambia  —  River  Navigation  —  Men  refuse  to  advance  —  King  Olenga- 
Yombi  —  A  Dance  —  Fetich-houses  —  Spirit  Worship  —  A  mad  Bull  — 
Cheating  the  King — Live  Gorilla  brought  in — How  caught  —  Ferocity 
of  the  Animal  —  Joe  escapes  —  Is  re-captured  —  Habits  and  Peculiarities 
of  Joe  —  Hippopotamus-shooting — Night-hunting — Hippopotamus-Meat 

—  Habits  of  the  Animal  —  Hide  —  Use  of  the  Tusks  —  They  capsize 
Boats  —  Peaceable  if  not  attacked  —  Voice  —  Combative — Adventures 
with  Hippopotami «»  186 

CHAPTEB  XIV, 

The  Anengue  Lake  —  Canoes  —  River  Scenery  —  Nature  of  the  Country — The 
Lagoons  —  Navigation  —  India-rubber  Vines — Mercantile  Products  and 
Facilities — Porcupine-hunts — Quengueza,  the  great  King  —  Change  of 
Season — Variety  in  Animal  Life — Birds  of  Passage — Fish — Bee-eater 

—  Curious  Habits  of  this  Bird  —  Serpents  —  The  Rivers  in  the  Dry  Season 

—  The  Lagoons  in  the  Dry  Season  —  Immense  Numbers  of  Crocodiles — 
Damagondai  —  Witchcraft  —  A  Curtain  Lecture  —  Shimbouvenegani  — 
An  Olako  —  Royal  Costume  —  Discover  a  new  Ape  —  The  Nshiego 
Mbouv^f  or  Nest-Building  Ape  (Troglodytes  Calvus) — How  they  Build — . 
Habits. —  Food  -r?  Description  pf  the  first.  Specimen — A  Cnocodile-hunt — 


1 


xiv  CONTENTS. 

Anengue  Canoes  —  The  Ogata — Turtle  —  How  the  Crocodile  gets  his 
Prey  —  A  Fight  looms  up  ahead  —  Oshoria  backs  down  —  People  of  the 
Anengue  —  Family  Idols  —  Worship  —  Sickness — Bola  Ivoga — African 
Festivals— A  clear  Case  of  Witchcraft— A  Native  Doctor  —  Exorcising 
a  Witch  — My  Town  is  deserted — I  am  made  a  Chief — We  get  a  second 
young  Gk)rilla  —  I  am  poisoned  with  Arsenic — Trial  of  the  Poisoner — 
Singular  Effect  of  Aisenio Page  218 

CHAPTEB  XV. 

Message  and  Hostage  from  Quengueza — Outfi£ — Makondai — Fame  of  Mr. 
Colt  —  Qoumbi  —  Reception  —  Family  Arrangements  in  Africa — Inter- 
marriage  — Driving  out  a  Witch  —  Riches  among  the  Camma  —  African 
Shams  —  A  Sunday  Lecture  —  Gorilla  shot  —  The  Poison  Ordeal  — 
Mboundou  —  Effects  of  the  Poison  — ^Native  Gorilla  Stories  —  Charms  — 
Young  Female  Gorilla  caught  —  Superstitious  Belief  —  Trouble  in  the 
Royal  Family  —  A  Holy  Place  —  Obindji's  Town — A  Royal  Introduction 

—  Houses — Decency  in  Obindji's  Town  —  Surprise  of  the  Negroes  at  my 
Appearance  —  Ordeal  of  the  Ring  boiled  in  Oil  —  Bashikouay  —  Kooloo- 
kamba — Another  new  Ape — Oouamba^  or  Hunger  for  Meat  —  Grace 
before  Meat  —  A  Day's  Work  in  Africa  —  Checks  —  I  am  counted  a 
Magician 247 

CHAPTEB  XVL 

Venomous  Flies — Gorilla — Cutting  Ebony — The  Ebony-tree  —  Anguilai's 
Town  —  Superstitions  —  Severe  Sickness  —  Kindness  of  the  Native 
Women  to  me  — Child  murdered  for  Sorcery  —  New  Cure  for  Sterility  — 
Ivory-eaters  —  Manioc  —  Capture  a  yowng  Nshiego  MhouvS — Its  Grief  for 
its  Mother  —  Biography  of  Nshiego  Tommy  —  Easily  tamed  —  His 
Tricks  —  Habits  —  Love  for  Wine  and  Scotch  Ale  —  His  Death  —  Curious 
Colour  —  Famine — Njavi  Oil  —  Gorillas  —  Evidence  of  their  vast  Strength 

—  Gtianiony  —  Return  to  Obindji's  —  Letters  and  Papers  from  Home  — 
Astonishment  of  the  Negroes  at  my  Reading — The  Ofoubou  River  — 
Starvation  —  Njali-Coody  —  The  Njambai  Festival  —  Woman's  Rights 
anlong  the  Bakalai  —  A  Midnight  Festival  — A  Mystery  —  An  Attempt 
at  Black-mail  —  Nature  of  the  Njambai,  or  Guardian  Spirit  —  Hunter 
killed  by  Gorilla — Native  Superstitions  —  The  Dry  Season  —  Gouamba 

—  The  Eloway  Fly  —  Huge  Serpents  —  Enormous  Gorilla  killed  — 
Curious  Superstition  about  the  Gorilla  and  a  Pregnant  Woman  —  Animals 
peculiar  to  this  Region  —  Generosity  of  the  Blacks  —  The  Superstition  of 
Roondah— Return 275 

CHAPTEB  XVn. 

The  Ants  of  Equatorial  Africa  — The  Bashikouay— The  Red  Ant— The 
Nchellelay  — The  Little  Ant —  The  Red  Leaf-Ant  —  The  Nest-building 
Ant 311 


CONTENTS.  XV 

CHAPTEB  XVm. 
The  Seasons  and  the  Fevers  of  Equatorial  Africa     »,     Page  318 

CHAPTEB  XIX. 

Politics:  the  Government,  Superstitions,  and  Slave  System  of  Equatorial 
Afidca       .,      .,     329 

CHAPTEB  XX, 

Account  and  Comparison  of  the  great  Apes  of  Africa :  the  Troglodytes  Gbrilla, 
the  T.  Kooloo-kamba,  the  Chimpanzee  {T,  niger)^  and  titie  Nshiego 
Mbouvd,  or  T.  calvus      341 

CHAPTEB  XXI. 

On  the  Bony  Structure  of  the  Gorilla  and  other  African  Apes ..     ..      ..  363 

CHAPTEB  XXII. 

The  Bakalai  —  Extent  of  Begion  in  which  they  are  met  with  —  Qualities  — 
Reasons  for  Intermixture  of  Tribes  —  The  Bakalai  are  Rovers  —  Fear  of 
Death  —  Old  People  abandoned  —  Treachery  —  Case  of  Retaliation  -^ 
Women-palavers  —  Arbitration  —  A  Fetich  Palaver  —  Appearance  of  the 
Bakalai  —  Property  —  Duties  of  a  Wife  —  Restrictions  on  Marriage  < — 
Slaves  —  Costume  —  Grass-cloth  —  Hunters  —  Fishing — Great  Tri^ers 
— Diseases  —  Leprosy — Music ..      ..      ..      .,      ..  383 

CHAPTEB  XXm, 

Departure  for  the  Interior — Meeting  of  the  People  —  Address  of  Ranpano  — 
I  am  made  a  Makaga  —  Use  of  Quinine  —  A  Sick  Friend — Death  in 
Goumbi  —  Sorcery,  and  how  it  is  discovered  —  Great  Excitement  — 
Terrible  Tragedy  —  The  Victims  —  The  Accusations — The  Poison-cup  — 
The  Execution  —  Visit  from  Adouma — Sincerity  of  the  Doctors  (?)  —  Up 
the  River  —  Manga-hunts  —  A  Manga  Doctor  —  Keeping  a  Creditor  — 
Querlaouen  —  An  African  Tragedy  —  Fight  on  the  River  —  Towards 
Ashira-land  —  The  Ashira  Plains  —  Splendid  View 392 

CHAPTEB  XXIV. 

We  enter  Ashira-land — Astonishment  of  the  People  at  my  Appearance — 
Their  Fear  of  my  Eyes  —  Grand  Reception — Message  and  Presents  from 
the  Ashira  King — Kendo — King  Olenda  —  His  Address  to  me  —  I  am 
an  Object  of  great  Wonder  —  My  Clock  a  Fetich  —  Features  of  the  Plain 

—  Villages  —  Houses  —  Agriculture  —  Appearance  of  the  Ashira — Dress 

—  Grass-cloth  —  Loom  —  Curious  Custom  of  Young  Women  —  Operation 
of  Dyeing  —  Manner  of  Hairdressing  —  Peculiarities — Fears  of  the  Slaves 

—  Condition  of  Women  —  Marriage  —  Splendid  Waterfall  —  Mount 
Nchondo  —  A  Superstition  about  it — A  Case  of  Insanity  —  Ascent  of 
Mount  Andele — Meet  a  Nshiego  Mbouv^  —  How  it  rests  at  Night  — 
Attempt  to  ascend  the  Nkoomoo-nabouali  —  Gorilla  killed  —  Difficulties 
of  the  Ascent  —  Starvation 408 


XVI  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTEB  XXV. 

The  Ashira  grow  Jealous  of  my  Projects  —  Set  out  for  the  Apingi  Country  — 
Olenda  blesses  us  —  The  Passage  of  the  Ovigui  —  Rude  Bridge  —  Features 
of  the  Country  —  We  fneet  Gorillas  —  The  Roar  of  the  Gorilla  —  His 
Walk — Great  Strength  —  Meet  the  Apingi  King — I  fall  into  an  Elephant- 
hole —  Famine  —  Musquitoes  —  We  see  the  Hembo  Apingi  River — Re- 
ception among  the  Apingi  —  Address  of  the  King  —  I  am  offered  a  Slave 
for  my  Supper — Wonder  of  the  People  at  my  Appearance  —  The  mys- 
terious Sajpcuii,  a  cloven-footed  Race  —  My  Clock  is  thought  a  guardian 
Spirit — I  am  asked  to  make  a  Mountain  of  Beads  and  Trade-goods — 
Fruitfulness  of  the  Women  —  Appearance  of  the  People  —  A  Leopard- trap 
^  Invested  with  the  Kendo  —  Palm-oil  —  Palm-wine  —  Drunkenness 
universal — Tattooing  — ;  Dress  of  the  Women  —  Lack  of  Modesty — I  am 
claimed  as  a  Husband  —  Weaving  of  Grass-cloth  —  Property  among  the 
Apingi* —  The  Apingi  Loom  —  The  Ndengui  —  Fetich  to  kill  Leopards  — 
War-belt ( Page  428 

CHAPTEB  XXVL 

Bible-reading  —  The  Negroes  are  frightened  and  run  away  —  The  Ceremony 
of  Bongo — Its  Lnportance  —  Curious  Phase  of  African  Slavery  —  Pre- 
parations to  ascend  the  River  —  Apingi  Villages  —  Fetiches  —  Super- 
stitions —  Spiders  —  Curious  Manner  of  catching  their  Prey  —  New 
Animals  —  Capsized -^  Putrid  Corpse  in  a  Village — Curious  Manner  of 
Burial  —  Leave  the  River  —  The  Region  beyond  —  Return  to  Remandji*s 
Town  —  Explore  the  Mountains  —  The  Isogo  —  Beyond  the  Isogo  — 
Ultima  Thule  —  My  Shoes  worn  out  —  Starvation  —  Great  Suffering  — 
Shoot  a  Gorilla  —  Illness  —  Home-sick  —  The  Return  to  the  Seashore  — 
Etita :  a  very  singular  Disease  —  The  Remedy  —  Heavy  Rains  —  An 
Uncomfortable  Night —  Fierce  Attack  of  Bashikouay  Ants  —  Difference  of 
Seasons — Arrival  in  Biagano  —  Close* 448 


APPENDIX^ 


A.  The  Fauna  OP  Equatorial  Africa 471 

B.  The  Languages  OF  Equatorial  Africa 474 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


1.  The  Gorilla        «     ..  FrontUpieee^ 

2.  Mponge  Woman,  showing  the  Maimer  of  dressing  Hair page  6 

3.  Head-waters  of  the  Ntambounay ..     ..     57 

4.  Mbondemo  Man,  and  Woman  carrying  her  Child        64 

5.  Fan  Warrior       66 

6.  My  first  Gorilla  ..     -     71 

7.  Grand  Beception  by  the  Cannibals        74 

8.  Ndiayai,  King  of  the  Fans      77 

9.  Fan  Bowman      77 

10.  Poisoned  Arrows  of  the  Fan *     78 

11.  Fan  Knife  and  Battle-axes       79 

12.  Fan  Shield  and  Spears 80 

13.  FatL  Dmmmer  and  Handja-player 81 

14.  Elephant  Battue  among  the  Fans   .. 83 

15.  The  Handja,  Fan  musical  Instrument 87 

16.  Fan  Blacksmiths       91 

17.  Fan  Pottery        92 

18.  Fan  Pipes 93 

19.  Fan  Spoon 97 

20.  Crossing  a  Mangrove-Swamp 114 

21.  To  keep  the  Devil  out      115 

22.  The  Leopard  and  his  Prey       125 

23.  Shekiani  Spoons        161 

24.  Wambee :  the  Shekiani  Banjo 163 

25.  Encamped  for  the  Night 166 

26.  Noheri,  a  diminutive  Gkizelle  ..     ..     168 

27.  Niar^  the  wild  Bull  of  Equatorial  Africa 175 

28.  Gamma  Man  and  Woman 196 

29.  Biver  Navigation  in  Equatorial  Africa 199 

80.  Native  tossed  by  a  Wild  BuU 204 

31.  Young  Gorilla 206 

32.  Toung  Nshiego  Mbouv^ 232 

33.  Crocodile-hunting  on  Lake  Anengue     ..     ^ 234 

34.  Idol  of  the  Slaves 238 

35.  Ouganga  exorcising  a  Sorcerer       241 

36.  Beception  at  Gk>umbi        250 

37.  Mboundou  Leaf 257 

38.  Obindji  in  his  Easy-dhair 267 

39.  The  Kooloo-kamba 270 

40.  Ebony  Leaves,  male  and  female      . .  278 

41.  The  Mboco,  or  Ivory-eater       282 

42.  Harp  of  the  Bakalai 294 

43.  Hunter  MUed  by  a  Gorilla       297 

44.  The  Bongo  Antelope        306 


xviii  LIST  OP  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

PAGE 

45.  The  Bashikonay  Ant 311 

46.  Whip  for  the  Women        834 

47.  Head  of  Gorilla ,     356 

48.  Nshiego  Mbouye  and  Tonng 859 

49.  HeadofKooloo-kamba ..     ..860 

50.  EarofKooloo-kamba       361 

51.  Skeletons  of  Man  and  the  Gorilla 370 

52.  Skalls  from  photographs,  Plate  L  ..     371 


Ko.  1.  Man,  Canoukn* 
„  2.  Gorilla,  male. 
3.  Gorilla,  female. 


t> 


No.  4.  Kooloo-kamba. 
„   5.  Nshiego  mboov^ 
„   6.  Chimpanr.ee. 


53.  Sknlls  from  photographs,  Plate  n. 873 


No.  7.  Gorilla,  female. 
„   8.  Gorilla,  male. 
„   9.  Man,  Caucasian. 


No.  10.  Kooloo-faunba. 
„   11.  Negro. 
„   12.  Chimpaniee. 


54.  Skulls  fix>m  photographs,  Plato  1X1 875 


No.  16.  Gorilla,  joong. 
„    17.  Gorilla,  red  romp. 
„    18.  Gorilla,  shedding  teeth* 


No.  13.  Nshiego  mboav^  joung. 
„    14.  Austmlian. 
„    15.  Nshiego  mbouv^ 

55.  Decapitation  scene  at  Gonmhi        ..     ..     898 

56.  The  Kendo 410 

57.  Ashira  Tohacco 418 

58.  Ashira  Thread  and  Needle      414 

59.  Ashira  Weapons 415 

60.  Ashira  BeUes '. 416 

61.  Liamha  Leaf      419 

62.  White-fronted  wild  Hog 422 

63.  Nshiego  Mhony^  in  his  Shelter       423 

64.  Ashira  Housekeeper 427 

65.  Bridge  over  the  Ovigui 481 

66.  Death  of  the  GoriUa         484 

67.  Apingi  Man  and  Woman .' 442 

68.  An  Apingi  Village 450 

69.  The  Kendo  Squirrel 453 

70.  The  Anomalurus  Beldeni ^     455 

71.  Apingi  Tools      —     .»     464 

72.  Ibeka,  Bakalai musicallnstrameQt        467 

7a  Battle,  to  drive  the  Devil  out 470 

74.  l£ap  of  Equatorial   Africa,   showing  the  line  of  M.   Da  Ohaillu*s 

Explorations •     ..  at  ike  end. 


EXPLORATIONS  AND  ADVENTURES 


IN 


EQUATORIAL  AFRICA. 


CHAPTER  I. 


Purpose  of  my  Explorations  —  Facilities — Nature  of  the  Country  to  be  ex- 
plored —  The  Gaboon  —  The  Mpongwe  People  —  Their  Jealousy  of  Travel- 
lers—  Trade  Peculiarities — Missionaries  —  Baraka — ^^  Manner  in  which 
the  Missionaries  teach  —  A  Day's  Work  on  the  Station. 

I  LEFT  America  for  the  Western  Coast  of  Africa  in  the  month 
of  October,  1855.  My  purpose  was  to  spend  some  years  in  the 
exploration  of  a  region  of  territory  lying  between  lat  2°  north 
and  2°  south,  and  stretching  back  from  the  coast  to  the  mountain- 
range  called  the  Sierra  del  CryBtaly  and  beyond  as  far  as  I  should 
be  able  to  penetrate. 

The  coast-line  of  this  region  is  dotted  here  and  there  with 
negro  villages,  and  at  a  few  points  "factories"  have  been  esta- 
blished for  the  prosecution  of  general  trade.  The  power  and 
knowledge  of  the  white  man  extend  but  a  very  few  miles  from 
the  coast,  and  the  interior  was  still  a  terra  incognita.  Of  its 
tribes,  several  of  whom  were  reported  to  be  cannibals,  nothing 
was  known,  though  terrible  stories  were  told  of  their  dark  super- 
stitions and  untameable  ferocity;  of  its  productions  only  a 
rough  guess  could  be  made  from  the  scant  supplies  of  ivory, 
ebony,  bar-wood,  and  caoutchouc  which  were  transmitted  to  the 
coast  by  the  people  inhabiting  the  ri^er-banks.  Of  the  natural 
history — which  was  the  subject  that  interested  me  most — suflS- 
cient  was  known  to  assure  me  that  here  was  a  field  worthy  of 
every  eflfort  of  an  explorer  and  naturalist. 

This  unexplored  region  was  the  home  of  that  remarkable  ape, 
the  fierce,  untameable  gorilla,  which  approaches  nearest,  in 
physical  conformation  and  in  certain  habits,  to  man,  and  whose 

B 


2  THE  GABOON.  Chap.  I. 

unconquerable  ferocity  has  made  it  the  terror  of  the  bravest 
native  hunters— an  animal,  too,  of  which  hitherto  naturalists 
and  the  civilized  world  knew  so  little,  that  the  name  even  was 
not  found  in  most  natural  histories.  Here,  too,  in  these  dense 
woods,  were  to  be  found — ^if  the  natives  told  aright — ^the  nest- 
building  mJiiego-wbouvij  an  ape  next  in  the  scale  to  the  gorilla ; 
several  varieties  of  other  apes ;  hippopotami  and  manatees,  in  the 
rivers ;  and  birds  and  beasts  of  many  and  various  kinds,  many 
entirely  unknown  to  us,  in  the  forests  and  among  the  hills. 

To  ascend  the  various  rivers,  hunt  in  the  woods,  and  acquaint 
myself  alike  with  the  haunts  and  habits  of  the  gorilla,  and  with 
the  superstitions,  customs,  and  modes  of  life  of  the  black  tribes, 
who  had  not  hitherto  been  visited  by  white  men :  these  were 
among  the  chief  objects  of  my  present  visit  to  the  African  Coast. 
Another  purpose  I  had  in  view  was  to  ascertain  if  in  the  interior, 
among  the  mountainous  ranges  in  which  the  rivers  took  their 
rise,  there  was  not  to  be  found  a  region  of  country  fertile  and 
populous,  and  at  the  same  time  healthy,  where  the  missionaries, 
who  now  suffer  and  die  on  the  low  coast,  could  work  in  safety 
and  to  advantage,  and  where  might  be  established  profitable 
trading-stations,  which  would  benefit  alike  whites  and  natives. 

Several  years'  residence  on  the  Coast,  where  my  father  had 
formerly  a  factory,  had  given  me  a  knowledge  of  the  languages, 
habits,  and  peculiarities  of  the  Coast  natives,  which  I  hoped  to 
find  serviceable  in  my  interior  explorations,  and  had  also  sufficed 
to  inure  my  constitution  in  some  degree  to  the  severities  of  an 
African  hot  season,  or  at  least  to  familiarize  me  with  the  best 
means  for  preserving  health  and  life  against  the  deadly  fevers  of 
the  Coast. 

The  Gaboon  Kiver,  which  ttdces  its  rise  among  the  Sierra  del 
Crystal  mountains,  empties  its  sluggish  waters  into  the  Atlantic 
a  few  miles  north  of  the  equator.  Its  mouth  forms  a  bay,  which 
is  the  finest  harbour  on  the  West  Coast ;  and  here  on  the  right 
bank  the  French  formed  a  settlement  and  built  a  fort  in  the 
year  1842.  It  was  under  the  protection  of  this  fort  that  my 
father  for  several  years,  through  agents,  carried  on  a  trade  with 
the  natives,  and  here  I  gained  my  first  knowledge  of  Africa  and 
my  first  acquaintance  with  the  Gaboon  tribes. 

When  I  returned  now,  after  an  absence  of  some  years,  my 
arrival  was  hailed  with  joy  by  my  former  acquaintances  among 


Chap.  I.  THE  MPONGWE  — TRADE.  3 

the  blacks,  who  thought  that  I  had  come  back  to  trade.  The 
negroes  of  the  West  Coast  are  the  most  eager  and  the  shrewdest 
traders  I  have  ever  met ;  and  they  were  overjoyed  at  the  pros- 
pect of  dealing  with,  and  perhaps  cheating,  an  old  friend  like 
myself.  Their  disappointment  was  great,  therefore,  when  I  was 
obliged  to  inform  them  that  I  had  come  with  no  goods  to  sell, 
but  with  the  purpose  to  explore  the  country,  of  which  I  had 
heard  so  many  wonderful  stories  from  them,  and  to  hunt  wild 
birds  and  beasts. 

At  first  they  believed  I  was  joking.  When  they  saw  landed 
from  the  vessel  which  brought  me  no  "  trade,"  but  only  an  outfit 
of  all  things  necessary  for  a  hunter's  life  in  the  African  wilds, 
they  began  perforce  to  believe  in  my  stated  purpose.  Then 
their  amazement  and  perplexity  knew  no  bounds. 

Some  thought  I  was  out  of  my  senses,  and  pitied  my  father, 
whom  they  all  knew,  for  being  troubled  with  such  a  good-for- 
nothing  son. 

Some  thought  I  had  ulterior  objects,  and  were  alarmed  lest  I 
should  secretly  try  to  wrest  the  trade  of  the  interior  out  of  their 
hands. 

These  Mpongwes,  or  Coast  tribes,  hold  in  their  hands,  as  will 
be  explained  farther  on,  the  trade  with  the  back  country  of  the 
Graboon  River ;  and  the  sliglitest  suspicion  that  I  was  about  to 
interfere  with  this  profitable  monopoly  sufficed  to  create  great 
terror  in  their  trade-loving  souls.  They  surrounded  me,  each 
with  his  tale  of  the  horrors  and  dangers  of  a  voyage  "  up  the 
country,"  asserting  that  I  should  be  eaten  up  by  cannibals, 
drowned  in  rivers,  devoured  by  tigers  and  crocodiles,  crushed  by 
elephants,  upset  by  hippopotami,  or  waylaid  and  torn  to  pieces 
by  the  gorilla. 

But  when  I  convinced  them  that  I  had  no  designs  upon  their 
trade,  and  that  my  purposed  travels  and  hunts  would  not  aflfect 
their  interests,  all  but  a  few  stedfast  old  friends  left  me  to  my 
fate. 

As  I  intended  to  remain  a  little  time  on  the  Gaboon  to  more 
perfectly  acclimate  myself,  I  took  up  my  residence  among  my 
friends  of  many  yeai-s,  the  American  missionaries,  whose  station 
is  at  Baraka,  eight  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  river.  Here  I 
found  a  welcome  in  the  hospitable  home  of  my  friend,  the  Rev. 
William  Walker,  and  was  able  to  enjoy  for  a  little  while  longer 

B  2 


4  BARAK  A — MISSIONS.  Chap.  L 

the  comforts  of  civilized  life  and  the  consolation  of  a  Christian 
social  circle,  which  were  soon  to  be  left  behind  me  for  a  long 
time. 

Baraka  is  the  head  station  of  the  American  Board  of  Foreign 
Missions  on  the  Glaboon  River,  and,  indeed,  the  only  mission 
the- board  has  as  yet  on  the  Western  Coast.  It  was  established 
in  1842  by  Rev.  J.  L.  Wilson. 

Baraka  is  a  Mpongwe  word,  derived  from  barracoon,  a  slave- 
factory  or  inclosnre.  Strangely  enough,  the  very  site  whence 
now  the  Gospel  is  taught  to  these  benighted  Africans,  and  where 
their  children  are  instructed  in  the  knowledge  and  duties  of 
Christianity  and  civilized  life — this  very  place  was  once,  and  not 
many  years  ago,  the  site  of  a  slave-factory,  where  the  cruel 
slave-trade  was  carried  on  with  much  energy  and  success. 

Baraka  is  situated  at  the  summit  of  a  beautifid  hill,  distant  a 
few  hundred  yards  from  the  shore,  and  about  eight  miles  above 
the  river's  mouth.  The  native  villages  surround  the  base  of  the 
hill,  and  are  scattered  along  the  river-bank,  and  are  thus  easily 
accessible  to  the  missionaries,  who  visit  them  at  all  times,  and 
preach  to  the  natives  several  times  a  week. 

The  missionary  grounds  are  spacious,  and  are  surrounded  with 
a  noble  hedge  of  fragrant  lime-trees.  The  buildings  are  mostly 
of  bamboo-which  is  the  best  building-material  on  this  part  of 
the  coast — and  consist  of  two  dwellings  occupied  by  the  mis- 
fiionary  families;  the  church  building,  which  has  some  fine 
shade-trees  in  front;  the  storehouse,  the  schoolhouse,  a  little 
building  containing  the  missionary  library,  houses  where  the 
children  attached  to  the  mission  are  lodged ;  and,  finally,  the 
kitchen — ^kitchens  being  in  the  tropics  necessarily  separate  from 
the  dwellings — euid  the  other  necessary  offices,  among  which 
figure  fowl-houses,  &c.  Behind  the  houses  is  a  fine  orchard, 
containing  various  fruit-trees,  all  planted  by  the  missionaries,  as 
were  also  the  fine  cocoanut,  mango,  and  other  trees  which  are 
scattered  about  the  premises,  and  beneath  whose  grateful  shade 
the  houses  are  built. 

The  missionary  establishment  begins  its  day  with  prayers, 
conducted,  for  the  benefit  of  the  cliildren,  in  the  Mpongwe 
language. 

After  prayers  the  girls  and  boys  clear  up  their  dormitories 
and  the  schoolrooms,  and  arrange   everything  for  the  day  s 


Chap.  I.  A  DAY  AT  THE  MISSIONS.  5 

labours.  This  is  carried  on  under  the  superintendence  of  the 
missionary  ladies. 

Next  comes  breakfast,  when  the  children  are  arranged  about 
the  tables  in  their  neat  dresses,  and  taught  to  eat  after  the  manner 
of  civilized  people. 

A  little  before  nine  o'clock  the  ringing  of  a  bell  calls -the 
children  who  live  at  home  in  the  villages  to  assemble  in  the 
schoolroom ;  and  here,  presently,  the  work  of  instruction  goes 
busily  on,  being  begun  with  prayers  and  the  singing  of  a  hymn 
in  the  native  tongue.  The  missionaries  and  their  wives  are 
here  assisted  by  native  teachers,  who  are  able  to  take  charge  of 
the  less-advanced  classes.  The  children  are  taught  in  their 
native  tongue  first,  and  after  mastering  their  A  B  C  go  on  to 
reading  the  Scriptures  in  the  Mpongwe.  Then  follow  lessons 
in  geography,  arithmetic,  history,  and  writing,  and  English 
lessons.  Many  of  the  scholars  are  bright  and  well  advanced, 
reading  English  well,  and  having  a  good  imderstanding  of 
history  and  geography,  and  even  writing  in  English.  There  is, 
of  course,  much  attention  given  to  religious  instruction ;  and,  by 
reading,  explanations,  and  inculcation  of  Bible  precepts,  efforts 
are  made  to  settle  the  rising  generation  firmly  in  the  great  life- 
principles  of  the  religion  of  Christ. 

It  is  only  upon  the  children  that  the  labours  of  the  mis- 
sionaries can  have  any  important  efiects.  The  older  natives 
are  dull,  lazy,  and  distrustful.  They  adhere  to  their  vile  super- 
stitions, and  are  with  dijKculty  influenced.  If  they  come  to 
church,  it  is  too  often  out  of  curiosity,  or  to  please  the  preacher, 
or  from  some  fancied  advantage  to  themselves.  The  children, 
on  the  contrary,  as  all  children,  are  bright,  docile,  easily  trained ; 
and  in  these  the  hope  of  christianizing  Africa  rests. 

On  two  or  three  afternoons  in  the  week  the  girls  are  collected 
in  a  sewing-circle,  where  the  ladies  of  the  mission  instruct  them 
in  the  use  of  the  needle,  and  practise  them  in  making  their  own 
dresses  and  clothing  for  their  brothers. 

Several  times  during  the  week  there  are  prayer-meetings, 
when  the  Word  of  God  is  explained  to  the  heathen. 

Saturday  is  a  holiday  for  the  children,  who  then  play,  and 
prepare  themselves  for  the  Sabbath.  Sunday  is  the  great  day 
of  the  week ;  theut the  bell  calls  all  who  will  come  together  in 
the  little  bamboo  church.   The  missionary  children  and  employes 


6  MPONGWE  HAIK-DBESSING.  Chap,  I. 

attend,  dressed  in  iheix  best;  and  even  the  heathen  of  the 
village  follow  this  cuBtom,  and  are  found  in  church  wearing 
their  best  gannents,  perhaps  their  only  ones.  There  the  preacher 
speaks  to  them  of  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God,  and  all, 
heathen  and  Christian,  join  in  singing  praises  to  His  holy  name. 
The  audience  is  generally  attentive  and  interested.  But  the 
positive  success  of  the  mission  is  so  far  not  great  How  should 
it  he?  To  bring  light  out  of  such  darkness,  to  remove  the 
superstitions,  the  ignorance,  the  idleness  and  wickedness  in 
which  these  poor  heathen  are  steeped,  is  a  labour  of  many  years. 
Many  times,  doubtless,  my  poor  Mends  the  missionaries  are  dis- 
couraged at  the  slight  result  of  their  hard  labour :  but  they  do 
their  best,  and  wisely  leave  the  rest  to  God,  knowing  that  He 
works  in  His  own  good  time,  and  often  effects  great  ends  with 
very  slight  means. 


Chap.  U.   MYSTERIOUS  DISAPPEARANCE  OF  AFRICAN  TRIBES.    7 


CHAPTER  II. 

The  Gaboon  People  —  Mysterious  Disappearance  of  African  Tribes — Mpongwe 
Villages  —  Houses,  how  built  —  A  Mpongwe  Interior  —  Costume  —  An 
African   Trader  —  Monopolies  —  The    Commission    Business    among    the 

.  Negroes  —  "  Trust "  —  Extensive  System  of  Credit  —  Native  Jealousy  —  A 
Day  with  an  African  Trader  —  Time  of  no  value  —  Mpongwe  Coasting- trade 
—  Their  Vessels  —  Products  of  the  Gaboon  —  The  Ivory-trade. 

The  object  of  my  stay  at  this  time  (January,  1856)  was  that  I 
might  become  thoroughly  acclimated  before  setting  out  on  my 
interior  explorations.  I  had  known  the  Gaboon  country  and 
people  for  several  years,  but  took  occasion  at  this  time  to  study 
closely  the  habits  and  customs,  and  to  restudy  the  language,  of 
this  tribe — the  Mpongwe — who,  once  numerous,  are  now,  like 
so  many  of  the  African  tribes,  from  various  reasons,  entirely 
disappearing. 

The  causes  for  this  mysterious  and,  to  sonje  extent,  unaccount- 
able extermination  of  certain  tribes,  who  die  out,  leaving  no  mark 
behind  them,  I  shall  consider  in  some  future  chapter.  The  fact 
is  patent  to  every  observer. 

The  Mpongwe  are  a  branch  of  one  of  the  great  families  of  the 
negro  race,  which  has  moved  gradually  from  the  head-waters  of 
the  Nazareth  down  toward  the  seashore,  extending  its  limits 
meantime  to  the  north  and  south,  until  now  they  are  found  jfrom 
the  Gaboon  River  on  the  north  to  Cape  St.  Catherine  on  the  south. 
A  portion  have  taken  possession  of  the  seashore,  and  others  are 
located  inland.  They  have  probably  taken  the  place  of  other 
tribes  who  have  disappeared  in  tlie  strange  way  in  which  even 
the  Mpongwe  are  now  gradually  lessening ;  while  the  Ndina  tribe 
is  nearly  gone,  only  three  persons  remaining  of  what  was  once  a 
numerous  people.     They  die,  and  little  more  can  be  said. 

All  the  divisions  of  the  Mpongwe  speak  the  same  language, 
with  a  difference  of  only  a  few  woi-ds ;  thcfugh  others  again,  sand- 
wiched between,  speak  an  entirely  different  tongue.  The  migra- 
tions of  the  great  African  nations  cannot  be  understood,  till  w^e 
know  more  about  the  interior.     I  know  only  that  there  are  eight 


8  MPONGWE  VILLAGES.  Chap.  IL 

different  tribes  now  settled  along  the  coast  south  of  the  Gaboon 
and  in  the  interior,  who  speak  the  same  language  and  have  evi- 
dently a  common  origin. 

The  Mpongwe  inhabit  mostly  the  right  side  of  the  Gaboon  for 
about  thirty  miles  up.  They  live  in  villages,  which  are  generally 
located  with  particular  regard  to  the  trading  facilities  afforded 
by  the  position,  for  these  negroes  are  inveterate  traders — ^in  fact, 
the  most  intelligent  and  acute  merchants  on  the  coast. 

The  Mpongwe  villages,  though  not  extensive,  are  the  neatest 
and  best  arranged  I  have  seen  in  Africa.  They  have  generally 
but  one  main  street,  on  both  sides  of  which  the  houses  are  built. 
Sometimes  there  are  a  few  short  cross-streets.  In  a  considerable 
village,  the  main  street  is  often  20  yards  wide  and  200  yards 
long.  The  houses,  of  course,  vary  in  size  according  to  the  wealth 
of  the  owner.  They  are  built  of  a  kind  of  bamboo,  which  is 
obtained  from  a  species  of  palm  very  plentiful  hereabouts,  and 
whose  leaves  also  furnish  them  mats  for  the  roofs.  Indeed,  this 
palm  is  one  of  the  most  generally  useful  products  of  the  country 
to  the  negroes. 

The  houses  are  always  of  quadrangular  form,  and  from  20 
to  100  feet  in  length  or  breadth.  The  principal  room  is  in  the 
centre.  The  floor  is  of  clay,  which  is  pounded  hard,  and  by  long 
use  becomes  a  hard  and  clean  flooring.  Both  houses  and  street 
are  neatly  kept. 

The  walls  are  built  up  by  first  driving  stakes  into  the  ground, 
and  to  these  stakes  neatly  tying  the  split  bamboos.  One  set  is 
tied  outside  and  another  inside,  and  the  crevices  which  are  left 
between  are  made  close  with  the  leaves  of  the  palm-tree.  Thus 
the  walls  are  smooth  and  glossy,  and  perfectly  clean.  Near  the 
creeks  they  get  a  large  yellowish-white  bamboo,  which  has  a  par- 
ticularly fbae  appearance. 

The  building  of  such  a  house  is  a  matter  of  considerable  im- 
portance to  a  Mpongwe  man.  He  has  great  quantities  of  mpavo 
— the  matting  for  the  roof — made  up  ready,  then  collects  a  suf- 
ficiency of  the  bamboo,  which  has  sometimes  to  be  brought  a 
considerable  distance  up  the  river,  and  finally,  getting  all  his 
slaves  together,  marks  out  his  ground-plan,  drives  in  his  stakes, 
and  puts  up  the  walls.*  Then  comes  the  question  of  doors  and 
windows,  in  which  each  man  exercises  his  own  taste,  which  gives 
a  certain  pleasing  variety  to  the  outsides.  As  for  the  interior, 
the  various  rooms  are  fitted  up  with  all  the  riches  of  their  owner ; 


Chap.  II.  MPONGWE  COSTUME.  9 

and  on  the  coast  it  is  not  imcommon  to  see  them  adorned  with 
looking-glasses,  chairs,  tables,  sofas,  and  very  often  a  Yankee  clock. 

There  is  a  great  contrast  between  such  neat  dwellings  and  tHe 
low,  circular,  dark,  and  dirty  hovels  of  the  negroes  between  the 
Niger  and  Senegambia,  with  their  rude  high-peaked  roofs  and 
clay  walls. 

They  are  the  best-looking  people  I  have  seen,  looking  very 
much  like  the  Mandigoes ;  of  ordinary  size  and  with  pleasant 
n^ro  features,  but  handsomer  than  the  Ck)ngo  tribes.  The  men 
wear  a  shirty  generally  of  English,  French,  or  American  calico, 
over  which  is  wrapped  a  square  cloth,  which  falls  to  the  ankles. 
To  this  is  added  a  %traw  hat  for  the  head.  Only  the  king  is 
allowed  to  wear  the  Mk  hat,  of  American  or  European  manu- 
facture. The  wealthier  men  and  chiefs,  however,  are  fond  of 
dress,  and,  when  they  can  afford  it,  delight  to  show  themselves 
in  a  bright  military  costume,  sword  and  all. 

The  chief,  and,  in  most  cases,  only  garment  of  the  women  is  a 
square  cloth,  which  is  wrapped  about  the  body,  and  covers  them 
from  above  the  hips  to  just  below  the  knees.  On  their  bare  legs 
and  arms  they  delight  to  wear  great  numbers  of  brass  rings, 
often  bearing  ifrom  twenty-five  to  thirty  pounds  of  brass  on  each 
ankle  in  this  way.  This  ridiculous  vanity  greatly  obstructs  their 
locomotion,  and  makes  their  walk  a  clumsy  waddle. 

Both  sexes  are  extremely  fond  of  ornaments  and  of  perfumery, 
with  which  they  plentiMly  besprinkle  themselves,  with  little  , 
regard  to  kind. 

The  most  characteristic  point  about  the  Mpongwe — ^indeed  of 
all  the  negro  tribes  I  have  seen — ia  their  great  eagerness  and 
love  for  trade.  My  friends  the  Mpongwe  live  by  trade.  Their 
position  at  and  near  the  mouth  of  the  Gaboon  gives  them  such 
facilities  and  such  a  command  of  the  interior  as  they  know  but 
too  well  how  to  use  and  misuse  to  their  own  advantage. 

Let  me  here  give  the  reader  an  idea  of  African  commerce* 
The  rivers^  which  are  the  only  highways  of  the  country,  are,  of 
course,  the  avenues  by  which  every  species  of  export  and  import 
must  be  conveyed  from  and  to  the  interior  tribes.  Now  the 
river-banks  are  possessed  by  different  tribes.  Thus,  while  the 
Mpongwe  hold  the  mouth  and  some  miles  above,  they  are  suc- 
ceeded by  the  Shekiani,  and  these  again  by  other  tribes,  to  the 
number  of  almost  a  dozen,  before  the  Sierra  del  Crystal  mountains 


10  TRADE  MONOPOLIES.  Chap.  II. 

are  reached.  Each  of  these  tribes  assumes  to  itself  the  privilege 
of  acting  as  go-between  or  middle-man  to  those  next  to  it^  and 
charges  a  heavy  percentage  for  this  office ;  and  no  infraction  of 
this  rule  is  permitted  under  penalty  of  war.  Thus  a  piece  of 
ivory  or  ebony  may  belong  originally  to  a  negro  in  the  far 
interior,  and  if  he  wants  to  barter  it  for  "  white  man's  trade," 
he  dares  not  take  it  to  a  market  himself.  If  he  should  be  rash 
enough  to  attempt  such  a  piece  of  enterprise  his  goods  would  be. 
confiscated,  and  he,  if  caught,  fined  by  those  whose  monopoly  ho 
sought  to  break  down,  or  most  likely  sold  into  slavery. 

He  is  obliged  by  the  laws  of  trade  to  intrust  it  to  some  fellow 
in  the  next  tribe  nearer  to  the  coast.  He,  in  turn,  disposes  of 
it  to  the  next  chief  or  friend,  and  so  ivory,  or  ebony,  or  bar-wood, 
passes  through  probably  a  dozen  hands  ere  it  reaches  the  factory 
of  the  trader  on  the  coast. 

This  would  seem  to  work  against  the  white  trader  by  in- 
creasing the  price  of  products.  But  this  is  only  half  the  evil. 
Although  the  producer  sold  his  ivory,  and  though  it  was  resold 
a  dozen  times,  all  this  trade  was  only  a  commission  business 
with  no  advances.  In  fact,  the  first  holder  has  trusted  each 
successive  dispenser  with  his  property  without  any  equivalent  or 
"  collateral  '*  security.  Now,  when  the  last  black  fellow  disposes 
of  this  piece  of  ebony  or  ivory  to  the  white  merchant  or  captain, 
he  rettdns,  in  the  first  place,  a  very  liberal  percentage  of  the 
returns  for  his  valuable  services,  and  turns  the  remainder  over 
to  his  next  neighbour  above,  ffe,  in  turn,  takes  out  a  com- 
mission for  his  trouble  and  passes  on  what  is  left ;  and  so,  finally, 
a  very  small  remainder — ^too  often  nothing  at  all — ^is  handed 
over  to  the  poor  fellow  who  has  inaugurated  the  speculation  or 
sent  the  tusk. 

Anyone  can  see  the  iniquity  of  this  system,  and  the  fatal  clog 
it  throws,  on  all  attempts  at  the  building  up  of  a  legitimate 
commerce  in  a  country  so  rich  in  many  products  now  almost 
indispensable  to  civilized  nations.  The  poor  interior  tribes  are 
kept  by  their  neighbours  in  the  profoundest  ignorance  of  what 
is  done  on  the  coast  They  are  made  to  believe  the  most  absurd 
and  horrid  stories  as  to  the  ferocity,  the  duplicity,  and  the 
cunning  of  the  white  traders.  They  are  persuaded  that  the 
rascally  middle-men  are  not  only  in  constant  danger  of  their 
lives  by  their  intercourse  with  the  ^whites,  but  that  they  do  not 


Chap.  IL  HONESTY  IS  THE  WORST  POLICY.  11 

make  any  profit  on  the  goods  which  they  good-naturedly  pass 
on  to  a  market ;  so  that  I  have  known  one  of  these  scoundrels, 
after  having  appropriated  a  large  share  of  the  poor  remainder 
of  returas  for  a  venture  of  ivory,  actually,  by  a  pitiful  story, 
beg  a  portion  of  what  he  had  handed  over  to  his  unsuspicious 
client.  Each  tribe  cheats  its  next  neighbour  above,  and  maligns 
its  next  neighbour  below.  A  talent  for  slandering  is,  of  course, 
a  first-rate  business  talent ;  and  the  harder  stories  one  can  tell 
of  his  neighbours  below  the  greater  profit  he  will  make  on  his 
neighbour  above. 

The  consequence  is  that  the  interior  tribes — ^who  own  the  most 
productive  country — ^have  little  or  no  incentive  to  trade,  or  to 
gather  together  the  stores  of  ivory,  bar-wood,  ebony,  &c.,  for 
which  they  get  such  small  prices,  and  these  at  no  certain  in- 
tervals, but  often  after  long  periods,  even  years  elapsing  some- 
times before  a  final  settlement  is  found  convenient.  Thus  they 
are  discouraged,  and  perforce  remain  in  their  original  barbarism 
and  inactivity. 

The  trade  in  slaves  is  carried  on  in  exactly  the  same  way, 
(except  that  sometimes  an  infraction  of  trade-laws,  or  some  dis- 
turbance on  account  of  witchcraft,  causes  a  war  between  two 
tribes  in  the  commission  business,  when,  of  course,  each  side 
takes  all  it  can  of  the  opposite  and  ships  them  direct  to  the 
coast — to  the  barracoons  or  slave-depots,  of  which  I  shall  have 
something  more  detailed  to  say  farther  on. 

There  are,-  however,  other  obstacles  to  the  prosecution  of  a 
regular  commercial  enterprise  even  by  the  shrewder  among  the 
negroes.  It  is  not  permitted  that  any  member  of  a  tribe  shall 
get  into  his  hands  more  than  his  share  of  the  trade.  It  occiu'red 
some  years  ago  to  a  shrewd  Mpongwe  fellow  that  in  trade  tran- 
sactions honesty  might  be  the  best  policy,  and  he  followed  the 
suggestion  so  well  that  presently  both  the  whites  and  the  in- 
terior natives  threw  a  very  considerable  trade  into  his  honest 
hands.  But  no  sooner  was  this  observed  than  he  was  threatened 
with  poisoning,  accused  of  witchcraft,  and  such  a  hullaballoo 
raised  about  his  ears  that  he  was  forced  to  refuse  the  trade 
offered  him,  and,  in  a  measure,  retire  from  business  to  save  his  life. 

More  recently  still,  there  were  three  or  four  men  in  the  river 
who  had  obtained  by  long  good  conduct  quite  a  character  for 
honesty,  and  also,  in  consequence,  got  a  good  deal  of  business. 


12  THE  CREDIT  SYSTEM.  Chap.  U. 

At  last  a  captain  came  for  a  load  of  bar- wood,  and  declared  that 
he  would  trust  only  the  three  or  four  men  in  question,  to  the 
bitter  disappointment  of  other  traders.  The  vessel  was  quickly 
filled  and  departed;  and  there  arose  a  great  "palaver" — ^the 
Mpongwe  cant  for  a  quarrel — in  which  the  kings  and  chiefs  and 
all  the  disappointed  trading  fellows  met  together  at  Glass  Town 
— the  residence  of  my  honest  friends — ^to  advise  about  such  an 
outrage.  The  men  were  called  up  for  trial.  They  had  been 
educated  at  the  American  mission,  and  knew  how  to  write  ;  and 
the  charge  made  against  them  dow  was  that  they  had  written  to 
the  white  man's  country  to  say  that  there  were  no  good  men  in 
Gaboon  but  themselves. 

To  this  the  accused  shrewdly  replied  that  the  white  men 
would  not  believe  men  who  should  thus  praise  themselves. 

But  reply  was  useless.  They  were  threatened  that  if  they 
took  the  next  ship  that  came,  the  malcontents  would  "  make  a 
boondgi,"  or  work  a  spell  of  witchcraft  upon  them,  and  kill 
them.  Fortunately,  in  this  case,  the  honest  fellows  had  learned 
at  tlie  mission  not  to  fear  such  threats ;  and  the  French  com- 
mander for  once  stepped  in  and  protected  them  against  their 
envious  fellows,  so  that  for  this  time,  on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa, 
honesty  seems  likely  to  get  its  reward. 

Again,  through  the  anxiety  of  white  traders  to  secure  "  trade," 
there  has  sprung  up  along  the  coast  an  injurious  system  of 
"  trust."  A  merchant,  to  secure  to  himself  certain  quantities  of 
produce  yet  to  come  down  from  the  interior,  gives  to  such  black 
fellows  as  he  thinks  he  can  depend  upon  advances  of  trade 
goods,  often  to  very  considerable  amounts.  In  this  way,  on  the 
Gaboon  and  on  the  coast,  often  many  thousand  dollars'  worth  of 
goods  are  in  the  hands  of  natives,  for  which  no  consideration  has 
been  received  by  the  white  trader,  who  meantime  waits,  and  is 
put  to  trouble  and  expense,  and  thinks  himself  lucky  if  he  does 
not  eventually  lose  a  part  of  his  investment. 

This  system  of  "  trust,"  as  it  is  called,  does  great  injury  to  the 
natives,  for  it  tempts  them  to  practise  all  sorts  of  cheats,  for 
which  they  are  sharp  enough — indeed,  much  too  shrewd  often 
for  the  white  man.  Of  course,  hia  only  dependence  lies  in  the 
knowledge  of  his  black  debtor  that  if  he  cheats  too  badly  his 
future  supplies  will  be  stopped  entirely.  But  the  practice 
develoi)S  all  kinds  of  overtrading  as  well  as  rascality — negroes 


Chap.  IL  A  DAY  WITH  THE  TRADERS.  13 

seldom  hesitating  to  contract  to  supply  much  greater  quantities 
of  produce  than  they  can  hope  to  procure  during  a  season* 

Even  the  slave-trade,  I  found,  on  my  visit  to  Cape  Lopez,  is 
burdened  with  this  evil  of  "  trust,"  and  some  of  the  Portuguese 
slavers,  I  was  told,  get  preciously  cheated  in  their  advances  on 
shipments  of  slaves  sold  **  to  arrive,"  but  which  do  not  come  to 
hand. 

I  have  heard  the  negroes  called  stupid,  but  my  experience 
shows  them  to  be  anything  but  that  They  are  very  shrewd 
traders  indeed ;  and  no  captain  or  merchant  who  is  a  new  hand 
on  the  coast  will  escape  being  victimized  by  their  cunning  in 
driving  a  bargain. 

Say  that  to-day  the  good  ship  Jenny  has  arrived  in  the  river. 
Immediately  every  black  fellow  is  full  of  trade.  The  ship  is 
boarded  by  a  crowd  of  fellows,  each  jabbering  away,  apparently 
at  random,  but  all  telling  the  same  story. 

Never  was  there  such  dearth  of  ivory,  or  whatever  the  captain 
may  want ! 

Never  were  the  interior  tribes  so  obstinate  in  demanding  a 
high  price  I 

Never  was  the  whole  coast  so  bare ! 

Never  were  diflSculties  so  great  I 

There  have  been  fights,  captain ! 

And  fever,  captain ! 

And  floods,  captain ! 

And  no  trade  at  all,  captain ! 

Not  a  tooth  1 

This  point  settled,  they  produce  their  "  good  books,"  which  are 
certificates  of  character,  in  which  some  captain  or  other  white 
trader  who  is  known  on  the  coast  vouches  for  the  honesty — ^the 
great  honesty  and  entire  trustworthiness— of  the  bearer.  It  is 
not  worth  while  for  a  fellow  to  present  himseK  without  a  certifi- 
cate, and  the  papers  are  all  goody  because  when  "  the  bearer " 
has  cheated  he  does  not  apply  for  a  "  character."  Now  these 
certificates  help  him  to  cheat.  When  he  finds  the  need  of  a 
new  set  of  papers,  he  conducts  himself  with  scrupulous  honesty 
towards  two  or  three  captains.  These,  of  course,  "  certify"  him, 
and  then  he  goes  into  the  wildest  and  most  reckless  speculations, 
upheld  by  the  "  good  books,"  which  he  shows  to  every  captain 
that  comes. 

Now,  while  they  are  pretending  that  nothing  is  to  be  bought. 


14  EVILS  OF  "TRUST."  Chap.  U. 

that  there  is  no  ivory  on  the  coasts  all  this  time  the  lying  rascals 
have  their  hands  Ml,  and  are  eager  to  sell.  They  know  the 
captain  is  in  a  hurry.  The  coast  is  sickly.  The  weather  is  hot 
He  fears  his  crew  may  fall  sick  or  die,  and  he  be  left  with  a 
broken  voyage.  Every  day  is  therefore  precious  to  him ;  but  to 
the  black  fellows  all  days  are  alike.  They  have  no  storage,  no 
interest  account,  no  fever  to  fear,  and,  accordingly,  they  can  tire 
the  captain  out.  This  they  do.  In  fact  often,  if  they  have  an 
obstinate  customer  to  deal  with,  they  even  combine  and  send  all 
the  trade  a  day's  journey  up  river,  and  thus  produce  a  fair  show 
of  commercial  scarcity.  At  last,  when  high  prices  have  been 
established,  when  the  inroads  of  fever  on  his  crew  or  the  advance 
of  the  season  have  made  the  poor  captain  desperately  willing  to 
pay  anything,  the  ivory  comes  aboard,  and  the  cunning  black 
fellows  chuckle. 

Even  then,  however,  there  are  tedious  hours  of  chaflfering.  A 
negro  has  perhaps  only  one  tooth  to  sell,  and  he  is  willing — as 
he  must  live  on  this  sale  for  a  long  period  of  idleness — ^to  give 
much  time  to  its  proper  disposal.  He  makes  up  his  mind  before- 
hand how  much  more  he  will  ask  than  he  will  eventually  take. 
He  brings  his  tooth  alongside ;  spends  the  afternoon  in  bargain- 
ing, and  probably  takes  it  back  ashore  at  dusk,  to  try  again  the 
next  day ;  till  at  last,  when  he  sees  he  cannot  possibly  get  more, 
he  strikes  the  trade.  I  have  known  several  days  to  be  spent  in 
the  selling  of  a  single  tooth  or  a  single  cask  of  palm-oiL 

Of  course  the  captain  protests  that  he  is  not  in  a  hurry — ^that 
he  can  wait — that  they  shan't  tire  him  out.  But  the  negroes  know 
better;  they  know  the  fatal  advantage  their  climate  gives  them. 

When  it  is  supposed  that  a  captain  or  trader  wUl  return  to  the 
coast  no  more  after  his  present  voyage,  then  he  is  properly  vic- 
timized, as  then  the  native  has  no  fear  of  future  vengeance  before 
him ;  and  I  have  known  many  individuals  who,  by  the  system  of 
"  trust,"  were  all  but  ruined — getting  scarce  any  return  at  all. 

It  is  much  to  be  wished  that  white  traders  would  combine  to 
put  down  at  least  this  abuse.  But  until  the  spread  of  commerce 
shall  break  down  the  scoundrelly  system  of  middle-men  in  this 
land,  there  will  be  no  really  prosperous  trade  there.  And  this 
will  not  happen  till  the  merchants  themselves  visit  the  liead- 
quarters  whence  the  produce  is  brought,  and  until  the  rude  tribes 
shall  be  somewhat  civilized  by  lengthened  contact  with  the 
whites.   At  present  things  are  in  a  state  of  utter  disorganization. 


Chap.  IT.  MPONGWE  COASTERS.  15 

and  the  "  trust "  abuse  seems  a  real  necessity.  For  so  hardly 
and  often  have  the  interior  tribes  been  cheated  of  all  returns 
for  their  wares,  that  now  they  have  come  to  demand  at  least  part 
payment  in  advance ;  and,  of  course,  this  advance  is  exacted  of 
the  white  trader  on  the  coast,  to  lure  whom  great  rumours  are 
spread  through  the  tribes  of  teeth  of  a  marvellous  size  lying 
ready  for  purchase,  &c.  Too  often,  when  an  advance  has  been 
made  for  a  specific  purchase— of  a  tooth,  say — ^it  is,  after  all,  seized 
for  some  intermediate  party's  debt  on  its  way  down,  and  thus 
the  poor  trader  is  again  victimized. 

So  eager  are  the  Mpongwe  for  trade  that  they  have  even  set 
up  a  regular  coasting  business.  Every  considerable  negro  trader 
owns  several  canoes ;  but  his  great  ambition  is  to  buy  or  build  a 
larger  vessel,  in  which  he  may  sail  along  the  coajst,  and,  getting 
goods  on  trust  from  white  merchants,  make  his  regular  voyage, 
or  establish  his  little  factory  on  some  out-of-the-way  point  on  the 
shore.  The  splendid  harbour  of  the  Gaboon  has  made  them 
tolerably  fearless  on  the  water,  and  their  rage  for  trade  leads 
them  to  all  manner  of  adventures. 

Their  coasting-vessels  are  only  large  boats,  but  I  have  seen 
some  of  so  considerable  size  as  to  hold  conveniently  eight  to  ten 
tons.  To  make  one  of  these  they  cut  down  an  immense  tree, 
sharpen  it  at  the  ends,  then  burn  out  the  interior,  guiding  the 
fire  so  as  to  burn  the  heart  of  the  tree  and  leave  them  the  shell 
they  need.  For  this  hull,  which  is  then  scraped  smooth,  and 
otherwise  finished  and  strengthened,  they  next  make  masts  and 
sails,  the  latter  being  of  matting,  and  then  they  are  ready  for 
sea.  These  cockle-shells  stand  the  wind  and  sea  remarkably 
well,  as  is  evident  when  the  squally  and  blustery  weather  of  this 
country  is  considered,  and  when  we  know  that  they  make  voyages 
from  the  Gaboon  as  far  as  Cape  St.  Catherine's  south,  and  as  far 
as  Banoko  and  Cameroon  north. 

The  start  for  one  of  these  voyages  is  a  great  occasion.  Guns 
are  fired,  and  the  people  shout  and  wish  a  pleasant  voyage ;  and 
the  lucky  vessel  is  received  at  her  port  of  destination  with  similar 
ceremonies. 

The  great  aim  of  a  Mpongwe  trader,  however,  is  to  get  **  trust " 
from  a  white  man,  with  authority  to  go  oflF  up  or  down  the  coast 
and  establish  a  factory.  Then  there  is  double  rejoicing.  But 
the  poor  white  trader  is  generally  sadly  victimised ;  for  his  agent 
goes  to  some  spot  where  he  thinks  he  can  get  ivory  and  other 


16  MPONGWE  FACTORIES.  Chap.  II. 

trade  and  settles  down.  Then,  first,  he  mostly  picks  out  the 
best  and  most  valuable  of  the  goods  with  which  he  has  been  in- 
trusted, and  secretes  these  for  his  own  use.  His  next  step  is  to 
buy  himself  some  slaves  and  to  marry  several  wives ;  all  which 
being  accomplished,  it  is  at  last  time  to  think  of  the  interests  of 
his  principal.  Thus,  after  many  months,  perhaps  he  makes 
returns  of  his  sales,  or  perhaps  he  fails  altogether  to  make 
returns,  if  he  thinks  he  can  cheat  so  far  with  impimity. 

These  fellows  understand  all  the  dialects  spoken  on  the  coast, 
as  well  as  English,  French,  Spanish,  and  Portuguese.  On  their 
voyages,  as  they  go  poorly  provisioned,  and  depend  more  on  luck 
than  real  skill,  they  often  suffer  extreme  hardships,  but  they  are 
seldom  drowned. 

The  chief  product  of  the  Graboon  country  is  its  ivory.  This  is 
said  to  be  the  finest  on  the  western  coast.  It  produces  also 
bar-wood,  a  dye-wood,  from  which  is  obtained  a  dark  red  dye, 
and  ebony,  the  last  taken  from  the  great  forests  of  this  wood 
which  abound  near  the  head-waters  of  the  Gaboon  Eiver.  I 
have  seen  very  large  sticks  brought  thence,  but  the  supply  is  not 
yet  large.  The  bar-wood  tree  is  found  in  great  plenty  along  the 
shores  of  the  river  and  its  numerous  tributary  creeks.  It  is  also 
found  on  the  Moondah  and  Danger  rivers.  CJopal  is  another 
product  of  this  country,  but  it  is  of  inferior  qutdity,  and  is  not 
sought 

Ivory  comes  down  the  river  from  the  interior  by  inland  jour- 
neys in  great  quantities.  Upwards  of  80,000  pounds  are  taken 
from  the  Gaboon  Eiver  yearly  when  home  prices  are  good ;  for 
the  ruling  prices  here  are  so  high  that  traders  cannot  buy  to  ad- 
vantage unless  the  home  demand  is  very  brisk.  I  suppose  that 
the  country  from  Banoko  to  Loango  furnishes  in  brisk  years  at 
leaat  150,000  pounds  of  ivory. 

But  however  important  may  be  these  commercial  resources  of 
the  Gaboon  country,  I  am  convinced  that  the  people  will  never 
prosper  till  they  turn  their  attention  more  to  agricultural  opera- 
tions, for  elephants  must  finally  disappear.  This,  indeed,  is  the 
great  evil  of  all  the  nations  of  Western  Africa,  The  men  despise 
labour,  and  force  their  women  and  slaves  to  till  the  fields ;  and 
this  tillage  never  assumes  the  important  proportions  it  deserves, 
so  that  the  supply  of  food  is  never  abundant ;  the  tribes,  almost 
without  exception,  live  from  hand  to  mouth,  and,  with  a  fertile 
soil,  are  half  the  time  in  a  state  of  semi-starvation. 


/  / 


lJ_ 


Chap.  III.  DECREASE  OP  THE  MPONGWE.  17 


CHAPTER  IIL 

Some  Causes  of  the  Decrease  of  the  Mpongwe  —  Restrictions  as  to  Intermai^ 
riage  —  Last  Days  of  King  Glass  —  Public  Opinion  on  the  Gaboon  —  Mourn- 
ing for  a  King  —  "  Making  "  a  new  King  —  Character  of  the  Mpongwe  — 
An  African  Gentleman  —  Food  —  Agriculture. 

To  retom  to  the  Mpongwe,  who,  as  the  leading  tribe  on  the 
Gaboon,  deserve  a  few  words  more.  I  have  s«ud  before  that 
this,  in  common  with  most  of  the  tribes,  is  slowly  decreasing  in 
numbers.  Polygamy  and  the  numerous  murders,  or  accusations 
for  witchcraft,  do  more  to  cause  this  decrease  thaa  aught  else 
visible ;  much  more  than  fevers  and  irregular  habits. 

The  Coast  tribe  is  much  divided  into  classes,  whose  distinction 
is  kept  up  chiefly  by  the  restraints  in  intermarriage.  Of 
Mpongwe  of  pure  blood  there  are  at  present  not  more  than 
three  hundred.  Next  to  these  in  rank  come  the  descendants  of 
Mpongwe  fathers  by  Mbenga,  Shekiani,  or  Bakalai  women; 
these  amount  to  about  800.  Next  come  the  children  of  Mpong- 
we men  by  their  slave  women.  These  are  called  hambai;  and, 
though  they  enjoy  little  less  consideration  than  the  purer  blood, 
are  not  permitted  to  marry  with  that  privileged  class.  These 
may  number  1000.  Then  come  the  children  of  slaves,  who  form 
a  great  proportion  of  the  population,  numbering  not  less  than 
1000 ;  and,  finally,  the  lowest  of  all,  the  slaves,  who  number,  I 
suppose,  three  or  four  thousand. 

They  live  chiefly  on  the  right  side  of  the  Gaboon  Eiver,  having 
their  villages,  called  Kring^,  Qua-ben,  Louis,  or  Dow^  Glass, 
Prince  Glass,  and  two  more,  on  Point  Obendo  and  Parrot  Island. 
On  the  left  side  are  the  villages  of  Boi  Dennis,  otherwise  called 
King  William,  King  George,  and  King  Lucan.  These  dignitaries 
are  petty  chiefs,  who  govern  after  a  fashion,  and  with  considerable 
limitations,  the  towns  named  after  them.  The  whole  tribe  seems 
to  be  ruled  by  four  of  the  principal  kings ;  but  when  disputes 
arise,  which  is  constantly,  there  must  be  a  palaver  in  the  village, 
in  which  the  old  men  join  and  advise.  King  Qua-ben  is  held  to 
be  the  father  of  the  Aguegueza,  to  which  family  King  Glass  also 

0 


18  AN  AFRICAN  TYRANT.  Chap.  III. 

belongs.  The  Point  Obendo  villages  belong  to  the  Ogongo 
family.  King  William  (or  Eompochembo)  belongs  to  the 
Ashiga  family,  and  is  the  most  intelligent  of  all  the  kings. 

While  I  was  in  the  Gaboon  old  King  Glass  died.  He  had 
long  been  ailing,  but  stuck  to  life  with  a  determined  tenacity 
which  almost  bade  fair  to  cheat  death.  He  was  a  disagreeable 
old  heathen,  but  in  his  last  days  became  very  devout — after  his 
fashion.  His  idol  was  always  freshly  painted  and  brightly  deco- 
rated; his  fetich  was  the  best-cared-for  fetich  in  Africa;  and 
every  few  days  some  great  doctor  was  brought  down  from  the 
interior,  and  paid  a  large  fee  for  advising  the  old  king.  He  was 
afraid  of  witchcraft — thought  everybody  wanted  to  put  him  out 
of  the  way  by  bewitching  him ;  and  in  this  country  your  doctor 
does  not  try  to  cure  your  sickness ;  his  business  is  to  keep  off 
the  witches. 

The'tribe  had  grown  tired  of  their  king.  They  thought,  indeed, 
that  he  was  himself  a  most  potent  and  evil-disposed  wizard,  and, 
though  the  matter  was  not  openly  talked  about,  there  were  few 
natives  who  would  pass  his  house  after  nighty  and  none  who 
would  be  tempted  inside  by  any  slighter  provocation  than  an, 
irresistible  jug  of  rum.  Indeed,  if  he  had  not  belonged  to  one 
of  the  most  noble  families  of  the  Mpongwe  tribe,  I  think  ho 
would  perhaps  have  been  killed,  so  rife  was  suspicion  against 
him. 

When  he  became  ill  at  last  everybody  seemed  very  sorry ;  but 
several  of  my  friends  told  me  in  confidence  that  the  whole  town 
hoped  he  would  die;  and  die  he  did.  I  was  awakened  one 
morning  early  by  the  mournful  cries  and  wails  with  which  the 
African  oftener  assumes  a  sham  sorrow  than  eases  a  real  grief. 
All  the  town  seemed  lost  in  tears.  It  is  a  most  singular  thing 
to  see  the  faculty  the  women  of  Africa  have  for  pumping  up 
tears  on  the  slightest  occasion,  or  on  no  occasion  at  all.  There 
needs  no  grief  or  pain  to  draw  the  water.  I  have  seen  them 
shed  tears  copiously,  and  laughing  all  the  while. 

The  mourning  and  wailing  lasted  six  days.  On  the  second  the 
old  king  was  secretly  buried.  The  Mpongwe  kings  are  always 
buried  by  a  few  of  the  most  trustworthy  men  of  the  tribe  in  a 
spot  which  they  only  know  of,  and  which  is  for  ever  hidden  from 
all  others.  This  custom  arises  from  a  vain  belief  of  the  Mpongwe 
that,  as  they  are  the  most  able  and  intelligent  people  of  Africa, 


Chap.  III.  MAKING  A  KING,  19 

the  other  tribes  would  like  much  to  get  the  head  of  one  of  their 
kings,  with  the  brains  of  which  to  make  a  powerful  fetich. 
Such  an  advantage  they  are  not  willing  to  give  to  their  neigh- 
bours. Now,  as  it  is  customary  to  hang  a  flag  or  a  piece  of 
cloth  where  a  Mpongwe  is  buried,  these  old  men  hung  also  a 
large  piece  of  bright  cloth  over  a  spot  where  the  king  was  not 
laid.  Where  he  was  put  I  cannot  tell,  because  the  secret  was 
not  told  even  to  me. 

During  the  days  of  mourning  the  old  men  of  the  village  busied 
ihemflelveB  in  choosmg  a  new  king.  This  also  is  a  secret  opera- 
tion.  The  choice  is  made  in  private,  and  communicated  to  the 
populace  only  on  the  seventh  day,  when  the  new  king  is  to  be 
crowned.  .  But  the  king  is  kept  ignorant  of  his  good  fortune  to 
the  last. 

It  happened  that  Njogordy  a  good  friend  of  my  own,  was  elected. 
The  choice  fell  on  him,  in  part  because  he  came  of  a  good  family, 
but  chiefly  because  he  was  a  favourite  of  the  people  and  could  get 
the  most  votes.  I  do  not  know  that  Njogoni  had  the  slightest 
suspicion  of  his  elevation.  At  any  rate,  if  he  had,  he  shammed 
ignorance  very  welL  As  he  was  waUring  on  the  shore,  on  the 
morning  of  the  seventh  day,  he  was  suddenly  set  upon  by  the 
entire  populace,  who  proceeded  to  a  ceremony  which  is  prelimi- 
nary to  the  crowning,  and  which  must  deter  any  but  the  most 
ambitious  men  from  aspiring  to  the  crown.  They  surrounded 
him  in  a  deuse  crowd,  and  then  began  to  heap  upon  him  every 
manner  of  abuse  that  the  worst  of  mobs  could  imagine.  Some 
spit  in  his  face ;  some  beat  him  with  their  iSsts ;  some  kicked 
him ;  others  threw  disgusting  objects  at  him ;  while  those  un- 
lucky ones  who  stood  on  the  outside,  and  could  reach  the  poor 
fellow  only  with  their  voices,  assiduously  cursed  him,  his  father, 
his  mother,  his  sisters  and  brothers,  and  all  his  ancestors  to  the 
remotest  generation.  A  stranger  would  not  have  given  a  cent 
for  the  life  of  him  who  was  presently  to  be  crowned. 

Amid  all  the  noise  and  struggle,  I  caught  the  words  which 
explained  all  this  to  me ;  for  every  few  minutes  some  fellow, 
administering  an  especially  severe  blow  or  kick,  would  shout 
out,  **  You  are  not  our  king  yet ;  for  a  little  while  we  will  do 
what  we  please  with  you.  By-and-by  we  shall  have  to  do  your 
wilL- 

Njogoni  bore  himself  like  a  man  and  a  prospective  king.    He 

c  2 


20  A  ROYAL  EECEPTION.  Chap.  IE. 

kept  his  temper,  and  took  all  the  abuse  with  a  smiling  face. 
When  it  had  lasted  about  half  an  hour,  they  took  him  to  the 
house  of  the  old  king.  Here  he  was  seated,  and  became  again 
for  a  little  while  the  victim  of  his  people's  curses. 

Then  all  became  silent ;  and  the  elders  of  the  people  rose  and 
said,  solemnly  (the  people  repeating  after  them), "  Now  we  choose 
you  for  our  king ;  we  engage  to  listen  to  you  and  to  obey  you." 

A  silence  followed,  and  presently  the  silk  hat,  which  is  the 
emblem  of  Mpongwe  royalty,  was  brought  in  and  placed  on 
Njogoni's  head.  He  was  then  dressed  in  a  red  gown,  and  re- 
ceived the  greatest  marks  of  respect  from  all  who  had  just  now 
abused  him. 

Now  followed  a  six  days'  festival,  during  which  the  poor  king, 
who  had  taken  with  the  office"also  the  name  of  his  predecessor, 
was  obliged  to  receive  his  subjects  in  his  own  house,  and  was  not 
allowed  to  stir  out ;  six  days  of  indescribable  gorging  of  food 
and  bad  rum — of  beastly  drunkenness  and  uproarious  festivity. 
Numbers  of  strangers  came  in  from  surrounding  villages  to  pay 
their  respects ;  and  all  brought  more  rum,  more  palm-wine,  and 
more  food.  Everything  that  tended  toward  festivity  was  given 
away,  and  all  who  came  were  welcome. 

Old  King  Glass,  for  whom  for  six  days  no  end  of  tears  had 
been  shed,  was  now  forgotten  ;  and  new  King  Glass,  poor  fellow, 
was  sick  with  exhaustion,  for  day  and  night  he  had  to  be  ready 
to  receive  and  be  civil  to  all  who  came. 

Finally,  all  the  rum  was  drunk  up,  the  allotted  days  were 
expired,  and  quiet  once  more  began  to  reign.  Now,  for  the  first 
time,  his  new  majesty  was  permitted  to  walk  out  and  view  his 
domains. 

By  long  intercourse  with  traders,  and  the  commercial  necessity 
for  mild  manners,  the  coast  Mpongwe  have,  as  a  people,  acquired 
a  polish  and  politeness  of  address  which  astonishes  strangers 
very  greatly.  They  know  perfectly  how  to  make  themselves  at 
home  with  all  the  whites  they  meet,  and  understand  how  to  flatter 
the  peculiarities  of  the  different  nationalities,  the  American, 
English,  French,  and  Spanish,  in  a  very  amusing  and  extremely 
shrewd  way.  In  fact,  they  are  a  mercantile  people,  and  recognise 
outward  politeness  as  a  valuable  commercial  quality ;  but>  with 
all  their  smoothness,  they  are  inwardly  great  retscals  and  keen 
dissimulators. 


Chap.  III.  AN  AFRICAN  GENTLEMAN.  21 

It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  efforts  of  the  missionaries  will  haye 
some  effect  upon  the  rising  generation,  among  whom  chiefly 
they  must  expect  to  labour ;  for  of  the  grown  negro,  in  whom 
the  love  of  idleness  and  chicanery  are  already  habits,  it  is  next 
to  impossible  to  make  anything. 

But  it  would  be  wrong  to  condemn  the  whole  people.  As 
future  pages  will  show,  I  met  everywhere  in  my  travels  men  and 
women  honest,  well-meaning,  and  in  every  way  entitled  to  re- 
spect and  trust ;  and  the  very  fact  that  a  white  man  could  travel 
alone,  single-handed,  and  without  powerful  backers,  through  this 
rude  country  without  being  molested  or  robbed,  is  sufiQcient  evi- 
dence that  the  negro  race  is  not  unkindly  natured. 

One  of  the  chief  men  of  Glass  Town,  a  man  whom  I  knew 
and  loved,  was  a  remarkable  exception  to  the  general  dishonesty 
of  the  coast  Mpongwe.  This  man  was  respected  and  trusted  by 
all  the  traders  of  the  various  nations  who  came  to  the  Gaboon, 
and  enjoyed  as  well  the  esteem  of  his  countrymen  and  of  the 
whites.  Though  not  a  professing  Christian,  his  long  intercourse 
with  the  missionaries  had  opened  his  eyes  to  the  deceits  and 
cruelties  of  fetichism.  He  adhered  to  polygamy,  probably  be- 
cause he  saw  no  way  to  rid  himself  of  his  numerous  family.  But 
he  was  really,  in  mcmners  and  conduct,  a  black  gentleman; 
genial,  affable,  polite,  kind,  and  benevolent  No  stranger  or 
poor  person  ever  passed  his  bamboo  house  without  help  from 
hinu  No  one  asked  in  vain  for  a  share  of  his  means  or  his  in- 
fluence. As  a  trader,  every  white  man  liked  him ;  and  he  was 
never  known  to  "  make  palaver,"  as  is  too  much  the  custom 
among  his  fellows.  He  died  when  I  was  in  the  Commi  coimtry ; 
and,  as  an  extraordinary  proof  of  his  benevolence  and  enlighten- 
ment, with  his  last  words  he  forbade  strictly  that  any  of  his 
slaves  should  be  killed  over  his  grave :  unlike  one  of  his  fellow- 
chiefs.  Toko,  who,  dying  but  a  little  while  before,  had  a  great 
number  of  poor  wretches  tortured  and  killed  at  his  AmeraL 

Poor  Will  Glass  I  He  lies  in  the  mission  burying-ground^ 
near  the  men  whom  he  loved  in  life,  and  who  had  before  him 
Mien  victims  to  their  zeal  for  Christ  and  their  love  for  their 
fellow-men. 

I  sat  one  day  in  Will  Glass's  house,  when  he  began  to  speak 
of  his  friends,  missionaries  who  had  returned  home,  and  whose 
absence  he  grieved  over.    Especially  he  seemed  to  feel  the  loss 


22  FOOD  —  PLANTATIONS.  Chap.  Ill . 

of  the  Rev.  J.  Leighton  Wilson,  our  common  friend,  andliowthe 
Secretary  of  the  Presbyterian  Board  of  Foreign  Missions.  Mr. 
Wilson's  memory  is  still  cherished  among  the  people  of  the 
Graboon ;  and  Will  Glass  told  me  how  the  natives  in  crowds 
escorted  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wilson  to  the  boat  when  they  were  about 
to  leave  the  coast  *'  Little  did  I  think  we  should  never  see  him 
again,"  said  he  ;  then^  after  a  pause>  he  added,  ^'  I  shall  never 
see  him  again." 

And  looking  up,  I  saw  two  great  tears  rolling  down  the 
wrinkled  cheeks  of  this  old  black  man,  who  hsA  probably  known 
no  tears  for  many  years  before.  Such  is  the  affection  which 
that  missionary  and  others  inspired  in  the  breasts  of  natives  who 
are  not  even  their  converts. 

The  vegetable  food  of  the  Mpongwe,  and  with  little  variation 
of  most  of  the  other  tribes  of  this  region  near  the  seashore, 
consists  of  Indian  com,  the  plantain,  yams,  sweet  potatoes, 
cassava  (manioc),  tania,  pumpkins,  and  ground  or  pea  nuts. 
The  last  produce  enormously,  and  considerable  oil  could  be 
made  if  any  one  would  give  attention  to  their  cultivation  for  this 
purpose.  The  forests  abound  in  wild  fruits  and  nuts,  some  of 
which  are  eaten ;  for  instance,  the  pine-apple  grows  wild  in  all 
parts  of  this  region,  and  is  a  delicious  fruit. 

Their  plantations  are  never  near  their  villages,  and  often  many 
miles  away.  The  consequence  is,  that  during  the  dry  season 
the  Mpongwe  villages  are  mostly  deserted,  all  hands,  men, 
women,  and  slaves,  being  busily  engaged  on  their  farms  in 
preparing  the  soil  for  the  crop,  which  must  be  put  down  by  the 
beginning  of  the  rainy  season.  This  is  a  busy  time,  as  generally 
new  clearings  have  to  be  made,  for  which  the  men  cut  down  the 
trees  and  bum  them,  when  the  women  come  in  and  put  in 
the  crop.  They  use  no  ploughs  or  hoes,  but  only  a  littie  tool 
like  a  gardener's  dibble,  with  which  they  turn  up  a  piece  of 
sod,  put  in  a  seed,  cover  it  over,  and  pass  on  to  the  next 
But,  mde  as  their  agricultural  knowledge  is,  they  sometimes 
raise  good  crops. 

The  soil  is  well  fitted  for  raising  many  valuable  articles 
of  commerce.  Sugarcanes  grow  luxuriantly  on  the  banks 
of  the  Gaboon.  Coffee-plants  were  first  introduced  by  the 
Rev.  J.  L.  Wilson,  fifteen  years  ago,  and  now  bear  finely,  those 
about  t&e  mission-grounds  being  particularly  loaded  with  berries. 


Chap.  III.  ANDfAJi  POOD.  23 

And  I  have  no  doubt  other  valuable  tropical  plants  not  indigenous 
would  succeed,  if  only  the  labour  necessary  for  proper  culture 
were  attainable. 

The  Mpongwe  eat  the  meat  of  almost  every  animal  found  in 
the  forest  and  river — deer,  antelopes,  wild  boar.  Civilization 
has  taught  them  not  to  eat  animals  of  other  orders  like  the 
other  natives,  such  as  chimpanzee,  crocodile,  monkeys,  rats,  and 
80  forth;  such  food  is  eaten  by  their  slaves.  Often,  when 
hunters  succeeded  in  killing  for  me  a  rare  and  unknown  bird,  I 
was  disappointed  of  preserving  it,  because  they  would  slyly  eat 
the  meat  and  ruin  the  skin. 


24  OORISCO  THE  BEAUTIFUL.  Chap.  IV. 


CHAPTEK  IV. 

Corisoo  the  Beautiful  —  The  Mbengas — Missionary  Stations  —  African  Wake 
—  Set  out  for  the  Muni  —  An  Explorer's  Outfit  —  Plan  of  Operations  —  Poor 
Debtor  in  Africa  —  Lynch  Law  —  My  Canoe  —  The  Muni  —  Mangrove 
Swamps  —  Lost — King  Dayoko  —  Salutations. 

The  Gaboon,  being  old  and  beaten  ground,  did  not  need  my 
explorations.  It  was  useful  to  me  as  a  starting-place  or  point 
of  departure,  because  here  only  could  I  lay  in  such  supplies  of 
goods  as  I  needed  from  time  to  time  in  making  my  way  into  the 
interior ;  and  hither  I  returned  to  rest  and  regain  health  and 
strength  after  each  of  my  tours.  Beyond  this  we  shall  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  Gaboon  hencefortlu 

It  was  my  intention  to  proceed  first  on  an  exploration  of  the 
Eiver  Muni,  and  for  this  purpose  I  sailed  from  Gaboon  for 
Consco  Island,  where  I  was  to  get  canoes  and  men  to  help 
me  at  least  a  part  of  the  way  up  river.  Corisco — ^ihe  picturesque 
Corisco  it  deserves  to  be  called — ^is  an  island  situated  in  the 
bay  of  the  same  name,  and  at  about  twelve  miles  from  the  main 
land  of  Cape  St  John,  between  that  and  Cape  Steiras.  It  is  a 
tolerably  high  and  well- wooded  island,  and  its  shores  are  lined 
chiefly  with  cocoanut-palms,  the  produce  of  some  cocoanut6 
floated  hither  from  the  isles  of  Prince's  and  St.  Thomas,  where 
they  are  very  plentiful,  whereas  here  the  cocoanut  is  scarce  known. 

Though  but  a  small  island,  Corisco  has  its  hills  and  valleys, 
forests  and  prairies,  and  has  even  a  little  lake  or  pond,  where 
ducks  often  come  to  bathe  and  fish.  It  seems  a  little  world,  and 
a  very  lovely  little  world.  The  shores  are  sometimes  rocky 
and  steep,  presenting  a  firm  front  to  the  waves  which  rage  and 
dash  against  its  sides ;  and  then  again  flat  and  sandy,  forming 
beautiful  white  shell-strewn  beaches  backed  by  lovely  palms, 
among  which  the  little  native  villages  are  clustered,  with  their 
plantations  of  plantain,  manioc,  peanuts,  and  com  showing 
through  the  palm-groves. 

The  villages  are  scattered  all  along  the  shore,  so    that, 


Chap.  IV.  THE  MBENGA.  25 

whichever  side  you  sail  past,  you  see  the  smoke  pleasantly 
curling  above  the  tree-tops.  Great  quantities  of  beautiful  shells 
are  found  on  the  shores,  and  among  the  rocks  at  low  tide  sea- 
birds  also  abound,  and  on  almost  any  steep  rock  overhanging  the 
water  the  hunter  may  see  fish-hawks  and  eagles  patiently  sitting 
and  watching  for  their  finny  prey  below.  Great  quantities  of 
fish  are  caught  by  the  natives,  and  at  certain  seasons  turtle 
frequent  the  shores,  and  are  "  turned  "  in  considerable  numbers. 
The  interior  forests  abound  in  parrots  and  smaller  birds. 

The  climate  of  the  island  is  healthier  than  that  of  the 
neighbouring  coast.  Water  is  scarce  at  certain  seasons,  though 
there  are  a  few  springs  and  little  rivulets  of  pure  water  in  the 
centre  of  the  island  which  never  run  dry.  The  soil  produces, 
besides  cocoanuts,  manioc,  plantain,  sweet  potatoes,  yams,  and 
ground-nuts ;  limes  are  also  abundant.  Manioc  is,  however,  the 
chief  food  of  the  people.  Palm-oil  trees  grow  abundantly,  but 
not  much  palm-oU  is  made,  and  the  natives  consume  all  the 
island  produces.  But  the  palm  adds  another  grace  to  a  landscape 
of  which  my  eyes  never  tired,  and  the  bright-feathered  parrots 
and  other  beautiful  birds,  and  squirrels  who  constantly  run  about 
this  palm  and  feed  on  its  bunches  of  yellow  nuts,  make  the  tree 
a  favourite  with  lovers  of  nature. 

The  island  is  not  more  than  twelve  miles  in  circumference. 
Its  population,  of  about  1000  souls,  is  scattered  aU  over  the 
island.  They  are  a  quiet^  peaceable  people,  hospitable  to 
strangers  and  fond  of  white  men,  particularly  of  the  missionaries 
who  have  settled  among  them.  They  belong  to  the  Mbenga 
tribe,  who  are  the  most  enterprising  traders  and  the  most  daring 
boatmen  of  the  coast.  They  were  formerly  the  most  warlike 
tribe  of  this  part  of  the  country,  and,  when  I  first  came  on  the 
coast,  were  continually  fighting  with  their  neighbours.  About 
ten  years  ago  the  Presbyterian  Board  of  Missions  sent  out  some 
missionaries,  and  the  labours  of  these  worthy  gentlemen  have 
almost  entirely  changed  the  character  of  the  Mbenga.  They 
are  no  longer  so  quarrelsome,  and  have  lost  that  reputation  for 
ferocity  on  which  they  formerly  prided  themselves. 

This  tribe  inhabits  not  only  Corisco,  but  also  the  land  about  the 
neighbouring  Capes  Steiras  and  St.  John.  Their  language  diflFers 
somewhat  from  the  Bakalai,  but  has,  like  that,  no  letter  E,  while 
the  Mpongwe  and  its  dialects  abound  in  the  use  of  this  letter. 


26  •  MISSIONARY  LABOURS.  Chap.  IV. 

Corisco  has  no  cattle  nor  wild  beasts,  the  only  qnadrapeds 
found  being  three  varieties  of  squirrels.  Snakes,  however,  are 
common,  particularly  a  venomous  black  snake.  The  island  pro^ 
duces  little  that  can  be  traded  away  except  vegetables.  The 
meat  of  the  inhabitants  consists  of  fish  and  turtle.  The  energies 
of  the  Mbenga,  finding  no  field  in  their  little  island,  carry  them 
to  the  main  land,  where  they  are  in  great  repute  as  traders.  In 
their  canoes  they  sail  up  the  Muni  and  Moondah  rivers,  and  as 
far  as  Banoko,  and  many  of  them  are  regularly  employed  by  the 
white  merchants  to  do  their  trading. 

There  are  three  missionary  stations  on  the  island,  Evanga- 
simba,  Ngobi,  and  Olongo.  There  is  a  school  at  each  station, 
and  when  I  was  last  there  these  schools  were  attended  during 
the  week  by  about  100  scholars,  and  on  Sunday  by  about  125. 
Many  of  the  children  are  growing  up  in  Christian  habits  of  life, 
and  it  is  not  too  much  to  hope  that  the  next  generation  will  live 
a  different  life  from  this  poor  heathen  and  ignorant  existence  of 
their  fathers.     There  are  about  75  church  members. 

The  missionaries  have  scholars  in  the  schools  from  tribes  on 
the  main  land,  and  these  they  hope  to  send  out  by-and-by  to 
tell  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation,  each  to  his  own  people. 

But  much  remains  to  be  done.  It  is  almost  impossible  to 
rout  superstitious  customs  out  of  the  hearts  of  those  who  have 
grown  old  in  their  practice.  Upon  such  the  missionaries  can 
have  but  little  influence.  They  say  "  Yes,  yes,"  but  they  go 
ahead  in  their  old  ways.  They  respect  and  love  the  missionaries ; 
they  see  the  absurdity  of  their  fetich  worship;  they  are  con- 
vinced of  the  wickedness  of  slave-killing  and  other  cruelties ; 
and  then  at  the  first  excitement  they  sink  back  supinely  into 
every  superstitious  or  cruel  custom.  It  is  to  the  rising  genera- 
tion that  the  good  missionaries  have  to  look  for  the  full  reward 
of  their  faithfal  labours. 

A  few  days  before  I  left  the  island,  Tcmda^  a  Mbenga  fellow 
who  had  travelled  with  me  on  the  Muni,  died,  and  at  his  funeral 
I  was  witness  to  a  singular  ceremony,  akin  to  the  "  waking  "  of 
the  body. 

The  mother  of  ix)or  Tonda,  who  heard  that  I  wished  to  see 
him  once  more,  led  me  to  the  house  where  the  body  was  laid. 
The  narrow  space  of  the  room  was  crowded ;  about  two  hundred 
women  were  sitting  and  standing  around,  singing  mourning 


Chap.  IV.  A  MBENGA  FUNERAL.  27 

songs  to  dolefal  and  monotonous  airs.  They  were  so  huddled 
together  that  for  a  while  I  could  not  distinguish  the  place  of  the 
corpse.  At  last  some  moved  aside,  and  behold !  the  body  of  my 
fnenA 

It  was  seated  in  a  chair. 

It  was  dressed  in  a  black  tail-coat  and  a  pair  of  pantaloons. 

It  had  several  strings  of  beads  about  the  neck. 

Altogether,  it  was  a  ghastly  sight,  though  the  pallid  face  of 
death  cannot  be  seen  in  the  negro. 

As  I  stood  looking,  filled  with  solemn  thoughts,  in  spite  of,  or 
rather  because  of,  perhaps,  the  somewhat  ludicrous  contrasts 
about  me,  the  mother  of  Tonda  approached. 

She  threw  herself  at  the  feet  of  her  dead  son,  and  begged  him 
to  speak  to  her  once  more. 

And  then,  when  the  poor  corpse  did  not  answer,  she  uttered  a 
shriek,  so  long,  so  piercing,  such  a  wail  of  love  and  grief,  that 
the  tears  came  into  my  eyes.  Poor  African  mother !  she  was 
literally  as  one  sorrowing  without  hope ;  for  these  poor  people 
count  on  nothing  beyond  the  present  life.  For  them  there  is 
no  hope  beyond  the  grave.  "  All  is  done,"  they  say,  with  an 
inexpressible  sadness  of  conviction  that  sometimes  gave  me  a 
heartache.  Truly,  it  is  worth  while  to  bear  words  of  comfort  and 
promise  to  such  as  these. 

As  I  left  the  hut,  thinking  these  things,  the  wailing  recom- 
menced. It  would  be  kept  up  by  the  women,  who  are  the  official 
mourners  on  these  occasions,  till  the  corpse  was  buried.  Then 
the  family  and  friends  would  lay  aside  their  ornaments  for  many 
months,  would  refrain  from  dancing  and  all  manner  of  merry- 
making, till  at  last  all  is  forgotten  again. 

At  the  funeral  the  friends  of  poor  Tonda  wished  to  bury  with 
him  a  quantity  of  goods ;  but  as  the  poor  fellow  was  being  buried 
according  to  the  Christian  manner,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Mackey  properly 
objected.  The  good  missionary  preached  words  of  hope  to  the 
many  hundreds  standing  about  the  grave,  and  perhaps  the  poor 
lone  grieving  mother  found  some  comfort  in  her  heart  when  she 
went  away.     I  was  glad  to  hope  so  at  any  rate. 

The  Bay  of  Corisco,  across  whose  mouth  lies  the  island  of  the 
same  name,  is  one  of  the  loveliest  bays  on  the  whole  African  coast. 
It  would  be  also  one  of  the  finest  for  mercantile  purposes,  were 
it  not  for  its  numerous  shallows.    It  is  about  twelve  miles  deep, 


28  UP  THE  MU^^I.  Chap.  IV. 

by  twenty-five  miles  across  at  the  moutb,  and  contains  several 
lesser  islands  and  some  sandy  islets,  which  afford  shelter  for  sea- 
birds,  and  are  famous  places  for  picking  up  fine  sea-shells.  The 
rivers  Muni  and  Moondah  empty  their  waters  into  the  bay ;  and 
on  a  clear  day  one  can  see  from  the  hill-tops  of  Corisco  the  distant 
highlands  of  the  interior  mainland,  and  the  high  mountains  yet 
farther  back  in  which  the  Muni  has  its  source. 

This  bay  was  formerly  much  frequented  in  the  season  (July 
and  August)  by  whales,  who  came  here  to  drop  their  young ; 
but  the  whale-ships  have  pursued  them  so  regularly  that  now 
they  are  very  shy,  and  no  longer  come  in  such  quantities  as 
formerly.  I  have  known  a  vessel  to  get  in  two  months  siirteen 
or  eighteen  whales* 

At  Corisco  I  enjoyed  the  hospitality  of  the  missionaries,  and 
take  this  occasion  to  offer  my  grateful  acknowledgments  to  the 
Kev.  Messrs.  James  Mackey  and  Clemens  for  many  kind  atten- 
tions received  from  them. 

It  was  here  that  I  made  preparations  for  a  long  journey,  in 
which  I  intended  to  explore  the  Muni  to  its  head-waters ;  to 
cross,  if  possible,  the  Sierra  del  Crystal,  and  see  what  kind  of 
country  and  what  manner  of  people  were  to  be  found  there.  I 
wanted  particularly  to  visit  the  cannibal  tribes  in  the  Sierra,  and 
to  ascertain  if  the  Congo,  which  had  been  supposed  to  flow  north- 
ward back  of  these  mountains,  was  there  to  be  found. 

My  voyage  was  to  be  made  alone,  so  far  as  white  companions 
were  concerned.  Mbango,  a  chief  or  head-man  among  the  Corisco 
people,  was  engaged  to  accompany  me,  to  introduce  me  to  a 
friend  of  his,  an  influential  king  on  the  Muni. 

We  set  out  in  Mbango's  canoe  on  the  27th  of  July.  The 
canoe  was  hewn  out  of  a  single  tree,  and,  though  narrow,  was 
commodious  and  safe  enough  for  so  rough  a  journey. 

My  crew  consisted  of  twelve  black  fellows,  besides  Mbango, 
all  armed  with  guns.  I  foresaw  that,  from  the  dread  all  the 
coast  natives  have  of  the  cannibal  tribes,  I  should  have  difficulty 
in  carrying  all  my  baggage.  I  therefore  determined  not  to 
encumber  myself  with  supplies  of  provisions  or  anything  else 
that  could  be  spared.  My  outfit  consisted  only  of  the  following 
articles : — ^A  chest  containing  100  fathoms  of  prints,  19  pounds 
of  white  beads,  a  quantity  of  small  looking-glasses,  fire-steels 
and  flints,  a  quantity  of  leaf  tobacco.    In  addition  to  which  came 


Chap.  IV.  NEW  WAY  TO  COLLECT  A  DEBT.  29 

my  greatest  dependence,  viz.,  80  pounds  of  shot  and  bullets,  25 
poundB  of  powder,  and  my  guns. 

The  day  on  which  we  sailed  was  beautiful.  There  was  a  fine 
breeze,  and  we  passed  in  rapid  succession  the  islets  which  dot 
the  Bay  of  Corisco,  Leval,  Banian,  and  Big  and  Little  AlobL 
We  were  making  fine  progress,  and  I  was  in  high  spirits  at  the 
auspicious  commencement  of  my  trip,  when  one  of  those  peculiar 
detentions  occurred  which  arise  out  of  the  ill-regulated  trade 
system  of  Africa,  and  which  would  be  laughable  were  they  not 
vexatious. 

Mbango  was  a  great  trading  man.  Therefore  Mbango  had 
debts  owing  him.  Now  Mbango's  debtors,  like  most  debtors  on 
the  African  coast,  were  not  fond  of  paying,  and  I  found  that 
Mbango  made  a  practice  of  lying  in  wait  for  them,  seizing  tliem, 
and  robbing  them  of  what  they  happened  to  have  with  them,  as 
a  kind  of  new  way  to  pay  old  debts. 

Accordingly,  as  we  were  sailing  along,  my  steersman  kept  an 
unusually  sharp  look-out  ahead.  His  care  was  presently  re- 
warded. We  saw  a  large  boat  sailing  along  down  toward  us 
carelessly,  as  though  they  had  no  enemies  to  dread.  No  sooner, 
however,  were  the  boatmen  near  enough  to  recognize  us  than, 
with  a  little  shout  of  surprise,  they  put  about  and  sailed  and 
paddled  off  in  the  utmost  haste. 

But  Mbango  also  gave  a  little  shout.  He  recognized  in  the 
same  moment  in  the  other  boat  a  veteran  poor  debtor  of  his. 
Turning  our  boat  after  the  other,  he  urged  his  men  to  paddle, 
and  mean  time  shouted  to  the  others  to  stop. 

But  the  more  he  called  "  Stop !  *'  the  harder  they  paddled  off. 

Now  our  side  became  excited.  Mbango  called  that  he  would 
fire  upon  them. 

This  only  frightened  them  more. 

Our  men  seized  their  guns,  and  (slyly  shaking  the  powder  out 
of  the  touchholes,  I  must  say  to  their  credit)  pointed  directly  at 
the  flying  boat. 

Now  the  women  even  seized  paddles  and  plied  them  vigor- 
ously. 

Then  our  side  fired  a  few  random  shots  over  the  heads  of  the 
flying  debtors.     Still  they  paddled  on. 

By  this  time,  however,  it  became  apparent  that  our  boat  was 
the  fjEistest.    Presently,  indeed,  we  overtook  the  other. 


30  A  CHACE  AND  SCUFFLE.  Chap.  IV. 

I  had  been  sitting  quietly  watching  the  fun ;  but  now,  as  we 
hauled  alongside  the  enemy's  boat,  and  I  saw  a  good  deal  of 
fierce  blood  up  on  both  sides,  I  began  to  remonstrate.  I  did  not 
wish  to  see  blood  spilt,  nor  did  I  C€ure  to  be  upset  in  the  scuffle ; 
but  my  voice  was  drowned  in  the  uproar.  A  desperate  hand-to- 
hand  fight  began  at  once  as  we  ranged  alongside.  How  we 
escaped  upsetting  I  do  not  yet  understand,  but  I  suppose  these 
fellows  instinctively  poise  themselves  aright  I  was  wet  through ; 
the  canoe  took  in  water,  and  murder  was  imminent,  when  sud- 
denly  the  other  canoe  again  gave  us  the  slip. 

Now  the  chace  began  again.  Again  we  shouted,  and  the  other 
side  paddled  as  for  dear  life  ;  but  it  was  of  no  avail.  Presently 
we  again  hauled  alongside,  and  this  time  we  made  fast.  Then 
came  another  fight,  in  the  midst  of  which  the  boatmen,  seeing 
they  were  about  to  be  overpowered,  suddenly  leaped  into  the 
water  and  swam  oS.  Though  we  were  some  miles  from  shore, 
they  had  no  uneasiness  as  to  the  result.  Mbango  caught  two  of 
them,  and  took,  besides,  a  woman  prisoner ;  then  coolly  turned 
on  his  course  again,  saying  to  me  with  a  smile  that  he  had  done 
a  very  good  day's  work.  He  explained  that  these  people  had 
long  owed  him  a  quantity  of  bar-wood,  for  which  he  had  paid  in 
advance,  and,  now  that  he  had  some  of  the  party  prisoners,  they 
would  soon  settle  up. 

About  a  mile  from  the  mouth  of  the  Muni  are  Big  and  Little 
Alobi,  two  small  islets.  The  first  has  a  few  native  villages,  ruled 
by  King  Mpapay,  who  this  day  presented  me  with  a  chicken 
and  a  bunch  of  plantains,  on  which  I  made  my  dinner.  In 
return  I  gave  his  negro  majesty  some  heads  of  tobacco. 

Little  Alobi  is  uninhabited,  and  is  used  by  the  whites  as  a 
d^p6t  for  bar-wood,  for  which  it  is  convenient,  as  vessels  can 
anchor  close  alongside  the  shore. 

Here  we  remained  over  night,  I  sleeping  ashore,  while  Mbango's 
favourite  slave  man  kept  watch  over  the  boat,  Mbango  threat- 
ening to  "  sell  him  to  the  white  man's  country"  if  anytiiing  was 
stolen. 

Next  day  I  had  a  chill,  and  laid  over,  not  caring  to  enter  the 
Muni  but  in  perfect  health.    I  took  the  usual  doses  of  quinine. 

The  following  morning  several  Muni  Eiver  men  came  down 
to  see  me,  having  heard  that  I  was  about  to  go  up  the  river ; 
and  in  the  afternoon  we  sailed  with  a  favourite  tide  for  the 


Chap.  IV.  TRIBUTARIES  OF  THE  MUNI.  31 

village  of  Mbango's  friend,  Dayoko.  We  had  a  fair  wind,  and 
the  boat  fellows  availed  themselves  of  it  to  lie  abont  and  do 
nothing,  which  they  perfectly  know  how  to  do.  These  canoes 
do  not  sail  <m  the  wind  at  all ;  but  hejore  it,  with  their  sails  of 
country  matting,  they  make  very  good  headway. 

Yesterday  I  measured  our  canoe.  She  is  thirty-five  feet  long, 
three  feet  wide,  and  about  three  and  a  half  feet  deep ;  made,  as 
before  said,  out  of  one  immense  tree.  The  Muni,  the  river  which 
I  was  now  to  ascend,  empties  its  waters  into  the  Bay  of  Corisco, 
in  lat  1°  2'  N.,  and  long.  9°  33'.  It  is  formed  by  the  confluence 
of  three  other  streams,  the  Ntongo,  a  stream  of  forty  miles'  length, 
whose  course  is  S.W.  by  W. ;  the  Ntambounay,  which  runs  an 
easterly  course  for  thirty  miles,  and  then  turns  to  the  south-west 
for  forty  miles  more,  when  it  disappears  in  the  mountains ;  and 
the  Noya,  which  runs  from  its  rise  sixty  miles  to  the  north-east, 
and  then  west  for  twenty  miles  more.  The  Ntambounay  and  the 
Noya  have  both  their  sources  in  the  Sierra  del  Crystd.  Their 
banks  are  sparsely  populated  by  various  tribes,  speaking  different 
dialects.  The  Muni  is,  like  most  of  the  rivers  of  the  coast, 
bounded  by  mangrove  swamps ;  but  near  the  mouth,  where  we 
sailed  to-day,  the  highlands  were  visible  in  the  background, 
and  made  up  a  picturesque  scene.  The  point  forming  one  side 
of  the  bank  at  the  mouth  is  high  land,  and  on  it  several 
Shekiani  villages  are  located,  which  look  very  pretty  from  the 
river. 

As  we  ascended  the  river  the  banks  became  more  swampy  ; 
and,  at  the  distance  of  seventeen  miles  fix)m  the  mouth,  we  came 
to  a  beautifril  little  island,  formed  by  the  junction  of  the  Ntongo 
with  the  Muni 

The  Ntongo  flows  from  the  north-east ;  is  a  considerable  stream, 
on  or  near  whose  banks  are  formed  villages  of  the  Ibouay, 
Itaimon,  and  Shekiani  tribes.  It  has  probably  a  course  or 
length  of  forty  miles,  and  rises  in  the  hills  which  form,  in  the 
interior,  one  of  the  spurs  of  the  Sierra  del  Crystal.  The  chief 
product  of  the  Ntongo  country  is  India-rubber,  of  which,  some 
years  ago,  considerable  quantities  were  brought  down  to  the 
coast  by  the  natives. 

Some  miles  above  the  mouth  of  the  Ntongo,  the  Ndina,  a 
creek,  empties  its  sluggish  waters  into  the  Muni.  The  Ndina  is 
but  a  swampy  creek,  overrun  with  mangrove  jungles,  back  of 


32  LOST  IN  THE  SWAMP.  Ohap.  IV. 

which  are  to  be  found  some  villages,  to  which  the  well-guided 
traveller  is  led  by  native  paths,  which  no  one  but  an  experienced 
woodman  would  perceive.  It  was  the  Ndina  which  we  were  now 
to  ascend.  As  the  tide  was  against  us,  and  was  stronger  than 
the  wind,  we  put  down  our  sail,  which  had  carried  us  along  thus 
far,  and  the  crew  took  to  their  paddles. 

When  we  had  pulled  about  twelve  miles  up  the  creek,  through 
a  continuous  mangrove  swamp,  in  which  the  sluggish  current  of 
the  river  often  lost  itself,  I  saw  that  my  men  began  to  look 
uneasy.  Presently  it  leaked  out  that  they  had  lost  their  reckon- 
ing. They  had  thought  ere  now  to  have  arrived  at  Dayoko's 
village — our  destination — and  began  to  be  discouraged.  . 

So  here  was  a  pleasant  prospect  of  passing  the  night  in  the 
swamp,  where  we  were  like  to  be  eaten  up  by  musquitoes,  whose 
buzz  was  already  noisy,  and  whose  sharp  bills  began  to  make 
themselves  felt  thus  early  in  the  afternoon. 

In  the  midst  of  our  perplexity  a  Mbenga  boat  came  down  the 
stream,  and,  on  inquiry,  its  crew  told  us  that  Dayoko's  village 
was  yet  a  considerable  way  off.  They  gave  us,  however,  the  right 
direction— an  important  matter,  as  in  the  approaching  gloom  we 
were  like  to  glide  out  of  the  main  channel  into  some  of  the 
numerous  side  "reaches,"  or  bayous,  which  lead  in  from  the 
main  stream.  Thus  encouraged  the  men  again  took  to  their 
paddles,  and,  to  show  their  joy,  began  to  sing  one  of  their  dis- 
cordant chants,  rendered  doubly  discordant  by  the  echoes  of  the 
woods. 

Presently  we  came  to  a  very  small  collection  of  huts ;  and 
here  I  asked  a  fellow  standing  on  the  bank  to  guide  us  up  to 
Dayoko's.  He  was  ready  to  do  so,  but  seeing  probably  that  I 
was  anxious  to  get  ahead,  thought  to  make  a  good  bargain  with 
me.  He  wanted  two  fathoms  of  cloth,  two  heads  of  tobacco,  and 
two  pipes.  This  was  unreasonable,  and  I  at  once  refused  to 
have  anything  to  do  with  him. 

Nothing  gives  these  people  so  poor  an  opinion  of  a  white  mau 
as  the  discovery  that  they  can  victimize  him  in  a  bargain ;  and 
accordingly  I  was  always  careftd  to  let  no  one  get  the  better  of 
me  even  in  trifles.  Fortimately  the  moon  presently  rose,  and 
we  were  enabled  to  thread  our  way  up  the  crooked  creek,  and 
found  by-and-by  the  mouth  of  a  smaller  creek,  at  whose  head 
Dayoko  lives. 


€hap.  IV.  DAYOKO'S  RECEPTION.  33 

About  ten  o'clock  we  arrived  at  the  village,  having  travelled 
that  day  about  forty-five  miles. 

When  we  arrived  the  tide  was  out,  and  I  had,  in  consequence, 
to  wade  through  the  stinking  mud-bank  which  lay  before  and, 
to  some  extent,  defended  the  village.  All  along  the  shores  of 
the  Ndina  are  composed  of  such  mud-banks,  which  at  low  tide 
are  dry,  and  emit  a  most  oflfensive  smell,  and  doubtless  cause 
much  sickness. 

The  noise  of  our  approach  awakened  the  whole  village,  and 
the  men  came  down  towards  us,  with  their  old  trade  muskets 
loaded,  and  ready  for  a  fight  should  it  prove,  as  often  happens, 
a  midnight  raid  of  the  enemy.  These  people  have  the  luck  of 
Cain ;  every  man's  hand  seems  against  them,  and  their  hand  is 
against  every  man.  They  a,re  constantly  quarrelling,  and  scarce 
ever  sleep  without  fear  of  a  hostile  incursion.  The  treacherous 
enemy  comes  down  upon  a  sleeping  village,  and  shoots  the  un- 
suspecting inhabitants  through  the  chinks  in  their  bamboo  houses, 
then  escapes  under  cover  of  the  darkness.  This  is  the  style  of 
warfare  all  over  this  part  of  Central  Africa,  except,  perhaps, 
among  some  of  the  Coast  tribes,  who  have  gained^  in  manliness 
at  least,  by  contttct  with  the  whites. 

They  were  greatly  rejoiced  when  they  found  us  to  be  their 
friends  the  Mbenga.  Visions  of  "  trade  "  began  to  loom  before 
them ;  they  opened  their  arms,  set  up  a  shout  of  gladness,  and 
immediately  conducted  us  in  state  through  the  village  to  the 
house  generally  set  apart  in  every  considerable  negro  town  for 
strangers. 

Here  a  great  fire  was  kindled,  and  presently  Dayoko  himself 
came  in,  his  eyes  not  half  opened,  for  he  had  but  just  waked  up. 
Then  came  all  his  wives  to  see  the  white  man,  whose  presence 
was  already  known,  and  pretty  soon  the  house  was  filled  and 
surrounded  by  most  of  the  men  and  women  of  the  village. 

Then  began  the  "salutation" — a  tedious  formality  among  the 
African  tribes  which  our  American  people  seem  to  copy  in  their 
"  public  receptions"  of  distinguished  or  notorious  men.  All  the 
chief  men  of  Dayoko,  together  with  himself  and  his  wives,  sat 
round  the  fire,  and,  when  all  was  hushed,  MbangOy  our  head-man, 
began  his  oration.  In  this  it  is  required  that  every  most  minute 
adventure  and  incident  of  the  voyage  up  river  shall  be  alluded 
to,  and  thus  a  catalogue  made  of  everything  that  has  happened 

D 


34  AN  OKATION  BEFOBE  SUPPEB.  Chap.  IV. 

"from  port  to  port.**  The  speaker  delivers  himself  in  short 
sentences,  each  containing  one  of  the  many  hundred  memorable 
facts  of  the  day's  journey.  All  sit  round  silent  and  open-mouthed, 
and  at  intervals  tiie  chief  men  give  little  grunts  of  approbation. 

At  last  all  was  told,  and,  to  my  great  satisfaction,  Mbcmgo  sat 
down« 

Immediately  all  ceremony  vras  dropped;  every  man  carried 
off  his  friend  to  have  a  talk  about  trade,  night  seeming  no  objec- 
tion, and  the  women  began  to  prepare  some  food,  of  which  I 
stood  in  much  need. 

About  twelve  o'clock  (midnight)  supper  was  ready,  and  I  sat 
down  before  an  immense  basket  of  boiled  plantains  and  a  few 
boiled  fish,  and  meide  a  very  hearty  meal.  This  ended,  I  was 
shown  to  my  place  in  the  house  assigned  me  for  sleeping, 
when  I  was  glad  enough  to  wrap  myself  in  my  musquito-netting 
and  sleep  till  daybreak. 


Chap.  V,  AFRICAN  ROYALIT.  35 


CHAPTEE  V. 

Dayoko  —  Airican  Royalty  —  Foreign  Relations  and  Diplomacy  in  the  Interior 
—  The  Value  of  a  Wife  —  Negotiations  —  The  dry  Season  —  The  Mbousha 
Tribe  —  A  Wizard  —  A  fetich  Trial  and  a  Murder  —  Progress  —  Excitement 
of  the  Shekianis  at  my  supposed  Wealth  —  The  Ntambounay  —  The  Sierra 
del  Crystal  —  Lost  again  —  Approaches  of  interior  Village  —  Agricul- 
tural Operations  —  Famine. 

My  first  business  on  the  following  day  was  to  talk  to  Dayoko 
about  my  expedition  into  the  interior;  in  fact,  to  ask  his 
permission  to  go,  and  to  obtain  from  him  an  escort. 

A  stranger  going  into  an  African  village  and  seeing  the  chief 
or  king  living  in  a  manner  as  simple  and  as  needy  as  any  of  his 
subjects — in  fact,  in  no  way  conspicuous  above  the  herd  of 
blacks,  and  receiving  even  but  little  of  the  respect  or  precedence 
which  is  usually  accorded  to  the  most  shadowy  monarchs,  would 
little  expect  that  such  a  king  possesses  great  authority  in  his 
own  tribe,  and  wields  great  influence  among  his  neighbours. 
Dayoko,  for  instance,  was  chiefly  remarkable  as  the  oldest  living 
man  in  his  village.  He  was  a  trader  like  the  rest,  a  beggar 
like  the  rest,  and  wm  very  glad  to  accept  from  me  a  propitiatory 
offering  of  an  old  dress-coat  which,  having  done  duty  for  a 
whole  winter  in  New  York,  had  been  put  away,  with  other 
cast-off  garments,  for  this  very  purpose.  So  far  Dayoko,  when 
placed  in  contact  with  civilization. 

But  Dayoko  is  the  oldest  and  most  influential  chief  among  the 
Mbousha  tribe.  His  age  gives  him  great  authority  among  his 
own  people,  and  a  judicious  culture  of  the  marriage  relation  has 
given  the  shrewd  old  fox  no  end  of  fathers-in-law  in  every  tribe 
within  a  hundred  miles.  Now,  to  have  a  father-in-law  in  Africa 
means  to  have  a  friend  in  need,  a  man  to  whom  you  can  con- 
fidently send  a  bit  of  ivory  or  bar-wood  to  sell,  and  whom  you 
call  on  in  any  emergency  where  he  can  help  you.  In  &pt,  the 
more  wives  a  man  has  the  more  power  he  gains  in  this  ^y^'  and 
women  are  chiefly  valuable  because  by  their  means  amicable 
and  commercial  relations  are  cultivated  and  subsist  between  the 

D  2 


36  THE  MARRIAGE  RELATION.  Chap.  V. 

tribes.  Dayoko  was  already  an  old  man.  He  had  begun  to 
marry  when  quite  young,  had  married,  right  and  left,  all  about 
him  ever  since,  and  was  now  related  to  one  or  two  great  men 
in  every  tribe  which  he  could  by  any  means  reach.  Thus  he 
promised  to  prove  a  most  useful  ally  to  me. 

Though  Dayoko's  palace  was  no  bigger  than  the  hut  of  any  of 
his  well-to-do  subjects,  I  found,  as  was  to  be  expected,  that  he 
had  more  wives  and  more  slaves  than  the  others.  And  I  found, 
too,  that  his  voice  in  the  councils  was  of  great  weight,  and  that, 
in  certain  cases,  he  possessed  a  veto  power  which  rendered  him 
supreme.  I  felt,  therefore,  that  if  I  could  gain  over  the  king  to 
my  project  I  need  not  care  for  the  people,  or  even  for  the  chiefs 
who  were  his  relatives,  farther  up  the  river. 

My  first  aim  was  to  convince  everybody  that  I  did  not  want 
to  trade.  This,  thanks  to  my  previous  hunts  on  other  branches 
of  the  Muni,  and  to  my  never  having  traded  or  shown  a  desire 
to  make  money,  was  not  so  difScult  to  do.  I  was  already  known 
as  a  great  hunter. 

Having  established  this  point,  I  called  Dayoko  into  my  house 
and  gave  him  the  present  with  which  a  negotiation  is  generally 
opened.  I  gave  him  the  coat  before  mentioned,  about  twenty 
yards  of  cotton  cloth,  some  powder,  some  looking-glasses  for  his 
wives,  and  some  gun-flints. 

His  majesty  accepted  graciously  all  my  offering. 

Then  I  spoke  of  going  into  the  Fan  country. 

Dayoko  thought  my  project  impossible. 

I  would  die  on  the  way,  and  he  should  have  my  death  on  his 
soul — a  consideration  which  seemed  to  affect  him  greatly. 

I  should  be  murdered  by  the  cannibals  and  eaten. 

There  was  war  on  the  river,  and  the  tribes  would  not  let  me 
pass. 

The  coimtry  was  sick. 

And  so  on. 

Seeing  that  I  exhibited  no  signs  of  repentance,  the  old  sinner 
turned  on  a  new  tack.  Sis  country  was  full  of  beasts  and 
birds.  Why  not  hunt  here  ?  and  he  would  give  me  as  many 
men  as  I  wanted. 

Finally,  I  told  him,  with  a  great  show  of  firmness,  that  go  I 
would,  if  not  with  his  people,  then  with  some  one  else. 

Hereupon  he  relented,  fearing  probably  that  I  would  leave 


Chap.  V.  NATIVE  CURIOSITY.  37 

him,  and  that  thus  he  should  not  make  so  much  out  of  me  as  he 
calculated. 

It  is  as  well  to  add  that  I  did  not  let  any  of  his  fellows  peep 
into  my  chest  They  are  all  greedy,  and  think  that  every  white 
man  is  by  nature  a  Croesus,  and  owner  of  untold  wealth  in 
cloth,  looking-glasses,  gun-flints,  powder,  and  tobacco.  And 
besides,  their  fear  of  some  white  man  beginning  a  direct  trade 
with  the  interior  tribes  makes  them  excessively  jealous  of 
everyone  who  attempts  to  reach  the  interior.  Dayoko's  people 
did  not  cease  to  warn  me  that  I  must  carry  nothing  into  the 
up-country,  to  all  which,  of  course,  I  said  Tes. 

It  was  at  last  determined  that  I  should  go  under  Dayoko's 
protection.  So  on  the  third  day  after  my  arrival  I  sent  my 
Mbenga  men  back,  and  was  now  left  alone  among  my  new 
friends.  I  am  to  wait  for  a  party  going  to  Mbene's  people, 
who  live  farther  up  river,  and  in  whose  charge  Dayoko  proposes 
to  put  me.  K  they  do  not  come,  I  shall  get  an  escort  of  his 
Mbousha  men. 

Meantime  numbers  of  the  neighbouring  tribes  come  daily  to 
see  me.  Most  of  ihese  have  never  seen  a  white  man  before,  and 
are  filled  with  astonishment  at  my  long  hair,  at  my  white  skin — 
it  is  really  tanned  a  very  dark  brown  by  this  time — and  at  the 
clothes  I  wear.  They  stand  about  me  in  such  crowds  that  often 
I  am  half  suffocated  with  the  stench  which  their  uncleanly 
bodies  give  out 

While  waiting,  I  amused  myself  with  hunting.  The  country 
about  here  affords  to  the  natumlist  little  but  birds ;  but  some  of 
these  are  splendid.  To-day  (August  16th)  I  shot  a  Nectarinia 
supefbuy  a  bird  well  named,  for  its  feathers  of  green  and  gold 
and  bright  pink  are  a  superb  sight  as  it  flies  about  through  the 
dark-green  foliage  of  the  woods. 

I  have  still  to  wait  for  the  people  Dayoko  promises.  This  will 
make  some  detention,  as  they  are  here  on  agricultural  intents, 
and  the  men  are  out  all  day  cutting  trees,  and  the  women 
cleaning  the  ground ;  everything  is  busy  bustle.  This  is  the  dry 
season,  and  now  all  planting  must  be  done,  for  in  a  few  -weeks 
the  rains  come  on,  and  then  it  is  too  late. 

The  dry  season  is  delightftil  in  Africa.  It  is  the  season  of  flowers, 
of  humming-birds — who  flit  through  bushes  at  all  hours,  and 
charm  one  with  their  meteor-like  flight — of  everything  pleasant. 


38  A  MBOUSHA  WIZARD.  Chap.  V. 

These  Mbousha  people  look  very  mucli  like  the  Shekiani 
tribe.  They  have  the  usual  negro  features,  and  are  of  medium 
height.  They  are  less  warlike  than  the  Shekianis,  but  quite  as 
superstitious  and  cruel,  as  I  had  occasion  to  know.  I  heard  one 
day,  by  accident,  that  a  man  had  been  apprehended  on  a  charge 
of  causing  the  death  of  one  of  the  chief  men  of  the  village.  I  went 
to  Dayoko  and  asked  about  it.  He  said  yes,  the  man  was  to  be 
killed ;  that  he  was  a  notorious  wizard,  and  had  done  much  harm. 

So  I  begged  to  see  this  terrible  being. 

I  was  tf^en  to  a  rough  hut,  within  which  sat  an  old,  old  man? 
with  wool  white  as  snow,  wrinkled  face,  bowed  form,  and  shrunken 
limbs.  His  hands  were  tied  behind  him,  and  his  feet  were 
placed  in  a  rude  kind  of  stocks.  This  was  the  great  wizard. 
Several  lazy  negroes  stood  guard  over  him,  and  from  time  to 
time  insulted  him  with  opprobious  epithets  and  blows,  to  which 
the  poor  old  wretch  submitted  in  silence.  He  was  evidently  in 
his  dotage. 

I  asked  him  if  he  had  no  friends,  no  relations,  no  son,  or  daugh- 
ter, or  wife  to  take  c€ure  of  him.    He  said  sadly,  "  No  one.** 

Now,  here  was  the  secret  of  this  persecution.  They  were  tired 
of  taking  care  of  the  helpless  old  man,  who  had  lived  too  long, 
and  a  charge  of  witchcraft  by  the  greegree  man  was  a  convenient 
pretext  for  putting  him  out  of  the  way.  I  saw  at  once  that  it 
would  be  vain  to  try  to  save  him. 

I  went,  however,  to  Dayoko,  and  argued  the  case  with  him.  I 
tried  to  explain  the  absurdity  of  charging  a  harmless  old  man 
>vith  supernatural  powers ;  told  him  that  Grod  did  not  permit 
witches  to  exist ;  and  finally  made  an  offer  to  buy  the  old 
wretch,  offering  to  give  some  pounds  of  tobacco,  one  or  two 
coats,  and  some  looking-glasses  for  him — goods  which  would 
have  bought  me  an  able-bodied  slave. 

Dayoko  replied  that  for  his  part  he  would  be  glad  to  save  him, 
but  that  the  people  must  decide ;  that  they  were  much  excited 
against  him ;  but  that  he  would,  to  please  me,  try  to  save  his  life. 

During  the  night  following  I  heard  singing  all  over  the  town 
all  night,  and  a  great  uproar.  Evidently  they  were  preparing 
themselves  for  the  murder.  Even  these  savages  cannot  kill  in 
cold  blood,  but  work  themselves  into  a  frenzy  of  excitement  first, 
and  then  rush  off  to  do  the  bloody  deed. 

Early  in  the  morning  the  people  gathered  together,  with  the 


Chap.  V.  AN  EXECUTION.  39 

fetich-man — the  infernal  rascal  who  was  at  the  bottom  of  the 
murder — ^in  their  midst.  His  bloodshot  eyes  glared  in  savage 
excitement  as  he  went  around  from  man  to  man  getting  the 
votes  to  decide  whether  the  old  man  should  die. 

In  his  hands  he  held  a  bundle  of  herbs,  with  which  he  sprinkled 
three  times  those  to  whom  he  spoke.  Meantime  a  man  was 
stationed  on  the  top  of  a  high  tree,  whence  he  shouted  from 
time  to  time,  in  a  loud  voice,  "  Jocoo  !  Jocoo  !  "  at  the  same  time 
shaking  the  tree  strongly. 

^  Jocoo  "  is  devil  among  the  Mbousha,  and  the  business  of  this 
man  was  to  keep  away  the  evil  spirit,  and  to  give  notice  to  the 
fetich-man  of  his  approach. 

At  last  the  sad  vote  was  taken.  It  was  declared  that  the  old 
man  was  a  most  malignant  wizard ;  that  he  had  already  killed  a 
number  of  people ;  that  he  was  minded  to  kill  many  more,  and 
that  he  must  die.  No  one  would  tell  me  how  he  was  to  be 
killed,  and  they  proposed  to  defer  the  execution  till  my  departure, 
which  I  was,  to  tell  the  truth,  rather  glad  ot  The  whole  scene 
had  considerably  agitated  me,  and  I  was  willing  to  be  spared  the 
end.  Tired  and  sick  at  heart,  I  lay  down  on  my  bed  about  noon 
to  rest  and  compose  my  spirits  a  little.  After  a  while  I  saw  a 
man  pass  my  window,  almost  like  a  flash,  and  after  him  a  horde 
of  silent  but  infuriated  men.     They  ran  toward  the  river* 

Then,  in  a  little  while,  I  heard  a  couple  of  sharp,  piercing 
cries,  as  of  a  man  in  great  agony,  and  then  all  was  still  as  death. 

I  got  up,  guessing  the  rascals  had  killed  the  poor  old  man, 
and  turning  my  steps  toward  the  river  was  met  by  the  crowd 
returning,  every  man  armed  with  axe,  knife,  cutlass,  or  spear, 
and  these  weapons,  and  their  own  hands  and  arms  and  bodies, 
all  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  their  victim.  In  their  frenzy 
they  had  tied  the  poor  wizard  to  a  log  near  the  river-bank,  and 
then  deliberately  hacked  him  into  many  pieces.  They  finished 
by  splitting  open  his  skull  and  scattering  the  brains  in  the  water. 
Then  they  returned,  and,  to  see  their  behaviour,  it  would  have 
seemed  as  though  the  country  had  just  been  delivered  from  a 
great  curse. 

By  night  the  men — ^whose  faces  for  two  days  had  filled  me 
with  loathing  and  horror,  so  bloodthirsty  and  malignant  were 
they — were  again  as  mild  as  lambs,  and  as  cheerful  as  though 
they  had  never  heturd  of  a  witch  tragedy. 


40  AFRICAN  FONDNESS  FOR  FIRE.  Chap.  V. 

These  tribes  suppose  that  no  cruelty  is  too  great  to  practise 
upon  a  wizard ;  and  this  kind  of  legalised  mnrder,  though  it 
temporarily  excites  their  passions^  does  not  seem  to  afflict  them 
with  any  remorseM  feelings  at  all. 

I  was  glad  to  take  refuge  in  the  woods  during  the  heats  of  the 
day,  my  house,  an  eight  by  ten  bamboo  structure,  low-roofed  and 
close,  being  uncomfortably  heated.  Yet  the  natives  pass  their 
idle  hours  near  a  large  fire,  and  this  from  a  desire  for  warmth, 
though  the  thermometer  stands  at  88°.  It  is  curious  to  see  how 
the  negro  relishes  a  fire.  I  have  nowhere  found  them  assembled, 
even  in  the  hottest  days,  but  about  a  great  blaze ;  and  the  first 
thing  done,  when  a  council  or  assemblage  of  any  kind  is  to  be 
held,  is  to  build  a  fire  that  would  seem  to  be  sufficient  to  thaw 
out  the  north  pole. 

August  17th  being  Sunday,  I  spent  the  day  in  my  hut  reading, 
to  the  great  surprise  of  two  fellows  who  were  "town-keepers," 
the  rest  of  the  village  having  gone  out  to  the  fields  to  labour.  I 
tried  to  explain  to  them  that  the  Bible  was  a  book  given  to  us 
by  the  true  God,  and  that  there  was  but  one  God. 

They  gave  me  the  answer  I  have  heard  so  often  on  the  coast, 
*'  Oh  yes,  that  is  true  for  you,  but  white  man's  God  is  not  our 
Grod ;  we  are  made  by  a  different  Grod."  And  to  this  they  stick 
pertinaciously. 

The  following  day  (18th)  we  were  to  start  for  the  interior. 
Dayoko  gave  me  two  of  his  sons  to  be  of  my  party — a  piece  of 
real  good  luck  for  me.  Also  he  sent  messages  to  all  the  neigh- 
bouring tribes  to  command  good  treatment  for  me. 

The  men  asked  to  be  paid  before  we  started — a  dangerous  prac- 
tice, as  they  are  likely  to  run  away.  But  as  they  were  Dayoko's 
men,  and  he  had  treated  me  well,  I  thought  best  to  agree.  They 
are  real  extortioners.  I  had  to  pay  for  canoes,  for  mat  sails,  for 
paddles,  for  every  least  thing  necessary  for  the  outfit ;  and  every 
fathom  of  cloth  or  string  of  beads  that  could  be  got  from  me  on 
any  pretext  I  was  relieved  of.  I  finally  agreed  to  give  to  each 
man  ten  yards  of  cloth  and  a  few  leaves  of  tobacco.  With  this 
they  were  content  Then,  to  make  them  happier,  I  went  to  their 
wives,  who  had  all  been  very  kind  to  me,  and  gave  each  some 
tobacco  to  solace  her  in  her  husband's  absence. 

At  last,  and  just  before  we  were  to  start,  when  all  was  ready 
and  the  men  were  gathered,  I  had  again  to  assure  Dayoko  that  I 


Chap.  V.  ON  THE  NTAMBOUNAY.  41 

did  not  at  all  intend  to  trade,  but  only  to  hunt  for  the  gorilla,  and 
Tisit  the  mountains  and  their  inhabitants.  Happily,  my  person 
and  pursuits  are  well  known  to  all  the  tribes,  who  have  given  me 
the  name  of  "Mona  dee  Chaillee,"  meaning  "the  child  of 
ChaiUee,"  remembering  me  as  my  father's  son. 

So  at  last  we  were  off.  My  party  consisted  of  two  sons  of 
Dayoko,  myself,  and  several  men  to  carry  my  chests  and  guns. 
Mbene,  the  Mbondemo  chief,  for  whose  place  we  are  bound,  is  to 
take  me  into  the  heart  of  the  Sierra  del  Crystal,  and  then  **  per- 
haps we  shall  cross  over  beyond,"  I  note  in  my  journal,  for  I 
desire  and  hope  to  reach  the  sources  of  the  Congo  by  this  route. 

We  started  in  canoes,  and  p€uldled  up  a  creek  which  led  into 
the  Muni  about  ten  miles  above  the  Ndina's  mouth.  It  was  a 
most  intricate  piece  of  navigation,  through  mangrove  swamps, 
which  sometimes  almost  barred  the  way  even  to  our  little  canoes ; 
sometimes  with  the  current  against,  and  sometimes  for  us,  and 
with  so  many  turns  and  twists  that  I  think  I  should  have  been 
puzzled  to  get  back  alone. 

When,  at  last,  we  reached  the  Muni,  the  tide  was  setting  down 
80  strongly  that  we  were  two  and  a  half  hours  paddling  about 
four  miles.  After  a  stop  at  a  little  village  situated  two  miles 
below  *the  point  where  two  rivers — the  Noya  and  the  Ntam- 
bounay — join  and  form  the  Muni,  we  began  to  ascend  the  Ntam- 
bounay.  We  had  the  tide  with  us ;  for  though  the  water  here 
is  fresh,  the  influence  of  the  tides  is  felt  so  far  back  as  here> 
more  especially  in  the  dry  season,  when  the  stream  is  low  and 
the  current  sluggish.  For  the  first  twenty  miles  we  ascended 
the  river  in  an  E.S.E.  direction.  It  continued  wide,  being  at 
least  200  yards  across  all  the  way,  and  its  banks  formed  a  most 
charming  landscape.  The  course  of  the  stream  was  dotted  and 
interrupted  by  many  small  islands,  whose  shores  were  bordered 
with  graceful  palms.  Evidently  we  had  got  out  of  the  dull  and 
dreary  region  of  mangrove  swamps. 

Towards  night  we  reached  a  Shekiani  village,  where  we  had  to 
stop  all  night.  It  was  one  of  the  most  uncomfortable  nights  of 
my  life.  I  never  saw  natives  so  excited  as  were  these  savages 
at  the  appearance  of  my  chests  and  travelling-bag.  Their 
cupidity  was  excited  by  what  they  thought  must  be  fabulous 
riches  in  my  possession,  and  I  was  told  at  once  by  a  head-man 
that  I  could  not  pass  to  the  interior  without  paying  to  this 


42  EXCITEMENT  OF  THE  NEGROES.  Chap.  V. 

Shekiani  town  a  tribute  of  six  shirts,  100  fathoms  of  cloth,  three 
great-coats,  and  a  great  quantity  of  looking-glasses,  files,  and 
beads.  This  would  have  entirely  ruined  me,  and  of  course  I 
paid  no  attention  to  the  demand. 

As  the  excitement  seemed  to  grow  the  longer  I  stayed,  I 
ordered  my  men  to  lie  in  my  hut,  thinking  that  the  fear  of 
killing  members  of  a  friendly  tribe  might  deter  them  from  firing 
in  upon  me  during  the  night.  I  certainly  expected  to  be  robbed, 
and  had  only  a  hope  that  the  affair  would  be  no  more  serious. 
I  lay  quietly  down,  with  my  double-barrelled  gun  by  my  side, 
ready  for  instant  action,  fully  resolved  to  sell  my  life  at  as  dear 
a  rate  as  possible.  Meantime  Dayoko's  sons  went  out  to  palaver 
with  the  chief. 

I  did  not  sleep  a  wink  all  night.  All  night  the  crowd  sur- 
rounded my  house,  talking,  shouting,  singing,  and  in  the  greatest 
excitement.  At  last,  about  four  o'clock,  things  became  a  little 
quieter,  and  towards  davlight  those  who  were  not  asleep  were 
still. 

As  early  as  I  could  go  out  I  called  on  the  king,  and  told  him 
that  my  chests  contained  only  powder,  shot,  and  other  heavy 
things  necessary  for  my  journey ;  and  also  I  gave  his  majesty 
a  few  fathoms  of  cloth,  and  distributed  a  few  leaves  of  tobacco 
among  his  bigmen ;  at  which  all  were  much  satisfied.  They 
asked  for  rum,  but  that  I  never  give  to  these  natives,  and  so 
refused  of  course.  Finally  we.  left  them,  many  of  the  people 
following  us  along  the  river,  and  wishing  us  good  luck  and 
speedy  return.    I  was  happy  enough  to  get  out  of  the  scrape. 

We  left  our  large  canoe  at  the  Shekiani  village,  and  passed 
up  the  Ntambounay  into  the  Noonday  Eiver,  making  in  this 
day,  Tuesday,  August  19th,  a  toilsome  journey  of  twenty-nine 
miles,  twelve  of  which  were  on  the  Noonday. 

The  Ntambounay  was  ascended  in  a  direction  S.E.  by  E.  till 
its  junction  with  the  Noonday.  Here  it  takes  a  turn  N.  by  E., 
an(^  as  we  did  not  want  to  go  this  way,  we  turned  into  the 
Noonday,  ascending  this  in  a  general  direction  to  the  S.E. 

The  landscape  continued  beautiful  on  the  Ntambounay.  The 
palms  lining  the  river-banks,  and  the  numerous  small  islands 
which  stud  its  smooth  and  glass-like  bosom,  the  occasional  deer 
which  started  away  from  the  water-side  as  our  canoe  swept  into 
sight,  the  shrill  cries  of  various  monkeys  gazing  at  us  in  astonish- 


Chap.  Y.  AFRICAN  RIVER  TRAVEL.  43 

ment  and  terror,  the  clear  sky  and  the  magnificent  solitude  of 
these  forests  which  surrounded  us,  and  through  whose  trees  we 
saw  only  at  considerable  intervals  the  smoke  curling  up,  which 
announced  a  village  hid  in  the  wilderness :  all  this  was  a  constant 
delight  to  every  sense. 

As  we  were  lazily  sailing  along,  I  espied  two  eagles  sitting 
on  some  high  trees  about  eighty  yards  off.  Willing  to  give  my 
fellows  a  taste  of  my  quality,  I  called  their  attention  to  the 
birds,  and  then  brought  both  down  with  my  double-barrel. 
They  could  hardly  believe  their  eyes  for  surprise,  such  shooting 
being  almost  miraculous  to  them.  When  they  had  got  a  little 
over  their  astonishment,  I  heard  them  say,  "Ah!  if  he  had 
fought  those  Shekiani  fellows  last  night,  how  many  he  would 
have  killed  1 " 

In  the  far  distance  the  ranges  of  the  Sierra  del  Crystal  could 
be  seen,  the  second  and  higher  range  rising  above  the  first. 
The  river  we  were  ascending  seemed  to  abound  in  fish,  which 
jumped  frequently  out  of  the  water  in  pursuit  of  their  insect 
prey;  and  the  bright-blue  kingfishers  shot  across  the  water 
hither  and  thither,  breaking  the  quiet  with  their  shrill  screams. 

As  we  got  higher  up  the  Noonday  the  stream  became  narrow, 
and  finally  almost  dwindled  away.  ]?art  of  its  course  lay  through 
a  tangled  thicket  or  jungle  of  aloe-trees,  whose  sharp  thorns 
tore  our  clothes,  and  wounded  me  so  that  I  was  covered  with 
blood.  We  had  here  a  fair  sample  of  African  "  river  "  travel. 
The  aloe-jungle  grew,  in  many  places,  right  into  the  narrow 
stream,  and  so  filled  it  up  that,  had  I  not  seen  it,  I  should  never 
have  believed  that  a  canoe  could  pass  through.  In  several 
places  we  hcwi  to  get  out  and  carry  the  canoe  over  fallen  trees 
which  entirely  barred  our  progress,  and  all  through  it  was  a 
battle  with  the  jungle,  and  a  passage  through  a  swamp  rather 
than  fair  navigation.  Yet  this  is  the  only  highway  of  this 
country,  by  which  the  natives  bring  all  their  ivory,  ebony,  and 
India-rubber  to  the  coast ;  for  even  this  is  better  than  travel- 
ling through  the  almost  impenetrable  jungle  on  foot,  in  which 
case  their  poor  women  have  to  bear  the  heavy  loads  on  their 
shoulders. 

Dark  came  on  before  we  had  reached  Mbene*s  town,  which 
was  the  nearest  settlement,  and  I  had  the  ugly  prospect  before 
me  of  passing  the  night  in  this  deadly  swamp.     Fortunately  I 


44  VILLAGE  DEFENCES.  Chap.  Y. 

had  fallen  in,  at  the  Shekiani  town,  with  a  son  of  King  Mbene ; 
and  this  good  fellow,  now,  seeing  my  men  wearied  out  and 
unable  to  go  farther,  volunteered  to  hurry  on  to  his  father's 
town  and  bring  assistance.  How  far  it  was  we  knew  not ;  but 
he  went  off. 

We  waited  an  hour,  but  no  help  arrived.  Then  I  sent  out 
two  of  my  men  to  meet  the  party  and  hurry  them  on.  Two 
hours  more  passed,  and  I  had  begun  to  despair  of  help,  when 
loud  shouts  ringing  through  the  woods  gave  us  notice  of  the 
approach  of  our  friends;  and  presently  rushed  in  among  us 
King  Mbene  himself,  his  face  radiant  with  smiles,  and  shouting 
a  welcome  to  me.  He  was  followed  by  a  large  party  of  men 
and  women,  who  took  up  my  boxes  and  other  things ;  Mbene 
took  one  of  my  guns,  and,  thus  relieved,  we  hurried  on  to  the 
town  or  encampment  of  my  royal  friend,  which  proved  to  be 
about  six  miles  off. 

The  people  had  been  here  so  little  time  that  they  had  not  had 
time  to  cut  a  road  to  the  river,  so  that  the  few  miles  we  traversed 
from  the  river-side  were  of  the  Roughest.  Happily,  elephants 
are  plentiful  hereabouts,  and  when  we  could  we  walked  in  their 
huge  tracks — ^the  rushing  of  a  herd  effecting  quite  a  clearing  in 
the  woods,  though  everything  grows  up  again  with  marvellous 
rapidity. 

I  thought  to  come  to  a  town.  My  astonishment  was  great 
when  I  found,  instead  of  the  usual  plantations  of  plantain-trees 
which  surround  the  collection  of  huts  which  make  up  an  African 
village,  an  immense  mass  of  timber  thrown  down  helter-skelter, 
as  though  a  hurricane  had  passed  through  this  part  of  the  forest 
It  appeared  that  Mbene's  people  had  their  village  at  some  dis- 
tance off,  but  c£une  here  to  make  new  plantations,  and  this  was 
their  way  of  making  a  clearing.  It  is  the  usual  way  among 
these  tribes.  The  men  go  into  the  forest  and  choose  a  site  for 
the  plantation ;  then  cut  down  the  trees  in  any  way,  just  as  luck 
or  fancy  may  direct ;  let  everything  lie  till  the  dry  season  has 
sufficiently  seasoned  the  great  trees,  when  they  set  fire  to  the 
whole  mass,  burn  it  up,  and  on  its  site  the  women  then  plant 
their  manioc,  maize,  and  plantains. 

It  was  only  with  the  greatest  difficulty,  and  with  many  tears 
from  thorns  and  trips  from  interposing  boughs,  that  I  got  through 
this  barrier,  than  which  they  could  not  have  made  a  better  wall 


Cbap.  V.  MBENE'S  VILLAGE.  45 

of  defence  for  their  village.  For  once  get  an  enemy  entangled 
in  such  a  piece  of  ground,  and  they  could  pepper  him  at  their 
convenience,  without  fear  of  retaliation. 

At  last,  when  my  patience  was  entirely  gone,  and  my  few 
clothes  were  literally  hanging  in  ribbons  about  me,  we  arrived  at 
the  camp.  Here  we  were  received  in  grand  African  style.  Guns 
were  fired,  the  people  shouted  and  danced,  everybody  was  as 
jolly  as  though  everybody's  brother  had  just  come  back  rich, 
and  I  was  immediately  installed  under  a  shed,  whither  the  king 
graciously  followed  me  with  a  present — very  welcome  indeed — 
of  a  goat  and  some  bunches  of  plantains. 

The  plantain  is  the  bread  of  all  these  tribes.  Lucky  would 
they  be  if  they  always  had  such  bread  to  eat ;  but  their  thriftless 
habits  leave  them  without  even  the  easily-cultivated  plantain^ 
and  force  them  to  eke  out  a  i^Tetched  subsistence  from  the  wild 
roots,  nuts,  and  berries  which  are  found  in  the  forests. 

I  had  seen  Mbene  before,  and  several  of  his  people  recognized 
me,  having  seen  me  when,  some  years  ago,  I  attempted  an  explo- 
ration of  this  region  in  company  with  the  Eev.  Mr.  Mackey. 
These  good  fellows  now  manifested  extraordinary  joy,  and  wel- 
comed me  to  their  town  with  all  sorts  of  dances  and  songs,  and 
offers  of  service. 

Mbene's  village  or  encampment  is  situated  at  the  foot  of  the 
first  granite-range  of  the  Sierra  del  Crystal.  The  forest-clad  hill- 
sides were  visible  in  the  distance,  and  were  to  me  a  delightful 
spectacle^  for  I  saw  that  I  was  now  approaching  the  goal  of  my 
desires.  The  people  had  not  as  yet  built  themselves  houses,  but 
were  living  in  camp,  under  rude  sheds  composed  of  leaves  spread 
thickly  over  four  forked  sticks  planted  in  the  ground.  Here 
each  head  of  a  family  gathered  his  wives,  children,  and  slaves 
about  him,  and  rested  in  safety  and  peace.  One  of  the  best  con- 
structed of  these  sheds — one  whose  sticks  stood  upright,  and 
whose  leafy  roof  was  water-tight — was  given  me,  and  here  I 
presently  fell  soundly  asleep,  after  first  placing  my  two  chests 
near  my  head. 

On  rising  the  next  morning,  I  found  that  we  were  really  not 
more  than  ten  or  fifteen  miles  from  the  hills.  Yesterday  evening 
we  could  see  two  ranges ;  the  lower  500  or  600  feet  high,  and 
the  farther  and  higher  from  2000  to  3000  feet  high.  It  is 
beyond  these  hills  that  the  Fans — ^the  cannibal  tiibe — live,  and 
the  gorilla  has  here  also  his  home. 


46  AGRICUTLURAL  OPERATIONS.  Chap.  V. 

Mbene  excused  himself  for  what  he  thought  a  shabby  reception 
of  me.  He  said  that  his  people  had  but  just  come  here ;  that  the 
men  had  been  busy  all  the  dry  season  cutting  down  trees  and 
clearing  the  woods.  He  said  that  they  had  had  very  little  to 
eat ;  had  been  obliged  to  beg  food  of  the  neighbouring  tribes, 
and  half  the  time  had  nothing  to  eat  but  the  nut  of  a  sort  of 
palm,  of  which  they  also  make  a  kind  of  wine.  This  nut  is  very 
bitter;  I  could  never  eat  it.  It  is  shaped  like  an  egg,  with 
rounded  ends.  To  prepare  it  it  is  divested  of  its  husk  and 
soaked  in  water  for  twenty-four  hours,  when  it  loses  in  part  its 
exceedingly  bitter  taste,  and  becomes  tolerably  palatable  to  a 
hungry  man.  Sometimes  hunger  presses  them  to  eat  the  nut 
without  soaking  it — I  have  been  compelled  to  do  so— and  it  is 
then  excessively  disagreeable. 

I  saw  at  once  that  it  would  not  do  for  me  to  stay  long  with 
Mbene,  for  I  could  not  live  as  these  people  do ;  and  of  my  own 
stores,  though  I  had  a  few  crackers  and  searbiscuit  left,  these 
would  not  last  long,  and  ought  to  be  kept  for  possible  sickness. 

The  negro  tribes  of  this  region  are  half  the  time  in  a  state  of 
starvation  by  their  utter  improvidence.  They  seem  imable  to 
cope  with  want^  even  with  so  fertile  a  country  as  theirs  to  help 
them.  Such  encampments  as  this  of  Mbene's  are  common  among 
all  the  tribes.  Their  agricultural  operations  are  of  the  rudest 
kind,  and,  from  the  necessity  of  seeking  out  the  most  fertile  soil 
as  well  as  from  general  habit,  they  prefer  to  go  to  a  distance  from 
their  villages  to  clear  and  plant  the  ground.  They  never  plant 
two  successive  years  in  the  same  place,  and  have,  therefore,  much 
labour  in  clearing  the  ground  every  time.  And,  after  all,  it  is 
not  imcommon  for  a  village  to  lose  all  the  fruits  of  its  labours 
by  the  incursions  of  a  herd  of  elephants,  who  trample  down 
what  they  do  not  eat  up.  This  happens  especially  to  plantain 
plantations. 

The  encampment  is  called  an  olako,  this  word  signifying  also  a 
new  site  for  *a  village  or  any  place  of  temporary  sojourn.  An 
olako  is  a  romantic  scene  to  look  at,  particularly  in  the  night, 
when  every  family  has  its  fire,  near  which  its  beds  are  made 
under  the  shades  before  described.  But  hunger  spoils  the 
prettiest  romance ;  and  I  would  have  given  up  the  camp  wil- 
lingly for  a  good  roast  fowl  or  a  sufiBcient  supply  of  bread. 

I  told  Mbene  that  as  his  place  had  no  food  to  offer  I  must  go 
farther ;  explained  to  him  my  objects ;  and  finally  it  was  agreed 


Chap.  V.  OFFER  OP  A  WIFE.  47 

that  his  brother  Ncomo  should  accompany  me  with  a  party  as 
far  as  the  Fan  tribe.  So  much  was  settled  without  difiBculty ; 
but  still  several  weeks  passed  ere  my  company  was  ready  to 
start  Meantime  I  made  myself  as  comfortable  as  possible 
under  the  circumstances.  The  king's  wives  supplied  me  with 
mats  for  my  bed,  and  imder  these  I  put  dry  leaves  enough  to 
make  a  soft  couch.  On  each  side  of  the  bed  I  built  a  fire  to 
keep  off  the  musquitoes,  which  were  very  troublesome,  and  thus 
I  tried  to  sleep  at  night    My  weary  days  were  spent  in  hunting. 

I  ought  to  add  that,  with  usual  African  hospitality,  my  kingly 
friend  offered  me  a  wife  on  my  arrival  at  his  place.  This  is  the 
common  custom  when  the  negroes  wish  to  pay  respect  to  their 
guests,  and  they  cannot  understand  why  white  men  should 
decline  what  they  consider  a  mere  matter  of  course.  I  endea- 
voured to  explain  to  Mbene  and  his  wives  what  our  own  customs 
were  in  regard  to  marriage ;  but  neither  men  nor  women  seemed 
to  understand  or  appreciate  the  Christian  idea  of  marriage. 

The  musquitoes  penetrated  through  the  smoke  of  my  fires, 
and  bit  me  so  that  I  could  scarce  sleep  on  the  first  night  after 
my  arrival,  and,  to  make  matters  yet  more  unpleasant,  the  rain 
poured  on  me  through  a  leaky  place  in  my  leafy  shelter,  so  that 
I  arose  next  morning  wet,  sore,  hungry,  but  withal  feeling 
unusually  well. 

I  went  to  make  arrangements  with  Ncomo  for  an  early  start 
Found  that  his  women  had  gone  out  to  beg  food  for  their  trip. 
Mbene  gave  me  a  chicken  for  my  dinner — an  unusual  luxury. 
But  I  had  to  shoot  my  fowl  before  eating  it  The  natives  build 
no  perches  for  their  poultry,  and  the  consequence  is  that  the 
chickens  fly  to  roost  in  the  topmost  branches  of  the  trees,  where 
they  are  safe  from  predatory  attacks  of  all  kinds,  either  by  their 
owners  or  by  wild  beasts. 

When  I  declined  Mbene's  offer  of  a  "  wife,"  he  said,  "  Oh 
well,  she  can  at  any  rate  wait  on  you  and  cook  for  you ;"  and  so 
I  am  lucky  enough  to  have  a  good  cook.  The  negroes  use  a  good 
deal  of  pepper  in  their  cooking,  which  I  think  healthy  for  this 
climate ;  otherwise  my  chicken-soup  was  good  enough,  and,  with 
the  addition  of  some  plantain  boiled,  and  some  remains  of  the 
goat  which  had  been  given  to  me  yesterday,  I  made  a  very  good 
dinner— probably  the  last  I  shall  get  for  a  good  many  days, 
unless  we  are  unusually  lucky  and  kill  some  deer  or  elephant 
on  our  road. 


48  **  MBENE'S  WHITE  MAN.''  Chap.  VI. 


CHAPTEE  VI. 

Hold  of  a  Traveller  on  the  Natives  —  Fruits  —  The  Mbondemo  —  Their 
Towns — Houses  —  Morals  of  War  —  Condition  of  Women  —  Women  as 
Bearers  —  The  Hills  —  A  Caravan  —  Mutiny — Rapids  of  the  Ntambounay 
—  Summit  of  the  Sierra — Contemplaticms  interrupted  by  a  Serpent  —  The 
first  Grorilla  —  Appearance  in  Motion  —  Famine  in  the  Camp  —  Native 
Stories  of  the  Gorilla — Superstitious  Notions  about  the  Animal — Lifeless- 
ness  of  the  Forest —  A  Beetrai. 

To-day  (August  20th)  I  sent  back  Dayoko's  men,  and  am  now 
in  Mbene's  power  and  at  his  mercy.  He  is  a  very  good  fellow, 
and  I  feel  myself  quite  safe  among  his  rough  but  kindly  people. 
I  have  fouiid  it  the  best  way  to  trust  the  people  I  travel  among. 
They  seem  to  take  it  as  a  compliment,  and  they  are  proud  to 
have  a  white  man  among  them.  Even  if  a  chief  were  inclined 
to  murder,  it  would  not  be  profitable  in  such  a  case,  for  the 
exhibition  of  his  white  visitor  among  the  neighbouring  tribes 
does  more  to  give  him  respect  and  prestige  than  his  murder 
would. 

They  speak  of  me  now  as  "  Mbene's  white  man."  Before  I 
was  "  Dayoko's  white  man."  The  title  has  comfort  and  safety 
in  it,  for  it  would  be  a  great  insult  to  Mbene  for  any  stranger 
to  molest  hd8  white  man,  and  it  is  to  his  own  honour  to  feed 
him  as  well  as  he  can. 

Of  course,  one  must  have  tact  enough  to  satisfy  the  chief  with 
occasional  little  presents,  given  him  generally  in  private,  so  that 
his  people  may  not  beg  from  him,  d»id  given,  also,  not  as  though 
you  wished  to  conciliate — for  it  will  not  do  to  show  any  symp- 
toms of  fear  however  much  cause  there  may  be — but  apparently 
as  friendly  gifts. 

This  is  the  only  safe  way  to  get  ahead  in  this  country,  and  I 
never  found  a  chief  whose  "  white  man  "  I  was  for  the  time  but 
would  help  and  further  my  plans  and  journeys. 

Dayoko's  men  are  to  return  to  Mbene's  camp  in  three  months 
to  look  for  me,  and  I  have  to  be  back,  if  possible,  by  that  time. 

The  women  have  brought  in  a  supply  of  the  bitter  palm-seeds 
and  of  other  fruits,  mostly  more  palatable  than  that  bitter 
abomination,  but  unfortunately  not  so  plentiful.     Among  these 


Chap.  VI.  MBONDEMO  SQUAITERS.  49 

is  a  round  nut  the  size  of  a  large  walnut,  containing  three  or 
four  oily  kernels,  each  of  the  size  of  a  peanut ;  when  these  were 
roasted  they  were  not  disagreeable.  And  there  was  a  remark- 
ably magnificent  fruit  which  I  never  saw  before,  resembling  in 
general  shape  a  bunch  of  grapes,  each  grape  olive-shaped,  and 
the  whole  of  a  bright  scarlet  colour.  It  was  really  a  splendid 
sight  to  see  these  glowing  bunches  hanging  from  the  trunks  of 
the  trees  which  bear  them.  The  seed  is  larger  than  that  of  the 
olive ;  the  skin  not  so  thick  as  that ;  and  the  pulp  is  quite  juicy 
and  of  a  pleasant  flavour. 

The  Mbcmdemo  tribe  is  allied  to  the  Mhisho^  Mbikiy  Mbousha, 
Ibouay,  Acoa^  and  Shekiani  tribes.  The  speech  of  all  these 
tribes  is  nearly  alike.  They  can  all  understand  each  other. 
Also  they  have  the  same  general  customs  and  superstitions,  and 
the  same  nomadic  habits.  The  Mbondemo  live  or  have  their 
towns  in  the  mountains  of  the  interior  east  of  Cape  Lopez,  and 
in  that  tract  of  country  which  extends  from  north  of  the  Muni 
to  the  Moondah  Biver. 

Since  I  first  knew  Mbene  he  had  moved  his  village  twice,  his 
present  removal  making  the  third.  I  asked  what  reasons  moved 
him  to  these  changes.  The  first  time,  he  said,  a  man  had  died 
there,  and  the  place  was  '*  not  good  "  after  that  The  second 
time  he  was  forced  to  move  because  they  had  cut  down  all  the 
palm-trees,  and  could  get  no  more  mirnbo  (palm-wine),  a  beverage 
of  which  they  are  excessively  fond,  though  they  take  no  pains 
to  preserve  the  trees  out  of  the  soft  tops  of  which  it  is  made. 
But  these  are  very  plentifiil  all  over  the  country ;  and  it  seems 
easier  for  them  to  move  than  to  take  care  of  the  tf^es  surround- 
ing their  settlements,  useful  as  they  are  to  them ;  for  they 
famish  not  only  the  wine  they  love,  but  the  very  bitter  nut  I 
mentioned  before,  which  often  keeps  them  from  starvation; 
while  of  its  trunk,  split  up,  they  make  the  sides  of  their  houses. 
A  country  which  has  plenty  of  palm-trees,  plenty  of  game,  a 
good  river,  and  plenty  of  fish,  is  the  ideal  region  of  a  Mbondemo 
settler  or  squatter. 

The  Mbondemo  villages  differ  materially  in  their  arrange- 
ments from  those  of  the  seashore  tribes  I  have  already  described. 
The  houses  are  mostly  of  uniform  size,  generally  from  twelve  to 
fifteen  feet  long,  and  eight  or  ten  feet  wide.  They  are  built  on 
both  sides  of  a  long  and  tolerably  wide  street,  and  invariably  join 

E 


50  A  MBONDEMO  INTERIOR.  Chap.  VI. 

each  other.  The  chiefs  house  and  the  palaver-house  are  larger 
than  the  others.  The  ends  of  the  street  are  barricaded  with 
stout  sticks  or  palisades,  and  at  night  the  doors  or  gates  of  the 
village  are  firmly  closed,  and  persons  approaching,  if  they  can- 
not explain  their  intentions,  are  remorselessly  shot  down  or 
speared.  The  houses  have  no  windows,  and  doors  only  on  the 
side  towards  the  street ;  and  when  the  door  of  the  street  is 
locked,  the  village  is,  in  fact,  a  fortress.  As  an  additional  pro- 
tection, however,  they  often  cut  down  thorny  brushwood  and 
block  up  the  surrounding  approaches ;  and,  also,  they  always 
locate  t^e  village  on  the  top  of  the  highest  hill  they  can  find  in 
the  region  where,  for  the  time  being,  they  squat.  All  this 
shows — what  is  the  truth — ^that  they  are  a  quarrelsome,  though 
not  a  brave  race.  They  are  continually  in  hot-water  with  their 
neighbours,  and  never  know  when  they  are  to  be  attacked.. 

Interiorly  the  Mbondemo  house  is  divided  by  a  bark  partition 
into  two  rooms ;  one  the  kitchen,  where  also  everybody  sits  or 
lies  down  on  the  ground  about  the  fire ;  the  other  the  sleeping 
apartment.  This  last  is  perfectly  dark  ;  and  here  are  stowed  their 
provisions  and  all  their  riches.  To  ascertain  how  large  a  family 
any  Mbondemo  householder  has,  you  have  only  to  count  the  lit- 
tle doors  which  open  into  the  various  sleeping  apartments  :  "  So 
many  doors  so  many  wives,"  it  was  explained  to  me.  The  houses 
are  made  of  bark  and  a  kind  of  jointless  bamboo,  which  is  got 
from  the  trunk  of  a  particular  palm.  The  strips  are  tied  to  posts 
set  firmly  into  tlie  ground,  with  rope  made  from  the  vines  of  the 
forest.  The  roofing  is  made  of  matting.  The  houses  are  neither 
so  large,  so  substantially  built,  nor  so  good-looking  as  those  of  the 
Mpongwe. 

To-day  (21st)  my  men  have  been  getting  ready  their  guns  for 
enemies  or  game.  The  tribes  of  Africa  have  so  many  petty  causes 
of  quarrel,  that  they  are  always  in  danger  of  a  fight.  They  are 
so  bound  together  by  ridiculous  superstitions  of  witchcraft,  and 
by  the  entangling  alliances  of  polygamy,  and  greatly  also  by  their 
want  of  good  faith  in  trade,  that  no  man  can  say  where  or  why  an 
enemy  is  waiting  for  his  life. 

I  have  already  spoken  of  the  system  of  intermarriages  by  which 
a  chief  gains  in  power  and  friends.  But  there  are  other  means 
of  securing  allies.  For  instance,  two  tribes  are  anxious  for  a  fight, 
but  one  needs  more  force.     This  weakling  sends  one  of  its  men 


Chap.  VI.  THE  WOMAN'S  QUESTION.  T)! 

secretly  to  kill  a  man  or  woman  of  some  village  living  near,  but 
having  no  share  in  the  quarrel.  The  consequence  is,  not,  as 
would  seem  most  reasonable,  that  this  last  village  takes  its  re- 
venge on  the  murderer,  but,  strangely  enough,  that  the  mur- 
derer s  people  give  them  to  understand  that  this  is  done  because 
another  tribe  has  insultod  them,  whereupon,  according  to  African 
custom,  the  two  villages  join,  and  together  march  U{)on  the 
enemy.  In  effect,  to  gain  a  village  to  a  certain  side  in  a 
quarrel,  that  side  murders  one  of  its  men  or  women,  with  a  pur- 
pose of  retaliation  on  somebody  else. 

Their  women  they  keep  only  to  minister  to  their  pride,  in- 
fluence, pleasure,  and  sloth.  A  man  pays  goods  or  slaves  for 
his  wife,  and  regards  her  therefore  as  a  piece  of  merchandise. 
Young  girls — even  children  in  arms — are  married  to  old  men 
for  political  effect.  The  idea  of  love,  as  we  understand  it,  seems 
unknpwn  to  these  people.  The  inhabitant  of  the  seacoast  has 
no  hesitation  in  bartering  the  virtue  of  his  nearest  female  rela- 
tives, nor  are  the  women  averse  from  the  traffic,  if  only  they  be 
well  paid.  And  I  will  add  that  many  of  the  whites  who  come  to 
the  coast,  sailors  and  others,  do  more  to  debauch  and  demoralize 
these  poor,  ignorant  natives  than  even  their  own  ignorance 
and  brutality  would  do. 

Adultery  with  a  black  man  is  punishable  by  fine  among  all  the 
tribes,  and  this  law,  which  is  strictly  executed,  is  the  cause  of  a 
most  singular  state  of  things.  Husband  and  wife  combine  to 
rob  some  fellow  with  whom  the  woman  pretends  to  cany  on  an 
intrigue,  making  sure  of  being  discovered  by  the  husband,  who 
thereupon  obtains  a  recompense  sufficient  to  heal  his  wounded 
honour,  and  upon  which  he  and  his  wife  and  accomplice  are 
able  to  live  for  some  time. 

Unlawful  intercourse  with  the  women  of  a  neighbouring  tribe  or 
village  is  the  cause  of  nearly  all  the  "  palavers,"  and  wars,  and 
fights  in  Africa.  K  a  tribe  wants  to  fight,  they  make  this  the 
cause  by  getting  one  of  their  women  to  intrigue  with  a  man  of 
the  other  tribe  or  village  ;  and  if  they  do  not  want  to  fight  even, 
they  are  often  forced  into  it 

Then  the  system  of  intermarrying  involves  half-a-dozen  tribes 
in  the  quarrel  of  two.  Each  chief  calls  on  his  fathers-in-law  to 
assist,  and  thus  the  country  is  thrown  into  uproar ;  property  is 
unsafe,  and  becomes  almost  valueless  to  them;    agricultural 

E  2 


52  MOHALS  OF  WAR.  Chap.  VI. 

operations  are  impeded,  and  whole  villages  gradually  disappear 
from  the  scene  of  contention,  either  by  migrating,  starving  out, 
or  being  killed  out. 

The  women  not  only  provide  all  the  food,  they  are  also  the 
beasts  of  burden  in  this  part  of  Africa.  My  party  from  Itbene's 
town  consisted  of  Mbene's  two  sons,  Miengai  and  Maginda,  a 
young  man  named  Pouliandaiy  and  half-a-dozen  stout  women 
to  bear  my  heavy  chests  and  other  luggage,  and  food  for  the 
journey. 

We  started  at  length  on  the  morning  of  August  24th.  The 
natives  had  done  what  they  could  to  gather  food  beforehand  for 
the  trip,  but  the  result  was  poor  enough.  My  own  supplies  were 
by  this  time  completely  exhausted.  The  half-dozen  crackers  I 
had  in  reserve  were  for  sickness  or  a  great  emergency.  Besides 
this,  they  had  succeeded  in  getting  several  large  bunches  of 
plantains  and  a  good  many  of  the  bitter  palm-nuts,  and  that 
was  all  the  commissariat. 

I  took  along  70  pounds  of  shot,  19  pounds  of  powder,  and 
10  pounds  of  arsenic  for  killing  and  preserving  my  specimens; 
also  my  chests,  containing  cloth,  tobacco,  beads,  &c.,  to  buy  food 
and  give  presents  to  the  natives  we  should  meet.  I  made  Miengai 
carry  the  shot,  as  the  women  had  already  enough.  But  my 
men  were  all  loaded  with  trade  on  their  own  account,  consisting 
of  brass  kettles,  iron  pots,  jugs,  &c.,  and  about  100  pounds  of 
salt,  put  up  in  little  packages  of  three  or  four  pounds. 

The  packing  of  the  women  is  a  subject  of  great  importance. 
They  carry  their  loads  in  heavy,  rude  baskets,  suspended  down 
the  back;  and  it  is  necessary  that  these  should  be  carefully 
arranged,  with  three  or  four  inches  of  soft  tree-fibre  next  to  the 
back  to  prevent  chafing. 

When  all  was  aiTanged — when  everybody  had  taken  leave  of 
all  his  friends,  and  come  back  half-a-dozen  times  to  take  leave 
over  again,  or  say  sometliing  before  forgotten — when  all  the 
shouting,  and  ordering,  and  quarrelling  were  done,  and  I  had 
completely  lost  patience,  we  at  last  got  away. 

In  about  five  miles*  travel  we  came  to  the  banks  of  the  Noon- 
day River,  which  is  here  a  narrow,  but  clear  and  beautiful 
stream,  so  clear  that  I  was  tempted  to  shoot  a  fish  of  curious 
shape  I  saw  swimming  along  as  we  stood  on  the  bank. 

I  fired  a  charge  of  small  shot  into  him  ;  but  no  sooner  had  I 


Chap.  VI.  THE  SIERRA  DEL  CRYSTAL.  53 

pulled  the  trigger  than  I  heard  a  tremendous  crash  on  the  oppo- 
site bank,  above  six  or  seven  yards  across,  saw  some  small  trees 
torn  violently  down,  and  then  came  the  shrill  trumpetings  of  a 
party  of  frightened  elephants.  They  had  been  standing  in 
a  dead  silence  on  the  opposite  bank  in  the  jungle,  whether 
watching  us  or  not  we  could  not  tell.  I  was  sorry  I  fired, 
as  we  crossed  the  stream  just  here,  and  we  might  have  killed 
one  but  for  this  fright  they  got,  which  sent  them  out  of  our 
reach. 

After  crossing  the  Noonday,  and  travelling  ten  miles  in  a  north- 
east direction,  we  reached  a  range  of  granite  hills,  which  are  a 
part  of  the  Sierra  del  Crystal  moimtains.  The  hills  were  very 
steep,  and  to  ascend  them  in  as  good  style  as  possible  we  sat 
down  and  took  our  dinners  first.  I  ate  a  few  boiled  plantains, 
not  very  strengthening,  but  the  best  we  could  get,  and  then  we 
essayed  the  crooked  and  poorly-marked  path  up-hill,  which  wound 
its  devious  course  about  immense  boulders  of  granite  and  quartz, 
which,  scattered  along  the  declivity,  gave  the  country  a  very 
strange  look. 

This  range  was  about  600  feet  high,  and  the  summit  formed  a 
table-land  three  miles  long,  which  also  was  strewed  with  the  im- 
mense quartz  and  granite  boulders. 

Passing  this  table-land,  we  came  to  another  tier  of  hills,  steeper 
and  higher  than  the  first,  which  also  had  to  be  surmounted.  In 
this  kind  of  travelling  I  find  that  the  natives  have  a  great  advan- 
tage over  me.  They  use  their  bare  feet  almost  as  monkeys  do 
theirs.  Long  practice  enables  them  to  catch  hold  of  objects  with 
their  toes,  and  they  could  jump  from  rock  to  rock  without  fear 
of  falling,  while  I,  with  thick  shoes  on,  was  continually  slij^ing, 
and  got  along  very  slowly. 

We  were  yet  on  the  first  plateau  when  Mimgai  suddenly  made 
me  a  sign  to  keep  very  still.  He  and  I  were  in  advance.  I 
thought  he  had  discovered  a  herd  of  elephants,  or  perhaps  a  tiger. 
He  cocked  his  gun,  and  I  mine,  and  there  we  stood  for  five  minutes 
in  perfect  silence.  Suddenly  Miengai  sent  a  "hurrah"  rolling 
through  the  forest,  which  was  immediately  answered  by  shouts 
from  many  voices  at  no  great  distance,  but  whose  owners  were 
hid  from  us  by  the  rocks  and  trees.  Miengai  replied  with  the 
fierce  shout  of  the  Mbondemo  warriors,  and  was  again  answered. 
Going  a  little  farther  on,  we  came  in  sight  of  the  encampment  of 


54  MBONDEMO  CARAVAN.  Chap.  VI. 

a  large  party,  who  proved  to  be  some  of  Mbene's  people  just  re- 
turning from  a  trading  expedition  to  the  interior. 

It  wa8  a  curious  picture.  They  lay  encamped  about  their  fires 
to  the  number  of  about  a  hundred — young  and  old,  men  and 
women ;  some  gray  and  wrinkled,  and  others  babes  in  arms. 
They  had  evidently  travelled  far,  and  were  tired  out  They  had 
collected  India-rubber,  and  had  in  charge  some  ivory,  and  were 
now  about  to  take  these  goods  to  Mbene  or  some  other  river 
chief,  to  be  sent  down  from  hand  to  hand  to  the  "  white-man 
market." 

Here  even  I  noticed  the  laziness  of  the  black  men,  and  the  cruel 
way  in  which  the  women  are  obliged  to  work.  The  Mbondemo 
men  lay  about  the  fires,  handling  their  spears  and  guns,  and  talk- 
ing or  sleeping,  while  the  women  were  doing  the  cooking  and 
making  the  camp  comfortable,  and  such  of  the  children  as  could 
walk  were  driven  out  to  collect  firewood  for  the  night.  The 
poor  things  seemed  to  be  very  weary,  but  they  got  no  mercy. 

Being  tired  ourselves,  we  built  our  camp-fires  near  the  party, 
and  I  had  the  opportunity  next  day  to  see  them  get  under  way. 
The  men  carried  only  their  arms,  and  most  of  them  were  armed 
to  the  teeth.  The  women  and  larger  children  carried,  in  the 
usual  baskets,  suspended  along  the  back,  the  food — of  which  they 
seemed  to  have  a  good  supply — ^the  ivory  and  India-rubber,  and 
besides — ^still  in  the  basket — such  of  the  babies  as  could  by  no 
means  get  along  alone.  The  old  people  were  not  exempt  from 
light  burdens,  though  they  had  to  totter  along  with  the  help  of 
long  sticks. 

The  whole  party  were  very  thinly  clothed,  even  for  Africa. 
They  had  with  them  an  old  chief,  to  whom  they  seemed  to  pay 
much  reverence,  and  he  was  constantly  waited  upon  by  his  wives, 
of  whom  he  seemed  to  have  several  with  him.  I  gave  them  a 
little  salt,  for  which  they  seemed  very  grateful. 

Next  morning  we  broke  up  before  daylight,  after  eating  a  very 
scanty  breakfast  of  a  few  cooked  plantains.  It  rained  all  day, 
and  consequently  we  tramped  all  day  in  the  mud,  wet  through, 
and  chilly.  About  noon  we  met  another  large  party  of  travelling 
Mbondemo  returning  from  the  interior.  They  had  never  seen  a 
white  man  before,  and  stared  at  me  with  all  the  eyes  they  had, 
though  they  did  not  seem  frightened.  I  fear  my  appearance 
gave  them  but  a  poor  idea  of  white  people.     I  was  clothed  in 


Chap.  VI.  CAMPING  IN  THE  BUSH.  55 

only  a  blue  drilling  shirt  and  trowsers,  both  wet,  and  the  latter 
muddy.  They  begged  for  some  tobacco  "  to  warm  themselves," 
and  a  few  leaves  which  I  gave  them  made  them  perfectly  happy. 
They  seemed  to  suflfer  from  the  rain  much  more  than  I  did, 
especially  the  women,  who  I  took  care  should  have  their  share 
of  the  tobacco. 

Among  this  party  were  two  fellows,  named  Ngolai  and  Yeava, 
who  were  firom  Mbene's  village,  and  well  known  to  Mbene's  sons. 
These  offered  to  go  with  us  if  we  would  give  them  food,  as  theirs 
was  nearly  gone,  and  Miengai  and  Maginda  promising  this  much, 
they  at  once  joined  our  party. 

After  a  walR  of  about  eighteen  miles  in  the  rain,  through  tliick 
woods,  and  over  a  rough  hilly  country  (and  in  a  general  direction 
of  E.S.E.),  we  came  to  oiu:  camp,  and  to  my  delight  found  very 
lai^e  and  commodious  huts  ready  for  us.  This  is  a  highway,  it 
seems,  of  this  country,  though  no  signs  of  a  road  are  visible,  and 
different  parties  of  traders  had  built  and  kept  up  these  very  neat 
and  comfortable  sheds.  They  were  built  of  sticks,  as  in  Mbene's 
village,  but  were  better  roofed,  and  larger.  Large  leaves  were 
laid  over  the  sticks,  and  being  carefully  disposed  shinglewise 
kept  out  the  rain  completely. 

We  built  great  fires  and  made  ourselves  comfortable.  I  had 
three  fires  lit  about  my  bed  of  brush,  hung  up  my  wet  clothes  to 
dry,  and,  after  comforting  myself  with  a  little  brandy,  went  to 
sleep  in  much  more  than  usual  snugness,  not  knowing  the  "  pala- 
ver "  which  was  in  store  for  me  on  the  morrow. 

When  we  got  up,  much  refreshed,  my  men  came  and  said  they 
were  tired,  and  would  40t  go  a  step  farther  if  I  did  not  pay  them 
more  cloth. 

They  seemed  in  earnest,  and  I  was,  as  may  be  imagined,  in 
considerable  trouble  of  mind.  To  return  now,  when  I  had  got 
so  far  along,  was  not  to  be  thought  of.  To  be  left  alone  would 
have  been  almost  certain  death,  and  to  give  what  they  demanded 
was  to  rob  myself  and  set  a  bad  precedent  to  my  guides.  Finally, 
I  determined  to  put  on  a  bold  front.  I  went  into  the  crowd,  told 
them — pistols  in  hand — that  I  should  not  give  them  any  more 
cloth  ;  that  neither  could  I  permit  them  to  leave  me,  because  their 
father,  Mbene,  had  given  them  to  me  to  accompany  me  to  the 
Fcm  tribe.  So  far,  I  told  them,  they  must  go  with  me,  or  else — 
here  I  motioned  with  my  pistols — tiiere  would  be  war  between 


56  FAMINE.  Chap.  VI. 

us.  But,  I  added,  .if  they  were  faithful,  I  would  give  each  some- 
thing additional  when  the  trip  was  done. 

After  a  consultation  among  themselves,  they  finally  said  that 
they  were  pleased  with  what  I  said,  and  were  my  friends.  Here- 
upon, with  great  lightness  of  heart  at  my  escape  from  an  ugly 
dilemma,  I  shook  hands  with  them,  and  we  set  out  on  the 
journey. 

It  was  ten  o'clock  before  we  made  a  start  on  this  day.  We 
were  now  approaching  the  second  mountain-range  of  the  Sierra 
del  Crystal,  and  passing  through  a  wild  country,  densely  wooded, 
rough,  and  strewn  along  the  higher  ground  with  immense 
boulders,  which  gave  an  additional  wildness  to  tlte  scene.  Up, 
and  up,  and  up  we  struggled,  through  a  forest  more  silent  than 
I  recollect  to  have  noticed  in  Africa  before  or  since.  Not 
even  the  scream  of  a  bird  or  the  shrill  cry  of  a  monkey  to  break 
the  dark  solitude — and  either  would  have  been  welcome ;  for, 
though  I  generally  abominate  monkey,  which,  roasted,  looks  too 
much  like  roast-baby,  I  was  now  at  that  point  of  semi-starvatioa 
when  I  should  have  very  much  delighted  in  a  tender  bit  even 
of  gorilla. 

Nothing  was  heard  but  the  panting  breathings  of  our  party, 
who  were  becoming  exhausted  by  the  ascent,  till,  at  last,  I 
thought  I  heard  a  subdued  roar  as  of  a  fall  of  water.  It  grew 
plainer  as  we  toiled  on,  and  finally  filled  the  whole  air  with  its 
grand  rush;  soon  turning  a  sharp  comer  of  a  declivity  and 
marching  on  a  little  way,  the  fall  literally  burst  upon  our 
sight — one  of  the  grandest  views  I  ever  saw.  It  was  not  a 
waterfall,  but  an  immense  mountain-toprent  dashing  down-hill 
at  an  angle  of  twenty-five  or  thirty  degrees,  for  not  less  than  a 
mile  right  before  us,  like  a  vast,  seething,  biUowy  sea.  The 
river-course  was  full  of  the  huge  granite  boulders  which  lie 
about  here  as  though  the  Titans  had  been  playing  at  skittles 
in  this  country;  and  against  these  the  angry  waters  dashed 
as  though  they  would  carry  all  before  them,  and,  breaking, 
threw  the  milky  spray  up  to  the  very  tops  of  the  trees  which 
grew  along  the  edge. 

Where  we  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  rapids  the  stream  took  a 
winding  turn  down  the  mountain ;  but  we  had  the  whole  mile  of 
foaming  rapid  before  us,  seemingly  pouring  its  mass  of  waters 
down  upon  our  heads. 


Chap.  VI.  ATTACKED  BY  A  SERPENT.  57 

These  were  the  head-waters  of  the  Ntambounay. 

Drinking  a  few  handfuls  of  its  pure,  clear,  cool  water,  we 
travelled  onward,  still  up  hill  and  partly  along  the  edge  of  the 
rapids.  In  another  hour  we  reached  a  cleared  space  where  a 
Mbondemo  village  had  once  stood,  and  where  we  were  surrounded 
with  some  of  the  springs  which  contribute  their  waters  to  the 
torrent  below  ua     And  this  was  the  summit. 

From  this  elevation — about  5000  feet  above  the  ocean  level — 
I  enjoyed  an  unobstructed  view  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach. 
The  hills  we  had  surmounted  the  day  before  lay  quietly  at 
our  feet,  seeming  mere  molehills.  On  all  sides  stretched  the 
immense  virgin  forests,  with  here  and  there  the  sheen  of  a 
watercourse.  And  far  away  in  the  east  loomed  the  blue  tops 
of  the  farthest  range  of  the  Sierra  del  Crystal,  the  goal  of  my 
desires.  The  murmur  of  the  rapids  below  filled  my  ears,  and, 
as  I  strained  my  eyes  toward  those  distant  mountains  which  I 
hoped  to  reach,  I  began  to  thinjc  how  this  wilderness  would  look 
if  only  the  light  of  Christian  civilization  could  once  be  fairly 
introduced  among  the  black  children  of  Africa.  I  dreamed  of 
forests  giving  way  to  plantations  of  coflfee,  cotton,  and  spices ;  of 
peaceful  negroes  going  to  their  contented  daily  tasks ;  of  farming 
and  manufactures ;  of  churches  and  schools ;  and,  luckily  raising 
my  eyes  heavenward  at  this  stage  of  my  thoughts,  saw  pendent 
from  the  branch  of  a  tree  beneath  which  I  was  sitting  an  immense 
serpent,  evidently  preparing  to  gobble  up  this  dreaming  intruder 
on  his  domains. 

My  dreams  of  future  civilization  vanished  in  a  moment.  Luckily 
my  gun  lay  at  hand.  I  rushed  out  so  as  to  "  stand  from  under," 
and,  taking  good  aim,  shot  my  black  friend  through  the  head.  He 
let  go  his  hold,  and,  after  dancing  about  a  little  on  the  ground, 
lay  dead  before  me.  He  measured  a  little  over  thirteen  feet  in 
length,  and  his  fangs  proved  that  he  was  venomous. 

And  now  that  Christian  civilization  of  which  I  had  mused  so 
pleasantly  a  few  minutes  before  received  another  shock.  My 
men  cut  off  the  head  of  the  snake,  and,  dividing  the  body  into 
proper  pieces,  roasted  it  and  ate  it  on  the  spot ;  and  I — poor, 
starved,  but  civilized  mortal ! — stood  by,  longing  for  a  meal,  but 
unable  to  stomach  this.  So  much  for  civilization,  which  is  a  very 
good  thing  in  its  way,  but  has  no  business  in  an  African  forest 
when  food  is  scarce. 


58  GORILLA-TRACKS.  Chap.  VL 

When  the  snake  was  eaten,  and  I,  the  only  empty-stomached 
individual  of  the  company,  had  sufficiently  reflected  on  the  dis- 
advantages of  being  bred  in  a  Christian  country,  we  began  to 
look  about  the  ruins  of  the  village  near  which  we  sat  A 
degenerate  kind  of  sugarcane  was  growing  on  the  very  spot 
where  the  houses  had  formerly  stood,  and  I  made  haste  to  pluck 
some  of  this  and  chew  it  for  the  little  sweetness  it  had.  But  as 
we  were  plucking  my  men  perceived  what  instantly  threw  us  all 
into  the  greatest  excitement.  Here  and  there  the  cane  was 
beaten  down,  torn  up  by  the  roots,  and  lying  about  in  fragments 
which  had  evidently  been  chewed. 

I  knew  that  these  were  fresh  tracks  of  the  gorilla,  and  joy 
filled  my  heart.  My  men  looked  at  each  other  in  silence,  and 
muttered  i\^yZa, -which  is  as  much  as  to  say  in  Mpongwe  Ngina, 
or,  as  we  say,  gorilla. 

We  followed  these  traces,  and  presently  came  to  the  footprints 
of  the  so-long-desired  animal.  It  was  the  first  time  I  had  ever 
seen  these  footprints,  and  my  sensations  were  indescribable. 
Here  was  I  now,  it  seemed,  on  the  point  of  meeting  face  to 
face  that  monster  of  whose  ferocity,  strength,  and  cunning  the 
natives  had  told  me  so  much ;  an  animal  scarce  known  to  the 
civilized  world,  and  which  no  white  man  before  had  hunted. 
My  heart  beat  till  I  feared  its  loud  pulsations  would  alarm 
the  gorilla,  and  my  feelings  were  really  excited  to  a  painful 
degree. 

By  the  tracks  it  was  easy  to  know  that  there  must  have  been 
several  gorillas  in  company.  We  prepared  at  once  to  foUow 
them. 

The  women  were  terrified,  poor  things !  and  we  left  them  a 
good  escort  of  two  or  three  men  to  take  care  of  them  and  re- 
assure them.  Then  the  rest  of  us  looked  once  more  carefully  at 
our  guns — for  the  gorilla  gives  you  no  time  to  reload,  and  woe 
to  him  whom  he  attacks !  We  were  armed  to  the  teeth.  My 
men  were  remarkably  silent,  as  they  were  going  on  an  expe- 
dition of  more  than  usual  risk ;  for  the  male  gorilla  is  literally 
the  king  of  the  African  forest.  He  and  the  crested  lion  of 
Mount  Atlas  are  the  two  fiercest  and  strongest  beasts  of  this 
continent.  The  lion  of  South  Africa  cannot  compare  with  either 
for  strength  or  courage. 

As  we  departed  from  the  camp,  the  men  and  women  left  behind 


Chap.  VI.  HUNTING  GORILLAS.  59 

crowded  together,  with  fear  written  on  their  faces.  Miengai, 
Makinda,  and  Ngolai  set  oat  in  one  party,  and  myself  and 
Yeava  formed  another,  for  the  hunt  We  determined  to  keep 
near  each  other,  that  in  emergency  we  might  be  at  hand  to  help 
each  other.  And  for  the  rest,  silence  and  a  sure  aim  were  the 
only  cautions  to  be  given. 

As  we  followed  the  tracks  we  could  easily  see  that  there  were 
four  or  five  of  them ;  though  none  appeared  very  large.  We 
saw  where  they  had  run  along  on  all  fours,  the  usual  mode  of 
progression  of  these  animals ;  and  where,  from  time  to  time,  they 
had  seated  themselves  to  chew  the  canes  they  had  borne  off. 
The  chace  began  to  be  very  exciting. 

We  had  agreed  to  return  to  the  women  and  their  guards,  and 
consult  upon  final  operations,  when  we  should  have  discovered 
their  probable  course ;  and  this  was  now  dbne.  To  make  sure 
of  not  alarming  our  prey,  we  moved  the  whole  party  forward  a 
httle  way  to  where  some  leafy  huts,  built  by  passing  traders, 
served  for  shelter  and  concealment.  And  having  here  bestowed 
the  women — who  have  a  lively  fear  of  the  terrible  gorilla,  in 
consequence  of  various  stories  current  among  the  tribes  of  women 
having  been  carried  off  into  the  woods  by  the  fierce  animal — we 
prepared  once  more  to  set  out  in  chace,  this  time  hopeful  to  catch 
a  shot. 

Looking  once  more  to  our  guns,  we  started  off.  I  confess  that 
I  never  was  more  excited  in  my  life.  For  years  I  had  heard  of 
the  terrible  roar  of  the  gorilla,  of  its  vast  strength,  its  fierce 
courage,  if,  unhappily,  only  wounded  by  a  shot  I  knew  that  we 
were  about  to  pit  ourselves  against  an  animal  which  even  the 
leopard  of  these  mountains  fears,  and  which,  perhaps,  has  driven 
the  lion  out  of  this  territory ;  for  the  king  of  beasts,  so  numerous 
elsewhere  in  Africa,  is  never  met  in  the  land  of  the  gorilla. 
Thus  it  was  with  no  little  emotion  that  I  now  turned  again 
toward  the  prize  at  which  I  had  been  hoping  for  years  to  get  a 
shot. 

We  descended  a  hUl,  crossed  a  stream  on  a  fallen  log,  and 
presently  approached  some  huge  boulders  of  granite.  Along- 
side of  this  granite  block  lay  an  immense  dead  tree,  and  about 
this  we  saw  many  evidences  of  the  very  recent  presence  of  the 
gorillas. 

Our  approach  was  very  cautious.     We  were  divided  into  two 


60  MAN-LIKE  APPEARANCE  OF  THE  GORILLA.       Chap.  Vf. 

parties.  Makinda  led  one  and  I  the  other.  We  were  to  surround 
the  granite  block  behind  which  Makinda  supposed  the  gorillas 
to  be  hiding.  Guns  cocked  and  in  hand,  we  advanced  through 
the  dense  wood,  which  cast  a  gloom  even  in  midday  over  the 
whole  scene.  I  looked  at  my  men,  and  saw  plainly  that  they 
were  in  even  greater  excitement  than  myself. 

Slowly  we  pressed  on  through  the  dense  brush,  fearing  almost 
to  breathe  lest  we  should  alarm  the  beasts.  Makinda  was  to  go 
to  the  right  of  the  rock,  while  I  took  the  left.  Unfortunately,  he 
circled  it  at  too  great  a  distance.  The  watchful  animals  saw 
him.  Suddenly  I  was  startled  by  a  strange,  discordant,  half 
human,  devilish  cry,  and  beheld  four  young  gorillas  running 
toward  the  deep  forests.  We  fired,  but  hit  nothing.  Then  we 
rushed  on  in  pursuit ;  but  they  knew  the  woods  better  than  we. 
Once  I  caught  a  glimpse  of  one  of  the  animals  again,  but  an  in- 
tervening tree  spoiled  my  mark,  and  I  did  not  fire.  We  ran  till 
we  were  exhausted,  but  in  vain.  The  alert  beasts  made  good 
their  escape.  When  we  could  pursue  no  more  we  returned 
slowly  to  our  camp,  where  the  women  were  anxiously  expect- 
ing us. 

I  protest  I  felt  almost  like  a  murderer  when  I  saw  the  gorillas 
this  first  time.  As  they  ran — on  their  hind  legs — ^they  looked 
fearfully  like  hairy  men  ;  their  heads  dovvTi,  their  bodies  inclined 
forward,  their  whole  appearance  like  men  running  for  their  lives. 
Take  with  this  their  awful  cry,  which,  fierce  and  animal  as  it  is, 
has  yet  something  human  in  its  discordance,  and  you  wiQ  cease 
to  wonder  that  the  natives  have  the  wildest  superstitions  about 
these  "  wild  men  of  the  woods." 

In  our  absence  the  women  had  built  large  fires  and  prepared 
the  camp,  which  was  not  so  comfortable  as  last  night's,  but  yet 
protected  us  from  rain.  I  changed  my  clothes,  which  had  be- 
come wet  through  by  the  frequent  torrents  and  puddles  we  ran 
through  in  our  eager  pursuit,  and  then  we  sat  down  to  our  supper, 
whi(jh  had  been  cooked  meantime.  And  now  I  noticed  that,  by 
the  improvidence  of  the  women,  who  are  no  better  managers 
than  the  men  (poor  things !),  all  my  plantains  were  gone — eaten 
up ;  so  that  I  had  to  depend  for  next  day— and  in  fact  for  the 
remainder  of  our  passage  to  the  Fan  tribe — on  two  or  three 
biscuits  which,  luckily,  I  yet  possessed. 

As  we  lay  about  the  fire  in  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep 


Chap.  VI.  GORILLA  STORIES.  61 

the  adventure  of  the  day  was  talked  over,  and  of  course  there 
followed  some  curious  stories  of  the  gorillas.  I  listened  in  silence 
to  the  conversation,  which  was  not  addressed  to  me,  and  was  re- 
warded by  hearing  the  stories  as  they  are  believed,  and  not  as  a 
stranger  would  be  apt  to  draw  them  out  by  questions. 

One  of  the  men  told  a  story  of  two  Mbondemo  women  who 
were  walking  together  through  the  woods,  when  suddenly  an  im- 
mense gorilla  stepped  into  the  path,  and,  clutching  one  of  the 
women,  bore  her  off  in  spite  of  the  screams  and  struggles  of  both. 
The  other  woman  returned  to  the  village,  sadly  frightened,  and 
related  the  story.  Of  course  her  companion  was  given  up  for 
lost.  Great  was  the  surprise,  therefore,  when,  a  few  days  after- 
ward, she  returned  to  her  home.  She  related  that  the  gorilla 
had  misused  her,  but  that  she  had  eventually  escaped  from  him. 

"  Yes,"  said  one  of  the  men,  "  that  was  a  gorilla  inhabited  by 
a  spirit." 

Which  explanation  was  received  with  a  general  grunt  of 
approval. 

They  believe,  in  all  this  country,  that  there  is  a  kind  of  gorilla 
— known  to  the  initiated  by  certain  mysterious  signs,  but  chiefly 
by  being  of  extraordinary  size — which  is  the  residence  of  certain 
spirits  of  departed  negroes.  Such  gorillas,  the  natives  believe, 
can  never  be  caught  or  killed ;  and,  also,  they  have  much  more 
shrewdness  and  sense  than  the  common  animaL  In  fact,  in  these 
"  possessed  "  beasts,  it  would  seem  that  the  intelligence  of  man  is 
united  with  the  strength  and  ferocity  of  the  beast.  No  wonder 
the  poor  African  dreads  so  terrible  a  being  as  his  imagination 
thus  conjures  up. 

One  of  the  men  told  how,  some  years  ago,  a  party  of  gorillas 
were  found  in  a  cane-field  tying  up  the  sugarcane  in  regular 
bundles,  preparatory  to  carrying  it  away.  The  natives  attacked 
them,  but  were  routed,  and  several  killed,  while  others  were  car- 
ried ofiF  prisoners  by  the  gorillas ;  but  in  a  few  days  they  re- 
turned home  uninjured,  with  this  horrid  exception :  the  nails  of 
their  fingers  and  toes  had  been  torn  oflf  by  their  captors. 

Some  years  ago  a  man  suddenly  disappeared  from  his  village. 
It  is  probable  that  he  was  carried  off  by  a  tiger ;  but  as  no  news 
came  of  him,  the  native  superstition  invented  a  cause  for  his 
absence.  It  was  related  and  believed  that,  as  he  walked  through 
the  wood  one  day,  he  was  suddenly  changed  into  a  hideous  large 


I 


62  A  JOURNEY  ON  AN  EMPTY  STOMACH.  Chap.  VL 

gorilla,  which  was  often  pursued  afterwards,  but  never  killed, 
though  it  continually  haunted  the  neighbourhood  of  the  village. 

Here  several  spoke  up  and  mentioned  names  of  men  now  dead 
whose  spirits  were  known  to  be  dwelling  in  gorillas. 

Finally  was  rehearsed  the  story  which  is  current  among  all 
the  tribes  who  at  all  know  the  gorilla :  that  this  animal  lies  in 
wait  in  the  lower  branches  of  trees,  watching  for  people  who  go 
to  and  fro ;  and,  when  one  passes  sufficiently  near,  grasps  the 
luckless  fellow  with  his  powerful  feet,  and  draws  him  up  into  the 
tree,  where  he  quietly  chokes  him. 

Many  of  the  natives  agree,  I  say,  in  ascribing  to  the  animal 
this  trait  of  lying  in  wait  for  his  enemies  and  drawing  them  up  to 
him  by  his  "  lower  hands,"  as  they  may  properly  be  called.  But 
I  have  little  doubt  tliat  this  story  is  incorrect  Of  course,  the 
secluded  habits  of  this  animal,  which  lives  only  in  the  darkest 
forests,  and  carefully  shuns  all  approach  to  man,  help  to  fill  the 
natives  with  curious  superstitions  regarding  it. 

This  day  we  travelled  fifteen  miles,  ten  of  which  were  easterly, 
and  five  to  the  south-east 

The  next  day  we  went  out  on  another  gorilla-hunt,  but  found 
no  traces  at  all.  I  came  in  very  tired ;  ate  all  my  sea-bread ; 
and  though  we  tried  our  best,  we  did  not  manage  to  reach  a 
certain  settlement  which  Makinda  had  assured  me  was  near.  I 
was  now  at  the  end  of  my  provisions.  I  have  never  been  able  to 
eat  the  wild  nuts  which  the  natives  miserably  subsist  on  in  such 
straits,  and  began  to  feel  anxious  to  reach  some  village.  For 
travelling  on  an  empty  stomach  is  too  exhausting  to  be  very 
long  endured,  as  former  experience  had  taught  me. 

We  rose  early  next  morning,  and  trudged  off  breakfastless. 
There  was  not  a  particle  of  food  among  us.  Singularly  enough, 
I  thought  yesterday  was  Saturday,  and  only  discovered  to-day 
that  it  was  Tuesday.  We  crossed  several  streams,  and  travelled 
all  day  through  a  forest  of  an  almost  chiUing  gloom  find  solitude, 
ascending,  in  the  midst,  the  steepest  and  highest  hill  we  have 
so  far  met  with.  I  suppose  it  to  bo  part  of  tlie  third  range  of 
the  Sierra. 

I  felt  vexed  at  the  thoughtlessness  of  my  men,  who  ought  to 
have  provided  food  enough  to  last  us.  But  I  ought  to  praise 
the  poor  fellows,  for,  though  long  hungry  themselves,  they  gave 
me  the  greater  part  of  the  few  nuts  they  found.      But  there 


Chap.  VI.  A  FEED  ON  HONEY.  63 

is  no  nourishment  for  my  poor  civilized  blood  in  these  rude 
things. 

This  is  one  of  the  hardest  days'  travel  I  ever  accomplished. 
We  made  twenty  miles  in  a  general  direction  of  east,  though 
some  deductions  must  be  made  for  deviations  from  a  straight 
line. 

The  forest  seemed  deserted.  Not  a  bird  even  to  kill.  We 
heard  the  chatter  of  a  few  monkeys,  but  sought  in  vain  to  get 
near  them  for  a  shot.  When  we  camped  I  took  a  swallow  of 
brandy  and  went  to  sleep,  as  the  best  way  to  forget  my  miseries. 

The  next  morning  I  woke  up  feeble,  but  found  that  the  fel- 
lows had  killed  a  monkey,  which,  roughly  roasted  on  the  coals, 
tasted  delicious,  though  I  think,  under  average  circumstances, 
the  human  look  of  the  animal  would  have  turned  me  from  it.  To 
add  to  our  satisfaction,  Makinda  presently  discovered  a  bee-hive 
in  the  hollow  of  a  tree.  We  smoked  the  bees  out  and  divided 
the  honey,  which  was  full  of  worms,  but  was  nevertheless  all 
eaten  up.  W^e  were  so  nearly  famished  that  we  could  scarce 
wait  for  the  hive  to  be  emptied.  No  sooner  was  the  honey 
spread  out  on  leaves  and  laid  on  the  grass,  than  everyone  of  the 
men  was  ready  to  clutch  the  biggest  piece  he  could  lay  his  hand 
on  and  eat  away.  There  might  have  been  a  fight,  to  prevent 
which  I  interposed,  and  divided  the  whole  sweet  booty  into  equal 
shares,  reserving  for  myself  only  a  share  with  the  rest.  This 
done,  everyone — myself  included — at  once  sat  down  and  de- 
voured honey,  wax,  dead  bees,  worms,  dirt,  and  all,  and  our  only 
sorrow  was  that  we  had  not  more. 

We  had  a  hard  time  getting  through  old  elephant-tracks,  which 
were  the  best  road  through  the  jungle.  Saw  no  animals,  but 
met  with  several  gorilla-tracks. 

Towards  two  o'clock  the  men  began  to  be  very  jolly,  which  I 
took  to  be  a  sign  of  our  approach  to  a  village.  Presently  they 
shouted,  and,  looking  up  towards  the  face  of  a  hill  before  us,  I 
saw  the  broad  leaves  of  the  plantain,  the  forerunner  of  an 
African  town.  Since  we  left  Mbene's  town  these  were  the  first 
human  habitations  we  had  met  with,  and  I  was  not  a  little 
refreshed  by  the  sight 

But  alas !  as  we  approached  we  found  no  one  coming  out  to 
meet  us,  as  is  the  hospitable  way  in  Africa,  and  when  we  got  to 
the  place  we  found  it  entirely  deserted.    It  was  an  old  town  of 


i>4  A  DESERTED  VILLAGE.  Chap.  VI. 

Mbene's  people.  Presently,  however,  some  Mbieko  people  liviog 
near,  relatives  of  Mbeiie's,  came  to  see  us,  and  gave  us  some 
plantains.     But  I  could  not  get  what  I  needed  most — a  fowl. 

The  Mbiehog  were  in  great  amazement.  None  had  ever  seen 
a  white  man  before.     They  thought  me  very  singular. 

We  spent  the  evening  in  our  houses  drying  and  warming  our- 
selves. It  was  much  better  than  the  forest,  even  though  it  was 
only  a  deserted  town. 

I  judged  myself  here  about  150  miles  from  the  coaet.  With 
the  exception  of  a  Mbieho  town  near  by,  we  were  now  sur- 
rounded on  three  sides  by  Fan  villages,  and  shall  make  the  ac- 
quaintance of  these  cannibals  in  a  very  short  time. 


Chap.  VI I.  MEETING  OF  THE  FANS.  65 


CHAPTEE  VII. 

Famine  —  Encounter  with  the  Fan  —  A  desperate  Situation  —  Fright  at  my 
appearance  —  A  Fan  Warrior  —  His  Weapons  —  Fetiches  —  Women  — 
I  am  closely  examined  —  Gorilla-hunt  —  Signs  of  the  Animal's  presence  — 
Appearance  of  the  Male  —  Roar  —  (Conduct  —  My  first  Gorilla  —  Division 
of  the  Spoils  —  Superstitions — Wandering  Bakalai  —  Mournful  Songs  — 
Their  Fear  of  Night  —  Cooking — Fan  Town  —  Cannibal  Signs  —  Presented 
to  his  cannibal  Majesty  —  The  King  is  scared  at  my  appearance  —  Descrip- 
tion of  his  Majesty  —  Mbene's  Glory  —  The  King  in  his  War-dress  —  Arms 
of  the  Fan  —  A  grand  Dance  —  The  Music. 

Next  day  Mbene  came,  which  gave  me  great  relief,  for  he  is 
a  steadier  and  more  influential  man  than  his  sons.  He  was  ex- 
hausted from  his  travels,  and  when  I  told  him  we  needed  food, 
he  immediately  set  off  to  a  Fan  village  a  few  mUes  off  for  a 
supply.  Unable  to  wait  for  his  return,  I  started  off  with  my 
men  to  meet  him,  hoping  perhaps  to  shoot  something  by  the 
way.  My  hunger  accelerated  my  movements,  and  pretty  soon  I 
found  myself  half  a  mile  ahead  of  my  companions  and  in  sight 
of  a  chattering  monkey,  who  dodged  me  whenever  I  took  aim  at 
him,  and  whom  I  vainly  tried  to  get  dowti  off  his  perch  on  the 
high  tree  where  he  lived. 

After  watching  this  animal  for  some  time,  I  happened  to  look 
down  before  me,  and  beheld  a  sight  which  drove  the  monkey  out 
of  my  mind  in  an  instant.  Judge  of  my  astonishment  when 
before  me  I  saw  9,  Fan  warrior,  with  his  two  wives  behind  him. 
I  was  at  first  alarmed,  but  immediately  saw  that  all  three  were 
quaking  with  deadly  terror.  The  man's  shield  shook  and  rattled, 
to  such  a  degree  was  he  firfghtened;  his  mouth  stood  open — 
the  lips  were  fairly  white  ;  one  of  his  three  spears  had  fallen  to 
the  ground,  and  the  other  two  he  held  in  a  manner  betokening 
abject  fear. 

The  women  had  been  carrying  baskets  on  their  heads,  but 
these  had  been  thrown  to  the  ground,  and  they  stood  in  perfect 
silence  and  terror  looking  at  me. 

They  all  thought,  it  appeared  afterwards,  that  I  was  a  spirit 
who  had  just  come  down  out  of  the  sky.     As  for  me,  my  first 


66  MUTUAL  EMBAEHASSMENT,  Chap.  TIL 

thought,  when  I  took  Id  the  situation,  was — Suppose  these  people 
grow  desperate  with  fear,  then  I  may  have  a  poisoned  arrow 
launched  at  ma  And  if  tliey  got  over  their  terror  ere  my  com- 
panions arrived,  then  I  was  likely  to  have  a  spear  sent  through 
me,  unless  I  were  quicker  than  my  aQtagonist  and  shot  him, 
which  I  by  no  means  desired  to  do ;  for,  aside  from  the  hatred 
of  unnecessary  bloodshed,  I  should  by  such  a  course  have 
endangered  my  life  among  his  countrymen. 

I  smiled  and  tried  to  look  pleasant,  in  order  to  reassure  them 
a  little;  hut  this  only  made  matters  worse.  Tliey  looked  as 
though  upon  the  point  of  sinking  to  the  ground. 


Then  I  heard  the  voices  of  my  men  behind  coming  up,  and 
presently  I  was  safe,  and  the  Fan  people  were  relieved  of  their 
(«rror.  Miengai  smiled  to  see  it,  and  told  the  man  he  need  not 
regard  me  as  a  spirit,  for  I  was  his  father's  white  man,  come 
from  the  seashore  on  purpose  to  visit  the  Fan.  Then  I  gave 
the  women  some  strings  of  white  heads,  which  did  more  than 
anything  else  to  ease  their  fears. 


.Chap.  VII.  APPEARANCE  OF  THE  CANNIBALS.  67 

On  onr  return  we  found  that  Makinda  had  brought  some 
plantains  but  no  fowl.  I  had  now  been  a  week  without  tasting 
flesh,  except  only  the  wretched  monkey  we  shot  on  the  way,  and 
felt  very  much  in  need  of  something  hearty. 

For  the  rest  of  the  day  we  held  levee  in  my  house.  Great 
crowds  of  Fan  from  the  neighbouring  villages  came  to  see  me. 
The  men  did  not  appear  very  much  frightened,  but  the  women 
and  children  were  excessively  so.  But  all  kept  at  a  very  re- 
spectable distance.  One  glance  from  me  toward  a  wcmian  or 
child  sufficed  to  make  these  run  off. 

If  I  was  not  frightened,  I  was  at  least  as  much  surprised  by  all 
I  saw  as  the  Fan  could  be.  These  fellows,  who  now  for  the  first 
time  saw  a  white  man  with  straight  hair,  were  to  me  an  equal 
surprise,  for  they  are  real,  unmistakeable  cannibals.  And  they 
were,  by  long  odds,  the  most  remarkable  people  I  had  thus  far 
seen  in  Africa.  They  were  much  lighter  in  shade  than  any  of 
the  coast  tribes,  strong,  tall,  well  made,  and  evidently  active ; 
and  they  seemed  to  me  to  have  a  more  intelligent  look  than  is 
usual  to  the  African  unacquainted  with  white  men. 

The  men  were  almost  naked.  They  had  no  cloth  about  the 
middle,  but  used  instead  the  soft  inside  bark  of  a  tree,  over  which 
in  front,  was  suspended  the  skin  of  some  wild-cat  or  tiger.  They 
had  their  teeth  filed,  which  gives  the  face  a  ghastly  and  ferocious 
look,  and  some  had  the  teeth  blackened  besides.  Their  hair  or 
"  wool"  was  drawn  out  into  long  thin  plaits ;  on  the  end  of  each 
stiff*  plait  were  strung  some  white  beads,  or  copper  or  iron  rings. 
Some  wore  feather  caps,  but  others  wore  long  queues  made  of 
their  ovm  wool  and  a  kind  of  tow,  dyed  black  and  mixed  with  it, 
and  giving  the  wearer  a  most  grotesque  appearance. 

Over  theii'  shoulders  was  suspended  the  huge  country  knife, 
and  in  their  hands  were  spears  and  the  great  shield  of  elephant- 
hide,  find  about  the  necks  and  bodies  of  all  were  hung  a  variety 
of  fetiches  and  greegrees,  which  rattled  as  they  walked. 

The  Fan  shield  is  made  of'  the  hide  of  an  old  elephant,  and 
only  of  that  part  which  lies  across  the  back.  This,  when  dried 
and  smoked,  is  hard  and  impenetrable  £ls  iron.  The  shield  is 
about  three  feet  long  by  two  and  a  half  wide. 

Their  fetiches  consisted  of  fingers  and  tails  of  monkeys ;  of 
human  hair,  skin,  teeth,  bones ;  of  clay,  old  nails,  copper  chains, 
shells ;  feathers,  claws,  «uid  skulls  of  birds ;  pieces  of  iron,  copper, 

F  2 


70  THE  ONSET  OF  A  GORILLA.  Chap.  VIL 

this  time — are  not  so  full  of  life  as  in  some  other  parts  to  the 
south. 

Suddenly  Miengai  uttered  a  little  cliLch  with  his  tongue,  which 
is  the  native's  way  of  showing  that  something  is  stirring,  and 
that  a  sharp  look-out  is  necessary.  And  presently  I  noticed, 
ahead  of  us  seemingly,  a  noise  as  of  some  one  breaking  down 
branches  or  twigs  of  trees. 

This  was  the  gorilla,.!  knew  at  once,  by  the  eager  and  satisfied 
looks  of  the  men.  They  looked  once  more  carefully  at  their 
guns,  to  see  if  by  any  chance  the  powder  had  fallen  out  of  the 
pans ;  I  also  examined  mine,  to  make  sure  that  all  was  right ; 
and  then  we  marched  on  cautiously. 

The  singular  noise  of  the  breaking  of  tree-branches  continued. 
We  walked  with  the  greatest  care,  making  no  noise  at  alL  The 
countenances  of  the  men  showed  that  they  thought  themselves 
engaged  in  a  very  serious  imdertaking ;  but  we  pushed  on,  until 
finally  we  thought  we  saw  through  the  thick  woods  the  moving 
of  the  branches  and  small  trees  which  the  great  beast  was 
tearing  down,  probably  to  get  from  them  the  berries  and  fruits 
he  lives  on. 

Suddenly,  as  we  were  yet  creeping  along,  in  a  silence  which 
made  a  heavy  breath  seem  loud  and  distinct,  the  woods  were  at 
once  filled  with  the  tremendous  barking  roar  of  the  gorilla. 

Then  the  underbrush  swayed  rapidly  just  ahead,  and  presently 
before  us  stood  an  immense  male  gorilla.  He  had  gone  through 
the  jungle  on  his  all-fom*s ;  but  when  he  saw  our  party  he  erected 
himself  and  looked  us  boldly  in  the  face.  He  stood  about  a 
dozen  yards  from  us,  and  was  a  sight  I  think  I  shall  never  foi^et 
Nearly  six  feet  high  (he  proved  four  inches  shorter),  with  im- 
mense body,  huge  chest,  and  great  muscular  arms,  with  fiercely- 
glaring  large  deep  gray  eyes,  and  a  hellish  expression  of  face, 
which  seemed  to  me  like  some  nightmare  vision :  thus  stood 
before  us  this  king  of  the  African  forest. 

He  was  not  afraid  of  us.  He  stood  there,  and  beat  his  breast 
with  his  huge  fists  till  it  resounded  like  an  immense  bass-drum, 
which  is  their  mode  of  offering  defiance ;  meantime  giving  vent 
to  roar  after  roar. 

The  roar  of  the  gorilla  is  the  most  singular  and  awful  noise 
heard  in  these  African  woods.  It  begins  with  a  sharp  barh^  like 
an  angry  dog,  then  glides  into  a  deep  bass  roU,  which  literally 


Chap.  VII.  MY  FIRST  GORILLA.  71 

and  closely  resembles  the  roll  of  distant  thunder  along  the  sky, 
for  which  I  have  sometimes  bfeen  tempted  to  take  it  where  I  did 
not  see  the  animaL  So  deep  is  it  that  it  seems  to  proceed  less 
from  the  mouth  and^throat  than  from  the  deep  chest  and  vast 
paunch. 

His  eyes  began  to  flash  fiercer  fire  as  we  stood  motionless  on 
the  defensive,  and  the  crest  of  short  hair  which  stands  on  his 
forehead  began  to  twitch  rapidly  up  and  down,  while  his  power- 
ful fangs  were  shown  as  he  again  sent  forth  a  thunderous  roar. 
And  now  truly  he  reminded  me  of  nothing  but  some  hellish 
dream  creature — ^a  being  of  that  hideous  order,  half-man  half- 
beast,  which  we  find  pictured  by  old  artists  in  some  representa- 
tions of  the  infernal  regions.  He  advanced  a  few  steps — ^then 
stopped  to  utter  that  hideous  roar  again — advanced  again,  and 
finally  stopped  when  at  a  distance  of  about  six  yards  from  us. 
And  here,  just  as  he  began  another  of  his  roars,  beating  his 
breast  in  rage,  we  fired,  and  killed  him. 

With  a  groan  which  had  something  terribly  human  in  it,  and 
yet  was  full  of  brutishness,  he  fell  forward  on  his  face.  The 
body  shook  convulsively  for  a  few  minutes,  the  limbs  moved 
about  in  a  struggling  way,  and  then  all  was  quiet— death  had 
done  its  work,  and  I  had  leisure  to  examine  the  huge  body.  It 
proved  to  be  five  feet  eight  inches  high,  and  the  muscular  deve- 
lopment of  the  arms  and  breast  showed  what  immense  strength 
it  had  possessed. 

My  men,  though  rejoicing  at  our  luck,  immediately  began  to 
quarrel  about  the  apportionment  of  the  meat — for  they  really 
eat  this  creature.  I  saw  that  they  would  come  to  blows  presently 
if  I  did  not  interfere,  and  therefore  said  I  would  myself  give 
each  man  his  share,  which  satisfied  all.  As  we  were  too  tired  to 
return  to  our  camp  of  last  night,  we  determined  to  camp  here 
on  the  spot,  and  accordingly  soon  had  some  shelters  erected  and 
dinner  going  on.  Luckily,  one  of  the  fellows  shot  a  deer  just 
as  we  began  to  camp,  and  on  its  meat  I  feasted  while  my  men 
ate  gorilla. 

I  noticed  that  they  very  carefully  saved  the  brain,  and  was 
told  that  charms  were  made  of  this — charms  of  two  kinds.  Pre- 
pared in  one  way,  the  charm  gave  the  wearer  a  strong  hand  for 
the  hunt,  and  in  another  it  gave  him  success  with  women. 
This  evening  we  had  again  gonlla  stories — but  all  to  the  same 


72  BAKALAI  MOURNERS.  Chap.  VII. 

point  already  mentioned,  that  there  are  gorillas  inhabited  by 
human  spirits. 

We  retmmed  to  our  deserted  village  next  day,  and  found  a 
division  of  travelling  Bakalai  in  possession.  These  people,  with 
whom  fortunately  I  could  speak,  had  lived  on  the  Noya,  some 
distance  from  here.  They  were  now  moving,  to  be  near  some 
of  their  tribe.  I  asked  why  they  left  their  former  village,  and 
learned  that  one  morning  one  of  their  men,  WhUe  out  bathing 
in  the  river,  had  been  shot.  Hereupon  they  were  seized  with  a 
panic,  believed  the  town  attacked  by  witches,  and  at  once  re- 
solved to  abandon  it  and  settle  elsewhere.  They  had  all  their 
household  goods  with  them — chests,  cloth,  brass  kettles,  wash- 
basins, pans,  &c.,  as  well  as  a  great  quantity  of  yams,  plantains, 
and  fowls. 

They  were  glad  to  get  some  tobacco  from  me,  and  I  was  glad 
to  trade  a  little  away  for  provisions. 

At  sunset  every  one  of  them  retired  within  doors.  The  chil- 
dren ceased  to  play,  and  all  became  quiet  in  the  camp  where  just 
before  had  been  so  much  life  and  bustle.  Then  suddenly  arose 
on  the  air  one  of  those  mournful,  heart-piercing  chants  which 
you  hear  among  all  the  tribes  in  this  land — a  wail  whose  burden 
seems  to  be,  "  There  is  no  hope."  It  was  a  chant  for  their  de- 
parted friends;  and  as  they  sang  tears  rolled  down  the  cheeks 
of  the  women,  fright  marked  their  faces  and  cowed  their  spirits — 
for  they  have  a  belief  that  at  the  sunset  hour  the  evil  spirits 
walk  abroad  among  them. 

I  listened  to  try  to  gather  the  words  of  their  chants ;  but  there 
was  a  very  monotonous  repetition  of  one  idea — ^that  of  sorrow  at 
the  departure  of  some  one. 

Thus  they  sang : 

"  We  chi  noli  luhella  pe  Tia  heshe. 
Oh,  you  will  never  speak  to  us  any  more. 
Wo  cannot  see  your  face  any  more ; 
You  will  never  walk  with  us  again. 
You  will  never  settle  our  palavers  for  us.*' 

And  so  on. 

I  thanked  Grod  that  I  was  not  a  native  African,  These  poor 
people  lead  dreadful  and  dreary  lives.  Not  only  have  they  to 
fear  their  enemies  among  neighbouring  tribes,  as  weU  as  the 
various  accidents  to  which  a  savage  life  is  especially  liable>  sucb 


Chap.  VII.  BAKALAI  COOKERY.  73 

as  staryation,  the  attacks  of  wild  beasts,  &c.,  but  their  whole 
lives  are  saddened  and  embittered  by  the  fears  of  evil  spirits, 
witchcraft,  and  other  kindred  superstitions  under  which  they 
labour. 

After  they  had  chanted  for  half-an-hour,  they  came  over  to 
my  house  with  various  fowls  and  other  food  to  buy  "white  man's 
tobacco  "  to  cheer  them  on  their  journey.  I  was  very  glad  to 
trade  with  them,  and  bought  fowls,  plantains,  sugarcane,  and 
pineapples.  In  Western  Africa,  men,  women,  and  children,  all 
smoke.  They  never  chew,  unless  they  learn  the  practice  of  the 
whites ;  but  smoking  seems  to  be  a  very  grateful  occupation  to 
them. 

To-night  I  found  Miengai  and  Makinda,  the  unworthy  sons  of 
King  Mbene,  stealing  my  plantains.  They  had  got  off  once  be- 
fore, so  this  time  I  pitched  into  them  with  my  fists,  and  gave 
them  as  much  punishment  as  I  thought  would  answer  them  as 
a  warning. 

The  next  morning  all  was  bustle  in  camp.  The  Bakalai  were 
cooking  a  meal  before  setting  out  on  their  travels.  It  is  asto- 
nishing to  see  the  neatness  with  which  these  savages  prepare 
their  food.  I  watched  some  women  engaged  in  boiling  plan- 
tains, which  form  the  bread  of  all  this  region.  One  built  a 
bright  fire  between  two  stones.  The  others  peeled  the  plan- 
tains, then  carefully  wewhed  them — just  as  a  clean  white  cook 
would — ^and,  cutting  them  in  several  pieces,  put  them  in  the 
earthen  pot ;  this  was  then  half  filled  with  water,  covered  over 
with  leaves,  over  which  were  placed  the  banana  peelings,  and 
then  the  pot  was  placed  on  the  stones  to  boil.  Meat  they  had 
not,  but  roasted  a  few  ground-nuts  instead ;  but  the  boiled  plan- 
tains they  ate  with  great  quantities  of  Cayenne  pepper. 

Next  day  we  had  promised  to  go  among  the  Fans  to  Uve,  so 
to-day  we  went  hunting  again.  I  had  no  padlock  to  my  house, 
and  was  in  a  quandary  how  to  leave  what  would  certainly  be 
stolen — all  my  provisions.  Fortunately,  I  bethought  me  of  some 
sealing-wax,  and  went  to  work  to  seal  up  my  door  with  pieces  of 
twine,  to  the  great  amusement  of  the  rascally  Miengai,  who  saw 
his  game  baulked,  but  could  not  help  laughing.  This  evening, 
as  I  sat  in  my  house,  tired,  I  perceived  a  smell  of  burning  meat. 
Stealing  out,  I  found  my  fellows  sitting  about  a  fire  and  roasting 
an  animal  which  I  could  not  recognize.     Their  duty  is  to  bring 


74  THE  KING  OF  THE  CANNIBALS.  Chap.  VII. 

me  all  they  kill,  but  they  evidently  did  not  They  seemed  much 
ashamed,  and  I  told  them  they  need  not  come  to  me  for  more 
powder. 

The  next  morning  we  moved  oflf  for  the  Fan  village,  and  now 
I  had  the  opportunity  to  satisfy  myself  as  to  a  matter  I  had 
cherished  some  doubt  on  before,  namely,  the  cannibal  practices 
of  these  people.  I  was  satisfied  but  too  soon.  As  we  entered 
the  town  I  perceived  some  bloody  remains  which  looked  to  me 
to  be  human ;  but  I  passed  on,  still  incredulous.  Presently  we 
passed  a,  woman  who  solved  all  doubt.  She  bore  with  her  a 
piece  of  the  thigh  of  a  human  body,  just  as  we  should  go  to 
market  and  carry  thence  a  roast  or  steak. 

The  whole  village  was  much  excited,  and  the  women  and  chil- 
dren greatly  scared  at  my  presence.  All  fled  into  the  houses  as 
we  passed  through  what  appeared  the  main  street — a  long  lane^— 
in  which  I  saw  here  and  there  human  bones  lying  about 

At  last  we  arrived  at  thp  palaver-house.  Here  we  were  left 
alone  for  a  while,  though  we  heard  great  shoutings  going  on  at 
a  little  distance.  I  was  told  by  one  of  them  afterwards  that  they 
had  been  busy  dividing  the  body  of  a  dead  man,  and  that  there 
was  not  enough  for  all.  The  head,  I  am  told,  is  a  royalty^  being 
saved  for  the  king. 

Pt^ently  they  flocked  in,  and  before  long  we  were  presented 
to  the  king.  This  pei'sonage  was  a  ferocious  looking  feUow, 
whose  body,  naked  with  exception  of  the  usual  cloth  al)out  the 
middle,  made  of  the  bark  of  a  tree,  was  painted  red,  and  whose 
face,  chest,  stomach,  and  back,  were  tattooed  in  a  rude  but  very 
effective  manner.  He  was  covered  with  charms,  and  was  fully 
armed,  as  were  all  the  Fans  who  now  crowded  the  house  to 
see  me. 

1  do  not  know  if  the  king  had  given  himself  a  few  extra  horrid 
touches  to  impress  me ;  but  if  so,  he  missed  his  mark,  for  I  took 
care  to  retain  a  look  of  perfect  impassiveness. 

All  the  Fans  present  wore  queues,  but  the  queue  of  Ndiaycd 
the  king  was  the  biggest  of  all,  and  terminated  in  two  tails,  in 
which  were  strung  brass  rings,  while  the  top  was  ornamented 
with  white  beads.  Brass  anklets  jingled  as  he  walked.  The 
front  of  his  middle-cloth  was  a  fine  piece  of  tiger-skin.  His 
beard  was  plaited  in  several  plaits,  which  also  contained  white 
beads,  and  stuck  out  stiffly  from  the  face.     His  teeth  were  filed 


Chap.  VII.  THE  CANNIBAL  TOWN.  75 

sharp,  and  coloured  black,  so  that  the  mouth  of  this  old  cannibal, 
when  he  opened  it,  put  me  uncommonly  in  mind  of  a  tomb. 

The  queen,  who  accompanied  her  lord,  and  who  was  decidedly 
the  ugliest  woman  I  ever  saw,  and  very  old,  was  called  Mash- 
umba.  She  was  nearly  naked,  her  only  article  of  dress  being  a 
strip  of  the  Fan  cloth,  dyed  red,  and  about  four  inches  wide.  Her 
entire  body  was  tattooed  in  the  most  fanciful  manner ;  her  skin^ 
from  long  exposure,  had  become  rough  and  knotty.  She  wore 
two  enormous  iron  anklets — iron  being  a  very  precious  metal 
with  the  Fan — and  had  in  her  ears  a  pair  of  copper  ear-rings 
two  inches  in  diameter,  and  very  heavy.  These  had  so  weighed 
down  the  lobes  of  her  ears  that  I  could  have  put  my  little  finger 
easily  into  the  holes  through  which  the  rings  were  run. 

I  think  the  king  was  a  little  shaken  at  sight  of  me.  He  had 
been  originally  much  averse  to  the  interview,  from  a  belief  that 
he  would  die  in  three  days  after  seeing  me.  Finally  Mbene  per- 
suaded him. 

Mbene  was  in  his  glory.  He  had  charge  of  a  white  man,  and 
among  a  people  whom  he  himself  feared,  but  who  he  saw  feared, 
in  turn,  we,  whom  he  knew  very  well.  He  told  the  Fan  king 
that  he  had  brought  him  a  spirit,  who  had  come  many  thousands 
of  miles  across  the  big  water  to  see  the  Fans. 

The  king  replied  that  this  was  well,  and  sent  off  his  queen — the 
ugly  one — to  prepare  me  a  house.  And  after  a  few  more  civilities, 
but  very  little  formality  of  any  kind,  his  majesty  withdrew. 

Pre^sently  I  was  conducted  to  my  housa  The  village  was  a 
new  one,  and  consisted  mostly  of  a  single  street  about  800  yards 
long,  on  which  were  built  the  houses.  The  latter  were  small, 
being  only  eight  or  ten  feet  long,  five  or  six  wide,  and  four  or 
five  in  height,  with  slanting  roofs.  They  were  made  of  bark, 
and  the  roofs  were  of  a  kind  of  matting  made  of  the  leaves  of  a 
palm-tree.  The  doors  run  up  to  the  eaves,  about  four  feet  high, 
and  there  were  no  windows.  In  these  houses  they  cook,  eat, 
sleep,  and  keep  their  store  of  provisions,  the  chief  of  which  is 
*  the  smoked  game  and  smoked  human  fiesh,  hung  up  to  the 
rafters. 

All  the  Fan  villages  are  strongly  fenced  or  palisadoed,  and 
by  night  they  keep  a  careful  watch*  They  have  also  a  little 
native  dog,  whose  sharp  bark  is  the  signal  of  some  one  ap- 
proaching from  without.     In  the  villages  they  are  neat  and 


76  SIGNS  OP  CANNIBALISM.  Chap.  VII. 

clean,  the  street  being  swept,  and  all  garbage — except,  indeed, 
the  well-picked  bones  of  their  human  subjects — is  thrown  out. 

After  visiting  the  house  assigned  me,  I  was  taken  through  the 
town,  where  I  saw  more  dreadful  signs  of  cannibah'sm  in  piles 
of  human  bones,  mixed  up  with  other  offal,  thrown  at  the  sides 
of  several  houses.  I  find  that  the  men,  though  viewing  me  with 
great  curiosity,  are  not  any  longer  afraid  of  me,  and  even  the 
women  stand  while  I  approach  them.  They  are  a  more  manly 
and  courageous  race  than  the  tribes  towards  the  coast. 

Then  we  returned  to  the  king,  where  we  were  presented  to 
his  four  wives,  who  showed  uncommon  dislike  to  my  presence. 
Mbene  is  in  great  glee,  as  wherever  he  goes  he  is  surrounded 
with  Fan  fellows,  who  praise  him  for  being  the  Mend  of  the 
spirit.  Indeed,  he  has  always  been  proud  of  this,  and  tells  now, 
with  no  little  pleasure,  to  the  astonished  Fan,  that  two  before 
me  have  visited  him,  which  is  a  fact. 

Towards  evening  we  retired  to  our  houses.  I  called  the  king 
into  mine,  and  ^e  him  a  large  bunch  of  white  beads,  a  looking! 
glass,  a  file,  fire-steel,  and  some  gun-flints.  His  face  was  fairly 
illuminated  with  joy,  and  he  took  his  leave,  highly  pleased. 
Presently  afterwards  one  of  the  queens  brought  me  a  basket  full 
of  bananas.  Some  of  these  were  already  cooked,  and  these  I 
at  once  refused,  having  a  horrid  loathing  of  the  flesh-pots  of 
these  people.  I  stated  at  once  my  fixed  purpose  to  have  all 
cooking  done  for  me  in  my  own  kettles,  and  mean  to  be  in- 
volved in  no  man-eating — even  at  second-hand. 

Shortly  after  sunset  all  became  silent  in  the  village,  and 
everybody  seemed  inclined  to  go  to  sleep.  I  barred  my  door  as 
well  as  I  could  with  my  chest,  and  lying  down  on  the  dreadful 
bed  which  was  provided  for  me,  placed  my  gun  by  my  side 
ready  for  use.  For  though  they  be  ever  so  friendly,  I  cannot 
get  it  out  of  my  head  that  these  people  not  only  kill  people,  but 
eat  them,  and  that  some  gastronomic  caprice  might  tempt  them 
to  have  me  for  a  dinner  while  I  am  among  them. 

I  said  dreadful  bed.  It  was  a  frame  of  bamboos,  each  about 
an  inch  in  diameter.  Of  course  it  was  rough ;  and  I  found  my 
bones  aching  so  in  the  morning,  that  I  might  as  well  have  slept 
on  a  nail-heap  or  on  a  pile  of  cannon-balls.  But  I  slept,  and 
was  not  interrupted,  though,  on  going  out  next  morning,  I  saw 
a  pile  of  ribs,  leg  and  arm  bones,  and  skulls  (human)  piled  up  at 


Chap.  VH.  ARMS  OF  THE  CANNIBALS.  77 

the  back  of  my  boose,  which  looked  horrid  enough  to  me.  In 
fact,  symptoms  of  cannibalism  efare  me  in  the  face  wherever  I 
go,  and  I  can  no  longer  doubt 

I  had  told  the  Idng  that  I  should  like  to  see  him  dresaed  in 
war  array,  bo  this  morning  (September  let)  he  called  upon  me 
with  his  queen  and  a  cortege  of  his  chieft.  The  body  was  again 
painted  red ;  he  wore  a  shield  of  elephant's  hide,  and  was  armed 
for  the  offensive  with  three  spears  and  a  little  bag  of  poisoned 
arrows.  His  head  was  splendidly  decorated  with  the  red 
feathers  of  a  ttmracaw  (corythaix) ;  his  teeth  were  painted 
very  black ;  and  his  whole  body  was  covered  with  greegrees 
and  fetiches,  to  protect  him  from  death  by  spears,  guns,  and 
witches. 

Everybody  admired  the  head-dress  of  Mashnmba,  the  queen. 
It  was  a  cap  of  white  beads.  These  beads  form  the  most  de- 
sired ornaments  of  the  blacks,  and,  with  tobacco  and  powder, 
ate  the  best  trade  a  traveller  can  take  into  the  interior. 

Ndiayai  remarked  that,  while  surrounded  by  his  warriors,  he 
feared  nothing,  and  spoke  of  the  bravery  of  his  people ;  and  I 
am  ready  to  believe  them  an  nnnsually  warlike  tribe.  They 
pointed  out  one  man  to  me  who  bore  the  name  of  "  Leopard" 
because  of  his  bravery.  He  had  killed  many  of  their  enemies, 
and  also  many  elephfuit& 


They  have  a  great  diversity  of  arms.  Among  the  crowd  to- 
day I  saw  men  armed  with  crosR-bows,  from  which  are  shot 
eiUier  iron-headed  arrows,  or  the  little,  insignificant-looking. 


78  POiaONRD  ARROWS.  Crap.  Vlf. 

bnt  really  most  deadly,  poison-t.ipped  arrows.  These  are  only 
slender,  harmlesa  reeds,  a  foot  long,  whose  sharpened  ends  are 
dipped  into  a  deadly  vegetable  poison  which  these  people  know 
how  to  make.  The  arrows  are  so  light  that  they  would  blow 
away  if  simply  laid  in  the  groove  of  the  bow.  To  prevent  this, 
they  use  a  kind  of  sticky  giim,  a  himp  of  which  is  kept  on  the 
under  side  of  the  bow,  and  with  which  a  small  spot  in  the  groove 
is  lightly  nibbed.  The  handle  of  the  bow  is  ingeniously  split, 
and  by  a  Uttle  peg,  which  acts  as  a  tri^er,  the  bow-string  is 
disengaged,  and,  as  the  spring  is  very  strong,  sends  the  arrow  tn 
a  great  distance,  and,  light  as  it  is,  with  great  force.  But  the 
merest  puncture  kills  inevitably.  They  are  good  marksmen 
with  their  bows,  which  require  great  strength  to  bend.  They 
have  to  sit  on  their  haunches,  and  apply  both  feet  to  the  middle 
of  the  bow,  while  they  pull  with  all  their  strength  on  the  string 
to  bend  it  back. 

The  larger  arrows  have  an  iron  head,  something  like  the 
sharp  barbs  of  a  haipoon.  These  are  used  for 
hunting  wild  beasts,  and  are  about  two  feet 
long.  But  the  more  deadly  weapon  is  the 
the  little  insignificant  stick  of  bamboo,  not 
more  than  twelve  inches  long,  and  simply 
sharpened  at  one  end.  This  is  the  &med 
poison-arrow — a  missile  which  bears  death 
wherever  it  touches,  if  only  it  pricks  a 
pin's-point  of  blood.  The  poison  is  mado  of 
the  juices  of  a  plant  which  was  not  shown  me. 
They  dip  the  sharp  ends  of  the  arrows  several 
times  iu  this  sap,  and  let  it  get  thoroughly 
dried  into  the  wood.  It  gives  the  point  a  red 
colour.  The  arrows  are  very  carefully  kept 
in  a  little  bag,  made  neatly  of  the  skin  of 
some  wild  animal.  They  are  much  dreaded 
among  the  triI>Gs  about  here,  as  they  can  be 
thrown  or  projected  with  such  power  as  to 
take  effect  at  a  distance  of  fifteen  yards,  and 
with  such  velocity  that  you  cannot  see  them 
f"!*"^^^^  at  aU  tiU  they  are  spent.  This  I  have  often 
proved  myself.  There  is  no  euro  for  a  wound  from  one  of 
these  harmless-looking  little  sticks — death  follows  in  a  very 
short  time. 


Chap.  VIT.  TOMAHAWK.  79 

Some  of  the  Fans  bore  ou  their  shoulders  the  terrible  war-axe 
fignred  below,  one  blow  of  wtuch  quite  Huffices  to  split  a 
humaQ  skulL  Some  of  these  axes,  as  well  as  their  spears  and 
other  iron-work,  were  beautifully  ornamented  with  scroll-work, 
and  wroiight  in  graceful  lines  and  curves  which  spoke  well  for 
their  artisans. 

The  war-knife,  which  hangs  by  the  side,  is  a  terrible  weapon 
for  a  hand-to-haud  confiict,  and,  as  they  explained  to  me,  is 
designed  to  thmst  through  the  enemy's  body ;  they  are  about 
three  feet  long.  There  ia  another  huge  knife  also  worn  by  some 
of  the  men  now  in  the  crowd  before  me.  This  is  over  a  foot 
long,  by  about  eight  inches  wide,  and  is  used  to  cut  down  thiongh 
the  shoulders  of  an  adversnrv.  It  must  do  tremendous  execution. 


Fu  Kaiit  ud  Am. 


Then  there  is  a  very  singular  pointed  axe,  which  is  thrown 
from  a  diictance,  as  American  Indians  are  said  to  use  the  toma- 
hawk. The  figure  (1)  will  give  the  reader  an  idea  of  the  curious 
shape  of  this  weapon.  When  thrown  it  strikes  with  the  point 
down,  and  inflicts  a  terrible  wound.  They  use  it  ^vith  great 
dexterity.     The  object  aimed  at  with  this  axe  is  the  head.     The 


80  GRAND  CELEBRATION.  Chap.  VII. 

point  penetrates  to  the  brain,  and  kills  the  victim  immediately ; 
and  then  the  round  edge  of  the  axe  is  used  to  cut  the  head  off, 
which  is  borne  off  by  the  victor  as  a  trophy. 

The  spears,  which  are  six  to  seven  feet  in  length,  are  thrown 
by  the  natives  with  great  force,  and  with  an  accuracy  of  aim 
which  never  ceased  to  surprise  me.  They  make  the  long  slender 
rod  fairly  whistle  through  the  air.  Most  of  them  can  throw  a 
spear  effectively  to  the  distance  of  from  twenty  to  thirty  yards. 

Most  of  the  knives  and  axes  were  ingeniously  sheadied  in 
covers  made  of  snake-skins,  or  human  skin  taken  from  some 
victim  in  battle*  Many  of  these  sheaths  are  ingeniously  made, 
and  are  slung  round  the  neck  by  cords,  which  permit  the 
weapon  to  hang  at  the  side  out  of  the  wearer's  way. 

Though  so  warlike,  they  have  no  armour.  In  fact,  their 
working  in  iron  is  as  yet  too  rude  for  such  a  luxury.  The  only 
weapon  of  defence  is  the  huge  shield  of  elephant's  hide ;  but 
this  is  even  bullet-proof;  and  as  it  is  very  large — three  and  a 
half  feet  long  by  two  and  a  half  broad — it  suffices  to  cover  the 
whole  body. 

Besides  their  weapons,  many  of  the  men  wore  a  smaller  knife 
— but  also  rather  unwieldy — which  served  the  various  offices  of 
a  jack-knife,  a  hatchet,  and  a  table-knife.  But,  though  rude  in 
shape,  they  used  it  with  great  dexterity. 

It  wafi  a  grand  sight  to  see  so  many  stalwart,  martial,  fierce- 
looking  fellows,  fiilly  armed  and  ready  for  any  desperate  foray, 
gathered  in  one  assemblage.  Finer-looking  men  I  never  saw ; 
and  I  could  well  believe  them  brave,  did  not  the  completeness  of 
their  armoury  prove  that  war  is  a  favourite  pastime  with  them. 
In  fact,  they  are  dreaded  by  all  their  neighbours,  and,  if  they 
were  only  animated  by  the  spirit  of  conquest,  would  soon  make 
short  work  of  the  tribes  between  them  and  the  coast. 

To-day  several  hundred  Fans  from  the  surrounding  villages 
came  in  to  see  me.  Okolo,  a  great  king  among  them,  gave  me 
his  knife,  saying  it  had  already  killed  a  man.  To-night  there  is 
a  great  dance  in  honour  of  the  arrival  of  a  spirit  (myself)  among 
them.  This  dance  was  the  wildest  scene  I  ever  saw.  Every- 
body was  there ;  and  I,  in  whose  honour  the  affair  was,  had  to 
assist  by  my  presence.  The  only  music  was  that  of  a  rude 
drum — an  instrument  made  of  a  certain  kind  of  wood,  and  of 
deer  or  goat  skins.    The  cylinder  was  about  four  feet  long,  and 


Chap.  VII.  MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS.  81 

ten  inches  in  diameter  at  one  end,  but  only  seven  tit  the  other. 
The  wood  was  hollowed  out  quite  thin,  and  tbo  akin  stretched 
over  tightly.  To  beat  it  the  drummer  held  it  slantingly  between 
his  lega,  and  with  two  sticks  beat  furiously  ujion  the  upper, 
which  was  the  lai^r  end  of  the  cylinder. 

This  music  was  accompanied  with  singing,  which  was  less 
melodious  even  than  the  drumming.  As  for  the  dauciug,  it  was 
an  indescribable  mixture  of  wildneaa  and  indecency. 

One  of  the  consequences  of  the  dance  is  that  we  are  to  have 
a  great  elephant-hunt,  and  women  are  busied  in  c<M>king  food, 
and  men  in  preparing  arms  for  this  great  game.  The  few  guus 
owned  by  the  Fans  have  been  carefully  furbished  up,  and  I 
have  prepared  my  two  for  action,  expecting  great  things  from 
such  desperate  hunters  as  these. 


Fmi  Drain  tnd  HukUi 


82  ELEPHANT-TRAPS.  Chap.  VIII. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  grand  Hunt  —  Fan  Mode  of  capturing  Elephants — A  pitched  Battle  — 
Man  killed  by  an  Elephant — Grace  before  Meat  among  the  Fan  —  The 
use  of  a  dead  Hunter —  Habits  of  the  Elephant — Harwu,  or  Elephant-trap 

—  Elephant  Meat  —  Condition  of  Women  —  Mairiage  Ceremonies  —  A  Fan 
Wedding  —  Musical  Instrument  —  Corpse  brought  in  to  be  eaten  —  Human 
Flesh  prized  —  Stories  of  Fan  Cannibalism  —  Encroachments  westward  of 
the  Fans  —  Their  Origin  —  Colour  —  Tattooing  —  Trade  —  Iron-smelting — 
Fan    Blacksmiths  —  Bellows    and  other    Tools  —  Pottery  —  Agricnltare 

—  Food  —  Slavery  —  The  Oshebo — Beyond  —  Superstitions  —  Swoery  — 
Charms  —  Idols. 

About  five  hundred  men  assembled  for  the  hunt  on  the  morning 
of  September  4th.  They  were  divided  into  different  parties, 
each  of  which  set  out  for  the  part  of  the  forest  assigned  it.  Mean- 
time Ndiayai  and  I  went  together  to  the  general  rendezvous,  a 
walk  of  about  six  hours  through  the  woody  and  mountainous 
country  which  1  have  already  described.  The  march  was  con- 
ducted in  great  silence,  and  every  care  was  taken  not  to  alarm 
any  game  which  might  be  near  our  track.  Arrived  at  our 
halting-place,  we  immediately  began  to  build  our  camp,  and  had 
hardly  got  our  shelters  constructed  when  it  began  to  rain. 

The  next  morning  we  set  out  for  the  hunting-ground.  And 
here  a  most  remarkable  sight  presented  itself.  The  elephant, 
like  most  other  great  beasts,  has  no  regular  walk  or  path,  but 
strays  somewhat  at  random  through  the  woods  in  search  of  food ; 
but  it  is  his  habit,  when  pleased  with  a  neighbourhood,  to  remain 
there  for  a  considerable  time,  nor  let  any  small  matter  drive  him 
away.  Now  of  this  the  Fan  take  advantage.  The  forests  here 
are  full  of  rough,  strong,  climbing-plants,  which  you  will  see 
running  up  to  the  tops  of  the  tallest  trees.  These  vines  they 
tear  down,  and  with  tliem  ingeniously,  but  with  much  labour, 
construct  a  kind  of  huge  fence  or  obstruction,  not  sufficient  to 
hold  the  elephant,  but  quite  strong  enough  to  check  him  in  his 
flight  and  entangle  him  in  the  meshes  till  the  hunters  can  have 
time  to  kill  him.  Once  caught,  they  quietly  surround  the  huge 
beast,  and  put  an  end  to  his  struggles  by  incessant  discharges  of 
their  spears  or  guns. 


Chap.  VIII.  UAK  KILLED  BY  AN  ELEPHANT.  38 

Presently  a  kind  of  hunting-horn  was  sounded,  and  the  chase 
b^an.  Parties  were  stationed  at  different  parts  of  the  barrier  or 
"  tangle,"  as  we  will  call  it,  which  had  an  astonishing  extent,  and 
must  have  cost  much  toil  to  make.  Others  stole  through  the 
woods  in  silence  and  looked  for  their  prey. 

When  they  find  an  elephant  they  approach  very  carefully. 
The  object  is  to  scare  him  and  make  him  run  toward  some  paji; 
of  the  barrier — ^generally  not  far  off.  To  accomplish  this,  they 
often  crawled  at  their  full  length  along  the  ground,  just  like 
snakes,  and  with  astonishing  swiftness. 

The  first  idea  of  the  animal  is  flight.  He  rushes  ahead  almost 
blindly,  but  is  brought  up  by  the  barrier  of  vines.  Enraged, 
and  still  more  terrified,  he  tears  everything  with  his  trunk 
and  feet  But  in  vain ;  the  tough  vines,  nowhere  fastened,  give 
to  every  blow,  and  the  more  he  labours,  the  more  &tally  he  is 
held. 

Meantime,  at  the  first  rush  of  the  elephant  the  natives  crowd 
round ;  and  while  he  is  struggling  in  their  toils  they  are  plying 
him  with  spears,  often  from  trees,  till  the  poor  wounded  beast 
looks  Hke  a  huge  porcupine.  This  spearing  does  not  cease  till 
they  have  killed  their  prey. 

To-day  we  killed  four  elephants  in  this  way.  It  was  quite  an 
exciting  time  to  the  natives,  though  I  confess  of  less  interest  to 
me  after  I  had  seen  the  first  killed.  It  seemed  monotonous  and 
somewhat  unfair ;  nevertheless,  there  is  sufficient  danger  about 
it  The  elephants  about  here  have  the  reputation  of  holding 
man  in  slight  fear,  and  the  approach  and  attack  are  work  for 
the  greatest  courage  and  presence  of  mind.  Even  then  fatal 
accidents  occur.  To-day  a  man  was  killed.  I  was  not  present 
at  the  accident,  but  he  seems  to  have  lost  his  presence  of  mind, 
and  when  the  elephant  charged  with  great  fury  at  a  crowd  of 
assailants,  he  was  caught,  and  instantly  trampled  under  foot. 

When  his  companions  saw  that  he  was  dead,  they  in  turn  grew 
furious,  and  ao^ually  pursued  the  elephant,  which  was  making 
its  escape,  charged  upon  it,  and  so  beset  it  with  spears,  that  in  a 
few  minutes  it  was  dead.  I  never  saw  men  so  excited  with 
rage.  They  began  even  to  cut  the  dead  animal  to  pieces  for 
revenge. 

They  have  certain  precautionary  rules  for  these  hunts,  which 
show  thekt  they  understand  the  animal     For  instance,  they  say 

G  2 


84  A  CANNIBAL  •*  GRACE  BEFORE  MEAT."        Chap.  VIII. 

you  must  never  approach  an  elephant  but  from  behind,  as  he 
cannot  turn  very  fast,  and  you  have  time  to  make  your  escape 
after  firing.  Great  care  is  necessary  that  the  vines,  which  are 
so  fatal  to  the  elephant,  do  not  also  catch  his  pursuers.  I  was 
told  that  it  was  not  unfrequent  for  a  man  to  be  thus  hopelessly 
entangled,  and  then  deliberately  killed  by  the  elephant  Often 
it  becomes  necessary  for  the  hunters  to  retreat,  and,  as  they  can 
scarce  outrun  the  great  heavy  animal,  at  such  times  all  hands 
take  refuge  in  trees,  which  they  climb  with  astonishing  swiftness 
— almost  like  monkeys.  Even  then,  however,  a  man  must  select 
a  stout  tree ;  and  Ndiayai  told  me  of  a  case  where  a  small 
sapling  was  pulled  down  by  an  enraged  beast,  and  the  occupant 
had  a  narrow  escape  for  his  life. 

Now  followed  the  rites  with  which  they  offer  thanks  for  a  good 
day's  hunt  to  the  idol  who,  in  their  belief,  guides  their  fortunes. 
Without  these  preliminary  rites,  no  meat  is  touched. 

First  comes  the  whole  party  and  dances  around  the  elephant, 
while  the  medicine  or  greegree  men  cut  off  a  portion — invariably 
from  one  of  the  hind  legs — of  each  elephant  This  was  the  meat 
intended  for  an  offering  to  the  idoL  This  meat  was  put  into  bas- 
kets, afterward  to  be  cooked  under  the  direct  superintendence  of 
the  greegree  man  and  the  men  who  killed  the  particular  animal. 
Finally,  the  whole  party  danced  about  the  baskets  and  sung 
songs  to  their  idol,  begging  for  another  such  good  hunt  as  this 
one. 

The  king  was  of  opinion  that  if  this  ceremony  were  neglected 
they  would  get  nothing  next  time ;  but  thought  their  songs  and 
dances  would  please  the  idol,  who  would  give  them  even  more 
elephants  in  future. 

The  sacrificial  meats  are  taken  into  the  woods,  where  it  is  pro- 
bable they  regale  some  panther — ^if  the  shrewd  medicine-man 
does  not  himself  come  and  eat  them.  And  the  body  of  the  poor 
fellow  who  was  killed  to-day  is,  I  am  told,  to  be  sent  to  another 
Fan  village,  to  he  sold  and  eaten.  This  seems  the  proper  and 
usual  end  of  the  Fans. 

The  elephants  were  cut  up  the  next  day,  and  the  meat  was 
all  hung  up  to  be  smoked,  which  these  natives  understand  how 
to  do. 

The  persistence  with  which  the  elephant  in  this  part  of  the 
country  sticks  to  a  spot  which  affords  him  such  leaves  as  he  best 


Chap.  VIII.  ELEPHANT-MEAT.  85 

likes,  is  very  remarkable.  It  is  m  part,  probably,  from  a  scarcity 
of  his  favourite  trees.  I  have  seen  them  remain  for  days  in  the 
immediate  vicinity  of  such  a  set  of  fences  as  I  have  described, 
where  the  natives,  of  course,  each  day  killed  some.  Sometimes, 
too,  they  will  almost  enter  the  towns,  pulling  down  the  small  trees, 
and  breaking  branches  off  the  larger,  to  get  the  food  which  best  suits 
their  taste.  Often,  however,  they  leave  a  neighbourhood  at  the 
first  attack,  when  the  natives  follow  and  make  new  fences. 

They  have  another  way  to  kiU  elephants,  which  I  saw  used  in 
the  woods  this  day,  and  have  often  seen  since.  They  discover  a 
walk  or  path  through  which  it  is  likely  that  a  herd  or  single 
animal  will  soon  pass.  Then  they  take  a  piece  of  very  heavy 
wood,  which  the  Bahalai  call  hancu,  and  trice  it  up  into  a  high 
tree,  where  it  hangs,  with  a  sharp  point,  armed  with  iron,  point- 
ing downward.  It  is  suspended  by  a  rope,  which  is  so  arranged 
that  the  instant  the  elephant  touches  it — which  he  cannot  help 
doing  if  he  passes  under  the  hanou — it  is  loosed,  and  fells  with 
tremendous  force  on  to  his  back,  the  iron  point  wounding  him, 
and  the  heavy  weight  generally  breaking  his  spine. 

It  is  generally  supposed  that  the  elephant  is  found  only  in  the 
plains ;  but,  from  various  observations  in  this  region,  I  conclude 
that  the  animal  also  frequents  the  mountains  and  rough  high 
coimtry.  Their  tracks  are  frequently  met  with  among  the 
mountains,  and  several  times  I  have  scarcely  been  able  to  believe 
my  eyes  when  I  saw  plainly  the  footprints  of  the  huge  animal  in 
spots  which  it  could  only  have  attained  by  the  ascent  of  almost 
precipitous  hill-sides — ascents  which  we  found  it  difficult  to  make 
ourselves. 

The  elephant-meat,  of  which  the  Fan  seem  to  be  very  fond, 
and  which  they  have  been  cooking  and  smoking  for  three  days, 
is  the  toughest  and  most  disagreeable  meat  I  ever  tasted  I 
cannot  explain  its  taste,  because  we  have  no  flesh  which  tastes 
like  it ;  but  it  seems  fiiU  of  muscular  fibre  or  gristle,  and  when  it 
has  been  boiled  for  two  days,  twelve  hours  each  day,  it  is  still 
tough.  The  flavour  is  not  unpleasant ;  but,  though  I  have  tried 
at  different  times  to  accustom  myself  to  it,  I  found  only  that  my 
disgust  grew  greater. 

It  rained  all  the  time  we  were  in  the  bush,  which  made  me 
rather  glad  when  the  time  came  for  our  return  to  the  town,  where 
I  once  more  got  on  dry  clothes,  and  slept  in  a  dry  place. 


80  MARRIAGE  CUSTOMS.  Chap.  VIII. 

As  we  were  returning,  I  learned  from  the  king  a  very  curioas 
particular  of  the  Fan  customs,  of  which  I  did  not  suspect  any  of 
these  West  African  tribes.  It  appears  that  they  never  marry 
their  girls  before  they  have  arrived  at  the  age  of  puberty,  and 
that  they  have  a  care  for  the  chastity  of  their  young  women.  In 
most  of  the  tribes  it  is  common  for  children  of  three  or  four 
years  to  be  married  to  men  grown — ^who,  of  course,  have  thence- 
forth a  claim  on  all  the  relatives  of  this  baby-wife — and  it  is  not 
at  all  infrequent  to  find  a  female  child  betrothed  at  birth.  I  had 
already  remarked,  what  I  suppose  is  the  natural  result  of  the  Fan 
custom,  that  these  people  have  more  children  by  far  than  either 
the  Shekiani,  Bakalai,  Mbicho,  Mbondemo,  Mbousha,  or  any  of 
the  interior  tribes  I  have  seen  north  of  the  equator.  Those  tribes 
are  gradually  but  surely  disappearing,  but  the  Fans  seem  likely 
to  survive. 

The  Fan  marriage  ceremonies  are  very  rude,  but  are  an  occa- 
sion of  great  jollity.  Of  course,  the  husband  has  to  buy  his  wife, 
and  the  shrewd  father  makes  a  bargain  with  him  as  well  as  he 
can,  putting  on  a  great  price  if  the  man's  love  is  very  ardent ;  so 
that  I  was  told  it  sometimes  took  years  before  a  man  could  buy 
and  marry  his  wife.  If  trade  with  the  seashore  were  better  it 
would  not  be  so  hard ;  but  as  "  trade  "  is  the  most  precious  thing, 
"  trade  goods "  are  always  expected  as  payment  for  a  wife. 
Hence  their  bravery  as  hunters ;  for  ivory  is  one  of  the  chief 
articles  they  send  down  to  the  coast ;  and  though,  after  a  hunt 
like  that  before  related,  the  meat  is  shared,  the  ivory  belongs  to 
those  who  killed  the  animal,  who  have,  however,  to  divide  the 
proceeds  with  their  immediate  relatives.  Copper  and  bra^  rings, 
white  beads,  and  the  copper  pans  called  neptunes  on  the  coast, 
are  the  chief  articles  of  trade  which  are  a  legal  tender  for  a  wife 
among  the  Fans. 

When  a  wedding  is  in  prospect  the  friends  of  the  happy 
couple  spend  many  days  in  obtaining  and  laying  in  great  stores 
of  provisions — chiefly  smoked  elephant-meat  and  palm-wine. 
They  engage  hunters  to  keep  up  the  supply,  and  accumulate 
enough  to  feed  the  great  numbers  who  are  expected  to  come. 
When  all  is  ready,  the  whole  town  assembles,  and,  without  any 
ceremony,  but  merely  as  a  public  sale,  as  it  were,  the  &ther 
hands  his  daughter  to  her  husband,  who  has  generally  already 
paid  her  price. 


Chap.  Vill.  PAN  MUSIC.  87 

The  "  Iiappy  pair  "  are,  of  course,  dressed  finely  for  the  occa- 
sion. The  bridegroom  is  attired  in  a  feather  bead-dress  of 
glowing  colours ;  his  body  is  oiled ;  his  teeth  are  black  and 
polished  as  ebony ;  his  huge  knife  hangs  at  his  side ;  and  if  he 
can  kill  a  leopard  or  panther,  or  other  rare  animal,  its  skin  is 
wrapped  about  his  middle  in  a  graceful  way.  The  bride  is  very 
simply  dressed,  or  rather  she  is  (like  all  the  Fan  women)  not 
dressed  at  all.  But  for  this  occasion  she  is  ornamented  with  as 
many  bracelets  as  she  can  get,  of  brass  or  copper,  and  wears  her 
woolly  locks  full  of  white  beads. 

When  all  are  assembled,  and  the  bride  is  handed  over  to  her 
lord,  a  general  jollification  ensues,  which  lasts  sometimes  for 
many  days.  They  eat  elephant  meat,  get  tipsy  on  palm-wine, 
dance,  sing,  and  seem  to  enjoy  themselves  very  much,  until  at 
last  wine  grows  scarce,  and  the  crowd  returns  to  an  involuntary 
sobriety. 

Their  dances  I  have  already  alluded  to,  as  well  as  the  drum 
which  figures  on  such  occasions,  and  which  is  the  more  highly 
valued  the  greater  noise  it  makes.  But  I  found  them  also  play- 
ing upon  an  instrument  of  another  kind,  and  of  so  ingenious  a 
construction  that  it  is  not  altogether  imworthy  of  more  civilized 
people.  This,  which  they  call  the  handja,  consists  of  a  light 
reed  frame,  3  feet  long  by  1^  broad,  into  which  are  set  and  se- 
curely fastened  a  set  of  hollow  gourds  covered  by  strips  of  a  hard 


red  wood  found  in  the  forests.  Each  of  these  cylinders  is  of  a 
different  size,  and  all  are  so  graduated  that  the  set  form  a  regular 
series  of  notes.     A  handja  generally  contains  seven.     The  per- 


88  CANNIBAL  PRACTICES.  Chap.  VIII. 

former  sits  down,  lays  the  frame  across  his  knees,  and  strikes  the 
strips  lightly  with  a  stick.  There  are  two  sticks,  one  hard,  the 
other  soft,  and  the  principle  is  the  same  on  which  music  lias 
been  produced  in  France  from  a  series  of  glasses.  The  tone  is 
very  clear  and  good ;  and  though  their  tunes  are  very  rude,  they 
can  play  them  with  considerable  skill.  Each  gourd  has  a  little 
hole  on  the  side,  covered  with  the  skin  of  a  spider. 

While  I  was  talking  to  the  king  to-day  (9th),  some  Ferns 
brought  in  a  dead  body  which  they  had  bought  in  a  neighbouring 
town,  and  which  was  now  to  be  divided.  I  could  see  that  the 
man  had  died  of  some  disease.  I  confess  I  could  not  bear  to 
stay  for  the  cutting  up  of  the  body,  but  retreated  when  all  was 
ready.  It  made  me  sick  all  over.  I  remained  till  the  infernal 
scene  was  about  to  begin,  and  then  retreated.  Afterwards  I 
could  hear  them  from  my  house  growing  noisy  over  the  division. 

Eating  the  bodies  of  persons  who  have  died  of  sickness  is  a 
form  of  cannibalism  of  which  I  had  never  heard  among  any 
people,  so  that  I  determined  to  inquire  if  it  were  indeed  a 
general  custom  among  the  Fans,  or  merely  an  exceptional  freak. 
They  spoke  without  embarrassment  about  the  whole  matter,  and 
I  was  informed  that  they  constantly  buy  the  dead  of  the  Osheba 
tribe,  who,  in  return,  buy  theirs.  They  also  buy  the  dead  of 
other  families  in  their  own  tribes,  and,  besides  this,  get  the 
bodies  of  a  great  many  slaves  fi^ra  the  Mbichos  and  Mbondemos, 
for  which  they  readily  give  ivory,  at  the  rate  of  a  small  tusk  for 
a  body. 

Until  to-day  I  never  could  believe  two  stories— both  well 
authenticated,  but  seeming  quite  impossible  to  anyone  unac- 
quainted with  this  people — which  are  told  of  them  on  the 
Gaboon.  A  party  of  Fans  who  came  down  to  the  seashore 
once  actually  stole  a  freshly-buried  body  from  the  cemetery, 
and  cooked  it  and  ate  it  among  them ;  and  at  another  time  a 
party  conveyed  a  body  into  the  woods,  cut  it  up,  and  smoked  the 
flesh,  which  they  carried  away  with  them.  The  circumstances 
made  a  great  fuss- among  the  Mpongwe,  and  even  the  mis- 
sionaries heard  of  it,  for  it  happened  at  a  village  not  far  from 
the  missionary  grounds,  but  I  never  credited  the  stories  till 
now,  though  the  facts  were  well  authenticated  by  witnesses.* 

*  These  stories  seem  so  incredible,   and  even  the  fact  that  these  people 
actually  buy  and  eat  the  corpses  of  their  neighbours — resting  as  it  does  upon 


Chap.  VIII.  ENCROACHMENTS  OF  THE  FANS.  89 

In  fact,  the  Fans  seem  regular  ghouls,  only  they  practise  their 
horrid  custom  unblushingly  and  in  open  day,  and  have  no  shame 
about  it.  I  have  seen  here  knives  covered  with  human  skin, 
which  their  owners  valued  very  highly. 

To-day  the  queen  brought  me  some  boiled  plantain,  which 
looked  very  nice ;  but  the  fear  lest  she  should  have  cooked  it  in 
some  pot  where  a  man  had  been  cooked  before — which  was  most 
likely  the  case — made  me  unable  to  eat  it  On  these  journeys 
I  have  fortunately  taken  with  me  sufficient  pots  to  do  my  own 
cooking. 

They  are  the  finest,  bravest-looking  set  of  negroes  I  have  seen 
in  the  interior,  and  eating  human  flesh  seems  to  agree  with  them, 
though  I  afterwards  saw  other  Fan  tribes  whose  members  had 
not  the  fine  air  of  these  mountaineers.  As  everywhere  else, 
location  seems  to  have  much  to  do  with  it.  These  were  living 
among  the  mountains,  and  had  all  the  appearance  of  hardy 
mountaineers. 

The  strangest  thing  about  the  Fans  (next  to  their  hideous 
cannibalism)  is  their  constant  encroachments  upon  the  land 
westward.  Tear  by  year  tribes  of  Fan  are  found  nearer  the 
sectshore;  town  after  town  is  being  settled  by  them  on  the 
banks  of  the  Gaboon ;  and  in  the  country  between  the  Gaboon 
and  the  Moondah  they  have  come  down  to  within  a  few  miles  of 
Point  Obendd.  In  fact  they  seem  a  stirring  race,  and  more 
enterprising  than  the  Bakalai,  Mbondemo,  Mbicho,  and  even 
the  Mpongwe ;  and  I  think  wiU  leave  these  gradually  behind 
and  take  possession  themselves  of  the  whole  line  of  seashore — 
when  they  may  degenerate,  though  it  is  to  be  hoped  they  will 
not. 

It  has  been  supposed  that  these  Fans  are,  in  fact,  the  GHaghi 
or  Jaga^  who  formerly  invaded  the  kingdom  of  Congo,  and  who 
seem  to  have  been  much  such  a  people.  The  fact  is,  however, 
that  in  my  later  journeys  to  the  head-waters  of  the  Nazareth, 
and  into  the  interior,  south  of  the  present  location  of  the  Fans, 
I  could  find  no  tribes  who  knew  anything  of  such  a  people. 

my  statement  alone  —  has  excited  so  much  evident  disbelief  among  friends 
in  this  country  to  whom  I  have  mentioned  this  custom,  that  I  am  very  glad 
to  be  able  to  avail  myself  of  the  concurrent  testimony  of  a  friend,  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Walker,  of  the  (Gaboon  mission,  who  authorises  me  to  say  that  he  vouches  for 
the  entire  truth  of  the  two  stories  above  related. 


90  IRON-WORKS.  Chap.  VIII. 

Now  the  migration  of  the  Fans  is  so  slow  a  process  that,  which- 
ever way  they  move,  it  is  impossible  they  should  not  be  remem- 
bered by  the  tribes  among  whose  villages  they  have  scattered 
their  own ;  and  were  they,  indeed,  the  Jaga  of  the  south,  I  must 
have  come  on  their  traces  somewhere.  Moreover,  all  the  Fans, 
when  asked  whence  they  came,  point  to  the  north-east.  No 
matter  how  many  different  men  or  villages  you  put  this  question 
to,  the  answer  is  always  the  same. 

The  Fans  are  in  colour  dark  brown  rather  than  black,  but 
have  curly  or  woolly  hair.  They  are  hghter  in  colour  than  the 
Bakalai,  Shekiani,  and  other  surrounding  tribes.  They  tattoo 
themselves  more  than  any  of  the  other  tribes  I  have  met  north 
of  the  equator,  but  not  so  much  as  some  to  the  south.  The  men 
are  less  disfigured  in  this  way  than  the  women,  who  take  great 
pride  in  having  their  breasts  and  abdomen  entirely  covered  vdth 
the  blue  lines  and  curves.  Their  cheeks  also  are  fully  marked 
in  various  figures,  and  this,  with  the  immense  copper  and  iron 
rings  which  weigh  down  the  lobes  of  their  ears,  gives  them  a 
hideous  appearance. 

They  have  considerable  ingenuity  in  manufacturing  iron. 
The  articles  of  trade  which  they  wish  for  most  seem  to  be  white 
beads — ^used  for  ornaments  everywhere  in  this  part  of  Africa — 
and  vessels  of  copper  and  brass.  The  "  neptune  '^ — a  plate  of 
yellow  copper,  which  has  long  been  one  of  the  standard  articles 
of  trade  imported  hither  by  the  merchants,  and  which  is  found 
very  far  in  the  interior — the  Fans  cut  up,  and  it  seems  to  pass 
as  a  kind  of  medium  of  exchange. 

Iron  ore  is  found  in  considerable  quantities  through  the  Fan 
country  cropping  out  at  the  surfece.  They  do  not  dig  into  the 
ground  for  it,  but  gather  what  lies  about  To  get  the  iron  they 
build  a  huge  pile  of  wood,  heap  on  this  a  considerable  quantity 
of  the  ore  broken  up,  then  comes  more  wood,  and  then  fire  is 
applied  to  the  whole.  As  it  burns  away,  wood  is  thrown  on 
continually,  till  at  last  they  perceive,  by  certain  signs,  that  they 
have  made  the  iron  fluid.  All  is  then  permitted  to  cool,  and 
they  have  now  cast  iron.  To  make  this  malleable  and  give  it 
temper,  they  put  it  through  a  most  tedious  serious  of  heatings 
and  hammerings,  till  at  last  they  turn  out  a  very  superior  article 
of  iron  and  steel,  much  better  than  that  which  is  brought  to 
them  firom  Europe.    It  is  a  fact  that,  to  make  their  best  knivee 


Chap.  VHr.  A  CANNIBAL  SMITHY.  91 

and  arrow-heads,  they  will  not  use  the  European  or  AmericaD 
iron,  but  prefer  their  own.  And  many  of  their  knives  and 
swords  are  really  very  iinely  made,  and,  for  a  rude  raoe,  beauti- 
fully ornamented  by  scroll-work  on  the  blades. 

As  blacksmiths,  they  very  far  surpass  all  the  tribes  of  this  re- 
gion who  have  not  come  in  contact  with  the  whites.  Their  war^ 
like  habits  have  made  iron  a  most  necessary  article  to  tbem ; 
and  though  their  tools  are  very  simple,  their  patience  ia  great, 
and,  as  the  reader  will  perceive  from  the  pictures  of  their  arms, 
they  produce  some  very  neat  workmanship. 

The  forge  is  set  up  anywhere  where  a  fire  can  be  bnilt.  They 
have  invented  a  singular  bellows,  composed  of  two  short,  hollowed 


cylinders  of  wood,  surmounted  by  skins  accurately  fitted  on, 
aud  having  an  appropriate  valve  and  a  wooden  handle.  The 
bellows-man  sits  down,  and  moves  these  coverings  up  and  down 
with  great  rapidity,  and  the  air  ia  led  through  small  wooden 
pipes  into  an  iron  joint  which  emerges  in  the  fire. 

The  anvil  is  a  solid  piece  of  iron  of  the  shape  seen  in  the 
illustration.    The  sharp  end  is  stuck  into  the  ground,  and  the 


blacksmith  sits  aloDgsidb  of  his  anvil  and  beats  the  iron  with  a 
singnlar  hammer,  which  is  simply  a  piece  of  iron  weighing  from 
three  to  six  pounds,  and  in  shape  a  truncated  cone.  It  has  no 
handle,  but  is  held  by  the  smaller  end,  and,  of  course,  the 
blows  require  much  more  strength.  It  is  a  little  curious  that, 
with  all  their  ingenuity,  they  should  not  have  diseoTered  so 
simple  a  thing  as  a  handle  for  a  hammer. 

Time  ia  of  no  value  to  a  Fan,  and  the  careful  blacksmith 
spends  often  many  days  and  even  weeks  over  the  manufacture 
of  a  small  knife,  while  weeks  and  months  are  used  to  turn  out  a 
finished  war-knife,  spear,  or  braiu-hatchet.  The  small,  graceful, 
and  often  intricate  lines  with  which  the  surfaces  of  all  their  best 
weapons  are  very  beautifully  ornamented,  are  all  mads  by  the 
hand  and  a  chisel-like  instrument,  struck  with  the  htunmer. 
They  evince  a  correct  eye,  and  a  good  deal  of  artistic  taste. 

They  have  also  some  skill  in  forming  pottery,  though  Ute 
only  objects  of  nlay  they  use  are  the  cooking-pot  and  the  pipe. 
The  former  is  in  sliape  much  like  our  common  iron  cooking-pot. 
It  is  remarkable  chiefly  for  the  very  regular  shape  they  give  it 
merely  by  hand,  for  of  the  lathe  they  are,  of  course,  ignorant. 
When  the  clay  is  moulded  it  is  set  in  the  sun  to  dry,  and 


afterwards   thoroughly   baked    in    the  fire.     Pipea   are   made 
in  the  same  way,  but  the  stems  are  always  of  wood.     Many  of 
the  Fan  had  trtm  pipes,  which  they  seemed  to  prefer  to  tlioee  of 
clay. 
Water  is  carried  or  kept  in  gourds,  and  in  jugs  made  of  a 


Chap.  Vffl.  AGRICULTURE.  93 

kind  of  reed  tightly  woven  and  afterward  coated  with  a  kind  of 
gum.  This  gum  is  first  softened  in  the  fire,  and  then  thickly 
laid  over  the  outside  of  the  vessel.    When  completed,  it  forms 


Fan  l^pes. 

a  durable,  water-tight  vessel ;  but  it  is  necessary,  before  using 
it,  to  keep  it  standing  in  water  for  a  fortnight,  to  take  away  the 
disagreeable  taste  of  the  gum. 

They  smoke  leaves  which  looked  to  me  like  a  kind  of  wild 
tobacco,  and  which  seem  to  grow  plentifully  here. 

The  meat  of  the  elephant  is  their  chief  subsistence,  while  the 
ivory  is  their  only  export  article,  and.  therefore,  very  important 
to  them,  as  thereby  they  get  their  brass,  copper,  kettles,  looking- 
glasses,  flints,  fircHsteels,  and  beads,  which  have  become  almost 
necessities  to  them.  Of  all  these,  however,  they  set  the  greatest 
value  on  copper  and  brass. 

Their  agricultural  operations  are  very  rude,  and  differ  but 
httle  from  those  of  the  surroimding  tribes.  Like  them,  they 
cut  down  the  trees  and  brush  to  make  a  clearing,  bum  every- 
thing that  is  cut  down,  and  then  plant  their  crop  in  the  cleared 
space.  The  only  agricultural  instrument  they  have  is  a  kind  of 
heavy  knife  or  cutlass,  which  serves  in  place  of  an  axe  to  cut 
down  trees,  and  for  many  other  purposes,  such  as  digging  the 
holes  in  which  they  plant  their  manioc  or  plantains. 

Their  staple  food  is  the  manioc,  a  very  useful  plant,  because 
it  yields  a  large  return,  and  is  more  substantial  food  than  the 
plantain.  It  is  cultivated  by  cuttings ;  and  one  little  stem, 
stuck  carelessly  into  the  ground  in  their  manner,  produces  in 
a  season  two  or  three  large  roots  the  size  of  a  yam.  They 
also  boil  the  leaves  and  eat  them,  and  they  make  excellent 
"greens." 

Besides  manioc  they  have  plantains,  two  or  three  kinds  of 
yams,  splendid  sugarcane,   and  squashes,  all  of  which  they 


94  THE  OSHEBAS.  Chap.  VIII. 

cultivate  with  considerable  success;  but  the  manioc  is  the 
&vourite.  Enormous  quantities  of  squashes  are  racised,  chiefly 
for  the  seeds,  which,  when  pounded  and  prepared  as  they  know 
how  to  do,  are  much  prized  by  them,  and  by  me  too.  At  a  cer- 
tain season,  when  the  squash  is  ripe,  their  villages  seem  covered 
with  the  seeds,  which  everybody  spreads  out  to  dry.  "VVTien 
dried,  they  are  packed  in  leaves  and  placed  over  the  fireplaces 
in  the  smoke,  to  keep  off  an  insect  which  also  likes  them.  The 
process  of  preparation  is  very  tedioua  A  portion  of  seeds  is 
boiled,  and  each  seed  is  divested  of  its  skin.  Then  the  mass  of 
pulp  is  put  into  a  rude  wooden  mortar  and  pounded,  a  vegetable 
oil  being  mixed  with  it.  When  all  is  well  mixed,  a  portion  is 
finally  cooked  over  a  charcoal  fire,  either  in  an  earthen  pot  or  in 
a  plantain  leaf.  It  is  then  very  sweet,  and  I  think  nourishing, 
and  certainly  quite  pleasant. 

Of  the  mortars  above  mentioned  every  Fan  family  possesses  at 
least  one.  They  are  of  wood,  and  are  in  fact  troughs,  being  two 
feet  long  by  two  or  three  inches  deep  and  eight  wide.  Besides 
these,  every  village  owns  and  uses  in  common  two  or  three 
immense  mortars  (also  of  wood),  which  are  needed  to  pulverize 
the  manioc-root.  When  it  is  reduced  to  flour  it  is  made  into 
little  cakes,  which  may  be  kept  for  several  days.  They  are  also 
very  fond  of  red  pepper,  which  plant  is  found  in  abundance  near 
all  the  villages. 

While  on  the  subject  of  food,  I  ought  to  say  that  they  do  not 
sell  the  bodies  of  their  chiefs,  kings,  or  great  men.  These  receive 
burial ;  and  consequently  they  do  not  eat  every  body  that  dies. 

Slavery  does  not  seem  very  prominent  among  them,  though  a 
great  many  of  the  Fans  themselves  are  yearly  sold  for  slave-s  to 
the  coast  traders  on  account  of  witchcraft  accusations,  debts, 
adultery,  &c.  Of  late  years  the  French  "  emigrant "  ships  have 
been  filled  with  Fans  to  a  very  great  extent. 

On  September  10th,  Ndiayai,  the  king,  took  me  over  to  an 
Osheba  town  some  miles  away,  whose  king  was  his  friend.  The 
town,  the  people,  the  arrangements,  everything  looked  just  as  in 
the  Fan  town.  I  should  not  have  known  they  were  of  a  different 
tribe  had  not  Ndiayai  assured  me  it  was  so.  I  imagine  they  are 
not  very  far  apart,  however.  Like  the  Fans,  the  Osheba  look 
warlike,  and  are  tall ;  their  women  are  smaller,  and  hideously 
ugly,  and  tattooed  all  over  their  bodies.  A  large  part  of  their 
intercourse  with  the  Fan  village  consists  in  the  interchange  of 


Chap.  VIII.  MY  ULTIMA  THULE.  95 

dead  bodies,  and  I  saw  as  many  human  bones  lying  about  the 
Osheba  village  as  among  the  Fans. 

King  Bunbakai,  the  Osheba  •  chief,  seeing  that  his  friend 
Ndiayai  did  not  die  after  having  ^een  me,  concluded  to  come 
out  and  have  a  look  at  me  himself.  He  was  a  sociable  old 
fellow,  dressed  in  the  Fan  style,  and  every  way  acting  as  a 
Fan  king  might.  We  stayed  with  him  several  days,  as  I  had 
come  in  great  part  to  see  what  lay  farther  east  toward  the 
interior,  and  how  I  should  get  farther.  But  I  was  now  come  to 
my  ultima  thule.  After  every  inquiry,  made  with  the  help  of 
my  Mbondemo  followers,  I  could  get  only  this  information : — 
that  beyond  the  Osheba  village,  two  or  three  day's  journeys 
off,  there  lived  other  tribes,  also  cannibals,  whose  names  my 
informants  did  not  know.  It  was  said,  however,  that  they  were 
warlike,  and  used  poisoned  arrows.  When  I  desired  to  advance 
in  that  direction  the  people  seemed  unwilling,  even  afraid  to 
accompany  me ;  assuring  me  that  on  account  of  the  wars  at 
present  in  existence  between  tribes  there,  any  party  attempting 
to  visit  either  side  would  run  the  risk  of  being  waylaid  with 
poisoned  arrows  by  the  other. 

I  had  a  great  desire  to  go  on,  but  confess  that  these  stories 
and  some  other  considerations  cooled  my  ardour.  I  was  com- 
pletely at  the  mercy  of  the  Fans,  and  should  be  still  more  so 
if  I  advanced,  for  Mbene's  men  would  not  go  farther.  And  I 
could  not  forget  that  the  Fans,  though  apparently  well  disposed 
toward  me,  had  a  great  penchant  for  human  flesh,  and  might — 
by  one  of  those  curious  freaks  which  our  tastes  play  us— be 
seized  by  a  passionate  desire  to  taste  me.  To  fall  sick  among 
them  would  be  to  tempt  them  severely  and  unjustifiably.  Then 
I  had  not  goods  enough  to  carry  me  among  a  strange  people  and 
also  bring  me  back ;  and  I  feared  that,  left  in  poverty,  I  should 
fail  to  receive  among  them  the  respect  and  obedience  which  the 
beads,  tobacco,  and  powder,  copper  and  brass  rings  of  a  white 
man  always  obtain  for  him.  Moreover,  the  Fan  language  is  such 
a  collection  of  throat  sounds  that  I  not  only  could  not  get  to 
understand  it,  but  could  not  for  some  time  distinguish  any 
words.  The  Osheba  is  yet  worse ;  and  harsher,  ruder,  or  more 
guttural  sounds  I  never  heard  made.  Now,  as  Mbene's  men  would 
not  go  with  me,  nor  even  stay  long  here,  I  was  like  to  be  left 
without  an  interpreter ;  and  to  go  among  any  new  tribes  beyond 
the  mountains  entirely  unable  to  hold  communication  with  them 


96  SUPEllSTITIONS.  Chap.  VUI. 

would  have  been  labour  almost  altogether  in  vain.  I  therefore 
determined  to  make  some  longer  stay  with  King  Ndiayai,  and 
then  return  by  a  new  route  to  the  seashore. 

So  vague  and  unsajbisfactory  were  the  rumours  I  heard  of 
country  and  people  in  the  farther  interior  that  I  shall  not  make 
any  guess  at  the  condition  of  that  vast  region.  Only  I  think  it 
quite  likely  that,  as  the  Fan  and  Osheba  tribes  point  eastward 
as  the  place  of  their  origin,  their  manners  and  custonus,  with 
such  knowledge  as  they  have  of  iron  and  of  poison,  and  such 
changes  in  life  as  the  different  circumstances  of  the  country 
may  necessitate,  may  be  characteristic  of  the  tribes  beyond. 

The  Fans  are  a  very  superstitious  people.  Witchcraft  seems 
to  be  a  very  common  thing  to  be  accused  of  among  them,  and 
the  death-penalty  is  sternly  executed.  They  set  little  value 
on  life ;  and  as  the  dead  body  has  its  commercial  value,  this 
consideration  too,  probably,  has  its  weight  in  passing  sentence 
of  death. 

Polygamy  is  a  fertile  source  of  quarrels  and  bloodshed  among 
them ;  and  the  growing  desire  for  "  white  man's  goods,"  to  pay 
for  which,  in  the  present  miserable  system  of  trade,  they  cannot 
get  sufficient  ivory,  induces  them  to  send  many  of  their  criminals 
to  the  coast  to  be  sold  to  the  slavers.  As  before  mentioned,  they 
have  but  few  slaves — a  circumstance  which  is  probably  in  part 
accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  they  eat  the  prisoners  taken  in 
war,  whereas  other  tribes  only  enslave  them. 

They  have  a  great  reverence  for  charms  and  fetiches,  and 
even  the  little  children  are  covered  with  these  talismans,  duly 
consecrated  by  the  doctor  or  greegree  man  of  the  tribe.  They 
place  especial  value  on  charms  which  are  supposed  to  have  the 
power  to  protect  their  owner  in  battle.  Chief  among  these  is  an 
iron  chain,  of  which  the  links  are  an  inch  and  a  half  long  by  an 
inch  wide.  This  is  worn  over  the  left  shoulder,  and  hanging 
down  the  right  side.  Besides  this,  and  next  to  it  in  value,  is  a 
small  bag,  which  is  suspended  round  the  neck  or  to  the  side  of 
the  warrior.  This  bag  is  made  of  the  skin  of  some  rare  animal, 
and  contains  various  fragments  of  others,  such  as  dried  monkey's 
tails,  the  bowels  and  claws  of  other  beasts,  shells,  feathers  of 
birds,  and  ashes  of  various  beasts.  All  these  are  of  the  rarer 
animals,  in  order  that  there  may  not  be  too  many  charms  of  one 
kind,  which  would  diminish  their  value  and  power. 

The  chief  village  of  each  family  of  the  Fans  has  a  huge  idol. 


Chap.  VIU.  INTERMARBIAGES.  97 

to  whose  temple  all  that  family  gather  at  certain  periods  to 
worship.  This  worship  consists  of  rude  dauces  and  singing. 
The  idol-houses  are  mostly  surrounded  by  a  number  of  skulls  of 
wild  animals,  prominent  among  which  I  recognized  the  skuU  of 
the  gorilla.  To  take  away  or  disturb  these  skulls  would  be 
counted  sacrilege,  and  worthy  of  death.  I  do  not  think  they 
offer  human  sacrifices. 

The  non-cannibal  tribes  do  not  intermarry  with  their  canmbal 
neighbours,  as  their  peculiar  practices  are  held  in  too  great 
abhorrence.  Trade  is,  however,  likely  to  break  down  this  barrier. 
Within  two  or  three  years  the  ivory  of  the  Fans  has  so  far 
excited  the  cupidity  of  their  neighbours  that  two  or  three  chiefs, 
among  whom  Mbene  was  one,  have  been  glad  to  take  Fan  girls 
to  wife,  in  order  thus  to  get  the  influence  of  a  Fan  father-in-law. 
The  poor  Fans,  who  are  farthest  of  all  from  the  coveted  white 
trade,  are  but  too  ^lad  to  get  a  son-in-law  nearer  the  seashore ; 
and  I  have  little  doubt  but  in  a  few  years  they  will  even  succeed 
in  intermarrying  with  other  tribes  to  a  considerable  extent. 

Notwithstanding  their  repulsive  habit,  the  Fan  have  left  the 
impression  upon  me  of  being  the  most  promising  people  in  all 
Western  Africa.  They  treated  me  with  unvarying  hospitality 
and  kindness;  and  they  seem  to  have  more  of  that  kind  of 
stamina  which  enables  a  rude  people  to  receive  a  strange  civili- 
zation than  any  other  tribe  I  know  of  in  Africa.  Energetic, 
fierce,  warlike,  decidedly  possessing  both  courage  and  ingenuity, 
they  are  disagreeable  enemies;  and  I  think  it  most  probable 
that  the  great  fiEunily  or  nation  of  which  they  are  but  a  small 
offshoot^  and  who  should  inhabit  the  moimtainous  range  which 
subsequent  explorations  convince  me  extends  nearly  if  not  quite 
across  the  continent — ^that  these  mountaineers  have  stayed  in 
its  course  the  great  sweep  of  Mohammedan  conquest  in  this  part 
of  Africa. 

It  should  be  added  here  that  the  Fan  are  known  on  the  coast 
as  the  Paofuen. 


Fan  Spoon. 


98  CLIMATE  OF  THE  MOUNTAINS.  Chap.  IX. 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

The  return  Trip — Climate  of  the  Mountain  Begion  —  Native  Courage— 
Mode  of  Warfare  —  Heavy  Rains  —  On  the  Noya  —  Visits  to  Native  Chieft 

—  Ezongo — Attempt  at  Black-mail — Alapay — TheMbicho — Net-hunting 

—  Bad  Shooting  of  the  Negroes  —  Attacked  by  the  Bashikouay  Ants— 
Toilet  of  the  Mbicho  —  Superstition  about  the  Moon  —  Ivory  of  this  District 
peculiar  —  Igouma  —  Fan  of  the  Country  —  An  immense  Cavern — Cross- 
ing a  Mangrove  Swamp. 

We  now  began  to  make  ready  for  our  return  to  the  sea.  I 
was  to  go  as  far  as  his  village  with  Mbene,  and  thence  take  my 
new  route.  Slbene  had  since  our  arrival  obtained  a  daughter  of 
King  Ndiayai  for  his  wife ;  a  point  of  great  exultation  to  this 
politic  old  negro,  who  rejoiced  that  so  rare  an  honour  should  fell 
to  him,  and  hoped  to  receive  large  consignments  of  ivory  from 
his  father-in-law's  people,  on  which  he  would  pocket  a  profitable 
percentage.  Mbene,  therefore,  had  relatives  to  take  leave  of— 
not  a  very  aflfecting  circumstance,  however. 

The  Fans  seemed  very  sorry  that  I  was  about  to  leave  them, 
and  all  expressed  a  wish  for  my  return.  Ndiayai  gave  me  a 
native  knife  as  a  token  of  remembrance,  which  was  as  much  as 
receiving  a  be-diamonded  snuff-box  from  another  sovereign — for 
knives  are  precious  in  Africa-  I  offered  a  large  price  to  another 
man  for  a  superb  knife  he  had,  but  could  not  get  it.  His  father 
had  given  it  to  him,  he  said,  and  he  could  not  part  with  it. 

So  at  last  we  were  fully  ready,  and  left  the  Fans  and  their 
mountains.  These  mountains  have  a  climate  which  is  by  no 
means  African  in  the  popular  conception.  Since  we  have  been 
here  we  have  had  rain  during  every  night ;  and  it  has  been  so 
much  clouded  that  I  do  not  think  the  sun  has  shone  clearly  for 
three  consecutive  hours  on  any  day  in  as  many  weeks.  The 
country  seems  well  watered,  and  the  soil  is  exceedingly  fertile. 
The  climate  is,  of  course,  much  healthier  than  it  is  on  the  rivers 
near  the  coast,  and  the  people  in  consequence  are  more  robust 
and  energetic  It  is  a  most  promisiug  country  for  the  labour 
and  settlement  of  white  men  at  some  time,  or  of  civilized  black 
men. 


Chap.  IX,  MODES  OF  WARFARE.  99 

Mbene  had  spent  some  days  before  our  stajrt  in  collecting  pro- 
visions. But,  though  we  had  a  good  supply,  he  asked  me  to 
stop  at  a  Mbicho  village  not  far  on  our  route  for  more.  I  con- 
sented, and  found  that  he  was  more  desirous  of  exhibiting  me  to 
arwther  father-in-law  of  his,  the  Mbicho  chief,  Imana  by  name, 
who  was  greatly  pleased  to  find  his  son-in-law  in  such  creditable 
company,  and  presented  me  with  two  fowls  and  two  bunches  of 
plantains  in  token  of  his  pleasure,  besides  supplying  our  whole 
party  with  abundant  provisions  next  morning,  when  we  went 
rejoicing  on  our  way,  the  men  singing  songs  as  they  marched 
through  the  woods. 

The  Mbicho  are  like  the  Mbondemo  in  looks,  and  their  lan- 
guage is  also  like  the  Shekiani.  They  are  not  a  very  numerous 
tribe. 

Our  party  from  here  consisted  of  twenty  men,  thirteen  women, 
and  two  boys.  I  caused  the  women  to  be  relieved  of  their  loads,  to 
their  surprise,  and  that  of  their  idle  husbands,  who  could  not  im- 
derstand  why  I  should  object  to  a  woman  doing  all  the  drudgery. 
As  we  marched  along  gaily  enough,  about  2  p.m.  one  day  my 
men  seemed  suddenly  uneasy.  I  asked  what  was  the  matter, 
and  received  for  reply  that  a  party  of  Shekianis  were  approach- 
ing, they  thought,  and  then  there  would  be  trouble,  as  some 
Shekiani  men  had  had  a  palaver  lately  with  Mbene.  I  felt  very 
uncomfortable,  for,  on  listening,  I  too  heard  sounds  as  of  men 
approaching,  and  I  knew  that  if  there  was  a  fight  it  would  be  of 
the  cruel,  treacherous  kind  which  the  negroes  affect — not  open, 
but  a  sudden  surprise,  which  would  give  no  chance  for  me  to 
interfere  and  prevent  bloodshed.  I  therefore  determined  to  stop 
the  palaver  if  I  could,  but  meantime  to  stick  to  my  party  as 
the  safest  way.  We  got  ready  our  guns,  and  then  cautiously 
advanced.  After  about  half-an-hour's  suspense  we  discovered 
the  enemy — not  a  party  of  Shekianis,  but  a  large  party  of 
chattering  monkeys,  of  which  we  immediately  shot  half-a-dozen^ 
which  were  roasted  by  the  men  for  their  suppers. 

The  warriors  of  this  part  of  Africa — with  the  exception  of  the 
Fans  and  Osheba — are  not  overstocked  with  courage.  They 
applaud  tricks  that  are  inhmnanly  cruel  and  cowardly,  and  seem 
to  be  quite  incapable  of  open  hand-to-hand  fight.  To  surprise 
man,  woman,  or  child  in  sleep,  and  kill  them  then ;  to  lie  in 
ambush  in  the  woods  for  a  solitary  man,  and  kill  him  by  a  single 

H  2' 


102  DOWN  THE  NOTA.  Chap.  IX. 

The  next  day  we  saw  numerous  elephants'  tracks ;  but  the 
great  beasts  avoided  us,  and  fled  in  haste  when  they  heard 
us  coming.  They  had  probably  been  hunted,  and  had  a  watch 
out  We  saw,  too,  a  strange  water-snake,  whose  body  was  black, 
with  rings  of  bright  yellow  along  the  whole  length.  My  men 
were  much  alarmed  when  they  saw  it,  for  they  said  its  bite  was 
mortal;  they  tried  to  kill  it  with  their  spears,  but  it  managed  to 
escape  them.  They  told  me  that  besides  being  poisonous  it  was 
very  good  to  eat,  and  gave  as  a  caution  that  the  head  must  be 
cut  off  immediately  it  is  killed,  in  order,  I  suppose,  to  prevent  its 
fangs  from  fastening  on  any  part  of  the  body. 

At  last,  after  some  hard  travelling,  the  forest  being  very  dense 
and  often  swampy,  while  numerous  streams,  bridgeless,  of  course, 
had  to  be  crossed  on  crazy  logs,  we  came  to  a  small  creek  leading 
into  the  Noya,  which  was  only  two  or  three  hundred  yards  dis- 
tant. We  seized  on  two  canoes  we  found  empty  on  the  creek ; 
and  as  these  would  not  hold  all  our  party,  I  put  in  all  my  goods 
and  as  many  men  as  I  could  make  room  for,  and  made  the  others 
promise  to  wait  till  we  sent  a  canoe  for  them,  which  was  likely 
to  be  soon.  Sure  enough,  scarce  had  we  emerged  into  the  Noya, 
a  noble  stream  refreshing  to  look  upon  after  the  wretched  creeks 
which  had  been  crossed  for  two  days  at  very  frequent  intervals, 
than  we  met  a  couple  of  women  fishing  in  two  canoes.  I  pro- 
mised them  some  leaves  of  tobacco  if  they  would  go  and  bring 
along  the  men,  and  they  were  only  too  glad  to  do  so. 

Thus  we  descended  the  Noya.  The  banks  are  clothed  in  this 
part  with  trees  of  a  pleasant  shape  and  a  dark  evergreen  ver- 
dure, which  made  a  favourable  contrast  to  the  immense  gloomy 
mangrove-swamps  which  line  all  these  rivers  near  the  seashore. 
Here  and  there  we  saw  little  native  villages  peeping  through  the 
woods,  looking  so  quiet  and  pleasant  that  for  the  moment  I  could 
forget  the  horrors  of  witchcraft,  polygamy,  and  other  cruelties 
which  rule  even  in  these  peaceful  groves. 

Towards  afternoon  we  came  to  the  village  of  a  chief,  Mbene*s 
friend,  who  had  sent  a  message  to  me  to  stop  at  his  place  on  my 
way  down.  We  were  received  with  acclamations ;  all  the  people 
turned  out  to  see  me,  and  there  was  the  usual  singing,  dancing, 
and  cutting  capers.  The  chief  took  me  immediately  to  his  own 
house,  the  best  in  the  town ;  but  I  was  not  destined  to  remain 
quiet,  for  presently  the  house  and  all  the  neighbourhood  began  to 


Chap.  IX.  INDIA-BUBBER  VINES.  103 

fill  up  with  people  eager  to  take  a  look  at  me.  I  was  this  time 
doubly  a  hero ;  for  they  had  heard  of  my  trip  to  the  Fan  country, 
and  had  prophesied  that  I  should  be  killed  and  eaten  by  those 
terrible  people,  of  whom  all  these  tribes  seem  to  stand  in  great 
awa  Now  that  I  was  come  back  in  safety,  they  openly  pro- 
claimed that  I  must  be  the  lucky  owner  of  a  fetich  of  very 
remarkable  powers.  The  king  complimented  me  on  my  safe 
return,  and  asked  why  I  cared  to  see  the  cannibals  and  go  to 
their  country. 

When  I  answered  that  I  went  there  to  shoot  birds  and  animals 
strange  to  me,  there  went  up  a  general  shout  of  astonishment, 
and  I  fear  I  lost  somewhat  of  the  confidence  and  admiration  of 
the  hearers,  for  they  could  scarce  give  credence  to  what  appeared 
so  foolish.  Nevertheless,  Wanga,  the  chief,  invited  me  to  stay 
as  long  as  I  pleased  with  him. 

I  got  up  early  the  next  morning  to  take  a  look  at  the  country, 
and  try  to  shoot  some  birds  for  my  collection  and  also  some 
pigeons  for  breakfast.  It  was  a  fine  clear  morning,  and  I  now 
for  the  first  time  noticed  the  beautiful  situation  of  Wanga's 
town,  which  I  had  been  too  weary  to  appreciate  the  night  before. 
It  lay  on  the  edge  of  a  bluflF,  perhaps  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet 
high,  which  overhung  the  Noya,  and  from  whose  summit  I  had 
a  view  of  this  river's  course  for  several  miles  up  and  down.  Im- 
mediately behind  the  town  was  a  heavy  forest  of  grand  old 
trees,  many  of  vast  size  both  for  height  and  thickness.  The 
underbrush  was  tolerably  dense,  and  huge  vines  stretched  from 
tree  to  tree,  like  gigantic  snakes.  Among  these  vines  I  noticed 
the  India-rubber  vine,  and  foimd  it  to  be  very  plentiful  in  this 
region. 

The  natives  looked  at  me  as  I  was  stuffing  the  birds  I  had 
killed^  and  were  lost  in  wonder  at  what  seemed  to  them  very 
remarkably  foolish. 

I  spent  several  days  in  the  villages  near  here,  and  was  every- 
where received  with  kindness  and  also  with  curiosity.  They  had 
never  seen  a  white  man  before,  and  of  course  were  full  of  sur- 
prise, and  alarm  too,  for  a  time.  Others,  who  were  more  expe- 
rienced, asked  curious  questions  about  the  manners  and  customs 
of  the  white  people.  When  I  told  them  that  a  man  was  put 
into  prison  for  having  two  wives,  both  men  and  women  set  up  a 
shout  of  wonder,  but  seemed  to  think  that,  though  the  white 


104  THE  PEOPLE  OF  THE  NOYA.  Chap.  IX. 

man's  country  must  be  a  great  country,  the  white  men  were 
themselves  more  lucky  than  wise. 

Wanga  had  promised  me  a  new  set  of  guides  if  I  would  stay 
some  days  with  him ;  accordingly,  I  sent  Mbene's  men  back, 
with  proper  acknowledgments,  and  prepared  for  a  start  with  my 
new  guides. 

We  were  to  go  down  the  Noya  for  a  few  miles  cmd  then  take 
the  land,  leaving  our  canoes  to  return. 

I  wanted  very  much  to  go  oflf  privately,  but  that  would  not  do. 
The  king  and  the  whole  village,  male  and  female,  about  two 
himdred  people,  came  down  to  bid  me  good-bye,  and  I  had  to  shake 
hands  all  round,  which  took  more  time  than  I  cared  to  spare  for 
the  purpose.  But  it  was  the  last  pleasure  I  was  ever  likely  to  do 
to  a  people  who  had  received  me  with  very  great  kindness.  One 
feels  a  strange  softness  about  the  heart  on  leaving  one  of  these 
simple  African  villages,  where,  stranger  in  a  strange  land,  he  has 
yet  been  treated  kindly,  and  all  his  wants  supplied.  The  people 
seem  really  sorry  to  see  you  go ;  and  as  you  leave,  thinking  that 
in  all  human  probability  you  will  never  meet  these  kind  people 
again,  you  feel  sorrier  than  you  expected. 

We  descended  the  Noya  for  a  few  miles,  hailed  at  every  turn 
by  the  inhabitants  of  villages  who  wished  us  to  stop ;  and  then 
abandoned  our  canoes  and  took  to  the  land.  For  some  miles  it 
was  very  swampy,  and  the  loads  of  my  men  made  travelling  diflS- 
cult  and  tedious.  I  had  now  with  me  the  entire  results  of  this 
expedition,  and  this  formed  no  light  burden,  even  for  the  stout, 
finely-made  negro  fellows  I  had.  The  people  along  the  Noya 
are  a  fine-looking  race,  not  above,  but  up  to  the  "  middle  height," 
with  rather  intelligent  features,  and  not  very  black.  They  seem 
to  live  very  happily  in  their  villages,  though,  of  course,  all  the 
vices  and  superstitions  of  Africa  infect  them,  and  often  make 
brutes  of  them. 

Presently  we  came  to  high  land,  and  then  the  landscape  re- 
gained somewhat  of  the  beauty  it  had  about  Wanga's  viUage, 
while  we  were  able  to  push  ahead  faster  over  the  solid  ground. 
Towards  sunset  we  reached  a  place  called  Ezongo,  where  the  in- 
habitants, seeing  our  heavy  loads,  and  supposing  that  I  brought 
them  vast  and  unheard-of  amounts  of  trade,  turned  out  with  the 
greatest  amount  of  enthusiasm  to  welcome  me. 

Their  ardour  cooled  somewhat  when  they  learned  the  contents 


Chap.  IX.  ATTEMPT  AT  BLACK-MAIL.  105 

of  my  packages,  and  I  found  in  the  course  of  the  evening  that  the 
tascally  chief  or  king  of  Ezongo,  thinking  I  must  place  a  great 
value  on  things  I  had  gone  so  far  to  get,  had  determined  to  hold 
me  till  I  paid  a  heavy  price  to  get  away. 

I  was  very  angry  at  this  outrage;  and  for  a  while  things 
looked  as  though  I  should  have  trouble.  I  determined  not  to 
submit  to  an  imposition  which  would  leave  me  empty-handed  and 
defenceless,  even  if  it  would  have  answered  to  let  any  one  of  these 
fellows  impose  on  me  under  any  circumstances.  There  seemed 
likely  to  be  a  palaver.  I  determined  to  fight  for  my  rights,  but 
was^  of  course,  anxious  to  get  all  settled  peaceably.  The  king, 
urged  on  by  his  people,  who  seemed  a  greedy  set  of  rascals,  in- 
sisted on  his  price.  At  last,  my  Mbicho  guides  from  the  Noya 
tried  to  settle  the  matter.  They  were  wise  enough  to  get  the 
king  to  come  to  me  with  them  alone.  I  gave  the  rascal  a  coat 
and  an  old  shirt,  and  told  him  what  was  literally  true — that  I  was 
very  poor,  and  could  not  pay  what  his  people  wanted,  and  that 
he  must  be  on  my  side.  He  went  out  at  once  and  harangued 
the  turbulent  extortioners.  I  watched  the  result  with  consider- 
able anxiety ;  but  at  last,  seeing  that  he  would  succeed,  paid  my 
Wanga-town  guides,  and  prepared  to  set  out  for  Yoongoolapay,  a 
village  whose  chief  I  had  seen  on  the  coast  some  time  before, 
when  he  made  me  promise  to  pay  him  a  visit  on  my  return  from 
the  interior. 

I  was  now  really  so  reduced  in  trade  that  I  had  only  a  few 
white  beads  left  to  pay  to  my  guides,  and  was  glad  enough  to  be 
getting  down  towards  the  territory  of  a  man  who  knew  me,  and 
would  probably  trust  me. 

We  arrived  at  our  destination  late  in  the  afternoon,  and  were 
received  with  great  demonstrations  of  joy.  My  old  friend,  King 
Alapay,  was  very  glad  to  see  me,  and  asked  me  to  stay  some 
days,  which,  being  very  much  worn  out  with  constant  exposure 
and  anxieties,  I  determined  to  do.  His  village  is  situated  upon 
a  high  hill  overlooking  the  surrounding  country,  and  a  beautifiil 
stream  skirts  the  foot  of  the  hill.  It  is  a  charming  situation, 
and  the  people  who  hold  it  I  found  very  kind,  peaceable,  and 
hospitable. 

A  considerable  number  of  independent  Mbicho  villages  lie  here 
within  a  circuit  of  a  few  miles,  and  live  in  great  harmony  with 
each  other,  all  having  prudently  intermarried  to  such  a  degree 


106  NET-HUNTINa.  Chap.  IX. 

that  they  are  really  one  large  family.  I  was  made  welcome 
among  them  all,  and  spent  some  very  pleasant  days  in  hunting, 
and  particularly  in  that  kind  of  sport  called  here  ashiga-hunting, 
or  net-hunting — a  practice  very  common  among  the  Bakalai 
tribes. 

This  singular  sport  is  very  much  practised  in  this  part  of 
Africa,  and,  as  it  is  generally  successful,  is  a  local  amusement, 
and  brings  out  the  best  traits  of  the  natives.  I  was  always  very 
fond  of  it. 

The  nets  are  made  of  the  fibre  of  the  pineapple  plants  and 
also  with  the  fibres  of  a  kind  of  tree,  which  are  twisted  into  stout 
threads.  They  are  from  sixty  to  eighty  feet  long  and  four  to 
five  feet  high,  and  every  village  owns  several.  But  as  few 
villages  have  suflBcient  to  make  a  great  spread,  generally  several 
unite  in  one  grand  hunt  and  divide  the  proceeds,  the  game 
caught  in  any  net  being  the  share  of  its  owners. 

The  first  day  we  went  out,  half-a-dozen  villages  met  together 
at  an  appointed  place,  the  men  of  each  bringing  their  nets. 
Then  we  set  oflF  for  a  spot  about  ten  miles  oflf,  where  they  had 
a  clearing  in  the  dense  woods  which  had  been  used  before.  We 
moved  along  in  silence,  so  as  not  to  alarm  the  animals  who  might 
be  near  our  ground.  The  dogs — for  dogs  are  used  for  this  hunt 
— ^were  kept  still  and  close  together. 

Finally  we  arrived  on  the  groimd,  and  the  work  of  spreading 
the  toils  began.  Each  party  stretched  a  single  net,  tying  it  up 
by  vines  and  to  the  lower  branches  of  trees ;  but  as  all  worked 
in  one  direction,  and  each  took  care  to  join  his  and  his  neigh- 
bour's net  together,  we  in  a  very  short  time  had  a  line  of  netting 
running  in  a  wide  hedf-circle,  and  at  least  half-a-mile  long. 

This  done,  a  party  went  out  on  each  side  to  guard  the  sides 
and  prevent  escape,  and  the  rest  of  us  were  then  ready  to 
beat  the  bush.  We  started  at  about  a  mile  from  the  nets,  and, 
standing  about  fifty  yards  from  each  other,  advanced  gradually, 
shouting  and  making  what  noise  we  could,  at  the  same  time 
keeping  our  guns  in  readiness  to  pop  down  anything  which 
should  come  in  our  way.  The  sport  would  have  been  less  ex- 
hausting had  not  the  jungle  been  so  dense.  Though  this  very 
spot  was  frequently  used  for  net-hunting,  and  therefore  more 
cleared  than  the  neighbouring  wilder  wood,  yet  we  were  obliged 
to  proceed  almost  step  by  step,  and  every  native  was  armed,  be- 


Chap.  IX.  l^GRO  GUNNERY.  107 

sides  his  gun,  with  a  kind  of  heavy  cutlass  or  maehetey  with  which 
it  was  necessary  literally  to  hew  out  a  way,  the  vines  making  a 
net-work  which  only  the  beasts  of  the  forests  could  glide  through 
without  trouble. 

As  we  advanced,  so  did  the  men  who  guarded  the  flanks,  and 
thus  our  party  gradually  closed  on  the  prey,  and  presently  we 
began  to  hear  shots.  I  heard  the  shots,  but  could  see  nothing, 
and  had  only  to  hold  my  own  gun  in  readiness,  and  pray  that  my 
neighbour  might  not  shoot  me  by  mistake  ;  for  they  are  fear- 
fully reckless  when  on  a  chace. 

At  last  we  came  in  sight  of  the  nets.  We  had  caught  a 
gazelle  of  a  very  minute  size — a  pretty  little  animal — which 
does  not  grow  to  be  larger  than  a  pointer.  It  is  very  grace- 
ful, and  ought  to  make  a  pretty  pet,  though  I  have  never  seen 
one  tamed.  There  were  several  other  little  quadrupeds,  and 
a  large  antelope  was  held  and  shot  before  I  came  up;  and  an- 
other antelope,  being  shot  at  and  missed,  rushed  forward  and 
got  entangled  in  the  net. 

Having  drawn  this  cover,  we  gathered  up  the  nets  and  the  dogs — 
who  enjoyed  the  sport  vastly — and  walked  oflf  to  try  another  place. 

I  do  not  wonder  at  all  at  the  bad  shots  the  natives  make. 
Wherever  I  have  been  among  them  my  shots  have  excited  as- 
tonishment ;  and  this  not  so  much  because  my  guns  are  better, 
as  because  I  have  good  powder,  and  they  do  not  know  how  to 
load  a  gun.  The  negro  idea  is  to  put  in  as  much  powder  as  he 
dares,  and  on  top  of  this  as  much  old  iron  as  he  can  afford  to 
throw  away  in  one  shot.  If  the  powder  was  of  only  average 
strength  they  would  blow  themselves  to  pieces,  but  the  traders 
on  the  coast  make  it  very  mild  by  adulterations;  and  I  have  ac- 
tually seen  bits  of  iron  of  various  shapes  rammed  into  a  gun  till 
it  was  loaded  to  within  a  few  inches  of  the  muzzle.  Consequently, 
the  recoil  is  heavy  ;  they  dare  not  hold  the  guns  to  their  shoul- 
ders, and  blaze  away  very  much  at  a  venture. 

Walking  over  to  another  part  of  the  forest,  about  three-quar- 
ters of  an  hour  distant,  we  again  spread  our  nets.  Here  we  had 
better  luck,  catching  a  number  of  antelopes,  deer,  and  some 
smaller  animals.  This  seemed  enough  for  one  day,  of  which  I 
was  very  glad,  for  I  was  tired  out. 

Before  breaking  up,  all  the  game  caught  was  laid  together, 
that  all  might  see  it.    And  now  I  had  opportunity  to  notice  the 


108  ATTACKED  BY  BASHIKOUAY.  Chap.  IX. 

curious  little  dogs,  about  a  foot  high,  and  sharp-eared,  who  had 
been  of  such  material  assistance  driving  the  animals  into  our 
toils.  They  were  standing  looking  at  their  prizes  with  eager 
and  hungry  eyes.  They  do  not  look  very  intelligent,  but  are  of 
the  greatest  use  in  this  sport,  because  when  they  bark  the  game 
is  never  far  off,  and  thus  they  warn  the  hunters.  Often  they  gno 
out  on  hunts  for  themselves;  and  it  is  no  unusual  thing  for  half- 
a-dozen  dogs  to  drive  an  antelope  to  the  neighbourhood  of  their 
village,  where  they  give  tongue,  and  the  hunters  come  out  and 
kill  their  quarry. 

When  we  returned  to  the  village,  one  antelope  was  put  aside 
for  me,  being  a  new  species,  and  the  rest  of  the  meat  was  imme- 
diately divided.  We  were  all  very  hungry,  and  cooking  began 
at  once.  I  confess  I  could  hardly  wait  for  the  dinner,  which  was 
one  worthy  an  emperor's  palate,  consisting  of  plantains  cooked 
in  various  ways,  and  venison  of  the  tenderest,  stewed  in  lemon- 
juice,  and  also  roasted.  Only  coffee  was  wanting,  for  my  coffee 
gave  out  some  days  ago. 

I  was  glad  to  go  to  sleep  early,  but  was  scarce  soundly  asleep 
when  I  was  turned  out  of  the  house  by  a  furious  attack  of  the 
bashikouay  ants.  They  were  already  all  over  me  when  I  jumped 
up,  and  I  was  bitten  terribly.  1  ran  out  into  the  street  and 
called  for  help.  The  natives  came  out,  and  lights  were  struck, 
and  presently  I  was  relieved.  But  now  we  found  that  the  whole 
village  was  attacked.  The  great  army  was  pouring  in  on  us, 
doubtless  excited  by  the  smell  of  meat  in  the  houses ;  and  my 
unfortunate  antelope  had  probably  brought  them  to  my  door. 
All  hands  had  to  turn  out  to  defend  ourselves.  We  built  little 
cordons  of  fire,  which  kept  them  away  from  places  they  had  not 
yet  entered,  and  thus  protected  our  persons  from  their  attacks ; 
and  towards  morning,  having  eaten  everything  they  could  get 
at,  they  left  us  in  peace.  As  was  to  be  expected,  I  found  my 
antelope  destroyed — literally  eaten  up. 

The  vast  number,  the  sudden  appearance,  the  ferocity  and 
voracity  of  these  frightful  animals  never  cease  to  astonish  me. 
Last  night  they  poured  in  literally  by  millions  and  billions,  and 
only  when  many  fires  were  lighted  were  they  forced  from  that 
direct  and  victorious  course  which  they  generally  hold.  Then, 
however,  they  retreated  in  parties,  and  with  the  greatest  regula- 
rity, vast  numbers  remaining  to  complete  the  work  of  destruction. 


Chap.  IX.  WELCOME  TO  THE  NEW  MOON.  109 

The  country  about  Yoongoolapay's  village  k  quite  hilly,  some 
of  the  hills  being  almost  worthy  to  be  called  mountain-peaks. 
Everywhere  a  dense  forest  covered  the  eartL  There  were  plen- 
tiful signs  of  iron  here  in  the  red  colour  of  the  earth  and  the 
abundance  of  ferruginous  quartz  scattered  all  over  the  ground. 
Blocks  of  a  peculiar  blackish  stone  formed  the  river-beds,  and 
also  the  sides  of  the  hills,  which  were  divided  by  these  layers  into 
regular  steps  or  terraces.  Of  these  stones  and  the  quartz  I 
gathered  specimens,  but  they  were  lost,  with  much  more,  by  a 
fire  which  destroyed  the  finest  collection  of  subjects  of  natural 
history  I  had  gathered  in  Africa. 

The  negroes  of  the  villages  differ  in  little  from  those  on  the 
coast  whom  the  reader  has  already  been  introduced  to,  except 
that  they  are  dirtier.  There  is  nothing  more  disgusting  than  the 
toilet  of  one  of  these  Mbicho  fellows,  except  it  be  the  toilet  of  his 
wife.  The  women  seem  to  lay  on  the  oil  and  red  earth  thicker 
than  their  husbands;  seem  to  wear  dirtier  cloths  about  their 
middles,  and  are  actually  less  endurable  when  gathered  in  a 
crowd  about  a  fire,  as  is  their  wont,  than  the  men.  Almost 
every  day  a  party  of  men  and  women  crowd  into  my  hut  to  see 
my  stuflSng  operations,  and  scarcely  are  they  there  than  I  have 
to  leave  it,  the  odour  is  so  insufferably  sickening. 

But  they  are  kind-hearted,  and,  though  tempted  sometimes  to 
steal,  the  mere  fact  that  I,  a  stranger  and  a  white  man,  supposed 
to  be  the  possessor  of  untold  wealth,  could  travel  through  all  these 
tribes  alone  and  remain  unmolested,  is  evidence  enough  that 
the  black  fellows  of  this  part  of  Africa  are  not  such  a  very  bad 
set 

I  noticed  in  this  village  a  custom  or  superstition  which  is  com- 
mon to  all  the  tribes  I  have  visited,  and  the  reason,  or  supposed 
reason  for  which  I  have  never  been  able  to  persuade  anyone  to 
tell  me.  On  the  first  night  when  the  new  moon  is  visible  all  is 
kept  silent  in  the  village ;  nobody  speaks  but  in  an  under-tone ; 
and  in  the  course  of  the  evening  King  Alapay  came  out  of  his 
house  and  danced  along  the  street,  his  face  and  body  painted  in 
black,  red,  and  white,  and  spotted  all  over  with  spots  the  size  of 
a  peach.  In  the  dim  moonlight  he  had  a  frightful  appearance, 
which  made  me  shudder  at  first.  I  asked  him  why  he  painted 
thus,  but  he  only  answered  by  pointing  to  the  moon,  without 
speaking  a  word. 


110  PECULIARITIES  OF  THIS  REGION.  Chap.  IX. 

There  are  other  and  varying  ceremonies  in  different  tribes  to 
welcome  the  new  moon ;  but  in  all  the  men  mark  their  bodies 
with  charmed  chalk  or  ochre ;  and  no  one  has  ever  been  pre- 
vailed on  to  tell  me  the  meaning  of  the  rites  or  the  particulars 
of  the  beliet  I  suppose  the  common  men  do  not  know  it 
themselves. 

After  a  stay  of  a  week  with  Alapay,  I  determined  to  move  on, 
and  gave  the  king  to  understand  that  he  must  give  me  men  to 
carry  my  baggage,  which  was  now  very  considerable ;  for  I  had 
added  some  birds  and  animals  to  it  here,  and  had  already  a 
great  deal  when  I  arrived. 

A  day  was  accordingly  appointed,  and  the  king  proposed  to  go 
along  with  me,  of  which  I  was  but  too  glad.  The  poor  villagers 
came  in  a  body  and  asked  me  to  stay  longer ;  and  on  the  morn- 
ing of  my  departure  all  hands  assembled  to  bid  me  good-bye. 
I  gave  each  some  leaves  of  tobacco,  with  which  they  were  im- 
mensely delighted,  and  then  shook  hands  all  round.  Our  de- 
parture took  place  amid  the  firing  of  guns  and  the  shouts  of  the 
people,  some  of  whom  were  almost  moved  to  tears.  The  Afri- 
can's affections  are  easily  excited ;  and  these  people  had  been 
so  kind  to  me,  they  felt  as  though  they  had  a  great  interest 
in  me. 

Our  path  lay  through  an  immense  forest — a  grand  solitude, 
gloomy  and,  even  at  midday,  unpenetrated  by  the  sun.  Here 
the  silence  was  only  made  more  striking  by  the  occasional  shrill 
scream  of  a  parrot  or  the  chatter  of  a  monkey.  We  saw  no  other 
animals,  though  elephant-tracks  abounded,  and  the  leopard  is 
known  to  frequent  these  woods. 

It  is  a  most  singular  thing  that  no  hippopotami  are  found 
between  the  Gaboon  and  the  Moondah,  whereas  south  of  the 
equator  they  abound  in  all  the  rivers  and  lakes,  particularlyin  the 
Nazareth  and  the  Cape  Lopez  rivers.  Also,  they  reappear  at  a 
certain  distance  north  of  the  equator,  so  that  there  is  this  narrow 
tract  or  belt  which  they  avoid.  The  same  may  be  remarked  of 
the  ostrich ;  while  the  elephant  of  this  narrow  belt  should  be  a 
variety,  if  one  may  judge  of  the  ivory,  which  is  that  peculiar 
and  highly-valued  kind  which,  on  being  first  cut,  is  greenish 
rather  than* white ;  and  when  turned  white  retains  its  colour 
and  does  not  quickly  turn  yellow,  as  is  so  common  with  ivory. 
The  biggest  ivory  of  the  coast  comes  &om  this  belt  under  the 


Chap.  IX.  HUGE  GRANITE  BOULDERS.  Ill 

equator.  I  have  seen  a  tusk  whose  weight  was  110  pounds,  but 
this  was  an  extraordinary  instance ;  the  most  weigh  from  twenty 
to  fifty  poimds.  They  are  mostly  of  a  shining  coffee-colour 
outside,  and  I  have  seen  some  which  were  as  black  as  coaL 

Alapay's  wife  (his  A^od-wife)  made  me  a  quantity  of  igouma, 
or  cassava-bread,  the  day  before  we  started,  so  that  with  a  little 
fish  and  some  plantains  I  was  not  likely  to  starve,  even  if  we 
did  not  enter  any  villages  on  the  way.  The  igouma  is  made  by 
poynding  and  making  a  paste  of  the  cassava.  This  paste  is 
boiled,  and  becomes  then  very  thick  and  firm.  It  is  now  shaped 
into  loaves  a  foot  long  and  four  or  five  inches  in  circumference, 
and  permitted  to  dry,  when  it  becomes  hard  and  tough,  and 
may  be  kept  several  weeks,  though  it  sours  and  becomes  unfit 
for  a  civilized  stomach  generally  after  two  or  three  days.  But 
it  will  not  do  to  be  squeamish  in  Africa,  which,  with  all  its 
tropical  richness  of  vegetation,  is  as  good  a  place  to  starve  in  as 
any  man  could  desire. 

In  the  afternoon,  shortly  after  eating  our  dinner  o{  igouma  and 
dried  fish,  we  came  to  a  Mbicho  village,  where  the  people  all 
turned  out  to  get  a  look  at  me,  as  they  had  never  seen  a  white 
man  before.  They  were  a  wild  set,  and  evidently  regarded  me 
as  a  very  strange  monster. 

Some  hours  after  leaving  this  village  we  came  to  a  high  ridge 
or  plateau,  along  which  were  strewn  some  of  the  most  extra- 
ordinary boulders  I  ever  saw ;  immense  blocks  of  granite  cover- 
ing the  ground  in  every  direction,  and  many  of  them  between 
thirty  and  forty  feet  high  by  one  hundred  long  or  mora  This 
hill  or  ridge  was  the  highest  I  had  seen  between  the  Moondah 
and  the  Muni ;  and  I  think  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  trees  which  ob- 
structed even  this  view,  I  should  have  been  able  to  see  the  ocean. 

Near  to  the  largest  of  these  granite  masses,  a  huge  rock  rising 
some  fifty  feet  out  of  the  ground,  I  saw  the  entrance — ^between 
solid  rocks — ^to  a  fine  large  cavern,  much  used  by  the  natives  as 
a  house  to  stop  in  over  night  when  they  are  travelling  back  and 
forth,  and  very  comfortable,  as  it  is  open  to  the  light,  and  its 
vast  opening  admits  such  a  flood  of  sunlight  and  air  that  it  is 
not  likely  to  be  used  as  a  lair  for  wild  beasts.  We  saw  the  re- 
mains of  various  fires  inside ;  but  I  am  bound  to  say  we  saw  also 
the  tracks  of  various  leopards  and  other  dangerous  beasts  on  the 
outside,  for  which  reason  I  did  not  care  to  sleep  there. 


112  A  FINE  WATERFALL.  Chap.  IX. 

While  exploring  the  cavern  I  thought  several  times  I  heard  a 
trickling  which  seemed  almost  like  the  noise  of  rain ;  in  fact, 
when  we  got  out  I  was  surprised  to  find  not  a  cloud  in  the  sky. 
Turning  for  an  explanation  to  Alapay,  he  led  me  along  a  path 
which  evidently  led  to  the  trickling,  which  soon  grew  in  our  ears 
to  the  soimd  of  rushing  waters.  Presently  we  came  to  the  edge 
of  a  steep  declivity,  and  here  I  saw  before  and  around  me  a  most 
charming  landscape,  the  centre  of  which  was  a  most  beautiful 
waterfaU.  A  stream  which  meandered  along  the  slope  of  the 
plateau,  and  which  had  until  now  escaped  us,  had  here  made  its 
way  through  a  vast  granite  block  which  barred  its  course,  and, 
rushing  through  the  narrow  round  hole  in  this  block,  fell  in  one 
silvery  cascade  for  fifty  feet  down  to  the  lower  leveL  Clear, 
sparkling,  an(J  pure  as  water  could  be,  it  rushed  down  to  its 
pebbly  bed — ^a  sight  so  charming  to  my  eyeg,  long  wearied  of  the 
monotony  of  the  interior  forests,  that  I  sat  for  some  time  and 
literally  "  feasted  my  eyes  "  upon  it. 

Then  came  an  attempt  to  have  a  view  from  the  bottom.  After 
some  difficult  climbing  we  got  to  the  bottom,  and,  looking  up, 
beheld,  under  the  fall,  a  hole  in  the  perpendicular  face  of  the 
rock,  which  formed  evidently  the  mouth  of  a  cavern." 

I  determined  to  enter  this.  We  lit  sooie  torches  I  took 
my  revolver  and  gun,  and,  accompanied  by  two  men,  made  good 
my  entrance  without  getting  wet  Once  inside,  where  probably 
man  had  never  before  stood,  we  excited  the  astonishment  of 
vast  numbers  of  huge  vampire  bats,  which  fluttered  around  our 
lights,  threatening  each  moment  to  leave  us  in  darkness,  while 
the  motion  of  their  wings  fiUed  the  cavern  with  a  kind  of  dull 
thunderous  roar. 

When  we  had  advanced  about  one  hundred  yards  from  the 
mouth  we  came  to  a  stream  or  puddle  of  water  extending 
entirely  across  the  floor  and  barring  our  way.  My  men,  who 
had  gone  thus  far  under  protest,  now  desired  to  return,  and 
urged  me  not  to  go  into  the  water  or  beyond,  because  all  sorts 
of  wild  beasts  and  snakes  were  sure  to  be  lying  in  wait  for  us. 
At  the  word  snakes  I  hesitated,  for  I  confess  to  a  great  dread  of 
serpents  in  the  dark  or  in  confined  places^  where  a  snake  is 
likely  to  get  the  advantage  of  a  man. 

Peering  into  the  darkness  beyond,  I  thought  I  saw  two  bright 
sparks  or  coals  of  eyes  gleaming  savagely  at  us.     Without 


Chap.  IX.  BEAUTIFUL  LANDSCAPE.  113 

thinking  of  the  consequences,  I  levelled  my  gun  at  the  shining 
objects  and  fired.  The  report  for  a  moment  deafened  us.  Then 
came  a  redoubled  rush  of  the  great  hideous  bats ;  it  seemed  to 
me  as  though  millions  on  millions  of  these  animals  were  sud- 
denly launched  out  on  us  from  all  parts  of  the  surrounding 
gloom ;  our  torches  were  extinguished  in  an  instant,  and,  panic- 
struck,  we  all  made  for  the  cavern's  mouth — I  with  visions  of 
enraged  snakes  springing  after  and  trying  to  catch  up  with 
me.  We  were  all  glad  enough  to  reach  daylight  once  more, 
and  I  think  my  men  could  not  have  been  persuaded  to  try  the 
darkness  again. 

The  scene  outside  was  as  charming  as  that  within  was  hideous. 
I  stood  long  looking  at  one  of  the  most  beautiM  landscapes  I 
saw  in  Africa.  Before  me,  the  little  stream,  whose  fall  over 
the  cliff  behind  me  filled  the  whole  forest  with  a  gentle  roar,  ran 
on  between  steep  banks  .which  sometimes  seemed  almost  to 
meet  and  hide  it.  Away  down  the  valley  we  could  see  its 
course,  traced  like  a  silver  line  over  the  plain,  finally  losing 
itself  to  our  sight  in  a  denser  part  of  the  forest  The  valley  it- 
self was  a  pleasant  wooded  plain,  which  it  seemed  the  hand  of 
man  had  not  yet  disturbed,  and  whence  the  song  of  birds  and 
the  chatter  of  monkeys,  and  hum  of  insects  came  up  to  us  in  a 
confusion  of  sounds  very  pleasant  to  the  ear. 

We  could  not  loiter  long  over  this  scene,  however.  I  was 
anxious  to  get  to  the  seashore,  and  we  set  off  again  to  make  as 
good  progress  before  dark  as  possible.  The  forest  abounded  in 
vines,  which  were  every  moment  getting  in  our  way,  and  briars, 
which  were  even  worse,  so  that  travelling  in  the  dark,  if  we  had 
to  do  it,  was  likely  to  be  very  unpleasant  The  whole  of  this 
country  abounds  in  little  rivulets  and  streams,  which  take  their 
rise  in  these  first  lulls  which  we  were  crossing  this  afternoon  and 
run  down  towards  the  seashore,  some  losing  themselves  ere 
getting  there,  and  others  emptying  their  tiny  loads  of  fresh 
water  into  the  great  Atlantic. 

I  suppose  the  elephants  like  plenty  of  water ;  we  found  our- 
selves almost  continually  crossing  or  following  elephants'  tracks. 
Indeed,  my  men  walked  very  cautiously,  expecting  every  mo- 
ment to  find  ourselves  face  to  face  with  a  herd.  But  they  are 
very  shy  in  this  part  of  the  country,  being  much  chased  for  the 
ivory ;  and  keep  a  good  watch  for  their  enemy,  man. 

I 


114  CROSSma  a  mangrove-swamp.  Chap.  ix. 

At  last  the  country  became  quite  flat,  the  elephant-tracks 
ceased,  and  presently,  as  we  neared  a  stream,  we  came  to  a 
mangrove-swamp.  It  was  almost  like  seeing  an  old  friend,  or 
an  old  enemy,  for  the  reminiscences  of  musquitoes,  tedious  navi- 
gation, and  malaria  which  tiie  mangrove-tree  brought  up  in  my 
mind,  were  by  no  means  pleasant  From  a  mangrove-tree  to  a 
mangrove-swamp  is  but  a  step.     They  never  stand  alone. 

Presently  we  stood  once  more  on  the  banks  of  the  little  stream 
whose  clear,  pellucid  waters  had  so  charmed  me  a  little  farther 
up  the  country.  Now  it  was  only  a  swamp.  Its  bed,  no  longer 
narrow,  was  spread  over  a  flat  of  a  mile,  and  the  now  muddy 
waters  meandered  slowly  through  an  immense  growth  of  man- 
groves, whose  roots  extended  entirely  across  and  met  in  the 
middle,  8ho>ving  their  huge  rounds  above  the  mire  and  water> 
like  the  folds  of  some  vast  serpent. 

It  was  high  tide,  and  there  was  not  a  canoe  to  be  had.  To 
sleep  on  this  side  among  the  mangroves,  and  be  eaten  up  by 
musquitoes,  was  not  a  pleasant  prospect,  and  to  me  there  seemed 
no  other.  But  my  men  were  not  troubled  at  all.  We  were  to 
cross  over,  quite  easily  too,  on  the  roots  which  projected  over 
the  water's  edge,  and  wliich  lay  from  two  to  three  feet  apart  at 
irregular  distances.  It  seemed  a  desperate  venture ;  but  they 
set  out,  jumping  like  monkeys  from  place  to  place,  and  I  fol- 
lowed, expecting  every  moment  to  fall  in  between  and  stick  in 
the  mud,  perhaps  to  be  attacked  by  some  noxious  reptile  whose 
rest  my  fall  would  disturb.  I  had  to  take  off  my  shoes,  whose 
thick  soles  made  me  more  likely  to  slip.  I  gave  all  my  bag- 
gage, and  guns  and  pistols  to  the  men,  and  then  commenced  a 
journey  whose  like  I  hope  never  to  take  again.  We  were  an 
hour  in  getting  across — an  hour  of  continual  jumps  and  hops. 
In  the  midst  of  it  all  a  man  behind  me  flopped  into  the  mud, 
calling  out  "  Omemba ! "  in  a  frightened  voice. 

Now  "  on^emba  "  means  snake.  The  poor  fellow  had  put  his 
hand  on  an  enormous  black  snake,  and,  feeling  its  cold,  slimy 
scales,  let  go  his  hold  and  fell  through.  All  hands  immediately 
began  to  run  faster  than  before,  and  to  shout  and  make  all  kinds 
of  noises  to  frighten  the  serpent.  But  the  poor  animal  also  took 
fright,  and  began  to  crawl  away  among  the  branches  as  fast  as 
he  could.  Unfortunately,  his  fright  led  him  directly  towards 
some  of  us ;  and  a  general  panic  now  ensued,  everybody  running 


Chac-.  is.  to  keep  the  devil  odt.  115 

as  fast  as  he  could  to  get  out  of  the  way  of  danger.  Another 
man  fell  into  the  mud  helow,  and  added  his  cries  to  the  general 
noise.  I  came  very  near  getting  a  mud-bath  myself,  but  luckily 
I  escaped.    But  my  feet  were  badly  cut  up. 

At  last  we  were  safe  across,  and  I  breathed  freely  once 
more.  A  little  way  from  the  edge  of  the  swamp  we  came  to  our 
resting-place,  the  TiUage  of  ein  old  friend  of  mine,  named  King 
Apouron.  He  came  out  to  meet  me  ;  guns  were  fired,  and  the 
Qsual  African  welcome  of  shouts  and  dances  gone  through  with,' 
and  then  wo  entered  the  village,  where  Alapay  and  Apouron 
began  the  ceremonies  of  introduction ;  tlie  former  giving  a  short 
account  of  my  various  adventures  in  his  village,  and  the  latter 
listening  with  apparent  interest,  and  frequently  exclaiming,  in 
a  wondering  way,  "  I  do  not  know  why  our  white  man  went  to 
your  bush-country !     I  do  not  know  why  he  should  go  there  1 " 

While  these  ceremonies  were  going  on  I  walked  to  the  edge 
of  the  village  and  took  a  long  look,  for  before  me  lay  once  more 
the  ocean  and  Corisco  Bay.  1  had  often  on  tliis  trip  wished 
myself  back  here,  and  it  was  with  no  slight  feehng  of  gratitude 
to  God,  who  had  preserved  me  through  all,  that  1  looked  once 
more  at  the  ocean. 


ro  kMp  (be  DctU  out.    Tbel 


X16  TROUBLES  OF  A  TRAVELLER.  Chap.  X 


CHAPTER  X. 

Up  the  Moondab  —  Vexations  of  a  traveller  in  Africa — Mangrove-swamps  — 
Mbix;ho  Men  run  off — Bashikoiiay  again  —  Missionary  Station  —  The  Bar- 
wood  Trade  —  Manner  of  getting  Bar- wood  —  The  India-rubber  Vine  — 
How  Rubber  is  gathered  —  Torturing  a  Woman — Adventure  with  a  wild 
Bull  —  Lying  out  for  Game  —  Bullock  and  Leopard  —  Birds. 

It  was  now  near  the  end  of  October,  and  the  rainy  season  had 
fairly  set  in.  I  determined,  after  some  consideration,  to  make 
a  trip  up  the  Moondah  before  going  to  the  Gaboon ;  hoping, 
indeed,  to  run  up  the  Moondah  and  cross  the  narrow  land  whidi 
separates  that  stream  from  the  Gaboon,  and  thus  return  down 
the  latter  to  my  headquarters. 

My  specimens  were  sent  to  Corisco.  I  received  a  supply  of 
goods  which  would  suffice  for  buying  food  up  the  Moondah ;  and 
having  settled,  after  some  palaver,  with  Apouron,  who  thought 
the  less  goods  I  took  with  me  the  better  he  should  be  off,  I  at 
last  got  off  on  the  30th  of  October. 

The  process  of  making  ready  for  such  an  expedition  as  this  is 
very  tedious,  especially  if  the  traveller  is  at  the  mercy  of  the 
king  of  a  small  village.  I  had  to  rent  my  canoe,  buy  my  masts, 
make  my  sails,  go  round  through  the  village  and  purchase  my 
paddles,  and,  finally,  I  had  to  engage  my  men.  When  all  this 
was  done,  the  goods  packed  aboard,  and  good-bye  said,  I  had 
been  ten  days  engaged  in  preparations.  Time  is  of  no  value  to 
the  African. 

We  had  a  head  wind,  but  nevertheless  saw  the  mouth  of  the 
Moondah  towards  afternoon  of  our  sailing  day.  The  tide  was 
running  out,  and  against  us,  and,  as  the  wind  was  still  ahead, 
our  progress  was  slow ;  but  it  gave  me  an  opportunity  to  kill 
some  of  the  birds  which  come  down  here  to  get  their  living,  on 
account  of  the  abundance  of  fish  found  here.  The  shore,  the 
mud-islands,  and  the  waters  all  aroimd  were  alive  with  these 
birds.  Here  a  flock  of  pelicans  swam  along  majestically,  keep- 
ing at  a  good  distance  from  our  boat ;  there  a  long  string  of 
flamingoes  stretched  along  the  muddy  shore,  looking,  for  all  the 
world,  like  a  line  of  fire ;  and  wherever  the  mud  peeped  out  of 


Chap.  X.  MY  MEN  DESERT.  117 

the  water  there  were  herons,  cranes,  gulls  of  various  kinds,  while 
a  tree  on  the  shore  was  covered  with  a  flock  of  the  beautiful 
iEIgrettajlaviroBtriSy  whose  pure  white  feathers  looked  like  snow 
in  the  distance. 

Towards  sunset  we  arrived  at  the  Shekiani  village  where  I 
intended  to  stop.  The  king  I  had  known  before,  and  thought  he 
would  help  me  up  farther.  This  village  lay  at  the  top  of  one  of 
the  only  two  hills  I  saw  on  the  Moondah,  and  these  are  both  at 
its  mouth.  It  is  throughout  a  low-banked,  swampy  stream, 
overrun  with  mangroves,  and  half  dry  when  the  tide  runs  out. 
It  used  to  aflford  a  good  deal  of  India-rubber,  and  the  bar-wood 
trade  is  always  very  brisk ;  also  it  produces  a  little  beeswax,  and 
a  trifle  of  ebony  and  ivory.  Thus  the  Shekianis  are  known  to 
white  men,  who  come  there  often  in  their  vessels  to  trade  with 
thenu    Several  thousand  tons  of  bar-wood  are  taken  annually. 

On  the  5th  of  November  I  started  with  a  new  crew  up  river. 
I  found  one  vast,  continuous  mangrove-swamp,  in  which  no 
villages  could  be  found — these  lying  mostly  away  from  the  main 
stream  on  Uttle  creeks,  which,  being  dry  at  low  tide,  could  be 
visited  only  with  difficulty.  From  these  gloomy  mangrove- 
forests  went  up  a  stench  of  decaying  matter  which  was  not  only 
unhealthy,  but  unpleasant.  Add  to  this  the  constant  risk  of 
getting  our  canoe  on  a  mud-bank,  and  a  persistent  drizzle  with 
which  we  were  favoured  all  day,  and  you  wiU  see  that  the  day's 
journey  was  not  plettsant, 

Near  sunset  we  came  to  a  Mbicho  village.  The  Mbicho  speak 
a  variety  of  the  Shekiani,  and  we  could  therefore  make  our- 
selves understood.  I  spent  the  night  here,  and  found  in  the 
morning  that  my  men  had  run  away  with  the  canoe,  leaving 
me,  fortunately,  my  goods,  but  no  means  of  getting  ahead.  I  had 
paid  them  beforehand.  I  learned  that  they  had  had  trouble  with 
a  village  we  should  have  to  pass,  and  did  not  dare  to  go  higher. 

The  Mbicho,  of  course,  were  delighted  to  have  me  at  their 
mercy,  and  determined — ^good  fellows ! — to  make  as  much  out  of 
me  as  possible.  I  began  operations  by  feeing  the  king — pri- 
vately, of  course — who  thereupon  told  his  people  that  I  wanted 
men  and  a  canoe,  and  that  I  was  his  dearest  friend.  There  was 
much  squabbling;  and,  finally,  I  succeeded  in  engaging  four 
men  to  go  with  me  for  ten  yards  of  prints  each ;  but  not  to-day 
— ^to-morrow.     "  To-morrow  "  is  the  favourite  word  in  Africa. 


118  MANGROVE-SWAMPS.  Chap.  X. 

Meantime  I  learned  that  some  white  men  lived  farther  up, 
and  knew  at  once  they  must  be  missionaries,  whom  I  determined 
to  see.  Accordingly,  next  morning,  we  started  again — ^this  time 
in  a  very  small  canoe,  and  with  no  conveniences  of  any  kind- 
We  were  still  among  mangrove-swamps ;  and  it  was  curious  to 
see  that  the  branches  of  this  tree,  which  hung  in  the  water  at 
high  tide,  and  were  bare  at  low  tide,  were  covered  thickly  with 
oysters. 

Between  the  mud,  the  smell,  and  the  hot  sun,  which  poured 
down  on  my  head  all  day,  I  got  a  violent  headache,  which  dis- 
appeared only  when  we  came  to  a  sudden  and  beautiful  change 
of  scenery.  About  forty  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  Moondah 
the  tide  ceases  to  affect  the  river,  and  the  swamps  disappear. 
As  we  were  sailing  along  we  came  to  a  turn  in  the  river, 
rounding  which  we  found  ourselves  in  what  seemed  really  another 
land.  The  mangroves  had  entirely  disappeared,  the  banks  of 
the  river  were  higher,  and  the  stream  itself  rolled  along  with  a 
life-like  current  between  its  well-defined  banks.  Palms,  and  the 
usual  vegetation  of  the  African  upland,  bordered  the  banks,  and 
here  and  there  lewge  trees  projecting  over  met  in  the  middle, 
and  formed  a  fine  arbour,  beneath  which  we  sailed,  relieved  of 
the  burning  rays  of  the  sun. 

Presently  we  came  to  a  small  creek,  and  rowing  up  that  for 
a  mile,  I  saw  before  me  a  narrow  path  which  was  to  lead  me 
over  to  the  Ikoi  Creek,  where  my  friends  the  missionaries  were 
living. 

The  Moondah  is  a  most  disagreeable  and  unhealthy  river — 
one  vast  swamp,  which  seems  little  likely  ever  to  be  useful  to 
man.  I  was  forced  to  take  quinine  twice  a  day  while  going  up, 
and  the  few  natives  who  live  near  its  banks  are  a  poor  set,  sickly, 
and  with  little  energy. 

At  the  back  of  the  swamp,  however,  there  are  hills  and  a  high 
country,  where  the  bar-wood  tree  exists  in  great  abundance. 
The  natives  cut  great  quantities  of  it  every  year ;  and  if  it  did 
not  grow  fast  and  in  the  greatest  plenty  they  would  long  since 
have  exhausted  it,  as  w^U  here  as  on  the  Muni  and  the  Gaboon. 
We  travelled  along  our  path  till  dark,  when  we  fell  in  with 
a  Bakalai  village.  The  people  wanted  me  to  stay,  but  their 
motions  were  suspicious,  and  I  would  not.  We  got  torches,  and 
I  sent  a  man  ahead  and  kept  one  behind,  to  light  us  on  our  way. 


Chap.  X,  MISSION  STATION,  119 

In  this  village  I  saw  an  albino,  his  face  quite  white^  and  his 
hair  flaxen — a  very  singular  sight. 

We  had  not  gone  far  with  our  torches  when  I  had  the  mis- 
fortune to  step  into  an  army  of  bttshikouay  ants.  I  was  covered 
with  them  in  an  instant,  and  screamed  for  help.  The  men 
rushed  towards  me  and  helped  me  to  strip  myself,  which  done,  we 
killed  what  remained  on  my  body.  For  a  few  minutes  I  suflfered 
the  most  frightful  torments,  and  was  glad  enough  to  have  all  the 
help  I  could  against  these  terrible  animals. 

Having  well  shaken  out  my  clothes,  I  put  them  on  again — 
having  gotten  out  of  the  way  of  the  ants,  of  course — and  we 
proceeded. 

We  next  found  that  we  were  on  the  wrong  road.  We  retraced 
our  steps  and  got  into  the  right  path,  but  had  gone  but  a  little 
way  when  once  more  I  had  the  misfortune  to  step  into  an  army 
of  bashikouay.  This  time  I  was  prepared.  In  an  instant  I  was 
stripped,  and,  though  I  was  severely  bitten,  yet  I  got  off  easier 
than  before. 

By  this  time  my  clothes  were  all  torn  to  pieces  by  the  sharp 
thorns,  and  I  was  beginning  to  think  that  the  company  of  the 
Bakalai  rascals  would  have  been  better  than  this  travelling  by 
night ;  when  the  men  announced  that  we  were  now  nearing  the 
Ikoi  village.  I  was  completely  exhausted,  and  could  not  have 
walked  another  mile,  and  I  made  up  my  mind  never  to  travel 
through  the  woods  again  by  night. 

The  natives  were  still  lying  about  their  fires  when  we  arrived 
in  the  village,  and  I  was  shown  the  missionaries'  house,  when  I 
found  to  my  joy  that  the  missionaries  who  now  resided  here 
were  both  old  friends  of  mine.  Rev.  Messrs.  Best  and  Pierce, 
of  the  A.  B.  C.  F.  M.  They  were  filling  the  place  formerly 
occupied  here  by  my  friend  the  Rev.  Mr.  Preston  and  his  good 
wife. 

Here  I  found  a  welcome,  and  once  more  a  real  bed  to  sleep 
upon,  and  had  some  opportunity  to  rest  my  wearied  limbs. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Best,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Preston,  and  Mr.  Pierce, 
had  laboured  for  some  years  among  the  Bakalai  about  the  IkoL 
They  understood  the  Bakalai  language,  and  taught  the  children 
here  in  the  Scriptures  and  other  branches  of  knowledge  with  con- 
siderable success.  Let  me  give  here  an  account  of  a  day  of  the 
life  of  these  missionaries. 


120  BAR-WOOD.  Chap.  X. 

Eyerybody  rose  at  daybreak,  and  presently  aft^r  a  little  bell 
called  the  servants  and  strangers  into  a  little  room  which  serves 
as  parlour  and  sitting-room  and  library,  where  morning  prayers 
were  offered  in  the  Bakalai  language ;  the  Bible  being  read  also 
in  Bakalai  from  a  translation  made  by  Mr,  Best. 

Then  came  breakfast ;  after  which  the  scholars  played  until 
nine  o'clock,  when  the  ringing  of  a  bell  called  them  to  school 
School  was  opened  by  a  hymn  sung  by  all  the  children,  followed 
by  prayer.  Then  came  recitations  of  the  classes.  They  seemed 
particularly  well  up  in  geography  when  I  was  there,  but  had  just 
begun  arithmetic,  and  were  doing  immense  sums  in  addition* 
The  children  seemed  to  enjoy  the  schooling;  and  as  the 
missionaries  are  Irind  to  them,  and  their  studies  are  not  very 
difficult,  while  their  play-hours  are  long,  it  seems  natural  that 
they  should  like  it.  From  twelve  to  two  was  recess ;  and  then 
the  girls  took  lessons  in  sewing,  their  great  ambition  being  to 
sew  well  enough  to  make  shirts.  Also  in  the  afternoon  the  boys 
were  taught  writing,  and  I  remarked  that  some  of  them  wrote 
beautiful  hands. 

The  people  about  here  are  engaged  in  the  bar-wood  trade, 
and  a  good  deal  of  this  dye-wood  is  shipped  down  this  creek  to 
the  Gaboon,  and  also  down  to  the  Moondah* 

Bar-wood,  as  I  have  before  explained,  is  a  red  dye-wood.  It 
is  the  trunk  of  what  the  natives  call  the  ego4ree,  a  large, 
tall,  very  graceful  tree,  with  abundant  branches  high  up,  small 
bright-green  leaves,  and  a  beautiful  smooth  reddish-coloured 
bark.  It  is  very  abundant  in  the  forests  of  this  part  of  Africa. 
In  fact,  the  supply  may  be  considered  as  inexhaustible,  the 
labour  of  bringing  it  to  market  being  the  most  costly  part  of  its 
production. 

Though  great  traders,  these  natives  have  no  ideas  about 
laying  up  a  store  of  their  products  before  it  is  wanted.  This  is 
what  detains  trading-vessels  so  long  on  the  coast.  When  a  vessel 
comes  for  bar-wood,  the  news  immediately  spreads  all  about  the 
neighbourhood,  and  the  men  bestir  themselves  to  get  a  supply 
down.  There  is  great  excitement  among  the  villages ;  and  this 
particularly  if  it  happens  that  the  chief  of  the  village  has  friends 
among  those  to  whom  the  captain  has  "given  his  trust" — that 
is  to  say,  those  with  whom  he  is  going  to  deal,  and  for  whom  he 
has  brought  goods. 


Chap.  X.  THE  INDIA-RUBBER  VINE.  121 

Every  man  immediately  goes  out  to  the  forest  and  selects  a 
tree  for  himself,  which  he  begins  to  cut  down.  The  bar-wood  of 
commerce  is  the  heart  or  main  part  of  the  trunk,  and  is  red. 
The  useful  wood  is  surrounded  by  a  covering  of  white  sap-wood 
about  two  inches  thick,  which  is  useless,  and  is  carefully  cut 
off.  Then  the  wood  is  cut  into  lengths  of  three  feet,  each  piece 
weighing  from  fifteen  to  twenty  pounds*  The  father  and  his 
children  cut  and  split  the  wood,  and  the  wives  carry  it  into  the 
villages,  and  the  latter  thereupon  claim  a  distinct  part  of  the 
returns,  which  they  get,  though  often  unwillingly.  Bar-wood 
is  so  low-priced  in  Europe  that  the  natives  here  get  but  very 
small  prices,  and  five  dollars  for  a  hundred  billets  is  already  a 
high  rate.  As  they  have  to  carry  everything  down  to  the  sea 
on  their  backs,  unless  they  are  lucky  enough  to  live  near 
rivers  or  creeks,  they  have  to  work  hard  enough  for  the  little 
they  get 

The  India-rubber  vine  afforded  once  one  of  the  largest  exports 
of  this  part  of  the  coast  The  caoutchouc  of  Africa  is  obtained 
from  a  vine  (called  dambo  by  the  natives),  and  not  from  a  tree. 
This  vine  is  of  immense  length,  and  has  singularly  few  leaves, 
and  only  at  the  extremity  of  the  vine.  The  leaves  are  broad, 
dark  green,  and  lance-shaped.  The  bark  is  rough,  and  of  a 
brownish  hue.  A  large  vine  is  often  five  inches  in  diameter 
at  the  base.  To  get  the  best  India-rubber,  the  milk  must  be 
taken  from  the  incision  in  the  bark,  without  wounding  the  wood^ 
as  this  has  a  juice  of  its  own,  which,  mixing  with  the  milk, 
spoils  it. 

The  recently-growing  demand  for  this  product  has  induced  the 
na,tives  to  adulterate  it  with  the  milky  juice  of  various  trees  and 
vines  found  in  these  forests.  This  has  seriously  injured  their 
trade,  but  will  probably  result  in  saving  this  valuable  vine  from 
total  extinction  in  this  part  of  the  country.  This  disaster  was 
like  to  be  caused  by  the  foolish  improvidence  of  the  native 
caoutchouc  collectors,  who  bled  the  vines  at  so  many  pores  as 
to  exhaust  them  of  their  life-blood.  Thus,  some  years  ago, 
thousands  of  vines  were  destroyed  annually ;  and  as  the  vine  is 
of  slow  growth,  and  the  milk  of  the  young  vine  is  thin,  watery, 
and  less  valuable,  they  have  very  much  injured  themselves  and 
the  reputation  of  their  goods  by  even  tapping  these, 

For  some  years  the  trade  was  entirely  stopped;  but  more 


122  NEGRO  BARBARITY.  Chap.  X. 

recently  the  French  haye  recommenced  it,  and  in  1859  an 
American  vessel  was  sent  out  by  a  New  York  house,  Messrs. 
James  Bishop  and  Co.,  to  get  a  cargo. 

The  caoutchouc- vine  grows  equally  well  in  low  and  high 
ground,  but  is  found  most  plentiful  in  the  valleys  and  bottom- 
lands along  the  Muni  and  other  rivers.  The  milk  taken  £rom  the 
vines  growing  on  high  lands  is,  however,  thicker,  and  yields  a 
better  article  of  India-rubber* 

It  is  a  pleasant  sight  to  see  a  party  of  natives  setting  out  to 
gather  India-rubber.  I  once  accompanied  such  a  party  on  the 
Benito  River,  my  object  being  game,  while  theirs  was  caoutchouc 
For  several  days  before  setting  out  the  women  were  busied  in 
preparing  food,  and  smoking  the  boiled  manioc  which  is  their 
principal  subsistence.  The  men  meantime  were  making  ready 
to  defend  themselves  against  the  attacks  of  wild  beasts  by 
furbishing  up  their  spears  and  guns.  Cutlasses  and  knives  were 
sharpened,  and  the  wooden  pots  in  which  the  precious  juice  was 
to  be  gathered  were  ciirefiilly  collected  and  made  ready  for 
transportation ;  while  others  still  prepared  the  wooden  moulds  in 
which  the  juice  is  permitted  to  solidify.  It  was  a  pleasant  scene 
of  industry  and  excitement  The  negroes  rejoiced  beforehand 
on  the  good  luck  they  hoped  to  have. 

But  all  this  innocent  joy  was  destroyed  iot  me  the  morning 
before  we  set  out,  by  accidentally  stumbling  across  one  of  those 
acts  of  barbarism  which  chill  the  blood  of  a  civilized  man, 
though  but  slightly  regarded  by  the  negroes.  I  was  hunting 
in  the  woods  near  the  village,  and  saw  sitting  on  a  tree  at  some 
distance  a  pair  of  beautiful  green  pigeons  {Treron  nudiro9tris), 
which  I  wanted  much  for  my  collection  of  birds.  By  dint  of 
much  exertion  I  penetrated  tiie  jungle  to  the  foot  of  the  tree, 
and  here  a  ghastly  sight  met  my  eyes.  It  was  the  corpse  of  a 
woman,  young  evidently,  and  with  features  once  mild  and  good. 
She  had  been  tied  up  here  on  some  infernal  accusation  of 
witchcraft  and  tortured.  The  torture  consisted  in  lacerations 
of  the  flesh  all  over  the  body,  and  in  the  cuts  red  peppers  had 
been  rubbed.  This  is  a  common  mode  of  tormenting  with  these 
people,  and  as  devilish  in  ingenuity  as  anything  could  well  be. 
Then  the  corpse  was  deserted.  I  could  only  hope  the  poor  girl 
died  of  her  wounds,  and  had  not  to  wait  for  the  slower  process 
of  agonized  starvation  to  which  such  victims  are  left.    Will  the 


Chap.  X.  MODE  OP  GATHERING  INDIA-RUBBER.  123 

reader  think  hard  of  me  that  I  felt  it  in  my  heart  to  go  back 
to  the  village  and  shoot  every  man  who  had  a  hand  in  this 
monstrous  barbarity?  But  what  would  have  been  the  use? 
Such  scenes  are  constantly  occurring  in  all  parts  of  heathen 
Africa,  and  will  continue  till  Christianity  is  spread  abroad  here, 
and  in  its  light  these  heathen  barbarisms  perish.  I  fear  it  will 
be  many  a  long  year  yet. 

Gloomy  and  savage  with  this  remembrance,  I  set  out  with  the 
negroes,  whose  cheerful  songs  grated  harshly  on  my  ears.  I 
wondered  how  people  could  sing  and  laugh  after  committing 
such  a  crime. 

The  party  were  in  high  spirits.  The  women  bore  on  their 
devoted  backs  the  cooking  utensils  and  other  necessary  camp- 
equipage.  The  men  carried  only  their  arms.  We  travelled  all 
day,  and  part  of  the  second  day,  ere  the  ground  was  reached. 
At  last  the  vines  grew  plentiful,  and  the  party  stopped  to  recon- 
noitre. After  a  two  hours'  exploration,  the  men  returned  satis- 
fied, greatly  exaggerating,  of  course,  the  abundance  of  the  vines 
— ^ihey  exaggerate  everything — but  all  agreeing  that  we  must 
encamp  where  we  were. 

Men  and  women  at  once  set  out  to  gather  large  leaves  with 
which  to  form  shelters  for  ourselves,  as  it  was  the  rainy  season, 
and  we  needed  to  be  protected  from  the  showers.  Branches 
and  leaves  were  also  collected  for  our  beds ;  and  a  huge  fire  was 
built  to  protect  us  from  the  incursions  of  leopards,  which  are 
plentiful  in  these  woods,  and  quite  daring  enough  to  attempt  a 
meal  even  from  so  large  a  party  as  ours. 

We  slept  close  around  the  camp-fire,  with  our  guns  in  readi- 
ness to  resist  any  venturesome  leopards;  but,  for  this  night, 
only  heard  the  terrible  roar  of  the  beasts  at  a  distance. 

The  next  morning  each  man  took  his  own  £eanily,  and  went 
out  on  an  independent  prospecting  tour.  These  negroes  have 
no  idea  of  worlring  together.  Though  they  set  out  in  a  large 
company,  this  is  only  to  protect  themselves  against  wild  beasts. 
Once  on  the  ground,  every  family  works  for  itself,  hunting  up 
its  own  vines,  and  carrying  away  separately  the  fruits  of  its  toil. 
Thus  it  comes  about  that  some  are  lucky  and  others  unlucky ; 
whence  originate  quarrels,  accusations  of  theft,  often  fights,  in 
which  the  weaker,  of  course,  is  the  sufferer.  The  scene  is  not 
so  pastoral  as  it  might  be. 


124  FIGHT  WITH  A  BUFFALO,  Chap.  X, 

The  negroes  stayed  out  all  day,  and  at  night  came  in,  each 
bearing  little  jars  of  milk  gathered  during  the  day.  The  milk 
was  now  poured  into  the  wooden  cylinders  in  which  it  is  per- 
mitted to  congeal,  and  then  all  once  more  gathered  about  the 
fire,  and  related,  with  much  noisy  declamation,  the  adventures 
of  the  day. 

On  this  first  day  I  shot  several  niar6  or  wild  buffalo  (Bos 
braehicJieros).  It  is  a  very  savage  beast,  and  one,  which  I  only 
wounded,  attacked  me.  I  had  taken  good  aim,  but  my  bullet 
struck  a  vine  on  its  way  and  glanced  aside,  so  that,  instead  of 
hitting  the  beast  between  the  eyes,  I  only  wounded  him  in  the 
body. 

It  was  a  huge  bull,  and,  tumiDg  fiercely,  he  came  at  me 
without  stopping  to  think.  I  had  but  a  moment  to  consider, 
and  prudently  determined  to  run,  for,  though  I  had  my  second 
barrel  in  reserve,  the  crash  of  the  infuriated  bull  was  too 
powerful.  As  I  turned  to  make  my  escape,  I  found  my  foot 
hopelessly  caught  in  a  tough  vine.  I  was  a  prisoner,  and  the 
bull  dashing  toward  me,  head  down  and  eyes  a-flame,  tearing 
asunder  the  vines  which  barred  his  progress  as  though  they  had 
been  threads.  I  had  been  nervous  a  moment  before ;  but  now, 
turning  to  meet  the  enemy,  felt  at  once  my  nerves  firm  as  a 
rock,  and  my  whole  system  braced  for  the  emergency. 

All  depended  on  one  shot,  for,  entangled  as  I  was,  if  I  missed 
the  bull  would  not,  I  waited  a  second  more,  till  he  was  within 
five  yards  of  me,  and  then  fired  at  his  head.  He  gave  one  loud, 
hoarse  bellow,  and  then  (thank  God !)  tumbled  at  my  feet^ 
almost  touching  me,  a  mass  of  dead  flesh. 

The  hunt  after  wild  boar  was  my  daily  amusement,  and  by 
its  means  I  supplied  the  whole  camp  with  meat ;  but  the  finest 
experience  of  this  trip  I  must  now  relate.  Arming  myself  one 
evening,  and  blacking  my  face  with  charcoal,  as  was  my  fashion 
in  all  my  hunts — ^nothing  seems  to  catch  the  eye  of  a  wild  beast 
of  this  country  so  quickly  as  a  white  face — I  went  out  of  sound 
of  the  encampment,  and  in  what  I  knew  to  be  a  walk  of  the 
buffalo,  and  lay  down  imder  the  shelter  of  a  huge  ant-hiU  to 
watch  for  game.  It  was  a  starlight  nighty  but  in  the  forest 
there  was  a  sombre  light,  in  which  such  a  spectacle  as  I  wished 
for  would  have  shown  to  advantage.  Here  I  lay  for  one  hour, 
two  hours,  three  hours,  and  heard  no  sound  but  the  indis? 


Chap.  X.  THE  LEOPARD  AND  HIS  PREY.  125 

tingoishable  medley  which  so  eloquently  tells  of  the  night-life 
of  the  woods.  Now  and  then  the  cracking  of  a  twig  and  a  grunt 
told  of  some  perambulating  pig;,  and  once  a  whole  herd  of 
gazelles  filed  past  me  in  fine  array,  never  knowing  my  presence, 
as  I  was  luckily  to  windward  of  them.  At  last,  I  am  ashamed 
to  say,  I  fell  asleep.  How  long  I  dozed  I  do  not  know,  but  I 
was  awakened  with  a  start  by  an  unearthly  roar — a  yell — as  of 
some  animal  in  extreme  terror  and  agony. 

I  started  up,  looked  hurriedly  about  the  narrow  space  which 
was  open  around  me,  but  saw  nothing.  The  woods  were  yet  re- 
sounding with  the  cry  which  had  so  startled  me.  And  now  a 
dull  booming  roar  succeeded,  and  I  could  guess  that  beyond  my 
sight,  out  in  some  other  open  space,  some  fortunate  leopard  had 
gained  a  meal.  Determined  to  see  the  fight^  if  possible,  I  made 
towards  the  sounds,  and,  emerging  from  the  wood,  saw  scudding 
across  the  plain,  and  at  but  little  distance  from  me,  a  wild  bull, 
on  whose  neck  was  crouched  what  I  instantly  knew,  from  the 
natives'  description,  to  be  a  leopard.  Vainly  the  poor  beast 
reared,  tossed,  ran,  stopped,  roared,  and  yelled.  In  its  blind 
terror  it  at  last  even  rushed  against  a  tree,  and  nearly  tumbled 
over  with  the  recoil.  But  once  more  anguish  lent  it  strength, 
and  it  set  out  on  another  race.  I  took  as  good  aim  at  the 
leopard's  figure  as  I  could,  and  fired,  but  with  no  effect  that  I 
could  discover.  The  exciting  spectacle  lasted  but  a  minute; 
then  the  bull  was  lost  to  my  sight,  and  presently  his  roars 
ceased.  Probably  the  leopard  had  sucked  away  his  life,  and 
was  now  feasting  on  the  carcase. 

We  stayed  a  week.  In  that  time  the  party  collected  five  hun- 
dred pounds  of  India-rubber,  and  then  returned  with  cheery 
songs  to  the  village,  each  one  expecting  to  make  great  bargains 
with  the  Mpongwe  traders,  or  with  white  men. 

To  return,  now,  to  my  regular  route,  from  which  this  has 
been  a  very  long  digression. 

The  country  about  the  Ikoi  Creek  seems  to  be  a  great  bird- 
country.  During  my  stay  at  Mr.  Best's  I  killed  a  great  many 
beautiful  birds,  some  rare,  and  a  few  of  hitherto  unknown 
varieties.  One  was  a  variety  of  the  partridge,  the  Francolinm 
iquamatm,  a  gray  bird,  whose  loud  caU  was  heard  in  the  forests 
every  evening  calling  its  mate.  They  sleep  side  by  side  on  a 
particular  branch  of  some  tree  where  they  have  their  home,  and 


126  SINGULAR  BIRDS*  NEST.  Chap.  X^ 

one  does  not  cease  to  call  until  the  other  arriyes  at  this  rendez- 
vous. The  other — ^a  very  curious  bird — has  been  since  named 
the  Barbatula  du  ChailluL  It  is  a  really  beautiful  creature : 
throat  and  breast  a  glossy  blue-black ;  head  scarlet ;  a  line  of 
canary-yellow  running  from  above  the  eyes  along  the  neck ;  and 
the  back,  which  is  black,  covered  with  canary-yellow  spots. 
This  singular  little  bird  makes  its  nest  with  great  pains  in  the 
wood  of  dead  trees.  The  m&le  and  female  settle  upon  a  tree 
which  seems  to  have  been  dead  a  suflScient  time  to  soften  the 
wood  a  little,  and  then,  going  to  work  with  their  bills,  peck  out 
a  circular  opening  two  inches  in  diameter,  and  perhaps  two 
inches  deep.  This  done,  they  dig  perpendicularly  down  for 
about  four  inches.  The  cavity  thus  made  is  their  nest.  Of 
course,  as  they  are  small  birds,  it  takes  them  a  long  time  to  per- 
form this  piece  of  carpentering — often  two  or  three  weeks. 
Then  it  is  lined  softly,  and  the  female  lays  her  eggs  and  hatches 
them  in  security. 

From  the  Ikoi  Creek  I  returned  without  incident  or  adven- 
ture to  the  Gaboon. 


Chap.  XL  PLANTATION  LIFE.  127 


CHAPTEK  XL 

Creek  Navigation  —  Nocturnal  Habits  of  the  Negroes  —  A  royal  Farm  — 
Beach-travel  —  Canoe-building  —  Ogoula-Limbai  —  A  great  Elephant- 
hunter —  In  the  Surf — Shark  River  —  Prairies  —  Sangatanga  —  King 
Bango  —  An  Audience  of  Royalty  —  A  Ball  —  Barracoons — Unwelcome 
Guest — A  Slaver  in  the  Offing  —  Decline  of  the  Slave-tiade  on  this  Coast — 
Idols. 

Mt  stay  in  Gaboon  was  only  long  enough  to  enable  me  to  seenre 
my  specimens  and  send  them  on,  and  to  prepare  myself  for  a 
trip  to  Cape  Lopez.  I  was  anxious  to  see  for  myself  the  barra- 
coons of  the  slave-traders,  as  well  as  to  hunt  the  wild  buffalo, 
which  is  found  in  great  numbers  on  the  prairies  of  that  part  of 
the  interior. 

When  all  was  ready,  I  placed  all  my  goods,  and  guns,  and 
ammunition  in  one  of  the  immense  canoes  which  the  Mpongwe 
make,  and  we  started  for  Mbata  Creek,  on  which  lay  the  planta- 
tion of  my  old  Mend  King  Bompochombo,  or  Boi  Dennis,  as  the 
French  call  him. 

We  entered  the  Mbata  Creek  at  4  p.m.,  and  paddled  up  and 
up,  the  stream  growing  narrower  all  the  time,  and  more  over- 
hung with  trees,  till  about  midnight  the  men  had  to  pull  the 
canoe  through  the  brushwood,  which  made  more  swamp  than 
creek.  This  brought  us  soon  to  the  end  of  the  creek,  and  then 
we  found  ourselves  on  the  royal  plantation. 

My  baggage  was  immediately  taken  to  the  king's  first  wife's 
house.  Though  so  late,  or  rather  now  getting  early,  the  people 
were  not  asleep.  It  is  a  singular  habit  the  Africitns  have,  and 
very  like  the  highest  class  of  society  in  our  own  cities — they  do 
not  sleep  at  night,  but  lie  about  their  fires,  and  smoke  and  tell 
stories,  dozing  off  all  day  afterwards.  I  was  not  surprised,  there- 
fore, to  find  the  Princess  Akerai  lying,  with  three  or  four  other 
women  near  a  huge  fire  (the  thermometer  was  at  85°),  smoking 
her  pipe,  and  saying  she  was  glad  to  see  me. 

However,  all  was  busy  in  an  instant.  The  princess  hurried  off 
to  cook  me  some  plantains  and  fish  which  her  slaves  were  pre- 
paring, and  which  I  greatly  enjoyed,  for  our  day's  journey  had 


128  THE  KING'S  FARM.  Chap.  XT. 

made  me  hungry.  A  fire  was  built  in  the  centre  of  the  floor  of 
the  house  which  I  was  to  occupy,  and  around  this  several  of  the 
king's  wives  assembled,  while  the  queen  busied  herself  in  pre- 
paring a  comer  for  my  sleeping  accommodations.  For  bed  I 
had  a  mat — simple  enough,  but  not  so  hard  for  the  bones  as  the 
bamboo  couch  I  had  enjoyed  at  Mbene's ;  and  there  was  added 
to  my  mat,  in  this  case,  the  unusual  luxury  of  a  musquito  netting, 
by  help  of  which  I  was  able  to  enjoy  a  good  sleep. 

The  negroes  are  very  hospitable  and  kind,  but  generally  very 
poor  and  dirty.  However,  it  does  not  seem  dirt  to  them  ;  and 
as  for  their  poor  half-starved  lives,  they  enjoy  them  as  though 
no  misery  were  in  the  world ;  till  death  or  great  distress  comes, 
and  then  their  sorrow  is  something  terrible — literally  a  sorrow 
without  hope. 

King  Rompochombo's  people  are  among  the  most  thriving  of 
the  Mpongwe.  The  plantations  where  I  now  was  belong  to  them, 
and  are  the  most  flourishing  I  saw  anywhere  on  the  coast.  The 
village,  which  lies  at  the  head  of  the  Mbata  Creek,  is  surrounded 
by  a  fertile  prairie,  which  was  now  in  full  cultivation.  The  people 
have  a  great  many  slaves,  and  the  women  seem  really  to  have  a 
taste  or  liking  for  agricultural  operations — perhaps  because  in 
their  Gaboon  villages  they  have  before  them  only  Sandy  or 
Pongara  Point,  a  long  sandy  flat,  where  nothing  will  grow. 
Here  I  saw  on  every  hand,  and  for  several  miles  in  all  directions, 
fields  of  ground-nuts,  plantains,  com,  sugarcane,  ginger,  yams, 
manioc,  squash  (a  great  favourite  with  all  the  negroes) ;  while 
near  their  little  huts  were  growing  the  paw-tree,  the  lime,  the 
wild  orange,  together  with  abundance  of  plantains  and  pine- 
apples. The  life  of  peaceful  industry  they  led  here  really  gave 
me  a  high  opinion  of  this  little  nation,  who  have  greater  persist- 
ence in  this  direction  than  ttny  of  their  fellows  I  have  seen. 
They  seemed  even  to  care  for  animals,  for  everywhere  I  saw 
goats  and  the  diminutive  African  chickens. 

The  king  was  at  his  town  on  the  coast,  but  had  given  orders 
to  have  me  forwarded  on  to  Cape  Lopez,  Sangatanga,  the  chief 
town  of  the  cape,  being  about  sixty  miles  from  Mbata.  The  king 
gives  himself  no  trouble  about  this  beautiful  plantation,  and  visits 
it  only  during  the  dry  season.  Indeed,  I  suspect  that  he  has 
little  authority  there,  the  queen  ruling  supreme,  managing  every- 
thing, and  ordering  the  labour  of  the  slaves  and  the  succession 


Chap.  XI.  MPONGWE  AGRICULTURE.  129 

of  the  agricultural  operationg.  Occasionally  she  sets  her  own 
hand  to  the  planting,  which  is  the  labour  of  the  women,  the  men 
cutting  down  and  burning  the  bushes,  which  spring  up  with 
such  terrible  rapidity  wherever  the  African  soil  is  left  for  a  season 
untouched. 

As  I  intended  to  spend  some  months  in  the  Cape  Lopez  coim- 
try,  I  had  brought  from  Gaboon  a  very  inconvenient  quantity  of 
luggage,  which  was  to  be  transported  overland  to  Sangatcmga 
from  here,  Mbata  being  the  head  of  navigation  in  this  direction. 
To  carry  my  three  heavy  chests  of  trade-goods,  200  pounds  of 
coarse  powder,  half-a-hundredweight  of  tobacco,  50  pounds  of 
shot,  three  double-barrelled  guns,  together  with  hams,  boxes  of 
crackers,  botfles  of  wine,  brandy,  and  oil,  woollen  blankets  for 
camping,  and  camp  cooking-utensils  (I  never  daSred  to  eat  food 
cooked  in  the  native  pots^  from  a  fear  of  what  was  in  them  before) 
— to  carry  all  this  required  some  thirty  men.  These  I  asked  the 
queenTnext  xao  Jng.  .ying  that  I  would  give  each  xnan  five 
fitthopoiS  of  cotton  doth,  some  beads,  and  tobacco.  She  made  no 
difficulty,  but,  of  course,  several  days  were  required  to  get  every- 
thing ready  for  a  start. 

Finally,  all  was  prepared,  and  we  started.  Omr  way  led  us  for 
ten  or  twelve  miles  through  a  fine  prairie,  interspersed  with  occa- 
sional hills,  and  making  altogether  a  beautiful  country  for  agri- 
culture. South  of  the  Gaboon  the  coimtry  changes  very  much, 
and  is  generally  less  rough  and  better  adapted  to  the  growing 
of  yams  and  other  farm-products  than  any  I  saw  to  the  north. 
Here,  as  we  travelled  along,  we  came  occasionally  upon  the 
bamboo  huts  of  slaves  who  lived  here,  far  away  from  their 
Mpongwe  masters  on  the  coast,  and  tilled  the  soil  on  their  own 
account,  sending  a  tribute  of  its  products  down  to  the  seaside 
whenever  canoes  came  up  the  Mbata  for  it  They  seemed  quite 
happy,  as  they  were  certainly  independent,  for  slaves.  The  old 
men  and  women  lay  lazily  in  front  of  their  little  huts,  smoking ; 
and  on  every  hand  were  smiling  fields  of  plantains,  manioc,  pea- 
nuts, and  yams. 

Towards  twelve  o'clock  we  approached  the  sea,  and  could  hear 
the  distant  boom  of  the  surf.  Presently  the  sky,  before  dear, 
became  overcast,  and  before  long  we  were  in  the  midst  of  a  wild 
storm — almost  a  tornado.  It  thundered  and  lightened  violently, 
andrained  as  it  rains  only  in  Africa.    We  rushed  for  a  little  hut 

E 


130  ALONG  THE  SHORE.  Chap.  XT. 

we  saw  before  us,  and  were  kindly  received  by  an  old  negro  and 
his  wife,  who  lived  there.  In  about  an  hour  the  storm  was  over, 
and  the  sky  was  again  clear.  These  storms  are  frequent  herein 
the  season,  and  sometimes  do  much  damage,  tearing  down  trees, 
and  overwhelming  the  plantations  in  ruin. 

Half-an-hour's  walk  brought  us  to  the  beach,  along  which  we 
now  had  to  walk.  The  soft  sand  made  our  travel  exhausting ;  I 
was  forced  to  take  off  my  shoes,  as  I  sank  down  above  my  ankles 
at  every  step.  This  lasted  the  whole  day,  and  I  was  glad  when 
night  came  and  we  stopped.  My  men  bore  it  better  than  I, 
though  they  had  heavy  loads  to  carry.  Though  our  walking  was 
bad,  the  scenery  was  often  very  fine.  On  one  side  was  the  rolling 
sea^  and  on  the  other  the  dark  green  forests,  coming  down  in 
seemingly  impenetrable  masses  nearly  to  the  shore.  Every  mile 
or  so  a  creek  cut  its  way  through  this  mass  of  green,  and  wound 
its  devious  course  into  the  interior,  having  a  curious  appearance 
—canal-like — ^from  the  way  in  which  the  vegetation  began  on 
the  very  banks,  in  the  same  solid  masses  which  presented  their 
fronts  seaward.  It  was  a  real  solitude,  the  roar  of  the  sea  break- 
ing the  grim  silence  of  the  forest  only  to  make  that  more  im- 
pressive. From  time  to  time  we  recognized  the  lonesome  cry 
of  the  chimpcmzee,  which  is  the  chief  inhabitant  of  these  wilds. 

Just  at  sunset  we  came  upon  a  beautiful  little  prairie  or 
natural  clearing,  situated  quite  in  the  middle  of  the  woods,  and 
received  an  unexpected  welcome  from  the  owner  of  some  huts 
we  saw  in  front  of  us.  He  proved  to  be  a  Mpongwe,  named 
Mbouma,  whom  I  had  known  at  Gaboon.  He  had  come  hither 
to  spend  the  dry  season  in  making  canoes,  the  trees  surrounding 
his  little  clearing  being  of  unusual  size.  He  had  chosen  for  the 
scene  of  his  labours  one  of  the  prettiest  spots  I  ever  saw  in  Africa. 
The  little  prairie  was  a  mile  long,  by  perhaps  one-third  of  a 
mile  wide,  perfectly  clear,  and  covered  with  a  luxuriant  growth 
of  grass,  which,  when  the  sun  lay  on  it  next  morning,  shone 
with  a  golden  glory.  The  very  beasts  of  the  forest  seemed  to 
rejoice  in  its  prettiness ;  monkeys  leaped  nimbly  along  the  tteea 
on  its  skirts,  and  the  song  of  the  birds  in  the  morning  gave  a 
charm  to  the  whole  scene  which  few  of  the  African  wilds  can 
boast. 

Mbouma  had  moved  hither  temporarily,  but  with  his  whole 
family — ^wives,  children,  and  slaves.     They  had  built  temporary 


Chap.  XI.  A  MPONGWE  BOAT-BUILDER.  131 

shelters^  rude  but  sufScient  leaf-roofed  huts,  and  lived  in  a  kind 
of  extended  picnic.     He  showed  me  some  immense  trees  he  had 
cut  down,  and  which  were  intended  for  canoes.     Several  of  these 
vessels  were  already  completed  and  ready  to  launch.    A  Mpongwe 
canoe  is  sometimes  of  very  considerable  size.    Mbouma  had  one 
finished,  which  was  60  feet  long,  3J  feet  wide,  and  3  feet  deep. 
The  process  of  canoe-building  is  very  simple.    The  tree  is  felled, 
cut  to  the  requisite  length,  divested  of  limbs,  if  any  are  in  the 
way,  and  then  fire  is  applied  to  bum  out  the  inside.      This  fire 
is  carefiilly  watched  and  guided  till  all  the  inside  is  eaten  away. 
Then  the  mpanOy  the  native  adze,  is  used  to  trim  all  off  neatly, 
and  to  give  shape  to  the  outside.    They  know  very  well  how  to 
do  this;    and  their  larger  canoes  are  very  stout  and  reliable 
craft,  in  which  considerable  coasting-voyages  are  sometimes 
made.    Unfortunately  the  making  of  the  canoe  is  mostly  the 
least  part  of  the  work.     The  canoe-tree  (for  only  one  kmd  of 
tree  is  used  for  this  purpose)  grows  almost  invariably  some  miles 
away  fi-om  the  water,  and  the  unlucky  boat-builder's  greatest 
undertaking  is  the  launch.      Ofi;en  they  have  to  transport  a 
sixty-foot  canoe  eight  or  ten  miles  overland  to   the   nearest 
creek  or  river.    In  this  case  they  cut  a  path  through  the  woods, 
and  on  this  lay  rollers  at  two  feet  apart,  on  which,  with  much 
trouble,  the  little  vessel  is  pushed  along. 

Mbouma  was  very  fortunate  in  his  choice  of  locality.  His 
farthest  canoe  was  but  two  miles  from  the  seashore,  and  he 
thought  his  labour  easy  enough.  But  he  was  forced  to  send  all 
his  canoes  by  sea  to  the  Gaboon. 

Little  prairies  like  this  of  Mbouma's  occurred  constantly  be- 
tween this  and  Sangatanga,  and  gave  me  a  good  opinion  of  the 
value  of  this  country  for  purposes  of  civilized  life.  They  were 
great  reliefe  to  the  dreary  journey. 

We  continued  to  skirt  the  seashore,  our  aim  being  to  gain  a 
Shekiani  village,  where  we  purposed  to  stop  the  night  In  the 
forenoon  I  shot  a  beautiful  black  and  white  fishing-esigle  (the 
Cfypohierax  angolevmfi),  which  sat  on  the  very  top  of  a  huge 
cotton-wood-tree,  looking  gravely  down  into  the  blue  sea  below, 
meditating  its  finny  prey. 

At  three  o'clock  we  reached  a  village  where  the  chief,  Ogoula- 
Limbai  by  name,  turned  out  to  meet  us  at  the  head  of  his  whole 
nation,  which  consisted  of  thirty  men,  sixty  or  seventy  women, 

E  2 


132  OGOULA-LBIBAI.  Chap.  XI. 

and  a  prodigious  number  of  children.  I  was  welcomed  and 
conducted  to  a  house — a  real  house — the  most  convenient  and 
substantial  I  had  met  with  among  the  wild  negroes.  It  was 
high,  had  a  plank  floor,  and  wsts  really  wonderful  for  a  savage 
chiefs  abode.  It  had  several  rooms  partitioned  off  with  planks ; 
and  when  I  had  rested  and  talked  a  while  I  was  asked  into  an- 
other room,  where  a  new  surprise  awaited  me.  The  walls  of  this 
room  were  covered  with  wall-paper,  and  all  around  were  hung 
little  pictures  of  saints.  A  table  was  covered  with  a  real  cotton 
cloth,  pn  which  was  my  dinner,  which  I  was  now  asked  to  eat. 
The  pikce  de  rSmtance  was  a  splendid  roast  of  boar-meat,  juicy 
and  fragrant.  The  wild  boar  is  very  plentiful  hereabouts,  and 
makes  a  very  fine  roast.    The  animal  is  black. 

I  ate  unquestioning,  determined  to  satisfy  my  body  before  I 
attempted  to  satisfy  my  mind  about  this  mystery  of  civilization 
in  a  rude  African  village  far  from  white  settlements. 

Finally  Ogoula-Limbai  explained  all.  A  Portuguese  carpen- 
ter, left  sick  by  some  passing  slaver,  had  lived  with  him  for  a 
while  and  built  him  this  astonishing  house ;  and  I  suppose  of  the 
Portuguese,  too,  my  black  friend  must  have  learned  the  table 
arrangements  and  the  art  displayed  in  cooking  that  delicious 
boar-roast.  I  suppose  Ogoula-Limbai  may  probably  have  been 
once  concerned  in  the  slave-trade ;  and,  though  he  did  not  men- 
tion it,  this  would  account  for  several  evidences  of  civilization 
I  saw  about  me.  However,  whatever  he  had  done,  he  does 
not  dare  now  to  set  up  a  slave-fitctory,  although,  doubtless,  his 
heart  longs  to  do  so.  He  is  a  vassal  of  the  king  of  Cape  Lopez, 
who  claims  a  monopoly  of  that  business,  and  would  soon  drive 
him  off  were  he  to  attempt  to  set  up  on  his  own  hook.  Ogoula 
is  the  only  Shekiani  chief  who  has  been  permitted  to  settle 
directly  on  the  seashore  between  Graboon  and  Cape  Lopez — ^the 
king  of  the  latter  place  suffering  no  such  attempt,  which  he  fears 
may  interfere  with  his  present  sole  possession  of  a  most  lucrative 
trade.  None  of  these  Shekiani  fellows  dare  trade  directly  with 
the  white  men.  They  must  all  submit  to  tiie  extortions  of  their 
neighbours  who  are  so  fortunate  as  to  possess  the  seashore ;  and 
if  Ogoula  were  to  attempt  direct  trade — ^though  he  has  the  finest 
chances — ^his  town  would  be  burned  down  in  a  week. 

Ogoula  has  the  reputation  of  being  the  greatest  hunter  of  ele- 
phants in  all  the  country  about  here.    As  he  could  speak  Mpon- 


Chap.  XI.  A  DARING  ELEPHANT-HUNTER.  133 

gwe,  he  told  me  some  of  his  adventures,  which  proved  indeed 
that  he  was  a  daring  and  expert  fellow.  Going  out  to  the  hunt 
one  day  he  met  two  elephants.  Being  alone  he  had  but  one 
gun,  and  would  have  retreated  and  watched  for  a  safer  chance ; 
but  the  great  beasts  saw  him  and  did  not  give  him  any  opportu- 
nity of  escape.  He  was  obliged  to  make  a  stand;  and,  taking 
good  aim,  he  killed  one  elephant.  Unfortmiately  it  was  the  fe- 
male, and  the  male,  seeing  its  partner  fall,  inmiediately  rushed 
at  him.  He  turned  to  retreat,  and  caught  his  foot  in  a  trailing 
vine.  The  more  he  struggled  the  less  he  got  loose,  and  mean- 
time his  pursuer  was  tearing  down  everjrthing  in  its  way,  and 
was  almost  on  top  of  him  when  he  got  his  foot  loose,  and  in 
desperation  swung  himself  into  a  young  sapling  which  stood  at 
hand.  Scarce  had  he  done  this,  when  the  elephant,  trumpeting 
with  rage,  was  beneath  him.  It  seized  the  sapling  with  its  trunk, 
and  swayed  it  violently  back  and  forth,  determined  to  puU  it 
down.  But  as  it  swung  on  one  side,  Ogoula,  nimble  through 
desperation,  was  able  to  catch  at  another  which  stood  near,  and 
when  the  elephant  seized  this,  he  gave  himself  a  great  swing 
and  caught  the  outstretched  branch  of  a  huge  fuU-grown  tree, 
from  which  he  clambered  to  a  safe  height  where  he  could  afford 
to  laugh  at  the  vain  rage  of  his  enemy. 

The  negroes  are  not  generally  good  marksmen,  but  they  have 
great  nimbleness  and  considerable  presence  of  mind,  and  often 
escape  in  situations  where  a  white  man  would  most  likely  be 
killed. 

As  my  men  were  very  much  exhausted  with  the  weight  of 
my  baggage,  I  asked  Ogoula  to  let  me  have  a  canoe,  which  he 
did.  The  road  to  Sangatanga  by  sea  was  a  little  further,  but  a 
good  deal  easier  than  along  the  yielding  sand  of  the  seashore ; 
so  the  luggage  wai3  to  be  put  in  the  canoe,  and  I  and  part  of  the 
people  to  go  with  it 

I  slept  on  a  sofa-bed — another  relic  of  the  Portuguese — with 
a  negro  boy  to  fan  me,  and  a  torch  by  whose  smoke  it  was 
hoped  the  musquitoes  would  be  driven  off.  As  the  natives  here, 
including  Ogoula  himself,  are  great  thieves,  my  things  were 
placed  in  a  room  near  mine,  where  my  men  slept. 

About  one  o'clock  I  woke  up,  roused  up  the  men,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  the  seashore.  Here  we  found  ourselves  in  a  position 
so  usual,  and  so  characteristic  of  the  negroes'  dealings,  that  I 


134  A  PALAVER  AND  A  DUCKING.  Chap.  XI. 

will  describe  it.  I  had  bargained  for  a  canoe  and  paid  for  it, 
expecting,  of  course,  to  have  it  in  such  a  condition  that  we  could 
use  it. 

Now  we  could  find  no  paddles.    I  went  to  Ogoula>  who  said 
they  must  have  been  stolen,  but  offered  a  new  set  for  two 
fathoms  of  cloth  and  two  bottles  of  rum. 
I  refused,  point-blank,  to  be  cheated. 

Ogoula  frowned — ^looked  blacker  than  usual,  in  fact^  and 
declined  to  help  us. 

There  was  much  "  palaver,"  and  finally  one  of  my  men  gave 
his  own  cloth  and  got  the  paddles.  I  was  very  angry,  but  could 
do  nothing;  and  happily  Ogoula  was  just  in  the  same  state. 
He  thought  himseK  ill-used  that  I  had  given  him  no  mm 
(which  I  never  carried  for  the  natives),  but  could  do  nothing — 
but  cheat.  Had  I  not  been  escorted  by  Rompochombo's  men, 
no  doubt  I  should  have  had  trouble — ^probably  been  robbed. 

We  now  put  our  things  aboard,  got  in,  and  put  off.  The  surf 
was  high,  the  boat  deep-laden,  and,  unluckily,  we  got  caught 
in  a  mountain  of  a  breaker,  which  turned  us  over  in  an  instant 
but  a  few  yards  from  the  shore,  and  sent  us  all  into  the  water, 
which,  fortunately  for  me,  was  not  deep. 

Here  was  another  mess.  We  got  ashore  again,  kindled  an 
immense  fire,  and  then  my  men,  who  were,  as  all  the  coast 
negroes  are,  good  divers,  set  out^  and  in  an  amazingly  short  time 
fished  up  everything  we  had  lost  but  one  or  two  small  packages. 
I  was  very  glad  to  find  my  guns  again,  for  without  them  I 
should  have  been  in  a  bad  plight  The  powder,  fortunately,  had 
been  so  ceurefolly  packed  that  it  was  not  injured ;  and,  as  for 
the  rest,  I  came  off  very  well 

Last  of  all  the  paddles  were  hunted  up.  They  had  been 
washed  ashore  a  long  distance  off.  Then  we  lay  down  by  the 
fire  till  dawn  and  dried  ourselves,  and,  when  day  broke,  I  had 
all  the  things  again  put  into  the  boat,  and  sent  the  men  off  to 
make  their  way  round,  determining  myself  to  walk  overland. 

While  we  lay  about  the  fire  I  kept  a  good  look-out  for  my 
friend  Ogoula,  and  was  rewarded  by  seeing  his  rascally  &ce 
peering  at  us  through  the  darkness.  He  came  down  when  he 
saw  himself  discovered,  and  expressed  himself  very  sorry ;  but  I 
felt  certain  that  if  we  had  been  in  confdsion  I  should  have  been 
plundered.     These  negroes  seem  to  be  unable  to  keep  their 


Chap.  XI.  SHARKS  —  SANQATANGA.  135 

hands  off  property  that  has  been  cast  ashore  by  the  sea,  no 
matter  how  slight  the  accident. 

I  set  out  with  a  man  to  carry  my  gun  and  show  me  the 
way.  Towards  noon  we  came  to  a  village,  where,  fortunately, 
we  got  something  to  eat,  for  I  was  very  hungry.  In  the  afteav 
noon  we  came  to  the  Shark  Eiver ;  rightly  named,  for  its  mouth 
was  actually  alive  with  huge  sharks,  which  swam  about  our  trail 
canoe  as  we  crossed  in  such  an  outrageously  familiar  manner 
that  I  was  rather  glad  to  get  safely  across. 

The  negroes  boast  that  they  can  swim  the  river  without 
danger  if  only  they  have  nothing  red  about  them ;  and,  in  fact, 
all  my  men  swam  across  without  accident,  first  carefully  con- 
cealing those  parts  of  their  scanty  dress  which  might  have  the 
obnoxious  colour.  They  also  offered  to  take  me  over  on  their 
backs;  but  this  I  refdsed,  from  a  fear  that  the  sharks  might 
make  an  exception  in  my  case  to  their  general  rule.  These  fish 
are  here  held  sacred — which  may  have  something  to  do  with  their 
harmlessness.  The  natives  believe  that  if  they  should  kill  one 
there  would  be  no  safety  from  their  attacks  thereafter.  It  is 
certainly  very  singular  that  they  should  not  attack  men  in  the 
water,  for  on  any  otiier  of  the  numerous  points  on  the  coast 
where  they  abound  a  man  would  be  instantly  killed  did  he 
venture  among  them. 

I  did  not  reach  Sangatanga  till  a  Uttle  before  dark,  having 
travelled  sixteen  hours,  counting  an  hour^s  rest  on  the  way,  and 
I  never  was  so  tired  and  footsore  in  my  life.  The  people  were 
greatly  surprised  at  the  feat — no  inconsiderable  one  under  an 
African  sun  and  over  beach-sand,  for  the  distance  is  quite  forty 
miles. 

The  prairies  grow  larger  and  more  important  as  the  traveller 
approaches  Sangatanga,  and  in  the  interior  they  form  a  still 
larger  portion  of  the  country.  The  change  is  very  curious  and 
very  decided ;  as  north  of  tiie  Gaboon  such  a  thing  as  a  clear 
patch  is  almost  unknown ;  all  being  vast,  dense,  hardly  pene- 
trable forest  All  the  interior,  from  Gaboon  to  Sangatanga  and 
Nazareth  Kiver,  is  hiUy,  rolling  land,  and  contains  immense 
prairie  tracts,  where  the  buffalo  has  his  home  and  pasture.  Each 
clearing  is  lined  with  dense,  evergreen  forests,  where  the  buffalo 
spends  his  days,  grazing  only  by  night ;  and  these  forests  shelter 
the  elephant,  leopard,  and  all  the  varied  fauna  of  these  woods, 


136  CAPE  LOPEZ.  Chap.  XI. 

which  abormd  greatly  more  in  game  than  the  country  north  of 
the  Gaboon. 

The  hills  above  Sangatanga  assume  very  fantastic  shapes,  and 
are  many  of  them  quite  steep.  Along  their  sides,  where  they 
are  bare,  they  are  covered  with  thousands  of  the  curious  hills  of 
the  white  ants  which  abound  hereabouts.  These  hills  or  nests 
are  about  two  feet  high,  and,  being  formed  like  flat-topped  toad- 
stools, such  as  are  common  in  our  meadows  after  a  rain,  look  in 
reality  like  a  vast  assemblage  of  gigantic  mushrooms. 

My  men  found  me  shelter  for  the  night,  and  I  saw  nothing  of 
the  town  or  ite  people  till  next  morning. 

Sangatanga  is  set  upon  a  tolerably  high  hill  fronting  the  sea^ 
shore,  between  which  and  the  town,  a  distance  of  about  two  miles, 
stretches  a  lovely  prairie,  about  which  are  scattered  numerous 
little  villages.  The  view  is  chjuming,  for,  turning  the  eye  up- 
wards from  the  landscape  which  lies  at  one's  feet,  the  beholder 
sees  before  him  the  boundless  stretch  of  the  ocean,  whose  billows 
seem  pouring  in  to  overwhelm  the  shore.  I  never  tired  of  this 
fine  landscape,  which  was  doubly  refreshing  after  my  long  and 
tedious  journeys  in  the  unpicturesque  regions  north  of  the  Gra- 
boon,  where  the  coast-line  almost  everywhere  is  a  deadly  swamp, 
and  the  interior  an  almost  lifeless  wilderness. 

At  the  top  of  the  hill  on  which  I  stood  was  the  royal  residence, 
where  dwelt  the  king  of  the  Oroungou  tribe — called  the  Cape 
Lopez  people  by  the  whites.  He  is  a  powerftil  chief,  and  his 
tribe — over  whom  he  rules  almost  as  a  despot  by  his  personal  in- 
fluence— are  a  thriving  and  influential  people. 

Cape  Lopez  proper  is  in  lat.  0^  36'  10"  S.,  and  long.  8°  40'  K 
from  Greenwich.  It  takes  its  name  fit)m  the  Portuguese,  who 
formerly  called  it  Cape  Lope  Gonsalvez.  It  is  chiefly  a  long 
sandy  point  projecting  into  the  sea,  on  which  it  gains  somewhat 
every  year.  This  point  protects  the  bay,  which  is  quite  large 
and  full  of  shallows  and  banks,  so  that  vessels  are  obUged  to 
anchor  feu*  from  the  shore.  The  cape  looks  from  the  sea  some- 
thing like  overflowed  land.  The  point  is  so  low  that  the  bushes 
and  trees  growing  on  it  seem  from  a  distance  seaward  to  be  set 
in  the  water. 

The  bay  is  about  fourteen  miles  deep,  and  several  small  rivers 
empty  their  waters  into  it  at  or  near  its  base.  The  Nazareth,  a 
more  considerable  stream,  also  has  its  mouths  here,  as  well  as  the 


Chap.  XI.  KING  BANGO.  137 

Fetich  Kiver,  one  of  its  branches — which  takes  his  name  from 
Fetich  Point,  a  remarkable  locality  at  its  mouth.  The  bay  has 
frequent  banks  and  shallows,  but  the  water  is  very  deep  near  the 
cape  itself,  and  vessels  of  large  size  may  sail  in,  almost  or  quite 
touching  the  land,  without  danger.  There  is  no  surf  in  the  bay ; 
but  outside  the  cape,  along  the  shore  to  the  south,  it  beats  in  so 
heavily  that  in  many  places  even  the  most  experienced  boatmen 
cannot  land  except  during  a  few  days  of  each  month. 

The  bottom  of  the  bay  is  swampy  and  overgrown  with  man- 
groves, which  come  quite  down  to  the  shores,  in  their  usual 
gloomy  and  impenetrable  masses.  The  water  here  is  brackish, 
from  the  large  quantity  of  fresh  water  brought  down  by  the 
Nazareth  and  other  streams.  The  rivers  are  all  lined  for  a  short 
distance  up  with  mangrove-swamps,  and  this  part  of  the  country 
has  a  gloomy,  dirty,  sickly  appearance — the  black  waters  rushing 
into  the  sea,  the  long  mangrove-flats  sending  up  noisome  exhala- 
tions, and  filling  the  air  with  a  pungent  and  disagreeable  odour 
of  decaying  vegetation. 

The  bay  abounds  with  all  sorts  of  delicious  fish,  and  the  cape 
itself  is  a  famous  place  for  turtle.  Near  the  right  bank  of  the 
mouth  of  the  Nazareth  there  is  a  little  village  called  Fishtown, 
where  gi-eat  quantities  of  fish  are  taken  every  year. 

There  is  a  safe  channel  through  the  shallows  from  the  cape  to 
the  mouth  of  the  Nazareth,  but  otherwise  the  bay  is  not  easily 
navigable. 

The  region  known  generally  as  the  Cape  Lopez  country  in- 
cludes all  the  shores  of  the  bay,  and  the  interior  for  thirty  or 
forty  miles.  It  has  much  fine  land,  and  King  Bango,  if  he  were 
not  a  drunken  vagabond,  might  be  a  prosperous  king.  Back  from 
the  seashore  the  land  becomes  higher  and  hilly,  the  mangroves 
give  place  to  forests  of  palm  and  more  useful  woods,  and  fine 
prairies  dot  the  coimtry  quite  thickly.  The  whole  of  this  dis- 
trict is  given  to  the  slave-trade.  It  produces  small  quantities  of 
ivory,  ebony,  wax,  &c. ;  but  the  slave  factory  is  the  chief  commercial 
establishment,  and  the  buying,  selling,  and  transporting  of  slaves 
for  the  barracoons  at  the  cape  is  the  most  profitable  business. 

About  ten  o'clock  of  the  morning  after  my  arrival  the  king 
sent  his  mafouga  (his  intendant,  major-domo,  herald,  and  secre- 
tary of  state)  to  the  village  where  I  had  stopped,  to  ascertain  who 
was  the  white  man  who  had  come,  and  what  was  his  business. 


138  A  ROYAL  AUDIENCE.  Chap.  XL 

The  Oroungo  language  being  almost  identical  with  the 
Mpongwe,  I  was  able  to  converse  with  the  mafouga,  and  in- 
formed him  that  I  was  too  tired  to  speak  or  see  anyone,  but 
that  next  day  I  would  see  the  king ;  with  which  he  went  oflf 
satisfied,  expressing  his  astonishment  that  any  white  man  could 
walk  on  foot  the  distance  I  did,  yesterday. 

At  eight  o'clock  the  following  morning  I  accordingly  prepared 
for  my  visit  to  King  Bango,  or  Passall — ^the  last  being  the  name 
given  him  by  the  traders.  His  Majesty  lives  at  the  top  of  the 
hill,  and  the  royal  palace  is  surrounded  by  a  little  village  of  huts, 
in  which  reside  the  royal  wives,  of  whom  there  are  really  a  vast 
number  (over  300),  as  the  king  takes  pride  in  keeping  up  the 
largest  harem  to  be  found  on  this  part  of  the  coast 

As  I  entered  the  village  the  mafouga  met  me,  with  the  king's 
cane  borne  aloft,  and  inquired,  in  an  official  voice,  my  business, 
and  if  I  desired  to  see  the  king. 

I  answered.  Yes — somewhat  disgusted  at  so  much  ceremony, 
though  the  crowd  of  loyal  subjects  who  had  followed  me  up  were 
hugely  pleased. 

I  was  asked  to  wait  awhile,  and  presently  (the  royal  wives 
having  put  the  finishing  touches  to  their  toilets,  perhaps)  I  was 
admitted  to  the  palace. 

It  was  an  ugly  hole  of  a  house,  set  on  pillars,  and  of  two  stories. 
The  lower  story  consisted  of  a  dark  hall,  flanked  on  each  side 
by  rows  of  small  dark  rooms,  looking  uncommonly  like  cells. 
At  the  end  of  the  hall  was  a  staircase,  steep  and  dirty,  up  which 
the  mafouga  piloted  me.  When  I  had  ascended,  I  found  myself 
in  a  large  room,  at  one  end  of  which  was  seated  King  Ba^igo, 
surrounded  by  about  a  hundred  of  his  wives,  and  with  his  in- 
terpreter and  some  of  his  principal  men  standing  near  him. 

The  king — a  middle-sized,  not  over-clean,  dissipated-looking 
negro,  dressed  very  lightly  in  a  shirt  and  a  dilapidated  pair  of 
pantaloons — wore  on  his  head  a  crown  which  had  been  presented 
to  him  by  some  of  his  friends  the  Portuguese  slavers,  and  over 
his  shoulders  a  flaming  yellow  coat  with  gilt  embroidery  all  over 
it — apparently  the  cast-oflf  coat  of  some  rich  man's  lackey  in 
Portugal  or  Brazil.  The  crown  was  shaped  like  those  commonly 
worn  by  actors  on  the  stage,  and  was  probably  worth  when  new 
about  ten  dollars.  But  his  majesty  had  put  around  it  a  new 
band  or  circlet  of  pure  gold,  which  must  have  been  worth  at 


Chap.  XI.  A  VISIT  FROM  KING  BANQO.  139 

least  two  hundred  dollars.  He  was  very  proud  of  this  crown. 
He  sat  on  a  sofa»  and  held  in  his  hand  a  cane^  which  officiated  as 
sceptre. 

Most  of  his  wives  present  wore  silks.  I  was  presented  to  the 
queen  or  head  wife,  an  old  woman,  and  by  no  means  pretty. 

The  king  remarked  that  the  slave-trade  no  longer  prospered. 
He  complained  of  the  English,  who  were  the  cause  of  this  stag- 
nation, and  feared  much  that  in  a  few  years  more  he  would  be 
left  without  customers. 

He  next  addressed  me  in  French,  and  told  me  he  had  been  to 
Braza  and  also  to  Portugal,  having  Kved  two  years  in  Lisbon, 
and  knew  how  to  read  Portuguese — a  bit  of  knowledge  which 
must  have  been  handy  in  his  business  affairs.  It  was  easy  to  see 
that  his  foreign  travel  had  done  him  little  good.  To  his  original 
ignorance  he  had  added  only  what  he  thought  European  manners, 
and  some  kinds  of  dissipations  perhaps  previously  unknown  to 
him. 

He  told  me  that  the  entire  village  on  the  hill  wsts  occupied 
by  his  family  and  slaves,  and  that  about  two  hundred  of  his  men 
were  now  in  the  country  on  his  plantation.  To  my  question  of 
how  many  children  he  had,  he  replied  that  he  did  not  know  the 
exact  number,  but  at  least  six  hundred,  which,  from  after  obser- 
vation, I  judge  a  fair  estimate. 

The  next  morning  that  absurd  personage,  the  mafouga,  who 
was  evidently  the  result  of  his  royal  master's  visit  to  Lisbon, 
came  down  to  my  house  to  announce  that  the  king  would  return 
my  visit  in  the  afternoon.  Accordingly,  at  two  o'clock  I  cu*- 
ranged  my  little  bamboo-house,  and  presently  a  great  beating  of 
drums  announced  that  King  Bango  was  under  way.  Soon  a 
great  procession  of  people  appeared,  at  the  head  of  whom  the 
king  was  borne  in  a  hammock.  I  went  out  to  meet  him,  and 
found,  to  my  surprise,  that  he  could  not  move.  I  thought,  at 
first,  that  he  was  dead-drunk,  but  was  presently  informed  that 
his  left  arm  and  leg  were  paralyzed,  and  thus  half  his  body  was 
dead.  His  people  lifted  him  out  of  his  hammock  and  seated 
him  on  a  seat  which  I  had  prepared,  and  here  six  of  his  wives 
surrounded  him  with  fans.  The  rest  of  his  family  who  were 
present  also  crowded  around,  and  I  soon  perceived  that  all  the 
women  were  drunk.  His  majesty  had  called  at  one  of  the  slave- 
factories  on  his  way  to  my  house,  and  there  rum  had  been 


140  A  BALL  AT  THE  PALACE.  Chap.  XI. 

served  out  to  the  whole  cortege.  Evidently  the  royal  ladies 
had  managed  to  get  more  than  their  share. 

Bango  was  dressed  as  yesterday,  except  that  he  had  on  a  new 
crown,  which  I  asked  to  see.  He  took  it  oflf.  I  found  that  it 
was  also  a  tawdry  concern,  but  enriched  with  gold  to  the  value 
of  at  least  a  thousand  dollars.  It  contained  some  poor  imita- 
tions of  precious  stones,  and  was  evidently  thought  an  object  of 
great  value  and  beauty  by  its  possessor.  After  praising  its 
beauty,  I  returned  it ;  whereupon  his  majesty  tried  to  pick  a 
quarrel,  saying  that  neither  Portuguese,  English,  French, 
Spaniards,  or  Americans  had  ever  before  asked  him  to  take  off 
his  crown,  and  that  he  thought  I  intended  to  insult  him.  Of 
course  I  said  I  had  a  great  desire  to  behold,  near  to,  such  a 
beautiful  object,  which  seemed  to  pacify  him.  He  informed  me 
that  this  crown  had  been  given  him  by  a  celebrated  slave-trader 
on  the  coast,  well  known  under  the  name  of  Don  Jose,  and  that 
it  was  sent  as  a  special  gift  from  one  of  the  richest  firms  of  Rio 
Janeiro,  who  had  dealt  largely  with  him. 

While  we  were  talking,  one  of  the  women  was  slyly  kicking 
me  on  the  shins  and  winking  at  me,  which  I  sincerely  hoped 
the  king,  her  husband,  would  not  see,  as  I  had  no  desire  to 
arouse  his  jealousy.  When  we  ceased,  all  the  women  began  to 
ask  for  rum,  which  I  refused,  but  gave  them  instead  several 
heads  of  tobacco,  and  then  formally  presented  the  king  with  two 
large  pieces  of  cloth.  This  put  him  in  good  humour,  and,  after 
some  refreshments,  he  set  out  for  home.  It  was  not  without 
great  trouble  that  his  huge  carcase  was  hoisted  into  the  ham- 
mock. As  he  left,  my  men  saluted  him  with  a  salvo  of  mus- 
ketry, which,  too,  flattered  his  vanity. 

The  next  night  a  ball  was  given  by  the  king  in  my  honour. 
The  room  where  I  had  been  first  received  was  the  ball-room. 
When  I  arrived,  shortly  after  dark,  I  found  about  one  hundred 
and  fifty  of  the  king's  wives  assembled,  many  of  whom  were 
accounted  the  best  dancers  in  the  country.  Shortly  afterwards 
singing  began,  and  then  a  barrel  of  rum  was  rolled  in  and 
tapped.  A  good  glassful  was  given  to  each  of  the  women,  and 
then  the  singing  recommenced.  In  this  the  women  only  took 
part,  and  the  airs  were  doleful  and  discordant.  The  words  I 
could  not  always  catch ;  but  here  is  a  specimen : — 


Chap.  XL  AN  OFFER  OF  MARRIAGE.  141 

"  When  we  are  alive  and  well, 
Let  lis  be  merry,  sing,  dance,  and  laugh  ; 
For  after  life  comes  death ; 
Then  the  body  rots,  the  worms  eat  it, 
And  all  is  done  for  ever." 

When  everybody  was  greatly  excited  with  the^e  songs,  the  king, 
who  sat  in  a  comer  on  a  sofa  with  some  of  his  favourite  wives 
next  him,  gave  the  signal  for  the  dance  to  begin.  Immediately 
all  rose  up  and  beat  a  kind  of  tune  or  refrain  to  accompany  the 
noise  of  the  tam-tams  or  drams.  Then  six  women  stepped  out 
and  began  to  dance  in  the  middle  of  the  floor.  The  dance  is 
not  to  be  described.  Anyone  who  has  seen  a  Spanish  fandango, 
and  can  imagine  its  lascivious  movements  tenfold  exaggerated, 
will  have  some  faint  conceptions  of  the  postures  of  these  black 
women.  To  attain  the  greatest  possible  indecency  of  attitude 
seemed  to  be  the  ambition  of  all  six.  These  were  relieved  by 
another  set  of  six  in  course  of  time,  and  so  the  ball  went  on  for 
about  two  hours,  when,  what  with  occasional  potations  of  rum 
and  the  excitement  of  the  dance  and  noise,  the  whole  assemblage 
got  so  uproarious  that  I  had  thoughts  of  retreating;  but  the 
king  would  not  suffer  it.  He  and  all  the  people  seemed  to 
enjoy  it  aU  exceedingly. 

Next  women  came  out,  one  at  a  time,  and  danced  their  best 
(or  worst)  before  a  closely-critical  audience,  who,  watching 
every  motion  with  jealous  eyes,  were  sure  to  applaud  by  audible 
murmurs  of  pleasure  at  every  more  than  usually  lewd  paa.  At 
last  this  ceased,  and  two  really  pretty  young  girls  came  out 
hand  in  hand  and  danced  before  me.  I  yfos  told  that  they  were 
daughters  of  the  king,  and  he  desired  that  I  should  take  them 
for  my  wives — an  offer  which  I  respectfully  but  firmly  declined. 

Finally  the  room  began  to  smell  too  high  for  me,  and,  as  the 
revelries  were  getting  madder  all  the  time,  I  slipped  out  and 
betook  myself  to  my  house  to  sleep. 

The  next  day  I  made  a  visit  to  the  barracoons,  or  slave-pens. 
Cape  Lopez  is  a  great  slave-d4p6t-— once  one  of  the  largest  on 
the  whole  coast — and  I  had,  of  course,  much  curiosity  to  see 
how  the  traffic  is  carried  on. 

My  way  led  through  several  of  the  villages  which  are  scat- 
tered about  the  extensive  plain.  Every  head  of  a  family  makes 
a  separate  little  settlement,  and  the  huts  of  his  wives  and  slaves 


142  THE  SLAVE-PENS  OF  CAPE  LOPEZ.  Chap.  XI. 

which  surround  his  own  make  quite  a  Uttle  viUage.  Each  of 
these  groups  is  hidden  from  view  by  surrounding  clumps  of 
bushes,  and  near  each  are  the  fields  cultivated  by  the  slaves. 
The  object  of  building  separately  in  this  way  is  to  prevent  the 
destruction  which  used  frequently  to  fall  upon  their  larger 
towns  at  the  han(ft  of  the  British  cruisers,  who  have  done  their 
best  several  times  to  break  up  this  nest  of  slave-dealing.  A 
town  could  be  shelled  and  burned  down ;  these  scattered  planta- 
tions afford  no  mark. 

Cape  Lopez  boasts  of  two  slave-factories.  I  now  visited  the 
one  kept  by  the  Portuguese.  It  was,  from  the  outside,  an  im- 
mense enclosure,  protected  by  a  fence  of  palisades  twelve  feet 
high,  and  sharp-pointed  at  the  top.  Passing  through  the  gate, 
which  was  standing  open,  I  found  myself  in  the  midst  of  a  large 
collection  of  shanties  surrounded  by  shade-trees,  under  which 
were  lying  about,  in  various  positions,  people  enough  to  form  a 
considerable  African  town. 

An  old  Portuguese,  who  seemed  to  be  sick,  met  and 
welcomed  me,  and  conducted  me  to  the  white  men's  house,  a 
two-story  frame  building,  which  stood  immediately  fronting  the 
gate.  This  was  poorly  furnished,  but  contained  beds,  a  table, 
chairs,  &c. 

Unfortunately  I  do  not  speak  either  Spanish  or  Portuguese, 
and  my  conductor  understood  neither  French  nor  English.  We 
had,  therefore,  to  make  use  of  a  native  interpreter,  who  made 
slow  work  of  our  talk.  The  Portuguese  complained  that  it  was 
now  very  hard  to  land  a  cargo  in  the  Brazils,  as  the  Government 
was  against  them,  and  that  each  year  the  trade  grew  duller. 
To  put  myself  on  a  right  footing  with  him,  I  told  him  I  had 
not  come  to  trade,  but  to  collect  objects  in  natural  history, 
and  to  see  the  country  and  hunt. 

I  was  now  led  around.  The  large  house  I  have  mentioned 
was  surrounded  by  a  separate  strong  fence,  and  in  the  spacious 
yard  which  was  thus  cut  off  were  the  male  slaves,  fastened  six 
together  by  a  little  stout  chain  which  passed  through  a  collar 
secured  about  the  neck  of  each.  This  mode  of  fastening  ex- 
perience has  prov^  to  be  the  most  secure.  It  is  rare  that  six  men 
are  unanimous  in  any  move  for  their  own  good,  and  it  is  found 
that  no  attempts  to  liberate  themselves,  when  thus  fastened, 
succeed.    They  reposed  under  sheds  or  shelters  built  about  the 


Chap.  XI.  WHITES  BELIEVED  TO  BE  CANNIBALS.  143 

yard,  and  here  and  there  were  buckets  of  water  from  which  they 
could  drink  when  they  felt  inclined. 

Beyond  this  yard  was  another  for  the  women  and  children, 
who  were  not  manacled,  but  allowed  to  rove  at  pleasure  through 
their  yard,  which  was  also  protected  by  a  fence.  The  men  were 
ahnost  naked.  The  women  wore  invariably  a  cloth  about  their 
middle. 

Behind  the  great  houses  was  the  hospital  for  sick  slaves.  It 
was  not  ill-arranged,  the  rooms  being  large  and  well-ventilated, 
and  the  beds — structures  of  bamboo  covered  with  a  mat — were 
ranged  about  the  walls. 

Outside  of  all  the  minor  yards,  under  some  trees,  were  the 
huge  cauldrons  in  which  the  beans  and  rice,  which  serve  as 
slave-food,  were  cooked.  Each  yard  had  several  Portuguese 
overseers,  who  kept  watch  and  order,  and  superintended  the 
cleaning  out  of  the  yards,  which  is  performed  daily  by  the  slaves 
themselves.  From  time  to  time,  too,  these  overseers  take  the 
slaves  down  to  the  seashore  and  make  them  bathe. 

I  remarked  that  many  of  the  slaves  were  quite  merry,  and 
seemed  perfectly  content  with  their  fete.  Others  were  sad,  and 
seemed  filled  with  dread  of  their  future ;  for,  to  lend  an  added 
horror  to  the  position  of  these  poor  creatures,  they  firmly  believe 
that  we  whites  buy  them  to  eat  them.  They  cannot  conceive  of 
any  other  use  to  be  made  of  them ;  and  wherever  the  slave-trade 
is  known  in  the  interior,  it  is  believed  that  the  white  men  beyond 
sea  are  great  cannibals,  who  have  to  import  blacks  for  the  market 
Thus  a  chief  in  the  interior  country,  having  a  great  respect  for 
me,  of  whom  he  had  often  heard,  when  I  made  him  my  first 
visit,  immediately  ordered  a  slave  to  be  killed  for  my  dinner, 
and  it  was  only  with  great  difficulty  I  was  able  to  convince  him 
that  I  did  not,  in  my  own  country,  live  on  human  flesh. 

The  slaves  here  seemed  of  many  different  tribes,  and  but  few 
even  understood  each  other.  The  slave-trade  has  become  so 
great  a  traffic  (here  I  speak  of  the  country  and  foreign  trade 
alike)  that  it  extends  from  this  coast  quite  to  the  centre  of  the 
continent ;  and  I  have  met  slaves  on  the  coast  who  had  been 
brought  from  much  farther  in  the  interior  than  I  ever  succeeded 
in  reaching.  The  Shekiani,  Bakalai,  and  many  other  tribes  far 
inland  sell  their  fellows  into  slavery  on  various  pretexts  (chiefly 
witchcraft),  and  thus   help  to  furnish  the  Sangatanga  slave- 


144  AN  UNWELCOME  BEDFELLOW.  Chat.  XI. 

barracoons.  The  large  rivers  which,  joining,  form  the  Nazareth^ 
provide  an  easy  access  to  the  coast,  and  give  Cape  Lopez  great 
advantages  for  obtaining  a  regular  supply  of  slaves;  and  the 
creeks  which  abound  hereabouts  afford  the  vessels  good  chances 
to  conceal  themselves  from  the  watchM  cruisers. 

I  wandered  about  the  town  the  rest  of  the  day  watching  the 
lazy  negroes,  and  did  not  return  to  my  house  till  after  dark.  I 
struck  a  match  and  set  fire  to  a  torch  to  go  to  bed  by;  and 
casting  my  eyes  about  to  see  if  anything  had  been  disturbed, 
noticed  something  glittering  and  shining  under  my  akoho  or  low 
bamboo  bedstead.  I  did  not  pay  much  attention  to  the  object, 
which  did  not  seem  important  by  the  dim  light  of  the  torch, 
till,  just  as  I  approached  the  bed  to  arrange  it,  I  saw  that  the 
glitter  was  produced  by  the  shining  scales  of  an  enormous 
serpent  which  lay  quietly  coiled  up  there  within  two  feet  of 
me.  My  first  motion  was  to  retreat  behind  the  door ;  then  I 
bethought  me  to  kill  it.  But  unfortunately  my  two  guns  were 
set  against  the  wall  behind  the  bed,  and  the  snake  was  between 
me  and  them.  As  I  stood  watching  and  thinking  what  to  do, 
keeping  the  doorway  fairly  in  my  rear  for  a  speedy  retreat,  I 
noticed  that  my  visitor  did  not  move,  and  finally  I  mustered  up 
courage  to  creep  along  the  floor  to  the  bedside  and  quickly 
grasp  one  gun.  Happily  it  was  loaded  very  heavily  with  large 
shot.  I  placed  the  muzzle  fairly  against  one  of  the  coils  of  the 
serpent  and  fired,  and  then  ran  out. 

At  the  report  there  was  an  instant  rush  of  negroes  from  all 
sides,  eager  to  know  what  was  the  matter.  They  thought  some 
one  had  shot  a  man,  and  then  run  into  my  house  for  concealment. 
Of  course  they  all  rushed  in  after,  helter-skelter ;  and  as  quickly 
rushed  out  again,  on  finding  a  great  snake  writhing  about  the 
floor.  Then  I  went  in  cautiously  to  reconnoitre ;  happily  my 
torch  had  kept  alight,  and  I  saw  the  snake  on  the  floor.  My 
shot  had  been  so  closely  fired  that  it  had  cut  the  body  fairly  in 
two,  and  both  ends  were  now  lopping  about  the  floor.  I  gave 
the  head  some  blows  with  a  heavy  stick,  and  thus  killed  the 
animal ;  and  then,  to  my  surprise,  it  disgorged  a  duck,  which  it 
had  probably  swallowed  that  afternoon,  and  then  sought  shelter 
in  my  hut  to  digest  it  quietly.  This  pretty  sleeping  companicm 
measured  eighteen  feet  in  length.  I  must  confess  that  I  dreamed 
more  than  once  of  serpents  that  night,  for  they  are  my  horror. 


Chap.  XI.  PURCHASE  OF  SLAVES.  145 

The  next  morning  I  paid  a  visit  to  the  other  slave-factory.  It 
was  a  neater  place,  but  arranged  much  like  the  first  While  I 
was  standing  there,  two  young  women  and  a  lad  of  fourteen 
were  brought  in  for  sale,  and  bought  by  the  Portuguese  in  my 
presence.  The  boy  brought  a  twenty-gallon  cask  of  rum,  a  few 
fathoms  of  doth,  and  a  quantity  of  beads.  The  women  sold 
at  a  higher  rate.  Each  was  valued  at  the  following  articles, 
which  were  immediately  paid  over :  one  gun,  one  neptune  (a 
flat  disk  of  copper),  thirty  fEtthoms  of  cloth,  two  iron  bars,  two 
cutlasses,  two  looking-glasses,  two  files,  two  plates,  two  bolts,  a 
keg  of  powder,  a  few  beads,  and  a  small  lot  of  tobacco.  Bum 
bears  a  high  price  in  this  country. 

At  two  o'clock  this  afternoon  a  flag  was  hoisted  at  the  king's 
palace  on  the  hill,  which  signifies  that  a  slaver  is  in  the  offing. 
It  proved  to  be  a  schooner  of  about  170  tons'  burden.  She  ran 
in  and  hove  to  a  few  miles  from  shore.  Immediately  I  saw  issue 
from  one  of  the  fEictories  gangs  of  slaves,  who  were  rapidly  driven 
down  to  a  point  on  the  shore  nearest  the  vessel.  I  stood  and 
watched  the  embarkation.  The  men  were  still  chained  in  gangs 
of  six,  but  had  been  washed,  and  had  on  clean  cloths.  Th^ 
canoes  were  immense  boats,  managed  by  twenty-six  paddles,  and 
carrying  besides  each  about  sixty  slaves.  Into  these  the  poor 
creatures  were  now  hurried,  and  a  more  piteous  sight  I  never 
saw.  They  seemed  terrified  almost  out  of  their  senses ;  even 
those  whom  I  had  seen  in  the  factory  to  be  contented  and  happy 
were  now  gazing  about  with  such  mortal  terror  in  their  looks  as 
one  neither  sees  nor  feels  very  often  in  life.  They  had  been 
content  to  be  in  the  fitctory,  where  they  were  well  treated  and 
had  enough  to  eat.  But  now  they  were  being  taken  away 
they  knew  not  whither,  and  the  frightful  stories  of  the  white 
man's  cannibalism  seemed  fresh  in  their  minds. 

But  there  was  no  time  (dlowed  for  sorrow  or  lamentation. 
Oang  after  gang  was  driven  into  the  canoes  until  they  were  full, 
and  then  they  set  out  for  the  vessel,  which  was  dancing  about  in 
the  sea  in  the  offing. 

And  now  a  new  point  of  dread  seized  the  poor  wretches,  as  I 
could  see,  watching  them  from  the  shore.  They  had  never  been 
on  rough  water  before,  and  the  motion  of  the  canoe,  as  it 
skimmed  over  the  waves  and  rolled  now  one  way  now  another, 
gave  them  fears  of  drowning,  at  which  the  paddlers  broke  into 

L 


146  SraPPlNO  SLAVES.  Chap.  XI. 

a  laugh,  and  forced  them  to  lie  down  in  the  bottom  of  the 
canoe. 

I  said  the  yessel  was  of  170  tons.  Six  hundred  slayes  were 
taken  off  to  her,  and  stowed  in  her  narrow  hold.  The  whole 
embarkation  did  not  last  two  hours,  and  then,  hoisting  her  white 
sails,  away  she  sailed  for  the  South  American  coast  She  hoisted 
no  colours  while  near  the  shore,  but  was  evidently  recognized  by 
the  people  on  shore.  She  seemed  an  American-built  schooner. 
The  vessels  are,  in  fitct,  Brazilian,  Portuguese,  Spanish,  some- 
times Sardinian,  but  oftenest  of  all  American.  Even  whalers,  I 
have  been  told,  have  come  to  the  coast,  got  their  slave  cargo, 
and  departed  unmolested,  and  setting  it  down  in  Cuba  or  Brazil 
returned  to  their  whaling  business  no  one  the  wiser.  The  slave- 
dealers  and  their  overseers  on  the  coast  are  generally  Spanish 
and  Portuguese.  One  of  the  head-men  at  the  factories  here 
told  me  he  had  been  taken  twice  on  board  slave-vessels,  of 
course  losing  his  cargo  each  time.  Once  he  had  been  taken  into 
Brest  by  a  French  vessel,  but  by  the  French  laws  he  was 
acquitted,  as  the  French  do  not  take  Portuguese  vessels.  He 
told  me  he  thought  he  should  make  his  fortime  in  a  very  short 
time  now,  and  then  he  meant  to  return  to  Portugal. 

The  slave-trade  is  reaUy  decreasing.  The  hardest  blow  has 
been  struck  at  it  by  the  Brazilians.  They  have  for  some  years 
been  alarmed  at  the  great  superiority  in  numbers  of  the  Africans 
in  Brazil  to  its  white  population,  and  the  government  and  people 
have  united  to  discourage  the  trade,  and  put  obstacles  in  the  way 
of  its  successful  prosecution.  If  now  the  trade  to  Cuba  could 
also  be  stopped,  this  would  do  more  to  put  an  end  to  the  whole 
business  than  the  blockading  by  all  the  navies  of  the  world. 

It  is  impossible  for  any  limited  number  of  vessels  to  effectually 
guard  4000  miles  of  coast  Eight  or  ten  years  ago,  when  I  was  on 
the  coast  of  Africa,  the  British  kept  some  26  vessels  of  light 
draught  on  the  coast,  several  of  which  were  steamers,  while  the 
rest  were  good  sailers.  The  French  also  had  26  vessels  there, 
and  the  Americans  their  complement  But,  with  all  this  force 
to  hinder,  the  slave-trade  was  never  more  prosperous.  The 
demand  in  Brazil  and  Cuba  was  good,  and  barracoons  were 
established  all  along  the  coast  Many  vessels  were  taken,  but 
many  more  escaped.  The  profits  are  so  great  that  the  slave- 
dealers  could  afford  to  send  really  immense  fleets^  and  count 


Chap.  XI.  DECAY  OF  THE  SLAVE-TRADE.  147 

with  almost  mathematical  certainty  on  making  a  great  profit 
from  those  which  escaped  the  cruisers.  The  barracoons  were 
shifted  from  place  to  place  to  escape  the  vigilance  of  the  men- 
of-war;  and  no  sooner  was  one  of  these  depots  broken  up  than 
another  was  established  in  some  neighbouring  creek  or  bay.  So 
great  was  the  demand  that  fearful  atrocities  were  sometimes 
practised  on  innocent  negroes  by  shrewd  captains,  who  begrudged 
eyen  the  small  price  they  had  to  pay  for  slaves.  Thus  it  is 
related  of  one  that  he  invited  a  number  of  friendly  natives  on 
board  of  his  vessel,  then  shut  them  under  hatches,  and  sailed 
away  with  them  to  Cuba  to  sell  them. 

A  pregnant  sign  of  the  decay  of  the  business  is  that  those 
engaged  in  it  begin  to  cheat  each  other.  I  was  told  by  Portu- 
guese on  the  coast  that  within  two  or  three  years  the  conduct  of 
Cuban  houses  had  been  very  bad.  They  had  received  cargo 
after  cargo,  and  when  pressed  for  pay  had  denied  and  refused. 
Similar  complaints  are  made  of  other  houses ;  and  it  is  said 
that  now  a  captain  holds  on  to  his  cargo  till  he  sees  the 
doubloons,  and  takes  the  gold  in  one  hand  while  he  sends  the 
slaves  over  the  side  with  the  other.  While  the  trade  was  brisk 
they  had  no  occasion  to  quarrel.  As  the  profits  become  more 
precarious,  each  will  try  to  cut  the  other's  throat. 

Now  there  are  not  many  barracoons  north  of  the  equator, 
and  the  chief  trade  centres  about  the  mouth  of  the  Congo.  The 
lawful  trade  has  taken  the  place  of  the  slave  traflSc  to  the  north- 
ward ;  and  if  the  French  wiU  only  abolish  their  system  of  "  ap- 
prenticeship," lawful  trade  might  soon  make  its  way  to  the  south. 

WTien  tiie  schooner  sailed  I  visited  the  king,  and  was 
announced  to  his  majesty  by  the  great  mafouga.  On  my  way  ' 
to  the  king's  house  I  passed  three  little  houses,  in  which  I  was 
then  told  were  deposited  five  idols,  which,  I  knew,  were  con- 
sidered the  most  powerful  on  all  the  coast  from  Banoko  to 
MayombaL  They  are  thought  to  be  the  great  protectors  of  all 
the  Oroungou  tribes,  and  are  themselves  placed  near  the  king's 
house,  who  delights  to  do  them  honour,  and  whom  they  protect 
fit)m  all  eviL 

The  five  idols  are  deposited  in  three  houses.  Pangeo,  a  male 
idol,  is  married  to  Aleka,  and  the  two  stand  together  in  one 
house.  Pangeo  is  the  special  protector  of  the  king  and  his  people^ 
and  watches  over  them  by  night,  keeping  off  every  evil. 

L  2 


L 


148  IDOL  WORSHIP.  Chap.  XI. 

Makambi,  a  second  male  idol,  is  married  to  Abiala,  and  they 
have  a  second  house  to  themselves.  Poor  Makambi  is  a  power- 
less god,  his  wife  having  usurped  the  power.  She  holds  a  pistol 
in  her  hand,  with  which  it  is  supposed  she  can  kiU  any  one  she 
pleases:  for  which  reason  the  natives  fear  her  greatly.  Slie 
protects  them  from  various  evils :  and  when  they  are  sick  they 
implore  her  to  make  them  well,  and  bring  her  presents  of  food 
to  propitiate  her. 

Last  comes  a  bachelor-god,  Numba,  who  is  the  Oroungou 
Neptune  and  Mercury  in  one,  keeping  off  the  evils  which  are  to 
come  from  beyond  sea  and  ruling  the  waves.  He  has  the  third 
house  all  to  himself. 

These  idols  are  all  large,  and  very  rudely  carved  and  orna- 
mented. The  people  seem  to  place  great  value  upon  thenL  I 
offered  20  dollars  for  one,  but  was  told  I  could  not  buy  it  for 
100  slaves  even,  which  is  as  much  as  to  say  that  it  was  not  to 
be  bought 


Chap.  Xn.  START  FOB  THE  INTEBIOB.  149 


CHAPTEB  XIL 

• 

Set  out  for  the  Interior — Prairies — Odd  Mistake — Hippopotami — Ngola  — 
l^egro  Theology  —  Hunts — Torture  of  a  Woman  —  Rum  —  The  Shekiani 

—  Appearance,  Manners,  and  Customs — Polygamy  —  Marriage  —  Super- 
stitions—  Bos  hrachicheros — Gamp  in  the  Woods  —  African  Humour  — 
Solid  Comfort  —  Hunting  with  a  Leopard  —  Great  Jollification  —  Super- 
stition about  the  Leopard  —  Elephant-shooting  —  Meeting  a  Boa  —  Stalking 
the  wild  Bull — Betum  to  Sangatanga — I  am  accused  of  Sorcery  —  Idols 

—  Bango*s  Treasures — Burial-ground  of  the  Barraooons  —  Disgusting  Sights 

—  Status  of  Slaves  in  AMca  — •  Oroungou  Cemetery — An  African  Watering- 
place —  Fetich  Point. 

When  I  asked  the  king  for  permission  to  go  into  the  interior 
on  a  hnnt,  he  immediately  gave  me  twenty-five  men  to  carry 
my  Inggage  and  help  me  in  hunting.  Of  tiiese,  three  were  his 
Majesty's  own  slaves,  and  reputed  the  greatest  hunters  in  the 
country.  They  were  the  providers  of  the  royal  table,  and  passed 
their  lives  in  the  hunt  and  in  the  busL  They  killed  elephants 
on  his  account,  bringing  him  home  the -ivory. 

I  desired  to  penetrate  into  the  hitherto  unexplored  interior  of 
this  latitude  till  we  should  meet  the  Nazareth  Eiver,  which  I  was 
told  we  should  do  at  the  distance  of  about  one  hundred  miles  to 
the  east.  For  their  services  I  agreed  to  give  the  men  twenty 
fathoms  of  cotton  cloth  each,  if  they  behaved  themselves  faith- 
fiilly  towards  me.  They  seemed  very  willing  to  go,  and  well 
satisfied  with  the  bargain. 

In  two  days  I  was  fully  prepared  for  a  start.  As  we  were  to 
meet  elephants,  leopards,  buffaloes,  and  the  gorilla,  I  provided 
myself  with  a  good  supply  of  bullets.  I  was  told  that  game  was 
very  plentiful  in  all  the  region  I  was  now  to  visit,  people  being 
scarce,  and  the  country  more  favourable  than  in  those  regions 
north  of  the  Gaboon  which  I  had  just  explored ;  itnd  this  report 
I  found  correct. 

The  night  before  we  were  to  starfc^  I  slept  in  a  dirty  room  at 
the  king's  house,  at  his  majesty's  request^  who  apparently  thought 
he  was  doing  me  a  great  grace.  Finally,  on  the  morning  of  the 
23rd,  we  got  tmder  way.     I  had  slept  scarcely  at  all  during  the 


150  A  SmaULAB  MISTAKE,  Chap.  XH. 

night  on  account  of  the  assaults  and  gambols  of  a  prodigious 
number  of  rats,  who  seemed  anxious  to  dispute  possession  with 
me  of  my  room,  so  that  I  astonished  my  men  by  getting  them 
up  at  an  unusually  early  hour.  At  half-past  five  we  were 
already  on  the  march,  myself  ahead,  with  Aboko,  my  head-man, 
and  Niamkala,  the  next  best,  at  my  side,  and  four  other  hunters, 
and  twenty-three  young  men,  as  bearers  and  assistants,  fol- 
lowing us. 

The  way  led  through  some  beautiful  prairies,  each  surrounded 
by  dark  forests,  and  seeming  like  natural  gardens  planted  in  tlie 
wilderness.  It  does  not  need  much  time  to  get  into  the  **  back- 
woods" here.  By  three  o'clock  Aboko  announced  to  me  that  ir© 
were  now  where  any  moment  we  might  come  upon  elephants  or 
buffalo ;  and  in  a  diort  time,  sure  enough,  we  saw  a  bull  standing 
deer^Uke  upon  the  edge  of  the  wood,  watching  us.  He  stood 
for  some  minutes,  safe  out  of  range,  and  then  turned  into  the 
wood,  evidently  not  likii^g  our  appearance.  We  ran  round  to 
intercept  its  tract,  ^d  I  waited  at  one  pass  in  the  wood  for 
Aboko  and  two  others  to  get  dear  round  and  drive  the  buU 
towards  me.  Suddenly  I  saw  something  approaching  me  out  of 
the  deep  gloom  of  the  forest,  but,  looking  closely,  took  it  to  be 
one  of  my  men.  It  caiixe  towards  me,  and  I  WEilked  unsuspi- 
ciously forward  to  a  clear  space.  Here  the  thing  caught  sight 
of  me,  and,  with  a  ^riU  scream,  ran  back  into  the  woods.  Then 
first  I  knew  that  in  the  dark  (for  in  these  forests  daylight  is 
almost  shut  out)  I  h^  mistaken  a  chimpanzee  for  a  man.  I 
was  vexed ;  for  the  beast  was  but  about  thirty  yards  off  when 
it  ran,  and  I  could  have  shot  it  easily.  Presently  my  men 
returned,  and  had  a  hearty  laugh  at  me  for  my  mistake,  which 
they  did  not  take  unkindly,  seeing  no  resemblance,  but  imputing 
the  mistake  to  my  ignorance,  and  in  part,  I  afterwards  found,  to 
lack  of  courage  on  my  part.  Of  their  mistake  in  this  last  regard 
I  fortunately  had  a  chance  to  convince  them  afterwards. 

Stealing  on  again,  we  shortly  killed  a  gazelle,  which  was  taken 
along  for  supper.  And  now  we  seemed  to  be  really  in  a  game* 
country.  For  the  first  time  I  enjoyed  my  prospects ;  for  though 
we  saw  only  single  beasts — ^now  ^  chimpanzee  rushing  into  the 
woods  at  a  great  distance  ahead,  then  a  ngivo  (a  singular  i^Tiimftly 
of  the  size  of  a  donkey,  with  shorter  legs,  no  horns,  and  black, 
with  a  yellow  spot  on  the  back — ^probably  a  new  animal),  and 


Chap.  XII.  A  CAMP  IN  THE  PRAIRIE.  X51 

again  a  gazelle  or  two,  flying  quickly  oat  of  range' — yet  we  saw 
also  abundance  of  tracks,  particularly  of  the  elephant ;  and,  on 
the  whole,  I  could  see  that  we  should  have  some  feunous  hunts. 
But  I  felt  that  I  should  have  brought  my  rifle,  at  least  for  thia 
country,  for  the  grass  was  so  short  that  on  the  prairies  it  was 
impossible  to  approach  an  animal  within  the  range  of  my 
double-barrelled  guns,  which  were  better  calculated  for  dose 
quarters. 

At  six  we  camped  in  the  midst  of  a  prairie,  my  men  collecting 
from  the  nearest  forest  an  immense  quantity  of  firewood,  and 
building  fires  which  must  have  been  visible  at  a  great  distance. 
Our  supper  was  of  roast  venison  and  plantains — good  enough  for 
such  hungry  fellows  as  we ;  and  shortiiy  after  seven  we  all  turned 
in ;  that  is  to  say,  we  stretched  ourselves  with  our  feet  to  the 
fires,  and  wn^ped  up,  I  in  my  blankets,  and  the  men  in  what- 
ever they  could  get  together  of  leaves  and  grass.  No  wonder 
the  poor  fellows  love. a  fire.  They  are  very  lightly  dressed,  and 
the  winds  here  near  the  equator  as  it  is,  in  the  dry  season  are 
very  bleak  and  cold  when  the  sun  is  not  up  to  warm  them* 
I  could  not  rest  well  for  cold,  though  I  had  a  thick  blanket 
about  me. 

We  had  travelled  about  twenty-five  miles — ^ten  towards  E JN^  J!. 
— ^through  a  really  beautiful  country,  rolling  and  hilly,  mostly 
prairie,  as  I  have  said,  with  a  light  sandy  soil,  and  with  foreste 
looking  rather  like  beautiful  green  islands  in  the  midst  of  the 
dear  spaces.  The  woods  are  the  safe  retreats  of  great  herds  of 
the  wild  bufiisdo  (Bos  braehicheroa)^  and  of  antelopes,  which  come 
into  the  great  grass-fields  by  m'ght  to  play  and  feed. 

Withal  the  country  was  much  broken  up,  and  the  highest  hills 
broke  off  in  abrupt  predpices,  on  which  one  would  come  sud« 
denly,  and  look  down  sometimes  a  hundred  feet  and  even  more 
into  little  vales  which  led  to  other  hills,  and  in  whose  quiet 
gloom  we  could  sometimes  distinguish  animals  walking  or  lying 
down.  One  gorge  we  had  to  cross  on  a  huge  tree ;  but  this  was 
the  channel  of  a  stream  which  flowed  down  towards  the  sea.  We 
crossed  three  or  four  little  streams,  all  dear  and  beautiful ;  but^ 
unless  the  deeper  dales  have  more  water  (as  I  imagine  they 
have),  the  country  is  not  well  watered. 

The  night  was  dear  and  very  diiUy  for  Africa,  and  I  cx)uld 
not  sleep,  though  I  had  placed  my  boxes  to  windward  for  shelter* 


152  A  CARAVAN.  Chap.  XH. 

So  about  two  o'clock  I  roused  everybody  up  to  move  on, 
thinking  it  easier  to  keep  warm  in  motion  than  while  lying  stilL 
The  men  were  very  glad.  Poor  fellows !  they  had  suffered  more 
than  L  Fortunately  it  was  bright  moonlight,  and  we  could  see 
our  way  clearly  across  the  prairie.  A  couple  of  hours'  sharp 
walking  brought  us  to  a  thick  wood  so  situated  as  to  shelter  us 
from  the  wind.  Here  we  quickly  built  a  tremendous  fire,  and 
again  stretched  out  for  a  short  nap,  which  lasted  till  six,  or 
sunrise,  when  the  cry  of  the  gray  partridge  (FrancoUntis  iqua- 
matuB)  aroused  us. 

Sunrise  found  us  under  way  again;  and  before  us  a  fine 
stretch  of  prairie,  on  whose  farther  borders  were  quietly  grazing 
several  herds  of  buffalo,  which  quickly  ran  into  the  woods. 
While  they  remained  they  gave  the  wild  a  singularly  civilized 
appearance.  It  looked  like  a  great  grazing  farm  in  June,  with 
cattle,  and  hay  almost  ready  for  harvest;  a  fine,  quiet,  old- 
country  picture  here  in  the  wflds  of  Airica. 

Towards  nine  o'clock  we  came  to  a  large  pool  or  lakelet,  and 
here  I  saw  for  the  first  time  a  hippopotamus.  A  dozen  of  these 
vast  unwieldy  creatures  were  sporting  and  snorting  in  the  water, 
now  popping  their  huge  unshapely  heads  out,  and  then  diving  to 
the  bottom.  Aboko  persuaded  me  not  to  kill  any  of  them,  as  he 
justly  remarked  we  could  not  have  got  them  out  of  the  water ; 
and  the  proper  way  is  to  take  them  when  they  come  on  shore  at 
night  to  feed. 

Shortly  after  we  came  to  an  open  space,  and  saw  in  the  dis- 
tance what  I  took  at  first  to  be  a  herd  of  buffalo,  but  which 
proved  to  be  a  caravan  approaching  us.  When  they  saw  us 
they  prepared  for  trouble — for  here  there  is  no  law,  and  every 
man's  hand  is  against  his  brother.  Tlie  greater  number  hid  in 
the  grass ;  and,  after  some  reconnoitring,  four  fellows,  well 
armed,  came  towards  us  to  ask  if  it  was  peace  or  war.  When 
they  saw  me,  they  were  at  once  filled  with  surprise,  and,  losing 
their  fears  in  their  amazement  at  seeing  a  white  man  far  in  the 
interior,  began  to  shout  out  to  their  company  to  come  and  see 
the  Otcmgam, 

I  was  immediately  surrounded  by  a  curious  crowd,  most  of 
whom  had  never  seen  a  white  man  before,  though  it  was  evident 
they  had  had  dealings  with  their  black  agents.  They  were  bound 
aouth  and  east  with  tobacco,  salt,  and  goods,  and  intended  to 


Chap.  XII.  NGOLA.  153 

bring  back  slaves  and  ivory.    They  were  Shekianis,  who  are  the 
prevailing  people  in  the  interior  hereabouts. 

We  left  them  in  the  midst  of  their  wonder,  being  anxious  to 
get  on  to  a  village  which  we  reached  about  the  middle  of  the 
afternoon.  This  village,  Ngola  by  name,  was  the  residence  of  a 
Shekiani  chief  named  Njambai,  a  vassal  of  King  Bango,  who  had 
sent  word  by  Aboko  that  I  was  to  be  entertained  as  long  as  I 
liked  to  stay  and  hunt.  It  contained  about  fifty  neat  bamboo- 
houses,  ngming  in  a  double  row  along  a  long  street,  in  the 
African  fashion.  But  the  whole  place  had  a  pleasing  look  of 
neatness  which  was  not  peculiarly  African.  It  lies  sixty  miles 
due  east  from  Sangatanga. 

As  we  approached,  the  women  caught  sight  of  me  and  ran 
screaming  into  the  houses.  It  is  curious  that  nothing  excites  so 
much  terror  in  an  interior  African  village  as  the  appearance  of 
a  white  maa  The  women  and  children  run  for  their  Uves, 
and  seem  to  be  afraid  that  the  mere  sight  of  a  white  wiU  kill 
them.  Here,  however,  the  men  did  not  seem  to  be  afraid,  as  my 
cannibal  friends  were ;  and,  though  Njambai  had  never  before 
seen  a  white  man,  he  received  me  very  courteously.  Aboko 
delivered  King  Bango's  message,  to  which  Njambai  replied  to 
me  that  he  owned  all  the  country  hereabouts,  and  I  should  have 
as  many  men  to  help  me  hunt  it  as  I  wished.  All  which  being 
satisfactorily  arranged,  I  was  escorted  to  the  house  of  the  king's 
brother,  which,  bSg  the  most  commodious  in  the  town,  waalet 
apart  for  my  use. 

Njambai's  house  was  built,  as  the  rest,  of  bamboo,  roofed  with 
palm-leaves,  and  floored  with  hardened  clay.  Everything  inside 
was  very  neat;  the  walls  were  hung  with  a  few  coloured  pictures, 
sent  probably  by  Bango ;  and,  though  there  were  no  chairs,  there 
were  two  wooden  benches  covered  with  mats,  on  which  the  king 
and  I  s^t  while  conversing.  The  house  was  about  twenty  feet 
long,  by  ten  high  and  ten  deep,  and  had  a  neat  veranda  in  front 

I  could  see  that  the  old  fellow  was  vaatly  delighted  at  my  visit, 
for  it  was  an  honour  that  had  hitherto  (luckily  for  me)  befaUen 
none  of  his  rival  chiefis.  I  was  sure,  therefore,  to  be  well  treated. 
In  {acty  I  had  the  best  house,  and  had  hardly  arranged  my  things 
when  dinner  was  ready  for  me,  consisting  of  boiled  and  roast 
plantains,  sweet  potatoes,  boiled  fowls,  and  roast  monkey—- of 
which  last  dish  I  did  not  on  this  occasion  partake,  as  monkey 


154  ITEGRO  THEOLOGY.  Chap.  XH. 

seems  too  mnch  like  man  until  you  gdt  very  hungry.  After 
dinner  I  sent  the  king  some  heads  of  Virginia  tobacco,  which  was 
the  most  welcome  present  I  could  make  him,  American  tobacco 
being  very  scarce  in  the  interior,  and  much  better  than  the  native 
weed.    He  sent  me  in  return  a  splendid  bundle  of  sugarcane. 

Altogether,  Ngola  surprised  me.  So  much  neatness  I  did  not 
expect  to  find  among  the  natives.  The  long  street  had  not  even 
a  weed.  Shinshooko's  house,  in  which  I  was  living,  was  large 
and  commodious,  equal  to  the  Sangatanga  houses ;  and  the  door 
was  even  provided  with  lock  and  key,  so  that  when  my  baggage 
was  all  stowed  away  the  worthy  Shiushooko  brought  me  the 
key,  and  gave  me  to  understand  that  his  people  might  steal  if 
they  were  tempted  by  open  doors.  The  village  is  sixty  miles 
nearly  due  east  from  Sangatanga;  and,  though  no  white  man 
had  ever  been  seen  here,  lyet  saw  many  marks  of  white  civiliza- 
tion  around  me. 

The  next  day  was  Sunday,  and  I  remained  quietly  in  my  house 
reading  the  Scriptures,  and  thankful  to  have  a  day  of  rest  and 
reflection.  My  hunters  could  scarcely  be  prevailed  upon  not  to 
hunt ;  they  declared  that  Sunday  might  do  for  white  people,  but 
the  blacks  had  nothing  to  do  with  it.  Indeed,  when  customs 
thus  come  in  contact,  the  only  answer  the  negro  has  to  make— 
and  it  applies  to  everything — ia,  that  the  God  who  made  the 
whites  is  not  the  God  who  made  the  blacks. 

Then  the  king  and  a  good  many  of  his  pec^le  gathered  about 
me,  and  we  astonished  each  other  with  our  talk.  I  told  them 
that  their  fetiches  and  greegrees  were  of  no  use,  and  had  no 
power,  and  that  it  was  absurd  to  expect  anything  of  a  men 
wooden  idol  that  a  man  had  made  and  could  bum  up.  Also, 
that  there  was  no  such  thing  as  witchcraft^  and  that  it  was  very 
wroDg  to  kill  people  who  were  accused  of  it ;  that  there  was  only 
one  Grod,  whom  the  whites  and  blacks  must  alike  love  and  de- 
pend on.    All  this  elicited  only  grunts  of  surprise  and  incredulity. 

Then  the  king  took  up  the  conversation,  and  remark^  that 
we  white  men  were  much  favoured  by  our  Gk)d,  who  was  so  kind 
as  to  send  us  guns  and  powder  from  heaven. 

Whereupon  the  king's  brother  remarked  that  it  must  be  veiy 
fine  to  have  rivers  of  alougou  (rum)  flowing  through  our  countiy 
all  the  year  round,  and  that  he  would  like  to  live  on  the  banks 
of  such  a  river. 


Chap.  XH.        UNLIMITED  OPFEBS  OF  MAERIAGE.  155 

ELereiipon  I  said  that  we  made  our  own  guns — which  ho  one 
present  seemed  to  believe ;  and  that  there  were  no  rivers  of  rum, 
which  seemed  a  disappointment  to  several. 

Next  the  king,  who  is  a  man  of  a  kind  heart  and  given  to 
bursts  of  liberality,  informed  me  that,  in  honour  of  my  coming  to 
stay  with  him,  he  would  place  ail  the  women  of  the  village  at  my 
oommand.  This  I  declined,  saying  that  white  men  thought  it 
yery  wrong  to  abuse  women,  and  that  in  my  country  each  man 
had  but  one  wife  (I  did  not  mention  the  Mormons),  and  was  not 
allowed  to  have  two  or  more.  This  seemed  to  them  the  toughest 
yam  of  all.  They  gave  a  general  shout  of  astonishment,  and 
even  the  women  said  this  was  a  curious  law,  and  not  good. 
Altogether,  I  think  they  must  have  thought  white  meia  a  very 
singular  people ;  and  perhaps  a  negro's  account  of  America 
would  be  quite  as  curious,  and  interesting,  and  one-sided,  as  a 
white  man's  account  of  AMca. 

The  next  day  my  hunters  started  out  before  daylight,  saying 
they  were  determined  to  lose  no  time,  for  fear  I  should  want 
to  stay  in^  the  house  another  day.  They  have  a  species  of  dry 
humour,  these  black  fellows,  and  this  was  a  specimen  of  it. 
There  was  a  large  party  of  us,  as  some  of  the  best  hunters  of  the 
town  were  to  go  with  us.  I  gave  them  all  powder — ^guns  they 
all  have,  such  as  they  are — and  we  divided  into  two  parties, 
Aboko  going  separately,  with  one  or  two  attendants,  on  a 
leopard-hunt,  while  I  took  the  great  crowd  with  me  into  the 
forest  for  what  we  should  find.  By  noon  we  were  back  with 
more  game  than  I  had  ever  shot  before  in  one  day  in  Africa, 
though,  to  be  sure,  none  of  it  was  large.  But  my  joy  was  greats 
for  among  the  animals  I  myself  killed  was  a  new  and  hitherto 
unknown  variety  of  the  Guinea-fowl,  and  a  most  beautiful  bird. 
Only  a  naturalist  can  conceive  my  pleasure  at  this  discovery. 

llie  crested  Guinea-fowl  (Numida  plumifera),  as  this  bird  is 
called,  is  a  new  bird.  It  is  one  of  the  handsomest  of  all  the 
Guinea-fowls  yet  discovered.  Its  head  is  naked,  the  skin  being 
of  a  deep  bluish-black  tinge,  and  is  crowned  with  a  tuft  of 
straight,  erect,  narrow,  downy  feathers  standing  in  a  bunch  close 
together.  The  upper  part  of  the  neck,  the  throat,  and  the  occi- 
put are  covered  with  short,  dark  feathers  in  the  male,  and  are 
naked  in  the  femala  The  plumage  of  the  body  is  of  a  fine 
bluish-black  ground,  variegated  with  numerous  eyes  of  white 


1  . 


156  TOILS  OF  A  NATURALIST.  Chap.  XIL 

slightlj  tinged  with  blue.  The  bill  and  legs  are  coloured  a  blue- 
black  similar  to  the  skin  of  the  head.  The  secondary  quills  of 
the  wings  have  the  outer  nibs  white.  The  total  length  of  the 
bird  I  shot  this  day  was  seventeen  inches. 

This  bird  is  not  found  in  the  forests  near  the  seashore,  but  is 
first  met  with,  as  I  afterwards  ascertained,  about  fifty  miles  east 
of  Sangatanga.  It  is  very  shy,  but  marches  in  large  flocks 
through  the  woods,  where  tie  traveller  hears  its  loud  voice.  It 
utters  a  kind  of  **  quack,"  hoarse  and  discordant,  like  the  voices 
of  other  Guinea-fowls.  It  avoids  the  path  left  by  travellers ;  but 
its  own  tracks  are  met  everywhere  in  the  woods  it  frequents,  as 
the  flock  scratch  and  tear  up  the  ground  wherever  they  stop.  It 
is  strong  of  wing,  and  sleeps  by  night  on  the  tops  of  high  trees, 
a  flock  generally  roosting  together  on  the  same  tree.  When 
surprised  by  the  hunter  they  do  not  fly  in  a  body,  but  scatter  in 
every  direction.  Thus  it  is  a  difficult  bird  to  gel^  and  the  natives 
do  not  often  get  a  shot  at  it 

I  had  eaten  nothing  before  going  out  in  the  morning,  and  was 
therefore  glad  to  get  my  dinner  and  breakfast  in  one  before  com- 
mencing to  stuff  my  prizes.  And  I  am  sure  never  bird-fancier 
or  stufier  took  more  pains  with  a  specimen  than  I  with  my  bril- 
liant Guinea-fowl.  It  was  carefully  put  away  with  a  curious 
black  monkey  (Colobics  Satamis),  and  both  were  sent  to  Sanga- 
tanga by  the  most  careful  man  I  could  find.  By  the  time  I  had 
done  I  had  a  bad  headache,  and  was  not  sorry  when  Aboko 
came  in  without  having  shot  anything ;  for  in  these  latitudes 
when  an  animal  is  shot  it  must  be  stuffed  without  loss  of  time, 
else  the  ants  eat  it  up. 

I  was  so  tired  that  I  went  to  bed  early,  but  got  scarcely  any 
sleep  at  aU.  The  whole  town  was  in  uproar  all  night.  The 
people  had  a  general  jollification  in  honour  of  my  staying  among 
them  so  long.  Fortunately  I  was  not  called  out  to  make  a 
speech,  or  take  any  other  part  in  the  ceremonies.  It  was  bad 
enough  to  listen  to  the  singing,  shouting,  dancing,  and  uproarious 
merriment.  The  next  day  I  had  a  worse  headache,  and  did  not 
hunt ;  but  stayed  in  town,  and  was  exhibited  to  great  numbers 
of  curious  Shekianis  who  trooped  in  from  neighbouring  villages 
to  see  the  white  man.  Of  course,  Njambai  was  in  ecstacies  over 
the  excitement.  These  people  had  never  seen  a  white  man 
before,  and  examined  me  with  a  curious  mixture  of  fear  and 


Chap.  XII.  A  WOMAN  TORTURED.  157 

wonder.  My  hair  especially  excited  their  astonishment.  Many 
of  them  said  I  must  be  a  spirit  (mbiuri),  and  seemed  to  hold  me 
in  great  awe. 

My  hunters  brought  in  towards  evening  a  great  quantity  of 
monkeys,  on  whose  flesh  they  feasted,  while  I  had  to  sit  down 
and  stuff  eight  of  .the  rarest  specimens  before  going  to  bed,  as 
they  would  not  keep.  Fortunately  all  was  quiet,  and  when  my 
work  was  done  I  was  able  to  go  to  sleep.  It  was  one  of  their 
superstitious  times.  There  was  something  the  matter  with  the 
moon.  I  was  unable  to  learn  what,  nor  do  I  believe  they  knew 
exactly  themselves ;  but  every  man  covered  his  body  with  red 
and  white  chalk-marks,  and  went  to  bed. 

I  did  not  go  out  the  next  day,  and  counted  myself  lucky  that 
I  did  not,  for  I  was  able  to  save  the  life  of  a  poor  woman  who 
was  being  killed  with  the  most  horrible  tortures.  After  dinner, 
as  I  was  reading,  I  heard  a  woman  crying  out  as  if  in  great  pain. 
On  my  asking  what  was  the  matter,  a  man  told  me  the  king 
was  punishing  one  of  his  wives;  and  some  others  hinted 
that  I  had  better  go  and  try  to  save  her  life.  I  hurried  over 
to  the  king's  house,  and  there,  in  front  of  the  veranda^  a 
spectacle  met  my  eyes  which  froze  my  blood  with  horror.  A 
woman,  naked,  was  tied  by  the  middle  to  a  stout  stake  driven 
into  the  ground.  Her  legs  were  stretched  out  and  fastened 
to  other  smaller  stakes,  and  stout  cords  were  bound  round 
her  neck,  waist,  ankles,  and  wrists.  These  cords  were  being 
twisted  with  sticks,  and  when  I  arrived  the  skin  was  already 
bxirsting  from  the  terrible  compression.  A  great  crowd  of 
spectators  were  standing  around,  not  much  excited*  I  suppose 
they  were  used  to  such  scenes. 

I  walked  up,  and,  taking  the  king  by  the  arm,  asked  him  to 
release  the  poor  wretch  for  my  sake,  and  not  to  kiU  her.  When 
I  spoke,  the  twisting  ceased.  The  executioners  seemed  willing 
enough  to  suspend  operations.  The  king  hesitated,  and  was  not 
willing  to  be  balked  of  his  revenge.  He  walked  into  his  house. 
I  followed  him,  and  threatened  to  leave  his  town  immediately  if 
he  did  not  release  her.  Finally  he  gave  in,  and  said,  **  Let  her 
loose  yourself.    I  give  her  to  you." 

I  rushed  immediately,  and,  being  unable  to  untie  the  savage 
cords,  cut  them  with  my  knife.  The  poor  creature  was  covered 
with  blood.    Some  of  the  ropes  had  penetrated  so  deeply  that 


158  PHASmUS  NIGER.  Chap.  XH. 

the  flesh  had  burst  open,  and  she  bled  freely.  However,  she 
was  not  seriously  hurt ;  and  I  thanked  Ood  in  my  heart  that 
I  had  been  able  to  save  her  life.  I  went  immediately  in  to  the 
king  and  made  hiTw  promise  me  that  he  wotild  not  punish 
her  again.  Then  I  asked  what  she  had  done  to  deserve  such 
pxmishment.  He  said  she  had  stolen  the .  bead  belt  which 
he  usually  wore  around  his  waist  and  given  it  to  her  lover — a 
heinous  offence  truly. 

Then,  to  change  the  current  of  his  ebony  majesty's  thoughts, 
I  pointed  out  to  him  a  small  bird  sitting  upon  the  top  of  a  high 
tree  near  his  house,  and  said  I  could  kill  that  bird.  He  said  it 
was  impossible,  as  I  knew  he  would,  The  negroes  are  poor 
marksmen.  I  sent  for  my  gun,  took  aim,  and  brought  down  the 
bird,  amid  the  loud  shouts  of  his  majesty  and  the  populace. 
They  examined  my  gun,  which  had  a  capAock,  and  was  a  great 
wonder  to  them,  as,  of  course,  they  use  only  flint-locks.  Then 
they  said  I  had  a  greegree  or  fetich  to  help  me  shoot  No  one 
who  had  not  a  powerful  charm  could  do  such  things,  they 
thought. 

Then,  to  clinch  their  good-humour,  I  brought  out  my  match- 
box and  struck  a  light.  This  has  never  fSailed  to  get  Jte  a 
great  reputation  among  the  interior  negroes.  It  is  a  trick* 
which  seems  to  them  the  most  marvellous  of  all,  and  these 
Shekianis  were  never  tired  of  seeing  me  "  make  fire." 

The  next  day  I  went  out  hunting  by  myself,  and,  to  my  great 
joy,  shot  another  new  bird,  a  black  wild-fowl  {PTumdvs  niger)^ 
one  of  the  most  singular  birds  I  have  seen  in  Africa,  and 
the  discovery  of  which  I  rank  as  next  in  importance  to  that  of 
the  new  Guinea-fowl  described  before.  Indeed,  of  the  sixty 
new  birds  I  was  able  to  add  to  the  list  of  known  African  birds, 
these  two  seem  to  me  the  most  interesting. 

The  PhamdMS  niger  is  about  eighteen  inches  long,  including 
the  tail-feathers.  Its  head  and  the  upper  part  of  its  neck  are 
bare  or  naked,  with  the  exception  of  a  longitudinal  strip  of 
short  black  feathers  which  runs  from  the  base  of  the  bill  to  the 
occiput,  ending  abruptly.  The  head,  where  it  is  bare,  is  in 
the  female  of  a  pink  hue,  and  in  the  male  of  a  bright  scarlet. 
The  throat,  in  front,  has  very  short  feathers.  When  I  saw  this 
bird  for  the  first  time  in  the  woods,  I  thought  I  saw  before  me  a 
domestic  chicken.    The  natives  have  noticed  the  resemblanoe 


Chap.  XH.  DESTRUCTIYENESS  OF  ANTS.  159 

too,  as  their  name  for  it  shows :  oovba  iga,  signifying  wild-fowl. 
Wild  they  are^  and  most  difficult  to  approach ;  and  also  rare, 
eyen  in  the  forests  where  they  are  at  home.  They  are  not  found 
at  all  on  the  sea-cocist,  and  do  not  appeal  until  the  traveller 
reaches  the  range  of  fifty  or  sixty  miles  from  the  coast.  Even 
there  they  are  so  rare  that,  though  I  looked  out  for  them 
constantly,  I  killed  but  three  in  all  my  expeditions.  They 
are  not  gregarious,  like  the  Guinea-fowl^  but  wander  through 
the  woods,  a  male  and  one  or,  at  most,  two  females  in  company, 
They  are  very  watchful,  and  fly  off  to  retreats  in  the  woods 
at  the  slightest  alarm. 

I  begin  now  to  have  so  many  animals  on  hand  that  I  find  I 
cannot  go  as  far  as  the  NazaretL  The  risk  of  losing  all  my 
collection  is  too  gi:eat;  and  the  trouble  of  taking  care  of  it 
is  greater  stilL  The  ants — ^those  little  pests — are  constantly  on 
the  look-out  for  prey;  and  it  is  impossible  to  leave  a  dead 
animal  about  for  the  shortest  time  without  imminent  risk  of 
having  it  destroyed.  Let  the  reader  bear  in  mind  that  not  only 
has  the  hunter-naturalist  in  these  A&ican  backwoods  to  kill  his 
game,  which  may  occupy  all  day,  but  when  he  comes  home  tired 
he  must  in[unediately  stuff  it  that  it  may  not  spoil,  and  then 
it  must  be  suspended  by  strings  from  the  rafters  of  the  house  to 
keep  the  ants  off.  The  slightest  carelessness  may  bring  ruin 
upon  his  most  cherished  specimens ;  and  I  have  mpre  than  once 
been  reduced  to  the  brink  of  despair  by  finding  a  choice  bird  or 
other  animal  in  one  night,  and  through  one  slight  oversight  in 
the  preparation  of  the  suspending  cord,  completely  riddled  and 
ruined  by  the  ants  before  morning. 

I  told  the  king  that  I  must  return  to  Sangatanga,  and  then 
began  to  pack  my  animals  and  skeletons  in  such  parcels  as 
would  be  handy  to  carry.  We  are  to  start  early  to-morrow 
(30th),  and  this  evening  I  distributed  all  my  tobacco  among  the 
people  of  the  village.  They  have  treated  me  well,  and  deserved 
this  trifle,  which  is  to  them  a  great  favour. 

The  king  gave  me,  as  provision  for  my  route,  a  chicken,  half- 
ardozen  eggs,  and  twelve  bunches  of  plantains.  I  promised 
to  send  V>iTn  firom  Sangatanga  25  heads  of  tobacco,  a  piece 
of  doth,  a  glass  full  of  powder,  three  pipes,  and  some  beads. 
He  added  a  particular  request  for  some  rum,  to  which  I  did  not 
agree. 


160  PECULIARITIES  OP  THE  SHEKIANIS.        Chap.  Xn. 

Then  he  said  that  I  must  come  again  and  see  him^  and  stay 
longer,  and  I  should  have  his  best  hunters  to  help  me.  *•  But,** 
added  he,  "when  you  come  don't  forget  to  bring  some  rum." 
And  so  he  went  on,  begging  this,  and  promising  that,  but  always 
recurring  to  the  rum.  Poor  old  king!  how  he  would  have 
enjoyed  a  trip  to  Sangatanga,  where  he  might  have  got  his 
fill  of  his  beloved  rum.  For  my  part,  I  made  it  a  point 
of  principle  during  my  travels  in  AJ&ica  never  to  give  a  negro 
rum. 

When  we  were  ready  to  start,  the  king  sent  his  son  with  me 
to  bring  back  his  presents,  and  desired  me  particularly  not 
to  forget  the  rum.  Saying  which,  he  gave  me,  as  a  souvenir,  an 
old  clay  pipe,  black  with  age  and  use,  which  he  seemed  to  have 
a  great  aflfection  for.  He  desired  me  to  carry  it  to  my  own 
country,  and  tell  the  people  that  this  had  been  the  favourite 
pipe  of  King  Njambai. 

I  penetrated,  on  different  occasions,  as  far  as  twenty  miles  due 
east  Vf  Njambai'8  town,  but  found  the  country  nowL  different 
from  that  already  described.  As  this  is  the  last  time  we  are  to 
come  in  contact  with  the  Shekiani  tribe  in  these  pages,  it  seems 
a  proper  place  to  give  the  reader  some  general  information  con- 
cerning this  large  and  important  tribe. 

The  Shekiani  tribe,  and  those  people  who  are  closely  allied  to 
them  and  speak  various  dialects  of  their  language,  occupy  a 
portion  of  the  sea-shore  and  interior  as  far  as  80  miles  from 
the  sea — ^from  the  banks  of  the  Mimi  and  Moondah  down  as  far 
south  as  the  banks  of  the  Ogobay.  Through  this  great  extent  of 
country  they  are  scattered  in  viUages,  having  nowhere  any 
central  point  of  union,  and  living,  for  the  most  part,  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Mpongwe  and  Bakalai  people.  Still  they 
manage  to  keep  up  their  nationality.  In  some  parts  they 
are  most  numerous  near  the  coast ;  in  others  they  range  as  the 
second,  third,  and  even  fourth  tribe  inland.  Thus  they  are 
settled  near  the  mouth  of  the  Muni  and  Moondah,  and  inhabit 
the  sea-shore  between  the  latter  river  and  the  Graboon ;  while 
south  of  the  Gaboon  they  have  given  way  to  the  Mpongwe,  and 
have  their  villages  in  the  interior. 

In  person  they  are  of  ordinary  size,  generally  light-coloured 
for  negroes,  and  not  so  fine-looking  as  the  Mpongwe  or  Mbengas. 
They  are  warlike,  treacherous,  much  given  to  trading,  and  are 


Chap.  XIL  MODE  OP  WARFARE.  161 

real  cheats.  They  are  ardent  hunters,  and  have  sufficient 
courage  and  great  skill  in  woodcraft,  being  very  lithe  and  active, 
light  of  foot,  and  cunning  in  their  manoQUvres  to  approach  their 
prey.  They  are  quarrelsome,  and  have  constant  "  palavers " 
either  with  their  own  villages  or  those  of  other  tribes.  They 
have  but  little  clan  feeling,  and  the  intercourse  between 
neighbouring  villages  of  Shekiani  is  not  always  friendly,  and 
scarcely  ever  intimate.  The  men,  in  common  with  all  other 
African  men  I  have  met,  have  little  or  no  taste  for  agriculture  ; 
they  leave  the  culture  of  the  ground  to  their  women  and  slaves. 
The  sea-shore  Shekianis  own  many  slaves,  but  those  of  the 
interior  but  few. 


Sh«kiani  Spoons. 

In  their  warfare  cimning  has  a  most  important  part  They 
laugh  at  the  courage  of  the  white  man  who  faces  his  enemy,  and 
delight  most  in  ambushes  and  sudden  surprises.  If  one  man  has 
a  quarrel  with  another,  he  lies  in  wait  for  him,  shoots  him  as  he 
is  passing  by  the  way,  and  immediately  retreats.  Then,  of  course, 
the  dead  man's  fiiends  take  up  his  quarrel ;  then  ensue  other 
ambushes  and  murders  ;  frequently  a  dozen  villages  are  involved 
in  the  palaver,  and  the  killing  and  robbing  goes  on  for  months 
and  even  years,  each  party  acting  as  occasion  offers.  This 
breeds  a  feeling  of  insecurity  which  is  destructive  to  all  settled 
habits.  Often,  to  escape  assassination,  a  whole  village  moves 
away  and  builds  anew  at  some  distance  ;  and  perhaps  then  the 
enemy  reaches  them,  or  new  complications  arise,  giving  cause  for 
new  murders. 

Withal  they  are  not  bloodthirsty,  but  simply  careless  of  human 
life,  passionate,  and  revengeful. 

M 


162  THE  MARRIAGE  RELATION.  Chap.  XXL 

Polygamy  of  course  prevails  among  them,  and  takes  rank  as  a 
political  in^tution,  as  has  been  already  explained.  A  man  finds 
it  to  his  interest  to  marry  into  as  many  influential  femilies  in 
his  own  and  other  tribes  as  he  can,  and  thus  extends  his  trade 
connexions  and  his  influence  and  authority.  But,  on  the  other 
hand,  it  is  the  cause  of  nearly  all  the  palavers  and  wars  they 
have.  The  men  are  continually  intriguing  with  strange  women, 
and  when  caught  are  murdered,  or  get  their  town  in  trouble. 
Female  chastity  is  little  valued ;  and  one  great  cause  of  the 
gradual  decrease  of  this  and  other  tribes  is  found  in  the  fact 
that  they  force  their  females  to  marry  at  so  early  an  age  that 
they  never  become  mothers.  Children  are  promised  in  mar- 
riage at  the  age  of  three  or  four  years,  or  even  at  birth ;  and 
girls  are  actually  wives  at  eight  and  nine,  and  sometimes 
earlier.  They  have  children  at  thirteen  or  fourteen,  but  of 
course  the  women  age  early,  and  the  majority  die  young  and 
childless. 

Though  chastity  is  not  valued  for  itself,  adultery  is  a  serious 
offence  among  townsmen.  It  is  punished  by  fines,  graduated 
according  to  the  means  of  the  offender ;  and  many  men  are  sold 
annually  into  slavery  where  the  fine  cannot  be  levied  in  any 
other  way.  Sometimes  the  guilty  man  compromises  by  working 
for  a  certain  time  for  the  injured  husband,  and  sometimes  blood 
alone  heals  the  difficulty. 

Each  man  has  generally  a  head  or  chief  wife — ^mostly  the 
woman  he  married  first ;  and  for  anyone  to  have  criminal 
intercourse  with  this  woman  ranks  as  a  most  heinous  crime,  for 
which  the  offender  is  at  least  sold  into  slavery.  Wh^i  the 
husband  forms  new  marriage  connexions,  and,  as  often  happens, 
his  new  bride  is  but  a  child,  she  is  then  put  under  the  care  and 
guardianship  of  the  head  wife,  who  brings  her  up  to  the  proper 
age.  They  marry  also  with  their  slave  women ;  but  the  children 
of  these  women,  though  free,  have  less  infiuence  and  position 
among  the  people  than  the  children  of  free  women.  Frequentiy 
the  women  desert  their  husbands  for  abuse  or  other  causes,  and 
run  off  to  other  villages;  and,  as  it  is  a  point  of  honour  to 
return  no  fugitives  of  this  kind,  here  is  another  fertile  source  of 
palaver  and  war. 

The  women  are  treated  very  harshly.  ^  The  men  take  care 
to  put  all  the  hardest  work  on  their  wives,  who  raise  the  crops, 


Chap.  XII.  SUPEHSTITIONS,  163 

gather  firewood,  bear  all  kinds  of  burdens;  and,  where  the 
bar-wood  trade  is  carried  on,  as  it  is  now  by  many  Sbekiani 
Tillages,  the  men  only  cut  down  the  trees  and  split  them  into 
billets,  which  the  women  are  then  forced  to  bear  on  their 
backs  through  the  forests  and  jungle  down  to  the  riTer-banks, 
aa  they  have  but  rude  paths,  and  beasts  of  burden  are  unknown 
in  all  this  part  of  Africa.  This  ia  the  most  severe  toil  imagin- 
able, as  the  loads  have  to  be  carried  often  six  or  seven  milee  or 
more. 

The  Shekiani  tribe  is  divided  into  clans,  and,  though  these 
families  grow  very  large  sometimes,  marriage  between  members 
of  the  same  clan  is  prohibited.  Children  add  much  to  a  man's 
consequence,  especially  boys ;  and  a  fmitfal  woman  enjoys,  for 
this  reason,  great  favour.  In  cases  where,  as  frequently  hap- 
pens, the  head  of  the  family  is  old  and  decrepit^  the  mother  of 
many  children  has  no  questions  asked  her.  They  know  nothing 
scarcely  of  the  care  of  children,  and  lose  a  great  proportion 
through  mistaken  treatment  in  infancy. 

Though  they  have  villf^s,  they  may  almost  be  called  a 
nomadic  people.  They  are  continually  moving  about  the 
country,  shifting  their  quarters  for  such  causes  as  a  palaver  with 
a  neighbouring  town,  the  death  of  the  chief,  or  a  belief  that  their 
village  is  bewitched.  Then  they  gather  up  all  their  household 
goods,  and,  collecting  what  provision  they  can,  move  off  in  a 
body,  sometimes  many  weary  miles  away. 


imbee:  Um  BheUonl  Bu)]a 


Their  superstitions  are  of  the  most  degrading  and  barbarous 
character.  I  shall  mention  here  only  that  the  belief  in  witch- 
craft is  general,  and  causes  much  misery ;  while  of  idols,  evil 
and  good  spirits,  greegrees,  fetiches,  and  charms,  there  seems  no 

H  2 


164  A  BUFFALO  SHOT.  Chap.  XII. 

end.    The  whole  subject  of  religious  superstitions  I  shall  treat 
in  detail  in  another  chapter. 

In  different  localities  the  Shekianis  are  known  by  sub-names, 
and  the  chief  of  these  are  the  Mbondemo  or  Ndemo,  the  Mbicho, 
the  Ntaimou,  and  the  Acoa — ^the  last  inhabiting  the  interior 
between  Gaboon  and  Cape  Lopez — the  Mbiki,  the  Mbousha,  and 
the  Ibouay.  All  these  speak  dialects  of  the  Shekiani,  but  hold 
themselves  to  be  separate  tribes.  The  location  of  all  these  little 
nations  will  be  found  on  the  map. 

We  set  out  on  our  return  to  Sangatanga  on  the  30th.  I  did 
not  intend  to  proceed  immediately  to  the  coast,  but  desired  to 
remain  a  couple  of  weeks  at  least  in  the  forest  and  prairies  by 
the  way,  as  I  saw  that  away  from  the  villages  I  should  have 
better  chances  to  hunt  the  shyer  animals,  and  those  which  I 
was  most  anxious  to  procure.  I  made  arrangements  by  which 
the  king  promised  to  give  to  such  men  as  I  sent  in  supplies 
of  food  for  my  party  from  time  to  time ;  and  having  thus 
provided  against  that  trouble  which  is  the  most  constantly 
besetting  the  traveller  in  this  country,  and  secured  myself 
against  actual  starvation,  even  if  we  had  poor  success  in  hunt- 
ing, I  set  out  in  good  spirits.  We  passed  by  a  road  or  path 
slightly  diverging  from  the  one  I  had  come  out  on,  which  gave 
me  a  chance  to  see  some  new  landscapes.  It  was  a  beautifully 
clear  day,  with  a  cool  breeze  blowing,  which  made  the  lon*:^ 
prairies  quite  endurable. 

Towards  three  o'clock  we  saw  before  us  a  little  lake  on  the 
borders  of  the  prairie,  and,  while  looking  at  the  water,  I  saw 
between  it  and  ourselves  a  solitary  buffalo.  I  was  a  little  in 
advance  of  my  party,  who  lay  down,  while  I  tried  to  approach. 
The  grass  was  very  short,  and  I  was  afraid  of  being  seen ;  but 
fort.unately  the  bull  presently  entered  a  patch  of  high  grass 
through  which  he  could  not  see  me,  and  now  I  advanced  quickly 
within  range.  Just  as  he  emerged  into  the  open  I  fired.  He 
gave  a  deep  roar  of  rage,  and  without  a  moment's  hesitation 
dashed  towards  me.  I  had  my  other  barrel  ready,  and  had 
raised  my  gun  to  give  him  the  second  bullet,  when  he  gave  a 
little  leap  and  tumbled  down  head  first — dead. 

When  my  fellows  saw  this  they  set  up  a  hurrah  of  joy  and 
hurried  to  the  prize.  It  was  at  once  skinned,  and  the  best  parts 
of  the  meat  taken  off.   We  camped  at  the  lake-side,  and  had  roast 


Oeap.  XII.  A  PERMANENT  CAMP.  165 

buffalo  for  sapper.  My  men  are  all  as  fat  as  pigs,  having  lived 
high  on  monkeys  and  other  game  ever  since  we  left  Sangatanga. 
They  account  me  a  great  and  successful  hunter,  and  seem  to 
think  they  have  never  had  such  a  ^^  good  time." 

We  were  now  about  fifteen  miles  from  Njambai's  village;  and 
after  sleeping  a  night  over  the  matter,  I  concluded  to  make  my 
permanent  camp  in  this  pretty  prairie,  where  we  were  near  water 
and  had  a  wide  stretch  of  forest  on  one  side  of  us  for  our  hunts. 
The  men  thought  it  a  good  place,  one  likely  to  afford  us  good 
sport,  especially  as  the  lake  was  likely  to  draw  beasts  to  its  banks 
to  drink.  Accordingly,  we  spent  a  whole  day  in  arranging  our 
encampment  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  everything  comfortable 
and  secure.  Fortunately  it  is  now  the  dry  season,  and  we  have 
no  rain,  but  only  the  cold  night-winds  to  fear.  With  branches 
of  trees  we  built  ourselves  shelters  which  should  protect  us  from 
the  wind.  I  had  my  boxes  piled  in  a  solid  mass  to  windward  of 
my  own  bed ;  and,  having  locked  everything  up,  threatened  to 
shoot  the  first  man  who  stole  anything  from  me.  Then  we  built 
light  roofs  of  leafy  branches  over  our  sleeping-places,  arranged 
the  fires,  and  behold !  a  village.  In  the  midst  of  our  work  came 
ten  slaves  of  Njambai  laden  with  plantains,  which  the  good  fel- 
low had  sent  after  me — ^a  most  welcome  supply. 

When  all  was  done,  and  we  were  ready  for  supper,  I  again 
warned  my  men  to  be  honest  and  keep  their  fingers  at  home. 
They  are  good  fellows ;  but  I  have  found  that,  while  all  savages 
steal,  in  this  part  of  the  country — where  the  slave-trade  prevails, 
and  where  the  negroes  have  come  in  contact  with  the  lowest  class 
of  whites — they  are  much  greater  thieves  than  is  even  usual  with 
them.  So  I  threatened  to  kill  the  first  man  I  caught  troubling 
my  property — to  shoot  without  mercy ;  "  and  then,"  said  I,  with 
great  sternness,  "when  I  have  blown  your  brains  out,  I  will 
settle  the  matter  with  your  king." 

To  which  Aboko  coolly  replied  that  the  settlement  was  not 
likely  to  do  them  any  particular  good — another  little  specimen 
of  African  humour. 

Of  course  they  all  protested  loudly  that  they  were  honest ; 
but  I  knew  their  temptations,  poor  fellows !  and  had  more  con- 
fidence in  their  faith  that  1  would  certainly  kill  the  thief  than 
in  their  good  resolutions. 

When  this  little  matter  was  settled,  we  drew  around  the  fire. 


166  AN  EVENING  IN  THE  WOODS.  Chap.  XIL 

The  sun  was  just  setting.  In  a  huge  ketUe  suspended  over  the 
fire  was  boiling  a  quantity  of  the  juicy  buffalo-meat ;  before  us 
was  a  great  pile  of  roasted  plantains ;  and  so,  seating  ourselves 
about  the  immense  fire,  for  the  evening  was  growing  chilly, 
we  took  a  hearty  supper  together;  I  eating  off  a  plate  and 
using  a  fork  —  which  vestiges  of  civilisation  I  have  always 
managed  to  carry  along  —  while  the  black  fellows  took  fresh 
leaves  for  plates  and  used  the  *^  black  man's  fork,"  as  they  call 
their  five  fingers.  * 

After  dinner  they  drank  a  jug  of  palra-wine,  which  had  been 
brought  from  Ngola ;  and  then,  to  crown  their  feast  with  the 
greatest  delight  of  all,  I  went  to  my  box,  and,  lifting  the  lid, 
while  the  shining  black  faces  peered  at  me  with  saucer-eyes  of 
expectation,  took  out  a  huge  head  of  Kentucky  tobacca     This 
"brought  down  the  house,"  so  to  speak;   there  was  a  wild 
hurrah  of  joy  as  I  distributed  a  good  portion  to  each,  and  in  a 
few  minutes  all  were  lying  about  the  fire  smoking,  with  that 
peculiar  air  of  utter  content  into  which  the  African  fiEdls  sa  ". 
readily  at  the  slightest  opportunity  of  fire  and  tobacco-smoka^  /" 
Then  ensued  wild  stories  of  hunting-adventures,  of  witchcraft^  "^  ' 
and  evil  spirits,  well  fitting  the  rude  picturesque  surroundings; 
and  they  lay  there  talking  and  talking,  till  at  last  I   was 
obliged  to  remind  them  that  it  was  one  o'clock,  and  time  to 
feel  sleepy. 

The  negroes  have  a  particular  delight  in  lying  around  a  com- 
fortable fire  at  night  and  telling  stories,  and  I  have  often  found 
them  thus  engaged  late  at  night  when  entering  a  village. 

The  next  morning  (June  1st)  Aboko  and  I  went  out  in  search 
of  elephants,  while  Niamkala  went  with  some  other  men  to  iiiint 
for  wild  pigs,  and,  if  he  could  find  them,  gorilla  and  chimpanzeeL 
I  had  poor  luck,  killing  only  a  few  small  monkeys  and  birds,  of 
no  value ;  but  as  we  were  returning  to  the  camp  I  had  quite 
unexpectedly,  as  such  good  luck  generally  comes,  the  great  shot   -." 
of  the  day.    As  Aboko  and  I  were  walking  carelessly  along  I   '■- 
heard  the  cry  of  a  gray  partridge  near  by,  and  turned  back  to 
get  a  shot  if  possible,  as  they  are  fine  eating.    As  I  pushed  into    ■  •- 
the  grass — we  were  just  on  the  edge  of  the  forest — ^I  saw  sud- 
denly several  buffalo,  one  of  which  I  made  sure  of,  as  he  stood 
a  little  in  advance  of  the  rest,  and  the  grass  was  high  enough 
for  a  stealthy  approach.     Aboko  and  I  advanced  slowly  towaiiis 


Chap.  XII.  STALKING  A  LEOPARD.  167 

the  unconsdons  bull,  who  stood  a  fair  mark ;  and  I  was  about  to 
raise  my  gun  when  Aboko  made  a  quick  sign  to  hold  still  and 
listen.  As  we  stood  perfectly  motionless  I  heard,  at  apparently 
a  little  distance  before  us,  a  low  purring  sound,  which  might 
have  been  taken  by  a  careless  ear  for  the  sound  of  the  wind 
passing  through  the  grass.  But  to  Aboko's  quick  ear  it  be- 
tokened something  else.  His  face  grew  yery  earnest,  and  he 
whispered  to  me  "  Njego,"  which  is  Shekiani  for  leopard. 

The  noise  continued,  and  we  moved  slowly  and  very  cautiously 
a  few  steps  ahead  to  get  a  position  where  we  could  see  over  the 
grass.  The  position  was  not  a  pleasant  one.  The  leopard  comes 
out  generally  by  night  only,  and  nothing  but  extreme  hunger 
will  bring  him  out  of  his  lair  in  open  day.  Now,  when  he  is 
hungry,  he  is  also  unusually  savage  and  quick  in  his  motions. 
We  knew  the  animal  was  near,  but  could  not  by  any  means  get 
a  sight  of  him.  As  the  wind  blew  from  it  towards  us,  I  perceived 
plainly  a  strong  and  peculiar  odour  which  this  animal  gives  out, 
and  this  proved  more  decidedly  that  it  could  not  be  far  off.  The 
thought  passed  through  my  mind — was  it  watching  us  ?  Did  its 
eyes  penetrate  the  grass  which  we  could  not  see  through  ?  If  so, 
was  it  perhaps  getting  ready  to  spring  ? 

Meantime  our  buffalo-bull  stood  stupidly  before  his  herd  not 
twenty  yards  from  us,  utterly  innocent  of  the  presence  of  so 
many  of  his  formidable  enemies,  and  little  suspecting  the  ciuious 
circumstances  to  which  he  was  about  to  owe  his  life. 

Just  then  we  moved  a  little  to  one  side,  and,  peering  through 
an  opening  in  the  grass,  I  beheld  an  immense  leopard,  a  female, 
with  a  tiny  little  leopardling  near  her  side.  The  beast  saw  us 
at  the  same  moment,  turning  her  head  quickly  at  some  shght 
noise  we  made.  She  had  been  watching  the  buffalo  so  intently 
as  not  to  notice  our  approach.  As  I  watched  her,  it  seemed  to 
me  as  though  a  curious  look  of  indecision  passed  over  her  face. 
She,  too,  had  more  game  than  she  had  looked  for,  and  was 
puzzled  which  to  attack  first.  Her  long  tail  wagged  from  side  to 
side,  and  her  eyes  glared  as  she  sought  for  a  moment  for  a 
decision.  But  1  saved  her  the  trouble ;  for  in  less  time  than  it 
takes  to  write  it  do\^Ti  I  had  put  a  ball  into  her  head,  which, 
luckily  for  us,  relieved  her  of  further  care  for  prey.  At  the 
same  time  Aboko  fired  into  the  little  leopard  and  killed  it. 

I  thought  the  men  would  have  lost  their  senses  for  joy,  when 


168  REJOICINGS  OVER  THE  DEAD  LEOPARD.     Chap.  XII. 

we  called  them  to  get  our  prizes.  The  leopard  ie  one  of  the 
most  feared  animals  of  these  forests.  The  gorilla  is  said  to  kill 
the  leopard,  but  is  not  so  daugeroi^  to  man  as  t)iis  great  cat 
Thus  it  is  considered  a  great  feat  to  hill  one  of  these  animals, 
and  the  whole  camp  was  alive  with  excitement.  Guns  were 
fired,  and  everybody  shouted  aloud.  In  the  midst  of  this  noise 
Niamkala  came  into  camp  with  some  wild  boars  and  a  ncheri — 
II  curious  little  beast — which  were  a  ^elcome  addition  to  our  bill 
of  fare. 


Then,  after  eupper,  the  men  painted  themselves  and  san^ 
songs  over  the  leopards  till  I  made  them  go  to  sleep,  which  was 
not  till  towards  morning.  They  danced,  they  sang  songs  of  vic- 
tory, they  abused  and  exulted  over  the  deceased  leopard.  They 
addressed  comical  compliments  to  its  beauty — and  it  is  really  a 
most  beautiful  animal.  They  shouted,  "  Now  you  will  kill  no 
more  people !  Now  you  will  eat  no  more  hunters  I  Now  yon 
cannot  leap  on  your  prey  I"  And  so  on,  till  the  mummery  grew 
past  laughing  at. 

Tiie  next  morning,  however,  I  first  learned  the  full  extent  of 
tlieir  rejoicing,  and  the  great  importance  attached  to  the  killing 
of  this  feared  beast.  I  was  drawn  to  where  we  had  suspended 
the  body  to  keep  the  ants  from  it  by  a  noise  of  angry  quai^ 
rolling,  and  found  Niamkala  asserting  his  determination  to  have 
the  end  of  the  leopard's  tail,  while  the  rest  of  the  hunters  were 
all  asserting  equal  rights  to  it,  and  the  non-combatants,  the 
bearers  of  our  luggage,  looked  on  in  envious  silence,  evidently 
wishing  they  could  also  put  in  claims.     On  inquiry,  I  found  that 


Chap.  XH.      SUPERSTITIONS  ABOUT  THE  LEOPARD.  169 

the  lucky  possessor  of  the  end  of  a  leopard's  tail  was  sure  to  be 
fortunate  among  the  women,  and  could,  in  virtue  of  this  powerful 
charm,  win  as  many  hearts  as  he  might  desire. 

Laughing  at  them,  I  reserved  the  desired  tail  for  him  among 
them  who  should  behave  best,  and  thought  I  had  settled  the 
quarrel.  But  now  came  a  fresh  division.  Aboko,  Niamkala, 
and  Fasiko  each  wanted  the  whole  brain  of  the  animal.  For  a 
few  minutes  a  fight  seemed  imminent  on  this  head,  which  seemed 
even  more  strenuously  disputed  than  the  other.  I  discovered 
that  the  brain,  if  properly  dried  and  mixed  with  some  other 
charm  called  manda,  and  the  nature  of  which  I  could  not  under- 
stand, gave  its  possessor  daimtless  courage  and  great  fortune  on 
the  hunt  And  I  was  so  happy  as  to  pei*suade  my  three  hunters 
— who  really  needed  no  such  amulet  to  patch  up  their  courage — 
that  a  part  was  in  this  case  as  good  as  the  whole. 

This  settled,  I  found  that  the  liver  was  laid  before  me.  As 
this  had  no  value  or  interest  for  me,  I  was  going  to  kick  it  aside 
and  walk  off,  but  was  stopped  and  entreated  to  take  off  the  gall, 
and  myself  destroy  it.  This  was  to  be  done  to  save  the  whole 
party  from  future  trouble.  It  appears  that  the  negroes  believe 
the  gall  of  the  leopard  to  be  deadly  poison,  and  my  men  feared 
to  be  suspected  of  having  concealed  some  of  this  poison  by  their 
friends  or  enemies  at  Sangatanga.  To  settle  which  beforehand 
I  was  now  to  destroy  it,  and  afterwards  to  bear  witness  for  them, 
if  by  chance  they  were  accused  of  poisoning.  Of  course  I  did 
so,  though  convinced  that  this  is  a  mere  superstitious  belief. 

This  day  (2nd)  my  men  were  all  day  smoking  the  great  quan- 
tity of  meat  we  have  on  hand.  It  is  magnificent  weather  for 
hunting  and  for  living  in  the  woods.  The  air  is  cool  and 
refreshing,  the  sky  clouded,  which  prevents  the  sun  from  being 
oppressive  ;  the  forest-trees  are  in  bloom,  and,  as  many  are  fra- 
grant, this  adds  to  our  pleasure.  The  nights  are  very  cold 
indeed,  but  against  that  we  manage  to  protect  ourselves.  The 
dews  are  light,  not  near  so  heavy  as  they  are  in  the  rainy 
season.  The  grass  is  in  great  part  burned  off  the  prairies,  and 
this  affords  us  much  better  chances  and  at  much  less  risk  than 
if  it  were  high ;  for  though  our  approach  is  sometimes  more 
difScult,  I  find  that  if  we  get  to  leeward  of  our  game  and 
manage  cautiously,  there  is  little  diflBculty.  Every  day  we  shot 
more  or  lees  small  and  unimportant  game,  among  which  must 


170  TOUCAN  —  EliEPH  ANT-HUNT.  Chap.  XII. 

be  counted  gazelle,  wild  boars,  monkeys  without  number,  and 
birds.  Thus  our  camp  was  full  of  meat.  As  these  himts  are 
commonplace  I  shall  not  give  them  place  here,  mentioning 
only  the  getting  of  the  new  and  more  important  animals. 

This  day  I  killed  another  new  bird,  a  species  of  toucan,  the 
TochM  camurus.  This  is  the  smallest  toucan  yet  discovered, 
the  length  of  my  specimen  being  but  fourteen  inches.  Its  bill 
is  red.  The  entire  throat  and  breast  are  amber-brown,  tinged 
with  purple  on  the  rump,  and  with  greenish-bronze  on  the 
wings  and  tail.  The  wing-coverts  are  tipped  with  white,  and 
this  formed  two  conspicuous  white  bars  crossing  the  wings 
diagonally.  The  primary  feathers  have  a  single  spot  of  pale 
purple  on  each  web,  larger  on  the  inner  side  ;  the  tertiaries  are 
edged  with  pale  purple  on  both  webs;  the  under  part  of  the 
wings  is  white ;  the  tail  is  tipped  with  white,  and  the  shafts  in 
the  tail-feathers  are  yellowish-white,  inclining  to  golden  above 
and  white  below.  This,  the  smallest  of  the  known  toucans,  is 
an  inhabitant  of  the  forests,  and  avoids  the  prairie.  It  is  shy, 
flies  in  flocks  of  from  five  or  six  to  a  dozen,  and  is  not  found 
north  of  the  equator,  at  least  so  far  as  I  know. 

This  is  the  third  new  bird  I  have  shot  in  the  Cape  Lopez 
country.  Most  of  the  birds  found  in  these  woods  are  common 
also  to  Southern  Africa,  and  are  already  described.  It  is  there- 
fore useless  to  mention  them  here. 

On  the  5th  Aboko  and  Niamkala  brought  in  a  fine  boar,  and 
reported  that  they  had  come  upon  fresh  elephants'  tracks,  where- 
upon it  was  immediately  resolved  that  we  should  all  turn  out 
after  elephants  to-morrow. 

Accordingly  we  hunted  all  the  6th,  but  in  vain,  and  slept  out 
in  the  woods,  determined  to  try  agaia  next  day.  Elephants  are 
not  very  plentiful  in  this  region,  at  least  at  this  season,  and  seem 
to  travel  a  good  deal,  not  finding  their  feed  in  such  abundance  as 
to  induce  them  to  stay  long  in  one  place.  We  had  travelled 
nearly  the  whole  of  the  7th,  when  at  last,  late  in  the  afternoon, 
we  came  across  our  quarry.  Emerging  from  a  thick  part  of  the 
forest  into  the  plain  which  bordered  it,  we  saw  to  our  left,  just 
upon  the  edge  of  the  wood,  a  solitary  bull-elephant.  I  had  seen 
the  great  beast  in  menageries,  and  also  in  the  wild  hunt  among 
my  friends  the  Fans,  where  all  was  such  confusion  that  one  could 
not  be  said  to  see  anything  distinctly.     But  here  all  was  still. 


Chap.  XII.  A  SUCCESSFUL  SHOT.  171 

The  huge  animal  stood  quietly  by  a  tree,  imconscibus  of  our  pre- 
sence. And  now  for  the  first  time  in  my  life  I  was  struck  with 
the  vast  bulk  of  this  gianfof  the  forests.  The  eye  and  mind  had 
leisure  to  dwell  upon  his  size,  and  the  place  was  well  adapted  to 
comparisons.  Great  trees  seemed  but  small  saplings  to  me  when 
I  measured  them  with  the  immense  beast  which  was  standing 
placidly  near  them. 

But  there  was  not  much  time  for  this  feeling.  What  we  were 
to  do  was  to  kill  him,  though  I  felt  a  sense  of  pity  at  destroying 
so  great  a  life.  I  was  very  anxious  to  get  the  first  shot  myself, 
but,  after  taking  in  all  the  chances  of  approach,  was  compelled 
to  admit  that  I  could  not  manage  it  with  any  certainty.  The 
grass  was  burned  in  every  direction  to  leeward  of  him,  and  we 
dared  not  risk  approaching  him  from  thcf  windward  for  fear  he 
should  smell  us. 

I  was  therefore  reluctantly  compelled,  as  a  sensible  hunter,  to 
resign  in  favour  of  Aboko,  whose  eyes  glistened  with  pleasure,  as 
he  lliought  now  to  show  his  skiU. 

Cocking  his  musket,  he  dropped  down  into  the  short  grass,  and 
began  to  creep  up  to  the  elephant,  slowly,  and  on  his  belly.  It 
was  a  splendid  piece  of  woodcraft.  We  stood  behind  some  trees, 
whither  we  had  all  retired  to  consult,  and  watched  Aboko  as  he 
glided  through  the  grass,  fox  all  the  world  like  a  huge  boa  con* 
strictor ;  for  the  slight  glimpses  we  caught  of  his  back,  as  he 
moved  farther  and  farther  away  from  us,  resembled  nothing  so 
much  as  the  folds  of  a  great  serpent  winding  his  way  on. 

Finally  we  could  no  longer  distinguish  any  motion.  Then  all 
was  silence  and  impatient  waiting,  suddenly  broken  by  the  sharp 
report  of  a  gun  ringing  through  the  wood  and  over  the  plain,  and 
eliciting  screams  of  surprise  from  sundry  scared  monkeys  and 
birds  who  had  perhaps  watched  the  secret  approach  with  us, 
though  from  a  better  point  of  view.  As  the  smoke  cleared  away 
I  saw  the  huge  beast  helplessly  tottering,  till  it  finally  threw  up 
its  trunk  and  fell  in  a  dead  mass  at  the  foot  of  a  tree.  The  men 
began  to  shout  with  excitement  at  such  a  good  shot,  and  we  all 
hurried  up  to  the  shapeless  black  mass,  whose  fiesh  was  yet 
quivering  with  the  death-agony.  Aboko's  bullet  had  entered  its 
head  below  the  ear,  and,  striking  the  brain,  was  at  once  fatal. 

Aboko  began  to  make  fetich-marks  on  the  ground  around  the 
body,  and  this  done  we  took  an  axe  which  we  had  carried  along 


172  DIVIDING  THE  PLUNDER.  Chap.  XII. 

and  broke  the  skull,  in  order  to  get  out  the  two  tusks.  The8e 
belonged  to  Aboko  of  right,  but,  as  he  was  King  Bango's  slave, 
he  was  bound  to  give  one  to  that  sablf  tyrant  The  proceeds  of 
the  other  would  be  divided  among  the  party,  Aboko  retaining,  of 
course,  the  most  considerable  share.  The  tusks  weighed  but  30 
pounds  each. 

We  slept  that  night  near  our  prize,  about  which  the  natives 
built  a  ring  of  fire  to  keep  off  intruders.  The  next  morning, 
when  news  came  into  camp  of  our  luck,  all  the  fellows  hurried 
out  to  bring  in  the  meat,  which  was  immediately  smoked,  and 
was  to  be  carried  into  Sangatanga  to  be  sold  and  given  away. 

I  never  saw  men  happier  than  these  poor  fellows.  They  ate 
nothing  but  meat,  but  ate  such  quantities  that  several  of  them 
have  got  sick,  and  I  have  been  obliged  to  give  them  laudanum  in 
brandy  to  cure  their  diarrhoea.  The  camp  is  full  of  meat,  and  as 
we  have  no  salt  it  does  not  smell  particularly  welL  Indeed,  I 
had  to  have  a  separate  shanty  built  on  one  side  and  to  leeward 
of  the  camp,  where  all  the  meat  is  now  smoked  and  kept,  as  I 
could  not  stand  the  smell.  At  night  the  negroes  lie  around  the 
fires,  the  jolliest  of  mortals,  drinking  palm-wine,  which  they  col- 
lect regularly  from  neighbouring  trees,  and  smoking  tobacco 
when  I  am  generous  to  them. 

Meantime  I  stuffed  such  animals  as  were  worth  taking  away ; 
and  as  provisions  were  plentiful  and  the  weather  incomparably  fine, 
my  men  in  good  spirits  and  myself  healthy,  we  were  in  no  hurry 
at  all,  and  could  afford  to  lose  a  day  or  two  in  idleness.  Differ- 
ent work  this  from  travelling  in  the  forests  of  the  Moondah  and 
Gaboon,  where  starvation  stares  one  in  the  face  the  whole  time, 
and  there  is  no  time  to  idle  from  point  to  point. 

On  the  14th  I  went  out  on  a  boar-hunt  Fresh  tracks  had 
been  found  near  the  camp,  and  three  of  us  went  out  to  get  a  shot 
We  had  not  gone  far  when  we  heard  to  the  right  of  us  the  grunts 
of  some  pigs.  As  they  are  very  wild,  we  jumped  hastily  behind 
some  trees  to  conceal  ourselves.  My  horror  may  be  imagined, 
when,  stepping  quickly  without  looking,  I  stumbled  over  some- 
thing in  my  path,  and,  looking  down,  found  myself  running 
against  an  immense  serpent  of  the  boa  kind  which  lay  snugly 
coiled  up  beside  my  tree.  A  look  showed  me  that  the  thing  was 
in  a  state  of  stupefaction,  consequent,  probably,  on  having  eaten 
too  heavy  a  dinner.    It  scarcely  moved,  and  did  not  raise  its  head. 


Chap.  XH.  LYING  IN  WAIT  FOR  BUFFALO.  173 

1  ran  to  Niamkala  and  borrowed  a  kind  of  heavy  cutlass  he  car- 
ried with  him,  and  with  a  blow  of  this  cut  the  python  in  two 
pieces,  which  instantly  began  to  wriggle  about  in  a  very  snaky 
and  horrible  way.  During  this  death-struggle  the  monster 
voided  the  body  of  a  young  gazelle,  which  was  in  a  half-digested 
condition,  but  still  sufficiently  firm  to  enable  us  to  distinguish 
what  kind  of  animal  it  was. 

The  noise  made  in  kilUng  the  snake,  which  proved,  by  th6  way, 
to  be  not  quite  20  feet  long,  of  course  fiightened  off  the  wild  pigs. 
We  pursued  them,  and  by  good  management  came  up  with  the 
herd,  ten  in  number,  in  about  an  hour's  time,  and  managed  to  bag 
two.  Besides  these  pigs,  my  hunters  e>arried  the  two  halves  of 
the  serpent  to  the  camp.  They  make  a  kind  of  soup  or  stew  of 
boa,  of  which  they  are  very  fond.  I  have  never  tasted  it>  and 
can  therefore  say  nothing  against  it 

After  this  day  of  hard  hunting  I  slept  soundly  on  my  primitive 
couch,  which  consists,  I  may  as  well  explain,  of  a  couple  of  mats 
spread  on  the  bare  and  soft  earth,  and  a  thick  blanket  for  cover, 
the  blue  star-lit  sky  being  my  canopy  and  roof. 

The  16th  and  17th  were  passed  in  shooting  birds  about  the 
camp,  some  of  which  I  have  stuffed,  but  no  new  ones.  The  men 
had  meantime  been  hunting  and  exploring  in  various  directions ; 
and  as  they  reported  that  great  herds  of  buffalo  (Bos  brachicheros) 
firequented  every  night  a  prairie  situated  about  ten  miles  &om 
our  camp,  I  determined  to  have  a  set-to  with  these  gentlemen. 

We  set  out  toward  sunset  of  thq  17th,  and  by  8  o'clock  reached 
the  forest  which  bounded  the  prairie  in  which  we  hoped  to  find 
our  game.  Securing  for  ourselves  safe  hiding-places  in  the  woods 
on  the  edge  of  the  plain,  we  lay  down  tmd  waited. 

Now  waiting  is  tedious ;  but  waiting  in  a  cold  night  from  8  to 

2  o'clock,  every  moment  expecting  what  does  not  come,  is  apt  to 
try  the  patience.  Mine  was  entirely  gone,  and  I  wished  myself 
comfortably  under  my  blanket  in  camp,  when  suddenly  the 
buffiJoes  cama  Aboko  heard  them  coming,  and  presently  a  herd 
of  about  25  stately  animals  emerged  from  the  woods  and  scat- 
tered quietly  about  the  grassy  plain.  The  moon  was  going  down, 
and  we  could  see  from  our  hiding-place  the  long  shadows  of  the 
buffaloes  silently  gliding  one  way  and  another,  but  never  near 
enough  to  us  for  a  shot  Soon  they  felt  quite  at  ease  and  began 
feeding,  ever  and  anon  gambolling  sportively  with  each  other. 


174  A  LEOPARD  SHARING  THE  SPOIL.  Chap.  XIL 

Seeing  them  engaged,  we  crawled  upon  them  with  great  care, 
and  at  a  snail's  speed.  We  had  almost  got  within  safe  range 
when  a  sudden  change  of  wind  discovered  us  to  them.  They 
snuffed  up  the  air  suspiciously,  and  instantly  gathering  together 
disappeared  in  the  woods. 

Here  was  ill-luck.  My  hunters  cursed  in  Shekiani,  and  I  grum- 
bled in  several  languages.  But  there  was  still  hope.  Silently 
we  crawled  back  to  our  lair,  and  waited  patiently  for  two  mortal 
hours  more ;  when  at  last  two,  a  male  and  female,  stalked  lei- 
surely into  the  field  and  began  to  crop  the  grass.  It  was  now 
dark.  The  moon  had  gone  down,  leaving  us  only  the  uncertain 
light  of  the  stars.  We  watched  the  motions  of  the  buffaloes  until 
we  thought  we  could  venture,  and  silently  crawled  towards  them 
again.  This  time  we  got  within  range.  I  chose  the  bull  for  my 
shot,  and  Niamkala  took  the  cow,  while  Aboko  was  ready  to 
second  me  with  his  gim  in  case  I  should  not  kill  my  animal.  We 
fired  both  at  once,  and,  by  pure  good  luck,  for  the  light  was  not 
enough  to  afford  a  chance  for  a  fair  shot,  both  the  animals  feU 
down  dead. 

It  was  now  nearly  daylight,  and  we  concluded  to  return  to  the 
camp  and  send  men  to  bring  in  the  meat,  thinking  that  no  wild 
beasts  would  trouble  our  prizes  at  such  unseasonable  hours.  But 
we  reckoned  without  a  hungry  leopard ;  for,  though  the  men  made 
haste  and  arrived  early,  ^the  cow  was  already  half-eaten.  The 
poor  leopard  who  ventured  out  so  early  in  the  morning  must 
have  been  nearly  £Emiished,  and  I  did  not  much  grudge  him  his 
meal,  though  I  should  have  liked  to  have  watched  for  him  and 
shot  him,  had  I  thought  of  his  coming. 

On  the  22nd  we  broke  up  the  camp  and  started  for  Sangatanga. 
The  day  before  was  a  busy  day.  The  men  were  packing  their 
meat,  which  they  thought  to  make  much  profit  from  in  Sanga- 
tanga. They  made  baskets  of  palm-leaves,  in  which  it  was 
solidly  packed  away.  And  all  the  time  they  were  working  at 
this,  they  were  boasting  of  how  much  tobacco,  rum,  and  other 
dainties  they  would  get  for  all  this.  Although  it  interfered 
with  my  time  and  delayed  my  progress,  I  was  glad  to  let  them 
carry  it,  for  they  work  better  when  their  master  gives  them 
such  little  privileges,  which  make  them  quite  happy.  But  I 
knew  their  plans  were  of  little  account.  As  I  foresaw,  they 
gave  half  of  their  meat  away  to  their  friends;   and  of  the 


D   UULL   Of   njDATOBUL  i 
(BalmiMcltmii.) 


Chap.  XII.        THE  BOS  BRACHICHEROS,  OR  NIARE.  175 

rest,  what  they  did  not  eat  themselves,  or  waste,  or  give  away 
to  begging  friends,  was  a  very  trifle  indeed,  and  not  enough 
to  trade. 

For  myself  I  had  my  stuffed  specimens  to  pack  securely  in 
such  a  way  that  they  would  be  portable.  The  monkeys  and 
birds,  and  even  the  bucks,  were  easily  carried ;  but  the  vsJuable 
specimens  of  the  Bo8  brachicheros  were  an  inconvenient  load. 
And  with  these,  as  they  are  a  quite  new  and  hitherto  undescribed 
species  of  bufialo,  and  a  very  singularly-formed  animal,  I  was 
obliged  to  be  most  careful. 

This  reminds  me  that  the  reader  has  not  yet  had  a  description 
of  this  animal.  It  is  the  wild  buffalo  of  this  part  of  Africa,  and 
a  fierce  and  shy  beast ;  terrible  if  only  wounded,  when  it  often 
attacks  the  hunter  with  headlong  fury ;  and  very  hard  to  come 
up  with  when  it  has  been  much  hunted.  It  remains  in  the 
forest  thicknesses  by  day,  but  comes  out  into  the  open  prairie 
by  night  in  herds  of  from  ten  to  twenty  or  twenty-five.  I  have 
seen  them  in  the  prairie  in  the  daytime,  but  very  seldom; 
while^  in  many  parts,  these  great  grass-fields  are  alive  with 
them  every  night.  Here  they  were  shy ;  but  in  one  of  my 
later  trips  I  met  great  herds  which  had  evidently  never  been 
chased.  Here,  on  my  appearance,  the  bull,  who  is  easily  dis- 
tinguished by  the  darker  colour  of  the  short  thin  hair,  would  rise 
up,  straighten  up  his  fine  fringed  ears,  and  his  thin,  wiry  tail, 
and  gaze  at  me  with  blank  astonishment,  until,  if  I  waited  long 
enough,  all  would  slowly  move  off  into  the  forest  A  wounded 
bull  is  a  dangerous  animal,  and  pretty  sure  to  attack  the  hunter 
if  it  can  get  at  him.  When  much  hunted  they  become  very 
shy,  and  forsake  the  prairie  altogether  by  day. 

The  Bos  brachicheros  is  an  animal  in  size  and  weight  equal 
to  our  lighter  cattle,  but  having  greater  strength.  In  the 
female,  the  body  is  covered  with  a  coat  of  thin  red  hair,  which 
grows  longer  along  the  spine,  and  is  there  of  a  reddish-black. 
In  the  bull  the  hair  is  generally  darker.  The  legs,  below  the 
knees,  are  of  a  dark  brown ;  lighter  in  the  femtJe.  The  hoofs 
are  longer  and  sharper  than  those  of  our  tame  cattle.  The  tail 
is  nearly  bare  to  its  end,  where  there  is  a  considemble  tuft 
of  black  hair  several  inches  long. 

The  head  is  very  pretty,  and  has  something  of  the  lightness 
of  the  deer's.    The  muzzle  is  black;  ears  long  and  pointed, 


176  CONCEALING  MEAT,  Chap.  XII. 

and  fringed  with  beautiful  silky  hair  several  inches  long,  which 
adds  much  to  the  grace  of  the  animal  The  horns  are  thrown 
backward  in  a  graceful  curve,  are  ten  or  twelve  inches  long, 
black,  flat  at  their  base,  and  rounded  near  the  end.  For  about 
five  inches  from  the  face  the  horns  are  corrugated,  the  wrinkles 
being  in  four  distinct  rows,  and  apparently  giving  strength  to 
the  horn.  Where  the  corrugations  cease  the  horn  grows 
suddenly  smaller,  and  round  and  smooth,  terminating  finally 
in  a  sharp  point  This  smooth  portion  has  a  polish  like  black 
ebony. 

The  proportions  of  the  animal  are^  fine  and  graceful.  It  is 
fleet  of  foot,  and  has  not  the  clumsiness  of  the  buffalo.  Indeed, 
in  expression  and  general  shape,  it  gives  one  the  idea  of  a 
mixture  between  the  antelope  and  the  common  cow. 

Having  packed  everything,  we  finaUy  made  a  start  for  Sanga- 
tanga  on  the  22nd.  My  men  are  loaded  down,  and  groan  at 
every  step.  They  have,  besides  my  skins  and. stuffed  animals, 
about  a  thousand  pounds  of  meat  of  their  own ;  and  it  seems 
lucky  that  our  powder  and  shot  began  to  run  out,  for,  if  we  had 
shot  much  more,  we  should  have  had  to  send  for  reinforce- 
ments of  men  to  carry  off  the  spoils.  This  is  the  finest  game- 
country  I  have  met  with  in  this  part  of  Africa,  and  is  greatly 
encouraging  to  a  poor  fellow  who  like  me  has  been  starving, 
and  shooting  scarce  anything,  in  the  wilds  north  of  the  Gaboon. 

My  men  seem  very  jolly,  though  groaning  under  their  burdens, 
and  I  am  glad  to  see  them  happy.  When  we  got  within  three 
miles  of  Sangatanga  they  buried  the  greater  part  of  their  meat 
in  the  forest,  and  begged  me  to  say  nothing  about  it  to  their 
people  or  to  King  Bango,  that  they  might  not  be  robbed  by 
the  king  and  people.  Of  course,  I  readily  promised.  They 
described  how  they  would  go  out  by  night  and  bring  their  meat 
to  the  little  plantation,  of  which  nearly  all  these  people  own 
one  ;  there  it  would  be  eaten  at  leisure.  ^ 

We  reached  King  Bango's  residence  on  the  afternoon  of  the 
23rd.  The  men  who  were  his  slaves  immediately  surrendered 
to  him  a  great  part  of  what  they  had  brought  in,  whether  meat 
or  ivory;  and  then,  protesting  that  this  was  all,  were  let  go 
about  their  business,  and  to  tell  their  adventures  to  their  excited 
townsmen,  amid  whose  enthusiastic  acclamations  we  had  entered 
the  town. 


Chap.  XII.  ^T  KING  BANGO'S.  177 

Then  I  was  left  {done  with  the  king,  who  seemed  worse  than 
when  I  left.  He  was  alarmed — ^feared  to  die ;  and  remarked 
that  it  was  very  singular  that  he  had  been  taken  worse 
immediately  after  my  departure,  and  that,  in  fact,  he  grew  sick 
even  on  that  night  when  I  slept  in  his  house.  I  saw  that  the 
old  fellow  thought  I  had  bewitched  him.  It  would  be  curious 
if  even  I  should  be  really  accused  of  witchcraft  in  this  country. 
I  replied  that  I  did  not  know  what  caused  his  sickness,  but  that 
I  also  had  been  iU  ;  and  that  doubtless  the  season  had  something 
to  do  with  it,  this  being  the  cold  month.  He  still  looked  un- 
pleasant ;  and  to  put  a  stop  to  a  discussion  which  would  never 
have  been  settled,  I  told  him  that  I  was  not  a  wizard,  and  that 
I  was  very  hungry  and  tired. , 

Hereupon  he  ordered  one  of  his  wives  to  make  coffee  for  me ; 
which  waa  done  by  bmlding  a  fire  in  a  half-barrel  filled  with 
earth  which  stood  in  one  comer  of  the  room.  By  the  time  my 
eyes  were  nearly  smoked  out  of  my  head  my  coffee  was  ready, 
and,  as  there  were  added  to  it  some  crackers  and  butter,  I  made 
quite  a  meal,  having  eaten  nothing  since  breakfast. 

My  house  was  too  far  off  to  reach  it  with  my  specimens  that 
night,  and,  remembering  King  Bango's  rats,  I  stayed  with  him 
only  with  great  fear  and  trembling,  carefully  hanging  up  my 
animals. 

I  scarcely  slept  at  all,  but  enjoyed  the  rest  amazingly.  My 
whole  body  was  sore,  and  my  legs  ached  with  real  pains.  This 
was  the  effect  of  so  much  walking.  I  had  not  felt  it  so  much 
while  on  the  way,  but,  now  that  rest  came,  I  could  not  sleep 
for  these  pains.  The  next  two  days  I  did  nothing  but  lie  in  the 
sun.  My  men  sent  word  that  they,  too,  could  not  walk  as  far 
as  my  house  to  get  their  pay,  so  that  I  am  not  alone  in  my 
sufferings.  Meantime  people  come  in  from  all  the  country 
round  to  see  me.  They  say  they  never  saw  such  a  person 
before ;  and  the  majority  have  doubts  about  my  sanity,  which 
are  expressed  and  discussed  in  my  hearing  with  the  greatest 
earnestness. 

My  men  came  on  the  27th  to  be  paid.  They  had  nearly 
recovered,  and  said  they  never  saw  a  man  walk  so  much  as  I  did. 
We  parted  with  great  good-feeling.  If  I  ever  want  them  they 
will  be  glad  to  come  with  me ;  and  I  should  be  glad  to  have 
them,  for  they  were  a  very  good  set  of  fellows.     Meantime  I 

N 


178  FETICH  WORSHIP.  Chap.  XH. 

suffered  a  good  deal  from  inflammation  in  my  legs,  and  was 
obliged  to  lay  up,  so  that  it  was  July  before  I  was  able  to  go 
anywhere  beyond  the  village. 

Walking  down  the  village  one  day  I  saw  a  negro  carpenter 
fellow  go  into  his  private  fetich-house,  and  was  lucky  enough  to 
be  able  to  watch  his  motions  without  being  discovered.  He 
first  built  a  little  fire  in  the  middle  of  the  hut,  then  stripped 
and  marked  his  body  with  white  chalk,  making  very  peculiar 
and  careful  stripes  on  one  of  his  arms  and  in  the  centre  of  his 
breast.  While  doing  this,  which  took  some  time,  he  kept  up  a 
constant  mumbling  of  words  which  I  could  not  understand,  but 
which  were  doubtless  prayers  addressed  to  his  fetich.  Then 
the  fire  was  extinguished  and  the  hut  was  shut.  When  he  came 
out  I  laughed  at  him;  but  he  took  the  whole  matter  very 
seriously,  of  course,  and  told  me  that  the  spirit  Numba,  which 
has  its  dwelling  in  the  ocean,  had  gone  into  his  chest,  and 
would  kill  him  if  he  had  not  exorcised  it  by  the  ceremony  I 
saw.  This  spirit  Numba  has  also  something  to  do  with  the 
moon,  but  what  I  could  not  discover. 

On  the  29th  the  king  announced  to  his  faithful  subjects  that 
his  big  fetich  had  informed  him  that  within  a  month  a  slave- 
ship  would  come  in  for  a  cargo.  Of  course,  everybody  firmly 
believes  this ;  and  if  by  any  chance  it  should  turn  out  differently, 
they  would  yet  believe  the  next  prophecy  which  the  royal  fetich 
or  any  other  shall  make.  I  suppose  the  king  had  a  dream,  and 
thought  his  fetich  spoke. 

I  find  it  difficult  to  get  anything  to  eat  here,  as  I  have  no 
rum  and  the  factories  have,  and  rum  is  the  chief  article  of 
demand  among  the  negroes.  In  fact,  I  was  in  such  straits  tJiat 
I  was  obliged  to  ask  one  of  the  factory-people  to  buy  some  food 
for  me,  I  paying  him  in  articles  which  the  natives  use,  but 
would  not  buy  of  me  because  I  had  no  rum  to  give. 

The  king  sent  his  mafouga  to  ask  if  I  would  give  him  a  few 
heads  of  tobacco*  King  Bango  is  not  only  a  great  beggar,  but 
a  great  miser.  He  is  the  richest  negro  on  this  part  of  the  coast, 
for,  besides  his  hundreds  of  slaves  and  his  three  hundred  wives, 
he  has  in  his  store-rooms,  securely  piled  up,  very  considerable 
quantities  of  goods,  which  he  delights  to  see  increased,  and  to 
which  only  one  person  besides  himself  has  access.  This  is  an 
old  woman,  who  was  the  wife  of  his  father,  and  is  now  his  own 


Chap.  Xn.  A  FETICH-BIRD.  179 

wife  by  right  of  inheritance.  The  slavers  he  has  in  his  power, 
as  he  could  destroy  their  fSetctories  if  they  offend  him,  and  they 
would  have  no  remedy ;  to  them,  therefore,  he  is  very  exacting, 
forcing  them  to  give  him  considerable  quantities  of  muskets, 
powder,  and  calico.  When  I  came,  knowing  the  king's  rapacity, 
I  made  haste  ,to  tell  him  that  I  did  not  come  to  buy  slaves,  and 
that  I  should  not  have  much  to  give  him.  He,  nevertheless, 
begs  all  he  can  of  me. 

As  I  came  from  seeing  the  king  I  shot  at  a  bird  sitting  upon 
a  tree,  and  missed  it  I  had  been  taking  quinine,  and  was 
nervous.  But  the  negroes  standing  around  at  once  proclaimed 
that  this  was  a  fetich-bird,  and  therefore  I  could  not  shoot  it. 

I  fired  again,  and  missed  again.  Hereupon  they  grew  tri- 
umphant in  their  declarations,  while  I,  loth  to  let  the  devil 
have  80  good  a  witness,  loaded  again,  took  careful  aim,  and,  to 
my  own  satisfaction  and  their  dismay,  brought  my  bird  down. 

Immediately  they  explained  that  I  was  a  white  man,  and  not 
entirely  amenable  to  fetich  laws ;  so  that  I  do  not  suppose  my 
shot  proved  anything  to  them  after  alL 

The  grass  has  been  for  some  time  very  dry,  and  by  regular 
custom  the  people  should  ere  now  have  mowed  down  a  broad 
strip  of  it  surrounding  each  house.  This,  for  some  reason,  has 
been  omitted,  and  the  consequence  was  that,  on  the  last  day  of 
June,  while  a  high  wind  was  blowing  from  the  sea,  some  grass 
accidentally  caught  fire  near  the  shore,  and  in  a  very  short  time 
the  whole  village  was  in  flames  and  bimied  to  the  ground.  I 
never  heard  such  screams  and  lamentations,  though  the  loss 
was  trifling,  most  of  the  natives  keeping  any  valuables  they 
may  have  out  at  their  plantation-houses,  where  they  are  safe 
from  the  attacks  of  their  most  feared  enemy,  the  men-of-war, 
who,  if  they  come,  might  throw  a  few  shells  into  the  town,  and 
buTB  everything  in  a  very  short  time. 

During  my  stay  in  the  village,  as  I  was  one  day  out  shooting 
birds  in  a  grove  not  &r  from  my  house,  I  saw  a  procession  of 
slaves  coming  from  one  of  the  barracoons  towards  the  further 
end  of  my  grove.  As  they  came  nearer  I  saw  that  two  gangs 
of  six  slaves  each,  all  chained  about  the  neck,  were  carrying  a 
burden  between  them,  which  I  presently  knew  to  be  the  corpse 
of  another  slave.  They  bore  it  to  the  edge  of  the  grove,  about 
300  yards  from  my  house,  and,  there  throwing  it  down  on  the 

N  2 


180  A  FUNERAL  FROM  THE  BARRACOONS.     Chap.  Xn. 

bare  ground,  returned  to  their  prison,  accompanied  by  the  over- 
seer, who,  with  his  whip,  had  marched  behind  them  hither. 

"Here,  then,  is  the  *burying-ground'  of  the  barracoons,"  I 
said  to  myself  sadly,  thinking,  I  confess,  of  the  poor  fellow  who 
had  been  dragged  away  from  his  home  and  friends,  to  die  h^e 
and  be  thrown  out  as  food  for  the  vultures,  who,  even  as  I  stood 
in  thought,  began  already  to  darken  the  air  above  my  head,  and 
were  presently  heard  fighting  over  the  remains. 

The  grove,  which  was,  in  fact,  but  an  African  aceldama,  was 
beautiful  to  view  from  my  house,  and  I  had  often  resolved  to 
explore  it^  or  rest  in  the  shade  of  its  dark-foliaged  trees.  It 
seemed  a  ghastly  place  enough  now,  as  I  approached  it  to  see 
more  closely  the  work  of  the  disgusting  vultures.  They  fled 
when  they  saw  me,  but  only  a  little  way,  sitting  upon  the  lower 
branches  of  the  surrounding  trees,  watching  me  with  eyes 
askance,  as  though  fearful  I  would  rob  them  of  their  prey. 

As  I  walked  towards  the  corpse  I  felt  something  crack  under 
my  feet,  and,  looking  down,  saw  that  I  was  already  in  the  midst 
of  the  field  of  skulls.  I  had  inadvertently  stepped  into  the 
skeleton  of  some  poor  creature  who  had  been  thrown  here  long 
enough  ago  for  the  birds  and  ants  to  pick  his  bones  clean,  and 
the  rains  to  bleach  them.  I  think  there  must  have  been  a 
thousand  such  skeletons  lying  within  my  sight.  The  place  had 
been  used  for  many  years,  and  the  mortality  in  the  barracoons 
is  sometimes  frightfuL  Here  the  dead  were  thrown,  and  here 
the  vultures  found  their  daily  carrion.  The  grass  had  just  been 
burned,  and  the  white  bones,  scattered  everywhere,  gave  the 
ground  a  singular,  and,  when  the  cause  was  known,  a  frightful 
appearance.  Penetrating  a  little  further  into  the  brush,  T  found 
several  great  piles  of  bones.  Here  was  the  place  where,  when 
years  ago  Cape  Lopez  was  one  of  the  great  slave-markets  on 
the  west  coaat,  and  barracoons  were  more  numerous  than  now, 
the  poor  dead  were  thrown  one  upon  another,  tiU  even  the 
mouldering  bones  remained  in  high  piles,  as  monuments  of  the 
nefarious  trafiSc 

The  free  African  looks  on  these  places  with  as  much  loathing 
and  disgust  as  the  white  traveller.  To  the  reader  of  this  there 
may  seem  little  real  difierence  in  condition  between  the  African 
slave  and  free,  but  in  reality  the  difference  is  quite  as  great  here 
as  it  is  in  other  and  more  civilized  slaveholding  nations.     Even 


Chap.  XH.  A  PLEASUEE-TRIP.  181 

in  this  rude  Cape  Lopez  country  to  be  bom  of  a  slave  mother  is 
a  disgrace,  and  debars  the  unfortunate  from  much  of  the  respect 
and  authority  which  his  daily  companions  enjoy,  and  this  though 
the  child  so  bom  is  in  reality  free,  as  it  follows  the  condition  of 
the  father.  The  slave,  in  Africa,  does  not  speak  for  himself.  If 
he  is  in  trouble,  if  there  is  an  "  adultery  palaver,"  a  "  stealing 
palaver,  or  "  trading  palaver,"  his  master  must  speak  for  him, 
and  dear  him  if  possible.  And  as  for  burial,  the  frmeral  of  a 
free  Oroungou  man  is  a  very  ceremonious  affair,  and  he  is  laid 
away  on  the  ground  with  the  utmost  care,  and  in  a  very  specially 
prepared  place.  No  worse  iosult  conld  be  offered  to  b^Tn  than 
to  suppose  that  his  remains  would  rest  in  such  a  spot  as  this 
horrible  barracoons'  burying-ground. 

Indeed,  the  Oroungou  cemetery,  where  the  Cape  Lopez  people 
are  laid  to  rest,  is  a  place  very  well  worth  a  visit.  I  passed  it 
on  my  way  down  to  the  extreme  sandy  point  of  the  cape,  where 
King  Bango's  people  fish  in  the  diy  season,  and  whither  I  went 
to  see  their  operations. 

My  old  hunting-friend  Fasiko  got  together  a  party  of  about 
forty  men  to  accompany  me  on  a  visit  to  Fetich  Point,  the 
Fetich  Eiver,  and  the  end  of  Cape  Lopez,  the  bearings  of  which 
places  from  Sangatanga  the  reader  will  find  on  the  map.  We 
were  to  travel  through  a  barren  country,  and  the  women,  there- 
fore, prepared  for  us  a  great  quantity  of  farina  (powdered 
manioc),  baskets  of  ground-nuts,  and  sweet  potatoes,  and  bunches 
of  plantains.  Fasiko  got  together  a  lot  of  mats  to  sleep  on,  and 
brass  kettles  to  cook  in,  and  the  men  were  laden  with  salt  to 
salt  the  fish  which  they  were  to  catch,  and  with  the  large  copper 
dishes  called  neptunes,  in  which  they  were  to  boil  the  salt  water 
to  get  other  supplies  of  salt,  which  is  made  in  considerable  quan- 
tities here  in  the  dry  season. 

It  was  a  very  jolly  party,  for  Cape  Lopez  is  the  Cape  May  or 
Nahant  of  Sangatanga,  and  the  dry  season  answers  to  our  July, 
when  everybody  that  is  anybody  is  supposed  to  be  out  of  town 
and  "  down  at  the  sea-side ;"  with  this  difference,  however,  that 
the  Sangatangians,  having  no  civilized  amusements,  and  in  fact 
little  amusement  of  any  kind,  make  a  good  thing  of  their 
**  summer  out  of  town,"  by  catching,  salting,  drying,  and  smoking 
great  quantities  of  good  fish,  which  aboimd  about  Cape  Lopez. 
So  the  women  carried  fish-baskets  instead  of  trunks,  and  the 


182  OROUNGOU  BURYING-GROUND.  Chap.  XH. 

men  were  anned  with  fish-nets — ^made  by  them  of  the  fibre  of  a 
vine — and. guns.  For  leopards  lurk  in  the  jungle  on  the  south 
side  of  the  cape ;  the  boa  hangs  from  the  Ixees  waiting  for  its 
prey ;  and  if  you  get  up  early,  as  everybody  at  a  watering-place 
should,  you  may  see  huge  elephants  trotting  down  along  the 
beach  and  cooling  their  tender  toes  in  the  surf. 

Fetich  Point  W6W  our  first  place  of  calL  We  set  out  across 
the  wide  bay  one  fine,  clear,  bright  morning,  in  four  crowded 
canoes.  We  reached  the  point  a  little  before  dark,  and  the  men, 
who  seemed  alive  and  jolly  as  could  be,  at  once  cast  their  net  in 
a  way  not  materially  dififerent  from  our  hand-nets,  and  made  a 
great  haul  of  fish. 

Fetich  Eiver  is  one  of  the  numerous  mouths  which  form  the 
delta  of  the  Nazareth ;  which  important  stream,  striking  the  low 
country  about  thirty  miles  back,  is  lost  and  divided  into  numerous 
littie  streams,  which  fall  into  the  bay  through  a  tangled,  dreary, 
and  poisonous  tract  of  mangrove-swamp,  where  no  one  lives,  and 
where  I  doubt  if  even  beasts,  except  serpents,  are  to  be  found. 
This  tract  of  swamp,  interspersed  with  occasional  marshes  of 
standing  water,  extends  for  many  nules  along  here,  and  is,  in 
its  present  state,  entirely  useless,  and  an  injury  to  the  otherwise 
pleasant  coast-line. 

The  fish  caught)  we  landed,  lighted  fires,  and,  having  eaten 
our  suppers,  prepared  for  a  night's  rest  by  spreading  mats  upon 
the  sand. 

Near  Fetich  Point  is  the  Oroungou  burying-ground,  and  this 
I  went  to  visit  the  following  morning.  It  lay  about  a  mile  from 
our  camp  toward  Sangatanga,  from  which  it  was  distant  about 
half  a  day's  pull  in  a  canoe.  It  is  in  a  grove  of  noble  trees, 
many  of  them  of  magnificent  size  and  shape.  The  natives  hold 
this  place  in  great  reverence,  and  refrised  at  first  to  go  with  me 
on  my  contemplated  visit,  even  desiring  that  I  should  not  ga 
I  explained  to  them  that  I  did  not  go  to  laugh  at  their  d^d, 
but  rather  to  pay  them  honour.  But  it  was  only  by  the  pro-- 
mise  of  a  large  reward  that  I  at  last  persuaded  Niamkala,  who 
was  of  our  party,  to  accompany  me.  The  negroes  visit  the 
place  only  on  funeral  errands,  and  hold  it  in  the  greatest  awe, 
conceiving  that  here  the  spiriiB  of  their  ancestors  wander  about^ 
and  that  these  are  not  lightly  to  be  disturbed.  I  am  quite  sure 
that  treasure  to  any  amount  might  be  left  here  exposed  in 
perfect  safety. 


Chap.  XH.  MODE  OF  OROUNGOU  BURIAL.  183 

The  groYO  stands  by  the  seanshore.  It  is  entirely  cleared  of 
nnderbmshy  and^  as  the  wind  sighs  through  the  dense  foliage  of 
the  trees  and  whispers  in  the  darkened,  somewhat  gloomy  grove, 
it  is  an  awful  place,  even  to  an  unimpressible  white  man.  Niam- 
kala  stood  in  silence  by  the  strand  while  I  entered  the  domains 
of  the  Oroungou  dead. 

They  are  not  put  below  the  surface.  They  lie  about  beneath 
the  trees  in  huge  wooden  coffins,  some  of  which,  by  their  new 
look,  betokened  recent  arrivals ;  but  by  £eu*  the  greater  number 
were  crumbling  away.  Here  was  a  co$n  feJling  to  pieces, 
and  disclosing  a  grinning  skeleton  within.  On  the  other  side 
were  skeletons,  abeady  without  covers,  which  lay  in  dust  beside 
them.  Everywhere  were  bleached  bones  and  mouldering  remains. 
It  was  curious  to  see  the  brass  anklets  and  bracelets  in  which 
some  Oroungou  maiden  had  been  buried  still  surrounding  her 
whitened  bones,  and  to  note  the  remains  of  goods  which  had 
been  laid  in  the  same  coffin  with  some  wealthy  fellow,  now 
mouldering  to  dust  at  his  side.  In  some  places  there  remained 
only  little  heaps  of  shapeless  dust,  from  which  some  copper,  or 
iron,  or  ivory  ornament  gleamed  out  to  prove  that  here,  tooy 
once  lay  a  corpse. 

Passing  on  to  a  yet  more  sombre  gloom,  I  came  at  last  to  the 
grave  of  old  King  Pass-all,  the  brother  of  his  present  majesty. 
The  coffin  lay  on  the  ground,  and  was  surrounded  on  every  side 
with  great  chests  which  contamed  the  property  of  his  deceased 
majesty.  Among  these  chests  and  on  the  top  of  them  were  piled 
huge  earthenware  jugs,  glasses,  mugs,  plates,  iron  pots  and  bars, 
brass  and  copper  rings,  and  other  precious  things  which  this  old 
Pass-all  had  determined  to  carry  at  last  to  the  grave  with  him. 
And,  also,  there  lay  around  numerous  skeletons  of  the  poor 
slaves  who  were,  to  the  number  of  one  hundred,  kUled  when  the 
king  died,  that  his  ebony  kingship  might  not  pass  into  the  other 
world  without  due  attendance. 

It  was  a  grim  sight,  and  one  which  filled  me  with  a  sadder 
awe  than  even  the  disgusting  baracoons'  ground. 

Between  Fetich  Point  and  the  river  lay  formerly  the  village 
of  the  Cape  Lopez  people ;  but  now  the  king  and  all  his  subjects 
have  moved  to  Sangatanga,  and  this  whole  district  is  deserted, 
except  in  the  fishing-season. 

The  land-breeze  blowing  when  I  returned,  we  started  for  the 


184  AN  AFRICAN  WATERING-PLACE.  Chap.  XH. 

sandy  point  of  the  cape.  It  is  a  curious  beach,  very  low,  and  so 
covered  with  a  short  scrub  which  hides  a  part  of  the  view,  while 
the  sand  ahead  is  undistinguishable  at  a  distance  from  the  water, 
which  it  barely  rises  above,  that  I  was  repeatedly  disappointed ; 
thinking  we  had  come  to  the  end,  when  in  fact  we  had  still  before 
us  a  long,  narrow  sand-spit  Finally  we  reached  the  extreme 
end,  and  landed  in  the  smooth  water  on  the  inside  of  the  spit  in 
a  kind  of  harbour. 

The  point  gains  continually  upon  the  sea,  and  every  year  a 
little  more  sand  appears  above  the  water ;  while  the  line  of  short 
shrubs,  which  acts  as  a  kind  of  dam  or  breakwater,  is  extended, 
and  holds  the  new  land  against  old  Neptune's  attacks. 

Among  these  shrubs  we  built  our  camp  ;  and  here,  for  some 
days,  we  had  a  very  lively  time.  The  women  were  all  day  on 
the  shore  making  salt ;  and  the  poor  children  had  hard  work  too, 
for  their  share  was  to  gather  brushwood  for  the  fires.  Some  of 
the  men  took  fish  in  their  nets ;  and  others  split  them,  cleaned, 
salted,  dried,  and  smoked  them,  which  done,  they  were  put  away 
in  baskets.  The  salt,  too,  when  made,  was  packed  securely  in 
baskets,  and  placed  near  the  fire  to  keep  it  dry. 

Others  of  our  party  went  out  early  in  the  morning  to  turn 
turtles.  These  animals  come  on  the  beach  to  lay  their  eggs  in 
the  sand,  where  the  sun  hatches  them.  The  negroes  lie  in  wait 
for  them  in  parties,  and  often  turn  twenty  in  a  morning.  Two 
or  three  men  rush  upon  an  unwieldy  turtle,  and,  with  one  jerk, 
roll  it  over  on  its  back,  where  it  lies,  vainly  struggling  to  recover 
its  legs,  until  the  turning  is  done,  when  all  hands  begin  to  kill 
and  clean.    The  meat  is  smoked. 

As  for  myself,  I  had  brought  with  me  an  immense  shark-hook 
and  a  stout  rope,  and  amused  myself  by  hooking  up  occasionally 
one  of  the  vast  numbers  of  sharks  which  swarm  in  the  waters 
about  the  cape,  and  are  often  stlmost  washed  upon  the  beach  by 
the  waves.  I  never  saw  such  immense  numbers  of  sharks  as  are 
found  hera  The  Chinese,  who  eat  shark-fins,  would  find  here 
enough  to  glut  the  Canton  market  for  a  season. 

But  there  was  hunting,  too.  South  of  the  cape  was  a  dense 
forest,  in  which  might  be  found  all  the  animals  which  live  in  an 
African  wood.  We  saw  elephants  on  the  beach,  but  shot  none. 
I  shot  great  numbers  of  sea-fowl,  which  fly  about  here  in  such 
flocks  as  almost  to  darken  the  air.    Betuming  one  evening  from 


Chap.  XH.  KILLING  A  LEOPARD.  185 

the  forest,  whither  Aboko,  Niamkala,  and  I  had  been  on  a  fruit- 
less hunt,  we  feU  in  with  larger  game.  Passing  along  the  edge 
of  the  forest,  we  were  suddenly  startled  by  a  deep  growl,  and, 
looking  quickly  about,  perceived  an  immense  male  leopard 
couching  for  a  spring  into  our  party.  Fortunately  our  guns 
were  loaded  with  ball,  and  in  a  flash  we  all  three  fired  into  the 
beast  It  was  already  upon  the  spring,  and  our  shot  met  it  as 
it  rose.  It  fell,  dead  and  quivering,  within  a  foot  of  Aboko, 
who  may  be  said  to  have  had  a  very  narrow  escape.  It  was  an 
immense  animal ;  and  its  skin,  which  I  preserved  as  a  trophy, 
is  most  beautifully  shaded  and  spotted.  In  fact,  there  is  scarcely 
a  more  beautiful  animal  in  the  world  than  the  African  leopard. 

On  my  return  to  Cape  Lopez,  I  sailed  back  with  my  specimens 
to  the  Gaboon,  whither  I  was  glad  to  return  once  more  to  take 
a  little  civilized  comfort.  I  remained  several  months  near  the 
Gaboon,  exploring  the  course  of  that  river  and  the  country  about 
its  borders,  and  finally  set  off  on  my  longest  and  most  adyen- 
torous  journey. 


186  THE  fiAwnffA  COAST.  Chap.  XIIL 


CHAPTER  XIIL 

The  "CammaCountry"— Coast  — Surf— Trade  — The  Caroline— A  mixed 
Crew — A  dusky  Bride  —  A  Squall — On  her  Beam-ends  —  Native  Timden 

—  Rampano — Sangala  Troubles  —  Nearly  a  Fight — The  City  of  Washington 

—  Attonpt  at  Assassination  —  The  Camma  People  —  Aniamhia  —  River 
Navigation  —  Men  refuse  to  advance  —  King  Olenga-Yomhi  —  A  Dance  — 
Fetich-houses  —  Spirit  Worship — A  mad  Bull  —  Cheating  the  King — Live 
Gorilla  brought  in  —  How  caught  —  Ferocity  of  the  Animal — Joe  escapes 

—  Is  recaptured  —  Habits  and  Peculiarities  of  Joe —  Hippopotamu8-«hootiDg 

—  Night-hunting  —  Hippopotamus-Meat  —  Habits  of  the  Animal  —  Hide — 
Use  of  the  Tusks  —  They  capsize  Boats  —  Peaceable  if  not  attacked  —  Voice 

—  Combative  —  Adventures  with  Hippopotami 

DuBiNG  a  somewhat  protracted  stay  at  the  Graboon,  I  prepared 
myself  thoroughly  for  my  next  and  most  important  tonr.  I  had 
long  been  anxious  to  explore  thoroughly  the  tract  known  as  ike 
Gamma  country ;  a  region,  like  those  I  had  just  visited,  totally 
unknown  to  white  men,  but  much  more  interesting  and  im- 
portant— ^to  judge  it  by  its  products — than  the  others,  as  it  is 
also  more  extensive  and  watered  by  larger  streams. 

The  "  Camma  country  "  begins  to  the  south  of  Cape  Lopes  in 
lat  0^  40'  S.,  and  extends  to  the  southward  as  far  as  the  Biver 
Camma,  in  lat  1^  50'  S.,  and  to  the  east  for  about  fifty  miles 
from  the  coast.  It  is  a  well- watered  region ;  the  Mexias,  and 
some  minor  branches  of  the  great  Ogobay  River,  running  into  the 
sea  in  its  northern  bounds,  while  the  Femand  Yaz,  the  Camma, 
and  the  Setti  have  their  mouths  farther  down,  at  various  points 
of  the  Camma  coast. 

The  coast-line  is  generally  low  and  swampy;  a  heavy  surf 
makes  landing  difficult,  except  at  a  few  points  protected  by  the 
shape  of  the  land,  and  the  shore,  viewed  from  the  sea,  has  so 
monotonous  an  aspect  that  seamen  find  it  difficult  to  recognize 
their  whereabouts,  even  after  considerable  experience  of  the 
coast.  The  mouths  of  the  rivers,  however,  are  readily  recog- 
nized by  the  great  streams  of  fresh  water  which  they  send  with 
considerable  force  into  the  sea,  discolouring  it  for  some  distance 
from  shore,  as  also  by  the  breakers  on  the  bars  which  line  these 
mouths. 


Chap.  XIII.  NATIVE  SEAMANSHIP.  187 

The  surf  on  the  coast  is  much  worse  during  the  dry  season,  or 
from  June  to  September.  During  the  rains  letnding  is  much 
easier;  but  even  then  one  needs  skilful  natives  and  the  best 
canoes.  For  this  recison  the  trade  along  this  part  of  the  coast  is 
not  very  brisk ;  vessels  touch  but  seldom ;  and  I  found  that  I 
v?a8  even  obliged  to  piu'chase  a  little  vessel  to  carry  me  from  the 
Graboon  to  the  scene  of  my  first  (intended)  settlement.  This 
was  a  cutter,  open  or  undecked,  of  about  seven  tons'  burden.  I 
intended  to  use  this  vessel  in  case  it  should  be  desirable  to 
return  at  any  time  when  no  ship  offered. 

I  knew  by  experience  that  I  should  meet  with  more  than  usual 
difficulties  in  my  attempts  to  penetrate  into  the  interior.  The 
natives  here  had  never  heard  of  me;  they  had  had  so  little 
intercourse  vriih  whites  that  they  were  even  more  jealous  than 
those  to  the  north ;  and  I  expected  nothing  less  than  to  have, 
in  the  first  place,  to  win  their  confidence  and  respect  by  Uving 
among  them  near  the  coast  for  a  considerable  time.  For  this 
reason  I  made  preparations  for  an  absence  of  from  fourteen  to 
twenty  months,  during  which  I  expected  to  be  entirely  alone. 

I  loaded  the  Caroline^  a  schooner  of  forty-five  tons,  with  two 
hogsheads  of  tobacco,  several  large  bales  of  prints,  a  great 
quantity  of  plates,  jugs,  and  other  earthenware  vessels ;  a 
himdred  muskets,  together  with  powder;  beads,  swords,  brass 
kettles,  neptunes,  &a,  and  a  considerable  stock  of  provisions  for 
myselC 

When  all  was  ready  I  went  on  board — and  should  have  been 
glad  to  have  come  immediately  ashore  again.  My  captain  was 
a  Portuguese  negro,  Comillo  by  name.  The  crew,  who  num- 
bered no  less  than  seven,  were  Mpongwe,  Mbenga,  and  Croo- 
men,  no  more  than  two  of  whom  could  understand  each  other, 
and  not  a  soul  could  understand  the  captain.  To  add  a  little 
more  to  this  confusion  of  tongues,  I  brought  on  board  two 
Mpongwe  men  and  their  wives,  who  were  to  serve  me  as  head- 
men, interpreters,  and  for  other  purposes  in  the  new  location 
where  I  intended  to  make  my  home. 

We  got  on  board  at  daylight,  and  by  dint  of  steady  shouting 
and  a  great  deal  of  standing  around,  vrith  a  little  work  now  and 
then,  we  got  the  anchor  up  just  at  dusk.  The  captain  did  not 
much  like  that  we  should  leave  port  on  Friday,  but  I  told  him 
I  would  take  the  responsibility.    No  sooner  had  we  got  out 


188  A  TOUGH  TIME.  Chap.  XIIL 

into  the  swell  than  every  man  (and  woman)  on  board  except 
the  captain  got  sea-sick.  The  cook  was  unable  to  make  break- 
fast next  morning,  the  men  were  lying  about  looking  like 
dying  fish,  and  in  the  canoe  which  we  had  on  deck,  Oya3ra, 
one  of  my  Mpongwe  men,  sea-sick  himself,  was  vainly  striving 
to  comfort  his  newly-married  wife,  who  was  more  sea-sick 
than  he.  It  was  good  fun  to  look  at  the  poor  fellow,  who 
was  really  in  love  with  his  spouse,  a  young  woman  of  twenty, 
who,  to  my  knowledge,  had  already  been  married  three  times, 
and  must  have  been  gratified  at  the  way  she  swayed  poor 
Oyaya. 

We  hoped  to  get  down  to  the  Gamma  region  in  five  days. 
But  on  the  5th,  our  sailing-day,  and  for  three  successive  days 
thereafter,  we  had  light  head  winds  and  a  head  current,  and  on 
February  10th  we  were  caught  in  such  a  storm  as  I  hope  never 
to  be  in  at  sea  again. 

The  steering  had  gone  on  so  badly  when  the  captain  was 
below  that  I  was  forced  to  stand  watcL  I  was  sleeping 
soundly,  having  steered  for  four  hours,  and  had  been  perhaps  an 
hour  in  my  berth,  when  I  was  awakened  by  the  captain's  voice 
giving  orders  to  take  down  the  mainsail.  I  jumped  on  deck 
immediately,  knowing  there  must  be  at  least  a  heavy  squall 
coming.  But  no  sooner  did  I  cast  my  eye  to  leeward  than  I 
saw  how  imminent  the  danger  was.  This  coast  is  troubled  by 
frequent  squalls  of  wind,  lasting,  in  general,  but  a  short  time, 
but  of  terrible  violence,  and  followed  by  torrents  of  rain.  Such 
a  squall  was  now  coming  up.  The  black  clouds  which  had 
gathered  about  the  horizon  were  becoming  lurid  white  with 
startling  quickness.  It  seemed  almost  as  though  they  were  lit 
up  by  lightning.  This  was  the  wind,  which  would  now  in  a 
moment  be  upon  us.    As  yet,  all  was  still. 

I  turned  to  see  if  the  mainsail  was  down,  but  found  nothing 
done  to  meet  the  squall.  The  captain  was  shouting  fix)m  the 
wheel,  the  men  were  running  about,  half-scared  to  death,  also 
shouting,  and  in  the  pitchy  darkness  (for  I  could  not  actually 
see  my  hands  when  held  close  before  my  eyes)  no  one  could 
find  the  halliards.  In  the  midst  of  our  trouble  the  wind  came 
roaring  down.  I  seized  a  knife,  determined  to  cut  everything 
away ;  but  just  then  somebody  let  go  the  halliards,  and,  in  the 
nick  of  time  the  mainsail  came  half-way  down.    Just  then  the 


Chap.  XIII.  NEGRO  SPECULATORS.  189 

squall  broke  upon  us  with  the  roar  and  force  of  a  tornado.  The 
jibs  flew  away  in  tq^  in  a  moment.  The  vessel  sank  over  on 
her  beam-ends.  The  water  rushed  on  to  her  decks,  and  the 
men  sung  out  that  we  were  drowning,  as,  in  fact,  we  should 
have  been  in  a  very  few  minutes.  Happily  the  wind  shifted  a 
little,  and  by  the  light  of  some  very  vivid  lightning  we  seized 
on  the  mainsail  and  pulled  it  down,  holding  it  so  that  the  wind 
should  not  catch  it  again. 

So  she  righted,  and  in  about  twenty  minutes  the  squall  died 
off,  and  was  succeeded  by  a  driving  rain,  pc  uring  down  in 
such  torrents,  that  we  could  get  no  protection  from  it  even 
below. 

The  next  morning  we  had  no  jibs,  and  our  other  sails  were 
severely  damaged.  This  did  not  help  us  along  very  fast  It 
was  not  till  the  13th  that  we  made  the  land ;  but  now  no  one 
on  board  knew  where  we  were,  not  even  our  captain,  who 
brings  up  every  day  an  old  quadrant,  about  the  use  of  which 
he  knows  as  much  as  a  cow  does  about  a  musket.  At  last  a 
canoe  came  off  to  ask  me  to  land  to  start  a  factory,  as  they 
had  plenty  of  ivory  and  palm-oil  and  other  trade.  K  I  had 
gone  ashore  I  should  probably  have  found  not  a  gallon  of  oil, 
not  the  smallest  tusk  of  ivory.  The  great  anxiety  of  every 
one  of  these  negroes  is  for  a  factory,  just  as  a  Western  town- 
builder's  chief  desire  is  for  a  raiboad.  They  lie,  and  beg,  and 
almost  force  a  white  man  ashore,  thinking  themselves  safe  if 
they  can  induce  him  to  set  up  a  little  factory  and  trust  them 
with  some  goods ;  for  they  do  not,  as  a  general  thing,  intend  to 
pay  him. 

However,  our  speculative  friend  in  the  canoe  informed  us  we* 
were  off  Cape  St.  Catherine,  and  therefore  a  good  many  miles 
south  of  the  mouth  of  the  Fernand  Vaz ;  so  we  turned  about  to 
retrace  our  steps.  Sailing  close  in  shore,  at  every  village  we 
passed  we  were  hailed  by  canoes  full  of  negroes  begging  us  to 
start  a  factory  in  their  place.  In  some  villages  we  could  even 
see  the  large  house,  looking  very  fine  from  the  sea,  but  doubt- 
less poor  enough  seen  close  to,  which  was  intended  for  the 
great  fiictory  which  should  make  everybody  rich.  This  house 
was  generally  surroimded  by  huts,  in  which  lived  the  natives 
waiting  for  their  commercial  millennium,  which,  alas!  never 
comes.    I  paid  no  attention  to  their  entreaties,  and  was  even 


190  MISTAKEN  FOR  A  SLAVER.  Chap.  XIH. 

firm  enough,  to  the  surprise  of  everybody,  to  decline  a  mag- 
nificent offer  of  two  slaves  made  by  the  natives  of  Aniambia^  or 
Big  Camma,  who  came  off  with  a  message  firom  their  king. 

At  last  we  came  to  the  mouth  of  the  Femand  Yaz,  and  our 
fame  and  the  disappointment  of  the  natives  had  gone  before  ns. 
It  had  been  determined  in  the  Graboon  that  I  should  set  up  my 
establishment  in  the  town  of  King  Ranpano,  who  was  a  friend 
of  Will  Glass,  one  of  my  Gaboon  allies.  As  the  Caroline  passed 
Banpano's  sea-village,  of  course  a  canoe  came  off  to  beg  me  to 
land.  But  they  evidently  had  little  hope ;  and  their  surprise 
was  extravagant  when  I  assented,  and  told  them  I  had  come  on 
purpose  to  set  up  a  factory  with  them. 

I  never  saw  men  so  anxious  for  trade  as  these  wild  Africans 
are.  They  remind  me  of  what  is  said  of  Western  land  specu- 
lators, and  really  they  have  quite  as  much  enterprise  and  quite 
as  sanguine  a  temperament  as  those  worthies. 

Bampcuio's  men  wanted  much  to  hug  me,  and  were  so  extra- 
vagant in  their  joy  that  I  had  to  order  them  to  keep  their 
hands  off.  I  sent  one  of  my  men  in  their  boat  to  bear  a  message 
to  the  king,  and  took  one  of  theirs  for  a  pilots  being  now 
anxious  to  get  across  the  intricate  bar  and  fairly  into  the  river 
before  dark.  As  we  sailed  along  into  the  river,  boats  shot  out 
to  meet  us  belonging  to  different  villages,  and  presently  I  had 
a  crowd  alongside  anxious  to  board  us  and  sufficient  almost  to 
sink  us.  They  took  me  for  a  slaver  at  first,  and  immediately 
called  out  their  names  in  Portuguese.  One  was  Don  Miguel, 
another  Don  Pedro,  another  Don  Francisco.  They  began  to 
jabber  away  in  Portuguese,  which  I  do  not  understand,  so  I  set 
my  captain  at  them,  who  had  some  difficulty  in  persuading 
them  that  I  came  on  no  such  errand.  Then  they  insisted 
that  I  should  set  up  my  factory  in  their  place.  They  belonged 
to  Elind^,  a  town  just  at  the  mouth  of  the  Femand  Vaz,  whose 
king  is  named  Sangala.  They  praised  the  greatness  and  power 
of  Sangala,  and  decried  poor  Ranpano,  until  I  had  to  order  all 
hands  ashore  for  the  nighty  being  anxious  to  get  a  good  qui^ 
sleep  to  prepare  for  to-morrow. 

From  Cape  St.  Catherine  to  the  Femand  Vaz  is  about  forty- 
five  miles,  reckoning  in  the  windings  of  the  shore.  The  whole 
coast  along  here  is  low,  covered  with  prairies,  wooded  here  and 
there.    The  landscape  has  a  great  sameness,  and  it  is  difficult  to 


Chap.  Xm.  PALAVER  AT  ELINDE.  191 

know  the  land.    The  shore  is  all  along  defended  by  breakers, 
which  become  very  formidable  in  the  dry  season. 

Dnring  the  night  a  fellow  named  Nehouga  came  off  to  see 
me.  He  was  brother  to  that  king  of  Cape  Lopez  of  whom  I 
haye  before  given  some  accomit.  The  king  falling  sick,  accnsed 
this  Nehouga  of  bewitching  him ;  whereupon  the  latter,  to  save 
his  life,  fled  the  country  and  came  down  to  get  protection  from 
Sangala,  his  father-in-law.  This  is  one  of  the  uses  of  &thers-in- 
law  in  this  coimtry. 

Nehouga  now  came  off  to  tell  me  that  Sangala  was  master  of 
all  the  river,  and  that  he  would  not  let  me  go  up  to  Banpano's, 
who  was  only  a  vassal  of  the  great  Sangala.  Therefore  he 
advised  me  as  a  friend  to  go  ashore  at  Elind4.  Fortunately  I 
knew  Mr.  Nehouga. 

Next  morning  (14th)  Sangala  sent  off  a  boat  for  me.  I  took 
two  interpreters,  and,  on  my  arrival  in  Elind6,  which  is  about 
two  miles  fix>m  the  river's  mouth,  was  conducted  to  the  best 
house.  Hither  came  Sangala  presently,  drunk,  and  attended  by 
a  great  crowd  of  eager  subjects.  He  grew  very  angry  when  I 
stated  my  intention  of  passing  up  the  river  and  going  into  the 
interior ;  declared  I  should  not ;  he  was  the  big  king  there,  and 
I  must  settle  in  his  town. 

We  had  some  sharp  words,  and  I  explained  to  his  Majesty 
that  I  was  an  old  African  and  saw  through  all  his  lies.  Then 
he  said  he  would  not  make  any  palaver  if  I  would  have  a  fcu^ry 
in  his  town  too. 

I  revised,  but  offered  to  dash  him  (give  him  some  pre- 
sents). 

He  refosed  this  offer.  And  now,  Eanpano  having  come,  and 
assuring  me  that  I  should  be  backed  up,  I  told  Sangala  I  should 
force  my  way  up. 

All  this  time  rain  was  pouring  down.  When  the  talk  ended 
Banpano  took  me  in  his  canoe  to  his  river-viQage,  a  town  which 
the  people  had  but  just  started,  their  real  town  being  on  the 
sea.  Thither  (to  the  sea-town)  we  went  next  day.  I  foimd  it 
a  very  substantial  place  for  an  African  town,  having  some  good 
houses,  and  looking  much  like  a  Mpongwe  village.  But  I  saw 
that  my  goods  could  not  be  brought  hither  without  great  trouble, 
nor  my  specimens  shipped  through  the  surf  without  great  danger, 
and  so  told  Banpano  I  must  live  on  the  river ;  whereupon  he 


192  READY  FOR  BATTLE.  Chap.  Xm. 

gave  me  at  once  as  much  land  as  I  wanted^  and  I  am  to  have 
houses  built  for  myself. 

Meantime  the  excitement  had  spread  over  the  country,  and 
all  Eanpano's  friends  gathered  to  help  fight  Sangala.  It  was 
really  a  droll  but  exciting  scene  to  see  canoe  after  canoe  come 
in,  loaded  with  armed  men,  drums  beating,  and  all  hands 
shouting  and  waving  swords,  guns,  and  spears.  All  were  pre- 
pared to  assist  Eanpano  s  white  man,  and  all  were  anxious  to 
bum  and  plunder  Elind^.  King  Eitimbo,  who  has  a  factory  in 
his  own  town,  kept  by  a  Mpongwe  fellow,  and  belonging  to  a 
New  York  house,  had  two  canoes  and  fifty  men.  King  Mombo, 
from  Sanguibuiri,  had  also  two  canoes ;  in  short  we  had  in  all 
no  less  than  twenty  big  canoes,  and  could  muster,  on  the  morning 
of  the  17th,  about  three  hundred  men,  most  of  whom  were  drunk 
on  mimbo-wine,  and  as  noisy  and  as  ready  for  fight  as  drunken- 
ness will  make  an  A&ican. 

Drums  were  beat,  and  songs  simg,  and  guns  fired,  as  we  pad- 
dled down  the  river ;  all  hands  had  their  faces  painted  white^ 
which  is  a  sign  of  war,  and  were  covered  with  fetiches,  greegrees, 
and  other  amulets.  The  white  paint  had  been  blessed,  and  was 
also  a  sovereign  protection  against  danger.  One  who  did  not 
know  the  genuine  and  neverfailing  cowardice  of  the  Africans, 
would  have  supposed  these  terrible  fellows  bent  upon  the  most 
bloody  of  raids.  I  was  not  disappointed  when,  sighting  Sangala's 
town,  they  pushed  over  to  the  other  shore  out  of  the  way,  and  took 
care  to  keep  the  Caroline  between  the  enemy  and  themselves. 

We  found  that  Sangala  had  also  gathered  his  friends,  and  had 
about  one  hundred  and  fifty  men  ready  for  fight.  These  fellows 
were  painted  more  outrageously  than  my  side,  having  red  as 
well  as  white  applied  in  broad  stripes.  They  looked  like  so 
many  devils,  shouting  and  firing  off  guns — each  side  knowing 
the  conmion  lack  of  courage,  and  thinking  it  prudent  to  scare 
the  other  in  advance. 

There  was  a  grand  palaver,  in  the  midst  of  which  I  sent  word 
to  Sangala  that  if  he  stopped  me  I  would  blow  his  canoes  out  of 
the  water  with  grape-shot,  and  then  go  and  bring  a  man-of-war  to 
finish  him  up.  (This  threat  of  a  man-of-war  always  strikes  terror 
into  their  guilty  consciences.)  I  loaded  my  guns  and  pistols,  and 
made  my  men  put  good  charges  into  their  pieces,  and  awaited 
the  event. 


Chap.  XIU.  HOUSE-BUILDING  IN  AFRICA.  193 

Presently  a  boat  came  to  ask  me  ashore,  Sangala  sending  his 
chief  wife  to  be  hostage  for  my  safety.  I  determined  to  go 
ashore,  and,  to  show  these  negroes  that  I  had  no  fear  of  them, 
took  the  woman  along  with  me,  to  her  great  joy.  Banpano  and 
his  brother  kings  protested  against  my  rashness,  as  they  thought 
it ;  but  I  assumed  an  air,  and  told  them  it  was  not  the  fashion 
of  white  people  to  fear  anything.  All  this  has  its  effect  upon 
them,  and  Ranpano  was  evidently  impressed,  as  also  was  old 
Sangala. 

We  met  on  neutral  ground  outside  his  town.  His  army  was 
drawn  up  in  battle  array,  and  made  a  fine  savage  display,  many 
of  the  men,  in  addition  to  their  paints,  wearing  beautiful  leopard- 
skins  about  their  waists.  They  came  up  to  us  at  a  full  trot  when 
we  were  seated,  and  made  as  though  they  would  spear  us  all ; 
but  it  was  only  a  kind  of  military  salute.  After  this  Sangala 
said  he  would  let  me  pass  up  for  a  barrel  of  rum.  I  reftised  to 
give  rum,  but  was  obliged  to  give  him  16  dollars  to  go  off  and 
buy  a  barreL  Also  I  gave  him  a  number  of  pieces  of  cloth  and 
other  things,  and  then  the  great  quarrel  was  settled. 

Eanpano  was  delighted.  He  said  he  would  no  more  be  king, 
but  install  me  in  his  place,  and  made  the  greatest  promises  of 
good  treatment.  We  loaded  seventeen  canoes  from  the  (7aro- 
line,  and  pulled  up  to  the  village  where  I  was  to  make  my  home 
and  headquarters  for  some  time ;  and,  to  my  great  astonishment, 
though  we  did  not  reach  the  town  till  after  dark,  not  a  thing  was 
stolen.  The  next  day  the  schooner  was  emptied ;  and,  I  am  glad 
to  say,  they  stole  not  a  single  article  of  me.  I  never  before  saw 
or  heard  of  such  a  case  of  honesty  in  Africa.  Everything  being 
now  at  Banpano's  town,  my  first  work  was  to  prepare  my 
quarters,  where  I  was  to  spend  some  portion,  at  least,  of  the 
next  twenty  months,  and  would  leave  my  possessions  in  my 
absence.  While  I  was  thinking  over  a  plan  for  my  house,  on 
the  evefaing  of  my  arrival,  in  came  Ranpano  with  his  head  wife 
to  get  his  present.  He  came  slyly,  that  his  people  might  not 
see  him ;  and  I  made  him  happy  with  ten  pieces  of  cloth,  a  gun, 
a  neptune,  a  kettle,  and  some  beads  and  other  trifles. 

The  next  day  everybody  was  set  to  work.  I  chose  the  site 
for  the  house,  a  beautiiul  little  spot  in  the  high  prairie  about  one 
hundred  and  fifty  yards  distant  from  the  huts  of  the  village ;  the 
very  prettiest  little  piece  of  ground,  taking  in  view  and  aU,  that 

o 


194  MY  LIFE  IS  THREATENED.  Chap.  XUL 

I  saw  in  all  Africa.  It  faced  the  river  which  I  was  to  explore, 
and  where  a  school  of  hippopotami  were  playing  about  every- 
day on  a  shoal ;  had  a  grove  at  its  back,  and  a  rivnlet  of  clear 
spring-water  rippling  along  one  side. 

Hither  every  day  the  men  brought  me  the  long  straight 
branches  of  a  kind  of  palm  growing  by  the  river-side,  which  are 
used  for  the  sides  of  a  native  house.  Some  gathered  the  leaves 
of  the  same  tree,  from  which  mats  for  roofing  are  made,  and 
others  went  through  the  woods  collecting  wild  vines,  with  which 
to  tie  the  poles  or  bamboos  together,  and  long  slender  poles  to 
set  up  at  the  comers  to  tie  the  bamboo  sides  up  to.  The  women 
cleaned  the  ground,  and  every  evening  huge  piles  of  building- 
material  were  laid  at  my  feet,  of  which  I  accepted  what  was 
good,  and  sent  away  the  rest. 

In  Africa  every  room  is  a  separate  house :  so  I  had  a  kitchen 
in  one  comer  of  my  place,  a  house  to  keep  my  goods  in  another^ 
a  house  for  my  specimens  in  another,  and  fowl  and  goat  houses ; 
my  own  Kving-house,  and  huts  for  my  men,  whom  I  intended  to 
keep  with  me,  all  crowded  together,  and  making  altogether  quite 
a  little  colony.  The  native  carpenter,  with  his  mpano,  or  native 
axe,  a  hammer,  and  a  knife,  made  me  windows  of  a  rude  sort, 
and  doors,  for  which  I  had  brought  hinges  and  locks  with  me. 

Everything  went  on  very  pleasantly  until  the  10th  of  April, 
when  pay-day  came  for  my  men.  I  had  settled  with  some,  when 
a  fellow  who  had  built  my  preserving  and  preparatory  house  for 
animals,  for  which  labour  I  had  promised  him  twenty- four  dollars 
in  goods,  had  the  impudence  to  ask  forty  for  his  party.  I  re- 
fused, whereupon  one  of  the  workmen  threatened  me  with  his 
knife.  Here  was  a  very  bad  case  indeed,  and  one  of  which  I  felt 
that  I  must  make  an  example.  I  ran  for  my  gun,  and  threatened 
to  shoot  the  fellow,  who  was  put  out  of  my  way  by  his  friends. 
Then  I  called  for  the  king,  and  demanded  that  the  rascal  should 
be  sent  to  my  house  in  chains. 

He  said  "  Yes,"  but  evidently  did  not  want  to  find  him ;  and 
I,  who  felt  that  I  must  make  an  example  of  the  man  if  I  looked 
for  peace  and  respect  in  the  future,  only  insisted  the  more  that 
they  should  catch  him. 

At  last,  seeing  that  they  only  pretended,  I  sent  for  my  Croo- 
men  and  began  to  pack  up  my  goods,  saying  I  would  go  back  to 
Gaboon,  and  would  not  stay  among  such  men.    Just  then  an 


Chap.  XIIT.  THE  TOWN  OF  WASHINGTON.  195 

American  whale-ship  appeared  in  the  offing,  and  I  sent  word  im- 
mediately that  I  would  take  passage  in  her. 

The  king  came  to  me,  and  upon  his  knees  begged  me  not  to 
go ;  and  finally,  seeing  I  was  determined,  set  off  with  some  men 
for  the  plantation  where  they  had  stowed  the  offender.  He  was 
one  of  the  oldest  and  most  influential  people  of  the  town,  and 
they  were  very  loth  to  give  him  up. 

On  the  next  day  (the  12th)  the  man,  whose  name  was  Ovenga, 
was  brought  in.  The  excitement  was  intense.  The  people  were 
gathered  in  a  crowd,  and  talked  over  the  matter;  the  king 
looked  almost  pale  with  anxiety,  and  Ovenga  himself  shook  like 
a  leaf.  I  demanded  that  he  should  be  tied,  brought  to  my  house, 
and  severely  flogged.  They  begged  that  his  cloth  might  not  be 
taken  off,  as  it  would  be  a  disgrace  to  expose  an  old  man.  To 
this  I  consented ;  but  sat,  with  a  hard,  stem  face,  waiting  for 
the  poor  criminal.  When  at  last  he  stood  bound  before  me,  I 
scolded  him  well  for  his  attempt  to  cheat,  and  made  much  of  the 
enormity  of  his  threat.  Then  I  said  I  could  pay  only  what  I  had 
promised ;  that  it  was  a  great  outrage  to  threaten  with  a  knife ; 
that  his  own  people  acknowledged  my  justice  in  flogging  him ; 
but  that,  as  they  did  not  know  "  white  man's  fashions"  in  such 
matters,  I  had  determined  to  forgive  him,  and  not  flog  him  at 
all ;  with  which  I  set  him  free. 

Instantly  thunders  of  applause  ran  through  the  village,  guns 
were  fired,  singing  and  dancing  began  all  over,  and  never  were 
such  a  set  of  jolly  fellows.  It  was  the  only  way  to  treat  them. 
If  I  had  passed  Ovenga's  threat  by,  I  should  probably  have  been 
murdered  at  some  future  time.  Now  they  think  more  highly  of 
me  than  ever  for  my  littlq  piece  of  justice  tempered  with  mercy. 

On  the  13th  of  April  I  took  possession  of  my  new  place,  which, 
being  quite  a  village,  I  have  called  Washington.  It  consists  of 
my  own  house,  which  has  five  rooms,  is  forty-five  feet  long  by 
twenty-five  wide,  and  cost  fifty  dollars;  my  kitchen,  four  dollars; 
fowl-house,  containing  a  hundred  chickens  and  a  dozen  ducks  ; 
the  goat-house,  with  eighteen  goats ;  a  powder-house;  two  other 
tolerably-sized  houses  for  stores,  &c. ;  and  a  dozen  huts  for  my 
men.     This  is  Washington  in  Africa. 

At  the  back  of  my  house  is  a  wide  extent  of  prairie.  In  front 
is  the  river  Npoulounai  winding  along ;  and  I  can  see  miles  on 
the  way  which  I  shall  soon  explore.     Its  banks  are  lined  with 

o  2 


196  THE  CAMMA  PEOPLE.  Chip.  XIII. 

mangroTes ;  and,  looking  up  stream  almost  aujr  time,  I  can  see 
schools  of  hippopotami  tossing  and  tumbling  on  the  flats, 

Aa  I  am  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  the  negroes  now,  I  am  Yery 
strict,  but  entirely  just,  in  my  dealings ;  making  myself' obeyed, 
and  that  without  luss  of  tiuie.  I  made  them  stop  their  drumming 
at  night,  and  do  not  let  my  own  men  go  off  without  asking 
leave ;  which  last  seemed  a  dreadful  trouble  to  them,  but  one 
to  be  endured,  as  I  pay  them  regularly  at  every  full  mocm  their 
fourteen  fathoms  of  cloth,  besides  keeping  them  in  tobacca 


And  now,  having  finished  my  villi^e,  let  me  say  a  word  about 
the  people.  They  are  very  much  like  the  Mpongwe,  and  have 
the  same  language,  with  a  few  local  variations.    The  women  wear 


Chap.  XIII.  UP  THE  FERNAND  VAZ.  197 

on  their  legs  a  large  number  of  brass  rings.  They  are  divided 
into  several  families,  some  of  which  own  the  right  to  the  sea- 
shore, while  others  are  forced  by  these  to  remain  in  the  interior, 
and  send  their  goods  to  them  to  trade  off.  These  are  called 
bnshmen ;  and,  as  might  be  expected,  they  are  poor,  as  their 
seashore  brethren  take  care  to  pick  the  best  of  all  the  trade. 
They  are  all  acute,  intelligent,  and  smart  traders,  though  they 
have  had,  even  at  the  river's  mouth,  but  very  little  intercourse, 
80  far,  with  whites. 

They  call  themselves  the  Commi,  though  we  call  them  Gamma. 
They  possess  the  seashore  firom  south  of  Cape  Lopez  to  Cape 
St.  Catherine,  having  also  one  or  two  viDages  on  the  Mexias. 
Their  chief  town  is  Aniambia,  once  a  large  and  flourishing  place 
for  these  people ;  but  their  chief  villages  are  on  the  banks  of 
the  Feruand  Vaz,  which  is  called  by  the  natives  the  Eliva. 

The  mouth  of  the  Femand  Vaz  is  obstructed  by  bars,  on  which 
the  sea  breaks  with  considerable  violence ;  but  the  channel  has 
generally  three,  and  in  the  rainy  season  four,  fathoms  water. 
The  banks  at  the  mouth  are  low ;  and  it  is  not  only  a  diflicult 
land-Ml  to  make  from  sea,  but  a  very  dreary  piece  of  land  when 
made. 

The  Camma  people  are  even  more  anxious  for  trade  than  the 
Mpongwe,  probably  because  they  have  not  yet  had  so  much  com- 
merce with  white  people.  Every  enterprising  Camma  fellow 
builds  a  few  huts  for  a  village  in  what  he  thinks  an  advantageous 
situation ;  then  builds  a  big  house  for  the  factory  which  is  to 
come ;  and  then  does  nothing  for  the  remainder  of  his  life  but 
wait  for  this  blissful  coming.  It  does  not  occur  to  him  to  collect 
ivory,  or  oil,  or  India-rubber.  He  prefers  rather  to  lie  in  wait 
for  passing  vessels,  and  try  with  his  most  honeyed  words  to  per- 
suade some  luckless  captain  ashore. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  negro  tribes  hereabout  are  much  alike 
in  their  general  characters.  A  description  of  the  Mpongwe  will 
answer  tolerably  well  for  all  the  seashore  tribes  from  the  Moon- 
dah  to  Cape  St.  Catherine,  making  allowance  for  the  greater 
rudeness  of  those  who,  like  these  Camma,  have  not  had  much 
acquaintance  with  Europeans. 

On  the  13th  of  April  I  bought,  for  thirty  dollars'  worth  of 
goods,  a  really  splendid  canoe,  which  I  hoped  would  be  service- 
able to  me  in  my  up-river  explorations.     I  was  now  anxious  to 


198  APPEARANCE  OF  THE  RIVER.  Chap.  XTTT. 

be  off,  and  detennined  to  make  a  short  trip  to  th^  seashore  by 
way  of  Aniambia.  This  would  carry  me  first  about  thirty-five 
miles  up  the  Femand  Vaz,  and  then  across  the  land,  as  the  reader 
will  see  by  referring  to  the  map. 

My  men  were  ready,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  14th  we  set 
out.  I  had  satisfied  myself  that  Eanpano  was  anxious  to  have 
me  remain  in  his  town,  as  were  also  his  people :  and  I  had  little 
fear  of  injury  to  my  things  in  my  absence  so  long  as  this  good 
opinion  of  me  was  kept  up.  I  therefore  called  the  people  to- 
gether before  my  departure,  and  said  that  I  had  perfect  confi- 
dence in  them ;  that  I  was  their  white  man,  and  had  come  to 
them  through  much  difficulty  and  danger  {cheers)  ;  that  Sangala 
people  wanted  me,  but  I  was  determined  to  live  with  the  honest 
folks  of  Biagano  {great  cheering)  ;  that  I  was  going  away  for  a 
few  days,  and  hoped  to  find  my  goods  all  safe  when  I  came  back. 

At  this  there  were  great  shoutings  of  "  You  can  go !"  "  Do  not 
fear !"  "  We  love  you !"  "  You  are  our  white  mail !"  "  We  will 
take  care !"  and  so  on  ;  amid  which  my  sixteen  men  seized  their 
paddles  and  shoved  off. 

Five  or  six  miles  above  Biagano  are  some  little  islands.  After 
passing  these  the  river  widened,  until  at  Sanguibuiri,  twenty 
miles  above  the  mouth,  it  is  about  three  miles  wide.  The  country 
was  low  here,  but  as  we  ascended  it  got  higher,  and  the  river 
narrowed,  often  suddenly,  till  in  a  few  miles  it  was  but  half- 
a-milo  wide.  At  nine  the  moon  rose,  and  we  pulled  along 
through  what  seemed  a  charmed  scene ;  the  placid  stream  shaded 
by  the  immense  trees  which  overhung  its  banks,  and  the  silence 
broken  now  and  then  by  the  screech  of  some  night-prowling 
beast,  or  more  frequently  by  the  sudden  plunge  of  a  playful 
henl  of  hippopotami. 

Towards  midnight  my  men  became  tired,  and  we  went  ashore 
at  a  little  village  which  was  nearly  empty.  We  could  find  only 
three  old  women,  who  were  fast  asleep,  and  not  particularly 
anxious  to  make  us  welcome.  I  was  too  sleepy  to  stand  upon 
ceremonies,  and  stowed  myself  away  under  a»rough  shed  without 
walls,  first  building  a  good  fire  in  front  and  arranging  my  mus- 
quito-bar  so  as  to  keep  out  those  buzzing  intruders.  But  I  had 
hardly  lain  down  when  there  came  up  suddenly  one  of  those 
fierce  tornadoes  which  pass  over  these  countries  in  the  rainy 
season.     Fortunately  it  was  a  dry  tornado,  and  one  discomibrt 


Chap.  Xni.  ANIAMBTA.  199 

"Was  thus  saved  us ;  but  while  it  lasted  I  had  to  stand  out  in  the 
clear  street,  lest  some  house  should  fall  on  me. 

Shortly  after  we  had  left  the  village  next  morning  (having 
paid  for  our  lodgings  with  the  ever-welcome  tobacco),  we  came 
to  a  part  of  the  river  where  it  widened  into  a  considerable  and 
very  pretty  lake.  This  was  studded  Avith  little  green  islets, 
which  lie  so  thickly  in  places  as  to  form  the  sluggish  stream  into 
numerous  little  lakelets,  creeks,  and  narrow  straits. 

All  this  while,  though  we  were  going  up  stream,  we  were  not 
diverging  greatly  from  the  coast-line,  and  were,  in  fact,  going 
down  the  coast  rather  than  into  the  interior.  The  sluggish  river 
runs  through  these  sandy  low  banks,  unable  at  any  point  to  force 
its  way  through  to  the  sea,  which  is,  in  places,  so  near  that  one 
may  hear  its  roar. 

About  ten  o'clock  of  the  second  day  we  came  to  another  bay 
or  lagoon,  on  whose  banks,  on  a  high  hill,  lies  the  pretty  village 
of  Igale  Mandi  Hereabouts  the  river  is  charming.  Thick 
forests  border  the  banks ;  and  on  the  trees,  as  we  passed  beneath, 
sat  or  skipped  about  that  graceful  and  curious  little  monkey, 
Cercocebtis  CollariSy  whose  white  whiskers  give  him  a  very 
pciculiar  and  venerable  appearance.  This  town  is  about  forty 
miles  from  the  mouth.  We  found  but  one  man  and  his  wife  at 
home.    The  rest  had  gone  to  make  palm-oil. 

Here  a  part  of  my  crew  refused  to  proceed.  It  leaked  out 
that  they  had  been  intriguing  with  some  women  in  Aniambia, 
and  now  they  were  afraid  of  being  caught  by  the  irate  husbands. 
So  I  left  them  behind,  not  caring  to  get  into  a  row  by  protecting 
them,  as  I  should  certainly  have  done  if  they  had  gone  along. 
It  would  be  fatal  to  a  traveller  in  Africa  to  let  any  one,  for  any 
cause,  interfere  with  the  men  he  employs.  I  never  permitted  it, 
even  when  my  men  were  in  fault. 

From  Igale  to  Aniambia  was  a  two  hours'  walk  through  grass- 
fields,  in  which  we  found  numerous  birds,  some  of  them  new  to 
me.  One  in  particular,  the  Mycteria  Senegalensis,  had  such  long 
legs  that  it  fairly  outwalked  me.  I  tried  to  catch  it,  but,  though 
it  would  not  take  to  the  wing,  it  kept  so  far  ahead  that  I  did  not 
even  get  a  fair  shot  at  it. 

Aniambia  lies  on  the  seashore,  near  a  point  north  of  Cape  St. 
Catherine ;  which  point  makes  a  safe  landing-place.  Here  was 
once  the   headquarters  of  the  now   scattered  Camma  people. 


200  KING  OLENGA-YOMBI.  Chap.  XIII. 

Twenty  years  ago,  when  King  Eegiindo  reigned  here,  it  had 
probably  a  population  of  nearly  three  thousand,  and  was  a  noted 
place  for  slave-factories,  and  for  ivory  and  other  African  produce. 
The  natives  still  speak  with  reverence  of  their  great  king.  After 
his  death  the  chief  men  in  the  leading  families  spread,  tiie  town 
broke  up,  and  gradually  the  tribe  has  become  scattered,  till  it 
occupies  the  wide  range  of  country  before  noted.  The  death  of 
their  king  was  a  death-blow  to  all  their  prosperity.  They  have 
had  but  few  factories  since,  and  have  robbed  most  of  them ;  and, 
as  they  own  no  king  nor  head  chief,  no  redress  is  to  be  got,  and 
white  men  have  ceased  to  come  among  them.  Once  in  a  great 
while  they  get  hold  of  some  unlucky  captain,  ignorant  of  thdr 
character,  whom  they  fleece  without  mercy,  and  generally  send 
away  only  when  they  have  ruined  him. 

Still  they  are  as  eagerly  on  the  look-out  for  shipping  as  ever. 
The  big  trade-house  stands  in  the  midst  of  the  village  in  all  its 
glory ;  the  English  flag  floated  to  the  breeze  on  the  high  pole 
which  every  Camma  village  has,  a  flag  being  the  sign  of  a  ship 
in  the  ofiKng ;  and  the  canoe  was  ready  to  launch  at  short  notice 
to  board  some  passing  merchantman. 

The  present  king,  Olenga-Yombi,  came  in  from  his  plantation 
when  he  heard  the  joyful  news  that  a  white  man  had  arrived, 
and  I  made  him  a  formal  visit.  He  was  a  drunken  old  wretch, 
surroimded  by  a  crowd  of  the  chief  men  of  the  town.  His 
majesty  had  on  a  thick  overcoat,  but  no  trousers ;  and,  early  as 
it  was,  had  jdready  taken  a  goodly  quantity  of  rum  or  palm- 
wine.  I  was  invited  to  sit  at  his  right  hand.  I  told  him  I  had 
come  to  purchase  a  little  ivory  and  to  hunt,  having  heard  that 
there  was  game  in  his  country.  After  presenting  him  with  a 
few  strips  of  cloth,  some  pipes,  and  several  heads  of  tobacco, 
which  put  him  in  a  good  temper,  he  declared  I  was  a  good  white 
man,  and  should  go  wherever  I  chose. 

Accordingly,  I  went  out  in  the  afternoon,  but  found  all  around 
here  a  very  low  country,  perfectly  flat,  and  mostly  prairie.  The 
long  grass  was  full  of  birds,  and  the  long-legged  Mycteria  was  in 
great  numbers.  There  were  also  great  flocks  of  a  beautiful  bird 
whose  dark  golden  body-plumage,  and  snow-white,  long,  downy 
neck,  made  a  very  fine  and  marked  contrast  with  the  green  grass. 
Next  to  these,  in  point  of  numbers,  was  the  snow-white  egrettOy 
which  is  found  in  vast  flocks  all  along  this  coast. 


Chap.  XTIF.  NEGRO  FANDANGO.  201 

At  nightfall  I  got  a  guide  and  went  out  to  see  if  I  could  get  a 
shot  at  something  larger  than  a  bird.  Gorilla  are  said  to  be 
found  in  the  country  behind  here ;  but  I  had  no  hope  of  getting 
a  shot  at  one  here,  and  was  prepared  for  game  of  less  note.  We 
had  gone  but  a  little  way  when  my  guide  pointed  out  to  me  a 
couple  of  bright  glowing  spots  visible  through  a  piece  of  thick 
brush.  The  fellow  trembled  as  he  whispered  "  Leopard ! "  but  I 
saw  at  once  that  it  was  only  the  light  of  a  couple  of  fire-flies  who 
had  got  in  proper  position  to  make  a  tolerable  resemblance  to 
the  glowing  eyes  of  the  dreaded  leopard. 

About  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  we  at  last  heard  a  grunting 
which  announced  the  approach  of  a  herd  of  wild  hogs.  I  lay 
in  wait  near  the  track  they  had  to  pass  along,  and  was  for- 
tunate enough  to  kill  the  big  boar  of  the  pack.  The  rest  of  the 
herd  made  oflf  without  showing  a  desire  for  fight,  as  these  mali- 
cious animals  do  sometimes,  and  we  returned  to  town  with  our 
trophy. 

On  the  next  evening  (17ih)  the  king  held  a  grand  dance  in 
my  honour.  This  is  an  honour  I  abominate,  but  one  which  can- 
not be  declined,  because  the  natives  enjoy  it  too  much  them- 
selves. All  the  king's  wives,  to  the  number  of  forty,  and  all 
the  women  of  the  town  and  neighbourhood  were  present  For- 
tunately the  dance  was  held  out  in  the  street,  and  not  in  a  room, 
as  in  Cape  Lopez.  The  women  were  ranged  on  one  side,  the 
men  opposite.  At  the  end  of  the  line  sat  the  drummers  beating 
tiieir  huge  tam-tams,  which  make  an  infernal  and  deafening 
din,  enough  to  distract  a  man  of  weak  nerves.  And,  as  though 
for  this  occasion  the  tam-tams  were  not  entirely  adequate,  there 
was  singing,  and  shouting,  and  a  series  of  brass  kettles,  which 
also  were  ftiriously  beaten ;  while,  as  a  last  and  most  ingenious 
addition,  a  number  of  boys  sat  near  the  drummers  beating  on 
hollow  pieces  of  wood.  It  is  curious  what  a  stirring  efiect  the 
sound  of  the  tam-tam  has  on  the  African.  It  works  upon  him 
as  martial  music  does  upon  excitable  Frenchmen ;  they  lose  all 
control  over  themselves  at  its  sound,  and  the  louder  and  more 
energetically  the  horrid  drum  is  beaten,  the  wilder  are  the 
jumps  of  the  male  African,  and  the  more  disgustingly  indecent 
the  contortions  of  the  women. 

As  may  be  imagined,  to  beat  the  tam-tam  is  not  a  labour  of 
love.    The  stoutest  negro  is  worn  out  in  an  hour  at  furthest^ 


202  FETICHES  AND  TTTEIR  HOUSES.  Chap.  XHT. 

and  for  such  a  night*8  entertainment  as  this  a  series  of  drnminers 
are  required. 

The  people  enjoyed  it  vastly,  their  only  regret  being  that  they 
had  not  a  barrel  of  rum  to  drink  in  the  pauses  of  the  dance. 
But  they  managed  to  get  just  as  drunk  on  palm-wine,  of  which 
a  great  quantity  was  served  out.  The  excitement  became 
greatest  when  tlie  Idng  danced.  His  majesty  was  pretty  drunk, 
and  his  jumps  were  very  highly  applauded.  His  wives  bowed 
down  to  his  feet  while  he  capered  about,  and  showed  him  the 
deepest  marks  of  veneration,  while  the  drums  and  kettles  were 
belaboured  more  furiously  than  ever. 

After  standing  it  as  well  as  I  could  for  two  hours,  I  left ;  but 
though  I  lay  down  I  could  not  sleep  all  night,  for  they  kept  it  up 
till  nearly  daylight. 

The  next  day  I  visited  the  two  fetich-houses.  Aniambia 
enjoys  the  protection  of  two  spirits  of  very  great  power,  named 
Abambou  and  Mbuirri.  The  former  is  an  evil  spirit,  the  latter 
is  beneficent.  They  are  both  worshipped;  and  their  accom- 
modations, so  far  as  I  was  permitted  to  see,  were  exactly  alike. 

They  were  housed  in  little  huts,  each  about  six  feet  square 
and  six  feet  high.  The  fetich-man,  who  is  also  doctor  and  town- 
oracle,  led  me  to  where  they  stood  together  at  the  end  of  the 
village,  and  respectfully  opened  the  doors  for  me  to  look  into 
his  holy  places. 

In  the  house  of  Abambou  I  saw  a  fire,  which  I  was  told  is  not 
permitted  to  go  out.  I  saw  no  idol,  but  only  a  large  chest,  on 
the  top  of  which  lay  some  white  and  red  chalk  and  some  red 
parrot-feathers.  The  chalk  is  used  to  mark  the  bodies  of  the 
devout  on  certain  occasions  when  vows  are  made.  The  feathers 
were  probably  part  of  the  trappings  of  the  spirit 

Abambou  is  the  devil  of  the  Gamma.  He  is  a  wicked  and 
mischievous  spirit,  who  lives  near  graves  and  in  burial-grounds, 
and  is  most  comfortably  lodged  among  the  skeletons  of  the 
dead.  He  takes  occasional  walks  through  the  country ;  and,  if 
he  is  angry  at  anyone,  has  the  power  to  cause  sickness  and 
deatL  The  Gamma  cook  food  for  him,  which  is  deposited  in 
lonely  places  in  the  woods ;  and  then  they  address  him  in  a 
flattering  manner,  and  ask  him  to  be  good  to  them,  and,  in 
consideration  of  their  gifts,  to  leave  them  alone.  I  was  prpsent 
onoo  at  a  meeting  where  Abambou  was  being  addressed  in 


Chap.  XHI.  FETICHES  AND  THEIE  HOUSES.  203 

public.  They  cried  continually,  "  Now  we  are  well  I  Now  we 
are  satisfied !     Now  be  our  friend,  and' do  not  hurt  us !  '* 

The  offerings  of  plantain,  sugarcane,  and  ground-nuts,  are 
wrapped  in  leaves  by  the  free  men,  but  the  slaves  lay  them  on 
the  bare  ground.  Sometimes  Abambou  is  entreated  to  kill  the 
enemies  of  him  who  is  making  the  sacrifice.  A  bed  is  made  in 
Abambou's  house,  and  here  he  sometimes  comes  to  rest  himself 
when  he  is  tired  of  going  up  and  down  the  coast.  At  the  new 
moon  great  quiet  reigns  in  the  Camma  villages,  and  then  the 
people  pray  to  their  spirits,  of  whom  each  family  or  subdivision 
of  the  tribe  owns  two,  kept  in  a  small  hut  in  the  village  of  the 
oldest  chief  of  that  family. 

Mbuirri,  whose  house  I  next  visited,  is  lodged  and  kept  much 
as  his  rivaL  He  is  a  good  spirit,  but  hAs  powers  much  the  same 
as  Abambou,  so  far  as  I  could  see.  Being  less  wicked,  he  is 
not  so  zealously  worshipped. 

There  is  a  third  and  much  dreaded  spirit,  called  Ovengua. 
This  is  the  terrible  catcher  and  eater  of  men.  He  is  not  wor- 
shipped, and  has  no  power  over  diseases.  But  he  wanders 
unceasingly  through  the  forests,  and  catches  and  destroys  luck- 
less travellers  who  cross  his  path.  By  day  he  lives  in  dark 
caverns,  but  at  night  he  roams  freely;  and  even  sometimes  gets 
into  the  body  of  a  man,  and  beats  and  kills  all  who  come  out  in 
the  dark.  Sometimes,  they  relate,  such  a  spirit  is  met  and 
resisted  by  a  body  of  men,  who  wound  him  with  spears,  and 
even  kiU  him.  In  this  case  his  body  must  be  burned,  and  not 
even  the  smallest  bone  left,  lest  a  new  Ovengua  should  %rise 
from  it.  There  are  many  spots  where  no  object  in  the  world 
would  induce  a  Camma  negro  to  go  by  night,  for  fear  of  this 
dreadful  monster.  It  is  really  a  frightful  superstition  to  an 
ignorant  and  credulous  people,  and  I  do  not  wonder  at  their  fear. 

They  have  a  singular  belief  that  when  a  person  dies,  who  has 
been  bewitched,  the  bones  of  his  body  leave  the  grave  one  by 
one,  and  form  in  a  single  line,  which  Une  of  bones  gradually 
becomes  an  Ovengua. 

It  is  not  an  easy  matter  to  get  at  the  religious  notions  of  these 
peopla  They  have  no  well-defined  ideas  of  them  themselves, 
and  on  many  points  they  are  not  very  communicative. 

I  set  out  early  on  the  19th  to  try  and  get  a  shot  at  some 
buffalo,  which  were  said  to  be  in  the  prairie  at  the  back  of  the 


204  THE  KING  IS  TRICKED.  Chap.  XIII. 

town.  Ifouta,  a  hunter,  accompanied  me,  and  met  with  an 
accident  through  losing  his  presence  of  mind.  We  had  been  out 
about  an  hour,  when  we  came  upon  a  bull  feeding  in  the  midst 
of  a  little  prairie  surrounded  by  a  wood  which  made  our  approach 
easy.  Ifouta  walked  around  opposite  to  where  I  lay  in  wait^  in 
order,  that  if  the  animal  took  alarm  at  him  it  might  run  towards 
me ;  and  then  began  to  crawl,  in  the  hunter  fashion,  through 
the  grass  towards  his  prey.  All  went  well  till  he  came  near 
enough  for  a  shot.  Just  then,  unluckily,  the  bull  saw  him. 
Kouta  immediately  fired.  The  gun  made  a  long  fire,  and  he 
only  wounded  the  beast,  which,  quite  infuriated,  as  it  often  is  at 
the  attack  of  hunters,  immediately  rushed  upon  him. 

It  was  now  that  poor  Ifouta  lost  his  presence  of  mind.  In 
such  cases,  which  are  continually  happening  to  those  who  hunt 
the  Bos  hrachichero9y  the  cue  of  the  hunter  is  to  remain  perfectly 
quiet  till  the  beast  is  within  a  jump  of  him,  then  to  step  nimbly 
to  one  side,  and  let  it  rush  past    But  Ifouta  got  up  and  ran. 

Of  course,  in  a  moment  the  bull  had  him  on  his  horns.  It 
tossed  him  high  into  the  air  once,  twice,  thrice,  ere  I  could  run 
up,  and  by  my  shouts,  draw  its  fiiry  to  myself.  Then  it  came 
rushing  at  me.  But  my  guns  do  not  hesitate,  and,  as  I  had  a 
fair  shot,  I  killed  it  without  trouble. 

Ifouta  proved  to  be  considerably  bruised,  but,  on  the  whole, 
more  scared  than  hurt ;  and  when  I  had  washed  him  in  a  creek 
near  by,  he  was  able  to  walk  home. 

The  next  day  (20th  of  April)  I  was  to  go  home,  and  the  king 
came  to  take  leave  of  me,  when  a  ftmny  scene  occurred.  His 
Majesty  made  a  long  stay,  and  his  subjects,  some  of  whom  were 
awaiting  his  departure  to  do  a  little  private  trading  with  me,  as 
they  dared  not  let  the  king  see  the  goods  they  got  of  me,  lost  all 
patience ;  so  they  sent  in  a  messenger  to  say  that  a  man  was 
anxious  to  speak  to  his  Majesty  in  his  house.  The  king  went 
off,  and  had  no  sooner  gone  than  in  rushed  the  men,  handed  me 
their  ivory,  and  begged  me  to  be  quick  and  give  them  their 
goods.  I  had  just  done  so  when  the  king  reappeared,  with 
a  stout  stick  in  his  hands,  and  laid  about  him  in  a  great  rage 
at  having  been  made  a  fool  of;  while  the  poor  wretches  dropped 
their  little  bundles  and  made  their  escape  as  best  they  might 

To  return  to  Eanpano's  town  we  took  a  different  road  by 
which  we  rectched  the  river  much  quicker.     The  whole  country 


Chap.  XUI.  TOWN  REMOVED.  205 

hereabouts  is  a  beautiful  prairie-land,  well  wooded  at  frequent 
intervals.  On  the  road  we  passed  a  place  in  a  forest  which 
is  supposed  to  be  haunted  by  the  spirit  of  a  crazy  woman  who, 
some  generations  ago,  left  her  home  in  a  neighbouring  village 
to  live  here,  and  who  has  been  an  object  of  dread  to  the  negroes 
ever  since.  They  believe  that  she  still  cultivates  her  plantation 
in  some  hidden  comer  of  the  forest,  and  that  she  often  lies  in 
wait  for  travellers,  whom  she  beats  and  kills  out  of  pure  malice. 

On  the  borders  of  the  river  we  found  the  village  of  Makaga- 
Oungiou,  the  chief  of  which  had  come  down  to  help  fight  the 
Sangala  people  on  my  account,  for  which  reason  I  was  glad 
to  be  civil  to  him.  The  town  was  situated  in  a  lovely  spot,  with 
a  fine  sandy  prairie  on  one  side  and  a  forest  on  the  other.  The 
scenery  was  very  enticing.  I  should  like  to  have  stayed  here 
some  time — the  more  so,  as  Makaga  told  me  that  the  cry  of  the 
gorilla  is  heard  frequently  in  these  woods,  and  the  animals  are 
daring  enough  to  come  down  and  rob  the  plantain  and  sugar- 
cane plantations. 

We  paddled  all  night,  and  reached  Biagano  on  the  morning 
of  the  24th.  Canoe  navigation  is  not  at  any  time  pleasant,  least 
of  all  by  night  But  this  time  we  had  an  added,  unpleasantness 
in  getting  by  accident  among  a  school  of  gambolling  hippo- 
potami, who  rose  all  around  us,  and,  by  their  boisterous  motions, 
several  times  nearly  capsized  us. 

I  found,  on  my  return,  that  all  the  Biagano  people  had  moved 
from  the  seashore  and  built  themselves  huts  near  my  house.  I 
had  reason  to  fear  for  my  fowls  and  goats ;  but,  on  remonstrat- 
ing, was  assured  by  all  hands  that  they  would  not  steal  from  me, 
and  that  they  did  not  want  to  live  away  from  their  white  man. 
T(J)acco  was  what  brought  them  to  me.  They  thought  they 
would  get  none  unless  they  were  near  me.  I  was  forced  to  be 
satisfied ;  and,  indeed,  must  acknowledge  that  they  behave  with 
great  propriety. 

On  the  4th  of  May  I  had  one  of  the  greatest  pleasures  of  my 
whole  life.  Some  hunters  who  had  been  out  on  my  account 
brought  in  a  young  gorilla  alive  !  I  cannot  describe  the  emotions 
with  which  I  saw  the  struggling  little  brute  draped  into  the 
village.  All  the  hardships  I  had  endured  in  Africa  were 
rewarded  in  that  moment. 

It  was  a  little  fellow  of  between  two  and  three  years  old,  two 


206  WE  CATCH  A  LIVK  GORILLA.  Chap.  Xlll. 

feet  six  ioches  in  len^h,  and  as  fierce  and  Etubbom  as  a  growD 
unitnal  could  have  been. 


My  hunters,  whom  I  could  have  hugged  to  my  heart,  took  him 
iu  the  country  between  the  Bembo  and  Cape  St.  Catherine.  By 
their  account,  they  were  going,  five  in  number,  to  a  village  near 
the  coast,  and  walking  very  silently  through  the  forest,  when  . 
they  heard  what  they  immediately  rec<^:nized  as  the  cry  of 
a  young  gorilla  for  its  mother.  The  forest  was  silent.  It 
was  about  noon ;  and  they  immediately  determined  to  follow  the 
cry.  Presently  they  heard  it  again.  Guns  in  hand,  the  biave 
fellows  crept  noiselessly  towards  a  dump  of  wood,  where  the 
baby  gorilla  evidently  was.  They  knew  the  mother  would 
be  near ;  and  there  was  a  likelihood  that  the  male,  the  most 
dreaded  of  all,  might  be  there  too.  But  they  determined  to 
risk  all,  and,  if  at  all  possible,  to  take  the  young  one  al^ve, 
knowing  what  a  joy  it  would  be  for  me. 

Presently  they  perceived  the  bush  moving ;  and  crawling  a 
little  further  on  in  dead  silence,  scarce  breathing  with  excite- 
ment, tliey  beheld,  what  has  seldom  been  seen  even  by  the 
negroes,  a  young  gorilla,  seated  on  the  ground,  eating  some 
berries  which  grew  close  to  the  earth.  A  few  feet  further  on  gat 
the  mother  also  eatmg  of  the  same  fruit 

Instantly  they  made  ready  to  fire ;  and  none  too  soon,  for  the 
old  female  saw  them  as  they  raised  their  guns,  and  they  bad 
only  to  pull  tri^ers  wiUiout  delay.  Happily  they  wounded  her 
mortally. 


Chap.  XIII.         FEROCITY  OF  THE  YOUNG  BEAST.  207 

She  fell.  The  young  one,  hearing  the  noise  of  the  guns,  ran 
to  his  mother  and  clung  to  her,  hiding  his  face,  and  embracing 
her  body.  The  hunters  immediately  rushed  toward  the  two, 
hallooing  with  joy  as  they  ran  on.  But  this  roused  the  little 
one,  who  instantly  let  go  his  mother  and  ran  to  a  small  tree, 
which  he  climbed  with  great  agility,  where  he  sat  and  roared  at 
them  savagely. 

They  were  now  perplexed  how  to  get  at  him.  No  one  cared 
to  run  the  chance  of  being  bitten  by  this  savage  little  beast,  and 
shoot  it  they  would  not.  At  last  they  cut  down  the  tree,  and,  as 
it  fell,  dexterously  threw  a  cloth  over  the  head  of  the  young 
monster,  and  thus  gained  time  to  secure  it  while  it  was  blinded. 
With  all  these  precautions,  one  of  the  men  received  a  severe 
bite  on  the  hand,  and  another  had  a  piece  taken  out  of  his  leg. 

As  the  little  brute,  though  so  diminutive,  and  the  merest 
baby  for  age,  was  astonishingly  strong  and  by  no  means  good- 
tempered,  they  could  not  lead  him.  He  constantly  rushed  at 
them.  So  they  were  obliged  to  get  a  forked  stick  in  which  his 
neck  was  inserted  in  such  a  way  that  he  could  not  escape,  and 
yet  could  be  k^pt  at  a  safe  distance.  In  this  uncomfortable  way 
he  was  brought  into  the  village. 

There  the  excitement  was  intense.  As  the  animal  was  lifted 
out  of  the  canoe  in  which  he  had  come  a  little  way  down  the 
river,  he  roared  and  bellowed,  and  looked  around  wildly  with  his 
wicked  little  eyes,  giving  fair  warning  that  if  he  could  only  get 
at  some  of  us  he  would  take  his  revenge. 

I  saw  that  the  stick  hurt  his  neck,  and  immediately  set  about 
to  have  a  cage  made  for  him.  In  two  hours  we  had  built 
a  strong  bamboo  house,  with  the  slats  securely  tied  at  such 
distances  apart  that  we  could  see  the  gorilla  and  it  could  see  out. 
Here  the  thing  was  immediately  deposited ;  and  now,  for  the 
first  time,  I  had  a  fair  chance  to  look  at  my  prize. 

It  was  a  young  male  gorilla,  evidently  not  yet  three  years  old, 
fully  able  to  walk  alone,  and  possessed,  for  its  age,  of  most 
extraordinary  strength  and  muscular  development.  Its  greatest 
length  proved  to  be,  afterwards,  two  feet  six  inches.  Its  foce 
and  hands  were  very  black,  eyes  not  so  much  sunken  as  in 
the  adult  The  hair  began  just  at  the  eyebrows  and  rose 
to  the  crown,  where  it  was  of  a  reddish-brown.  It  came  down 
the  sides  of  the  face  in  lines  to  the  lower  jaw  much  as  our  beards 


208  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  CAPTIVE.  Chap.  XIII. 

grow.  The  upper  lip  was  covered  with  short  coarse  hair; 
the  lower  lip  had  longer  hair.  The  eyelids  very  slight  and  thin. 
Eyebrows  straight,  and  three-quarters  of  an  inch  long. 

The  whole  back  was  covered  with  hair  of  an  iron-gray, 
becoming  dark  nearer  the  arms,  and  quite  white  about  the  tmus. 
Chest  and  abdomen  covered  with  hair,  which  was  somewhat  thin 
and  short  on  the  breast.  On  the  arms  the  hair  was  longer  than 
anywhere  on  the  body,  and  of  a  grayidi-black  colour,  caused  by 
the  roots  of  the  hair  being  dark  and  the  ends  whitish.  On  the 
hands  and  wrists  the  hair  was  black,  and  came  down  to  the 
second  joints  of  the  fingers,  though  one  could  see  in  the  short 
down  the  beginning  of  the  long  black  hair  which  lines  the 
upper  parts  of  the  fingers  in  the  adult.  The  hair  of  the  legs  was 
grayish-black,  becoming  blacker  as  it  reached  the  ankles,  the  feet 
being  covered  with  black  hair. 

When  I  had  the  little  fellow  safely  locked  in  his  cage,  I  ven- 
tured to  approach  to  say  a  few  encouraging  words  to  him.  He 
stood  in  the  furthest  comer,  biit,  as  I  approached,  bellowed 
and  made  a  precipitate  rush  at  me ;  and  though  I  retreated  as 
quickly  as  I  could,  suc<*eeded  in  catching  my  trouser-legs,  whidi 
he  grasped  with  one  of  his  feet  and  tore,  retreating  immediately 
to  the  comer  furthest  away.  This  taught  me  caution  for  the 
present,  though  I  had  a  hope  still  to  be  able  to  tame  him. 

He  sat  in  his  comer  looking  wickedly  out  of  his  gray  eyes, 
and  I  never  saw  a  more  morose  or  more  ill-tempered  fece  tlian 
had  this  little  beast. 

T)^j  first  thing  was,  of  course,  to  attend  to  the  wants  of  my  cap- 
tWjf  I  sent  for  some  of  the  forest-berries  which  these  animals 
are  known  to  prefer,  and  placed  these  and  a  cup  of  water  within 
his  reach.  He  was  exceedingly  shy,  and  would  neither  eat  nor 
drink  till  I  had  removed  to  a  considerable  distance. 

The  second  day  found  Joe,  as  I  had  named  him,  fiercer  than 
the  first.  He  rushed  savagely  at  anyone  who  stood  even  for  a 
moment  near  his  cage,  and  seemed  ready  to  tear  us  all  to  pieces. 
I  threw  him  to-day  some  pineapple  leaves,  of  which  I  noticed  be 
ate  only  the  white  parts.  There  seemed  no  difficulty  about  his 
food,  though  he  refused  now,  and  continued  during  his  short  life 
to  refuse,  all  food  except  such  wild  leaves  and  fruits  as  were 
gathered  from  his  native  woods  for  him. 

The  third  day  he  was  still  morose  and  savage,  bellowing  wheu 


Chap,  XIII.  MT  PRIZE  IS  UNTAMEABLE.  209 

any  person  approached,  and  either  retiring  to  a  distant  comer  or 
roshing  to  attack.  On  the  fourth  day,  while  no  one  was  near, 
the  little  rascal  succeeded  in  forcing  apart  two  of  the  bamboo 
rails  which  composed  his  cage,  and  made  his  escape.  I  came  np 
just  as  his  flight  was  discovered,  and  immediately  got  all  the 
negroes  together  for  pursuit,  determining  to  surround  the  wood 
and  recapture  my  captive.  Bunning  into  the  house  to  get  one  of 
my  guns,  I  was  startled  by  an  angry  growl  issuing  from  under  my 
low  bedstead.  It  was  Master  Joe,  who  lay  there  hid,  but  anxiously 
watching  my  movements.  I  instantly  shut  the  windows,  and 
called  to  my  people  to  guard  the  door.  When  Joe  saw  the  crowd 
of  black  faces  he  became  furious,  and,  with  his  eyes  glaring  and 
every  sign  of  rage  in  his  little  face  and  body,  got  out  from  be- 
neath the  bed.  We  shut  the  door  at  the  same  time  and  left 
him  master  of  the  premises,  preferring  to  devise  some  plan 
for  his  easy  capture  rather  than  to  expose  ourselves  to  his 
terrible  teeth. 

How  to  take  him  was  now  a  puzzling  question.  He  had  shown 
such  strength  and  such  rage  already,  that  not  even  I  cared  to  run 
the  chance  of  being  badly  bitten  in  a  hand-to-hand  struggle. 
Meantime  Joe  stood  in  the  middle  of  the  room  looking  about  for 
his  enemies,  and  examining,  with  some  surprise,  the  furniture.  I 
watched  with  fear  lest  the  ticking  of  my  clock  should  strike  his 
ear,  and  perhaps  lead  him  to  an  assault  upon  that  precious  article. 
Indeed,  I  should  have  left  Joe  in  possession,  but  for  a  fear  that 
he  would  destroy  the  many  articles  of  value  or  curiosity  I  had 
hung  about  the  walls. 

Finally,  seeing  him  quite  quiet,  I  despatched  some  fellows  for 
a  net,  and  opening  the  door  quickly,  threw  this  over  his  head. 
Fortunately  we  succeeded  at  the  first  throw  in  fatally  entangling 
the  young  monster,  wha  roared  frightfully,  and  struck  and  kicked 
in  every  direction  under  the  net.  I  took  hold  of  the  back  of  his 
neck,  two  men  seized  his  arms  and  another  the  legs,  and  thus 
held  by  four  men  this  extraordinary  little  creature  still  proved 
most  troublesome.  We  carried  him  as  quickly  as  we  could  to 
the  cage,  which  had  been  repaired,  and  there  once  more  locked 
him  in. 

I  never  saw  so  furious  a  beast  in  my  life  as  he  was.  He 
darted  at  everyone  who  came  near,  bit  the  bamboos  of 
the  house,  glared  at  us  with  venomous  and  sullen  eyes,  and 

p 


210  DEATH  OF  JOE.  Chap.  XIU. 

in  every  motion  showed  a  temper  thoroughly  wicked  and 
malicious. 

As  there  was  no  change  in  this  for  two  days  thereafter,  but 
continual  moroseness,  I  tried  what  starvation  would  do  towards 
breaking  his  spirit ;  also,  it  began  to  be  troublesome  to  procure 
his  food  from  the  woods,  and  I  wanted  him  to  become  accustomed 
to  civilized  food,  which  was  placed  before  him.  But  he  would 
touch  nothing  of  the  kind ;  and  as  for  temper,  aftier  starving  him 
twenty-four  hours,  all  I  gained  was  that  he  came  slowly  up  and 
took  some  berries  from  the  forest  out  of  my  hand,  immediately 
retreating  to  his  comer  to  eat  them. 

Daily  attentions  from  me  for  a  fortnight  more  did  not  bring 
me  any  further  confidence  from  him  than  this.  He  always 
snarled  at  me,  and  only  when  very  hungry  would  he  take  even 
his  choicest  food  from  my  hands.  At  the  end  of  this  fortnight  I 
came  one  day  to  feed  him,  and  found  that  he  had  gnawed  a 
bamboo  to  pieces  slyly  and  again  made  his  escape.  Luckily  he 
had  but  just  gone ;  for,  as  I  looked  around,  I  caught  sight  of 
Master  Joe  making  off  on  all  fours,  and  with  great  speed,  across 
the  little  prairie  for  a  clump  of  trees. 

I  called  the  men  up  and  we  gave  chace.  He  saw  us,  and  before 
we  could  head  him  off  made  for  another  clump.  This  we  sur- 
rounded. He  did  not  ascend  a  tree,  but  stood  defiantly  at  the 
border  of  the  wood.  About  one  hundred  and  fifty  of  us  sur- 
rounded him.  As  we  moved  up  he  began  to  yell,  and  made  a 
sudden  dash  upon  a  poor  fellow  who  was  in  advance,  who  ran, 
tumbled  down  in  affright,  and,  by  his  fall,  escaped,  but  also  de- 
tained Joe  suflBciently  long  for  the  nets  to  be  brought  to  bear 
Upon  him. 

Four  of  us  again  bore  him  struggling  into  the  village.  This 
time  I  would  not  trust  him  to  the  cage,  but  had  a  little  light 
chain  fastened  around  his  neck.  This  operation  he  resisted  with 
all  his  might,  and  it  took  us  quite  an  hour  to  securely  chain  the 
little  fellow,  whose  strength  was  something  marvellous. 

Ten  days  afl^r  he  was  thus  chained  he  died  suddenly.  He  was 
in  good  health,  and  ate  plentifully  of  his  natural  food,  which  was 
brought  every  day  for  him ;  did  not  seem  to  sicken  until  two 
days  before  his  death,  and  died  in  some  pain.  To  the  last  he 
continued  utterly  untameable;  and,  after  his  chains  were  on, 
added  the  vice  of  treachery  to  his  others.    He  would  come  some- 


Chap.  XIU.  HIPPOPOTAMUS-HUNTING.  211 

times  quite  readily  to  eat  out  of  my  hand,  but  while  I  stood  by 
him  would  suddenly — ^looking  me  all  the  time  in  the  face  to  keep 
my  attention — ^put  out  his  foot  and  grasp  at  my  leg.  Several 
times  he  tore  my  pantaloons  in  this  manner,  quick  retreat  on  my 
part  saving  my  person ;  till  at  last  I  was  obliged  to  be  very  care- 
ful in  my  approaches.  The  negroes  could  not  come  near  him  at 
all  without  setting  him  in  a  rage.  He  knew  me  very  well,  and 
trusted  me,  but  evidently  always  cherished  a  feeling  of  revenge 
even  towards  me. 

After  he  was  chained,  I  filled  a  half-barrel  with  hay  and  set  it 
near  him  for  his  bed.  He  recognized  its  use  at  once,  and  it  was 
pretty  to  see  him  shake  up  the  hay  and  creep  into  this  nest  when 
he  was  tired  At  night  he  always  again  shook  it  up,  and  then 
took  some  hay  in  his  hands,  with  which  he  would  cover  himself 
when  he  was  snug  in  his  barrel. 

On  the  20th  of  May  I  went  up  the  river  about  five  miles  to 
shoot  hippopotami.  There  was  here  a  place  in  the  river  shallow 
enough  for  them  to  stand  in  and  play  around ;  and  here  they 
remained  all  day,  playing  in  the  deep  water,  or  diving,  but  for 
the  most  part  standing  on  the  shallows,  with  only  their  ugly  noses 
pointed  out  of  the  water,  and  looking,  for  all  the  world,  exactly 
like  so  many  old  weather-beaten  logs  stranded  on  a  sand-bar. 
We  approached  slowly  and  with  caution,  to  within  thirty  yards 
of  the  school,  without  seeming  to  attract  the  slightest  attention 
from  the  sluggish  animals.  Stopping  there,  I  fired  five  shots, 
and,  so  far  as  I  could  see,  killed  tiiree  hippopotami  The  ear  is 
one  of  the  most  vulnerable  spots,  and  iM&  was  my  mark  every 
time.  The  first  shot  was  received  with  but  little  attention ;  but 
the  struggles  of  the  dying  animal,  which  turned  over  several 
times,  and  finally  sank  to  the  bottom,  seemed  to  rouse  the  herd, 
who  began  to  plunge  about  and  dive  down  into  the  deep  water. 
The  blood  of  my  victims  discoloured  the  water  all  around,  and  we 
could  not  see  whether  those  which  escaped  were  not  swimming 
forua 

Presently  the  boat  received  a  violent  jar,  and,  looking  over- 
board, we  perceived  that  we  were  in  the  midst  of  the  herd. 
They  did  not,  however,  attack  us,  but  were  rather,  I  imagine, 
anxious  to  get  away.  We,  too,  pulled  out  of  the  way  as  fast  as 
we  could,  as  I  was  not  anxious  to  be  capsized.  Of  the  dead 
animals  we  recovered  but  one,  which  was  found  two  days  after  on 

p  2 


212  A  NIGHT-HUNT.  Chap.  XIH. 

a  little  island  near  the  river's  mouth.  I  think  it  Vkelj  that  the 
negroes  secretly  ate  up  the  others  as  they  washed  ashore,  fearing 
to  tell  me,  lest  I  should  claim  the  prizes. 

This  was  such  poor  sport  that  after  Joe  Gorilla  died  I  deter- 
mined to  go  on  a  night-hunt  after  hippopotami.  These  animals 
come  ashore  by  night  to  feed.  As  I  have  said  before,  the  Fer- 
nand  Vaz  runs  for  many  miles  parallel  with  the  seashore,  sepa- 
rated from  the  sea  by  a  strip  of  sandy  prairie.  On  this  prairie 
the  river-horses  feed,  and  the  "  walk "  of  a  herd  is  e€isily  dis- 
cernible at  a  great  distance,  looking  very  much  like  a  regular 
beaten  road,  only  their  immense  tracks  showing  who  are  its 
makers.  In  the  path  no  grass  grows ;  but  the  ground  is  hard, 
and  solidly  beaten  down  by  their  constant  passage  to  and  fit).  It 
is  curious  that  they  will  not  even  leave  such  a  walk  if  they  have 
been  attacked  there,  but  come  back  without  faiL  This  gives  the 
hunter  a  great  advantage. 

We  chose  a  moonlight  night,  and  paddled  up  to  the  vicinity  of 
one  of  these  "  walks,"  where  Igala,  my  hunter,  and  I  set  out  by 
ourselves.  I  had  painted  my  face  with  a  mixture  of  oil  and  soot, 
which  is  a  prudent  measure  in  a  white  hunter  in  Afiica,  where 
the  beasts  seem  to  have  a  singularly  quick  eye  for  anjrthing 
white.  We  chose  the  leeward  side  of  the  track,  for  the  hippo- 
potamus has  a  very  pice  smell,  and  is  easily  alarmed  at  night, 
feeling  probably,  that  on  land  his  sluggish  movements  and  huge 
bulk  have  their  disadvantages.  We  lay  down  under  shelter  of 
a  bush  and  watched.  As  yet  none  of  the  animals  had  come  out 
of  the  water.  We  could  hear  them  snorting  and  plashing  in  the 
distance,  their  subdued  snort-like  roars  breaking  in  upon  the  still 
night  in  a  very  odd  way.  The  moon  was  nearly  down,  and  the 
watch  was  getting  tedious,  when  I  was  startled  by  a  sudden 
groan,  and,  peering  into  the  half-light,  saw  dimly  a  huge  animal, 
looking  doubly  monstrous  in  the  uncertain  light.  It  was  quietly 
eating  grass,  which  it  seemed  to  nibble  off  quite  close. 

There  was  another  bush  between  us  and  our  prey,  and  we 
crawled  up  to  this  in  dead  silence.  Arrived  there  we  were  but 
about  eight  yards  from  the  great  beast  The  negroes  who  hunt 
the  hippopotamus  are  sometimes  killed.  The  animal,  if  only 
womided,  turns  most  savagely  upon  its  assailant ;  and  experience 
has  taught  the  negro  hunters  that  the  only  safe  way  to  approach 
it  is  from  behind.     It  cannot  turn  quickly,  and  thus  the  hunter 


Chap.  XIH*         HABITS  OF  THE  HIPPOPOTAMUS.  213 

has  a  chance  to  make  good  hia  escape.  This  time  we  could 
not  get  into  a  very  favourable  position,  but  I  determined  to  have 
my  shot  nevertheless,  eight  yards  being  safe  killing  distance, 
even  with  so  poor  a  light  as  we  had  by  this  time. 

Igala  and  I  both  took  aim.  He  fired ;  and,  without  waiting  to 
see  the  result,  ran  away  as  swiftly  as  a  good  pair  of  legs  could 
carry  him.  I  was  not  quite  ready,  but  fired  the  moment  after 
him ;  and,  before  I  could  get  ready  to  run — in  which  I  had  not 
Igala's  practice — I  saw  there  was  no  need  to  do  so.  The  beast 
tottered  for  a  moment,  and  then  fell  over  dead. 

This  closed  our  night's  sport,  as  none  of  the  herd  would  come 
this  way  while  their  companion  lay  there.  So  we  returned  home, 
poor  Igala  remonstrating  with  me  for  not  running  as  he  did,  this 
being,  as  it  appeared,  considered  one  of  the  chief  accomplish- 
ments of  the  hippopotamus-hunter.  Our  good  luck  created  great 
joy  in  the  village,  where  meat  was  scarce.  The  men  went  out  at 
daylight  and  skinned  the  prize,  and  brought  in  the  meat  and  hide. 
The  latter  I  stuflTed,  and  it  is  now  in  my  collection. 

The  meat  does  not  taste  unlike  beef.  It  is  rather  coarse-grained, 
and  not  fat,  and  makes  a  welcome  and  wholesome  dish.  The 
blacks  are  very  fond  of  it 

The  hippopotamus  is  found  in  most  of  the  rivers  of  Africa 
which  flow  into  the  Atlantic  or  Indian  oceans  ;  but  in  none  but 
the  Nile  of  those  which  flow  into  the  Mediterranean.  Ajid  in 
the  Nile  it  is  only  met  tax  up.  It  is  found  in  greatest  abundance 
south  of  the  equator  and  in  the  interior.  Frequent  as  they  were 
in  theFemand  Vaz,  I  found  them  more  numerous  in  the  Ogobay 
and  other  of  the  interior  streams,  and  have  reason  to  believe 
that,  in  the  far  and  as  yet  unexplored  centre,  they  are  more 
numerous  stilL  It  is  a  very  clumsily-built,  unwieldy  animal ;  but 
remarkable  chiefly  for  its  enormous  head,  whose  upper  mandible 
seemed  to  me  moveable  like  the  crocodile's,  and  for  its  dispropor- 
tionately short  legs.  The  male  is  much  larger  than  the  female ; 
indeed,  a  full-grown  male  sometimes  attains  the  bulk,  though  not 
the  height,  of  the  elephant  In  the  larger  specimens  the  belly 
almost  sweeps  the  ground  as  they  walk. 

The  feet  are  cmiously  constructed,  to  facilitate  their  walking 
among  the  reeds  and  mud  of  the  river-bottoms,  and  swimming 
with  ease.  The  hoof  is  divided  into  four  short,  apparently 
clumsy,  and  unconnected  toes ;  and  they  are  able,  by  this  spread 


214  FOOD  OF  THE  HIPPOPOTAMUS.  Chap.  XIH. 

of  foot,  to  walk  rapidly  even  through  mud.  I  have  seen  them 
make  quick  progress,  when  alarmed,  in  water  so  deep  that  their 
backs  were  just  on  the  river-level. 

The  skin  of  an  adult  hippopotamus  is  from  one  and  a  half  to 
two  inches  thick,  and  extremely  solid  and  tough— quite  bullet^ 
proof,  in  fact,  except  in  a  few  thinner  spots,  as  behind  the  ear 
and  near  the  eyes.  It  is  devoid  of  hair,  with  the  exception  of  a 
few  short  bristly  hairs  in  the  tail,  and  a  few  scattered  tufts,  of 
four  or  five  hairs  each,  near  the  muzzle.  The  colour  of  the  skin 
is  a  clayey  yellow,  assuming  a  ros€»te  hue  under  the  belly.  In 
the  grown  animal  the  colour  is  a  little  darker.    The  teeth  are : 

Incisors,  - :  canines,  :; ;  molars, =  36  in  all. 

*  4  *  1—1  6—6 

After  watching  for  a  great  many  times  the  movements  of  the 
hippopotamus,  I  became  assured  that  the  huge  crooked  tusks, 
which  give  its  mouth  so  savage  an  appearance,  are  designed 
chiefly  to  hook  up  the  long  river-grasses  on  which  these  animals 
feed  in  great  part.  Often  I  have  seen  one  descend  to  the  bottom, 
remain  a  few  minutes,  and  re-appear  with  its  tusks  strung  with 
grass  which  was  then  leisurely  chewed  up.  They  make  the 
whitest  of  all  ivory,  and  in  the  Camma  country  the  beasts  are 
much  hunted  for  the  sake  of  the  tusks,  as  the  dentists  of  Europe 
make  a  demand  for  this  white  ivory. 

The  animals  consort  together  in  flocks  of  from  three  to 
thirty.  They  choose  shallows  in  the  rivers,  where  the  depth 
of  the  water  allows  them  to  keep  their  footing,  and  yet  have 
their  whole  bodies  submerged.  Here  they  remain  all  day, 
swimming  off  into  the  deeps  and  diving  for  their  grassy  food, 
gambolling  in  the  waves,  and  firom  time  to  time  throwing  up  a 
stream  of  water  two  or  three  feet  high.  This  is  done  with  a 
noise  like  "blowing,"  and  is  doubtless  an  effort  for  breatL 
It  is  pleasant  to  watch  a  flock  peacefully  enjoying  themselves, 
particularly  when  they  have  two  or  three  yoimg  among  them. 
The  little  fellows,  who  are  comically  awkward,  play  about  their 
dams,  and  I  have  often  seen  them  seated  on  the  back  of  the 
mother,  and  chasing  each  other  about  the  shoals. 

They  prefer  parts  of  the  rivers  where  the  current  is  not  very 
swift,  and  are  therefore  to  be  found  in  all  the  lakes  in  the 
interior.    Also,  they  prefer  to  be  near  their  grass-fields.     They 


Chap.  XIII.  TIMIDITY  OF  THE  HIPPOPOTAMUS.  215 

are  very  fond  of  a  particular  coarse  grass  which  grows  on  these 
prairie,  and  will  travel  considerable  distances  to  hunt  this  up, 
always  returning,  however,  before  daylight  Their  path  over- 
land is  very  direct.  Neither  rocks,  nor  swamps,  nor  bushes  can 
prove  formidable  obstacles  to  a  water-beast  of  such  bulk ;  and 
one  of  their  peculiarities  is  that  they  will  always  return  to  the 
water  by  the  same  road  they  came.  Unless  much  pursued  and 
harassed,  they  are  not  very  much  afraid  of  man.  Some  of  their 
fiEtvourite  grass  was  growing  on  a  little  plain  at  the  back  of  my 
house,  and  several  times  I  found  hippopotamus-tracks  not  more 
than  fifty  yards  firom  the  house.  They  had  not  feared  to  come 
as  near  i  this;  though,  probably,  if  the  wind  had  been  from  me 
to  them,  they  would  have  avoided  the  place. 

They  always  choose  a  convenient  landing-place,  one  where 
the  bank  has  a  long  and  easy  incline,  and  this  they  use  till  they 
have  eaten  up  all  the  provender  which  lies  in  that  vicinity. 
Before  going  ashore  they  watch  for  an  hour,  and  sometimes  for 
two  hours,  near  the  landing,  remaining  quiet  themselves  and 
listening  for  danger.  The  slightest  token  of  the  hunter's 
presence  on  such  occasions  sends  them  away  for  that  night.  If 
no  danger  appears,  they  begin  to  wander  ashore  in  twos  and 
threes.  I  never  saw  more  than  three  of  a  flock  grazing  together ; 
and  during  their  stay  ashore  they  place  more  dependence  on 
their  ears  than  on  their  eyes.  I  have  watched  closely  in  many 
hunts,  and  am  convinced  that  the  beast  walks  along  with  his 
eyes  nearly  shut  This  makes  the  approach  easier,  though  their 
hearing  is  very  quick ;  and  it  is  common  to  get  within  three  or 
four  yards  before  firing.  I  generally  tried  to  get  at  least  as 
near  as  four  yards,  and  found  my  most  successful  aim  to  be  at 
a  spot  near  the  shoulder,  and  one  just  behind  the  ear. 

When  playing  in  the  water  this  animal  makes  a  noise  very 
much  resembling  the  grunt  of  a  pig.  This  grunt  it  also  utters 
when  alarmed  at  the  near  approach  of  man.  The  stuffed  skin 
loses  its  original  coloiu*,  so  that  our  stuffed  specimens  do  not 
give  a  true  idea  of  the  clay-colour  of  the  live  beast  Its  excre- 
ment is  like  the  horse's,  but  smaller  and  dryer. 

When  enraged,  or  suddenly  disturbed,  it  utters  a  kind  of 
groan,  a  hoarse  sound,  which  can  be  heard  at  a  considerable 
distance.  They  are  very  combative  among  themselves,  and  I 
often  saw  marks  on  their  bodies  of  desperate  conflicts.     One,  a' 


216  COMBAT  OP  HIPPOPOTAMI^  Chap.  XIIL 

male  which  I  killed,  had  its  thick  hide  lacerated  in  a  frightful 
manner  in  numerous  stripes,  from  a  fight.  The  young  males 
suffer  particularly  in  these  encounters,  as  they  are  much  imposed 
upon  by  the  grown  males,  who  are  jealous  of  them.  Their 
principal  weapons  of  offence  are  their  huge  tusks,  with  which 
they  strike  most  savage  blows. 

It  was  my  good  fortune  once  to  be  witness  to  a  combat 
between  two  hippopotamL  It  occurred  in  broad  daylight  I 
was  concealed  on  the  bank  of  the  stream,  and  had  been  for 
some  time  watching  the  sports  of  a  herd,  when  suddenly  two 
huge  beasts  rose  to  the  surface  of  the  water  and  rushed  together. 
Their  vast  and  hideous  mouths  were  opened  to  their  widest 
possible  extent ;  their  eyes  were  flaming  with  rage,  and  every 
power  was  put  forth  by  each  to  annihilate  the  otiber.  They 
seized  each  other  with  their  jaws ;  they  stabbed  and  punched 
with  their  strong  tusks;  they  advanced  and  retreated;  were, 
now  at  the  top  of  the  water,  and  again  sank  down  to  the  bottom. 
Their  blood  discoloured  the  river,  and  their  groans  of  rage  were 
hideous  to  listen  to.  They  showed  little  powers  of  strategy, 
but  rather  a  piggish  obstinacy  in  maintaining  their  ground,  and 
a  fijghtfal  savageness  of  demeanour.  The  combat  lasted  an 
hour.  It  was  evident  that  their  tusks  could  not  give  very 
dangerous  wounds  to  such  thickly-protected  bodies  as  theirs. 
At  last  one  turned  about  and  made  off,  leaving  tlie  other 
victorious  and  master  of  the  field. 

My  observations  lead  me  to  believe  that  in  general  the  hippo- 
potamus will  not  wantonly  attack  a  canoe  passing  on  the  river. 
They  either  do  not  seem  to  notice  it  at  all,  or  else  avoid  it  by 
diving  imder  water.  They  are  troublesome  beasts,  however,  to 
the  traveller  paddling  along  in  a  frail  canoe,  for  they  are  very 
apt  to  rise  suddenly  imder  a  boat  and  throw  it  over,  to  their 
own  alarm,  as  well  as  to  the  inconvenience  and  danger  of  the 
passengers.  In  some  instances  the  huge  beast  becomes  despe- 
rate from  fright,  thinks  himself  attacked,  and  with  great  rage 
demolishes  the  canoe.  But  even  in  such  cases  I  have  not  heard 
of  their  ever  touching  the  swimming  passengers,  who  have  only 
to  keep  away  from  the  canoe  to  make  sure  their  escape.  One 
of  my  men  related  an  adventure  of  this  kind  which  happened  to 
him  and  others  a  few  years  ago.  They  were  capsized  by  a 
hippopotamus,  which  rose  suddenly  under  their  canoe*    In  aa 


Chap.  XIH.        NEGRO  HIPPOPOTAMUS-HUNTING.  217 

instanty  and  with  the  greatest  Airy,  the  animal  turned  upon  the 
canoe,  which  he  did  not  leave  till  he  had  broken  it  into  small 
pieces.  But  he  did  not  even  seem  to  see  the  men,  who  swam 
off,  and  reached  the  shore  without  hmi;. 

The  negroes  hunt  tiie  hippopotamus  only  with  guns.  In  those 
parts  where  they  have  not  yet  obtained  guns  they  never  attack 
it,  but  leave  it  undisputed  master  of  the  forest  and  river ;  for 
they  can  but  very  seldom  indeed  succeed  in  entrapping  it  into 
the  pits  which  are  dug  for  this  and  some  other  of  the  larger 
animals. 


218  UP  THE  RIVER.  Chap.  XIV. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

The  Anengue  Lake  —  Canoes  —  River  Scenery — Nature  of  the  Country  — 
The  Lagoons  —  Navigation  —  India-rubber  Vines  —  Mercantile  Products 
and  Facilities — Porcupine-hunts  —  Quengueza,  the  great  King — Change 
of  Season  —  Variety  in  animal  Life  —  Birds  of  Passage  —  J^sh  —  Bee-eater 

—  Curious  Habits  of  this  Bird  —  Serpents  —  The  Rivers  in  the  d^  Season 

—  The  Lagoons  in  the  dry  Season  —  Immense  Numbers  of  Crocodiles  — 
Damagondai  —  Witchcraft  —  A  Curtain  Lecture  —  Shimbouvenegani  — 
An  Olako  —  Royal  Costume  —  Discover  a  new  Ape  —  The  Nshiego  Mhouvi, 
or  Nest- building  Ape  (Troglodytes  Calvus)  —  How  they  build  —  Habits  — 
Food  —  Description  of  the  first  specimen  —  A  Crocodile-hunt  —  Anengue 
Canoes  —  The  Ogata  —  Turtle  —  How  the  Crocodile  gets  his  Prey  —  A 
Fight  looms  up  ahead — Oshoria  backs  down  —  People  of  the  Anengue  — 
Family  Idols  —  Worship  —  Sickness  —  Bola  Ivc^  —  African  Festivals  — 
A  clear  Case  of  Witchcraft  —  A  native  Doctor  —  Exorcising  a  Witch  — 
My  Town  is  deserted  —  I  am  made  a  Chief  —  We  get  a  second  young 
Gorilla — I  am  poisoned  with  Arsenic  — •  Trial  of  the  Poisoner  —  Singular 
Effect  of  Arsenic.        ^ 

When  poor  Joe  Gorilla  died  I  prepared  to  set  out  upon  my 
explorations  up  river.  The  hope  of  taming  him  kept  me  at 
Biagano  till  then. 

We  were  to  make  a  start  on  the  evening  of  May  27th,  and 
on  that  morning  I  called  king  and  people  together,  and  gave 
them  charge  of  my  property ;  declaring  that  if  anything  were 
stolen  during  my  absence  I  would  sm-ely  shoot  the  thief. 

They  all  protested  that  I  need  not  even  lock  the  doors  of  my 
house.  But  I  thought  it  best  not  to  expose  them  to  too  much 
temptation. 

I  next  counted  my  ten  goats  in  their  presence,  and  told  them 
I  wanted  no  leopard-stories  told  me  when  I  came  back — at 
which  they  shouted  and  laughed,  and  declared  neither  they  nor 
the  leopard  should  touch  them.  Then  I  gave  one  of  my  men 
some  goods  to  trade  for  ivory,  another  some  vvith  which  to  buy 
ebony,  and  left  one  of  my  Mpongwe  fellows  in  charge  of  my 
entire  premises,  locking  the  doors.  And  then  I  was  ready  to 
go  off. 

I  had  twelve  stout  paddlers  in  my  canoe,  which  was  laden 
pretty  deeply  with  provisions  for  myself,  and  with  trade-goods 


Chap.  XIV,  DIFPIOULT  NAVIGATION.  219 

for  the  people  I  was  to  meet,  and  which  I  had  entrusted  to  one 
of  Banpano's  sons.  My  object  on  this  trip  was  to  ascend  the 
Npoulounay,  a  branch  of  the  Ogobay,  as  far  as  a  great  swampy 
country  which  the  Gamma  fellows  were  always  talking  of,  and 
which  no  white  man  had  yet  seen.  The  reader  can  foUow  my 
course  on  the  chart. 

We  found  the  Npoulounay  for  the  first  eight  miles  to  run 
through  the  mangrove-swamps,  which  render  navigation  so  dis- 
agreeable. Above  that  the  banks  became  higher  and  clearer. 
Starting  about  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  pulled  till 
four  next  morning,  when  all  hands  were  worn  out,  and  we  went 
ashore  on  a  little  island  to  get  a  nap.  But  here  the  musquitoes 
assailed  us  in  such  numbers  that,  though  we  could  stretch  oxu* 
legs,  sleep  was  out  of  the  question.  As  soon  as  daylight  came 
we  were  off  again. 

At  about  sixty  miles  from  Biagano  we  came  to.  a  fork  in  the 
river.  We  took  the  right  branch.  A  few  miles  further  up 
there  was  another  tributary,  which  we  entered,  as  this  led  to. 
the  lake.  The  stream  was  here  about  two  hundred  yards  wide, 
but  with  very  low,  marshy  banks,  and  no  wood.  Immense 
fields  of  reeds  and  other  water-weeds  covered  the  marshy  soil 
as  flEir  as  we  could  see  from  our  little  canoe,  and  gave  the  land- 
scape an  aspect  of  utter  desolation.  The  stream  had  scarce  any 
current,  the  water  was  turbid,  and  the  smell  of  decaying  vegeta- 
tion exceedingly  unpleasant.  In  the  lar  distance  beyond  the 
plains  we  could  see  the  outlines  of  hills  and  higher  plains. 
Where  these  join  the  marsh,  crocodiles  are  found  in  great 
plenty,  as  I  was  told  now  by  the  natives,  and  found  for  myself 
afterwards. 

While  I  was  wondering  at  the  change  in  this  sluggish  river 
from  the  rapid-flowing  Ogobay,  we  came  suddenly  to  what 
seemed  the  end  of  navigation  in  this  direction.  The  river  was 
here  as  wide  as  at  the  mouth,  but  closed  suddenly.*  Paddling 
round  the  shore,  to  try  for  some  possible  outlet,  for  it  would  be 
too  bad  to  have  taken  so  much  trouble  to  get  into  this  nasty 
cul-de-sac,  we  found  at  length  a  stream,  not  more  than  six  yards 
wide,  which  poured  with  a  tolerably  rapid  current  into  what 
seemed  to  me  now  only  a  lagoon.  Up  this  narrow  avenue  we 
pushed,  much  doubting  where  it  would  lead  us,  for  none  of  my 
men  had  been  here  before,  and  I  was  going  by  guesswork. 


220  AN  AFRICAN  JOKE.  Chap.  XIV. 

As  we  ascended  the  narrow,  deep  little  stream,  it  branched 
off  in  several  places,  and  became  gradually  narrower,  till  at  last 
we  were  pushing  our  canoe  laboriously  along  through  a  deep, 
crooked  ditch,  not  more  than  two  yards  wide,  and  overhung 
with  tall  reeds,  on  which  great  numbers  of  birds  were  balancing 
themselves,  as  though  enjoying  our  dilemma. 

For  two  hours  we  pushed  along  in  this  way,  and  I  was  upon 
the  point  of  giving  up  and  returning,  when  we  suddenly  emerged 
into  the  long-looked-for  lake  of  Anengue.  A  vast  body  of 
water,  at  least  ten  miles  wide,  and  dotted  with  various  beautiful 
wooded  isles,  was  spread  suddenly  before  our  gladdened  eyes. 
We  lay  on  our  paddles  and  gazed  about  us*  On  one  side  the 
lake  is  bounded  by  hills  which  come  close  down  to  the  shore. 
On  the  other  the  hills  recede,  and  between  them  and  the  water 
lies  a  dreary  extent  of  low  marsh.  Several  towns  were  in  sight, 
all  located  at  the  summits  of  hills,  and  towards  one  of  these 
we  pushed  with  what  speed  we  could,  for  all  hands  were  tired 
and  hungry.  For  though  we  had  breakfasted  on  bananas  and 
sugarcane  early  in  the  morning  at  a  deserted  village,  this  is 
not  very  substantial  food ;  and  of  meat  none  of  us  had  partaken 
since  leaving  Biagano. 

This  deserted  village  deserves  to  be  mentioned,  if  only  for  a 
cheerful  joke  made  upon  it  by  one  of  my  men.  It  is  general 
in  this  country  for  the  people  to  leave  tiieir  town  if  the  chief 
dies  under  suspicion  of  having  been  bewitched,  and  such  lonely 
huts  and  abandoned  plantations  are  therefore  common  wherever 
the  traveller  goes.  The  natives  in  general  regard  such  with  a 
superstitious  fear,  believing  that  the  spirits  of  the  departed 
remain  and  keep  guard  over  the  property  left  But  my  men 
were  "  sick  of  hunger,"  as  they  said,  and  had  now,  fix)m  contact 
with  me,  become  somewhat  less  superstitious ;  so  that  no  one 
refused  to  go  ashore,  or,  when  there,  to  eat,  as  well  as  we  could 
eat  for  the  savage  onslaught  of  the  musquitoes.  While  we  were 
grumbling  at  finding  so  little  comfort,  one  of  them  said  it  was 
evidently  not  the  spirits  which  had  driven  off  the  people  here, 
but  the  musquitoes;  which  was  thought,  and  was  really,  a 
tremendous  joke  for  this  latitude,  and  set  us  all  into  good 
humour  again. 

About  two  o'clock  we  arrived  at  the  village  of  King  Damagon- 
dai.    A  great  crowd  was  assembled  to  receive  us,  visitors  not 


M       h. 


Chap.  XIV.  GREAT  INDIA-RUBBER  COUNTRY.  221 

being  frequent  here;  and  when  the  presence  of  a  wonderful 
white  man  became  known,  the  anxiety  of  the  people  to  see  me 
knew  no  bounds.  Quarters  were  provided  for  me  by  the  king, 
who  was  rejoiced  to  see  me,  and  sent  me  a  goat ;  which,  in  this 
part  of  the  country,  where  they  have  no  tame  cattle,  is  as  much 
as  half-a-dozen  bullocks  would  be  in  South  Africa. 

From  the  1st  to  the  10th  of  June  I  spent  in  exploring  the 
lake  and  its  islands.'  I  find  everywhere  deep  water  enough  for 
steamers  of  moderate  draught  to  have  free  play,  though  in  the 
dry  season  I  was  told  there  are  a  good  many  shoals,  though  not 
enough,  I  should  think,  to  interfere  with  navigation.  The  whole 
country  around  is  literally  filled  with  the  India-rubber  vine. 
Immense  quantities  of  the  best  caoutchouc  might  here  be  got, 
and  with  very  little  trouble,  if  only  the  natives  had  some  one  to 
show  them  how  to  gather  it  without  destroying  the  vines,  and 
without  getting  it  so  mixed  with  impure  matter  as  to  destroy  its 
commercial  value.  It  was  enough  to  make  a  trader's  mouth 
water  to  see  the  immense  quantity  of  land  covered  with  this  vine. 
Here  are  chances  for  a  commerce  which  I  think  our  American 
merchants  will  not  long  leave  unworked.  And  then  we  may 
hope  to  see  a  real  and  enduring  civilization  step  in  and  help 
these  poor  natives  upward  a  little. 

For  the  present  they  are  a  lazy  but  good-natured  people 
hereabouts ;  ready  enough  to  work,  if  they  could  only  be  sure 
to  get  some  pay  for  their  labour,  but  with  little  energy,  because 
they  see  no  possibility  of  a  direct  connexion  with  the  seashora 

Game  is  not  very  abundant  in  this  part  of  the  country,  and  the 
animal  most  hunted  is  the  porcupine.  They  hunt  with  dogs, 
which  track  the  truculent  little  beast  to  its  lair  or  burrow,  whence 
it  is  dug  out  by  the  men.  The  hunt  was  too  laborious  to  be 
counted  sport,  though  the  natives  seemed  to  enjoy  it  amazingly. 
The  dogs  hunted  by  scent,  and  never  barked  at  a  deserted  hole. 

The  porcupine  is  only  foimd  at  the  foot  of  the  range  of  hills 
which  rises  about  ten  miles  from  the  village  I  was  stopping  at. 
Here  it  burrows  among  the  huge  boulders  which  cover  the 
ground.  Several  times  we  came  upon  them  wandering  about, 
and  shot  them  outright.  I  noticed  that  the  dogs  were  very 
careful  not  to  touch  the  animal  till  they  were  sure  it  was  dead, 
having  probably  had  sad  experience  of  its  sharp  spines. 

It  is  as  well  to  add  here  that,  though  most  of  the  West  Africap 


222  KING  QUENGUEZA.  Chap.  XIV. 

villages  have  crowds  of  dogs,  I  could  never  learn  of  a  case  of 
hydrophobia,  nor  did  the  natives  even  know  of  such  a  disease  aa 
madness  in  dogs. 

While  on  a  porcupine-hunt  the  tube  of  one  of  my  guns  was 
accidentally  broken,  and  on  June  10th  I  had  the  misfortune  to 
break  my  reimaining  gun  by  a  vexatious  accident  in  hunting  a 
marabout  I  had  wounded  the  bird,  and  was  running  after  it, 
but  it  could  run  faster  than  I.  When  quite  near  it,  in  my 
eagerness  I  struck  at  it  with  my  gun,  missed  my  aim,  and 
shattered  the  stock  and  bent  the  barrel  on  a  stone.  This  made 
it  necessary  to  return  to  Biagano. 

My  coming  back  was  fortunate,  for  in  a  few  days  after  came  a 
high  and  mighty  visitor  from  far  up  the  Eiver  Bembo.  King 
Quengueza,  of  whom  I  had  often  heard  from  the  Camma  men, 
lives  up  the  Eembo  about  ninety  miles,  and  is  sovereign  over  a 
large  tribe  of  people.  He  was  a  man  whom  I  had  not  even 
hoped  to  see  here,  and  whose  influence  and  friendship  I  was  very 
glad  to  have.  He  came  down  in  considerable  state,  in  three 
canoes,  with  three  of  his  fevourite  wives,  and  about  one  hundred 
and  thirty  men.  When  he  saw  me  he  was  much  astonished,  and 
said  he  had  heard  of  me  for  a  great  hunter,  and  had  expected  to 
see  a  tall  and  stout  man,  and  not  such  a  feeble  body  as  mine. 
He  was  now  convinced,  he  said,  that  I  must  have  a  brave  heart, 
to  hunt  as  I  did. 

Fortunately  the  king  and  I  could  talk  together  without  an 
interpreter,  so  that  I  did  not  need  any  rascally  Camma  to 
confound  my  words  and  misrepresent  my  wishes,  as  they  are  apt 
to  do,  not  caring  to  have  white  men  trade  with  the  interior,  or 
even  explore  it 

He  told  me  there  were  plenty  of  gorilla  and  nsdii^os  in  his 
country,  and  that  if  I  would  come  I  should  have  liberty  and  pro- 
tection to  hunt  and  do  what  I  pleased.-  I  was  ready  to  go  imme- 
diately, but  he  said  the  fall  of  the  rainy  season  would  be  the  best 
time,  and  so  I  put  my  visit  off. 

I  sent  the  kind-hearted  old  fellow  off  well  contented,  with  his 
canoes  fall  of  presents  of  iron  bars,  brass  rods,  &c.,  and  about  one 
hundred  dollars'  worth  of  goods  on  trust  to  buy  me  ebony  with. 
He  promised  me  great  sport,  and  an  introduction  to  some  tribes 
of  whom  even  these  Camma  knew  nothing,  and  who  are, 
therefore,  beyond  even  their  ultima  Thule.    To  do  him  greater 


Chap.  XIV.         THE  COAST  IN  THE  DRY  SEASON.  '223 

honour,  my  people  fired  a  salute  as  he  started  off,  with  which  he 
was  highly  delighted-as  an  African  is  sure  to  be  with  any 
noise. 

The  dry  season  was  now  setting  in  in  earnest,  and  I  devoted 
the  whole  month  of  July  to  exploring  the  country  along  the  sea- 
shore. It  is  curious  that  most  of  the  birds  which  were  so 
abundant  during  the  rainy  season  had  by  this  time  taken  their 
leave,  and  other  birds,  in  immense  numbers,  flocked  in  to  feed 
on  the  fish,  which  now  leave  the  seashore  and  the  bars  of  the 
river-mouth,  and  ascend  the  river  to  spawn. 

The  breakers  on  the  shore  were  now  frightful  to  see.  The 
coast  was  rendered  inaccessible  by  them  even  to  the  natives,  and 
the  surf  increased  to  that  degree  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  even, 
that  it  was  difficult  to  enter  with  [a  canoe.  Strong  breezes 
prevailed,  and  though  the  sky  was  constantly  overcast,  no  drop 
of  rain  fell.  The  thermometer  fell  sometimes  to  64°  of 
Fahrenheit,  and  I  suffered  from  cold,  as  did  also  the  poor  natives, 
who  make  no  provision  of  thick  clothing  for  such  weather,  though 
it  is  the  same  every  year.  The  grass  on  the  prairies  was  dried 
up  to  powder.  The  ponds  are  dried  up ;  only  the  woods  keep 
their  resplendent  green. 

At  this  season  the  negroes  leave  their  villages  and  work  on 
their  plantations.  Biagano  was  almost  deserted ;  all  hands  were 
on  the  farms ;  the  women  harvesting  the  crop  of  ground-nuts, 
one  of  the  staples  of  this  country,  and  the  men  building  canoes 
and  idling  around.  Their  farms  are  necessarily  at  some  distance 
off,  as  the  sandy  prairie  is  not  fit  to  cultivate,  being  only,  in  &ct, 
a  deposit  of  the  sea. 

Fish,  particularly  mullet,  were  so  abundant  in  the  river  that 
sometimes,  when  I  took  my  evening  constitutional  in  a  canoe  on 
the  water,  enough  mullet  leaped  into  the  boat  to  furnish  me  a 
breakfast  next  day. 

Birds  flocked  in  immense  niunbers  on  the  prairies,  whither 
they  came  to  hatch  their  young. 

The  ugly  marabouts,  firom  whose  tails  our  ladies  get  the 
splendid  feathers  for  their  bonnets,  were  there  in  thousands. 
Pelicans  waded  on  the  river-banks  all  day  in  prodigious  swarms, 
gulping  down  the  luckless  fish  which  came  in  their  way.  I  loved 
to  see  tbem  swimming  about  in  grave  silence,  and  every  moment 
grabbing  up  a  poor  fish,  which,  if  not  hungry,  they  left  in  their 


224  .    NATURE  IN  THE  DRY  SEASON.  Chxp.  XIV. 

huge  bag,  till  sometimes  .three  or  four  pounds  of  reserve  food 
thus  awaited  the  coming  of  their  appetite. 

And  on  the  sandy  point,  one  morning,  I  foimd  great  flocks  of 
the  Ibi9  religiosa  (the  sacred  Ibis  of  the  Egyptians),  which  had 
arrived  overnight,  whence  I  could  not  tell. 

Ducks  of  various  kinds  built  their  nests  in  every  creek  and  on 
every  new  islet  that  appeared  with  the  receding  waters.  I  used 
to  hunt  these  till  I  got  tired  of  duck-meat,  fine  as  it  is.  Cranes, 
too,  and  numerous  other  waterfowl  flocked  in,  every  day  bringing 
new  birds.  All  come,  by  some  strange  instinct,  to  feed  upon  the 
vast  shoals  of  fish  which  literally  filled  the  river. 

On  the  seashore  I  sometimes  caught  a  bird,  the  Sula  eaperm, 
which  bad  been  driven  ashore  by  the  treacherous  waves  to  which 
it  had  trusted  itself,  and  could  not^  for  some  mysterious  reason, 
get  away  again. 

And  finally,  every  sand-bar  is  covered  with  gulls,  whose  shrill 
screams  are  heard  from  morning  till  night  as  they  fly  about 
greedily  after  their  finny  prey.  It  is  a  splendid  time  now 
for  sportsmen ;  and  I  thought  of  some  of  my  New  York  friends 
who  would  have  enjoyed  such  great  plenty  of  game  as  was  now 
here. 

Land  birds  are  equally  plentiful ;  but  I  have  time  to  enume- 
rate only  one  curious  species.  This  is  the  bee-eater,  of  which  I 
discovered  two  new  species,  A  common  one  is  the  Merapiem 
bicolor — a  splendid  little  fellow,  whose  breast,  of  a  gorgeons 
roseate  hue,  looks  as  he  flies  about  like  a  lump  of  fire.  The  bee- 
eaters  feed  on  bees  and  flies,  and  are  remarkable  for  the  nests 
they  build.  These  are  holes  in  the  ground,  always  on  the  edge 
of  some  bank  or  acclivity,  and  from  three  to  four  feet  deep. 
Great  numbers  of  these  nests  are  found  in  every  hill-side,  and  in 
these  they  sleep  at  night 

Serpents  are  not  so  common  as  in  the  rainy  season,  but  do  not 
altogether  abandon  the  coimtry,  as  I  had  reason  to  discover  one 
night.  I  had  retired  to  rest,  but  was  roused  by  a  tremendons 
fluttering  among  my  chickens.  I  rushed  out  immediately 
expecting  to  catch  a  thief,  but  found  nobody ;  and  as  the  hons^ 
were  not  broken  into,  returned  to  my  own  room,  thinking  it  was 
only  a  false  alarm.  But  I  was  no  sooner  in  than  I  rushed  out 
again,  for,  in  the  dim  light,  I  found  myself  upon  the  point  of 
stepping  upon  a  huge  black  snake  which  had  come  in  during 


Chap.  XIV.  TO  THE  ANENGUE  AGAIN.  225 

my  absence.  I  had  my  gun  in  my  hand,  and  lost  no  time  in 
blowing  his  head  to  pieces  with  cold  lead.  He  was  ten  feet  long, 
and  of  a  kind  whose  bite  is  said  by  the  negroes  to  be  fatal.  The 
hideous  beast  was  just  swallowing  one  of  my  chickens  when 
I  killed  it.  It  had  been  among  the  fowls,  which  accounted  for 
the  noise  I  heard.  The  negroes  rushed  in  when  they  heard 
the  report  of  my  gun,  and  with  great  joy  cut  off  the  head  of  their 
enemy.  This  was  thrown  into  the  river,  but  the  slaves  cooked 
the  body  and  ate  it.  ' 

As  Quengueza  could  not  be  visited  till  the  rainy  season 
returned,  I  determined  to  make  another  trip  to  the  Anengue 
country ;  and  to  this  I  was  the  more  induced,  as  I  wished  to 
ascertain  what  chances  there  were  for  steam  navigation  in  the  dry 
season,  when  the  water  is  at  its  lowest.  At  high  water  it  is  deep 
enough  all  the  way  up. 

Accordingly,  on  the  1st  of  August,  I  started,  with  the  canoes 
and  a  crew  well  am\ed,  for  fear  we  might  be  interrupted,  as  some 
of  the  people  come  up  this  way  to  make  plantations  in  the  dry 
season,  and  might  dispute  our  advance.  I  determined  to  let  no 
man  bar  the  road  to  me.  I  found  the  Npoulounay  shallower,  but 
yet  quite  practicable  for  a  steamer  of  light  draught ;  and  when 
we  got  into  the  Ogobay  the  water  was  still  deeper — ^this  being  in 
every  way  a  nobler  stream.  Yet  there  is  a  difference  in  the 
depth  of  the  Ogobay,  between  dry  and  rainy  seasons,  of  about 
fifteen  feet.  Now  the  river  was  covered  with  muddy  islands,  left 
dry  and  covered  with  reeds ;  among  which  sported  the  flamingo 
— ^a  bird  not  seen  here  in  the  wet  season.  All  these  reedy  islets 
were  submerged  when  I  passed  up  last  May. 

There  are  very  few  villages  betweeen  Biagano  and  the 
Anengue — we  counted  but  seven ;  and  yet  the  country  seems 
habitable  enough.  I  was  struck  with  the  immense  height  of 
some  of  the  palm-trees  which  lined  the  banks.  They  were  really 
giants  even  in  these  primitive  woods. 

We  slept  the  first  night  on  an  island  in  the  Ogobay,  under  our 
musquito-nets,  of  which  I  had  laid  in  a  store.  These  nets,  which 
the  natives  also  use,  are  made  of  a  grass-cloth  which  comes  from 
the  far  interior,  and  which  is  too  thick  to  be  comfortable  in  the 
house,  but  does  very  well  out-of-doors,  where  it  keeps  out  the 
dews  as  well,  and  protects  the  sleeper  against  the  cold  winds 
which  prevail.     The  next  morning  I  saw,  for  the  first  time,  a  fog 

Q 


226  CEOOODILES.  Chap.  XIY. 

in  this  part  of  Africa.  It  was  very  thick,  but  the  san  soon  drove 
it  away. 

I  sent  out  my  net,  and,  in  a  few  minutes,  the  men  caught  fish 
enough  for  supper  and  breakfiBtst 

The  low  banks  of  the  Ogobay  were  now  dry,  and  covered  with 
reeds.  The  river  ran  in  its  regular  channel,  and  was  about 
fourteen  or  fifteen  feet  lower  than  last  May,  though  still 
practicable  for  light-draught  steamers.  These  low  banks,  which 
are  submerged  in  the  rainy  season,  will  make  splendid  rice-fields 
when  all  this  country  comes  to  be  civilized.  Here  might  be 
grown  rice  enough  to  supply  all  the  country  round,  even  if 
thickly  settled. 

Coming  to  where  the  Ogobay  is  divided  by  an  island  into  two 
channels,  we  took  the  one  I  passed  last  May,  but  found  ourselves 
nearly  stopped  by  a  sand-bank  which  reached  clear  across,  and 
had  but  three  feet  of  water  on  it.  But  it  was  a  narrow  bar,  and 
tjould  be  easily  cut  in  two.  Then  we  entered  the  Anengue ;  but 
this  river  we  found  entirely  changed  from  last  May.  Then  it 
was  a  deep,  swift  stream ;  now  its  surface  was  dotted  with  num- 
berless black  mud-banks,  on  which  swarmed  incredible  numbers 
of  crocodiles.  We  actually  saw  many  hundreds  of  these  disgust- 
ing monsters  sunning  themselves  on  the  black  mud,  and  slipping 
oflf  into  the  water  to  feed.  I  never  saw  so  horrible  a  sight.  Many 
were  at  least  twenty  feet  long ;  and,  when  they  opened  their 
frightful  mouths,  looked  capable  of  swallowing  our  little  canoes 
without  trouble. 

I  determined  to  have  a  shot  at  these  beasts,  who  seemed  no- 
ways frightened  at  our  approach.  Making  my  men  paddle  pretty 
well  in,  I  singled  out  the  Inggest  of  a  school,  ai^l  lodged  a  ball 
in  his  body  by  way  of  the  joints  of  his  forelegs,  where  the  thick 
armour  is  defective.  He  tumbled  over,  and,  after  struggling  in 
the  water  for  a  moment,  sank  into  the  mud.  His  compani(Hi8 
turned  their  hideous  snaky  eyes  down  at  him  in  momentary  sur- 
prise, but  did  not  know  what  to  make  of  it,  and  dropped  bock  to 
their  sluggish  comfort  I  shot  another,  but  he  sank  cdso ;  and  as 
my  m^i  did  not  like  to  venture  into  the  black  mud  after  them, 
we  got  neither. 

When  wo  came  to  the  narrow  and  intricate  channel  of  last 
May,  we  found,  to  my  surprise,  a  tremendous  current  running. 
Last  May  the  water  of  the  lake  had  overflowed  its  shores,  and 


Chap.  XIV.  THE  LAKE.  227 

itfi  regular  outlets  had,  therefore,  no  great  pressure  upon  them. 
Now  this  outlet  was  crowded  with  water,  which  rushed  through 
at  such  a  rate  that,  at  some  of  the  turns  in  the  crooked  channel, 
we  were  actually  swept  back  several  times  before  we  could  make 
our  way  good.  At  one  point,  where  two  outlets  joined,  we  could 
not  pass  till  I  made  the  men  smoke  their  (Hmdouguai  (a  long 
reed  pipe),  which  seems  to  give  them  new  vigour,  and  gave  them 
also  a  swallow  of  my  brandy.  This  done,  they  gave  a  great 
shout  and  pushed  through ;  and,  in  a  short  hour,  we  emerged 
upon  the  lake. 

The  lake,  alas !  had  changed  with  the  season,  too.  It  was  still 
a  beautiful  sheet  of  water,  and  good  enough  for  navigation.  But 
all  over  its  placid  face  the  dry  season  had  brought  out  an  erup- 
tion of  those  black  mud-islands  which  we  had  noticed  below ; 
and  on  these  reposed,  I  fear  to  say  what  numbers  of  crocodiles. 
Wherever  the  eye  was  turned,  these  disgusting  beasts,  with  their 
dull  leer,  and  huge,  savage  jaws,  appeared  in  prodigious  numbers. 
The  water  was  alive  with  fish,  on  which  I  suppose  the  crocodiles 
had  fat  living.  But  pelicans  and  herons,  ducks,  and  other 
water-birds  also  abounded,  drawn  hither  by  the  abundance  of 
their  prey. 

Paddlmg  carefully  past  great  numbers  of  crocodiles,  into  whose 
ready  jaws  I  was  by  no  means  anxious  to  fall,  and  past  several 
native  villages,  we  at  last  reached  the  town  of  my  old  friend 
Damagondai,  who  stood  upon  the  shore  ready  to  receive  me.  He 
was  dressed  in  the  usual  middle-cloth  of  the  natives,  and  a  tar- 
nished scarlet  soldier-coat,  but  was  innocent  of  trousers.  But  his 
welcome  was  none  the  less  hearty,  though  the  unmentionables 
were  lacking. 

His  town,  which  contains  about  fifty  huts,  lies  on  some  high 
ground  at  a  little  distance  from  the  watei ;  and  the  people  came 
to  meet  us  on  the  shady  walk  which  connects  them  with  the  lake. 
Everybody  seemed  glad  to  see  us.  I  distributed  presents  of  to- 
bacco, gave  the  king  some  cloth,  and  put  him  in  a  good-humour, 
though  he  could  scarce  forgive  me  for  not  bringing  him  rum  alsa 
I  noticed  in  the  middle  of  the  village  a  strongly-built  goat-house, 
which  is  a  sign  that  leopards  sometimes  come  this  way. 

Damagondai  put  all  his  town  at  my  disposal,  and  suggested 
that  I  had  better  pick  out  two  or  three  of  the  best-looking  girls 
for  wives  for  myself.    He  was  somewhat  amazed  when  I  declined 

0  2 


228  A  NIGHT  WITH  AN  AFRICAN  KING.        Chap.  XIV. 

this  pleasant  offer,  and  insisted  upon  it  that  my  bachelor  life  must 
be  very  lonely  and  disagreeable. 

The  king  is  a  tall,  rather  slim  negro,  over  six  feet  high,  and 
well  put  together,  as  most  of  these  men  are.  I  suppose  in  war  or 
in  the  chace,  he  had  the  usual  amount  of  courage,  but  at  home 
he  was  exceedingly  superstitious.  As  night  came  on  he  seemed 
to  get  a  dread  of  death.  He  grew  querulous ;  told  the  men  to 
stop  their  noise ;  and  at  last  began  to  groan  out  that  some  of  the 
people  wanted  to  bewitch  him  in  order  to  get  his  property  and 
his  authority.  Finally  he  got  excited,  and  began  to  curse  all 
witches  and  sorcerers ;  said  no  one  should  have  his  wives  and 
slaves ;  and,  in  fact,  became  so  maudlin  that  I  interfered^  and 
declared  there  were  no  witches,  and  his  fears  were  absurd. 

Of  course  I  received  the  stereotyped  answer,  **  There  may  be 
none  among  your  white  people ;  but  it  is  very  different  among 
us,  because  we  have  known  many  men  who  were  bewitched  and 
died."  To  such  an  argument  there  is  no  reply.  They  always 
insist  that  we  are  a  distinct  race,  and  have  few  things  in  common 
with  them.  Those  ethnologistB  who  hold  to  diversity  of  races  of 
men  would  receive  readier  credence  here  in  savage  Africa  than 
they  obtain  in  America  or  Europe. 

When  my  objections  had  been  settled,  the  old  fellow  b^an  to 
lecture  his  wives,  telling  them  to  love  him  and  to  feed  him  wdl, 
for  he  had  given  a  great  deal  of  money  and  goods  to  their  parents 
for  them,  and  they  were  a  constant  expense  and  uneasiness  to 
him ;  to  all  which  the  poor  women  listened  with  great  respect ; 
and  no  doubt  made  up  their  grateful  hearts  to  give  their  lord  and 
master  a  good  breakfast  next  morning. 

At  last  this  dreariest  of  African  nights  got  too  slow  for  the 
people,  who  suddenly  struck  up  a  dance  and!  forgot  all  about 
witchcraft.     And  I,  too,  was  tired,  and  went  to  my  dreams. 

The  Anengue  people,  though  they  intermarry  with  their  neigh- 
bours the  Gamma,  are  not  permitted  to  come  down  to  the  sea- 
shore for  trada  This  would  distmrb  the  monopoly,  and  monopoly 
is  the  most  sacred  thing  in  West  Afric^u  The  consequence  is 
that  they  have  no  energy  or  life  among  them.  They  are  idle, 
and  lie  about  doing  absolutely  nothing  day  after  day.  Once  in 
a  great  while  they  kill  an  elephant  and  dispatch  its  tusks  down 
to  the  sea ;  but  the  small  returns  they  get,  after  the  Gamma 
have  taken  off  their  rascally  percentage,  does  not  encourage 


Chap.  XIV.  KING  SHIMBOUVBNEGANI.  229 

them  to  trade.  They  are  not  great  hunters,  the  vast  shoals  of 
fish  in  the  lake  giving  them  a  sufiBciency  of  food  without  hunting 
for  it  They  also  eat  the  meat  of  crocodiles,  which  they  harpoon 
with  a  rude  kind  of  jagged  spear.  During  my  stay  I  and  my 
crew  lived  almost  entirely  on  fish,  which  were  caught  in  a  net 
I  had  brought  along.  Hiere  is  one  fine  fish,  called  the  condo, 
which  is  really  delicious,  and  fit  for  the  table  of  the  greatest 
gourmand. 

On  the  5th,  the  day  after  our  arrival,  Damagondai  took  me 
across  the  lake  to  the  village  of  one  Shimbouvenegani,  a  king 
with  a  big  name  and  a  small  village,  who  lives  fifteen  miles  oS, 
at  the  eastern  end  of  the  lake.  I  found  the  water  now  very  shal- 
low in  places,  though  affording  passage  still  for  light-draught 
vessels.  The  little  islets  were  quite  nymerous.  On  the  hills 
which  formed  the  boundary  of  the  lagoon  at  high  water,  I  saw 
plenty  of  ebony-trees  on  the  side  I  had  not  before  visited.  Thus 
ebony  and  India-rubber  are  both  to  be  got  here. 

We  found  the  king  with  the  long  name  not  at  his  village,  but 
at  his  olakoj  a  place  temporarily  erected  in  the  woods  when  the 
people  of  a  village  want  to  hunt,  or  fish,  or  pursue  agriculture. 
They  had  chosen  a  charming  spot  in  the  woods  just  upon  the 
shores  of  the  lake,  which  here  had  high  abrupt  banks,  and  looked 
more  like  a  pleasant  river  them  a  lagoon.  Their  musquito-nets 
were  hung  up  under  the  trees,  and  every  family  had  a  fire  built, 
and  from  the  pots  came  the  fragrant  smell  of  plantains  and  fish 
cooking.  We  were  seated  at  a  rude  table,  and  presently  Shim- 
bouvenegani came  up,  rejoiced  to  see  me.  The  usual  ceremony 
of  introduction  was  gone  through,  Damagondai  relating  that  he 
had  brought  his  white  man  over  here  because  game  was  plenty, 
and  to  do  a  favour  to  his  friend  the  king. 

The  latter  was  a  meagre  negro  of  between  sixty  and  seventy 
years  old,  dressed  in  a  very  dirty  swallow-tailed  coat,  and  in 
what  was — so  I  judged — some  thirty  or  forty  years  ago  a  silk  or 
beaver  hat.  This  is  an  article  which  only  kings  are  permitted 
to  wear  in  West  Africa,  and  my  friend  seemed  very  proud  of  it. 
His  dress  did  not  amount  to  much,  from  the  New  York  stand- 
point, but  I  doubt  not  it  had  cost  him  several  hundred  dollars* 
worth  of  ivory — and  so  he  had  a  fashionably-recognized  right  to 
feel  that  his  appearance  was  "  the  thing." 

The  people  gathered  about  to  examine  my  hair — ^that  constant 


230  THE  NSHIEGO  MBOUVE.  Chap.  XIV. 

maryel  to  the  interior  negroes ;  and  presently  some  large  pots  of 
palm-wine  were  brought,  whereupon  all  hands  proceeded  to  cele- 
brate my  arrival  among  thenu  I  added  some  tobacco^  and  ih^i 
their  happiness  was  complete. 

Meantime  Damagondai  had  presented  me  to  his  eldest  bod, 
Okabi,  who  lived  in  this  village.  It  is  curious  that  in  this 
country  the  eldest  son  of  a  chief  always  lives  abroad.  Okabi 
hurried  off  to  fix  a  little  privacy  of  tree-branches  for  my  use,  pat 
up  a  table  for  me,  and,  arranged  his  aJcoko  or  bed  for  my  sleep- 
ing ;  then  gave  me  in  charge  to  his  two  wives,  who  were  to  take 
care  of  me. 

It  was  charming  weather,  and  I  enjoyed  all  this  travelling 
about  very  much. 

The  next  morning  S]|;Limbouvenegani  sent  me  some  plantains 
and  a  quantity  of  sugarcane  by  the  hands  of  a  young  black 
woman,  who  also  brought  a  message  that  she  was  to  be  my 
wife.  I  had  to  decline  the  matrimonial  proposal,  which  seemed 
to  grieve  the  black  nymph,  while  her  royal  master  was  merely 
surprised,  but  evidently  thought  that  it  was  right  I  should  do  as 
I  pleased. 

This  day  we  went  out  on  a  hunt — one  of  those  hunts  which  are 
marked  with  the  brightest  of  red  ink  in  my  calendar.  On  this 
day  I  discovered  a  new  and  very  curious  ape.  We  had  been 
travelling  some  hours,  when  we  came  upon  a  male  and  female  of 
the  Bo9  hracMcheroB,  I  shot  the  bull,  a  splendid  fellow,  who  fur- 
nished us  dinner  and  supper.  After  dinner  we  marched  on,  and 
had  a  weary  time  of  it  for  some  hours,  the  ground  being  swampy 
and  no  game  in  sight.  As  I  was  trudging  along,  rather  tired  of 
the  sport,  I  happened  to  look  up  at  a  high  tree  which  we  were 
passing,  and  saw  a  most  singular-looking  shelter  built  in  its 
branches.  I  asked  Okabi  whether  the  himters  here  had  this 
habit  of  sleeping  in  the  woods,  but  was  told,  to  my  surprise,  that 
this  very  ingenious  nest  was  built  by  the  nshiego  rnbauve^  an  ape, 
as  I  found  afterwards,  which  I  put  in  the  genus  ISvglodyte^  and 
called  Troglodytes  ealvua;  an  animal  which  had  no  hair  on  ito 
head — so  Okabi  told  me. 

I  saw  at  once  that  I  was  on  the  trail  of  an  animal  till  now 
unknown  to  the  civilized  world.  A  naturalist  will  appreciate  the 
joy  which  filled  me  at  this  good  fortune.  I  no  longer  felt  tired, 
but  pushed  on  with  renewed  ardour  and  with  increased  cautioD, 


Chap.  XIV.  HABITS  OF  THE  NSHIEGO.  231 

determined  not  to  rest  till  I  killed  this  nest-building  ape.  One 
such  discovery  pays  the  weary  naturalist-hunter  for  many  months 
of  toil  and  hardship.  I  felt  already  rewarded  lor  all  the  incon- 
veniences and  expenses  of  my  Gamma  trip.  I  have  noticed  that 
it  is  always  at  the  most  unexpected  moment  that  such  a  piece  of 
luck  befalls  a  poor  fellow. 

I  saw  many  of  these  nests  after  this,  and  may  as  well  say  here 
that  they  are  generally  built  about  fifteen  or  twenty  feet  from 
the  ground,  and  invariably  on  a  tree  which  stands  a  little  apart 
from  others,  and  which  has  no  limbs  below  the  one  on  which  the 
nest  is  placed.  I  have  seen  them  at  the  height  of  fifty  feet,  but 
very  seldom.  This  choice  is  probably  made  that  they  may  be 
safe  at  night  from  beasts,  serpents,  and  falling  limbs.  They 
build  only  in  the  loneliest  parts  of  the  forest,  and  are  very  shy, 
and  seldom  seen  even  by  the  negroes. 

Okabi,  who  was  an  old  and  intelligent  hunter,  was  able  to 
tell  me  that  the  male  and  female  together  gather  the  material 
for  their  nests.  This  material  consists  of  leafy  branches  with 
which  to  make  the  roof,  and  vines  to  tie  these  branches  to  the 
tree.  The  tying  is  done  so  neatly,  and  the  roof  is  so  well 
constructed,  that  until  I  saw  the  nshiego  actually  occupying  his 
habitation,  I  could  scarce  persuade  myself  that  human  hands 
had  not  built  it  It  throws  off  rain  perfectly,  being  neatly 
rounded  at  the  top  for  this  purpose. 

The  material  being  collected,  the  male  goes  up  and  builds  the 
nest^  while  the  female  brings  him  the  branches  and  vines.  The 
male  and  female  do  not  occupy  the  same  tree,  but  have  nests 
not  far  apart. 

From  all  I  have  observed,  I  judge  that  the  nshiego  is  not  gr^a- 
rious.  The  nests  are  never  found  in  companies ;  and  I  have  seen 
even  quite  solitary  nests  occupied  by  very  old  nshiegos-mbouve, 
whose  silvery  hair  and  worn  teeth  attested  their  great  age. 
These  seemed  hermits  who  had  retired  from  the  nshiego  world. 

They  live  on  ^vild  berries,  and  build  their  houses  where  they 
find  these.  When  they  have  consumed  all  that  a  particular 
spot  affords,  they  remove  and  build  new  houses,  so  that  a  nest 
is  not  inhabited  for  more  than  eight  or  ten  days. 

We  travelled  with  great  caution,  not  to  alarm  our  prey,  and 
had  a  hope  that,  singling  out  a  shelter  and  waiting  till  dark, 
we  should  find  it  occupied.    In  this  hope  we  were  not  dis- 


232  A  NSHIEGO  KILLED.  Chap.  XiV. 

appointed.  Lying  quite  Btill  in  our  concealment  (which  tried 
my  patience  sorely),  we  at  last,  just  at  dusk,  heard  the  loud 
peculiar  "HevI  Hew!  Hewl"  which  is  the  call  of  the  male  to 
his  mate.  We  waited  till  it  was  quite  dark,  and  then  I  saw 
what  I  had  so  longed  all  the  weary  afternoon  to  see.  A  nsfai^o 
was  sitting  in  his  nest.  His  feet  rested  on  the  lower  branch ; 
his  head  reached  quite  into  the  little  dome  of  a  roo^  and  his 
arm  was  clasped  firmly  about  the  tree-trunk.  This  is  their  way 
of  sleeping. 

After  gazing  till  I  was  tired  through  the  gloom  at  my  poor 
sleeping  victim,  two  of  us  fired,  and  the  unfortunate  beast  fell 
at  our  feet  without  a  struggle  or  even  a  groan. 

We  built  a  fire  at  once,  and  made  our  camp  in  this  place, 
that  when  daylight  came  I  might  first  of  all  examine  and  skin 
my  prize.  The  poor  ape  was  hung  up,  to  be  out  of  the  way 
of  the  bashikouay  and  other  insects,  and  I  fell  asleep  on  my 
bed  of  leaves  and  grass,  as  pleased  a  man  as  the  world  contd 
weU  hold." 


NiUego  Mben*^  (yoang). 

•  For  description  of  the  aniraal,  soc  '  Proceedings  of  the  Boston  Society  of 
Natural  History,'  June,  1860. 


Chap.  XIV.  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  NSHIEGO.  233 

Next  morning  I  had  leisure  to  examine  the  nshiego.  I  wa« 
at  once  stmck  with  the  points  of  difiference  between  it  and  the 
chimpanzee.  It  was  somewhat  smaller  than  the  chimpanzee  I 
had  killed ;  but  its  great  distinction  was  its  bald  head.  This 
is  its  mark.  This  specimen  was  3  feet  11  inches  high  or  long. 
It  was  an  adult.  Its  skm,  where  there  is  no  hair,  is  black,  in 
its  natural  state.  The  throat,  breast,  and  abdomen  are  covered 
with  short  and  rather  thin  blackish  hair.  On  the  lower  part  of 
the  abdomen  the  hair  is  thinnest;  but  this  is  not  perceived 
unless  looked  at  carefully,  as  the  skin  is  the  colour  of  the  hair. 
On  the  legs  the  hair  is  of  a  dirty  gray  mixed  with  black. 

The  shoulders  and  back  have  black  hair  between  two  and 
three  inches  long,  mixed  with  a  little  gray.  The  arms,  down  to 
the  wrist,  have  also  long  black  hair,  but  shorter  than  in  the 
gorilla.  The  hair  is  much  thinner,  in  general,  than  on  the 
gorilla,  and  the  skin  is  not  so  tough.  I  noticed  that  the  bare 
places,  where  the  hair  is  worn  off  by  contact  with  hard  substances 
in  sleeping,  were  different  from  the  bare  places  which  are  so 
conspicuous  on  the  chimpanzee. 

There  is  a  yet  greater  difference  between  this  animal  and  the 
gorilla.  It  is  not  nearly  so  powerful  as  that  monster.  Its  chest 
is  of  far  less  capacity ;  its  muscular  development  is  not  on  the 
same  prodigious  scale;  its  arm  is  a  little  longer;  and  the 
fingers  of  the  gorilla  are  not  only  shorter,  but  also  much  more 
powerful  than  those  of  the  nshiego  mbouv6.  There  is  also  a 
similar  difference  in  the  fingers  of  the  feet  The  largest  nshiego 
I  shot  measured  a  few  inches  over  four  feet  in  height,  and  its 
spread  of  arms  was  almost  seven  feet 

The  hair  of  the  nshiego  is  blacker,  longer,  and  glossier  than 
that  of  the  gorilla.  The  latter  has  his  head  covered  with  hair, 
while  the  former  is  bald,  both  male  and  female.  The  nose  of 
the  nshiego  is  not  so  prominent  as  the  gorilla's ;  the  mouth  is 
wider ;  the  ears  are  much  larger ;  the  chin  is  rounder  than  that 
of  the  gorilla,  and  has  some  thin,  short  hairs  on  it.  The 
posteriors  of  the  nshiego  are  bare,  and  there  the  skin  is  white. 
The  eyebrows  of  the  nshiego  are  of  thin  black  hair,  but  long. 
The  side  of  the  face  is  thinly  covered  with  hair,  commencing 
about  the  middle  of  the  ear. 

I  sent  my  prize  into  the  olako,  and  on  om:  way  back  we  had 
the  good  luck  to  kill  another.    This  was  a  very  old  animal, 


234  NATIVE  CANOES  AND  HARPOONfiL        Chap.  XIV. 

with  venerable  aspect,  aUbrerj  tair,  and  decayed  teeth.  It 
measmed  4  feet  4  inches.  Its  weight  was  so  consideraUe  that, 
to  carry  it,  we  had  to  tctke  out  its  intestines.  I  found  in  the 
stomach  only  some  leaves.  On  my  return  to  the  olako  I  stuffed 
my  two  prizes,  ready  to  send  home. 

On  the  9th  we  had  a  great  crocodile-hunt.  The  people  w^e 
very  glad,  as  they  seem  extravagantly  fond  of  the  meat.  They 
kill  more  or  less  every  day  at  this  village,  and  so  at  the  others ; 
but  the  negroes  are  so  lazy  that  they  were  glad  to  let  me  go 
and  save  them  the  troubla  The  crocodile  has  not  much  meat 
on  him,  so  that,  though  some  were  killed  every  day,  the  village 
was  never  suflSciently  supplied. 

We  went  in  canoes.  These  canoes  are  of  a  very  singular 
construction;  quite  flat-bottomed,  very  Ught  draught,  about 
fifty  feet  long,  and  not  more  than  two  broad.  They  are  ticklish 
craft.  The  oarsmen  stand  up  and  use  paddles  seven  feet  long, 
with  which  they  can  propel  one  of  these  boats  at  a  very  good 
rate.  The  canoes  are,  of  course,  easily  capsized — ^th^  gunwale 
being  but  a  few  inches  above  the  water ;  but  they  do  not  often 
tip  over.  What  surprised  me  most  was  the  way  the  negro 
paddlers  stood  up  at  their  work  all  day  without  tiring. 

The  negroee  hunt  the  crocodile  both  with  guns  and  a  kind 
of  harpoon.  They  have  very  poor  guns,  and  powder  is  a  scarce 
article  with  them ;  so  the  harpoon  is  most  used.  The  vulneraUe 
part  of  the  animal  is  near  the  joints  of  his  forelegs,  and  there 
they  endeavour  to  wound  it.  Though  so  many  are  killed,  they 
do  not  decrease  in  numbers,  nor,  strange  enough,  do  they  seem 
to  grow  more  wary.  As  we  started  out  we  saw  them  swimming 
about  in  all  directions,  and  lying  on  the  mudbanks  sunning 
themselves.  They  took  no  notice  of  our  boat  at  all.  As  we 
were  to  shoot,  we  were  obliged  to  look  for  our  prizes  oa  the 
shore,  for,  if  killed  in  the  water,  they  sink  and  are  lost.  Pre- 
sently we  saw  an  immense  fellow  extended  on  the  bank  among 
some  reeds.  We  approached  cautiously ;  I  took  good  aim,  and 
knocked  him  over.  He  struggled  hard  to  get  to  the  water,  but 
had  been  hit  too  surely.  His  strength  gave  out  ere  he  could 
reach  it,  and,  with  a  few  final  kicks  he  was  dead.  We  got 
one  more,  and  then  they  brought  another  canoe,  and,  cap- 
sizing it  along  the  shore,  rolled  the  dead  monsters  in  and 
paddled  off  for  the  village.    One  measured  eighteen  and  the 


Chap.  XIV.  HABITS  OP  THE  OGATA.  235 

other  twenty  feet  in  length.  I  never  saw  more  savage-looking 
jaws*  They  were  armed  with  most  fDrmidable  rows  of  teeth,  and 
looked  really  as  though  a  man  would  be  a  mere  bite  for  them. 

During  the  heat  of  the  day  these  animals  retire  to  the  reeds, 
where  they  lie  sheltered.  In  the  morning  and  late  afternoon 
they  come  forth,  to  seek  their  prey.  They  swim  with  great 
silence,  making  scarce  even  a  ripple  on  the  water,  and  make 
pretty  good  progress  through  the  water.  The  motion  of  the 
paws  in  swimming  is  like  that  of  a  dog,  over  and  over.  They 
can  stand  quite  stiU  on  top  of  the  water,  when  they  may  be  seen 
looking  about  them  with  their  dull,  wicked  eyes.  They  sleep 
in  the  reeds,  not  for  long  in  the  same  place.  Their  eggs  they 
lay  in  the  sand  on  the  islands  in  the  lake,  covering  them  over 
with  a  layer  of  sand.  The  great  abundance  of  fish  in  the  lake 
makes  them  increase  so  fast  as  they  do»  The  negroes  seemed 
rather  indifferent  to  their  presence,  and  certainly  did  not  view 
them  with  the  loathing  and  horror  they  inspired  in  me. 

On  the  11th  I  went  on  a  hunt,  but  killed  only  a  nkaga — ^a 
beautiful  little  monkey,  whose  head  is  crowned  with  a  fillet  of 
bright  red  hair.  They  are  in  great  numbers  in  these  woods. 
Coming  home,  I  found  near  the  water  the  hole  or  burrow  of 
an  ogata.  This  is  a  species  of  alligator  which  lives  near  pools, 
and  makes  a  long  hole  in  the  ground  with  two  entrances,  in 
which  it  sleeps  and  watches  for  prey.  The  ogata  is  a  night- 
roving  animal,  and  solitary  in  its  habits.  It  scrapes  this  hole 
witb  its  paws  with  considerable  labour.  It  lives  near  a  pool,  for 
the  double  reason,  I  imagine,  that  it  may  bathe,  and  because 
thither  come  bock,  for  which  it  lies  in  wait  in  its  hole.  The 
negroes  tell  me  that  the  ogata  rushes  out  with  great  speed  upon 
any  wandering  animal,  and  drags  it  into  the  hole  to  eat  it.  When 
they  discover  one  of  these  holes  they  come  with  their  guns — 
which  are  generally  loaded  with  iron  spikes — and  watch  at  one 
end,  while  a  fire  is  built  at  the  other  entrance.  When  it  becomes 
too  hot,  the  Ogata  rushes  out  and  is  shot.  I  killed  one,  which 
proved  to  be  seven  feet  long.  It  had  great  strength  in  its  jaws, 
and  very  formidable  teeth.  Like  the  crocodile,  its  upper  jaw  is 
articulated,  and  seems  to  rise  when  the  mouth  is  opened. 

On  the  13th  I  bought  a  few  sticks  of  ebony,  and  one  of  the 
men  brought  me  a  piece  of  izomba-meat.  The  izomba  is  a 
turtle.     The  meat  is  excellent ;  and  when  I  inquired  about  the 


236  CROCODILE  AND  DEER.  Chap.  XIV. 

animal,  I  found  reason  to  believe  it  a  new  species.  The  best 
way  to  take  it  is  to  watch  for  it  on  some  of  the  islands  in  the 
lake,  whither  it  goes  to  lay  its  eggs  by  night.  I  went  out  in  a 
boat  the  same  night,  and  we  were  so  lucky  as  to  turn  one  great 
turtle  just  as  she  was  done  laying.  She  had  noticed  us,  silent 
as  our  approach  was,  and  had  nearly  escaped.  I  found  to  my 
joy  next  morning  that  it  was  really  a  new  species. 

On  the  14th  I  gave  Shimbouvenegani  two  pieces  of  cotton 
cloth,  some  tobacco,  and  beads,  and  returned  to  Damagondai's 
town.  Here  I  found  a  canoe  from  King  Banpano,  who  had 
sent  to  inform  me  that  a  vessel  was  on  the  coast  by  which  I 
could  send  things  to  America  if  I  wished.  I  determined  to  go 
down  immediately  and  send  some  specimens  off. 

On  our  return  to  Damagondai's  town,  as  we  were  paddling 
along,  I  perceived  in  the  distance  ahead  a  beautiful  gazelle, 
looking  meditatively  into  the  waters  of  the  lagoon,  of  which 
from  time  to  time  it  took  a  drink.  I  stood  up  to  get  a  shot, 
and  we  approached  with  the  utmost  silence.  But^  just  as  I 
raised  my  gun  to  fire,  a  crocodile  leaped  out  of  the  water,  and, 
like  a  flash,  dived  back  again  with  the  struggling  animal  in  his 
powerful  jaws.  So  quickly  did  the  beast  take  his  prey  that, 
though  I  fired  at  him,  I  was  too  late.  I  do  not  think  my  bullet 
hit  him.  K  it  did,  it  struck  some  impenetrable  part  of  his  mail 
I  would  not  have  believed  that  this  huge  and  unwieldy  animal 
could  move  with  such  velocity ;  but  the  natives  told  me  that 
the  deer  often  falls  prey  to  the  crocodile.  Sometimes  he  even 
catches  the  leopard,  but  then  there  is  a  harder  battle  than  the 
poor  little  deer  could  make. 

In  the  afternoon  news  came  that  Oshoria,  the  king  of  a  town 
situated  at  the  junction  of  the  Anengue  and  Ogobay  rivers, 
intended  to  stop  me  on  my  way  down  and  exact  tribute  for  my 
passage.  Poor  King  Damagondai  was  much  troubled.  He 
sent  his  brother  down  with  a  present  of  a  plate,  a  mug,  and  a 
brass  pan  to  propitiate  him.  I  was  very  angry,  and  determined 
to  put  down  Mr.  Oshoria.  We  cleaned  our  guns,  and  I  pre- 
pared my  revolver;  and  next  morning  we  set  out  without 
waiting  for  the  king's  brother's  return,  greatly  to  the  dismay  of 
these  peaceable  people. 

When  we  came  in  sight  of  Guaibuiri,  Oshoria'^  town,  I  saw 
that  some  of  my  fellows  began  to  show  the  white  feather.    I 


Chap.  XIV.  THE  TRIBE  OF  THE  LAKE.  237 

therefore  told  th6m  I  would  blow  out  the  brains  of  the  first  man 
who  failed  to  fight  to  the  death,  at  the  same  time  pointing  to 
my  revolver  as  the  intended  instrument  of  death.  They  have 
a  great  respect  for  this  wonderful  revolver ;  and  immediately 
answered  me,  "We  are  men." 

So  we  pulled  up  to  the  town.  On  the  shore  stood  about  one 
hundred  and  fifty  fellows  armed  with  spears  and  axes,  led  by 
ten  men  who  had  guns.  I  went  immediately  up  to  them, 
revolver  in  one  hand  and  double-barrelled  gun  in  the  other. 
At  this  piece  of  bravado  they  became  very  civil,  and  instead  of 
firing  at  my  party  received  us  peaceably. 

Damagondai's  brother  hurried  down  to  meet  me,  and  announced 
that  there  was  no  palaver.  I  was  then  led  to  where  the  quarrel- 
some Oshoria  stood,  whom  I  reproached  for  his  conduct,  telling 
him  that  if  anybody  had  been  killed  the  palaver  would  have 
been  on  his  head.  He  said  he  had  been  vexed  that  I  did  not 
stop  to  see  him  on  my  way  up ;  and  after  making  further 
excuses,  added,  "Aou6  olom^;"  which  means,  "Thou  art  a 
man;"  an  expression  used  in  several  ways,  either  to  designate 
a  smart  man,  or  a  rascal,  or,  in  the  best  sense,  a  very  brave 
man.    I  was'  content  to  accept  it  as  an  intended  compliment 

I  was  presented  with  fruits  and  fowls,  and  we  were  presently 
the  best  of  friends ;  and  when  I  brought  down  a  little  bird  which 
sat  on  a  very  high  tree^  they  all  declared  I  must  have  a  very  big 
shooting-fetich,  and  respected  me  accordingly ;  and  to  show  them 
I  was  not  afraid  of  them  I  spent  the  night  at  their  village* 

Leaving  this  place,  we  got  back  to  Biagano  without  farther 
trouble. 

The  people  of  the  Ogobay  and  the  Anengue  are  of  the  same 
tribe  with  the  seashore  Camma.  They  intermarry ;  their  cus- 
toms and  superstitions  are  the  same ;  their  palavers  are  the  same ; 
and,  though  they  are  more  peaceable,  they  have  the  will  to  be 
just  as  great  rascals.  The  country  behind  the  river-swamps  is 
very  rich  in  all  manner  of  tropical  products.  The  ebony  is  found 
in  ihe  hills ;  but  to  transport  heavy  substances  twenty  miles  to 
the  river  or  lake-shore,  in  a  country  where  there  are  no  roads,  is 
too  much  trouble  for  these  lazy  fellows — for  which  reason  very 
little  is  cut.  The  copal-tree  is  also  found,  as  well  as  the  India- 
rubber  vine.  They  raise  sugarcane  in  great  quantities,  yams, 
ground-nutSy  plantains,  manioc,  apd  sweet  potatoes.     The  chief 


238  BUYING  AN  IDOL.  Chaf.  XIV. 

commercial  produce  of  the  conntry  at  present  is  ivory,  of  whicli 
a  small  quantity  is  brought  down  every 
year. 

In  their  religious  notions  they  do  not 
differ  from  their  neighhours,  the  Pemand 
Vaz  Camma,  or  indeed  from  the  natives  of 
tiiis  region  generally.  In  Damagondai's  town 
I  was  BO  fortunate  as  to  become  posseased  of 
one  of  their  idols  or  mhuitit.  It  is  a  mistake 
to  suppose  that  these  natives  worship  their 
greegrees  and  fetiches.  Wherever  I  have 
been  I  have  found  the  bead-man  or  chief 
of  each  family  in  possession  of  an  idol, 
which  was  worshipped  by  that  family.  This 
whole  matter  is  kept  so  secret  that,  unless 
the  traveller  pays  particular  attention,  he 
may  live  in  a  village  for  weeks,  and  not 
know  of  this  idore  existence.  And  for  this 
reason  some  have  asserted  that  they  have 
no  idols. 

The  family  of  King  Glass,  in  Gaboon,  has 
an  idol  which  is  several  generations  old,  I 
am  certain.  So  in  Cape  Lopez  the  reigning 
&mily  has  an  ancient  idoL  Mention  has 
been  made  before  this  of  others.  Dama- 
gondai's idol  was  a  female  figure,  with  copper 
eyes,  and  a  tongue  made  of  a  sharp  sword- 
shaped  piece  of  iron.  This  explained  her 
chief  attributes:  she  cuts  to  pieces  those 
with  whom  she  is  displeased.  She  was  dressed 
in  a  Shekiani  cloth,  covering  her  from  the 
neck  down.  She  is  said  to  speak,  to  walk, 
to  foretell  events,  and  to  take  vengeance  on 
her  enemies.  Her  house  is  the  most  promi- 
nent one  in  the  whole  village.  She  comes 
to  the  people  hy  night,  and  tells  them  in 
their  sleep  what  is  going  to  happen.  In  this 
way,  they  asserted,  my  coming  had  been  fore- 
^*'''  told.     They  worship  her  by  dancing  around 

her,  and  singing  her  praises  and  their  requests.     Sometimes  a 


Chap.  XIV.  BOLA  IVOGA.  239 

single  man  or  woman  comes  to  prefer  a  request ;  and  once  I 
saw  the  whole  village  engaged  in  this  rite.  They  oflfer  her 
sugarcane  and  other  food,  which  they  believe  she  eats. 

I  tried  to  buy  this  goddess,  but,  ugly  as  she  was,  Damagondai 
said  no  money  would  purchase  her.  But  he  insinuated  that  for 
a  proper  price  I  could  have  the  goddess  of  the  slaves.  These 
poor  fellows  were  absent  on  the  plantations,  and  after  council 
with  his  chief  men,  the  king  determined  to  tell  them  that  he  had 
seen  their  mbuiti  walk  off  into  the  woods,  I  packed  her  up  and 
took  her  off  with  me,  and  opposite  is  her  portrait. 

From  August  18th  to  the  31st  I  was  badly  sick  with  dysentery 
and  symptoms  of  malignant  fever,  contracted,  probably,  in  the 
Anengue  marshes.  In  three  days  I  took  one  hundred  and  fifty 
grains  of  quinine,  and  thus  happily  succeeded  in  breaking  the  force 
of  the  fever,  which  was  the  most  dangerous  of  the  two  diseases. 

By  September  9th  I  was  pretty  strong  again,  and  the  people 
came  to  ask  me  if  I  was  willing  for  them  to  hola  ivoga,  that  is,  to 
make  a  terrible  noise  with  their  ceremonious  breaking  of  the 
mourning-time.  I  gave  my  consent,  and  next  day  great  num- 
bers of  canoes  came  down  to  help  in  this  ceremony.  When  any 
one  of  importance  dies,  the  tribe  or  town  cease  to  wear  their 
best  clothes,  and  make  it  a  point  to  go  unusually  dirty.  This  is 
to  mourn.  Mourning  lasts  from  a  year  to  two  years.  As  for  the 
breaking  up  of  mourning,  this  shaU  now  be  described. 

The  man  who  had  died  left  seven  wives,  several  slaves,  a 
house,  a  plantation,  and  other  property.  All  this  the  elder 
brother  inherits,  and  on  him  it  devolves  to  give  the  grand  feast 
For  this  feast  every  canoe  that  came  brought  jars  of  mimho  or 
palm-wine.  Sholomba  and  Jombuai,  the  heir,  had  been  out  for 
two  weeks  fishing,  and  now  returned  with  several  canoe-loads  of 
dry  fish.  From  their  plantations  quantities  of  palm-wine  were 
brought  in.  Everyone  in  the  village  furbished  up  his  best 
clothes  and  ornaments.  Drums  and  kettles  were  collected; 
powder  was  brought  out  for  the  salutes;  and  at  last  all  was 
ready  for  bola  ivoga. 

The  wives  of  the  deceased  seemed  quite  jolly,  for  to-morrow 
they  were  to  lay  aside  their  widows'  robes  and  to  join  in  the 
jollification  as  brides.  The  heir  could  have  married  them  all, 
but  he  had  generously  given  up  two  to  a  younger  brother  and 
one  to  a  cousin. 


240  PHYSIC  AMONG  THE!  CAMMA.  Chap.  XIY. 

At  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning  three  gnns  were  fired  off  to 
announce  that  the  widows  had  done  eating  a  certain  mess,  mixed 
of  various  ingredients  supposed  to  have  magical  virtues,  and  by 
which  they  are  released  from  their  widowhood.  They  now  put 
on  bracelets  and  anklets,  and  the  finest  calico  they  had.  About 
nine  all  the  guests  sat  down  on  mats  spread  about  the  house  of 
deceased  and  along  the  main  street.  They  were  divided  into 
little  groups,  and  before  each  was  set  an  immense  ja^  of  mimba 
All  began  to  talk  pleasantly,  till  suddenly  the  Biagano  people 
fired  off  a  volley  of  about  one  hundred  guns.  This  was  the 
signal  for  the  drinking  to  begin.  Men,  women,  and  children  set 
to ;  and  from  this  time  till  next  morning  the  orgies  were  con- 
tinued without  interruption.  They  drank,  they  sang,  they  fired 
guns,  and  loaded  them  so  heavily  as  they  got  tipsy,  that  I  wonder 
the  old  trade-guns  did  not  burst ;  they  drummed  on  everything 
that  could  possibly  give  out  a  noise;  they  shouted;  and  the 
women  danced — such  dances  as  are  not  seen  elsewhere.  They 
are  indecent  in  their  best  moments.  The  reader  may  imagine 
what  they  were  when  every  woman  was  furiously  tipsy,  and 
thought  it  a  point  of  honour  to  be  more  indecent  than  her 
neighbour. 

Next  day,  about  sunrise,  Jombuai  came  to  ask  me  to  assist  at 
the  concluding  ceremony.  His  brother's  house  Avas  to  be  torn 
down  and  burned.  When  I  came  they  fired  guns,  and  then, 
in  a  moment,  hacked  the  old  house  to  pieces  with  axes  and  cut- 
lasses. When  the  ruins  were  burned  the  feast  was  done.  And 
this  is  to  go  out  of  mourning  among  the  Camma. 

Hardly  were  the  rejoicings  done,  when  Ishungui,  the  man  who 
had  faithfully  taken  care  of  my  house  in  my  absence,  lay  at 
death's  door.  He  had  gone  out  on  Jombuai's  fishing-excursion, 
caught  cold,  and  had  now  a  lung  fever.  I  knew  when  I  saw  him 
that  he  must  die,  and  tried  to  prepare  his  mind  for  the  change. 
But  his  friends  by  no  means  gave  him  up.  They  sent  for  a 
distinguished  fetich-doctor,  and  under  his  auspices  began  the 
infernal  din  with  which  they  seek  to  cure  a  sick  man. 

The  Camma  theory  of  disease  is  that  Obambou  (the  devO)  has 
got  into  the  sick  man.  Kow  this  devil  is  only  to  be  driven  out 
with  noise,  and  accordingly  they  surround  the  sick  man  and  beat 
drums  and  kettles  close  to  his  head ;  fire  off  guns  close  to  his 
ears ;  sing,  shout,  and  dance  all  they  can.     This  lasts  till  the 


^J 

• 


Chap.  XIV.  HOW  TO  DISCOVER  A  WITCH.  241 

poor  fellow  either  dies  or  is  better — unless  the  operators  become 
tired  out  first,  for  the  Camma  doctors  either  kill  or  cure. 

Ishungui  died.  He  left  no  property,  and  his  brother  buried 
him  without  a  coffin  in  a  grave  in  the  sand,  so  shallow  that,  when 
I  chanced  to  come  upon  it  some  days  after,  I  saw  that  the  wild- 
beasts  had  been  there  and  eaten  the  corpse.  The  mourning 
lasted  but  six  days ;  and,  as  there  were  no  wives  or  property,  so 
there  was  no  feast*  The  relatives  of  the  deceased  slept  one  night 
in  his  house,  as  a  mark  of  respect ;  aud  then  all  that  remained 
was  to  discover  the  person  who  had  bewitched  the  dead  man. 
For  that  a  young  man,  generally  healthy,  should  die  so  suddenly 
in  course  of  nature  was  by  no  means  to  be  believed. 

A  canoe  had  been  dispatched  up  to  the  lake  to  bring  down  a 
great  doctor.  They  brought  one  of  Damagondai's  sons,  a  great 
rascal,  who  had  been  foremost  in  selling  me  the  idol,  and  who  was 
an  evident  cheat.  When  all  was  ready  for  the  trial,  I  went  down 
to  look  at  the  doctor,  who  looked  literally  like  the.  devil.  I  never 
saw  a  more  ghastly  object.  He  had  on  a  high  head-dress  of 
black  feathers.  His  eyelids  were  paiated  red,  and  a  red  stripe, 
from  the  nose  upward,  divided  his  forehead  in  two  parts.  Another 
red  stripe  passed  round  his  head.  The  face  was  painted  white, 
and  on  each  side  of  the  mouth  were  two  round  red  spots.  About 
his  neck  hung. a  necklace  of  grass  and  also  a  cord,  which  held 
a  box  against  his  breast.  This  little  box  is  sacred,  and  contains 
spirits.  A  number  of  strips  of  leopard  and  other  skins  crossed 
his  breast,  and  were  exposed  about  his  person;  and  all  these 
were  charmed,  and  had  charms  attached  to  them.  From  each 
shoulder  down  to  his  hands  was  a  white  stripe,  and  one  hand 
was  painted  quite  white.  To  complete  this  horrible  array,  he 
wore  a  string  of  little  bells  around  his  body. 

He  sat  on  a  box  or  stool,  before  which  stood  another  box  con- 
taining charms.  On  this  stood  a  looking-glass,  beside  which  lay 
a  buffiilo-hom  containing  some  black  powder,  and  said,  in  addi- 
tion, to  be  the  refuge  of  many  spirits.  He  had  a  little  basket  of 
snake-bones,  which  he  shook  frequently  during  his  incantations ; 
as  also  several  skins,  to  which  little  bells  were  attached.  Near 
by  stood  a  fellow  beating  a  board  with  two  sticks.  All  the 
people  of  the  village  gathered  about  this  couple,  who,  after  con- 
tintiing  their  incantations  for  a  while,  at  last  came  to  the  climax. 
Jombuai  was  told  to  call  over  the  names  of  persons  in  the 

B 


242  I  AM  MADE  A  CHIEF.  Chap.  XIY. 

village,  in  order  that  the  doctor  might  ascertain  if  any  one  of 
those  named  did  the  sorcery.  As  each  named  was  ccdled  the 
old  cheat  looked  in  the  glass  to  see  the  result. 

During  the  whole  operation  I  stood  near  him,  whicTi  seemed  to 
trouble  him  greatly.  At  last,  after  all  the  names  were  called, 
the  doctor  declared  that  he  could  not  find  any  "witch-man," 
but  that  an  evil  spirit  dwelt  in  the  village,  and  many  d  the 
people  would  die  if  they  continued  there.  I  have  a  suspicion 
that  this  final  judgment  with  which  the  incantations  broke  up 
was  a  piece  of  revenge  upon  ma  I  had  no  idea  till  next  day 
how  seriously  the  words  of  one  of  these  {cugangoL)  doctors  is 
taken. 

The  next  morning  all  was  excitement.  The  people  were 
scared :  they  said  their  mhuiri  was  not  willing  to  have  them  live 
longer  here;  that  he  would  kill  them,  &c.  Then  began  the 
removal  of  all  kinds  of  property  and  the  tearing  down  of  houses ; 
and  by  nightfall  I  was  actually  left  alone  in  my  house  with  my 
Mpongwe  boy  and  my  little  Ogobay  boy,  Makondai,  both  of 
whom  were  anxious  to  be  oflf. 

Old  Kanpano  came  to  beg  me  not  to  be  ofi^Buded ;  that  he 
dared  not  stay,  but  would  build  his  house  not  too  far  away ;  that 
the  mbuiri  was  now  in  town :  he  advised  me  as  a  firiend  to  move 
also ;  but  nobody  wished  me  ill — only  he  must  go,  &c. 

I  did  not  like  to  abandon  my  houses,  which  had  cost  me  money 
and  trouble,  and  where  I  was  more  comfortably  fixed  thaji  I  had 
ever  before  been  in  Africa.  So  I  called  a  meeting  of  the  people, 
and  tried  to  induce  some  of  them  to  come  over  and  live  with  me. 
Now,  though  they  loved  tobacco,  though  they  worshipped  trade, 
though  they  had  every  possible  inducement  to  come  and  live 
near  me,  "  their  white  man,"  as  they  called  me,  it  was  only  with 
the  greatest  difficulty  I  coidd  get  some  men  who  had  already 
worked  for  me  to  come  over  and  stay  in  my  place.  These  b^an 
immediately  to  build  themselves  houses,  and  by  October  8th  the 
little  village  was  built,  of  which  I  was  now,  to  my  great  surprise, 
offered  the  sovereignty.  I  remembered  how  the  new  king  was 
made  in  the  Gaboon  ;  and  though  it  seemed  romantic  to  be  the 
chief  of  a  negro  town  in  Africa,  the  thought  of  the  contumely 
which  precedes  the  assumption  of  royalty  deterred  me.  Finally 
the  men  determined  to  have  me  as  the  chief  next  to  Banpano, 
and  with  this  my  ambition  was  satisfied. 


Chap.  XIV.  GORILLA-HUNTS,  243 

On  the  1st  of  November  I  went  in  a  canoe,  with  guns  and 
provisions,  up  to  Irende,  a  town  about  forty  miles  up  the 
Femand  Vaz.  Hereabouts  there  was  likelihood  of  some  good 
hunts ;  so  I  had  been  told.  In  fact  we  killed  a  number  of  wild 
red  pigs,  and  some  beautiful,  but  very  shy  red  gazelles.  It  is  a 
curious  circumstance — ^which  I  think  I  ascertained  to  be  a  fact — 
that  on  this  part  of  the  Femand  Vaz  the  gorilla  lives  only  near 
the  left  bank,  and  the  chimpanzee  only  near  the  right  l^uik  of 
the  stream,  until  one  rejkjhes  the  Eembo  River. 

On  the  9th  I  started  for  the  town  of  my  old  firiend  Makaga, 
where  I  was  heartily  received.  We  went  out  on  a  gorilla-hunt 
on  the  10th,  but  took  too  many  men,  and  probably  made  too 
much  noise ;  for  we  saw  none,  and  retnmed  next  day  with  our 
trouble  for  our  pains.  On  the  13th  I  went  out  mth  only  one 
hunter,  and  he  took  me  to  a  part  of  the  country  fiill  of  the  wild 
pineapple.  The  gorilla  is  very  fond  of  the  leaves  of  this  plant, 
of  which  it  eats  the  white  stems.  We  saw  great  quantities  thus 
eaten  away,  therefore  we  hoped  to  find  here  the  beasts  them- 
selves. 

About  noon,  Mbele,  my  hunter,  was  some  distance  ahead,  when 
suddenly  I  heard  his  gun  &:ed.  I  ran  up,  and  found  he  had  shot 
and  killed  a  female  gorilla  about  half-grown. 

Coming  back  we  heard  the  cry  of  the  gorillas  off  at  one  side 
of  our  path.  We  approached,  but  were  discerned,  and  came  np 
only  to  see  four  young  animals  making  off  on  their  all-fours  into 
the  woods.  I  noticed  that  in  their  trot  their  hindlegs  seemed  to 
play  in  between  their  arms ;  but  they  made  very  good  speed. 

Before  we  got  to  town  again  I  shot  a  mhoyoy  a  very  shy  animal, 
of  the  woK  kind,  with  long  yellowish  hair  and  straight  ears.  I 
have  often  watched  these  beasts  surrounding  and  chasing  small 
game  for  themselves.  The  drove  runs  very  well  together ;  and 
as  their  policy  is  to  run  round  and  round,  they  soon  bewilder, 
tire  out,  and  capture  any  animal  of  moderate  endurance. 

I  found  this  a  great  gorilla  coimtry ;  the  animals  even  ap- 
proached the  town  early  in  the  morning,  and  I  found  that  I  need 
not  make  long  journeys  in  order  to  reach  the  hunting-ground. 
But  they  are  very  difficult  of  approach;  the  shghtest  noise 
alarms  them  and  sends*  them  off.  It  is  only  once  in  a  way  that 
you  can  surprise  an  old  male,  and  then  he  wiU  fight  you. 

On  the  25th  I  got  a  second  young  gorilla.    This  time  I  was 

b2 


244  TOUCHING  SCENE.  Chap.  XIY. 

accessory  to  its  capture.  We  were  walking  along  in  silence, 
when  I  heard  a  cry,  and  presently  saw  before  me  a  female  gorilla, 
with  a  tiny  baby-gorilla  hanging  to  her  breast  and  sucking.  The 
mother  was  stroking  the  little  one,  and  looking  fondly  down  at 
it ;  and  the  scene  was  so  pretty  and  touching  that  I  held  my 
fire,  and  considered — ^like  a  soft-hearted  fellow — whether  I  had 
not  better  leave  them  in  peace.  Before  I  could  make  up  my 
mind,  however,  my  himter  fired  and  kUled  the  mother,  who  fell 
without  a  struggle. 

The  mother  fell,  but  the  baby  clung  to  her,  and,  with  pitifiil 
cries,  endeavoured  to  attract  her  attention.  I  came  up,  and 
when  it  saw  me  it  hid  its  poor  little  head  in  its  mother's  breast. 
It  could  neither  walk  nor  bite,  so  we  could  easily  manage  it;  and 
I  carried  it>  while  the  men  bore  the  mother  on  a  pole.  When 
we  got  to  the  village  another  scene  ensued.  The  men  put  the 
body  down,  and  I  set  the  little  fellow  near.  As  soon  as  he  saw 
his  mother  he  crawled  to  her  and  threw  himself  on  her  breast 
He  did  not  find  his  accustomed  nourishment,  and  I  saw  that 
he  perceived  something  was  the  matter  with  the  old  one.  He 
crawled  over  her  body,  smelt  at  it,  and  gave  utterance,  from 
time  to  time,  to  a  plaintive  cry,  "  Hoo,  hoo,  hoo,"  which  touched 
my  heart. 

I  could  get  no  milk  for  this  poor  little  fellow,  who  could  not 
eat,  and  consequently  died  on  the  third  day  after  he  was  caught. 
He  seemed  more  docile  than  the  other  I  had,  for  he  already 
recognized  my  voice,  and  would  try  to  hurry  towards  me  when 
he  saw  me.  I  put  the  little  body  in  alcohol,  and  sent  it  to  Dr. 
Wyman,  of  Boston,  for  dissection. 

The  mother  we  skinned ;  and,  when  I  came  to  examine  her, 
I  found  her  a  very  singular  specimen.  Her  head  was  nluch 
smaller  than  that  of  any  other  gorilla  I  ever  saw,  and  the  rump 
was  of  a  reddish-brown  colour.  These  are  peculiarities  which 
made  this  specimen  different  from  all  others  I  have  seen.  I 
called  her,  therefore,  the  gorilla  with  the  red  rump. 

On  the  29th  and  30th  of  November  I  took  my  last  hunts  near 
Makaga's  place.  I  found  gorilla  growing  scarce.  I  had  hunted 
them  too  perseveringly ;  so  I  determined  to  return  to  Biagano 
to  make  ready  for  my  trip  up  the  Eembo. 

I  found  all  safe,  and  at  once  prepared  for  my  next  trip.  This, 
however,  was  nut  off  by  one  of  those  accidents  which  happen 


Chap.  XIV,  POISONED  BY  MY  COOK.  '  245 

in  these  barbarous  countries  once  in  a  while.  On  the  5th  of 
December  I  was  poisoned  by  my  cook.  He  was  a  Sangatanga 
fellow,  who  had  been  sent  to  me  from  the  Gaboon  because  I 
could  not  stand  the  cooking  of  my  Biagano  Mends.  He  had 
served  in  the  Cape  Lopez  slave-factories,  and  had  there  learned 
treachery  and  thieving.  For  a  time  he  behaved  well ;  but  by- 
and-by  I  began  to  miss  things,  and  made  sure,  after  watching 
the  Camma  fellows  pretty  closely,  that  the  thief  could  be  nobody 
but  my  cook. 

On  this  day  I  was  preparing  a  tiger's  skin  which  Igala,  my 
hunter,  had  killed  the  night  before,  and  had  to  send  cook  for 
something  in  my  storehouse.  He  came  back  without  the  key, 
which  he  said  was  lost.  I  told  him  if  he  did  not  get  it  before 
night  I  would  punish  him. 

I  had  Sholomba,  a  native  prince,  to  dine  with  me,  and  we  had 
fowls,  chicken-soup,  and  a  goat  for  dinner.  It  happened  that 
Sholomba's  family  hold  chickens  in  abhorrence  as  food,  be- 
lieving that  one  of  their  ancestors  had  been  cured  of  a  deadly 
disease  by  the  blood  of  a  fowl ;  therefore  he  ate  of  the  goat.  I 
took  two  plates  of  chicken-broth,  and  had  scarce  finished  the 
last  when  I  was  seized  with  frightful  pains  and  vomiting,  and 
diarrhoea  set  in,  and  lasted  all  night.  I  never  suffered  such 
frightful  torments. 

When  I  was  first  taken  sick  I  called  Boulay,  the  cook,  who 
said  he  had  put  nothing  in  the  soup ;  but,  when  charged  with 
poisoning,  turned  and  fled  into  the  woods.  The  next  afternoon, 
when  I  was  somewhat  easier,  my  people  brought  the  wretch  in. 
He  had  fled  down  river,  but  had  been  caught.  Eanpano  and  all 
were  very  angry,  and  demanded  the  life  of  him  who  had  tried  to 
kill  their  white  man.  It  was  proved  that  he  had  gone  into  my 
storehouse  with  the  key  he  said  was  lost ;  and,  after  some  pre- 
varication, he  admitted  that  he  had  taken  two  tablespoonfuls 
of  the  arsenic  I  always  had  at  hand  there,  and  put  it  in  my 
soup.  I  owe  my  Ufe  to  his  (w^-dose ;  consequently  to  a  kind 
Providenca 

Banpano  kept  Boulay  in  chains  till  I  was  well  enough  to  sit 
in  judgment  over  him.  Then  it  was  determined  that  he  should 
sufler  death ;  but  I  interfered,  and  desired  that  he  should  be  let 
oflf  with  one  hundred  and  ten  lashes  with  a  whip  of  hippopotamus- 
hida    Eleven  of  the  stoutest /r^^wim  of  the  town  were  chosen  to 


246  SINGULAR  EFFECT  OF  ARSENIC.  Chap.  XIT. 

administer  the  pumshmenti  and  when  it  was  over  Bonlay  was 
again  put  in  chains. 

Bad  news  travels  even  in  this  country,  where  there  are  neitha 
mails  nor  post-roads.  Boulay  had  brothers  in  Cape  Ix^z,  who 
in  some  way  hectrd  of  his  rascality.  They  were  troubled  at  this 
disgrace  to  their  family,  and  appeared  before  me  one  day  with 
four  slaves  in  tiieir  train.  They  thanked  me  for  not  killing 
their  brother,  which,  they  ^aid,  I  had  a  right  to  do.  They  said, 
"  Boulay  has  conducted  himself  as  a  slave  in  trying  to  poison 
his  master.**  Then  they  begged  me  to  give  him  to  them  and  to 
spare  his  life,  and  handed  over  to  me  the  four  slaves  they  had 
brought  as  an  equivalent 

The  brothers  were  old,  venerable,  and  honest-looking  men. 
They  evidently  grieved  deeply  for  the  crime  of  their  kinsman. 
I  told  them  that  in  my  country  we  did  not  "  make  palaver  for 
money ;"  that  I  might  have  killed  their  brother,  according  to  their 
own  laws.  Then  I  called  Boulay,  and  told  him  how  meanly  he 
had  treated  me ;  then,  taking  off  his  chains  myself,  I  handed 
him  over  to  his  brothers,  with  the  four  slaves  they  had  given  me. 
They  thanked  me  again  and  again.  Banpano  forbade  Boulay 
ever  to  return,  and  so  they  went  back  to  Cape  Lopez. 

I  found  myself,  after  some  weeks,  not  only  entirely  recovered 
from  the  effects  of  the  arsenic,  but  also  cured  of  a  fever  which 
had  long  beset  me.  I  have  mentioned,  in  another  place,  that, 
where  quinine  has  ceased  to  affect  the  traveller  in  Africa,  solu- 
tions of  arsenic  are  sometimes  administered,  and  with  good  effect, 
in  fever  cases. 


Chap.  XV.  QUENGUEZA  SENDS  A  HOSTAGE.  247 


CHAPTER   XV. 

Mestoge  and  Hostage  from  Quengneza  —  Ontfit  —  Makondai  —  Fame  of 
Mr.  Colt  —  Goombi  —  Reception  —  Family  Arrangements  in  Africa  — 
Intermarriage  —  Driving  out  a  Witch  —  Kiches  among  the  Comma  — 
African  Shams  —  A  Sunday  Lecture  —  Gorillas  shot  —  The  Poison  Ordeal 
—  Mbondo — Effects  of  the  Poison  —Native  Gorilla  Stories  —  Charms  — 
Young  Female  Gorilla  caught  —  Superstitious  Belief  —  Trouble  in  the 
Hoyal  Family  —  A  Holy  Place  —  Obindji's  Town  —  A  Royal  Introduction 
— Houses  —  Decency  in  Obindji's  Town  —  Surprise  of  the  Negroes  at  my 
Appearance  —  Ordeal  of  the  Ring  boiled  in  Oil  —  Bashikouay  —  Kouloo- 
kamba  —  Another  new  Ape  —  Oouamba,  or  Hunger  for  Meat  —  Grace 
before  Meat  —  A  Day's  Work  in  Africa  —  Checks  —  I  am  counted  a 
Magician. 

Towards  the  close  of  January,  1858,  when  I  was  thinking  of 
King  Quengueza  and  of  my  approaching  visit  to  him,  the  old 
fellow  sent  down  his  eldest  son  to  me  with  a  lot  of  ebony,  and 
his  youngest  son,  a  boy  of  ten,  who  was  to  be  left  with  me. 
Quengueza  sent  word  that  I  must  come  soon ;  that  I  should  have 
his  escort  to  go  to  the  ftir  interior,  and  that  he  was  ready  to  cut 
ebony  for  me.  Meantime,  lest  I  should  be  afraid  to  trust  myself 
in  his  hands,  he  sent  his  young  son,  who  was  to  remain  in 
Kanpano's  hands  as  hostage  for  my  safety.  "  You  see,"  he  sent 
word,  "  I  am  not  afraid  of  you.    You  may  trust  me.'* 

This  message  determined  me  to  get  ready  at  once  for  my  trip. 
I  packed  my  goods  and  put  my  house  in  order,  and  at  last  called 
together  the  people  of  Biagano  for  a  serious  talk.  I  knew  they 
were  opposed  to  my  taking  trade-goods  to  the  interior,  but  I 
could  not  go  without.  I  therefore  told  them  that  I  not  only  now 
was,  but  intended  to  remain  their  white  man ;  that  I  took  goods 
only  to  pay  my  way,  and  that  my  explorations  would  help  their 
trade,  while  I  only  wanted  to  hunt.  At  the  same  time  I  told 
them,  if  they  did  not  help  me  with  canoes  I  should  leave  them 
and  never  come  back.  They  were  glad  to  let  me  go  where  I 
wished,  and  to  help  me  as  £Etr  as  I  needed  help. 

Next  day  I  had  a  more  formal  ceremony  still.  In  my  houses 
remained  about  two  thousand  dollars*  worth  of  ebony  and  goods, 
together  with  ivory,  all  my  specimens  not  sent  to  America,  and 


248  A  TRADER'S  OUTFIT.  Chap.  XV, 

various  other  things  of  value.  These  were  to  remain,  and  I  had 
to  trust  to  the  honour  of  a  parcel  of  black  fellows  for  their  safety. 
Accordmgly  I  took  Banpano  and  some  of  his  head-men  aU 
over  the  premises,  showed  them  everything  I  had  which  was  to 
remain ;  then  said,  '*  Give  me  a  man  to  keep  all  safe,  that  I,  who 
am  your  white  man,  may  lose  nothing." 

They  gave  me  at  once  old  Binkimongami,  the  king's  brother, 
to  whom  I  promised  good  pay  if  my  things  were  kept  safe. 

Then  I  distributed  tobacco  to  all  the  people  ;  and  next  mean- 
ing (February  26th)  we  set  oflf  for  G<x)mbi,  Quengueza's  place. 

I  had  to  take  my  big  boat,  because  no  canoe  would  hold  all 
the  goods,  powder  and  shot,  guns  and  provisions  I  required.  I 
had  26  guns,  150  pounds  of  lead,  200  pounds  of  coarse  trade - 
powder,  30  pounds  of  fine  powder  for  myself,  about  10,000  yards 
of  cotton  cloth,  400  pounds  of  beads,  and  quantities  of  iron  and 
brass  pots,  kettles,  and  pans ;  caps,  coats,  shirts,  looking-glasses, 
fire-steels,  flints,  knives,  plates,  glasses,  spoons,  hats,  &c.,  &c. 
This  is  an  African  explorer's  outfit.  For  this  I  hoped  to  get  not 
only  friendly  treatment,  but  ebony,  ivory,  and  wax,  and  perhaps 
India-rubber.  But  all  that  was  only  by  the  way.  Grorillas  were 
my  chief  object,  and  the  exploration  of  the  far  interior.  Quen- 
gueza  had  promised  me  safe  conduct  to  points  very  far  back 
towards  the  unknown  centre  of  the  continent ;  and  as  I  was  the 
first  white  man  to  venture  up  in  this  direction,  so  I  was  anxious 
to  get  as  far  as  possible. 

We  were  fifteen  in  aU  in  my  boat.  Another  canoe,  with  other 
fifteen  men,  followed  us.  In  my  own  boat,  Jombuai,  a  fellow 
from  my  own  town,  and  who  had  married  some  wives  up  the 
Bembo,  was  the  head  man ;  Quengueza's  little  boy  was  of  our 
party,  and  also  the  brave  little  Makondai,  whom  I  had  at  first 
determined  to  leave  behind,  as  being  too  small  to  stand  the 
fatigues  of  such  a  journey.  The  little  fellow  entreated  so  to  be 
taken  with  us  that  I  at  last  consented.  He  behaved  like  a  trump, 
and  I  had  no  occasion  to  regret  my  confidence  in  him. 

We  started  on  the  morning  of  February  26th,  1858.  When 
we  had  got  a  few  miles  up  river  the  slaves  of  Jombuai  came 
down  to  bid  him  good-bye,  and  brought  him  a  large  quantity  of 
plantains — ^a  welcome  accession  to  our  provision-store.  A  few 
miles  up  and  we  were  clear  of  the  mangroves,  and  the  river 
began  to  widen^  emd  its  shores  became  beautiful    Fine  palin9 


Cdap.  XV.  VILLAGE  OF  "  CHARLEY."  249 

lined  the  banks,  and  seemed  even  to  guard  them  from  the  en- 
croachments of  the  full  river,  which  ran  along  quite  level  with 
its  banks. 

We  pulled  nearly  all  night,  and  by  noon  of  the  next  day 
reached  Monwe  Island,  thirty-five  miles  fix)m  the  mouth  of  the 
river,  but  only  about  ten  miles  from  the  sea,  as  the  reader  will 
see  by  the  map.    Here  we  took  a  rest,  the  heat  being  excessive. 

A  little  above  Monwe  the  Femand  Vaz  becomes  much  nar- 
rower. It  then  takes  an  easterly  direction ;  and  from  this  point 
upward  it  is  known  to  the  natives  as  Eembo,  which  means  *'The 
River."  At  Quayombi  several  small  islands  divide  the  river 
temporarily  into  different  channels,  without,  however,  seriously 
obstructing  the  navigation. 

The  land  which  divides  the  river  into  three  here  we  found  to 
be  mere  mud-banks,  half  overflowed  and  covered  with  reeds. 
When  we  got  into  the  main  stream  I  found  it  suddenly  nar- 
rower, but  a  full  rushing  tide,  two  hundred  yards  wide,  and  from 
four  to  five  fathoms  in  depth  aU  along,  with  no  shallows  or  other 
impediments  to  navigation. 

On  the  28th  we  passed  numerous  towns,  my  men  shouting, 
singing,  and  firing  guns  at  every  inhabited  place,  and  the  people 
gazing  at  us  from  shore  in  great  wonder.  In  the  afternoon  I 
went  ashore  at  the  village  of  "  Charley,"  a  quarrelsome  fellow, 
who  had  become  known  to  white  traders  some  years  before  by 
seizing  and  imprisoning  a  whole  canoe-load  of  negroes  who  had 
been  sent  up  on  a  trading  expedition.  He  put  them  into  a  very 
uncomfortable  kind  of  stocks  called  ntckogo,  which  consists  of  a 
heavy  billet  of  wood  in  which  the  feet  are  stuck,  and  a  lighter 
biUet  into  which  tiie  hands  are  secured*  Thus  the  man  is  help- 
less both  gainst  men  and  against  musquitoes  and  flies;  and 
here  the  poor  fellows  were  kept  till  the  trader,  who  was  waiting 
in  a  ship,  sent  up  a  ransom  for  them. 

The  two  chiefs  treated  me  very  weU,  and  said  they  felt  friendly 
towards  me,  as  indeed  they  showed  by  killing  in  my  honour  the 
flatted  calf  (it  was  a  goat),  and  sending  besides  some  chickens 
and  plantains.  They  were  much  alarmed  at  the  charmed  pistol 
(one  of  Colt's  revolvers),  which  I  fired  ofl*  to  show  them  how 
many  of  them  I  could  kill  without  stopping;  and  I  owe  my 
safety,  in  fact,  to  Mr.  Colt,  whose  wares  have  a  great  reputation 
wherQver  I  have  been  in  Africa* 


250  BECEPTION  AT  GOUMBI.  Chap.  XV. 

We  slept  all  day,  and  towards  sunset  set  ont  up  river  again. 
I  made  tiie  men  pull  all  night,  giving  them  tobacco  to  keep 
them  awake.  They  smoked,  sang  their  most  exciting  songs, 
and,  whenever  we  passed  a  town,  fired  oflf  guns;  being  deter- 
mined, so  they  said,  to  let  all  the  country  know  that  their  white 
man  was  ascending  the  Eembo. 

About  one  o'clock  the  next  day  (the  29th)  we  came  to  Goumbi, 
the  residence  of  King  Quengueza.  Here  we  were  received  in  a 
most  triumphant  manner.  I  could  not  make  myself  heard  for 
shouts  and  the  firing  of  gims.  The  whole  population  of  Groumbi 
crowded  down  to  the  shore  to  see  me  ;  and  I  was  led  up  in  pro- 
cession to  an  immense  covered  space,  capable  of  holding  at  least  a 
thousand  people,  and  surrounded  by  seats.  These  were  quickly 
filled  up  by  ihe  people,  among  whom  I  presently  found  there 
were  strangers  from  various  parts  of  the  interior,  drawn  thither 
by  the  news  that  I  was  coming  up  to  Groumbi,  and  now  gazing 
at  me,  and  especially  at  my  hair,  with  the  greatest  wonder  in 
their  countenances* 

A  large  high  seat  was  appointed  for  me,  and  another  close  to 
it  was  for  Quenguezm  who  presently  arrived,  and,  with  a  face 
beaming  with  joy,  shook  hands  with  me. 

He  is  an  old,  white-woolled  negro,  very  tall,  spare,  and  of  a 
severe  countenance,  betokening  great  energy  and  courage,  which 
he  has,  and  for  which  he  is  celebrated  aU  over  this  country.  He 
is  a  very  remarkable  man,  for  his  opportunities ;  and  has  more 
natural  intelligence  than  any  other  negro  I  met  in  Africa.  He 
made  haste  to  explain  to  me  that,  as  he  was  in  mourning  for  his 
brother,  who  had  died  two  years  ago,  he  could  not  dress  finely. 
He  had  on  a  finely-knit  black  cap,  and  a  cloth  of  black  also, 
both  of  Ashira  make,  and  really  beautiful ;  no  shirt — ^which 
article  is  not  allowed  to  mourners — and  an  American  ooat  too 
small  for  him. 

When  he  had  done  welcoming  me,  I  called  his  little  son, 
Akoonga,  whom  he  had  sent  me  as  a  hostage,  and  who  had 
been  brought  up  in  my  canoe.  When  he  came  forward,  I  ^d 
to  the  king,  in  a  loud  voice,  that  the  people  might  hear,  "  You 
sent  your  son  to  me  to  keep,  so  that  I  might  feel  safe  to  come  to 
you.  I  am  not  afraid.  I  like  you,  and  can  trust  you*  I  believe  you 
will  treat  me  and  my  men  rightly ;  and  therefore  I  have  brought 
your  little  son  back  to  you.    I  do  not  want  him  for  safety." 


Chap.  XV,  QUBNGUEZA'S  ADDRESS.  251 

At  this  tiiere  was  tremendous  shouting,  and  all  the  people 
seemed  oyerjoyed. 

Then  I  reminded  the  king  of  his  promise  to  let  me  go  into 
the  interior,  and  to  help  ma  The  khig  and  the  people  shouted 
approval  Then  I  said  I  had  come  to  benefit  them.  I  had 
brought  goods,  and  would  buy  their  ebony  and  ivory,  as  much 
as  they  would  get  At  this  announcement  the  shouts  and 
rejoicings  grew  boundless  aud  obstreperous.  I  had  touched — as 
I  expected — ^their  most  sensitive  nerva 

The  king  then  rose  to  reply.  There  was  immediately  &  dead 
«flence— for  Quengueza  is  honoured  by  his  peopla  He  first 
gave  me  a  large  house,  which  he  pointed  out  to  me.  It  had  a 
veranda  with  seats  in  front  Then  he  turned  to  the  people, 
and  said : — 

<<  This  is  my  ntcmgani  (white  man).  He  has  come  from  a  far 
country  to  see  ma  I  went  down  to  beg  him  to  come  up  to  me. 
Now  he  has  coma  Let  no  one  do  any  harm  to  his  peopla 
For  him,  I  need  not  speak.  Give  food  to  his  peopla  Treat 
them  welL  Do  not  steal  anything.  A  lig  palaver  would  come 
on  you." 

Then  he  addressed  himself  to  the  Ashira  and  Bakalai,  who 
were  present,  saying,  "  Beware  I  Do  not  steal  my  white  man, 
for,  if  you  should  make  the  attempt,  I  would  sell  you  alL" 

This  closed  the  ceremonies.  I  was  permitted  to  go  to  my 
house  ;  and  the  people  were  ordered  to  go  down  and  unload  my 
boat,  and  bring  my  things  up  to  the  housa 

Groumbi  is  ninety-five  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  river.  It 
is  the  last  town  of  the  Gamma;  and  is  important  because  it 
commands  the  whole  of  the  upper  river,  so  far  as  the  natives 
are  concerned,  by  an  hereditary  right  The  Abouya  femily, 
who  reside  in  Goumbi,  and  of  whom  Quengueza  is  the  chief, 
claim,  and  are  allowed  to  have,  the  sole  right  of  trading  up 
river.  Sometimes  they  allow  a  few  down-river  Gamma  who  have 
wives  in  Goumbi  to  go  up  and  cut  ebony ;  but  even  this  pri- 
vilege is  sparingly  granted,  and  for  all  intents  and  purposes 
Quengueza  has  a  monopoly  of  aU  the  commerce  with  the  rich 
country  beyond,  and  really  considers  the  people  who  live  above 
him  as  his  vassals. 

It  is  very  singular  that  among  all  these  people  descent  and 
inheritance  are  taken  from  the  mother.     The  son  of  a  Gamma 


252  QUENGUEZA'S  SUPERSTITIONS.  Chap.  XV, 

m6tn  by  a  woman  of  another  tribe  or  nation  is  not  connted  a 
Camma ;  and,  to  narrow  it  down  to  families,  to  be  a  true  Abouya 
(citizen  of  Goumbi),  it  is  necessary  to  be.  bom  of  an  Abouya 
mother.  If  only  the  father  were  Abouya,  the  children  would  be 
considered  half-breeds. 

Up  to  Goumbi  there  is  safe  navigation  for  little  steamers  in 
almost  every  month  of  the  year,  and  with  light-draught  steamers 
at  any  time.  The  river  is  deep  and  narrow,  and  the  banks  steep 
all  the  way  up.  About  fifteen  miles  above  Quayombi  the  current 
becomes  stronger.  Here  the  hills  come  down  to  the  river, 
receding,  however,  above.  The  country  seemed  fertile  and  pro- 
ductive ;  and  the  number  of  villages  we  passed  on  our  way 
argues  well  for  its  fertility. 

On  the  1st  of  March  I  received  a  visit  from  one  Igoumba,  a 
chief  of  the  Ashiras,  an  interior  people.  He  had  fled  from  his 
home  because  he  had  been  accused  of  practising  sorcery.  Also 
several  Bakalai  chiefs  came  to  see  me,  and  asked  me  to  visit 
their  country. 

Quengueza  was  all  this  time  perfectly  happy.  He  danced,  and 
sang,  and  made  jokes,  and  altogether  was  as  jolly  as  though  idl 
his  wishes  and  desires  had  been  gratified  at  once.  He  gave  me 
back  his  little  boy,  Akoonga,  to  stay  with  me ;  and,  as  Makondai 
is  already  my  steward,  the  young  prince  has  been  appointed  to 
wash  my  dishes.  I  gave  Quengueza  his  present  of  fifty  yards  of 
cloth,  a  gun,  a  neptune,  and  some  beads,  &c  He  was  greatly 
pleased,  and  promised  again  that  I  should  go  into  the  interior 
as  far  as  he  had  authority  and  influence.  He  is  an  unusually 
sensible  negro,  and  sees  how  my  explorations  may  be  of  great 
benefit  to  him  so  long  as  he  holds  the  key  of  the  country. 

Nevertheless,  he  is  curiously  superstitious.  For  a  year  he  had 
not  passed  down  a  street  which  leads  most  directly  to  the  water, 
but  had  always  gone  a  roundabout  way.  This  was  because  when 
he  came  to  the  throne  this  street  was  pronounced  to  be  bewitched 
by  an  enemy  of  his ;  and  he  was  persuaded  that  if  he  passed  by 
it  he  would  surely  die.  Several  times  efforts  had  be^ien  made  by 
distinguished  doctors  to  drive  away  the  witch  which  there  lay  in 
wait;  but  the  king,  though  he  believed  in  sorcery,  had  not 
much  faith  in  the  exercisers  or  doctors. 

A  last  attempt  to  drive  off  the  aniemba  or  witch  was  made 
on  the  night  of  March  2nd-3rd.     A  famous  doctor  from  th^ 


Chap.  XV.  EXORCISING  A  WITCH.  253 

far-oflf  Bakalai  country  had  been  brought  down  to  perform  this 
act.  His  name  was  AquaUai.  The  people  gathered  in  great 
numbers  under  the  immense  hangar  or  covered  space  in  which 
I  had  been  received,  and  there  lit  fires,  around  which  they  sat. 
The  space  thus  covered  was  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  long  by 
forty  wide,  and  roofed  with  bamboo  and  leaves.  About  ten 
o'clock,  when  it  was  pitch-dark,  the  doctor  commenced  opera- 
tions by  ainging  some  boasting  songs,  recounting  his  power  over 
witches.  This  was  the  signal  for  all  the  people  to  gather  into 
their  houses  and  about  their  fires  under  the  hmigar.  So  much 
haste  did  they  make,  that  two  women,  failing  to  get  home,  and 
afraid  to  go  farther  through  the  streets,  took  refuge  in  my  house. 

Next  all  the  fires  were  carefully  extinguished,  all  the  lights 
put  out ;  and  in  about  an  hour  more  not  a  light  of  any  kind 
was  in  the  whole  town  except  mine.  I  gave  notice  that  white 
men  were  exempted  from  the  rules  made  in  such  cases,  and  this 
was  allowed.  The  most  pitchy  darkness  and  the  most  complete 
silence  reigned  everywhere^  No  voice  could  be  heard,  even  in 
a  whisper,  among  the  several  thousand  people  gathered  in  the 
gloom. 

At  last  the  curious  silence  was  broken  by  the  doctor,  who, 
standing  in  the  centre  of  the  town,  began  some  loud  babbling 
of  which  I  could  not  make  out  the  meaning.  From  time  to  time 
the  people  answered  him  in  chorus.  This  went  on  for  an  hour, 
and  was  really  one  of  the  strangest  scenes  I  ever  took  part  in.  I 
could  see  nothing  but  the  faces  of  the  two  women  in  my  house, 
who  were  badly  frightened,  poor  things !  as,  in  feet,  all  the  people 
were.  The  hollow  voice  of  the  witch-doctor  resounded  curiously 
through  the  silence ;  and  when  the  answer  of  many  mingled 
voices  came  through  the  darkness,  it  really  assumed  the  air  of  a 
serious,  old-fashioned  incantation  scene. 

At  last,  just  at  midnight,  I  heard  the  doctor  approach.  He 
had  beUs  girded  about  him,  which  he  jingled  as  he  walked. 
He  went  separately  to  every  family  in  the  town,  and  asked  if 
the  witch  which  obstructed  the  king's  highway  belonged  to 
them.  Of  course  all  answered.  No.  Then  he  began  to  run  up 
and  down  the  bewitched  street,  calling  out  loudly  for  the  witch 
to  go  oflEr  Presently  he  came  back  and  announced  that  he 
could  no  longer  see  the  aniemba,  and  that  doubtless  she  had 
gone  never  to  come  back.     At  this  all  the  people  rushed  out 


254  WEALTH  AT  GOUMBT^  Chap.  XV. 

and  shouted,  **  Go  away !  go  away  I  and  never  dome  back  to 
hurt  our  king !" 

Then  iSres  were  lit,  and  we  all  sat  down  to  eal  Thk  done,  all 
the  fires  were  once  more  extinguished,  and  aU  the  people  sang 
wild  songs  until  four  o'clock*    Then  the  fires  were  again  lit 

At  sunrise  the  whole  population  gathered  to  accompany  their 
king  down  the  dreaded  street  to  the  water. 

Quengueza,  I  know,  was  brave  as  a  hunter  and  as  a  warrior. 
He  was  also  intelligent  in  many  things  where  his  people  were 
very  stupid.  But  the  poor  old  king  was  now  horribly  a&aid. 
He  was  assured  that  the  witch  was  gone ;  but  he  evidently  thought 
himself  walking  to  almost  certain  death.  He  would  have  refused 
to  go  if  it  had  been  possible.  He  hesitated,  but  at  last  deter- 
mined to  &ce  his  fate,  and  walked  manfully  down  to  the  river 
and  back  amid  the  plaudits  of  his  loyal  subjects. 

By  the  6th,  matters  began  to  be  put  in  train  for  some  hunting- 
expeditions.  Food  was  scarce  in  town  on  account  of  the  great 
number  of  strangers  present;  but  the  king's  thirty  wiTes-he 
has  only  this  moderate  number— bring  food  for  me  and  my  men 
every  day.  (^engueza  has  given  me  Etia,  his  fevourite  hunter 
and  slave,  for  a  guide  in  the  bush.  This  Etia  is  a  fine-looking 
old  man,  a  native  of  the  far  interior,  whence  the  king  bought  him 
many  years  ago.  He  lives  now  on  a  little  plantation  outside  of 
town,  where  he  has  a  neat  house  and  a  nice  old  wife,  who  always 
treated  me  in  a  kind  motherly  way.  Etia's  business  is  to  supply 
the  royal  larder  with  "  bush-meat ;"  and  he  hunts  almost  every 
week  for  this  purpose. 

Also,  Quengueza  gave  me  Mombon,  his  overseer,  chamberlain, 
steward,  man  of  business,  factotum;  the  man  whose  place  it 
was  to  take  care  of  the  king's  private  affairs,  set  his  slaves  to 
work,  oversee  his  plantations,  and  who  had  the  care  of  the  keys 
of  the  royal  houses.  Mombon  was  to  see  that  I  was  made  com- 
fortable in  town. 

A  man's  wealth  is  reckoned  here,  first  by  the  number  of  slaves 
he  owns,  next  by  the  number  of  wives,  and  then  by  the  number 
of  chests.  Clhests  are  used  to  secure  goods  in.  Therefore  chests 
have  come  to  be  the  synonym  here  for  property  of  this  kind,  as 
banks  indicate  money  with  us.  Now  chests,  to  be  secure,  must 
have  locks,  and  therefore  locks  of  American  make  are  in  great 
demand  aU  over  this  country.    Native  locks  are  not  very  secure. 


Chap.  XV.  A  HUNTING-PARTY.  255 

But  as  locks  secure  chests,  so  keys  are  worn  in  great  numbers  as 
the  outward  symbol  of  ownership  in  locks,  and  chests,  and  pro- 
perty. And  I  found  shams  even  in  Goumbi,  for  several  of  my 
Camma  friends  had  a  great  array  of  chests,  most  of  which  were 
empty ;  and  indeed  it  is  the  mode  to  collect  as  many  boxes  as 
you  can,  no  matter  if  you  have  nothing  to  put  in  them. 

Some  of  their  houses  have  locks  also.  But  to  have  a  lock  you 
must  have  a  door ;  and  though  this  door  is  but  a  very  narrow, 
shabby  affair,  a  whole  great  tree  must  be  whittled  down  with 
their  rude  axes  to  make  the  board  which  shall  answer  for  a 
door.  Therefore  doors  are  a  luxury  in  Goumbi,  as  indeed  also 
<m  the  coast. 

On  Sunday,  the  7th,  I  rested,  and  had  a  talk  with  the  people,' 
trying  to  explain  to  them  something  about  the  one  true  God, 
and  the  absurdity  of  their  superstitions.  They  have  always  one 
answer  to  everything  a  white  man  says  against  their  customs) 
and  this  was  brought  forward  this  day,  as  usuaL  An  old  man 
said,  "  You  are  white,  we  are  black.  The  God  who  made  you 
did  not  make  us.  You  are  one  kind  of  people,  we  are  another. 
You  are  mbuiri  (spirits),  and  do  not  need  aU  the  fetiches  and 
idols  that  we  have.  We  are  poor  people,  and  need  them.  God 
gave  you  the  good  things,  to  us  he  has  not  given  anything." 

It  is  difficult  to  meet  this  point  of  difference  of  race,  which  is 
asserted  in  all  good  faith  by  every  honest  negro  you  meet  in 
Africa.  You  cannot  convince  them  that  they  and  we  are  all 
men  and  brethren.  And  till  you  do  this,  they  remain  strong  in 
their  superstitions. 

On  the  8th  we  started  for  a  two  days'  hunt  Etia  and  Gambo, 
the  latter  a  son  of  Igoumba,  an  Ashira  chie(  and  a  noted  hunter, 
and  a  few  others,  with  myself,  made  up  the  party.  We  set  out 
from  Etia's  house,  where  the  old  fellow  had  skulls  of  elephants, 
hippopotami,  leopards,  and  gorillas  ranged  around  as  trophies 
of  his  prowess.  G^mbo  was  an  ill-looking  fellow,  by  reason  of 
being  much  pitied  with  the  small-pox ;  but  he  had  fiery  eyes, 
good  courage,  and  a  kind  heart,  as  I  discovered. 

I  was  amused  at  a  remark  Quengueza  made,  as  we  started 
from  the  town  together.  "  See,"  said  he,  to  some  people,  "  how 
hunters  love  each  other !  No  matter  if  they  come  from  different 
nations,  and  are  different  people.  See  how  my  white  man  loves 
these  black  hunters  T 


256  HUGE  FEMALE  GORILLA  KILLED.  Chap.  XT. 

We  had  been  going  through  the  woods  about  three  hours, 
when  at  last  we  came  upon  fresh  gorilla-tracks.  Etia  now  set 
out  by  himself,  while  Gambo  and  I  walked  silently  in  another 
direction.  The  gorilla  is  so  difficult  of  approach  that  we  had 
literally  to  creep  through  the  thick  woods  when  in  their  vicinity. 
The  dead  silence  and  the  tediousness  of  the  approach,  together 
with  the  fact  that  the  hunter  cannot  expect  to  see  his  enemy  till 
he  is  close  upon  him,  while  even  then  the  gloom  of  the  forest 
makes  him  but  dimly  visible — all  this  makes  the  hunt  of  this 
animal  most  trying  to  the  nerves.  For  it  is  in  the  hunter's 
mind  that  if  he  misses — if  his  bullet  does  not  speed  to  the  most 
fatal  point,  the  wounded  and  inftiriated  animal  will  make  short 
work  of  his  opponent. 

As  we  crept  silently  along,  suddenly  the  woods  resounded  with 
the  report  of  a  gun.  We  sped  at  once  towards  the  quarter 
whence  the  report  came,  and  there  found  old  Etia  sitting  com- 
placently upon  the  dead  body  of  the  largest  female  gorilla  I 
ever  saw.  He  had  hit  her  fatally  with  his  first  ball.  The  total 
height  of  the  animal  was  4  feet  7  inches ;  length  of  the  hand, 
7J  inches ;  length  of  the  foot  from  the  hair  comprising  the  heel, 
8J  inches ;  round  of  hand  above  the  thumb,  9J  inches ;  ditto, 
under  the  thumb,  9  inches.  Length  of  the  fingers  (hctnds): 
thumbs,  If  inches ;  first  finger,  4  inches ;  second,  4J  inches ; 
third,  3J  inches ;  fourth,  3 J  inches.  Circumference  of  thefmgen 
{hands)  :  thumb,  2  J  inches ;  first  finger,  3  J  inches  ;  second, 
4  inches ;  third,  3  J  inches ;  fourth,  3  inches.  Circumference  of 
the  toes :  thumb,  3J  inches ;  first  finger,  2|  inches ;  second, 
2J  inches;  third,  2 J  inches;  fourth,  If  inches.  This  was  a 
huge  animal  for  a  female,  for  these  are  always  much  smaller 
than  the  males. 

The  next  morning  I  heard  a  great  commotion  on  the  planta- 
tion, and  learned  that  an  old  doctor,  named  Olanga-Condo,  was 
to  drink  the  mboundou.  This  is  an  intoxicating  poison,  which  is 
believed  by  these  people  to  confer  on  the  drinker — if  it  do  not 
kill  him — the  power  of  divination.  It  is  much  used  in  all  this 
part  of  the  country  to  try  persons  accused  of  witchcraft.  A  poor 
fellow  is  supposed  to  have  bewitched  his  neighbour,  or  the  king, 
and  he  is  forced  to  drink  mboundou  to  establish  his  innocence. 
If  the  man  dies  he  is  declared  a  witch.  If  he  survives  he  is 
innocent.     This  ordeal  is  much  dreaded  by  the  negroes,  who 


Chap.  XV.  POISON  ORDEAL.  257 

often  run  away  from  home  and  stay  away  all  their  lives  rather 
than  submit  to  it.  The  doctors  have  the  reputation  of  being 
unharmed  by  the  mboondou ;  and  I  am  bound  to  admit  that 
Olanga  dtrmk  it  without  serious  consequences.  Nerertheless,  it 
h  a  deadly  and  speedy  poison.    I  have  seen  it  adminiatered,  and 


Ubaundw  LniT  (biV  tiH).* 

have  seen  the  poor  drinker  fall  down  dead,  with  Uood  gushing 
firom  his  mouth,  eyes,  and  nose  in  five  minutes  after  taking  the 
dose.  I  was  told  by  a  native  friend  that  sometimes,  when  the 
mboundou-drinker  is  really  hated,  the  dose  is  strengthened 
secretly ;  and  this  was  the  case,  I  suppose,  in  those  instances 
where  I  saw  it  prove  fatal  I  have  also  been  assured  by  negroes 

♦  I  gave  Ui  Pnir.  John  Torrey,  of  New  York,  Bome  of  tho  leaves  and  root  of 
thi«  lematkable  plant  for  chemical  analysis,  aod  insert  hero  the  note  in  which 
he  coiiununicat«s  his  opinion  as  to  its  properties  and  chemical  affinities. 

-  «S.  St  Mitk'g  Ptoce,  Hem  Yoik,  Nor.  »tb,  19U. 

"  Mr  T>EAB  SSiR, — The  leaf  and  root  of  the  mboundou  which  jou  placed  in 
my  hands  for  examination  are  insuiiicient  materials  for  dctennining  with  ctr- 
fainty  the  plant  to  which  they  belong.  From  the  iateiigely  poisonous  quality 
of  the  root,  and  the  symjitoms  which  result  from  its  administration,  there  can 
be  little  doubt  that  the  active  principle  is  a  Vf^to-alkali  belonging  to  the 
Strtfchjiine  group.  Under  a  powerful  gl&ss,  1  have  not  hccn  ahle  to  detect  any 
cryatatline  Kalt  in  the  lark.  The  taste  of  the  infusion  is  extremely  hitler. 
The  ligneotu  portion  of  the  bark  is  much  less  active,  is  very  bard,  and,  from 
the  numerous  annual  rings,  it  must  be  of  very  slow  growth. 

"  The  mboundou  pretty  certainly  belongs  to  a  natural  order  that  contains 
many  fenomous  plants — viz.,  the  Looamiaoeji  ;  and,  from  the  peculi&r 
veining  of  the  leaves,  it  is  probably  a  species  of  Slrychuot  belonging  to  that 
section  of  the  genua  which  includes  S.  nux  vomica. 

"  Yours  inily, 

"  Mr.  Paul  B.  Du  Chaillu."  "  John  Tobbei. 


258  A  MBOUNBOU  PROPHET.  Chap.  XV. 

that  sometimes  the  veins  of  the  person  who  drinks  it  burst 
open. 

This  time  I  overlooked  the  whole  operation.  Several  of  the 
natives  took  the  root  and  scraped  it  into  a  bowl.  To  this  a  pint 
of  water  was  poured.  In  about  a  minute  fermentation  took 
.place  :  the  ebullition  looked  very  much  like  that  of  champagne 
when  poured  into  a  glass.  The  water  then  took  the  reddish 
colour  of  the  cuticle  of  the  mboundou  root  When  the  fermenta^ 
tion  subsided,  Olanga  was  called  by  his  friends.  The  drinker  is 
not  permitted  to  be  present  at  the  preparation  of  the  mboundou, 
but  he  may  send  two  friends  to  see  that  all  is  fair. 

When  Olanga  came  he  emptied  the  bowl  at  a  draught.  In 
about  five  minutes  the  poison  took  efiect  He  began  to  stagger 
about.  His  eyes  became  bloodshot.  His  limbs  twitched  con- 
vulsively. His  speech  grew  thick  ;*  and  other  important  sym- 
ptoms showed  themselves,  which  are  considered  as  a  sign  that 
the  poison  will  not  be  fatal.  The  man's  whole  behaviour  was 
was  that  of  a  drunken  man.  He  began  to  babble  wildly ;  and 
now  it  was  supposed  that  the  inspiration  was  upon  him.  Imme- 
diately they  began  to  ask  him  whether  any  man  was  trying  to 
bewitch  Quengueza.  This  question  was  repeated  several  times. 
At  last  he  said,  "  Yes,  some  one  was  trying  to  bewitch  the  king." 
Then  came  the  query,  "Who?"  But  by  this  time  the  poor 
fellow  was  fortunately  hopelessly  tipsy,  and  incapable  of  reason- 
able speech.  He  babbled  some  unintelligible  jargon,  and  pre- 
sently the  palaver  was  declared  over. 

While  he  was  being  questioned,  about  one  hundred  people  sat 
around  with  sticks  in  their  hands.  These  they  beat  regularly 
upon  the  ground,  and  sung  in  a  monotone, 

"  If  he  is  a  witch,  let  the  mboundou  kill  him. 
If  he  is  not,  let  the  mboundou  go  out." 

The  whole  ceremony  lasted  about  half  an  hour ;  and  when  it 
was  over  the  people  dispersed,  and  Olanga,  who  had  by  that 
time  partially  recovered,  lay  down  to  sleep.  I  was  told  that 
this  old  Olanga  could  drink  the  poison  in  very  considerable 

•  A  frequent  and  involuntary  discharge  of  the  urine  is  the  surest  indication 
that  the  mlx)undou  will  have  no  fatal  eflfect,  as  it  proved  with  Olanga,  other- 
wise it  is  generally  followed  by  death.  The  very  words  employed  by  the 
men  when  any  one  drinks  the  ix)i8on  seem  to  imply  what  are  its  usual  conse- 
quences. 


Chap.  XV.  NEGRO  STORIES  OP  THE  GORILLA.  259 

quantities  and  at  frequent  intervals,  with  no  other  ill  effect  than 
this  intoxication.  This  gave  him,  of  course,  a  great  name  among 
these  superstitious  people. 

When  the  mboundou  ceremony  was  over  we  returned  to 
Goumbi  Next  day  (the  10th)  we  were  to  go  to  a  considerable 
distance,  to  a  spot  where  Etia  gave  me  hopes  we  should  catch  a 
young  gorilla  alive,  perhaps.  This  I  was  most  anxious  of  all  to 
do-  I  would  have  gone  through  any  hardships  and  peril  to  get 
one  large  enough  to  be  kept  alive. 

This  time  we  had  a  large  party :  Etia,  Gambo,  myself,  and 
ten  men,  each  armed  and  laden  with  provisions  for  a  couple  of 
days.  The  men  were  covered  with  fetiches  and  charms.  They 
had  painted  their  faces  red,  and  had  cut  their  hands  —  this 
bleeding  of  the  hands  being  done  for  luck.  The  fellows  were 
very  nearly  naked — ^but  this  is  their  usual  habit. 

As  for  me,  I  had  also  made  extra  preparations.  I  had  black- 
ened my  face  and  hands  with  powdered  charcoal  and  oil,  and 
my  blue  drilling-shirt  and  trousers  and  black  shoes  made  me  as 
dark  as  any  of  them.  My  revolver  hung  at  my  side,  with  am- 
munition-bag and  brandy-flask.  My  rifle  lay  upon  my  shoulder. 
All  this  excited  the  admiration  of  the  crowd  who  assembled  to 
see  us  set  out. 

Quengueza  was  greatly  delighted,  and  exclaimed,  "What 
kind  of  ntangani  (white  man)  is  this  ?  He  fears  nothing ;  he 
cares  for  neither  sun  nor  water ;  he  loves  nothing  but  the  hunt." 

The  old  fellow  charged  the  people  to  take  great  care  of  his 
white  man,  and  to  defend  him  with  their  lives  if  need  be. 

We  travelled  all  day,  and  about  sunset  came  to  a  little  river. 
Here  we  began  at  once  to  make  a  fire  and  leafy  shelters  for  the 
night-  Scarce  was  the  firewood  gathered,  and  we  safely  bestowed 
under  our  shelters,  than  a  storm  came  up,  which  lasted  half  an 
hour.  Then  all  was  clear  once  more.  We  cooked  plantains  and 
smoked  fish.  I  fried  a  piece  of  ham  for  myself;  and,  with 
tobacco,  afterwards,  we  were  as  jolly  as  could  be.  Now  came 
stories  of  gorillas,  to  which  I  always  listened  with  great  interest. 
The  natives  of  the  whole  gorilla  region  have  like  superstitions 
about  these  ferocious  beasts,  though  each  relater  speaks  from 
different  authority. 

"  I  remember,"  said  one,  "  my  father  told  me  he  once  went 
out  to  the  forest)  when  just  in  his  path  he  met  a  great  gorilla. 

s  2 


260  FEMALE  GORILLA  SHOT.  Chap.  XV. 

My  father  had  his  spear  in  his  hands ;  when  the  gorilla  saw  the 
spear  he  began  to  roar. '  Then  my  father  was  terrified  and 
dropped  his  spear.  When  the  gorilla  saw  that  my  father  dropped 
the  spear  he  was  pleased.  He  looked  at  him,  then  left  him  and 
went  into  the  thick  forest.  Then  my  father  was  glad,  and  went 
on  his  way." 

Here  all  shouted  together,  "Yes  I  so  we  must  do  when  we 
meet  the  gorilla.     Drop  the  spear.    That  appeases  him." 

Next  Gambo  spoke :  "  Several  dry  seasons  ago  a  man  sud- 
denly disappeared  from  my  village  after  an  angry  quarreL  Some 
time  after  an  Ashira  of  that  village  was  out  in  the  forest.  He 
met  a  very  large  gorilla.  That  gorilla  was  the  man  who  had 
disappeared.  He  had  turned  into  a  gorilla.  He  jumped  on 
the  poor  Ashira,  and  bit  a  piece  out  of  his  ann.  Then  he  let 
him  go.  Then  the  man  came  back,  with  hisbleeding  arm.  He 
told  me  this.  I  hope  we  shaU  meet  no  suchman-gorillas.  They 
are  very  wicked.    We  would  have  terrible  times." 

Choms.  **  No,  we  shall  not  meet  such  wicked  gorillas." 

Then  one  of  the  men  spoke  up :  "If  we  kill  a  goriUa  to-mor- 
row, I  should  like  to  have  a  piece  of  the  brain  for  my  fetich. 
Nothing  makes  a  man  so  brave  as  to  have  a  fetich  of  gorilla's 
brain.     This  gives  a  man  a  strong  heart." 

Chorus  (of  those  who  remained  awake)  :  "  Yes !  this  gives  a 
man  strong  heart." 

Thus  we  gradually  dropped  ofi*  asleep. 

Next  morning  we  cleaned  and  reloaded  our  guns,  and  started 
off  to  the  hunting-ground.  There  is  a  particular  little  berry 
growing  close  to  the  ground  of  which  the  gorilla  is  very  fond, 
and  where  this  is  found  in  abundance  you  are  sure  to  meet  the 
animal.  We  had  gone  on  about  an  hour  when  we  heard  the 
cry  of  a  young  gorilla  after  its  mother.  Etia  heard  it  firsts  and 
at  once  pointed  out  the  direction  in  which  it  was. 

At  once  we  began  to  walk  with  greater  caution  than  before, 
and  presently  Etia  and  Gambo  crept  ahead,  as  they  were  expert 
with  the  net,  and  also  the  best  woodsmen.  I  unwillingly  re- 
mained behind,  but  dared  not  go  with  them  lest  my  clumsier 
movements  should  betray  our  presence. 

In  about  half  an  hour  we  heard  two  guns  fired.  Buiming  up 
we  found  the  mother-gorilla  shot,  but  her  little  one  had  escaped. 
They  had  not  been  able  to  catch  it 


Chap.  XV.  THE  YOUNG  GORILLA  CAPTURED.  261 

The  poor  mother  lay  there  in  her  gore,  but  the  little  fellow 
was  off  in  the  woods ;  so  we  concealed  ourselves  hard  by  to  wait 
for  its  return.  Presently  it  came  up,  jumped  on  its  mother, 
began  sucking  at  her  breasts  and  fondling  her.  Then  Etia, 
Gambo,  and  I  rushed  upon  it.  Though  evidently  less  than  two 
years  old,  it  proved  very  strong,  and  escaped  from  us.  But  we 
gave  chace,  and  in  a  few  minutes  had  it  fast;  not,  however, 
before  one  of  the  men  had  his  arm  severely  bitten  by  the  wicked 
little  wretch. 

It  proved  to  be  a  young  female.  We  carried  it  back  to  the 
mother,  first  securing  it  with  some  stout  cords  and  sticks.  It 
ran  to  its  dead  mother,  and  in  a  touching  way  buried  its  head 
in  her  bosom,  and  seemed  really  to  feel  grief. 

We  determined  to  go  back  to  the  camp  for  the  day.  The 
mother  was  at  once  skinned,  and  I  took  skin  and  skeleton,  while 
the  men  divided  the  meat  among  them.  The  little  one  was 
then  carried  along,  but  proved  very  troublesome,  making  savage 
attempts  to  bite  all  who  came  near  her. 

The  mother-gorilla  was  4  feet  4  inches  in  height ;  the  little 
one  was  2  feet  1  inch  high.  I  lost  the  skin  of  the  old  one, 
which  was  spoiled  before  I  could  prepare  it. 

ITie  little  one,  unhappily,  lived  but  ten  days  after  capture. 
She  persistently  refused  to  eat  any  cooked  food,  and  anything,  in 
fact,  but  the  nuts  and  berries  which  they  eat  in  the  forest,  and 
which  my  men  were  obliged  to  gather  daily  for  her  use.  She  was 
not  so  ferocious  as  the  male  I  had  before,  but  quite  as  treacherous 
and  quite  as  untameable.  She  permitted  no  one  to  approach  her 
without  making  offensive  demonstrations.  Her  eyes  seemed 
somewhat  milder,  but  had  the  same  gloomy  and  treacherous 
look,  and  she  had  the  same  way  as  my  other  intractable  captive 
of  looking  you  straight  in  the  eyes  when  she  was  meditating  an 
attack.  I  remarked  also  the  same  manoeuvre  practised  by  the 
other  when  she  wished  to  seize  something — say  my  leg,  which, 
by  reason  of  her  chain,  she  could  not  reach  with  her  arm: 
she  looked  me  straight  in  the  face,  then  quick  as  a  flash  threw 
her  body  on  one  leg  and  arm,  and  reached  out  with  the  other 
leg.  Several  times  I  had  narrow  escapes  of  a  grip  from  her 
strong  great-toe.  I  thought  I  saw  sometimes  that  when  she 
looked  at  me  it  was  as  though  she  were  cross-eyed,  but  of  this  I 
could  not  make  certain.     AU  her  motions  were  remarkably 


262  A  WOMAN  PALAVER.  Chap.  XV. 

quick,  and  her  strength,  though  so  small  and  young,  was  extra- 
ordinary. 

While  she  was  alive  no  woman  who  was  enceinte,  nor  the 
husband  of  such  woman,  dared  approach  her  cage.  They  beheve 
finnly  that  should  the  husband  of  a  woman  with  child,  or  the 
woman  herself,  see  a  gorilla,  even  a  dead  one,  she  would  give 
birth  to  a  gorilla,  and  not  to  a  man  child.  This  superstition  1 
have  noticed  among  other  tribes  too,  and  only  in  the  case  of  the 
Gorilla. 

When  we  returned  to  town  I  found  the  king  making  a  tre- 
mendous row  about  the  misconduct  of  a  piece  of  property  he 
had  inherited  from  his  deceased  brother.  I  have  already  ex- 
plained that  in  this  country  the  children  do  not  inherit.  When 
a  man  dies,  his  brothers,  if  he  has  any,  come  into  possession  of 
his  property.  If  there  are  no  brothers,  then  cousins,  uncles, 
and  only  in  the  last  resort  children.  It  should  be  added  that 
property  means  chiefly  slaves  and  wives.  The  house  remains 
to  the  widows  till  the  mourning-time  is  over,  and  is  then  burned 
down.  Plantations  are  not  property,  because  any  man  may 
cultivate  any  piece  of  land,  but  holds  only  during  use.  Guns 
and  such  personal  property  are  all  divided  immediately  after 
death. 

Now  the  piece  of  property  which  had  caused  Quengueza's  ire 
was  the  favourite  wife  of  the  deceased  king.  The  mourning- 
time  was  nearly  over,  and  Quengueza  had  announced  that  the 
royal  widows  should  be  divided  among  his  male  relatives- 
cousins — he  reserving  to  himself  only  one  or  two  of  the  best^ 
looking.  Now  the  royal  fancy  had  been  set  particularly  upon 
this  one  in  question,  and  she,  with  feminine  perverseness,  had 
been  caught  in  an  intrigue  with  a  common — but  very  good- 
looking — fellow  of  the  town.  Quengueza  was  highly  enraged. 
He  swore  he  would  not  take  a  single  one  of  his  brother's  widows. 
He  swore  revenge  on  the  fellow  who  had  so  displaced  him.  The 
people  were  very  much  distressed.  They  came  in  a  body  and 
begged  him  to  ta^e  at  least  two  of  his  brother's  wives.  The 
town  was  agitated  the  whole  day  upon  the  important  question ; 
and  I  was  pleased  to  hear  at  sunset  that  Quengueza  had  at  last 
thought  it  best  to  accede  to  the  wishes  of  his  people.  So  that 
fuss  was  over. 

The  poor  fellow  who  caused  such  a  popular  commotion  sent 


Chaf.  XV.  GRKAT  HEAT.  263 

slaves  to  his  majesty  as  a  peace-offering.  But  his  majesty 
grandly  sent  them  back,  and  with  them  word  that  he  would 
receive  nothing  from  one  who  had  so  injured  him. 

For  several  days  I  hunted  the  woods  near  Goumbi,  shooting 
chiefly  birds.  I  find  the  birds  and  also  the  quadrupeds  of  this 
region  very  much  the  same  as  in  the  Cape  Lopez  interior.  The 
soil  appears  rich,  and  thick  forests  prevail  hereabouts.  Ebony  is 
cut  a  little  farther  up  the  river.  India-rubber  vines  I  have  not 
seen  in  such  plenty  here.  Elephants  are  abundant  some  twenty 
miles  off.  But  ebony  is  likely  to  be  the  chief  produce  of  the 
vicinity  of  Goumbi. 

On  the  18th  of  March  I  asked  Quengueza  to  expedite  me  to 
the  interior.  The  Bakalai  and  Ashira  chiefs  had  both  asked  me 
to  come  to  their  country,  assuring  me  good  hunts  and  kind  treat- 
ment Quengueza  spoke  of  more  presents,  as  a  way  of  enhancing 
his  importance  among  the  neighbouring  tribes.  I  gave  him  some 
things,  and  "  trusted  *'  him  with  200  dollars'  worth  of  goods,  for 
which  he  is  to  give  me  ebony  when  I  return  from  the  interior. 
I  also  trusted  four  of  the  chief  men  of  the  town.  At  this  the 
whole  population  was  extravagantly  delighted,  for  this  gave  them 
all  profitable  employment  at  cutting  ebony. 

At  last,  on  the  22nd,  we  got  off  for  up  the  river.  Quengueza 
and  I  with  my  baggage  were  in  a  large  canoe,  which  had  twenty- 
two  paddlers.  The  Ashira  and  Bakalai  chiefs  followed  in  other 
canoes,  and  to  them  followed  several  Goimibi  canoes.  It  was 
intensely  hot.  Even  the  negroes  suffered ;  and,  though  I  had  a 
thick  umbrella  over  my  head,  and  sat  quite  still,  I  had  frequently 
to  bathe  my  head,  for  I  feared  a  sunstroke. 

The  river  is  narrow  but  quite  deep  above  Goumbi,  and  the 
current  is  much  stronger  than  below.  It  is,  in  fact,  now  a  real 
and  live  river,  flowing  jn  a  deep  channel  between  high  lands  and 
hill&  Here  I  fancy  the  dry  season  does  not  diminish  it  so  much 
but  what  steamers  may  always  safely  navigate. 

Everybody  complained  but  my  little  MakondaL  The  little 
rascal  had  a  pride  in  all  he  endured  in  my  company.  He  is  the 
most  spirited  little  negro  I  ever  saw,  a  real  little  hero ;  and  I 
am  glad  I  took  him  with  me,  though  it  was  hard  for  him  some- 
times. 

The  first  town  we  stopped  at  was  Akaka,  the  first  of  the  Ba^ 
kalai  towns,  about  fifteen  miles  from  Goumbi.  From  here  I 
could  see  the  high  mountains  of  the  far  interior.     They  rose  blue 


264  A  WELCOME  RAINSTORM.  Chap.  XV. 

against  the  sky  to  the  E.N.E. ;  and  I  should  think  the  nearest 
hills  could  not  have  been  more  than  thirty-five  miles  away  on  an 
air-line.  The  high  blue  peaks  were  much  farther  off,  of  course. 
But  these  farthest  peaks  I  hoped  yet  to  reach,  there  to  plant  the 
American  flag  where  no  white  man  had  stood  before. 

A  little  before  we  got  to  Akaka  we  came  to  a  holy  place  on 
the  river  called  Evendja-  Quengauai.  Here  all  hands  got  out  of 
the  canoes  to  dance.  It  is  the  rule  that  all  who  have  not  passed 
up  the  river  before  shall  sing  a  song  of  praise  to  the  god  of  the 
place,  and  pluck  a  branch  from  a  tree  which  must  be  set  in  the 
mud  near  the  shore.  This  is  for  luck.  Poor  Makondai  was 
hurried  off  to  take  his  share  in  the  devotions  before  I  knew  what 
was  going  to  be  done.  I  also  was  invited,  but  told  Quengueza 
that  there  was  but  one  God,  to  whom  I  trusted  all  of  us. 

"  Yes,"  said  he,  "  that  is  good  for  you.  But  we  must  have 
many.     We  are  poor.     We  are  not  like  you  white  men." 

In  the  afternoon  we  lay  by  at  a  plantation,  while  a  terrible 
rainstorm  burst  over  the  country,  cooling  the  air  deliciously. 
These  storms,  which  come  up  at  this  season  nearly  every  day, 
help  one  to  bear  the  dreadful  heat  which,  without  this  relief, 
would  be,  I  believe,  insupportable.  To-day  at  noon  my  thermo- 
meter stood  at  119°  Fahrenheit  in  the  shade  of  my  umbrella. 

When  we  stopped  for  breakfast  next  day,  I  noticed  a  little  way 
from  us  an  extraordinary  tree,  quite  the  largest  in  height  and 
circumference  I  ever  saw  in  Africa.  It  was  a  real  monarch  of 
even  this  great  forest  It  rose  in  one  straight  and  majestic  trunk 
entirely  branchless,  till  the  top  reached  far  above  all  the  sur- 
rounding trees.  There  at  the  top  the  branches  were  spread  out 
somewhat  like  an  umbrella,  but  could  not  give  much  shade, 
being  so  high.  I  found  that  this  tree  was  highly  venerated  by 
the  people,  who  call  it  the  oloumt.  Its  kind  are  not  common 
even  here,  where  its  home  is  said  to  be.  Its  bark  is  said  to  have 
certaiQ  healing  properties,  and  is  also  in  request  from  a  beUef 
that  if  a  man  going  off  on  a  trading  expedition  washes  himself 
first  all  over  in  a  decoction  of  its  juices  in  water,  he  will  be  lucky 
and  shrewd  in  making  bargains.  For  this  reason  great  strips 
were  torn  off  this  tree  to  the  height  of  at  least  twenty  feet. 

In  the  afternoon  we  passed  a  creek  or  bayou,  called  the  Eliva- 
monos — so  called  because  of  the  exceeding  abundance  there  of 
that  delicious  fish  the  mullet.  Bakalai  villages  now  became 
more  frequent ;  and  I  see  that  these  people  are  more  energetic 


Chap.  XV.  GRAND  RECEPTION  BY  OBINDJI.  265 

and  provident  than  the  seashore  tribes.  At  Mpopo  I  saw  thou* 
sands  of  plantain-trees  surrounding  the  village.  Finally  we 
arrived  at  the  village  of  Obindji,  a  chief  who  is  a  great  friend  of 
Quengueza'Sy  and  with  whom  we  shall  make  our  headquarters 
for  a  while. 

The  people  rushed  down  to  the  banks  to  see  me,  none  of  them 
having  ever  seen  a  white  man  before.  They  looked  at  me  with 
great  curiosity,  and  particularly  admired  my  hair,  which  is  always 
an  object  of  curiosity  to  the  Africans. 

We  came  up  firing  guns  and  singing  songs.  When  we  ap- 
proached the  shore  Obindji  came  down  in  great  state,  dressed  in 
his  silk  hat  (the  crown),  a  coat  and  shirt,  and  a  nice  cloth.  He 
was  ringing  his  kendo,  a  bell,  which  is  the  insignia  of  kingship 
here — something  like  a  royal  sceptre. 

I  said,  **  Why  do  you  ring  your  kendo  ?  " 

He  replied,  "Obindji's  heart  is  glad,  and  he  thanks  his 
Mboundji  (fetich)  that  he  has  to-day  come  up  higher  than  he 
ever  stood  before.    A  Mbuiri  (spirit)  has  come  to  see  Obindji." 

When  we  were  landed,  and  the  two  kings  and  I  were  seated  in 
chairs,  the  grand  reception  began.  Quengueza  gave  a  relation 
of  his  entire  intercourse  with  me  from  the  time  he  came  down  to 
see  me  to  the  present  hour.  All  was  said  in  short  sentences ;  and 
the  people  who  listened  gave  frequent  approval.  Then  Obindji 
replied,  giving,  in  like  manner,  a  statement  of  his  feelings  when 
he  heard  that  Quengueza  was  about  to  bring  a  white  man  to  see 
him,  &c  Then  they  clapped  hands ;  Obindji  shook  hands  with 
me  (very  awkwardly) ;  and  then  the  ceremony,  which  had  lasted 
three-quarters  of  an  hour,  was  over. 

The  town  of  Obindji  is,  by  my  reckoning,  about  140  miles  from 
the  mouth  of  the  river.  It  is  a  recent  settlement,  and  not  very 
large.  The  family  is  quite  powerftd;  but  when  their  chief 
wifiiied  to  remove  to  the  river  from  his  inland  settlement,  most 
of  his  people  refused.  These  Bakalai  are  reputed  to  be  very  war- 
like, and  various  circumstances  show  that  they  are  so.  They  are 
much  dreaded  by  other  tribes ;  and  I  find  that  these  others  have 
left  all  the  right  side  of  the  river  to  their  fighting  neighbours. 
Those  who  live  on  the  river-bank,  however,  are  in  some  sort 
bound  to  keep  the  peace ;  for  they  have  no  right  near  the  water 
but  with  the  leave  of  Quengueza,  and  this  they  get  only  on 
promise  of  peaceable  behaviour. 

Their  houses  also  show  their  prominent  trait    They  are  not 


266  .  QUENGUEZA'S  POLITENESS.  Chap.  XV. 

built  of  split  bamboos,  like  those  farther  down  the  river,  but  of 
bark,  which  is  peeled  off  large  trees  in  slips  four  to  five  feet  long 
and  a  foot  wide,  and  securely  lashed  on  the  sides.  This  makes 
them  tight.  The  bamboo  walls  always  have  open  strips,  through 
which  an  enemy  can  see  to  shoot  those  inside.  From  this 
danger  the  bark  waUs  protect  them.  The  houses  here  are  small, 
however,  not  more  than  twelve  feet  long  by  eight  wide.  They 
are  generally  two  rooms  deep,  and  in  the  back  room  the  family 
sleep,  while  in  front  their  goods  are  kept.  In  war-time  they 
change  their  sleeping-places  in  the  house  every  night,  so  that  the 
enemy  may  be  at  a  loss  where  to  fire  when  attacking  from  the 
outside. 

They  have  a  few  guns  among  them ;  but  a  man  who  owns  a 
gun  and  some  powder  is  rich.  They  were  much  astonished  at 
my  percussion-locks,  and  yet  more  at  my  revolver,  which  was  a 
constant  marvel  to  them.  Revolvers  of  simple  constnictioD 
would  bring  almost  any  price  among  these  people  if  they  could 
be  made  with  flint-locks. 

The  town,  and  another  which  lay  just  above,  separated  from 
Obindji's  by  a  narrow  creek,  were  surrounded  with  extensive 
manioc  plantations.  Here  I  notice  again  that  the  Bakalai  raise 
better  crops  than  the  lower  tribes. 

During  the  week  so  many  people  came  from  up  the  river  that 
food  grew  scarce,  and  Quengueza  sent  down  to  Goumbi  for  sup- 
plies for  our  party.  One  very  old  chief  came  down  from  his 
town,  over  a  hundred  miles  farther  up  the  river.  When  he  came 
ashore  Quengueza  and  I  went  to  see  hini  in  his  house,  waiving 
ceremony  on  account  of  his  age.  When  he  saw  me  he  started 
back,  and  was  much  moved.  He  exclaimed,  "  You  are  not  a 
man.  You  are  a  mbuiri"  (spirit).  He  had  come  the  long 
journey,  he  said,  to  see  the  man  who  made  guns  and  powder; 
and  I  saw  clearly  he  wished  to  ask  me,  as  the  Fan  people  did,  to 
sit  down  and  make  him  some  guns. 

I  had  a  laugh  at  Quengueza,  who  endeavours  to  teach  all  his 
neighbours  the  ideas  he  gets  from  me.  In  common  with  many 
of  his  subjects,  the  old  fellow  was  much  troubled  with  fleas,  and 
when,  as  he  stood  talking  with  me,  a  flea  became  too  trouble- 
some, he  used  to  adroitly  catch  him,  and  gravely  crack  him  cm 
his  thumbnail.  This  disgusted  me  so  that  I  remonstrated,  and 
at  last  succeeded  in  reforming  this  one  of  his  abuses.  But  no 
sooner  had  he  given  up  the  disgusting  practice  himself,  tiian  he 


Chap.  XV.  OBINDJl'S  EASY-CHAIH.  2G7 

at  ouce  forbade  it  to  all  his  own  subjects,  and  became  a  most 
zealous  advocate  to  decency  among  our  Bakalai  friends. 

"Why  do  you  crack  your  fleas  before  my  white  man,  eh? 
Dirty  fellow !  Go  away  I  You  make  my  white  man  sick !  "  he 
used  to  cry  out.  And  to-day,  when  we  had  our  interview  with 
the  up-river  chief,  Quengueza  was  equally  zealous — though  more 
polite — with  him.  But  the  old  man  replied,  "  Thus  have  I  done 
all  my  life — it  is  now  too  late ; "  and  gravely  continued  his 
massacre. 

Obiudji's  chair  is  a  remarkable  specimen  of  furniture,  tlie  only 
question  arising  in  my  mind  is  to  know  how  my  friend  Obindji 
finds  comfort  in  such  a  position.  It  is  really  amusing  to  me  to 
look  at  him  while  he  is  seated  on  a  little  stool,  his  back  resting 
on  the  main  part  of  the  arm-chair,  while  his  arms  are  supported 
by  two  of  the  roots.  In  this  attitude  he  seems  to  enjoy  his  pipe 
most  wonderfully,  and  presents  a  perfect  type  of  African  laziness. 
The  easy-chair  is  made  out  of  a  single  root  of  a  tree,  and  gene- 
rally the  possession  of  one  is  attainable  only  by  rieli  men. 


Obli<4Jilnhl>Euy«1uilr. 

As  Obindji  is  to  be  our  headquarters,  we  are  having  houses 
built.  The  men  have  gone  out  into  the  forest  to  collect  bark, 
and  leaves,  and  posts.  Meantime  the  28tli  was  Sunday,  and  I 
requested  Quengneza  to  make  the  men  rest  on  tliis  day,  explain- 
ing to  liim  the  nature  of  our  Sabbath, 

The  old  man  was  puzzled  for  a  moment,  then  said : — 
"  We  are  much  hurried  now.    Suppose  you  put  off  the  Sunday 
for  three  or  four  weeks ;  then  we  can  have  as  many  Sundays  as 
vou  want" 


268  WONDER  OF  MY  VISITORS.  Chap.  XV. 

I  had  a  sb'ght  attack  of  fever,  caiised  doubtless  by  the  great 
heat  we  suffered  from  on  the  river.  Some  of  the  men  had  fever, 
too,  and  also  Quengueza's  brother.  I  gave  them  quinine,  which 
cured  them  and  relieved  me  too. 

Up-river  chiefs  continue  to  come  in  with  their  wives,  slaves, 
and  people — all  anxious  to  see  the  man  who  makes  guns,  beads, 
iron  and  brass  kettles,  &c. ;  and  all  rapt  in  astonishment  at  my 
strange  appearance.  They  seem  really  to  find  a  much  greater 
contrast  between  myself  and  them  than  I  can  see.  Most  of  them 
regard  me  as  a  powerful  spirit,  and  all  admire  Quengueza's  foi^ 
tune,  who  has  the  care  of  me,  and  whose  friend  I  am.  Many  of 
the  chiefs  are  fine-looking  fellows,  weU  armed  with  spears  and 
bows.  They  seem  brave  and  warlike.  Some  of  their  caps  and 
grass-cloth  are  very  finely  made ;  and  I  am  really  anxious,  the 
more  I  see,  to  get  among  the  Ashira,  who  seem  to  be  the  moeft 
ingenious  of  all  these  people.  All  these  visitors  had  heard  of  my 
trusting  Quengueza,  and  now  came  to  beg  goods  from  him,  for 
which  they  would  help  him  to  cut  ebony. 

On  the  30th  my  house  was  done,  and  I  set  up  my  bed  and 
other  household  goods.  I  had  with  me  an  American  clock ;  and 
this  excited  the  constant  wonder  and  awe  of  the  people,  who  could 
not  be  persuaded  but  it  was  a  spirit,  and  a  very  powerful  spirit, 
keeping  watch  over  me.  This  day,  also,  a  Bakalai  chef  who  is 
to  hunt  with  me  brought  me  in  a  female  gorilla  which  he  had 
killed  in  the  woods.  This  female  was  not  quite  full-grown.  It 
measured  three  feet  eleven  inches.  Its  canine  teeth  had  not 
attained  their  full  size.  The  face  was  intensely  blacky  as  were 
also  the  hands  and  feet  The  hair  on  the  crown  was  reddish,  but 
not  so  deep  a  colour  as  in  some  older  females  I  have  seen.  On 
the  body  the  hair  was  a  blackish-red,  and  no  longer  on  the  arms 
than  on  the  rest  of  the  body.  The  breast  was  covered  only  with 
very  light  down. 

The  heat  is  still  excessive.  It  rains  every  night,  and  that 
somewhat  cools  the  air ;  but  in  the  afternoon,  my  thermometer, 
standing  in  a  well-shaded  place,  ranges  from  106°  to  98°.  There 
is  but  little  breeze,  and  the  air  is  oppressively  hot.  On  the  2nd 
of  April  I  saw  another  trial  by  ordeal  performed.  A  little  boy, 
son  to  Aquailai,  the  doctor  who  had  driven  the  witch  from  the 
main  street  of  Goumbi,  reported  that  one  of  Quengueza's  men  had 
damaged  a  Bakalai  canoe.  The  owner  required  to  be  paid  for 
the  injury.     The  Goumbi  man  denied  the  act,  and  asked  for  trial. 


Chap.  XV.  ORDEAL  OF  THE  HOT  RING.  269 

An  Ashira  doctor  was  called  in,  who  said  that  the  only  way  to 
make  the  truth  appear  was  by  the  trial  of  the  ring  boiled  in  oil. 
Hereupon  the  Bakalai  and  the  Goumbi  men  gathered  together, 
and  the  trial  was  at  once  made. 

The  Ashira  doctor  set  three  little  billets  of  bar-wood  in  the 
ground  with  their  ends  together,  then  piled  some  smaller  pieces 
between,  till  all  were  laid  as  high  as  the  three  pieces.  A  native 
pot  half-full  of  palm-oil  was  set  upon  the  wood,  and  the  oil  was 
set  on  fire.  When  it  burned  up  brightly  a  brass  ring  from  the 
doctor's  hand  was  cast  into  the  pot ;  the  doctor  stood  by  with  a 
little  vase  full  of  grass  soaked  in  water,  of  which  he  threw  in  now 
and  then  some  bits.  This  made  the  oil  blaze  up  afresh.  At  last 
all  was  burned  out,  and  now  came  the  triaL  The  accuser,  the 
little  boy,  was  required  to  take  the  ring  out  of  the  pot.  He 
hesitated,  but  was  pushed  on  by  his  &ther.  The  people  cried 
out,  "  Let  us  see  if  he  lied  or  told  truth." 

Finally  he  put  his  hand  in,  seized  the  red-hot  ring,  but  quickly 
dropped  it,  having  severely  burnt  his  fingers.  At  this  there  was 
a  shout,  "  He  lied !  he  lied !"  and  the  Groumbi  man  was  declared 
innocent. 

I  ventured  to  suggest  that  he  also  would  bum  his  fingers  if  he 
touched  the  ring ;  but  nobody  seemed  to  consider  this  view.  I 
judge  that  where  an  accuser  has  to  substantiate  a  charge  in  this 
way  information  is  not  easily  to  be  got. 

On  the  6th,  at  last,  we  set  off  for  a  two  or  three  days'  hunt. 
We  went  up-river  for  about  ten  miles,  and  then  struck  inland  to 
a  deserted  Bakalai  village,  where  we  made  our  camp.  When 
that  was  arranged  we  went  out  to  look  for  gorilla-tracks.  It  was 
too  late  to  hunt ;  but  Querlaouen,  my  chief  hunter,  wanted  to  be 
ready  for  the  morrow.  I  saw  nothing ;  but  Malaouen,  another 
hunter,  came  in  after  dark,  and  said  he  had  heard  the  cry  of  the 
kooloo,  and  knew  where  to  find  it  in  the  morning.  I  myself  on 
returning  to  the  camp  had  heard  this  cry,  but  did  not  know 
what  animal  had  uttered  it 

Of  course  I  asked  what  this  kooloo  was,  and  received  for 
answer  a  circumstantial  description  of  the  animal,  which  threw 
me  into  the  greatest  excitement ;  for  I  saw  that  this  was  most 
certainly  a  new  species  of  ape,  of  which  I  had  not  even  heard  as 
yet.  It  was  called  kooho-kamba,  by  the  Goumbi  people,  from  its 
noise  or  call,  '^  kooloo,"  and  the  Gamma  word  kamba^  which 
means  "speak."    The  Bakalai  call  it  simply  " koola." 


270  THE  KOOLOO-KAMBA.  Chap.  XV. 

I  scarce  slept  all  night  with  fidgeting  over  the  morrow's 
prospects.  The  kooloo  was  said  to  be  very  rare  here,  and  there 
was  a  chance  only  that  we  should  find  that  one  whose  call  had 
been  heard. 

At  last  the  tedious  night  was  gone.  At  the  earliest  streak  of 
dawn  I  had  my  men  up.  We  had  fixed  our  guns  the  night 
before.  All  was  ready,  and  we  set  out  in  two  parties.  My  party 
had  been  walking  through  the  forest  about  an  hour,  when 
suddenly  I  stepped  into  a  file  of  bashikouay  ants,  whose  fierce 
bites  nearly  made  me  scream.  The  little  rascals  were  infiiriated 
at  my  disturbance  of  their  progress,  and  held  on  to  my  legs  and 
to  my  trousers  till  I  picked  them  off.  Of  course  I  jumped 
nimbly  out  of  the  way  of  the  great  army  of  which  they  formed 
part,  but  I  did  not  get  off  without  some  severe  bites. 

We  had  hardly  got  clear  of  the  bashikouays  when  my  ears 
were  saluted  by  the  singular  cry  of  the  ape  I  was  after.  "  Koola- 
kooloo,  koola-kooloo,"  it  said  several  times.  Gambo  and 
Malaouen  alone  were  with  me.  Gambo  and  I  raised  our  eyes, 
and  saWj  high  up  in  a  tree-branch,  a  large  ape.  We  both  fired 
at  once,  and  the  next  moment  the  poor  beast  fell  with  a  heavy 
crash  to  the  ground.  I  rushed  up,  anxious  to  see  if,  indeed,  I 
had  a  new  animal.  I  saw  in  a  moment  that  it  was  neither 
a  nshiego  mbouve,  nor  a  chimpanzee,  nor  a  gorilla.  Again  I 
had  a  happy  day — marked  for  ever  with  red  ink  in  my  calendar. 
.  We  at  once  disembowelled  the  animal,  which  was  a  male.  I 
found  in  its  intestines  only  vegetable  matter  and  remains.  The 
skin  and  skeleton  were  taken  into  camp,  where  I  cured  the  former 
with  arsenic  suflBciently  to  take  it  into  Obindji. 

The  animal  was  a  full-grown  male,  four  feet  three  inches  high. 
It  was  less  powerfiilly  built  than  the  male  gorilla,  but  as  powei^ 
ful  as  either  the  chimpanzee  or  nshiego  mbouve.  When  it  was 
brought  into  Obindji,  all  the  people  and  even  Quengueza,  at  once 
exclaimed, "  That  is  a  kooloo-kamba."  Then  I  asked  them  about 
the  other  apes  I  already  knew ;  but  for  these  they  had  other 
names,  and  did  not  at  all  confound  the  species.  For  all  these 
reasons  I  was  assured  that  my  prize  was  indeed  a  new  animal ; 
a  variety,  at  least,  of  those  before  known. 

The  kooloo-kamba  has  for  distinctive  marks  a  very  round  head ; 
whiskers  running  quite  round  the  face  and  below  the  chin ;  the 
face  is  round ;  the  cheek-bones  prominent ;  the  cheeks  sunken ; 
the  jaws  not  v(^ry  prominent — le«s  so  than  in  any  of  the  apes. 


Chap.  XV.  GOUAMBA.  271 

The  hair  is  black ;  long  on  the  arm,  which  was,  however,  partly 
bare. 

The  chimpanzee  is  not  found  in  the  woods  where  I  shot  this 
kooloo-kamba.  The  gorilla  is  evidently  much  the  more  powerful 
animal  of  the  two.  The  koolpo  is,  however,  the  ape,  of  all  the 
great  apes  now  known,  which  most  nearly  approaches  man  in  the 
structure  of  its  head.  The  capacity  of  the  cranium  is  somewhat 
greater,  in  proportion  to  the  animal's  size,  than  in  either  the 
gorilla  or  the  nshiego  mbouv^.  Of  its  habits  these  people  could 
tell  me  nothing,  except  that  farther  interior  it  was  found  more 
frequently,  and  that  it  was,  like  the  gorilla,  very  shy  and  hard 
of  approach. 

Meat  was  now  becoming  scarce,  and  I  was  glad  to  go  back  to 
town ;  and  happier  yet  when  Querlaouen  overhauled  us  with  a 
wild  pig  as  a  prize,  of  which  the  good  fellow  gave  me  half  The 
negroes  were  feasting  on  the  kooloo-meat,  which  I  could  not 
touch.  So  the  pig  was  welcome  to  me,  as  indeed  it  was  to 
Quengueza,  whom  we  found  almost  crying  with  an  aflFection 
which  is  common  in  Africa,  and  is  called  gouamha — but  for  which 
we,  happily,  have  no  name.  Oouamha  is  the  inordinate  longing 
and  craving  of  exhausted  nature  for  meat  The  vegetable  diet 
here  is  not  of  a  satisfying  nature  at  best.  Just  now  all  provisions 
were  scarce  in  Obindji,  and  even  Quengueza  had  not  tasted  meat 
for  four  days.  He  was  exhausted,  nervous,  and,  though  a  stout 
old  fellow,  really  whimpering.  This  was  gouamha,  of  which  I 
have  suflFered  often  enough  in  these  wilds  to  vouch  that  it  is  a 
real  and  frightful  torture. 

The  rainy  season  is  now  at  its  height.  The  river  is  swollen  ; 
the  water  rushes  down  in  a  yellow  muddy  stream,  and  on  a  level 
with  the  banks.  My  house  is  but  about  four  feet  above  the 
water-level,  and  it  stands  on  high  groxmd.  Below,  at  this  time, 
all  is  overflowed ;  and  on  the  Anengue  Lake  the  crocodiles  have 
probably  retired  to  the  reeds. 

Accusations  of  sorcery  are  really  the  cause  of  very  many 
troubles  and  miseries  among  these  people.  On  the  11th 
Obindji's  younger  brother  was  brought  up  on  a  charge  of  having 
bewitched  to  death  his  elder  brother,  Obindji's  predecessor.  This 
man  had  been  dead  a  year,  and  his  poor  brother  had  already 
drunk  mboundou  three  times  to  establish  his  innocence.  Still 
the  charge  was  pushed.    He  gave  away  some  slaves  for  peace' 


272  NEGRO  DOCTORS  OR  PROPHETS.  Chat.  XV. 

sake.    But  now  his  brother-in-law  demanded  another  trial    I 
interfered  and  procured  his  release,  at  least  while  I  am  here. 

On  the  12th  Quengueza  went  down  to  Groumbi  to  attend  to 
another  case  of  mboundou-drinking.  A  young  girl  is  accused  of 
having  bewitched  some  fellow  who  died,  and  has  now  to  undergo 
the  ordeaL  •  God  help  her !  I  made  the  king  promise  me  she 
should  not  be  killed.     More  I  could  not  do. 

I  meantime  went  off  to  a  neighbouring  town  where  a  friend  of 
mine  had  killed  three  elephants.  These  animals  are  not  very 
plentiful  hereabouts,  but  they  are  not  much  hunted  either.  The 
natives  are  too  idle  to  take  the  trouble,  and  would  rather  suffer 
gouawha  often  than  go  hunt.  Besides  this,  guns  have  become  so 
much  the  use  here  that  they  no  longer  entrap  or  spear  the  huge 
beast,  but  trust  to  their  hunters  for  supplies.  Those  only  have 
guns.  It  is  strange  how  even  here,  where  no  white  man  has 
ever  been,  guns  and  powder,  brass  and  iron  pots,  beads,  &c.,  are 
not  at  all  uncommon.  Of  course  all  such  things  have  an  extra- 
vagant value,  which  is  an  advantage  to  the  trader,  or  would  be, 
could  he  come  up  here. 

I  came  into  the  town  just  when  the  ceremonial  dance  was  about 
to  be  performed  which  precedes  the  division  of  the  meat.  This 
is  a  thankoffering  to  two  spirits,  Mando  and  Olombo,  who  seem  to 
have  an  influence  on  the  hunt.  An  Ashira  doctor  was  leading 
in  the  ceremonies.  I  find  here,  as  I  have  heard  it  said  also  in 
more  civihzed  countries,  that  the  prophet  gains  in  repute  the 
fjEtrther  he  travels  from  home.  In  Goumbi  a  Bakalai  doctor  was 
held  in  high  esteem.  In  Biagano  a  Goumbi  doctor  was  chief 
of  all  the  prophets.  Here,  among  the  Bakalai,  only  an  Ashira 
doctor  was  thought  worthy.     So  it  goes. 

They  had  three  pieces,  cut  from  the  hind-quarters  of  the 
elephants,  boiling  in  large  pots.  Around  these  they  danced, 
while  the  Ashira  doctor  chanted  praises  and  petitions  to  the 
spirits.  A  piece  was  cut  off  and  sent  into  the  woods  to  appease 
the  hunger  of  these  deities  (or  more  likely  of  their  representatives, 
the  leopards),  and  then  the  rest  was  eaten.  Next  came  the 
division  of  the  great  heaps  of  uncooked  meat.  The  town, 
the  town's  friends,  the  hunters,  the  hunters'  friends,  and  their 
friends,  all  came  and  got  shares.  I  received  about  fifty  pounds 
for  myself;  and  though  the  meat  is  unpleasant  to  the  taste, 
tough  to  chew,  and  in  every  way  unpalatable,  as  I  knew  to 


Chap.  XV.  A  DEVIT^BIRD.  273 

my  cost  by  former  sad  experience,  I  was  glad  to  have  it ;  for 
meat  was  scarce,  and  I  had  the  appetite  of  a  hunter. 

The  killing  of  an  elephant  is  an  event  among  the  Bakalai,  not 
only  for  the  meat,  but  because  the  ivory  is  sent  down  to  the 
coast,  and  procures  for  them  the  cloth,  powder,  guns,  trinkets — 
whatever  they  get  of  civilized  people ;  for  they  do  not  yet  cut 
much  ebony  or  bar-wood. 

Hunting  in  the  rear  of  the  village,  on  the  15th,  I  shot  a 
curious  bird,  the  Alethe  castanea — a  new  species.  It  is  said  by 
the  natives  to  have  a  devil  in  it — for  what  reason  I  could  not 
discover ;  probably  for  none.  But  its  habit  makes  it  singular. 
They  fly  in  a  small  flock,  and  follow  industriously  the  bashikouay 
ants  in  their  marches  about  the  coimtry.  The  bird  is  insecti- 
vorous ;  and  when  the  bashikouay  army  routs  before  it  the 
frightened  grasshoppers  and  beetles,  the  bird,  like  a  regular  camp- 
follower,  pounces  on  the  prey  and  carries  it  ofl*.  I  think  it  does 
not  eat  the  bashikouay. 

My  old  enemies  the  snakes  are  quite  abundant  in  these  woods. 
As  we  push  through  the  bush  we  often  see  some  great  anaconda 
hanging  from  a  projecting  bough,  waiting  its  prey.  The  other 
day  I  shot  a  little  bird  which,  in  its  fall,  lodged  among  some 
vines.  I  was  anxious  to  get  it,  and  began  to  climb  up  fiiter  it. 
Just  as  I  was  reaching  out  for  my  bird,  a  snake,  belonging  to  one 
of  the  most  venomous  kinds  found  in  this  part  of  Africa,  stuck 
out  his  head  at  me  from  the  thick  vine  foliage.  I  was  very  much 
startled,  and  dropped  down  to  the  ground  without  loss  of  time. 

Fortimately  I  had  only  to  drop  a  few  feet.  It  was  one  of  the 
narrowest  escapes  I  had  in  Africa — for  there  is  no  cure  for  this 
serpent's  bite,  and  I  could  literally  feel  its  breath  against  my  face 
before  I  saw  it. 

Singularly  few  accidents  happen  from  snake-bites  among  the 
natives.  They  wander  everywhere  barefooted,  and  seem  to  have 
no  dread  till  they  see  a  snake,  when  they  scamper  off  fast  enough 
if  it  is  very  venomous.  The  python  they  kill  because  they 
like  its  meat,  which,  they  say,  makes  a  delicious  soup.  I  have 
never  tasted  it. 

When,  as  here,  I  am  hunting  regularly,  I  get  up  at  five  in  the 
morning.  Monguilomba  then  makes  me  a  strong  cup  of  coffee, 
which  is  served  by  Makondai.  This  drunk,  daylight  shows 
itself;  I  start  for  the  bush  and  hunt  until  ten,  which  is  my 

T 


274  A  DAY'S  WORK.  Chap  XV. 

breakfast-hour.  After  breakfast  I  stuff  the  birds  shot  in  the 
morning,  and  rest  till  three.  Then  out  again  into  the  bush  till 
six,  which  is  sunset  and  dark  here,  when  I  get  back  and  find 
my  dinner  ready,  with  Makondai  to  wait  on  me.  After  dinner 
bird-stufiBng  goes  on  again,  till  all  the  prizes  of  the  day  are 
secure.  That  done,  I  go  among  the  people  and  hear  them  talk 
until  it  is  time  to  go  to  sleep. 

This  is  the  average  day.  Of  course,  when  we  go  out  on  great 
hunts,  all  orderly  arrangements  are  broken  up  ;  and  I  have  often 
to  sit  up  half  or  all  the  night  to  prepare  my  prizes,  which  wiU  not 
keep  till  next  day  in  this  hot  climate. 


Chap.  XVI.  VENOMOUS  PLIES.  275 


CHAPTER  XVL 

Venoinons  Flies — Gorilla  —  Cutting  Ebony  —  The  Ebony-tree  —  Ano^ibii^s 
Town  —  Saperstitions  —  Severe  Sickness  —  Kindness  of  the  native  Women 
to  me  —  Child  murdered  for  Sorcery  —  New  Cure  for  Sterility  —  Ivory- 
eaters —  Manioc  —  Capture  a  young  Nshiego  Mhouve  —  Its  grief  for  its 
Mother  —  Biography  of  Nshiego  Tommy  —  Easily  tamed  —  His  Tricks  — 
Habits  —  Love  for  Wine  and  Scotch  Ale  —  His  Death  —  Curious  Colour 

—  Famine  —  Njani  Oil  —  Gorilla  —  Evidence  of  their  vast  Strength  — 
Guaniony  —  Return  to  Obindji's  —  Letters  and  Papers  from  Home  —  Asto- 
nishment of  the  Negroes  at  my  Heading  —  The  Ofoubou  River —  Starvation 

—  Njalie  Coody  —  The  Njambai  Festival  —  Woman's  Rights  among  the 
Bakalai  —  A  midnight  Festival  —  A  Mystery  —  An  Attempt  at  Blackmail 
— Nature  of  the  Njambai,  or  Guardian  Spirit  —  Hunter  killed  by  Gorilla — 
Native  Superstitions  —  The  Dry  Season  —  Gouamba — The  Eloway  Fly  — 
Huge  Serpents  —  Enormous  Gorilla  killed  —  Curious  Superstition  about 
the  Gorilla  and  a  pregnant  Woman  —  Animals  peculiar  to  this  Region  — 
Generosity  of  the  Blacks  —  The  Superstition  of  Roondah — Return. 

On  Tuesday,  the  20th  of  April,  we  set  out  for  one  of  our  great 
hunts,  going  up  the  river  a  short  distance  and  then  striking  into 
the  forests.  We  found  many  open  spots  in  these  woods,  where 
the  soil  was  sandy,  and  the  grass  was  not  very  luxuriant, 
growing  not  more  than  two  feet  high.  The  sun  is  very  oppressive 
in  these  clear  spots. 

We  were  troubled,  too,  on  the  prairie  by  two  very  savage  flies, 
called  by  the  negroes  the  hoco  and  the  nchauncu  These  insects 
attached  us  with  a  terrible  persistency  which  left  us  no  peace. 
They  were  very  quiet  bloodsuckers,  and  I  never  knew  of  their 
attacks  till  I  felt  the  itch  which  follows  the  bite  when  the  fly  has 
left  it     This  is  again  followed  by  a  little  painful  swelling. 

The  next  day  we  were  out  after  gorillas,  which  we  knew  were 
to  be  found  hereabouts  by  the  presence  of  a  pulpy  pear-shaped 
fruit  growing  close  to  the  ground,  the  tondo,  of  which  this 
animal  is  very  fond.  I  also  am  very  fond  of  the  subdued  and 
grateful  acid  of  this  fruit,  which  the  negroes  eat  as  well  as  the 
gorilla.  It  is  curious  that  that  which  grows  in  the  sandy  soil 
of  the  prairie  is  not  fit  to  eat. 

We  found  everywhere  gorilla-marks,  and  so  recent  that  we 

T  2 


276  MEETING  A  GORILLA.  Chap.XVT. 

began  to  think  the  animals  must  be  avoiding  us.  This  was  the 
case,  I  think,  though  I  am  not  sure.  At  any  rate  we  beat  the 
bush  for  two  hours  before,  at  last,  we  found  the  game.  Suddenly 
an  immense  gorilla  advanced  out  of  the  wood  straight  towards 
us,  and  gave  vent  as  he  came  up  to  a  terrible  howl  of  rage — as 
much  as  to  say,  "  I  am  tired  of  being  pursued,  and  will  face  ycra." 

It  was  a  lone  male — the  kind  who  are  always  most  ferodons; 
and  this  fellow  made  the  woods  ring  with  his  roar,  which  is  really 
an  awful  sound,  resembling  very  much  the  rolling  and  muttering 
of  distant  thunder. 

He  was  about  twenty  yards  oflF  when  we  first  saw  him.  We  at 
once  gathered  together,  and  I  was  about  to  take  aim  and  bring 
him  down  where  he  stood,  when  Malaouen  stopped  me,  saying, 
in  a  whisper,  "  Not  time  yet" 

We  stood  therefore  in  silence,  gims  in  hand.  The  gorilla 
looked  at  us  for  a  minute  or  so  out  of  his  evil  gray  eyes,  then  beat 
his  breast  with  his  gigantic  arms,  gave  another  howl  of  defiance, 
and  advanced  upon  us. 

Again  he  stopped,  now  not  more  than  fifteen  yards  away. 
Still  Malaouen  said,  "  Not  yet" 

Then  again  an  advance  upon  us.  Now  he  was  not  twelve 
yards  oflF.  I  could  see  plainly  the  ferocious  face  of  the  mon- 
strous ape.  It  was  working  with  rage ;  his  huge  teeth  were 
ground  against  each  other  so  that  we  could  hear  the  sound ;  the 
skin  of  the  forehead  was  moved  rapidly  back  and  forth,  and  gave 
a  truly  devilish  expression  to  the  hideous  face :  once  more  he 
gave  out  a  roar  which  seemed  to  shake  the  woods  like  thunder, 
and,  looking  us  in  the  eyes  and  beating  his  breast,  advanced 
again.  This  time  he  came  within  eight  yards  of  us  before  be 
stopped.  My  breath  was  coming  short  with  excitement  as  I 
watched  the  huge  beast.  Malaouen  said  only  "  Steady  1"  as  be 
came  up. 

When  he  stopped,  Malaouen  said,  "  Now."  And  before  be 
could  utter  the  roar  for  which  he  was  opening  his  mouth,  three 
musket-balls  were  in  his  body.  He  fell  dead  almost  vdthout  a 
struggle. 

"  Don't  fire  too  soon.  If  you  do  not  kill  him  he  will  kill  you," 
said  Malaouen  to  me — a  piece  of  advice  which  I  found  afterwards 
was  too  literally  true. 

It  >vas  a  huge  old  beast  indeed.     Its  height  was  5  feet  6 


Chap.  XVI.  THE  EBONY-TREE.  277 

inches.  Its  arnis  had  a  spread  of  7  feet  2  inches.  Its  huge 
brawny  chest  measured  50  inches  around.  The  big  toe  or  thumb 
of  its  foot  measured  5  J  inches  in  circumference.  Its  arm  seemed 
only  immense  bunches  of  muscle,  and  its  legs  and  claw-like  feet 
were  so  well  fitted  for  grabbing  and  holding,  that  I  could  see 
how  easy  it  was  for  the  negroes  to  believe  that  this  animal  con- 
ceals itself  in  trees,  and  puUs  up  with  its  foot  any  living  thing — 
leopard,  ox,  or  man — ^that  passes  beneath.  There  is  no  doubt 
the  gorilla  can  do  this,  but  that  he  does  it  I  do  not  believe.  They 
are  ferocious,  mischievous,  but  not  carnivorous. 

The  face  of  this  gorilla  was  intensely  black.  The  vast  chest, 
which  proved  his  great  power,  was  bare,  and  covered  with  a 
parchment-h'ke  skin.  Its  body  was  covered  with  gray  hair. 
Though  there  are  suflScient  points  of  diversity  between  this 
animal  and  man,  I  never  kill  one  without  having  a  sickening 
realization  of  the  horrid  human  likeness  of  the  beast.  This  was 
particularly  the  case  to-day,  when  the  animal  approached  us  in 
its  fierce  way,  walking  on  its  hind  legs,  and  facing  us  as  few 
animals  dare  face  man. 

On  the  27th  of  April  Quengueza  and  I,  with  about  twenty 
slaves  and  some  himters,  started  up  river  for  the  ebony  country, 
where  the  king  wished  to  cut  wood,  while  I  should  hunt  All 
the  forests  up  here  are  full  of  precious  woods.  Ebony  is  found 
in  greatest  plenty  at  the  top  of  the  hills  which  line,  at  some 
distance,  the  river-course.  Bar-wood  is  found  everywhere,  and 
in  great  abundance.  The  natives  have  not  yet  cut  much  of  it, 
and  there  is  enough  here  for  a  brisk  trade  for  years.  The 
India-rubber  vine  is  found  on  all  hands ;  and  when  a  regular 
trade  is  once  established,  this  will  be  one  of  the  great  staples  of 
the  river.  There  are  also  many  other  varieties  of  hard  woods, 
some  pink,  some  chesnut,  some  yellow  in  colour,  and  all  suscep- 
tible of  a  high  polish,  many  of  which  would,  no  doubt,  have  a 
commercial  value  were  this  region  opened  to  white  trade. 

As  we  were  to  stay  a  month,  the  king  took  some  of  his  wives 
"with  him.  We  pulled  up  the  river  against  the  strong  current  as 
before;  and  I  learned  that  the  country  where  we  killed  the 
gorilla  is  called  Kanga-Niare. 

The  ebony-tree  is  not  found  on  low  ground,  or  near  the  river. 
It  is  met  with  all  along  the  ridges  and  hills  which  run  here 
north  and  south.    It  is  one  of  the  finest  and  most  graceful  trees 


278  THE  EBONY  OF  COMMERCE.  Chap.  XVI. 

of  the  African  forest.  Its  leaves  are  long,  sharp-pointed,  dark 
greeo,  and  hang  in  clusters,  producing  a  gratelul  shade.  Its 
bark  is  smootli,  and  of  a  dark^reen.  The  trunk  rises  stzai^t 
and  clean  to  a  considerable  height — often  fifty  or  sixty  feet ; 
then  large  heavy  branches  are  sent  out  I  have  seen  one  of  Uiese 
trees  which  had  a  diameter  of  five  feet  at  the  base.  The  rDatar« 
ebony-tree  is  always  found  hollow,  and  even  its  branches  are 
hollow.  Next  the  bark  is  a  white  "sap-wood,"  which  is  not 
valuable.  This,  In  an  average  tree,  is  three  or  four  inches  tJiick, 
and  next  to  tliia  lies  the  ebony  of  commerce.  The  young  trees 
are  white  or  sappy  to  the  centre  ;  and  even  when  tfaey  attain  a 
diameter  of  nearly  two  feet  the  black  part  is  streaked  with  white. 
Trees  less  than  three  feet  in  diameter  are  not  cut  dovm. 


Ebony  Lmt«  :  Muk  and  Feinilo  (Tnlf  ibe  unm]  iln). 

ITie  ebony-tree  is  found  intei-mixed  with  othera  in  the  forest 
Generally  three  or  four  trees  stand  together,  and  none  otben 
within  a  little  distance.  Thus  the  cutters  move  through  the 
woods  constantly  seeking  trees. 

We  were  bound  to  the  town  of  a  chief  named  Anguilai,  whom 
I  had  met  at  Obindji's  town.  The  place  was  called  N'calai- 
Boumba,  and  was  a  considerable  town,  though  very  lately  built 
We  were  nearly  all  day  on  our  journey.  On  the  way  we  paased 
several  villages,  the  largest  of  which,  Npopo,  I  afterwards  visited. 
The  river-banks  all  the  way  up  are  densely  wooded,  but  very 
sparsely  inhabited  by  the  animal  creation.  We  saw  but  one 
monkey  and  a  few  birds  the  whole  day. 

Two  hours  before  reaching  this  point  we  had  been  dreoofaed 


% 


Chap.  XVI.  AN  ATTACK  OF  FEVER.  279 

« 

by  a  severe  rain-storm.  Great,  therefore,  was  our  surprise,  when, 
having  climbed  over  the  trees  which  had  been  cut  down  in  front 
of  the  town,  and  which  lay  there  a  very  formidable  barrier  to  any 
one's  approach,  we  found  the  street  dry ;  and  the  people  were  as 
much  surprised  at  seeing  us  wet  We  had  happened  only  to 
encounter  a  passmg  ram-eloud. 

Anguilai's  town  is  the  hottest  place  I  saw  in  Africa.  Most  of 
the  negroes  have  wit  enough  to  build  on  top  of  some  hiil,  where 
they  get  a  breeze.  But  this  town  was  set  in  a  hollow,  and  the 
houses  were  so  small  and  close  as  to  be  quite  unendurable  to 
me.  All  these  Rembo  Bakalai  are  but  lately  from  the  interior. 
They  have  been  induced  to  move  to  the  river  by  Quengueza,  who 
makes  them  useful  to  him,  and  they  are  not  yet  at  home  there. 
^'calai-Boumba  was  not  yet  a  year  old.  The  people  were  still 
awkward  canoe-men ;  and  in  other  matters  were  evidently  not  at 
home  in  the  country. 

On  the  29th  I  went  down  to  a  little  village  called  Npopo,  and 
found  the  people  all  gone  into  the  bush.  Everything  was  open 
and  exposed  to  thieves ;  chickens  and  goats  were  walking  about, 
and  I  wondered  to  see  such  carelessness  in  the  village.  But  in 
the  centre,  looking  down  on  everything,  stood  the  mbuiti,  or  god 
of  Npopo,  a  copper-eyed  divinity,  who,  I  was  informed,  safely 
guarded  everything.  It  seemed  absurd ;  but  I  was  assured  that 
no  one  dared  steal,  and  no  one  did  steal,  with  the  eyes  of  this 
mbuiti  upon  him. 

This  uncommonly  useful  divinity  was  a  rudely-shaped  piece 
of  ebony  about  two  feet  high,  with  a  man's  face,  the  nose  and 
eyes  of  copper,  and  the  body  covered  with  grass. 

On  the  la«t  of  April  I  was  brought  down  to  my  bed  with  fever. 
In  three  days  I  took  150  grains  of  quinine  and  two  heavy  doses 
of  calomel.  This  was  the  severest  attack  I  had  yet  had  in 
Africa.  I  suflTered  veiy  much  from  the  heat  in  the  little  houses, 
and  was  glad  when  Quengueza  had  his  shades  built  on  the  ebony- 
ground  and  we  moved  thither. 

While  I  lay  sick  the  people  came  and  entreated  me  not  to 
hunt  so  much  and  so  constantly.  They  said,  "  Look  at  us ;  we 
hunt  one  day  and  rest  two.  When  we  hunt  three  days  we  rest 
a  week  after  it.  But  you  go  out  every  day ! "  I  think  they  are 
rights  and  shall  follow  their  rule. 

I  shall  never  forget  the  kindness  of  the  women  to  me  while  I 


# 


280  MURDER  OF  A  BOY.  Chap.  XVI. 

was  sick.  Poor  souls!  they  are  sadly  abused  by  their  task- 
masters ;  are  the  merest  slaves,  have  to  do  all  the  drudgery,  and 
take  blows  and  ill-usage  besides ;  and  yet  at  the  sight  of  suffering 
their  hearts  soften  just  as  in  our  own  more  civilized  lands ;  and 
here,  as  there,  no  sooner  did  sickness  come  than  these  kind  people 
came  to  nurse  and  take  care  of  me.  They  tried  to  cook  nice 
food  for  me ;  they  sat  by  me  to  fan  me ;  they  brought  more 
mats  for  my  bed ;  ■  brought  me  water ;  got  me  refreshing  fruits 
from  the  woods ;  and  at  night,  when  I  waked  up  from  a  feverish 
dream,  I  used*  to  hear  their  voices  as  they  sat  around  in  the 
darkness,  and  pitied  me  and  devised  ways  for  my  cure.  They 
thought  some  aniemba  (devil)  had  entered  my  body,  and  could 
not  be  persuaded  that  I  was  not  bewitched. 

Poor  Anguilai  was  sadly  alarmed  at  my  illness.  He  accused 
his  people  of  wickedly  bewitching  me ;  and  one  still  night 
walked  up  and  down  the  village,  threatening,  in  a  loud  voice,  to 
kill  the  sorcerers  if  he  could  only  find  them. 

On  the  5th  of  May  I  was  able  to  walk  again  a  little,  and  went 
to  see  an  ebony-tree  which  had  been  cut  down  not  far  from  the 
town.  It  was  a  magnificent  tree,  four  feet  and  over  in  diameter 
at  the  base,  and  furnished  eleven  splendid  billets,  weighing  1500 
pounds.  I  took  particular  pains  with  these,  and  they  went  to 
America  afterwards  in  fine  condition,  and  are  of  a  size  that  large 
wide  boards  could  be  sawn  from  them. 

To  cut  down  such  a  tree  is  no  small  undertaking  for  these 
negroes  with  their  slight,  rude  axes.  They  cut  only  on  one  side. 
Several  get  to  work. together,  and  many  hours  of  steady  labour 
pass  ere  the  tree  at  last  falls.  To  get  my  logs  down  to  the 
river  I  had  to  call  in  the  help  of  the  Bakalai,  and  we  cut  a  road 
down  to  the  shore,  along  which  the  logs  were  drawn.  Some 
weighed  nearly  three  hundred  pounds,  and  were  by  far  the 
largest  ever  taken  from  here. 

On  the  6th  one  of  those  barbarous  scenes  occurred  in  the 
village,  which  show  how  even  these  kind-hearted  negroes  are 
wrought  to  horrid  cruelties  by  their  devilish  superstitions.  A 
little  boy  of  ten  years  had  been  accused  of  sorcery.  On  being 
examined,  he  confessed  that  he  had  "  made  a  witch.^'  Hereupon 
the  whole  town  seemed  to  be  seized  of  the  deviL  They  took 
spears  and  knives,  and  actually  cut  the  poor  little  fellow  to 
pieces.     I   had   been   walking  out,   and   returned  just  as  the 


% 


Chap.  XVI.  NEW  CURE  FOR  STERILITY.  281 

dreadful  scene  was  over.  I  doubt  if  I  could  have  saved  his  life 
had  I  been  on  the  spot.  As  it  was,  I  could  not  even  make 
the  wretched  men  feel  shame  at  their  bloody  act  They  were 
still  frantic  with  rage,  and  were  not  quiet  for  some  hours  after. 

The  next  day  (7th)  I  witnessed  another  curious  scene  of  super- 
stition. One  of  the  king's  wives  stood  up  in.the  open  street  and 
had  herself  cut  on  the  back  of  her  hands  with  knives.  She  bled 
very  freely,  and  seemed  to  be  very  glad  in  her  heart  at  the  pain 
inflicted  on  her.  I  asked  what  was  the  reason  for  such  conduct ; 
and  she  explained,  with  a  smiling  face,  that  she  was  weakly  and 
barren,  and  that  now  she  would  be  strong  and  have  children.  It 
seems  to  be  their  method  of  letting  blood. 

At  last,  on  the  8th,  we  started  for  the  ebony-woods.  Our  new 
location  was  about  nine  miles  from  the  river,  on  the  side  of  a 
long  hill,  and  close  by  where  a  cool  sparkling  rivulet  leaped  from 
rock  to  rock  down  into  the  plain,  making  most  pleasant  music 
for  me  as  I  lay,  weak  and  sick,  in  camp.  Five  huge  ebony-trees 
lifted  their  crowned  heads  together  in  a  little  knot  just  above  us. 
All  around  were  pleasant  and  shady  woods.  It  was  a  very  plea- 
sant camp,  but  proved  to  have  one  drawback:  we  nearly  starved 
to  death.  I  sent  out  the  hunters  immediately  on  our  arrival 
They  were  gone  two  days,  but  brought  back  nothing.  Game  is 
scarce  here,  and  without  an  ashinga  or  net,  such  as  the  Gaboon 
Bakalai  and  other  tribes  have,  not  much  is  to  be  got.  On  the 
11th  we  began  to  suffer  from  gouamba,  and  got  no  meat  So  I 
went  out  myself  and  shot  several  birds — two  new :  the  Cama- 
roptera  caniceps  and  the  Oeocichla  compsonota — and  a  very 
remarkable  animal  of  the  squirrel  kind,  called  by  the  natives 
the  mbocOf  which  eats  ivory.  I  have  called  it  the  "ivory-eater, 
Sciurm  eborivorua,^^  as  the  fact  that  it  hunts  in  the  woods  the 
carcasses  of  elephants  and  gnaws  the  ivory,  often  destroying  the 
finest  tusks,  cannot  be  disputed.  A  number  of  these  bitten 
tusks  reach  the  European  market  All  the  negroes  of  different 
tribes  tell  this  story  about  it  It  has  very  sharp  and  large  cutters, 
well  adapted  to  its  business. 

The  birds  and  the  ivory-eater  I  ate,  preserving  their  skins, 
and  this  relieved  my  gouamba  for  the  time.  On  the  12th  our 
hunters  returned.  They  had  killed  a  gazelle,  but,  being  famished 
themselves,  had  eaten  it.  Their  hands  were  empty,  and  I  was 
Jiearly  in  despair,  for  we  could  not  buy  either  fowl  or  goat ;  and 


282  aOUAMBA.  Chap.  XVl. 

though  the  sister  o!  Anguilai  sent  me  out  daily  plantains  and 
yams,  I  ueeded  meat.  All  the  rest,  poco-  fellows,  were  soaring 
with  me ;  and  they  had  to  live  on  manioc,  which  is  worse  than 
gousmbe  for  me. 


Mboco.  ot  iTrH^-Edlir  (SiAm  ebarhona). 

Manioc  is  the  bread  of  these  people,  and  a  very  poor  kind  of 
bread  it  is.  It  is  a  root,  and  is  poisonous  when  first  dug  from  the 
ground.  It  must,  therefore,  be  laid  to  soak  in  water,  for  friMn 
three  to  live  days,  according  to  the  season.  By  this  time  it  is 
rotted,  or  in  a  fermented  condition,  and  quite  soft,  and  now  it  ie 
ready  for  cooking;  or  if  it  is  for  a  journey,  for  drying  and  smok- 
ing. Thus  prepared  it  will  keep  for  six  weeks  or  two  month& 
But  I  never  could  get  to  like  the  tasteless  sour  stuff,  and  never 
ate  it  when  anytiiing  else  was  to  be  got. 

At  last  I  could  stand  it  no  longer,  and  determined  to  make  np 
a  regular  hnnting-party,  and  stay  out  till  we  got  something  to 
eat.     JSIahiouen  told  me  that  if  we  went  off  about  twentv  miles 


Chap.  XVI.      CAPTURE  OF  A  YOUNG  NSHIEGO  MBOUVfi.        283 

we  should  come  to  a  better  game  comitry;  and  so  we  started  in 
the  direction  he  pointed  out,  where,  ha  thought,  we  should  also 
find  the  gorilla,  or  perhaps  the  nshiego  mbouve. 

The  men  were  covered  with  greegrees  and  fetiches,  and  had 
cut  their  hands  for  luck.  Anguilai  told  me  that  his  ogana  (idol) 
had  told  him  that  to-morrow  the  heart  of  otanga  (the  white  man) 
would  be  glad,  for  we  should  kill  game. 

For  some  hours  after  we  started  we  saw  nothing  but  old  tracks 
of  different  wild  beasts,  and  I  began  to  think  that  Anguilai's  ogcma 
had  been  too  sanguine.  Finally,  towards  twelve  o'clock,  when 
we  were  crossing  a  kind  of  high  table-land,  we  heard  the  cry  of 
a  young  animal,  which  we  all  recognized  to  be  a  nshiego  mbouve. 
Then  all  my  troubles  at  once  went  away  out  of  mind,  and  I  no 
longer  felt  either  sick  or  hungry. 

We  crawled  through  the  bush  as  silently  as  possible,  still  hear- 
ing the  baby-like  cry.  At  last,  coming  out  into  a  little  cleared 
space,  we  saw  something  running  along  the  ground  towards  the 
spot  where  we  stood  concealed.  When  it  came  nearer  we  saw  it 
was  a  female  nshiego  mbouve,  running  on  all-fours,  with  a  young 
one  clinging  to  her  breasts.  She  was  eagerly  eating  some  berries, 
jind  with  one  arm  supported  her  little  one. 

Querlaouen,  who  had  the  fairest  chance,  fired,  and  brought  her 
down.  She  dropped  without  a  struggle.  The  poor  little  one 
cried  "Hew !  hew !  hew ! "  and  clung  to  the  dead  body,  sucking 
the  breasts,  burying  its  head  there  in  its  alarm  at  the  report  of 
the  gun. 

We  hurried  up  in  great  glee  to  secure  our  capture.  I  cannot 
tell  my  surprise  when  I  saw  that  the  nshiego  baby's  face  was  pure 
white — very  white  indeed — ^pallid,  but  as  white  as  a  white  child's. 

I  looked  at  the  mother,  but  found  her  black  as  soot  in  the  face. 
The  little  one  was  about  a  foot  in  height  One  of  the  men  threw 
a  cloth  over  its  head  and  secured  it  till  we  could  make  it  fast 
with  a  rope;  for,  though  it  was  quite  young,  it  could  walk.  The 
old  one  was  of  the  bald-headed  kind,  of  which  I  had  secured  the 
first  known  specimen  some  months  before. 

I  immediately  ordered  a  return  to  the  camp,  which  we  reached 
towards  evening.  The  little  nshiego  had  been  all  this  time  sepa* 
rated  from  its  dead  mother,  and  now,  when  it  was  put  near  her 
body,  a  most  touching  scene  ensued.  The  little  fellow  ran  in- 
stantly to  her,  but,  touching  her  on  the  £Etce  and  breast,  saw  evi- 


284  JOKES  OF  THE  NEGROES.  Chap.  XVI. 

dently  that  some  great  change  had  happened.  For  a  few  minutes 
he  caressed  her,  as  though  trying  to  coax  her  hack  to  life.  Then 
he  seemed  to  lose  all  hope.  His  little  eyes  became  yery  sad, 
and  he  broke  out  in  a  long  plaintive  wail,  "Ooee!  ooee!  ooee!" 
which  made  my  heart  ache  for  him.  He  looked  quite  forbrn, 
and  as  though  he  really  felt  his  forsaken  lot.  The  whole  camp 
was  touched  at  his  sorrows,  and  the  women  were  especially  moved 

All  this  time  I  stood  wonderingly  staring  at  the  white  face  of 
the  creature.  It  was  really  marvellous  and  quite  incomprehensi- 
ble ;  and  a  more  strange  and  weird-looking  animal  I  never  saw. 

While  I  stood  there,  up  came  two  of  my  hunters  and  began  to 
laugh  at  me.  "Look,  Chelly!"  said  they,  calling  me  by  the 
name  I  was  known  by  among  them,  "  look  at  your  friend.  Every 
time  we  kill  gorilla,  you  tell  us,  *  Look  at  your  black  fiiend !' 
Now,  you  see,  look  at  your  white  friend !"  Then  came  a  roar  at 
what  they  thought  a  tremendously  good  joke. 

"  Look !  he  got  straight  hair,  ail  same  as  you.  See  white  face 
of  your  cousin  from  the  bush !  He  is  nearer  to  you  than  gorilla 
is  to  us." 

And  another  roar. 

"  Gorilla  no  got  woolly  hair  like  we.  This  one  straight  hair, 
like  you." 

"  Yes,"  said  I ;  "  but  when  he  gets  old  his  face  is  black ;  and 
do  not  you  see  his  nose  how  flat  it  is,  like  yours  ?  " 

Whereat  there  waa  a  louder  laugh  than  before.  For,  so  loqg 
as  he  can  laugh,  the  negro  cares  little  against  whom  the  joke  goes. 

I  may  as  well  add  here  some  particulars  of  the  little  fdlow 
who  excited  all  this  surprise  and  merriment  He  lived  five 
months,  and  became  as  tame  and  docile  as  a  cat.  I  called  him 
Tommy,  to  which  name  he  soon  began  to  answer. 

In  three  days  after  his  capture  he  was  quite  tame.  He  then 
ate  crackers  out  of  my  hand ;  ate  boiled  rice  and  roasted  plan- 
tain ;  and  drank  the  milk  of  a  goat  Two  weeks  after  his  capture 
he  was  perfectly  tamed,  and  no  longer  required  to  be  tied  up. 
He  ran  about  the  camp,  and,  when  we  went  back  to  Obindji's 
town,  found  his  way  about  the  village  and  into  the  huts  jostae 
though  he  had  been  raised  there. 

He  had  a  great  affection  for  me,  and  used  constantly  to  follow 
me  about  When  I  sat  down,  he  was  not  content  tiU  he  had 
climbed  upon  me  and  hid  his  head  in  my  breast.     He  was  ex- 


Chap.  XVI.         THE  STORY  OF  NSHIEGO  TOMMY.  285 

tremely  fond  of  being  petted  and  fondled,  and  would  sit  by  the 
hour  while  anyone  stroked  his  head  or  back. 

He  soon  began  to  be  a  very  great  thief.  When  the  people  left 
their  huts  he  would  steal  in  and  make  off  with  their  plantains  or 
fish.  He  watched  very  carefully  till  aU  had  left  a  house,  and 
it  was  difficult  to  catch  him  in  the  act.  I  flogged  him  several 
times,  and,  indeed,  brought  him  to  the  conviction  that  it  was 
wrong  to  steal ;  but  he  could  never  resist  the  temptation. 

From  me  he  stole  constantly.  He  soon  found  out  that  my 
hut  was  better  furnished  with  ripe  bananas  and  other  fruit  than 
any  others ;  and  also  he  discovered  that  the  best  time  to  steal 
from  me  was  when  I  was  asleep  in  the  morning.  At  that  time 
he  used  to  crawl  in  on  his  tiptoes,  move  slyly  towards  my  bed, 
look  at  my  closed  eyes,  and,  if  he  saw  no  movement,  with  an  air 
of  great  relief  go  up  and  pluck  several  plantains.  If  I  stirred 
in  the  least  he  was  off  like  a  flash,  and  would  presently  re-enter 
for  another  inspection.  If  my  eyes  were  open  when  he  came  in 
on  such  a  predatory  trip,  he  at  once  came  up  to  me  with  an 
honest  face,  and  climbed  on  and  caressed  me.  But  I  could 
easily  detect  an  occasional  wistful  glance  towards  the  bunch  of 
plantains. 

My  hut  had  no  door,  but  was  closed  with  a  mat,  and  it  was 
very  funny  to  see  Tommy  gently  raising  one  comer  of  this  mat 
to  see  if  I  was  asleep.  Sometimes  I  counterfeited  sleep,  and 
then  stirred  just  as  he  was  in  the  act  of  taking  off  his  prize. 
Then  he  would  drop  everything,  and  make  off  in  the  utmost 
consternation. 

He  kept  the  run  of  meal-times,  and  was  present  at  as  many 
meals  as  possible ;  that  is,  he  would  go  from  my  breakfast  to 
half-a-dozen  others,  and  beg  something  at  each.  But  he  never 
missed  my  breakfast  and  dinner,  knowing  by  experience  that  he 
fared  best  there.  I  had  a  kind  of  rude  table  made,  on  which  my 
meals  were  served  in  the  open  part  of  my  house.  This  was  too 
high  for  Tommy  to  see  the  dishes ;  so  he  used  to  come  in  before 
I  sat  down,  when  all  was  ready,  and  climb  up  on  the  pole  which 
supported  the  root  From  this  perch  he  attentively  surveyed 
every  dish  on  the  table,  and,  having  determined  what  to  have, 
he  would  descend  and  sit  down  at  my  side. 

If  I  did  not  immediately  pay  attention  to  him  he  began  to 
howl,  *^Hew!  hew!  hewl"  louder  and  louder,  till,  for  peace' 


286  TOMMrS  TRICKS.  Chap.  XVI. 

sake,  bis  wants  were  satisfied  Of  course  I  could  not  tell  what 
he  had  chosen  for  dinner  of  my  diflTerent  dishes,  and  would  offer 
him  first  one,  then  another,  till  the  right  one  came.  If  he  re- 
ceived what  he  did  not  want,  he  threw  it  down  on  the  ground 
with  a  little  shriek  of  anger  and  a  stamp  of  his  foot ;  and  tiiis 
was  repeated  till  he  was  served  to  his  liking.  In  short,  he  be- 
haved very  much  like  a  badly-spoiled  child. 

If  I  pleased  him  quickly,  he  thanked  me  by  a  kind  of  gentle 
murmur,  like  "  Hoohoo,"  and  would  hold  out  his  hand  to  shake 
mine.  He  was  very  fond  of  boiled  meat — particularly  boiled 
fish,  and  was  constantly  picking  bones  he  collected  about  the 
town.  He  wanted  always  to  taste  of  my  coffee,  and  when 
Makondai  brought  it,  would  beg  of  me,  in  the  most  serious  man- 
ner, for  some,  and  if  given  without  sugar  he  would  not  drink  it 

I  made  him  a  little  pillow  to  sleep  on,  and  this  he  was  very 
fond  of.  When  he  was  once  accustomed  to  it  he  never  parted 
from  it  more,  but  dragged  it  after  him  wherever  he  went.  If 
by  any  chance  it  was  lost,  the  whole  camp  knew  it  by  his  howls; 
and  sometimes  I  had  to  send  people  to  look  for  it  when  he  had 
mislaid  it  on  some  forest  excursion,  so  that  he  might  stop  his 
noise.  He  slept  on  it  always,  coiled  up  into  a  little  heap,  and 
only  relinquished  it  when  I  gave  him  permission  to  accompany 
me  into  the  woods. 

As  he  became  more  and  more  used  to  our  ways,  he  grew  more 
impatient  of  contradiction,  and  more  fond  of  being  caressed; 
and  whenever  he  was  thwarted  he  howled  in  his  disagreeable 
way.  As  the  dry  season  came  on  it  became  colder,  and  Tommy 
began  to  wish  for  company  when  he  slept,  to  keep  him  warm. 
The  negroes  would  not  have  him  for  a  companion,  for  he  was  for 
them  too  much  like  one  of  themselves.  I  would  not  give  him 
room  near  me.  So  poor  Tommy  was  reduced  to  misery,  as  he 
seemed  to  think.  But  soon  I  found  that  he  waited  till  every- 
body was  fast  asleep  at  night,  and  then  crawled  in  softly  next 
some  of  his  black  friends,  and  slept  there  till  earliest  dawn. 
Then  he  would  up  and  away  undiscovered.  Several  times  he 
was  caught  and  beaten,  but  he  always  tried  it  again. 

He  showed  an  extraordinary  fondness  for  strong  drink.  When- 
ever a  negro  had  palm-wine  Tommy  was  sure  to  know  it  He 
had  a  decided  taste  for  Scotch  ale,  of  which  I  had  a  few  bottles, 
and  even  begged  for  brandy.    Indeed,  his  last  exploit  was  with  a 


Chap.  XVI.  DEATH  OF  TOMMY.  287 

Iwandy-bottle,  which,  on  going  out,  I  had  carelessly  left  on  my 
chest.  The  little  rascal  stole  in,  and  seeing  it,  and  being  unable 
to  get  out  the  cork,  in  some  way  broke  it.  When  I  returned, 
after  some  hours'  absence,  I  found  my  precious  bottle — it  was 
the  last^  and  to  the  traveller  in  this  part  of  Africa  brandy  is  as 
indispensable  as  quinine — broken  in  pieces,  and  Master  Tommy 
coiled  up  on  the  floor  by  the  side  of  the  fragments  in  a  state 
of  maudlin  drunkenness.  When  he  saw  me  he  got  up  and  tried 
to  stagger  up  to  me,  but  bis  legs  tottered,  and  he  fell  down 
several  times.  His  eyes  had  a  glare  of  human  drunkenness ; 
his  arms  were  extended  in  vain  attempts  to  reach  me ;  his  voice 
came  thick ;  in  fact,  he  looked  disgustingly  and  yet  comically 
human.  It  was  the  maudliTi  and  sentimental  stage  of  human 
drunkenness  very  well  represented.  I  gave  him  a  severe  thrash- 
ing, which  served  to  sober  the  little  toper  somewhat ;  but  nothing 
could  cure  him  of  his  love  for  liquor. 

He  had  a  great  deal  of  intelUgence ;  and  if  I  had  had  leisure 
I  think  I  might  have  trained  him  to  some  kind  of  good  be- 
haviour, though  I  despaired  of  his  thieving  disposition.  He  lived 
eo  long,  and  was  growing  so  accustomed  to  civilized  life,  that  I 
began  to  have  great  hopes  of  being  able  to  carry  him  alive  to 
America.  He  delighted  to  eat  with  the  negroes;  while  they 
were  seated  round  the  dish  he  used  to  dip  his  hands  into  it 
at  the  same  time  they  did.  As  the  dry  season  advanced,  and 
the  nights  grew  cooler,  he  became  exceedingly  fond  of  sitting 
near  the  fire  with  the  men  in  the  evening ;  and  Master  Tommy 
seemed  then  to  enjoy  himself  wonderfully,  and  quite  as  much  as 
any  human  being.  From  time  to  time  he  looked  up  into  the  faces 
of  those  round  him,  as  if  to  say,  "  Do  not  drive  me  away  I "  and 
the  very  white  colour  of  his  face  contrasted  singularly  with  the 
black  heads  around  him.  His  eye  was  intelligent,  and  when  left 
to  himself  his  whole  countenance  had  a  look  of  sadness,  some- 
times painful  to  behold.  A[any  times  I  tried  to  penetrate  and 
read  the  inward  thoughts  of  this  wonderful  little  creature,  which 
not  only  excited  my  wonder,  but  that  of  the  natives.  Tommy 
had  a  reputation  quite  as  great  as  mine  throughout  the  country. 
But  alasl  poor  Tommy  I  One  morning  he  refused  his  food, 
seemed  downcast,  and  was  very  anxious  to  be  petted  and  held  in 
the  arms.  I  got  all  kinds  of  forest-berries  for  him,  but  he 
refused  all.     He  did  not  seem  to  suffer,  but  ate  nothing ;  and 


288  STARVATION.  Chap.  XVI. 

next  day,  without  a  struggle,  died.  Poor  fellow!  I  was  very 
sorry,  for  he  had  grown  to  be  quite  a  pet  companion  for  me ; 
and  even  the  negroes,  though  he  had  given  them  great  trouble, 
were  sorry  at  his  death. 

The  mother  of  Thomas  was  an  adult  female,  aged,  to  judge  by 
her  teeth,  which  were  much  worn ;  but  quite  black  in  the  fBLce 
and  hands.  She  was  of  the  bald-headed  variety  of  the  nshiego — 
the  nshiego  mbouv6  of  the  Bakalai.  Eyebrows  thin,  and  finom 
half  to  three-quarters  of  an  inch  long.  Eyelids  thin  and  short. 
Upper  and  lower  lips  and  chin  sparsely  covered  with  short  gray 
hairs.  Neck  hairy.  Thin  hair  on  the  cheeks,  beginning  at  the 
temples  parallel  with  the  upper  part  of  the  ear.  Ears  large. 
The  head  entirely  bald  down  to  a  line  drawn  from  the  middle 
part  of  the  ears  behind ;  this  bald  skin  was  quite  black.  On  the 
back  fine  black  hair.  Bump  partly  bare,  and  where  bare  the 
skin  was  quite  white.  Hair  on  the  chest  grayish-black  and 
thin,  growing  thicker  on  the  abdomen,  and  grayer  on  the  legs. 
Height  3  feet  9  inches.  This  female  diflfered  very  decidedly 
from  the  female  of  the  goriUa  or  chimpanzee. 

Tommy  turned  darker  as  he  grew  older,  and  at  his  death  wsa 
yellow  rather  than  white. 

To  return  now  to  our  camp.  On  the  next  day,  May  15th,  we 
set  out  again,  in  hopes  to  kiU  at  least  a  gazelle.  It  was  already 
late  in  the  afternoon  when  we  saw  our  first  piece  of  game,  a 
beautiful  little  monkey,  called  by  the  negroes  the  ndova.  He 
poked  his  white  nose  out  of  a  bush  and  chattered  at  us,  and 
Malaouen,  without  loss  of  time,  replied  with  a  charge  of  buck* 
shot,  which  tumbled  him  over.  With  this  we  were  obliged  to 
return  to  camp,  having  taken  no  provisions  along.  Gouamba 
was  very  strong  in  me  to-day,  and  I  determined  to  have  soup 
made  of  the  monkey,  and  try  it.  The  animal  was  very  fat ;  and 
as  hunger  stifled  my  disgust,  I  made  a  pretty  good  meaL  I 
shared  with  Quengueza  and  his  wives,  who  did  not  touch  the 
nshiego-meat.  This  made  a  fat  feast  for  the  Bakalai  and  the 
slaves,  who  were  exceedingly  rejoiced.  I  could  not  stomach  it ; 
it  was  too  much  like  cannibalism.  Nor  have  I  ever  but  once 
tasted  the  meat  of  any  of  these  great  apes,  though  necessity 
compelled  me,  after  this,  to  dine  off  monkey. 

My  men  were  now  getting  short  of  every  kind  of  provisionSy 
and  I  was  obliged  to  purchase  for  them  from  the  villages.     The 


Chap.  XVI.  USE  OF  NJAVI  OIL.  289 

chief  articles  brought  were  some  loaves  of  ndicOy  a  kind  of  bread 
made  of  the  seeds  of  the  wild  mango-tree  pounded  and  dried. 
It  does  not  taste  unpleasantly,  but  I  could  not  live  on  it.  There 
was  also  a  dear  yellow  oil,  which,  when  cool,  had  the  colour  and 
consistency  of  scorched  lard,  and  was  called  offali  njavi  (njavi 
oil).  It  is  made,  with  infinite  labour,  from  the  seeds  of  a  certain 
tree  which  is  abundant  here,  and  is  one  of  the  finest  ornaments 
of  these  forests.  They  boil  the  seed,  then  mash  it  on  a  hollowed- 
out  board,  and  then  squeeze  out  the  not  very  abundant  oil  with 
their  hands.  It  makes  a  nice-looking  oil,  which  is  used  to  cook 
meat  in ;  and  thus  prepared,  meat  does  not  taste  badly. 

They  also  mix  the  oil  with  a  kind  of  odoi^iferous  powder  called 
yomboy  and  this  mixture  is  then  applied  in  great  quantities  upon 
their  wool.  They  think  it  gives  out  a  pleasant  fragrance,  but'  in 
reality  it  makes  an  abominable  stench. 

But  another  use  of  the  oil  is  really  sensible.  When  the  men 
have  been  for  some  time  out  in  inclement  weather,  or  are  dusty 
or  parched  with  working  in  the  sun,  their  skin  becomes  dried  up, 
cracked,  and  reddish  in  colour.  Then  they  come  home,  wash 
oflf  clean,  and  oil  themselves  all  over  with  this  soft  oil.  The 
dried-up  skin  becomes  in  a  little  time  smooth,  and  of  a  shiny, 
healthy  black  again.  Palm-oil  is  used  elsewhere  for  this  pur- 
pose ;  but  the  pahn-oil  tree  is  very  scarce  here,  and  the  little 
of  the  oil  they  have  is  brought  from'  the  Ashira  country  to  the 
east,  which  is  now  my  Promised  Land,  towards  which  I  daily  lift 
longing  eyes* 

On  the  16th  I  went  out  by  myself  and. shot  some  birds,  and, 
to  my  great  joy,  a  ncTuymbi,  a  beautiftil  gazelle.  Now  gouamba 
was  put  off  for  some  days.  The  meat  was  carefully  smoked,  and 
the  next  day  Malaouen  retured  to  the  village,  and  Querlaouen 
came  out  to  hunt  with  me.  This  changed  the  luck,  it  seemed, 
for  we  had  hardly  gone  an  hour's  walk  from  camp  when  we  came 
upon  a  herd  of  wild  pigs,  and  bagged  two. 

Unfortunately  my  salt  is  all  used  up.  I  have  been  able  to 
buy  a  little,  but  it  is  a  very  dear  article  here,  as  they  have  to  get 
it  from  the  seashore  natives,  and  the  trade  is  very  irregular. 

On  the  18th,  as  we  were  hunting,  I  heard  in  tiie  fiir  distance 
what  I  at  first  took  to  be  muttering  thunder.  I  hurried  on  to 
reach  some  shelter  in  an  ebony-grove  at  a  distance  before  the 
storm  should  break,  but  presently  perceived  the  noise  to  be 

u 


290  THE  ROAR  OF  THE  GORILLA.  Chap.  XVI. 

caused  by  a  male  gorilla  which  was  roaring  to  its  female  ;  who, 
after  a  while,  could  be  heard  answering  with  a  weaker  roar. 
The  forest  fairly  shook  with  the  tremendous  voice  of  this  ani- 
mal. The  echoes  swelled  and  died  away  from  hill  to  hill,  until 
the  whole  forest  was  full  of  the  din. 

Unluckily  I  had  gone  out  with  my  smallest  gun  loaded  with 
shot  to  shoot  birds.  I  put  in  a  ball  instead  of  the  shot,  and  de- 
termined to  follow  up  the  animals.  By-and-by  I  could  hear 
the  deep  drum-like  sound  which  the  male  gorilla  causes  by 
beating  his  breast  with  his  huge  fists.  The  jungle  was  quite 
thick,  and  our  adyance  slow.  Poor  Makondai  was  in  a  great 
fright  as  we  heard  the  animal,  which  kept  up  its  terrible  roar- 
ing, waiting  at  short  intervals  to  hear  the  replies  of  its  female. 

Presently  I  heard  trees  cracking,  and  saw  through  the  woods 
how  every  few  minutes  a  sapling  was  swung  about  and  th«i 
broken  off.  While  I  was  watching  these  actions  I  suppose  the 
animal  became  aware  of  the  presence  of  danger,  for  presently  a 
dead  silence  followed  on  the  loud  roars;  and  when,  gun  in  hand, 
I  broke  through  the  wood,  my  gorilla  was  gone. 

I  am  sure  that  I  must  have  heard  this  gorilla's  roar  three 
miles  off,  and  the  noise  of  beating  his  breast  at  least  a  mile.  No 
words  can  describe  the  thunderous  noise  which  it  produces,* 

In  examining  the  wood  where  these  gorillas  were  moving 
and  feeding,  I  learned,  for  the  first  time,  the  cause  of  the  great 
wear  there  is  on  the  canine  teeth  of  this  animal,  and  especially 
of  the  male,  which  I  could  not  before  account  for,  and  also  saw 
some  surprising  evidences  of  their  strength.  Several  trees, 
each  of  which  was  trom  four  to  six  inches  in  diameter,  had 
broken  down  by  these  animals;  and  I  found  that  they  had 
bit  into  the  heart  of  these  trees  and  eaten  out  the  pith.  Now 
the  wood  is  hard,  and  by  the  peculiar  form  of  the  gnawing  I  saw 
at  once  that  it  was  by  this  work  that  the  very  singular  abradoD 
of  the  canines  is  caused. 

The  Rembo  is  still  deep  and  rapid  as  far  as  we  ascended, 
and  the  land  becomes  more  mountainous,  the  hills  approaching 
nearer  and  nearer  to  the  banks  of  the  river.  When  we  returned, 
the  town  was  filled  with  joy  at  our  success  on  the  hunt.     Quen- 

•  I  say  three  miles  off,  because  I  was  three-quarters  of  an  hour  before 
coming  near  the  beasts. 


Chap.  XVI.  NEWS  PROM  HOME.  291 

gaeza  made  himself  sick  carousing  on  four  hams  which  I  gave 
him  from  ray  share  of  some  wild  pigs  we  had  shot.  The  old 
fellow  has  brought  all  the  ebony  down — a  heavy  job,  as  the 
pieces  weighed  from  twenty  to  sixty  pounds,  and  had  to  be 
carried  on  men's  shoulders  over  a  very  rough  and  woody  country. 

I  ought  to  mention  that  on  our  way  up  river  the  people 
pointed  out  to  me  a  tree  which  contained  a  nest,  which  they 
said  belonged  to  a  bird  called  the  giuinionian,  an  immense  eagle, 
according  to  their  description,  which  preys  on  monkeys.  I  could 
not  see  the  bird — nor  did  I  ever  see  it — ^though  once  a  bird  was 
pointed  out  to  me  as  this  mysterious  eagle ;  but  it  was  so  high 
in  the  air  that  I  could  not  say  what  it  was,  and,  notwith- 
standing  my  great  endeavour,  I  am  sorry  to  say  I  W6is  imable 
ever  to  get  one. 

On  the  28th  of  May  we  started  down  the  river  for  Obindji's 
town.  I  bade  good-bye  to  all  my  friends,  and  distributed  pre- 
sents among  them,  remembering  particularly  the  women  who 
had  been  so  kind  to  me.  Our  canoes  were  loaded  with  ebony ; 
and  in  the  stem  of  mine  was  perched,  near  my  shoulder,  little 
Tommy,  the  nshiego. 

When  we  got  to  Obindji's,  I  found  a  man  who  had  come  all 
the  way  from  Biagano  with  a  package  of  eight  letters  and  a  file 
of  New  York  papers,  which  had  been  forwarded  to  me  by  my 
friends  the  missionaries  at  the  Gaboon.  I  had  now  been  many 
months  in  utter  ignorance  of  the  doings  of  the  great  civilized 
world ;  and  while  the  letters  from  friends  and  home  were  most 
eagerly  opened  and  read,  the  file  of  papers  lay  before  me  like 
some  great  mystery  about  to  be  revealed — a  mystery  of  no  very 
near  personal  interest  to  me,  but  yet  one  which  I  was  eager  to 
probe  to  such  bottom  as  I  could. get  at.  So  I  sat  down  to  read. 
The  people  were  much  astonished — and  so  was  I  at  many  things 
I  read.  It  Was  a  singular  intermingling  of  two  lives.  In  the 
body  I  was  yet  in  the  rude  town  of  poor  old  Obindji,  fer  enough 
ftt)m  civilization  to  make  civilized  life  seem  improbable.  But 
in  the  spirit  I  was  walking  New  York  streets,  with  a  friend  at 
my  side  reveah'ng  to  me  at  every  step  all  that  had  occurred  in 
these  many  months.  I  am  sure  no  papers  were  ever  more 
thoroughly  read  than  these ;  even  the  advertisements  had  a 
delightful  novelty  to  me.  Happily  the  29th  was  Sunday,  and 
I  took  my  ease  with  my  papers  all  day. 

u  2 


292  GENERAL  SCARCITY  OF  FOOD.  Cha?.  XVT. 

On  the  30th  we  started  with  one  hundred  men  up  the  Ofouboo, 
the  river  which  joins  the  Rembo  just  above  Obindji,  for  a  Bakalai 
town  called  Njali-Coudi6,  the  chief  of  which  was  a  friend  of 
Quengueza's,  who  had  sent  to  promise  me  some  gorilla-hunts  if 
I  would  come  to  see  him. 

The  Ofoubou  is  a  smaller  river  than  the  E^mbo,  but  at  pre- 
sent had  overflowed  its  banks,  and  spread  its  waters  over  the  strip 
of  lowland  which  bordered  it  and  separated  it  from  the  hills. 
Njali-Coudi6  lies  about  ten  miles  from  the  river  among  the  hills. 
After  pulling  up  the  stream  for  about  five  miles,  we  came  to 
the  landing-place,  whence  we  had  to  strike  inland.  Here  we 
found  a  swamp,  having  from  two  to  two  and  a-half  feet  water 
upon  it,  through  which  we  had  to  wade,  over  clayey,  slippery 
ground,  for  nearly  a  mile.  This  mile  lasted  an  hour.  Then  we 
came  to  high  and  dry  ground,  and  travelled  onward  till  at 
three  o'clock  we  reached  the  town,  where  we  were  received  with 
a  hearty  welcome. 

We  had  left  Obindji's  without  a  morsel  of  breakfast  even;  and 
as  I  had  not  broken  my  fast  since  the  previous  evening,  I  was 
not  sorry  when  Mbango,  the  chief,  sent  me  a  goat  and  some 
bunches  of  plantains,  of  which,  when  cooked,  I  made  a  very 
satisfying  meal. 

Obindji's  town  was  nearly  at  the  starvation-point  The  poor 
fellows  had  been  very  generous  to  us  while  they  had  food  to 
give ;  but  now  was  the  time  of  general  scarcity,  when  the  last 
crop  was  eaten  up,  and  the  coming  crop  was  not  yet  ready. 
Tliey  were  actually  living  on  the  poor  roots  they  could  gather  in 
the  woods.  In  Mbango's  town  they  were  a  little  better  off;  but 
even  here,  our  advent  soon  created  a  famine.  The  staples  of 
this  country  are  plantains  and  manioc  New  plantains,  even  if 
plucked  green,  will  soon  ripen  and  rot.  They  do  not  know  how 
to  dry  and  preserve  them.  Manioc  may  be  dried,  and  thns 
made  to  last  two  months  at  farthest ;  but  long  before  that  it  is 
poor  eating.  Of  course,  there  are  periods  every  year  when  these 
perishable  provisions  are  eaten  up,  and  when  even  a  prudent 
town  suffers  for  want  of  food ;  for  fish  are  not  very  plentiful 
here,  and  as  for  game,  they  are  not  very  good  hunters,  and  even 
I  foimd  it  a  poor  game  country.  Often  I  ^vished  for  a  few  ears 
of  Indian  corn  to  establish  a  new  order  of  things  among  these 
poor  people,  but  com  is  not  grown  at  all  in  these  parts  of  the 


Chap.  XVI.  SURPRISE  AT  MY  APPEARANCE.  293 

interior,  and  on  the  seashore  they  do  not  use  it  much  as  an 
article  of  food. 

Mbango  had  been  notified  of  our  coming,  and  had  built  for  me 
a  very  neat,  commodious  bark  house,  with  a  day  floor  pounded 
hard^  and  all  very  clean  and  comfortable.  The  village  itself  is 
one  of  the  neatest  I  have  seen  among  the  BakalaL  When  I 
had  eaten  my  dinner,  the  people  came  in  crowds  te  see  me.  My 
hair  was,  as  usual,  the  most  singular  part  of  my  person  te  them. 
A  considerable  number  of  female  strangers  were  in  the  tewn  te 
celebrate  the  feast  of  Njambaiy  one  of  their  spirits ;  and  these 
could  not  look  at  me  or  wonder  at  my  appearance  enough. 

There  was  such  a  crowd,  indeed,  that  next  day  food  began  to 
grow  scarce,  and  I  had  to  send  Makondai  over,  with  thirty  men 
and  some  articles  of  barter  to  buy  some  plantains.  In  buy- 
ing food,  beads  are  the  best  trade.  The  women  cultivate  the 
ground  and  sell  the  surplus  products,  and  they  prefer  beads 
above  everything  elsa  The  women  in  all  this  country  seem  to 
have  a  good  deal  of  privilege  in  this  way.  They  are  expected 
to  feed  their  husbands;  and  Quengueza  frequently  tells  his 
wives  to  feed  him  well  and  take  good  care  of  him,  because  he 
treats  them  well.  But  what  is  left  or  not  needed  of  the  fruits 
thus  raised  the  men  have  no  right  to.  The  women  sell  and 
keep  for  themselves  the  articles  received.  Makondai  returned 
next  day  with  forty-five  bimches  of  plantains  and  two  fowls — a 
very  good  supply  for  the  time. 

Meantime  the  feast  went  on,  and  gave  me  a  sleepless  night, 
as  no  African  feast  or  ceremony  is  complete  without  shouting, 
singing,  drumming,  and  dancing,  and  playing  on  such  a  harp  as 
is  shown  in  the  picture  overleaf.  Mboiigo,  it  appears,  is  the  head 
or  chief  of  his  clan  or  family,  which  includes  half-a-dozen  towns 
within  thirty  miles  around.  As  chief,  Mbango  keeps  the  idol  of 
the  clan,  and  all  come  hither  at  regular  periods  to  sing  songs  of 
invocation  to  it  It  is  a  female  figure,  of  wood,  nearly  life-size, 
and  with  cloven  feet  like  those  of  a  deer.  Her  eyes  were  of 
copper;  one  cheek  was  painted  red,  and  the  other  yellow. 
About  her  neck  hung  a  necklace  of  tigers'  teeth.  She  is  said  to 
have  great  power,  and  the  people  believe  that  on  certain  occa- 
sions she  nods  her  head.  She  is  said  to  talk  frequently — as 
mighty  indeed,  be  expected.  She  is  very  highly  venerated  by 
the  people. 

I  teld  Mbango  that  the  noise  near  my  house  disturbed  my 


294  NEGRO  WORSHIP.  Chaf.  XVL 

sleep,  aad  the  good  fellow  ordered  his  people  to  celebrate  a  little 
farther  away.  On  the  30th  and  Slot,  however,  there  was  a  dead 
sOence  and  a  great  darkness.  No  light  was  allowed  but  mr  own. 
The  mbniti  (idol)  was  set  out  in  the  middle  of  the  street,  and 
the  people  stood  all  arouud  her.  She  is  said  to  have  bowed, 
walked  about,  and  spoken  to  some  one,  expressing  her  pleasure 


Hup  or  llie  Bikalnl.    Th?  itrlngt  an  nud;  out  af  Uk  dried  UMI  of  ■  iprda  oT  tnc 

at  two  gazelles  which  had  been  offered  her  the  night  befiwa 
She  ate  some  of  the  meat — so  I  was  assured — and  left  the  iwt 
for  the  people.- 

On  the  2nd  (June)  the  women  began  their  peculiar  worship  of 
Njamhai,  which,  it  seems,  is  their  good  spirit ;  and  it  is  remark- 
able that  all  the  Bakalai  clans,  and  all  the  females  of  tribes  I 
have  met  during  my  journeys,  worship  or  venerate  a  spirit  with 
this  same  name.  Near  the  seashore  it  is  pronounced  Njembai, 
but  it  is  evidently  the  same. 

This  worship  of  the  women  is  a  kind  of  mystery — no  men 
being  admitted  to  the  ceremonies,  which  are  carried  on  in  a 
house  very  carefully  closed.  This  house  was  covered  with  dry 
palm  and  banana  leaves,  and  liad  not  even  a  door  open  to  the 
street  To  make  all  close  it  was  set  against  two  other  honses, 
and  the  entrance  was  through  one  of  these.  Quengneza  and 
Mbango  warned  me  not  to  go  near  this  place,  as  not  even  they 
were  permitted  so  much  as  to  take  a  look.    All  the  women  of 


Chap.  XVI.  SPYING  OUT  A  MYSTERY.  295 

the  village  painted  their  £Etces  and  bodies,  beat  drums,  marched 
about  the  town,  and  from  time  to  time  entered  the  idol-house, 
where  they  danced  all  one  night,  and  made  a  more  outrageous 
noise  than  even  the  men  had  made  before.  They  also  presented 
several  antelopes  to  the  goddess,  and,  on  the  4th,  all  but  a  few 
went  off  into  the  woods  to  sing  to  Njambai. 

I  noticed  that  half-a-dozen  remained,  and  in  the  course  of  the 
morning  entered  the  Njambai-house,  where  they  stayed  in  great 
silence.  Now  my  curiosity,  which  had  been  greatly  excited  to 
know  what  took  place  in  this  secret  worship,  finally  overcame 
me.  I  determined  to  see.  Walking  several  times  up  and  down 
the  street  past  the  house  to  allay  suspicion,  I  at  last  suddenly 
pushed  aside  some  of  the  leaves,  and  stuck  my  head  through  the 
walL  For  a.  moment  I  could  distinguish  nothing  in  the  dark- 
ness. Then  I  beheld  three  perfectly  naked  old  hags  sitting  on 
the  clay  floor,  with  an  immense  bundle  of  greegrees  before 
them,  which  they  seemed  to  be  silently  adoring. 

When  they  saw  me  they  at  once  set  up  a  hideous  howl  of 
rage,  and  rushed  out  to  call  their  companions  from  the  bush. 
In  a  few  minutes  these  came  running  in,  crying  and  lamenting ; 
rushing  towards  me  with  gestures  of  anger,  and  threatening  me 
for  my  offence.  I  quickly  reached  my  house,  and,  seizing  my 
gun  in  one  hand  and  a  revolver  in  the  other,  told  them  I  would 
shoot  the  first  one  that  came  inside  my  door.  The  house  was 
surrounded  by  above  throe  hundred  infuriated  women,  every  one 
shouting  out  curses  at  me ;  but  the  sight  of  my  revolver  kept 
them  back.  They  adjourned  presently  for  the  Njambai-house, 
and  from  there  sent  a  deputation  to  the  men,  who  were  to  in- 
form me  that  I  must  pay  for  the  "  palaver  "  I  had  made. 

This  I  peremptorily  refused  to  do;  telling  Quengueza  and 
Mbango  that  I  was  their  stranger,  and  must  be  allowed  to  do  as 
I  pleased,  as  their  rules  were  nothing  to  me  who  was  a  white 
man  and  did  not  believe  in  their  idols.  In  truth,  if  I  had  once 
paid  for  such  a  transgression  as  this,  there  would  have  been  an 
end  of  all  travelling  for  me,  as  I  often  broke  through  their 
absurd  rules  without  knowing  it,  and  my  only  course  was  to 
declare  myself  irresponsible. 

However,  the  women  would  not  give  up,  but  threatened  ven- 
geance not  only  on  me,  but  on  all  the  men  of  the  town ;  and  as 
I  as  positively  refused  to  pay  anything,  it  was  at  last,  to  my 
great  surprise,  determined  by  Mbango  and  his  male  subjects 


296  A  PALAVER  SETTLED.  Chap.  XVI. 

that  they  would  make  up  &om  their  own  possessioiis  such  a 
sacrifice  as  the  women  demanded  of  me.  Accordingly  Mbango 
contributed  ten  fathoms  of  native  doth,  and  the  men  came  one 
by  one  and  put  their  offerings  on  the  ground — some  plates,  some 
knives,  some  mugs,  some  beads,  some  mats,  and  vcuious  odi^ 
articles.  Mbango  came  again,  and  asked  if  I,  too,  would  not 
contribute  something;  but  I  refused.  In  fact^  I  dared  not  set 
such  a  precedent  So  when  all  had  given  what  they  could,  the 
whole  amount  was  taken  to  the  ireful  women,  to  whom  Mbango 
said  that  I  was  his  and  his  men's  guest,  and  that  they  could  not 
ask  me  to  pay  in  such  a  matter,  therefore  they  paid  the  demand 
themselves.  With  this  the  women  were  satisfied,  and  there  the 
quarrel  ended.  Of  course  I  could  not  make  any  further  in- 
vestigations into  their  mysteries.  The  Njambai  feast  lasts  about 
two  weeks.  I  could  learn  very  little  about  the  spirit  which  they 
call  by  this  name.  Their  own  ideas  are  quite  vague.  They 
know  only  that  it  protects  the  women  against  their  male  ene- 
mies, avenges  their  wrongs,  and  serves  them  in  various  ways  if 
they  please  it. 

On  the  6th  I  went  out  to  see  the  mbcmdo,  or  olakoy  of  Igoumha, 
the  Ashira  chief  of  whom  I  made  mention  at  GoumbL  It  lies 
about  ten  miles  east  from  Mbango's  town,  and  the  people  were 
engaged  in  cutting  ebony,  which  was  to  be  given  to  Quengueza. 
The  camp  was  placed  in  a  very  beautiful  spot,  a  half-clearing  on 
the  hill-side,  not  far  from  where  the  Niama  Bembai  faUs  down 
through  the  hills  by  several  pretty  cascades.  This  is  a  very 
pretty  stream,  which  has  its  rise  eastward  in  the  Ashira  coimtoy, 
and  flows  into  the  Ofoubou.  Its  bed  is  gravelly,  and  its  waters 
clear  and  purling  like  some  northern  brook.  Here  it  affords 
plenty  of  water-power,*  waiting  for  factories. 

On  the  way  I  killed  a  beautiful  bird,  the  Apohderma  narina, 
the  size  of  the  common  dove,  but  with  a  splendid  crimson  breast, 
golden  green  on  the  back,  and  wings  coloured  a  fine  pearl  gray. 
Also  one  of  the  men  shot  a  young  T.  ccUmis,  female.  It  was 
two  feet  eleven  inches  high,  and  was  of  a  curious  mulatto-colour. 

The  next  day,  7th,  we  went  on  a  gorilla-hunt.  All  the  olako 
was  busy  on  the  evening  of  my  arrival  with  preparations ;  and, 
as  meat  was  scarce,  everybody  had  joyfiil  anticipations  of  hunger 
satisfied  and  plenty  in  the  camp.  Little  did  we  gue^  what 
frightful  death  was  to  befall  one  of  our  number  before  the  next 
sunset 


Chap.  XVI.  MAN  KILLED  BY  A  GORILLA.  297 

I  gave  powder  to  the  whole  party.  Six  were  to  go  off  in  one 
direction  for  gazelles  and  whatever  luck  might  send  them; 
and  six  others,  of  whom  I  was  one,  were  to  hunt  for  gorillas. 
We  set  oflf  towards  a  dark  valley,  where  Gambo,  Igoumba's  son, 
mid  we  should  find  our  prey.  The  gorilla  chooses  the  darkest, 
gloomiest  forests  for  its  home,  and  is  found  on  the  edges  of  the 
clearings  only  when  in  search  of  plantains,  or  sugarcane,  or 
pineapple.  Often  they  choose  for  their  peculiar  haunt  a 
wood  so  dark  that,  even  at  midday,  one  can  scarce  see  ten  yards. 
This  makes  it  the  more  necessary  to  wait  till  the  monstrous 
beast  approaches  near  before  shooting,  in  order  that  the  first 
shot  may  be  fatal.    It  does  not  often  let  the  hunter  reload. 

Our  little  party  separated,  as  is  the  custom,  to  stalk  the  wood 
in  various  directions.  Gumbo  and  I  kept  together.  One  brave 
fellow  went  off  alone  in  a  direction  where  he  thought  he  could 
find  a  gorilla.  The  other  three  took  another  course.  We  had 
been  about  an  hour  separated  when  Gambo  and  I  heard  a  gun 
fired  but  a  little  way  from  us,  and  presently  another.  We  were 
already  on  our  way  to  the  spot  where  we  hoped  to  see  a  gorilla 
slain,  when  the  forest  began  to  resound  with  the  most  terrific 
roars.  Gumbo  seized  my  arms  in  great  agitation,  and  we  hurried 
on,  both  filled  with  a  dreadful  and  sickening  alarm.  We  had 
not  gone  far  when  our  worst  fears  were  realised.  The  poor 
brave  fellow  who  had  gone  off  alone  was  lying  on  the  ground  in 
a  pool  of  his  own  blood,  and  I  thought,  at  first,  quite  dead.  His 
bowels  were  protruding  through  the  lacerated  abdomen.  Beside 
him  lay  his  gun.  The  stock  was  broken,  and  the  barrel  was 
bent  and  flattened.  It  bore  plainly  the  marks  of  the  gorilla's 
teeth. 

We  picked  him  up,  and  I  dressed  his  wounds  as  well  as  I 
could  with  rags  torn  from  my  clothes.  When  I  had  given  him 
a  little  brandy  to  drink  he  came  to  himself,  and  was  able,  but 
with  great  difficulty,  to  speak.  He  said  that  he  had  met  the 
gorilla  suddenly  and  face  to  face,  and  that  it  had  not  attempted 
to  escape.  It  was,  he  said,  a  huge  male,  and  seemed  very 
Nkvage.  It  was  in  a  very  gloomy  part  of  the  wood,  and  the 
darkness,  I  suppose,  made  him  miss.  He  said  he  took  good 
aim,  and  fired  when  the  beast  was  only  about  eight  yards  off. 
The  ball  merely  wounded  it  in  the  side.  It  at  once  began  beat- 
ing its  breasts,  and  with  the  greatest  rage  advanced  uix)n  him. 


298  GOEILLA-HUNTEBa  Geap,  XVL 

To  ran  away  was  impossible.  He  would  have  been  caught  in 
the  jungle  before  he  had  gone  a  dozen  steps. 

He  stood  his  ground,  and  as  quickly  as  he  could  reloaded  his 
gun.  Just  as  he  raised  it  to  fire  the  gorilla  dashed  it  out  of  his 
hands,  the  gun  going  off  in  the  fall ;  and  then  in  an  instant^  and 
with  a  terrible  roar,  the  animal  gave  him  a  tremendous  blow  with 
its  immense  open  paw,  frightfully  lacerating  the  abdomen,  and 
with  this  single  blow  laying  bare  part  of  the  intestines  As  he 
sank,  bleeding,  to  the  ground,  the  monster  seized  the  gun,  and 
the  poor  hunter  thought  he  would  have  his  brains  dashed  out 
with  it.  But  the  gorilla  seemed  to  have  looked  upon  this  also 
as  an  enemy,  and  in  his  rage  almost  flattened  the  barrel  between 
his  strong  jaws. 

When  we  came  upon  the  ground  the  gorilla  was  gone.  This 
is  their  mode  when  attacked — ^to  strike  one  or  two  blows,  and 
then  leave  the  victims  of  their  rage  on  the  ground  and  go  off 
into  the  woods. 

We  hunted  up  our  companions  and  carried  our  poor  fellow  to 
the  camp,  where  all  was  instantly  excitement  and  sorrow.  They 
entreated  me  to  give  him  mediciue,  but  I  had  nothing  to  suit  his 
case.  I  saw  that  his  days  were  numbered ;  and  all  I  could  do 
was  to  make  him  easy  by  giving  him  a  little  brandy  or  wine  at 
intervals.  He  had  to  tell  the  whole  story  over  again ;  and  the 
people  declared  at  once  that  this  was  no  true  gorilla  that  had 
attacked  him,  but  a  man — a  wicked  man  turned  into  a  gorilla. 
Such  a  being  no  man  could  escape,  they  said ;  and  it  could  not 
be  killed,  even  by  the  bravest  hunters.  This  principle  of 
fatalism  and  of  transmigration  of  souls  is  brought  in  by  them  in 
all  such  cases,  I  think,  chiefly  to  keep  up  the  courage  of  their 
hunters,  on  whom  such  a  mischance  exercises  a  very  depressing 
influence.  The  hunters  are  the  most  valued  men  in  these  negro 
villages.  A  brave  and  fortunate  one  is  admired  by  all  the 
women ;  loved — almost  worshipped — ^by  his  wives ;  and  enjoys 
many  privileges  among  his  fellow-vill^ers.  But  his  proudest 
time  is  when  he  has  killed  an  elephant  or  a  gorilla  and  filled  the 
village  with  meat.  Then  he  may  do  almost  what  he  pleases. 
The  next  day  we  shot  a  monster  gorilla,  which  I  suppose  is  the 
same  one  that  killed  my  poor  hunter,  for  male  gorillas  are  not 
very  plentiful 

June  Wth,  Yesterday  I  had  a  very  severe  chill,  but  was  able 


Chap.  XVJ.       ANIMAL  LIFE  IN  THE  DRY  SEASON.  299 

to  check  it  with  quinine,  fortunately.  The  dry  season  has  now 
definitely  set  in  here,  and  the  days  are  cloudy  and  the  nights 
somewhat  cooL  We  are  no  longer  obliged  to  build  shelters 
when  sleeping  out  in  the  woods ;  and  can  hunt  all  day  without 
being  wet  through  as  formerly — all  which  gives  me  a  good  deal 
of  comfort 

The  poor  fellow  who  was  hurt  by  the  gorilla  died  on  the  9th ; 
and  some  men  went  out  on  the  10th  and  shot  a  large  gorilla, 
whose  remains  were  brought  into  camp  with  great  rejoicings  on 
their  parts,  but  great  rage  on  mine.  My  hunters  had  seen  me 
skin  gorillas  and  other  animals  so  often  that  they  thought  they 
could  do  this  for  me,  and,  wanting  the  meat  of  this  one,  they 
took  off  the  hide.  So  far  so  good ;  but  the  fellows  did  not  know 
what  a  value  I  placed  upon  the  bones,  and,  to  save  themselves 
time  and  labour,  they  broke  the  bones  of  the  legs  and  of  the 
pelvis.  Thus  a  fine  specimen  was  spoiled  for  me,  or  at  least 
made  incomplete.  I  scolded  them  so  that  they  ran  away  into 
the  woods,  as  they  said,  to  get  out  of  hearing  of  my  tongue. 

This  gorilla  was  an  adult  male,  and  measured  five  feet  seven 
inches  in  height. 

With  the  dry  season,  which  has  now  regultu'ly  set  in,  various 
migratoiqr  birds  return  from  their  wanderings,  and  enliven  the 
forests  and  rivers,  which  are  inhabited  by  other  species  during 
the  rainy  season.  All  nature  has  brightened  up,  and  the  long- 
dreary  fores*  is  alive  with  the  chatter  and  song  of  birds.  The 
spurred  quail  {Peliperdrix  Lathami),  with  its  pretty  spotted 
breast,  I  met  at  every  turn  in  the  wood.  The  splendid  Numida 
plumifera  is  more  abundant ;  great  numbers  of  kingfishers 
occupy  the  logs  and  overhanging  branches  on  the  rivers,  watching 
for  prey;  and  doves  are  cooing  to  each  other  all  day  long.  In 
the  little  purling  streams  in  the  hill  country  a  beautiful  little 
otter  has  made  his  appearance,  and  watches,  beneath  rocks  and 
in  dark  pools,  for  passing  fish ;  while  on  the  Ofoubou  and  the 
Bembo  a  large  otter,  with  fine  brown  fur,  plunges  into  the  water 
almost  before  one  can  get  even  a  sight  of  him.  Several  varieties 
of  swallows  twitter  and  skip  over  the  water,  and  one  flies,  like  the 
lark,  so  high  that  it  can  scarce  be  distinguished.  Parrots,  of 
varied  colours  and  size,  are  screaming  and  chattering  all  day  in 
the  open  woods.  One  in  particular,  the  gray  parrot,  flies  in 
flocks  of  hundreds  t<^ether,  and  makes  the  whole  wood  alive 


300  VENOMOUS  FLIES.  Chap.  XVL 

with  its  screams.     These  birds  build  their  nests  in  hollow  trees, 
and  are  very  sociable  in  their  nature. 

Until  the  1st  of  July  we  moved  at  random  almost  about  the 
country  between  Mbango's  town  and  the  Rembo.  Game  is  not 
at  all  plentiful,  and  we  suffered  occasionally  fix)m  gouamba,  I  par- 
ticularly, who  do  not  like  the  meat  of  either  the  elephant  or  the 
crocodile — on  which,  nevertheless,  I  had  to  live  by  turns  for  a 
week  at  a  time.  The  meat  of  the  elephant  is  very  tough  and 
stringy.  The  natives  smoke  it,  which  makes  it  tougher  still,  and 
we  had  sometimes  to  boil  it  two  days  before  it  was  masticable. 
It  tastes  rank  and  coarse,  and  has  not  a  bit  of  the  delicate  flavour 
of  hippopotamus-meat  As  for  the  flesh  of  the  crocodile,  nothing 
but  hunger  could  make  me  eat  it ;  but  necessity  of  that  kind 
knows  no  law.  It  is  really  very  white,  and  also  tender ;  and  the 
negroes  think  it  delicious.  But  I  could  never  conquer  my 
disgust ;  and  it  seemed  to  me,  besides,  tasteless  and  dry. 

This  upper  country  has  few  musquitoes,  but,  in  their  stead, 
several  varieties  of  flies,  which  are  exceedingly  troublesome. 
The  igoogouai  is  a  small,  almost  imperceptible  gnat,  which 
appears  in  great  numbers  in  the  morning,  until  ten  o'clock,  from 
which  time  it  is  seen  no  more  till  four,  when  its  operations  are 
recommenced,  and  last  tiU  sunset  These  little  flies  are  most 
determined  bloodsuckers,  very  sly  in  their  approaches,  but 
leaving  behind  them  a  bite  which  itches  terribly  and  for  a  con- 
siderable time.  Small  as  they  are,  even  the  thick  hides  of  the 
negroes  are  punctured  by  them.  In  hunting  they  are  very 
troublesome,  and  often  made  my  men  so  nervous  that  they  could 
hit  nothing. 

Another  is  the  ibolaiy  an  insect  twice  as  large  as  our  conmion 
house-fly.  It  approaches  you  with  a  sharp  wliistle,  and  its  sting 
is  long  and  strong  enough  to  pierce  the  thickest  clothes  one  can 
wear  in  the  heat  of  an  African  summer.  The  sting  is  so  sharp 
that  I  have  often  jumped  up  with  the  sudden  pain,  which  was  as 
if  a  pin  had  been  stuck  savagely  into  my  person.  But  the  bite 
of  this  insect,  if  painful,  does  not  last,  like  that  of  another  of  the 
same  size,  which  is  called  the  nchouna.  This  animal  makes  no 
noise  to  warn  you  of  its  approach,  and  inserts  its  bill  so  gently 
that  often  it  gets  its  fill  of  blood  before  you  know  you  are  bitten. 
Presently,  however,  the  itching  begins,  and  lasts  for  several 
hours,  varied,  at  intervals,  by  sudden  sharp  stabs  of  pain,  as 


Chap.  XVI.  THE  ELOWAY.  301 

though  a  scorpion  had  bitten  you.  Often  this  lasts  the  whole 
day.     These  last-named  animals  are  found  mostly  on  the  rivers. 

The  'S>ocOy  another  fly,  is  the  size  of  a  hornet,  and  very  quick 
in  its  motions.  Its  bite  is  the  most  severe  of  all,  and  clothing  is 
no  protection  from  them.  Often  the  blood  has  run  down  my 
face  or  arm  from  one  of  their  savage  attacks,  and  even  the  well- 
tanned  skin  of  the  negroes  is  punctured  till  it  bleeds,  so  that  one 
would  think  a  leech  had  been  at  his  work  on  them. 

But  most  dreadful  of  all  is  the  eloway^  a  nest-building  fly  (?  wasp) 
which  frequents  the  water-side,  where  its  clay  hives  are  hung  to  the 
pendent  branches  of  trees.  This  fly  is  really  a  monster  of  fero- 
city, and  the  natives  run  from  it  as  they  do  from  no  other  animal 
or  insect  of  these  woods.  The  eloway  is  a  little  fly,  shaped  much 
like  a  bee,  but  not  quite  so  big.  The  body  is  longer  in  propor- 
tion than  that  of  a  bee.  Their  hives  are  made  of  clay,  and  evi- 
dently have  separate  apartments,  as  the  whole  pendent  bottle- 
shaped  mass  is  filled  idih  holes,  each  of  which  has  a  little  roof 
over  it.  They  generally  choose  a  branch  which  is  ftdl  of  leaves 
for  their  nago  or  nest,  and  thus  are  hidden  from  view.  The  clay 
of  the  nest  is  so  hard  that  even  a  bullet  fired  from  a  reasonable 
distance  made  no  impression  upon  it,  as  I  found  by  several  trials. 
The  hives  seem  to  be  very  full ;  when  disturbed  I  have  seen  them 
issuing  in  large  swarms,  and  several  from  each  hole. 

When  troubled  they  are  very  savage,  and  attack  with  a  kind 
of  blind  rage.  Sometimes  when  paddling  down  the  Kembo  a 
canoe  accidentally  strikes  against  a  tree  containing  an  eloway 
nago.  Instantly  they  fall  ferociously  upon  the  men.  The 
natives  always  dive  into  the  water  and  swim  xmder  water  for  a 
little  distance ;  but  I  noticed  that  if  one  of  these  venomous 
little  insects  had  settled  on  a  man,  he  clung  to  him  even  in  the 
water,  and  had  literally  to  be  picked  offi  In  such  cases  I  always 
covered  myself  up  with  matting  and  lay  still  till  they  retired. 
Happily,  they  do  not  pursue  far ;  and  when  the  enemy  is  out  of 
their  sight  they  return  quietly  to  their  nests. 

Their  bite  is  exceedingly  painful,  and  they  leave  in  the  wound 
an  acrid  poison,  which  pains  for  two  or  three  days.  At  intervals 
of  an  hour  the  poison  seems  to  gather  fresh  force,  the  wound 
begins  to  throb,  and  for  a  little  while  is  excessively  painful. 
The  natives  fear  these  eloways  very  much,  and  retreat  with  all 
expedition  when  they  have  accidentally  disturbed  a  nestw    When 


302  SNAKES.  Chap.  XTT. 

they  see  a  nest,  also,  they  ^ways  paddle  to  the  opposite  side  of 
the  stream.  Going  nearly  naked,  they  ej:e  very  much  exposed 
to  its  attacks ;  and  ite  motions  are  so  very  quick  that  even  a 
speedy  tumble  overboard  does  not  generally  save  them  from  one 
or  two  bites. 

Of  snakes  all  this  back  country  has  a  great  abundance.  A  few 
are  harmless ;  some  of  the  large  species  attack  the  larger  beasts 
and  crush  them  in  their  folds ;  or,  if  smaller,  they  have  poison- 
fangs.  It  is  curious  that  the  negroes  have  no  vegetable  or  other 
remedy  for  a  snake-bite ;  but  they  are  not  often  bitten.  The 
snakes  are  easily  alarmed,  and  the  noise  of  an  approaching 
hunter  scares  them  out  of  his  path.  Sometimes  they  hang  from 
the  limbs  of  trees,  waiting,  probably,  for  prey  to  pass  beneath, 
and  several  times  such  a  pendent  animal  has  given  me  a  fright 
by  falling  down  beside  me  as  I  stood  under  a  tree.  But  they 
never  attack  man,  so  far  as  I  have  seen.  I  saw  and  killed  on 
several  occasions  pythons  measuring  from  20  to  25  feet ;  but  the 
largest  I  ever  saw  had  been  killed  by  a  party  of  natives,  and 
was  just  skinned  as  I  came  up.  This  was  on  the  Eembo.  The 
skin  measured  a  little  over  33  feet  in  length. 

The  smaller  snakes  feed  on  birds,  and  squirrels,  and  rats,  which 
I  am  convinced,  from  frequent  observation,  they  are  able  to 
charm  with  their  look.  This  power  of  charming  I  had  always 
doubted,  but  was  convinced  by  one  day  watching  a  venomous 
black  snake,  over  four  feet  long,  subduing  and  catching  a 
squirrel  which  sat  on  the  lower  branch  of  a  tree.  It  was  in  the 
rear  of  Obindji's  town.  I  had  gone  out  to  shoot  birds,  and  my 
attention  was  attracted  by  the  very  pecuhar  and  continued 
chattering  of  a  squirrel.  When  I  saw  it  I  did  not  know  what  to 
make  of  its  movements.  It  seemed  as  though  tied  to  its  branch 
and  very  anxious  to  get  away.  Its  head  was  thrust  forward,  its 
eyes  fixed  and  glaring ;  but  its  body  trembled,  and  was  jerked 
about  from  side  to  side.  All  the  time  it  was  screaming  and 
chattering  in  a  really  pitiable  manner.  Following  the  direction 
of  its  glance  I  saw  the  cause  of  its  alarm.  The  black  snake  was 
slowly  creeping  out  on  the  limb,  and  as  steadily  kept  his  eyes  on 
his  victim.  The  whole  curious  process  went  on  under  my  in- 
spection for  at  least  ten  or  twelve  minutes,  during  all  which 
time  the  snake  seemed  to  fix  the  gaze  of  the  squirrel  upon 
itself.    The  squirrel  came  nearer  and  nearer,  until  it  reached 


Chap.  XVI.         USEFULNESS  OP  SNAKES  —  FEVER.  303 

the  mouth  of  the  snake,  which  made  a  spring,  grasped  its  prey 
in  its  mouth,  and  quickly  coiled  its  folds  about  it. 

I  have  seen  many  such  cases  of  charming,  both  of  birds  and 
squirrels ;  and  sometimes  firing  my  gun  dissolyed  the  charm,  by 
diverting  momentarily  the  gaze  of  the  snake. 

Though  snakes  are  dangerous  animals,  their  presence  is  a  great 
blessing  to  the  country.  They  destroy  great  numbers  of  rats 
and  mice,  and  other  of  the  smaller  quadrupeds  which  injure  the 
native  provisions ;  and  it  is  but  just  to  say,  that  while  they  some- 
times frequent  houses,  and  are  fond  of  creeping  over  the  roofs  or 
along  the  hollow  bamboos  of  the  sides  of  the  native  huts,  they 
are  peacefully  inclined,  and  never  attack  man  unless  trodden  on. 
They  are  glad  enough  to  get  out  of  the  way ;  and  the  most 
feared  snake  I  saw  in  Africa  (the  Echidna  tumcomis)  was  one 
which  is  very  slow  in  its  movements,  from  which  cause  it  happens 
that  it  oftener  bites  people  than  others,  being  unable  to  get  out 
of  the  way  quickly.  Though  serpents  abound  in  all  parts  of  the 
country,  I  have  travelled  a  month  at  a  time  without  seeing  one, 
probably  on  account  of  the  bushy  character  of  the  country. 

The  country  near  the  river,  though  hilly,  is  not  entirely  healthy 
for  whites.  I  have  had  several  attacks  of  fever,  owing  to  the  re- 
tiring water  leaving  the  muddy  soil  bare  and  damp,  but  all  were 
slight ;  and  I  suppose  if  a  man  came  up  here  and  lived  carefully 
he  would  be  quite  safe.  I  sleep  often  in  the  forest,  and  am  forced 
to  be  as  reckless  of  health  as  a  man  can  be  ;  and  I  do  not  expect 
to  escape  fever  if  there  is  any  in  the  country.  The  natives  are 
generally  tolerably  healthy.  I  have  seen  cases  of  what  I  judge 
to  be  leprosy,  but  they  have  little  fever  among  them,  or  other 
dangerous  diseases. 

Gambo  and  I  have  been  hunting  for  a  week  after  another 
gorilla.  The  natives  said  that  a  monstrous  animal  had  been 
several  times  seen  in  the  forest  some  ten  miles  to  the  east,  and 
it  was  just  such  a  one  I  needed  to  make  my  series  complete. 
Therefore  I  determined  to  get  him.  On  June  10th  we  were  at 
last  lucky  enough  to  find  him.  We  had  been  on  the  hunt  for 
several  hours,  when  we  came  upon  tolerably  fresh  tracks  of  an 
animal  which  I  saw  must  be  a  very  large  one.  These  tracks  we 
followed  cautiously,  and  at  last,  in  a  densely  wooded  and  quite 
dark  ravine  we  came  suddenly  upon  the  beast  There  were  two 
gorillas,  a  male  and  female.     Owing  to  the  dense  jungle,  in  a 


304  A  LARGE  GORILLA  KILLED.  Chap.  XVI. 

nook  of  which  they  were  concealed,  they  saw  us  first.  The 
female  uttered  a  cry  of  alarm,  and  ran  off  before  we  could  get  a 
shot  at  her,  being  lost  to  sight  in  a  moment  in  the  bush.  The 
male,  however,  whom  I  particularly  wanted,  had  no  idea  of 
running  off.  He  rose  slowly  from  his  haunches  and  at  once 
faced  us,  uttering  a  roar  of  rage  at  our  evidently  untimely  intru- 
sion. Gambo  and  I  were  accompanied  only  by  a  single  hunter 
and  an  Ashira  boy,  who  bore  an  extra  gun.  The  boy  fell  back, 
and  we  stood  side  by  side  and  awaited  the  advance  of  the 
hideous  monster.  In  the  dim  half-light  of  the  ravine,  his 
features  working  with  rage,  his  gloomy,  treacherous,  mischievous 
gray  eyes,  his  rapidly-agitated,  and  frightful,  satyr-like  features 
had  a  horrid  look,  enough  to  make  one  fancy  him  really  a 
spirit  of  the  damned. 

He  advanced  upon  us  by  starts,  as  is  their  fashion,  pausing  to 
beat  his  fists  upon  his  vast  breast,  which  gave  out  a  dull,  hollow 
sound  like  some  great  bass-drum  with  a  skin  of  ox-hida  Then 
he  roared,  making  the  forest  ring  \vith  his  short  bark  and  the 
refrain,  which  is  singularly  like  the  loud  muttering  of  thunder. 

We  stood  at  our  posts  for  at  least  three  long  minutes,  guns  in 
hand,  before  the  great  beast  was  near  enough  for  a  safe  shot.  In 
tliis  time  I  could  not  help  thinking  of  the  misfortune  of  my  poor 
hunter  but  a  few  days  ago ;  and,  as  I  looked  at  the  gorilla  before 
us,  I  could  fancy  the  horror  of  the  situation  when,  with  empty 
gun,  the  poor  fellow  stood  before  his  remorseless  enemy,  who 
came  upon  him,  not  with  a  sudden  spring  like  the  leopard,  but 
with  a  slow,  vindictive  certainty  which  is  like  fate. 

At  last  he  stood  before  us  at  a  distance  of  six  yards.  Once 
more  he  paused,  and,  raising  his  head,  began  to  roar  and  beat  his 
breast.  Just  as  he  took  another  step  towards  us  we  fired,  and 
down  he  tumbled,  almost  at  our  feet,  upon  his  face,  dead. 

I  saw  at  once  that  we  had  the  very  animal  I  wanted.  It  is 
the  oldest  of  all  my  collection,  and  very  near  the  largest  I  ever 
saw.  Gambo,  who,  though  a  young  man,  was  stiQ  an  old  hunter, 
said  a  few  were  larger,  but  not  many.  Its  height  was  five  feet 
nine  inches,  measured  to  the  tip  of  the  toes.  Its  arms  spread 
nine  feet.  Its  chest  had  a  circumference  of  sixty-two  inches. 
The  hands,  those  terrible  claw-like  weapons,  with  one  blow  of 
which  it  tears  out  the  bowels  of  a  man  or  breaks  his  arms,  were 
of  immense^  muscular  power,  and  bent  like  veritable  daws.    I 


Chap.  XVI.        NATIVES'  DREAD  OF  THE  BLOW  AY.  305 

could  see  how  fiightAil  a  blow  could  be  struck  with  such  a  hand, 
moved  by  such  an  arm,  all  swollen  into  great  bunches  of  muscular 
fibre,  as  this  animal  possessed.  The  big  toe  was  no  less  than 
six  inches  in  circumference. 

As  we  brought  it  into  the  olako,  three  women,  who  were 
pregnant,  hastened  out  at  the  other  end  with  their  husbands, 
and  nothing  could  induce  them  to  return  till  the  skin  was  dried 
and  put  away.  They  could  not  be  convinced  but  that,  if  even 
the  husband  saw  the  beast,  the  wife  would  bear  a  young  gorilla. 

The  people  were  very  glad  of  the  meat ;  and  I  was  wishing  I 
could  eat  it  as  they  do — for  I  had  no  meat^  and  felt  gouamba  a 
little — ^when  old  Querlaouen  sent  me  half  a  gazelle  he  had 
killed,  which  placed  me  beyond  need  for  the  present. 

On  the  13th  of  July  we  started  for  Obindji's  town,  on  my 
return.  Groing  down  the  Ofoubou,  a  canoe  of  Bakalai,  strange 
to  the  river,  were  a  little  before  us.  Suddenly  we  saw  them 
stop  paddling  and  pitch  headlong  out  of  the  canoe.  My  men 
said  they  had  disturbed  a  nest  of  eloway,  which  we  found  after- 
wards to  be  the  truth.  Our  canoe  was  immediately  shot  up 
stream  for  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  and  we  waited  an  hour  before 
the  crew  would  venture  past  the  dreaded  eloway's  nest ;  such  is 
their  fear  of  this  revengeful  little  fly.  Even  then  they  were 
very  careful  to  paddle  quite  over  to  the  farther  bank  of  the  river. 

The  Rembo  has  lost  a  good  deal  of  its  waters  since  I  was  here 
on  my  way  up.  It  has  Mien  from  twelve  to  fifteen  feet^  but  is 
yet  deep  enough  for  navigation.  The  numerous  aquatic  birds 
and  waders  which  come  in  with  the  dry  season  now  give  the 
river  a  lively,  pleasant  air.  The  white  sand  which  lines  the 
shores  is  clean  and  bright,  and  with  the  cool  mornings,  which 
are  sometimes  foggy,  and  the  bright  green  of  the  well-wooded 
banks,  the  traveller  has  a  charming  scene  before  him.  The 
stream  is  still  yellow,  but  is  much  clearer  than  it  was  a  month 
ago.  Then  the  rains  were  driving  down  a  turbulent  tide,  laden 
with  mud ;  now  the  clear  waters  roll  on  placidly,  as  though  all 
was  peace  and  civilization  at  their  borders. 

The  country  about  here  is  probably  the  richest  field  for  an 
enterprising  naturalist  now  remaining  in  the  world.  Equatorial 
Africa  seems  to  have  a  fauna  of  its  own.  The  lion,  common  both 
to  North  and  South  Africa,  is  not  found  here  at  alL  Neither 
are  the  zebra,  gnu,  giraffe,  rhinoceros,  or  ostrich,  and  the  great 

X 


306  THE  FAUNA  OF  THE  REMBO  REGION.     Chap.  XVI. 

number  of  antelopes  so  common  in  other  parts  of  the  continent, 
known  here.    There  are  no  tame  cattle,  no  horses,  no  donkeys ; 
in  fact,  the  only  domesticated  animals  are  goats  and  fowls,  and  a 
species  of  sheep.     I  do  not  think  the  Bos  brachicheros,  the  wild 
bull  of  this  country,  could  be  tamed.    It  is  found  here,  but  not 
in  such  herds  as  roam  on  the  Cape  Lopez  prairies.   Several  kinds 
of  gazelles  ofier  sport  to  the  hunter-naturalist ;  and  I  saw  several 
specimens  of  a  very  beautiful  antelope  hitherto  unknown,  which 
may  be  considered  by  far  the  hcmdsomest  antelope  yet  dis- 
covered in  Africa,    This  animal,  of  which  I  am  enabled  to  give 
an  excellent  representation,  drawn  from  a  well-preserved  speci- 
men in  my  collection,  is  rare,  and  very  shy ;  swift  of  foot,  as  are 
all  its  kind,  and  exceedingly  graceful  in  its  motions,  though 
more  heavily  built  than  most  of  the  antelope  kind.    Among  the 
carnivora,  the  leopard  takes  the  first  rank.    It  is  a  very  large 
and  majestic  animal  here.    I  have  killed  several  over  five  feet 
long.     There  is  also  a  hyena,  whose  raids  among  the  goats  are 
often  troublesome ;  and  several  varieties  of  tiger-cats,  of  which 
the  Genetta  Aubryana  and  Fieldicma  are  of  the  finest  species  yet 
known.     The  crocodile  is  found  in  the  swamps  and  lagoons 
which  border  the  Eembo ;  the  iguana  occurs  in  the  woods; 
while  of  monkeys  there  were  a  dozen  new  varieties  ;  of  squirrels 
upwards  of  half-a-dozen  ;  and  of  rats  several,  the  chief  of  which 
was  fifteen  inches  long.     Most  of  these  are  peculiar  to  this  part 
of  the  continent,  and  are  unknown  to  the  north  and  south. 

Among  the  most  i)eculiar  of  the  monkeys  is  the  little  oshingui, 
one  of  the  smallest  of  the  whole  monkey  tribe.  It  is  a  frolicsome 
and  innocent  little  animal,  and  remarkable  for  its  fondness  for  the 
water ;  so  that  where  you  meet  one  of  them  hopping  about  the 
branches  overhead,  you  may  be  sure  water  is  not  far  off.  They 
always  sleep  on  some  tree  whose  branches  overhang  a  water- 
course. This  little  monkey  is  also  a  great  favourite  with  the 
monkey-birds  {Bucero%  albocri/statiui)^  which  I  often  saw  playing 
with  it. 

Of  birds,  the  most  remarkable  which  I  shot  in  this  region  was 
the  "  nehalitoguay  " — so  called  by  the  negroes.  It  resembles 
somewhat  the  Asiatic  bird  Mttscipeta  paradm,  and  is  one  of  the 
most  graceful  and  lovely  birds  I  ever  saw.  Its  back,  tail-cover, 
and  very  long  flowing  tail  are  pure  milk-white ;  its  crested  head 
and  breast  are  greenish-black,  and  abdomen  an  ashy-brown.  The 


jlour,  brlBhl  orange,  wilb  »  chMlnul  [uldi  belwMn  the  honuuidTfa,  bflow  ulikh 
■nvmU  bavlni!  In  llin  mkbUe  ■  dark  browo  Urlpe;  but  (be  dilcf  fntuM  vT 
K  UK  alrtpn  on  «cb  bdk. 


Chap.  XVI.  RETURN  TO  BIAGANO.  307 

white  feathers  of  the  back  seem  to  form  a  fine  mantle,  and  give 
the  bird  a  very  singular  appearance.  This  little  bird  has  been 
named  after  myself,  the  Muscipeta  du  ChaiUui. 

At  last,  on  tiie  2nd  of  August,  I  began  to  make  prepttrations 
for  a  return  to  Biagano.  It  was  high  time.  I  was  still  suflfering 
from  fever  attacks,  and  had  not  quinine  enough  left  for  one  large 
dose,  which  might  have  put  a  stop  to  it.  Solution  qf  arsenic  I 
did  not  like  to  take  much  of.  As  a  febrifuge,  it  must  be  care- 
fully used,  and  not  very  often,  or  it  leaves  its  eflfects  on  the 
system. 

Not  only  was  1  sick,  but  also  poor  and  ragged.  My  clothes 
were  torn  and  patched,  and  I  looked,  in  reality,  very  little  better 
or  more  civilized  than  my  negro  friends.  Food  was  scarce ;  and 
though  my  friends  and  hunters,  Querlaouen,  Obindji,  and  others, 
gave  me  what  they  had,  it  was  robbing  them,  I  felt ;  and  even 
then  I  did  not  get  such  food  as  I  began  to  need.  My  goods,  too, 
were  all  gone,  so  that  even  if  1  had  been  well  I  could  not  have 
gone  farther  into  the  interior.  But  the  numerous  hardships  of 
this  long  trip,  the  sleeping  night  after  night  in  wet  clothes,  the 
tramping  through  rain  and  hot  sun,  the  sufferings  from  the 
intolerable  gouamba,  and  the  yet  less  tolerable  total  starvation — 
all  these  had  done  their  work  upon  me,  and  I  began  to  feel  the 
want  of  a  long  and  thorough  repose.  So  I  told  Quengueza  we 
must  go. 

Obindji  was  very  sorry.  I  believe  he  and  many  of  the  others, 
particularly  Querlaouen  and  his  fellow-hunters,  had  conceived  a 
real  afiection  for  me.  They  gave  me  of  their  poor  store  without 
ever  asking  for  a  return,  and  took  all  pains  to  please  me  and 
make  me  comfortable,  even  when  they  saw  that  my  goods  were 
getting  very  low.  And  I  must  own  that  I  had  a  kind  of  affection 
for  a  country  where,  in  the  discovery  of  new  and  strange  animals, 
I  had  enjoyed  one  of  the  greatest  pleasures  possible  to  man. 
The  rough  life  was  forgotten  when  I  looked  at  my  precious  col- 
lections ;  and  the  thought  of  a  gorilla  even  now  enabled  me  to 
shake  off  the  fever. 

I  need  not  say  that  the  faithfulness  of  the  poor  natives 
touched  me  nearly.  Not  one  but  had  treated  me  as  though  1 
was  his  own  brother ;  and  I  should  have  been  a  brute  had  I  not 
heartily  returned  all  their  affection. 

My  little  boys,  Makondai  and  Monguilomba,  who  had  acted  so 

X  2 


308  THE  SUPERSTITION  OF  ROONDAH.         Chap.  XVI. 

bravely  during  all  these  months,  were  overjoyed  when  they  saw 
ray  preparations  for  returning  to  the  seashore.  Quengueza,  too, 
was  tired  of  bush-life,  as  he  called  it — calling  these  Bakalai  his 
bushmen.  He  is  to  go  down  to  Biagano  with  me,  where  I  can 
reward  him  for  all  his  kindness  and  faithfulness  to  me.  He  had 
done  royally  for  me  in  everything.  Every  fowl  or  goat  he  got 
as  a  present  up  here  he  gave  me ;  I,  in  return,  hunting  for  him. 
We  always  ate  together  at  a  table  which  1  had  made,  and  which 
was  covered,  when  we  were  in  town,  always  with  a  clean  white 
(dotL  I  was  anxious  to  show  these  people  tiie  difference  between 
civilized  and  savage  life,  and  this  was  one  of  the  points  most  apt 
to  strike  them ;  for,  like  all  rude  people  and  little  children,  they 
are  very  observant  of  sraaU  things. 

This  day  I  had  a  glimpse  at  another  curious  superstition  of 
these  people.  One  of  the  hunters  had  shot  a  wild  bull,  and 
when  the  carcass  was  brought  in  the  good  fellow  sent  me  an 
abundant  supply  of  the  best  portions.  The  meat  is  tough,  but 
was  most  welcome  for  a  change.  I  had  a  great  piece  boiled  for 
dinner,  and  expected  Quengueza  to  eat  as  much  as  would  make 
several  hungry  white  men  sick.  Judge  of  my  surprise,  when, 
coming  to  the  table  and  seeing  only  the  meat,  he  refused  to 
touch  it. 

T  asked  why  ? 

"  It  is  roondah  for  me,"  he  replied.  And  then,  in  answer  to 
my  question,  explained  that  the  meat  of  the  Bos  brachicheros 
was  forbidden  to  his  family,  and  was  an  abomination  to  them, 
for  the  reason  that  many  generations  ago  one  of  their  women 
gave  birth  to  a  calf  instead  of  a  child. 

I  laughed ;  but  the  king  replied  very  soberly  that  he  could 
show  me  a  woman  of  another  family  whose  grandmother  had 
given  birth  to  a  crocodile^for  which  reason  the  crocodile  was 
roondah  to  that  family. 

Quengueza  would  never  touch  my  salt-bee^  nor  even  the 
pork,  fearing  lest  it  had  been  in  contact  with  the  beef.  Indeed 
they  are  all  religiously  scrupulous  in  this  matter ;  and  I  found, 
on  inquiry  afterwards,  that  scarce  a  man  can  be  found  to  whom 
some  article  of  food  is  not  "roondah."  Some  dare  not  taste 
crocodile,  some  hippopotamus,  some  monkey,  some  boa,  some 
wild  pig,  and  all  from  this  same  beliefl  They  will  literally 
suffer  the  pangs  of  starvation  rather  than  break  through  this 


Chap.  XVI.  GOOD-BYE  TO  QUERLAOUEN.  309 

prejudice ;  and  they  very  firmly  believe  that  if  one  of  a  family 
should  eat  of  such  forbidden  food,  the  women  of  the  same  family 
would  surely  miscarry  and  give  birth  to  monstrosities  in  the 
shape  of  the  animal  which  is  roondah,  or  else  die  of  an  awful 
disease. 

Sometimes  I  find  that  the  fetich-man  forbids  an  individual  to 
touch  certain  kinds  of  food  for  some  reason,  or  no  reason  rather. 
In  this  case  the  prohibition  extends  only  to  the  man,  and  not  to 
his  family. 

It  is  astonishing  how  strictly  such  gross  feeders  as  they  are 
adhere  to  their  scruples.  It  shows  the  power  a  superstitious 
faith  has  even  over  a  lawless  people  as  these  are.  I  am  certain 
nothing  in  the  world  would  have  induced  the  old  king  to  eat  the 
flesh  of  the  wild  buU,  or  even  to  eat  out  of  a  dish  in  which  that 
had  been  cooked  or  otherwise  contained. 

As  we  were  preparing  to  go,  my  Bakalai  friends  came  in  with 
presents  of  provisions.  Baskets  of  cassava,  smoked  boar-hams, 
sweet  potatoes,  and  manioc  are  brought  as  freewill  oflferings,  for 
they  know  I  have  little  to  give  in  return. 

At  last,  on  the  evening  of  the  6th,  I  gave  Obindji  a  present  I 
had  reserved  for  him,  and  which  he  well  deserved,  and  on  the 
following  day  we  started  in  the  canoes  for  Goumbi.  All  the 
chief  people  came  to  the  shore  to  shake  hands  and  say  good-bye. 
All  said  I  must  come  again  and  bring  trade.  Also,  they  said, 
I  had  spoken  to  them  of  white  men  coming  to  teach  poor  black 
people ;  and  they  would  like  to  have  some  such  teachers.  They 
all  had  a  look  of  regret  at  our  parting,  and  nearly  every  one 
came  with  some  little  parting  gift.  I  was  very  much  touched 
myself  at  their  simple  afiectionate  ways. 

When  all  was  ready  for  a  start  Makondai  fired  a  gun,  and 
then  I  swung  out  the  American  flag  to  the  breeze,  the  first  time 
that  it  or  any  other  flag  of  a  civilized  nation  had  floated  over 
these  waters     The  people  shouted,  and  we  were  off. 

Presently,  several  miles  down  stream,  we  passed  Querlaouen's 
plantation.  He  and  his  kind  old  wife  and  their  children  stood 
on  the  shore  and  beckoned  me  to  stop.  We  paddled  in,  and  the 
good  fellow  silently  put  into  my  boat  another  smoked  boar-ham, 
while  his  wife  gave  me  a  great  basket  of  sweet  potatoes.  As  we 
started  away  again  the  wife  sliouted,  "  When  you  come  back, 
bring  mo  some  beads."     The  children  cried  out,  "Wlien  you 


310  SICKNESS  — RETURN  TO  THE  GABOON.    Ckap.  XVI. 

come  back,  bring  us  some  cloth."  But  old  Querlaouen  stood  still 
and  silent  like  a  black  statue,  until,  by  a  turn  of  the  river,  he 
was  lost  to  our  sight. 

On  the  next  day  we  made  a  triumphant  entry  into  Goumbi, 
where  we  remained  two  days  to  lay  in  provisions. 

From  Goumbi  to  Biagano  our  voyage  was  a  triumphal  pro- 
cession. Quengueza  accompanied  me  to  show  to  Eanpano  that 
he  brought  me  back  safe  ;  and  all  of  Goumbi  that  had  canoes 
accompanied  Quengueza  for  fim's  sake,  beating  tam-tams,  sing- 
ing songs,  and  firing  guns. 

At  last,  on  the  13th  of  August,  I  got  back  to  Biagano,  where 
the  whole  population  turned  out  to  receive  me,  headed  by  Ean- 
pano and  old  Rinkimongami,  my  housekeeper.  I  found  my  house 
undisturbed,  and  my  live-stock  on  hand  and  in  good  condition, 
and  made  old  Rinkimongami  very  proud  by  expressing  my 
satisfaction.  He  said,  "Now  you  tell  me  what  I  stole?"  And 
Eanpano  exclaimed,  "  Ah !  we  don't  steal  from  our  white  man." 

And  now  came  the  time  when  I  was  to  pay  for  my  long  tour. 
It  is  quite  usual  for  natives  of  the  interior  coming  to  the  sea- 
shore to  be  seized  with  fever.  It  is  a  great  change,  and  I  ex- 
pected to  be  affected  by  it  in  some  measure.  Nor  were  my 
expectations  ungrounded.  Day  after  day  my  fever  attacks  grew 
worse,  until,  having  no  proper  medicines,  and  living  nece^arily 
here  without  many  of  the  comforts  a  sick  man  needs,  I  was  quite 
prostrated.  Then,  luckily,  one  day  came  by  a  vessel.  Some  of 
my  men  boarded  her  with  a  note  to  the  captain.  He  was  going 
to  the  Gaboon,  and  I  gladly  accompanied  hinu  There,  under 
the  kind  care  of  my  missionary  friends,  I  managed,  in  a  short 
time,  to  recover  my  health  sufficiently  to  think  of  another  trip, 
in  which  I  hoped  to  make  a  thorough  geographical  exploration 
of  the  farther  interior. 


Chap.  XVII.  THE  BASHIKOUAY  ANT.  311 


CHAPTER   XVIL 

The  Ants  of  Equatorial  Africa  —  The  Bashikouay  —  The  Red  Ant  —  The 
Nchellelay  —  The  Little  Ant  —  The  Red  Leaf-ant  —  The  Nest-building 
Ant. 

In  the  forests  of  this  part  of  Africa  are  found  vast  numbers  of 
ants,  some  of  whose  tribes  are  so  terrible  to  man,  and  even  to 
the  beasts  of  the  wood,  from  their  venomous  bites,  their  fierce 
tamper  and  voracity,  that  their  path  is  freely  abandoned  to  them, 
and  they  may  well  be  called  lords  of  the  forest 

I  know  of  ten  different  species  of  ants  found  in  these  regions, 
all  differing  widely  in  their  choice  of  food,  the  quality  of  their 
venom,  the  manner  of  their  attack,  or  the  time  of  their  opera- 
tion. The  most  remarkable  and  most  dreaded  of  all  is  the 
bashikouay. 


llie  Bashikouay  Ant,  magnified  to  twice  ita  natural  siie. 

This  ant,  also  called  nchounou  by  the  Mpongwe,  is  very 
abundant  in  the  whole  region  I  have  travelled  over  in  Africa, 
and  is  the  most  voracious  creature  I  ever  met  It  is  the 
dread  of  all  living  animals,  from  the  leopard  to  the  smallest 
insect 

1  do  not  think  that  they  build  a  nest  or  home  of  any  kind. 
At  any  rate  they  cany  nothing  away,  but  eat  all  their  prey  on 
the  spot  It  is  their  habit  to  march  through  the  forests  in  a 
long  regular  lino — a  line  about  two  inches  broad  and  often 


812  FEROCITY  OF  THE  BASHIKOUAY.         Chap.  XVII. 

several  miles  in  length.  All  along  this  line  are  larger  ants,  who 
act  as  officers,  stand  outside  the  ranks,  and  keep  this  singular 
army  in  order.  If  they  come  to  a  place  where  there  are  no 
trees  to  shelter  them  from  the  sun,  whose  heat  they  cannot  bear, 
they  immediately  build  underground  timnels,  through  which  the 
whole  army  passes  in  cohmins  to  the  forest  beyond.  These 
tunnels  are  four  or  five  feet  underground,  and  are  used  only  in 
the  heat  of  the  day  or  during  a  storm. 

When  they  grow  hungrj'  the  long  file  spreads  itself  through 
the  forest  in  a  front  line,  and  attacks  and  devours  all  it  over- 
takes with  a  fury  which  is  quite  irresistible.  The  elephant  and 
gorilla  fly  before  this  attacL  The  black  men  run  for  their 
lives.  Every  animal  that  lives  in  their  line  of  march  is  chased. 
They  seem  to  understand  and  act  upon  the  tactics  of  Napoleon, 
and  concentrate,  with  great  speed,  their  heaviest  forces  upon 
the  point  of  attack.  In  an  incredibly  short  space  of  time  the 
mouse,  or  dog,  or  leopard,  or  deer  is  overwhelmed,  killed,  eaten, 
and  the  bare  skeleton  only  remains. 

They  seem  to  travel  night  and  day.  Many  a  time  have  I 
been  awakened  out  of  a  sleep,  and  obh'ged  to  rush  from  the  hut 
and  into  the  water  to  save  my  life,  and  after  all  suffered  in- 
tolerable agony  from  the  bites  of  the  advance-guard,  who  had 
got  into  my  clothes.  When  they  enter  a  house  they  clear  it  of 
all  living  things.  Cockroaches  are  devoured  in  an  instant. 
Eats  and  mice  spring  round  the  room  in  vain.  An  overwhelming 
force  of  ants  kills  a  strong  rat  in  less  than  a  minute,  in  spite  of 
the  most  frantic  struggles,  and  in  less  than  another  minute  its 
bones  are  stripped.  Every  living  thing  in  the  house  is  devoured. 
They  will  not  touch  vegetable  matter.  Thus  they  are  in 
reality  very  useful  (as  well  as  dangerous)  to  the  negroes,  who 
have  their  huts  cleaned  of  all  the  abounding  vermin,  such  as 
immense  cockroaches  and  centipedes^  at  least  several  times  a 
vear. 

When  on  their  march  the  insect-world  flies  before  them,  and 
I  have  often  had  the  approach  of  a  bashikouay  army  heralded 
to  me  by  this  means.  Wherever  they  go  they  make  a  dean 
sweep,  even  ascending  to  the  tops  of  the  highest  trees  in  pursuit 
of  their  prey.  Their  manner  of  attack  is  an  impetuous  leap. 
Instantly  the  strong  pincers  are  fastened,  and  they  only  let  go 
when  the  piece  gives  way.     At  such  times  this  little  animal 


Chap.  XVII.  THE  GRAY  BASHIKOUAY.  313 

seems  animated  by  a  kind  of  fury  which  canses  it  to  disregard 
entirely  its  own  safety,  and  to  seek  only  the  conquest  of  its  prey. 
The  bite  is  very  painful. 

The  negroes  relate  that  criminals  were  in  former  times 
exposed  in  the  path  of  the  bashikouay  ants,  as  the  most  cruel 
manner  of  putting  them  to  death. 

Two  very  remarkable  practices  of  theirs  remain  to  be  related. 
When  on  their  line  of  march  they  require  to  cross  a  narrow 
stream,  they  throw  themselves  across  and  form  a  tunnel — a 
living  tunnel — connecting  two  trees  or  high  bushes  on  opposite 
sides  of  the  little  stream,  whenever  they  can  find  such  to 
facilitate  the  operation.  This  is  done  with  great  speed,  and  is 
effected  by  a  great  number  of  ants,  each  of  which  clings  with  its 
fore  claws  to  its  next  neighbour's  body  or  hind  daws.  Thus 
they  form  a  high,  safe  tubular  bridge,  through  which  the  whole 
vast  raiment  marches  in  regular  order.  If  disturbed,  or  if  the 
arch  is  broken  by  the  violence  of  some  animal,  they  instantly 
attack  the  offender  with  the  greatest  animosity. 

The  bashikouay  have  the  sense  of  smell  finely  developed,  as 
indeed  have  all  the  ants  1  know,  and  they  are  guided  very  much 
by  it.  They  are  larger  than  any  ant  we  have  in  America,  being 
at  least  half  an  inch  long,  and  are  armed  with  very  powerful 
fore  legs  and  sharp  jaws,  with  which  they  bite.  They  are  red 
or  dark-brown  in  colour.  Their  numbers  are  so  great  that  one 
does  not  like  to  enter  into  calculations ;  but  I  have  seen  one 
continuous  line  passing  at  good  speed  a  particular  place  for  twelve 
hour9.  The  reader  may  imagine  for  himself  how  many  millions 
on  millions  there  may  have  been  contained  here. 

There  is  another  species  of  basliikouay  which  is  found  in  the 
mountains  to  the  south  of  the  equator.  It  is  of  great  size.  The 
body  is  grayish-white  in  colour ;  the  head  of  a  reddish-black.  Its 
fangs  are  very  powerful,  and  it  is  able  to  make  a  clean  bite  out 
of  a  piece  of  flesh.  It  is  thus  a  very  formidable  animal ;  but 
fortunately  its  motions  are  not  so  quick  as  those  of  its  fierce 
brother ;  it  does  not  march  in  such  vast  armies,  nor  does  it  pre- 
cipitate itself  upon  its  prey  with  such  irresistible  fury.  In  it» 
motions  it  is  almost  sluggish.  They  do  not  invade  villages,  nor 
climb  trees  in  piu^uit  of  prey ;  and  I  do  not  think  them  nearly 
so  voracious  as  their  fellows  before  mentioned.  If  they  were, 
they  could  doubtless  clear  the  country  of  every  living  thing,  for 


314  THE  NCHELLELAY.  Chap.  XVD. 

they  are  much  more  powerful.    They  are,  in  fact,  to  ants  what 
whales  are  to  fishes. 

Next  to  the  bashikouay  come  the  neheUelayy  or  white  antB. 
These  troublesome  animals  do  not  bite  or  attack  living  things  at 
all.  They  live  on  vegetable  substances,  and  are  particularly 
fond  of  cotton-cloth,  paper,  and  old  wood.  They  have  a  greet 
aversion  to  daylight,  and  use  all  means  possible  to  avoid  it  To 
reach  an  object  which  is  situated  in  the  light  they  build  a  clay 
tunnel,  through  which  they  pass  in  safety.  The  clay  seems  to 
be  moistened  with  some  juices  of  their  own,  and  becomes  quite 
firm  on  exposure  to  the  air.  Their  nests,  which  are  curiously 
shaped,  with  overhanging  flat  roofs  (exactly  like  a  toadstool 
or  gigantic  mushroom),  are  constructed  in  the  same  manner, 
and  are  built  up  from  within,  the  underground  excavation* 
doubtless  furnishing  clay  for  this  purpose. 

It  is  almost  impossible  to  keep  anything  safe  from  these 
destroyers.  They  work  in  silence,  unseen,  and  with  wond^iiii 
rapidity.  One  night's  negligence  suffices  to  spoil  a  box  of 
clothing  or  books.  They  seem  to  be  attracted  by  smell  rather 
than  sight  to  their  prey.  They  are  always  near ;  and  they  cut 
through  any — the  hardest— -wood,  in  order  to  reach  the  object  of 
their  desires.  I  have  noticed  that  they  always  cut  through  the 
middle  of  a  piece  of  cloth  first,  as  though  they  were  trying  to  do 
as  much  mischief  as  possible.  Such  is  their  perseverance  and 
destructiveness,  that  I  think  one  of  the  greatest  boons  to  this 
part  of  Africa  would  be  to  rid  it  of  this  pest 

The  earth  of  which  they  build  their  houses  becomes  so  hard, 
after  it  has  been  mixed  with  their  saliva,  that  it  stands  the 
heaviest  and  longest  rain-storms  without  melting  or  breaking 
away,  and  they  last  many  rainy  reasons.  They  leave  no  opening 
in  their  house  for  air  or  light,  for  both  which  they  seem  to  have 
a  particular  aversion.  And  thus,  too,  they  are  protected  from 
other  ants  who  are  their  enemies,  and  against  whom,  being 
unarmed,  they  would  find  it  difficult  to  defend  themselves. 

Among  these  enemies  the  chief  is  the  bashikouay  ant,  which 
pursues  the  white  ant  with  great  fury.  I  have  sometimes,  when 
I  noticed  some  of  these  white-ant-hills  in  the  track  of  an  army 
of  bashikouay,  knocked  away  the  top.  No  sooner  was  this  done 
than  the  bashikouay  rushed  to  their  work,  and  in  a  short  time 
not  a  white  ant  was  left 


Chap.  XVII.  VARIETIES  OF  ANTS.  315 

When  the  house  is  only  slightly  injured,  the  working  ants  are 
called,  and  immediately  set  to  work  to  mend  the  hole,  using  clay 
brought  from  the  interior.  The  outside  work  is  only  carried  on 
during  the  night. 

These  ants,  though  called  white,  are  really  of  a  straw  colour. 
They  emit  a  strong  smell,  especially  if  crushed. 

The  Little  Ant. 

This  is  a  minute  house-ant,  found  in  myriads  in  every  African 
village  in  this  region,  and  a  great  plague ;  for  the  least  care- 
lessness with  food  on  your  part  will  bring  them  on  you,  and  ioiin 
everything  you  have  eatable  to  which  they  can  gain  access.  In 
an  African's  house  all  food  is  suspended  from  the  ceiling  by  cords 
which  are  limed  (tarred  on  the  coast)  to  make  the  ants'  passage 
impossible.  But  even  then  they  sometimes  drop  doum  on  their 
prey.  Tables  are  set  in  cups  of  water  on  the  coast  to  keep  off 
these  troublesome  visitors.  I  was  unfortunate  enough  once  to 
leave  my  sugar-bowl  within  their  reach.  I  returned  in  less 
than  half-an-hour  for  it,  and  then  already  it  was  covered,  inside 
and  out,  with  countless  thousands  of  these  little  scavengers. 
The  whole  bowl,  inside  and  out,  was  one  living,  heaving  mass 
of  black. 

They  seem  to  have  a  very  acute  smell.  They  are  never  seen 
till  something  to  eat  is  within  their  reach,  and  then  they  come 
— where  from  I  do  not  know — in  such  vast  numbers  that  the 
traveller  is  not  only  astonished,  but  alarmed  at  such  a  besieging 
army. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  these  little  ants,  one  red  and  the  other 
black ;  but  in  other  respects,  so  far  as  I  know,  alike. 

The  Blaek  Ant 

Hves  in  the  forests,  generally  in  rotten  trees,  and  is  not  trouble- 
some, as  it  mostly  hunts  singly,  not  in  swarms,  and  does  not 
attack  man  unless  it  is  first  disturbed.  When  it  does  attack,  its 
bite,  as  I  have  experienced,  is  very  sharp  and  painfrd ;  but  the 
pain  does  not  last  long,  and  the  poison,  if  there  is  any,  is  not 
very  virulent 

The  Bed  Leaf -ant. 

This  animal  has  a  singular  manner  of  building  its  nest.     It 


316  VARIETIES  OF  ANTS.  Chap.  XVII. 

prefers  to  live  in  certain  trees,  which  very  often  are  completely 
killed  by  these  ingenious  house-builders.  They  choose  the  end 
of  a  branch  where  there  is  generally  a  thick  bunch  of  leaves;. 
These  leaves  they  glue  one  to  the  other  by  their  edges  in  such 
a  way  that  they  make  a  bag  the  size  of  an  orange,  and  tins  is 
the  nest  It  is  a  very  singular  sight  to  see  a  number  of  trees  in 
the  forests  with  pendants  of  this  kind  to  every  limb  and  branch ; 
for  they  will  build  all  over  a  tree,  and  so  occupy  and  abuse  it  as 
very  shortly  to  kill  it  The  bite  of  these  ants  is  very  painful, 
and  their  temper,  as  with  most  ants  who  can  defend  themselves, 
very  vindictive.  Woe  to  the  traveller  who  inadvertently  shakes 
a  tree  or  branch  on  which  these  fellows  have  built  They  im- 
mediately fall  upon  him  in  great  numbers,  and  bite  him  without 
mercy. 

There  is  a  reddish-black  ant,  of  medium  size,  which  builds  its 
nest  about  the  roots  of  certain  trees,  which  it  ascends  to  eat  the 
tender  shoots  of  the  branches.  Its  bite  is  rather  painfiil,  and  it 
often  kills  the  trees  on  whose  shoots  it  feeds,  and  about  whose 
roots  it  lives. 

The  common  Black  Sandrant, 

This  is,  next  to  the  bashikouay,  the  most  to  be  dreaded  of  any 
ant  1  met  in  Africa.  It  is  a  little  black  ant,  living  chiefly  in 
the  Camma  country,  near  the  villages,  and  found  travelling 
solitarily  through  the  sand  of  the  prairie.  Fortunately  it  is  not 
very  numerous. 

Its  bite  is  not  felt  at  the  time,  but  in  a  little  while  after  there 
is  a  very  severe  and  distressing  pain  as  though  a  scorpion  had 
bitten  you;  and  this  lasts,  with  intermissions,  sometimes  for 
many  hours.  After  suflFering  half-a-dozen  times  from  the  bite 
of  this  little  plague,  I  came  to  dread  it  more  than  any  other  ant 
or  other  venomous  insect  of  Africa.  The  bashikouay  gives  you 
warning,  tind  the  bite  is  only  painful  at  the  moment ;  but  this 
Camma  ant  attaclw  singly  and  unperceived,  and  you  are  bitten 
before  you  know  it 

A  Nest-building  Ant. 

There  is  also  a  black  ant,  wliich  builds  a  very  ingenious 
hanging  nest,  suspending  it  from  the  branches  of  trees.  This 
nest  is  generally  two  feet  long  by  a  foot  in  diameter,  and  inside 


Chap.  XVU.  VARIETIES  OF  ANTS.  317 

is  full  of  galleries  and  highways,  where  work  is  done,  and  food 
is  stored,  and  eggs  are  laid,  and  the  young  are  raised.  To  make 
these  nests  safe  and  waterproof  in  the  heavy  rains  which  prevail 
liere,  the  ants  construct  them  just  as  our  houses  are  roofed  or 
shingled,  with  this  difference,  that  while  the  tiers  of  leaf  which 
they  use  to  shingle  their  building  overlap  each  other,  and  thus 
shed  the  water,  they  do  not  touch  each  other — by  which  means 
a  fine  system  of  ventilation  is  kept  up  in  the  nest. 

Small  Underground  Bashikouat/. 

This  ant  is  not  so  much  dreaded  as  the  formidable  reddish- 
black  bashikouay.  It  is  smaller,  of  a  reddish  colour,  and  does 
not  live  in  the  forest,  but  in  the  villages  and  houses  among  men. 
It  does  not  appear  in  numbers  above-ground  till  it  smells  food 
near.  Then  they  issue  from  a  great  number  of  little  holes  in 
the  ground,  whose  passages  seem  all  to  communicate  with  each 
other  below  the  ground.  Its  bite,  though  not  so  terrible  as  that 
of  the  bashikouay,  is  still  very  painful.     It  is  not  a  roving  ant. 

27ie  large  Red  Ant, 

This,  though  one  of  the  largest  of  the  African  ants,  does  not 
attack  man.  It  is  a  night  ant,  and  is  never  seen  by  day ;  it 
even  avoids  candlelight.  This  ant  is  excessively  fond  of  cooked 
meat,  and  also  of  sugar.  It  chooses  its  habitation  in  dark  comers 
and  hidden  closets,  where  the  light  will  not  disturb  it. 


318  THE  SEASONS,  Chap.  XVni. 


CHAPTER   XVIII. 

The  Seasons  and  the  Fevers  of  Equatorial  Africa. 

The  Western  Coast  of  Africa  has  two  seasons — the  dry  and  the 
rainy  season.  Both  the  time  and  the  duration  of  these  seasons 
depend  on  the  latitude  and  longitude  of  the  place.  That  is  to 
say,  the  sun  rules  the  season ;  and  whenever  the  sun  is  in  the 
zenith  of  any  given  place,  that  spot  has  then  its  rainy  season. 
Thus,  when  the  rains  are  at  their  heiglit  in  Senegambia,  it  is  dry 
under  the  equator. 

But  the  duration  of  the  rains  is  also  ruled  somewhat  by  the 
general  formation  of  the  country.  A  wide  open  country  or  sandy 
desert  has  less  rain  and  a  shorter  rainy  season  than  a  wooded 
tract,  and  the  mountain  ranges  have  the  most  rain  of  alL  Thus, 
on  the  mountains  in  the  interior,  it  rains  much  more  and  con- 
siderably longer  than  in  the  same  latitude  near  the  seashore. 

The  rainy  season  begins  in  the  interior  among  the  mountains, 
and  gradually  approaches  the  seashore ;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  dry  season  commences  on  the  seaboard  and  passes  to  the 
interior.  There  is  almost  a  month  of  difference  in  the  seasons 
in  these  countries,  though  situated  in  the  same  latitude,  and 
only  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  apart. 

The  tract  nearest  the  equator  on  both  sides  has  the  longest 
rainy  season ;  and  as  we  approach  the  tropics  the  rains  become 
shorter  and  the  dry  season  longer. 

Near  the  equator  the  rains  begin  about  die  middle  or  end  of 
September,  and  terminate  in  the  beginning,  or  sometimes  not 
till  the  close  of  May.  The  dry  season  lasts  from  May  to 
September. 

But  on  or  near  the  equator  this  long  rainy  season  is  inters 
rupted  by  a  short  period,  when  the  rains  cease.  This  "  little  dry 
season "  lasts  from  a  month  to  six  weeks,  and  sometimes  even 
longer.  It  occurs  in  the  middle  or  end  of  December,  lasting 
into  January  or  the  beginning  of  February.  During  this  time 
it  rains  very  little. 

The  period  of  the  "  little  dry  season "  is,  therefore,  that  at 


Chap.  XVIII.  THE  RAINS.  319 

which  the  sun  is  nearest  the  southern  tropic.  As  by  the  revolu- 
tion of  the  earth  the  sun  becomes  non-vertical  near  the  equa- 
torial line,  the  rains  again  begin,  and  grow  heaviest  when  the 
sun  is  on  the  line. 

Though  the  rains  are  heavy  before  this  little  dry  season,  they 
are  as  nothing  compared  with  those  which  follow.  Tornadoes 
then  become  frequent,  and  blow  with  extraordinary  force  during 
February,  March,  and  ApriL 

During  the  rainy  season  the  streams  become  swollen  and 
overflow  their  banks,  covering  the  flat  country  which  borders 
their  courses.  The  bush  vegetation  and  the  grass  of  the  prairies 
grow  luxuriantly ;  and  when  the  waters  retire  a  heavy  deposit 
of  fertile  mud  remains  to  enrich  the  soil,  and  also  to  breed  fevers 
and  other  diseases. 

During  the  rainy  season  on  the  coast  the  prevailing  wind  is 
from  the  south-west. 

The  hottest  part  of  the  year  is  during  the  rains.  Near  the 
equator  the  hot  months  are  December,  January,  February, 
March,  and  part  of  April,  though  on  the  coast  the  thermometer 
ranges  no  higher  than  from  85°  to  90°.  A  few  weeks  before 
the  dry  season  sets  in  the  days  and  nights  become  cooler,  and 
the  wind  veers  gradually  from  south-west  to  south.  After  the 
first  month  of  the  wet  season  it  rains  mostly  only  at  night. 

The  dry  season  is  the  coolest  part  of  the  year  in  this  part  of 
Africa,  and  the  natives  often  suffer  from  cold.  The  thermometer 
ranges  as  low  sometimes,  early  in  the  morning,  at  64° ;  the  sky 
is  overcast,  which  is  peculiar  to  this  season ;  the  wind  on  the 
coast,  which  had  blown  from  the  land  in  the  morning  and  from 
the  sea  by  night,  now  almost  turns  into  one  steady  sea-breeze, 
which  blows  strongly,  especiaDy  in  the  afternoon  and  evening. 
This  is  the  sickly  season  in  Africa  for  the  negroes,  who  at  this 
time  suffer  much  from  pleurisies  and  fevers ;  and  it  is  an  un- 
comfortable fact  that  it  is  much  healthier  and  safer  for  white 
men  to  explore  the  rivers  in  the  dreary  rainy  season  than  in  the 
many-ways  charming  dry  season. 

This  dry  season  is  to  the  negroes  what  summer  is  to  us.  They 
go  more  frequently  on  travels  and  trading-tours  into  the  interior ; 
their  villages  are  deserted,  everybody  going  .out  to  the  planta- 
tions ;  they  bum  the  dry  brush,  cut  down  trees,  and  dear  the 
ground  for  agricultural  operations ;  and  when  the  streams  have 


320  THE  DRY  SEASON.  Chap.  XVm. 

fairly  receded  within  their  banks,  go  out  in  search  of  ivory,  which 
is  often  found  on  the  dry  bottoms  of  recently  full  lagoons,  and 
near  the  recently  overflown  river-banks. 

As  we  depart  from  the  equator  and  approach  the  tropical 
bounds,  the  rainy  seasons  become  shorter  and  the  dry  seasons 
longer.  This  is  owing  to  the  influence  of  the  sun,  as  before 
explained ;  and  not  only  is  the  rainy  season  shortened  by  the 
quicker  passage  of  the  sun  over  the  regions  nearest  the  Epical 
lines,  but  as  the  sun  is  for  half  the  year  near  one  or  other  of  the 
tropics,  so  they  laci  the  short  intermediate  dry  season  which  is 
a  relief  to  the  long  rains  on  the  equator.  Also,  it  is  observed 
that  the  rains  somewhat  precede  the  sun  in  its  course,  and  last, 
in  any  given  place,  until  it  has  receded  so  far  as  to  have  no 
farther  influence. 

Near  the  equator,  on  the  seashore,  the  rainy  season  marks  it^ 
beginning  by  a  continuous  drizzle,  but  without  much  thunder 
during  the  first  month.  Thunder  is  heard  rolling  in  the  far 
distance  in  the  direction  of  the  mountains,  and  finally  the  rains 
come  on  in  full  force  with  thunder  and  lightning.  Then  the  sun 
is  at  the  zenith  for  that  spot.  As  it  moves  to  the  south  or  north 
the  rains  gradually  grow  milder ;  and  when  the  sun  stands  over 
the  tropic  of  Capricorn  there  occurs  on  the  equator  that  inter- 
mediate dry  season  to  which  I  have  alluded. 

It  is  noticeable  that  the  equatorial  dry  season  is  not  inter- 
rupted by  any  short  rainy  season  to  balance  the  "  little  dry 
season"  which  interrupts  the  long  rains  at  the  time  when  the 
sun  is  near  the  southern  tropic ;  also  that  the  rains,  which  begin 
as  the  sun  returns  from  the  north,  are  more  continuous  while  the 
sun  is  to  the  south  of  the  equator  than  when  it  is  to  the  north. 
Doubtless  the  conformation  of  the  land  and  the  prevailing  winds 
operate  to  aggravate  the  rains  at  one  time  and  to  withhold  them 
at  another. 

During  the  dry  season  there  is  little  and  often  no  perceptible 
dew. 

The  fii-st  care  of  a  white  man  coming  to  remain  for  a  time  on 
the  West  Coast  is  to  inure  his  body  by  degrees  to  the  heat  and  to 
the  miasms  which  create  the  fevers  so  fatal  to  the  white  race. 
On  my  first  voyage  to  Africa  I  arrived  in  the  hottest  time  of  the 
year — in  the  middle  of  the  rainy  season.  My  chief  solicitude  was 
for  a  while  to  keep  clear  of  fever  ;  for  those  who  are  seized  on 


Chap.  XVm.  FEVER.  321 

their  first  amval  suffer  more  severely,  and  are  prostrated  for 
longer  periods  afterwards  than  those  who  escape  for  a  time. 

I  may  as  well  state  here  that  all  white  residents  on  this  coast 
have  the  fever  more  or  less.  None  escape  altogether — ^too  many 
die.  That  a  good  constitution,  managed  with  prudence,  will 
stand  a  good  many  attacks,  is  proved  by  my  own  experience  and 
that  of  others.  I  suffered,  in  the  four  years  over  which  this  nar- 
rative extends,  from  no  less  than  fifty  attacks,  and  have  swallowecl 
quite  fourteen  ounces  of  quinine. 

I  will  here  relate  the  treatment  which  I  found,  after  much  ex- 
perience, to  answer  best,  both  as  preventive  and  curative ;  and 
by  following  which  and  living  carefully,  I  was  able  to  imdergo 
with  impunity  such  hardships  and  exposures  as  are  too  often  fatal 
to  white  men  on  the  African  coast 

From  the  day  of  my  arrival  on  the  coast  I  took  quinine 
morning  and  evening,  in  doses  of  three  or  four  grains.  This  I 
have  found  a  good  preventive.  When  languor,  headache,  and 
aching  of  the  limbs  appeared  as  premonitory  symptoms  of  fever, 
I  increased  the  dose  to  eight  or  ten  grains.  Thus  for  the  first 
month  I  took  daily  doses  of  quinine ;  and  for  the  next  month 
occasional  doses,  generally  every  two  days.  During  my  whole 
stay  in  Africa  I  took  from  time  to  time,  even  when  in  perfect 
health,  doses  of  quinine  or  quinine  wine  as  a  prophylactic  or  pre- 
ventive against  malaria.  Also  I  took  daily,  while  near  the  coast, 
where  such  articles  were,  with  care,  attainable,  either  port  or 
sherry  wine,  ale,  or  claret  in  moderation.  When  at  my  dep6t 
for  the  time  being,  I  always  took  care  to  have  these  articles  at 
hand.  In  my  journeys  to  the  far  interior  I  could  not,  however, 
encumber  myself  with  such  supplies.  But  I  always  provided  a 
sufficient  store  of  pure  brandy  to  afford  me  at  least  a  thimbleftd 
daily.  This  I  found  an  excellent  remedy  for  cramps  occasioned 
by  bad  food  and  indigestion,  or  exposure  to  wet  and  cold,  and  a 
very  valuable  tonic  for  the  debilitated  system  of  a  half-starved 
explorer  and  hunter.  Brandy  and  strong  coffee,  both  daily,  but 
in  the  greatest  moderation,  are,  next  to  good  habits  and  a  good 
constitution,  the  best  safeguards  against  disease  to  the  traveller 
in  Central  Africa.  Some  of  my  good  friends  the  missionaries 
sometimes  remonstrated  with  me  for  what  they  thought  setting 
a  bad  example  to  the  natives,  and  I  am  bound  to  say  they  reli- 
giously abstained  themselves,  except  when  absolutely  necessary. 


322  PRECAUTIONS  AGAINST  FEVER.        Chap.  XTni. 

But  they  do  wrong ;  and  a  proof  of  this  is,  that  many  of  them 
succumb  to  the  climate  and  the  fevers,  and  not  one  enjoys  as 
good  general  health  as  was  my  good  fortune ;  although  the  life 
of  a  traveUer  like  myself  was  necessarily  more  exposed  than  Uiaf 
of  one  living  steadily  in  one  place,  and  not  subject  to  extremes 
of  exertion  and  of  hunger. 

The  fact  is  that  our  American  missionaries  too  often  carry 
with  them  into  the  tropics  the  habits  of  our  temperate  and 
healthy  climate,  and  make  it  a  matter  of  conscience  to  adhere 
to  such  customs  as  are  not  at  all  calculated  to  preserve  health 
under  changed  circumstances.  Total  abstinence  may  perhaps 
do  for  the  temperate  clime  of  the  United  States ;  but  I  have  no 
hesitation  in  saying  that  a  little  wine,  brandy,  or  ale  every  day 
is  absolutely  necessary  to  keep  up  the  tone  of  the  system  in  a 
white  person  in  Airica.  One  esteemed  friend,  a  missionary  on 
the  coast,  had  been  a  vegetarian  at  home.  He  adhered  almost 
literally  to  this  habit  in  his  new  field  of  labour,  notwithstanding 
the  advice  of  those  who  had  experience  of  the  coast.  He  ate 
nothing  but  fruits  and  vegetables,  and,  of  course,  presently  con- 
tracted a  dangerous  dysentery.     "  Circumstances  alter  cases," 

The  climate  of  the  West  Coast  is  sickly  and  exhausting,  not 
because  of  its  extreme  heats,  but  because  of  its  high  average  tem- 
perature and  moisture,  and  the  universal  prevalence  of  malaria. 
Owing  to  the  prevalence  of  a  sea-breeze,  the  mercury  is  rarely 
higher  than  90°  in  the  shade ;  but  then  it  rarely  falls  below  80^ 
for  nine  months  in  the  year ;  and  even  in  the  remaining  three— 
the  dry  season — it  never  gets  below  64°.  Thus  the  body  gets 
no  relief  at  all,  and  is  gradually  weakened  until,  finally,  fever  is 
brought  on  by  some  incautious  exposure  to  the  ever-present 
malaria. 

Exposure  to  the  mid-day  sun  must  be  carefully  avoided. 
Whenever  I  walked  in  the  sun,  even  mornings  and  evenings,  I 
carried  an  umbrella  over  my  head  and  a  handkerchief  in  my  bat 
In  fact,  the  theory  of  the  turban — hot  as  tiiat  head-covering 
looks — is  the  true  one  for  a  tropical  sun.  White  men  cannot 
work  much  on  the  coast.  They  must  rest  a  great  part  of  every 
day.  Nevertheless,  regular  exercise  is  highly  beneficial;  and 
those  who  walk  or  ride  mornings  and  evenings  always  enjoy  the 
best  health.  Between  10  A.M.  and  4  p.m.  exposure  to  the  sun  is 
dangerous,  and  should  be  carefully  avoided  by  new  comers. 


Chap.  XVIII.  CAUSES  OF  FEVER,  323 

Finally,  cofTee  is  a  healthy  beverage.  And  when  the  system 
becomes  accustomed  to  quinine,  and  this  medicine  ceases  to 
operate,  sometimes  a  small  dose  of  Fowler's  solution  of  arsenic 
will  be  found  very  successful  in  stopping  the  chills. 

The  African  coast  fever  is  caused  by  the  miasms  which  rise 
trom  the  immense  swamps  which  line  this  part  of  the  coast,  and 
which  are,  in  fact,  the  mouths  of  the  various  rivers  and  their 
lower  tributary  creeks.  These,  falling  into  the  low  lands,  are 
there  dispersed,  and  become  sluggish.  Their  beds  are  filled  with 
decaying  vegetable  matter  brought  in  immense  masses  from  the 
upper  country  during  the  rainy  season.  The  banks  are  lined 
and  overgrown  with  dense  masses  of  mangroves,  bamboos,  and 
other  water-loving  trees  and  jungle,  which  keep  out  the  light  of 
the  sun ;  and  now,  when  the  dry  season  comes  on,  the  miasms 
rise  and  are  dispersed,  so  that  no  part  of  the  coast  is  free  from 
their  influence. 

The  heavy  rains  which  prevail  during  the  long  rainy  season  of 
eight  or  nine  months  suflSce  to  saturate  the  soil,  and  to  decay 
the  mouldering  vegetable  substance  which  meanwhile  accumu- 
lates. The  heats  of  the  dry  season  drain  the  creeks  and  expose 
their  beds,  which  now  exhale  such  poisonous  vapours  as  even  the 
natives  cannot  withstand.  These  find  the  dry  season  the  most 
sickly ;  and  most  white  residents  have  a  similar  experience — 
contrary  to  the  commonly  received  opinion.  I  have  no  doubt 
that  the  great  mortality  of  several  African  exploring  expeditions 
arose,  in  a  measure,  from  the  mistaken  supposition  that  the  dry 
season  was  the  safest  for  such  ventures. 

The  beginning  of  the  rainy  season  is  another  period  of  especial 
iinhealthiness.  Then  the  river-beds  are  still  heated,  and  the  first 
rains  are  immediately  exhaled  into  feverish  vapours.  It  is  only 
after  a  severe  and  continued  drenching,  when  the  rainy  season  is 
fully  set  in,  that  African  rivers  should  be  explored. 

The  preliminary  symptoms  of  fever,  which  are  of  the  utmost 
importance  for  preventive  purposes,  are  too  generally  overlooked 
by  those  newly  arrived  on  the  coast.  To  old  stagers,  who  have 
had  experience,  they  afford  the  opportunity,  by  care  and  a  con* 
fidderable  dose  of  quinine,  to  stave  off  the  attack. 

These  symptoms  set  in  generally  a  few  hours  before  the  chill. 
Incautious  exposure  to  the  mid-day  sun,  sitting  in  wet  clothes, 
or  unusual  excitement,  however,  often  precipitate  the  attack.    1 

Y  2 


324  PREMONITORY  SYMPTOMS.  Chap.  XVIH. 

have  seen  a  man  lose  his  temper,  and  almost  instantly  fall  into  a 
cliilL  In  fact,  the  mind  must  be  guarded  as  well  as  the  body 
when  illness  is  threatened. 

The  premonitory  symptoms  are :  loss  of  appetite  and  irrita- 
bility of  temper ;  then  heaviness  of  the  head,  languor,  aching  of 
the  limbs,  an  unpleasant  taste  in  the  mouth,  continual  yawning 
and  stretching,  and  general  prostration. 

If  these  are  neglected,  there  follows  gradually  a  slight  sexmr 
tion  of  cold.  The  suflTerer  seeks  shelter  from  the  breeze  and  puts 
on  an  overcoat.  Finally  comes  the  regular  chill,  which  is  some- 
times light,  but  oftener  very  severe. 

When  the  chill  has  lasted  for  a  considerable  but  variable  time, 
it  disappears,  and  fever  sets  in.  Often  the  close  of  the  chill  is 
varied  with  sudden  iBashes  of  heat,  succeeded  by  the  cold.  The 
hot  stage  generally  lasts  about  six  hours,  and  subsides  graduallj. 
On  its  cessation  the  patient  feels  relieved,  but  finds  himself 
greatly  prostrated.  His  face  is  shrunken  and  pallid,  and  he  has 
a  generally  cadaverous  appearance. 

In  some  cases  fevers  begin  without  chills,  but  only  preceded 
by  headache,  nausea,  pains  in  the  back  and  limbs,  &c.  I  have 
had  many  more  fevers  than  chills,  and  was  often  taken  first  bj 
fever. 

Meantime,  between  the  attacks  of  fever,  quinine  must  be  im- 
mediately given,  and  in  as  large  doses  as  the  system  can  bear; 
for  Africa  is  not  a  place  for  small  doses.  The  medicine  may  be 
taken  internally,  which  is  the  usual  way ;  or  the  body  may  be 
rubbed  with  it,  in  which  case  a  larger  quantity  must  be  used,  as 
the  pores  do  not  imbibe  it  ;readily ;  or,  finally,  it  may  be  used  by 
injection. 

Frequently  the  medicine  does  not  prevent  a  return  of  the  chiD 
for  one  or  even  two  paroxysms,  and  at  periods  of  firom  twelve  to 
twenty-four  hours.  In  this  case  the  symptoms  are  increased.  In 
the  fever  stage  the  skin  becomes  red  and  hot,  the  face  turgid,  the 
eyes  bright  and  watery ;  there  is  violent  pain  in  the  head,  great 
thirst,  and  often  distressing  and  continued  nausea.  Sometimes 
nausea  is  so  severe  as  to  make  the  internal  application  of  quinine 
impossible,  in  which  case  rubbing  it  into  the  skin  and  taking  it 
by  injection  will  be  found  useful.  But  long-continued  nausea 
often  seriously  complicates  the  disease  and  weakens  the  body, 
thus  making  it  less  able  to  resist  attacks. 


Chap.  XVm.  MALIGNANT  FEVER.  325 

During  the  fever  the  pulse  is  always  increased  in  frequency 
and  force ;  but  the  range  is  great,  varying  from  80  to  130  beats 
per  minute,  even  in  simple  and  uncomplicated  fevers.  To  allay 
thirst,  weak  lemonade  is  given.  The  period  of  recovery  varies, 
of  course,  with  the  severity  of  the  attack ;  but  even  in  very  mild 
cases  several  days  are  required  to  re-establish  the  patient's  health. 

The  disease  I  have  described  is  the  common  and  mild  form  of 
coast-fever,  the  simplest  and  least  dangerous  of  all.  Often, 
however,  other  symptoms  appear  with  these,  and  cause  a  com- 
plicated intermittent,  which  is  much  more  serious,  because  more 
difficult  to  treat  when  it  has  once  become  chronic. 

This  is  occasioned  by  inflammation  of  the  spleen  and  liver. 
The  spleen  is  subject  to  a  chronic  enlargement  where  patients 
have  suiffered  fix)m  intermittent  fever,  and  persons  suffering  from 
such  enlargement  should  not  remain  on  the  coast  Affections 
of  the  spleen  cannot  always  be  known  without  percussion ;  but 
affections  of  the  liver  are  easily  recognized  by  their  effect  upon 
the  a)mplexion.  The  white  of  the  eyes  becomes  yellow,  and  the 
whole  complexion  is  sallowed. 

Intermittent  fever  often  approaches  very  insidiously,  the  first 
chills  being  so  light  as  to  be  almost  invariably  neglected,  imtil 
finally  a  decided  chill  proclaims  that  the  fever-demon  has  gained 
possession. 

But  the  most  dangerous  form  of  fever  in  Africa  is  that  known 
as  malignant  or  pernicious  fever.  To  this  violent  disease  stout 
and  full-blooded  men  are  much  more  subject  than  lean  and  thin 
persons.  It  is  noticeable  that  the  African  climate  is  much  more 
fatal  to  full-blooded,  robust,  hearty  people,  than  to  those  who 
axe  lank  and  thin.  No  length  of  residence  or  completeness  of 
acclimation  exempts  a  man  from  this  last-mentioned  form  of 
fever.  The  oldest  residents  are  sometimes  carried  off  with  a 
speed  which  is  truly  frightful.  The  disease  not  unfrequently 
runs  its  course  in  twenty-four  to  thirty-six  hours. 

The  approach  of  malignant  fever  is  very  insidious.  An  attack 
begins  mostly  with  an  ordinary  chiD,  attended  by  no  unusual  or 
marked  symptoms.  Sometimes  the  patient  has  had  a  light  chill 
a  day  or  two  before  this,  which  he  has  neglected.  Sometimes  he 
has  felt  slightly  unwell  for  ten  or  fourteen  days ;  haa  complained 
of  loss  of  appetite  and  general  weariness ;  but,  as  these  symptoms 
are  not  very  marked,  they  are  very  apt  to  be  overlooked,  espe- 


326  TREATMENT  OF  MALIGNANT  FEVER.    Chap.  XVm. 

cially  with  new  comers.    It  requires  one  fiilly  on  his  goard  and 
familiar  with  all  the  symptoms  to  detect  its  approach. 

The  real  attack  may  begin  with  a  chill  or  with  a  fever,  but  its 
effects  are,  in  either  case,  at  once  evident  in  a  peculiarly  yellow 
skin  and  haggard  countenance.  In  fever  there  is  profuse  perspi- 
ration, a  rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  high  and  irregular  pulse,  and 
general  prostration.  Sometimes  the  body  is  hot,  but  dry.  Thirst 
is  urgent,  but  the  stomach  rejects  whatever  is  swallowed. 

Now  is  the  time  to  give  quinine  in  large  doses.  In  such  cases 
I  have  stopped  or  rather  cured  the  attack  by  taking  this  medi- 
cine at  the  rate  of  60  grains  per  day,  20  grains  at  a  dose ;  and 
if  I  were  suffering  from  a  severe  attack,  I  should  not  hesitate 
to  take  in  one  day  150  grains. 

K  the  paroxysm  of  fever  returns,  it  is  with  renewed  force,  and 
the  third  attack  is  commonly  fatal.  Before  death  the  patient 
becomes  insensible :  there  is  violent  vomiting,  which  is,  in  hct, 
but  a  regurgitation  of  the  ingesta,  mixed  with  green  and  yellow 
fluids.  Immediately  after  the  chill,  and  even  before  this  has 
passed  off,  the  urine  becomes  dark  red  or  black.  The  pulse  is 
very  irregular,  the  breathing  slow,  and  finally  the  patient  sinks 
away  into  a  state  of  coma,  and  dies  without  a  struggle. 

There  is  another  form  of  attack  which  ends  even  more  quickly 
than  the  one  just  described.  In  this  there  is  no  yellowness.  The 
countenance  is  pale,  and  has  a  peculiar  ghastliness  and  wildness 
of  expression.  The  skin  is  cold  to  the  touch,  though  the  pati^t 
does  not  complain  of  cold.  The  whole  sur&ce  is  almost  insensible 
to  stimulants.  The  pulse  is  generally  small  and  very  frequent, 
particularly  in  the  beginning.  Under  these  symptoms  sometimes 
a  patient  sinks  away,  reaction  never  occurring.  The  treatment 
here  must  be  stimulating.  In  the  last  stages  there  is  sometimes 
blindness  and  deafness;  in  others  there  is  not  only  entire 
prostration  of  the  intellect,  but  raving  delirium,  and  the  patient 
must  be  held  in  bed  by  force.  This  soon  ends  in  stupor  and 
death. 

The  natives  sometimes  suffer  from  fever,  though  by  no  means 
as  frequently  as  the  whites.  With  them  the  chills  return  some- 
times every  third  or  seventh  day  for  some  weeks,  and  finally 
wear  out  of  themselves.  I  have  known  a  few — ^four  or  five- 
instances  where  natives  died  of  malignant  fever,  but  this  does 
not  happen  often.    In  the  cases  I  saw  they  had  first,  for  a  few 


Chap.  XVIII.  CARE  OP  HEALTH  IN  AFRICA.  327 

days,  the  usual  chills,  which  then  tamed  into  malignant  fever, 
under  which  they  sank. 

In  cases  of  malignant  feyer,  inflammatory  complications  of  the 
liver,  spleen,  or  brain  greatly  aggravate  the  attttck,  and  almost 
alwayB  give  the  disease  a  fatal  turn. 

If  the  chills  are  broken  by  medicine  they  are  apt  to  return  at 
longer  but  regular  intervals,  mostly  in  seven,  fourteen,  or  twenty- 
one  days,  and  precautions  should  be  used  against  such  returns. 
It  is  well  to  take  quinine  twelve  or  twenty-four  hours  before  the 
periodica]  return  of  the  chiU. 

Persons  residing  permanently  in  any  fever  district  are  more 
liable  to  attacks  than  those  who  are  moving  about,  and  in  this  I 
had  an  advantage,  though  on  several  occasions  a  return  to  the 
coast  from  the  interior  brought  on  a  fever  which  probably  I 
should  have  escaped  had  I  remained  all  the  time  on  the  coast 
Where  a  fever  is  not  broken  readily  by  medicine,  it  is  prudent 
to  try  a  temporary  change  of  locality. 

I  will  conclude  this  chapter  by  a  summary  account  of  my 
course  of  treatment  of  myself  in  a  fever  attack.  When  the  chill 
was  felt  I  covered  myself  heavily  to  induce  perspiration.  Then 
my  extremities  were  severely  rubbed  with  pepper  and  mustard 
to  restore  their  temperature.  The  thirst  of  fever  was  quenched 
with  cold  lemonade.  Costiveness  was  averted  by  cathartics.  For 
headache  cold  water  was  applied,  and,  when  this  was  without 
effect,  leeches,  which  are  very  abundant  almost  everywhere  in 
this  region.  If  my  liver  was  affected  I  took  calomel,  and  also 
applied  leeches.  Meantime  quinine  was  taken  in  doses  of  from 
4  to  1 2  grains,  and  at  the  rate  of  from  12  to  60  grains  per  day, 
according  to  the  violence  of  the  attack.  And  when  the  fever 
was  broken  I  continued  to  take  four  or  five  grain  doses  daily  for 
some  weeks,  as  a  preventive. 

The  treatment  must  be  energetic.  Delays  are  most  dangerous ; 
and  I  have  found  it  well  to  meet  every  individual  symptom,  so 
far  as  possible,  with  a  remedy.  In  intermittent  chills,  where  the 
paroxysm  returns  generally  after  seven  days,  I  was  very  careful 
to  take  quinine  the  day  before  and  on  the  day  of  the  chill  a  few 
hours  before  it  came  on.  Patients  should  not  be  frightened  by 
the  slight  deafiiess  and  ringing  in  the  ears,  which  is  one  of  the 
immediate  effects  of  quinine.  These  effects  go  off  presently,  and 
they  are  useful  as  evidence  that  the  drug  has  taken  effect 


328  EXPLANATION.  Chap.  XVIH. 

During  my  residence  in  Africa  I  paid  much  and  dose 
attention  to  the  phases  of  fever ;  but  it  was  not  till  after  some 
years  of  careful  study  of  my  own  symptoms  that  I  became  able 
to  detect  its  insidious  approach  with  any  degree  of  certainty,  and 
thus,  by  timely  preventives  and  care,  ward  off  many  attacks. 

In  justice  to  myself,  my  readers,  and  particularly  the  medical 
profession,  I  must  say,  in  conclusion,  that  I  have  never  studied 
medicine,  and  know  nothing  of  diseases  or  their  remedies  beyond 
what  my  necessities,  as  a  traveller  in  a  barbarous  and  sickly 
country,  have  compelled  me  to  learn  experimentally.  But 
necessity  is  an  able  teacher. 


Chap.  XIX.  SUBDIVISIONS  OF  THE  TRIBES.  329 


CHAPTEE  XIX. 

Politics :  the  Gk)yemment,  Superstitions,  and  Slave  System  of  Equatorial 

Africa. 

I  HAVE  found  it  most  convenient  to  consider  these  three  subjects 
together,  because  each  is  intimately  affected  by  the  other ;  and 
to  treat  of  them  separately  would  be  almost  impossible. 

Among  the  tribes  which  I  visited  in  my  explorations  I  found 
but  one  form  of  government,  which  may  be  called  the  patriarchaL 
There  is  not  sufficient  national  unity  in  any  of  the  tribes  to  give 
occasion  for  such  a  despotism  as  prevails  in  Dahomey  and  in  other 
of  the  African  nationalities.  I  found  the  tribes  of  Equatorial 
Afijca  greatly  dispersed,  and,  in  general,  no  bond  of  union  be- 
tween parts  of  the  same  tribe.  A  tribe  is  divided  into  numerous 
dans,  and  these  again  into  numberless  little  villages,  each  of 
which  possesses  an  independent  chief  The  villages  are  scat- 
tered, are  often  moved  on  account  of  death  or  witchcraft,  as  I 
have  already  explained  in  the  narrative,  and  not  unfirequently 
are  engaged  in  war  with  each  other. 

The  chieftainship  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  hereditary,  the  right 
of  succession  vesting  in  the  brother  of  the  reigning  chief  or  king. 
The  people,  however,  and  particularly  the  elders  of  the  village, 
have  a  veto  power,  and  can,  for  sufficient  cause,  deprive  the  lineal 
heir  of  his  succession,  and  put  in  over  him  some  one  thought  of 
more  worth.  In  such  cases  the  question  is  put  to  the  vote  of 
the  village ;  and  where  parties  are  equally  divided  as  to  strength, 
there  ensue  sometimes  long  and  serious  palavers  before  all  can 
unite  in  a  choice.  The  chief  is  mostly  a  man  of  great  influence 
prior  to  his  accession,  and  generally  an  old  man  when  he  gains 
power. 

His  authority,  though  greater  than  one  would  think,  judging 
from  the  little  personal  deference  paid  to  him,  is  final  only  in 
matters  of  every-day  use.  In  cases  of  urgency,  such  as  war  or 
any  important  removal,  the  elders  of  the  village  meet  together 
and  deliberate  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  population,  who 
finally  decide  the  questioiL 


330  PROPERTY.  Chap.XDL 

The  elders,  who  possess  other  authority  and  are  always  iu  the 
counsels  of  the  chief,  are  the  oldest  members  of  important  famiUes 
in  the  village.  Respect  is  paid  to  them  on  account  of  their  years, 
but  more  from  a  certain  regard  for  "  family,"  which  the  Africaji 
has  very  strongly  wherever  I  have  known  him.     These  families 

Except  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Gaboon,  trade  with  whites 
is  yet  insignificant  There  is  no  property  in  land ;  they  have  no 
cattle,  and  the  riches  which  give  a  man  consequence  consist, 
therefore,  of  slaves  and  wives.  The  more  wives  (and  fathers-in- 
law)  the  more  power.  The  more  slaves,  the  more  ease  and 
plenty.  The  nature  of  the  country  and  the  total  absence  of 
national  eaprity  makes  such  vast  predatory  wars  as  we  hear  of  in 
Dahomey  and  other  kingdoms  impossible  in  this  great  r^ion. 
Nevertheless,  life  and  property  are  by  no  means  secure.  The 
African  is  a  jealous  creature.  He  watches  his  neighbour's  pro- 
sperity with  jaundiced  eyes,  and  a  man  acquires  wealth  in  slaves 
and  wives  at  the  constant  risk  of  his  life.  His  relatives  cannot 
help  thinking  of  their  rich  inheritance  if  he  were  out  of  the  way. 
His  neighbours  would  like  to  plunder  him.  And  so  presently 
nmiours  are  raised  that  he  is  a  potent  and  evil-minded  sorcerer 
— that  he  "  possesses  a  witch ;"  then  come  accusations — witnesses 
are  but  too  easily  obtained — the  case  is  sure  to  go  against  him— 
and  he  flees  for  refuge  to  another  tribe,  remaining  in  lifelcmg 
banishment ;  or,  if  he  faces  it  out,  is  compelled  to  try  the  poison 
ordeal,  and,  unless  he  has  firm  and  influential  and  faithful  friends 
— ^a  rare  thing  here— he  perishes. 

As  for  other  property,  such  as  ivory  or  trade  goods,  these  are 
carefully  concealed— only  the  owner,  his  head  wife,  and  a  few 
trusty  friends  knowing  of  their  existence.      . 

The  villages  in  all  this  region  are  not  very  populous.  Very 
few  have  a  thousand  inhabitants,  many  have  only  a  few  hundreds, 
and  many  more  not  even  a  hundred.  Large  expeditions  for 
purposes  of  robbery  or  murder  are  therefore  impossible :  still 
less  possible  because  of  the  nature  of  the  country,  which  is  an 
almost  impenetrable  forest,  and  because  the  people  have  no 
beasts  of  burden  or  draught  to  convey  thenu 

Nevertheless,  wars  are  frequent,  and  in  some  parts  almost 
constant  Quarrels  or  palavers  arise  on  account  of  bad  &ith  in 
trade ;  intrigues  with  strange  women;  a  desire  for  slaves,  either 


Chap.  XIX.  SLAVERY.  331 

for  domestic  service  or  for  the  foreign  trade ;  wanton  or  vindic- 
tive accusations  of  sorcery ;  and  often  out  of  mere  commercial  or 
social  jealousy  of  the  neighbours'  superior  prosperity  or  good  luck. 

In  war  they  show  no  bravery,  although  on  the  hunt  they  are 
certainly  brave  enough.  They  despise  boldness  and  admire 
cunning ;  prefer  to  gain  by  treachery,  if  possible ;  have  no  mercy 
or  consideration  for  the  enemy's  women  and  children ;  are  cruel 
to  those  who  fall  in  their  power. 

The  system  of  slavery,  as  it  prevails  here,  is  not  at  all  under- 
stood, and  I  diall  endeavour  to  make  it  plain  to  my  readers. 
In  the  first  place,  I  ought  to  state  that  its  existence  has  no  con- 
nection at  all  with  the  foreign  slave-trade.  There  were  slaves 
held  here  long  before  a  barracoon  was  built  on  the  coast — 
probably  long  before  the  good  priest  Las  Casas  thought  of 
relieving  his  poor  Indians  by  substituting  black  men  in  their 
place.  History  testifies  of  tUs.  Nor  is  it  continued  because  of 
the  present  foreign  slave-trade.  It  has  an  independent  exist- 
ence, and  is  ruled  by  laws  of  its  own. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  slaves  in  all  the  tribes  I  met.  One 
class  are  domestic  servants,  who  are  not  sold  out  of  the  tribe, 
and  who,  while  sufferiner  some  disabilities  as  slaves,  have  yet  a 
la.^  portion  of  Ubertyf  and  a  certain  yoice  and  influence  L  the 
village  where  they  are  owned.  They  are  protected  by  their 
master ;  have  often  property  of  their  own ;  and  their  chief  duty 
is  to  provide  him  with  food,  either  by  hunting  or  by  assisting  in 
the  tillage  of  the  ground,  which  is  the  labour  of  free  women  and 
the  female  slaves. 

Masters  are  seldom  very  severe  with  their  slaves,  and  this 
because  they  fear  the  slave  will  in  revenge  bewitch  them.  The 
slave  is  held  to  be  in  a  very  inferior  position  to  a  free  man ;  and 
the  master  may  kill  his  slave  if  he  will,  no  one  having  the  right 
^of  interfering  between  them.  The  laws  or  customs  of  the  coun- 
try protect  him  in  this  privilege,  which  I  have  myself  known  to 
be  exercised.  Many  slaves  enjoy  the  confidence  of  their  masters 
to  that  degree  that  they  are  sent  on  long  trading  journeys  with 
much  valuable  property.  They  are  generally  faithful  to  such 
trusts. 

Those  tribes  which  have  a  connection  with  the  coast,  and  a 
foreign  market  for  their  slaves,  also  employ  themselves  in  pur- 
chasing slaves  from  other  tribes  to  supply  this  trade.    This  is  a 


332  FOREIGN  SLAVE-TRADE.  Chap.  XIX. 

distinct  kind  of  slavery,  however ;  and  the  domestic  slave  is,  in 
most  cases,  in  no  fear  of  being  sold  to  the  coast  so  long  as  he  is 
accused  of  no  crime.  The  foreign  slave-trade  is  now  suppUed 
almost  entirely  from  the  interior.  Thus  many  of  that  singular 
people,  the  Fttns,  have  been  recently  brought  down  to  the  coast. 
So  the  Ashira  and  Apingi,  and  members  of  tribes  living  even 
beyond  them,  and  totally  unknown  to  the  whites,  find  their  way 
down  to  the  Cape  Lopez  and  other  barracoons,  handed  along 
from  tribe  to  tribe  just  like  a  tusk  of  ivory  or  a  stick  of  ebony.    . 

It  may  easily  be  imagined  that  the  effect  of  this  foreign 
demand  on  the  tribes  living  nearest  the  coast  is  to  multiply 
accusations  of  witchcraft  and  other  crimes,  for  which  slavery  is  a 
punishment,  and  thus  to  enlarge  the  evils  of  this  system.  But 
it  must  also  be  admitted  that,  whereas  now  a  man  is  too  valuable 
to  kill  and  is  sold,  if  the  foreign  demand  did  not  exist,  all  men 
accused  of  sorcery  would  be  barbarously  murdered. 

Inquire  of  the  men  of  any  tribe  in  this  region,  and  they  wiD 
tell  you  that  they  do  not  sell  their  own  people,  but  that  thejf  are 
all  freemen.  Nevertheless,  the  observer  will  find  that  debtore 
are  often  sold ;  sorcerers,  adulterers,  and  cheats  are  either  sold 
or  killed ;  and  in  all  palavers,  of  whatever  kind,  the  man  who 
goes  to  the  wall  is  pretty  sure  to  be  sold  off.  They  do  not 
keep  such  people  in  tiieir  own  tribes,  but  sell  them  to  the  next 
tribe,  as  I  have  remarked  before.  Where  tribes  are  fast  dis- 
appearing, the  children  bom  slaves  in  the  country  of  their 
master  are  not  sold,  but  form  a  kind  of  population  apart. 

No  better  illustration  could  be  given  of  the  way  in  which  the 
slave-system  has  ingrafted  itself  upon  the  life  and  policy  of  these 
tribes. than  this, — ^that,  from  the  seashore  to  the  farthest  point  in 
the  interior  which  I  was  able  to  reach,  the  commercial  unit  of 
value  is  a  slave.  As  we  say  dollar,  as  the  English  say  pound 
sterling,  so  these  Africans  say  slave.  If  a  man  is  fined  for  an 
offence,  he  is  mulcted  in  so  many  slaves.  If  he  is  bargaining 
for  a  wife,  he  contracts  to  give  so  many  slaves  for  her.  Perhaps 
he  has  no  slaves ;  but  he  has  ivory  or  trade  goods,  and  pays  d 
these  the  value  of  so  many  slaves — ^that  is  to  say,  as  much  ivory, 
or  ebony,  or  bar-wood,  or  the  amount  in  trade  goods  which 
would,  in  that  precise  place,  buy  so  many  slavea  For  it  must 
not  be  forgotten  that  at  every  short  remove  into  the'interior  the 
slave's  value  diminishes ;  so  that,  among  the  Apingi,  a  slave  is 


Chap.  XIX.  THE  SLAVE  A  UNIT  OF  VALUE.  833 

worth  only  about  one-seventh  what  he  would  bring  at  Cape 
Lopez.  This  deterioration,  however,  is  balanced  by  the  increased 
value  of  trade  goods,  for  which  the  demand  always  exceeds  the 
supply,  and  which,  therefore,  to  some  extent,  rule  the  market 

If  a  man  is  fined  a  certain  number  of  slaves,  he  may  pay  in 
"  trade  "  of  any  kind.  If  he  has  no  slaves  or  goods,  then  he  is 
often  sold  himself,  and  the  proceeds,  be  it  ivory  or  other  "  trade," 
are  divided  among  those  to  whom  the  fine  was  incurred. 

It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  slave-trade  is  the  cause  of 
all  the  wars  and  quarrels  of  the  African  tribes  and  nations. 
Where  it  plays  a  part,  it  doubtless  aggravates  these ;  but  the 
total  absence  of  any  law  but  that  of  the  strongest — the  almost 
total  ignoring  of  the  right  of  property,  and  the  numerous  super- 
stitions of  the  people,  are  the  fertile  causes  of  constant  warfare. 

A  greater  development  of  regular  civilized  trade  would  be  a 
great  boon  to  these  people.  Many  articles,  such  as  guns,  powder, 
tobacco,  brass,  and  iron  in  various  shapes,  &c.,  have  become 
necessities  to  the  tribes  who  are  within  reach  of  white  trade ; 
but  they  are  never  obtainable  in  nearly  sufiScient  quantities,  and 
consequently  are  held  very  precious.  Now  the  high  prices  are 
a  great  temptation  to  the  cupidity  of  the  African,  who,  having  a 
power  of  life  and  death  over  his  children,  often  does  not  hesitate 
to  sell  these  where  other  produce  is  lacking.  He  finds  that  one 
of  his  children  is  not  bright,  that  it  has  no  sense,  or  that  it  wants 
to  bewitch  the  father.  Then  a  consultation  ensues  with  the 
rdatives  of  the  mother ;  they  are  promised  a  share  in  the  pro- 
duce of  the  sale — ^for  they  have  rights  also  in  the  child — and, 
when  they  are  brought  to  consent,  the  unhappy  child  is  sold  oflf. 

With  the  increase  of  legitimate  trade  such  temptations  will 
be  done  away  with.  At  the  same  time,  I  am  convinced  that  the 
introduction  of  agricultural  industry,  the  planting  of  cotton  and 
sugar  for  export,  when  these  ends  are  accomplished  will  only 
serve  to  rivet  the  bonds  of  the  slave  by  so  much  as  they  will 
increase  his  value  to  the  master.  Now,  the  slave  only  adds  to 
his  master's  e^^  and  consequence ;  then,  he  will  appeal  to  his 
cupidity.  Show  him  that  he  can  make  a  profit  on  his  labour, 
and  he  will  never  consent  to  set  him  free. 

Polygamy  exists  everywhere.  A  man's  great  ambition  is  to 
have  a  great  many  wives.  These  cultivate  the  ground  for  him, 
and  it  is,  in  fact,  Uieir  duty  to  feed  him.    He  does  not  interfere 


334  WOMEN.  Chap.  XIX- 

with  their  labours  on  the  soiL  They  are  responsible  for  his  daily 
food.  The  man  buys  his  wife  of  her  father  for  a  sum  agreed  on, 
often  when  she  is  but  a  child.  She  becomes  his  wife  sometimee 
at  the  age  of  five,  and  sometimes  still  younger.  Often  the  young 
child  is  placed  under  care  of  the  future  husband's  chief  wife,  a 
priyileged  personage,  who  superintends  her  husband's  affairs, 
shares  his  secrets,  rules  his  other  wives,  and  to  intrigue  with 
whom  is  a  special  and  greater  offence  than  adultery  with  the 
others.  A  man's  claims  on  his  father-in-law  for  help  in  trade, 
or  in  a  pcJaver,  are  rigidly  respected,  and  this  gives  additional 
value  to  a  great  number  of  wives.  I  have  found  that  the  wives 
rarely  disagree  among  themselves.  Early  marriage  and  hard 
treatment  makes  many  of  the  women  childless ;  and  greegrees, 
which  are  believed  to  cure  sterility,  are  in  great  demand  all 
over  the  country.  Children,  whether  male  or  female,  are 
thought  a  great  blessing,  not  only  to  the  father,  but  to  his  vil- 
lage, whose  consequence  is  increased  by  every  birth.  They 
know  very  little  of  the  right  care  of  children,  and  a  great  pro- 
portion of  the  infants  die. 

Men  marry  at  every  opportunity,  and  at  all  ages  up  to  seventy 
or  eighty.  As  long  as  he  can  buy  wives,  this  is  his  great 
ambition.  Obedience  is  the  wife's  first  duty,  and  it  is  enforced 
without  mercy.  Such  a  whip  as  is  figured  below  is  an  important 
instrument  found  in  every  house.  It  is  made  of  the  hide  of 
the  hippopotamus  or  manatee,  and  is  a  barbarous  weapon,  as 
hard  and  heavy  as  iron.  This  is  laid  on  with  no  light  hand, 
the  worthy  husband  crying  out,  "  Bascal,  do  you  think  I  paid 
my  slaves  for  you  for  nothing?"  The  wives  are  more  harshly 
treated  than  the  slaves — a  stroke  of  the  whip  often  leaves  a 
life-long  mark ;  and  I  saw  very  few  women  in  all  my  travels 
who  had  not  some  such  marks  on  their  persons. 


Whip,  or  the  AMoan  Peaoe-maker. 


The  women  in  all  the  tribes  are  much  given  to  intrigue,  and 
chastity  is  an  unknown  virtue.     As  they  are  not  confiend  in 


Chap.  XIX.  FETICHISM.  335 

their  moyements,  but  roam  about  freely  and  till  the  soil,  oppor- 
tunity is  never  wanting.  And  if  a  woman  has  many  children, 
her  many  sins  are  easily  forgiven  her.  Then  she  is  the  pride, 
not  only  of  her  husband,  but  of  the  whole  village. 

Fetichism  is  the  name  applied  by  Europeans  to  the  religion 
of  the  tribes  and  natives  of  western  and  southern  Africa.  It  is 
derived  from  the  Portuguese  term  feiticdOy  signifying  magic;  and 
this,  in  turn,  comes  from  the  Nigritian  feitico,  which  means  ''  a 
magic  thing."  Among  the  tribes  with  which  I  am  familiar, 
there  is  no  native  generic  term  equivalent  to  our  word  religion, 
and  no  necessity  for  one,  as  they  have  no  idea  of  a  system  of 
belief.  By  fetichism  is  understood  the  worship  of  idols,  and 
animate  and  inanimate  objects,  such  as  serpents,  birds,  rocks, 
mountain  peaks,  feathers,  teeth,  &c. ;  and  the  belief  in  good  and 
evil  spirits,  in  the  power  of  charms  (called  monda),  and  in  the 
significance  of  dreams. 

Their  religious  notions  are  of  the  loosest  and  vaguest  kind, 
and  no  two  persons  are  found  to  agree  in  any  particulars  about 
which  the  traveller  seeks  information.  After  the  most  careful 
and  extensive  inquiries,  I  am  unable  to  present  an  array  of 
items  from  which  the  reader  may  make  up  a  theological  system. 
Superstition  seems  in  these  countries  to  have  run  wild,  and  every 
man  believes  what  his  fancy,  by  some  accident,  most  forcibly 
presents  to  him  as  hurtM  or  beneficiaL 

The  only  point  on  which  I  have  come  to  a  determinate  con- 
viction is  that,  though  these  people  lay  offerings  upon  the  graves 
of  their  friends ;  though  they  even  sometimes  shed  the  blood  of 
slaves  on  the  grave  of  a  chief  or  of  a  father  of  a  family  ;  though 
they  fear  the  spirits  of  the  recent  dead ;  though  their  beUef  in 
sorcery  is  very  strong :  yet  they  are  sunk  in  an  utter  materialism, 
and  not  only  have  no  definite  ideas  as  to  the  state  of  the  soul 
after  death,  but  do  not  even  believe  in  its  existence  for  any  con- 
siderable time  after  it  leaves  the  body. 

They  fear  the  spirits  of  the  recentli/'depaxted;  and  besides 
placing  furniture,  dress,  and  food  at  their  graves,  return  from 
time  to  time  with  other  supplies  of  food.  When  men  and 
women  are  slain  over  a  grave,  they  even  believe  that  their  spirits 
join  that  of  him  in  whose  honour  they  have  been  killed.  During 
the  season  appointed  for  mourning,  the  deceased  is  remembered 
and  feared ;  but  when  once  his  memory  grows  dim,  the  negro 


336  FEAR  OF  SPIRITS.  Chap.  XIX. 

ceases  to  believe  in  the  prolonged  existence  of  the  departed 
spirit 

Ask  a  negro  where  the  spirit  of  his  grandfather  or  greats 
grandfather,  whom  he  did  not  know,  is,  and  he  will  reply  con- 
fidently that  it  is  "  done,"  "  gone  out,"  no  more,  or  that  he  does 
not  know  where  it  has  gone. 

I  have  frequently  held  such  conversation  as  this : 

"  Do  you  believe  there  is  a  God?" 

«  Yes." 

"  Do  you  think  you  will  see  this  God  when  you  die ?" 

«  No." 

"  After  death  all  is  done,"  is  a  proverb  always  in  their  months. 
The  fear  of  spirits  of  the  departed  seems  an  instinctive  feeling 
for  which  they  do  not  attempt  to  account  to  themselyes,  and 
about  which  they  have  formed  no  theory.  They  believe  the 
spii'it  is  near  and  about  them ;  that  it  requires  food  and  pro- 
perty ;  that  it  can  and  sometimes  does  harm  them.  They  think 
of  it  as  a  vindictive  thing,  to  be  feared  and  to  be  conciliated. 
But  as  the  memory  of  the  departed  grows  dim,  so  does  this  fear 
of  his  spirit  vanish.  Ask  a  negro  about  the  spirit  of  his  brother 
who  died  yesterday,  and  he  is  full  of  terror ;  ask  him  about  the 
spirit  of  those  who  died  long  ago,  and  he  will  tell  you  carelessly, 
"  It  is  done ; "  that  is  to  say,  it  has  no  existence. 

This  total  lack  of  generalization  or  systematizing  a  belief  is 
very  curious,  and  goePthrough  all  their  individual  superstitions. 
Thus  a  negro  told  me  such  a  man's  soul  (whom  he  knew),  when 
he  died,  went  to  the  woods,  and  now  inhabited  a  certain  bird, 
which  was  therefore  sacred.  But  when  I  asked  if  he  believed  in 
the  transmigration  of  souls,  he  confidently  told  me  No.  He 
believed  in  this  particular  case,  and  for  some  special  reason,  but 
no  farther.  The  ouganga  or  doctor  had  said  so,  or  he  had 
dreamt  it,  or  it  was  the  current  belie£  But  beyond  that  he  did 
not  think. 

I  found  in  all  the  tribes  I  visited  a  faith  in  the  existence  and 
power  of  two  great  spirits,  one  called  Abambou  or  Ocoucou,  and 
the  other  Mbuirri.  They  have  other  names  in  various  tribes, 
but  wherever  I  journeyed  I  found  this  belief.  Both  appear  to 
be  evil  spirits,  though  sometimes  willing  to  do  good.  They  aie 
not  represented  by  idols,  but  have  houses  built  for  their  occupa- 
tion when  tired  of  wandering,  food  offered  to  them,  and  are 


Chap.  XIX.  IDOL-WORSHIP.  337 

feared  and  implored  to  do  no  harm.  One  is  generally  connted 
80  much  less  evil  than  the  other,  that  he  may  be  called  a  good 
spirit  in  some  cases,  and  by  comparison.  Some  tribes  belieye 
them  to  be  married  to  two  female  spirits.  They  are  said  some- 
times to  walk  into  the  village  by  night  and  to  let  their  voices 
be  heard.  These  two  spirits  are  the  potent  ones ;  they  seem  to 
be  more  powerM  than  all  the  others.  In  sickness  and  on  other 
grave  occasions  they  are  always  invoked. 

The  name  AniambU  stands,  I  think,  for  Q-od,  But  yet  they 
have  no  idea  of  a  Supreme  and  Almighty  Spirit,  Creator  and 
Preserver.  The  word  aniembay  which  sounds  much  like  the 
previously-named,  and  is  probably  derived  from  the  same  root, 
signifies  "  possessed  by  a  witch." 

The  large  idol  of  a  clan  is  kept  in  a  house  made  for  the  pur- 
pose, and  hither  come  its  worshippers  when  they  are  about  to 
proceed  on  a  hunting  or  other  important  expedition.  They 
present  food,  and  then  invoke  its  protection  by  dancing  and 
singing  before  it. 

Such  idols  are  handed  down  from  generation  to  generation, 
and  are  much  feared.  There  are  also  private  idols,  possessed 
and  worshipped  by  individuals ;  but  these  have  less  authority. 

Their  idols,  which  are  always  repulsive  figures,  are  believed 
to  speak,  to  walk  about^  to  eat  and  drink — in  short,  to  perform 
all,  or  nearly  all,  the  functions  of  a  man.^  It  is  remarkable  that 
ihey  have  no  priests.  The  cuganga  or  doctor  is  their  wise  man 
and  medicine-man — ^he  who  exorcises  evil  spirits  and  puts  power 
into  their  charms ;  but  he  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  idoL 

Next  in  order,  after  the  idols,  come  the  charms  or  greegrees, 
ccdled  by  them  mondcu  Greegree,  like  fetich,  is  a  term  of 
European  origin.  In  these  mondas  they  have  implicit  faith. 
No  negro  in  all  this  region  but  has  about  his  person  one  or  more 
of  these  articles.  The  preparation  gives  a  considerable  revenue 
and  much  honour  to  the  doctors,  who  have,  however,  themselves 
the  greatest  confidence  in  these  things.  The  mondas  are  gene- 
rally worn  about  the  neck  or  waist ;  are  made  of  the  skins  of 
fare  animals,  of  the  claws  of  birds,  of  the  teeth  of  crocodiles  or 
leopards,  of  the  dried  flesh  and  brains  of  animals,  of  the  feathers 
of  rare  birds,  of  the  ashes  of  certain  kinds  of  wood,  of  the  skin 
«nd  bones  of  serpents,  &c.  &c.  Every  greegree  has  a  special 
power.     One  protects  from  sickness ;  another  makes  the  heart 

z 


838  FEAR  OF  DEATH..  Chap.  XIX. 

of  the  hunter  or  warrior  brave ;  another  gives  success  to  the 
lover ;  another  protects  against  sorcery ;  some  cure  sterility,  and 
others  make  the  mother's  breast  abound  in  milk  for  her  babe. 
The  charmed  leopard-skin  worn  about  the  warrior's  middle  is 
supposed  to  render  that  worthy  spear-proof ;  and  when  he  has 
an  iron  chain  about  his  neck  no  bullet  can  hit  him.  K  the 
charm  fails,  his  faith  is  none  the  less  firm,  for  then  it  is  con- 
sidered that  some  potent  and  wicked  sorcerer  has  worked  a  too 
powerful  counterspell,  and  to  this  he  has  fallen  a  victim. 

The  greatest  curse  of  the  whole  country  is  the  belief  in  amembiiy 
sorcery  or  witchcraft.  The  African  firmly  believes  death  to  be 
always  a  violence.  He  cannot  imagine  that  a  man  who  was  well 
two  weeks  ago  should  now  be  lying  at  death's  door  with  disease, 
unless  some  potent  wizard  had  interfered,  and  by  witchcraft 
broken  the  thread  of  life  and  inflicted  sickness.  They  have  the 
most  terrible  and  debe^sing  fear  of  death. 

"Are  you  ready  for  death?"  I  sometimes  asked. 

"No!"  would  be  the  hasty  reply.  "Never  speak  of  that; 
ah  1"  with  a  shudder  of  horror. 

And  then  a  dark  cloud  settled  on  the  poor  fellow's  face  ;  in 
his  sleep  that  night  he  had  horrid  dreams,  and  for  a  few  days  he 
was  suspicious  of  all  about  him,  fearing  for  his  poor  life,  lest  it 
should  be  attacked  by  a  wizards 

If  the  African  is  once  possessed  with  the  belief  that  he  is 
bewitched,  his  whole  nature  seems  to  change.  He  becomes  sus- 
picious of  his  dearest  friends.  The  father  dreads  his  children — 
the  son  his  father  and  mother,  the  man  his  wife,  and  the  wives 
their  husband.  He  fancies  himself  sick,  and  really  often  becomes 
sick  through  his  fears.  By  night  he  thinks  himself  surrounded 
with  evil  spirits.  He  covers  himself  with  fetiches  and  charms, 
makes  presents  to  the  idol  and  to  Abambou  and  Mbuirri ;  and  is 
full  of  wonderful  and  frightful  dreams,  which  all  point  to  the 
fact  that  the  village  is  full  of  wicked  sorcerers.  Gradually  the 
Tillage  itself  becomes  infected  by  his  fears.  The  people  grow 
suspicious.  Chance  turns  their  suspicions  to  some  unlucky  indi- 
vidual, who  is  supposed  to  have  a  reason  for  a  grudge.  Finally, 
the  excitement  becomes  too  high  to  be  restrained;  and  often 
they  do  not  even  wait  for  a  death,  but  begin  at  once  the  work  of 
butchering  those  on  whom  public  suspicion  is  fastened.  On  the 
death  of  a/ree  man,  at  least  one  or  two  persons  are  killed  ;  but 


Chap.  XIX.  THE  OUQANGA,  OR  DOCTOR.  339 

this  is  not  generally  the  case  when  women,  children,  or  slaves 
die.  The  law  of  witchcraft  makes  no  distinction,  as  regards  its 
victims,  between  prince,  slave,  or  free  man,  male  or  female. 

In  such  cases  the  influence  of  the  ouganga,  or  doctor,  is  always 
potent  for  evil.  He  gains  in  power  by  every  such  scene;  and 
it  is  his  interest,  therefore,  to  foster  rather  than  to  restrain  the 
excitement.  His  incantations  are  waited  upon  with  breathless 
interest,  and  woe  to  the  luckless  man  or  woman  who  has  offended 
him,  for  now  he  has  his  revenge.  His  decisions  follow  often  the 
prejudices  of  the  multitude,  who  have  suspected  beforehand  those 
that  are  thought  to  be  possessed  of  the  aniewha.  From  the  doctor's 
decision  there  is  no  appeal  but  that  of  the  mboundou. 

The  ouganga,  or  doctor,  is  a  personage  whose  chief  powers 
are  the  ability  (which  is  real)  to  drink  great  quantities  of  the 
mboundou  poison,  and  the  power  (which  is  imaginary)  to  discover 
sorcerers,  and  to  confer  powers  on  greegrees  and  charms,  which, 
without  his  manipulations,  are  worthlessL  This  personage  enjoys, 
therefore,  great  consequence  in  his  tribe  or  village.  His  word 
is  potent  for  life  or  death.  At  his  command — or  rather  at  his 
suggestion — ^the  village  is  removed :  men,  women,  and  children 
are  slain  or  enslaved ;  wars  are  begun  and  ended.  I  was  never 
able  to  satisfy  myself  on  the  interesting  point  whether  these 
doctors  were  themselves  deceived ;  but,  after  close  observation 
and  many  trials,  I  conclude  that  they  are  in  most  cases.  One 
or  two  I  knew  to  be  such  great  rascals  that  I  felt  pretty  sure 
they  were  also  humbugs ;  but  the  great  majority  were,  I  am 
confident,  victims  to  their  own  delusions.  The  African  has  a 
peculiarly  excitable  temperament.  I  noticed  that  doctors,  like 
other  men,  when  on  their  death-beds,  always  laid  their  death  at 
the  door  of  some  malignant  sorcerer,  and  called  for  vengeance 
upon  him.  They  are  subject  to  the  same  fears  as  their  dupes, 
and  have  as  great  confidence  in  their  own  dreams. 

The  region  in  which  I  travelled  is  so  amply  blessed  with  rains 
that  there  is  no  necessity  for  the  "  rain-maker,"  who  is  so  im- 
portant a  member  of  a  South  African  tribe.  But  in  some  tribes 
there  are  ougangas  who  pretend  to  the  power  to  stop  the 
rains,  and  gain  great  honours  by  these  pretensions  in  the  rainy 
season,  when,  if  they  really  owned  the  skill  they  aspired  to, 
they  would  often  be  most  useful  to  the  poor  wet  uncomfortable 
traveller. 

z  2 


340  DIVINATION  AND  DEMON  POSSESSION.        Chap.  XIX. 

On  the  eye  of  all  the  more  important  nndertakings  of  the 
village  or  tribe  a  doctor  is  consulted,  who  pretends  to  be  able, 
by  certain  ceremonies  of  divination,  to  foretell  the  issue,  and  by 
this  they  shape  their  conduct.  It  sometimes  happens,  too,  that 
a  negro,  not  a  doctor,  is  seized  with  the  belief  that  Obamboa  (a 
devil)  is  in  his  body.  The  bowelsarethe  seat  of  this  possession ; 
and  tiie  possessed  goes  about  in  a  vrild  way — sees  visions,  dreams, 
and  pretends  to  foresee  fiiture  events,  gaining  sometimeB  con- 
siderable temporary  prestige. 


Chap.  XX.    FIRST  KNOWLEDGE  OP  ANTHROPOID  APES.        841 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Aoootmt  and  Comparison  of  the  great  Apes  of  Africa:  the  Troglodjtes 
Gorilla,  the  T.  Kooloo-kamba,  the  Chimpanzee  (T.  niger)^  and  the  Nshiego 
Mbouvd,  or  T.  calvua. 

In  this  chapter  I  propose  to  give  the  reader^  in  a  collected 
form,  the  results  of  my  researches  into  the  habits  of  those  species 
of  man-like  apes  which  I  met  in  the  forests  of  Equatorial  Africa. 
Of  these  the  gorilla  is  the  chief;  and  I  am  the  first  white  man 
who  has  systematically  hunted  this  beast,  and  who  has  at  all 
penetrated  to  its  haunts.  The  other  apes — ^the  Troglodytes  calvus^ 
or  nshiego  mbouy6,  and  the  T.  Kooho-kamba — I  had  the  satis- 
faction to  be  the  first  to  make  known,  by  preserved  specimens 
and  by  description.  Such  particulars  as  have  been  mentioned 
already  in  the  course  of  this  narratiye  I  shall  not  repeat  here, 
it  being  my  wish  to  give  in  this  place  only  a  general  view  of 
these  animals — their  structure,  habits,  and  modes  of  life — such 
as  would  have  unduly  interrupted  the  ncurrative,  and  been  less 
satisfiEictory  to  the  reader,  had  it  been  interspersed  in  various 
places  there. 

For  several  centuries  naturalists  had  been  vaguely  cognizant 
of  the  existence  of  a  very  peculiar  and  remarkable  species  of  ape 
in  Western  Africa.  It  was  named  by  Tyson,  in  1699,  the  Soma 
tylvetitris^  or  Pigmy.  LinnaBUS,  in  some  of  the  editions  of  his 
*  Systema  Naturae,*  calls  it  the  Romo  troglodytea.  Blumenbach 
named  it  the  Simia  troglodytes,  and  under  this  name  the 
chimpanzee  afterwards  became  generally  known.  This — ^the 
chimpanzee — ^was  the  first  species  of  anthropoid  ape  known  to 
the  scientific  world. 

In  course  of  time  naturalists  became  acquainted  with  another 
species,  brought  from  Borneo— the  orang-outang.  This  animal 
differed  from  the  African  ape  in  being  covered  with  reddish- 
brown  hair,  and  in  many  other  particulars.  It  was  caUed  Simia 
satyrus. 

In  1780  the  skeleton  of  another  large  ape  was  sent  from 
Batavia  to  Holland  by  Baron  Wurmb,  the  resident  governor,  who 


342  DISCOVERY  OF  THE  GORILLA.  Chap.  XX. 

called  it  the  P<mgo»  It  received  firom  naturalists  the  name  Pmgo 
Wurmbi. 

Up  to  the  year  1829,  when  Cuvier  revised  his  summary  of  our 
knowledge  of  the  animal  kingdom  in  his  ^  Regno  Animal,'  our 
knowledge  of  the  anthropoid  apes  wad  limited  to  these  three 
species. 

It  was  long  suspected  by  eminent  naturalists  that  the  pongo 
of  Wurmb  was  but  the  adult  form  of  the  orang.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  was  found  that  the  facial  angle  of  the  young  orang  of 
Borneo,  and  of  the  young  chimpanzee  of  Africa,  by  the  predomi- 
nant cranium  and  small  jaws  and  teeth,  approached  nearer  than 
any  other  known  mammalian  to  the  human  species,  and  especially 
to  the  lower  negro  forms.  This  was  the  opinion  of  leading  com- 
parative anatomists,  some  of  whom  maintained  that  these  forms 
belonged  to  or  denoted  separate  and  advanced  species,  until,  in 
1835,  Professor  Richard  Owen,  the  illustrious  British  comparatiTe 
anatomist,  investigated  the  state  of  dentition  of  these  heads,  and 
established  the  fact  that  they  belonged  to  the  young  of  a  larger 
species. 

In  1812  Geoffrey  St.  Hilaire  made  the  genus  Troglodyte9  for 
the  chimpanzee,  and  this  classification  has  been  adopted  by  all 
who  have  come  after  him* 

Meantime  there  had  been  vague  rumours  of  the  existence  in 
Africa  of  another  and  larger  species  of  ape.  It  was  not,  however, 
till  1847  that  the  scientific  world  was  startled  by  unexpected 
evidence  of  the  existence  of  this  new  species.  A  skull  was  dis- 
covered accidentally,  towards  the  close  of  the  year  1846,  by  my 
good  friend  Rev.  Dr.  J.  Leighton  Wilson,  now  of  New  York,  and 
then  a  missionary  of  the  American  Board  of  Commissioners  for 
Foreign  Missions  on  the  Gaboon,  West  Africa.  Dr.  Wilson  after- 
wards obtained  another  skull  and  part  of  a  skeleton,  which  he 
presented  to  the  Boston  Natural  History  Society. 

The  firsirdiscovered  skuU  Dr.  Wilson  presented  to  Dr.  Savage, 
of  Boston,  who  afterwards  procured  another,  the  skull  of  a 
female ;  and  from  these  various  bones  Dr.  Savage  and  Professor 
JeffHes  Wyman  prepared  the  descriptive  memoirs  printed  in 
vol,  V.  of  the  Boston  *  Journal  of  Natural  History,'  by  which  the 
existence  of  this  new  and  singular  animal  was  first  announced  to 
the  scientific  world.* 

*  Other  memoirs  are  in  vols.  v.  and  Ti.  of  the  *  Best.  Jour,  of  Nat.  EKst/  by 


Chap.  XX.  HANNO'S  VOYAGE.  843 

This  brings  me  to  an  examination  of  the  accounts  brought  by 
various  travellers,  from  Hanno  down  to  a  recent  period,  of  an 
animal  resembling  more  or  less  the  real  gorilla,  and  which  have 
been  supposed  to  allude  to  that  animal,  and  to  furnish  evidence 
that  they  saw  and  killed  it  The  record  of  Hanno's  voyage  is 
one  of  the  most  curious  fragments  of  antiquity  remaining  to  us. 
His  voyage  is  supposed  to  have  occurred  in  the  sixth  century 
before  Christ,  though  some  critics  place  it  at  a  much  later  period. 
He  was  sent  out  by  the  government  of  Carthage  to  circumnavi- 
gate the  African  continent  His  journal  begins  with  the  following 
sentence,  which  sufficiently  relates  the  object  of  his  voyage : — "  It 
was  decreed  by  the  Carthaginians  that  Hanno  should  undertake 
a  voyage  beyond  the  Pillars  of  Hercules,  and  found  Lybo- 
Phoonician  cities.  He  accordingly  sailed  with  sixty  ships  of 
fifty  oars  each,  and  a  body  of  men  and  women  to  the  number  of 
thirty  thousand,  with  provisions  and  other  necessaries."  Ac- 
cording to  Pliny,  he  was  to  follow  the  coast-line  of  the  continent 
till  he  reached  the  Arabian  Gulf. 

The  passage  in  the  PeripltiSy  or  Voyage  of  Hanno,  in  which  it 
is  supposed  he  alludes  to  the  animal  now  known  as  the  gorilla, 
reads  as  follows : — "  On  the  third  day,  having  sailed  from  thence, 
passing  the  streams  of  fire,  we  came  to  a  bay  called  the  Horn  of 
the  South.  In  the  recess  was  an  island  like  the  first,  having  a 
lake,  and  in  this  there  was  another  island  full  of  wild  men.  But 
much  the  greater  part  of  them  were  women  with  hairy  bodies, 
whom  the  interpreters  called  gorilla&  •  *  But  pursuing  them, 
we  were  not  able  to  take  the  men ;  they  all  escaped  from  us  by 
their  great  agility,  being  eremnobates  (that  is  to  say,  climbing 
precipitous  rocks  and  trees),  and  defending  themselves  by  throwing 
stones  at  us.  We  took  three  women,  who  bit  and  tore  those  who 
caught  them,  and  were  unwilling  to  follow.  We  were  obliged, 
therefore,  to  kill  them,  and  took  their  skins  ofi",  which  skins  were 
brought  to  Carthage,  for  we  did  not  navigate  farther,  provisions 
becoming  scarce." 

Prof.  Jeffries  Wyman,  describing  four  crania  and  a  skeleton ;  in  vols.  iii.  and 
iv.  of  the  'Transact,  of  the  Zoological  Soc.  of  London,*  by  Prof.  Richard  Owen, 
describing  the  skeleton ;  tome  viii.  of  the  '  Archives  du  Museum,'  by  Duvernay ; 
and  in  vol.  x.  of  the  *  Archives  du  Museum  d*Histoire  Naturelle,'  by  Isidore 
Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire.  Dr.  Wyman  and  Dr.  Savage  named  the  new  animal  the 
gorilla,  a  name  applied  by  Hanno,  an  old  Carthaginian  navigator,  to  the  wild 
hairy  men  which  he  found  on  the  coast  of  Africa. 


344         HANNO  DID  NOT  SEE  THE  TRUE  GORILLA.    Chap.  XX. 

According  to  Pliny,  the  ekins  were  hung  in  the  temple  ai  Juno, 
and  the  name  gorillas  was  changed  to  gorgcnes.  Two  of  these 
skins  were  yet  in  the  temple  at  the  time  when  Carthage  was 
taken.  *^  Penetravit  in  eas  (Gorgades  Insulas)  Hanno  Poenomm 
imperator,  prodiditque  hirta  feminarum  corpora,  yiros  pemicitate 
eyassisse,  duarumque  gorgonum  cutes  argumenti  et  miracnli 
gratia  in  Junonis  templo  posuit,  spectatas  usque  ad  Carthagin^n 
captam." 

Comparing  this  account  with  the  habits  of  the  gorilla,  as  set 
forth  further  on,  I  belieye  the  reader  will  join  me  in  the  ccm- 
clusion  that  the  animal  seen  and  captured  by  Hanno  was  not 
the  gorilla  of  our  day,  though  it  miay  have  been  the  chimpanzee. 
The  huge  gorilla  consumes  so  great  an  amount  of  vegetable 
food  that  no  considerable  number  could  have  found  sustenance 
on  an  island  such  as  Hanno  mentions.  Moreover,  unless  its 
habits  have  undergone  a  very  great  change,  it  is  not  likely  that 
the  males  would  have  retreated  and  left  their  females  in  the 
lurch.  In  my  experience,  the  male  invariably  advances  towards 
the  foe,  and  secures  the  safe  retreat  of  its  female,  and  on  such 
occasions  acts  with  ferocious  courage.  Again,  to  capture  even  a 
female  gorilla  by  hand  and  by  simple  force  is,  I  think,  impos- 
sible. Ko  one  who  has  seen  the  animal  in  its  native  forests^ 
and  watched  the  exhibition  of  its  enormous  strength,  would 
believe  the  account. 

It  seems  probable,  therefore,  that  Hanno  met  only  the  Troglo- 
djftea  mger^  or  chimpanzee,  which  is  common  in  the  mountains 
and  forests  of  Senegambia,  and  which  does  not  attack  maa« 
Even  of  this,  however,  I  doubt  if  his  men  captured  any  adult 
specimens.  They  took,  probably,  some  half-grown  females,  who 
were  not  active  enough  to  get  away. 

Andrew  Battel,  an  A£rican  traveller,  whose  adventures  were 
taken  down  by  Purchas,  and  printed  in  his  *  Pilgrims,'  is  the 
first  in  modem  times  who  makes  mention  of  two  different 
African  apes,  the  pongo  and  the  engeco.  He  was  for  a  while 
prisoner  to  the  Portuguese  in  Angola,  and  has  this  passage  on 
the  apes : — 

^'  The  greatest  of  these  two  monsters  is  called  pongo  in  their 
language,  and  the  lesser  is  called  engeco.  The  pongo  is  in  all 
proportions  like  a  man,  for  he  is  very  tall,  and  hath  a  man's 
face,  hollow-eyed,  with  long  haires  upon  his  brows.    His  body 


Chap,  XX.  BATTEL'S  ACCOUNT.  346 

is  fall  of  haire,  but  not  very  thicke,  and  it  is  of  a  dnnnish 
colour.  He  differeth  not  from  man  but  in  his  legs,  for  they 
have  no  calfe.  He  goeth  alwaies  u^n  his  legs,  and  carrieth 
his  hands  clasped  on  the  nape  of  his  necke  when  he  goeth  upon 
the  ground.  They  sleepe  in  trees,  and  build  shelter  for  the 
raine.  They  feed  upon  the  fruit  that  they  find  in  the  woods, 
and  upon  ants,  for  they  eate  no  kind  of  flesh.  They  cannot 
speake,  and  have  no  understanding  more  than  a  beast.  The 
people  of  the  countrie,  when  they  travaile  in  the  woods,  nutke 
S^s  where  they  sleepe  in  ite  ni/hi,  and  in  the  morning,  when 
they  are  gone,  the  pongos  will  come  and  seat  about  the  fire  till 
it  goeth  out,  for  they  have  no  understanding  to  lay  the  wood 
together.  They  goe  many  together,  and  kill  many  negroe  that 
travaile  in  the  woods.  Many  times  they  faU  upon  elephants 
which  come  to  feed  where  they  be,  and  so  beat  them  with  their 
clubbed  fists  and  pieces  of  wood  that  they  wiU  runne  roaring 
away  from  them.  The  pongos  are  never  taken  alive,  because 
they  are  so  strong  ten  men  cannot  hold  one  of  them ;  but  they 
take  many  of  their  young  ones  with  poisoned  arrows.  The 
young  pongo  hangeth  on  his  mother's  belly  with  his  hands  fast 
clasped  about  her,  so  that,  when  the  countxy-people  kill  any  of 
the  females,  they  take  the  young  which  hangs  fast  upon  the 
mother.  When  they  die  among  themselves,  they  cover  the  dead 
with  great  heapes  of  boughs  and  wood,  which  is  commonly 
found  in  the  forests."* 

This  description  of  Battel  seems  to  me  the  most  accurate  of 
any  down  to  Bowditch,  of  whom  I  am  presently  to  speak.  I 
believe  that  the  gorilla  is  not  found  south  of  the  Setti-Camma 
Biver,  this  being  the  last  point  to  which  I  have  been  able  to 
trace  it  The  language  of  the  Mayomba  people  has  some 
affinity  to  that  of  the  Mpongwe,  though  greatly  differing  from 
it  The  word  enffeco,  which  is  applied  by  Battel  to  the  smallest 
of  the  monster  apes,  is  undoubtedly  the  nshiego  of  the  Mpongwe 
and  Camma  tribes  of  this  day.  As  for  the  word  pongos,  I  am  at 
a  loss.  It  cannot  apply  to  the  Mpongwe  tribe,  for  this  tribe 
has  emigrated  to  the  Gaboon  within  this  century  ;  three  of  the 
Ndina,  the  former  possessors  of  the  river,  remaining  alive  to 
this  day ;  and  in  Andrew  Battel's  time  the  Mpongwe  tribe  were 

♦  Furchas,  His  PilgriiM,  Part  ii.,  p.  984.    London,  1623. 


346  BOSMAN'S  ACCOUNT.  Chap.  XX. 

living  far  in  the  interior^  and  their  name  was  unknown,  sup- 
posing them  to  have  had  even  existence  as  a  tribe  then.  Un- 
fortmiately,  I  was  unacquainted  with  Battel's  story  when  I  wa« 
in  Africa,  or  I  should  have  inquired  among  the  Mayomba 
people  as  to  the  origin  and  meaning  of  the  name,  if,  indeed, 
any  traces  of  the  word  remain  after  more  than  three  centuries, 
which  seems  to  me  very  doubtful  Allowing  that  Battel  knew 
the  gorilla  and  chimpanzee,  the  reader  will  see  that  he  made 
many  serious  errors  in  his  descriptions  of  their  habits  and 
appearance.  His  stories  are  mere  travellers'  tales,  and  are  un* 
true  of  any  of  the  great  apes  of  Africa. 

After  him  come  other  travellers,  who  tell,  however,  such  ab- 
surd and  incredible  stories  that  it  is  plainly  to  be  perceived  how 
they  added  themselves  to  the  already  sufficiently  exaggerated 
reports  of  the  negroes. 

Tenmiinck  quotes,  in  his  ^  Esquisses  Zoologiques '  upon  the 
coast  of  Guinea,  a  passage  of  Bosman,  which  seems  to  refer  to 
the  gorilla  and  chimpanzee.  If  it  is  to  be  counted  anything  mare 
than  a  fable,  it  is  a  very  exaggerated  and  untrustworthy  account 
Bosman  says :  "  They  [these  apes]  are  in  this  country  by  thou- 
sands. The  first  and  most  conmion  are  those  which  are  called 
by  our  people  smitten.  They  are  fawn-coloured,  and  become 
very  tall.  I  have  seen  some  with  my  own  eyes  who  are  five 
feet  high,  and  somewhat  smaller  than  a  man.  They  are  very 
wicked  and  bold ;  and  what  an  English  merchant  told  me 
appears  incredible,  that  there  is,  behind  the  fort  the  English 
have  at  Wimba,  a  great  quantity  of  these  monkeys,  who  are  so 
bold  that  they  attack  men." 

Bosman  continues:  "There  are  negroes  who  affirm  that 
these  monkeys  can  speak,  but  that  they  wiU  not,  in  order  not  to 
work.  These  monkeys  have  an  ugly  face,"  cmd  so  on.  "  The 
best  thing  about  these  kind  of  monkeys  is,  that  they  can  be 
taught  everything  their  master  desires." 

Passing  by  several  other  travellers'  tales  of  this  kind,  we 
come  at  last  to  the  first  real  account  of  the  gorilla.  This  was 
given  by  T.  E.  Bowditch,  in  his  *  Narrative  of  a  Mission  from 
Cape  Coast  Castle  to  Ashantee,'  published  in  London,  1819. 
He,  too,  is  the  first  to  call  it  by  its  Mpongwe  nama  In  that 
part  of  his  work  relating  his  visit  to  the  Gaboon,  he  says :  "  The 
favourite  and  most  extraordinary  subject  of  our  conversation 


Chap.  XX.  GORILLA-STORIES.  347 

on  natural  history  was  the  vngenoy  an  animal  like  the  orang- 
outang, but  much  exceeding  it  in  size,  being  five  feet  high  and 
four  across  the  shoulders.  Its  paw  was  said  to  be  even  more 
disproportioned  than  its  breadth,  and  one  blow  of  it  to  be  fataL 
It  is  seen  commonly  by  them  when  they  travel  to  Kaybe,  lurk- 
ing in  the  bush  to  destroy  passengers,  and  feeding  principally 
on  wild  honey,  which  abounds.  Among  other  of  their  actions 
reported  without  variation  by  men,  women,  and  children  of  the 
Mpongwe  and  Sheekal  [Shekiani],  is  that  of  building  a  house 
in  rude  imitation  of  the  natives,  and  sleeping  outside  on  the 
roof  of  it."* 

So  far  all  travellers  spoke  either  of  the  chimpanzee  (Troglo- 
dytes niger),  or  related  hearsay  accounts  of  the  gorilla.  It  re- 
mained for  the  Eev.  Dr.  Wilson,  an  American  missionary,  to 
present  to  the  world  the  first  real  evidence  of  the  existence  of 
this  monstrous  animal ;  and  for  Dr.  Savage  and  Professor  Jefiries 
Wyman,  the  celebrated  compcurative  anatomist,  of  Boston,  to  give 
to  natural  history  the  first  memoir  on  part  of  the  skeleton  and 
on  the  cranium.  Still,  no  traveller  or  resident  had  succeeded  in 
following  the  animal  to  its  haunts  in  the  unknown  regions  of  the 
interior,  and  such  particulars  of  its  habits  as  came  to  Europe 
and  America  were  obtained  from  the  natives,  whose  dread  of 
the  monstrous  beast  fills  their  minds  with  superstitious  ideas  of 
its  nature,  and  exaggerated  notions  of  its  habits. 

My  long  residence  in  Africa  gave  me  superior  facilities  for 
intercourse  with  the  natives,  and  as  my  curiosity  was  greatly 
excited  by  their  reports  of  this  unknown  monster,  I  determined 
to  penetrate  to  its  haunts  and  see  with  my  own  eyes.  It  has 
been  my  fortune  to  be  the  first  white  man  who  can  speak  of  the 
gorilla  from  personal  knowledge ;  and  while  my  experience  and 
observation  prove  that  many  of  the  actions  reported  of  it  are 
false  and  vain  imaginings  of  ignorant  negroes  and  credulous 
travellers,  I  can  also  vouch  that  no  description  can  exceed  the 
horror  of  its  appearance,  the  ferocity  of  its  attack,  or  the  impish 
malignity  of  its  nature. 

I  am  sorry  to  be  the  dispeller  of  such  agreeable  delusions ; 
but  the  gorilla  does  not  lurk  in  trees  by  the  roadside,  and  drag 
up  unsuspicious  passers-by  in  its  claws,  and  choke  them  to 

*  Mission  to  Asbantee,  p.  440« 


348  HABITS  OF  THE  GORHiLA.  Chap.  XX. 

death  in  its  vice-like  paws ;  it  does  not  attack  the  elephant^  and 
beat  him  to  death  with  sticks ;  it  does  not  carry  off  women 
from  the  native  villages ;  it  does  not  even  boild  itself  a  house 
of  leaves  and  twigs  in  the  forest-trees  and  sit  on  the  roo^  as  has 
been  confidently  reported  of  it  It  is  not  gregarious  even,  and 
the  numerous  stories  of  its  attacking  in  great  numbers  have  not 
a  grain  of  truth  in  them. 

It  lives  in  the  loneliest  and  darkest  portions  of  the  dense 
African  jungle,  preferring  deep  wooded  valleys  and  also  rugged 
heights.  The  high  plains  also,  whose  surface  is  strewn  with 
immense  boulders,  seem  to  be  favourite  haunts.  Water  occurs 
everywhere  in  this  part  of  Africa,  but  I  have  noticed  that  the 
gorilla  is  always  found  very  near  to  a  plentiful  supply. 

It  is  a  restless  and  nomadic  beast,  wandering  from  place  to 
place,  and  scarce  ever  found  for  two  days  together  in  the  same 
neighbourhood.  In  part  this  restlessness  is  caused  by  the  strog* 
gle  it  has  to  find  its  favourite  food.  The  gorilla,  though  it  has 
such  immense  canines,  and  though  its  vast  strength  doubtless  fits 
it  to  capture  and  kill  almost  every  animal  which  frequents  the 
forests,  is  a  strict  vegetarian.  I  examined  the  stomachs  of  all 
which  I  was  lucky  enough  to  kill,  and  never  found  traces  there 
of  aught  but  berries,  pineapple  leaves,  and  other  vegetable 
matter.  It  is  a  huge  feeder,  and  no  doubt  soon  eats  up  the 
scant  supply  of  its  natural  food  whidi  is  found  in  any  limited 
space,  and  is  then  forced  to  wander  on  in  constant  battle  with 
famine.  Its  vast  paunch,  which  protrudes  before  it  when  it 
stands  upright,  proves  it  to  be  a  great  feeder ;  and,  indeed,  its 
great  frame  and  enormous  muscular  development  could  not  be 
supported  on  little  food. 

It  is  not  true  that  it  lives  much  or  at  all  on  trees.  I  found 
them  almost  always  on  the  ground,  although  they  often  dimb 
the  trees  to  pick  berries  or  nuts,  but  after  eating  they  return 
to  the  ground.  By  the  examination  of  the  stomach  of  many 
specimens,  I  was  able  to  ascertain  with  tolerable  certainty  the 
nature  of  its  food,  and  I  discovered  that,  for  all  I  found,  it  had 
no  need  to  ascend  trees.  It  is  fond  of  the  wild  sugarcane; 
especially  fond  of  the  white  ribs  of  the  pineapple  leaf;  and  it 
eats,  besides,  certain  berries  which  grow  close  to  the  ground ; 
the  pith  of  some  trees,  and  a  kind  of  nut  with  a  very  hard  shelL 
This  shell  is  so  hard  that  it  requires  a  strong  blow  with  a  heavy 


Chap.  XX.  COURAGE  OF  THE  MALE  GORILLA.  349 

hammer  to  break  it ;  and  here  is  probably  one  purpose  of  that 
enormous  strength  of  jaw  which  long  seemed  to  me  thrown 
away  on  a  non-carnivorous  animal,  and  which  is  sufficiently 
evidenced  by  the  manner  in  which  the  barrel  of  the  musket  of 
one  of  my  unfortunate  hunters  was  flattened  by  an  enraged 
male  gorilla. 

Only  the  young  gorillas  sleep  on  trees,  for  protection  from 
wild  beasts.  I  have  myself  come  upon  fresh  traces  of  a  gorilla's 
bed  on  several  occasions,  and  could  see  that  the  male  had  seated 
himself  with  his  back  against  a  tree-trunk.  In  fact  on  the  back 
of  the  male  gorilla  there  is  generally  a  patch  on  which  the  hair 
is  worn  thin  from  this  position,  while  the  nest-building  Troglo' 
dyte$  calvus,  or  bald-headed  nshieffOj  which  constantly  sleeps  un- 
der its  leafy  shelter  on  a  tree-branch,  has  this  bare  place  at  its 
side,  and  in  quite  a  different  way.  I  believe,  however,  that 
while  the  male  always  sleeps  at  the  foot  of  a  tree,  or  elsewhere 
on  the  ground,  the  female  and  the  young  may  sometimes  ascend 
to  the  tree-top,  as  I  have  seen  marks  of  such  ascension. 

Those  apes  which  live  much  in  trees,  as  the  chimpanzee,  have 
fingers  on  both  their  fore  and  hind  feet  much  longer  than  the 
goriUa's,  which,  indeed,  approximate  much  nearer  to  the  con- 
struction of  the  human  hand  and  foot,  and  are,  by  reason  of  this 
different  construction,  less  fitted  for  tree-climbing.  Here  I  may 
state  that,  though  young  chimpanzees  are  often  captured  by  the 
negroes  of  the  Muni  Moonda  and  Gaboon  rivers,  which  shows 
that  they  are  somewhat  abundant  in  those  regions,  I  never  met 
with  a  single  shelter,  and  consequently  have  come  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  they  make  none. 

The  gorilla  is  not  gregarious.  Of  adults,  I  found  almost 
always  one  male  with  one  female,  though  sometimes  the  old 
male  wanders  companionless.  In  such  cases,  as  with  the  '^  rogue  " 
elephant,  he  is  particularly  morose  and  malignant,  and  dangerous 
to  approach.  Young  gorillas  I  foimd  sometimes  in  companies 
of  five;  sometimes  less,  but  never  more.  The  young  always 
nm  off,  on  all  fours,  shrieking  with  fear.  They  are  difficult  to 
approach,  as  their  hearing  is  acute,  and  they  lose  no  time  in 
making  their  escape,  while  the  nature  of  the  ground  makes  it 
hard  for  the  hunter  to  follow  after.  The  adult  animal  is  also 
shy,  and  I  have  hunted  all  day  at  times  without  coming  upon 
my  quarry,  when  I  felt  sure  that  they  were  carefully  avoiding 


850  THE  ATl^ACK  OF  THE  MALE  GORILLA.      Chap.  XX. 

me.  When,  however,  at  last  fortune  favours  the  hunter,  and  he 
comes  accidentally  or  by  good  management  upon  his  prey,  he 
need  not  fear  its  running  away.  In  all  my  hunts  and  encounters 
with  this  animal,  I  never  knew  a  grown  male  to  run  off.  When 
I  surprised  a  pair  of  gorillas,  the  male  was  generally  sitting 
down  on  a  rock  or  against  a  tree,  in  the  darkest  comer  of  the 
jungle,  where  the  brightest  sun  left  its  traces  only  in  a  dim 
and  gloomy  twilight  The  female  was  mostly  feeding  near  by; 
and  it  is  singular  that  she  almost  always  gave  the  fdarm  by 
running  off  with  loud  and  sudden  cries  or  shrieks.  Then  the 
male,  sitting  for  a  moment  with  a  savage  frown  on  his  face, 
slowly  rises  to  his  feet,  and,  looking  with  glowing  and  malign 
eyes  at  the  intruders,  begins  to  beat  his  breast,  and,  lifting  up 
his  round  head,  utters  his  frightful  roar.  This  begins  with 
several  sharp  barks,  like  an  enraged  or  mad  dog,  whereupon 
ensues  a  long,  deeply  guttural,  rolling  roar,  continued  for  ovct 
a  minute,  and  which,  doubled  and  multiplied  by  the  resoundii^ 
echoes  of  the  forest,  fills  the  hunter's  ears  like  the  deep  rolling 
thunder  of  an  approaching  storm.  As  I  have  mentioned  before, 
I  have  reason  to  believe  that  I  have  heard  this  roar  at  a  distance 
of  three  miles.  The  horror  of  the  animal's  appearance  at  this 
time  is  beyond  description.  At  such  a  sight  I  could  forgive 
my  brave  native  hunters  for  being  sometimes  overcome  with 
superstitious  fears,  and  ceased  to  wonder  at  the  strange,  weird 
"gorilla-stories  "  of  the  negroes. 

It  is  a  maxim  with  the  weU-trained  gorilla-hunters  to  reserve 
their  fire  till  the  very  last  moment.  Experience  has  shown 
them  that — whether  the  enraged  beast  takes  the  report  of  the 
gun  for  an  answering  defiance,  or  for  what  other  reason  un- 
known—if  the  hunter  fires  and  misses,  the  gorilla  at  once  rushes 
upon  him  ;  and  this  onset  no  man  can  withstand.  One  blow  of 
that  huge  paw  with  its  nails,  and  the  poor  hunter  s  entrails 
are  torn  out,  his  breast-bone  broken,  or  his  skull  crushed.  It  is 
too  late  to  re-load,  and  flight  is  vain.  There  have  been  negroes 
who  in  such  cases,  made  desperate  by  their  frightful  dangOi 
have  faced  the  gorilla,  and  struck  at  him  with  the  empty  gun. 
But  they  had  time  for  only  one  harmless  blow.  The  next  mo- 
ment the  huge  arm  came  down  with  fatal  force,  breaking  musket 
and  skull  with  one  blow.  I  imagine  no  animal  is  so  fatal  in  its 
attack  on  man  as  this,  for  the  reason  that  it  meets  him  {^ce  to 


Chap.  XX,  DEATH  OF  THE  GORILLA.  351 

face,  and  uses  its  arms  as  its  weapons  of  offence,  just  as  a  man 
or  a  prize-fighter  would— only  that  it  has  longer  arms,  and  vastly 
greater  strength  than  the  strongest  boxer  the  world  ever  saw. 

The  gorilla  is  only  met  in  tiie  most  dark  and  impenetrable 
jungle,  where  it  is  diflScult  to  get  a  clear  aim,  imobstructed  by 
vines  and  tangled  bushes,  for  any  distance  greater  than  a  few 
yards.  For  this  reason,  the  goriUa-hunter  wisely  stands  6till 
and  awaits  the  approach  of  the  infuriated  beast  The  gorilla 
advances  by  short  stages,  stopping  to  utter  his  diabolical  roar, 
and  to  beat  his  vast  breast  with  his  paws,  which  produce  a  dull 
reverberation  as  of  an  immense  bass-drum.  Sometimes  from  the 
standing  position  he  seats  himself  and  beats  his  chest,  looking 
fiercely  at  his  adversary.  His  walk  is  a  waddle,  from  side  to 
side,  his  hind  legs —which  are  very  short^ — being  evidently  some- 
v^hat  inadequate  to  the  proper  support  of  the  huge  superincum- 
bent body.  He  balances  himself  by  swinging  his  arms,  somewhat  ^ 
as  sailors  walk  on  shipboard ;  and  the  vast  paunch,  the  round 
bullet-head,  joined  awkwardly  to  the  trunk  with  scarce  a  vestige 
of  neck,  and  the  great  muscular  arms,  and  deep,  cavernous  breast, 
give  to  this  waddle  an  ungainly  horror,  which  adds  to  his  ferocity 
of  appearance.  At  the  same  time,  the  deep-set  gray  eyes  sparkle 
out  with  gloomy  malignity;  the  features  are  contorted  in  hideous 
wrinkles ;  and  the  slight,  sharply-cut  lips,  drawn  up,  reveal  the 
long  fangs  and  the  powerful  jaws,  in  which  a  human  limb  would 
be  crushed  as  a  biscuit. 

The  hunter,  looking  with  fearful  carie  to  his  priming,  stands 
still,  gun  in  hand,  often  for  five  weary  minutes,  waiting  with 
growing  nervousness  for  the  moment  when  he  may  relieve  his 
suspense  by  firing.  I  have  never  fired  at  a  male  at  greater  dis- 
tance than  eight  yards,  and  fix)m  fourteen  to  eighteen  feet  is  the 
usual  shot.  At  last  the  opportunity  comes ;  and  now  the  gun  is 
quickly  raised,  a  moment's  anxious  aim  at  the  vast  breadth  of 
breast,  and  then  pull  trigger. 

In  shooting  the  hippopotamus  at  night,  and  on  shore,  the 
negro  always  scampers  off  directly  he  has  fired  his  gun.  When 
he  has  fired  at  the  gorilla  he  stands  still.  I  asked  why  they  did 
not  run  in  this  case  too,  and  was  answered  that  it  was  of  no  use. 
To  run  would  be  fatal.  If  the  hunter  has  missed  he  must  battle 
for  his  life  face  to  face,  hoping  by  some  piece  of  unexpected  good 
fortune  to  escape  a  fatal  blow,  and  come  off,  perhaps,  maimed  for 


352  THE  GORILLA  UNTAMABLE.  Chap.  XX. 

life,  as  I  have  seen  several  in  the  up-riyer  villages.  Fortunalely, 
the  gorilla  dies  as  easily  as  man ;  a  shot  in  the  breast,  if  fairly 
delivered,  is  sure  to  bring  him  down.  He  falls  forward  on  his 
fSskce,  his  long,  muscular  arms  outstretched,  and  uttering  with  his 
last  breath  a  hideous  death-cry,  half  roar,  half  shriek,  which,  whik 
it  announces  to  the  hunter  his  safety,  yet  tingles  his  ears  with  a 
dreadful  note  of  human  agony.  It  is  this  lurking  reminiscence 
of  humanity,  indeed,  which  makes  one  of  the  chief  ingredi^ts 
of  the  hunter's  excitement  in  his  attack  of  the  gorilla. 

The  common  walk  oi  the  gorilla  is  not  on  his  hind  legs,  bet 
on  all*fours.  In  this  posture,  the  arms  are  so  long  that  the  head 
and  breast  are  raised  considerably,  and,  as  it  runs,  the  hind  legs 
are  brought  far  beneath  the  body.  The  leg  and  arm  on  the  same 
side  move  together,  which  gives  the  beast  a  curious  waddla  It 
can  run  at  great  speed.  The  young,  parties  of  which  I  have 
often  pursued,  never  took  to  trees,  but  ran  along  the  ground; 
and  at  a  distance,  with  their  bodies  half-erect,  looked  not  unlike 
negroes  making  off  from  pursuit :  the  hind-legs  moved  between 
the  arms,  and  those  were  somewhat  bowed  outward.  I  have  never 
found  the  female  to  attack,  though  I  have  been  told  by  the 
negroes  that  a  mother  with  a  young  one  in  chaise  will  some- 
times make  fight.  It  is  a  pretty  thing  to  see  such  amother  with 
the  baby  gorilla  sporting  about  it  I  have  watched  them  in  the 
woods,  till,  eager  as  I  was  to  obtain  specimens,  I  had  not  the  heart 
to  shoot  But  in  such  cases  my  negro  hunters  exhibited  do 
tenderheartedness,  but  killed  their  quarry  without  loss  of  tim& 

When  the  mother  runs  off  from  the  hunter,  the  young  one 
grasps  her  about  the  neck,  and  hangs  beneath  her  breasts  with 
its  little  legs  about  her  body. 

I  think  the  adult  gorilla  utterly  untamable.  In  the  course 
of  the  narrative  the  reader  will  find  accounts  of  several  young 
gorillas  which  my  men  captured  alive,  and  which  remained  with 
me  for  short  periods  till  their  deaths.  In  no  case  could  any 
treatment  of  mine,  kind  or  harsh,  subdue  these  little  monsters 
from  their  first  and  lasting  ferocity  and  malignity.  The  young 
of  the  nshiego  mbouvi  (21  calvu9)y  on  the  contrary,  is  very  easily 
tamed,  and  I  had  one  for  some  months  as  a  companion.  The 
young  orang  and  chimpanzee  have  been  frequently  tamed.  Of 
the  new  and  rare  kooloo-kamba  I  was  not  so  fortunate  as  to 
secure  a  living  specimen ;  but  being  only  a  variety  of  the  diim- 


Chap.  XX.  STRENGTH  OF  THE  GORILLA.  353 

panzee,  the  young  could  be  tamed,  no  doubt  But  the  gorilla  is 
entirely  and  constantly  an  enemy  to  man — resenting  its  captivity, 
young  as  my  specimens  were — ^refusing  all  food  except  the  berries 
of  its  native  woods,  and  attacking  with  teeth  and  claws  even  me, 
who  was  in  most  constant  attendance  upon  them ;  and  finally 
dying  without  previous  sickness,  and  without  other  ascertainable 
cause  than  the  restless  chafing  of  a  spirit  which  could  not  suffer 
captivity  nqr  the  presence  of  man. 

The  young  of  the  chimpanzee  is  yellow ;  that  of  the  nshiego 
mbouv^  is  a  very  pale  white ;  but  the  young  gorilla  is  coal-black. 
Even  the  youngest  I  got,  which  was  a  mere  baby  in  arms  and 
could  not  walk,  was  black  as  jet. 

The  strength  of  the  gorilla  is  evidently  enormous.  A  young 
one  of  between  two  and  three  years  of  age  required  four  stout 
men  to  hold  it,  and  even  then,  in  its  struggles,  bit  one  severely. 
That  with  its  jaws  it  can  dent  a  musket  barrel,  and  with  its  arms 
break  trees  from  four  to  six  inches  in  diameter,  sufliciently  proves 
that  its  vast  bony  frame  has  corresponding  muscle.  The  negroes 
never  attack  them  with  other  weapons  than  guns ;  and  in  those 
parts  of  the  far  interior  where  no  European  guns  had  yet  reached, 
as  among  the  Apingi,  this  great  beast  roamed  unmolested,  the 
monarch  of  the  forest.  To  kill  a  gorilla  gives  a  hunter  a  life-long 
reputation  for  courage  and  enterprise  even  among  the  bravest  of 
the  negro  tribes,  who  are  generally,  it  may  be  said,  not  lacking 
in  this  quality  of  courage. 

The  gorilla  has  no  cries  or  utterances  that  I  have  heard  except 
those  already  described,  the  short,  sharp  bark,  and  the  roar  of 
the  attacking  male,  and  the  scream  of  the  female  and  young 
when  alarmed ;  except,  indeed,  a  low  kind  of  cluck,  with  which 
the  watchftd  mother  seems  to  call  her  child  to  her.  The  young 
ones  have  a  cry  when  in  distress ;  but  their  voice  is  harsh,  and 
it  is  more  a  moan  of  pain  than  a  child's  cry. 

It  uses  no  artificial  weapon  of  offence,  but  attacks  always  with 
its  arms,  though  in  a  struggle  no  doubt  the  powerful  teeth  would 
play  a  part.  I  have  several  times  noticed  skulls  in  which  the 
huge  canines  were  broken  off,  not  worn  down,  as  they  are  in 
almost  all  the  adult  gorillas  by  gnawing  at  trees  which  they 
wished  to  break,  and  which,  without  being  gnawed  into,  are  too 
strong  even  for  them.  The  negroes  informed  me  that  such  teeth 
were  broken  in  combats  between  the  males  for  the  possession  of 

2  A 


354  GORILLA-MEAT.  Chap.  XX. 

a  female,  and  I  think  this  quite  probable.  Such  a  combat  must 
form  a  magnificent  and  awful  spectacle.  A  struggle  between  two 
well-matched  gorillas  would  exceed,  in  that  kind  of  excitement 
which  the  Bomans  took  such  delight  in,  anything  in  that  line 
which  they  were  ever  gratified  witL 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  gorilla  walks  in  an  erect  posture 
with  greater  ease  and  for  a  longer  time  than  either  the  chim- 
panzee or  nshiego  mbouv^.  When  standing  up,  his  knees  are  bent 
at  the  joints  outwards,  and  his  back  has  a  stoop  forward.  His 
track,  when  running  on  all-fours,  is  peculiar.  The  hind  feet 
leave  no  traces  of  their  toes  on  tlie  ground.  Only  the  ball  of 
the  foot  and  that  thumb  which  answers  to  our  great  toe  seem  to 
touch.  The  fingers  of  the  fore  hand  are  only  lightly  marked  on 
the  ground. 

The  natives  of  the  interior  are  very  fond  of  the  meat  of  the 
gorilla  and  other  apes.  Gorilla-meat  is  dark  red  and  tough.  The 
seashore  tribes  do  not  eat  it,  and  are  insulted  by  the  offer  of 
it,  because  they  suspect  some  affinity  between  the  animal  and 
themselves.  In  the  interior  some  families  refuse  to  eat  gorilla- 
meat  from  the  superstitious  belief  explained  elsewhere,  that  at 
some  time  one  of  their  female  ancestors  has  brought  forth  a 
gorilla.  The  skin  is  thick  and  firm  as  an  ox-hide,  but,  though 
much  thicker  than  in  any  other  ape,  it  is  very  tender ;  it  bre^ 
easily,  especially  under  the  arm,  near  the  hip.  When  the  hide 
is  dried,  the  epidermis  comes  off  very  easily,  and  in  this  differs 
much  from  the  skin  of  the  other  apes,  which,  though  not  so 
thick,  are  not  so  tender. 

I  do  not  give  here  any  account  of  other  superstitions  of  the 
negroes  concerning  the  gorilla,  because  they  are  fuUy  detailed 
in  other  parts  of  the  book. 

In  height  adult  gorillas  vary  as  much  as  men.  The  adult 
males  in  my  collection  range  from  five  feet  two  inches  to  five  feet 
eight ;  and  the  parts  of  a  skeleton  which  my  friend  Professor 
Jeffiries  Wyman  has,  are  so  mudi  larger  than  any  in  my  pos- 
session, that  I  am  warranted  in  concluding  the  animal  to  which 
it  belonged  to  have  been  at  least  six  feet  two  inches  in  height 
The  female  is  much  smaller,  less  strong,  and  of  h'ghter  frame. 
One  adult  female  in  my  collection  measured,  when  shot,  four 
feet  six  inches. 

The  colour  of  the  skin  in  the  gorilla,  young  as  well  as  adult, 


Chap.  XX.  APPEARANCE  OF  THE  GORILLA.  355 

18  intense  black.  This  colour  does  not  appear,  however,  except 
in  the  face,  on  the  breast,  and  in  the  palms  of  the  hands.  The 
hair  of  a  grovm,  but  not  aged  specimen,  is  in  colour  iron-gray. 
The  individual  hairs  are  ringed  mth  alternate  stripes  of  black 
and  gray,  which  produces  the  iron-gray  colour.  On  the  arms 
the  hair  is  darker  and  also  much  longer,  being  sometimes  over 
two  inches  long.  It  grows  upwards  on  the  fore-arm  and  down- 
wards on  the  main-arm.  Aged  gorillas,  the  negroes  told  me, 
turn  quite  gray  all  over ;  and  I  have  one  huge  male  in  my  col- 
lection whose  worn-out  tusks  show  great  age,  and  whose  colour 
i^,  in  fact,  a  dirty  gray,  with  the  exception  of  the  long  black 
shaggy  hair  on  the  arm.  .  The  head  is  covered  with  reddish- 
brown  hair,  short,  and  extending  almost  to  the  neck,  or  where 
the  neck  should  be. 

In  the  adult  male  the  chest  is  bare.  In  the  young  males  which 
I  had  in  captivity  it  was  thinly  covered  with  hair.  In  the  female 
the  mammae  have  but  a  slight  development,  and  the  breast  is  bare. 
The  colour  of  the  hair  in  the  female  is  black,  with  a  decided 
tinge  of  red,  and  not  ringed  as  in  the  male.  The  hair  on  the 
arms  is  but  little  longer  than  that  on  the  body,  and  is  of  a  like 
colour.  The  reddish  crown  which  covers  the  scalp  of  the  male 
is  not  apparent  in  the  female  till  she  is  almost  grown  up. 

In  both  male  and  female  the  hair  is  found  worn  off  the  back ; 
but  this  is  only  found  in  very  old  females.  This  is  occasioned,  I 
suppose,  by  their  resting  at  night  against  trees,  at  whose  base 
they  sleep. 

The  eyes  of  the  gorilla  are  deeply  sunken,  the  immense  over- 
hanging bony  frontal  ridge  giving  to  the  face  the  expression  of 
a  constant  savage  scowL  The  mouth  is  wide,  and  the  lips  are 
sharply  cut,  exhibiting  no  red  on  the  edges,  as  in  the  human 
face.  The  jaws  are  of  tremendous  weight  and  power.  The  huge 
canines  of  the  male,  which  are  fully  exhibited  when,  in  his  rage, 
he  draws  back  his  lips  and  shows  the  red  colour  of  the  inside  of 
his  mouth,  lend  additional  ferocity  to  his  aspect  In  the  female 
these  canines  are  smaller. 

The  almost  total  absence  of  neck,  which  gives  the  head  the 
appearance  of  being  set  into  the  shoulders,  is  due  to  the  back- 
ward position  of  the  occipital  condyles,  by  means  of  which  the 
skull  is  set  upon  the  trunk.  The  brain-case  is  low  and  com- 
pressed, and  the  lofty  ridge  of  the  skuU  causes  the  cranial  profile 

2a2 


HEAD  AND  BODY  OF  THE  GORILLA. 


to  describe  an  almost  straight  line  from  the  occiput  to  the  snpn- 
orbital  ridge.  The  immense  development  of  the  temporal 
muscles  which  arise  from  this  ridge,  and  the  corresponding  sae 
of  the  jaw,  are  evidences  of  the  great  strength  of  the  animal 

The  eyebrows  are  thin,  but  not  well  defined,  and  are  almuet 
lost  in  the  hair  of  the  scalp.  The  eyelashes  are  thin  also.  The 
eyes  are  wide  apart ;  the  ears  are  smaller  than  those  of  man, 
and  in  form  closely  resemble  the  human  ear.  They  are  slmoet 
on  the  same  parallel  with  the  eyes.  In  a  front  view  of  the  foce 
the  noee  is  flat,  but  somewhat  prominent — more  bo  than  in 
any  other  ape ;  this  is  on  account  of  a  slightly  projecting  nose- 
bone.  The  gorilla  is  the  only  ape  which  shows  such  a  projec- 
tion, and  in  this  respect  it  comes  nearer  to  man  than  any  other 
of  the  man-like  apes. 

The  profile  of  the  trunk  shows  a  slight  convexity.  The  chest 
is  of  great  capacity ;  the  shoulders  exceedingly  broad ;  the  pec- 
toral regions  show  slightly  projecting  a  pair  of  nipples,  as  in 
the  other  apes  and  in  the  htunan  species.  The  abdomen  is  of 
immense  size,  very  prominent,  and  rounding  at  the  sides.  The 
arms  have  prodigious  muscular  development,  and  are  very  long, 
extending  as  low  as  the  knees.  The  fore-arm  is  nearly  of  uni- 
form size  from  the  wrist  to  the  elbow.  The  great  length  of  the 
arms  and  the  shortness  of  the  logs  form  one  of  the  chief  devia- 


Chap.  XX.  LIMBS  OF  THE  GORILLA.  357 

tions  from  man.  The  arms  are  not  so  long  when  compared 
with  the  trunk,  but  they  are  so  in  comparison  with  the  legs. 
Tliese  are  short,  and  decrease  in  size  from  below  the  knee  to 
the  ankle,  having  no  calf.  The  superior  length  of  the  arm 
(humerus)  in  proportion  to  the  fore-arm,  brings  the  gorilla,  in 
that  respect,  in  closer  anthropoid  affinities  with  man  than  any 
of  the  other  apes. 

The  hands  of  the  animal,  especially  in  the  male,  are  of  im- 
mense size,  strong,  short,  and  thick.  The  fingers  are  short  and 
of  great  size,  the  circumference  of  the  middle  finger  at  the  first 
joint  being  in  some  gorillas  over  six  inches.  The  skin  on  the 
back  of  the  fingers,  near  the  middle  phalanx,  is  callous  and  very 
thick,  which  shows  that  the  most  usual  mode  of  progression  of 
the  animal  is  on  all-fours,  and  resting  on  the  knuckles.  The 
thumb  is  shorter  than  in  man,  and  not  half  so  thick  as  the  fore- 
finger. The  hand  is  hairy  as  far  as  the  division  of  the  fingers, 
those,  as  in  man,  being  covered  with  short  thin  hairs.  The  palm 
of  the  hand  is  naked,  callous,  and  intensely  black.  The  nails 
are  black,  and  shaped  like  those  of  man,  but  smaller  in  propor- 
tion, and  projecting  very  slightly  beyond  the  ends  of  tiie  fin- 
gers. They  are  thick  and  strong,  and  always  seem  much  worn. 
The  hand  of  the  gorilla  is  almost  as  wide  as  it  is  long,  and  in  this 
it  approaches  nearer  to  those  of  man  than  any  of  the  other  apes. 

The  foot  is  proportionally  wider  than  in  man.  The  sole  is 
callous  and  intensely  black,  and  looks  somewhat  like  a  giant 
hand  of  immense  power  and  grasp.  The  transverse  wrinkles 
show  the  frequency  and  freedom  of  movement  of  the  two  joints 
of  the  great  toe,  proving  that  they  have  a  power  of  grasp.  The 
middle  toe,  or  third,  is  longer  than  the  second  and  fourth,  the 
fifth  proportionally  shorter,  as  in  man. 

The  toes  are  divided  into  three  groups,  so  to  speak.  Inside 
the  great  toe,  outside  the  little  toe,  and  the  three  others  partly 
united  by  a  web.  The  two  joints  of  the  great  toe  measured,  in 
one  specimen,  six  and  a  half  inches  in  circumference.  As  a 
whole,  the  foot  of  the  gorilla  presents  a  great  likeness  to  the 
foot  of  man,  and  by  far  more  so  than  in  any  other  ape.  In  no 
other  animal  is  the  foot  so  well  adapted  for  the  maintenance  of 
the  erect  position.  Also,  the  gorilla  is  much  less  of  a  tree- 
climber  than  any  other  ape.  The  foot  in  the  gorilla  is  longer 
than  the  hand,  as  in  man,  while  in  the  other  apes  the  foot  is 


358  THE  CHIMPANZEE.  Chap.  XX. 

somewhat  shorter  than  the  hand.  The  hair  on  the  foot  comes 
to  the  division  of  the  toes.  With  the  exception  ,of  the  big  toe, 
the  others  present  a  great  likeness  to  those  of  man,  being  free 
only  above  the  second  phalanx ;  they  are  slightly  covered  with 
thin  hair  and  free. 

Of  the  chimpanzee  {Troglodytes  niger)y  an  animal  long  though 
not  very  thoroughly  known  to  naturalists,  I  regret  that  I  have 
nothing  new  to  state.  Though  found  in  almost  all  the  regions 
which  I  visited,  it  is  everywhere  very  rare,  except  near  the 
Danger,  Gaboon,  and  Cape  Lopez  countries.  I  killed  one  and 
saw  another  in  my  Cape  Lopez  expedition ;  and,  in  my  former 
days  in  Africa,  I  for  a  short  time  owned  two  young  living  speci- 
mens. Both  of  these  died,  however,  before  I  was  able  to  make 
any  observations  upon  their  peculiarities.  The  zoological  gar- 
dens and  menageries  of  Europe  have,  at  diflTerent  times,  had 
several  specimens  of  the  yoimg  of  this  ape. 

The  chimpanzee  differs  from  the  gorilla  in  these  chief  particu- 
lars : — ^It  is  a  great  tree-climber,  passing  much  of  its  time  among 
the  branches  of  the  great  trees  of  tropical  Africa.  It  is,  though 
untameable  when  grown,  still  not  fierce  and  malign  like  the 
gorilla.  It  has  never  been  known  to  attack  man,  and  its  young 
are  tractable  and  easily  tamed.  While  the  gorilla  resists  man, 
the  chimpanzee  flies  to  the  densest  woods :  it  is  therefore 
hunted  with  even  greater  diflSculty  than  the  gorilla. 

Like  its  great  congener,  it  is  not  gregarious.  The  young 
consort  in  small  companies,  but  the  adults  go  in  pairs  or  singly. 
The  young  have  a  yellow  face,  which  changes  to  an  intense 
black  as  they  grow  older.  They  are  difficult  to  keep  in  a  state 
of  captivity,  dying  almost  invariably  of  consumption  or  dysen- 
tery. 

I  do  not  know  of  an  instance  of  an  adult  chimpanzee  being 
caught  alive,  and  think,  on  account  of  their  shyness  and  activity, 
it  would  be  a  very  difficult  animal  to  capture.  Here  I  may  ob- 
serve that,  though  the  negroes  are  very  ingenious  in  their  con- 
trivance of  traps  for  nearly  all  the  greater  beasts  of  the  forest, 
catching  by  various  devices  not  only  the  elephant,  hippopotamus, 
antelope,  but  even  the  leopard,  I  know  of  no  case  in  which  an 
ape  of  any  kind  was  caught  in  this  way.  Tkey  must  kill  the 
mother  in  order  to  capture  the  young. 

The  chimpanzee  is  remarkable  for  its  unusually  wide  geo- 


( TrjjftodifUt  colnu,} 


Chap.  XX,  THIS  NSHIEGO  MB0UV6.  359 

graphical  range.  It  is  found  from  the  Gambia  in  almost  every 
degree  of  latitude  down  to  the  parallel  of  St.  Philipe  Benguela. 
The  greatest  part  of  this  large  region  is  densely  wooded,  which 
is  necessary  for  the  animaPs  existence ;  but  there  are  very  con- 
siderable variations  in  the  climate,  such  as  the  other  apes  do  not 
seem  to  bear. 

Its  food  conlBists  of  berries,  leaves,  and  nuts.  So  far  as  I  have 
been  able  to  ascertain,  it  builds  no  shelter  like  the  nshiego 
mbouv^.  In  the  Cape  Lopez  country  I  examined  and  inquired 
diligently,  but  could  find  no  trace  of  any  such  habit,  although 
the  n^roes  are  familiar  with  the  animal.  In  the  Gaboon 
country  the  chimpanzee  is  called  nshiego ;  in  the  interior  it  is 
known  as  the  nch^ko,  a  name  which  very  much  resembles  that 
of  the  leopard — ^n'gigo. 

The  nshiego  mhouye  {H'Offlodytes  calvtis)  has  a  much  narrower 
range  than  the  chimpanzee,  and  even  than  the  gorilla.  I  found 
it  only  in  the  table-lands  of  the  interior  and  in  the  densest 
forests.  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  found  indifferently  in 
the  haunts  of  the  goriUa  in  the  farther  interior,  and  do  not  know 
that  the  two  species  quarrel.  It  difiTers  from  the  gorilla  in  being 
smaller,  milder,  far  more  docile,  less  strong,  and  in  the  singular 
habit  of  building  for  itself  a  nest  or  shelter  of  leaves  amid  the 
higher  branches  of  trees.  I  have  watched,  at  different  times, 
this  ape  retiring  to  its  rest  at  night,  and  have  seen  it  climb  up  to 
its  house  and  seat  itself  comfortably  on  the  projecting  branch, 
with  its  head  in  the  dome  of  the  roof,  and  its  arm  about  the  tree. 
The  shelter  is  made  of  leaves  compactly  laid  together,  so  as 
easily  to  shed  rain.  The  branches  are  fastened  to  the  trunk  of 
the  tree  with  vines,  in  which  these  forests  greatly  abound.  The 
roof  is  generally  from  six  to  eight  feet  in  its  greatest  diameter, 
and  has  the  exact  shape  of  an  extended  umbrella.  There  are 
mostly  two  of  these  shelters  in  adjoining  trees,  from  which  I 
conclude  that  male  and  female  live  together  all  the  year.  The 
young  probably  stay  with  the  parents  till  old  enough  to  build 
nests  of  their  own.  The  ingenuity  and  intelligence  shown  in 
this  contrivance  always  struck  me  as  something  quite  marvellous. 
It  is  certainly  something  which  the  goriUa  is  not  at  all  capable  of. 

The  distinctive  marks  of  the  T.  calvtiSy  those  which  prove  it  to 
be  a  separate  variety  of  the  chimpanzee,  may  be  stated  as  follows : 
its  head  is  bald,  and  shining  black;  its  temper  is  not  fierce  like 


360  THE  KOOLOO-KAMBA.  Chap.  XS. 

the  gorilla's ;  its  young  is  wfUte,  while  the  young  gorilla  is  bla«;k, 
and  the  young  chimpanzee  yellow.  Its  head  is  nearly  round,  and 
bullet-formed ;  the  nose  is  very  flat ;  the  ears  larger  than  in  the 
gorilla,  but  smaller  than  in  the  kooloo-kamba  and  chimpanzee ; 
the  eyes  sunken ;  the  t«eth  and  canines  small  when  compared  with 
the  gorilla's.  The  arms  reach  a  httle  below  the  knee.  The  hands 
are  long  and  slender ;  the  foot  shorter  than  the  hand.  The  toes 
are  free.  The  callosities  on  the  back  of  the  fingers  show  that 
this  animal  goes  commonly  on  all-fours,  and  reets  its  weight  on 
the  doubled-up  hands.  The  hair  is  of  one  uniform  rosty-black 
colour.  The  male  is  larger  than  the  female.  I  hare  killed  an 
old  male  whose  skeleton  seems  more  powerful  than  that  of  any 
female  gorilla  I  have  seen,  but  I  suspect  it  to  have  been  an  nn- 
comutouly  large  specimen,  it  being  much  larger  than  the  other 
adult  specimen  I  had. 

I  cannot  tell  if  this  animal  would  attack  man  if  it  were  only 
wounded,  but  I  doubt  it.  Its  docility,  when  young,  makes  it  very 
strikingly  different  from  the  gorilla.  Those  I  saw  ran  away  as 
soon  as  they  caught  sight  of  me. 

Lastly,  we  come  to  the  kooloo-kamba.  This  ape,  whose  sin- 
gular cry  distinguishes  it  at  once  &om  all  its  congeners  in  these 
wilds,  is  remarkable,  as  bearing  a  closer  general  resemblance  to 
man  than  any  other  ape  yet  known.  It  is  very  rare,  and  I  was 
able  to  obtain  but  ono  specimen  of  it.     This  is  smaller  than  the 


adult  male  gorilla,  and  stouter  than  the  female  gorilla.     The 
head  is  its  most  remarkable  point.     This  struck  me  at  once  as 


Chap.  XX.  EAR  OP  KOOUpO-KAMBA.  3til 

having  an  expression  cariously  like  to  an  Esquimaux  or  Chioa- 
man.  The  face  is  bare  and  black.  The  forehead  is  higher  than 
is  any  other  ape,  and  the  cranial  capacity  greater  by  measure- 
ment proportionally  to  size.  The  eyes  are  wider  apart  than 
in  any  other  ape.  The  nose  is  flat.  The  cheek-bones  are  high 
and  prominent  and  the  cheeks  sunken  and  "lank."  The  ridge 
over  the  eyes  ie  well  marked.  The  mnzzle  is  leas  prominent 
and  broader  than  in  the  other  apes.  The  sides  of  the  face  are 
covered  with  a  growth  of  straight  hair,  which,  meeting  under  the 
chin  like  the  htunan  whiskers,  gives  the  face  a  remarkably 
human  look.  The  arms  reach  below  the  knee.  The  hair  on  the 
arms  meets  at  the  elbow,  growing  upwards  on  the  fore-arm  and 
downwards  on  the  arm.  The  body  is  hairy.  The  shonlders  are 
broad;  the  hands  long  and  narrow,  showing  it  to  be  a  tree- 
climber.  The  arms  and  hands  are  very  muscular.  The  abdomen 
is  very  prominent,  as  it  is  in  the  gorilla.  The  ears  are  very 
large,  and  are  more  nearly  like  the  human  ear  than  those  of  any 


other  ape.  The  subjoined  cut  is  from  a  drawing  made  with  great 
rare  from  my  specimen,  and  shows  this  singular  ear  very  cor- 
rectly. 

The  gorilla  hue  been  mentioned  by  different  travellers  under 
the  following  names :  jxmgo,  by  Battel,  1629 ;  inffena,  Bowditch, 
1819;  ertge-ma.  Savage,  1847;  erige-ena  or  inge-ena,  Gautier 
Laboulay,  1849;  ngena,  Ford,  1852;  ngina  or  gina.  Admiral 
Penaud,  1852;  djina,  Aubry  Lecomte,  1854-57.  Except 
"  pongo,"  all  these  names  are  various  spellings  of  the  Mpongwe 
name  for  the  gorilla,  which  is  ngena,  as  given  by  the  Rev.  Dr. 
J.  L.  Wilson  in  his  '  Western  Africa,'  which  I  have  spelled  ngtjia. 


362  NATIVE  HAME8.  Chap.  XX. 

In  the  Mpongwe  language,  as  in  some  of  the  Sonth  African 
tongues,  most  of  the  words  have  the  prefix  of  eithern  or  m. 

The  cJnmpcmzeey  which  I  suppose  Hanno  to  have  called  fforilla, 
and  Pliny  gorffo^  is  called  enffeco  by  Battel,  1625 ;  pyffmie,  by 
Tyson,  in  his  Anatomy  of  a  PygmiCy  1699;  cMmpameey  hj 
Gravelet,  1738  ;  enjokoy  jocko,  or  petit  ourcmg-outangy  by  BuflTon, 
1766  ;  pongo,  by  Bufifon,  in  1786 ;  inchego,  by  Bowditch,  1819; 
enche-ecoy  by  Savage,  in  1847 ;  ntcliegoy  by  Franquet,  in  1852; 
nchegOy  by  Aubry  Lecomte,  1854-57 ;  most  of  which  are  varia- 
tions again  of  the  Camma  name,  which,  according  to  our  English 
mode  of  spelling,  should  be,  as  I  have  given  it,  "  nshiega" 
Nshiego  is  the  negro  name  for  the  true  chimpanzee ;  and  the 
new  species,  which  I  first  discovered,  and  to  which  the  name 
Troglodytes  ccUvus  has  been  given,  they  call  the  nshiego  mbomre 
— mbouv^  meaning  in  the  language  of  the  country  another  tribe 
of  nshiego  or  chimpanzee.  The  Troglodytes  kooloo-kamba  the? 
know  as  the  kooloo-kamba,  or  simply  as  the  koola.  Kooloo- 
kamba  is  derived  from  the  verb  kamba,  to  speak,  and  kooloo 
from  the  two  notes  it  utters. 


Chap.  XXL  AUTHORITIES.  368 


CHAPTER   XXI. 

On  tho  bony  Structure  of  the  Gorilla  and  other  African  Aprs. 

We  come  now  to  consider  the  anatomy  of  the  great  African 
apes ;  and  I  propose  to  speak  more  especially  of  those  points  of 
structure  wherein  these  animals  most  nearly  resemble  man.  I 
should  state  here  that  naturalists  have  not,  thus  far,  been  able 
to  agree  on  this  question.  Some  have  given  to  the  gorilla  the 
honour  of  approximating  nearest  to  man  in  structure,  while 
others  reserve  this  foj  the  chimpanzee.  Dr.  Jeffries  Wyman, 
the  accomplished  and  distinguished  comparative  anatomist  of 
Harvard  University,  was  the  first  to  give  a  scientific  account  of 
the  cranium  and  of  a  part  of  the  skeleton  of  the  gorilla  in  1847. 
To  him  belongs  the  honour  of  having  first  brought  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  scientific  world  this  wonderful  am'mal.  In 
1849,  Dr.  Wyman  gave  another  description  of  two  additional 
crania  of  the  gorilla.  In  these  memoirs  he  classified  this  animal 
in  the  genus  Troglodytes, 

In  1848,  Professor  Richard  Owen,  the  learned  Superintendent 
of  the  Natural  History  department  of  the  British  Museum,  pub- 
lished an  account  of  the  gorilla  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Zoolo- 
gical Society  of  London,  and  in  this  he  agreed  with  Dr.  Jeffries 
Wyman,  and  retained  the  gorilla  in  the  genus  Troglodytes.  Since 
1848,  that  illustrious  zootomist  has  written  several  memoirs,  giving 
extended  definitions  of  the  anatomical  structure  of  the  gorilla. 

Professor  Duvemoy  and  Professor  Isidore  Geoflroy  St.  Hilaire, 
of  Paris,  have  written  long  memoirs  on  the  comparative  anatomy 
and  systematic  position  of  this  wonderful  animal ;  and  both,  after 
very  able  scientific  description,  consider  the  differences  in  the 
osteology,  dentition,  and  outward  character  of  the  gorilla  to  be  of 
sufficient  generic  importance  to  create  the  genus  gorilla.  They 
give  the  trivial  name  of  ngina  to  the  animal. 

Professors  Duvemoy,  St  Hilaire,  and  Dr.  Jeffries  Wyman 
agree  in  putting  the  gorilla  below  the  chimpanzee  in  its  an- 
thropoid character,  while  Professor  Owen  is  of  opinion  that  the 


364    ANTHROPOID  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  T.  GORILLA.  Chap.  XXI. 

gorilla  is  nearer  akin  to  man  than  the  T.  niger,  or  ehimpwizee, 
and  does  not  think  that  the  anatomical  peculiarities  of  the  animal 
are  sufficient  to  make  a  new  genus.  On  this  last  point  he  agrees 
with  Dr.  Wyman. 

The  most  important  anthropoid  characters  of  the  gorilla, 
which  are  referred  to  by  Professor  Owen  in  his  first  memoir,  are 
the  following : — 

"  1st.  The  coalesced  central  margins  of  the  nasals  are  pro- 
jected forward,  thus  offering  a  feature  of  approximation  to  the 
human  structure,  which  is  very  faintly  indicated,  if  at  all,  in  the 
T.  niger  [or  chimpanzee]. 

"  2nd.  The  inferior  or  alveolar  part  of  the  premaxillaries,  on 
the  other  hand,  is  shorter  and  less  prominent  in  the  T.  gorilla 
than  in  the  T.  niger;  and  in  that  respect  the  larger  species 
deviate  less  from  man. 

"  3rd.  The  next  character,  which  is  also  a  more  anthropoid 
one,  though  explicable  in  relation  to  the  greater  weight  of  the 
skull  to  be  poised  on  the  atlas,  is  the  greater  prominence  of  the 
mastoid  processes  in  the  T.  gorilla,  which  are  only  represented 
by  a  rough  ridge  in  the  T.  niger. 

"  4th.  The  ridge  which  extends  from  the  ecto^terygoid  along 
the  inner  border  of  the  foramen  ovale  terminates  in  the  T.  gorilla 
by  an  angle  or  process  answering  to  that  called  *  styliform*  or 
spinous  in  man,  but  of  which  there  is  no  trace  in  the  T.  niger. 

"  5th.  The  palate  is  narrower  in  proportion  to  the  length  in 
the  T.  gorilla,  but  the  premaxillary  portion  is  relatively  longer 
in  the  T.  niger."* 

In  1849,  Dr.  Wyman,  in  referring  to  the  above  memoir  of 
Professor  Owen,  says,  in  refutation,  and  claiming  for  the  chim- 
panzee a  nearer  affinity  to  man :  "  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we 
enumerate  those  conditions  in  which  the  enge-ena  [gorilla]  re- 
cedes farther  from  the  human  type  than  the  chimpanzee,  they 
will  be  found  by  far  more  numerous,  and  by  no  means  less 
important 

"  The  larger  ridge  over  the  eyes,  and  the  crest  on  the  top  of 
the  head  and  occiput,  with  the  corresponding  development  of  the 
temporal  muscles,  form  the  most  striking  features.  The  pre- 
maxillary bones  articulating  with  the  nasals,  as  in  the  other 
quadrumana  and  most  brutes;    the  expanded  portion  of  the 

*  Op.  cit.,  vol.  ill.,  'Transactions  of  the  Zoological  Society,'  184^. 


Chap.  XXI.  PROFESSOR  WYMAN'S  REMARKS.  365 

nasals  between  the  frontals,  or  an  additional  osseous  element  of 
this,  prove  an  independent  bone;  the  vertically  broader  and  more 
arched  zygomata,  contrasting  with  the  more  slender  and  hori- 
zontal ones  of  the  chimpanzee;  the  more  quadrate  foramen 
lacerum  of  the  orbit ;  the  less  perfect  infira-orbital  canal ;  the 
orbits  less  distinctly  defined ;  the  larger  and  more  tumid  cheek- 
bones ;  the  more  quadrangular  nasal  orifice,  which  is  depressed 
on  the  floor ;  the  greater  length  of  the  ossa  palati ;  the  more 
widely-expanded  tympanic  cells,  extending  not  only  to  the 
mastoid  process,  but  to  the  squamous  portion  of  the  temporal 
bones — these  would,  of  themselyes,  be  suflBcient  to  counterbalance 
all  the  anatomical  characters  of  the  (enge-ena)  gorilla, 

"  When,  however,  we  add  to  them  the  more  quadrate  outline 
of  the  upper  jaws;  the  existence  of  much  larger  and  more 
deeply-grooved  canines;  molars  with  cups  on  the  outer  side, 
longer  and  more  sharply-pointed ;  the  dentes  sapientiaD  of  equal 
size  with  the  other  molars ;  the  prominent  ridge  between  the 
outer  posterior  and  the  anterior  inner  cups ;  the  absence  of  a 
crista  galli ;  a  cranial  cavity  almost  wholly  behind  the  orbits  of 
the  eyes ;  the  less  perfectly-marked  depressions  for  the  cerebral 
convolutions ;  and,  above  all,  the  small  cranial  capacity  in  pro- 
portion to  the  size  of  the  body,  no  reasonable  grounds  for  doubt 
remain  that  the  enge-ena  occupies  a  lower  position,  and  conse- 
quently recede  farther  from  man  than  the  chimpanzee." 

Professor  Wyman  goes  on  to  say : 

^'  It  does  not  appear  that  any  other  bones  of  the  skeletons  have 
as  yet  fallen  into  the  hands  of  any  European  naturalists.  A  de- 
scription of  some  of  the  more  important  of  them  will  be  foimd 
in  the  memoir  above  referred  to,*  in  which  it  will  be  seen  that 
there  are  two  anthropoid  features  of  some  importance,  which  go 
to  support  the  views  advanced  by  Professor  Owen.  These  are 
the  comparative  length  of  the  humerus  and  ulna,  the  former 
being  seventeen  and  the  latter  only  fourteen  inches,  and  the 
proportions  of  the  pelvis.  .  This  last  is  of  gigantic  size,  and  is  a 
little  shorter  in  proportion  to  its  breadth  than  in  the  niger. 

"  While  the  proportions  of  the  ulna  and  humerus  are  more 
nearly  human  than  in  the  chimpanzee,  those  of  the  humerus  and 
femur  recede  much  farther  from  the  human  proportions  than  they 
do  in  the  chimpanzee,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  following  measures : 

*  *  Journal  of  the  Boston  Natural  History  Society,'  vol.  v.,  p.  417. 


866      COMPARISON  OF  T.  GORILLA  AND  T.  NIGER.    Chap.  XXL 

Homenu.  Femur. 

Man        15-0     ..  ..     18-5 

Chimpanzee 10*9     ..  ..     11"0 

Enge-ena        17-0     14-0 

"  Thus,  in  man,  the  femur  is  three  inches  longer  than  the  hu- 
merus. In  the  chimpanzee  these  bones  are  nearly  of  the  same 
length ;  and  in  the  enge-ena  the  humerus  is  three  inches  longer 
than  the  femur,  indicating,  on  the  part  of  the  enge-ena,  a  less 
perfect  adaptation  to  locomotion  in  the  erect  position  than  in  the 
chimpanzee." 

My  own  observations  have  led  me  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
gorilla  walks  more  often  in  the  erect  posture  than  the  chimpm- 
zee,  and  in  this  I  agree  with  the  conclusion  of  Professor  Owen. 

In  1853,  1855,  and  1859,  Professor  Owen  wrote  several  very 
detailed  memoirs  upon  the  entire  skeleton,  and  in  these  is  always 
of  the  opinion  that  the  gorilla  is  the  nearest  akin  to  man. 

"  Among  the  closer  anthropoid  afi^ities  of  the  gorilla,"  he 
says,  "  very  significant  of  the  closer  afiSnities  of  the  gorilla  is  the 
superior  length  of  arm  (humerus)  to  the  fore-arm,  as  compared 
with  the  proportions  of  those  parts  in  the  chimpanzee. 

"  In  the  hind  limbs,  chiefly  noticeable  was  the  first  api>ear^ 
ance,  in  a  quadnmianous  series,  of  a  muscular  development  of 
the  gluteus,  causing  a  small  buttock  to  project  over  each  tuber 
ischiL  This  structure,  with  the  peculiar  expanse  (in  qnadrumana) 
of  the  iliac  bones,  leads  to  an  inference  that  the  gorilla  must 
naturally,  and  with  more  ease,  resort  occasionally  to  station  and 
progression  on  the  lower  limbs  than  any  other  ape."  • 

This  statement,  as  quoted  above,  agrees  entirely  with  my  own 
observations. 

"The  arms  in  man  reach  to  below  the  middle  of  the  thigh; 
in  the  gorilla  they  reach  nearly  to  the  knee,  and  in  the  chimpan- 
zee, they  reach  below  the  knee.  ♦  ♦  »  ♦  j^q  humerus  in 
the  gorilla,  though  less  long,  compared  with  the  uhia,  than  in 
man,  is  longer  than  in  the  chimpanzee."  t 

"The  scapulae  are  broader  in  the  gorilla  than  in  the  chimpan- 
zee, and  come  nearer  to  the  proportion  of  that  bone  in  man.  But 
a  more  decisive  resemblance  to  the  human  structure  is  presented 
by  the  iliac  bones.    In  no  other  ape  than  the  gorilla  do  they 

*  *  On  the  Classification  and  Geographical  Distribution  of  the  Mammalia, 
etc.,  etc.,'  1859,  pp.  70  and  71. 
t  Ibid.,  p.  78. 


Chap.  XXI.  FOOT  OF  THE  GORILLA.  367 

bend  forward  so  as  to  produce  a  pelvic  concavity ;  nor  are  they 
so  broad,  in  proportion  to  their  length,  in  any  ape  as  in  the 
gorilla, 

"  The  lower  limbs,  though  characteristically  short  in  the  go- 
rilla, are  longer  in  proportion  to  the  upper  limbs,  and  also  to  the 
entire  trunk,  than  in  the  chimpanzee.  ♦  ♦  •  •  But  the 
guiding  points  of  comparison  here  are  the  heel  and  the  hallux 
(great  toe,  or  thumb  of  the  foot). 

"The  heel  in  the  gorilla  makes  a  more  decided  backward 
projection  than  in  the  chimpanzee ;  the  heel-bone  is  relatively 
thicker,  deeper,  more  expanded  vertically  at  its  hind  end,  besides 
being  fully  as  long  as  in  the  chimpanzee :  it  is  in  the  gorilla 
shaped  and  proportioned  more  like  the  human  calcaneum  than 
in  any  other  ape.     ♦     ♦     ♦     ♦ 

"  Although  the  foot  be  articulated  to  the  leg  with  a  slight  in- 
version of  the  sole,  it  is  more  nearly  plantigrade  in  the  gorilla 
than  in  the  chimpanzee.    «    ♦    ♦    * 

"  The  great  toe,  which  forms  the  fulcrum  in  standing  or  walk- 
ing, is,  perhaps,  the  most  characteristic  peculiarity  in  the  human 
structure ;  it  is  that  modification  which  differentiates  the  foot 
from  the  hand,  and  gives  the  character  of  his  order  (Bimcma), 
In  the  degree  of  its  approach  to  this  development  of  the  hallux 
(big  toe),  the  quadrumanous  animal  makes  a  true  step  in  affinity 
to  man.     ♦     ♦    ♦     ♦ 

"  In  the  chimpanzee  and  gorilla  the  hallux  reaches  to  the  end 
of  the  first  phalanx  of  the  second  toe,  but  in  the  gorilla  it  is 
thicker  and  stronger  than  in  the  chimpanzee.  In  both,  however, 
it  is  a  true  thumb  by  position,  diverging  from  the  other  toes,  in 
the  gorilla,  at  an  angle  of  60°  from  the  axis  of  the  foot."  * 

"  In  the  greater  relative  size  of  the  molars  compared  with  the 
incisors,  the  gorilla  makes  an  important  closer  step  towards  man 
than  does  the  chimpanzee.     ♦     ♦     ♦     ♦ 

"  In  the  chimpanzee  the  four  lower  incisors  occupy  an  extent 
equal  to  that  of  the  first  three  molars,  ♦  ♦  *  »  whUe  in 
man  the  four  are  equal  to  the  two  first  molars  and  half  of  the 
third.  In  this  comparison,  the  term  molar  is  applied  to  the  bi- 
cuspid.! 

"  The  proportion  of  the  ascending  ramus  to  the  length  of  the 

lower  jaw  tests  the  relative  affinity  of  the  tailless  apes  to  man. 

*  Owen,  pp.  79,  80.  f  Ibid.,  p.  83. 


368  RELATIVE  POSITION  OF  THE  APES.  Chap.  XX!. 

"  In  a  profile  of  the  lower  jaw,  compare  the  line  drawn  verti- 
cally from  the  top  of  the  coronoid  process  to  the  horiaontal 
length  along  the  alveoli :  in  man  and  the  gorilla  it  is  about  eeven- 
tenths,  in  the  chimpanzee  six-tenths. 

"  Every  legitimate  deduction  from  a  comparison  of  cranial  cha- 
racters makes  the  tailless  qtuzdrumana  recede  from  the  human 
type  in  the  following  order :  gorilla,  chimpanzee,  orang,  gibbon."* 

Professor  Isidore  GeoflTroy  St.  Hilaire  makes  a  new  genus  for 
the  gorilla,  which  he  has  named  Gorilla,  and  has  called  the  only 
species  of  the  genus  thus  named  nginci.  This  arrangement  he 
bases  on  the  following  structural  peculiarities : —  ")• 

"  li'dtude  de  la  conformation  generale  de  la  tete  chez  le  gorille, 
des  proportions  des  membres,  et  par  cons6quent  des  conditions 
generales  de  la  station  et  de  la  progression,  celle  de  la  conformap 
tion  de  ses  mains,  et  de  la  stnicture  des  m&chelieres  inf^rieures, 
nous  out  6galement  conduit  &  cette  conclusion,  confirmee  en 
outre  par  un  grand  nombre  de  faits  secondaires. 

"  Le  gorille  n'appartient  pas  an  genre  Troglodytes ;  il  constitoe 
un  genre  distinct,  genre  auquel  restera  sans  doute  applique  le 
nom  que  j'ai  propose  pour  ce  singe  quelques  jours  apr^  son  ar- 
rivee  en  France — Gorille  (gorilla). 

"  Les  caract&res  principaux  de  ce  genre  peuvent  Stre  ainsi  rS- 
sum6s: 

"  1.  Tete  arrondie  dans  le  jeune  age.  Tete  trfcs-allongte  et 
tris-deprimee,  k  I'etat  adulte,  les  cretes  cranienes  tres-saillantes. 
Conques  auriculaires  petites  et  de  forme  humaine. 

*^ Membres  anterieurs  longs  (but  much  less  than  in  the  orangs  and 
gibbons),  leur  extremity  atteignant  Tanimal  debout  le  milieu  de 
la  jambe. 

"  Mains  ontMeures  larges.  *  Ce  caractere  s^pare  bien  plus  en- 
core le  gorille  de  Torang  que  du  chimpanz^.'  La  paume  en 
particulier  presque  aussi  large  que  longue  (de  proportion  presque 
exactement  humaine;  les  daigts  courts^  relativement  k  cenx  de 
rhomme  et  du  chimpanzee). 

**  Mains  posterieures  allonges,  les  trots  daigts  intermediairet 
(chez  le  m&le)  rAinis  par  des  t^mentsjusgu^a  la  secondefalaHge; 
ongles  des  quatre  mains  tres-applatis  comme  chez  Thonmie  et  le 
chimpanzee  seuls. 

*  Owen,  p.  84. 

t  See  page  37,  *  Arcliives  du  Museum  d'Bistoiro  Naturelle,'  torn.  x. 
liv.  i.  et  ii. 


Chap.  XXL  PLACE  OF  THE  GORILLA.  369 

"  Les  canines  enormes,  les  incisores  presque  rang^  en  ligne 
droite,  les  trois  mdchelihres  infirieures  alhmgies  d^avcmt  en  arrive, 
et  a  talon. 

*'  Les  caract^res  qui  sont  indiques  en  italiques  sont  ceux  que 
distinguent  particuliferement  le  genre  gorilla  du  genre  troglo- 
dytes." 

For  these  and  other  reasons,  Professor  St.  Hilaire  makes  of 
the  gorilla  the  genua  "  Gorilla,"  and  places  it  nearer  the  Simians  in 
some  respects  than  the  Troglodytes  niger.  His  arrangement  or 
order  is  as  follows : — Somo,  TroglodyteSj  Q-oriUoy  Simia,  Hylobates. 

I  must  own  that,  at  first  sight,  judging  from  the  living  speci- 
men and  from  its  cranium,  the  gorilla  presents  all  the  features 
of  a  far  more  bestial  animal  than  the  T.  calvus,  T,  kooloo-kariiboy 
T.  niger y  or  the  orang.  All  the  features  of  the  gorilla,  especially 
in  the  male,  are  exaggerated ;  the  head  is  longer  and  narrower ; 
the  brain  is  backward ;  the  cranial  crests  are  of  immense  size ; 
the  jaws  are  very  prominent,  and  show  great  power ;  the  canines 
are  very  large.  The  proper  cavity  of  the  brain  is  marked  by 
the  immense  occipital  ridges.  But  the  remainder  of  the  skeleton 
of  the  gorilla  comes  much  nearer  to  that  of  man  than  that  of 
any  other  ape. 

And,  after  a  careful  examination  of  the  osteological  fEicts  which 
have  been  mentioned ;  after  having  observed  the  live  gorilla  and 
studied  carefully  its  mode  of  progression,  I  came  to  the  convic- 
tion that  in  its  mode  of  progression  the  gorilla  is  the  nearest 
akin  to  man  of  all  the  anthropoid  apes. 

In  size  the  gorilla  varies  as  much  as  does  man.  Adult  male 
gorillas  measure  from  five  feet  two  inches  to  six  feet  two  inches. 
Part  of  a  skeleton,  in  the  possession  of  Dr.  Wyman,  shows  that 
the  animal  might  have  reached  the  latter  size  when  extended  on 
the  ground  in  a  perfectly  straight  position ;  but  as  the  gorilla  is 
unable  to  stand  perfectly  upright,  the  legs  being  somewhat  bent 
and  the  body  thrown  forward,  the  largest  specimen  would  not 
appear  higher  than  five  feet  nine  inches. 

To  show  the  reader  the  contrast  between  the  bony  structure 
of  man  and  the  gorilla,  I  place  diagrams  of  their  skeletons  side 
by  side  on  the  following  page.  The  accompanying  table  of 
measurements  shows  the  points  of  simUarity  and  of  difference : — 

2  B 


COMPARISON  OF  SKELETONS- 


Manhai 

12  (and  Bometimes  13)  pairs  of  ribs. 

7  cervical  vertobrs. 

12  dorsal  (and  Bometimes  13)  vertebne 
5  lumbar  (sometimes  4)  do. 

5  sacral  do. 

8  cartel  (wrist)  bones. 


Tiie  Gorilla  has 
13  pairs  of  ribe. 

7  cervical  vertebno, 
13  dorsal  do. 

3  lumbar        do. 
6  sacral  do. 

8  caqwl  (wrist)  bones. 


s 


Chap.  XXI.    ANTHROPOID  CHARACTER  OF  SKELETON.  371 

The  T.  calvus  has  sometimes  fourteen  pairs  of  ribs.  Man  has 
sometimes  thirteen  pairs  of  ribs ;  but  what  are  termed  ribs  are 
vertebral  elements,  which  are  so  called  when  long  and  free,  as 
in  the  dorsal  vertebrae,  which  are  not  distinguished  from  the 
processes  with  which  they  are  anchylosed  in  the  lumbar  ver- 
tebrae. The  cervical  series  departs  most  from  that  of  man. 
All  the  African  apes  possess  the  same  number  of  vertebrae  as 
tnan.  , 

The  gorilla  skeleton,  tl^e  skuU  exceptedy  resembles  the  bony 
frame  of  man  more  than  that  of  any  other  anthropoid  ape.  In 
the  form  and  proportions  of  the  pelvis,  the  number  of  ribs,  the 
length  of  the  arm,  the  width  of  the  hand,  and  the  structure  and 
arches  of  the  feet — all  these  characteristics,  and  also  some  of  its 
habits,  appear  to  me  to  place  the  gorilla  nearer  to  man  than 
any  other  anthropoid  ape  is  placed. 

Among  all  the  anthropoid  apes,  the  number  of  teeth  corre- 
sponds with  that  in  the  human  species,  but  the  canines  are 
much  larger,  especially  in  the  male  gonlla.  The  incisors  also 
are  large.  In  the  ape  the  bicuspids  are  implanted  by  three 
distinct  fangs,  two  external  and  one  internal,  and  the  external 
one  is  divided.  In  man  they  are  implanted  by  one  external 
and  one  internal ;  and  in  the  Caucasian  race  the  two  fangs  are 
sometimes  united. 

The  skull  (No.  18)  is  that  of  a  gorilla  shedding  his  milk-teeth. 
The  upper  milk  incisors  have  fallen,  and  the  four  permanent 
ones  of  that  jaw  are  making  their  appearance,,  while  in  the  lower 
jaw  the  two  lateral  deciduous  or  milk  incisors  are  yet  firmly  in 
place,  though  the  two  central  incisors  of  the  second  dentition 
have  made  their  appearance  and  are  half-grown. 

The  milk  or  first  canines  are  yet  firmly  in  place  in  both 
jaws,  and,  on  extracting  one  of  them^  the  germ  of  the  second  or 
permanent  tooth  is  scarcely  discoverabla  On  withdrawing  one 
of  the  milk  molars  of  the  lower  jaw,  the  rudiments  of  the  bi- 
cuspids, or  permanent  teeth  which  replace  them,  are  perceptible. 
The  first  permanent  molar  of  the  lower  jaw  is  in  place  and  use, 
and  the  second  is  coming  into  place  ;  but  the  third,  or  wisdom- 
tooth,  is  still  completely  inclosed  within  the  jaw.  In  the  upper 
jaw,  the  milk  molars  are  imdisturbed,  and  but  little  worn ;  and, 
as  in  the  lower  jaw,  the  first  permanent  molar  is  in  place  and 

2b2 


372  DENTAL  ARRANGEMENT.  Chap.  XXL 

use ;  while  the  socond  is  emerging,  and  the  third  is  titill  com- 
pletely inclosed  in  its  socket. 

The  intermaxillary  suture  is  very  distinct  throughout  its  whole 
length  in  this  skull. 

The  large  ridge  over  the  eyes  and  the  crest  on  the  top  of  the 
head  (Nos.  2  and  8),  and  extending  over  upon  the  occiput,  toge- 
ther with  the  corresponding  development  of  the  temporal  muscles 
and  the  large  canines,  are  the  main  outward  characters  which 
seem  to  remove  the  gorilla  £EU*ther  from  man  than  the  chimpanxee, 
and  give  to  this  animal  so  ferocious  a  look.  One  of  the  remark- 
able features  in  the  skulls  of  gorillas  is  the  great  variation  in  the 
height  of  the  crest  on  the  top  of  the  head  and  occiput  Some- 
times a  skull  less  powerful  than  any  other  will  have  a  higher 
ridge,  and  if  this  higher  ridge  belong  to  a  rather  young  male  the 
crest  will  not  be  so  thick.  The  crest  in  the  gorilla  becomes 
rounder  on  the  edges  as  the  animal  grows  older. 

But  in  the  female  gorilla  the  canines  are  not  much  larger,  in 
proportion  to  the  relative  size  of  the  animals,  than  in  the  chim- 
panzee ;  the  frontal  and  occipital  ridges  of  the  head  are  bat 
slightly  marked  (Nos.  3  and  7). 

In  the  female  gorilla  *'  with  the  red  rump,"  the  head  of  which 
seems  somewhat  deformed,  the  space  between  the  eyes  is  much 
narrower  (No.  17). 

The  skulls  of  the  T.  niger,  or  chimpanzee  (Nos  6  and  12), 
and  T,  calvns  (nshiego  mbouve)  (No.  5),  are  smaller  and  rounder 
than  that  of  the  gorilla,  and  show  more  capacity  relatively  to 
their  size  than  that  of  the  male  gorilla,  but  I  think  not  much 
more  than  that  of  the  female  gorilla.  That  of  the  kooloo-kamba 
(Nos.  4  and  10)  has  perhaps  a  greater  relative  capacity  than  any 
other  of  the  ajKJS. 

The  corresponding  small  amount  of  brain  in  the  male  gorilla, 
and  the  excessive  preponderance  of  the  cerebellum  or  back 
brain,  with  its  enormous  strength,  would  seem  to  corroborate 
om*  opinion  of  the  excessive  brutality  of  this  beast 

The  changes  which  occur  in  the  development  of  the  female 
gorilla's  skull  from  early  youth  to  adult  life  are  not  so  great  by 
far  as  they  are  in  the  male  gorilla's  skull,  which  may  be  called 
a  complete  metamorphosis. 

The  skulls  of  i/aun{/  gorillas,  female  and  male,  and  of  the 


Chap.  XXI.     COMPARISON  OF  CRANIAL  CAPACITY. 


373 


young  of  the  chimpanzee  and  other  apes,  are  much  alike,  and 
could  hardly  be  recognized  one  from  another  (Nos.  13,  15,  and 
16).  When  young,  the  head  is  more  round  and  more  human. 
As  the  animals  grow  older,  the  occiput  becomes  long  and  com- 
pressed; the  muzzle  large  and  projecting;  the  frontal  ridge, 
which  was  small,  prominent ;  and  the  crests  and  occipital  ridges, 
which  ate  not  seen  in  the  young,  become  enormous  in  the  adult 
male  gorilla.  These  appear  to  be,  as  they  doubtless  are,  an 
eflTectual  defence  of  the  monstrous  skull  against  the  dangers  of 
ferocious  conflicts ;  but  the  chief  purpose  which  they  serve,  is  for 
the  attachment  of  the  powerful  temporal  muscles  which  move 
the  enormous  jaws. 

Bjr  the  following  tables  of  measurements  the  reader  can  form 
an  idea  of  the  comparative  cranial  capacity  of  the  different  apes 
of  Africa.  The  measurements  are  by  my  friend  Professor 
Jeffi-ies  Wyman,  of  Boston. 


»» 


Antbority. 

Dr.  J.  Wyman. 


Cbanial  Capacitt  of  Adult  Chimpanzee,  Nshieoo,  akd  Eooloo-kahba. 

Cubic  Inches. 

I,  Chimpanzee 26  .. 

11.  „  24  .. 

m.  „  22  .. 

rv.  Nshiego  mbouv^ ..  22  .. 

V.  Kooloo-kamba        25  .. 

VI.  Chimpanzee 20  .. 

VII.  Nshiego  mbonv^ 18  .. 

Vin.        „      mbouvd  (young)      ..      ..  21  .. 


From  this  it  will  be  seen  that  the  cranial  capctcity  of  the 
kooloo-kamba  and  nshiego  mbouv^  is  intermediate  betweea 
the  two  extreme  measurements  of  the  chimpanzee. 


CBA.NIAL  Capacity  of  Gorilla. 

Cubic  Inches. 

I.  Male       34-5  .. 

II.      „  28-3  .. 

III.     „  28     .. 

V.      „  26     .. 

VI.  Female 29*5  .. 

VII.  Male  27     .. 

VIII.      „  32     .. 

IX.      „  32-6  .. 

X.  Male  30-3  .. 


Authority. 

Dr.  J.  Wyman. 


Dr.  S.  Kneeland. 
Dr.  J.  Wyman. 
Prof.  Owen. 
Dr.  J.  Wjrman. 


374  INFERIORITY  OP  T.  GORILLA.  Chap.  XXI. 


Cbanial  Capacity  op  GoBXLLA^-continued, 

Cubic  Inbhcs.  Antboriij. 

XI.  Female 25     ..  .♦     Dr.  J.  Wyman. 

XIL      „  24 

XIII.     „  29-6 

^^«      »        (young,  shedding  teeth)  ..     20*5 


••  99 

••  99 


XV.  Gorilla  with  red  rump 19*5., 

I.  and  III.  were  obtained  by  Dr.  George  S.  Perkins. 

II.  and  XI.  were  obtained  by  Dr.  T.  S.  Savage. 
VII.  was  obtained  by  the  Rev.  J.  L.  Wilson. 

IV.,  v.,  VI.,  XIL,  XIIL,  XrV.,  XV.,  are  from  my  own  collection. 
Vni.  was  obtained  by  the  Rev.  William  Walker. 
IX.  is  in  the  Hunterian  Museum  in  London. 

Cable  Indiea. 

Average  of  ten  males        29*70 

„         three  females 26'00 

„         thirteen  adults       28*85 

Maximum 34*05 

Minimum 24*00 

No.  XI.  is  deformed,  and  is  therefore  not  referred  to  in  the  averages. 

As  an  interesting  contrast,  I  will  give  a  summary  of  the 
measurements  of  a  vast  number  of  crania  by  Dr.  S.  G.  Morton, 
of  Philadelphia,  giving  in  cubic  inches  the  average  capacity  of 
some  of  the  different  families  of  the  human  race.* 

The  average  capctcity  of  the  adult  negro  and  AustraUan  brain 
is  75  cubic  inches.  The  lowest  capacity,  65  and  63  cubic  inches, 
was  found  among  the  Hottentots  and  Australians.  The  average 
capacity  of  thirteen  adult  goriUas  was  but  28.85  cubic  inches. 
This  is  an  incontestable  proof  of  the  great  ascendancy  of  the 
intellectual  life  of  the  human  species,  even  in  the  lower  orders 
of  the  human  family,  which  increases  gradually,  and  possesses  an 
activity  of  nutrition  which  tends  to  the  continual  development  of 
that  organ  as  long  as  the  ossification  and  the  sutures  of  the 
cranium  are  not  complete,  which  is  not  the  case  until  man 
has  attained  the  adult  age ;  while  even  after  that  period  it  is 
known  that  the  brain  increases  sometimes  in  weight.  The 
difference  of  size  of  brain  or  cranicd  capacity  between  the  highest 
ape  and  the  lowest  man  is  much  greater  than  between  the  highest 
ape  and  the  lowest  ape.    In  the  gorilla  the  range  is  only  from 

*  '  Catalogue  of  skulls  of  man  and  inferior  animals  in  the  collection  of 
Samuel  George  Morton,  M.D.,'  3rd  edition,  Philadelphia,  1849. 


Chap.  XXI.  SKULL  OP  T.  KOOLOO-KAMBA.  375 

24  to  35  including  both  sexes,  and  from  18  to  26  in  the  varieties 
of  chimpanzees ;  but  from  35,  in  the  ape,  the  capacity  expands 
at  once  to  63  in  the  lowest  human  cranium.  The  variation  of 
size  of  brain  is  considerable  in  the  human  species ;  but  the 
position  and  the  quality  of  the  brain  have  more  to  do  with  the 
intellectual  manifestations. 

The  average  weight  of  the  brain  of  a  child  of  four  years,  of 
the  Caucasian  race,  having. its  first  teeth,  is  38  to  40  ounces. 
There  are  no  measurements  for  this  age.  The  average  capacity 
of  the  adult  Caucasian  skull  is  92  cubic  inches,  and  the  maxi- 
mum is  114  inches.  The  average  weight  of  a  brain  of  a  male 
Caucasian  is  4  lbs.  troy. 

The  cranial  capacity  of  a  young  gorilla  or  nshiego  mbouve  is 
from  20  to  22  cubic  inches — supposing  a  subsequent  development 
equal  in  measure  to  that  in  man  this  would  produce  an  animal  of 
a  high  grade  of  intelligence.  But  this  development  does  not  take 
place.  The  actucd  increase  in  brain,  in  the  adult  gorilla  (or 
other  anthropoid  apes),  over  the  young,  is  very  slight.  The 
head  increases  in  size  and  weight  with  age ;  but  it  is  the  bones, 
which  grow  into  a  hard,  firm  brain-case  ;  the  brain  itself  remains 
almost  without  increase  in  weight  or  size.  This  proves  con- 
clusively that  the  animal  has  very  limited  powers  of  intelligence ; 
and,  from  my  own  observations,  I  believe  that  the  limit  of  that 
intelligence  may  be  reached  in  a  single  year  of  its  life. 

Comparing  the  skeletons  of  the  T.  calvus^  or  nshiego  mbouv^ 
and  T.  kooloo-kamba  with  the  21  niger,  it  does  not  strike  me 
that  their  differences  are  of  generic  importance,  but  only 
varieties;  especially  when  it  is  remembered  how  much  indi- 
vidual gorillas  differ  in  size  and  in  proportions. 

The  skull  of  the  kooloo-kamba  is  much  broader  than  that  of 
either  the  chimpanzee  or  21  calviis.  In  the  kooloo-kamba  ^e 
incisors  strike  squarely  upon  each  other,  and  present  a  broad 
grinding  surface. 

Measured  from  the  supra-orbital  ridge  above  the  eyes  back- 
ward to  the  occipital  ridge,  the  plane  dividing  that  section  of  the 
skull  would  have  more  than  one-third  of  the  brain  superior  to 
that  line.  The  inter-temporal  diameter  is  greater  in  proportion 
than  in  either  the  gorilla,  the  chimpanzee,  or  the  21  calws. 

The  kooloo-kamba  skull  being  placed  in  situ  upon  the  lower  jaw, 


376  MAN  AND  THE  APES.  Chap.  XXL 

the  whole  head  preserves,  nnsustained,  its  erect  position ;  bat 
this  is  also  true  of  some  of  the  Gorillas  and  nshi^o  mbonv^. 

The  peculiar  development  of  the  cheek-bones  gives  a  great 
breadth  to  the  face ;  the  muzzle  is  not  so  prominent  as  in  the 
other  apes ;  the  head  is  rounder ;  the  capacity  of  the  cranium 
is  greater  than  the  nshiego  mbouvi,  as  shown  by  the  table  of 
measurement  of  the  crania.  The  skull  approaches  somewhat 
nearer  in  shape  to  the  human  skull.  The  width  of  the  pelvis  is 
greater  than  its  height,  but  it  has  somewhat  the  general  form  of 
that  of  the  chimpanzee  and  the  nshiego  mbauv^^  but  in  these 
two  the  height  of  the  pelvis  exceeds  its  width. 

There  are  two  points  of  great  difference  I  must  remark  on, 
which  still  farther  establish,  in  my  opinion,  the  vast  chasm  which 
lies  between  even  the  lowest  forms  of  the  human  race  and  the 
highest  of  the  apes.  One  of  these  is  that,  in  the  apes,  the 
vertebral  column  has  a  single  curvature  in  the  form  of  a  bow, 
and  is  thus  enabled  to  act  like  an  elastic  spring,  which  preserves 
the  animal  from  sudden  shocks  in  running  or  leaping  on  all- 
fours;  while  in  man  the  spinal  column  has  three  opposite 
curvatures,  which  answer  the  same  purpose  so  long  as  the  body 
is  in  the  erect  position,  but  are  not  calculated  for  progres- 
sion on  all-fours.  Moreover,  the  mode  of  articulation  of  the 
head  with  the  spinal  column  obliges  man  to  maintain  himself 
erect,  while  in  the  ape  it  is  such  that  the  head  must  be  thrown 
backwards  when  in  an  erect  position,  in  order  to  maintain  the 
balance  of  the  body ;  and  I  have  frequently  observed  the  fact 
that  the  gorilla  is  not  able  to  preserve  himself  for  any  con- 
siderable length  of  time  in  an  erect  posture. 

In  man,  therefore,  both  the  position  of  the  head  and  the 
curves  of  the  vertebral  column  make  the  erect  posture  the  only 
natural  one,  and  any  other  is  quite  painful^  even  if  assumed 
only  for  a  short  time;  and  this  difference  is  an  orffonic  one, 
resulting,  not  from  the  force  of  habit,  but  from  a  difference  in 
original  structure. 

The  whole  framework  of  man  proclaims  that  he  is  created  to 
carry  himself  erect ;  and,  unlike  all  the  quadrumana,  his  supe- 
rior extremities  do  not  perform  any  service  in  the  act  of  loco- 
motion. 

Then  comes  the  head,  with  its  enormous  expansion  of  the 


Chap.  XXL    DIFFERENCE  IN  STRUCTURE  OF  BRAIN.  377 

brain.  The  condyles  of  the  occiput  are  brought  forward  to  the 
base  of  the  skull,  and  by  this  the  balance  of  the  head  on  the 
neck-bone,  which  has  a  ^ight  tendency  forward.  The  arms  in 
man  are  in  more  syraraetrical  proportion  with  the  length  of  the 
legs.  The  femur  in  man  is  longer  in  proportion  to  the  leg  than 
in  any  other  animal ;  the  lower  limbs  (legs)  are  longer  than  in 
any  of  the  apes ;  the  pelvis  is  broader  than  it  is  long ;  the  iliae 
bones  are  bent  forward  ;  the  humerus  is  longer  than  the  fore- 
arm ;  the  thumb  is  much  longer  than  in  any  ape,  and  is  the 
most  useful  member  of  the  hand. 

Another  point  is  made  by  Dr.  P.  Gratiolet,  in  a  very  able 
p^)er,  read  before  the  Sociiti  ^ Anthropologie  of  Paris,  on  micro- 
cephalus  considered  in  its  relations  to  the  characteristics  of  the 
human  race.  In  this  able  paper  he  has  the  following  re* 
marks: — 

"  The  study  of  the  brain  of  microcephalic  persons  [or  small* 
brained  persons]  has  provided  me  with  other  elements,  by  the 
aid  of  which  the  absolute  distinction  of  man  is  evidently  and 
anatomically  proved.  In  comparing  attentively  the  brain  of 
monkeys  with  that  of  men,  I  have  found  that,  in  adult  age,  the 
arrangement  of  cerebral  folds  is  the  same  in  one  group  as  in  the 
other ;  and,  were  we  to  stop  here,  there  would  be  no  sufficient 
ground  for  separating  man  from  animals  in  general ;  but  the 
study  of  development  calls  for  an  absolute  distinction." 

Speaking  of  the  anatomical  development  and  structure  of 
the  brain,  he  then  continues  :— **  In  fact,  the  temporo-sphenoidal 
convolutions  appear  first  in  the  brain  of  monkeys,  and  are  com- 
pleted by  the  frontal  lobe,  while  precisely  the  inverse  order 
takes  place  in  man ;  the  frontal  convolutions  appear  first,  the 
temporo-sphenoidal  show  themselves  last ;  thus  the  same  series 
is  repeated  in  the  one  case  from  aU>w/\u  the  other  from  wio  <i. 
From  this  fact,  rigorously  verified,  a  necessary  consequence 
follows :  no  arrest  in  the  progress  of  development  could  possibly 
render  the  human  brain  more  similar  to  that  of  monkeys  than 
it  is  at  the  adult  age ;  far  from  that,  it  would  difier  tiie  more 
the  less  it  were  developed." 

Thus  we  see  that,  even  in  the  lowest  idiots,  the  brain  pre- 
serves the  material  and  zoological  characters  of  man ;  and, 
though  often  inferior  in  appearance  to  that  of  the  chimpanzee. 


378  STRONG  LINE  OP  DEMARCATION.  O^t.  XXI. 

gorilla^  or  Goang,  is  neivertlieless  an  undeniable  human  brain. 
Disease,  or  degradation  in  continued  reproduction  (astheniegenff), 
may  dwarf  a  man,  but  will  never  make  of  him  an  ape ;  and, 
moreover,  modem  observations  have  demonstrated  that  idiots 
do  not  breed. 

Though  there  is  a  great  dissimilarity  between  the  bony  frame 
of  man  and  that  of  the  gorilla,  there  is  also  an  awful  likeness, 
which,  in  the  gorilla,  resembles  an  exaggerated  caricature  of  a 
human  being.  With  the  knowledge  of  the  anthropoid  apes  which 
now  exists,  derived  from  the  critical  examinations  of  their  osteo- 
logy, their  dentition,  by  various  observers,  such  as  Greoflfroy, 
Tiedeman,  Cuvier,  Owen,  Wyman  and  others,  it  is  easy  to  see 
the  anatomical  peculiarities  belonging  to  the  anthropoid  apes ; 
and  these  peculiarities  constitute  so  wide  a  gap,  that  the  greatest 
difTerences  between  the  most  degraded  tribes  of  the  human 
race  and  the  highest  type  of  a  Caucasian  are  very  slight  in 
comparison,  as  the  reader  will  perceive  in  Nos.  1,  9, 11,  and  14, 
which  represent  the  Caucasian,  Australian,  and  Negra 

Finally,  let  me  say  that,  in  the  country  which  I  explored,  the 
gorilla,  and  all  the  other  man-like  apes  peculiar  to  Africa,  are 
found  roaming  in  the  same  forests  that  are  inhabited  by  the  natives, 
aud  both  live  in  proximity  to  each  other.  While  there  I  have 
inquired  patiently  and  thoroughly  about  the  strange  stories  told 
by  the  natives  of  the  apes  carrying  away  people — stories  which, 
I  must  admit,  they  firmly  believe,  as  they  believe  any  of  the 
other  stories  mentioned  in  my  narrative  about  women  giving 
birth  to  elephants,  crocodiles,  hippopotamus^  antelopes,  &a  &e. 
But  when  called  to  give  me  proof,  it  turned  out  that  the  stories 
had  always  happened  to  some  persons  that  had  died — some  form^ 
ancestress.  Still  the  stories  have  been  handed  from  generation 
to  generation,  impressing  themselves  deeply  on  the  supersti- 
tious minds  of  the  natives,  who  delight  in  the  mystical  and 
wonderful.  Particularly  while  I  resided  among  the  tribes 
found  in  the  mountains  near  the  banks  of  the  Ovenga  river, 
where  the  gorilla  is  rather  more  common  than  anywhere  else, 
I  searched  in  vain  if  an  intermediate  race,  or  rather  several 
intermediate  races  or  links  between  the  natives  and  the. gorilla, 
could  be  found;  and  I  must  say  here  that  I  made  those 
inquiries  conscientiously,  with  the  sole  view  of  bringing  before 


Chap.  XXT.    MEASUREMENTS  OP  SKELETON  OP  T.  GORILLA.  379 

science  the  facts  which  I  might  cdUect  Bat  I  haye  searched 
in  vain :  I  found  not  a  single  being,  yonng  or  oH,  who  could 
show  an  intermediate  link  between  man  and  the  gorilla,  which 
would  certainly  be  found  if  man  had  come  from  the  ape.  I  sup- 
pose from  these  facts  we  must  come  to  the  conclusion  that  man 
belongs  to  a  distinct  family  from  that  of  the  ape.  The  first 
belonging  to  the  order  Bimana,  and  the  latter  to  the  other 
quadrumanous  series. 

I  close  this  chapter  with  the  foUowiog  tables  of  measurements 
of  the  gorilla  skeleton,  carefully  made  from  one  of  my  most 
perfect  specimens,  an  adult  male,  which,  when  first  shot,  mea- 
sured five  feet  eight  inches  in  extreme  length. 


Measubements  of  the  Gorilla's  Skeleton. 

Lower  Jaw, 

Incbee. 

Length  of  the  inferior  maxillary  bone,  from  the  inferior  angle  of  the 

ramus  to  the  canine  tooth     6 

Do.  to  the  median  line,  measured  around  to  a  point  between  the  middle 

incisors    ..      ...     ...      ^.      .,.      ..      ..^     «      7 

Perpendicular  height  of  the  ramus  of  the  jaw         ..  4 

Greatest  breadth  of  dq.      ...     ..      ..,     ..      2f 

Length  of  alveolus  (in  a  straight  line  of  the  teeth)        3 J 

Width  across  the  jaw  from  the  outer  margin  of  the  last  molars   ..      ..  2^ 

Da  do.  at  the  canine  or  bicuspids 2i 


Upper  Jaw, 

Length-of  alveolus  from  the  last  molar  to  the  canine     ..      ..      ..      ..  3) 

Do.  do.  around  to  the  median  line    ..      .. ..  4} 

Breadth  across  the  jaw  at  the  molars       ..      ..      ..      «.      • 2i 

Do.  do.  at  the  extremities  of  canine         2\ 


Skua. 

Diameter  of  nasal  aperture       If 

Distance  from  lower  margin  of  do.  to  the  margin  of  the  eye-socket     ..  3 
Width  of  the  face,  measured  across  the  eyes  to  the  outer  margins  of  the 

lateral  orbital  ridges      ..      ••  S} 

Width  of  the  face,  measured  at  the  molar  protuberances      6} 

Depth  of  the  eye-socket  to  the  optic  foramen 2 J 

Greatest  length  of  the  face,  measured  in  a  straight  line  from  the  summit 

of  the  orbital  ridge  to  the  lowest  point  of  the  chin    ..      „      ..      ..  7} 


380    MEASUREMENTS  OF  SKELETON  OF  T.  GORILLA.   Chap.  XXI. 

Distance  from  the  base  of  the  nose  to  the  top  of  the  orbital  ridge  on  the  !»*«• 

median  line 2| 

Distance  from  do.  to  the  outer  angle  of  do      3| 

Distance  on  the  median  line  from  the  middle  incisor  of  the  upper  jaw 

to  the  foramen  magnum  (spinal  oi)ening) 'J 

Diameter  of  the  foramen  magnum  or  spinal  opening      IJ 

Distance  from  the  posterior  margin  of  that  opening  to  the  lateral  ter- 
mination of  the  occipital  crest       3J 

Distance  on  the  median  line,  measured  from  the  middle  incisor  of  the 
upper  jaw  across  the  spinal  opening  to  the  outer  point  of  the  occipital 

crest        12} 

Transverse  diameter  of  the  base  of  the  skull  from  the  mastoid  jiro- 

tuberances ^ 

Length  of  the  occi/>i7aZ  erf s<  on  its  summit 11 

Greatest  height  of  this  crest,  measured  perpendicularly  from  the  surface 

of  the  skull     ..      ..      1 

Length  of  the  m€(iian  cresi  on  the  top  of  the  skull        5 

Distance  from  the  summit  of  the  orbital  ridge  to  the  point  qfjanctum 

o/"  <^  crcs^  on  the  occiput 7 

(Measured  from  the  highest  points  of  the  orbital  ridge  and  the  occi- 
pital junction  of  the  crests,  a  line  will  not  touch  the  skull.) 

Measurement  around  the  entire  skull,  within  the  zygomatic  arch,  on 
the  depressed  line  just  posterior  to  the  eye-sockets,  and  anteriorly  to 

the  crests        ..      ..      .^     ..      ..      ..      ..     11 

Lateral  diameter  of  the  space  beneath  the  zygomatic  arches 2 

Antero-posterior  do,  do ,      .,      ^      2J 

Length  of  Spinal  Column, 

Length  of  the  cervical  vertebra)       ..       4f 

„      from  first  dorsal  vertebra  to  extremity  of  the  sacrum       ..      ..     21} 

Total       26i 

Add  for  shrinkage  of  the  intervertebral  cartilages  (nearly  one-sixth  of 
total  length)   ..      ..      ..      ..      4J 

■  •  • 

Total  length  of  spine     31 

Measurements  of  Thorax. 

Length  along  the  fourth  rib,  measured  from  the  spine  of  its  vertebra  to 

the  articulation  with  cartilage      ..      13J 

TiCngth  of  its  dry  cartilage ,      2 

Breadth  of  sternum  (breast-bone) If 

Length  of  the  sixth  rib 15 

„      of   cartilage  of    the  sixth   rib  to    its    ensiform    articulation 

(dried) 4; 


Chap.  XXI.    MEASUREMENTS  OF  SKELETON  OF  T.  GORILLA.  381 


..     Pelvic.. 

Inches. 

Greatest  breadth  of  pelvis,  Tirom  crests  of  the  iliac  bones       15J 

Breadth  of  pelvis,  measured  outwardly  and  posteriorly  from  the  same 

points  as  above       ..      .. IB 

Height  of  pelvis  (perpendicular  measurement)       14 

(sacro-pubic,  or  antero-posterior 6  J 

oblique ..      5] 

bis-iliac,  or  transverse 5| 


Upper  Extremities. 

Greatest  length  of  the  scapula  plate        9 

Length  measured  from  coracoid  process  to  the  inferior  extremity  of  the 

scapula ..      .. 12} 

Circumference  of  the  head  of  the  humerus      Si 

Greatest  diameter  of  the  glenoid  cavity ..      ..       2 

Length  of  the  humerus  to  radial  articulation         ..      ..      18 

Circumference  of  the  humerus  in  the  middle  of  its  shaft       4} 

„  at  the  distal  articulation,  measured  around  the  condyles       0 

Length  of  radius  (fore-arm)      13S 

Direct  length  of  ulna         ^ 15 

Length  measured  on  its  outward  curvature 15| 


Lower  Extremities, 

Length  of  femur,  measured  from  the  round  ligament  to  the  lateral 

margin  of  tibial  articulation.. ..      ..  13| 

Length  measured  from  summit  of  the  great  tuberosity  to  the  lateral 

margin  of  tibial  articulation \A\ 

Length  from  the  round  ligament  to  the  superior  margin  of  patella     ..  12f 

Circumference  of  the  head  of  the  femur ..      .,       Gi 

Circumference  of  the  neck  of  the  femur..      ..      ..       44 

Greatest  circumference  of  the  femur  around  the  two  tuberosities ..      ..       8J 

Circumference  of  middle  of  the  shaft       4 

Circumference  at  the  knee,  measured  over  the  patella llj 

Length  of  patella       ..      ..       2 

Greatest  length  of  tibia  (perpendicular) llJ 

Length  of  fibula  from  knee  to  ankle 10} 


The  Foot. 

Greatest  length  of  OS  calcis        3 

Circumference  of  ankle  around  the  OS  calcis Cg 

Greatest  length  of  foot,  measured  on  top  from  tibia  to  cxtrcuiity  of 

middle  toe      7? 


382    MEASUREMENTS  OP  SKELETON  OF  T.  GORILLA.  Chap.  XXL 

Length  of  bones  of  middle  toe  from  os  cuneiforme  to  extremity  of  the  i«*«. 

toe 61 

Length  of  great  toe  from  da     ..      4i 

Greatest  length  of  sole  of  the  foot,  measured  from  posterior  extremity 

of  08  calcis,  in  a  straight  line,  to  the  extremity  of  the  middle  toe  ..       9 
Da  measured  t» /^  arcA  of  the  Toot  from  do.  *     ..      ..      9| 

The  Iland. 

Length* of  the  hand,  from  the  carpal  bones  to  the  extremity  of  the 

middle  finger 8} 

Length  of  thumb       3J 

Total  length  of  the  dried  skeleton  (from  the  vertex  to  the  sole)  5  feet  5  inches. 


The  following  comparative  ineasurements  of  the  pelvis  in  the 
various  ai)es  are  given  in  inches  and  hundredths: — 


Height  of  pelvis   . .    . .    .... 

Breadth  across  ilic^  outside  . . . 
Antero-posterior  diam.  of  brim 
Oblique                   „           „ 
TraDsverse    


Chim- 
panzee— 
Male. 


11-40 

10-00 

5-20 

4-10 

3-75 


Nshiego 

Mbouve— 

Male. 


11-50 

10-80 

5-35 

4-25 

4-00 


Kooloo- 

kamba— 

Male. 


40-90 

11-20 

5  00 

4-75 

4-40 


Large  Male     „    ... 

belonirlngto      *  «"»•«• 
Dr.  Wyinan. 


I 


15-10 

17-70 

8  00 

6-60 

6-10 


10- 10 

1210 

6-20 

5-60 

4-20 


It  is.  right  to  mention  that  the  facial  angles  of  the  skulls,  as 
given  in  the  plates,  have  been  taken  by  the  craniometer,  an 
instrument  invented  by  Professor  Qiiekett,  Conservator  of  the 
Koyal  College  of  Surgeons,  London* 


Chap,  XXII.  THE  BAKALAI  TRIBE.  •  383 


CHAPTER   XXIL 

Tlie  Bakalai  —  Extent  of  Region  in  which  they  are  met  with  —  Qualities  — 
Reasons  for  Intermixture  of  Tribes — ITie  Bakalai  are  Rovers — Fear  of 
Death  —  Old  People  abandoned  —  Treachery  —  Case  of  Retaliation  — 
Women-palavers — Arbitration  —  A  Fetich  Palaver — Apjjearance  of  the 
Bakalai  —  Property  —  Duties  of  a  Wife  —  Restrictions  on  Marrii^e  — 
Slaves  —  Costume  —  Grass-cloth  —  Hunters  —  Fishing  —  Great  Traders  — 
Diseases  —  Leprosy  —  Music. 

Before  resuming  the  narrative,  I  think  it  well  to  give  the 
reader  some  account  of  the  Bakalai,  the  people  among  whom  I 
had  spent  now  so  many  months  in  hunting  and  exploration. 

They  are  one  of  the  most  numerous,  widely  extended,  and  im- 
portant tribes  I  met  with  in  Equatorial  Africa.  From  the  Muni 
on  the  north  to  the  Femand  Yaz  on  the  south,  and  from  the 
seashore  to  the  Apingi  country,  I  met  with  settlements  of  Bakalai 
To  the  north  they  approach  the  seashore,  and  live  on  the  rivers; 
but,  as  I  made  my  way  south,  I  found  that  they  receded  from 
the  ocean,  and  were  met  farther  inland.  Their  settlements  are 
widely  scattered,  and  they  are  often  found  living  in  independent 
towns  in  regions  chiefly  occupied  by  other  tribes.  How  far  they 
reach  inland  I  cannot  telL  To  the  Ashira  they  were  known  as 
neighbours,  and  even  the  Apingi  pointed  eastward  towards  the 
unknown  centre  of  the  continent  when  I  inquired  for  BakalaL 

On  the  Kembo  they  are  so  entirely  an  inland  people  that  they 
did  not  know  much  even  of  the  management  of  canoes.  Be- 
tween the  Gaboon  and  Corisco  some  of  them  live  on  the  banks 
of  the  rivers,  as  I  have  said,  and  are  extraordinary  boatmen ; 
but,  wherever  they  are,  they  are  great  hunters  and  traders,  and 
treacherous  warriors. 

The  tribes  of  Western  Africa  are  curiously  intermixed,  as  the 
reader  will  have  seen  ere  this  from  the  accounts  of  my  wander- 
ings among  them.  This  happens  because  the  most  enterprising 
are  always  striving  to  get  possession  of  the  rivers,  which  are  the 
only  highways  of  the  country.  From  these  they  drive  away  tlie 
weaker  tribes,  or  rather  portions  of  tribes ;  as  on  the  Ikoi  some 
Bakalai  had  to  desert  their  towns,  where  tliey  drove  a  brisk 


384  THEIR  ROVING  PROPENSITY.  Chap.  XX I  L 

trade,  because  of  the  jealous  rage  of  other  villages  of  the  samc^ 
tribe  who  were  stronger,  and  determined  to  have  the  trade  in 
their  own  hands.  There  is  nowhere  in  this  region  any  owner- 
ship in  land,  so  that  any  family  of  any  tribe  has  a  right  to  settle 
on  any  unoccupied  territory,  and  if  there  is  a  dispute  it  is  settled 
by  the  strong  arm. 

But  one  of  the  peculiar  traits  of  the  Bakalai,  which  distin- 
guishes them  from  other  tribes  with  whom  they  are  intermixed, 
is  their  roving  character.  They  never  stay  long  in  one  place.  A 
Bakalai  village  is  scarce  built— often  the  plantations  have  not 
borne  fruit  the  first  time — when  they  feel  impelled  to  move- 
Then  everything  is  abandoned ;  they  gather  up  what  few  stores 
of  provisions  they  may  have,  and  start  off,  often  for  great  dis- 
tances, to  make  with  infinite  pains  a  new  settlement,  which  will 
be  abandoned  in  turn  sometimes  after  a  few  months,  though 
occasionally  they  remain  a  year  or  two,  and  even  more,  in  the 
same  place.  Thus,  on  the  head-waters  of  the  Gaboon  and  its 
tributaries,  the  favourable  position  for  trade  obliges  them  to 
;ifemain  in  the  same  neighbourhood.  But  even  there  they  shift 
from  one  place  to  another,  distant  only  a  mile  or  two  from  each 
other. 

Many  things  contribute  to  this  roving  tendency,  but  first  of 
all  is  their  great  fear  of  death.  They  dread  to  see  a  dead  per- 
son. Their  sick,  imless  they  have  good  and  near  friends,  are 
often  driven  out  of  the  village  to  die  in  loneliness  in  the  forest 
I  have  twice  seen  old  men  thus  driven  out,  nor  could  I  persuade 
anyone  to  give  shelter  or  comfort  to  these  friendless  wretches. 
Once  an  old  man,  poor  and  naked,  lean  as  Death  himself^  and 
barely  able  to  walk,  hobbled  into  a  Bakalai  village  where  I  was 
staying.  Seeing  me,  the  poor  old  fellow  came  to  beg  some 
tobacco — their  most  cherished  aolace.  I  asked  him  where  he 
was  going. 

"  I  don't  know." 

*•  Where  are  you  from  ?" 

He  mentioned  a  village  a  few  miles  off. 

"  Have  you  no  friends  there  ?" 

"None." 

"  No  son,  no  daughter,  no  brother,  no  sister  ?" 

'*  None." 

"  You  are  sick  ?" 


Chap.  XXn.  REMOVAL  OP  VILLAGES.  385 

**  They  drove  me  away  for  that** 

"What  will  you  do?** 

"Die.** 

A  few  women  came  up  to  him  and  gave  him  water  and  a  little 
food.  But  the  men  saw  death  in  his  eyes.  They  drove  him 
away.  He  went  sadly,  as  though  knowing  and  submitting  to 
his  fate.  A  few  days  after  his  poor  lean  body  was  found  in  the 
wood.    His  troubles  were  endei 

When  a  man  dies  in  a  Bakalai  village  the  stahility  of  that 
settlement  has  received  a  violent  shock.  If  a  second  dies,  then 
the  people  at  once  move  away.  They  think  the  place  be- 
witched; they  fitncy  death,  dreaded  death,  stalking  in  their 
midst*  A  doctor  is  called,  who  goes  through  his  incantations, 
and  some  poor  wretch  is  condemned  to  drink  the  mboundou. 
Often  several  friendless  creatures  are  accused  and  condemned 
in  a  breath,  and  murdered  in  cold  blood.  Then  the  village  is 
broken  up ;  the  people  set  out  again  upon  their  wanderings, 
and  fix  upon  some  lonely  spot  for  new  plantations  and  a  new 
home. 

It  is  as  though  they  were  all  their  lives  vainly  fleeing  from 
the  dread  face  of  death.  This,  indeed,  is  the  refrain  of  all  their 
sad  songs,  the  burden  of  every  fear.  Having  little  else  to  lose, 
they  seem  to  dread,  more  than  any  other  people  I  ever  knew, 
the  loss  of  life.  And  no  wonder ;  for  after  death  is  to  them 
nothing. 

**  Death  is  the  end."  "  Now  we  live ;  by-and-by  we  shall 
die  ;  then  we  shall  be  no  more.**  "  He  is  gone;  we  shall  never 
see  him  more ;  we  shall  never  shake  his  hand  again ;  we  shall 
never  hear  him  laugh  again.**  This  is  the  dolorous  biurden  of 
their  evening  and  morning  songs. 

And  stiU,  by  a  strange  contradiction,  they  are  extravagantly 
superstitious.  Believing  that  there  is  no  life  beyond  thi8,(they 
yet  fancy  a  ghost  or  spirit  in  every  moving  tree  or  bush  after 
night,  and  in  the  twilight  hour  are  sometimes  overpowered  with 
an  undefinable  dread,  which  makes  them  fear  to  come  even  out- 
side their  huts. 

Another  cause  of  fear  is  their  treacherous  and  quarrelsome 
disposition.  They  are  constantly  quarrelling  with  their  neigh- 
bours. I  have  already  explained  the  singular  ideas  they  have 
of  retaliation.    Once  I  was  in  a  village,  when,  on  a  sudden,  I 

2  c 


386  TREACHERY.  Chap.  XXIL 

heard  great  wailing  among  the  women.  I  found  that  two 
women  had  been  killed  by  some  persons  unseen,  while  they  were 
standing  in  the  creek  near  by,  washing.  The  murderers  were 
not  known  for  some  days.     All  was  consternation  in  the  Tillage. 

Then  it  somehow  reached  their  ears  that  these  women  had 
been  killed  by  men  who  had  come  from  a  village  fifty  mfles  off. 
This  village  had  a  palaver  or  quarrel  with  one  nearer.  They 
came  down  and  killed  two  women  of  a  village  which  ihey  had 
no  quarrel  with,  and  this  made  the  villagers,  whose  relatives 
they  had  thus  murdered,  their  allies.  This  singular  doctrine 
of  alliance  seems  to  be  accepted  by  most  of  the  tribes. 

Many  of  their  quarrels  and  palavers  arise  about  women. 
Polygamy  prevails  extensively ;  female  chastity  is  not  valued, 
except  as  an  article  of  merchandise;  the  women  have  great 
freedom  and  an  intriguing  spirit^  and  the  consequence  is  that  a 
faithful  wife  is  an  unheard  of  thing.  The  crime  of  adultery  with 
a  head-wife,  however,  is  considered  a  very  serious  misdemeanour, 
for  which  the  offender  may  be  heavily  fined  if  he  is  rich,  sold 
into  slavery  if  he  is  poor,  or  perhaps  killed. 

Now,  when  a  man  is  caught  in  such  an  offence,  he  makes  his 
escape,  if  possible,  to  the  next  village.  It  is  considered  dis- 
honourable to  give  up  a  fugitive,  and  if  he  gets  safely  there  he 
is  secure  for  the  time.  Then  begins  quarrelling,  succeeded  pre- 
sently by  murder;  then  the  curious  process  of  securing  alli^ 
breeds  more  murder  and  retaliation,  and  so  in  a  few  days  a 
large  tract  of  country  is  interested  in  a  quarrel,  and  fights  and 
assassinations  continue  till  some  villages  are  almost  fcnihilated, 
and  others  are  removed  afar  off,  only  to  be  mixed  up  with  new 
strifes. 

When  war  has  really  broken  out  in  the  country  once,  there  is 
no  rest  nor  safety.  No  man  or  woman  in  any  village  can  take 
a  step  in  any  direction,  day  or  night,  without  fear  of  death 
They  lay  ambuscades  to  surprise  each  other's  villages.  They 
shoot  through  the  tree-bark  of  which  their  houses  are  made,  and 
kill  sleeping  persons.  They  use  every  unfair  means  of  warfare ; 
and  the  meaner  the  attack  and  the  greater  the  treachery,  the 
more  glory  they  have  won.  In  such  times  of  war  fires  are  put 
out  after  dark,  because  they  give  light  to  the  enemy ;  the  people 
keep  a  dead  silence,  lest  their  voices  should  betray  their  where- 
abouts;  the  hunters  fear  to  hunt,  the  women  and  slaves  to 


Chaf.  XXn.        APPEARANCE  OP  THE  BAKALAL  387 

plant,  and,  in  consequence,  everybody  is  in  a  condition  of  semi- 
staryation«  This  lasts  sometimes  for  months.  At  last  whole 
districts  are  depopulated ;  those  who  are  not  killed  desert  their 
villages,  and  iJl,  perhaps,  because  a  man  in  one  village  stole 
from  one  in  another  and  refused  satisfieu^on. 

On  the  banks  of  the  Bembo  Ovenga  I  found  that  the  Bakalai 
had  agreed  among  themselves  to  settle  their  quarrels  by  arbitra- 
tion. I  was  much*  surprised  to  find  that  not  only  was  this  the 
rule,  but  the  practice.  But  I  found  that  Quengueza,  who  is 
master  of  all  this  country,  and  makes  his  rule  felt,  was  at  the 
bottom  of  this  salutary  change.  He  would  not  allow  them  to 
fight.  He  understood  very  well  that  trade  and  war  could  not 
go  on  together ;  and,  though  the  trade  was  insignificant  from  our 
point  of  view,  it  was  important  to  him. 

While  I  was  in  Obindji's  town,  the  Bakalai  chiefe  and  people, 
to  the  number  of  several  hundreds,  met  together  to  ask  justice 
on  the  head  of  Pend4,  Obindjfs  brother,  who  was  charged  with 
having  stolen  the  bones  of  a  dead  person  to  make  a  fetich, 
which  fetich  would  keep  trade  away  from  a  particular  town. 
This  palaver  was  very  violent ;  and  I  think,  if  Quengueza  had 
not  been  on  the  spot,  would  have  ended  in  bloodshed.  Pend^ 
denied  having  done  what  he  was  charged  with,  and  I  do  not  be- 
lieve that  anybody  thought  him  guilty,  towards  the  end  of  the 
fuss.  Nevertheless,  to  obtain  quiet,  the  poor  fellow  had  to  give 
three  slaves  to  the  three  chiefs  who  were  the  principal  accusers. 

The  Bakalai  are  of  the  ordinary  size.  The  men  are  generally 
well  made ;  some  are  of  small  stature ;  and  I  have  seen  among 
them  some  splendid  specimens  of  manhood.  They  are  not 
very  black ;  they  have  full  negro  features.  They  are  not  very 
strong,  chiefly,  I  suppose,  because  they  live  poorly;  but  they 
have  great  powers  of  endurance,  and  on  this  account  make  ad- 
mizahle  hunters.  Considering  their  numerous  superstitions  and 
their  poor  marksmanship,  they  must  be  considered  brave  fellows 
on  the  hunt.  To  face  a  gorilla,  and  calmly  await  his  approach 
till  you  know  that  if  you  miss  him  you  will  certainly  be  his  prey, 
must  be  counted  an  act  of  no  common  courage.  And  this  is  the 
manner  in  which  the  Bakalai  hunt  this  terrible  beast. 

Wives  and  slaves  are  their  only  property.  A  man's  standing 
is  according  to  the  number  of  his  wives.  As  soon  as  a  Bakalai 
has  acquired  some  European  goods  in  return  for  ivory  or.  ebony, 

2  c  2 


388  COSTUME  OF  THE  BAKALAI.  Chap.  XXII. 

he  immediately  sets  out  to  buy  a  new  wife.  They  generally 
prefer  to  marry  very  young  girls ;  and  often  young  children  are 
regularly  bargained  away.  In  this  case  they  remain  with  their 
parents  till  the  age  of  puberty. 

When  a  man  has  chosen  a  girl,  he  calls  on  her  parents  and 
explains  his  wishes.  They  put  a  price  upon  her,  which  he  pays, 
and  then  the  poor  girl  is  turned  over  to  him.  The  more 
children  she  has,  the  more  her  husband  loves  her,  and  the 
greater  is  her  importance  in  the  town.  The  population  being 
small  in  nearly  all  the  villages,  every  birth  is  hailed  with  joy ; 
and  as  girls  have  a  money  value,  they  are  as  highly  thought  of 
as  boys,  who  make  hunters  and  warriors.  Few  Bakalai  women 
have  many  children.  Those  who  do  have  their  own  way  in  many 
things,  and  are  able  to  tyrannize  over  their  own  household  and 
rival  wives. 

The  duties  of  a  wife  are  to  labour  for  her  husband,  to  cook 
for  him,  to  work  in  the  fields,  and  to  be  generally  his  beast  of 
burden  and  superior  slave.  When  the  husband  dies,  his  wives 
and  slaves  are  divided  among  his  relatives ;  his  brothers  taking 
preference,  but  even  his  sons  inheriting  sometimes. 

It  is  a  curious  fact,  that,  though  they  will  take  their  brother's 
or  father's  wives  in  marriage,  they  will  not  marry  a  womui  of 
the  sajRe  family  or  clan  with  themselves.  This  is  the  case,  ^so, 
among  other  tribes. 

Of  slaves  the  Bakalai  have  not  many.  The  wants  of  the  white 
traders  on  the  coast,  and  their  own  need  for  white  men's  goods, 
make  them  sell  most  of  those  they  get  to  the  tribes  nearer  the 
coast.  People  caught  in  adultery — particularly  with  a  "  head- 
wife  " — are  sold  into  slavery  in  certain  cases.  Those  accused  of 
sorcery  are  killed  or  sold  into  slavery.  Also  a  debtor  may  be 
sold  by  his  creditor. 

Their  costume  is  very  light  Where  they  can  get  American 
or  European  goods,  they  so  greatly  prefer  those,  because,  it  may 
be  supposed,  of  their  rarity,  that  a  Bakalai  will  wear  a  filthy  rag 
of  cotton  print  for  months  without  washing,  rather  than  throw  it 
aside  for  a  clean  native  grass-cloth  wrapper.  The  women  are 
extravagantly  fond  of  European  beads,  and  wear  also  anklets  and 
bracelets  of  copper  or  iron.  The  rude  mat  which  is  worn  round 
the  middle  by  the  men  is  made  of  grass,  and  very  ingem'ously 
constructed.    But  the  fine  grass-cloth,  some  of  which  is  reaUy 


Chap.  XXII.  FOOD  OP  THE  BAKALAI.  389 

beautiful,  is  not  made  among  them.  That  they  get  from  the 
Ashira,  a  people  farther  inland — or  from  other  interior  tribes,  of 
whom  more  will  be  said  farther  on. 

In  their  general  habits  it  miist  be  admitted  that  they  are  very 
filthy.  The  inland  people  hardly  Jmow  what  it  is  to  wash.  They 
oil  themselves  frequently ;  and  when  the  deposit  of  oil  on  the 
wool  gets  stale,  the  smell  and  appearance  are  very  disgusting 
and  nauseating. 

They  are  great  hunters ;  but,  as  game  is  scarce  in  this  part 
of  the  country,  gouawha  is  their  natural  state.  They  do  any- 
thing for  meat^  and  it  is  horrible  to  see  the  voracity  with  which 
they  precipitate  themselves  on  a  portion  of  meat  when  any  is 
brought  into  camp.  The  few  goats  and  chickens  they  keep  are 
not  sufficient  for  their  use,  and  they  seem  to  have  no  idea  of 
cultivating  them  and  increasing  them.  Those  who  Uve  on  the 
river  have  great  fishing  excursions,  which  famish  them  with  a 
portion  of  their  sustenance.  When  the  rivers  recede  at  the 
approach  of  the  dry  season,  the  waters  remain  behind  on  the 
plains  in  pools.  To  one  of  these  pools  a  village  of  Bakalai 
will  come— men,  women,  and  children— and,  with  earthenware 
pots  and  bowls,  empty  out  the  water.  The  poor  fish,  for 
whom  no  way  of  escape  is  open,  struggle  vainly  against  their 
enemy,  who  finaUy,  having  thrown  out  nearly  all  the  water,  rush 
in  pellmell  and  take  out  the  fish.  These  are  kiUed,  and  what 
are  not  eaten  on  the  spot  are  smoked  for  future  use,  and  thus  a 
considerable  store  is  often  laid  by  for  a  needy  time^ 

For  hunting,  almost  all,  even  of  those  who  live  far  beyond  the 
region  where  white  men  penetrate,  make  use  of  guns  and 
powder.  These  are  the  chief  articles  of  trade,  and  are  most 
sought  for  by  the  natives  everywhere.  For  the  women  beads  are 
the  most  valued ;  and  even  the  men  do  not  despise  ornaments. 

They  are,  like  all  the  tribes  of  this  country,  great  traders ; 
and,  if  the  rivers  were  once  opened  and  kept  open  by  white 
men,  this  eagerness  for  trade  would  help  much  to  develop  the 
abundant  resources  of  the  country.  Before  I  ascended  the 
Bembo  the  whole  river  was  divided  by  petty  chieftains,  who 
maintained  their  trading  monopoly,  and  prevented  the  seashore 
people  from  direct  trade  with  the  up-river.  Now,  I  prevailed 
upon  Quengueza  at  last  to  let  the  seashore  men  come  up  with  their 
goods,  showing  him  that  the  trade  would  be  much  greater,  and 


\ 


390  LYING  PROPENSITY— DISEASES.  Chap.  XXII. 

would  really  be  in  his  hands ;  so  that  now  the  riyer  is  open  one 
way.  Still,  no  one  of  the  up-river  could  come  past  Quengueza 
to  take  his  goods  to  the  seashore.  That  would  not  be  per- 
mitted, and  an  attempt  to  do  so  would  cause  war. 

They  are,  as  a  rule,  the  shrewdest  judges  of  human  nature  tiiat 
ever  I  met  with.  Lying  is  thought  an  enviable  accomplishment 
among  all  the  tribes,  and  a  more  thorough  and  unhesitating  liar 
than  one  of  these  negroes  is  not  to  be  found  anywhere.  A 
man  does  not,  therefore,  believe  what  another  says,  but  watches 
his  countenance,  and  forms  his  opinions  from  the  other's  lookM, 
Now  in  this  species  of  almost  intuitive  judgment  the  Bakalai 
excels  all  his  brethren  of  the  other  tribes.  Sometimes  men 
came  to  Obindji  and  told  him  long  stories  on  some  subject  of 
importance.  The  old  chief  would  listen  gravely  and  say  nothing 
to  the  speaker,  but  presently  would  come  to  me  and  say : 

"  The  man  lies.** 

"  But  how  do  you  know  ? "  I  would  ask,  knowing  that  the 
man's  story  was  perfectly  straightforward  and  not  at  all  impro- 
bable. 

"  I  watched  his  face,"  was  the  reply.  **  We  Bakalai  watch  the 
face.    The  words  are  nothing ;  but  the  face  tells  us." 

And,  indeed,  they  are  marvellously  shrewd  physiognomists ;  no 
slight  advantage  to  a  nation  of  ardent  traders. 

Of  diseases,  besides  fevers,  to  which  they  are  subject  in  certain 
seasons,  the  chief  are  a  kind  of  leprosy,  the  venereal  disease, 
and  a  kind  of  virulent  ulcers.  These  last  break  out  on  the  arm 
or  leg  and  eat  in  to  the  bone.  When  the  disease  reaches  the 
bones  the  patient  dies.  In  leprosy  the  patient  becomes  gra- 
dually white  in  the  parts  attacked,  the  skin  of  the  body  dries  up 
and  cracks,  suppuration  takes  place  in  the  centre  of  the  diseased 
spots,  the  extremities  of  the  hands  and  feet  rot  away  and  &I1 
off,  and  at  last  the  patient  dies.  In  fact,  it  seems  to  me  the 
body  is  dead  and  mostly  decomposed  before  the  spirit  leaves  it 
Lepers,  who  are  in  some  regions  rather  common,  are  kept  in  a 
room  apart  in  the  house;  but  the  people  do  not  seem  much 
afraid  of  them.  The  disease  is  in  certain  fEonilies,  and  often 
does  not  break  out  till  the  unfortunate  subject  is  full-grown. 
They  linger  sometimes  for  years  in  daily  expectation  of  death. 
The  natives  know  nothing  of  a  cure.  Li  feet,  they  have  very 
little  knowledge  of  remedies  for  any  disease.    When  a  man  is 


Chap.  XXIL  MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS.  391 

sick  he  is  left  to  nature.  If  he  dies  it  is  witchcraft,  and 
then  the  doctor  is  called  in  to  discover  the  witch.  I  have  seen 
some  cases,  but  not  many,  of  the  disease  called  elephantiasis. 
Scrofula  is  somewhat  prevalent,  as  it  is  in  many  other  tribes. 
Most  of  these  diseases  must  be  attributed  to  insufficient  nourish- 
ment and  filthy  habits. 

They  are  fond  of  music  of  certain  kinds.  The  tam-tam  is  the 
noisiest  instrument,  and  is  used  for  aU  dances  and  ceremonials. 
But  they  have  also  a  guitar,  and  a  harp  of  eight  strings — an 
ingenious  instrument,  on  which  some  of  the  men  play  with  a 
good  deal  of  skill ;  and  some  of  their  airs  were  really  pretty, 
though  sad  and  monotonous.  The  ombi,  as  this  is  called,  is  a 
source  of  great  delight  to  them.  Often  and  often  I  have  heard 
it  played  all  night,  while  the  crowd  of  listeners  sat  in  silence 
around  the  fire.  While  the  tam-tam  rouses  their  feelings,  and 
rectlly  throws  them  into  a  &enzy,  the  ombi  has  a  soothing  and 
softening  effect  upon  them. 

Both  instruments  are  called  omii  One,  which  is  shaped 
like  a  banjo  or  guitar,  has  but  four  strings.  The  other,  with 
eight,  is  a  harp.  Both  are  made  of  thin  pieces  of  a  resonant 
wood,  sometimes  covered  with  snake,  gazelle,  or  goat  skin. 
The  strings  are  the  long,  fine,  fibrous  roots  of  a  tree,  and  answer 
their  purpose  very  well.  The  sound  of  the  ombi  with  eight 
Strings  is  soft  and  somewhat  musical^  and  is  used  to  accompany 
the  voice ;  in  such  cases  the  airs  are  generally  plaintive. 


392  ANXIETIES  OP  RANPANa  Chap.  TltnT 


CHAPTER   XXIIL 

Departure  for  the  Interior  —  Meeting  of  the  People  —  Address  of  Ranpano — I 
am  made  a  Makaga — Use  of  Quinine — A  sick  Friend — Death  in  GomnU 

—  Sorcery,  and  how  it  is  discovered  —  Great  excitement  —  Terrible  Tragedy 
— The  Victims  —  The  Accusations  —  The  Poison-cup  —  The  Execution  — 
Visit  from  Adouma —  Sincerity  of  the  Doctors? — Up  the  River —  Manga- 
hunts — A  Manga  Doctor  —  Keeping  a  Creditor  —  Querkouen — An  African 
Tragedy  —  Fight  on  the  Kiver — Towards  Ashira-land — The  Afihira  Plains 

—  Splendid  View. 

At  last  I  was  ready  to  make  another  start;  my  health 
restored,  my  spirits  in  some  measure  recovered,  and  eager  for 
the  new  region. 

On  the  10th  of  October,  1859,  Quengueza  was  still  too  weak 
to  travel,  so  I  determined  to  start  without  him. 

Banpano  and  his  people  had  been  urging  me  for  some  time 
not  to  go ;  and  now,  when  I  was  all  ready,  the  old  king  called 
a  grand  palaver,  which  I  attended,  and  of  which  the  chief 
purpose  was  to  persuade  me  not  to  venture  into  the  interior. 

My  good  old  friend  Banpano  was  really  solicitous  about  m& 
He  made  me  an  address,  in  which  he  informed  me  that  he  had 
heard  the  interior  people  wanted  to  get  me  into  their  power. 
They  wanted  to  kill  me,  in  order  to  make  a  fetich  of  my  hair. 
They  had  very  many  fetiches  already,  and  were  very  anxious  to 
make  their  collection  complete — so  it  appeared. 

I  replied  that  I  had  no  fear  of  them ;  that,  so  far,  I  had  been 
brought  back  safely  to  them,  and  I  was  willing  to  trust  my  God 
again. 

Then  he  said,  "We  love  you.  Tou  are  our  white  man 
(ntangani).  What  you  tell  us  we  do.  When  you  say  it  is 
wrong,  we  do  not  do  it.  We  take  care  of  your  house,  your 
goats,  your  fowls,  your  pcurots,  your  monkeys.  Tou  are  the 
first  white  man  that  settled  among  us,  and  we  love  you.** 

To  which  all  the  people  answered,  "  Yes,  we  love  him !  He 
is  our  white  man,  and  we  have  no  other  white  man." 

Then  the  king  said,  "  We  know  that  writing  talks.    Write 


Chap.  XXIH.  I  AM  MADE  A  MAKAGA.  393 

U8,  therefore,  a  letter  to  prove  to  your  Mends,  if  you  do  not 
come  back,  that  it  was  not  we  who  hurt  you." 

To  this  followed  various  objections  to  my  going,  to  all  of 
which  I  was  obliged  to  make  grave  answers. 

Finally,  when  they  gave  me  up,  all  exclaimed  in  accents  of 
wonder,  "  Ottangani  angani  (man  of  the  white  men) !  what  is 
the  matter  with  you  that  you  have  no  fear  ?  God  gave  you  the 
heart  of  a  leopard !     You  were  bom  without  fear ! " 

More  than  a  year  ago  the  Camma  gave  me  the  title  of  "rno- 
Aro^o,"  an  honourable  name,  which  only  one  man,  and  he  the 
bravest  and  best  himter  in  the  tribe,  may  bear.  The  office  of 
the  makaga  is  to  lead  in  all  desperate  affairs.  For  instance,  if 
any  one  has  murdered  one  of  his  fellow-villagers,  and  the 
murderer's  town  refuses  to  give  him  up  (which  is  almost  always 
the  case,  they  thinking  it  a  shame  to  surrender  anyone  who  has 
taken  refuge  with  them),  then  it  is  the  business  of  the  makaga 
to  take  the  best  men  of  the  villages,  lead  them  to  the  assault  of 
that  which  protects  the  murderer,  and  destroy  that,  with  its 
inhabitants.  It  is  remarkable  that,  in  all  the  Camma  country, 
the  murder  of  a  free  man  is  punished  with  the  death  of  the 
murderer.  My  title  was  rather  an  honorary  one,  as  I  was  never 
called  on  to  execute  justice  among  them. 

At  last  Banpano  gave  me  sixteen  men  to  take  me  to  Goumbi, 
from  where  Quengueza's  people  were  to  set  me  on.  Makondai, 
the  little  fellow  who  had  so  bravely  accompanied  me  on  my  last 
tour,  asked  to  be  taken  again,  and  I  took  him  gladly.  He  is 
a  brave,  intelligent  lad,  and,  by  his  care  for  my  coffee  and  many 
other  matters,  added  much  to  my  comfort 

Quengueza  could  not  come  with  us ;  but  he  sent  orders  to 
his  brother,  who  reigned  in  his  stead  at  Goumbi,  to  give  me 
as  many  people  as  I  wanted,  and  to  afford  me  protection  as  far 
as  I  needed  it ;  and  specially  named  Adouma  to  be  the  chief  of 
the  party  who  were  to  accompany  me  to  the  Ashira  country. 

When  all  this  was  done,  there  was,  according  to  African 
custom,  a  formal  leave-taking.  Quengueza's  men,  Banpano's, 
and  mine  gathered  before  the  old.  king,  who  solemnly  bade  us 
Grod-speed,  taking  my  two  hands  in  his  and  blowing  upon  them, 
as  their  custom  is  ;  saying,  "  Go  thou  safely,  and  return  safely." 

It  is  now  (October)  the  full  rainy  season,  and  not  the  most 
comfortable  for  travelling.    But  it  is  probably  the  healthiest^ 


394  TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK.  Cult.  XXHI. 

and,  as  for  the  rest^  there  is  little  choice.  Besides  provisions)  I 
took  with  me  some  wine  and  brandy  to  help  me  in  rainy  ni^ts, 
and  a  goodly  quantity  of  quinine — ^the  one  indispensable  requi- 
site, without  which  let  no  man  travel  in  Western  AiHca.  I  know 
the  prejudice  which  exists  against  this  remedy ;  but  I  have  within 
this  last  four  years  taken  fourteen  ounces,  and  live  as  a  proof 
that  it  is  a  useful  medicine  and  a  very  slow  poison. 

We  arrived  at  Goumbi  on  the  13th,  after  meeting  with  two 
very  heavy  storms  of  wind  and  rain  on  the  way.  The  people 
asked  after  their  king,  who  had  gone  away  well,  and  whom,  they 
thought,  I  ought  to  have  brought  back  in  the  same  condition. 

I  was  asked  to  go  and  see  an  old  friend  of  mine,  Mpomo,  who 
was  now  sick.  They  had  spent  the  m'ght  before  drumming 
about  his  bedside  to  drive  out  the  devil.  But  I  soon  saw  that 
neither  drumming  nor  medicine  would  help  the  poor  fellow. 
The  film  of  death  was  already  in  his  eyes,  and  I  knew  he  could 
scarce  live  through  the  approaching  night.  He  held  out  his 
hand  to  me  in  welcome,  and  feebly  said,  **  Chally,  save  me,  for 
I  am  dying." 

He  was  then  surrounded  by  hundreds  of  people,  most  of  them 
moved  to  tears  at  their  friend's  pitiable  condition. 

I  explained  to  him  that  I  had  no  power  to  save  him ;  that 
my  life  and  his  were  alike  in  the  hands  of  Gkxl ;  and  that  he 
should  commend  both  body  and  soul  to  that  one  God.  But  he 
and  all  around  had  the  conviction  that,  if  only  I  wished,  I  could 
cure  him.  They  followed  me  to  my  house,  a^ing  for  medicine ; 
and  at  last,  not  to  seem  heartless,  I  sent  him  a  restorative — 
something,  at  least,  to  make  his  remaining  moments  easy.  At 
the  same  time  I  warned  them  that  he  would  die,  and  they  must 
not  blame  me  for  his  death.  This  was  ;necessary,  for  their 
ignorance  makes  them  very  suspicious. 

When  I  awoke  next  morning  I  heard  the  mournful  wail 
which  proclaimed  that  poor  Mpomo  was  gone  to  his  long  rest 
This  cry  of  the  African  mourners  is*  the  saddest  I  ever  heard. 
Its  burden  is  really  and  plainly,  "  All  is  done.  There  is  no 
hope.  We  loved  him.  We  shall  never  see  him  again."  They 
mourn  literally  as  those  who  have  no  hope. 

In  the  last  moments  of  a  Camma  man  who  lies  at  the  point 
of  death,  his  head-wife  comes  and  throws  herself  by  him  on  hk 
bed.    Then,  encircling  his  form  with  her  arms,  she  sings  to  him 


Chap.  XXni.    INCANTATIONS  TO  DISCOVER  A  SORCERER.    395 

songs  of  love,  and  pours  out  a  torrent  of  endearing  phrases,  all 
the  village  standing  by  nttering  wailings  and  shedding  tears. 
Such  a  scene  was  always  very  touching  to  me. 

When  I  went  to  Mpomo's  house  I  saw  his  poor  wives  sitting 
in  tears  npon  the  ground,  throwing  moistened  ashes  and  dust 
over  their  bodies,  shaving  their  heads,  and  rending  their  clothes. 

In  the  afternoon  I  heard  talk  of  witchcraft. 

The  mourning  lasted  for  two  days.  On  the  17th  the  body, 
already  in  a  state  of  decomposition,  was  put  in  a  canoe  and 
taken  to  the  cemetery  of  the  Goumbi  people  down  the  river 
some  fifty  miles.  It  was  pitiable  to  see  the  grief  of  his  poor 
wives.  They  seemed  to  have  really  loved  him,  and  sorrowed 
for  him  now  that  he  was  dead,  as  they  had  carefully  and  lovingly 
attended  upon  him  till  he  died.  I  saw  them,  on  the  night  of 
his  death,  weeping  over  him,  one  after  the  other  taking  him  in 
her  arms.  It  was  a  strange  sight  In  these  sorrowM  moments 
there  was  no  sign  of  jealousy  between  the  poor  women,  that  I 
could  see.    All  were  united  by  their  love  for  the  same  object 

Those  who  have  studied  the  African  character,  and  know  how 
much  they  are  given  to  dissimulation,  cannot  be  certain  whether 
the  display  of  love  come  fix)m  real  sorrow  or  not.  Of  course, 
every  wife  ought  to  appear  much  distressed,  for,  should  they  not 
show  a  profound  sgrrow  they  would  certainly  be  accused  of 
bewitching  their  husbands.  I  have  even  known  cases  where 
the  mother  was  killed  as  the  cause  of  the  death  of  her  own 
child. 

On  the  day  Mpomo  was  buried  proceedings  were  begun  to 
discover  the  persons  who  had  bewitched  the  poor  fellow.  They 
could  not  be  persuaded  that  a  young  man,  hale  and  hearty  but 
a  few  weeks  ago,  could  die  by  natural  causes.  A  great  doctor 
was  brought  from  up  the  river,  and  for  two  nights  and  days  the 
rude  scenes  which  I  have  already  once  given  an  account  of  were 
repeated. 

At  last,  on  the  third  morning,  when  the  excitement  of  the 
people  was  at  its^  height — when  old  and  young,  male  and  female, 
were  frantic  wiih  the  desire  for  revenge  on  the  sorcerers,  the 
doctor  assembled  them  about  him  in  the  centre  of  the  town,  and 
began  his  final  incantation,  which  should  disclose  the  names  of 
the  murderous  sorcerers. 

Every  man  and  boy  was  armed,  some  with  spears,  some  with 


396  CALLING  OUT  THE  VICTIMS.  Chap.  XXIH. 

swords,  some  with  guns  and  axes,  and  on  every  face  was  shown 
a  determination  to  wreak  bloody  revenge  on  those  who  should 
be  pointed  out  as  the  criminals.  The  whole  town  was  rapt  in 
an  indescribable  fury  and  horrid  thirst  for  human  blood.  For 
the  first  time  I  found  my  voice  without  authority  in  GoumbL 
I  did  not  even  get  a  hearing.  What  I  said  was  passed  by  as 
though  no  one  had  spoken.  As  a  last  threat^  when  I  saw  pro- 
ceedings begun,  I  said  I  would  make  Quengueza  punish  them 
for  the  murders  done  in  his  absence.  But  alas !  here  they  had 
outwitted  me.  On  the  day  of  Mpomo's  death  they  had  sent 
secretly  to  Quengueza  to  ask  if  they  could  kill  the  witche& 
He,  poor  man !  sick  himself,  and  always  afraid  of  the  power  of 
sorcerers,  and  without  me  to  advise  him,  at  once  sent  back  word 
to  kill  them  all  without  mercy.  So  they  almost  laughed  in  my 
face. 

Finding  all  my  endeavours  vain,  and  that  the  work  of  blood- 
shed was  to  be  carried  through  to  its  dreadful  end,  I  determined, 
at  least,  to  see  how  all  was  conducted. 

At  a  motion  from  the  doctor,  the  people  became  at  once  quite 
still.  This  sudden  silence  lasted  about  a  minute,  when  the  loud, 
harsh  voice  of  the  doctor  was  heard : 

"There  is  a  very  black  woman,  who  lives  in  a  house" — 
describing  it  fully,  with  its  location — "  she  bewitched  Mpomo." 

Scarce  had  he  ended  when  the  crowd,  roaring  and  screaming 
like  so  many  hideous  beasts,  rushed  frantically  for  the  place 
indicated.  They  seized  upon  a  poor  girl  named  Okand^a,  the 
sister  of  my  good  friend  and  guide  Adouma.  Waving  their 
weapons  over  her  head,  they  tore  her  away  towards  the  water- 
side. Here  she  was  quickly  bound  with  cords,  and  then  all 
rushed  away  to  the  doctor  again. 

As  poor  Okandaga  passed  in  the  hands  of  her  murderers,  she 
saw  me,  though  I  thought  I  had  concealed  myself  from  view. 
I  turned  my  head  away,  and  prayed  she  might  not  see  me.  I 
could  not  help  her.  But  presently  I  heard  her  cry  out, 
«  Chally,  Chally,  do  not  let  me  die ! " 

It  was  a  moment  of  terrible  agony  to  me.  For  a  minute  I 
was  minded  to  rush  into  the  crowd  and  attempt  the  rescue  of 
the  poor  victim.  But  it  would  have  been  of  not  the  slightest 
use.  The  people  were  too  frantic  and  crazed  to  even  notice 
my  presence.    I  should  only  have  sacrificed  my  own  life  vdthout 


Chap.  XXIH.  RECITAL  OF  CHARGES.  397 

helping  her.  So  I  turned  away  into  a  comer  behind  a  tree, 
and — ^I  may  confess,  I  trust — shed  bitter  tears  at  my  utter 
powerlessness. 

Presently  silence  again  fell  upon  the  crowd  Then  the  harsh 
voice  of  the  devilish  doctor  again  rang  over  the  town.  It 
seemed  to  me  like  the  hoarse  croak  of  some  death-foretelling 
raven : 

** There  is  an  old  woman  in  a  house" — describing  it — "she 
also  bewitched  Mpomo." 

Again  the  crowd  rushed  oS.  This  time  they  seized  a  niece 
of  King  Quengueza,  a  noble-hearted  and  rather  majestic  old 
woman.  As  they  crowded  about  her  with  flaming  eyes  and 
threats  of  death,  die  rose  proudly  from  the  ground,  looked  them 
in  the  face  unflinchingly,  and,  motioning  them  to  keep  their 
hands  off,  said,  "  I  will  drink  the  mboundou ;  but  woe  to  my 
accusers  if  I  do  not  die !  ** 

Then  she,  too,  was  escorted  to  the  river,  but  without  being 
bound.  She  submitted  to  all  without  a  tear  or  a  murmur  for 
mercy. 

Again,  a  third  time  the  dreadful  silence  fell  upon  the  town, 
and  the  doctor's  voice  was  heard : 

**  There  is  a  woman  with  six  children.  She  lives  on  a  planta- 
tion towards  the  rising  sun.     She,  too,  bewitched  Mpomo." 

Again  there  was  a  furious  shout,  and  in  a  few  minutes  they 
brought  to  the  river  one  of  Quengueza's  slave-women,  a  good 
and  much-respected  woman,  whom  .also  I  knew. 

The  doctor  now  approached  with  the  crowd.  In  a  loud  voice 
he  recited  the  crime  of  which  these  women  were  accused.  The 
first  taken,  Okandaga,  had — so  he  said — some  weeks  before 
asked  Mpomo  for  some  salt,  he  being  her  relative.  Salt  was 
scarce,  and  he  had  refused  her.  She  had  said  unpleasant  words 
to  him  then,  and  had  by  sorcery  taken  his  life. 

Then  Quengueza's  niece  was  accused.  She  was  barren,  and 
Mpomo  had  children.  She  envied  him.  Therefore  she  had 
bewitched  him. 

Quengueza's  slave  had  asked  Mpomo  for  a  looking-glass.  He 
had  refused  her.    Therefore  she  had  killed  him  with  sorcery. 

As  each  accusation  was  recited  the  people  broke  out  into 
curses.  Even  the  relatives  of  the  poor  victims  were  obliged  to 
join  in  this.    Every  one  rivalled  his  neighbour  in  cursing,  each 


398  DECAPITATION  OF  THE  VICTIMS.       Chap.  XXIIL 

fearful  lesfc  lukewarmness  in  the  ceFemony  shonld  expose  him 
to  a  like  fate. 

Next  the  victims  were  put  into  a  large  canoe  with  the  execa- 
tioners,  the  doctor,  and  a  number  of  other  people,  all  armed. 

Then  the  tam-tams  were  beaten,  and  the  proper  persons  pre* 
pared  the  mboundou.  Quabi,  Mpomo's  eldest  brother,  held  the 
poisoned  cup.  At  sight  of  it  poor  Okandaga  b^an  again  to 
cry,  and  even  Quengueza's  niece  turned  pale  in  the  face— for 
even  the  negro  face  has  at  such  times  a  pallor  which  is  quite 
perceptible.  Three  other  caooes  now  surrounded  that  in  which 
the  victims  wera    All  were  crowded  with  armed  men. 

Then  the  mug  of  mboimdou  was  handed  to  the  old  slave- 
woman,  next  to  the  royal  niece,  and  last  to  Okandaga.  As 
they  drank,  the  multitude  shouted,  "If  they  are  witches-,  let 
the  mboundou  kill  them ;  if  they  are  innocent,  let  the  mboundou 
go  out" 

It  was  Ae  most  exciting  scene  of  my  life.  Though  horror 
almost  froze  my  blood,  my  eyes  w^e  riveted  upon  the  spectacle. 
A  dead  silence  now  occurred.  Suddenly  the  slave  fell  down* 
She  had  not  touched  the  boat's  bottom  ere  her  head  was  hacked 
off  by  a  dozen  rude  swords. 

Next  came  Quengueza's  niece.  In  an  instant  her  head  was 
off,  and  the  blood  was  dyeing  the  waters  of  the  river. 

Meantime  poor  Okandaga  staggered,  and  struggled,  and  cried, 
vainly  resisting  the  working  of  the  poison  in  her  system.  Last 
of  all  she  fell  too,  and  in  an  instant  her  head  was  hewed  off. 

Then  all  became  confused.  An  almost  random  hacking  ensued, 
and  in  an  incredibly  short  space  of  time  the  bodies  were  cut  in 
small  pieces,  which  were  cast  into  the  river. 

When  this  was  done  the  crowd  dispersed  to  their  houses,  and 
for  the  rest  of  the  day  the  town  was  very  silent  Some  of  these 
rude  people  felt  that  their  number,  in  their  already  almost  extin- 
guished ta'ibe,  was  becoming  less,  and  the  dread  of  death  filled 
tiieir  hearts.  In  the  evening  poor  Adouma  came  secretly  to  my 
house  to  unburden  his  sorrowing  heart  to  me.  He,  too,  had  been 
compelled  to  take  part  in  the  dreadfiil  scene.  He  dared  not  even 
refrain  from  joining  in  the  curses  heaped  upon  his  poor  sister. 
He  dared  not  mourn  publicly  for  her  who  was  considered  so 
great  a  criminaL 

I  comforted  1^™  as  well  as  I  could,  and  spoke  to  him  of  the 


Chap.  XXIII.  "  ASKING  ILOGO."  399 

true  God,  and  of  the  wickedness  of  the  conduct  we  had  witnessed 
that  day.  He  said  at  last,  "  Oh,  Chally !  when  you  go  back  to 
your  far  country,  let  them  send  men  to  us  poor  people  to  teach 
us  from  that  which  you  call  God's  mouth,"  meaning  the  Bible. 
I  promised  Adouma  to  give  the  message,  and  I  now  do  so. 

I  have  often  endeavoured  to  get  at  the  secret  thoughts  of  the 
doctors  or  wonder-workers  among  these  people.  They  lead  the 
popular  superstition  in  such  manner  that  it  is  almost  impossible 
to  suppose  they  are  themselves  deceived,  and  yet  it  is  certain  that 
most  of  them  have  a  kind  of  faith  in  it.  Nevertheless,  it  is  not 
likely  that  they  are  imposed  upon  to  the  same  extent  as  the 
common  people,  and  this  because  they  are  most  b^efaced  im- 
postors themselves.  ITiey  go  about  covered  with  charms,  which 
they  themselves  give  importance  to.  They  relate  most  wonderful 
dreams  and  visions,  which  are  most  certainly  spun  out  of  their 
own  brains.  They  practise  all  manner  of  cheats;  and  wh^n 
they  fasten  a  charge  of  sorcery  on  any  person,  it  is  scarce  pos- 
sible to  conceive  that  in  such  a  case  they  are  the  victims  of 
delusions  which  they  themselves  create.  Indeed  I  must  say, 
that  generally  for  months  before  popular  feeling  points  to  those 
who  are  believed  to  be  wizards.  I  have  never  foimd  them  very 
friendly  to  myself,  and  never  disposed  to  assert  or  deny  any- 
thing. One  thing  only  1  can  assert  about  them :  they  can  drink 
great  quantities  of  mboimdou  without  taking  harm  from  it. 
And  this  is  one  great  source  of  their  power  over  the  people. 

Before  leaving  Goumbi,  a  grand  eflTort  was  made  by  the  people 
to  ascertain  the  cause  of  their  king's  sufferings.  Quengueza  had 
sent  word  by  my  men  to  his  people  to  consult  Ilogo^  a  spirit  said 
to  live  in  the  moon.  The  rites  were  very  curious.  To  consult 
Ilogo,  the  time  must  be  near  full  moon.  Early  in  the  evening 
the  women  of  the  town  assembled  in  front  of  Quengueza's  house, 
and  sang  songs  to  and  in  praise  of  Ilogo,  the  spirit  of  Ogouayli 
(the  moon),  the  latter  name  being  often  repeated.  Meantime  a 
woman  was  seated  in  the  centre  of  the  circle  of  singers,  who  sang 
with  them,  and  looked  constantly  towards  the  moon.  She  was 
to  be  inspired  by  the  spirit,  and  to  utter  prophecies. 

Two  women  made  trial  of  this  post  without  success.  At  last 
came  a  third,  a  little  woman,  wiry  and  nervous.  When  she 
seated  herself  the  singing  was  redoubled  in  fury ;  the  excite- 
ment of  the  people  had  had  time  to  become  intense ;  the  drums 


400  A  FIGHT  ON  THE  RIYER.  Chap.  XXIII. 

beat ;  the  outsiders  shouted  madly.  Presently  the  woman,  who, 
singing  violently,  had  looked  constantly  towards  the  moon, 
began  to  tremble.  Her  nerves  twitched;  her  face  was  con- 
torted ;  her  muscles  swelled ;  and  at  last  her  limbs  straightened 
out,  and  she  lay  extended  on  the  ground,  insensible. 

The  excitement  was  now  intense  and  the  noise  horrible.  The 
songs  to  Ilogo  were  not  for  a  moment  discontinued.  The  words 
were  little  varied,  and  were  to  this  purport : — 

"  Ilogo,  we  ask  thee ! 
Tell  who  has  bewitched  the  king  I 

"  Ilogo,  we  ask  thee, 
What  shall  we  do  to  cure  the  king  ? 

**  The  forests  are  thine,  Ilogo  1 
The  rivers  are  thine,  Ilogo  I 
The  moon  is  thine  I 
•  0  moon !  0  moon  I  0  moon  I 

Thou  art  the  house  of  Ilogo  I 
Shall  the  king  die  ?    0  Ilogo  I 
0  Ilogo !  0  moon  1  0  moon  1 " 

These  words  were  repeated  again  and  again,  with  little  varia- 
tion. The  woman,  who  lay  for  some  time  insensible,  was  then 
supposed  to  be  able  to  see  things  in  the  world  of  Ilogo,  and  was 
expected  to  bring  back  a  report  thereof.  When  she  at  last  came 
to  her  senses,  after  half  an  hour's  insensibility,  she  looked  very 
much  prostrated.  She  averred  that  she  had  seen  Hogo ;  that 
he  had  told  her  Quengueza  was  not  bewitched ;  that  a  remedy 
prepared  from  a  certain  plant  would  cure  him  ;  and  so  on.  I 
am  convinced  the  woman  believed  what  she  said,  as  did  all  the 
people.  It  was  a  very  curious  instance  of  the  force  of  imagi- 
nation and  extreme  excitement  combined. 

I  should  have  mentioned  before  that,  as  we  were  sailing  up  the 
river  a  little  above  Biagano,  we  had  a  fight.  The  crew  of  one 
of  my  canoes  got  into  a  quarrel  with  a  canoe  from  one  of  the 
villages,  and  presently  we  came  to  hard  blows.  The  noise  was 
deafening,  and  the  blows  which  were  given  on  both  sides  were 
tremendous,  and  showed  to  great  advantf^e  the  superior  thick- 
ness of  the  African  skulL  The  weapons  used  were  a  kind  of  pole, 
of  very  heavy  and  hard  wood,  called  the  tcngo.  It  is  an  unwieldy 
weapon,  being  seven  feet  long,  and  about  an  inch  in  diameter. 
The  outer  end  is  heavier,  and  is  notched  so  as  to  inflict  severer 


L 


Chap.  XXIII.  NEGRO  LOVE  OF  ABUSE.  401 

wounds,  arid  when  the  battle  was  over  I  noticed  that  ever)' 
tongo  was  covered  with  blood  and  wool.'  I  am  sure  that  one 
blow  from  a  tongo  would  have  fractured  the  skull  of  a  white  man. 
The  length  of  the  tongo  makes  it  an  awkward  and  ineffective 
weapon ;  but  the  African  does  not  like  to  come  to  close  quarters 
with  his  enemy. 

When  we  had  beaten  off  the  assailants,  they  retired,  followed 
by  the  abusive  songs  of  our  side,  who  were  very  proud  of  their 
victory.  Abuse  is  the  negro's  forte  and  his  delight,  and  my 
fellows  bubbled  over  with  the  most  ridiculous  reproaches,  already 
set  to  a  sort  of  impromptu  tune. 

"  Yoiu:  chief  has  the  leg  of  an  elephant !"  sung  one ;  and 
another, 

"  Ho  I  his  eldest  brother  has  the  neck  of  a  wild  ox  !" 

"  Your  women  are  dirty  and  ugly !" 

"  You  have  no  food  in  your  village,  poor  fellows.    Ho !  ho !" 

And  so  they  \^ent  on,  pouring  out  ridicule  upon  the  discom- 
fited foe.  Nothing  touches  a  negro  so  quickly  as  ridicule,  and  I 
fancy  my  men  will  have  to  pay  for  theirs  when  they  return. 
Their  words  were  felt  to  be  harder  than  their  blows. 

On  the  21st  I  sent  my  Biagano  people  back.  On  the  next  day 
I  left  for  Obindji's  town  and  the  far  interior,  with  thirty-five 
Goumbi  men  and  Adouma  for  my  head-man.  The  men  I  had 
to  pay  each  about  six  dollars'  worth  of  cloth.  To  Adouma  I 
only  promised  that  I  would  "  make  his  heart  glad,"  which  means 
that  he  should  be  well  paid. 

I  was  glad  to  take  poor  Adouma  along,  not  only  to  cheer  him 
up,  but  because  thus  I  was  likely  to  save  him,  for  a  while,  at 
least,  from  his  sister's  fate.  These  tribes  have  a  belief  that  the 
powers  of  sorcery  are  inherited,  and  go  from  generation  to 
generation  in  certain  families.  Now  several  of  Ad6uma's 
ancestors  had  been  killed  for  Avitchcraft  at  different  times ;  his 
sister  had  but  just  met  the  same  fate,  and  the  poor  fellow  him- 
self was  quite  likely  to  be  a  victim  when  the  next  sorcery  row 
took  place. 

While!  remained  in  the  town  I  refused  to  speak  to  the  men 
who  had  been  most  active  in  the  killing  of  the  women.  They 
felt  ashamed  when  they  saw  that  I  was  not  inclined  to  notice 
them,  and  tried  to  express  their  sorrow;  but  I  would  hear 
nothing  from  them.     I  was  determined  to  show  my  horror  at 

2  D 


402  SINGULAR  NAMES.  Chap.  XXI  H. 

their  conduct,  and  to  hold  out  to  them  the  threat  that  if  they 
would  do  80  they  need*  expect  nothing  from  me. 

While  I  staid  at  Goumbi  this  time  I  noticed  again  that  the 
people  do  not  like  to  drink  of  the  water  of  the  river.  This  dis- 
like is  found  in  all  the  tribes  that  live  on  the  larger  streams. 
Their  women  have  to  bring  water  for  drinking  from  the  springs 
and  streamlets,  often  at  considerable  distances.  This  is  because 
they  have  a  horror  of  drinking  from  water  into  which  slaves  who 
die,  and  persons  executed  for  witchcraft,  are  thrown. 

On  the  22nd  we  at  last  got  off.  My  goods  were  so  heavy  that 
I  required  several  canoes.  I  carried,  besides  plenty  of  ammuni- 
tion, a  large  supply  of  beads,  toba^o,  caUco,  looking-gWs,  files, 
fire-steels,  &c.  Some  of  the  men  who  are  with  me  this  time  have 
most  curious  names,  such  as  6ooloo-6ani,  Biembia,  Agambie-3Io, 
Jombai,  Manda,  Akondogo. 

We  left  the  shores  of  Goumbi  without  the  customary  singing. 
Scarce  a.  word  was  said.  We  were  going  to  explore  an  unknown, 
and,  to  the  negroes,  fearful  region;  and,  moreover,  Mpomo*s 
death  made  smging  out  of  order. 

The  day  was  very  hot,  and  towards  evening  we  were  overtaken 
by  a  terrible  storm  of  rain  and  wind.  I  was  glad  when,  towards 
sunset,  we  reached  the  village  of  Acaca,  where  my  friend 
Acoundie  soon  made  me  comfortable  and  dry.  I  was  prevailed 
upon  to  spend  a  day  here  to  hunt  the  manga,  a  species  of 
manatee,  of  whose  meat  the  people  are  very  fond. 

During  the  day  we  passed  the  celebrated  oloumi-tree ;  and  here 
the  men  fortified  their  courage  by  a  curious  superstitious  rite. 
They  went  ashore,  and  presently  stripped  bark  from  the  tree, 
which  they  boiled  in  water.  With  this  water  they  then  wadied 
themselves  thoroughly,  thus  securing  to  themselves  good  fortune 
for  the  trip,  and  success  in  certain  speculations  which  they  hoped 
to  be  able  to  make  in  the  Ashira  country,  where  they  expect 
to  get  "  trusted  "  with  slaves,  and  ivory,  and  cloth  to  sell  on  the 
coast. 

The  morning  after  our  arrival  at  Acaca  we  set  off  in  small, 
very  flat  canoes,  made  on  purpose  for  this  sport.  A  manga 
doctor  accompanied  us.  We  went  into  the  Niembai,  on  whose 
grassy  bottom  the  manga  dwells,  and  here  stationed  the  boat 
among  the  high  reeds  which  lined  the  shore.  The  doctor  spread 
a  powder  he  had  in  a  pouch  thickly  on  the  water,  and  returned 


Chap.  XXIII.  MANGA-HUNTING.  403 

then  towards  the  reeds.  Presently,  while  we  kept  silence,  a 
great  beast  came  to  the  surface,  and  began  greedily  sucking  in 
the  powder.  Immediately  they  stole  upon  it  with  the  canoe, 
and,  when  they  got  near  enough,  fastened  a  harpoon  to  it.  To 
this  was  attached  a  long  strip  of  native  rope.  The  animal 
immediately  made  for  the  bottom,  but  in  a  few  minutes  came  to 
the  top,  and  presently,  after  some  struggles,  died.  Then  they 
brought  an  empty  canoe,  which  was  upset,  and  the  body  of  jthe 
animal  put  into  it,  whereupon  we  returned  to  the  village. 

Before  it  was  cut  up  the  manga  doctor  went  through  some 
ceremonies  which  I  did  not  see,  and  nobody  was  permitted  to 
see  the  animal  while  he  was  cutting  it  up. 

This  manga  is  a  new  species  of  manatee.  Its  body  is  of  a 
dark  lead  colour ;  the  skin  is  smooth,  very  thick,  and  covered  in 
aU  parts  with  single  bristly  hairs  from  half  an  inch  to  an  inch  in 
length.  The  eyes  are  very  small ;  the  paddles  are  without  nails. 
The  specimen  we  kiUed  was  ten  feet  long.  Its  circimiference 
was  very  considerable,  but  I  could  not  get  at  it  to  measure  it. 
This  animal  feeds  on  the  leaves  and  grass  growing  on  the  river- 
banks. 

The  people  were  greatly  rejoiced.  The  beast  weighed  about 
1500  pounds,  as  I  calculate  fi-om  its  requiring  eighteen  men  to 
drag  it,  and  the  meat  is  delicious — something  like  pork,  but 
finer  grained  and  of  a  sweeter  flavour.  To-night  all  hands  were 
smoking  it.  The  doctor  was  greatly  rejoiced  at  his  success,  and 
praised  himself  to  me  at  a  great  rate.  But  I  could  not  discover 
the  composition  of  his  powder,  which  was  certainly  quite  eflS- 
cacious. 

On  the  24th  we  started  for  the  interior.  When  we  got  to 
Mpopo  I  found  my  men  would  not  be  able  to  carry  all  my 
luggage.  I  had  to  hire  more.  The  chief  asked  his  wives  to 
Aimish  some  slaves  for  me,  but  they  asked  such  a  price  for 
their  services  that  I  would  not  give  it.  It  is  curious  how  seldom 
a  husband  in  this  country  interferes  with  that  property  which  he 
has  given  to  his  wives.  The  women  jealously  guard  their  rights 
in  this  respect ;  ahd  so  long  as  they  feed  their  husbands  and 
make  them  comfortable,  they  are  not,  in  many  things,  subject  to 
male  rule  at  alL 

On  the  26th  we  got  to  Obindji's  town.  The  old  fellow  was 
rejoiced  to  see  me,  and  here  I  got  several  Ashira  men  and  two 

2  D  2 


404  THE  TRAGEDY  OF  POOR  QUERLAOUEN.     Chap.  XXHT. 

Bakalai,  which  makes  my  troop  up  to  thirty-two  men  all  told, 
and  sets  me  on  my  way  rejoicing. 

One  of  the  Ashira  fellows  was  here  last  spring  when  I  was 
here.  He  had  brought  a  slave  to  Obindji  to  sell  for  him,  and  he 
had  been  waiting  for  the  proceeds  ever  since.  He  might  have 
waited  a  year  or  two  longer  if  I  had  not  come,  and  he  would 
have  done  so  quite  willingly.  The  creditor  in  such  case  lives 
with  the  debtor.  Okendjo  was  fed  by  Obindji's  wife ;  and,  to 
comfort  and  cheer  him  while  he  was  waiting,  Obindji  gave  him 
one  of  his  own  wives— a  hospitable  custom  in  this  part  of  Africa, 
which  a  man  is  always  expected  to  observe  towards  his  viaitora. 
Whenever  I  entered  a  strange  village,  the  chief  always  made 
haste  to  place  a  part,  and  often  his  whole  harem  at  my  service. 
Time  was  literally  of  no  account  to  Okendjo.  0bindji*8  town 
was  as  jolly  a  place  as  any  village  of  his  own  country.  And 
perhaps,  in  a  few  months,  his  goods  would  come.  So  the  days 
went  on  pleasantly  with  him. 

When  he  heard  my  destination  mentioned,  he  at  once  con- 
ceived the  brilliant  idea  of  having  the  honour  of  guiding  the 
first  white  man  to  his  king,  and  thus  gaining  imperishable 
renown  to  himself.  I  was  very  glad  to  have  him,  as  he  was  a 
very  intelligent  negro. 

Yesterday,  as  we  approached  Obindji's  town,  we  came  to  the 
plantation  of  my  old  friend  Querlaouen.  I  got  out  of  the  canoe, 
and  went  ashore  to  greet  the  good  old  African  and  his  wife  and 
children,  for  whom  I  had  brought  presents  such  as  they  wished. 
But  alasl  I  found  no  house  or  plantation.  The  place  was 
deserted  ;  the  jungle  was  thickest  where  his  Uttle  clearing  had 
been,  and  I  walked  back  with  disappointed  and  foreboding 
heart.  On  the  river-bank  I  met  a  Bakalai,  who  told  me  poor 
Querlaouen's  story.  Some  months  before  the  old  hunter  had 
gone  out  after  an  elephant.  His  slave  who  was  with  him  heard 
the  report  of  the  gun,  and,  finding  that  his  master  did  not 
return,  set  out  to  seek  him.  He  found  him  in  the  forest,  dead, 
and  trampled  into  a  shapeless  mass  by  the  beast,  which  he  had 
wounded  mortally,  but  which  had  strength  enough  left  to  rush 
at  and  kill  its  enemy.  The  poor  body  was  brought  in  and 
buried.  But  now  came  in  the  devilish  superstitions  of  the 
Africans.  This  family  really  loved  each  other.  They  lived 
together  in  peace  and  unity.      But  the  people  declared  that 


Chap.  XXTII.      GREAT  EXPECTATIONS  OP  MY  MEN.  405 

Querlaouen's  brother  had  bewitched  him  and  caused  his  death. 
The  brother  was  killed  by  the  mboundou  ordeal,  and  the 
women  and  children  had  gone  to  live  with  those  to  whom  they 
belonged  by  the  laws  of  inheritance,  and  were  thus  scattered 
in  several  villages.  I  was  consequently  prevented  repaying  this 
family  for  their  kind  deeds  to  me. 

Early  on  the  27th  we  were  awakened  by  the  voice  of  Obindji, 
who  was  recommending  Okendjo  to  take  great  care  of  "his 
white  man,"  and  see  that  nothing  hurt  him.  We  were  soon 
under  weigh.  Our  road  led  up  the  Ofoubou  for  some  three 
miles  and  a  half.  Then  we  struck  off  due  east,  and  after  half 
an  hour's  arduous  travel  we  got  through  the  marshy  bottom 
land  which  bounds  the  river,  and  stood  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain 
ridge,  along  which  lay  the  route  to  Ashira-land.  Here  we  gave 
three  cheers,  and  with  great  hopes  I  led  the  way  into  a  new 
terra  incognita. 

By  five  that  night,  when  we  encamped,  we  had  advanced  in  a 
straight  line  about  twenty  miles  from  the  Ofoubou.  The  country 
was  mountainous,  very  rugged,  and  very  thickly  wooded  with 
great  trees.  The  ground  was  in  many  places  thickly  strewn  with 
the  immense  boulders  which  I  had  noticed  in  my  journey  to  the 
Fans,  only  here  quetrtz  rock  was  more  abundant.  Numerous 
streams  of  the  purest  and  most  crystalline  water  rolled  in 
every  direction,  tumbling  over  the  rocks  in  foaming  cascades^ 
or  purling  along  in  a  bed  of  white  pebbles,  which  was 
delightfully  reminiscent  of  the  lull-streams  and  trout-brooks  of 
home. 

This  night  we  had  no  rain-storm,  which  was  very  lucky,  as, 
when  camping-time  came,  we  were  too  tired  to  build  ourselves 
shelters.  Before  this  not  a  night  had  passed  since  I  started 
from  Biagano  without  our  having  one  of  the  powerful  storms  of 
mixed  wind  and  rain  for  which  this  is  the  proper  season.  Several 
times  they  even  overtook  us  by  day. 

Our  camp  was  full  of  life  this  evening.  The  men  were  rejoicing 
in  anticipation  of  great  trade  in  slaves  and  ivory,  and  gave  their 
imagination  full  swing.  When  trade  was  exhausted,  they  rejoiced 
over  the  wives  they  would  get  among  the  Ashira,  where  they 
expect,  as  strangers  from  a  far  land,  to  be  sumptuously  enter- 
tained. And  at  last  Okendjo  capped  their  pleasure  by  pro- 
mising them  great  feasts  of  goats  and  plantains,  the  Goumbi 


•106  VAST  BOULDERS.  Chap.  XXIII. 

and  Bakalai  regarding  Ashira-land  as  the  country  of  goats  and 
plantains. 

We  were  kept  awake  between  one  and  three  o'clock  by  the 
roarings  of  a  leopard,  which,  however,  could  not  face  the  fire, 
which  we  had  kept  bright,  so  he  could  not  make  his  breakfost 
upon  one  of  us  as  he  desired  But  neither  did  I  think  it  quite 
safe  to  venture  into  the  gloom  after  him.  The  leopard  is  a  beast 
that  cannot  be  trifled  with  even  by  white  men.  As  for  the 
negroes,  they  are  very  much  afraid  of  him  ;  and  I  have  known 
cases  where  so  many  persons  were  carried  away  out  of  a  village 
by  a  persistent  leopard,  who  had  got  a  taste  of  black  meat  and 
liked  it,  that  the  survivors  had  to  move  away. 

Next  morning  (29th)  I  found  out  that  the  fellows  had  slyly 
thrown  away  a  quantity  of  my  plantains,  to  be  relieved  of  the 
burden.  I  warned  them  that,  if  we  were  short  of  food,  they 
would  have  to  starve  first. 

This  day  the  country  was  much  as  yesterday.  Ebony  grows 
in  great  abundance  on  all  hands.  The  poorer  the  soil,  the  taller 
the  trees,  and  the  more  numerous.  In  many  places  the  rains 
had  washed  away  the  soil  from  the  immense  and  wide-spreading 
roots,  which  ran  along  the  ground  looking  like  huge  serpents. 
To-day  we  saw  for  the  first  time  a  tree  new  to  me,  and  which 
my  men  called  the  indoonoo.  It  has  an  immense  girth,  and  is  a 
much  taller  and  better  shaped  tree  than  the  baobab,  which  is  not 
found  in  this  part  of  Africa.  I  measured  one,  of  only  moderate 
size,  which  had  fallen  down,  and  found  it^  at  some  feet  from  the 
base,  eight  feet  in  diameter.  This  tree  ia  not  known  on  the 
Kembo,  and  was  as  new  to  my  Bakalai  as  to  me.  The  Ashira 
fellows,  however,  knew  it  very  well. 

I  think  the  blocks  of  quartz  grow  more  and  more  immense  as 
we  proceed.  To-day  there  were  some  which  were  really  stupen- 
dous masses,  and  it  was  a  most  curious  sight  to  see  our  caravan 
filing  between  two  such  ponderous  blocks,  looking  like  pigmies 
alongside  of  these  huge  boulders. 

Towards  evening,  at  last»  we  began  to  see  signs  of  a  change  in 
the  face  of  the  country.  Plantations  could  be  seen  from  time  to 
time ;  the  soil  became  more  clayey ;  and  at  last  we  emerged 
from  the  immense  forest  I  saw  spread  out  before  me  the  great 
Ashira  prairie-land,  dotted  plentifully  with  villages,  which  looked 
in  the  distance  like  ant-heaps.     I  stood  for  a  long  time  on  the 


Chap.  XXITI.  THE  ASHIRA  PRAIRIE-LAND.  407 

edge  of  a  bluff,  taking  in  this,  one  of  the  finest  landscapes  I  ever 
saw  in  my  life.  Far  as  the  eye  could  reach  was  a  high  rolling 
prairie.  As  I  afterwards  discovered,  the  plain  is  about  fifty-five 
miles  long  by  ten  wide.  All  over  this  vast  plain  were  scattered 
collections  of  little  Ashira  huts.  The  hills  and  valleys  were 
streaked  with  ribbon-like  paths,  and  here  and  there  the  eye 
caught  the  silver  sheen  of  a  brook  winding  along  through  the 
undulating  land.  In  the  far  distance  loomed  up  mountains 
higher  than  any  I  had  yet  seen,  and  whose  peaks  were  lost  in 
the  clouds.    It  was  a  grand  sight. 


408  ASUIRA-LAND  AT  LAST.  Ciup.XXlV. 


CHAPTER   XXIV. 

We  enter  Ashira-land  —  Astonishment  of  the  People  at  my  Appearance  — 
ITieir  Fear  of  my  Eyes  —  Grand  Reception  —  Message  and  Presents  from 
the  Ashira  King — Kendo  —  King  Olenda  —  His  Address  to  me  —  I  am 
an  Object  of  great  Wonder  —  My  Clock  a  Fetich  —  Features  of  the  Plain  — 
Villages  —  Houses  —  Agriculture  —  Appearance  of  the  Ashira  —  Dress  — 
Grass-cloth  —  Loom  —  Curious  Custom  of  young  Women  —  Operation  of 
Dyeing  —  Manner  of  Hair-dressing  —  Peculiarities  —  Fears  of  the  Slaves  — 
Condition  of  Women  —  Marriage  —  Splendid  Waterfall  —  Mount  Kchondo 

—  A  Superstition  about  it  —  A  Case  of  Insanity  —  Ascent  of  Mount  Andele 

—  Meet  a  Nshiego  Mbouv^  —  How  it  rests  at  Night — Attempt  to  ascend 
the  Nkoomoo-nabouali  —  Gorilla  killed  —  Difficulties  of  the  Ascent  — 
Starvation. 

To  make  our  entry  into  Ashira-land  properly,  Okendjo  sent 
two  men  ahead  to  announce  that  "the  spirit"  was  coming  to  see 
them,  and  that  he  (Okendjo)  had  been  selected  as  his  guide. 
Soon,  in  the  nearest  village,  we  began  to  see  people  moving  abont 
hurriedly,  and  in  half  an  hoiu:  the  whole  plain  knew  something 
liad  occurred*  Meantime  those  nearest  us  came  out  to  meet  us, 
and  we  moved  forward  to  them.  When  they  saw  me,  all 
stopped,  and  the  majority  turned  back  with  awe  and  alarm 
depicted  on  their  faces.  We  continued  to  advance  slowly.  It 
was  nearly  dusk  when  we  entered  the  nearest  village.  But  very 
few  of  the  people  dared  to  approach  me ;  and  even  those  took 
to  flight  if  I  fixed  my  eye  upon  them,  evidently  fearing  I  would 
do  them  a  mischief. 

Okendjo  walked  ahead  of  me,  proclaiming,  in  a  most  magnilo- 
quent manner,  the  many  virtues  of  the  great  white  man  or  spirit 
whom  he  had  brought  to  see  his  countrymen.  And  the  crowd 
answered  to  his  words  in  shouts,  "  The  tangani  has  come !  The 
spirit  has  come  to  see  our  land — our  land,  which  he  never  saw 
before  1" 

It  happened  luckily  that  the  chief  of  the  first  village  we  came 
to  was  a  brother  of  Okendjo.  Akoonga  met  us  at  the  entrance 
of  his  place,  and  said,  "  Is  it  true,  Okendjo,  what  I  hear,  that  you 
bring  to  us  this  man  ?  Is  it  not  an  hallucination  of  my  mind, 
occasioned  by  too   much   palm-wine?      Is  he  the   spirit  who 


Chap.  XXIV.  PLEASANT  RECEPTION.  409 

makes  the  guns,  the  cloth,  the  beads,  the  brass  rods,  and  the 
copper  rings  ?" 

Okendjo  replied,  "  He  is  the  man.  This  is  he  of  whom  you 
have  he^  so  much.    He  comes  from  a  far  country  to  see  us." 

Then  the  people  shouted  out  their  surprise.  A  house  was 
given  me,  and  when  I  had  taken  possession  the  chief  came,  fol- 
lowed  by  ten  of  his  wives,  each  bearing  two  bunches  of  plantains, 
which,  with  fear  and  trembling,  they  deposited  at  my  feet.  Next 
were  brought  four  goats,  twenty  fowls,  several  baskets  of  ground- 
nuts, and  many  bunches  of  sugarcane. 

When  these  were  delivered,  Akoonga  said  to  Okendjo,  "  Tell 
the  spirit  that  I  thank  him  that  he  stays  in  my  village  a  night. 
Tell  him  he  is  welcome,  and  all  those  who  follow  him.  He  is 
the  master  while  he  is  here.  This  food  is  for  him.  As  for  his 
people,  my  women  will  cook  for  them." 

I  thanked  him. 

Then,  showing  me  the  house,  he  said,  "  It  is  your  house  ;  my 
wives  are  yours ;  my  slaves  are  yours ;  my  people  are  yours." 

Then,  at  last,  I  had  a  chance  to  refresh  myself  with  supper. 
After  supper,  being  tired,  I  lay  down,  but  was  not  yet  asleep 
when  I  heard  the  chief  say  to  his  people,  "  Be  silent ;  do  not 
trouble  the  spirit ;  do  not  speak  lest  you  awake  him.  Neither 
our  forefathers  nor  ourselves  ever  saw  such  a  wonder  as  this." 

The  consequence  of  this  kind  and  very  unusual  forethought 
was  that  I  enjoyed  a  very  good  night's  rest. 

By  my  reckoning,  the  village  of  Akoonga  is  two  hundred  and 
forty  miles  east  from  Cape  Lopez. 

Early  next  morning  the  rush  of  people  began.  They  were  less 
afraid  than  on  the  evening  before,  and  crowded  around  me  in 
such  masses  that  I  was  nearly  stifled.  As  usual,  my  hair  was 
the  great  object  of  wonder  to  them.  I  stood  it  as  long  as  I 
could,  but  at  last  had  to  ask  the  chief  to  send  them  away.  Not 
to  disappoint  their  curiosity  too  much,  I  consented  to  walk 
through  the  streets  at  intervals  of  an  hour  or  two,  and  thus  give 
all  an  opportunity  to  look  at  me.  This  piece  of  complaisance 
gratified  them  immensely. 

In  the  morning,  Olenda,  the  king  or  head  chief  of  the  Ashiras, 
sent  two  messengers  with  presents  of  goats  and  plantains,  and  a 
desire  that  I  should  come  to  his  town.  I  sent  back  word  that  I 
would  the  day  after  to-morrow ;  to-day  ray  feet  were  too  sore. 


410  THE  ASHIRA  KING.  Cbap.  XXIV. 

The  king  sent  word  thaX  I  should  be  carried  if  I  would  come. 
I  replied  that  I  wonld  come  on  the  day  I  had  appointed.   That 
I  never  broke  my  word  nor  ever  changed  my  miad. 

Accordingly,  on  November  2nd,  early  in  the  morning,  I  wit 
aroused  by  King  Olenda'a  people,  who  had  come  to  eHcort  me 
with  singing  and  dancing.  I  took  leave  of  Akoonga,  giving  him 
a  present  of  one  hundred  yards  of  cloth,  and  some  beads,  and  an 
old  shirt,  whereat  he  was  vastly  delighted. 

My  men  had  now  easy  times.    My  bf^gage  was  carried  alto- 
gether by  the  Ashira,  who  marched  ahead  singing  wild  songs 
celebrating  my  arrival  among  them.     After  a  journey  of  t«Q 
miles  over  the  grassy  prairie  we  came  to  Olenda's  toivn,  which 
may  be  called  the 
capital   of  the   na- 
tion.     I   was   (xin- 
duct«d  to  the  best 
house  in  the  place ; 
'  and,   after   waiting 
half  an   hour,  the 
need  the  approach  of 

of  royalty  in  some  of 
intral  Africa.  It  is  a 
I  with  a  long  handle, 
e  piece,  as  shown  in 
1  which  with  us  an- 
ird  of  cows  or  sheep, 
mt  of  the  sovereign, 
len  on  visits  of  state 

d  before  me — a  most 

He  was  an  old,   old 

snow,  face  a  mass  ol 

lan,  and  bent  almost 

painted  his  hazard 

1    ^        old  face  red  on  one  side,  and  white  on  the  other, 

'  in  streaks,  and,  as  he  stood  before  me,  I  wcmdered 

'^™^  as  much  at  his  appearance  as  did  he  at  min& 

When  we  had  looked  at  each  other  for  some  five  minutee  he 

made  me  a  formal  address  in  Ashira,  which  was  translated  ftv 


Chap.  XXIV.  ROYAL  ADDRESS  TO  ME.  411 

me  by  Okendjo.  He  said,  "  I  have  no  bowels.  I  am  like  the 
Ovenga  Eiver ;  I  cannot  be  cut  in  two.  But  also  1  am  like  the 
Niembai  and  Ovenga  rivers,  which  unite  together.  Thus  my 
body  is  united,  and  nothing  can  divide  it" 

This  gibberish,  which  may  possibly  have  had  some  mystic  sig- 
nificance at  one  time,  I  afterwards  discovered  was  the  regular 
and  invariable  salutation  of  the  Ashira  kings,  Olenda's  prede- 
cessors, time  out  of  mind.  Each  chief  and  important  person  has 
such  a  salutation,  which  they  call  kombo. 

Then  he  continued:  "You,  the  spirit,  have  come  to  see 
Olenda.  You,  the  spirit,  have  put  your  feet  where  none  like 
you  have  ever  been.    You  are  welcome." 

Here  the  old  king's  son,  also  a  very  old  negro,  with  snow- 
white  wool,  handed  over  to  the  king  two  slaves,  which  the  king 
formally  presented  to  me,  together  with  three  goats,  twenty 
bunches  of  plantains,  twenty  fowls,  five  baskets  of  ground-nuts, 
and  several  bunches  of  sugarcane. 

"This,"  said  he,  "is  to  salute  you.  Whatever  else  you  want, 
tell  me.  I  am  the  king  of  this  country.  Whatever  else  you 
wish,  let  it  be  known  to  me." 

I  replied  that  slaves  I  did  not  want,  but  that  if  any  of  his 
people  were  on  the  coast  I  should  be  glad  to  have  them  taught 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  white  man,  that  they  might  come  and 
tell  it  to  their  people. 

Then  more  of  the  old  man's  children  came;  all  old,  and 
wrinkled,  and  white-headed  men.  They  stood  before  me, 
regarding  me  with  wonder  and  awe;  while  the  people,  of 
whom  thousands  were  gathered  from  all  the  villages  of  the 
plain,  looked  on  in  silence,  and  expressed  their  surprise  in 
whispers. 

At  last  the  old  king  turned  to  his  people  and  said,  "  I  have 
seen  many  things  in  my  life,  and  many  wonderful  things,  and 
now  I  am  ready  to  die,  for  I  have  seen  the  spirit  from  whom 
we  receive  all  things.  It  will  always  be  said  in  our  nation  by 
those  coming  after  us,  that  in  the  time  of  Olenda  the  spirit  first 
appeared  and  dwelt  among  us.  You  are  welcome"  (turning 
to  me).  "  Keep  this  spirit  well  (to  his  people)  ;  he  will  do  us 
good." 

It  was  a  very  impressive  scene,  and  all  was  conducted  with 
great  decorum  and  dignity. 


412  I  .ASTONISH  THE  NATIVES.  Chap.  XXIV. 

Nov,  9^A.  The  last  week  has  been  devoted  to  seeing  and  being 
seen.  From  all  the  one  hundred  and  fifty  villages  of  the  plain 
the  people  have  streamed  to  Olenda's  town  to  see  "  the  spirit" 
They  come  in  the  night,  sleep  on  the  ground  outside  the  town, 
and  in  the  morning  crowd  about  me,  following  me  with  curious 
gaze,  wondering  at  my  hair,  and  trying,  unobserved,  to  get  a 
glance  at  my  eyes.  The  moment  I  look  at  them  they  run  o% 
especially  the  women  and  children.  The  African  has  a  great 
dread  of  the  steady  look  of  a  white  man's  eye.  They  believe 
it  has  an  evil-working  influence,  and  it  is  certainly  a  potent 
weapon  to  reduce  a  refractory  or  turbulent  crowd.  Even  the 
bravest  warrior  will  quail  beneath  the  steady  glance  of  a  white 
man. 

My  clock  is  an  object  of  constant  wonder  to  them.  Ther 
think  it  watches  over  me.  Its  constant  ticking  day  and  night 
is  noticed,  and  this,  to  them,  denotes  the  watchfulness  of  my 
familiar.  Nothing  could  persuade  them  that  a  musical-box, 
which  I  sometimes  wound  up  and  caused  to  play  for  them,  was 
not  a  very  powerful  devil  in  my  employ.  And,  though  they 
have  a  few  guns  and  know  their  use,  my  revolver  excited  not 
only  their  admiration,  but  a  superstitious  kind  of  reverence. 
They  could  not  comprehend  a  machine  which  could  fire  time 
after  time  right  ahead  without  stopping. 

The  Ashira  plain,  which  I  have  in  this  week  to  some  extent 
explored,  is  the  finest  and  most  delightful  country  I  have  seen 
in  Africa.  The  soil  is  light,  but  tolerably  good.  It  is  well 
watered  with  small  brooks.  The  undulations  of  the  prairie, 
which  is,  in  fact,  a  table-land  surrounded  on  all  sides  by 
higher  mountains,  give  the  landscape  a  charming  variety.  The 
siUTOunding  mountains,  the  splendid  peak  of  the  Nkoomoo- 
nabouali  on  the  north,  the  Andele  and  Ofoubou  to  the  south, 
the  peaks  of  Ococoo  to  the  east,  are  all  covered  with  dense 
masses  of  forest,  and  lend  a  solemn  majesty  to  the  scene,  from 
whatever  point  it  is  viewed.  They  thoroughly  inclose  the  great 
prairie,  their  forests  reaching  to  the  very  feet  of  the  hills,  and 
marking,  with  curious  distinctness,  the  boundary  beyond  which 
man  has  not  encroached. 

I  learned  from  the  natives  that  beyond  the  Nkoomoo-nabouali 
range  a  superb  cataract  was  known.  A  stream  called  the 
Ilembo  Ngouyai  runs  through  a  high  defile,  and  finally  falls 


Chap.  XXIV.  ASHIRA  VILLAGES.  413 

iato  the  plain  down  an  abrupt  precipice,  resummg  its  course 
around  the  very  base  of  the  mountain.  Its  roar  fills  the  whole 
surrounding  country,  and  its  vapour  rises  along  the  aides  of 
the  mountain  into  a  magnificent  rainbowed  column  visible  at 
a  great  distance.  This  great  fall,  called  the  Samba  Nagoahi, 
I  hoped  afterwards  to  visit,  but  ihe  reader  will  see  that  the 
Fates  denied  mo  this  pleasure.  I  floated  on  the  Rembo 
Ngouyai,  within  sight  of  the  vapour  rising  from  the  cataract, 
and  listened  to  its  sublime  roar,  but  in  my  light  canoe  I  did 
not  dare  risk  a  near  approach  through  turbulent  waters  ;  while 
the  approach  overland  was  found  too  difficult  for  my  time, 
and  strength,  and  limited  supplies.  The  negroes  of  this  region 
are  full  of  wonderful  stories  of  its  fury.  They  believe  that 
beyond  the  mountains  lives  a  great  spirit  who  sends  down  this 
torrent. 

The  villages  were  so  scattered  at  random  that  I  could  not 
make  an  accurate  count  of  them,  but  there  are  between  150 
and  200.  They  are  the  neatest  I  have  seen  in  Africa,  The 
houses  are  small,  but  cleanly,  and  built  of  tree-bark.  The 
village  is  generally  composed  of  one  long  street,  with  houses  on 
each  sida  The  streets  are  kept  very  clean ;  and  this  is  the  only 
tribe  where  die  ground  at  the  back  of  the  houses  is  also  cleared 
off.  The  villages  are  surrounded  hy  thousands  of  plantain-trees, 
and  regular  paths  connect  them  with  each  other.  I  learned  that 
villages  are  removed,  as  among  other  tribes,  for  death  or  witch- 
craft, but  not  beyond  the  plains. 

Behind  every  village,  in  particular  near  the  boundary  of  the 
forest,  are  great  plantations,  carried  on  with  much  industry, 


and  where  tobacco,  peanuts,  plantains,  yams,  and  sugarcane 
are  grown  in  quantities  which  make  this  a  land  of  plenty,  where 


414  THE  ASHIRA  PEOPLE.  Chap.  XXIV. 

no  man  staryes.  Bushes  of  wild  cotton  were  seen  now  and 
then,  but  not  in  great  plenty.  As  I  stood  on  one  of  the  highest 
hills  which  diversify  the  plain,  and  cast  my  eyes  over  the  scene, 
the  yellow  waving  grass  and  cane  fields  contrasting  with  the 
dark  green  of  the  forest,  reminded  me  strongly  of  the  harvest- 
fields  of  my  home,  and  gave  the  landscape  a  charm  of  homely 
rural  beauty  which  is  lacking  elsewhere  in  Africa,  where  all  is 
wild  and  grand,  but  where  the  traveller's  heart  often  aches  for 
something  which  shall  remind  him  of  home. 

The  people  are  the  finest  I  have  seen  in  Africa.  They  are 
evidently  a  separate  nation,  for  the  Bakalai  and  other  tribes 
who  surround  them  are  much  lighter  coloured.  The  Ashira 
are  invariably  coal-black.  The  women,  in  particular,  have  fine 
forms,  and,  though  they  have  fall  negro  features,  many  of  the 
young  women  have  a  grace  of  carriage  and  a  sprightliness  of 
manner  which  is  something  quite  un- African. 

The  dress  of  the  men  and  married  women  consists  of  a  flowing 
garment  called  a  ndengui,  which  is  made  of  a  kind  of  grass- 
cloth  woven  by  them,  and  which  I  found,  in  many  cases,  of 
very  fine  and  tolerably  even  texture.  The  loom  is  a  com- 
plicated structure,  which  is  suspended  between  two  trees,  or 
at  the  front  of  the  house.  It  is  worked  on  the  same  principle 
on  which  seamen  make  their  mats  on  board  ship,  having 
two  sets  of  **  dividers,"  to  separate  the  web  and  admit  the 
shuttle  with  the  warp.  The  thread  which  is  used  is  obtained 
from  a  species  of  palm  which  I  saw  only  here  and  among  the 
Apingi.  They  take  the  leaf,  which  is  from  two  to  three  feet 
long,  and  strip  off  from  it  the  thin  cuticle,  which  is  then  dried, 
and  becomes  a  tolerably  firm  yam.  They  told  me  that  this 
tree  is  very  short-lived,  dying  after  having  borne  fruit  but 
once. 


Aakini  Thread  and  Needle. 


They  sew  very  neatly  with  a  wooden  needle  and  grass  thread, 
a  skein  of  wliich  is  here  represented. 


Chap.  XXIV.  COSTUME  OF  THE  A6HIRA.  415 

B7  a  siugnlar  faehioii,  whicli  I  never  saw  elsewhere,  girls  and 
young  women,  till  they  are  married,  are  not  allowed  to  wear 
any  clothing  except  the  narrow  graes-cloth  girdle  atxiut  the 
middle.  They  wander  about  as  freely  as  a  total  absence  of  the 
sentiment  of  motiesty  can  let  them.  Their  scant  toilet  was 
simply  a  fashion  of  such  long  standing  that  it  was  taken  as  a 
matter  of  course. 

The  men,  who  are  not  nearly  so  finely-built  as  the  women, 
though  they  too  are  superior  to  the  men  of  the  surrounding 
tribes,  wear  on  their  heads  caps  of  grass-thread  knit  in  a  most 
beautiful  manner,  something  in  the  style  of  the  crochet>work 
which  is  the  amusement  of  our  ladies.  The  cap  is  called  ashUa. 
From  their  shoulders  hangs  a  bag,  not  unlike  tiie  ^shion  of  our 
game-bags,  with  a  mass  of  pendent  strings  surrounding  the  hag. 
It  is  a  very  pretty  thing,  and  is  used  to  carry  whatever  they 
may  hare,  which  we  would  put  in  our  pockets. 


Both  men  and  women  are  very  fond  of  copper  ornaments, 
such  as  bracelets  and  anklets,  which  they  manu&cture  from  the 
copper  brought  hither  by  the  Bakalai  from  the  seashore. 

Some  of  ^eir  grass-cloth  remains  of  its  natural  colour,  which 
is  a  dark  buff.  Other  articles  are  dyed  black  in  a  very  ingenious 
manner.  A  beautiful  bush,  which  grows  in  abuu(kuGe  here, 
bears  a  profusion  of  small  berries  in  which  the  dye  is  secreted. 
To  obtain  it,  bowerer,  it  is  necessary  first  to  rub  the  doth 
thoroughly  with  clay  until  it  is  quite  covered,  and  then  put  it 
to  soak  for  a  day  in  running  water.     After  soaking  twenty-four 


416  SINGULAK  HAIR-DItESRING.  Cnxv.  XXIT. 

hours  it  is  put  in  a  kettle  with  water  and  the  berries  and  bark, 
and  some  leaves  of  the  same  tree.  The  whole  is  boiled  for 
three  or  four  hours.  When  the  cloth  is  taken  out  it  is  of  a 
light  black  or  brown  colour.  It  does  not  turn  of  the  peculiar 
deep  shining  black  till  it  is  once  more  rubbed  in  clay  and  sotik«l 
in  running  water. 


The  Ashira  women  dress  their  h»ir  in  a  very  curious  way, 
and  quite  differently  from  any  negroes  I  have  seen.  The 
pictures  here  given  make  an  explanation  unnecessary-,  exwpl 
to  say  that  the  protuberance  on  the  top  of  the  head  and  the 
projecting  horns  are  their  own  wool,  made  stiff  by  being  stmnp 
over  such  substances  as  plantain-leaves  or  sticks.  The  toilet 
of  an  Ashira  lady's  hea<l  is  rather  a  complicated  affair;  but 
then  a  head  "lasts"  a  good  while.  The  hair  is  covered  wilh 
palm-oil. 


n 


Chap.  XXIV.  MANNERS  OF  THE  ASHIRA.  417 

The  women  paint  their  bodies  red  with  the  dye  obtained  from 
the  barwood-tree.  They  are  particularly  fond  of  wearing  copper 
rods  about  their  necks,  which  makes  them  look  as  thpugh  ready 
collared  for  the  slave-market.  Both  men  and  women  file  their 
teeth  slightly  in  the  middle,  and  it  does  not  produce  an  un- 
pleasant effect  on  the  stranger.  Occasionally  I  saw  an  old 
man  with  teeth  filed  to  a  point,  as  is  the  savage  custom  in  many 
of  the  African  tribes.  It  gives  the  countenance  a  peculiar  look 
of  ferocity  which  is  not  soon  forgotten. 

Seeing  no  slaves,  although  I  had  been  some  days  at  Olenda's 
town,  I  began  to  think  they  had  none.  But  I  soon  discovered 
that  the  poor  slaves,  on  hearing  of  my  arrival,  had  been  panic- 
struck.  They  thought,  poor  fellows  I  that  I  had  come  to  cdrry 
them  off  to  the  seashore  to  be  fattened,  and  then  carried  off  to 
the  white  man's  country  to  be  eaten,  and  that  I  myself  intended 
to  eat  a  few,  which  is  the  use  they  fancy  we  make  pf  slaves. 
Accordingly,  they  retreated  to  the  plantations,  where  they  hid 
themselves,  and  resolutely  refused  to  make  their  appearance ; 
nor  would  any  assurances  or  entreaties  of  mine  induce  them  to 
come  forth.     The  masters  only  laughed 

The  women  cultivate  the  soil  among  the  Ashira,  as  among  the 
other  tribes.  They  are  very  industrious,  and  seemed  to  me 
milder  mannered,  as  they  certainly  were  healtliier  than  elsewhere 
in  Africa.  They  do  not  become  wives  till  they  have  arrived 
fully  at  the  age  of  puberty,  which  is  one  suflBcient  reason  for  the 
greater  beauty  of  tiie  little  nation,  and  for  its  iutellectual  supe- 
riority, as  denoted  by  the  cloth  manufactures,  and  the  settled  and 
provident  mode  of  life.  Polygamy,  of  course,  prevails;  and 
parents  sometimes  sell  their  children,  which  is  not  thought  a 
crime.  The  less  I  say  about  the  morals  of  the  women  the  better. 
Let  it  suflSce  that  chastity  is  not  one  of  the  virtues  of  the  Ashira. 

This  whole  country  is  well  watered.  Along  every  distant 
mountain-side  rivulets  are  dancing  downward,  and  are  lost  in  the 
plain,  or  eventually  fall  into  the  Ovenga  or  Ovigui,  which  flow 
past,  the  last  emptying  into  the  Kembo  Apingi. 

Nov.  10th  To-day  I  set  out  for  the  mountains  to  the  south, 
the  Ofoubou,  Andelo,  and  Orere  mountains,  among  which  the 
Ofoubou  river  has  its  source.  I  left  my  luggage  with  King 
Olenda,  and  took  only  a  few  presents  for  the  chiefs  who  had  in- 
vited me  to  visit  their  towns  in  the  mountains.     Olenda  gave  me 

2  E 


418  AN  INSANE  NEGRO.  Chap.  XXIV. 

one  of  his  sons  as  gnide,  and  told  all  his  people  to  take  great 
care  of  "  the  spirit" 

After  a  march  of  about  a  mile  and  a  half  in  a  general  direc- 
tion of  south,  we  came  to  the  foot  of  Mount  Nchondo,  one  of 
the  highest  peaks  in  the  prairie.  It  is  much  venerated  among 
the  Ashira,  who  believe  that  from  it  goats  came  to  them.  Many 
assured  me  that  their  friends  had  received  these  animals  from 
the  mountain ;  and  I  suppose  that  formerly  it  was,  in  fact,  some- 
times the  hiding-place  of  wild  goats,  who,  issuing  forth  from 
some  unknown  recesses,  gave  rise  to  this  singular  superstition. 

After  skirting  for  some  miles  the  base  and  slopes  of  these  hills, 
we  came  to  the  foot  of  the  cloud-capped  Mount  Andele.  Here 
was  the  village  of  Mouendi,  whose  chief,  Mandji,  came  forth  with 
groat  joy  to  meet  me,  his  people  singing,  "  It  is  good  that  the 
white  man  comes  to  see  our  town." 

They  brought  me  presents  of  food,  as  usual,  and  seemed  greatly 
to  wonder  at  my  hands,  my  hair,  &c. 

In  the  country  we  crossed  to-day  I  saw  some  deserted  villages. 
Here  death  had  been  accompanied  by  witchcraft ;  for  the  poor 
Ashira  too  are  stricken  with  the  belief  that  death  is  the  result 
of  violence,  and  must  have  been  caused  by  the  wicked  machina- 
tions of  sorc^erers. 

Wherever  I  went  the  villages  were  remarkably  neat.  The 
houses  are  small,  but  clean.  The  lack  of  the  mpavOy  of  which 
the  houses  of  most  of  the  other  tribes  are  built^  accounts  for 
tlieir  diminutive  size.  They  have  to  carry  this  unwieldly  build- 
ing material  often  many  miles,  and  on  their  backs,  as  they  have 
no  beasts  of  burden.  The  streets  were  always  scrupulously  neat, 
not  a  weed  or  a  piece  of  offal  to  be  seen. 

While  I  was  resting  in  one  of  the  villages,  a  poor  crazy  fellow 
came  capering  and  singing  along  the  street  I  was  so  much 
amused  at  his  antics,  and  at  the  forbearance  of  the  people  with 
him,  that  I  gave  him  an  old  torn  coat  I  had  with  me.  At  this  he 
was  vastly  delighted,  and  redoubled  his  jumps  and  songs,  while 
the  villagers  were  also  much  pleased.  The  poor  fellow  followed 
me  for  several  days,  and  tried  to  show  his  gratitude  by  dancing 
and  singing  for  my  diversion.  In  this  part  of  Africa  idiots — 
those  who  are  dull,  stupid,  senseless,  and  gloomy — are  mucJi  dis- 
liked and  soon  got  rid  of.  Generally  they  are  sold  to  another 
tribe  as  slaves.     But  such  poor  light  fellows  as  this  was  are 


Chap.  SXIV.  THE  INTOXICATING  LIAMBA.  419 

kindly  treated,  and  I  ttiuik  regarded  with  a  certain  snperstitioTiB 
reverence.  I  have  Been  bat  three  Buch  in  all  my^  jonmejB,  bat 
have  seen  many  brutish  idiots.  I  may  ae  well  add  here  that 
Cfkses  of  deaihess  are  very  rare,  I  do  not  remember  to  have  met 
any,  except  very  aged  people.  Among  the  Bakalai  I  found  one 
mute,  and  I  have  seen  in  another  tribe  two  burapbaekB — both. 
By  the  way,  remarkably  cunning  fellows.  I  do  not  remember  a 
single  caee  of  blindness  in  all  my  journeys,  not  even  among  the 
very  a^ed. 

I  found  in  these  hill  villages  a  plant  they  call  the  liamba  and 
which  the  men  cultivate  with  great  care.  The  leaf  is  used  to 
smoke  in  their  clay  pipes,  and  has  powerful  exhilarant  and  nat^ 
cotie  effects.  From  some  leaves  which  I  brought  home,  I  have 
discovered  that  this  liamba  is  nothing  else  than  the  well-known 
Cannabis  Indica,  or  Indian  hemp,  ^m  which  the  lar-famed 
Eastern  drug  haakeetJi  is  made. 


One  day  during  my  journey  I  found  a  village  in  great  excite- 
ment One  of  ^e  men  had  been  smoking  liamba  leaves,  and 
bad  ran  out  to  the  forest  in  an  insane  state,  and  it  was  feared  he 
would  be  eaten  by  wild  beasts.  Such-  cases  are  not  uncommon 
in  the  Ashira  country.  Under  my  own  observation  afterwards. 
2  E  2 


420  EFFECTS  OF  THE  LIAMBA.  Chap.  XXIV. 

one  liamba-smoker  became  furiously  and  permanently  insane, 
and  I  saw  many  who  were  miserably  debilitated  by  the  habit 

Hasheesh  and  the  Cannabis  Indica  are  so  well  known  that  it  is 
not  necessary  to  say  anything  about  them  here.  The  plant  is  a 
native  of  Abyssinia,  Persia,  and  Hindostan,  and  is  not,  in  my 
opinion,  indigenous  to  this  part  of  Africa.  This  I  think,  because 
I  nowhere  heard  of  its  growing  wild,  and  because  the  Ashira  and 
Apingi,  the  only  people  I  met  with  who  use  it,  cultivate  it  with 
considerable  care.  How  it  came  thither,  or  how  they  first  came  by 
a  knowledge  of  its  qualities,  I  could  not  learn.  There  are  among 
the  Ashira  many  confirmed  liamba-smokers,  and  the  habit  seems 
very  quickly  to  fix  itself  with  a  fatal  tenacity.  Beginners  I  have 
seen  fall  down  in  convulsions  from  the  first  few  puf&.  Practiced 
smokers  are  seen  laughing,  talking,  quarrelling,  and  acting  in  all 
respects  like  drunken  persons.  Insanity  is  often  its  ultimate 
result  on  those  who  persist  in  its  use.  I  have  several  times  seen 
men  run  into  the  forest  under  the  influence  of  a  few  whife  of 
liamba,  perfectly  unconscious  and  raving. 

The  negroes  acknowledge  its  pernicious  eflTects,  but  yet  its 
votaries  increase  ;  and  though  the  plant  is  yet  unknown  to  the 
seashore  tribes,  they  will  soon  fall  under  its  subjugation,  for  it 
is  making  gradual  but  sure  advances.  I  never  saw  the  leaf  on 
the  seashore,  but  once  saw  a  few  of  the  seeds  in  the  possession  of 
a  slave  in  a  slave-factory.  He  was  carefully  preserving  them, 
intending  to  plant  them  in  the  country  to  which  he  should  be 
sold. 

The  negroes  choose  for  the  Uamba  a  soil  humid,  rich,  and  near 
the  summit  of  a  hill,  in  a  sunny  exposure,  where  it  may  secure 
the  greatest  amount  of  heat. 

The  soil  of  the  prairie  is  light  and  somewhat  clay-like,  but 
would  make  a  fine  agricultural  country.  It  seems  specially 
adapted  for  grazing  purposes.  Nearer  the  mountains  the  soil  is 
richer,  blacker,  and  deeper ;  and  here  are  the  largest  plantations, 
even  the  people  living  in  the  centre  of  the  plain  cultivating 
farms  at  its  edge.  Villages  are  very  numerous  at  the  foot  of 
these  mountains. 

On  the  12th  I  set  out  on  my  return  to  the  plains.  I  made  an 
excursion  to  the  west,  towards  Obindji's  village,  to  hunt.  I 
took  a  number  of  Ashira  with  me,  who  covered  themselves  with 
fetiches,  as  usual,  and  gashed  their  hands  for  good  luck.     They 


Chap.  XXIV.  GORILLA-STORIES.  421 

were  in  high  spirits  because  a  fetich  had  given  indications  that 
we  should  get  much  game.  When  we  had  camped  that  evening, 
and  after  a  rain-tornado  had  passed  and  left  us  in  quiet  in  our 
leafy  shelters,  the  men  began  to  tell  stories  of  the  gorilla.  Some 
of  these  were  such  as  the  reader  h^  already  met  with  in  this 
volume ;  but  two  were  told  of  quite  a  different  kind.  One  of 
these  related  how  a  gorilla  was  walking  in  the  forest,  when  sud- 
denly he  met  a  nghgo  or  leopard.  The  gorilla  stopped,  and  so 
did  the  leopard.  The  latter,  being  hungry,  crouched  for  a 
spring  at  his  foe,  whereat  the  gorilla  set  up  a  hideous  roar. 
Undismayed  by  this,  the  leopard  made  his  leap,  but  was  caught 
in  mid-air  by  the  gorilla,  who  seized  his  foe  by  the  tail,  and 
whirled  him  round  his  head  till  the  tail  broke  off,  and  the  animal 
escaped,  leaving  his  brush  in  the  hands  of  the  gorilla  I 

The  leopard  ran  away  to  his  companions,  who,  when  they  saw 
him,  asked,  "  What  is  the  matter?  "  whereupon  the  unfortunate 
beast  recounted  his  defeat.  At  this  the  chief  ngego  howled  and 
howled  till  all  the  leopards  of  the  forest  came,  who,  when  they 
saw  their  brother's  injury,  vowed  vengeance,  and  set  out  to  find 
the  gorilla. 

They  had  not  long  to  hunt.  When  the  gorilla  saw  them  coming 
he  broke  down  a  tree,  of  which  he  made  a  club,  which  he  swung 
round  and  round  his  head,  and  kept  the  troop  of  leopards  at  bay. 
At  last,  however,  he  grew  tired,  and  then  the  leopards  rushed  on 
him  with  one  accord  and  soon  killed  him. 

Next  came  a  story  of  a  gorilla  and  an  elephant,  told  with  a 
good  deal  of  dramatic  force.  As  the  gorilla  was  walking  in  the 
forest  with  his  wife  and  baby,  they  came  suddenly  upon  a  huge 
elephant,  who  said,  "  Let  me  pass,  gorilla,  for  these  woods  belong 
to  me." 

*'  Oh,  oh ! "  said  the  gorilla.  "  How  do  the  woods  belong  to 
thee?  Am  I  not  master  here?  Am  I  not  the  man  of  the 
woods  ?     Do  I  not  roam  where  I  please  ?  " 

And,  ordering  his  wife  and  baby  to  go  aside,  he  broke  down  a 
large  tree,  and  brandishing  it  like  a  club,  made  at  the  elephant, 
whom  he  soon  killed.  The  body  of  the  elephant  was  found  by 
a  man  a  few  days  al'terwards,  with  the  club  of  the  gorilla  lying 
by  its  side. 

This  story,  the  narrator  assured  me,  was  a  fact ;  and  I  think  he 
firmly  believed  it.     These  two  fables  seemed  to  mo  to  evince 


422  AFRICAN  WILD  HOG.  Chap.  XXIV. 

more  imagination  than  any  I  had  heard  before,  and  I  have  given 
them  here  for  that  reason. 

The  next  morning  I  succeeded  in  bagging  a  wild  boar  and 
several  pigs.  These  animals  are  not  only  very  savage,  but 
singularly  active.  When  I  brought  down  the  boar,  three  others 
which  were  with  him  were  much  startled,  and,  in  their  fright, 
made  a  leap  which  must  have  measured  over  ten  yards.  I  have 
seen  them  repeatedly  leaping  across  the  Ovenga,  where^  by  my 
own  measurement  it  was  more  than  eight  yards  across.  Once  1 
saw  one  miss  the  opposite  bank,  and  I  shot  it  in  the  water. 

This  wild  hog  is  peculiar  to  this  part  of  Africa,  and  is  a  new 
species.  I  have  called  it  PataTnochoerua  albifron».  The  animal 
looks  somewhat  like  the  Potamochoertu  penicUlatua.  It  is  a  very 
remarkable-looking  animal,  attaining  a  great  size,  and  conspi- 
cuous for  a  curious  white  face,  adorned  with  several  large  warty 
protuberances  on  each  side,  half-way  between  the  nose  and  eye& 
These,  and  the  singular  long  bristles  which  surround  the  eyes 
and  the  long  ears,  ending  in  a  tuft  of  coarse  hair,  give  the  animal 
a  very  remarkable  expression.     The  colour  of  the  body  is  red. 

We  got  no  gorillas  on  this  hunt,  but  I  killed  a  very  remark- 
able animal,  the  CynogaJe  velozy  resembling  a  small  otter,  and 
the  only  animal  of  this  genus  known,  as  yet,  I  believe,  in  Africa. 
It  resembles  somewhat  the  Asiatic  Cynogale  BermetH  (Gray),  the 
only  one  of  the  genus  hitherto  described ;  but  the  size  of  the 
animal,  the  length  and  character  of  the  tail,  and  the  habitat 
indicate  a  distinct  species.  I  have  called  it  vdox  because  of  the 
extreme  rapidity  with  which  it  darts  through  the  water  after  its 
prey.     Of  its  habits  I  unfortunately  could  learn  nothing.* 

On  the  12th  I  set  out  to  ascend  the  principal  peak  of  Mount 
Andele.  We  were  two  days  about  the  ascent,  which  was  a 
tedious  affair,  and  without  its  reward,  as,  when  I  reached  the 
simimit,  I  found  it  enveloped  in  clouds,  and  mists,  and  forests, 
and  could  get  no  view  at  all. 

On  our  way  down,  at  suuset  of  the  third  day,  we  heard  the 
call  of  a  nshiego  mbouve  {Troglodytes  calvus).  I  immediately 
caused  my  men  to  lie  down,  and  was  just  getting  into  a  hiding- 
place  myself,  when  I  saw,  in  the  branches  of  a  tree  at  a  little 

•  For  fiill  description  of  this  curious  animal,  naturalists  are  referred  to  the 
*  Proceedings  of  the  Boston  See.  Nat.  Hist.,'  vol.  vii.,  p.  353,  1860. 


■n 


Chap.  XXIV.       NEST  OP  THE  NSHIEGO  MBOUVE.  423 

distance,  the  curious  nest  or  bower  of  this  ape;  hard  by,  on 
another  tree,  was  another  shelter.  We  crept  up  within  shot  of 
this  nestj  and  then  waited,  for  I  was  determined  to  see  once 
more  the  precise  manner  in  which  this  animal  goes  to  rest.  We 
lay  flat  on  the  ground,  and  covered  ourselves  with  leaves  and 
brush,  scarce  daring  to  breathe,  lest  the  approaching  animal 
should  hear  us. 

From  time  to  time  I  heard  the  calls.  There  were  evidently 
two,  probably  a  male  and  female.  Just  as  the  sun  was  setting  I 
saw  an  abimal  approach  the  tree.  It  ascended  by  a  hand-over- 
hand movement,  and  with  great  rapidity ;  crept  carefully  under 
the  shelter,  seated  itself  in  the  crotch  made  by  a  projecting 
bough,  its  feet  and  haunches  resting  on  Hm  bough;  then  put 
one  arm  about  the  trunk  <rf  the  tree  for  security.  Thus,  I  sup- 
pose, they  rest  all  night ;  and  this  posture  accounts  for  some 
singular  abrasions  of  hair  on  the  side  of  the  nshiego  mbouv^. 
At  a  little  distance  off  I  saw  another  shelter  made  for  the  mate. 

No  sooner  was  it  seated  than  it  began  again  to  utter  its  call. 
It  was  answered,  and  I  began  to  have  the  hope  that  I  should 
shoot  both  animals,  when  em  unlucky  motion  of  one  of  my  men 
roused  the  suspicions  of  the  ape  in  the  tree.  It  begfiLn  to  prepare 
for  descent,  and,  unwilling  to  risk  the  loss  of  this  one,  I  fired. 
It  fell  to  the  ground  dead.  It  proved  to  be  a  male,  with  the  face 
and  hands  entirely  black. 

As  we  were  not  in  haste,  I  made  my  men  cut  down  the  trees 
which  contained  the  nests  of  these  apes.  I  found  them  made 
precisely  as  I  have  before  described,  and  as  I  have  always  found 
them,  of  long  branches  and  leaves  laid  one  over  the  other  very 
carefally  and  thickly,  so  as  to  render  the  structure  capable  of 
shedding  water.  The  branches  were  fastened  to  the  tree  in  the 
middle  of  the  structure  by  means  of  wild  vines  and  creepers, 
which  are  so  abundant  in  these  forests.  The  projecting  limb  on 
which  the  ape  perched  was  about  four  feet  long. 

There  remains  no  doubt  in  my  mind  that  these  nests  are  made 
by  the  animal  to  protect  it  from  the  nightly  rains.  ,When  the 
leaves  begin  to  diy  to  that  degree  that  the  structure  no  longer 
sheds  water,  the  owner  builds  a  new  shelter,  and  this  happens 
generally  once  in  ten  or  fifteen  days.  At  this  rate  the  nshiego 
mbouve  is  an  animal  of  no  little  industry. 


424  A  GORILLA  SHOT.  Chap.  XXIV. 

On  the  18th  I  told  Olenda,  to  whom  I  had  returned,  that  I 
wished  for  men  to  help  me  ascend  the  high  peak  of  Nkoomoo- 
naboualiy  which  was  about  forty  miles  off.  He  laughed,  and  said 
I  could  not  do  it ;  I  should  starve  in  the  attempt ;  besides,  there 
was  a  mighty  spirit  living  there  which  would  prevent  us  from 
passing.  However,  I  had  set  my  heart  on  ascending  this  peak ; 
and  though  it  proved  impossible  to  draw  the  slaves  from  their 
concealment,  I  managed  to  bribe  a  sufficient  number  of  freemen 
to  be  my  guides  through  the  impenetrable  forest  which  lay  be- 
tween the  prairie  and  the  mountain-top,  and  to  help  me  in  the 
ascent  The  negroes  are  excellent  woodmen,  and  are  very  rarely 
lost,  even  in  a  forest  where  they  are  strangers. 

We  set  out  on  the  21st,  taking  with  us  food  for  several  days, 
and  blankets  for  myself  to  keep  me  from  suffering  from  the 
cold.  Unfortunately  for  me,  we  found  part  of  the  forest  low 
and  swampy ;  and  a  dense  thorny  jungle,  in  which  I  had  lost, 
by  the  evening  of  the  22nd,  not  only  my  shirt,  but  the  greater 
part  of  every  other  garment  I  wore,  besides  numerous  patches 
of  skin. 

On  the  night  of  the  22nd  a  tremendous  rain-storm  put  out  our 
fires  and  left  us  most  uncomfortable.  Next  morning  we  heard 
the  roar  of  a  gorilla,  which  revived  my  drooping  spirits.  After 
swallowing  a  cup  of  coffee  and  a  biscuit — more  I  dared  not  eat, 
for  our  provisions  would  scarce  hold  out — ^we  set  out  to  kiU 
the  ape. 

We  had  not  far  to  go.  I  went  off  to  the  east  with  one  of  my 
hunters.  We  had  walked  barely  a  quarter  of  a  mile  when  we 
heard  the  loud  roar  again:  this  time  quite  near.  We  stood 
quite  still  for  fear  of  alarming  the  beast,  which  was  evidently 
approaching  us,  as  we  could  see  the  bushes  bent  towards  us. 
The  fear  of  alarming  him,  however,  proved  needless.  When  he 
saw  us  he  at  once  struck  aside  the  intervening  bushes,  rose  to  an 
erect  position,  made  a  few  steps,  stopped,  and  seated  himself; 
then,  beating  his  vast  breast,  wliich  resounded  like  an  old  drum, 
he  advanced  straight  upon  us.  His  dark  eyes  flashed  with  rage, 
his  features  worked  convulsively,  and  at  every  few  paces  he 
stopped,  and,  opening  his  cavernous  mouth,  gave  vent  to  his 
thunderous  roar,  which  the  forests  gave  back  with  multiplied 
echoes. 


Chap.  XXIV.  STARVATION  AND  SUFFERING.  425 

He  was  evidently  not  a  bit  alarmed,  and  was  quite  ready  for  a 
fight.  We  stood  quite  still.  He  advanced  till  he  stood  beating 
his  breast  within  six  yards  of  us,  when  I  thought  it  time  to  put 
an  end  to  the  scene.  My  shot  hit  him  in  the  breast,  and  he  fell 
forward  on  his  face  dead.  They  die  very  easily,  and  have  none 
of  that  tenacity  of  life  which  the  most  savage  animals  have.  In 
this  they  also  resemble  man.  It  proved  to  be  a  middle-aged 
male,  a  fine  specimen. 

By  the  evening  of  the  24th  we  had  ascended  I  could  not  tell 
how  fiw  up  the  mountain-side,  but  I  fear  not  very  far.  The 
woods  were  still  dense ;  every  step  was  attended  with  diflBculties. 
The  negroes  were  sufiering  from  hunger,  and  we  had  but  one 
day's  provisions  left.  My  poor  rags  could  no  longer  be  kept  to- 
gether, and  at  every  advance  my  bleeding  body  bore  witness  to 
the  difficulties  of  a  farther  ascent ;  so  I  determined  not  to  risk 
certain  death  by  starvation,  but  rather  to  return. 

I  sent  men  up  the  highest  trees  I  could  find,  to  try  if  they 
could  obtain  a  view  which  would  determine  our  position ;  but 
they  could  see  only  an  interminable  forest,  whose  general  out- 
line was  so  far  hidden  from  them  that  it  was  impossible  even  to 
say  that  we  were  near  or  far  from  the  plain,  or  how  high  or  low 
we  were. 

So,  on  the  25th,  we  set  out  on  our  way  back,  praying  only 
that  we  might  not  starve  by  the  way.  Fortimately,  one  of  the 
men  discovered  a  bees'  nest  in  a  tree,  and  we  ate  up  their  wormy 
store  of  honey ;  and  in  the  afternoon  we  shot  a  leopard,  which 
lay  in  a  tree  just  ahead  of  us  as  we  were  passing  along,  and  I 
dare  say  hoped  to  make  his  dinner  off  one  of  our  party.  It  was 
a  splendid  beast,  and  very  large.  We  had  it  cut  to  pieces  in 
short  order,  and  had  a  satisfactory  supper  from  leopard-steak. 

But  there  was  only  a  bite  a-piece  for  the  party,  and  we  were 
half-famished.  The  next  morning  we  rose  weak  and  depressed. 
I  could  scarce  stand.  We  picked  a  few  berries  for  breakfast, 
and  again  made  for  the  plain.  I  took  a  last  mouthful  of  brandy, 
and,  to  encourage  the  men,  walked  in  advance,  and  assumed  a 
degree  of  high  spirits  which  I  did  not  in  reality  possess. 

'11th.  This  morning  I  could  only  with  great  difficulty  rise 
from  my  poor  bed  of  leaves.  We  set  forward  without  breakfast. 
I  dared  not  send  the  men  into  the  forest  for  berries,  for  every 


426  RETURN  TO  THE  PRAIRIE.  Chap.  XXIV. 

hour  was  precious,  and  they  might  not  find  any  after  all.  So 
we  walked  on  with  empty  stomachs,  praying  for  a  sight  of  the 
plain. 

On,  and  on,  and  on,  through  the  gloomy  jungle,  no  man  saying 
a  word  to  the  other,  and  every  man  looking  anxiously  for  the 
first  sign  of  the  prairie-land,  which  now  seemed  a  very  fairy-land 
to  me. 

At  last,  in  the  afternoon,  about  three  o'clock,  a  sudden  lighting 
up  of  the  forest's  gloom  gave  us  hope,  and  afl«r  another  hour's  anxi- 
ous marching  the  wide  plain  lay  before  us.  With  a  simultaneous 
renewal  of  strength  and  hope,  we  set  off  on  a  run,  nor  stopped  till 
we  had  reached  a  village  at  the  very  bounds  of  the  bush.  Here 
tiie  people  were  at  first  very  much  alarmed  at  our  appearance 
and  our  frantic  actions.  ^'Food,  food,  food  I"  was  all  that  any  of 
us  could  cry  out  When  they  discovered  that  we  did  not  mean 
mischief,  they  approached,  and,  learning  our  necessities,  made 
haste  to  supply  us  with  all  manner  of  food  in  their  possession. 
One  came  with  yams,  another  with  plantains,  others  with  little 
baskets  of  cassava;  and  all  expressed  sorrow  that  they  had 
nothing  better  to  offer.  The  chief  killed  a  goat  for  me,  which 
we  ate  up  as  fast  as  it  could  be  cooked.  I  feared  I  should  be  sick 
from  putting  too  large  a  share  on  my  so  long  empty  stomach : 
but,  happily,  the  goat  did  not  disagree  with  any  of  us.  Probably 
there  was  not  enough  of  it. 

The  next  day  we  returned  to  Olenda's  town,  and  were  re- 
ceived with  all  the  honours  due  to  such  a  starvation  adventure. 
Makondai  came  with  tears  of  joy  in  his  eyes  to  welcome  me 
back.  He  told  me  that  in  my  absence  a  boy  had  been  accused 
of  witchcraft,  and  was  to  be  killed  the  next  day.  I  went  to  the 
king,  and  told  him  nobody  must  be  murdered  on  such  non- 
sensical pretence  while  I  was  there,  for  I  should  leave  instantly, 
and  never  come  back.  So,  after  some  hesitation,  they  gave  the 
boy  to  me,  and  he  is  to-night  safe  in  my  house. 

The  weather  has  been  very  hot  lately ;  and,  as  my  hair  was 
too  long  for  comfort,  I  told  Makondai  one  day  to  cut  it  for  me, 
giving  him  a  pair  of  scissors  I  had  in  my  kit.  He  did  not  do  it 
very  artistically,  but  in  the  interior  of  Africa  one  comes  to  care 
little  for  looks  or  fashions.  When  he  had  done  he  gathered  up 
the  cut  hair  and  threw  it  out  into  the  street   I  was  not  attending 


CaAP.  XXrV.  ASHIRA  HOUSEKEEPER.  427 

to  what  was  going  on,  and  was  surprised  presently  at  a  noise  of 
scnffling  and  fighting  in  front  of  my  house. 

I  looked  out  and  beheld  a  most  laughable,  scene.  The  men 
were  bnsily  picking  up  the  scattered  hairs,  and  those  who  could 
not  get  at  them  were  dispating  possession  with  their  luckier 
neighhouiB.  Even  the  old  king,  Olendai  was  in  the  midst, 
eager  for  a  'share.  As  each  got  what  he  could,  he  would  tie 
them  up  carefully  in  the  comer  of  his  ndengui,  and  walk  off 
very  contentedly. 


O^nk:  tbe  AlUra  HooHkHper. 

I  called  Olenda  and  asked  what  was  the  use  of  this  hair.  He 
replied,  "  Oh,  spirit !  these  hairs  are  very  precious ;  we  diall 
make  mondas  (fetiches)  of  them,  and  they  will  bring  other 
white  men  to  us,  and  bring  ns  great  good  luck  and  riches. 
Since  you  have  come  to  us,  oh  spirit!  we  have  wished  to  have 
some  of  your  hair,  but  did  not  dare  to  ask  for  it^  cot  knowing 
that  it  could  be  cut."  I  was  happy  that  it  had  not  occurred  to 
them  to  appropriate  violently  my  whole  head,  hair  and  all,  and 


428  ASHlllA  HOUSEKEEPER.  Uuap.  XXIY. 

was  ^ad  enough  to  let  the  old  king  walk  off  with  his  precious 
lock  of  a  wliite  man*s  hair. 

On  going  one  day  into  the  house  of  an  Ashira  chief  I  saw  an 
ogana  (idol),  which,  after  much  urging  and  for  good  pay,  he  sold 
me.  Its  likeness  is  given  on  the  preceding  page.  Its  oflSce  is 
to  watch  over  the  pnoperty  of  its  owner,  and  keep  thieves  out  of 
the  house ;  and  I  was  assured  that  no  one  could,  and,  wliat  is 
better,  no  one  did  steal  while  this  "housekeeper"  was  cared  for, 
and  kept  in  the  house. 


CriAP.  XXV.  BLACK-MAIL.  429 


CHAPTER    XXV, 

The  Ashira  grow  jealous  of  my  Projects  —  Set  out  for  the  Apingi  Country  — 
Olenda  blesses  us  —  The  Passage  of  the  Ovigui  — Rude  Bridge  —  Features 
of  the  Country  —  Wc  meet  Gorillas  —  The  Roar  of  the  Gorilla  —  His  Walk 

—  Great  Strength  —  Meet  the  Apingi  King  —  I  fall  into  an  Elephant-hole 

—  Famine  —  Musquitoes  —  We  see  the  Rembo  Apingi  River  —  Reception 
among  the  Apingi  —  Address  of  the  King — I  am  offered  a  Slave  for  my 
Supper  —  Wonder  of  the  People  at  my  Appearance  —  The  mysterious 
Sapadif  a  cloven-footed  Race  —  My  Clock  is  thought  a  guardian  Spirit  —  I 
am  asked  to  make  a  Mountain  of  Beads  and  Trade-goods  —  Fmitfnlness  of 
the  Women  —  Appearance  of  the  People  —  A  Ijcopard-trap  —  Invested  with 
the  Kendo  —  Palm-oil  —  Palm-wine  —  Drunkenness  universal  —  Tattooing 

—  Dress  of.  the  women  —  Tjack  of  Modesty  —  I  anj  claimed  as  a  Husband 
— Weaving  of  Grass-cloth  —  Property  among  the  Apingi- — The  Apingi 
Loom  —  The  Ndengui  —  Fetich  to  kill  Leopards  —  War-belt. 

My  determination  to  go  farther  into  the  interior  has  aroused 
the  jealousy  of  the  Ashiras.  All  the  chiefs  came  in  to  Olenda 
and  expressed  their  disapproval  of  my  project.  They  do  not 
wish  their  trade  interfered  with,  and  are  fearful,  if  a  white  man 
once  reaches  the  far  East  beyond  them,  those  people  will  not  be 
content  to  trade  with  the  Ashii*a  longer.  I  stated  my  objects, 
and  that  I  did  not  go  as  trader,  but  as  traveller,  and  to  collect 
new  animals.  At  last  Olenda  said,  "  This  white  man  must  go 
where  he  wishes.  He  has  been  sent  to  me  by  my  friend  Quen- 
gueza.     He  must  do  what  he  pleases." 

Then  the  rascally  chiefs  asked  me  what  I  would  give  them  as 
presents  if  I  was  permitted  to  go.  To  this  I  put  on  a  show  of 
anger,  and  asked  if  I  was  not  their  guest,  their  stranger,  and 
why  they  were  so  mean  as  to  beg  me  for  my  goods?  They 
seemed  much  ashamed.  Of  course  I  gave  them  some  trifles 
afterwards  for  good  will. 

There  was  a  show  of  reason  for  their  fears.  Among  my  train 
were  several  men  from  Goumbi,  slaves  of  influential  men  of  that 
town,  who  had  been  sent  with  me  with  trade  articles,  such  as  the 
Ashira  most  want,  in  order  to  bring  back  to  Goumbi  ivory  and 
the  bongo  cloth  (grass-cloth),  which  is  the  staple  export  of  the 


430  KING  OLENDA'S  BLESSING.  Chap.  XXV. 

Ashiras.  Of  course  it  was  feared  that  not  only  I,  but  also  these 
fellows,  would  confuse  and  break  up  the  Ashira  monopoly  of 
trade  with  the  farther  interior.  It  is  curious  to  see  how  greatly 
slaves  are  trusted  in  this  country.  The  owners  of  these  fellows 
had  no  security  for  their  return,  nor  for  the  goods  they  intrusted 
to  them ;  for  I,  of  course,  would  not  become  responsible  for  them. 
But  they  were  sure  to  return.  They,  who  were  originally  them- 
selves from  an  interior  tribe,  have  come  to  feel  greatly  attached 
to  Goumbi,  and  look  down  with  contempt  on  the  Ashira,  whom 
they  call  "  men  of  the  woods." 

I)ec.  4th.  Food  has  been  collected  and  cooked  for  my  trip.  I 
am  to  give  the  Ashira  men  six  fathoms  of  cloth  each  to  go  with  me 
to  the  Apingi  country  and  wait  for  me  there.  Olenda  gave  me 
a  numerous  band,  including  three  of  his  sons  to  accompany  me, 
Minsho,  Iguy,  and  Aiaguy,  the  latter  a  very  common  name  here. 

It  rains  nearly  every  day,  and  every  few  days  we  have  tre- 
mendous storms  of  wind  and  rain.  AJl  the  rivers  are  swollen, 
and  the  prairie  looks  very  green  and  beautiful. 

We  set  out  on  Dec.  6th.  Early  in  the  morning  Olenda  called 
us  around  him,  and  after  telh'ng  his  sons  to  take  good  care  of 
me,  the  venerable  old  man  proceeded  formally  to  bless  us,  wishing 
us  good  success.  It  was  a  touching  scena  At  the  dose  he 
took  a  sugarcane,  bit  a  piece  of  the  pith,  and  spat  a  little  of  the 
juice  in  the  hand  of  each  one  of  the  party,  at  the  same  time 
blowing  on  the  hand.  Then  he  said  solemnly,  "  Let  aU  have 
good  speed  with  you,  and  let  it  be  as  smooth  (pleasant)  as  the 
Jbreath  I  blow  on  your  hand."  Then  Minsho  received  the  cane, 
which  he  is  to  bring  back. 

I  found  that  the  prairie  was  much  more  swampy  to  the  east- 
ward, towards  the  foot  of  the  hills,  than  I  had  supposed.  We  had 
to  walk  through  much  mud,  and  often  to  wade  through  consider- 
able pools  and  swamps  of  standing  water,  produced  by  the 
constant  heavy  rains.  In  one  of  these  swamps  we  had  to  wade 
up  to  oiu*  middles  in  muddy  water,  and  some  of  the  party  slipped 
down  on  the  roots  with  which  the  bottom  is  covered. 

The  forest  beyond  the  line  of  the  prairie  is  also  inhabited.  We 
passed  over  a  dozen  villages,  the  people  of  which  flocked  out  to 
see  the  "  white  spirit."    They  were  all  Ashira. 

Towards  noon  wo  approached  the  Ovigui  River,  a  mountain- 
torrent,  which  was  to  be  crossed  by  a  rude  and  very  dangerous 


Chap.  XXV.  DANGEROUS  BRIDGE.  Ml 

bridge.  This  bridge  I  had  dreaded  all  day,  and  wbeti  at  last  I 
saw  it  I  was  by  no  meaos  reassured.  The  stream  was  about 
thirty  yards  wide,  and  rushed  through  the  forest  overflowing  its 
banks.  The  waters  were  very  swift,  and  I  saw  that  even  a  good 
swimmer  would  be  helpless  here,  and  would  soon  be  dashed  to 
pieces  against  the  &llen  trees  which  jutted  out  in  every  direction. 
Now  I  swim  but  very  little. 

The  bridge  was  a  complicated,  shaky  structure,  of  wMcli  the 
engraving  will  give  the  reader  some  idea. 


It  appears  that  the  Ovigui  had  its  bed,  till  some  years  ago,  not 
here,  but  some  hundreds  of  yards  on  the  other  side.  This  is  a 
trick  that  some  of  the  mountain-etreams  of  Africa  have.    Now  in 


432  AN  UNPLEASANT  ADVENTURE.  Chap.  XXV. 

the  new  bed  f?tood  certain  trees  which  native  ingenuity  saw  could 
be  used  as  the  piers  for  a  bridge.  In  this  place  two  trees, 
standing  each  about  seven  or  eight  yards  from  one  side,  were 
chosen.  Other  trees  opposite  on  the  banks  were  so  cut  as  to  fall 
into  these.  Thus  were  formed  two  portions  of  the  bridge,  and 
these,  though  sufficiently  rude,  were  not  seriously  bad  for  a 
traveller.  It  now  remained  to  unite  the  still  open  space  in  the 
centre,  between  the  two  "  piers,"  and  here  came  the  tug.  Unable 
to  transport  heavy  pieces  of  timber,  they  had  thrown  across  this 
chasm  a  long,  slender,  bending  limb,  which  sagged  down  in  the 
middle  until,  when  it  bore  a  man's  weight,  its  centre  was  three 
feet  below  the  surface  of  the  rushing  tide.  Of  course  no  one 
could  walk  on  this  without  assistance,  so  a  couple  of  strong  vines 
had  been  strung  across  for  balustrades ;  but  as  these  vines  were  of 
necessity  so  slack  as  to  be  parallel  with  the  bamboo,  they  were 
of  the  very  slightest  assistance. 

My  heart  failed  me  as  I  stood  looking  at  this  breakneck 
concern.  To  add  to  the  pleasurable  excitement  of  the  scene, 
Minsho  told  me  tliat  this  W6is  a  much  better  crossing  than  some 
others  they  had  lower  down,  but  admitted  that  even  here  some 
half-dozen  of  their  people  had  been  drowned  within  a  year. 

I  watched  the  party  crossing  with  great  interest.  One  man 
slipped  when  midway,  but  luckily  recovered  himself.  He 
dropped  only  a  box  of  mine  containing  two  pairs  of  shoes. 
Another,  who  was  carrying  a  gun,  so  narrowly  escaped  falling  as 
to  drop  that,  which  was  also  swept  ofiF  and  lost  Meantime 
I  wondered  if  I  should  follow  in  the  wake  of  my  shoes  and  gun. 

At  last  all  were  across  but  Minsho.  I  had  stripped  to  my 
shirt  and  trousers,  and  set  out  on  my  trial,  followed  by  Minsho, 
who  had  a  vague  idea  that  if  I  slipped  he  might  catch  me.  It 
was  an  unpleasant  suspense  in  every  way ;  and  as  I  crossed  tlie 
centre  part,  and  felt  the  current  beating  against  my  legs  and 
almost  seeming  to  have  a  hold  on  me,  with  purpose  to  drag  me 
away,  I  vowed  I  would  never  try  such  navigation  again. 
However,  I  managed  to  hold  on  to  the  vine  and  drag  my- 
self up,  very  weak  and  pale  with  excitement,  but  'outwardly 
necessarily  calm,  as  it  would  not  do  to  let  these  natives  see 
me  make  adiflBculty  of  anything  they  could  do. 

Again  we  plunged  into  the  primeval  forests  of  ebony,  bai> 
wood,  India-rubber  vines,  and  other  strange  woods.     After  about 


Chap.  XXV .  A  RUGOED  JOU  RNEY.  433 

two  miles  of  travel  we  came  to  a  curious  little  strip  of  prairie, 
which  was  five  or  six  miles  long,  but  only  a  few  hundred  yards 
wide.  This  they  called  Odjiolo,  but  they  could  not  tell  me  its 
origin.     It  was  not  inhabited. 

A  few  miles  farther  on  the  path  led  over  a  curious  steep  mount 
c^alled  Mount  Ocoucou.  We  had  to  climb  the  almost  perpen- 
dicular sides,  and  I  had  to  grasp  branches  or  vines  as  I  ascended 
the  face  of  this  high  hill.  Having  surmounted  that  and  three 
others,  with  intervening  plains  and  valleys,  all  covered  with  dense 
forests,  we  at  last  found  ourselves  on  the  banks  of  another  little 
purling  mountain-brook  which  skirted  the  base  of  our  last  hill, 
the  Aloumy.  Here  we  lit  fires,  built  shelters,  and  camped  for 
the  night  This  day  we  made  but  twenty  miles,  fifteen  of  which 
were  due  east 

Dec.  1th,  As  we  advance  the  country  becomes  more  rugged 
and  mountainous.  On  every  side  brooks  and  rills  and  small 
streams  are  wending  their  way  down  to  the  Ovigui,  or  towards 
the  Apingi  river,  and  very  frequently  we  have  to  march  along 
the  bed  of  a  purling  brook,  the  only  way  which  the  broken  and 
rocky  country  affords  us.  This  day  was  exceedingly  trying  for 
our  feet.  We  picked  our  way  through  a  forest  dense  and  gloomy, 
every  step  obstructed  by  rocks  and  broken  ground.  This  is 
evidently  the  favourite  haunt  of  gorilla.  Several  times  during 
the  day  we  heard  his  roar  in  the  distance.  We  heard  also  the 
cry  of  a  nshiego  mbouv^  at  a  little  distance,  and  started  in 
pursuit,  but  the  animal  made  its  escape,  having  probably  heard 
us.  At  the  foot  of  a  tree  we  found  some  leafy  branches  gathered, 
while  in  another  tree  was  a  shelter  completed.  No  doubt  a  pair 
had  been  at  work  together.  The  negroes  here  told  me  also  that 
these  apes  work  in  pairs,  both  collecting  branches,  and  the  male 
building  the  shelter  when  the  material  is  brought  together,  while 
the  female  carries  it  up  to  him. 

Judging  from  his  cry,  one  of  the  gorillas  we  heard  in  the 
afternoon  seemed  to  be  so  near  that  I  was  tempted  to  hunt  him 
up.  He  proved  farther  off  than  any  of  us  thought.  We 
wandered  nearly  three-quarters  of  an  hour  through  the  forest 
before  we  readied  him.  His  almost  incessant  roars,  which 
seemed  to  denote  that  he  was  enraged  at  something,  gave  us  a 
good  clue  to  his  whereabouts. 

I  find  that  I  do  not  get  accustomed  to  the  roar  of  the  gorilla. 

2  F 


434  ACTIONS  OF  THE  GORILLA.  Chap.  XXV. 

Notwithstanding  the  numbers  I  have  hunted  and  shot,  it  is  still 
an  awfiil  sound  to  me.  The  long  reverberations,  coming  from 
his  potenteous  chest ;  the  vindictive  bark  with  which  each  roar 
is  begun ;  the  hollow  monotone  of  the  first  explosion,  all  are 
awe-inspiring,  and  proclaim  this  beast  the  monarch  of  these 
forests. 

When  the  animal  became  aware  of  our  approach  he  at  once 
came  towards  us,  uttering  a  succession  of  the  short  bark-like  yells 
which  denote  his  rage,  and  which  have  a  peculiarly  horrible 
eflfect.  They  remind  one  only  of  the  inarticulate  ravings  of  a 
maniac. 

Balancing  his  huge  heavy  body  with  his  arms  the  animal  came 
towards  us,  every  few  moments  stopping  to  beat  his  breast,  and 
throwing  his  head  back  to  utter  his  tremendous  roar.  His  fierce 
gloomy  eyes  glared  upon  us ;  the  short  hair  was  rapidly  agitated, 
and  the  wrinkled  face  seemed  contorted  with  rage.  It  was  like 
a  very  devil,  and  I  do  not  wonder  at  the  superstitious  terror  with 
which  the  natives  regard  it 

His  manner  of  approach  gave  me  once  more  an  opportunity 
to  see  with  how  much  difficulty  he  supports  himself  in  the  erect 
posture.  His  short  and  slender  legs  are  not  able  firmly  to 
sustain  the  vast  body.  They  totter  beneath  the  weight,  and  the 
walk  is  a  sort  of  waddle,  in  which  the  long  arms  are  used,  in  a 
clumsy  way,  to  bal^^pce  the  body  and  keep  up  the  ill-sustained 
equilibrium.  Twice  he  sat  down  to  roar,  evidently  not  trusting 
himself  to  this  exertion  wliile  standing. 

My  gun  was  fresh  loaded,  and  could  be  depaided  upon,  so  I 
stood  in  advance.  I  waited,  as  the  n^o  rule  is,  till  the  huge 
beast  was  within  six  yards  of  me  ;  then,  as  he  once  more  stopped 
to  roar,  delivered  my  fire,  and  brought  him  down  on  his  face 
dead. 

It  proved  to  be  a  male,  full  grown,  but  young.  His  huge 
canine  tusks,  his  claw-like  hands,  the  immense  development  of 
muscle  on  his  arms  and  breast,  his  whole  appearance,  in  fact, 
proclaimed  a  giant  strength.  There  is  enough  likeness  to 
humanity  in  this  beast  to  make  a  dead  one  an  awfiil  sight,  even 
to  accustomed  eyes,  as  mine  were  by  this  time.  I  never  quite 
felt  that  matter-of-course  indifference,  or  that  sensation  of 
triumph  which  the  hunter  has  when  a  good  shot  has  brought  him 
a  head  of  his  choice  game.     It  was  as  though  I  had  killed  some 


Chap.  XXV.  FEATURES  OF  THE  cbuNTRY.  435 

moDstrous  creation,  which  yet  had  something  of  humanity  in  it 
Well  as  I  knew  that  this  was  an  error,  I  could  not  help  the 
feeling. 

This  animal  was  five  feet  eight  inches  high.  In  the  evening, 
Minsho  brought  in  a  young  female  he  had  shot,  which  measured 
three  feet  eight  inches. 

As  we  advanced,  the  scenery  became  even  more  grand  and 
picturesque.  We  were  already  on  a  high  plain  or  table-knd,  but 
oiu*  route  led  us  continually  to  higher  levels  by  regular  grada- 
tions of  ascent  Some  of  the  hills  we  had  to  surmount  were  firom 
two  to  three  thousand  feet  high.  The  higher  we  got,  the  vaster 
became  the  piles  and  boulders  of  quartz  and  granite,  which  seem 
to  have  been  scattered  over  the  face  of  all  this  country  by  some 
vast  convulsion  of  nature  ages  ago. 

The  scenery  was  already  Alpine.  It  lacked  only  the  snow- 
capped peaks,  of  which  I  have  not.yet  met  any.  This  country  is 
very  abundantly  watered,  and  in  the  afternoon  we  passed  some 
considerable  streams.  One  of  these  we  traced  upwards  for  several 
miles,  as  it  ran  along  the  foot  of  some  huge  hills  which  we  had 
to  ascend  one  after  another.  The  highest  peaks  of  this  range 
were  called  the  Kayambi  and  the  Boundou,  and  another  called 
the  Okoukoue.  Where  we  crossed  the  stream  finally  it  was 
about  one  hundred  and  twenty  feet  wida  It  is  called  the 
Louvendji. 

Passing  this,  we  came  at  sunset  to  a  bamdo — a  traveller's  house 
— a  rude  shelter  left  by  former  caravans  at  the  foot  of  a  high  hill 
called  Koungou. 

The  bando  was  occupied  by  a  party  of  Apingi,  who,  when  they 
saw  me,  instantly  ran  off,  very  much  scared.  It  was  only  after 
many  persuasions  that  they  could  be  brought  back.  Presently  a 
tremendous  tornado  came  up,  followed  by  rain,  which  made  us 
glad  we  had  reached  shelter.  Such  storms  frequently  do  great 
damage  to  the  woods,  and  are  very  dangerous  to  travellers,  as 
trees  are  uprooted,  and  branches  fall  on  every  side. 

The  bando  here  was  roofed  with  peculiar  and  very  large  leaves 
from  two  trees,  which  are  called  here  the  %hiy%hayray  and  the 
quaygayray. 

To-day  we  travelled  about  twenty-five  miles  in  a  general 
direction  of  east. 

Bee.  ^th.  This  day  the  country  was  less  wild,  and  the  hills 

2  F  2 


436  LEOPARD  AND  BUFFALO— SERPENTS.       Chap.  XXV. 

very  few.  We  saw  in  the  distance  about  midday  some  Bakalai 
villages,  situated  on  a  little  prairie,  but  my  people  were  afraid  to 
approach  them.  No  persuasions  of  mine  would  induce  them  to 
go  near.  They  were  afraid,  Minsho  said,  of  trouble  with  the 
Bakalai,  who  are  here  a  warlike  people,  and  we  encamped  on  the 
border  of  the  prairie. 

Bee.  9th.  Last  night,  fortunately  for  me,  it  was  clear  and  bright 
starlight.  About  midnight  our  camp  was  awakened  by  a 
tremendous  roaring,  and  jumping  up,  I  saw  in  the  plain  before 
me  a  grand  and  exciting  scene.  A  wild  buffalo  had  been 
wandering  in  the  woods,  and  a  leopard  had  leaped  upon  him. 
The  poor  animal  rushed,  with  roar  after  roar  of  agony  and  firight, 
into  and  across  the  plain,  vainly  plunging  and  striving  to  loose 
the  claws  of  his  enemy,  who  sat  upon  his  himip,  and  was,  as  we 
could  see,  sucking  the  blood  from  his  neck.  The  poor  beast 
doubtless  fell  a  victim  to  the  leopard,  whose  attack  is  generally 
fatal.  It  was  a  splendid  sight,  though  it  lasted  but  for  a  few 
minutes.  This  is  the  second  scene  of  the  kind  which  I  have 
been  favoured  with. 

This  day,  and  also  the  next  (10th),  we  journeyed  along  to  die 
eastward,  hurried  onward  by  a  lack  of  food.  As  usual  in  Africa, 
all  the  provisions  we  could  carry  could  not  be  made  to  last  above 
three  days. 

As  we  were  walking  along  through  some  grass,  I  came  sud- 
denly upon  a  large  specimen  of  the  most  poisonous  serpent 
occurring  in  this  part  of  Africa :  the  Echidna  nasicomia.  This 
and  a  species  of  w^a  are  much  dreaded  by  the  negroes.  I  saw 
it,  fortunately,  when  a  few  feet  from  it,  and,  as  it  is  a  sluggish 
beast  and  slow  of  movement,  I  had  time  to  fire  and  kill  it 
before  it  could  maJce  a  spring.  Fortunately,  I  did  not  destroy 
the  head,  and  had  therefore  an  opportunity  to  examine  its  really 
enormous  poison-fangs,  which  lay  imbedded  in  the  sheaths  on 
each  side  of  the  mouth. 

The  habits  of  this  serpent  make  it  dangerous  to  the  incautious 
traveller.  It  does  not  climb  trees,  as  do  most  African  serpents, 
but  lies  in  the  grass,  or  in  little  open  spaces  in  the  woods,  in  a 
state  of  semitorpidity.  It  leaps  with  a  quick  motion  when 
excited,  and  is  not  easily  scared  by  approaching  noises.  It  is 
short — few,  I  should  say,  reach  even  four  feet  in  length — but 
very  stout,  some  specimens  I  killed  being  six  and  eight  inches 


Chap.  XXV.  MEETING  KING  REMANDJI.  437 

in  their  greatest  diameter.  It  is  splendidly  marked,  and  on 
each  side  of  the  flat  large  miizzle  it  has  three  homy  projec- 
tions ;  the  posterior  one  is  situated  over  the  nostril,  and  is  the 
largest  The  head  is  triangular,  the  nostrils  very  large,  the  tail 
short  and  pointed.  The  natives  say  that  its  bite  causes  sure, 
and  almost  instant  and  painful  death.  They  hold  it  in  great 
fear. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  10th,  as  we  were  passing  through  a 
dense  wood,  we  heard  people  talking  not  far  from  us,  and  pre- 
sently we  stood  before  Kemandji,  the  king  of  the  Apingi  tribe. 
He  was  a  fine-looking  old  negro.  At  sight  of  me  he  and  his 
company  stood  silent  and  amazed  for  a  few  minutes,  looking  at 
us.  Then  the  king  began  on  a  sudden  to  dance  about  in  a 
most  unroyal  and  crazy  manner,  shouting  again  and  again,  "  The 
spirit  has  come  to  see  me!  the  spirit  has  come  to  see  my 
country ! " 

When  he  was  a  little  pacified  he  told  us  he  came  to  fish,  and 
must  now  go  for  his  wives,  whom  he  had  sent  on  before,  and 
who  had  food.  We  were  directed  to  go  on  to  a  bando  not  far 
off,  whither  he  would  return  for  the  night,  as  his  town  was  too 
distant. 

We  went  on,  hoping  that  the  women  would  have  food  for  us. 
Meantime  night  came  on ;  it  grew  darker  and  darker ;  and  as 
we  did  not  yet  reach  our  rendezvous,  and  I  was  half-famished,  I 
pushed  ahead,  to  try  if  I  could  not  kill  a  stray  gazelle  for  supper. 
Presently  I  thought  I  perceived  an  animal  a  little  off  the  path, 
and,  stepping  towards  it,  suddenly  pitched  head  foremost  into  an 
elephant-trap,  a  hole  about  eight  feet  long  by  six  feet  wide  and 
ten  deep ;  a  wretched  place,  where  I  lay  helpless,  momentarily 
expecting  to  see  some  huge  serpent  fall  on  the  top  of  me. 
I  cried  out  lustily,  and  fortunately  was  heard  by  my  people 
and  dragged  out  with  a  creeper,  which  they  cut  and  let  down  to 
me. 

In  these  holes  the  Apingi  catch  their  elephant&  I  saw  many 
of  them  afterwards.  They  are  ingeniously  covered  with  brush 
and  leaves,  but  are  evident  enough  to  a  man  who  has  once  seen 
or  fallen  into  one. 

Finally  we  reached  the  olako,  and  when  Remandji  came  he 
had  but  a  few  fish  to  eat,  therefore  we  poor  half-famished  fellows 
had  to  go  to  sleep  supperless.    All  night  we  endured  torments 


438  THE  REMBO  APINGI.  Chap.  XXV. 

indescribable  from  musquitoes,  which  must  be  of  a  new  kind, 
for  their  sting  was  like  that  of  a  bee.  In  the  morning  our 
bodies  were  swollen  as  though  we  had  been  beaten  all  over. 
Smoke  and  fire  seemed  to  have  no  effect  upon  them.  I  never 
suffered  such  torture  in  my  life. 

The  next  morning  we  started  off  again,  and,  after  a  three 
hours'  march,  came  at  last,  by  a  sudden  opening  of  the  forest, 
upon  a  magnificent  stream,  the  Rembo  Apingi.  It  was  much 
hu-ger  than  I  had  been  led  to  expect — about  three  hundred  and 
fifty  yards  wide,  as  far  as  I  could  guess,  and  evidently  a  con- 
siderable body  of  water.  As  I  stood,  in  amazement  and  delight, 
looking  down  upon  the  beautiful  stream,  whose  waters  were  gliding 
down  towards  the  great  sea,  a  tremendous  cheer  firom  a  crowd 
which  had  quickly  collected  about  me  announced  to  the  people  on 
the  other  side,  where  the  villages  were,  that  "  the  white  man  " 
had  come.  The  cheer  was  responded  to  by  gathering  crowds  on 
the  opposite  bank,  and  presently  some  exceedingly  frail,  narrow 
canoes  and  several  rafts  were  pushed  across  to  ferry  us  over. 
The  Apingi  have  villages  only  on  the  farther  bank  of  the  river. 

I  got  into  a  canoe,  which  was  managed  by  the  Apingi  boatmen 
with  much  skill.  The  Ashira  know  nothing  of  boating.  The 
rafts  were  composed  of  several  logs  tied  together.  Their  motion 
was  very  slow. 

The  shouting  continued  until  I  was  safely  housed  in  the 
largest  house  in  the  town.  This  was  a  little  hut,  with,  for- 
tunately, a  piazza  in  front ;  for,  when  I  had  secured  my  goods 
inside,  there  was  scarce  room  for  me  to  turn. 

Presently  Remandji  came  to  me,  followed  by  all  the  old  men 
of  his  town  and  the  chiefs  from  neighbouring  villages.  He 
brought  me  two  dozen  fowls,  and  some  bunches  of  plantains, 
and  baskets  of  cassava,  which  being  laid  at  my  feet,  he  addre^ed 
me,  saying,  "I  have  beheld  what  our  forefathers  never  saw, 
what  I  never  saw  before.  I  bid  welcome  to  thee,  oh  white 
man !  oh  spirit !  I  thank  your  fiither,"  turning  to  Minsho,  "  for 
sending  this  spirit  to  me,  for  nothing  greater  could  happen 
to  us." 

Then  he  said,  "  Be  glad,  oh  spirit !  and  eat  of  the  things  we 
give  thee." 

Whereupon,  to  my  astonishment,  a  slave  was  handed  over  to 
me  bound,  and  Bemandji  said, "  Kill  him  for  your  evening  meal ; 


Chap.  XXV.  I  AM  THOUGHT  A  CANNIBAL.  439 

he  is  tender  and  fat,  and  you  must  be  hungry."  It  took  me  a 
moment  to  recover  from  my  astonishment.  Then  I  shook  my 
head,  spat  violently  on  the  ground,  and  made  Minsho  tell  them 
that  I  abhorred  the  people  who  ate  human  flesh,  and  that  I  and 
my  people  never  did  so. 

To  which  Kemandji  replied, "  We  always  heard  that  you  white 
men  eat  men.  Why  do  you  buy  our  people  ?  Why  do  you 
come  from  nobody  knows  where,  and  carry  oflf  our  men,  and 
women,  and  children  ?  Do  you  not  fatten  them  in  your  far 
country  and  eat  them  ?  Therefore  I  gave  you  this  slave,  that 
you  might  kill  him,  and  make  glad  yoiu*  heart" 

It  was  a  diflScult  matter  to  explain  to  the  king  that  he  was 
much  mistaken,  and  that  we  do  not  eat  our  slaves.  The  whole 
matter,  from  his  point  of  view,  was  absurd.  "  If  we  did  not  eat 
them,  what  did  we  want  them  for?"  was  his  incessant  question  ; 
nor  could  his  majesty  be,  by  any  skill  of  mine,  inducted  into 
the  mysteries  of  our  labour  system,  and  of  its  rules  of  demand 
and  supply. 

When  at  last  mv  meal  was  cooked  and  served  for  me, 
Bemandji  came  in  to  taste  of  what  was  provided,  and  to  drink 
of  the  water  that  was  set  for  me.  This  is  a  custom  observed  in 
every  tribe  I  have  visited,  and  is  to  show  the  guest  that  he  runs 
no  risk  of  being  poisoned.  Even  the  wives  taste  of  the  food 
they  set  before  their  husbands,  they  not  being  permitted  to  eat 
with  the  gentlemen  of  the  house. 

I  may  add  here  that  the  negroes  have  no  prejudices  on  the 
subject  of  meat  which  has  died  a  natural  death.  Even  if  it 
is  very  high  they  relish  it,  and  if  the  beast  has  died  of  disease, 
that  makes  no  odds  to  their  tolerant  stomachs. 

As  usual,  the  people  are  full  of  wonder  at  my  appearance. 
They  avoid  my  glance,  they  admire  my  wonderful  straight  hair, 
my  white  skin  (which  is  pretty  black  by  this  time),  and  my 
clothing ;  and  at  last  several  urgently  requested  me  to  take  off 
my  "foot  coverings,"  that  they  might  see  if  I  had  toes  like 
them. 

I  asked  with  surprise  why  they  had  a  doubt  upon  the  subject, 
and  was  then  informed  that  they  had  thought  perhaps  I  was 
like  a  people  far  away  in  the  interior,  whom  they  call  the 
Sapadiy  and  who  have  cloven  feet,  like  a  bush-deer. 

Now,  wherever  I  have  been  in  Africa,  I  have   heard  this 


440  THE  CLOVEN-FOOTED  SAPADI.  Chap.  XXY. 

legend;  and  the  nation  called  Sapadi  are  always  located  in 
much  the  same  place — ^in  Central  Equatorial  Africa.  At  Cape 
Lopez  slaves  from  the  interior  had  told  me  of  such  a  people ; 
among  the  Camma  the  curious  legend  is  devoutly  believed; 
Quengueza's  people  mentioned  them ;  and  now  these  Apingi 
proved  believers.  I  always  questioned  everybody  to  get  at  all 
they  thought  or  believed  upon  the  subject. 

Bemandji  immediately  called  one  of  his  slaves  and  a  man  of 
the  Shimba  tribe,  both  of  whom  declared  positively,  and  with  a 
look  of  great  truthfulness,  that  they  had  seen  the  Sapadi;  that 
they  were  people,  black,  and  in  all  things  like  themselves,  only 
they  had  feet  split  like  a  bush-deer's. 

I  asked  why  they  did  not  capture,  these  people  and  send  them 
to  the  coast  as  slaves ;  to  which  was  answered  that  they  were  so 
fiEir  off  that  they  did  not  reach  to  them. 

That  there  was  a  nation  clovenfooted  they  were  firmly  pe^ 
suaded,  and  no  reasoning  could  shake  their  belief.  Indeed,  I 
suppose  my  white  sldn  and  straight  hair  were  quite  as  wonderful 
to  them  as  a  Sapadi's  cloven  foot. 

It  is  curious  that  wherever  I  have  heard  of  this  people  they 
have  had  the  same  name,  Sapadi.  But  the  negro  has  so  vivid 
an  imagination  that  all  conjectures  as  to  the  origin  of  the 
superstition  are  vain.  Some  fellow  may  have  dreamed  it,  and 
afterwards  infected  the  country  with  his  dream.  Among  the 
Camma  many  people  believe  that  the  whites  who  make  the  cloth 
which  traders  bring  them  are  not  like  us,  but  a  race  with  but 
one  eye,  and  that  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead. 

Dec.  16th.  Yesterday  1  wound  my  musical-box  and  set  it  on 
an  Apingi  stool  in  the  street,  in  the  midst  of  a  great  crowd  who 
had  come  in  to  see  "  the  spirit"  They  were  infinitely  surprised 
and  afraid  at  the  sweet  sounds,  and  particularly  when  I  went 
away  from  it  and  left  it  to  play  alone.  They  looked  from  me 
to  the  box,  and  back,  and  finally  exclaimed,  "  Lo !  the  devil 
speaks  to  him  I"  My  clock  is  kept  on  the  piazza,  and  its 
constant  Hotac,  particularly  in  the  still  night,  when  it  can  be 
heard  all  over  the  village,  seems  to  strike  them  with  awe. 
They  say  the  spirit  watches  over  me,  especially  when  I  sleep, 
and  would  kill  any  one  who  should  try  to  injure  me  or  my 
property. 

When  they  saw  me  write  they  at  once  exclaimed  that  I  was 


Chap.  XXV.      I  AM  EXPECTED  TO  WORK  A  MIRACLE.  441 

about  to  make  cloth,  and  this  was  the  pattern.  Whereupon 
ensued  a  council  of  about  thirty  Apingi  chiefs,  who,  after  due 
deliberation,  came  to,  Bemandji  at  their  head,  and  addressed 
me,  saying,  "  Spirit,  you  are  our  king.  You  have  come  to  our 
country  to  do  us  good.  You  can  do  everything."  And  then 
requested  that  I  would  now  proceed  to  make  for  them  a  pile  of 
beads  as  high  as  the  highest  tree  in  the  village  (pointing  to  it), 
that  they  and  their  women  and  children  might  go  and  take  as 
much  as  they  wished.  Also  cloth,  and  brass  kettles,  and  copper 
rods,  and  guns,  and  powder.  And  all  the  people,  who  had 
gathered  around,  to  the  number  of  several  thousands,  to  listen, 
answered  "  Yo !  yo ! "  as  a  sign  of  approval. 

I  saw  that  they  really  asked  in  good  faith,  and  had  no  doubt 
but  their  wishes  would  be  readily  fulfilled.  They  believed  fiiUy 
that  I  made  by  night  all  the  articles  which  I  gave  them  day 
after  day  in  return  for  fruits  and  food,  and  that  I  hid  them  in 
the  forest  during  the  day,  to  be  produced  as  occasion  required. 
Nor  could  I  convince  them  that  I  had  not  the  power  to  make 
these  articles  by  a  simple  operation  of  the  wilL  It  was  a  severe 
disappointment  to  all  who  had  gathered  from  many  miles  around 
to  witness  the  expected  miracle.  Most  of  the  Apingi  chiefs  had 
come  hither  bringing  whole  villages  of  people  with  them,  who 
encamped  in  the  forest  in  such  numbers  that  starvation  soon 
began  to  appear  in  the  camp.  Even  an  Ashango  chief  had 
come  from  a  hundred  miles  eastward,  so  quickly  does  great 
news  travel,  bringing  some  of  his  people  to  carry  away  a  share 
of  the  goods  which  I  was  to  create  so  miraculously.  As  they 
approached,  the  faces  of  the  great  crowd  were  beaming  with 
satisfaction,  and  they  hetd  so  little  doubt,  that  if,  indeed,  I  had 
done  the  wonder  they  asked,  these  poor  heathen  would  scarce 
have  been  surprised.  It  was  a  most  strange  and  curious  scene 
to  me.  They  went  away  grieved,  because,  as  they  thought,  I 
reftised  to  do  them  a  kindness. 

As  the  people  from  all  the  neighbouring  villages  came  to  look 
at  me,  I  got  a  good  idea  of  them  without  going  about  myself. 
The  women  seem  to  be  very  fruitful,  more  so  than  with  any 
tribe  I  have  before  seen  in  Africa.  Almost  every  woman  I  see 
has  three  or  four  children.  But  they  are  hideously  ugly,  rather 
small,  compared  with  the  men,  and  tattooed  all  over  in  a  manner 
which  they  think  beautiful,  but  which  is  to  me  hideous.     Both 


APPEAHANCE  OF  THE  APINGI. 


men   and  women  file  their   t«eth,  wlitch  gives  their  faces  a 
frightfully  savage  appetuance. 

In  colour  they  are  rather  a  yellowish  black.  Indeed,  I  have 
remarked  that,  in  all  parts  of  the  continent,  from  the  bounds  of 
the  Sahara  to  the  Apingi,  the  natives  of  the  mountainons  regions 
of  the  interior  are  much  lighter  than  the  people  of  the  seaboard 
and  the  plains  or  desert- 
On  the  17tli  we  went  into  the  forest  to  conBtmct  a  trap  for 
leopards,  two  goats  having  disappeared  the  night  before  from  a 
flock  belonging  to  Bemandji.     The  trap  was  a  very  dngiilar 


Chap.  XXV.  I  AM  CHOSEN  KING.  443 

and  most  ingenious  structure.  They  cut  a  great  many  sticks, 
which  were  firmly  put  into  the  ground  close  together,  and  in 
two  lines  or  rows,  about  two  feet  apart.  To  make  them  more 
firm,  they  were  tied  togetlier  with  grape-vines,  and  then  more 
sticks  were  laid  across  the  top,  and  also  strongly  lashed  down. 
One  end  of  the  row  was  left  open;  the  other  was  closed,  a 
live  goat  having  first  been  fastened  there.  This,  by  its  bleating, 
was  to  lure  the  leopard,  who,  crawling  into  this  cul  de  sac,  had 
not  sense  enough  to  get  out  again,  the  space  being  purposely 
made  too  narrow  to  admit  of  his  turning  round.  This  kind 
of  trap  is  also  used  to  catch  the  small  gazelle  (ncheri),  and  other 
small  animals  of  the  woods ;  and  I  afterwards  saw  such  traps 
for  the  smaller  beasts,  quite  a  mile  long,  with  various  openings, 
all  turning  inward,  and  admitting,  but  not  emitting  the  bewil- 
dered prey. 

On  the  18th  I  was  formally  invested  with  the  kendo,  which  is 
here,  also,  the  insignia  of  the  head-man  or  chief  ruler.  Bemandji 
put  the  kendo  over  my  shoulder,  which  gave  me  like  power  with 
himself.  It  was  done  in  the  presence  of  an  immense  crowd, 
who  shouted  out  their  approval,  and  promised  to  obey  me. 
Bemandji  said,  "  You  are  the  spirit,  whom  we  have  never  seen 
before.  We  are  but  poor  people  when,  we  see  you.  You  are 
of  those  whom  we  have  often  heard  of,  who  come  Irom  nobody 
knows  where,  and  whom  we  never  hoped  to  see.  You  are  our 
king  and  ruler ;  stay  with  us  always.  We  love  you,  and  will  do 
what  you  wish."  Whereupon  ensued  shouts  and  rejoicings ;  palm- 
wine  was  introduced,  and  a  general  jollification  took  place,  in 
the  orthodox  fashion  at  coronations.  From  this  day,  therefore,  I 
may  call  myself  Du  Chaillu  the  First,  King  of  the  Apinfi:L  Few 
sovereigns  have  assumed  rule  with  so  general  approval  of  their 
subjects,  I  imagine.  Of  course,  I  would  not  submit  to  the  ill- 
usage  which  the  king  elect  has  to  undergo  here,  as  among  the 
Graboon  or  other  tribes,  before  his  investiture ;  therefore  it  was 
omitted  in  my  case. 

The  kendo  used  here  is  made  by  the  Shimba,  a  tribe  still 
farther  east,  who  are  reputed  the  greatest  workers  in  iron  in  all 
this  region.  From  them  all  these  interior  tribes  obt^  the  few 
iron  articles  they  possess. 

This  coimtry  is  fuU  of  palm-trees,  of  the  kind  the  fruit  of  which 
yields  oil.    I  never  saw  such  vast  quantities  of  palms,  all  hanging 


444  COSTUME  OF  THE  WOMEN.  Chap.XXT. 

full  of  ripe  nuts.  Thousands  of  tuns  of  oil  might  easily  be  made 
here,  and  transported  on  rafts  by  water  to  the  seaboard,  if 
only  the  trade  could  once  be  opened.  The  Apingi  eat  the  nuts, 
and  seem  to  thrive  upon  them.  Indeed,  I  incline  to  the  belief 
that  this  nutritious  food  is  one  cause  of  the  superior  fertility  of 
the  Apingi  women.  They  make  but  little  oil,  and  use  that 
chiefly  to  rub  on  their  heads  and  bodies.  The  Ashira  are  their 
only  customers,  and  that  to  the  extent  of  only  a  few  calabashes 
of  oil  annually,  for  which  they  pay  such  a  trifle  that  it  is  not 
worth  their  while  to  make  it. 

They  are  fond  of  the  palm-wine,  and  go  out  regularly  into  the 
forast  to  obtain  it.  In  my  wanderings  and  hunts,  I  often  saw  the 
calabash  hung  to  a  tube  inserted  in  the  tree ;  the  owner  comes 
for  it  early  in  the  morning,  and  generally  drinks  it  in  the  forest 
alone,  lest,  if  he  took  it  into  the  village,  some  thirsty  friend  might 
beg  a  drop.  They  do  not  kill  the  tree  to  get  the  juice,  as  do 
many  other  tribes.  The  men  love  to  get  drunk.  I  have  seen 
half  the  men  in  a  town  drunk  at  the  same  time.  But  it  must  be 
said  for  the  women  that  they  are  much  more  temperate,  though 
sometimes  they  also  get  drunk. 

The  women' have  a  particular  form  of  tattooed  lines  which 
is  thought  most  beautiful.  A  broad  stripe  is  drawn  from  the 
back  of  the  neck  along  the  shoulders,  across  the  breasts,  meeting 
in  an  acute  angle  in  the  hollow  of  the  chest.  Other  stripes  are 
drawn  in  curves  along  the  back,  and  from  the  breast  down  over 
the  abdomen.  The  more  of  these  marks,  the  greater  is  the 
beauty.  They  are  permitted  to  wear  only  two  of  the  little 
squares  in  which  the  Apingi  grass-cloth  is  made,  and  conse- 
quently, go  nearly  naked,  while  their  husbands  are  often  fully 
covered.  I  cannot  divine  the  origin  of  this  custom ;  but  it  has 
robbed  the  women  of  any  remnant  of  modesty  which  exists 
naturally  in  other  tribes.  They  do  not  seem  to  liave  a  trace 
left,  and  yet  are  not  lewd  or  forward.  Eemandji's  head-wife  or 
queen,  a  rather  pretty  young  woman,  after  the  Apingi  custom, 
came  with  her  husband  one  day  to  see  me.  I  gave  her  a  piece 
of  bright  cotton  cloth,  which  delighted  her  so  much  that  she 
immediately  began,  to  my  great  dismay,  to  disrobe  herself,  in 
order  to  put  on  my  present.  But  when  she  had  reduced  herself 
to  a  state  of  nature,  something  else  of  my  goods  attracted  her 
attention,  and  she  began  to  talk  and  look  around  her  with  the 


Ciup.  XXV.  I  AM  CLAIMED  AS  A  HUSBAND.  445 

most  complete  unconcern  for  some  time,  before  she  bethought 
her  of  the  neglected  cloth,  with  which  she  endued  herself  very 
leisurely. 

I  had  a  little  adventvre  with  another  of  the  women.  The 
king,  on  my  arrival,  signified  to  me,  with  the  usual  liberality  of 
African  kings,  that  any  of  his  wives,  or  any  of  anybody  else's 
wives  that  pleased  my  eyes,  I  was  requested  to  consider  my  own. 
I,  of  course,  replied  that  in  our  country  we  did  not  marry  in  this 
off-hand  way ;  which  he  could  not  at  all  understand.  As,  however, 
the  women  are  the  housekeepers,  when  I  was  settled  a  little  I 
chose  one  of  the  oldest  and  ugliest  that  I  saw,  and  installed 
her  as  my  housekeeper,  cook,  and  maid  of  all  work.  For  two 
or  three  days  all  went  well.  But  one  morning  I  was  waited 
upon  by  a  deputation  of  men  and  women,  who  hailed  me  with 
much  joy  as  their  relative  ;  thanked  me  for  the  honour  I  had 
done  them  in  taking  their  relative  to  wife ;  and  gravely  asked 
me  for  presents  to  make  their  hearts  glad  on  such  a  joyful 
occasion. 

I  confess  that  for  once  I  lost  my  temper.  I  took  a  stick  and 
drove  my  new  relatives  out  of  the  village,  packed  off  my  slan- 
dering housekeeper  after  them,  and  heaped  all  the  abuse  upon 
them  I  was  master  of  in  Apingi.  They  fled  with  the  utmost 
consternation. 

When  I  told  Eemandji  of  the  affair,  he  laughed  and  said, 
**  You  see — ^why  don't  you  take  my  advice  ?  " 

The  Apingi  are,  for  Africans,  a  very  industrious  people.  The 
men  do  some  work  here,  and  this  is  an  extraordinary  sight  in 
Western  Africa.  They  use  the  fibrous  parts  of  the  leaf  of  a 
palm,  which  grows  in  great  abundance  here',  to  make  a  fine 
grass-cloth,  for  which  they  are  noted  among  all  the  tribes.  It 
is  called  mbongo  when  in  squares,  and,  by  the  tedious  course  of 
trade  from  tribe  to  tribe,  comes  even  to  the  seashore.  The 
other  tribes  farther  eastward  also  make  this  cloth.  They  told 
me  that  this  palm  (which  is  a  new  species  not  familiar  to  me) 
perished  when  it  had  once  borne  seed.  Though  found  growing 
wild,  it  is  also  planted  about  all  their  houses,  and  along  with 
some  fruit-trees  which  they  rear,  is  property  which  only  the 
owner  may  use. 

The  holding  of  property  in  trees  of  any  kind  is  something  new 
to  me  in  Africa,  and  shows  that  the  Apingi  have  made  a  very 


44G  WEAVING  —  GRASS-CLOTH.  Chap.  XXV. 

important  step  in  advance  of  the  Bakalai  and  Shekiani,  and  all 
the  other  tribes  I  have  met.  Moreover,  an  Apingi  village  stands 
and  remains  in  the  same  place,  at  least  for  a  long  time.  They  are 
a  settled  people,  and  need  only  flocks  and  cattle  to  make  them 
a  very  prospering  nation.  Among  the  other  tribes  described  in 
this  book,  a  town  is  only  a  temporary  resting-place,  abandoned 
at  the  first  death ;  land  and  trees,  of  whatever  kind,  are  free  to 
anyone ;  and  even  with  the  Mpongwe  of  the  Gaboon,  who  have 
long  been  under  trading  influence,  though  they  cannot  afford 
to  remove  a  whole  town,  the  house  in  which  a  man  has  died  is 
destroyed,  never  to  be  raised  again  on  the  same  spot.  The 
reader  will  appreciate  the  delight  with  which  I  hailed  a  peo- 
ple who  live  on  the  same  spot  for  several  generations;  who 
cultivate  and  acknowledge  private  property  in  trees ;  and  who 
make  cloth. 

The  men  are  the  weavers  among  the  Apingi.  The  loom  is 
a  complicated  instrument,  much  resembling  that  used  by  the 
Ashira,  who  have,  no  doubt,  got  it  from  these  neighbours  of 
theirs.  The  loom  is  stretched  imder  the  piazza  of  the  house, 
and  it  is  a  very  pretty  and  cheering  sight,  as  one  walks  along 
the  street,  to  see  a  nxmiber  of  busy  weavers  weaving  this  fine 
and  very  useful  cloth. 

The  Apingi  have  the  reputation  of  making  the  softest  grass- 
cloth  in  all  this  region.  Some  of  their  coloured  patterns  are 
very  pretty.  The  pieces,  owing  to  the  short  staple  of  the  fibre 
used,  and  their  inability  to  give  it  a  longer  twist,  are  never  more 
than  three  feet  long  by  about  two  wide.  To  work  in  colours, 
they  first  dye  the  threads,  and  very  ingeniously  work  them  in 
in  the  weaving.  It  is  a  day's  work  to  make  one  plain  square ; 
and  to  make  one  of  the  coloured  ones  takes  two,  and  sometimes 
three  days.  The  square  is  about  two  feet  long  and  eighteen 
inches  in  width.  When  sent  off  to  be  sold  they  are  tied  up  in 
pa(*kages  of  twenty  or  thirty.  In  this  shape  they  find  their  way 
even  down  to  the  coast,  and  are  everywhere  used  for  garment^ 
and  also  for  musquito-bars.  My  bars  were  always  of  this  stuff. 
The  natives  prefer  it  to  our  common  trade-cottons ;  and  here,  in 
Apingi-land,  the  people  did  not  care  to  exchange  their  cloth  for 
mine,  for  which  I  did  not  blame  them. 

To  make  a  ndengui  several  of  the  mbongo  pieces  are  sewed 
together  with  gi*a«s  thread  and  a  wooden  needle,  and  the  sewing 


Chap.  XXV.  A  FETICH  TO  KILL  LEOPARDS.  447 

18  done  quite  as  neatly  as  ours.  The  men  are  the  tailors.  From 
SIX  to  nine  cloths  go  to  a  ndengui.  The  dandies  among  the 
Apingi  wear  sometimes  a  cloth  thrown  over  the  shoulder,  more 
for  ornament  than  use.  The  women  are  strictly  restricted  to 
the  very  moderate  costume  I  have  already  described. 

18th.  Yesterday  I  told  Remandji  I  wanted  to  go  on  a 
leopard-hunt.  He  immediately  brought  me  a  man  who  had  a 
fetich  which  enabled  him  to  kill  leopards  ad  libitum,  and  without 
personal  danger.  I  laughed.  The  man  said,  "  liaugh,  oh  white 
man !  but  you  will  see." 

He  went  through  a  mass  of  ceremonies,  then  told  me  I  must 
not  accompany  him,  but  that  next  day  I  should  see  a  leopard. 
His  big  monda  would  help  him. 

This  morning  he  started,  and  to  my  surprise,  came  in  in  the 
afternoon  with  a  handsome  leopard.  He  asked  so  much  for  the 
skin,  which  they  value  for  ornaments,  that  I  would  not  buy  it. 
I  suppose  they  must  be  plentiful  in  the  forest,  and  shall  go  out 
and  kill  for  myself. 

The  strip  of  skin  cut  from  the  head  along  the  spine  to  the  tail 
is  used  here  as  a  war-belt,  after  being  charmed  by  the  fetich- 
man  or  ouganga.  This  makes  the  wearer  invulnerable,  they  say. 
No  spear,  or  arrow,  or  bullet  can  hit  a  man  who  has  such  a  belt 
on.  Of  course,  as  only  one  belt  can  be  made  from  each  skin, 
and  nothing  but  a  leopard's  skin  will  answer,  these  bear  a  high 
price,  every  warrior  placing  a  great  account  upon  his  personal 
safety. 


448  SINGULAR  CAUSE  FOB  FEAn.  Chap.  XXVI. 


CHAPTER  XXVL 

Bible-reading — ^The  Negroes  are  frightened  and  run  away  —  The  Ceremony  of 
Bongo  —  Its  Importance  —  Curious  Pliase  of  African  Slavery  —  Preparadons 
to  ascend  the  River — Apingi  Villages  —  Fetiches  —  Superstitions  —  Spiders 

—  Curious  Manner  of  Catching  their  Prey  —  New  Animals  —  Ca^wized  — 
Putrid  Corpse  in  a  Village  —  Curious  Manner  of  Burial  —  Leave  the  River 

—  ITie  Region  beyond  —  Return  to  Itemandji's  Town  —  Explore  the  Moun- 
tains —  The  Isogo  —  Beyond  the  Isogo  —  U  Itima  Thule — My  Shoes  give 
out  —  Starvation  —  Great  Suffering  —  Shoot  a  Gorilla  —  Illness  —  Honae- 
sick  —  The  Return  to  the  Seashore  —  Etita:  a  very  singular  Disease  — 
ITie  Remedy  —  Heavy  Rains — An  uncomfortable  Night — Fierce  Attack 
of  Bashikouay  Ants  —  Difference  of  Seasons  —  Arrival  in  Biagano  —  Close. 

• 

Decemher  l^th  was  Sunday  by  my  account.  I  sat  in  my  hut 
and  read  the  Bible,  and  a  great  crowd  came  aronnd  and  watched 
me  with  wondering  eyes.  I  explained  to  them  that  when  I 
read  it  it  was  as  though  God  talked  with  me.  Then,  to  gratify 
them,  I  read  aloud,  and  afterwards  tried  to  explain  to  them 
something  of  the  teachings  of  Christ.  Presently  I  let  the  leaves 
of  the  book  slip  through  my  hands  to  show  them  how  many 
there  were.  To  my  great  surprise,  the  little  noise  I  thus  made 
seemed  to  frighten  them  very  much.  In  an  instant  the  whole 
crowd,  Remandji  and  all,  had  disappeared,  with  symptoms  of 
the  greatest  terror.  My  first  effort  to  speak  to  them  the  Word 
of  God  seemed  to  meet  with  little  success. 

By-and-by  I  persuaded  some  to  come  back,  and  they  told  me 
that  the  noise  I  made  was  like  that  made  by  their  spirit.  They 
seemed  to  think  that  I  had  some  communication  with  Ococoo, 
who  is  their  chief  spirit 

To-day  many  people  returned  to  their  villages  disappointed 
that  1  did  not  make  for  them  cloth,  copper,  and  iron,  which 
nothing  will  convince  them  that  I  cannot  make  in  great  profu- 
sion by  a  mere  effort  of  the  will. 

On  the  20th,  as  I  was  speaking  with  Remandji,  a  man  came 
and  laid  his  hands  on  the  ctiefs  head.  He  said,  "Father,  I 
want  to  serve  you.  I  choose  you  for  my  master,  and  will  never 
return  to  my  old  master." 

Tliis   ceremony  is  called  bongo,   and  is  a  curious  phase  of 


Chap.  XXVI.  THE  CEREMONY  OF  BONGO.  449 

African  slavery.  It  obtains  more  or  less  in  all  the  tribes.  When 
a  slave  gets  hard  treatment  from  his  master,  and  has  reason  to 
be  dissatisfied,  he  slips  off  to  another  village  and  chooses  for 
himself  a  new  master.  This  man  is  obliged  to  accept  and  pro- 
tect him.  He  cannot  refiise.  Nor  is  any  "  palaver  "  made  on 
this  account.  No  one,  for  instance,  could  hold  Eemandji  re- 
sponsible for  this  act.  He  may  even  visit  immediately  the  village 
from  which  the  slave  has  run  away ;  only  the  slave  himself  must 
not  go  back  thither,  else  he  exposes  himself  to  be  reclaimed. 
The  bongo  is  given  always  to  a  person  of  another  village,  and 
always  to  one  of  another  family  or  clan  in  the  same  tribe.  The 
technical  term  is  to  "  beat  bongo,"  in  allusion  to  the  laying  on 
of  hands.  This  singular  custom  has  a  marked  influence  on  the 
condition  of  the  slaves,  who  have  always  open  to  them  this  legi- 
timate and  tolerably  easy  avenue  of  escape  from  tyranny.  It 
prevents  families  being  separated,  in  peirticular,  for  nothing  will 
make  a  slave  leave  his  master  so  quickly  as  to  have  his  wife 
sold  away  from  him. 

To-day  canoes  were  being  procured  for  an  ascent  of  the  river. 
They  got  quite  a  little  fleet  together  for  me ;  but  all  are  small, 
and  so  easily  capsized,  that  navigation  is  by  no  means  comfort- 
able to  me,  who  can  scarce  swim  a  stroke.  However,  there  was  no 
help  for  it,  so  I  prepared  for  accidents  by  tying  my  compass  to  a 
cord  fastened  about  my  neck,  then  tied  my  gun  fast  by  a  long 
rope  to  the  canoe,  which  would  float  in  any  case,  and  took,  be- 
sides this,  only  a  little  box  containing  a  change  of  clothes  and 
two  pairs  of  shoes  (the  most  necessary  article  hereabouts  to  the 
traveller).  Then  Eemandji,  myself,  and  a  paddler,  got  in  and 
started,  followed  by  the  fleet. 

The  canoes  are  quite  flat  in  the  bottom,  float  almost  entirely 
above  water,  and  are  very  well  designed  to  stem  the  swift  cur- 
rent of  this  river,  which  runs,  at  this  time  of  the  year,  at  the  rate 
of  four  or  five  miles  per  hour. 

Before  we  started  necessity  compelled  me  to  spend  a  morning 
at  the  river-side  washing  my  clothes.  The  negroes  have  so  little 
idea  of  even  the  commonest  cleanliness,  that  they  never  wash 
their  scanty  garments.  When  I  make  a  considerable  stay  with 
any  tribe  I  generally  manage  to  teach  some  woman  how  to  wash. 
It  is  a  disagreeable  labour,  which  I  cannot  bear.  I  would  much 
rather  cook,  though  that  generally  falls  to  some  one  else. 

2  G 


450  UP  THE  RIVER.  Chap.  XXVI. 

We  ascended  the  river  at  very  slow  speed,  passing  the  8b<»re8 
at  the  rate  of  about  two  or  three  miles  the  hour.  The  people 
sang  as  they  paddled,  I  sat  very  still  and  very  uncomfortably 
in  the  bottom  of  the  boat. 

We  passed  several  villages  in  about  three  hours  after  starting. 
These  Apingi  villages  are  not  as  pretty  to  look  upon  as  those  of 
the  Ashira.  In  the  latter  I  find  always  a  verandah  next  the 
house,  where  the  cooking  is  done ;  while  in  the  Apingi  house 
the  same  room  has  to  serve  as  store-room,  bed-room,  and  kitchen. 
The  Apingi  houses  are  built  of  bark,  as  the  Ashira,  and  the  roof 
'  is  made  of  large  leaves.  There  is  generally  one  larger  house  in 
the  village,  which  belongs  to  the  chief.  The  villages  have  no 
high  fence  of  pickets,  which  is  an  evidence  that  the  people  are 
not  warlike. 

We  landed  at  the  village  of  Agobi,  a  chief  I  had  seen  before. 
He  gave  me  some  fowls,  but  complained  that  the  leopards  had 
eaten  up  all  his  goats.  I  saw  here  the  largest  o^Aon^ot^-tree  I 
ever  saw.  It  was  hung  full  of  the  olive-shaped  fruit  This  is 
larger  than  our  olives,  quite  fleshy,  and,  when  ripe,  of  a  dark  red 
colour.  This  tree,  and  a  number  of  others,  Agobi  told  me  had 
been  planted  by  his  grandfether,  which  shows  that  property  has 
been  respected  among  these  people  for  at  least  two  or  three 
generations.  Most  of  these  villages  are  surrounded  by  groves  of 
these  trees.  The  fruit  is  boiled,  and  has  then  an  agreeable  acidity 
both  pleasant  and  wholesome  in  this  climate.* 

I  find  that  the  superstitions  of  this  people  are  as  great  as  those 
of  the  tribes  nearer  the  sea.  They  hold  that  death  is  caused  by 
witchcraft ;  but  yet  they  do  not  remove  after  every  death  as  do 
the  Gamma,  Shekiani,  Bakalai,  and  the  other  tribes.  Among 
the  seashore  tribes  the  Apingi  have  great  repute  as  wizards, 
and  Apingi-land  is  the  land  of  aniemhoy  where  anyone  may 
learn  to  become  a  powerful  sorcerer.  Consequently,  tiie  Apingi 
fetiches  are  very  highly  valued  by  the  coast  tribes,  especially 
those  professuig  to  remove  barrenness.  I  had  special  instruc- 
tions from  a  number  of  childless  fathers  in  my  town  on  the  sea- 
shore to  bring  them  some  Apingi  mondas,  but  the  price  proved 

*  In  the  forests  near  the  seashore  is  found  a  tree  belonging  to  the  same 
family  as  the  ashangou,  and  which  is  there  called  the  ashafou.  Bat  the  fruit 
of  this  is  less  fleshy  and  more  acid  than  that  of  the  ashangoa,  and,  when  ripe, 
is  of  a  rosy  hue. 


Chap.  XXVI,  .      IMMENSE  SPIDERS.  451 

too  high  for  my  means  and  my  good-nature,  and  I  did  not, 
either,  care  to  give  any  such  indorsement  to  their  superstitious 
nonsense. 

In  the  evening  we  had  a  dance,  and  Agobi,  bent  on  the 
utmost  civility,  sent  some  women  to  dance  for  my  especial 
delectation.  I  quickly  sent  them  back,  preferring  to  take  my 
amusements  with  the  mass.  The  African  dances  are  much  alike 
ever3rwhere,  and  had  long  ceased  to  amuse  me. 

To-day  I  enquired  of  a  young  man,  who  had  for  wife  the 
prettiest  woman  in  the  Apingi  country,  why  he  was  so  ragged  ; 
his  ndenguy  being  all  torn  and  worn  out.  He  calmly  answered, 
"  This  woman  has  entirely  ruined  me."  I  asked  how  it  had  hap- 
pened, and  he  replied  that  in  order  to  get  possession  of  her 
from  her  husband,  he  had  been  obliged  to  give  all  he  possessed 
in  the  world.  From  this  conversation  I  learned  that  it  was 
customary  in  the  Apingi  country,  that  when  a  man  fell  in  love 
with  his  neighbour's  wife,  and  she  in  her  turn  loved  him,  the 
lover  might  secure  her  for  himself  by  giving  the  same  amount 
in  goods  or  slaves  to  the  husband  as  he  had  given  to  obtain  her 
in  the  first  instance.  Under  such  circumstances  he  cannot  re- 
fuse, and  the  woman  becomes  the  wife  of  another.  However 
repugnant  this  system  may  appear  to  us,  I  have  no  doubt  that 
among  the  Apingi  this  rule  prevents  quarrels,  or  even  wars, 
which  otherwise  would  take  place  among  these  villages. 

As  I  was  walking  through  the  forest  on  a  hunt  the  next  day, 
I  was  bitten  by  one  of  the  immense  yellow-spotted  spiders  which 
are  so  numerous  in  all  the  African  woods  and  openings,  and  in 
the  huts  of  the  natives  as  welL  Some  of  the  spiders  of  this 
country  grow  to  an  immense  size.  I  have  frequently  seen  them 
with  a  body  as  large  as  a  sparrow's  egg.  The  house-spider, 
which  lives  chiefly  on  flies  and  cockroaches,  is  mostly  of  a  duU 
gray,  which  concetJs  its  approach  in  the  gloom  of  the  hut  One 
species  of  house-spider  does  not  make  a  web  for  its  prey,  so  far 
as  I  have  been  able  to  discover.  It  conceals  itself  during  the 
day  in  the  crevices  of  the  hut,  and  preys  only  by  night  At 
the  approach  of  evening,  the  cockroaches,  which  so  swarm  in 
every  African  hut,  come  forth  to  act  their  part  of  scavengers. 
Then,  by  the  dim  light  of  a  torch,  and  half-smothered  with  the 
heat,  I  have,  for  hours  at  a  time,  watched  the  motions  of  this 
spider.    It  comes  out  very  carefully  from  its  lair,  and,  having 

2  G  2 


452  VARIOUS  SPECIES  OF  SPIDER^.  Chap.  XXVI. 

got  a  good  station,  remains  perfectly  rigid  and  motionless  often 
for  half-an-hour,  waiting  for  some  nnlucky  cockroach  to  pass  by. 
At  last  the  cockroach  rushes  past.  In  an  instant  the  spider 
has  pounced  upon  him.  Now  ensues  a  tug  and  battle  which  is 
of  the  greatest  interest,  and  which  is  often  prolonged  for  half- 
an-hour.  The  great  African  cockroach  grows  to  the  size  of  an 
almost  full-grown  mouse,  and  is  a  strong  and  somewhat  formi- 
dable animal  to  the  spider.  The  latter  fastens  on  its  back,  and, 
to  prevent  being  borne  off,  clings  with  two  of  his  hairy  legs  to 
the  floor  or  sides.  All  the  cockroach's  endeavours  are  to  es- 
cape. He  tugs  and  jerks,  and  often  succeeds  in  dragging  bis 
enemy  off  for  some  distance.  Then  the  spider  manages  to 
catch  hold  with  his  feet  again,  and  once  more  the  struggle  is 
renewed.  All  this  time,  however,  the  spider  is  sucking  away  at 
the  juices  of  the  cockroach,  and  so  presently  the  struggles  grow 
weaker  and  weaker,  and  the  poor  cockroach  succumbs :  where- 
upon his  enemy  drags  off  the  body  to  some  comer,  where  it  can 
be  finished  at  leisure. 

Another  very  large  house-spider  spins  a  web,  and  catches  its 
prey  of  flies  and  cockroaches  as  ours  do. 

But  the  largest  and  most  numerous  species  are  found  in  the 
forest.  The  large  black  and  yellow  spotted  one  by  which  I 
was  bitten  spins  its  web  in  every  wood.  The  web  is  a  bright 
yellow,  like  the  sam,e  colour  in  the  spider's  body.  It  is  generally 
placed  in  an  open  space  between  two  shrubs,  and  is  often  three 
feet  in  diameter.  The  thread  is  very  coarse,  and  so  strong  that 
when,  walking  rapidly,  I  have  inadvertently  run  against  such  a 
web,  I  have  felt  a  very  perceptible  resistance  to  my  progress. 
The  bite  of  this  insect  is  very  painful,  but  not  poisonous.  The 
pain,  which  is  like  running  a  red-hot  needle  into  the  flesh,  is  soon 
over,  and  the  wound  heals  up  immediately.  I  have  been  several 
times  bitten  by  this  spider. 

One  or  two  species  have  very  short  legs,  and  flat,  oval  bodies, 
surrounded  by  pointed  spurs,  looking,  when  taken  from  their 
webs,  more  like  bugs  than  veritable  spiders.  All  the  wood- 
spiders  use  webs  to  entangle  their  prey.  They  are  of  many 
colours ;  but  none  are  poisonous  to  man,  so  far  as  I  have  been 
able  to  discover,  by  the  personal  trial  of  being  bitten,  or  by  the 
report  of  the  natives. 

Also,  during  my  stay  at  Agobi's  village,  I  shot  two  very  re- 


Chap.  XXVI.      A  REMAItKABLY  SMALL  SQUIRREL.  453 

markable  little  animals.      One,  called  by  the  Apingi  the  kendo, 
is  a  sqtiirrel,  and  the  smallest,  by  far,  yet  known.     It  is  given,  in 


its  actual  size,  in  the  accompanying  engraving,  made  &om  my 
BtuSed  specimen.  It  ie  a  graceful,  lively  little  animal,  leaping 
from  branch  to  branch,  sitting  up  on  its  hind  legs  to  gnaw  its  food, 
carrying  its  tail  over  its  back,  and  in  all  respects  acting  hke  its 
larger  bretliren.  I  have  called  this  new  species,  Sciurua  minutv*.* 
It  seems  to  me  one  of  the  most  curious  and  graceful  little 
animals  I  saw  in  Africa.  When  my  guide  saw  my  shot,  and  the 
poor  little  thing  tumbling  to  the  ground,  he  was  greatly  amazed 
at  such  skill ;  and  when  we  got  back  to  the  village,  the  negroes 
told  me,  with  astonishment,  that  this  was  the  first  time  they  had 
ever  known  a  kendo  killed.  They  concluded  that  I  had  a  very 
powerful  monda,  by  whose  aid  alone  I  could  accomplish  such 
wonders.  Many  have  begged  me  to  make  them  mmdag  to  give 
them  skill  in  the  hunt. 
•  For  description  see  'Procccdingsof  the  Boston  Soc.  Nat.  Hist.',  1860,  p.  3fi0. 


454  THE  ANOMALURUS  BELDENI.  Chap.  XXTI. 

On  another  day,  as  I  was  hunting  in  the  forest,  I  came  to  an 
immense  tree,  whose  vast  trunk  was  covered  and  hung  about 
with  a  great  number  of  dead  vines.  Such  trees  are  the  common 
resort  of  nocturnal  animals  and  birds,  which  here  find  cozy  nooks 
wherein  to  conceal  themselves  by  day ;  and  I  immediately  pro- 
ceeded to  examine  the  vines  for  a  prize  of  this  kind.  Presentiy 
I  saw  something,  which,  being  brought  down  by  the  gun,  proved 
to  be  an  Arwmalurus.  On  examination,  to  my  joy,  I  found  it  a 
new  species.  The  animals  of  the  genus  Arwmalurus  are  very  rare, 
and,  so  far,  only  four  species  are  known,  including  this  which  I 
shot,  and  of  which  this  specimen  in  my  collection  is  the  only  one 
I  was  able  to  secure.  It  is  a  beautifiil  little  animal,  with  soft 
far.  Its  flying  membrane  permits  it  to  fly  downward ;  but  I  do 
not  think  it  is  equal  to  an  upward  flight,  as  the  membrane  is  not 
larger  than  in  those  of  other  species  which  I  have  shot,  and 
which  I  know  were  not  able  to  fly  upward.* 

I  named  this  little  animal  the  Anomalurus  Beldeni^  in  re- 
membrance of  my  good  friend  George  Mortimer  Belden,  Esq.,  of 
New  York. 

On  the  20th  we  made  about  thirty  miles  up  stream.  On  the 
22nd  we  started  again,  and  made  some  ten  miles  more,  through 
a  beautiful  but  mountainous  country,  and  over  as  noble  a  river 
as  the  heart  of  a  steamboat  captain  could  wish  for.  No  rapids 
impeded  our  progress,  and,  though  the  current  was  strong,  the 
water  was  everywhere  of  good  depth,  averaging  from  three  to 
four  fathoms.  This  is  the  rainy  season.  The  songs  of  numerous 
birds  resounded  gaily  over  the  waters,  and  the  busy  hum  of 
insect  life  came  witli  a  gentle  buzz  to  us  as  we  voyaged  along. 
Everything  was  clad  in  brightest  green.  The  river-bank,  down 
to  the  very  water's  edge,  was  a  mass  of  verdure.  •  It  was  as 
pleasant  a  country  as  could  be  seen  anywhere  in  America,  only 
lacking  the  softening  touch  of  human  culture  to  make  it  perfect 

In  the  afternoon,  near  sunset,  the  accident  which  I  had  pro- 
vided against  happened.  A  canoe,  attempting  to  cross  the  rapid 
river,  was  borne  down  by  the  current,  and,  before  we  could  get 
out  of  the  way,  swept  down  upon  us.  In  a  moment  both  frail 
boats  were  capsized,  and  the  men  were  swimming  for  the  shore. 
As  for  poor  me,  I  dared  not  trust  my  unskilfal  self  to  the 

•  For  a  detailed  description  naturalists  are  referred  to  *  Proceedings  of  Boston 
Soc.  Nat.  Hist.'  for  18G0. 


WE  ARE  CAPSIZED. 


stream.  I  clung  to  the  canoe.  Happily,  we  were  not  far  from 
shore,  and  Eemandji  and  my  poddler  soon  dragged  the  boat  to 
where  I  could  get  a  footing  and  wade  out.  I  could  uot  help 
laughing  at  the  old  woman  whose  canoe  had  caused  the  accident. 
She  swam  off  down  stream  like  a  buoy,  shouting  continually, 
"  Where  is  my  bunch  of  plantains  ?     Give  me  my  plantains  1" 


456  NEW-BORN  CHILDREN  MURDERED.  Chap.  XXVJ. 

Climbing  out  at  a  bend  of  the  river,  she  waited  for  her  capsized 
canoe  to  float  along,  secured  that,  and  then  got  in  again  and 
paddled  off,  full  of  complaints  at  losing  her  plantains.  All  these 
Apingi  swim  like  so  many  fishes,  and,  I  suppose,  haye  occasion 
enough  for  the  accomplishment,  with  their  little  cockle-fihells  of 
boats. 

Wet  as  I  was,  and  with  my  little  box  of  clothes  and  rifle 
soaking,  we  marched  off  to  a  village  near  which  we  were  capsized. 
As  we  entered,  my  nostrils  were  assailed  by  a  most  horrible  and 
loathsome  smell,  as  of  meat  in  the  last  stage  of  putrescence. 
The  whole  viUage  was  tainted,  and  my  stomach  was  quite  turned 
with  the  abominable  stench.  On  inquiry,  I  learned  that  it  pro- 
ceeded from  the  putrid  corpse  of  a  man  who  had  died  seven  days 
ago.  It  is  their  custom  to  keep  the  body  just  as  long  as  it  will 
liold  together.  It  lies  in  the  house  in  which  it  died,  and  the 
only  wonder  is  that  the  stench  does  not  breed  a  disease. 

I  at  once  told  Bemandji  that  I  could  not  stay  there  unless  they 
buried  the  corpse  immediately.  I  was  accordingly  conducted  to 
the  windward  end  of  the  village,  where  the  air  was  but  little 
tainted.  Judge  of  my  astonishment,  when  presently  a  man  ap- 
peared, bearing  upon  his  shoulders  the  nearly  naked  and  fester- 
ing body.  They  had  determined  that  it  was  as  well  to  humour 
my  prejudice,  and  this  was  the  funeral  cortfege.  They  make  no 
coflSn,  but  always  bear  the  corpse  out  on  the  shoulders  of  the 
nearest  male  relative.  No  man  follows  the  deceased  to  his  last 
resting-place.  There  is  no  cemetery,  and  they  leave  the  body  at 
but  little  distance  from  the  village.  No  grave  is  dug,  but  it  is 
laid  in  a  cleared  space,  and  near  it  are  placed  some  tusks  of 
ivory,  or  some  of  the  bracelets  or  other  ornaments  of  deceased. 

While  I  was  in  this  village  a  woman  gave  birth  to  twins,  and 
one  of  the  children  was  immediately  killed,  the  negroes  of  this 
and  most  of  the  other  tribes  holding  that  if  both  are  permitted 
to  live  the  mother  will  die.  In  Obindji's  town  I  once  saw  two 
boys,  seven  years  old,  who  had  both  escaped,  and  their  mother 
too ;  but  all  the  people  looked  upon  her  as  a  remarkable  woman. 

Salt  is  very  scarce  here,  and  bears  a  high  value.  It  is  all 
brought  from  the  seashore,  the  Cape  Lopez  people  making  con- 
siderable quantities  yearly,  which  is  then  scattered  over  the  in- 
terior. Here,  among  the  Apingi,  it  is  so  scarce  that  ten  pounds 
of  poor  salt  will  buy  a  boy  slave.     It  is  a  great  luxury ;  I  have 


Chap.  XXVI.  THE  FALL  OF  SAMBA  NAGOSHf.  457 

little  doubt  that  they  suflTer  for  the  lack  of  it.  I  think  the 
frequency  of  skin-diseases  and  ulcers  here  is  caused,  partly,  by 
lack  of  salt.  Yet  the  Apingi  have  less  disease  of  these  kinds 
than  the  BakalaL  But  they  do  not,  like  the  Bakalai,  eat  so 
much  tainted  and  diseased  meat,  and  they  consume  a  great  deal 
more  oil  than  those,  this  being  a  poor  country  for  hunting,  but 
abounding  in  palm-oil  palms,  which  furnish  them  a  considerable 
portion  of  their  food. 

Bee.  23rd.  Having  no  fit  canoe,  I  am  obliged  to  give  up  my 
projected  farther  ascent  of  the  river.  So  far  as  I  have  ascended, 
the  Rembo  Apingi  runs  nearly  due  south.  It  is,  I  should  judge, 
from  three  to  four  hundred  yards  wide,  of  good  depth,  and  with 
a  rapid  current.  The  villages  are  mostly  situated  on  heights  a 
little  removed  from  the  river-banks.  There  is  no  chansre  in 
their  habits,  nor  do  the  women  improve  either  in  beauty  or  in 
variety  of  costume  as  the  traveller  ascends. 

We  returned  to  Remandji's  town  on  the  evening  of  the  24th, 
and  next  day,  having  procured  the  largest,  stoutest  canoe  I 
could  find,  I  set  off  down  the  river  to  try  to  get  a  glimpse  of  the 
great  wonder  of  this  region,  the  great  fall  of  Samba  NagosJdy  of 
which  I  had  already  heard  so  much.  I  was  accompanied  by  a 
dozen  canoes  full  of  negroes.  The  stream  is  very  rapid.  This 
was  the  rainy  season,  and  the  banks  were  filled,  the  water  turbid 
and  yellow,  and  the  current  swift,  running  at  the  rate  of  about 
five  miles  an  hour.  We  swept  rapidly  down  stream  past  the 
villages  of  the  Kamba,  Aviia,  Osounga,  and  Njavi  tribes. 

The  scenery  grew  grander  and  bolder  as  we  advanced.  The 
mountains  neared ;  the  banks  became  high  and  precipitous ;  the 
force  of  the  current  increased ;  and  every  mile  of  downward 
progress  seemed  to  bring  us  to  a  more  magnificent  country.  At 
last  we  could  hear  the  dull  boom  of  the  fall  in  the  distance.  The 
negroes  told  me  it  was  still  a  long  distance  off — as  near  as  I 
could  teU,  at  least  five  or  six  mUes ;  but  even  here  the  river 
began  to  break  up  into  rapids,  and  navigation  in  the  small 
Apingi  canoes  became  too  dangerous  to  risk  it  ferther.  So  I 
pulled  the  canoe  to  shore,  and  called  a  halt.  By  this  time  it 
was  nearly  dark.  We  had  come  down  from  Bemandji's  about 
sixty  miles.  We  made  our  camp  by  the  side  of  the  stream,  and 
in  hearing  of  the  fall,  which  I  determined  to  see  the  next  day 
by  an  overland  journey. 


458  ,         THE  FALL  OF  SAMBA  NAGOSHL  Chap.  XXVI. 

The  mighty  roar  of  the  fall  sounded  in  my  ears  all  night, 
and  next  morning  I  wished  to  start  early  to  see  it.  But,  alas ! 
no  one  would  accompany  me.  The  men  represented  that  some 
hostile  Bakalai  lived  in  the  forest  on  the  way,  who  would  kill 
them )  and  after  a  survey  of  the  jJmost  impenetrable  jungle,  I 
had  to  give  up  all  idea  of  trying  it  alone,  which  had  been  my 
first  thought  So,  after  much  fruitless  inquiry  and  vain  efiFort 
with  my  cowardly  followers,  I  had  to  abandon  all  hope  of  seeing 
this  remarkable  fall.  That  I  missed,  when  so  near  it,  so  fine  a 
sight,  was  a  severe  disappointment  to  me ;  but  the  traveller  in 
Africa  learns,  by  bitter  experience,  to  yield  to  circumstances 
now  and  then,  and  to  feel  thankful  if,  on  the  whole,  he  has 
accomplished  the  main  part  of  his  undertaking,  even  with  such 
unpleasant  drawbacks  as  this. 

That  the  fall  of  Samba  Nagoshi  is  a  majestic  sight  all  the  de- 
scriptions of  the  negroes  go  to  prove.  It  is  the  great  marvel  of 
which  all  the  tribes  have  heard,  even  those  who  live  at  a  distance, 
and  of  which  aU  speak  with  awe  and  wonder.  Better  proof  yet 
is  the  very  considerable  volume  of  water  which  the  Rembo 
Apingi  brings  down  here,  as  well  as  the  great  roar,  which  filled 
the  air  at  tlie  distance  of,  I  judge,  four  or  five  miles,  nearer  than 
which  I  did  not  get,  on  account  of  the  rapids.  I  have  named 
this  fall  in  my  map  the  IhcgAiie,  in  honour  of  her  Majesty  the 
Empress  the  of  French. 

My  men  told  me  that  before  the  moving  hither  of  the  savage 
and  treacherous  Bakalai,  the  Apingi  used  to  penetrate  down 
river  as  far  as  the  Anenga  tribe,  who  command  the  junction  of 
the  Rembo  Ngouyai,  and  the  Rembo  Okanda.  The  tribes  on 
this  bank  of  the  river  are  named,  commencing  above,  the  Njavi, 
Evili,  Ngaloi,  and  Anenga.  I  have  seen  (on  my  trip  up  the 
Ogobay)  a  few  of  the  last  two  tribes,  who  speak  the  language  of 
the  Mpongwe. 

I  was  assured  that  the  Rembo  Okanda  was  much  larger  than 
the  Rembo  Ngouyai,  and  I  know  that  its  shores  must  be  popu- 
lous, for  from  there  are  brought  a  great  many  of  the  slaves 
which  supply  the  Cape  Lopez  market  Remand ji,  who  had  been 
over  the  ground,  informed  me  that  the  Rembo  Okanda  was  five 
or  six  days'  journey  oflf,  to  the  north  or  north-west,  and  that  the 
intervening  country  was  very  mountainous.  He  named  the 
following  tribes  as  inhabiting  this  fine  river:  the  Meouandji, 


Chap.  XXVI.  EXPLORATIONS  EASTWARD.  459 

the  Mosheho,  the  Madouma,  the  Njavi,  the  Npovi,  and  the 
Moshobo. 

Next  to  the  Apingi,  up  the  river,  are  the  Aponon.  They  are 
said  to  speak  the  Ashira  dialieet,  inhabit  immense  prairies,  which 
are  covered  with  high,  thick  grass,  and  are  a  warlike  people. 
They  showed  me  some  horns  from  this  district  which  belonged  to 
an  animal  unknown  to  me.  The  river,  according  to  them,  con- 
tinued to  flow  in  a  southerly  direction. 

Next  to  the  Aponon  lived  the  Ashango ;  but  on  the  right 
bank,  while  the  Aponon  inhabit  the  left.  The  Ashango  prairies 
were  three  long  days*  journey  away,  to  the  south  and  east  The 
people  catch  and  tame  wild  goats,  which  they  then  sell  to  the 
tribes  west  of  them. 

Beyond  these  lie  the  Njavi,  and  in  their  country  a  great  fall  or 
rapid  obstructs  the  river,  which  is  even  there  a  very  large  stream. 
Beyond  the  Njayi  is  an  unknown  land  even  to  the  Apingi,  who 
had  never  been  even  as  far  as  there,  but  from  which  they  hear 
through  their  slaves. 

On  the  28th  I  set  out  on  an  exploration  of  the  mountain-range, 
which  extends  almost  due  east  so  far  as  I  can  see  from  the 
highest  point  near  Bemaudji's  village,  and  from  the  river  as  far 
as  I  ascended.  The  chief  accompanied  me.  He  would  not  go 
far,  but  I  determined  to. follow  this  range  as  far  as  I  could. 
The  problem  I  wished  to  solve  was  whether  it  continued  ite 
easterly  direction,  and  to  what  probable  distance. 

On  the  first  day  we  made  twenty-rfive  miles  due  east  We 
stopped  for  the  night  in  an  Apingi  village.  We  were  received 
with  shouts  of  welcome.  Most  of  the  people  had  already  seen 
me  on  my  first  arrival  in  Remandji's  village.  The  next  morning 
we  set  out  again,  and,  travelling  eastward  about  twenty  miles, 
reached  at  nightfall  an  Isogo  village,  the  chief  of  which  was  one 
of  Bemandji's  numerous  fathers-in-law. 

The  men  armed  and  stood  on  the  defensive,  and  the  women 
screamed  and  ran  away  when  they  saw  me  coming.  If  Bemandji 
had  not  been  with  me,  I  suspect  I  should  have  had  difficulty  in 
explaining  my  wishes  before  I  was  transfixed  with  spears. 
When  Bemandji  explained  that  I  was  a  mighty  spirit,  but  to 
them  quite  harmless,  they  were  satisfied,  and  furnished  us 
supper  and  a  sleeping-place. 

These  people  speak  the  same  dialect  as  the  Apingi,  but  are 


460  ROUGH  JOURNEYING.  Chap.  XXV  L 

by  the  latter  considered  an  inferior  people — why,  I  eonld  not 
tell,  for  their  houses,  dresses,  and  customs  are  quite  alike. 

We  were  now  in  the  midst  of  the  hills  which  constitute  the 
range  I  have  spoken  of.  The  Isogo  inhabit  the  higher  plains, 
and  have  many  villages.  They  told  me  that  the  mountains 
extend  in  an  easterly  direction  as  far  as  they  had  gone,  which 
was  several  days'  journey. 

To  this  point  Remandji's  son  accompanied  me.  We  travelled 
eastward,  and  at  the  last  of  the  Isogo  villages  the  chief  took 
leave  of  me.  A  party  of  Isogo  and  Apingi  agreed  to  accom- 
pany  me  as  far  as  the  Ashango  villages,  which  they  said  lay  in 
the  mountains,  about  tliree  days'  journey  off. 

The  air  is  tolerably  pure  and  cool  on  these  high  mountains ; 
my  spirits  were  high;  I  was  now  going  straight  east,  and, 
though  I  had  not  goods  enough  with  me  to  pass  me  very  fisur, 
yet  my  depot  at  Bemandji's  village  was  sufficiently  supplied  to 
pay  all  I  might  owe.  My  hopes  were  bright  that  I  might  now 
penetrate  at  least  400  miles  direct  east,  and  settle  the  ques- 
tioned extension  of  this  hitherto  unknown  mountain-range  so 
far  across  the  continent. 

We  started  on  the  29th.  The  way  was  somewhat  rocky,  and 
the  forest  dense.  Beads  there  were  not,  and  my  companions 
did  not  even  know  the  country.  We  travelled  by  compass, 
avoiding  the  eminences,  and  keeping,  the  greatest  part  of  the 
time,  the  rocky  rivulets  for  our  paths.  Of  course  such  paths 
were  terrible  for  my  shoes.  The  first  day  I  wore  out  a  pair  of 
shoes,  the  heels  giving  way.  Fortunately,  I  had  provided  a 
spare  pair,  and  I  was  able  to  go  on  the  next  day.  On  the  firat 
night,  as  we  slept  around  our  fire,  we  v^ere  awakened  by  the 
scream  of  a  leopard,  which  did  not,  however,  come  within  shot, 
nor  did  we  venture  after  it,  as  man  has  no  fair  chance  with  this 
animal  by  night.  When  the  leopard  ceased  his  cries,  a  terrible 
tornado  came  up,  which  broke  down  trees  and  branches  all 
around  us,  and  this  was  followed  by  a  heavy  rain-storm,  with 
strong  lightning,  which  lasted  till  five  o'clock,  a.m. 

The  next  morning,  donning  my  fresh  pair  of  shoes  and  m^lnTig 
a  frugal  breakfast  of  plantains,  we  set  out  again*  The  majestic 
forest  through  which  we  travelled  seemed  to  be  quite  devoid  of 
life,  except  indeed  insect  life.  Once  in  a  while  I  ran  against 
the  web  of  the  great  yellow  spider,  and  occasionally  we  heard 


Chap.  XXVI.        LONELY  GRANDEUR  OP  THE  FOREST.  461 

the  cry  of  some  little  birds.  But  no  larger  animals  had  left 
their  traces  in  our  sight.  My  gun  seemed  a  useless  encum- 
brance.  Not  even  a  monkey  showed  liimself.  * 

The  gloom  of  the  woods  was  something  quite  appalling  to  the 
spirits.  It  seemed  a  fit  place  for  the  haunt  of  some  sylvan 
monster,  delighting  in  silence  and  the  shades  of  night.  I  was 
on  the  look-out  for  gorillas ;  but  the  natives  did  not  seem  to 
expect  to  find  even  many  of  them  here,  though  they  knew  the 
animal. 

These  lifeless  forests,  so  diflferent  from  the  teeming  woods  of 
Southern  Africa,  fiU  the  traveller  with  awe.  Dependent  in  a 
great  degree  upon  his  rifle  for  his  living,  the  miserable  explorer 
finds  himself  here  in  momentary  danger  of  starvation.  For  of 
the  cumbrous  provision  of  the  negroes  it  is  quite  impossible  to 
carry  an  adequate  supply.  With  starvation  staring  us  in  the 
face,  we  pushed  on  energetically,  and  by  the  evening  of  the 
second  day  had  made,  by  my  reckoning,  about  sixty-five  miles 
from  the  last  Isogo  village,  in  a  crooked  direction,  or  a  little 
more  than  a  hundred  from  Eemandji's  town. 

The  next  day  (Dec.  Slst)  we  hoped  to  reach  the  Ashango 
country,  where  we  could  rest  We  had  not  yet  shot  anything 
but  two  little  birds,  which  I  had  for  supper  this  day.  My  men 
had  still  a  little  plantain  left. 

The  next  day,  the  first  of  1859,  and,  alas  I  the  last  of  my  east- 
ward tour,  we  set  out  early,  determined  to  reach  help  before 
night,  for  our  provisions  were  no  longer  sufficient  to  encumber 
us.  The  ground  had  been  getting  rougher  all  the  day  before  ; 
our  paths  were  the  course  of  streams ;  and  now,  about  two  in 
the  afternoon,  occurred  what  I  had  been  dreading.  My  last 
pair  of  shoes  gave  out  completely.  They  were  torn,  both  upper 
and  sole,  and  at  every  step  my  bleeding  feet  were  more  and 
more  torn,  till  at  last  llie  agony  grew  too  great,  and  I  could  not 
set  a  step  forward  without  almost  an  accompanying  scream. 
There  was  yet  no  sign  of  an  inhabited  country.  Far  as  we 
could  see  below  us  and  ahead — and  this  was  not  far — we  saw 
only  dense  forests. 

The  pain  obliged  me  to  lie  down  near  a  brook  where  I  had 
stopped  to  bathe  my  wounded  feet.  We  built  a  fiure,  and,  keep- 
ing my  gun  in  readiness  for  any  passing  game,  I  sent  my  men 
ahead  to  see  if  they  could  spy  out  a  village.      Evidentiy  the 


462  STARVATION  AND  SUFFERING.        Chap.  XXVI. 

vague  report  of  a  three  days'  journey  was  a  delusion  and  a 
snare.  The  men  were  themselves  ignorant  of  localities,  and 
only  kept  up  their  spirits  because  I  showed  no  signs  of  alarm. 

They  returned  after  an  hour,  reporting  nothing  in  sight. 
Then  we  made  our  camp  for  the  night  I  tied  up  my  shoes  as 
well  as  I  could  for  to-morrow's  journey ;  we  ate  the  last  of  our 
plantains ;   I  took  a  mouthful  of  brandy,  and  we  went  to  sleep. 

Thus  ended  New  Year's  day,  1859.  Next  morning  my  poor 
feet  were  more  swollen  than  ever.  They  would  not  fit  into  the 
torn  shoes  at  all.  How  to  progress  I  did  not  know.  To  advance 
was  plainly  impossible  without  provisions.  The  men  gathered  a 
few  wild  berries  and  nuts,  on  which  we  made  a  kind  of  break- 
fast, and  then  I  took  out  from  a  little  sack,  in  which  it  had 
long  been  laid  away,  an  American  flag,  which  I  had  meant  to 
plant  upon  my  farthest  point.  I  did  not  think,  when  months 
ago  I  sewed  it  snugly  in  its  cover,  that  I  should  feel  so  bitterly 
disappointed  at  having  to  use  it. 

Keeping  one  man  with  me,  I  sent  the  rest  to  ascend  a  little 
peak  which  rose  not  far  on  my  right.  Even  from  its  top  the 
view  could  not  but  be  confined,  on  account  of  the  thick  forest 
I  gave  them  my  gun  to  shoot  anything  alive  they  might  see  to 
make  the  pot  boil ;  commanded  them  to  hang  the  bright  little 
flag  from  the  top  of  the  highest  tree  they  could  climb,  and  then 
to  report  to  me  what  they  saw  beyond  this,  our  farthest  point 

The  good  fellows  were  gone  two  hours.  They  came  back 
with  a  small  monkey  and  a  serpent  nearly  twelve  feet  long,  of 
the  boa  species.  The  monkey  they  gave  me.  The  snake  made 
them  a  meal,  and  something  over. 

Then,  finding  it  impossible  to  advance  farther,  I  sent  two 
men  to  climb  the  highest  tree  in  sight,  and  fasten  the  American 
flag  at  its  top.  When  it  floated  out  on  the  breeze,  I  made  my 
men  give  three  cheers  for  the  star-spangled  banner,  and  divided 
the  remains  of  my  brandy  among  them. 

Having  eaten  our  dinner,  and  breakfast,  and  supper  all  in 
one,  I  drank  a  glass  of  wine  to  the  health  of  friends  at  home, 
then  carefully  bandaged  my  feet  with  the  sleeves  of  my  shirt, 
forced  them  gently  into  the  ragged  shoes,  and  we  set  out  on  our 
way  back.  It  was  a  sorry  day  for  me.  I  longed  more  than  I 
can  tell  to  advance.  It  seemed  too  great  a  disappointment  to 
stand  as  I  did  just  here — to  have  within  my  grasp,  almost^  the 


Chap.  XXVI.  ILL  AND  HOME-SICK.  '  463 

solution  of  a  curious  and  impoi'tant  geographical  problem,  and 
to  leave  it  unsolved. 

Of  the  journey  back  I  have  but  a  dim  and  feverish  recollec- 
tion. I  remember  that  my  feet  got  worse  instead  of  better ; 
that  when  the  wretched  shoes  were  beyond  even  tying  together 
with  vines,  I  cast  them  away,  and  bandaged  the  feet  with  what 
remained  of  my  shirt.  That  on  the  second  and  third  day  of 
our  journey  we  had  not  even  a  little  bird  to  eat,  but  plunged 
forward  in  a  stupid  apathy  of  hunger  and  pain.  That  on  the 
fourth  morning  one  of  the  men  espied  a  gorilla,  who  came 
roaring  towards  us,  beating  his  vast  chest,  and  waddling  up  to 
the  attack  with  such  horrid  utterances  and  soul-freezing  aspect, 
eyes  glaring  and  the  monstrous  face  distorted  with  rage,  that 
for  once,  waking  out  of  my  dreamy  stupor,  and  seeing  this 
image  of  the  devil  coming  upon  us,  I  would  have  run  if  my  feet 
would  have  borne  me.  I  remember  that  when  my  gun-carrier 
shot  the  huge  beast,  the  men  rushed  upon  it,  and  tore  rather 
than  cut  it  up,  to  stifle  with  its  loathed  flesh  the  hunger  which 
was  gnawing  at  their  vitals. 

Then  we  went  on,  relieved  for  a  time  from  starvation,  I  drag- 
ging my  bleeding,  bare,  and  swollen  feet  over  the  rough  and 
thorny  ground,  till  at  last,  at  noon  of  the  fifth  day,  we  came  to 
the  Isogo  towns. 

Here  I  lay  but  half-conscious  for  three  days.  The  people 
brought  me  food ;  the  kind  women  bathed  and  oiled  my  feet. 
Women  are  ever  kind  and  ready  to  help  the  helpless,  even  in 
brutalised  Africa. 

And  now,  in  this  long  sickness,  I  began  to  wish  for  home.  I 
longed  to  get  back  to  the  sea.  Each  day  I  became  less  patient 
with  my  inactive  condition,  more  eager  for  a  sight  of  the  ocean. 

When  I  could  walk  once  more,  though  not  without  pain,  I  re- 
turned to  Kemandji's,  packed  up  my  few  goods  and  journals, 
and  set  out  on  the  way  back.  For  the  first  time  in  my  life  I 
was  home-sick — really  and  thoroughly  home-sick. 

When  I  told  Eemandji  that  I  must  return,  he  called  Minsho 
and  said,  "  The  spirit  must  go  back.  We  are  sorry  ;  but  as  it 
is  his  will,  we  must  submit  Wait,  however,  that  we  may  get 
him  food,  that  he  may  not  be  hungry  on  the  way."  There- 
upon the  people  brought  me  fowls,  plantains,   and  manioc. 


464  FAREWELL  TO  REMANDJI.  Chap.  XXVL 

The  kendo  I  was  requested  to  keep,  ^that  when  you  come 
back  you  may  be  our  master." 

Bemandji  also  gave  me  two  beautiful  grass  caps  done  in  fine 
crochet-work,  and  which  have  excited  the  admiration  of  many 
ladies  in  this  country  for  the  neatness  of  their  work. 

I  gave  the  old  chief  my  knife  and  fork,  and  afterwards,  at  his 
own  specijJ  request,  covered  the  wtJls  of  his  hut  inside  with 
some  New  York  papers  which  I  had  received  on  my  way  to  the 
Ashira,  and  whose  columns  had  helped  to  while  away  my  inactive 
days  here  in  the  far  interior.  He  was  very  proud  of  this,  and 
promised  to  preserve  them  tiU  the  next  white  spirit  came  to  see 
him,  to  whom  it  will  doubtless  be  a  curious  spectacle.  He  said, 
"  When,  in  after  years,  I  tell  the  people  from  far  away  that  a 
white  spirit  came  to  see  me  and  was  my  friend,  they  will  say, 
*  You  lie.'  Then  I  will  sho)v  them  these  things  which  you  have 
left  me.     Then  they  will  believa" 

I  was  presented  with  a  large  anvil  of  iron,  used  by  the  Apingi 
in  their  blacksmithing  operations ;  but  it  was  too  heavy  to  carry 
off,  and  moreover,  as  iron  ia  the  gold  of  these  people,  it  would 
have  been  cruel  to  rob  them.  They  work  iron  very  neatly,  but 
not  to  so  great  an  extent  as  the  Fan,  who  are  the  best  blacksmiths 
I  saw  in  Africa.  They  make  knives  similar  to  the  Ashira's,  and 
axes  such  as  are  displayed  in  the  engraving  below,  and  oma- 


Apingi  Tools.—!.  Axe ;  2.  Mpano. 

ment  them  very  nicely.    But  their  specialty  is  the  weaving  of 
cloth. 


Chap.  XXVI.  A  FRIGHTFUL  DISEASE.  465 

We  set  out  finally  on  the  16th  of  January,  being  ferried  across 
the  river  in  the  little  canoes.  As  we  were  travelling  through  the 
bush  on  our  way  to  the  Ashira  plains,  I  suddenly  started  a  flock 
of  monkeys.  One  of  my  young  men,  Ishoungi  by  name,  was  with 
me.  When  I  had  shot  my  monkey  and  returned  from  picking 
him  up,  I  saw  the  strangest  change  that  surely  ever  took  place 
in  a  man.  Ishoungi,  who  was  as  black  as  a  crow  when  I  left  him, 
had,  in  less  than  a  mimUe,  become  covered  all  over  with  blotches, 
which  gave  him  a  ghastly  spotted  appearance,  frightful  and  sick- 
ening to  the  view.  It  was  a  complete  and  most  singular  meta- 
morphosis. The  swellings  extended  under  my  own  observation, 
and  in  less  than  five  minutes  scarce  a  spot  on  his  whole  body 
was  left  in  its  pure  black  state.  Even  his  face  was  covered.  His 
lips  were  disfigured,  his  nose  put  out  of  shape,  his  eyes  dosed. 

This  singular  disease  is  known  to  the  Ashira  by  the  name  of 
etita.  The  swellings  are  large,  but  of  difierent  sizes  and  shapes, 
and  look  much  as  though  the  subject  had  been  badly  scalded. 
The  skin  is  raised,  and  a  thin  matter  collects  beneatli  it  An 
intolerable  itching  pain  follows,  which  makes  the  poor  sufierer 
scream  with  agony.  I  dropped  my  monkey  and  led  poor  Ishoungi 
to  a  little  brook  not  far  off,  where  I  sprinkled  him  with  water, 
which  seemed  somewhat  to  ease  his  pain.  Presently  one  of  the 
Ashira  men  came  along,  and,  seeing  his  condition,  took  out  some 
yellow  bark  o*f  a  tree,  unknown  to  me,  from  a  pouch  he  carried. 
This  he  made  fine,  then  chewed  it  with  water  in  his  mouth. 
When  he  had  chewed  it  a  little  he  spat  the  juice  on  the  other's 
body,  and  Ishoungi  rubbed  and  spread  it  gently.  Wherever  it 
touched,  the  swelling  went  down.  In  little  more  than  twenty 
minutes — certainly  in  less  than  half  an  hour — the  swellings  were 
gone,  leaving  scarce  any  mark  upon  his  body. 

This  was  the  first  severe  case  I  had  met  with  in  Africa,  though 
my  boatmen  on  the  Rembo  had  sometimes  to  suffer  from  slight 
attacks.  I  will  not  attempt  to  account  for  this  singular  pheno- 
menon farther  than  to  say  that  my  observation  led  me  to  charge 
it  to  great  overheating  and  sudden  cooling  of  the  blood.  It  is 
known  to  the  Gamma  and  Bakalai ;  but  they  do  not  suffer  from 
it  much.    They,  too,  call  it  etita. 

It  was  the  rainy  season  still,  and  the  forest  was  in  many  places 
muddy.  We  passed  the  first  night  (16th-17th)  at  a  Bakalai 
village,  where  I  received  a  present  of  a  gazella    In  the  night  the 

2  H 


466  A  NIGHT  IN  THE  DARK.  Chap.  XXVI. 

roof  of  my  hut  waa  swept  oflF  by  a  tomado,  and  I  stood  in  the 
street  a  couple  of  hours  for  fear  of  being  buried  in  the  rains  of 
the  village. 

It  rained  in  torrents  the  whole  night  and  the  greater  part  of 
the  next  day,  and  when  we  came  to  the  banks  of  the  Louvendji 
we  found,  instead  of  the  pleasant  and  easily-fordable  stream  it 
had  been  on  our  outward  passage,  a  fierce  torrent,  utterly  im- 
passable. We  had,  therefore,  to  remain  there  all  night,  and  it 
was  not  till  late  next  afternoon  that  we  mcmaged  to  cross.  The 
flies  and  bees  were  here  so  troublesome  that  I  was  fedrly  driyen 
from  the  camp  into  the  woods.  They  were  attracted  in  yast 
swarms  by  our  ripe  plantains. 

Then  came  once  more  the  passage  of  the  dreaded  bridge  of 
the  Ovigui.  The  stream  was  very  full,  the  current  very  rapid, 
and  the  passage  uglier  than  before.  In  the  middle  of  the  frail 
bridge  the  water  was  up  to  our  necks,  and  swept  past  us  im- 
petuously as  we  clung  to  the  guards.  Happily,  though  I  lost 
my  footing  once,  being  the  shortest  man  of  tibe  party,  I  managed 
to  get  safely  across.  That  night  it  came  on  to  rain  before  we 
reached  our  camping-ground.  The  consequence  was  that  we 
were  unable  to  light  a  fire — ^the  first  time  I  have  ever  known 
this  occur  on  my  travels.  It  was  a  stupid  blunder,  which  caused 
us  to  spend  the  night  in  a  most  uncomfortable  manner — ^I  seated, 
gun  in  hand,  on  my  chest,  and  the  negroes  firing  guns  and 
shouting  all  night  to  keep  off  the  leopards,  several  of  which  we 
heard  about  us.  It  was  the  most  uncomfortable  night  I  ever 
spent.  My  feet  were  by  no  means  tough,  and  pained  me ;  and 
it  was  not  easy  to  sit  still,  awake,  in  the  pouring  rain,  and  await 
the  yell  and  spring  of  some  leopard,  who  could  probably  see  us 
quite  well  in  the  darkness. 

At  last  day  dawned,  and  we  pushed  on.  We  reached  the 
plains  without  farther  mishap.  My  home-sickness — a  strange 
longing  which  I  never  experienced  before — still  made  me 
miserable.  I  was  impatient  to  push  on,  but  was  so  weak,  what 
with  fever  attacks,  occasioned  by  hardships  and  by  my  sore  feet, 
that  I  had  perforce  to  lie  stilL 

On  the  22nd  I  finally  managed  to  get  oS.  Olenda  and  his 
people  gave  me  plenty  of  presents,  arms,  a  loom,  fetiches,  an 
idol,  and  provisions  to  last  me  to  Obindji's  town.  Makondai  was 
glad  to  return,  and  I  longed  constantly  for  the  sea. 


Chap.  XXVI.  ATTACKED  BY  ABT8.  467 

Many  of  the  little  valleys  aituated  in  the  hollow  of  the  hills 
were  now  mach  overflowed.  On  our  first  day  out  I  had  the  mie- 
foitune  to  step  into  abashikonay  army,  and  was,  as  usual  on  such 
occaBions,  badly  bitten,  as  were  several  of  my  men.  These  were 
different  &om  the  bashikouay  met  nearer  the  seashore.  They 
were  larger,  stronger,  slower  in  their  movements,  and  had  not 
the  very  peculiar  dashing  mode  of  attack  which  characterizes  the 
bashikouay  figured  and  described  before.  Their  bite  was  more 
severe :  they  literally  took  pieces  of  flesh  out  of  my  legs,  and 
made  me  bleed  very  freely;  but  their  attack  was  much  less 
fierce.  Nothing  can  stand  the  onset  of  the  smaller  bashikouay 
ant,  nor  is  it  possible  to  drive  them  off  except  by  killing  them. 
These  lai^r  ants  are  not  tree-climbers,  the  natives  told  me. 

On  the  24tb  we  at  last  reached  the  banks  of  the  little 
Ofoubou  again,  and  the  next  day  we  floated  down  to  Obindji's 
town,  where  we  were  welcomed 
with  great  shouts    of  joy,  gun- 
firing,  music  and  dancing,    and  \ 
every  action  which   the  African 
uses  to  express  his  delight     The 
Boond  of  the  ibeka  was  the  most 

prominent;  it  is  a  curious  little    itdu:  miiiiaiiiiutrniiiaitott>i*B4kiu. 
instrument  with  six  wooden  keys. 

As  we  crossed  the  range  of  hills  which  divide  the  Ashira  plains 
from  Uie  Bakalai  country  to  the  westward,  I  found,  to  my  sur- 
prise, that  on  the  western  side  of  this  watershed  it  was  now  the 
dry  season.  All  the  little  brooks  were  dried  up ;  the  ground  was 
completely  dry ;  and  when  we  reached  the  Ofoubou  and  Ovenga, 
these  streams  were  quite  low.  This  was  the  nkoumonna,  the 
short  middle  dry  season,  which  had  set  in  here  a  month  before, 
while  in  the  Apingi  and  Ashira  r^on,  and  on  the  eastern 
slope  of  these  hiUs,  the  first  part  of  the  rainy  season  was  in  full 
force. 

I  spent  a  night  with  Obindji,  then  took  canoes  and  was  pulled 
down  to  Gonmbi,  where  I  found  my  old  friend  Qnengueza  absent, 
to  my  great  disappointment  After  two  days'  rest  I  passed  down 
stream  again,  and  on  the  lOth  of  February  was  haUed  by  my 
old  keeper  Binkimongami,  and  by  his  chief  Ranpano.  They 
had  almost  given  up  the  hope  of  seeing  me  again,  but  had  k^t 
my  live-stock  and  goods  safely.  They  were  very  proud  when  I 
2  H  2 


468  SINGULAR  COLONY  OF  BIRDS.  Chap.  XXVL 

expressed  my  pleasure,  and  the  town  had  a  general  jollification, 
to  which  I  contributed  unlimited  tobacco  from  the  interior. 

Then  for  the  seashore  to  look  out  for  a  ship.  The  fever 
began  to  creep  on  me.  Quinine  I  had  taken  to  the  amount  of 
fourteen  ounces,  till  now  it  had  almost  ceased  to  afiect  me, 
except  when  taking  great  quantities.  Fowler's  solution  of  arsenic 
seemed  also  powerless.  I  had  grown  to  be  an  unhappy  Mithri- 
dates — poison-proof.  Daily  I  seemed  to  get  weaker,  and  daily 
I  longed  more  to  feel  the  fresh  searbreeze  which  should  bear  me 
to  America. 

Four  long  months  were  yet  to  elapse,  however,  before  at  last 
my  vessel  came  in  sight.  In  this  dull  time  of  packing,  writing, 
and  illness,  many  weary  hours  were  relieved  by  watching  the 
singular  actions  of  a  very  curious  bird,  the  SyeobiuB  nifferrimus, 
which  had,  in  immense  numbers,  colonized  a  little  grove  of  trees 
near  my  house  during  my  last  absence.  The  habits  of  these 
little  twitterers  are  most  remarkable,  and  I  never  wearied  of 
watching  their  various  and  very  skilful  and  intelligent  manoeuvres 
in  nestJbuilding  and  gathering  food. 

There  are  two  species,  but  both  live  in  the  same  trees  and 
indiscriminately  among  each  other,  though  not,  of  course,  in  the 
same  nests.  The  male  of  one  species  is  entirely  black,  and  the 
female  a  dark  gray,  while  in  the  other  the  male  is  yeUow,  with 
black  and  yellow  throat.  The  eggs  of  the  first  mentioned  are 
bluish,  with  black  spots,  while  those  of  the  last  are  light  pink, 
with  dark  spots. 

They  are  extremely  sociable  birds,  and  not  only  establish 
themselves  in  vast  colonies,  but  prefer  always  to  live  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  a  village,  and,  at  any  rate,  not  far  from  where 
the  palm  and  the  plantain  abound.  They  seem  fond  of  the 
society  of  man,  something  as  our  own  swallows  are. 

They  are  singularly  industrious  birds.  When  they  have  settled 
upon  a  tree  on  which  to  plant  a  colony,  they  labour  from  daylight 
till  dark,  day  after  day,  with  the  utmost  joy  and  fun  and  perse- 
verance at  their  very  singular  pendent  nests,  which  I  will  now 
proceed  to  describe.  The  nest  is  in  shape  rounds  or  nearly  so, 
with  a  narrow  passage  for  entrance  and  exit,  leading  down  one 
side  and  opening  beneath.  It  is  securely  fastened  to  an  out- 
stretched twig,  probably  for  safety  from  monkeys  and  serpents ; 
and  I  have  counted  on  one  tree  near  my  house  over  two  thousand 


Chap.  XXVI.  A  VESSEL  IN  SIGHT.  469 

of  such  pendent  little  balls,  each  inhabited  by  a  family  of  the 
birds. 

The  birds,  when  building,  strip  the  tough  outside  fibre  of  the 
palm  or  plantain-leaf,  and  split  this  into  very  narrow  strips  not 
more  than  two  or  three  lines  wide,  but  the  whole  length  of  the 
leaf.  Male  and  female  both  work  at  gathering  this  material : 
when  a  sufficient  number  of  strips  are  brought  to  begin  a  nest, 
and  the  pendent  twig  is  fixed  upon,  the  birds  begin  to  turn  these 
leaf-strips  over  the  twig,  and  to  interlace  them  below  in  a  manner 
which  enables  the  finished  nest  to  shed  rain.  The  birds  work 
with  the  greatest  assiduity  with  both  beak  and  feet ;  and  often  I 
would  see  one  little  fellow  one  minute  holding  \>j  his  feet  and 
working  the  fibres  in  with  his  bill,  the  next  suspended  by  the 
bill  and  pushing  all  together  with  his  feet,  and  then  adroitly 
slipping  inside,  and,  by  pushing  and  working  with  his  body, 
giving  the  nest  a  round  shape.  The  entrance  is  the  last  made, 
and  doubtless  instinct  teaches  them  to  turn  its  mouth  down,  to 
enable  it,  too,  to  shed  rain. 

Sometimes  trees  on  which  these  industrious  little  fellows  build 
are  quite  killed  by  the  weight  of  so  many  nests,  and  by  the  space 
they  occupy  preventing  the  regular  growth  of  the  branches.  The 
nests  are  used  not  only  to  breed  in,  but  also  to  live  in,  and  each 
pair  breeds  several  times  a  year,  raising  two  young  at  a  brood. 
Of  course,  with  such  rapid  increase  they  are  always  needing  new 
nests,  so  that  the  building  process  is  going  on  almost  all  the 
time.  It  is  remarkable  that  among  so  many  nests,  all  looking 
to  my  eyes  exactly  alike,  each  bird  was  always  able  to  find  his 
own.  But  I  must  own  that  sometimes  I  noticed  a  strong  fellow 
trying  with  might  and  main  to  oust  one  of  his  weaker  brethren 
from  his  home,  though  generally  with  little  success.  They  have 
a  foreknowledge  of  the  rainy  season  evidently,  for  just  before 
this  sets  in  they  are  peculiarly  active  in  building  and  repairing, 
and  at  such  times  the  village  near  which  they  have  settled  is 
alive  with  their  merry  twittering  and  active  bustle. 

In  watching  these  little  neighbours  of  mine  I  spent  many  a 
day  which  would  have  been  unutterably  weary  but  for  them. 
At  last,  on  the  1st  of  June,  I  was  so  happy  as  to  spy  a  saiL  My 
heart  beat  anxiously  lest  she  should  pass.  But,  to  my  great  joy, 
the  little  brig  stood  right  in  shore.  By  night  I  knew  that  my 
friends  in  the  Gaboon  had  sent  to  inquire  for  news  of  me.     They 


470  RETURN  HOME.  Chap.  XXVI. 

had  given  me  up  for  lost  The  captain  had  orders  tx>  aBcertain 
how  I  came  to  my  death.  I  was  glad  to  be  able  to  assnre  him 
that  I  was  not  dead  yet. 

And  now  came  the  weary  work  of  taking  in  my  cargo  of  beaato 
and  other  things — the  tedious  delays  which  yet  kept  me,  poor 
fever-stricken  wretch !  to  the  shore.  At  last  we  were  off,  and 
with  a  thankful  heart  I  welcomed  the  cool  breeze  which  hote  me 
back  to  civilization,  to  Mends,  and  to  renewed  health. 

And  here  I  part  from  the  reader,  who,  I  trust,  has  not  yawned 
over  my  troubles,  nor  grown  weary  over  the  story  of  my  adven- 
tures and  explorations. 


Wicker-work  BatUe  to  drtre  the  DevU  ont 


APPENDIX. 


(A.) 
THE  FAUNA  OF  EQUATORIAL  AFRICA. 

For  the  use  of  naturalists,  I  give  here  a  list  of  the  animals  collected  by  me 
during  the  explorations  described  in  the  body  of  the  book.  New  species  I 
have,  for  convenience  of  reference,  put  by  themselves.  For  detailed  descrip- 
tion of  the  new  animals  the  scientific  reader  is  referred  to  the  *  Proceedings  of 
the  Boston  Society  of  Natural  History '  for  1860. 


MAMMALIANS. 

SPEOIES  DISOOVEBED   BT  F.    B.    DU   CHAILLU. 


Troglodytes  calvns, 

„         Eoolo-kamha. 
Trogelaphus  albo-virgatus. 
Potamochoenis  albifrons. 
Genetta  Fieldiana. 
Anomalarus  Beldeni. 

„        (not  described  yet). 


Gercopithecus  nigripes. 
OtoUcnus  apicalis. 
Gynogale  velox. 
Sciums  Nordhoffl. 
„      eborivoms. 

Wilsoni. 

subalbidus. 


t> 


ft 


Soinrus  nibripes. 
„      minutos. 
Manatns  Oweni. 
Aspidonectes  aspilus 

(turtle). 
[Several  species  of  mammals 

not  yet  described.] 


T.  Gorilla. 

T.  Niger  (Ghimpanzee). 

Elephas  Africanus. 

Hippopotamus. 

Bos  brachicheros. 

Trogelaphus  silvicultrix. 

„         (species  not  de> 

termined). 
LeoparduB  varius. 
Gazella    (four   species^  not 

determined). 
Grocodilus  vulgaris. 
Gams  aureus. 


KNOWN   SPBOIBS. 

Genetta  Aubryana. 

M       poensis. 
Hynna  striata. 
Hystrix  cristata. 
Golobus  Satanus. 
Presbytes  albigena. 
Gercopithecus  melanogenys. 
cephus. 
(species     not 
determined). 
Mangabet  k  collier  (Gerco- 

cebus). 
Gynocephalus  Mormon. 


>t 


*t 


Otolicnus  Pelii. 

Sciurus   (three    species  not 
determined). 

Sorex  odoratus. 

Yespertilio  minutus. 

„        (two    other   spe- 
cies, not  determined). 

Anomalurus  Fraseri. 

Lutra  (species    not    deter- 
mined); 

Pangolin. 


Kinixys  erosa. 


TURTLES. 
StemothsBrus  Derbianus. 


Tryonix  Aubryii. 


SERPENTS  AND   OTHER  REPTILES. 


Pjrthon  bivittatus. 

Thrasops  flavigularis,  or  Bu- 
cephalus capensis. 

Ghlorophis  heterodermus. 

Boffidon  quadrivirgatum. 

Toxicodryas  Blandingii. 

Echidna  nasicomis. 

A  species  of  naja. 

Braohyoranion  corpulontum 
(snake). 

Goluber  Philips! 


Dryophis  Kirtlandi. 
DiiMaa  or  Toxicodryas  Blan* 

dingii. 
Lcptophis  smaragdinus. 
Dendrophis  flavigularis. 
Sphenorhina  elegans. 
Cferrhosaurus  Bibronii. 

„  uigro  lineatus. 

Euprepes  striata. ' 

„        Blandingii. 

,.        albilabris. 


Bufo  maculatus. 
Dactylethra  Mfilleri. 
Hyla  puntata. 
Rana  Bibronii. 

„     albolabris  (discovered 

by  me.) 
Heterogloasa  Africana. 
Ghamaleo  dilepsis. 

granulosus. 


t» 


472 


APPENDIX. 


(A.) 


BIRDS. 


SPECIES  DISOOYERED  BY  P.   B.   DU  CHAILLU. 


Barbfttula  Du  Ohaillui. 

„         fuliginosa. 
Diceum  BnshisB. 
^gitbaloB  flavifroDB. 
Camaroptera  tincta. 
Silvia  FraBina. 
Butalis  inf UBcatoB. 
Muscicapa  epulata  {But<dU 

epuiattu). 
Erythrocercns  M*Oallii. 
Dijmoica  Bairdii. 
Onniger  xanthogaeter. 
PYirhurufl  leuco])leiini8. 
Melignothes  oonirostriB. 

„         exilis. 
Alethe  castanea. 
TricophoniB  calurus. 
leucorns. 


ff 


TrioopUonis  notatus  (Xeno 

cichla). 
Phasidns  niger. 
Numida  plumifera. 
Tockus  camunis. 
Francolinus  n^uaioatas. 
Andiopadus  Tirens. 
Butalis  comitatns. 
Sycobius  Bachelliie. 

M        Bcntatus. 
Meropiscus  Mttlleri. 
Atticora  nitens. 
Hetierodes  instgnis. 
Ispidina  Leoontii. 
Eopsaltria  cinerea,  or  Hy- 

podes  cinerea. 
Meropogon  Breweri. 
Eupnnodes  schlstaceiiB. 


Camaroptera  canicepa. 
SyMetta  virenB. 
Pannoptila  Woodhonsei. 
Macrosphenus  flarScans. 
Geocichla  compsonota. 
Tricophoms  cbloronotna. 

.  tricolor  (Xeno- 

cichla). 
Andropadus  cnrYirostris. 
Muscipeta  specioea. 

M        an  GbaillnL 
Trochocercus  nitens. 
Parisoma  melannnim. 

„       olivescens. 
Turdirostria  ftdveecens. 
Hypbantomis  cinctus. 
Golumba  iriditorqn^. 
unicincta. 


SPECIES  ALBEADY  DESCRIBED. 


Gypobierax  Angolensis. 
Tepbrodomis  ocreatos. 
Polyboroides  radiatnB. 
n  typiciiB. 

Acoipiter  Tousseneli. 
„        HartlaubiL 
Halisetus  vocifer. 
„        blagrus. 
Spiza)tus  ooronatuB. 
„        occipitalis. 
Spilornis  bacha. 
Miscratur  macronms. 
Aviceda  cnctdoides. 
8cotopelia  Pelii. 
CbaunonotuB  Sabinei. 
IxoB  ABbanteuB. 
IxonotoB  guttatuB. 
Nectarinia  superba. 
M  Jobannae. 

fuliginosa. 
necterina. 
angolensis. 
cbloropy^a. 
subcollans. 
tepbrolama. 
AntbrepteB  aurantia. 
n  Frazeri. 

Nectarinia  cyanolnma. 
n         Reicbenbaoliii 
„  cnprea. 

„  obscura. 

„  cyanocepbala. 

„  Strangerii. 

„  vertic^is. 

Merops  bicolor. 
Breweri. 


M 


♦» 


» 


Merops  BullockioideB. 
M      albicollis. 
M      yariegatuB. 
Meropiscus  gularis. 
Alcedo  leucogastra. 
Halcyon  badia. 

M       Senegalensis. 

«      dryas. 
Alcedo  quadribracbys. 
Oorytbornis  cieruleocepbala 
Ceryle  rudis. 
Motacilla  Capensis. 
Telopbonus  leucorbyncbus. 
Laniarus  cruentis. 

„        Pelii. 

„        cbloris. 
Dryoscopus  major 
Campepbaga  nigra. 
Lobotos  Temminckii. 
Geblepyris    or    graucalus 

azurea. 
Dicrurus  caracinus. 

„        atripennis. 
SigmoduB  ruflventriB. 
AntbuB  Gk)uldii. 
OorvuB  curvirostrifl. 
ZanclostomuB  flayirostris. 
CbaunonotuB  Sabinei 
CoBsypba  poensis. 

M       verticalis. 
Pratincola  salax. 
CicropuB  Gordoni. 
Musicapa  grisola. 
Gypselus  ambrosiacua. 
Atticora  Mclbina. 
Cbietura  Subinoi. 


Hirundo  cabirica. 

„        nigrita. 
CecroplB  GK)rdoni  {Hinmdo). 
Pyrenestes  coccineuB. 
Platystira    melanoptem 

(muscicapa). 
Platystira  leucopygialis. 
ZanclostomuB  BBreus. 
LaniuB  SmitbiL 
Tricopborus  simplex. 
M  palescens. 

M  fosai. 

Macronix  flavirentria. 
Andropadus  latirostris. 

„  graciliroetns. 

Sycobius  nitens. 
M        cristatus. 
„       nigeirimus. 
„        malimbus. 
„        scutatuB. 
OrioluB  nigripennis. 

M     Baruffi    (interme- 
dius). 
Gaprimulgus  binotatus. 
Camaroptera  superciliaria. 

„  baoicepB. 

Euprinodes  rufogularis. 

„  olivaceua. 

Artomigias  fuliginosa. 
DryosocopuB  amnis. 
Lamprocolius  splendidiB. 

n  purpureiceps. 

Muscipeta  flaviventris. 
M         Smitbii. 

melanogaatra. 
melampyra. 


»» 


1 


(A.) 


APPENDIX. 


473 


!♦ 


t» 


f* 


II 


*» 


»> 


f« 


Bias  musicua 
Gampephaga  nigra. 
Estrelda  rubriventris. 

atricapiUa. 

melpoda. 

rubriventris. 
Passer  Swainsonii. 
Corjthaix  meriani. 

„         (species    not  de- 
termined). 
Turaous  giganteus. 
Tockus  fasciatus. 
Tnrtur  erythrophrys. 
Buoeros  cJbocnstatus. 

atratus. 

cylindricus. 

fistolator. 

poensis. 
Apaloderma  narina. 
Treron  calva. 

M     nudirostris. 
Peristera  cbalcospilos  (Co- 

Itunba). 
Peristera  puella. 

„        tympanistria. 
„        afra. 
„        Malberbi. 
Sqnatarola  helvetica. 
Oharadrius  zonatus. 
Hiaticula  pecuaria. 
Harpiprion  olivaceus. 
Totanus  hypoleucns. 
Calidris  arenaria. 
Sterna  Senegalensis. 
Podica  Senegalensis. 
Numenius  phseopus. 
Strepsilas  interpras. 
Fraseria  ocreata. 


ft 


cinerascens. 
Platystiiti  melanoptera. 

„        lencopygiaiis. 
Pratinoola  salax. 
Macronix  flaviventris. 
Stiphornis  erjrthrothorax. 
Sylvietta  microura. 
Gisticola  cursitans. 
Spermestee  cncuUata. 

„  poensis. 

Ortygospiza  atricollis. 


t* 


»f 


Fringillaria  tabapisi. 
Fouiua  erythrops. 
Hyphantomis  navigula. 

n  Grayi  (female 

of  flavigola). 
Hypbantomis  textor. 
Hypbanturgus  personatus. 
Cohostrutbus  macroums. 
Centropus  monacbns. 
Dendrobates  Garoli. 
Pogonias  birsutus. 
Oxylopbus  Jacobinus. 
Francolinus  LaOui/mi. 
Bubo  leucostictus. 
Svmium  Woodfordii. 
Eurystomus  afer. 

„  gularis. 

Drymoica  ruficeps. 
„        nsBvia. 

fortirostris. 
lateralis. 
Hylia  prasina    (Stypbrornis 

superciliaris). 
Pbyllopneuste  umbrovirens. 
Gisticola  cursitans. 
Turdus  Pelios. 
Xenocicbla  syndactila. 
Pyrrburus  pallescens. 
Hyliota  vimaoea. 
Dryoscopus  affinis. 

„  major  (Telopbo- 

nus  major). 
Nigrita  canioapila. 
Inteifrons. 
fusconota 
bicolor. 
Vidua  principalis. 
Spermospiza  guttata. 
Psittaous  paobyrbyncbus. 
Barbatula  subsulfurea. 

„         scolopaoea  {Xylo- 
bucco), 
Gynmobucco  calvus. 
Tracbypbonus  purpuratus. 
Dendropicus  Gabonensis. 

„  nigriguttatus. 

Donibromus  Garoli. 

bracbyrbyncbus. 
nivosus. 


i» 


»t 


»» 


If 


Dendromus  AiHcanus. 

„  (several  species, 

not  yet  determined). 
Indicator  maculatos. 
Gentropus  Francisoi. 
H  monacbus. 

Guculus  Gabonensis. 
Gbrysococcyx  smaragdineus. 
Synoicus  Adansonii. 
CEdicnemus  Senegalensis. 
Glareola  cinerea. 
Lobivanellus  adbiceps. 
iEgialites  marginatus. 

„        pecuarius. 
Ardea  goliatb. 
Egretta  flavirostris. 

„       bulbucus. 
Butorides  atricapiUa. 
Giconia  leucocepbala. 
Mycteria  Senegalensis. 
Leptotilos  crumenifera. 
Scopus  umbretta. 
Tantalus  ibis. 
Gteronticus  hagedash. 
„         olivaceus. 
Ibis  religiosa. 
Numenius  pbsBopbus. 
Actitis  bypoleucus. 
Parra  Africana. 
Rallus  oculeus. 
Himantomis  hnmatopus. 
Pborpbyrio  Alleni. 
Limnocorax  flavirostris. 
Phoenicopterus  er3rtbr9Bus. 
Nettapus  Biadagascariensis. 
Dendrocygna  viduata. 
Querquedula         Hartlaubii 

(Annas  cyanoptera). 
Podica  Senegalensis. 
Sterna  Gaspia. 

„      cantiaca. 

„     Senegalensis. 
Rbyncbops  orientalis. 
Plotus  Levaillantii. 
Sula  Gapensis. 
Garbo  Africanus. 
Nycticorax  Europteus. 
[Some  species  not  yet  de- 
scribed.] 


474  APPENDIX.  (B.) 

(B.) 

THE  LANGUAGES  OF  EQUATORIAL  AFRICA. 

As  we  acquire  greater  knowledge  of  the  langoages  and  dialects  of  the  natioui 
and  tribes  of  Central  Africa,  the  conviction  gains  ground  among  j^ologists 
that  the  people  of  this  great  continent  belong  to  two  distinct  families.  Hie 
line  of  separation  I  believe  to  be  found  one  or  two  degrees  north  of  the  equator. 
To  the  south  of  this  line  all  the  people  now  known  speak  in  dialects  whieh^ 
though  sufficiently  distinct,  belong  evidently  to  one  common  family,  having  a 
common  origin.  This  is  true  of  all,  so  far  as  known,  from  the  northern  line  I 
have  denoted  down  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  except  the  Hottentots,  ihe 
Namaquas,  and  a  few  other  insignificant  tribes  near  the  last-mentioned  place, 
who  are  not  supposed  to  belong  to  either  branch  of  the  African  fiunily. 

This  class  of  languages  and  dialects  may  be  distinguished  by  the  tiUe  alli- 
terative. The  changes  which  the  words  undergo  in  their  declensions  and  con- 
jugations always  affect  both  the  initial  and  final  syllables,  and  whole  sentences 
occur  having  a  complete  alliteration  throughout. 

The  tribes  of  the  northern  half  of  the  continent,  so  far  as  their  languages  are 
known  to  me  by  study  or  by  personal  observation  (the  latter  confined  to  the 
western  coast,  through  Gambia  and  Senegambia  to  the'borders  of  the  Desert), 
use  dialects  less  regular  in  Uieir  structure,  less  melodious  in  sound,  and  by  &r 
more  difficult  for  the  tongue  and  ear  of  the  white  man. 

Within  the  region  which  I  explored  the  language  of  the  Mpongwe  is  the 
most  widely  spread.  It  is  used,  with  slight  variations  and  modifications,  by 
no  less  than  seven  of  the  most  considerable  tribes,  the  Mpongwe,  Commi 
(Camma),  Oroungou,  Ogobay,  Rembo,  Ngaloi,  Ayomba,  and  Anengsk  Some 
other  dialects,  also,  are  evidently  derived  from  this,  while  another  large  class 
has  marks  of  decided  kinship  to  the  Bakalai  language.  This  last  is  spdcen, 
either  purely  or  in  dialects  varying  but  slightly,  by  the  Bakalai,  Mbenga, 
Eombe,  Bapoukou,  Balengue,  Mbousha,  Mbondemo,  Mbisho,  Mbiki,  She&iaui, 
Apingi,  Evili,  and  probably  many  more  tribes  of  the  interior. 

The  language  of  the  cannibal  tribe,  the  Fans,  stands  alone,  being  evidently 
not  related  to  any  of  the  others.  It  is  rude,  and  very  guttural,  and  bean 
some  likeness  to  that  spoken  in  the  interior  of  Cape  Palmas  and  on  the  Croo 
coast. 

The  Mpongwe  and  Bakalai,  and  their  kindred  dialects,  are  to  a  remarkable 
degree  r^ular  and  systematic  in  their  structure.  I  found  it  very  extraordinaiy 
that  languages  used  only  by  savages,  and  having  no  written  standard,  should 
retain  their  precision  and  system  as  these  have  done.  Scarce  any  languages 
known  are  so  systematic  as  these.  They  are  rich  in  words  expressive  of  the 
ideas  of  these  barbarous  people,  and  they  are  capable  of  very  great  expansion 
for  new  wants.  From  radicals  already  in  use  new  words  can  be  regularly 
derived  when  needed,  and  are  at  once  imderstood. 

The  Bakalai  and  its  branches  have  no  letter  r.  The  Mpongwe  and  the 
Ashira,  on  the  contrary,  abound  in  this  letter,  which  is  rolled  or  accented  vAy 
strongly.  The  Mpongwe  strikes  me  as  one  of  the  finest  of  all  the  known 
languages  of  Africa.    It  is  remarkable  that  all  the  tribes  which  use  it  are  much 


(B.)  APPENDIX.  475 

less  warlike  than  those  which  use  the  Bakalai,  many  of  which  are  fierce  and 
troublesome. 

The  tribes  inhabiting  the  west  coast  south  of  Cape  St.  Catherine  speak 
dialects  some  of  which  show  more  affinity  with  the  language  of  the  Mpongwe, 
others  with  that  of  the  Bakalai ;  but  all  show,  in  the  formation  of  many  of 
their  words,  a  third  element,  proving  that  some  of  these  words  hare  been  derived 
from  another  language  with  which  the  two  former  have  not  been  acquainted. 

The  Mpongwe  language  is  to  a  very  great  extent  polysyllabic.  There  are 
scarce  a  score  of  monosyllabic  nouns  in  the  whole  language,  and  not  more  than 
three  or  four  monosyllabic  verbs.  It  abounds  in  contracti(ms  and  compounded 
words,  in  which,  however,  the  parts  are  preserved  sufficiently  well  to  be  very 
easily  distinguished.  There  are  but  few  words  difficult  of  utterance  to 
Americans  or  Europeans,  and  the  pronunciation  is  very  distinct,  each  syllable 
being  fully  sounded,  making  it  easy  of  acquisition  to  strangers.  Almost  all 
the  words  terminate  in  a  vowel,  which  is  fully  sounded,  and  a  great  part  of  the 
nouns  and  verbs  also  begin  with  a  vowel.  The  genders  of  nouns  are  not  distin- 
guished otherwise  than  by  prefixing  the  term  man  or  woman.  For  instauce, 
vxmna  means  child ;  w<mt<MJtxmna  is  girl ;  and  dUm^woftma  is  boy.  There 
are  several  ways  of  forming  the  plural.  Nouns  which  begin  with  a  consonant 
are  made  plural  by  prefixing  i  to  the  singular  forms ;  thus,  nago^  house ;  inago^ 
houses.  Nouns  banning  with  o  form  their  plurals  by  changing  o  into  % ; 
thus,  cmemba,  snake ;  imemiba^  snakes.  Nouns  beginning  with  e  form  their 
plurals  by  dropping  the  e ;  thus,  egara,  chest ;  gara,  chests.  Nouns  beginning 
with  i  form  their  plurals  by  changing  «  to  a ;  thus,  idambe^  a  sheep ;  adaiM, 
sheep.  All  the  changes  in  the  Mpongwe  nouns,  except  such  as  result  from 
contractions,  are  on  the  first  syllable.  The  noun  of  agency  is  in  nearly  all 
cases  formed  by  prefixing  the  letter  o  to  the  verb ;  thus,  noka  is  to  lie,  and 
onoka  is  a  liar. 

Personal  pronouns  abound  in  the  Mpongwe,  and  also  in  the  Bakalai  and 
other  dialects  of  this  region.  Thus,  in  Mpongwe,  mie  is  I  and  me ;  you,  atoe ; 
y^f  he ;  ay^^  she  or  it ;  ozW,  us ;  tmuwey  ye ;  nuwe,  you ;  waoj  they ;  wa^ 
them. 

The  adjectives  have  many  changes  besides  their  degrees  of  comparison. 
They  do  not,  however,  possess  any  inflections  to  indicate  gender  or  case.  In 
the  following  examples  we  find  no  less  than  seven  forms  of  the  adjective  mpo2b, 
which  means  large : — 

Nyar4  mpdlo,  a  large  oow.  Idambe  ivolu,  a  large  sheep. 

Inyar4  impoZo,  large  cows.  Adambe  ampolo,  large  sheep. 

Egara  evc^,  a  large  chest  Omemba  ompcio,  a  large  snake. 

Oara  vdlu,  large  chests.  Immniba  tmpdlo,  large  snakes. 

These  and  like  changes  are  used  with  the  utmost  precision,  arbitrary  as  they 
are,  and  though  they  have  of  course  no  grammatical  rules  nor  any  written 

standard. 
We  come  now  to  speak  of  the  verb,  which  has,  in  all  the  languages  of  the 

southern  half  of  Africa,  the  most  peculiar  forms.    The  Mpongwe  verb  has  four 

moods,  the  indicative,  imperative,  conditional,  and  subjunctive.  The  indicative 

mood  is  formed  with  the  aid  of  auxiliary  particles.    The  imperative  is  derived 

from  the  present  of  the  indicative  by  the  change  of  its  initial  consonant  into  ita 


•476  APPENDIX.  (B.) 

reciprocal  consonant ;  ihns^  tcnda,  to  love,  ronda^  love  thou  ;  denda^  to  do, 
lenda,  do  thou. 

The  conditional  mood  has  a  form  of  its  own,  but  the  conjunctive  particleB 
are  used  as  auxiliaries  at  the  same  time,  and  different  conjunctive  particles  are 
used  with  different  tenses.  The  subjunctive  has  only  one  form,  and  is  used  as 
the  second  verb  in  a  sentence  where  there  are  two  verbs. 

The  tenses  in  the  Mpongwe  are  the  present^  fxtst,  perfect  past,  and  fviure. 
The  perfect  past  tense,  which  represents  the  completeness  of  an  action,  is 
formed  from  the  present  tense  by  prefixing  a  and  by  changing  the  final  into  i ; 
tiius,  tonda,  to  love,  aiondi,  loved  or  did  love. 

The  past  is  derived  frcHn  the  imperative  by  prefixing  a  and  by  changing  a 
final  into  i;  thus,  rondo,  love  thou,  arondi,  to  have  loved. 

The  future  tense  is  formed  by  the  aid  of  the  auxiliary  participle  he;  as,  mt 
he  tcnda,  I  am  going  to  love.  But  this  combination  of  words,  if  the  nomina- 
tive follows,  expresses  past  time. 

In  the  future  tense  Uie  nominative  goes  before  the  verb  in  the  order  of  con- 
struction. When  an  action  is  immediately  to  take  place,  the  present  tense  k 
used  as  a  future ;  as  mi  bta,  I  am  coming  immediately  ;  while  mi  be  hia  means 
I  am  coming  after  a  while,  or  at  some  indefinite  time. 

The  passive  is  formed  from  the  active  simply  by  changing  a  final  into  o  : 
thus,  mi  tanda,  I  love ;  mi  tondo,  I  am  loved.  In  the  liistorical  and  perfect 
tense,  which  terminates  in  i,  o  is  simply  adjoined :  thus,  arondi,  have  loved ; 
arondio^  to  have  been  loved. 

There  is  also  in  every  Mpongwe  verb  a  negative  for  every  affirmative  form, 
and  the  negative  is  distinguished  from  the  affirmative  by  an  accent  or  dwelling 
on  the  first  or  principal  vowel  of  the  verb,  which  I  will  characterize  in  writinsj 
by  the  use  of  an  italic  letter.  The  negative  form  belongs  to  the  passive  ^ 
well  as  to  the  active  voice,  and  this  slight  difference  of  intonation  or  accentua- 
tion is  one  of  the  most  difficult  for  a  foreigner  to  catch : — 

Mi  tondo,  J  love.  Mi  tondo,  I  am  loeed. 

Mi  tonda,  I  do  not  love.  Mi  tondo,  I  am  not  loved. 

All  the  verbs  in  the  Mpongwe  language,  with  the  exception  of  about  fifteen 
or  twenty,  may  be  regarded  as  regular  verbs,  inasmuch  as  they  are  governed 
by  the  same  fixed  principle.  The  verbs  of  two  or  more  syllables  have  always 
the  final  a;  and  the  incipient  consonants  of  these  verbs  are  either  6,  d,/jj\  k^ 
p,  8,  ty  or  sh.  Each  of  these  has  a  reciprocal  consonant  Such  verbs  as  com- 
mence with  m  or  n,  which  have  no  reciprocal  consonants,  retain  these  two 
letters  throughout  all  their  inflections,  but  in  other  respects  are  perfectly 
regular.  The  invariable  reciprocal  letter  of  6  is  v  or  w.  So  the  imperative  is 
derived  from  the  present  of  the  indicative  in  all  the  verbs  which  commence 
with  6,  by  changing  b  into  w  ot  v :  thus.  Mi  honga,  I  take ;  imp.,  wonga,  take. 
In  the  same  manner,  and  with  invariable  uniformity,  d  is  changed  into/,/ 
into  V,  oxfvm  into  vw,  j  into  y,  k  into  ^,  p  into  v,  n  into  z,  sh  into  zy,  and  t 
into  r.     Thus, 

Mi  bonga,  I  take ;  Mi  kamba,  I  speak ; 

Wonga,  take.  Gamba,  speak. 

Every  regular  verb  in  the  language  may  be  said  to  possess  five  conjugations 
and  as  many  as  six  compound  conjugations.    Thus,  from  kamba^  to  speak,  or 


(B.)  APPENDIX.  477 

I  speak,  the  causation  is  formed  by  clianging  a  into  iza :  kamhizay  to  oanse  to 
speak.  The  form  which  implies  habitual  action  is  derived  from  the  radical  by 
prefixing  ga:  thus,  kambaj  to  speak;  kamhaga^  to  speak  habitually.  The 
relative  conjugation,  which  implies  performing  an  action  for  or  to  some  one,  is 
derived  from  the  radical  by  suffixing  na  :  thus,  from  Jccmiba,  to  speak,  comes 
kamhana  or  kambina,  to  speak  to  or  with  some  one.  The  indefinite  is  derived 
from  the  radical  by  suffixing  the  imperative  to  the  present  of  the  indicative  : 
thus,  from  kamha  comes  kambagamba,  to  speak  at  random. 

In  the  Mbenga  language,  the  radical  kcUaga,  speak,  is  changed  as  follows  : 
kcUakate,  to  continue  speaking ;  kalakia^  to  speak  to  or  speak  for ;  kalakide^ 
to  cause  to  speak ;  kalanakianiy  to  speak  for  one  another ;  kalaka  hekcUikali, 
to  speak  at  random ;  takala,  to  speak  first  (in  a  trial) ;  keUaka  ho  kalaka, 
speak  and  do  nothing  else. 

The  radical  form  of  the  verb  expresses  the  simple  idea  without  any  accessory 
or  contingent  meaning.  The  second  expresses  continuance  of  the  action,  and 
in  many  verbs  intensity  of  the  simple  idea :  thus,  kdlakcUe  mbi  yokakaU,  speak 
on  ;  I  will  hear. 

These  remarks  and  exemplifications  will  give  some  idea  of  the  beauty  and 
philosophical  structure  of  the  languages  of  this  region.  There  is  in  these  lan- 
guages a  mine  which  will  richly  repay  working.  They  possess  an  extensive 
unwritten  literature,  consisting  of  proverbs,  parables,  all^ories,  mystic  inter- 
pretations, fables,  and  fantastic  and  fobulous  stories,  which  are  handed  down 
from  generation  to  generation.  Many  of  these  fables  I  have  listened  to  in  the 
evening,  by  the  light  of  my  camp-fire,  with  unbounded  delight,  wondering  at 
the  imagination  of  the  barbarous  African. 

I  regretted  only  that  want  of  time  and  my  other  pursuits  prevented  me  from 
investigating  and  writing  down  many  of  their  wonderful  stories  and  fables. 

I  close  with  a  table  of  numerals,  which,  as  being  Uie  easiest  to  collect  for 
comparison,  must  serve  as  a  beginning  for  the  philologist  who  desires  to  study 
the  languages  of  this  region.  All  that  are  here  given  were  collected  by  myself. 
All  but  two  or  three  I  obtained  when  among  the  tribes  to  whom  each  list  is 
credited.  The  others  I  gained  by  a  visit  to  a  French  emigrant  ship  sailing 
from  Cape  Lopez  with  a  cargo  of  negroes.  To  show  what  great  facilities  the 
student  can  have,  even  on  the  coast,  for  studying  the  languages  of  the  far  in- 
terior tribes,  I  may  mention  that  on  board  this  very  ship  I  found  men  from  no 
less  than  thirty-eight  difierent  tribes ! 

SENEGAMBIA  TBIBES. 


Kingdom  of  Sin. 

Yolot 

Kingdom  of  Bm>1. 

Ko 

IL^n. 

Bien  or  Ben  (quick) 

.  Kilin€. 

T^  ta. 

2  B^tique. 

Niar. 

Foulo  or  fonla. 

F^^ 

3  B^tafouUtque. 

Ni^p  (quick). 

Sabo  or  saba. 

Toh2u>ua. 

4  B^ta  founaqne. 

Ni^et. 

Nani 

Nani 

5  B^ta  foutadaque.  Di^roum. 

Loulou. 

Dolou. 

6  B^ta  fotique. 

Di^onm  ben. 

Ourb. 

Wbita. 

TBdtaflou. 

Di^um  niet. 

Om6  olo. 

Oukfi^. 

8  B^tafou. 

DierouiD  niep. 

U 

Oiyapa. 

9  B^tafousd 

Di^roum  nielet. 

Konontai. 

TkkoH. 

10  Karbaki. 

Fonque. 

Ten. 

Fo. 

478 


INDEX. 


(B.) 


TRIBES  OF  THB  PAUI  COAST. 


Bftoolobo. 

Vmey. 

Bonx^ 

Goku 

1N6. 

Dondo. 

Tan. 

Ngoumou. 

2  mm. 

T^. 

V^^. 

Nti^. 

SThn. 

Saquoy. 

Daba. 

Ntal. 

4  Hain. 

Nani 

Nani. 

Tina. 

5H56. 

SoulotL 

Lolou. 

Nonon. 

6Nodo. 

Soudondo. 

Malda. 

Diegonm^ 

TDi^tan. 

SonfMa. 

MaTfil^. 

Di^ti^. 

8Diyien. 

Souaaquoy. 

Mi^Iflhaba. 

Dietai. 

9  Bhondo. 

Sounaui. 

Malnan. 

Dectina. 

lOIpou. 

Tan. 

Boh. 

ETeia. 

TBIBES  IN   THE    BIGHT  OF  BENIN. 


OnokbwBtnd. 


Bilei«o6,  fl«Ued  also 
Motengoe  and  AyoDga^. 

1  Qu^Yoho.  Mpoco. 

2  Ibard  IbaU. 
8  Raro.  Ilalo. 

4  Inal.  Inai. 

5  Itano.  Itani. 

6  Itano  na  gu€?oho.Otoba. 

7  Itano  na  ibar^  EmbouMi. 

8  Itano  na  raro.  Lombi. 

9  Itano  na  inai.  Dibona. 
10  Ndioum  or  nai-  Dioum. 

hinal. 


Gamenm  w  Dwalm. 

E'ou^. 

B^ba. 

B^lo. 

Bend. 

Betano. 

Motoba. 

Samba. 

Lbmb^. 

Iboua. 

Dom. 


Ibonai. 

Eroko. 

Biba. 

Belalo. 

BinaL 

Betani. 

Otoba. 

Mboaedi 

LouambL 

Iboua. 

Ndioum. 


TBIBES  OF  THE  GABOON,    MUNI,    Am)   MOONDAH  BIYKBS. 


MpoDgwe,  spoken  by 
elf^t  tribes  before 
mentioiied. 

1  Mori. 

2BaQL 

8  Ncharo. 

4NaL 

STani 

6Roiia. 

7  Boaguenon. 

8  Ananai. 

9  Inongoum. 
lOIgoum. 


Ubooflba. 

Ivoco. 
Bd)a. 
Bdalo. 
Benal. 
Betano. 
Ivoco  b^ba. 
Ivooo  belalo. 
Ivoco  benai. 
Ivoco  betano. 
Dioum. 


Sbekkni,  spoken  also  by 
the  llboodeino,Itaiinon, 
Mblki.  and  Mblsbo. 

W6t^. 

Iba. 

Bitashf. 

In^ 

Itani. 

Itani  m^  wot^. 

Itani  n^  iba. 

Itani  n€  itacbi 

Itani  ind. 

Dioum. 


Mbenga. 

Mpoco. 

Ibali. 

Bala. 

InaL 

Itano. 

Otoba. 

EmbouaidL 

Loguambi. 

IboubL 

Dioum. 


TBIBES 

Alombo. 
1  ImoBbi. 
2IbaI. 
3  Iraro. 
4Ina. 
5Irano. 


ON  OB  KEAB  THE  OGOBAI  AND  ITS  TBIBUTABIES. 

Ngob^  or  Mgob£  (Gamma).  Ashira. 

Mosbi.  Mosbi.  I^wotau. 

Bal.  Bd.  Bd)a. 

Raro.  Irero.  ^laU. 

Ina.  Irano  or  iina.  Benai. 

Dourano.  Samano.  Bitani. 


(B.) 


APPENDIX. 


479 


TBIBES  ON  OB  MEi^  THE  OOOBAI  AND  ITS   TBIBUTABIES — COnHnued. 


Alombo. 

Ngob6  or  Mgob6  (Camma).       Ashinu 

BakaUt. 

6  Isamouin. 

DiflambonaL 

Tn^^,    frero    or 

Na  i^wotau. 

inana. 

7  Disambouai. 

Kambo  moshi 

Bitani-nabiba. 

8  Denana. 

Dinanouai 

Eambo  bd. 

Bitani  nabilali. 

9Ifou. 

Ipoi. 

Bitani  na  benai 

10  D^oum^. 

Igoom. 

Xgonm. 

Dionm. 

MpovL 

IQavl 

ApingL               AvUa.             Aahango. 

1  Mou^ta. 

M5n. 

Mpoco.         ^  Moliai. 

Moshi. 

2Beyali. 

Bioli. 

Mbani.            Bani^. 

BibS. 

SBetata. 

Betato. 

Tcharo.          Nchado.         Biraro. 

4  Benal. 

Bdna. 

InaT.               Naio. 

Bina. 

5  Betani. 

Betani. 

Itani.              Ktano. 

Shkman5. 

6  Betani  mou^ta.    Samouna. 

Moroba.          Enapo. 

Nchambo. 

7  Betani  bevali      Nchamon. 

Pombo. 

8  Betani  betata.      Mponbon. 

9  Betani  benai.       Ouk. 

10  Nchinia. 

Igoume. 

Ashaki. 

Moshebo. 

Meonaii4lt               Madooma. 

Moshe-bo. 

1  Mori. 

Mb. 

M6. 

Mpoco. 

Poco. 

2  Bani. 

Yolfe. 

Biol^. 

Niol^ 

Yolb. 

SShata, 

Moshato. 

Tato. 

Tato. 

Nehalo. 

4NaI. 

Minal. 

Nk. 

Na. 

Benai. 

5  Itani. 

Tani. 

Tani. 

Tani 

6 

Motoba. 

10  Dioum. 

Dioiim. 

Fan  Tribe  (Cumltals). 

Slave  tnm  River  Congo. 

1  Fo. 

Boisse. 

2Bd. 

Gnali 

3Lk 

Tato. 

4Ne. 

Minai. 

5  Tani. 

Tano. 

6  ShAn^. 

Samoum. 

7  Zangoua. 

Sabonani 

• 

8  Moi^m  or  Onam 

1. 

Nana. 

9  Iboum  or  Ibou. 

Vona. 

10  Woooo  or  Abonm. 

KonmL 

LOMDON  :    PEIMTRD  BT  W.  OLOWXS  AKD  80MB,  ST AMFOBD  STSBBT, 

AHD  CHAUMO  CROeS. 


:  I 


—  -  _^ 


7b 


NGITUOE     Ekt 


hy  John  ^ 


w  v7"eE-.:it>.o^ 


1 


1 


L  .
