On Pithecanthropus Erectus: A Transitional form Between Man and the Apes
Author(s): Eugene Dubois
Source: The Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, Vol. 25
(1896), pp. 240-255
Published by: Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2842246 .
Accessed: 15/06/2014 04:04

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .

.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.


                Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve
                and extend access to The Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland.


                              This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                                             All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
240     DR. EUGENEDUBOIS.-On Pithecant7hopus
                                          erectus:


On PITHECANTHROPUS
                ERECTUS:a TRANSITIONALFORMbetween
 MANand theAPES. By Dr. EUGENEDUBOIS. (Abstract.)'
MANY years ago, Dr. Dubois said Junghuhnand othershad
discoveredfossilremainsin Java. Withtheobjectof contiinuina
the workof exploration,  he (Dr. Dubois) had been employedby
the Dutch Indian Governmentto make furtherinvestigations.
D)uringthe years1890-95 he had been successfulin obtaining
a large quantityofremainsof mammalsand reptiles,belonging
mainly to extinct species, closely allied as one mightexpect
to the later Tertiaryand Pleistocenefaunaeof India.
   The chieflocalitiesin whichthese discoverieswere made are
in the southern slope of a low range of hills, called the
Keudengs,whichextendsforabout 60 miles between the resi-
dences Kediri, Madiun, and Suirakartaon the one side, and
Rembangand Samarangon the other.
   The area in which these vertebrateremainsare abundantly
found has, in many places, a breadthaveragingfromone to
threemiles. The specimensdiscoveredwere lying in beds of
cementedvolcanictuff;consistingof clay,sand,and lapilli stone.
The very general occurrenceof the remains of fresh-water
animalsin these beds and their arrangementin what English
geologists call current-bedding   or false-beddingprove con-
clusively their fluviatileorigin. The strata throughoutthe
whole area have undergoneconsiderabledisturbanceby folding,
the resultof whichhas been to give them a general southerly
dip of 30 to 15?. The whole formationreaches a maximum
thicknessof morethan 350 metres.
   The strata rest unconformably   upon beds of marine marl,
sand,and limestone,whichare accordingto ProfessorMartin,of
Leiden,of Pliocene age.
   The fossil vertebratefauna met with in these strata is the
sanie throughout the Keudeng and otherlocalitiesin Java. Its
age can only be decided after the descriptionof Dr. Dubois'
collectionhas been published,but there are already sufficient
grounds for saying that the stratigraphicalposition of the
fauna and its relation to the Post-Tertiaryand Pleistocene
vertebratefaunaeof India pointsto the conclusionthat it is
most probablyyoungerPliocene. In no case,however,can it
be later than the oldestPleistocene,forthespeciesfoundbelong
   This abstractappears by permissionof the Royal Dublin Society,before
whichbody the paper was read on the 20th of November,1895; the paper is
publishedin fullin the Transactionsof the Royal Dublin Society,vol.vi,part I,
page 1. (February,1896.) The illustrations, whichare also kindlylent by the
Royal Dublin Society,are unavoidablydeferredtill the next number.


                 This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                                All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
          Journalof the AnthropologicalInetitute,Vol. XXt, Plate XVta.


                                                                                                 H


    D-,

           7/                   i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~77
                                                                                   //


G           Q
                                                                 c                           Q


                  SECTION        OF THE        BONE STRATA AT TRINIL.

                A-Vegetable soil.
                B-Sand-rock.
                C-Bed of lapilli rock.
                Dl-Level in whichthe fourremainswerefound
                E-Conglomerate.
                F-Clay-rock.
                G-Marine breccia.
                H-Rainy seasonlevel of river
                 I-Dry seasonlevel of river.


                 This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                                All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                                                                            Sill


Profileoutlinesof the skulls of Pithecanthropu.s ereefus(Pe), a Papua
                Joe describedby ProfessorCunningham,anidof J1Iylu6b
    mic0rocephlil
    ma'^rus (Smi),and Anthlropopithecus troglodyte.s(At). G1- G-labell
    ntchw superior. Lni-Linea nuehae    inferior.


This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
               All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                              Institife, Vol. XXV, Plate XVIe.
Jot2rnlalof ftleAnthlropolocqgea7


    FEMUR,    TWO MOLAR TEETH,                   AN'D CALYARIA              OF
                   Pittecanthropuserectus.


          This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                         All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                     Form betweenMlanand theApes.
        A .Transitwonal                                                                 241

 exclusively to living genera, except the extinct sub-gener-a
 Stegodonand Hexaprotodon,   and musttherefore  be youngerthan
 the principal part of the Upper Miocene or Lower Pliocene
 Siwalik fauna, which includes a good many extinct genera;
 further the numberofthe extinctspeciesseems to be somewhat
 greaterthanthat of the Narbada faulna,which belongs to the
 earlyPleistocene.
    In the neighbourhood of Trinil(in the regencyof Ngawi,of
 the ResidencyMadiun) Dr. DuLboisdiscovereda spot at the foot
 of the Keudeng veryrich in fossil remains. Here in August,
 1891, and duringothe followingo    year he uileartheda large
 quanitityof fossil bones, amongstwhich he discoveredthe
 calvaria, thighbone and teeth of a great mani-likemammal,
 whichhe consideredan intermediate   formbetweenman and the
 apes, and named accordinglyPitthecanthropus  erectus. So much
 impressedwas Dr. Dubois withthe importanceof his find,that
he determinedat once to publish a provisionaldescriptionof
 the remains.
    This monograph, whichwas lnecessarily  incomplete,owing,to
the author'sisolationifromvarious sourcesof comparisonand
reference, has givenrise to much discussionamongstaliatomists
alndzoologistsin Europe and America,and it was with the
view of providing,furtherinformationthat Dr. Dubois had
returned to Europe, bringing with him the specimens in
question.
   The lecturer then proceeded to furnisha more detailed
accountofthe localityfromwhichthe remainswere obtained.
   In the neighbourhood  of Trinil the Bengawan or Solo river
runs as far as Ngawi,a distance of 7y miles, between steep
banks, composed almost exclusively of the above-mentioned
volcanicsand and lapilli, cementedtogetherand hardenedinlto
softrock,similarto thosein the Siwalik hills. In thisarea the
stratahave a generaldip S. of about 50, and are only concealed
by a thin coveringof vegetable mould; throughl     these,in the
immediatevicinityof Trinil,the riverhas cut its channel to a
depthof 12 to 15 metres.
   At pointsabove and below Trinil,the Pliocelnemarland lime-
stoneappearunderthesestrata.
   The firstfossilbones here discoveredwere cut out -oftherock
by meansof hammerand chisel, anid consistedof the horn of
a speciesofsmialldeer, which is anmong   the commonestof the
fauna, a molar tooth of Stegodon,and a few otherbones, all
belongingto the same homogeneousfautnaniet with in other
partsof theKeudena Hills.
   In making,the excavations care was taken that the layers
wereremovedone by one. They consistedfrolmi       above down-


            This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                           All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
 242   DR. EUGENEDUBOIS.-On Pithecanthropits
                                          erectus:

 wards of alternatelycolouredsandrockwhich became coarser
 owing,to a greateradmixtureoflapilli especiallyin the deepest
 layer,which mneasured about one metrein thickness,and which
 muerged below witha conglomerate    laver. Underthis thereis a
 sharplydefinedlafyerof hardenedblackish clay. In the sand-
 rockthe bones werefound in increasingnumbers fromabove
 downiwards, so that the lapilli layer containedthe most; in the
 conglomerate layerbut fewweremet with; whilstin the clay
none werediscovered.
   It was in the lapilli layer on the left bank of the river,
amidsthundredsof otherskeletalremains,that the third molar
toothwas foLnd. This was in September,1891; here also) a
mnonth later,on exactlythe samelevel in thatlayer the cranium
was discovered at a point one metre distant fromthe spot
wvhere the toothwas pickedup. The mammalianremainsfound
in the samelayerare forthe mostpart thoseof extinctspecies,
forit is almost certain that some of them are now living in
Java.
   These comprisedthe bones of a speciesof Cervuswhich still
survives in the Malayan Isles. Many remainsof Stegodon,
besidessome of a speciesof Bubalus apparentlyidentical with
the Siwalik species. At the same timea Bos elephasdiffering
fromthe known species, living or fossil,was discovered. In
addition the genera rhinoceros,sus, felis, hyaena,and others
wererepresented,  whilsta gavial and crocodilewerefounid  which
differsomewhat from the existing species in India, were
unearthed.
   The settingin of the rainy seasonpreventedthe continuance
of the excavationsuntil next May, when workwas resumed,
withthe result that in August, 1892, the left femurwas dis-
coveredin preciselythe same layer at a distance of 15 metres
fromthe spotwherethe skull-capand molar toothwere found
in the previousyear.
   In the Octoberfollowinga secondmolartoothwas discovered.
Thislay 3 metresfromthe place wherethe skull-capwas picked
up, in a direction towards the spot where the femur was
found. This toothwas not describedin Dr. T)ubois'firstmono-
graph,as it was only suibsequently  metwith amonga number
of teethtakenfromthe same place.
   Of the remainsof animalsfoundin the same strata in other
places, the most interestingare a gigantic panigolin(Mauis),
three times as large as the existingJavanese species,a hippo-
potamusbelongingto an extinctSiwalik sub-genus,a tapir,an
elephas,and the extinctsub-genusleptobos.
  These details as to the geologicalconditionsunderwhiclhthe
fourbones were discoveredwere advanced to prove that they


             This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
       A fThansitional
                    Forgnbetween
                               Man and theApes.                                           243

not only came fromthe same bed, mostprobablylate Pliocene,
but thattheywere all found at preciselythe same level in it,
hence mostprobablytheymustbe of equal age. The fact that
theircontoursare sharpis opposedto the view that theyhave
beenwashed out of an older(later ? ) bed. Dr. Dubois therefore
thouglht thattherewas littlereasonto doubt their originfrom
the rockystrata.
   All the bones werein the same state of fossilization,harder
than marble,very heavy, and of a chocolate-browncolour.
The femurwas twice the weightof a recent human)femurof
the same dimensions. The erosionon the surfaceof the skull-
cap was not the resultof disease as somnecritics had suiggested,
but was due to the corrodinginfluenceof the water,whichhad
similarlyaffectedall the bones foundin thislocality.
   In discussingthe questionas to whetherthe bones belonged
to the same individual or no, Dr. Dubois statedthat in his
opinion the distances apart at whiclhtheywere foundwas no
argumentagainsttheircommon origin. In his experiencehe
lhad frequently  found portionsof the same skeletonas widely
separated and, in some instances,fragmentsof the same bone
were met with as far apart. Nor had he ever founidanything
like a completeskeletonwhichseemedto provethat the bonles
musthave beenwidelyscattered.Dr. Dubois advancedthetheory
thatin all probabilitythe remainswere those of animalswhich
had perished in volcanic catastrophies,their corpses being
washed down in the course of a large Pliocenleriver. Most
probablythe bones,beforetheywere depositedand buried in
the old alluvia,were separatedfromone anotherby the rotting
of the fleshor it maybe togetherwiththe fleshwere tornapart
by crocodiles. In supportof the latterview Dr. Dubois nioted
the fact thatmanyremainsof crocodileswerefoulndas well as
the marksof theirteethin thespongypartsof manyfossilbones.
   Consideringthe fewexamplesthereare of the fossil remains
of anthropoidapes, and the abseniceof humaniremainisfrom
strataolderthan the middlePleistocene,the lecturerurgedthat
it was almost impossible'to conceivethat the tlhighbone now
discovered,which most certainlybelonged to the Tertiary
Period,could be human,whilstthe skull founidalongsideof it
should be regarded as that of a great anthropoidape, a sup-
positionwhichlwould necessarilyinvolvetheir separate origin;
much more reasonable to him appeared the view that they
belongedto one and the same intermediateform.

  Dr. DuBois, in referringto hls critics, divided them into
two groups, the first,which included Professors Sir W.
Turner, Cunningham., A. Keith, Lydekker, Paul Matschie,


              This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                             All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
244   DR. EuGENEDUBOIS.-On Pithecanthropus
                                        erectus:

IRudolpMartin,and A. Pettit, held tlhatthe thigh bone and
calvariawere human. The secondgroupconsistedof thosewho
thoughtthat the skull was sim-ianand the femurhuman,and
who furtherdenied that there was any organic connection
betweenthem.
   Only ProfessorManouvrierof Paris, and ProfessorMarsh in
 America admnitted  thepossibilityof the remainsbelongingto a
 transitionformbetweenmnan    and the apes.
   In discussingthe bones in detail,Dr. Dubois said most were
 agieed that the femurwas humnan    and not simianin character.
 Virchow alone was singular in maintainingthe view that it
 belongedto the ape, most probablya Hylobates,and advanced
 in supportof his opinionthe factthat the bone had a straight
 candle-likeshaftsuch as neveroccursin mnan.
   The lecturerhowever declined to agree withthis conclusion,
 as he pointed ouit that the shaft of the bone was distinctly
 curved,thoughnot to the same extentas is ordinarilymet with
in humanfemora. Furthertherecould be little doubtthat the
fossil bone belongedto a formhavingan erectposture,and in
this respect the condyles are quite humanin theircharacters,
contrastinrg markedlywith those of Hylobates,whichare dis-
tinctlysimian.
   Mr. Dubois, however drewattentionto threeminorpointsof
differelncebetweenthe fossilbone and the typicalhuman femur,
and statedthat afterhavilngexamined a very large lnumberof
human femoraof different   races, he had been led to consider
these three charactersas marks of differentiation    from the
human femur. The points of diffeiencereferredto by the
lecturer,were-
    1. The moreroundedformof the shafton its innerside.
    2. A less extensivepopliteal'area which,moreover,is convex
          in its middle,thus iinpartillna rounded,instead of a
          flattened,formto the shaftin this situation.
    3. A less raised anidmoresimian-liketrochanteric  line.
   Mr.Dubois laid particularstresson the small developmentof
 the poplitealspace, the like of which he had never seen in a
human femur,and pointed out that Dr. Hepburn had shown
 that in Hylobates the vastus internusmuscle and thefemnoral
head of the bicepsflexorcruriscame into close proximityto each
otheron the lower part of the posteriorsurfaceof the femur
belowthe level of the insertionof the adductormagnusmnuscle.
They are only separatedfromeach otherby a stronginter-mus-
cular septuim,which extends to within an inch of the ininer
joinlt. By this means the superiorpart of the popliteal surface
of the femuris renderedconvex,and presentsa median lon,gi-


             This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
           A TransitionalForm between
                                    3iEanand theApes.                                           245

  tudinalelevation. An extensionof thesemuscularattachments
  would exactlyproducethe appearancesfoundin Pithecantharpus
  erectus.
    Dr. Manouvriertoo admittedthathe had neverseen a similar
 form of popliteal surface, though he had examined many
 thousands of specimens. Dr. Dubois, therefore,held that
 thoughthe femurmightbe human,yet considerinothe circum-
 stancesunderwhich it was found associated with an ape-like
 skull and simianteeth,he was justifiedin assumingthat it was
 not human but belonged to an intermediateform. A form
 possiblylike thatofa giganticgibbon,forit was onlynecessaryto
 double the linear dimenisions of the thighbone alnd skull of an
 existingHylobatesto have dimensionsexactlycorresponding      to>
 the Java form.
    In referringto the exostosis which is connectedwith the
 fossilbone behindthe shaftjust below the small trochanter,  the
 lecturer stated that most were agreed that this pathological
 growthcould have effected  little if any change in the normal
 generalformof the bone.
    In regardto the skull-captherewas muchgreaterdivergence
 of opinion. Cunningham,Turner,A. Keith, R. Martin, and
 Topinardregardedit as human. Lydekkerthinks it that of a
 microcephalicidiot,whilst Krause, Waldeyer,Virchow,Hamy,
 Manouvrier,Flower, and Marsh denied the possibilityof it
 beinghuman,and regardedit as moreprobablythat of an ape.
 The calvaria measures 185 m.m. in length and 130 m.m. in
 breadth; its cranialcapacityhas been estimatedat 1,000 c.c.
   This is in markedcontrastwiththe highestcranialcapacities
of the anthropoidapes,whichnever exceed 600 c.c.,and more
usually measure about 500 c.c. On the other hand many
instances are met with amongic   AustralianVeddahs and Anda-
manese of a cranial capacityas low as 1,000 c.c.
   As the cranialcapacityis doubtlesscorrelatedwith the size
of the body, Dr. Dubois pointedout that assumingthe femur
to belongto the skull, the height of the individual estimated
fromit accordingto human proportions       would be 165 to 170
c.m. Contrastingthiswiththe heightof Veddah women,which
averagesabout 143 c.m.,we are justifiedin decliningto admit
the possibilityof a skull with-such a snmallcapacity beiina
human. The other alternativeis that the skull is that of a
microcephalicidiot; all thingsconsideredthis is imiostimprob-
able. It is far more likely,therefore,  assumingthe skull and
femurto belong,to the same individualthatwe have notto deal
witha humancranium.
   The Trinil skull in formand size verycloselyresemblesthe
type ofthe anthropoidapes. The smallnessof the arch of tlhe
  vOL.   XXV.                                                                               s


                This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                               All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
246    DR. EUGENE DUBOIS.-On                                        erectus:
                                                       Pithecanthropus

 vertex,the low recedingforehead,the torusoccipitalis,and the
especiallystrongprojectionof the orbital parts of the frontal
 bone,are all simianclharacters.Further,the superioroccipital
ridge seems to unite with the posteriorpart of the temporal
ridge,and formsa well marked swelling,commonas a rule in
the skulls of fullgrownapes, but never seen in humnancrania,
 not exceptingthose of microcephalicidiots.
   Whilst admittirno the close resenmblance between the Trinil
skull of the Neanderthal and Spy crania,Dr. Dubois drew
 attentionto the difference  in size and capacity between his
 specimenand thosementioned. The Neanderthalskull has an
estimatedcapacityof 1230 c.c., whilst its length and breadth
 exceeds the Trinilskull by about 15 m.m.,the same holds good
 withregardto the Spy crania. The most inmportant    points of
differencebetweenthe Spy skulls and Dr. Dubois' specimen
were themoremarkedflattening     of the parietalregion and the
relativelygreaterdimensionsof the orbital parts of the Java
skull. The Trinil skull differedin similar respects fromthe
 microcephalicskull describedby ProfessorCunningham.
   As Virchowhas pointed out the orbital part of the Trinil
skull is quite different
                       fromthat of man,and on comparingthe
fossilcalvaria with crania of the anthropoidapes, the propor-
tion between the lengths of its orbital and cerebralparts is
foundto be exactlythe same as in the skulls of gibbons. In
Hylobates alone is the arch of the craniumas high as in
Pithecanthropuis.A furtherpoint of importancein the Trinil
skull is the pronouncedforwardslope of the infra-inialpart of
the occiput; in thisrespectit differs
                                    littlefromthe hunman  folm,
and is much moremarkedthan in the anthropoidapes, as the
followingfiguresshow.
   In the anthropoidsthe angle formedby the median line of
the nuchal plane and the median line fromthe glabella to the
hinderborderof the foramnen  magnumvaried from830 to 860,in
Seinnopithecusmaurusit was 90', in Macacus cynomolgus106'.
In man the angle is about 500, in the No. 2 Spy skull 560, in
the miicrocephalicskull described by Cunninghamn     it is 680,
whilstin Pithecanthropusit equals 650.
   In discussingthe question of the teeth, one of which had
been discoveredsince the publicationof his memoir,Dr. Dubois
stated there was much differenceof opinion regardingtheir
orig,in,-Krause,Ten Kate, and Turnerconsideredthem simian,
whilst R. Martin, Lyddeker, Cunningham.and Manouvrier
inclinedto the viewthat theywere human. Both the teethare
rmodelledafter exactly the same type,so that there is little
ound fordisputingthe connectionbetweenthem,the crenalion
of thecrownsis the same,and the dimensionsare not dissimuilar.


             This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
        A Transitionatl        Allanand theApes.
                         between
                     Formn                                                                247

Thle more recentlydiscoveredtoothwas much moreworn on
 the crownthanthe thirdmolarpreviouslyfound,butDr. Dubois
-pointedout thatit was notuncommonto findthe second molars
-morewornthan the thirdmolars,so that this circumstancedid
 not disprovethe assumptionthatthe two teethbelonged to the
 same inidividual.
   Dr. Dubois consideredthat the teethwere not hunman,      first
aon account of their great size and the divergentnature and
 lenathof theirfangs,and secondly,because the buccalposterior
 cusp is in a stateof retrogression,
                                   exactlyas is seen in the case
,ofthe molarsof anthropoidapes.
   Summingup his argumentsthe lecturersaid thai; on geo-
 logicaland anatomicalgroundswe werejustifiedin assumingthat
 we had in thesefourspecimensevidenceof a formintermediate
between man and the anthropoidapes, and further,that it is
,exceedingly  probablethat the severalbones all belongedto one
.and the same individual.
   The concluding words of the lecture may be given in
extenso:.
   " I attemptedto give here a diagrammaticrepresentationof
my views withreferenceto the phylogeneticevolutionof man
and the apes.
   " In the Eocene, when the Old World and Americanmammal
faunaweremorenearlyrelated,we have a hypotheticalgenus,
Archipithecus,   fromwhichdiverseda branchgivingrise to the
platyrhineapes, the families Cebida- and Hapalidae. In the
earlyMiocene or,perhaps,in the Upper Eocene, froma common
hypotheticalPalaeocercopithecus,  the ancestorof the Old World
apes, there branched offall the lower Old World apes, the
 Cercopithecidoe.Afterwardsin the Miocene, when the main
stemhad becomemoreanthropoid,       therebranchedoffthe Upper
Miocene or Lower Pliocene from Dryopithecus,which in its
-characters is intermediatebetweenthe lowercatharineapes and
the inan-like apes. Still later in the Miocene originatedthe
hypotheticalformProthylobates,   a verygeneralisedform,which
I regardas the ancestorof all the anthropoidapes and man.
During the Middle and Upper Miocene, there originatedfrom
this stem-form,  firsta branch giving rise to Pliopithecus,and
the formfromi    whichwe have the femurofEppelsheim('Dryo-
pithecus' sec. Pohlig), whichI call Pliohylobates; further,  the
existing genus IHylobates; secondly, branches giving rise to
Sirnia,and to Troglodytesand gorilla.
   " Lastly,we have in the main stem,originatingfromProthy-
lobates, during the Lower Pliocene (or Upper Miocene) the
Tiwalik Paheopithecus,which after a carefulexamination of
the specimenin the Indian museum at Calcutta,on which the
                                                     s 2



              This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                             All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
 248   DR. EUGENE DUBOIS.-On                                         erectus:
                                                        Pithecanthropus

 genus is founded,I regardas a decidedlyHylobatoid formi,  but
 approachingtowardsman. Betweenthis formand man comes
 in the Upper Pliocene, Pithecanthropus,which, while still
 retainingmany Hylobatoid characters,approaches,as I haves
 triedto show,nearestof all to man,but cannotbe placed in the
 genus Horno."
   The followingdiscussiontook place on exhibition of the
 remainsof Pithecanthropus erectusto a meetingof the Institute.
   Sir WILLIAM FLOWER congratulatedDr. Dubois upon the
results of his successfulexplorationsin Java, resultingin the
discoveryof a largeand interestingMamnialianfauna,and said
that all presentmustfeelparticularlyindebtedto himforgivinlg
them an opportunity   of inspectingthe specimenshe had ex-
hibitedthat evening,and forthe full and lucid explanationhe
had given of them. It was unfortunatethat the fragmentary
conditionof the remailnsof Pithecanthropuswas such as to leave
much of its real nature open to conjecture. A comparisonof
the craniumwith that of the Nealnderthalman, showed a
decidedlylowerform,especiallyin the narrowerfrontalregion.
On the whole it presented,exceptin size, a remarkablereseni-
blance to that of Hylobactes.
   Sir JOHN LUBBOCK also congratulatedDr. Dubois on his
interestingdiscovery. He asked forsome furtherdetailsas to
the positionof the bones with 'referenceto the remains of the
Plioceine Mammnalia, for in Dr. Dubois's originalmemoirthis
was not explained in detail. He also inquired whetherthe
greatamountof abnormalgrowthon the fenmur     would not have
considerablyinterfered with the movenment   of the animal. If
so that would point to its being human. A man inightwell
have been engaged in some sedentaryoccupation,or perhaps
supported by his family. A monkey, however,was more
dependenton retainingits activityunimpaired.
   Mr. BLAND SUTTONwas of opinionthat the threespecimens-
calvaria,teeth,and femur-should be separatelydiscussed. It
was pure assumptionto believe thattheybelongedto the same
individuals. In regardto the teethand calvaria he would not
offeran opinion. The femur was undoubtedlyhuman, and
exhibited the muscular markings characteristicof a typical
thighbolle of a thoroughlyadult man. The irregtular
                                                  bony iiiass
connectedwith the shaftwas such as is met with in thatvery
rare disease known as qnyositis        whichis characterised
                              ossificans,
by extensiveossificationof the tendonsand tissuesof muscles
at their attachments. Thus it was curious that two sets of
humianremaills,the Neanderthal and the Javan,which had


             This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
       A TransitionalForm,between
                                Man and theApes.                                         249

givenrise to much discussion,belonged to diseased skeletons;
the Neanderthal fragmentsexhibited clear and undoubted
evidenceof rickets.
  Mr. Suttonwas of opinionthat the attempt to form a new
genus for these remains was at least premature,and the
generalisationas to the probable phylogenyof anthropoidsand
man based upon it, was one calculated to brilngridicule upon
Anthropological Science.

   Mr. E. T. NEWTON called attentionto the fact that the bones
of Pithecanth'ropus
                  being,apparently,in a similarlymineralized
conditionto thoseof the extinct animals found in the same
stratum,was strong evidence of their being of the same age.
It was a noteworthyfactthat,so manyobserverswere agreedas
tothegreatsimilarityto Hylobatespresentedby thecalvaria and
femurof Pithecanthropus, and fromthe occurrenceof the latter
in beds whereseveralof the formsweregiganticrepresentations
of living genera,nothingwas more likelythan thatPithecan-
thropuswas a gigantic Hylobates. And still further,it was
in Hylobates,ratherthan in the larger anthropoidapes, that
manyanatomiststracedthe greatestresemblanceto Man.

    Sir WILLIAM TURNER said: The opportunitywhich Dr.
 Dubois has given us of seeing his very interestingspecimens
and the fullerdescriptionof the conditionsunder which they
were fouind,have enabled us to realise their charactersand
antiquitymuch more clearlythan was possible froma perusal
of his memoirpublished last year. The association of these
specimenswith bones and teeth of mammals,many of which
are now extinct,and theircorrespondence withthemin minerali-
zation,showsthemto be of undoubted antiquity,and if their
humancharacteris accepted, inalkesthem rank as the most
ancienthuman remainswhich have yet been discovered. As
regardsthe thighbone,the opportunity   of carefullyexamining
it, bothlast week in Edinburgh,and now at this meeting,does
not lead me to alter the opinion which I expressed in my
publishedcriticismof the originalmemoir,thatthereis nothing,
in its forniand appearancewhichwouldlead one to say that it
possessed charactersspecificallyor genericallydistinct from
thoseof a humanthighbone,and in this respectmy conclusion
is in harmonywiththe opinionsof many anatomistswho have
seenit. The bone is in variouspartsundoubtedlymodified  fronm
disease; forin additionto the remarkablebranchedand pointed
exostosis,thereis evidenceof a pathologicalgrowthof bone for
some distance down the linea aspera, and of ilew bone growth
aroundthe posteriorborderofthe articulararea of thecondyles.


             This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
250   1iR. EUGENE DUBOIS.-On                         Pithecanathropus
                                                                  erectus:

 Clearlytherefore increasedperiostealbone formationhad beerr
 taking place for some time before death, and it is not
 unlikelythatthe convexityof the poplitealsurfaceofthe bone,
 to whichDr. DDuboisattachesso much importanceas differen-
 tiatingit fromthe human femur,may have been producedby
 increasedperiostealactivityin thatregion. Furtherit may be
 stated that thereseemsto be no prolongationof articulararea
 on the back of the femurimmediatelyabove the innercondyle,
 such as Havelock Charles has associated with the squatting
posture.
   As regardsthe skull cap, now that one has seen it, thereis
more difficNlty  in coming to a conclusion. If, however,the
thigh bone and calvaria belong,to the same skeleton,and
Dr. Dubois, from his personal examinationof the locality,
has no doubt onithis point, the establishmentof the human
characterof the femurwould require us to regardthe calvaria
as also human. Withoutquestiontheywere foundin the samie
geologicalhorizonand belongto the same epoch. The calvaria
is less distinctively human than the Neanderthal skull cap
whicheveryonenow admitsto be human. In the latterthere
is a foreheadwith roundedfrontaleminences,but in the Java
specimen the frontalbone is flattenedand slopes abruptly
backwardsin a mannersuch as approximatesit much moreto
the shape in the ape than to a human skull,evelnas low as thle
Neanderthal; though I should state that in the Edinburgh
UniversityMuseum is the cast of a microcephalicwoman
with a frontalflatteningverylike that of the Java calvaria.
In the parietal region the Neanderthal and Java specimerns
have a great resemnblance   to each other,and both differfrom
the correspondingregion in the ape by their considerable
breadth and less rounded sides. In the occipital regioln,as
Dr. Dubois testifies,the formis more human than ape-like.
The iinternalcapacityof 1,000 cub. cent. is more like that of
man than of the ape. No existingspecies of ape has a greater
internalcapacitythan from500 to 600 c.c.,whilst I anidother
anatomistshave measuredmanyhuman craniawitha capacity
of less than 1,100 c.c. and some even withless than 1,000. As
thecapacityindicatesthemassof thebrainand its possibilitiesto
exercisefunction bothas a sensori-motor       and as the seat of
                                        ceintre
intelligence,it will restwiththose who legard this calvaria as
belongingto a Hylobates,  muchlargerthan any existing, species,
to give a satisfactory explanationof the presence of so large a
brain in an animal,which,if the thigh bone belongedto the
skull,had not the bulk of body of a large gorilla; in which
animal the brain cavity does not reach 600 c.c. The thigh
bone certainlycannot be regardedas that of Hylobates. in


             This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
       A TransitionalForm between
                                Ma,nandItheApes.                                         251

          may I expressthe thanks of anthropologists
conielusioni,                                        in this
countryto Dr. Dubois for his courtesyin bringiing the speci-
mensforour inspection,and the furtherhope that the govern-
mentof the Netlherlands  may continuethe searchforadditional
remainsin the saine locality.

   Dr. GARSON   saidl that he had studiedDr. Dubois' memoiron
 Pithecanthr-opus erectusvery carefullyand also the various
 criticismsof it which had been published. He was therefore
 extremelyglad to see the specimensthemselves,as theyshowed
 manymorphologicaldetails of which the plates and diagrams
 gave but an imperfectidea; the paper also which Dr. Dubois
 had read that evening threwfurtherlight on the specimens.
 In the firstinstance he had been very uncertain as to the
 geologicalepochto which theyshouldbe referred,    but fromthe
 additional information  Dr. Dubois had just given regardingthe
 manmmalian   faulnafound in the same formationwiththem,he
 was satisfiedas to theirbeingPliocene. As regardsthe speci-
 mens themselves,althoughthere was no absolute proofthat
theyall belongedto the same skeleton,he did not think there
 was any positive proof to the contrary. Some authoritieshad
urged, from a study of the plates, that the femurwas less
worn than the calvaria, but examination of the specimens
themselvesdoes riotsupportthis view. Again it had been said
thatthe last molartoothwas littlewornand therefore     probably
came froma youngercraniumthan that found. He had seen
severalinstances,however,wherethe last molarwas almostun-
wornwhile the otherteethof the serieswereconsiderablewormn
and the skull was thoroughly   adtultwiththe suturesobliterated,
preciselyas was shown by the calvaria and the other molar
toothrecentlyadded to the specimensnow underconsideration.
The local conditionsunder which the specimenswere found
must have considerableweight in determiningthe questionas
to whetheror not the several fragmentsbelongedto the same
individual; of these Dr. Dubois was in the most favourable
positionto judge.
   The femuris extremelyhuman-like,    and if taken alone would
undoubtedlybe said to be that of Ilomo. The last molartooth,
also, mightperhapsbe ascribedto the same genus,as in a skull
of an Australianinative in the Royal College of Surgeons
Museum he had found a last upper molar tooth measuring
16 mm. transverselyand 11L4 mm. in the antero-posterior
direction,which is even slightlylarger than in the Javan
specimen. The calvaria, on the other hand,is verydifferent,
and much more gibbon-likethan one would imagine fromthe
drawingsof it. The large bonyformationon the femuris very


             This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
252   DR. EUJGENE
                DUBOIS.-Om,Pithecanthroptus
                                        erectus:

simnilarin size and characterto what occursin the femurof a
skeletonof a man in the Pathological Collectionof the College
of Surgeons,except that in the latter specimenit is situated
lower down on the shaftofthebone,and the ossificationextends
fromthefemurto the ischium; thereare also severalotherossi-
fications of the muscular attachmentsand aponeuroses. The
 modificationof the surfacesforthe attachmentsof the muscles
of the back of the thigh near the popliteal regionof the femur
from Java are interesting,but even if the bone be taken by
itself,-hewas not certainas to theirsignificance. The factthat
a pathologicalconditionofgreat rarityto the extent to whiclh
 it obtains,is presentin the feinur,is apt to make one thinkit
possible that anl aberrantconditionmay also be presentin the
calvaria, and that it mighthave belonlgedto a microcephalic
 Homnosapiens. The probabilityof chances is, however,very
mnuchagainst such a combinationof abnormalitiesoccurrinii
in the same indivTidual.The charactersof the calvaria also did
not,to his mind,support such a conclusion. By these the
specimen,if taken alone,might be ascribed to a large extinct
Hylobates,althoughit shouldbe rememberedthat in theselarge
extinct formsthe brain is proportionately   smaller than in the
recent,whereas in this specimen the capacityof the calvaria
indicatesas faras he could judge a proportionally larger brain.
This then brings us to the hypothesisof Dr. Dubois, that the
positionwhich should be assignedto it is somewhereon a phy-
logeneticline between Hylobatesand Homo. The charactersof
the femurand also of the molar tooth,particularlyas regards
its fangs,beingin some respects differentfromthoseof Homo
sapiens, and consideringthe strongopinion Dr. Dubois has
formedfromexaminationof thestrataand theothermammalian
remains thereincontained,it is most reasonable to conclude
that the specimens are probablyparts of the skeletonof one
animal,and thatit belongedto one of those extinct species of
primates more or less relatedto Hornosapiens,whichthereare
strong a priori groundsto believe existed in Pliocene times.
He was of opinion that the specimenscould not be ascribedto
either the genus Hono or species sapiens,and must be classed
as anotherand distinctgenus and species,but he did not think
it necessaryto createa newfamilyof Primatesforthe specimens
as theircharacterswere sufficientlyclose to thoseofHomo to be
includedin the familyHom,inidce.

  Mr. KEITH saw no reason for dissentingr   from Dr. Dubois'
conclusionthat these fossilremainsbelongedto a late Tertiary
period. He thoughtDr. Dubois was also rightin regardingthe
remainsas of one species,but it was open to questionif of one


             This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
                                 MAfaand theApes.
        A TransitionalForm between                                                        253

 individual. The third molar was slightlyworn, the second
 considerablyso; such a conditionindicated an animal in an
 earlystage of maturity. But the sutures of the calvaria were
 ossified; such a conditionoccurredonlyin the later stages of
 humanlife,veryseldomin the earlier. It was true that ossi-
 ilcationof the suturesbegan in the earlystages of maturityof
 the apes' skull, but ossificationwas directlydue to the great
 developmentof the tenmporal    and occipital long ridges-a de-
 velopmentabsentin this calvaria. The sutureswouldtherefore
 follow the course of ossificationusually taken in the human
 skull, so that the teeth and calvaria evidentlybelonged to
 differentindividuals.
    The chiefquestion that had to be settled was, whetherthe
 skull was humanor not. What was the criterioui      of a human
 skull? What was the criterionof an ape's skull ? How
 were they to be disting,uished    ? To his mind there were
 only two differencesbetweenthe skulls of men and apes,
 and they were differences,  not in kind, but in degree. The
firstdifference was in the large excess of cranialcapacityof the
 human skull; in the extent of its cranial capacity the skull
beforethemmeritedto be called human. The seconddifference
 betweenthe skulls of apes and men lay in the large develop-
mentof muscularridges and processes for the fixationof the
masticatoryapparatus; the developmentwas extensivein apes;
it was slightin men. In the extent of this development,      also,
the calvariain questionwas distinctlyhuman.
   Dr. Dubois had placedPithecctnthropus   directlyin the stemof
the human race, and regardedit as representingthe human
race duringthe late Tertiaryperiod. Pithecanthropus       was, in
short,Plioceneman. He thoroughly      agreedwithDr. Dubois as
to the genealogical position of Pithecanthropus,    but entirely
differed fromhim as to his method of nomelnclature.In fact,
the question arose, where in the ancestryof the lhumanrace
was one to draw a line to markwherepithecoidformscease and
man commelice. Dr. Dubois had drawn that line between the
Tertiaryand Quaternaryperiods; but it seemed to him,that in
the nomenclatureof a race, the same principle should be
followedas in the nomenclatureof a human individual. The
same name servesin infancyas in old age. Hence he thought
it betterto call Dr. Dubois' Pitheccanthropus  erectu,s-Pliocene
Man.

  ProfessorTHOMSON said what struckhim mostwas the very
differentcomplexionput upon the case, nowthat theyhad an
opportunityof examining the actual specimens. This only
went to prove how difficultit was to formany correctopinion


              This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                             All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
254   DR. EUGENE DUBOIS.-Om Pithecanth7roptts
                                          erectus.

on such a matterby the nmere  perusal cf a monograph,  howevex
good. For his part all he felt justifiedin sayingwas that the
calvaria was undoubtedlyape-like in all its characters,except
in regardto its capacity: on theotherhand the femurdisplayed
all the featuresof a well-developedhumanthighbone.
   He could not agree with Dr. Dubois in the argumentshe
advancedregardin-g  thecausationof thispeculiarmodellingof the
popliteal surface,for it seemed to the speaker that the same
argumentswould apply equally well against Dr. Dubois' con-
clusions; for,accordina to his own showing,there was little
difference betweenthe popliteal surfacein man and the chim-
panzee,thoughin the latter the adductormagnus musclewas
extensivelyattachedto that surface.
   Regardinothe teeth ProfessorThomnson    was not inclined to
admlitthe impossibilityof their being human,for an examinia-
tion ofAustralianCrania had led him to conclude that the size
of theteethwas niotsufficientto precludethepossibilitythatthey
werehuman miolars.
   As to whetheror no the calvaria and thighbone belonged to
the samneindividualwas a matterof vital importance. Unfor-
tunatelythe evidence advanced was not conclusive,and the
onlycourseleftopen at presentwas to reserveone's judgment.
This,however,did not detractfromthe remarkablevalue of the
discoveryof this skull,which he regardedas by far the most
importantcontributionto our knowledgeof an intermediate
fornm betweenman and the knownapes.

   Prof.G. D. THANE said the difficulty of formingan opinion
upon the remainsbeforethe meetingis renderedverygreat by
the circumstancethat the indicationsafforded by the femurand
by the calvaria are directlyopposeclto one another. The femilur
in its conformationis human, and of a high type. It is a
(luestionwhetherthe peculiarfeaturesof the lower part of this
boniereferredto by Dr. Dubois may not be related to the
pathological processes by which it has been affected. The
individualto whom-this femurbelonged undoubtedlystood on
the lower limbs only with the knee-joint fully extended,as
indicated by the designation"erectu,s" given by Dr. Dubois,
possessed a great toe,and not anl opposable hallux,and was
thereforezoologically"man." The teeth are human in their
characters,but peculiarin their large size and their spreading
fangs. The calvaria, however,apart fromits size, appears to
resemblemorenearlythat of one of the higher apes than the
corresponiding part of a European skull,and approachesmore
closelyto the formerthan the Neanderthalspecimen. Probably
its most pronouncedsimian featureis the formof the occiput.


             This content downloaded from 185.2.32.110 on Sun, 15 Jun 2014 04:04:52 AM
                            All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
    R. H. MATHEWS.-StoneCookingHoles and Grooves,
                                               &c. 255

Assuming provisionallythat the remains are from the same
individual,judgrmient must be reservedin view of the isolated
characterof the find,since thereis always the possibilityof the
calvaria belongingto an exceptionial,
                                    or microcephalicindividlial
of a well developed human variety. But, just as the racial
characterof the Neanderthalskull was establishedby the dis-
coveriesat Spy, so it may be hoped that in the future other
specimenswill be forthcoming  whichwill establishthe value of
theseas bring,ingabeforeus a distant stage in the plhylogeny of
Man.



STONECOOKING-HOLES and GROOVESfor STONE-GRINDTNG
                                              use3d
   by the AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES. By R. H. MATHEWS,
   Licensed Surveyor.
                                [WITH        PLATE       XVII.]

WHILST I was engagedin searchingforand describingaboriginal
rockpaintingsand carvingsin the countyof Cuniberland,New
South Wales, I came uponisome holes in a large rock,which
had apparentlybeen used by the aboriginesas ovensforcooking
theirfood. As I have neverseen ovens of a similarcharacter
describedin any scientifiework, I have thoughtthat a few
remarksupon themwould be of interestto themembersofyour
Institute,and would also perhaps have the effectof inducing
othersto give us the benefitof their observationsin different
parts of Australia. There must be a niumberof gentlemen
livingin the interiorof the colonies,where the natives are still
numerous,who could furnishvaluable informationin regardto
theirmodes of cooking,and the implementsused. This is a
subject on which anthropologistsalways endeavourto obtain
information, and we find it set down among the "Hints                                     to
Travellers"issued by variouslearnedSocieties.
  The supposedovens referred  to consistof holes in the surface
of a large tabular rock of Hawkesburysandstone,about 200
feetin lengthand 50 feetwide,witha slightslope towardsthe
niorth-east.These holes have the appearance of having been
formedby the weatheringaway of softpatchesof the rock, and
the largestof theniaireabout 15 inches deep. It is likelythat
theyhave been artificiallydeepened by the natives to render
them suitable for use as ovens. In Nos. 1 and 4, Plate I,
I foundal numberof loose pieces of sandstone,of irregular
shapes,averaging3 or 4 inches each way,which had evidently
been burntin the fire. Indicationsof firewere also discernible
on the walls of the holes,whichinducedme to think that they
