Homoeopathy, the Science of Therapeutics
Carroll Dunham
Homoeopathy, the Science of Therapeutics: A Collection of Papers Elucidating and Illustrating the Law of Cure. New York: Boericke & Tafel, 1877.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/homopathyscienc00dunhgoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.

We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  iion-coninieicial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  from  autoiiiaied  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Mainrain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use.  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  countiy  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web


at  http:  //books  .google  .  com/


.—I


rBEC?


fii^l^MSl


LIBRARY

Cooper  Medical  College


Date


NO.^^^  -//'jS.  CLASS  ^;


1  jffrui  pleoi-s  return  it. You,  may  thmJc  thia  1

2  a  etranffe  remest,  but  I  f-nd  that  althouffh  £
f  many  qf  rny  Jriands  an  poor  anihmMioiauia,  *
I  tf-iisy  are  T^early  aJl  tj^ood  bookkeepers.  — ^COTT. I


HOMCEOPATHY
THE  SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS


%  dCoIUftion  of  Japtrs


BL-UCIDATING AND I  L  L  U  STRATI  NO


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  HOMCEOPATHY.


CARROLL  DUNHAM.  A.M..  M.D.

CKADUATB OP THE NBW-VOKK COLLEGE OF  PHYSICIANS  AND SUftCEONS ; DBAN OP NHW-VOKK

HOH<EOPATNIC COLLEGE  1 PROFESSOR OP lUTBJdA UBDICA ; PRESIDENT OF THE

AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF HOUaOPATHV,  AND OF THE WORLD'S HOHOO-

PATHIC  CONVENTION  HELD  AT  PHILADELPHIA,  1876;  AND  MSHBER

OP VARIOUS AHERICAN AMD FOREIGN SOCIETIES.


for  sale  at  all  homceopathic  pharmacies.

printed  foh  the  phoprivtor,  ev
Francis  Hart  &  Company,  No.  63  Murray  Street,  New-York.

1877.


Entovd,  aecorHag  to  Act  of  Congrcn,  in  the  yeu  1877,

By  Harribt  E-  K.  Dunham,
In  th«  Office  of  the  libniiui  of  Codsich  at  WuhinKtan.


■  ■  ■  •  * • *


X  \\o\


p.  p.  WELLS,  M.  D.


THE  HONORED  COLLEAGUE  AND  BELOVED  FRIEND  OP


CARROLL DUNHAM,


THIS VOLUMB


IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED.


CONTENTS.


I  ....1864


99


Date. P*ce.
I. HOMCEOPATHV  THE  SCIENCE  OF  ThERA-  )  gg

PEUTICS 5

II,  AKTAGONISM between HOMaOPATHY  >  gg  g

AND  Allopathy )

HI.  Relation  of  Pathology  to  Thera-
peutics

IV.  Primary  and  Secondary  Symptoms  of  \

Drugs  as  Guides  in  Determining  >  ....1875 115
the  Dose )

V.  The  Dose  in  Drug-Proving i860  X36

VI.  Alternation  of  Remedies. No.  i 1863  156

VII.  Alternation  of  Remedies. No.  2 1865  166

Vni.  Editorial  Remarks  on  Alternation. I...  1865  215

IX.  Editorial  Remarks  on  Alternation.  II...  1865  223

X.  The  Use  of  High  Potencies  in  the  >

Treatment  of  the  Sick 5 ^ ^

XI.  Reply  to  a  Letter  on  High  Potencies...  1864 257

XII.  The  Question  of  the  Dose 1864 267

XIII.  The  Basis  of  Treatment 1864 272

XIV.  Diagnosis  in  Homceopathic  Practice,  )

WITH  Compilations  from  Dr.  Kas-  > 1852 277

par's  Lectures )

XV.  Belladonna— --Reported  from  the  German.  1852 343

XVI.  A  Weak  Spot  in  our  Materia  Medica  ....1870 347


*^^


■*r:


'*«r


■■"n  ^.


^tiH ^


■o.v< ,"


'^Ty.-  -


>DR


^.>:-


■^-


CONTENTS.

Date.  Pag«.

XVII.  Directions  for  Drug-Provers 1869  350

XVIII. PROVINGS  OF  LiLIUM  TiGRINUU 1870  353

XIX.  MuREx  Purpurea 1864  367

XX.  Platina — Adapted  from  the  German 1853  387

XXI.  Remarks  on  Rumex  Crispus i860  417

XXII.  Remarks  on  Guao 1863  423

XXIII.  Remarks  on  Spigelia 1864  427

XXIV.  Dr.  Harley  on  Conium  Maculatum 1869  433

XXV.  Remarks  on  Conium  Maculatum 1870  443

XXVI.  Remarks  on  Mezereum i860  458

XXVII.  Deafness  Cured  by  Mezereum 1858  462

XXVIII.  Croup  Cured  sy  Bcenninghausen's  Powders,  i860  467

XXIX.  Chronic  Diarrhcea  cured  by  a  Sin-
gle Dose  of  a  High  Potency


XXX.  Pterygium  Crassuh  Cured  by  a  Sin-
gle Dose  in  a  High  Potency


^™'|  ....1860 470

Sin-  }  o,

5  ....1864 474


XXXI.  Panama  Fever  Cured  by  Arsenicum  , i860  479

XXXII.  Case  Cured  by  Magnesia  Carbonica 1870  48a

XXXIII.  Ovarian  Tumor  Cured  by  Colocynth 1869  485

XXXIV.  Baptisu  as  a  Hair-Wash 1868  4S8

XXXV.  Chlorine  in  Spasmus  Glottidis. No.  i  . . .  1859  490

XXXVI.  Chlorine  in  Spasmus  Glottidis. No.  2  ...1863  497

XXXVII.  Chlorine  in  Spasmus  Glottidis. No.  3  ...1869  499

XXXVIII.  On  the  Elimination  Theory  1866  502

XXXIX.  Cholera  1865  504


PREFACE.


Since  the  death  of  Dr.  Carroll  Dunham,  a  desire
has  been  expressed  by  many  of  his  colleagues  that
his  writings  should  be  collected  in  book  form.

The  present  volume  contains  such  as  most  directly
express  his  views  on  the  cure  of  disease  by  drugs.  In
their  arrangement  no  attention  has  been  paid  to  the
order  of  time  in  which  they  were  written,  but  those
on  the  principles  of  cure  have  been  placed  together,
while  clinical  cases  illustrating  these  principles  have
been  put  side  by  side;  and  so  great  is  the  unity  of
thought  running  tltrough  all,  that  it  has  not  been
deemed  inappropriate  to  give  to  the  collection  the
title  of  the  main  Essay.

If,  forgetting  that  experience  and  reflection  will,
as  years  go  by,  modify  the  opinions  of  every  thinker,
any  reader  should  fancy  he  sees  contradictions  in
these  papers,  he  is  referred  to  the  dates  at  which  tliey
were  writtcn'^  and  he  will  discover  a  mind  ever
progressive  and  hospitable  to  truth.  In  1864  the
Author  writes:  "The  object  of  our  professional  life
is  to  find  out  the  truth,  and  shape  our  practice  accord-
ingly. Consistency  to  this  object  is  true  consistency,

■Sec  Tabic  of  CoaUnU.


PREFACE.

while  consistency  to  any  form  of  opinion  or  doctrine
which  may  at  one  time  have  been  supposed  to  be  the
truth  and  proclaimed  by  us  as  such,  consistency  to
such  opinion  merely  because  we  may  have  once
publicly  uttered  it,  this  is  the  basest  and  most  ignoble
bigotry  and  cowardice."

These  papers  were  occasional,  unconnected  contri-
butions to  periodicals,  addresses  delivered  at  the
request  of  societies,  studies  of  remedies  or  some
topic  connected  with  them,  and  clinical  cases.  Could
they  have  been  revised  for  publication  as  a  book  by
the  hand  that  wrote  them  they  might  be  more
uniform  in  style  though  scarcely  more  connected  in
thought  To  the  Essay,  "Homceopathy  the  Science
of  Therapeutics,"  the  Author  devoted  more  than  usual
time,  and  after  its  publication  in  the  American  Homce-
opathic  Review  it  was  issued  in  pamphlet  form.
The  Dedicatory  Letter  which  then  accompanied  it
is  here  given:


To  M.  J.  Chapman,  A.  M.,  CanUb.,  M.  D.,  Edin.,  London.

Dear  Friend  a  nd  Colleagtu  ;

If  I  show  presumption  in  honoring  these  pages  b;  the  prefix  of  your
name,  I  may  plead  is  extenuatioa  that  they  were  in  some  tort  written  iX  your
instigation.

When  I  bad  the  pleasure  of  personal  intercourse  with  you  (sow  ten
years  ago),  you  frequenlly  gave  me  the  following  advice :  "  Make  a  study  of
Hygiene  in  its  relations  to  Medidne  I "

One  could  not  proceed  far  in  such  a  study,  involving  as  it  does  the
entire  philosophy  of  the  ait  of  medidne,  without  being  compelled  to  meet  the


PREFACE.


bllowing  (juestiont,  which  hftve  perplexed,  uid  itiU  perplex  and  divide  our
■cbool;

It  die  Honi<xopftthic  bwoTaiTeiiiEScienl  for  ^l  ibc  procednrei  required
in  tbc  IrcMiDfiil  o(  (be  »iclc  f

Or  ii  it*  oa  (he  coolrar7,  only  s  part  or  «  still  broader  gcnenlliation  ?
Or,  again,  are  there  oiktr  lawt  which  are  sametimrt  to  be  our  guides  in
ipcndcs?  aiA  if  lo,  vhfn  are  (he;  to  be  used  7
Are  (o-cdlted  "auxiliary  "  oieaos  ever  rccjubiie?  aad  if  so,  how  do«*
■lUs  fact  aBect  ihe  jurisdktion  of  the  law  of  cure  ?

Thovc  who  give  only  a  /mi W  jurisdiction  to  (he  Therapeutic  law  deduce
lhelry&l/4  from  thtirfnutue;  bnc  Ihe^  have  never  given  a  uliifactorj  defioi-
doo  of  Ihe  t^trndaritj  of  this  limited  jimsdiction.

Those,  oo  the  other  hand,  who  claim  escluMve  dominion  for  the  Thera-
peutic law,  bctie  their  faith  by  their  practice,  for  in  Ireatinf  thr  Uclc  they  do,  as
a  inatier  of  lact,  avail  themselves  of  qmau  aad  methods  which  are  not  author-
ized by  ihl*  law.

Vet  neither  parly  should  be  called  dishoneit  The  truth  U,  their  clin-
ical laiiinct,  their  practical  sagacity,  has  outran  their  philotophical  acutencM>
Each  parly  felt  iu  way  nearly  to  the  Iruc  trroiind,  but  neither  has  succeeded
in  vindicating  its  claim  to  consiilcncy  iu  oc<:upying  that  ground.

The  resoil  has  been,  on  the  part  of  Honneopathit;  practiiioncrs  an  uncer-
tainty of  their  true  potition  in  telatiooio  Old-school  ntediciDe,aHd,co<i»equenily,
a  degiee  ofdiiitrusi  on  the  pari  of  the  community.

It  has  teemed  to  me  that  theie  dtffictiltics  might  be  removed,  and  ihe
perplexing  questions  fairly  answered,  by  an  elahara(ion  of  the  lutarc  and  rehi-
tions  of  (he  idences  of  Therapeutics  and  Hygiene,  which  should  show:

Thot  r^Tdt/rMAii-^  concerns  herself  only  with  the  discovery  and  selection
of  an  individually  specific  remedy  for  each  individual  case  of  disease;  which  is
done  in  accordance  with  a  Therapeutic  law.  ThU  law  may  be  the  IIonKropethic
sula,  or  il  may  he  some  broader  generalizalioo ;  but  (here  can  be  but  one
'  of  this  kind ;

That  the  province  of  Hygiene  in  to  di«oovec  whatever  causes  may  have
eoalributed  to  iitduce  or  perpetuate  the  diseased  conJition,  and,  if  possible,  to
JVC  them  -,
That  llygitnt  alone  is  sulfideot  10  restore  many  sick  persons  to  beallh,
and  that  it  \\  Jn  most  cases  an  indispensable  aid  to  I'herapeulici;  that,
therefore,  the  priclicing  phyiidan  is  at  one  and  ihe  same  time  Ilygicnisi  and
Therapentltt.  employing  often,  therefore,  (or  the  same  case  both  specific  reme-
dies and  varions  "auxiliaries:  "

That  in  so  far  as  Hygiene  is  concerned,  Homoeopaths  and  Allopaths
|MCapy  common  groond,— tbc  philosophy  of  (he  science  being  the  same  for
Dth,  however  modified  and  shadnl  in  practical  application by  (he  different
'Therapeutics  of  the  two  schools;

That  in  Tltcxapeutics  alone^lbat  ia,  in  the  discorerj  and  selection  of

individoally  specific  remedy  for  each  individual  c*^«e  of  di»ea»e— do  we

'  radically  from  the  old  school  of  mrdidnr,^thc  AUopathti  having,  in  fad*

■dence  of  Therapeultci  whatever,  tkrir philotofky  »/ turt  btimgam  applica-

I  ^ du  frintipUi  of  f/ygitn*  to  all  diimitd  mtditmu.


PREFACE.

The  natural  seqaence  of  a  study  of  the  philosophy  of  the  sdeace  of
Therapeutics  is  the  question  h07  to  make  a  practical  application  of  it  in  the
treatment  of  the  uck.  I  have  therefore  written  of  the  study  of  the  Materia
Hedica.

Should  the  vievrs  I  present  throw  any  light  npon  these  subjects,  I  shall
have  to  thank  you  for  the  direction  ^ven  to  my  studies.  Should  they  prove
worthless,  you  will  join  me  in  hoping  for  a  sounder  fruit  from  the  labors  of  the
next  decade.

CARROLL  DUNHAM.
A''«w-K»-*,  January,  1863.


Should  the  reader  miss  in  the  present  volume
some  Paper  he  had  expected  to  find  here,  it  is  prob-
ably among  the  "  Lectures,"  reserved  for  future  pub-
lication, or  among  the  Miscellanies  not  strictly
belonging  to  the  present  book.

IrvingieH-cn-HudsoH,
June  25,  1877.


HOMCEOPATHV Tllli: SCIENCE OF
THERAPEUTICS.


I


Homoeopathy  claims  to  be  "  The  Science  of  Therapeutics."
This  claim  involves  the  assumption  that  prior  to  the  estab-
lishment  of  Homoeopathy  on  a  scientific  basis,  Therapeutics,
as  a  science,  haU  no  existence.  It  is  incumbent  on  Humvcop-
athists  to  show  the  justice  of  this  assumption.  To  accom-
plish this,  it  will  be  necessary  to  prove  that  such  a  science  ts
possible,  to  demonstrate  what  its  nature  and  conditions  must
be,  and  to  show  that  medicine  hitherto  has  not  furnished  the
means  for  the  construction  of  a  science  which  fulfills  these
conditions.

It  is  the  object  of  this  paper,  first,  to  discuss  the  nature
and  condition.^  of  tlie  only  possible  science  of  Therapeutics,
10  show  that  these  conditionst  arc  not  fulfilled  by  what  is
called  rational  medicine,  and  to  inquire  in  what  degree  they
are  fulfilled  by  Homfropathy.  And,  second,  to  examine  the
methods  by  which  this  science  may  be  most  successfully  stud-
ied and  made  subservient  to  the  practical  art  of  medicine,

But  on  the  threshold  of  the  discussion  we  are  met  by  the
necessity  of  defining  the  term  Tlic rape u tics.  It  will  be
found  chat,  though  still  sufficiently  comprehensive,  it  is  used
by  us  in  a  much  more  restricted  sense  than  that  which,  in
popular  thoui^ht.  is  attached  to  it.

Therapeutics  being  eiymologically  the  science  of  curing
diseases,  it  would  seem  to  comprise  the  entire  function  of
the  physician.  It  is  evident,  however,  on  slight  considera>
tion.  that  the  medical  man  in  general  practice  brings  into
requisition  too  great  a  variety  of  scientific  knowledge  to
admit  of  comprehension  under  a  single  term. To  show


2  HOMOEOPATHY

how  great  this  variety  is  and  at  the  same  time  to  give  an
indirect  definition  and  limitation  to  the  term  Therapeutics,
let  us  analyze  a  series  of  cases  which  shall  not  be  ideal
cases,  but  drawn  from  records  of  actual  practice.

The  physician  is  called  in  haste  to  an  elderly  person  whose
only  intelligible  complaint  is  of  great  anguish  in  the  prae-
cordia,  and  which  appears  by  its  violence  to  endanger  his
life.  If  he  be  in  immediate  danger  of  death,  the  state  of  his
affairs  renders  it  desirable  that  his  family  should  be  informed
of  the  fact  and  how  long  he  will  probably  live.  The  prog-
nosis is  demanded,  and  its  correctness  is  a  matter  of  great
importance.  The  medical  man  must  rely  on  his  knowledge
of  Pathology^  for  a  conclusion  respecting  the  nature,  cause,
and  probable  termination  of  the  disease.  With  this,  if  it  be
a  fatal  case,  the  function  of  the  physician  ends.  Yet  how
important  may  this  function  be  to  the  survivors !  Here  is  as
yet  no  question  of  Therapeutics.  It  is  merely  a  problem  in
the  natural  history  of  disease,  which  the  physician  regards
just  as  a  Naturalist  would  a  problem  in  Physics,  and  just  as
if  the  idea  of  curing  disease  had  never  entered  the  head
of  man.

Again,  he  is  called  to  a  man  who  lies  in  an  epileptiform
convulsion.  It  is  well  known  that  convulsions  may  arise
from  the  most  various  proximate  causes.  They  may  result
from  physical  irritation  of  the  nervous  centers  or  of  the
extremities  of  the  nerve-filaments,  and  in  this  case  they
will  cease  to  recur  so  sooii  as  the  cause  of  irritation  is
removed  ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  from  modifications  of  the
vital  functions,  such  as  are  beyond  our  observation  and
which  we  can  rectify  only  indirectly  by  the  action  of  specific

'Throughout  this  paper,  as  always  suts,Ai\A\%concreU. A  corresponding

by  its  author.  Pathology  is  used  with  a  distinction  obtains between  Physiol-

meaning  totally  distinct  from  Chat  of  ogy,  which  is  the  science  of  healthy

Pathological  Anatomy. The former  processes^at functions,  and  Physiolog-

is  the  science  of  morbid  processes  and  icat  Anatomy,  which  is  the  science  of

functions,  and  is  abstract;  the  latter  is  healthy  organs  and  tissues.
the  science  of  morbid  organs  and  tis'


THE  SCIENCE  OP  THERAPEUTICS.


agents.  The  first  problem  before  the  physician  is  to  dctcr-
rzaine  by  a  study  of  the  phenomena  which  tlic  patient
presents,  to  which  of  these  great  classes  the  case  before
him  belongs.  It  is  indispensable  to  determine  tliis  question,
because  the  treatment  of  the  case  must  depend  directly
npon  it, — in  the  former  case  it  may  be  mechanical  or  hygi-
enic, in  the  latter  it  m>ist  be  therapeutic.  He  determines,
we  will  suppose,  in  the  case  before  us,  that  the  convulsion
is  eccentric  in  its  origin  and  reflex  in  its  nature,  and  he  sees
reason  for  suspecting  tliat  it  depends  on  some  cause  of  irri-
tation in  a  nerve- filament  of  the  lower  extremity.  He  seeks,
in  the  history  of  the  case,  and  by  a  physical  examination,
for  this  irritating  cause,  and  discuverv  tliat  the  patient  had,
years  ago,  received  a  {gunshot  wound  in  ihe  thigh  There
is  DO  evidence  that  the  ball  was  ever  extracted.  A  close
examination  seems  to  confirm  the  conjecture  that  it  still  lies
imbedded  in  the  muscles  of  the  thigh.  An  exploratory
operation  is  performed  and  the  ball  is  actually  foimd  lying
upon  a  branch  of  the  sciatic  nerve.  It  Ls  removed  and  the
patient  has  no  more  convulsions.'

In  this  case  the  physicians  knowledge  of  pathology  ena-
)led  him  to  discriminate  between  the  varieties  of  convulsion
as  to  their  proximate  causes;  his  acquaintance  with  physiol-
ogy familiarized  tiini  with  the  phenomena  of  reflex-nervous
action  and  enabled  him  to  detect  the  scat  of  the  irritation,
and  finally  his  dexterity  in  practical  surgery  placed  it  in  his
jiower  to  cure  the  patient  of  a  dreadful  malady.  But.  in  this
from  beginning  to  end.  Therapeutics  was  not  called  into
play.

Again,  the  patient,  a  child  of  two  and  a  half  years,  is
subject  to  epileptiform  convulsions,  which  occur  daily,  often
iwn'ce  a  day.  They  first  appeared  when  the  child  was  four-
teen months  old  and  soon  after  it  was  weaned.  They  arc
now  producing  a  ver>'  sad  effect  upon  the  child's  intelligence.

■  This  occurred  in  the  pr«ctke  of  r  distinguisbed  Surgeon  of  MissKhtuctts.


4  HOMCEOPATHY

The  same  question  of  proximate  cause,  which  the  last  case
gave  rise  to,  suggests  itself,  first  of  all,  to  the  mind  of  the
physician.  Careful  investigation  satisfies  him  that  there  is
probably  a  constant  or  a  frequently  repeated  source  of  irri-
tation in  the  digestive  apparatus.  What  so  probable  cause
of  irritation  in  these  organs  as  improper  food  ?  The  question
is  put  at  once,  "What  food  does  your  child  take?"  "Nothing
whatever,  except  molasses-cake  and  milk."  "  How  do  you
make  molasses-cake  ?"  "  Three  cups  of  flour,  one  of  butter,
one  of  milk,  one  of  molasses,  one  egg  and  a  tea-spoonful  of
pearlash  !"  "Very  bad  for  your  child  !  Give  it  good  wheat
bread  and  milk  and  nothing  else,  except  this  powder"  (of
sugar  of  milk  as  a  placebo).  The  diet  of  the  child  is  thus
reformed,  but  no  medicine  is  administered  and  the  case  is
carefully  watched.  For  one  week  the  spasms  steadily  de-
crease in  frequency  and  in  violence,  at  the  end  of  that  period
they  cease  and  they  never  recur.'  Thus  an  abnormal  state
of  things,  which  would  certainly  have  had  a  fatal  issue,  is
rectified  by  the  application  of  a  knowledge  of  Physiology,
Pathology  and  Hygiene ;  but  Therapeutics  has  no  part  in  it

Errors  in  diet  being  perhaps  the  most  numerous  of  all  of
which  the  community  are  guilty,  instances  like  this  might  be
accumulated  to  an  indefinite  extent  It  is  clear  that  a  large
part  of  a  medical  man's  practice  is  made  up  of  similar  cases,
and  consequently  that  a  great  many  serious  cases  may  be
successfully  treated  without  recourse  to  medicine — without
the  aid  of  Therapeutics.

Again,  a  patient  presents  herself  with  the  following  history:
Within  three  months  she  has  rapidly  emaciated ;  her  sleep  is
disturbed,  her  appetite  gone;  she  has  night-sweats;  is  prone
to  diarrhoea;  takes  frequent  deep  inspirations  which  fatigue
her;  has  a  dry,  hacking  cough ;  complains  of  extreme  weak-
ness and  despondency.  A  careful  physical  examination  fails
to  discover  organic  disease  of  thoracic  or  abdominal  organs,

<  This  case  occurred  in  ii!57.  There The  child  on  good  diet  is  healthy,
has  been  no  recurrence  of  spasms.


THE  SCIENCE OF  THERAPEUTICS.


I


nor  docs  an  investigation  of  her  domestic  or  social  relations
disclose  any  source  of  mental  or  affcctional  anxiety.  The
case  is  perplexing  as  tu  its  inducing  cause,  and  the  physician
primarily  to  specific  remedies  for  its  cure, — in  other  words,
to  call  Therapeutics  to  his  aid. — when  he  discovers  that  the
patient  is  nursing  an  infant  of  twelve  months.  Her  milk  is
very  abundant,  but  a  microscopic  examination  shous  that  ft
is  extremely  deficient  in  oily  matter,  tt  is  now  clear  that
the  patient  is  unequal  to  tlie  drain  to  which  nursing  subjects
her;  she  is  suffering  from  consequent  anaemia.  It  is  ordered
that  she  wean  her  babe  at  once.  As  soon  as  she  does  so,
appetite  returns,  tlie  cough  and  night-sweats  disappear,  and
strength  and  flesh  are  restored.  Now,  it  is  true  that,  in  such
a  case,  the  decline  of  vigor  may  be  retarded,  and  after  wean-
ing, the  restoration  may  be  accelerated  by  a  judicious  appli-
cation of  Therapeutics ;  but  it  is  unquestionably  true  that
Therapeutics  would  play  a  very  subordinate  part,  since  no
administration  of  medicines  could  be  an  offset  to  the  drain
which  is  exhausting  the  patient.

En  cases  of  similar  exhaustion,  facial  Neuralgia  of  a  reg-
ularly intermitting  character  sometimes  occurs  and  bids
defiance  to  Therapeutics,  the  patient  meanwhile  declining
rapidly  in  strength  and  health  until,  medicine  being  perhaps
altogether  discarded,  but  the  patient  induced  to  wean  her
infant  and  tlicreby  enabled  to  take  hearty  food,  strength
and  flesh  return,  and  the  Neuralgic  pains  cease.  In  this
case,  also,  the  restoration  may  be  aeceterated  by  a  judicious
recourse  to  Therapeutics,  but  here  too  Therapeutics  must  be
subordinate  to  Hygiene.

Once  more,  a  patient,  who  exhibits  signs  of  depraved
nutrition,  cotnplains  of  a  burning  pain  under  theangleof  the
right  scapula,  with  a  tight  aching  across  the  back  between
the  scapulx-.  I  fear  that  repeated  prescriptions  will  fail  to
relieve  this  burning  pain  unless  the  physician's  knowledge  of
pathology  shall  have  suggested  to  him  that  the  symptoms


6  HOMCEOPATHY

result  ultimately  from  a  too  steady  use  of  the  needle  with
too  rapid  a  motion,  and  unless  his  skill  in  Hygiene  shall  have
enabled  him  so  to  order  her  mode  of  life  as  to  combine  due
recreation  and  exercise  in  the  open  air  with  her  necessary
labor.  Here,  as  in  other  cases,  Therapeutics  may  of  course
come  in  and  play  a  subordinate  part.

Finally,  a  patient  has  severe  darting  and  aching  in  the
shin,  especially  at  evening,  with  coldness  of  the  extremity,
and,  after  the  pain  has  lasted  an  hour,  great  sensibility  to
touch,  relieved  by  warmth  and  by  continued  motion.  This
case  has  been  treated  by  a  variety  of  Therapeutic  agents
in  the  hands  of  several  learned  practitioners,  but  with  no
success.  It  is  noticed  that  the  patient,  in  the  course  of  his
business,  incurs  great  exposure  to  dampness  and  cold.  A
woolen  stocking  is  advised,  and  he  enjoys  ever  after  adopting
it  almost  complete  freedom  from  suffering,  and  which  is
rendered  absolutely  complete  by  a  few  doses  of  Rhus  tox-
icodendron. It  must  be  remarked  that  this  remedy  had  been
previously  administered  in  every  variety  of  potency  and  dose.

Instances  of  a  similar  character  to  these  might  be  indefi-
nitely multiplied.  They  go  to  show,  not  that  medicines  are
vain  or  unnecessary,  but  that  very  many  cases  of  severe
suffering  and  even  of  what  threatens  to  become  fatal  disease
occur  in  general  practice,  which  call  for  and  are  successfully
met  by  the  application  of  scientific  knowledge  apart  from
Therapeutics.  They  show  that  an  extensive  and  thorough
knowledge  of  Physiology,  Pathology  and  Hygiene  are  indis-
pensable to  the  physician  to  enable  him  to  make  that  prelim-
inary analysis  of  a  case  by  which  he  will  determine  under
what  category  the  case  belongs,  and  whether  or  not  it  calls
for  treatment  by  medicines  in  part  or  entirely — whether  it
comes  under  the  domain  of  Therapeutics  or  not.  They  show,
moreover,  that,  inasmuch  as  Homceopathy  directly  involves
the  science  of  Therapeutics  alone,  there  is  a  large  field  which
is  occupied  and  cultivated  in  common  by  Homceopathists
and  practitioners  of  the  Old  School. They  serve  in  part,  also.


THE  SCIENCE OF  THERAPEUTICS.  7

to  mark  the  boundaries  of  that  field  in  which  "  Rational
Medicine  "  may  legitimately  claim  dominion,  in  which  her
chief  honors  have  btcn  won,  and  in  u  hich  the  great  advances
which  she  boasts  of  having  made  in  the  treatment  of  diseases
within  the  last  thirty  years  have  almost  exclusively  been
achieved — the  field  of  Hjgiene.  It  is  fitting  that  wc  study
for  a  few  momenbi  this  territory'  of  Hygiene,  which  is  com-
mon to  practitioners  of  all  the  varieties  of  Therapeutic  faith
and  practice, — this  scit;ncc  on  which,  togctlier  witK  the  sci-
ence of  Therapcniics,  the  whole  art  of  medicine  is  based —
its  subjects,  limits,  conditions,  and  mode  of  growth.

The  Nature  anm  Limits  ok  the  Sciences  of
lIvoiKNE  AND  TheraI'KUTICS.  —  The  living  organism
possesses  a  susceptibility  to  the  iictitm  of  certain  general
tinauli,  such  as  light,  heat,  electricity.  ;ilimcnl,  atmospheric
etc.  The  action  and  reaction  of  these  stimuli  and  this
susceptibility  arc  the  conditions  uf  life.  So  long  as  they  act
upon  it  in  a  due  relative  proportion,  as  regards  intensity  and
quantity,  the  equilibrium  of  the  functions  is  preserved  and
the  organism  continues  in  healthy  action.  The  absolute
witlidrawal  of  one  of  the  stimuli  for  any  considerable  length
of  time  results  in  death.  A  disturbance  of  their  due  propor-
tion, in  respect  of  intensity  or  quantity,  produces  an  abnor-
mal performance  of  function  in  tlie  organism— a  deviation
from  health — disease.  Bui  these  stimuli  are  continually
varying  in  proportion,  or,  in  otiier  words,  the  relative  suscep-
tibitity  of  tlie  organism  is  continually  changing.  Why  docs
not  disease  constantly  exist  ?  Because  the  organism  is
endowed  witli  either  a  faculty  of  provisionally  supplementing
tu  a  Limited  extent  one  stimulus  by  another,  or  with  a  kind
of  clasticlt>', — a  power  of  enduring  for  a  certain  time  a
disturbance  of  the  equilibrium  of  these  stimuli,  and  of
rebounding  to  a  nurmul  iK-rfurmancc  of  functions  again  so
soon  as  the  natural  proportion  of  the  stimuli  is  restored  or
the  deficiency  made  up. In  this  respect,  the  living  organism


8  HOMCEOPATHY

difTers  from  an  inorganic  machine,  which  cannot,  in  the
nature  of  things,  possess  any  power  to  endure  a  disturbance
of  that  equilibrium  of  forces  which  is  the  condition  of  its
normal  working  without  a  disorganization  from  which  it  has
no  inhereiit  power  to  recover.

But,  in  the  organism  this  elasticity  has  its  limits. This
"vis  medicatrix  natura"  is  not  inexhaustible. If  the  due
proportion  of  the  stimuli  remain  too  long  disturbed,  the
functions  of  the  organism  become  permanently  deranged —
at  least,  to  such  an  extent,  that  no  restoration  of  the  balance
of  the  stimuli  will  cause  a  return  to  their  normal  perform-
ance. The  functions  are  and  remain  deranged — disease
has  occurred  ;  or,  if  we  choose  to  call  every  deviation  from  a
state  of  equilibrium  disease,  then  we may  say  that  now
disease  ensues  which  has  no  tendency  to  revert  to  health
without  the  intervention  of  some  extraneous  influence  foreign
to the organism and different from the general stimuli
aforesaid. Since,  then,  the  general  stimuli  will  not  bring
back  the  organism  to  a  healthy  action,  a  new  element
must  be  sought  for  and  introduced,  the  action  of  which
upon  the  susceptibilities  of  the  organism  may  cause  a  restora-
tion to  health. This  new  element  will  be  a  special  stimu-
lus. Being  foreign  to  the  oi^nism  and  different  from  the
general  stimuli,  not  only  must  it  act  upon susceptibilities
in  the  organism  which  the  latter  do  not awaken,  'but  the
formula  which  shall  express  its  relations  to  those  suscepti-
bilities, and  which  shall  furnish  the  rule  for  its  employment,
can  never  be  discovered  by  a  study  of  Physiology,  for  Physi-
ology concerns herself  with  the relations  of the  general
stimuli aforesaid and the  general susceptibilities of the
organism. This  formula  of  the  relations  of  special  stimuli
and  special  susceptibilities  can  be  discovered  only  by  the
application  of  induction  to  a  multitude  of  instances  of  the
action  and  reaction  of  siuk  stimuli  and  susceptibilities,  and
confirmed  by  subsequent  deductive  verifications. This  for-
mula will  constitute  an  empirical  law,  which  will  be  the  law


THE SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


or  fundamental  principle  of  Tkeraptutks.  For  the  applica-
lion  of  sptcial  stimuli  to  the  Jtseased  organism  is  the  domain
of  the  scienct  of  Therapeutics,  while  all  that  concerns  the
restoration  and  maintenance  of  a  proper  equilibrium  of  the
general  stimuli  appertains  to  the  science  of  Hygiene.

These  propositions  may  be  more  intelligible  if  illustrated
by  a  reference  to  daily  experience.  A  healthy  man  is  ex-
posed to  an  unusual  degree  of  cold;  in  other  words,  there
exists  for  him  a  deficit  of  heat — one  of  the  general  stimuli
which  are  necessary  to  maintain  life.  Nature  has  anticipated
variations  in  the  supply  of  this  stimulus  from  external
sources  by  her  liberal  pronsions  of  calorific  apparatus  within
the  organism.  Despite  the  operation  of  Uiis  provision,  he
is  chilled  and  suffers  from  rigors,  etc.  Altera  time  he  seeks
shelter,  sits  by  a  fire,  takes  a  warm  drink;  in  other  words,
receives  from  external  sources  an  excess  of  that  general
stimulus  from  deficiency  of  which  he  has  been  suffering.  His
functions  resume  their  normal  play.  He  is  in  perfect  health.
Here  the  equilibrium  uf  the  functions  has  been  disturbed  and
(if  we  use  terms  with  extreme  rigor)  disease  has  been  pro-
duced, but  not  to  a  degree  beyond  the  provisions  of  the  vis
medieatrix  natures — the  natural  tendency  to  a  restoration  of
the  balance  of  tlxe  functions.  The  case  was  treated  upon
"  general  principles  "  in  accordance  with  the  maxim  causa  sub-
lata  tollitur  effectus.  And  this  maxim  represents,  in  fact,
the  great  law  of  Hygiene,  viz. :  that  it  be  ascertained  what
stimulus  has  been  deficient  or  excessive  in  quantity  or
abnormal  in  quality,  and  that  the  equilibrium  of  the  stimuli
be  restored.

Rut  let  us  suppose  that  the  same  man  has  again  been
exposed  to  cold,  perhaps  to  a  greater  degree,  He  seeks
shelter  and  essays  to  restore  the  lost  heat,  but  without  avail.
Despite  the  fire  and  warm  drinks,  the  rigors  continue  and
arc  succeeded  by  fever  and  quickened  respiration,  cough,
etc.  or  by  rheumatic  pains,  redness  and  swelling,  etc.  Why
this  diflercnce  between  the  cases  ? This  case  too  has  been


«^


lO  HOMCEOPATHY

treated  on  "general  principles,"  The  cause  has  been  re-
moved, why  has  not  the  effect  ceased  ?  The  equilibrium  of
the  general  stimuli  has  been  restored  and  the  loss  made
good ;  why  is  not  the  normal  equilibrium  of  the  functions
re-established  ?

The  normal  proportion  of  the  general  stimuli,  it  is  true,
has  been  restored,  but  during  the  disturbance  a  new  element
had  been  introduced  into  the  problem.  The  organism  had
suffered  a  dynamic  and  then  an  organic  change.  The  func-
tions are  permanently  modified.  The  general  stimuli  may
henceforth  be  balanced  never  so  carefully,  and  in  strictest
accordance  with  the  rules  of  Hygiene  ;  the  organism  will  not
respond.

Its  functions  are  performed  after  a  new  fashion.  The
organs  are  not  susceptible  to  the  wonted  stimuli  applied
according  to  the  laws  of  Hygiene.  The  organism  has  passed
from  a  state  of  health  into  one  of  permanent  disease.  The
general  stimuli  which>  modified  and  balanced  under  the  laws
of  Hygiene,  sufficed  to  steady  it  as  it  rocked  and  swayed  in
its  rapid  course  along  the  rough  and  crooked  railway  of  life,
will  no  longer  answer  the  purpose,  for  in  its  rocking  it  has
run  off  the  track,  and  is  now  bumping  along  over  the  cross-
ties,  making  headway,  it  is  true,  but  toward  its  own  destruc-
tion. It  needs  now  the  intervention  of  some  new  agent
acting  under  a  new  law — of  a  jack-screw  and  levers  operated
by  forces  from  without — to  re-instate  it  on  the  road  of
healthy  action.  The  wonted  general  stimuli  under  the  laws
of  Hygiene  being  insufficient,  new  stimuli  of  a  special  charac-
ter must  be  applied  according  to  a  new  law.  This  new  law,
whatever  it  be,  is  the  Therapeutic  law,  and  these  new  stimuli
are  Therapeutic  agents,  and  the  study  of  the  law  and  of  the
agents  constitutes  the  science  of  Therapeutics.

Having  thus  marked  out  its  limits,  we  have  next  to
inquire  what  the  nature  of  any  possible  science  of  Thera-
peutics must  be.  Its  subject  is  the  modified  functions  and
organs  of  the  body. Its  agents  are  special  stimuli  drawn


THE  SCIENXE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


II


from  whatever  region  of  the  external  «'orId.  By  what  sort
of  a  rormiila  can  these  agents  be  applied  to  that  subject  ?
Can  the  Therapeutist  act  on  "general  principles"  as  the
Hygicnist  docs?  Can  he  act  on  the  maxim  vausa  sud/a/a
iotiitur  effeclus?  Obviously  he  cannot.  In  so  far  as  the
cause  of  disease  can  be  discovered  in  external  influences,  the
_tre:itnient  falls  within  tlte  limits  of  the  science  of  Hygiene  as
ready  discussed.  In  so  far,  however,  as  the  cause  of
liscasc  is  identical  with  the  essential  cause  of  the  modifica-
tion of  function  or  organ  wliich  we  recognize  as  the  disease,
it  can  never  be  discovered,  for  it  is  the  same,  in  its  natnrc,  as
the  cause  of  healthy  functional  or  organic  action ;  in  other
words,  it  is  life  itself,  the  nature  of  which,  as  of  ever)'  first
cause,  is  inscrutable.  It  being  impossible  then  to  ascertain
the  essential  cause  of  disease,  and  to  apply  a  remedy  accord-
ing to  the  rational  metliod — as  tlie  Hygienist  docs — the
Therapeutist  is  necessarily  thrown  back  from  an  attempt  to
investigate  ^n/fiT/ur.y,  to  the  study  <ii  phenomena  and  to  tlie
adoption  of  the  (•w//>;Vj7/ method  In  accordance  with  this
method,  the  subject  of  his  researches  will  be  respectively  the
phenomena  manifested  by  the  patient,  and  the  phenomena
produced  by  the  special  stimulus,  and  his  endeavor  must  be
to  discover  a  general  formula  which  shall  express  a  constant
relation  between  these  two  scries  of  phenomena  and  shall
serve  as  the  Therapeutic  law.  In  thus  acting,  and  upon  this
method,  he  will  do  precisely  what  the  student  of  every
branch  of  Natural  Science  docs  and  has  dune.  For  in  his
inability  to  find  out  the  essential  cause  of  the  phenomena
that  form  the  subject  of  his  study,  the  physician  finds  himself
in  the  very  sa'mc  predicament  as  the  N'aluralist  who  likewise
has  vainly  sought  to  discover  the  essential  causes  of  the  phe-
nomena of  gravitation,  of  light,  of  chemical  action,  and  of  elec-
tricity, As  the  physician  is  unable  to  discover  the  essential
nature  of  life  and  organism,  whether  normal  or  modified,  to
ascertain  the  cause  of  health  or  of  disease,  and  is  therefore
unable  to  treat  disease  upon  the  principle  "  tolle  causam  "


12  HOMCEOPATHY

(except  in  matters  of  Hygiene,  as  before  stated),  or  "on
general  principles ;"  so  the  Naturalist  has  been  compelled  to
abandon  the  rational  method,  such  as  Aristotle  proposed  and
philosophers  elaborated  up  to  the  time  of  Bacon  and  New-
ton, and  to  adopt  an  empirical  method  in  which  the  funda-
mental principle  is  an  empirical  law  or  generalization
expressing  the  relation  between  two  series  of  phenomena.
The  science  of  Physics,  for  example,  consists  of  the  phenom-
ena respectively  of  two  bodies,  or  series  of  bodies,  so  far
as  density  and  volume  are  concerned,  and  of  the  law  of
gravitation  which  expresses  the  relation  between  these
respective  phenomena.

The  Therapeutist,  then,  abandoning  all  idea  pf  construct-
ing a  science  of  Therapeutics  on  the  rational  method,  must
have  recourse  to  the  empirical,  as  the  elaborators  of  other
natural  sciences  have  done.  The  elements  of  his  science  will
be  as  follows:  He  has  to  deal  with  a  subject  known  by  its
phenomena — the  sick  body,  with  an  agent  known  also  by
its  phenomena  —  the  drug;  and  with  a  law  which  shall  tell
how  to  apply  the  agent  to  the  subject  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  a  cure, — a  law  which  shall  express  the  general
relation  between  the  drug  and  the  morbid  organism.

The  following  tabular  statement  will  show  more  clearly
the  nature  of  Therapeutics  as  a  science,  and  its  harmony
with  other  Natural  Sciences;  for  every  Inductive  Natural
Science  (except  those  of  classification)  consists  elementarily
of  two  series  of  independent  phenomena,  connected  by  the
formula  of  their  general  relation  :

THERAPEUTICS.

MorbidFunctions&Organs,  \  (  Toxic  Functions  &  Organi,

Or,  Psthology  and  Patho- f  Therapeutic 1  Or,  Pathogenesis  and  Patho-
logical Anatomy, i  Law.  1 genetic  Anatomy,
Or,  Sick- Phenomena, } \  Or,  Drug- Phenomena,

PHYSICS.

Phenomena of the Sun,  )  y^ -■  t  Phenomena  of  the  £^th,.

as  regards  Volume  and  > .„ ,. < as  regards  Volume  and

Den^.  S *"'"*='""'• \ Density.


THE SCIENCE OF THERAPEUTICS.


u


PropcrliM  <rf  PoUita,


Propenics  of  ihc  Lumiaoui  f
Body.  J


CHEMISTRY.

Ia-vt  of  Chemical
AfTmiljt  Mid  Dc6-
nite  Froportion.

OPTICS.

Law  of  llie

Diffuiion  of

Lighl.


Ptopcriics  of  Sulphuric  kcid.


Properties  of  the  ligbt-re>
cciving  body.


Though  thus  simple  in  theor>'.  Therapeutics  is  in  reality
the  most  complex  of  all  tlie  natural  sciences,  Each  of  the
classes  of  phenomena  requires  for  its  study  the  aid  of  several
auxiliary  sciences.  Thus,  in  order  to  know  thoroughly  the
phenomena  of  disease,  we  must  call  to  our  aid  Anatomy  and
Physiology,  Chemistry,  Physics  and  Psychology.  To  know
and  understand  thoroughly  the  phenomena  of  artificial  dis-
ease or  pailiogenesy,  wc  must  avail  ourselves  of  the  same
auxiliary  sciences.  Tlie  more  imperfect  otir  knowledge  of
these  sciences,  the  less  complete  will  be  our  acquaintance
respectively  with  the  phenomena  of  Pathology  and  Patho-
gcnesy.  and  the  converse.  But,  however  complete  or  partial
may  be  our  knowledge  of  these  t^vo  classes  of  phenomena,
the  relation  between  them,  as  known,  remains  the  same,  and
is  always  expressed  by  the  therapeutic  law.  The  same  is
true  of  Physics  and  of  all  the  natural  sciences.  Our  knowl-
edge of  the  physical  properties  of  matter  is  continually
increasing.  l"he  more  complete  it  is,  the  more  exact  will  be
our  application  of  the  law  of  attraction.  But  complete  or
incomplete,  the  law  is  equally  applicable,  and  /^ra  tanta
available.

The  Conditions  of  a  Science  of  Therapeutics. —
We  come  now  to  consider  two  conditions  to  which  every
natural  science  must  be  subject,  and  which  may  therefore
serve  as  tests  of  its  fitness  to  be  regarded  as  a  "Science."
The  fintt  of  these  is  a  capabilitj-  of  infinite  progress  tn  each
of  its  elements  without  detriment  to  its  integrity  as  a  whole.


14  HOMCEOPATHY

We  have  already  seen  that  the  science  of  Physics  is  capa-
ble of  such  progress  in  the  phenomena  with  which  it  deals.
Our  knowledge  of  these  phenomena  is  continually  growing
more  comprehensive  and  more  minute,  and  new  elements  of
knowledge  are  continually  coming  into  our  possession  with
regard  to  them ;  yet  their  relation  to  each  other  through
the  law  of  attraction  remains  the  same,  and  the  science,  in
its  nature  and  structure,  receives  no  modification.  But  not
only  are  its  subjects,  the  phenomena,  capable  of  progress ;
the  law  itself  may  advance  from  a  minor  to  a  grander  gener-
alization, as  it  was  advanced,  step  by  step,  by  Newton,  and
still  without  destruction  of  the  previous  steps.  The  same  is
true  of  Chemistry.  As  our  means  of  investigation  become
more  exact  and  extensive,  our  knowledge  of  the  properties
of  bodies  increases ;  yet  the  law  of  Chemical  Affinity  in
definite  proportions  remains  undisturbed.  Furthermore,  this
law  itself  becomes  the  subject  of  more  extended  generaliza-
tions. The  law  as  established  by  Black  and  Cavendish  was
suspended,  yet  not  overthrown  (nor  the  science  disturbed)
by  the  wider  generalization  of  Dalton's  Atomic  Theory ;
and  this  again  forms  but  a  part  of  Faraday's  Theory  of  the
Identity  of  Chemical  Affinity  and  Electrical  Attraction,  and
amid  all  these  revolutions  in  abstract  theory,  the  science  of
practical  Chemistry  has  held  an  even  way.

In  the  science  of  Optics,  again,  the  phenomena  of  the
luminous  body  and  those  of  the  light- receiving  body  are
connected  by  the  law  of  the  transmission  and  diffusion  of
light.  This  structure  of  the  science  and  all  that  is  based
upon  it  rests  undisturbed  through  all  the  mighty  changes
which  recent  discoveries  have  wrought  in  our  knowledge  of
Optics — enriched  but  not  revolutionized  by  them.  But
while  the  progress  of  the  science  has  been  thus  rapid  and
uninterrupted,  philosophers  have  been  and  remain  at  vari-
ance respecting  the  very  nature  of  light  and  its  mode  of
propagation.  One  school  holds  to  the  theory  of  emission,
another  to  the undulatory  theory. Now,  let  us  suppose


THE  SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTECS.


15


that  the  science  of  Optics,  instead  uf  being  based  upon  an
empirical  law.  the  result  of  induction,  and  which  expresses
the  relation  between  two  series  of  observed  phenomena,  had
been  based  upon  a  theory  of  tlu  essential  nature  of  light  and
its  mode  of  transmission.  It  is  very  evident  tliat  tlie  whole
structure  that  might  be  built  upon  the  theory  of  emission
would  be  toppled  over  so  soon  as  the  theory  of  undulation
should  be  established.  And  should  subsequent  observation
again  lend  countenance  to  the  theory  of  emission,  down
would  go,  of  necessity,  the  whole  science  as  built  upon  the
undulatory  theory.  And  thus,  inasmuch  as  experience  and
sound  philosophy  render  it  tolerably  certain  that  we  shall
never  attain  absolute  knowledge  on  this  subject,  we  should
have,  tlirougli  all  time,  an  endless  succession  of  half-cum-
pleted  fabrics  and  hopeless  ruins,  but  no  infinitely  progres-
sive science  of  Optics.

Tliis  furnishes  an  exact  illustration  of  what  would  be  the
history  of  any  science  of  Therapeutics  not  constructed  upon
the  empirical  plan  already  elaborated.  Let  us  suppose  that
instead  of  taking  as  the  subject  of  action,  the  phenomena  of
disease  as  derived  from  observation  witli  all  the  aid  which
auxiliar}'  sciences  can  afford,  we  should  take  a  theory  of
disease, — its  essential  nature  awl  mode  of  development, — and
upon  this  theory  should  construct  a  science.  All  would
go  well,  until  facts  should  show  tliat  our  theory  was  insuf-
ficient and  untenable  (and  facts  would  show  this,  since,  as
we  have  already  seen,  tlic  essential  nature  of  disease  is
inscrut'iblc).  Now  our  whole  structure  would  be  ovcr-
throivn,  nor  would  the  fragments  even  be  available  for  the
construction  of  another  science  or  another  theory,  for  they
would  consist  of  observations  made,  not  independently,  but
on  the  basis  of  a  theory  and  with  reference  to  it.  lliere
could  thus  be  no  possibilit>'  of  steady,  uninterrupted,  infinite
progress  in  the  science.  There  would  be  a  succession  of
dynasties  of  theory,  each  based  on  the  overthrow  of  a
former,  and  each  in  turn  demolished  by  its  successor That


1 6  HOMCEOPATHY

this'  is  the  history  of  the  Therapeutics  of  the  Old  School
of  medicine  up  to  the  present  day  is  admitted  by  common
consent  It  will  continue  until  attempts  to  erect  a  rational
science  of  Therapeutics  upon  a  theory  of  disease,  confound-
ing the  law  with  the  phenomena,  shall  give  place  to  die
construction  of  an  empirical  inductive  science.

"  What  then  ! "  it  may  be  asked,  "  shall  we  not  investigate
and  theorize  upon  the  nature  of  disease  in  general,  or  of
diseases  in  particular?"  By  all  means  investigate  and
theorize,  just  as  physicists  do  upon  the  nature,  properties
and  transmission  of  light — but  do  it  as  studying  the  science
of  Pathology,  not  that  of  Therapeutics — and  avoid  most
carefully,  making  these  theories  which  can  be  at  best  no
more  than  temporary  aids  to  the  observation  and  grouping
of  phenomena,  the  basis  of  a  practical  science.  If,  however,
they  throw  light  on  the  study  of  phenomena,  render  our
observations  of  them  more  keen  and  more  exact,  or  afford
us  connecting  links  between  isolated  groups  of  phenomena, —
and  they  will  do  all  this, — they  will  render  valuable  indirect
aid  to  the  science  of  Therapeutics,  just  as  similar  investiga-
tions of  light  have  advanced  our  knowledge  of  Optics.

A  second  condition  or  test  of  a  natural  science,  and
therefore  of  any  proposed  science  of  Therapeutics,  is  that  it
shall  provide  for  the  prediction  of  future  events  within  its
own  domain.  It  must  furnish  means  of  prevision.  The
problem  must  be  as  follows :  Given  the  law  and  one  series
of  phenomena,  to  state  the  corresponding  series  of  phenom-
ena on  the  other  side.  This  condition  is  admirably  stated
by  Whewell :  "  Men  cannot  help  believing  that  the  laws  laid
down  by  discoverers  must  be  in  a  great  measure  identical
with  the  real  laws  of  nature,  when  the  discoverers  thus
determine  effects  beforehand,  in  the  same  manner  in  which
nature  herself  determines  them  when  the  occasion  occurs.
Those  who  can  do  this  must  to  a  great  extent  have  detected
nature's  secret — must  have  fixed  upon  the  conditions  to
which  she  attends  and  must  have  seized  the  rules  by  which


THE  SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


17


she  applies  them.  Such  a  coincidence  of  untried  facts  widi
speculative  assertions  cannot  be  tlic  work  of  chance,  but
implies  some  krgc  portion  of  truth  in  the  principles  on
which  the  reasoning  is  founded.  To  trace  order  and  law  ifl
that  which  has  been  observed,  may  be  considered  as  inter-
preting what  nature  has  written  down  for  us  and  will
commonly  prove  that  wc  understand  her  alphabet.  But  to
predict  what  has  not  been  obierved  is  to  attempt  ourselves  to
use  the  legislative  phrases  of  nature ;  and  when  she  responds
plainly  and  precisely  to  tliat  which  we  thus  utter,  we  cannot
but  suppose  that  we  have  in  a  great  measure  made  ourselves
masters  of  the  meaning  and  structure  of  her  language.  The
prfdktioK  of  results  even  of  the  same  kind  as  those  which
have  been  observed,  in  new  cases,  is  a  proof  of  real  success
in  our  inductive  processes."  '

The  discovery  of  the  planet  Neptune  by  Levcrrier  and
Adams  affords  an  instance  of  this  prevision,  in  Astronomy,
the  details  of  which  are  familiar  to  all.  The  problem  was:
Given  the  law  of  attraction  and  a  scries  of  phenomena,  con-
sisting of  certain  unexplained  perturbations  of  Jupiter — to
find  the  other  and  corrcs[X)nding  series  of  phenomena.  The
calculations  were  made ;  the  resulting  phenomena  were
stated  to  be  those  of  an  undiscovered  planet  of  a  given  size
and  orbit  and  a  definite  location,  the  existence  of  which  was
accordingly  affirmed  and  its  discovery  predicted.  Physical
investigation  confirmed  the  induction.

This  condition  applies  to  all  natural  sciences,  and  of  course
to  Therapeutics,  The  problem  would  be:  Given  the  Thera-
peutic law  and  a  certain  series  of  phenomena  of  natural  or
drug  disease,  to  find  the  corresponding  series  of  phenomena
of  drug  or  natural  disease.

Does  "R-^tional  Medicine"  Fulfill  thesf  Condi-
tions?— This  being  the  nature  and  these  tlie  conditions  and


'  Wbrwelli  Philnefhy  eflki  Induttivt  Sdeneet,  vol.  H.,  pp.  64,  65.

3


I8  HOMOEOPATHY

tests  of  the  only  possible  science  of  Therapeutics,  we  come
now  to  inquire  whether  the  Old-School  Therapeutics  are  of
this  nature  or  will  sustain  these  tests.  The  works  of  the
foremost  men  of  the  Old  School  abound  in  admissions  of  their
lack  of  a  therapeutic  law  and  of  the  chaotic  state  of  their
practice.'  But  the  efforts  of  these  men  to  remedy  this  sad
state  of  things  show  a  constant  misapprehension  of  the  philos-
ophy of  the  science  they  are  striving  to  construct

We  may  divide  Old-School  Therapeutics  into  two  methods.
The  one  bases  the  plan  of  cure  upon  a  theory  of  the  nature
of  the  disease/  endeavors  so  to  study  the  pathology  of  the
disease  as  to  form  a  sound  hypothesis  of  its  modus  operandi
and  then  essays  the  cure  upon  "  gener^d  principles."  It
undertakes,  in  fact,  to  act  in  Therapeutics  upon  what  we  have
seen  to  be  the  true  method  in  Hygiene.  There  are  three
objections  to  this  method,  any  of  which  would  be  conclusive
were  there  not  a  prior  difficulty  in  the  simple  impossibility  of
arriving  at  a  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the  disease,  which
is  modified  life.  A  simple  example  will  show  this  impos-
sibility. In  Pneumonia  the  blood  contains  an  excess  of
fibrine.  How  happens  this  ?  Why,  either  the  elimination
of  fibrine  has  been  retarded  or  its  fabrication  has  been  accel-
erated. What  are  the  agents  of  these  respective  processes  ?
Cells — which  are  essentially  similar  in  all  parts  of  the  body
— and  yet  whose  structureless  walls  possess  the  power  of
separating  from  th^  circumambient  fluids  the  most  diverse
substances  in  different  organs — nay,  even  of  manufacturing
new  substances.  Now,  until  we  can  learn  the  secret  of  this
mysterious  power  of  the  cell  wall,  which  begins  and  ends
with  life,  which  we  can  neither  comprehend  nor  imitate  nor
simulate,  we  shall  not  arrive  at  an  understanding  of  the
nature  of  any  disease.

'  See  Forbes,  Bennett,  Tod,  Holmes  says :  "  In  these  wards,  by  those  bed-

and  others.  sides,  have  you  seen  the  patient  ap-

■  Thus  Prof.  Geo,  T.  Elliott  in  his  plication  of  the  searching  analytical

recent  Valedictory  to  the  Graduating  laws  by  which  we  seek  to  discover  the

class  at  Bellevue College Hospital  essentiality  of  disease."


!E  SCIENCE  OP  THERAPEUTICS.

Of  the  other  objections  to  this  method  the  first  two  arc
somewhat  paradoxical.  The  method  constitutes  rather  a
congeries  of  sciences  of  Tlierapcutics.  based  on  theories  of
isolated  groups  or  types  of  disease,  than  a  single,  all-embrac-
ing science  founded  on  one  comprehensive  theory-  of  disease.
Hence,  a  new  science  must  be  formed  for  ever>'  new  type.
It  is  too  spe^iii/  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  too  general  to
embrace  all  t/te  pkenomeita  of  each  tndix'idual  case.  For
observation  shows  incontestably  that  so  great  are  the  vari-
eties of  temperament  and  relative  organization  and  condition
^mong  men.  that  no  two  cases  of  the  same  disease,  so  to
speak,  are  exactly  alike.

Such  a  Therapeutics  must  be  necessarily  based  on  a
lheor>"  wliich  is  a  generalization,  and  which  therefore  over-
looks those  phenomena  of  a  given  case  which  arc  peculiar  to
the  individual  [raticni  and  takes  cognir.ancc  only  of  those
phenomena  which  arc  common  to  a  great  number  of  cases.
Now,  a  metliod  which  requires  such  generalization  and  makes
no  provision  for  the  strictest  individuahzation  Is  radically
vicious.

The  eye  of  science  regards  natural  phenomena  with  the
most  absolute  impartiality.  In  her  view  there  are  no  trifies,
no  events,  subjective  or  objective,  which  are  "irrelevant"
and  "of  no  moment"  A  method  of  Therapeutics,  however,
which  selects  a  few  symptoms,  calls  them  pathognomonic  of
Pneumonia,  constructs  upon  them  a  theory  of  tlte  disease,
and  from  this  deduces  a  mode  of  cure,  must  disregard  many
phenomena  of  every-  individual  cas'e.  It  arbitrarily  pro-
nounces them  "  accidental  " — but  Nature  knows  no  asciden/s.

So  far  is  this  method  from  meeting  the  rec|uircments  of
inductive  science,  that  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  this
proce&.<i  of  generalization  actually  leads  to  the  treatment  of
cases  which  have  no  real  existence  and  never  had  any,— in
feet,  to  the  trfaf»UNt  of  abslractii'MS.  For  who  ever  saw  a
case  in  which  none  but  the  pathognomonic  symptoms  of
Pneumonia  were  prcscnt^orof  Rheumatism  oi  Dysentery?


20  HOM(EOPATHY

Who  ever  saw  ideal  cases  of  these  diseases?  We  all  see
cases  which  present  the  pathognomonic  symptoms  plus
certain  others  peculiar  to  the  individual,  but  these  vary
with  the  individual,  and  thus  make  each  case  different  from
every  other.  We  see  and  treat  the  Pneumonia  or  Rheuma-
tism of  John  Doe  or  Richard  Roe,  each  of  which  presents,
in  addition  to  the  pathognomonic  signs  of  the  disease,  certain
peculiar  modifications  impressed  upon  these  signs  by  tiie
temperament  and  idiosyncrasies  of  these  persons,  along
with  other  symptoms  peculiar  to  each.  For  such  an  indi-
vidualization of  disease  as  would  give  equal  (or,  as  they
deserve,  higher)  rank  to  these  peculiarities  of  the  individual
patient^  the  method  under  consideration  makes  no  provision.
This  fallacy  was  perceived  and  well  exposed  by  the  Letp»c
Professor  who  recently  exclaimed  to  his  class:  "Gentlemen,
we  have  to  do  with  patients  and  not  with  diseases."

The  next  objection  to  this  method  is  that  it  does  not  fulfill
the  first  condition  of  a  physical  science.  It  is  not  capable  of
infinite  progress.  This  point  needs  no  elaboration.  It  was
fully  considered  when  the  condition  was  stated.  In  confir-
mation of  what  was  then  said,  I  need  not  refer  to  the
successive  rise  and  decline  of  Brunonism,  Broussaisism,  the
humoral  and  solid  pathology,  the  theory  of  the  dyscrasias
and  the  reign  and  decadence  of  Iron,  Iodine,  Cod  Liver
Oil,  etc.

The  second  method  of  Old-School  Therapeutics  is  the
methodical,  which  discards  theory  and  founds  its  rules  for
treating  disease  upon  numerical  data,  obtained  from  observa-
tion or  by  experience  upon  the  sick.

Given  records  of  three  series  of  cases,  1,000  in  each,  and
under  three  modes  of  treatment :  Under  treatment  A,  500
recovered ;  under  B,  300 ;  under  C,  200.  A  is  adopted  as
the  established  mode  of  treatment  for  the  disease — "  Risum
teneatis,  Amicif"  An  elaborate  criticism  of  this  method  is
unnecessary.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  it  does  not  fulfill
either  condition  of  a  physical  science. It  is  incapable  of


THE SCIENCE OF  THERAPEUTICS.


21


I


infinite  progress.  The  addition  of  500  cases  to  the  3000
above  named  might  modify  all  conclusions  and  place  treat-
ment C  in  advance  of  A  or  B.  There  would  result  a
complete  revolution  in  practice  and  in  the  direction  of
investigation.

But  it  utterly  fails  to  enable  us  to  foresee  and  provide
against  new  forms  of  disease.  If  a  thousand  or  two  of
cases  must  be  seen  and  experimented  upon,  in  all  conceivable
ways,  before  definite  and  trustworthy  conclusions  as  to  the
best  treatment  can  be  arrived  at,  who  would  not  pray  tliat
his  turn  might  come  among  the  third  or  fourth  thousand  ?
Who  would  not  pity  the  victims  among  the  first  thousands?

Notwithstanding  these  obvious  objections,  this  method  of
constructing  a  science  of  Therapeutics  upon  observation,
wbetlier  at  random  or  based  on  experimentation  upon  the
sick,  has  the  sanction  of  some  of  the  highest  names  in  the
profession — among  which  it  is  sufficient  to  name  Louis  and
Forbes.  It  demands,  therefore,  a  more  extended  considera-
tion. As  it  involves  the  application  of  both  Mathematics
and  Logic,  the  opinion  of  the  highest  authorities  in  these
respective  sciences  should  be  conclusive  as  to  the  soundness
of  the  method,  and  we  content  ourselves  with  quoting  two
of  them  :

M.  Auguste  Comte,  one  of  the  first  living  mathematicians,
and  who  would  therefore  be  disposed  to  apply  mathematical
methods  to  the  natural  sciences  wherever  this  were  possible,
expresses  himself  in  the  following  manner  concerning  the
numerical  method  in  medicine :

"  Indeed,  the  spirit  of  calculation  tends  in  our  day  to  intro-
duce itself  into  this  study  (Physiology),  especially  into  that
part  of  it  which  relates  to  medical  questions,  by  a  far  less
direct  method,  under  a  far  more  deceptive  form,  and  with
infinitely  more  humble  pretensions.  I  wish  to  speak  of  that
assumed  application  of  it  which  is  called  the  Statistics  of
Medicine,  from  which  so  many  savanis  expect  great  things
and  which,  from  its  very  nature,  can  lead  only  Co  profound


22  HOMtEOPATHY

and  direct  degradation  of  the  medical  art  (which  would  be
reduced  by  it  to  a  method  of  blind  enumeration).  Such  a
method,  if  we  may  be  allowed  to  call  it  by  the  name  of
method  at  all,  cannot  in  reality  be  anything  else  than  absolute
empiricism,  disguised  under  the  frivolous  garb  of  mathe-
matics. Pushed  to  its  extreme  logical  consequences,  it  will
tend  to  make  all  rational  medication  radically  disappear  from
medicine,  by  conducting  the  practitioner  to  make  random
trials  of  certain  therapeutic  measures  with  the  object  of
noting  down,  with  minute  precision,  the  numerical  results  of
their  application.  It  is  evident,  on  principle,  that  the  con-
tinued variations  to  which  all  organism  is  subject,  are  neces-
sarily more  pronounced  in  a  pathological  than  in  a  normal
state,  and  as  a  consequence  of  this  fact,  the  cases  must  be
even  less  exactly  similar,  whence  results  the  manifest  impos-
sibility of  making  a  judicious  comparison  between  two  cura-
tive methods  derived  from  data,  furnished  by  statistical  tables
alone,  independent  of  some  sound  medical  theory.  No  doubt,
some  direct  experimentation,  restrained  under  proper  limits,
might  be  of  great  importance  to  medicine  as  well  as  to
Physiology,  but  it  is  precisely  under  the  strict  condition  that
it  shall  never  be  merely  empirical,  but  shall  always  attach
itself  either  in  institution  or  in  its  interpretation  to  an  entire
system  of  corresponding  positive  doctrines.  Notwithstanding
the  imposing  aspect  of  the  forms  of  exactness,  it  would  be
difficult  to  conceive  of  an  opinion  in  Therapeutics  more  super-
ficial and  more  uncertain  than  that  which  rests  solely  on  the
easy  computation  of  fatal  and  favorable  cases,  to  say  nothing
of  the  pernicious  practical  consequences  of  such  a  manner  of
proceeding,  when  one  could  not  beforehand  exclude  any  kind
of  attempt.

"  It  is  really  deplorable  that  geometricians  have  sometimes
honored  with  some  kind  of  encouragement,  such  a  profoundly
irrational  aberration  by  making  vain  and  puerile  efforts  to
determine  by  their  illusory  theories  of  chances,  the  number  of
cases  sufficient  to  make  these  statistical  results  legitimate."^

'  Court  dt  PkiUsephie  Positive,  ■^T  M.  AugnsteComte.tom.  iii.,pp.  418-^420.


THE SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


23


And  with  a  direct  reference  to  the  method  of  obtaining  a
correct  system  of  Tliera politics  by  experimenting  with  indi-
vidual medicines  and  indi\'idnal  cases  of  diseases,  and  form-
ing of  the  results  statistical  tables  from  which  deductions  are
to  be  drawn  by  the  numerical  method,  the  highest  modem
authority  in  philosophy,  John  Stuart  Mill,  speaks  in  his  Sys-
tem of  Logic: '  "  Let  the  subject  of  inquiry  be  the  conditions
of  health  and  disease  in  the  human  body ;  or  (for  greater
simplicity)  the  conditions  of  recovery  from  a  given  disease  ;
and  in  order  to  narrow  the  question  still  more,  let  it  be
limited,  in  the  first  instance,  to  this  one  inquiry:  la  or  is  not
a  particular  medicament  (Mercury,  for  instance)  a  remedy  for
that  disease  f

"The  experimental  method  would  simply  administer  Mer-
cury* in  as  many  cases  as  possible,  noting  the  age,  sex;  tepi-
perament  and  other  peculiarities  of  bodily  constitution,  the
particular  form  and  variety  of  the  disease,  the  particular
stage  of  its  progress,  etc,  remarking  in  which  of  these  cases
it  produced  a  salutary  effect,  and  with  what  circumstances  it
was  on  tliosc  occasions  combined. • • • •

"  When  we  devise  an  experiment  to  ascertain  the  effect  of  a
given  agent,  there  arc  certain  precautions  which  we  never,  if
we  can  help  it,  omit  In  tlie  first  place,  we  introduce  the
agent  into  the  midst  of  a  set  of  circumstances,  which  we  have
exactly  ascertained.  It  need  hardly  be  remarked  how  far
this  condition  is  from  being  realized  in  any  case  connected
with  the  phenomena  of  life ;  how  far  we  are  from  knowing
what  arc  all  the  circumstances  which  pre-exist  in  any
instance  in  which  Mercury  is  administered  to  a  living  being.
This  difficulty,  however,  though  insuperable  in  most  cases,
may  not  be  so  in  all ;  tlterc  are  sometimes  (though  I  should
think  never  in  Physiology)  concurrences  of  many  causes
in  which  we  yet  know  accurately  what  the  causes  arc.  But
when  we  have  got  rid  of  this  obstacle,  we  encounter  another
still  more  serious.  In  other  cases,  when  wc  intend  to  try  an
experiment,  we  do  not  reckon  it  enough  that  there  be  no  cir-

>  Haipcr'i  edition,  1S48,  p.  nko.


24  HOMCEOPATHY

cumstances  in  the  case,  the  presence  of  which  is  unknown  to
us.  We  require  also  that  none  of  the  circumstances  whidi
we  do  know  of  shall  have  effects  susceptible  of  being  con-
founded with  those  of  the  agent  whose  properties  we  wish  to
study.  We  take  the  utmost  pains  to  exclude  all  causes
capable  of  composition  with  the  given  cause ;  or  if  forced  to
let  in  any  such  causes  we  take  care  to  make  them  such  that
we  can  compute  and  allow  for  their  influence,  so  that  the
effect  of  the  given  cause  may,  after  the  subduction  of  those
other  effects,  be  apparent  as  a  residual  phenomenon.

"  These  precautions  are  inapplicable  to  such  cases  as  we
are  now  considering.  The  Mercury  of  our  experiment
being  tried  with  an  unknown  multitude  (or  let  it  be  a  known
multitude)  of  other  influencing  circumstances,  the  mere  fact
of  their  being  influencing  circumstances  implies  that  they
disguise  the  effect  of  the  Mercury,  and  preclude  us  from
knowing  whether  it  has  any  effect  or  no. • • •

"  In  phenomena  so  complicated  it  is  questionable  if  two
eases  similar  in  all  respects  but  one  ever  occurred ;  and  were
they  to  occur  we  could  not  possibly  know  that  they  were  so
exactly  similar.

"  Anything  like  a  scientific  use  of  the  method  of  experi-
ment in  these  complicated  cases  is  therefore  out  of  the
question.  We  can  in  the  most  favorable  cases,  only  discover,
by  a  succession  of  trials,  that  a  certain  cause  is  very  often
followed  by  a  certain  effect"

Has  "Rational  Medicine"  Accomplished  Noth-
ing?— But  it  may  reasonably  be  asked,  can  it  be  possible
that  a  large  number  of  men  of  every  generation  since
Hippocrates,  and  among  them  some  of  the  brightest  intel-
lects the  world  has  known,  should  have  been  engaged  in  the
study  and  practice  of  medicine,  with  no  better  result  than
this — a  simple  vacuity?  I  admit  the  rare  intelligence  and
devotion  of  the  laborers.  But,  in  the  first  place,  the  task  is
mightier than any other essayed by man ; may it not


NCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


35


reasonably  require  ages  to  complete  its  plan  ?  Again,  labor,
however  intelligent  and  devoted,  if  misdirected,  must  fail  of
its  end.  If  one  generation  of  intellectual  giants  erect  a
towering  fabric  and  their  equally  lusty  successors  demolish
it,  what  does  tlie  third  inherit  save  a  heap  of  rubbish  which
it  may  require  the  best  years  of  its  life  to  clear  away.  Gen-
eration after  generation  of  wise  men  labored  to  construct
the  physical  theory  of  the  universe,  yet  not  until  tlie  recent
day  of  Newton  did  we  learn  how  to  begin  aright  True,
Newton's  predecessors  from  tlic  earliest  ages  observed  and
stored  away  a  mass  of  isolated  facts  of  the  greatest  value,
but  they  knew  not  the  magic  word  wheren-itli  to  charm
them  into  order.  In  like  manner,  it  is  not  denied  that  ne
are  indebteil  to  our  predecessors  for  a  vast  number  of
isolated  facts  of  incontestable  value  as  materials  to  be  used
in  the  construction  of  a  science  of  Therapeutics.  \Vc  are
indebted  to  them  also  for  the  elaboration  of  those  subsidiary
sciences — Anatomy,  Physiology.  Pathology,  Chemistry  and
the  hke — in  which,  indeed,  the  great  glories  of  the  medicine
of  to-day  have  been  won,  and  without  which,  we  cheerfully
admit.  Therapeutics  as  a  science  could  not  exist

But  it  is  said  that  Therapeutics,  must  have  advanced  inas-
much as  the  rates  of  mortality  have  steadily  diminished.
On*  sort  of  improvement  we  gladly  acknowledge.  Simul-
taneously with  the  spread  of  Homoeopathy,  Old-School
physicians  began  to  Learn  to  abstain  from  mischievous  modes
of  treatment  formerly  pursued,  and  which  terribly  enhanced
the  natural  fatality  of  diseases.  Professor  Bennett,  in  the
introduction  to  his  work  on  Clinical  Medicine,  specifies
Apoplexy,  Pneumonia  and  Pleurisy,  Syphilis,  Small-po-v,
Phthisis,  Bright's  disease,  and  Favus.  as  diseases  in  treating
which,  he  says,  "great  improvements  have  been  made;"
and  he  adduces  this  as  a  proof  of  the  advancement  of
medicine.  A  reference  to  the  chapters  in  M'hich  he  treats
of  these  diseases  shows  that  he  conceives  the  "  improvement
in  their  treatment"  to  consist  in  abstinence  from  methods


.c:*9


26  HOMCEOPATHY

which  were  formerly  employed  and  which  he  clearly  proves
were very mischievous. For example, Blood-letting  in
Apoplexy,  Pneumonia,  Pleurisy,  Phthisis  and  Bright's  dis-
ease— the  immoderate  use  of  Mercury  in  Syphilis — heroic
medication  and  external  warmth  in  Small-pox,  and  avoid-
ance of  all  internal  medication  for  Favus,  which  he  conceives
to  be  a  vegetable  parasite. This  improvement,  then,  is  purely
negative, a  very  poor  ground  on  which  to  claim  positive
advancement in the construction of  a science, however
deserving of the gratitude of suffering humanity. The
formula  for  improvement  of  all  kinds  is,  *' Cease  to  do  evil;
learn  to  do  well." We  admit  that  the  Old  School  are  learning
to  obey  the  former,  the  negative  clause. We  invite  them  to
advance  and  join  us  in  the  latter,  the  positive.

Again,  an  extended  knowledge  of  the  remote  causes  of
disease  and  of  the  principles  of  Hygiene  has  enabled  med-
ical men  to  prevent  the  occurrence  or  the  spread  of  many
forms  of  disease.  And  far  be  it  from  us  to  undervalue,
through  any  love  of  a  newly  constructed  science  of  Thera-
peutics, this  branch  of  a  physician's  function,  the  forestalling
or  arrest  of  maladies  by  Hygienic  means.  As  increased
knowledge  in  this  department  of  science  has  enabled  us  to
dispense  with  therapeutic  agents  in  many  cases  in  which
they  were  formerly  resorted  to,  so  we  firmly  believe  that,
with  the  advancement  of  learning.  Hygiene  will  more  and
more  curtail  the  boundaries  of  Therapeutics,  until  the  day
shall  come  when  the  physician  shall  be  prized  as  \ht  preserver
rather  than  solely  the  restorer  of  health,  and  shall  be  con-
sulted respecting  the  means  of  preventing  rather  than  solely
of  c«rm^ disease,  and  the  "family  doctor"  shall  be  regarded
as  the  confidential  adviser,  valuable  in  proportion  as  he
keeps  his  client  out  of  bed,  just  as  the  family  lawyer  is  con-
fided in,  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  his  clients  out  of  court !
In  that  day  there  will  be  fewer  apothecaries.

Does  Homceopathv  fulfill  the  Conditions  of  a
Science  of  Therapeutics? — Returning  now  to  our  argu-


THE  SCTKNCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


37


It,  we  5nd  Uiat  the  field  is  open  for  a  science  o(  Tlicra-
pcutics.  In  the  light  of  what  has  been  said  we  proceed  to
examine  the  claims  of  Homoeopathy  to  the  honor  of  being
that  science.

In  its  structure  as  a  science.  Homoeopathy  conforms  to
the  model  we  have  delineated.  It  consists  of  a  law  or
formula  which  expresses  the  relation  between  two  series  of
phenomena,  diosc  of  a  given  case  of  disease  on  the  one
hand  and  those  of  a  given  drug-proving  on  the  other.  The
elaboration  of  each  of  these  series  is  the  province  of  various
subsidiary  sciences,  and  they  arc  analogous  in  their  mode  of
elaboration.  Each  series,  however,  is  entirely  independent
of  the  other.  Each  may  be  pursued  independently,  as  a
branch  of  Natural  Science  and  under  tlic  hcadii  of  Patliolo^y
and  Pathogenesy  respectively,  researches  may  be  made  in
each  without  any  view  to  a  practical  application  in  the  cure
of  tlie  sick.  It  is  only  when  connected  by  tlie  law  of  their
relation  (the  formula  of  similarities)  that  they  constitute  the
science  of  Therapeutics.

Their  application,  moreover,  in  obedience  to  this  law  is
baxed  upon  no  lij'pothesis  respecting  the  essential  nature  of
eitlicr  variety  of  phenomena  or  of  their  tnodtts  operandi
where  brought  into  operation.  This  may  surprise  some  who
know  how  earnestly  Hahnemann  argued  on  these  very
points  in  his  OrganoM.  But  these  arguments  were  no  essen-
tial parts  of  his  system.  They  were  the  results  of  an
endeavor  to  commend  his  discovery  to  the  grcvalcnt  way
of  thinking.  They  constitute  the  only  controvertible  part
of  his  writings,  and  arc  the  only  positions  of  his  which  have
not  triumphantly  withstood  the  assaults  of  his  critics.

Coming  now  to  apply  to  Homceopathy,  as  tests,  the  condi-
tions to  which  we  have  shown  that  every  inductive  science
must  conform,  we  5nd  in  the  6rst  place  that  it  is  capable  of
in^nite  progress  in  each  of  its  elements,  without  such  prog-
ress involving  the  destruction  or  denial  of  what  has  been
previously constructed or received. The study  of the


28  HOMCEOPATHY

phenomena  (whether  of  disease  or  of  drug-action)  was  limited
at  first  to  the  observation  of  external  manifestations  and
subjective  sensations  as  these  might  present  themselves  to
our  senses  unassisted  by  any  of  the  aids  by  which  modem
science  has  sharpened  them,  or  to  our  minds  unaided  by
that  knowledge  of  the  connection  and  mutual  relations  and
dependences  of  symptoms  for  which  we  are  indebted  to
modern  discoveries  in  Chemistry  and  PathoI<^y.  But  these
advances  in  Pathology,  great  as  they  have  been,  have  not
altered  the  relation  which  the  phenomena  of  natural  disease
bear  to  those  of  drug-disease.  These  phenomena  respect-
ively, whether  rudely  apprehended,  or  clearly  and  fully
understood  in  all  their  relations  and  inter-dependences,  still
bear  the  same  relation  to  each  other — expressed  by  the  law
Similia  Similibus  Curantur.  And  we  can  imagine  no
possible  development  of  the  sciences  of  Pathology  and
Pathogenesy  which  could  alter  this  relation.

And  then  the  law  itself  may  be  but  a  stepping-stone  to  a
still  wider  generaUzation  which  shall  one  day  embrace  both
it  and  something  besides,  and  which  shall  make  clear  some
things  which  we  now  see  darkly.  But  should  this  occur,  as
the  like  has  occurred  in  other  Natural  Sciences,  there  will
be,  there  can  be,  no  revolutionary  action  in  it.  It  may  be
that  the  edifice,  as  we  now  occupy  it,  is  still  unfinished, —  it
may  be  that  other  stories  are  one  day  to  be  added, — but
assuredly,  as  the  tower  is  to  the  spire,  as  the  buttress  to  the
pinnacle,  so  wU  this  generalization  be  to  that  which  may  be
constructed  upon  it, — a  basis, — an  indispensable  first  step  in
the  construction  of  the  science.

The  complete  manner  in  which  the  second  condition —
that  oi prevision — is  fulfilled  by  Homceopathy  is  a  source  of
inexpressible  benefit  to  the  race.  It  follows,  from  the  very
terms  of  the  science,  that  if  the  phenomena  of  a  given  case
of  disease  be  known,  the  law  of  relation  will  at  once  point
to  the  appropriate  remedy  (if  this  be  contained  in  the  Ma-
teria Medica) ;  and  this  indication  may  be  relied  upon  with


SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


89


implicit  confidence,  even  Uiough  no  such  case  of  disease  has
ever  heretofore  been  subjected  to  treatment  Conversely,
when  the  properties  of  a  given  drug  have  been  investigated
and  its  toxic  phenomena  wdl  ascertained,  the  physician  is
able  to  pronounce  with  certainty  what  form  of  disease  it  will
cure,  even  though  no  such  disease  has  ever  been  witnessed
or  treated  by  himself,  or  by  anybody.  An  illustrious  exam-
ple of  this  prevision  was  afforded  by  Hahnemann.  The
terrible  fatality  of  Asiatic  Cholera,  on  its  first  iavasioa  of
Europe,  is  well  known.  In  extenuation  of  their  lack  of
success,  physicians  of  the  Old  School  pleaded  tliat  the  disease
was  new  to  them, — they  had  had  no  opportunities  to  study
it.  and  to  ascertain  by  experiment  the  effects  of  remedies
upon  it  The  plea  was  plausible,  but  fatal  to  the  pretensions
of  their  science.  In  fact,  it  was  good  for  nothing.  For
surely  the  first  thousand  cases  should  have  afforded  means
enough  for  learning  the  Pathology  of  the  disease  and  how
to  cure  it,  if  tAis  wtre  to  be  teamed  from  Pathology.  But
hundreds  of  thousands  perished,  and  yet  the  percentage  of
mortality  remained  the  same.

While  the  disease  was  stil!  on  the  confines  of  Europe, —
before  it  had  invaded  Germany,— long  before  cither  he  or
any  of  his  disciples  had  ever  seen  a  case  of  it,  "Hahnemann,
guided  by  the  unerring  therapeutic  rule  he  had  discovered,
at  once  fixed  upon  the  remedies  which  should  prove  spe-
cific for  it,  and  caused  directions  to  be  printed  and  distributed
over  the  country  by  thousands;  so  that  on  its  actual  inva-
sion the  Homccopathists  and  those  who  tiad  received  Hahne-
mann's directions  were  fully  prepared  for  its  treatment  and
prophylaxis;  and  tlius  there  is  no  doubt  many  lives  were
saved  and  many  victims  rescued  from  the  pestilence.  On  all
sides  statements  were  published  testifying  to  tlie  immense
comparative  success  that  had  attended  the  employment  of
the  means  recommended  by  Hahnemann  before  he  had  seen
or  treated  a  single  case.  This  one  fact  speaks  more  for
Horoceopatby,  and  the  truth  of  the  law  of  nature  on  which


^m


30  HOMCEOPATHy

the  system  is  founded,  than  almost  any  other  I  could  offer,
viz. :  that  Hahnemann,  from  merely  reading  a  description  of
one  of  the  most  appallingly  rapid  and  fatal  diseases,  could
confidently  and  dogmatically  say,  such  and  such  a  medicine
will  do  good  in  this  stage  of  the  disease,  such  and  such  other
medicines  in  that ;  and  that  the  united  testimony  of  hundreds
of  practitioners  in  all  parts  of  Europe  should  bear  practical
testimony  to  the  accuracy  of  Hahnemann's  conclusions."'

We  may  add  that  in  the  second  Epidemic  of  Cholera  in
1849,  the  Old  School,  despite  their  experience  in  1831-34,
had  but  little  better  success,  while  again  the  justice  of  Hah-
nemann's conclusions  and  the  claim  of  Homoeopathy  to  that
prevision  which  characterizes  a  true  science  were  vindicated
by  the  splendid  success  of  the  Homoeopathic  treatment

John  Stuart  Mill,  in  the  portion  of  his  work  on  Logic
from  which  we  have  already  quoted,  in  speaking  of  the  three
methods  of  investigation, — that  of  observation,  that  of  exper-
imentation, and  that  of  deduction, — after  showing  conclu-
sively that  the  former  two  are  inapplicable  to  medicine,
speaks  of  the  deductive  method  in  terms  which  are  (unin-
tentionally of  course,  and  for  this  very  reason  they  are  the
more  conclusive)  a  description  of  the  philosophyof  Homoeop-
athy. "  If,  for  instance,  we  try  the  experiments  with  Mer-
cury on  a  person  in  health,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  general
laws  of  its  action  up)on  the  human  body,  and  then  reason
from  these  laws  to  determine  how  it  will  act  upon  persons
affected  with  a  particular  disease,  this  may  be  a  really  effect-
ual method,  but  this  is  deduction."

How  TO  Study  the  Science  of  Therapeutics. —
The  method  of  studying  the  two  series  of  phenomena
which,  together  with  the  law  of  relation,  constitute  the
science  of  Therapeutics,  follows  from  what  has  been  said.

When  first  brought  into  the  presence  of  a  concrete  case  of
disease,  the  business  of  the  physician  is  to  ascertain  what

'  Dudgeon's  Lecturts  on  Homaopathy,  p.  37.


THE  SCIENCE OF  THERAPEUTICS.


3'


)ranch  of  medical  science  he  i-s  called  upon  to  exercise. Is
I  the  case  one  which  requires  hygienic  manjigemcnt  or  thcra-
ipeulic^  or  both,  or  is  tlie  patient  beyund  the  reach  of  art?
To  answer  these  questions  a  diagnosis  and  prognosis  must
be  made,  and  to  make  these,  a  knowledge  of  the  remote  and
proximate  causes and of  the  course  and  determination  of
,  diseases  is  required. In  a  word,  a  knowledge  of  Physiology
and  Pathology  is  indispensable  on  the  very  threshold  of  med-
ical practice  and  before  any  question  of  Thenipcutics  has
arisen.

When  these  preliminary  questions  have  been  settled  and
case  has  been  found  to  come  u*ithin  the  domain  of  Ther-
^utics,  its  phetioniena  are  to  be  studied  in  such  a  way  that
ail  deviations  from  a  nonnai  state  may  be  perceived,  as  well
I  those  which  arc  common  to  a  number  of  similar  cases,  as
more  particularly  those  which  seem  to  be  peculiar  to  the
individual  case  in  hand,  and  which  therefore  ser\'e  to  give  it
individuality-  and  to  distinguish  it  from  all  other  and  similar
cases.  The  case  is  to  be  then  individuali)!C<I  as  sharply  as
po5.sibIe,  and  a  complete  picture  of  the  morbid  phenomena
obtained  in  their  natural  groups  and  connections.

Now,  morbid  phenomena  are  deviations  from  Healthy
phetwmen,!.  How  can  we  recognize  the  deviations  unless
we  are  familiar  with  the  standard?  How  can  we  appreciate
morhid phenomena  save  through  a  knowledge  of /'Ayjw/i?^,
which  is  tlie  science  ai  healthy  phenomena  t

In  like  manner  we  are  able  to  get  a  complete  picture  of
the  morbid  symptoms  only  by  an  orderly  and  methodical
investigation  ;  and  such  an  investigation  is  possible  to  those
alone  who  are  familiar  witli  Oic  relations  and  sequences  of
morbid  phenomena. —  thai  is  to  say,  with  Pathology.  A
I  simple  reference  to  practical  experience  will  prove  this.  A
patient  complains  of  pain  in  her  left  hypochondrium.  distress
and  faintncss  in  the  epigastrium,  vertigo  and  various  symp-
toms of  dyspepsia,  but  never  thinks  of  mentioning — perhaps
is  unconscious  of — certain  evidences  of  uterine  disease  to


32  HOMCEOPATHY

which  the  attention  of  the  physician  is  instantly  directed
through  his  knowledge  of  the  connection  and  sequence
of  symptoms.  So  of  the  connection  of  certain  fonns  of
vomiting  with  disease  of  the  brain  or  of  the  kidneys,  etc,  etc

Clearly,  then,  Physiology  and  Pathology  are  quite  indis-
pensable to  the  physician,  and  they  speak  with  little  thou^
who  affirm  that  these  sciences  are  of  no  value  to  the  HomoB-
opathist  and  are  disregarded  by  him.  They  are  the  sciences
respectively  of  healthy  and  morbid  phenomena.  He  cannot
take  the  first  step  in  the  study  of  disease  or  of  Materia
Medica  save  by  their  aid.  But  he  restricts  them  to  their
legitimate  function.  Pathology  is  for  him  not  a  guide  m
Therapeutics,  but  an  instrument  which  he  uses  in  studying
those  phenomena  which  are  to  be  respectively  the  subject  and
the  agents  of  his  therapeutic  operations.

Having,  by  the  aid  of  Pathology,  arrived  at  a  complete
and  comprehensive  knowledge  of  the  morbid  phenomena,  he
passes  on  beyond  the  confines  of  that  science  to  a  higher  and
more  complex  science,  whose  domain  is  the  relation  of  the
phenomena  of  which  he  has  thus  acquired  a  knowledge,  wiUi
ot/ier  phenomena.  Through  Pathology  he  learns  to  ktiow
disease,  but  it  is  through  Therapeutics  alone  that  he  can  curt
it.  And  it  is  quite  time  that  it  were  well  understood  not
only  by  the  profession  but  also  by  the  public,  that  to  know
the  nature  and  course  of  a  disease  is  not  of  necessity  to  know
how  to  cure  it.  It  may  be  a  necessary  preliminary  step-
but  it  is  nothing  more.  Nor  is  this  true  of  medicine  alone.
My  carriage  breaks  down  ;  I  well  know  where  it  has  broken
and  why  and  how  ;  yet  this  knowledge  does  not  involve  the
knowledge  how  to  forge  and  weld  the  iron  that  has  broken
and  so  to  mend  it.  For  that  I  require  knowledge  of  another
sort.  The  nature  of  Pneumonia,  of  Cholera,  or  Rheumatism
is  as  well  known  as  those  of  any  disease  can  be;  "their
Pathology,"  as  doctors  say,  "  is  well  understood,"  yet  this
gives  no  clue  to  their  therapeutic  treatment, — it  is  no  guide
to  the  special  stimulus  which  must  be  brought  to  bear  on  the


THE  SOENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


33


diseased  organs  to  lead  them  back  to  healthy  action.  This
stimulus  must  be  discovered  by  quite  another  method  ;  its
discovery  is  the  object  of  a  distinct  process.
*  Thus  PathoIog>',  restricted  to  its  proper  sphere,  is  an  indis-
pensabtc  auxiliary  to  the  study  of  the  subject  of  Therapeutics.
It  may  be  fiirthcr  subservient  in  enabling  the  physician  to
group  the  symptoms  of  a  case  in  such  a  way  as  more  readily
to  marshal  and  retain  them  in  memory.  Nor  is  generaliza-
tion of  this  kind  at  all  repugnant  to  the  letter  or  spirit  of
Hahnemann's  method  or  of  homoeopatliic  science.

The  generalization  to  which  Hahnemann  objected  was  to
lliat  uf  disease  in  ^'eneral  upon  nosological  hypotheses  made
on  theoretical  grounds,  and  then  applied  a  priori  to  individual
cases.  That  to  which  we  refer  is  a  generalization  made  spe-
cially in  each  case,  consisting  of  a  grouping  of  connected
symptoms  under  one  general  term  and  extending  only  to
such  pathological  states  as  arc  well  defined  and  constant,  such,
for  example,  as  Anxinia,  Plethora,  the  proportion  between
the  affccrions  of  diflcrent  parts  of  the  nervous  system,  etc.,
under  which  wc  may  group  a  number  of  generic  symp-
toms to  the  great  relief  of  our  memory,  while  at  the  same
time  the  individual  or  characteristic  symptoms  arc  not  only
not  obscured  by  the  process  but  are  even  brought  more
sharply  into  view,  as  will  be  evident  when  wc  consider  this
matter  more  at  length  under  the  head  of  the  Study  of  the
Materia  Medica.


The  Study  of  the  Materia  Medica. — The  method
by  which  any  subject  may  be  most  successfully  studied  must
depend  on  the  use  which  is  to  be  made  of  the  knowledge
thus  gained.  It  is  proper,  then,  to  inquire  at  the  outset  in
what  way  the  knowledge  of  Materia  Medica  is  to  be  made
SubscrxHcnt  to  the  treatment  of  disease.

In  accordance  with  the  homoeopathic  kw,  we  select  for  the
cure  of  each  individual  case  of  disease  that  remedy  of  which
the  pathogenetic  effects  are  most  similar  to  the  symptoms  of
4


34  HOMCEOPATHY

the  case.  In  the  process  of  making  this  selection  we  must
pass  in  mental  review  the  various  drugs  which  compose  the
Materia  Medica,  take  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  pure
effects  of  each,  and  institute  a  comparison  between  each  In
turn,  and  the  case  for  which  we  are  prescribing.  This  b  the
theory  of  the  process.

Now,  it  is  evident  that,  in  order  to  select  from  a  number  of
candidates  one  which  most  nearly  resembles  a  given  standard,
we  must  be  familiar,  not  merely  with  the  general  properties
of  all  the  candidates  or  of  certain  classes  into  which  they  may
be  divided,  but  also  with  certain  properties  more  or  less  pecu-
liar to  each  one  of  the  candidates,  and  which  shall  serve  to
distinguish  each  of  them  from  all  the  others.  In  fact  our
method  requires  the  strictest  individualization  of  both  disease
and  remedy.  We  are  so  to  study  Materia  Medica  as,  above
all,  to  bring  into  strong  relief  and  fix  firmly  in  memory  those
peculiarities  of  each  drug  which  are  not  met  with  in '  any
other,  and  which  therefore  serve  to  individualize  and  give
character  to  the  drug  that  produces  them  and  which  are
called  its  "  characteristic  symptoms."  This  term  having  been
much  and  loosely  used  of  late,  it  may  not  be  unprofitable  to
devote  a  few  words  to  the  subject  of  characteristic  symp-
toms.

By  some  writers  the  leading  and  most  obvious  and  most
frequently  recurring  symptoms  are  called  characteristic.
Thus  Bennett  calls  fever  a  characteristic  of  the  Exanthemata.
By  others  the  pathognomonic  symptoms  of  a  class  of  diseases
are  called  characteristic, — by  others  the  pathologico-anatom-
ical.

Now,  the  signification  of  such  a  word  as  characteristic  19
not  absolute.  It  depends  on  the  connection  in  which  you
please  to  use  it,  and  which  is  determined  by  the  question,
"  Characteristic  of  what?"  In  the  instances  just  adduced,
tfie  varieties  of  symptoms  cited  may  indeed  be  called  char-
acteristic, but — characteristic  of  what?  Of  classes  (the
Exanthemata), of  groups (nosological) — but  not  of  indi-


THE  SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


35


viduah.  But  the  only  sense  in  which  Homoeopathists  can
use  the  term  is  in  its  application  to  individuals.  Hence  a
characteristic  symptum  must  mean  one  which  is  possessed
by  none  other  than  the  individual  drug  of  which  it  is  predi-
cated, and  to  wliich  therefore  it  gives  character  as  an  indi-
viduai.  In  this  sense  it  corresponds  precisely  to  those
features  of  a  man  by  which  his  friends  are  enabled  to  distin-
guish him  from  othtr  persons  and  to  recognize  him  at  a  glance.

It  is  obvious  tJiat  these  characteristic  symptoms  so  pre-
cious to  the  Therapeutist  may  seem  to  be  of  little  or  no
pathological  value, — may  even  seem  accidental  to  those  who
foryet  tlwt  there  arc  no  accidents  in  Nature.  They  would
be  valueless  if  we  did  not  need  to  individualize,  but  could  be
content  with  grouping  our  diseases  and  remedies.

To  the  Naturalist  whose  object  it  is  to  group  his  sped-
mens,  it  is  sufficient  to  know  that  John  Doe  has  a  vertebral
column,  is  a  mammal,  has  two  bands,  and  is  a  Caucasian —
because  this  enables  him  at  once  to  place  John  Doc  in  tJic
variety  Caucasian  of  the  species  man,  and  his  analysis  goes
no  farther.  From  this  his  whole  physiological  status  follows.
But  these  items  of  general  knowledge  would  hardly  enable
the  sluriff  to  recognize  John  Doc  in  Broadway.  It  is  of  no
importance  to  the  Naturalist  tliat  he  has  such  "  accidental "
peculiarities  as  an  aquiline  nose,  black  eyes  and  hair,  and  a
brown  mole  on  the  left  a!a  nasi ;  but  these  very  peculiarities
are  all  important  to  the  sheriff,  for  they  give  him  the  means
of  detecting  the  object  of  his  search  upon  the  crowded  street
It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  the  points  on  which
the  Naturalist  laid  stress  arc  equally  important  to  the  sheriff;
fbr  if  the  latter  should  bear  in  mind  only  the  individual
peculiarities  of  the  object  of  his  quest  and  should /o'-^^/  that
he  b  a  Caucasian,  he  might  And  the  former  in  the  person  of
an  Indian,  or.  If  he  should  forget  that  he  Is  a  bimanous
creature,  he  might  arrest  a  monkey.

To  drop  the  figure,  then,  it  is  evident  that  we  must  seek
to  discover  among  the  symptoms  of  every  drug  certain  ones


36  HOMCEOPATHY

that  are  produced  by  no  other  drug,  and  which  shall  serve
to  distinguish  it  from  all  other  drugs  similar  in  other  re-
spects ;  that  these  symptoms  will  often  be  unimportant  and
trivial  in  a  physiological  point  of  view ;  furthermore,  that  we
must,  for  convenience  sake,  when  the  number  of  drugs  in
our  Materia  Medica  has  become  considerable,  endeavor  so
to  group  them,  on  the  basis  of  certain  clearly  defined  symp-
toms or  collections  of  symptoms,  that  for  the  purpose  rf
preliminary  examination  and  comparison,  these  groups  may
be  regarded  and  compared  as  though  they  were  individual
drugs.

Let  us  suppose  a  case  of  uterine  haemorrhage.  As  many
as  forty  drugs  probably  produce  uterine  haemorrhage.  On
the  basis  of  this  symptom,  they  form  a  group  isolated  from
the  three  hundred  and  forty  remaining  drugs  of  the  Materia
Medica.  We  select  this  group  from  the  Materia  Medica,  and
now  we  must  select  a  remedy  from  the  group.  It  were  a
tedious  task  to  consider  and  compare  them  one  by  one.  But
we  group  them  again ;  ten  of  them  produce  dark-colored
and  ten  florid  haemorrhage ;  ten  a  limpid  and  ten  a  clotted
discharge.  Our  case  has  a  dark-colored  discharge.  Our
choice  is  now  restricted  to  ten  drugs.  But  of  the  ten  which
produce  a  dark  discharge,  only  five  produce  simultaneously
a  congestive  headache.  Thus  we  are  Hmited  to  five  drugs.
Thus  far,  the  distinctions  on  which  our  grouping  has  been
based  (or  which  have  been  characteristic  of  the  groups)
have  had  a  pathological  significance  and  importance.  We
can  find  no  such  basis  for  any  further  subdivision  into-
groups.  But  we  observe  in  the  case  a  peculiar  subjective
symptom.  The  patient  complains  "as  though  a  living  body
were  moving  through  the  abdomen."  This  may  seem  triviaL
It  is  equally,  however,  a  symptom  produced  by  Crocus,  which
is  one  of  the  five  remedies  to  which  our  choice  had  been
restricted,  and  it  is  produced  by  no  other  drug  in  the  Materia
Medica.  It  is,  then,  a  characteristic  symptom  of  Crocus^
enabling  us  to  individualise  Crocus,  and  to  distinguish  it


THE  SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


37


from  all  the  other  drugs  which  in  many  other  respects  agree
with  it

It  will  be  observed  that  dark-colored  uterine  hicmorrhagc,
tfiough  produced  by  Crocus,  cannot  be  said  to  be  character-
isitc  of  it  It  is  a  characteristic  symptom  of  a  group  to
which  Crocus  belongs,  but  not  of  Crocus,  for  it  is  produced
by  the  other  members  of  Oiis  group  as  wcH  as  by  Crocus.

Characteristic  symptoms  must  of  necessity  be  for  the  most
part  subjective  and  seemingly  trivial  phenomena.  A  list  of
them  alone,  if  presented  as  the  palliogcncsis  of  a  drug,
would  be  as  meaningless,  and  at  first  sight  as  ridiculous,  as  a
Ust  of  the  colors  and  marks  and  angles  and  curves  by  whidi
friends  recognize  each  other  would  be,  if  presented  alone  as
the  sum  total  of  the  properties  of  certain  genera  and  species
of  Uie  animate  creation.  As  a  background  to  the  latter,
there  must  be  a  series  of  phenomena  capable  of  morpholog-
ical and  organic  arrangement,  and  as  the  basis  of  the  former
we  must  have  a  series  of  objective  and  organic  symptoms
capable  of  physiological  and  pathol(^ical  arrangement  and
of  approximate  explanation.  Rut  it  must  never  be  forgotten
there  can  be  no  individualization,  and  without  this  there  can
be  no  accurate  hom<xopathic  prescription.

The  truth  of  this  is  made  apparent  by  a  glance  at  the
history  of  Homoeopatliy.  Certain  of  Hahnemann's  followers
discarded  the  apparently  trivial  subjective  phenomena  from
tile  provings  of  drugs,  retaining  only  tlie  objective,  organic
symptoms.  They  thus  lost  the  means  of  distinguishing
between  the  individual  members  of  the  groups  of  remedies.
It  was  thenceforward  useless  for  them  to  discriminate  closely
between  individual  ca.ses  of  any  one  typo  of  disease.  Hence,
inevitably,  arose  the  fashion  of  prescribing  a  specific  remedy
for  a  disease, — as  Uie  phrase  went, — putting  the  leading
members  of  respective  groups  of  drugs  and  diseases  to  rep-
resent the  whole  groups.  These  were  the  so-called  "spectf-
ikers," — who  had  one  or  two  remedies  for  dysentery,  one


38  HOMCEOPATHY

for  hooping-cough,  one  or  two  for  scarlatina,  ete.,  "of  whom
the  world  is  weary."

But  the  characteristic  is  not  always  a  definite  ^mptom.
Sometimes  It  is  so, — as  in  the  case  of  Crocus,  and  as  in  die
peculiar  diplopia  of  Stramonium.  But  sometimes  it  resides
in  a  peculiar  condition  which  attaches  to  some  symptom
common  to  two  or  more  drugs.  This  condition  may  be  of
time,  or  circumstance,  or  concomitance.  Thus,  if  two  drugs
have  the  symptom  "  dry  cough  from  tickling  in  the  supra-
sternal fossa," — but  to  one  is  added  the  condition  "occurring
only  in  the  evening," — this  condition  of  time  is  the  charac-
teristic of  that  drug  in  so  far  as  the  dry  cough  is  concerned ;  or
if  one  have  this  condition  of  circumstance,  that  "the  cougfa
is  aggravated  by  inspiring  cold  air," — this  condition  is  the
characteristic ;  or  if  one  have  the  concomitant  that  the  cough
is  attended  by  retching, — this  condition  of  concomitance  is
the  characteristic.

Sometimes  the  characteristic  resides  in  the  conditions
collectively.  We  borrow  examples  from  Dr.  Drysdale's
admirable  Introduction  to  The  British  Repertory  :

"  Pain  in  the  stomach  with  nausea  occurs  under  twenty-
eight  medicines.

"  Pain  in  the  stomach  in  the  morning  under  thirty-
seven.

"  Pain  in  the  stomach  with  nausea  in  the  morning  under
four  only."

Or  it  may  reside  in  a  concomitant.

"  Dry  retching  occurs  under  forty-five  drugs.

"  Dry  retching  in  the  morning  under  five.

"  Dry  retching  with  eructation  under  one  only — Ledum."

Every  drug-proving,  then,  is  to  be  studied  in  a  two-fold
way :  On  the  one  hand,  so  as  to  enable  us  to  attach  it  in
our  memory  to  certain  groups  of  drugs  to  which  it  shows
marked  general  resemblances ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  so  as
to  bring  out  clearly  into  view  those  characteristics  which
distinguish  it  from  all  the  other  drugs  of  these  groups  in


THE  SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS,


39


particular  and  of  the  Materia  Medica  in  general. Our  study
will  be  at  once  synthetic  and  analytic.

Such  a  study  is  of  necessity  comparative  in  its  nature.
£ach  positive  step  in  the  study  of  a  drug  Involves  a  question
of  the  correspondence  or  dificrcncc  of  other  drugs  in  respect
of  that  step.  Ad  isolated  study  of  all  the  remedies  would
not  give  us  an  available  knowledge  of  the  Materia  Medica.
It  is  not  enough  to  know  that  Pulsatilla,  Nux  vomica  and
Charaomilla  each  produce  diarrhcEa  of  a  certain  kind.  Wc
must  also  know  and  Ax  in  our  minds  the  similarities  and  dif-
ferences of  each  of  these  diarrhojas  to  those  oi  the  two
other  and  of  all  other  drugs.  The  study  of  one  drug  is,  in
fact,  then,  the  study  of  the  whole  Materia  Medica.  One  is
never  so  competent  to  thoroughly  master  a  proving  as  when
he  has  already  mastered  all  other  provings.  The  first  effort
must  necessarily  be  the  least  satisfactory,  the  most  im-
perfect

This  is  the  task  to  which  the  student  of  Materia  Medica  is
invited  and  at  which  his  predecessors  have  been  laboring  for
fifty  years.  Wliy,  he  may  ask,  has  not  this  been  wrought
out  and  systematized  by  those  who  have  gone  before?  Why
is  the  Materia  Medica  left  in  tlie  same  state  in  wluch  Hahne-
mann placed  it  fifty  years  ago?

Our  Materia  Medica  consists  of  the  provings  of  drugs
upon  the  healthy,  made  by  Halinemann  and  his  disciples.
These  provings,  as  we  have  tliem,  are,  for  the  most  part,  a
formal  arrangement  of  the  symptoms  ^subjective  and  object-
ive observed  by  the  prover  or  his  friends.  No  attempt  is
made,  with  but  few  exceptions,  to  trace  any  pathological
connection  between  symptoms,  or  to  give  any  physiological
explanations,  or  to  distinguish  between  characteristic  and
generic  symptoms.  Tlic  symptoms  alone  are  given,  just  as
the  symptoms  of  a  case  of  disease  would  be  given  by  an
intelligent  but  uninstructcd  patient  who  unfolds  his  case  to
us  in  as  plain  untcchnical  words  as  he  can,  leaving  to  us  the
task  of  tracing  connections  and  contriving  explanations.


40  HOMCEOPATHY

There  they  stand,  records  of  facts  made  in  the  plain  vernac-
ular, intelligible  so  long  as  the  language  shall  endure.

But  Hahnemann  had  a  much  higher  idea  of  the  kind  of
knowledge  of  Materia  Medica  which  a  physician  requires
than  this  statement  would  imply.  In  an  essay  on  "  The
this  knowledge  as  follows:  "What  organs  it  (the  drug)
deranges  functionally,  what  it  modifies  in  other  ways,  what
nerves  it  principally  benumbs  or  excites,  what  alterations  it
effects  in  the  circulation  and  digestive  operations,  how  it
affects  the  mind,  how  the  disposition,  what  influence  it  exerts
over  some  secretions,  what  modification  the  muscular  fiber
receives  from  it,  how  long  its  action  lasts,  and  by  what
means  it  is  rendered  powerless,  etc.,  etc."  Why,  then,  did
he  not  construct  his  Materia  Medica  on  this  model  ?  Un-
questionably because,  with  a  wonderful  sagacity  which
together  with  his  brilliant  genius  and  his  prodigious  learning
made  him  the  "  double-headed  prodigy,"  which  Jean  Paul
Richter  called  him,  Hahnemann  clearly  perceived  the  follow-
ing truths :  that  the  positive  facts  with  which  a  physician  has
to  deal  in  constructing  a  Materia  Medica  are  the  observations
of  the  prover  recorded  in  plain,  unfigurative,  non-hypotheti-
cal language.  That  the  construction  which  he  saw  to
be  so  desirable  must  be  the  result  of  the  application  of  the
sciences  of  Physiology  and  Pathology  to  these  facts.  That
the  facts  of  the  proving  being  of  the  nature  of  positive
observation  are  enduring  and  unchangeable.  But  that  the
sciences  of  Physiology  and  Pathology,  being  incomplete  and
progressive,  are  continually  undergoing  change,  and  that  their
terms  must  therefore  be  ever  varying  in  significance  as  the
theories  on  which  the  sciences  are  based  vary.  That,  con-
sequently, a  Materia  Medica  constructed  by  him  out  of  these
two  elements,  one  constant  and  the  other  variable,  would  of
necessity  be  transient, — could  not  be  enduring, — would
soon  grow  obsolete  and  in  its  decline  would  carry  out  of
sight  the  constant  element  also,  and  thus  the  labor  of  the


THE  SCIENCE OF THERAPEUTICS.


41


»


»


provers  would  soon  be  lost  to  the  world.  Such  a  structure
would  have  involved  an  intermingling  of  tlie  current phyiio-
iogical  theories  with  the  facts  derived  from  observation.
The  precise  point  and  extent  of  the  intermingling  would
soon  become  undistinguishable  and  tliu.s  a  vitiated  record
would  be  transmitted  to  posterity  such  as  the  advance  of
science  would  soon  render  useless.  A  comparison  of  the
present  state  of  Physiology  with  that  of  1800,  of  which  the
very  terms  are  almost  obsolete,  makes  the  great  wisdom  of
this  view  apparent.  On  the  other  hand,  the  pure  records  of
observed  facts,  untainted  by  theoretical  speculations,  come
to  us  from  the  Master's  hand  as  pure,  as  intelligible,  as
available  as  when  first  recorded.

We  have  the  same  material  for  the  construction  of  a  phys-
iological theory  of  the  drug-action  that  Hahnemann  had,
and  we  can  construct  it  witli  the  advantage  in  our  favor  of  tlie
great  advances  which  Physiology  and  Pathology  have  made
since  Hahnemann's  day.  This  is  the  work  which  each  of  us
niust  do  for  himself.  No  other  can  do  it  for  him.  The  result
of  his  labor  may  and  will  differ  somewhat  from  that  of  every
other  student,  for  will)  tlie  light  of  the  auxiliary  sciences  he
forms  a  judgment  concerning  observed  facts,  and  ike  sig'
Hificanet  0/  a  fact  is  measured  by  the  capacity  o0  the  obsenter}

The  student  should  seek  his  knowledge  i>f  Materia  Mcdica
at  the  fountain  head,  in  the  original  publications  of  Hahnc-
inann's  Materia  Medica  Pura  and  Chronic  Diseases  in  the
provings  in  Stapf's  Archiv.  and  in  the  Austrian  and  otlier
journals.

The  Manuals,  however  convenient  for  reference  in  the
fauny  of  practice,  arc  not  suitable  for  systematic  study.  In
some  of  them,  the  phraseology  of  the  prover  has  been  altered.


'  LkM  by  *n  utnisaioD  I  fxposc  my.
self  (o  ouKonstntclion,  I  may  say
that  iiujinnch  u  ailvan«>  in  collal.
era  I  medical  M:ience»  ore  aiTording
cxntttnaatly  new  aida  U>  obaenration.


it  is  iacumlxnt  en  ucU  generation  lo
teprove  lo  a  certain  cxtimt  the  rem*
cJici  uf  the  Materia  Medica  no  a*  to
bring  Ihe>e  nid»  to  bear  on  (be  tludy
of  Pathogen«ay.


42  HOM(EOPATHY

In  others,  the  symptoms,  as  reported  by  the  prover,  have
been  arbitrarily  sundered  into  fragments  and  these  ftagmeots
are  scattered  throughout  the  record.  Or  symptoms  tx  usm
in  morbis  have  been  introduced  and  the  names  of  diseases  sup-
posed to  have  been  cured  by  the  drug  are  incorporated  with
the  pure  symptoms.  In  all  of  them  the  arrangement  is  some-
what altered.  In  many,  attempts  at  abbreviation  have  been
made,  and  with  no  better  success  than  if  one  should  squeeze
one's  lemons  to  lessen  the  bulk  of  one's  luggage  and  yet
hope  to  have  good  lemonade  at  the  end  of  one's  journey ;
for  it  always  happens,  and  must  from  the  nature  of  the  case,
that  the  skins  are  the  part  retained  while  the  juice  is  thrown
away.

If  a  Manual  must  be  employed,  that  of  Noack  and  Trinks
seems  preferable ;  for  it  preserves  the  phraseology  of  die
prover  and  does  not  to  any  great  extent  sunder  groups  of
symptoms,  while  it  places  under  distinct  headings  the  pure
symptoms,  and  the  clinical  effects  of  the  drugs  and  the
theoretical  speculations  of  the  compilers,  so  that  the  student
is  in  no  danger  of  mistaking  the  one  for  the  other,  a  danger
to  which  Jahr's  Manual  does  certainly  expose  him,  and  for
which  reason  Jahr's  work  is  less  desirable  than  that  of  Noack
and  Trinks.

We  have  dwelt  at  some  length  on  the  sources  from  which
the  student  should  seek  his  knowledge  of  Materia  Medica —
and  with  good  reason !  "  For,  can  a  bitter  fountain  send
forth  sweet  waters  ?  "  '*  Do  grapes  grow  on  thorns,  or  figs
on  thistles?"  If  the  student  should  fall  among  false  or
incompetent  teachers,  could  the  doctrine  and  practice  he
learns  be  true  and  successful  ?  Now,  it  will  be  observed  that
the  records  and  provings  and  the  manuals  of  Materia  Medica
to  which  we  have  commended  the  student  are  all  German
works,  while  nine-tenths  of  our  American  and  English  prac-
titioners and  students  are  unacquainted  with  the  German
language.' It  is  humiliating  to  us  to  be  compelled  to  say

'  The  Antbor  considered  a  IiqowI- to  a  student  of  Homoeopathy. —  Ed,
edge  of  German  almost  indispensable


THE  SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


43


I


•


I


that  there  are  no  trustworthy  manuals  in  the  English  lan-
guage and  no  translations  of  the  German  works  which  we
have  named  on  which  reliance  can  be  placed,  We  have
tran^ations  of  Hahnemann's  Materia  Medica  and  Chtvnic
Diseases  and  of  Stapfs  Contributions  to  tke  Materia  Medica^
by  Dr.  Hempel.  But.  either  (perhaps  we  should  say  hoffi)
from  lack  of  moral  capacity,  or  of  intellectual  and  profes-
sional acquirements,  or  from  haste  and  carelessness,  the
translator  has  ixi  marred  these  works  by  errors  of  omission
and  of  translation,  that  they  are  to  the  student  and  prac-
titioner what  false  lights  on  a  dithctilt  coast  are  to  the  unsus-
pecting mariner.

Dr.  Hempel  translated  also  Jahr's  New  Manual  or  Sfmp-
tomen  Codex,  and  claims  to  have  incorporated  with  it  nearly
all  that  is  valuable  in  the  Manual  of  Noack  and  Trinks,  thus
making  it  the  most  complete  and  perfect  work  of  the  kind  in
existence,  and  the  best  possible  in  the  present  state  of  our
science.  This  translation  was  published  with  a  preface  by
Dr.  C.  Hcring  and  under  the  high  sanction  of  his  name  and
that  of  Dr.  Gray,  of  New- York.  It  is  almost  universally
used  in  this  country  and  in  England,  and  the  knowledge  of
the  Materia  Medica  and  of  the  true  practice  of  Homceop-
athy  possessed  by  the  rising  generation  of  practitioners  is,
in  the  main,  what  this  manual  is  capable  of  affording.

]f  now,  I  should  say  that  this  translation  and  compilation
contains  all  the  errors,  omissions  and  perversions  which  ren-
dered Dr.  Hcmpel's  former  translations  untrustworthy,  along
with  many  otlicrs  peculiar  to  this  work,  1  should  surely  hear
in  reply  that  Dr.  Hering  has  e.xpressly  in  his  preface  com-
mended the  diligence  and  accuracy  and  zeal  of  the  trans-
lator, and  I  should  be  referred  to  page  six  of  the  preface,'
where  Dr.  Hcring  is  made  to  say,  "The  Editor  has,  with
extraordinary  minuteness  and  labor,  compared  the  two  man-
uals and  has  transferred  to  the  manual  of  Jahr  all  additional
drugs  and  patliuyenetic  effects  contained  in  Noack  and
Trinks'  work." What  could  I  say  in  offset  to  this  indorse-

*  Jahr**  A'/tc  Mamiatta  ^ympimtem  Cedtx,  pref.  vi.


44  HOMCEOPATHY

ment  of  Dr.  Hering  ?  There  is  a  word  to  say  on  the  subject
of  this  preface.  It  was  unquestionably  written  originally  by
Dr.  Hering  in  German.  The  English  translation,  by  whom-
soever made,  seems  not  to  have  been  altogether  satisfactory
to  Dr.  Hering  (as  well  it  might  not  be),  for  the  German
original  was  published  by  him  (a  "  verbatim  copy,"  as  he
says)  in  the  Allg.  Horn.  Zeitung.  The  English  preface  to
Jahr's  New  Manual  differs  from  this  German  original  far
more  widely  than  the  license  of  scholarship  will  at  all  justify.
In  a  foot-note  to  the  original  of  the  passage  we  have  quoted
above  in  commendation  of  the  Editor  and  translator  of
Jahr's  New  Manual,  Dr.  Hering  says  : '  "  After  comparison
of  the  translation  with  the  original,  the  above  indorsement
is  hereby  altogether  and  completely  withdrawn."*  Thus,
in  an  obscure  foot-note  in  a  German  periodical,  seen  by  not
more  than  one  in  a  hundred  of  those  American  and  English
students  who  are  induced  by  Dr.  Hering's  commendatory
preface  to  place  confidence  in  Dr.  Hempel's  translations
and  compilations,  Dr.  Hering  vindicates  his  fame  as  a  good
scholar  and  a  faithful  champion  of  our  science  by  withdraw-
ing his  commendation  of  Dr.  Hempel.

If  those  whose  confidence  has  been  misplaced  by  reason
of  this  indorsement  in  English,  canceled  in  German  only,
should,  with  a  measure  of  just  indignation,  demand  of  roe
why  the  retraction  was  not  made  in  the  language  and  in  the
country  in  which  the  commendation  was  suffered  to  be  pub-
lished,— why  Drs.  Hering  and  Gray,  acknowledged  leaders
of  our  school  in  America,  did  not  suppress  this  so-called
translation  or  expose  its  false  pretensions,  in  words  as  intel-
ligible and  as  widely  read  as  those  in  which  their  support
of  it  was  permitted, — alas !  I  have  nothing  to  say.  (See
Appendix.)

To  plead  that,  in  a  matter  which  involves  the  education
or  perversion  of  a  whole  generation  and  the  healthy  progress

^Vol.  XL,  Nos.  23  iiR<}  24,  Feb-  *  Dies  wird  hiermit  nach  Vergleich-

ruary  and  March,  1851.  ung  der  UeberseUung  mit  dem  Orig>

inal  ganz  und  gar  zuriickgenommen.


THE  SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


45


*
^


*


k


and  soundness  of  Homoeopathy  wherever  the  Englbh
language  is  spoken, — in  such  a  matter  tlie  engrossmenLs  of
business  or  tenderness  toward  a  delinquent  individual  kept
them  silent,  would  be  to  cast  a  doubt  upon  the  estimate  in
which  they  hold  scientific  truth,  a  doubt  inadmissible  in
gentlemen  of  their  position.

It  a\-aiU  not  to  say :  V/hy  find  fault  witti  these  translations
and  this  manual,  inasmuch  as  we  have  no  others  ?  Had  the
unworthiness  of  these  been  made  known,  had  they  not,  on
the  contrary,  been  indorsed  by  high  autliority,  we  had  long
since  had  others  and  trustworthy.  An  exposure  of  the
impcrfeciions  we  have  spoken  of  would  have  created  a
demand  for  other  works,  and  it  is  not  less  true  in  science
than  in  trade  that  "demand  creates  a  supply."


Having  selected  a  remedy  on  which  to  commence  his
studies,  the  student  should  gather  together  all  the  reports  of
provcrs,  whctlier  in  the  form  of  their  daily  records  (in  which
form  our  dear  and  lamented  colleague  Dr.  Jostin  published
his  admirable  proving  of  Rumcx  crispus,  as  did  also  the
Austrian  provers),  or  in  the  Hahnemannian  anatomical
scheme,  and  should  carefully  peruse  them.  We  will  assume
that  he  has  selected  Pulsatilla,  and  will  use  this  remedy  to
illustrate  what  we  have  further  to  say.  We  have  no  other
proWng  of  this  drug  than  the  very  perfect  one  of  Hahnemann
in  vol.  i o(  Afafi-rsa  Medtca  Ptira.

During  the  first  perusal,  —  and  several  may  be  necessary
for  the  purpose,— the  student  should  endeavor  to  make  a
^«ww/ analysis  of  the  proving.  This  analysis  would  enable
him  to  place  the  drug  along  with  several  others  in  one  or
other  of  certain  groups  into  which  he  will  find,  as  he
advances  in  his  studies,  the  Materia  Mcdica  arranges  itself.
Among  the  chief  points  of  tliis  general  analysis  will  be  the
following :

tktrt  of  actum  in  the  drug. It  will  be  seen  that  every


46  HOMCEOPATHY

more  decidedly  than  others.  Pulsatilla,  for  example,  acts
pre-eminently  upon  the  vegetative  system,  upon  the  organs
of  reproduction  and  their  appendages,  and  upon  the  com-
position of  the  blood,  depressing  the  action  of  the  former
systems  and  producing  in  the  latter  a  condition  similar  to
that  of  one  form  of  chlorosis.  We  learn  these  facts  by
bringing  a  knowledge  of  Physiology  to  bear  upon  and
interpret  the  symptoms  of  the  intestinal  tract  and  of  the
urino-genital  organs,  those  of  the  vascular  system  and  the
symptoms  of  the  head  and  disposition.  For  in  these  we
have  retarded  digestion,  vertigo,  audible  pulsation  of  the
carotids,  momentary  loss  of  sight  and  hearing  on  sudden
exertion,  palpitation,  paleness,  retarded  and  scanty  menstru-
ation with  syncope  and  exhaustion ;  depressed  melancholic
disposition.  On  the  other  hand,  the  student  will  notice  that
Pulsatilla  exerts  but  little  action  upon  the  bones,  skin  and
glands,  and  this  will  be  another  important  step  toward
grouping.

II.  The  extent  to  which  the  organic  substance  ts  affected.
From  some  provings  it  must  be  gathered — Spigelia,  for
example — that  the  organic  substance  is  but  slightly  aflfected
or  only  in  isolated  localities,  while  in  other  provings  the
effect  is  profound  and  general, — Carbo  vegetabilis  and
Lachesis.  In  others,  again,  the  affection  of  the  organic
substance  and  the  irritation  of  the  nervous  system  are  equal
in  degree  and  both  are  great, — Arsenicum.  Conclusions  on
this  head  are  drawn  from  the  following  symptoms :  those  of
the  complexion  and  of  the  skin  generally,  as  regards  color
and  temperature,  which  enlighten  us  respecting  congestions,
if  there  be  any,  and  the  color  and  character  of  the  congesting
fluid ;  those  of  the  evacuations  from  the  bowels,  bladder,
uterus  and  all  secreting  glands  and  surfaces ;  those  of  the
cutaneous  eruptions  and  ulcers;  finally,  those  which  denote
the  existence  of  dyscrasias  of  whatever  variety,  e.g.,  dropsies,
phthisis,  cancer,  gout,  rheumatism,  etc.  Under  this  head
we  find  in  the  proving  of  Pulsatilla  no evidence  of  any


THE  SCIENCE  OF  THKRAPEUTICS.


47


I


I
I


icr  action  than  tJiat  abuvc  mentioned — a  hydnemic
dyscrasia  and  which  is  further  corroborated  by  the  abundant
serous  or  thin  mucous  discharges  from  secreting  glands  and
suHaces.

III.  Tkt  action  of  the  drug  on  t!u  vital  power,  correlative
of  the  above,  and  shown  in  the  symptoms  of  the  nervous
system  as  they  are  given  conjointly  with  the  symptoms  of  the
various  organ-;  to  which  the  different  parts  of  the  nervous
system  are  distributed.  He  may  consider  the  nervous  system
under  five  heads,  a.  Theseasorium,  of  which  the  symptoms
arc  found  chiefly  under  tlie  rubrics  Head  and  Disposition.
^.  The  general  scnsibiiity.  c.  The  general  mobility.  Data
respecting  these  heads  are  found  in  the  symptoms  of  the
tissues  to  which  Uie  nerves  of  sense  and  motion  are  distrib-
uted, d.  "W^A  special  sensibility,  sts>  exhibited  in  the  symp-
toms of  the  organs  of*  special  sense — the  eye,  car,  nose  and
tongue,  f.  The  sympathelic  system — as  exhibited  in  the
s}'mptoms  of  organs  containing  invohmtary  muscles — in  the
intestinal  tract  and  in  all  tlie  sphincters.

In  forming  conclusions  on  any  one  of  these  points,  regard
must  be  had  to  the  entire  remaining  action  of  the  drug.  We
should  otherwise  reach  a  very  false  judgment  Pulsatilla,
for  example,  produces  blindness  and  deafness.  We  might
regard  these  as  ver>'  important  afTcctions  of  the  special
senses,  did  we  not  leam  aLso  thai  these  phenomena  occur
simultaneously  with  scanty  and  difficult  menstruation,  and
with  palpitation  and  throbbing  of  the  carotids,  and  conjointly
with  great  pallor  and  frequent  syncope.  Tliese  concurrences
compel  us  to  regard  the  blindness  and  deafness  as  sympa-
thetic symptoms  occurring  in  a  chlorotic  patient,  and  con-
nected perhaps  with  a  hydra;mia  produced  by  Pulsatilla.

Tlicse  three  sections  of  a  general  analysis  having  been
elaborated  during  a  first  perusal,  the  student  will  already  be
in  a  position  to  arrange  many  drugs  in  groups  by  their  stmi-
laritics  and  differences  in  these  respects.  He  will  note,  for
example,  that  in their  sphere  of  action  Pulsatilla  and  Nux


48  HOMCEOPATHY

vomica  are  closely  allied,  while  again  they  differ  widely  in
their  mode  of  action  both  on  the  organic  substance  and  on
the  vital  powe'r,  etc.

The  practical  use  of  such  an  analysis  is  this :  that  when
such  fundamental  facts  are  known  of  two  or  more  drugs,  it  is
enough  to  have  clearly  in  mind,  in  any  case  of  disease,  what
are  the  effects  of  the  disease  in  these  three  fundamental
respects.  If,  then,  the  action,  for  example,  on  the  organic
substance  be  similar  to  what  we  have  seen  to  be  the  effect
of  Pulsatilla,  there  can  be  no  possibility  of  Nux  vomica  being
applicable  in  the  case  and  no  need,  therefore,  of  studying  that
drug  further  for  the  case.  This  procea  of  elimination  by
means  of  a  general  analysis  may  be  relied  on  wherever  we
have  good  and  complete  provings  of  drugs,  and  where  the
case  of  disease  presents  clear  and  definite  symptoms.
When  we  are  dealing  with  fragmentary  provings  and  obscure
cases  it  is  of  course  not  practicable.

As  further  examples,  we  may  adduce  the  following :  Spi-
gelia  and  Silicea  both  affect  the  special  senses  remarkably  and
similarly ;  yet  they  are  extremely  different  in  their  action  on
the  organic  substance.  Hyoscyamus  and  Carbo  vegetabilis
affect  the  sphincters  similarly,  though  in  other  respects  so
unlike.

After  thus  generalizing  in  a  comprehensive  way,  the
student  will  observe  certain  phenomena  of  a  more  special
character ;  for  example,  that  among  the  variety  of  sensations
recorded  as  having  been  produced  by  the  drug,  there  is  a
certain  uniformity  in  general  character  throughout  most  of
the  organs  affected.  But  here  he  meets  difficulties  arising
from  inaccuracy  of  provers,  or  rather  from  the  fact  that,  all
descriptions  of  sensations  being  clothed  in  figurative  lan-
guage, the  imaginations  of  different  provers  suggest  to  them
different  modes  of  expression.  The  wealth  of  the  German
language  in  synonyms  has  not  diminished  this  difficulty.  An
approximate  analysis  of  sensations  such  as  has  been  made
by  Dr.  Dudgeon  would  be  of  service  in  this  regard. The


THE  SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


49


•


I


•


individuality  of  some  drugs  is  much  more  strongly  marked
than  that  of  others  by  tliis  feature  of  their  effects,  and  pro
tanto,  it  serves  as  their  characteristic.  Thus  Bryonia  and
Squilla  are  distinguished  by  sticking,  and  Arsenicum  by
ifuruinff,  pains.

Another  point  to  be  noted,  and  which  may  serve  still
further  to  individualize  tlie  drug,  is  periodicity,  whicll  in
many  drugs  is  well  marked  and  of  a  definite  type ;  e.  ^.,
Arsenium,  Tpccacuanha,  Katnim  muriaticum,  Nux  vomica.
In  Pulutilla  it  is  very  marked,  but  the  type  is  not  constant

But,  perhaps,  the  most  important  of  all  the  considerations
in  which  resides  the  individuality  of  a  drug  arc  the  condi-
tions and  concomitants  of  tlte  symptoms.  The  conditions
are  the  phenomena  of  time,  place,  and  circumstance  on
which  the  symptoms  depend.  For  example,  Pulsatilla  pro-
duces tearing  pain  in  the  hip.  So  do  several  drugs,  but
thqt  of  Pulsatilla  occurs  in  the  o/)'fr««)«,— condition  of
time;  it  occurs  and  is  aggravated  in  a  warm  room, — con-
dition of  place ;  occurs  during  and  is  aggravated  by  repose,
—condition  of  circumstance.  A  concurrence  of  this  phe-
nomenon and  these  conditions  is  found  only  under  Pulsatilla.
Here  these  conditions  are  the  characteristic.  The  concomi-
tants are  those  phenomena^  whether  we  call  them  sympa-
thetic or  secondary,  which  always  accompany  any  symptom
or  group  of  symptoms.  Absence  of  tliirst  is  a  concomitant
of  many  groups  of  symptoms  under  Pulsatilla.  So  likewise
arc  chilliness,  cold  feet,  wakefulness  in  the  evening  and
sleepiness  in  the  morning,  etc.  Nux  vomica  has  the
reverse. So  is  cold  sweat  of  the  forehead  under  Vcratrum.

Having  thus  made  a  general  analysis  of  the  proving,
obtaining,  first,  a  general  view  of  the  action  of  the  drug  on
the  great  divisions  of  the  organism  and  of  the  pathological
conditions  which  it  produces  ;  and.  second,  a  general  view  of
the  ckaracttrislics  of  its  action,  the  student  may  proceed  to
a  special  analysis,  which  will  involve  a  similar  study  of  the
action  of  the  drug  on  each  organ  and  anatomical  region  of


50  HOMCEOPATHY

the  body. In  this  he  cannot  do  better  than  follow  the
Hahnemannian  scheme.

The  points  to  be  considered  in  each  region  and  under  each
rubric  are  the  following :  The  organic  changes ;  the  sensa-
tionSt — their  nature,  locality  and  direction ;  the  conditions
of  time,  place  and  circumstance,  and  the  concomitants.  Thus,
for  example,  in  studying  the  Head,  he  may  consider :

a.  The  Sensorium,  under  which  the  subdivisions  may
be:

/.  Vertigo,  its  nature,  conditions  of  time,  place  and  cir-
cumstance, and  its  concomitants.  Thus,  the  vertigo  of  Pul-
satilla is  a  staggering ;  it  occurs  afler  eating,  in  a  warm  room»
and  during  repose  (there  is  a  rare  alternate  effect)  ;  the
concomitants  are  heaviness  in  head  on  stooping,  paleness
and  internal  heat  in  the  head.

2.  Intelligence,  with  conditions  and  concomitants  as  above.

3.  Memory,

^.  Illusions  of  the  imagination, "  "

b.  Headache,  under  which  the  points  to  be  noted  are :
/.  Character  of  the  pain.

2.  Locality.

J. Its  course  if  it  rtiove.

^.  Conditions  and  concomitants  as  above.

c.  The  Organic  Changes,  which  are  to  be  studied  io
the  same  way.  These  comprise  all  objective  and  material
phenomena.

In  this  manner,  the  student  will  examine  the  effect  of  the
drug  upon  each  organ  and  tissue  of  the  body,  as  will  be  more
clearly  shown  by  a  scheme  for  the  study  of  the  Materia
Medica  which  will  be  appended  to  this  essay.

The  result  will  be  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  action  of


THE SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


SI


*

k


the  drug,  in  so  for  as  the  proving  is  complete,  upon  the
whole  organism  in  general  and  in  detail.  The  special
analysis  will  serve  to  correct  certain  errors  into  which  the
general  analysis  might  lead  the  practitioner.  Conditions  are
not  always  uniform  for  all  the  organs.  Thus,  although  the
^iwra/ conditions  of  Pulsatilla  are  occurrence  and  aggrava-
tion in  the  afternoon  and  evening,  during  repose  and  by
heat,  with  relief  by  motion  and  cold,  and  must  be  so  stated
in  a  general  analysis,  yet  tliere  are  a  few  special  symptoms
to  which  the  opposite  conditions  attach,  and  this  &ct  is
brought  out  by  the  special  analysis.

The  study  of  a  proving  to  be  practically  available  must  be
comparative.  After  ascertaining  the  properties  of  each  drug
by  positive  investigation  and  analysis  in  the  manner  detailed,
the  next  step  is  to  ascertain  what  drugs  resemble  it,  and  in
what  features  they  are  like  and  how  tliey  differ.  To  make
such  a  comparison  as  tliis  in  studying  the  Materia  Medica,  a
repertory  is  indispensable,  and  thi.<^  neetl  alone,  if  a  repertory
were  not  equally  indispensable  in  daily  practice,  would  be  a
sufHcicnt  reply  to  those  who  idly  talk  about  such  a  work
being  superfluous  or  mischievous.

Such  is  a  method  of  studying  the  Materia  Medica  which,
after  much  reflection  and  trial  of  various  plans,  I  venture  with
unfeigned  diffidence  to  unfold.  It  is  elaborate  and  requires
a  wearying  application  which  those  alone  can  appreciate  who
have  engaged  in  similar  tasks.  To  complete  such  a  sys-
tematic study,  even  in  comparative  leisure,  might  require
seven  years  of  unremitting  labor-^just  the  period  for  which
a  lad  is  apprenticed  to  learn  his  trade.  Should  we  shrink
from  devoting  so  long  a  time  to  the  mastery  of  tlie  most
complex  and  difficult,  and  llie  noblest  science  and  art  whicli
are  possible  to  man  on  earth  ?

I  desire  to  add  a  few  words  of  a  practical  nature.  Pre-
possibility  of  which  will  be  apparent  from  what  has  been
written.


52  HOMCEOPATHY

The  one  consists  in  prescribing  from  a  general  analysis  of
drugs  without  regard  to  the  characteristics  which  individual-
ize them.  This  is  equivalent  to  prescribing  any  member
indifferently  of  a  whole  group  of  drugs,  and  necessitates  a
corresponding  generalizing  view  of  disease.  It  is  the  method
of  the  Old  School  which  seeks  to  arrange  drugs  and  diseases
in  groups  and  which  ignores  characteristics  and  individuals.

The  other  error  consists  in  prescribing  on  the  strength  of  one
or  two  characteristics  which  may  be  detected,  without  however
examining  whether  the  general  effects  of  the  drug  correspond
to  the  general  features  of  the  disease.  Now,  characteristics,
for  the  most  part,  as  we  have  seen,  derive  their  value  from
their  association  as  concomitants  or  conditions  with  some
symptom  which  is  not  in  itself  a  characteristic.  Discon-
nected from  this,  they  are  as  void  of  significance  as  a  man's
nose  would  be  if  cut  off  from  his  face,  though  while  on  his
face  it  might  have  been  the  chief  feature  by  which  his  friends
recognize  him.  I  will  not  deny  that  by  this  method,  great
successes,  "lucky  hits"  I  would  call  them,  are  sometimes
made.  But  I  do  stoutly  affirm  that  atrocious  and  inexcus-
able blunders  are  much  more  frequently  the  result

I  admit,  too,  that  in  certain  cases  of  disease  there  is  no
possibility  of  making  such  an  analysis  as  we  have  advised,
and  that  certain  drugs  are  so  incompletely  proved  that  we
know  of  them  only  one  or  two  characteristic  symptoms  and
cannot  study  them  as  recommended.  All  that  can  be  said
of  such  cases  is  that  they  are  incomplete  and  come  under  no
rule.  We  must  do  the  best  we  can  and  adopt  a  defective
method,  which  is  nevertheless  sometimes  successful  rather
than  make  no  attempt  to  cure.  Better  cure  by  a  "  lucky
hit"  than  not  at  all.  But  let  not  this  lead  us  astray  where
we  might  do  better.

If  one  had  to  traverse  a  wilderness  he  would  desire  first  of
all  a  compass.  If  this  were  not  to  be  had  he  might  "  steer
by  the  stars."  If  these  were  obscured  he  might  judge  from
the  direction  of  vegetation  and  of  hills  and  rivers. Failing


THE  SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


53


k


these,  he  might  even  "guess"  and  his  guess  might  lead  him
right  Nevertheless,  few  travelers  of  sound  mind  would  be
led  by  such  a  success  to  prefer  a  "  guess  "  to  a  "compass."

A  Scheme  for  the  Study  of  Materia  Medica. — In
the  hope  tliat  what  has  been  written  may  serve  not  only  to
explain  the  method  in  which  I  have  thought  the  study  of
Materia  Medica  may  be  best  pursued,  but  also  to  assist  those
who  are  entering  upon  that  arduous  study,  I  publish  here>
with  a  schedule  drawn  up  originally  for  my  own  guidance,
and  which,  X  think,  was  a  great  assistance  to  me.


¥


A.— GENERAL ANALYSIS.


1.  Action  on  the  Vital  Power — as  exhibited  in  the
action  of  the  remedy  upon — a.  The  scnsorium ;  i.  The
special  senses ;  c.  The  sphincters ;  d.  The  other  involuntary
muscles;  e.  The  power  of  locomoiion.  »

2.  Action  on  the  Organic  Substance;  as  exhibited
in  a.  Tiie  complexion  (showing,  viz. :  the  state  of  vessels
and  the  nature  of  tlieir  contents);  6.  The  evacuations;  c.
Ulcers,  if  any  which  previously  existed  are  modified  by  the
remedy  or  if  any  arc  produced  by  tlie  remedy ;  d.  Erup-
tions ;  f.  General  afTcctions  of  a  dyscrasic  naturCj  such  as
dropsy,  tuberculosis,  etc,  etc.

3.  The  Si'here  of  Action  of  the  Remedy.  What
organs  or  systems  of  the  body  are  affected  in  a  general  way
and  in  what  order  they  are  affected.

4.  Sensations.  What  kind  of  sensations  predominate
what  relation,  if  any,  appears  to  exist  between  certain
varieties  of  sensation  and  certain  classes  of  organs  or
tissues.

5.  Periodicity.  If  there  be  any  periodicity  in  the  symp-
toms it  is  to  be  particularly  noted  and  its  character  defined.


54


IIOMfEOPATIIV


6.  Peculiarities.  There  are  few  good  provings  which
which  are  incapable  of  classification,  which  run  throu^  the
whole  action  of  the  remedy  and  which  are  peculiar  to  one
remedy  and  are  tlierefore  important  characteristics.

These  pecuiiarities  constitute  the  eonditions  of  time,  cir-
cumstance, aggravation  and  concomitance,  which  are  attached
to  the  symptoms  and  often  give  individual  character  to  them
as  belonging  to  one  remedy  in  particular,  and  as  incapable
being  recorded  as  produced,  for  example,  by  Pulsatilla,  the
questions  "When  did  it  occur?"  "When  was  it  aggra-
vated?" "When  was  it  ameliorated?"  "When  did  it
cease?"  give  the  condition  of  time  which  attach  to  that
symptom.  In  like  manner  the  questions  "  Under  what  cir-
cumstances (viz.,  of  rest  or  motion,  of  heat  or  cold,  etc.,
etc.)  did  it  occur,  was  it  aggravated,  was  it  ameliorated,"
give  the  conditions  of  circumstance  and  aggravation  which
attach  to  the  symptom.

It  will  be  observed  of  almost  every  remedy  that  certain
symptoms  or  series  of  symptoms  are  accompanied  by  one
or  several  other  symptoms.  TTiis  fact  is  the  condition  of
concomitance  to  which  we  refer.  For  example,  many  symp-
toms of  Pulsatilla  arc  accompanied  by  a  disposition  to
weep,  of  Nux  vomica  by  fugitive  chills,  of  Arsenicum  by
inordinate  weakness,  of  Veratrum  by  cold  sweat  of  the
forehead,  etc.

It  is  further  noticeable  that  in  the  provings  of  some  drugs
this  concomitance  of  symptoms  by  other  symptoms  is
strongly  marked,  and  almost  universal  as  in  the  case  of
Arsenicum.

7.  Resume  of  the  Ch.\racteristics  of  the  Remedy.
This  will  include  cvcrj'thing  in  the  above  analysis  which  is
shown  by  a  comparative  study  of  other  drugs  to  be  peculiar
to  it.  It  will  comprise  in  particular  the  conditions  of  time,
circumstance,  aggravation  and  concomitance,  and  ^^^riods
of  the  day  at  which  the  action  of  the  drugs  is  most  marked.


A


THE  SCIENXE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


s$


B— SPECIAL ANALYSIS.


/.  Head.


I
I

I


a.  Sensorium,  comprising  the  subdivisions:  i.  Vertigo;
2.  Intelligence;  3.  Memory;  4.  Illusions.  Each  of  these
subdivisions  is  to  be  studied  in  respect  of  sensations  in  so
far  as  they  can  be  predicated  of  it ;  of  periodkUjf  ;  of  con-
MtUms  of  time,  circumslance,  aggravation  and  amelioration  ;
and  of  eoncomitan^f.  And  under  the  latter  rubric  it  is  to  be
especially  inquired  what  symptoms  affecting  other  of^ans,  or
systems,  occur  simultaneously  in  evident  physiological  con-
nection with  the  symptom  under  consideration.  •

b.  Headache.  The  points  to  be  investigated  arc :  i.  The
location  of  tiie  pain  if  it  be  stationary — \^&cQurse  if  it  move;
2.  TTie  sensation;  3,  The  conditions  of  time,  circumstance,
a^^^vation  and  amelioration,  as  above  explained  in  details
^  Concomitance.

c  Organic  changes.  Tliese  affect  the  material  substances
and  tissues  of  the  head,  and  comprise  all  deviations  from  a
normal  material  condition  of  which  we  can  in  any  way
become  cognizant — affections,  for  example,  of  the  skin,
glands,  vessels,  organs  of  special  sense,  etc.

2.  Eyes.

a.  The  Orbit,  i.  Location;  2.  Sensations;  3.  Condi-
tions; 4.  Concomitance;  5.  Organic  changes.  These  sub-
divisions here  and  throughout  the  scheme,  wherever  used,
are  to  be  understood  and  studied  as  already  explained  in  the
general  analysis  and  under  the  title  "  Head."

b.  Lids.  I.  Location;  2.  Sensation;  3.  Conditions;  4.
Concomitance ;  5.  .Organic  changes.

c.  Conjunctiva,  i.  Location;  2.  Sensations;  3.  Condi-
tions ;  4.  Concomitance ;  5.  Organic  changes.

d.  Globe.  I.  Location;  2.  Sensations;  3.  Conditions;
4.  Concomitance;  5.  Organic  changes.


56  HOMCEOPATHY

e.  Secretions,  i.  Character,  as  regards  color,  acridity,
quantity,  etc. ;  2.  Conditions;  3.  Concomitance.

f.  Special  sense.  i.  Vision,  altered,  intensified,  dimin-
ished, or  perverted.  2.  Conditions  attached  to  such  altera-
tion ;  3.  Concomitance.

N.  B.  After  each  such  study  of  a  single  organ,  a  phj^io-
logical  estimate  should  be  made  of  the  signiAcance  of  the
symptoms.  For  this  purpose  a  faithful  study  of  the  con-
comitance is  of  inestimable  value.  For  example,  the  proving
of  Pulsatilla  gives  sudden  loss  of  vision.  Is  this  Amaurosis  ?
The  concomitance  shows  that  the  loss  of  vision  is  accom-
panied fay  lo^s  of  hearing,  by  syncope,  and  occurs  at  a
period  of  menstrual  irregularities.  The  symptom  is  at  once
explained.  This  is  only  a  very  obvious  instance  of  what  is
not  always  an  easy  though  always  a  most  necessary  task.

3.  Ears.

a.  External  Ear.  i.  Location;  2.  Sensations,  3.  Con-
ditions ; 4.  Concqmitance ; 5.  Organic  changes.

fa.  Internal  Ear.  i.  Location;  2.  Sensations;  3.  Con-
ditions; 4.  Concomitance;  5.  Organic  changes  (as  secre-
tions, etc.)  and  their  conditions.

c.  Special  sense.  i.  Deviations,  whether  intensified,
diminished  or  perverted ;  2.  Conditions ;  3.  Concomi-
tance.

^.  Nose.  i.  Location;  2.  Sensations ;  3.  Organic  changes,
including  secretions.  With  reference  to  each  of  the  above,
observe,  a.  The  conditions; b.  The  concomitance.

Special  sense  of  smell,  i.  Deviations  from  a  normal  con-
dition ; 2.  Conditions ; 3.  Concomitance.

5.  Face. i.  Location; 2.  Complexion;  3.  Sensations;

4. Temperature; 5.  Organic  changes. As  regards  each

of these  subdivisions, study,  a. The conditions ; b. The
concomitance.


THE SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


57


¥


»


6.  Lips,  i  .  Location ;  2.  Aspect ;  3.  Sensations ;  4.
Temperature ;  J.  Organic  changes.  Respecting  each  sub-
div'sion,  note,  a.  The  conditions;  b.  The  concomitance.

7.  Gums  AND  Teeth,  i.  Location;  2.  Sensations;  3.
Organic  changes.  In  reference  to  each  subdivision,  note,  a.
The  conditions;  b.  The  concomitance.

S.  Mouth,  i.  Location ;  2.  Sensations;  3.  Organic
changes. Of  these,  a.  The  conditions;  b.  Concomitance.

p.  Taste.  1.  Deviation  from  normal  state,  a.  Condi-
tions ;  b.  Concomitance.  ,

TO.  Tongue,  t.  Location;  2.  Sensations;  3.  Aspect;
4.  Organic  changes.  Of  tlicse,  a.  llie  conditions;  b.  The
concomitance.

//.  Throat  ano  Fauces,  i.  Location;  2.  Sensations;
3.  Aspect;  4.  Organic  changes  (including  tumefaction,  secre-
tion, deposits,  etc.).  Respecting  these  divisions,  a.  The
conditions ;  b.  The  concomitance.

/J,  CEsoPHAGUS.  t .  Location  ;  2.  Sensations ;  3.  Organic
changes;  4.  Special  function.  Of  these,  a.  The  conditions;
b.  The  concomitance.

rj.  Stomach,  i.  Location;  2.  Sensations;  3.  Organic
changes;  4.  Special  function  modified,  as  respects,  a.  Appe-
tite;  b.  Thirst ;  and  these  modifications  may  be  exaltation,
diminution  or  perversion;  c.  Nausta :  d.  Voitiiting.  Re-
specting these  divisions  and  subdivisions,  observe,  a.  The
conditions;  b.  The  concomitance.

t4.  Hypochondria,  r.  Right,  2.  Left  As  regards  each,
study,  I.  Location;  2.  Sensations;  3.  Organic  changes.  As
regards  each  subdivision,  observe,  a.  The  conditions ;  b.
The  concomitance.

(Here  and  wherever  the  rubric  comprises  a  region  which
contains  3  number  of  organs,  endeavor  to  make  by  the  aid
of  the  sciences  of  Phy.siology  and Pathology a  rational


58


HOMCEOPATHY


appreciation  of  the  organs  involved,  and  in  this  study,  pay
especial  regard  to  the  concomitance,  in  order  to  gain  the
full  physiological  significance  of  the  symptoms.  For  exam-
ple, in  afTections  of  the  right  hypochondrium  where  the  liver
may  be  supposed  to  be  implicated,  the  concomitance  will
justify  the  supposition  if  it  show  simultaneous  and  corre-
sponding symptoms  of  the  tongue,  stomach,  head,  stool,
skin,  back,  etc.,  etc.  So  of  the  left  hypochondrium  and  the
uterine  system.)

75.  Abdomen,  i.  Lof;:ation  with  appreciation  of  the
organs  involved;  2.  Sensations;  3.  Organic  changes.
Respecting  these  divisions,  note,  a.  The  conditions ;  b.  The
concomitance.

16.  Stool,  i.  Sensations,  their  character,  location  and
course,  a.  Before  stool ;  b.  During  stool ;  c.  After  stooL
As  regards  these  three  subdivisions,  note,  a., The  conditions;
b.  The  concomitance.  2.  Organic  phenomena,  viz.,  color,
odor,  consistence,  composition,  e.  g. — digested  or  not —
consisting  of  faeces  alone  or  combined,  etc

77.  Anus  and  Rectum,  i.  Location;  2.  Sensations;
3.  Organic  changes  (including  secretions,  tumors,  condylo-
mata, etc.,  etc.).  Respecting  all  of  these  divisions,  note,  a.
The  conditions ;  b.  The  concomitance.

18.  Urinary  Organs.

a.  Bladder,  i.  Location ;  2.  Sensations ;  3.  Organic
changes.

b.  Urethra,  i.  Location ;  2.  Sensations ;  3.  Organic
changes.

c.  Kidneys,  i.  Location;  2.  Sensations;  3.  Organic
changes.

d.  Ureters,  i.  Location ;  2.  Sensations ;  3.  Organic
changes.

With  regard  to  all  of  these  divisions,  under  each  of  these
organs,  study,  a.  The  conditions;  b.  The  concomitance.


THE  SCIENCE  OF  THERAPEUTICS.


59


I


c  Urine,  l.  Quantity;  3.  Color— physical  properties;
3.  Odor ;  4.  Deposits.

f.  Micturition,  r.  Frequency;  2.  Sensations.  Note,  a.
Conditions;  b.  Concomitance.

/p.  Genital  Organs — MaU.

a.  Penis.  i.  Location  \  2.  Sensations ;  3.  Organic
changes.

b.  Testes,  i.  Location ;  2.  Sensations ;  3.  Organic
changes.

c  S/>ecial /unctian.  i.  Modifications,  as  regards  exalta-
tions, diminution,  or  perversion ;  2.  Sensations.

Respecting  these  divisions  and  subdivisions,  study  under
each,  a.  "Die  conditions;  b.  The  concomitance.

d.  Secretion.  I.  Quantity ;  2.  Quality,  admixture,  etc. ;
J.  Mode  of  evacuations, a.  Conditions;  b.  Concomitance.

^(7.  Genital  Orcaus— Fentale.

a.  Vuiva.  I.  Location ;  3.  Sensations;  3.  Organic
changes.

b.  Vagina.  I.  Location ;  2.  Sensations ;  3.  Organic
changes;  4.  Secretion,  considered  as  regards,  a.  Character;
b.  Quantity;  c.  Color.

c  Uterus.  I.  Location;  2.  Sensations;  3.  Organic
changes ;  4.  Secretions  considered  as  above.

d. Ovaries, i.  Sensations; 2.  Organic  changes. Under
these  divisions  and  subdivisions,  note,  a.  The  conditions;
,  b.  The  concomitance,  attaching  to  each.

c.  MenstruaticH.  i.  Sensation;  2.  Periodicity;  3.  Quan-
tity; 4.  Color;  5.  Consistence;  6.  Duration.  Under  these,
a.  The  conditions ;  b.  The  concomitance.

2i.  Respiratory  Organs.

a.  Nasal  Mucous  Membrane.  !.  Location;  2.  Sensations;
3.  Organic  changes ;  4.  Secretions,  as  regards  quantity  and
quality.  Respecting  all  these,  a.  The  conditions;  b.  The
concomitance.


60  HOM<EOPATHY

h.  Larynx  and  Trach£a.  i.  Location;  2.  Sensations;  3.
Organic  changes;  4.  Secretions  as  above.  Respecting  all
these,  a.  The  conditions;  b.  The  concomitance.

/.  Cough,  a.  Its  sound;  b.  Its  character,  as  paroxysmal
or  otherwise,  dry  or  loose;  c.  Location  ofthe  sensation  which
provokes  it;  d.  Conditions;  e.  Concomitance.

2.  Sputa.  I.  Character;  2.  Consistence;  3.  Color;  4,
Smell ;  5.  Taste  ;  6.  Locality  from  which  it  appears  to  come ;
7.  Mode  of  evacuation;  8.  Sensations  which  precede  and
follow  its  evacuation ;  9.  Conditions; 10.  Concomitance.

c.  Thorax — Internal,  i.  Location;  2.  Sensation;  3.  Or-
ganic changes, a.  Conditions ;  b.  Concomitance.

— External.  i.  Location;  2.  Sensation ;  3.  Organic
changes  (including  mammae  and  nipples);  4.  Secretions.
Respecting  the  above,  a.  Conditions;  b.  Concomitance.

d.  Respiration.  i.  Sensations;  2.  Organic  action;  3..
Breath,  its  odor,  temperature,  volume.  Regarding  these,  a.
The  conditions;  b.  Concomitance.

22.  Heart.

a.  Subjective, i.  Location;  2.' Sensations.

b.  Objective,  i.  Location;  2.  Organic  changes  as  shown
by  position,  sounds,  magnitude  and  by  rational  signs ;  3.
Pulsation.  Respecting  these  divisions,  a.  The  conditions;
b.  The  concomitance.

2^.  Back.  i.  Location,  dividing  the  back  into  regions
from  below  upward  and  appreciating  the  oi^^s  and  tissues
involved,  as  well  as  the  concomitance  will  admit;  2.  Sensa-
tions; 3.  Organic  changes.  Under  these,  a.  Conditions;
b.  Concomitance.

24..  Upper  Extremities — Right  and  Left.  Re-
specting each,  study

I .  Articulations,  i.  Location;  2.  Sensations;  3.  Organic;.
changes.


THE  SCIENCE OF  THERAPEUTICS.


6i


2.  Jnterarticular  Regitm. l.  Locations ; 2. Sensations ;

3.  Organic  changes. Respecting  all  of  these,  a.  Conditions;
b.  Concomitance.

25.  Lower  Extremities — Right  and  Left.  Studied
in  all  respects  as  the  Upper  Extremities.

As  regards  the  Extremities  generally,  note  Sensations  with
their  course  (and  Duration)  if  they  be  wandering;  c.g.y  from
a  right  upper,  to  a  left  lower  extremity,  etc.

36,  Sleep, i.  Character;  2,  Periods;  3.  Preceded  by;

4.  Succeeded  by;  6.  Concomitance.

a  Dreams. I.  Condition^;  2.  Concomitance.

J/.  Fever,  as  a  paroxysm  made  up  of  stages.

1.  Incomplete  Paroxysm,  consisting  of  only  one  or  of  two
stages.  I.  Their  order;  2.  Relative  severity  and  duration i
3.  Antecedents;  4.  Sequelae;  5.  Conditions;  and,  6.  Con-
comitance.

2.  Complete  Paroxysm.  I.  Order  of  the  stages;  2.  Their
relation  to  each  other.  Then  considcrthc  separate  stages ;  e.g.:

a.  Chill.  I.  Character;  2.  Precursor;  3.  Succeeded  by;
a.  Conditions ;  b.  Concomitance.

b.  Fever,  as  a  single  stage,  or  Heat.  i.  Character;  2.
Precursors ;  3.  Sequelae, a.  Condition  ;  b.  Concomitance.

c.  Sweat.  1,  Character;  2.  Precursors;  3.  Sequelae,  a.
Conditions;  b.  Concomitance.

Between  chill  and  heat  and  heat  and  sweat,  study  the

Interval  i.  Character;  2.  .Sensations;  3.  Conditions;  4.
Concomitance. Also  the  time

A/ttr  tkf  paroxysm.  I.  Sensations;  2.  Conditions;  3.
Concomitance.

Pulse. I.  Quality;  2.  Frequency;  3.  Conditions.

2S.  Skim.

I,  General,  i.  Sensations;  2.  Oi^anlc  changes;  3.  Con-
ditions; 4.  Concomitance.


62 HOMCEOPATHY  THE  SCIENCE OF  THERAPEUTICS.

2.  Special.  i.  Localities  affected ;  2.  Sensations ;  3.
Organic  changes;  4.  Conditions;  5.  Concomitance.

3.  Organic  Changes. Under  this  head  are  comprised  :

1.  Eruptions,  i.  Aspect;  2.  Color;  3.  Sensations;  4.
Secretions,  a.  Their  color;  b.  Consistence;  c.  Odor;  d.
Quality — e.g.,  acrid  or  bland,  etc.;  5.  Scabs,  a.  Quality;
b.  Tenacity ;  c.  Color ;  d.  Odor ;  e.  Conditions  of  subjacent
tissues  or  secretions.

2.  Ulcers. To  be  studied  as  Eruptions.

3.  Warts. "

4.  Tumors,  i.  Physical  properties;  2.  Sensations;  3.
Conditions ;  4.  Concomitance.  *

zp.  Mind.

1.  Faculties  Modified,  i.  Exalted;  2.  Depressed;  3.
Perverted. Under  these,  a.  Conditions ;  b.  Concomitance.

2.  Memory. As  under  Faculties.

30.  Disposition,  i.  Quality;  2.  Conditions;  3.  Con-
comitance.


APPENDIX.


STATIONS  on  the  Hiitorjr  of  HonKcopcdiic  Litcntafc  in  the  English
igiuge.  LetlcT  from  Dr.  Lijtpe.
r.  Cumtl  OunhxiD  in  hi*  excellent  article  "  Homimpalhjr  the  Science  of
rrapcutics,"  [)uhliiih<;(l  in  the  Amkxican  (loMOtorATHic  Kkview,  after
»[aplunin|i  that  il  is  humiliiline  to  be  coinpellcd  to  say  thai  thvre  ue  no
nutworthy  inaDual&  of  our  Matcru  Medicx  in  the  Koglish  Udeubcc,  alludes  to
,h«  PrttKC  t)f  Jair't  J>^ew  Mamucl  and  Symfttmem  CoJtx,  by  Dr.  Conttaotine
|«nn|[,  And  refers  to  the  subsequent  publication  of  that  Pre&ce  in  the  original
man  uianuj^nipt,  in  the  AU/;.  f/^m.  Z*>tnHg,  and  which  containi  alio  the
lining  foot-note  by  I>r.  Hexing :  "  After  comparison  of  the  tnnshtlioa  with
Ihe  original,  the  above  indorsement  it  hereby  altogether  and  completely  with-
inm.**  Dr.  Dunham  forlher  Mys  that  if  he  wete  asked  why  this  retraction
irai  not  made  in  the  language  and  in  the  country  in  which  the  cominendation
iras  »aSered  to  be  pulili^hed,  he  would  have  nothing  to  say.  Dr.  Dunhiim
I  rtl»r  continues :  "  l(  avaiU  doI  lo  uy,  why  Euid  fault  with  these  translations
I'l  lhi>  manual,  inauBuch  *\  we  hare  no  others  ?  Had  the  unwurlhinesi  of
Kteic  hccB  made  known,  had  they  not,  on  the  contrary,  beeo  indurted  by  high
thorily,  we  had  long  since  hat!  others  and  truttworthy.  An  expo«ure  of  the
crfectloof  we  have  iipoken  of  would  have  created  a  demand  for  other  wotka,
[it  i«  not  leu  true  in  tciencc  than  in  trade  that  'demand  creates  a  supply.'  "
-.  D.  WiUoD,  who  li  now  publishing  an  article  in  the  MnnXty  //ematftiMir
I-,  beginning  in  No,  7,  vol.  vL,  headed  "  How  fat  is  Dr.  Hcnpcl  10  ba
aa  a  translator  of  Hahnemann's  works,"  says  in  that  number :  "  Yet.
10  say.  nu  one,  as  far  a«  I  am  aware,  has  hitherto  publicly  pointed  out
^Innilers  that  have  been  perpetrated  by  Dr.  Hcmpel  in  his  voluoiiaoas
LatiDos  of  Hahnemann's  works."  To  correct  the  above  erroneous  ^taie-
I  sUow  me  then  to  publish  the  following  facts :

■'j  Xno  Manuai  and  Syntpti>mm  CnJfx,  by  Dr,  C.  J.  Hempel.  vol.  UI.,

viewed  by  me  for  the  f'hUaJei^hia  Jtmrnal  tf  Hamtnpathy,  in  1852,  in

page  427  to  4j2,  my  oamc not  appearing. Dr. Hempcl  puts  In a

her  in  roL  i.,  page  467  to  t(yb  of  the  same  /ournair  dated  December  15th»

In  vol.  i,  page  ]l8  to  531  of  that  Journal.  I  fell  compelled  as  the

I  of  the  Review  to  answer,  and  Iheie  say  :  "  I  write  ( this  criticbm)  for  the

HtmtMpalhiiU,  to  vindicate  ourselves  before  the  world,"  clc. Dr.

answers  again,  February  14th,  1853,  voL  L,  page  549,  and  remarks

Linterext  of  the  publisher  must  be  protected;  he  then  appeals  to  the

Indatiops  of  Dr.  C. Ilering  in  the  preface  to  the  first  volume  of  the


64  APPENDIX.

work,  to  which  I  replied,  Much  24th,  1853,  vol.  ii.,  page  59  to  61,  vmdic&thi{
Dr.  Hering  by  stating  that  he  could  not  then  publish  his  original  Gennan
preface  or  its  correct  translation,  nor  could  he  withdraw  his  reGonuneadatioB
in  the  country  in  which  that  commendation  was  published,  as  the  JToma^atiuc
Journal  then  published  was  in  the  hands  of  the  publisher  of  the  Nem  Mamu^
who  would  not  receive  and  circulate  communications  adverse  to  his  interests.
I  further  then  gave  there  the  foot-note  of  Dr.  Hering  in  the  Allg.  Horn.  Ztitta^,
above  referred  to.  "After  comparing  the  translation  with  the  original,  I
solemnly  withdraw  this  my  above  communication  and  indorsement."

Dr.  Hempel  again  replied,  in  voU  ii.,  pages  318  and  319,  declaring  me  to
stand  convicted  of  libel,  threatening  legal  proceedings  or  demanding  an  arbitia-
tion  by  committee.  The  committee  report  of  the  14th  of  September  and  the
8th  of  October,  1853,  is  published  in  voL  ii.,  page  430,  and  this  committee,
having  examined  Dr.  C.  Hering's  original  German  manuscript  of  the  prebce
to  the  New  MamiaitoA  its  publication  in  the  Allg.  Horn.  Ztitmtg,  with  the
translation  by  Dr.  Hempel  as  published,  find,  that  the  point  assumed  by  me,
viz.,  that  the  translation  of  Dr.  C.  Hering's  preface  to  the  Ntvi  Matttiai  and
Symplcmen  Codex  contained  willful  perversions  and  omissions,  has  been  estab-
lished. A  reply  to  this  report  by  Dr.  C  Hempel  is  published  in  vol.  ii.,  page
573,  in  which  he  boldly  denies  that  he  is  guiltjof  any  essential  alterations.
Later  the  publisher  succeeded  in  obtaining  by  some  means  the  names  of  a  few
physicians  as  a  recommendation  to  the  Complete  Repertory.

The  Review  was  published  ten  years  ago.  It  had  only  the  effect  to  procure
for  Dr.  C.  J.  Hempel  a  professorship  in  the  Pennsylvania  College  of  Homoeop-
athy. What  effect  his  tcachmgs  and  publications  had  while  Professor  in  that
Institute  are  well  known.

That  ten  years  later  Dr.  Wilson,  in  England,  and  Dr.  Dunham,  in  the
United  States,  should  indorse  my  review  of  1853  is  exceedingly  gratifying  to
me,  but  unfortunately  does  not  remedy  the  evil  done  to  Homoeopathy  and  ita
progress  during  that  length  of  time,

I  sincerely  hope  that  Drs.  Wilson  and  Dunham  will  be  more  successful  in
1862  in  arousing  the  English-reading  members  of  the  profession  to  the  necessity
of  accurate  translations  and  correct  versions  of  Hahnemann's  writings  and  our
standard  works.

Ad.  LlPPB,  H.  D.

Philadelphia,  December  7th,  1862.

Note. — ^The  facts  respecting  the  publications  in  the  Philadelphia  Jtrnmal^  in
•852-53,  are  essentially  as  above  stated  by  Dr.  Lippe.  The  reasons  why  they
did  not  attract  general  attention  and  were  not  accepted  by  the  profession  as  ft
withdrawal  by  Dr.  Hering  of  his  strong  indorsement  of  Dr.  Hempel's  transla-
tion of  the  Symptomen  Codex,  I  suppose  to  be  the  following  :

1.  The  first  paper  by  Dr.  Lippe  was  anonymous,  and  therefore  was  not
authoritative  in  any  personal  sense.

2.  The  foot-note  attached  by  Dr.  Hering  to  the  German  publication  of  his
preface  was  not  quoted  by  Dr.  Lippe  until  after  a  succession  of  demurrers  bj
Dr.  Hempel  And  replications  by  himself  bad  given  the  matter  the  aspect  of
a  somewhat  personal  controversy;  and  even  then  it  was  introduced  as  a  kind


APPENDIX.


65


of  eiiter  dUtum,  became  the  foot-note  referred  to  the  "  Sf tnptDtnen  Codex  or
Kew  Manual,"  in  two  rolumcs.  whems  Dr.  Lippc'c  icvicw  bad  treated  klmoit
exclunTcly  oi  the  Repertory,  or  vol.  Ui.

New.  ihix  reperiorj  wu  re&lly  to  all  interns  and  puTposes  act  bo  much  a
tnniUticMi  is  n  new  wnrk  by  Dr.  Heni[>el,  and  he  Is  entitled  to  comtnendalion
or  adv-cne  critidtm  occofdiDg  to  the  merits  or  detnerits  of  the  work,  u  an
Author  raiher  than  fts  a  Translator.  In  such  a  capacity  Dr.  Hering's  foot-note
and  prc&ce  could  hardly  refer  to  him,  and  hence  the  foot-note,  introduced  "by
the  way,"  in  Dr.  LipjieS  letlcri  concerning  his  review  of  the  Repertorjr  failed
to  attract  general  attention  and  lo  vindicate  Dr.  Bering.

But  the  atiore  "  annotationti  "  are  entirely  laticbctory.  Coming,  aa  ihcy  do^
from  a  confidential  friend  of  Dr.  Hering.  and  with  hin  expreu  unction  and
^iproTal,  tfaeyare  a  complete  withdrawal  of  hit  indorsement  of  the  Englith
TvnioD  of  Jahr't  Xew  Manual.  They  give,  moreover,  a  tatitfaclory  rea»on
wby  Ibis  withdrawal  could  not  have  been  published  at  an  eirlier  date  in  this
oouatry,  vU. :  the  fiict  that  the  publishing  interest  controlled  all  of  our  Journals
Cron  the  year  i$50  to  tSjS,  to  »cb  an  extent  thai  nothing  in  the  shape  of  an
■d*crse  criiictsm  of  any  important  publication  was  allowed  to  appear  in  any
JcniraaL This  statement  the  writer  can  corroborate  from  pertonal  experience.

While  accepting  Dr.  Lippe's  annotations  as  fnll  and  satisfactory  on  these
|K>ini»,  I  am  not  disposed  to  adopt  unreservedly  bis  criticisms  of  1>r.  Elempel.
I  have  no  evidence  that  the  errors  and  otnissions  which  render  it  impossible
to  receive  his  work*.  a.s  trustworthy  translations  of  the  books  they  profess  to
represent,  arc  willful  or  malicious.  I  think  they  may  be  all  acconnted  (or  by
the  fad  that  the  transUtioAs  were  nuide  in  haste  and  therefore  carelessly,  and
tlut  to  some  of  the  tusks  which  he  undertook  Dr.  Hempcl  may  have  been,  at
the  lime,  hardly  competent.  Aiul  when  we  consider  the  immense  amount  of
l«bar  rcafuireil  by  these  numerous  translattona,  we  can  hardly  wonder  that
erton  have  been  committed  and  omissiimt  made.  Unhappily,  this  does  not
make  the  books  any  less  undeserving  of  confidence.  Of  course  an  error  or  an
Omiaaion  is  just  as  fatal  to  the  lruiiworlhine«s  of  a  translation,  whether  ri  be
the  re»ull  of  haste,  of  oreles&nes^  or  of  willful  perversion — but  the  interests  of
science  do  not  require  the  critic  to  go  beyond  a  statement  of  the  bet  that  the
work  is  not  trustworthy,  and  of  the  panic-uiars  in  which  it  fails.

In  my  leinarks  on  Manuals  to  which  Dr.  Lippc  alludei,  I  refer  only  to  that
iwrtof  the  New  Manual  whicli  relalet.  to  the  Materia  MediSa.  The  faults  of
lb«  English  version  of  the  preface,  however  provoking  to  the  .\ulhor  of  tlie
pre&ce,  have  not  the  same  kind  of  relation  to  the  general  interests  of  the
tdenee.  They  do,  however,  concern  the  personal  and  professianal  leputalion
of  Dr.  Hering,  and  at  his  re<]ue5t  we  publish  a  letter  addressed  by  him  to  Dr.
r.  Editor  of  the  f'hilaJtlf'hia  Jifitma!  of  tfomaffaiky  ai  the  lime  of  the
ttiOB  of  Dr.  Lippe's  Review  of  the  Repertory  before  alluded  to.

DUKUAU.
[COTV.  ]

FiiitAOKtrHiA,  August  iStb,  1853.
Dr.  WiL  Gardikck,

Sir:  Vou  say,  in  your  Joumnl,  the  last  number,  page  318,  you  "  wish  to  deal

JuiUy" — ''nothing  further  lo  be  published  on  that  subject." On  the  isme

6


66  APPENDIX.

pagr  you  allow  your  own  nunc  to  be  put  at  the  head  of  a  comauttce  to
ex9u»ine  the  urifrinal  manuscript  of  Dr.  Hering'i  prefMe,  or  as  an  altemadve
the  mean  threat  uf  netting  New-Vork  pettifoggers  upon  the  first  one  who  hu
had  aliiliiy  anil  courage  to  awake  the  attention  of  Americut  Homoeopaths  to
the  itant;er  tn  wliitli  iii(inn))oliiing  and  book  manufactaring  leads  oar  cause.  I
«n  willing  to  lay  in  (he  hands  of  any  respectable  committee  meeting  in  Phila-
delphia, at  any  time,

I. My  iiri|jiiial  manusmpt.

3,  The  verlmtim  printed  c<ii>y  In  the  Alfg^.  Horn.  Ztitung.

jt-  The  Knglisli  irnnslalion  of  it  as  a  preface  to  the  Symptomen  Codex.

4-  A  cimipariixin  of  the  translation  with  the  original,  p(»nting  out  the  willfid
perverhiimn  und  oniiKniouH.

Said  cinniiiiiire,  mcnrding  to  common  sense  and  custom*  cannot  have  anj
interested  iMrtie).  nlemIlc^^  of  it,  but  ought  to  be  appnnted  by  them,  and  of
course  only  nf  nmh  physicians  as  understand  the  German  language.  Yon
ought  III  Ite  llir  umpire.  U  not  your  Journal  the  proper  oigan  in  which  soch  a
rrixtrl  ot  such  a  i*t>mmillce  ought  to  be  published?
(Sigiird)

Yours,

CONSTA.VnNC  Hkuno.


ANTAGONISM BETWEEN HOMCEOPATHY  AND
ALLOPATHY.


Addrcu,  d«liveTcd  at  the  Knii-ftiini)«l  meeljog  of  the  Hoiaccopalhic  Medical
Society  of  th«  Suce  of  Nenr-York,  AHMny,  ycbriuu^  lo,  [863.

GentUmtH  of  the  Society  :

By  the  rctjiicst  of  your  president  and  other  officers,  I
appear  before  you  to  perform  that  duty  which,  on  such  an
occasion  as  tliis,  devolves  upon  the  president  of  the  Society,
but  which  tlie  special  engagements  of  tliat  officer,  at  this
season  of  the  year,  in  New- York,  have  prevented  his  ful-
filling.

The  session  of  this  evening  brings  to  a  close  the  first
regular  meeting  of  the  Homoeopathic  Medical  Society  of  the
State  of  New-York.

The  object  of  this  Society  is  declared  to  be  "  the  advance-
ment of  the  science  of  medicine."

In  these  days,  when  the  value,  of  associated  tabor  is  so
well  understood,  one  might  certainly  ask,  with  surprise,
"  Can  it  he  that,  prior  to  this  year,  there  has  existed  in  the
State  of  New- York  no  central  organization  for  the  advance-
ment of  the  science  of  medicine  ?  "

The  fact  is,  there  has  been  a  State  Medical  Society  in
active  operation  since  1806.  Its  object  is  the  same  as  that
of  our  Society;  its  organization  and  its  mode  of  operation
arc  identical  with  ours.

What,  then,  is  the  necessity  for  a  second  Societj-  ? Why

l*hould men  of  the same  profession,  engaged in similar

■labors,  for  a  common  object,  divide  their  forces,  and  thereby

diminish their efficiency  ? What  is the nature  of  the

antagonism  which  this  division  implies,  and  what  is  the


6S  ANTAGONISM BETWEEN

necessity  for  its  perpetuation  ?  Candid  and  exhaustive
replies  to  these  questions  will  explain  and  justify  our  posi-
tion of  separation  from  the  Old  School  of  medicine.  Thejr
will,  at  the  same  time,  sharply  define  the  outlines  of  that
branch  of  medical  science  to  which  we  have  especially
devoted  ourselves,  and  will  give  us  a  clear  view  of  the  labors
which  devolve  upon  us  for  its  advancement  and  develop-
ment

I  propose,  therefore,  to  discuss  this  antagonism, — first
from  a  historic  and  then  from  a  philosophical  point  of  view.

Samuel  Hahnemann,  the  great  reformer  of  medicine,  was
a  regularly  educated  physician,  of  great  learning  and  very
uncommon  general  culture  and  literary  attainments.  In  the
words  of  Sir  John  Forbes,  who  surely  cannot  be  accused  of
any  partiality  for  the  founder  of  Homoeopathy :  "  No  candid
observer  of  his  actions,  or  candid  reader  of  his  writings,  can
hesitate  for  a  moment  to  admit  that  he  was  a  very  extraor-
dinary man, — one  whose  name  will  descend  to  posterity  as
the  exclusive  excogitator  and  founder  of  an  original  system
of  medicine,  as  ingenious  as  many  that  preceded  it,  and
destined,  probably,  to  be  the  remote,  if  not  the  immediate,
cause  of  more  important  fundamental  changes  in  the  prac-
tice of  the  healing  art  than  have  resulted  from  any  promul-
gated since  the  days  of  Galen  himself;  •  ,  •  •
he  was  undoubtedly  a  man  of  genius,  and  a  scholar ;  a
man  of  indefatigable  industry  and  of  dauntless  energy."*

Hufeland,  the  Nestor  of  orthodox  medicine  in  Germany,
in  calling  attention  to  an  essay  published  by  Hahnemann,  in
his  Journal,  in  i8oi,  speaks  of  him  as  "one  of  the  most  dis-
tinguished physicians  in  Germany."

This  being  the  estimate  in  which  Hahnemann  was  held  by
his  most  distinguished  contemporary  (Hufeland)  and  by  his
most  learned  critic  (Forbes),  both  of  whom,  be  it  observed,
were  opposed  to  the  medical  reform  which  he  had  instituted,
let  us  glance  at  his  professional  career.

*  British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review,  xli.,  1S46.


HOM<EOPATHy  AND ALLOPATHY.


69


After  practicing  in  various  localities  and  positions,  with
such  success  and  acceptance  as  to  acquire  the  reputation
which  Hufcland  records  of  being  "one  of  the  most  distin-
guished phy^cians  in  Germany."  Hahnemann  tells  the  pro-
fession, in  several  essays  on  medical  subjects,  that  he  has
become  so  deeply  convinced  of  the  tmccrtainty  of  medical
practice,  and  of  the  positive  injurious  effects  of  many  meth-
oAs  in  common  use  among  physicians  at  that  day,  that  at
length  he  really  "doubts  whether  his  patients  would  not,  in
many  cases,  have  thriven  as  well,  or  better,  without  his  aid  as
uiitk  it"

This  conviction  of  the  uncertainty  oi  medicine,  this  sus-
picion of  the  injury  which  it  sometimes  inflicts  on  the
patients,  were  not  peculiar  to  Hahnemann.  Girtanner  and
several  others,  before  his  day,  expressed  them.  Sir  John
Forbes,  from  whom  we  have  already  quoted,  says,  in  1846,
of  the  medical  methods  of  our  own  time,  "  In  a  considerable
proportion  of  diseases  it  would  fare  as  well,  or  better,  with
patients,  in  the  actual  condition  of  the  medical  art,  as  more
generally  practiced,  if  all  remedies,  at  least  all  active  reme-
dies, especially  drugs,  were  abandoned."  *' Things  [in  medi-
cine] have  arrived  at  such  a  pitch,  that  they  cannot  be  worse;
they  must  mend  or  end."'  Such  views  have  been  repeatedly
expressed  by  members  of  the  medical  profession  in  this
country.

Hotinemann  has  said  nothing  more  severe  nor  more
sweeping  than  this  condemnation  of  practical  medicine,
by  the  late  head  of  the  profesision  in  England.

But  what  did  Hahnemann  do  when  he  had  become  con-
vinced of  the  inutility  and  mischievousness  of  the  current
medical  methods  ?  Did  he  continue  a  routine  practice  for
the  sake  of  "making  a  living?"  No!  like  a  noble,  honest
man,  he  refused  to  make  a  pretense  of  curing  where  he
Mirvid  he  did  not  cure.  He  relinquished  the  practice  of
cine  and  devoted  himself  to  the  collateral science of

■  Brituk  aHd  /•'ortign  Mtdicat  Rft/iew,  xli.,  1846.


70  ANTAGONISM BETWEEN

chemistry  and  to  literary  labors.  But  his  mind  was  ever  at
work  on  the  great  question  of  the  improvement  of  tiie  prac-
tice of  medicine,  for  he  was  "  sure  that  the  Creator  had  not
left  His  creatures  without  a  means  of  succor  from  the  pangs
and  ravages  of  disease."

Thus  intent  on  this  subject,  he  could  not  fail  to  remark
that  although  the  prevailing  treatment  of  diseases  was,  in
general,  blind  and  at  least  ineffectual  to  cure,  yet  there  were
certain  remedies  which  were  used  in  the  case  of  certain  dis-
eases with  almost  uniformly  happy  results — or  at  least  with
such  results  as  lefl  no  room  for  doubting  that  in  these  cases,
at  least,  real  cures  were  effected. This  he  had  observed  to
be  the  result  of  the  use  of  mercury  in  certain  cases,  not
unfrequently  encountered  by  medical  men ;  but  his  attention
was  especially  called  to  the  fact  in  connection  with  Peruvian
bark,  the  febrifuge  properties  of  which  had,  during  the  latter
part  of  the  preceding  century,  become  well  established  and
highly  prized  on  the  continent.

"If,"  he  thought  to  himself,  "if  the  number  of  these
specific  remedies  could  be  vastly  increased,  and  if  some  sys-
tem could  be  discovered  in  accordance  with  which  we  could
ascertain  their  exact  properties  and  could  know  beforehand
in  what  cases  of  disease  they  would  be  applicable,  then  in-
deed would  the  uncertainties  of  medical  practice  be  removed,
then  might  we  anticipate  as  great  success  in  the  treatment
of  all  diseases  as  we  now  attain  in  the  treatment  of  a  few  for
which  we  have  specifics."

Tftis  desire  for  specifics  was  not  original  with  Hahnemann.
It  had  been  expressed  before  his  day  by  Bacon  and  by  Boyle.
Sydenham  had  longed  for  them  in  expressions  almost
pathetic  in  their  hopelessness.  But  Hahnemann,  with  his
"dauntless  energy  and  indefatigable  industry,"  went  to  work
to  discover  this  system.

A  casual  observation  in  Cullen's  Materia  Medica  gave  him
the  clue  to  his  discovery,  as  the  falling  apple  did  to  Newton,
and  the  swinging  chandelier  in  the  church  at  Fisa,  to  Galileo.


HOMCEOPATHV AND ALLOPATHY.


71


rom  this  observation  it  occurred  to  him  that  provings  of

gs  upon  healthy  persons  might  furnish  a  knowledge  of
eir  specific  properties,  and  that  the  administration  of  drugs

cases  presenting  symptoms  similar  to  those  which  the  drug
■produces  in  the  healthy  subject,  might  be  the  law  of  the  ap-
plication of  specifics.

He  sought  throughout  the  whole  medical  literature  of
ancient  and  modern  times  for  instances  bearing  upon  this
subject,  and  he  collected  a  large  mass  of  evidence  corrobo-
rating his  speculations.

He  then  proceeded  to  verify  his  theory  by  actual  experi-
ment First  upon  himself  and  then  upon  all  healthy
persons  who  would  join  him  in  tlicse  self-sacrificing  labors,
he  proved  the  effects  of  a  number  of  drugs.  Then,  cautiously,
fint  in  his  own  family,  and  then,  little  by  little,  in  his
general  practice,  which  he  had  now  resumed,  he  gave,  as
occasion  offered,  the  drugs  which  he  had  proved,  in  cases
of  disease  that  presented  symptoms  similar  to  those  pro-
duced by  the  drugs.

From  1790  to  1805.  fifteen  years  of  the  prime  of  his  life
vrerc  devoted  to  constant,  exhausting  labors  of  this  nature,
during  which  time  he  proved  on  his  own  person  more  than
sixty  drugs ;  "  for,"  said  he,  "  when  we  have  to  do  with  an
art  whose  end  Is  the  saving  of  human  life,  any  neglect  to
make  ourselves  masters  of  It  becomes  a  crime  I  "  *  At  the
end  of  this  period,  sure  of  the  truth  of  the  great  principle  he
had  discovered, —  with  all  the  incidental  testimony  of  history
to  support  it— with  the  positive  results  of  a  long  experience
to  confirm  it, — he  presented  his  views  and  the  results  of  his
labors  to  the  profession  in  an  essay  of  wonderful  logical
power,  of  the  utmost  moderation  in  expression,  full  of  almost
tender  persuasion  and  of  the  noblest  enthusiasm;'  and  lie
published  at  the  same  time  the  first  part  of  his  Materia
Medlca.'  Five  years  later  appeared  the  more  elaborate
exposition,  tlie  "  Oi^anon."


^1 '  Dualgeon,  Hahn^mans'i
H  Writings.


Lesier *  Medicine  of  Experience.
*  Frag,  dc  Vir.  Med.  poi.


72  ANTAGONISM BETWEEN

This  was  the  turning-point  of  Hahnemann's  career.  Let
us  see  what  was  his  relation  to  the  profession  at  this  time.

He  had,  by  universal  consent,  attained  a  position  in  the
profession  which  justified  him  in  assuming  to  criticise  pre-
vailing methods  qnd  to  suggest  improvements.  He  had
shown  the  need  of  improvements,  and  he  had  borne  testi-
mony to  his  honesty  in  this  exposition,  by  retiring  from  a
lucrative  practice.  He  now  came  before  the  profession  say-
ing, "  I  believe  I  have  discovered  a  system  which  will  render
the  practice  of  medicine  certain,  and  its  success  brilliant  I
have  labored  fifteen  years  to  test  my  discovery.  My  own
experiments  and  the  testimony  furnished  by  the  records  of
medicine  convince  me  of  its  truth.  I  lay  it  and  them  before
you,  my  colleagues,  and  I  conjure  you  in  the  name  of  truth,
by  the  interests  of  humanity,  to  investigate  it  candidly  and
without  prejudice."  "  If,"  he  says  in  his  letter  to  Hufeland
on  this  occasion,  "  if  experience  should  show  you  that  my
method  is  the  best,  then  make  use  of  it  for  the  benefit  of
mankind,  and  give  God  the  glory  !"

How  were  this  exposition  and  appeal  received  by  the
medical  men  of  the  day  ?

In  1811,  appeared  the  Anti-Organon  of  Prof  Heckcr — a
work  full  of  the  most  bitter  aspersions  upon  Hahnemann's
personal  character,  whereas,  in  fact,  the  question  had  rela-
tion to  principles  dLiid  not  to  persons  ;  abounding  in  the  most
concentrated  contempt  and  scorn  of  the  system  which  Hahne-
mann had  unfolded  ;  and  without  a  single  suggestion  to
investigate,  by  practical  experiment,  the  practical  method
which  Hahnemann  had  stated  to  have  been  attended,  in  his
hands,  with  such  brilliant  practical  stucess  /

And  from  that  day  to  the  .present,  all  the  utterances  of
the  Old  School,  whether  from  the  press,  the  council,  the
professor's  chair,  or  in  the  forum  of  the  academy,  have  been
bitter  personal  denunciations  and  aspersions  of  the  character
and  motives  of  Hahnemann,  and  of  all  who  have  adopted  or
have  even  shown  a  disposition  to  investigate  his  method.


HOMCEOPATHY  AND ALLOPATHY.


73


But  many  a  scientific  discoverer  has  met  witli  opposition
and  calumny  at  the  hands  of  his  colleagues.  Not  to  go
beyond  the  ranks  of  medicine,  Harvey  was  denounced  as  a
qyack,  because  he  demonstrated  the  circulation  of  the  blood  !
Jennerwas  scandalized  with  most  persistent  violence  because
hi!  introduced  vaccination.

To  Hahnemann,  however,  persecution  came  nearer  home.
After  he  had  satisfied  himself  of  the  value  of  his  discovery
of  the  true  method  of  medical  practice,  he  resumed  the
exercise  of  his  profession.  His  success  was  more  brilliant
than  it  had  ever  been.  His  fame  as  a  practitioner  grew
rapidly,  nnd  patients  began  to  come  to  him  from  consider-
able distances.  This  good  fortune  excited  the  envy  of  his
colleagues  in  Konigsluttcr,  where  he  then  resided.  At  their
instigation,  the  apothecaries  of  the  place  brought  a  prosecu-
tion against  him  for  infringement  of  the  law  which  forbids  to
practitioners  of  medicine  the  compounding  and  sale  of  the
an  inevitable  corollar>'  to  his  new  system  of  practice,  Hahne-
and  that  he  used  simple  preparations  such  as  could  not  be
obtained  in  the  requisite  purity  at  the  apothecaries'.  In
vain  it  was  urged  that  the  spirit  of  the  lawwas  not  infringed,
since  Hahnemann  himself  was  an  expert  apothecary  and
chemist,  and  since  his  remedies  were  not  "  eowpoundcd"  but
simples,  and  not  ''sold,"  but  dispensed  gratuitously.  The
op[>osition  was  too  strong.  He  was  forbidden  to  practice,
save  in  accordance  with  the  taw  alluded  to.

Rather  than  yield  in  a  matter  which  he  considered  essen-
tial to  the  freedom  of  the  physician  and  to  the  purity  and
certainty  of  bis  practice,  Hahnemann  determined  to  leave
Konigsluttcr;  and  accordingly,  to  the  delight  of  his  col-
leagues and  of  the  apothecaries,  and  to  the  regret  of  the
citizens,  who  were  loath  to  lose  tlieir  benefactor,  and  a  cortege
of  whom  attended  his  carriage  far  beyond  the  gates  of  the
town,  he  removed  to  Hamburg.


74  ANTAGONISM BETWEEN

Here,  as  he  became  known  and  appreciated,  the  same
persecution  was  revived,  and  with  the  same  result  He
removed  to  Altona.

In  this  way,  during  a  period  of  twenty-two  years,  from
1799  to  1821,  Hahnemann  was  constrained,  by  the  persecu-
tion of  his  colleagues,  under  cover  of  the  law,  to  change
his  abode  at  least  eleven  times.  The  last  place  from  which
he  was  driven  in  this  manner  was  Leipsic — a  city  for  which
he  had  a  peculiar  affection.  Here  he  had  pursued  his
earliest  medical  studies  and  met  with  his  first  successes.
Here  he  had,  in  later  years,  established  a  college  of
Homoeopathy,  and  had  lectured  to  lai^e  audiences.  In
the  shady  walks  and  groves  that  surround  the  city,  he
had  been  wont  to  spend  the  evening  of  each  day  in  social
converse  with  his  family  and  with  the  students  whom  he
had  gathered  about  him  and  who  took  part  in  his  labors  of
proving  drugs.

From  this  city  of  his  love,  the  scientific  capital  of  his
fatherland,  he  was  now,  in  the  sixty-sixth  year  of  his
laborious  life,  driven  away  to  an  asylum  offered  him  in
the  tiny  capital  of  the  tiny  Duchy  of  Anhalt-Coethen !

No  wonder  that  he  who  for  so  many  years  had  followed
the  injunction,  "  When  they  persecute  you  in  one  city,
flee  ye  to  another," — that  he  who,  like  the  Divine  Healer,
had  gone  "  about  from  place  to  place  doing  good  and
healing  all  manner  of  sickness  and  disease  among  the
people" — no  wonder  that  he  forgot,  under  the  pressure
of  this  last  indignity,  that  other  injunction  of  the  Divine
Teacher,  to  "  love  them  that  hate  you,  and  pray  for  them
that  despitefully  use  you  and  persecute  you,"  and  that,  like
Luther,  he  now  bared  his  hitherto  sheathed  weapons  of
satire  and  invective  against  those  who  had  striven  to  hinder
his  usefulness — who  had  so  cruelly  marred  his  peace  and
happiness — all  save  that  peace  which  can  never  be  taken
from  the  man  who  has  within  himself  the  "  mens  sibi  conscia
recti/" If  in  this  he  erred  and  came  short  of  the  Divine


HOMfXOPATHY AND ALLOPATHY.


rs


I


I


example,  let  him  among  men  who  is  "  pure,"  cast  the  first
stone  at  him  !

Time  brings  its  sweet  revenges.  After  a  career  of  honor
and  usefulness  at  Coethen,  where  his  ever-increasing  fame
brought  htm  throngs  of  patients  from  all  parts  of  Europe,
and  a  subsequent  residence  iti  Paris,  where  his  reputation
extorted  from  the  government  a  license  to  practice  as  he
pleased,  Hahnemann  died  at  Paris  in  [843,  full  of  years
and  honors.  Eight  years  afterwani,  in  1S51,  the  town
council  of  Lcipsic  appropriated  a  beautiful  plot  of  ground
as  a  site  for  his  monument,  and  the  council  celebrated
officially  the  uncovering  of  a  costly  and  beautiful  bronze
statue  of  that  man,  as  one  of  Saxony's  most  illustrious
sons,  whom  thirty  years  before  the  same  council  had  t'gno-
miniously  chased  from  their  borders  as  an  unauthorized

Before  we  leave  this  branch  of  our  subject,  let  us  draw
one  lesson  from  the  story  of  Hahnemann's  persecutions.
All  his  sufferings  might  have  been  avoided,  he  might  have
lived  in  peace  and  affluence,  enjoying  consideration  among
his  colleagues  and  making  plenty  of  money,  liad  he  been
willing  to  "  yield  a  little,"  to  waive  the  right  of  dispensing
hts  own  medicines,  to  accommodate  his  system  in  various
points  to  suit  the  notions  of  his  time.  The  temptation  to
do  this  might,  by  some,  be  supposed  to  have  been  great,
for  Hahnemann's  family  was  lai^e,  he  suffered  during  his
wanderings  from  the  pinchings  of  cruel  poverty,  and  this
took  from  him  the  leisure  so  necessary  for  his  studies.

But  Hahnemann  was  not  made  of  the  stuff  that  could
compromise,  for  personal  ease  and  prosperity,  the  charter
that  God  had  given  him  for  the  benefit  of  the  race.  He
refused  to  give  up  one  particle  of  anything  which  he
deemed  essential  to  the  purity  and  pcrfectncss  of  his  system,
and  so  he  has  left  it  to  us,  pure  and  perfect !

Let  us  remember  his  example  when  prospects  of  ease  and
consideration,  and  of  the  cessation  of  strife  for  the  truth.


y6  ANTAGONISM  BETWEEN

tempt  us  to  compromise  unworthily  with  any  portion  of
the  Old  School  of  medicine.

For  there  are  those  among  us,  as  there  are  men  in  other
walks  of  life,  who,  for  the  sake  of  what  they  call  fieace
and  union,  would  join  hands  with  what  they  know  to  be
false !  aye,  even  though  to  do  it,  they  should  have  to  "  cut
off  the  fanatics,"  who  adhere  strictly  to  Hahnemann, — to
leave  the  " brains"  of  their  system  " out  in  the  cold"

This  is  the  origin  and  the  personal  history  of  the  antag-
onism between  Homceopathy  and  the  dominant  school  of
medicine.  Hahnemann  showed  the  imperfections  of  the
current  methods.  Nobody  disproved  what  he  said.  Every-
body agreed  with  him  and  everybody  sighed  for  something
better.  He  discovered  something  better  and  offered  it  to
his  colleagues,  with  demonstrations  of  its  value ;  he  begged
them  to  investigate  it;  and  in  case  they  should  find  it
better  than  the  old  method,  to  use  it  for  the  good  of  man-
kind, and  give  God  the  glory  !  Then,  with  one  accord,
they  denounced  him  as  a  vile  impostor,  and  chased  him
from  their  midst,  nor  have  they  yet  ceased  to  heap  ignominy
on  his  name !

It  may  be  objected  that  I  have  not  stated  the  whole
grounds  of  the  opposition  of  the  Old  School  to  Homceop-
athy, inasmuch  as  I  have  said  nothing  about  the  "  little
doses."

If  this  were  true,  it  would  not  alter  the  bearings  of  the
case,  because  the  doctrine  of  the  "  little  doses,"  like  all  the
rest  of  Hahnemann's  method,  was  offered  to  the  profession,
to  be  by  them  submitted  to  the  test  of  experience,  by  which,
like  all  the  rest,  it  should  stand  or  fall.  But,  in  point  of
feet,  Hahnemann  came  very  slowly  to  see  the  necessity  of
of  Homceopathy ;  and  he  did  not  express  himself  authorita-
tively upon  this  subject  until  long  after  the  opposition  to
him  and  the  prosecutions  in  the  name  of  the  apothecaries


HOM<EOPATHY AND  ALLOPATHY.


77


I


were  in  fuH  blast !  Therefore,  this  opposition  could  not
have  originated  in  the  doctrine  of  the  t^se.

Nor  is  the  question  of  tlie  dose  at  all  essential  to  the
experiments  which  Hahnemann  invited  his  professional
brethren  to  make  for  the  purpose  of  testing  his  system.
Intelligent  experiments  with  doses  of  ordinary  size  would
convince  any  physician  of  the  truth  of  the  Homceopathic
law;  and  if  he  continued  Uie  experiments,  the  inconven*
icnces  that  he  would  find  to  result  from  the  use  of  such
doses  would  inevitably  lead  the  experimenter,  as  tliey  led
Hahnemann,  to  continually  diminish  the  dose,  until  he
should  become  convinced  of  the  truth  of  Hahnemann's
dogma  on  this  subject  also.

This  has  been  the  uniform  experience  of  alt  physicians
who  Iiavc  become  convinced,  through  experiment,  of  the
truth  of  Homa>opathy,  and  have  adopted  the  method  in
practice.  And  the  more  strictly  they  conform  to  Hahne-
mann's method  in  prescribing,  the  more  exactly  do  they
agree  with  him  respecting  the  dose.  The  number  of  these
witnesses  amounts  to-day  to  many  thousands,  and  tlieir
concurrent  testimony  does  not  admit  of  dispute.


Let  us  now  consider  this  antagonism  from  a  philosophical
point  of  view.

As  I  have  already  said,  Hahnemann  perceived  that  the
prevailing  method  of  treating  disease  comprised  two
processes.

One  of  these  processes  was  what  was  then,  and  is  still,
called  the  "Rational."  It  involves  a  theory  of  the  cause
and  essential  nature  of  the  disease,  and  the  resort  to  some
CTCpcdient  which  would  be  likely  to  remove  this  supposed
cause  of  the  disease,  and  to  bring' about  a  contrary  state,
and  so  conduce  to  health.  Of  this  kind  was  Galen's
method,  which  divided  diseases  into  Aot,  cold,  moiit  and
dry;  made  a  similar  classification  of  remedies,  and  applied
to  each disease a remedy  from  a  class of  the contrary


78


ANTAOONESM BETWEEN


nature.  Less  glaringly  absurd,  but  in  no  way  different  in
nature,  are  the  theories  which  hold  that  certain  diseases,
for  example,  are  caused  by  accumulation  of  the  blood  in
certain  organs,  and  arc  to  be  cured  by  abstraction  of  b!ood  ;
that  others  depend  upon  what  is  imagjined  to  be  want  of
tone,  and  are  to  be  cured  by  remedies  which  are  assumed
to  be  tonics ;  that  others  are  due  to  a  languid  state  of  the
"animal  spirits,"  and  are  to  be  encountered  by  the  admin-
istration of  "  stiniulantSt"  etc.

That  tlicse  were  tlie  grounds  upon  which  the  prevalent
methods,  in  the  generation  precetling  Hahnemann,  were
based,  is  shown  by  Cullen's  theory  of  the  action  of  bark,
and  also  by  the  following  passage  from  "Sydenham  on
Pleurisy :  "

"  After  attentively  considering'  the  various  phenomena  of
this  disease,  1  think  it  is  a  fever  originating  in  a  proper  and
peculiar  inflammation  of  the  blood, — an  inflammation  by
means  of  which  nature  deposits  the  peccant  matter  in  the
pleura.  In  my  treatment,  I  have  the  following  aim  in
view :  to  repress  tlie  inflammation  of  the  blood,  and  to
divert  those  inflamed  particles  which  have  made  an  onset
on  the  lining  membrane  of  the  ribs  (and  which  have  lit
up  so  much  mischief)  into  their  proper  outlets.  For  this
rea-son.  my  sheet-anchor  is  b^ood -letting."

A  modification  of  this  process  is  that  which  is  known  as
the  Htppocratic  method  of  observing  and  following  the
indications  of  nature  ;  in  the  words  of  Sydenham,  "watch-
ing what  method  Nature  might  take,  with  the  intention  of
subduing  symptoms  by  fallowing  in  her  footsteps."  Accord-
ing to  this  method,  if,  in  any  disease,  recovery  was  preceded
by  a  critical  evacuation, — such  as  a  copious  sweat, — this
was  assumed  to  be  nature's  method,  and  sudorifics  were
accordingly  resorted  to  in  similar  cases.

Now,  independently  of  tlie  fatal  objection,  tliat  this
method  would  confine  our  curative  power  to  such  diseases
as  Nature  herself  \s,  wont  to  cure  by  critical  discharges,  etc.,—


HOM(EOPATHY  AND  ALLOPATHY.


79


the  very  diseases,  therefore,  in  which  medical  aid  could  be
best  dispensed  with, —  while  it  makes  no  provision  at  all  for
such  diseases  as  rarely  or  never  get  well  of  themselves, —
Such  as  nature  never  cures  by  critical  discharges, — tlie
very  cases,  therefore,  in  which  there  is  mos/  need  of  the
iolcrvcntion  of  art, — Sydenham  tells  us  that  he  "found  tliat
spontaneous  sweats  often  did  good."  "  But  these."  he  says,
"were  very  different  things  Uom  forced  ones."  And  Hahne-
mann showed  that  "  in  such  cases  the  critical  discharges
and  the  recovery  were  simultaneous ;  that  the  discharge  was
the  amsfquence  and  announcement  rather  than  the  cause  of
the  recovery  ;  and  that  to  infer  from  such  a  state  of  things
that  we  could  bring  about  a  cure  by  inducing  an  artificial
sweat,  would  be  tike  ringing  bells  and  lighting  bonfires  to
secure  a  victory  instead  of  to  annottnce  one."'

The  other  process,  which  Hahnemann  perceived  to  be
comprised  in  the  prevailing  methods  of  treatment,  was —
administering,  in  the  case  of  a  very  few  diseases,  of  which
fever  from  marsh  miiisma  may  be  taken  as  the  most  illustri-
ous example,  certain  remedies  which  had  been  discovered  to
possess,  in  some  unexplained  way,  a  power  to  cure  these  dis-
eases. Such  remedies  had  been  discovered  by  the  merest
accident.  No  method  was  known  by  which  others  could  be
discovered :  no  method  had  been  suggested  by  which  it
could  be  more  clearly  ascertained  and  defined  for  what  par-
ticular varieties  of  the  diseases  in  question  these  "  specifics,"
as  they  were  called,  were  especially  appropriate.

Hahnemann  showed  the  fallacy  of  the  philosophy  on
which  the  "  Rational"  method  was  based.  He  showed  that,
even  admitting  that  accumulations  of  blood  do  exist  as  tlie
"proximate  cause"  in  certain  diseased  conditions,  yet  these
accumulations  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  essential  cause  of
the  disease.  On  the  contrary,  that  cause  must  be  sought  in
that  force  which  regulates  the  circulation  and  preserves  its
[equilibrium.  This  force  must  have  been  set  into  abnormal
'Russell,  llitHry  and Htrtti if  tht  Art  sf  M(dui$u.—'" Sydenham."


80  ANTAGONISM BETWEEN

action,  in  order  that  an  accumulation  could  take  place  la  any
particular  organs ;  and,  therefore,  in  the  accumulations  we  see,
not  the  essential  cause  of  the  disease,  but  only  one  of  the  remits
of  that  cause.  To  undertake,  then,  by  abstraction  of  blood  to
remove  a  result  of  the  cause,  is  not  to  cure  the  disease  by
removing  the  cause,  but  only  to  seek  to  palliate  it  by  carry-
ing away  some  of  its  products.  He  showed,  further,  tfjat  this
abnormal  condition  of  one  of  the  dynamic  forces,  the  action
of  which  constitutes  the  life  of  the  body,  is  beyond  the
sphere  of  our  observation.  Like  the  healthy  action  of  these
same  forces — in  a  word,  like  life — it  is  an  ultimate  fact,
behind  which  we  cannot  penetrate,  and  which,  therefore,  we
cannot  study  as  a  cause  of  disease  and  seek  to  remove  l^
direct  rational  means.

But  Hahnemann  went  farther,  and  showed  that,  although
we  cannot  investigate  the  ultimate  nature  and  causes  of  those
modifications  of  the  dynamic  forces  of  the  organism,  wiiich
are  the  essential  causes  of  diseased  action,  and  then  remove
them,  as  a  "  rational"  method  would  propose  to  do,  yet  that
if,  while  a  disease  is  in  full  vigor,  we  administer  a  remedy
which  causes  a  sudden  cessation  of  the  morbid  action  with-
out any  abstraction  of  the  fluids  or  any  derivative  action
whatever,  we  are  then  justified  in  concluding  that  the  remedy
we  have  given  has,  in  some  way  or  other  peculiar  to  itself
reached  that  force  which  was  in  a  state  of  abnormal  action,
and  has  so  modified  it  as  to  bring  it  back  to  a  condition  of
normal  action ;  that  this  remedy  has  a  "  specific  "  effect  upon
that  force  under  certain  conditions ;  and  we  draw  this  con-
clusion upon  the  general  principle  that  when  an  effect  ceases
we  may  conclude  that  the  cause  has  ceased  to  act

And  Hahnemann  showed,  farther,  that  if  we  could  discover
substances  having  such  a  specific  action,  and  a  law  by  which
we  should  know  just  when  to  apply  them,  we  should  have
accomplished  the  much  needed  reform  in  medical  science.

He  appreciated  so  highly  the  value  of  the  specifics  of  which
medicine  was  already  in  possession,  that  he  consecrated  his


HOMCEOPATHY AKD ALLOPATHY.


Si


t


*


t


*e  to  the  task  of  discovering  a  method  of  increasing  their
number  and  of  reducing  their  use  to  a  system.

la  this  appreciation  of  the  direction  in  which  alone  im-
provement in  tlie  curing  of  diseases  was  to  be  looked  for,
Hahnemann  was  anticipated,  as  I  have  said,  by  Bacon,  Boyle
and  Sydenham.

Thus  Bacon,  in  the  "  Advancement  of  Learning,"  af^cr  a
sweeping  condemnation  of  the  tmphilosophical  method  of
Galen,  says  :  "  A  work  is  wanting  upon  the  cures  of  reput-
edly incurable  diseases,  that  physicians  of  eminence  and  res-
olution may  be  excited  and  encouraged  to  pursue  the  matter
as  far  as  the  nature  of  things  will  permit ;  since  to  pronounce
diseases  to  be  incurable  is  to  exhibit  ignorance  and  careless-
ness, as  it  were,  and  to  screen  ignorance  from  reproach."
And  again,  "  I  find  a  deficiency  in  the  receipts  of  propriety
respecting  the  cure  of  particular  diseases,"  Again,  *'  They
have  no  particular  medicines  which,  by  a  specific  property,
are  adapted  to  particular  diseases.  I  remember  a  learned
Jew  physician  who  used  to  say,  '  Your  European  physi-
cians are  like  bishops;  they  have  the  keys  of  binding
and  loosing— nothing  more!'  It  would  be  of  great  conse-
quence if  physicians  eminent  for  learning  and  practical  skill
vould  compile  a  work  of  approved  and  experienced  medi-
cines in  particular  diseases."

The  learned  Boyle,  the  father  of  chemistry,  who  had
devoted  much  time  to  the  study  of  medicine,  says :  "  I  can-
not forbear  to  wish  tliat  divers  learned  physicians  were  more
concerne<l  liian  they  seem  to  be  to  advance  the  curative  part
of  their  profession,  without  which,  three  at  least,  of  four
other  parts,  may  prove  indeed  delightful  and  l^ene^cial  to  the
physician,  but  will  be  of  very  little  use  to  ^c  patient,  whose
relief  is  yet  ^^  principal  end  of  physic.  I  had  much  rather
that  the  physician  of  any  friend  of  mine  should  keep  his
patient,  by  powerful  medicines,  from  dying,  than  tell  me
punctually  when  he  shall  die,  or  show  me  in  the  opened  car-
cass why,  it  is  supposed,  he  lived  no  longer."
7


f2  ASTTiV^inEX  1AJ»£13

-  r  oidsir  k:  rrsrr  ^irr  tzs:  tz**  Tranr  -jmig  a^ti-T

T-sw^iiit  tiK  r^K. sb:-* --jtif  f-irTi5y  " :ae

^T**:-5--n'^ If titt JCiilKTT. IT SJl  ZZ*l^ "HIS ZV
't*TT-i-r-  -a-'-t*—  "T-^.^iT KIT"'  TfZrt^

ppergji'is  re  --irTrrri-ir  ±ra^  ifssn  SIC  "  brri  beai  ^"r'irTtB-


r^r^-r  '-wr-f-p-  -^%*  ri^Tt'T'^  ^'f  *TT — ^-^  ic^Kr^irr^r:
:iE!:  £TT  rtib-r  jars  :»:*  dx  'z»z<±j-  _tis  rrT:-»=r  :3k  rcmzxiaQs-
ncK  nf  pusms  r:  tiUs  re  r:^r~  ">'— ^ — -^.;--  tjsr:  j^  =caert-
enc;  msx^ssz  the:  sctrnt  7t:<H.:cs  ic  rsctrz:  psrnruzr  3b^s


HOMEOPATHY  AND  ALLOPATHY.


8S


and  the  patient  restored  to  health,  or  else  wc  must  discover
a  specific,  hy  the  latter  method,  we  shall  attack  tlie  malady
directly."

It  may  be  observed  that  Sydenham  did  not  hesitate  to
choose  the  latter  method  so  soon  as  the  specific  virtues  of
Peruvian  bark  in  intermittent  fever  were  recognized,  and  that
he  was  the  chief  means  of  making  the  value  of  this  great
specific  known  in  England;  nor  have  the  profession  gener-
ally, since  his  day,  been  disposed  to  hesitate  tn  their  choice
between  the  Hippocratic  and  the  specific  methods  of  treat-
ing this  disease, — the  two  alternatives  which  Sydenham  so
clearly  lays  down.

He  continues :  '*  By  no  means  do  I  wish  to  express  myself
as  if  wise  and  learned  physicians  were  to  despair ;  as  if  they
were  to  think  out  no  better  modes  of  treatment,  and  as  if
they  were  to  throw  away  the  hope  of  discovering  nobler  and
more  potent  medicines  for  accelerating  the  cure  of  diseases.^
So  far  am  I  from  this  that  I  do  not  despair  of  finding  out,
even  myself,  some  sttch  medicines  and  some  such  method  of
curing."

These  things  which  Bacon,  Boyle  and  Sydenham  point
out  so  forcibly  as  the  desiderata  of  Medicine,  which  Syden-
ham did  not  despair  of  finding  out,  yet  died  \vithout  dis-
covering,—  these  "specific  medicines."  and  \X\\s  "  metkodus
medendi"  were  offered  to  the  profession  one  hundred  years
later  by  Hahnemann.

Dr.  I^ttsom  tells  us.  "the  great  Sydenham,  for  all  his
labors,  only  gained  the  sad  and  unjust  recompense  of  cal-
umny and  ignominy,  and  that  from  emulation  of  some  of  his
collegiate  brethren  and  others,  whose  indignation  at  length
arose  to  that  height  that  they  endeavored  to  banish  him  from
that  illustrious  society  (the  Koyal  College  of  Fhysicians),  as
guilty  of  medicinal  heresy."

And  yet  Sydenham  only  longed  for.  and  looked  for^vard
to,  the  discovery  of  specifics  and  of  the  law  of  their  employ-
ment He  was  the  Moses  of  the  specific  method. It  was,


84


ANTAGONISM  BETWEEN


iherefore,  in  the  regular  course  of  historic  sequence  that
Hahnemann,  the  Joshua  of  tliat  method,  who  led  the  hosti
of  .iCsculapius  into  the  promised  land  of  which  the  Moses
had  had  a  glorious  vision,  should  be  unsparingly  denounced
as  a  heretic  and  actually  banished  from  every  well-regulated
society!

This,  then,  is  the  aniagonisnt.  Hahnemann  shows  that
specifics  arc  to  be  discovered  by  ascertaining  the  effects  of
drugs  upon  healthy  persons;  that  they  are  to  be  applied  by
giving  to  a  sick  person  such  a  drug  as  would  produce,  in  the
healtliy  subject,  symptoms  similar  to  those  of  the  sick  per-
son. He  presents  this  discovery  to  the  profession  as  some-
thing in  advance  of  present  knowledge.  They  refuse  to
accept  or  even  to  test  it,  and  they  denounce  him  for  ofTcrii^
it On  which  side  lies  the  onus  of  the  antagonism  ?

But  it  may  be  said,  however  true  these  statements  are  as
regards  the  age  for  which  Hahnemann  wrote,  the  scientific
progress  of  the  last  fifty  years  has  changed  all  that.  It  Mas
changed  the  names  of  things  and  little  besides  in  therapeutics.
Wc  hear  no  more,  it  is  true,  of  "temperaments"  and
"humors,"  of  the  "animal  spirits,"  of  the  "  Arccehus,"  but
instead,  the  talk  is  now  of  "  the  dyscrasias,"  of  "  diatheses,"
of  the  "cellular  pathology,"  of  "analogies"  and  "heterol-
ogies."

There  is  the  same  endeavor  to  draw  from  a  theory  of  the
tsuHtial  nature  of  the  disease  a  rational  indication  of  cure,
of  wluch  Hahnemann  exposed  the  fallacy  and  impossibility.
Indeed,  Sir  John  Forbes  affirms,  in  1846,  "The  progress  of
therapeutics  (the  cure  of  diseases)  during  all  the  centuries
that  have  elapsed  since  the  days  of  Hippocrates,  has  been
less  than  that  achieved  by  the  elementary  sciences  of  medi-
cine during  the  last  fifly  years.  This  department  of  medi-
cine must  indeed  be  regarded  as  yet  in  its  merest  intancy."

It  should  be  clearly  understood,  and  I  state  it  most
emphatically,  that  all  expositions  of  the  insufficiency  and


HOMCEOPATHY  AND  ALLOPATHY.


85


¥


¥


i


the  chaotic  state  of  the  prevalent  system  of  medicine —
whether  by  the  outspoken  leaders  of  the  Old  School,  Hke
Forbes,  or  by  Hahnemann  and  his  followers — refer  ex-
clusively to  the  department  of  therapeutics,  the  science  and
art  of  curing  diseases  by  medicines.  In  the  development  of
the  natural  history  of  the  healthy  and  of  the  diseased  body,
that  is  to  say,  in  the  sciences  of  physiology  and  physio-
logical anatomy,  and  of  pathology  and  pathological  anatomy,
as  well  as  tn  the  departments  of  hygiene,  surgery,  obstetrics
and  medical  cliemistr)',  medicine  has  fully  kept  pace  with
the  wonderful  progress  of  scientific  knowledge  in  our  day.
We  proht  by  the  labors  of  our  colleagues  in  these  branches,
and  accord  them  full  recognition  and  admiration.  But  the
great  /«(/  and  aijWt  of  all  these  things  is  to  cure  di.^eases.
If  they  afford  no  facilities  for  this,  they  are  profitless  to  man-
kind. Now,  if  the  same  men  who  have  brought  these
collateral  sciences  to  such  perfection  have  been  unable  to
bring  therapeutics  out  of  what  Forbes  calls  its  present  chaos
of  ''merest  infancy,"  is  not  the  conclusion  irresistible  that
they  have  not  yet  got  hold  of  the  right  clue — of  the  true
philosophy  of  the  science  ?

Tliere  is  even  a  greater  indisposition  in  our  day,  than  in
the  time  of  Boyle,  to  admit  the  value  and  to  stimulate  the
discovery  of  specifics.  Nor  is  this  wonderful ;  for  specifics
obstinately  refuse  to  range  themselves  under  any  rational
hypothesis.  They  exert  a  peculiar,  in.scrutable  action  upon
certain  organs  when  in  certain  conditions,  and  more  than
this  nobody  can  say  of  them.  And  yet,  notwithstanding
their  philosophical  aversion  to  them,  the  practical  sagacity
erf"  our  colleagues,  with  which  they  keep  their  philosophy
strangely  at  variance,  leads  them  to  seize  eagerly  upon
^ledfics  whenever  these  are  presented  to  their  notice.
Witness  the  avidity  uith  which  they  have  availed  themselves
of  Iodine,  Ergot,  Cod  Liver  Oil,  the  Hypophosphites,  Iron,
Vcratrum  viridc,  as  welt  as  of  Nickel  and  Oxalate  of  Cerium
which  the  Houdin  of  orthodox  medicine  has  lately  intro-


86  ANTAGONISM BETWEEN

duced  to  them.  Nay,  people  do  say  that  our  learned  friends
of  the  Old  School  make  frequent  use,  "  upon  the  sly,"  of
Aconite  as  a  specific  in  fever,  and  of  Nux  vomica  and  of
Pulsatilla  as  specifics  in  gastrodynia  and  dysmenorrhcca,
etc.,  etc., — remedies  of  the  specific  properties  of  which  their
only  knowledge  is  derived  from  the  labors  of  Hahnemann.

It  is  true,  they  undertake  to  give  a  "  rational "  theory  of
the  action  of  these  specific  remedies,  but  with  as  little  suc-
cess as  Cullen  met  with  when  he  attempted  to  explain  the
febrifuge  action  of  Peruvian  bark.  It  is  all  comprised  in
the  doggerel  explication  that  Moli^re  gives  of  the  hypnotic
effects  of  opium :

"  Donundfttur  caasam  et  ratiooem  qnare
Opium  fftcit  dormire.
A  quoi  reipondeo.
Quia  est  in  co
Virtns  donnitiva,
Cujus  est  natura
Sensus  aisoupire."

Now,  as  in  the  days  of  Hahnemann,  there  is  an  antagonism
between  the  Homoeopathists  and  the Old School. The
former  hold  out  to  the  latter  what  they  believe  to  be  that
method  which  has  ever  been  a  desideratum  in medicine.
The  latter  refuse  even  to  examine  it,  and  expel  the  Homce-
opathists  from  all  associations  over  which  they  hold  control
We  cannot  unite  with  them  in  any  associated  labors  without
ignoring  and  disavowing  what  we  believe  to  be  the  truet
theory  and  practice  of  the  all-important  part  of  medical^
science — the  science  of  therapeutics. Tkey  will  net  uni^-^
with  us  in  associated  labors for  the  development  of  th^
science.

Had  Hahnemann  done  nothing  more  than  devise  a  meth^^
of  discovering  and  using  specifics  in  the  gross  and  what  ^
sale  sense  in  which  the  term  was  and  is  understood  and  us^^
by  the  Old  School  of  medicine,  he  would  still  have  be^^
entitled  to  the  gratitude  of  mankind. He  did  iar  more.


HOMCEOPATHY AND ALLOPATHY.


»7


He  perceived  that,  in  the  dominant  school,  a  specific  was
set  apart  as  adapted  to  any  individual  member,  indiscrimi-
nately, of  a  large  nosological  group  [of  diseases];  that  bark,
for  example,  was  held  to  be  the  specific  for  malarious  fevers
in  general,  and  that  no  account  was  taken  of  individual
devialwns  within  the  limits  of  this  group.  Whereas,  in
point  of  fact,  he  perceived  what  is  well  known  %vithin  the
profession  and  without  it.  that  although  bark  is  really  the
specific  for  many,  indeed  for  the  majority  of  malarious
fevers,  it  is  not  so  for  ail ;  since  many  cases  cannot  be  cured
or  even  improved  by  its  use.

Now,  this  wholesale  way  of  regarding  diseases,  in  groups,
was  the  logical  and  inevitable  consequence  of  the  Old  School
theories  of  disease  and  of  the  method  of  cure.  When  Galen
propounded  the  doctrine  that  all  diseases  depend  upon  one
of  four  conditions,  heat,  cold,  dr>'ness,  moisture,  it  was  an
inevitable  consequence  that  he  should  disregard  every  phe-
nomenon presented  by  his  patients,  except  such  as  served
to  indicate  that  the  case  belonged  to  one  of  the  above  cate-
gories, and  that  he  should  have  but  four  classes  of  remedial
agents  appropriate  to  these  categories.

eases to  certain  patliologico- anatomical  states  as  their  essen-
tial causes,  it  is  manifest  that  whatever  varieties  tlic  case  of
each  one  of  a  dozen  patients  may  present,  must  be  disre-
garded,  provided  the  pathologico* anatomical  condition  be
the  same  in  all,  for  they  arc  grouped  on  the  basis  of  this
condition,  and  the  indication  for  the  cure  is  drawn  from  the
existence  of  this  condition,  and  must  necessarily  be  the  same
for  all.

Now,  just  as  any  spot  upon  the  surface  of  the  globe  may
be  approached  by  an  almost  infinite  number  of  roads,  and
yet,  when  the  traveler  has  reached  the  spot,  there  shall  be
nothing  in  the  mere  fact  of  his  presence  there  to  indicate
with  certainty  the  road  by  which  he  has  come  thither,  so  the
ixnvz  pat hohgico -anatomical  result  may  issue  from  the  most


88


ANTAGONISM BETWEEN


multifarious  fiat fufhfficai  j>/v£esses,  which  processes,  however,
leave  no  sign  in  the  rau/t.  IC,  Uicn,  the  mode  of  treatment
be  based  on  the  result,  it  can  take  no  account  of  this  variety
in  the  procisus.

A  wholesale  generalization,  then,  of  diseases  and  of  reme-
dies is  inevitable  (lom  the  philosophy  of  the  "  Rational"
method.

The  common  experience  of  the  community  teaches  men
that  diseases  to  which  the  same  name  is  given  may  present
in  diflerent  persons  an  entirely  diflcrcnt  aspect  John  Doe
and  Richard  Roe  both  have  rheumatism,  but  their  symptoms
and  whole  condition  are  so  entirely  different  that  no  one
would  have  imagined  them  to  have  the  same  disease,  if  the
doctor  had  not  said  so.  The  path  ologtco-ana torn  leal  condi-
tion, however,  is  the  same  in  both  (viz.,  the  altered  condition
of  the  blood),  and  consequently  the  rational  indications  for
the  cure  are  identical  in  the  two  cases.  If  the  doctor  he
true  to  the  philosophy  of  his  method,  he  treats  them  alike,
notwithstanding  the  difference  in  their  symptoms  and  ap-
parent condition.  But  I  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  which
is  familiar  to  every  one,  that  every  sagacious  and  long-
headed physician  of  the  Old  School  pays  the  less  regard  to
the  rules  of  his  art  the  more  experience  he  acquires  at  the
bedside.

In  treating  disease  he  "  feeU  his  way,"  as  the  saying  is;
he  relies  on  his  "  practical  tact  and  experience,"  and  oftea
deviates  widely  from  the  rules  of  practice  as  they  are  deduced
in  the  books  from  the  theory  of  the  art ;  he  trusts  less  and
less  implicitly  to  a  path ologico- anatomical  basis  of  treatment,
and  more  and  more  to  "  general  indications,"  by  which  he
means  the  aura  of  the  symptoms  of  each  individual  case.
In  trutli,  experience  has  taught  him  the  fallacy  of  the  science
of  therapeutics,  as  founded  on  the  "  Rational "  basis.

Now,  if  this  were  a  tnu  science,  would  not  experience
rather  confirm  tlie  practitioner's  faith  in  it,  and  add  to  his
skill  in  applying  it?


HOMOiOPATHY AND  aLLOPATHV.


S9


When  on  the  other  hand  we  cast  aside  all  endeavors  to
base  a  method  of  treatment  upon  a  theory  of  disease:  when
we  give  over  all  attempts  to  discover  the  inscrutable,  casen-
tial  nature  and  cause  of  diseases,  and  confine  our  observa-
tions to  the  phenomena  of  morbid  action,  whether  these  be
materiai  or  functional,  then  wc  can  take  into  account  the
pat kologieal  processes  as  well  as  the  path  ologico-ana torn  ical
rtsults.  We  are  tlun  in  condition  to  give  due  weight  to  the
peculiarities  of  each  individual  case  of  disease,  to  study  i/,
as  under  other  circumstances  groups  are  studied,  and  to  give
due  attention  to  the  modifying  idiosyncrasies  of  the  indi-
vidual.

Hence,  under  our  method  alone  is  an  absolute  individual-
ization of  disease  possible.  Such  a  method  of  studying  dis-
ease, however,  would  be  barren  under  the  Old  School  method
of  treatment,  even  with  specifics.  For  the  properties  of  spe-
cifics were  known  to  the  Old  School  only  with  reference  to
large  and  ill-defined  groups  of  diseases.  By  us,  on  the  other
hand,  specifics  are  studied  in  tlie  cfTects  which  they  produce
upon  the  healthy  subject,  precisely  as  diseases  are  studied  in
the  effects  which  morbific  causes  produce  upon  the  sick.
The  same  strict  individualization,  tlicn,  is  practicable  with
regard  to  specifics  that  we  have  seen  to  be  necessary  in  the
study  of  diseases.  It  is  not  only  practicable — it  is  fruitful
of  the  richest  returns.

The  case,  therefore,  is  not  half  stated  when  we  say  that
Hahnemann  discovered  the  method  of  specifics.  He  taught
us  how  to  discover  and  apply,  and  showed  us  the  necessity  of
^plying,  an  individual  specific  to  each  individual  case  of  dis-
ease, as  studied  in  the  totality  of  its  phenomena  and  without
regard  to  the  nosological  group  to  which,  for  purposes  of
classification,  the  case  might  be  assignable.

As  a  necessary  consequence  of  this  individualization,  Hah-
nemann taught  the  value  of  subjective  symptoms.  By  these,
we  mean  those  symptoms  of  which  the  physician  becomes
cognizant  through  the  sensibilities  of  the  patient Among


go  ANTAGONISM  BETWEEN

them  are  all  the  varieties  of  pains  and  abnormal  sensatioiu
which  accompany  disease.  These  symptoms  were  previously
disregarded  and  are  still  considered  as  of  no  value  by  tlie
"rationzd"  or  "physiological"  school  of  medicine.  Thus,  Pro-
fessor Bock,  of  Leipsic,  in  his  work  on  Diagnosis  (1853),
says  :  "  Only  the  objective  symptoms — of  which  the  prac-
titioner derives  a  knowledge  by  the  use  of  his  own  five
senses,  by  sight,  touch,  hearing,  mensuration,  percussion,  and
by  microscopic  and  chemical  examinations — are  of  any
value  to  the  physician.  The  subjective  symptoms  are  in  tiu
highest  degree  uncertain  and  treacherous."  In  other  words,
the  disease  is  to  be  studied  in  all  cases  just  as  the  phenomena
of  an  inanimate  plant  or  mineral  are  studied ;  the  case  of  an
intelligent  and  self-possessed  patient,  just  as  that  of  a  patient
whose  intelligence  is  dormant  under  the  cloud  of  a  typhoid
fever !

Now,  everybody  knows  that  pains  and  various  sensations
different  from  those  of  health,  make  up  a  lai^e  and  impor-
tant part  in  every  case  of  illness.  And  what  are  these
sensations  ?  Unquestionably  they  are  the  results  of  abnor-
mal action  of  the  sentient  nerves,  or  else  they  are  evidences
conveyed  by  the  sentient  nerves  of  abnormal  action  in  some
of  the  organs  of  the  body.

It  is  in  the  highest  degree  unphilosophical  to  arbitrarily
disregard  and  cast  aside  any  of  the  phenomena  of  disease.
If  they  find  no  place  in  our  system  of  medicine,  why,  so
much  the  worse  for  our  system  !  If  they  cannot  be  made
available  under  our  method  of  treating  disease,  this  fact  is
prima  facie  evidence  that  our  method  is  defective !  Fur-
thermore, every  physician  and  every  intelligent  person
knows,  by  observation  and  experience,  that  pains  and  abnor-
mal sensations  almost  always  precede  any  material  or
organic  evidence  of  disease.  Common  sense  teaches  every
man  the  value,  in  medical  treatment,  of  the  maxim,  "  Obsta
principiisl"  Diseases  should  come  under  treatment  at
the  earliest  possible  moment Some  that  are  curable  at  an


HOMCEOPATHY AND ALLOPATHY.


91


,  early  period  are  well  known  to  be  incurable  by  our  present
resources.  If  allowed  to  establish  themselves  firmly.  But
the  first  evidences  of  nearly  all  diseases  consist  of  subjective
symptoms.  A  method,  therefore,  which  docs  not  provide
for  the  employment  of  these  symptoms  in  the  determination
of  the  treatment,  cannot  furnish  means  for  encountering  dis-
ease at  the  very  outset.

And,  appealing  again  to  the  experience  of  the  community
to  bear  me  out,  I  say  that  honest  and  candid  practitioners
of  tlie  Old  School  often  say  to  their  patients,  "  Wait  a  little
until  your  disease  shall  have  become  developed, — at  present
I  know  not  what  to  do."  Why  does  he  not  know  what  to
do  ?  This  question  touches  the  weak  point  in  the  philoso-
phy of  the  physiological  school.  It  is  because  the  patient,
as  yet,  presents  only  "  subjective  symptoms,"  which  are
evidence  of  "dynamic  changes"  only, — because  he  cannot
form  a  theory  of  the  cause  of  the  disease  until  the  disease
has  progressed  far  enough  to  furnish  htm  with  some  material
results  of  these  dynamic  changes. — in  a  word,  with  objective
symptoms-  This  instance  is  another  evidence  of  the  insuf-
ficiency of  the  Old  School  philosophy  of  medicine,  while  at
the  same  time  it  shows  that,  so  long  as  they  accept  this
philosophy,  the  physiological  school  are  consistent  and
logical  in  excluding  subjective  symptoms  from  consideration.

Not  a  few  diseases — the  neuroses,  for  example — consist
almost  entirely  of  subjective  symptoms.  In  these,  the  phys-
iological  physician  admits  his  inability  to  institute  a  rational
treatment,  and  he  resorts  at  once  to  specifics.  But  if  the
specific  method  of  treatment  is  available  against  diseases  for
which  the  physiological  method  fai!<i,  as  well  as  for  all  other
cases,  is  it  not  confessedly  the  universal  method  ?

Hahnemann's  method,  which  avails  itself  of  all  the  phe-
nomena which  the  patient  prcscnts.^holding  that  all,
together,  make  up  the  disease, — sets  a  true  value  upon  sub-
jective symptoms.  Not  requiring  a  theory  of  the  nature
and  cause  of  the  disease  as  a  preliminary  to  the  treatment,


92


ANTAGONISM  BETWEEN


but  basing  the  treatment  directly  upon  the  phenomena  wbkb i
the  patient  presents,  it  can  proceed  to  cure  %  patient  wboj
presents  only  subjective  symptoms  as  readily  and  as
as  one  in  whom  these  have  given  place  to  objeclivf  9>'r
toms.

More  than  diis,  Hahnemann  shoured  the  value  of  snl
jective  symptoms  in  the  aid  which  they  afford  us  in  infl*-
vidiializing'  cases  of  disease,  and  thereby  enabling  us  to
select  a  specific  for  each  individual  case  with  more  absolute
precision.  Indeed,  he  showed  that  it  is  only  by  means  of
subjective  symptoms  that  the  application  of  individual  spe-
cifics is  possible.  It  has  already  been  remarked  that  the
material  or  organic  changes  in  the  tissues  of  the  body,
which  furnish  the  objectixt  symptoms,  may  have  resulted
from  any  one  of  a  number  of  pathohgical  procrsus  or
abnormal  alterations  of  function,  and  that  they  give  us  in
t/tnnselves  no  means  of  knowing  from  what  particular  abnor-
mal process  they  resulted.  Now,  unless  we  know  tliis,  we
cannot  apply  specifics  with  exactness.  The  physiological
school  have  no  means  of  knowing  it.  and  therefore  they,
very  logically,  do  not  undertake  to  apply  specifics  with
exactness  to  individualize  cases  of  disease.  But  the  stibjettixv
symptoms  enable  us  to  take  cognizance  of  these  patho-
logical processes,  these  abnormal  changes  of  function,  and
hence  the  value  of  these  symptoms.  To  Hahnemann
belongs  the  honor  of  having  demonstrated  this  value,  and
of  having  shown  us  how  to  avail  ourselves  of  it  fl

To  Hahnemann,  again,  belongs  the  credit  of  having-
insisted  upon  the  propriety  of  using  only  one  remedy  at  a
time.  As  this,  however,  was  clearly  expressed  by  Boyle,
and  is  admitted  by  Sir  John  Forbes,  1  shall  content  myself
with  quoting  their  words.  Boyle  says  (1654):  "  It  seems
a  great  impediment  to  tlie  further  discovery  of  tl»e  virtues  of  t
simples,  to  confound  so  many  of  tliem  in  compositions;  fi^|
in  a  mixture  of  a  great  number  of  ingredients,  it  is  hard  to
know  what  is  the  operation  of  each  or  any  of  them,  so


HOM<EOPATHy  AND  ALLOPATHY.


93


I  fear  there  will  scarce,  in  a  long  time,  be  any  progress  made
in  the  discovery  of  the  virtues  of  simple  drugs,  till  they  either
be  opener  employed  singly  or  be  but  few  of  them
employed  in  a  single  remedy."  And  Forbes  says,  in
1846:  "Our  system  here  is  greatly  and  radically  wrong.
Our  officinal  formulx  arc  already  most  absurdly  complex,
and  our  fashion  is  to  double  and  redouble  the  existing  com-
picxitics.  This  system  is  a  most  serious  impediment  in  the
way  of  ascertaining  the  precise  and  peculiar  powers  (if  any)
of  the  individual  drugs,  and  thus  interferes  in  the  most
important  manner  with  the  progress  of  therapeutics."

And,  Anally,  Hahnemann  demonstrated  these  facts:

xst  That  the  curative  potoer  of  a  specific  remedy  is  not  in
the  direct  ratio  of  its  material  quantity.  This  had  been  sus-
pected by  his  predecessor  Sydenham,  with  respect  to  bark.

2d.  That  a  drug  exerts  a  more  powerful  effect  on  those
organs  for  which  it  has  a  specific  affinit>'  when  these  organs
are  sick  than  when  they  are  healthy  ;  whence  it  follows  that
smaller  doses  of  the  same  drug  are  required  to  atre  diseases
for  which  it  is  the  specific  remedy,  than  would  be  needed  to
produce  their  symptoms  in  the  healthy  person,

5d.  That  not  only  are  smaller  doses  of  specifics  required
to  cure  diseases  than  to  produce  their  sjTUptoms  in  the
healthy,  but  that,  when  the  symptoms  of  the  diseased  organ-
ism are  similar  to  those  produced  in  the  healthy  subject  by
a  given  drug,  then  this  drug  will  act  curativcly  on  that
organism  in  doses  so  small  that  they  would  hardly  produce
any  effect  whatever  on  the  healthy  organism.

But  how  small  ?  This  is  the  practical  question.  A  priori,
Hahnemann  said,  *'  The  smaller  the  better,  provided  they
only  cure  the  disease  in  the  quickest  and  surest  manner."
He  experimented  for  the  purpose  of  reaching  definite  con-
clusions, and  out  of  these  facts  and  experiments  came  the
doctrine  and  practice  of  the  little  doses. And  I  repeat  that

£vho  follow  Hahnemann most closely, individualize
ases  most  strictly,  and  select  the  individual  specific


94  ANTAGONISM BETWEEN

with  most  exactness,  will  surely  arrive,  as  all  such  have
done,  at  the  conclusion,  on  this  subject,  to  which  Hahne-
mann came.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  first  and  second  facts  I  mentioned
respecting  the  dose  of  specifics  did  not  escape  the  acute  mind
of  Robert  Boyle.  He  says :  "  To  show  you  tfiat  a  distem-
pered body  is  an  en^ne  disposed  to  receive  alterations
under  such  impressions  as  will  make  none  upon  a  sound
body,  let  me  put  you  in  mind  that  those  subtle  streams
that  wander  through  the  air  before  considerable  changes  cS
weather  disclose  themselves,  are  wont  to  be  painfully  felt  by
many  sickly  persons,  and  more  constantly  by  men  that  have
had  great  bruises  or  wounds,  in  the  parts  that  have  been  so
hurt, — though  neither  are  healthy  men  at  all  incommoded
thereby,  nor  do  those  themselves  that  have  been  hurt  fed
anything  in  their  sound  parts  whose  tone  or  texture  has  not
been  altered  or  enfeebled  by  outward  violence."

If  quantity  be  accepted  as  the  measure  of  power,  then  the
question  of  the  dose  must  be  resolved  by  the  well-known
laws  of  physics.

But  so  soon  as  it  is  admitted  that  the  power  of  a  drug  is
not  determined  by  its  quantity  alone,  but  also  by  its  form,
and  still  more  by  the  condition  of  tke  patient  and  by  .the  rela-
tion of  the  specific  properties  of  the  drug  to  the  diseased
condition  against  which  it  is  administered,  then  the  whole
question  is  withdrawn  from  the  domain  oi physics  and  is  left
open  to  be  settled  by  experiment.

Now,  it  is  admitted  by  all  medical  men,  that  some  drugs
at  least,  exert  their  specific  influence  more  speedily  and  more
powerfully  when  given  in  small  doses  than  when  given  in  large
doses,  as,  for  example,  Mercury,  and  according  to  Dr.  Chris-
tison,  Oxalic  acid,  which  shows  that  there  is  not  always  a
direct  ratio  between  power  and  quantity.

Moreover,  all  medical  men  agree  that  in  certain  morbid
states,  the  body  is  much  more  sensitive  to  the  specific  action
of  certain  remedies  than  it  is,  in  certain  other  morbid  states.


HOMEOPATHY AND ALLOPATHY.


95


»
¥


»


to  the  same  remedies.  The  phrase  that  "  such  or  such  a
disease  does  not  l>car  Mercury  well,"  is  familiar  to  the  pro-
fessional ear.  This  shows  that  the  condition  of  the  patient
has  something  to  do  in  determining  the  power  with  which  a
certain  dose  of  a  specific  shall  manifest  its  action,  and  con-
versely that  tills  condition  should  be  taken  into  consideration
in  determining  the  dose.

These  two  facts  show  that  the  whole  question  of  the  dose
was,  at  the  time  of  Hahnemann's  writing,  an  open  one,  to
be  settled  by  experiment  alone.

And,  as  Hahnemann  showed  that  those  morbid  conditions
of  the  system  in  which  a  specific  exerts  the  most  power  in
small  doses, — in  which,  in  other  words,  the  susceptibility  of
the  system  to  the  specific  is  the  greatest, — are  precisely  those
in  which  the  symptoms  are  similar  to  those  which  the  same
drug  would  produce  in  a  healihy  person,  it  folloivs  that  no
experiment  can  be  valid  on  the  subject  of  the  dose  which
docs  not  take  into  consideration  the  condition  of  the  patient
at  the  time,  and  which  does  not  require,  as  preliminary  con-
ditions, first,  that  the  subject  of  the  experiment  shall  be  sick,
and  second,  that  the  symptoms  of  the  sickness  shall  be  simi-
lar to  those  which  the  drug  with  which  the  experiment  is
made  would  produce  on  tiie  healthy  subject.

In  none  of  the  experiments  on  which  our  opponents  base
their  objections  to  the  dose  of  Homoeopathy  have  these  con-
ditions been  observed.

In  no  case  in  which  they  have  been  observed  has  tlie
result  been  adverse  to  that  at  which  Hahnemann  arrived.

But,  in  truth,  these  objections  depend  in  general  not  so
much  on  the  result  of  experiments  as  on  what  is  called  the
a /Priori  improbability,  and  upon  the  seeming  simplicity  and
triviality  of  the  means  employed  in  proportion  to  the  end

ight  to  be  attained.

improbability  exists  only  in  the  minds  of  those  who
reckon  respecting  tlie  living  organism  as  they  reckon  respect-
ing an  inanimate  machine,  employing  the  rules  of  physics.


96


ANTAGONISM  BETWEEN


Let  me  quote  agntn  from  Boyle:  "Whereas,"  he  says^  "ft
is  objected  that  so  small  a  quantity  of  the  matter  of  a  specific
as  is  able  to  retain  its  nature,  when  it  arrives  at  the  part  it
should  work  on,  must  have  little  or  no  power  to  relieve  it;
this  difficulty  will  not  stagger  those  who  know  how  unsafe
it  is  to  measure  the  power  that  natural  agents  may  have  to
work  upon  such  an  engine  as  the  human  body  by  their
bulk,  ratlier  than  by  their  subtlety  and  activity."

And  as  concerns  the  relative  simplicity  and  triviality  of
the  dose,  listen  to  the  practical  Sydenham.

Speaking  of  the  success  of  his  new  plan  of  treating  rheuma-
tism with whey, instead  of by  blood-letting,  he says:
"  Should  any  one  despise  this  method  for  its  simpticUy,  1
would  have  him  to  know  that  weak  minds  only,  seem  things^
far  b^ing  clear  and  plain. • ♦ • The  usual  pomp  of
medicine  exhibited  over  dying  patients  is  like  the  garl
of  a  beast  at  the  sacrifice."  ^

Gentlemen  of  the  Society:  In  the  torch-races  of  ancicnF
Greece  the  participants  ran  with  lighted  torches,  each  striv-
ing to  preserve  the  flame  alive,  and  to  hand  his  torch  uncx- !
tinguished  to  his  successor.  If  the  light  went  out  in  hisj
hands  he  was  dishonored.  This  was  done  in  memory  of
Prometheus,  who  first  brought  fire  from  heaven  for  the
benefit  of  men.  M

We  have  received  from  the  generation  of  the  pupils  and
successors  of  Hahnemann  the  blazing  torch  which  the
Prometheus  of  our  system  lighted  at  the  altar  of  Eternal
Truth.  Our  honor  depends  on  the  care  with  which  we
cherish  it,  and  the  state  in  which  we,  in  turn,  transmit  tt  to
those  who  shall  follow  us.

The  especial  direction  which  our  labors  should  take  is
determined  by  the  peculiarities  of  our  method.

\Vc  arc  to  increase  the  number  of  specific  remedies. Wei
are  to  labor  diligently,  as  our  predecessors  have  done,  to
increase  our  materia  mcdica,  until  we  shall  have  ascertained


*  Kossell,  Hittary  and  Hintt  of  the  Arte/  Mtdicitu.


HOMCEOPATHY AND  ALLOPATHY.


97


the  specific  remedial  properties  of  all  substances  capable  of

bctn^  used  in  treating  diseases.

But  more  especially  arc  we  to  labor  to  make  the  knowl-
ledge  we  thus  acquire  of  new  specifics,  and  the  knowledge

wc  already  possess  of  such  as  wc  now  use,  more  exact  and
[dcAnitc;  until  we  shall  possess  an  exhaustive  knowledge
[of  each  remedy,  and  also  such  a  differential  knowledge  as

shall  put  us  in  possession  of  all  the  points  of  resemblance
land  difference  between  each of  our  remedies  and  all tlie

And  it  is  in  this  particular  province  that  there  is  the
£^atest  present  need  of  labor.  Our  materia  medica  is  being
filled  with  the  names  of  drugs  of  which  a  few  general  proper-
tics  are  loosely  recorded,  but  rcspcctint;  which  no  trxact  or
exhaustive  knowledge  has  been  attempted  to  be  gained.
All  this  must  be  changed  if  wc  would  establish  and  maintain
a  reputation  at  all  commensurate  with  the  demands  of
modem  science.

L Finally,  wc  must  bring  to  bear  upon  our  study  of  materia

'medica  and  of  symptomatology*  all  that  is  useful  in  the
labors  of  the  physiological  school  of  medicine,  in  the  depart-
ment  of  the  collateral  medical  sciences  of  physiology,  pathol>
ogy,  chemistry  and  physical  diagnosis.

For,  chaotic  as  are  the  thcraixrutics  of  this  school,  and
based  on  a  false  philosophy,  we  must  not  suffer  this  fact  to
blind  us  tu  the  wonderful  progress  made  by  it  in  these
collateral  sciences,  and  which  are  as  valuable  to  us  as  to  it.

I  They  supply  the  means  of  exact  observation.  Wc  need,
then,  in  part,  to  rrprove  our  materia  medica.  availing  our-
selves of  these  improved  means  of  observation ;  and  we
must  employ  tlie  same  in  uur  examination  of  the  sick.

I  We  are  called  also  to  give  ourselves  to  the  study  of  sud-
jective  symptoms.  This  is  our  especial  province,  because
the  physiological  school  discards  these  symptoms.  I'rof.
Bdclr  says  they  are  "di^tatU  to  understand  and  apt  to
deceive."
S


98 ANTAGONISM  BET.  HOMCEOPATHY  AND  ALLOPATHY.

I  have  yet  to  learn  that  a  study  is  to  be  avoided  because
it  is  difBcult !  or  that  a  precious  tool  should  be  cast  aside
because  it  requires  a  skillful  hand  to  use  it

The  import  of  subjective  symptoms,  their  connection  with
each  other,  their  physiological  and  pathological  significance,
are  all  matters  which  it  is  indispensably  necessary  for  us  to
elaborate  and  master.

And,  last  of  all,  the  still  open  question  of  the  dose
demands  our  earnest  study.

Conscientious,  untiring  labor  in  these  departments  will
enable  us  to  hold  with  honor  our  place  in  the  great  race,
and  to  hand  our  torch,  still  blazing,  to  our  successors.

We  shall  thus  do  our  part  toward  making  good  the  confi-
dent expectation  of  our  master  respecting  his  system.

"  Our  art,"  says  he,  "  needs  no  political  lever,  no  worldly
badges  of  honor,  in  order  to  become  something.  Amid  all
the  rank  and  unsightly  weeds  that  flourish  round  about  i^
it  grows  gradually  from  a  small  acorn  to  a  slender  tree;
already  its  lofty  summit  overtops  the  rank  vegetation  around
it  Only  have  patience !  It  strikes  its  roots  deep  under
ground,  gains  strength  imperceptibly,  but  all  the  more  cer-
tainly, and  in  due  time  it  will  grow  up  to  a  lofty  God's  oak,
stretching  its  great  arms,  that  no  longer  bend  to  the  storm,
far  away  into  all  the  regions  of  the  earth ;  and  mankind,
who  have  hitherto  been  tormented,  will  be  refreshed  under:
its  beneficent  shadows."


RELATION  OF  PATHOLOGY  TO
THERArEUTICS.'


The  question  of  the  Relation  of  Pathalogj'  to  Therapeutics
is  one  of  exceeding  importance,  if  for  no  other  reason  than
this :  that,  by  a  very  large  portion  of  the  medical  profession,
it  is  commonly  held  that  the  whole  science  of  Therapeutics
is  based,  in  its  general  principles  and  in  its  special  appHca-
tions,  upon  the  science  and  the  facts  of  Pathology.

Before  beginning  the  discussion  of  this  subject,  it  is  neces-
sary to  define  the  terms  used  in  stating  the  question,  as  well
OS  certain  kindred  terms.

The  study  of  the  tissues  and  organs  of  which  the  healthy
human  body  is  composed  constitutes  the  science  of  Physi-
ological Anatomy.  It  may  be  pursued  upon  the  living  or
the  dead  body,  provided  the  death  resulted  from  violence  and
not  from  disease.

The  tissues  and  organs  of  the  healthy  body  are  so  fashioned
as  to  perform,  each,  a  special  work.  This  act  of  performing
its  special  work  is  called  the  function  of  an  organ.  An
organ  can  act  only  during  the  life  of  the  individual.  Func-
tions, therefore,  can  be  predicated  only  of  living  organs.  The
study  of  the  performance  of  their  special  work  by  the  aggre-
gation of  organs  which  make  up  the  body  constitutes  the
science  of  Physiology.

Physiological  Anatomy,  then,  is  the  science  of  the  tissues
and  organs  of  the  healthy  body ;  Physiology  is  the  science  ot
^ic  functions  of  the  lualthy,  living  organism.

When  any  or  all  of  the  tissues  or  organs  of  the  body  have
suffered  modifications  of  substance  or  of  structure  in  consc-

^  Rend  before  the  Homueopatliic  MedicsU  Society  of  the  Suie  of  Ncw-Vork,
May,  i86i.


lOO


RELATION Oy  PATHOLOGY


can  be  J
V  is  the™


quencc  of  disease,  the  study  of  these  material  changes,  whidi
arc  the  results  of  disease,  constitutes  the  science  of  Pa/Ac-
logkal  Anatffmy.  This  may  be  studied  upon  the  living  or
the  dead  diseased  organism.

When,  in  consequence  of  the  action  of  a  morbific  agent,
any  or  all  of  the  organs  of  the  body  perform  their  special
work  in  an  abnormal  manner ;  in  other  words,  when  the
function  of  any  of  the  organs  of  the  body  is  perverted,  the
study  of  these  changes  and  perversions  of  function  constitutes
the  science  of  Patiiology,  which,  like  Physiology,  can  be
studied  only  in  the  living  organism.

Pathologkal  Anatomy,  then,  is  the  science  of  the
tissues  and  organs  of  the  diseased  body. Pathology
science  of  the  abnorauxl  fumtiom  of  the  diseased  Hvtug  body.

Diseased  tissues  and  organs  being  modiftcattons  of  healthy
tissues  and  organs,  it  is  clearly  necessary  to  understand
PAysioiogital  Anatomy  before  we  can  understand  Patho-
logical Anatomy.  Just  as  necessary  is  it,  for  the  same  reason,
to  understand  Physiology  before  we  can  master  Patholof^.
Indeed  the  latter  might  be  said  to  exist  only  by  comparison
with  the  former.

If  this  be  true  of  the  details  of  these  sciences,  it  is  no  less
true  of  their  essential  nature  and  philosophy.  If  one  would
gain  a  correct  notion  of  the  subject,  scope,  limits  and  rela-
tions of  the  science  of  Pathology,  be  must  first  have  a  jusi
and  exact  idea  of  those  of  Physiology,  To  the  latter,  there-
fore, I  propose  to  devote  a  few  words.

Dr.  Carpenter  defines  the  object  of  Physiology  to  be  the
study  of  "the  phenomena  which  normally  present  them-
selves during  the  existence  of  living  beings,"  or,  in  another
place,  "the  phenomena  of  health  or  normal  life."

Its  object,  then,  is  not,  as  it  has  been  sometimes  loosely
stated,  life  itself,  but  }i\Q  p/unomena  whieh  depend  upon  and
result  from  normal  life.  The  science  oi  Physiology  brings
these  phenomena  into  systematic  form,  classifies  and  com-
pares them,  analyses  secondary  and  complex  phenomena  into


4


TO  THERAPEUTICS.


lOl


their  simple  elements,  and  seeks  the  ultimate  phenomenon
in  which  the  real  elementary  manifestation  of  simple  life  b
made,  uncomplicated  hy  secondary  or  related  chemical  or
mechanical  phenomena.

Virchow  says,  "  The  chief  point  is  to  obtain  a  recognition
of  the  fact  that  the  ct-i/  is  really  the  ultimate  morphological
element  in  which  there  is  any  manifestation  of  life,  and  that
we  must  not  transfer  the  scat  of  real  vital  action  to  any  point
beyond  the  cell."'

Dr.  Carpenter  says,  "  The  cell  lives  /or  itself  and  by  itself,
and  is  dependent  upon  nothing  but  a  due  supply  of  nutri-
ment and  a  proper  temperature  for  the  continuance  of  its
growth,  and  for  the  due  performance  of  its  functions  until  its
term  of  life  expires.  Its  chief  endowment  seems  to  be  that
of  attracting  or  drawing  to  itself  some  of  the  various  sub-
stances which  arc  contained  in  the  nutritive  fluid  in  relation
with  it.  This  fluid  is  a  mixture  of  a  great  number  of  com-
ponents; and  different  sets  of  cells  appear  destined  severally
to  appropriate  these.  As  far  as  is  yet  known,  however,  the
composition  of  the  cell-wall  is  everywhere  the  sanu,  being
that  of  Proteine."

Dr.  J.  H.  Bennett  says,  "  Nutrition  is  now  considered  to
depend  upon  an  inherent  vital  property  peculiar  to  the  tissues
themselves,  which  exercise  a  force  at  the  same  time  attract-
ive and  selective.  By  its  agency  each  tissue  and  gland
attracts  from  the  blood  that  amount  of  matter  which  is
necessary  to  maintain  it  in  bulk,  and  at  the  same  time  selects
from  it  the  peculiar  substance  necessary  for  itself  and  for  the
secretion  it  is  destined  to  produce."

According,  then,  to  the  most  advanced  writers  on  this  sub-
ject, wc  arc  to  regard  the  organism  as  a  complex  which  is
capable  of  being  analyzed  into  an  aggregation  of  cells,  of
homogeneous  structure,  but  each  of  which  is  endowed  with  a
peculiar  inherent  vital  power  of  "attraction  and  selection,"
which  we  recognize  only  in  its  results  and  which  constitutes
the  only  "  realactionof /f/V"  that  weare  capable  of  observing.
CVJ/.  A(4.,  Ebb.  ed.>


102  RELATION OF PATHOLOGY

In  the  words  of  Virchow,  "  Every  animal  presents  itself  as  a
sum  of  vital  unities,  every  one  of  which  manifests  all  the
characteristics  of  life."

Life,  then,  really  consists  in  the  exercise  by  each  cell  of
its  inherent  peculiar  attractive  and  selective  power.  Physi-
ology concerns  herself  with  the  results  of  this  exercise.  A
cell  by  virtue  of  its  inherent  power  abstracts  from  the  nutri-
ent fluid  a  substance  which  is  to  serve  to  nourish  the  oi^an
to  which  the  cell  belongs,  or  to  furnish  the  secretion  of  that
organ.  If  the  former,  then  the  future  history  of  that  organ,
its  development,  its  functions  and  its  interstitial  decline  and
dissolution  and  the  fate  of  its  dibris  belong  to  the  secondary
and  complex  phenomena  to  which  Physiology  devotes  her-
self With  these  phenomena,  life  has  no  exclusive  connec-
tion save  in  the  primary  exertion  by  the  cell-wall  of  its
"  inherent  attractive  and  selective  power."

Physiologists  with  great  propriety  attempt  to  explain  by
mechanical,  chemical  and  electrical  laws  the  secondary  phe-
nomena of  the  organism,  the  relations  of  different  tissues  and
secretions  to  each  other  and  their  mutual  reactions.  But
they  make  no  attempt  to  explain  the  action  of  the  cell-wall
which  is  the  ultimate  and  essential  phenomenon  of  life.  They
accept  this  as  an  ultimate  fact,  they  recognize  a  power  pecu-
liar to  the  wall  of  each  variety  of  cell  and  different  from
that  of  any  other  cell,  and  they  deal  with  the  results  of  the
exercise  of  this  power.

Physiology  having  been  defined  as  the  science  of  the  phe-
nomena of  normal  life.  Pathology  has  been  declared  by  the
same  writer  (Dr.  Carpenter),  to  be  the  science  of  the  phe-
nomena of  "  disease  or  abnormal  life."

If  the  mutual  reaction  of  two  secretions  be  different  in  any
individual  case  from  that  which  is  observed  in  the  healthy
organism,  one  or  other  of  the  secretions  must  be  of  an  abnor-
mal character.  This  must  have  resulted  from  an  abnormal
exercise  by  the  cell- wall  of  that  inherent  selective  power,  by


TO  THERAPEUTICS.


roj


virtue  of  which  the  secretion  was  made.  The  essential  and
ultimate  act  of  disease  is  found,  HJce  that  of  H/e,  to  consist
in  some  abnormal  exercise  by  the  cell-wall  of  its  inherent
vital  power.  As  we  recognize  the  existence  of  tins  poivcT
in  the  healthy  cell  only  through  its  action  and  Its  result,
vix..  the  function  of  secretion  and  tlie  substance  secreted,  so
we  recognize  disease,  which  is  ait  abnormal  exercise  of  this
power,  only  through  its  action,  viz.,  the  perverted  function,
and  through  its  result,  vi^.,  an  abnormal  secretion.

•'  Not  unfrequently,*'  says  Dr.  Bennett,  '*  this  attractive
and  selective  power  in  the  tissues  is  deranged,  producing
increase  or  diminution  in  growth  or  secretion,  generiil  or
partial  Not  unfrcquently  the  selective  power  appears  to  be
lost;  and  the  attractive  power  much  increased,"  etc.,  etc
From  this  alteration  of  these  forces,  diseased  conditions
of  these  fluids  and  tissues  result.  The  secondary  and  com-
plex phenomena  resulting  from  the  reaction  of  abnormal
tissues  are  analyzed  by  Pathology  and  referred  to  this
elementary  deviation  in  the  selective  and  attractive  forces
of  the  cell-wall,  But  the  nature  and  intimate  cause  of  this
alteration,  which  is,  however,  the  essence  of  disease.  Pathol-
ogy docs  not  attempt  to  explain  or  apprehend,  knowing  it
only  by  its  effects.

As.  therefore.  Physiology  concerns  herself  with  the  results
ef  Hfe,  so  does  Pathology  take  cognizance  of  the  results
0/  disease.  For  it  must  be  repeated  that  as  the  functions  of
healthy  organs  and  the  tissues  of  the  healthy*  body  which
aje  respectively  the  subjects  of  Anatomy  and  Physiology
arc  not  ///<:.  but  only  results  of  life,  so  the  abnormal  func-
tions and  the  altered  tissues  of  the  diseased  body,  which  are
respectively  the  subjects  of  the  science  of  Patliology  and
Pathological  Anatomy  are  not  disease  itself,  but  only  the
results  of  disease.

These  distinctions,  It  will  be  perceived,  have  a  direct  and
most  important  bearing  upon  the  science  of  Therapeuticsi
M^'ch  has  for  its  object  the  cure  of  disease.


104


RELATION OF PATHOLOGY


The  process  by  which  the  secretion  of  any  9uid  of  tiie
body  IS  accomplished  cannot  be  explained.  It  is  an  exer-
tion of  that  peculiar  vita)  power  of  which  we  have  spoken
as  inherent  in  the  cell-wall.  The  secretion  of  the  gastric
juice  and  of  the  bile,  for  example,  is  wholly  inexplicable.
But  when,  after  being  secreted,  these  or  similar  fluids  are
brought  into  contact  with  each  other  or  with  any  foreign
substance,  whether  within  or  without  the  body,  the  actions
and  reactions  which  ensue  are  explicable  by  chemical,
mechanical  or  electrical  laws,  and  these  explanations  con-
stitute the  object  of  Physiology.  It  is  obvious  that  these
phenomena  may  be  of  great  complexity  and  that  the
explanations  may  require  to  state  the  conditions  of  several
successive  series  of  reactions,  which  intervene  between  the
external  fact  or  symptom  as  viewed  by  the  observer,  aod
that  ultimate  action  of  the  cell-wall  which  Virchow  declares
to  be  "the  only  real  vital  action  of  the  hving  organism" —
or,  on  the  other  hand,  the  phenomena  may  be  simple  and
the  explanation  may  be  complete  by  a  simple  and  direct
reference  to  tlie  selective  action  of  the  cell-wall.  Thus,  for
example,  the  fact  of  salivation,  as  noticed  by  an  external
observer,  is  made  up  of  the  discharge  of  the  salivary  secre-
tion into  the  mouth.  The  explanation  refers  us  at  once
to  that  selective  power  of  the  cell-wall  of  the  salivary  glands
which  extracts  from  the  nutritive  fluids  the  constituents  of
this  peculiar  secretion  which,  as  such,  is  not  found  any-
where in  the  body  except  in  tlie  salivary  ducts  as  tlie  remit

On  the  other  hand,  the  fact  of  urination  is  made  up,  so
far  a.s  the  external  observer  is  concerned,  of  the  discharge  of
urine  from  the  urethra  and  the  emptying  of  the  urinary
bladder.  The  physiological  investigation,  however,  shows
the  process  to  be  quite  complicated,  and  the  explanation
carries  us  through  several  scries  of  phenomena,  before  we
arrive  at  the  ultimate  fact.  Thus,  wc  trace  the  urine  through
its  reservoir,  tlie  bladder,  up  the  ureters  to  the  tubuli  of  the


I


TO  THERAPEUTICS.


105


I


Iddneys,  where  it  has  probably  received,  if  not  the  whole,  at
least  a  great  portion  of  its  watery  constituents;  and  this
contribution  may  require  a  further  explanation  by  the
mechanical  laws  of  endosmosis  and  exosmosU  whereby  this
constituent  ^v■as  separated  from  the  blood.  Not  tracing  this
constituent  further,  for  tlie  present,  by  asking,  as  we  should
logically  be  required  to  do,  how  this  substance  came  to  be
contained  in  definite  quantity  in  the  blofKl,  we  seek  the
other  constituents  of  the  urine  and  find  the  urea  and  possi-
bly some  other  of  them  eliminated  by  the  Malpighlan
bodies  from  the  blood  through  the  agency  of  the  cell-walL
And  yet  even  thia  can  hardly  be  called  the  ultimate  vital
act,  which  will  require  to  be  sought  by  a  still  deeper  analysts.
For  although  {he  celts  of  the  Malpighian  bodies  do  separate
the  urea  from  the  blood,  yet  they  do  not  manufacture  it
from  the  constituents  of  that  fluid.  They  find  it  there
already  formed,  and  an  exhaustive  analysis  of  the  physio-
logical fact  of  urination  would  require  us  to  seek  the  origin
of  the  urea  in  the  blood.  This  would  lead  us  ,to  the  study
of  the  nutrition  and  decay  of  the  nitrogcnizcd  tissues,  and
in  the  ccU-walls  of  these  we  should  first  meet  with  that
ultimate  vital  act,  in  which  alone,  of  all  the  processes  which
arination  involves,  life,  pure,  simple  and  inexplicable,  is
concerned.

Physiology  goes  somewhat  further  than  this  analysis  of
the  actual  normal  functions  of  the  living  organism.  Under
the  name  of  Experimental  Physiology  she  not  only  seeks  to
apply  the  test  of  synthesis  to  her  analysis,  but  she  endeavors
to  solve  her  problems  by  the  substitution  of  analogous  sub-
stances for  some  elements  of  the  nutrient  fluid,  or  for  some
<^  the  secretions  of  the  organism,  and  thus  light  is  thrown
not  merely  on  the  processes  of  the  living  organism,  but  also
contributions  are  made  to  the  derived  science  of  Pathology.


' Let  us  now  take  a  similar  view  of  the  science  of  Pathology,
which  deals  with  abnormal  functions  as  Physiology  does  with


tcA  RZLATIOy  OF  PATHOLOGY

normal  fimcdona.  aod  which  might  almost,  by  a
speech,  be  '•ajT^  the  science  at  yiarbid  Pkysiaiagy,

Tne  act  of  aiorbid  salh-atioa  is.  to  the  observer  of  obfcct-
rre  rxxurrencea,  only  a  discharge  of  afaaonnal  saliraiy  fluid.
Th«  padicicgical  expianadoa,  like  the  ^vsiolagii^J,
to  th«  aelectica  firom  the  blood  by  the  ccQ-wsE  of  the
of  tfa«  labstances  oat  of  which  it  &bricates  the  safiray
fiaid.  If  the  t^ood  be  nonnal  and  yet  the  saliva  be;  as  wc
have  supposed,  abnormal,  then  the  my^terioos  power  of  the
ceQ-wall  must  have  been  pen-erted,  altered  c»-  impaired.
This  maaifestation  of  life  must  have  become  a  manifestatioa
of  abnormal  life — which  is  disease.  Here,  then,  ts  the  jam/
of  diuast — just  wliere  we  found  the  seat  tA  life — in  tiie
inherent  attractive  and  selective  power  of  ^  die  ceH-valL
Thi-i,  then,  is  the  nature  of  disease,  a  modification  of  that
unknown  and  inscrutable  power,  life.

"  Healik"  sa>-s  Carpenter,  "  or  normal  life;"  *'distaM  or
abnormal  life."

"Not  unfrequently,"  says  Dr.  Bennett,  "this  attractive
and  selective  power  in  the  tissues  is  deranged.  Not  nnfre-
quently  the  selective  power  appears  to  be  lost  and  the
attractive  power  greatly  increased,  and  thus,"  af^  a  few-
call  inflammation  ensue."

To  take,  now,  an  example  of  a  more  complex  series  of
phenomena,  the  fact  of  the  evacuation  of  morbid  urine,
simple  as  it  may  appear  to  the  observer  of  external  phe-
nomena only,  yet  leads  us,  in  our  search  after  the  original
act  of  "  abnormal  life "  in  which  the  morbid  excretion  had
its  origin,  to  examine  first,  whether  the  change  was  purely  a
chemical  change,  originated  and  effected  while  the  urine  was
retained  in  its  reservoir,  the  bladder — for  if  so,  it  differs
little  from  a  corresponding  change  which  occurs  daily  in
the  "  vase  de  nuit" — secondly,  whether  the  urine  derived  its
morbid  character  from  the  admixture  of  morbid  secretion,
or  effuuon  from  the  surface  of  the  bladder,  of  the  ureters^


TO  THERAPEUTICS.


ro7


of  the  pelvis  of  the  kidney,  or  from  the  tubuH  ;  from  each  of
which  it  might  receive  blood,  or  miicua,  or  pus,  or,  perhaps,
liquor  sanguinis  alone  holding  fibrine  in  solution,  or  finally
solid  fibrinous  casts;  or,  thirdly,  whether  the  morbid  change
in  the  urine  came  from  a  loss,  on  the  part  of  the  cell-
walls  in  the  Malpighian  bodies,  of  their  inherent  vital
selective  power,  whereby  they  are  enabled  to  separate  from
the  blood  those  substances  which  it  'a  their  province  in
the  healthy  body  to  separate ;  or,  finally,  whether  the  blood
no  longer  contains,  as  in  a  normal  state  it  should  do,  those
elements  which  tt  is  the  function  of  the  kidney  cells  to
eliminate  from  it, — in  other  words,  whether  the  whole  train  of
processes  which  eventuates  at  last  in  the  evacuation  of
abnormal  urine,  may  be  traceable  to  an  abnormal  interstitial
nutrition  and  destruction  of  the  nitrogenized  tissues ;  all
these  are  questions  which  it  is  the  legitimate  and  very
useful  business  of  Pathology  to  solve.

Now,  be  it  observed,  whether  the  cause  be  traced  to
abnormal  action  in  the  cell  of  bladder,  ureter,  kidney,  or
in  that  of  the  muscular  or  cercbnil  tissue,  wc  arrive  always
at  the  fact  that  as  the  action  of  the  ccU-wall  in  the  healthy
body  constitutes  the  only  real  vita/  action  of  the  organism,
the  only  unmixed  manifestation  of  life ;  so  the  modified  and
abnormal  action  of  the  cell-wall  in  the  diseased  body  consti-
tutes the  only  reai  action  of  abnormal  vitality  in  the
organism — the  only  unmixed  manifestation  of  disease.

It  may  be  objected  that  no  account  has  been  taken  in
what  we  have  said,  of  the  action  of  the  nervous  system,
to  which,  nevertheless,  both  in  the  case  of  morbid  saliva-
tion and  in  that  of  morbid  urine,  the  alteration  in  the  sali-
vary gland  and  in  the  kidney  respectively  may  have  been
attributable.  But  this  objection  simply  adds  another  step  to
the  analysis.  For  every  action  of  any  part  of  tlie  nervous
system  involves  an  expenditure  of  a  portion  of  nervous
substance,  that  is,  a  process  of  interstitial  destruction  and
reconstruction,  and  this  process  is  effected  only  through  the


io8


RELATION OF  PATHOLOGY


attractive  and  selective  power  of  the  cell-wall  of  the  nervooi]
tissue. Thus  arc  wc  brought  again  face  to  face  with  thii
inevitable  mysterious  power,  the  abnormal  action  of  which  I
constitutes  Diuasi.

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  discuss  the  relations  of  limj
science  of  Pathologj',  which  treats  of  the  phenomena  of  the]
diseased  organism,  to  the  science  of  Therapeutics,  which  pro-
poses to  cure  disease.

It  has  been  stated  that  a  large  portion  of  the  medical  pro-
fession liold  tliat  the  science  and  practice  of  Therapeutic*
arc  based  upon  the  science  and  facts  of  Pathology. Tt  is
held  that  the  explanation  of  the  phenomena  of  the  morbid
organism,  which  Pathology  furnishes,  gives  the key  to  the
procedures  which  should  be  adopted  for  the  restoration  of
the  morbid  organism  to  a  healthy  condition. If,  for  example,
it  be  ascertained  through  the  investigations  which  PathoU
ogy  makes  for  us,  that  a  certain  series  of  morbid  symptoms
may  be  traced  to  an  abnormal  condition  of  the  gastric  fluid,—
a  loo  great  acidity,  for  example, — "  it  is,"  sa>'s  Dr.  Bennett,
"the  discovery  and removal  of  such causes  as this  that]
constitute  the  chief  indications  of  the  scientific  practitioner. '^
Let  us  see  in  what  way  Dr.  Bennett  proposes  that  thi
"removal" shall be accomplished. He say«i, supposing^
another  case  :  "  The  capillary  vessels  become  over-distendedj
with  blood,  and  the  exudation  of  the  liquor  sanguinis  to
unusual  extent  takes  place,  constituting  inflammation. Hoirl
is  this  to  be  treated  ? In  the  early  stage,  topical  bleeding,
if  directly  applied  to  the  part,  may  diminish  the  congestion,^
and  the  application  of  cold  will  check  the  amount  of  exuda-
tion. But  the  exudation,  having  once  coagulated  outside  o(
the  vesseh.  acts  as  a  foreign  body,  and  the  treatment  mosi
be  directed  to  furthering  the  transformations  which tak<
place  in  it,  and  facilitating  the  absorption  and  excretion
cfTetc  matter. This  is  accomplished  by  the  local  applicaciot
of  heat  and  moisture,  the  internal  use  of  neutral  salts
dissolve  the  increase  of  fibrine  in  the  blood,  and  the  empk>y-|


TO  THERAPEUnca.


109


metit  of  diuretics  and  purgatives  to  assist  its  excretion  by
urine  or  stool."

In  tins  plan  of  treatment,  wc  have  a  proposition  to  adopt
mechanical  measures — blood-letting — for  the  diminution  of
a  congestion ;  chemical  means — neutral  salts — for  the  solu-
tion of  the  exudation;  and  mechanical  means  again —
diuretics — for  the  removal  of  the  dissolved  exudation  from
the  blood.

But  it  cannot  fail  to  attract  the  attention  of  every  reader
that  this  plan  proposes  to  deal  only  with  the  resuits  of
disrase — not  with  the  disease  itself — for  the  congestion  is  a
primary  result  of  the  abnormal  action  of  cell-wall,  and  the
exudation  which  results  from  the  congestion  is  a  secondary
result  of  the  same  abnormal  action  of  the  cell-wall.  This  is
clearly  shown  by  Dr.  Bennett's  words  already  quoted,  but
which  we  again  cite :  "  Not  unfrequently  the  selective  power
of  the  cell  appears  to  be  lost,  and  the  attractive  power  so
much  increased,  that  the  liquor  sanguinis  is  drawn  out
through  the  vessels,  so  that  its  fibrine  coagulates  in  a  mass
outside  of  them.  This  result,  preceded  or  accompanied  by
certain  changes  in  the  vessels  themselves,  and  more  or  less
stagnation  of  the  current  of  the  blood,  constitutes  the

It  is  here  most  distinctly  stated,  and  most  conclusively
shown,  that  the  cause  of  the  phenomena  of  inflammation  lies
behind  these  phenomena  of  congestion  and  exudation,  and
is  to  be  found  in  a  modi6cation  of  that  mysterious  vital
power  of  the  cell-wall.  It  follows  from  this  that  a  treatment
which  is  addressed  to  these  resultant  phenomena,  and  not  to
their  cause,  must  be  but  a  palliative  treatment  It  can  in  no
sen.sc  be  called  a  radical  or  a  rational  treatment  To  remove
or  assist  in  removing  from  the  body  or  any  part  of  it  the
results  of  morbid  causes  may  alleviate  suffering,  may  enable
the  patient  to  hold  out  longer  under  disease,  just  as  pumping
out  a  leaking  ship  may  postpone  the  time  when  she  will
sink,  may  increase  her  chances  of  getting  into  port  before


no  RELATION or  PATHOLOGV

she  sinks. — may  thus  in  fact  be  tlie  means  of  saving  her.  Bat
as,  certiiinly,  pumping  is  only  a  palliative  mode  of  treating  i
leaking  ship — as  the  stoppage  of  the  leak  is  the  only  radical
treatment  imafrinable — so  in  the  case  of  inflammation  Ae
only  radical  treatment  would  be  one  which  addressed  itself
directly  to  the  cell-u'all,  and  in  such  a  way  as  to  restore  to
it  the  just  amount  and  proportion  of  its  now  perverted
"  inherent  attractive  and  selective  power.'*

It  is  evident  that  when  this  had  been  accomplished,  con-
gestion would  cease  to  be  produced,  and  in  consequence  of
this  cessation  there  would  be  no  further  cxudatiott.  It
might  now  be  within  the  province  of  Pathology  to  indicate
some  mechanical  or  chemical  n*ay  of  aiding  or  hastening  the
removal  of  the  results  of  disease — the  congestion  and  exuda-
tion— but  this  would  be  only  a  sequel  of  the  curative  trtat-
ntcnt.

A  curative  treatment,  then,  must  address  itself  directly  to
the  cell-n-all,  which  is  the  ultimate  seat  of  disease.  And
every  method  which  is  directed  to  the  results  of  eiisectsty
which  are  the  proper  subjects  of  Pathology  and  Pathol(^cal
Anatomy,  must,  of  necessity,  be  ^palliative  method.

But,  it  may  be  objected,  we  are  unable  to  plan  any  such
curative  treatment,  for  the  reason  that  we  do  not  understand
the  nature  of  this  cell  force,  nor  the  nature  of  its  perversion.
in  any  case.  To  recur  to  our  simile  of  the  ship :  it  is  some-
times impossible  to  find  the  leak,  or,  if  its  location  be  known,
to  stop  it  Nothing  remains  h\x\  palliation.  This  statement,
as  applied  to  disease,  is  correct  in  only  a  few  instances,  the
number  of  which  is  becoming  continually  diminished  by  tlic
progress  of  science.  It  is  true  that  we  do  not  understapd
the  nature  of  tlie  cell  force,  whether  normal  or  pervcrtcd-
Neither  do  we  understand  the  nature  of  chemical  affinity,
nor  the  modus  operandi  of  chemical  reaction.  Yet  we  have
an  experimental  knowledge  of  each,  and  we  know  the
peculiar  chemical  affinities  and  reactions  of  a  vast  Dumber  of
bodies.


TO  THERAPEUTICS.


Ill


I


I


*


In  like  oianner  wc  may  Icam  the  reaction  of  foreign
bodies  introduced  into  the  circulation  upon  the  inherent
forces  of  the  cell-wall.  Reasoning  upon  the  general  physical
law  that  "  like  effects  are  produced  by  similar  causes,"  we
conchidc  that,  if  in  any  case,  having  introduced  into  the
circulation  of  the  healthy  subject  a  foreign  body,  we  observe
the  phenomena  of  congestion  and  exudation,  with  stagnation
of  the  current  of  the  blood,  identical  with  those  known  to  us
as  the  phenomena  of  inflammation,  then  the  peculiar  inherent
powers  of  the  cell-wall  must  have  been  affected  by  this
foreign  body  in  precisely  the  same  way  (whatever  it  be)  as
that  in  which  any  accidental  exciting  cause  of  inflammation
affects  these  forces.  Wc  thus  discover  re-agents  which  act
directly  upon  the  inherent  power  of  tlic  cell-wall,  and  we
thus,  by  experiments  upon  the  healthy,  determine  precisely
the  limits  and  direction  of  their  action.  This  knowledge  is
rendered  possible  and  exact  by  the  science  of  Pathology,
which  enables  us  to  trace  out  and  analyze  the  results  of
intentionally  induced  abnormal  cell-action,  just  as  it  does
those  of  tuadenlai  distase.

This  is  not  a  matter  of  mere  speculation.  It  is  well  known
to  every  physician  that  almost  every  drug,  every  substance
in  fact  which  is  not  a  simple  aliment,  has,  besides  any
chemical  affinities  it  may  possess  for  some  of  the  secretions
of  the  living  organs,  a  certain  peculiar  power  of  modifying
the  functions  of  some  of  the  organs  of  the  body,  a  power
which  is  Inexplicable  and  is  rccogni?^  only  by  its  results.
Examples  of  tliis  power  of  drugs  arc  found  in  that  of  Tartar
emetic  to  produce  changes  which  result  in  congestion  and
exudation,  of  Opium  to  produce  changes  which  result  in
narcotism,  etc.  These,  which  are  known  as  the  specific
properties  of  drugs,  arc  evidently  the  properties  by  which
they  modify  the  forces  of  the  cell-wall,  and  from  which  all
observed  Pathological  (or  Pathogenetic)  and  Pathologico-
anatomical  phenomena  result.

And  it  is  manifest  that  the  specific  modifying  power  of


112


RELATION OF PATHOLOGY


each  drug  can  be  surely  ascertained,  as  an  absolute  propcrtsr,
by  testing  it  upon  the  health}^  living  organism.  And  it|
follows  as  clearly,  from  all  that  has  been  said,  that  the  appli-
cation of  specific  drugs  which  have  a  direct  action  upon  tbe|
cell-wall  whose  inherent  forces  arc  acting  abnormally  under
the  influence  of  disease,  is  the  only  direct  and  radical  method
of  curing  disease.

The  task  of  finding  out  by  what  formula  the  spcctfic
action  of  drugs  upon  the  ceU-forces  of  different  tissues
should  be  brought  to  bear  upon  the  perverted  cell-forces
in  any  given  case  of  disease,  comes  under  the  science  of
Therapeutics  and  lies  beyond  our  present  province.  It  is
the  problem  of  the  Therapeutic  Law.

From  all  that  has  been  said,  the  Relations  of  Pathology
and  Therapeutics  may  be  deduced  in  a  few  words.

Physiology  and  Pathology  themselves  teach  us  that  the
science  of  Pathology  can  in  no  sense  serve  as  a  basts  or ,
foundation  of  the  science  of  Therapeutics.  They  show  usj
that  whereas  Patliotogy  is  the  science  of  disease  ba»ed  on
a  theory  of  observed  morbid  processes.  Therapeutics,  when
truly  regarded,  is  a  science  of  cure,  based  on  a  theory  of
cure  and  resting  on  a  foundation  of  experiment  Although
not  the  basis  of  Therapeutics,  Pathology  must  yet  be  a
most  important  instrument  in  the  practical  application  of  the
science  of  Therapeutics.  ■

The  problem  in  the  art  of  medicine  being  to  apply  to  the  "
abnormally  acting  cell-wall  that  remedial  agent  which  is
capable  of  acting  directly  upon  it,  and  tn  such  way  as  torn
restore  its  normal  action,  it  is  clearly  indispensable  that  the
physician  be  able  to  trace  the  morbific  agent  through  all  its
complex  resultant  phenomena  up  to  the  original  perversion
of  cell-force,  from  which  the  whole  disorder  springs;  that
he  be  able  to  analyse  secondary  and  tertiary  series  of
phenomena  into  their  simple  elements.  And  in  this  work
Pathology  is  the  instrument  of  which  he  avails  himselL H

I  cannot  refrain,  in  conclusion,  firom  rendering  homage  to


TO  TlIKRAl'EUnCS.


"3


that  wonderful  prcwsion  of  jjcnius  by  which,  in  an  age  when
Pathology,  as  wc  understand  it,  was  unknown,  Samuel  Hah-
nemann anticipated  all  that  wc  have  said,  and  all  that  the
most  advanced  writers  of  our  day  have  taught,  respecting
tfie  scope  and  influence  of  Pathology  in  relation  to  Thera-
peutics.

The  symptoms  of  the  urinary  organs  in  connection  with
the  discharge  of  morbid  urine  would  at  one  time  liavc  been
regarded  as  the  proper  subject  of  treatment.  But  Pathology
has  now  taught  us  (o  trace  these  symptoms  back  to  the
kidney,  and  beyond  the  kidney  to  the  blood,  and  beyond  the
blood  to  the  nutrition  and  the  destruction  of  all  the  nitro-
gcnized  tissues.  As  Dr.  Carpenter  remarks,  ''  When,  for
example,  the  urine  presents  a  particular  sediment,  our
inquiries  arc  directed  not  so  much  to  the  kidney  itself,  as
to  the  constitutional  state  which  causes  an  undue  amount  of
the  substance  in  question  to  be  carried  off  by  the  urinarj'
excretion,  or  which  prevents  it  from  being  (as  usual)
dissolved  in  the  fluid."  To  confine  the  attention,  therefore,
in  prescribing  for  a  given  case,  to  the  immediate  oi^n  the
pervcrsi<»n  of  whose  functions  is  most  obviously  pointed  out
by  the  prominent  symptoms,  is  to  disregard  the  clearest
indications  of  Pathology.  Wc  must  analyze  these  obvious
symptoms  and  must  include  their  remotest  elements  in  our
indications.  Nay,thcse  remotest  elements — the  con.stitutional
disturbances,  (or  instance,  of  which  Carpenter  speaks — are
even  more  important  indications  for  treatment  than  the  more
obvious  and  objective  symptoin.";.  But  how  can  we  analyze
these  more  obvious  symptoms,  and  ascertain  those  "  consti-
tutional disturb-mces "  in  which  they  have  tlieir  origin?  In
no  other  way  than  by  a  study  of  the  functions  of  the  entire
organism — in  what  way  and  to  what  extent  they  arc  per-
fnrnicd  in  an  abnormal  manner.  But  ttiis  brings  us  at  once
to  that  rule  on  which  Hahnemann  so  strongly  insisted,  that

Cganism  of  tilc  patient  should  be  examined  in
e  way,  and  that  the  "  totality  of  the  symp-


t


114  "  RELATION OF  PATHOLOGY  TO  THERAPEUTICS.'

toms"  should  be  made  the  basis  of  the  prescription ;" nay,
that  the  constitutional,  general  symptoms  are  often  more
conclusive  as  to  the  proper  treatment  than  the  more  obvions
local  symptom.  The  grand  old  master  reached  at  a  angle
bound  the  same  conclusions  to  which  the  labors  of  a  half
century  of  able  Pathologists  have  at  length,  -with  infinite
research,  brought  the  medical  profession.

And  those  of  our  school  who  insist  upon  Pathology  as  a
basis  of  Therapeutics,  who  look  upon  the  single  objective
symptom  and  its  nearest  organic  origin  as  the  subjecrt  for
treatment,  and  who  deride  the  notion  of  prescribing  upon
the  totality  of  the  symptoms,  and  claim  to  be  more  than
mere  symptom-coverers,  in  that  they  discover  and  aim  to
remove  the  cause  of  the  disease — these  colleagues  are  as
false  in  their  Pathology,  according  to  the  highest  Old-School
authority,  as  they  are  faithless  to  the  doctrines  and  impotent
as  to  the  successes  of  the  founder,  of  the  Homceopatiuc
School.


PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  SYMPTOMS  OF
DRUGS  AS  GUIDES  IN  DETERMINING  THE
DOSE.


As  preliminary  to  an  intelU^ble  discussion  of  this  question,
wc  must  briefly  define  primary  and  secondary  symptoms
respectively,  and  state  how,  in  our  judgment,  the  discrimina-
tion between  them  bears  upon  the  selection  of  the  remedy.
And  this,  notwithstanding  these  questions  have  been  elabo-
rately and  lucidly  discussed  by  other  members  of  this  bureau.
For  it  will  not  have  escaped  the  reader's  observation  that
these  terms  arc  used  with  different  significations  by  dificrent
writers.

Symptoms  may  be  called  primary  as  being  first  in  order
of  occurrence,  in  comparison  with  others  which,  occurring  at
a  later  period,  arc,  with  reference  to  time,  secondary  to  them.

Or,  symptoms  may  be  called  primary  as  being,  in  a  sense,
the  exciting  cause  of  other  and  opposing  symptoms,  which
arc  then  secondary  to,  as  being  contingent  upon,  the  former.

Or,  symptoms  may  be  styled  primary  as  being  of  greater
importance  or  significance  than  others  called,  therefore,
secondary.

I'hc  distinction,  then,  may  be  based  on  considerations  of
time,  of  opposition  in  nature,  or  of  rank.  And  it  is  impor-
tant not  to  confound  or  combinethese  ideas  in  our  discussions.

Since  most  of  our  traditional  notions  on  this  subject
originated  in  Hahnemann's  utterances  upon  it  throughout
his  writings.  I  will  briefly  repeat  his  views  before  stating  my
practical  conclusions.

In  an  essay  entitled  Sug^cs/ums  for  Ascertaining  tk*
CuraCivt  Powers  of  Drugs,  published  1796  (S.  W.,  312),


H6 PRIMARV  AND  SECONDAKV  SYMPTOMS  OF  DRUGS


Hahnemann  says:  "Most  medicines  have  more  than  one
action ;  the  f\T$t  a  direct  actian,  which  gradually  changes
into  the  second  (which  I  call  the  indirect  secondary  action^
The  latter  is  generally  a  state  exactly  the  opposite  of  the
former.  In  this  way  most  vegetables  act.  But  few  mcdi-
cines  are  exceptions  to  this  rule,  e.g.,  metals  and  minerals."
He  illustrates  what  he  means  by  the  secondary  action  in  the
following  note :  "  Under  Opium,  for  example,  a  fcarlcsi
elevation  of  spirit,  a  sensation  of  strength  and  high  courage;
an  imaginative  gayety,  etc.,  are  part  of  the  direct  primary
action,  of  a  moderate  dose ;  but  after  eight  or  twelve  faoun
an  opposite  state  seLs  in — the  indirect  secondary  action;
there  ensue  relaxation,  dejection,  diffidence,  fear,  loss  of
memory,  etc."

In  the  preface  of  the  Fragmenta  de  Vir.  Med.  Pos.,  etc.,
1805,  Hahnemann  says:  "Simple  drugs  produce  in  the
healthy  body  symptoms  peculiar  to  themselves,  but  not  all
at  once,  nor  in  one  and  the  same  series,  nor  all  in  each
experimenter;  but  to-day  perhaps  Uicse,  to-morrow  those;
this  first  one  in  Caius,  the  third  in  Titus,  but  so  that  on
some  other  occasion  Titus  may  experience  what  Caius  felt
yesterday.

"A  certain  drug  evokes  some  symptoms  earlier  and
others  later,  which  arc  somewhat  opposed  and  dissimilar  to
each  other;  indeed  may  be  diametrically  opjiosed.  I  call
the  former  primarv-,  or  of  the  first  order,  and  the  latter
secondary,  or  of  the  second  order.

"  For  each  individual  drug  has  a  peculiar  and  definite
period  of  action  in  the  human  body,  longer  or  shorter,  and
when  this  has  passed,  all  the  symptoms  produced  by  the
drug  cease  together.

"Of  the  drugs,  therefore,  tlie  effects  of  which  pass  over  in
a  brief  space  of  time,  die  primary  symptoms  appear  and
disappear  within  a  few  hours.  After  these  the  secondary
appear  and  as  quickly  disappear.  But  the  exact  hour  in
which  any  symptom  may  be  wont  to  show  itself  cannot  be


A3  GUIDES  m  DETERWI>aNO  THE  DOSE.


TI7


positively  determined,  partly  because  of  the-  diverse  nature
of  men.  partly  because  of  different  doses. ■ • •

"  I  have  obscn-ed  some  drugs  the  course  of  whose  effects
consisted  in  two,  three  or  more  paroxysms,  comprising  both
kinds  of  symptoms,  both  the  primary  sxid  the  secondary;
the  former,  indeed,  as  I  have  stated  in  general  terms,
appeared  first  and  the  latter  stcond.  And,  sometimes,  it
seems  to  me  1  have  seen  symptoms  of  a  kind  of  M/Vt/ order.

"Under  the  action  of  moderate  or  small  doses,  the  symp-
toms of  the  first  order  come  chiefly  to  view ;  less  frequently
those  of  the  second  order.  I  have  chiefly  preserved  the
former,  as  most  suitable  to  the  Medical  Art  and  most  worthy
to  be  known."

Finally  he  speaks  of  a  class  of  symptoms  which  he  de-
nominates "reliquias,"  generally  the  effects  of  very  large
doses,  and  which  seem  to  indicate  or  depend  upon  more  or
less  permanent  alterations  of  tissue,  including  the  symptoms
of  the  "  agony"  in  fatal  cases.

As  illustrating  these  views,  I  quote  remarks  prefixed  or
appended  to  the  symptomatology  of  several  of  the  drugs
mentioned  in  the  Fra^mmia.

In  a  note  to  Aconite,  Hahnemann  says:  "Through  the
whole  course  of  action  of  tliis  plant,  its  effects  of  the  first
and  second  order  were  repeated  in  short  paroxysms,  two,
three,  or  four  times  before  the  whole  effect  ceased  (eight  to

*'  Coldness  of  the  whole  body  and  dry  internal  heat  Chilli-
ness. Sense  of  heat  first  in  the  hands,  then  in  the  whole  body,
especially  in  the  thorax,  without  sensible  external  heat.

"  Alternating  paroxysms  (during  the  third,  fourth,  and
fifth  hours);  general  sense  of  heat,  with  red  cheeks  and
headache,  worse  on  moving  the  eyeballs  upward  and  later-
rally,  then  shivering  of  the  whole  body  with  red  cheeks  and
hot  head ;  then  shivering  and  lachrymation  with  pressing
headache  and  red  cheeks,"


tl8 PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  SYMPTOMS  OF  DRUGS


In  a  note  to  Chamomilla,  Hahnemann  says:  "  Tl»e  course
of  its  action  is  run  in  paroxysms  of  several  hours'  duration,
comprising  symptoms  of  each  order,  free  spaces  or  remis-
sions being  interjected,  so,  nevertheless,  that  in  the  earlier
paroxysms,  the  symptoms  of  the  first  order,  in  the  later,
those  of  the  second  order  predominate."

In  a  note  to  Ignatia,  he  says:  "  Ignatia  is  wont  to  display
the  curriculum  of  its  operation  in  several  paroxysms  com>
prising  both  orders  of  symptoms,  and  repeated  at  intervals
of  several  hours;"  and  concerning  the  mental  symptoms:
"Inconstanc)*,  impatience,  vacillation,  quarrelsomeness,  won-
derful mutability  of  disposition,  now  prone  to  laughter,  now
to  tears,"  he  says :  "  These  mental  symptoms  are  wont  to  be
repeated  at  intervals  of  three  or  four  hours."

Hahnemann's  teachings  on  this  subject  in  the  Orgawm
(in  which  all  the  editions  substantially  agree)  have  been  so
fully  given  by  Dr.  C.  Wessclhoeft  in  the  preceding  section  of
the  report  of  this  bureau,  that  I  am  spared  the  necessity  of
quoting  them.

It  appears  Uiat  Hahnemann,  in  the  Fragvunta  and  the
Organon,  teaches  that  among  the  symptoms  of  a  drug»
there  appear  series  which  are  opposed  to  each  other  la
different  degrees  of  diversity,  from  being  "  somewhat
opposed"  to  "  diametrically  opposite :"  and  that,  of  these
scries,  that  which  occurs  Jirst  in  order  of  time,  is  to  rank
among  the  primary,  and  that  occurring  subsequently  among
the  secondary  symptoms.  But  he  calls  attention  to  the  fact
that  there  are  some  kinds  of  symptoms  in  every  proving,  to
which  there  can  be  no  series  of  an  opposite  nature,  j.  e.,  to
which  an  opposite  cannot  be  predicated  ;  for,  he  says,  "  Our
organism  always  bestirs  itself  to  set  up  in  opposition  to  this
effect  [first  drug  action],  the  opposite  condition,  where

SVCH A CONDITION  CAN  EXIST.'"

In  his  definition  of  primary  and secondary  symptoms,

therefore,  Hahnemann  blended  the  elements  of  time  and  of

'  Organom,  2d ud  3J  ed., }  74;  4th  ed.,  $  *>


AS  GUIDES IN DETERMINING  THE DOSE.


iig


causation  or  nature  (viz.,  that  these  classes  were  opposed  In
their  nature).  The  secondary  symptoms  were  not  an  inde-
pendent scries,  but  were  sccondarj'  by  virtue  of  tlieir  relation
of  opposition  in  nature  to  a  series  of  preceding  symptoms-
And  such  symptoms  as  did  not  tn  their  nature  admit  of  an
opposite  condition  (as,  for  example,  pain,  cutaneous  eruption,
etc.)  could  not  be  called  primary,  because,  in  the  nature  of
things,  they  could  not  be  followed  by  an  opposite  class  of
symptoms.  Nor  could  they  be  called  secondary,  because,  in
the  nature  of  things,  they  could  not  have  been  preceded  by
an  opposite  series,  which  could  stand  to  them  in  the  relation
of  primary  symptoms,  Hahnemann,  then,  appears  to  have
recognized  in  the  pathogeneses  of  drugs,  symptoms  which
being  opposed  in  nature  could  be  arranged  into  scries  of
primary  and  secondary,  and  other  symptoms  not  susceptible
of  such  arrangement.

He  distinctly  tell  us'  that  the  primary  or  positive  symp-
toms of  drugs  are  those  on  which  we  are  to  base  our
prescriptions.

These  statements  in  the  Organon,  as  quoted  by  Dr.  Wes-
sclhoeft,  embrace  not  only  a  description  of  various  classes  of
symptoms  as  observed  by  Hahnemann  In  drug-proving,  but
also  a  theory  of  the  nature  and  genesis  of  these  various
classes.  A  man's  observations  of  natural  phenomena,  if  he
be  a  keen  and  accurate  observer,  as  Hahnemann  unquestion-
ably was,  are  generally  correct.  Hts  theoretical  explanation
of  them  is  pretty  sure  to  be  tinctured  with  the  philosophy  of
tlie  period  in  which  he  wrote,  and  is  not  likely  to  be  accepted
without  qualification  by  men  of  a  subsequent  period.  And,
at  the  present  day,  few  would  accept  Hahnemann's  explana-
tion of  the  genesis  of  primary  and  secondary  symptoms  as
representing  respectively  a  state  of  passivity  followed  by  a
state  of  intensified  activity  on  the  part  of  the  vital  force ;
this  conception  of  a  vital  force,  in  the  sense  in  which  Hahne-
mann used the term, being one  which,  itself,  has been

*  Of;r«)iKr«,2d«ul3ded.,  (  59;  4th  ed.,  4  IS>-


120 PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  SYMPTOMS  OF  DRUGS

discarded  by  most  physiologists. But  the  rejection  of  Hi
explanation  offered  by  Hahnemann  does  not involve  th-^^t^
rejection  of  the  observations  to  which  he  attached  it.

Among  the  symptoms  which  he  called  primary  (rrT~~^
wirkungen),  Hahnemann  recognized  the  occasional  occur- — *-
rence  of  what  he  called  alternate  (WechselwirkungeD)^C.)>
opposed,  sometimes  contradictory  symptoms,  which,  never— — ^^•
theless,  were  not  secondary.  He  does  not  tell  us  how  te^^
recognize  these,  nor  how  to  distinguish  them  from  th^^  ^
secondary  symptoms.  But  he  does  give  us  instances  o£K^  ^
what  he  regards  as  secondary  symptoms,  as  follows  •}  "  Th^^^

gayety  which  follows  the  use  of  coffee  is  a  primary  symp—

torn ;  the  subsequent  drowsiness  and  lassitude  are  sec&mdturf"^
symptoms.  The  sleep  which  follows  Opium  is  a  primary  — "
and  the  subsequent  insomnia  a  secondary  symptom;  the
purging  of  cathartics  is  a  primary  and  the  subsequent  con-
stipation a  secondary  symptom.  The  constipation  of  Opium
is  a  primary  and  the  subsequent  dtarrhcea  a  secondary  symp-
tom." And  consistently  with  Hahnemann's  instructions,  we
should  not  expect  to  base  our  prescriptions  on  these  second-
ary symptoms.

But  when  we  examine  Hahnemann's  remarks  on  the  indi-
vidual drugs  of  the  Materia  Medica  Pura,  we  find  devia-
tions from  his  definitions  and  illustrations  as  given  in  the
Organon.  In  the  preface  to  Belladonna  we  read  :  *  "  There
is  no  known  drug  of  long  action  which  expresses  itself  in  so
manifold  (two  and  three  fold)  alternate  conditions  as  Bella-
donna. Only  compare  symptom  15  with  16  and  this  with
17,  56  with  58,  and  this  with  60,  61  and  1 14,  and  these  with
113  and  152;  again,  62  with  ^i,  64,  and  these  with  70,
and  62  with  72,  158  with  159,  and  this  with  160  and  165,
and  this  with  163  ;  and  172  with  174  and  175,  and  these
with  176.  Of  tu}ne  of  these  alternate  conditions  (Wechsel-
wirkungen)  can  it  be  said  that  they  are  beyond  the  primary
action."

'  Organon,  3d  and  3d  eds.,  %  76; ' MaUria MtdUa  PMra,ltltA.
4th  ed.,  $  65.


AS GL*TDES  IN DETERMINING  THE DOSE.


121


tions as  follows :

Contracted  pupils  and  dilated  pupils.

Abdominal  pains  compcllmfj  to  bend  backward  and  to  sit
stiil, — to  move  forward  and  not  admitting  of  motion.

Suppressed  stool  and  urine  and  involuntary  stool  and
micturition,  and  constant  tenesmus.

Sleeplessness  and  deep  slumber.

Raging  delirium  and  wild  fear,  and  foolish  madness,  etc.

It  is  evidently  Hahnemann's  meaning,  and  surely  experi-
ence justifies  him,  that  Belladonna  may  be  given  (other
symptoms  corresponding)  when  cither  the  one  or  the  other
(the  opposite)  of  these  conditions  is  present.  And  these
secondary,  and  on  which  we  arc  told,  we  are  nat  to  base  our
prescriptions.

In  the  introduction  to  Nux  vomica  {McUfria  Medica  Pura,
rst  cd.)  Hahnemann  says :  "  The  symptoms  of  a  single  dose
of  Nux  vomica  are  wont  to  recur  several  days  in  succession,
at  the  same  time  of  day,  even  at  the  same  hour,  or  every
other  day.  Hence  the  usefulness  of  this  drug  in  some  typical
diseases  when  the  symptoms  otherwise  correspond.  Besides
this  periodicity  of  the  symptoms,  and  besides  the  alternation
of  heat  an(J  cold,  there  follow  also  upon  one  another,  here
and  there  {a.s  is  the  case  also  with  other  drugs),  symptoms
which  differ  very  much  from  one  another,  and  appear  to  be
opposed  to  each  other,  although  they  all  belong  to  the  primary
action  of  the  drug.  \^'c  may  call  these  alternate  actwns
(Wechselwirkungen)."  And  among  the  symptoms  of  Nux
.vomica,  Hahnemann  calls  attention  to  232  and  233  '^ano-
rexia," as  contrasted  with  236-238,  "  great  appetite,"  and
says  these  are  alternate  actions,  and  belong  to  the  primary
S5Tnptoms,  and  are,  therefore,  to  be  used  as  bases  of  pre-
Kriptions.  He  refers  also  to  369-374,  "  Constipation  with
tenesmus,"  etc;  and  to  357-359,  "  Diarrhcea  with  desire
and  tenesmus,"  etc ; and  sayg,  in a  note, "  Diarrhoea,


123 PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  SYMPTOMS  OF  DRUGS


constant  abundant,  strictly  so  called,  is  not,  according
my  observation, to be expected in the primary actJortl
of  Nux  vomica ;  and  that  which  here  appears  among  the'
symptoms  as  diarrhoea  is  partly  very  small,  mostly  mucous
discharges with tenesmus and pain," etc Again, in
note  to  456,  he  says:  "  Discharge  of  mucus  from  the  nosets
an  alternate  action  with  dry  obstructions  of  the  nose."  There!
is,  clearly,  a  discrepancy  between  Hahnemann's  general  prop-
ositions in  the  OrgoTion  and  his  practical  insthictions  in  theM
Materia  Medica  Pura. For  we  find  from  the  latter  that  Bel-^
ladonna,  for  instance,  may  be  given  for  the  primary  symptom,
"sopor,"  as  well  as  for  what in the  Organon  is  called  the
secondary t  but  in  the  Materia  Medica  Pura  the  alternate  symp-
tom "  sleeplessness,"  and  that  Nux  vomica  may  be  given  for j
the /riwiiry  symptom  "  constipation,"  and  likewise  for  whaffl
is  called  in  the  Organon  the  secondary,  but  in the Afaferia*
Medica  Pura  the  alternate  symptom  "  diarrhoea."

The  very  \^rrti%  primary  and  secondary,  as  thus  illustrated,
seem  to  imply  a  succession  of  symptoms,  more  or  less  opposed
in  character,  and  all  of  them  dilTcring  from  the  equilibri-
um of  function  which  wc  recognizcas  health.  The  instances
given,  and,  indeed,  the  only  possible  instances,  relate  to  func-
tions of  which  a  "more"  or  "less,"  or  an  "opposite,"  may  ■
be  predicated ;  as,  for  CKample,  temperature,  sleep,  certain™
mental  conditions,  and  the  secretions  and  excretions  gener-
ally. TTius  we  may  have  an  unnaturally  prolonged  sleep  or
wakefulness,  gayety,  or  despondency,  and  a  plus  or  minus  of
sweat,  alvine  discharge,  urine,  etc,  etc.  i)ut  how  could  we
have  an  opposite  condition  to  any  specified  pain  or  sub-
jective sensation,  to  parenchymatous  deposit,  to  cutaneous
eruption,  etc.,  etc.  ?  The  absence  of  these  phenomena  would
be/«  tanto  a  state  of  health  ;  it  would  not  be  an  opposed^
morbid  condition  or  sensation.  fl

The  possibility,  then,  of  classifying  symptoms  into  primary™
and  secondary  on  the  basis  of  the  relative  nature  of  the  symjK
toms,  is  not  co-extensive  with  symptomatology  \  it  is  partial.


rRMINING THE


123


I

I

I


confined  to  a  moderate  number  of  conceivable  morbid  phe-
nomena.

Shall  wc,  then,  in  the  second  place,  base  the  distinction  on
the  clement  of  time,  and  call  tlie  symptoms  which  first  occur
primary,  and  those  which  come  later,  secondary?  Where
then  shall  we  draw  the  line  ?  how  many  hours  or  days  shall
we  allow  for  the  development  of  primary  symptoms?  In
view  of  the  immense  differences  in  the  rapidity  with  which
the  curriculum  of  action  of  different  drugs  is  run,  it  is  obvious
that  a  special  nile  must  be  established  for  each  drug.  Nor  is
tfiis  the  only  difficulty.  The  results  of  different  doses  on  the
same  provers,  and  of  different  doses  or  even  of  the  same  dose
on  different  provers,  are  so  various  that,  ist,  as  Hahnemann
intinutes  in  the  preface  to  ttie  Fragmenta,  the  symptom
which  appears  in  one  prover  to-day  will  not  appear  for  several
days  in  another  prover ;  and,  2d,  a  very  small  dose  may  pro-
duce only  one  series  of  symptoms ;  a  larger  dose  two  series
<^  opposed  symptoms ;  a  still  larger  dose  two  scries  differ-
ently opposed  ;  and  a  very  large  dose  again  only  one  series.
This  point  has  been  so  well  illustrated  by  Frof  Allen,  with
■whose  views  I  am  glad  to  express  my  entire  concurrence,
that  I  need  not  dwell  upon  it,  but  may  content  myself  with
two  illustrations  from  our  Materia  Medica.

On  looking  over  the  register  of  symptoms  of  Argentum
nitricum.'  we  find  reported  as  occurring  early  in  the  prov-
ing, irritation  of  ilie  bladder  and  urethra  and  increased  fre-
quency and  quantity  of  urine,  and  as  occurring  later  in  the
prwing.  diminution  in  frequency  of  micturition  and  in  the
quantity  of  urine.  Surely  one  might  pronounce  the  former
to  be  primary  and  the  latter  secondary  symptoms.  But  on
examining  the  provers'  day-books  wc  find  that  the  majority  of
the  provers  (being  those  who  took  large  doses)  report  the
former  and  not  the  latter  symptoms.  It  was  the  prover  who
took  the  30th  who  reported  diminished  urine,  and  he  did  not
report  any  increase  at  any  time.

<  Otti,  Ztit.  I.


134 PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  SYMPTOMS  OF  DRUGS


These  symptoms,  therefore,  which  appear  in  the  register
to  be  opposed,  and  properly  distinguishable  as  primary  and
secondary,  did  not  bear  to  each  other  any  relation  of  appo-
sition or  correlation,  as  they  might  have  done  had  they  oc-
curred in  the  same  individual.  They  are  di^ereiU.  unrelated,
independent  effects  of  different  doses  in  dilferent  individuals.
And  let  mc  suggest,  in  passing,  that  the  beautiful  pictures
of  primary  and  secondary  effects  of  drugs  which  wc  find  in
works  of  Old-School  writers,  and  which  have  been  made  the
basis  of  "Iaw!>  of  tlie  dose"  by  writers  of  our  own  school,
arc  composite  pictures  made  up  from  a  variety  of  observa-
tions on  patients  and  from  cases  of  poisoning,  and  bear  no
more  resemblance  to  a  pathogenesis  on  a  single  individual,
than  the  composition  of  an  artist  which  has  the  mountains  of
Ecuador  covered  with  the  forests  of  Oregon  and  decked  with
the  flowers  of  Java  presents  to  a  faithful  landscape  from  nature.

Most  of  the  provcrs  of  Tellurium  taking  tlie  3d  trit.  had,
on  the  first  and  subsequent  days,  symptoms  of  the  general
sensibility,  of  sweat,  of  the  skin,  of  the  bladder,  etc.,  etc.
But  one  prover  who  took  the  4th  trit  had  no  symptoms  at
all  until  the  fourteenth  or  fifteenth  day,  when  cutaneous
symptoms  affecting  the  ear  appeared  and  were  very  persist-
ent and  troublesome.  Were  these  symptoms  secondary
because  they  came  later  than  af/rer  symptoms  in  ot/ur  prov-
crs? And  secondary  to  what?  How  can  John's  lumbago
be  secondary  to  James's  toothache  ?  But  during  the  second
month  this  same  prover,  his  car  symptoms  having  vanished,
had  symptoms  referred  to  the  dorsal  spine.  Were  these
secondary  to  the  ear  symptoms  because  they  came  later  ?
Certainly  as  regards  ttmeXhcy  were  secondary,  because  later.
But  being  in  nature  wholly  unrelated,  neither  opposite  nor
similar,  they  cannot  be  called  secondary  as  regards  nature
nor  as  regards  rank  or  value.  Both  have  been  repeatedly
verified  in  practice.

Again,  wc  are  told '  that  coldness,  a  condition  corrcspond-
'  "The  Dose."  by  E.  M.  Hale.  M.D.,  M  A.  J.,  ix.  265.


AS  GUIDES  IN DETERMINING  THE DOSE.


125


ing  to  the  chilly  stage  of  fevers,  is  the  primary  effect  of
Aconite,  and  that  a  state  corresponding  to  the  hot  stage  of
fevers  is  the  secondary  effect  of  that  drug.  Let  us  hear
Hahnemann.  In  the  introduction  to  Aconite'  he  says:
"  Aconite  is  one  of  a  few  drugs  whose  primary  action
consists  in  several  altertutting  conditions  of  ckill  or  coldness
and  Meat."  And  now  let  us  study  the  day-books  of  the
Austrian  provers  of  Aconite.

RothausI  took  tincture  of  Aconite  in  doses  regularly
increasing  from  six  drops  daily  to  5fteen  drops  daily  for
nine  days,  when,  feeling  powerful  effects,  he  ceased  taking  it
and  noted  his  symptoms.

From  the  second  to  the  eighth  day  inclusive,  he  had  the
following  constantly  recurring  symptoms:  restlessness  at
night;  bad  dreams;  unnatural  heat  0/  body  ;  rawness  and
increased  secretion  in  the  larynx ;  cough ;  vertigo ;  head-
ache. On  the  ninth  day,  after  midnight,  severe  chill  in
paroxysms  of  shivering,  starting  from  the  prxcordia,
lasting  two  hours,  followed  by  burning,  dr>*  heat,  with
frequent,  feverish  putse ;  and  this  followed  by  moderate
sweat

For  the  next  six  days  he  had  various  troublesome  symp-
toms affecting  the  chest  and  limbs,  and  on  the  sixteenth  day
of  the  proving  he  had  again,  at  night,  a  febrile  paroxysm
consisting  of  chill,  heat  and  sweat,  the  first  less  severe,  the
last  more  abundant  than  on  the  ninth  day.

On  the  seventeenth  day,  at  night,  a  similar  febrile  par-
oxysm.  Then  for  seven  days  symptoms  of  Increasing
severity  in  the  head  and  chest,  ending  with  haemoptysis  on
the  nineteenth  day.  and  finally,  on  the  twenty-fourth  day,  a
very  severe  and  well  marked  and  defined  neuralgic  head  and
face  ache.

How  can  the  ingenuity  of  the  most  ambitious  lawgiver
find  a  pretext  for  dividing  the  symptoms  (especially  the
febrile  symptoms)  of  this  excellent  proving  into  primary  and


■  Mat,  MeJ.  Pmu,  I  St  ed.


136 PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  SYMPTOMS  OF  DRUGS


secondary?  A  febrile  paroxysm  occurred  on  the  ninth,  the
sixteenth  and  the  seventeenth  days;  before  it  and  after  it
were  well-marked  symptoms  of  the  chest  and  extremities.
Which  shall  be  primary  and  which  secondary  if  date  of
occurrence  determine  the  question  ?  Which,  if  nature  or  if
rank  determine  it  ?

Certainly,  if  lateness  of  occurrence  stamp  a  symptom  as
secondary,  then  the  neuralgic  head  and  face  ache,  the  very
last  symptom  reported  by  Rothausl,  must  be  classed  as
secondary.  Not  so  fast,  however  I  In  the  proving  of
Aconite  by  Zlatarovich  with  Uie  second  decimal,  which  he
took  in  increasing  and  very  large  doses  for  seven  days  with-
out effect,  the  very  first  symptom  was  a  violent  neuralgic
Rothausl  on  his  t\venty -fourth  day.

It  appears,  then,  that  Rothausl's  last  symptom  was  Zla-
tarovich's  first.  If  the  time  of  occurrence  determines  the
class,  we  must  rank  Rothausl's  headache  among  the  second-
ary, and  Zlatarovich's  identical  headache  among  the  primary,
and  thus  we  have  the  same  symptom  In  each  class,  which  is
a  reduclio  ad  absurdum.

It  will  be  noticed  that  these  identical  symptoms,  produced
at  different  times  in  different  provers  of  Aconite,  were  pro-
duced by  different  doses.  The  opposite  symptoms  of  Argen-
tum  nitricum  in  different  provers  resulted  from  different  doses.

Prof.  T.  F.  Allen  has  shown  how  greatly  the  results  of
different  doses  vary.  Dr.  Sharp  shows  that,  in  the  same
prover,  Aconite  has  four  different  kinds  of  action  on  the
heart,  as  shown  by  the  radial  pulse,  depending  on  the  dose»
and  that  in  only  two  of  these  is  one  series  of  symptoms
followed  by  an  opposite  series.

Hahnemann,  who,  it  must  be  remembered,  had  an
immense  experience  as  a  drug-prover,  and  who  brought  to
the  work  a  devotion  and  powers  of  observation  and  analysts
rarely  equaled,  was  well  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  appear-
ance of  apparently  contradictory  symptoms  in  a  proving  Is


AS  GUIDES  IN  DETERMLNING  THE  DOSE.


127


greatly  dependent  on  the  dost,  as  appears  from  %  66  of  the
Organon  (4th  ed.),  in  which,  for  this  reason,  he  recommends
the  use  of  small  doses  in  proving.

Passing  for  a  moment  to  the  second  division  of  the  subject,
the  value  of  primary  and  secondary  symptoms  as  guides  in
selecting  the  remedy,  there  arc  many  drugs  which,  having
certain  constant  characteristic  symptoms,  have  also  series
of  alternating  symptoms  relating  chiefly  to  the  secretions.
Among  them  we  may  mention  Veratrum  alburn,  which  has
{122-124)  "Thin  stool  passing  unnoticed  with  flatus.  Fre-
quent liquid  stools.  Liquid  stools  unnoticed  with  flatus.
Diairhuea  of  acrid  fsccs,  etc."  And  also  (127-139).  "  Con-
stipation from  thickness  and  hardness  of  fxces.  A  desire
and  compulsion  to  stool  in  the  upper  abdomen,  and  yet  no
stool,  or  a  very  difficult  one,  as  if  from  inactivity  of  the  rectum,
and  as  if  the  rectum  took  no  part  in  the  peristaltic  motion
of  the  upper  intestines."  Also  Hahnemann  quotes  from
Grcding,  "  Diarrhcea  with  copious  sweat"  and  "long-con-
tinued constipation."

The  efficacy  of  Vcratrum  Jn  the  treatment  of  diarrhcea  of
an  appropriate  character  is  universally  conceded  in  our
school.  And  in  my  own  practice,  Vcratmm  has  for  many
years  been  a  frequently  used  and  highly  valued  remedy  for
ionstipation  in  persons  of  all  ages,  but  especially  in  infants
and  young  children,  in  whom  digestion  appearing  to  be  well
performed,  the  evacuation  of  fxces  appears  nevertheless  to
be  impossible  because  of  the  inertia  of  the  rectum — a  fact
demonstrated  by  the  circumstance  that  a  healthy  stool  can
be  procured  almost  at  will  by  irritation  of  the  rectum,  as  by
the  common  practice  of  introducing  into  the  anus  a  piece  of
soap  or  an  oiled  paper,  or  a  rubber  bougie.  We  have  here
the  apparent  anomaly  of  the  same  remedy  equally  efficacious
in  diarrhcea  and  constipation.

Nux  vomica  furnishes  a  similar  example.  Its  cfHcacy  in
certain  forms  of  constipation  as  well  as  of  dysenteric  diar-
rho:a  is  well  known.


138 PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  SYMPTOMS  OF  DRUGS


Let  us  now,  for  a  moment,  examine  a  little  more  close!)*
the  nature  of  tlie functions  affecting which  the  alternate
series  (if  opposed  conditions,  which  have  been  called  primary
and  secondary,  arc  mostly  observed  in  drug-proving, ist
They  are  such  as  in  the  nature  of  things  arc  periodic,  and
not continuous ; characterized  by  periods of  repose  and
activity, and susceptible of quantitative and qualitative
correlative  interchange among  themselves. Thus  sleep  u
periodic,  and  capable  of  being  supplemented  to  a  deforce  by
other  forms  of  repose  to  the  nervous  system. The  intestinal
canal,  the  gen tto- urinary  apparatus,  the  skin,  in so  far  as
secretion and excretion are concerned, have periods  of
activity and repose ; and the inactivity of  one may be
made  up  by increased activity of another. And thus
the  function of any one  of  these apparatus  may vary
widely  at  different  times  without  a  condition  of  opposition
being  established. For  this  reason,  then,  the  mere  quanti^
of  one  of  the  excretions,  or  the  degree  in  which  any  one  of
these  periodic  and  convertible  fimctinns  is  performed,  does
not  rank  first  among  the  indications  on  which  the  selection
of  a  drug  is  to  be  based. If  we  now  analyze  the  prescrip-
tions of  Veratrum  and  Nux  vomica  referred  to,  wc  shall
Bnd  certain  constant phenomena characterizing both the
constipation  and  the  diarrhoea,  and  which  would  determine
the  prescription  almost  without  reference  to  the  excretion.

The  Veratrum  diarrhcta  is  uncontrolled  and  almost  unno-
ticed by  the  patient,  liquid  fxces  escaping  with  the  flatus.
Here  we  have  a  paretic  and  anxsthetic  state  of  the  rectum
and  sphincter.  The  Veratrum  constipation  exists  solely
because  the  rectum  docs  not  perform  its  expulsive  function,
and  is  not,  as  normally  it  should  be,  irritated  thereto  by  the
presence  of  fseces.  Here  likewise  is  a  paretic  and  anaesthetic
condition.  But  Veratrum  is  not  fully  indicated  in  either  case
without  the  characteristic  general  symptoms:  general  depres-
non  of  vitality ;  predominant  coldness  of  the  body;  pallor
and  cold  sweat  of  the  forehead,  or  of  the  whole  body,  on


AS  GUIDES  IN  DETERMIWMG  THE  DOSE.


129


slight  emotion  or  exertion,  as,  for  example,  on  having;  a
diarrhceic  stool,  or  making  the  ineffectual  effort  to  have  a
stool,  if  constipated.

Both  the  constipation  and  the  diarrhoea  of  Nux  vomica
are  characterized  by  increased  but  uncoordinated  activitj*
of  the  intestine,  evinced  by  tormina  and  tenesmus,  and  fre-
quent insufficient  stools;  so  that  the  condition  of  intestinal
action  is  the  same,  whether  there  be.  as  in  one  case  a  minus,
and  as  in  the  other,  a  fi/rts  of  excretion;  and,  indeed,  in  the
Nux  vomica  patient  these  conditions  often  alternate.  These
remarks  and  instances  will  sufficiently  illustrate  my  conclu-
sions, viz. :

That  the  appearance  or  non-appearance  of  opposed  series
among  the  symptoms  of  a  drug  depends  chiefly,  if  not  alto-
gether, upon  the  dose  in  which  the  drug  was  proved;  and
that  the  question  of  the  constant  and  necessary  appearance
of  such  series  cannot  be  determined  until  experiments  with  a
uniform  and  the  least  possible  dose  shall  have  been  made  by
many  provers  with  the  same  drug,  and  in  the  case  of  many
drugs,  and  therefore  that,  1st,  Although  in  our  Materia
Medica,  as  it  now  exists,  pathogeneses  do  present  certain
series  of  symptoms  more  or  less  opposed,  nevertheless
(excluding  the  symptoms  of  the  agony  which  are  not  available
in  practice),  inasmuch  as  these  series  of  symptoms  occur  in
different  orders  in  different  provers  according  to  dose  or
idiosyncrasy,  no  sound  practical  distinction  can  be  drawn
between  them,  based  on  assumed  difference  of  nature,  by
virtue  of  which  they  c^n  be  designated  respectively  as
primary  and  secondary.

2d :  That  symptoms,  apparently  opposed  (not  including
those  of  tlie  agony),  occurring  in  a  drug-proving  arc  equally
available  as  guides  in  the  selection  of  remedies.

Coming  now  to  the  special  subject  of  this  paper,  I  justify
the  length  at  which  tlie  preliminary  subjects  have  been  dis-
cussed by  the  suggestion  that,  if  I  have  shown  that  tliere  is
no  basis  for  a  division  of  drug- symptoms  into  primary  and
10


I30


lARY  AND  SECONDARY  SYMPTOMS  OF  DRUGS


secondary,  I  have  thereby  shown  the  impossibility  of  a  law
of  dose  based  on  such  a  division.  Or,  if  admitting  that  in
pathogeneses  there  do  appear  groups  of  symptoms  appar-
ently  opposed,  I  have  shown  that  these  refer  only  to  certain
functions,  and  by  no  means  embrace,  or  could  be  made
include,  the  symptoms  of  the  entire  or^^nism.  I  havel
thereby  shown  tliat  an  alleged  law  of  dose  based  on  the
existence  of  these  groups,  must  necessarily  be  partial,  and
therefore  devoid  of  tliat  generality  of  application  to  the  entire
pathogenesis  which  alone  would  justify  the  appellatioQj
"LAW;"  and  I  claim  to  have  shown  these  things.  \

In  1844,  Dr.  C.  Hcring  in  a  letter  to  the  German  Central
Vcrcin  in  session  at  Magdt-burgh  {A''.  Archiv.,  21,  3,  166)
rejects  Hahnemann's  explanation  of  primary  and  secondary
symptoms.  He  admits  that  there  are  in  every  proving
primary  and  secondary  symptoms,  In  the  sense  that  some
symptoms  appear  earlier  and  others  later  in  the  course  of  the
proving,  but  affirms  that  although  these  may  appear  to  be
opposed  to  each  other,  they  are  all  to  be  regarded  as  drug-
symptoms,  and  as  such  are  to  be  made  the  basis  of  prescrip-
tions. He  gives  instances  of  such  prescriptions  in  the  cases
of  Conium.  Opium,  and  Mercury.  Indeed,  he  says  that  the
lohger-lasting,  more  permanent  and  more  opposed  to  the
earlier  these  later  symptoms  are,  the  more  useful  arc  they  in
practice.  He  says  further,  that  "the  course  of  the  drug-
disease  (in  proving)  must  correspond  with  that  of  the  disease
to  be  treated."  Hcring  further  states  that  "all  symptoms
which  arise  in  provings  of  the  higgler  potencies  are  similar  to
the  later  effects  of  the  lower  or  so-called  stronger  doses,  and
are  not  like  l)\i  first  effects  of  strong  doses."  He  adds  that
the  great  characteristics  of  remedies  [as  we  have  seen  in  the
cases  of  Nux  vomica,  Veralrum,  etc]  accompany  both  thej
earlier  and  later  symptoms,  e.  g.,  the  burning  of  Arsenic

From  these  considerations,  Hcring  deduces  the  following
law  of  dose :

"Having  chosen  the  remedy  according  to  tlie  symptoms
of  a  case  from  the  complete  correspondence  of  the  charac-J


AS  GUIDES  IN DETERMINING  THE DOSE.


131


teristics  in  disease  and  dmg,  v/e  have  only  to  consider
whether  the  symptoms  of  the  case  generally  have  more
resemblance  to  the  earlier  (primary)  5}Tnptoms  of  the  drug,
and  then  we  give  the  lower  potencies;  or  more  resemblance
to  the  later  (secondary)  effects,  that  is.  to  the  symptoms
produced  by  the  higher-potency  provings,  and  then  wc  give
the  higher."

analogous  to  those  which  produced,  in  t^e  proving,  the
symptoms  presented  by  the  case  under  treatment.  But  it
amounts  to  a  great  deal  more,  for  by  showing  that  the
symptoms  produced  in  provings  by  small  doses  correspond
witli  the  later  effects  of  large  doses,  it  enables  us  to  infer  the
effects  of  small  doses  in  cases  where  provings  have  been
conducted  with  lai^e  doses  only.

In  i860,  Dr.  E.  M.  Hale  published  an  elaborate  article  in
the  //.  A.  y.  of  H.,  vol,  ix.,  on  "The  Dose,"  in  which  he
expresses  the  belief  that  he  has  discovered  the  long-desired
law  by  which  "the  proper  dose  for  each  case  may  be
selected  with  as  much  certainty  as  the  proper  remedy,"  as
follows :

"  In  any  case  of  disease  we  must  select  a  remedy  whose
primary  and  secondary  symptoms  correspond  with  those  of
the  malady  to  be  treated,"  and

"  If  the  primary  symptoms  of  a  disease  arc  present,  and
wc  are  combating  them  with  a  remedy  whose  primary
symptoms  correspond,  we  must  make  the  dose  the  smallest
compatible  with  reason ;  and  if  we  are  treating  the
secondary  symptoms  of  a  malady  with  a  remedy  whose
secondary  symptoms  correspond,  we  must  use  as  large  a
dose  as  we  can  with  safety."

These  propositions  rest  on  the  assumption  that  all  drugs
produce,  and  all  diseases  present,  two  series  of  symptoms,
primary  and  secondary,  and  that  in  one  or  other  of  these
classes  is  embraced  every  symptom  of  drug  or  disease.  X
have  expressed  my  dissent  from  this  view,  and  given  reasons
for  thinking  that  a  distinction  between  primary  and  second-


132 PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  SYMPTOMS  OF  DRUGS


ary  symptoms,  if  ever  justifiable,  is,  at  most,  applicable  to
but  a  portion  of  the  symptoms  of  each  drug.  It  cannot,  if  1
am  correct,  be  made  the  basis  of  a  general  law.  ^

Dr.  Hale  iUtistratcs  his  meaning  by  referring  to  Aconite,  ^
the  primary  symptoms  of  which,  he  says,  "correspond
perfectly  with  the  chilly  stage  of  all  fevers"  while  the
secondary  symptoms  of  Aconite  "  correspond  witli  the  hot
stage  of  fever."  He  therefore  recommends  a  small  dose  of  a
dilution  of  Aconite  during  the  chilly  stage,  and  large  doses
of  the  tincture  or  tst  decimal  during  the  hot  stage,  and
relates  results  of  such  treatment,  which  seem  to  h*¥^^^
satisfied  him,  but  would  hardly  have  satisfied  me.  ^^^|

Again,  he  tells  us  that  the  primary  symptoms  of  a  group
of  remedies, of  which Cinchona,  Fcrrum, Conium, Nux
vomica,  and  Ignatia  arc  members,  are  such  as  to denote
that  these  drugs  first  "  increase  the  tone  and  strength  of  the
muscular  or  nervous  system,  impart  vitality  and  vigor  to  the
functions  of  the  vital  organs ; "  and  that  their  secondary  effects
are  to  cause  "  a  peculiar  atony,  a  condition  of  deficient  vitality,  ■
and  a  cachexia  of  a  more  or  less  obstinate  character." And,
stating further, that an  outbreak  of  intermittent fever  is _
always  preceded  by  "an  era  of  good  feeling,"  a  condition  |
of  exalted  muscular  and  nervous  tone  and  vigor,  he  regards
this  as  the  primar).'  stage  of  that  disease,  to  be  treated,  when
recognized, therefore, by  small  doses  of Cinchona. The
outbreak of paroxysmal fever is regarded by  Hale as
belonging  to  the  secondary  series  of  symptoms,  and  therefore
to  be  treated  by  as  large  doses  of  Cinchona  as  may  safely _
be  given.  |

In  a  paper  presented  to  this  Institute  in  1874,  Dr.  Hale
reiterates  these  views  in  substance  and  re-affirms  this  alleged
"law  of  dose."  He  illustrates  the  tu-o  alleged  series  of
symptoms  in  disease,  called  primary  and  secondary,  by  the
instance  of  inflammation  of  the  urinary  passages,  in  which
congestion  and  arrested  secretion  with  fever  and  pain  appear
first,  and  are  succeeded  by  profuse  secretion  or  suppuration^


AS  GUIDES  IN  DETERMINING  THE  DOSE.


m


prostration  and  cessation  of  pain,  etc.  And  he  affirms  that
the  group  of  cognate  drugs,  of  which  Cantharis  may  be  the
representative,  presents  similar  series  of  primary  and
secondary  symptoms.

Considering,  first  of  all,  the  last  illustration,  it  is  true  that
the  process  of  inflammation  consists  of  scx'cral  successive
steps,  "accelerated  and  increased  circulation,  followed  by
retarded  and  diminished  circulation,  exudation  of  liquor
sanguinis,  emigration  of  leucocytes  and  stiisis,"  and  it  is  true
that  the  earlier  steps  are  prior  to  the  later,  but  they  are
equally  successive  and  necessary  steps  in  a  uniform  and
definite  process,  and  nothing  justifies  the  drawing  a  line
anywhere  in  the  process,  and  affirming  that  all  that  lies
behind  the  line  belongs  to  a  different  and  opposite  series  to
that  which  lies  in  front  of  it  Nor  can  1  recognize  in  drug-
provings  any  such  opposed  scries.  Neither  Hahnemann's
provings  of  Cinchona  and  Ferrum,  nor  Hahnemann's
and  Harlcy's  proving  of  Conium.  nor  Hahnemann's  provings
of  Nux  vomica  and  Ignatia  seem  to  me  to  support  tiie  alle-
gations of  Dr.  Hale.

Alluding  now  to  Hale's  remarks  upon  Aconite,  I  refer  to
my  quotations  of  Hahnemann,  Rothausl,  Zlatarovich  and
Sharp,  whicli  show  that  Aconite  docs  not  produce  a  distinct
chilly  stage  first,  followed  by  continued  heat,  but,  as  Hahne-
mann says,  "  alternating  conditions  made  up  of  shiver-
ing  or  cold  and  heat,  and  recurring  frequently  or  at  longer
intervals,"  So  that  while  I  will  not  deny  that  Dr.  Hale  pre-
no  ground  for  the  theory  on  which  he  says  he  acted,  or
which  he  deduced  from  his  action.

And,  if  I  may  deviate  for  an  instant  from  the  subject
strictly  under  discussion,  these  statements  about  Aconite  and
its  application  suggest  the  fact  that  many  prescriptions  pro-
fessedly homceopathic  are  really  made  r.r  wjm  in  merHs,  and
are  not  based  on  a  strict  individualization  of  the  case,  and  a


134 PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  SYMPTOMS  OF  DRUGS


selection  of  the  drug  whose  symptoms  correspond  to  it
Aconite,  having  early  acquired  a  reputation  as  a  remedy  in
febrile  conditions,  is  tuo  oftei]  given  in  routine  fashion,  "in
all  fevers"  (to  use  Dr  Hale's  phrase),  and  therefore  in  many
cases  in  which  the  symptoms  do  not  at  all  indicate  it.  For,
as  even  Hahnemann  warned  us,  "  it  is  not  in  every  case
presenting  febrile  symptoms  that  Aconite  is  homcEopathically
indicated  ;  "  and  therefore  it  cannot  truly  be  said  to  corre-
spond to  the  "  chilly  "  or  any  other  "  stage  of  all  fevers."
Given  when  the  patient  is  quiet,  lies  still,  is  tranquil  in  mind
and  hopeful  or  patient,  it  will  not  remove  the  symptoms  as  a
horn oeo path ically  selected  remedy  would  do.  Nor  is  it
indicated  by  a  similarity  of  symptoms  in  any  save  a  small
minority,  if  in  any,  of  the  intermittent,  remittent  or  con-
tinued fevers  which  so  often  prevail  in  different  parts  of  our
country,  nor  in  the  febrile  condition  which  persists  when
parenchymatous  inflammation  is  established  in  any  important
organ.

It  was  my  purpose  to  follow  and  analyze  the  statements
and  arguments  of  this  writer  on  this  important  subject,  but
I  find  tliat  I  cannot  do  so.  His  premises  consist  of  citations
from  allopathic  writers,  which  seem  to  me  to  be  statements
based  on  observations  of  the  action  of  drugs  in  large  doses
on  the  sick,  and  on  tlieoretical  deductions  from  these  obser-
vations, and  which  certainly  bear  little  or  no  resemblance  to
the  pathogeneses  of  the  Materia  Medtca  Pura,  on  which  I
have  been  wont  to  rely  for  a  knowledge  o(  drug-effects,  but
to  which  my  colleague  rarely  refers.  His  allusions  to  treat-
ment seem  to  me  to  be  of  a  very  generic  character,  based
on  assumptions  of  the  pathological  nature  of  the  disease  in
question,  and  consisting  of  an  application  of  drugs  according*
to  a  vague  and  general  resemblance  of  assumed  pathological
conditions,  In  all  of  this  I  fail  to  see  any  allusion  to,  or  any
place  for,  the  strict  individualization  of  cases,  which  is  the
very  essence  of  sound  homoeopathic  treatment  In  studying
these  papers,  in  fact,  I  hardly  realize  that  I  am  perusing  the


AS  GUIDES  IN DETERMINING  THE  DOSE-


i35


works  of  a  practical  honi(EOpathtst,  according  to  my  concep-
tion of  Hahnemann's  idea  of  homceopathic  practice,  and  I
perceive,  to  my  dismay,  that  I  do  not  stand  on  common
ground  with  the  author  to  the  extent  necessary  to  make
possible  a  further  discussion  of  his  treatment  of  the  question
at  issue.

I  must  content  myself,  therefore,  with  the  simple  state-
ment that  my  own  observation  and  experience  do  not  enable
me  to  corroborate  Dr.  Hale's  statement  of  the  "  Law  of  the
Dose."  based  on  the  distinction  of  primary  aad  secondary
symptoms.  Where  Aconite  has  been  truly  indicated  by  tlie
symptoms  of  the  case.  I  have  seen  prompt  relief  foUow  the
administration  of  a  high  potency,  given  when  the  patient
was  ill  the  hot  stage,  and  likewise  when  in  the  chilly  stage;
and  in  both  the  effect  has  appeared  in  a  much  shorter  time
than  Dr.  Hale's  remarks  would  lead  one  to  anticipate.

In  the  treatment  both  of  constipation  and  of  dysenteric
diarrhoea  by  Nux  vomica  in  cases  in  which  the  characteristics
of  Nux  vomica  were  present,  the  higher  potencies  have  been
equally  efficient,  leaving  nothing  to  be  desired,  and  the  same
may  be  said  of  Vcratrum  album  in  dianhoea  and  in  consti-
pation, when  the  characteristics  of  that  drug  were  present

It  may  be,  and  I  am  inclined  to  believe,  that  the  law  pro-
posed by  Dr.  Hering  may  be  found  to  represent  the  facts ;
but  for  its  demonstration  and  its  general  application  in
practice,  wc  need  a  much  more  complete  Materia  Mcdica
tlian  has  yet  been  furnished  us.

In  conclusion  of  this  branch  of  the  subject,  I  think  that  no
law  for  tlie  determination  of  the  dose  can  be  deduced  from
the  relation  of  opposition  or  contrariety  on  the  basis  of
which  symptoms  have  been  divided  into  series  of  primary
and  secondary.


THE  DOSE  IN  DRUG-PROVING.


The  symptoms  which  drugs  prodiice  upon  the  healthy
organism  vary  according  to  the  dose. They  may  be :

1.  Chemical — depending  on  the  chemical  affinity  which
exists  between  Uie  drug  and  the  tissues  of  the  body,  and
independent  of  vitality  ;  or,

2.  MECHANICAI.  (or  revolution  a  r>-),  consisting  chiefly  in
violent  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  organism  to  eject  from  its
cavities  the  offending  substance ;  or,

3-  Dynamic,  contingent  upon  vitality  and  resulting  from
tlie  relations  of  the  peculiar  properties  of  the  drug  to  the
susceptibilities  of  the  living,  healthy  organism.  These
dynamic  effects  may  be:

A.  C/wfnV— such  as  arc  common  to  all  the  members  of
a  certain  class  of  drugs  and  which  serve  to  distinguish  this
class  from  others,  but  do  not  furnish  means  of  distinguishing
between  different  individuals  of  the  same  class.  For
example.  Arsenic  in  certain  doses  produces  \*omiting  and
diarrhara,  with  cold  sweat  and  cramps  of  the  extremities.
These  are  dynamic  effects  of  Arsenic  but  they  are  gemric^
since  other  members  of  the  class  to  which  Arsenic  belongs,
viz.:  Cuprum,  Vcratrum,  Tartar  emetic,  etc.,  in  certain
doses,  produce  identical  symptoms;  and  were  these  reme-
dies proved  in  such  doses  alone,  it  tvould  be  impossible  to
distinguish  the  patliogcnesis  of  one  of  them  from  that  of  any
of  the  others.

B.  Specific — such  as  results  from  the  dynamic  action  of
tlie  drug  and  are  peculiar  to  it  They  serve  to  distinguish
a  given  drug  Irom  all  others. For  example,  Arsenic,  taken


THE  DOSE  m  DRUG-PROVING.


"37


in  different  doses  from  those  which  produce  the  generic
dynamic  effects,  produces  vomiting  and  diarrhcEa  or  ten-
dencies thereto;  but  these  phenomena  arc  accompanied  and
characterized  by  conditions  quite  different  from  those  which
accompany  the  simiHar  symptoms  of  Cuprum,  Vcratrum,  etc.,
and  are  thus  distinguishable  from  the  effects  of  these  drugs.

The  Specific-dytiamic  symptoms  maybe  again  sub-divided
into  Cfntrat  and  Peripheral.

The  Central  symptoms  appear  speedily  after  the  drug  is
taken,  are  generally  the  result  of  comparatively  large  doses
and,  in  the  case  of  many  drugs,  are  confined  to  the  aliment-
ary* canal  and  to  the  organs  immediately  connected  with  it

The  Peripheral  symptoms  appear  more  tardily,  are  gen-
erally the  result  of  comparatively  small  doses,  taken  repeat-
edly or  allowed  to  act  without  interruption  for  a  long  period,
and  appear  in  the  bones,  skin,  glands,  etc.,  and  in  the
coordinated  phenomena  of  life.  They  are  often  the  mani-
festations of  a  dyscrasia  or  cachexy.  Doses  which  produce
central  symptoms  do  not  generally  produce  the  peripheral
(or  at  least  not  until  after  a  long  period  has  elapsed)  and
vice  versa.  For  example.  Mercury,  in  certain  doses,  pro-
duces well-marked  and  characteristic  action  upon  the  aliment-
ary canal  and  its  appendages.  In  smaller  doses  it  produces,
instead  of  these  effects,  a  series  of  symptoms  in  the  skin,
bones,  glands,  etc. — the  Mercurial  cachexy.  The  former
arc  what  wc  mean  by  central  specific  dynamic  symptoms.
The  latter  arc  the  peripheral  symptoms.  Arsenic,  again,
furnishes,  according  to  the  dose,  examples  of  all  of  the  above
varieties  of  symptoms.  In  certain  doses  it  develops
chemical  and  revolutionary  effects.  In  smaller  doses,  as  we
have  seen,  generic  dynamic ;  in  still  smaller  doses,  j/^(:(/f<-
dyaamic  symptoms  of  the  *rf«/ra/ variety.  In  yet  smaller
doses,  it  produces  periplterat  specific  symptoms,  which  arc
those  of  the  so-called  "gradual  poisonii^;"  as  for  instance
in  poisoning  by  exhalations  of  Arsenic  from  green  wall-
paper, in  which  the  phenomena  of  vomiting  and  diarrhcea


us


THE  DOSE IN  DRU&PKOVINti.


3fr I


or  the  ccnirai  specific  symptoms  do  not  appear,  btit  inscr**^
of  these  we  have  evidence  of  a  distinct  cachexy,  in  the  s&a
and  glandular  symptoms,  marasmus,  etc.

Such  are  the  varieties  of  symptoms  produced  by  corre-
sponding varieties  in  the  dcsg.  It  is  hardly  ncces&ary  to  saf
Uiat  tliey  are  not  always  to  be  distinguished  with  precision;
but  the  facility  with  which  we  are  able  to  recognize  them  t&
in  proportion  to  the  completeness  of  our  proving.

It  unquestionably  behooves  the  homneopathic  pbysictaa  to
have  an  eschaustivc  knowledge  of  the  whole  sphere  of  action,
the  varieties  and  snbvarictics  of  dynamic  effects  which  iw
have  specified.  This  knoAvlcdgc  is  to  be  attained  in  the  ftf"^
place  only  by  drug-proving.  The  proving  of  dntgs  nnx^s*
then  be  so  conducted  as  to  produce  in  the  greatest  poasil^l*^
completeness. and  clearness,  each  of  these  varieties  3ndsu't=>'
varieties.  This,  as  has  been  shown,  is  to  be  accomplished  fc»y
a  skillful  selection  and  succession  of  doses.  It  is  not  so  simf>l^
and  easy  a  matter  as  it  might  at  first  view  appear  to  be :  fcy*''

First:  The  doses  by  which  the  corresponding  varieties  C7'
symptoms  are  produced,  differ  widely  in  different  drugs-  Fc^
example,  a  half  grain  of  crude  Nitrate  of  silver  or  of  Sul-
phuric acid  produces  chemical  symptoms,  while  a  half  grain
of  Lycopodium  or  of  Silicca  produces  probably  no  symptooi
at  all. A  grain  of  Arsenic  produces  ^rwrrxc  dynamic  symp-
toms, while  ten  grains  of  Natnim  muriatlcum  may  be  inert
Forty  drops  of  Bryonia  tincture  may  excite  a  fair  show  of
specific  dynamic  symptoms,  while  forty  drops  of  tincture  of
Opium will ])roducc generic dynamic symptoms or full
narcotism.

Secondly :  The  susceptibility  of  different  provers  to  tiw
same  drug  is  very  different,  and  the  degree  of  susceptibility
which  each  provcr  possesses  is  to  be  learned  only  by  exper-
iment For  example,  one  prover  will  take  five  hundred  drops
of  Thuja  without  any  effect;  another,  taking  twenty  drops,
experiences  violent  spuific  symptoms.


THE  DOSE  IN  UKUU-PROVLNG.


n9


Thirdly:  The  susceptibility  of  provers  to  different  prepa-
rations of  the  aamc  drug  is  very  various  and  apparently  capri-
cious. One  records  characteristic  specific  symptoms  from
large  doses  of  the  crude  drug,  and  is  not  affected  by  smaller
doses ;  another  is  acted  on  by  dilutions  and  not  by  any  quan-
tity of  the  crude  substance.

The  relative  power  of  a  drug  and  susceptibility  of  the
prover  being  altogether  unknown  until  ascertained  by  direct
experiment,  the  proving  of  a  new  drug  is  therefore  a  matter
of  pure  experiment  in  every  particular,  and  it  might  at  first
view  be  supposed  to  be  a  matter  of  indifference  in  what  man-
ner or  with  what  doses  the  experiment  is  begun  ;  which  vari-
ety or  subvariety  of  symptoms  is  first  developed,  whether
we  take  heroic  doses  and  develop  chemical  symptoms  or
small  doses  and  produce  peripheral  dynamic  symptoms  i  since
in  cither  case  we  sliould  be  able  by  subsequent  experiments
based  on  the  first,  to  develop  the  complementary  symptoms
and  thus  complete  our  proving.  Experience  teaches,  however,
that  this  supposition  is  not  sound,  and  for  the  following  rea-
sons :  Drugs  vary  not  more  in  the  intensity  than  in  the  per-
manence of  their  action  upon  the  organism.  Some  drugs
appear  speedily  to  exhaust,  sometimes  by  a  sin^c  large  dose,
the  susceptibility  of  the  prover,  so  that  no  subsequent  doses,
whether  large  or  small,  produce  any  effect.  Of  others  again,
a  single  large  dose  develops  some  one  getiiric  or  central  spe-
cific symptom,  and  along  with  it  induces  such  an  exalted  and
distorted  susceptibility  that  every  subsequent  dose,  whether
large  or  small,  evokes  straightway  that  one  symptom  or
series  of  symptoms  and  none  other.  Thus  the  proving  is  in
either  case  partial  and  incomplete — we  fail  to  get  those  symp-
toms which  are  the  most  valuable  of  all  to  us,  as  being  those
which  clearly  characterize  the  drug  and  enable  us  to  distin-
guish it  from  all  other  drugs,  viz.: — ^\^  peripheral  z.w^  central
specific  dynamic  symptoms.  To  illustrate  this  point, — it  is
wellknown  that  Mercury  given  in  such  doses  as  to  produce  ff«-
tral specific  symptoms,  induces  often  so  great  a  susccptibili^


I40


THE  DOSE  IN  DRUG-PROVIKG.


of  tlic  organism  to  the  action  of  this  drug  that  subsequent
doses,  even  uf  tolerably  high  dilutions,  provoke  straight-
way a  series  of  central  symptoms.  The  same  is  true  of  Ar-
senic. Wc  have  seen  a  case  in  which,  generic  and  ^ecific
symptoms  having  once  been  produced  by  massive  doses  of
Tartu"  cmvtic,  the  organism  remained  so  sensitive  to  the
action  of  this  substance,  that  a  few  globules  of  the  thirtieth
dilution  would  at  any  time  produce  vomiting  and  diarrhcca,
with  cold  sweat  and  prostration.  It  may  be  said  that  these
arc  cases  of  very  unusually  great  susceptibilit>'  to  the  action
of  the  respective  drugs.  This  is  true,  but  it  is  precisely  such
cases  of  great  .susceptibility  that  arc  of  exceeding  value  to
us,  for  in  them,  by  jndicicuis  experimentation,  we  could  get
most  valuable  peripheral  symptoms,  unalloyed  by  generic  or
by  revolutionary  clTccts.

There  is  no  reason  to  believe,  on  the  other  hand,  that
small  doses,  so  administered  as  to  produce  the  peripheral
^ecific  s>*mptoms,  modify  the  susceptibility  of  tlie  prover
in  any  such  way  as  to  prevent  his  obtaining  by  subsequent
larger  doses  the  central  specific,  the  generic  dynamic,  or
even  the  chemical  and  mechanical  effects.  It  follows  from
what  has  been  said,  that  to  obtain  an  exhaustive  proving  of
a  drug,  we  should  begin  with  small  doses,  gradually  increas-
ing the  quantity  until  unequivocal  symptoms  appear.  We
shall  thus,  if  we  continue  our  experiments  a  suitable  length
of  time,  obtain  peripheral  symptoms  ;  and  these  small  doses
will  not  have  so  influenced  the  system  as  to  prevent  our
obtaining  by  subsequent  larger  doses  the  other  varieties  of
effects.  Inasmuch  as.  in  the  nature  of  things,  the  peripheral
symptoms,  representing,  ;is  they  do,  a  cachexy,  cannot  be
speedily  produced,  a  considerable  space  of  time  should  be
devoted  to  our  6rst  experiments  with  small  doses.  Finally,
after  an  interval  of  non-medication,  larger  doses  should  be
taken  until  wc  have  exhausted  the  whole  dynamic  action  of
the  drug,  and  even  obtained  a  fair  picture  of  its  chemical
and  revolutionary  action,  although  this  may  in  a  measure  be
gained  from  records  oi poisonings.


TlIE  IWSE  IN  DRUG-PROnNG.


141


But,  in  this  relation,  what  are  the  "  small  doses "  "n-ith
which  we  arc  lo  begin  our  proving  f  The  term  is  compara-
tive. Are  they  drop  doses  of  the  tinctures,  or  are  they
high  dilutions  f  They  are  such  doses  as  have,  in  the  proving
of  some  previous  drug,  shown  themselves  ca{>ablc  of  produc-
ing unequivocal  symptoms.  We  must  search  the  records  of
provings,  therefore,  for  our  standard  initial  dose.  What
this  is  at  present  wc  shall  soon  sec :  as  our  experience
increases,  this  standard  may  from  time  to  time  be  altered.

It  is  evident  that  the  method  of  conducting  a  proving  is  a
matter  of  great  importance,  and  should  not  be  left  to  caprice
or  accident.  The  completeness  of  our  Materia  Mcdica,  and
consequently  our  ability  to  cure  disease,  depend  upon  our
selection  of  a  happy  method.  This  important  subject  has
received  the  attention  of  tlie  American  Institute  of  Homceop-
athy,  to  which  the  Central  Bureau  of  Materia  MedJca
has  presented  a  report  on  Drug-Provings.  The  majority  of
the  Bureau  repeat  Hahnemann's  directions  for  proving  as
contained  in  the  Organ&u  ;  and  as  regards  the  dose,  they
recommend  "the  provcr  who  makes  use  of  potencies"  to
make  a  trial  of  the  high  potencies  first,  and  afterward,  if
necessary,  to  take  the  lower  dilutions  and  triturations,  or
the  crude  substance  or  tincture,  if  satisfactory  results  are
not  obtained  with  the  attenuations.

This  recommendation  accords  with  our  deductions  and
corresponds  with  the  spirit  of  Hahnemann's  directions.
Hahnemann's  instructions  differed  at  different  periods  of  his
life.  One  essential  idea,  however,  pervades  tticm  all — a
small  dose  is  to  be  taken  at  first,  and  the  dose  is  to  be
increased  until  unequivocal  symptoms  manifest  themselves.
In  the  last  edition  of  the  Organon  he  adds,  as  the  result  of
his  extensive  observation,  that  "The  most  recent  experience
has  taught  that  medicinal  substances,  when  taken  in  the  crude
state,  do  not  for  a  long  time  display  the  full  extent  of  their
virtues,  as  they  do  when  taken  in  higher  developments.
Thus  any  one,  even  of  those  medicines  whose  virtues  are


142


THE  DOSE  IX  DRUG-PROVINa


considered  weakest,  is  now  found  to  be  most  advantageous
studied  if  four  to  six  globules  of  the  thirtieth  dilution
taken  every  morning  for  several  days." In  this  statemtf*
Hahnemann  does  not  contradict  the  spirit  of  his  forra^
directions,  for  he  adds,  "Should  the  effects  of  such  a  doseb^
weak,  it  may  be  daily  increased/' He  further  adds.  "Th^
more  moderate  the  dose,  the  more  are  the  primitive  effi
developed,  which  are  the  most  important  to  be  known."'
We  see  nothing  in Hahnemann's  writings  which  shows  that
he  ever  thought  of  restricting  the  dose  in  proving to  the
thirtieth  dilution,  as  some  have  stated ;  he  simply  assures
us  that  unless  provings  with  so  high  a  dilution  were  made,
the  provcr  would  fail  to  get  all  of  the  symptoms  which  the
drug  is  capable  of  evolving.

In  the  Minority  report  of  the  Central  Bureau,'  Dr.
Hempel  differs  from  the  majority  in  so  far  as  the  proving
with  dilutions  is  concerned.  He  would  propose  that  "all
such  provings  should  be  rejected  rather  than  encouraged;"
and  he  "  is  convinced  in  his  deepest  soul,  that  it  is  owing  Co
the  incorporation  of  such  provings  in  our  Materia  Medka
that  all  the  confusion  and  uncertainties  with  which  it  is  dow
tainted,  arc  presenting  immense  and  almost*  insufferable
difficulties  to  the  inexperienced  student  of  our  science."
We  trust  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  in  commenting
freely,  as  we  shall  do,  on  Dr.  Hempel's  report,  we  arc
actuated  by  no  unworthy  feeling  toward  our  coUeagne,
whose  unceasing  and  very  arduous  labors  in  the  cause  of
Homoeopathy  command  our  highest  respect,  and  deserve
the  grateful  recognition  of  every  English  and  American
Homoeopath.  Wc  speak  of  him  only  because,  by  his  report,
he  stands  forth  as  the  representative  of  certain  opinions,
which  seem  to  us  unsound  and  unsupported  by  the  evidence
on  which  they  are  supposed  to  rest.

His  report  may  be  reduced  to  the  following  propositi
I.  Drugs should not be proved  with  attenuated
stances.

*  Am,  ffom,  Xtvitm,  vol.  L,  p.  $75.


THE  DOSE  IN  DRUG-PROVING.


143


3.  The  middk-  and  higher  potencies  do  not  produce
reliable  symptoms,  unless  the  system  has  been  previously
saturated  with  massive  doses  of  the  original  drug.  Corol-
lary :  the  saturation  of  the  system  by  massive  dosea  of  a
drug  renders  it  susceptible  to  the  action  of  the  middle  and
higher  potencies.

3,  In  exceptional  cases  a  peculiar  idiosyncrasy  may
enable  the  organism  to  develop  symptoms  from  the  higher
potencies  ;  but  "  it  is  unreliable  to  commence  the  proving
with  these  potencies."  The  sequence  of  this  conclusion  is
not  very  clear.  We  suppose  Dr.  Hcmpcl  to  mean  that
symptoms  developed,  where  an  idiosyncratic  susceptibility
to  drug-action  exists,  are  not  so  reliable  as  those  developed
where  there  is  no  idiosyncrasy.

It  is  much  to  Dr.  Hempcl's  credit  that  he  has  not  left
these  propositions  to  stand  in  his  report  as  bare  unsupported
assertions.  Recognizing  the  experimental  nature  of  tlie
question,  he  has  referred  for  corroboration  of  his  views  to
the  experience  of  those  who  have  made  our  provings,  and
has  called  to  the  witness-stand  the  great  body  of  our  dnig-
provera  in  the  following  terms :  "/I//  the  splendid  provings
of  the  original  provers  of  the  Materia  Medica,  and  of  the
Austrian  Provers'  Union,  of  the  Provers"  Society  of  Prague,
and  of  any  other  Provers'  Society,  whose  provings  are
accepted  with  universal  acclaim  and  confidence,  have  been
instituted  with  massive  doses  of  the  strongest  preparations  of
the  drug;  the  higher  and  middle  potencies  were  miwr/rti^/y
tried  a/ti^r  the  former."  If  this  statement  were  Uterally
correct,  if,  indeed,  none  of  tiiese  provers  ewr  btgan  their
provings  with  potencies,  then  they  are  incompetent  witnesses
for  Dr.  Hempcl's  purpose — they  are  incapable  of  testifying
as  to  the  action  of  dilutions  when  not  preceded  by  massive
doses,  since,  Dr.  Hcmpcl  says,  tluy  never  tried  them.  If
this  were  so,  then  the  second  proposition  of  Dr.  Hempel's
report  would  rest  unsupported  save  by  the  one  witness
whom,  we  neglected  to  say.  Dr.  Hcmpel  cites,  first  of  all,  in


THE  DOSE IN DRUG-PROVING.


these  words:  "Dr.  Hempc]  has  never  been  able  to  elicit
any  reliable  symptoms  by  means  of  the  middle  or  higher
potencies,  unless  the  organism  had  been  previously  saturated
with  massive  doses  of  the  original  drug."  On  this  one
point  of  negative  evidence,  then,  this  important  proposition
stands — "Dr.  Hempel  has  never  been  able."  But  perhaps
others  hav€  been  able.  Perhaps  the  very  witnesses  whom
Dr.  Mempel  has  called  have  been  more  successful  than  he.
We  will  cross-examine  them.

First,  then,  we  call  upon  the  "Original  Provcrs  of  the
Materia  Afcdica,"  by  which  wc  suppose  Dr.  Hempel  means
Hahnemann's  "  Materia  Medica  Pura"  and  "  Chronischc
Krankbeiten."  Of  these  provers,  the  "  Great  Original"  was
Hahnemann  himself  His  pupils  and  friends  adhered
strictly  to  his  directions  and  method.  What  Hahnemann's
opinion  was  as  to  the  propricly  of  commencing  a  proving
with  small  doses  we  have  already  seen.  After  thirty-five
years'  experience  in  drug-proving,  he  sums  up  his  observa-
tions in  the  advice  to  begin  with  the  thirtieth  dilution.
But  what  was  his  practice  f  What  doses  did  he  actually
take  ?  It  has  been  generally  supposed  that  he  did  not  as  a
rule  record  the  doses  with  which  his  provings  were  made.
Dr.  Ilcmpcl,  however,  seems  to  have  had  access  to  some
sources  of  knowledge  on  the  subject  that  arc  not  open  to  the
general  reader,  for  he  tells  us  without  qualification,  that  "«//
the  splendid  provings  of  the  original  provers  of  the  Materia
Medica  were  made  with  massive  doses  of  the  strongest  prepa-
rations, etc."  Those  who  have  not  enjoyed  these  unusual
means  of  information,  gather  from  a  few  observations,  scat-
tered through  Hahnemann's  writings,  the  following  facts:

Silver  was  proved  by  Hahnemann  in  the  first  trituration.
The  Nitrate  of  Silver,  of  which  he  gives  a  few  symptoms,  in
the  fifteentli  dilution.  Carbo  vegetabilis  was  proved  in  the
third  trituration.  In  a  letter  in  the  Neues  Archiv.  (1813),
he  directs  Stapf  to  prove  Helleborus  thus:  "Add  a  drop  of
the  tincture  to  eight  ounces  of  water  and  one  drachm  of


THE  DOSE  IN  DRUG-PROVING.


U5


»


alcohol ;  shake  welt,  and  take  an  ounce  every  hour  and  a
half  or  two  hours  until  some  decided  c/Tects  arc  produced."
And  camphor,  thus:  "Dissolve  two  grains  in  a  drachm  of
alcohol ;  shake  this  well  with  eight  ounces  of  water,  and  ta.ke
in  from  four  to  six  doses  during  the  day."

In  the  first  publication  of  the  proving  of  Natrum  inurial-
icum  (1830),  Hahnemann  tells  us  that  a  great  part  at  least
of  this  proving  was  made  with  the  thirtieth  dHution,  and  he
adds,  that  "  it  is  only  in  such  a  highly  potcnizcd  form  that
this  and  all  other  drugs  display  the  whole  of  their  power  to
alter  the  condition  of  the  organism."  This  was  Hahnemann's
conclusion  after  thirty  years  of  active  experience  in  drug-
proving.  As  a  voucher  he  gives  us  the  proving  of  Natrum
munaticum.  the  value  of  which  is  attested  by  the  clinical
experience  of  the  last  thirty  years,  and  confirmed  iis  wc
shall  see  by  the  Austrian  re-proving.  In  the  same  volume  of
the  Chronische  Krankheiten,  Hahnemann  published  the
proving  of  Kali  carbonicum,  and  large  additions  tii  the
previously  published  provings  of  Carbo  vegetabilis,  Causti-
cum,  Conium  and  Sulphur.  It  is  but  reasonable  to  con>
elude  that  the  symptoms  of  Kali  carbonicum,  and  many
at  least  of  those  of  the  other  drugs  above  named,  were
produced  by  the  thirtieth  dilution  as  well  as  those  of
Natrum  muriaticum.

In  view  of  these  facts,  it  is  hardly  correct  to  say,  as  Dr.
Hempel  doeSj  that  '*  all  the  provings  of  the  original  provers
of  our  Materia  Medica  were  made  with  massive  doses  of  the
strongest  preparations,  etc."

Second,  wc  call  upon  tlie  Austrian  Provers'  Union.  This
society  conducted  in  the  years  1842  to  1848,  a  series  of
rc-provings  of  certain  of  the  drugs  proved  by  Hahnemann,
in  the  hope  of  discovering  the  pathological  connection  of  the
symptoms  whicli  in  Hahnemann's  scheme  are  disconnected.
Conceiving  also  that  some  of  Hahnemann's  s>'mptoms  were
vague,  because  produced,  as  they  supposed,  by  small  doses,
they  pushed  their  provings  with  massive  doses,  in  many
11


J  46


THE DOSE  IN DRUG-PROVING.


cases  I0  extreme  poisoning.  With  these  views  wc  could
hardly  expect  from  thcni  much  testimony,  either  positive  or
negative,  on  tlie  subject  of  proving  with  potencies ;  but,  to
that  which  they  do  rurnish,  we  should  expect  them  to  be
unfavorable  witnesses  for  our  views,  since  their  proclivities
are  almost  uniformly  against  the  use  of  potencies  in  proving
or  in  therapeutics.  Dr.  Hempcl  says,  "All  these  splendid
provings,  etc.,  were  instituted  with  massive  doses ;  the
middle  and  higher  potencies  were  invariably  tried  a/Ur  the
former." I-ct  iis  examine  the  records.

Jn  the  proving  of  Aconite,  sixteen  provers  made  in  all
thirty-seven  cxperimcnf^.  Six  of  these  were  made  with
dilutions  from  the  first  to  the  twelfth  centesimal,  and
symptoms  were  observed  in  all  but  one.  In  live  of  these
cases,  large  doses  of  the  titiclufv  had  been  taken  hefort  the
dilution.  In  one  case  the  provcr  began  with  the  first  cen-
tesimal dilution  and  gat  symptoms.

Tn  the  proving  of  Hryonia,  fourteen  provers  made  twenty-
nine  experiments,  of  which  ten  were  with  dilutions  from  the
first  decimal  to  the  203d.  In  two  of  these,  the  provers
began  with  the  dilutions,  viz. ;  with  the  tenth  and  the  thirtj>
eth,  and  got  in  one  case  very  graphic  symptoms  ;  In  the
other,  symptoms  unequivocal  though  less  numerous.  In  the
cases  in  which  dilutions  were  used  after  massive  doses  of
the  tincture  had  been  taken,  considerable  intervals  were
allowed  to  elapse  after  the  last  symptoms  from  the  tincture-
proving  disappeared  before  the  dilutions  were  taken,  e.  g.,
forty-one  days  before  the  203d  dilution  was  taken,  and  yet
this  dilution  appears  to  have  produced  decided  symptoms.
It  is  true  that  the  propriety  of  ascribing  these  symptoms  to
the  Bryonia  is  called  in  question  by  the  Editor  of  the
Austrian  Journal,  but  with  scarcely  sufficient  grounds,  since  a
subsequent  proving  wnth  the  203d  dilution  evoked  them
again.  Here,  then,  in  the  only  two  cases  in  which  dilutions
were  taken  before  the  tincture,  symptoms  were  obtained
(while in  one case  in which they  were  taken after  the


THE  DOSE  IN DRUG-PROVING.


147


tincture,  no  symptoms  were  otjaervc<l,  shows  that  the  corollary
to  proposition  No.  2  is  at  least  not  universaliy  true).

tn  the  proving  of  Silver  wc  find  that  tlie  drug  was  taken
by  one  provcr  each  in  the  first,  second,  and  third  triturations,
and  in  tlic  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  dilutions,  and  valuable
symptoms  were  obtained  by  each.  Tlie  Editor  caJls  atten-
tion to  the  great  correspondence  bct^vcen  tiicse  symptoms
and  those  of  Hahnemann,  obtained,  as  wc  know,  from  the
first  trituration.

In  the  proving  of  Nitrate  of  Silver,  the  Editor  remarks :
"Setween  the  experiments  a  sufficient  time  elapsed  to
insure  against  the  effects  of  one  experiment  being  compli-
cated by  those  of  a  preceding  one,  two  years  being  con-
sumed in  the  proving."  The  proving  was  begun  with  the
first  decimal  trituration,  nnd  subsequently  En  succession  the
second,  sixth,  and  thirtieth  dilutions  were  used.  The  effect
of  each  dose  ■was  allowed  to  expend  itself  before  a  new
experiment  was  instituted  ;  symptoms  clear  and  character-
istic, and  covering  a  period  of  six  to  nine  days,  were  obtained
from  a  single  dose  of  the  thirtieth  dilution.  Here,  it  is  true,
the  dilutions  were  preceded  by  low  triturations,  yet  the
Austrian  provers  were  of  opinion  that  in  these  ca.<ie3  the
lower  preparations  did  not  influence  the  susceptibility  of
the  system  to  the  higher  potencies.

In  proving  Kali  bichromicum,  in  only  two  cases  was  a
dilution  higher  Oian  the  third  employed.  Tn  both  of  these  the
twelfth  was  used  and  symptoms  were  obtained.  In  one,  that
of  Dr.  Wachtl,  the  symptoms  from  a  single  dose  give  a  com-
plete picture  of  the  subjective  and  objcctiveeffectsof  this  drug
in  tlie  pharynx  and  neighboring  organs.  Tn  neither  of  these
cases  had  the  drug  been  previously  taken  in  massive  doses.

In  the  proving  of  Colocynth,  fifteen  provers  made  twenty-
five  experiments.  Ten  were  made  witli  dilutions,  and  in
nint,  symptoms  were  obtained.  In  three  of  these,  the  third
dilution  was  used  and  no  otlier  preparation  of  Colocynth  had
previously  been  taken.


148


THE DOSE IN DRUG-PROVING.


In  proving  Thuja,  twenty-three  provcrs  made  fifty-nine
experiments.  Seventeen  were  made  with  dilutions,  and,  in
thirteen,  unequivocal  symptoms  fallowed  Nine  began  their
provings  with  dilutions  and  got  symptoms.  Four  began
their  prov in ga  with  dilutions  and  got  /w  symptoms.  But,  on
the  other  hand,  seven  conducted  their  provings  with  massive
doses  of  the  tincture  without  obtaining  any  unequivocal
symptoms.  It  is  evident,  then,  that  negative  testimony  oo
this  subject  is  of  little  value,

In  proving  Cochineal,  four  provers  began  their  experi-
ments with  the  hundredth  dilution,  one  with  the  sixtieth
and  one  with  the  thirtieth  dilution,  and  all  got  valuable
symptoms.  One  provcr,  on  the  other  hand,  began  with  the
200th  dilution  and  gradually  descended,  getting  no  symptoms
until  he  took  massive  doses.

In  the  proving  of  Natrum  murladcum,  thirty-nine  proven
took  part  Fourteen  began  with  dilutions  varying  from  the
sixth  to  thirtietli, — tlie  majority  beginning  with  the  thirtieth,
— tweKx  obtained  symptoms  of  which  some  are  of  great
value,  lasting  and  recurring  for  many  days  afler  the  last  dose.
Thus,  in  twelve  cases  out  of  thirty-nine,  dilutions  were  taken
before  "the  system  was  saturated  with  massive  doses  of  the
strongest  preparations,  etc.,"  instead  of  dilutions  being  "  in-
variab/y  tried  after''  such  massive  doses.

symptoms  to  the  dilutions,  except  the  case  of  the  203d  of
Bryonia,  they  have  been  so  admitted  by  the  Au-itrian  prov-
ers themselves.

In  conclusion,  we  may  observe  that  with  Natrum  muriati-
cum  the  record  of  the  Austrian  provings  closes,  In  his  con-
cluding remarks  on  that  drug.  Dr.  Watzke  uses  the  following
language:  "lam — alas!- — I  say,  alas!  for  I  would  much
rather  have  upheld  the  larger  doses  which  accord  with  current
views — I  am  compelled  to  declare  myself  for  the  higher
dilutions.  The  physiological  experiments  made  with  Natrum
muriaticum, as  well  as  the  great  majority  of  the  clinical


THE  IX>SE  IN DRUG-PROVING.


149


results  attained  therewith,  speak  decisively  and  distinctly  for
these  preparations.  Scwra/  a/  our  tnost  cautious  provers
have  obtained  unquestionable  characteristic  Natrum  muriati-
c-urn symptoms  from  them."  It  is  remarkable  that  as  Hah-
nemann was  evidently  led  by  experience  to  recommend  that
in  drug-provings  dilutions  should  be  used  as  well  as  crude
preparations,  in  like  manner,  the  Austrian  provcr  should,  as
Lhe  result  of  his  experience,  express  himself  as  above.
Watzkc  further  remarks : '  *'  I  am  very  far  from  regarding  a
stormy  metltod  of  proving  as  the  only  proper  and  useful  one,
and  I  recognize  the  conditions  of  an  all-sided  knowledge  o(
the  remedy,  in  the  free,  unrestrained  method  wc  have
adopted ;  experiments  being  made  with  large,  small,  and
smalUsl  doses  according  to  the  disposition,  judgment  and
good  pleasure  of  the  provcr."  And  again,  in  reply  to  a
critic,  "  My  friend  says,  '  /  have  proved  all  my  remedies  in
strong  and  some  in  the  strongest  doses ;  with  many  I  have
aJso  made  provings  with  the  higher,  even  with  the  thirtieth
dilution' — Have  /then  done  otherwise  ?  "

In  a  recent  number  of  the  Allg.  Zeitung,  it  is  stated  that
a  member  of  the  Old  Austrian  Provers'  Union  has  begun  to
prove  Quassia  amara  with  the  thirtieth  dilution,  and  has
obtained  valuable  symptoms. Experto  end*.

In  view  of  these  facts,  we  think  Dr.  Hempel  Is  hardly  cor-
rect in  stating  that  "  all  the  provings  of  the  Austrian  Provers'
Union  were  made  with  massive  doses,  etc. —  the  middle  and
higher  potencies  being  invariably  tried  afttr  the  massive
doses."

The  records  of  the  Austrian  Union  not  only  prove  that
dilutions  may  evoke  trustworthy  symptoms  in  a  majority  of
the  cases  in  which  they  are  employed,  but  tlicy  also  give  us
the  means  of  forming  a  judgment  on  the  propositions  which
form  the  substance  of  Dr.  Hempel's  report

\.  "Drugs  should  not  be  proved  with  attenuations." —
Now,  since  it  has  been  shown  that  attenuations  produce

Oiil,  Ztittehri/I,  vaL  iii.,  p.  64,  nuU.


:5o


THE DOSE IN  DRUC-PRO\nNG.


reliable  and  valuable  symptoms,  we  submit  that  they  should
be  used  and  for  llicse  reasons :

{a,)  Because  attenuations  have  produced  symptoms  which
have  not  also  been  produced  by  massive  doses,  and  which
have  been  confirmed  by  clinical  experience.  In  the  proving
of  Natrum  muriaticum,  the  only  distinct  picture  of  periodic
fever  was  induced  in  Dr.  Wurmb  while  proving  the  thirtieth
and  twenty-fifth  dilutions.  Dr.  Schrctcr,  proving  the  thirti-
eth, got  symptoms  which  no  provcr  with  massive  doses  pre-
sents. In  the  proving  of  Thuja,  certain  symptoms  affecting
the  vision  were  produced  in  Dr.  Hubcr  by  the  sixtieth  dilu.
tion,  and  in  Prof.  Zlatarovich  by  the  twelfth,  which  no  other
provers  have  recorded.  In  the  proving  of  Colocynth,  the
third  dilution  produced  symptoms  not  recorded  by  any
prover  who  took  massive  doses,  and  yet  corroborated  by  a
second  prover  with  the  third.

(6.)  Because  some  provers  arc  susceptible  to  tlw  action  of
dilutions  or  small  doses,  and  not  to  that  of  massive  doses  of
the  crude  substance.  For  instance,  Dr.  Wurmb  got  decided
and  persistent  symptoms  from  dilutions  (tliirtieth  to  sixth)
of  Natrum  muriaticum.  From  lower  dilutions  and  from
the  crude  substance,  even  in  half-ounce  doses  and  repeated
frequently,  he  got  no  symptoms.  Was  tiiis  because  his
system  was  saturated  ?  We  think  not ;  for  on  recurring  to
the  dilutions,  he  again  got  symptoms  as  at  first  Now,  had
the  provings  been  confined  to  the  crude  substance,  we
should  not  have  Dr.  Wurmb's  proving  of  Natrum  muriati-
cum, the  most  complete  and  reliable  single  experiment  that
we  possess,  and  which  we  could  hardly  consent  to  give  up,
notwithstanding  Dr.  Hempcl's  opinion  that  '*  potcncy-prov-
ings  should  rather  be  rejected  than  encouraged."  The  same
thing  is  ob.served  in  the  provings  of  Aconite,  Thuja  and
Colocynth.

2.  "  Potencies  do  not  produce  reliable  symptoms  unless
the  system  has  been  previously  saturated  with  massive
doses  of  the  crude  substance;  and,  Corollary,  massive  doses


THE DOSE LV DRUG- PROVING,


render  the  system  susceptible  to  the  action  of  smaller  quan>
titics."

We  have  shown  that  in  repeated  instances,  symptoms
which  Hahnemann  and  the  Austrian  provcrs  regarded  as
"  reliable "  have  resulted  from  potencies  not  preceded  by
massive  doses — symptoms  confirmed  by  other  provin^js  and
by  clinical  experience.  On  what  grounds  docs  Dr.  Ilcmpel
question  their  reliability  ?

Again,  wc  have  no  conclusive  evidence  that  massive  doses,
as  a  rule,  render  the  system  more  sensitive  to  small  doses.
In  some  cases  they  appear  to  do  so.  In  others  they  have
the  opposite  cfTect.  tn  the  records,  wc  find  the  utmost
variety  as  regards  the  susceptibility  of  provcrs  to  various
doses.  Some,  like  Dr.  Wurmb,  arc  susceptible  to  dilutions
alone  of  a  given  drug,  others  to  massive  doses  alone.  Many
obtain  symptoms  at  first  from  comparatively  small  doses  of
the  crude  substance,  but  find  it  necessary  to  steadily  increase
the  dose,  until  finally,  after  taking  in  sonic  cases  several
hundred  drops  or  grains,  they  get  no  symptoms  at  all  from
any  preparation.  This  looks  like  a  W«w//«^of  the  suscepti-
bility rather  than  an  exaltation.  Wc  are  not  always  justi-
fied in  assuming  that,  where  dilutions  were  taken  aficr
massive  doses,  the  symptoms  were  due  to  the  massive  doses
and  not  to  the  dilutions.  In  the  majority  of  these  cases  a
sufficient  period  elapsed  between  the  experiments  to  prevent
all  possibility  of  the  one  complicating  the  other.  In  a  few
cases  no  such  period  elapsed,  and  in  these  it  may  be  that  the
previous  massive  doses,  yet  even  In  these  cases  we  cannot
be  certain  of  this;  for  in  one  of  them,  that  uf  Prof.  Zlataro-
vich,  who,  after  taking  in  the  aggregate  several  thousand
drops  of  the  Thuja. tincture,  changed  without  delay  to  the
twelfth  dilution,  a  symptom  was  ob3cr\'ed  which  had  not
occurred  to  him  or  to  any  one  elsL-  while  proving  the  tincture,
but  only  to  liuber  while  taking  the  sixtieth.

In  conclusion,  we  sec  in  the  Austrian  records  more  reason


152


TUE  OOSE  IN  DRUG- PROVING.


to  suppose  that  massive  doses,  as  a  rule,  biunt  than  that
Utcy  L'xult  tlic  susceptibility,  although  in  some  cases  tbejr
unquestionably  have  tlic  latter  cfTcct.  As  these  cases
cannot  be  recognized  in  advance,  it  is  clear  that  in  the  case
of  an  individual  drug  or  prover,  nothing  positive  on  this
head  can  be  assumed  as  a  basis  on  which  to  plan  a  proving.

3.  It  is  said  that  "idiosyncrasy"  deterounes  the  action  of
potencies,  and  that  provings  having  this  origin  arc  not
reliable.

The  word  "  idiosyncrasy  "  is  used  in  two  senses.  Properly,
it  signifies  an  abnormal  sensibility  to  drug-action ;  or  such  a
relation  to  a  special  drug  zs  that  the  drug  produces  in  the
pruver  symptoms  that  occur  to  no  other  prover,  and  which
bear  no  analogy  at  all  to  tlie  symptoms  which  others  experi-
ence. Such  symptoms  as  these  must  always  be  regarded  as
suspicious  until  verified  by  clinical  experience.  Such  an
tdiosyncrasy  is  cxcmpliticd  by  persons  who  have  "  hay
asthma,"  "rose  catarrh,"  etc.

But.  as  most  frequently  employed,  _thc  word  "idiosyn-
crasy" is  synonymous  with  "  susctptibiiity"  implying  an
unusually  acuity  but  not  abnormal,  sensibility  to  the  action  of
the  drug,  and  a  prover  who  shows  a  marked  susceptibility  to
the  action  of  a  drug  is  said  to  have  an  idiosyncrasy  which
&VOr9  it3  -iction.  This  susceptibility  is  simitar  to  that  which
individuals  exhibit  for  natural  diseases — some  being  prone
to  one  kind  of  disease,  others  to  another,  just  a'^  one  prover
is  especially  susceptible  to  Thuja,  another  to  Aconite.  Now,
what  pathologist  would  think  of  objcctiog  to  z  case  of
pneumonia  that  it  was  not  a  reliable  picture  of  the  disease,
because  it  could  be  shown  that  the  patient  had  a  great
susccptibilit)'  to  the  disease,  and  took  it  on  the  slightest
provocation  ?  A  certain  susceptibility  to  the  action  of  a
drug  is  absolutely  necessary  to  a  good  proving.  Hahne-
mann speaks  of  it  in  his  Organou  as  a  ncccssar>-  condition.
What  the  Austrian  pruvers  think  on  the  subject  may  be
gathered from the following remaiis of Watzke (Dr.


TUE  DOSE  IN  DRUG-PROVING.


1S3


Wurmb  proved  Thuja  five  times, — four  times  in  massive
doses  and  once  in  dilutions ;  result  very  meager) :  "  We
may  observe  that  the  proving  of  a  drug  is  not  so  easy  an
aifair  as  It  seems  to  be.  The  Individuality  of  the  prover  as
well  as  of  the  drug  plays  here  so  important  a  part,  that  a
successful  proving  is  often  an  entirely  accidental  piece  of
good  fortune  of  the  susceptible  prover,  while  the  boldest,
but  unsusceptible  prover,  with  the  best  good-will  and  the
greatest  devotion  may  obtain  only  a  scanty  and  one-sided
result"

This  susceptibility  may  be  to  the  drug  in  general  or  to
particular  preparations  of  it.  Wurmb  was  acted  on  only  by
dilutions  of  Natrum  muriaticum.  Watzke  only  by  immense
doses  of  the  crude  substance,  Watzke  was  sensitive  to  very
small  doses  of  Thuja,  while  Wurmb  and  Rcisinger  were
almost  insensible  to  extry  preparation  of  it.  Obviously,  then,
a  prover's  susceptibility  varies  with  the  drug  and  with  the
preparations,  and  can  be  learned  only  by  experiment  with
all  preparations.

From  the  general  tenor  of  Dr.  Hempel's  report,  one
might  infer  that  while  the  middle  and  higher  potencies
produce  symptoms  only  in  very  exceptional  cases,  massive
doses  of  the  strongest  preparations' act  always.  The  records
of  the  Austrian  provings  hardly  warrant  such  an  assumption.
Of  the  thirty-one  experiments  made  with  tincture  of  Aconite,
six  were  not  followed  by  any  trustworthy  symptoms.  Of
the  thirty-six  made  with  large  doses  of  tincture  of  Thuja,
seven  were  without  result.  Of  fourteen  made  with  large
doses  of  crude  Colocynth,  one  was  without  result  Of  the
fifteen  provers  of  Byronia,  one  at  least  took  very  large
doses  of  the  tincture  without  observing  any  symptoms.
Several  who  took  large  doses  of  crude  Natrum  muriaticuni
were  insensible  to  its  action.  It  is  obvious,  then,  that  the
development  of  symptoms  is  not  of  necessity  copious  and
satisfactory  in  the  ratio  of  the  dose.  The  Austrian  records
abound  in  editorial  remarks,  intimating  that  provers  have


154


THE DOSE  IN DRUG-PROVINO.


defeated their object  by  taking  too  iarge  doses, and bjr|
repeating  the  dose  too  frequently.

We  have  seen,  then,  that  potency-provings  may  be  trust-
worthy and  that  they  arc  indispensable  to  a  complete  and
exhaustive  proving.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  even  the  few
Austrian  potency- proving  which  we  have,  were  not,  gener-
ally, conducted  in  such  a  way  as  to  demonstrate  the  full
value  of  such  experiments,  In  very  many,cases,  only  a
few  days  were  allowed  for  the  development  of  symptoms
before  a  larger  dose  was  taken.  In  tlic  few  cases  in  which
a  different  course  was  pursued,  as  in  Wiirmb's  proving  of
Natrum  muriaticum,  clear  and  persistent  and  most  valuable
series  of  symptoms  were  obtained.

In  order  to  obtain  a  perfect  proving,  "die  provcr  should
ever  bear  in  mind  certain  fallacies  to  which  he  is  liable.
These  fallacies  differ  according  to  the  dose  which  he  is
employing;  they  are  equal  for  cither  extreme  of  dose.  If
he  use  the  higher  dilutions,  he  is  in  great  danger  of
confounding  "imaginary"  symptoms  with  real  subjective
rf#7/^ symptoms.  If  he  employ  massive  doses,  he  is  in  equal
danger  of  including  in  his  record  chemical  and  meckanicai
symptoms.  F.Ithcr  error  is  a  source  of  confusion  and
unccrtiint}',  but  he  is  greatly  mistaken  who  thinks  to  avoid
introducing  confusion  and  uncertainty  into  the  Materia
Mcdica  by  simply  rejecting  potency-provings.  They  can  be
avoided  only  by  tlie  constant  analysis  of  the  symptoms
(whether  produced  with  potencies  or  with  large  doses),
by  frequent  repetitions  of  tlie  provings  on  one's  self  and
others,  and  by  clinical  verifications  of  the  symptoms.  Tliea
Austrian  records  give  an  example  of  the  latter  fallacy.  The
symptoms  are  so  intermingled  with  chemical  and  revolu-
tionary effects,  that  one  cannot  use  too  great  caution  in
basing  a  prescription  upon  them.


In  conclusion,  we  may  assume  the  following  points  to
established  by  induction  and  by  direct  experience  :


THE DOSE  IK  DRUG- PROVIXG.


>S5


In  ordc^r  to  obtain  an  exhaustive  proving:

1.  We  must  prove  the  drug  botk  in  dilations  and  in
massive  doses.

2.  The  proving  should  be  ctmtmenced  with  dilutions  i
and  high  dilutions  should  be  employed  until  satisfactory
evidence  is  obtained  that  the  provcr  is  not  susceptible  to
their  action.  We  thus  obtain  OJie  of  the  unknown  quantities
of  our  problem,  vix.,  the  measure  of  the  susceptibility  of
the  prover.

3.  Where  a  keen  susceptibility  is  found  to  exist,  the
greatest  care  must  be  exercised  to  avoid  blunting  or  per\'crt-
ing  it  With  this  view,  repeated  experiments  should  be
made  at  long  intervals,  with  high  potencies,  until  no  new
varieties  of  symptoms  arc  evoked.  Then,  after  a  long
period  of  nan -medication,  the  provcr  should  take  lower
potencies  and  then  small  doses  of  the  crude  substance
repeated  at  intervals,  and  finally  after  another  long  period  of
rejKisc,  /trrfiff  doses  of  crude  substance.  A  thorough  proving
after  this  fashion  may  require  years  for  its  completion — but
it  will  have  an  advantage  over  most  of  our  recent  provings,
in  the  fact  that  it  will  be  thorough,  and  that  it  will  be  of
permanent  and  certain  use  to  the  practitioner.

4.  In  proving  with  dilutions,  as  well  as  with  massive  doses,
a  long  period  of  time  should  be  occupied  in  testing  each
preparation,  in  order  that  the  full  effect  may  be  seen  in  the
production  of  dyscrasias,  etc.

5.  The  greatest  care  should  be  exercised  in  verifying
symptoms  by  repeated  experiments,  in  order  that  "  imagi-
nary "  symptoms  on  the  one  hand  and  chemical  and
mechanical  symptoms  on  the  other  may  be  excluded.  The
fashion,  which  has  become  very  prevalent  of  late,  of  including
in  the  pathogenesis  every  sensation  which  occurs  during
the  proving,  without  distinction  or  verification — and  which
may  be  called  the  Pre-Rapliaelite  method  of  proving —
cannot  be  too  strongly  rebuked.


ALTERNATION  OF  REMEDIES. No.


The  fallowing  remarks  upon  the  Interesting,  but,  in  our
judgment,  unsound  paper  on  this  subject  by  Dr.  J.  R.  Coxe,
jr.,  published  in  the  February  number  of  the  current  volume
oftlie  American  HomtEopathic  Review,'  may  serve  at  least
it  is  hoped,  to  call  attention  to  this  very  important  approach
to  Polypharmacy  in  the  customary  method  of  prescrilMng,
and,  perhaps,  to  stimulate  a  discussion  of  its  necessity  and
propriety.

In  admitting  that  the  alternation  of  remedies  is  incompat-
ible with  the  thcor>-  of  a  true  homfEopathic  prescription,  our
colleague  has  granted  all  that  the  opponents  of  alternation
could  reasonably  ask.  That  our  practice  has  not  yet  come
up  to  our  theory,  and  that  wc  are  not  yet  fully  possessed  of
the  means  and  knowledge  to  bring  it  up  to  tliat  degree  of
strained  someiinus  to  alternate  remedies,  as  it  were  HHd<r
proteit,  may  nut  be  denied.  But  to  urge  that  because  our
practice  lags  thus  behind  our  theory,  we  are  to  rest  satisfied
with  it,  nay,  to  iie/c?td  it  and  to  conform  our  theory  to  it,  is  a
position  that  would  be  fatal  to  all  progress,  and  which  we
cannot  think  of  conceding.  Nor  is  the  appeal  to  exfitrience
in  tlie  sense  in  which  our  colleague  uses  it  valid.  He  "  has
alternated  remedies  in  a  practice  of  twenty-five  years,  and
his  practice  has  been  generally  successful."  We  do  not
doubt  this.  But  we  believe  his  respected  father  practiced
allopathy  for  a  much  longer  period,  and  was  a  successful
practitioner ;  would  this  /act  be  a  valid  argument  in  lavOT
of  alhpaiky  T

'  VoL  liL,  1863.
156


ALTERNATION  OF  REMEDIES. NO. I.


Alternation  and  suecfssion  of  remedies  are  not  generally
understood  to  be  identical  processes.  By  alternation,  we
think,  practitioners  generally  understand  the  prescription,  at
one  and  the  same  time,  of  two  or  more  remedies  to  follow
each  other  at  short  intervals,  the  symptoms  of  these  remedies
taken  altogetktr  being  thought  to  cover  the  symptoms  of
the  case  more  completely  than  those  of  either  remedy  alone
would  do.  The  prescription  is  the  result  of  one  single
examination  of  the  patient  and  of  one  single  comparison  of
the  symptoms  with  the  Materia  Medica.

But  when  a  succession  of  remedies  is  given,  in  either  an
acute  or  a  chronic  disease,  the  understanding  is,  that  the
first  remedy,  having  been  carefully  selected,  is  allowed  to
exhaust  its  action  alone,  and  then  a  collection  of  the
symptoms  the  patient  tlun  presents  is  made,  and  the  case  is
this  process  is  repeated,  each  new  prescription  being  the
subject  of  a  special  study,  until  the  case  is  cured.  Such  a
process  is  equivalent  to  prescribing  for  a  number  of  new  and
independent  cases,  and  it  is  evidently  not  incompatible  with
the  theorj-'  of  a  true  homccopathic  prescription.

The  very  thonghtful  article  by  Dr.  Payne,  to  which  refer-
ence is  made  by  Dr.  Coxe,  contains  nothing  incompatible
with  these  views.  He  instances  cases  in  which  a  remedy
which  had  covered  all  the  symptoms  acts  well  for  a  time,
then  ceases  to  act,  and  leaves  the  case  still  uncurcd,  He
advises  then  a  fresh  study  of  the  case,  and  especially  a  study
of  the  previous  history  of  the  patient,  and  the  prescription
of  a  suitable  antipsoric  or  antisyphilitic  —  in  fact,  a  strictly
homccopathic  prescription  de  novo.  Now,  in  many  such
cases,  acute  though  they  appeared  at  the  outset,  if  the  pre-
only  the  present  symptoms,  but  also  the  previous  history  of
sufficed  for  the  case.  For  although  chronic  diseases  may  be
incurable except by  an  antipsoric,  antisyphllitic or anti-


158


ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES. NO. I.


sycotic,  yet  these  remedies  may  also  be  required  in  the  very
beginning  of  diseases  that  appear  to  be  most  acute.  I  can
certainly  testify,  from  repeated  observation,  to  the  efficacy
of  Sulphur"  in  most  violent  pucq>eral  peritonitis,  that
remedy  being  all  that  was  required  to  bring  the  cases  to  a
speedy  and  favorable  issue.  This  calls  to  mind  Hahne-
mann's admonition— C?fy««(3»,  %  257.  •  •  •
The  physician  "  should  never  lose  sight  of  this  great  truth,
that  of  all  known  remedies  there  is  but  one  that  merits  a
preference  before  all  others,  viz. :  that  whose  symptoms
bear  the  closest  resemblance  to  the  totality  of  those  wbicfa
characterize  the  malady."

Be  this  as  it  may.  Dr.  Payne's  advice  clearly  contemplates
a  new  study  of  the  case  for  every  new  prescription,  and,  if
this  plan  be  pursued,  the  treatment  will  be  strictly  homoe-
opathic, even  though  a  dozen  remedies  were  required  in
succession  before  the  case  is  cured.

Alternation,  however,  as  generally  understood  and  prac-
ticed,  docs  not  contemplate  this  new  study  of  the  case  before
a  second  remedy  is  administered,  or  before  every  change  of
remedies;  and  herein  it  fails  to  come  up  to  the  requirements
of  a  true  homcropathic  prescription.  And  this  is  the  kernel
of  the  whole  controversy.

Suppose  a  case  of  pleurisy.  Bryonia  covers  all  the  symp-
toms. The  patient  improves  for  a  time  and  then  ceases  to
improve.  The  case  is  studied  anew.  Some  symptoms  are
found  to  have  vanished ;  some  new  ones  have  appeared.
The  physician  studies  the  previous  history  of  the  patient
more  closely ;  he  may  or  may  not  conclude  that  there  13  a
psoric  taint.  At  all  events  he  perceives  that  Sulphur
corresponds  to  the  symptoms  better  than  any  otlicr  remedy.
new  case  that  had  just  come  under  his  treatment.  This  is  an
instance  of  succession  of  remedies.  But  each  prescription  is  a
strictly  horaceopathic  one,  and  in  every  reject  commendable.

Suppose  another  case. A  patient  has  acute  tonsilitts.


ALTERNATION OF  REMEDIES. NO. I.


'59


donna, to  be  followed  in  four  hours  by  Mercurius,  and  that
again  in  four  hours  by  Belladonna,  and  so  on."  These  two
steady  nags,  so  familiar  to  all,  in  this  relation,  are  sometimes
enlivened  by  the  company  of  Aconite  and  Ccffca  (pro  re
"four  in  hand."

This  is  an  example  of  alternation  of  remedies,  and  is
objectionable  on  the  following  grounds :  Suppose  the  first
dose  of  Belladonna  to  have  been  a  judicious  prescription,
beforehand  that  this  effect  will  be  just  such  as  to  cause  the
totality  of  the  symptoms  at  the  end  of  four  hours  to  corre-
spond exactly  to  Mercurius,  and,  what  would  be  still  more
wonderful,  how  can  he  foresee  that  the  effect  of  the  Mer-
curius will  be  just  such  as  to  cause  Belladonna  to  be  better
indicated  than  any  other  remedy  at  the  end  of  another
period  of  four  hours?  The  second  remedy  (a  fortuiri  a
without  a  preliminary  study  of  the  actual  condition  of
the  patient  as  modified  by  the  action  of  the  first  remedy.
It  cannot,  therefore,  be  an  exact  homceopathJc  prescrip-
tion.

Hahnemann  has  expressed  himself  fully  on  this  subject  in
the  Organon^  as  follows:

Sec.  272.  "In  no  instance  is  it  requisite  to  employ  more
than  one  simple  medicine  at  a  time."  '^

Sec.  169.  "  It  may  easily  occur,  on  examining  a  disease
for  the  first  time,  and  also  on  selecting  for  the  first  time  the
remedy  that  is  to  combat  it,  that  the  totality  of  the  symp-


'  FourUiedilion.BriuthlranKUiion.

'  Experiments  have  been  made  by
some  llomoropathiits  in  casen  where,
faniigtnlag  that  One  port  of  the  lymp.
loots  of  a  diseuc  rcquireil  uii'C  remedy,
and  thai  Lnolher  raTie(L]r  was  moTc
Auilable  lo  Uie  other  part,  Ihej'  have


^ven  both  remedies  tit  ifae  luune  Ume,
or  ntarly  to ;  bul  I  eamcitly  caution
iill  my  tdhcrenlc  ngitiniil  such  a
huvdaui  pracIJcc,  which  never  will
be  necesDar]',  thuu^h.  in  some  io-
itancei,  it  may  appear  serricc&ble."


160


ALTERNATION  OF REMEDIES. NO. I.


toms  of  the  disease  is  found  not  to  be  sufficiently  covered  by
the  morbific  symptoms  of  a  single  medicine,  and  that  two
remedies  dispute  the  preference  as  to  eligibility  in  the
present  instance,  the  one  being  homoeopathic  to  one  part  of
the  disease,  and  the  other  still  more  so  to  another.  It  is,
then,  by  no  means  advi<able  after  using  the  preferable  of  the
tHo  remedies,  to  take  the  other  without  examinaium.
because  the  medicine  given  as  the  inferior  of  the  two,  under
the  change  of  circumstances,  may  not  be  proper  for  the
remaining  symptoms ;  in  which  case,  it  follows,  that  a  suit-
able homtropathic  remedy  for  the  neir  set  of  symptoms
should  be  selected  in  iu  stead."

Sec.  167.  "In  short,  if  the  application  of  an  imperfect
homcEopathic  remedy  used,  in  the  first  instance,  cause  any
accessory  symptoms  of  some  importance,  the  action  of  the
first  dose  is  not  allowed  to  exhaust  itself  in  acute  diseases;
the  altered  state  of  the  patient  is  then  to  be  examined  and
tiie  remainder  of  the  primitive  symptoms  to  be  joined  to
tfiose  which  have  been  recently  discovered,  to  form  of  the
whole  a  new  image  of  the  disease."

Sec.  168.  "  A  new  remedy  that  is  analogous  may  then  be
easily  discxjvcrcd  among  the  medicines  that  arc  known,  a
single  application  of  which  will  suffice,  if  not  to  destroy  the
disease  entirely,  at  least  to  facilitate  the  cure  in  a  great
degree.  If  tliis  new  remedy  \%  not  sufficient  to  restore  the
health  completely,  then  examine  what  yet  remains  of  tlie
diseased  state  and  select  the  homoeopathic  remedy  that  is
most  suitable  to  the  new  image  that  results  from  it  In  this
manner,  the  phy^cian  must  continue  until  he  attains  his
object  —  that  is  to  say,  until  he  has  fully  restored  the  health
of  the  patient"

The  name  and  practice  of  Hahnemann,  Baenninghausen
and  Hering  have  been  adduced  in  support  of  alt^matUm.
Hahnemann's  views  on  the  subject  we  have  already  quoted
from  the  Organon.  The  case  to  which  Dr,  Coxe  refers,  as
cured  by  Hahnemann  by  "  the  alternate  use  of  Bryonia  tinct-


ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES. NO. I.


161


urc  and  Pulsatilla."  has  escaped  our  notice,  and  we  should
esteem  it  a  (avot  if  Dr.  Coxc  would  inform  us  whereabouts
in  homcropathic  literature  it  is  recorded.

Hahnemann  published  very  few  cases.  In  vol.  ii.  of  the
Materia  Medica  Pitra.  third  edition,  1838,  he  relates  two
casts,  one  of  which  was  cured  by  a  single  dose  ai  Bryonia
tincture,  and  the  other  by  a  single  dose  of  Pulsatilla.  May
Dr.  Coxe  have,  possibly,  referred  inaccurately  to  these  cases
and,  by  a  fault  of  memory,  blended  them  ?

It  is  often  stated,  however,  Uiat  Halmemann  used  Bryonia
and  Rhus  toxicodendron  alternately  in  his  very  successful
treatment  of  the  typhus  or  hospital  fever  which  prevailed
so  extensively  in  northern  Germany,  in  1813-14,  after  the
French  invasion.  A  reference  to  his  article  on  the  "Treat-
ment of  the  Typhus  or  Hospital  Fever  at  present  prevailing,"
originally  published  in  the  Altgem.  Anzeig.  dcr  Deutselten,
number  six,  \9>\.\,  and  translated  by  Dr.  Dudgeon  among
"  Hahnemann's  Lesser  Writings,"  '  will  show  how  erroneous
this  statement  is.

He  says,  "This  fever  has  two  principal  stages,"  of  which
he  gives  the  distinguishing  symptoms;  the  first  stage  being
characterized  by  "pains  and  eonsciousnfss"  the  second
stage  by  "delirium  and  mania."

"In  the  first  stage,"  he  continues,  "two  vegetable  sub-
stances are  of  use  and  generally  quite  remove  the  disease  at
the  commencement — the  Bryonia  alba  and  the  Rhus  tox-
icodendron."

He  proceeds  to  give  the  special  indications  for  each  of
these  remedies.  "  If  the  patient  complains  of  dizziness,
shooting  {or  jerking- tearing)  pains  in  the  head,  throat,  chest,
or  abdomen,  etc.,  which  are  /c/l  particularly  on  moving  the
part — in  addition  to  the  other  symptoms,  the  haemorrhages,
the  vomiting,  the  heat,  the  thirst,  the  nocturnal  restlessness,
etc.,  wc  give  a  single  drop  of  Bryonia'".  Improvement  takes
place  in  the  course  of  four  and  twenty  hours,  and  as  long  as

'  P.  631  *t  tn/.,  Aiaerican  edlcSoD.

1£


I62


ALTERNATION  OF  REMEDIES. NO. I.


the  improvement  ^KS  en,  wc  give  him  no  otlicr  medicine,  nor
even  repeat  Ihc  same  dose.

"  If  now  the  amendment  produced  by  the  single  dose  of
Bryonia  goes  off  in  the  course  of  two,  three  or  four  days,  that
is  to  say,  if  the  patient  then  complains  of  skating  pains  m
(me  or  other  parts  of  the  body  whilst  the  part  is  at  rest;  if  the
prostration  and  anorexia  arc  greater,  if  there  is  harassing
cough  ot  such  a  debility  of  certain  parts  as  to  threaten
paralysis,  we  give  a  single  drop  of  Rhus  toxicodendron"  and
no  more  nor  any  other  medicine  so  long  as  the  improve-
ment is  manifest  and  continued,  •  •  Or,  if  the  symptoms
ttie  attack,  we  give  at  its  very  commencement  a  drop  of
Rhus  toxicodendron"." •  •  •  •

"The  whole  disease  will  generally  be  removed  by  a  single
dose  of  the  first  or  of  the  second  medicine  (according  as  the  one
or  the  other  is  indicated,  without  the  addition  of  any  other).

"  [f,  notwithstanding,  the  disease  should  pass  into  the
•second  stage*  of  delirium  and  mania,  then  Hyoscyamus
nigcr  meets  all  the  indications  of  tlie  case."

These  detailed  dtreciions  for  the  treatment  of  an  epidemic
disease  give  a  perfect  picture  of  a  true  homoeopathic  treat-
ment They  state,  in  substance,  that  tlie  generic  symptoms
of  the  disease  are  always  accompanied  in  the  commencement
by  one  or  the  other  of  two  groups  of  characteristic  symp-
toms. Accordingly,  as  one  or  the  other  of  these  groups  is
present.  Bryonia  or  Rhus  is  to  be  given.  When  the  conse-
quent amelioration  ceases,  then  the  case  is  to  be  examined
anew,  and  wording  ta  the  characteristics  then  found  to
present  themselves,  a  new  remedy  is  to  be  selected,  and  thus
the  practitioner  is  to  go  on  until  the  case  is  cured.  But
alternation  is  nowhere  advised  or  allowed.

Hahnemann's  brief  and  very  general  hints  relating  to  the
treatment  of  croup  are  of  the  same  general  character.  In
the  introduction  to  Spongia,*  he  says:  "Homoeopathy  has


I  Maigria  MtdUo  Pura,  vol.  vi.,  teoand  cation,  Ormleo,  p.  199.


ALTERNATION OF  REMEDIES. NO. I.  I63

found,  in  symptom  145  and  in  other  symptoms,  the  most
remarkable  applicability  of  Spongia  to  tliat  terrible  acute
disease — membranous  croup — provided,  however,  the  local
infiafftmation  has  first  been  diminished  or  subdued  by  a  very
small  dose  of  Aconite.  The  additional  use  of  a  small  dose
of  Hepar  sulphuris  will  rarely  be  found  necessary."  Nothing-
is  here  said  or  in  any  way  intimated  concerning  alternation.

In  giving  general  directions  beforehand  for  the  treatment
of  this  disease,  which  usually  presents  a  very  uniform  group
of  symptoms,  he  shows  that  the  symptoms,  while  the  local
inflammation  is  still  raging,  call  for  a  very  small  dose  of
Aconite ;  that  when  this  has  acted,  it  will  generally  be  found
that  the  local  inflammation  is  subdued,  leaving  a  group  of
symptoms  which  correspond  best  to  the  symptoms  of
Spongia ;  that  sometimes  there  may  be  such  a  modification
as  to  call  instead  or  subsequently  for  Hepar  sulphuris.

When  a  physician  has  it  in  his  power  to  visit  his  cases
frequently,  and  to  watch  their  course,  he  has  no  excuse  for
deviating  from  the  methods  of  a  true  homcEOpathic  prescrip-
tion. If  it  prove  necessarj'  to  give  a  succession  of  remedies,
he  is  bound  to  make  each  successive  prescription  the  subject
of  a  special  study,  both  of  the  symptoms  of  the  patient  and
of  the  provings  in  the  Materia  Mcdica,  and  to  select  on  each
occasion  the  remedy  which  corresponds  best  to  the  symp-
toms of  the  case.

But  where,  as  sometimes  happens,  the  physician  is  unable
to  see  the  case  at  all,  or  where  he  is  giving  general  direc*
tions  for  the  treatment  of  a  case  which  it  is  supposed  may,
at  some  future  time,  occur,  this  accuracy  is  impossible,  His
will  probably  be  present  in  each  stage  of  the  disease,  if  it
appear  in  the  ordinary  form  and  follow  the  ordinary  course ;
to  point  out  the  indications  for  the  appropriate  remedy  in
each  stage;  and  to  instruct  his  client  to  give  only  one  medi-
cine at  a  time  at  each  stage,  and  never  to  repeat  the  dose,
or  to  give  any other remedy so  long  as  amelioratioo  Is


164


ALTERNATION  OF  REMEDIES. KO. I.


manifest.  This  is  the  best  the  physician  can  do  when
treating  disease  under  the  disadvantage  of  never  seeing  the
patient  This  is  the  method  adopted  by  Hahnemann  with
reference  to  hospital  typhus.  It  is  tlic  method  of  Dr.
Ba-nnin^hausen  in  treating  crotip.

It  is  well  known  that  Dr.  Rrcnninghausen  docs  not  visit
that  the  first  symptoms  of  croup  arc  almost  uniformly  com>
bined  with  a  local  inflammation  which,  along  with  all  the
other  symptoms,  forms  a  group  to  which  Aconite  corresponds
better  than  any  other  remedy.  His  first  powder,  therefore,
is  Aconite.  And  his  instructions  arc  explicit  The  second
powder  Is  never  to  be  given  until  the  amelioration,  conse-
quent on  the  first,  shall  have  ceased,  and  so  with  the  remain-
ing powders.  The  recipients  of  "  croup  powders "  are
especially  and  carefully  instructed  under  what  circumstances
alone  it  is  proper  to  give  any  or  all  of  the  subsequent
powders.  This  is  as  near  an  approach  to  a  new  study  for
each  change  of  remedy  as  is  possible  when  the  physician
docs  not  sec  the  patient.

It  docs  not  really  amount  in  most  cases  even  to  a  succes-
sion, much  less  an  altematwn  of  remedies,  for  in  a  large
majority  of  cases  the  Aconite  alone  cures  the  patient

That  Dr.  Bcenninghausen  docs  not  regard  tliis  method  as
an  "alternation  of  remedies"  is  shown  in  vol.  ii.,  p.  561,  of
the  American  Homcfopathic  Review.

Indeed,  in  theory  and  in  practice  Dr.  Bcenninghausen  is  as
decidedly  opposed  to  alternation  as  we  have  shown  that
Hahnemann  was.

We  believe  we  could  say  that  Dr.  Hering's  views  are
simitar  to  those  wc  have  expressed,  but  we  prefer  to  await  a
statement  from  his  own  vigorous  pen  of  those  arguments,
both  theoretical  and  practical,  which  none  could  give  so
well  as  he.

In  conclusion,  we  hope  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  add,  tha(
inasmuch  as  offensive  language  and  odious  epithets  lend  no


ALTERNATION  OF  REMEDIES. NO. I.  165

Strength  to  ailment  nor  sweetness  to  persuasion,  we
entirely  agree  with  our  colleague  in  his  closing  paragraph.
Nay !  for  that  very  reason,  he  will  allow  us  to  say,  we  could
almost  wish  his  own  expressions  had  been  a  very  little  less
emphatic.


'ALTERNATION  OF  REMEDIES. No.  2.


When,  in  the  February  and  April  numbers  of  this  Revic^^'
vol.  iii.,  1863,  we  published  Dr.  J.  R.  Coxe's  artide  C^
Alternation,  and  our  own  modest  objections  to  what  '^
regarded  as  unsound  argument  and  inaccurate  statement  o  ^
the  part  of  Dr.  Coxe,  we  had  no  idea  that  we  were  enter^'
ing  upon  the  discussion  of  a  question,  about  the  terms  ow
which  there  could  be  any  chance  for  a  misunderstanding*^
Subsequent  publications,  from  various  quarters,  have  shown,
that  all  practitioners  do  not  understand  the  same  thing  by
the  word  alternation,  as  applied  to  the  mode  of  prescribing
homceopathic  remedies.  We  think  we  shall  be  able  to  show
that  the  practice  which  some  writers  defend,  under  the  name
of  alternation,  is  not  properly  called  by  that  name.  But»
before  entering  upon  the  subject  itself,  we  desire  to  make,
once  for  all,  two  statements  of  general  principles  by  which
we  are  governed  not  only  in  the  treatment  of  this  question
but  of  all  questions  that  concern  the  practice  of  medicine ;
premising  that  we  utterly  disclaim  any  disposition  to  dogpna-
tize  or  to  speak  as  with  authority  on  any  question  of  medical
practice.  If  the  earnestness  of  conviction  should  betray  us
into  too  positive  warmth  of  language,  this  is  our  misfort-
une ;  and  none  can  disapprove  it  more  decidedly  than  we
regret  it

I.  The  business  of  the  physician  is  to  cure  his  patient;
this  is  the  great  practical  object  of  his  labor.  We  believe
that  nature  is  not  always  restricted  to  a  single  path — and
that  while  some  cases  are  so  severe  that  there  is  but  one

^Americfm  Homaopathu  Review,  186$.  *Iii(l.  1863.


ALTERNATION OF  REMEDIES. NO. 2.


167


way  in  which  it  is  possible  to  cure  them,  there  are  often
several  ways  in  which  it  may  be  possible  to  effect  the  cure
of  some  other  case  ;  each  way  having  more  or  less  of  incon-
venience attaching  to  it  and  of  detriment  resulting  from  it,  in
proportion  as  it  differs,  more  or  less  widely,  from  the  bfst
way.  Thus,  we  believe  tliat  Allopathy,  with  her  heroic
antipkhgiitics,  her  revtUsives  (borrowed  from  the  "  circum-
locution office  "),  and,  still  more  frequently,  with  her  blind
and  blundering  misuse  of  specifics,  does  sometimes  "cure"
her  cases ;  but  this  is  not  the  kind  of  cure  that  should  satisfy
the  physician's  desires.  It  is  neither  safe  {inasmuch  as  it
is  debilitating  in  itself  and  is  likely  to  involve  damaging
sequels),  nor  rapid,  nor  pUasant.  Thus,  likewise,  we
know  that  Homoeopathists  who  mix  medicines,  whether  in
the  tumbler  or  in  the  patient's  stomach  (conglomerators  or
alternators),  do  often  "  cure  "  their  patients.  These  cures,
if  our  observations  be  correct,  are  neither  so  rapid  nor  so
pleasant  (free  from  scquel.'e)  as  cures  might  be ;  and  we  are
confident  that  by  these  methods  not  nearly  so  large  a  pro-
portion of  the  sick  may  be  cured  as  by  adherence  to  the
simple,  single  remedy.  Still,  we  admit  that  when  a
physician  has  cured  a  patient,  by  whatever  method,  he  has,
in  so  far  as  t/iat  patient  is  concerned,  done  the  chief  part  of
his  duty.  Though  his  method  were  not  the  best  of  known
methods,  he  is  not  to  be  blamed  without  qualification.

2.  But.  although,  from  the  ethical  stand-point,  we  may
concede  that:

"  'T  ixbeUer  lo  hft»e  "  trrrd and  tmrtJ
"  Than  never  lo  ha«  "  rwrrt/  "  mt  »n,"

we  think  there  is  abundant  reason  for  cautioning  the  prac-
titioner to  beware  of  confounding  the  misfortune  of  the  error,
with  the  good-luck  of  the  cure.

As  one  to  whom  have  been  confided  the  interests  of  that
individual  patient,  he  may  justly  rejoice  in  the  cure  ;  but  do
his  functions  cease  here  ?  By  no  means.  He  is  a  man  of
science,  lo  whose  care  are  to  be  intrusted,  every  day  of  his


i6&


ALTERNATION  OF  REMEDIES. NO.  2.


active  professiunal  life,  case  after  case  of  disease  which  he  is
to  bend  his  ener^^ics  to  cure. What  is  it  to  be  a  man  of

science  ?  It  U  to  be  one  who.se  mind  i.s  stored  with  an  array
of  facts  carefully  observed  by  others  as  well  as  by  himself,
and  methodically  arranged,  in  such  wise  that  principles  have
been  and  may  be  correctly  inferred  from  them  —  principles
by  virtue  of  which  new  observations  may  be  arranged  along
with  these  facts — principles  by  the  aid  of  which  the  facts
which  will  result  from  operations  obsen-ed  to  be  in  progress.
or  intentionally  put  into  activity,  may  be  accurately  predicted,
and,  conversely,  may  bo  produced  at  pleasure.

Such  is  tlie  scientific  physician.  Let  us  note  the  difference
between  the  action  of  kis  mind  and  that  of  \hn  patient ,  after
a  cure  of  the  latter  has  been  accomplished  by  the  former.
The  patient  says  to  himself,  *'  I  was  sick  and  now  I  am  well.
I  will  pay  my  doctor  and  then,  to  my  work  again  !"  This  is
all  his  sickness  is  to  the  patient

The  soliloquy  of  tlie  doctor  will  depend  very  much  upon
the  nature  of  the  mental  process  by  which  he  arrived  at  the
mode  of  treatment  that  cured  the  patient It  may  be :

1.  "  How  can  I  ever  be  thankful  enough  for  the  lucky
accident  tliat  made  me  give  him  Ledum !  May  I  be  as
fortunate  when  I  guess  again  !"  or,

2.  "  When  I  gave  Bryonia  alone  and  Sepia  alone,  ttiough
each  seemed  to  correspond  pretty  well,  still  die  patient  did
not  get  much  better.  But  when  the  happy  tliought  of
alternating  them  occurred  to  me,  and  I  did  it,  she  recovered.
From  this  I  shall  learn  that  two  remedies,  each  of  which
corresponds  to  part  of  a  case,  may  cure  the  case  if  given
in  alternation,  when  neither,  if  given  singly,  would  cure
it;'-  or,

3.  "  A  year  ago  I  should  have  given,  for  such  an  angina
as  this,  Belladonna  and  Mercurius  in  alternatiuii,  as  Kummel
recommends,  and  the  patient  would  probably  have  gotten
well  in  two  or  tluee  days  and  I  should  have  been  satisfied ;
but  since  T  have  studied  Lachesis,  I  find  that  remedy  covers


ALTERNATION  OF  REMEDIES. NO. «.


i6g


itic  whole  case  much  better  than  Belladonna  and  Mcrcimus

would  do ;  and  lo  1  he  is  well  in  twelve  hours. From  this,  t

learn  to  shun,  more  earnestly  than  ever,  those  expedients

vhich,  like  alternation,  are  borrowed  from  the  polypharmacy

of  the  Old  School  and  which,  being  oppoied  to  sound  prin-

dple,  must  be  inferior  in  their  results  to  some  better  way

which  accords  with  sound  principles  and  which  way  I  ^hall

be  most  likely  to  find  out  if  I  make  my  practice  follow  prin-

"^ple. This  case,  then,  gives  me  fresh  zeal  in  my  study  of

Watcria  Mcdica  ;*'  or,

4-  "This  case  cost  me  much  study.  I  saw  that  the  symp-
torns  of  the  abdomen  and  digestive  canal  as  well  as  those  of
^e  lumbar  region  and  of  tlic  hip  and  thigh  and  the  general
conditions  of  aggravation  and  amelioratinn  corresponded
*<irnirably  to  Colocynth,  but  then,  the  patient  had,  in  addi-
^*^n,  an  enlarged  ovary  (from  which,  possibly  in  some  way,
trie  other  symptoms  sprang),  and  I  have  never  heard  of
Colocynth  in  connection  with  enlarged  ovary.  I  might,
tl^crefore,  hax-e  been  tempted  to  alternate  Colocynth  with
*<5oic  remedy  which  is  known  to  have  cured  and  perhaps
P^'otluced  enlai^ed  ovary,  such  as  Lachesis,  Apis,  Graphites,
*-ycopodium,  Staphysagria.  etc.,  but  for  my  aversion  lo
disregard  what  seems  to  me  the  well-established  principle :
^'^^t  maladies  are  not  local  affections,  but  general,  pervading
"*c  entire  organism  —  that  the  individual  man  is  not  an
^EEregation  of  independent  monads,  each  of  which  may  be
or  get  well  '  on  its  own  hook,'  without  its  neighbor  being


Ul


"^^sfeby  Jostled,  and  against  which  may  be  discharged  a  cor-

^^^spxinding  load  of  medicinal  monads  each  of  which  will  find

*^  ^3wn  particular  lai^ct  without  hitting  any  other — not  this,

. *-*t  an  individual  bitng.  whose  functions  and  tissues  are  so

^5*tiniatcly  connected,  that,  'if  one  member  suffers,  all  the

|^**^«nbers  suffer;'  and  conversely,  if  we  get  the  VvLy  to  the

"^^l^y  by  finding  llie  characteristic  symptoms  which  will

^^*-  xit  us  to  the  true  remedy,  we  shall  cure  the  tntirt  suffer-

^^  ,  to  whatever  member  wc  may  address  ourselves. In  this


I/O


ALTERNATION OP REMEDIES. NO. 2,


faith,  regarding  the  characteristic  symptoms  as  calling
unmistakably  for  Colocynth  (Uicrc  was  nothing  character-
istic of  any  remedy  in  the  ovarian  symptoms  — the  ovary  was
enlarged,  tliat  was  all),  t  give  that  remedy.  And  now,  while
in  a  few  days  the  other  symptoms  which  plainly  called  for
Colocynth  disappeared  (permanently,  as  the  event  proved),
in  the  space  of  two  months  the  ovarian  tumor  had  likewise
disappeared,  and  the  patient,  who  had  been  confined  for  six
years  to  her  room  and  couch,  could  now  walk,  drive,  and  go
about  the  house  as  well  as  ever.'  From  this  I  learn  the
unity  of  disease,  and  by  this  I  am  strengthened  in  my  belief
that  adherence  to  wclt-scttlcd  principles  will,  in  the  end,
carry  one  farther  and  faster,  even  over  dark  and  uncertain
ways,  than  any  make-shift  and  irrational  expedient  would  be
likely  to  do  ;  "  or,

5.  "In  this  case  of  dysmenorrhcea  the  symptoms  of  the
head  and  eyes  are  very  characteristic  of  Cyclamen.  But,
surely,  the  menstrual  symptoms  are  too  important  to  be
overlooked  in  this  case,  and  the  remedy  must  correspond  to
these  symptoms  in  order  to  cover  the  case.  T  looked  for
the  symptoms  of  Cyclamen  on  the  female  sexual  organs,
and  lo !  none  are  recorded  in  the  Materia  Medica  Pura.  It
seems  that  there  was  not  a  woman  among  the  early  provers
of  Cyclamen.  What  was  to  be  done  ?  The  menstrual
symptoms  corresponded  pretty  well  with  tliose  of  Pulsatilla,
though  the  head  and  eye  symptoms  did  not  correspond.
Should  I  alternate  Cyclamen  and  Pulsatilla,  which  jointly
cover  the  case  ?  I  should  have  high  authority  for  such
a  course !  But,  I  reflect,  that  the  same  kind  of  a  human
organism  which,  under  some  disease-producing  influence,
experiences,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  the  amenorrhcca  and
the  head  and  eye  symptoms  of  my  patients — the  same  kind
of  human  organism,  I  say,  experienced  also,  when  proving
Cyclamen,  head  and  eye  symptoms  exactly  like  those  of
my  patient. Is  it  not  fair  to  presume  that,  if  this  disease-

'  j>»  •'Obitrvativnt  on  Ciftocymtk."


ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES. NO. 2.


171


producing  cause  and  the  speci5c  properties  of  Cycl:imcn  arc
so  nearly  alike  as  to  produce  identical  symptoms  in  the  kead
and  eyes,  tlicy  would  have  produced  identical  symptoms
likewise  in  the  female  sexual  organs,  had  the  provcr  of
Cyclamen  been  a  woman  ?  So  strongly  did  probabilities
seem  to  me  to  favor  this  presumption,  that  regarding  alter-
nation as  an  unsound  and  irrational  expedient,  I  was  about
to  take  the  risk  of  giving  Cyclamen  alone  on  the  strength,
of  this  anticipated  result  of  some  future  proving  by  a
woman,  when,  chancing  to  meet  with  the  new  Austrian
proving  of  Cyclamen,  I  found  that  provings  by  women  arc
there  recorded  which  confirmed  my  presumption  in  every
particular.  The  case  recovering  speedily  under  Cyclamen,
I  Icam  from  it  that  in  many  cases  we  are  tempted  to  alter-
nate because  wc  cannot  cover  every  feature  of  the  case  with
either  of  the  remedies  which  we  think  of  alternating.  But,
in  some  of  these  cases,  the  symptoms  which  are  really
ckaracUristic  are  fully  met  by  one  of  these  remedies,  and
there  is  ground  for  a-ssuming,  as  clinical  records  show,  that
subsequent  and  more  extended  provings  will  demonstrate  to
us  that  this  remedy,  if  fully  proved,  would  really  cover  the
entire  case,  ckaraeieristics  and  all.  This  experience  fortifies
mc  against  a  temptation  to  alternate,  and  leads  me  to  rely
more  confidently  on  the  indications  furnished  by  characier-
istie  symptoms."

If  wc  review  these  cases  and  analyze  the  operations  of  the
physician's  mind,  we  shall  see  that,  in  number  one,  he  con-
fesses that  he  has  been  the  "accident  of  an  accident,"  and
he  invokes  his  "  good  luck  "  to  stand  him  in  stead  again.
He  does  not  exercise  his  reasoning  faculties  at  all,  \jtl
him  pass.

In  the  other  cases,  there  is,  besides  a  thanksgiving  for
succtrss,  an  effort  of  the  mind  to  arrange  the  facts  which  the
case  presents  in  order,  along  with  some  otlier  facts  already
stored  there,  and  to  infer  from  the  aggregate  store  of  facts
some  principle  or  plan  of  action  which  may  be  profitably


"72


ALTERNATION OF  REMEDIES. NO. 2.


brought  to  bear  on  some  future  case.  It  is  thus  and  oh,
thus  that  "txperieiice  teaches"  For^  ^ce  no  two  cases
ever  met  wth  tliat  arc  in  every  respect  precisely  alike,  th
experience  acquired  in  treating  one  case  can  never  be  avail  -
able  ia  treating  another,  except  through  the  tntermcdiat^
application  of  the  reasoning  powers.  We  hear  and  observe
facts,  collect  and  arrange  then),  analyze  and  reflect  upontf
them,  induce  principles  from  them,  and  prepare  ourselves  to*
foalce  practical  application  of  these  principles  when  a  new
case  shall  call  for  it

Now,  what  13  this  but  theorizing  ?  When  we  analyze  a
case  in  such  a  way  as  to  suggest  to  our  minds  its  proper
mode  or  course  of  action,  or  to  infer  from  it  any  principle
that  might  help  us  in  a  future  case,  we  form  a  "  theory."
We  cannot  think,  indeed,  abuut  collecting  facts  without
tiuorising.

Yet  the  defenders  of  alternation  invite  ur  simply  "  to  look
and  sec,"  to  "  establish  facts.  These  once  fixed,  any  thcorj'
which  will  perfectly  account  for  them  is  good."  These
are  Dr.  Hawky's  words.'  And  the  London  Homtxopaikic
Review,  vol.  ix.,  p.  432,  quotes  Dr.  Hawlcy's  words  approv-
ingly :  "  The  homceopathic  system  of  medicine,"  •  •  •
says  Dr.  Hawley,  "  basus  itself,  not  on  tlieories  but  on  facta
as  they  are  observed  in  the  world  of  man.  It  frees  its  dis-
dplcs  from  all  dogmas  and  simply  asks  thcni  to  look  and
sec."  Well,  being  thus  invited,  wc  "look  and  sec."  What
do  we  see  ?  Why  we  sec  Dr.  Hawlcy  giving  Bryonia  and
Septa  in  alternation  in  one  chronic  case  and  Arsenic  and
China  in  another  case,  and  curing  both  in  a  way  which
satisfies  him  well.  This  is  what  we  see.  But  what  does  Dr.
Hawlcy  see  when  he  looks  at  these  same  facts  ?  Why  he
sees  something  which  proves  to  him  that  "  for  him,  the  use
of  remedies  Jn  alternation  is  better  than  the  use  of  a  single
remedy."  And  the  I^ondon  Review  sees  in  the  satne  facts
something  "  which  proved to  htm  (Dr. Hawlcy)  that  the


'  AmtrUan  tlomanpatkit  Unnrw,  tdI.  v.,  p.  3j8,


ALTERNATION OF  KBUEDIES. NO. 2.


173


alternation  of  medicines  is  not  only  admissible,  but  that
cases  now  and  Uien  occur  which  CAN  ONLY  BE  CURED  BY
SUCH  ALTERNATION."

la  not  this  "theorizing"  pretty  strongly  and  on  a  rather
slender  basis  ?  Our  friends  warn  us  against  "  theory  "  and
yet,  from  two  facts.  Dr.  Hawley  concludes  that,  "  for  him,
the  use  of  remedies  in  alternation  is  better  tlian  tlic  use  of
a  single  remedy."  From  the  same  two  facts  tlie  I^ndon
Revicxv  makes  Dr.  Hawtey  conclude  that  "cases  now  and
then  occur,  which  CAN  ONLY  BE  CURED  BY  SUCH  ALTER-
lATlON."  Tliis  is  a  broad  generalization  cm  a  very  narrow
foundation.  But  Dr.  Hawley  admonishes  us  that  "  we  have
not  yet  any  such  collection  of  facts  as  will  ivarrant  any
generalisation"

For  ourselves,  wc  should  not  feel  justified  in  drawing  any
such  conclusions  as  these  from  Dr.  Hawlcy's  cases  or  from
any  of  the  cases  already  narrated,  cured  by  alternation.
When  adduced  in  evidence,  wc  accept  them  as  facts  and
give  ihcm  what  we  consider  to  be  their  full  value.  They
prove  to  us  that  cases  may  be  cured  by  alternated  remedies,
but  they  prove  no  more  than  that.  They  prove  that  two
remedies  in  alternation  cured  a  case  which  neither  of  those
two  remedies  singly  had  cured.  Beyond  this  tlicy  prove
nothing.  Assuredly  they  do  not  prove  that  a  physician
could  not  have  cured  each  case  more  quickly  Avith  some
3ther  remedy,  given  singly.  How  could  such  evidence  be
held  by  us  to  justify  such  conclusions  as  Dr.  Hawley  and
his  reviewer  draw  from  it,  when  our  daily  experience  fur-
nishes case  after  case  which  had  been  treated  ineffectually  by
physicians  who  always  alternate  and  which  yields  promptly
to  the  single  remedy.  Evidence  of  tllis  kind  whether  FOR
or  AGAINST  alternation,  will  not  settle  this  question.

These  remarks,  extended  as  they  are,  have  been  made  for
the  purpose  of  showing  that  clinical  experience  is  available
as  a  means  of  improvement  111  medical  practice  only  In  so
£u-  as  it  is  analyzed,  thought  about,  and,  tn  fact,  "  theorised'*


<74


ALTERNATION  OF  REMEDIES. NO. 2.


about;  that  those  who  deprecate  dogmatism  and  would  put
off  the  rorniation  ofgcncralizations,  do,  themselves,  d<^7natize
and  theorize,  and  from  the  nature  of  the  case  they  must  do  so
in  the  act  of  reasoning  about  the  evidence  they  bring  forward.

If  this  be  inevitable,  then,  it  must  be  allowed  us  likewise
to  theorize  and  in  what  we  have  to  say  about  alternation
we  shall  hold  ourselves  justified  in  basing  our  argument  on
generalizations  from  a  multitude  of  collated  facts.  We  hold
that  the  argument  from  theory  is  in  order.  And  regarding
a  SCIEXCB  as  being  a  connected  and  independent  series  of
generalizations  based  on  an  analysts  of  methodically  arranged
and  collated  facts,  we  require  the  advocates  of  alternation  to
rest  tlieir  cause,  as  we  do  our  opposition  to  alternation,  on
such  a  generalization.  Failing  to  do  this,  they  have  no  claim
for  their  method  as  a  part  of  tlie  SCIENCE  of  Therapeutics.
Failing  this,  the  facts  which  seem  to  justify  alternation  can
be  used  in  no  other  way  than  in  the  blind,  empirical  way  of
literal  itnitation.  in  which  accuracy  and  certainty  arc  quite
out  of  the  question.  Hut  our  whole  object  in  study  and
labor,  beyond  the  direct  need  of  our  patients^  Is  to  complete
the  structure  of  our  science,  such  as  wc  have  defined  a
Science  to  be,  a  means  of  attaining  accuracy  and  certainty.

Some  of  the  advocates  of  alternation  have  failed  to  per-
ceive the  necessity  of  raising  their  procedures  to  the  level  of
a  scientific  method.  They  still  rest  on  the  rude  empirical
ground  of  unmcthodized  experience.  Their  argument  is:
"  I  have  alternated  remedies  which,  singly,  had  failed,  and  I
cured,  Henceforth  I  shall  alternate."  Or,  as  the  London
Review  varies  the  argument  (9, 432),  "  The  practice  of  alter-
nation of  remedies  is  one  so  widely  adopted  that  it  would
appear  to  have  the  sanction  of  very  extended  practical
experience.  •  •  •  Experience  has  proved

abundantly  that  the  alternation  of  remedies  increases  the
rapidity  of  the  cure,"  etc  Tlie  same  argument  was  used  by
Dr.  Coxc,'  who  claims  to  have  alternated for  twenty-five

'  Ameriean  HvmavpalkU  JttvUw,  uL,  59.


ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES. NO. 2.


175


fears, and  to  have  betn  successful. As wc have before

emarked,  the  same  argument  may  be  used  by  Allopathists,

and  by  the  advocates  of  every  form of  practice,  whether

pure,  mixed,  or  wholly  vicious. The  same  argument  niay

I be,  and  is,  advanced  by  those  who  oppose  alternation.

^ft Others,  however,  have  seen  the  necessity  of  basing  their

^iUJvocacy  of  alternation  on  some  general  principlcH,  amun|r

them  particularly  Dr.  Drysdalc  '  and  Dr.  Coe,'  and  to  these

statements  of  principles  we  wish  to  devote  some  attention.

^^ But,  first, let  us  have  a  clear  understanding  of  what  is

^Bropcrly  meant  by  alternation  of  remedirs.

^m As  we  have  stated,  the  term  is  used  in  different  senses.

H I. Dr. J. R. Coxe (loc.  cit.)  seemed  to  think  that  the

«:>pponents  of  alternation  contend  that  each  case  of  sickness

should  be  treated  with  one  single  remedy,  and  that,  if  during

an  illness  a  change  in  the  symptoms  should  compel  a  change

in  the  remedy,  this,  by  whatever  name  it  be  called,  is,  in

/att,  aJ/fmatu>a. He  scouts  the  idea  of  any  real  distinction

between  alfgnuitwn  and  succession of  remedies. Well, if

this  be  all  that  alternation  means,  we have no  reason  to

i oppose  it.  But,  what  is  a  case  of  disease  in  this  sense  ?  Docs
it  comprise  all  that  may  ail  a  man  from  the  time  that  he
lakes  to  his  bed  to  the  time  that  he  goes  to  his  work  again  7
Suppose  a  patient  sick  of  dysenter>',  and  recovering  finely
under  the  single  remedy  Mcrcurius  corrosivus.  A^-Tien  just
convalescent  he  is  seized  with  rheumatism,  and  requires
Rhus  toxicodendron.  Is  it  "  alternating  "  to  give  it  to  him  ?
And  then,  suppose  him  safety  over  rheumatism ;  but  just
before  he  goes  to  work  again,  he  has  a  return  of  dysentery,
requiring  Mcrcurius  corrosivus.  Is  it  "alternating"  to  give
it,  if  the  symptoms  require  it  ?  And  if,  when  cured  of  this
relapse,  he  gets  the  measles  and  requires  Euphrasia,  is  it
"  alternating "  again  to  give  him  this  remedy  ?  Why,
according  to  this  defmition,  if  you  call  this  all  one  sickness.


Annali  af  BrUitk Hamavpatlkit


* Tkt  AmrrititH /lommfaMc  Jt*t
view,  vol.  v.,  April,  1865.


i;6


ALTERNATION  OF REMEDIES. NO. 2.


it  has  been  a  case  of  alternation.  If  you  call  it  four  sick-
nesses, perhaps  not.  To  the  patient,  certainly,  it  is  "  all
one,"  whatever  you  call  it!  Now,  suppose  llic  symptoms
in  a  case  to  have  changed  just  as  decidedly  as  in  tlic  case
supposed  above,  but  yet  not  so  definitely  as  to  induce  you
to  give  to  the  changes  these  nosoh)gical  names  of  dysentery,
rheumatism  and  measles.  The  medicines,  Mcrcuriiis,  Rhus
and  Euphrasia  will  have  been  just  as  dearly  indicated  by
these  successive  changes,  and  just  as  imperatively  required
as  though  the  patient  were  regarded  as  having  had  four
successive  diseases.  Is  it  "  alternation "  to  give  these
remedies  successively  just  as  they  become  clearly  indicated  ?
Wc  think  it  is  not,  but  some  say  it  is.  We  are  sure  it  is
sound  practice.

2.  Dr.  Quin,  of  London,'  calls  the  method  of  prescribing
successive  remedies  in  a  case  as  the  changes  of  symptoms
may  require  them,  '^alternation  a  posteriori"  and  sanctions
and  defends  it  But  he  reprobates,  under  tlte  name  of
"aliemation  a  priori"  tlie  practice  which^  it  seems  to  us,  is
the  only  one  which  can  properly  be  called  "alternation,"
viz. :

■*  Prucribmg  at  ihc  very  onUet  of  the  trctlmcnt  — nt  the  verjr  Ant  viiit  aad
kIso,  not  unfrc!]ucQt1y,  uJniost  itt  every  sulueijucnt  visit,  two  or  more  medictnet,
lo  be  nllcm.-ited  every  quarter,  fauir  hour,  or  every  Iwo,  three,  or  four  boon.
It  is  difEcull  to  believe,"  he  contiuaes,  "  that  sach  practitionert  «rc  in  Ibe  tuiliil
of  carefully  coDsidcnng  the  caies  nndcr  trcnUnenl,  ax  have  well  sludied  their
Materia  Medicn,  oi  In  divest  one's  sielf  of  the  idea  thai  Itiey  roort  to  sudt  slip,
sliod  practice  in  the  hope  ihst  if  one  nf  Ibc  medicinn  doe*  not  liil  off  Ibe
cataplaint,  some  one  of  the  olEien  may.  One  mcctx  with  inilmctions  for
aimilar  altpcnalion  laid  down  in  popular  liooks  on  HomcEopathy,  showing  that
iHi  a  prieri  style  of  attemaling  remedies  is,  with  oertain  praclilioneix,  moro  K
rule  than  an  exception.*'

3.  Dr.  Drysdale  defines  alteruatian  to  be  "tlu  giving  a
sec&nd  medicine  -Mkile  the  sphere  of  action  of  the  first  is  stiil
unexhausted."  But  Dr.  Drysdale,  while  advocating  alter-
nation, in  this  sense,  in  certain  specified  cases,  does  not
propose  to  give  his  second  medicine  except after  a  careful

'  Annmal  AJdrtu,  Amnatt  of  Brilith  HomttofathU  SatUty.


ALTERNATION OF KEMEUIES. NO. 2-


^77


re-exacni nation  of  the  symptoms  of  the  patient,  and  .1  com-
parison of  them  with  the  Materia  Mcdica.  It  is  clear,  then,
that  alternation  as  he  defines  and  defends  it,  is  not  the  same
thing  a*  the  alternation  a  priori  wliich  Dr.  Quin  reprobates,
and  lo  which  we  would  restrict  tlie  tenii.  Dr.  Drysdale's
dcAniiion  seems  to  us  very  vague  and  impracticable.  How
arc  wc  to  know  when  the  sphere  of  action  of  tlie  medicine
is  exhausted  ?  By  inferences  from  tlie  proving  ?  But
wc  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  speed  at  which  vital
processes  go  on  in  sickness  may  be  very  ditTerenl  from  tiiat
during  a  physiological  proving.  Reduced  to  a  practical
rule.  Dr.  Drysdale's  reasoning  would  amount  to  this:  If,  on
our  second  \Tsit,  symptoms  shall  be  fuund  to  have  arisen
which  seem  to  call  for  the  second  medicine,  wc  should
suspend  the  first  and  give  the  second,  and  then.  If,  at  the
third  visit,  the  symptoms  be  found  to  have  changed  again,
so  39  to  call  again  for  the  first  medicine,  we  should  give  it.
3ttt  this,  he  says,  is  "  altcntatian."  Witli  certain  qualifica-
tions we  agree  to  his  ntU  of  practice,  but  we  object  to  the
natHc  he  gives  it  And  here  names  are  important.  It  is  of
great  consequence  to  avoid  giving  to  two  radically  different
procedures  one  and  the  same  name.
*

Now,  what  do  kv  mean  by  "alternation?"  Let  us  give
a  practical  answer.  Wc  have  before  us  a  prescription  label
filled  up  by  Dr John  Doc. It  reads  thus;

"No.  1,  Aeon.';  No.  2.  Bcllad.*;  of  each,  twelve  pow-
ders. Take  tlic  powders  alternately  as  numbered,  every
four  hours."


We  have  another  paper  containing  directions  prepared  by
Dr,  Busy,  for  a  chronic  patient :  .

"Take  as  follows:  Mcrcurius  hydriod.,  first  decimal  tritu-
ration, every  night  fur  seven  nights;

"Then  Siilphur-\  every  night  for  seven  nights;

"Then  CoUinsonia',  every  night  for  seven  nights;
13


178  ALTERNATION  OF  REMEDIES. NO. 2.

"  Then  Podophyllum  pelt*,  every  night  for  seven  nigh
"Then  Ignatia^  and  China',  alternately  every  night
morning,  for  seven  days ;

"Then  Aurum  met.',  every  night  for  seven  nights;

"Then  Pulsatilla',  every  night  for  seven  nights;

"  Then  Phytolacca  dec.',  every  night  for' seven  nights."


We  object  to  these,  and  to  all  kindred  procedures,  th
they  rest  on  hypotheses  which  are not  warranted  by  dtse
present  possibilities  of  science. Dr.  John  Doe's  first  pre-
scription of  Aconite may  be all right; the symptoiM»*
probably  call  for  it But  the  physician  cannot  know  io
advance  that, in four  hours, the  symptoms  will  have  SO
changed  that,  if  he  were  present,  he  would  perceive  Bella-
donna to  be  indicated ;  and  that,  in  four  hours  later.  Aconite
will  be  indicated  again  ;  and  that  the  symptoms  will  go  on,
oscillating  between these two series of  indications, each
oscillation  consuming  just  four  hours.

And  "Dr.  Busy,"  by  what  wonderful  gift  could  he  foresee
that  seven  days  of  Mercurius  hydrargyrum  would  bring  his
patient  to  a  state  requiring  Sulphur,  and  seven  days  of
Sulphur  to  a  state  requiring  Collinsonia  (whatever  that  state
may  be),  and  seven  days  of  Collinsonia  to  a  state  calHngfor
Podophyllum  (and  for  just  seven  days  of  it  too),  and  seven
days  of  Podophyllum  to  a  state  of  complex  misery  that  calls
for  China  and  Ignatia  in  alternation  (for  just  seven  days
likewise)  and  so  on  to  the  end  of  this  long  chapter!

•'  Oh,  wad  some  [lower  that  gifiie  gie  us/  "

These  instances,  and  the  comments  upon  them,  comprise
our  definition  of  "  alternation,"  and  our  objection  to  it.  It
is  a  practice  very  prevalent  in  the  United  States  and  in
England.  It  is  exceptional  in  Germany,  France,  Spain  and
Italy.

The  principles  which  govern  the  selection  and  administra-
tion of  homoeopathic  remedies  are  very  simple.


ALTERNATION  OP  REMEDIES, No. 2.


179


The  great  law,  SIMIUA  SIHIUBUS  curantur.  teaches
OS  to  select  a  remedy  the  characteristic  pathogenetic  symp-
toms of  which  arc  vcr\'  similar  to  those  of  the  patient.
This  is  a  grand  generalization,  supported  by  a  multitude  of
facts.  We  accept  it  It  takes  no  heed  of  names-o(  diseases,
nor  of  pathological  theories  of  the  seat  and  origin  of  diseases.
Giving  a  broad  and  liberal  signification  to  the  word  "symp-
torn,"  so  as  to  include  everything  abnormal  about  the
patient  whether  it  be  historical  or  actual,  this  law  pays
regard  to  the  symptoms  alone.  It  require  that  the  symp-
toms shall  be  collected  and  compared  with  the;  Materia
Mcdica  nvry  timr  a  prtscription  is  made,  and  that  the  drug
that  has  produced  symptoms  most  similar  to  those  of  the
patient  shall  be  chosen  and  given.  This  is  a  true  homceo-
patliic  prescription.  No  matter  how  often  during  the  sick-
ness of  a  patient  this  process  be  repeated  ;  no  matter  how
many  remedies  be  given  in  succession  ;  no  matter  if  the
first  remedy  he  recurred  to  after  the  second  and  the  second
after  the  first — if  each  prescription  have  been  the  fruit  of  a
special  collection  of  symptoms  and  comparison  of  them  with
the  Materia  Medica — call  it  "' d/Zi'r/Ki/ww,'*  or  by  whatever
other  wrong  name  you  please,  it  is  a  sound  and  defensible
homo.'opathic  prescription,  such  as  Halinemann  taught  and
practiced,  and  his  followers  adopted.

But  the  physician  sometimes  leaves  a  second  remedy  to
be  substituted  for  the  first  under  certain  specified  contingen-
cies- Is  this  alternation  ?  By  no  means.  In  so  doing,  he
symptoms  which,  in  his  judgment,  will  be  an  indication  that
another  remedy  is  required.  He  is  merely  instructing  and
empowering  another  person  to  make,  in  his  stead,  the  study
and  selection  of  a  remedy  which  should  precede  and  be  the
basts  of  every  new  prescription.

.\nd  wherever,  in  his  writings.  Hahnemann  has  seemed
to  authorize  or  sanction  alternation,  his  directions  have  been
of  this  character He  has  mentioned  that  a  certain  group


Il


ALTERNATION  OF REMEDIE!


ioTJtr


of  rcmoUes  is  likely  to  be  indicated  in  a  certain  disease,  and
although  he  has  sometimes  used  the  word  "  alternate "
(abuvc/tse/nj,  yet,  in  every  case.  hL-  lias  specified  the
particular  symptoms,  or  groups  of  symptoms,  which  would
specialty  indicate  and  authorize  the  preference  to  be  giveu
to  one  or  another  remedy  of  these  groups.

In  a  previous  paper'  we  showed  this  to  be  true  of
Ilahnematin's  directions  for  the  use  of  Spungia,  Hcpar  and
Aconite  in  croup,  and  also  for  Bryonia  and  Rhus  in  typhoid
fever. The  same  is  true  of  his  directions  touching  cholera.

The  I^ndon  Honuzopathic  Rez'iew '  says :  "  Those  who
combat  '  Alternation  '  on  the  ground  that  it  is  opposed  to
the  practice  of  Hahnemann,  fall  into  a  grave  error.  In  the
introduction  to  lidladunna  in  his  Materia  Medico  Pura,  he
advises  the  alternation  of  Aconite  and  Coffca  cruda  in  purple
rash,  in  these  words :  '  Aconite  and  Coffea  should  be  alter-
nately given  every  twelve,  sixteen  or  twenty-four  hours,  in
proportion  as  one  or  other  remedy  is  indicated.' "

It  is  true  that  the  above  words  are  contained  in  the  intro-
duction tn  Bellationna,  but  they  arc  not  all  the  words  con-
tained in  the  sentence  from  which  they  arc  quotctl,  This
sentence,  complete,  is  as  follows:  "There  (in  the  purple  rash)
Belladonna,  naturally,  does  no  good,  and  the  other,  common,
charlatan  treatment  must  also  allow  the  most  of  the  patients
to  die  of  it,  whereas  they  might  all  be  cured  by  the  alternate
use  of  Aconite  and  of  the  tincture  of  Coffc;!  cruda,  the
former  for  the  heat  and  the  increasing  restlessness  and
agoutiiing  anxiety,  the  latter  for  over-excessive  pains  with  a
lachrymose  hutnor ;  the  Aconite  in  the  30lh  dilution  of  the
juice  and  the  tincture  of  Coffea  cruda  in  the  3d  dilution.
both  in  tlie  dose  of  the  smallest  part  of  a  drop,  the  one  or
the  other  every  twelve,  sixteen  or  twenty-four  hour&,  accord-
ing as  tht  one  or  the  other  is  indicated."  The  two  groups  of
sjrmptoms  which Ilahncmann  gives  as  indications,  respcct-

' MmrrutiK /Awamjw/iinf AVpi/w',  "  Viil.  in,,  |i.  432.

April,  t86j.


I


ALTERNATIOX  OF REMEDIES. NO. 2.


I8l


ively,  for  the  one  or  the  other  of  these  remedies.,  are  omitted
by  the  I^ndfin  Rrvieru.  They  arc  the  essence  of  tlic  whole
matter.  Following  this  advice  of  Hahnemann,  it  would  not
be  possible  for  the  practitioner,  on  meeting  a  case  of  purple
rash,  to  begin  with  a  blind  a  prhri  alternation  of  Aconite
and  Coffea.  On  the  contrarj'.  aa  we  understand  Hahne-
mann's direction,  he  should  examine  his  case  to  see  whether
it  presented  the  groups  of  symptoms  "heat,  increasing  rest-
lessness and  agonizing  anxiety,"  in  which  case  he  would
^ve  Aconite ;  or  whellier  the  character i^^tics  of  the  case
were  "over-exccssivc  pains  with  a  lachrymose  humor,"  in
which  case  he  would  give  Coffea.  Suppose  at  his  next  visit,
twelve,  sixteen  or  twenty-four  hours  after,  he  should  find,  as
might  well  happen,  that  the  group  of  symptoms  first
observed  had  disappeared  and  had  given  place  to  the  other
group,  he  would,  for  this  reason,  change  his  remedy.  Or,  if
he  lived  at  a  distance  from  the  patient,  he  might  make  the
nur%  his  deputy,  and,  instructing  this  deputy  aa  to  the
distinction  between  tlie  groups  of  symptoms,  might  direct
her  (as  Hahnemann  has  directed  us)  to  make  changes  in  the
remedies  when  corresponding  changes  in  the  symptoms
should  call  for  tliem.  In  this  way  there  would  be  no
assumption  and  no  a  priori  "alternation."  The  practice
would  be  sound,  fulfilling  the  conditions  of  a  sound  prescrip-
tion, viz. :  that  each  prescription  be  preceded  by  a  fresh
collection  of  the  symptoms  of  the  case,  and  comparison  of
them  with  tlie  Materia  Mcdica.

Is  it  suggested  thai  Hahnemann  meant  to  intimate  that
these  groups  of  symptoms  might  co-exist  in  the  patient  at
tlie  same  time  and  might  make  a  "  totality  of  symptoms'*
that  would  require  these  two  remedies  to  cover  it.*  But
these  groups  are  pathologically  incompatible.  No  one  con-
versant with  tlie  |)licni>rnena  of  sickness  could  conceive  of  a
patient  presenting,  at  one  and  the  .«iame  time,  "heat,  increas-
ing restlessness  and  agonizing  anxiety,"  and  likewise  oivr-
svnubilitjf  to  pain  and  a  disposiiion  to  weep  ami  tUspond. No  t


1 82


ALTERNATION  OF  REMEDIES. NO.  2.


patients  in  awaxing  fever  often  swear;  but  they  seldom  pine
and  weep .-  they  feci  general  anguish  but  make  light  of  specific
pains.  But  when  the  fever  has  waned,  there  often  succeeds
it  a  stage  of  over -sensibility  and  of  proncness  to  weep ;  and
this  succession  may  be  repeated  again  and  again,  and  we  sup-
pose Hahnemann,  recommended  these  remedies  to  comr-
pond  to  this  succession.  We  cannot  comprehend  his  words
in  the  sense  attached  to  them  by  the  1j>ndon  Revietu.  In
the  signification  in  which  tee  have  understood  ihcm,  ihey
correspond  ])recis*.']y  to  all  of  his  other  directions,  which
have  been  quoted  as  favoring  "alternation."

But,  now,  suppose  it  conceded  that,  while  Ilahnemaiin's
practical  deductions  from  scientific /Wwrr^/r.^  were  opposed  to
"alternation,"  )xis,  practice  sanctioned  it  Is  the  argument
from  his /»rac/«-f  all  powerful  against  V\^  principles?  This
reminds  us  of  what  the  Chairman  of  the  British  Society  calls
Dr.  Drysdale'sSocratic  irony  " — you  all  object  to  alternation,
and,  yet,  you  all  alternate."  We  have  seen  that  Dr.  Drys-
dale's  definition  uf  altenidtiun  is  such  as  to  cover  almost
every  actual  cjise  of  treatment  and  is  dilTcreut  from  that  of
every  other  writer.  But,  the  argument  from  the  universality
of  a  practice,  in  favor  of  its  propriety,  is  a  dangerous  one  to
play  with.  Place  it  in  the  mouth  of  a  theologian  and  see
how  it  reads :  You  all  condemn  «*«,  and  yet,  you  are  ail
sinners  r'

Does  tlie  weight  of  this  argument  He  on  the  side  of  sin
or  on  the  side  of  the  comicm nation  of  sin  !  Does  propriety
necessarily  follow  from  universality  ?  Are  the  majority
altvays  right,  just  because  they  are  the  majori^  ?  If  so,  all
hail,  Allopathy  1

The  conditions  of  a  true  and  defensible  honifeopathtc  pre-
scription require,  in  our  opinion,  that  the  symptoms  of  the
patient,  at  the  time  of  prescribing,  shall  be  collected  and
compared  with  the  provings  in  the  Materia  Medica,  and  that
the  drug  whose  symptoms  correspond  most  closely  with
tliosc  ol  the  patient  shall  be  selected. Perhaps  no  Homtm-


ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES. NO. 2.


183


pathician  would  object  to  this  statement  But  let  us  see
what  it  requires.

First.  It  requires  that  before  every  prescription,  the
symptofos  of  the  patient  shall  be  studied  anew.  In  some
way  or  other,  whutlicr  It  be  done  by  the  physician  or  by  a
provisional  deputy  specially  instructed  for  the  case  (as  wc
have  explained  that  the  nurse  may  be),  more  or  less  perfectly,
this  must  be  done.  We  have  seen  that  in  the  ordinary
method  of  alternation  (a  priori)  this  is  not  attempted  to  be
•done  and  cannot  be  done  ;  it  is  not  proposed  to  do  it

Second.  It  requires  that  the  aggregate  of  the  symptoms
presented  by  the  patient  be  regarded  as  one  malady,  for
which  an  analogue  is  to  be  found  in  the  Materia  Medica.
Wc  have  no  authority  in  science  for  arbitrarily  dividing  this
aggregate  of  symptoms  into  groups,  for  each  of  which  we
are  to  find  an  analogue  in  the  Materia  Medica,  and  then
giving  these  analogues,  in  combination,  or  in  alternation.
This  requirement  is  perhaps  the  most  difficult  of  all  to  fulfilL
In  collecting  the  symptoms,  our  utmost  sharpness  of  insight
and  our  deepest  and  must  extensive  learning  in  every  de-
partment of  physiological,  psychological  and  pathological
science  will  be  tasked  to  construct,  from  the  patient's  history
and  from  his  present  condition,  a  complete  picture  of  tlie
morbid  phenomena  which  he  presents,  from  which  the
physiological  idiosyncrasies  of  his  peculiar  temperament  and
personality  shall  all  have  been  eliminated,  and  in  which  his
symptoms  shall  be  duly  arranged  with  regard  to  their  mutual
relations  and  dependencies.  Then,  furthermore,  inasmuch
a3  we  cannot  hope  to  find,  in  the  proving  of  any  drug,  a
duplicate  symptom  for  every  symptom  of  the  patient,  the
rarest  judgment  and  most  extensive  knowledge  of  semeiology
arc  required  to  analyze  the  patient's  symptoms  and  to  detect
those  which  arc  truly  characteristic  of  that  Individual  case,
and  for  which  an  analogue  must  be  found  in  tlie  proving ;
and  to  set  these  characteristics  apart  from  the  other
symptoms,  the  analogue  of  which  it  may be  less  impera'


i84


ALTERNATION OF  REMEDIES. NO. 2.


tivcly  necessary  to  discover.  It  is  here,  undoubtedly,  tliat
the  greatest  knowledge  and  ability  are  required  of  the
physician  and  here  that  failures  are  most  frequently  made.
It  is,  probably,  from  failures  in  Oiis  analysis  of  symptoms,
that  the  supposed  necessity  of  alternation  most  frequently
arises.

Third.  It  requires  that  a  drug  shall  be  selected  which
has  produced  on  the  healthy  subject,  symptoms  very  similar
to  those  of  the  patient.  The  substance  given  must  have
been  proved  in  the  same  form  (not  necessarily  the  s'avcw:  dose)
as  that  in  which  it  is  proposed  to  be  given.  If  Hcpar  sul-
phuris  calcareum  correspond  to  the  case,  this  requirement  is,
by  no  mean5,  fulfilled  if  wegivcSuIphurand  Calcareacarbonica
combined  or  alternated,  on  the  ground  that  these  substances
are  the  constituents  of  llcpar  sulphuris  calcareum.  For,
this  involves  the  assumption  that  the  Sulphur  and  the
Calcarca  carbontca  have  undergone  no  changes  during  the
process  which  made,  out  of  them,  that  third  substance —
Hcpar  sulphuris.  No !  Hcpar  sulphuris  was  proved  a$  tuck.
If  wc  select  it,  for  the  reason  that  the  symptoms  which  it
produced  correspond  to  those  of  the  patient,  then  we  must
give  Hepar  sulphuris,  the  very  substance  that  was  proved.
Otherwise  we  plunge  into  a  sea  of  speculation  and  hy-
pothesis and  forfeit  that  certainty  which  it  was  the  sole
object  of  our  science  (as  of  every  science)  to  attain.  In  like
manner,  if  the  Iodide  of  Mercury  had  been  proved  on  the
healthy  subject  and  its  symptoms  were  most  similar  to  those
of  our  patient,  it  would  tint  be  a  compliance  with  the
demands  of  our  science  should  we  give,  instead  of  Iodide  of
Mercury  the  very  substance  that  produced  these  symptoms,
the  Mercurius  vivus  and  the  tincture  of  Iodine,  assuming
that,  because  Iodide  of  Mercury  is  a  compound  of  these  two
substances,  therefore  the  conjoined  or  alternate  action  of  the
elements  from  whose  union  it  sprang  must  be  identical  with
its  own.  From  instances  like  these,  it  is  clearly  to  be  seen
that  wc  may  not,  consisteatly  with  the principles of  our


ALTERNATION OF  REMEDIES. TtO. 2.


than  tttat  in  which  they  were  proved.  If  drugs  had  been
proved  in  alternation,  we  might  then  with  propriety,  perhaps,
is  a  hap-hazard,  chance  operation — successful,  no  doubt,  at
times,  but  in  rucH  a  way  that  succes.'i  could  never  be  fore-
seen or  insured,  nor  could  tlic  experience  of  tlic  practitioner
in  any  way  serve  to  establish  or  confirm  any  principle  of
tnedical  science.

^V  homoeopathic  prescription,  as  we  have  defined  it.  is  a
deduction  from  a  generalization,  which  has  been  established
by  induction  from  a  multitude  of  instances,  This  is  the  law
stMluiA  siMiUBUS  CURANTUR,  in  accordance  witli  which
the  remedy  is  selected,  under  the  three  requirements  that
^  wc  have  specified.  So  well  established  is  this  law  of
^■V^&tijre.  tiiat  if  we  arc  so  fortunate  as  to  be  able,  in  any  given
^■•^Ascr  of  disease,  to  comply  closely  with  those  requirements,
^»*ncl  particularly  witli  tlie  second,  wc  may  with  certainty
predict,  and  in  confidence  await,  the  favorable  result  of  our
proscriptions.  Such  certainty  of  foresight  and  such  conli-
^■<lcncc  it  is  our  great  object  to  attain,  and  nothing  but  a
^frciontific  method  can  afTord  them.

^B  £tut  we  have  shown  tliat  alternation,  as  scv  use  the  term,
^_  \Kis  iicicntific  method.  It  docs  not  meet  the  requirements
^H  of  the  law.  It  docs  not  take  the  aggregate  of  the  symptoms
P^  IS  tht  single  basis  of  prescription.  It  does  not  give  the
j^L  Terrtcdy,  single  and  simple,  sucli  as  it  was  used  in  tticfirwing:
^M  But  it  permits  itself  to  act  on  two  assumptions — that  the
^H  litiCrcgatc  of  the  symptoms  may  be  arbitrarily  divided  and
liiivc  been  proved  independently  of  each  other  may  be  used
conjointly  as  a  sort  of  composite  analogue  to  the  aggregate
^ the  symptoms;  and  all  tht.s  with  equally  good  and  sure
'Kultit.  These  two  assumptions  arc  not  even  atUgtd  to  be
hucd on any collection of facts. Their tntroductJOii


1 86


ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES. NO. 2.


deprives  the  proceeding  of  all  claim  to  a  strictly  scientific
])rcK:cs3

The  advtx:atcs  and  defenders  of  allcrnation  are  nattirally
divided  into  two  classes.  The  one  frankly  disavow  any
pretension  that  alternation  is  h  sctentilic  deduction  from  a
general  principle,  and  defend  it  oil  tlie  simple  ground  of
experience.  They  have  alternated  successfully  in  a  case  or
cases  like  the  present,  and  therefore  they  do  it  again.

Now.  ubvicmsly.  witit  this  class  we  cannot  discuss  the
question  on  scientific  grounds.  There  is  no  reason  in  their
method,  becauiic  there  is  in  it  nu  reference  to  general  princi-
ple, to  natural  laws :  it  gives  no  means  of  foreseeing  and
providing  fur  future  results  ;  it  Is  the  simplest  form  of  litcra]
cnipiricism.  Wc  can  do  nothing  more  than  show,  as  has
been  done,  its  unreasonableness  and  the  precarious  and  con-
tradictory and  disappointing  character  of  its  results.  We
can  only  point  out  how  far  it  falls  below  the  standard  of
action  to  which  practitioners  of  medicine  should  hold  them-
selves, and  how  unworthy,  in  our  judgment,  -such  metliods
arc  of  reasoning  and  conscientious  men.

The  second  class  accept  our  definition  of  the  requirements
of  a  sound  prescription,  and  our  statement  of  the  obligation
of  scientific  men  to  abide  by  natural  laws.  But  ihey  claim
tliat  alternatiun  docs  not  nccussarily,  as  we  have  maintained,
contravene  the  requirements  of  such  a  prescription;  and
they  claim  tliat  there  arc  certain  established  principles  in
accordance  with  which  we  may,  with  scientific  accuracy,
determine  when  and  how  to  alternate.  This  clas.t  defend
alternation  "on  principle."  As  the  former  class  comprises
some  of  our  most  conscientious  and  estimable  colleagues,  so
does  the  Utter  embrace  many  of  the  most  gifted  and  learned
rf  our  school.  Their  opinions  are  worthy  of  the  most
earnest  and  respectful  consideration.

We  have  previously  stated  that  some  who  defend  alter-
nation on  principle  designate  by  that  name  methods  which,
we  think,  ought  not  to  be  so  called,  and  which  we  do  not


ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES. HO. 2.


187


find  lault  with ;  as,  for  example,  Dr.  Coxe  ;  likewise  Dr.
Drysdalc,  in  50  far  as  his  definition  is  concerned.  Their
methods  do  not  always,  of  necessity,  conflict  with  the  require-
ments of  a  sound  prescription.  There  are  still  other  pro-
cedures, called  "  altwrnatton,"  but  which  are  not  always
necessarily  liable  tu  the  objections  urged  against  "alter-
nation," properly  so  called,  as  w^  have  defined  it  (a  priori).

The  occurrence  of  complications,  and  especially  of  trau-
matic complications,  such  as  a  burn  of  tlie  hand,  during  the
course  of  a  pneumonia — a  contused  vulva  simultaneously
with  a  milk  fever,  are  mentioned  by  Dr.  Drysdale,  as
instances  which  may  require  alternation  ;  as,  for  example,
Urtica  urcns  to  the  burned  hand,  while  Phosphorus  is  being
given  internally  for  the  pneumonia,  and  Arnica  to  the
vulva,  while  Aconite  is  given  for  the  milk  fever.

Now,  of  such  cases  as  these  it  might  perhaps  be  properly
said,  that  they  do  not  come  under  the  scope  of  our  inquiry,
inasmuch  as  tiic  bum  and  the  contusion  might  be  regarded
as  purely  local,  and  not  at  all  constitutional  affections,  and
the  respective  applications  might  be  viewed  in  tile  same
light,  and  as  not  capable,  when  thus  used,  of  atTccting  ttie
general  system,  and  of  thus  being,  in  fact,  alternated  with
the  remedy  which  the  patient  is  taking  internally.  But,
waiving  this  reply,  we  may  say  that  the  teaching  of  our
own  experience  is,  that,  in  such  cases  as  these,  the  best  way
is  to  follow  the  one  great  rule  which  governs  homoropathic
prescription ;  after  the  occurrence  of  the  complication,  collect
and  scrutinize  the  patient's  symptoms  anew.  If  the  bum
shall  have  been  so  slight  as  to  make  no  impression  on  the
general  system,  to  produce  no  modification  in  the  symptoms
of  the  previously  existing  pneumonia,  then  there  is  no
reason  for  doubting  that  simple  protection  from  the  atmos-
pheric air  will  be  all  that  is  needed  in  the  way  oi  treatment
for  tiic  burn.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  bum  have  been  of  a  serious
character,  so  as  to  produce  constitutional  disturbance,  it  will


188


ALTERNATION*  OF REMEDIES. MO. 2.


assuredly  have  modified  the  symptoms  of  the  pneumonia,
and  we  shall  perhaps  hnd,  on  taking  Hie  aggregate  of
the  symptoms  again,  that  some  other  remedy  than  phos-
phorus U  now  indicated  to  meet  tJie  new  state  of  things
resulting  from  the  pneumonia  and  the  shock  of  the  bum
combined,  and  that  this  new  remedy  will  meet  both  troublcs.
For  it  must  not  be  hastily  assumed,  as  Dr.  Drysdale  sccnis
Inclined  to  intimate,  that  Urtica  uren<;  locally  applied  is
always  the  best  (or  a  good)  remedy  for  burns.  They  are
often  (at  toast)  best  treated,  as  Bttnninghausen  has  shown.
by  an  internal  remedy.  Singularly  enough,  it  once  chanced
to  mj-aelf  to  meet  the  complication  which  Dr.  Drysdale  here
supposes.  The  bum  was  scvltc,  and  the  effect  of  the  shock
so  modified  the  symptoms  of  the  pneumonia  that  the  result-
ing aggregate  of  symptoms  called  unmistakably  for  Arseni-
cum, which  was  given  with  most  gratifying  results,  as
regards  both  pneumonia  and  burn.  The  same  may  be  said
of  the  application  of  Arnica  to  contused  vulva.  Indeed,
there  is  too  great  haste  among  us  to  recur  to  topical
applications.

The  second  "  principle "  upon  which,  according  to  Dr.
Drysdale,  "the  practice  of  alternation  rests,"  is  "the  main-
taining the  susceptibility."  Dr.  Drysdale  says;  "  In  disease
we  generally  find  that  the  susceptibility  tu  the  liomceopathic
remedy  is  present  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  and  our  great
object  should  be  to  manage  the  doses  and  repetitions  so
that  it  shall  not  be  exhausted  before  the  natural  period
j  essential  for  a  cure.  Tliis  unfortunately,  however,  not  uo-
frcquently  happens,  in  spite  of  varying  the  dilutions  or
originaUy  having  chosen  the  best.  In  this  case  the  plan  has
been  adopted  of  interposing  doses  of  anotlier  remedy  as
nearly  as  possible  homoeopathic  to  the  case.  T1n«  must,  of
course,  be  an  antidote,  but.  ;is  in  the  ca.se  of  natural  disease,
it  may  tend  to  revive  the  susceptibility  to  the  first  remedy.
■  ■  •  Without  the  use  of  occasional  alternation  and
intermediate  remedies,  wc  should  be  almost  deprived  of  the


ALTERNATION OK REMEDIES. KO. 2.


189


use  of  a  large  class  of  serviceable  remedies  iti  chronic  disease,
such  as  Opium  in  constipation.  Lobelia,  Lactuca,  etc.,  in
asthma,  CoHTea  and  Aconite  in  neuralgia,  etc."

This  question  of  the  propriety  of  alternating  for  the  pur-
pose of  reviving  the  exhausted  susceptibility  may  be  treated
in  much  the  jyime  way  as  the  question  of  alternating  to  meet
complications.  When  we  have  a  case  under  treatment,  we
shall  not  be  led  to  suspect  an  exhaustion  of  susceptibility,
except  by  a  change  in  the  symptoms.  Now.  if  the
symptoms  have  changed,  this  very  change  furnishes  us  tlie
basis  for  a  new  prescription.  Why  shall  we  not  at  once
proceed,  in  accordance  with  the  great  rule  of  our  art,  to
select  a  new  remedy  corresponding  with  tliese  changed
symptoms?  Why  should  we  prefer,  to  tliis  certain  method,
the  pathological  hypothesis  that  the  susceptibility  to  a  rem-
edy which  we  have  assumed  to  be  suited  tu  liic  dise.ise  has
become  exhausted  and  needs  a  stimulant?  This  hypothesis
may  be  correct,  but  can  never  be  a  certain  basis  for  practice.

But  let  us  take  an  example  ;  Cases  of  dysentery  not  imfrc-
qucntly  occur  in  which  Nux  vomica  or  Mcrcurius  seemed  in
the  beginning  to  be  very  clearly  indicated.  The  patient  im-
proves for  a  few  da>'3  under  the  use  of  one  of  these  remedies,
and  then  ceases  to  improve.  On  a  careful  scrutiny  of  the
case  it  appears  that  tlie  prominent  characteristic  symptoms
(most  of  them  subjWtive,  of  course)  have  disappeared  or  be-
come obscure.  Even  the  evacuations  have  ceased  to  be
tharacteristic  of  any  remedy.  The  entire  system  is  dull,
languid,  uniinpressible.  In  such  a  case  as  this,  we  arc  told
that  the  susceptibility  of  the  patient  has  become  exhausted;
that  a  few  doses  of  Opium  will  arouse  it  so  that  it  will  agaia
respond  to  tlie  appropriate  remedy,  and  will  be  cured.

As  a  matter  tif  fact  we  know  this  treatment  does  succeed
in  many  cases,  but  the  rationale  of  the  process  is  by  no
means  satisfactory  to  us.  And  this  is  not  a  .solitary  instance
of  a  successful  practice  following,  through  good  luck,  from  a


190  ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES. NO. 2.

shall  find,  that  when  the  patient  ceases  to  improve  under  the
Nux  or  the  Mercurius  which  was  first  given,  his  symptoms
changed  in  such  a  way  that  their  totality  furnished  a  satisfac-
accordingly  have  selected  Opium  and  cured  his  case,  even,
though  the  notion  of  "exhausted  susceptibility  "  had  never-
entered  his  head. Simple  adherence  to  the  great  prindpl^^
of  homceopathic  prescribing,  viz.,  that  each  prescription  is  t.-^^
be  founded  on  a  new  collection  of  the  symptoms  and  a  ne  -"^jf
comparison  of  them  with  the  Materia  Medica,  leads  to  su^^;-
cess  in  all  such  cases,  without  the  intervention  of  any  path»«:i3-
logical  hypothesis  whatever ;  at  the  same  time  it  excludes  ^^all
danger  of  appearing  to  sanction  the  bad  habit  of  altematio^  n.
As  regards  the  use  of  Opium  for  constipation  in  chron^^i*^
diseases,  and  Coffea  in  neuralgia,  these  being  used  as  Jnttr—  '^'
mediate  or  alternated  remedies,  they,  like  topical  applic  — ^"
tions  in  traumatic  complications,  are  much  abused,  and  oft^^^"
altogether  needless  if  not  hurtful. A  single  example  w "^^
illustrate  this  point : A  patient,  not  long  ago,  while  under ^
friend's  treatment  came  under  my  observation. Her  symp^^^^^"
toms  corresponded  exceedingly  well  with  those  of  Coniu^*"'^
maculatum. It was  a chronic disease of  long standin^^'
She  had  troublesome  constipation,  which  was  sometimes  &<^
bad  that  it  seemed  to  completely  neutralize  the  good  efiect
which  Conium  was  evidently  producing. A  dose  or  two  of
Opium  ** would relieve the  constipation, and  the patient
would  seem  for  a  while  to  improve  again  under  the  Conium.
This  might  be  called  an  illustration  of  what  Dr. Drysdale
refers to as the necessity for alternated or intermediate
remedies  in  either "  complications  of  chronic  diseases,"  or
"exhausted  susceptibility." It  was  not,  however, satisfac-
tory to  my  friend,  nor  to  myself He  could  not  regard  the
regularly  recurring  constipation  as  a  foreign  complication.
Believing  in  the  unity  of  disease,  he  looked upon  it  as  an
integral  portion  of  that  patient's  sickness  and  did  not rest
contented  until  he  had  found  a  single  remedy  which  covered


ALTERNATtON OF REMKDIES. NO. 2.


igr


^Wth  the  symptoms  to  which  Conium  corresponded  and  the
coBitipation besides. This remedy was Alumina, under
which  the  bowels  became,  and  they  have  remained,  perfectly
r^Ur. The  patient's  improvement,  in  other  respects,  was
all  that  could  be  desired. In  this  case,  as  in  most  cases
narrated  of  cures  by  alternation,  the  Opium  and  Conitim,  in
alternation, seemed to work  very well,  and  promised to
effect  a  cure  in  the  fullness  of  time. I  doubt  not  that  if.
to  all  the  other  histories  of  cures  by  attcrnalion,  a  se^ufil
could  be  written,  it  would  be  found  that  each  of  these  cases
has,  in  the  Materia  Mcdic:a  (actual  or  future),  its own  par-
ticular Alumina,  which  would  ctfect  a  cure  in  as  itw  dnys,
as  the  most  sanguine  alternate  would  expect  to  acccnnplish
it  in  tnoutks.

Having  thus  shown  our  belief  that  the  alternation  which
Dr.  Drj-sdale  defends,  for  the  purposes  of  "  meeting  compli-
ctions,"  and  of  "awakening  susceptibility,"  is  mt  aller-
oation  a  priori,  not  alternation  properly  so  (ailed,  but  is
Koipatibje  with  sound  doctrine,  although  explained  by  the
**  of  uHiOHud  pathological  hypotheses,  we  shall  pass,  next,
to  the  two  general  principles  on  which  alternation,  properly
so  Called,  is  really  based  and  defended.

Before  proceeding  furtlier  in  the  discussion  of  the  subject
0'  Altcmatioo, let us briefly recapitulate the positions'
already  taken.

'■  We  have  assumed  tliat  the  propriety  of  .Mtcmation  can
be  Ofgued  about  only  by  those  who  regard  the  practice  of
inciiictae  as  an  art  based  upon  scientific  principles,  by  rcfcr-
eiuc  to  which  it  is  to  be  regulated  and  exercised.  We  have
(lOl  considered  it  possible  to  discuss  the  question  with  those
flHjo  make  their  practice  a  scries  of  repetitions  of  individual
experiences,  witliout  the  intervention  of  general  principles
taaed  on  and  inferred  from  a  large  number  of  individual
instances.

Xu  discussion  can  be  sustained  with  this  class  of  pmcti-
tjopers,  for  the  reason  that  argument  involves,  in  its  very


192


ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES. NO. 2.


nature,  an  appeal  to  principle  and  the  exercise  of  reason.
Ulwn,  consequently,  an  advocate  of  Alternation  objects  to
our  condemnation  or  his  method,  tliat  he  regards  tlic  subject
from  a  practkal  point  of  view,  while  we  persist  in  ignoring
^\c  practical,  and  in  looking  only  at  the  que:»tion  as  one  of
seienee,  we  feel  driven  to  the  conclusion  that,  if  excluded
from  the  ground  of  scuntific  prinrtpU,  wc  have  no  ground
left  on  M'hich  to  stand  for  the  discussion  of  this  or  of  any
question  of  medical  practice  ;  and  further  than  this  we  have
nothing  to  say.

3.  We  have  stated  our  belief  that  many  writers  have
defended,  under  the  name  of  Alternation,  modes  of
practice  which  arc,  in  our  opinion,  not  property  called
Alternation,  and  which  certainly  are  not  open  to  the  objec-
tions that  we  entertain  to  what  we  have  defined  as  ALTER-
NATION, properly  so  called.

3.  Defining  Alternation,  as  we  understand  it,  we  have
taken  occasion  lo  state  the  requirements  of  a  sound  homoeo-
pathic prescription,  requirements  which  cannot  be  met  by
the  process  of  Alternation.

Wc  conic  now,  in  conclusion,  to  consider  certain  state-
ments of  principles  by  which  Alternation,  as  wc  define  it,
has  been  sought  to  be  justified  and  defended.

Dr.  Coe  '  states :  "  It  is  an  established  principle  in  Homoe*
opathy,  demonstrated  by  drug-proving  and  clinical  experi-
ence, that  each  drug  has  its  own  specific  sphere  and  manner
of  action,  hence  that  each  remedy  acts  in  a  particular
manner  upon  a  particular  organ  or  tissue,  or  upon  a  particu-
lar set  of  organs  or  tissues.  Another  recognized  principle
in  llomtcopalhy  is,  that  attenuated  remedies  act  on  the
system  only  by  virtue  of  their  honiax)pathicity  to  the  disease
by  which  the  system  is  at  the  time  affected ;  hence  they  are
inert  when  taken  by  persons  in  health."  [One  of  our  best
prtnings  of  Natrum  muriaticum  on  the  healthy  was  made
bj'  Dr.  Wurmb  wiUi  the  jo/A  decimal  diluUoH  /] *  •

■  Amtrieam  if«mtNfatMi(  Revinc,  vul,  v.,  p.  447.


ALTERNATION  Of ttEMliDlB^ NO. 2,


193


"But.  supposing  I  find  no  single  remedy  that  will  complete
ttie  picture  [corresponding  to  the  picture  of  the  disease];
Some  part  is  still  dcfectivc^tt  cither  wants  a  head,  a  body,
or  a  titnb,  what  am  1  to  do  ? What  I  do  is  this : I  finish
out  the  picture  with  something  that  will  complete  it If  the
bead  symptoms  are  unmistakably  Aconite  symptoms,  and
nothing  else,  the  chest  symptoms  unmistakably  Bryonia  symp-
toms, and  nothing  else,  and  the  symptoms  of  the  lower  limbs
unmistakably  Rhus  symptoms,  and  nothing  else/  I  can  finish
'my  picture  in  no  other  way,  nor  can  any  one  else. • •
[But the  single  remedy  objector  says,  one  of  my  medicines
'iil  modify  the  action  of  the  other  in  such  a  manner  that  I
Cannot  rely  upon  their  doing  what  their  pathogenesis  would
indicate. [  think  he  is  mistaken. If  attenuated  medicines
(^nly  act  homccopathically,  as  we  all  hold,  only  acf  upon
tAos^  organs  and  tissues  which  are  affected  by  disease  in  a
iTiaxjtier  similar  to tlie drug affection, then my  Aconite,
"ryonia  and  Rhus  each  goes  to  its  own  place,  and  performs
Its own  office,  without intcrfen'ng or  tieing  interfered  with
t»K the  others."

Il>r.  Drysdalc  appears  to  agree  with  Dr.  Coe,  for  he  says;*

'There  arc,  therefore,  no  n  priori  physiological  grounds  for

iDubting  that  two  medicines,  whose  physiological  spheres

(are sufiiciently  dissimilar,  can  display  their  effects  without

I  Wt<irference,  when  given  at  intervals. Let  us  apply  this  to

t^  treatment  of  complications  in  disease,  and  by  this  wc  may

chiefly  understand  those  symptoms  or  morbid  states  that  are

not  necessarily  dependent  on  one  common  proximate  cause,

to*'!  arc  connected merely  by their  happening  to  co-exist

i0  the  same individual." [VVc protest against this  cool

'  Iltttnuiu  capili  ccmccm  plctor  eqainun
Jungcra  It  vclit,  ct  variu  iiuIucctc  plunuu
Undlttue  coUatU  m«iibn»,  ui  tarpitcr  atnini
Deunat  in  ptKoem  muliec  formosn  supcrne.
SpecUtum  sdmtEKi  ri»utn  icncalU,  iinki?

Itfrat.  Bpitl.  ad  Pitentt.
•  Anmatj  »/Sritith  Htm.  Stfitty,  irii.,  375.
14


194


ALTERNATION  OF REMEDIKS, NO. 2.


assumption  Umt  two  or  more  "  morbid  states  may  co-exist
in  tht;  same  individual,"  connc.ctcd  merely  by  their  acci-
dental co-existence!]  "  After  exposure  to  cold  wc  may  be
attacked  with  inflammation  of  the  nasal,  tracheal  or  bronchbd
mucous  membrane,  or  parenchyma  of  tlic  lungs  or  tlie  pleura
or  the  parietes  of  the  chest  or  the  liver  or  peritoneum,  eta,
according  to  the  specific  susceptibility  of  the  tissues  attacked;
and  each  of  these  diseases  may  exist  separately,  and  be
attended  witli  the  appropriate  essentia!  and  sympathetic
symptoms  of  the  case.  In  such  cases  we  ought  properly  to
rely  on  one  medicine,  which  may  be  reasonably  expected  to
meet  the  specific  susceptibility  nf  the  part  primarily  alfected.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  from  exposure  to  the  same  cause,
inflammation  may  be  set  up  in  several  of  those  tiiisucs  at  the
same  time,  and  thus  several  trains  of  morbid  symptoms  set
up  that  have  no  necessary  [  would  the  author  have  better
expressed  his  real  meaning  if  he  had  said,  ^patitohgico-atut'
tomiealf  ]  connection,  except  that  of  occurring  in  the  same
individual.  In  Uiat  case,  how  can  any  one  medicine  be
homttopathic  to  the  casu  which  does  not  show  its  specific
relation  to  all  those  different  tissues  in  healtli  ?  •  •

"  Dr.  Catc  also  brings  forward  inflammation  of  the  mucous
coat  of  the  colon.  When  it  extends  to  the  peritoneal  coat
of  the  gut,  he  gives  Mercurius  corrosivus  in  alternation  with
Sulphur,  corresponding  to  their  specific  action  oa  thctr
(these)  different  tissues.  Also  in  inflammation  of  the  mem-
branes of  the  bniin^  threatening  effusion,  he  finds  Bryonia,
alternated  with  Hellebore,  more  efficacious  than  either
singly.  But  this  is  already  recognized  in  Momcvopathy,
without  stepping  into  the  doubtful  regions  of  pathology."

In  discussing  these  statements  we  desire  to  use  great  mod-
eration of  expression,  conceding  freely  that  they  involve
questions  of  patholog)*  and  pathogenesy,  of  which  our
knowledge  is  only,  and  perhaps  can  be  only,  proximative,
and  concerning  which,  instead  of  absolute  /acts,  wc  have
only  probabilities.


ALTERNATION  OK REMEDIES. NO. 2.


»9S


Among  those  who  discuss  questions  of  medical  philoso-
phy may  be  distinguished  two  characters  of  mind,  corre-
sponding to  similar  classes  amon^'  intellectual  philosophers —
the  analytic  and  the  synthetic

The  tendency  of  tlie  one  class  is  to  divide  an  independent

SiKiup  of  phenomena,  such  as  a  sick man  or  a  drug-])n>ving

pfftents, into  elements  each one  of  which  it  inclines  to

regard  as  independent  of  the  others. To  the  researches  of

"■»  character  nf  mind  wc  owe  our  knowledge  of  Histology,

«>th  physiological  and  pathological,  and  much  else  that  is  of

'"estimable  value  in  medical  science. 'ITie  same  disposition.

**^"ig  carried  into  clinical  investigation,  the  symptoms  of  the

^^U  man  have  been  analyzed  into  the  perversions  of  function

**■ the  various  organs,  and  the  alterations  of  the  different  tJs-

^'^^s  of  the  body,  as  well  as  the formation  of  tissues  not

'^Und  in  the  healthy  body. As  a  result,  we  have  the  precious

®*^'«snces  of  Pathology  and  Pathological  Anatomy.

ISascd,  as  tlicse  analyses  arc,  upon  material  changes  of

"■"Victure  and  of  product,  the  danger  to  which  those  who

^'^^age  in  them  are  liable  is  this  :  that  having  their  attention

*^<:lusively  directed  to  material  clianges,  or  to  visible  and

^*>gible results of material changes, they overlook two

^<^ints to which it  is  equally  important  that  observations

*Hould  be  directed.

isL  That  inasmuch  as  healthy  tissues  exist,  and  healthy
Vinctions  arc  performed,  by  virtue  of  an  imponderable  force
^^^ed  for  lack  of  a  better  name,  "vital  force,"  and  which
•s  inherent  in  each  tissue,  and  gives  to  it  its  specific  proper-
ties, there  must  have  been  a  change  in  this  Jorct  preceding
*very  material  change.

2d.  That  this  force,  though  it  seem  to  impart  to  each  tissue
and  organ  a  susceptibility  to  stimulus  peculiar  to  that  tissue,
yet  so  pervades  and  vivifies  the  entire  organism,  as  lo  give
rise  to  what  is  known  as  sympathy — a  property  of  living
organisms,  by  virtue  of  which  there  results,  from  the  serious
modification  of  any  function or  alteration of  any  tissue,  a


«96


ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES. NO. 2.


corresponding  and  definite  modification  of  most  if  not  all  of
tht;  functions  (if  tiic  body,  and  an  alteration  of  at  least  many
of  the  tissues.  It  is  by  virtue  of  this  property  that  each
individual  man  is  a  iivin^  unit,  and  not  a  collection  of
independent  monad<t,  which  merely  chance  to  co-exist  ta
one  human  form.

No  physical  research  can  detect  this  vital  force,  nor  reveal
the  nature  or  modus  operandi  of  this  function  of  sympathy,
and  hence  it  happens  that  those  whose  minds  incline  to  rest
upon  the  data  of  physical  analysis  are  prone  to  overloolr'jj
them,  or,  even  though  they  admit  them  in  their  phiiosophyj
yet  to  practically  ignore  or  underestimate  them. From  this
tendency  rcsiiUs  a  disposition  to  regard  the  proximate  causcv
of  disease — that  is  to  say,  the  material  change  of  tissue  and^
product — as  the  essence  of  the  disease,  forgetting  the  modifi-
cation of  vital  force,  which  must  have  preceded  and  been  the
occasion  cf  this  proximate  cause, — and  a  further  disposition
to  look upon  the  alteration  oi  function  and  tissue  of  eaek\
organ or system of the  body  as a  separate  discasw:, thus
easily  admitting titc idea  of  the co-existcncc of  several
independent  diseases  and  of  complicating  diseases  witliout
number.

From  the  stand-point  of  tJiis  class  of  mind  it  is  not  easy  to!
perceive  the  mutual  relations  and  iiitcrdcpcndencies  of  appar-  ;
ently  remote  groups  of  symptoms — such,  for  example,
ulceration of  the cervix uteri and chronic conjunctivitis,
which,  if  they  co-exist  in  any  patient,  would  be  likely  to  be
regarded  as independent diseases, and to  be treated  by '
independent  courses  of  medication; whereas,  in  fact,  they, J
are  so  intimately  connected  that  they  are  best  treated  by  a
single  remedy.

Nothing  is  farther  from  our  purpose  than  to  make  light  of
Pathologj',  which,  as  an  aid  in  tfu  imtestigation  of  disease^  -J
is  of  inestimable  value. It  is  evident,  however,  that  Hahne-
mann was  right  in  warning  his  disciples  against  making  it
the  basis  of  medical  practice. Its  investigations  cannot,  in


ALTERNATION Or REMEDIKS. NO. 2.


197


«ic  nature  of  things,  go  beyond  material  changes.  Yet  dis-
ease begins  in  dynamic  changes;  and  the  connections  of
differeni  groups  of  symptoms  are  dynamic,  and  beyond  the
tTEach  of  physical  research.

And  then,  even  where  the  subject  i«  material  and  amen-
able to  physical  research,  to  base  the  prescription  upon  a
determination  of  the  organ  or  iiisue  affected  by  tlie  drug
and  by  the  disease,  is  to  go  backward  from  the  certainty
>fded  by  a  comparison  of  the  symptoms  to  the  uncertainty
a  ioubU  hypothesis. For,  as  in  the  cases  supposed  by  Dr.
'sdale,  we  have  first  to  assume  that  the  symptoms  pro-
laced  on  the  healthy  subject  by  Mercuritis  corrosivus  and
Sulphur  respectively,  show  that  the  one  of  these  drugs
especially  on  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  colon,  and
PtJie  other  on  the  serous  covering  of  it;  and,  secondly,  we
injust  assume  that,  in  the  patient  before  us,  the  inflammation
■  ^^nich  began  in  Uie  mucous  membrane  has  extended  to  tlie
l^^'ous membrane ; and on this double assumption our
iternation  is  to  be  based  and  defended. Suppose,  that  in
I**® progress  from  within  outward,  the  disease  al.so  affected
'* muscular  coat — should  wc  give  Nux  vomica  also  ? Or
•^ glands  likewise  —  shall  wc  give  a  fourth  remedy,  say,
'''Mfi  ? Then  the  vascular  system  of  the  gut  is  probably
J'*^'-Jlianeously  affected  —  would  tiiiscall  for  Hamamclis.orfor
■■^^inite  for  the  arteries  and  Hamamclis  for  the  veifis  f Here
''^ should  have  six  remedies  to  be  alternated,  the  selection
^^ch  being  based  upon  its  "specific  relation  to  the  tissue"
:tcd,  etc.,  etc. Now,  what  is  all  this  but  a  revival  of  the
method,  against  which Hahnemann  so  earnestly  pro-
Sd.  of  prescribing  upon  the  basis  of  an  hypothesis  of  the
I*- ^-*re  and  scat  of  the  disease — an  utter  throwing  overboard
*^^Tc  whole  system  of  Inductive  Philosophy,  as  so  logically
*-* so  successfully  applied  to  medical  practice  by  Hahne-

1 1  may  be  wortli  our  while  to  dwell  for  a  few  moments
*^gcr  on  this  very  important  branch  of  the  subject,  for  it  is


19&


ALTERNATION OF  REUEDIES. NO. 2.


a  point  on  which  very  many  practitioners  have  gone  astray.
Indeed,  we  have  seen  an  attempt  to  reconstruct  our  entire
Materia  Medica  Piira,  on  the  basis  of  xhc  specific  action  of
the  drugs  respectively  upon  certain  organs  and  tissues  of
the  body — almost  all  symptoms  not  anatomically  expli-
cable being  excluded  (the  so-called  "  American  Materia
Medica").

The  statement  of  a  "  general  principle."  which  wc  quoted,
viz.,  "  It  is  an  established  principle  in  Homu^opathy,  demon-
strated by  drug-proving  and  clinical  experience,  that  each
drug  has  its  own  spccilic  sphere  and  manner  o(  action.
Afnce(l)  that  each  remedy  acts  in  a  particular  manner  upon
a  particular  organ  or  tissue,  or  upon  a  particular  set  of  organs
or  tissues,"  contains,  it  seems  to  us,  a  fallacy.  While  wc
admit,  of  course,  that  each  drug  has  its  own  specific  sphere
and  manner  of  action,  it  docs  not  seem  to  us  that  this  is
equivalent  to  saying  that  each  drug  acts  in  its  peculiar  way
on  "a  particular  oi^an  or  tissue,  or  a  particular  set  of  organs
and  tissues,"  leaving— (for  //sis  is  implied  in  the  statement,
as  the  rest  of  the  article  frorn  which  we  quote  shows) — teav*
ing  the  other  oi^ns  and  tissues  of  the  body  whoify
unaffected  by  the  action  of  the  drug  or  disease,  as  the  case
may  be.  Yet  it  is  necessary  to  assume  this  fallacy,  in  order
to  justify  the  practice  of  alternation.

On  the  contrary,  we  have  never  met  with,  and  we  do  not
believe  in  the  possible  existence  of,  a  case  of  sickness  in
which,  as  adduced  by  Dr.  Coe.  the  head  could  be  atTccted  in
one  way,  so  as  to  unmistakably  call  for  Aconite,  and  yet  no
organ  of  the  body  show  Aconite  symptoms;  while  at  the
(ame  time  tiie  chest  presented  exclusively  Bryonia  symp-
toms, and  the  extremities  Rhus  symptoms.  The  uniform
tendency  of  our  own  practical  experience  goes  lo  satisfy  us
that,  if  any  concrete  case  should  present  clear  characteristic
Aconite  symptoms  in  any  portion  of  the  body,  then  not  only
would  symptoms  of  disease  be  found  in  most  of  the  other
important  organs  or  systems,  but  that  these  systems  would


ALTERXATION  OF  REMEDIES. NO. 2.


199


prcsicnt  more  or  less  well  defined  characteristics  of  Aconite:
or  even  should  they  not present  characteristics  which  we
recognii^e  as  those  of  Aconite,  the  symptoms  would  never-
theless speedily  disappear  under  the  use  of  Aconite,  if  that
Idrtig  were  dearly  indicated  by  characteristic  symptoms  in
the  other  organs. So  abundantly  has  our  experience  con-
firmed this  view,  that  if  wc  find  clear  characteristics  of  any
drug  in  the  symptoms  of  any  orgaji  of  the  body,  no  matter
what  symptoms  may  be  presented  by  other  parts of  the
body,  and  no  matter  how  little  these  latter  symptoms  may
seem  to  indicate  this  same  drug,  we  never  dream  of  alterna-
ting' remedies. We  are  confident  that  a  remedy  which  is
clearly  indicated  by  characteristic  symptoms,  tliough  they  be
but few in  number, wilt cover the  whole case,  and will
remove  the  entire  disea.<te. Nor  do  we,  as  is  assumed  by  the
alternators,  expect  to  accomplish  by  "succession"  what  they
aim  lo  effect  by  Alternation. We  so  thoroughly  believe  in
the  unity  of  disease  as  to  be  confident, that, in however
many organs and  tissues  morbid sjmiptoms  may  present
themselves,  they  still  spring  from  and  depend  upon  one  and
the  same  unknown  and  inscrutable  cause,  just  as  the  multifari-
**us  symptoms  of  a  drug-proving  depend  upon  the  one  cause.
*K.  the  drug;  and  that  though  the  characteristic  symptoms
which  fumisli  the  indication  for  tlie  remedy  may  be  observed
™y  in  the  symptoms  of  one  organ  or  system,  yet  the  symp-
''""s  of  all  the  rest  of  the  body  will  be  equally  controlled  by
"•c  action  of  this  remedy. It  is  remarkable,  however,  to
now  ip-eat  an  extent,  if  wc  observe  carefully  and  intelligently,
^''  '^ay  recognize,  in  tlic  various  groups  of  symptoms  affect-
■"E  the  various  organs  of  the  patient,  the  characteristic  mode
01  action,  and  the  conditions  of  that  remedy,  the  characteris-
'ntiications  for  which  wc  find  in  some  one  organ  alone  of
patient !


the


*<lc  tendency  of  the  second  of  the  classes  of  minds  into
*"*ch  we  divided  medical  philosophy  is  to  synthesis.  They
^^>  perhaps,  in  danger  of underestimating  those  material


200  ALTERNATION OF  REMEDIES. NO. 2.

changes  of  tissue  which  are  the  proximate  cause  of  disease,
because  they  are  intent  upon  observing  and  tracing  out  that
perversion  of  the  vital  force  which  must  have  preceded  and
induced  all  the  organic  and  material  changes  which  the  case
presents,  and  which  perversion  they  regard  as  essentially  the
disease  itself  They  study  this  perversion  in  its  various
manifestations,  viz.,  the  symptoms.  They  do  not  seek  to
analyze  these  groups  of  symptoms,  for  the  purpose  of  form-
ing a  theory  respecting  the  tissues  affected,  so  as  to  select  a
remedy  which  affects,  as  they  suppose,  identical  tissues,  and
in  the  same  way.  They  do  not  thus  admit  hypothesis  into
their  method.  They  study  the  groups  of  symptoms  to  get
at  their  peculiarities  and  conditions.  Profoundly  impressed
with  the  intimate  connection  of  all  parts  of  the  body,  through
the  all-pervading  Vital  Force  (whatever  it  may  be),  and  with
the  fact,  observed  every  day,  that  change  of  function  in  one
part  of  the  body  speedily  brings  about  corresponding  changes
in  almost  every  other  part,  they  seek,  by  the  light  of  one
group  of  symptoms,  to  find  in  the  patient  other  and  corre-
sponding groups.  In  these  investigations  Physiology  and
Pathology,  which  teach  the  relations  and  mutual  dependen-
cies of  different  organs,  are  of  inestimable  value,  enabling  the
student  to  find  in  remote  organs  parallel  groups  of  symp-
toms; the  characteristic  which  determines  his  choice  of  a
remedy  being  often  in  an  organ  very  remote  from  that  to
which  his  attention  was  first  called  as  being  the  seat  of
disease.  Having  thus  been  led,  by  his  philosophy,  to  collect
the  various  groups  of  symptoms  presented  by  the  entire
body,  as  constituting  one  single  disease,  the  practitioner
surveys  this  collection  in  search  of  the  characteristic  symp-
tom, or  group  of  symptoms  which  shall  point  to  his  remedy.
Ninety  of  the  symptoms  might  be  found  among  many  reme-
dies, ten  perhaps  may  be  peculiar  to,  and  characteristic  of,  a
single  drug.  This  he  selects,  without  hesitation,  as  his
remedy  for  the  entire  malady  of  that  patient

Suppose  the  patient  to  have  taken  cold,  and  to  present.


ALTERNATION OK REMEOIBS. NO. 2.


20 1


in  consequence,  a  malady  which,  anatomically,  is  made  up
of  a  pneumonia  and  hepatitis.  It  in  all  well  enough,  and
doubtless  important  fur  tiie  purposes  of  iliai^iiosis  and  prog-
nosis, to  make  this  pathologico- anatomical  analysis  of  the
case.  But  when  we  come  to  regard  the  case  from  the
stand-point  of  Tlierapeutics.  we  are  not  surely  to  follow  the
plan  which  Dr.  Drj-sdale  seems  to  sanction,  viz.,  to  look
among  the  drugs  which  are  shown  by  provings  to  act  on  the
tissues  of  the  hing,  and  select  the  best  from  atnnng  them,
and  then  to  look  among  remedies  which  act  on  the  tissues
of  the  liver,  and  select  the  best  from  among  these  remedies,
and  to  alternate  the  two  thus  selected.  What  if,  as  would
be  likely  in  such  a  case,  the  pleura,  likewise,  were  inflamed  ?
Should  wc  have  a  third  remedy  ?  Or  the  kidneys  also  ?
Should  wc  have  a  fourth  ? "Quous^ue  tandem "

On  the  contrary,  wc  should  collect  the  various  groups  of
symptoms,  as  well  those  from  which  the  Pathologist  infers
6iat  the  tissue  of  the  lung  is  aflfected,  as  those  from  which  he
infers  that  the  tissue  of  the  liver  is  affected.  All  other
symptoms  likewise  would  be  gathered.  Wc  should  examine
purpose  of  finding  in  them  the  peculiar  characteristics  of
some  particular  drug.  In  thus  dealing  with  the  case,  we
^uld  liave  this  advantage  over  the  Pathologist,  that  whereas
kit  inferences  may  lead  him  astray,  since  the  lung  tissue
may  not  be  affected  as  he  thinks  it  is — and  likewise  the
tissue  of  the  livir — we,  on  the  other  hand,  taking  into
account  only  the  obvious  symptoms,  avoid  at  least  one  very
patent  source  of  fallacy.  Our  own  experience  has  alto-
gether misled  us  if  we  do  not  find,  in  the  case  supposed,
&at  if  the  lung  symptoms  give  us  characteristic  indications
for  a  remedy,  the  liver  symptoms  not  only  will  not  contradict
this  indication  by  affording  one  for  some  other  remedy,  but
tt»cy  will  corroborate  the  indication,  so  as  to  give  us  no  pre-
text fur  alternating.

But  another  case  is  supposed,  viz.,  that  a  pneumonia  is


302


ALTERNATION OF REMCDIKS, NO. 3.


present,  and  a  remedy  has  been  well  selected  for  it,  and  now
a  hepatitis  supervenes  to  complicate  the  case.  Here,  we
are  told,  is  a  new  disease,  which  can  have  nothing  to  do
with  the  previously  existing  pneumonia,  and  which  must
require  a  distinct  treatment,  in  the  way  of  alternation.  This
is  in  no  way  different  from  the  complication  of  a  bum,  of
which  we  have  already  spoken.  If  the  complication  is
serious  enough  to  produce  constitutional  symptoms  (as  a
hcpatitw  would  surely  be),  it  would  always  (or  our  observa-
tion has  uniformly  deceived  us)  modify  all  existing  symp-
toms. For  example,  a  severe  bum  would  give  a  typhoid
character  to  an  existing  pneumonia.  We  must  then  make  a
new  collection  of  the  symptoms,  and  proceed  as  before  to
select  a  remedy.

Under  any  other  plan  —  if  we  are  to  select  our  remedy
according  to  correspondence  of  known  drug-action  and
disease -action  upon  the  tisstus  of  the  body — not  only  are
we  liable  to  errors  already  pointed  out,  but  our  scope  is
wonderfully  restricted.  How  could  we  find  remedies  for
changes  of  structure,  such  as  we  can  never  expect  to  sec  in
drug-provings,  such  as  cancer  and  heterologous  growths  of
all  kinds?  How.  for  affections  which  do  not  depend  on  or
involve  any  definite  known  change  of  tissue,  as  intermittent
fever,  epilepsy,  hysteria,  and  the  host  of  chronic  ailments  ?

The  two  principles  on  which  alternation  has  been  sought
to  be  defended  have  been  stated  as  follows :

ist.  "  Each  drug  has  its  own  specific  sphere  and  manner
of  action ;  hence  that  remedy  acts  in  a  particular  manner
upon  a  particular  organ  or  tissue,  or  upon  a  particular  set
of  organs  or  tissues."

2d.  "  Attenuated  remedies  act  upon  the  system  only  by
virtue  of  their  homceopathicity  to  the  disease  by  which  the
system  is  at  the  time  affected."

The  artificial  disease  intentionally  produced  by  a  drug,
and  the  natural  disease  which  results  from  the  usual  morbific
predisposing  and  exciting  causes  may,  for  all  purposes  of


ALTERNATION OK REMEDIES. NO.


argument,  be  regarded  as  identical.  Principle  No.  i  might,
therefore,  with  equal  propriety,  be  expressed  thus :  "  A
disease  has  its  own  specific  sphere  and  manner  of  action ;
hence  that  disease  acts  in  a  particular  manner  upon  a
particular  organ  or  tissue,  or  upon  a  particular  set  of  organs
or  tissues."

A  corollary  of  this  proposition  is,  that,  inasmuch  as  the
drug  and  the  disease  respectively  act  in  a  particular  manner
and  upon  particular  organs  or  tissues,  they  leave  other
organs  and  tissues  of  the  body  altogether  unaffected,  in  their
normal  state  and  performing  their  healthy  functions,  and
liable  to  be  themselves  attacked  by  some  other  disease,
which  may  afTl-ct  them  in  its  own  particular  manner,  and
may  run  a  sifnultaneous  and  indeptndent  course.

This  ia  the  argument  for  alternation  which  is  constructed
upon  these  principles:  a  certain  disease  afi'ects  in  a  peculiar
way  certain  organs  or  tissues  of  the  body,  leaving  the  other
organs  and  tissues  in  the  fulfillment  of  their  normal  functions.
Attenuated  medicines  may  be  administered  to  cure  this
disease.  Attenuated  medicines  "  act  only  by  their  homoeo-
palhicity  to  the  disease."  "  They  are  inert "  so  far  as  action
on  the  healthy  organs  or  tissues  is  concerned.  Homoeo-
pathic medicines  act  only  where,  says  Dr.  Drysdale,  they
fiod  that  preternatural  susceptibility  to  their  action,  which
inheres  tn  organs  or  tissues  diseased  in  a  manner  similar  to
the  morbid  state  which  those  drugs  can  produce  on  the
healthy.

These  attenuated  medicines  then  may  be  given  for  the
CISC  we  have  supposed.  They  will  act  upon  the  diseased
organs  and  tissues,  but  will  not  affect  the  Jualthy  ones  at  alL
Now,  then,  during  tlie  existence  of  this  disease,  which,  as
stated,  affects  in  a  particular  manner  certain  organs  and
tissues,  and  leaves  all  the  rest  undisturbed,  a  second  disease
may  attack  the  individual  (may  wc  call  one  who  may  be
thus  divided  up  an  iniiix'idua!  f )  acting  in  some  oUicr  par-
ticular manner,  upon  some  other  particular  organ  or  tissue.


ALTERNATION OF RBMEDIES. NO. 2.


To  meet  this  new  disease,  co-cjdstent  with  the  original,  it
is  affirmed  tliat  a  second  remedy  homoeopathic  to  it  may  be
administered  simultaneously  with  the  former  remedy.  Or
rather,  since  to  administer  it  simultaneously  might  involve
the  risk  of  the  chemical  reaction  of  the  drugs,  the  remedies
may  be  alternated.  It  vnl\  not  interfere  with  the  former
remedy,  because  attenuated  medicines  act  only  by  virtue  of
their  homtsopathicity  to  the  disease  (to  which  they  are
respectively  homceopathic).  Thus  each  drug  "  will  go  to  its
own  place,"  like  tlic  respective  members  of  a  well-trained
coach  team  when  ihc  winding  horn  announces  that  the  coach
is  ready  for  the  new  relay !

Such  is  the  argument  for  alternation  succinctly,  and,  we
think  it  will  be  conceded,  fairly,  stated.  In  a  former  discus-
sion of  this  subject  wc  showed  that,  assuming  natural  disease
and  drug  disease  to  be,  for  the  purposes  of  this  argument,
substantially  the  same  thing,  it  was  /roving'  too  muck  to
demonstrate  that  two  or  more  diseases  co-existing  in  the
body  could  not  and  do  not  affect  each  other.  This  would
render  a  cure  of  a  disease  impossible ;  for  in  the  act  of
curing  we  propose  to  cure  a  natural  disease  by  creating  in
the  body  a  drug  disease  which  shall  annihilate  the  natural
disease,  and  shall,  in.  that  very  act,  be  itself  annihilated.
When  a  certain  form  of  rheumatism  exists  in  the  body,  we
give  Bryonia,  and  our  intention  is  that  Bryonia  shall  so  act'
upon  the  body  (producing,  therefore,  virtually,  a  Bryonia
disease)  as  to  cause  the  disappearance  oi  the  rheumatism  and
at  the  same  time  not  to  leave  in  its  stead  a  Bryonia  disease
nor  any  other  disease.  But  if  two  diseases  co-existing  cannot
react  upon  and  modify  each  other,  how  could  a  cure  take
place  ?  The  proposition  is  evidently  too  broad ;  the  argu-
ment proves  Ino  much.

Dr.  Drysdalc  provides  against  this  objection  by  linuting^
the  alleged  possible  independent  co-existence  of  diseases,  to
diseases  which  act  in  a  dissimilar  manner  upon  remote  or
unrelated  organs  and  tissues.


ALTERNATION OF  REMEDIES. NO. 2.


205


According  to  this  view,  two  diseases  might  co-exist  and
not  modify  each  other,  if  seated  in  organs  distant  from  each
other  or,  which  is  equivalent,  a  natural  disease  may  exist,
and  a  drug  may  be  given  which  acts  only  upon  organs
remote  from  those  which  are  the  seat  of  the  disease,  and  (if
the  doses  be  strong  enough)  may  produce  its  peculiar  drug
disease  without  at  all  aifecting  the  natural  disease  which  is
already  present

In  other  words,  it  is  only  diseases  {whether  natural  or
drug  diseases)  which  arc  homoeopath ically  related  to  each
other,  that  arc  incompatible  and  may  not  co-exist  without
modifying  each  other.

Dr.  Drysdale  and  several  other  physicians  hold  these
views,  and  appeal  to  their  own  observation  and  experience.
If  we  may  be  allowed  to  draw  an  inference  from  Dr.  Drys-
(lalc's  remarks,'  he  believes  that  a  hepatitis  may  supervene
upon  an  already  active  pneumonia,  and  that  each  may  run  an
independent  course,  and  be  treated  independently  by  alter-
nated remedies,  without  modifying  each  other  or  blending
into  one  morbid  state.

Our  own  experience  has  led  us  to  very  diAerent  conclu-
sions, and  we  have  on  our  side  the  names  of  colleagues  who,
lot  having  deviated  from  the  tttodis  of  practice  Qh?.er>jeA  by
Hahoemann's  eariy  </tscip/es,  do  not  feel  compelled  to
^Jtnowlcdgc  and  lament,  as  Dr.  Drysdale  does,  that  their
practice  is  "not  proportionally  so  successful  as  was  that  of
Hahnemann's  early  followers.'

How  can  this  direct  contrariety  of  inferences  from  observa-
tion be  explained  ?  We  have  altogether  too  profound  a
respect  for  the  observing  and  reasoning  powers  of  our  dis-
sentient friends,  to  set  tliem  a  particle  below  our  own  !  There
must  be  an  opposition  in  some  of  our  methods  of  observa-
tion, or  principles  of  inference.  It  will  be  found,  we  think,
ia  the  fact  that  to  the  word  "disease"  we  respectively  attach


*Anmab  t/  Brititk  Ifom. Set.,  No.


'JVetir  Rfftrtary,  IntTodnction.


306


AtTaU(4T10V  OF  REMCOIES. Na 2.


very  diilercnt  ideas.  Wr  mean  by  disease  the  aggregate  of
tboK  lympcwnf  presented  by  the  skk  man,  whidi  are  char-
adcfiltfe  of  Mt  partieolar  deviation  from  a  healthy  sutc
The  colleagues  from  whom  we  diflcr  speak  of  disease  as
denoting  a  ilefioite  pathological  and  pathologico-anatomical
change  of  the  functions  and  tissues  of  some  definite  otgan
or  tyatem  of  organs.

In  this  latter  view  the  patient  might  present  evidence  of
those  pathological  changes  in  the  organs  and  functions  of
renpiration,  to  which  the  name  pneumonia  has  been  attached.
Here  then  is  one  disease,  pneumonia.

He  may  also  present  evidences  of  those  patholt^ical
changes  of  function  and  tissue  in  the  livcrwhtch  give  rise  to
the  name  hepatitis.  And  here  would  be  another,  co-existent
disease,  hepatitis;  and  these  two  pathological  and  pathologi-
co-anatomical  conditions  might,  we  freely  admit,  from  the
pathotof^cal  and  nosological  stand-point,  run  their  course  to
resolution  or  to  destruction  without  so  modifying  each  other
as  to  coalesce  cr  in  any  way  blend  or  be  confounded  ;  for  the
lungn  ami  the  liver  can  never  collide.

But,  let  it  be  borne  in  mind,  we  are  discussing  a  question
of  pr^icticat  nicclictnc  and  not  one  of  pathology  or  of  nosoU

ORy-

How  would  this  case  look  from  ottr  stand-point?  The
patient  has,  we  suppose,  dyspnoea,  stitching  pain  in  the
thorax,  hard,  dry  cough  from  tickling  behind  the  sternum,
itcanty  and  occasionally  bloody  sputa — headache  on  the
vertex,  and  sharp  fever.  He  is  worse  at  night ;  his  pains  arc
much  aggravated  by  motion,  and  are  relieved  by  repose  and
by  warmth,

We  have  selected  Bryonia  for  him — had  previously  diag-
nosticated pneumonia  (physical  signs  aiding  or  confirming
our  diagnosis).  Now  he  gets,  in  the  hepatic  region,  stick-
ing pains,  fullness  and  tenderness ;  he  has  bilious  vomiting
tind  bitter  taste.  Aided  again  by  phj-sical  signs,  we  diag-
nosticate  hepatitis,  complicating  the  pneumonia ; but  the


I  symptoms  still  indicate  Bryonia,  and  so  we  continue  that
remedy.
But,  we  shall  be  asked,  suppose  the  new  symptoms  da  not
indicate  Bryonia,  but,  on  the  contrary,  some  other  drug,  will
you  not  give  that  other  drug  for  tlie  liver  and  continue  the
Br>"onia  for  the  pneumonia  ?
To  this  we  reply  that  in  so  far  as  our  observation  has
taug'ht  us,  in  such  a  case  tlie  supervening  of  these  new
symptoms  ^of  the  liver,  namely)  will  have  so  modified  the
whole  organism,  including  the  diseased  respiratory  organs,
that  Bryonia  will  no  longer  be  indicated  by  any  symptoms ;
hut  the  aggregate  of  characteristic  symptoms  of  the  entire
sicWness  will  now  indicate  some  other  remedy  which  will
apply  to  and  will  cover  the  whole  morbid  state  of  that
, individual.

■  Here  we  arc  again  at  issue.  Dr.  Drysdalc  and  his  friends
"  appeal  to  certain  observations  which  we  will  now  briefly
I discuss.

H  In  the  discussion  which  followed  the  reading  of  Dr.  Dry*-
H  dale's  paper  in  the  British  Homoeopathic  Society,  Dr.  Rus-

■  **'*  took  the  same  ground  as  Dr.  Drysdale.  He  said  :  "That
"*■<*  morbid  specific  actions  could  occur  simultaneously  in
_  *^  human  body,  and  each  pursue  its  course  without  arrest-
^6  or  modifying  the  other,  is  a  proposition  entirely  at
^"3.Bce  with  the  opinions  of  the  old  pathologists  who
"°*»»-islied  before  the  time  of  Hahnemann.  •  •  It  is  of
s^'cat  importance  to  us  to  know  whether  this  patliological

'^*'^trine  be in  accordance  with  the  larger  experience  and

*<srvation  to  which  we  now  have  access."

^^c could hardly  have  two diseases more specifically

'^tinct  than typhus  and  small-pox,  yet,  in the following

^■'ra.tive,  we  have  a  description  of  the  two  running  their

^**irsc, side by  side, without either  interfering with  the

^^er." The  case  occurred  in  the  London  Fever  Hospital,

**^  is  quoted  by  Dr.  Murchison.

Dr.  Russell  proceeded  to  say  :  "There  are  many  instances


ALTERNATION  OF  REMEDIES. VO. 2.


307


308


ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES. KO. 2.


of  a  similar  kind  on  record,  and  we  must  frame  our  theories
so  that  they  shall  embrace  this  new  category  of  cases.
Suppose  we  encounter  a  case,  and  there  are  such  on  record,
of  a  combination  of  scarlet  fever  and  of  typhus,  how  are  we
to  deal  with  it  ?  Are  wc  to  engage  only  one  of  the  two
destroying  agents,  and  let  the  other  alone  until  the  first  be
entirely  subdued  ?  If  we  believe  it  is  impossible  for  two
medicinal  actions  to  proceed  pari  passu  in  the  animal
economy,  this  is  the  rational  course  to  pursue,  and  the  one
recommL-nded  by  Hahnemann!"  (This  is  an  inexcusably
lax  statement.  Hahnemann  nowhere  ever  recommended
that  we  should  make  only  a  part  of  the  patient's  ailment
the  basis  of  our  choice  of  a  remedy ;  he  always  strongly
insisted  on  our  considering  the  "  totality  of  the  symptoms*'
and  this  would  include  both  scarlet  fever  and  typhus.)

But,  if  two  entirely  different  natural  morbid  processes
can  co-exist  in  the  human  body  without  the  one  afTccting
the  development  of  the  other,  what  reason  is  there  why  tlierc
may  not  be  two  artificial  simultaneous  scries  of  morbid
phenomena,  each  equally  independent  of  the  other?  If
scarlet  fever,  or  if  small-pox,  can  each  run  its  course,  while
at  the  same  time  typhus  is  doing  so  likewise,  why  may  not
Belladonna  and  Arsenicum  each  run  their  course  when  given
in  alternation,"'

In  reference  to  this  last  question,  we  may  ask,  would  Dr.
Russell  expect  to  get  pure  symptoms  of  any  drug  if  it  were
proved  simultaneously  with  another  drug ;  would  he  believe
that  the  two  drug-diseases  would  run  an  independent,  simul>
tancous  course  in  a  provcr  ?  Would  he  practically  believe
it  by  consenting  to  rely  upon  a  materia  mcdica  pura  made
up  in  this  way  P  Or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  would  he
trust  to  a  materia  mcdica  composed  of  the  results  of  an
artificial  (drug)  disease  running  "  an  independent  course
simultaneously"  with  "  a  natural  disease  ?"  In  other
words,  would  he  trust  provings  made  on  sick  persons  P

'  AtUMlt  Sni'sh  /hmaofathie  Saeitty,  xiu.,  p.  399  rt  *ef.


ALTERNATION  OF  REMEDIES. NO. 2.


209


We  know  he  would  not ; for  he  is  one  of  those  who

[reject  or su^ect  the  provings  of  many  of  our  most  val-

'  liable drugs,  because  symptoms  observed  on  the  sick  are

incladed in ttic list, or because the provers were not

tarcful  enough to  exclude  other  morbi6c  or  toxic  agents

while  proving.

But  this  inconsistency  aside,  let  us  take  notice  that  In
Itittse  remarks,  and  in  this  citation  of  a  case  of  the  co-exist-
cncc  of  two  diseases,  Dr.  Russell  speaks  altogether  from  the
stand-point  of  the  pathologist  and  nosologist,  and  not  at  all
from  that  of  the  practical  physician — the  stand-point  of
therapeutics.  He  thinks  he  has  proved  his  case  if  he  has
established,  what  nobody  is  disposed  to  deny,  viz.,  that  two
nosological  abstractions,  called  by  distinct  names  (to  wit,
Karlet  fever  and  tj'phus),  may  co -exist

Docs  he  forget  that  nothing  is  more  firmly  established  in
homojopathic  practice  than  that  the  "name"  which  wc  may
fed  authorized  to  give  to  a  sickness  in  no  wise  determines
WT  tnattttittt  of  the  sickness?  Because  we  call  the  sickness
typhus,  we  do  not  therefore,  of  necessity,  give  Arsenicum,  or
scarlet  fever  Belladonna  I  We  may  as  often  have  to  give
Arecnic  in  a  case  that  wc  should  call  scarlet  fever,  and  Bella-
donna in  a  t>'phus.

What,  then,  guides  us  in  selecting  a  remedy  ?  Nothing
save  the  aggregate  of  the  characteristic  symptoms.  We
might  divide  and  subdivide  the  symptoms  and  signs  that  the
Mckman  present*;  (including  under  the  designation  "symp-
tDEiu  and  signs  "  everything  that  distinguishes  that  sick  man
from  himself  when  not  sick)  into  a  dozen  nosological  groups,
each  having  a  distinct  name,  atid  yet  the  aggregate  of  these
symptoms  might  (and  we  think  it  always  would)  point  to
one  single  remedy  as  corresponding  to,  and  indicated  by,  the
entire  morbid  state  of  that  sick  man.

To  prove  his  case  by  the  argument  and  instances  quoted,
IH.  Russell  must show  that  the  symptoms  of  the  scarlet
fever  and  of  the  typhus,  respectively,  were  incompatible  in
15


2IO .


ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES. NO. 2.


the  case  cited  hy  him,  and  that  they  did  not  combine  to
present  the  characteristics  of  one  common  remedy.

For  this  is  tlic  point  of  the  whole  discussion.  No  matter
how  many  of  the  pathological  groups  which  arc  dignified  by
the  names  of  distinct  diseases  may  co-exist  In  a  patient,  if
they  be  so  blended  and  mutually  modified  as  to  indicate,  in,
the  aggregate,  one  single  rcmcdyj  there  can  be  no  call  for
ai/crfuztiim.

Inasmuch  as  Dr.  Russell  rests  his  argument  for  alternation
on  the  possible  and  fiequent  co-existence  of  distinct,  speci5c
forms  of  disease,  it  is  incumbent  on  him  to  show  that  these
co-existent,  distinct  forms  of  disease  do  not,  by  their  co-ex-
istence, modify  each  other  and  blend  into  one  harmonious
aggregate  of  symptoms,  the  characteristic  ones  of  which
may  be  covered  by  a  single  remedy.  In  our  experience
this  has  always  seemed  to  be  the  case,  and  we  shall  adduce
other  evidence  to  the  same  effect.

But  before  citing  authorities,  let  lis  point  out  how  far  Dr.
Russell's  argument,  even  allowing  it  full  force,  conies  short
of  being  a  defense  of  alternation,  as  it  is  actually  practiced
here  and  in  England  I  Dr.  Russell  allows  it  where  "  two
distinct,  .specific  forms  of  disease  "  co-exist,  such  as  scarlet
fever  or  .small-pox  and  t)Tjhus — a  phenomenon  that  no
physician  in  ordinary  family  practice  is  likely  to  observe
more  than  once  a  week !  Yet  how  mafij^  times  a  day  do  a
majoritj''  of  our  colleagues  alternate?  It  is  safe  to  say  that,
with  vcrj'  many,  the  giving  a  single  remedy  is  the  infrtquent
exception!  Their  case  is  exactly,  met  by  the  following
remarks  of  Dr.  Russell,  one  of  the  champions  of  alternation:

"The  objection  usually  urged  against  alternation  is  that
it  leads  to  laxity  of  practice.  True,  if  we  give  two  medi-
cines instead  of  one  and  let  the  system  take  its  choice,  as-
it  were,  to  which  it  .shall  submit' — if,  in  a  given  case,  for
example,  wc  find  two  medicines  pretty  nearly  indicated,  and,
instead  of  ourselves  .selecting  tlie  one  and  rejecting  the  other,
we  toss  them  both  in,  trusting  that  the  right  one  will  act,


ALTERNATION OF  REMEDIES. NO. 2.


211


tnd  Ihc  other  be  a  nonentity  or  negative  quantity.  NO
OVE  WHO  DEALS  CONSCIENTIOUSLY  WITH  HIMSELF  WILL
DELrBERATELY  APPROVE  OF  SO  SIMPLE  A  METHOD  OF
EVADING  THE  DIFFICULTY  OF  CHOICE."

A  few  instances  and  citations  may  serve  to  recall  to  the

minds  of  practitioners  of  medicine,  the  frequent  instances

in  which  two  varieties  of  disease,  co-cxistinj;.  modify  each

other. A  young  person  whose  parents  died  of  consumption,

and  who  has  himself  had  abscesses  of  tl)c  cervical  glands

snd  eniption.'i  of  the face  and  who  rakes  cold  readily — js

fKble  and  pale — who,  in  short,  has  scrofulosis  and  is  a  pre-

''estined  victim  of  consumption,  gets  an  attack  of  enteritis

'''"of  pneumonia. Is  it  not  notorious  that  the  joint  action

^nd  reaction  upon  each  other,  of  this  chronic  scrofulosis  and

"•e  acute  enteritis  or  pneumonia,  will  be  such  that  instead

*'• the  acute  affections  running  the  short  and  sharp  course

*hich  they  would  follow  in  a  robust  subject,  tliey  will  almost

sufeiy  degenerate  into  tuberculosis  of  the  mesenteric  glands

*''t3i  colliquative  diarrhcea,  and  of  the  lungs,  respectively?

■'^■'Id  would  any  one  dream,  of  treating  these  acute  affections

"* Such  a  subject  just  as  they  would  treat  them  in  a  subject

***-lTerwisc  and  previously  healthy?

3ut  why  not  ? Because  the  previously  existing  disease
Modified and (so far  as  symptoms  arc  concerned)  blended
'"Uli  the  acute  attacks. No doubt  p«^  single  remedy  will
^ver  this  blended  case.

When  a  patient  has  suffered  from  paroxysms  of  intermit-
tent fever,  and  on  the  cessation  of  their  regular  recurrence
Be  is  still  sallow,  feeble,  dj-spcpric  and  full  of  malaise,  there
can  be  no  question  that  he  still  suffers  from  the  disease — the
result  of  marsh  miasm.  If  now  this  patient  get  a  pneumonia
or  a  neuralgia,  here  will  be  a  second  and  a  distinct  and
dissimilar  disease  co-extsting  with  the  former.  So  different,
however,  will  be  its  course  from  what  it  would  have  been  in
a  patient  not  laboring  under  miasmatic  discasc,^30  blended
will  it  be,  from  the  begimiing,  with  the  latter, —  that,  though


312


ALTERNATION OK REMEDIES. NO. 2.


a  wholly  distinct  "  pathological  form "  of  disease,  it  will
require  the  identical  treatment  of  miasmatic  disease  and  will
yield  to  nothing  else.  The  same  thing  is  eminently  true  of
syphiiis  in  the  system.

Bonchut  says : '  "  Syphilis,  herpctism.  scrofula,  the  marsh-
miasmatic  disease,  etc.,  often  appear  under  forms  not
habitual.  •  •  •  w^  imagine  that  we  arc  deal-
ing with  acute  or  chronic  inflammations,  and  wc  treat  them
as  such  until,  some  day,  changing  our  method,  we  sec  them
recover,  one  under  Mercury,  another  under  Sulphur,  another
under  Sulphate  of  quinine,  another  under  Iodine,  etc  XsJ
there  anything  stranger  than  those  obscr\'acions  in  marshy
countries,  where  pneumonia,  fever,  enccphalo- meningitis,
are  cured  by  Quinine  rather  than  by  blood-lettings  and  by
antiphlogistics?  "

Another  instance  of  the  modifying  power  of  two  morbid
influences  co-operating  on  the  same  individual  is  furnished
by  the  fact  that  when  an  epidemic  prevails  not  only  are
almost  all  healthy  persons,  to  some  extent,  affected  by  tlic
epidemic  influence,  but  the  maladies  of  all  sick  persons,
■whatever  their  nature  may  be,  are  modified  and  changed
into  a  greater  or  less  conformity  witlj  the  epidemic,  what-
ever it  may  be.

Dr.  David  Hosaclc  uses  these  words:*  "The  fiict  stated
by  Sydenham  and  other  writers  on  epidemics,  that  the
prevailing  disease  swallows  up  all  other  disorders ;  that  is,
that  during  the  prevalence  of  an  epidemic  plague,  typhus,
dysentery  or  other  diseases  of  this  class,  every  indisposition
of  a  febrile  sort  readily  assumes  the  character  of  the  prevail-
ing disorder.  \Vc  know  tliis  to  be  experienced  in  tlic
diseases  of  other  countries,  and  we  see  Jt  daily  exemplilied
in  our  own."

Homceopatliicians  especially,  since  their  obser\'ations  are
finer  and  are  less  exposed  to  fallacy  from  drug-poisonings,


■  fatMoiesit  GiiUraU,  p.  369,


■  Ct^tatuTi  Diet, fraei.  JtftJ.,  t,
404.  note.


ALTERNATION  OF  REMEDIES. NO. 2.


213


*


have  opportunity  to  make  obser\'ations  of  this  kind,  and
they  have  often  noticed  how,  at  one  season  and  under  one
epidemic,  a  single  drug  or  group  of  drugs  corresponds  to
the  most  diverse  patholagical  forms  of  disease,  while  at  other
seasons  and  under  other  epidemic  influences,  very  different
groups  of  remedies  arc  indicated  by  ihc  same  pathological
forms  of  disease.

And  wc  bchcvc  that  most  Homoeopathicians  who  have
dealt  much  with  chronic  cases,  must  have  fallen  in  with
patients  who  labor  under  such  a  constitutional  affection  as
herpes  or  cancer,  and  which,  under  favorable  circumstances,
is  kept  in  a  latent  condition  by  thr  occasional  use  of  some
clearly  indicated  remedy.  If  these  patients  get  an  acute
disease  of  whatever  kind,  this  disease  is  almost  sure  to
present,  at  an  early  period,  symptoms  which  indicate  this
$ame  remedy  that  suits  their  chronic  malady.  Does  not
this  argument  a  posteriori  show  that  these  two  independent,
eo-cxistcnl  maladies  blend  and  modify  each  other,  at  least  in
Ihe  view  of  the  therapeutist?

The  entire  homosopathic  doctrine  of  chronic  diseases,  and
the  use  and  necessity  of  so-called  antipsoric  remedies,  arc
based  upon  this  same  idea  of  the  mutually  modifying  influ-
ence of  two  co-existent  maladies.

Hahnemann  says  he  found  that  in  some  persons  acute
disorders  did  not  yield  promptly  to  remedies  which  seemed
indicated  and  which  quickly  cured  them  in  others.  On
examining  closely  he  found  these  patients  presented,  in  the
present  or  in  the  past,  symptoms  indicating  their  infection
by  certain  miasmt  which  he  reduced  (whether  rightly  or  not
is  immaterial)  to  three  miasms — psora,  syphilis  and  sycosis.
He  sought  for  remedies  which  would  meet  the  indications  of
these  chronic  miasms  and  the  acute  affections  combined,  and
diis  led  him  to  prove  and  use  the  remedies  known  as  the
antipsorics.  Our  success  with  those  remedies  might  be  taken
as  another  a  posteriori  proof  of  the  blending  of  two  co-exist-
ing  diseases.


314


ALTERNATION OF REMEDIES. NO. 2.


Dr.  Drysdale,  apologizing  for  the  practice  of  alternation,
says:

"We  have  not  a  few  examples  where  the  patient  has,
through  ignorance  or  design,  unknown  to  us>  taken  lai^e
doses  of  heterogeneous  drugs,  such  as  Quinine  or  Opium  or
purgatives,  and  yet  our  higher  dilutions  have  taken  effect
notwithstanding.  On  this  subject  Trinks  confirms  Kampfer's
remark,  that,  in  chronic  diseases  which  have  bircn  long
treated  with  excessive  doses  of  allopathic  medicines,  wc  often
find  a  great  susceptibility  to  the  action  of  homceopathic
medicine."

Arc  these  writers  to  be  understood  as  maintaining  tliat
chronic  drug-poisonings,  such  as  the  mercurial,  the  sulphur,
the  iodine,  the  quinine,  the  iron  or  tlie  opium  cachexy,  do
not  cause  acute  disease  to  be  most  difficult  of  cure  ?  The
contrary  is  notoriously  the  case,  as  the  literature  of  phy-
sicians of  every  school  abundantly  shows.  How  can  this  be,
unless  the  artificial  chronic  disease,  viz.,  the  cachexy,  blend
with,  and  modify,  the  supervening  acute,  natural  disease  !

These  remarks  might  be  extended  to  great  length  by  mul-
tiplied instances.  They  suffice,  however,  to  show  distinctly
the  practical  conclusions  to  which,  what  we  concci\'e  to  be
sound  principles,  as  well  as  accurate  observation,  have  led
us.  With  them  we  conclude  what  wc  have  to  say  concerning
the  alternation  of  remedies,  taking  our  leave  of  the  subject
in  the  spirit  of  Bishop  C hilling worlli's  declaration  :

"  I  will  take  no  man's  liberty  of  judgment  from  him ;  nei-
ther shall  any  man  take  mine  from  me.  I  wilt  think  no  maa
the  worse  man,  •  •  I  will  love  no  man  ihe  less  for  differ-
ing in  opinion  from  mc.  And  what  measure  I  mete  to  others
I  expect  from  them  again."


EDITORIAL  REMARKS  ON  ALTERNATION.*


I.


We  publish  with  great  pleasure  articles  which,  like  the
above,  though  they  seem  to  favor  a  practice  which  wc  depre-
cate, arc,  nevertheless,  honest  expressions  of  the  earnest
Mnvictions  of  men  of  close  observation  and  faithful  study.

Nothing  could  be  farther  from  our  intention  than  to
nndertake  to  dogmatize  on  this  question,  which  we  admit  to
be  an  open  question,  and  on  which  men  of  eminence  enter-
tain opinions  at  variance  with  our  own.  It  may  be  allowed
08,  nevertheless,  in  all  courtesy  to  our  contributor,  to
agnify  the  points  on  which  we  take  issue  with  him.

I.  We  assuredly  do  entertain  the  belief  that  "two  or  more
medicinal  forces  (or,  we  prefer  to  say  "morbific  forces")
cannot  together  act  upon  the  economy  without  so  modifying
each  other  that  neitlier  shall  produce  the  effect  it  would  if
Only  one  were  acting."  This  belief  has  prevailed  among
medical  men  from  the  earliest  ages.  It  Ls  the  foundation  of
the  practice  of  polypharmacy  in  all  its  varieties,  from  the
complex  prescriptions  of  the  seventeenth  century  to  tlie
alternations  of  our  own  colleagues.  For  we  hold,  with  Dr.
Sorge  (by  no  means  a  Hahnemannian,  let  us  add),  that
"the  practice  of  alternation,  as  it  exists  among  homceopa-
thicians,  is  only  another  form  of  mixing  remedits  with  the
intention  of  getting  an  effect  compounded  of  the  action
of  the  two  or  more  drugs  that  are  alternated."

We  say,  this  belief  is  tiie foundation of  polypharmacy.

le  rationale  of  a  compound  prescription  we  take  to  be  the
following:  the  drug  which is  regarded  as  the  one  chiefly

'  Suggwted  by  x  contribution  by  Dr.  H,  to  the  Amutiean  H^mae^thie
Review,  vol.  v^  February,  1865.


216


EDITORIAL  REMARKS  ON  ALTERNATION.


indicated  possesses,  let  us  suppose,  certain  properties  which
would  be  hurtful  to  the  patient.  Another  drug  is  conjoined
with  it  for  the  purpose  of  antidoting  those  hurtful  proper-
ties. Again,  it  lacks  tlie  power  to  produce  certain  effects
which  are  deemed  desirable.  Another  drug  is  added  to
supplement  this  deficiency,  and  so  on,  ad  infiniium.  This
entire  procedure  rests  on  the  belief  that  these  medicinal
forces  will  so  modify  each  other  in  the  economy  that  neither
shall  produce  the  effect  it  would  if  only  one  were  acting.

As  an  example,  wc  mention  calomel  and  opium,  a  very
familiar  combination.  Certainly  the  object  of  giving  the
opium  is  that  it  may  modify  the  action  of  the  calomel,  and
in  a  way  which  conforms  to  the  known  action  of  opium  when
given  alone.

If  there  were  no  reason  to  believe  that  "  two  or  more
morbific  forces  (a  drug  is  a  morbific  agent  exciting  a
morbific  force)  could  not  together  act  upon  the  economy,
without  so  modifying  each  other  that  neither  shall  produce
the  effect  it  would  if  only  one  were  acting,"  how  could  we
ever  aire  disease?  The  morbific  force  whicli  constitutes  the
disease  is  acting  upon  the  economy,  and  wc  bring  to  bear
upon  the  economy  another  morbific  force,  viz.,  a  drug.  Now,
if  tlie  latter  be  properly  selected  willi  reference  to  the  former,
we  know  that  these  forces  will  so  modify  each  other  that,  on
the  one  hand,  tlic  manifestations  of  disease  wtU  cease,  and
on  the  other  hand,  the  drug  will  not  i)roduce  pathogenetic
symptoms  as  it  would  on  the  healthy  subject  This  state-
ment rests  on  the  basis  of  such  "facts"  as  our  friend  invokes.
On  what  other  theory  than  the  mutual  modification  of  mor-
bific forces  acting  together  upon  the  economy  could  it  be
explained  ?

On  what  other  theory  could  wc  explain  the  action  of
antidotes  as  homoeopath  I  cians  understand  and  employ  them?
How  else  could  we  explain  the  action  of  Belladonna,  in
large  doses,  in  antidoting  poisonous  doses  of  morphine'  as

'  AwuritaH  Jaumal  JI/^^koI  Sfiftta,  Jaaiiuy,  i86z.


EDITORIAL REMARKS  ON ALTERNATION.


217


wrfl  as  the  mutual  antidoting  powers  which  allopaths  have
recently  discovered,  many  of  the  ccrcbro  stimulants  and
spinant  alkaloids  to  possess  ?  How  else,  finally,  could  we
explain  the  efficacy  claimed  for  the  practice  of  alternation
in  general  and  for  certain  instances  of  it  in  particular,  such
as  the  cases  related  by  Dr.  H.,  and  which  we  fully  credit,
where  Belladonna  and  Bryonia  in  alternation  accomplished
what  neither  could  do  singly,  and  where  Arsenic  and  China
in  alternation  cured  a  case  which  neither  alone  had  cured  ?
How  else  but  by  conceding  that  two  or  more  medicinal
forces  cannot  act  together  upon  the  economy  without  so
modifying  each  other,  that  neither  shall  produce  the  effect  it
Would  if  only  one  were  acting  ?

The  fact  that  medicinal  or  morbific  influences  must  be
avoided  when  we  arc  engaged  in  proving  drugs  is  universally
admitted  ;  even  Dr.  H.  assented  to  it,  But  on  what  other
grounds  than  the  belief  already  stated  ?

That  persons  long  accustomed  to  use  tobacco  or  cofTee  are
"01  easily  affected  by  drugs  is  accounted  for,  probably,  by  the
^^ct  that  long  habit  has,  in  so  far  as  those  persons  arc  con-
Mrned,  caused  tobacco  or  coflFec  to  cease  to  be  "  medicinal
fcrces."  Use  has  become  "second  nature."  That  in  per-
sons not  accustomed  to  the  use  of  coffee,  a  dose  of  it  will
°*odify  the  action  of  another  morbific,  or  medicinal,  force  is
wnjonstrated  by  the  effect  of  coffee  antidoting  opium,  Nux
'oniica,  alcohol,  as  well  as  in  neutralizing  the  beneficial
Curative  action  of  many  drugs,  as  our  clinical  observations
often  satisfy  us  that  it  does.  The  same  statements  apply  to
tobacco.

2-  We  think  we  may.  then  assume,  as  conceded,  the  fact
Aat  "two  or  more  medicinal  forces  cannot  at  the  same  time
act  upon  the  human  system,  without  mutual  modification."
it  is  now  asked,  whether  granting  this  modification,  we  may
aot  avail  ourselves  of  It  to  derive,  from  the  alternate  use  of
drugs  which  modify  each  other,  good  effects  that  we  have
attained  in  no  other  way? There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the


*l»


iUiL REMARKS ON ALTERNATION.


Iity  of  this  being  done,  no  doubt  that  it  has  been
L...^ ^ttth  advantage;  as,  indeed.  Dr. H.  shows  by  two

hul,  in  the  present  state  of  our  science,  it  would  be  impos-
«iblu  lur  any  one  to  lay  down  rules  for  the  selection  of  remc-
Jli^H  ti.>  be  j;ivcn  in  alternation,  with  the  view  of  gaining  any
d««lieJ  modification  of  the  action  of  each.  Nor  can  we  con-
V4}iva  of  the  possibility  of  arriving  at  any  such  law.  The
lulo  o(  the  ancient  polyphannacy,  viz.,  to  select  remedies
iACVuling  to  the  effects  which  they  produce  singly,  and  to
goutbtne  them  with  reference  to  the  cfTcct  desired,  does  not
ftlstity*  work  well  in  practice.  For  example,  calomel  and
^tHuiit  ])roilucc  a  combined  effect,  which  is  clearly  a  modifi-
Mtton  of  the  known  action  of  each  drug.  But  on  the  other
huMil.  the  combined  action  of  opium,  ipecacuanha  and  the
ktili'liate  of  potash  in  Dover's  powder  is  quite  distinct  and
(lltlrrent  from  that  of  either  constituent  alone,  and  is  such
HI  ruuld  hardly  be  anticipated  from  what  wc  know  of  these

Arsenic  and  China  produced  a  combined  effect  which
Ourod  an  ague  that  neither  angly  would  cure.  Now,  if  this
fiut  were  to  be  taken  as  a  guide  in  selecting  a  combination
for  a  case  of  uterine  disease,  for  example,  in  which  wc  were
■t  a  loss  to  decide  between  Sepia  and  Pulsatilla,  it  might
lead  us  to  alternate  those  two  remedies.  But  it  b  not  three
months  since  one  of  us  took  charge  of  a  case  in  which  this
Mltcrnation,  on  this  very  ground,  had  been  employed,  but  the
|Nitient  had  not  recovered.  Wc  were  led  to  the  conclusion
that  the  Sepia  was  really  the  remedy  indicated — that  it  did
good,  but  that  its  effects  were  constantly  antidoted  by  the
I'ulftatUla.  We  omitted  the  Pulsatilla,  gave  Sepia  judiciously,
and  the  patient  promptly  recovered.

'  When,  in  addition  to  this  difficulty  arising  from  the  fact
that  alternated  drugs  do  not  alvrays  produce  a  morbific  action
which  can  be  predicated  in  advance  from  their  known  single
action,  wc  consider  that the  various  degrees  of  suscepti-


I


I

\


EDITORIAL  REMARKS  ON ALTERMATIOK.


219


bility  of  the  organism  to  drugs  indicated  with  difTerent
degrees  of  accuracy,  lA-ill  cause  the  modification  by  drugs  of
each  other's  action  to  be  different  in  each  individual  case,  wc
clearly  see  that  wc  can  never  be  in  a  position  to  predicate,
ill  advance,  the  effect  of  the  joint  administration  of  several
dnigs.  We  can  never,  therefore,  have  a  scientific  indication
for  such  a  combination  or  alternation.  If  wc  make  it,  it
must  always  be  the  result  of  "guess-work" — of  "feeling  our
way  along,"  just  as  Dr.  H.  did  in  the  cases  he  relates.

But  we  claim  superiority  for  Homceopathy  in  that  it  ^ves
us  the  means  of  selecting  our  remedies  with  a  reasonable
certainty  of  their  effects,  and  we  rightly  claim  that  medicine
should  not  rest  content  with  anything  short  of  a  method
which,  given  the  symptoms  of  a  disease,  points  us  to  a  cer-
tain remedy  if  our  materia  medtca  contain  it ;  or,  given  the
pathogenesis  of  a  drug,  indicates  to  us,  a  priori,  the  complex
of  symptoms  which  the  drug  will  remove.

But  the  method  of  alternation  throws  us  back  from  all
such  certainty — back  to  the  field  of  unmcthodizcd  clinical
experience — back  to  the  trackless  wilderness  of  polyphar-
macy and  allopathy.

For  these  reasons,  briefly  and  imperfectly  stated,  from  the
stand-point  of  science  we  hold  that  homeopathic  medicine
cannot  countenance  nor  tolerate  alternation.  And  wc  have
»uch  a  faith  in  the  unity  of  nature  as  to  believe  that  what

md  reasoning  shows  to  be  erroneous,  accumulated  facts
prove  to  be  mischievous  and  unnecessary.
But  there  is  another  view  of  this  matter  from  the
practical  stand-point.  Dr.  H.  says :  "  Grant  that  in  a  given
case  of  the  use  of  two  remedies,  some  one  remedy  might
have  been  found  that  would  as  well,  or  better,  have  answered
the  purpose  •  •  •  the  question  is  not.  Could  some
other  person  have  done  better  than  I,  but  Have  /  done  the
best  I  could  ?  Undoubtedly,  yes !  And,  so  far  as  the
exonerates  him,  even  though  his  prescription  were  a  faulty


sao


EDITORIAL  REMARKS ON ALTERNATION.


one.  And  in  so  far,  from  the  practical  point  of  view,  alter-
nation may  be  justifiable.  But  will  this  question,  '  Have  I
done  the  best  I  could  ? '  if  affirmatively  answered,  always
experience  may  commit  a  sad  blunder  and  yet  be  fully
justilied,  because  being  inexperienced  and  young,  bad
though  his  error  was,  he  did  'the  best  he  could.'  Would
this  plea  justify  the  same  blunder  ten  years  later?
Obviously  it  would  not  Yet  is  it  not  the  tendency  of  this
plea  to  satisfy  a  man  with  the  knowledge  he  has  and  with
the  methods  he  pursues,  and  thus  to  blunt  his  zeal  for
greater  knowledge  and  better  methods  ?  Remonstrate  with
the  allopathist  for  murdering  patients  with  lancet  and  purge;
he  replies,  *I  act  according  to  my  light;  I  do  the  best  I
can.'  And  so  through  all  degrees  of  error  and  imperfect
knowledge.  It  is  a  dangerous  plea,  unless  its  complement
be  always  added,  '  I  have  done  the  best  1  can,  but,  please
God,  I  will  do  better  next  time ! "'

And  here  we  see  tlie  advantage  of  a  soufui  "tkwry**
which  our  friend  holds  in  so  light  esteem.

Suppose  a  practitioner  driven,  as  Dr.  H.  was  driven,  to
alternate.  The  patient  recovers.  He  has,  nevertheless,
a  conviction  that  drugs  modify  each  other's  action  in  a  way
that  we  cannot  foretell,  and  that  the  action  of  the  entire
organism  is  so  harmonious  that  "  two  morbid  states  cannot
co-exist  independently,"  and  that,  therefore,  the  morbid
state  being  essentially  one,  there  must  be  a  possibility  of  one
similar  drug-disease  to  oppose  it.  A  sound  theory  compels
him  to  the  belief  that  alternation  is  not  justifiable  nor
defensible  on  scientific  grounds,  and  that  it  can  do  nothing
to  advance  our  knowledge  of  Therapeutics,  but  rather  con-
fuses it  He  enters  in  his  mind  a  protest  against  the  practice
to  which  the  necessities  of  practical  duty  and  hi.s  limited,
knowledge  of  the  materia  mcdica  have  constrained  him,  and
turns  with  redoubled  vigor  to  the  study  of  materia  medica,
smarting  a  little  with  shame  that  the  exigencies  of  practice


EDITORUL REMARKS  ON  ALTERNATION.


221


I


liave  found  him  unprepared,  and  have  compelled  him  to  a
resort  which,  though  successful,  his  reason  condemns,  and
determined  that  the  next  time  he  will,  if  possible,  be  equally
if  not  more  successful,  and  by  a  method  which  shall  commend
itself  to  his  reason,  and  shall  add  to  his  stock  of  knowledge
for  future  use.

And  if,  while  "  doing  the  best  they  can,"  as  each  case
presents  itself,  practitioners  will  earnestly  and  systematically
study  the  materia  mcdica,  determined  to  do  better  and
better  the  next  time,  we  shall  have  no  word  of  reproach  to
otter  against  their  temporary  expedient  of  alternating  drugs.
With  broader  knowledge  they  will  alternate  less  and  less,
and  wc  arc  very  sure  that  they  will  see,  as  we  have  done,
how,  in  case  aflcr  case  in  which  they  had  alternated,  the
recovery  was  in  truth  retarded  by  the  mutual  reaction  of
the  drugs;  and  how  the  careful  individualization  of  the  case,
and  tlic  painstaking  selection  of  the  single  drug  in  the
manner  that  Hahnemann  advised,  will  be  in  their  hands  the
means  to  a  success  far  beyond  any  ever  reached  through
alternation.  For,  though  we  have  admitted  and  do  admit
that  success  is  often  attained  through  alternation,  and  that
"success  is  the  object  of  all  our  labors,"  we  arc  nevertheless
convinced,  through  our  own  experience. — for  we  have  alter-
nated in  our  day, — that  a  much  larger  measure  of  success  is
obtained  by  adherence  to  the  rule  of  administering  single-
remedies,  and  that  closer  study  of  the  materia  mcdica  and
sharper  investigation  of  cases  will  preserve  us  from  those
dilemmas  in  which  wc  are  tempted  or  compelled  to  resort
to  alternation.

4-  And  if  we  appeal  to  the  experience  of  Hahnemann,
let  it  be  understood  that  we  appeal  to  tlie  man  who  both
knew  materia  medica  better  than  any  other  man  ever
knew  it,  and  who  had  more  practical  experience  than  any  of
as  has  had.  Let  us  not  indulge  in  the  fallacy  of  supposing
that,  because  we  are  now  practicing  in  the  fifty-ninth  year
since  the  Organon  was  published,  we  have  had  fifty-nine


^33


EDITORIAL  REMARKS  ON  ALTERNATION.


years'  experience  in  homceopathic  practice,  and  have  been
studying  materia  medica  fifty-nine  years.  On  the  contrary;"
our  own  experience  is  measured  only  by  the  actual  number
of  years  we  have  practiced  ;  since  in  this  matter  of  assimila-
ting' to  one's  own  mind  the  facts  of  the  materia  medica,  and
of  seeing  the  correspondence  between  these  and  tlic  facts  of
the  disease,  we  can  borrow  but  little  from  the  experience  of
others.

If  then  we,  from  our  little  experience  of  fiHieen,  or  ten,
or  five  years,  appeal  to  Hahnemann  with  his  venerable
experience  of  more  than  fifty  years  of  active  practice,  with
his  unapproachable  knowledge  of  the  materia  medica,  of
which  he  might  justly  say  like  ^Cneas,  "magna  pars  fui,"
with  his  unrivaled  powers  of  observation  and  discrimination  ;
if  we  appeal  to  him  as  "authority"  on  this  question,  at  once
practical  and  scientific,  can  it  justly  be  said,  that  we  are
seeking  some  "authority  outside  of  and  beyond  our  own
reason?"  Our  colleague  appeals  to  collections  of  "lacts."
Is  not  Hahnemann's  statement  of  his  practical  conclusions  a
most  stupendous  "collection  of  facts?"  ^^'ho  ever  observed
so  many  of  them  ?  Who  ever  observed  so  well  as  he  ?
Facts  must  be  received  on  testimony;  who  ever  reported
more  graphically  and  more  faithfully  than  Hahnemann  ?  If
we  doubt  his  ability,  his  capacity,  his  candor,  what  are  wc
doing  with  his  materia  medica,  on  the  truth  of  which  wc
risk  our  patients'  lives  ?

This  outcry  against  "swearing  in  the  words  of  the  master"
has  come  to  have  a  very  different  meaning  from  that  of  the
ancient  original  protest.  It  was  never  meant  to  intimate
that  the  opinion  and  testimony  of  him  whose  abilities  had
crowned  him  "  king  of  men  "  should  not  have  a  royal  weight
of  influence.


EDITORIAL  REMARKS  ON  ALTERNATION."


II.


This  article  very  justly  affirms  that  the  question  of  alter-
nation, being  a  practical  one,  "must  be  decided  by  experi-
ence ; "  that  no  dogmatism  will  satisfy  those  differing  in
opinion.  The  writer  then  straightway  proceeds  to  dogma-
tise on  the  basis  of  two  assumptions,  which  he  claims  to  be
*'  established  principles  in  Homeopathy,"  but  which  very  few
Till  concede  in  the  terms  in  which  he  has  expressed  them.

Having  referred  the  question  to  experience,  he  makes  no
appeal  to  experience,  whether  his  own  or  his  neighbor's.  If
he  have  experience  which  can  throw  light  on  this  question,
it  ought  to  be  comparative  experience.  He  ought  to  be
able  to  say:  "  For  a  certain  period  of  limes  I  avoided  alterna-
tion, selecting  my  remedies  as  Hahnemann  directs  ;  then,  for
a  period  I  alternated.  My  success  under  the  latter  method
was  the  greater."  Such  a  statement  as  this  would  cany
weight  But  we  gather  from  this  article  that  the  author  has
always  practiced  alternation,  deriving  his  ideas  of  its  pro-
priety and  necessity  from  the  assumed  "established  prin-
ciples "upon  which  he  bases  his  arguments,  and  upon  the
assumed  imperfections  of  the  materia  medica.

If  our  conjecture  be  correct,  then  his  experience,  l]eing
conAncd  to  tlie  practice  of  alternation  and  not  bearing  upon
the  opposite  method,  can  have  only  a  negative  value.  It
merely  shows  that  a  measure  of  success  does  attend  this
faulty  form  of  practice,  a  point  which  was  freely  conceded  to
Dr.  H.'  But  inasmuch  as  no  advocate  of  alternation  claims
invariable success,  the question remains,  "  Might  not  the

I  SugCcilcd  by  X  contribution  by  Dr.  C  to  (he  Amfritan  H^mmopatkic
Knifw,  vol.  Y.,  AprU,  1865.  ■  See  previout  paper.


224


EDITORIAL  REMARKS ON ALTERNATION.


success  have  been  greater  If  alternation  had  been  avoided?  "
Not  having  any  comparative  experience  by  the  light  of
which  to  answer  this  question,  the  alternator  ab  initio,  could
not  reply.

Our  editorial  note  to  Dr.  H.'s  paper  expressly  referred  to
Hahnemann's  experience,  and  to  the  experience  of  the
writer,  as  being  of  this  comparative  character,  and  as,  there-
fore, bearing  on  this  question,  and  as  showing,  so  far  as  they
go,  that  the  results  of  adherence  to  the  single  remedy  are
more  satisfactory  than  those  of  alternation.

Some  of  the  points  touched  by  Dr.  C.  arc  too  important
to  be  treated  in  this  annotation.  They  will  be  discussed  in
a  future  ninnber  of  the  Review}

Suffice  it  now  to  say  that,  when  he  states  that  "  the  only
reason  why  he  practices  alternation  is  the  want  of  perfection
of  the  materia  medica,"  he  concedes  (if  he  will  allow  us  to
add  one  other  analogous  reason,  viz.,  "  want  of  perfection  ia
the  knowledge  possessed  by  practitioners  of  the  materia
medica  which  we  already  have")  all  that  the  opponents
of  alternation  contend  for.  For  this  position  admits  that
alternation  is  wrong  in  principle,  and  is  only  necessitated  by
a  temporary  emergency.  We  contend  that  the  emergency,
instead  of  being  common,  Is  rare,  if  not  altogetlier  imaginary,
and  wc  appeal  to  our  practice.

How  dangerous  it  is  to  discuss  a  question  of  science  with
rhetorical  figures!

Dr.  C.  makes  merry  over  his  imagined  doubtc-headcd
monster,  for  each  head  of  which  he  provides  a  club,  and  he
grows  happy  at  the  thought  that  by  his  two-handed  energy
he  will  have  destroyed  this  figurative  disease  much  more
quickly  than  the  luckless  editor  could  do  it,  whom  he
restricts  to  the  use  of  a  single  club  to  be  applied  to  but  one
head  at  a  time.

Now,  wc  have  always  supposed  that  the  efficacy  of  an
annament  depended  not  so  much  upon  the  number  of
^  See  "  Alternatioa  of  Remedies,"  Noi.  j  uid  z.


BDITORIAL  REMARKS  ON  ALTERKATIOX.


23$


efficient  weapons  as  upon  the  skill  with  which  the  weapons
existing  were  used,  and  one  club  in  a  vigorous  right  hand
might  do  more  execution  oven  on  a  double-headed  monster
than  two  clubs  even  in  the  hands  of  our  ambidextrous  cor-
respondent But  why  restrict  the  monster  to  the  "two-
headed  "  form  ?  If  we  arc  to  admit  the  dual  or  multiple
independent  co-existence  of  disease,  why  not  liken  it  to  a
centipede,  each  foot  "possessing  independent  vitality?"
With  what  armament  now  will  our  friend  cope  with  his
antagonist?  Shall  he  call  Briarcus  in  consultation,  and  arm
him  with  one  hundred  clubs  ?  We  do  not  believe  in  the
multiple  co-existence  of  disease.  Leaving  out  of  view
traumatic  affections  which  may  supervene  during  idiopathic
sickness,  as  Urysdale  shows,  we  believe  in  the  unity  of
disease,  and  we  expect  to  find  one  remedy  of  which  the
characteristic  symptoms  cover  the  whole  case.

The  figure  of  the  two-headed  monster  is,  therefore,  in  our
view,  defective,  but,  admitting  the  figure,  why  must  wc  use
clubs  at  all  ?  In  the  days  when  brute  force  reigned
supreme  they  were  well  enough.  But  surely  in  this  day  of
enlightenment  "clubs  arc  not  trumps."

Hercules  was  the  embodiment  of  brute  strength  as  dis-
tinguished from  intellectual  acuteness  and  skill.  Surely  his
subjugation  of  the  Lerncan  Hydra  should  not  serve  us  as  an
example  in  treating  disease.  We  cannot  afford  to  spend  so
much  time  as  the  club  treatment  requires;  for  both  the
experience  of  Hercules,  and  that  of  our  Irish  friends  at  Don-
nybrook  Fair,  prove  that  the  breaking  of  heads  by  clubs  is
a  tedious  and  uncertain  affair.  We  decline  to  enter  into
competition  witli  our  friend  in  the  use  of  his  favorite  thera-
peutic agent,  the  club,  whether  he  use  it  .single,  double,  or  a
hundred  fold.  But,  if  he  insist  on  a  mechanical  figure,  we
will  suggest  that,  while  At:  is  counting  the  heads  of  the
monster  and  is  casting  about  in  his  cSub-room  for  a  bludgeon
adapted  to  each  head,  and  is  fitting  his  hand,  for  the  arduous
efibrt,  and  is  so  getting  his  balance  as  to  make  sure  that  the
16


226  EDITORIAL  REMARKS  ON  ALTERNATION.

complex  wielding  of  his  numerous  weapons  shall  not  trip
him  up,  we  shall  humbly  survey  the  monstrous  form  with.
the  intent  to  study  the  controlling  characteristics  of  his
anatomical  structure,  and  when  we  shall  have  learned  to
what  type  he  belongs  and  what  are  his  characteristics  as  an
individttal,  then  with  one  single  weapon  (a  slender  sword,
it  may  be,  or  a  bodkin,  or  a  drop  of  prussic  acid),  we  shall
touch  the  vital  part  (the  heart,  or  the  medulla,  or  a  delicate
mucous  membrane)  on  whose  integrity  depends  the  life  of
all  the  heads  and  all  the  rest — and  presto — before  the
ponderous  clubs  have  time  to  fall  on  those  devoted  heads
"belaboring  them  simultaneously" — the  work  is  done  1

Multiplicity  in  armament  is  generally  inconsistent  with
simplicity  and  efficiency,  and  is  characteristic  of  a  barbaric
age  or  race.

Thus  the  double-club  array  is  known  as  the  "  Indian
Clubs."

The  Japanese  wear  two  swords,  and  yet  cannot  stand  a
moment  before  the  single  rapier  of  the  Frenchman.

The  savage  of  the  Southern  States  glories  in  his  belt  full
of  six-shooters,  and  his  boot-legs  bristling  with  bowie-knives.
Before  the  single  purpose  of  the  Northern  Farmer  he  is
rapidly  passing  into  the  realm  of  history.


THE USE OF HIGH POTENCIES IN  THE
TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK.


Having  been  honored  by  the  President  of  the  Society'
with  an  appointment  to  report  on  the  use  of  High  Potencies
in  Chronic  Diseases,  I  trust  it  may  not  be  considered  an
unwarrantable  presumption  if,  for  the  following  reasons,
I  venture  to  modify,  to  a  slight  extent,  the  theme  assigned
to  me.

First,  The  subject  contemplates  a  report  of  a  practical
nature.  But  from  the  stand-point  of  practice,  I  think  that  a
dear  and  well-defined  distinction  between  acute  and  chronic
diseases  is  not  possible.  If  we  attempt  to  base  such  a
idistinction  upon  the  clement  of  time  alone,  paying  regard
ronly  to  tlic  duraiion  of  the  disease,  it  cannot  be  made  at  the
beginning  of  the  treatment,  and  cannot  therefore  be  of  any
practical  value  in  determining  the  potency  to  be  used.

If  we  base  the  distinction  upon  a  pathological  conception
—that  is,  upon  the  presumed  existence  in  the  patient  of  some
dyscrasta,  diathesis  or  miasm — It  is  equally  impossible,  at
least  in  very  many  instances,  to  make  it  at  the  commence-
tnent  of  an  illness.

It  is  a  matter  of  common  remark  that  cases  which  begin
without  any  sign  of  miasmatic  or  dyscratic  complication
often  develop  in  their  course  unequivocal  evidence  of  such
complication,  so  that  a  case  which  would,  in  the  outset,  have
been  regarded  as,  in  this  sense,  unquestionably  acute,  proves
in  its  course  to  be  unmistakably  chronic.

Second.  Furthermore,  the  subject  as  stated,  irjvolves  a
kind  of  petitio  prinetpii. To  require  a  report  on  the  "  Use

>  The  Ilomoeopatluc  Medical  Sodeljr  of  tbe  Sute  of  New-Vork,  Oct.,  1863.


33S


THE  USE  OF  HIGH  POTENCIES


of  the  High  Potencies  in  Chronic  Diseases"  is  ia  some
sort  to  imply  that  these  potencies  are  especially  useful  and
appropriate,  if  at  all,  in  the  treatment  of  chronic  diseases
as  distinguished  from  acule  diseases — an  implication  which
it  13  true  corresponds  to  a  ver>*  widely  received  opinion
among  those  physicians  who  have  but  little  practical
acquaintance  with  the  action  of  the  high  potencies,  but
which,  as  wc  shall  see,  is  not  supported  by  the  results  of
experiment

By  the  kind  indulgence  of  the  Society,  then,  I  shall  beg
leave  to  report  on  the  "Use  of  High  Potencies  in  the  Treat-
ment of  the  Sick."

No  question  connected  with  Homoeopathy  has  given  rise
to  more  vigorous  controversy  or  to  more  earnest  partisan
feeling  than  that  concerning  the  infinitesimal  dose.  Tlie
most  bitter  opposition  of  the  Old  School  to  Hahnemann  was
based  on  this  question.  It  has  been  also  the  chief  ground
of  division  and  contention  among  homoeopattusts  them-
selves.

After  an  animated  disputation  covering  a  period  of  more
than  fifty  years,  there  seems  now,  however,  to  be  a  cessation
of  hostilities  between  the  advocates  and  opponents  of  the
higher  potencies.  There  seems  to  be  a  mutual  disposition
to  suspend  the  discussion  hitherto  maintained  chiefly  on
hypothetical  grounds,  and  to  appeal  in  good  faith  to  the
"ultima  ratio" — experiment.  The  times  arc  favorable,
tliercfore,  for  a  quiet  survey  of  the  field  and  for  a  dis-
passionate estimate  of  the  experimental  knowledge  of  which
the  practical  labors  of  our  colleagues  have  put  us  in  pos-
session.

It  is  probable  that  Hahnemann  was  never  what  could  be
Disease,  published  1789.  before  he  had  discovered  the  hom-
oeopathic law  of  cure,  he  portrays  the  cvit  effects  of  exccs-
^ve  doses  of  mercurial  preparations,  and  speaks  of  radically
curing  some  cases  of  syphilis  by  the  use  of  a  single  grain  of


IN  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK.


229


Mercurius  soltibiHs  In  divided  doses;  arid  says  that  eight
grains  thus  administered  will  often  be  sufficient  to  cure  "veiy
severe  cases  of  syphilis."  Compared  with  the  practice  of  his
contemporaries,  these  are  almost  infinitesimal  prescriptions.

In  his  first  essays  upon  the  homoeopathic  law,  Hahnemann
advises  the  administration  of  doses  but  little,  if  any,  smaller
than  those  he  had  previously  used.  We  first  meet  with  the
recommendation  to  use  infinitesimal  doses  in  the  essays  on
"Scarlet  Fever,"  published  in  1801,  but  referring  to  cases
treated  in  1799.  He  here  advises  Belladonna  and  Chamo-
milla  to  be  given  in  preparations  which  correspond  pretty
nearly  to  the  third  centesimal  dilution.

It  pleases  Dr.  Dudgeon  to  suppose  that  "this  sudden
change,"  as  he  calls  it,  from  material  to  infinitesimal  doses,
was  a  matter  of  expedii;ncy  and  policy  rather  than  of  con-
viction on  the  part  of  Hahnemann,  inasmuch  as  it  coincided
in  point  of  time  with  the  prosecutions  of  Hahnemann  by  the
apothecaries.

But  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  change  was  so  very
sudden  as  to  require  such  an  explanation.  Even  so  short  a
period  as  one  year  spent  in  constant  practice  might  be  suffi-
cient to  satisfy  so  acute  an  observer  as  Hahnemann,  that
remedies  given  according  to  the  homceopalhic  law  must  be
given  in  very  small  doses.

The  whole  career  of  Hahnemann  is  a  consistent  protest
against  the  adoption  or  renunciation  of  any  procedure  con-
nected with  the  practice  of  medicine,  on  grovmds  of  mere
policy  or  expediency.  Hahnemann's  long  life  was  a  con-
tinual sacrifice  of  ease  and  prosperity  and  highly  prized
friendships  to  his  convictions  of  truth.  While  therefore,
during  a  period  of  twenty  years  he  submitted  to  be  driven
from  city  to  city  rather  than  renounce  the  right  of  dispensing
his  own  medicines,  is  it  at  all  probable  that  he  devised  the
method  of  diluting  or  potcntizing  remedies  and  inMstcd  on
flie  superiority  of  potentized  remedies,  simply,  or  in  any
degree  from  motives  of  expediency?


930


THE  USE  OF  HIGH  POTENCIES


Tn  subsequent  essays  Hahnemann  advises  still  more  dis-
tinctly the  administration  of  potentized  remedies,  and  in  the
first  edition  of  the  Organon,  published  in  i8io,  he  says:
*' Scarcely  any  dose  of  the  homceopathically  selected  remedy
can  be  so  smalt  as  not  to  be  stronger  than  the  natural  disease
and  not  capable  of  overcoming  it."  About  the  same  period
he  advises  the  use  of  the  ninth  dilution  of  Nux  vomica  and
the  eighteenth  of  Arsenic.

In  tlic  earlier  volumes  and  editions  of  the  Materia  Medtca
Pitra,  Hahnemann  recommends  a  particular  dose  for  each
remedy.  Some  remedies  are  to  be  given  in  the  first  dilution,
some  in  Uie  third,  some  in  the  ninth,  some  in  Uie  fifteenth,
some  in  the  twenty- fourth,  some  in  the  thirtieth.

In  subsequent  editions  of  the  Materia  Medina  and  in  the
work  on  Chronic  Diseases,  Hahnemann,  as  is  well  known,
advises  that  all  remedies  be  given  in  a  uniform  dose — die
thirtieth  dilution.

In  the  latter  years  of  his  life  he  speaks  of  using  with  great
success  the  sixtieth,  otic  hundred  and  fiftieth  and  three  hun-
dredth dilutions,  and  it  is  well  known  that  during  these  years
he  did  not  confine  himself  to  a  uniform  dose,  but  used  in  some
cases  the  lower  potencies,  and  in  some  the  very  highest.

It  is  not  unworthy  of  remark  tliat  as  Hahnemann's  prac-
tical experience  in  the  treatment  of  disease  increased,  so  did
his  estimate  of  the  advantage  and  necessity  of  using  higher
dilutions,  in  at  least  many  cases,  likewi.se  increase.

The  promulgation  of  the  dynamization  theory  by  Hahne-
mann, and  his  adoption  of  the  practice  of  giving  infinitesimal
doses,  were  the  occasion  of  the  most  violent  denunciation  of
Homceopathy  by  his  professional  opponents.  Indeed,  to
this  day,  lliis  really  subordinate  department  of  the  method
is  regarded  by  allopaths  as  the  essential  feature  of  Homoe-
opathy; and  to  a  superficial  observer  it  would  seem  as  if  the
infinitesimal  dose  were  almost  the  only  obstacle  to  a  blend-
ing of  Homoeopathy  and  the  so-called  Physiological  School
of  Medicine.


IN  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK.


231


The  progressive  advocacy  by  Hahnemann  of  the  higher
dilutions,  and  especially  the  introduction  by  Korsakoff  of
what  are  technically  known  as  the  "high  potencies"  (the
one  hundred  to  fifteen  hundredth)  gave  rise,  as  has  been
said,  to  a  lively  and  bitter  and  decidedly  personal  contro-
versy among  homcKopatliists.

In  every  party  or  school  which  is  still  a  minority,  there
arc  always  Conservathf€S,  who  regret  the  necessity  which
compelled  a  separation  from  the  party  or  school  of  the
majority ;  who  strive  to  make  that  separation  as  little
decisive  and  marked  as  may  be ;  who  stoutly  oppose  any
measure  which  would  tend  to  increase  the  division  or  to
make  it  irremediable  ;  and  who  hail  with  delight  almost  any
project  of  compromise  or  reunion.  There  are  also  Radicals,
whose  turbulent  nature  revels  in  the  sensation  of  opposition ;
whose  tendency  it  is  to  lay  more  stress  on  points  of  differ-
ence than  on  points  of  coincidence;  who,  having  once
separated  from  the  majority,  will  not  only  entertain  no
thought  of  a  reunion  with  them,  but  consider  that  fidelity  to
the  principle  on  which  their  separation  was  based,  requires
that  the  separating  chasm  should  be  made  continually  wider.
They  seem  to  glory,  not  so  much  in  the  truth  for  the  sake
of  which  they  separated,  as  in  the  mere /ir/ of  separation.

These  two  classes  arc  necessary  in  every  progressive
schooL  The  Radicals  furnish  the  propelling  force — the
steam.  The  Conservatives  supply  the  restraining  and
moderating  influence — ^the  fly-wheel.

Among  the  followers  of  Hahnemann,  the  Radicals  and
the  Conservatives  were  the  respective  parties  to  the  contest
about  tlic  potentization  theory ;  and  in  weighing  the  argu-
ments which  each  side  brought  fonvard,  we  must  not  lose
sight  of  the  respective  tendencies  of  these  two  parties.

The  law,  Simiiia  similibus  curanlur,  which  is  the  essence
of  Homccopathy,  was  not  an  absolute  novelty  in  medicine.
Indeed,  Hahnemann's  first  argument  in  favor  of  it  ^vas
drawn  from  the  records  of  medicine. He  showed  that,  in  all


»|a


THE  USE  OF  HIGH POTENCIES


ages,  many  cures  had  been  made  m  accordance  with  it  He
proved  that  his  contemporaries,  often  unwittingly  and  some-
times consciously,  applied  it  in  treating  the  sick.  To  urge
its  admission  as  the  universal  law  ef  cure  was,  therefore,
simply  to  advocate  the  recognition,  as  a  universal  truth,  of
that  which  was  already  ruccivcd  by  medical  men  as,  at  least,
a  truth  of  partial  and  limited  application.

Accordingly,  the  opposition  to  Hahnemann  was,  at  the
vcr>'  first,  moderate.  It  was  somewhat  of  the  nature  of  a
demand  for  more  conclusive  testimony.

Men  of  conservative  tendencies  might  very  consistently,
at  this  time,  have  become  liom  ceo  path  ists ;  for  it  was  not
unreasonable  to  anticipate,  at  some  period  in  the  not  dis-
tant future,  a  universal  recognition  of  the  homceopathic  law
of  cure  and  a  consequent  reunion  with  the  dominant  power.

But  the  dynamization  theory  was  in  irreconcilable  opposi-
tion to  all  the  notions  of  Hahnemann's  opponents.  It  taught
that  doses  inconceivably  small  were  sufficient  to  effect  radi-
cal cures  in  acute  and  dangerous  diseases — that  such  doses
were  even  more  efficacious  than  larger  ones.  It  taught  that
instead  of  the  curative  power  of  the  drug  being  directly  in
proportion  to  its  material  quantity,  there  was  reason  for
believing  that,  to  some  extent,  at  least,  the  converse  was
true.

There  could  be  no  such  thing  as  a  compromise  on  this
question.  Truth  lay  either  with  Hahnemann  or  with  his
opponents.  It  could  not  lie  between  them.  To  maintain
this  dynamization  theory  would  be  to  make  the  separation
between  homoeopaUtists  and  tlic  dominant  school  of  medi-
cine perpetual  and  irremediable

It  is  easy  to  perceive  what  sort  of  a  reception  was  likely
to  be  accorded  to  tlie  dynamization  theory  by  the  Conserva-
tive homoeopathists.  They  could  not  regard  it  without
unfavorable  prepossessions.  If  compelled  at  last  to  admit  its
soundness,  this  would  not  be  until  irresistible  testimony  in
it<;  &vor  had  been  amassed- — nor  even  then  without  regret


IN  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE SICK.


»33


for  the  fact  and  deprecation  of  the  obstacles  which  it
created  in  the  way  of  a  reunion  with  the  Old  School.  All
their  a  priori  assumptions  would  be  unfavorable  to  its
validity.

The  Radicals,  on  the  other  hand,  would  receive  with  joy
this  additional  clement  of  difference  from  the  Old  School  of
medicine.  They  would  advocate  it  with  enthusiasm.  Their
a  priori  arguments  would  lend  it  a  vigorous  support

Thus  in  relation  to  a  question  that  can  be  settled  by
experiment  alone,  and  by  a  course  of  experiment  requiring
careful  unprejudiced  observation  through  many  successive
years,  we  have  all  the  conditions  requisite  for  an  ardent  con-
troversy at  the  very  outset,  before  any  valid  evidence  could
possibly  have  been  gathered  by  cither  party.

We  shall  be  less  surprised  at  the  vigorous  opposition  to
the  dynaraization  theory,  if  we  recollect  the  condition  of
medicine  and  pharmacy  at  the  beginning  of  the  ])rcsent
century.  The  posology  of  that  period  was  decidedly  heroic.
Drugs  were  given  in  the  crudest  forms.  Pharmaceutical
chcmistrj'  had  not  yet  discovered  the  essential  principles  of
drugs,  the  use  of  which  at  the  present  day  has  made  doses
of  the  one-fourth,  one-eighth,  or  one-twentieth  of  a  grain
familiar  even  to  practitioners  of  the  Old  School.  The
microscope  was  still  a  rude  and  primitive  instrument;
quantitative  chemical  analysis  had  not  attained  any  great
development;  much  less  was  there  any  thought  of  applying,
as  is  now  done,  tlie  reactive  susceptibility  of  the  living
organism  to  detect,  through  its  specific  affinities,  particles  of
matter  so  small  as  to  elude  the  microscopist  and  the  chemist
In  fact  the  doctrine  of  the  extreme  divisibility  of  matter
rested,  at  that  time,  rather  on  the  speculations  of  tlie  meta-
physician than  on  the  demonstration  of  the  naturalist

For  this  very  reason,  on  the  other  hand,  the  speculations
of  the  metaphysician  had  at  that  period  the  wider  scope
and  the  greater  authority.  And  thus  it  was  very  easy  for
SORte  of  Hahnemann's  more  radical  followers  to  erect  on  a


aS4


THE  USE  OF  HIGH  POTENCIES


figurative  illustration  used  by  him  in  the  Organon  a  "ctoud-
capped  "  theory  of  the  transplantation  of  the  medicinal  force
Irom  the  substance  of  tiie  drug  to  the  substance  of  tlie
vehicle  used  for  dilution,  and  upon  the  basis  of  this  airy
hypothesis  to  explain  all  manner  of  supposed  action  and
reaction  of  drug-spirit  upon  diseased  force,  etc.,  etc

These  considerations  will,  I  think,  justify  us  in  passing
over  with  scarcely  a  word  of  comment  all  that  was  so  copi-
ously written  on  the  subject  of  the  dose,  from  the  date  of
Korsakoff  8  first  publication  to  the  date  of  Dr.  Trinks*  public
letter  to  Dr.  Stens  in  JS59.

Tlie  principles  involved  in  the  question  of  the  efficacy  and
advantages  of  high  potencies  arc  these :

1.  The  curative  power  of  a  properly  selected  drug  is  not
in  the  direct  ratio  of  the  quantity  of  the  drug.

2.  The  process  of  potentization  which  Hahnemann  in-
vented, develops  a  curative  power  in  substances,  which  in
the  crude  form,  manifest  no  such  power;  and  it  increases
the  curative  power  of  drugs  which  to  the  crude  form  do
manifest  a  curative  power.

Now,  although  these  principles  had  been  satisfactorily
established,  one  would  think,  by  the  successful  use  of  the
thir<I  or  sixth  potencies,  long  before  the  controversy  about
the  "  high  potencies  "  began,  yet  it  will  be  perceived  that
almost  all  the  objectors  who  began  to  write  after  Korsa-
koff's publication  and  Hahnemann's  cautious  and  conditional
approval  of  it.  derive  their  arguments  from  considerations
of  the  probable  quantity  of  the  drugs  which  these  high
potencies  might  contain.  Thus  wc  arc  cautioned,  even  by
those  who  admit  that  higher  potencies  have  curative  powers,
that  they  arc  not  to  be  trusted  in  acute  diseases  which  have
a  rapid  course,  because,  as  Dr.  Scott  expresses  it,  "  In  these
diseases  the  vital  forces  act  with  exaggerated  energy  and  to
act  upon  them,  we  require  a  greater  amount  of  medicinal
power,  that  is,  a  lower  dilution."  This  statement,  it  will  be
perceived,  regards  the  curative  power  as  directly  proper.


IN THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK.


235


tioned  to  the  quantity  of  the  drug,  and  begs  the  whole
question  at  issue.

But  when  Hahnemann  had  sliown  that  a  more  efficient
curative  power  was  exerted  by  the  first  dilution  or  tritura-
tion, or  even  by  drop  doses  of  the  mother  tincture  of  drugs
than  by  massive  doses,  as  he  had  done  to  the  satisfaction  of
all  homccopathists,  long  before  the  higher  dilutions  were
ever  made,  he  had  demonstrated  that  the  curative  power  of
drugs  is  not  in  the  proportion  of  their  material  quantity,  and
had  thus  established  the  first  principle  of  the  dynamization
theory.

When,  furthermore,  he  showed  to  the  satisfaction  of  all
homccopathists,  that  substances  which  in  their  crude  state
exert  no  medicinal  power,  such  as  gold,  charcoal,  tin,  com-
mon salt,  etc.,  etc,  do,  after  dilution,  trituration  or  potenti-
zation,  come  to  possess  a  medicinal  power,  he  demonstrated,
in  part,  the  second  principle  of  the  dynamization  theory.

These  demonstrations  removing  the  question  of  dose
entirely  from  tlie  domain  of  mechanics,  in  which  ^ower  is
directly  proportioned  to  quantity,  left  the  whole  question
open  for  experiment.

The  points  to  be  determined  were  these :

1.  The  curative  power  of  a  drug  not  being  directly  pro-
portioned to  the  quantity  of  the  drug,  what  relation  does
exist  bctivccn  this  power  and  quantity  ?  What  effect  does  a
continued  diminution  of  quantity  exert  upon  the  curative
power  of  the  drug  ?

2.  It  being  admitted  that  the  potentization  process  docs
develop  the  curative  power,  what  are  the  limits  of  this
development  ?  What  varieties  in  the  nature  and  extent  of
this  developed  power  arc  produced  by  various  degrees  of
potentization  ?

Obviously  these  questions  were  to  be  solved  only  by  a
long  course  of  methodical  experiment

While  the  controversy  on  hypothetical  grounds  was
being  carried  on  by  the  Conservative  and  Radical  homce-


2i6


THE  USE OF  HIGH POTENCIES


opathUts,  reports  of  cases  were  accumulating  In  the  homoe-'
opathtc  journals,  which  furnished  indisputable  testiiDony  to
the  action  of  the  higher  potencies.  Among  those  who  pub-
lished these  records,  the  names  of  Gross,  Stapf,  Hcring,  von
BcEnninghauscn.  i^gidi  and  Nunez  arc  conspicuous.

Their  testimony  was  disjiuted  on  various  grounds. Against
some  cases  it  was  urged  that  they  were  inconclusive,  since  it ,
was not  clearly  shown that the  cure resulted  from thefl
remedy  given  and  not  rather  from  some  hygienic  prcscrip-  ^
tion or restriction resorted  to  at the same  time. Such
criticism  is  legitimate,  and  cases  to  which  it  is  fairly  applica-
ble must  be  excluded.

Against  other  cases  it  was  urged  that  the  data  were  not  SO
fully  recorded  as  to  enable  the  reader  to  make  sure  of  the  ,
diagnosis.  I  do  not  think  such  criticism  as  this  is  admis-  m
sible,  unless  in  a  very  few  cases.

The  value  and  authority  of  clinical  records  always  depend  ,
on  the  reputation  of  the  reporter  for  knowledge,  accuracy  ■
and  integrity.  Now,  whether,  in  reporting  a  case  of  alleged  '
pneumonia,  the  reporter  simply  state  that  it  was  a  case  of  ^
pneumonia,  presenting  ^uch  or  such  characteristic  symptoms,  f
or  whether  he  present  a  minute  and  elaborate  detail  of  all
the  rational  and  physical  signs  of  the  patient,  obtaintng  by
the  aid  of  auscultation,  percussion,  mensuration  and  chemt-  ,
cal  and  microscopical  analysis — in  either  case,  we  have-fl
nothing  to  depend  upon  but  the  scientific  capacity  and  Ae  "
integrity  of  the  observer.  ^

If  he  have  these  qualities  in  a  sufficient  degree  to  obtain  f
with  certainty  the  requisite  physical  and  rational  signs  on
which  to  base  a  trustworthy  diagnosis  of  pneumonia,  his
staifmeni  of  this  diagnosis  will  be  sufficient  without  the
details.  If  he  have  them  not,  no  details  which  he  might
pretend  to  give  would  be  deserving  of  the  slightest  confi-
dence. These  considerations  annihilate  the  objection  made
by  Dr.  Watzke  to  cases  published  by  Gross  and  Bccnning-
hausen  in  the  Archiv.


Df'tHE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK.


237


In  general,  however,  it  were  well  to  exclude,  provisionally
^t  least,  all  cases  of  doubtful  diagnosis.

While  cases  demonstrating  the  value  and  efficacy  of  the

high  potencies  were  accumulating,  a  few  cases  were  also

published  in  which,  the  higher  potencies  having  been  used

without  effect,  a  lower  potency  or  a  crude  dose  of  the  same

c/rug  effected  a  cure. Dr.  Black  relates  that  in  a  case  of

«ieadache  Lachesis^  only  produced  symptoms  of  nervous  dis-

*u  rbance,  while  Lachesis'  effected  a  cure. Dr.  Trinks  records

*  oaac  which  had  been  treated  by  Hahnemann  for  nearly  two

•^^•ars  with Rhus  in  a  higher  dilution  without  effect,  and

^^^J^ich  he  himself  cured  within  a  few  months  by  repeated

*'<=>sos  of  the  mother  tincture  of  Rhus.

"Tlie  angry  controversy  was  brought  to  a  temporary  close

3^ tDr.  Trinks*  public  letter  to  Dr.  Stens,  in  which  he  states :

^ xvas  bom  a  skeptic. As  to  the  wonder  cures  (cures  by

^^*-^ ^'E^*  potencies)  published  in  the  journals,  I  can  only  say»

^^C3  not  believe  a  word  of  them." "Non  credo  quia  impos-

**  •^=*'»lc  est,"  seems  to  be  the  creed  of  Dr.  Trinks — the  impossi-

*^_y  consisting  in  a  mere  assumption,  on  his  part,  that  such

-para^^ns  ^onnot  possess  any  power. This  same  argu-

-«^t — "non  credo" — may,  witli  equal  force,  be  urged  by

^^^^= allopathists  against  the  first  or  third  dilutions,  which  Dr.

*~*  *iks  is  in  the  liabit  of  using.

~-k."he  argument  proves  too much. If  Dr.  Trinks  may

^i^»Tiiss  with  "  I  don't  believe  it,"  the  testimony  of  those

^^^^o  advocate  the  high  potencies,  on  the  same  grounds  may

^«se  reject  his  accounts  above  referred  to,  of  the  cases  in

"vVUch  he  alleges  that  the  lower  potencies  were  efficacious

where  the  higher  had  failed.

But  the  opponents  of  the  high  potencies  were  not
content  with  seeking  to  invalidate  the  testimony  of  the
advocates  of  these  preparations.  Some  of  them  presented
records  of  cases  in  which  they  had  made  unsuccessful  trials
of  the  high  potencies.  Of  these,  many  were  no  doubt  made
in  good  faith,  and  must  be  accepted  as  evidence  that  there


238


THE  USE  OF  HIGH  POTENaES


are  cases  in  which  the  high  potencies  fail  to  cure.  But
majority  of  these  records  are  like  those  of  Dr.  Watzke,
referred  to  by  him,  in  the  (Esterrtichiscke  Zcitschrift,  voL  ii-,
where  he  says,  the  patients  on  whom  he  tried  the  high  poten-
cies suffered  for  most  part  from  diseases  in  which  there  was
Httle  reason  to  expect  a  favorable  result  from  any  remedy,
tn  whatever  dose,  for,  he  says,  they  were  cases  of  "  dis-
solving pulmonary  tubercle,  of  fungoid  tumor  of  the  brain,
of  cerebral  and  pulmonary  apoplexy,  of  spinal  paralysis,
of  chronic  hydrocephalus,  valvular  insuQicicncc  of  the  heart,
of  fibrous  tumor  of  the  uterus,  etc.,  etc.

Yet,  no  doubt,  Dr.  Watzke  is  one  of  those  who  would
exclaim  against  the  unfairness  of  Andral  in  pretending  to
test  Homoeopathy  in  the  Paris  hospital,  by  giving  a  single
dose  of  a  homceopathic  remedy  to  a  patient  laboring  under  flj
incurable  disease  1  T

Dr.  Watzke  himself,  though  so  bitterly  opposed  to  the  ,
advocates  of  high  potencies,  is  constrained  to  state  io  hJsfl
resum^ o(  the  proving  of  Natrum  muriatJcum,  in  the  fourth™
volume  of  the  Austrian  youmal,  "  I  am,  alas! — I  say,  alasl
for  I  would  much  rather  have  upheld  the  larger  doses  which  ■
accord  with  current  views — I  am  compelled  to  declare  ~
myself  for  the  higher  dilutions.  The  physiological  experi-
ments made  with  Natrum  muriaticum,  as  well  as  the  great
majority  of  the  clinical  results  obtained  therewith,  speak
decisively  and  distinctly  for  these  preparations."  This  is
strong  language  from  an  avowedly  unwilling  witness  t

The  conclusion  to  which  an  impartial  estimate  of  the
evidence  concerning  the  high  potencies,  up  to  the  year  1 8  50,
would  lead,  is  well  and  justly  expressed  by  a  writer  in  the
British  youmat  of  Homtxopatky,  vol.  v.,  p.  154:

"  I.  The  high  potencies  do  act

"2.  They  act  sometimes  very  energetically.

"  3.  They  often  act  curaiivcly  with  surprising  rapidity,

*'4.  They  sometimes  cure  where  the  lower  dilutions  have
felled — though  the  evidence  on  this  point  is  scanty."


IN  "the  treatment  of  the  sick.


ssr


In  genera],  however,  it  were  well  to  exclude,  provisionally
at  least,  all  cases  of  doubtful  diagnosis.

While  cases  demonstrating  the  value  and  efficacy  of  the
high  potencies  were  accumulating,  a  few  cases  were  also
published  in  which,  the  higher  potencies  having  been  used
without  effect,  a  lower  potency  or  a  crude  dose  of  the  same
drug  effected  a  cure.  Dr.  Black  relates  that  in  a  case  of
headache  Lachcsis""  only  produced  symptoms  of  nervous  dis-
turbance, while  Lachesis"  effected  a  cure.  Dr.  Trinks  records
a  case  which  had  been  treated  by  Hahnemann  for  nearly  t\\'0
years  with  Rhus  in  a  higher  dilution  without  effect,  and
which  he  himself  cured  within  a  few  months  by  repeated
doses  of  the  mother  tincture  of  Rhus.

The  angry  controversy  was  brought  to  a  temporary  close
by  Dr.  Trinks'  public  letter  to  Dr.  Stcns,  in  which  he  states :
"  I  was  bom  a  skeptic  As  to  the  wonder  cures  (cures  by
the  high  potencies)  published  in  the  journals,  I  can  only  say,
I  do  not  believe  a  word  of  them."  "Non  credo  quia  impos-
sibile  est,"  seems  to  be  the  creed  of  Dr.  Trinks — the  impossi'
bility  consisting  in  a  mere  assumption,  on  his  part,  that  such
preparations  cannot  possess  any  power.  This  same  argu-
ment—  "non  credo" — may,  with  equal  force,  be  urged  by
the  allopathists  against  the  first  or  third  dilutions,  which  Dr.
Tiinks  is  in  the  habit  of  using.

The  argument  proves  too  much.  If  Dr.  Trinks  may
dismiss  with  '*  I  don't  believe  it,"  the  testimony  of  those
who  advocate  the  high  potencies,  on  the  same  grounds  may
these  reject  his  accounts  above  referred  to,  of  the  cases  in
which  he  alleges  that  the  lower  potencies  were  efficacious
where  the  higher  had  failed.

But  the  opponents  of  the  high  potencies  were  not
content  with  seeking  to  invalidate  the  testimony  of  the
advocates  of  these  preparations.  Some  of  them  presented
records  of  cases  in  which  they  had  made  unsuccessful  trials
of  the  high  potencies.  Of  these,  many  were  no  doubt  made
in  good  faith,  and  must  be  accepted  as  evidence  that  there


J4Q


THE  USE  OF  HIGH  POTENCIES


curative  power  which  is  pretended  to  be  developed  by  potcnt-
ization  is,  tliey  say,  simply  a  facility  of  action  produced  by
minute  subdivision.

Hypothetical  explanation  docs  not  alter  focts.  If,  how-
ever, the  above  were  the  sole  explanation  of  the  action  of
potcntizcd  remedies,  then  it  should  result  that  the  highest
dcveIopm,cnt  of  tlie  curative  power  should  be  reached  in  that
dilution  in  which  the  particles  have  been  reduced  to  a  size
appreciably  less  than  that  of  a  blcod  corpuscle.  And,
indeed,  this  ground  has  been  taken  by  some  writers.  Now,
arithmetical  calculation,  as  well  as  microscopic  observation,
fixes  upon  the  third  centesimal  dilution  as  that  in  which  the
above  degree  of  subdivision  has  unquestionably  been
attained.  If  this  view  were  correct,  then,  dilutions  higher
than  the  third  should  not  display  a  curative  power;  or  if
they  do  display  such  power,  it  should  not  be  in  any  case
superior  to  that  of  the  third  dilution.

Now,  if  it  should  chance  to  result  from  actual,  incontro-
vertible experiment,  that  potencies  higher  than  the  third  do
display,  with  rare  exceptions,  a  greater  curative  power  than
the  third  or  lower  potencies,  this  superiority  must  be  directly
attributable  to  the  process  of  potcntization,

I  deem  it  right,  therefore,  to  call  all  those  potencies  above
the  grade  of  that  of  which  the  action  admits  a  mechanical
explanation— "the  higlur  potencies.''  The  term  will  apply,
in  this  view,  to  all  above  the  third  centesimal.

In  1850  Drs.  Wurmb  and  Kaspcr  took  charge  of  the
Lcopoldstadt  Hospital,  in  Vienna.  Their  views  on  the
subject  of  the  dose  were  no  secret  They  had  no  faith
whatever  in  the  higher  potencies.  They  were  physicians  of
much  more  than  ordinary  scientific  attainments,  and  of  great
devotion ;  and  Dr.  Wurmb,  at  least,  had  few  superiors  in  an
exact  and  thorough  knowledge  of  materia  medica.  In  their
"Clinical  Studies,"  published  in  1852,  tliey  tlius  express  ttie
posological  views  with  which  they  entered  on  the  charge  of
the  Hospital :


IN  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK,


"  We  have  given  almost  always  the  thirtitth  decimal  dilu-
tion, and  only  exceptionally  a  higher  or  a  lower  dilution.
■  •  We  propose  to  adhere  to  this  dilution  for  two
years  longer,  then  to  give  another  dilution  for  an  equally
long  period,  and  finally  to  give  for  a  similar  period  still
another  dilution.  Such  experiments  as  these  are  indispen-
sable to  the  solution  of  the  question  of  the  dose,  but  mani-
festly they  are  valid  only  in  the  case  of  disease  with  regard
to  which  the  preliminarj-  question,  What  can  Nature  do,  and
what  can  Art?  has  akcady  been  definitely  answered,  and
in  favor  of  the  latter?"

Here  is  the  plan  of  an  experiment  which,  if  faithfully
carried  out,  gives  promise  of  some  very  conclusive  data  on
the  subject  of  the  dose.  Such  questions  as  tliis  require  for
their  solution  a  multitude  of  instances  such  as  can  hardly
be  gathered  in  private  practice.  But  a  hospital  affords  an
appropriate  and  sufficient  field  for  their  collection.  The
hospital  of  Dr.  Wurmb  is  the  only  one  which  has  been
devoted  to  such  uses.

Before  the  expiration  of  the  three  periods,  of  three  years
each,  involved  in  the  plan  as  above  stated.  Dr.  Kasper  was
succeeded  by  Dr.  Martin  Eidherr,  who  has  published  in
the  (Esttrreichische  Zeitsehrift,  for  1 862,  the  result  of  the
ten  years'  experiment

It  seems  that  in  i860  the  Austrian  Homceopathic  Society
of  Vienna  proposed  as  a  subject  for  consideration  the  ques-
tion of  the  dose,  inviting  all  homceopathists  of  all  countries
to  take  part  in  the  discussion.  A  large  number  of  responses,
both  verbal  and  written,  were  made  to  this  invitation,  some
of  which  are  published  in  the  Austrian  Journal,  for  1862.
Dr.  Eidherr,  the  Editor  of  the  Journal,  remarks:  "These
discussions  have,  as  is  well  known,  led  as  yet  to  no  positive
result,  because  they  rest  exclusively  on  subjective  grounds.
While  some  record  most  brilliant  cures  effected  only  by  the
higher  dilutions,  othens  narrMe  similar  coses  cured  only  with
the  lower.  Consequently,  the  society  regards  the  question
\1


342


THE  USE  OF  HIGH  POTENCIES


as  5ti]]  an  open  one  and  calUfor  further  communications  oa.
the  subject"

At  this  point  it  was  suggested  that  the  material  in  the!
shape  of  clinical  records  which  had  been  for  ten  years  accu-
mulating in  the  archives  of  the  Leopoldstadt  Ho<tpital  might,
if  collated,  throw  some  further  light  on  the  subject.

Dr.  Eidherr  undertook  tlje  task.  He  resolved  to  confine
his  investigations  to  a  single  disease,  pneumonia  (which  by
tlie  way  is  very  prevalent  in  Vienna),  for  the  reason  that  the
diagnosis  of  this  disease  is  easy,  and  that,  by  means  of  the
physical  signs,  its  course  and  progress  and  decline  may  be
more  accurately  followed  and  observed  than  is  the  case  with
many  other  acute  diseases.

During  the  ten  years,  from  185010  1859  inclusive,  all  cases
in  the  Leopoldstadt  Hospital  had  been  treated  for  the  first
three  years  witli  the  thirtieth  decimal  dilution,  for  the  second
period  of  three  years  with  tlie  sixth,  and  for  the  remaining
four  years  with  the  fifteenth  decimal  dilution.  It  was  pro-
posed to  compare  tlie  results  of  the  treatment  of  pneumonia
during  these  three  periods.

But,  in  order  to  avoid  [a  fallacy  in  drawing  conclusions
from  this  comparison,  it  was  necessary,  first,  to  inquire
whether  the  Genius  Epidcmicus  was  the  same  for  these  three
periods,  or,  if  not  the  same,  how  great  an  influence,  and  in
favor  of  which  period,  did  the  difTcrcnce  exert?  1

To  meet  this  preliminary  question.  Dr.  Eidherr  made  a
study,  first,  of  those  conditions  which  favor  the  origin  and
spread  of  pneumonia:  and,  second,  of  the  prevalence  and
course  of  pneumonia  in  the  great  General  Hospital  of  Vienna
durini;  the  same  periods  of  time.

The  first  section  of  his  treatise  consists  of  tabular  state-
ments of  the  meteorological  phenomena  of  the  dcccnnium  in
question,  and  of  the  relations  of  these  phenomena  to  the
prevalence  of  pneumonia  as  observed  in  the  great  General
Hospital  of  Vienna.

The  second  section  comprises  short  and  succinct  accounts


IN  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK.


343


of  the  cases  of  pneumonia  treated  in  the  Lcopoldstadt
Hospital  during  the  three  periods  into  which,  as  already
stated,  the  dcccnnium  was  divided.

The  third  section  contains  a  statement  of  the  results  of
the  treatment  by  the  different  dilutions  used  during^  the
three  periods  in  question,  taking  into  account  the  modifying
influence  of  the  different  atmospheric  conditions  of  these
periods.

The  cases  occurring  during  the  three  periods  of  time  into
which  the  whole  period  of  ten  years  was  divided,  are  called
by  Dr.  Eidherr — Groups  i,  2.  3.

Group  No.  I,  embracing  the  years  1850,  1851  and  1852,
was  treated  exclusively  with  the  thirtieth  decimal  potency.

Group  No.  2,  embracing  the  years  1853,  1 854  and  1 85  5,
was  treated  exclusively  with  the  sixth  decimal  potency.

Group  No.  3,  embracing  the  years  1856.  1857,  1858  and
1859,  was  treated  exclusively  with  the  fifteenth  decimal
potency.

A  careful  estimate  of  the  different  meteorological  con-
ditions of  these  epochs  leads  Dr.  Eidherr  to  the  conclusion
that  during  the  first  epoch  the  atmospheric  conditions  were
most  favorable  to  the  prevalence  and  severity  of  pneumonia,
and  therefore  the  Uast  favorable  for  the  treatment ;  during
the  second  epoch  least  favorable  for  the  spread  and  severity
of  pneumonia,  and  therefore  the  most  favorable  for  the
treatment

In  observing  and  recording  cases  of  pneumonia  in  this
hospital,  the  physical  signs  have  always  been  carefully  noted.
and  records  have  been  made  of  the  following  points  in  the
history  of  each  case  :

r.  The  seat  of  the  infiltration.

2.  Its  duration,  reckoned  from  the  time  at  which  it  was
first  perceived  to  the  time  at  which  it  was  noticed  that  it
began  to  be  resolved  (?).

3.  The  time  at  which  resolution  of  the  infiltration  began.

4.  The  time  at  which  resolution  was  completed.


244


THE USE  OF  HIGH POTENCIES


5.  The  time  at  which  all  physical  signs  disappeared

6.  Duration  of  convalescence.

The  comparison  between  tlie  three  groups  is  made  with
reference  to  all  of  these  points.

The  results  are  stated  as  follows :

Group  I,  treated  with  the  thirtieth  decimal  dilution ;

The  average  duration  of  the  infiltration  was  three
days.

The  average  date  of  commencing  resolution  was  the  third
day.

The  average  date  of  completed  resolution  was  4.9  days
from  the  beginning.

The  average  date  of  vanishing  of  the  physical  signs  was,
as  concerns  the  infiltration,  7.  i  days ;  as  concerns  the  exuda-
tion, 12.3  days  from  the  beginning.

The  average  duration  of  convalescence  was  4.4  days.

Group  2,  treated  with  the  sixth  decimal  dilution  during
the  years  1853,  1834  and  1855  ;

The  average  duration  of  the  infiltration  was  4.1  days.

Resolution  began,  on  the  average,  in  3.5  days,  and  was
complete  in  6.9  days.

The  physical  signs  disappeared,  on  the  average,  as
concerns  the  infiltration,  in  9.3  days;  as  concerns  the
exudation,  in  20.3  days.

The  duration  of  the  convalescence  was,  on  the  average,
5.3  days.

Group  3,  treated  with  the  fifteenth  decimal  dilution,  during
the  years  1856,  1857,  1858  and  1859;

The  average  duration  of  infiltration  was  3.4  days.

Resolution  began  in  3.2  days.

It  was  complete  in  6.3  days.

The  physical  signs  disappeared,  so  far  as  the  infiltration
was  concerned,  in  10,3  days;  so  far  as  the  exudation  was
concerned,  in  18.  i  days.

Average  duration  of  convalescence,  4.S  daysL

To  recapitulate  the  above -^


IN  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK.  245

The  average  duration  of  the  infiltration  was :
For  Group  i,  3.0  days.
2.4.1 "

Resolution  began :

For  Group  i,  on  the  3d  day.

2.  - 3.5 "

3.  " 3-2 "
Resolution  was  complete :

For  Group  i,  on  the  4.9  day.

2,  " 6.9 "

3,  •' 6.3 "

The  physical  signs  of  the  infiltration  vanished :
For  Group  i,  on  the  7.1  day.
2, " 9.3 "
*'  3, " 10.3 "

The  physical  signs  of  the  exudation  vanished :
For  Group  i,  on  the  12.3  day.

2,  " 20.5 "

3.  " 18. I "

Dr.  Etdherr  gives  also  a  tabular  statement  of  the  average
aumber  of  days  during  which  each  case  of  each  group
remained  in  hospital — that  is,  the  total  duration  of  each  case
from  its  reception  to  its  dismissal,  as  follows  :

Group  I,  treated  with  the  thirtieth  decimal  dilution;  fifty-
five  cases  were  treated ;  their  aggregate  residence  in  the  hos-
pital amounted  to  680  days;  or  an  average  of  11. 3  days
each.

Group  2,  under  the  sixth  decimal  dilution;  thirty-one
cases,  606  days ;  an  average  of  19.5  days  for  each  case.

Group  3,  treated  with  the  fifteenth  decimal  dilution;  fifty-
four  cases,  and  795  days ;  an  average  of  14.6  days  for  each
case.


246


TllE  USE  or  HIGH POTENCIES


I  now  proceed  to  give  as  briefly  as  possible  the  conclusion
to  which Dr.  Eidiierr is  led  by  this  careful  study  of  his
statistics. He  says:  "This  is  the  most  extensive  experiment
that  has  ever  been  made,  bearing  on  the  question  of  the
dose. Its  subjects were 107 cases of  pneumonia. Each
case was the subject of careful investigation. Every
imaginable  care  was  taken  to  obviate  every  source  of  fallacy.**
The  experimenters  were  not  radical  homoeopathists. Their
prepossessions were  rather  against the  high potencies. I
can  bear  personal  testimony  to  the  fact  that,  in 1 85 1 ,  while «
the  thirtieth  dilution  was  the  standard  used  En  the  hospital,  ■
Dr.  Wurmb  frequently  expressed  himself  as  believing  that  "
statistics  would  decide  in  favor  of  lower  dilutions. It  was  ^
not  known  how  statistics  had decided  until Dr.  Eidhcrrfl
made  the  analysis  from  which  I  have  quoted,  and  which '
shows  that  in  every  point  uf  view  the  action  of  the  thirtieth
dilution,  in  so  acute  and  dangerous  a  disease  as  pneumonia,  is
more  certain  and  more  rapid  than  that  of  the  5fteenth  or
sixth  dilution,  and  that  the  fifteenth  is  preferable  to  the  sis
dilution — or, to  translate  the  decimal  into  the  ccntc$im<
scale,  the  fifteenth  is  better  than  the  seventh,  the  seventh
than  the  third.

Against  this  record  Dr.  Trinlcs  would  raise  in  vain  his
"ncH  credo"

If  we  refer  now  to  the  points  which  were  stated  in  iS;*
as  still  requiring  to  be-  proved  In  relation  to  the  high  poten-
cies, we  find  the  third  question  satisfactorily  solved  by  thi»^
experiment  in  the  Leopoldstadt  Hospital For  the  exper-
iment  proves  beyond  a  doubt,  that  the  higher  potencies  arc]
applicable  and  trustworthy  in  acute  as  well as in ckronii
diseases.

It  enables  us  also  to  give  a  probable  affirmative  anstvcr  to-j
the  first  question,  and  to  say  that  the  higher  arc,  at  least  so
far  as  pneumonia  Is  concerned,  to  be  prejcrrtd  to  the  lowtr
dilutions.

The  second  question,  viz.,  whether  higher  dilutions


a.is ,

theg

ixtkl

imaU^
:nth

orl


IN  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK.


347


oflener  succeed  in  curing  than  lower  dilutions,  is  left  unaf-
fected by  this  great  experiment.

Let  us  now  recapitulate  the  points  at  issue.  I  think  we
may  safely  state  that,  up  to  the  present  time,  experience
has  established  these  facts:  that  the  continued  diminution  of
the  material  quantity  of  a  drug  through  the  process  of
potcntization  does  not  diminish  the  curative  power  of  the
drug  when  homceopathically  applied  ;  that,  on  the  contrary,
the  process  of  potcntization  does  positively  increase  the
curative  power  of  a  drug  when  homceopathically  used;  that
this  increase  of  curative  power  is  progressive,  as  far  at  least
as  the  fifteenth  centesimal  dilution,  and  is  demonstrated
in  the  treatment  of  both  acute  and  chronic  diseases.

It  was  incumbent  on  the  advocates  of  the  higher  potencies
to  demonstrate  not  only  that  these  preparations  are  effica-
cious, nor  simply  that  they  are  equally  efficacious  witli  the
lower  potencies,  but  that  they  are  superior  in  efficacy.

This  has  been  shown  by  the  Vienna  experiment  up  to  a
certain  degree.  The  seventh  centesimal  has  been  shown  to
be  su[K.Tior  in  the  treatment  of  pneumonia  to  the  third,  and
the  fifteenth  to  the  seventh.  There  is  a  natural  desire  to
lind  tlie  linut  of  potcntization.  The  Vienna  experiment
gives  lis  no  reason  to  suppose  that  this  limit  has  been
attained  in  the  fifteenth  potency.

Many  most  eminent  practitioners  assert  for  what  are
technically  termed  the  "high  potencies,"  as  great  a  superi-
ority over  the  fifteenth  and  thirtieth  as  the  latter  have  been
shown  to  possess  over  the  third.  Cases  arc  accumulating  in
our  journals  which  go  to  corroborate  these  assertions.  We
cannot  refuse  to  believe  these  narrations.  While  they  have
not  yet  established  a  general  superiority  of  tlie  "high
potencies "  (sixtieth  to  two  hundredth)  over  the  fifteenth
and  tliirtjetli  for  the  treatment  of  all  cases,  acute  and  chronic,
they  nevertheless  prove  beyond  dispute  that  the  rapid  and
permanent  cure  of  both  acute  and  chronic  diseases  is  withia
their  scope.


THE  USE  OF  HIGH  POTEN'CIES


llMy  MUblUh,  moreover,  the  fact  that  in  many  cues
llww  hlith  potencies  (the  two  hundredth,  for  example)  cure
lUlliiii  fi  in  which  the  lower  potencies  of  the  same  drug  have
biM

'1  he  determination  of  absolute  superiority  and  of  definite
iiiiiiu  tif  increase  of  curative  power,  is  impossible  from  our
|ir«*cnt  data.

Amung  those  who  have  long  used  the  high  potencies  (!n
pjirticular  the  two  hundredth).  Dr.  von  Bccnninj^hauscn
itandi  pre-eminent  It  is  true  that  his  practice  lies  chiefly
ftinong  chronic  diseases.  Nevertheless,  many  acute  dLseases
ire  treated  solely  in  accordance  witli  his  directions.  He
has  for  many  years  used  exclusively  the  two  hundredth
latencies.  His  increasing  fame  and  practice  attest  the
validity  of  the  services  which  lie  renders  to  those  who
consult  him.  The  high  character  which  he  has  always
borne  as  aa  acute  and  sagacious  observer  of  natural  phe-
nomena, the  unblemished  reputation  which  he  has  sustained
throughout  his  long  and  eventful  life,  cause  his  observations
and  his  statements  to  be  received  witli  implicit  reliance  and
belief  by  ait  who  arc  at  all  cognizant  of  his  social  position.
He  does  not  hesitate  to  express  a  decided  conviction  of  the
great  superiority  of  the  high  potencies  over  tlie  tower,  in
both  acute  and  chronic  diseases.

Dr.  iEgidi,  who,  after  having,  on  their  first  introduction,
spoken  favorably  of  the  high  potencies,  retracted  to  some
extent  this  good  opinion,  has  recently  announced  as  the
result  of  a  long  course  of  experiment  in  his  private  practice,
embracing  the  history  of  more  than  4,000  cases,  a  clear  and
unequivocal  preference  for  the  high  potencies  in  both  acute
and  chronic  diseases.

Dr.  Battman  has,  within  the  last  two  year^,  published  a
aeries  of  cases  of  severe  membranous  croup,  and  of  very
dangerous  acute  pulmonar>'  affections,  cured  in  a  marvelous
manner  with  the  two  hundredth  potency;  and  basing  him-
self on  these  narraUons,  he  makes  a  warm  protest  against


IN  THE TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK.


349


the  irrational  conduct  of  those  homoeopathists  who,  at  the
same  time  that  they  object  to  the  illogical  conduct  of  the
allopathists  in  refusing  even  to  listen  to  any  evidence  in.
bvor  of  Homoeopathy,  obstinately  close  their  own  ears  to
all  that  is  alleged  in  behalf  of  the  high  potencies.

Of  six  physicians  of  Austria  and  Hunjjary  who  presented
written  essays  on  the  question  of  the  dose  to  the  Vienna
society,  none  denied  the  curative  action,  often  prompt  and
surprising,  of  the  high  potencies  (one  hnndrcdth  to  the  tlircc
hundredth)  in  both  acute  and  chronic  diseases.  Only  one
expressed  a  doubt  that  they  were  tn  any  case  superior  to  the
lower  potencies.  Two  did  not  hesitate  to  claim  such  superi-
ority for  them  in  decided  terms.

Dr.  Wurmb,  the  head  of  the  Leopoldstadt  Hospital,  states'
It  often  remedies  in  the  higher  dilutions  act,  where  the
>wer  dilutions  of  the  same  remedy  had  failed  to  act  He
pves  an  instance  in  which  Belladonna^"  effected  a  cure  in
chronic  migraine,  in  which  a  lower  potency  of  the  same
remedy  had  failed  to  do  any  good.  The  one  hundredth  and
two  hundredth  potencies  are  now  not  infrequently  adminis-
tered in.  the  Leopoldstadt  Hospital.  Dr.  Wurmb  remarks*
that  "  since  he  has  had  experience  with  the  one  hundredth
dilution  prepared  by  Dr.  Eidherr,  and  has  satisfied  himself
of  the  wonderful  effects  which  often  result  from  them,  he
the  thirtieth  or  any  other  potency."  He  docs  not  state
what  he  considers  to  be  "suitable  cases."  It  is  probable
that  he  does  not  consider  his  experience  to  be  great  enough,
as  yet,  to  justify  hini  in  laying  down  any  general  rules  on
the  subject.  It  is  likely  that  he  decides  for  each  particular
case,  according  to  his  view  of  probahilitUs,  and  that  he
rcannot  always  give  a  clear  reason  for  his  preference  of  one
'potency  over  anotlier.  Each  case  thus  treated  may  be
regarded  as  in  some  sort  an  experiment — a  contribution  to
that  multitude  of  instances  from  an  analysis  of  which  we
'  t£jt.,  Zeit.,  I.  15S,  iS6a.  ■  Loc  dt.  3,  p.  157.


350


THE USB OF mCH POTENQES


may  hope  to  deduce,  at  some  future  time,  a  general  law  of

posehgy.

If,  after  this  general  view  of  the  evidence  on  the  subject
of  the  high  potencies,  it  be  appropriate  for  me.  on  such  an
occasion  as  the  present,  to  state  my  own  experience  and
methods,  it  may  be  done  very  briefly.

Before  I  had  fairly  entered  to  any  great  extent  upon  the
responsibilities  of  the  practice  of  medicine,  I  had  the  advan-
tage of  observing  the  practice  of  some  very  eminent  physi-
cians and  of  listening  to  the  counsel  uf  others.

Not  to  mention  American  physicians,  I  heard  in  England
chiefly  the  advocates  of  the  low  and  the  lowest  potencies.
The  high  potencies  were  at  that  time  rarely  mentioned  in
England  except  in  terms  of  ridicule.  And  the  contempt
which  the  assumed  non-material  nature  of  these  potencies
inspired  in  the  matter-of-fact  mind  of  that  taurine  nation-
ality, whose  devotion  to  the  pound  avoirdupois  is  even
greater,  if  that  were  possible,  than  to  the  pound  sterling,
was  cordially  extended  to  the  intellectual  acutcncss  and  the
scientific  acquirements  of  all  who  believed  in  these  potencies
and  who  used  them.  Since  that  period  the  cause  of  the  high
potencies  has  been  nobly  advocated  in  England,  by  a  few  of
those  strong  men.  who  are  the  true  glory  of  the  nation.

Passing  from  England  to  Westphalia,  I  enjoyed  free  and
full  and  tong-continued  opportunities  to  observe  the  practice
of  Dr.  von  Bcenninghausen,  who  used  the  two  hundredth
potency  exclusively.  There  was,  certainly,  in  his  practice,
less  parade  of  scientific  auxiliaries  than  I  had  seen  at  the
English  hospitals  or  in  the  English  dispensaries ;  but  I  do  not
think  the  diagnosis  was  less  accurate  on  that  account  I  am
very  sure  tliat  the  success  of  the  treatment  left  but  Uttlc  to
be  desired.  Though  some  acute  diseases  were  here  treated
with  high  potencies  under  my  observation,  yet  the  majority
were  chronic  cases,  and,  deeply  impressed  with  the  great
responsibility  involved  in  my  judgments,  I  was  hardly  ready,
from  these  observations,  to  conclude  on  the  advantage  of


IN  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK.


2St


using  high  potencies  in  a  general  practice.  Nevertheless,
the  cfTcct  of  these  observations  was  such  as  to  satisfy  mc  of
the  efficacy  of  the  higher  potencies  in  all  forms  of  diseases.
The  question  remained,  "Arc  they  superior  to  the  lower  ?"
Stapf,  who  was  then  living  in  retirement,  counseled  me  to
use  the  high  potencies  in  chronic  diseases,  and  thought  the
medium  potencies  were  all  that  could  be  desired  in  acute
diseases.  He  had  no  statistics  of  comparative  observations
by  which  to  justify  his  opinions.

In  Vienna,  Wurmb  and  Kaspar  were  in  tlie  middle  of  the
first  epoch  of  the  deccnnium  of  which  Eidherr  has  given  us
the  analysis.  They  were  treating  all  diseases  with  the  thir-
tieth decimal  dilution.  Their  examinations  of  patients  were
minute  and  masterly,  their  prescriptions  careful,  their  suc-
cess very  striking.

Fleischmann,  at  the  same  time,  was  giving  the  mother
tincture  or  tlie  lowest  dilutions.  His  diagnosis  was  careless,
his  success  neither  rapid  nor,  except  as  compared  with  heroic
allopalliic  treatment,  very  striking.  His  prescriptions  were
not  accurate.  He  did  not  individualize  his  cases,  but  pre-
the  subject  of  the  potency,  hi.s  opinions,  I  learned  from  him-
self, were  immovably  made  up.  I  perceived  that  he  had
ceased  to  be  capable  of  learning,  although  he  still  lived ;  that,
in  knowledge,  as  in  stature,  he  had  attained  his  growth ;
ossification  was  complete  in  his  perceptive  intellect  no  less
than  in  his  physical  skeleton.

In  Paris,  Tcssier  was  treating  acute  diseases  in  the  hospital
Ste.  Marguerite  with  the  sixth,  twelfth  and  fifteenth  dilu-
tions. His  success  exceeded  that  of  Fleischmann.  It  was
inferior  to  that  of  Wurmb,  but  it  was  easy  to  perceive  how
inferior  he  was  to  that  excellent  physician  in  minute  and
comparative  knowledge  of  the  materia  medica.

In  Paris,  Dr.  Terry  was  prescribing  at  his  dispensary  the
two  hundredth  potency,  with  but  few  exceptions,  in  all  forms
of  disease. The  reports  indicated  a  very  wonderful  success,


352


THE  USE  OF  HIGH  POTENCIES


but,  from  the  nature  of  a  dispensary  practice,  this  could  not
be  made  the  subject  of  exact  observation.

My  conclusions  from  all  these  observations  were  favorable
to  the  high  potencies,  so  far  as  to  admit  their  energetic  action
on  acute  as  well  as  chronic  diseases  and  their  ^^«<rra/ supe-j
riority  in  the  treatment  of  the  latter ;  but  I  was  not  satisfted'
that  tliey  were  so  trustworthy,  as  a  general  rule,  in  the  treat-
ment of  acute  diseases  as  to  be  preferable  to  the  lower  poten-
cies. I  therefore  began,  in  my  own  practice,  with  the  use  of
the  lower  and  medium  dilutions  (third  to  twelfth  and
fifteenUi)  in  acute  diseases.  When  very  sure  that  my
selection  of  the  remedy  was  entirely  correct  and  that  the
case  would  not  suffer  should  my  first  prescription  prove
inert,  I  ventured,  during  the  first  few  years  of  my  practice,  to
give  a  high  potency  in  acute  diseases,  t  now  look  back  on
this  period  with  wonder  tliat  the  idea  of  a  definite  and  direct
relation  between  the  curative  power  and  the  material
quantity  of  a  drug  should  have  been  so  hard  to  eradicate
from  my  mind.

Experience  of  tlie  action  of  the  higher  potencies,  on  my
own  person,  in  very  acute  illness,  first  fully  convinced  me—
perhaps,  because,  in  my  own  case  I  took  the  risk  of  trying
the  experiment  more  freely  and  fully  than  I  had  ever  done
in  the  case  of  others.

For  tfie  last  five  years'  I  have  used  the  high  potencu
(two  hundredth  of  my  own  manufacture  and  of  Lchrmann's,
indiscriminately)  in  all  forms  of  disease  that  occur  in  a
general  practice.  I  am  very  sure  that  my  practice  has
grown  more  successful  every  year.  While  I  trust  that  an
increasing  knowledge  of  the  Materia  Medica  may  have  con-
tributed greatly  to  tliis  result,  I  cannot  be  mistaken  in  the
belief  tliat  much  is  also  due  to  my  more  and  more  frequent
use  of  the  high  potencies.

I  cannot  say  that  cver>'  prescription  has  done  everything
I  expected  or  hoped  from  it. Nobody's  practice  can  be

^  Written  in  1863.


IN  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK.


253


free  from  painful  failures.  In  such  cases,  wherever  I  have
been  tolerably  sure  that  my  choice  of  remedy  was  correct,  I
have  repeated  the  same  remedy  in  a  higher  or  lower  potency
as  the  cose  might  be,  and  while  I  have  collected  from  my
practice  many  instances  in  which  a  high  potency  has  acted
promptly  where  a  low  had  failed  to  act,  I  have  noted  only
one  case  in  which  a  high  potency  acted  but  inefficiently
while  a  lower  gave  prompt  and  complete  relief.

From  my  own  experience,  tlien,  the  presumption  would
lie  in  favor  of  the  high  potencies  in  both  acute  and  chronic
diseases.

A  few  instances  will  serve  to  illustrate  what  has  been  said.
They  are  presented  only  as  illustrations,  by  no  means  as  the
evidence  on  which  my  convictions  rest.

A  gentleman  who  had  suffered  many  years  from  necro^
of  the  femur  was  subject  to  acute  attacks  of  periostitis.  The
twelfth  potency  of  Asafcetida  was  found  to  relieve  his
suffering,  and  repeated  doses  of  it  generally  effected  a  cure
/ithin  three  or  four  days.  After  treating  several  attacks  in
this  way.  I  gave  him,  at  the  commencement  of  a  fresh  attack,
a  doac  of  .Asafcetida*^.  The  cure  was  directed  in  the  space
>f  six  hours.  A  difference  so  remarkable  was  very  obvious
to  the  patient,  who,  learning  from  me  the  difference  between
lis  and  my  former  prescriptions,  requested  to  be  treated
Iways  thereafter  with  the  two  hundredth.  Here,  whatever
cavils  may  be  raised  about  the  diagnosis  or  other  points,  tlie
feet  remains  incontestable,  thai  attacks  which  required  for
their  cure  several  days  and  repeated  doses  of  Asafcetida'*,
■were  cured  in  six  hours  by  a  single  dose  of  the  two
hundredth.  Could  it  be  that  repeated  treatment  of  these
.attacks  had  modified  their  severity,  and  that  the  ameliora-
[^tion  chanced  to  coincide,  in  point  of  time,  with  the  change
>f  potency  ?  To  satisfy  myself  on  this  point,  I  once  reversed
l-thc  experiment,  and  without  my  patient's  knowledge  gave
hlie  twelfth  instead  of  the  two  hundredth  potency.  The
ick  came  on  with  its  ancient  severity  and  persistencci


2H


THE USE OK HIGH POTEXaES


much  to  my  patient's  disgust,  who  was  abundantly  satisfied
with  the  high  potency,  but  much  ashamed  of  mj  want  of
con^dcncc.

Even  after  I  had  become  quite  satisfied  of  the  superiority
of  high  potencies  in  most  acute  diseases.  I  yet  hesitated  to
employ  them  io  a  malady  so  fearful  and  so  rapid  as  croup.
In  this  I  still  adhered  to  the  low  (the  third)  dilutions  of
Aconite,  or  Spongia,  or  Hcpar,  as  the  case  might  require,  or
to  the  watery  (first  centesimal)  dilution  of  Rromium  or
Iodine,  if  these  remedies  were  indicated.  Notwithstanding
I  had  actually  witnessed  most  surprising  success  in  Dr.  von
Bcenninghausen's  practice  with  the  t^vo  hundredth  potencies
in  severe  croup,  I  hesitated  to  use  them.  I  argued  to
myself:  "These  low  potencies  have  served  me  well.  The
majority  use  them.  !  do  not  know  that  tlie  high  are  better,
even  if  ihcy  be  as  good.  The  success  with  them  may  be
exceptional,  I  dare  not  rink  the  los.s  of  time  which  would
accrue  from  an  unsuccessful  experiment  with  them."

Thus  it  turned  out  that  1  never  used  the  high  potencies
until,  three  years  ago,  in  the  most  severe  case  of  membran-
ous croup  I  ever  saw,  the  low  potencies  in  which  I  had
always  trusted  failed  me  utterly,  and  I  knew  not  what  else
to  do.  A  resort  to  the  use  of  the  t^vo  hundredth  potencies
of  Aconite,  Hepar  sulphuris  and  Spongia  saved  my  patient
from  this  extremity  of  danger,  and  satisfied  me  that  a  trial
of  the  high  potencies  in  the  outset  of  an  attack  of  croup,
instead  of  involving  a  risk  of  wasting  time,  does  in  truth
obviate  such  a  risk  from  the  employment  of  the  lower
potencies.  From  tliis  time  on,  in  the  treatment  of  croup,  I
have  uniformly  begun  with  the  two  hundredth  potency  of
whatever  remedy  was  indicated.  My  success  has  been  more
unifonn  and  much  more  rapidly  attained  than  ever  before.

My  first  use  of  a  high  potency  of  Bromine  was  accidental
remedy  was  indicated,  I  found  that  the  crude  substance  or  a
low  dilution was  not  to be  obtained. I  had the  two


IN  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK.  255

hundredth  potency  in  my  pockct-casc.  I  gave  it  with  a
result  equally  happy,  and  much  more  speedy  than  I  had
ever  before  witnessed.  This  was  altogether  contrar>'  to  my
preconceived  notions  concerniog  Bromine,  and  it  summarily
upset  a  very  pretty  chemical  theory  I  had  formed.

As  already  remarked,  I  have  sometimes  met  with  facts  of
a  contrary  significance.  In  a  case  of  chronic  asthma,  of
great  severity,  I  have  recently  found  Glonoinc  of  the  greatest
Other  at  hand.  W^en  the  action  of  this  dose  was  exhausted
I  gave  the  two  hundredth.  The  result  was  by  no  means
satisfactory.  The  sixth  again  produced  happy  effects  as
before.  Repeated  experiments  of  this  kind  convinced  me
that  in  this  instance  the  high  potency  did  nef  act  so  favor-
aWy  or  so  efficiently  as  the  low.  Whether  this  peculiarity
should  be  accounted  for  by  assuming  an  idiosyncrasy  on
the  part  of  the  patient,  or  a  peculiarity  of  Glonoine  which
renders  it  incapable  of  high  potentization,  or  whether  the

taction  of  the  Glonoinc  in  this  case  will  prove  to  have  been
only  palliative,  and  therefore  temporary,  is  a  question  which
can  only  be  solved  by  a  wider  experience  than  I  possess  in

t'the  use  of  various  potencies  of  this  new  but  valuable
remedy.'

But  this  fact  that  a  low  potency  succeeded  where  a  higher
bad  failed,  together  with  similar  facts  reported  by  other  prac-
titioners, must  have  a  bearing  upon  general  conclusions.

In  conclusion,  I  think  the  following  statements  arc  war-
ranted :

1.  In  prescribing,  the  first  essential  is  the  correct  choice
of  the  remedy.  The  second  point — which  is  also,  in  many
cases,  though  net  always,  essentiai-^is  the  judicious  choice
of  the  potency,

*Theiub»equcnt  hL»tory  of  (hit  cue  recntred  with  iu  arigin&l  severity,  and

coniinnft  the  suspicion  thai' the  great  no  foim  of  Ulcinoinc  (not  of  any  other

relief  aSottkd  hy  Giotioine  wan  pallU-  rcmetly  ih*t  I  tried)  availed  to  give

tive> Aficr  a  few  months  the  disease  relief.


256


THE  USE  OF HIGH POTENCIES.


2.  That,  in  both  acute  and  chronic  diseases,  the  prefer-
ence, other  things  being  equal,  is  to  be  given  to  the  higher
over  the  lower  potencies.  The  experience  of  VVurmb  shows
that,  in  severe  pneumonia,  the  fifteenth  is  to  be  preferred  to
tlie  seventh  and  the  seventh  to  the  third  (centesimal),  t
should  go  further  and  say  tliat,  in  general,  preference  should
be  given  to  still  higher  potencies,  even  to  the  two  hun-
dredth.

3.  Experience  shows  that,  while  the  majority  of  cases,
both  acute  and  chronic,  arc  cured  more  speedily  by  the  high
than  by  the  lower  potencies,  yet,  in  some  cases,  the  converse
is  observed.  No  explanation  of  this  difference  has  been
discovered,  nor  can  its  occurrence  be  foreseen  in  any  case.
While  therefore  the  presumption,  in  every  case,  being  in
fevor  of  the  high  potencies,  the  treatment  should  be  begun
with  them,  nevertheless,  should  no  favorable  result  ensue,
recourse  should  be  then  had  to  lower  potencies,  provided
always  there  be  a  reasonable  certainty  that  the  remedy  has
been  rightly  selected.

4.  The  question,  whether  the  "high  potencies"  are  more
generally  successful  than  tlie  lower,  and  in  what  proportion
they  are  so,  is  yet  to  be  determined  by  statistics  drawn  from
methodical  experiment.

5.  A  general  law  for  the  a  priori  selection  of  the  potency
suitable  for  a  concrete  case,  if  such  a  law  be  possible,  is  yet
to  be  discovered


REPLY  TO  A  LETTER  ON  HIGH  POTENCIES.


The  questions  contained  in  the  follawing  letter,  recently
received,  represent  a  class  of  queries  that  are  frequently
propounded  both  orally  and  in  correspondence.  Tt  has
appeared  not  inappropriate  to  publish  a  general  reply  to
these  and  similar  questions:

"  I.  In  what  form  do  you  use  these  potencies,  in  the  shape
of  pellets  or  liquids?

*'  2.  Do  you  use  the  decimal  or  the  ctntesimat  scale  in  the
preparation  of  the  high  potencies  ?

"3.  Do  you  repeat  the  high  potencies  in  rapid  succession
in  acute  diseases,  as  you  do  the  low  preparations  ?

"4.  If  you  use  pellets,  do  you  consider  them  perfectly
reliable?  and  how  many,  as  a  general  rule,  constitute  a  dose,
either  dry  or  taken  in  water  ?

"5.  Do  you  alternate  the  high  potencies,  or  do  you  rely
upon  the  single  remedy  ?

"6.  Do  you  believe  that  the  high  potencies,  fronri  your
own  experience  in  the  use  of  them  and  from  what  you  have
beheld  in  the  practice  of  others,  are  far  superior,  in  all
respects,  to  the  low  preparations  as  remedial  agents  ?

"Some  of  these  questions  may  seem  in  themselves  to  be
insignificant,  but  I  do  not  consider  tliem  so,  for  in  making
my  first  trial  I  wish  to  start  right,  that  the  experiment
may  be  made  fairly,  with  a  sincere  desire  to  know  the  truth,
the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth.

"  In  conclusion,  let  me  say  that  you  may  rest  assured  your
answers  to  this  communication  will  be  kept  perfectly  private,
and  no  publicity  (as  coming  from  you)  given  them.

••Permit  me  to  repeat  that  it  is  only  a  sincere  desire  to
18


258


REPLY  TO A LETTER


seek  out  and  find  the  truth  that  has  led  mc  tlius  to  trouble
you."

We  heartily  respect  our  correspoodeat's  earnest  desire  to
get  at  the  "whole  truth,"  and  to  "start  fair"  in  hisexperi.
mcnt;  and  wc  respect  his  hesitation  to  use  the  high  potencies
until  he  should  have  a  reasonable  assurance  that  la  so  dotng
he  would  not  be  hazarding  the  interests  of  his  patients.  We
take  this  public  manner  of  replying  to  his  questions,  partly
with  a  view  of  convincing  him  that  we  have  no  wish  that  our
"answers  to  this  communication"  should  be  "kept  strictly
private."  On  the  contrary,  we  should  be  glad  to  have
"publicity  (as  coming  from  us)  given  them."  For  they  are
expressions  of  our  honest  convictions,  the  result  of  as  careful
observations  and  as  cautious  and  complete  experiments  as
we  have  up  to  the  present  time  been  capable  of  making.
They  express  our  present  opinion, — tliose  views  in  accord-
ance with  which  we  shape  our  daily  practice.

But  wc  hold  ourselves  bound  by  them  only  so  long  as
they  shall  continue  to  be  our  honest  convictions.  Should
further  observation  and  more  extended  experience  satisfy  us
that  any  of  our  present  positions  arc  untenable  we  shall
gladly  abandon  them  for  others,  and  shall  then,  likewise,  be
not  only  willing  but  anxious  to  have  "publicity  (as  coming
from  us)  given "  to  lliese  new  views.  The  object  of  our
professional  life  is  to  find  out  the  truth  and  to  shape  our
practice  accordingly.  Consistency  to  this  object  is  true
consistency ;  while  consistency  to  any  form  of  opinion  or
doctrine  that  may  at  one  time  have  been  supposed  to  be  the
truth  and  proclaimed  by  us  as  such, — consistency  to  such
opinion  merely  because  wc  may  have  once  publicly  uttered  it,
—  this  is  the  basest  and  most  Ignoble  bigotry  and  cowardice.

In  the  article'  to  which  our  correspondent  refers,  we  had
no  object  but  to  express  frankly  and  plainly  the  views  whicli
govern  us  in  the  practice  of  medicine.  Wc  would  call  his
attention  to  the  fact  that  the greater  part  of  the  article

■  ■•  The  Um  of  Hifh  Potencies  in  tli«  Tteaimnit  of  ibe  Sick*"


A


ON HIGH POTENCIES.


259


consisted  of  citations  of  the  ofHnions  and  experiences  of  other
practitioncis  whose  conclusions  were  but  corroborated  by
our  own.

I.  Tn  what  form  do  you  use  these potei^ies,  in  the  shape  ef
pellets  or  of  liquids  f

As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  use  them  in  the  form  of  peilets.
As  a  matter  of  faith,  we  know  no  difference  between  pellets,
pills,  triturations  or  liquids.  The  pellet  is  merely  a  conven-
ient means  for  dividing  a  drop  of  liquid  into  a  number  of
equal  parts,  and  it  is  for  this  object  that  we  use  them.  Wc
have  been  in  the  habit  of  buying  unmcdicated  pellets  or
globules  at  Smith's  Pharmacy,  and  medicating  them  with
liquid  potencies  of  our  own  preparation.  Pellets  thus  medi-
cated we  find  retain  their  remedial  powers  for  several  years
at  least, — exactly  how  long  we  cannot  say.  They  arc  so
much  more  portable  and  more  convenient  to  administer  than
liquids,  that  this  furnishes  us  a  sufficient  reason  for  preferring
tlicm  to  the  liquid  form  of  prescriptions,  A  writer  in  tlic
British  foumal  of  Homceopathy,  some  years  ago,  published
an  essay  on  the  Globule  versus  the  Pillule,  making  out  a
very  bad  case  for  the  unlucky  globule  as  calculated  to  bring
Homcropathy  into  contempt  in  the  eyes  of  persons  not  indoc-
trinated. There  is  something  laughable,  if  it  were  not
deplorable,  in  this  argument,  the  pitii  of  which  ts  Uiis :  "We
give  small  doses,  to  be  sure,  but  let  us  not,  by  using  the
pellet,  appear  to  give  small  ones;  let  us  u.se  as  big  a  pill  as
anybody  that  we  may  not  seem  to  give  a  small  dose,  and
may  not  rudely  jostle  the  prejudices  of  our  patients."
But  surely,  if  contempt  would  have  damaged  Homoeopathy,
this  luckless  science,  despised,  scorned,  ridiculed,  and,  scores
of  limes,  extinguished  by  Homeric  laughter,  should  have
been  done  for  long  ago !  To  adopt  and  defend  this  much
contemned  science,  and  yet  to  slirink  from  the  obvious
smaltncss  of  a  pcllct-dosc — is  not  this  "to  strain  at  a  gnat
and  swallow  a  camel."

Nothing  wilt  gain  the  confidence  of  a  patient  so  surely  as


26o  REPLY  TO  A  LETTER

st4ccess  /  His  confidence,  once  gained  by  success,  cannot  be
shaken  by  the  form  of  your  dose !  Yes,  it  may  though  t  If
he  sees  that  while  your  doctrines  require  you  to  give  small
doses,  you  yet  dissemble  and  juggle,  and,  by  using  large
pills  and  lozenges  and  mixtures,  try  to  make  it  appear  that
you  are  giving  as  large  doses  as  your  Old-School  neighbor,
he  will  suspect  that  your  faith  in  the  system  you  profess  is
not  really  strong,  and  he  will  have  doubts  of  both  you  and
your  system.  The  sick  man  who  feels  that  you  are  curing
him,  cares  not  a  straw  for  the  logical  improbabilities  of  your
doctrines,  nor  for  the  scientific  difficulties  attending  the  expla-
nation of  the  action  of  your  little  dose.  Large  or  small, —
much  or  nothing, — if,  under  your  auspices,  his  health  return,
he  will  have  faith  equally  in  yourself  and  in  your  methods.

We  have  been  amazed  at  much  that  has  been  said  and
written  on  this  subject  Our  own  patients  have  rarely
remarked  upon  the  pellet.  One,  who  had  never  seen  them
before,  once  said  to  us,  "  Do  you  really  hope  to  cure  me
with  those  tiny  pills?"  "Yes,  certainly."  "I  should  not
believe  they  could  possibly  have  any  power"  "Why?
Because  they  are  so  fine  and  small  for  pills?"  "Yes."
"Then,  my  dear  sir,  instead  of  regarding  them  as  'fine
pills,'  consider  them  to  be  very  coarse  granular  powder,  and
you  cannot  fail  to  be  impressed,  a  priori,  with  their  immense
power!"  He  perceived  the  absurdity  of  his  objection,
which  was  to  the  outward  form  and  not  to  the  inherent
power.  The  success  of  the  prescription  satisfied  him  of  the
virtue  of  little  pills.

Another  patient  objected  to  the  very  small  vials  of  my
pocket-case.  I  replied  they  were  a  matter  of  convenience
to  me,  but  if  he  would  be  better  satisfied  I  would,  next  day,
bring  his  dose  in  a  quart  bottle  and  pour  out  the  same  quan-
tity (pellets).  He  also  perceived  that  his  objection  was
frivolous,  and  was  content.

2.  Do  you  use  the  decimal  or  centesimal  scale  in  the  prepa-
ration of  the  high  potencies  ?


ON HIGH  POTENCIES.


259


consisted  of  citations  of  the  opinions  and  experiences  of  other
practitioners  whose  conclusions  were  but  corroborated  by
our  own.

I .  In  what  form  da  you  use  these  potencies^  in  the  shape  of
pellets  or  of  liijuuis  ?

As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  use  thcra  in  the  form  of  pellets.
As  a  matter  of  faith,  we  know  no  difference  between  pellets,
pills,  triturations  or  liqviids.  The  pellet  is  merely  a  conven-
ient means  for  dividing  a  drop  of  liquid  into  a  number  uf
equal  parts,  and  it  is  for  this  object  that  we  use  them.  We
have  been  in  the  habit  of  buying  unmedicated  pellets  or
globules  at  Smith's  Pharmacy,  and  medicating  them  with
liquid  potencies  of  our  own  preparation.  Pellets  thus  medi-
cated wc  find  retain  their  remedial  powers  for  several  years
at  least, — exactly  how  long  we  cannot  say.  They  arc  so
much  more  portable  and  more  convenient  to  administer  than
liquids^  that  this  furnishes  us  a  sufficient  reason  for  preferring
them  to  the  liquid  form  of  prescriptions.  A  writer  in  the
British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,  some  years  ago,  published
an  essay  on  the  Globule  versus  the  Pillule,  making  out  a
very  bad  case  for  the  unlucky  globule  a.t  calculated  to  bring
Homceopathy  into  contempt  in  the  eyes  of  persons  not  indoc>
trinatcd.  There  is  something  laughable,  if  it  were  not
deplorable,  in  this  argument,  the  pith  of  which  is  this:  "VVc
give  small  doses,  to  be  sure,  but  let  us  not.  by  using  the
pellet,  appear  to  give  small  ones ;  let  us  use  as  big  a  pill  as
anybody  that  we  may  not  seem  to  give  a  small  dose,  and
may  not  rudely  jostle  the  prejudices  of  our  patients."
But  surely,  if  contempt  would  have  damaged  Homotopathy,
this  luckless  science,  despised,  scorned,  ridiculed,  and,  scores
of  times,  extinguished  by  Homeric  laughter,  should  have
been  done  for  long  ago!  To  adopt  and  defend  this  much
contemned  science,  and  yet  to  shrink  from  the  obvious
smallness  of  a  pellct-dosc — is  not  this  "  to  strain  at  a  gnat
and  swallow  a  camel"

Nothing  will  gain  the  confidence  of  a  patient  so  burcly  as


262  REPLY  TO  A LETTER

sometimes  direct,  particularly  in  cases  that  have  been  actively
treated  by  allopathic  physicians  before  we  were  called,  and  in
which  we  apprehend  a  sluggish  response  to  remedies,  a
repetition  of  the  dose  every  few  hours,  until  some  ameiiora-
tion  or  decided  aggravation  appear,  but  we  always  order  a
suspension  of  the  remedy  as  soon  as  either  is  manifest.

2.  We  know  of  no  clear  distinction  between  acute  and
chronic  diseases  on  which  to  base  a  difference  in  treatment
Indeed  no  difference  whatever,  unless  it  be  one  analogous
to  that  which  Hahnemann  laid  down,  viz. :  that  chronic
diseases  are  based  on  the  awakening  of  miasms  that  had
hitherto  lain  dormant  in  the  system.

For  instance,  is  scarlatina  an  acute  disease  ?  Assuredly  it
is  so  regarded.  Yet,  on  the  third  day,  scarlatina  often  shows
that  it  has  awakened  and  ingrafted  itself  upon  the  scrofulous
(or  psoric  f)  taint  in  the  patient's  constitution  and  then,
surely,  it  becomes  typically  chronic.  This  is  an  example
of  what  we  see  happen  in  all  forms  of  disease.  It  prevents
an  available  distinction  between  acute  and  chronic  diseases.

We  can  assure  our  correspondent  that  it  is  safe  and
advantageous  to  strictly  follow  the  Hahnemannian  rule
about  the  repetition  of  the  dose  in  acute  no  less  than  in
chronic  diseases.  But  let  us  anticipate  a  possible  confusion
in  his  mind.  Some  writers — Dr.  Drysdale  we  are  surprised
to  see  among  them — seem  to  think  that  Hahnemann,  when
he  said,  "  Watt  till  the  first  dose  shall  have  exhausted  its
action,"  meant  to  say,  "Do  not  repeat  the  dose  until  that
period  shall  have  elapsed  which  I  have  indicated  in  the
Materia  Medica  as  the  duration  of  action  of  each  drug."
This  period  for  some  drugs  is  several  days,  for  others  several
weeks  or  even  months.  We  do  not  so  understand  him.
The  duration  of  action  of  a  remedy  on  the  healthy  subject
(prover)  furnishes  no  criterion  of  the  duration  of  its  action
on  the  sick.  Again,  the  duration  of  its  action  on  one  sick
person  furnishes  no  criterion  of  the  duration  of  its  action  on
another  sick  person. Surely  the  vital  processes  are  much


OK  HIGH  POTENaBS.


263


more  rapid  in  acute  pneumonia  than  they  arc  in  tubercu-
losis. Is  it  not  probable  that  the  duration  of  action  of  a
dose  of  medicine  would  be  shorter  in  tlie  former  Uian  in
the  latter  ?

We  suppose  Hahnemann  meant  as  follows:  "  If  ameliora-
tion follows  a  dose  of  medicine,  do  not  repeat  the  dose  until
the  amelioration  ceases  Co  progress,  Then,  if  the  symptoms
be  the  same  as  before,  though  mitigated  in  severity,  repeat
the  dose.  If  the  symptoms  be  dilTerent,  study  llie  case
anew  and  make  another  selection  of  remedy."  It  is  in  tliis
sense  that  we  have  understood  and  that  we  apply  Hahne-
mann's rule.  Not  pretending  that  we  do  not  often,  through
crrorn  of  judgment,  infringe  it,  we  arc  sure  that  whenever
"we  do  so,  misfortune  follows,  and  that  in  proportion  to  our
faithfulness,  so  is  our  success.

In  respect  of  the  repetition  of  doses,  as  well  as  the  form  of
the  prescription,  wc  have  no  difficulty  with  our  patients.
Patients  arc  like  soldiers;  they  believe  in  a  man  who  believes
in  himscir  Wc  say  this  in  all  humility,  for,  in  a  matter  of
science,  belief  in  one's  self  is  faith  in  the  laws  one  has  under-
taken to  carry  out  in  practice.  And  if  the  physician  show
confidence  in  his  methods,  his  patients  will  yield  themselves
implicitly  to  his  guidance.  The  prejudice  in  favor  of  large
and  many  doses  is  a  relic  of  past  ages,  when  the  practitioner
was  paid,  not  for  his  skill  and  personal  services,  but  for  the
meduin^s  he  furnished, — a  barbarous  usage,  which,  along
with  slavery,  we  received  from  our  British  progenitors.
Unlike  them,  we  have  discarded  the  former  but  not  the
latter.

4,  If  you  use  pfliets,  do  you  consider  than  perfectly  re-
liable T  Assuredly,  or  else  we  would  not  use  tliem.  We
medicate  them  ourselves.

And,  hovi  many  constitute  a  dosef  If,  properly  medi-
cated, one  is  as  good  as  one  hundred.  As  there  is  a  possi-
bility that,  in  medicating  several  thousands  at  one  operation^
a  pellet  here  and  tliere  may  fail  to  get  saturated,  we  usually


264  REPLY  TO  A  LETTER

give  about  four  to  six. We  use  the  smallest  pellets  as  most
easily  and  surely-  medicated.

5.  Do  you  alternate  the  high  potencies^  or  do  you  rely  upom
the  single  remedy  f

Here  again  our  friend  confounds  a  principle  and  quantity.
If  it  be  right  and  advantageous  to  alternate  the  low,  it  is
right  and  advantageous  to  alternate  the  high  potencies.
But,  in  fact,  we  do  not  alternate  at  all.  We  always  rely  on
the  single  remedy  at  one  time.  Dr.  Drysdale  says  that
everybody  alternates,  and,  therefore,  there  must  be  some
necessity  for  the  practice.  But  his  illustrations  are  so  far
fetched,  and  his  definition  of  alternation  is  so  contrary  to
the  conceptions  which  all  other  homceopathicians,  from
Hahnemann  down,  have  had  on  the  subject,  that,  notwith-
standing our  respect  for  Dr.  Drysdale,  we  must  repeat,  in
the  very  face  of  his  learned  paper,  tliat  we  do  not  alternate.

Our  understanding  of  the  practice  of  alternation,  and  our
objections  to  it  were  stated,  as  well  as  we  are  able  to  state
them,  in  the  American  Hojnaopathic  Review,  June,  1863,
vol.  iii.,  No.  12.'

We  are  opposed  to  it  in  theory,  and  we  abjure  it  in  prac-
tice. It  is  an  abominable  heresy.  As  a  shot-gun  maims
where  the  rifle  would  kill,  so  alternation  may  change  and
modify  and  maim  the  disease,  but  it  never  does  nor  can
effect  the  clean,  direct  and  perfect  cure  that  a  single  remedy,
exactly  homceopathic,  will  accpmpHsh.  As  a  relic  of  the
polypharmacy  which  has  been  the  stumbling-block  of  the
Old  School,  we  loathe  it.  As  a  refuge  of  |he  careless  pre-
in  homceopathic  practice,  a  fatal  obstacle  to  progress  in  the
clinical  portion  of  our  Materia  Medica,  we  deplore  it

6.  Do  you  believe  that  the  high  potencies,  from  your  own
experience  in  tlte  use  of  them,  and  from,  what  you  have  beheld
in  the  practice  of  others,  are  far  superior  in  all  respects  to  the
low  preparations  as  remedial  agents  ?

>  See  "Alternation  of  Remedies,"  in  this  book.


ON  HICK  POTENCIES.


265


Aft  affirmative  answer  is  involved  in  the  statement  that
we  use  the  high  in  preference  to  the  low  preparations.
For  details  wc  refer  again  to  the  article  which  prompted
our  correspondent's  tetter.  Personally  we  have  suffered,
and  do  now  suffer,  from  chronic  organic  disease,  and  from
occasional  very  violent  acute  attacks.  Wc  always  use  the
high  potencies  in  these  cases,  preferring  them,  to  the  low.
We  use  them  in  our  family  and  among  our  friends.  We
use  them  in  general  practice.  Many  of  our  friends  and
patients,  non- professional  persons,  know  the  fact  and  freely
say  that  they  and  their  children  are  more  speedily  cured  by
tile  high  tiian  by  the  low  potencies.

N.  B,  The  imaginations  of  our  friends  aforesaid  arc  not
more  lively  than  those  of  the  average  of  other  people.
Indeed,  they  are  plain,  matter-of-fact  persons,  possessing
much  common  sense,  but,  for  the  most  part,  no  genius.
They  prefer  high  potencies.

And  now,  having  replied  in  detail  to  the  queries  of  our
correspondent,  let  us  add  a  few  remarks  which  wc  beg  him
to  receive  in  good  part

To  change  the  aspect  of  a  case,  to  cause  the  original
symptoms  to  be  supplanted  by  other  symptoms,  this  is  no
more  a  cure  than  "a  strategic  change  of  base"  is  a  "  victori-
ous campaign."  Yet  this  may  be  effected  by  repeated  doses
of  a  drug  in  a  low  potency,  whether  the  drug  be  strictly
homcEopathic  to  the  case  or  not.  And  a  succession  of  such
changes  and  supplantings  may  be  effected,  day  after  day,
until  finally  the  patient  gets  well  or  nearly  so.  Meanwhile
the  patient  may  be  amused  by  the  varieties  which  each  day
brings  forth,  and  if  he  know  nothing  of  a  true  homoeopathic
cure,  but  have  heretofore  had  only  the  heroic  treatment,  he
may  fancy  he  has  been  doing  finely.

Now,  in  this  way.  with  low  potencies,  a  practitioner  may
do  quite  a  business  on  a  very  slender  capital  of  knowledge.

Not  so  if  he  use  the  high  potencies.  With  these  no
change  is  ejected  In  the  case  unless  the  remedy  have  been


266 REPLY  TO A  LETTER  ON  HIGH  POTENCIES.

'  Strictly  homoeopathic  to  the  case.  They  are  like  the  rifle-
ball — if  they  hit,  they  kill;  if  not,  there  is  no  record  of  the
shot. There  can  be  no  good  luck  from  scattering.

Now  it  will  be  perceived  that  the  question  of  cures  with
high  and  low  potencies  is  not  merely  a  question  of  potencies,
and  our  friend's  trial  will  not  be  a  fair  one  unless  he  make
sure  that  his  selection  of  the  remedy  in  each  case  in  which
he  tries  the  high  potencies  is  strictly  homceopathic.  If  he
make  sure  of  this  and  be  correct  in  it,  then  let  him  go  on  in
confidence  with  his  experiment We  bid  him  God-speed.


THE  QUKSTION  OF  THE  DOSE.


In  a  report  to  the  Homceopatliic  Medical  Society  of  the
state  of  New- York,  on  the  "Use  of  High  Potencies  in  the
Treatment  c{  the  Sick,"  published  in  this  Review,'  I  stated.
"'that  I  have  noted  only  one  case  in  which  a  high  potency
acted  but  inefficiently,  while  a  lower  gave  prompt  and  com-
plete relief;"  and,  again,  "that  a  general  law  for  the  a
prufti  selection  of  tlie  potency  suitable  for  a  concrete  case,
if  such  a  law  be  possible,  is  yet  to  be  discovered;"  and,
again,  "this  fact  that  a  low  potency  succeeded  where  a
higher  had  failed,  together  with  similar  facts  reported  by
other  practitioners,  must  have  a  bearing  upon  general  con-
clusions."

The  question  of  the  dose  is  manifestly  an  open  one.  Expe-
rience must  be  accumulated  before  we  can  hope  to  discover
a  law  for  our  guidance  on  the  subject.  Every  fact  bearing
on  the  question  should  have  our  candid  and  careful  study.

In  the  report  alluded  to.  a  portion  of  the  evidence  in  favor
of  the  high  potencies  was  detailed.  Tlie  following  cases
present  evidence  on  the  other  side  and  deserve  particular
attention.  They  arc  published  by  Dr.  Arnold,  of  Heidel-
bci^,  in  the  Homceopathische  Vierteljahnchrift^  together
with  some  very  fair  and  ingenuous  remarks  by  Dr.  Arnold,
who,  it  may  be  remarked,  is  in  the  habit  of  using  only  the
lowest  potencies  or  massive  doses.

Psoriasis  Guttata  cured  by  Arstnic—T^c  power  of  the
preparations  of  Arsenic  to  cure  psoriasis  is  so  well  known
that  I  should  not  publish  this  case,  were  it  not  that  it  fur>


'  iVgrfi Amerieati
Xniew,  vol.  4.  p.  jo^


Jfatitacpatkie 'If^mte^atkifeiu VierUiJAkrukrifl,
JaDiui7. 1864.


e  QUESTION OF  THE  DOSE.

in,  a  striking  evidence  of  the  fact,  tibat
ies  we  are  often  obliged  to  give  strong
f  heroic  remedies  if  we  would  accomplish

iteen  years  old,  whose  childhood  had
ho  had  never  had  any  sickness  worth  naming,
ectly  strong  and  well,  and  had  a  bloo:
nd  in  whom  no  predisposing  cause  for  any
be  discovered,  observed  several  years  ago.  oca
of  the  body,  isolated,  red,  somewhat  elevated,
le  surface  of  which  small  scales  were  visttdc;
.owever,  as  she  felt  well  and  the  spots  had  spared
d  neck,  she  did  not  think  it  necessary  to  sedc
trice. Gradually  the  spots  became  more  numer-
limensions  also  increased,  and  although  the  patient
:her  complaint,  she  was  yet  induced  to  seek  tiw
a  physician  on  account  of  the  itching,  which
iblesorae,  especially  at  night

aves  and  the  so-called  blood-purifying  tea  (spedes

i)  had  no  result In  the  spring  of  1861  she  came  to

ne  eryption  was  over  the  whole  skin  with  the  excep-

the  face  and  hands ; the spots  were  laige and

nt I  gave  her  at  first  one  grain  daily  of  the  sixth

d  trituration of  Arsenic. But  as no change had

ed  in  fourteen  days,  I  changed  to  the  fourth  decimal

ition,  of  which  a  grain  was  taken  every  forenoon. In

:en  days  I  found  a  slight  improvement,  in  that  certain

;  seemed  to  be  less  red  and  did  not  itch  so  much  aA

t I  now  intermitted  the  use  of  Arsenic  for  three  wedc^

after  this  period  found  again  the  old  evil  condition.  One

in  of  the  third  decimal  trituration  of  Arsenic,  which  was

}  given  daily  for  fourteen  days,  wrought  a  more  striking

>rovement,  as  well  in  relation  to  the  development  and  stse

Jie  spots,  which  were  much  less,  as  also  in  respect  to  the

ing  at  night  which  had  almost  altogether  ceased. But

imuch  as,  after  a  pause  of  fourteen  days,  diis  improve-


9ttofl

nowH
imal  "


THE  QUESTION  OF  THE  DOSE.

ni^nt  had  again  partly  disappeared,  I  felt  myself  obliged  to

'^■^ort  to  a  still  stronger  dose  of  the  remedy  in  order  not  to

P«Jt the  patience  of  my  ch'ent  to  too  severe  a  test She  now

■^^^^ived,  once  every  day,  two  grains  of  the  second  decimal

**"^ *«A  ration — that  is,  one-fiftieth  of  a  grain  of  Arsenious  acid.

**^<^  action  of  this  dose  resulted,  after  two  weeks,  in  a  very  fl

^*^^~»Vcing improvement, which moreover maintained  itself  ^

**  ■"*  «~ing  a  suspension  of  the  remedy  for  the  next  two  weeks.

'^^i'fc.crefore  allowed  the  patient  to  continue  the  remedy  for

^ weeks  longer,  taking  daily  a two  grain  dose  of  the

«3nd  decimal  dilution. The  cure  was  complete  and  per-

sient;  for  a  half  year  afterward  T  had  an  opportunity  of

ing  the  lady,  and  was  assured  tliat  tlie  recovery  had  been

ing.

)n  the  subject  of  the  homceopathic  relation  of  Arsenic  to

>riasis,  scarcely  any physician  who is  familiar  with  the

:cts  of  this  remedy  can  entertain  a  doubt. 1  must  confess,

5,  that  I  have  often  seen  a  cure  result  from  the  use  of  the

cth,  but  still  more  from  the  fourth  decimal  trituration  of

^s  drug. Even  in the  case  just  related,  the  amelioration

^ght  have  proceeded  to  an  enduring  cure  if  the  use  of  the

~urth  trituration  had  been  continued  for  a  longer  time.

^^t  inasmuch  as  the  patient  had  borne  the  Arsenic  very

ell,  and  not  a  single  symptom  of  its  pathogenetic  action

-ad  been  apparent,  even  after  a  daily  dose  of  two  grains  of

l>e  second  trituration,  there  was  no  reason  for  losing  time  ia.'

--*lie  use  of  small  doses. In  any  ca.se,  this  is  a  new  evidence

J>at  in  chronic  diseases  even  very  heroic remedies  must

letimes  be  given  in  very  large  doses.

Nasal  Polypus  cured  by  Calcarea. — A  lady,  aged  fifty-five,
"of  respectable  position  in  society,  pale,  of  delicate  constitu-
tion, small  and  rachitic  from  ctiildhood,  but  never  seriously
m,  perceived,  several  years  ago,  in  the  right  nostril  an
impediment  to  respiration.  An  examination  by  a  physician
readily  disclosed  the  presence  of  a  mucous  polvpus.  Various
remedies  were  administered  during  a  long  period  without


I


iya


THE  QUESTION OF  THE DOSE.


perceptible  efTcct.  Neither  Mcrcurius  dulcis,  used  as  a  snuff,
nor  Corrosive  sublimate  in  solution,  to  be  inhaled,  had  a
noteworthy  or  enduring  effect  The  patient  thought  the
weather,  and  especially  to  the  dryness  or  moisture  of  the
atmosphere  than  to  the  remedies  used.

Under  these  circumstances,  the  operation  being  proposed,
I  was  aakcd  whether  a  cure  was  possible  without -operative
procedures.  I  declared  that  a  cure  by  means  of  internal
remedies  not  only  might  succeed,  but  that  it  would  have  a
mucli  more  enduring  result  than  the  mechanical  removal  of
the  growth  could  have ;  and  furthermore,  that  an  operation,
in  case  it  should  prove  necessary  ir/i'^r  an  internal  treatment,
would  be  more  certain  and  more  lasting  in  its  result  than
one  without  the  previous  use  of  corresponding  remedies.

Having  seen  from  Calcarea  carbonica  in  several  similar
cases  a  very  striking  and  unmistakable  curative  action,  I
ordered  at  first  one  grain  daily,  and  aAer  eight  days  two
grains  daily  to  be  taken.  Afler  two  months,  tlie  patient
appeared  and  reported  that  she  had  taken  the  remedy  four
weeks  and  then  intermitted  it  for  four  weeks,  and  that  no
change  in  her  condition  was  observable.  And  I  could
myself  perceive  neither  increase  nor  decrease  of  the  poly-
pus excrescence.  This  determined  me  to  give  the  second
decimal  trituration  of  Calcarea,  one  grain  daily.  After
fourteen  days,  the  nostril  having  become  more  permeable,
and  a  diminution  in  tlie  size  of  the  polypus  being  percepti-
ble, although  very  trifling  in  degree,  I  allowed  a  pause  of
four  weeks  in  the  use  of  the  remedy.  After  this  lapse  of
time,  the  tumor  had  regained  its  former  size ;  the  lady  was
more  than  ever  inclined  toward  the  operation.

I  concluded  to  wait  upon  her  a  few  weeks  longer,  and
gave  her  the  officinal  lime-water,  a  tea-spoonful  twice  daily  in
milk.  Four  weeks  later  the  lady  came  again  to  me ;  a  most
careful  investigation  revealed  no  traces  of  the  polypus. She


THE  QUESTION  OF  THE  DOSE.  2/1

informed  me  that  there  was  amelioration  after  the  very  first
doses  of  lime-water,  and  that  after  a  fortnight  the  nose  had
felt  entirely  free,  and  since  that  time  there  had  been  no
aggravation.

The  improvement  has  already  lasted  more  than  a  year
without  any  further  administration  of  the  remedy.  Repeated
examinations  have  failed  to  enable  me  to  discover  any  trace
of  the  polypus.


THE  BASIS  OF  TREATMENT.*


Hahnemann,  throughout  his  works,  takes  every  opportu-
nity to  urge  the  insufficiency  of  a  pathological  theory  of  the
nature  of  a  disease  as  the  basis  of  the  treatment  He  every-
where urges  that  the  only  sure  indication  for  every  case  is  to
be  found  in  the  totality  of  the  symptoms  which  the  case
presents.  One  would  think  that  nothing  could  be  more  clear
and  convincing  than  his  arguments  on  this  subject

His  opponents  declared  that  his  method  ignored  medical
science,  left  no  scope  for  pathology  and  diagnosis,  and
reduced  therapeutics  to  a  degrading  mechanical  comparison
of  symptoms.  Very  many  homoeopathists  have  so  £ir
deviated  from  Hahnemann's  method  as  to  endeavor  to  blend
with  the  use  of  his  doses  and  remedies,  an  application  of
pathology  as  a  basis  of  treatment.  This  endeavor  can  never
be  successful,  inasmuch  as  the  function  of  pathology  is  to
furnish,  not  an  indication  for  medical  treatment,  but  simply
a  means  of  elucidating  and  collating  the  symptoms.  The
result  has  been  a  sad  falling  off  from  the  standard  of  success
in  practice  which  was  established  by  Hahnemann  and  his
pupils.  The  points  at  issue  are  illustrated  by  the  following
case:

Willie  M.,  four  years  old,  was  brought  to  me  December  3,
1863.  He  had  been  healthy  since  February,  1863,  when  he
is  reported  to  have  had  a  long  attack  of  gastric  fever,  from
which  he  finally  recovered  with  the  affection  about  to  be
perceptible  at  all  times  when the  child  was  awake,  and

'Read  before  the  Horn.  Med.  Society  of  Oneida  CooDty,  N.  Y.,
Juneaist,  1864.


THE  BASIS  OF  TREATMENT.


373


which,  on  making  any  exertion,  were  very  much  aggravated,
and  resulted  in  an  attack  of  convulsive  cough  with  difficult
inhalation,  the  whole  paroxysm  resembling  precisely  what
was  remarked  that  the  child  seemed  to  be  free  from  dyspncra
when  sleeping  soundly,  but  at  no  other  time.  On  waking  in
tlie  morning  he  had  always  a  hard  fit  of  coughing,  during
which  he  sometimes  raised  a  little  tenacious  mucus.  His
appetite  was  good,  though  somewhat  capricious.  He  was
considerably  emaciated  ;  his  spirits  were  good,  and  he  often
attempted  to  join  in  the  sports  of  other  children,  but  was
obliged  soon  to  desist,  because  or  the  dyspnoea  and  cough
which  every  physical  exertion  caused  and  which  greatly-
fatigued  him.  On  percussion  and  auscultation  the  lungs
were  found  resonant;  the  respiratory  murmur  was,  of  course,
masked  by  the  loud  wheezing.

The  child  had  been  taken,  in  September,  to  Professor  A.
Clark,  of  New- York,  who,  after  careful  and  repeated  exami-
nations, had  given  a  written  diagnosis — "Chronic  Laryn-
gismus." He  gave  a  very  unfavorable  prognosis  and  the
advice  to  avoid  all  medication,  save  only  a  dose  of  som«
antispasmodic  during  the  violent  attacks  of  dyspncea.  This
advice  had  not  been  followed.  The  child  had  been,  through^
out  his  illness,  under  what  I  regard  as  very  skillful  homu:-
opathic  treatment  I  had  once  seen  him  in  consultation,  but
had  not  been  able  to  suggest  anything  that  proved  of  service
to  him.

When  now  placed  under  my  sole  care,  I  well  knew  that
the  child  had  already  taken,  without  benefit,  every  remedy
which  has  symptoms  at  all  resembling  Millar's  asthma  or
any  spasmodic  affection  of  the  respiratory  organs.  And  it
was  also  evident,  on  even  a  cursory  examination,  tliat  no  one
of  these  remedies  was  cUarty  indicated  by  the  symptoms  of
the  case.

I  therefore  resolved  to  follow,  as  implicitly  as  I  could,  the
advice  given  by  Hahnemann  for  the  examination  of  the
19


274


THE  BASIS  OF  TREATMENT.


patient  and  the  selection  of  the  remedy.  Dismissing  from
my  mind,  then,  every  notion  concerning  the  scat  and  prob-
able pathological  nature  of  the  disease,  I  examined  the
patient  and  made  the  following  record  of  the  symptoms
which  he  presented.

1.  Child  emaciated,  flesh  soft,  skin  inclined  to  be  y
(naturally  fiur — a  blonde)  and  dry.

2.  Appetite  very  good;  alu-ays  calls  for  food  as  soon  as  a
coughing  fit  begins  in  the  morning  or  forenoon.

3.  The  right  hypochondrium  hard,  distended,  tender  to
the  touch,  painful  on  exertion  and  when  he  coughs.  The
right  shoulder  is  elevated  and  the  spinal  column  laterally
curved ;  dullness  on  percussion  on  the  right  side,  extending
three  fingers'  breadth  below  the  margin  of  the  ribs.

4.  Distension  of  the  epigastrium  which  is  t>*mpanitic  on
percussion,  and  tender  to  the  touch.

5.  Much  rumbling  of  flatus  in  the  abdomen.

6.  Frequent  inefTcctual  desire  for  stool ;  stool  scanty  and
dry,  occurring  once  daily  or  once  in  two  days.

7.  Cough  dry ;  sometimes  in  the  morning  a  very  Httle
tenacious  sputa ;  always  a  coughing  fit  in  the  morning  on
waking;  he  has  to  sit  up  to  cough;  cough  excited  by
eating  and  drinking,  by  rapid  motion,  by  exertion,  by  cr)'ing
or  talking. The  cough  hurts  his  right  side.

8.  Constant  wheezing  and  dyspnoea  aggravated  by  exer-
tion and  by  lying  down,  relieved  during  sleep.

The  tender  age  of  the  patient  rendered  it  impossible  to
obtain  many  subjectwe  symptoms,  such  as  usually  facilitate
the  individualization  of  cases,  and  the  determination  of  the
appropriate  remedy.

Before  proceeding  further  in  the  narration  of  the  case.  I
desire  to  say  a  word  upon  its  pathology.  The  symptoms
arc  before  us :  what  shall  our  diagnosis  be?  Is  the  case  one
of  spasmodic  laryngeal  disease,  complicated  by  cert^n
gastro-enteric  and  hepatic  affections  ?  Or,  is  it  a  cfarooic
hepatitis,  complicated  by  laryngismus? Which


*

I
I

4


THE BASIS OF  TREATMENT.


275


^


p»HTOary,  and  which  secondary?  What  relation  do  the
K'K'oups  of  symptoms  bear  to  each  other?  Professor  Clark
s^s«:rns  to  have  adopted  the  former  view,  regarding  tlic  gastro>
l*-^s^patic  troubles  as  secondary,  if  indeed  he  paid  any  atten-
*-»<^n  whatever  to  this  corapHcation.  The  homoeopathic
F**~»3^cian5  who  preceded  mc  probably  adopted  the  same
^-^»<-Mf  and  based  tlicir  treatment  upon  it.  Now  if  in  so
C3<:>ing  they  had  happened  to  take  a  correct  pathological
■<="«■,  the  result  might  have  been  favorable;  or  if  they  had
*^optcd  and  acted  upon  the  second  hyiwthesis,  and  this  had
"a^nced  to  be  the  correct  view,  the  result  might  have  been
^voruble.

■But  is  it  not  obvious  to  every  candid  mind,  that,  in  either
success  in  the  treatment  based  upon  a  pathological  con-
'-'^^'"iition  of  the  case  must  depend  on  the  correctness  of  the
*^*^**ological  hypothesis — a  matter  in  which  certainty  can
**"*'«-»'  be  atUined


Cli


w  the  other  hand,  if  we  throw  aside,  as  irrelevant,  the


^K  *>-*-c  scries  of  questions  as  to  which  is  the  primary  disease
^^  *-^  which  the  secondary — which  the  original  malady  and
y  ^^^^  the  complication — if  wc  say  to  ourselves:  "Here  is
B  ^ick  child;  let os examine  and record  those  points  in

H  ^^ch  he  differs  from  a  healthy  child,"  we  get  the  series  of
|«  ^''**lptoms  above  recited,  which  are  fads,  indisputable,
**«tiistakablc,  the  result  of  pure  observation.  If  now,  with-
^t  hypothesis  or  si>eculation,  we  seek  to  find  and  do  find  a
*tOcdy  which  presents  a  scries  of  symptoms  corresponding
closely  to  those  of  Oic  patient,  experience  justifies  us  in
relieving  that  wc  shall  have  reached  the  utmost  possible
Certainty  of  correctly  selecting  the  remedy.

Comi>aring  the  symptoms  with  the  Materia  Mcdica,  we
perceive  at  once  that  the  remedies  whose  names  arc  usually
associated  with  Millar's  Astlima.  Laryngismus,  etc.,  viz. :
Sambucus,  Spongia,  Ciiia,  Lachcsis,  Hcpar,  Stanniim,  Chlo-
rine, etc.,  etc,  do  not  cover  the  case,  having  but  little
cofTCspundeuce  with  groups  i,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6.


aj6  THE BASIS  OF  TREATMEXT.

Nux  vomica,  on  the  other  hand,  covers  these  groups  very
well,  as  will  be  seen  by  comparing  Materia  Medica.  In
addition,  it  has  violent  paroxysms  of  cough  in  the  moming
very  early  {676  and  677),  excited  by  motion  and  exertion
(670,  671,  672),  producing  pain  in  the  epigastric  zone  (6S9),
and  accompanied  by  a  desirt  to  eat  (my  own  observation).
It  has  also  a  well-marked  d>-spnGea.

The  correspondence  was  so  close  that  I  had  no  hesitation
in  giving  Nux  vomica.

Dec  9,  four  powders  of  the  200th  were  given,  one  to  be
taken  every  night,  and  the  patient  to  report  in  ten  days.

Dec  21,  the  report  was  brought  to  me,  that  the  child  had
no  more  wheezing  nor  dyspnoea ;  had  been  free  from  cough
for  five  days,  can  play  long  and  vigorously  without  incon-
venience, is  regular  in  his  bowels,  complains  no  longer  of
pain  or  tenderness  in  the  hypochondrium — in  fact  seems
to  be  perfectly  weU.

He  deranged  the  digestion  by  eating  candy  at  Christmas,
and  had  a  slight  return  of  pain  in  the  hypochondrium,  'which
a  dose  of  Sulphur  relieved.  He  has  ever  since  been  entirely
free  from  dyspnsa  and  laryngeal  spasm,  and  is  in  the  enjoy-
ment of  robust  and  perfect  health.

If  such  a  mode  of  practice  as  this  be,  as  is  char|red,
unxieniific — if  it  ignore  the  sciences  of  pathology  and  diag-
nosis as  bases  of  treatment — thus  much  at  least  may  be  said
in  its  favor,  that  it  far  surpasses  every  other  method  tn  the
facilities  it  affords  for  the  fulfillment  of  one  not  unimportant
object  of  the  physician — the  cure  of  the  patient.


DIAGNOSIS IN HOMCEOPATHIC PRACTICE;

Wmt  CoutttjiTiom  rxoM  Dk.  Kaspak's  LvcniKKS.


It  is  an  objection  often  urged  against  Homrropathy,  that,
as  a  sj'Stcm  of  therapeutics,  it  dispenses  with  the  necessity
for  diagnosis.  The  objection  ts  unfounded.  For  all  pur-
poses of  prognosis  and  hygienic  management,  we  have  as
great  need  of  diagnosis  as  our  brethren  of  the  old  practice.
according  to  the  "  totality  of  the  symptoms."  But  by  this
we  are  far  from  meaning  to  imply  that  each  symptom  is
symptoms.  On  the  contrary,  while  on  the  one  hand,  every
symptom  must  be  taken  into  consideration  as  indispensable
to  a  true  "  picture  of  the  disease,"  and  hence,  in  this  vinv,
no  one  symptom  can  be  said  to  be  less  important  than
another;  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  the  symptoms  vary  among
themselves  in  rank.  Some  are  primary  or  idiopathic,  others
are  reflex  or  sympathetic.  The  Latter  are  as  important  to  a
"picture  of  the  disease"  as  the  former,  but  they  are  important
not  simply  as  symptoms,  but  as  sympathetic  symptoms.  Now,
to  form  a  diagnosis  is  to  distinguish  from  among  the  whole
number  of  symptoms,  the  idiopathic  and  sympathetic  symp-
toms, to  attribute  each  symptom,  whether  idiopathic  or
sympathetic,  to  the  organ  or  tissue  which  is  in  reality  its
seat,  and  to  form  a  just  notion  of  the  pathological  con-
dition of  that  organ  or  tissue.  That  it  is  necessary  for  us  to
make  such  a  diagnosis  before  prescribing,  follows  at  once
from  the  rationale  of  a  homceopatliic  prescription.

The  homceopathic  practitioner  having  got  "  a  picture"
of  the  disease  he  is  about  to  treat,  i.  e.,  having  got  the


2;8


DIAGNOSIS  IN HOMEOPATHIC PRACTICE.


"totality  of  the  symptoms,"  proceeds  to  compare  this
picture  with  the  pathogeneses  of  various  drugs.  Now,
these  pathogeneses  arc  themselves  "pictures  of  disease;"
they  are  symptoms  of  drug-disease.  As  such,  they  are
divisible  into  idiopathic  and  sympathetic  symptoms;  the
organs,  or  tissues,  itt  which  they  have  their  scat,  and  the
pathological  conditions  of  these  organs,  may  be  various.  In
seeking  a  drug  whose  symptoms  shall  correspond  most
nearly  to  those  of  the  disease  to  be  treated,  it  is  evidently
necessary  to  seek  a  drug,  the  idiopathic  symptoms  of  which
shall  correspond  to  the  idiopathic  symptoms  of  the  disease,
and  the  sympathetic  to  the  sympathetic  ;  a  drug,  too,  whose
symptoms  of  cither  variety  shall  have  the  same  seat  as  the
analogous  symptoms  of  the  disease,  and  shall  result  from  a
similar  pathological  condition.  But  we  cannot  select  this
drug  without  having  previously  formed  a  diagnosis,  not
merely  of  the  disease  to  be  troetcd,  but  also  of  the  various
drug-diseases  or  pathogeneses  that  constitute  our  Materia
Medica.  This  necessity  may  be  illustrated  by  a  reference
to  errors  into  which  a  neglect  of  it  leads  us.  Spontaneous
vomiting  of  bile  by  a  child  may  be  an  idiopathic  symptom
indicating  abdominal  derangement ;  or,  it  may  be  merely
sympathetic  of  cerebral  disturbance.  Several  drugs  produce
vomiting  of  bile  ;  some  directly  or  idiopathically,  by  afiect-
ing  the  digestive  organs ;  others,  by  a  reflex  or  sympathetic
action,  their  primary  action  being  on  the  nervous  centers.
According  to  our  diagnosis  of  the  disease  in  the  child,  and
of  the  drug-disease,  we  should  give  under  the  one  view,  Nux
vomica,  Ipecacuanha,  or  their  analogues ;  or,  under  the
otlicr.  Belladonna.  Again,  depraved  appetite,  convulsive
movements,  distorted  vision,  a  peculiar  aspect  of  distress,
may  be  the  idiopathic  expression  of  disorder  in  the  nervous
centers,  or  may  be  'sympathetic  with  irritation  produced  by
entozoa.  In  the  one  case  we  should  select  a  remedy  which
affects  the  nervous  centers  idiopathically,  as  Belladonna  or
its  analogues ;  and  in  the  other  a  remedy  which  acts  idio-


DIAGNOSIS  IN HOMCEOPATHIC PRACTICE.


279


pathically  on  the  vegetative  sphere,  and  affects  the  nervous
centers  sympathetically,  as  Cina.  Neglect  to  distinguish
between  these  varieties  of  symptoms  has  led  compilers  of
manuals  to  recommend  Cina  tH  hydrocephahts.

Moreover,  it  is  requisite  to  determine  the  seat  of  the
symptoms,  both  in  the  disease  and  in  the  pathogenesis.
Pain  and  tenderness  in  the  right  iliac  region,  with  local  heat
and  fever,  may  have  their  scat  in  the  cellular  tissue,  in  the
muscular  or  peritoneal  layers,  in  the  ccccum,  or  e\*cn,  at
certain  times,  in  the  ovary.  So  might  similar  symptoms  in
a  pathogenesis  arise  from  a  pathological  condition  of  these
various  tissues.  Evidently  we  cannot  select  our  remedy
with  certainty  of  its  adaptcdncss,  unless  wc  make  a  diagnosis
both  of  the  disease  and  of  the  pathogeneses  of  the  drugs.

Again,  tenderness  in  the  coxofemoral  region,  pain  on
moving  the  Umb.  and  on  pressing  the  great  trochanter  in
toward  the  acetabulum,  may  have  its  seat  in  the  tissues  of
the  joint,  or  in  the  ner\'cs  that  supply  that  region.  And  we
have  drugs  that  affect  the  tissues  of  tlie  joint,  and  others  that
affect  the  nerves  in  question.  We  must  select  the  former  if
tlic  joint,  and  the  latter  if  the  nerves  be  affected  ;  and  in
order  to  make  the  selection  we  must  previously  make  the
twofold  diagnosis  so  often  urged.  Neglect  of  this  has  led  to
the  erroneous  reco  ram  ends  tlon  of  Colocynlli  in  kip-joint
disease.  A  twofold  diagnosis,  then,  is  a  necessary  pre-
liminary to  a  properly  conducted  homoeopathic  prescription.

The  diagnosis  of  the  disease  to  be  treated  is  to  be  made,
of  course,  where  the  disease  is  encountered,  at  the  bedside.
But  the  diagnosis  of  tlic  drug- diseases  constitutes  the  syste-
matic study  of  the  Materia  Mcdica.

Our  provings  are  a  mass  of  symptoms,  for  the  sj*stcmatic
study  of  which  some  feasible  method  has  been  long  a  desid-
eratum. Their  study  and  arrangement  under  the  form  of
a  diagnosis  furnish  a  method  well  calculated  to  tix  the
characteristics  of  the  drug  in  the  memory,  and  at  the  same


28o  DIAGNOSIS  IN  HOMOEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.

Dr.  Watzke  and  Dr.  Kaspar,  resident  physicians  in
Wurmb's  Homceopathic  Hospital,  In  Vienna,  have  arranged
a  number  of  remedies  in  the  form  of  a  diagnosis,  the  expo-
sition of  which  constituted  the  matter  of  lectures  on  Materia
Mcdica,  delivered  by  Dr.  Kaspar  at  the  Hospital,  in  the
summer  of  1851. '  The  substance  of  sixteen  lectures  by  Dr.
Kaspar  follows,  from  which  the  scope  and  aim  of  the
analysis  will  be  evident ;  and  tt  may  not  be  amtsa  to  sug-
gest that  these  analyses  arc  designed  rather  as  aids  in  the
Study  of  Materia  Mcdica  than  as  direct  guides  for  practice,
and  that,  being  greatly  condensed,  they  require  diligent
study  and  constant  comparison  with  the  Hahncmanniaa
pathogeneses.


NO. T. HEPAR  SULPHURIS CALCAREUM.

Hepar  has  many  close  relations  with  Mcrcurius.  The
distinction  between  them  is,  in  fact,  rather  negative  than
positive.  Almost  all  the  symptoms  of  Hepar  are  found
under  Mercurius,  but  not  all  those  of  Mercurius  under
Hepar.

Hepar,  like  Mercurius,  develops  its  effects  in  the  vegeta-
tive processes.  Yet,  whereas  Mercurius  increases  to  excess
the  whole  secretive  activity,  and  thereby  produces  emacia-
tion (/.  e.,  by  excessive  secretion,  salivation,  diarrhoea,
diaphoresis),  the  same  ciiaractcr  belongs  to  Hepar  in  a  much
less  degree.  Hence  Hepar  produces  no  putrid  collapse,
makes  no  penetrating  impression  upon,  and  alteration  of,
the  vital  processes ;  hence,  too,  it  exerts  no  visible  rtfltx
action  upon  the  nervous  life,  as  Mercurius.  While  the  reso-
lutive, alterative  action  of  Mercurius  extends  even  to  Ae
formation  of  new  secreting  organs  (abscess,  secreting  pus),
Hepar  possesses  no  such  power.  In  the  action  of  Hepar,
appcara,  in  a  slighter  degree,  the  tendency  to  abnormal
*  These  lectures  tbe  aulhur  attended. —  Kd,


NO. 1. HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM.


28 1


SfcretioH,  and  the  resulting  symptoms  have,  for  the  most
part,  quite  a  different  pathological  foundation  from  that  of
analogous  symptoms  of  MltcuHus.

The  effects  of  Hepar  appear  most  distinctly  in  the
lymphatic  system,  the  activity  of  which  it  excites  in  a  high
degree  ;  and  hence  it  cither,  on  the  one  hand,  increases  the
absorptive  activity  of  the  lymphatic  system,  or  else,  on  the
other,  causes  a  too  abundant  collection  of  lymph  in  the
glands,  and,  in  consequence,  obstruction,  inflammation,  and
suppuration  of  the  glands.  We  find,  therefore,  among  the
symptoms  of  Hepar,  a  great  number  indicating  this  character,
and  wc  lind  the  greatest  number  of  symptoms  in  those  parts
of  the  body  in  which  the  lymphatic  vessels  are  most  abundant,
neck,  shoulder,  bend  of  the  elbow,  dorsum  of  the  foot,  etc.

On  the  increased  resorption,  on  the  other  hand,  depend
a  number  of  other  symptoms  in  other  organs,  especially  in
those  in  which  the  lymphatic  vascular  system  is  highly
developed.

Although  I  have  so  strongly  insisted  on  Mw,  as  the  sphere
of  action  of  Hepar,  I  would  not  be  understood  to  deny  to  it
any  farther  action.  The  excitation  of  organic  activity  can

If  the  resorptivc  activity  of  the  lymphatic  be  increased,  so
will  be  also  that  of  the  venous  system.  The  excretions  will
be  altered  in  quantity  and  in  quality.

The  action  of  Hepar  is  upon  the  periphery  directly.
Hence  we  find  congestion  of  the  skin  and  mucous  mem-
branes; and,  in  consequence,  redness,  heat,  swelling — in  a
word,  an  inflammatory  condition  shown  by  prickings,  eleva-
tions of  the  skin,  rhagades ;  a  slight  degree  of  suppuration
manifesting  itself  in  rhagades,  pustules,  nodes,  tubercles,
ulcers,  also  flashes  of  heat,  and  dull  redness  of  parts  rich  in
blood— lips,  checks,  conjunctiva,  etc.

Partly  in  this  way,  and  partly  also  by  the  fact  of  engorge-
ment and  obstruction  of  the  lymphatic  glands,  we  may
explain  the  symptoms  which  appear  in  the  ikin.


282


DIAGNOSIS  IN HOM<EOPATHIC PRACTICE,


Mucous  Metnbrancs.  These  are  similarly  excited.  Their
secretion  is  not  greatly  increased.  Often,  indeed,  it  is
diminished  ;  and  it  is  always  ihickaud.  The  watery  portion
being  immediately  absorbed  again,  the  secretion  becomes
viscous,  even  membranous,

1.  In  tlic  Jntcstimil  Tract,  Hcparmust  prodacc  dtmtnutioa
of  action  ;  hence  anorexia,  nausea,  vomiting,  acid  eructations,
alienated  taste,  development  of  gas,  etc,  and,  above  all,
enfeebled  peristaltic  action,  and  tlus,  again,  causes  pain
(mctcorismus)  and  difficult  evacuation  even  of  soft  farces.

Add  to  these  considerations,  the  irritation  of  tfae  mucous
membrane  consequent  on  the  great  number  of  lymphatic
vessels  in  it,  and  wc  may  explain  the  several  sensations  and
pains  in  the  ahmentary  tract,  especially  the  frequent  tenes-
mus and  aggravation  after  every  stool.  The  stools  are
green,  yellowish -brown,  often  mixed  with  blood.

2.  In  the  Respiratory  Organs  we  find  a  ^milar  condition,
various  sensations  indicating  thickening  of  the  secretions ;
hence,  difficult  respiration,  laborious,  dry  cough.  This  con-
dition, together  with  the  putTy  tumefaction  of  the  mucous
membrane,  which  usually  accompanies  such  a  condition,  wilt
explain  to  us  the  symptoms  which  we  find  especially  in  the
larynx.

3.  In  the  Urinary  Mucous  Membrane  appears  the  same
state  of  chemosis.  Urine  is  scanty  and  dark,  witli  abundant
salts  so  that,  when  evacuated,  it  is  already  turbid,  or  else  it
soon  becomes  so.

4.  The  Salivary  Glands  are  excited  to  a  more  abundant
secretion.

The  action  of  Hepar  on  the  Sanguine  Vascular  SysUm
may  be  easily  determined;  for  if  it  excites  one  portion  of
this  system,  the  remaining  portions  must  of  necessity  be  also
excited,  though  in  a  less  degree.  Hence,  febrile  symptoms
are  not  wanting.  They  are  still  more  clearly  pronounced
when  a  somewhat  violent  inflammatory  excitement  has  mam'-
fested  itself,  producing  its reflex  action  on  the  organism.


4
4


NO. I. HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM.


iSj


The  general  vascular  excitement,  however,  can  never  assume
the  character  of  pure,  intense  syoocha.

The  rel.itions  of  Hcp.ir  to  the  Sexual  System  are  unim-
portant The  menses  appear  too  early,  and  are  too  copious.

StHsatwns.  As  e\'ery  revulsion  of  the  vegetative  proc-
esses provokes  various  sensations,  so  docs  that  produced  by
Hcpar.  It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  pains,^  strictly  speaking,
are  seldom  excited  by  it  The  more  frequent  sensations  are
itching,  pricking,  rending,  and  feeling  as  if  beaten.  {\n
inflamed  parts,  however,  burning,  sticking,  and  tearing /d/nx
are  experienced.)  Such  sensations  will  be  especially  felt  in
parts  where  lymphatic  vessels  course  in  greatest  numbcra,
the  ax  ilh,  bend  of  the  elbow,  etc :  thus  we  have  heat,  redness,
and  pain  from  the  fingers  to  the  shoulders;  needle  stickings,
itching  in  the  fingers,  su-elUng  in  the  fmgera,  and  the  same
condition  in  the  thigh,  ham,  dorsum  of  Uic  foot  and  the  toca

Characteristic  Symptoms.

1.  Pains.  V^artous.  Especially  pressing  and  general
sensatioftt.

2.  Aggravation  of  Conditian.  At  night,  and  by  exposure
to  cold.

3-  Thickening  of  the  secretions,  swelling,  inflammation
and  suppuration  of  the  glands.

Ituiicati^HS  /or  Administration.  Hepar  may  be  indi-
cated—

1.  Tn  diseases  of  acute,  sub-acute,  and  chronic  form.

2.  In  diseases  occurring  in  lymphatico-phlegmatic  indi-
viduals, with  white  delicate  skin,  blund  hair,  disposition  to
glandular  swellings.

3.  In  all  cases  of  glandular  affection,  as  well  for  the
collective  chronic  process  as  for  the  individual  acute  exacer-
bations ; all  scrofulous  and  tuberculous  affections; enlarge-


'  The  Germuii  disUnguisb  between
Fdn  (Stim^rt)  and  ScDsUian  (Gt'
/Mt).  eain  is  fartiat,  u  to  extent,
mid  «M«nMwM4f,  fts  i<tifat,*.g.,  itick-


lag  In  the  shooJdcr.  Smtatten  it
ecDcnl.  u  to  txUftt,  and  iodeflnilv.
\%  to  seat,  e.g.,  oppretsioo,  Issbitudc,
itching.


284


DIAGNOSIS  IN HOMtEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.


ment,  inflammation,  and  suppuration  of  all  lymphatic  glands,
especially  those  of  the  neck;  a  similar  condition  of  the
cellular  tissue.  Hence  it  is  indicated  in  mesenteric  diseases
ol*  children  ;  in  frequently  recurring  an^na;  in  inflanamation
of  the  salivary,  cervical,  and  inguinal  glands;  panaris;
inflammation  of  the  eyelids  ;  discharge  of  prostatic  fluid.

4.  All  kinds  of  inflammation  which  pass  into  suppuration;
punitcnt  exudations  (pleuhtis);  abscess  (for  maturation,
Mercuriiis  is  preferable) ;  hip-joint  disease  (caries).

5.  InBammation  terminating  in  solid,  membranou;;  cxuda-
tioDS ;  acute  catarrh ;  laryngeal  croup  (after  use  of  Aconite);
lymphangioitis,  as  well  external  as  uterine ;  phlegmasia  alba
dolcns;  hooping-cough,  after  the  stage  of  inflammation  (?).

6.  Abscesses  and  analogous  formations.

7.  The  Mercurial  Cachexy.  Calvities  aiVcr  Mercury;
salivary  fistula.

8.  Cutaneous  Affections.  Crusta  lactea ;  Tinea;  Erysipelas
(after  Belladonna)  in  scrofulous  individuals.  Generally  in
scrofulous  skin- diseases,


NO. IL CONIUM MACULATtJM.


I


Conium  belongs  to  that  class  of  remedies  which  alter  the
vegetative  vital  process  in  all  its  relations.  Among  the
vegetati\'e  functions,  that  of  resorption  suffers  the  first  and
most  marked  alteration,  being  diminished  in  activity  or
completely  arrested.  The  great  representative  of  this  func-
tion is  the  lymphatic  system,  on  which,  therefore,  Conium
exerts  its  primary  and  most  striking  action.

Next  in  degree,  and  of  the  same  nature,  is  its  action  on
the  venous  system.  The  diminution  of  the  vitality  of  this
system  involves,  on  tlie  one  hand,  diminished  general
absorption,  and  on  the  other,  retarded  circulation  of  the
absorbed  fluids.  Hence,  collections  form  in  parenchymata
and  cavities,  either  in  the  form  of  fluid  infiltration  or  exu-


NO.  11. CONIUU  MACULATUM.


ass


datioti,  or  as  hard  tumors.  In  the  lymphatics  themselves
depositioDS  occur,  which  sometimes  give  rise  to  tumors.
Such  collections  arc  hostile  to  the  organism;  they  serve  as
excitants  to  the  surrounding  tissues  ;  hence,  aji  inflammatory
condition  not  unfrequently  arises  in  these  formations,  which
leads  to  r/u-ir  destruction.  In  some  cases,  however,  the
contrary  takes  place,  and  the  organ  attacked  becomes
altered.

On  these  general  pathological  momenta  depend  the
following  Conium  symptoms.

Skin.  Tuberculous  eruption,  passing  over  into  Furun-
culi ;  Fetechi^e  ;  Erysipelatous  cutaneous  inflammations ;
Gutta  Rosacea  ;  Ulcers;  Gangrenous  ulcers,

Glarnis.  Various  pains,  generally  sticking  or  cutting,
especially  in  the  mamma  and  mesenteric  glands.  Indura-
tion, suppuration,  and  alteration  of  the  same;  hordeola;
swelling  of  the  tonsils.  Pains  in  the  liver.  Inflammation
of  the  prepuce.  Pressing  in  prostate,  and  discharge  o^
prostatic  juice.  Orchitis ;  pain  and  swelling  of  testes.
The  various  symptoms  in  the  breast  and  abdomen  indicate
that  the  glands  arc  attacked ;  but  the  fact  needs  anatomical
demonstration.  The  general  disturbance  of  the  rcsorptivc
function  probably  depends  on  paralysis  of  the  ganglionic
system,  in  consequence  of  which  all  the  vegetative  functions
must  be  more  or  less  disturbed.

Vascular  System,  The  vascular  system  loses  its  cnct^y.
The  circulation  becomes  irregular,  universally  retarded  and
enfeebled.  Whatever  excitation  there  may  be  depends
rather  upon  local  causes  than  upon  general  stimulus.
Hence,  the  general  thcrmogcncsis  will  be  rather  below  the
normal  standard  ;  but  it  may  be  partially  increased.  Con*
scquently,  in  the  Conium  fever,  coldness  predominates;  the
pulse  is  slow  and  small.  (Still,  the  contrary  may  occur;
the  pulse  may  be  quick  and  strong,  and  the  heat/flr/itf/Zy
increased.)  The  blood  in  the  venous  system,  therefore,  will
be  propelled  slowly  ;  hence,  tliis  system  will  be  gorged  ;  this


336


DIAGNOSIS IN  HOMCEOPATHIC PRACnCE.


will  be  espedall}''  manifest  in  the  abdomen.  The  blood  does
not  receive,  on  the  one  hand,  the  needed  reparation,  or,  on
the  other,  the  necessary  elaboration  ;  it  consequently  tends
to  fluidity  and  decom petition.  Accordingly,  cyanosis,  ecchy-
mosis,  ulceration,  and  haemorrhage  may  easily  and  often  be
provoked.  The  results  of  every  impediment  of  the  circu-
lation are  manifested,  rather  in  the  periphery ;  hence,  sev-
eral inflammatory  conditions  produced  by  Conium.  More
frequently,  however,  the  same  cause  favors  the  origin  of
infiltrations.  By  \nrtue  of  these  tendencies  we  have  inflam-
mations of  the  eyes  and  eyelids,  hordeola,  inflammatory
epistaxis,  hemorrhage  from  swollen  livid  gums,  irritable
state  of  the  throat,  bleeding  ulcers,  hematuria,  and  inAam-
matory  symptoms  in  the  urinary  organs.

From  what  has  been  said  of  the  general  primary  action  of
Conium,  its  reflex  effect  on  the  individual  functions  of  the
vegetative  sphere  necessarily  follow.  We  mention  the  con-
ditions of  its  action  in  general  terms  and  in  specialties.

The  vegetation  in  general  is  depressed ;  this  is  shown  by
emaciation  and  change  of  color.

The  secretions  are  in  general  diminished,  because  inter-
stitial absorption  is  diminished ;  for  secretion  must  necessarily
proceed  pari  passu  with  absorption  ;  and  wherever  this  is  not
the  case,  the  increase  of  secretion  over  absorption  must  be
only  in  consequence  of  some  local  irritation,  e.  g.,  increase  of
salivary,  lachrymal,  and  prostatic  secretions.  Hence,  vomiting
is  rarely  produced  by  Conium.  And,  since  Conium  furnishes
scanty  secretions,  the  stool  is,  for  the  most  part,  retained
and  scanty.  Urine  is  scanty  ;  the  mucous  membrane  of  the
urino-genital  system  is,  for  the  most  part,  dry.  The  menses
are  retained  or  retarded.

As  specialty,  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  intestines  stand
in  nearer  relation  to  Conium  than  the  stomach  docs  (probably
because  of  tticir  more  intimate  connection  with  the  mesenteric
glands),  and  that  the  most  various  symptoms  are  produced
in  them. The  stool  is  generally  scant}*,  with  flatulence  aod


I


NO. n. CONIL'M MACULATCM.


287


pain  before  evacuation.  If  the  stools  are  abundant  and
watery,  so  is  the  urine.  The  evacuation  of  urine  is  attended
by  violent  pressing  and  by  burning.  The  sweat  is,  for
the  most  part,  only partial, and  is  then  accompanied  by

heat

Nervous  System.  The  action  of  Conium  on  the  nervous
system  is  considerable,  yet  certainly  of  minor  importance
ami  often  secondary,  showing  itself  in  spasms  of  various  kinds;
it  centers  in  the  sensorium,  where  depression  predominates.

Sexital  System.  The  special  relation  of  Conium  to  the
sexual  organs,  especially  the  female,  is  very  important  Its
action  is  especially  manifest  in  the  breast  and  uterus,  pro-
ducing in  these  organs  swelling,  changes  arrested,  or  abnor-
mal secretion.

Condition.  The  Conium  symptoms  are  aggravated  at
night  and  early  in  the  morning.


A.VAIYS/S,

1.  Alters  the  t*egeiative  functions  by  altering  or  modify-
ing resorption;  infiltrations  or  collections  result,  which  tend
to  decomposition.  Increased  venosity,  and  finally  depraved
□atritton;  effects  especially  evident  in  the  lymphatic  system
and  in  all  glands,  and  among  these,  ^rf/,  the  mesenteric.

2.  Glands.  In  closest  relation  with  female  sex  and
mamma.

3.  Nervous  System,  Secondary  Symptoms,  manifestetl  by
spasms.

4.  Secretions. In  general  diminished.

5.  Pains. No  particular  character.

6.  Aggravation. Night  ;uid  early  morning.
Application. Conium corresponds to  lymphatic,  blond,

pale  individuals ;  to  children,  especially  those  with  targe,
soft  abdomens,  and  tendency  to  glandular  enlargements  and
cutaneous  eruptions ;  to  women,  especially  in  connection
with  uterine  diseases  or  with  Icucorrhcca  ;  to  women  in  the
climacteric  period; to  old  women  with  collections  in  the


DUCNOStS  tS  BOMOOPATBIC  PRACTICE.


utents :  to  pregnant  women ;  also  to  tDcUviduals  who  an
easily  excited  ;  to  hypochondriacs.

Diuases  in  gtntral.  All  those  dyscrasiaa  whose  develop-
inent  begins  by  deposttiott  in  the  glandular  system.  Tuber-
culosis and  scrofulosis,  especially  when  these  dyscra^as
concentrate  in  the  mesenteric  glands  ;  when,  raoreover,  they
evince  rather  a  fasavt  character,  and  do  not  ma  a  r^id
course,  but  gradually  form  deposits,  and  thereby  give  rise
to  partial  congestions;  in  the  first  periods  of  such  aiTccti<Hi$,
so  long  as  there  is  no  especial  colliquation,  and  while  the
secretions  are  in  general  diminished.  (I^  on  the  other  Hand,
thc>'  show  an  active  character,  Hepar  is  indicated;  when
colliquation  has  set  in,  Mfratrius.)

1.  Tubfrculosti  Meseraica.  Tuberculosis  glandularum
maxillarum  colli.  Angina  in  tubercnloso  wiiAamt  fevtr
(Conium  alternated  with  Hepar).

3.  ScTofttUms  and  Tuberculous  Cutaneous  Afftctions,
especially  lupus  sub-cutancus ;  tubercles  of  the  sldn  ;  papules
with  a  white  secretion.

3.  Strofulous  and  Sub-acuU  Ophthalmia,  with  gnd
photopkobia  e^ccially,  atfcctton  and  suppuration  of  the
meibomian  glands ;  formation  of  tubercles  on  the  eyelids ;
conjunctivitis,  uith  little  or  no  mucous  secretion;  keratitis,
c^ecially  when  ncbulse  form  ;  also  chronic  nebulae.

4.  Scrofulous  Affection  of  the  Ears,  with  swelling  of  the
parotids;  albuminous,  watery  otorrhiea.

5.  Scrofulous  swelling  of  the  nose. Orsna.

6.  Scrofulous  Spinal  Affection.  Pott's  curvature  ;  soft-
ening of  vertebral  column ;  scrofulous  coxalgia.  which
develops  slowly  ;  scrofulous  and  tuberculous  caries,

7.  In  fibrous  Scirrkusy  in  so  far  at  least  as  at  the  begin-
ning, it  consists  of  albuminous  infiltration,  Conium  may  be
of  service  ;  \>mX  generally  when  an  affection  of  this  kind  in
the  mammary  or  axillary  gland  is  presented  to  our  notice,
it  is  too  late  for  its  removal  If,  however,  rational  symptoms
or  hereditary  taint  give  reason  to  anticipate  or  suspect  the


NO. II. CONIUM  MACULATUM.


389


commencement  of  such  an  affection,  Conium  would  certainly
be  among  the  most  useful  remedies,  yet  the  symptoms  of
Conium  have  rather  the  character  of  those  of  infarctus  than
of  developed  fibroidcs.  in  which  the  knife  alone  avails.'

8.  JnduratUm  in  general  of  mamma  and  uterus  (as  well
after  reduction  of  inflammation  as  in  chronic  form),  with
discharge  of  mucus.  All  indurations;  not  so  markedly
indicated,  however,  in  indurations  resulting  from  inflam-
mation.

9.  For  the  Carcinomatous  diathesis  Conium  can  do  noth-
ing, even  in  the  beginning.

ro.  In  Atrophy  of  mamma  and  uterus,  Conium  may  be
useful ;  the  conditions  to  which  Conium  corresponds  often
coinciding  with  atrophy;  numerous  observations  show  its
especial  applicability  to  affections  of  old  women.

11.  Results  of  Contusions ;  hence,  after  difficult  or  instru-
mental labor.

12.  Since  the  conditions  already  named  are  mostly  con-
joined with  discharge,  Conium  may  be  considered  as  anti-
leucorrhceic.  Chlorosis,  amcnorrhtea,  and  dysmenorrhaea,
when  they  depend  on  the  same  cause,  indicate  Conium;
jret  these  symptoms  may  be  independent,  and  may  still  coin-
cide with  the  symptoms  of  Conium.  To  the  same  category
belong  also  sterility,  milk-tumors,  and  affections  caused  by
the  sudden  removal  of  the  child  from  the  breast


'  The  later  Englisli  authors  are
dlipoied  Co  coD&ie  the  [crm  Sdnhiu
to  the  first  Blagc  of  Camer,  before  ul-
cemtton  takes  pluc.  Scirrhos,  then,
isilwtjrsa  malignnHt  sS{tKi\aa.  The
<Sermik8  af>p!y  the  term,  however,
indifterentlir  to  such  benign  or  malig-
Tiant  tumors  as  from  their  ph}'sical
character,  Aartitttti,  merit  ihc  name.
From  this  eharaettr,  the  btnigm  fihroiti
iumior  {fibroidei  fii  RoLil^iiik]r)of  ihc
olcrnt  or  iDamma  is  ofien  called
Sfirvkus.  It  is  ttf  tku  tpeties  of
SO


tumor,  and  not  to  the  malignant  Can-
ttr  in  its  JSnt  ttagt,  lliai  Coniunt  Is
applicable,  and  even  in  chli,  to  benign
fibroidcs  only  in  the  fDmtaTive  itage.
Daring  the  year  1851,  two  patients  in
Dr.  Wurmb's  Hospital,  in  Vienna,  in
whom  fibrous  tumor  of  the  uterus
was  dearly  recognized,  were  treated
with  Canitnm.  Id  one,  the  tumor
disappeared;  in  the  other,  it  had
i;rcally  dimiaithcd  in  siie,  when  the
refused  fiuthcr  ucatmcnt.

C.  D.


290


DIAGNOSIS IN HOMCEOPATHIC PRACTICE.


1 3.  Affections  of  the  Intestinal  canal ;  seldom  when  th<
are  primary, — chiefly when they  arc combined with,
rather  are  consequent  upon,  a  general  condition  indicatii
Conium. Vomiting during pregnancy; diseases of
intestinal  canal  in  tuberculous  and  scrofulous  persons,  espe-
cially scrofulous  children.

14.  Dry,  nightly,  tickling  cough,  especially  in  scrofuk
or  aged  persons ;  evening  dyspntsa ;  pertussis,  with  muc
vomiting ;  asthma  senile.

15.  Feeble  condition  of  old  women  and  men;  h)
hypochondriasis  in  chaste  wedlock.


NO. m. MERCURIUS.


Mercurlus has been well proved. Its  symptoms
chiefly  objective.

1.  Its  only  primary  effects  arc  on  the  vc|^tative  spt
which  It  affects  in  the  highest  degree,  both  quantitively
qualitatively. It  alters  the  vegetation  so  deeply  and  tht
oughly,  that  it  assimilates  itself,  as  it  were, to  the  whc
organism,  decomposes  and  separates  its  organic  constituent
and  becomes  itself  a  new  element  of  the  organism. Hent
arises  a  new  Mercurio-vitol  process,  tlie  natural  vital  procc
having  given  place to the operation of  Mercurius.
other effects— viz., upon tlie nervous system^are sec-
ondary.

2.  In  the  vegetative  sphere,  Mercurius  attacks,  first  of  all,
the  secretive  and  resorptive  processes.  (The  increased
absorption  is  not  a  secondary  result  of  increased
Absorption,  as  well  as  secretion,  is  primarily  affected,
is  shown  by  the  rapid  absorptJbn  of  Mercurius  by  the  exter-,
nal  skin.)  It  excites  both  of  these  processes  to  increax^l
activity.  The  secretions  are  therefore  increased  in  quantity.
They  are  altered  in  quality.  This  alteration  has  refcrei
both  to  consistence  and  to  intimate  chemical  compoiatM


VO. lit. MERCURIUS.


291


In  consLstence.  they  become  thinner  and  more  fluid ;  this
effect  distinguishes  Mcrcurius  from  remedies  otherwise  anal-
ogous, but  which  thicken  the  secretions.  (Hcpar,  Conium.)
As  to  chemical  composition,  tliey  become  acrid  and  exco-
riating. This  twofold  alteration  depends  upon  the  peculiarity
of  Mcrcurius,  already  stated  (i):  in  the  first  place,  this  plas-
ticity of  the  secretions  is  diminished,  and  fluidation  instead
of  coagulation  is  brought  about;  in  the  next,  in  the  room
of  the  displaced  plastic  materials,  whose  decomposition  it
effects,  Mcrcurius  insinuates  and  establishes  itself.

3.  Mcrcurius  causes,  first,  a  condition  of  excitation  ^even
to  inflammation  an<I  suppuration).  This  is  to  be  explained,
generally,  by  the  .stimulating  action  of  Mcrcurius,  and  the
reaction  of  the  organism.  Then  follows  a  torpid  collapse  of
tfie  of^anic  forces, — weakness  even  to  exhaustion.  This
results  from  the  commencing  decomposition  induced  by
Mercurius.

4.  Mercurius  penetrates  the  whole  organism.  No  portion
escapes  its  action.  Before  all  other  parts,  however,  in  sus-
ceptibility, stand:  i.  AH  the  membranes  and  the  glands
of  the  lymphatic  system ;  2.  The  parenchymatous  organs ;
and  3.  The  muscular  and  ncr\*ous  systems.


EFFECTS  /.V  GENERAL.

I.  Vegetation.  The  vegetative  function  depends  upon
the  equality  in  activity  of  the  secretive  and  absorptive
processes.  If  one  or  both  of  these  be  abnormally  affected,
nutrition  and  assimilation  (vegetation)  will  immediately
sympattiize.  Since  Mercurius  affects  these  proce&ses  pri-
marily, in  a  verj*  high  degree,  vegetation  must  be  deeply
affected.  The  vegetative  process  is  retarded,  and  at  last
entirely  arrested,  with  the  following  phenomena :

I.  As  to  Nutrition.  General  emaciation.  Laxity;  pale,
earthy  hue  of  the  skin  and  mucous  membranes;  baldness.
Spong'iness  of  the  tissues,  especially  of  the  gums ;  disposi-
tion to ha:morrhagc ; diseases  of  the bones, and,  as  a


292


DIAGXOSIS IN HOMCEOPATHIC PRACTICE.


natural  consequence,  great  weakness,  increased  by  every
slight  cflTort ;  great  sensibility  to  all  injurious  influences ;
violent  thirst,  double  vision.

2.  Assimilation  (i.  <•.,  with  reference  to  vitality  and  con-
stitution of  the  blood)  is  most  deeply  aflectcd.  On  tlie  one
hand,  the  tone  of  the  vessels  is  depressed ;  and  on  the
other,  the  blood  itself  loses  its  plastic  constituents,  becoming
altered  in  composition.  Hence,  in  general^  the  pulse  is
Increased  in  frequency,  but  is  feeble  (it  may  be  also  slow
and  soft).  In  the  beginning,  however,  congestion  and  even
inflammation  occurs  in  individual  organs ;  but  later,  only
hypcrarmia  and  stases  in  these  and  in  the  periphery.  Exu-
dations often  occur,  partly  because  of  the  local  inflammatioQ
in  the  hypcrxmic  parts,  and  partly  because  of  the  increased
fluidity  of  the  blood.  Although,  in  consequence  of  the
decomposition  of  the  blood,  the  venosity  threatens  to  pre-
ponderate, this  result  is  nevertheless  obviated  by  the
excessive  secretion,  and  anemia  or  hydremia  is  every^vhere
manifest ;  or  if  venosity  become  manifest,  it  is  of  short
duration,  showing  itself  in  ecchymosis.

Secondary  Symptoms.  With  the  phenomena  above-men-
tioned, the  whole  vital  energy  succumbs.  The  thermogenesis
will  tliorcforc  be  diminished.  Thus,  the  cliilliness,  sensi-
bility to  cold  air,  and  desire  for  the  warmest  possible
temperature,  are  explicable.  This  is  the  general  condition ;
there  may  be,  however,  temporary  and  partial  excitement
of  the  vascular  system ;  and  hence  alternations  of  heat  and
cold  occur,  which  appear  so  much  the  more  frequently,  as
the  ercthistic  condition  is  more  highly  developed.

II.  Ncnjous  Sysifm.  The  effects  on  the  nervous  system
spring  from  two  causes:  (i),  a  general  cause, — the  diminu-
tion and  decomposition  of  the  fluids,  and  the  reduction  of
the  functions  to  an  erethisttc  or  even  a  torpid  condition ;
and  (2),  a  special  cause, — the  action  of  Mercuritis  upon  the
membranes,  which  extends  to  the  neurilemma  and  tlie
nervous  centers.


NO. III. MERCURIUS.


293


t.  The  nen'ous  power  is  diminished;  hence,  as  regards
sensation,  a  feeling  of  g^rcat  depression,  as  well  as  actual
prostration,  restlessness  and  general  indisposition ;  and,  as
regards  motion,  a  lack  of  power,  the  motions  becoming
tremulous,  indirect,  and  scarcely  obedient  to  the  will :
hence,  mercurial  trembling,  loss  of  speech,  dysphagia,
cough,  etc.

2.  By  virtue  of  the  special  cause,  the  neurilemma  being
attacked,  true  neuralgia  occurs  (prosopalgia  mercurialis),
especially  when  single  nerve-twigs  are  involved.  The  pain
is  drawing  and  tearing,  attacks  generally  but  a  single  nerve ;
often  changes  its  location,  but  sometimes  retains  its  seat  for
montlis ;  is  aggravated  by  hygrometric  changes,  and  by
changes  of  temperature.  The  ///i  side  is  the  most  power-
fully affected.

3.  As  a  general  rule,  only  the  nerves  of  sensation  and
motion  arc  attacked,  the  vegetative  nerves  suffering  through
the  local  conditions.

4.  The  sensorium  is  generally  depressed  (save  during
erethism)  ;  hence  giddiness,  irritability,  mental  disturbance,
mania,  melancholy,  loss  of  memory,  imbecility.

III.  SecretwHS  in  general.  The  secretions  of  every  kind
are  altered  and  increa.sed.  They  become  acrid,  and  the  quan-
tity of  some  of  their  constituents  is  abnormally  increased.

1.  Sweat.  Exceedingly  copious,  easily  provoked,  oily,
sour,  giving  a  yellow  tinge  to  the  linen.

2.  Of  Mucous  Membranes  in  general.  Acrid,  causing
therefore  burning  in  the  anus  and  tenesmus,  tenesmus  of
the  bladder,  and  burning,  before  and  after  micturition.  The
salivary  secretion  is  characteristically  increased.  The  pan-
creatic secretion  is  increased ;  secretion  of  bile  is  increased  ;
hence  greenish -yellow  stools.

3.  Genital  Organs.  Glandular  and  urethral  gonorrhcea ;
increased  discharge  of  semen. Menses  increased  in  quantity.

k-I^ucorrhoea,  <u>metimes  mucous,  sometimes  purulent

Respit  pins. The  peculiarities  of  the secre-


m


DIAGNOSIS  JN HOM(EOPATHlC  PRACTICE.


tions  induced  by  Mercurius  are  here  less  obvious.  The
normal  secretion  seems  often  even  diminished.  Frequent
haemorrhage.

Abnormal  SccrefioHi. To  this  category  belong :

{i.}  The  purulent  decomposition  of  inflamed  parts  gen-
erally.

(2.)  Formation  of  pustular  eruptions.

(3.)  Ulcers  in  general,  as  combining  these  two  character-
istics. For,  as  to  the  former,  the  suppuration  always  pro-
ceeds from  an  inflammatory  process,  and  is  hence  preceded  by
signs  of  inflammation, — redness,  heat,  swelling, — especially
when  occurring  in  the  glands  and  cellular  tissue ; hence  ■
swelling  of  the  gums,  fauces,  tonsils,  epiglottis,  paroiid  and
submaxillary  glands  and  inflammation  and  suppuration  of
the  cervical, inguinal, meibomian  and mammary  glands.
Again,  as  to  the  latter,  the  eruptions  caused  by  Mercurius
have  the  complete  character  of  inflammation,  with  a  ten-
dency to  suppuration or  to  puriform  collections. (The *
irritative  character  of  Mercurius,  and  the  consequent  reaction  fl
of  the  organism,  together  with  the  tendency  of  Mercurius "
to  cause  fluidity,  induce  the  suppuration.) The pustule
formation  is  often  incomplete ; hence  erythema,  eczema,
erysipelas, impetigo,  rupia  f'/tar^^  vesicles) ; or,  in  mucous
membranes, aphtha:, herpes prscputialis. The eruptions
have  this  peculiarity,  that on  the  spots  originally  occupied
by  them,  sequela;  form — e.  g:,  scales.

The  mercurial  ulcer  originates  In  inflammation,  removing
the  epidermis,  and  producing  a  discharge  of  pus  and  sanies.
The  ulcer  rapidly  increases  in  breadth  and  depth,  soon
becomes  indolent  and  spongy,  and  finally  bleeds.  The
circumference  is  red,  the  mai^ns  puflcd.  It  most  fre-
quently occurs  in  mucous  membranes,  and  in  the  mouth
and  on  the  genital  organs.

5,  Serous  and  Fibrous  Tissues.  These  tissues  become
irritated.  A  secretion  takes  place  in  the  capsules  of  joints
and  sheaths  of  muscles,  fulfilling  the  conditions  of  rheu-


4


NO. III. MERCURiUS.


295


matism.  la  the  serous  sacs,  collections  of  water  form
(mcrcurinl  rheumatism),  and  also  of  pu3.  Inflammation  of
the  periosteum  occurs,  witli  deposition  of  new  products,
e.  g.,  gummata.  The  bones  become  dry  and  brittle,  through
loss  of  fluidity.

IV.  Mercurius  excites  the  lymphatic  glandular  system  in
general,  even  to  inflammation  and  ulceration  of  the  glands
(axillary,  cervical  inguinal,  etc.),  and  at  the  same  time
primarily  stimulates  in  a  very  high  degree,  the  absorption
in  the  lymphatic  vessels.  N.  B.  It  aflfects  especially  the
salivary  glands,  increasing  the  secretion,  inducing  swelling,
inflammation  and  suppuration.

7"j4/  Liver.  Mercurius  induces  incomplete  reproduction;
hence  the  fatty  diathesis.  It  is  indicated,  before  all  other
remedies,  in  fatty  disease  of  tfic  liver,  resulting  from
depressed  vegetation.

For  the  Spleen,  Mercurius  has  little  afl!inity.  For  the
Lungs,  more  than  for  the  spleen.


A//ALYS/S  IN  ANATOMICAL  ORDER.

Head, Various  sensations  and  pains. Congestion.
Eyes. Irritation, swelling sensation as  of  sand in  the

eye,  lachrymation,  conjunctival  congestion,  photophobia,
ptosis,  crdcma  of  cellular  tissue  and  conjunctiva,  loss  of
brilliancy  in  cornea,  nebula;,  amblyopia,  amaurosis,  iritis.

Ears.  Inflammation  with  pustules,  hemorrhage,  deafness,
Dluston  of  the  sense ;  pains.

Nose.  Peculiar  painfulncss  of  nasal  bones.  Mercurius,
above  all  remedies,  is  related  to  the  nose,  especially  to  the
pharyngeal  portion  of  it. Swelling  and  ha;morrhage.

Face.  Collapse,  paleness,  blue  rings  around  the  eyes.
CEdema,  convulsive  jerkings.

T$etk.  Swelling,  redness,  burning,  bleeding  of  gums;
looseness  of  teeth,  aggravation  of  pain  by  cold  applications,
and  at  night

Mouth  and  Pharynx. At  first,  erythema;  at  the  same


2g6


DIAGNOSIS IN HOMtEOPATHIC PRACTICE.


time  cedema,  vesicles,  pustules,  aphtlwt.  The  inflamed  spots
are  very  sensitive  and  bleed  easily.  Swelling  and  dryness
of  tongue,  discharge  of  saliva.  Difficulty  in  moving  the
tongue,  even  to  paralysis.

Throat,  CEsopfuxgiis.  StiRhess,  swelling  of  pharynx,
pressing  pain,  and  excoriation.  Dysphagia.  The  tonsils.
are  first  afTected,  then  the  gums.

Digestive  Organs,  i.  Loss  of  appetite,  nausea,  bulimy^
metallic  taste,  no  thirst,  save  a  desire  to  moisten  the  dry-
parts  aiTectcd.  2.  Digestion  disturbed.  Ructus,  vomtturitisa
collection  of  water  in  the  mouth;  nightly  nausea.  Mucous
secretion  increased  and  changed;  pancreatic  juice  altered.
Stomach  pains.  3.  Abdomen.  Fullness,  oppression,  meteor-
ism,  sensibility,  sticking,  cutting,  pinching  pains  in  liver.  4.
Stools.  Frequent,  with  little  or  no  discharge  of  solid  or  soft
ftEces;  pappy,  whitish-gray  or  green-yellow,  sometimes.
bloody,  acrid  and  excoriating;  tenesmus,  pinching  and
burning  in  anus,  going  un  to  inflammation,  suppuration  and
hemorrhage. Dysentery.

Mcrcurius  has  especial  affinity  for  the  tn'o  ends  of  the
digestive  canal.  The  stomach  and  upper  intestine  are  but
slightly  alifectcd  ;  oflcn  not  at  all.

Genital  Organs.  The  mucous  membrane  Ls  the  part
chiefly  afllected.

1.  Male.  Swelling;  formation  of  scales,  vesicles,  pustules,
ulcers,  analogous  to  those  of  the  mouth  and  pharynx ;
discharges,  itching  and  burning;  discharge  of  semen  without
pleasure ;  gonorrhcea.

2.  Female.  Gidema;  Leucorrhcea  purulent,  acrid.  Men-
ses copious.

Respiratory  Organs.  Expectoration  streaked  with  blood.
Mucous  membrane  Ught-colored  ;  its  substance  little  afTected.
Coryza,  with  acrid,  purulent  discharge.  Trachea.  Dry
irritation ;  cough,  with  bloody  sputa.  iMngs,  dyspn<ra,
asthma,  sticking  pains,  oppression.

Back  and  Limbs. In  these  parts  arc  experienced  all  the


NO. III. MERCURIUS.


297


symptoms  relating  to  skin,  serous  and  fibrous  membranes
and  bones,  e.g.,  itching,  crawling,  buniing,  lassitude,  loss  of
power — tearing,  sticking,  and  throbbing  pain,  cracking  of
the  joints — cramps  and  trembling — ccdema,  exostosis.

Characteristics.  Aggravation  by  cold,  and  at  night ;
from  exposure  to  currents  of  air.  and  to  change  of  weather;
this  applies  to  all  the  symptoms.  Swelling  and  irritation
of  the  parts  attacked,  suppuration,  ulceration,  pustular  erup-
tions. Increased  and  acrid  secretions,  salivation,  diarrha'a,
goncrrhcea.  Menses  too  copious.  Sweat;  trembling  and
spasm,  especially  of  the  flexors.  Osseous  affections.  Es-
pecial relation  to  those  mucous  surfaces  which  arc  nearest
the  external  skin.

Application,  i.  Generally.  To  individuals  of  a  depressed
vegetation,  of  a  tendency  to  mucous  and  bloody  discharge,
to  suppuration  with  hydremia,  to  affections  of  the  lymphatic
and  glandular  systems.  To  children  in  the  period  of  denti-
tion ;  to  youths  of  feeble  and  Icucophlcgmatic  temperament,
but  not  torpid,  on  the  contrary,  rather  ercthistic.  In  both
acute  and  chronic  diseases ;  in  the  former,  however,  not
until  the  general  excitement  has  somewhat  abated,  and  the
inflammatory  condition  has  become  localized.  In  simple
inflammations  as  well  as  in  formation  of  deposits.

2.  As  to  erases.  In  all  erases  characterized  by  slow
depression  of  the  plastic  life,  by  increased  and  altered  secre-
tions, and  still  more,  by  a  tendency  to  suppuration  or  to
purulent  exudation.  All  erases  in  which  Mercurius  is  indi-
cated are  characterized  by  erethism  and  never  by  torpor,
hence,  Mercurius  does  not  stand  high  oil  the  list  of  antiscor-
butics, because  in  scorbutus  there  is  mere  collapse,  and  no
tendency  to  suppuration.  Still  in  cases  of  scorbutus,  with
manifest  excitement  combined  with  phlebitis,  it  is  often
available.  In  other  cases,  Carfoo  vegctabilis,  Arsenicum,
China,  Arnica,  Lachcsis,  are  preferable.  Mercurius  is  more
strongly  indicated  in  the  tuberculous  and  scrofulous  erases
when  the  parts  attacked  threaten  to  inflame  and  suppurate.


298


DIAGNOSIS IN HOM(EOPATHIC PRACTICE.


and  where  erethism  is  present  and  ulceration  threatens. As
to  special  erases :

1.  /«  Tubcreuhsis.  In  the  second  stage,  with  tuberculous
ulceration  and  copious  purulent  expectoration,  with  fever
and  gradual  emaciation,  Mcrcurius  should  nfi/tTbc  employed.
It  is  indicated  only  in  an  crcthlstic  condition  of  the  lungs —
hence  not  in  pneumonia,  rather  in  hectic  fever  in  consequence
of  pyiemia.  In  tuberculous  affections  of  the  bones  with
tendency  to  caries. In  necrosis,

2.  In  Scro/uiosis,  with  ulceration  or  swelling  of  the  glands,
otherwise  Calcareais  preferable.  Scrofulous  affections  of  the
bones.  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.  In  rachitis,  as  distinct  from
scrofula,  probably  not  so  appropriate  as  Calcarea.

3.  In  Syp/iiiis,  especially  when  the  mucous  membrane  and
glands  are  affected — especially  when  ulcerated.  Mcrcurius
has  less  affinity  for  tlic  eruptions  unless  they  be  pustular
(Rupia).  Not  so  well  adapted  to  the  syphilitic  osseous
affections.

4.  In  Pyamia,  from  absorption  of  purulent  matters.
Except  Arsenic,  no  better  remedy  is  known  for  this  crasts.
Also  in  erases  tliat  present  similar  symptoms  to  those  of
pyxnita.

5.  In  the  Infiammatory  crasts,  with  mild  fever  with
tendency  to  localiration,  and  infiammatory  exudations  in  the
cellular  tissue  and  glands.  Pleuritis,  meningitis,  peritonitis.
Inflammation  of  the  capsules  of  joints  and  sheaths  of
muscles,  with  purulent,  plastic  exudations.

6.  In  the  Typhoid  crasis,  Mcrcurius  is  scarcely  indicated
unless  in  typhoid  parotitis.  But  in  puerperal  fever  it  is  a
most  precious  remedy  against  both  the  local  affection  and  the
general  condition.  In  metritis  puerperalis, — affections  of
the  joints,  and  puerperal  deposits  (metastatic),  because  of  the
general  tendency  to  pyaemia.

7.  In  the  Rheumatic  rrajM,  seldom  indicated,  rather  where
the  periosteum  is  affected  with  aggravation  by  change  of
weather.


for


MBRCURIUS.


299


8.  In  the  CEdematic  crasis,  contra-indicated  in  anasarca  or
ascites.

9.  Mercurius  is  indicated  in  Icterus,  with  irritation  of  tlie

liver — febris  biliosa.

10.  In  Exanthemata,  vesicular,  and  pustular  (seldom  the
papular),  both  acute  and  chronic.  In  variola,  when  pyxmia
is  established  after  the  repercussion  of  the  eruption.  In
salivation;  in  herpes  zoster  Mercurius  vivus  is  a  specific.
In  benign  furunculus  (not  in  malignant),  impetigo,  miliaria,
eczema,  cnista  lactea.


Ili/DICATIONS  m  ANATOMICAL  ORDER.

I.  Head.  Hydrocephalus  acutus;  abscesses  in  the  scalp;
caries;  syphilis.

3.  Ophthalmia  scrofulosa,  and  catarrlialis  witli  purulent
secretion  ;  inflamed  cellular  tissue.

3.  Otitis  with  purulent  discharge.

4.  Angina  with  tendency  to  suppuration.  Tonsillitis.
Aphtha.

5.  Swelling,  inflammation  and  suppuration  of  the  gums.

6.  Glossitis;  inflammation  of  cellular  tissue  and  glands,
with  irritation  of  all  surrounding  parts;  suppuration,  ulcera-
tion, salivation,  toothache,  with  ulcers  from  caries,  stomacace
(compare  Iodine).

7.  Hepatitis,  acute  and  chronic. Bilious  derangements.

8.  Enteritis,  acute  and  chronic,  when  actual  pus  is  formed
after  the  first  stage.

9.  Diarrhoea  generally,  with  muco-purulent  stools,  green
and  bloody,  tenesmus,  scanty  stools,  much  tormina,  burning
in  rectum,  no  pains  in  the  abdomen.

10.  Proctitis,  and  proctalgia,  with  discharge  of  pus  and
blood-

II.  Dysentery  in  high  grades,  with  purulent  secretions,
tenesmus,  scanty  stool.

12.  Inflammation  of  kidneys  (and  irritation  after  inflam-
mation), with  irritation  and  purulent  urine.


300  DIAGNOSIS  IN  HOMCEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.

13.  Inflammation  of  the  bladder  and  urethra.

14.  Gonorrhcea,  ulceration  of  the  genitals ;  oedema
prxputialts  (especially  in  children,  with  slight  erysipelas) ;
orchitis;  leucorrhcea  excoriating.

1  s .  Metritis,  especially  lymphangioitis,  leading  to  pyaemia.

1 6.  Oophoritis  (after  Belladonna,  and  succeeded  by
Platina). Hydrops  ovarii. (Graphites  ?)

17.  Catarrh;  iwt  indicated  unless  there  be  purulent  dis-
charge.

18.  Myelitis.

19.  Fanaritis.  (Mercurius  yields  only  to  Hepar  in
efficacy.)

20.  Psoitis;  scrofulous  coxalgia  in  incipience.  When
suppuration  already  exists,  Mercurius  does  not  remove  it.
Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

21.  Arthritis. White  swelling.

22.  Trembling,  twitching  of  the  features,  as  a  secondary
phenomenon. Neuralgia.


NO.  IV. ACONITE.

Aconite  is  the  general  representative  of  antiphlogistics.

Effects  in  general,  i.  Vascular  System.  It  operates  power-
fully as  a  direct  excitant  of  the  vessels,  and  produces,  there-
fore, true  synocha.

2.  Aconite  produces  no  crasis,  and  has,  therefore,  no
tendency  to  product-formation.  Its  action  is  purely
dynamic,  viz.:  the  pulse  is  much  accelerated,  hard  and
strong;  thermogenesis  is  increased;  thirst  great;  general
sensation  abnormal.

3.  It  has  a  greater  action  on  the  more  vascular  organs —
hence  above  all,  on  the  lungs,  giving  rise  to  various  degrees
of  excitement;  next  to  the  lungs  it  affects  the  periphery,
and,  last  of  all,  the  intestines.  Hence  congestion  of  blood
to  these  parts,  and  haemorrhages.


NO. IV. ACONITE.


301


4.  It  has  no  especial  relations  to  the  fibrous  and  mucous
tissues,  although  it  exerts  an  inflammatory  action  on  all
organs  and  tissues  of  the  body.  (Br^'onia  also  has  this
specific  action,  although  it  excites  the  vascular  system  less
intensely  than  Aconite.)

5.  Its  action  on  the  Nen^ous  System  is  secondary,  i.  The
scnsoriiim  is  cither  excited  in  consequence  of  the  vascular
excitement, — hence  delirium, — or,  2.  It  is  depressed  by
reason  of  the  vascular  congestion  ;  hence  sopor.

6.  Aconite  has  characteristic  morning  and  evening  exacer-
bations; tlie  majority  of  the  pains  are  sticking ;  other  pains
occur  according  to  the  nature  of  the  organ  attacked.

General  Indications.  Aconite  is  generally  indicated,  i.
In  all  inflammations  in  the  beginning,  against  the  vascular
excitement  which  always  prevails,  before  the  disease  is  fully
developed.  Its  action  is  brief,  and  docs  not  interfere  with
that  of  subsequent  prescriptions.  2.  As  an  alternating
remedy  after  the  development  of  the  disease,  when  the
vascular  excitement  continues.

Special  Indications.  I.  (i.)  Inflammatory  Fever.  (2)  In
all  inflammations,  a.  While  the  vascular  excitement  is  great,
and  before  any  product  has  yet  formed,  b.  When  the
product  is  already  forming,  if  the  vascular  storm  has  not
abated.  (3.)  Especially  in  inflammations  of  the  serous  and
fibrous  tissues ;  Aconite  is  preferable  to  all  other  remedies
in  these  cases — when  the  vascular  excitement  is  great,  and
a  plastic  exudation  threatens  (for  less  intense  vascular
excitement  and  a  threatened  scroxts  exudation,  Bryonia) ;
hence  in  meningitis,  pleuritis,  peritonitis,  under  these  con-
ditions.

2.  In  Ophthalmia, — acute,  with  febrile  excitement,^ — a
sovereign  remedy.

3.  In  the  periods  of  dentition  and  menstruation  with
vascular  excitement  It  does  not  disturb  the  menstrual
function.

4.  Acute  Rheumatism.


302


DIAGNOSIS IN HOM(E0PATHTC PRACTICE.


5.  Acute  Catarrh.

6.  Tuberculosis  with  febrile  excitement.

7.  Vascular  affections.  Arteritis,  pericarditis,  and  endo-
carditis. In  organic  heart  disease,  for  the  periodical  excite-
ment (Aconite  is  preferable  to  Digitalis,  which  sometimes
leaves  injurious  sequels.)

8.  Violent  dynamic  congestions,  depending  on  no  organie
cause.


Na  V. CALCAREA  CARBONICA.


anit  I


Calcarca  affects  exclusively  the  vegetative  system ;  all
other  action  is  secondary.  The  secretive  and  resorptive
functions  are  immediately  stimulated  to  increased  activity,
and  a  condition  of  irritation  ensues.  All  organs  and  sys-
tems arc  affected,  the  nutrition  of  a!I  being  altered.  The
lymphatic  system  is  affected  in  a  special  degree ;  and,  in
tlic  mode  of  this  affection,  the  Calcarea  symptoms  resemble
the  scrofulous  process  in  its  lower  grades.  Calcarca  is  a
chronic  remedy,  because  it  alters  the  erases ;  also  a  sub-
acute, because  the  prtrducts  of  the  altered  erases  provoke  a
state  of  irritation. Its  action  is  not  stormy,  but  mild  and  slotr.

1.  Nervous  Systettt.  Not  specifically  affected;  the  iso-
lated spasms  that  occur  are  secondary.  Patns  corresponding
to  the  nature  of  tlie  organs  attacked.  Sticking  p<uns,  and
a  sensation  of  rigidity,  predominate.

2.  Vtgitation  in  General.  A  cachectic  habit  is  induced  ;
decrease  of  temperature;  puffincss  of  the  soft  parts;  laxity
and  general  debility,  with  increased  sensibility  to  external
influences, — as  changes  of  weather.

3.  Vascular  System.  Moderate  degree  of  fever ;  chill  and
heat  quickly  alternating  ;  fugitive  heats;  chilliness  predom-
inates. Sweat  breaks  out  easily,  especially  in  ttie  palms
and  soles  ;  evening  exacerbation.  Thus,  a  fe\'cr  resembling
that  of  Tuberculosis.  The  composition  of  the  blood  is  not
primarily  altered ;  secondarily  it  is  altered.


4


i


4-  Lymphatic  System.  Excitement  and  irritation.  Re-
sorption is  deranged,  and  its  activity  is  increased ;  Uie
glands  are  swollen,  irritated,  become  the  seat  of  a  deposit,
and  even  pass  into  a  state  of  inflammation.  The  glands
of  the  neck  and  mesentery  arc  especially  attacked.

5.  Skitt.  Irritation,  evinced  by  erythema,  erysipelas,
papules,  vesicles,  pustules,  bleeding  ulcers,  and  scaling  ofTof
the  epidermis,  especially  on  the  head ;  the  skin  ulcerates
easily,  especially  at  tender  points, — e.  g.,  tips  and  margins
of  eyelids,  the  inner  surface  of  the  arms,  and  the  anterior
surface  of  the  thigh,  dorsum  of  the  foot,  and  outer  surface
of  the  ear,  etc.

6.  Mucous  Membrane  and  Glands.  Irritation.  Secretion
ratlicr  diminished  than  increased.


ANALYSIS  /.V  ANATOMICAL  ORDER.

1.  Head.  No  especial  symptom  of  cerebral  disturbance.
Frequent  congestion  in  consequence  of  the  general  irritation.

2.  Eyfs.  Irritation  and  rigidity  of  the  lids.  Conjunctiva
reddened  ;  feeling  as  of  sand  in  the  eye  ;  photophobia  ;  tlie
secretion  of  the  meibomian  glands  is  thick  and  glutinous.
Lachrymal  secretion  increased.

3.  Ears.  Increased  secretion  of  cerumen.  Purulent
discharge ;  deafness.

4.  Nose.  Ulceration  of  the  alse;  purulent,  fcettd  dis-
charge. Dry  obstruction.

5.  Month.  Gums  red  and  swollen.  Also  the  whole  mouth
to  the  uvula.  Salivation.  Tonsils  and  palate  swollen.  Deg-
lutition difficult

6.  Intestinal  Tract.  In  stomach  and  abdominal  canal
great  sensibility  to  pressure  ;  burning  and  pinching  pains.
Loss  of  appetite.  Repugnance  especially  to  meat,  which
passes  away  undigested.  Rancid,  sour  eructations.  Fkccs
long  retained  ;  hence,  tormina  Stools  solid  and  dry,  with
straining.  Sometimes  also  diarrhoea  (secretion  being  abnor-
mal in  quality),  watery  and  pappy,  always  scanty. The


304


DIAGNOSIS  IN  HOMOEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.


intestinal  secretion  being:  abnormal,  induces  irritation;  hence,
spasm  of  stomach  and  intestine.

7.  Liver. Irritation,  especially  in  the  biliary  passages.

8.  Urinary  Organs.  Pressing  and  sticking  in  the  kid-
neys and  bladder ;  burning,  dysuria,  enuresis.  Urine
diminished  in  quantity,  and  for  the  most  part  saturated
with  saline  constituents,  and  hence  dark  or  turbid.

9.  Genitals.  Congestion  and  swelling.  As  to  sexual
functions,  erethism  ;  and,  as  an  alternate  effect,  diminished
instinct.  Sweating  of  the  labia  and  scrotum  (in  gonorrhoea
and  onanism,  compare  Sepia  and  Selenium.  Bni^nninghausca).
It  is  a  most  important  remedy  in  connection  with  early
and  too  copious  menstruation  ;  so  much  so,  that  it  acts
favorably  only  when  these  conditions  are  present

10.  Respiratory  Organs.  Mucous  secretion  altered, — either
increased  or  diminished.  Tenacious,  thick  mucus.  Dryness
of  throat ;  dry  cough,  constriction  of  cliest,  with  hoarseness
and  roughness.

11.  Muscles.  Stiffness;  pains  in  the  joints,  causing  difii-
culty  of  motion.  (Calcarea  favors  the  secretion  of  chalky
deposits  in  the  synovial  sac.)

12.  Bone-pains  from  head  to  feet.

Ckaracteristies.  Calcarea  affects  primarily  only  the  vege-
tative sphere ;  from  this  its  operation  extends  over  the
whole  organism,  exciting  moderately,  producing  irritaUon,
and  appearing  to  favor  a  deposit  of  the  earthy  salts.  The
lymphatic  system  of  vessels  and  glands  is  first  and  most
deeply  affected,  being  the  seat  of  irritation,  .swelling.  depos<
its,  and  their  consequences.  The  skin  and  mucous  mem-
branes are  next  affected ;  the  secretions  are  often  diminished,
and  often  increased  (when  increased,  only  relatively)^  and
are  generally  acrid  and  sour.  The  whole  nutrition  suffers
very  greatly.  Menstruation  is  too  early  and  too  copious.
The  pains  are  various ;  chiefly  a  feeling  of  stiffness,  with  or
without  sticking  pains.  Aggravation  by  change  of  temper-
ature, especially  by  cold, and  at  night. (Rifnninghauscn


NO. V. CAIXAREA CARBONICA.


305


designates  many  important  symptoms,  which  are  aggravated
in  the  morning,  in  contradistinction  to  corresponding  symp-
toms of  CfUWiZ/rKw,  which  have  evening  aggravation. —  C.  D.)
Applicatifm.  To  youthful  persons  and  females;  to  those
who  are  badly  nourished,  pale,  with  affections  of  the  skin
and  mucous  membranes ;  to  all,  in  short,  who  present  tlie
scrofulous  diathesis,  or  one  like  it ;  especially  at  the  period
of  development ;  dentition  and  puberty  (menses  too  copi-
ous) ;  moreover,  for  children  generally.  Tlie  symptoms  of
Calcarea  present  a  striking  picture  of  crethistic  scrofula,
for  which  diathesis  it  is  eminently  appropriate.  (For  the
cancerous  diathesis.  Arsenic;  for  the  chlorotic,  Pulsatilla.)
Tuberculosis  and  Rachitis,  with  excitement  and  irritation.

1.  Children  who  do  not  walk  until  after  the  usual  age,
who  manifest  great  irritability,  have  large,  distended  abdo-
mens, and  scrofulous  inflammations  of  the  skin, —  1.  e.,  gen-
erally little  vesicles  producing  crusts,  chiefly  on  the  head
and  face,  lips,  nose,  and  eyes,— subjects  to  scrofulous  ophthal-
mia, scrofulous  ozcena,  scrofulous  affections  of  the  ears, —
especially  with  a  purulent  discharge.  In  atrophia  infantum,
without  suppuration,  Calcarea  is  better  than  Arsenic.  In
osteomalacia  ;  swelling  of  the  glands.  Indigestion,  with  acid-
ity, in  scrofulous  subjects.  Acid,  pappy  diarrhoea;  also
constipation.  Hclniintliiasis  in  a  scrofulous  diathesis.  What
is  true  of  scrofula  in  general,  is  true  also  of  tuberculosis.

2.  Adults  also ;  in  tuberculosis,  with  colliquative  sweats.
Ophthalmia,  with  thick  blcnnorrhrea.  Ophtlialmia  which
has  left  behind  it  opacity  of  the  cornea. Blennorrhoea  nasalis.

3.  Rlumnatism,  acute  or  chronic.  Tendency  to  vesical
calculus.

4.  Tonsillitis  frequently  recurring;  general  irritation  of
tonsils.

5.  Gastritis.  Chronic,  especially  with  acid  formations.
Gastromalacia  chronica,  witli  evacuation  of  undigested  fxces.
Disposition  to  catarrh,  chronic  catarrh,  catarrh  of  bladder
and  vagina.

81


306


DIAGNOSIS  IN  HOM<E0PATHIC  PRACTICE.


NO. VI. BRYONIA ALBA.


Bryonia  is  in  every  respect  closely  allied  to  Aconite,  as
well  in  its  geaeral  relation  to  the  vascular  system  as  in  its
special  affinities.

1.  Vegetation.  It  operates  directly  on  the  ve^etation^
affecting  especially  the  secretive  process,  producing  a  high
degree  of  irritation,  sometimes  even  inflammation.  First  of
all,  however,  it  increases  the  activity  of  the  resorptive  appa-
ratus ;  that  of  the  secretive  function  is  a  consequence,
(Compare  Mcrcurius.)  Bryonia  induces  tlte  formation  of
products,  viz. :  infiltration  into  the  cellular  tissue,  and  serous
exudations  into  the  serous  sacs.  It  produces  no  plastic
exudations  (as  Hcpar  and  Mercurius  do).  The  blood  is
affected,  as  in  the  milder  forms  of  typhus.  By  virtue  of  its
action  on  the  rcsorptivc  and  secretive  functions.  Bryonia  has
especial  affinities  for  the  abdomen,  where  abound  tliose
organs  and  tissues  on  which  it  especially  acts,  vir.,  serous,
fibrous,  and  mucous  tissues.

2.  Vascular  System.  The  vascular  system  is  excited  in  a
less  degree  than  by  Aconite.  Its  action  is  partial,  i.  r.,  is
exerted  upon  single  organs.  During  the  paroxysm  of  fever,
the  chill  predominates,  occurring  often  In  the  midst  of  the
heat.  Thirst  is  very  intense  (because  of  the  increased
resorption) ;  sweat  very  copious.

3.  Nervous  System.  On  the  nervous  system  it  acts,  1.
probably  directly,  attacking  the  serous  envelopes,  the  men-
inges and  neurilemma;  2.  mechanieaUy,  the  excretions
which  it  induces,  producing,  by  compression,  a  depressing
effect.

4.  Skin.  No  especial  relation.  Irritation,  oedema,  and
vesicles,  characteristic. No  pustules.

J.  Eyes.  Irritation,  serous  secretion,  especially  attacks
the  sero-fihrous  tissues  (keratitis,  sclerotitis,  iritis).  The
secretions  are  at  first  watery ;  later,  they  are  purulent,  thick
and  tenacious.


NO. VI. BRYONIA ALBA.


307


6.  Ears.  A  mild  form  of  periostitis — watery  discharge,
sticking  pains,  illusions  and  dullness  of  hearing.

7.  Face.  Generally  paleness;  frequently,  however,  fugi-
tive heat,  swelling,  with  slight  reflncss.

8.  Digestive  Apparatus.  Irritation.  Secretion  of  the
mucous  membrane  is  at  first  thinned,  then  thickened,  and  then
altogether  suppressed.  Burning  In  the  mouth  and  throat;
difficult  deglutition.  The  fibrous  coats  of  the  muscles  are
especially  affected,  hence  pain  on  turning  the  head,  swallow-
ing, etc.  (different  in  seal  from  pain  of  Belladonna).  CEdcma
of  the  gums,  and  of  the  whole  cavity  of  the  mouth.  Perios-
teum alveolorum  affected;  excessive  sticking  pains  through
the  entire  row  of  teeth,  accompanied  by  oedema  of  the
gums,  even  to  tlic  roots  of  the  teeth.  Salivary  secretion
increased  and  thin.  Stomach.  Digestion  disturbed,  in  con-
sequence ructus,  vomituritio,  vomitus  post  pastum.  Intes-
tine. Similar  irritation ;  constipation  as  well  as  diarrhoea
(serous) ;  rather,  however,  an  alternation  of  the  two ;
pinching  and  burning  pains.  Peritoneum.  Irritation.
Sticking  pain,  great  sensibility.  Hence,  symptoms  from  the
liver,  kidneys,  bladder,  and  uterus  (their  peritoneal  coats
being  affected).  The  secretion  of  the  liver  is  increased.
The  stools  are  thin  and  green,  from  intermixed  bile;
frequent  vomiting  of  bile.  The  kidneys  more  deeply
affected,  secretion  diminished,  urine  clear.  For  the  sexual
organs  it  has  no  affjiiity,  except  in  so  far  as  the  serous
envelopes  of  the  organs  are  concerned.  CEdematous  and
painful  swellings  of  the  testes.

9.  Respiration.  Irritation.  Secretion,  for  the  most  part,
increased,  thin  and  serous.  Dyspnoea.  Pleuritic  inflamma-
tions, with  exudation.

I  o.  Rkeumadsmus  Acutus.  Pain,  swelling,  increased
temperature,  redness,  sensibility  to  changes  of  the  weather,
inability  to  move  the  parts.  Inflammation  of  the  perios-
teum, especially  of  the  bead  and  face»  with  the  characteristic
sticking  pains.


3o8


DIAGNOSIS  IK  HOMEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.


Tile  symptoms  occur  chiefly  in  the  serous  and  fibrous  tis-
sues.

Application.  Bryonia  is  indicated  in  a  condition  betweei
synocha  and  typhus,  resembling  the  former  as  respects  tlw
vascular  system,  and  the  latter  as  respects  the  nervous  (com>
pare  Arnica).  It  is  suitable  for  nervous  and  bilious  tem-
peraments, persons  of  dry  and  spare  habit,  dark  complexion,
excitable  character,  and  predisposition  to  inflammation  of  the,
raembranaus  tissues;  for  women  and  children  in  whom'
excitability  is  great,  but  energ>'  and  stability  of  reaction  only
moderate,  who  are  inclined  to  lymphatic  exudations  and
accumulations,  and  to  nervous  diseases,  and  at  the  same
time,  in  an  equal  degree,  to  active  congestions.

It  is  appropriate  in  all  varieties  of  rheumatism,  and  in  all
conditions  in  which  catarrhal  and  rheumatic  characters  are
combined.

1.  Typhus.  The  efficacy  of  Bryonia  in  tlic  commence-
ment of  typhus  is  attested  by  all  homcEOpathic  writers;  but,
as  in  its  very  commencement  typhus  is  not  easily  recognized,
the  claims  of  Bryonia  remain  sub-dubio.  In  t)'phus  versa-
tilis,  however,  with  rheumatic  pains,  it  is  efficacious  in  all
stages.  Also  in  complications  of  typhus,  with  meningitis
or  pleuritis.  In  localized  typhus,  attacking  the  peritoneum
or  pleura,  it  is  a  sovereign  remedy.

2.  JntenmttcHt  Fever.  Only  in  those  cases  in  which  the
disease  acts  directly  upon  the  ganglionic  system,  in  which
the  cold  predominates,  and  thirst  and  pain  in  the  limbs  are
great,  with  accessory  symptoms,  e.  g.,  serous  diarrhcea  and
sticking  pains.

3.  ^kin.  Urticaria.  MorbiHi  with  eedema,  especially  with
a  vesicular  eruption.  Miliaria  (copious  sweat).  Sweating  of
the  feet,  not  offensive.  If  offensive,  Carbo-vegetabilis  is
preferable.

4.  Nervous  Affections,  of  various  kinds,  having  their  seat
in  the  meninges  and  neurilemma.  Oppression,  dizziness,
staggering,  etc.


NO. VI. BRYONIA ALBA.


309


5.  Rheumatism.  Acute,  with  serous  exudations  and
general  vascular  excitement.

6.  Membranes.  Inflammation  of  serous  membranes,  with
serous  exudations  containing  plastic  floccuh'.  Irritation  of
meninges  (in  actual  inflammation  Belladonna  is  better).  Con-
junctivitis. Hydrops  oculi  acutus.  OCdema  palpebrarum.
Otitis.  Ozxna.  Swelling  of  the  face,  with  sticking  pain  or
without  pain.  Toothache,  sticking  pain,  with  extensive
swelling,  increased  by  cold,  alleviated  by  warmth.  Periton-
itis, and  hence  hepatitis  and  enteritis  serosa.

7.  Gastric  phenomena,  especially  serous  diarrhcea.  Also
renowned  as  a  remedy  for  constipation.  (The  irritated  con-
dition of  the  membranes  induces  diarrhoea,  and  probably,  at
a  later  period,  dryness  of  the  membranes,  and  hence  con-
stipation.)

8.  Icterus,  depending  on  chagrin,  anger,  excessive  physical
efforts,  and  a  sedentary  mode  of  life.

9.  Mastitis,  in  nurses,  especially  when  the  mamma  is
somewhat  cedematous  ^vith  sticking  pains,  and  the  inflamma-
tion is  slight  (for  violent  inflammation,  with  hardness,
redness,  and  pressing  pain, Belladonna;— Phosphorus,  Bcea-
ninghausen).

10.  Respiratory  Organs.  PIcuritis.  Bronchitis  with  dimin-
ished secretion,  much  irritation,  exciting  a  cough,  and  scanty
serous  expectoration,  raised  with  difficulty.  In  pneumonia
it  is  less  frequently  indicated;  only  in  plcuro-pneumonia,  and
in  pneumonia  with  great  oedema.  In  bilious  pneumonia  (of
the  right  lower  lobe).  Bryonia  has  in  general  great  affinity
to  the  biliary  apparatus.

1 1.  General.  Pericarditis,  endocarditis,  hydrocele  (Rhodo-
dendron). CEdematous  glandular  swelling.  Sclereme.
Anasarca,  especially  acute  cedema  pedum.

In  phlegmone  colli  experience  has  shown  Bryonia  to  be  a
most  valuable  remedy  (Wurmb).


3IO


DIAGNOSIS IN HOMCEOPATHIC PRACTICE.


NO.  VIL RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.


GENERAL  EFFECTS.

Rhus  acts  primarily  on  the  vegetative  system,  affecting
especially  the  functions  of  resorption  and  secretion.  All
other  symptoms  are  reflex  from  these  effects.

1.  Its  primary  action  is  excitation  (irritation).

2.  It  has  especial  relations  to  the  membranes ;  and
especially  to  the  mucous  membranes  and  external  skin,
producing  irritation  and  even  inflammation.

SPECIAL  ACTION.

1.  Vascular  System.  Irritation,  even  to  fever.  The  pulse
is  hard,  full,  and  frequent,  and  the  heart  impulse  strong;
but  the  peripheral  vascular  system  is  more  particularly
affected,  and  sometimes  this  alone.  Hence  the  external
heat  exceeds  tlie  internal ;  botlj,  however,  are  abnormally
increased;  thirst  is  very  great.  Vascular  torpor  is  only  a
secondary  condition,  and  is,  hence,  no  indication  for
Rhus.

2.  Nervous  System.  Secondarily  affected.  In  case  of
moderate  vascular  irritation,  the  ner^'ous  system  is  excited ;
in  case  of  very  great  vascular  irritation,  it  is  depressed.
Hence,  in  the  former  case,  great  mental  excitement,  anxiety,
irritation,  sleeplessness,  or  restless  sleep  witli  anxious  dreams;
and,  in  the  latter  case,  sinking  of  the  powers,  weakness  even
to  syncope,  tremblings  and  convulsive  jerkings.

3.  Cerebral  System.  Specifically  affected.  Symptoms  of
incipient  typhus :  headache,  diminished  mental  activity,
uncertainty  of  mnvement,  roaring  in  the  ears,  long  apparent
pondering  before  answering  a  question.  These  cerebral
symptoms  are  present  in  cverj*  case  of  Rhus  intoxication,
and  arc  hence  characteristic.  Hence  the  applicability  of
Rhus  in  typhus.

4.  Nutrition.  Depressed,  but  not  in  a  very  marked
degree.


NO.  Vi;. RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

5.  S^^refifftts.  i.  In  the  Ai^^/irr ^ades  of  excitement,  sW
the  secretion's  are  diminished  in  quantity  and  thickened.
2.  In  the  iciuer  grades  of  excitement,  they  are  increased  in
quantity  and  thickened,  or  else  they  become  serous.  3.  The
Rhus  irritation,  unless  it  proceed  to  inflammation,  is  always
accompanied  by  serous  discharges,  in  the  form  of  evacua-
tions or  of  cedema.


T/SSUES.

1.  Skin.  Especially  affected.  Even  contact  of  the  leaves
of  the  plant,  or  proximity  to  them,  produces  an  eruption,
varying  in  intensity  from  the  slightest  erythema  to  the
gravest  form  of  vesicular  erysipelas.  Vesicular  formations
are  characteristic  of  Rhus.

2.  Mucoui Membranes.  \.  /^/Ar^^,  swcllingofthctongue;
ccdcma  and  swelling  of  tonsils,  and  vesicular  angina ;
phimosis  and  paraphimosis,  vesicular  formations  on  the  whole
penis,  scrotum,  and  perineum,  witli  cedematus  swelling  of  the
neighboring  parts.  This  Rhus  cedema  is  everywhere  hot
2.  Dryness  of  the  mueous  membranes,  and,  in  consequence,
difficult  deglutition,  tickling  in  tlie  larynx,  dry  tongue,  hoarse-
ness, dry  and  painful  cough,  burning  in  the  chest,  burning
pain  in  the  stomach,  nausea,  repugnance  to  stimulating  food,
as  flesh,  wine,  etc'

Intestinal  Canal.  Tardy  aetion.  Tenesmus ;  painful
evacuation  of  dry,  friable  fxces,  often  light-colored  ;  also,
but  less  frcquently^  from  the  tendency  to  serous  depositions,
thin  serous  stools. (Sec  note.)

Urine.  Diminished ;  evacuation  painful ;  tenesmus,  with
burning ;  emission  by  drops ;  also,  involuntary  evacuation.
Urine  turbid  and  scanty,  with  copious  white  sediment ;  also,
increased  in  quantity  and  pale.  (See  note.)  Region  of  the
bladder,  sensitive.


*  The«c  diffcrenl  conditions  of  Ihe
mucous  membrane  dq>end  on  the
diffcrenl  J/grets  of  irritmtiat  induced


bjf  difftrtnt  gradtt »f  inloiitatiett.
Vide  upra,  Strntiaiu,  I  and  2.

C.T>.


312


DIAGNOSIS  IN  HOMEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.


Sexual  S/s/em. Excited  ;  a  condition  of  eretliism.

3.  Serous  Membranes.  Secretion  diminished;  dryness,
cracking  in  the  joints;  feeling  of  roughness  and  stiffness;
sticking  pains.

4.  SerO'fihrous  Tissues.  Secretion  diminished  ;  sensation
of  stiffness  in  the  sheaths  of  the  muscles,  causing  pain  and
difficulty  of  motion.

5.  Osseous  System.  Periosteum  is  attacked;  boring  and
deep  sticking  pains  in  the  malar  and  maxillary  bones.

Ckaracteristics.  Aggravation  during  rc/uj.?/  amelioration
by  motion  ;  action  often  confined  to  one  side,  more  frequently
the  ie/i  side.


APPUCATIOJ^.

General,  i.  To  acute  and  sub-acittc  cases  ;  less  frequently
to  chronic.  2.  In  affections  of  the  membranes,  especially
if  accompanied  by  an  evident  dyscrasia,  and  attended  by
nervous  phenomena.  3.  In  affections  resulting  from  expos-
ure to  rain  while  perspiring. (Hcenninghausen.)

Special.  I.  Vesicular  Cutaneous  Diseases  of  all  Varieties.
Erythema  and  erysipelas  bullosum ;  scarlatina  miliaris ;
miliaria;  carbuncle;  and,  generally,  all  cutaneous  eruptions
that  tend  to  gangrene.  Herpes  acutus ;  crusta  lactca ;
hydrargyrosis ;  variola,  with  highly  developed  cedema  and
great  cutaneous  irritation ;  acute  pemphigus  ;  ccdema  aPt*
acute  eruptions,  with  redness,  heat  and  fever;  acute  oedems
per  se  (Morbus  Brightii  ?).

II.  Sero-Jibrous  Membranes. Acute  and  sub-acute  rheu-
matism affecting  the  joints  and  muscles,  characterized by
considerable swelling, redness, heat of the joint, painj
diminished  by  motion^  increased  by  repose,  with  miliarii
and  pustules  around  the  joint ;  rheumatism  of  the  fascia  lata»  "

III.  Rheumatic  Odontalgia. Tearing,  boring  pain  over
the  whole  chin  ;  swelling,  redness  of  the  gums ;  erysipelatous
swelling  of  the  cheeks  and  region  of  the  lower  jaw,  even  to^
the  eyes  and  forehead.


KO. VII. RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.


313


IV.  Mucous  Membrams.  Acute  catarrhs  and  inflanima-
tions;  laryngitis,  bronchitis,  gastritis,  enteritis,  etc,  of
mild  degree,  attended  by  nervous  phenomena.

1.  Conjunctivitis,  witii  cedema,  vesicles  and  pustules ;
great  pain,  dryness,  photophobia ;  gluing  together  of  the
eyelids  ;  pain  on  opening  the  eyelids,  especially  in  scrofulous
subjects.

2.  Otitis  and  pharyngitis.

3.  Inflammation  of  prepuce  and  scrotum,  Mith  vesicles
and  oedema.

4.  Mucous  diarrhoea,  with  great  tenesmus;  first  stage  of
dysentery,  scanty,  frequent  and  painful  stool.

V.  Typhus  and  other  Maladies,  with  Nervous  Phenomena.
In  the  lower  grade  of  typhus,  in  the  first  stage,  cvcr>'thing
indicates  Rhus ;  predominant  excitement ;  constipation,  or
frequent  serous,  greenish-yellow  stools,  especially  if  attended
by  miliary  eruption.

1.  Miliaria  pucrpcralis;  purpura  hasmorrhagia  febrilis.

2.  Catarrhal  fever,  when  the  nervous  system  is  especially
involved.

3.  Puerperal  fever  in  the  lower  grades;  peritoneal  irrita-
tion without  exudation,  rather  of  a  rheumatic  character;
exudation  scanty,  and  not  plastic.

4.  Pleuritis  of  the  same  character  as  peritonitis,  nervous
phenomena  accompanying.

5.  Pneumonia ;  difficult,  thick,  tenacious  expectoration,
with  slow  and  tedious  resolution  (Pneumonia  notha).

6.  Heart  diseases,  especially  of  the  pericardium,  attended
by  nervous  phenomena.

7.  Lumbago;  paralysis  in  lumbar  region.*

8.  Intermittent  fever.  Nervous  symptoms  predominate.
During  the  paroxysm  a  rheumatic  condition  comes  on.
Thirst  and  heat  arc  very  great.  During  the  sweat,  miliaria
make  their  appearance.

■  Amons  Uie  records  of  his  Ijrge  of  tbe  lumbar  isuscle*  In  evwt,  a/ier
vclerinary  experience,  B<enningluiu«n  ealving,  cured  by  Rhus,  followed  by
hM muiy  cues noted  of  .por&lytis Niu  Tonaicft. —  C  D.


"- -»  Z- -lr--^»  '*-*- Zr rll'tC^  -'-'i — =..


J.'r^'?T.'^ 3r —


T^TXI "ZE iT>lBLL

rrr- srrnu=  sur-


en: nrr— =;rr-iii: tnz: tr..  -nir-L" ^r'f^:  riESiisf zkhcc  At

li-jt — 4i'  r-t-ir.L. tr., ^i-r-f-.-iSr zr^ rtTnTnishfri  in

crTTt- f :— :ti,T.-.! tns; ~z — i--ir.i. :.■■!=?- n=n=; as  applica-

.'\!-r:vi. <\x:rK. \ rsr.:.-;;.  nmir- azrion.

—  .-iasfujtZim.  <.f^^"^-."•Il^  .T^fsnnncL-  t:  tilt  venoB
zossmrtm:.  th;  nhJft;7ni;.:'i  mr-ir.r.r.nr>i.:  tempcrantent:
ir-\-r,ni..  ritnf  ?.-  tn.'  nfi-.-^jr- ^T■^*^-^s.T.:  TPmncrament.

Tr.i  ™iiR- .-■.."  n:.-Ti.,-iifT.  I'l-".  tTi.-«.  ,-  l^n-nnu;^  are  «,£pw-
aza:. r //»»..-, an^ ^• wk^t:'*' t^.•«: r ■T-njcmjcum,  ho»-

pmrm!!\ in.  ?\-mntrtm-  n Wr'-i-*"*. -~- a^^Tavated  is  the

Lj\Lr.ti.rnn-. iit.  >^r»-.->rti«.  n'-ivii-.-.-*-  ""^^'Vi .;£u-£ii«^  pus:

ttnwiet. til; nrnnivtoiin. wh<i. Tt». rwits> n: Brvonia  ast


NO. iX. LEDUM PALUSTRE.


315


accompanied  by  the  general  feeling,  as  if  beaten  (zerschla-
genhcitschmerz)  throughout  the  muscular  system.

Colchicum,  then,  is  more  suitable  when  the  excitation  is
slight, — when  the  disease  inclines  rather  to  a  torpid  char-
acter, therefore  to  diseases  of  torpid,  phlegmatic  individuals.

5.  Chuf  Spfure  of  Acti<m,  Rheumatism  (sub-acute  and
chronic,  but  not  of  very  ancient  date),  chronic  gout,  with
thickened  secretions,  especially  if  characterized  not  so  muc^
hy  pain  as  by  impediments  to  the  free  motion  of  the  parts
(semi-paralysis,  quasi-paralysis).  In  the  latter  stages  of
acute  rheumatism  Colchicum  is  often  indicated.  (Kaspar
appears  to  find  frequently  appropriate  in  acute  rheumatism,
1st,  Aconite;  2d,  Bryonia;  3d,  Colchicum.)

In  dropsy,  conjoined  with  a  general  torpid  condition,  with
little  or  no  irritation, — dropsy  after  exanthematous  diseases,
— also,  but  less  frequently,  in  dropsical  affections  of  the
synovial  sacs,  and  of  the  thoracic  cavities, —  Colchicum  is
indicated.

In  diarrhcea,  with  plastic  excretion  and  rheumatic  com-
plication, characterized  by  great  flatulence, —  in  a  low  grade
of  autumnal  dysentery,  or  rather  in  sanguineous  diarrh'Cca
than  in  real  dysentery, — Colchicum  is  appropriate.

In  hydrops  oculi,  diseases  of  the  sclerotica  and  cornea,
and  especially  opacit>'  of  the  cornea, — and  among  affections
of  the  chest,  in  chronic  catarrh,  with  scanty  plastic  secre-
tion, and  great  sensibility  to  changes  of  temperature,  espe-
cially to  cold  sur, — Colchicum  shows  itself  efficacious.


NO,  IX. LEDUM PALUSTRE.


Ledum  ranks  next  to  Colchicum  in  its  action  on  the  serous,
6brous,  and  mucous  membranes.  Its  action  is  more  power-
ful than  that  of  Colchicum,  producing  not  only  irritation
and  an  increased  thickened  secretion,  but  also  a  deposit  of
solid,  earthy  masses.


3i«


DIAGNOSIS  IN HOM(EOPATHIC  PRACTICE.


Vascular  System.  In  their  relations  to  this  system  are
found  the  true  distinctions  between  Bryonia,  Colchicum,  and
Ledum.  Ledum  aifccts  the  blood  distinctly,  producing  a
definite  crasis.  viz, :  a  tendency  to  exudation  of  blood  ;  hence
we  find  it  producing  haemorihages  (which  are  not  induced  by
Bryonia  and  Colchicum).  The  blood  has  a  special  tendency
to  the  periphery.  Moreover,  Ledum  has  far  g;reatcr  rela-
tions to  the  periosteum  and  mucous  membrane  than  eitlier
Colchicum  or  Bryonia  (of  these  two,  Colchicum  has  the
greater  affinity  for  mucous  membranes  and  periosteum).  The
pains  of  Ledum  are,  to  a  greater  extent,  sticking  and  tear-
ing, slicking  as  if  caused  by  medUs^  as  well  in  internal  as
in  superficial  parts.

A  characteristic  of  Ledum  is  a  deficiency  of  vital  heat,
induc'mQ^  firedominani  coldness  and eAilliriess.  As  in  the  case
with  Bryonia  and  Colchicum,  the  sticking  and  tearing  fiains,
and  also  the  symptoms  that  occur  at  night,  arc  aggravated  by
motion  and  by  warmth.  Like  Bryonia,  Ledum  produces  a
hot  swelling,  but  it  has  an  especial  affinity  for  the  hip  and
shoulder.

Application,  i.  In  chronic  rheumatism  Ledum  is  espe-
cially indicated  when  the  secretion  is  scanty  and  thick,  and  is
no  longer  absorbed,  but  concretions  begin  to  form,  residua
in  periosteal  and  cartilaginous  envelopes,  pain  greatly
increased  by  motion.  Ledum  has  a  special  affinity  for  the
regions  of  the  hip  and  shoulder.  Ttic  affection  must  not  be
entirely  chronic;  in  such  a  case  the  mineral  remedies  are
rather  indicated,  Calcarca,  Mcrcurius,  Iodine,  etc.  To  b<
consulted  in  coxalgia,  lumbago,  arthrocace.  In  affections
of  the  bones,  especially  in  the  formation  of  nodes.

2.  Chronic  Cutaneous  Affections.  Transformations  of  th<
epidermis.  Ecchymoses  (rather  in  chronic  cases,  such  as
chronic  morbus  maculosus).  Bleeding  ulcers  on  tlie  fore-
head. Tuberculous  eruptions  in  drunkards.

3.  Intermittent  Fever.  When  the  cold  stage  is  of  long
duration,  with  violent thirst Neglected  typhus,  with I,


f.  X. SEPIA.


517


important  anaemia,  or  3,  visible  alteration  of  the  blood
crasis  (inducing,  for  instance,  ecchymosis),  or  3,  affections  of
the  mucous  membranes  especially  (nasal  hxmorrhagc  or
bloody  expectoration  ivitfumt  irritation).

4.  Headache.  Especially  in  the  sequelae  of  syphilis,  and
in  mercurial  poisoning.

5.  Ophthalmia  Chronica.  A  renowned  remedy,  espe-
cially in  affections  of  the  mucous  membranes,  with  copious
secretion  from  tlie  meibomian  glands  and  opacity  of  the
cornea.

6.  Dropsy,  viz.,  Ascites.  Ledum,  like  Colchicum,  has  a  great
affinity  for  tlie  abdominal  organs,  probably  because  of  their
great  venosity.

7.  Chronic  Pulmonary  Catarrh.  Even  in  pneumonia,  if
the  symptoms  correspond,  especially  if  the  cough  is  accom-
panied by  bloody  expectoration,  and  threatens  to  become
chronic. Tuberculosis  with  ha:moptysis.

8.  Tubercular  disease  of  the  bones.  Ulcers  of  skin  and
gangrenous  ulcers. (Hartmann.)

9.  Gout.  According  to  Rau's  experience,  one  of  thechief
remedies,  even  for  maladies  complicated  with  gout


NO.  X. SliPIA.


GENERAL  EFFECTS.
Septa is essentially a remedy  affecting  the vegetative
sphere. Its  other  effects  are  only  secondary'.

1.  It  has  a  transforming  action,  altering  the  erases. Its
action  is  slow,  but  deep  and  prolonged.

2.  It  diminishes  the  reproductive  energy  of  the  vegetable
sphere. This  is  made  manifest —

a.  Through  the  sluggish  performance  of  the  functions.

b.  Through  the  deficient  general  nutrition.

3.  Pains and isolated symptoms arc but feebly pro-
nounced.


318


DIAGNOSIS  IN  HOMCEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.


4.  It  has  special  relations  to  the  portal  system,  and  to  th«
female  sexual  system.


SPECIAL  EFFECTS.

A.  Primary.  1.  i?j^jj'iiwr  is  impaired,  acidity  predominat-
ing; sour  and  foul  eructations;  tormina  and  mcteorismus;
chilliness  after  meals  \  neither  copious  diarrhoea  nor  obstinate
constipation;  frequent  tenesmus.  Haemorrhoidal  tumors;
excoriation  between  the  nates  (corresponding  to  the  acrid
character  of  the  discharge).

2.  On  the  Portal  Syst£$u  and  the  Ltvtr.  a.  Functions  of
the  Liver.  In  degree  these  are  not  greatly  disturbed.  In
kind  the  bile  is  altered  ;  it  acquires  a  sour  or  foul  character
(hence  vomiting  and  diarrhoea)  with  too  little  alkali.

b.  It  induces  also  a  change  of  texture  in  the  liver,  as  is
manifested  by  the  disturbed  state  of  the  circulation  (numer-
ous stases).

c.  The  complexion  is  altered.  The  skin  becomes  yellow
and  earthy- colored — like  the  wax  of  old  church  candles.
Puf5ness  of  the  soft  parts ;  there  is  no  emaciation ;  this  appears
later — first,  an  increase  of  the  fatty  tissue,  then  laxity  and
flaccidity,  lastly,  emaciation.  Also,  irritations  of  the  skin,
showing  itself  in  red  spots  with  yellow  areola:.

d.  Mental  depression  ;  sadness,  inclination  to  anger.

3.  Sexual  System,  a.  Enfeebled  condition,  manifested
by  erethism  (sexual  instinct  without  energy), — rapid
emissions,  followed  by  great  exhaustion  and  apathy  after
coitus.

h.  Profuse  perspiration  about  the  genital  organs,  especially
of  females;  excoriation  and  itching.

f.  Sepia  has  more  relation  to  the  female  sex,  yet  is  not  to
be  overlooked  in  reference  to  the  male.  Menses  scanty  or
suppressed,  or  else  occurring  too  early.  During  the  sup-
pression of  the  menses  mental  depression  and  apathy.

B.  Secondary.  i.  Nervous  System.  a.  The  nervous
system,  especially  in  the  female  sex,  standing  in  the  closest


NO. X. SEPIA.


319


relation  to  the  sexual  system,  shows  a  tendency  to  erethism,
in  consequence  of  which  hysteric  phenomena  present  them-
selves, which  may  increase  even  to  spasms.

b.  The  sensations  and  pains  of  Sepia  are  indistinct  in
character,  and  arc,  generally,  feelings  of  weakness,  apathy
and  lassitude ;  sometimes,  however,  they  arc  more  distinct,
occurring  as  burning,  sticking  or  cutting  pains — especially
in  the  loins  (corresponding  to  the  liver  and  sexual  system).

2,  Vascular  System,  a.  Participates  slightly  in  the  effects
of  Sepia,  except  in  tlic  easily  provoked  orgasms  of  blood  to
the  head  and  chest.  The  symptoms  chiefly  unimportant
and  secondary.

b.  Vascular  energy  is  diminished— so,  consequently,  is
the  thermogenesis.  Subjective  and  objective  venosity;
passive  congestions,  perspiration ;  palpitation,  pulsations
felt  over  tlie  whole  body.  These  occur,  but  may  well  be
regarded  as  phenomena  belonging  to  the  nervous  rather
than  to  the  vascular  system.

3.  Sfcreiive  System.  Only  in  so  far  generally  affected,  as
that  the  secretions  and  excretions  present  an  abnormal
character,  having  a  tendency  to  become  sour  and  foul.
They  are  sometimes  increased,  sometimes  diminished.  The
increase  of  perspiration  is  most  marked.

(].  Respiratory  System.  A  tendency  to  furnish  a  counter-
poise to  the  general  condition ;  hence,  not  unfrequently,  a
condition  of  irritation,  catarrh  with  even  bloody  expectora-
tion, cough,  sometimes  dry,  sometimes  moist — irritation  of
the  pleura.

5.  Sexual  System.  Tlie  physiological  connection  between
uterus  and  mamma  is  here  manifested  by  the  emaciation  and
flaccidity  of  the  mammzc,  and  the  swelling  and  ulceration  of
the  nipples.

CHA  RA  C  TEKJS  T/CS.

I.  The /ftiflj  are  dull;  pain  like  paralysis  is  predominant
Amelioration  from  -warmth  and  violent  motion.  Aggravation
by  repose  and  at  night.


3^


DIAGNOSIS  IN  HOMEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.


3.  A  peculiar  cachectic  aspect;  enfeebling  of  the  vegeta-
tion. Predominant  affections  of  the  portal,  hepatic  and
sexuaJ  systems.  Especially  applicable  to  females.  Gener-
ally menstruation  scanty,  suppressed,  or  precocious.


APPUCATlOlf.

A.  General  i.  Age.  Sepia  is  especially  adapted  to
affections  occurring  at  the  climacteric  period,  in  women
who  were  formerly  excitable ;  after  long-continued  depress-
ing mental  atTeclions,  or  great  bodily  or  mental  labor.

2.  Aspect.  An  unmistakable  aspect ;  a  peculiar  yellow-
ish puffy  complexion,  rather  fat.  The  tissues  are  soft  and
flaccid  ;  they  easily  and  quickly  collapse  and  soon  recover.

3-  Temperament. Good-natured,  yet  easily  excitable.

4-  The  affections  complained  of  are  not  violent,  often
disappearing  altogether,  and  are  concentrated  in  the  digestive
and  sexual  sphere.  A  special  indication,  in  addition  to  the
above,  is  a  very  slight  acrid  and  excoriating  dischai^
ex  genitalibus.

5.  Although  especially  adapted  to  females,  Sepia  is  also
applicable,  variatis  variandis,  to  llie  male  sex,  especially  to
woman-like,  soft-tissued  men,  who  were  formerly  of  a  fiery
temperament,  but  have  settled  down  into  a  sedentary,  medi-
tative  mode  of  life.

B.  Special.  I .  Affections  of  the  Digestive  apparatus  and
the  Liver  indicate  Sepia,  a.  By  sour  and  putrid  formations,
manifested  by  eructations  and  habitual  flatulence,  and  dis-
turbed digestion.  Inveterate  sub-acute  pyrosis  (in  acute,  not
appropriate, — compare  Ipecacuanha,  etc.).  Pains  in  the  stom-
ach, and  cramps  of  the  stomach  and  intestines  after  eating.

i  b.  Pains  in  the  hepatic  and  iliac  region,  excited  by  touch-
ing those  regions;  hence,  applicable  in  corresponding
affections  of  the  liver  generally ;  in  degeneration  of  the  liver
and  intestines^  Sepia  is  applicable,  at  most,  only  in  the
beginning;  later,  ^M^r  remedies  come  into  play.  (Ascites
as  secondary  to  hepatic  affection.)


Graphites.


321


2.  Sexuai  Syslftn.  a.  Uterus.  Chronic  infarctus ;  indu-
ration. Acrid  discharge  ;  laxity  of  the  neighboring  parts  ;
blcnnorrhcea,  prolapsus.  Amenorrhoea  and  dysmenorrhcea
(menses  being  either  too  early  or  too  late,  and  too  weak).
Sterility,  abortion,  displacement  of  the  uterus.  Mucous
polypus.

h.  Male  Sex.  Increase  of  sexual  instinct,  and  at  the
same  time  loss  of  sexual  power.  Erethism  (in  both  sexes)  \
hence,  frequent  nocturnal  pollutions,  followed  by  great
exhaustion. Chronic,  very  profuse,  corrosive  gonorrhoea,

3.  Nervous  Affections.  Nervous  affection  of  the  abdom-
inal organs  and  uterus;  hence,  melancholia  and  actual
hysteria ;  megrim  easily  induced.  Nervous  toothache
during  pregnancy  and  at  the  climacteric  period.  Irritatio
spinalis  ;  and,  in  consequence,  paralysis  of  the  lower  part  of
the  trunk.

4.  Cutaneous  Affections.  Herpes  circinatus ;  stinking
perspiration  of  the  feet  (not  stinking,  Bryonia). Psoriasis.

5.  Affections  of  Eyes,  Ears^  and  Nose.  (As  far  as  the
vascular  system  is  concerned).  Chronic  ophthalmia,  with
acrid  secretion  (abdominal  ophthalmia,  according  to  Pro-
fessor Rosas,  of  Vienna),  and  yellow  sclerotica.  Deafness,
in  a0cctions  of  the  liver  and  abdominal  organs.  In
Ozctna,  fi  very  important  remedy.  Ulceration  and  eruption
about  the  mouth,  with  simultaneous  disturbance  of  the
digestion.

6.  Excretions.  ConsHpation/with  much  tenesmus.  Mucous
diarrhoea ; stinking  cold  sweat  of  the  extremities.

7.  Thoracic  Affcctiotis.  Tuberculosis.  Affections  of  the
heart  depending  on  abdominal  disease.  Palpitation.  Inter-
mittent fever,  cold  predominating.  Ulceration  of  the  fccL
Varices.


NO. XL CRAPHiTES.


Graphites  resembles,  in  many  respects,  its  chemical  sis-
ters, the  Carbons;  less,  however,  in  its  general  character,
23


332


DIAGNOSIS  IN  HOMOiOPATHIC  PRACTICE.


than  with  reference  to  certain  peculiar  symptoms.  Its
action  is  very  extensive  and  energetic,  affecting,  ia  a
marked  degree,  the  entire  vegetative  sphere.  We  find,  in
Uie  eflects  of  Graphites,  all  the  phenomena  of  a  depressed
vegetative  Hfc,  and  a  diminished  assimilative  activity,  and
can  only  remark,  as  a  specialty,  the  peculiar  tendency  to
tlie  formation  of  pus.  This  specialty  will  be  noted  hcre-
ailcr.

1.  Vegetative  Life.  Almost  no  remedy  attacks  ifiis  sys-
tem  ttnth  so  yreat  energy  in  proportion  to  tlie  degree  of
reaction  which  it  excites.  In  this  respect,  Graphites  stands
between  Arsenic  and  the  Carbons.  The  phenomena  of
general  and  local  excitement  induced  by  it  are  pretty  clear^
yet  are  only  to  be  explained  as  secondary ;  and  they  pro-
ceed only  from  the  vascular  system,  and,  in  a  very  slight
degree,  from  the  nervous  system.

2.  Secretions.  In  general,  the  secretions  are  diminished
and  thickened.  Tlic  character  of  decomposition  is  manifest
in  a  greater  or  less  degree ;  hence,  the  secretions  arc
offensive,  of  unnatural  color  and  repulsive  taste.  As  is
always  the  case  when  tlie  character  of  decomposition  pre-
vails, the  serous  secretions  are  increased.

3.  Sh'rt.  Here  we  see,  strongly  developed,  the  phenom-
ena furnished  by  every  disease  which  manifests  a  tendency
to  morbid  secretions, — vir. :  itching,  formation  of  pimples ;
irritation,  with  bluish-red  papules  of  various  size,  liaving
an  erysipelatous  aspect  There  is,  however,  a  special
tendency  to  erythema,  suppuration,  ulceration  ;  hence,
serous  vesicles,  ulcers  discharging  pus  and  sanies,  moist
eruptions,  rhagadcs,  scaly  ulcers  on  alt  parts  of  the  skin,
and  on  its  transitions  to  mucous  membrane,  especially  about
the  mouth.

4.  MucotiS  Membranes.  In  the  mucous  membranes,  this
character  of  Graphites  is  still  more  distinctly  manifested.
T/ieir  secretion  \s,  for  the  most  part,  diminished ;  hence,
they  become  dr/. Tlie  secretions  assume  a  tliick,  tenacious


GRAPHITES.


323


character,  arc  difficult  of  solution  (or  excretion),  and  have
a.  foul,  saltish  taste.

(i.)  T/tf  Eye  becomes  turbid  and  dr)*,  the  lids  cohere;
they  burn  and  are  irritated.

(2.)  In  the  Ear,  a  similar  condition  is  manifested;  buzzing
in  the  car,  and  deafness.

(3.)  Drytuss  of  the  Nose,  inclination  to  sneeze,  loss  of
smell,  or  a  foul  odor  constantly  in  the  nose.

{4.)  Mouth  and  Throat.  Coated  tongue;  sensation  as  of
sometliing  fixed  in  llie  throat;  frequent  endeavors  to  hawk
up  something ;  dryness  of  throat,  hoarseness,  tickling,  burn-
ing,  rawness ;  dyspnoea,  anxiety,  dry  laborious  cough.

(5.)  Inti-itittal  Tract.  Diminished  stools;  dryness  and
burning  in  the  urethra  and  vagina ;  difficult  and  painful
micturition.

The  tendency  to  ulceration  appears  most  distinctly  in
those  mucous  membranes  which  are  in  more  immediate
contact  with  the  atmosphere ;  hence  ulcerative  pain,  with
vesicles,  pustules  and  ulcers,  and  corresponding  discharges
from  nose  and  mouth.

5.  The  Urinary  Sceretion  is  either  diminished  or  increased ;
more  frequently  diminished.

6.  Mcnsintalion.  Diminished,  retarded,  enfeebled  (Hahne-
mann).

7.  The  Semittal  Secretion  is  likewise  scanty,  or  fails
entirely ;  hence  diminished  sexual  instinct,  and  imperfect
ejaculation  of  semen.

8.  Assiwiiation.  Graphites  diminishes  the  assimilative
action,  inasmuch  as  the  part  destroyed  by  its  primary,
decomposing  action  is  not  perfectly  restored ;  while  at  the
same  time  it  enlarges  it.  inasmuch  as  it  induces  abnormal
deposits  and  secretions.  The  altered  blood-crasls  docs  not
permit  a  sufficient  r^cneration  of  the  removed  portions ;
hence  ttie  vital  turgor  sinks,  the  tissues  lose  tlieir  elasticity  ;
while  the  new  tissues  do  not  arrive  at  tc,\tual  completeness.
Hence  ensue  collapse,  flabbiness,  discoloration  of  skin  and


324


DIAGNOSIS  IN HOM(£OPATHIC PRACTICE.


mucous  membranes,  loss  of  epidermis,  falUctg  out  of  the
hair.

Circulation  is  generally,  at  first,  in  a  state  of  excitement;
hence  sometimes  a  general  storm,  but  more  frequently
partial  congestions  present  themselves.  Soon,  however,  the
circulation  loses  energy,  becomes  slow,  idle,  weak.  As
everywhere,  under  such  circumstances,  so  here  also  appear
soon  an  increased  vcnosity,  and  then  stases  in  the  capillary
vascular  system,  which  lead  to  exudations  in  the  form  of
oedema,  ecchymosis,  vesicles,  etc.

In  the  lymphatic  system,  the  same  process  goes  on  ;  hence
swelling  of  the  glands,  induration,  and  irritation.  In  this
condition,  a  corresponding  fever  is  evident,  in  which  the
cold  predominates,  the  heat  being  less  general  and  less
molent ;  coldness  of  greater  part  of  the  body,  and  heat  only
here  and  there.  Sweat  and  thirst,  especially  thirst,  are  often
violent,  and,  as  in  all  enfeebled  conditions,  arc  easily  and
speedily  provoked  by  slight  causes.

The  nen'ous  system  partakes  very  little  in  tlie  action  of
Graphites,  since  this  action  is  not  excessive,  rapid,  nor
violent.  The  phenomena  that  do  occur  are  chiefly  those  of
depression  ;  hence  the  cerebral  activity  is  markedly  impaired.

The  general  sensation,  according  as  it  docs  with  the
condition  of  tlie  vegetative  life,  is  depressed ;  hence  gen-
eral weakness,  lassitude,  relaxation  of  the  tissues.  Syncope
is  easily  induced,  together  with  great  anxiety.  On  this
account  the  feeling  of  lassitude  is  altogether  the  predominant
general  sensation;  the  other  varieties  of  pain  not  being
constantly  produced  by  Graphites,  but  being  due  to  the
local  conditions  induced  by  it  The  activity  of  the  motory
functions  is  impaired ;  these  functions  lack  energy,  but  their
debility  never  amounts  to  more  than  a  very  slight  degree
of  paralysis;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  convuliiive  jcrkings,
tremblings,  and  spasmodic  phenomena  arc  not  unfrcqueatly
present

Particular  Functioits. I,  Z>;^rt/i(?«  is  impaired.  Graphites


NO.  XI. GRAPHITES.


3*5


has  an  especial  relation  to  this  process;  for  several  symp-
toms arc  peculiar  to  Graphites,  viz, :  salt,  sour,  foul  taste  in
the  mouth,  aversion,  especially  to  meat  and  salt  food,  and
disinclination  to  other  articles  of  food  ;  unpleasant  sensation
before  eating;  during  %  meal,  immediate  unpleasant  effects,
especially  abdominal  distension,  borborygmi ;  after  eating,
many  sufferings,  burning,  sticking,  and  stomach  cramp,
singultus,  nausea;  many  marked  secondary  symptoms.

2.  Intestinal  Canal.  At  the  same  time  with  above  digest-
ive phenomena,  great  meteortsmus,  discharges  of  flatus,  and
cramps-

Liver  and  Spleen.  Pain ;  bilious  vomiting.  Stool  gen-
erally retained  solid,  of  a  horribly  offensive  character ;
seldom  watery.

Anus.  Burning  and  pitiching.  Prolapsus,  discharges  of
blood ;  hemorrhoidal  tumors.

Urine.  The  urinary  and  genital  systems  are  markedly
affected.


APPLlCATtOl^.

Graphites  is  applicable,  according  to  special  indications,  in
both  acute  and  chronic  diseases ;  more  frequently  in  chronic.
The  acute  conditions  in  which  it  is  indicated  cannot  be
strictly  and  purely  such,  but  rather  be  conditions  growing
out  of  a  chronic  diseased  state,  corresponding  in  general
character  to  Graphites.  Its  province  is  the  more  highly
developed  affections  of  the  vegetative  sphere,  and  we  might
in  this  view  call  Graphites  a  high  potency  of  sulphur ;  for
no  small  number  of  symptoms  is  common  to  both  remedies  ;
in  Graphites,  however,  tliey  reach  a  higher  grade  of  develop-
ment This  intermediate  position  of  Graphites  between
Sulphur  and  Arsenic  and  Carbon,  indicates  its  very  extended
sphere  of  action,  which,  however,  is  distinct  from  that  of  the
others,  inasmuch  as  Graphites  has  so  marked  a  tendency  to
the  ulcerative  and  corresponding  processes.

Diseases  in General, i. Cutaneous  Affections. Those


326


DIAGNOSIS IN HOMCKOl'ATHIC PRACTICE.


which  are  disposed  to  suppuration.  Ulceration  with  a
peculiar  scanty  discharge,  and  formation  of  fungous  granu-
lations (hence  panaritis).  This  ulcer  is  not  easily  healed —
presents,  however,  a  certain  degree  of  vitality,  even  of
irritation ;  hence  granulations  form,  or  at  least  there  is  an
evident  tendency  to  tlieir  formation.  Scrofula  and  tubercle
do  not  generally  correspond  to  Graphites,  yet  may  do  so  tn
individual  forms,  which  arc  not  infrequent

Arthritis.  Graphites  is  one  of  the  very  first  remedies,
especially  where  there  is  no  deposit,  or  a  very  slight  one,
when  it  is  probable  that  the  sero-fibrous  tissues,  by  their
dryness,  aggravate  the  condition.

Diseases  in  parttadar.  i.  Skin  is  e^ecially  the  province
of  Graphites.  Its  distinctive  character  is  this:  a  product
forms,  the  epidermis  is  removed,  pustules  and  vesicles  form
and  re-form,  or  disappear,  and  are  succeeded  by  scales;  die
pustules  or  scales  fall  away,  and  leave  a  raw  place,  difficult
to  heal,  and  generally  covered  by  a  certain  amount  of
secretion,  which,  in  the  air,  dries  to  a  scab,  scale,  or  mem-
brane, and  covers  the  spot  Moreover,  cutaneous  secretions
are  produced,  which  thicken  and  elevate  the  epidermis,  and
form  granulations  of  various  kinds  (horny,  panaritic  fungi).
Finally,  to  Graphites  belong  those  skin  diseases  which  are
followed  by  successive  crops  of  littU  vesicles,  which  scab
over  and  so  gradually  cover  large  surfaces.  In  this  category
belong  eczema,  herpes,  impetigo,  lichen  (?),  in  the  lower
grades ;  psoriasis,  pityriasis,  ichthyosis,  scaly  eruption  on
the  head,  and  falling  out  of  tiie  hair.  Among  the  maladies
not  herein  included,  and  in  which  Graphites  is  indicated,  b
erysipelas,  which  frequently  returns,  or  has  so  slow  a  migra-
tion that  gradually  almost  the  whole  body  is  covered  by  it

2.  Eyes. Often  recurring  inflammation, especially  with

formation  of  ulcers. Scrofulous  ophthalmia,  with  cohcsioos

of  the  lids  and  photophobia,  especially  in  conjunction  with

crusta  laclea. Dryness  of  the  conjunctiva.

.  3.  Ears. X>eafncss,  buzzing  in  tiie  ears,  when  in  a  gouty


NO.  Xll. IPECACUANHA.


327


constitution,  but  especially  when  there  is  reason  to  suspect
dryness  of  the  mucous  lining  of  the  ear,  as,  for  example,
simultaneous  dry  catarrh  of  the  nose,  pharynx,  etc.

Toothache,  ivith  swelling  and  ulceration  of  the  gums.

Ulcers  of  the  Mouth.  Especially  with  offensive  swellings
of  the  glands  of  the  throat;  frequent  angina,  with  conse-
quent ulceration.

Dyspepsia,

Chronic  Gastritis  (Ulcus  per/orans).  Flatulence  very
great  Constipation,  with  occasional  diarrhcea ;  chronic
colic.

Genitalia. Swelling  of  prepuce,  especially  in  children.

Herpes  Pnspuiialis.  Burning  on  micturition.  Want  of
semen  and  lack  of  sexual  instinct;  swelling  and  induration
of  testes.  Hydrocele.  Enlarged  pvarics;  amcnorrhcea;
Menses  scanty,  delayed,  and  painful.

Respiratory  Organs.  Dryness  of  mucous  membrane;
hence  chronic  catarrh  in  many  cases  of  tuberculosis;  great
roughness  and  hoarseness  of  the  voice ;  sensibility  of  larynx
or  quick  respiration,  and  on  change  of  temperature,  inducing
a  tickling  and  spasmodic  cough.

N.  B,  Applicable  to  the  pysmic  and  uraemic  processes;
to  affections  of  the  liver  without  degenerations.


NO.  Xn.  IPECACUANHA.


Belongs  to  that  class  of  remedies  which  act  chiefly  on  the
nervous  system.  Its  action  is  very  moderate  in  degree;
hence  not  ver>'  striking.  Its  exciting  action  is  exerted
chiefly  on  the  thoracic  plexus ;  it  stands  therefore  in  a  kind
of  opposition  to  Nux  vomica,  which  affects  rather  the
subdiaphragmatic  ganglia.

I.  Nervous  System.  The  brain  and  spinal  system  arc
scarcely  affected;  at  mosf  they  arc  affected  only  by  a  reflex
action. Still  less  is  the  scnsorium  acted  upon. Little  or  no


328


DIAGNOSIS  IN HOMCEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.


pain  is  induced  ;  at  most  it  is  secondary.  The  symptoms  of
spasm  are  more  numerous  and  better  marked.  Character.
The  symptoms  reveal  a  distinctly  intermittent  character,
in  which  they  are  rivaled  only  by  Nux  and  Pulsatilla.  The
pains  suddenly  appear  and  suddenly  disappear.  They  are
aggravated  at  night  (because  the  vegetative  sphere  is
especially  affected).  For  the  same  reasons,  similar  symptoms
occur  at  the  same  time  in  various  parts  of  the  body.
Gastric  phenomena  are  always  present ;  and  organic  settsation,
«*./.,  consciousness  of  defmed  organic  conditions,  in  a  high
degree;  e.  g.,  nausea,  constant  constriction  of  the  chest,
premonitions  of  spasms,  constrictive  sensations  in  the  salivary
ducts,  in  the  urinary  and  sexual  organs.

2.  Vascular  System.  Great  analogy  to  Nux.  Ipecac-
uanha has  little  effect  on  the  great  vessels  and  the  heart
(Nux  affects  the  capillary  system  and  the  great  vessels  at
the  same  time);  it  has  more  especial  affinity  to  the  capillary
vascular  system  alone  ;  hence  external  coldness,  and  internal
heat,  and  vice  versa,  objective  heat,  but  subjective  coldness
of  the  skin,  and  vice  versa.

3.  Vegetaiion. Ipecacuanha  excites  and  alters  the  vege-
tation. The  secretions  arc  in  general  diminished  in  quantity;
in quality they arc scarcely altered. There seems to
be  no  connection  or  mutual  dependence  between  objective
and  subjective  phenomena. Sweat,  urine,  saliva,  are  for  the
most part increased; other secretions, which require a
greater  elaboration,  for  example,  those  of  mucous  membranes^
are  diminished, Bile  is  generally  increased. Hiemorrhages
are  frequent  (because  of  tlie  action  of  Ipecacuanha  on the
capillary  system),  yet  no  profuse  discharge  of  undecomposed
blood,  threatening  tlie  organism. Ipecacuanha  affects the
stomach  and  chest,  but  acts  less  strongly  on the  intestines.
Nausea,  inflation,  constrictive  sensation,  vomiting  (scanty),
without  giving  relief,  and  the  matters  vomited not  qualita-
tively altered. Foul  taste,  scratched  feeling  in  the  throat,
yet  the  tongue  not  foul,  etc The  peristaltic  action  of  the


KO. Xn. IPECACUANHA.


329


bowels  is  diminished ;  the  antiperistaltic  increased ;  constipa-
tion, also  watery  diarrhaa.

Lungs.  More  important  action,  constriction,  dyspnoea,
irritation  inducing  cough,  increased  sensibility,  spasm,
diminished  secretion.

Application.  To  pale,  blonde  individuals,  women  and
children.  Disturbance  of  the  vegetative  nervous  system,  of
the  stomach  and  lungs  at  the  same  time.

Special.  I.  Disorder  of  the  stomach  after  an  excess,  if  the
disturbance  continue  some  time  (for  the  more  transient
disorders,  Nux  vomica,  Pulsatilla,  etc.).  After  typhus  and
intermittent  fever,  for  the  remaining  stomach  aflcctionSj
chronic  nausea,  and  vomiting.  Indisposition  after  eating,
yet  without  loss  of  appetite.  In  particular  the  gastric
phenomena  of  pregnancy.  All  these  ailments  arc  generally
conjoined  with  chest  affections,  anxiety,  constriction,  etc.

2.  Acute  affections.  Variola,  morbilli,  catarrh,  in  its  last
stages.

3.  Intermittent  fever.  It  ranks  with  Nux  vomica
Pulsatilla,  and  China,  as  one  of  the  best  remedies.  The
fever  in  which  it  is  indicated  is  characterized  by  gastric
phenomena  of  low  intensity;  the  chill  predominates,  and  the
chest  also,  is  affected ;  the  patient  feels  as  if  a  hoop  were
placed  around  ihe  body.

4.  Nervous  fever  \ti  the  beginning;  cholera  in  the  begin-
ning; and  in  the  sequela:  of  cholera.

5  Hcentorrftage,  from  partial  over-excitements,  especially
in  incipient  tuberculosis  in  young  girls;  also  in  hemorrhage
from  paralysis  of  the  capillary  vascular  system,  but  never  la
hiemorrhage  arising  from  general  crasis,  or  decomposition.
Seldom  in  haemorrhage  from  the  stomach  and  intestines;
oEWner  in  that  from  the  lungs  and  nose.

6.  After  the  violence  of  acute  pulmonary  affections  has
abated,  when  irritation  remains.  In  chronic  catarrh  with
physical  symptoms  of  a  very  low  grade;  when  the  irritation
inducing  cough,  and the  dyspnoea  are  great  at  periodic


330


DIAGNOSIS  IN  HOMCEOPATHIC PRACTICE.


intervals;  hence,  in  all  asthmatic  cases.  In  all  coughs  vntfa
a  tendency  to  vomiting,  if  not  violent,  even  in  a  slight
degree. Spasms  during  pregnancy. Abuse  of  China.


NO.  xin. CHtNA.


China  has  much  in  common  with  Arsenic  and  Carbo
vegctabilis.  It  develops  its  effects  on  the  vitality  of  the
blood  ;  debility  ensues,  like  that  induced  by  venesection,  i

which  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  blood  are  altere
and,  in  consequence,  various  functional  disturbances  mani
fest  themselves.  The  entire  vegetation  suffers,  the  tone  of
the  organism  becomes  enfeebled,  the  blood  becomes  thin
and  watery,  and  the  circulation  lacks  energy  ;  hence  ensue
stases,  hemorrhage,  watery  diarrhcea,  abundant  sweat  and
urine.

Circulation.  Tlie  energy  f>f  the  circulation  is  diminished^
the  pulse  becomes  small  and  weak  in  consequence  of  the
anxmia ;  hence,  erethism  and  debility.  (Carbo  induces
debility,  with  torpor;  Arsenic.  clcbilit>',  with  excitation,
presenting,  therefore,  a  closer  analogy  to  China.)  The  veins
become  varicose  ;  the  arteries,  however,  retain  their  tone.

Ncrvotts  System.  Krethistically  affected.  Greatly  in-
creased sensibility  to  all  external  influences.  (China  induces
greater  sensitiveness  of  the  scalp  to  external  touch  than
any  other  remedy  docs.)  The  affection  of  the  nervous
sj*stem  exercises  a  reflex  action  on  the  blood  ;  hence,  also,
excitation  alternating  with  depression.  (Belladonna  induces
a  continuous,  enduring  excitation.)

Vegetalion.  The  whole  vegetation  appears  depressed,  the
vital  turgor  diminished.  The  skin  is  pale  and  earthy,  the
vessels  being  visible  through  it.  The  digestive  function  is
modified.  For  the  iiver,  China  has  a  special  affinity,  as
well  as  for  the  spleta,  in  enlargement  of  which  a  small
dose  of  China  effects  a  speedy diminution of  volume.


c

m
'I

i

'4


4


NO. XIU. CHINA.


331


Clina  induces  hypcrxmia  of  both  of  these oi^ans ; the
diajinutioti  is  llierefore  a  secondary  effect (Piorry's  cxperi-
licnts.)
To  the  Stomach,  China  bears  important  relations  (espe-
feiaJly  to  the  solar  plexus),  enfeebling  its  activity,  inducing
loss  of  appetite,  without  vitiating  the  taste. Nausea,  and
disinclination  for  certain  articles  of  ordinary  diet,  result  from
^^  altered  digestive  activity  and  tlie  altered  secretions ;  in
particular,  water-brash,  in  consequence  of  the  watery  secre-
tions. The  rest  of  the  digestive  canal  is  but  little  affected  ;
"'^tery  stools,  however,  occur,  in  consequence  of  intestinal
P^ral^sis;  hence,  also,  Licnteria.

To  the  Lungs  and  Genital  Organs,  China  has  no  special

delations. The  secretions of  the  mucous  membranes  arc

Vatery  and  thin  (oedema  pulmonum). It  is  not  specifically

"^^'^icated  in  anasarca,  and  it  induces  vesicles  (miliaria)  only

[**3'' inducing  a  general  debility. To  ihc  uterus,  no  especial

'>^ity. The  menstrual  flow  is  increased  in  quantity  and

fl  iiidity,  with  general  weakness  and  anaemia.

C^Jiaraettristic  Symptoms, \.  Pains. Sticking, tearing,

*~»*-^^^ng,  in  particular  lassitude*  with  a  peculiar  restlessness,

j^^t^clling  to  constant  motion. Pain,  as  if  after  a  journey

foot

'  *  Aggravation. By  touch,  motion,  and  by  every  kind
t^hysical  or  mental  effort.

.  Very  great  sensitiveness  to  external  influences,  cspe-
"'^'lly  of  the  skin  and  the  head,  to  the  external  touch.
^%.  Yellow,  earthy  hue  of  the  skin.
S-  Fever,  chill  predominating ;  heat  and  cold  but  par-
'•^^Aly  distributed. Thirst  during  the  cold,  and  bet^vecn  it
*l«i  the  heat

€.  Pulse  generally  quick,  small,  and  soft

7.  Thirst  during  the  cold  stage.

8.  Gastric  affection  ;  water-brash.

9.  Swelling  and  pain  of  liver  and  spleen.
la  Diarrhcea,  watery  and  soft :  slowly  expelled.


c^r


332


DIAGNOSIS  IN IIOMQEOPATUIC  PRACTICE.


11.  Menses  generally  increased,  but  thin  and  watery.

12.  Symptoms  periodic  in  character.

13.  Feeble  condition  after  loss  of  vital  juices,  after  h^i^cra-^
rhagcs,  sweat,  pollutions,  onanism,  etc


or


iX£


SPECIAL  INDICATIONS.

1.  After  all  enfeebling  maladies  (intermittent  and  nen^'^'"*
fever,  etc).

2.  After  great  loss  of  fluids.

3.  After  mental  exertions,  night  watchings,  etc
(i.)  In  atrophia  infantilis  and  senilis.

(2.)  In  hemorrhages,  only  when  tliey  depend  on  debil£^ ^*
on  torpor  of  the  vessels,  and  fluidity  of  the  blood.

4.  In  chlorosis,  China  compares  with  Pulsatilla  and  Ftf-^T"
rum.

(r.)  Pulsatilla  U  indicated  when  paleness  predominate
where  emaciation  is  not  yet  marked,  and  where  thetur^
vitalis  is  still  present Fluor  Albus.

(2.)  China,  where  there  is  a  yellowish  hue,  gastric  syn"*
toms  are  conjoined,  and  the  tui^or  vitalis  is  going  or  qix.
gone.

(3.)  Frrrum,  where  there  arc  vascular  erethism,  fugiti
flashes  of  heat,  diminished  menstrual  flow,  but  the  blooA-
a  bright  red  color.

5.  Hydrops  from  atony  and  anaemia.

6.  Sequels  of  liver  disease. Ascites.

7.  Sequels  of  cutaneous  disease. CEdema,  cyanosis.

9.  Typhus  seldom,  and  only  when  accompanied  by  tt*^^''
bilious  diarrhoea.

9l  Sequela:  of  cholera.

10.  Intermittent  fever.  The  experience  of  allopaths  sho^
that  in  this  disease  we  should  not  neglect  China. Dr.  Kasl>
says  he  gives  China in  all  cases  of  intermittent  fever,
which  no  other  remedy  is  clearly  indicated,  even  though t*^'
indication  be  not  very  clear /;r  China. The  enUrge<l  spl^^  ^*
diminishes  in  a  short  time  and  permanently.


NO. XrV. PHOSPHORUS.


333


11.  Gastric  and  bilious,  according  to  their  form.  Gas-
tralgia.

12.  Affections  oflivcr  and  spleen.  Enlargement  of  the  liver.

13.  Lienteria,  a  cardinal  remedy.  {Weakness  of  the
intestinal  canal — a  too  thin  gastric  secretion.)

14..  Nocturnal  pollutions  too  frequent.  Amenonhoea;
abortion ;  delayed  parturition ;  chlorotic  palpitation  of  the
heart.  With  reference  to  general  sensibility  ;  compare  China
with  Cocculus  and  Ignatia.


NO.  XIV.  PHOSPHORUS.

Phosphorus  acts  directly  upon  the  blood-life,  modifying  it
in  a  remarkable  manner,  producing  a  tendency  to  decom.
position,  and  causing  ecchymosis,  hemorrhage  and  depositions
in  the  parenchymatous  organs.  The  pus  of  which  it  induces
the  formation  is  intermediate  between  true  fius  and  sanUs.
Phosphorus  induces,  in  particular,  a  violent  crethistfc  con-
dition of  the  whole  vital  process,  acting  first,  upon  the
nervous  system,  then  by  a  reflex  action  upon  the  vascular
and  the  remaining  system,  and  causing  in  its  subsequent
action,  apathy,  torpor,  and  paralytic  conditions,

1.  Vascular  S/siem.  Erethism  is  distinctly  marked.
Sometimes  it  is  general;  sometimes  partial,  affecting
especially  the  head  and  chesl;  chills  predominate,  but
excessive  heat  is  often  induced,  and  these  sensations  alter-
nate quickly  with  each  other.  Sensations  resulting  from  a
partial  crethistic  condition  in  the  head  and  chest  accompany
almost  all  other  symptoms.  Throbbing  of  the  vessels  of  the
head  (also  Belladonna).  The  general  temperature  is  much
elevated.  Thirst  may  be  increased  or  absent.  Sweat  is
much  increased.

2.  Nervous  System.  Much  excited.  This  excitement  is
manifested  in  gayety  and  levity,  in  diminished  sleep  without
consequent  suffering;  in  restlessness  and  dreamful  sleep,  in


I


334  DIAGNOSIS  m  KOMCEOrATHlC  PRACTICE.

entire  sleeplessness,  even  in  delirium.  The  fantasy  is  exalttd
In  the  further  action  of  Phosphonis  apathy  is  induced ;  ibt
mental  activit)'  and  ability  arc  diminished ;  trcnibling  and
jerking  of  the  muscles  arc  frequent,  especially  of  the  muscle*
of  the  head,  face  and  neck.

3.  Nuiritioti.  Impaired — as  shown  by  tlie  earthy  ohd-
plcKion.  with  tlie  peculiar  yellow  tint,  recog-nized  in  the
Phosphorus  degeneration.  The  turgor  vitalis  is  at  fint
increased,  tlicn  depressed,  emaciation  resulting-.  The  Stcrt-
tions  arc  in  general  diminished,  even  to  dryness.  (Sn^eat
and  urine  are  (mechanically  ?)  increased).

4.  Skin.  Phosphorus  has  little  affinity  for  the  skin.  It
induces  the  formation  of  papules  and  of  ulcers,  especially  on
the  points  of  transition  between  the  mucous  membrane  and
the  skin,  and  in  the  hollows  of  the  joints  (this  is  very
characteristic). Ecchymoses.  ■

5.  Jzj'cs.  Irritation,  swelling,  theconjunctix-a  is  reddened,
and  the  cornea  is  rendered  opaque;  the  globe  of  the  eye
enlarges,  and  vesicles  form  in  and  aronnd  the  eyes;  in  con-
sequence, sensations  as  of  clouds  and  sparks  before  the  eyes  J
are  induced,  with  a  sensation  as  of  sand  in  the  eye,  and
twitching  of  the  eyelids.

6.  £ars. Dryness.  ■

7.  Nose.  Dryness,  ulceration,  sticking,  efflorescence  around
the  nose.

8.  Mouth.  Dryness,  furred  tongue,  vesicles,  ap/ttha,
difficult  deglutition  (because  of  the  dr>*ness).  The  pharynx
is  irritated  and  InHamcd.

9.  Digestion.  Disturbed,  as  is  shown  by  loss  of  appetite,
disgust,  nausea,  scanty  vomiting,  acrid  eructations.

10.  Excretions.  Sensation  of  heat  through  the  whole
intestinal  track,  even  to  burning,  relieved  by  Coffee.  Various
pains.  Great  development  of  gas  (mctcorismu.*!  tympanitis).
Stoois  are  scanty,  of  a  pappy  nature,  green,  also  gray,  ihin
and  frequent.  Sometimes  they  are  difficult  and  painful,
attended  by  tenesmus  and  burning  in  the  onus.


I


NO. XJV. PHOSPHORUS.


335


11.  Respiratory  Orgafts. A  Specific  Action. Phosphorus
"induces great dryness, roughness, hoarseness, laborious

cough,  with  a  scanty,  tenacious,  muco-purulcnt  and  bloody
expectoration.  The  respiration  is  accelerated,  ivith  a  feeling
of  constriction,  heat,  congestion  and  sticking  pain.

12.  Gctiiio- Urinary  Organs.  Inflammation  of  the  kid-
neys (?).  Diminution  or  increase  of  the  urine;  burning  in
the  urethra,  or  involuntary  micturition.  The  sexual  instinct
is  incrca.sed,  showing  itself  in  priapism,  nymphomania,
pollution,  powerless  coitus,  etc.  Menstruation  is  too  early
and  too  copious.

13.  Botus.  Phosphorus  exerts  a  specific  action,  especially
on  the  jaw-bones,  inducing  inllanimation  and  suppuration,
with  a  simultaneous  formation  of  callus.


APrUCATlO.V.

Phosphorus  is  indicated  as  well  in  acute  as  in  chronic  cases,
^rather  in  acute  diseases.  In  all  conditions  of  nervous  and
vascular  irritation  wiih  dcbiUfy, — hence  in  erethistic  con-
ditions it  stands  before  all  oUicr  remedies.  In  the  diseases
in  which  it  is  applicabk,  ttic  transition  is  always  easy  to
torpor  ;  there  is  always  a  dyscrasia,  approaching  in  character
the  Typhoid  dyscrasia.

Special  Application.  I.  In  typhus.  The  Phosphorus
pathogenesis  is  a  perfect  picture  of  erethistic  t>'phus  (cerebral
and  abdominal).  It  is  to  be  compared  with  Arsenicum,
which  produces  collapse,  decubitus,  and  colliquative  diarrho^
and  is  thereby  distinguished  from  Phosphorus,  which  has  no
diarrhoea.

In  pneumo-tj'phus,  where  the  diagnosis  hesitates  between
tuberculosis  and  typhus.  In  ait  cases  in  which  inflamma-
tion takes  on  a  nervous  character,  e.  g.,  dysentery,  pyaemia,
acute  catarrh,  witli  nervous  symptoms.

2.  To  inflammation  of  mttcous  membranes  Phosphorus  has
a  peculiar  affinity,  with  a  scanty  muco-purulent  secretion.
Hence,  in  ophthalmia  with  general  vascular  excitement;  In


336


BIACNOSIS IX  H0M<E0PATI1IC PRACTICE.


pneumonia  tuberculosa  (frequent  in  Phosphorus  factories),
gastritis,  enteritis,  nephritis,  and  hxmaturia,  witJi  dai
scanty,  turbid  urine.

3.  Ostitis  and  necrosis,  especially  of  maxillary  bones.

4.  Rheumatism.  In  bone  diseases  depending  on  rheum
tism. In  diseases  assuming  a  ehronic  form.

1.  Day-bliiidne.ss ;  photophobia,  with  spots  and  spai
before  the  eyes.  Otitis,  with  deafness  after  nervous  fevfl
Polypus  nasi. Dental  caries.

2.  Priapism,  impotence ;  amenorrhcea.


NO.  XV. CHAMOMILLA.


Chamomilla  affects  directly  both  the  animal  and  vegetal
nervous  systems, — the  latter  in  a  greater  degree.  It  ai
more  decidedly  on  the  sensitive  than  on  the  motory  sphe
Like  Ignatia,  it  has  no  violent,  long-endtiring,  or  deep-f
action.  Nevertheless,  by  a  long  use  of  it,  the  vegetation
seriously  affected.

GENERAL  ACTION.

1.  In  the  animal  nervous  system.  Motory  sphere.
spasms,  or  rather  tremblings  and  tu-itchings.  of  short  dur
tion.  The  parts  among  which  the  middle  spinal  nerves  a
distributed  appear  most  strongly  affected.  ^li

2.  Vegetation. — The  sensitive  sphere  is  more  affectedTB
the  motory.  I.  Spasm  occurs  also  in  the  vegetative  muscuti
system  ;  but  of  a  very  feeble  character,  z.  Pain  in  stoma<
and  intestines  is  very  considerable.  When  spasm  occur
pain  is  always  present  predominating  over  the  spasm  (<
and  very  often  pain  occurs  without  spasm.

First  the  gastro-intestinal  sphere  is  affected, — thciT
thoracic.

I.  Stomach.  Dull  sensations,  pain,  oflen  also  spasn
Violent  nausea  interfering  with  appetite. Singultus  whri


NO. XV. CHAHOMILLA,


337


eating,  ructus,  vomituritio,  vomitus, — all  this  being  attended
by  more  or  less  pain.  Sensation  of  fullness  when  the
stomach  is  empty,  and  vice  versa.  Anxiety  in  the  epigas-
trium after  eating  ;  drawing  pains  in  the  loins  and  hypochon-
dria ;  accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth ;  alienated  taste ;
sometimes  even  vertigo ;  loss  of  sense-  Hence,  in  general,
aggravation  after  eating.

2.  Intestine.  Pain,  flatulence,  peristaltic  motion  increased,
a nti- peristaltic  motion  induced.

3.  Chest-  Increased  irritability  of  the  lungs;  hence
tickling,  constriction,  and  anxiety.

4.  Brain.  Irritability,  anger,  chagrin,  restlessness,  anxie^,
weeping,  groaning,  fright,  crying  out,  speaking  during  sleep,
and  sudden  starting,  especially  in  children.

5.  Vascular  System.  Easily  excited  ;  hence  frequent  con-
gestions of  short  duration.  Contradiction  of  the  objective
and  subjective  symptoms,  r.  g-,  external  cold,  and  internal
heat,  as  in  the  case  of  Ignatia ;  Chamomilla,  however,  has
pain  and  greater  disturbance  of  sensation  than  Ignatia,  and  its
vascular  excitement  isgreater.amounting  to  a  considerable  de-
gree of  fever,  even  to  delirium,  and  attended  by  violent  thirst

6.  Blood,  Little  affected,  unless  by  a  long  use  of  Chamo-
milla, which  renders  the  blood  less  plastic  and  induces
chlorosis.

7.  Sccretiatts-  Not  altered,  only  increased,  especially  those
of  the  intestines  and  liver;  in  consequence  of  the  latter
effect,  the  excretions  are  more  green  in  appearance,  and
increased  in  quantity. Development  of  flatus.

8.  Female  Sexual  System.  Although  this  system  is  not
specifically  affected,  yet  the  menses  and  sexual  instinct  are
increased.

9-  Aggravation  of  the  pains  by  rest  and  warmth.


APPUCATlOtf.


Chamomilla is  applicable  in  erethism of  the  sensitive
nervous  spheres ;  hence,  peculiarly  appropriate  for  children,

sa


338


DIAGNOSIS  IN  H0M(E0PATH1C  PRACTICE.


and  for  women,  especially  during  pregnancy  :  for  person
irritable  temperament,  prone  to  congestion,  after
and  anger.  Among  children's  diseases,  it  is
appropriate  for  such  as  result  from  the  use  of  milk
always  bad  or  rendered  so  temporarily  by  a  fit  of  ai
the  part  of  the  nurse, — inducing  vomiting,  cuttings  ia
abdomen,  etc.  ChamomiUa  may  be  used,  when  indl
in  all  diseases,  except  in  conditions  of  torpor  and  syn
or  of  great  excitation;  hence,  in  sub-acute  co
hysteria,  certain  odontalgia,  with  jerkings  and  distortion
the  face,  aggravated  by  warmtk  ;  in  sub-acute  rbeumatisi'
in  mastitis.  In  erybipelas  faciei  it  is  renowned.  In  inter-
mittent  fever,  with  abdominal  symptoms  characteristic  of
Chamomitla.  In  diarrhoea,  with  violent  pains;  abdomintl
spasms  before  the  evacuation ;  stools  pappy,  watery,  add
and  bilious.  In  gastric  affections,  especially  after  chagrio
and  anger,  with  much  thirst  and  heat  Icterus,  conse-
quent on  a  fit  of  anger,  with  great  excitability.  Importasi
in  the  period  of  dentition;  in  the  menstrual  period,  for
menstrual  colic;  metrorrhagia  with  the  characteristic  symp-
toms of  ChamomiUa — false  pains;  in  several  varieties  of
asthma,  with  great  sensibility.  Ischias,  cramp  of
calves.


NO. XVI. NUX VOMICA.


The  primary  action  of  Nu.x  Vomica  is  exerted  exclusively
upon  the  Nervous  SysUm,  inducing,  first,  xtariation  in  tht
inttnsily  of  action  of  tliat  system,  viz.,  txcitati^nt,  sooo
followed  by  torpidity,  and  secondly,  alteration  in  ifs  mode  g/
action.

The  Motory  or  Ccntri/ngal  /actor  of  Uie  nervous  system
is  especially  affected.  The  Ctntral  portions  (the  ganglia
and  the  spinal  cord  themselves)  arc  more  affected  tJian  the
firipheric,  and  above  all  the  abdominal  ganglia  and  those


NO.  XVI. NUX  VOMICA.


parts  of  U]e  spinal  cord  in  immediate  connection  with  the
diapi^agm.

1.  Spinal  Cord.  The  action  of  Nux  is  chiefly  on  the
motory  or  centrifugal  factor,  producing  spasm,  especially  in
the  abdomen  and  lower  extremities,  rather  tonic  than  clonic,
induced  by  very  slight  exciting  causes,  even  by  change  of
weather.  Individual  Symptoms.  Jcrkings,  stiffness,  cramp,
spasm  of  the  pharynx,  and  of  the  anus,  erection  of  the  penis,
spasm  of  the  bladder,  in  a  word,  of  all  the  half  voluntary
muscles,  spasmodic  distortion  of  the  face  and  mouth.  Tris-
mus, spasm  of  the  tongue  (followed  by  partial  paralj-sis)  of
the  cesophagus  and  rectum.  All  of  these  symptoms  are
followed  by  torpidity  and  temporary*  partial  paralysis.

2.  Vegetative  System,  Motory  Factor.  Dilatation  and
contraction  of  the  irb,  spasm  of  the  stomach  and  intestine.
The  chief  malady  of  this  system,  bearing  close  relation  to
the  symptoms  of  Nux  Is  cardialgiay  both  presenting  us
eructations,  nausea,  vomiting,  constriction  and  protrusion  of
the  intestine,  painful  anti-peristaltic  motion,  palpitation,
pulse  momentarily  irregular.

3.  Cerebral  System.  The  character  of  the  phenomena
induced  by  Nux  in  this  system  is  similar  to  that  above
depicted,  but  the  phenomena  are  less  strongly  pronounced.
They  arc  the  reflex  of  those  induced  in  the  spinal  and  vege-
tative system.  The  Organs  of  Sense  are  strongly  influenced,
but  those  functions  which  arc  peculiarly  cerebral  (i.  e.,
sensorial  functions,  phantasy,  etc.)  are  but  slightly  affected.
Susceptibility  to  mental  and  sensuous  impressions  is  greatly
increased;  this  condition  is  soon  followed  by  one  oi apathy,
in  which,  however,  consciousness  is  preserved.  (N.  B.
Under  the  action  of  Stramonium  and  Hyoscyamus,  in  a
corresponding  condition,  consciousness  is  lost.)

4.  The  Pains  and  Sensations  excited  by  Nux  are  such  as
usually  accompany  spasm — cramp-pains,  jcrkings,  etc.  A
feeling  of  e.xhaustioQ,  a  sensation  as  if  beaten^  is  very
constantly  observed.


340


DIAGNOSIS  IK  HOMffiOPATHlC PRACTICE.


Phmomena  of  the  Vegetative  Life  generai/y.

1.  Vascular  System.  Increased  activity,  soon  followeillif
exhaustion,  hence  Nux  rather  retards  than  accelerates  At
circulation  (causing  congestions).  The  general  cfiecb  rf
Nux  in  this  respect  resemble  those  of  Cocculus  and  IgoUii.
The  frequently  observed  phenomenon  of  external  cold  w4
internal  heat  (and  vice  versa)  is  important,  as  showing  lUi
state  of  partial  excitation  and  partial  torpidity.

C/iaracier  of  the  Fever.  Violent  chill,  external  heat  wtli
internal  cold,  and  vice  versa.  The  thirst  is  slight,  or  then
is  great  tliirst  at  the  period  of  greatest  coldness  (shoviif
that  the  latter  is  a  consequence  of  alteration  of  nervms
functions,  and  not  of  an  immediate  vascular  excitement;
this  is  shown,  loo,  by  the  fact  that  drinking  rather  aggn-
votes  than  relieves  tite  thirst).

2.  Assimilation.  The  efTects  of  Nux  are  very  complex,
its  especial  action  being  iipon  the  abdominal  f^anglionic
S)rstcm.  A  habitus  gastricus  is  the  chief  indication  for  itj
administration  ;  a  skin  yellowish  or  earthy,  eyes  yellow  or
dirty- looking,  tongue  coated,  teeth  yellow,  irritability  d
temper,  hypochondriasis,  hysteria,

3.  Gastric  Phenomena.  These  depend  on  aJteration  in
the  mode  of  action  of  the  nerves.  The  gastric  secretion  is
modlRed,  the  odor  of  the  breath  is  unpleasant,  the  taste  is
salt  or  bitter.  These  phenomena  depend  on  the  condition
of  the  stomach,  and  not  upon  any  altered  state  of  the
mouth  (as  appears  from  tlie  fact  that  the  sense  of  tastt
retains  its  full  power  of  distinguishing  different  articles
and  qualities  of  food,  a  characteristic  of  Nux),  bulimy  or
anorexia.  While  eating,  nausea,  headache,  tormina;  afttr
tating,  these  symptoms  are  aggravated,  eructations,  vomit-
ing, which  is  never  profuse,  but  is  generally  sour  or  bitter
mucus.  Thirst,  yet  drinks  are  not  well  endured.  Although
these  symptoms  occur  after  eating,  they  are  also  manifested
at  other  times-^an  evidence  of  the  alteration  of  ncrvota
action.


NO, XVI. NT7X  VOMICA.


parts  of  the  spinal  cord  in  immetliate  connection  with  the
diaphragm.

1.  Spinal  Cord.  The  action  of  Nux  is  chiefly  on  the
motory  or  centrifugal  factor,  producing  spasnn,  especially  in
the  abdomen  and  lower  extremities,  rather  tonic  than  clonic,
induced  by  very  slight  exciting  causes,  even  by  cliange  of
weatlier.  Individual  Symptoms,  Jcrkings,  slifiness,  cramp,
spasm  of  the  pharynx,  and  of  the  anus,  erection  of  the  penis,
spasm  of  the  bladder,  in  a  word,  of  all  the  half  voluntary
muscles,  spasmodic  distortion  of  the  face  and  mouth.  Tris-
mus, spasm  of  the  tongue  (followed  by  partial  paralysis)  of
the  oesophagus  and  rectum.  AH  of  these  symptoms  are
followed  by  torpidity  and  temporary  partial  paralysis.

2.  Vegttative  System,  Motory  Factor.  Dilatation  and
contraction  of  the  iris,  spasm  of  the  stomach  and  intestine.
The  chief  malady  of  this  9y;tcm,  bearing  close  relation  to
the  symptoms  of  Nux  is  cardialgia,  both  presenting  us
eructations,  nausea,  vomiting,  constriction  and  protrusion  of
the  intestine,  painful  anti-peristaltic  motion,  palpitation,
pulse  momentarily  irregular.

3.  Cenbral  System.  The  character  of  the  phenomena
induced  by  Nux  in  this  system  is  similar  to  that  atwve
depicted,  but  the  phenomena  are  less  strongly  pronounced.
Tliey  are  the  reflex  of  those  induced  in  the  spinal  and  vege-
tative system.  The  Organs  of  Sense  arc  strongly  influenced,
but  tiiose  functions  which  are  peculiarly  cerebral  (i.  e.,
sensorial  functions,  phantasy,  etc.)  arc  but  slightly  affected.
Susceptibility  to  mental  and  sensuous  impressions  is  greatly
increased;  this  condition  is  soon  followed  by  one  al apathy,
in  which,  however,  consdousness  is  preserved.  (N.  B.
Under  the  action  of  Stramonium  and  Hyoscyamus,  in  a
corresponding  condition,  consciousness  is  lost.)

4.  The  Pains  and  Sensations  excited  by  Nux  arc  such  as
usually  accompany  spasm — cramp-pains,  jcrkings,  etc.  A
feeUng  of  exhaustion,  a  sensation  as  if  beaten,  is  very
constantly  observed.


342


DIAGNOSIS  IN  HOMCEOPATHIC PRACTICE.


of  the  lower  part  of  the  body, — especially  those  which  inn^
at  the  same  time,  the  muscles  of  both  the  animal  and  Tts^
tative  spheres;  in  all  cases  where  Nux  is  indicated,  rt»u^»K-
ness  must  be  ntain^d;  cases  in  which  pressure  or  v>anA
applied  to  the  vertebral  column  provokes  the  spasms.  7m
spasm,  in  the  forms  of  tetanus,  trismus,  eclampsia  infantas.
etc.  Nux  is  a  very  important  remedy  in  cases  of  trcmblin
induced  by  metallic  poisoning/  and  in  saturnine  colit
Spasms  of  the  pharynx  and  larynx,  and  of  the  diaphragsi;
angina  pectoris.  Spasm  of  the  stomach ;  spasmodic  vw^
iting,  with  scanty  evacuation ;  vomiting  during  pregtaacf.
Hernia. Flatulent  and  menstrual  colic.

Over-excitability  of  the  senses.  Irritation  of  the  spinal  coii
2.  Intermittettt  Fever.  Nux  is  probably  indicated  in  niiw
cases  out  of  every  ten.-  These  cases  are  distinguished  bvoef-
tain  gastric  phenomena  ;  the  complexion  is  of  a  tight  icteric
hue ;  there  is  obstinate  constipation,  with  violent  pain  ii
the  loins.  The  cold  predominates.  Thirst  is  present,  yet
drinking  aggravates  the  sj-mptoms.

3-  In  Typhus,  Nux  is  only  sympathetically  indicated,
when  there  is  continued  constipation,  or  in  the  mild  forra
of  typhus,  attended  by  the  peculiar  gastric  symptoms  <rf
Nux.

4.  Sub-acute  and  chronic  muscular  rheumatism;  certaia
forms  of  delirium  tremens  ;  nervous  vertigo,  depending  on
abnormal  affections.  Morning  vomitus  after  a  debauch.
Headache  after  meals ;  the  cephalic  congestion  always,  if
conjoined  with  gastric  phenomena.

5.  In  gastric  derangements  from  use  of  coflfce  ;  dynamic
affections  of  the  liver.  In  hernia,  both  free  and  incarcerated
In  haimorrhoids.  In  neuralgia.  In  catarrh,  with  dry,  labo-
rious, tickling  cough  ;  with  spasm,  and  even  vomiting-.

'  For  poisoning  by  Acienic,  with
tnmbling  of  the  hands,  in  hat-mokcrs,
they  ^vc,  in the  Genenil  Hospiial


(Allopathic)  of  VicRUft,  sulphur,  in
drachm  do^ca,  tnd  relieve  the  pitieat
geDcrall/  in  about  four  dxyi. —  C.  D.


'  It  will  be  remcinbered  that  thrtf
lecture!  were  delivered  in  »  «ab«i1r
of  Vienna,  in  which  a  peculiar  fenn
of  Inlermitieni  Fever  is  cDdcBiic.—
C.  D,


BELLADOl


Belladonna  excites  simultaneously  the  nervous  and  vas-
lilar  s>-stems,  and  is  hence  indicated  neither  in  pure  inflam-
*Datory  fever,  nor  in  pure  nervous  fever,  but  as  a  kind  of
>hibiou$  remedy  in  that  condition  in  which  the  symptoms
both  appear, — in  the  "ncurophlogosen"  of  Schonlein,  in
"fcbris  infiammatoria  nervosa"  of  Vogi, — hence  not  in
ire  phlegmonous  inflammation  nor  in  pure  spasm  but  in
*flammatory  spasm.
I.  Vascular  System.  Strongly  excited;  most  of  all  the
IcapiUary  system,  in  which  the  eflects  of  Belladonna  are
Wpedally  manifest  in  the  skin,  throat,  head  and  lungs,  con-
stituting an  affection  very  similar  to  scarlatina.  (According
to  Sdiunlein,  the  scarlatina  pulse  is  present)  Belladonna  is
"ic  Aconite  of  the  capillary  vascular  system.

H.  VEGETATtON.  Skin  and  mucous  membrarus,  are
^^t^ckcd ;  hence,  dryness  of  the  throat  and  constriction,
'"'^'"eased  thirst,  diminished  secretions,  burning  and  spasms
^^ tfcc  stomach.

III.  Although  Belladonna  affects  powerfully  the  Gland-
^•A-R  System,  yet  it  gives  no  especial  characteristic  indi-
^«cn.

1Y.  Nervous  System.  Exaltation,  alienation,  and  depres-
*'^*i,  the  last  only  from  large  doses  (bad  provings),  and
^»Ording  no  special  indication.  This  affection  of  the  nervous
^^stem  depends  not  only  upon  the  encephalon  but  also  upon
^^  spinal  cord ;  and  the  sensitive  as  well  as  the  motor
"Serves  are  affected ;  hence pains, convulsions, and  tonic


<  Report  of  ■.  dinJc*!  Lecture  hy  Dr.  Wunnb,  in  th«  Second
HomoeopkttLtc  Hospital,  Vienna.


344


BELLADONNA,


spasms,  are  first  induced,  and  finally  paralysis.  Upon  the
ganglionic  system  Belladonna  acts  as  a  depressing  agent

Characteristics.  \.  Pain.  Oppression,  pressing  from
within  outward  and  vice  versa,  also  throbbing.  The  pain
comes  on  suddenly,  rises  quickly  to  its  greatest  intensity,
and  suddenly  vanishes  or  changes  its  seat-  It  is  aggravated
in  the  evening  and  at  night  by  coffee,  wine,  vinegar  (hence
vinegar  is  no  antidote) ;  ameliorated  by  pressure  and  com-
pression.

Indications.  1.  htflammation  of  the  ear,  erysipelatous;
ditto  of  the  throat  and  fauces  with  constrictien,  which  serves
to  distinguish  Belladonna  from  Mcrcurius  and  from  Nitric
Acid,  which  last  is  indicated  where  aphtha:  appear  on  the
ton»ls. Also  in  malignant  angina.

2.  In  pneumonia,  typhus,  and  acute  catarrh,  with  cerebral
complications.  Tussis  convulsiva  more  frequently  requires
other  remedies,  as  Hyoscyamus,  Sulphur,  Vcratrum  and
Cuprum.

3.  Abdominal  affections.  Flatulent  colic,  sausage-like
inflation  of  the  colon  with  pain  in  the  umbilical  region.
Hernia,  in  inflammatory  condition.  Hepatic  congestion.
Icterus  infiammatorius.  Haemorrhoids  with  constriction  of
the  sphincter.

4.  Nervous  affections.  Melancholy  during  pregnancy  and
the  puerperal  state.  Spasm  with  consciousness  (peculiar  to
Belladonna).  Mania.  Delirium  tremens.  Hydrophobia
(Wurmb  has  no  experience;  would  incline  to  expect  more
from  the  animal  poisons).

5.  Nenrous  accidents.  I.  Clonic  spasms  in  the  upper  part
of  the  body.  Epilepsy.  Chorea  (with  reference  always  to
XXyc  genius  of  the  remedy),  i.  Congestio  ad  caput  Dis-
turbed menstruation.  Kaphania.  2,  Pain.  a.  Prosopalgia
FothergiUii  (also  Fcrrum  Carbonicum)  in  cases  in  which
there  is  simultaneous  vascular  excitement.  In  fiureiy
nervous  cases  it  is  not  indicated.  (Spigelia  preferable.)
b.  Toothache;  gums  inflamed;  aggravated  by  cold. c.  Sleep-


BELLADONNA.


345


/fssitess,  especially  of  plethoric  children.  From  nervous
over-excitement,  {Coffra.)  H.  Certain  particular  nervous
maladies.  I.  Febris  nervosa  vcrsatilis  of  the  ancients,  or
typhus  in  which  the  abdominal  ulcers  are  wanting;  2.
Typhus  ccrebralis ;  3. Febris  intermittens  apoplectlca.

6.  Vascular  diuases.  i.  Congeition.  Pain  in  sinciput;  great
sensibility  to  air  and  noise  ;  roaring  in  the  head,  sparks  before
the  eyes,  especially  in  amcnorrhoea  and-dysmenorrhoea ;  apo-
plexy and  its  prodromena.  In  short,  in  every  case  in  which
the  allopath  would  resort  to  venesection.  An  antidote  to
Hyoscyamus.  2.  Inflammation,  a.  Of  the  brain  and  mem-
branes, especially  in  metastasis  from  scarlatina ;  delirium
ferox,  dilated  pupils,  red  face,  spasms.  In  children  during
dentition  (when  the  irritation  is  too  great  for  Chamomilla) ;
when  tonic  spasms  occur  (compare  Hyoscyamus  and  Stra-
monium). The  large  cerebrum  of  children  disposes  them  to
this  affection ;  hence  Hclladoniia  is  appropriate  as  prophy-
lactic, h.  Ophthalmia,  t.  Scrofulau-i  ophthalmia,  as  an
intercurrent  remedy  in  case  of  photophobia  with  vascular
injection  {without  this,  Conium)  and  dryness  of  the  eyes.

2.  Catarrhal  ophthalmia,  with  dryness  of  throat  and  cough.

3.  Arthritic  ophthalmia.  4.  Internal  ophthalmia,  amblyopia
and  recent  amaurosis.

7.  Sfxual  diseases.  Metrophlebitis  even  in  metastasis  to
the  parotid,  the  joints,  etc.  Mania  puerpcralis.  Orgasm  to
the  uterus.  Menses  copious,  blaclc,  clotted.  A  pressing
outward.  Cutting  lumbar  pains  extending  round  to  hypo-
gastrium.  Sensibility  of  the  uterus.  Affections  before
and  after  menstruation.  Labor-pains  deficient  from  non-
dilatation  (rigidity)  of  the  os  uteri.

8.  Skin.  I.  Scarlatina, — the  smooth  variety,  not  the  mili-
ary. In  ordinary  scarlatina  Aconite  and  Belladonna  alter-
nately. Also  the  same  as  prophylactics.  Wurmb  always
succeeds  giving  them  in  small  doses  f")  one  remedy  each
day  in  a  single  dose.  Measles  with  affection  of  the  head
and  throat Erysipelas,  smooth  form  (the  vesicular,  Rhus).


34^  BELLADONNA.

External  erysipelatous  inflammatioii  of  the  ears.  2.  Glands.
Inftammation  of  the  salivary  glands  with  affection  of  the
head.  For  the  inguinal  glands  and  testes  slight  affinity.
Inftammation  of  axillary  glands  during  the  climacteric
period,  and  when  the  swelling  remains  stationary  and
resembles  scirrhus  and  is  worse  during  menstruation.  Degen-
eration of  the  mamma,  and  erysipelatoid  inflammation,  but
not  traumatic  inflammation,  in  which  Arnica  in  small  doses  is
indicated.  Inflammation  of  the  uterus  with  great  haemor-
rhage, pressing  outward.


A  WEAK  SPOT  IN  OUR  MATERIA  MEDICA.


The  Homoeopathic  Materia  Mcdica  is  constructed  upon
the  results  of  provings  on  healthy  subjects.  Every  day's
experience,  in  its  application  at  the  bedside,  shows  us  that
the  more  accurate  the  prover's  observation  of  the  symptoms
which  the  drug  produces  in  him,  the  more  certainly  can  we
determine  whether  the  drug  is  appropriate  for  our  case.

We  call  certain  drugs  "well  proved"  because  the  state-
ments of  symptoms  are  so  clear,  the  discriminations,  especially
of  subjective  symptoms,  are  so  sharp  and  well  defined,  as
regards  character,  locality,  direction  and  conditions,  that  wc
get,  by  study  of  the  proving,  a  vivid  realization  of  the  patho-
genesis, and  can  be  sure  whether  a  similarity  exists  between
it  and  our  patient's  array  of  symptoms.  And,  moreover,  the
symptomatology  of  some  of  our  *'  well  proved  "  drugs  is  so
full  and  precise  that  we  are  able,  particularly  if  we  borrow  a
little  from  the  toxicologist,  to  construct  a  very  complete
pathological  theory  of  the  drug-action,  with  which  we  may
compare  our  theory  of  the  pathology  of  the  patient's  disease  ;
and  thus  we  may  have  the  double  satisfaction  of  a  patho-
logical and  a  symptomatological  correspondence  between
patient  and  drug.

A  reference  to  our  Materia  Mcdica,  in  so  far  as  the  symp-
toms of  the  respiratory  organs  are  concerned,  will  illustrate
this  point.  How  sharply  defined,  for  example,  arc  the  indi-
cations for  Aconite,  Bryonia,  Squilla,  Phosphorus,  Sulphur,
Chelidonium.  Antimonium  tartaricum,  Spongia,  Veratrum,
Bromine,  and  many  other  drugs  1  In  other  words,  how
clearly  do  the  symptoms  reveal  to  us  what  part  of  the
apparatus  is  aflfected,  and  how  it  is  aflected,  down  to  the


348


A  WEAK  SPOT  IN  OUR  MATERIA MED1CA.


finest  shades  of  difference  I  And  with  what  remaikaUc
precision  and  certainty,  as  compared  with  former  medial
respiratory  organs  !

A  strong  contrast  with  this  precision  and  certainty  a
presented  by  the  indefinite  indications  wc  possess  for  pic<
scriptions  in  diseases  of  the  sexual  organs  of  women.  Evea
our  "best  proved"  drugs  furnish  comparatively  few  symp-
toms referable  to  these  organs;  and.  of  these  few,  dK
language  is  generally  so  vague  that  we  are  at  a  loss  lo
determine  what  part  of  the  apparatus  may  have  been  the
objective  symptoms  are  often  most  unsatisfactory  and  mdef*
inite.  Compare,  in  evidence  of  this,  the  relative  clearness
and  fullness  with  which  discharges,  for  instance,  from  the
respiratory,  and  from  the  female  sexual  organs  have  been

Here,  then,  is  a  weak  spot  in  our  Materia  Mcdica  ;  and,
practically,  it  is  one  that  we  must  greatly  deplore.  Women's
diseases  constitute  a  large  majority  of  our  cases.  For,  at
least  half  of  the  community  are  women  ;  and,  what  with  the
enforced  illnesses  contingent  on  maternity;  upon  evolution
and  involution,  which  are  often  attended  with  serious  dis-
eases ;  because  of  our  modes  of  living,  which  bear  so  hardly
upon  woman  ;  upon  the  unequal  struggle  which,  as  yet,
women  arc  forced  to  maintain,  who  wage  alone  the  hard
battle  of  life,— this  half  of  the  community,  as  the  records  of
all  of  us  must  show,  call  for  professional  aid  at  least  twice  as
often  as  the  other.  And  yet,  in  reference  to  their  peculiar
diseases,  our  Materia  Medica  is  weakest.

The  reason  and  the  remedy  are  not  far  to  seek.

Wc  have  comparatively  few  symptoms  of  drug-action
upon  women,  because  comparatively  few  women  have  been
provers  of  drugs.  And  the  symptoms  we  have  are  lacking
in  precision,  because  our  women- provers,  as  a  rule,  have
been  deficient  in definite  knowledge  of  the  structure  and


A  WEAK  SPOT  IN  OUR MATERIA  MEDICA.


349


physiology  of  the  oi^[ans  distinctive  of  their  sex,  and  have,
therefore,  been,  lo  some  extent,  incompetent  observers.
respiratory  organs  which  they  possess  in  common  with  men,
than  of  their  own  characteristic  sexual  organs ;  a  fact  not
surprising,  perhaps,  but  certainty,  from  the  stand-point  of
the  Materia  Mcdica,  deplorable.

This  want  in  our  Materia  Mcdica  can  be  supplied  only  by
the  vohmtary  labors  of  women  as  provcrs  of  drugs.  And
that  their  provings  may  possess  the  requisite  definitcnessand
precision,  the  provcrs  must  have  acquired  such  a  degree,  at
least,  of  professional  knowledge  as  to  understand  the  anatomy,
physiology  and  relations  of  the  apparatus  peculiar  to  their
sex.  In  other  words,  they  must  be,  for  this  object,  at  least,
and  to  this  extent,  physicians.  More  especially  is  Ihis  neces-
sary as  regards  the  symptoms  produced  upon  tlie  sexual
apparatus  of  women,  since,  in  the  work  of  defining  and  com-
prehending tliese  symptoms,  at  least,  tliey  can  receive  no  aid
from  professional  »utt.

None  but  women  can  do  this  work.  None  but  women
educated  in  medical  science  can  do  it  worthily  and  well,  so
that  our  Materia  Mcdica  may  be  an  efficient  means  for
the  treatment  of  women's  diseases.  If  this  fact  furnish  an
ar^ment  for  the  medical  education  of  women,  the  fault
lies  in  nature !  And  if,  engaged  in  the  execution  of  such
a  work  as  is  here  indicated, — so  sorely  needed,  and  which
they  alone  can  perform, — women  physicians  should  seek
admission  to  the  privileges  of  our  profession,  I,  for  one,
could  not  imagine  a  more  complete,  nor  a  more  beneficent
vindication  of  tiicir  right,  than  such  a  contribution  to  human
knowledge  would  be.


DIRECTIONS  FOR  DRUG-PROVERS.

GlVKII TO  TBI WOUXN WHO PBOTSD LiUITM TlORIKttM.


The  object  in  proving  a  drug  is  to  ascertain  the  change
which  the  drug  is  capable  of  producing  in  the  functioiis  ud
organs  of  the  healthy  body.

It  is  very  important  Uiat  each  prover  should  know  and
be  able  to  recognize  the  various  sensations  and  variatiow
of  function  to  which  she  may.  by  peculiarity  of  consti*
ttition,  be  subject  when  in  average  health  ;  so  that  she  mav
not,  while  proving  a  drug,  mistake  such  natural  variationi
for  elTects  of  a  drug.

The  prover  should  have  at  hand,  at  all  times,  a  aolt-
book,  in  which  to  record  the  times  of  taking  the  drug  and
the  doses,  as  well  as  the  symptoms  as  tlicy  occur.  The
record  should  be  made  as  soon  as  the  symptom  is  per-
ceived, and  tlic  time  of  its  occurrence  and  tlie  circumstances
of  the  prover  at  the  time  should  be  recorded.

Before  beginning  the  record  of  a  proving,  the  prover
temperament,  the  sicknesses  which  she  has  had,  and  those
to  which  she  has  an  inherited  or  acquired  tendency  ;  also
whatever  pains  or  sensations  she  may  be  habitually  subject
to;  also  any  peculiar  susceptibilities  she  may  possess  to
external  influences  of  any  kind,  or  to  mental  or  moral  or
emotional  excitements,  depressions,  or  perversions.  Her
constitutional  peculiarities  respecting  the  menstrual  function
should  be  carefully  recorded  ;  regarding  frequency,  quantity,
character,  and  whatever  inconveniences  or  sufferings  pre-
cede, accompany,  or  follow  menstruation ;  such  as  headache.


n


DIRECTIONS  FOR DRUG-PROVERS.


351


backache,  colic,  Icucoirhoea,  etc.,  together  with  peculiar
states  of  mind  or  emotion.

In  describing  sensations  or  pains  which  may  occur  during
a  proving,  it  is  not  sufficiently  definite  to  say  "  pain  in  the
head,"  "  pain  in  the  back,"  etc.  The  character  and  locality
— stating,  for  example,  that  tlie  pain  is  "cutting,"  "burning,"
"  sticking,"  etc., — and  specifying  its  location, and,  if  it  move,
its  course.

The  prover  should  find  out  by  experiment,  and  should
carefully  state,  what  circumstances  a^ravate  or  ameliorate
the  pain  (or  other  symptom),  and  note  its  periodical  recur-
rence, because  periodicity  is  a  very  important  element  in
the  history  of  the  action  of  drugs.  For  example  ;  is  the
pain  worse  when  the  prover  stands,  or  sits  or  lies  down,
worse  during  exercise  and  better  during  rest,  worse  on  first
waking,  worse  in  the  cold  and  relieved  by  heat,  worse  or
better  from  touch  or  pressure,  etc.,  etc.  All  such  condi-
tions of  aggravation  or  amelioration  should  be  carefully
recorded.

If  tlie  pain  move  from  one  part  of  the  body  to  another,
the  fact  and  the  course  of  the  pain  should  be  recorded.

The  sitffs  of  the  body  on  which  symptoms  occur  should
always  be  stated.

The  /itftrs  of  occurrence,  aggravation,  and  amelioration
are  very  important  elements ;  as,  in  the  morning  or  after-
noon ;  at  ni^ht,  before  or  after  midnight,  or  waking  from
sleep  ;  just  before  or  after  eating,  etc.,  etc.

Changes  in  the  quantity,  quality,  and  appearance  of  the
urine,  for  instance,  should  be  measured,  and  the  quantity
per  day  recorded  ;  it  shouEd  be  tested  for  acid  and  albu-
men, and  whatever  sediment  It  may  deposit  should  be
tions  should  be  most  carefully  recorded  ;  such  as  its  greater
or  less  frequency  or  quantity  ;  alterations  of  color  and  con-


352


DIRECTIONS FOR DRUG-PROVERS.


latency ;  whether  acrid  or  not ;  pains  and  discomforts  of
body  or  mind  which  precede,  accompany,  or  follow  it

Secretions  not  obscr\'cd  by  the  provcr  when  in  health —
such  as  Icucorrhoca,  unusual  perspirations,  etc. — should  be
bland  or  acrid,  times  of  occurrence,  and  circumstances  which
increase  or  diminish  them,  and  symptoms  which  accompany
them.

If  organic  symptoms  occur,  such  as  eruptions  or  sus-
pected enlargements  or  displacements  of  organs,  it  is  well
to  consult  a  physician  in  order  to  ascertain  the  exact  condi-

Tlic  records  should  be  full  and  minute.  It  is  better  to
be  obliged  to  erase  something  afterward,  than  to  risk  the
loss  of  an  important  symptom  by  aiming  at  brevity.

The  dose  should  be  taken  at  a  time  when  the  prover  can
rest,  in  mind  and  body,  for  a  half  hour  after  taking  it
The  early  moaning  is  the  best  time,  for  then  the  provcr
will  have  a  chance  to  observe  the  action  of  the  drug  for
fifteen  to  eighteen  hours  without  interruption  by  sleep.  It
is  better  to  begin  with  a  small  dose,  gradually  increasing  it
until  effects  arc  recognized,  and  then  to  cease  taking  the
drug  until  these  cflects  have  ceased  It  may  then  be
repeated  in  a  somewhat  larger  dose.  No  danger  of  per-
manent illness  is  incurred  by  this  mode  of  proving  drugs.

During  a  proving,  the  prover  should  abstain  from  the
use  of  medicines,  cosmetics  and  perfumes,  but  should  make
no  marked  deviation  from  her  usual  diet  and  regimen.
Habits  of  so  long  standing  as  to  have  become  "second
nature  "  should  be  continued  in  moderation,  since  to  break
them  off  suddenly  is  to  institute  at  once  a  morbid  state.


LILIUM  TIGRINUM.


A  tUiniARV  or  A  VEW  PKOVINGS  UPON  WOUEff.


My  studies  have,  for  years  past,  shown  me  the  weakness
of  the  Homteopathic  Materia  Medica  in  respect  of  the  physi-
ological effects  of  drugs  upon  the  peculiar  organism  of
women.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  but  few  of  the  provers
to  whose  observation  wc  owe  our  Materia  Medica  were
women.  I  have  not  been  able  to  imagine  any  method  by
which  this  deficiency  in  the  Matefia  Medica  could  be  sup-
plied, except  by  the  voluntary  acts  of  women,  who  should
undertake  to  prove  drugs.  And  it  has  seemed  to  mc
improbable  that  this  work  could  be  performed  with  the
requisite  accuracy  and  intelligence  unless  the  women  who
should  undertake  it  were  educated  in  the  medical  sciences.
Finally,  it  appeared  to  me  that  women  who  had  become  by
education  and  acquirements  members  of  the  medical  pro-
fession, would  not  be  likely  to  take  a  hearty  and  efficient
part  with  us  in  the  great  work  of  perfecting  the  vital
clement  of  our  science, — the  Materia  Medica, — unless  they
were  recognized  and  received  by  us  as  fellow- workers  on  an
equal  footing  in  ever>'  respect,  for  a  similar  reason  to  that
which  led  Mr.  Dickens  to  decline  the  Queen's  invitation  to
give  a  reading  at  Windsor  Castle,  saying,  "  I  will  not  appear
as  an  artist  where  1  should  not  be  received  as  a  man;"
and,  conversely,  I  thought  that  if  so  received  they  would
respond  cordially  and  generously  to  an  invitation  to  engage
in  the  work  for  the  promotion  of  medical  science,  and  in  a
department  in  which  they  alone  could  work,  and  tlie  com-
pleteness of  which  would  be  forever  a  monument  of  tlieir
ability  and  devotion.
S4


3S4


UUUM  TIGRINUM.


When,  therefore,  at  the  session  of  the  Institute  in  1869 1
resolution  was  pending  which  declared  the  digibilit)'  i
properly  qualified  women  to  membership,  I  determmni*
invite  women  who  had  joined  the  medical  profesfiioa  B
engage  in  the  labor  of  proving  drugs,  fe<:b'ng  confidcnl  iht
the  results  of  their  work  would  demonstrate  how  nisA
and  indispensable  it  is  to  the  completioa  and  pcrfectiM  ^
our  Materia  Medica.  The  results  even  thus  far  have  jcfl-
6cd  tliis  confidence.  More  than  tliirty  women,  most  ^
them  members  of  the  profession,  respondeti  cordially  to  i^j
invitation,  and  entered  upon  the  work  of  drug-proni
One-third  of  the  number  have  already  reported  results  of
satisfactory  nature,  and  of  which  I  here  present  a
mary.

The  drug  selected  for  proving  was  the  Lilium  ti|
the  tiger-lily — which  was  introduced  into  the
Medica  by  Dr.  W.  E.  Payne,  of  Bath,  Mc.,  who
communicated  to  us  just  enough  to  show  that  ii  had
powerful  specific  action  upon  the  female  organism.
symptoms  were  known,  however,  only  to  members  of  the
Institute.  I  thought  that  by  engaging  a  number  of  provta
in  di^erent  parts  of  the  country,  in  a  simultaneous  provta{
of  ttiis  drug,  utterly  unknown  to  most,  if  not  all  of  tiwtn,!
should  receive  reports  which,  if  they  should  corroborate  caA
other,  would  be  vcr)' conclusive  as  to  the  action  of  the  drag-
Inasmuch  as  this  drug  belongs  by  right  of  discovery
Dr.  W.  E.  Payne,  I  have  turned  over  to  him  the  vei
reports  received  from  my  provers,  tliat  he  might  incorponic
them  with  hia  own,  and  prepare  the  whole  for  publication  i»
the  Transactions  0/  tke  iHStitute.

The  first  proving,  and  which  I  shall  give  in  greatest
detail,  was  made  under  my  own  observation  and  directiod,
by  a  lady  of  30  years,  unmarried,  a  practicing  physician,
and  who  had  always  enjoyed  good  health,  although  quite
susceptible  to  the  action  of  drugs.

No.  I. She  began  her  proving  OcL  i,  1&69,  by  uleuv


1^1


earag.
vcrytfci


J


LILIUM TICRINUM.


3S5


%it  drops  of  the  "  centesimal  dilution  of  Lilium  tigrinum
thrice  daily. She  reports  as  follows  :

"I  6r5t  noticed  that I was more active;  things went

easily. There  was  no  other  effect  for  four  days,  unless  it

*«  increased  sexual  instinct ;  then  a  sweetish  nausea,  with

fiilness  of  the  abdomen,  particularly  after  eating — even  after

eating  small  quantities. But  food  docs not increase  the

nausea;  no  desire  to  vomit

"  On  the  6th  day  moral  symptoms  were  developed.  I  do
not  want  to  be  pleased  ;  don't  care  to  talk ;  desire  to  sleep.
Slept  well  all  night,  with  unpleasant  dreams.  Omitted
•nedictne  two  da>'s,  during  which  the  nausea  and  full  feeling
subsided.  At  intervals  the  skin  of  Uie  abdomen  felt  stiff
and  stretched.  On  the  7th  day  took  five  drops  of  the  3*.
and  in  a  few  hours  the  nausea  was  much  increased,
with  the  same  bloated  sensation  in  the  abdomen,  par-
ticularly across  the  hips  and  in  the  region  of  the  uterus;
(Urting  pains  in  different  parts  of  the  head,  some  tearing
P»in  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen  from  the  region  of
ihe  ovar>-  down  both  sides.  I  ate  as  much  as  usual,  but
felt  no  appetite  for  it ;  was  restless,  with  a  desire  to  do
Something,  but  no  ambition.  A  sensation  of  pressure  in
the  vagina,  and  a  pain  at  the  top  of  the  sacrum  extending
to  the  hips.

*  *  8th  E>ay. Worse  on  going  to  bed ;  can't  go  to  sleep ;

w«l<d  feeling  in  the  head,  as  though  I  should  go  crazy  and

°** One  would  take  care  of  me ;  thoughts  of  suicide ;  how

™*Jch opium would put me  to sleep forever, and who

'''Oijid  ^nj]  ji,y  body,  and  who  would  care ;  nausea  constant.

loth  Day. Pain  in  tlie  right  iliac  region,  better  during

""^^^^ion ;  the  head  grows  wild  after  I  have  been  quiet  for  a

sfiori  time. At  2  P.  M.  of  tlie  10th  day  (Oct.  10),  took  five

*"Qps  of  the  3'. Increased  depressing  weight over  the

»^^Cs;  worse  in  the  evening. The  knees  ache." No  more

^'Jicine  was  taken  by  this  provcr.

"^ight  days  afterward  (Oct-  20th),  she  came  to  me  to  state


356


LILIUM  TICRINUM.


her  symptoms,  her  mind  being  in  such  a  state  that  she  could
not  herself  record  them.  The  following  sympiums  had
come  on  on  the  20th  (ten  days  after  last  dose),  and  steadily
increased :  A  sensation  in  the  pelvis  as  though  everything
was  coming  into  the  world  tlirough  the  vagina.  L^st  night
it  was  very  distressing,  and  not  relieved  by  change  of
position.  The  dragging  downward  toward  the  pelvis  is  fdt
as  high  as  the  stomach  and  even  the  shoulders ;  not  relieved
by  lying  down,  tliough  worse  when  standing ;  a  disposition  to
place  the  hand  upon  the  hypogastrium  and  press  upward  in
order  to  relieve  the  dragging  sensation.  Likewise  an  aching
and  pressure  across  tlic  lumbo-sacral  region,  and  some
pressure  upon  the  rectum.  Likewise  pressure  and  a  crazy
feeling  upon  the  vertex,  so  that  she  cannot  write  her
symptoms.  To>day  (22d),  when  walking,  a  sensation  as  if
everything  were  pressing  down  in  the  pelvis  and  into  ihe
vagina,  so  that  she  inhales  forcibly  in  order  to  draw  up  the
thorax  and  clear  the  pelvis.

She  wants  somebody to  talk  to  her  and entertain  her.
Feels  quite  nervous ;  wants  to  cry  from  a  feeling  of  trritatioa
and  of  something  wrong  in  the  abdomen  and  pelvis. Feds,
hurried  and  yet  incapable,  as  tf  she  had  a  great  deal  to  doj
and  cannot  do  it;  much  thirst;  drinks  often,  and  much  at  ■
time.

Bowels  generally  regular.  Now  she  has  alternately  a  solid
and  a  loose  stool,  several  during  the  day,  and  a  constant
feeling  as  though  she  must  have  a  stool ;  this  feeling  result*
ing  from  a  sensation  as  if  something  were  pressing  against '
the  anterior  wall  of  the  rectum  at  the  anus  and  about  one
to  three  inches  above  it.

She  is  conscious  of  feeling  nervous  and  irritable,  and  yet
says  she  feels  jolly.  Grumbling  pain  in  right  side  of  head
and  teeth.  1

Yesterday,  when  walking,  pain  in  both  ovaries,  worse  i&
the  /(*//,  extending  down  the  anterior  and  inner  aspect  of  the
left  thigh,  as  if  it  would  be  impossible  to  take  another  step;


LILIUM  TIGRINUM.


357


;as  soon  as  she  extended  the  limb  she  must  immediatly  flex
lit  again,  and  then,  because  of  a  restless  discomfort,  must
again  extend  it  At  length  she  went  to  sleep  on  the  back
with  knees  and  thighs  flexed.

She  cannot  tell  which  pelvic  pain  is  the  worse,  that  in  the
back  or  that  in  the  pubic  region.  The  whole  contents  of
the  pelvis  seem  to  drag  downward  and  forward  and  quite
from  the  epigastric  region,

She  cannot  record  her  symptoms.  Don't  want  to  com-
plain, and  yet  don't  avoid  people.  Feels  bloated,  but  is  not
so.  Somewhat  tender  on  pressure  in  the  region  of  the
ovaries,  especially  the  right.

Oct.  23.  Aching  in  the  pelvis  between  promontory  of
sacrum  and  the  pubes.  It  feels  to  her  as  if  the  aching  were
not  in  the  uterus  but  around  it  She  feels  constantly  the
two  spots  corresponding  to  the  ovaries,  and  which  ache  and
feel  like  little  coats  of  Are.  In  the  pelvis,  a  feeling  tike  a
dragging  out,  as  if  the  whole  contents  were  pusliing  down
into  a  funnel,  the  outlet  of  which  coincided  with  the
vagina.

Oct  25.  For  the  last  36  hours  constant  desire  for  stool
from  pressure  on  the  rectum  ;  a  stool  every  half  hour,  lumpy,
diarrhceic,  with  flatus;  constant  tenesmus,  and  burning  in
the  urethra.  These  symptoms  continued,  along  with  those
knife  were  inserted  into  the  ovarj*  and  ripped  down  the  groin
and  the  anterior  part  of  the  thigh  ;  the  pain  extended  over
the  lumbo-sacral  region,  and  she  must  cry  herself  to
sleep.  Somewhat  relieved  by  pressure  on  the  ovarian
region.

Diarrhoea  and  pressure  on  bladder  continue  without  relief
until  the  27lh.  She  remarks  that  her  symptoms  are  all
worse  when  she  gives  up  active  resistance  to  them  and  con-
trol over  herself,  as  for  example,  when  she  sits  down  to  rest
or  tries  to  go  to  sleep.


35«


ULIUM TIGRIN"UM.


Oct  28- Menses  occurred  at  the  rcg^ular  day  and
but  only  while  she  keeps  moving. The  flow  cease
she  becomes  quiet. She  feels  much  hurried  and  driwi!
knows  not  why ;  walks  fast  and  constantly,  but
is  much  confused  in  mind.

Oct.  29. She  noticed  some  heart  symptoms,  oat
definite. On  the  30th.  after  walking,  a sudden  fli
sensation  in  the  heart. This,  like  all  other  symptQnu.  a
felt  if  she  can  busy  herself  muck. A hurried feeling
the  heart  with faintne&s  and  fluttering  as  though  she
make  no  exertion  but  must  sit  still. The  scat  of  painii
apex  of  the  heart. Twice  she  had  a  sharp  pain  there. Fl
hurried  as  tliough  she  must  breathe  quickly,  yet  docs  &

Tlie prover  feels  that  her  whole  system has been
foundly  affected by  the  drug. "She  is  not  the
once was;" feels hurried but incapable; no
strength  for  busincjs;  discouraged  and  despondent

Nov. I. A  dry,  single  cough ; heart symptoms
troublesome  ;  short  of  breath,  especially  on going  up;

Appetite  very  much  increased,  especially  for  meai^
the  more  so  the  more  pronounced  the  symptoms  were.
mental  symptoms  arc  striking  ;  she  is  averse  to  being  «br.
which  formerly  she  liked  (but  does  not  dread  it).  Htf
sexual  instincts,  formerly  dormant,  arc  now  quite  stnuK.
wits  and  intuitions  dull  and  languid,

Nov.  10.  The  prover  reports:  She  had  been  quite  wH
since  the  4th,  and  supposed  the  action  of  the  drug  exhausted
but  on  the  7th  the  bearing  down  sensation  in  the  pelva
returned ;  evcr>thing  seemed  to  be  pressing  out  of  llr
vagina,  Tliis  continued  on  tlie  Stli  like  light  labor  paiitt
Leucorrhcea  also  occurred  (a  thin  acrid  discharge,  leavug
a  brown  stain).  She  had  never  before  had  it  All  these
symptoms  worse  afternoon  and  evening  till  midnight  (^
the  9th  leucorrhtEa  had  ceased,  but  in  the  afternoon  il
returned  worse  than  ever,  and  she  could  not  sleep  for  the
pelvic  distress.


LILTUM  TTGRIJfUM.


3S9


iov.  II.  She  feels  depression;  has  pressure  on  bladder
id  rectum;  is  inert,  yet  restJess  and  peevish;  Icucorrhcca
continues.  With  these  symptoms  comes  the  desire  again
for  meat.  Uurning  pain  across  the  hypogastrium  from  groin
to  groin.  In  short,  the  symptoms  first  experienced  repeat
themselves.  She  had  not  taken  any  more  of  the  Lilium
tip-iiHim.  In  addition  she  notices  a  peculiar  mental  con-
dition ;  a  desire  for  fint  things  of  ever>*  kind.  She  is  dis-
satisfied witli  what  she  has,  and  envious  of  others.

Nov.  12.  While  attending  a  lecture,  much  irritation  in
the  womb  and  a  singular  state  of  mind — desire  to  strike  tlie
lecturer,  and  in  the  evening  a  disposition  to  swear  at  every-
body and  everything,  and  to  think  and  speak  of  obscene
things ;  as  these  feelings  came,  the  uterine  pains  passed  away.
To-day  the  tcucorrhcea  ceased.

Nov.  13.  She  has  been  languid,  dull,  and  foi^tful  since
the  last  report  Menses  recurred  (14th)  after  an  interval  of
only  two  weeks;  a  slight,  dark,  thick,  and  offensive  dis-
charge.

Dec.  I.  It  is  eight  weeks  since  she  took  Lilium  tigrinum.
Yesterday,  great  hunger,  and  she  ate  largely,  yet  felt  as  if
she  should  starve.  Felt  the  old  hurry  and  incapacity;  the
old  pains  in  head  and  teeth  relieved  by  motion  and  occupa-
tion, followed  by  the  diarrhcea  and  tlic  pressure  on  tlie
bladder.

Dec.  4.  She  is  now  passing  this,  the  third  series  of
symptoms  produced  by  the  Lilium  tigrinum;  the  passionate
excitement,  the  aching  and  burning  pain  in  the  ovaries  (in
the  right),  which  organs  are  distinctly  defined  to  her  sensa-
tion ;  then  despondency  with  aggravation  at  night  and
diarrhoea  in  the  morning;  then  pressing  down  in  the  pelvis
and  burning  all  around  the  pubes  and  genitals,  worse  from  3
to  5  P.  M.,  and  passing  away  from  8  P.  M.,  accompanied  by
pressure  on  the  bladder.

The  symptoms  on  this  occasion  were  so  severe  and  dis-
tressing— physical  no  less  than  mental — that  I  could  not


360


UUUM TIGRINUM.


allow the  prover  to  continue  to  endure  them,
I'latina^  repeatedly,  under  which  she  gained  speedy  re

No.  2.  To  compare  with  the  above,  I  will  give  an  ab&t
of  a  proving  made  under  the  super\'ision  of  Dr.  W,
Payne,  at  about  the  same  time,  the  provers  having  no  ci
municalion :

Mrs.  P.,  aged  55,  has  ceased  to  menstruate.

Jan.  26,  1870,  took  a  drop  of  the  **  centesimal. In
evening,  after  griping  pain,  had  free,  fxcal  stool,  followed
acrid  feeling  in  anus  and  rectum,  a  very  rare  thing  for
prover. During  the  night,  a  feeling  in  all  the  extrcmitic
if  the  blood  were  pushed  outward  ;  restlessness ;  heat
pain  in  forehead  and  brow.

Next  day  a  free  stool,  followed  by  acrid  sensation  at
anus.  Frequent  desire  to  urinate  during  the  day,  ^
scanty  discharge  and  followed  by  an  acrid  sensation  in
urethra.  These  symptoms  recurred  daily  with  mar
aggravation  about  5  P,  M.  till  February  2.  Diarrhoeic  s
every  morning,  followed  by  acrid  irritation  at  anus,  c
tinuing  about  an  hour. Same  symptoms  with  urine.

Feb.  2.  Repeated  medicine.  Increase  of  the  all
symptoms ;  burning  in  palms  and  soles  all  night,  with  c
slant  desire  to  find  a  cool  place  for  them ;  some  cutting  j
in  the  left  mammary  gland,  with  aching,  beginning  bC
the  nipple,  deep  in  the  breast,  as  though  between  the  gl
and  the  ribs  and  extending  around  that  side  to  the  sp
seeming  to  pass  under  the  lower  end  of  scapula,  con
on  after  rcriring  and  worse  when  lying  on  the  affei
side.

These  symptoms  continued  and  recurred  daily ;
repeated  the  medicine,  which  was  followed  by  a  severe  bli
ing  headache  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  head,  the  peculU
of  which  was  a  sensation  as  if  all  the  blood  were  pres:
outward  through  every  aperture.  The  medicine  was  rcpei
every  third  or  fourth  day.  About  tlie  9th  and  loth,  in
left  side  of  the  abdomen  (ovarian  region)  soreness  to  pr


LILIUM  TIGRINUM.


361


lUre;  darting  pains  at  times  in  this  region,  extending  to  the
groin  and  pubes  in  front ;  frequent  desire  to  urinate.

On  the  1 2th,  the  head  being  clearer  and  better,  great
heaviness  and  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  womb,  with
stinging  and  darting  pain  tn  the  ovarian  region.

14th.  Tlic  ovarian  pains  become  more  decided  and  ex-
tend down  the  left  thigh.

This  series  of  symptoms  continued  until  the  2tst,  when
the  ovarian  pain  continuing,  there  was  also  a  bearing  down
in  the  uterine  region,  with  a  desire  to  sustain  the  parts  by
pressing  upward  with  the  hand  against  the  vulva ;  symp-
"  pressing  and  bearing  down  sensation  "  in  the  whole  of  the
sexual  organs,  with  a  feeling  as  if  the  internal  parts  were
being  pulled  outward  and  downward  from  the  mammary
and  nmbiiical  region  through  the  vagina;  irresistible  desire
to  press  the  hands  against  the  vulva  to  prevent  tlie  internal
organs  from  escaping.

These  symptoms  continued  to  recur  for  a  full  month  aflcr
the  last  dose  of  Lilium,  and  the  morning  diarrhtea  for  more
than  six  weeks.

No.  3.  This  prover  took  Lilium^  in  one  dose  a  quarter
ounce.  No  symptoms  were  observed  for  two  weeks,  Then,
of  which  the  most  striking  were  those  last  in  order,  pain  in
the  lumbar  region  as  though  the  back  would  break ;  bearing
down  pain  in  the  pelvis,  especially  when  walking;  pressure
and  weight  low  down  in  the  vagina.

She  reports,  also,  a  headache,  as  if  the  head  were  too  full
of  blood— as  if  the  blood  would  issue  from  nose  and  ears.

No.  4,  This  prover,  who  had  suffered  from  astigmatism,
and  was  h>T>crmctropic,  experienced  from  Lilium^,  heart
symptoms,  pain  through  the  heart  to  the  back,  and  a  feeling
as  if  the  heart  were  squeezed  in  a  vice.  She  cannot  walk
straight  by  going  into  a  warm  room,  the  symptoms  having
occurred  while  walking  in  cold  air.

Also,  her  eyesight  became  very  dim. She  took  no  more


302


ULJUM  TICRINUM,


medicine,  and  in  about  a  month  her  eyesig-ht  was  restored.
She  tlien  found  ttiat  the  astigmatism  no  lonj^cr  existed.

previous  provcr — pressure  from  within  out:A\'ard  ;  the  same
nervous  prostration,  and  a  morning  diarrhcca  with  modi
tenesmus.  She  states  the  symptoms  persisted  for  a  mo«4
after  tlic  last  dose.

No.  6.  This  provcr  reports  nervous  tremulousncss  and
inability  to  apply  the  mind ;  aggravation  in  tJie  aftemooB,
and  a  headache  similar  to  the  preceding.  Also,  menses
diminished  in  quantity,  but  occurring  too  soon.  Likewise,
severe  pains  in  the  uterus;  could  not  bear  the  weight  oi
clothing  on  the  pelvis ;  profuse  acrid  leucorrhcea.  While
the  pain  in  the  pelvis  was  so  severe,  a  vaginal  examination
disclosed  the  fact  that  the  uterus  was  antevertcd  ;  a  state  of
things  that  had  never  before  existed.  During  the  pains
hysterical  paroxysms.

Nos.  7.  and  8. The  same  series  of  symptoms  as  above.

From  this  resume  we  may  gather  some  of  the  chief  charac-
teristics of  Lilium.  When  taken  in  moderate  doses  the
effects  are  not  immediate.  Days  elapse  before  unmistak*
able  symptoms  of  the  drug-action  appear.  But  tlie  effects
are  very  persistent,  as  the  record  of  every  prover  shows.
They  tend,  moreover,  to  recur  at  longer  or  shorter  intervals,
and  in  groups  which  preserve  a  definite  order.  Thus,  prover
No-  I,  whose  record  I  have  given  at  greater  lenfjtb,  reports
a  third  recurrence  of  a  group  of  symptoms  nearly  two  months
after  the  dose  of  Lilium.  In  mate  provers  the  same  recur-
rence of  symptoms  in  definite  groups  has  been  observed,  with
an  interval  of  comparative  freedom  from  symptoms.  The
simultaneous  observation  of  these  peculiarities  in  proven
residing  far  from  each  other,  and  not  known  to  each  other,
precludes  any  doubt  of  its  genuineness.

Of  the  symptoms  observed  by  women,  as  well  as  men,  the
effects  on  the  mind  are  noteworthy,  and  are  of  two  varieties.
First,  as noticed  by  Dr. Payne,  anxiety  and  apprehensioQ


LILIUH  TtURlNUH.


363


that  an  incurable  disease  exists  or  is  impending,  and  this
produces  despondency.  Second,  as  exhibited  most  decidedly
in  prover  No.  i,  and  clearly,  though  less  pronounced,  in
several  oUiers,  a  consciousness  of  an  unnatural  state  of  mind
and  feeling,  which  at  last  develops  into  an  exalted  condition
in  which  the  prover  is  disposed  to  find  fault  with  persons
and  things,  to  exaggerate  her  own  importance  and  excellence,
and  look  down  upon  others;  conjoined  with  this  is  an  exal-
tation of  the  sexual  instinct.  In  several  provcrs  this  state  of
things  has  resulted  in  hysterical  paroxysms.  In  prover  No.
1  it  assumed  such  marked  proportions  that  I  was  constrained
to  put  an  end  to  it  by  administering  Platina,  the  indications
for  which  are  evident  from  the  mental  symptoms.  Intel-
lectual activity  is  impaired  in  both  men  and  women.  Both
have  complained  of  the  feeling  of  hurry  and  restlessness,

Menstruation  is  accelerated,  in  some  cases  recurring  in
two  weeks. The  flow  is  very  scanty.

An  acrid,  thin,  brownish  leucorrhaea  was,  to  several  prov-
ers,  a  troublesome  symptom.

But  the  most  striking  symptoms,  and  those  most  widely
observed,  relate  to  the  pelvic  organs.  They  did  not  gener-
ally present  themselves  until  a  number  of  days  after  the
proving  was  begun.  They  consist  of  a  dragging  or  pulling  or
forcing  down  sensation  in  the  pelvis,  as  though  the  entire
contents  of  the  pelvis  were  pulled  down  through  the  vagina,
or  would  issue  from  the  vulva.  This  sensation  is  not  con-
fined to  the  back  or  hips, — nor  again  to  the  hypogastric
And  tlie  two  provers  in  whom  this  symptom  was  most
thorax,  the  mammary  region,  and  the  shoulders.  So
marked  is  the  sensation  of  down^va^d  and  outward  pressure
that  the  provcrs  place  the  hand  on  the  hypogastrium  or  the
vulva  as  though  to  prevent  protrusion.  In  three  provers,
physical inspection revealed the existence of  anteversio


364


LILIUM  TIGRINUU.


uteri,  a  trouble which none of them had ever  bdbrej
experienced.

In  this  train  of  symptoms  belong  also  the  tenesmus  of
bladder  and  rectum,  and  the  diarrhoea  and  frequent  mictsn-
tion.

There  is  agreement  of  the  provers  respecting  painsy  bun*
ing  or  cutting,  and  tenderness  in  the  region  of  the  owie^
especially  of  the  right  ovary.

The  symptoms  generally  are  worse  in  the  afternoon  aid '
before  midnight,  except  the  diarrhtea,  which  seems  to  bea
morning  diarrhcea.

[f  now,  with  the  light  which  these  provings  afford  us,  wc
seek  to  place  Lilium  tignnum  in  its  appropriate  niche  it
our  Materia  Mcdica,  and  to  estimate  its  value  by  compariiofi
with  otiier  drugs,  we  observe,  yfrj/.'  The  uniform  occurrence,
in  so  many  provers,  of  pelvic  symptoms,  as  well  as  the
demonstration,  by  physical  examination,  of  the  uterine  di»-<
placement,  establish  its  a  priori  claim  to  rank  among  the
remedies  for  prolapsus  and  displacement  of  the  uterus,  for
catarrh  of  vagina  and  uterus,  and  for  inHammatton  of  the
ovary.  And  if  we  run  a  parallel  with  the  symptoms  of  other
remedies,  wc  find  marked  peculiarities  which  characteriie
Lilium.  In  the  morning  diarrhfca,  coming  suddenly  and
with  tenesmus,  it  resembles  Podophyllum,  and  Podophyllum
has,  likewise,  a  general  bearing  down  in  the  pelvis — con-
fined, however,  to  the  lumbo-sacral  region,  while  tlie  mental
and  moral  symptoms  produced  by  Podophyllum  bear  no
resemblance  to  those  of  Lilium.  Moreover,  in  so  far  as  nly
own  observation  goes,  Podophyllum  both  produces  and
removes  these  pelvic  symptoms  only  when  they  occur  in
connection  with  certain  symptoms  of  the  digestive  tract;
such  as  Lilium  has  no  relation  with.

Sepia  produces,  certainly,  a  bearing  down  sensation  upon
the  lumbar  region,  together  with  dragging  and  even  sharp
pains  from  the  region  of  the  ovaries  extending  downward  to
the  pudenda,  but  besides  that,  Sepia  presents  us  no  symp-


I


ULIUM TIGRINUM.


365


toms  of  diarrhcea  and  irritation  of  rectum  and  anus,  and  no
such  leticorrhcca  as  Lilium  ;  the  conditions  are  very  diflfcrent.
The  Lilium  pains  arc  aggravated  in  the  afternoon,  and
before  midnight  They  grow  worse  during  repose  and
when  one's  mind  is  passive  ;  worse,  therefore,  on  lying  down
and  trying  to  compose  one's  self  to  sleep.  Whereas,  on  the
other  hand,  the  Sepia  pains  are  worse  from  9  a.m.  to  noon,
and  are  relieved  by  repose ;  being  aggravated  by  motion
and  occupation.  The  state  of  mind  produced  by  the  two
drugs  is  very  different.  Almost  the  same  differences  exist
between  LUium  and  Pulsatilla.

Belladonna  resembles  Lilium  in  the  bearing  down  sensa-
tion, both  in  the  back  and  in  the  pubic  region,  and  in  the
fact  that  there  is  not  immediate  relief  from  repose.  But,
on  the  other  hand,  Lilium  gives  no  evidence  of  that  general
affection  of  the  organism,  especially  of  the  circulation,
which  accompanies  every  well  pronounced  group  of  Bella-
donna symptoms.  On  the  contrary,  under  Lilium,  when
the  patient  suffered  most,  nutrition  and  appetite  were  not
impaired. Tbcy  were  even  improved.

It  is  probable  that  further  provings  of  Helonias  dioica
will  show  a  strong  analogy  between  it  and  Lilium  as  regards
their  action  on  the  female  organism.  Wc  know  enough
already  to  recognize  a  difference  in  the  mental  symptoms.
Lilium  dulls  the  intellect,  produces  a  sensation  of  hurry
with  inability,  and  a  distress  based  on  a  clearly  defined
apprehension  of  having  some  fatal  or  serious  malady.
Helonias  produces  profound  melancholy,  deep,  undefined
depression,  with  sensation  of  soreness  and  weight  in  the
womb,  a  "consciousness  of  a  womb."

Flatina  seems  to  me  to  present  the  strongest  features  of
resemblance  to  Litium,  both  in  the  pelvic  symptoms  and  in
at  least  one  phase  of  mental  symptoms,  and  the  result  of
my  trials  with  prover  No.  i  shows  its  power  to  antidote
Lilium.  But  Flatina  does  not  present  any  of  the  symp-
toms of  the  intestinal  tract  which  are  so  prominent  under


366  LILIUH TIGRINUM.

Lilium  nor  are  its  effects  on  the  function  of  menstruation
similar.

It  will  be  observed  that  I  have  said  nothing  of  the  action
of  Lilium  upon  the  heart  This  is  because  my  provers  were
not  very  markedly  affected  in  that  way  (except  one  of
them),  but  chiefly  because  my  purpose  was  to  show  the
action  of  the  drug  on  the  oi^ans  and  functions  peculiar  to
women,  and  to  demonstrate  how  valuable  additions  may  in
a  short  time  be  made  to  Materia  Medica  in  its  weakest  part
by  the  labors  of  professionally  educated  women  heartily
engaged  in  this  work,  which  none  but  such  as  they  can
perform.


MUREX  PURPUREA.


»


This  substance  was  first  introduced  into  the  Materia
Medica  by  Dr.  Pctroz,  of  Paris,  in  some  observations
publislicd  in  the  Revue  Critique  et  Ritrospective  de  la  Maiiire
MedicaU,  vol.  iii.,  1841.

Dr.  Pctroz  does  not  state  from  what  variety  of  the  moUusk
which  furnishes  the  purple  coloring  matter  the  specimen
employed  by  him  in  the  proving  was  obtained.  A  coloring
substance,  to  all  appearance  identical,  is  found  in  various
genera  oi  the  family  Muricida:  as  well  as  in  the  genus
purpura  of  the  family  Buccinidse.

Weber,  of  Paris,  in  his  Codex  des  Midicaments  Homao-
patkiques  on  pharmacopre  pratiqtte  tt  raisondc,  has  the
following  remarks :

"  MuREX  PURPUREA.  Coquille  k  pourpre.  It  belongs
to  the  class  of  mollusks  and  to  the  family  of  Purpurifera.
There  are  several  varieties  which  may  have  the  same  value
in  Homoeopathy,  inasmuch  as  up  to  the  present  day  the
only  part  used  for  experimentation  has  been  the  coloring
matter  which  furnishes  the  purple,  and  even  this  experimen-
tation has  been  made  not  upon  the  healthy  subject,  but
upon  the  sick.

"The  ancients  derived  their  purple  dye  from  several
different  mollusks,  from  the  Biecinmn,  a  variety  found  upon
the  rocks,  as  well  as  from  the  Purpurea,  which  is  the
"  Coquille  a  pourpre,"  properly  so-called,  and  which  is
found  not  only  upon  the  Phcenician  coast,  but  also  through-
out the  Mediterranean.  Recently  a  juice,  analogous  to  the
purple  dye,  has  been  found  in  several  conchiferx  belonging
to  the  family  of  the  Limacidx. This  juice,  which  is  viscous,


3«


MUREX  PURPUREA.


and,  wlicn  first  obtained,  colorless,  is  found  in  a  distinct
little  sac  which  in  the  majority  of  these  mollusks  is  situated
between  the  heart  and  the  liver.  When  brought  into
contact  with  the  atmosphere  this  juice  becomes  succcswvely
yellow,  green,  blue  and  finally  a  reddish  purple.

"It  is  insoluble  in  water,  alcohol  or  ether ;  consequently,
for  homceopathic  use,  the  6rst  three  attenuations  should  be
prepared  by  trituration."

Jabr  and  Catellan,  in  their  Pharmaco^m,  Paris.  1853,  say  ;

"  MUREX  PURPUREA,  purpura  patula,  cochlea  veram  pur-
puram  fundens ;  pourpre  antique ;  Purpurschnecke.  An
oval  shell  furrowed  transversely,  studded  with  tubercles,
especially  when  young ;  with  a  somewhat  short  helix,  the
aperture  bell-mouthed.  Color,  a  blackish  russet  externally.
The  columella  of  a  russet  yellow.  The  straight  margin
white.  This  variety  of  shell  inhabits  the  Mediterranean,
where  it  is  pretty  common.  Its  juice,  which  is  the  true
purple  dye,  is  contained  in  a  large  fold  in  the  form  of  a
pocket  upon  the  back  near  the  neck.  Tt  requires  a  good
deal  of  adroitness  to  collect  this  juice,  for  it  is  quickly  thrown
out  by  the  animal.  The  juice,  after  being  taken  from  the
animal,  is  at  first  blue,  and  then  of  a  beautiful  green,  finally
of  a  magnificent  purplish  red.  Cloth  dyed  with  it  always
preserves  its  color."

The  provings  recorded  by  Dr.  Petroz,  and  which  are  the
only  ones  that  we  possess,  are,  it  must  be  confesaed.yrajf-
itientaiy.  So  are  the  contributions  of  every  individual
prov^r  of  ex^ry  drug.  So  are  the  single  stones,  of  which
when  they  arc  duly  placed  together,  a  stately  mansion  is
constructed.  If  the  stones  were  neglected,  because,  when
regarded  separately,  they  arc  nothing  like  a  house,  how  could
they  ever  be  brought  together  and  built  up,  forming  the
house  ?  If  the  results  of  each  individual  prover's  or  experi-
menter's labors  arc  to  be  withheld  on  the  ground  tliat  they
are  fragmentary,  how  shall  matter  be  accumulated  for  a
complete  and  exhaustive  proving?


1£I7S1:X  PURPUREA.


369


It  has  been  further  objected  that  Dr.  Pctroz's  proving  i9
not  a  pure  one,  because  his  subjects  had,  two  of  them  a
slight  Icucorrhcea,  and  the  third  a  cutting  uterine  pain  at
the  time  of  the  menstrual  flow.  Some,  chief  among  them
Dr.  Roth,  of  Paris,  would  rigorously  exclude  from  the
Materia  Medtca  Pura  everything  which  docs  not  rest  upon
exact  observation  of  the  eflect  of  drugs  upon  exclusively
and  strictly  healthy  persons.

Etymologically,  he  is  quite  correct.  A  /»rv  Materia
Mcdica  has  no  business  with  a  single  symptom  obtained
from  observation  on  the  sick,  however  slightly  sick,  or  sick
in  a  way  however  foreign  to  the  nature  of  the  symptom  in
question.

But  in  good  part,  the  criticism  of  Dr.  Roth  is  sheer
pedantry,  not  practical  sagacity.

An  ideal  Materia  Mcdica  Pura  should  contain  only  s>tnp-
toms  obtained  upon  the  absolutely  healthy.  Ages  will
elapse  before  we  can  have  a  complete  Materia  Mcdica  of  this
kind. It  is  certainly  an  object  wortliy  of  unceasing  labor.

The  Materia  Mcdica  which  wc  possess  while  made  up  in
good  part  of  pure  symptoms  (symptoms  observed  upon  the
absolutely  healthy),  contains  also  symptoms  observed  upon
those  who  are  not  absolutely  healthy.  The  symptoms  we
possess  of  certain  medicines  are  wholly  of  the  latter  cliar-
acter.  Cases  occur  in  practice  to  which  no  remedy  of  which
we  have  pure  symptoms  corresponds,  but  which  nevertheless
finds  its  simile  and  its  individual  specific  in  one  of  these
drugs  of  which  we  have  no  knowledge  except  the  symptoms
it  has  produced  upon  the  sick.

Now,  the  pedantry  of  the  critic  in  his  closet  may  exclude
firom  a  pure  Materia  Mcdica  every  proving  that  is,  so  to
speak,  impure,  but  the  question  for  tiic  prafitical  man  is  this:
Shall  any  proving,  however  fragmentary,  however  impure,
which  yet  puts  it  in  the  power  of  the  physician  to  cure  even
a  single  case  of  disease,  be  cast  out  from  the  Materia
Medica  ?  The  answer  must  be,  let  it  remain  for  the  sake  of
30


370


MUREX  PURPUREA.


these  rare  cases  as  a  stimulus  to  pore  and  complete  pforiiiiv
as  a  contribution  to  the  clinical,  if  not,  in  pedantic  Uta*
neaa,  to  \hc  pathogenetic  history  of  the  drug^l

The  point  of  greatest  importance  in  relation  to  the  IJif
mentary  provings,  which  arc  published  from  time  to  tin*
and  from  a  collection  of  which  an  exhaustive  knowlcdgeat
the  drug  is  ultimately  to  be  obtained,  seems  to  us  to  bcdii,
that  the  name  and  condition  of  the  prover  should  be  attudK^
to  each  symptom,  and  that  thus  tlie  student  may  be  enaUcJ
to  judge  for  himself  of  the  purcness  and  authenticity  of  de
symptoms.

The  observations  of  Dr.  Petroz  are  given  in  the  foUoviig
with  but  little  abbreviation. They  are followed by  wot
clinical  observations  by  Dr.  Constantine  Hering  and
practitioners. AH  together,  these  remarks  should  serve
draw  attention  to  Murcx  purpurea  as  a  substance  p
rich  returns  to  the  careful  prover.

MuRKX  PURPUREA,  by  Dr.  Petroz,  of  Paris,  from  U
Revue  Critique  et  RHroipectivc  dt  la  Matiire  M/dicale  :

The  entire  scope  of  the  action  of  therapeutic  agents  is
not  easily  recognized,  even  by  those  who  have  a  prolbtiJiil
understanding  of  the  Materia  Medica  based  on  experiments*
tion  on  the  healthy  subject.

This  difficulty  explains  the  astonishment  of  practitioners
when  they  meet  with  unexpected  results,  the  products  of
some  particular  condition  different  from  that  which  coosti-
tutes  the  physiological  state.  The  observations  of  tbeM
effects  in  conditions  very  similar  to  each  other,  if  collected
with  care,  should,  after  a  time,  constitute  the  second  part  of
the  Materia  Medtca,  which  we  might  call  the  clinical,
contradistinction  to  thc/«r.f  or  exfierifwntal  part.

The  latter,  however,  the  fundamental  basis  of  the  art
curing,  should  be  regarded  as  an  inviolable  law,  the  point  of
departure  of  every  positive  notion,  the  sacred  volume  to
which  we  faithfully  recur  on  every  occasion  on  which  we
may  have  been  led  away,  by  a  sort  of  involuntary  innpulsc  as


MUREX  PURPUREA.


37»


it  were,  to  that  empiric  method  which  has,  up  to  the  present
time,  charactertzeii  the  successively  prevailing  doctrines.

Experimentation  on  the  healthy  subject,  whflc  it  produces
symptoms  analogous  to  the  majority  of  those  observed  in
the  sick,  has  not  been  abie  to  go  so  far  as  to  produce  those
disorders,  whether  functional  or  material,  so  serious,  and  yet
so  common,  which  appall  tiie  most  practiced  and  hardened
observer.

That  the  proving  of  a  medicinal  substance  upon  the
healthy  subject  should  make  known  all  the  effects  which  it
is  capable  of  developing,  it  must  be  repeated  not  only  under
different  conditions  of  age,  sex,  etc.,  but  also  under  variable
conditions  of  susceptibility.  But  even  if  one  succeed  in
finding  healthy  individuals  of  verj*  unusual  susceptibility,
this  is  but  trifling,  compared  with  the  susceptibility  which
characterizes  certain  pathological  conditions.

Furthermore,  where  is  the  physician,  who.  whatever  hij
devotion  to  science,  would  assume  the  right  of  pushing  his
proving  to  the  extent  of  endangering  the  life  of  the  prover.

This  difficulty  of  pushing  experimentation  far  enough  to
discover  every  medicinal  property  which  a  substance  may
possess  is  relative,  as  I  have  said  above,  to  the  susceptibility
of  tlie  prover.  Thus  a  young  woman,  very  impressible  and
courageous,  presented  to  me,  when  under  the  influence  of
Lycoperdon  Bovista,  symptoms  which  were  the  very  image
of  asphyxia  from  the  fumes  of  charcoal.  •  • •

In  proving  a  mtttuisa  asperata  she  experienced  several  Cfnlcp-
tiform  nervous  symptoms.

But  it  is  a  rare  thing  to  find  individuals  so  well  adapted  to
this  work.  In  default  of  tliem  we  must  interrogate  the  path-
ological susceptibility,  which,  in  its  turn,  may  prove  a  fruitfiil
source  of  positive  knowledge.


PATHOGSNESY.

No.  I. A  woman,  46  years  old,  of  nervous  tempera-
nent,  very  impressible,  but  in  good  health.


372


MUREX  PURPUREA.


I


One  dose  of  Murex,  fourth,  was  taken  in  six  spoonfuls  of
water.  The  first  spoonful  was  taken  January  5th,  in  the
evening.

Twelve  hours  after  taking  the  medicine,  acute  pain  in  the
right  side  of  the  uterus,  which  crossed  the  entire  body  and
extended  upward  to  the  left  breast ;  extreme  feebleness  of  aB
voluntary  motions,  the  legs  bend  under  her ;  irre^tible
necessity  of  remaining  seated ;  confusion  of  ideas,  repug-
nance to  conversation,  deep  sadness.

At  six  P.  M.,  palpitations  of  the  heart,  and  throbbings  of
the  arteries  in  the  neck.

In  the  evening,  excessive  fatigue,  somnolence,  heat  of  the
hands;  pulse  80.  Pains  in  the  knees;  pains  in  the  loins,
sensation  of  excoriation  and  of  burning  pain,  as  if  broken,
in  the  chest The  night  was  good.

January-  7th.  The  second  spoonful,  in  the  evening.  Sharp
burning  pain  under  the  false  ribs  of  the  left  fiank,  toward  _
the  vertebral  column,  in  paroxysms;  somnolence  and  sad- fll
ness;  difficult  evacuation  of  fa:ccs,  stool  requiring  an  eoenu
of  tepid  water.  Tlic  stitch  in  the  side  has  lasted  the
whole  day.  In  the  evening,  painful  tension  tn  the  right
hypochondrium.  Dry,  infrequent  cough.  Dyspnoea.  Voice
is  changed  and  hoarse.  The  heaviness  is  much  diminished.
No  leucorrhcca  since  the  first  spoonful

The  third  spoonful  on  the  evening  of  the  seventh.

8th.  Tiic  night  good.  On  awaking,  feels  well  TTie  stitcb
in  the  side  h<is  disappeared.  Sensation  of  dryness  and  of  con-
striction in  the  uterus.  The  heaviness  has  disappeared.  No
leucorrhcea.

The  fourth  spoonful  was  taken  on  the  evening  of  the
eighth.

9th.  A  good  day.  Natural  stool  Fifth  spoonful,  evts
ning.

loth.  Very  good  day. Sixth  spoonful

tith.  In  the  morning,  a  sensation  of  heaviness  and  ^
dilation  in  the  labia  majora. The  urine  has  a  white  depo^^


MUREX  PURPUREA.


373


Expulsion  of  a  small  quantity  of  bloody  mucus,  after  passing
water.

1 2th.  A  good  day.  In  the  evening  Xhc  menses  appeared
abundantly. Stool  natural.

13th.  Pain  In  the  uterus,  as  if  wounded  by  a  cutting
instrument  This  sensation  has  been  habitual  during  the
menstrual  flow  for  many  years.

No.  2.  A  woman,  aged  38  years,  of  a  sanguine  tempera-
ment, sound  mind,  judicious  powers  of  observation,  good
health.

First  day.  The  Icucorrhoea  having  disappeared  entirely,
pain  in  the  occiput  toward  midday,  pain  in  the  arms  below
the  elbow.

Second  day.  On  awaking,  headache,  which  disappearson
getting  up.  During  the  day  pains  in  the  left  temple,  com-
ing and  going.  •  •  Toward  the  close  of  the  day,
tightness  in  the  occiput;  I  involuntarily  raise  my  hand  to  the
part  affected,  when  the  tightness  passes  from  left  to  right;  I
raise  to  the  head  the  hand  of  the  opposite  adc  to  that  which
is  the  scat  of  the  pain ;  I  bend  my  head  backward  because
it  sccnis  to  mc  that  this  motion  relaxes  the  nerves  of  the
occiput  and  of  the  neck;  constant  desire  to  urinate  during
the  day;  at  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  great  desire  to
sleep.

Third  day.  Headache  as  the  evening  before,  and  relieved
in  the  same  way;  sleep  with  troublesome  dreams;  I  fled
from  a  troubled  sea  and  found  myself  again  in  a  meadow
with  water;  during  the  day  momentary  heaviness  of  the
head;  at  five  o'clock  my  right  check  was  burning;  in  the
evening,  twice,  I  had  a  very  violent  stitch  on  the  left  side  of
the  abdomen,  downward ;  it  ascended  perpendicularly  and
lasted  one  minute;  at  nine  o'clock,  violent  sleepiness.
During  the  day,  pains  in  the  legs  from  time  to  time,  tight-
ness in  the  head  on  each  side  above  the  cars;  pains  in  the
breasts.

Fourth  day. Painful  dreams,  headache  on  waking • •


374


HVKEX  PURPUREA.


pretty  severe  colic;  hunger  during  the  day;  appetite  pwtiy
good  in  tlie  morning,  but  not  at  dinner ;  pains  in  the  breuh

Fifth  day,  I  will  explain  to  you.  The  prover  has  Mt
dared  write  all  that  she  has  felt  in  the  region  of  the  geaicri
organs;  excessive  sexual  desire,  an  excitement  which  v3
and  reason  could  hardly  control.

Sixth  day.  The  left  cheek  burning.  Hunger  dorhig  Ae
day ;  in  the  evening,  headache  with  pain,  lasting  about  a
hour.

Seventh  day.  Troublesome  dreams;  waked  -with  a  sbit
in  fear;  in  the  morning,  leucorrhoea,  very  scanty,  but  green-
ish ;  in  the  evening,  flatulent  coUc.  This  is  tlic  seventh  itj
of  medication,  and  since  the  second  day  I  have  been  very
much  constipated ;  to-day  I  could  not  go  to  stool ;  in  the
evening  I  had  headache  in  front  of  the  forehead.  I  bare
forgotten  to  say  that,  during  the  first  days,  in  the  momiig
before  breakfast,  I  coughed  several  times.  In  the  eventi^
when  breathing,  I  had  wheezing  in  the  chest;  for  sevenl
days,  1  experience,  during  the  day,  paroxysms  of  angnisfa.
of  fear  and  dread.

No.  3.  A  woman,  aged  39  years,  of  sanguine. lynoplutic
temperament

First  day.  At  two  o'clock  and  at  four,  I  have  had  sharp
but  transient  pains  above  the  cerebellum.  Less  of  leucor-
rhcea,  but  always  mixed  with  blood.

Second  day,  Friday.  Since  noon,  the  head  embarrassed
and  a  little  heavy;  little  disposition  to  work;  at  half-past
two  o'clock,  buzzing  in  the  ears,  and  increased  heaviness  n
the  liead,  relieved  about  four  o'clock  ;  about  half-past  six.  I
was  taken  witli  a  sharp  pain  in  the  abdomen  on  the  lefl  side.
It  was  acute  and  extended  over  tlic  whole  abdomen ;  not
equally  intense,  but  felt  in  dilTerent  spots,  like  a  sharp  point;
the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  remained  sore  the  whole  even-
ing. The  leucorrhcea  scanty  and  not  mixed  with  blood.  Is
bed,  pains  in  the  renal  and  lumbar  regions,  and  a  decided
heat  above  the  thighs  persistent


HUREX  PURPUREA.


37S


Third  day,  Saturday.  Less  heaviness  of  the  head  ;  but
Httic  Icucorrhfra,  but  it  Is  thicker;  not  mixed  u-ith  blood;
the  sore  spots  of  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  arc  less  sensi-
tive, but  are  still  occasionally  felt ;  some  lancinating  pains;
the  heat  of  ttic  thighs  has  disappeared,  but  that  of  the  hip
region  continues  even  when  not  recumbent

Fourth  day,  Sunday.  This  morning,  on  going  to  stool,
the  blood  had  disappeared,  and  up  to  one  o'clock,  blood  was
mingled  with  leucorrhcea;  about  three  o'clock  I  experienced
a  severe  pain  above  tlie  right  temple ;  a  little  pain  in  the
thighs;  I  have  remarked  that  since  taking  the  medicine  the
pains  in  the  loins  and  hips  are  greater.  In  tlie  evening,  on
going  to  stool,  the  blood  flowed  copiously ;  this  day,  but
little  leucorrhcea. For  two  days,  pains  in  the  breasts.

Fifth  day,  Monday.  No  blood  to-day ;  but  little  Icucor-
rha;a;  but,  on  rising,  pains  under  the  left  thigh,  very  sensi-
ble on  touching  the  part  This  continued  throughout  the
day.  Some  lancinating  pains  in  the  womb;  the  hips  are
painful ;  no  heat  of  the  thighs,  either  in  bed  or  when  up.

Sixth  day,  Tuesday.  No  blood ;  but  little  leucorrhcea.
The  pain  below  the  thigh  is  less  severe,  but  the  part  is
always  sensitive  to  the  touch.  The  breasts  have  been  veiy
painful,  and  in  bed  I  have  had  sharp  and  painful  lancinations
in  them.  The  pains  of  the  thiglis  and  of  the  loins  have
almost  disapi^ieared.

Seventh  day,  Wednesday.  During  the  night  I  waked
with  a  start,  and  a  violent  desire  to  urinate.  Urinated  very
copiously.  No  blood  nor  leucorrhcea  during  the  night,  a
good  deal  during  the  day.  Heaviness  of  the  head  and  even
dizziness,  but  since  taking  the  medicine,  and  even  before,  I
have  not  had  so  good  a  day.  I  have  observed  that  since
taking  the  medicine  1  lose  my  memory,  and  even  find  my
words  with  difficulty.

Eighth  day,  Thursday.  Ceased  to  take  the  medicine.
The  day  has  been  a  very  bad  one.  Ver>'  severe  pains  in
the  breasts,  loins  and  thighs. Distress  in  the  abdomen,


376


MUREX PURPUREA.


resembling  that  which  I  feel  at  the  approach  of  the  maati;
and  wc  are  now  at  the  20th  of  August,^  lliey  should  not
come  until  the  5th  of  September. Desire  to  sleep,  du
of  head ;  labor  is  irksome.

This  evening,  no  more  pains  except  in  the  thighs,  al
below  and  toward  the  middle.  When  urinating  during- the  dif
blood  appeared  slightly  ;  scarcely  any  leucorrhcea,  but  vay
thick  and  yellow.  I  have  remarked  that  I  suffer  more  wba
sitting  than  when  walking,  and  the  pains,  which  I  cease
to  feel  when  walking  to  and  fro,  return  almost  immediately
when  I  resume  the  sitting  posture. Good  sleep  and  appetite.

Ninth  day,  Friday.  Good  night ;  yet  on  first  waking,
and  also  several  times  during  Uie  night  on  waking.  I  had
pretty  severe  pains,  such  as  attend  the  menses  ; anguish.

The  breasts,  to-day,  have  been  less  painful;  no  moct
blood  in  the  leucorrhcea,  and  al  stool  scarce  any  leucorrhoca ;
no  pain  in  loins  but  extreme  latitude  and  pains  in  the  legs
and  knees. No  lancinations. A  good  day.

Headache,  however,  and  frequent  transient  sharp  pain  in
the  right  temple.  My  headache,  which  continues  this
evening  is  more  on  the  right  side  than  on  tlic  left.

Ciinical  O&strvations.  No.  i.  Madame  J.,  mother  of  several
children  whom  she  nursed,  enjoyed  very  good  health  up  to
her  forty-fifth  year.  At  this  period  she  be^n  to  have
irregularity  of  the  menses  and  soon  to  complain  of  painful
weariness  in  the  loins,  of  a  sensation  of  weight  in  the
h>*pogastrium  and  more  particularly  in  the  rectum,  all  of  which
gave  her  great  concern  ;  deep  sadness  at  the  approach  of  the
menses,  which  were  very  abundant  for  several  days,  and^d
were  attended  with  great  pain  caused  by  the  expulsion  of^l
large  coagula.  Subsequently,  the  flow,  which  lasted  ten  of
twelve  daj's,  became  russet-colored  and  finally  serous.  The
interval  from  one  period  to  the  next  was  only  about  tea
days,  during  which  the  above  s>*mptoms  diminished  without
entirely  ceasing,  and  at  the  recurrence  of  the  mciistnial  flow
re-appeared  with  their  original  severity.


MUREX  PURPUREA.


377


Exploration,  by  means  of  the  speculum,  revealed  the  pres-
ence of  a  soft,  violet- colored  enlargement  of  the  neck  of
the  uterus;  a  large  excoriation  on  its  anterior  aspect,  which
was  caused  to  bleed  by  a  slight  touch,  induced  recourse  to
cauterization,  after  which  the  patient  was  enjoined  to  observe
absolute  repose  and  a  light  not  very  abundant  diet  The
menses  subsequent  to  the  operation  were  Less  abundant,
without  coagula  and  consequently  less  painful  and  of  shorter
duration ;  the  secondary  symptoms  ^vere  also  less  marked.
This  improvement  did  not  last  longer  than  a  few  months,
when  the  symptoms  returned  with  increased  violence.
Walking,  or  standing'  for  a  long  time  became  almost  impossi-
ble ;  the  pain  at  the  appearance  of  the  menses  became  again
violent,  for  tlie  expulsion  of  large  coagula;  during  the
periods  of  suffering,  the  pulse  was  small  and  frequent;
emission  of  urine  was  impossible ;  a  copious  sweat  covered
the  patient's  body.  Sabina  ^,  in  120  grammes  of  water,
given  in  spoonful  doses,  every  half  hour,  moderated  the
severity  of  the  symptoms  witliout  much  abridging  tlieir
duration.  Eight  days  aftenvard  the  patient  took  Murex
purpurea*,  five  centigrammes  in  180  grammes  of  water  (a
spoonful  morning  and  evening).

Under  the  influence  of  this  remedy,  the  painftil  weariness
of  the  loins,  of  the  thighs,  the  weight  upon  the  rectum,  the
leucorrhcea,  the  itching  occasioned  by  it  and  the  pains  in  the
hypogastrium  diminished  and  then  disappeared.

The  menstrual  epoch,  \vhich  was  retarded  several  days,
occurred  as  before  tlic  sickness,  except  that  there  was  the
weakness  resulting  from  the  antecedent  sufferings.  A  second
dose,  like  the  first,  was  given,  immediately  after  the  cessation
of  the  menses.  P'rom  that  time  she  was  restored  to  perfect
health.  Eighteen  months  have  elapsed,  during  which  she
has  led  an  active  and  sometimes  a  fatiguing  life,  without  her
health  being  at  all  impaired.

No.  2.  Madanic  F.,  30  years  of  age,  of  a  sanguine-lymphatic
temperament,  mother  of  two  children,  was  subject,  in  infancy,


378


MUREX  PURPUREA.


to  violent  attacks  of  cough,  caused  by  congestion  of  the  lungs,
the  results  of  a  psoric  taint  (retrocession  of  itch).  These
attacks  ceased  to  appear  about  the  tunc  of  her  first  preg-
nancy, another  organ  becoming  Clicn  the  center  of  the  con-
gestion and  the  seat  of  disorders  of  another  character.  The
patient  began  by  experiencing  a  sensation  of  pressure
toward  the  genital  oi^ns;  some  months  after  her  first  con-
finement, a  heavy  weight  pressing  upon  the  recttun.  swelling
of  the  hemorrhoids,  greenish  yellow  Icucorrhaea,  sometime*
bloody,  and  discharge  of  pure  blood  by  tlic  vulva  at  stool.

Thrilling  pains  in  tlie  lower  extremities.  Painful  weariness
in  the  loins,  in  the  nates  ;  very  great  debility  which  rendered
walking  very  difficult,  often  impossible,  at  the  period  of  the
menses.  To  these  s>*mptom3,  which  kept  growing  voorc
intense,  there  was  added  a  painful  aching  in  the  whole
hypogastrium ;  it  caused  an  inexpressible  anguish  and  fre-
quent syncope,  which  ceased  when  the  menses  began  to
appear ;  soon  these  became  excessive,  accompanied  by
spasms  in  the  abdomen,  together  with  sharp  lancinations  in
the  uterus.

Several  cauterizations  had  been  made,  the  operator  having
been  induced  to  resort  to  them  (as  he  is  reported  to  have
said)  by  the  tumefaction  of  the  cervix,  in  which  there  were
several  deep  fissures.  The  body  of  the  uterus,  more  volu-
minous than  natural,  was  very  much  inclined  forward,  the
cervix  resting  upon  tlie  posterior  wall  of  the  pelvis.  This
position  must,  no  doubt,  have  aggravated  the  pains.

The  cauterization,  although  often  repealed,  did  but  little  ^
good.  It  was  given  up,  and  for  several  months  longer  the  fl
sufferings  were  the  same.  Immediately  after  the  menstrual  X
period, five  centigrammes  of Murcx*were given in 120  <Z2

grammes  of  water ;  the  patient  took  a  spoonful  every  mom ^

ing.  The  symptoms  perceptibly  diminished  before  tbe^^^
ensuing  menstrual  period.  Tlie  latter  was  attended  witln^^
but  little  suffering,  and  the  flow  was  less  than  usuaL  Abov^^^i
all,  tlie  Icucorrhcea  was  decidedly  diminished. A  secoo»^^^


MDREX PUKPOREA.


379


dose,  given  in  the  same  way,  as  soon  as  the  flow  bad  ceased,
was  sufficient  to  re-establish  the  health  of  the  patient,  who
for  the  last  year  has  continued  to  be  well

From  these  two  obscrvations  and  others  analogous  to
them,  one  may  deduce  principles  of  a  useful  application.
They  will  find  their  place  hereafter.


RtauMC  Of  TUB  PATHCMsexmc  SvMrToua  op  Mosex  rum-t'KKjt,

BY DK. PkTROI.

Head.

1.  Confusion  of  ideas,  repugnance  to  conversation,  deep
sadness  in  the  evening ;  first  day.

2.  Pain  in  the  occiput  toward  midday  ;  first  day.

3.  Headache  on  awaking,  which  disappears  on  rising ;
first  day.

4.  During  the  day,  pain  In  the  left  temple,  which  goes
and  comes.

5.  Heaviness  of  the  head  from  time  to  time,  which  leaves
at  intervals  great  clearness  in  Uic  ideas ;  second  and  third
day.

6.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  tightness  behind  the  head,
which  causes  her  to  raise  the  hand  involuntarily  to  the  seat
of  the  pain ;  when  the  pain  is  on  the  left  side  she  raises  the
right  hand,  and  vice  versa.  Desire  to  bend  the  head  back-
ward ;  tliis  motion  relieves  the  head  and  neck  ;  second  day.

7.  The  head  is  heavy  for  short  periods  of  time ;  third  day.

8.  The  right  check  bums  toward  evening ;  third  day.

9.  Tightness  of  the  head  behind  the  ears;  third  day.

10.  The  left  cheek  bums  in  the  morning;  ^xth  day.

1 1.  Mcadadie  (heaviness)  lasting  one  hour  ;  sixth  day.

12.  Hrcssive  frontal  headache;  seventh  day.

13.  Confusion  in  the  head,  sleepiness ;  labor  is  irksome ;
eighth  day.

14.  Fressivc  pain  in  the  right  temple  ;  ninth  day.

15.  Pain  in  the  occiput,  very  acute,  but  of  short  duration  ;
first  day.


580


MUREX PURPUREA.


i6.  Head  confused,  heavy ;  indisposition  to  work  ;
day.

17.  Buzzing  in  the  ears  and  increased  heaviness  is  tbc
head ;  second  day.

18.  Diminution  of  memory,  difficulty  in  6nding^  words.

19.  Heaviness  of  the  head  as  when tJie atmosphcn  it
close.

2a  The  nose  is  cold  all  day  so  that  she  is  much  tncoiD-
moded  thereby ;  third  day.

Thorax.

2 J.  Palpitation  of  the  heart,  throbbing  of  the  arteries rf
the  neck ;  first  day.

22.  Pain  in  the  thorax  as  if  broken.

23.  Incisive  burning  pain  under  the  false  ribs  (left  adt),
and  toward  the  spine ;  second  day.

24.  Dry  infrequent  cough,  oppression  ;  second  day.

25.  The  voice  is  changed,  hoarseness;  second  day.

26.  Pain  in  the  mamms ;  third  and  fourth  days.

27.  Cough  in  the  morning  before  breakfast; first  day.

28.  Wheezing  En  the  chest  in  the  evening  when  brcathimg:
seventh  day.

29.  Severe  pains  in  the  mammae ;  eighth  day.
%o.  Sharp  lanclnations  in  the  mammx.

Stomach.

31.  Hunger  during  the  day,  in  the  morning;; none
dinner.

32.  Hunger  the  sixth  day.

Abdomen.

33.  Evacuation  difficult;  second  day.

34.  Painful  tension  in  the  right  hypochondrium ;  secoi
day.

35.  Colic; fourth  day. Colic  in  the  evening; seventh
day.  Constipation  which  lasts  five  days  and  more. Uncasi-


HUREX PURPUREA.


381


Oeaa  in  tiie  abdomen  like  that  which  is  caused  by  the
approach  of  tlie  menses ;  their  appearance  is  retarded  Alteen
days ;  eighth  day.

36.  Acute  pain  like  a  sharp  point  in  the  left  side  of  the
abdomen  extends  and  is  felt  in  different  isolated  spots ;  the
left  side  of  the  abdomen  remained  painful  the  whole  evening ;
second  day.

37.  The  same  symptoms  less  severe ;  third  day.

38.  Pressure  upon  the  anus  like  painful  points;  first
day.

Genital  Organs.

39.  Acute  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  uterus  which
crosses  the  body  and  ascends  to  the  left  mamma ;  first  day.

40.  Sensation  of  dryness  and  of  constriction  in  the  uterus ;
second  day.

41.  Sensation  of  weight  and  of  dilation  in  the  labia
majora ;  seventh  day.

42.  Pain  as  if  wounded  by  a  cutting  instrument  in  the
uterus ;  seventh  day.

43.  In  tlie  evening  (third  day),  two  violent  lancinations,
lasting  one  minute,  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  in  an
upward  direction.

44.  Excitement  of  the  genital  organs ;  desire  so  violent
as  to  fatigue  the  reason.

45.  Greenish  thick  Icucorrhoea;  seventh  day.  The  same
(third  day)  diminished  but  thicker;  eighth  day.

46.  The  leucorrhcca  becomes  bloody;  ninth  day.

47.  Return  of  bloody  discharge  from  the  vulva  on  going
to  stool  (fourth  day)  a  part  of  the  day ;  it  ceases  and
re-appcars.

48.  Venereal  desire  renewed  by  the  slightest  touch  ;  sec-
ond day.

49.  Heaviness  in  the  vagina  during  the  existence  of  the
pain  in  the  abdomen.

50.  Throbbings  in  the  uterus;  fifUi  day.


38J


MUREX PURPUREA.


it.  Wat«ry  Icocorrhcea  lasting  only  a  half  day;  iccocui
day.

Urineay  Organs.

$2.  Urine  with  white  sediment  Discharge  of  a  small
quantity  of  bloody  mucus  after  the  passage  of  urine ;  fifth
day.

53-  Frequent  call  to  urinate  during  the  day  ; second  day.

54.  When  urinating  slight  bloody  discharge;  eighth  day.

55.  Frequent  reed  to  urinate  during  the  night,  urin
colorless;  third  day.

56.  Urine  foetid;  the  odor  mucli  reseoibhng  lltat  of  Vale-
rian; this  odor  soon  diminishes  and  disappears  ; third  day.

Tmmk.

57.  Pain  in  the  loins.  Sensation  of  burning,  of  excoria-
tion ;  first  day.

58.  Fain  in  the  loins ;  eighth  day.

59.  Pain  in  the  loins  when  lying  down,  pain  in  the  hips
(second  to  third  day)  especially  in  bed.

60.  Pain  around  the  pelvis ;  third  day.

Extremities.

61.  Extreme  feebleness  in  the  volnntary  movemeots.
The  limbs  give  way  and  there  is  irresistible  desire  to  remain
seated;  first  day.

62.  Fain  in  the  knees ;  first  day.
6j. Heat  in  the  hands;  first  day.

64.  Pain  in  the  arms  below  the  elbows  (first  day)  ;  sEmple
pain  in  the  legs  from  time  to  time;  third  day.

65.  Pains  of  very  great  weariness  in  the  thighs  (eigbth
day);  pain  of  contusion  in  the  front  and  middle  of  the
thighs.

66.  Extreme  lassitude,  pains  in  the  legs  and  knees ;  nintii
rfay.

67.  Sharp  heat  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  thighs;  second
day.


4


MUREX PUKeUREA.


383


68.  On  rising,  acute  pain  in  Uie  middle  anterior  portion
of  the  left  thigh ;  she  cannot  bear  to  have  it  touched ;  it
lasts  the  whole  day ;  fifth  day.

69.  Sensation  of  throbbing  in  tlic  anterior  part  of  the
thigh.

SUtp.

70.  Drowsiness ;  first  day.

71.  Drowsiness  and  sadness;  second  day.

72.  At  9  p.  M.  great  desire  to  sleep.

73.  Sleep  with  troublesome  dreams;  fleeing  from  a  tur-
bulent ocean  she  found  herself  in  a  plain  full  of  water;  third
day.

74.  Troublesome  dreams  (fourth  day) ;  ditto  (seventh
day),  waking  witli  fright.

75.  Sleep  interrupted  by  pains  altogether  similar  to  those
which  sometimes  accompany  the  menses  (third  day) ;
anguish.

7(5.  Wakes  with  a  start  and  a  violent  desire  to  urinate;
urine  abundant

General  Symptoms.

yj.  Excessive  fatigue ;  first  day.

78.  Sensation  of  anguish  during  the  day,  feeling  of  fear,
of  indefinite  fright;  for  several  days  the  sufferings  are
greater  when  sitting  than  when  walking ;  when  walking  they
cease,  and  re-appear  on  sitting  down.

79.  Sensation  of  dryness  in  the  skin,  as  if  it  would  crack.


PROVINGS  ON  Patients,  by  M.  dc  B.,  furnished  by  Dr.
C.  Hering.

January  12th,  1852.  Taken  by  a  lady,  aged  38  years,  of
sanguine -nervous  temperament  She  has  been  ill  eight
years  of  prolapsus  uteri.  For  more  than  a  year  she  was
unable  to  stand.  For  several  years  she  has  suffered  excru-
ciating pain. Her  mind  is  in  a  very  gloomy  state.


384


HURBX PURPUREA.


She  has  been  under  my  care  about  three  years,  and  bsj
constantly  but  sbwly  regained  health.  She  can  now  nk
about  ten  miles  and  rest  in  an  hour  afterward;  can  an  I
about  e^bt  hours  in  a  day,  but  must  rest  frequently,  audi
has  never  passed  a  day  wltliout  lying  down.  Her  mindhnl
gradually  recovered  its  cheerfulness,  and  she  has  been  kt
several  months  desirous  of  society,  which  even  one  year  I
since  she  could  not  at  all  endure.

I  directed  her  not  to  take  any  other  medicine  for  ten  ^j
before  the  Murex.  She  has  taken  three  doses  at  intervals'
of  ten  days.  The  symptoms  have  been  the  same  each  tiiM,
only  much  more  intense  than  the  first  dose.  I  gave  her  the
two  hundredth  dilution ;  she  took  it  in  the  morning  as  »««
as  she  had  risen.  For  the  first  four  hours  she  felt  uothii^.
Then  she  felt  a  debility  of  tlie  entire  muscular  system;  a
inking  of  the  stomach;  an  enlargement  of  the  bowels;  a
distinct  feeling  o/tAe  womb  ;  and  great  sensitiveness  of  tlie
bowels,  with  sharp  pain  running  up  from  the  groin  to  the
socket  of  tlie  right  hip.  A  sensation  as  of  the  creeping  of  a
snake  over  the  entire  region  of  tlie  short  ribs,  upon  the  left
side ;  great  depression  of  spirits ;  it  seemed  to  her  that  she
was  hopelessly  ill.  She  was  obliged  to  go  to  bed  and  lie
there.  These  symptoms  continued  for  nearly  a  week,  with-
out abatement,  and  at  the  end  of  a  week  she  felt  about  as
usual,  except  that  she  was  rather  gloomy  in  mind.  The
second  and  third  doses  produced  the  same  symptoms,  but,
less  intense.  I

No.  2.  A  tady.  aged  about  30  years,  of  sanguine- nervous
temperament,  had  been  for  five  years  subject  almost  con-
stantly to  pain  in  her  right  hjp,  and  a  feeling  of  sinldrtg  at
the  stomach,  which  incapacitated  her  for  sewing  or  knitting.
She  took  but  one  dose  and  said,  "  It  made  me  miserable.  I J
was  so  low-spirited  that  I  gave  up  everything.  I  had  n»i
strength  left.  My  stomach  seemed  gone,  and  an  intolerable
creeping  pain  in  my  right  hip  kept  me  from  getting  any
ease  in  any  position." I  ought  to  add  that  this  lady  had'


MUREX  PURPUREA.


385


P


been  so  well  for  the  last  eiRht  months  that  I  had  not  been  in
attendance  upon  her.  The  duration  of  the  effect  of  the
medicine  in  her  case  was  about  five  days.

No.  3.  A  lady,  aged  23  years,  of  sanguine-nervons  tem-
perament. I  had  treated  her  during  the  year  past  for  pro-
lapsus uteri,  with  the  ordinary'  debility  in  the  lumbar  region,
palpitation  of  the  heart,  sinking  at  the  stomach,  etc.,  that
usually  accompany  that  affection.  She  recovered  rapidly
and  seemed  to  be  in  sound  health  for  Uie  Last  six  months.
She  took  three  doses  of  Murex  at  intervals  of  ten  days,  and
perceived  no  effiwrt  whatever.

The  foHowing  case,  n^ch  occurred  undeir  my  own  ohserva-
tion,  presents  some  points  of  interest :

Mrs.  C,  aged  sB  years.  Seven  years  ago,  about  four
months  af^r  her  marriage,  she  had  a  mbcarriagc  and  subse-
quently a  probpsus  utcr>  and  so-called  ulceration  of  tht
cervix,  for  which  she  was  tinder  local  (allopathic)  treatment
for  a  period  of  eighteen  months.  Three  years  ago,  after
unusual  exercise  under  circumstances  of  great  emotional
excitement,  she  had  a  recurrence  of  the  prolapsus,  under
which  she  suffered  for  some  time.

June  30th.  After  taking  unusually  violent  exercise,  the
patient  was  suddenly  subjected  to  terrible  mental  excite-
menL

July  1st  She  applied  for  medical  treatment  She  has
bearing  down  sensations  ;  a  feeling  as  if  tltc  internal  genitals
were  being  pushed  out,  with  great  nausea  and  faintness,  and
a  peculiarly  distressed  sinking  sensation  in  the  epigastrium.
A  vaginal  examination  reveals  a  slight  prolapsus,  a  very  long
cervix,  but  no  ulcerations.  There  was  utter  loss  of  appetite
and  great  despondency.

In  consequence  of  ttie  great  faintness  and  "  sinking  at  the
stomach"  (which,  Dr.  Lippe  says,  is  a  strong  characteristic
of  Murex),  in  addition  to  the  other  symptoms  which  indi-
SG


386  MUREX  PURPUREA.

powder  every  four  hours (no  higher potency  being  at
hand).

July  3d.  The  patient  reports  that  in  fifteen  minutes  after
taking  the  first  powder,  she  felt  very  hungry  and  ate  some-
thing. After  the  second  powder,  a  still  greater  degree  of
hunger ;  she  again  took  food.  After  tiie  tiiird  powder,  she
expressed  herself  as  "  half  starved "  and  had  to  have  a
hearty  meal  prepared,  which  she  ate. She  slept  well.

July  4th.  After  the  first  powder,  this  morning,  the  same
sensation  of  hunger,  though  in  a  less  degree  than  yesterday.
In  the  region  of  die  uterus  she  felt  much  better.

July  6th. Has  gained  in  every  way. Felt  quite  well  as
regards  the uterine symptoms and  tiie  sinking  at  die
stomach,  until  this  evening,  having  been  frightened  by  a«^
dog,  she  fainted. This  brought  back  the  symptoms  of  Julja^
1st,  which,  however, were  soon  reUeved  by  Murex,  an^^
have  not  since  returned.


PLATINA."


P


Preparations  for  nudkinal  me.  Chemically  pure  Platina,
which  is  soft,  and  may  be  cut  with  a  knife,  is  di&solvcd  in
aqua  regia  by  the  aid  of  heat,  the  resultant  golden  yellow
solution  diluted  to  a  sufficient  extent,  and  a  clean  smooth  rod
of  steel  suspended  in  it,  on  which  the  Platina  precipitates,
forming  a  crystalline  coating.  This  precipitate,  which  may
be  easily  rubbed  off  the  rod,  is  several  times  washed  in
distilled  water  (until  free  from  acid),  and  then  well  dried
between  layers  of  bibulous  paper  One  grain  of  this  pre-
cipitate, triturated  for  two  hours  with  ninety-nine  grains  of
milk  sugar,  forms  the  first  centesimal  trituration  of  Ptatina.
The  further  dynamizations  arc  prepared  in  the  usual  manner.

Literature.  Stapf  and  Gross,  Archiv.  i.,  i  :  Hahnemann,
Chronic  Diseases,  v.

Action.  Platina  develops  its  effects  as  well  in  the  province
of  the  brain  as  in  that  of  the  spinal  cord,  and  of  the  great
nervous  branches  proceeding  from  it.  The  great  splanchnic
nerves,  distributed  in  the  abdomen,  and,  In  particular,  tlie
nerves  of  the  uterine  system  given  off  from  the  hypogastric
plexus,  are  especially  affected  by  Platina.  From  this
specific  action,  no  inconsiderable  number  of  symptoms  seem
to  result  which  arc  quite  peculiar  to  this  remedy,  as  well
moral  affections  as  many  aches  and  pains.  Hence  this
remedy,  as  will  be  seen,  is  especially  appropriate  for  diseases
of  females,  such  as  we  often  meet  in  women  and  maidens.
Whether  Platina  is  suitable  only  for  irritable,  excitable
females,  with  predominant  activity  of  the  sexual  functions,  as
the  majority  of  writers  assume,  and  among  them  Stapf  and

'Adapted  Irom  ihc  Ceraua  of  Dr.  V«t  Meyer.


P  LATIN  A.


Gross, the  provers  of  it,  who, by  the  way, made  their
provings  on  a  very  excitable  'young  woman.  I  shall  leave
undetermined. For  myself,  I  have  had  frequent  occasion  to
administer  Platina,  and  have  obtained  the  very  best  curative
results in appropriate diseased conditions, occurring io
phlegmatic women of  lax  fiber. This  observation,  too,
appears  to  me  to  stand  by  no  means  in  opposition  to  the
totality  of  the  Platina  symptoms,  but  rather  to  accord  roost
dearly  with  them. For,  on  a  critical  review  of  what  has
been  made  known  concerning  the  action  of  the  remedy,  we
6nd  that  all  or  by  far  the  greater  part  of  its  symptoms
the  character  oi  depression,  but  not  Uiat  of  rrefkism. A  la<
of  energy,  a  lack  of  electric  tension  of  the  nerves,  if  I  may
express  myself,  seems  to  me  more  clearly  manifest  in  Platin
than  in  any  otlier  remedy. And  alUiough  we  find,  it  is
isolated  phenomena  which  seem  to  indicate  a  contrary  actiog^  -^r*^
yet  we  regard  these  only  as  reflex  or  alternate  effects ;  aiw^i^H
indeed, they  occur  in  so isolated  a  manner  as almost -^^p
disappear  before  the  mass  of  symptoms  which  justify  t"^-^^
view  I  have  taiken. It  may  be  that  a  farther  proving  of  tS-m  ms
drug,  which,  by  the  way,  is  very  desirable,  would  dispre*-^-— ?
our  assumption  :  for  the  present,  however,  we  can  only  hc:>  ■  J
to  that  proving  of  which  we  are  already  in  possession. ^  n
this  proving  wc  find,  in  every system  on  which Platf  ar^M
acts, tlie stamp of relaxation,  of  diminished energy, «^^
depression,  of  torpor. As  well  in  the  psychical  and  sensuot^  *<
«8  in  the  sensitive,  motor,  and*  vegetative  nervous  systef^  *> ,,
we sec this character manifested by  the trembling, tt"^"
sensations  of  chilliness,  the  coldness  and  paralysis  which  a  "^^
so  frequently  present. The  assertion  will  be  demonstrati^^ |i
when  we  come  to  consider  the  passive  and  negative  relatl^— -*
of  Platina to  the  5>'mpathctic  system  as  the  regulator ^
the  entire  vascular  system  in  the  human  body. But  PUtl  ^™
presents  no  phenomena  of  hyperemia,  no  independent *
primary  inflammation,  no  strikingly  accelerated  circulati*^-*"-
HcncCj  wc  find  no  alterations in the  pulse, such  as ^tdK


PXATINA.


^


3«9


Warned  and  careful  provers would c«rtainly  have signal-
ited  had  they  occurred  during  the  proving.

We have gained, then,  several general positions with
reference  to  the  ^hcrc  of  action  of  Ptatina.

1.  A negative  position,  viz. :  that  it  does  not  dh-ectly
affect  the  blood  life.

2.  That  it  exerts  its  gieatest  power  upon  the  brain  and
spwal  cord,  and  especially  in  several  particular  provinces  of
these  nervous  centers;  and,  finally,

3.  l~hat  it  dcpotcntizes  and  depresses  tlic  nervous  life.
Let  tts  now  seek  to  determine  these  characteristic  qualities

in  the  jW<'i//4^d/ phenomena  of  the  drug,  and  inquire,  first,
tkow  and  how  far  the  action  of  Platina  is  manifest  on  the
t>rain  and  ^inal  cord,  and  what  changes  this  drug  is  able  to
^^ct  in  the  individual  spheres  of  these  central  organs.  But,
'o  giving  a  true  picture  of  the  action  of  Platina,  1  cMinot
^>c  expected  to  adhere  closely  to  the  organic  order  of  the
individual  parts  of  the  nervous  system.  I  shall  rather  bring
first  to  view  those  phenomena  which  stand  forth  most
^'f^lcingly  among  the  symptoms  of  Platina,  and  arrange  the
others  subsequently  in  the  order  of  their  importance.  Thus,
"^Ci,  in  surveying  the  isolated  Platina  symptoms,  we
^'■^^^wnter  a  pathological  picture  which  we  have  not  unfre>
^'■^ndy  occasoa  to  meet  in  women — I  mean  hysteria.

-I  n  the  dclii»eation  of  this  picture,  we  begin  by  the  rcdtal
Viose  symptoms  which  relate  to  tl>e  proximate  cause  of
'^ is  affection:


T.  mSTURBANCES  IN  THE  imeRINE  SYSTEM.

"The  follo«-iag  symptoms  clearly  indicate  this:
In  both  groins,  painful  drawing,  at  if  the  menses  were

iC  to  set  in.

Crossing  in  the  bypogastriom,  with  a  feelings  of  weakness,
^^ before  the  menses.
■ ^^nfal ppcssing down  toward the gcnita]s>  as if  the


390


PLATINA.


mensei;  were  commencing;  sometimes  with  tenesmus,  draw- 1
ing  through  the  groins  over  the  hips  to  the  sacrum,  what
the  pain  continues  longer.

Painful  sensibility  and  constant  pressure  in  the  pobic
region  and  in  the  genitals,  with  almost  constant  tntenul
chilliness  and  external  objective  coldness  (except  in  dv
face).

In  the  evening,  in  bed,  the  painful  pressure  as  if  firam  the
menses  commencing  ceases  immediately,  but  is  felt  agakiia
the  morning,  after  rising.

Cutting  in  the  hypogastrium,  as  if  before  the  menses,  witJi
drawing  headache.

On  the  second  day  of  the  menses,  cutting  in  the  abdo-
men ;  then,  pressing  down  in  the  groin,  alternating  wits
pressure  in  the  genitals,  with  increased  congestion  and  dis-
charge of  blood.

Pressing  in  the  abdomen,  and  depression  of  spirits,  witikj
copious  menstrual  flow.

Menses  six  days  too  early,  with  diarrhoea.

Menses  fourteen  days  too  early,  and  very  copious.

Menses  six  days  tuo  early,  and  lasting  eight  days,
drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen  the  first  day.

The  first  day  of  the  menses,  discharge  of  rnuch  clotted
blood.  Voluptuous  tingling  in  the  genitals  and  in  the  abdo-
men, with  oppressive  anxiety  and  palpitation  ;  thereupon,
painful  pressure  low  in  the  genitals,  with  relaxed  feeling  andj
sticking  in  the  sinciput.

Leucorrhoea  like  white  of  egg,  without  sensation,  only  bj
day,  sometimes  after  urinating,  sometimes  aft.er  rising  from*
her  seat

If  wc  consider  these  symptoms  connectedly,  we  see  tliat
the  disturbances  excited  in  the  uterine  system  by  Platina
consist  chiefly  in  certain  spasmodic  affections  and  pains,  and
in  the  too  early  appearance  of  the  menstrual  discharge.
This  anticipation  of  the  menses,  however,  docs  not  result
from  an  abnormal,  congestive  overloading  of  the  uterus  with


PLATINA.


391


btood,  as  we  have  heretofore  seen  to  be  the  case  with
Aconite,  and  as  others  have  observed  of  Pulsatilla  and
Crocus,  in  the  case  of  which  remedies  the  clearly  marked
alternations  in  the  character  of  the  blood  discharged,  in
addition  to  many  other  phenomena  indicative  of  hyperemia,
are  evidence  of  such  a  condition.  The  too  early  and  too
long-continued  menstruation  of  Platina  depend  not  so  much
on  sanguineous  congestion  as,  rather,  on  atony  of  the  nerves
and  vessels  of  the  uterus,  whereby  a  condition  resembling
anarmia  is  induced,  which  is  indicated  in  tlic  symptoms
"pale  and  sunken  face ;  pale,  wretched  aspect  for  several
days."  (The  heat  and  redness  of  face  arc  alternate  effects.)
This  atonic  condition  is  evidenced,  too,  by  the  already  men-
tioned symptom,  "  painful  sensibility,  etc.,  with  almost  con-
stant internal  chilliness  and  external  objective  coldness;"
since,  indeed,  as  we  shall  soon  see,  chilliness  and  coldness
are  peculiar  to  Platina.

Proceeding  with  the  further  delineation  of  the  Platina
hysteria,  to  which  we  have  a  good  clue  in  the  symptoms,
"pressing  in  abdomen,  with  ill-humor,  attending  tlie  copious
menses,"  we  shall  see  what  is  the  nature  of  the  psychical
affection.

II. DISTURBANCES  IN  THE PSYCHICAL  SPHERE OF
THE  NERVOUS SYSTEM.


Depression,  despondency,  taciturnity.

She  thinks  she  is  neglected,  and  stands  alone  in  the
world.

Anxiety,  with  flushes  of  heat  and  trembling  of  the  hands.

Great  anxiety,  with  violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  when-
ever she  would  speak  in  company,  so  that  speaking  becomes
irksome  to  her.

Anxiety  as  though  she  should  die  or  lose  consciousness,
with  trembling  in  every  limb,  oppressed  breathing,  and
violent  palpitation  of  the  heart.


392


ELATIKA.


Anxie^  in  region  of  the  heart,  and  apprchensiveness,  as
if  she  must  soon  die,  with  disposition  to  weep^  and  actual
weeping.

Great  restlessness  of  disposition,— she  can  rest  quietly
nowhere, — with  melancholy  which  renders  even  the  most
joyous  objects  disagreeable  to  her.  She  thinks  she  b  not
fit  for  the  world,  is  tired  of  life,  but  has  the  greatest  dread
of  death,  which  she  believes  is  at  hand.

Morose  and  ill-content.

Discontent  with  the  whole  world ;  everytfaiog  is  a  con-
straint; with  inclination  to  weep.

Sad  and  morose,  she  sits  alone,  without speaking, aad^
cannot  resist  sleep ;  then,  inconsolable  weeping,  capecialfy^-^jMy
when  spoken  tu.  ^||

Silence  and  involuntary  weeping,  even  after  beta^^s^JH
addressed  in  the  most  friendly  manner,  so  that  she  is  apgr^-^^^jji
at  herself  for  it.  ^k

Disposition  to  weep,  and  weeping  after  receiving  a  miU_».»-^^|
rep  root

Ill-humored,  and  disposed  to  weep ;  often  obliged  W  £  i
weep  involuntarily,  which  relieves  her.

Disposition  tu  weep,  and  nieldncfaoly;  worse  in  her  c]jauia3Bi^3HM|
ber.  better  in  the  open  air.  ^|

Sad  and  morose  the  first  morning;  the  next,  tndcscribab<=ff  jesI^
happy,  especially  in  the  open  air,  so  that  she  could  hi-.MS.x^ive
embraced  cver>*thing,  and  made  merrj*  over  the  sadd^  tutJtae
objects.

Very  lachryinose,  and  easity  touched  by  causes  quhe
trivial.

Very  earnest  and  silent the  first  day; tlic next  d^^^y,
everytliing  presents  itself  to  her  in  a  ridiculous  aspect.

Chiltintsfi  and  shuddering,  mingled  with  fugitive  heat;  WMVC^
ill-humored  taciturnity  in  the  open  air;  later,  pliiw^  ~"^
warmth  throughout  whole  body,  with  return  of  cheerftdi

Great  cheerfulness,  so  tliat  she  couki  dance,  a  half  h(
after  weeping.


""^

^


PLATINA.


393


Great  cheerfulness  for  two  days ;  everything  seems  joyous,
ihe  could  laugh  at  the  saddest  object ;  third  day,  gfreat  melan-
choly in  the  morning  and  evening,  with  weeping,  even  over
joyous  or  ridiculous  objects,  and  also  when  spoken  to.
Invobnur>-  disposition  to  whistle  and  sing.
Very  fretful  and  irritable,  even  at  things  and  words  that
are  quite  innocent,  so  tliat  she  could  sometimes strike  at
berseU*  and  her  friends.
K No  remedy  gives  us  so  striking  a  picture  of  the  hysteric
KpcTvcrslon  of  the  disposition  as I'latina. The  depression
■smd  anxiety  which  often  increase  in  intensity,  even  up  to
~  actual  apprehension  of  death,  so  that,  as  I  have  sometimes
<xpcricnced  at  the  bcd^dc,  patients  make  every  provision

^and  arrangement  for  the  disposition  of  their  alTairs  after
death,  are  characteristic  indications  of  hysteria  as  well  as  of
the  Platina  disease.  Platina,  however,  is  most  especially
appropriate  in  that  form  of  hysteria  in  which  the  disposition
I  to  weep,  and  the  fear  of  death,  which  is  thought  to  be  at
~ hand, accompany all tlie other morbid phenomena. I

|ccm,ember  a  case  in which  a  mother  was compelled, on
account  of  debility,  to  wean  her  child  earlier  than  she  had
wished  to  do  so. Several  days  after  I  was  called  to  her,  and
on  entering  the  chamber  found  her  friends  wringing  their
hands  as  tliey  surrounded  her bed  ;  for the patient,  who
never  ceased  weeping,  spoke  amid  anxiety  and  apprchensioR.
of  QOtfaing  but  her  death,  and  how  fearful  it  was  to  have  to
die so young. She had  already made all testamentary
^■rangements. The  most  careful  investigation  could  discover
bhotbiag  morbid  in  the  mamma:,  which  were  stiU  distended
^VttJi  oitlk,  but  not  hard ;  even  the pulse had not  varied
■C^^roca  its  normal  condition. My  exhortation  to  dismiss  these
^lioughts  of  death,  for  which  there  existed,  I  assured  my
K^atient,  not  the  slightest  ground,  was  gently  rejected,  as  was
^^iso  at  first  the  medicine  I  ordered  for  her;  and  she  told  me
^^^th  tears,  that  she  had  merely  sent  for  me  that  she  might
^te.c«  me  once  again  before  her  death. Finally,  I  succeeded


594


PLATINA.


in  getting  her  to  take  a  grain  of  the  third  trituratioo  of
Platina.  When  I  saw  the  patient  again  in  the  evening,  the
fear  of  death  and  the  weeping  had  vanished,  and  tlic  depres-
sion which  still  remained  yielded  the  following  day  to
her  accustomed  chcerfuUiess.  She  became  healthy,  and
remained  so.

Moreover,  we  find  in  the  just  enumerated  moral  symptoms
of  Platina,  the  alternations  of  cheerfulness  and  sadness,  of
laugliing  and  weeping,  which  arc  peculiar  to  h>-stcria, —
just  as,  generally  in  nature,  exaltation  so  often  follows
depression  or  alternates  with  it

The  same  condition  of  depression  we  observe,  too,  in  the
perceptive  faculty,  as  is  shown  by  the  following  symptoms:

Illusion  of  fancy  upon  entering  the  room  after  a  walk  of 3"
one  hour,  as  if  everything  around  her  were  very  small,  aw'<  ^ \
everybody  inferior  to  her,  both  in  regard  to  body  and  mind,^.  .A.
and  as  if  she herself  were  tall and  elevated ; the  nwmc-^rm
appears  gloomy  and  disagreeable  to  her.  accompanied  witlz~^i'kn
slight  anguish,  sad  and  vexed  mood,  vertigo,  and  uncomfort — ,,#%_-
able  feeling  in  the  midst  of  a  society  that  she  was  generally  fboc^  ^^^<
of;  all  this  passes  off  in  the  open  air  when  die  sun  thim  m »■— ^-^
Looking  down  contemptuously  and  pitifully  upon  pcopl^^^.  -<
whom  at  other  times  she respects,  against  her  will,  \w  ^ ^
paroxysms. During  her  contemptuous  turns  she  is  suddenl-  ^ >;
attacked  with  canine  hunger,  and  cats  in  a  greedy,  hast%i^ T
manner ;  when  the  regular  meal-time  arrived  she  had  lost  a.^^^^=d
her  appetite. Proud  feeling. Cold,  absent,  indifferent  I^k in

company  of  friends;  she  only  answers  when  she  must,  ai^ id

is only half conscious of wliat she says ; after haviK^ ig

answered,  she  reflects  whether  her  answer  had  been  suitabi" ' c;
she  is  constantly  absent  without  knowing  where  her  thougt^a^^^ts
arc roaming. She  imagines  she  docs  not  belong  xo  b- >— er
family ; after  a  short  absence  all things appear  changi^^s^^d
to her ; absence of mind ; she listens to  conversatu^  :^^Bas
around  her,  but  after  they  arc  terminated  she  has  fort,ulL  ^ ""
what  she  heard. Great  absence  of  mind ;  she  hears  i^


PLATINA.


39S


mat  is  said  to  her,  even  when  addressed  with  great  emphasis.
Not  disposed  to  intellectual  labor;  dull,  stretching  sensation,
as  of  a  board  before  the  forehead,  passing  attacks  of  vertigo
in  quick  succession,  in  the  evening  when  standing,  as  if  she
would  lose  her  consciousness;  violent  vertigo,  she  dares  not
move  her  eyes  ;  more  in  day-time  than  at  night;  generally
when  she  is  attacked  with  palpitation  of  the  heart.

The  characteristic  feature  of  these  Platina  illusions  is  the
proud  exaltation  of  one's  self  above  other  persons,  who  are
regarded  as  contemptible.  Tins  circumstance  also  has  Its
origin  in  a  defiresstd  moral  activity,  as  is  shown  by  the
related  symptoms,  "  the  chamber  seems  gloomy  and  un-
pleasant," "anxious  apprehension,"  "ill-humor,  vertigo,  and
discomfort,"  etc., and  the  "alleviation  in  the  open  air."  Hence,
too,  Stapf  and  Gross  recommended  Flatina  as  "a  very  welcome
specific  remedy  for  a  not  infrequent  kind  of  melancholy."

The  sleep,  too,  gives  a  clear  indication  of  disturbance  in
the  psychic  nervous  system.  In  this  relation  we  are  to  con-
sider the  following  symptoms :

£.xcessive  weakness  and  drowsiness  in  the  evening;  falls
asleep  af^er  midnight,  with  tearing  in  the  ball  of  the  toe  ;  she
wakes  in  tlic  night  in  a  sort  of  stupor,  and  is  unable  to  col-
lect her  senses;  wakes  about  midnight ;  ideas  which  she  is
unable  to  repel  crowding  upon  her  mind,  no  sleep  until
morning;  anxious  dreams,  and  gloomy  thoughts,  and  sad
visions  when  waking  suddenly;  anxious,  confused  dreams  of
war  and  bloodshed,  She  dreams  of  fires,  wants  to  go  there,
but  cannot  get  ready,  with  her  preparations  of  toilet,  etc.
He  wakes  in  the  morning  with  a  peevish  and  anxious  mood
as  if  he  had  suffered  injury  during  his  sleep.

Platina  symptoms ;  for  many  more  alterations  of  functions
induced  by  this  remedy  might  easily  be  made  to  contribute
to  the  completion  of  the  picture.  I  shall  mention,  however,
in  this  relation,  only  the  digestive  disturbances,  the  spasmodic
affections,  and  the  pains  induced  by  Platina. But  I  fear  to


Z96


PLATINA.


lead,  by  this  course,  to  the  erroneous  supposition  that  all  tfte
other  phenomena  of  Platina  belong  also  to  hysteria,  and
thus  to  the  false  conclusion  that  Platina  is  only  and  exda>
sivcly  a  remedy  for  hysteria ;  whereas,  on  the  one  hand,
not  every  fomi  of  hysteria  finds  its  remedy  in  Platina,  and
on  the  other,  Platina  is  a  remedy  for  several  other  morbid  con-
ditions, not  only  of  women,  but  also  of  men.  To  guard  agaiast
this  error,  I  must  forbear  to  cite  further  the  Platina  symp-
toms resembling  hysteria,  but  would  not  wish  to  deter  others
from  studying  and  estimating  their  relations  and  correspond-
ence. First,  however,  I  must  call  attention  to  a  few  otber
symptoms  of  Platina,  nearly  related  to  hysteria,  less
important  than  those  already  cited,  but  still  characteristic
It  not  unfrcqucntly  happens  in  hysteria,  that  a  feeling  of
indescribable  anxiety,  with  respiratory  embarrajismenl,  or
a  spasmodic  constriction  of  the  ursophagiis,  is  exi>erienced
This  condition,  generally  denominated  "hysteric  asthma,"
is  depicted  in  the  following  symptoms  of  Platina :

Sudden  arrest  of  breathing  in  tiie  throat,  as  takes  place
when  walking  against  tht:  wind.  Oppressed  breathing,  with
warm  rising  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  to  the  pit  of  the
throat;  she  has  to  take  deep  breath;  accompanied  %vith  a
hoarse  voice,  going  off  again  with  the  oppression.  Impeded
respiration  from  weakness  of  the  chest;  deep  breathing,  as  if
a  load  were  oppressing  the  chest;  frequt-nt  deep  breathing
without  oppression  of  the  chest;  asthma,  as  if  laced  loo
tightly,  with  heavy,  slow  breathing.

Another  trouble  frequently  attendant  on  hysteria  is  (be
so-called  c/avus  hystericus,  a  peculiar,  tense,  pressing,
squeezing  headache,  appearing  In  paroxysms,  and  confined
to  a  small  spot

The  following  symptoms  may  be  referred  to  this  con-
dition: cramp-pain  in  the  right  temple  in  the  afternoon;
cramp-pain  in  the  forehead,  as  if  between  screws;  cramp-
like  tension  in  the  temples,  as  if  between  screws ;  com-
pression in  the  forehead,  in  paroxysms ;  sudden  and  short


PLATINA.


397


presing  from  without,  inward  in  the  vertex ;  pressure  under
the  right  frontal  eminence,  iocrea&ing  nad  decreasing  in
paroxysms;  sudden  attack  of  contusivc  pain  in  a  small  spot
of  the  left  parietal  bone ;  dull  pressure  in  the  right  parietal
bone,  as  of  a  plug  being  lodged  in  It^  violent  boring  in  the
center  of  the  forehead,  decreasing  gradually,  and  finally
disappearing.

Let  us  now  leave  the  subject  of  hysteria,  and  consider  the
farther  action  of  Platina  on  the  healthy  body  ;  and,  first:


in. THE  DISTITRBANCES TN THE  VEGETATIVE
NERVOUS SYSTEM.

Viscid  and  slimy  in  the  mouth  the  whole  day,  especially
after  a  mealf  also  in  the  morning,  with  very  bad  humor;
occasional  conflux  of  water  in  the  mouth ;  st.'nsation  in  the
upper  part  of  the  tongue  as  if  burnt,  increased  by  rubbing
the  teeth  over  it;  scraping  sensation  in  the  throat,  as  if  raw,
'in  the  evening  after  lying  down,  and  on  the  day  Tollowing,
rmctimes  accompanied  with  an  irritation  resulting  in  short
rough ;  sweet  taste  on  the  tip  of  tJie  tongue;  no  appetite;
ic  relishes  the  first  mouthfuls,  but  she  is  soon  replete ;  she  is
speedily  satisfied  at  supper  owing  to  great  sadness,  later  she
^eats;  pinching  in  the  umbilical  region  after  ;i  meal,  as  if
kliarrhcca  would  come  on ;  empty  eructations  in  the  morning;
Houd  eructations  in  the  morning,  and  after  dinner;  sudden
■gulping  up  of  a  bitter  sour  fluid,  inducing  cough  and  a  scrap-
ing sensation  in  the  tliroat ;  nauseous  feeling  in  the  region  of
•Otc  stomach  ;  qualmishness  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  in
the  morning ;  continual  nausea,  with  great  faintness,  anxious-
ness,  and  a  trembling  sensation  through  tlic  whole  body  in
the  forenoon;  desire  to  vomit,  without  vomiting,  coming
and  going  increasingly  accompanied  with  great  qualmish-
ness and  uneasiness  in  the  limbs.

Sfoma^/t. Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  also  when
touching  it;  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  after  eating


398


PLATJNA.


bread  and  butter,  as  If  he  had  eaten  something  that  had  not
been  digested;  repletion  in  the  stomach  and  abdomcf),  asV
overloaded,  in  the  morning  before  breakfast,  with  a  ffJoA
deal  of  empty  eructation;  distension  of  the  pit  of
stomach  and  the  stomach  itself,  with  a  scratching  and  tev
Ing  sensation  in  the  stomach ;  drawing  pain,  with  pmsm
under  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  if  occasioned  by  a  straia;
contractive  pain  around  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  if  she  had
laced  herself  too  tightly,  with  a  suffocative  sensation  ;  pain-
ful sensation  around  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  if  she  had
laced  herself  too  tightly,  with  sensation  as  if  it  would  go
off  by  eating;  oppression  around  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
independent  of  brcatliing ;  pinching  in  the  region  of  the
acrobiculus  cordis,  and  shortly  after  sensation  as  if  press-
ing into  the  hypogastrium,  as  if  flatulence  were  crowding
down ;  the  sensation  went  off  when  a  desire  for  emissioa
of  flatulence  made  its  appearance,  which,  however,  took
place  with  great  difficulty,  the  sensation  in  the  gnia
returned  all  the  time,  with  distension  of  the  abdomen;]^!
creeping  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  rising  into  the  throat,  as^V
if  she  had  swallowed  little  particles  of  a  feather,  vomiturititHi
ensued  ;  itching  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  going  off  by
friction;  fermenting  sensation  in  the  region  of  the  stomach;
dull  beating  as  with  a  hammer  in  and  near  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  in  the  region  of  one  of  the  cartilages  of  the  ribs
(immediately);  violent  stitches  on  the  right  side  near  the  pit
of  the  stomach  ;  dull  shocks  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach ;
violent  dull  stitching  shocks  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  slowly
going  and  coming;  gnawing  and  writhing  sensation  in  the
stomach  early  in  the  morning,  with  canine  hunger  and  accu-^U
mulation  of  water  in  the  mouth,  not  relieved  by  eating.  ^|

Abdomen.  Colic  toward  evening  increased  by  raising
one's  self  in  the  bed,  and  then  ceasing  gradually ;  great  dis-
tension of  the  abdomen  in  the  evening ;  spasmodic  distcn-
aon  of  the  abdomen  in  several  places,  causing  elevations
and  depressions  on  the  surface ;  sensation  in  the  whole  of


PLATINA.


399


the  abdomen,  as  if  she  had  laced  herself  too  tightly ;  sensa-
tion in  the  whole  abdomen,  as  of  being  pinched  together
from  the  umbilicus  to  the  back ;  painful  pinching  under  the
left  short  ribs ;  jerking  pinching  in  various  parts  of  the
abdomen;  jerking  drawing  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,
with  some  arrest  of  breathing ;  a  darting  pain  through  the
abdomen,  succeeded  by  weariness  of  Uic  knees;  drawing
through  the  abdomen,  from  the  chest  toward  both  groins,
this  drawing  terminates  in  the  genital  organs,  where  it
causes  a  pain  ;  a  writhing  sensation  around  the  umbilicus,
with  oppressed  breathing,  and  a  tremulous  sensation  through
the  whole  body;  very  painful  stitch  deep  in  the  abdomen
above  the  umbilicus,  when  suddenly  raising  one's  self  after
cowering;  dull  stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  umbilicus;  dull
shocks  in  the  abdomen,  at  intervals,  below  the  short  ribs ;
stitches  in  the  abdomen  in  the  morning ;  fine  stinging  in  the
right  side  of  tJie  abdomen,  moving  in  the  umbilical  region
when  lying  upon  the  affected  side,  but  increasing  when  lying
on  the  left  side;  anxiety  in  the  whole  abdomen,  succeeded
by  a  pain  in  the  abdomen  as  after  fright,  accompanied  by
a  desire  as  if  diarrhora  would  come  on ;  slight  burning
around  the  umbilicus;  sudden  burning  darting  from  above
downward  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  ;  burning  sensa-
tion in  a  small  spot  of  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  in  parox-
ysms ;  sudden  jerking,  resembling  a  dull  shack  in  a  small
spot  in  the  abdominal  integuments ;  dull  contusive  pain
below  the  umbihcus  in  the  integuments;  dull  shocks,  a  sort
of  beating  in  the  region  of  a  true  lower  rib;  motion  In  the
abdomen  as  of  flatulence;  rumbling  in  the  epigastrium
before  breakfast ;  rubbing  sensation  in  the  abdomen,  before
breakfast,  with  a  pinching  anxiety  in  the  intestines ;  emission
of  short,  interrupted  flatus,  sometimes  difficult;  copious
emission  of  flatulence.

Constipation,  lasting  several  days.

Constant  tenesmus.

Frequent  ineffectual  desire  for  stool,  or  with  scanty  stool*


400


PLATINA.


which  passes  only  part  at  a  time,  with  violent  straining  and
painful  sensation  of  weakness  and  tension  in  the  abdominal
muscles.

Difficult  stool,  with  cutting,  burning,  and  protrusion  ot
the  varices.

Stool  hard,  as  if  burned,  with  slight  tenesmus  before  and
after  it.

Scanty,  tenacious  stool,  cohering  like  clay,  with  long  preas-
ing  and  straining  of  the  abdominal  muscles.

Papcscent  stool  in  the  morning,  half  digested  and  soidC'
what  bloody ;  afterward,  increased  tension  in  the  left  bypcv
chondrium  and  loins.

Papescent  stool  in  the  evening,  with  ascarides.

Tenesmus,  with  evacuation  of  a  piece  of  tape-worm.

Violent,  noisy evacuation  after dinner,  first thin,
solid,  expelled  in  fragments  almost  pulverulent,  with

straining;  after  the  expulsion  he  feeb  a  shaking  and  shud

dering,  especially  in  the  upper  part  of  the  body ;  and  affe
rising  from stool  he  feels  a  slight  pain  and  ^s'eakness  about
the  umbilicus;  considerable  tenesmus,  even  when  the  stooC'
is  not  hard,  and  after  every  stool  a  violent  stitch  in  the  anuSc-'
with  subsequent  cramp-like  contraction  of  the  nates^  extend-
ing toward  the  small  of  the  back.

Shuddering  after  stool  and  urination.

Much  discharge  of  blood  from  the  anus.

Tingling  tenesmus  in  the  anus,  as  if  diarrhcea  would  set  U
every  evening  before  going  to  sleep,  at  the  same  hour  each  day-
Burning  in  tlie  rectum  during  stool,  and,  afterward,  violenV
itching.

Violent,  dull  stitches  tn  front  part  of  the  rectum,  so  thatf
she  could  cry  out

Urine  pale  yellow  in  the  morning,  clear  as  water  In  the— — "^  j
afternoon.  \

Very  red  urine,  with  white  clouds.

Urine  becomes  turbid,  and  leaves  a  red  stain  on  the  side
of  the  vessel.


:,ATINA.


ioT


If  we  cast  a  glance  over  all  these  symptoms,  we  find  here
torpor  of  the  intestinal  canal  distinctly  pronounced.  The
flatulent  colic,  which  is  clearly  depicted  in  the  symptoms,
depends,  here,  on  a  paralytic  weakness  of  the  whole  intesti-
nal tract.  The  peristaltic  action  is  diminished ;  hence  an
inordinate  development  or  retention  of  intestinal  gas,  and
manifold  digestive  disorders,  as  consequences.  Eructations,
nausea,  anorexia,  partial  or  complete,  oppression  at  the
stomach,  fullness,  distension  of  the  stomach  and  abdomen,
distension  of  an  isolated  part  of  the  abdomen  and  drawing
in  of  the  rest,  cutting,  gnawing,  wrenching,  gurgling,  finally,
discharge  of  flatus,  sometimes  very  troublesome ;  constipa-
tion, very  dry  or  papcsccnt  stools,  containing  half-digested
matter, — all  these  phenomena  furnish  clear  evidence  of  the
torpidity  of  the  muscular  fiber,  or,  rather,  of  the  diminished
activity  of  the  intestinal  motor  nerves.  Homoeopathists  are
acquainted  with  several  remedies  which  develop  in  a  high
degree  the  signs  of  flatulence  and  its  attendant  difficulties.
I  mention  only  for  example  Colocynth,  which  is  sure  to
occur  to  the  mind  of  every  homceopathist  when  flatulence  is
mentioned.  But  the  flatulence  of  Colocynth  depends  rather
on  an  abnormal  composition  of  the  gastric  juices,  and  a
vicious  bilious  secretion ;  hence  the  bitter  taste,  the  green
vomiting,  the  abdominal  pain  after  anger,  the  altered  color
of  the  stools.  The  Platina  symptoms,  on  the  otfier  hand,
indicate  by  no  means  an  altered  composition  of  the  fluids
necessary  to  digestion ;  and  nothing  is  left-  to  which  to
attribute  the  flatus  and  other  abnormal  symptoms  of  the
intestinal  canal,  save  a  diminislied  activity  oS  the  intestinal
muscular  fiber.

IV. AFFECTIONS  OF  THE  MOTORV  NERVOUS  APPARATUS.


SPASMODIC  PHBNOMSS'A.


Cramp-like  feeling  of  contraction  darts  suddenly  through
the  head  from  the  right  temple  to  the  left ;  then,  feeling  of
fl7


402


PLATINA.


dullness,  as  if  too  tightly  bound,  with  trembling,  both  ads]
of  the  head.

Cramp  in  the  cervical  muscles,  as  if  from  lying  on
bard  a  pillow;  worse  on  motion.

Cramp  in  the  hand  on  exerting  it.

The  finger  is  drawn  crooked,  with  painful  drawing  vf  il|
the  arm  on  bending  the  arm.

At  night,  aflcr  rising,  cramp  and  contraction  of  the  soles]
of  the  feet.
'  Great  inclination  to  violent,  almost  spasmodic^  yai

Yawning,  afternoon,  without  sleepiness.

Frequent  yawning,  afternoon,  so  violent,  her  eyes  oveiflo

Violent  yawning  after  a  meal,  so  that  the  cervical  mi
become  painful,

A  chitl  runs  over  the  whole  body  after  ya-wning.

Jerking  of  the  muscles  in  the  legs  after  walking  a  Uttit

Cramp-like  jerking  here  and  there  in  the  limbs,  likt
throbbing.

Painful  trembling  of  the  whole  body,  with  throbbing  in
the  vessels.

Trembling  sensation,  at  times,  through  the  whole  body.

First,  a  trembling  sensation  in  the  hands  and  feet,  then
chilliness  and  violent  trembling  of  the  whole  body,  as  if  to
the  most  violent  chill,  with  chattering  of  the  teeth,  the  faa
at  the  same  time  being  warm  and  the  hands  cold.

The  trembling,  which,  standing  midway  between  spasm
and  paralysis,  is  often  met  with  in  the  pathogenesis  of
Flatina,  and  is  associated  in  it  with  many  other  morbni
phenomena,  leads  us  very  naturally  to  disturbances  erf
another  nature  in  the  province  of  the  motory  nervous
system.

PjlJf^l  YTIC  PNESOMBNA.


Weakness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck ;  the  head  sinks
ward.
Weakness  in  the  nape ;  she  cannot  hold  up  the  head.


PLATWA,


403


I


I


Relaxed  reeling  in  both  arms,  as  if  they  had  held  up
something  heavy ;  diminished  by  moving  them  to  and  fro,
but  returning  immediately  when  they  are  at  rest,  with  draw-
ing, as  on  a  thread,  from  the  shoulder  to  the  hand.

Sudden  paralysis,  as  after  an  apoplectic  fit,  in  a  small
^>ot,  now  of  the  right,  now  of  Uic  left  arm.
Heaviness  of  the  arms.

Feeling  as  if  paralyzed  in  the  left  arm;  she  has  to  let  it
snk  down ;  much  worse  when  resting  the  arm  on  the  chair,
when  sitting,  even  when  leaning  the  shoulder  against  the
chair.

Weariness  and  weakness  of  the  Left  arm,  with  drawing
in  it.

Paralytic  feeling  in  the  right  fore-arm,*  drawing  from  above
downward.

Weakness,  with  trembling  disquiet  in  the  thighs,  especially
toward  the  knees,  as  when  tired  by  walking,  felt  only  when
sitting.

Weakness  in  thighs  (and  whole  limbs),  as  if  beaten,  with
tremulous  uneasiness  in  them,  when  sitting  and  standing.

Great  weakness  in  the  knee-joints  and  their  neighborhood,
itiore  when  standing  than  when  walking,  worst  when  going
upstairs.

Weakness  in  the  knees  when  walking,  also  in  the  thighs
\when  sitting,  as  if  fatigued  by  walking.

Tottering  when walking,  as if  the  limbs  had  no  firm
footing,

Weakness,  especially  when  sitting ;  the  feet  feel  as  if  over-
fatigued,  and  are  full  of  trembling  uneasiness.

The  phenomena  resembling  paralysis  are  much  more
«learly  defined  than  arc  the  spasmodic  affections.  The
-whole  muscular  system  appears  dormant,  and  seems  to  have
lost  Its  tone.  Even  in  sitting  and  leaning  the  body  against
a  solid  object,  this  weakness  and  laxity  of  fiber  arc  significant
<nough  to  warrant  the  conclusion  tliat  many  forms  of  disease
resembling  paralysis  must  find  a  remedy  in  Platina. Thus,


PLATTNA.

on  the  motor  nerves,  our  remedy  acts  as  a  defirfssing  ajat
taking  from  them  their  wonted  energy  and  only  here
there,  through  its inroad upon  their  activity, pro*
spasmodic  phenomena  of  slight  importance.

Let  us  now  go  farther,  and  see  whether  the  distinctivej
characteristic  of  Platina  displays  itself  in  any  other  n<i
system  subject  to  the  control  of  the  brain.


V. AFFECTIONS  OF  THE  SENSITIVE  NERVOUS  SYSTEM.,

Wc  have  here  phenomena  of  two  kinds  to  consider,'—^
Atuesthcsia  and  Pain,


A<~ANMSTHBStA.

Tensive,  numb  feeling  in  the  whole  sinciput,  as  after  i
blow,  extending  as  far  as  the  nasal  bone ;  numb  feeling  is
the  sinciput,  as  if  constricted,  in  a  warm  room  full  of  pefsoni;
increased  after  a  short  time  to  a  violent  pressings  togetfaa.
with  a  sensation  as  of  a  dull  digging  up,  with  impatieiKe
and  ill-humor,  and  heat  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body,
especially  in  the  head,  as  if  the  sweat  of  anguish  would
break  out ;  in  the  evening,  when  in  the  cool  air,  he  feds  M
unusual  heat,  and,  when  beginning  to  walk,  a  painful
shaking  of  the  brain,  as  if  a  ball  were  knocking  against  die
skull ;  afteru'ard  the  same  sensation  is  felt  when  lying  is
bed,  accompanied  witli  a  slight  roaring  in  the  ears;  irtioi
the  pain  abates  he  falls  asleep,

Feeling  of  coldness,  creeping,  and  numbness  in  the  wt
right  side  of  the  face.  ^

Cramp-like  painful  feeling  of  numbness  in  the  left
of  the  zygoma.

Tensive  feeling  of  numbness  in  the  zygomata  and  mast<Hd
processes,  as  if  the  head  were  compressed  by  screws.

Feeling  of  numbness  in  coccyx,  as  if  afler  a  blow
sitting.


I'LATINA.


405


Tcnave  feeling  of  numbness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  just
at  the  occiput,  as  if  bound  together.

Sensitive  feeling  of  numbness  and  trembling  of  the  right
thumb,  in  the  morning,  as  if  contused.

Trembling  feeling  of  numbness  in  the  knees,  and  extend-
ing to  the  feet,  as  if  too  tightly  bound.

Feeling  of  numbness,  and  weakness,  and  dull  pressure  on
the  inner  side  of  the  bend  of  the  left  knee,  when  sitting.

Cramp-like  jerking  of  the  legs  from  above  downward,
witli  a  feeling  of  stiffness,  which  is  also  felt  in  the  feet  when
sitting,  especially  in  the  evening.

Tremulous,  creeping  uneasiness  in  the  legs  when  sitting,
witli  feeling  of  numbness  and  stiffness,  especially  increased
in  the  evening,  and  also  in  bed.

Feeling  of  numbness  and  weariness,  in  the  feeling  only,
ivben  sitting,  as  if  after  standing  a  long  time.

S.—PAiyS  AXD  SEMSATWNS.

The  true  character  of  Platina  is  clearly  depicted  in  the
"Scclings  of  dullness  and  numbness.  Now,  even  if  we  assume,
btritb  the  majority  of  physiologists,  that  pain  consists  in  an
xalted  activity  of  the  sensitive  nerve,  then,  notwithstanding,
latina  produces,  as  wc  shall  sec,  no  small  number  of  pain-
]  sensations,  still,  paradoxical  as  this  may  at  first  view
ppear,  the  general  character  of  Platina,  viz.,  that  of  dspres-
ian,  is  clearly  manifested  in  the  form  which  the  Platina
[3>ains  assume.  No  substance  which  acts  on  the  human  body
"leaves  unaffected  the  sensitive  nerves  so  easily  and  quickly
excitable.  Hence,  wc  find,  that  in  all  provings  of  drugs  on
the  healthy  body,  a  greater  or  less  number  of  pains  occur.
But  for  the  very  reason  that^m  so  frequendy  accompanies
the  pathological  modifications  of  the  organism,  it  is  incapable
of  serving,  in  its  generality  as  pain,  as  an  index  for  the  dis-
covery of  the  peculiar  character  of  a  drug.  If  we  received
it  as  our  guide,  we  should  always,  of  necessity,  infer  an


PLATINA.


increased  Activity.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  examine  die
determintng  conditions  in  which  the  pains  originate,  in  ofdti
to  form  an  opinion  as  to  whetlier  the  paios  are  induced  \rf
congestion  or  anaemia,  by  inflammation,  or  by  a  conditjooof
paralysis,  etc.,  etc.  In  determining  the  character  of  a  dni^
then,  the  pains  and  sensations,  inasmuch  as  they  occv
almost  universally,  are  to  be  subordinated  and  accommodxtea
to  the  other  phenomena.  Perhaps  the  AtHd  of  pain,  whedxr
more  of  a  sticking  or  squeezing,  more  of  a  tearing'  or  coo-
tracting,  more  of  a  pressing  or  pinching  pain,  stands  in  soott
relation  to  the  nature  of  the  drug  which  produces  the  fwm,
and  so  may  contribute  somewhat  to  the  unfolding  of  tk
latter.  We  shall  lay  no  greater  stress,  however,  on  tlis
assumption,  which  is  quite  hypothetical,  than  on  this,  thii
the  kind  of  pain  depends  on  the  tissue  in  which  it  originatts

I  will  enumerate  briefly  the  various  pains  and  sefts>-
tionf?  which  Platina  excites,  naming,  at  the  same  time,  ihe
parts  in  which  they  especially  occur  ;  and  I  have  cndeavoml
to  indicate,  by  the  order  of  succession,  what  kinds  of  pais
occur  most  frequently,  and  what  kind  less  often.

Cramp-pain  (head,  forehead,  temples,  orbital  margiu.
ears,  nose,  zygoma,  lower  maxilla,  teeth,  fauces,  chest,  owe.
throat,  fore-arm,  hand,  fingers,  htps,  limbs,  thighs,  legs,  calC
tarsus,  heel.  toes).

Oppression  (head,  eyes,  nose,  zygoma,  epigastrium,  ribs,
genitals,  chest,  back,  shoulders,  fore-arm,  ham,  sole  of  foot
toes).

Oppression,  wave-tike,  over  the  right  orWt.

Pressing  (forehead,  rectum,  GENITALS).

Pressing  together  (forcheatl).

Pressing  inward,  cramp-like  (temples,  vertex).

Tension  (temples,  orbital  margins,  globe  of  the  eye,
nape,  hips,  thighs,  ham,  calf,  dorsum  of  the  foot,  toes).

Drawing  (head,  ears,  teeth,  gullet,  epigastrium,  abdomen."
scapula,  hand,  fmger,  thigh,  knee,  calf,  heel).

Drawing  together  (head,  temples,  epigastrium,  abdomen).


PLATINA.


407


Tenesmus  (anus).

Jerking  (nose,  soles  of  the  feet).

Sticking  (head,  meatus  audttorius,  cheeks,  gullet,  gastric
region,  abdomen,  rectum,  pnecordia,  back,  axilla,  hand,
cruro-tarsal  joint  ball  of  tlic  foot,  toes).

CraivUng,  itching,  prickling,  tickling  (temples,  lower
maxilla,  corners  of  the  eyes,  face,  nose,  tongue,  epigastrium,
arms,  genitals,  chest,  thyroid  region,  hand,  fingers,  thumbs,
limbs,  knees,  ankle-bones,  soles  of  feet,  toes).

Chafing  (orbital  margins,  tips  of  ears,  nose,  cheeks,  parts
about  the  mouth,  chin,  genitals,  scrotum,  hand,  feet,  and
I«).

Burning  i^iA^,  eyes,  cars,  tongue,  region  of  umbilicus,
.bdomen,  rectum,  chest,  arm,  elbow,  hand,  knee,  toes).

Pain  as  from  a  blow  or  thrust  (head,  temples,  arch  of
ryebrow,  abdomen,  cocc>'x,  shoulder,  arm,  limbs,  thighs,
nee).

Nutnbness  and  feeling  as  of  paralysis  (head,  cheeks,  lips,
osc,  face,  zygoma,  chin,  coccyx,  nape,  arm,  fore-arm,  hand,
■^humb.  limbs,  thighs,  knees,  hollow  of  the  knee,  feet).

Feeling  of  coldness  (head,  eyes,  cheeks,  lips,  face,  chin,
scapula,  hand).

Throbbing  and  throbbing  pain  (teeth,  region  of  stomach.
Jibs,  fore-arm,  legs,  toes).

Soreness  (eyes,  lips,  palate,  back,  legs,  ankle-joints,  and
bones).

Tearing  (ears,  thigh,  dorsum  of  foot,  toes).

Shocks  and  blows  (chin,  epigastrium,  chest,  back,  skin,  calf).

Stortings  (ears,  chin,  legs).

Jerking  and  jerking  pain  (upper  lip,  gastric  region
(visible),  abdomen,  fore-arm,  limbs).

Feeling  as  if  burned  (upper  lip,  tongue).

Feeling  as  if  beaten  (arm,  thigh).

Feeling  as  tf  dislocated  {knee,  ankle).

Feeling  as  if  contused  (head,  mastoid  process,  elbow,
thumb,  knee).


408


PLATINA.


Pain  of  excoriation  (back,  scapula).

Pinching  (umbilical  region,  epigastrium,  abdomen).

Duii pains  (head,  teeth,  arm,  thigh).

Cutting  (abdomen,  dorsum  of  foot).

Digging  (forehead,  cars,  teeth).

Bering  (forehead).

Scratching  (gullet).

The  pain  most  frequently  encountered  in  Platina  pro^-ingt
is  cramp-pain.  Wc  meet  with  this  in  almost  every  part  rf
the  body.  The  following  symptoms,  for  example,  presene
modifications  of  it

"Tensive  pain  in  both  upper  orbiul  mai^ns.  exteodnc
to  the  globe  of  the  eye  itself;  they  are,  as  it  were,  coo-
pressed.

"  In  the  left  ala  nasi  cramp-like  jerkings  at  regular  hiter-
vals ;  cramp-like  jerkings  at  regular  intervals  in a  small
below  the  external  knuckle  of  the  right  hand.'*

Tlie  sensation  of  pressing  inward,  too,  is  a  very-
symptom  of  Platina. In  addition  to  the  instances  in  whick
this is  distinctly expressed, the following, among otiicr
symptoms,  seem  to  belong  to  this  sensation:

"  In  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  a  sudden,  ftmtive
pressing  inward,  as  by  a  dull  body.

"Fugitive  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  vertex,  a  pnaiac
inward.

"  Dull  pain  in  the  right  parietal  bone,  as  if  a  plug  wrrr
forced  there.  ^|

"  In  the  middle  of  the  back,  on  the  right,  near  the  spine,
violent  pain,  as  if  a  sharp  plug  were  fixed ;  or  pressing  upoo
tt,  piun  like  a. sore  wound,  continuing  a  long  time.

"  Behind,  on  the  left  mastoid  process,  pressing;  pain,  as
if  by  a  dull  instrument ;  on  pressure,  pain  as  from  a  con-
tusion.

"  On  a  small  spot,  above,  on  the  thorax,  painful  sensa-
tion, as  if  one  pressed  powerfully  on  it,  with  a  dull  body."  ^H

Just  as  frequent  as  the  cramp-pain  is  in  the musculX^^


PLATINA.


409


tissue,  is  the  feeling  of  itching  in  the  skin.  We  find  it  ander
various  forms,  e.  g.  :

"  On  the  upper  margin  of  the  orbit  a  kind  of  sore,  eating
sensation,  as  if  caused  by  excoriation.

"  On  the  scrotum  a  frequent  sore,  corrosive  sensation,  as
if  from  excoriation  by  woolen  cloth,  so  that  he  must  change
his  position  frequently,  especially  when  sitting,  also  when
lying  in  bed ;  many  days,  above  and  around  the  ankle-joint
and  bones,  a  smarting  and  sore  gnawing  sensation ;  if,  when
walking,  the  clothes  strike  against  the  uncovered  foot,  the
part  pains  as  if  raw  and  excoriated  ;  sticking,  gnawing  in  a
small  spot  on  the  left  sole,  compelling  him  to  scratch  the
part

*'  Tingling  in  the  nose,  as  from  snuff,  or  as  before  epistaxis,
compelling  him  to  rub  the  nose,  causing  the  eyes  to  water,
and  inducing  a  vain  desire  to  sneeze.

'*  On  the  knuckles  and  finger,  a  burning  prickling,  as  if  he
had  touched  stinging  nettles,  compelling  him  to  scratch
vigorously.

'*  On  the  left  elbow,  a  kind  of  sore  burning,  as  if  scraped,
or  abraded  by  woolen  cloth.

"  On  the  right  temple,  formication,  passing  down  the  right
side  of  the  check  and  lower  jaw,  with  a  sensation  of  cold.

"  Formication  and  sensation  as  of  a  cold  breeze  in  the  left
hand.

"  At  a  little  spot  on  the  left  parietal  bone,  ai  inUrvaJs,  a
kind  of  dull,  corrosive  sticking."

A  peculiarity  of  the  itching,  burning,  prickling,  etc,  is,
that  the  scratching  and  rubbing,  to  which  they  usually
compel  the  patient,  afford  only  a  very  brief  amelioration.

Nearly  related  to  the  cramp-pain  of  Platina,  is  the  sensa-
tion of  contraction  and  constriction,  to  be  found  in  the
following  symptoms :

'■  The  head  seems  to  him,  as  it  were,  compressed  in  a
frame ;  a  dull,  painful  sensation.

"Cramp-pain  in  the  forehead,  as  if  between  screws.


4IO


PLATINA.


"  In  a  somewhat  wann  room  (with  many  persons),  first  a
feeling of  dullness  in the  sinciput,  as if  contracted  \ this
increases  more  and  more  to  a  violent  headache,  first, in  the
right  temple,  later,  in  the  whole  head,  but  always  worst  id
the  forehead ; a  dull, sometimes  dizzy  compression, nnth
very  cross  and  impatient  humor;  at  the  same  time  heat  id
the  upper  part  of  the  body,  especially  the  head;  an  anxiots
sweat  seems  about  to  break  out ;  every  minute,  a  flash  of
heat  runs  over  him ;  nothing  relieves  this  condition,  which,
if  it  moderate  for  an  instant,  returns  quickly  with  violcnoe! .
In  the  evening,  when  standing  in  the  cool  air,  he  is  uncoir^^
monly  warm  (no  thirst). When  beginning  to  walk,  after  ^

short  rest,  the  brain  Ls  painful,  as  if  shaken,  or,  as  if  a  seic^g^^.
tive  ball,  lying  loose  in  the  head,  struck  against  the  crai^  ^^
walls.  In  the  evening,  in  bed,  in  addition  to  the  dull  feel^  '^ml
in  the  forehead,  a  roaring  in  the  ears ;  tlien,  when  the  P^k..^S)||
abate,  he  sleeps.

"Tensive,  dull  feeling  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  just  on g._jK
occiput,  as  if  tightly  bound  together.

"  A  kind  of  spasmodic  contractive  sensation  darts  qai<
and  suddenly  from  the  right  temple,  through  the  head,
the  lcf%  temple;  later,  the  head  feels  numb  and  tremblS^a^
on  both  sides,  as  if  a  cloth  were  wound  tightly  about  it

"  In  the  left  great  toe,  a  painful  sensation,  as  if  tig^l^  dy
bandaged."

It  is  characteristic  of  the  morbid  phenomena  induced byJ
Platina,  that  they  often  appear  at  regular  rhythmical  int^<i-
vals,  and,  beginning  feebly,  become  more  violent,  and tMnta
again  diminish  in  intensity.

•'  In  the  epigastrium,  to  the  left,  a  few  violent,  dull  stit^^^^^Sj
like  shocks,  at  long  intervals.

"  In  the  left  ulna,  two  inches  from  the  wrist,  at  intetTi^^**t
pain  in  evcr>'  position,  like  a  kind  of  jerking,  espcciall^i^
the  tendons.

"  Below  the  knee,  from  the  right  tibia  down,  painful  sH'
at  irregular  intervals,  as  from  a  dull  instrument


PLATINA.


4!  I


"A  pressing  cramp-pain  in  the  left  temple,  beginning
moderately,  and  rising  and  falling  in  severity.

"  In  left  side  of  thorax,  a  cramp- tike  pain,  moderate  at
first,  gradually  increasing,  and  then  decreasing.

'*  On  top  of  the  right  shoulder,  a  pain  as  from  a  blow,
moderate  at  first,  then  gradually  increasing,  and  then
decreasing."

A  farther  peculiarity  of  the  Platina  symptoms  is  that  they
become  aggravated  by  sitting  and  standing,  and  arc  alleviated
by  wallcing, — a  feature  agreeing  exactly  with  the  general
character  of  the  drug.

The  following  symptoms  come  under  this  head:

"  When  sitting  and  standing,  a  painful  feeling  of  weakness
in  the  whole  right  limb,  especially  in  the  superficial  muscles
of  both  thighs,  as  if  beaten,  with  a  tremulous  uneasiness.

"  When  sitting,  a  dull  pain,  as  from  a  fall,  in  the  head  of
the  left  thigh.

"  Great  weakness  in  the  knee-joints  and  surrounding  parts,
even  when  sitting,  but  especially  when  standing,  making  him
sway  back  and  forth  involuntarily.

"  When  walking,  he  feels  but  little  weakness;  but.  so  soon
as  he  sits,  the  feet  are  as  if  tired,  trembling,  and  full  of
uneasiness."

Another  characteristic  of  the  Platina  symptoms  is  the
evening  exacerbation.

"  Spasmodic  jerkings  down  the  left  thigh,  and  feeling  of
numbness  in  the  legs  and  feet  when  sitting,  especially  in  the
evening.

"  Feeling  of  fatigue  in  the  soles,  with  a  sensation  as  if
they  were  swollen  around  the  ankles.  When  sitting,  the
fatigue  ascends  gradually  into  the  calves,  with  a  sensation  as
if  they  were  stretched,  in  the  evening.
•  "  In  the  afternoon  and  evening  she  feels  in  her  worst
humor."

A  farther  peculiarity  of  Platina,  which  should  not  be  over-
looked, is  that  strikingly  prominent  sensation  of  eotd  and


4»a


PLATINA.


ehiUimess  which,  as  already  stated,  attends  manjr  phe
and  often  appears  independently. We  shall  be  less  lilre^
r^ard  this  chilliness  and  feeling  of  coldness as  a
symptom,  or  a  disturbance  in  the  sphere  of  the  Sym
inasmuch  as  we  perceive  no  reaction  of  any  kind, —
sweat,  or  change  of  pulse.

TTiese  phenomena  of  chill  and  coldness  are,  here,  ntfatri
reflex  action  on  the  sensitive  nervous  system,  depcndema
the  torpor  peculiar  to  this  drug.  I  do  not  therefore
to  cite  here  the  following  symptoms :

"Chill,  with  chattering  of  the  teeth,  in  the  evening,  iriia
undressing.

"  Constant  feeling  as  if  he  should  freeze,  with  ffgqwfit
shuddering  down  the  limbs,  especially  in  the  open  air>  cnb
when  it  is  warm.

"  Cold,  with  shivering  over  the  whole  body,  down  to  At
feet.

"  Cold  chill  running  over  the  back.

"  Shivering  from  cold,  evening.

"  Constant  shuddering  through  the  whole  body,  e^>ecU^
the  limbs,

"Frequent  shuddering  from  above,  down  the  arm  and  the
whole  body,  with  horripilation.

"A  shiver  runs  over  her  when  she  steps  from  her  ^^hanrt*^
into  the  open  air.

"  Sudden  shiver  on  head,  chest,  and  arms,  after  en
warm  room.

"  Shivering  in  the  forenoon,  with  drowsiness.

"  She  becomes  suddenly  quite  warm,  and  fancies  she
very  red,  although  her  complexion  is  as  usual."

I  have  dwelt  at  somewhat  greater  length  on  the  funcdonsi
affections  of  the  sensitive  nerves,  because  it  is  in  just  tbex
effects  that  many  peculiarities  and  characteristic  features  «f
Platina  arc  most  strikingly  prominent;  for  phenomena  present
.themselves  here,  as  we  have  seen,  which  serve  as  important
points  in  the  general  indications  of  the  remedy.


PLATINA.


413


It  only  remains,  for  the  sake  of  completeness,  to  cite  a  few
symptoms,  which,  even  if  of  no  great  importance,  yet  serve
to  fin  out  the  picture  of  the  Platina  disease.  These  symp-
toms relate  to  the  oi^ns  of  special  sense:


VI. AFFECTIONS OF THE SENSORIAL NERVOUS SYSTEM.


"Painful  drawng  around  the  left  eye,  seeing  as  if  through
gauze,  and  sensation  as  of  the  eyes  being  agglutinated.  The
eyes  are  painful  when  using  them  in  the  evening,  at  candle-
light, and  when  exerting  them  ;  they  first  itch,  obliging  her
to  rub  them ;  then  they  suppurate,  are  very  painful,  see  a
tremulous  and  twinkling  light,  obliging  her  to  close  them,
and  making  it  impossible  for  her  to  sec  any  object

"  Tingling  of  the  ears ;  tingling  of  the  cars,  afterward
tearing  in  the  same;  whizzing  in  the  ears,  with  stitches  in
the  head ;  noise  in  the  cars,  as  of  the  wind  blowing  into  them,
increased  by  the  least  noise  to  such  an  extent  that  she  has
great  difficulty  in  hearing  others ;  roaring  in  the  right  ear ;
noise  in  the  right  ear,  as  of  the  wing  of  a  large  bird ;  dull
roaring  and  rolling  in  the  ear  every  morning,  and  afterward
every  evening  after  lying  down,  at  the  same  hour  for  several
weeks;  duU  roaring  in  the  right  ear,  with  obtusion  of  the
head  from  a  sort  of  cramp-like  pressure;  jerks  in  the  right
car  like  distant  thunder."

h'tnally,  a  few  symptoms  belonging  to  the  male  genital
system  remain  to  be  cited :

"Erections  toward  morning.

"  Constant  erections  during  steep,  with  amorous  dreams.

"  Constant  erections  at  night  without  seminal  emission,  and
without  many  dreams.

"Embrace  with  little  pleasure,  and  very  brief."

These  symptoms  agree  with  the  general  character  of
Platina.  The  erections  arc,  if  I  may  use  the  expression,
passivt,  and  are  attended by  no  desire;  hence,  erections


414


PLATINA.


without  emission  and  embrace  of  short  duration with  very
little  pleasure.

Having  thus  taken  a  survey  of  the  general  and  special
sphere  of  action  of  Platina,  I  shall  now  consider  several
remedies  that  are  related  to  it,  and  briefly  refer  to  the
diagnostic  difference  between  them  and  Platina.  First  of  all
t  name  Asafatida.  This  remedy,  as  well  as  Platina,  exhibits
many  of  the  phenomena  of  hysteria,  but  of  an  altogether
different  form  of  that  disease.  Menstruation,  too,  is  rendered
more  frequent  by  Asafcctida ;  still,  however,  it  remains  scan^.
The  hysteric  perversion  of  the  disposition  and  maraU  are
clearly  induced,  it  is  true,  by  Asafoelida,  and  even  the  globus
hystericus  is  present ;  but  then  Asafstida  fails  to  induce  the
disposition  to  weep,  the  fear  of  death,  the  abscnt-mindednesa,
the  self-exaltation  above  others,  which  are  so  peculiar  to  Platina.

The  affections  of  the  vegetative  nervous  system  induced
by  Asafoetida  arc  eminently  of  a  spasmodic  nature,  as  well
as  those  induced  by  Platina ;  but  they  seem  to  depend
partly  upon  a  peculiar  gastric  condition  and  partly  on
obstructions  in  the  portal  system.  Asafuetida  aflccts  the
periosteum,  for  which  Platina  has  no  affinity  at  all.  Oa  the
other  hand,  AsafcEtida  has  the  trembling,  the  cramp-Like
sensations,  ceasing  and  re-appearing  at  regular  intervals,
aggravated  by  sitting,  and  ameliorated  by  walking,  in  cotn-
mon  with  Platina,  although  with  various  modifications  and
under  di/Tcrcnt  conditions.  The  paralytic  condition  is  not  so
clearly  developed  in  the  action  of  Asafcetida.  But  the
phenomena  which  most  strikingly  distinguish  Asafcetida
from  Platina  arc  the  symptoms  of  congestion  and  fever,
which,  a.s  wc  have  seen,  are  altogether  wanting  to  the  latter.
Hence  it  follows,  that  torpor  and  inactivity,  and  prostration
of  the  functions,  do  not  make  up  the  character  of  Asafcetida;
but,  as  a  rule,  most  of  its  effects  upon  the  brain  and  spinal
cord  appear  to  be  rcHcx  effects  from  affections  of  tlie  vegeta-
tive nervous  system,  whereas  the  action  of  Platina  upon
these  central  organs  is  independent  and  primary.


PLATINA.


415


Crocus,  altliough  far  more  widely  different  than  Asafccdda
from  Platina,  may  yet  be  reckoned  among  the  related
remediea,  becauiie,  perhaps,  of  its  al!inity  for  the  female
organism,  and  of  its  action  on  the  morale  and  the  dispositioD.
The  too  early  and  too  copious  menstruation  and  the
metrorrhagia  which  Crocus  induces  depend,  however,  on  an
overloading  of  the  uterine  vessels  with  blood;  hence,  the
blood  is  black  and  clotted;  and,  hence,  the  haemorrhages
which  occur  also  in  other  organs  are  easily  provoked  by
motion  or  exertion.  The  moral  effects  arc  directly  opposed
to  those  of  Platina.  In  the  case  of  the  latter  wc  have  weep-
ing and  fear  of  death;  in  that  of  the  former,  laughing  and
unrestrained  merriment;  but  the  frequent  alternation  of
cheerfulness  and  ^dness  is  a  feature  common  to  both
remedies.  When  I  add,  in  conclusion,  that  the  majority  of
the  morbid  phenomena  of  Crocus  are  induced  by  congestions,
venosity,  and  other  abnormal  states  of  liie  vascular  system,
we  at  once  perceive  the  distinctions  between  the  remedies.

PuhatiUa  is  in  several  aspects  similar  and  related  to
Platina.  But,  from  the  very  fact  that  it  is  a  polychrcst, —
that  is,  that  it  acts  in  very  many  ways,  and  exerts  its  healing
power  in  a  great  number  of  acute  as  well  as  chronic  diseases,
— the  difference  of  its  character  from  that  of  Platina  may,
notwithstanding  their  similarity,  be  clearly  seen.  It  would
lead  me  too  lar  to  unfold  this  difference  in  all  its  aspects;
this  may  be  done  with  greater  propriety  when  treating  of
Pulsatilla.  Only  tliis  much  I  may  say:  that  the  similarity
of  Pulsatilla  to  Platina  is  shown  most  clearly  in  their
respective  moral  effects,  and  in  their  action  on  the  female
sexual  system.  But  even  in  these  symptoms  there  are
important  differences,  the  psychical  effects  of  Pulsatilla  con-
sisting chiefly  in  fretfulness,  complaint,  and  lamentation,  and
the  disposition  to  weep  which  belongs  to  this  remedy,  arising
rather  out  of  tluu  conditions  ;  whereas,  the  weeping  induced
Xf^  Flad'na  b  a  result  of  apprehensiveness  and  of  weakness
of  disposition.


416


PLATINA.


With  regard  to  menstruation.  Pulsatilla  induces  a  number
of  abnormal  symptoms,  retards  the  menses,  and  causes  a
discharge  of  black  clotted  blood.  Hence,  Pulsatilla  is  not
improperly  regarded  as  antidote  to  Platina.

Last  of  all,  it  remains  to  mention  Pluntbum  atttimm,
which  shows  much  resemblance  to  Platina  in  its  spasrootix
and  paralytic  symptoms ;  but  whereas  in  the  case  of  Platiitt
these  are  primary,  in  that  of  Plumbum  they  arc  secondary.
On  thb  account,  too.  Platina  is  the  remedy  for  certain  cases
of  lead-colic.  These  two  metals  stand  almost  in  the  same
relation  that  Arsenic  and  Carbo  vegetabilis  hold.  Tbe
tendency  to  decompose  everything  of  an  organic  natures
common  to  these  two  remedies;  but  Arsenic  induces  iBs
decomposition  after  a  previous  over-excitement  and  too
strong  impression  upon  the  organism,  while  the  pecuUaritf
of  inducing  decomposition  is  a  part  of  the  primary  action  i
Carbo.

The  dose  in  which  Platina  may  be  given  is  various.  I  have
generally  given  the  second  or  third  trituration,  witli  the  best
results;  but  I  doubt  not  that  it  is  active  in  higher  potencies,
this  being  attested  by  the  experience  of  competent  physi-
cians.


REMARKS  ON  RUMEX  CRISPUS.


My  clinical  experience  of  the  last  two  years  has  given  me
a  feeling  of  great  gratitude  to  Dr.  Joslin,  for  his  introduction
of  Rumcx  Crispus  to  the  profession  by  his  excellent  proving.
The  value  of  the  published  proving  is  much  enhanced  by
the  publication  of  the  daily  records  of  each  prover,  which
enable  the  student  to  appreciate  tlie  consccuftvc  action  of
the  drug  much  more  perfectly  than  the  Hahncmannian
scheme  allows,  while  the  latter,  again,  is  indispensable  to  the
prcscribcr.

I  have  used  Rumex  chiefly  in  acute  catarrhal  aficctions  of
the  larynx,  trachea  and  bronchi.  In  these  cases  it  seems  to
me  to  present  a  close  analogy  in  its  action,  to  Belladonna,
Lachcsis,  Phosphorus  and  Causticum.  Without  assuming
to  present  an  exhaustive  analysis  of  the  action  of  Rumex
on  the  respiratory  organs,  I  proceed  to  state  the  indica-
tions for  its  use  to  which  my  studies  of  it  thus  far  have
led  me.

Rumex  diminishes  the  secretions,  and  at  the  same  time
exalts  in  a  very  marked  manner  the  sensibility  of  the  mucous
membrane  of  the  larynx  and  trachea,  exceeding  in  the  extent
of  this  exaltation  any  remedy  known  to  us.  The  cough
therefore  is  frequent  and  continuous  to  an  extent  quite  out
of  proportion  to  the  degree  of  organic  alTection  of  the
mucous  membrane.  It  is  dry,  occurs  in  long  paroxysms,  or,
under  certain  circumstances,  is  almost  unintcmtpted.  It  is
Induced  or  greatly  aggravated  by  any  irregularity  of  respira-
tion such  as  an  inspiration  a  little  deeper  ur  more  rapid
than  usual,  by  the  inspiration  of  air  a  little  colder  than
that  previously  inhaled,  by  irregularity  of  respiration  and
23


4i8


REMARKS ON RUMEX CRTSPUS.


irregular  motion  of  the  larynx  and  trachea  such  as  are
involved  in  the  act  of  speech  and  by  external  pressure  upon
the  trachea,  in  tlic  region  of  the  supra-sternal  fossa.  These
phenomena  show  a  very  great  morbid  irritability  of  the
mucous  membrane  of  the  larynx  and  trachea.

The  subjective  symptoms  are  rawness  and  soreness  in  the
trachea,  extending  a  short  distance  below  the  supra-sternal
fossa  and  laterally  into  tlic  bronchi,  chiefly  to  the  left ;  and
tickling  in  the  supra-sternal  fossa  and  behind  the  sternum,
provoking  the  cough ;  this  tickling  is  very  annoying  and
very  persistent,  and  is  often  but  momentarily,  and  sometimes
only  partially,  relieved  by  coughing.  The  cough  occurs
chiefly,  or  is  much  worse  in  the  evening,  after  retiring,  and
at  that  time  the  membrane  of  the  trachea  is  particularly
sensitive  to  cold  air  and  to  any  irregularity  in  the  flow  of  air
over  its  surface,  so  that  the  patient  often  covers  the  head
with  the  bedclothes  to  avoid  the  cold  air  of  the  apartmeoC,
and  refuses  to  ^eak  or  even  to  listen  to  conversation,  lest
his  attention  should  be  withdrawn  from  the  supervision  of
his  respiratory  acts,  which  he  performs  with  tlie  most  careful
uniformity  and  deliberation, — and  all  in  the  hope  of  pre-
venting the  distressing  tickling  and  the  harassing  cough  which
would  ensue  from  a  neglect  of  these  precautions.  I  have
frequently  witnessed  tliis  state  of  tilings  during  the  last  three
years,  and  have  invariably  given  prompt  relief  with  Rumex.

In  the  group  of  remedies  in  which  I  have  placed  Rumex
(along  with  Belladonna,  Lachesis,  Phosphorus,  Causticum)^
it  stands  pre-eminent  in  respect  to  the  extreme  sensibility
of  the  tracheal  mucous  membrane.  All  of  these  remedies
produce  symptoms  identical  in  kind.  The  characteristic  of
each  is  to  be  found  in  the  relative  degree  in  which  each
symptom  is  pronounced  in  the  different  remedies,  quite  as
much  as  in  the  possession  by  any  one  of  them  of  symptoms
not  produced  by  the  others.

Thus  Belladonna,  Lachesis  and  Rumex,  produce  each,  a
dry  cough,  induced  by  tickling  in  the  larynx  or  trachea  and^;^


I


RBHARKS  ON RUMEX CRISPUS.


419


I


provoked  by  deep  inspiration,  by  speaking,  and  by  external
pressure  on  the  larynx  or  trachea.  Kach  produces  soreness
or  rav'ncss  of  the  lar>'nx  or  trachea.  The  cough  of  each  is
spasmodic  and  long-continued,  and  is  worse  at  night  after
retiring.  But,  apart  from  the  fact  that  Belladonna  and
L^chesis  act  more  upon  the  larynx,  and  Rumex  more  upon
the  lower  part  of  the  trachea,  we  observx  that,  in  tlie  case
of  Lachests,  Uie  slightest  external  pressure  on  the  larynx  or
trachea  produces  violent  and  long-continued  spasmodic
cough ;  the  patient  cannot  endure  the  least  constriction  in  that
region,  not  even  the  ordinary  contact  of  his  clothing.  There
is,  moreover,  a  sense  of  fullness  in  the  trachea  and  a  very
painful  aching  in  the  whole  extent  of  the  os  hyoides.  In
the  case  of  Belladonna  not  only  is  cough  produced  to  a
moderate  extent  by  pressing  upon  the  larynx,  but  soreness
and  pain  are  experienced  with  a  sense  of  internal  fullness
and  soreness  which  at  once  suggest  the  presence  of  acute
laryngitis  submucosa.  In  Rumex,  on  the  other  hand,
there  is  no  sensibility,  strictly  speaking,  of  the  trachea,  but
simply  such  an  irritability  of  the  mucous  membrane  that
cough  is  produced  by  the  change  of  position  induced  in  that
membrane  by  external  pressure  on  the  trachea.  As  regards
the  extent  and  intensity  of  this  symptom,  Rumex  holds  a
lower  rank  than  the  other  remedies  named.

But  the  irritability  of  mucous  membrane  by  virtue  of
which  cough  is  induced  by  hurried  or  deep  inspiration  or  by
speaking,  while  it  is  common  to  Belladonna,  Lachcsis,
Rumex  and  Phosphorus,  is  produced  in  the  most  exalted
d^ree,  as  we  have  already  seen,  by  Rumex,  which,  as
regards  this  symptom,  takes  first  rank.  A  sensation  of
rawness  or  roughness  in  the  larynx,  trachea  and  bronchi  is
produced  by  each  of  the  four  remedies  above  named,  but
the  locaiity  and  the  degree  in  which  it  is  produced  vary  in
^  such  a  manner  as  to  serve  in  some  measure  as  a  character-
H  istic  of  each.  It  is  most  marked  in  Phosphorus  and  Bella-
H donna,  less  prominent  in  Rumex,  and  least  of  all  in  Lachesis.


4a»


REMARKS ON RUMEX CRISPUS.


In  Belladonna  and  T^chesis  it  is  most  marked  in  the  larj'nx;
indeed  it  is  almost  confined  to  that  region.  Rumcx  pro-
duces it  in  the  trachea  and  upper  part  of  tlic  bronchi,  while
Phosphorus  induces  it  in  the  whole  mucous  tract  from  the
larynx  to  the  smaller  bronchi;  and,  moreover,  in  the  Phos-
phorus proving  this  "rawness "  of  the  air-passages  is  accom-
panied by  a  00  less  characteristic  sense  of  weight  and
constriction  across  the  upper  part  of  the  thorajc,  which
indicates  an  affection  of  the  finer  air-tubes  and  of  the  air-
vesicles  of  such  a  character  as  seriou&Iy  to  impede  the  func-
tion of  respiration.  In  considering  this  last  symptom  we
must  mention  Causticum  also,  which  produces  "rawness"
extending  the  whole  length  of  the  sternum.

All  five  remedies,  again,  produce  hoarseness  ;  Phosphorus,
Causticum  and  Belladonna  most  eminently,  Rumex  less
decidedly,  and  Lachesis  in  a  still  less  degree.  As  regards
complications,  Belladonna  and  Lachesis  apply  especially  to
those  which  involve  the  fauces  and  pharynx,  and  are«cute,
the  one  of  a  sthenic,  the  other  of  an  asthenic  character;
Phosphorus  to  those  of  the  pulmonary  tissues  of  a  definite
inflammatory  character,  and  Rumex  to  certain  affections  of
the  lungs  and  tlieir  envelopes  of  which  the  nature  is  not
clearly  defined  in  the  proving.  They  are  indicated  by  pains,
generally  sub-acute,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  lung  near  the
clavicle  and  axilla,  and  more  frequent  In  tlie  lefl  than  m  the
right  lung.

In  addition to  these observations  on the respiratory
Cleans,  I  have  noticed,  in  one  case,  the  cessation  of  a  browo
watery  diarrhoea  after  the  administration  of  Rumex. A  boy
of  five years  had  brown  watery  diarrhcea,  chiefly  io the
morning,  having  five  stools  from  five  to  nine  A.  M.,  attended ^
with  moderate  griping  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdo— ^  ,
men. This continued several days, notwithstanding twc:^  -,
prescriptions  which  I  made  for  it. Observing  that  the  bo]^^
had  a  cough  which  presented  the  characteristic  features  oa^
the  Rumex  cough,  I  gave  that  remedy,  and  both  diarrfaas^c^


REMARKS  ON  RUMEX  CRISPUS.


42 1


I


and  cough  were  speedily  cured.  The  symptom  "  brown
watery  dJarrhcca"  occurs  once  in  the  provings.  In  relating
this  case  I  cannot  forbear  remarking  that  had  I  been  more
careful  to  collect  and  consider  the  tctaUty  of  tlu  symptoms,
embracing  cough  as  well  as  diarrhoea,  I  should  have  given
Riunex  at  first,  instead  of  making  two  blundering  prescrip-
tions on  the  basis  of  a  partial  view  of  the  symptoms  which
embraced  the  diarrha'a  alone.

The  following  case  from  my  clinical  record  will  illustrate
the  character  of  tlic  Rumex  cough  :

M.,  aged  twenty-two,  of  feeble  constitution,  strumous,
subject  for  several  years  to  sub-acute  rheumatism;  has  had
a  severe  cold  for  several  days,  and  is  now  confined  to  the
bed.  The  pulse  is  quick,  not  hard,  1 10,  skin  moderately  hot
and  dry,  face  somewhat  flushed.  Respiration  embarrassed
not  so  much  by  any  constriction  of  the  chest  as  by  the
violent  and  long-continued  cough  which  follows  any  attempt
to  make  a  full  inspiration.  A  physical  examination  of  the
<:hest  reveals  no  abnormal  condition.  The  patient  complains
of  roughness  and  soreness  in  the  lower  part  of  the  trachea
and  behind  the  upper  third  of  the  sternum,  much  more  per-
ceptible when  she  coughs.  The  cough  is  dry,  slightly
hoarse,  very  violent  and  fatiguing  to  the  patient.  It  is  pro-
voked by  a  tickling  in  the  supra-sternal  fossa;  is  induced
by  pressure  upon  the  trachea  in  that  region,  and  especially
by  talking  and  by  deep  inspiration  or  by  the  inspiration  of
cool  air.  Tliis  irritability  of  the  trachea  increases  very
markedly  after  7  P.  M.,  so  that  the  patient  suffers  exceedingly
from  the  constant  tickling  and  violent  cough.  She  can  pre-
vent them  only  by  respiring  with  vcrj'  great  caution  and
deliberation,  by  avoiding  all  distractions  of  speech  and  con-
versation, and  finally  she  draws  the  bedclothes  over  the
head  in  order  to  avoid  inhaling  the  cool  air  of  the  chamber.

This  patient  states  that  she  has  frequently  had  such  coughs
as  this,  and  they  have  proved  very  obstinate  although  under
skillful  homceopathic  treatment I  gave  Rumex"  in  solution.


422  REMARKS  ON  RUHEX  CRXSPUS.

a  tea-spoonful  every  two  hours.  After  tlie  second  dose  there
was  complete  relief.  The  next  evening,  a  very  slight  diq»-
sidon  to  cough. No  further  symptoms.

I  supplied  the  patient  with  Rumex",  and  advised  her  to
use  it  at  once  on  the  occurrence  of  such  a  cough,  and  I  am
informed  that  she  has  always  succeeded  in  subduing  the
cough  within  twelve  hours.


»


REMARKS  ON  GUAO.'


Tlie  Guao  is  undoubtedly  the  "Comocladia  dentata,"
belonging  to  the  same  family  as  the  Rhus  toxicodendron
and  venenata,  and  the  Anacardium  occidentale  or  Cashew-

"  Ana£ardia£ea.  Comocladia  dentata(Guao).  St  Domingo

suid  Cuba. A  tree. Stem  erect,  not  much  branched. Leaves

pinnated,  shining  and  green  above  ; with  a  round  rachis  six

i.nches  long ;  leaflets  six  to  ten  on  each  side,  with  an  odd

one,  oblong,  acuminate,  ^ring- toothed,  veiny  and  somewhat

«iowny  at  the  back. Juice  milky,  glutinous,  becoming  black

t>y  exposure  to  the  air,  staining  the  linen  or  the  skin  of  the

same  color,  only  coming  olT  with  the  skin  itself,  and  not

xemovable  from  linen  by  washing  even  if  repeated  for  many

years  successively. It  is  supposed  by  the  natives  of  Cuba.

that it  is death  to  sleep  beneath its  shade,  especially  for

^rsons  of  a  sanguine  or  fat  habit  of  body. This  is  firmly

l)elieved,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  the  most

dangerous  plant  upon  the  island."

An  interesting  article  upon  the  "  Comocladia  dentata
(Guao)."  by  J.  G.  Houard.  M.  D.,  Philadelphia,  comprising
contributions  toward  a  proving  of  this  plant,  and  some
symptoms  removed  by  its  administration,  was  published  in
the  Philadelphia  Journal  of  Homaopatky}

It  seems  not  irrelevant  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that
the  Guao  (Comocladia  dentata)  may  possibly,  from  the
similarity  of  the  names,  be  confounded  with  the  Guaco
(Mikania  guaco).  a  totally  different  plant

*  Nolet  appended  to  x  Paper  on  ■  Fi»»  MfJita,  page  189,  (  $9t(.

O«io,  wriiwn  by  Dr.  Jorf  J.  Navarro,  ■  \<A.  n.  (No.  t),  page  73  tl  Jtf.,

of  Cuba. AmMMm  Hamx^falkk  Kt-  Ma;,  1854.
^*«»,  vol.  iii.,  Harcb.


4H


REMARKS  ON GUAO.


The  Guaco  (Mikania  guaco)  is  a  climbing  plant  used  in
Central  and  South  America  as  an  antidote  to  the  poison  of
serpents.  It  is  incidentally  alluded  to  by  Humboldt:'
"The  liana,  called  vejuco  de  guaco  (Mikania),  which  M.
Mutro  has  rendered  so  celebrated,  and  which  is  the  most
certain  remedy  for  the  bite  of  venomous  serpents."

"  Forster,  Schomburgh,  Poppig  and  Tschudi,  agree  tiiat
in  South  America  the  Mikania  guaco  is  the  best  remedy  for
the  bite  of  venomous  serpents,  and  that  it  has  in  innumer-
able instances  demonstrated  its  specific  curative  power.  The
freshly  expressed  juice  of  this  creeping  plant  is  dropped  into
the  somewhat  dilated  wound,  the  surrounding  parts  arc
repeatedly  rubbed  and  covered  with  the  bruised  leaves,  and
the  juice  at  the  same  time  also  internally  taken.  It  is  effica-
cious against  the  bites  of  the  most  venomous  serpents.  It  b
also  used  as  a  prophylactic."'

Turchetti  states  that  Guaco  locally  applied  destroys  the
specific  property  of  the  pus  from  a  chancre,  and  prevents  the
production  of  a  second  chancre  by  inoculation.  He  also
claims  for  it  podtive  curative  powers  in  syphilis.'

Lindlcy  speaks  of  the  Guaco  as  follows* :  "  Aristolochlaccae
(Guaco).  The  Guaco  of  the  Caraccas.  reported  to  be  a
powerful  remedy  for  the  bites  of  serpents,  Is  said  by  Dr.
Hancock  to  be  some  plant  of  this  genus."

In  ^zAUgemtine Homceopaihiscfu  ZHtung^  in  a  letter  from
Bordeaux  it  is  stated,  "A  Mexican  physician  has  sent  hither
a  plant,  Houacou"  (evidently  the  same  as  Guaco),  "which  has
proved  very  curative,  in  Mexico,  in  certain  very  severe  mal-
adies possessing  great  similarity  to  cholera.  Our  physicians
have  made  successful  experiments  with  it;  out  of  eight
patients  to  whom  it  was  given,  six  were  cured.  •  •  A  few-
drops  administered  on  a  lump  of  sugar  restored  a  distinct
pulse  to  a  patient  who  had  already  become  quite  pulseless."


'  TVmftUi  Bohtt's  edition,  vol.  it.,

■  H«m^pathite!u  VitrUljakrukriJt,
4,  39>-39*-


*Schnud['K  Jahrbtuk,  Bd.  lOt,  pt
1 68.

*  Flem  lit^ktt^  P>e*  344*  (  9'$-

*  Vol.  L,  page  laS,  December,  illjl- .


%


REMAKKS  ON  GUAO.


4»5


In  the  Ailgenuinf  Hameeopathische  Ztitung;^  reference  is
made  to  an  article  by  Dr.  J.  G.  Houard,  of  Philadelphia,  in
line  North  Anuriean  Journal  of  Homxapathy}  This  article  is
a  translation  of  a  Spanish  pamphlet  on  Guaco  in  cholera.  It
gives  no  other  name  than  Guaco  to  the  remedy  used  and  no
description  of  the  plant  from  which  it  was  derived,  but  refers
to  an  article  on  the  subject  by  Dr.  Chalmers,  an  allopathist,
in  the  Diario  of  Havana.

In  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Homotopathtscht  KHnik*  it  is  stated
that  Guaco  was  recommended  in  cholera  by  Dr.  W.
Valentin.  It  had  already  been  recommended  in  1853  by
Otto,  of  Copenhagen,  for  gout,  asthma,  rheuma ;  by  Chabert.
in  Mexico,  for  cholera,  and  in  1836  had  been  used  with  good
effect  in  cholera,  by  Czeterkyn,  in  Poland.  In  1840,  Jobst  pub-
lished a  pamphlet  on  the  subject  giving  communications  from
the  then  President  of  Venezuela,  Dr.  Vargas  of  Caraccas.
According  to  the  latter,  Guaco  (in  form  of  tincture)  is  used  in
Caraccas  in  the  following  diseases:  it  cures  tlie  bites  of
poisonous  snakes ;  of  the  scorpions;  prevents  hydrophobia ;
antidotes  poisons ;  is  useful  in  relieving  pain  from  wounds
resulting  from  falls  or  floggings  (it  would  be  valuable  in
boarding-schools  and  on  the  plantation) ;  favors  menstrual
flow  and  removes  constipation;  is  efficacious  against  affec-
tions of  the  liver,  obstinate  ulcers;  is  said  to  prevent  and
cure  cancer;  has  a  happy  effect  in  spasm  of  the  stomach  and
consumption,  when  the  latter  depends  upon  menstrual  dis-
turbances ;  cures  asthma ;  cures  tertian  and  all  fevers  com-
plicated with  chill ;  is  a  powerful  anthelmintic ;  restores  the
functions  of  the  stomach  in  feeble  persons^  and  stimulates  the
circulation  ;  cures  megrim  radically ;  alleviates  toothache*. —
a  goodly  list  of  virtues  !

We  have  no  complete  proving  of  Mikania  guaco,  although


'  Vol.  H*.,  iMije  6,  1857.

■Vol.  ti.,page  t6.

'  Vol  Ui.,  page  94,  June,  1854.

*DieriaeA .Vewe Entilfchiitg,


MaUria  MtJiea,  i.,n,^J^I'*{/eb€r
Gmttv.  Sitttigart,  1840^  ■  Wim.
WMkmttkrift,  44."


426  REMARKS  ON  GUAO.

the  editor  of  the  Allgemeine  Hemaopatkiscke  Zeiiung  sbtes
that  one  has  been  made  by  Dr.  Elb,  of  Dresden.

Dr.  Elb  refers  to  this  in  an  article  on  "Spinal  Diseass''
(of  which  we  hope  soon  to  present  a  notice  to  the  readei)  ■
the  course  of  which  he  gives  the  pathogenesis  of  Guacoi
so  far  as  it  relates  to  symptoms  of  the  spinal  nervous  systtn.


^AUgtmtimt  ffamtupatKteht  Ztihmg,  61,  aa  and  43.


REMARKS  ON  SPIGELIA.'


To  take  a  general  view  of  the  action  of  Spigelia  upon  the
organism,  it  may  be  said  to  be  manifested  cliiefly  upon  the
nervous  system  of  animal  life.  Spigelia  is  eminent  among
the  remedies  of  cur  Materia  Medtca  for  the  extent  to  which
its  action  seems  to  be  exerted  upon  the  nerves  themselves
or  their  envelopes.  Upon  the  substance  of  the  turvotts
centers,  howe^'er,  its  action  is  probably  very  slight.

I.  Spigelia  excites  the  nerves  of  special  sense  In  a  marked
degree,  and  this  without  any  clearly  defined  inflammatory
affection  of  the  organs  of  special  sense.  In  this  regard,  it
differs  from  Belladonna,  Rhus,  and  other  remedies  which
excite  particularly  the  nervous  system  of  animal  life.  But
there  is  an  exception  to  this  statement.  In  the  tissues  of
the  eye  Spigelia  excites  inflammation,  its  symptoms  giving
a  well-marked  picture  of  rheumatic  sclerotitis.

Spigelia  exerts  a  marked  action  on  the  trifacial  nerve,
producing  prosopalgia,  which  involves  the  orbit,  the  zygoma
and  the  superior  maxilla ;  also  upon  the  nerves  of  the  tongue;
perhaps  also  upon  the  portio  dura.  The  prosopalgia  of
Spigelia  is  distinguished  by  sticking,  burning  pains  with
subsequent  swelling  and  soreness  of  the  parts  affected. In


'AUBUlt'i.N  V.,MMch  »6, 1877.

•  ■  '  •  In  (he  fifth  volume  of
the  AmfritoH  f/oitaopatkie  f^n'ifto,
pftge  5j7,  U  an  •rticle  on  Spigrlia
purporiinfE  to  have  been  read  by  mc
in  October,  1S64.  It  U  true  thai  I
naA  it.  uid  by  icquctt  of  Di.  Dun-
ham it  went  u  ray  poper,  dlhough
I  did  not  irrite  a  wgrd  of  it.


I>r.  Dunham  wu  its  author,  and  it
ahoutd  appear  in  any  collection  of  his
WTttings.  Dr.  Dunham's  reasons  for
wishing  it  10  appear  as  mine  vrere,  Chat
hf  waj  writing  so  much  (or  the
iftviftv,  that  he  was  gUd  to  have
some  other  name  appear  occasionally.
C.  W.  Bovcx.


42S


REMARKS  ON SPIGELIA.


this  respect  it  closely  resembles  the  prosopalgia  of  CoUi-
cum,  from  which,  however,  it  is  distinguished  by  the  n
able  exattaUon  of  the  special  senses  and by the
nervous  eretliism  and  excitement  and  intolerance  of
which  characterize  Spigclia,  whereas  Colchicum  on  the
hand has an  etjually  remarkable tolerance of pain,
patient,  enduring  disposition,  with  a  general  scmi-poral)
condition.

2.  Tliere  is  no  evidence  of  any  definite modificati'oii
the  organic  substance  of  any  part  of  the body,  unless
action  upon  the  pericardium  be  inferred  ex  usu  in  mariit.

3-  The  sphere  of  action  of  Spigclia  is  not  extensive  ll
embraces  the  nerves  of  animal  life  and  of  special  sense,  a^
the  fibrous,  and  perhaps  the  muscular,  tissues  of  the  hcaitxa^
of  the  smaller  extremities.

The  effect  of  Spigclia  upon  the  heart's  action  seems  to  bf
due  to  a  morbid  condition  which  the  drug  excites  in  tk
pericardium,  and  hence  its  value  in  pericarditis.

4.  The  pains  of  Spigclia  are  sticking,  tearing,  and  bum-
ing  pressing.  They  are  aggravated  by  motion  and  in  the
afternoon  and  at  evening.  Tliey  often  prevent  sleep.  Then
is  great  lassitude  and  heaviness  of  the  limbs.  Great  sen-
sibility of  the  whole  body  to  touch ;  the  least  touch  oa
any  part  of  the  body  sends  a  shudder  through  the  whole
frame.

5.  There  is  no  marked  periodicity  in  the  symptoms.

Let  us  now  examine  more  closely  tlie  different  parts  of  the
body  chiefly  affected.

Head.  There  is  vertigo  when  looking  down  and  when
walking.  The  memory  is  impaired,  and  mental  effort  is  vcrj-
irksome.

The  headache  is  very  characteristic  and  presents  a  good
picture  of  a  form  of  so-called  "nervous  headache."  Is
general,  the  sensations  are  dullness,  heaviness  and  pain  is
the  head ;  the  pain  is  much  increased  by  shaking  or  jarring
the  head,  as  by  walking,  especially  if  one  make  a  misstep.


REMARKS ON SPIGELIA.


429


or  cough  or snccse; by moving the  fadal  muscles; by

speaking  aloud  or  by  any  loud  noise,  as  well  as  by  touch  or

by  a  bright  light. These  things  increase  the  pain  so  that

it  seems  as  though  the  head  would  burst ;  the  patient  Is

compelled  to  support  it  with  the  hand,  or  to  bind  it  around.

(Here  we  have  headache  with  over-sensibility  of  the  senses

of  sight.'hearing  and  touch,  with  relief  from  binding  the  head.

These  symptoms  resemble  the  headache  of  Silicea,  which

has  likewise  exaltation  of  the  special  senses  and  relief  from

binding up the head, but it  is  to  be  carefully  noted,  as

characteristic, that the relief  to  the Spigelia headache

comes  from  the  pressure  of  the  bandage,  while  to  the  Silicea

lieadache, the relief is from tlic wannth ; for warmth

relieves  the  Silicea  headache,  while  it  rather  aggravates  the

lieadache  of  Spigelia.)

The  pains  are  a  heaviness  and  feeling  as  of  a  load  or
"^veightin  the  head;  a  pressing  from  without  inward^  aggra-
I  'vated  by  stooping  forward,  unless  the  forehead  is  supported
liy  the  hand ; a  sensation  of  swashing  and  surging  of  the
train  within  the  cranium  (compare  China  and  Rhus  and
JVpis)  at  every  step,  or  on  the  least  motion,  or  when  speaking
loudly,  and  very  severe  when  a  false  step  is  made  or  the
"body  is  jarred;  rcUeved  by  repose. This  swashing  sensation
is  often  accompanied  by  a  tearing,  digging  pain  in  some  small
well-defined  portion  of  the  head;  generally,  scmi-latcral,  as,
for  example,  in  the  left  parietal  region,  or  the  space  extend-
ing from  the  left  occiput  to  the  left  forehead. As  regards
and  is  often  confined  to  one  side ; more  frequently  the
left.

The  occiput  is  the  seat  of  many  pains  which  extend  into
the  nape  of  the  neck  causing  stilTness  and  at  the  same  time
restlessness.  In  the  forehead  and  in  the  frontal  protuber-
ances wc  find  pulsating  stitches;  pressure  from  witliout
inward;  boring  and  burning  pains;  the  latter  arc  probably
superficial  and  seated  in  the  supra-orbital  nerve. In  the


430


REMARKS  ON SPICELIA.


frontal  protuberances  tearing  pain extending  into  !iK<li]
and  aggravated  by  motion  of  the  globe  of  the  eye.

In  the  temporal  region  wc  find  pulsating^  stitches,  piivi |
inward  and  burning,  extending  into  the  zygoma.

We  pass  now  to  tlie  Eyes,  which  are  acted  upon  n«a»]
as  regards  the  tissues,  especially  the  muscular  and  13m  |
tissues,  but  also  as  regards  the  special  sense  of  vision.

In  addition  to  the  affections  of  the  eye  proper,  we  fiadiil
the  left  orbit  pressing  neuralgic  pains  extending  down  '.o4 1
zygoma  and  leaving  on  the  zygoma  a  tumor  which  is:
tivc  to  the  touch.

The  conjunctiva  is  moderately  inflamed.  There  fa  mode
ate  pain  as  if  sand  were  in  the  eye,  a  slight  secrctioBt
muco-pu.s  and  bland  lachrymation.

Tlie  affection  of  the  deeper  tissues  of  the  eyeball  Is  sbon
by  the  dull  and  flat  aspect  of  the  eye,  the  supra-orbital  piA
redness  and  inflammation  of  tlie  sclerotic  with ptous,  pn
in  eye  and  brow ;  the  eyeball  is  painful  w^hcn moved  ul
feels  tense  as  if  too  large  for  the  orbit  (Paris  quadriJblu):
sticking  pain  in  the  eye. The  eye  is  painful  when  vaatA
in  any  direction  (Bryonia),  an  intolerable  pressive  paiii,»]
great  that,  rather  than  endure  it,  tlie  patient,  when  desron
of  looking  from  side  to  side,  moves  the  whole  head,  tutdi'
of  merely  the  eyeball. Heat  ajid  burning  in  the  eyes.

Vision.  The  sensibility  of  the  retina  is  increased,  inducing
photophobia.  It  is  Ukewise  perverted,  causing  illusions,  »
if  hairs  or  feathers  were  on  the  lashes,  and  these  illustoos
are  increased  by  wiping  the  eyes;  sparks  and  a  sea  of  firt
The  pupils  arc  dilated.

The  sense  of  luaring  is  exalted  wf  connectu>H  with  dK
headache.

In  the  zygomatic  region  of  the  left  side  of  the  face,  bur
ing  or  tearing  pressive  pains  which  leave  a  dull  sensattoa'
swelling  as  the  pain  abates. There  arc  stitches  frotn
upper  maxilla  to  the  vertex.

We  pass  now  to  the  symptoms  of  the  thorax.


REMARKS  ON SPIGELU.


431


There  are  stitches  in  the  chest  in  various  parts;  and  on
both  sides,  most  frequently  the  left  TIicsc  stitches  arc  gen-
erally from  within  outward,  and  are  aggravated  by  respira-
tion {most  by  inspiration)  and  by  motion.  They  occur
under  the  nipple  of  either  side,  and,  on  the  left  side,  are
directed  toward  the  scapula  and  left  arm.

The  following  symptoms:  violent  stitch  in the  left  side
just  under  the  heart recurring  periodically ; stitch  in the
diaphragm  on  the  left  side,  so  violent  as  to  arrest  breathing  ;
dull  stitciics,  synchronous  with  tlie pulse,  in Uie  region  in
I  vbtch  the  heart's  impulse  is  felt ;  stitches  between  this  spot
and  the  epigastrium  ;^these  symptoms,  together  with  those
which  denote  modified  action  of  the  heart,  viz. :  very  violent
pulsation,  audible  to  the  patient  and  visible  to  the  by-stand-
ers  ;  violent  palpitation  and  anxiety ;  tremulous  motion  of
the  heart ;  palpitation  increased  by  sitting  down  and bend-
ing forward,  and  by  deep  inspiration  and retention  of  the
"breath ;  palpitation  as  soon  as  he  sits  down  after  rising  in
the morning,  and,  in  the  praecordial  region,  a  heavy  painful
pressing  load  causing  constriction  and  anxiety  with  cutting
and  griping  as  from  wind  in  the  abdomen  ; — tliese  symptoms
all  dearly  point  to  an  affection  of  the  heart  and  pericardium,
and,  in  such  diseases,  clinical  experience  has  shown  Spigelia
to  be  of  exceeding  value.
I Clinical  Indications. It  is  evident  from  our  hasty  and
partial  review  of  the  symptoms,  that  Spigelia  may  be  clearly
indicated  in  cases  that  would  come under  the  following
groups:

I.  Headaches;  generally  semi-lateral,  so-called  nervous;
accompanied  by  great  exaltation  of  the  special  senses  (com-
pare Silicea,  Conium);  aggravated  by  motion,  noise,  light  and
thought ;  involving  generally  the  Uft  eye  and  orbit  without
congestion  of  tlie  head.  In  such  affections  (if  attended,  as
frequently,  by  nausea  and  vomiting,  they  resemble  "  sick  head-
I  aches  ")  Spigelia  compares  with  Silicca,  Belladonna,  Apis,
Ignatia,  Thuja,  Sanguinaria.


432  REMARKS  ON  SPIGEUA.

2.  In  Sclerotitis.  Also  in  nasal  catarrh  when  the  dis-
charge is  chiefly  from  the  posterior  nares  into  the  pharynx,
and  attended  by  neuralgic  affections  of  tbe  pharynx  and
region  of  the  ear  and  lower  jaw,  provided  always  the  general
symptoms  correspond.

3.  Above  all,  in  acute  or  sub-acute  affections  of  the  heart
which  present  symptoms  similar  to  those  of  Spigelia  above
quoted,  it  is  an  invaluable  remedy ;  as  for  example,  in  acute
pericarditis,  with  anxiety  and  weight  in  the  praecordia,
stitches  through  the  heart  arresting  respiration,  oppressed
and  accelerated  palpitation  so  forcible  as  to  be  audible  and
visible,  and  excited  or  aggravated  by  change  of  position  or  by
the  slightest  motion.  In  such  cases,  Spigelia  compares  witii
Aconite,  Bryonia,  Kalmia,  Lach&sis,  Naja.  And  with  t}ie
new  remedy  Cactus  grandiflorus.


Dr.  harley  on  conium  maculatum.


The  idea  of  a  Materia  Medka  Pura — a  coHccrion  of  the
effects  of  drugs  upon  the  healthy — did  not  originate  with
Hahnemann.  He,  himself,  quotes  several  of  his  prede-
cessors— notably  Hallcr,  who  explained  and  urged  the
necessity  of  such  a  collection,  as  the  only  means  of  acquiring
an  exact  knowledge  of  the  relations  of  drugs  to  the  human
organism,  and  a  possible  key  to  their  therapeutic  use.  But
Hahnemann  was  the  first  physician  who  seriously  devoted
a  large  part  of  his  life  to  the  labor  of  ascertaining  these
effects,  and  making  such  a  collection.  Many  a  critic  has,
to  his  own  satisfaction,  demolished  Hahnemann's  work,  and
shown  the  fallacy  of  liis  demonstration  of  the  value  of  prov-
ing on  the  healthy.  And,  until  very  recently,  the  task
of  systematically  developing  the  pure,  that  is  xhc  physwhgi-
tai.  Materia  Medica  has  been  left  to  our  own  school  of
medicine.  But  the  same  mysterious  mental  and  moral
influences  which  have  "drifted"  the  dominant  school  into
admissions  of  the  (at  least  partial)  truth  of  the  law,  similia
similibus  curaniur;  into  advocacy  of  the  single  remedy  (in
theory  at  least) ;  and  into  the  concession  that  the  thera-
peutic power  of  a  drug  is  not  necessarily  in  the  direct  ratio
of  the  quantity,  have  recently  overtaken  prominent  phyn-
cians,  especially  of  Engliuid ;  and  Sir  lliomas  Watson  lias
distinctly  pointed  to  a  pure  Materia  Medica  as  a  possible
way  to  a  therapeutic  law,  and  an  escape  from  the  present
chaos  of  therapeutics.  And  Dr.  John  Harley,  of  London,
in  the  Gulstonian  Lectures  of  1868,  on  "The  Old  Vegetable
Neurotics,"  has  given  us  an  installment  of  the  "pure  Materia
Medica"  of  the  future,  as  the  allopathists  understand  and
S9


434  DR. HARLEV ON CONIUH MACtTUiTUX.

propose  to  construct  it  His  work  presents  tlie  pb3rsioki^
cal  action  and  therapeutic  use  of  Hemlock,  Opimm,  Bdk-
donna  and  Henbane,  alone  and  in  combinatioxi.

It  is  worthy  of  our  most  thoughtful  study.  We  mid
not  allow  a  pardonable  feeling  of  satisfaction  that  the  oppo-
nents who  would  have  overwhelmed  with  scorn  our  Bfaterii
Medica  Pura,  have  now  come  to  build  such  a  structure  fer
themselves  after  our  plan ;  nor  hug  ourselves  in  sclf-soffi-
ciency  because  they  disdain  to  use  the  materials  we  ban
lathered.

While  we  have  labored  in  our  departments  of  Mateiia
Medica  and  Therapeutics,  the  allopaths  on  their  side  hare
not  been  idle.  The  sciences  of  physiology,  pathology  and
organic  chemistry  have,  through  their  industry,  made  won-
derful advances,  and  now  all  the  resources  -which  these
sciences  afibrd  them  are  brought  to  assist  our  opponents
in  their  physiological  provings  of  drugs.  It  behooves  ns,
with  minds  devoid  of  prejudice  and  concat,  and  widi  a
teachable  spirit,  to  scrutinize  their  labors  and  canvass  their
achievements,  that  we  may  profit  by  their  contributions
to  useful  knowledge,  and  avoid  the  errors  into  which,  throng
an  erroneous  application  of  these  auxiliary  sciences,  they
may  chance  to  fall.

The  first  drug  treated  by  Dr.  Harley  is  the  Conium  mac-
ulatum.  We  propose  to  give  a  summary  of  his  pathogenesis,
and  his  views  of  the  therapeutic  uses  of  this  drug,  and  then
to  give  a  parallel  summary  of  Hahnemann's  provings  and
of  our  clinical  experience,  with  reflections  upon  the  similari-
ties and  differences.  A  similar  treatment  of  the  otiier
remedies  discussed  by  Dr.  Harley  will  follow.

Some  remarks  in  the  preface  are  worthy  of  quotation.
Dr.  Harley  says :

"  My  object  tliroaghout  has  been  to  ascertain,  dearly  and  definitelj,  tbe
action  of  the  drugs  employed  on  the  healthy  body  in  medicinal  doses,  from  the
smallest  to  the  largest;  to  deduce  simple  practical  condosions  ft-om  the  (act»
observed ;  and  then  to  apply  the  drug  to  the  relief  of  the  pftrticulv  oosdi-
tions  to  which  iu  action  appeared  suitable."


HARLTT  ON  COMtTH  MACULATUM.


435


A  hoouxopathist  might  almost  have  written  this,  certainly
^*»e  first  section. But  in  the  deduction  "of  simple  practical
^conclusions  from  the  facts  observed,*'  the  door  is  opened  to
■^ypothcsfa  and  error;  and  how  can  one  "apply  the  drug  to
^^c  relief,"  etc.,  unless  one  possess  a  therapeutic  law  e:<press-
»»ig the  relation  between  such  "conditions"  and  the  patho-
^cn  etic  "  facts  obscr\'ed  "  ? Here  are  the  weak  points  of  Dr.
X^Iarley's  system. Until  he  shall  have  a  therapeutic  law,
other  than  the  general  rule,  "causa  sublata,  toUitus  effeetus"
\\e. will be  unable to  apply tlie remedy tlicrapeutically,
except  through  the  inter^'ention  of  two  hypotheses,  one  in
pathology,  to  account  for  the  symptoms  of  the  patient,  and
tjie  other  tn  pathogeneay,  to  explain  the  phenomena  pro-
ciuced  in  the  drug-proving;  and  the  introduction  of  hypoth-
eses into  a  scientific  induction  makes  way  for  error.

X>x.  Harley  devoted  much  time  to  an  examination  of  the
■relative  value  of  the  different  officinal  preparations  of  Conium,

rost  of  which  he  regarded  as  destitute  of  medicinal  power.
Discarding  the  Timtura  conii  fruetus  the  Tinctura  ccnii
^dried  leaf),  and  the  Extractum  coiiii,  of  the  I^ndon
^  Pharmacopeia,  as  positively  or  comparatively  inert  he
■  regards  as  a  uniform  and  very  active  preparation.  We  may
^  say,  briefly,  that  his  process  is  substantially  the  same  as  that
employed  by  Messrs.  H.  M.  Smith  &  Brother,  the  well-
known  Homceopathic  Pharmaceutists  of  New- York.  Pcreira
wrote  in  1858:  "In  the  present  state  of  uncertainty  with
respect  to  the  real  physiological  operations  of  Hemlock,  it  is
obviously  impossible  to  lay  down  indications  for  its  use
whicli  can  be  much  relied  on."  Dr.  Harley  proved  Conium
first  on  himself  and  says:  "  Having  assured  myself  of  tlie
ejects  of  Hemlock  in  my  own  person,  1  have  thus  been  able
to  fully  appreciate  its  operations  in  others,  and  proceed  much
more  boldly  than  I  could  have  done  nithout  such  personal
knowledge."  It  would  be  a  satisfaction  to  add,  "more
inUUigtntly"  also.


436


DR. HARLEV  ON  CONIUM  MACULATUM.


"  PiyHtlffitai  Attivnif/ f/emhd.—ThK  JSrtt  efftct  of  /femUek'u  w*i^*»-

eiOB  or  tbe  motor  funcUon;  utl  lu  last  Is  tb«  cotoplete  obliiendoB  tld
miuctilat  notion  derived  from  the  ccrebro-ipiDftI  motor  tmcl.

"Afler  l^ing  Z  iij.  of  llie  Suemi  etnii,  I  set  out  walking;  maA  dtfCtAwfe
of  an  hour  afier  the  dose  I  felt  a  heavy,  dog^ng  icnKation  ia  nj  k^
There  was  a  lUsUnct  impaiimenl  of  ntotor  poirer.  I  fell,  so  to  spcaL  te
'  the  £0  *  was  taken  out  of  me.  It  was  oot  that  I  felt  tattgae  just  ihca.  Mi
SMnuaaif  a  Axxg  waii  suddenlj'  put  upon  me.  tad  thai  it  woald  bH«lKs
hnpouible  to  walk  fa&t  if  uiged  to  da  so.  After  walking  about  a  auk  i^tf
this  sensaiioD  w&j  vccy  decided,  and  on  pullia|[  a  fool  on  the  scnpcr  it  At
door  the  olh»  It^  was  ahat:;^'  ^^^  f^'^  aluiost  too  weak  to  support  oe.  V;
ntovemeala  appeared  clumsy  lo  mjrMlf,  and  it  teemed  neceaaary  dial  I  ihariE
make  an  tSotX  to  control  tliem.  At  tiie  aame  time  there  waa  a  shic^ilia^d
the  adaptation  of  the  ejre.  Mjr  vtiion  wax  good  for  fixed  objects  ;  bat  wfcn  ■
nnevcn  object  wax  pnt  in  motion  before  the  eyes,  there  wax  a  luue  and  dtaoaa
of  Tiiipn,  producing  a  feeling  of  giddinets.  The  pulae  and  pupils  were  «Mt
fedcd.  71/M  were  the  whole  nf  the  eSecU;  and, after  continuing  fornka^
they  rapidly  disappeared  and  left  m«  in  the  possession  of  my  tuo^  vigor.

"3.  If  a  strong,  active  individDil  take  five  or  ax  drmchns  of  the  Stttm*
gcttisg  up  in  the  morning,  and  itart  offfiir  a  long  watf.  he  will  be  oveitakaa
the  cosrse  of  half  or  three-quatlers  of  an  hour  irith  a  feeling  or  genen]  ttti
neits,  and  a  special  weakness  of  the  knees,  as  if  be  bad  been  reipilatly  tired  lai
by  walkingall  day  to  the  full  exieni  of  kin  powers.  If  he  be  unutaaDy actKl
and  strong  he  will  not, peihaps,  yield  to  the  inclination  to  rest,  but  wQlinciri
skiwly  on  his  way,  feeling  a  strange  lightness  and  powerle»«ness  of  Ibe  1^
with  a  tendency  to  drop  forward  on  his  knees.  1'his  will  be  assodated  v^i
some  gkddinesB.  and  a  feeling  of  bcavineia  over  the  eyes.  At  first  the  Mh
oflaDguoririll  be  most  oppressive,  bat  it  will  soon  become  loare  lolenhk:  *^
if  be  should  continue  the  journey  for  an  hour,  he  will  lind  that  the  faeSac  "^
fatigue  has  by  this  time  nearly  passed  oC  Id  the  course  of  another  bon  ht
will  be  ts  aciive  u  ever.

"3.  The  foUowinj;  were  the  effects  produced  la  my  own  person  duriaf  ■
period  otm/,  and  they  contrast  well  with  the  foregoing:

"Three-quaitcrs  of  an  hour  after  taking  live  drachms  and  a  haU  of  &nw
epmii,  on  raiting  my  eyes  from  the  object  on  which  they  had  been  &ied  1*1
more  distant  one,  the  visiou  was  confused,  and  a  fccUng  of  giddlDeas  sadfaiR
came  over  me.  That  these  symptoas  were  due  lo  impatniKnt  of  powvbtk
muscular  apparatus  employed  in  the  adaptation  of  the  eye.  waa  obriovs  to  mi;
for,  so  long  as  my  eyes  were  fixed  on  a  given  object,  the  giddioeaa  dJaapmunL
and  the  definition  and  capacity  of  vision  for  the  minutest  objects  we>*  nt*
paired.  But  the  instant  thai  I  directed  the  eyes  to  aaotber  object,  all  mt  Iw
and  confusion,  and  I  felt  giddy ;  and  in  order  to  reeorcr  my  viuon  and  dia^
the  sense  of  giddiness,  it  was  neceuary  tolayhold  upon  some  otiicci,asit  wtn.
with  my  eyes,  and  rest  them  securely  upon  it.  It  was  clear  to  me  M>«'  >W
adjusting  muscular  apparatus  of  the  eye  was  enfeebled,  and  its  contr^atiQas  •*
sluggishly  performed  that  ihey  could  no  longer  keep  pace  with  the  moce  atSl*
movements  of  the  external  mnaclcs  of  the  eyeball.


DR. HARLEV ON  COXIUM MACULATUM.


437


"Whliiii  ten  minuies  of  die  ippcftraDce  of  this  disor<l«t  of  vision  a  general

anacnlv  letKugjr  ftfTcctnl  mc.  rad  tb«  erelklB  fell  su  hearjr  a*  if  thejr  were

oppresMd  witb  Um  dc«pe*t  drowsinesi. The  pui>lLt  were  couJd«ratily  dilated.

I  ut  down  to  note  tbesc  observationm  but,  twing  afraid  to  Ruinbun  tltiii  poitUK

Icti  ihe  rapidly  incieaung  mtuculivT  lethargy  should  get  the  better  of  lae,  I

Twe  up  again  and  tried  to  shake  it  oK An  hnnr  and  a  quarter  after  taking  tlie

dme  1  fvit  felt  decided  weakness  in  my  legx. The  glddinexs  anddinttnutioa  of

ttotor  po\eer  ooniinucd  lo  increase  foi  the  next  fifteen  minutes. An  bonr  and

a  half  after  taking  ihe  dose  these  cAects  utained  their  cnaximuRi,  and  at  thik

time I  was  cold,  pale  and  tottering. The  puhe,  which  bad  been  emotionally

excited by  the  tudden  occcMion  of  the  forcgoin)[  tymplons,  was  now  sixty-

eight,  (jaite  regalar,  and  o(  undiminiubcd  force  and  volume. The  legs  felt  as

U  they  would  soon  be  loo  weak  to  tupport  me. There  was  a  posiuve  diminu-

tioD  of  Tolaatary  power  in  every  part  of  the  mu%cuUr  system,  aiKl  thi&  nearl)'

ajDODBled  to  oomplele  paralysis  as  far  »  (he  hnmslriog  and  levator  palpebne

KBiucles  were  coaceraed. At  one  time  llie  grttatost  eaeidoii  was  required  to

«levate  the  eyelids. The  mind  remained  perfectly  clear  and  calm,  and  the

twain  actire  throughoui:  but  the  body  seemed  heavy  and  well-nigh  asleep.

^Uter  continuing  for  about  half  an  hour  at  their  maximum,  the  synptoms

began  r^tdly  to  dedine.  and  within  three  hours  and  a  half  af^cr  taking  the

^Ofte  tkcy  bad  totally  diMppearcd.  ■•■■■>

"A  dc]ic*te  young  woman,  of  inactive  batata*  took  four  dncluni  of  the

vSWrsir. Twenty  mintttes  afterward,  and  while  attending  (o  her  u»ual  duties,

*he  expcriencett  uaose«  and  giddincsi. She  dropped  an  inkttand  which  she

I  -wnu  holding  in  her  hand,  and  wax  unaMe  to  walk,  and  she  was  placed  in  tlie

I  Tcciimbrot  poslurc. Thnc  symplonts  came  on  with  alarming  swiftness,  and

tlic  pulse  wenl  up  loone  hundred  and  twenty-six  from  cmoiional  excitement  (?);

Inii,  in  a  few  minutes  the  heart  regained  lis  usual  quietude,  and  ilie  temaiaed

perfectly  comfortable  and  calm,  but  without  power  to  move  the  sums  or  legs.

Aa  boor  after  lAUng  the  medicine  there  was  nearly  complete  muscular  paraly-

•to;  tb«  eyelids  were  closed,  the  pupils  widely  dilated,  and  the  nuDd  dear,

cahn  nod  active,  and  sbe  expressed  herself  quite  conforuble.  She  tried  persever-

ingly  to  raise  the  eyelids  when  I  requested  her  lo  do  so,  but  sbe  was  quite  onable

to  separate  their  margins. The  pulse  and  respiration  were  normal ; the

■wfiue  warm. At  the  end  of  an  hour  theac  symptonu  passed  ofT,  and  after

Ibree  hours  she  bad  completely  recovered  her  activity  and  resumed  her  duties.

Tttc  next  day  she  complained  of  slight  wearisome  pain  in  the  moacles  of  the

"  I  proceed  now,"  continue*  Dr.  Haitey,  "to  consider  in  detail  the  action  of
Coniuia  npon  the  nerroiit  system.  The  eattieit  indications  of  the  operation  of
the  medicioc  arc  invariably  those  that  arise  from  the  dcpreulon  of  the  motor
fuikction  of  the  MtW  frjir  vf  ner^tt.  Tbey  are  giddiness,  the  sensAlion  of  a
hcKvy  weight,  depressing  the  eyelids,  or  actual  ptosis;  a  dull,  la/y  or  fixed
expressioidess  stare,  like  that  of  a  drunken  person;  dlbtaiion  of  the  pufuts.
After  moderate  doses,  the  interference  of  vision  is  only  sach  as  rcsulu  ia
hatmesSi  ns  if  a  this  film  of  uuuparent  vapor  were  floating  between  tbe  eyo
and  the  object * * * It  occurs  independently  of  any  dilatation


438


DR. HARI.EY  ON  CONItIM MACULATUM.


of  ibepnpiU,  u)d  u  compatible  with  good  delinitioD  for  fixed  ofa|Mli.  be
diM  to  imperfect  adjuEimcnt  of  the  refracting  media  of  the  eye  from  jmid
paralysis  of  the  ciliary  branches  of  th«  third  nerve.  It  is  through  thete  «■■
branches  that  the  iiMlmdual  first  becomes  conscious  of  the  cffccli  of  Ot
ttemtoek,  ind  ff  he  shonU  be  Teftdin;  at  the  titnc  he  will  saddent;  hud  <k
occupation  fatiguing,  and  verjr  toon  afterward  it  tnajr  be  impossible,  lad  b
will  be  glad  to  close  Ihe  ejres  to  relieve  himxelfof  the  ayniptoni,  and,  m  Si
muxcuLar  Icthargj-  liegins  to  be  felt,  content  to  lie  perfectly  still,  as  Ifukep

"In  full  doiri  the  dcpics«nt{  itiHiience  involrci  Ihe  other  branches  of  Ac
nerTc,  and  the  loiy  movements  of  the  eyeball,  or  dull,  fixed  bikI  ooctaoiBlf
divergent  «tare,  iniiicile  the  patiiolly  paralyicd  condition  of  tbe  etlR^
mtttthi  pflht  tyfbitUi  while  more  or  less  drooping  of  tbe  upper  Uds  espnno
ft  limilar  condition  of  tbe  levator  palpebrse.

"D^uMt  viriCM,  from  Inability  to  maintaia  the  convereeuce  of  the  optic lA
excepting  as  a  very  evanescent  effect,  is  a  companuively  rare  remit  nf  tit
action  of  Hemlock.  I  have  only  observed  it  in  a  fiew  persons.  Id  ose  rf
these,  n  delicate  invalid,  confined  by  weakness  and  ovariaii  discftsc  ckidly  Ib
the  recumbent  position,  two  drachma  of  the  Suz-^m  tanii  produced  full  efcn.
accompanied  by  double  vision.  This  was  a  constant  symptom ;  It  n^mf  ■
holfan  hour  after  tnking  Ihe  medicine,  and  lasted  tnrcnty  minutes.

"ARer  hnving  taken  the ///w/tvi  for  six  months  she  told  me,  aa  oftaul
happened  to  «ec  her  during  the  opembon  of  Ihe  medicine,  that  she  raw  ^d
objecl  in  the  room  double,  thu  my  eyes  were  also  doubled,  and  that  sbe  ftbo
if  she  were  squinting,

"  Dilatation  0/  the  pupil  occurs  usually  after  only  very  large  doves,  and  tte
it  it  often  but  kbuht,  and  only  observable  in  a  subdued  light,  tbe  excitenntcf
strong  light  overcottiiug  the  tendency  10  dilate,  just  ai  tbe  exertion  of  a  Mnof
will  strengthent  for  a  time  au  enfeebled  limb.

"The  absence  of  any  preponderating  action  of  lite  muscle^  supplied  tn  At
fiiurlk  and  sixth  pairs  0/ Mrvei,  shows  that  Ihcy  ore  cqaaUy  ofiiected  with  tk
third  pair.

"A  proportionate  diminution  of  power  is  itlso  observed  in  the  muido
■applied  by  the  motor  branches  of  the  ^^M  and  sevtniM  pairi.  The  coninc^
power  of  the  m.  orhicularit,  in  particular,  is  distinctly  weakened.

"  Upon  the  ^f'^4/A/>at>  the  action  of  Conium  is  not  very  apparent  in  a  tCUet'
health ;  bni  In  the  spasmodic  affecttoas,  arising  from  irritation  of  this  aefvc,  ih
influence  is  very  decided.

*'A>  to  the  hypoghstai  ntrtie,\  hare  never  observed  any  decided  Ioh  tf
voluntary  power  in  Ihe  tongue  during  Ihe  action  of  Conium,  unleu,  u  ta
chorea,  some  deiangecnent  of  this  center  pre-existed. • ■  •  •

"  In  the  absence  of  irritation,  functional  or  Icsional,  it  is  equally  diffifult  l»
recagniKC  any  paiticnlar  influence  upon  Ibe  tpimai  <ori,  HemUti  mUtCa  Ae
motor  function  of  this  part  of  the  nervous  system  lost  dL  all,  and.  shon  of  t.
poisonouB  dote.  It  does  not  interfere  wilb  it*  motor  activity,  or  reHex  fuuctiA
OS  it  is  called,  in  any  appreciable  degree. ■•■•'. .

<*  When,  however,  there  is  a  morbid  excitabilily  of  the  reflex  functioa  of  tut
spLDol  cord,  the  influence  of  Conium  in  lubdaiog  it  is  powerful  and  direct.


DR. HARLEY OS CONIUM MACULATUM.  439

"ConhuD,  then,  in  a.  lUU  cf  hcaltb,  and  ia  tlic  Tulkit  medidntl  doses  that
Wt  cut  TTOWre  lo  pTe,  cxetti  iU  p«>w«  c)ii<fl]>,  if  not  exelusively,  upon  the
notor  centers  within  the  cranium.  And  of  thete  the  nrfmi  itriaU,  of  counc,
■re  the  ports  phndpaQy  aSccted.

"  Excepting,  then,  the  redcx  action  of  the  cord,  the  whole  motor  fuoctioii  of
in  indlviduit,  under  the  fuO  inflaeiicv  of  Cobuub.  ia  Ktually  asleep ;  and  this  b
the  draplest  view  that  we  can  ukc  of  the  physiological  action  of  tIemlMk.  It
B  to  the  torfvra  ttriaia,  to  the  MuUer  ccalcn  of  notiaB.Bod  to  the  whole  of  the
moiOT  tract,  precisely  what  Ofium  U  lo  the  brain  of  a  person  readily  influenced
by  iu  hypnotic  action;  and  jut  u  Ofium  tranquiliics  and  re£refh»  (he  over-
evciied  and  weary  brain,  lo  docs  Coninm  soothe  and  strcncthen  the  onduly

cxciloi  anil  exhausted  centers  of  motor  activity. ■ • • ■ •
•*  The  influence  of  Conlnm  appear*  to  be  in  proportion,  not  to  the  inascular

■trcnittb  of  the  Individual,  but  lo  his  motor  activity. * * * A  dall,  inactive

duld  requires,  lo  produce  «  pven  cfied,  oaly  half  (he  quantity  that  a  tirely,

^uftive  one  does*

This  observation  b  in  conformity  with  the  law  ;  the  more
similar  the  symptoms  the  smaller  the  dose.

"Upoo  the  eerebrsm,  f/rmlxk  is  powerless.  I  hare  never  been  able  to
Ttcopiiie  the  Icosi  Kurtufic,  nor  directly  hypnotic,  efTocu.

"  Like  the  cercbram,  the  laitcry  fart  of  the  nervous  system  is  allogethct
uuffected  directly  by  the  action  of  Coninm.  Iti  anodyne  power  in  certain
diseases  may  be  fairly  attributed  to  moscular  relaxation  In  the  diseased  parts
rather  than  to  a  direct  infliicnce  upon  the  sensory  nerves.  •  ■  •
Of  iu  anodyne  inHoeoce  upon  the  facial  branches  of  the  liRh  nerve,  I  have
been  uaablc  hitherto  lo  obtain  other  than  very  doubtful  evidcficc.  *  *

I  think  that  we  may  trace  the  anydonc  influence,  which  ftrmttck  undonhtcdly
eiercises  over  llie  sensory  branches  of  the  fifth  nerve,  lo  the  power  thai  it
possesses  of  calming  the  general  irritabilily  of  the  raolor  centers.  *  *

Cooium  has  no  influence  upoo  the  circaialing  organs,  upon  the  secrelions  or
eacretiofvo,  or  directly  upon  natrilioD.  Its  influence  npon  the  seanal  functJoas
b  traceable  to  a  direct  action  npon  the  spinal  cord."


After  thus  tlcscribing  the  physiological  action  of  Gjnium,
Dr.  Harley  discusses  its  therapeutic  value,  giving  examples
which  comprise  all  the  cases  in  which  he  has  used  Hemlock
alone.  He  gives  the  following  general  conclusion  :  *' Hemlock
given  in  doses  which  fall  far  short  of  producing  its  proper
physiological  action,  is  useless  in  the  treatment  of  diseases
for  which  it  is  adpated."  The  homceopathist  will  perceive
that  Dr.  Harley  comes  to  tliis  conclusion,  because  he  regards


440


DR. HARLEY  ON CONIUM MACULATUM.


and  use*;  Hemlock  as  "adapted"  only  to  cases  to  which  it  is
cnantiopathic.

"  In  MlcctiiiK  Hrmtgck  u  a  remedy  ia  the  treatment  of  nervoos  din  as*  i.
*  *  *  «rc  most  be  ^dcd  by  that  simple  ttcw  of  iu  fAysiolo^lea)
action  which  I  hxvc  now  so  fully  stated ;  and  then  the  only  question  to  be  pn^
posed  will  be.  Is  then  Irritation, direct  or  rellex.of  the  motor  centenf  If
there  be,  Coninm  i«  the  appropriuc  and  hopefvl  remedy."

The  horn  ceopa til  ist  will  ask :  May  there  not  be  many
varieties  of  such  irritation,  varieties  in  kind,  extent,  and
complication  ?  And  again :  May  not  the  results  of  irrita-
tion occurring  in  individuals  of  different  idiosyncrasy  be
very  various  ?  And  arc  all  such  varieties  to  find  tbeir
"  appropriate  and  hopeful  remedy  "  in  Conium  ?  How  con-
tice ;  for  how  few  cases  fail  to  present  "  irritatioo.  direct  or
reflex,  of  the  motor  centers  "  I

Dr.  Harley  gives  examples  of  the  beneficial  action  of "^^^
Conium  in  cases  presenting  tendencies  to  convulsions. A  _^^^
case  of  epilepsy  was  ameliorated. Mnscular  tremor  andt^,^^
chorea  were  cured; but  the  rapidity  of  the  cure in  thc^*^j
six  cases  of  cliorea  is  not  such  as  a  homceopathic  physiciairx.^^^
would  consider  creditable. Dr. Marlcy  docs  not  ascrib<fc^-yij
chorea  to  a  perversion  of  the  co-ordinating  function. H»  f~~fc
doubts  if  there  be  such  a  function,  and  regards  chorea  a.^%. as
due  to  "an  undue  excitability  of  the  motor  centers,  whicT^^^-ii
throw  off  impressions  so  rapidly  that  the  will  is  puzzled  t-^*- to
control them." If  this be alt  that chorea is, Coniur^  .An,
according  to  Dr. Harley,  should  cure  every  case. As
matter  of  fact,  we  see  a  great  variety  of  symptoms  in  diOe^:
ent cases  of  chorea,  and  similarly  we see great  vanetid
in  the  modifications  which  different  medicines  produce  i
the  motor  functions. Dr.  Harley's  (the  ph>'sioIogical)  methc
takes  no  account  of  such  varieties. It  is  not  broad  enou^g.  'g^
for  the  iacts  of  nature  with  which  it  assumes  to  deal.

He  proposes  to  use  Conium  in  tetanus,  and  has  empIoy»^  "^-*"«'
it  in  spasm  of  the  oesophagus  and  stomach ;  tn  the  glob^i^bus


DR. BARLEY  ON CONIL'M MACULATUM.


441


hystericus ;  in  spasmodic  cough,  laryDgismns  stridulus,  and
pertussis;  ia  paraplegia,  and  in  concussions  of  the  spine,
iad  in  exhaustion  and  irritability  of  the  sexual  organs.

He  speaks  highly  of  Conium  as  a  remedy  in  inflammatory
diseases  of  the  eye,  and  gives  six  cases  of  "strumous
inflammation  of  the  conjunctiva,  more  or  less  involving
the  cornea  and  iris,  successfully  treated  by  Conium  alone
and  unaided  by  external  applications.  The  speedy  relief
from  the  photophobia,  lachrymation,  and  spasm  of  the
orbicularis  has  often  suqirised  me."  He  accounts  for  its
action  on  the  ground,  that  "  in  produdng  complete  mus-
cular relaxation  it  acts  bencBcially  in  rdieving  pain  and
tension,  and  thus  removing  irritation."  It  is  difficult  to
believe that  strumous ophthalmia (keratitis) depends on

I  "spasm  of  the  orbicularis  and  corrugator  superciliL"  Con-
junctivitis palpebralis,  at  least,  is  well  established,  and,  in
most  cases,  destructive  keratitis  has  set  in  de/arf  the  spasm
becomes  a  prominent  symptom.  Dr.  Harlcy  gives  an
excellent  case  of  this  disease  cured  in  three  months  by  two
drachm  doses  of  Conium  every  second  day.  I  shall  give
tfic  record  of  a  severe  case  cured  in  one  month  by  a  few
doses  of  Conium "".

In  cancer  he  considers  fffmlock  a  palliative,  in  that  it
allays  muscular  spasm,  and  thus  mitigates  pain.  In  glandu-
lar enlargements,  and  in  cerebral  diseases,  he  has  found  no
beneAt  from  Conium.

In  these  citations  we  have  given  a  fair  and  full  view  of
Cr.  Harley's  provings  of  Conium,  and  experience  in  its
^crapeutic  use.  He  admits  its  impcrfectncss,  but  seems
to  regard  this  as  relating  to  extent  rather  than  to  method  or
principles.

'  Let  us  now  reflect  a  moment  on  this  method  of  regarding
and  stating  the  physiological  eflects  of  a  drug.  How  satis-
factory it  appears  to  have  the  entire  action  of  a  drug  con-
densed in  one  crisp  generalization  like  this  of  Dr.  Harley,
instead  of  having  to  read  page  after  page  of  symptoms


442  DR. HARLEY  ON  CONIUM MACULATUU.

arrange  in  anatomical  order !  And  how  easy  seems  die
application  of  such  a  generalization  to  therapeutics,  possess-
ing, as  we  do,  the  law.  Let  us  not,  however,  be  led  astray
by  such  fascinations !  Such  generalizations  are  not  possiUe
in  the  present  state  of  medical  science.  So  long  as  there
occur  in  the  healthy  body,  phenomena  physical,  mental  or
psychical,  which  we  cannot  fully  explain  by  known  physio-
logical processes — and  there  are  thousands ;  so  long  as  the
sick  present  symptoms  physical,  mental  or  psychical,  which
we  cannot  account  for  by  well-understood  pathological  proc-
esses— and  their  name  is  legion, — so  long  will  it  be  impos-
sible to  reduce  phenomena  and  symptoms  respectively  to  a
general  physiological  or  pathological  formula.  And,  con-
versely, whoever,  in  his  therapeutic  philosophy  includes
only  such  phenomena  of  symptoms  as  he  can  thus  explain
and  account  for,  disregarding  or  overlooking  all  others,
binds  therapeutics  to  the  slow  chariot-wheels  of  physiology
and  pathology,  and  forbids  that  more  rapid  progress  of  this
practical  department  of  medicine  which  is  possible  under  a
therapeutic  law  that  turns  to  account  every  phenomenon  (rf
pathogenesy,  and  every  symptom  of  the  patient  This  will
appear  more  clearly  when  we  come  to  study  the  homceo-
pathic  proving  of  Conium.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.


The  following  remarks  are  based  upon  the  proving  pub-
lished by  Hahnemann  in  the  "Chronic  Diseases,"  volume
iii.,  second  edition :

General  Analysis,  i.  The  action  of  Conium  upon  the
vital  power  is  very  peculiar.  It  depresses  the  sensorium,
weakening  the  memory,  producing  mental  lassitude  and  dull-
ness, \nth  difficulty  in  expressing  one's  ideas;  and  yet>
under  its  action,  the  special  senses  are  abnormally  acute,  at
least  those  of  sight,  smell  and  hearing.  The  pulse  is
enfeebled  and  irregular,  but  in  no  other  way  does  the  invol-
untary muscular  system  appear  to  be  affected.  Power  of
locomotion  is  not  impaired,  but  extreme  lassitude  and
debility  are  manifest  throughout  the  body,  indisposing  to
physical  exertion.  Clonic  spasms  of  the  muscles  of  the  face,
arms  and  hands,  have  been  observed.

2.  There  is  not  much  in  our  proving  of  Conium  that
shows  a  marked  action  on  the  organic  substance,  never-
theless Hahnemann's  acute  observation  enabled  him  to  per-
ceive indications  for  a  clinical  application  of  it,  which  has
demonstrated  that  it  must  possess  the  power  to  alter  pro-
foundly the  structure  of  various  parte  of  the  body ;  as  for
•^xanriple,  the  glandular  substance,  the  substance  of  the
cornea,  the  skin,  and  the  uterus  and  ite  appendages.

Among  the  symptoms  of  Conium,  those  of  the  disposition
are  very  well  marked  and  characteristic.  The  prover  is  much
vlepressed  and  disposed  to  weep,  yet  easily  aroused  to  anger,
averse  to  companionship,  and  inclined  to  shun  society,  yet
dreads  to  be  alone.  Sexual  desire  in  the  male  is  easily
-aroused,  even  by  the  mere  presence  of  women,  yet  the


444


CONIUM HACULATUM.


«


sexual  or^ns  appear  so  much  enfeebled  that  seminal  emis-
sions take  place  under  these  circumstances,  and  sometimes
without  erection.  In  like  manner  in  the  female,  the  menses
appear  too  early,  but  arc  scanty,  the  flow  being  accompanied
by  many  accessory  symptoms,  among  which  extreme  ten-
derness of  the  mammary  glands  is  very  characteristic.

The  muscular  las«tude  is  most  maHced  in  the  early  morn-
ing; the  arms  and  legs  feel  tired  and  sore,  the  knees  tremble,
and  after  a  short  walk  the  prover  is  exhausted  and  must  lie
down.  The  symptoms  generally  are  worse  at  night,  espe-
cially the  cough,  and  the  pains  are  worse  during  repose.

With  these  general  remarks,  we  pass  to  a  more  detailed
consideration  of  the  symptoms,  in  anatomical  order.

Conium  produces  the  following  effects  upon  the  mind  and  .P>  ^-j
disposition;  Depression,  sadness,  under  which  tears  corner .«^y^,
easily,  excessive  anxiety,  or  else  unnatural  indinercnce,  witirC^^jd
depression. The  provcr  scemi; sunk  in thought,  and  i&^  i

apprehensive  respecting  the  present  or  the  future. Dislike  ot<r» o|
society,  and  yet  a  dread  to  be  alone ; — this  apparently  incom
patible  symptom  reminds  one  of  tlic  incongruities  of  hysteria
and  has  been  very  often  verified  in  practice. Hahnemanx
urges  upon  us  the  importance  of  attending  to  the  sympto:
of  the mind. Tliis  is  a  characteristic  mind-symptom
Conium. Upon  the  sensorium  it  produces  vertigo,  which  i
experienced when rising  from  the  recumbent  or  aittini
posture,  when  rising  after  stooping ;  or,  on  the  other  tianc^
when  going  down-stairs ;  and  it  is  often  worse  when  lyi
down — a  symptom  which  is  noteworthy  in  connection  wi
Dr.  Harlcy's  speculations  u]>on  the  physiological  action
Conium. Memory  seems  to  be  enfeebled,  as  is  likewise
power  of  comprehending  what  one  reads,  or  of  corrcctl:^'' *
expressing  one's  self. Nevertheless.  Hahnemann  renwrr— ^h"Im
that  the  provcrs  of  Conium  are  unusually  susceptible  to  tT-^^fte
action  of  wine  or  alcohol,  and  wc  shall  see  that  the  specf  ^^:=^^i
senses  are  abnormally  acute  under  its  influence.  ^^^H

Of  the  head  symptoms,  wc  remark,  first,  as  to  the  chai.==— a^^^^


Mna

'IQS

of
I  tt

d.

-«],'
ith


I


COmUM MACULATUM.


44S


terof  the  pains:  an  iuAing  piin,  vrhich  is  sometimes  confined
to  one  side  of  tlie  head,  feels  like  a  heavy  downward  press-
ure, and  is  increased  by  motion  of  the  eyes;  sometimes  in
die  occiput,  like  a  heaviness  when  one  sits  leaning  forward;
sometimes  in  the  temples  and  over  the  eyes,  like  a  pressure
bom  within  outward.  Second.  Tearing^  pains,  as  a  momtng
headache,  as  if  the  brain  were  torn.  Third.  A  drawing
pain  in  the  forehead  and  temples,  and  a  piercing  pain  from
within  outward.  The  headaches  are  generally  worse  during
motion  and  from  a  sudden  jar  or  shock,  such  as  a  false  step,
which  sometimes  produces  a  digging  pain  in  the  head ;  and
the  brain  seems  to  be  sensitive,  speaking  and  noise  producing
an  unpleasant  concussion  in  it

In  the  ejfes  heat  and  burning ;  itching  and  piercing  pains
in  the  canthi,  or  a  smarting  as  if  some  acrid  substance  had
been introduced into the eye. In the eyeball,  aching,
increased  by  reading,  and  in  the  evening,  by  closing  the  eye.
The  white  of  the  eye  is  sometimes  red  and  inflamed ;  the
tears  arc  abundant,  overflowing  the  lids,  and  are  very  acrid.
The  lids  arc  thick  and  inflamed,  pustules  appearing  upon
them. The  special  sense  is  variously  affected. Photophobia
is  among  the symptoms. A  short-sighted  provcr  was
enabled  to  sec  much  farther  than  usual. Transient  blind-
ness, or dimness  of  vision,  was noted by others; while
or  luminous  spots  were  moving  in  front  of  the  eyes,  and  as
f  when  reading,  the  lines  upon  the  printed  page  moved  up
:d  down. These eye-symptoms^ produced upon die
lealthy,  afford  us  a  more  valid  reason  for  using  Conium
n  strumous ophthalmia than Dr.  Harley's physiological
jxplanation  of  its  action  could  do.
In  the  inner  ear,  sharp  shocks  from  within  outward  were
~TeIt  when  swallowing,  and  piercing  pains  and  aching;  pain-
_  ful  tension  behind  the  ear  and  piercing  pains  in  the  mastoid
K]>roccss. The  cerumen  was  blood-red  in  color;  the  special
■sense  abnormally  acute,  and  painfully  so,  every  noise  caus-


446  CONIUM MACULATUM.

ing  the  prover  to  start  The  provers  complained  of  nishin^
roaring  and  ringing  noises  in  the  ear,  with  throbbing,  as  of
the  pulse;  when  blowing  the  nose  the  ears  feel  as  if
obstructed.

The  sense  of  smell  is  very  acute,  perhaps  perverted ;  z
prover  stating  that  he  seemed  to  smelt  tar^  as  though  it  were
in  the  posterior  nares.

On  the  lips,  vesicles  appear  near  the  vermilion  border,
and  are  very  sore.

Drawing  pains  and  fine  stitches  in  the  gums  and  teetiL
The  toothache  is  aggravated  by  cold  food  ;  the  gums  bleed
easily,  and  the  teeth  feel  as  if  they  were  loose  ;  the  tongue
is  dry  and  swollen ;  deglutition  difficult  and  painful,  fnHn
soreness  of  the  throat  Speech  is  difficult,  probably  for  die
above  reasons.

Appetite  is  diminished ;  the  taste  is  not  blunted,  but
provers  complain  of  a  sour,  foul  or  bitter  taste,  especially  in
the  throat  Eructations  occur,  sometimes  tasteless,  some-
times sour  or  offensive,  or  tasting  of  the  food;  somedmcs
they  are  incomplete  and  produce  pain  in  the  stomadL
Nausea  and  vomiting  of  mucus  occur,  sometimes  early  in  the
morning,  sometimes  after  eating,  sometimes  toward  evening.

Digestion  is  much  disordered,  as  we  see  by  the  symptoms
which  occur  soon  after  eating ;  rapid  distension  of  the  abdo-
men after  eating  only  a  little  milk ;  distension  in  the  epigas-
tric zone  after  eating  but  little ;  it  impedes  respiration ;
nausea,  vomiting  and  hiccough  after  eating ;  sour  taste  and
eructations,  and  rising  of  sour  liquid  in  the  mouth  after
eating.  Aching  and  pressing  in  the  epigastrium.  It  extends
from  the  epigastrium  up  to  the  pharynx,  and  feels  as  if  a
ball  were  rising  to  the  throat  Other  parts  of  the  organism
are  affected  at  the  same  time.  After  eating,  provers  mo-
tion aching  in  the  back  of  the  neck,  vertex  and  forehead,
with  nausea ;  a  gentle  heat  seems  to  pass  from  the  stomadi
through  the  arms  to  the  fingers,  and  then  the  hands  appear
as  if  dead.


CONIUM UACULATUM.


447


»


I


In  the  right  hypochondrium  an  aching  increased  by
in^iration ;  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  an  aching  tension,
extending  lower  down  in  the  abdomen,  with  a  sensation  of
heaviness  throughout  the  abdomen.

In  the  abdomen,  a  constrictive  pain,  with  an  involuntary
drawing  of  the  abdomen  up  toward  the  thorax,  and  a  press-
ing and  aching  pain.  Cutting  and  piercing  pains  in  the
abdomen,  with  some  degree  of  sensibility  to  pressure,  are
noted,  along  with  the  accumulation  of  flatus  in  the  intestines.
Pains  in  the  groins  as  if  swollen.

As  regards  the  stooi,  we  find  under  Conium  frequent  desire
for  an  evacuation,  with  scanty  discharge  or  none  at  all ;  also
liquid  diarrhceic  stool  with  coltc,  discharge  of  flatus,  and
much  mucus,  or  undigested  food,  or  even  blood.  At  night
the  evacuations  are  involuntary.  The  stools  are  preceded
by  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  accompanied  by  burning,
pressing  or  cutting  pains  in  the  rectum ;  and  are  followed,
whether  they  are  diarrhoHc  or  not,  by  a  sensation  of
general  weakness  and  trembling,  or  even  faintncss.

The  urine  is  high-colored,  and  there  is  frequent  desire  to
pass  it,  and  the  stream  is  interrupted ;  tlierc  is  a  spasmodic
pressure  tn  the  region  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  and  a
sharp,  piercing  pain  from  without  inward  after  urinating;
severe  cutting  pains  in  the  urethra  during  the  act  of  passing
water.  Passing  water  does  not  rehcvc  the  desire  to  do  so.
In  women,  when  passing  water,  pressure  upon  the  uterus
and  cutting  pains.

lo  the  male  sexual  organs,  cutting  pain  through  the
scrotum  to  the  root  of  the  pcnis;'pres5ing  and  tearing  pains
\n  the  testes;  frequent  emissions  of  semen  at  night  and
«vcn  during  the  day,  excited  by  the  presence  of  women;  on
t:he  other  hand,  deficient  erections  or  complete  impotence.

In  the  female  sexual  organs,  violent  itching  of  the
udenda,  and  even  within  tlie  vagina,  day  and  night  for  a
^ood  while,  most  ]*u.st  after  menstruation.  The  menses
appear  too  soon,  but are  scanfy ; they  are preceded by


i^


448


CONIUM MACULATUM.


dry  heat  over  the  whole  body,  anxious  dreams,  aod  a
depressed  and  anxious  state  of  mind,  and  by  piercing  pains
in  the  region  of  the  liver ;  worse  when  lying  down  at  night,
or  on  inspiration.

Leucorrhcea  occurs,  of  a  white  acrid  mucus,  which
produces  much  burning,  and  is  preceded  by  pain  tn  the
abdomen.

In  the  respiratory  organs,  we  notice  a  catarrhal  condition;
abundant  discharge  of  mucus  &Dm  the  nose,  with  hcaise-
ncss,  rawness  of  the  throat  and  cough.  The  cough,  which
is  forcible  and  frequent,  appears  to  loosen  some  mucus  in
the  chest,  which,  however,  the  patient  cannot  expectorate
until  some  time  has  passed,  when  a  slight  cough  brings  it  up.
In  the  throat,  a  constant  tickling  and  itching,  provoking
a  dry,  teasing  cough.  The  cough  becomes  worse  on  Ijing
down  at  night,  and  even  threatens  to  end  in  vomiting;  it.:»f  |
produces  shocks  in  the  head  and  pain  in  the  abdomen...^^^^
These  cough  symptoms,  especially  the  teasing,  dry  cougfarj^^  ,g
on  lying  down  at  night,  have  often  been  verified  in  practice.  ;^;:^(;(

Respiration  is  short  and  labored,  especially  inspiration  «-a«3ii
sides  of  the  chest,  increased  by  inspiration ;  tension  aiu:».a-K.^ui:
weakness  in  the  chest;  palpitation  of  the  heart,  especiall)^' CciU
afUr  drinking;  it  is  visible  to  others  as  well  as  felt  by  th»«^C:^  th
prover.

The  mammae  are  hard,  very  painful  to  the  touch  {cspe  ^xrj  pe
dally  during  menstruation),  vnih  stitching  pains,  at  night,  i&s  •-•  i
them. The  nipples  itch,  and  when  rubbed,  bum.

In  the  (^flcjfr  are  observed,  in  the  sacral  region  and  betwcc«^'S»c*
the  scapulse,  stitches  and  tenuve  dravnng  pains,  mad^=>^'"^
increased  by  moving  the  arms  upward;  severe  aching  iti  T  n
the  sacral  region  from  walking  a  short  distance,  followed  b^«J  ^i
nausea  and  lassitude ;  stitches  in  the  sacrum  when  standing  ^"^  |%
with  drawing  through  the  lumbar  vertebrjc  fl

In  the  extremities,  lassitude  and  weakness,  more  markc^»^^'*W
in  the  lower  extremities,  with  numbness  of  fingers  aod  toe-^-'


CONiUM  MACULATUM.


449


the  former  lookiag  as  tf  they  were  dead. There  are  also

piercing  and  tearing  pains  throughout  the  extremities  and  in

L the  joints,  particularly  in  the  elbow  and  hip  joints.

I Cooiutn  appears  to  produce  disposition  to  sleep,  in  the

■  early  morning  and  by  day,  so  great  as  to  be  almost  irre^t-

F  iblc. The sleepiness  continues  in the  evening,  yet  the

prover  does  not  get  to  sleep  until  late,  and  the  sleep  during

the  night  is  disturbed  and  interrupted,  and  attended  by  heat

of  the  body  and  twitching  of  tlic  arnis  and  hands,  and  much

depression, with  disposition  to  weep,  and  by  bad  dreams.

As  before  remarked,  the  sleep  is  prevented  and  interrupted

bj'  dry,  teasing  cough — a symptom  whicli has received

»  numberless  clinical  verifications.
coldness,  without  thirst,  occurs  in  the  morning,  with  vertigo
and  depression  of  spirits;  slight  heat  in  the  afternoon,  with
thirst,  attended  by  relief  of  the  head  symptoms;  sweat  in
the  evening,  quite  abundant  during  the  first  sleep  ;  or  dur-
ing the  night ;  sweat  only  of  the  legs  ;  or,  again,  sweat  early
»in  the  morning  on  awaking,  of  the  legs,  although  they  are
cold.  The  pulse  is  irregular,  as  regards  both  force  and
frequency.

I Upon  the  skin,  Conium  produces  on  various  parts  of  the
body  a  fine,  hardly  visible  eruption,  which  itches  considerably.
Ulcers already  existing in provcrs assume, under its
action,  a  blackish  color,  discharge  an  offensive  ichor,  and
I^ed  and  patn. Swollen  glands  become  the  seat  of  piercing
I Pains  and  soreness.

B Before  we  proceed  to  consider  the  therapeutic  applications

of  Conium, it  will  be  interesting  to  turn  to  Dr. Harley's

Statement  of  its  physiological  effects,  as  observed  by  him.'

■t^e comprises its  entire action in  tliis  brief  statement:

H*  Conium,  then, in  a  state of health,  and in tlie  fullest

^3nedicinal doses  that  we  can  venture to  give, exerts its

jpower.  chiefly,  if  not  exclusively,  upon  the  motor  centers

'  Sec  prerioiu  Articlet
30


450


CONIUM  MACULATUM.


within  the  cranium. And,  of  these,  the  corpora  striata,  of
course,  are  the  parts  chiefly  affected."

The  peculiar  symptoms  of  the  mind  and  disposition,  the
abnormal  acuteness  of  the  special  senses,  the  characteristic
concomitant  symptoms  of  the  stool,  are  not  mentioned  in
his  record ;  perhaps  because  the  doses  which  he  used  in
proving  were  so  large  that  tlie  violent  symptoms  provoked
by  them  masked  such  subjective  phenomena  as  tiiese;  per-
haps, and  probably, because  they  were  not  susceptible  of
physiological  explanation,  and  could,  therefore,  have  no  %\^—
nificancc  and  no  therapeutic  value  for  him. We,  fortunately ^
have  a  means  of  applying  to  therapeutic  uses,  symptoms  ti^^^
which  wc  have  not  yet  found  the  physiological  key. 0^x:^^
therapeusts,  therefore,  is  not  held  back  by  the  short-coming  ^
of  our  pathology,  however  greatly  it  might  be  rc-cnfora^,^
by  the  perfection  of  that  science.  ^

Therapeutic  Applications. As  might  be  inferred  from  *i*^
symptoms,  Conium has  been  frequently  and  succcssfu"-^  ^r
used  in  mental  affections. Hlwcrt  reports'  a  case  of  insan^-^,
which  had  for  two  years  been  unsuccessfully  treated  alC^^j
pathically. The  peculiarity  of the  case  was  the regii_»~iu
alternation  in  tlie  condition  of  the  patient For  ten  day^^^  i
would  be  depressed,  melancholy,  taciturn,  fearful,  with  r*-  — e^^
less  nights ;  the  succeeding  ten  days  excited,  violent,  ^^Ef^-.
table, mischievous, Conium",  a dose  every fourth  C-  3aj-,
He  seemed  wcI!  after  tlie  second  dose,  but  the  remedy »as
continued,  as  a  precautionary'  measure,  for  several  moi^i^
in  smaller  and  less  frequent  doses.

Elwcrt  reports'  another  c^st  of  melancholy  with  enU«~^d
spleen,  cured  by  Conium.

in  which,  altiiough  there  was  evidently  uterine  disease  e3CBt- (
■ng,  yet  no  characteristic  indications  for  treatment  coul<J  be
found  in  the  uterine  symptoms.


^  Altgtmtint  U»ma»patktttkt


Zeit'  ^AUgemetm*  fiomtnftrihinhd

MHg,  ix.,  p.  1^


Z»f


tUM MACULA'


*45<


»


The  peculiar  mental  symptoms — depression,  timidi^,
taciturnity,  aversion  to  society,  and  at  the  same  time  a
dread  of  being  alone — induced  me  to  give  Conium,  with
very  satisfactory  results,  as  regards  botli  mental  and  uterine
symptoms.

In  aflfections  of  the  eyes,  Conium  has  been  much  and
satisfactorily  used.  TiilfT  says.'  speaking  of  hordeola :
"  Conium  will  be  useful  wlierc  the  trouble  recurs ;  where
several  hordeola  become  indurated,  and,  on  occasion,  inflame
again,"  He  places  Staphysagria  beside  Conium  in  this
regard. Its  chief  application,  however,  has  been  in  scrof-

Inlous  ophthalmia.
Knorre  says:'  "Photophobia  is  cither  a  symptom  of
inflammation  of  tlic  eye,  or  an  independent,  purely  nervous
condition  of  the  eye,  without  participation  of  the  vascular
B  system.  In  the  latter  case  the  photophobia  is  often  con-
joined  with  spasmodic  closure  of  the  lids.  When  it  is
impossible  to  open  the  lids,  the  inflammation  of  the  lids  is
generally  an  index  of  inflammation  existing  within  the  eye.
Usually,  the  scrofulous  photophobia  is  conjoined  with  a  pale
reddish  discoloration  of  the  globe  fA  the  eye,  which  appears
like  a  projecting  seam  around  the  cornea,  or  else  there  are

I  visible  only  a  few  scattered  blood-vessels  in  the  conjunctiva.
It  is  wonderful  how  quiclvly  and  certainly  Conltim  relieves
such  cases;  but  where  the  inflammation  predominates  and
the  photophobia  is  not  so  marked,  Conium  is  not  so  effica-
cious.

Knorre,  Frank,  Segin,  Marschalt  and  Thorer  publish  in  the
Aligemdna  Hommopathiuiu  Zcitang,  and  in  Hygea  and  Prakt-
Uch£  Beitrdge,  cases  illustrating  the  action  of  Conium  in
strumous  ophthalmia.  In  all  uf  these  cases,  the  photophobia
V\as  the  prominent  symptom.  In  must  of  them,  the  flow  of  tears
Was  excessive  and  the  liquid  acrid,  producing  much  inflam-
tiation  of  the  lids ;  ulcers  and  obscuration  of  the  cornea


»  Homatfalhiuht  Vurttljahrtehrift,


452


CONIUM MACULATUM.


were  noticed  in  some  cases. In  this  connection,  the  follow-]
ing  case  may  be  of  interest :

A  girl  of  six  years  had  been  treated  three  months  fori
"ulcer  of  the  cornea,"  by  applications  of  a  cr>'stal  o(  swi^/taU]
of  copper,  and  was  brought  to  me  in  the  following  condition;
The  eyes  were  forcibly  closed ;  the  head  bent  down  and,J
when  possible,  buried  in a  pillow  or  in  the  mother's  df
to  avoid  the  light. On  any  attempt  to  open  the  lids,  a
copious  flow  of  tears  gushed  out,  and  tlic  spasmodic  closur
was  so  firm  that  1  could  not  get  a  view  of  the  globe  of  th«
eye. If  tbc  lids  were  forcibly  separated,  the  eye  was  rollec
upward  so  as  to  hide  the  cornea. The  sclerotic  was  oc
deeply  colored ;  the  conjunctiva  palpebralis  thick,  dark- it:
and  velvety. The  edges  of  the  lids  were  thickened,  cxcor
ated  and  covered  with  light  scabs. I had  to  accept
statement  of  my  allopathic  predecessor  that  there  was  a  dc
ulcer  on  eadi  cornea.

The  general  health  was  good. I  gave  Conium*",  a  d<
every  night In  one week  the  photophobia  had  so
diminished that I could get a  view  of the  cornea,
large  but  not  deep  ulcer  was  visible  on  the  right  core
smaller  one  on  the  left  Lachrymation  much  less;  the  Hds  I
inflamed. The  Conium  was  continued,  but  less  frcquw
In one  month  from  the  beginning  of  treatment,  the  pht
phobia  had  ceased  ;  the  ulcers  were  healed,  leaving  a  pe:
opalescence  in  the  right  cornea,  which,  from  observatioi
other  cases,  I  tliink  will  disappear  within  a  year  or  two.

Had  there  been  disorder  of  the  digestion  and  constipati<mj
such  as  clearly  to  indicate  Nux  vomica  in  this  case,  I  shouJUj
have given it, and expected, under its action, grot
amelioration  of  the  photophobia; such  having been  my
experience  in  coses  of  this  kind.

Rentsch  reports' two  casesof  deafness,  in  both  of  whidi  tbe
deafness  had  been  preceded  and  was  accompanied  by  symp-
toms of  disorder  of  the  liver. The  deafness  seemed  to  depefld

'  AUpmtiHt  Homa«pathitekt  Z*ituHg,  louvUi,,  93,  ■od  xxxTiiL,  I/O-


CONIUM MACULATUM.


453


on  accumalatioa  of  hanSened  and  dark  cerumen,  which,
being  removed,  and  Conium  administered,  the  deafness  passed
away.  It  would  appear  that  the  deafness  depended  on  the
accumulation  of  cerumen,  and  was  cured  by  its  removal;  but
it  is  ootewortliy  that  the  liver  symptoms  ceased  under  tlie
action  of  Conium,  and  tliat  the  cerumen  did  not  accumulate
again.

Kammerer  reports '  a  case  of  "cancerous  ulcer  "of  the
lower  lip,  from  pressure  of  tobacco-pipe,  promptly  healed,
under  the  internal  and  external  use  of  Conium  first

Caspari  relates'  a  similar  case — scirrhus  of  the  lower  lip
of  two  years'  standing,  already  ulcerated.  Under  Conium"
the  ulcer  healed  and  the  tumor  diminished.  Six  weeks
after  treatment  began,  however,  the  patient  had  the  tumor
removed  by  a  surgeon.  How  far  the  favorable  action  of
Conium  could  have  availed  in  this  case,  we  are,  therefore,
unable  to  know.

In  Gastralgia,  Dr.Wcrber  states*  that  he  has  found  Conium-
always  an  excellent  remedy,  where  tlicre  was  a  tendency  to
constipation,  the  patient  being  of  lymphatic  constitution;
and  he  relates  a  case  cured  by  it,  speedily,  the  symptoms
being:  painful  spasm  of  the  stomach,  a  feeling  as  if  the
stomach  contracted,  or  of  a  heavy  burden  upon  the  stomach  ;

c  could  not  bear  tight  clothing ;  the  pain never  entirely
but  was  sometimes  moderate,  and  then  gradually

came  very  severe  ;  tendency  to  constipation  ;  an  obstinate,
wearisome.spasmodic  cough,  which  aggravated  the  gastralgia,
the  cough  increased  by  talking,  running,  and  by  emotion.

Dr.  Gauwerky  reports  a  cure  of  cancer  in  the  stomachy
and  Dr.  Stens  of  cancer  on  the  lip,  with  Conium ;  the  details
not  given.*

Drs.  fiiirkner  and  Heil  report'  cases  of  cancer  of  the


>  Ankiv,  viii.,  pari  X,  p.  70.

'  jtrrhhi,  iv.,  pait  2,  p.  24.


^Alt^mtitu  Homaopathistke  Ztit-
mmg,  xli»^  p.  70.

*  llirKhcl's  Ztitttkhflt  iv.,  pp.  67,
58,130.


454


COOTUM MACULATUB4.


Stomach  and  perforating  ulcer  of  the  stomach  respectively,
in  which  the  diagnosis  can  hardly  be  questioned,  and  which
were  ultimately  fatal.  Conium,  however,  caused  such
marked  improvement  in  both  cases,  that  we  may  suppose
they  might  have  been  cured,  had  they  come  under  treatment
earlier.

Dr.  Battmann reports^  a  case  of  enlargement  of the
mesenteric  glands,  ending  in  suppuration  and  a  large  abscess,
which was  opened near the  umbilicus. The  patient  wat
terribly  reduced,  the  abscess  continued  to  discharge  and  thes„^
tumor to grow  until Conium was administered, wheiE^^
improvement  set  in  and  the  boy  rapidly  recovered.

In  enfeebled  conditions  of  tlie  male  sexual  organs,  whethe^»^
these  result  from  self-abuse  or  from  excessive  vener^^^-^.
Conium  has  proved  a  valuable  remedy.  Lobethal,  Ehrhanl.£>'3
Marschall,  Hartmann,  bear  witness  to  its  value.

I  have  used  it  successfully  where,  along  with  weakne
Uiere  also  was  much  sexual  erethism,  amatory  tllouglrf^^
occurring  and  even  emissions  being  provoked  by  the  m^^.^-^
presence  of  women,  lo  tlic  great  annoyance  of  tlie  patie-^^^^
In  this  regard,  Conium  belongs  to  the  same  group  as  Scpc^^ou
Selenium,  and  Getseminum.

Hahnemann  *  suggests  that  Conium  would  be  an  effici  -v^rf
remedy in tJiat kind of hypochondriac's which  ^"'*" -sja
unmarried  men  of  chaste  habits. It  is  singular  that JUr.
Hariey  should  have  been  led  to  hold  similar  views. (Or  Earr
not?)

Griessclich*  says  that  Conium  relieves  delayed  and  sca-niy
menstruation,  accompanied by  symptoms  which  point to
congestions in other  organs, and especially when tHc  ^
mammx  are  lax  and  shrunken.  fl

Hartmann  says:*  "Conium  is  an  excellent  remedy  wboi
menstruation  fails  to  appear,  but  instead  thereof,  every  ft>«r


'  AllgfmfJMt  Ilemteo^this<k»  Ztit-
>^g,  '»»..  P-  163.
■  Materia  Mtdiea  Pura,  I*.,  p.  aj8.


*  Ifygm,  «Ki..  p.  195.

*  Thfraftt,  ii.,  p.  610.


CONIUM MACULATUM.


455


weeks,  there  is  great  sensitiveness  of  the  outer  and  inner
pudenda;  constant  dry  heat  of  the  body,  without  thirst;
with  anxious  dreams  and  heaviness  in  all  tlie  limbs ;  disposi-
tion to  weep;  restlessness;  anxious  care  about  evcty  trifle;
and  piercing  pain  in  the  region  of  U»c  liver,  often  lasting
several  days,  and  much  enfeebling  the  whole  body."  I
would  add  to  the  above,  tenderness  of  the  mammx.

Hartmann  likewise  says:  "In  the  hysterical  attacks  and
spasms  no  remedy  is  more  suitable  than  Conium  often  is.
Most  of  the  symptoms  in  these  cases  originate  In  the  sexual
system. The  patients  often complain of  itching in and

I  about  the  pudenda,  with  pain  like  the  downward  pressure
of  tiic  uterus,  and  stitches  in  the  vagina;  menses  suppressed
or  dehctent;  leucorrhtsa  acrid,  with  frequent  constricting
' pains  in  the  abdomen ;  pressure  in  the  ccsophagus.  as  if  a

I  bail  were  rising  from  the  stomach  to  the  pharynx;  depres-
sion; discontent;  disposition  to  weep  when  alone.  Palpita-
tion and  pain  with  every  pulsation,  as  if  a  knife  were  thrust
through  the  occiput,  with  irregular  pulse.
Clinical  experience  has  shown  the  power  of  Comutn
to  arrest  the  growth  of  fibrous  tumors  of  the  uterus,  as  I
have  had  several  occasions  to  observe.  The  indications
must,  in  such  cases,  be  derived  from  the  concomitant
symptoms.  One  which  I  have  several  times  observed,  and
^vhich  has  led  me  to  tlie  successful  use  of  Conium,  is  this:
•  Symptom  441,  after  every  stool,  trembling  weakness."
Tumors  of  a  suspicious  nature  in  tlie  mammx  have  been
used  to  disappear  by  the  use  of  Conium.  They  are
enerally  the  seat  of  piercing  pains,  much  worse  at  night
e  rest  of  the  gland  is  abnormally  tender.  I  have  had
veral  such  cases.

Hartung  reports'  a  "tumor  of  the  right  mamma,  of  a
stony  hardness,  irregular  surface,  the  seat  of  stitching  pains;
upon  it  a  raw,  irregular,  motst elevation;  swelling  of  tlie
I  .axillary  glands. All  disappearing  under  Conium.


ffygw,  xiili.,  13s.  from  Fragmtntader  kmUrlatienem  Stkri/tm
Uaktumamn't.


4$6


CONIUM MACULATUM,


Caspar!  reports  a  scirrhus  of  the  left  breast  following
blow,  cured  by  Contum.

In  a  case  of  mine  in  which  Conium  relieved  the  pwi^j
but  did  nothing  more,  Clematis  erecta  caused  the  disapf
ancc  of  the  tumor.

The  action  of  Conium  in  curing  spasmodic,  dry  cou{
worse  in  the  evening  and  at  night,  and  greatly  fatif^iing
patient,  is  witnessed  by  many  writers.  Hartmann,'  Kase-
mann,'  Hirsch,'  Mayrhofcr,'  Hartmann.*  I  have,  myselC^
very  often  observed  its  happy  action  in  such  coughs.  Like-
wise, in  whooping-cough,  it  has  been  frequently  used  with
good  effect ;  chiefly,  I  think,  however,  when,  upon  the
spasmodic  affection  a  sub-acute  bronchitis  had  supervened,
attended  by  a  cough  of  the  above  character.

Hirschel  relates*  that  a  tuberculous  youth  had,  for  a  long
time,  a  tickling  cough,  dry,  provoked  by  a  spasmodic  tidt-
llng  in  the  larynx,  which  was  not  tender  on  pressure.  TV
cough  came  on  about  six  P,  M.,  continued  several  hours,  aod
was  very  wearisome. Conium',  one  dose,  cured  the  cou^

Schwenke  reports'^  a  singular  case.  In  a  lad  of  tlurtRii
years,  a  noise,  apparently  from  tlie  larynx,  like  tfaa— 1\
tha — h,  was  heard,  with  respiration  so  loud  and  disturiiiiij
that  he  was  dismissed  from  school.  The  muscles  of  the
right  side  of  tlie  face  were  subject  to  spasmodic  t>vitchings
which  preceded  an  increase  of  the  noise.  He  also  ran-
plained  of  spasmodic  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  glotdi;
swelling  of  the  glands. Conium'  effected  a  permanent  curt

Cures  of  ecrema  are  reported  by  Hartlaub,  Seidel  and
Schron.

Enlargement  and  induration  of  the  glands,  in  whattic
locality,  find  in  Conium,  according  to  Hartmann,  their  moc


'  Tkttvpie,  i.,  ris.
•/0'A'M,x.,359.

'  Attjjitmtiiu  J/vmm>fathiiehf  Ztit-
mng,  iw.,  308.

•  'OX"".  «"ii-.49S'


ung,\i.,  109.

•  ZeUi(kri/t,  i,.  yy.

^  AtlgrmHrnt  /iamt^^aHitrit  I*
tnf,  Ix.,  154.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  4S7

frequently  efficient  remedy ;  a  statement  confirmed  by  much
clinical  testimony.

These  citations  might  be  widely  extended.  What  has
been  said  will  suffice,  however,  to  show  the  application  of
Conium,  according  to  the  Homoeopathic  law,  and  will
suggest  an  interesting  comparison  with  Dr.  Harley's  paper.


REMARKS  ON  MEZEREUM.


The  late  Dr.  Wahle,  of  Rome,  one  of  the  most  distin-
guished of  Hahnemann's  own  pupils,  and  well  known  by  his
acquirements  In  the  science  of  Materia  Medica,  considered
the  proving  of  Mezereum,  which  was  first  published  in  the
fourth  volume  of  the  Arcktv,  to  be  both  erroneous  ant^KL
defective.

It  is  no  very  uncommon  thing  to  find  a  Homoeopath  wbc^^^AO
considers  a  portion  or  the  whole  of  our  Materia  Medics-= — y--^
defective. But  the  peculiarity  which  distinguished  Wahl'^C^^e
was  this :  whenever  he  saw  an  error  or  a  defect,  he  thougt
it  his  duty  rather  to  go  to  work  and  correct  the  error
supply  the  defect,  than  simply  to  expose  them  and  denounc
the  Materia  Medica,  taking  credit  meanwhile for  his  01
acuteness. Accordingly,  he instituted a new proving  c
Mezereum,  of  which  a  number  of  the  symptoms  are  hei
given. They  were  given  me  by  his  son,  the  present
Wahle,  from  whom  we  may  expect  a  volume  of  his  fathei
provings  when  peace  and  liberty  shall  prevail  in  the  Pa
States  /

Scalp  and  Face.

1.  The  head  is  covered  with  a  thick,  leather-like
under  which  thick  and  white  pus  collects  here  and  thi
and  the  hair  is  glued  together.

2.  On  the  head,  great,  elevated  white  scabs,  under  whi<
ichor  collects  in  quantity,  and  which  begins  to  be  ofiensl
and  to  breed  vermin.

3.  The  scabs  on  the  head  look  chalky,  and  extend  to
eyebrows  and  to  the  nape  of  the  neck.


REMARKS ON MEZEREUM.


459


4.  Gray,  earthy  complexion.

5.  The  child  scratches  the  face  continually;  it  becomes
covered  with  blood.  The  face  and  forehead  are  red  and
hot,  with  great  restlessness  and  peevishness.  In  the  night
the  child  scratches  its  face  so  that  the  bed  is  covered  with
blood  in  the  morning;  and  the  (ace  is  covered  with  a  scab
which  the  child  keeps  constantly  tearing  off  anew,  and  oa
the  spots  thus  left,  raw,  lat^c,  "fat"  pustules  form.

6.  The  ichor  from  the  scratched  place  excoriates  otlier
parts.

7.  The  skin  of  the  face  is  of  a  deep  inflammatory  redness,
^ind  the  eruption  is  "fat"  and  moist. (Impetigo.)

8.  A  honey-tike  scab  around  the  mouth.

•f^idney.
K 9.  Sticking  in  the  kidney  and  pain  as  if  torn.

■ 10.  Menses  too  frequent,  and  lasting  too  long.

^taryirj.

1 1 .  In  the  larynx  a  tickling  as  if  with  a  feather,  which
-^^auscs  coughing. When he has  eaten  anything  he  must

^ough  until  he  vomits  it  up  again. The  vomited  matter  is
^30ur  or  bitter.

12.  Cough,  with  retching  and  scratching,  or  scraping  in
the  pit  of  the  Uiroat,  as  if  something  sweet  lay  there  which
<annot  be  coughed  up.

Im 13.  Between  six  and  seven  A.  M.  moderate  cough — at  no

H  other  time.

H 14.  Dry  cough  day  and  night,  with  emaciation  and  loss

H  «f  strength,  with  tensive  pains  across  the  thorax.

H 15.  Sticking  in  the  right  side  of  the  thorax.

H (Note  by  Dr.  Wahle. Mezcreum  cures  no  small  propor-

H  tion  of  cases  of  whooping-cough.)


4fiO


REMARKS  ON  MEZS&BVIf.


Inferior  Extremities.

16.  Between  the  Glutei,  four  large  scabs  surrounded  by
dark  redness  and  on  hardened  bases.

17.  Itching  in  the  hollow  of  the  right  knee.

18.  Pains  in  the  periosteum  of  the  long  bones,  especially
^c  tibiae,  worse  at  night  and  in  bed;  at  this  time  the  least
touch  is  intolerable.

ig.  The  whole  shin  is  covered  with  elevated  white  scabs.

General.

20.  Itching  and  burning  in  the  arms  and  legs,  and,
scratching,  violent  stickings  as  \Wth  needles.

2t.  The  fiery  red  inflammation  of  the  knuckles  of  the  l«
foot  extends  over  the  instep  and  calf,  and  hard  tubcrct
form  in  the  cellular  tissue,  which  itch  on  the  slightest  toucl'  -^f\^
and  violent  burning  pains  ensue.

Skin.

22.  Blotches  break  out  over  the  whole  body.

23.  Eruption — pale  red,  itching  after  scratching,
scabs  are  adherent  and  depressed  in  the  center.

24.  Ulcers, covered  with thick,  whitish,  yellow  sea'
under  which  thick  yellow  pus  collects.

25.  Throbbing  around tlie ulcer,  and,  endrcling  it»
bright  red  areola  with  burning  pain.

26.  In  the  ulcers,  burning  pain  in  the  evening  tn  bed.

27.  Around  the  ulcers,  fiery  red  areolae,  shining  lik^
mirror.

28.  Vesicles  appear  around  the  ulcers,  itching  violcra*Jy
and  burning  like  fire. After  eight  days  these  vesicles
up,  leaving  scabs,  the  tearing  ofT  of  which  causes  great  pj
and  retards  the  healing.

29.  The parts affected  feel,  on  being  touched, as
swollen,  which  is  not  the  case.

30.  Linen  or  charpic  sticks  to  the  ulcers ;  when  it  b  ■t*::*'^
away  they  bleed.


REMARKS  ON  HBZEREUM.  461

These  symptoms  suggest  at  once  the  applicability  of
Mezereum  to  Cnista  lactea,  to  various  forms  of  pure  Impeti-
go, and  to  some  of  those  mercurial  or  mercurio -syphilitic
ulcers  on  the  lower  extremities  which  often  prove  so  difficult
to  cure.  I  have  frequently  had  occasion  to  witness  the
prompt  curative  action  of  Mezereum  in  these  affections,  in
which  I  have  generally  used  the  two  hundredth  potency.
This  has  proved  efficacious  in  cases  in  which  the  lower
dilutions  have  been  inert

The  characteristics  of  the  Mezereum  skin-diseases  are
well  defined  in  the  above  symptoms,  viz. :

Itching  occurring  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  aggravated
and  changed  to  burning  by  touch  or  by  scratching.  Sensi-
tiveness to  touch.

Ulcers  with  an  areola,  sensitive  and  easily  bleeding,  pain-
ful at  night;  the  pus  tends  to  form  an  adherent  scab,  under
which  a  quantity  of  pus  collects.  A  close  relationship  is
shown  by  these  symptoms  to  exist  between  Mezereum  and
Arsenicum,  Asafoetida  and  Mercurius.


DEAFNESS  CURED  BY  MEZEREUM.


G.  W.  W.,  aged  seventeen  years,  small,  but  well  pi
portioned  and  of  good  constitution,  healthy  since  his  ni:
year,  has  been  deaf  since  he  was  four  years  old. Wh
three  years  of  age,  he  had  an  eruptive  disease  of  the  wh<
scalp,  which, after  resisting for  a  year all the nuli
methods  of  allopathic  treatment,  was  finally  caused  to  di
pear,  in  the  following  manner : A  tar-cap  was  placed  u
the  head,  and  when  firmly  adherent  to  the  scabs,  was  violen
torn  off. The  scabs  came  with  it,  leaving  the  whole  sc_
raw. This  raw  surface  was moistened  with  a  saturar
solution  of  nitrate  of  silver. The  eruption did  not
appear ;  but  from  that  time  the  child  was  deaf.

"The  condition  of the youth now  excites the earara. ^g^
solicitude  of  his  friends. His  inability  to  move  in  soci^^Vy
or  to  get  a  situation  in  business,  on  account  of  his  dea&i^siao
has  produced  a  morbid  state  of  mind. He  broodis  over Tj^
infirmity,  and  secludes  himself  even  from  his  own  family.  * '

Under  these  circumstances,  he  applied  to  me  to  be  cxtrcd
of  his  deafness. His  present  condition  is  as  follows : Hi-
is  quite  unable  to  hear  ordinary  conversation,  and  has  never
heard  a  sermon  in  his  life. A  loud-ticking  lever  watch  can
be  heard  at  a  distance  of  three  and  a  half  inches  from  eitlKr
ear. On  application  of  the  watch  to  his  forehead,  or  to  tbe
teeth,  he  hears  it  distinctly. Occasional  buzzing  noises  in  front
of  the  ears. A  physical  examination  of  his  ears  reveals  tiK
following  condition :  The  external  meatus  is  abundantly  sup-  ''^

plied  with  soft,  normal  wax.  The  membrana  tympani  is  white,


ii


opaque,  and  evidently  thickened.  When  the  patient  attempts ■  ^

to  inflate  the  middle  ear  (which  he  accomplishes,  with  grot ■  *"

■  (Us


DEAFNESS  CURED BY MEZEREUM.


463


difficulty,  by  closing  both  mouth  and  nose  and  making  a
forcible  expiration),  the  mcmbrana  tympant  becomes  but
very  slightly  convex,  and  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish
its  distended  blood-vessels.  There  has  evidcndy  been  a
deposit  in  the  substance  of  the  membrane.  On  examination
of  the  throat,  it  appears  that  the  orifice  of  the  eustachian
tube  is  free.

Feb.  3,  [857.  Patient  received  a  powder  containing
three  globules  of  Mezereum**,  to  be  taken  on  retiring.

Feb.  24.  Thinks  he  hears  better — "every  sound  seems
much  louder  than  before."  Hears  my  watch  at  a  distance  of
four  and  a  half  inches  from  the  right  ear,  and  four  and  a
quarter  from  the  Icflear. Saccharum  lactis.

March  i.  Mas  not  improved  during  the  last  week.  Meie-
reum*',  three  globules.

f  March  27.  Hears  my  watch,  with  the  right  car,  six  and
a  half  inches,  and  ftith  the  left  car,  seven  inches.  Saccha-
rum lactis.

April  20.  Hears  my  watch,  with  the  right  ear,  at  a
distance  of  ten  inches,  and  witli  tlie  left,  at  a  distance  of
fourteen  inches.  Hears  ordinary  conversation  easily,  with
attention. Saccharum  lactis.

Sept.  28.  Has  been  steadily  improving  until  three  weeks
ago,  when  he  became  more  deaf  again,  without  apparent
cause. Mezercum**,  three  globules,  on  retiring.

Jan.  26,  1858.  Hears  my  watch  at  a  distance  of  fourteen
inches  from  the  right  ear,  and  twenty-four  inches  from
the  left  ear.  Deafness  returns  when  he  takes  cold,  but
disappears  with  the  cold.  Mezereum*,  three  globules,  on
retiring.

March  1 9.  To  his  surprise,  on  going  to  church,  although
seated  at  the  extreme  end  of  a  very  large  building,  he  dis-
tinctly heard  the  whole  sermon — for  tlie  first  time  in  his  life.
On  physical  examination,  the  opacity  of  the  mcmbrana  tym-
pani  is  found  to  have  disappeared,  and  its  elasticity  to  have
sensibly  increased.


404


DEAFNESS  CURED  BY  HEZEREUM.


May  24.  Patient  writes  me  that  he  has  obtained,  witti-
out  difBculty,  a  situation  in  a  store,  and  that  he  is  no  longer
conscious  of  being  deaf.  His  sole  difficulty  is  that,  as  he  has
the  reputation  of  being  deaf,  everybody  shouts  at  him.
His  father  Myites,  that  the  son's  hearing  is  "  perfectly
restored."


Rejcarks.  The  success  of  the  treatment  resorted  to  in
this  case  warrants  a  few  remarks  upon  its  rationale.  Here
was  a  case  which  presented  to  the  practitioner  apparently
nothing  on  which  to  base  a  prescription.  There  was  a  thick-
ened membrana  tympani — nolliing  more.  The  work  of
thickening  had  probably  been  accomplished  years  ago.  Here
was  a  patko!agic0-anatQmical  condition^  but  no  pathologkat
process  and,  consequently,  tliere  were  no  abnormally  per-
formed functions — or,  in  other  words,  no  symptoms  of
disease — from  which  to  draw  indications  for  the  treatment
The  pathologico-aiiatomical.rtffff///fV>n  threw  no  certain  light
on  the  pathological  process  which  had  produced  it — just  as
a  knowledge  of  the  town,  at  which  a  traveler  has  arrived,
gives  no  certain  clue  to  the  road  by  which  he  readied  it

But,  as  Hahnemann  advised  his  disciples,  the  history  of  a
case  is  often  of  the  utmost  importance  in  determining  the
treatment  In  the  case  before  us  the  coincidence  between
the  violent  removal  of  the  tinea  capitis  by  nitrate  of  silver,
and  the  appearance  of  the  deafness,  was  too  marked  to
escape  notice.  It  could  not  fail  to  occur  to  the  practittoner
that  the  scalp  disease  was  one  phase  of  a  psoric  afiection,  as
Hahnemann  would  have  called  it,  or  of  a  dyscrasia,  as  the
modern  school  of  German  pathologists  would  say  (for  the
doctrine  of  the  dyscrasias  is  but  a  rehash  of  Halmcmann's
psora  theory),  and  tliat  this  affection,  disturbed  in  its  locali-
zation upon  the  scalp,  had  transferred  itself  to  the  tissues  of
the  ear.  It  further  occurred  to  me  that,  since  in  this  latter
localization  there  were  no  sufHcient  indications  for  a  pre-
scription, I  might  find  such  indications  in  the  phenomena  a/


DEAFNESS  CURED BY MEZEREUM.  465

the  former  localization  upon  the  scalp.  I  accordingly
addressed  myself  to  the  task  of  getting  a  complete  picture
of  this  affection,  which  had  disappeared  thirteen  years  before.
By  good  fortune,  the  mother  of  the  patient  was  possessed
of  a  good  memory,  and  of  very  excellent  powers  of  descrip-
tion, and  from  her  I  learned  that  "  thick,  whitish  scabs,  hard
and  almost  horny,  covered  the  whole  scalp.  There  were
fissures  in  the  scales,  through  which,  on  pressure,  there
exuded  a  thick,  yellowish  pus,  often  very  offensive.  There
was  great  itching,  and  a  disposition  to  tear  off  the  scabs
with  the  finger-nails — especially  troublesome  at  night."

The  remedy  which  corresponds  most  closely,  in  its  patho-
genesis, with  the  above  group  of  symptoms,  is  undoubtedly
Mezereum.  In  the  introduction  to  the  proving  of  that  drug,
in  the  Chronic  Diseases,  vol.  iv.,  Hahnemann  recommends
it  for  moist  eruptions  of  the  scalp.  In  the  proving,  in  the
Archiv,  vol.  iv.,  many  symptoms  point  to  a  similar  erup-
tion— itching,  especially,  at  night;  but  the  conclusive  group
of  pathogenetic  symptoms  is  the  following,  from  a  new
proving  of  Mezereum,  by  the  late  Dr.  Wahle,  of  Rome,  of
which  the  manuscript  was  shown  me  by  his  son,  the  present
Dr.  Wahle:

"  Head  covered  over  with  a  thick  leather-like  crust,  under
which  thick  white  pus  collects  here  and  there,  and  the  hair
is  glued  together ;  on  the  head,  great,  elevated,  irregular,
white  scabs,  under  which  pus  collects  in  quantity,  and
becomes  offensive  and  breeds  vermin.  The  child  keeps
scratching  its  face  and  head  at  night,  and  continually  tears
off  the  scabs."

The  resemblance  between  these  groups  of  symptoms  was
so  striking  that  Mezereum  was  at  once  selected  as  the
remedy  for  this  case  oi  deafness,  just  as  if  the  scalp  affection
had  been  still  in  its  original  form,  and  had  been  the  imme<
diate  object  of  the  prescription.

It  not  unfrequently  occurs  that  we  are  called  upon  to
31


466  PEAFNESS  CURED BY MEZEREUM.

than  active  diseases.  In  such  cases  it  would  seem  that  we
may  often  successfully  base  a  prescription  upon  the  symp-
toms of  a  diseased  condition  which  no 'longer  exists,  but
which  form  in  reality  a  part  of  the  case.  It  may  not  be
amiss  to  call  attention  to  the  completeness  of  the  corrobora-
tion which  this  case  affords  (were  any  needed)  of  Hahne-
mann's psora  theory.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that
Hahnemann  had  no  idea  of  restricting  the  appellation  psora
to  itch,  as  we  understand  that  term,  that  is  to  the  disease
caused  by  the  acarus.  On  the  contrary,  in  his  Chronic
Diseases,  vol.  iv!,  he  expressly  includes  under  it  various
forms,  as  "Itch,  Tinea  Capitis,  Herpes,  etc."


CROUP  CURED  BY  BCENNINGHAUSEN'S
POWDERS.


On  the  evening  of  January  24th,  I  received  a  message  to
the  effect  that  a  little  boy,  aged  eighteen  months,  fat  and
healthy,  was  slightly  feverish,  and  somewhat  hoarse.  I  was
requested  to  send  some  medicine.  I  sent  a  powder  of
Aconite",  mentioning  to  the  messenger  that  croup  might
perhaps  be  threatening,  and  requesting  to  be  sent  for  on  the
first  indications  of  that  disease.  The  next  morning  I  was
told  that  the  child  was  not  much  better,  and  was  requested
to  visit  it  in  the  course  of  the  day.  I  went  immediately.
As  soon  as  the  hall-door  was  opened,  I  heard  the  hoarse
ringing  respiration  of  the  child,  which  was  in  the  second
story,  and  which  I  found  sitting  up  in  its  crib,  with  an
expression  of  great  anguish,  breathing  at  the  rate  of  35  in
the  minute  and  with  great  labor.  There  was  but  little  cough;
occasionally,  an  effort  which  resulted  in  a  hoarse  dry  bark,
but  which  was  immediately  suppressed,  apparently  because
it  interfered  with  respiration.  The  face  was  turgid  and  of  a
purple  hue.  The  hands  were  frequently  applied  convul-
sively to  the  larynx,  but  as  a  general  thing  the  child  was
quiet,  looking  with  pitiful  appealing  eyes  to  the  by-stander  as
if  for  aid.  The  skin  was  hot  and  dry  except  on  the  fore-
head, which  was  moist  and  cool,  pulse  hard,  not  full,  130.
On  saying  to  the  mother,  "  The  child  is  exceedingly  ill,"  I
was  told,  "  He  has  been  as  bad  if  not  worse  all  night."  He
had  vomited  once,  about  an  hour  before  my  arrival,  bring-
ing up  a  small  piece  of  tough  membrane.

Here  was  a  case  of  membranous  croup  of  great  severity,
which  had  been  in  full  blast  at  least  twelve  hours  before  I


468  CROUP CURED

was  called  to  it ;  in  which  the  purple  turgid  face  and  the
exhausted  aspect  of  the  child  showed  that  the  powers  of
life  had  already  begun  to  fail  under  the  imperfect  decarboni-
zation  of  the  blood.  Considering  the  gravity  of  the  case,
and  its  long  duration  before  treatment  was  begun,  I  hesifeited
to  give  the  powdere  recommended  by  Boenninghausen,  but
gave  at  once  Bromine,  first  centesimal,  in  water,  a  tea-
spoonful  of  the  solution  every  fifteen  minutes.

At  the  end  of  two  hours  the  child  was  in  no  respect
better;  the  pulse  was  weaker  and  more  frequent ;  there  had
been  no  relief  for  an  instant  to  the  labored  character  of  the
respiration,  which  numbered  now  40  in  the  minute.  I  gave
Hepar  sulphuris,  second  trituration,  alternately  with  the
Bromine.  At  the  end  of  two  hours  there  was  still  no  change
for  the  better ;  the  disease  was  steadily  advancing,  as  it
seemed,  to  a  fatal  termination.  Already  it  had  reached  a
point  at  which  I  have  seen  both  Guersant  and  Trousseau  at
the  Enfans  Malades  refuse  to  perform  tracheotomy,  on  the
ground  that  the  disease  had,  by  its  long  duration,  so  pre-
vented oxygenation  of  the  blood  and  consequent  renovation
of  tissues  that  a  favorable  issue could  not  be hoped  for.

I  determined  now  to  give  the  Bcenninghausen  powders;
waiting  therefore  a  half  hour  from  the  time  at  which  the  last
dose  of  the  Hepar  was  given,  I  gave  a  powder  of  Aconite'*,
to  be  followed  at  intervals  of  a  half  hour  by  Hepar  ^,
Spongia^,  and  this  series  repeated  (the  method  indicated
in  a  foot-note  to  my  translation  of  Boenninghausen's  article).'
It  was  now  5  P.  M.,  a  time  of  day  after  which  croup  gen-
erally begins  to  be  aggravated.  At  7  o'clock  the  child  was
greatly  relieved,  respiration  30  in  the  minute,  much  less
labored,  the  sound  softer,  cough  rather  more  frequent  and
somewhat  loose  in  sound.  I  left  a  second  series  of  the  pow-
ders to  be  taken  at  intervals  of  one  hour. The  child  slept  at

II  P.  M.,  and  at  intervals  during  the  night,  and  the  next
morning  was  so much  better  that  it  seemed  unnecessary

^American  Homaopathit  Revitw,  vol.  ii.,  p.  2ia.


BY  BCENNINGHAU  SEN'S POWDERS.  469

to  give  more  medicine,  although  I  left  a  series  of  the  pow-
ders to  be  given  in  case  of  a  relapse.  They  were  not  given^
however.  The  child  recovered  rapidly  without  relapse  or
sequelae  of  any  kind,  and  on  the  fifth  day  was  as  well  as
usual.

This  was  unquestionably  the  most  severe  case  of  croup
that  I  have  ever  seen  recover  in  this  or  any  country.
Judging  from  my  experience  with  Bromine  and  Hepar  in
other  cases,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that,  not  acting
more  evidently  and  more  promptly  than  they  appeared  to  do
in  this  case,  nothing  whatever  was  to  be  hoped  for  from  them.
In  croup,  if  they  act  beneficially  at  all,  they  do  so  promptly.
child  in  any  degree  to  these  remedies  or  to  deny  the  curative
action  of  the  Boenninghausen  powders.


CHRONIC DIARRHCEA CURED BY  A SINGLE
DOSE  OF  A  HIGH  POTENCY.

Charles  C ,  aged  ten  years,  has  had  diarrhoea  ever

since  he  was  four  years  old ;  has  been  subjected  to  various
modes  of  treatment,  including  the  Homceopathic,  but  with-
out any  material  benefit. He  is  of  good  height  for  his  age,
but  is  emaciated  to  an  extraordinary  degree ; — not  only  are
his  tissues  utterly  devoid  of  fat,  but  the  muscles  are  wonder-
fully attenuated; — my  thumb  and  finger  meet  with  ease
around  the  middle  of  his  arm. Nevertheless,  he  is  active
and  full  of  fun. His  appetite  is  prodigious ; thirst very
great; he  complains  of  distress in the  epigastric region,
which  is  much  greater  just  before  a  stool,  compelling  him  to
press  his  hand  upon  that  region  and  bend  forward ;  this  is
relieved  to  some  extent  by  a  movement  of  the  bowels. The
epigastrium  is sensitive  When touched. The  abdomen  is
greatly  distended ;  this  is  habitual ;  it  is  hard  and  tympa-
nitic ;  by  forcible  manipulation,  one  can  detect  hard  ovoid
bodies,  deep  in  the  abdomen,  as  large  as  a  pigeon's  egg.
The  number  of  stools  in  twenty-four  hours  varies  from  five
to  twenty. They  are  copious,  pappy,  of  a  dark  greenish-
brown  color,  quite  offensive. TTiey  occur  chiefly during  a
period  from  4  A.  M.  to  noon — seldom  after  noon  or  before
midnight. Though  so  copious,  they  do  not  produce  faint-
ness  or  a  sense  of  weakness,  nor  does  the  boy  complain  of
debility,  although  aware  that  he is  not  so  strong  as  other
boys  of  his  age. On  the  contrary,  he  is  lively  and  full  of
mischief,  his  chief  complaint  being  of  the  very  frequent  pain
"grumbling  pain,"  and  sometimes,  "a  very  sharp  squeeze."

Of  the  particulars  of  his  previous  treatment  I  could  learn


CHROMC DIARRH(£A CURED.


47"


but  little.  During  the  summer  preceding  my  first  visit  to
him  he  had  been  under  homteopathic  treatment  (not  in  this
village'),  and  I  was  told  that  he  had  taken  a  good  deal  of
Arsenicum,  which,  however,  to  the  great  surprise  of  his  phy-
sician had  done  him  no  good.

And,  indeed,  on  a  hasty  review  of  the  symptoms,  it  might
seem  extraordinary'  that  Arsenicum  should  have  failed  to
cure  the  case.  The  dark,  pappy,  offensive  stools,  preceded
by  tolerably  acute  pain  in  the  abdomen,  with  great  and
excessive  emaciation,  comprehend,  to  speak  with  tlic  patliol-
ogists  of  our  school,  the  essential  features  of  this  present
disease  of  the  alimentary  canal,  and,  moreover,  present  a
fair  simile  to  the  Arsenicum  disease.  A  carcfii)  examina-
tion, however,  will  show  that  some  even  of  these  symptoms
vary  in  important  aspects  from  the  corresponding  symptoms
of  Arsenicum,  while  other  symptoms  which  betray  the
diathesis  of  the  patient  are  quite  at  variance  with  those  of
Arsenicum.  For  exampU,  in  the  first  place,  the  thirst,
although  very  great,  is  not  satisfied  by  a  small  quantity  of
water,  as  in  the  Arsenicum  disease;  the  stool,  though
similar  in  color,  consistency  and  odor  to  that  of  Arsenicum,
is  eopioHS,  that  of  Arsenicum  being,  like  all  the  secretions
under  that  drug,  scanty.  It  is  not  attended  by  as  great  a
sense  of  exhaustion  as  one  would  expect  to  find.  Indeed,
the  debility  and  muscular  weakness  arc  muck  less  than  one
would  suppose  must  result  from  a  diarrlKta  so  copious  and
of  so  long  duration,  whereas  in  the  Arsenicum  disea.se,  the
general  prostration  is  much  greater  than  can  be  accounted
for  by  the  actual  drain  upon  the  system.  In  the  second
place,  the  aggra\'ations  occur  in  the  mornings,  while  in  the
Arsenicum  disease  they  occur  almost  exclusively  in  the
^xienings.  The  abdomen  is  di^stended  and  hard,  making  the
child  quite  pot-bellied,  whereas  Arsenicum  produces  retrac-
tion of  the  abdominal  walls  and  concavity  of  the  abdomen.
The  appetite  is  very  great,  a  symptom  which  is  not  charac-
teristic of  Arsenicum.

■  Newbureh,  N.  Y.


472  CHRONIC DIARRHCEA CURED

Then  it  appears,  although  the  symptom  to  which  my
attention  was  first  called,  as  being  the  symptom  of  chief
importance,  seemed  to  point  to  Arsenicum  as  its  remedy,
yet  the  conditions  and  concomitants  of  that  symptom  and
the  general  symptoms  of  the  patient  did  not  at  all  demand,
but  decidedly  contra- indicated,  that  remedy.

But  with  what  propriety  can  the  diarrhoea,  the  frequent
liquid  stool,  be  regarded  as  the  symptom  of  chief  impor-
tance, the  primary  symptom,  so  to  speak  ? It  is  that  symp-
tom which  would  first  strike  the  observation  of  the  patient's
friends,  because  so  decidedly  objective  in  its  character ;  but
it  is  obviously  a  secondary  phenomenon,  depending  on  the
diseased  state  of  the  alimentary  canal  and  of  the  mesenteric
glands; and  this  diseased  state  depended unquestionably
upon  a  general  depressed  state  of  the  vascular  and  nervous
systems,  or  upon  a  modified  vital  action,  which is  mani-
fested in  those  general  symptoms,  upon  which  we  predicate
distinctions  of  dyscrasia  and  diathesis. Taking  this  view  of
the  case,  it  is  evident  that  to  assign  the  chief  place  in  our
for  symptoms  (and  secondary  ones  at  that)  rather  than  for
the  whole  morbid  state  of  the  patient. But  if,  in  accordance
with  the  view  I  have  indicated,  we  give  but  a  secondary
place  to  the  diarrhoea,  it  becomes  easy  to  find  a  remedy  for
our  case. The  distended,  prominent  abdomen,  the  indurated ^
and  enlarged  glands,  the  excessive  appetite,  the  great  thirst,
demanding  large  draughts  of  water,  the  pain  in  the  upper  partjr^^^^
of  the  abdomen  just  before  the  stool,  the  tender  epigastrium  ,^-~,^
the  copious  and  long-continued  diarrhcea,  without  correspond^^^^.
ing  exhaustion, — all  these  symptoms  combine  to  exhibit
condition  which  finds  its  exact  simile  in  Calcarea  carbonic^,^
Moreover,  although  Calcarea  does  not  produce  stools  of  t^^e
color  met  with  in this case, yet the conditions of  stOc/
produced  by  Calcarea  correspond  to  those of  the  case iti
hand. The  aggravations  of  Calcarea  are  frequently  in  t/ie
morning,  and  the  pain  in  the  abdomen  is  relieved  by  warmtft


BY  A  S!NGLE DOSE OF A HIGH POTENCY. 473

as  in  this  case.  Calcarea  carbonica,  therefore,  was  selected
as  the  appropriate  remedy,  and  the  propriety  of  giving  it
being  so  obvious  that  I  could  not  suppose  it  had  been  over-
looked by  the  physicians  who  had  previously  attended  the
lad,  and  there  being  every  probability  that,  if  they  gave  it
at  all,  they  gave  it  in  low  potencies,  I  concluded  to  give  the
two  hundredth.  Two  globules  were  accordingly  dissolved
in  four  ounces  of  water,  and  a  tea-spoonful  of  the  solution
ordered  to  be  given  every  four  hours.  For  the  week  pre-
ceding this  prescription  the  boy  had  had  twenty  stools  daily,
and  very  great  pain.

On  the  third  day  after  the  remedy  was  administered,  I

<:alled  again. The  lad  had  had  but  one  stool  daily  since  the

day  after  my  visit ;  and  during  the  ten  months  which  have

since  elapsed,  his  bowels  have moved  regularly,  but  once

«jaily,  the  stool  being  in  all  respects  normal. In  the  space

«f  one  month  the  lad  became  so  ruddy  and  plump — having

gained  twenty-two  pounds  in  weight — that  I  should  not  have

Tcnown  him. As  he  gained  flesh  and  strength,  the  rotundity

of  the  abdomen  disappeared,  and  at  the  end  of  the  third

month  the  indurated  abdominal  glands  were  no  longer  to  be

felt He  received  no  medicine  besides  the  single  dose  of

Calcarea  carbonica^,  above  mentioned.

It  may  seem  incredible,  and  I  confess  I  cannot  explain  it,
that  a  drain  so  long  established  and  so  copious  could  be
instantaneously  checked  without  producing  at  least  tempo-
rary disturbance  of  some  other  character.  The  fact,  how-
ever, does  not  admit  of  dispute.

In  a  review  of  this  case,  two  points  seem  worthy  of  notice.

1.  The  prompt  and  enduring  action  of  the  high  potency.
I  would  not  venture  to  say  that  a  low  potency  would  not
have  acted  as  promptly  ;  certainly,  however,  nothing  bttUr
could  be  imagined  or  desired.

2.  The  great  importance  oC  paying  careful  regard,  in  the
selectioa  of  a  remedy,  to  the  general  symptoms  of  the
patient,  as  denoting  the  dyscrasia,  and  to  the  amditums
(time  and  character  of  aggravation,  etc)  of  every  symptom.


PTERYGIUM CRASSUM CURED BY A SINGLE
REMEDY  IN  A  HIGH  POTENCY.'


The  following  case  is  thought  worthy  of  special  notice  for
several  reasons.  It  presents  an  instance  of  a  diseased  con-
dition which,  being  on  the  surface  of  the  eye,  may  be  made
the  subject  of  constant  observation  :

Such  a  condition  has  never,  so  far  as  my  knowledge  goes,
been  produced  by  any  remedy.  It  is  not  contained  in  any
proving.  A  homceopathic  prescription  for  it  must  therefore
be  based  upon  the  general  characteristic  symptoms  which
the  patient  may  present,  and  to  which  corresponding  symp-
toms may  be  found  in  some  drug-proving.

The  writer  had  never  treated  a  case  before,  and  does  not
recall  any  record  of  a  cure  made  by  homoeopathic  remedies.
He  was  not,  consequently,  influenced  in  the  selection  of  a
remedy  by  any  knowledge  ex  usu  in  morbis.

The  patient  was  not  encouraged  to  expect  a  cure,  but
looked  forward  to  a  surgical  operation  ^ls  a  matter  of  neces-
sity. There  can  be  no  ground,  then,  for  ascribing  the  cure
to  faith,  the  last  resort  of  the  credulous  incredulous,  to  whom
it  is  easier  to  believe  that  a  grave  and  material  disease  can
be  cured  by  imagination,  the  intangible,  than  by  a  high
potency,  the  imponderable !

The  cure  was  effected  by  a  single  remedy,  in  a  high
potency,  the  two  hundredth  {prepared  by  myself).

J.  N.  S.,  a  farmer,  aged  fifty-five  years, — generally  in  good
health, — has  had  for  three  years  a  pterygium  upon  each  eye.
Starting  from  the  inner  angle  oT  the  eye,  this  morbid  growth,

'  Read  before  the  Homoeojialhic  Medical  Society  of  Cayuga  County,
N.  Y.,  Jane  22,  1864.


PTERVGIUU  CRASSUM CURED.


475


which  was  thick,  opaque,  and  richly  supplied  with  large
blood-vessels,  and  much  resembled  a  strong'  muscle,  extended
over  the  sclerotic,  liaU  invaded  the  cornea  with  a  thick,  broad
extremity,  and  now  covered  more  ti»an  one-half  of  llie  pupil,
rendering  the  patient  nearly  blind.

The  conjunctiva  of  the  remaining  portion  was  deeply
injected.  The  eyes  were  filled  in  the  morning  with  a  muco-
purulent secretion.

The  patient  was  unable  to  endure  artificial  light,  and  com-
pelled to  carefully  protect  the  eyes  during  the  day-time.
Reading  was  out  of  the  question  at  all  times.

Within  the  last  six  months  the  growth  of  the  pter>'gium
had  been  very  rapid.

The  eyes  were  very  painful,  especially  in  the  evening  and
at  night  The  pain  n-as  in  the  inner  angle  of  the  eye,  a
pricking,  smarting  pain,  seeming  to  be  situated  deep  in  the
globe.  Dust  in  liie  aunosplicrc  greatly  aggravated  tlic  pain.
In  addition  there  was  a  very  severe  pressure  at  tk^  root  of
tkt  M0U  and  across  the  supra-orbital  region.  There  was
considerable  lachrymation,  especially  in  the  evening.

The  eflfect  of  this  disease  was  to  entirely  incapacitate  the
patient  for  every  kind  of  business.

In  this  condition  the  patient  placed  himsclfundcr  my  care
about  the  ist  of  July,  1863.  He  had  been  advised  that  an
operation  for  the  removal  of  the  pterygium  was  the  only
thing  to  which  he  could  look  for  relief,  but  had  also  been
told  that  in  the  present  inflamed  condition  of  the  eyes,  and
at  tlic  unfavorable  season  of  midsummer,  the  operation  would
expose  htm  to  no  inconsiderable  danger  of  sequelae  that
might  be  very  disastrous.  He  had  been  counseled  to  endure
his  present  symptoms  until  tlie  weather  should  become
colder  and  more  favorable  for  tlie  operation.

His  motive,  therefore,  in  coming  to  me  was  to  get  some
palliation  of  his  suffering,  some  temporarj*  relief,  that  the
summer  months  might  be  made  more  tolerable  to  him.

I  gave  him  no  encouragement  to  behcvc  that  I  could  do


476  PTERYGIUM CRASSUM  CURED

more  than  slightly  palliate  his  sufferings ;  for,  as  has  been
already  remarked,  I  had  never  treated  a  pterygium,  and
never  heard  of  a  homoeopathic  cure  of  one.

Seeking  a  homceopathic  remedy  for  the  case,  as  it  has
been  stated,  I  could  get  no  light  from  the  objective  symp-
toms, since  no  proving  contains  anything  like  them.
Nothing  remained  but  the  subjective  symptoms.  Of  these
the  pain,  smarting  and  pricking,  and  which  was  singularly
confined  to  the  inner  angle  of  the  eye  and  seemed  deep-
seated,  the  pushing  pain  at  the  root  of  the  nose,  the  marked
aggravation  in  the  evening, — these  symptoms  together  sug-
gested Zincum  metallicum.

In  the  proving  of  Zincum  we  find  (symptoms  194,  197,
205,  209),  biting,  pricking  and  soreness  in  the  inner  an^e
of  the  eyes ;  lachrymation,  especially  in  the  evening  ;  inflam-
mation and  redness  of  the  conjunctiva;  suppuration  of  the
inner  angle  with  soreness, — many  of  these  symptoms  being
aggravated  in  the  evening ;  symptom  248,  "  Pressure  on
the  root  of  the  nose,  as  if  it  would  be  pressed  into  the  head,
almost  intolerable,"  together  with  249-251  of  a  like  sig-
nificance.

The  other  symptoms  of  the  patient  being  well  covered  by
those  of  Zincum,  I  concluded  to  give  this  remedy.

I  felt  the  more  hope  of  some  benefit  from  it,  from  the  fact
that  my  (allopathic)  preceptor,  who  had  much  experience
and  success  in  the  treatment  of  diseases  of  the  eye,  had
often  said  that  Sulphate  of  zinc,  applied  externally,  had  a
more  beneficial  effect  in  pterygium  than  any  other  astringent
or  caustic  application.

Now,  as  Sulphate  of  zinc  is  by  no  means  so  powerful  an
astringent  or  caustic  as  many  other  substances  that  are  com-
monly used  as  applications  in  such  cases,  certainly  the  supe-
riority of  Zinc  could  not  be  attributable  to  its  mere  posses-
sion of  those  properties  which  it  has  in  common  with  other
collyria,  as,  for  example.  Nitrate  of  silver.  Sulphate  of
copper,  etc.,  etc. It  must  be  due,  then,  to  some  spediic


BY A SINGLE REMEDY IN A  HIGH POTENCY. 477

quality  of  the  Zinc.  In  passing,  let  me  venture  the  remark,
that  in  clinical  observations  like  the  above,  made  by  sagacious
allopathic  observers,  we  may  often  find  valuable  hints  to
supplement  our  pathogenetic  knowledge  of  drugs.

To  return  to  the  case,  I  determined  to  give  the  two
hundredth  potency  of  Zinc,  the  case  being,  as  it  seemed  to
me,  a  very  fine  one  for  experiment  with  a  high  potency.

I  gave  four  powders  of  sugar  of  milk,  each  containing
three  globules  of  Zincum  metalHcum^,  and  ten  additional
powders  containing  nothing  but  sugar  of  milk;  a  powder
to  be  taken  dry  on  the  tongue,  every  night  on  retiring;  the
patient  to  report  on  the  fourteenth  day.  No  change  to  be
made  in  diet,  regimen,  or  occupation.  No  external  applica-
tions to  be  made.

July  I S-  The  patient  presented  himself  and  stated  that  on
the  third  day  after  he  began  to  take  the  powders  he  began
to  fee!  much  better,  and  that  now  he  was  entirely  free  from
pain  and  discomfort  and  from  lachrymation.  The  morning
secretion  was  much  less.  I  thought  the  eye  appeared  less
inflamed,  but  beyond  this  there  was  no  change  in  its  physi-
cal condition.  I  gave  sugar  of  milk  and  requested  a  report
in  a  fortnight,  or  sooner,  in  case  the  pains  should  return.

August  I.  No  return  of  pain.  Tlie  pterygium  has  cer-
tainly diminished  in  size;  it  is  not  so  thick  and  luxuriant  as
formerly. Sugar  of  milk.

August  10.  The  patient  came  to  apprise  me  of  a  return
of  the  pains  to  moderate  extent  I  gave  three  powders  of
Zincum  metallicum^,  to  be  taken  every  night  on  retiring.

August  20.  The  pains  disappeared  after  the  first  powder
and  have  not  returned.  The  pterygium  is  evidently  de-
creasing.

Twice  again  the  pains  returned,  and  on  each  occasion  I
gave  a  powder  of  the  Zincum^.  By  the  end  of  October,
the  time  fixed  for  the  operation,  the  pterygium  had  dimin-
ished so  far  that  it  was  only  a  little  colorless  ridge  in  the
extreme inner angle  of  the eye, the sight  was entirely


4/8  PTERYGIUM CRASSUM  CURED.

restored,  the  patient  could  use  his  eyes  freely  both  by  day
and  in  the  evening;  there  was  no  longer  any  thought  of  die
operation  ;  in  fact,  it  would  have  been  hard  to  find  anything
to  operate  upon.

At  the  present  date  there  is  no  trace  of  the  pterygium
remaining  upon  the  left  eye.  In  the  inner  angle  of  the
right  eye  there  is  a  small  speck  yet  visible.


PANAMA  FE\^R  CURED  BY  ARSENICUM.


A.  J.,  aged  thirty,  strong,  muscular  and  hitherto  healthy,
sent  for  me.  He  had  been  exposed  about  eight  weeks
before,  while  on  the  isthmus  of  Panama,  to  unusual  vicissi-
tudes of  weather,  and  three  weeks  after  he  left  Panama  had
sickened  \vith  chill,  fever,  vomiting,  etc.,  more  or  less
severe,  which,  however,  he  succeeded  in  suppressing  by
targe  doses  of  quinine,  so  as  to  be  able  to  travel  for  a  few
days  at  a  time.  Three  days  before  I  saw  him  he  was  taken
with  an  unusually  severe  chill,  followed  by  high  fever  and
alternations  of  chill  and  fever,  with  severe  constitutional
symptoms,  which  continued,  notwithstanding  large  and  re-
peated doses  of  quinine,  until  I  found  him  in  the  following
condition :

Though  still  quite  stout  he  had  lost  flesh  greatly,  having
decreased  in  weight  thirty  pounds  during  the  last  month.
His  face  was  of  a  dusky  red  hue,  hot  and  dry,  eyes  injected,
dry  and  ferrety,  the  pupils  contracted,  with  a  very  restless,
anxious  expression.  The  patient  had  constant  thirst,  though
satisfied  with  a  single  swaltow  of  water  at  a  time.  The
stomach  was  excessively  irritable — drink  was  rejected  as
soon  as  taken  ;  a  profound  disgust  for  food  of  all  kinds.  The
tongue  was  covered  with  a  thick,  brownisli  coat,  and  felt  to
tlie  patient  dry,  though  not  actually  so.  When  protruded,
the  tongue  trvmbled  and  was  moved  involuntarily  back  and
forth,  in  spite  of  efforts  to  keep  it  stilL  The  hands  trembled
excessively  when  held  out,  and  the  patient  complained  of
indescribable  weakness  and  prostration.  Nevertheless,  tliere
was  uncontrollable  restlessness,  it  being  literally  impossible
to  remain  for  more  than  an  instant  in  one  position-^thc


480  PANAMA FEVER CURED BY ARSENICUM.

recumbent posture was intolerable ; alternations of  chill
and  heat,  partial  and  fugitive  in  character,  were  experienced,
each  lasting  about  fifteen  minutes,  the  heat yielding  for  a
few  moments  to  a  partial,  clammy  sweat,  which was  soon
succeeded  by  chill  again. There  were  dyspnoea  and  short,
dry  cough. The  spleen was  much  enlarged and dull  on
percussion. During  the last  two  nights  the  patient  had
been  unable  to  sleep  at  all,  but  had  been  exceedingly  rest-
less and  uncomfortable,  tormented  by  thirst The  pulse  was
140,  very  quick,  small  and  wiry. The  head  was  confused,
and  I  found  the  sensorium  much  clouded,  it  being  difficult
to  get  definite  answers  to  my  questions ;  there was,  how-
ever, a  constant  effort  to  give  expression  to  a  sense  of  great
uneasiness  and  vague  apprehension  of  severe  illness.

No  one  who  has  been  at  all  conversant  with  Panama
Fever  could  fail  to  recognize  the  gravity  of  the  above.  I
expected  to  have  a  long  and  perhaps  a  doubtful  battle  with
the  disease,  and  proceeded  accordingly  to  make  arrange-
ments for  an  indefinite  sojourn  on  the  part  of  my  patient
who  was  not  a  resident  of  this  place.'  From  the  symptoms
as  detailed,  there  could  be  no  doubt  of  the  prescription
required  at  the  moment  The  excessive  prostration,  con-
joined with  the  great  nervous  and  vascular  erethism,  the
irritability  of  the  stomach,  the  great  thirst,  satisfied  for  the
moment  by  a  small  quantity  of  water, — the  intermingled
heat,  chill  and  partial  sweat  presenting  at  no  time  a  definite
paroxysm  of  intermittent, — along  with  the  dyspnoea  and
anxiety,  and  the  peculiar  pulse,  weak  and  yet  excited,  made
it  a  matter  of  course  that  I  should  give  Arsenicum,  which
as  the  indications  were  so  clear  that  the  selection  of  the
remedy  could  not  be  a  matter  of  doubt,  I  gave  in  the  two
hundredth  potency,  deeming  this  a  very  fair  case,  both  as
regards  the  clearness  of  indication  and  the  severity  of  the
disease,  for  the  demonstration  of  the  power  of  the  high
potencies.  I  gave  at  4  P.  M.  a  powder  of  Saccharum  lactis
»  Newburgh,  N.  Y.


PANAMA FEVER CURED BY ARSENICUM.  48 1

containing  two  globules  of  Arsenicum'",  to  be  taken  dry,
and  to  be  followed  by  a  similar  powder  every  four  hours.

The  following  day  I  found  that  my  patient  had  slept
three  hours  the  night  before ;  his  stomach,  no  longer
irritable,  tolerated  beef  tea  and  toast,  the  chills  and  heat
occurred  about  once  in  four  hours,  lasting  for  a  few  moments
only ;  cough  and  dyspncea  had  disappeared.  Prostration
still  excessive,  restlessness  moderate,  intelligence  good,
tongue  and  hands  less  tremulous.  Arsenicum^  as  before,
every  six  hours.

The  third  day.  A  better  night,  no  chills  or  heat  to-day,
strength  increasing;  no  restlessness.  Arsenicum^  every
eight  hours.

The  fourth  day.  Slept  well  last  night,  feels  like  walking
out;  appetite  good,  tongue  clean. Saccharum  lactis.

The  fifth  day. Feels  quite  well  and  strong.

The  next  day  he  resumed  his  journey.  In  such  a  case,
one  would  apprehend  a  relapse  after  the  expiration  of  one,
two  or  three  weeks.  I  have  made  especial  inquiries  respect-
ing my  patient,  and  find  that  nothing  of  the  kind  has
and  he  has  steadily  gained  strength  and  flesh,  and  is  to  all
appearance  well.


3d


A  CASE  CURED  BY  MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


Mrs.  S.,  aged  hventy-seven  years,  fair  and  stout,  has  been
married  six  years,  but  never  pregnant.  Before  marriage,
menstruation  was  normal ;  soon  after  marriage,  it  became
irregular,  as  follows  :  menses  would  appear  at  intervals  of
three  or  four  months,  and  the  flow  would  continue,  with
scarcely  an  intermission,  for  twelve  or  fourteen  weeks.  The
discharge  was  generally  dark  and  thick,  accompanied  by
pain,  more  or  less  severe.  During  the  flow  the  patient
became  quite  feeble  and  anaemic,  although  not  apparently
emaciated.

She  applied  to  me,  March  i6,  stating  that  she  had  been
flowing  since  March  ist;  the  discharge  being  thick,  dark  and
abundant,  and  attended  by  unusuallysevere,  labor-like  pains,
night  and  day.  She  was  already  very  feeble  ;  and,  judging
from  past  experience  that  she  would  continue  to  flow  in  this
way  for  at  least  two  months,  she  apprehended  a  degree  of
prostration  that  would  utterly  disable  her.  I  gave  Platina",
a  dose  every  night.  The  flow  continued,  although  daily
diminishing  in  quantity,  for  one  week,  and  then  ceased.
The  patient  immediately  began  to  regain  strength.  There
was  no  re-appearance  of  menses  until  June  i6,  when  they
came  on  as  before,  but  without  pain,  continued  two  days,
ceased  for  twenty-four  hours,  re-appeared,  and  continued
until  July  4.  During  this  time  Platina^  was  taken  as
before.  July  18,  menses  re-appeared,  the  flow  being  very
abundant,  dark,  and  somewhat  coagulated.  The  patient
was  weak,  had  no  appetite,  and  complained  of  pain  and
much  commotion  in  the  abdomen.  Platina  having  failed  to
produce  a  lasting  effect,  China,  Crocus,  and  Hamamelis  were


A CASE  CURED BV MAGNESIA CAKBONICA.


483


given,  but  without  satisfactory  results.  The  flowing  con-
tinued from  July  18  to  September  12,  when  the  patient's
condition  of  debility  was  quite  deplorable.  I  now  found
her  symptoms  to  be  as  follows :  the  flow  was  not  quite  so
dark,  very  profuse,  but  much  ttufrr  profust  during  the  night
and  on  first  rising  than  it  was  during  the  day.  On  rising  in
the  morning,  the  patient  experienced  a  contracting  pain  in
the  abdomen,  and  a  sharp  upward  stitch  in  tlie  rectum,
followed  by  a  dischai^c  of  coagula  from  the.  vagina  There
was  not  much  flowing  during  the  day,  while  throughout  th£
Higkt  it  was  abmtdixnt.  She  was  very  weak,  and  had  much
headache  and  no  appetite.  I  gave  Magneiiia  carbonica^  to
be  dissolved  in  water,  a  tea-spoonful  every  four  hours  until
better.  September  16,  she  reported  that  after  taking
Magnesia  carbonica  for  tivo  days  the  flowing  at  night
ceased  ;  now,  after  four  days,  the  flowing  had  entirely  ceased.
The  improvement  in  general  condition  had  been  remarka-
ble. From  this  time,  the  progress  of  the  patient  was  all  that
could  be  desired.  In  five  weeks  menstruation  re-appeared
and  pursued  a  normal  course,  and  there  has  been  no  recur-
rence of  the  former  long-standing  troubles.

Tlie  prescription  of  Magnesia  carbonica  in  this  case  H'as
followed  by  very  prompt  and  complete  relief.  The  symp-
tom which  led  to  it  was  the  "condition  "  of  the  flowing,  viz.:
"  worse  during  the  night."  Shall  we  now,  on  the  strength
of  this  conformation  of  this  unusual  («'c  might  say  unphysi-
ological)  symptom,  pronounce  the  latter  a  "  characteristic,"
or  a  "  key-note  "  of  Magnesia  carbonica  f  It  was  certainty
the  symptom  in  the  case  which  struck  me  as  most  remarka-
ble (for  I  do  not  remember  meeting  it  before  in  practice),
and  the  fact  that  I  found  it  in  the  proving  of  Magnesia  car-
bonica determined  me  to  give  that  remedy.  But  would  it  be
safe  to  rely  on  this  symptom  alone  as  a  "  key-note  "  and
always  give  Magnesia  carbonica  when  we  meet  the  symp-
tom in  practice?  No  doubt  we  should  sometimes  brilliantly
succeed,  but  I  am  sure  wc  should  oflen  fail. At  least  one


484  A CASE  CURED  BY  MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.

Other  remedy  has  the  same  symptom,  flowing  worse  at  night,
viz.,  Bovista;  and  still  others  may  have  it.  Between  these
two  remedies,  the  distinction  is  easily  found  in  the  diversity
of  the  other  symptoms.

Magnesia  carbonica  produces*  too  frequent  and  too
profuse  menstruation;  the  flow,  which  is  dark  and  thick,
being  more  profuse  at  night, '  corresponds  with  my  case  in
every  particular.

Bovista,  on  the  other  hand,'  makes  menstruation  tardy  and
scanty ;  the  flow,  which  is  watery,  being  most  abundant  at
night  ^

These  remedies,  so  different,  agree  in  this  one  symptom,
"  increase  of  flowing  at  night"  We  could  avoid  error  in  a
prescription  only  by  taking  cognizance  of  the  totality  of  the
symptoms, — Hahnemann's  approved  method.  Should  we
venture  to  base  a  prescription  on  this  remarkable  symptom
alone,  as  a  characteristic  or  "key-note,"  we  should  probably
fail  in  half  our  cases.

Ex  uno  disce  omnes.  There  is  no  royal  road  to  knowledge
of  the  Materia  Medica.


'  C-4romVZ?MAMCf,  Symptoms  50010  MedUa,  vol.  iii,,  Bovista;  Symptom*

525.  382  10  394-

•  Symptom  jio.  *  Symptom  385.

•  Hartlaub and Trinks' Materia


OVARIAN  TUMOR  CURED  BY  COLOCYNTH.


On  October  lo,  1864,  I  was  requested  to  visit  Mrs.  C.  E.
H.,  aged  about  thirty-eight  years.  She  gave  me  the  follow-
ing history :  She  had  been  always  in  good  health,  married
ten  yeare,  but  never  pregnant  While  traveling  in  France
in  1854,  she  was  attacked  with  what  was  then  called  acute
.peritonitis.  She  was  confined  to  her  bed  several  years.
Partially  recovering,  she  consulted  Trousseau,  who  discovered
the  right  ovary  inflamed  and  somewhat  enlarged.  From
this  time  she  was  more  or  less  unable  to  walk,  and  suffered
much  from  a  tumor,  which  gradually  developed  in  the  pelvis,
between  the  uterus  and  the  rectum,  and  which  was  pro-
nounced by  Trousseau  to  be  an  enlarged  and  prolapsed
ovary.

In  1863  she  came  to  New- York,  and  placed  herself  under
one  of  our  most  experienced  gynecologists,  who  confirmed
Trousseau's  diagnosis,  pronounced  the  case  incurable,  and
advised  a  sparing  resort  to  anodynes  to  mitigate  severe  suf-
fering. I  found  Mrs.  H.  confined  to  her  sofa ;  she  had  not
left  her  room  for  a  year.  A  firm,  elastic  tumor  occupied  the
space  between  the  uterus  and  vagina  anteriorly,  and  the
rectum  posteriorly,  completely  occluding  the  vagina,  and
rendering  defecation  very  difficult.  It  seemed  not  to  be
adherent  to  the  walls  of  either  passage.  Attempts  at
walking  induced  paroxysms  of  acute  pain  across  the  hypo-
gastrium,  in  the  sacral  region,  and  around  the  hip-joint ;
from  here  the  pains  extended  down  the  groin  and  along  the
femoral  nerve.  The  pain  was  relieved  by  flexing  the  thigh
upon  the  pelvis ;  and  always  induced  or  aggravated  by
extending the thigh. Even without  the  provocation  of


486


OVARIAN TUMOR CURED BV COLOCVNTH.


motion  there  were  frequent  and  severe  paroxysms  of  pain,
digestion  feeble ;  but  the  general  condition  of  the  patient
was  good.  Nervous  sensibility  was  very  gr^^^  The  pains
sacral  nerves.

The  patient  had  a  dread  of  taking  opiates,  and  had  used
them  sparingly.  I  was  requested  to  mitigate  t]ie  pains,  tf
possible, —  no  hope  being  entertained  of  a  cure.  With  no
definite  expectations  of  accomplishing  a  radical  cure,  I  pre-
paroxysm  of  pain  came  on,  and  to  be  repeated  every  hour
during  the  paroxysm.  This  prescription  was  based  on  the
results  of  the  Austrian  proving  of  Colocynth,  which  conflrm
and  amplify  tlic  provtngs  of  Hahnemann.

November  i.  1  learned  that  the  paroxysms  had  been  less
frequent,  much  shorter,  and  milder;  the  remedy  appearing
to  control  them.

March  \,  1865.  The  patient  walked  half  a  mile  to  my
office  and  reported  that  she  had  had  no  pain  for  a  month.
She  could  walk  half  a  mile  daily  without  fatigue  or  pain,
and  had  resumed  the  charge  of  her  household  after  aa
interval  of  nine  years.  She  thought  the  tumor  had  become
somewhat  smaller.  Being  about  to  sail  for  Europe,  she
desired  some  more  Colocynth,  that  she  might  be  provided
in  case  pain  should  return.

June  9,  1869.  Mrs.  H.  has  just  arrived  from  Europe.  I
find  her  perfectly  well.  There  has  been  no  return  of  piin
since  1 865 .  The  tumor  disappeared  from  its  positioa
between  the  vagina  and  rectum  in  the  autumn  of  1 S65,  uuf
was  plainly  perceptible  in  the  abdomen,  about  as  large  as  a
Sicily  orange.  It  has  since  disappeared  entirely,  and  nothing
of  the  kind  can  now  be  discovered.  Was  this  really  an
ovarian  tumor?  No  doubt  appeared  to  be  entertained  by
the  eminent  physicians  who  preceded  me  in  the  case.  Did
the  Colocynth  cause  its  absorption  ? The  patient  has  no


OVARIAN  TUMOR  CURED BY COLOCYNTH.  487

doubt  on  this  point  Why  should  it  not  have  done  so  ?
Because  we  have  no  record  of  any  action  of  Colocynth,
except  on  the  intestinal  mucous  membrane,  and  on  certain
plexus  of  nerves  7  Fortunately,  the  action  of  remedies  is
not  restricted  to  the  measure  of  our  imperfect  a  priori
knowledge  of  them.

A  reviewer  in  the  British  Journal  takes  exception  to  a
statement  of  mine,  that  a  remedy,  when  indicated  by  a
well-marked  group  of  symptoms,  will  often  remove,  not
merely  those,  but  also  other  groups  apparently  unconnected,
— in  fact,  the  whole  disease.  This  case  is  in  point  And  yet
I  can  hardly  doubt  that,  in  such  cases,  a  complete  proving,
■were  it  possible,  would  show  that  the  remedy  does  produce
likewise  these  seemingly  unconnected  symptoms, — in  fact,  a
picture  of  the  whole  disease.  Indeed,  on  examining  the
Austrian  proving,  we  find  FroHch  reports  two  brief  prov-
ings  on  women,  both  of  which  show  the  action  of  Colocynth
on  Ae  ovaries.  Had  we  well-instructed  women -provers,
how  much  more  we  should  know  of  the  action  of  drugs  I


BAPTISIA AS A HAIR-WASH.


Miss  A.  S.,  forty-two  years  old,  of  light  complexion,
spare  figure,  very  excitable,  and  prone  to  dwell  upon  her
own  ailments  and  disabilities,  consulted  me  in  December,
1864,  for  chronic  constipation;  to  palliate  which,  she  had
been  in  the  habit  of  taking  daily,  a  pill  of  extract  micis
vomica  and  aloes.

Under  the  use  of  sulphur*",  followed  by  albumina^,  she
became  able  to  dispense  with  her  purgative  pill,  having  a
regular  stool  every  day.

On  the  20th  February,  1865,  she  applied  to  me  again  with
the  following  symptoms :

"The  day  before,  her  eyes  began  to  smart  and  feel  as
though  she  had  been  exposed  to  wood-smoke.  They  felt
full  of  dust;  the  conjunctiva  of  the  globe  was  injected  ;  there
was  a  discharge  of  muco-purulent  matter  from  the  eyes  this
morning.

"  Fluent  coryza,  the  discharge  being  thin,  not  acrid,  a
sore  spot,  feeling  raw,  internally  on  the  left  side  of  the
pharynx ;  these  symptoms  are  aggravated  by  exposure  to
damp,  cool  air.  Headache,  a  pressure  backward  in  the
entire  frontal  region ;  severe  pain  from  the  right  side  of  the
occiput  to  the  right  frontal  protuberance.

"She  feels  ill,  in  an  undefinable  way;  feels  weak;  half
depressed  in  spirits,  half  apprehensive  of  some  coming  evil.
Feels  as  though  some  unknown  but  irresistible  influence  had
possession  of  her  and  she  were  about  to  be  ill,  or  to  meet
with  some  misfortune."

Her  face  was  flushed,  but  there  was  no  heat  of  skin  ;  the
pulse  was  about  eighty,  soft  and  slightiy  irregular.


BAPTISIA AS  A HAIR-WASH.  489

Something,  I  cannot  tell  what,  struck  me  as  incongruous
in  the  patient's  appearance  and  symptoms,  and  led  me  to
doubt  whether  her  condition  were  an  idiopathic  disease.  I
said  to  her,  "You  seem  to  me  to  be  under  the  influence  of
some  drug  or  poison.  What  have  you  taken  ?"  She  pro-
tested that  she  had  taken  no  medicine.  The  similarity  of
her  condition  to  my  idea  of  the  symptoms  of  Baptisia,  came
forcibly  to  my  mind,  and  I  asked,  "  Have  you  not  taken  or
in  some  way  used  the  tincture  of  the  Baptisia?"  After
some  hesitation,  she  replied :  "  I  have  been  using  for  several
days  a  hair-wash,  composed  chiefly  of  the  tincture  of  Wild
Indigo.  Could  that  have  anything  to  do  with  my  symp-
toms?"

I  forbade  the  hair- wash,  and  gave  nitric  acid^.

A  week  passed  before  the  symptoms  disappeared,  those
of  the  eyes  lingering  longest.

Nkw-York,  Dec  i,  1867.


CHLORINE  IN  SPASMUS  GLOTTIDIS. No.  u


•0


In  the  year  1850,  after  submitting  to  the  manipuIatiDns  of
a  dcnti<^t,  I  was  advised  to  wash  the  mouth  with  a  solution
of  Chlorine. A  weak  solution  o(  Chlorine  gas  in  cold  water
was  accordingly  prepared, and I  proceeded to  rinse  the
mouth  with  it. Scarcely  had  the  liquid  been  received  into
my  mouth,  when  I  became  sensible  of  a  spasmodic  action  of
some  part  of  tlie  respiratory  organs  of  the  following  charac-
ter: Inspiration  was  unimpeded,  and  could  be  effected  in
the  natural  manner,  but  expiration  was  absolutely  impossible,
and  this  impossibility  arose,  if  I  might  trust  my  sensations,
not  from  any  inability  of  the  muscles  of  expiration,  but  from
a  closure  of  the  rima  glottidis. Expiration  being  felt  to  b«=^fc^-*r
impossible,  inspiration  was  again  attempted,  and  was  accom— .^-^_^
plished,  fully  and  easily,  although  the  act  was  attcndec^^^
by  a  sUght  crffwing  noise. E.\piration.  which  was  agair
attempted,  was  impossible  as  before. By  these  successiv->
operations,  the  lungs  became inflate<I to  a  most  painf»~
degree,  but,  so  firmly  did  the  glottis  appear  to  be  close
that  it  seemed  as  though  air  might  pass  through  any  p-  --,tjij
of  the  thoracic  walls  more  readily  than  by  the  ^\•ay  of  tL_7~ft
larynx. This  arrest  of  respiration  having  endured  for  abcr— y^.
a  minute,  the'  face  becoming  turgid  and  livid,  partial  CQ^rn;,
supervened,  the  spasm  relaxed,  and  respiration  became  fVc^
again.

In 1852,  I  had  an opportunity  of  witnessing  the  eifrcj
of  a  strong  accidental  inhalation  of  chlorine  gas  by  an  adufc
The  same  phenomena  of  comparatively  free,  but  avwiitf
inspiration,  and  of  absolutely  obstructed  expiration  presented
themselves;  the  face  became  extremely  livid,  convukn


CHLORINE  IN  SPASMUS  GLOTTIDIS. NO. I.


491


movements  of  the  extremities  began,  and  the  patient  became
partially  comatose.  1  administered  ammonia  by  olfaction  ;
the  spasm  relaxed,  and  consciousness  returned  alont;  witli
normal  respiration.

These  experiments  show  a  power  in  chlorine  to  produce
the  following  condition :  Spasm  of  the  glottis,  whidi  inter-
feres but  little  with  inspiration,  giving  to  it  a  crowing  sou[id, '
but  which  prevents  expiration.  During  the  continuance  of
the  spasra.  the  respiratory  acts  consist  of  a  succession  of
crowing  insftirations,  each  followed  by  an  ineffectual  effort  at
expiration,  the  whole  serving  to  inflate  the  chest  to  a  most
painful  extent,  and  attended  at  last  by  turgcsccnce  of  the
face,  and  mort  or  less  complete  coma,  with  or  without  con-
vulsive movements  of  the  extremities,  and  during  which  the
spasm  rclaxci.

In  the  Proving  of  Chlorine,'  a  similar  effect  is  indistinctly
indicated.  Pcrcira  says:  "  If  an  attempt  be  made  to  inhale
undiluted  chlorine  gas,  it  produces  s^asm  of  tht  gfottis.
Twice  I  have  suffered  severely  from  the  accidental  inhala-
tion of  it;  and  each  time  it  gave  the  sensation  of  constric-
tion of  the  air-tubes,  such  as  might  be  produced  by  a
spasmodic  condition  of  the  muscular  fibers  of  the  bronchial
tubes."  The  peculiar  nature  of  the  chlorine  spasm,  viz.,
that  it  affecti  expiration  almost  exclusively,  is  not  mentioned
by  Pcreira.

Hearing  in  mind  the  odium  which  has  been  attempted  to
be  cast  upon  some  of  our  colleagues  for  flooding  our  litera-
ture with  "fragmentary  provings,"  which  serve  no  purpose
but  to  "cumber  the  Materia  Medica."  and  to  annoy  our
practitioners  with  an  "  cmbarras  de  rickesses"  (as  if  it  were
not  worth  while  to  publish  and  to  study  anything,  however
"  fragmentary."  if  it  furnish  us  the  means  of  curing,  were  it
but  a  single  case  ! ),  I  might  have  abstained  from  publishing
the  above  symptoms  of  Chlorine,  had  not  the  following  case
demonstrated  their  practical  value.

'  In  voL  ii.  of  the  A'euet  Arthim,


492 CHLORINE  IN  SPASMUS  GLOTTIDIS. NO. I.


June  24th, A  female  infant,  seven  months  old,  well  devel-
oped iind  large,  the  fourth child  of  healthy {larents, was
brought  to  mc  with  the  following  history : Having  been
previously  in  perfect  health,  she  was  seized  three  weeks
ago,  with  a  spasmodic  affection  of  the  respiratory  organs.
Suddenly  and  without  any  warning,  she  would  make  a  long
inspiration, with a slight  crowing noise ; an attempt  to
exhale  would  be  made,  but  without  success ;  another  crow-
ing inspiration  followed  by  a  forcible,  but  incfTcctiial  effort  to
exhale;  and  this  would  be  repeated  until  the  child  became
blue  around the mouth,  and sank  into  partial uncons-
ciousness, when  free  respiration  would  take  place,  and  the
child  would  generally  sink  into  a  deep  sleep. Frequently
toward  the  close  of  an  attack,  convulsive  movements  of  the
extremities  would be  noticed,  and  once,  general  spasm
occurred. At  first,  these  attacks  came  on  only  after  some
excitement,  or  on  the  child  being  startled. They  frequently
occurred  during  sleep,  arousing  the  child  suddenly,  and  tbey
were  most  frequent  from  midnight  to  7  A.  M. Within  the
week  before  1  saw  her,  they  had  become  very  frequent — as
many  as  thirty  to  forty,  occurring  during  the  twenty-four
hours. The  child  had  begun  to  emaciate  rapidly,  had  lost
appetite,  strength  and  playfulness,  tlie face  was pale  and
bloated,  and the  eyes  had  a  dull and glassy expression.
The  child  had  been  under  most  skillful  homceopathic  treat-
ment since  the  commencement  of  the  attacks,  and  as  she
failed  to  improve,  change  of  air  was  recommended,  and  she
was  brought  to  Newburgh. The  climate  failing  to  benefit
her,  the  child  wa.1  placed  under  my  care. The  case  seemed
all  the  more  serious  from  the  fact  that,  last  year,  tlie  parents
had  lost  an  ol<ler  child,  a  boy,  with  the  same  affection. In
the  fourth  week  of  the  disease,  of  which  the  course  had  been
in  every  respect  similar  to  that  of  the  infant  above  narrated,
convulsions  supervened,  and  the  child  died  at  the  end  of  tlie
sixth  week. This  child  was under  enlightened allopathic
care. It  may  be  interesting  to  note,  that the  autopsy


CHLORINE IN SPASMUS GLOTTIDIS. NO. I. 493


no  mal formation,  and  no  organic  lesion ;  simply
ion  and  atrophy.

On  careful  examination  of  my  little  patient,  I  could
discover  nothing  abnormal  in  the  condition  of  the  heart  or
lungs,  and  no  sign  of  disease  that  was  not  fairly  attributed
10  the  frequent  rccurrenci;  of  these  spasms,  with  the  venous
congestion  consequent  upon  them.  It  was  evidently  a  case
of  spasmus  glottidis  (asthma  thymicuni,  a&thma  millari,
asthma  laryngeum  infantum,  laryngismus  stradulus).  and
had  advanced  almost  to  tlic  second  or  convulsive  stage  in
which  the  prognosis  is  decidedly  unfavorable.

The  remedy  which  is  recommended  before  all  others  for
this  disease,  in  our  hand-books  and  repertories  li  Sambucus.
The  symptom  on  which  this  recommendation  is  based  is  the
following:  "Slumber  wth  half-open  eyes  and  mouth;  on
awaking  from  it.  he  could  not  draw  a  breath,  and  was
compelled  to  sit  up,  whereupon  respiration  was  very  hurried,
with  wheezing  in  the  chest,  as  if  he  should  suffocate ;  he
lashed  about  with  his  hands ;  the  head  and  face  were
bloated  and  bluish  ;  he  was  hot,  without  thirst ;  weeping  at
the  approach  of  a  paro.\ysm. — all  this  without  cough,  and
especially  at  night,  from  tu-elve  to  four  o'clock."  On  com-
paring tills  picture  with  the  case  under  consideration,  we
find  correspondences  in  the  general  characters  of  the  affec-
tion. The  spasmodic  embarrassment  of  respiration,  the
absence  of  fever  and  of  cough,  the  occurrence  of  tlie
paroxysms  suddenly,  chiefly  at  night,  and  on  awaking,  show
a  general  appropriateness  of  bambucus  to  spasms  of  the
larynx  and  bronchial  tubes.  But  we  seek  in  vain  for  the
unequal  disturbance  of  the  inspiratory  and  the  expiratory  acts,
which  are  the  individual,  and  therefore  the  characteriitic,
peculiarity  of  the  case  under  consideration.  And  failing  to
find  this,  we  should,  as  a  matter  of  course,  expect  that
Sambucus  would  fail  to  cure,  or  in  any  way  to  affect  the
case.  And  this  had  been  the  fact.  So,  too,  of  Lachesis
and  several  other  remedies  which,  as  well  as  Sambucus,  had


494


CHLORINE IN SPASMUS GLOTTIDIS. NO. I.


already  been  tried  before  the  case  came  under  my  care.
In  this  very  pecuharity.  which  was  characteristic  of  the  case,
the  similarity  of  Chlorine  was  most  striking,  And  it  was
with  the  utmost  confidence  of  a  happy  result,  that  I  deter-
mined, after  a  careful  examination  of  the  case,  to  administer
Chlorine.  I  accordingly  prepared  a  saturated  solution  of
Chlorine  gas  in  water  at  60°  Fahrenheit,  and  made  from
this  the  first  centesimal  dilution,  in  which  the  odor  of  the
Chlorine  could  be  faintly  perceived.

Of  tliis  1  ordered  twenty  drops  to  be  dissolved  in  four
table* sj)Oonfu Is  of  water,  and  a  tea>spoonful  to  be  given  to  the
child  every  three  hours.  (A  porcelain  spoon  was  used.)  I
also  directed  a  few  drops  to  be  placed  in  tlic  child's  raoutli
at  the  beginning  of  each  paroxysm,  if  this  should  be
possible.

The  first  dose  was  given  at  four  P.  M,,  June  24th.  During
the  preceding  twenty-four  hours  the  child  had  had  forty
paroxysms.  During  the  succeeding  twenty-four  hours  there
occurred  but  four  paroxysms,  only  one  of  which  began  with
any  severity,  and  tliis  one  was  instantly  arrested  midway  by
a  few  drops  of  the  solution  placed  u[}on  the  child's  tongue.
During  the  night  of  the  26th  not  a  single  paroxysm.  Im-
provement in  the  general  condition  of  the  patient  now
became  agiparent ;  appetite  and  playfulness  returned ;  the
bloated  aspect  of  the  face  and  the  dullness  of  the  eye  dis-
appeared. On  the  27th  the  paroxysms  increased  in  number
and  5cverit>'.  On  examining  the  solution,  I  found  that  it
had  changed  in  character,  and  no  longer  contained  Clilonnc
A  fresh  solution  was  prepared,  and  thenceforward  it  was
prepared  afresh  every  second  day.  From  this  lime.  July
1st,  the  remedy  was  continued;  a  dose  every  four  hours,
when,  the  spasms  having  wholly  ceased,  and  the  child
appearing  well,  it  was  finally  discontinued.  On  the  2d  July
a  .slight  spasm  occurred,  and  the  child  appeared  feverish  and
excited,  with  greenish  diarrhoea.  I  found  a  lower  incisor
pressing  strongly  upon  the  gum,  which  was  hot  and  swoUea,


CHLORINE  m  SPASMUS  GLOTTIDIS. NO. I.


495


and  which  t  fortliwilli  lanced.  In  two  hours  the  child  had
lost  every*  trace  of  illness.  Since  this  date  she  has  continued
in  good  health,  with  the  exception  of  some  trifling  disorder
attendant  upon  dentition.'  There  has  been  no  sign  of  a
rccarrence  of  the  i^pasm  of  the  glottis.

I  am  aware  that  children  who  arc  subjects  of  this  disease
have  occasionally  periods  of  exemption  from  its  attacks,
though  this  is  not  the  case  when  the  attacks  are  so  frequent
and  also  violent  as  in  the  above  case,  and  it  is  possible  tliat
this  child  may  be  again  attacked  under  provocation  of  diffi-
cull  dentition  or  of  some  equally  powerful  exciting  cause.
As  there  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  of  the  controlling  power
of  chlorine  over  the  first  attack,  I  should  have  no  misgivings
about  its  success  in  subsequent  attacks,  should  the  condition
be  the  same  as  before.

In  connection  with  the  above  remarks  upon  Chlorine,  it
may  not  be  amiss  to  call  attention  to  a  kind  of  spasm  of  the
glottis  occasionally  produced  by  chloroform,  and  which
strikingly  resembles  the  spasms  produced  by  Chlorine.  Now,
by  the  presence  of  an  alkaline  solution,  chloroform  is  readily
decomposed,  and  Chlorine  set  free.  The  question  at  once
suggests  itself  whether  in  these  cases  of  spasms  such  a
decomposition  has  been  induced  by  the  reaction  of  the
alkaline  saliva  upon  the  vapor  of  chloroform,  and  whether
the  spasm  is  caused  by  the  Chlorine  thus  set  free.

In  this  case,  the  spasm  of  the  glottis  constituted  the  whole
of  the  morbid  condition.  But  sometimes  spasm  of  the
glottis  occurs  as  a  complication  of  some  affection  of  the
throat  or  of  the  respiratory  apparatus,  and  in  such  cases
Chlorine  may  be  of  great  service.  In  the  winter  of  1853.  I
visited  in  consultation  a  case  of  scarlatina,  in  which  slough*
ing  of  tlie  pharynx  to  a  great  extent  had  taken  place  and  in


■  MATshill  Hall  ndvties,  that  in  [his
diieuc  spectftl  attention  (hould  be
pMd  to  the  *tale  of  ihc  gumt,  if,  as  it
gcncralljF  lliK  cu«,  it  occur  during
(lentition.  and be  advisee (requeDl,


even  duly  ncarificatian*,  of  Ibe  giimi.
Until  Ihc  Itt  of  July  there  wm*  no  lign
o[  irritation  of  the  gtims,  which  hul
bc«a  carefully  cxainined  by  isv  ev«ry
day.


496 CHLORINE  IN SPASMUS  GLOTTIDIS. NO. I.

which  spasm  of  the  glottis  had  set  in,  threatening  to  cause  a
speedily  fatal  termination.  The  attacks  of  spasm  were
almost  constant,  the  child,  a  boy  of  eight  years,  scarcely
rallying  from  one  paroxysm  before  another  came  on.  The
character  of  the  spasm  was  precisely  such  as  I  had  seen
produced  by  Chlorine.  Chlorine  water  was  administered,
and  the  spasms  ceased  instantly,  with  but  one  or  two  very
slight  recurrences.


CHLORINE  IN  SPASMUS  GLOTTIDIS. No.  2.


More  than  thcee  years  ago,  I  published '  an  account  of
the  effects  of  the  inhalation  of  Chlorine  gas  in  two  instances,
with  the  record  of  a  case  in  which  the  symptoms  of  the
disease  were  so  similar  to  the  effects  which  I  had  witnessed
and  experienced  from  the  inhalation  of  Chlorine,  that  I  was
induced  to  administer  a  solution  of  Chlorine  gas  in  water.
The  case  was  rapidly  cured.  The  following  case  furnishes
additional  evidence  of  the  value  of  Chlorine  in  certain  spas-
modic affections  of  the  glottis:

December  12th,  1862.  J.  S.,  aged  fifty-two  years,  has
suffered  from  follicular  pharyngitis;  has  had  the  larynx  and
fauces  swabbed,  burned  and  penciled  with  nitrate  of  silver
until  he  could  endure  it  no  longer.  For  two  years  he  has
not  been  under  medical  treatment.  He  now  suffers  much
from  pain  in  the  throat,  and  has  an  habitual  cough  and
expectoration  of  glairy  mucus.  Within  iliree  days  the  cough
has  assumed  a  spasmodic  character,  with  the  following
peculiarities  :

The  desire  to  cough  results  from  a  tickling'  and  a  sensation
of  rawness  behind  the  thyroid  cartilage.  When  the  patient
seeks  to  yield  to  this  de.sire,  he  finds  it  impossible  to  expel
the  air  from  the  chest,  as  is  required  in  the  act  of  coughing.
The  cough  is  therefore  abortive,  although  the  desire  grows
continually  more  and  more  intense.  Tlie  obstruction  to  the
free  and  sudden  expulsion  of  air.  which  would  constitute  a
just  below  the  larynx.  At  the  same  lime  he  can  draw  air
into  tlie  lungs  quite  freely.

'  Vol.  n.  of  Uk  Amtriran.  llamvopathir  Rrvifw,  1859 : "  Chlorine  in
SpaEtnut  Ulouidift. No.  i."

33


498 CHLORINE  IN SPASMUS GLOTTIDIS. NO. 2.

This  freedom  of  inhalation  and  impeded  exhalation,
together  with  the  constantly  increasing  tickling  in  the  larynx
which  compelled  the  patient  to  make  very  energetic  but
unavailing  efforts  to  cough,  continue  until  he  sinks,  ex-
hausted and  covered  with  sweat,  upon  a  couch,  when  the
spasm  seems  to  relax  and  he  can  cough  and  exhale  with
comparative  freedom.  These  paroxysms  recur  about  every
two  hours.

I  prepared  immediately  a  weak  solution  of  Chlorine  gas
in  cool  water,  so  weak  that  the  odor  of  the  gas  could  scarcely
be  detected,  and  when  one  of  the  paroxysms  was  at  its
height,  administered  a  tea-spoonful.  The  effect  was  magical.
The  spasm  relaxed  immediately  and  the  tickling  was  allayed.
The  dose  was  repeated  every  two  or  three  hours,  as  the
tickling  recurred,  and  in  the  course  of  twenty-four  hours  the
disposition  to  a  recurrence  of  the  paroxysms  had  ceased.

Several  days  afterward  the  patient  applied  to  me  for  a
quantity  of  "that  solution,"  stating  that  since  he  had  taken
it,  his  throat  had  been  more  comfortable  and  his  voice  better
than  they  had  been  since  the  day  when  he  was  unhappily
persuaded  to  allow  caustic  to  be  applied  to  his  throat.


CHLORINE  IN  SPASMUS  GLOTTIDIS. No.  3.

Several  years  since  I  published'  an  accidental  proving  of
Chlorine,  with  some  cases  of  spasm  of  the  glottis  in  which
I  had  used  it  with  advantage.

Last  month  I  was  called  to  a  child,  two  years  and  a  half
old,  which  had  just  been  brought  home  from  the  country,
and  was  supposed  to  be  at  the  point  of  death.  Five  weeks
Twfore,  it  had  sickened  with  scarlatina,  which,  according  to
the  physicians  in  attendance,*  had  become  complicated  by
•diphtheria,  and  this  by  inflammation  of  the  right  lung  and
deposit  therein.  An  abscess  had  formed  and  discharged
externally  on  the  neck;  leaving  an  ulcer  about  two  inches
long  and  one  and  a  half  broad,  which  exposed  the  cervical
muscles,  and  showed  no  disposition  to  heal ;  copious  and
very  offensive  discharge  from  both  ears  ;  the  throat  seemed
to  be  full  of  a  thick,  yellow  matter,  very  offensive,  which
the  child  would  occasionally  eject,  but  seemed,  for  the  most,
to  be  unable  to  move  either  up  or  down.  Any  attempt
to  examine  the  throat,  or,  on  the  part  of  the  child,  to
open  the  mouth  to  take  food  or  drink,  or  any  attempt  to
cough,  produced  a  fearful  spasm  of  the  glottis,  which  seemed
to  admit  the  air  well  enough  but  to  prevent  its  exit,  and
which  lasted  until  the  child  became  livid  and  sank  exhausted.
And  this  constituted,  in  the  opinion  of  my  predecessors,  the
insuperable  obstacle  to  the  child's  recovery.  The  spasm
prevented  its  tasting  food.  No  food  had  been  taken  for
a  week,  and  very  little  during  the  entire  illness.  The  child
was  now  very  feeble  and  greatly  emaciated.  Its  death  had
been  hourly  looked  for  by  the  doctors.

'  Ameritan IlomaopatkU Review,  '  Allopaths  of  excellent  profesnonai

tdL  ii.,  pp.  18  and  448: "Spasmns standing.
Glottidis. No.  i."


500 CHLORINE  IN  SPASMUS GLOTTIDIS. NO. 3.

I  prepared  immediately  some  Chlorine  water^  diluted,
until  the  gas  was  just  perceptible,  and  gave  to  the  child.
He  took  a  moutliful  and  began  to  choke  with  the  spasm;
I  immediately  placed  near  his  face  a  handkerchief,  wet  with
strong  Chlorine  water,  so  that  he  might  inhale  the  gas.
The  spasm  ceased  instantly  and  he  swallowed.  I  left  orders
for  a  similar  procedure  whenever,  from  any  cause,  whether
coughing  or  swallowing,  the  spasm  should  be  induced.  It
never  failed  to  arrest  the  spasmodic  action  and  enable  the
child  to  swallow,  or  to  eject  the  matter  from  the  throat
A  number  of  days  elapsed  before  the  child  could  make
an  articulate  sound,  or  any  sound.  The  doctors  had  thought
the  diphtheria  had  induced  paralysis  of  some  of  the  pharyn-
geal muscles,  and  perhaps  others,  and  hence  the  spasm  in
the  associate  and  neighboring  muscles.  And  it  may  be  so.
They  regarded  the  spasm  an  Insuperable  obstacle  to  recovery.
It  was  evident  to  every  attendant  that  the  Chlorine  relaxed
the  spasm  and  enabled  the  child  to  swallow.  His  subse-
quent improvement  was  uniform  and  rapid  under  Carbo
vegetabilis*"".

It  may  be,  by  and  by,  some  esteemed  friend  will  tell
me^  "I  have  used  Chlorine  in  a  case  presenting  exactly
these  symptoms,  and  it  failed,"  and  may  thence  conclude
that  I  am  mistaken  in  ascribing  the  successful  issue  of
my  case  to  Chlorine.  I  suppose  I  shall  reply :  There  are
two  possible  fallacies.  I  have  stated  the  symptoms  which
led  me  to  give  Chlorine,  but  they  may  not  comprise  the
real  symptoms  which  constituted  the  case  a  case  for  Chlorine,
just  as  the  judge  may  give  a  righteous  judgment,  but
may  base  it,  in  his  written  opinion,  on  most  erroneous  prem-
ises. So,  on  the  other  hand,  you,  in  your  case,  may  have
may  have  overlooked  something  else  in  your  case  which
constituted  it  an  essentially  different  one  from  mine. The

'  Amtritan Ifomaopalhic Review,  *  United  States  Medical  and  Sur^

ii.,  370.  gital  Journal,  vol.  iv.,  p.  408.


CHLORINE  IN  SPASMUS  GLOTTIDIS. NO. 3. 50I

sciences  of  pathology  and  semetology  are  too  imperfect  to
admit  of  these  back  strokes  of  critidsm  overthrowing  posi-
tive evidence  by  negative.  Why,  they  are  not  admitted
in  chemistry,  and  hardly,  even  in  astronomy !  I  shall  urge
these  considerations  in  reply,  but  feebly,  doubtless,  and  to
no  purpose,  and  shall  at  last  fall  in  with  the  current  of  the
day,  which,  who  can  resist  ?  and  shall  read  the  old  proverb,
"Seeing  is  not  believing;"  and  shall  give  in  my  adhesion
to  the  scientific  motto  of  our  time :  "  Belief  is  human ;  but
to  d(ftt6t  divine."


ON  THE  ELIMINATION  THEORY.*


My  Dear  Doctor:  Your  favor  of  the  nth  inst  was
received  on  the  12th.  I  should  have  been  glad  to  send  a
few  words  of  greeting  to  the  Connecticut  State  Homoeopathic
Society,  if  I  had  known  earlier  the  date  of  your  meeting.
As  it  is,  I  have  no  more  time  than  to  call  your  attention  in
a  few  words  to  the  importance  which  the  "  Elimination
Theory"  is  now  assuming,  among  the  allopaths,  in  relation
to  disease  and  its  treatment  For  centuries  back  it  has
been  suggested,  every  now  and  then,  by  some  wise  man,
that  the  secretions  and  excretions  of  patients  are  the  results
of  efforts  which  nature  is  making  to  get  rid  of  some  poison-
ous morbific  matter ;  and  that  the  true  indication  is  to  favor
rather  than  to  check  these  excretions.  But,  in  general,  the
practice  of  allopaths  has  been  to  check  and  suppress  them,
as  though  they  regarded  the  discharges  themselves  as  being
the  disease.  Now,  as  you  must  have  noticed,  Dr.  George
Johnson,  of  King's  College  Hospital,  London,  a  very  high
authority,  comes  out  with  a  statement  and  argument  apply-
ing the  "  Elimination  Theory  "  to  Cholera.  He  holds  that
the  evacuations  and  vomited  substances  result  from  an  effort
of  nature  to  get  rid  of  a  poison,  and  that  they  should  be
encouraged  and  not  be  checked.

He  opposes  absolutely  the  sedative  and  astringent  treat-
ment by  opium,  tannin,  kino,  etc.,  and  advises  cathartics
and  emetics,  and  he  says  that  applying  this  method,  by
treating  cholera  with  castor-oil,  in  1849  and  1854,  he  gained
a  very  remarkable  success.

'  Communication  to  ihe  Secretary  of  the  Connecticut  State
Homoeopathic  Society.


ON  THE  ELIMINATION  THEORY.  503

Now,  let  it  be  observed  that  the  treatment  of  such  a
disease  as  cholera  by  pui^tives  and  emetics  is,  in  a  certain
rude  way,  a  homceopathic  treatment.  The  remedies  which
we  find  most  successful,  viz.,  Veratrum,  Cuprum,  Ipecacu-
anha, are  classed  by  allopaths  as  emetics  and  cathartics.
This  is  another  instance  of  the  fact,  which  has  been  noticed
in  other  departments  of  pathology  and  therapeutics,  that
the  most  advanced  medical  philosophy  is  slowly  bringing
allopaths  round  to  the  same  practical  position  to  which
Hahnemann's  practical  sagacity  and  observation  led  him
seventy  years  ago,  before  there  was  a  possible  basis  for
medical  philosophy  as  it  now  exists.

One  other  point:  Dr.  George  Johnson,  detailing  his  cases
of  cholera  treated  by  castor-oil,  says  he  would  have  been
still  more  successful  had  he  not  erred  by  using  excessive
dosds.  He  found  he  must  use  small  doses.  This  was  Hahne-
the  homoeopathic  law,  and  it  has  been  the  experience  of
every  succeeding  experimenter.  And  the  more  strictly  the
law  is  followed  in  all  minutix,  the  smaller  must  be  the  dose,
if  we  would  get  all  possible  good,  avoiding  all  unnecessary
evil  effects.  It  is  in  this  way  that  homoeopaths  have  been
gradually  led  to  use,  first  attenuated  medicines,  and  finally
the  higher  potencies.


CHOLERA.'

I.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Asiatic  Cholera,  which  has
prevailed  during  the  past  summer  in  various  parts  of  Europe,
has  been  brought  to  our  shores.  Reasoning  from  analogy,
we  have  good  grounds  for  believing  that  it  will  be  epidemic
in  the  Atlantic  states  next  summer.  It  is,  therefore,  the
part  of  prudence  in  us  to  refresh  our  knowledge  of  the
history  and  character  of  this  terrible  disease,  and  of  the
causes  which  seem  to  favor  its  propagation,  in  order  that  we
may  be  the  better  able  to  meet  the  great  practical  problems :

How  TO  WARD  IT  OFF,  AND  HOW  TO  DEAL  WITH  IT.

I.  History.  Like  all  invasions  and  all  epidemics,  cholera
comes  from  the  East,  marching  westward.  It  is  known  to
have  existed  in  the  delta  of  the  Ganges  since  1629.  But  in
i8i7it  appeared  in  Hindostan,  as  a  wide^spread  and  terribly
fatal  epidemic.  From  Calcutta  and  Jessore  its  progress  was
westward,  although  it  spread  also  into  China  and  the  Indian.
Archipelago.  In  July,  1821,  it  had  reached  Muscat  in
Arabia,  and  in 1823 It  touched  the Georgian  frontier  of

I  Of  the  following  paper.  Sections  i.  allopathic  physicians ;  as,  for  example,

to  iv.  were  written  for  and  published  in  Mr. Wilde, of Dublin,  the dislin-

a  non-medical  journal,  the  Indepfnd-  guished  aural  surgeon,  and  Dr.  Mc-

fn/,  in  November  and  December,  1865.  Laughlin,  of London, Inspector of

To  avert  any possible  charge of  Cholera Hospitals for the Golden
presenting  an  tx  parte  case,  the  testi-  Square  District,  in  1854-55.
mony  to  the  superiority  of  homoeo-  To  these sections a  fifth  is now
pathic  treatment  in  Cholera  was  chiefly  added,  on  the  Prevention  and  Treat-
taken  from  tbe  writings  of  impartial  ment  of  Cholera. — C.  D.
Government officers, or of hostile  New-Yokx,  April  20,  1866.


CHOLERA.


505


Russia.  Thence  it  spread  northward  through  Russia,  Poland
and  Austria,  extending  in  July,  i83t,  lo  St.  Fetcreburg  and
Cronstadt,  and  in  Octuber,  to  Berlin,  Vienna  and  Hamburg,
to  October,  1S31,  it  appeared  in  Sunderland,  England,
having  been  brought  from  Hamburg.  It  extended  to  Lon-
don in  February,  1832,  appearing  first  in  the  immediate
neighborhood  of  the  shipping.  From  England  it  crossed  to
France,  breaking  out.  March  23d,  in  Paris,  where  in  one
month  it  carried  off  2o,CXX)  persons.

It  was  conveyed  in  an  emigrant  vessel  from  London  to
Quebec,  where  it  appeared  June  8,  1 832.  A  few  weeks  later
it  became  epidemic  in  the  city  of  New- York,  where  it  pre-
vailed with  great  fatality  until  late  in  the  autumn.  It
re-appeared  in  1834.

In  1847  and  1^4^  cholera  again  invaded  Europe  from
the  East  December  8,  1848.  the  packet-ship  "New-Vork"
arrived  at  quarantine  at  Staten  Island,  N.  V.,  having  on
board  a  number  of  passengers  sick  with  cholera.  Several
had  died  on  the  voyage.  From  this  infection,  cholera  pre-
vailed at  quarantine  for  several  weeks,  and  two  or  three  cases,
which  were  traced  to  this  vessel,  occurred  in  this  city.

Again,  February  15,  1849,  cholera  broke  out  on  board
the  packet-ship  "  Liverpool."  on  her  way  to  this  port  There
were  fifty  cases,  of  which  forty  died.  During  the  succeed-
ing months  of  spring  and  early  summer,  several  vessels  suc-
cessively brought  the  disease  to  the  quarantine ;  but  it  did
Dot  become  epidemic  in  the  city  of  New- York  until  June,
1849.  It  prevailed  until  October.  In  the  summer  of  1854
it  was  again  epidemic  in  New-York.

In  June,  1865,  wc  heard  of  cholera  a-i  prevailing  at  Mecca,
and  on  the  route  from  Mecca  to  Alexandria.  It  was  very
btai  at  Alexandria,  Cairo  and  Constantinople.  It  extended
to  Jerusalem  and  along  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  and
Adriatic.  At  Marseilles,  we  have  reason  to  believe,  it  was
and  is  still  quite  fatal,  although  no  official  reports  have  been
allowed  to  be  published. At  the  present  time,  November,


So6


CHOLERA.


1865,  it  prevails  extensively  in  Paris.  Tlie  cases  which
recently  arrived  at  our  quarantine  were  from  Pnris,  by  way
of  Havre.  A  few  cases  have  appeared  at  Southampton,
England.  We  may  hope  that  tlie  influence  of  winter
will  prevent  the  malady  spreading  at  present,  but  we
sliould  look  for  its  re-appearance  as  an  epidemic  next
summer.

The  characteristic  features  of  an  attack  of  Asiatic  cholera
are.  in  brief,  as  follows:  In  the  chest  and  at  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  a  distressing  anxiety  and  sense  of  oppression.  Gene-
ral, and  oAen  extreme,  prostration.  Nausea,  falntncss,  loud
rumblings  in  the  bowels.  Sudden  and  forcible  vomiting  of
a  n(ilky  or  watery  fluid,  in  large  quantities.  Evacuations
from  the  bowels,  consisting  of  a  similar  watery  substance,
containing  white  floating  grains.  These  vomitings  and
evacuations  are  attended  and  followed  by  spasms,  tremors,
and  very  rapid  loss  of  the  heat  of  the  body.  The  skin  becomes
cold,  clammy,  and  shriveled.  The  fingers  look  like  those  of
a  xvasherwomati ;  the  skin  has  lost  its  elasticity,  and  if
pinched  into  a  ridge  it  retains  that  form  for  a  long  time.
There  is  often  great  thirst ;  but,  in  many  cases,  tlie  liquid
is  no  sooner  swallowed  than  it  is  forcibly  ejected  from  ibe
stomach.  The  extremities  are  frequently  the  seal  of  very
painful  cramps,

Severe  cases  pass  on,  in  the  course  of  eight  to  sixteen
hours,  to  tlie  stage  of  CoLT.AfSE.  tndecd,  the  most  severe
cases  may  almost  be  satd  to  commence  with  collapse.  In  this
condition  tlie  features  are  pinched  and  sunken;  tlie  skin  is
of  a  bluish  color,  icy  cold,  and  clammy;  the  tongue  is  cold,
and  the  hands  are  corrugated.  The  voice  is  husky  and  faint,
and  llie  breath  is  cold.  The  pulse  is  frequent,  very  small,
and  often  imperceptible.  The  evacuations  from  the  stomach
and  bowels  become  less  and  less  frequent  as  this  stage
becomes  more  fully  developed ;  and,  in  most  cases,  they
entirely  cease  iMrveral  hours  before  death.  The  secretion  of
urine  is  suspended. The  thirst  is  intense. The  ext*


CHOLERA.


507


surface  of  the  body  is  very  cold,  but  the  patients  complain
of  an  internal  burning  heat

During  tilt-  whole  course  of  the  disease  the  mind  is  clear
and  composed.  It  is  very  remarkable  that,  although  fully
aware  of  their  condition  and  danger,  the  majority  of  cholera
patients  manifest  a  singular  apathy  and  indifTL-rcncc  with
regard  to  the  result.  The  stage  of  collapse  may  last  from
two  to  twelve  hours.  In  a  majority  of  coses  it  ends  in
death,  [n  the  more  fortunate  minority,  reacliitn  sets  in,
marked  by  returning  warnuh  and  re -established  secretions.

It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  more  rapidly  fatal  the  case,
the  earlier  the  collapse  occurs,  and  the  less  abundant  are
the  evacuations.  In  the  most  terribly  rapid  cases,  which
destroy  life  in  a  few  hours,  there  arc  almost  no  evacuations.
It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  death,  in  cholera,  does  not  come
from  the  drain  on  the  system  resulting  from  the  evacuations,
and,  consequently,  mere  astringent  remedies  will  not  cure
cholera.

During  an  epidemic  of  cholera,  diarrhcea  is  very  prevalent
It  almost  always  precedes  an  attack,  and  doubtless  predis-
poses to  iU  Instant  attention  should  therefore  be  paid  to
such  premonitions.  In  like  manner,  slight  cramps  are  often
felt.  They  should  be  regarded  as  premonitions,  and  medi-
cal adsicc  should  be  sought  at  once.

The  mortality  of  cholera  has  been  very  uniform.  In
1830-32,  on  the  continent  of  Europe  and  in  Great  Britain,
Uie  deaths  in  private  practice  were  about  39^  per  cent,
of  the  cases;  in  hospital  practice  tliey  were  about  %T%
per  cent

In  Great  Britain,  there  occurred,  in  1831-33,  137,080
cases  of  cholera,  of  which  52,547  died,  or  about  38^  per
cent  In  subsequent  epidemics  the  figures  have  been  about
the  same,  Krom  the  official  returns  in  the  daily  newspapers
of  New- York,  in  1849,  it  appears,  that  in  this  city  there
occurred,  in  a  period  of  fifty-two  days,  2,631  cases,  of
which  915  died,  or  34.78  per  cent. The  resident  physician


5o8


CHOLERA.


reported,  as  treated  in  the  hospitals,  r,02i  cases;  of  which
880.  or  53.71  per  cent,  died.

These  facts  are  startling  ;  but  they  are  nevertheless  /mU.
Instead  of  striving  to  avoid  and  ignore  tliem,  we  should
calmly  accept  them  as  incentives  to  our  next  topic:  The'
study  of  the  causes  which  favor  the  occurrence  and  increaaei
the  malignity  of  epidemic  cholera.


n.

In  coming  to  consider  the  causes  which  favor  the  occur-
rence and  spread  of  cholera,  and  increase  its  malignity,
we  are  met  by  the  questions:  Is  cholera  contagious, — that'
is,  docs  it  spread  by  tsuck  or  contact?  Or,  on  the  other
hand,  docs  it  exist  in  a  community  by  virtue  of  some  poison
ditTuscd  through  the  atmosphere,  and  to  which  all  persons
in  the  community  arc  alike  exposed,  and  under  the  influence
of  which  all  who  are  predisposed  to  the  disease  sicken,
whether  they  had  been  previously  in  the  presence  of  cholera
patients  or  not  ?

The  ablest  minds  in  tlie  medical  profession  have  sought  to
solve  these  questions  and  have  come  to  different  conclu.sions-

In  favor  of  the  contagiousness  of  cholera,  its  general  line
of  march  has  been  urged  as  an  argument  It  followed
established  routes  of  travel :  along  the  track  of  Eastern
caravans;  from  Asia  to  Moscow  ;  thence  to  St  Petersburg;
thence  to  Berlin  and  Hamburg;  from  Hamburg  on  board
a  vessel  bound  to  England,  and  from  this  vessel  to  Sunder-
land, the  port  at  which  she  arrived ;  from  Sunderland  through-
out England.

Again:  Professor  Simpson,  of  Edinburgh,  traced  cholera
from  London,  by  a  vessel,  to  Leith,  where  the  sick  of  this
vessel  were  placed  in  quarantine  on  a  hospital-ship.  The
nurses  of  this  hospital-ship  were  attacked  with  the  disease,
no  other  cases  of  it  having  as  yet  occurred  in  Scotland.  On
shore,  it  first  assailed  persons  who  had  been  in  communi-


CHOLERA.  509

cadon  with  the  sick  in  hospital.  In  this  manner  the  firat
six  cases  that  occurred  in  Scotland  were  traced  to  the  ship
which  had  arrived  from  London,  where  cholera  was  pre-
vailing, and  on  which,  during  her  voyage,  passengers  sick-
ened of  cholera.

In  the  same  way  Professor  Alison  traced  the  first  four
cases  in  Edinburgh.  And  these  two  very  eminent  physi-
cians had  no  doubt  of  the  contagiousness  of  cholera  in
Uie  epidemic  in  question.

So,  too,  Mr.  Moir,  of  Musselburg,  showed  that  the  first
twenty-three  cases  of  cholera  in  Prestonpans  could  be  traced,
by  an  unbroken  chain  of  contact  with  the  person  or  the
clothing  of  cholera  patients,  back  to  a  first  case,  which  came,
already  ill,  from  a  district  in  which  cholera  then  existed.

During  the  first  epidemic  in  the  United  States,  a  vessel
took  some  cases  to  Charleston,  S.  C.  They  were  strictly
quarantined  under  military  guard.  Many  of  the  soldiers
took  the  disease  and  died.  So  did  some  of  the  physicians
and  nurses  who  were  sent  from  the  city  to  take  care  of  the
sick.  But  not  a  case  occurred  in  the  city  nor  in  any  person
who  had  not  been  in  contact  with  the  sick.

Such  facts  as  these  can  hardly  be  explained  on  any  theory
of  chances.

On  the  other  side  of  the  question,  epidemics  of  cholera  are
could  not  be  sufficiently  accounted  for  by  its  mere  con-
tagiousness. An  English  commission,  sent  to  investigate
this  very  question,  reported  that  in  Asia,  Turkey  and  Russia,
the  history  of  cholera  precludes  the  idea  of  its  having  spread
solely  by  contagion,  or  of  its  being  an  eminently  contagious
disease.  Instances  are  adduced  of  its  invading  a  large
district  or  city,  at  several  distant  points  simultaneously,  and
of  its  attacking  so  many  persons  within  a  short  space  of  time
that  the  doctrine  of  contagion  alone  would  be  inadequate  to
explain  the  facts.

The  strictest  quarantine  has  not  kept  out  the  disease ;  as.


510  CHOLERA.

for  example,  at  Moscow,  where,  to  no  purpose,  a  large
garrison  preserved  around  the  city  a  prohibitive  cordon,  kept
with  a  strictness  known  only  in  the  Russian  army.

At  Charleston,  although  quarantine  kept  the  cholera  out
in  1832,  it  was  of  no  avail  in  1833.  Though  it  seemed  to
preserve  New- York  in  December,  1 848,  yet  cholera  passed
its  barriers  in  June,  1849.

Finally,  it  has  been  observed  that,  in  some  places  and  at
some  seasons,  although  cholera  has  been  introduced  and
persons  have  been  exposed  to  its  infection,  yet  it  does
not  extend — certainly  not  for  a  long  time.  This  was  the
case  in  London  in  1831,  and  in  New-York  in  December,
1848.  On  other  occasions  it  spreads  like  wild-fire,  as  at
Paris,  in  1832,  where,  in  one  month,  it  carried  off  20,000
persons.

But  this  last  argument  is  not  conclusive  against  the  con-
tagiousness of  cholera ;  for  the  same  apparent  reluctance  to
extend  itself  was  observed  in  the  case  of  the  plague  (univer-
sally regarded  as  contagious)  in  Cyprus,  1759.  It  has  been
observed  of  small-pox  and  of  typhus  on  some  occasions.

From  all  the  evidence  on  this  subject  we  may  conclude
that,  while  in  certain  epidemics  cholera  has  undoubtedly
been  introduced  and  propagated  by  contagion,  yet  the
degree  of  contagiousness  of  the  disease  has  greatly  varied  in
different  places,  at  different  times  and  under  different  cir-
cumstances. We  think  that  "contagiousness  is  not  an  essen~
tial  attribute"  of  this  (if  of  any)  disease;  "it  is  an  accident,
depending  upon  many  modifying  causes"  (Russell);  and
that,  in  most  cases  of  disease  (cholera  as  well  as  other
diseases),  the  question  is  not  so  much  one  of  kind  (contagious
or  not  contagious)  as  rather  one  of  degree  {highly  contagious
or  slightly  so).

It  appears  that,  at  all  times,  there  have  been  requisite  for
the  prevalence  of  cholera  in  a  community  a  peculiar  state  of
the  atmosphere  and  peculiar  local  conditions.  And,  almost
always,  those  who  are  attacked  by  cholera  are  found  to  have


CHOLERA.  5 1 1

been  previously  subjected  to  the  influence  of  certain  predis-
posing causes.

Admitting,  therefore,  the  importance  of  contagion  as  a
means  of  conveying  the  seed  of  cholera,  we  perceive  that
there  must  be  in  the  individual  in  whom  the  seed  is  planted
a  congenial  soil ;  and  there  must  be,  likewise,  in  the  gen-
eral conditions  of  atmosphere  and  mode  of  life  to  which
that  individual  is  subjected  a  favorable  climate.  If  these
be  lacking,  the  seed  will  not  germinate  and  bear  fruit  after
its  kind.

Let  us  inquire  what  conditions  constitute  this  favorable
climate  and  congenial  soil ;  what  are  some  of  the  predispos-
ing causes  of  cholera.

1.  Climate  and  Topography.  Hot  climates  and  the
warm  season  of  the  year  predispose  to  cholera.  The
epidemic  of  1817  began  in  a  hot  summer  in  Hindostan.  In
all  climates  the  disease  has  been  temporarily  checked,  if  not
extinguished,  by  cold  weather.  The  apparent  exception  in
Russia  is  explained  by  the  habits  of  the  Russian  people —
the  great  heat  and  the  extreme  filth  of  their  winter  habita-
tions. The  epidemic  of  the  past  autumn  in  France  seems
to  have  been  checked  by  the  coming  on  of  cool  weather.

Cholera  has  prevailed  most  severely,  though  not  exclu-
sively, along  the  sea-coast  and  in  the  course  of  large  rivers, —
more  particularly  where  the  land  is  low,  fiat  and  swampy,  or
imperfectly  drained.  The  low  "  made  land  "  of  commercial
cities  is  its  favorite  feeding- ground.  In  this  cholera  resem-
bles typhus  and  diphtheria.

2.  Hygienic  Conditions.  No  fact  is  better  established,
and  none  is  more  important  to  be  widely  known,  than  this :
That  wherever  filth  abounds  there  cholera  makes  itself  at
home.  The  exhalations  from  an  undrained  soil,  saturated
with  the  washings  of  uncleaned  streets;  an  atmosphere
tainted  by  the  effluvia  from  accumulated  decaying  garbage


512  CHOLERA.

and  from  animal  and  human  excretions — these  furnish  a.
climate  in  which  the  seed  of  cholera  will  rapidly  develop  and
grow  with  rank  luxuriance.  This  is  demonstrated  by  both
positive  and  negative  evidence.

In  London,  cholera  was  longest  prevalent  and  was  most
deadly  in  the  uncleansed  and  overcrowded  tenement  houses.
In  New- York,  in  1832,  it  began  in  Cherry  and  Roosevelt
streets,  and  then  appeared  in  Reade,  Duane  and  Washing-
ton streets.  It  raged  furiously  at  the  Five  Pointe,  in  the
"rotten  row"  in  Laurens  street,  and  at  Corlaer's  Hook.  In
1849  '^  'i'^^  appeared  in  Baxter  street,  then  in  Mulbeny
street  It  then  broke  out  in  Stanton  and  in  Thompson
streets.  Whoever  is  familiar  with  these  localities  will  recog-
nize in  their  names  the  synonyms  of  vegetable  decay  and
animal  filth,  and  wilt  also  know  them  as  the  undrained  sites
of  ancient  swamps  and  ponds,  the  water  of  which  still  stands,
sending  up  vapors  through  their  oozy  soil.  See  General
Viele's  recent  pamphlet  and  map,  "  The  Topography  and
Hydrology  of  New- York."

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  stated  on  good  authority  that  not
a  single  case  of  cholera  occurred  in  any  of  the  new  "  Model
Lodging  Houses "  of  London,  which  are  clean,  dry,  li^t
and  well  ventilated,  and  which  are  not  allowed  to  be  over-
crowded. In  1849,  ''*  Philadelphia,  which,  with  the  partial
exception  of  two  districts,  was  prepared  for  cholera  by
thorough  cleansing,  only  747  persons  died  of  that  disease,
while  in  New- York  5,071  died  of  it.  Boston  was  still  more
carefully  purified,  and  the  cholera  confined  itself  to  a  few
narrow  lanes  and  crooked  streets  of  the  city.

But  the  impure  air  that  favors  cholera  is  not  found  in
filthy,  narrow  streets  alone.  It  may  exist  in  splendid  houses,
upon  our  cleanest  and  broadest  avenues,  if  the  sewers  which
drain  the  houses  be  defective,  clogged,  or  not  ventilated.  It
may  exist  in  any  sick-room,  anywhere,  if  ventilation  and
cleanliness  of  person  and  of  furniture  be  n^Iected.


CHOLERA.


sn


3.  Personal  Habits.  It  13  universally  conceded  that  the
free  use  of  alcoholic  drinks  predisposes  to  cholera.  It  should
be  remembered,  however,  that  habitual  drunkards  arc  also
babituolly  filthy,  and  irregular  in  their  habits,  and  arc  often
destitute-  Those  ivho,  having  previously  abstained  from
liquor,  resort  to  its  free  use  for  the  purpose  of  warding  off
cholera,  thereby  only  increase  their  liability  to  the  disease.
On  the  other  hand,  those  who  are  Imbituated  to  the  moderate
use  of  wine  run  a  risk  if  they  suddenly  discontinue  this  habit

Excesses  and  extremes  of  all  kinds  predispose  to  cholera.
Excessive  filth  does  so.  So  does  excessive  bathing,  with  a
view  to  extreme  cleanliness;  for  it  reduces  the  heat  of  the
body,  and  debilitates  the  system.  The  inordinate  use  of
either  animal  or  vegetable  food  is  a  predisposing  cause.
But  so,  mast  emphatically^  xi,  fasting  or  abstinence,  especially
as  regards  animal  food.  The  excessive  mortality  from
cliolcra  in  Paris,  which  we  have  mentioned,  occurred  during
the  fastings  of  Lent.  Nothing  like  it  occurred  at  any  other
period.  In  a  part  of  T^viisinna,  where  nearly  all  the  people
arc  Papists,  the  mortality  during  a  cholera  epidemic  was
quadrupled  during  and  after  a  three  days'  fast

Anything,  in  food  or  regimen,  that  irritates  the  bowels
predisposes  to  cholera.  So  does  fatigue  or  violent  exercise.
Reduction  of  the  temperature  of  the  body  by  exposure  to
night  air  or  by  excessive  bathing  has  the  same  effect

But  the  most  powerful  of  all  predisposing  causes  are
moral:  fear,  depressing  dread — panic!  We  should  strive
against  this  in  every  way.  And  we  shall  be  most  likely  to
avoid  panic  this  summer  if  we  now  faithfully  employ  every
means  to  ward  off  the  disease  wc  dread.


HI.


From  a  study  of  the  history  and  the  predisposing  causes
of  the  cholera,  we  turn  to  the practical  questions: How
may  wc  ward  off  the  disease  ? Or  how,  if  it  come  among
34


5M


CHOLERA.


us,  may  wc  circumscnbe  its  extent  and  moderate  its  malig-
nity ?

Preventive  measures  may  be  collective,  undertaken  by  the
state,  for  the  common  good ;  or  individual,  set  on  foot  by
individuals,  or  single  families,  for  their  own  benefit.


Quarantine.  Do  its  advantages  compensate  for  the
inconveniences  and  sufferings  to  individuals,  and  the  great
losses,  by  restrictions  on  commerce,  which  it  involves?

It  is  not  known  that  quarantine  regulations  have  ever
protected  any  community  during  tbe  entire  course  of  any
epidemia  Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  abundant  evi-
dence that  a  strict  quarantine  has  interposed,  for  a  time  at
least,  an  effectual  bar  to  the  advance  of  the  disease,  thus
postponing  its  visitations,  though  it  could  not  prevent  them.
To  all  who  properly  value  human  life  above  convenience  lo
journeying  and  the  uninterrupted  flow  of  trade,  this  fact  is  a
sufficient  argument  in  favor  of  a  strict  quarantine.

Indirectly,  a  quarantine  may  operate  for  good  or  for  evil
For.  gaod,  if,  while  it  postpones  the  invasion  of  cholera  for
three  or  six  months,  it  nevertheless  warns  us  to  prepare  for
its  inevitable  coming.  For  evii,  if,  by  its  temporary  success
in  staying  the  pestilence,  it  deludes  us  into  fancying  that  the
destroyer  will  pa.ss  us  by,  and  that  we  need  take  no  care  to
set  our  houses  and  cities  in  order  against  his  coming.  For,
it  is  probable  that,  by  tlic  aid  of  a  rigid  quarantine,  we  gain
the  advantage  of  ample  warning  and  of  time  to  adopt  the
necessary  hygienic  measures  for  mitigating  the  severity  afld
circumscribing  the  extent  of  the  disease.

The  chief  of  these  measures  is  the  removal  of  decaying
organic  matter  from  our  houses  and  neighborhood.  Epi-
demics of  cholera  have  been  very  aptly  called  "Frovidential
admonitions  to  'clean  up.'"  They  come  with  the  graduated
severity  characteristic  of  Providential  warnings.  We  see
them  far  oflT.  Their  approach  is  gradual.  At  last  they  come
to  our  doors ;  and  there  their  advance  Is  stayed  for  a  time


i


CHOtERA.


m


by  change  of  season  or  by  our  quarantine.  During  all  this
time,  if  we  have  understood  the  warning,  we  may  have  been
diligently  removing  from  our  midst  the  predisposing  causes
of  the  disease.  In  proportion  to  our  promptness  in  taking
warning,  and  to  our  diligent  faithfulness  in  preparing,  will  be
the  gentleness  of  the  final  visitation.  When,  last  June,  we
heard  of  cholera  in  Egypt,  we  should  have  begun  to  clean
our  city.  Now  that  it  has  knocked  at  our  doors,  we  have
still,  in  all  likelihood,  some  weeks  in  which  to  make  ready.

Of  course,  our  streets  must  be  cleaned.  And  means
should  be  taken  to  prevent  garbage  being  thrown  into  the
streets.  Many  families  throw  refuse  into  the  streets,
through  ignorance  and  carelessness.  A  friendly  word  in
explanation  of  the  bad  consequences  that  result  from  it
would  be  more  effective  in  preventing  it  than  a  city  ordi-
nance. Every  citizen  may  make  it  his  duty  to  make  such
representations  and  expostulations  to  his  delinquent  neigh-
bors. In  so  doing  he  will  subserve  his  own  interests.

But  the  greater  part  of  the  bad  air  of  our  houses  comes
from  ccss-pools  and  sewers.  Ccss-pools  and  privy-vaults
should  be  emptied  and  cleansed  during  the  cold  winter
months.  Drains  leading  from  houses  to  ccss-pools  or  sewers
should  be  carefully  cleared,  and  all  traps  in  such  drains  or  in
soil-pipes  should  be  opened  and  cleansed.  It  will  be  found
in  many  instances,  that  traps  in  waste  and  soil  pipes,  and
under  kitchen-sinks,  although  they  allow  water  to  pass,  are,
nevertheless,  often  clogged  with  considerable  quantities  of
most  offensive  matter.


Drainage.  Many  houses  in  New-York  and  its  suburbs
stand  upon  "made  ground,"  which  is  not  properly  drained.
The  cellars  and  surrounding  grounds  arc  damp.  Such
localities  should,  if  possible,  be  well  drained.  If  this  be
impossible,  the  cellars  and  lower  stories  must  be  kept
thoroughly  ventilated,  and  the  walls  and  cellar  floors  fre-
quently whitewashed,  to  destroy  the  fungi  which  dampness


5l«


CHOLERA.


and  confined  air  develop. It  must  not  be  forgotten  that
ventilation  requires  provision  for  both  the  entratue  and  egress

of  currents  of  air.

I

Ventilation.  Wherever  air  stagnates,  whether  in  cel-
lars or  elsewhere  in  houses,  there  dampness  collects,  and  the
lower  forms  of  vegetation  develop,  and  an  atmosphere
results  which  predisposes  to  disease.  In  apartments  which
are  constantly  occupied  by  human  beings,  the  exhalations
accumulate  upon  the  walls  and  taint  the  atmosphere.
Frequent  applications  of  whitewash  and  abundant  ventilation
are  suitable  correctives.  These  remarks  apply  to  all  of  our
residences,  and  not  merely  to  tenement  houses  and  out-
buildings.

DRINKING-WATER  is  often  made  impure  by  decaying
vegetable  or  animal  matters,  and  is  then  a  fruitful  source  of
disease.  Wells  dug  near  privies  or  cess-pools,  or  near  which
drains  are  laid,  should  always  be  examined  with  reference  to
this  fact.

From  some  of  the  dangers  thus  far  enumerated  the  resi-
dents of  New-Vork  are  exempt.  But,  to  a  greater  extent
than  most  other  people,  they  are  endangered  by


UnveNTILATED  Sewers.  The  sewers  receive  the  refuse
from  our  houses.  If  the  sewers  were  properly  constructed,
this  refuse  would  never  stagnate  in  them.  But  even  so,
decomposition  of  oi^;anic  matter  must  continually  go  on  ia
them,  evolving  noxious  gases.  To  prevent  these  gases
from  flowing  back  into  the  houses  through  the  waste  and
soil  pipes,  stench-traps  are  placed  in  these  pipes.  They
consist  of  an  elbow  formed  in  the  pipe,  and  in  which  water
remains,  constituting  a  barrier  to  tlie  backward  Sow  of  the
gases.  But  this  is  an  effective  barrier  only  so  long  as  the
gases  are  subjected  to  no  upward  pressure.  If  the  gases  be
subjected to  such  pressure,  they  bubble  up  through  the


CHOLERA.


517


water  in  the  trap,  and  pass  into  the  house  through  the
outlets  of  bath-tubs,  wash-basins,  and  closets.

Now,  it  is  notorious  that  in  but  few  of  the  sewers  of  New-
York  is  the  flow  of  matter  unimpeded.  No  provision  is
made  for  the  outlet  of  gases  from  the  scwcra.  The  gases
accumulate,  and,  by  this  accumulation  and  by  the  heat
evolved  in  their  generation,  tliey  become  subjected  to  press-
ure. They  bubble  up  through  the  stench-trap,  and  pervade
the  house. Thus


Our  Houses  Ventilate  our  Sewers!  Our  refuse  is
discharged  into  the  sewers,  only  that  it  may  there  be  con-
verted into  poisonous  gases,  and  be  received  again,  in  that
form,  into  our  houses.  The  more  completely,  under  these
circumstances,  a  house  is  provided  with  the  "  modem  con-
veniences," the  more  deadly  a  habitation  it  is !  There  arc
houses  in  Fifth  avenue  and  in  Twenty-third  street  whicli  have
illustrated  these  facts  by  the  sad  experience  of  their  inmates.

In  many  houses  there  are,  besides  the  main  stench-trap
or  sink.  In  these  cases,  the  portion  of  pipe  intervening
between  the  main  and  the  secondary  traps  becomes  a
"closed  chamber,"  in  which  the  poisonous  gases  forced  up
from  the  sewer  are  confined.  Any  increase  of  temperature,
even  the  varying  heat  of  the  house,  will  expand  these  gases,
and  cause  them  to  bubble  up  through  the  secondary  traps,
and  into  the  house,  as  before.

These  most  serious  dangers  may  be  obviated  by  ven-
tifating-thc  sewers  or  the  waste-pipes,  The  latter  can  be  done
for  himself  by  every  householder.  It  is  only  necessary  to
connect  with  his  waste  or  soil  pipe,  just  below  the  uppermost
trap,  a  smaU  pipe,  which  shall  be  led  up  through  the  roof,
and  shall  open  into  the  atmosphere,  allowing  the  gases  to
escape.  This  will  prevent  any  pressure  of  gas  below  the
traps.  Personal  observation  and  experience  have  convinced
us  of  the  great  value  of  this  ventilation  of  waste-pipes. On


518


CHOLERA.


a  large  scale,  ventilation  of  sewers  in  English  towns  ha$
reduced  the  mortality  from  ^hus  to  one-half  its  former
amount

It  should  be  noted  that,  as  many  of  die  prcdi^)09iDg
causes  of  cholera  are  the  same  as  those  of  t>'phus  and  of
diphtheria,  so  preventives  of  the  former  are  also  preventives
of  the  latter  hardly  less  deadly  maladies.

It  is  a  question  of  practical  importance  whether^  in  case  it
has  been  impossible  to  empty  and  clean  cess-pools  and  vaults
before  the  appearance  of  cholera,  it  would  be  safe  to  do  so
after  the  disease  has  begun  to  prevail.  We  think  not  It
would  be  better  not  to  disturb  the  accumulation  of  organic
matter.  But  we  may  intercept  the  gases  which  arise  from
these  collections,  and  may  hold  them,  employing  for  this
purpose  a  mixture  of  substances  which  chemically  unite  wiA
the  gases  and  substances  which  mechanically  absorb  them;
as,  for  example,  a  mixture  of  equal  parts  of  ground  plaster
and  of  pulverized  charcoal  (or  coal  ashes)  with  the  addition
of  one-eighth  part  of  copperas  (sulphate  of  iron).  This
should  be  spread  upon  the  surface  of  the  contents  of  the  cess-
pool or  privy-vault.

As  regards  the  measures  to  be  adopted  by  individuals  to
ward  off  cholera,  they  must  consist  mainly  in  the  avoidance
of  those  things  which  have  been  specified  as  predisposing
causes  of  the  disease.

Excesses  of  all  kinds  are  to  be  avoided— excesses  of  a^f/r-
n^Hc^  as  well  as  of  use.

The  very  free  use  of  vegetable  food,  especially  of  the
coarser  kinds.

Indulgence  in  alcoholic  drinks.

Exposure  to  night  air ;  to  cold ;  to  undue  fatigue  of
kind;  to  mental  depression.

But  it  would  be  unwise  to  make,  during  the  prevaUntf
an  epidemic,  sudden  and  violent  changes  in  habits,  which,
though  bad,  arc  nevertheless  long-established  habits.  "It  is
not  safe  to  trade  horses  when  crossing  a  stream."


CHOLERA.


5<9


IV.


If,  in  spite  of  the  measures  by  which  we  had  hoped  to
wafxl  it  off,  cholera  come  among  us  as  an  epidemic,  wc  shall
find  it  to  our  advantage  to  have  well  considered  beforehand,
and  determined,  how  we  may  best  deal  with  it.  Tliis  is  a
question  for  each  individual  to  settle  for  jiimself,  since  the
responsibility  is  his.

The  obvious  answer,  as  indicating  the  wisest  course,  would
be:  "I  will  seek  medical  advice."  But  it  is  all  important  to
know  what  are  the  earliest  signs  Uiat  medical  advice  is  needed.

Dr.  Guerin,  in  his  elaborate  report  on  cholera  to  the
French  Academy,  lays  great  stress  on  the  "fact"  that
almost  every  case  of  decided  cholera  is  preceded  by,  what
he  calU,  a  "  curable  stage ; "  a  period  during  which  the
patient  suiters  from  a  diarrhcea,  or  some  other  derangement
of  tlic  digestive  organs.  This  may  last  even  for  a  week  or
ten  days.  It  is  often,  apparently,  so  slight  a  deviation  from
health  that,  in  ordinary  times,  one  would  think  it  hardly
necessary  to  consult  a  physician  or  take  remedies  for  it.
But  an  experienced  physician  would  at  once  recognise  it  as
a  choleraic  diarrhosa — as,  in  fact,  ckoUra  in  the  preliminary,
or,  as  Guerin  calls  it,  the  "curable  stage."  The  patient
should  place  himself  under  medical  treatment  as  early  as
to  enable  a  non-medical  person  to  distinguish  it  wttk  cer-
tainty from  a  common  diarrhoea.  Nor  is  it  possible  to  gtVQ
such  directions  for  its  treatment  as  would  be  proper  for  a>
large  part  of  the  community,  without  modification  to  suit  the
constitutional  peculiarities  of  each  individual.

If  "  one  man's  meat  is  another  man's  poison,"  so,  much
more  frequently,  is  his  medicine.  No  faith  should,  there-
fore, be  placed  in  remc<iies  or  nostrums  that  are  offered
as  "sure  cures"  for  everybody,  in  every  st^e  of  cholera,
Cte.  Each  patient  requires  a  treatment  especially  adapted
to  his  particular  constitution,  and  to  his  actual  condition.


520


CHOLERA.


Many  persons  arc  so  fortunate  as  to  have  a  medical
adviser  who  commands  their  entire  confidence ;  who  has
attended  tliem  through  dangerous  illnesses,  has  studied
and  appreciated  their  constitutional  peculiarities  and  tenden-
cies, and  to  whose  care  they  would,  under  any  emergency,
unhesitatingly  intrust  their  lives.  To  such  persons  no  better
advice  can  be  given  than  this:  "Consult  your  physician  ;
be  advised  by  him  how  to  guard  against  cholera,  how  to
meet  its  first  advances,  and  then,  resolving  to  follow  his
counsels  implicitly,  go  about  your  business  with  an  easy
mind."  But  many  are  not  thus  happily  situated.  They
have  no  trusted  medical  adviser.  Even  now,  in  anticipation
of  the  coming  of  cholera,  they  arc  anxiously  looking  for  the
soundest  medical  counsel,  and  for  that  system  of  medical
treatment  which  offers,  in  its  statistics,  the  strongest  gtiar-
antees  of  success.  For  intelligent  members  of  the  com-
munity well  know  that  there  are  radical  differences  in  the
views  of  medical  men  as  regards  the  proper  and  the  most  suc-
cessful treatment  of  cholera  as  well  as  of  all  other  diseases.

It  were  a  foolish  affectation  to  ignore  these  differences.!
For  the  information,  therefore,  of  those  whose  minds  are
not  settled,  but  who  arc  in  .quest  of  facts  on  the  subject
of  these  differences  in  modes  of  medical  treatment,  I  will
give  in  this  section  a  summary  of  the  statistics  of  tlie  treat-
ment of  cholera  under  the  two  principal  antagonistic  systems
of  medicine.

As  might  naturally  be  supposed,  and  for  obvious  reasons,
the  mortality  of  patients  treated  in  hospitals  is  always  much
greater  than  that  of  patients  treated  at  their  own  houses.

From  1S3I  to  1848  the  mortality  of  cholera  patients
treated  by  the  ordinary,  "regular,"  or  allopathic  treatment
at  their  tmm  houses,  throughout  Europe,  was  one  in  two  and
a  half  cases,  or  more  than  39  per  cent.  In  hospital  practice,
during  the  same  period,  and  under  the  same  method,  the
mortality  was  one  in  one  and  a  half  cases,  or  more  than
57  per  cent


CHOLERA.


521


During^  the  same  period  the  mortality  of  patients  treated
at  their  own  houses,  by  homceopathic  physicians,  was  one
death  in  eleven  cases,  or  a  little  more  than  9  per  cent.

In  homceopathic  hospitals,  the  mortality  u-as  one  in  three
and  one-twelfth  cases,  or  a  little  more  than  33  per  cent

In  the  city  of  New-York  in  1832,  the  mortality  under
allopatliic  practice  was  :  in  hospitals,  50  per  cent ;  in  private
practice.  33  per  cent.

In  1849  ^^  mortality  under  allopathic  practice  was:  in
hospitals,  S3-7  per  cent. ;  in  private  practice,  34.7  per  cent.

During  this  epidemic  in  New- York,  the  aggregate  mor-
tality under  homceopathic  treatment,  under  many  disadvan-
tages, was  I  s  per  cent.

Summing  up  the  whole  number  of  patients  hitherto  re-
ported as  treated  homwopathically,  in  Europe  and  America,
both  in  private  and  in  hospital  practice,  wc  find  a  mortality
of  9  per  cent,  while  the  most  favorable  statement  of  mor-
tality under  allopathic  treatment  is  32  per  cent

But  these  reports  of  the  results  of  homceopathic  treatment
have,  although  most  unjustly,  been  called  in  question.  It  is
proper  to  authenticate  them  by  citing  the  action  of  govern-
ment officials,  who  are  not  Interested  in  Uie  disputes  of
physicians,  and  by  quoting  the  words  of  distinguished  medi-
cal men  who  are  not  homoeopathists.

Dr.  Gcrstcl,  of  Vienna,  and  Dr.  F.  F.  Quin,  now  a  vener-
able and  distinguished  practitioner  in  I^ndon,  treated  cholera
in  Tuichnowitz,  Moravia,  in  1831.  At  the  close  of  the
epidemic,  a  report  was  made  to  the  Austrian  Government
by  the  inspector. It  concludes  as  follows:

"The  proportion  of  deatlis,  compared  with  other  places  in
which  the  epidemic  raged,  was  small  The  homceopathic
treatment,  which  was  carried  out  to  a  great  extent  by  Dr.
Oerstel,  was  the  cause  of  this  iavorable  result (Signed)


Dr.  Victor  MitxAtuKr  von  Msrx,


532


CHOLERA.


In  1 836  cholera  visited  Vienna  a  second  time.  The  prac-
tice of  HomfEOpathy  was  at  that  time  forbidden  in  Aualria,
but  permission  was  obtained  to  open  a  Ilomceopathic
Cholera  Hospital,  I  state  the  result  in  the  words  of  Mr.
Wilde,  of  Dublin,  the  distinguished  aural  and  ophthalmic
surgeon,  who  is  no  friend  to  Homoeopathy. Me  says:'

"  Upon  comparing  the  report  made  [by  the  government
inspector,  who  visited  the  hospital  daily]  of  tlie  treatment  of
cholera  in  this  hospital  with  that  of  the  same  epidemic  in  the
other  hospitals  of  Vienna  at  a  similar  time,  it  appeared  that
while  tivo-tkirds  of  those  treated  by  Dr.  Flcischmann
(homcEopathic)  recovered,  two-thirds  of  those  treated  by  the
ordinary  methods,  in  other  hospitals,  died.  This  very  extra-
ordinary result  led  Count  Kolowrat,  Minister  of  the  Interior,
to  repeal  the  law  relative  to  the  practice  of  HomcEopathy."

Thus  the  very  fact  that  the  practice  of  Homceopatliy  ha&
been  sanctioned  by  law  in  Austria  since  1S3G,  is  an  eternal
monument  and  testimony  to  the  superior  success  of  the
homceopathic  treatment  of  cholera.

In  Paris,  in  1848-50,  Dr.  Tcssier,  in  the  Hospital  St:
Marguerite  (Hotel  DIcu,  annexe),  treated  cholera  patients  tn
his  wards  homccopathically.  The  general  report,  made,  not
by  Tcssier,  but  by  allopathists,  gives  for  his  wards  a  mor-
tality from  cholera  of  34)4  per  cent.,  while  in  tlie  otlter
wards  and  hospitals  tlic  mortality  was  57  per  cent.

In  1854,  in  Great  Britain,  Government  established  a
Medical  Council  to  gather  returns  of  the  treatment  and
mortality  of  cholera  under  every  method,  and  to  report  to
Parliament.

When  the  report  was  submitted  to  tlie  House  of  Com-
mons, it  was  noticed  that  the  retumsof  the  homc£op»thic  prac-
titioners and  of  the  London  Homceopathic  Hospital  were
not  included  in  it  The  House  of  Commons  tlicrcupon  callt
for  these  rejected  returns,  and  they  were  presented  in  a  sepa-
rate report,  entitled  "  Return  to  an  Address  of  Hon.  House

■  Atulris  and  iti  Imslitulmu,  p.  175.


CHOLERA.


523


of  Commons,  dated  May  17,  1855;  for  copies  of  any
letters  ;  •  •  together  with  copies  of  any  returns  that  have
been  rejected  by  the  Medical  Council."

This  return  gives  the  statistics  of  tlie  London  Homceo-
pathic  Hospital,  attested  by  Dr.  McLoughlin,  an  eminent
allopathic  physician,  who  was  government  inspector  of
cholera  hospitals,  by  appointment  of  the  same  medical
council  which  rejected  the  returns !

The  mortality  of  cholera  in  the  Homceopathic  Hospital
was  r6.4  per  cent.

Under  allopathic  treatment,  during  the  same  epidemic,  the
Medical  Council's  return  to  rarliamcnt  gives  the  mortality  as
59.2  per  cent

In  a  public  letter  contained  in  the  report  of  the  Homceo-
pathic Hospital,  and  addressed  to  one  of  the  physicians  of
this  hospital.  Dr.  McLoughlin,  Government  Inspector,  says : '

"You  are  aware  that  I  went  to  your  hospital  prepossessed
against  the  homoeopathic  system  ;  that  you  had  in  me,  in
your  camp,  an  enemy,  ratlicr  than  a  friend.  •  •  •  That  there
may  be  no  misapprehension  about  the  cases  I  saw  in  your
hospital,  I  will  add  that  all  I  saw  were  true  cases  of  cholera,
in  the  various  stages  of  the  disease ;  and  that  1  saw  several
cases  which  did  well  under  your  treatment  which  I  have  no
hesitation  in  saying  would  have  sunk  under  any  other.

"  In  conclusion.  I  must  repeat  to  you  what  I  have  already
told  you.  and  what  I  have  told  every  one  with  whom  I  have
conversed,  that  alttiough  an  allopatli  by  principle,  education,
and  practice,  yet,  was  it  the  will  of  Providence  to  afflict  me
with  cholera,  and  to  deprive  me  of  the  power  of  prescribing
for  myself,  I  would  rather  be  in  the  hands  of  a  homceopathic
than  an  allopathic  prc|criber.

"  I  cannot  suppose  that  anything  I  have  said  above  can  be
of  value  to  the  homoeopathic  system  ;  but,  such  as  it  ts,  you
are  at  full  liberty  to  make  what  use  you  please  of  this  letter.

"LONDOM,  February  aa,  1855."

'  See  "  Rrtnm  to  House  of  Commons."


524  CHOLERA.

Let  it  be  remembered,  as  a  grand  result  of  statistics
hitherto,  that  in  the  cholera  the  homoeopathic  treatment
saves  91  in  100  cases;  allopathy  saves  never  more  than  68
in  100  cases.

These  av^  facts,  and  they  are  re-assuring  fttcts  I  The  wise
will  heed  them.


V.


The  homoeopathic  treatment  of  cholera,  as  of  every
disease,  requires,  in  order  to  the  attainment  of  the  greatest
success,  a  strict  individualization  of  cases,  and  a  special
modification  of  the  treatment  to  meet  the  peculiarities  of
each  case.  This  can  be  done  only  by  a  skillful  and  experi-
enced homoeopathic  physician ;  and  no  general  directions
for  treatment  can  be  published  which  will  give  the  best  possi-
ble method  for  treating  each  person  attacked  with  cholera.
Those,  therefore,  who  are  within  reach  of  a  physician,  should
summon  him  at  the  earliest  moment  The  following
memoranda  are  offered  for  the  assistance  of  such  as  have  no
physician  at  hand.

The  subject  divides  itself  into  questions  of:

1.  Prophylaxis,  or  Prevention  of  Cholera.

2.  Treatment  of  Cholerine,  or  Preliminary  Diar-

RHCEA.

3.  Treatment  of  Cholera  Proper.

I.  Prophylaxis.  The  fundamental  principle  of  the
homoeopathic  practice  of  medicine  is  this:  that  a  sick
person  is  to  be  treated  by  the  administration  of  a  drug
which  has  been  found,  by  experience  or  observation,  to
produce  upon  healthy  persons  symptoms  very  similar  to
those  which  the  sick  person  presents.


CHOLBRA.


5*5


In  accordance  with  this  great  principle,  it  is  clear  that  if
the  symptoms  which  a  drag  produces  upon  healthy  persons
are  known,  it  is  possible  to  foresee  and  to  foretell  what
kinds  of  sickness  tliat  drug  will  cure.

In  this  way.  long  before  cholera  had  invaded  Europe,  on
its  first  westward  march,  Hahnemann,  having  become  ac-
quainted with  the  action  of  these  drugs  u]X>n  the  healthy^
perceived  and  announced  that  Camphor,  Vcratrum  album,
and  Cuprum  metallicum,  would  be  the  most  efficacious
remedies  for  cholera,  and  so  it  proved.

A  similar  application  of  the  same  law  induced  Hahne-
mann to  recommend  one  or  another  of  these  remedies
(according  to  circumstances),  as  prophylactics,  or  prevent-
ives of  cholera.  The  great  weight  of  testimony  compels  us
to  believe  that  this  use  of  prophylactic  remedies  has  saved
very  many  who  would  otherwise  have  been  attacked.  Dr.
A.  Cricca,  of  Smyrna,  in  a  report  dated  September  28,
1865,  says  of  those  who.  under  his  directions,  used  the
prophylactic  remedies:  "Out  of  the  very  considerable
number  of  persons  of  all  classes  and  conditions  (600  families
or  about  3,000  individuals)  not  one  {to  our  knowledge)  has
been  attacked  with  real  cholera.  Their  slight  derangements
of  stomach  have  been  easily  cured  by  Veratrum  album."

The  selection  of  the  prophylactic  remedy  must,  to  some
extent,  be  governed  by  the  nature  of  the  epidemic,  and
therefore  the  best  preventive  cannot  always  be  determined
until  the  epidemic  has  appeared,  and  its  peculiar  nature  has
been  ascertained.

Cuprum.  But,  as  a  general  rule,  both  in  Europe  and  ia
this  countrj',  Cuprum  has  been  considered  the  most  efficient
preventive.  A  dose  of  Cuprum  metallicum  should  be  taken
every  third  day,  on  rising  in  the  morning.  It  was  noticed,
that  during  the  epidemic  of  1849,  in  Paris,  workers  in  bras»
and  copper  escaped  tlie  disease.

Sulphur.  In  some  epidemics,  Sulphur  has  been  the  best
prophylactic. It will be suitable if  the diarrhcea  whicK


$96


CHOLERA.


prevails  at  the  same  Hmc  as  the  cholera,  and  the  diarrhoEa
which  precedes  many  cases  of  cholera,  be  of  the  character
taken  as  directed  for  Cuprum.  ■

2.  Preliminary  Diarrhcea.  It  has  been  stated  thai
almost  every  attack  of  cholera  is  preceded  by  a  diarrhcea,
which  may  last  from  six  hours  to  six  days,  and  which,  if
promptly  treated,  is  almost  always  easily  cured.

During  the  prevalence  of  an  epidemic  of  cholera,  cveiy
diarrhcea,  however  slight,  should  be  regarded  as  being,
possibly,  a  preliminary  to  an  attack  of  cholera,  and  should
at  once  receive  careful  attention.  At  the  same  time,  it  1$
all-important  that  the  patient  should  not  give  himself  up  to
fear  and  panic.  Let  him  use  his  utmost  self-control  to  keep
his  mind  calm  and  his  faculties  clear,  so  that  he  may  be  able
to  observe  his  own  condition  and  note  its  changes.  Every-
thing should  be  done  quietly,  and  without  precipitate  haste.
Prompt  attention  to  the  diarrhtea  is  advised,  not  so  much
because  the  patient's  condition  is  already  a  perilous  one,  but
rather  that  he  may  prevent  it  becoming  such.

As  soon  as  diarrhoea  occurs,  the  patient  should  go  to  bed
and  be  warmly  covered,  but  not  so  as  to  produce  perspira-
tion. He  should  keep  the  recumbent  position  as  long  as
diarrhcea  continues,  using  a  bed-pan  when  the  bowels  move.
If  thirsty,  he  may  drink  cold  water,  but  in  moderate  quanti-
tics.  The  food  should  be  light,  but  nutritious,  and  taken
frequently  in  small  quantities.  The  appropriate  remedy
should  be  taken  without  delay.

If  the  diarrhoea  come  on  in  the  ntght,  no  matter  how
slight  it  may  be,  the  patient  should  immediately  call
assistance,  or  begin  to  treat  it.  He  must  on  no  account
wait  until  morning,  as  many  do,  thereby  losing  precious
time.

The  following  remedies  are  likely  to  be  suitable :

Sulphur. \i  the  diarrhoea  comes  on  in  the  night.  a/Ur


CHOLERA.


5*7


midnight,  the  stools  being  yellow,  pappy,  and  attended  by
great  urgency,  though  the  urging  is  often  ineffectual ;  and
if,  at  the  same  time,  there  arc  cramps  in  the  soles  of  the
feet.  Sulphur  should  be  taken,  a  dose  every  two  hours,
until  relief  is  experienced.  It  is  a  general  rule  that  doses  of
medicine  should  not  be  repeated  after  the  patient  has  begun
to  improve,  nor  so  long  as  improvement  continues  to
progress.

Phosphoric  acid.  If  the  evacuations  arc  light-colored,
liquid,  copious,  and  not  attended  by  pain ;  if  the  tongue  is
covered  with  a  gluey  mucus,  and  there  are  cramps  in  the
arms,  witli  a  gciierdl  sense  of  weakness.  Phosphoric  acid  is
the  remedy. Take  as  above.

Aruuicum.  If  the  evacuations  are  frequent,  smalt  in
quantity,  liquid,  dark-colored,  and  quite  offensive;  attended
by  ^arp  pain  very  low  in  the  abdomen  and  by  burning  in
the  rectum,  and  followed  by  great  prostration  of  strength;  if,
likewise,  the  patient  has  great  thirst,  drinking  but  Httlc  at  a
timt,  and  is  very  restless  in  body  and  anxious  in  mind,  he
should  take  Arsenicum,  as  directed  for  Sulphur.

CroUm  tigiium.  If  the  evacuations  are  sudden  and  very
copious,  consisting  of  a  large  quantity  of  yellow  water,
which  passes  with  a  rush,  and  if  an  evacuation  occurs  every
time  the  patient  drinks,  Croton  tiglium  is  the  remedy.  Take
as  directed  for  Sulphur.

Veratrttm  album.  If  the  diarrha-a  is  watery,  copious,
and  very  painful,  and  is  accompanied  by  copious  vomiting,
wluch  is  repeated  ever)'  time  the  patient  drinks,  and  by  cold-
ness and  blueness  of  face  and  hands,  and  cold  sweat  on  the
forehead,  Veratrum  album  must  be  taken,  and  repeated
every  fifteen  minutes  until  warmth  returns  and  water  can  be
retained  on  tlie  stomach.


3.  Cholera.  A  case  may  pass  gradually  from  choleraic
diarrhcea  into  real  cholera;  or  a  neglected  diarrhoea  may
apparently  cease  for  a  time,  and  then  cholera  may  suddenly


528


CHOLERA.


supervene;  or  cholera  may  come  (it  rarely  docs  so)  without
warning.

In  the  last  two  cases,  symptoms  resembling  those  already
patient  suddenly  loses  strength,  and  looks  pinched  and  hlue.
The  skin  becomes  very  cold ;  the  voice  husky  and  deep ;  the
skin  of  the  fingers  shrivels.  There  are  intense  distress  and
anguish  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  burning  in  the  bowels.
The  patient  tosses  in  agony.  There  arc  cramps  in  the  calves,
and  sometimes  nausea  and  vomiting,  with  cold  sweat;  but,
generally,  the  evacuations,  both  up  and  down,  arc  moderate
and  infrequent.

Camphor.  This  is  the  form  of  the  disease  for  which
Camphor  has  been  proved  to  be  so  excellent  a  remedy.

In  addition  to  the  administration  of  Camphor,  the  patient's
extremities  should  be  vigorously  rubbed,  and  bottles  of  hot
water  applied  to  them  until  the  natural  heat  is  restored.  The
room  should  be  well  ventilated,  and  cold  water  given  freely
if  desired.

Carbo  vegetabilis.  Sometimes  the  collapse  is  still  more
marked.  Even  at  the  outset,  the  tongue  and  very  breath
are  cold.  Tlie  voice  is  extinct.  There  is  no  vomiti'ng,
diarrhoea,  spasm,  or  pain.  The  urine  is  suppressed.  Give
Carbo  vcgctabilis  every  five  minutes,  until  warmth  returns.

Veratrum  album.  When  the  evacuations  are  profuse,  both
upward  and  downward,  consisting  of  rice-n'ater  and  frothy
fluids,  with  great  anguish  in  the  abdomen,  thirst  for  cold  water,
which  is  taken  in  large  quantities,  but  is  vomited  as  soon  as
swallowed ;  with  contracted  features,  cold  sweat  on  the  fore-
head, hands  and  feet,  moderate  cramps  in  hands,  feet  and
calves;  with  suppression  of  urine, — Veratrum  album  should  be
given ;  a  dose  every  five  minutes  until  decided  improvement
is  manifest.

In  cases  requiring  Camphor  the  COLLAPSE  is  the  most
prominent  feature.  In  those  which  require  Veratrum  album,
the  EVACUATIONS  and  the  coldness  are  the  most  promi-


CHOLERA.  529

nent  symptoms. But  in  those  cases  which  call  for  Cuprum,
the  SPASMS  or  cramps  are  most  prominent

Cuprum  nietallicum.  When  the  evacuations  are  not  very
copious,  but  the  spasms  in  the  chest  and  stomach  are  very
painful,  with  great  tenderness  to  touch,  the  spasms  coming
on  in  paroxysms,  both  in  the  stomach  and  in  the  extremities ;
the  thirst  is  moderate ;  the  vomiting  is  allayed,  for  a  time,  by
drinking  water;  the  face  is  blue  and  cold;  the  respiration
short  and  labored;  the  voice  husky;  and  the  urine  sup-
pressed, give  Cuprum  metallicum  as  directed  for  Veratrum.

Administration  of  Remedies.  Where  medicines  in
liquid  form  are  used,  a  drop  of  the  liquid,  on  sugar  or  in
water,  may  be  used  as  a  dose ;  where  used  in  the  fc>rm  of
powder,  as  much  as  would  lie  on  a  three-cent  piece ;  where
globules,  three  or  four.

Inconvenient  results  have  been  observed  from  the  use  of
too  large  and  too  frequent  doses  of  Camphor;  and  the  pub-
lic should  be  cautioned  against  using  Camphor  without  a
clear  indication  of  its  necessity.  Where  too  much  has  been
taken,  it  produces  terrible  anguish  and  burning  at  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  so  great  as  to  drive  the  sufferer  almost  to
despair.  A  few  globules  of  Phosphorus  will  promptly  anti-
dote the  Camphor  and  relieve  the  patient


35


J


XllOl  Dunham, Carroll.
D917  Homeooathy, , ,
1877  5772


NAME  DATE  DUE


I
