An Experiment with Time (J. W. Dunne, 1927; public domain)
===============================================================================
Dunne's theory of serial time and precognitive dreams — the book that made 'precognition' a subject of serious psychical research. Source: Internet Archive.

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

Oc

AN |
EXPERIMENT
WITH TIME

J: W: DUNNE

t


= Vv

S .}\ pew wor

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
1927

All rights reserved

~
\e
4 a a
, 4 rf Bede os
. : a
7 4 4 '

287899


Set up and electrotyped.
Published March, 1927,

(DY AGB
AS

Printed in the United States of America by
J. J. LITTLE AND IVES COMPANY, NEW YORK

Ss Ss &bwe & YM

ee ee ee |

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

PART I
CHAPTER I

It might, perhaps, be advisable to say here,—since
the reader may have been glancing ahead,—that this
is not a book about “ occultism,” and not a book
about what is called “ psycho-analysis.”’

It is merely the account of an extremely cautious
reconnaissance in a rather novel direction,—an
account presented in the customary form of a narra-
tive of the actual proceedings concerned, coupled
with a statement of the theoretical considerations
believed to be involved,—and the dramatic, seem-
ingly bizarre character of the early part of the story
need occasion the reader no misgivings. He will
readily understand that the task which had to be
accomplished at that stage was the “ isolating ” (to
borrow a term from the chemists) of a single, basic
fact from an accumulation of misleading material.
Any account of any such process of separation must
contain, of course, some description of the stuff
from which the separation was effected. And such
stuff very often is, and in this case very largely
was—rubbish.

The fact which has emerged in the present
instance is precisely what, on theoretical grounds,
we should have expected to find. It fits very nicely
into its little niche in the system of knowledge; and

I

2 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

it seems, moreover, to possess the attribute against
which nothing can ever permanently contend—the
attribute of being clearly and directly observable
by everyone interested. It is hoped that the present
reader will take steps to satisfy himself upon this
point.
* * * *

There does not appear to be anything in these
pages that anyone is likely to find difficult to follow,
provided that he avoids those occasional paragraphs
in smaller print which have been written more par-
ticularly for specialists. And Part V. may require
reading twice. But there are a few commonplace
semi-technical expressions which will crop up now
and again; and it is always possible that other people
may be accustomed to attach to these words mean-
ings rather different to those which the present
writer is hoping to convey. Any such misunder-
standing would result, obviously, in our being at
cross-purposes throughout the greater part of the
book. Hence it might be advisable for us to come to
some sort of rough preliminary agreement, not as to
how these terms ought rightly to be employed, but as
to what they are to be regarded as meant to mean
in this particular volume. By so doing we shall, at
any rate, avoid that worst of all irritations to a
reader—a text repeatedly interrupted by references
to footnote or glossary.

That the agreement will be entirely one-sided will
make it all the easier to achieve.

CHAPTER II

BRIEFLY, then:

Let us suppose that you are entertaining a visitor
from some country where the inhabitants are all
born blind; and that you are trying to make your
guest understand what you mean by “seeing.”
You discover, we will further assume, that the pair
of you have, fortunately, this much in common:
You are both thoroughly conversant with the mean-
ings of all the technical expressions employed in
the physical sciences.

Using this ground of mutual understanding, you
endeavour to explain your point. You describe
how, in that little camera which we call the “ eye,”
certain electro-magnetic waves radiating from a dis-
tant object are focussed on to the retina, and there
produce physical changes over the area affected;
how these changes are associated with currents of
“nervous energy ”’ (possibly electrical) in the criss-
cross of nerves leading to the brain-centres, and how
molecular or atomic changes at those centres suffice
to provide the “seer ”’ with a registration of the
distant object’s outline.

All this your visitor could appreciate perfectly.

Now, the point to be noticed is this. Here is a
piece of knowledge concerning which the blind man
had no previous conception. It is knowledge which
he cannot, as you can, acquire for himself by the
ordinary process of personal experiment. In sub-
stitution, you have offered him a description, framed
in the language of physical science. And that sub-
stitute has served the purpose of conveying the
knowledge in question from yourself to him. .

3 .

4 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

But in “‘ seeing ”’ there is, of course, a great deal
more than mere registration of outline. There is,
for example—Colour.

So you continue somewhat on the following lines.
That which we call a “red” flame sets up electro-
magnetic waves of a certain length: a “blue”
flame sets up waves exactly similar save only that
they differ slightly in this matter of length. The
visual organs are so constituted that they sort out
waves showing such disparity in length, and this in
such a way that these differences are finally regis-
tered by corresponding differences in those physical
changes which occur at the brain centres.

From the point of view of your blind guest, this
description, also, would be entirely satisfactory.
He could now understand perfectly how it is that a
physical brain is able to register wave-length-differ-
ence. And, if you were content to leave it at that,
he would depart gratefully convinced that the lan-
guage of physics had again proved equal to the task,
and that your description in physical terms had
equipped him with a knowledge of, for instance,
what other people call “red ’’ as complete in every
respect as that which they themselves possess.

But this supposition of his would be absurd. For
concerning the existence of one very remarkable
characteristic of red he would still, obviously, know
nothing whatsoever. And that characteristic (pos-
sibly the most puzzling, and certainly the most
obtrusive of them all) is—its redness.

Redness? Yes. Without bothering about whether
redness be a thing or a quality or an illusion or any-
thing else, there is no escaping the fact (1) that it
is a characteristic of red of which you and all seeing
people are very strongly aware, nor the further fact,
(2) that your visitor, so far, would have not the

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 5

faintest shadow of an idea-that you or others experi-
ence anything of the kind, or, indeed, that there
could exist anything of the kind to be experienced.
If, then, you intend to complete your self-imposed
task of bringing his knowledge on the subject of
“seeing ’’ up to the same level as your own, there
remains yet another step before you.

Realizing this, you mentally glance down your
list of physical expressions, and—a moment’s
inspection is enough to show you that, for the pur-
pose of conveying to your blind guest a description
of redness, there is not a single one of these expres-
sions which is of the slightest use whatsoever.

You might talk to him of particles (lumps,——
centres of inertia), and describe these as oscillating,
spinning, circling, colliding, and rebounding in any
kind of complicated dance you cared to imagine.
But in all that there would be nothing to introduce
the notion of redness. You might speak of waves
—big waves, little waves, long waves, and short
waves. But the idea of redness would still remain
unborn. You might hark back to the older physics,
and descant upon forces (attractions and repul-
sions), magnetic, electrical, and gravitational; or
you might plunge forward into the newer physics,
and discourse of non-Euclidean space and Gaussian
co-ordinates. And you might hold forth on such
lines until exhaustion supervened, while the blind
man nodded and smiled appreciation; but it is
obvious that, at the end of it all, he would have no
more suspicion of what it is that (as Ward puts it)
“you immediately experience when you look at a
field poppy ” than he had at the outset.

Physical description cannot here provide the
information which experience could have given.

Now, redness may not be a thing—but it 1s very

6 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

certainly a fact. Look around you. It is one of
the most staring facts in existence. It challenges
you everywhere, demanding, clamouring to be
accounted for. And the language of physics 1s
fundamentally unadapted to the task of rendering
that account.

It is obvious that dubbing redness an “ illusion ”
would not help the physicist. For how could
physics set about describing or accounting for the
entry of the element of redness into that illusion.
The universe pictured by physics is a colourless
universe, and in that universe all brain-happenings,
including “illusions,” are colourless things. It 1s
the intrusion of Colour into that picture, whether
as an illusion or under any other title, which requires
to be explained.

Once you have thoroughly realized that redness
is something beyond a complex of positions, a com-
plex of motions, a complex of stresses, or a mathe-
matical formula, you will have little difficulty in per-
ceiving that Colour is not the only fact of this kind.
If your hypothetical visitor were deaf, instead of
blind, you could never, by giving him books of
physics to read, arouse in him even the beginning
of a suspicion regarding the nature of “ Sound,”
as heard. Now, Sound, as heard, is a fact: (put
down this book and listen). But in the world
described by physics there is no such fact to be
found. All that physics can show us is an altera-
tion in the positional arrangement of the brain par-
ticles, or alterations in the tensions acting upon
those particles. And in no catalogue of the mag-
nitudes and directions of such changes could there
be anything to suggest that there exists anywhere in
the universe a phenomenon such as that which you
directly experience when a bell tolls. In fact, just

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 7

as physics cannot deal with the element of redness
in “red,” so is it inherently unable to account for
the intrusion of that clear bell-note into a universe
which it can picture only as an animated diagram of
groupings, pushings, and pullings.

But if, in such a diagram, there can be nothing of
either Colour or Sound, is it likely to be of any use
our hunting therein for phenomena like ‘ Taste”
and “Smell”? The utmost that we could hope
to find would be those movements of the brain-par-
ticles which accompany the experiences in question;
or, possibly, some day, the transference equations
relating to some hitherto unsuspected circuit of
energy. Your hypothetical visitor and yourself
might each possess the fullest possible knowledge
of these brain-disturbances, the most complete
acquaintance with such energetic equations as may
still remain to be written; but, if you could actually
taste and smell, and he could not, it is incontro-
vertible that your knowledge of each of these
phenomena would include something: quite unknown
to, and, indeed, quite unimaginable by, him.

Now, when we say of any occurrence that it is
“ physical,’”’ we mean thereby that it is potentially
describable in physical terms. (Otherwise the ex-
pression would be wholly meaningless.) So it is
perfectly correct to state that, in every happening
with which our sensory nerves are associated, we
find, after we have abstracted therefrom every
known or imaginable physical component, certain
categorically non-physical residua.

But these remnants are the most obtrusive things
in our universe. So obtrusive that, aided and
abetted by our trick of imagining them as situated
at our outer nerve-endings, or as extending beyond
those endings into outer Space, they produce the

8 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

effect of a vast external world of flaming lights and
colours, pungent scents, and clamorous, tumultuous
sounds. Collectively, they bulk into a most amaz-
ing tempest of sharply-differentiated phenomena.
And it is a tempest which remains to be considered
after physics has completed its say.

Puysics.—Nor is this last a matter for wonder-
ment. For the ideal object of physics is to seek
out, isolate, and describe such elements in Nature as
may be credited with an existence independent of
the existence of any immediate observer. Physics
is, thus, a science which has been expressly designed
to study, not the universe, but the things which
would supposedly remain in that universe if we were
to abstract therefrom every effect of a purely sen-
sory character. From the very outset, then, it re-
nounces all interest in such matters as those colours,
sounds, etc., of which we are directly aware,—mat-
ters essentially dependent upon the presence of an
immediate observer, and non-existent in his absence,
—and it limits itself to a language and a set of con-
ceptions serviceable only for the description of facts
pertaining to 1ts own restricted province.

PsycHOLoGyY AND PsycHICAL.—But, as scientific
investigators of the situation in which we find our-
selves, we cannot, of course, neglect to study a
mass of phenomena so large and so obtrusive as to
constitute, to first appearance, the whole of the
world we know. Consequently, a separate science
has gradually arisen which endeavours to deal with
these and other of the rather bulky leavings of
physics. This science is called ‘“ Psychology,”
and the facts with which it deals—facts existing
only in the presence of an immediate observer
—are dubbed “mental,” or, more commonly,
“ Psychical.”

CHAPTER III

Now, although it is scientifically indisputable that
the brain, regarded as a purely physical piece of
mechanism, cannot create, unassisted and out of
nothingness, any of those vivid psychical appear-
ances we call “colour,” ‘ sound,” ‘“ taste,” etc.,
it may be taken as experimentally established that
these phenomena do not.come into existence unless
accompanied by some stimulation of the corre-
sponding sense organs. Moreover, they vary in
character according to the character of the sense
organ involved: lights and colours accompany
activities of the optic nerves; sounds are associated
with the existence of ears; tastes with palates. The
psychical phenomena are different because the sen-
sory organizations are different. Colour experi-
ences in Man range from violet to deep red, accord-
ing to the wave-lengths of the electro-magnetic rays
impinging upon the eye. If that wave-length be
further slightly increased, the associated psychical
experience is one of heat alone. But we know that,
with a very little modification of the sensitive optical
elements involved, those heat experiences would be
accompanied by experiences of a, visible infra-red
colour.

Thus, the physical brain, though it cannot create
such sensory appearances, is a prime factor in their
characterization, and, for that reason, an important
factor in whatever process it may be that causes
them to appear.

The situation, thus far, is usually summed up in
the cautious statement that these particular kinds of

9

10 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

psychical phenomena, on the one hand, and their
corresponding sense-organ stimulations, on the
other, invariably accompany one another, or run, so
to say, on parallel tracks in Time. This, be it
noted, 1s never advanced as an “explanation ”’: it
is merely supposed to be a simple way in which the
facts can be announced without dragging in the
various metaphysical creeds favoured by the various
announcers.

PsyCHONEURAL PARALLELISM.—The assumption
that this “parallelism” of psychical and neural
(nervous) events extends to all observable thought-
experience—that there is no observable psychical
activity without some corresponding activity of
brain—is called “ Psychoneural Parallelism”; the
activity in either class being referred to as the
“correlate ”’ of that in the other.

The accumulated evidence in favour of this view
is practically overwhelming. Hard thinking induces
brain fatigue; drugs which poison the brain inter-
fere with our reasoning processes; brain deteriora-
tion affects our ability to form new memories.
Above all, “concussion” of the brain appears to
destroy all memory of the events which immediately
preceded the accident—indeed, it is by the failure
of the patient to remember what led up to that acci-
dent that the physician diagnoses concussion. This
provides us with almost indisputable evidence that
‘the means’ of remembering are “ brain-traces ”
which require a little time for their assured estab-
lishment.

That such brain-traces (insulated paths formed
by the passage of nervous currents) do, in fact,
exist, is well known; and, moreover, it has been
shown that the greater the ability of the individual
to perform associative thinking, the more numerous

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME II

and the more complex in their ramifications are the
brain paths in question.

OBSERVER.—We have now arrived within intro-
ductory range of that very meek-spirited creature
known to modern science as the “ Observer.” It
is a permanent obstacle in the path of our search for
external reality that we can never entirely get rid of
this individual. Picture the universe how we may,
the picture remains of our making. On the other
hand, it is, probably, equally true that, paint the
picture how we will, we have to do it with the paints
provided. But there is no reason why either of
these limitations should invalidate the result re-
garded as a map by which we may safely set our
course. Moreover, we can test it in that respect;
and experience has shown that, thus tested, it proves
reliable. Therein lies the justification of our search
for knowledge.

It is worth noting that, from the study of a pic-
ture, we may always infer a little about the character
and situation of the unincluded artist. Science,
indeed, is often obliged to decide that certain
changes or peculiarities in what is observed are only
to be accounted for by inferring changes or pecu-
liarities in the observer.

The general procedure, however, in every science,
is to begin by the accurate tabulating of differences
in what is observed. If we subsequently discover
that these differences are due to the character or
actions of the observer, we can note that such is the
explanation of the difference and draft our science
accordingly; but that addition to our knowledge
does not invalidate our previous analysis of the
differences as observed.

All sciences deal only with a standard observer,
unless the contrary is explicitly stated; and

12 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

psychology is no exception to this rule. Its ob-
server 1S assumed to be any normally constituted
individual. And this individual is the same observer
as 1s ultimately employed in physics. In what the
psychologist says about the colours of “ after-im-
pressions,” and in what the physicist says about the
“spectra ” of certain stars, this same standard ob-
server is implicated. And it is assumed that he is
not colour-blind.

Now, it must be admitted that the tenets of
psychoneural parallelism are not very encouraging
to this “observer.” For they suggest that, when
the brain-workings come to an end, the psychical
phenomena cease likewise from troubling. More-
over, the scientific procedure of pushing the ob-
server as far back as possible—so as to get as much
as possible of the picture into the category of that |
which is observed—tends to reduce him to the level
of a helpless onlooker with no more capacity for
interference than has a member of a cinema audience
the ability to alter the course of the story develop-
ing before him on the screen. Nor is there much
more comfort to be obtained from a study of the
various metaphysical interpretations (none of them
offer an explanation) of this parallelism of Mind
and Body. Idealist and Realist may dispute hotly
as to precisely how far the observer colours, so
to say, the phenomena which he observes; but
decisions arrived at in that respect need not suggest
that he has any power of changing either the colour-
ing he confers or the thing perceived as thus
coloured—much less the ability to continue observ-
ing when there is no longer any brain activity to be
observed.

ANIMISM.—In this connection, however, we must
recognize the existence of a small but very vigorous

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 13

group of philosophers known as “ Animists.” In
this twentieth century the leading exponent of
Animism is indubitably Professor William Mc-
Dougall, whose book, “ Body and Mind,” sets out
the arguments for and against the theory with
scrupulous fairness. Indeed, I cannot call to mind
anyone who has stated the case against Animism
with such devastating force. | |

Animism holds that the observer is anything but
a nonentity. He is no “conscious automaton.”
He may, indeed, stand right outside the pictured
universe; but he is a “ soul,” with powers of inter-
vention which enable him to alter the course of
observed events—a mind which not only reads the
brain, but which employs it as a tool. Much as the
owner of an automatic piano may either listen to
its playing or play on it himself.

The inference is that this observer can survive
the destruction of that brain which he observes. As
for his intervention, there is no insuperable objec-
tion to that from the physical side. McDougall ©
quotes and suggests various ways in which interven-
tion could be effected without adding to or sub-
tracting from the amount of energy in the nervous
system.

The man-in-the-street is always at a loss to
understand why the great majority of men of science
are so coldly opposed to the idea of a “soul.”” The
religious man in particular cannot comprehend why
his arguments should arouse not merely opposition,
but bitter contempt. Yet the reason is not far to
seek. It is not that the idea is attributed to man’s
inordinate conceit (though this is sometimes done
by the unreflecting) ; for, all said and done, a navvy
who can walk into a public-house and order a pot
of beer is an infinitely more wonderful thing than

14 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

is the biggest lump of cooling mud that ever swam
in the skies. But there can be no reasonable doubt
that the idea of a soul must have first arisen in the
mind of primitive man as the result of observation
of his dreams. Ignorant as he was, he could have
come to no other conclusion but that, in dreams, he
left his sleeping body in one universe and went
wandering off into another. It is considered that,
but for that savage, the idea of such a thing as a
“soul ” would never have even occurred to man-
kind; so that arguments subsequently introduced to
bolster up a case thus tainted at its source can have
no claim to anyone’s serious attention.

CHAPTER IV

PRESENTATIONS.—Psychology must begin, then,
by describing observed appearances (the literal
translation of the word “ phenomena ”) without any
prejudging of the issue as to what is the cause of
these. So, though it may speak of such phenomena
as if they were things, it must not be regarded as
asserting that they are, at bottom, anything more
than effects associated with brain-workings. It
leaves, at the outset, that question open.

FIELD OF PRESENTATION.—AII such phenomena
it styles “ Presentations,’ and it regards them as
located within the individual’s private “ Field of
Presentation.” (We shall employ this term in
preference to the commoner “ Field of Conscious-
ness,” which is insufficiently definite.) This field
of presentation contains, at any given instant of
Time, all the phenomena which happen to be offered
for possible observation. Let us take a concrete
example of what that means. You are now reading
this book, and your field of presentation contains
the visual phenomena connected with the printed
letters of the word you are regarding. It contains
also, at the same instant, the visual phenomenon
pertaining to the little numeral at the bottom of
the page. This you “failed to notice”; but
the numeral in question was, clearly, inside the
area covered by your vision—it was affecting
your brain wa the eye, its psychical “correlate ”’
was being offered to your attention. And that
statement holds good for a host of other visual
phenomena. On reflection, you will also agree that

15

16 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

the field must have then contained—presented to
attention but left “ unnoticed ’—certain muscular
sensations such as pressures against your body,
quite a number of sounds, and the pleasant feeling
produced by the air flowing into your lungs as you
breathed.

ATTENTION.—It would be unsafe to say that these
comparatively unnoticed phenomena were not being
consciously observed. When you are watching a
fall of snow, observation may be concentrated upon
a single floating flake; but that does not mean that
you fail to perceive the remainder. Were these to
vanish, leaving the single flake in the air, their dis-
appearance would instantly distract your startled
attention from the object of your previous pre-
occupation. When listening to the playing of an
orchestra, you do not need to cease following the
music in order to be aware that the irritating person
in the seat ahead has stopped beating time with his
programme. As a general rule, however, observa-
tion seems to be definitely centred upon one or
another specific part of the crowd of presentations
—though we have no psychical evidence to show
that this is anything more than a matter of habit.
Observation thus centred is called “ Attention.”
It is usual to speak of the part of the field centred
upon as being in the “ Focus of Attention”; and
it is a matter of common knowledge that, at and
around this “focus,” attention may be concentrated
in greater or less degree of intensity.

In Physiology (the science which deals with the
brain as a physical organism) the field of presenta-
tion would be merely the particular part of the cere-
brum which happens to be, at that moment, in the
state of activity associated with the production of
psychical phenomena. And the focus of attention

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 17

would be simply that particular brain path which the
maximum current of nervous energy happened to
be following. One would be apt to suppose, off-
hand, that this maximum flow would be produced
by whatever happened to be the greatest sensory
stimulation; but such could not be the rule. The
hungry man, coming to the luncheon table, has his
attention focussed, not upon the brightness of the
shining silver, but upon the far duller sensory
stimulation of the well-browned mutton chop.
Attention, therefore, may be either attracted from
without the organism or directed from within. If
we were to attribute such directing to the ultimate
observer, we should be admitting him to the status
of a full-blown animus with powers of intervention.
For, as every schoolboy knows, the concentrating
of attention has a very marked effect in the forma-
tion of memories. But the physiologist would
insist that we have no need to regard this internal
directing of attention as originating in anything
beyond the purely mechanical internal condition of
the brain.

Now, the field of presentation at any given
moment may contain a great many observable
phenomena besides those sensory appearances which
we have been considering. It may contain, for
example, “Memory Images.”*

What sort of a phenomenon is a ‘“ memory
image ’’?

IMPRESSIONS.—Presentations may be divided
into two sharply differing classes. The first of

*TI apologize to the modern psychologist for this revival
of the ancient word “ image.” He will find, later on, that
its use is perfectly justified, even though it does mean no
more than the re-employment of a “ disposition,” or the re-
stimulation of a brain path.

18 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

these comprises all phenomena which appear to the
observer as directly attributable to the action of
his outer sensory organs or nerve endings. That
they are truly associated with the activities of such
surface machinery is evident from the fact that
movement of, or external interference with, the
organs or nerve endings in question results in an
alteration of the character of the phenomena ob-
served, and from the equally significant fact that, in
the absence of such movements or interferences, the
phenomena remain unaltered and unescapable. They
cannot, in popular parlance, be “willed away.”
Such phenomena are styled, “ Impressions.”

IMAGES.—But now, picture to yourself a room
which you remember. There is no doubt that what
you are observing is a visual presentation—a mental
picture. The process is not one of saying to your-
self: “ Let me see: there was a sofa in that corner,
and a piano in the other, and the colour of the
carpet was such-and-such.” Rather does the whole
of what you remember come before your eyes in the
form of a simultaneous vision. If, however, you
want to make absolutely certain that such visual
pictures are not things which you deliberately manu-
facture from a catalogue of verbally remembered
detail, you may try the following experiment. Look
carefully at a painting of a landscape; then, after
half an hour, try to re-visualize what you saw. You
will find that you can re-observe much of the exact
colouring of the original impressions,—the peculiar
olives and browns and greys,—even though many of
these colours were quite beyond your powers of
artistic analysis, let alone verbal description. So
you must be seeing, as an “image,” an arrange-
ment of colours similar to those which you saw as
impressions.

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 19

EXTERNAL-REALITY TONE.—There is a difference
between an impression and its related image which
it has puzzled every psychologist to describe. It
lies in the presence or absence of what is sometimes
called “sensory vividness,’ but what, I think,
would be better referred to as “ External-reality
tone.’ As compared with a room which you can
see with your eyes, the room you are remembering
seems unreal, yet real enough to be recognizable as
a visual, and not, say, an aural image. Again,
strike the rim of a wine glass, and listen to the
sound as it dies away. It grows fainter and fainter
till it vanishes ; but to the last (as Ward points out)
it retains its external-reality tone. After it has
entirely disappeared, you can remember what it >
sounded like just before it died away. That memory
is recognizable as a memory of sound—an aural
image. It has all the tonal qualities of the original
faint impression; but it lacks the appearance of
external reality.

Again, compare the true memory image with the
phenomenon commonly called an “after impres-
sion.” The latter may be easily observed. If
you stare hard for sixty seconds at a brilliant
red lampshade, and then look up at the ceil-
ing, you will see, after a moment or so, a
patch of green, shaped in outline like the lamp-
shade. This phenomenon is dim, exhibits little, if
any, detail within its boundaries, is of the oppo-
site (complementary) colour to the original impres-
sion, and lacks all perspective—seeming to be flat
all over. It possesses, however, external-reality-
tone, and is clearly an impression. It moves as you
move your eyes. But, while actually watching this
green patch floating before you, you can observe a
true memory image of the original impression of the

20 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

lampshade. It is of the original red colour, exhibits
much internal detail, and appears to be three-dimen-
sional—t.e., to possess the depth apparent to
binocular vision.

Five minutes later, when all trace of the green
after-impression has vanished, you can observe at
will clear memory images of either red lampshade
or green patch.

It may be noted, then, that images are phenomena
quite distinct from mere dying impressions.

CHAPTER V

MeEmory-Train.—Now, when you are trying to
recall a succession of observed impressions, the
images pertaining to these are observed as if they
were actually arranged in an order corresponding
to the order in which the original impressions were
received. This supposed arrangement is called, as
everybody knows, the “ Memory-Train,”’ and it is
noticeable that the process of remembering events
in the order in which they occurred is one which
involves sometimes a very considerable mental
effort. But if you are merely allowing your mind
to wander—as in a daydream—without knowingly
aiming at any definite goal, the set of images which
is then observed appears to be arranged in a
sequence which has little correspondence with any
previous observed succession of events.

TRAIN oF IpEAS.—This curious succession of
images is called the “ Train of Ideas,’ and it is
possibly a very significant fact that the simple, un-
directed following of a train of ideas appears to
entail no mental effort or fatigue whatsoever.

Almost everybody has, at one time or another,
amused himself by retracing the train of ideas which
has led him, without any conscious aim on his part,
to think of, or remember, a certain thing. ‘“ I saw
this,” he will say, “and that made me remember
so-and-so; and that made me think of such-and-
such.” And so on. Here, however, is a specific
example.

It is now evening, and in front of me stands a
teacup with a chequered black and white border-

ai

22 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

ing. The sight of this (an impression) “ brings
up’ a memory image of the chequered oilcloth
floor-covering which, this morning, I was using as
material for an experiment in obtaining after-im-
pressions. Now, at the time of making that experi-
ment I was thinking of Ward’s description of these
phenomena in the “ Encyclopedia Britannica’; and
the next image to appear before me is an image of
the red volume in question (mine is the small-print
edition). Following that, there appears an image
of an open page in the volume, and a very vivid
image of the sensation of eye-strain involved in its
reading. That “brings up ” an image of the read-
ing-glass I sometimes use. That “brings up”
the image of the lens I borrowed in a fishing-tackle
shop yesterday morning in order to examine some
trout flies I was buying. That “brings up” the
image of the friend for whom I had purchased those
flies, as he stood when asking me to do so. And
that “brings up” the pleasing image of the two-
and-a-half pound trout I annexed from that friend’s
water two days ago. Thus, starting with a teacup,
I arrive at a trout.

Now, examination of the nature of a train of
ideas brings to light the following facts.

GENERIC JMAGES.—When a number of partly
similar impressions have been attended to at
different times, there is observable, besides the
several memory images pertaining to those several
impressions, a vague, general image comprising
nothing beyond the key elements which are common
to all those separate images. For example, the
images of the hundreds of tobacco pipes which I
have seen, smoked, and handled, all contain a
common element which is now apparent to me as an
ill-defined image of “pipe” in general. It pre-

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 23

sents all the essential characteristics which serve to
distinguish a pipe from any other article such as,
say, an umbrella. Such characteristics are: Hollow
bowl, tubular stem—in short, an appearance of
utility for the purpose of smoking. But this
indefinite image does not exhibit any indication of
specific colour or precise dimensions. It seems,
however, to be the nucleus of all the definite images
of particular pipes to be found in my mental equip-
ment; for, if attention be directed to it, there will
quickly become observable the image of sometimes
one and sometimes another of such particular pipes.

These vague, almost formless general images are
called “ Generic Images,’ and they appear to be
analogous to a central knot to which the specific,
definite images are in the relation of radiating
threads.

ASSOCIATIONAL NETworRK.—It is obvious that
many of these threads—these definite images—may
be radiating also from another generic image. A
definite image of a particular wooden pipe-bowl may
pertain, on one side, to the generic image, “ pipe,”
and, on another, to the generic image I call “ grained
wood.” That generic image may have, as another
of its components, a definite image of a polished
walnut table, which image, again, may also be a
radiating thread pertaining to the generic image,
“furniture.” A thread from “furniture ’—say,
the image of a particular suite seen in a shop win-
dow—may be the link with the generic image
“antiquities.” So far, then, we are confronted
with something analogous to a network of knots
(generic images) and radiating threads (definite
images) along the meshes of which attention may
be led without conscious effort on the part of the
observer. Ideas linked together in this manner

24 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

graphically analogous to a network of knots and
threads are said to be “associated.” Hence we
may refer to the structure in question as the “ Asso-
cational Network.”

It is commonly assumed that association is of
two kinds: association by similarity, as when one
event recalls a similar event which may have hap-
pened long ago; and association by contiguity,
which means that, when two events have occurred in
close succession, the recalling of one leads to the
recollection of the other. |

To the physiologist the associational network is
simply the network of brain-paths, the ‘‘ knots”
being regions—or patterns—therein, and the “ con-
necting threads” being paths which pertain to
more than one such region—or pattern. All the
phenomena of association seem to be adequately
accounted for on that supposition; and on no other
theory, so far as I can see, is it possible to account
for association by “ similarity” at all.

In the absence of any other guidance, the path
taken by the train of ideas seems to be conditioned
very largely by the factor of freshness in the images.
Other things being equal, an image which has been
recently established makes a stronger bid for the
wandering attention than does one which has long
been neglected. The reader will notice that, in
the example of a train of ideas given a little way
back (the one which began with a teacup), all the
images related to experiences which had recently
occurred. For example, the black and white
chequering of the teacup led me, not to chess,
which is a very obtrusive generic image of mine,
but to the piece of linoleum I had seen that morn-
ing. Physiologically, this would mean that brain-
paths which have been recently traversed offer a

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 25

better passage to the currents of nervous energy
than do those which have been allowed to fall int:
disuse.

The supposed ‘‘ memory train” does not appear
to be anything more than a particular pathway
through the associational network, the pathway
which happens to have been thus recently traversed.
If you try to trace a “‘ memory train ” back for more
than a little way, you find that the path has ceased
to be clearly marked out: the images do not come
up in a steadily correct sequence of, so to say, their
own accord. You have to help the memory out by
reasoning as to which event must have happened
next—and sometimes you reason wrongly.

DreaMs.—Dreams, like many other mental
phenomena, are composed largely of images sup-
plied by an associational network. But they differ
from mind-wandering in several important respects.
In the latter form of activity reason is nearly always
partially at work to determine the course to be fol-
lowed along the network. But in dreams this
guidance seems to be largely lacking, and the dream
images present themselves as real—though curiously
unstable—episodes in a personal adventure story
of an only partially reasonable character.

INTEGRATION.—Association between the images
is sometimes clear enough; but, as a general rule,
such association takes the curious form known as
an “Integration.” By this word we shall mean:
“‘A combination of associated images in which the
composing elements are qualitatively distinguish-
able.” (This definition is from Baldwin’s “ Dic-
tionary of Philosophy and Psychology ”.) For
example, the image of a pink dress seen in a shop
window on Monday, and that of a shop girl seen
when the same place is re-visited on Tuesday, may

26 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

combine, in Tuesday night’s dream, into a single
image of the shop girl wearing the pink dress. But
on waking and recalling the dream, the two com-
ponents of the dream-image, dress and girl, are
clearly distinguishable as images of originally
separate impressions.

* aK *x aK aK

ConceEpts.—It will be noticed that, in the fore-
going list of definitions, no attempt has been made
to delve below that class of thought process which
is styled “imagery ”—a class in regard to which
the psychoneural connection suggests itself very
readily. Thought processes of a higher order are
not yet properly—or even, perhaps, improperly—
understood. Our knowledge of these is of the very
vaguest description. There appear to be certain
generalized ideas called “ Concepts,” such as, for
example, those we employ when we think of “ eat-
ing,” “playing,” “imagining,” or of “ difficulty,”
“truth,” ‘‘ deception,” ‘‘ difference”; but it is
even doubtful whether these may legitimately be
herded together under any such single class-name.
Compare, for instance, “eating” with “ differ-
ence.” The former idea may be no more than the
stimulation of the more broadly determinative lines
of some extensive pattern in the plexus of brain-
paths; but the latter may claim a connection with,
or share in, every single idea we can formulate.

It is here that the animist is enabled to put up his
best fight in defence of the observer’s alleged power
of intervention. But even here the materialist may
claim to have overrun a considerable part of the dis-
puted territory. For the man whose brain has been
injured by disease may, apparently, forget what
“eating ” is; or may be more than a little hazy

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 27

regarding the existence of a “ difference ” betwixt
himself and a grasshopper.

Our present pathway does not take us across this
particular battlefield; though we pass within hailing
distance of the combatants. From them, however,
we may accept the information that concepts are
often determinants of the route that attention
follows through the associational net. It is hardly
possible for the unguided attention to dwell upon
any concept without finding itself, a moment later,
confronted by a generic, or even specific, image
clearly related to that main idea.

* * *k xR aK

Before we pass on to the next section, there is
one aspect of psychology which had best be made
perfectly clear. In all sciences, new facts may be
discovered by:

(1) Logical deduction from already established
facts;

(2) Direct experiment;

(3) Both processes corroborating each other.

A fact which is in class 2 alone (1.e., one which
has not been logically deduced from other facts)
requires considerably more in the way of experi-
mental proof than does a fact in class 1. If,
indeed, it is of the kind which could not conceivably
be deducible from any other knowledge at our dis-
posal (e.g., that we experience “ pain ” when a cer-
tain kind of nerve is over-stimulated), it cannot be
regarded as scientifically useful unless it fulfils the
condition that it is “open to anybody to ob-
serve”? (Baldwin’s “ Dictionary of Philosophy and
Psychology”). A great many psychological facts
are of this non-deducible kind; and, in dealing with
these, the psychologist follows the scientific rule.

28 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

He is not content to say: ‘‘ Men of unimpeachable
integrity and unquestionable authority have inves-
tigated such-and-such mental phenomena, and the
outcome of their inquiries has been to establish,
etc., etc.” On the contrary, his assertions (as dis-
tinct from his speculations) will always be found to
imply: “ Do this or that with your mind, and you
will observe that the facts are of such-and-such a
character.”

The particular matter with which we shall be con-
cerned in this book was, when first discovered, an
apparently non-deducible fact in class 2 alone, and
it had to be treated accordingly. Later on it was
found to be a fact in class 1 (1.e., directly deducible
from facts already established). Thus, in the end,
it is presented to the reader as a fact in class 3.

PART II
CHAPTER VI

In this section, it will be necessary to relate, as
briefly as possible, the regrettably dramatic and
extremely misleading incidents referred to in the
second paragraph of the first chapter (the reader
will remember the assurance given therein). It
will be noticed that the incidents in question
mimicked to perfection many classical examples | of
alleged “clairvoyance,” “ astral-wandering,” and

‘messages from the dead or dying.” It will be
understood that they are described merely for their
illustrative worth (the reader who has followed
what has been written on the subject of psycho-
logical evidence will appreciate this), and because
they form part of the “narrative of the actual pro-
ceedings involved.” But, from one point of view,
these occurrences had a value entirely unique. This
was because I was not, as is usually the case in such
matters, compelled to take them at second-hand
from some “ clairvoyant ” or “‘ medium ”—with all
the important points left out and a mass of mis-
leading suggestion thrown in. For they happened,
one and all, to myself.

* * * * aK

The first incident provided a very fair example of

what might easily have passed for “ clairvoyance.”

It occurred in 1898, when I was staying at an

hotel in Sussex. I dreamed, one night, that I was

having an argument with one of the waiters as to

what was the correct time. I asserted that it was
29

30 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

half-past four in the afternoon: he maintained that
it was half-past four in the middle of the night.
With the apparent illogicality peculiar to all dreams,
I concluded that my watch must have stopped; and,
on extracting that instrument from my waistcoat
pocket, I saw, looking down on it, that this was
precisely the case. It had stopped—with the hands
at half-past four. With that I awoke.

The dream had been a peculiar one (in ways
which have nothing to do with this book) and the
net result of it all was that I lit a match to see
whether the watch had really stopped. To my sur-
prise it was not, as it usually is, by my bedside. I
got out of bed, hunted round, and found it lying
on the chest of drawers. Sure enough, it had
stopped, and the hands stood at half-past four.

The solution seemed perfectly obvious. The
watch must have stopped during the previous after-
noon. I must have noticed this, forgotten it, and
remembered it in my dream. Satisfied on that
point, I rewound the instrument, but, not knowing
the real time, I left the hands as they were.

On coming downstairs next morning, I made
straight for the nearest clock, with the object of
setting the watch right. For if, as I supposed, it
had stopped during the previous afternoon, and
had merely been rewound at some unknown hour
of the night, it was likely to be out by several hours.

To my absolute amazement I found that the hands
had only lost some two or three minutes—about the
amount of time which had elapsed between my
waking from the dream and rewinding the watch.

This meant, of course, that the watch had stopped
at the actual moment of the dream. The latter was
probably brought about by my missing the accus-
tomed ticking. But—how did I come to see, in

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 31

that dream, that the hands stood, as they actually
did, at half-past four?

If anyone else had told me such a tale I should
probably have replied that he had dreamed the
whole episode, from beginning to end, including
the getting up and re-winding. But that was an
answer I could not give to myself. I knew that I
had been awake when I had risen and looked at the
watch lying on the chest of drawers. Yet, what
was the alternative? “ Clairvoyance ”—seeing
across space through darkness and closed eyelids?
Even supposing that there existed unknown rays
which could effect that sort of penetration, and then
produce vision,—which I did not believe,—the
watch had been lying at a level above that of my
eyes. What sort of rays could these be which bent
round corners?

From Sussex, I went to Sorrento, in Italy. Lying
in bed there one morning, I awoke and fell to won-
dering what the time might be. I lacked energy
to look at my watch, which lay outside the mosquito
curtains, on a small table within reach, but out of
sight when my head was on the pillow. It occurred
to me to experiment with the object of ascertaining
whether I could again see that watch in the appar-
ently “clairvoyant ” fashion of the earlier experi-
ence. Closing my eyes, and concentrating my
thoughts upon wondering what the time might be,
I fell into one of those semi-dozes in which one is
still aware of one’s situation. A moment later I
found myself looking at the watch. The vision I
saw was binocular, upright, poised in space about a
foot from my nose, illumined by ordinary daylight,
and encircled by a thick, whitish mist which filled
the remainder of the field of sight. The hour hand
stood at exactly eight o’clock; the minute hand was

32 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

wavering between the twelve and the one; the second
hand was a formless blur. To look more intently
would, I felt, wake me completely, so I made up
my mind to treat the minute hand as one treats the
needle of a prismatic compass, and to divide the
arc of its swing. This gave the time as two and a
half minutes past eight. That decided, I opened
my eyes, reached out under the mosquito curtains,
grabbed the watch, pulled it in, and held it up
before me. I was wide awake, and—the hands
stood at two and a half minutes past eight.

This time there seemed to be no way out. I was
driven to the conclusion that I possessed some
funny faculty of seeing—seeing through obstacles,
across space, and round corners.

But I was wrong.

* * * * *
Then came an incident of an entirely different
character.

In January, 1901, I was at Alassio, on the Italian
Riviera, having been invalided home from the Boer
War. I dreamed, one night, that I was at a place
which I took to be Fashoda, a little way up the
Nile from Khartoum. The dream was a perfectly
ordinary one, and by no means vivid, except in one
particular. This was the sudden appearance of
three men coming from the South. They were
marvellously ragged, dressed in khaki faded to the
colour of sackcloth; and their faces under their
dusty sun-helmets were burned almost black. They
looked, in fact, exactly like soldiers of the column
with which I had lately been “ trekking” in South
Africa, and such I took them to be. I was puzzled
as to why they should have travelled all the way
from that country to the Soudan, and I questioned
them on that point. They assured me, however,

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 33

that this was precisely what they had done. “ We
have come right through from the Cape,” said one.
Another added: “ I’ve had an awful time. I nearly
died of yellow fever.”

The remainder of the dream was unimportant.

At that time we were receiving the Daily Tele-
graph regularly from England. On opening this
paper at breakfast, the morning after the dream, my
eye was caught by the following flaring headlines:

THE CAPE TO CAIRO
“DAILY TELEGRAPH”

EXPEDITION AT KHARTOUM

From our special correspondent.
Kuartoum, Thursday (5 p.m.).
The “ Daily Telegraph ” expedition has
arrived at Khartoum after a magnificent
journey, etc., etc.

A note in another part of the paper stated that
the expedition was led by M. Lionel Decle. I
heard or read subsequently that one of the three
white men of the party had died en route; not, how-
ever, of yellow fever, but of enteric. Whether this
was true, or whether there were three white leaders,
I do not know.

One or two remarks may be made here.

I had heard, some years previously, that M.
Lionel Decle was contemplating some such trans-
continental journey; but I did not know that any-
thing had come of the scheme. Certainly I had no
idea that the expedition had started.

The expedition arrived at Khartoum the day
before the news was published in London, and thus
long before I had the dream, as that issue of the

34 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

paper had to get from London to Alassio, and the
dream did not occur till the night before its arrival.
This put any “astral-wandering’”’ business com-
pletely out of the question.
I attempted no explanation.
* * * * *

The next incident was as dramatic as any lover
of the marvellous could desire.

In the spring of 1902; I was encamped with the
6th Mounted Infantry near the ruins of Lindley, in
the (then) Orange Free State. We had just come
off trek, and mails and newspapers arrived but
rarely.

There, one night, I had an unusually vivid and
rather unpleasant dream.

I seemed to be standing on high ground—the
upper slopes of some spur of a hill or mountain.
The ground was of a curious white formation. Here
and there in this were little fissures, and from these
jets of vapour were spouting upward. In my dream
I recognized the place as an island of which I had
dreamed before—an island which was in imminent
peril from a volcano. And, when I saw the vapour
spouting from the ground, I gasped: “It’s the
island! Good Lord, the whole thing is going to
blow up!’ For I had memories of reading about
Krakatoa, where the sea, making its way into the
heart of a volcano through a submarine crevice,
flushed into steam, and blew the whole mountain to
pieces. Forthwith I was seized with a frantic
desire to save the four thousand (I knew the
number ) unsuspecting inhabitants. Obviously there
was only one way of doing this, and that was to
take them off in ships. There followed a most dis-
tressing nightmare, in which I was at a neighbour-
ing island, trying to get the incredulous French

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 35

authorities to despatch vessels of every and any
description to remove the inhabitants of the threat-
ened island. I was sent from one official to another ;
and finally woke myself by my own dream exertions,
clinging to the heads of a team of horses drawing
the carriage of one “ Monsieur le Maire,” who was
going out to dine, and wanted me to return when his
office would be open next day. All through the
dream the number of the people in danger obsessed
my mind. I repeated it to everyone I met, and, at
the moment of waking, I was shouting to the
“Maire,” “Listen! Four thousand people will
be killed unless .

I am not certain now when we received our next
batch of papers, but, when they did come, the
Daily Telegraph was amongst them, and, on open-
ing the centre sheet, this is what met my eyes:

VOLCANO DISASTER
MARTINIQUE

TOWN SWEPT AWAY
AN AVALANCHE OF FLAME

PROBABLE LOSS OF OVER
40,000 LIVES

BRITISH STEAMER BURNT

One of the most terrible disasters in the
annals of the world has befallen the once
prosperous town of St. Pierre, the com-
mercial capital of the French island of
Martinique in the West Indies. At eight
o'clock on Thursday morning the volcano
Mont Pelée which had been quiescent for
a century, etc., etc—

36 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

But there is no need to go over the story of the
worst eruption in modern history. |

In another column of the same paper was the
following, the headlines being somewhat smaller:

A MOUNTAIN EXPLODES

There followed the report of the schooner Ocean
Traveller, which had been obliged to leave St.
Vincent owing to a fall of sand from the volcano
there, and had subsequently been unable to reach
St. Lucia owing to adverse currents opposite the
ill-fated St. Pierre. The paragraph contained
these words:

When she was about a mile off, the
volcano Mont Pelée exploded.

The narrator subsequently described how the
mountain seemed to split open all down the side.

Needless to say, ships were busy for some time
after, removing survivors to neighbouring islands.

There is one remark to be made here.

The number of people supposed to be killed was
not, as I had maintained throughout the dream,
4,000, but 40,000. I was out by a nought. But,
when I read the paper, I read, in my haste, that
number as 4,000; and, in telling the story subse-
quently, I always spoke of that printed figure as
having been 4,000; and I did not know it was really
40,000 until I copied out the paragraph fifteen
years later.

Now, when the next batch of papers arrived,
these gave more exact estimates of what the actual
loss of life had been; and I discovered that the true
figure had nothing in common with the 4,000 I had

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 37

both dreamed of, and gathered from the first report.
So my wonderful “clairvoyant ” vision had been
wrong in its most insistent particular! But it was
clear that its wrongness was likely to prove a matter
just as important as its rightness. For whence, in
the dream, had I got that idea of 4,000? Clearly
it must have come into my mind because of the
newspaper paragraph. This suggested the extremely
unpleasant notion that the whole thing was what
doctors call “ Identifying Paramnesia ”’; that I had
never really had any such dream at all; but that,
on reading the newspaper report, a false idea had
sprung up in my mind to the effect that I had pre-
viously dreamed a dream containing all the details
given in that paragraph.

Moreover, reflection showed that the Cape to
Cairo vision might very well have been of the same
character.

Indeed, the more I thought of the two episodes
the clearer it became that, in each case, the dream
had been precisely the sort of thing I might have
expected to have experienced after reading the
printed report—a perfectly ordinary dream based
upon the personal experience of reading. How,
then, could I be sure that those dreams had not
been false memories engendered by the act of
reading?

But there was the watch business to be taken into
account. That, certainly, could not be made to fit
in with the new theory; unless I were a great deal
madder than I could bring myself to believe.

I was, however, absolutely satisfied that neither
in the Cape to Cairo nor in the Mont Pelée dream
had there been any “astral wandering,” or any
direct vision across leagues of space, or any “ mes-
sages’ from the actors in the actual episodes

38 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

represented. These dreams had been induced,
either by the readings of the paragraphs, or else
by telepathic communications from the journalist in
the Daily Telegraph office who had written those
accounts.

CHAPTER VII

To my great relief, the next experience, which
occurred some two years later, completely squashed
the ‘Identifying Paramnesia ” theory.

I dreamed that I was standing on a footway of
some kind, consisting of transverse planks flanked
on my left side by some sort of railing, beyond which
was a deep gulf filled with thick fog. Overhead,
I had an impression of an awning. But this last
was not clearly seen, for the fog partly hid every-
thing except three or four yards of the planking
ahead of me with its attendant portion of railing
and gulf. Suddenly I noticed, projecting upwards
from somewhere far down in the gulf, an im-
mensely long, thin, shadowy thing like a gigantic
lath. It reached above the plankway, and was
slanted so that it would, had the upper end been
visible through the fog, have impinged upon the
awning. As I stared at it, it began to wave slowly
up and down, brushing the railing. A moment
later I realized what the object was. I had seen
just such a thing once before in a cinema picture of
a fire in the early days of cinematography. Then,
as now, I had undergone the same puzzlement as to
what this sort of waving lath might be, until I had
realized that it was the long water-jet from a fire-
engine hose, as photographed through intervening
smoke. Somewhere down in that gulf, then, there
must be a fire-engine, and it was playing a stream
of water upon the smoke-hidden, railed structure
where I stood. As I perceived this, the dream
became perfectly abominable. The wooden plank-

39

40 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

way became crowded with people, dimly visible
through the smoke. They were dropping in heaps;
and all the air was filled with horrible, choking,
gasping ejaculations. Then the smoke, which had
grown black and thick, rolled heavily over every-
thing, hiding the entire scene. But a dreadful,
suffocated moaning continued—and I was entirely
thankful when I awoke.

I was taking no chances with ‘“ Identifying
Paramnesia ” this time. I carefully recalled every
detail of the dream after waking, and not till I had
done this did I open the morning papers. There
was nothing in these. But the evening editions
brought the expected news.

There had been a big fire in a factory somewhere
near Paris. I think it was a rubber factory, though
I cannot be sure. At any rate it was a factory for
some material which gave off vile fumes when burn-
ing. A large number of workgirls had been cut off
by the flames, and had made their way out on to
a balcony. There, for the moment, they had been
comparatively safe, but the ladders available had
been too short to admit of any rescue. While longer
ones were being obtained, the fire-engines had
directed streams of water on to the balcony to keep
that refuge from catching alight. And then there
happened a thing which must, I imagine, have been
unique in the history of fires. From the broken
windows behind the balcony the smoke from the
burning rubber or other material came rolling out
in such dense volumes that, although the unfor-
tunate girls were standing actually in the open air,
everyone of them was suffocated before the new
ladders could arrive.

This dream left the whole business more puzzling
than ever. It seemed that nothing could explain

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 4I

it. For ‘clairvoyance ”’ is not an explanation. It
is a meaningless expression, a mere admission of
inexplicability. And “ telepathy ” required an enor-
mous amount of stretching before it could be made
to fit the facts.

* * 2* 2k 2K

Then came a dream which somewhat simplified

matters. For it ruled out definitely: Insanity,
clairvoyance, astral-wandering, spirit-messages, and
telepathy. But it left me face to face with
=n much more staggering than any of
these.
_ In 1904, a few months after the fire dream, I was
staying at the Hotel Scholastika, on the borders of
the Aachensee, in Austria. I dreamed one night
that I was walking down a sort of pathway between
two fields, separated from these last by high iron
railings, eight or nine feet high, on each side of
the path. My attention was suddenly attracted to
a horse in the field on my /eft. It had apparently
gone mad, and was tearing about, kicking and
plunging in a most frenzied fashion. I cast a hasty
glance backwards and forwards along the railings
to see if there were any opening by which the animal
could get out. Satisfied that there was none, I
continued on my way. A few moments later I
- heard hoofs thundering behind me. Glancing back
I saw, to my dismay, that the brute had somehow
got out after all, and was coming full tilt after me
down the pathway. It was a full-fledged night-
mare; and I ran like a hare. Ahead of me the path
ended at the foot of a flight of wooden steps rising
upward. I was striving frantically to reach these
when I awoke.

Next day I went fishing with my brother down

42 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

the little river which runs out of the Aachensee. It
was wet-fly work, and I was industriously flogging
the water when my brother called out: “ Look at
that horse!’ Glancing across the river, I saw the
scene of my dream. But, though right in essen-
tials, 1t was absolutely unlike in minor details. The
two fields with the fenced-off pathway running
between them were there. The horse was there,
behaving just as it had done in the dream. The
wooden steps at the end of the pathway were there
(they led up to a bridge crossing the river). But
the fences were wooden and small,—not more than
four or five feet high,—and the fields were ordinary
small fields, whereas those in the dream had been
park-like expanses. Moreover, the horse was a small
beast, and not the rampaging great monster of the
dream—though its behaviour was equally alarming.
Finally, it was in the wrong field, the field which
would have been on my right, had I been walking,
as in the dream, down the path towards the bridge.
I began to tell my brother about the dream, but
broke off because the beast was behaving so very
oddly that I wanted to make sure that it could not
escape. As in the dream, I ran my eye critically
along the railings. As in the dream, I could see
no gap, or even gate, in them anywhere. Satisfied,
I said: “ At any rate, this horse cannot get out,”
and re-commenced fishing. But my brother inter-
rupted me by calling, “Look out!” Glancing up
again, I saw that there was no dodging fate. The
beast had, inexplicably, just as in the dream, got
out (probably it had jumped the fence), and, just as
in the dream, it was thundering down the path
towards the wooden steps. It swerved past
these and plunged into the river, coming straight
towards us. We both picked up stones, ran thirty

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 43

yards or so back from the bank, and faced about.
The end was tame, for, on emerging from the water
on our side, the animal merely looked at us, snorted,
and galloped off down a road.

Now, it seemed to me that from this incident one
thing was abundantly clear. These dreams were
not precepts (impressions) of distant or future
events. They were the usual commonplace dreams
composed of distorted images of waking experience,
built together in the usual half-senseless fashion
peculiar to dreams. That is to say, if they had
happened on the mghts after the corresponding
events, they would have exhibited nothing in the
smallest degree unusual, and would have yielded
just as much true, and just as much false, informa-
tion regarding the waking experiences which had
given rise to them as does any ordinary dream—
which is very little.

They were the ordinary, appropriate, expectable
dreams; but they were occurring on the wrong
nights.

Even the watch dreams were merely the dreams
I ought to have had after seeing the watch. In the
first of those incidents I had, when awake, seen the
watch lying face upwards on the chest of drawers,
with the hands stopped; and the corresponding
dream image had been of a stopped watch, face
upwards. In the second instance I had held the
watch up facing me about a foot from my nose,
while lyng with my head on my pillow; and the
reader will remember that the corresponding dozing
image had been of a watch in precisely that position.
The white mist had been, of course, the image of
the mosquito curtains out of focus, as these were
when I looked at the real watch.

No, there was nothing unusual in any of these

44 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

dreams as dreams. They were merely displaced in
Time.

That, of course, was staggering enough. But I
felt, nevertheless, that it had been a great advance
to resolve all these varied phenomena into one
single class of incident—a simple, if mysterious,
transposition of dates.

But in all this speculation I was still a long way
from the truth.

The two remaining incidents I propose to relate
in this section contained nothing to alter my half-
formed opinion that temporal aberration constituted
the whole of the mystery involved. But, had I not
made this semi-discovery, I should certainly have
regarded the following incident as a message from
the “spirit-world ” or a “ phantasm of the dying.”

%K * #€ #€ aK

In 1912 I spent a good deal of time at Salisbury
Plain, experimenting with one of my stable aero-
planes. A military aeroplane competition was in
progress, and most of the officers of the then tiny
Royal Flying Corps were there. One of these I
had not met before, nor did I see very much of him;
in fact, I do not think I spoke to him more than
twice. Since these records are not evidence, or
intended to be regarded as such, it will suffice if I
refer to him as Lieutenant B. The other officers
were all old friends of mine. Shortly after the
conclusion of the competition the annual army
manceuvres began, and, having nothing to do with
these, I went to Paris to inspect another machine
which was being built there to my design.

One morning while in that city I dreamed that I
was standing in a very large meadow, situated in a
landscape which I did not recognize. In this

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 45

meadow a monoplane landed, crashing rather badly
some fifty yards away. Immediately afterwards I
saw B. coming to me from the direction of the
wreck. I asked if much damage had been done.
He replied, “‘ Oh, no, not much,” and then added,
“Tt’s all that beastly engine; but I’ve got the hang
of it now.” The dream was a longish one, all
about aeroplane accidents (a common form of night-
mare with me, even to this day), and B.’s smash
was by no means the worst thing I saw. I awoke
to find the servant by my bedside with the morning
tea, from which fact I was subsequently able to fix
the hour of the dream as close on 8 a.m.

B. was killed between 7 and 8 that morning, fall-
ing into a meadow near Oxford. But I did not
read of the accident till about two days and a night
later.

But now, note the following points:

1. Engine failure had nothing whatever to do
with the accident, nor could B. for one moment have
ever thought that it had. For the monoplane was
planing down—with the engine partly or entirely
stopped—at the time; and the accident was due to
the uncoupling of a quick-release gadget in one of
the main “ lift ” wires, and the consequent breaking
upward of one wing. Of course, the planing down
may have been compulsory, and due to engine
failure; but there could have been no doubt in B.’s
mind that his wing had broken.

On the other hand, B. had made to my sister,
while we were at the Plain, a remark about the
engine almost exactly like that I heard him make in
the dream, and it is more than likely that she had
repeated it to me. She would naturally have
done so. |

2. B. was merely a passenger in the machine. It

46 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

was being piloted by another man, a stranger to me,
who was also killed. There was nothing of this in
the dream.

But when I read the paragraph about the catas-
trophe, it was B.’s name alone which caught and
held my attention; and I did not know of the death
of the other man until I looked up the record of the
accident several years later.

3. The paragraph did not state the cause of the
accident, and so left me with nothing to go upon
but (possibly) B.’s past remark about the engine.

4. The coincidence in time was not really remark-
able. Dreams of aeroplane accidents were, as I
have said, very frequent with me in those days, and
between seven and eight, when the noise of motor
trafic in the streets begins to penetrate to one’s
consciousness, has always been my hour for this
particular class of nightmare.

So I concluded that here, again, the dream was
associated with the personal experience of reading
the paragraph.

x % * # %

In the last incident of this series, the chrono-
logical aberration was far more considerable.

The dream occurred in the autumn of 1913. The
scene I saw was a high railway embankment. I
knew in that dream—knew without questioning, as
anyone acquainted with the locality would have
known—that the place was just north of the Firth
of Forth Bridge, in Scotland. The terrain below
the embankment was open grassland, with people
walking in small groups thereon. The scene came
and went several times, but the last time I saw that
a train going north had just fallen over the embank-
ment. I saw several carriages lying towards the

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 47

bottom of the slope, and I saw large blocks of stone
rolling and sliding down. Realizing that this was
probably one of these odd dreams of mine, I tried
to ascertain if I could “get” the date of the real
occurrence. All I could gather was that this date
was somewhere in the following spring. My own
recollection is that I pitched finally upon the middle
of April, but my sister thinks I mentioned March
when I told her the dream next morning. We
agreed, jokingly, that we must warn our friends
against travelling north in Scotland at any time in
the succeeding spring.

On April the 14th of that spring the “ Flying
Scotsman,” one of the most famous mail trains of
the period, jumped the parapet near Burntisland
Station, about fifteen miles north of the Forth
Bridge, and fell on to the golf links twenty feet
below.

* * x x 2*

The above-described incidents have been selected
from a group of about twenty, simply because they
were closely studied and carefully memorized at the
time of their occurrence. Most of the others were
merely noted, so to say, en passant, and are now
almost completely forgotten. Curiously, I can
remember no dreams of the coming Great War—
except one. That one related to the bombardment
of Lowestoft by the German fleet. I recognized the
place as Lowestoft, but had no idea as to the
nationality of the bombarding vessels.

PART Ii
CHAPTER VIII

No one, I imagine, can derive any considerable
pleasure from the supposition that he is a freak;
and, personally, I would almost sooner have dis-
covered myself to be a “medium.” There might
have been a chance of company there. Unfor-
tunately it was abundantly clear that there was no
“‘mediumship ” in this matter, no “ sensitiveness,”
no “clairvoyance.” I was suffering, seemingly,
from some extraordinary fault in my relation to
reality, something so uniquely wrong that it com-
pelled me to perceive, at rare intervals, large blocks
of otherwise perfectly normal personal experience
displaced from their proper positions in Time.
That such things could occur at all was a most
interesting piece of knowledge. But, unfortunately,
in the circumstances it could be knowledge to only
one person—myself.

There was, however, a very remote possibility
that, by employing this piece of curiously acquired
knowledge as a guide, I might be able to discover
some hitherto overlooked peculiarity in the structure
of Time; and to that task I applied myself.

Progress here was definite, but it was terribly
slow. There was no help to be found in the con-
ception of Time as a fourth dimension. For Time
has always been treated by men of science as if it
were a fourth dimension. What had to be shown
was the possibility of displacement in that dimen-
sion. Nor did I gather much comfort from Berg-

49

50 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

son; for to tell a man who is confronted with parts
of Time clearly transposed that Time has no parts
is distinctly futile. I cared not a whit whether
Time were “a form of thought,’ or an aspect
of reality, or (this was later) compoundable with
Space. What I wanted to know was: How it got
mixed?

For “ mixed” was the right word. Between the
dream and the corresponding waking experience
came the memory of the dream, while the memory
of the waking experience followed them all!

However, the coming of the first world war put
a temporary stop to further investigation; and it
was not until 1917 that any new developments
occurred.

In January of that year I was in Guy’s Hospital,
recovering from an operation. There, one morn-
ing, when reading a book, I came upon a reference
to one of those “combination ”’ locks which are
released by the twisting of rings embossed with
letters of the alphabet. As I read this, something
seemed, for one fleeting instant, to be stirring, so
to say, in my memory; but whatever it was it imme-
diately subsided. I paused for a second, but
nothing further developed, so I returned to my
book. Then, luckily, I changed my mind, tossed
the volume aside, and set myself determinedly to
worry out exactly what it was that I had momen-
tarily associated with the sentence read. In a little
while it came back. I had dreamed, during the
previous night, of precisely such a combination
lock.

The chances of coincidence, where two such
vague, commonplace events were concerned, needed
no pointing out. But I could not remember having
seen, heard, or thought of such a lock for a year

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 51

or more. And, knowing from past happenings that
my dreams did, sometimes, contain images of future
- experience, it seermed to me that the appearance
of the lock image in the previous night’s dream
might have been another instance of my particular
abnormality. Such a supposition might prove, at
any rate, worth considering.

A few days later the great Silvertown explosion
occurred, shaking the whole building, breaking
windows, and causing the nurses to extinguish the
lights, on the supposition that Zeppelins were over-
head. Such an experience was calculated to make
one dream; and dream I did, but, as usual, on the
_ wrong night—the night before the associated event.
After the disaster I told a fellow-convalescent of
this experience. He interrupted me, saying,
‘Wait!’ and then: “ Curious, that. Now that I
come to think of it, I also dreamed of an explosion
last night.”

He could no longer, by then, recall any of the
details of his dream, and, since big bangs of all
sorts were fairly common during the war, coinci-
dence might well have been responsible for the
facts. But—supposing this were not the case, and
that the dream had been in the same class as mine?
What followed?

There were thus two new suppositions to be
examined. Viewed separately, each of these
appeared wild in the extreme; but considered
together they were sufficiently suggestive to justify
a little closer attention.

The validity of the first of these would mean
that my dream pre-images were connected, not only
with highly exciting and dramatic events, but also
with the veriest trivialities, such as this little matter
of reading about a combination lock. Exactly, in

52 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

fact, as dream images of past events are connected
just as often with unimportant happenings as with
experiences more striking. Again, it had been by
the merest accident of fortune that I had set myself
to recall that dream; and had I not done so I should
never have been aware of the incident. According
to this, then, I.might, for all I could tell, have had
these dreams with considerable frequency, and have
either forgotten them at once, or else have failed
to notice their connection with the subsequent
related events.

But if the supposition about my friend’s dream
were correct, this failure to observe a connection
was precisely what had happened in his case. He
had not completely forgotten the dream, but the
occurrence of the actual explosion had not served
to recall it.

I had got no further than this in my speculations
when the friend in question came up in a state of
some excitement. ‘“ You remember what we were
saying about dreams?” he asked. ‘“ Well, I have
been talking to So-and-So” (one of the hospital
surgeons), “and he told me of a curious thing
which had happened to him the other night. He
had just got into bed and gone to sleep when he
dreamed that he was aroused and compelled to go
out to attend to a fractured leg. Almost imme-
diately after his dream he was aroused, owing to
the arrival of an urgent message which necessitated
his going out to attend to just such a case. And
in telling me the story he pointed out that he had
not had to deal with a fractured leg for over six
weeks.”

So here, possibly, was a third incident, involving
a third person. What, I wondered, would become
of the record of that event? The surgeon would

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 53

tell it to a few friends, who would attribute the
whole thing to coincidence (it might have been
that), and in course ‘of time he would forget all
about it himself. But

And then, what about that curious feeling which
almost everyone has now and then experienced—
that sudden, fleeting, disturbing conviction that
something which is happening at that moment has
happened before?

What about those occasions when, receiving an
unexpected letter from a friend who writes rarely,
one recollects having dreamed of him during the
previous night?

What about all those dreams which, after having
been completely forgotten, are suddenly, for no
apparent reason, recalled later in the day? What
is the association which recalls them? |

What about those puzzling dreams from which
one is awakened by a noise or other sensory event—
dreams in which the noise in question appears as
the final dream incident. Why is it that this closing
incident zs always logically led up to by the earlier
part of the dream?

What, finally, of all those cases, collected and
tabulated by the Society for Psychical Research,
where a dream of a friend’s death has been followed
by the receipt, next day, of the confirmatory news?
Those dreams were, clearly, not “ spirit messages,”
but instances of my “effect ””—simple dreams
associated merely with the coming personal ex-
perience of reading the news.

I had done nothing but suppose, in hopelessly
unscientific fashion, for a week or more, and it
seemed to me that I might as well complete my
sinning. So I took a final wild leap to the wildest
supposition of all.

54 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

Was it possible that these phenomena were not
abnormal, but normal?

That dreams—dreams in general, all dreams,
everybody’s dreams—were composed of tmages of
past experience and images of future experience
blended together in approximately equal propor-
tions?

That the universe was, after all, really stretched
out in Time, and that the lop-sided view we had
of it—a view with the “ future ” part unaccountably
missing, cut off from the growing “ past” part by
a travelling “present moment ’’—was due to a
purely mentally imposed barrier which existed only
when we were awake. So that, in reality, the
associational network stretched, not merely this
way and that way in Space, but also backwards
and forwards in Time; and the dreamer’s attention,
following in natural, unhindered fashion the easiest
pathway among the ramifications, would be con-
tinually crossing and recrossing that properly non-
existent equator which we, waking, ruled quite
arbitrarily athwart the whole.

The foregoing supposition was not, be it noted,
perceived as a possible explanation. The mixture
in the order of actual experience—viz., dream,
memory of dream, corresponding waking impres-
sion, and memory thereof—would still have to be
accounted for. But it would put the problem on
an entirely different footing. There would be no
longer any question as to why a man should be
able to observe his own future mental states;
that would be normal and habitual. On _ the
contrary, the initial puzzle would be: What was
the barrier which, in certain circumstances, de-
barred him from that proper and comprehensive
view.

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 55

All this was seen in, so to say, a single flash of
thought, almost too rapid for analysis.

It was rejected with even greater swiftness.
For it was absolutely inconceivable that a thing of
this sort, if true, could have managed to escape,
through all these centuries, universal perception and
recognition.

CHAPTER IX

A LITTLE later on, however, I saw that this abrupt
recoil had been illogical. For the whole supposi-
tion had been based, of course, upon the earlier
hypothesis that any general recollection of these
images was rendered difficult by the species of
inhibition which had prevented my friend from
associating his waking experience of the explosion
with his previous dream. No memory is ever
aroused unless there is some associated idea which
revives it, and if that association misses fire, there
can be no recall.

Dreams, moreover, are mostly about trivial things
—things which happen every day of one’s life.
Such a dream, even if it were, in actual fact, related
to to-morrow’s event, would naturally be attributed
to yesterday’s similar incident. Then, again, nine-
tenths of all dreams are completely forgotten
within five seconds of waking, and the few which
survive rarely outlast the operation of shaving.
Even a dream which has been recalled and mentally
noted is generally forgotten by the afternoon. Add
to this the before-mentioned partial mental ban
upon the requisite association; add to that an un-
conscious, matter-of-fact assumption of impossi-
bility ; and it becomes quite probable that it would
be only a very few of the more striking, more
detailed, and (possibly) more emotional incidents
which would ever be noticed at all. These, more-
over, would be attributed to telepathy or to “ spirit
messages,” or even to anything which, though insane
in other respects, could, at least, be expressed in

56

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 57

the conventional terms of a single, absolute, one-
dimensional Time.

It was true, of course, that the theory of normality
would take a lot of threshing out. The statement
made in the last chapter was, obviously, incomplete;
and the full description of the process involved
might never be forthcoming. But the alternative
was the hypothesis of abnormality; and that meant,
not merely abnormality in the sense of excess of,
or deficiency in, some common quality of mind, but
abnormality in a sense which was itself senseless.
It is difficult to really believe in the utterly mean-
ingless.

Finally (and this was what attracted me most),
the supposition of normality—of something in-
herent, not in this or that individual, but in Time
itself—would mean, if correct, that the phenomena
in question ought to be potentially ‘open to any-
one to observe, provided he fulfilled the necessary
conditions.”

Hence, if one could devise an experiment which
would overcome the two initial difficulties of re-
membering and associating, the thing should prove
to be directly observable by every normal indi-
vidual, including the present reader.

The arrangement of that experiment was, clearly,
the first step. Explanation could come (and, as will
be seen, did come) later.

CHAPTER X

- THE reader will have guessed that the experiment
referred to in the last chapter was tried, and that -
it proved successful; because otherwise, manifestly,
this book would never have been written.

It was not, however, until the following winter
that I could bring myself to take the normality
hypothesis seriously enough to put it to the test.
Then, with many misgivings, and practically no
hope of success, I began the first essential experi-
ment, upon myself. I knew, of course, that I had
these dreams occasionally; but only at intervals
of sometimes a year or more. According to the
new theory, however, I should be having similar
dreams throughout all these intervals, unknown to
myself.

As a rule, on nine mornings out of ten, I have
no recollection of having dreamed at all. That,
however, did not greatly trouble me. Many people,
I know, were genuinely convinced that they never
dreamed; but, from experiments I had made, I was
satisfied that “ dreamless sleep” is an illusion of
memory. What happens is that one forgets the
dreams at the very instant of waking. I myself
have remembered, some days later, a dream which
had occurred when I was under an anesthetic,
although, during the intervening interval, I had
believed myself to have been, at the time, in a
state of complete unconsciousness.

My starting-point, then, was a belief in the possi-
bility of recalling a fraction of the lost dreams of
these apparently blank nights of mine. Now,

58

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 59

according to the new hypothesis, that fraction
should contain images of both past and future
events. It was probable that the majority of such
images would not be distinct and separate, but, on
the contrary, so blended and intermingled that the
components would not be distinguishable as belong-.-
ing to any special waking event. But just as one
can, occasionally, clearly identify one part of such
a blend of images as relating to a particular past
event (wde definition of “ Integration ” in Part I.),
so should one be able, on occasion, to identify an
element in the blend as pertaining to a particular
future occurrence. The point was (and this is an
important point) that one must not expect ever to
come upon a complete idea or scene which related
wholly to the future. As an example of what I
mean, the reader may turn back to the dream of a
horse, narrated in Part II. There, the greater part
of the dream related to the future; but the general
appearance of the horse, and that of the fields and
railings, were, to the best of my belief, details
collected from past experience.

The dream, if recalled, would, preferably, be
written down, so as to make the remainder of the
experiment a matter of comparison between two
hard, material facts—the record and the waking
event. And, to facilitate subsequent analysis of
the dream images, these would best be described
with as much detail as possible. A short record,
full of detail, would be of more value than a long
one drafted in vaguer terms.

But there was an even more cogent reason why
amplitude of detail would be essential. A long
dream contains a great many images, and a long
day a great many impressions. By the ordinary laws
of chance some of these would be bound to fit, if the

60 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

experiment were sufficiently extended. Hence cor-
roborative detail would have to be the crucial test.
For example, the dream of a pile of coins on a book,
followed next day by the observation of a pile of
coins in such a position would be the class of
coincidence which would be bound to occur in any
case. What would be required would be something
more in the nature of a pile of sixpences upsetting
off a red book, followed by such a waking ex-
perience. (The rest of the scene of such a dream—
the table and the room and the cause of the mishap
—would probably be entirely different; but that
would not matter.) The point was that nothing
should be accepted as relating clearly to the future
which did not contain the elements of what a racing
man would call a “ double event.”

The next thing to be considered was the necessity
of a time limit. Obviously, even a dream of a
pile of sixpences upsetting off a red book would be
likely to be matched by a similar waking experience,
if one allowed oneself the whole of one’s life in
which to look for the matching. A bank clerk
might even find fulfilment in a fortnight. I decided
that two days should be the accepted limit; but that
this might be extended in ratio to the oddity and
unusualness of the incident. That would be a
matter for judgment. My dream of the bombard-
ment of Lowestoft, for instance, oecurred a year
or so before the event; and I have had one clear
case—to be described later—of a dream image
relating beyond all possibility of doubt to an event
which happened some twenty years later.

Since, then, the possibility of satisfactory identi- |
fication would depend mainly upon unusualness in
the incident, the worst time to choose for the ex-
periment would be the period when one was lead-

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 61

ing a dull life with each day exactly like the last.
But in such circumstances a visit to a theatre or
to a cinema might well prove a useful auxiliary to
the experiment. (That, I may say now, is an in-
valuable tip.) Also, one might expect to get dreams
of novels one was going to read. (I may add here
that one does, as a matter of fact, get some of
one’s best results that way.) But, speaking
generally, it would be best to select nights pre-
ceding a journey or some other expected break in
the monotony of circumstances.

Another factor would be evidently the number
of the results achieved. Satisfaction might be
obtained either from the previous dreaming of a
single, very unusual incident; or almost equally
well from the previous dreaming of several fairly
unusual events, any one of which results, had it
been the only one, might justly have been attributed
to rather exceptional coincidence. So it was decided
that all results of the singly decisive kind should
be marked with a +; and that results which, though
nearly decisive, required the backing of other
similar results, should be marked with a sort of
hot-cross bun, thus: ®.

The foregoing describes the conditions I laid
down for the test, and also the nature of the difh-
culties I was prepared to encounter. And encounter
these I did, in abundance. But there were two
which [ did not foresee.

The dreaming mind is a master-hand at tacking
false interpretations on to everything it perceives.
For this reason, the record of the dream should
describe as separate facts, (a), the actual appearance
of what is seen, and, (0b), the interpretation given to
that appearance.

For example: during one of the days of the test

62 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

I happened to be blowing a wood fire with a pair
of bellows, and, in so doing, I brought the nozzle
of the instrument into contact with the red-hot
surface (facing me) of a large log. I do not know
whether the reader has ever done this; but the effect
is most startling, not to say alarming. A dense
shower of very brilliant sparks—a regular Crystal
Palace firework display—leaps from the fire straight
into your face and goes streaming past your ears,
causing you to jump back for fear of being blinded.
But there appears to be no heat in these sparks;
at any rate, no holes are burned in your clothes.
The experience is a most striking and unusual
one; and, as it happened, precisely such a shower
of sparks had flown past my ears in a dream during
the previous night. But I had omitted to record
the immediate dream-impression, which was simply
that of a shower of little sparks, and had written
down, instead, the explanation I had subsequently
attached to that shower—wviz., that a crowd of
persons who happened to be present in the dream
had been throwing cigarette ends. Both aspects
of the dream-incident should have been recorded:
first, the image seen, and then the interpretation
attached thereto. This should be done throughout
all the records.

The second difficulty is one which demands
careful attention. For it was here, at last, that I
found the thing I had been looking for—the reason
why this curious feature in the character of temporal
experience has managed, through all these cen-
turies, to escape universal observation.

The waking mind refuses point-blank to accept
the association between the dream and the subse-
quent event. For it, this association is the wrong
way round, and no sooner does it make itself per-

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 63

ceived than it is instantly rejected. The intellectual
revolt is automatic and extremely powerful. Even
when confronted with the indisputable evidence of
the written record, one jumps at any excuse to avoid
recognition. One excuse which is nearly always
seized is the dissimilarity of the adjacent parts of
the scene, or the fact that there are parts in the
“integration ”’ which do not fit the incident ; matters
which do not, of course, in the least affect the fact
that there are parts of the scene or integration
which do fit with the required degree of exactitude.

The result is that, on reading over the record
at the end of the succeeding day (or two days), one
is apt to read straight on through the very thing
one is looking for, without even noticing its con-
nection with the waking incident. The reading
should therefore be done slowly, with frequent
pauses for consideration and for comparison with
the day’s events. In the cases of nearly all the
results I am going to relate, the connection was,
at first, only half-glimpsed, was then immediately
rejected, and was finally accepted only on account
of the accumulating weight of the previously un-
noticed points of corroborative detail.

The simplest way to avoid this initial failure to
notice is to pretend to yourself that the records
you are about to read are those of dreams which
you are going to have during the coming night;
and then to look for events in the past day which
might legitimately be regarded as the causes of
those dreams. This is not unfair. It is only a
device to enable you to notice; not a device to
assist you to judge. That you do later, concerning
yourself then solely with the corroborative details,
and giving no thought to the Time order.

* * * * *

64 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

The dodge for recalling the forgotten dreams is
quite simple. A notebook and pencil is kept under
the pillow, and, immediately on waking, before
you even open your eyes, you set yourself to
remember the rapidly vanishing dream. As a rule,
a single incident is all that you can recall, and this
appears so dim and small and isolated that you
doubt the value of noting it down. Do not, how-
ever, attempt to remember anything more, but fix
your attention on that single incident, and try to
remember its details. Like a flash, a large section
of the dream in which that incident occurred comes
back. What is more important, however, is that,
with that section, there usually comes into view
an isolated incident from a previous dream. Get
hold of as many of these isolated incidents as you
can, neglecting temporarily the rest of the dreams
of which they formed part. Then jot down these
incidents in your notebook as shortly as possible;
a word or two for each should suffice.

Now take incident number one. Concentrate
upon it until you have recovered part of the dream
story associated therewith, and write down the
briefest possible outline of that story. Do the
same in turn with the other incidents you have
noted. Finally, take the abbreviated record thus
made and write it out in full. Note details, as
many as possible. Be specially careful to do this
wherever the incident is one which, if it were to
happen in real life, would seem unusual; for it is
in connection with events of this kind that your
evidence is most likely to be obtained.

Until you have completed your record, do not
allow yourself to think of anything else.

Do not attempt merely to remember. Write the
dream down. Waking in the middle of the night,

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 65

I have several times carefully memorized my pre-
ceding dreams. But, no matter how certain I have
been that those memories were firmly fixed, I
have never found one shred of them remaining
in the morning. Even dreams which I have
memorized just before getting up, and rememor-
ized while dressing, have nearly always vanished
by the end of breakfast.

It will be impossible, of course, for you to write
down all the detail. To describe the appearance
of a single dream-character completely would keep
you busy for ten minutes. But write down the
general detail, and all uncommon detail. Memorize
the remainder by reading through your final record
and attentively revisualizing each picture described
therein; so that, should one of these unwritten
details subsequently prove important, you can be
satisfied that you are not then recalling it for the
first time.

If, on waking, you are convinced that you have
not dreamed at all, and cannot recall a single
detail; stop trying to recollect the dream, and con-
centrate, instead, on remembering of what you were
thinking when you first awoke. On recalling that
thought, you will find that it was consequent on a
dream, and this dream will immediately begin to
return.

a a aK * *

Read your records over from their beginning at
the end of each day of the experiment.

The sort of thing you may expect to find will be
described in the next chapter.

CHAPTER XI

THE account of the following experiments, once
again, is not scientific evidence, nor is it intended
to be regarded as such. It is evidence for me, and
part of my excuse for publication; but it is not, of
course, evidence for the reader. Conviction, for
him, must depend either on the convincingness of
the arguments advanced in the concluding chapters,
or else on the results which, according to the theory,
he is likely to obtain if he makes the experiment
himself—upon himself.

Personally, I found this image-hunting a fasci-
nating and even exciting business. But it was a
new kind of sport, and I made every possible
blunder open to a raw beginner. Not only did I
delay the attempt to recall the dream until I had
been awake for half a minute or more; but I also
failed to appreciate sufficiently the importance of
detail in the written accounts. Incidents which
should have been described in fifty words were
recorded in three. The result was that, although
the dreams yielded much that was suggestive of
future experience, I could find little that was
identifiable as belonging to either half of Time.
There was the shower-of-sparks dream recounted
in the last chapter, and five slightly more doubtful
results. There was one fully described image, the
original of which was seen four years later ; but that
was outside the prescribed limits of the test. It
was not, in fact, until the eleventh day that I got
the clear, conclusive result I had expected.

On the afternoon of that day I was out shooting

66

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 67

over some rough country. I was a little uncertain
regarding the boundaries covered by the permission
which I had obtained, and presently found myself
on land where, I realized, I might have no right
to be. As I crossed this, I heard two men shouting
at me from different directions. They seemed,
moreover, to be urging on a furiously barking dog.
I made tracks for the nearest gate in the boundary
wall, trying to look as if unaware of anything un-
usual. The shouting and barking came nearer and
nearer. I walked a trifle faster, and managed to
slip through the gate before the pursuers came into
view. Altogether a most unpleasant episode for a
sensitive individual, and one quite likely to make
him dream thereof.

On reading over my records that evening, I, at
first, noticed nothing; and was just going to close
the book, when my eye caught, written rather more
faintly, right at the end:

“ Hunted by two men and a dog.”

And the amazing thing about it was that I had
completely forgotten having had any such dream.
I could not even recall having written it down.

There was nothing identifiable on the twelfth
day; but the thirteenth gave another excellent
result.

During the day I read a novel in which one of
the characters hid in a large secret loft in the roof
of an old house. Later on in the story he had to
fly from the house, and escaped from the loft by
way of a chimney.

The previous night’s dream was about a large,
mysterious, secret loft, which I discovered, and ex-
plored with great interest. A little later in the
dream it became advisable for me to escape from

68 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

the house, and I decided to do this by way of the
loft. |

On the fourteenth night I had four “ hot-cross-
bun ” results.

The net result of the experiment was that in the
course of a fortnight I had been able to identify
two conclusive instances of the “effect,” and six
which, though-not conclusive when regarded singly,
could scarcely be attributed to coincidence when
their number was taken into account. But the most
important point was this: Not one of those instances
would ever have been observed at all, had not the
dreams been memorized and written down, and the
records reinspected after the waking events.

* * * * *

So far, then, the theory that the effect was merely
a normal characteristic of Man’s general relation-
ship to Time—but one so constituted as to elude
casual observation—had been partly borne out by
experiment. But, on that theory, the effect in ques-
tion should be just as experimentally observable
to everyone else as it was to myself. This meant
that I must persuade another person to make a
similar trial.

A young woman, whom I will call Miss B., good
naturedly agreed to undertake the task. I selected
her mainly because she was an extremely normal
individual, who had never had any sort of
“psychical ” experience, and who (this was the
great thing) believed that she practically never
dreamed at all. Indeed, she assured me that it
would be useless for her to experiment, as she had
only had some six or seven dreams in the whole
course of her life.

The morning after the first night she came to
me and told me that it was quite hopeless. She

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 69

had tried to remember her dreams the very instant
she woke; but there had been nothing to remember.
So I told her not to bother about looking for
memories of dreams, but to endeavour instead to
recollect of what she had been thinking at the
moment of waking, and, after she had got that, to
try to recall why she had been thinking it. That
worked; as I had known it would; and on each of
the next six mornings she was able to remember
that she had had one short dream.

Counting the experiment as starting from the
first dream, she obtained, on the sixth day, the
following result.

Waiting at Plymouth Station for a train, she
walked up to one end of a platform and came
upon a five- or six-barred gate leading on to a road.
As she reached the gate a man passed on the other
side, driving three brown cows. He was holding
the stick out over the cows in a peculiar fashion,—as
if it were a fishing-rod.

In the dream, she walked up a path she knew,
and found, to her great surprise, that it ended ‘in
a five- or six-barred gate which had no business
to be there. The gate was just like the one at the
station, and, as she reached it, the man and the
three brown cows passed on the other side, exactly
as in the waking experience, the man holding out
the stick fishing-rod fashion over the cows, and the
whole group being arranged just like the group
she saw.

The dream occurred the morning before the
waking experience.

The blending of the “past ” image of the path
with the “ future ” image of the gate provided an
excellent specimen of integration.

* * * * *

70 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

I then asked my cousin, Miss C., to try. -She
was positive that she had never had any experience
of this kind, and was sure that, as a general rule,
she dreamed very little. She proved excellent at
recovering the lost dreams, and good at noting
detail. But at first she was very weak at perceiving
connections, even with past events. She could not,
for example, understand how a dream of walking
on roofs could be connected with the experience
of climbing about the roof of a bungalow with me
on the previous day, though she had not been on
a roof of any sort for years. She obtained, how-
ever, on the eighth day, the following first-class
result:

Immediately upon her arrival at a certain country
hotel she was told of a curious person staying there
whom all the guests suspected, having made up
their minds that she was a German. (This was
during the last stages of the war.) Shortly after-
wards she met this person—for the first time—in
the hotel grounds. These are rather uncommon.
They extend a long way, contain numbers of large,
rare trees, and would certainly be taken for public
gardens by anyone who did not know that they
belonged to the hotel. The supposed German was
dressed in a black skirt with a black-and-white
striped blouse, and had her hair scraped back in a
“bun ” on the top of her head.

My cousin’s dream was that a German woman,
dressed in a black skirt, with a black-and-white
striped blouse, and having her hair scraped back in
a ‘bun ” on the top of her head, met her in a public
garden. My cousin suspected her of being a spy.

The dream occurred about two days before the
event. (The record is undated, but was in my
hands when the confirmatory event took place. )

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 71

She had already had one almost, but not quite,
conclusive result earlier in the experiment—a dream
connected with some news in a letter she subse-
quently received from a friend.

* * ss aK 4

Mrs. L., the next person to try, got an excellent
result on the very first night. It related, however,
to two separate experiences which occurred during
the following week. The two-day limit was here
exceeded; but the correspondence was so clear that
the result came under the rule permitting an ex-
tension of the limit in exceptional cases.

The waking experiences concerned two public
meetings at Corwen. Mrs. L. went to one of these,
and, in describing it to me afterwards, told me she
was surprised at the large number of clergymen
who seemed to have arrived out of the void to fill
the building; for it did not seem to her that there
was anything in the business before the meeting
which could be of special interest to the Church.

She was not present at the other meeting. But
my sister was there, and she told Mrs. L. of her
experiences. On putting her head in at the door
she found a regular pandemonium in progress. She
was about to withdraw discreetly, when the chair-
man, catching sight of her, called out: “ Come in,
Miss Dunne, and see how we Welsh fight!”’

In Mrs. L.’s dream she was at a public meeting,
and was greatly annoyed by the interruptions of a
clergyman in the audience, who, instead of allowing
the business to proceed, insisted on preaching a
sort of sermon ending in a prayer. She expostu-
lated. The clergyman leaned so far back that he
touched her. Another man in the audience pushed
against her arm. She rose, and, thumping a table,

72 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

cried: ‘“‘ Who is responsible for the behaviour of
the audience? I know the Welsh are notorious for
bad behaviour in public, but I will not have it
here.”

Mrs. L. forgot all about this dream after writing
it down. Its record was not re-read by her after
the second day, and so she missed it when the two
meetings occurred later in the week. It was. only
by chance that I happened to look back through
the notes and discover it.

* * x x

Major F., the next person approached, entered
upon the experiment with considerable interest.
He pointed out that, if there were anything in this
business, it might mean the spotting of a Derby
winner. He finished satisfied that I was perfectly
right, but also satisfied, I am afraid, that the dream-
ing mind did not properly understand its business.

He happens to be a marine artist of considerable
reputation; and on the second day of the test he
set forth to paint a couple of boats which he had
previously seen lying on the beach. But he found
that one boat, which was pointed at both bow and
stern, had been painted, since his last visit, in
staring lifeboat (red and blue) colours. However,
he made his sketch; a process necessitating, of
course, long and close attention to the boat and
its colours. The vessel stood on short, green turf.
Some distance away, on a pier which came into the
picture, was another long, red, somewhat boat-like
object with something draped across tts middle.
Major F. took a field-glass to ascertain what this
stuff was, and discovered it to be a net.

The associated dream-image was that of a red-
and-blue lifeboat standing on green turf with a net
draped over its middle.

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 73

This dream had occurred during the previous
night.

Major F., at first, could not see the connection.
He thought that the similarity ought to have
extended to everything else in the dream scene,
and was disappointed that this had not been the
case. However, he continued the trial.

On the next day it rained heavily, and we both
set out to look for a sheltered place from which to
paint pictures. We entered a small house which
was in course of construction, and, finding the view
from the lower windows too restricted, erected a
ladder against the cross-beams of the unfinished
upper story, and climbed up on to these. The
ladder was a rather unusual one, in that it had
square rungs.

One of Major F.’s dreams on the preceding night
had been that he was climbing a ladder which did
not appear to be set against any wall. It went up,
so to say, into space. And it had square rungs.

He had not been up a ladder for six years.

What finally convinced him, however, was this:
He dreamed that he was sailing a toy boat with a
small boy protégé of his to whom he had (actually)
presented this vessel. A little later on he dreamed
he saw a similar boat, but full size, dismasted, and
with its sails lying flat on the water. The crew
were washing-them. A few days after this he heard
that his boy friend had been taken to a pond to
sail his new boat, but instead of doing so had
insisted on removing the sails, laying them flat in
the water of the pond and scrubbing them.

He agreed that these three results, taken to-
gether, were conclusive.

* a a a a

74 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

A little while before this my brother had written
to me to say that he had “ got ” the post-war death
of General Leman, the Belgian hero, and, on open-
ing his newspaper at breakfast, had found the
announcement confronting him.

My sister, like my brother, obtained her result
without the necessity of experimenting. (Both, of
course, were now on the lookout for the effect.)
Her evidence, however, extended into a department
of science where “ Beeton ” is a greater name than
“Newton.” Here, although an ignoramus, I am
humble, and so I am prepared to take her word
for it that the correspondence of events in this case
was sufficiently detailed to put coincidence entirely
out of the question,

CHAPTER XII

THE situation was now a little clearer. It had
been discovered that the effect was one which was
apparent only to definitely directed observation,
and its failure to attract general attention was, thus,
sufficiently explained. But the rough-and-ready
method which had been devised for the purpose of
rendering it perceptible seemed to work quite well.
The original hypothesis of solitary abnormality had
been completely killed, and, moreover, in the light
of the experiment, I did not appear to possess even
a specially well developed faculty for observing
the effect. Those other people had got their decisive
results more quickly than I, and, in most cases,
those results had been clearer.

The outcome of the experiments suggested that
the number of persons who would be able to per-
ceive the effect for themselves would be, at least, so
large as to render any idea of a shared abnormality
absurd—for wholesale abnormality is a contradic-
tion in terms. Indeed, when one cam consider

in addition, that practically everyone has occasion-
ally experienced that queer sense of events having
“happened _before,’’ and that most people are apt
to_recall suddenly an apparently forgotten dream
| re can ther reason) somethin
occurs which reminds them of (1.e., is associated
with) that dream, it became fairly clear that, if there

“were abnormality anywhere, it would probably per-

tain to thosé, if such there should prove to be, who

were mentally debarred from observing the effect.

Statistics in that respect, however, could be col-
75

76 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

lected only from experiments conducted on a wide-
spread scale consequent upon the publication of a
book.

Meanwhile, the explanation seemed as far away
as ever.

The trouble was that the effect was so extremely
definite in its aspects. It was no broad, vague
affair such as might be covered by some sweeping
generalization (Relativity, for example, or a two-
dimensional theory of Time) ; it bristled with pecu-
liarities; it presented clues which pointed like
signposts to half a dozen solutions—mostly con-
tradictory. And, though it was easy to devise
explanations which should cover some of the facts,
it was difficult to find anything which could fit
them all. |

In the hope of obtaining additional data, I recom-
menced experimenting upon myself, the immediate
object being to ascertain whether there were any
observable differences between the images which
related to the future and those which related to the
past. As it turned out, the most careful observa-
tion failed to bring to view any such distinguishing
features.

In the course of these further experiments, how-
ever, I came upon three dreams of a specially illu-
minative kind, and these, perhaps, had best briefly
be described.

The first afforded a fairly clear example of
an associational chain running from ‘“ past” to
future.” The connecting link was the idea of
spilled ink, which idea entered into both the related
waking experiences.

Waking experience (1): before the dream— .
Watched a friend seated at a table filling a foun-
tain-pen, and thought he was going to spill the ink.

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 77

Waking experience (2): after the dream.—Read
a French detective story. The detective seemed to
be unusually incompetent, and, towards the end of
the book, I began to wonder when he was going to
exhibit some sign of the skill with which the reader
had been asked to credit him.

In the dénouement he pretended to stumble, and,
in so doing, upset some ink over a table at which
the villain was seated. The latter, to save his
clothes, threw himself back in his chair, raising his
hands above the flood. Whereupon, the detective
seized one hand and slapped it down first into the
ink and then on to a piece of blotting-paper, thus
obtaining a set of finger-prints. He then trium-
phantly denounced the criminal.

Dream: between the two waking experiences —
A famous detective was going to give us an exhibi-
tion of his skill. We waited a long time, but he
seemed quite incompetent. Finally, he pretended
to stumble, and, in so doing, spilled ink from a
fountain-pen over the criminal, whom he then
triumphantly denounced.

The second dream exhibited a similar associa-
tional chain, but in this case the link—shooting
dangerous game with a revolver—was much clearer.

Waking experience (1): before the dream.—Saw
pictures of a lion-shooting expedition. My brother
was thinking, at the time, of joining such an expedi-
tion, and I began to wonder what guns he ought to
take. While considering the merits and demerits
of various weapons, was reminded of an enormous
seven-chambered revolver I had seen in a Paris gun
shop, which apparatus was supposed to be part of
the equipment of any up-to-date hunter of lions.
Wondered, with some amusement, what Bea eor
ing with a ‘revolver would be like.

78 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

Waking experience (2): after the dream.—Read
Ethel Sidgwick’s ‘‘ Hatchways.” Two chapters
are devoted to the episode of a leopard, which has
escaped from a menagerie. It has appeared near a
country house where a sort of children’s school treat
is in progress, and has killed a goat. Later on,
the hero is saved from the animal by a retired
explorer, who arrives in the nick of time and kills
the beast with two shots from a borrowed revolver.

Dream: between the two waking experiences.—
Looking from the windows of a country house, saw
the head and shoulders of a lion moving through a
cornfield. It was known in the neighbourhood
that this lion had escaped from a menagerie, and
that it had killed a goat. Wondered if I could hit
it from the window with my revolver, but decided
that the range was too far. Decided to lie up
alongside the track in the cornfield, and wait till
the beast repassed. Felt, however, that I should
prefer to be armed with something better than a
revolver. Went out to try to get a rifle.

The third dream provided an example of a per-
fect integration, the component parts of which were
related to impressions received before and after the
dream.

Waking experience (1): before the dream.—Saw
in the garden of an hotel where I was staying the
bottom, minus the sides, of an old, small, flat-
bottomed boat.

Waking experience (2): after the dream—My
sister persuaded me to go with her to one of the
Olympia motor cycle shows, as she wanted my |
opinion on a small “ scooter ” which had caught her
fancy. It was a neat-looking little thing called the
‘“Unibus,” and it was entirely different to the other
scooters in the show, inasmuch as it was built on

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 79

motor-car principles, with shaft, gear-box, etc. It
was equipped with a little seat of curious shape (on
all scooters that we had seen hitherto, one stood on
the base-board). Also, it was fitted with a shield
for the protection of ladies’ dresses. I pointed out
the advantages of this last feature, and added that
in ordinary scooters she would get her feet horribly
wet and muddy. As [I said that, there flashed
through my mind the old curious conviction: This
has happened before. Knowing what that meant,
I set to work and presently revived the lost memory.
It belonged to a dream, and what was more, a dream
which I had recorded. On my return home I
looked up the notes, and found that they had been
made two years before.

Dream: between the two waking experiences. _
Saw my sister coming down a street, sitting in
an extremely curious little motor-car. (I had made
a sketch of this machine, which was simply the
“Unibus,” without its shield.) Called out to her
something about getting her feet wet. Saw water
: the roadway up to the level of the low, oval plat-

orm.

The notes stated that the platform of this tiny car
was the piece of a flat-bottomed boat I had seen
nine or ten days before.

Since we have got on to the subject of long-range
association with a dream in the middle, I may as
well describe the most perfect example of the kind
I have ever experienced. The gap between dream
and future event was about twenty years.

Waking experience (1): before the dream—
When a small boy, between twelve and fourteen, I
read with enormous interest Jules Verne’s “ Clipper
of the Clouds.” Readers of that book will prob-
ably remember the illustrations of the author’s idea

80 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

of a flying machine. These showed a long, dark
hull of about the size and shape of a modern
“‘ Destroyer,” except that it had a ram bow. This
thing, which looked as if it had got off the sea and
into the air by mistake, was supported solely by a
cloud of tiny screw propellers mounted on a forest
of thin metal masts. There were no wings, or any-
thing of that sort.

Waking experience (2): after the dream.—Some
twenty years later, in 1910, I made the first decisive
flight in the first aeroplane which possessed com-
plete inherent stability.* It was a rather exciting
episode. The thing got off too soon, bounced—
and, when I recovered my scattered wits, I found it
roaring away over the aerodrome boundary, climb-
ing evenly, and steady as a rock. So I left well
alone, and allowed it to look after itself. This it
did till the engine gave out (usually a matter of
three minutes in those days). The sensation was
most extraordinary. The machine, like all those
of my design, was tailless, and shaped, as viewed
from below, like a broad arrow-head minus the
shaft. It travelled point foremost, and, at that
point, there was fitted a structure like an open (un-
decked) canoe, made of white canvas stretched over
a light wooden framework. Seated idly in this,
and looking down over the sides at the cattle scam-
pering wildly around three hundred feet below, the
whole of the main structure of the aeroplane was
away back behind the field of vision, and the effect
produced was that one was travelling through the
void in a simple open canoe.

Dream: between the two waking experiences.—,

* Mr. L. Gibbs had previously persuaded a similar machine

of my design to leave the ground; but the flight on that
occasion was limited to a few yards.

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 81

A few days after I had read, as a small boy, Jules
Verne’s book, I dreamed that I had invented a
flying machine, and was travelling through space
therein. It must be borne in mind that I had never
heard of, or conceived the possibility of, any flying
machine different to the great metallic, screw-sup-
ported ‘“‘ clipper of the clouds.”” Yet in my dream
I was seated in a tiny open boat constructed of some
whitish material on a wooden framework. I was
doing no steering. And there was no sign of any-
thing supporting the boat.

I may add here that the boat-like nacelle of the
“ Dunne” biplane had not been added on account
of any lingering, unrecognized memory of the
dream. The earlier machines had no such feature.
This had been attached as an afterthought, simply
in order to reduce the “ head-resistance ” of the
pilot, which resistance, at that particular place, was
believed to exercise a detrimental effect upon the
stability of the apparatus.

I never forgot that dream, and recalled it with
amusement when, in 1901, being on sick-leave from
the Boer War, I set to work in earnest to devise some
“ heavier-than-air ” contrivance, which should solve
the great military problem of reconnaissance. But
it seemed to me a dream natural enough for a boy,
and I did not then perceive the significance of the
appearance of the dream-machine—indeed, I could
not do so, for the. related constructional develop-
ment did not come till ten years later. By then I had
dismissed the dream as of no importance, and it
was only recently that I realized that the corrobora-
tive detail of the little, white, open boat classified
the whole as an “anticipation” of “ future”
experience.

* * * * *

82 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

Granted that the dreaming attention ranges about
the associational network without paying heed to any
particular “ present,” there is nothing astonishing
in its lighting on an image many years “ ahead.”
This, in fact, is exactly what we should expect, for
in its “ backward ” travel it often lights on images
many years “ behind.”

But, when it comes to computing the proportion
which the images of the past bear to the images of
the future, in a given series of dreams, one is apt to
be misled. For the images which relate to events a
long way behind can be recognized and counted;
but those which relate to events similar distances
ahead cannot be identified. Hence, the only way
to strike a balance is to confine the statistics to the
range of a few days either way. Images which
relate equally well to either past or future—such as
those of friends, and of everyday scenes—should
not be counted. Images which are apparently of
the past should be submitted to the same severe
scrutiny as are those which are apparently of the
future, for coincidence will operate just as effectively
in either direction.

Computing in this fashion I have found that the
images which relate indisputably to the near-by
future are about equal in number to those which per-
tain similarly indisputably to the near-by past.

CHAPTER XIII

Way only in dreams? That was the question
which blocked all progress. Every solution which
could reduce Time to something wholly present ruled
that the pre-images should be just as observable
when one was awake as they were when one slept.
So, why only in dreams?

I should be ashamed to confess how long a period
elapsed before I saw that, in framing that question,
I was begging the question. The moment, how-
ever, that I did realize this, I proceeded to put the
matter to the test.

A little consideration suggested that the simplest
way to set about a waking experiment would be to
take a book which one intended to read within the
next few minutes, think determinedly of the title,—
so as to begin with an idea which should have asso-
ciational links with whatever one might come upon
in that future reading,—and then wait for odds and
ends of images to come into the mind by simple
association.

Obviously, one could save a lot of time by reject-
ing at once all images which one recognized as per-
taining to the past. Also, since the images would
be perceived while awake and with one’s wits about
one, one might rely more upon one’s memories of
them than one could when the memories were formed
sleeping, and thus save a vast amount of writing.
A brief note of each image should suffice.

The first experiment was a gorgeous success—
until I discovered that I had read the book before.

It was interesting, however as showing the

83

84 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

tremendous difficulty the waking mind experiences
in freeing itself from its memories. I spent by far
the greater part of the time in rejecting images of
the past and starting afresh with a mind compara-
tively blank.

Apart from the items which related to the book
(already read), I got only a few ideas, mostly con-
cerning London and the exterior and interior of
clubs. The only exception was the single word
“qoodkmfe,’ which drifted into my mind, seem-
ingly, from nowhere. A little reflection satisfied
me that I had never in my life come upon such a
word, so I jotted it down.

Two or three days after this I moved, quite un-
expectedly, to London. On my arrival, I went to
my club, and having for the moment nothing better
to do, proceeded to the library, picked out a newly
published novel, and tried a second experiment.
Result—nil. In fifteen minutes I got only eight
images, which did not clearly belong to the “ past ”
half of the associational network. One of these
eight related to a kangaroo hunt in Australia—riders
and hounds chasing pell-mell after the leaping
animal. Another comprised the single word
“narwhal.” There was nothing in the book that
fitted, and presently I threw it aside.

I then drifted into a little inner library, which is
an excellent place for a nap. I chose a comfortable
armchair, and, for appearances’ sake, equipped
myself with another volume—R. F. Benton’s
“Book of the Sword,” opening this in the middle.

Immediately my eyes fell upon a little picture of
an ancient dagger, underneath which was inscribed
“Knife (wood). I sat up at that, and began to
dip into the book, turning back after a moment to
page 11. There I came upon a reference to the

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 85

horn of the narwhal. Reading on, I found on the
succeeding page the words, “ The ‘ old man’ kan-
garoo, with the long nail of the powerful hind leg,
has opened the stomach of many a staunch hound.”

Now, there was nothing conclusive here, but it
was just the sort of suggestive but uncertain thing
one keeps on getting throughout the dream experi-
ment, while one is waiting for one’s decisive result.
I was, therefore, encouraged to proceed.

I tried next with Baroness van Hutten’s book,
“Julia.” Result—a quarter of a sheet of notepaper
of material, the only thing that fitted being “ pink
house,’ there being a reference in the book to
“ pink houses.” (Not good enough. )

Arnold Bennett’s ‘‘ Riceyman Steps ” served for
the next experiment. I got only three lines of
material, but these contained the words, “J am
entitled to say.” On opening the book I found in
the first paragraph the words, “The man himself
was clearly entitled to say.”

Then I tried with Mason’s ‘‘ House of the
Arrow.” Here I altered the procedure. I opened
the book at the beginning, and found the name of
one of the characters, being careful not to glance at
any other page. It seemed to me that a name which
would be likely to occur in close connection with
many of the incidents of the story would provide a
better associational link than does the mere idea of
the book’s title.

I do not know if the present reader is acquainted
with the “ House of the Arrow,” and, if he is not, I
am most unwilling to spoil for him, even in the
interests of science, the enjoyment of a first-class
detective story. So I will merely say that the centre
knot of the whole tangle—the thing upon which
everything in the plot hangs—ts a clock pointing to

86 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

half-past ten. This feature, however, does not
come into the story till halfway through the book.

The character I had chosen from the opening
pages as an associational link accompanied the
detective throughout the latter’s investigation. Con-
centrating attention on that character, the first
image I saw and noted was that of a clock pointing
to half-past ten.

With Lord Dunsany’s book, “The King of
Elfland’s Daughter,” I got “ Long cliffs of crystal
looking over dark sea. Fireflies dancing over this
sea.’ Not a bad description of the night scene pic-
tured in the book, where the long crystal cliffs look
down upon a mist-covered plain over which the
lights of Elfland are dancing, advancing, and
receding.

I then tried a book of Snaith’s, taking the
heroine’s name as an associational link. Here I
failed completely. But, in the middle of this experi-
ment, I got one very curious image.

It was that of an umbrella with a perfectly plain,
straight handle, a mere thin extension of the main
stick, and of much the same appearance and dimen-
sions as the portion which projected at the ferrule
end. This umbrella, folded, was standing unsup-
ported, upside down, handle on the pavement, just
outside the Piccadilly Hotel.

I happened to pass that way in a bus next day.
Shortly before we got to the hotel I caught sight of
a most eccentric-looking figure walking along the
pavement in the same direction, and on the hotel
side of the street. It was an old lady, dressed in a
freakish, very early-Victorian, black costume, poke
bonnet and all. She carried an umbrella in which
the handle was merely a plain, thin, unpolished
extension of the main stick, of much the same

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 87

appearance and dimensions as the portion which
projected at the ferrule end. She was using this
umbrella—closed, of course—as a walking-stick,
grasping it pilgrim’s-staff fashion. But she had it
upside down. She was holding it by the ferrule
end, and was pounding along towards the hotel with
the handle on the pavement.

I need hardly say that I had never before in all
my life seen anyone use an umbrella that way.

* * * * *

These experiments showed me that, provided one
were able to steady one’s attention to the task, one
could observe the “effect” just as readily when
awake as when sleeping. But that steadying of
attention is no easy matter. It is true that it makes
no call upon any special faculty, but it does demand
a great deal of practice in controlling the imagina-
tion. Hence, to anyone who is desirous merely of
satisfying himself as to the existence of the
“effect,” I should recommend the dream-recording
experiment in preference to the waking attempt.

But, for studying the problem, the waking experi-
ment is of distinct value, because one can follow a
great deal of what one’s mind is doing. Also, there
is no dream-story to complicate matters.

In my own case, I employed this experiment
mainly in order to seek for the barrier, if any, which
divides our knowledge of the past from our knowl-
edge of the future. And the odd thing was that
there did not seem to be any such barrier at all.
One had merely to arrest all obvious thinking of the
past, and the future would become apparent in
disconnected flashes. (For, however difficult and
troublesome the process, that was what, ultimately,
it resolved itself into.) Yet, if one tried to follow

88 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

6

up the “memory train” from past to future, one
came, not so much to a resisting barrier, but to an
absolute blank. Moreover (and this I discovered
by separate experiment), if one allow the attention
to pass from the image under consideration to
another which was manifestly associated therewith,
one remained, so to say, in the “ past” part of the
network. There, attention was completely at home.
The associated images followed one another in
swift, easy succession; attention ran on and on with-
out noticeable effort or fatigue.

It was only by rejecting manifest associations with
the last image, and waiting till something apparently
disconnected took its place, that attention was
enabled to slip over the dividing line.

CHAPTER XIV

THERE remains one more dream to be described.
While not, perhaps, completely conclusive, it was so
nearly so that it had to be taken into serious account.
And since, if it really did relate to the future, it
could not possibly fit in with the solution I happened
to be favouring at the time, it caused me to abandon
work on those particular lines, and to hark back to
an earlier theory. And this, as it turned out, was
wholly fortunate.

On the morning after the dream I was, while
dressing, engaged in following up a long train of
reminiscences of my school days—a train which led,
in perfectly logical sequence, to the memory of an
adventure with a wasp. Asa boy I was terrified of
these insects, and could hardly bring myself to
remain in the same room with one. Imagine my
horror, then, when, during a meal in a room with
an open window, a large wasp entered, flew to me,
settled on my neck and proceeded to crawl round
deep down inside my Eton collar. I sat there,
white as the tablecloth, while a master adjured me,
quite unnecessarily, not to move. To this day I
can remember the horrid sensation of the insect’s
soft, faintly felt perambulations. And so, forty-
four years later, on this particular morning, when
my train of thought had brought me to that early
memory, I tried to recall the feel of those crawling
feet. As I did so I happened to be combing my
hair; the comb caught at a particular place on the
crown of my head, and instantly there came back to
my mind a dream of the previous night. I had

89

go AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

dreamed of that feeling of something catching in
my hair at that precise point of my scalp, had been
convinced that a wasp was crawling there, and had
called to a companion to take it off.

Now, assuming that this was an anticipatory
dream—an instance of the ‘‘ effect ”’—we have the
following facts to consider.

The simultaneous presentation to consciousness
of the sensory impression of the comb in the scalp
and the memory image of the feel of the wasp’s feet,
was a Straightforward enough example of the proc-
ess of forming an association by “ contiguity.” And,
before that association had been formed, it was pre-
sented in the dream in the shape of an integration.

A very pretty mixture of experience.

PART IV
CHAPTER XV

BEFORE we begin to look for an explanation, it
might be as well for us to glance, briefly, at what
precisely it is that we have to explain.

First, of course, there is the ‘“‘ effect’ itself—
the apparent temporal disorder of the presentations.
The actual order of experience, such as might be
recorded in a diary, runs thus:

a

a a pre-presentation of A.

a” a re-presentation (memory) of a’
A a presentation.
a

a re-presentation of 4.

If we accept the evidence afforded by the dream
described in the last chapter, the matter becomes
more complicated in this respect: It looks as if A,
in the above list, might be any sort of compound of
presentations. '

Next, we have the following to consider:

As the result of observing an image of future
experience, the experimenter takes pencil and
paper, and notes down, or even makes a sketch of,
the details of the pre-image observed. In so doing,
he is performing a definite physical act. But tt ts
an act which would never have been performed had
he not observed that pre-wmage. In other words,
he interferes with that particular sequence of

mechanical events which we postulate as the back- ~

bone of our “‘conscious automaton” or materialistic
theories.
gI

92 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

This is barefaced “intervention.” But it implies
something more. These future events are, at any
rate, real enough to be experienced as pre-presenta-
tions; yet—since, as we have just seen, the observer
can alter his course of action as the result of his
pre-observation—they are events which, theoreti-
cally, may be prevented from happening. Are we,
then, to say that they are only partly real—less real,
for instance, than are past events? That is another
question our explanation has to answer.

Furthermore, this ability of the observer to inter-
fere with the course of brain events introduces the
question of ‘ free-will.” Our solution will have to
make a satisfactory statement in that connection.

Finally, it is essential that the explanation does
not contradict the already known facts of psychol-
ogy and psychophysics. And of those facts there
are some which greatly limit our range of permis-
sible speculation. On the psychical side we have the
fact—dwelt upon in Chapter XIII.—that the mem-
ory “ train ” does not run through into the “ future.”
It ends in the “present.” On the psychophysical
side we have all that is included in the usual evi-
dence for parallelism, and, in particular, the known
fact that concussion of the brain apparently destroys
or paralyzes recently formed memories. There can
be no question but that here something more than
a mere “motor habit” is affected: the patient’s
mind with regard to such immediately previous
events seems to be a complete psychological blank.

CHAPTER XVI

IT is worth noting that Relativity admits of “‘see-
ing ahead ” in Time, in the sense that what is future
to Jones may be present to Brown. But it does
not admit of an event in the remoter future of Jones
appearing to Jones a day or two before an event in
his nearer future. And that is our problem.

* * * * *

It must be borne in mind that material records
are indications of the past only, so far as the thing
on which those records are imprinted is concerned.
If, on inspecting a target at a given instant, you
perceive a round, punctured hole in the corner, you
may infer that a bullet has passed through at that
point. But nowhere does that target offer you any
indication that another puncture is presently going
to appear therein—at, say, half an inch from the
centre of the bull’s-eye. It is true that, from a
complete knowledge of all the mechanical move-
ments which were going on in that quarter of the
universe at the moment of your inspection, you
might, if you were possessed of some sort of super-
lative intelligence, be able to deduce that a bullet
would shortly strike the bull’s-eye at the point in
question. But that is to confuse the issue. It is
to introduce a host of indications external to the
one we are considering—which one is the state of
the target. That state offers no indication con-
cerning the coming puncture. So uncommunica-
tive is it that, in working out your prophecy, you
would leave the question of present damage or lack

93

94 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

of damage entirely out of consideration: it could
not affect your decision. The target contains no
“record” of its own future—the indications you
use are, in fact, everywhere except on that surface.
But the punctured corner of the target is a record
of the past history of the target; and it is from that
record, and not from a knowledge of what exactly
was going on throughout the whole of that quarter
of the universe at some earlier moment of Time,
that you deduce the past impact of the bullet.

Punctures in the target are indications of the
future, in the sense that they are evidence of the
directions which the bullets may be taking, and so
indications of what may be going to happen to the
stop-butt at the back of the target; but they are
not indications of future punctures in the target
itself.

Now, the brain is a material organ, and the state
of the brain at any given instant is no more an
indication of what the world outside the brain is
going to present to that brain in the future than
is the state of our target an indication of where the
next bullet is going to strike, or whether a new one
is going to strike it at all.

CHAPTER XVII

It is never entirely safe to laugh at the meta-
physics of the “ man-in-the-street.” Basic ideas
which have become enshrined in popular language
cannot be wholly foolish or unwarranted. For
that sort of canonization must mean, at least, that
the notions in question have stood the test of
numerous centuries and have been accorded
unhesitating acceptance wherever speech has made
its way.

Moreover, the man-in-the-street is, all said and
done, Homo sapiens—and the original discoverer
of Time. It was from him, and from him alone,
that science obtained that view of existence.

His conclusions regarding the character of his
discovery seem to have been very emphatic in detail,
if slightly uncertain in synthesis. His idea was
that temporal happenings involved motion in a
fourth dimension.

Of course he did not call it a fourth dimension,—
his vocabulary hardly admitted of that,—but he was
entirely convinced:

1. That Time had length, divisible into “ past ”
and “ future.”

2. That this length was not extended in any
Space that he knew of. It stretched neither north-
and-south, nor east-and-west, nor up-and-down, but
in a direction different to any of those three—that
is to say, in a fourth direction. |

3. That neither the past nor the future were
observable. All observable phenomena lay in a
field situated at a unique “instant” in the Time

95

96 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

length,—an instant dividing the past from the
future,—which instant he called “ the present.”

4. That this “present” field of observation
moved in some queer fashion along the Time
length; so that events which were at first in the
future became present and then past. The past
was thus constantly growing. This motion he
called the “ passage ” of Time.

There is a point here worth noting—a point which
we shall have to discuss more fully later on. An
examination of the last paragraph will show that
many of the words therein refer to another Time,
and not to the Time stretch over which the passage
of the “ present ” field of observation was supposed
to take place. This, perhaps, will be more readily
seen if the paragraph be repeated with the words in
question italicized.

4. That this “ present ” field of observation
moved in some queer fashion along the Time
length; so that events which were at first in the
future became present and then past. The past
was thus constantly growing.

The employment of these references to a sort of
Time behind Time is the legitimate consequence
of having started with the hypothesis of a move-
ment through Time’s length. For motion in Time
must be timeable. If the moving element is every-
where along the Time length at once, it 1s not mov-
ing. But the Time which times that movement is
another Time. And the “ passage” of that Time
must be timeable by a third Time. And so on
ad infinitum.* It is pretty certain that it was
because he had a vague glimpse of this endless array

* This, of course, has been pointed out before now—as a
fundamental objection to the Newtonian idea of a Time which
flows.

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 97

of Times, one, so to say, embracing the other, that
our discoverer abandoned further analysis.

But he adhered to his two main conceptions—the
Time length and the Time motion. And he coined
special phrases with which to convey to his entirely
comprehending companions those two very prac-
tical and useful ideas. He spoke of a “long”
Time and a “short”? Time (never of a broad or
narrow Time). He referred to the “ remote ”’ past
and the “near” future. He said, “ when to-
morrow comes,” and, “when I get to such and
such an age.” In his more poetical moods, he
declared that Time “ flew,” and that the years
“rolled by ”: ”: he wrote of “life’s journey,” and
of living “ from day to day.”

He symbolized this general conception of Time
in several ways; most exhaustively, perhaps, in his
sheets of piano music. In these, the dimension
running up-and-down the page represented Space,
and intervals measured that way represented dis-
tances along the instrument’s keyboard; while the
dimension running across the page from side to
side represented the Time length, and intervals
measured that way indicated the durations of the
notes and of the pauses between them. But that
did not complete the symbol. So far, the page
represented merely what we should, to-day, call a
‘“‘ Space-time continuum.” In order to complete
the symbol, it was intended that the player’s
point of vision should travel from left to right
along the model Time dimension, and that the
written chords should be played as this moving
point, representing the moving “ present,” reached
them.

In another case the Time dimension was repre-
sented by the circumference of a circle, this length

98 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

being marked off into portions representing Time
distances. But that alone did not suffice to convey
his conception of Time. There was no moving
“present.”” So he added a pointer to represent
this “present,” and set it moving over the sym-
bolical Time dimension by means of machinery.
The entire contraption was then not only a symbol,
but an actual working model of Time as he con-
ceived it. It was an extremely useful device; and
he called it a “ clock.”

Now, a clock-face without hands; a sheet of
music which directs that all the chords are to be
played with one resounding crash; and the concept
of a Time length in which every part is equally
present to a seventy-year-long observer : these three
things are, to the man-in-the-street, exactly equiva-
lent in value.

For he did not conceive Time as having length
(or infer that Time had length) save for some very
good and quite imperative reason. Nor is that
reason in any way hidden or obscure. We all per-

ceive phenomena as being arranged in two sorts of
order. There are those which appear to be merely
separated in Space, and those which appear to be

“ successive.” That difference is “given”; it is
there; it confronts us, do what we will, or think how
we may. We must have conceived or perceived
that Time had length merely as part and parcel of
an attempt to account for this apparent succession
of phenomena. So it would have been equally
part and parcel of that attempt that the Time length
should be regarded as a length moved-over, a dimen-
sion in which we travelled from second to second,
from hour to hour, from year to year, thus coming
upon the Time-separated events one after the other,
just as we come upon objects in our mundane jour-

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 99

neys. The original concept must have appeared
as a single one—that of length-moved-over. That
the two component ideas in this complex—Time
length and Time movement—may possess any
analytical value regarded entirely apart from each
other, demands a considerably more advanced
power of reasoning.

It was not until comparatively recent years that it
seems to have occurred to anyone that the man-in-
the-street’s imagined, but unchristened, fourth
dimension might prove to be a “ real ” fourth dimen-
sion, akin to any of the three dimensions of Space.
D’Alembert (1754) wrote of a friend of his who had
conceived this notion.* But the earliest printed
treatise on the subject that I can discover is a mono-
graph by C. H. Hinton entitled, “ What is the
Fourth Dimension? ” and published in 1887.

Hinton described a little model system of lines sloping
in different directions but supposedly all connected to a
rigid framework. If this framework with its fixed, slant-
ing lines were to be passed slowly downward through a
fluid plane which stretched at right angles to the direction
of the motion, “there would be the appearance of a
multitude of moving points in the plane, equal in number
to the number of straight lines in the system.” If solid
threads of matter were substituted for the lines, these
moving points (cross-sections of the threads) would appear
as moving atoms of matter to an imagined two-dimensional
being inhabiting the fluid plane and regarding it as all
the Space there was. Similar considerations would hold
good for an arrangement of four-dimensional threads of
matter passing through three-dimensional Space. ‘“ Were
such a thought adopted, we should have to imagine some
stupendous whole, wherein all that has ever come into
being or will come co-extsts, which, passing slowly on,

*I am indebted to Mr. Edwin Slosson for this piece of
information,

100 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

leaves in this flickering consciousness of ours, limited to
a narrow space and a single moment, a tumultuous record
of changes and vicissitudes that are but to us.” The
italics are mine.

Readers who are not used to visualizing geo-
metrical figures may find Hinton’s description a
little difficult to follow. It might be as well, there-
fore, to present the idea in a rather simpler form,
and to illustrate this by means of a diagram. But,
before we do so, a word or two of explanation
regarding Time diagrams in general may not come
amiss.

A dimension is not a line. It is any way in which
a thing can be measured that is entirely different to
all other ways. In geometry we are measuring a
fundamental thing called “ Extension”—a _ thing
which is simply the formal opposite to nothingness.
We find that, if we set about measuring this in ways
which appear to be each totally different to all the
others, these ways must appear to be each at right
angles to all the others. Thus, if we choose to start
by regarding north-and-south as one way (one
dimension), we may consider east-and-west as
another way, because we can measure off distances
east-and-west without ever moving northward or
southward at all. A third way in which we could
measure without infringing on the other two ways 1s
up-and-down. If Time has length,—which is exten-
sion,—then Time provides us with a fourth way, for
we could measure along Time without moving in
any of the dimensions already mentioned. A fifth
way ... but we have, as yet, no names for any
other ways. Yet, theoretically, there may be an un-
limited number of such ways, each at right angles
to all the others.. Mathematicians think nothing of
considering ten of them. But we cannot wsualize

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 101

more than three at a time, because our bodies and
brains are machines which are not constructed. to
work in more than three dimensions.

When it comes to drawing diagrams, we find our-
selves limited to the use of the two dimensions in
_which the paper is extended—viz., up-and-down
and from side-to-side. But we may use these two
dimensions to represent any two dimensions we
please,—the fourth and the fifth, for example, or the
first and an imagined one-hundredth,—because,
whichever two dimensions we choose to represent,
these must be at right angles to each other in exactly
the same way as are the dimensions of the paper.
Thus, we can say that one dimension of the paper
represents Time, and the other a dimension of
Space, and thus draw diagrams exhibiting the rela-
tion of real Time to this.Space dimension. For, if
Time is really extended (has length), it would be
possible for the diagram to be~placed, in exactly
that fashion, in a plane which extended one way in
Time and the other way in Space.

But what about the remaining two dimensions of
Space? Well, one of them may be considered as
standing out at right angles to the plane of the
paper, and may even, if you like, be shown in a
perspective view. The other cannot be shown at
all, or even imagined. You merely know that it
must be considered as extending at right angles to
the other three. But the simpler kinds of Time
diagram deal with problems in which the considera-
tion of more than one or two dimensions of Space
is unnecessary.

In the present diagram, we shall consider the
side-to-side dimension of the paper as representing
Time, and the up-and-down dimension as represent-
ing Space. In order to avoid all chance of any

102 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

reader confusing a dimension with a line, I propose
to place a little dimension-indicator in the corner
of the picture, just as a cartographer places in the
corner of his map a little diagram showing the
points of the compass. Time will be indicated by T,
and Space by S. .

Here, then, is Hinton’s idea, pictured in two

“— eee  eeee
.G
Ts)
°
iB.
qm
T
&
Fic. 1.

dimensions, but with lines of a rather more varied
character than had those which he took into con-
sideration.

The full lines represent material threads extend-
ing (enduring) in Time. If you examine any one of
these lines, you will notice that the points of which
it is composed are placed at different positions in
Space (different heights in the page) at different
moments in Time (different distances from the
margin). The dotted line AB represents a section .

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 103 _

of what Hinton called a “ fluid plane” (you may
imagine the rest of it as sticking out at right
angles to the paper, though that is quite unneces-
sary). The arrow-head to the T in the little di-
mension-indicator shows that AB is to be regarded
as moving, without tilting one way or another,
straight along the Time dimension. The arrows at
the top and bottom of the moving line are merely
there to reinforce this idea. They will be omitted,
as a rule, in subsequent diagrams.

If AB were to travel thus, the little bits of the full
lines, where these are intersected at C, D, E, F, G,
and H, would appear as moving either towards A or
towards B—as moving, that is to say, in Space. (If
you will cut, in a piece of paper, a fine slit to repre-
sent AB, lay this on the diagram with the slit paral-
lel to AB, and then slide the paper in the direction of
the arrow, you will see these apparent movements
with great clearness. )

A creature whose field of observation was thus
limited to AB would be aware, therefore, of a little
world of moving particles. But you and I, whose
field of observation covers the whole diagram, per-
ceive that the actual bits of the full lines inter-
sected do not really move about on the page: what
happens is merely that the sectional wews of the
lines move as our eyes follow the movement of AB.
And the only thing which seems to us to really move
over the page is the line AB. |

So, according to Hinton’s theory, a being who
could see Time’s extension as well as that of Space
would regard the particles of our three-dimensional
world as merely sectional views of fixed material
threads extending in a fourth dimension, and would
consider that the only thing in the entire Cosmos
that really moved was that three-dimensional field

104 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

= of observation which we call the “ present
moment.”
Hinton thus assumes that the past and the future
“co-exist,” and that our experience of change is
due to a relative motion between this Time exten-
sion and that “ narrow space and a single moment ”
which 1s the present. But he refrains from noting
that such relative motion must take Time.
As a contribution to the subject, Hinton’s exposi-
tion was remarkable, in that it clearly indicated the
w part that must be played by matter in any careful
interpretation of the man-in-the-street’s vague idea.
According to Hinton, matter, as exemplified by his
y ‘(threads,” extended in the Time dimension.
The man-in-the-street has never definitely carried

yr his analysis thus far. To him, it seems essential
4 that something should move in Time; but there is
no evidence that he has ever realized that there
Ww would be a vast difference between (a)_a system in
m which his three-dimensional field of observation
moved through-a-stationary world of four-dimen-
sional matter, and (b)_a system_in. which he-and a
three-dimensional_ material world moved together,

en_bloc, through a blank. -

| The latter concept is, of course, entirely devoid
q7of meaning. Its acceptance may, in fact, be said
- (Uk to constitute the great Time Fallacy. Movement
re we V of the universe as a whole through a thousand such
ju" yt featureless dimensions could not make the slightest
si difference to what was going on in that universe: it
pio” ihwcould not explain or account for any phenomenon
| WA rv whatsoever, temporal or otherwise. There would
be no change, no experience of succession, which

‘ws would not be equally apparent in the absence of that~
supposed motion. Nor would the concept of such
a _ amplify or abstract from any concepts that

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 105

you can entertain unthout thinking of such a
motion.

The man who allows himself to drift unwittingly
from his original concept of an occupied Time,—a
dimension in which he travels from event to event,
—and who begins to entertain in its place the mean-
ingless idea of his travel through an empty and in-
effectual continuum, seldom proceeds very far in
his thinking before, perceiving the nonsensicalness
of his new idea, he decides that ‘“‘ there is no such
thing as\fime.”

CHAPTER XVIII

To Hinton there was no qualitative difference
between the Time dimension and the dimensions of
Space. He started with four dimensions of Ex-
tension, all fundamentally alike, and his problem
was to discover why any human being should regard
one of these as specially distinguished from ali the
others. He found his answer in the idea of a three-
dimensional field of observation moving up the
four-dimensional block. This, it will be noted,
made the apparent Time dimension the same for
all observers, no matter which way the bundles of
material threads representing their bodies happened
to be inclined in the whole dimensional extension.
His travelling field would, thus, be a constituent of
the universe which existed independently of the
existence of any individual observer.

Mr. H. G. Wells took a slightly different view.
And, in the “Time Machine,” published seven
years later, he, through the mouth of one of his
fictional characters, stated his case with a clearness
and conciseness which has rarely, if ever, been sur-
passed. ?

He begins by insisting on the necessity of regard-
ing Time as a fourth dimension. (Hinton had not
perceived this.) It is a way in which matter must
be measured.

“ There can be no such thing as an instantaneous
cube . . . any real body must have Length,
Breadth, Thickness, and . . . Duration.”

Matter, thus, for him, as for Hinton, extends
(endures) in Time.

106

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 107

“For instance, here is a portrait of a man at
eight years old, another at fifteen, another at seven-
teen, another at twenty-three, and so on. All these
are evidently sections, as it were, Three-dimen-
sional representations of his Four-dimensional
being, which is a fixed and unalterable thing.”

(The portraits in question would have needed to
be sculptured, three dimensional figures. But the
meaning is clear.)

He emphasized and re-emphasized the fact that
there was no qualitative difference between a Time
dimension and a Space dimension. There was an
apparent distinction, drawn by the observer, but no
such distinction if you left the observer out of it.

“There are really four dimensions, three of which
we call the three planes of Space, and a fourth,
Time. There is, however, a tendency to draw an
unreal distinction between the former and the latter,
because it happens that our consciousness moves
intermittently in one direction along the latter from
the beginning to the end of our lives.”

A little later on, he refers to the Time-moving
elements as “our mental existences.” Note the
use of the plural. There is no all-embracing mov-
ing stratum, filling Space between the different
observers, but a number of “ mental existences,”
one for each observer, and it is the motion of
these which alone determines which dimension is
Time.

Now, that statement implies something which
Wells did not specifically mention. Each of such
mental existences would be centred in or about the
corresponding observer’s brain, and so, in its travel,
would be bound to follow whatever bundle of fixed
lines in the four-dimensional extension represented
that brain. Hence, if it were the travel of the

108 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

“mental existence ”’ which caused the observer to
make an artificial distinction between Time and
Space, each observer would regard Time as stretch-
ing in the direction in which his body line extended.
It would follow that his body line would seem to
him to be running straight up this Time dimension
of his, and not to be bending this way and that in
Space—i. e., sitting in a railway train, he would
seem to himself (until he began to speculate about
it) to be at rest.

Moreover, the body lines of different observers
are never parallel. Our bodies do not remain a
constant distance apart from one another in Space.
Therefore, different observers would hold slightly
differing opinions as to the correct directions of the
Time and Space dimensions.

For the rest, we may note, that, like Hinton,
Wells fails to mention that anything which moves
in Time must take Time over its movement.

* * 2* * *

“ Relativity ” is a particular theory grafted on to
the general theory of Time-dimensional universes.
Consequently, its survival or demise cannot affect
the validity of that general theory.

The Relativitists exactly reversed the procedures
of the nineteenth century Time-dimensionalists.
Certain apparent anomalies in certain optical experi-
ments led Einstein to enunciate, for the first time
in history, the idea that different individuals might
hold different views regarding both Time (as told
by clocks) and Space (as measured by rods). From
this, Minkowski deduced the existence of a four-
dimensional extension in which there was no qualli-
tative distinction between the dimensions, but only
an apparent distinction, each observer regarding

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 109

Time_as stretching in the direction of his own,

apparently straight body-line.
But Einstein’s theory embraces a further supposi-
tion; one which, unfortunately, removes the subject

to regions largely beyond the comprehension of the
man-in-the-street. This ‘“ Space-Time” extension
is said to be not “ flat,” but ‘ curved.”

Neither of these Relativitist additions have any
determinating influence upon the broader doctrine
with which we shall be concerned in this book,—a
doctrine which relates to Time-dimensional theory
in general,—and the reader may accept or reject the
Einstein teachings without committing himself to
agreement or disagreement with anything in the
following pages.

The extensions of Time-extended objects are
usually, in Relativity theory, called “ World
lines’; but they are sometimes referred to as
“Tracks.”’ “An _ individual,’ says Professor
Eddington,* “is a four-dimensional object of
greatly elongated form; in ordinary language we
say that he has considerable extension in time and
insignificant extension in space. Practically he is
represented by a line—his track through the world.”
The addition of those last five words to an otherwise
perfectly complete statement may seem to the reader
something akin to “hedging ”—for how can the
line be both the observer and the observer’s path?
But Eddington, a little farther on, is at pains to
make his own view clear. The “track” of the
(presumably physical) observer is that observer
“himself.” The italics are Eddington’s own.
And, again, lower down on the same page, he re-
marks : “A natural body extends in time as well
as in space, and is therefore four-dimensional.”

* “ Space, Time and Gravitation,” p. 57.

110 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

This seems plain enough. To any specific ob-
server contemplating such a system of fixed,
objective lines, the appearance of motion in the
dimensions representing Space could be produced,
as in Hinton’s model, by the real movement, along

the observer’s “track ”’ of. a field of-—observation

apparently at right angles to the dimension repre-

senting Tine - But to suggest anything of that
kind would be to hint that this Time-travelling field
of observation pertained to a psychical observer.
For the physical observer is already defined as the
“track ” travelled over.

Now, the Relativitist has a very difficult case to
present, and he certainly does not want to be handi-
capped with the burden of a psychical observer.
On the other hand, he does not wish to appear to
ignore the fact that we observe events in succession.
It is this quandary which drives him to a statement
which appears to be intended as non-committal.
The “ observer ” is said to move along his “ track,”
and the reader is left to infer what he pleases from
that.

Unfortunately, however, the reader has usually
been allowed to infer that by “ observer ” is meant
a physical apparatus, inorganic or organic. So he
can hardly be blamed for supposing that he is in-
tended to understand that the “track” is formed
merely by the peculiar warpings of the Relativitist’s
‘‘ Space-Time,” and that the physical elements of
the observer’s body move over the tracks, leaving
these empty before and behind.

If, however, he were to assert that this is the
teaching of Relativity, he would be told that a track
which possessed reality in such a sense and to such
an extent as to account for all the physical charac-
teristics of an imagined three-dimensional object

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME III

moving along it would be, in every one of its cross-
sections, physically indistinguishable from the
imagined object itself. Physically, the track would
actually be the object extended in Time.

And that is the crux of the whole business. Any-
thing that could properly be regarded as moving
along the track would have to be something different
from the fixed sections of the track itself.

The Relativitists, having committed themselves
to the idea of motion along these Time-extended
tracks, find themselves, like everybody else, com-
pelled to consider that conception of a Time
embracing Time which must always accompany the
idea of anything moving in Time. Here, their
habit of writing of the tracks, sometimes as exten-
sions of physical objects, and at other times as the
paths of travelling, non-extended, physical objects
—of writing, in fact, as if the two conceptions were
identical—seems to lead them into some confusion.
They speak of clocks, physical instruments, as
moving along the tracks, and as recording the rates
of their progress. But the clock is, physically, a
bundle of the tracks, and cannot move over itself.
While, psychologically, it is merely a moving cross-
sectional view of that bundle of tracks, and so does
not provide any physical registration of the rate of
its movement.

Relativity, as already said, comprises a great
deal more than a collection of logical and experi-
mental proofs of the old, general fourth-dimensional
theory of Time. But there seem to be only two
points in its teaching which are of immediate con-
cern to ourselves:

1. The Relativitist recognizes the existence of a
Time embracing Time, even though he may not
realize that this is a serial conception.

112 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

2. It is part of Relativity theory that the tracks
before and behind the position of any assumed
Time-travelling observer possess, in all their cross-
sections, all the observable characteristics of a
three-dimensional world of matter.

CHAPTER XIX

WE are now, I think, justified in accepting three
propositions:

I. That the brain contains memory traces of our
past, attended-to experiences.

There seems to be no escaping this conclusion.
Concussion does not destroy merely the ability to
give verbal or other expression to the memories
involved. The memories themselves are in some
way affected, eich mind appears to him-
self to be completely blank-so far as these memories
are concerned. And, since the physiological evi-
dence is that such traces must in any case be
formed, and must be destructible, we have no
grounds on which to seek for any other explanation
of the facts.

2. That Time has length, divisible into years,
days, minutes, etc.,—a length in which each instant
lies between two neighbouring instants,—a length
in which events are situated.

That is the standard conception. And its enun-

ciation is equivalent to saying that Time is a fourth
way _in which length can be measured—a fourth

dimension of Extension.

We are not, however, accepting Proposition 2
merely because it embodies the popular view. We
do so because it follows logically from Proposi-
tion 1. For we have to recognize that a brain
stimulation which is past, and a similar brain stimu-
lation at a much later period, are, not one and the
same event, but two events separated by intervening
_ events. - We might have imagined that separation

Ta 113

114 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

as being in some fourth-dimensional ‘ memory
train.” But Proposition 1 rules out that idea. We
start with the conception of memory as being merely
the re-stimulation of an old brain trace. Hence we
have to regard the separation of the two brain
events as being in Time.*

Incidentally this means that our Time length is
not unoccupied; it contains physical configurations.
This argument might have been useful, were it not
that the reader is, I take it, already satisfied by the
argument in Chapter XVII. that the conception of
Time as having length is utterly meaningless unless
that length is regarded as occupied by such events.
Moreover, if Time has length, the endurance of
anything in Time must mean, as Wells pointed out,
extension in that length.

The question as to whether each individual has
his own private Time direction, or whether there is
only one Time direction, common to all observers,
is a question which will be immaterial to our argu-
ment; and the reader may accept whichever view
he pleases.

3. That the observer observes cerebral events—
or, if you prefer it, their psychical correlates—in
succession.

The reader who wishes to dispute this proposi-
tion, or to assert its non-significance in the realm of
our practical knowledge, must be prepared to main-
tain, whenever he suffers from gout, toothache, in-
digestion, rheumatism, or any other of the pains
which punctuate our earthly histories, that the dis-
comfort which he is actually enduring has no more
real significance to him than has a similar pain
which he remembers as having happened in the past

* See also the criticism of Bergsonism in the third section
of the present chapter.

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 115

»—that he is feeling the two pains, past and present,
equally. To avoid all possible misconception as to
what this succession in experience implies, let us
consider your physical cerebrum as a “ world-line ”
(Fig. 2) extended in Time. We are not consider-
ing motion in Time, but only extension therein.

At A, B, and C the cerebrum is in a condition
which means acute discomfort to the observer, C
being that point, called ‘“ death,” where bodily dis-
solution begins. It may be argued that the cere-
bral section at A is experiencing the discomfort at
A, and that the cerebral section at B is experiencing

A & ¢c

F ane FF

FIG. 2.

the discomfort at B, and so, of course, is not
experiencing the discomfort at A or C. But the
point is that you, whom we will assume to be experi-
encing the discomfort at B, did experience the dis-
comfort at A, and may be looking forward with con-
siderable misgiving to the experiencing of the dis-
comfort at C. Why should the cerebral section at
B be in a state of alarm about what is happening
to the cerebral section at C? It is not going to
experience that particular discomfort itself: it
remains where it is. But you, the observer, know
only too well that you are not going to continue
observing the cerebral event at B. You know that
you will presently be observing the cerebral event
at C, and that, even though C represents the end of
your little personal cinema show, no power of yours

116 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

can prevent its ultimate occupation of your screen
of observation. Your field of observation must
have moved, therefore, from A to B, and be moving
from B towards C.

x x He aK mK

We may note here that we need not trouble to
debate the question as to whether the idea of Time
as having length is an analytical device or the recog-
nition of a “reality.” Analytical devices are
merely instruments for rendering manifest differ-
ences and relations which, without such assistance,
would remain concealed. But unless these rela-
tions are already there, waiting to be brought to
light, the analytical device can exhibit nothing new.
It is true that such contrivances may describe
phenomena in a language of their own,—as the mer-
cury column in a thermometer indicates degrees of
temperature in terms of divisions of height, or as the
mathematician represents variables in terms of +
and y,—but that does not affect the question.
Whatever the analytical device exhibits must have
its corresponding characteristics in the underlying
reality; and that is all that need concern the man
of science.

However, lest the reader should suspect that he
is being manceuvred into a position he did not in-
tend to adopt, it might be as well to point out this:
All the practical, everyday questions he asks himself
regarding Time are questions based upon the as-
sumptions that Time has length, that events are
positioned along that length, and that he experi-
ences these events in succession. The answers to
those questions must, therefore, be given im terms
of those assumptions.

* * * * *

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 117

It might, also, be advisable, at this point, to warn the
reader against a conception which is in the nature of a
trap. “ Why,” it may be asked, “do all these Time-
dimensionalists, past and present, exhibit their physical
‘world-lines ’ as extending ahead of that ‘ present moment ’
represented by AB in Fig 1? Why should we not modify
that diagram, and say that the world-lines are growing in
Time, as shown in Fig. 3?”

Fic. 3.

The answer is that such a conception offends against
the scientific law of the Economy of Hypothesis. That
law forbids us to introduce, when considering a problem,
more hypotheses than are strictly needed to cover the
facts. For an unnecessary hypothesis is an unwarranted
hypothesis.

Consider how the law applies in the present case. Fig.
4 represents the facts to be considered before we introduce
the clarifying conception of Time’s length. It represents a
world of Space in which particles are moving about.

In this diagram we have—

118 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

1. Physical objects, C, D, E, F, G, and H.

2. Only one kind of activity—the motions of these objects
up and down in the dimension representing Space. But
these motions may be of varying velocity—a charactetistic
which we find it very difficult to comprehend or define. In
fact, we had to wait till Newton’s day before we could
exhibit such varying velocities as determined by laws.

a

eee @eeemed@ewe ®@
=

Fic. 4.

Now, introducing a Time dimension, we have, in Fig. 1
(the reader is advised to glance back at this)—

The physical objects, one dimension larger than in
Fig. 4.

In comparison with this, we have, in Fig. 3—

The physical objects, also one dimension larger than in
Fig. 4. But, in addition—unnecessary addition—we have
it that these extended objects must be conceived as being
perpetually added to by a process of creation. This is a
very strange proposition, and one for which we have no evi-
dence whatsoever.

Turning to the way in which motion is exhibited, we have,
in Fig. i—

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 119

Still no more than one kind of activity —the motion of
AB in the Time dimension.

We have gained, however, this much: We have suc-
ceeded in generalizing motion (a very important thing from
the mathematical and philosophical point of view). We have
got rid of all the varying, reciprocating motions of Fig.
4, and have substituted for these the single, simple, uniform
motion of AB in the Time dimension.

In comparison with this, we have, in Fig. 3—

Activity in the Time dimension (as in Fig. 1); for the
world-lines are being constructed by uniform growth in that
dimension.

But we also still have activity in the Space dimension
(as in Fig. 4) ; for the world-lines are being constructed by
growth in that dimension as well as in the Time dimension.

Moreover, we still have the original complexity of motion
of Fig. 4; for the growings in the Space dimension are of
varying velocities.

Thus, while Fig. 1 involves the minimum of hypotheses
necessary to cover the facts, and, incidentally, reduces motion
to its simplest aspect, Fig. 3 introduces an additional, and so
quite unnecessary, hypothesis—an hypothesis, moreover,
which, instead of simplifying our idea of motion, adds further
complexity thereto, and an hypothesis which is, in itself, of
an extremely dubious character.

So our choice lies between Fig. 4 and Fig. 1, according as
to whether we do or do not want to analyze the significance
of Time.

The reader will, perhaps, forgive me if I conclude this
chapter with a section addressed more particularly to students
of Bergsonian philosophy.

* * * * *

Fig. 3 seems to me to represent with absolute accuracy the
conception of Time finally adopted by Professor Henri Berg-
son in his essay published the year following the appearance
of Hinton’s monograph. The date is of interest as showing
that the fourth-dimensional theory of Time was well to the
fore in those days.

Bergson begins by considering the supposed four dimen-
sions of Extension,—three of Space and one of “ duration,” —
and argues that the last-named is spurious. From this one
is apt to assume, rightly or wrongly, that by “duration ”’ is

120 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

meant Time, and that Bergson is attempting an analysis of
Fig. 4 without employing the device of a Time dimension.

The moments of “ pure duration,” he holds, are not ex-
ternal to one another, but are “superposed,” presumably as
a printer might superpose pictures. |

Presently, however, it becomes clear that “ pure duration ”
is not “ Time.”

“To sum up,” he says, “ every demand for explanation
in regard to freedom comes back, without our suspecting it,
to the following question: ‘Can time be adequately repre-
sented by space?’ To which we” (2e., Professor Bergson)
“answer: ‘ Yes, if you are dealing with time flown; no, if
you speak of time flowing.’ ” *

And that, obviously, is what is represented in Fig. 3.

“Pure duration” thus seems to be identifiable with the
man-in-the-street’s “ present ” and Hinton’s moving “ narrow
space and single moment ”—the line AB in Fig. 3.

But Bergson sees that this acceptance of a Time dimension
with moments which are external to one another is not
enough. His “pure duration” also has its moments, and
these are not external to one another, but superposed.

He leaves us, thus, to contemplate two sets of moments
—those which are superposed, and those in the “ past” part
. of a Time dimension.

Speaking entirely for myself, I should say that Bergson’s
superposed moments of “ pure duration” are his acknowl-
edgments of the existence of that Time embracing Time
which insists on obtruding itself into every attempt at
temporal analysis. His growing “past” takes Time to
grow. But it would seem that Bergson, unwilling to
recognize such a series of Times, and compelled by his
earlier pages to grudge every inch of extension to any sort
of Time whatsoever, has to take refuge in the “ super-
position ” idea.

Professor H. Wildon Carr (wide p. 114 of “ The
Philosophy of Change ”) seems to exhibit Bergson’s theory
in a slightly different light, the element in Fig. 3 which
grows as a train of past events being called “ Memory.”
Remembering is, thus, a backward jumping of conscious-
ness in a memory dimension. This theory, presumably,
is what compels Bergson to devote so much time to a

*“ Time and Freewill,” p. 221.

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 121

courageous, if rather forlorn, attack upon the accepted
physiological view of memory. But Fig. 3 serves equally
well to illustrate Wildon Carr’s interpretation. We have
merely to change the T in the dimension-indicator into
an M standing for memory, and to label our moving line
AB as DD standing for Bergson’s “ pure duration.”

In either case the diagram stands condemned for the
same reason as before: it introduces the totally un-
necessary hypothesis of continual creation out of nothing,
in addition to extension in a fourth dimension; and this
at the cost of still further increasing, instead of simplify-
ing, the complex character of variable motion.

Bergson’s attitude as regards future events is emphatic.
As in Fig. 3, they simply do not exist in any shape or
jane whatsoever. His argument for freewill is based upon
that.

PART V
CHAPTER XX

A “Series” is a collection of individually dis-
tinguishable items arranged, or considered as
arranged, in a sequence determined by some sort
of ascertainable law. The members of the series,—
the individually distinguishable items,—are called
its “ Terms.”

The nature of the terms, when these are con-
sidered apart from their standings as members of
the series, is of small consequence to the mathe-
matician. The terms may be, let us say, peas in a
pod, or the oscillations of a pendulum, or ridges
and furrows in ploughland, or the stresses along a
cantilever girder—it is all one to him. His interest
is concentrated on the relation between the terms—
the relation which links each term to the next and
makes manifest the law that binds the whole into
an ordered extension.

This characteristic relation between the terms
may or may not affect the values of the terms them-
selves. Thus the essential significance of a pea
is not, that I know, greatly affected by the fact that
it lies in a row of similar peas. But each swing
of the pendulum owes the extent of its movement
to the previous swing. And the stresses at any
place in the cantilever girder, due to an applied
load at the girder end, depend for their magnitudes
upon the particular relation connecting the series
of stresses along the structure. (For instance, in

123

124 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

the simple beam shape, the values of the forces
acting upon the uprights and diagonals constitute
series of equal terms; but the values of the forces
acting upon the longitudinal members constitute
series in arithmetical progression. )

In the first term of a series, the relation which
links the terms is absent on one side; and this lop-
sidedness may have a very practical significance.
Thus the first swing of the pendulum has no
previous swing to determine it: it must be started
by an external agency. The first furrow in a
ploughed stretch differs in section from all the ©
others. And the forces acting on the end members
of our cantilever girder are balanced at the outer
ends, not by pushes and pulls in similar members,
as elsewhere in the series, but by the externally
applied end-load.

Now, we have seen that if Time passes or grows
or accumulates or expends itself or does anything
whatsoever except stand rigid and changeless before
a Time-fixed observer, there must be another Time
which times that activity of, or along, the first
Time, and another Time which times that second
Time, and so on in an apparent series to infinity.
And we might suppose that every philosopher who
found himself face to face with this conspicuous,
unrelenting vista of Times behind Times would
proceed, without a moment’s delay, to an exhaustive
and systematic examination of the character of the
apparent series, in order to ascertain (a) what were
the true serial elements in the case, and (b) whether
the serialism were or were not the sort of thing
that might prove of importance. For, of course, it
might turn out to be an entirely negligible affair.
But, to people who have devoted their lives to the
search for a simple explanation of the universe,

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 125

the idea that one of their approximate funda-
mentals—next door, indeed, to the sought-for
nothingness—might prove to be of a serial character
would be bound to appear a supposition to be
avoided at almost any cost. Quite rightly, they
would pause, and look round for some shorter path.
Yet to a halt of that kind one is obliged to set a
limit. To stand, for twenty-two centuries, staring
at a perfectly open road is not necessarily at
variance with the recognized traditions of philo-
sophical procedure. But it would be a pity to risk
having this estimable circumspection mistaken for
commonplace somnolence.

CHAPTER XXI

WHETHER we embark upon the analysis of a serial
time because of the logical compulsion, or whether
we do so from motives of curiosity as to what sort
of a country such an avenue would be likely to re-
veal, we must realize that, if we discover anything
which 1s not already manifest in the ordinary, ac-
cepted first stage of the series, that thing will be
something outside the purview of any philosophy
which has been developed upon the basis of a uni-di-
mensional Time. That is to say, it will be something
entirely strange to our present views of existence.
We shall have, therefore, no right to halt and haver
merely because we encounter novelty—novelty is
what we are expecting to find. We must bear in
mind, moreover, that serialism in Time is almost
bound to signify serialism in other matters. In
actual fact (the reader had best be warned of the
worst) we shall find that it involves a serial observer.

In these circumstances the strictly proper course
will be for us to get the analysis finished first,—
regardless of whether what is exhibited appears as
probable or the reverse, so long as it follows
logically from our premises,—and then proceed to
ascertain whether the results do or do not assimilate
with the general body of our knowledge. And,
as it happens, this is one of those cases where the
adoption of a correct method is imperative; for it
is not until the analysis is finished that the new
conceptions begin to assume any sort of complete
significance.

The reader, then, is advised to put all thoughts

126

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 127

of meanings and implications entirely out of his
mind until we come to the next chapter, and to
regard the present analysis as a simple mental
exercise of no more actual import than a cross-
word puzzle. So that all he will need to do for
the moment is to satisfy himself that the three
laws recited at the conclusion of this chapter are
laws which have been properly deduced from our
premises, and that they represent quite truly the
relations between the terms of our series.

* * * K *

“From the windows of our railway carriage,”
says Professor Eddington, ‘‘ we see a cow glide
past at fifty miles an hour, and remark that the
creature is enjoying a rest.”

This is an illustration which pleases in more
ways than one; and I regret to have to interrupt
the reader’s contemplation thereof in order to
direct his attention to a picture painted in less
enticing colours. But we have to get on.

We are still, then, seated in the same carriage;
but this is now standing at a railway station.
Looking from the windows on the side remote from
the platform, we perceive another train at rest
upon the rails. As we watch it a whistle blows, and
we become aware that our train is beginning to pull
out. Faster and faster it goes; the windows of the
opposite train are running swiftly across the field
of view; but . . . a doubt arises . . . we miss the
accustomed vibration of our vehicle. We glance
towards the platform windows, and discover, with
something of a shock, that our carriage is still
stationary. It is the other train which 1s moving.

Now, in the first of these two cases attention is
fixed upon the visual phenomenon of the cow; this

128 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

phenomenon moves across the “ field of presenta-
tion,” and attention follows it. We judge that
attention is directed to a point in the field of
presentation corresponding to something which is
fixed in external Space; and that, while attention
is thus fixed, the field of presentation, and the
observer, move.

In the other instance, again, the visual phenome-
non of a window pertaining to the opposite train
moves across the field of presentation, and attention
follows that phenomenon. Again we judge that
attention is fixed and that the field—with the
observer—is moving; but afterwards, in the light
of other evidence, we reverse that judgment and
say that the field and observer must have been fixed,
and that attention must have moved.

In each case, then, the judgment may differ ; but
in each case the direct psychological experience is
of the same general character. The phenomenon
observed, whether this be the cow or the window
of the opposite train, moves across the field of
presentation—followed by the focus of attention—
until it disappears at the edge of the field. And
im each case the field of presentation remains fixed
with regard to the observer.

Such a field of presentation, fixed with regard
to the observer, and in which conscious observation,
condensed to the shifting focus called “ attention,”
is assumed to be taking place, is bound to be the
starting-point of our analysis. (All readings of
instruments are perceived as appearances within
that field.) It must be remembered, however, that
the field contains phenomena other than visual; it
embraces, in fact, every species of mental phenome-
non which, whether attended-to or not, is being
presented for observation. It represents the

‘AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 129

observer’s outlook on Space. And, on our theory,
it occupies the same spacial position as does that
portion of the observer’s cerebrum which is in the
state of apparent activity associated with the pro-
duction of observable psychical phenomena.

We shall represent this spacial position of field
and cerebrum by CD in Fig. 5, the up-and-down
dimension of the paper being regarded as Space.
Temporal measurements are not yet shown.

Since the contents of CD are to be considered
as in a state of apparent activity, they must be
imagined as apparently moving up and down in

be Geen

Fic. 5.

the dimension representing Space. Moreover, the
length of CD is uncertain; for larger or smaller
portions of the cerebrum may be active at different
instants. The diagram is to be looked upon, in
fact, not only as a model, but as a working model.
We indicate this by fitting two little arrowheads to
the dimension-indicator at the. bottom of the
diagram, showing that apparent motion in Space 1s
supposed to be taking place.

(It must be remembered that, according to the
more commonly accepted view of Space, CD itself
may be moving as a whole in the Space dimension. )

Fig. 5 is our starting-point. It does not repre-

130 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

sent a “term” in the series; for Time is not being
indicated therein at all.

To the observer whose field of presentation
occupies the spacial position CD, events are pre-
sented in succession. To him Time is apparent as
an insistent characteristic of existence—a charac-
teristic which, though real enough to be of immense
personal importance, cannot be defined in terms of
the three-dimensional limits of his spacial outlook.
Phenomena in his field seem to move about, alter,
and vanish. And these changes appear to “take
Time.” He endeavours to identify this ‘‘ Time
taken” with a bit of Space moved over by some
indicator such as a clock-hand; but fails because
he cannot rid himself of the knowledge that the
movement of the clock-hand is not measurable in
terms of the clock-face alone. The hand “ takes
Time ” over its movement: it may traverse the
clock-face quickly or slowly. Stopping the clock
does not prevent other movements from “ taking
Time.” He is aware of a growing store of
memories; but is certain that this growth is also a
process which “takes Time.” Even when he sits
in the dark and thinks, he is aware that such think-
ing is “ taking Time.” And when he recovers from
an anesthetic, he has evidence that Time has
“ elapsed.”

He realizes that this “ Time” which is “ taken ”
is a measurable thing; that the measurement in-
volved is of the simple, one-way kind called
“extension ’”’; and that, in this extension, the
phenomena he observes persist for longer or shorter
lengths. And, since we are in entire agreement
with him, we will proceed to introduce this dimen-
sion of extension into our diagram as the side-to-
side dimension of the paper.

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 131

The total process may be more easily followed
if we divide it into two half-steps. The first of
these consists merely in showing the physical
elements in the cerebrum CD as having extension
(1.e., endurance) in Time. We begin by taking an
instantaneous photograph of Fig. 5. To avoid
trouble with the Relativitists, we shall assume that
we are standing side by side with the proprietor of
CD. We may, thus, consider the positions which
the apparently moving elements exhibit in that
photograph as their position at that particular
instant of Time which both we and the owner of
the cerebrum in question regard as the “ present ”
instant. This photograph is shown as CD in Fig. 6
(a), or as C’D’ in Fig. 6 (b). We show the “ past ”’
and “future” states of the apparently moving
elements of Fig. 5 as occupying fixed positions to,
respectively, the left and right of CD (or C’D’)
in a Time dimension.

These “ past,” “present,” and “future” states
will together give us a band of wavy lines enduring
(extending) in Time. A vertical (spacial) cross-
section taken anywhere in this band will indicate
what psychoneural phenomena would be observed
at that instant of Time—f the field of presentation
were there. |

But although “ past ” and “ future” states of the
cerebral elements are shown as entities occupying’
fixed positions in the Time dimension, it is ques-
tionable whether we are treating the field of presen-
tation in the same way. The fact that CD in
Fig. 6 (a) or C’D’ in Fig. 6 (b) is a snapshot of
the moving elements of Fig. 5 at an instant of
Time which both we and the owner of the cerebral
elements photographed regard as the “present”’
instant, seems to suggest that CD (or C’D’) is the

132 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

only field of presentation in the whole extension.
We note this en passant, and, while waiting for
further light on the subject, proceed to consider
the essential difference between Figs. 6 (a) and
6 (b).

r
9
C
A = = == A
—_ — oO. Se
= Sa aes
°D
e
6 Cd
é
? v $
$
{
r
e,!
Sa ee
a a= —— oe
ee ge” —_
- en
= 4
= = d

Fie. 6.

It will be seen that whereas, in Fig. 6 (a), the
band of lines is shown running straight along the
Time dimension, the trend in Fig. 6 (b) is slightly
aslant. This is because AA’ represents the only
possible extension according to the views of those
who, like the Relativitists, hold that distinctions
between Space dimensions and Time dimensions
are merely artificial distinctions drawn by individual

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 133

observers, each of whom regards the direction in
which his body lines extend as being the Time
dimension. According to that theory, our state-
ment that we are regarding the vertical dimension
of the paper as Space, and the horizontal dimension
as Time, is simply acquiescence in the opinion of
the owner of the cerebrum shown in Fig. 5, and it
commits us to agreement with his complementary
view of his own Time endurance as something
extending straight along the Time dimension. But
BB’ represents one of the many slanting extensions
regarded as possible by those who maintain that
the Time direction is the same for everybody, and
that it has nothing to do with the direction of any
particular observer’s body-lines.

The “ present moment” in Time is indicated in
each case by the dotted prolongation of the line
representing the instantaneous photograph CD
(or C’D’).

We have now accomplished the first of our two
half-steps, and it will be seen that the result is to
leave us with a very incomplete representation of
the state of affairs which we started to analyze—
the state exhibited in Fig. 5. The elements in that
diagram were considered as apparently moving up
and down in the Space dimension, such motion
being apparent both to the owner of the pictured
cerebrum and to ourselves. The diagram was to
be regarded as a working model, exhibiting its
states in succession. But there is no evidence of
any such motion in Figs. 6 (a) and 6 (b). The
lines which show the elements of Fig. 5 in their
Time extension—the bands AA’ or BB’—are con-
sidered as being stationary in all dimensions. (For
that reason we have had to remove the arrow-heads
from the little dimension-indicator). And the

134 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

cerebral states represented by the various cross-
sections of those bands are not being presented to
any observer in succession. FEither they are all
being presented together, or else one only is being
presented—the state at the “ present” instant, CD
(or C’D’).

The second of our two half-steps consists in the
reintroduction of these missing phenomena of
motion. We do this in the obvious and, indeed,
only possible way—the way to which the reader is
now accustomed. We simply add an arrow-head
to the T in the dimension-indicator, in order to
show that CD (or C’D’) is—as we had all along
suspected—the only field of presentation in the
diagram, and that this field is travelling along the
Time dimension in the direction indicated by that
arrow. We do this in Figs. 7 (a) and 7 (b).

And we do one thing more. We place the
numeral 1 after the T in the dimension-indicator.
The reason for this will be apparent in a moment.

The first stage of our analysis is now complete,
and it brings us to a merely revised edition of our
starting-point. Our diagram is again a working
model, and it no longer contradicts the statements
we made regarding Fig. 5. The line CD (or C’D’)
is still, as we had originally stated, a field of presen-
tation. Events are being presented in succession
within that field. And the intersection points
between that travelling field and the wavy lines
are moving up and down within the field, giving
the appearance of moving elements.

As the field of presentation moves over the
extended substratum, some of the phenomena pre-
sented in the field will appear as moving in relation
to other phenomena in the field. For attention,
focussed upon the apparently moving phenomenon,

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 135

has a fringe which covers enough of the immedi-
ately adjacent, comparatively non-moving phe-
nomena to enable the difference to be perceived.
There is no evidence here, of course, that such
movements of attention are anything more than

—_—__ = Uy
A pains —,,. ee A
ae — ee
“we oe —
8
©)
e
e
@
TA a
$s
e
e
e
e
gl pn”
Tee ee
ne —
—— ene se
cae .— —_ —
ee et ae a
a= Sea
8
e
3 e
e
T.8
Ss

Fic. 7.

conditioned, non-voluntary activities in the field of
a non-intervening observer.

The result of this first stage leaves us, however,
still dissatisfied. Analyzing what was involved in
our premises, we have arrived at conclusions which,
so far as they go, are logically unescapable. The
trouble is that they do not go far enough.

136 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

To begin with, we find ourselves confronted with
a new object for consideration: to wit, a Time-
travelling field of presentation.

Now, we cannot separate that travelling field of
presentation from an observer to whom its contents
are being presented—contents provided by the
cerebral elements in the substratum travelled over.
Hence, CD (or C’D’) must be regarded as the
place where this observer (a Time-travelling
observer ) intersects with AA’ (or BB’). The field
in question is, of course, our original field, and
the observer thereof is our original, conscious
observer. And this observer must be a definite
entity; for no mere abstraction can travel in, so to
say, its own unsupported right.

It is to be noted, however, that there is nothing
here which need alarm the materialist. It is
abundantly clear that, when this observer, with his
field, reaches the terminus of the cerebral sub-
stratum, he will find that the observable phenomena
have come to an end. Nor is there anything to
show that he has the smallest capacity for inter-
ference with the purely mechanical sequence of the
cerebral states which he observes.

We are bound to regard this observer as three-
dimensional. And, to avoid any possible confusion,
we had better set forth exactly what that statement
implies.

A Time dimension, for any observer, is a
dimension in which all the events which he ex-
periences appear to him to follow one another in
a definite sequence—a dimension in which he (or
his attention) does not move backwards so as to
upset that order of successive experience. Those
dimensions in which his attention can move to and
fro appear to him, therefore, to be at right angles

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 137

to that Time dimension. Whatever dimension,
then, in our diagrams, actually determines, for
the observer moving therein, that order of suc-
cessive experience, is that observer’s true Time
dimension.

To the observer we are here considering, the
dimension which thus determines the order of his
successive experiences is the dimension moved over
by the field. The movements of his attention are,
therefore, confined to the three spacial dimen-
sions at right angles to that Time. So he is an
entity whose capacity for observation is three-
dimensional. And that is what we mean by calling
him a three-dimensional observer.

Whether he has, or has not, in other capacities,
extensions in other dimensions is immaterial to the
arguments in this chapter. As an observer he is
three-dimensional.

Now, our first stage, again, has left us with a
new Time problem to consider. For the observing
entity, with its field CD (or C’D’), is travelling
neither so slowly as to be stationary, nor so rapidly
as to be in all places at once; and every condition
between those two extremes must be describable
in terms of Time taken per distance traversed.
But the distance traversed is along our first-con-
sidered Time dimension; so the time which is
taken must be a Time which is not shown anywhere
in the diagram. Just as our first-considered Time
is not indicated anywhere in Fig. 5. Hence we
mark the T in Figs. 7 (a) and 7 (0) as T 1, to show
that it is not the ultimate Time which times the
movements, real or apparent, in those diagrams.
That ultimate Time we may call Time 2.

ok *K *k Oe 2K

%

138 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

In order to simplify our next diagrams, we shall
now draw the bands AA’ or BB’ (it will not here
matter which) as they would appear to an eye set
level with the page and looking up that page from
bottom to top. Seen thus, either band would appear
as a single line; and this line is represented by
GH in Fig. 8. The field CD (or C’D’)—the place
where our travelling observing entity intersects—
is represented by the travelling point O. And
each fixed point between G and H represents a
single cerebral state, a spacial cross-section of
either of the bands AA’ or BB’.

a ae
Fic. 8.

The Space dimension shown in Figs. 7 (a) and
7 (b) is here sticking out at right angles to the
page. We shall have no. room in the picture for
other Space dimensions; but we may remember
that they are supposed to be intersecting the
diagram.

The view of affairs represented in Fig. 8 may
be regarded as the first “term” of our series.
Time is exhibited and analyzed therein, and it is
shown that it is not ultimate Time.

Our business is now to exhibit the Time taken
by the movement of O from left to right of Fig. 8
in exactly the same fashion as we exhibited the
Time taken over the Space movements of the
elements in Fig. 5.

The new dimension of Time will have to be at

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 139

right angles to GH, just as our original dimension
of Time had to be made at right angles to CD in
Fig. 5. We shall, as already said, call this new
dimension Time 2. In relation to this Time 2,
Time 1 is, theoretically, akin to any of the three
“ordinary ” dimensions of Space. Instead of a
four-dimensional world in which the fourth dimen-
sion is Time, we have now a five-dimensional world
in which the fifth dimension plays that insecure role.

In this Time 2 all the entities in GH, including
the travelling entity at O, have endurance. That
is to say, they remain in existence while you watch
O travelling. These endurances will have to be
shown as extensions in the Time 2 dimension.

We begin, as before, by taking our instantaneous
photograph of our working model. This photo-
graph is taken at what is, to us, the “present
moment ” of ultimate Time,—the Time which times
the movement of O along GH,—that is to say,
Time 2. It represents the condition of Fig. 8 at
that “present moment.” We exhibit this photo-
graph as GH in Fig. 9, the line pp’ indicating the
“present moment ”’ in question.

Next, we have to show the “ past ” and “ future ”
(in this Time 2 dimension) conditions of the fixed
cerebral states represented by the fixed points in '
GH as, respectively, below and above their
“present ” condition in GH. Since these states
do not change their position either in Space or in
Time 1, their endurances in Time 2 must be shown
as extensions straight up Time 2. They thus
become, in Fig. 9, vertical lines extending up and
down the page with no limit either way that we
are, as yet, able to assign. But we need treat only
a few selected points in this fashion.

We have now another definite entity to consider

140 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

—the three-dimensional observing entity which
intersects at the three-dimensional field O. In the
“present ” condition of Fig. 8 (GH in Fig. 9)
the point of this intersection is at the middle of the
line. Since, however, this point is, in Fig. 8,
travelling along Time 1, its positions in the “ past ”’
conditions of that diagram must be shown more

a” H a“

°”

Bites” Hiatt
roy

|
re Ww’

FIG. 9.

towards the G’G” side of Fig. 9, and its positions
in the “ future” conditions must be shown more
towards the H’H” side. Linking up these various
points of intersection, we get a diagonal line like
O’O”. This line will represent the endurance
(temporal extension) of the definite intersecting
entity.

Here we have to ask ourselves again the same

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 14!

question that we asked in stage 1. We have shown
the “past ” and “ future” states of all the definite
entities in our working model (Fig. 8)—including
the intersecting entity at O—as extensions of those
entities, occupying fixed positions in the “ past”
and “ future” parts of Time 2 dimension. But
have we treated our original three-dimensional field
of presentation in that fashion? Our answer here
is bound to be the same as before, and for the same
reason. Though everything else in our Time maps
were fixed, this field of presentation O would have
to be moving. Otherwise the diagrams would not
be working models, and would not represent that
working model state of affairs which we set out to
analyze. The cerebral states would not be being
presented to any observer in succession. Either
they would all be being presented together, or else:
one only—the state at the fixed O—would fall
within that category. This three-dimensional field|
of presentation O must, therefore, always be re-!
garded as travelling in such a fashion as to come
upon the cerebral states one after another.

But before we consider further the nature of this °
motion, let us see whether we cannot ascertain a’v
little more about the character of our observing. ~
entity O’O”.

O has represented, from the outset, the chiees
dimensional field where conscious observation is ©
taking place. It is clear, then, that, at the point -
O in our definite, enduring entity O’0”, that entity ~
is a conscious observer—our original, three-dimen-
sional, conscious observer. What is it elsewhere ?, -
We might say, “an unconscious observer,” but
that is a dubious expression best avoided. A *
better name is unconscious “ reagent,” which would &
mean here, simply, an entity which reacts to, or is=

ame -

i)

142 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

modified in accordance with, the cerebral states (the
vertical lines of Fig. 9) which it intersects. This
name does not suggest observation in any sense
beyond that in which an instrument observes. How
such a “ reagent ” can become conscious at the field
of presentation O is a matter which we shall be
able to understand when we have completed the
analysis. For the moment all that we know is that
the reagent must be considered, on account of our
original definition of O, as conscious at that point.

Now, O has to be regarded as travelling, and as
travelling in Time 1. Since, while so doing, it must
remain in O’O”, it must be considered as travelling
up that diagonal; that is to say, as travelling up
Time 2. Which means that, for our ultimate
observer to observe the contents of the instants of
Time I in succession it is necessary that he shall
observe the contents of the instants of Time 2 in
succession. He must have a field of presentation
travelling up whatever is ultimate Time—in this
case, Time 2.

By analogy with stage 1 we should expect that
the whole of GH in Fig. 9 (the instantaneous photo-
graph of Fig. 8 at a moment of Time 2 which
appears to us as “ present”) would turn out to be
this field of presentation travelling up Time 2—a
field the existence of which could not become
evident until Fig. 8 had been expanded in Time 2.
Just as, in stage 1, the existence of a Time-
travelling field CD (or C’D’) within the apparently
active Fig. 5 could not become evident until Fig. 5
had been expanded in Time tI.

It will be remembered, however, that the first
term of a series may differ in some respects from
ill the remainder. Consequently it might be wiser
mot to trust to analogy here, but to continue to

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 143

establish the characteristics of our second term by
direct analysis of what is involved in the fact of
succession in experience.

O, then, is travelling up O’O”, But the only
thing which marks o ff O as a definite point in O’O”
as the line GH. This line, therefore, must be
travelling up Time 2. GH, however, represents
the condition of Fig. 8 at what we are considering
to be the “present moment” in Time 2. Hence
this “ present moment ” in Time 2 is travelling up
Time 2.

It is advisable to remember here that, just as
Time 2 is true Time in this stage, So is the Time 2
travelling “present moment” the true travelling
“present moment.” Our old, Time I, travelling
“present moment ” has become merely an inter-
section point between the true travelling “ present
moment ”’ in Time 2 and a fixed diagonal in the
diagram. It does not exist in its own right, but is
determined by the Time 2 “ present moment.” The
point O is determined by pp’. To put it in scien-
tific language, our Times are arranged in series,
not in parallel.

Now, the points in O’O” are being consciously
and successively observed from O’ to O” by what-
ever is our ultimate observer. And we have just
seen that the only thing which determines the order
of succession in which these points are being
observed is the travelling “present moment” in
Time 2. So the ultimate observer of the changing
point in O’O” is an observer for whom Time 2
plays the part of the real and only Time. It does
not matter what he thinks about Time, or where
he supposes it to extend. Time 2 is the Time which
determines the sequence of his experiences. And
Time I is at right angles to what is, for him, the

144 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

real and only determinative Time. Time 1 is,
therefore, in relation to him, akin to a dimension
of “ordinary ” Space. In other words, just as, in
stage 1, the ultimate conscious observer exhibited
himself as a three-dimensional being in a three-
dimensional world, so, in the more elaborate view
afforded by stage 2, the ultimate conscious observer
exhibits himself as the four-dimensional observer in
the four-dimensional world marked off by pp’. This
four-dimensional observer must have a four-dimen-
sional field of presentation lying in, and travelling
with, pp’. |

But the discovery of new elements in our grow-
ing diagram does not entitle us to repudiate any
previous supposition upon which that diagram has
been erected. The argument for the existence of
this field of presentation number 2 is based upon
the hypothesis that there is a point O travelling in
O’O”. And we may not now deny that O’O” Is,
at O, a conscious, three-dimensional observer. For
it is only because we acknowledge, in stage 1, the
presence of such a conscious, three-dimensional
observer at that point in GH that we were enabled,
later, to insert the line O’O” in the diagram.
And so it goes from the beginning of the analysis.
Nothing that has been previously ascertained and
identified may be ignored later on. All that we
may do is to discover new elements as our diagram
grows more elaborate.

Hence the three-dimensional field of presentation
of our stage I observer turns out to be an element
in the four-dimensional field of our stage 2 observer.
And the discovery that there is a stage 2 four-
dimensional observer—observer 2, who is the ulti-
mate conscious observer we are seeking—means
that our ‘‘ reagent ” is, at its conscious three-dimen-

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 145

sional section O, an element in the field of
observer 2.

Then, again, observer 1’s attention (which 1s
merely a name for concentrated observation,
whether externally determined or otherwise) was
regarded as focussed upon some particular phe-
nomenon in field 1. The attention of our ultimate
observer must also be regarded as focussed about
that same phenomenon. But the focus of observer
I, who is three-dimensional, must be itself three-
dimensional. And the focus of observer 2 must,
similarly, be four-dimensional. Hence the three-
dimensional focus of observer I must be surrounded
by the four-dimensional focus of observer 2.

How far, now, are we to say that field 2 extends
along pp’. From G to H, replies analogy. But
we are not trusting to analogy; and so I must ask
the reader to follow me to the same conclusion by
a rather longer route.

A field of presentation is delimited by certain
cerebral states of observable character placed at
what is to the observer at right angles to Time.
In GH there is, we know, one such observable
state—the state at O. But for GH to be a field of
presentation from end to end, all the other cerebral
states therein should be of an observable character.

Quite so. And that is precisely what they are.
We extended them originally in Figs. 6 (a) and
6 (b) as “past” and “ future” states of the cere-
brum of Fig. 5—-states which were all of an ob-
servable character.

Yes, but did not that imply that they were observ-
able only to the conscious observer whose focus of
attention was following field 1 in Figs. 7 (a) and
7 (b), and who, therefore, would experience those
cerebral states one after another?

146 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

Again, quite so; but our now elaborated view of
those diagrams has shown us that it was really
observer 2 who was the ultimate conscious observer
of the successive cerebral states in the bands
AA’ or BB’, and whose focus, surrounding the
focus of observer 1, was following field 1. So
observer 2, following in this way the focus of
observer 1, has already consciously observed the
cerebral states (vertical lines) to the left of O in
Fig. 9, and is going to observe similarly those to
the right. All those states must therefore be, to
him, of an observable character. And they lie in
what is to him at right angles to Time. Hence,
GH, from end to end, lies within the four-dimen-
sional field of presentation. That its observer’s
attention happens to be following, for some reason,
one particular point in that field—a point in O—
does not affect the matter: a field of presenta-
tion is not limited to the focus of attention (vide
Part I.).

Yes, but was not the cross-section of the diagonal
reagent in the substratum of field 2 an intermediary
observer in whose absence that substratum would
not have been consciously observed by observer 2?

No, our ultimate observer is a four-dimensional
observer with a four-dimensional focus of attention
covering slightly four-dimensional bits of the sub-
stratum. But observer I is only a three-dimensional
observer, reacting only to three-dimensional aspects.
In his observational capacity he is not, to observer 2,
a concrete entity at all. He is akin to a plane
without thickness in a world of solids—observable
only on condition that the solids are being observed.
And his observations (modifications in accordance
with the local three-dimensional character of the
substratum) could not have been even observable

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 147

to observer 2 except as part and parcel of dimen-
sionally larger areas observed.

So GH is, like CD (or C’D’) in Figs. 7 (a) or
7 (b), a field of presentation. And, like those
stage 1 fields, it stretches, athwart the Time
dimension, from edge to edge of the cerebral sub-
stratum. Since this characteristic holds good in
two terms of the series, we may regard it as
a repetitive relation which will appear in every
term.

We conclude stage 2, then, by fitting an arrow-
head to Time 2 in the dimension-indicator of
Fig. 9, in order to show that GH is a field of
presentation moving up Time 2. The motion
of field 1 along Time 1 is now recovered. For, as
GH moves up the diagram, the point O, where GH
intersects with O’O”, moves along GH towards H,
thus coming upon the cerebral states one after
another in succession from left to right.

Our diagram—which represents the second term
of the series—is once again a working model. And
it does not contradict the information previously
provided by Fig. 8. In that figure, O was a point
of intersection travelling along GH. Our more
elaborate diagram confirms that statement, and
merely supplies the additional information that the
travelling of the intersection point is due to the
Time-2-travelling of the GH which is intersected
that GH proving to be a field of presentation con-
cealed in the over-compressed view afforded by
Fig. 8. We still have at O our original three-
dimensional observer moving along Time 1, but he
proves to be merely a section—a conscious section—
of his own temporal extension above and below in
the form of the diagonal reagent.

It is to be noted that our travelling field 2, GH,

148 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

must be, in its turn, a line where a definite entity,
observer 2, intersects with the plane figure
G’G”H”H’. Also that, since the area around O—
where this observer 2 is consciously observing—
travels from end to end of GH, that observer must,
everywhere throughout GH, be capable of conscious
observation. Also that ultimate Time—the Time
which times the movement of GH up the plane, and
of O along GH—is not Time 2, but Time 3.

- aE e ae *

We may, conveniently, carry the analysis one
stage further; but we need not trouble to repeat
the arguments.

We shall discover, of course, that the Time and
the field and the observer which, in stage 2, we
considered as being ultimate, were not ultimate at
all; and we shall come upon a larger-dimensioned
lot of ultimates which, in their turn, will only retain
that status until the next stage is reached. And
so on to infinity.

In Fig. 10 we exhibit three dimensions of Time
as the three dimensions of a solid figure seen
in perspective. We have to draw imaginary
boundaries to this figure in order to make the per-
spective clear; but these edges have, properly, no
position that we can, as yet, indicate, except where
they mark off the beginning and the end of the
extension of the cerebral substratum in Time I.
The block has sides, but, as yet, no other boun-
daries.

Time 3 is shown as the vertical dimension of
the block. In relation to this Time the dimensions
we call Time 1, and Time 2, are akin to dimensions
of Space.

The middle horizontal plane-section of this

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 149

block-figure, the plane G’G”H”H’, is our instan-
taneous photograph of Fig. 9, shown in perspective.
The endurances, in the new dimension of Time, of
the cerebral states represented by the Time 2 ex-

T.1 Til

Fic. 10.

tended lines in Fig. 9 should be shown by extend-
ing these lines in the Time 3 dimension so that
they form planes arranged like pieces of toast in
a rack. But to fill these in would overcrowd the
diagram. Our first reagent, O’O”, will endure
(extend) in Time 3 as a similar plane dividing the
block diagonally; that is to say, the plane ABCD.

In the “ present ” condition of Fig. 9 (shown in
the middle of the block), the field of presentation
GH—which, be it remembered, must be marked
out by the intersection of some definite observing
entity with the plane of the figure—is at the middle
of the plane. In the “past” condition of Fig. 9

150 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

(the plane at the bottom of the block) this field—
this line of intersection—is at DE. In the “ future ”
condition of Fig. 9 (at the top of the block) this
field is at FB. The definite intersecting entity,
reagent number 2, lies, therefore, along the sloping
plane DFBE, which plane represents its endurance.

The intersection of this plane with the plane
ABCD is the line DB. The new travelling field of
presentation (field 3) is the plane G’G”H’H’. As
this field 3 plane travels up the block its line of
intersection with the sloping plane DFBE (the line
GH) moves over the travelling field 3 plane towards
G’H”. That is to say, field 2 moves along Time 2.
The point O (where the three planes ABCD,
DFBE, and G’G”’H”H’ intersect) moves, mean-
while, along the travelling line GH towards H.
That is to say, field 1 moves along Time 1.*

* ss ss *x *

The analysis will continue, evidently, in the same
fashion to infinity. There we shall have a single
multidimensional field of presentation in absolute
motion, travelling over a fixed substratum of objec-
tive elements extended in all the dimensions of
Time. The motion of this ultimate field causes
the motion of an infinite number of places of inter-
section between that field and the fixed elements,
these places of intersection constituting fewer-
dimensional fields of presentation. At infinity,

* It will be remembered that the figure is a diagrammatic
representation of serial relations, and that one cannot, in
considering movements within the block, overlook the system
on which that block has been constructed. One cannot, for
example, consider the point O as moving up DB, without,
at the same time, recognizing the conditions of that move-
ment—viz., that field 3 is travelling in Time 3, and field 2
in Time 2.

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME I51

again, we shall have a Time which serves to time
all movements of or in the various fields of presen-
tation. This time will be ‘“ Absolute Time,’ with
an absolute past, present, and future. The present
moment of this absolute Time must contain all the
moments, “ past,” “‘ present,” and “ future,” of all
the subordinate dimensions of Time.

It will be noticed that we can never show the
path which O really follows. In Fig. 9 this path
appears as O’O”, but in Fig. 10 it appears as DB.
We have to show it differently with each intro-
duction of another dimension of Time. But it will
be seen that, to the observer of each specific moving
field in the ultimate, completed diagram, O’s path
will appear to lie within his field.: (For example,
to the observer of the field GH in Fig. 10, O appears
as moving from G to H.)

The nature of the series is now beginning to
become apparent. It is akin to the “ Chinese
boxes ” type—the type where every term is con-
tained in a similar but larger (in this case dimen-
stonally larger) term.

Its laws may easily be ascertained. As the first
we have— | +

1. Every Time-travelling field of presentation
1s contained within a field one dimension larger,
travelling in another dimension of Time, the larger
field covering events which are “past” and
“ future,’ as well as “ present,’ to the smaller
field.

The second law brings in the serial observer.
(This entity is not, of course, the same thing as a
series of independently existing observers. )

We have seen that the contents of the instants
of Time I can only be presented to the ultimate
observer in succession on condition that the contents

152 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

of the instants of Time 2 are being likewise suc-
cessively presented, and so with the contents of
the instants of all the other Times in the series.
This ultimate observer is, therefore, the observer
of the field of presentation travelling up the dimen-
sion of Time at the infinity end of the series. As
the observer of that field, he is the observer of all
the lesser and contained travelling fields.

Again, O has been, from the beginning of the
analysis, the place where conscious observation is
taking place. So, at whatever stage we may halt,
our ultimate observer at that stage is observing
consciously at O. In Fig. 9, for example, observer
2, GH (coinciding with the field GH) is, like
observer I, consciously observing at O. But the
interesting thing is that no observer possesses this
power of conscious observation in his own right;
he owes it entirely to the conscious observer next
above him in the series.

For the travelling conscious observer GH is the
only thing which, by its intersection with the reagent
O’O”, distinguishes in O’O” the place O wherein
that reagent is capable of conscious observation.
Omit GH, and there is no O. Similarly, when we
pass to Fig. 10, we see that the travelling field 3,
G’G"H"H’ coinciding with conscious observer 3,
is the only thing which, by its intersection with
reagent 2, DFBE, distinguishes in DFBE a line
GH wherein that reagent is capable of consciously
observing, as at O. Omit G’G’H”H’ from the
diagram, and GH, containing O, vanishes. And
so it goes on throughout the series, to infinity. In
short, leave out the higher conscious and successive
observer, and the lower observer ceases to exist as
either conscious or successive, though there still
remains an unnecessary and unjustified diagonal

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 153

reagent, unconscious, and reacting to everything at
once.

Therefore, just as the phenomena presented for
observation are all ultimately referable to the set
of cerebral states with which we started at the
“ hither’? end of the sertes, so all conscious obser-
vation, like all successive observation, 1s ultimately
referable to the observer at the “ far” end of the
series; that 1s, to the observer at infinity.

(“ Observer at infinity ” does not mean an ob-
server infinitely remote, in either Time or Space.
“Infinity” here refers merely to the number of
terms in the series. The observer in question is
merely your ordinary everyday self, “here” and
éé now.’ )

So for our second law we have—

2. The serialism of the fields of presentation
involves the existence of a serial observer. In this
respect every time-travelling field 1s the field
apparent to a similarly travelling and similarly
dimensioned conscious observer. Observation by
any such observer 1s observation by all the conscious
observers pertaining to the dimensionally larger
fields, and 1s, ultimately, observation by a conscious
observer at infinity.

Hence, since “attention” is only a name for
concentrated conscious observation, the attention of
the observer pertaining to any field must be refer-
able to the attentions of the observers pertaining
to the dimensionally larger fields, and so to the
observer at infinity. But the focus of attention (the
area covered by observation of a given degree of
concentration) must have, in each case, the same
number of dimensions as have the observer and his
field. In field 1 it is three-dimensional; in field 2
it is four-dimensional; and so on.

154 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

Consequently we have, as our third law—

3. The focus of attention in any field has the
same number of dimensions as has that field, and
ts a dimensional centre of the foci of attention in
all the higher fields, up to and including attention
in the field at infinity. |

And now let us see whether there is anything to
be made of it all.

CHAPTER XXII

Our analysis has ascertained the nature of the
temporal machinery which is bound to exist if we
observe events in succession. The question which
has now to be answered is whether an inspection of
that machinery will enable us to account for any-
thing else. And the reply is in the affirmative.

Oddly enough, the first thing which emerges is
something which I did not in the smallest degree
anticipate. From the outset it was obvious that
the analysis would exhibit (1) a series of fields of
presentation, each travelling within the next higher
field; (2) a series of fixed diagonals, one intersect-
ing another; and (3) a serial observer. But I had
not realized that the fixed diagonals would repre-
sent the endurances of observing elements in that
serial observer, and that each of such elements
would be unconscious save at the point where it
was intersected by the field of the next higher
conscious observer. The discovery of these strictly
localized travelling areas of conscious observation
was of considerable importance. For it became
evident at once that, side by side with the analysis
of the machinery of succession, there was proceed-
ing, quite unexpectedly, a detailed disclosure of
the machinery of consciousness.

How would you define a conscious observer?
Define him, that is to say, in such a fashion as to
distinguish him from an unconscious observer like
a camera? You would begin, I imagine, by enun-
ciating the truism that he is one who is aware of
his acts of observation. And you would then realize

155

156 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

that this is equivalent to saying that he consciously
observes those acts of observation. |

It is immediately clear to you that you will reach
no explanation of consciousness by that route; but
it is equally clear that you have been led to make
a statement which is absolutely true and which you
cannot possibly retract. But consider what that
‘statement signifies. Consciously observing the
primary act of observation is itself a secondary
act of conscious observation, and therefore, accord-
ing to the initial statement, it must be consciously
observed by a tertiary act—and so on to infinity.
You are embarked upon the description of a serial
process which has no end to it. And the only way
of escape is to go back to the beginning and. . .
deny that our friend is aware of his acts of obser-
vation. Hence, though the explanation of con-
sciousness eludes you, it becomes clear that, if our
observer is to be conscious at all, he must be a
serial observer, every term in which is consciously
observing the acts of observation of the “lower ”
term.

It is dificult to see how such a serial observer
can exist anywhere in the three dimensions of Space
alone, but the analysis in our last chapter has shown
that he can—and does—exist very nicely in the
multitudinous dimensions of Time. Reagent 1,
consciously reacting to the cerebral substratum at
O, is, there, a presentation in the travelling field of
observer 2—is sectional feature which, in its state of
reaction, is being consciously observed. Similarly,
reagent 2 is, at GH (wherein it is consciously
observing at O), a presentation in the travelling
field of observer 3 (vide Fig. 10). And so on to
infinity.

It will be noticed that, according to this analysis,

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 187

a man can be conscious without being conscious of
himself. In fact, there is, strictly speaking, no
such thing as self-consciousness at all. If you
consider any observer in the series, you will per-
ceive that the observer whose reactions he observes
is always an observer in a “lower” term. The self
observed is a “lower” self. The existence of a
true self, or possibly of a “‘ higher ” self, might be
inferred as an outcome of the discovery that certain
phenomena in the substratum were not public
property; but such knowledge would be of an ac-
quired character, and it would not be self-observa-
tion.

But let us see if the analysis has yielded anything
else.

Well, there is . . . but this is a lapse into pure
psychology, and must be regarded as such. Psychol-
ogists are always seeking for an explanation of how
it is that we are aware of the passage of Time—
aware, that is, not merely of motion or of change,
but of the fact that motion and change involve Time
transit. That Time should be a length travelled
over is, all said and done, a rather elaborate con-
ception; yet that this is the way we do habitually
think of Time is agreed to by everyone, both
educated and—which is much more curious—un-
educated. The child instantly understands its
- nurse’s lumbering attempts at explanation. It
scarcely needs to be told that “yesterday” has
“‘ passed by” and that “ to-morrow ” is “ coming.”’
How does it, how did we, arrive at this remarkable
piece of knowledge?

A theory often hazarded is that attention is never
really confined to a mathematical instant. It covers
a slightly larger period. That is to say, it has a
small extension in the Time dimension.

158 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

Now, this small extension is actually given us
by Law 3 of the series. The law asserts that the
focus of attention in field 1 is the dimensional .
centre of the foci of attention in all the higher
fields. That means that the focus in field I is
surrounded by a fringe which, however narrow it
may be, is being subjected to attention by observer
2. That means, again, that observer 2, whose
attention is surrounding and following observer 1’s
attention in field 1, must perceive observer 1’s
apparent movement in relation to those stationary
(cerebral) presentations in field 2 which are covered
by his own dimensionally larger focus. The process
is precisely similar to that by which observer I
perceives objects travelling across his own three-
dimensional field. Hence observer 2 (and so the
observer at infinity) not only observes what
observer 1 is observing, but perceives that indi-
vidual as travelling from “past” to “future” in
Time I.

(Philosophers will note that “ succession in ex-
perience ” is thus bound to involve the “ experience
of succession.” )

In connection with this overlapping of the focus
of observer 1 by that of observer 2, there is another
point which may possess some measure of signifi-
cance. Any focus of attention travelling along
Time 1 will come upon irregularities in the sub-
stratum—irregularities which we represented by the
waviness of the substratum lines in Figs. 7 (a) and
7 (b). In their relation to field 1 and its focus,
these irregularities, whether observed or not, are
the movements of physical elements in _ three-
dimensional Space. But the slightly wider, over-
lapping focus of observer 2 may quite well cover
a Time 1 length containing a considerable number

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 159

of these irregularities, which would thus be pre-
sented as Time 1 pattern in the part of the sub-
stratum covered by that focus. This means that
observer 2, following field 1 with his attention,
should be capable of directly perceiving in the
objective universe characteristics beyond those .
which present themselves as the spacial groupings
and spacial movements of enduring particles.
Physical frequency would be presented as pattern—
a frequency would appear as something concrete.
This may ultimately prove to have some formal
connection with the observer’s interpretations of
frequency as sensation. But we should, probably,
be exhibiting the matter in its most significant
aspect if we said that what the ultimate observer
should thus be able to observe directly is a highly
important and very remarkable characteristic known
to physical science as “ Action.” But of this more
anon.

Can we gather anything else?

Yes, we have, at last, the explanation of our
dream “ effect.”

Law 3 asserts that the focus of attention in any
lower field is surrounded by the foci of attention
in all higher fields. (Which is simply a way of
saying that it is the observer at infinity who is,
ultimately, attending to the phenomena in that
lower field.) Thus, in waking moments, the atten-
tion of observer 2 is not ranging to and fro over
the limits of field 2, but is following the focus of
observer I in field 1 moving laterally across field 2.
But what if there is no focus of attention in field 1?
What if field 1 becomes, as in deep sleep, a blank,
owing to the passivity of the cerebrum? Such a
situation is exhibited in Fig. 11.

The gap running up the middle of the diagram

160 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

indicates the absence of all such cerebral states as
are associated with the production of psychical
phenomena. So, at the moment (in absolute Time)
when field 2, GH, moving up Time 2, is in the
position shown, there is nothing in field 1 (the inter-
section point of GH and O’O”) for observer 1 to

é
6” a’ & Ww”
o”
|
|
T.2
G A B H’
TA T.l
Fic, It.

attend to. The focus of attention of observer 2
has thus become the first term of the series of con-
centric foci: it has no smaller-dimensioned focus
to follow. And so there is nothing to restrain it
from moving—at right angles to its Time dimension
—in all the dimensions of its field of presentation
GH. In other words, when the observer at infinity

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 161

finds nothing to attend to in field 1, his attention
will wander elsewhere. That such wanderings of
attention will account for all the commonly recog-
nized phenomena of dreams will be shown in the
next chapter. All that we need point out here is
that, in those wanderings, attention will come upon
cerebral correlates of sensory. phenomena, memory
phenomena, and trains of associative thinking which
may be either in the “past” (as at a) or in the
“future” (as at b) of Time 1. When waking,
attention, following that field 1 point where the
travelling GH intersects with O'O”, has already
come upon the AA’ cerebral state (at as), and is
going to encounter the BB’ cerebral state (at b’).

Anything else?

Yes; the results of the analysis agree admirably
with all that was discovered during the course of
the “ waking experiments.”

That analysis has sharply distinguished presen-
tation, referable to the original cerebral states, from
observation (which includes attention), referable to
the observer at infinity. So it is not surprising that
it has brought to light no law which compels the
ultimate observer to direct his attention to any par-
ticular phenomenon in any particular field. That
such attention is, as a matter of plain fact, habitually
directed during waking moments to phenomena in
field 1 is obvious enough; but theory leaves us with
habit as the only compulsion in the matter. And
practice bears this out. In the waking experiments,
as the reader will remember, attention, so long as
it was allowed to follow an easy, swift train of
associated images, came upon nothing but images
of the past. The reason now seems fairly clear.
That the train of associated images came into
observation swiftly and easily showed that the

162 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

attention of the ultimate observer was travelling
according to habit. But habit keeps it in field 1,
and in that field all images relate to the past.
Nevertheless, the habit was no law. It could be
overcome. By determinedly refusing to attend to
these readily proferred images, attention in field 1
could be completely discontinued. And, in the rare
instants when this was successfully effected, atten-
ion in field 2 was free, as in dreams, to slip away
along associational tracks extending elsewhere than
in the Time 1 “ present moment.”

Confining ourselves, in this chapter, to the
simplest things deducible from the analysis, we
have one more point to note.

It is abundantly clear that our serial observer is
going to have considerable difficulty in disengaging
himself from the trammels of conscious existence.
In fact, one cannot see how he is going to manage
it at all. |

The substratum which provides the ultimate con-
tents of his serial field of presentation is merely
the extension (endurance) in many dimensions of
Time, of the primary extension in Time 1. That
Time I extension has a beginning and an end, and
these two boundaries are taken into account and
appear everywhere in the extensions in the other
dimensions of Time. But the fields which travel
over the extensions in the second and “ higher ”’
dimensions of Time do not, in any term, move
from or towards those two boundaries; they travel
straight up between them. The only field which
runs out of the multidimensional figure is field 1.
Death—that is to say, the arrival of a travelling
field at a boundary—is, thus, not a serial element.
It is, like sleep-gaps and the various Time irregu-
larities in the substratum, one of those solely first-

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 163,

term characteristics, which—as we saw earlier—
must exist in any series which has a beginning.

There may be, of course, arbitrary terminations
to the extensions of the substratum in the other
dimensions of Time,—some deity may cut them
off,—but the analysis indicates that, failing such
interference, the substratum persists to infinity in
all Time dimensions save the first. For it does not
exhibit in those other dimensions the characteristics
which, in Time 1, indicate a possible splitting apart
of the Time-extended lines at a place farther on
in the stretch.

So observer 1 seems to be the only observer
who dies. |

* He * * ee

The reader will note, I hope, that the foregoing
tenets of Serialism have not been deduced from the
empirical evidence supplied by our dream effect,
but have been obtained by a direct analysis of what
must, logically, be the nature of any universe in,
which Time has length and in which events are
experienced in succession.

The case for the dream effect is, therefore, a
double one—logical and empirical. The procedure
in the book might, indeed, have been entirely
reversed. We might have begun by analyzing what
was involved in the fact that we experience events
in succession. At the conclusion of that analysis
~ we should have noticed—as a very trivial corollary
to the disclosures of real importance—the proba-
bility of.the dream effect. And we might then have
described the experiments undertaken to test the
validity of this last conclusion. That would have
been the usual fashion of a scientific report.

But the circumstances in this case are unique.

164 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

It is obvious that, although the ‘observer at
infinity ” is nothing more magnificent or more
transcendental than one’s own highly ignorant self,
he 1 iS beginning to look perilously like a full- fledged

“animus.” Now, it has been pointed out, in Part I.,
that belief in the animus must have originated in
the study of dreams. Savages and men of poor
education, remembering their dreams, could have
come to no other conclusion but that, in dreams,
they were in a field of existence entirely different
from that of ordinary waking life. That belief has
been supposed to be childish and absurd. If it
were really so, then the case for the animus would
have to be regarded as tainted at its source.

I have thought it correct procedure, therefore, to
begin by putting the savage before the court, and
by showing, empirically, that his dreams did, in
fact, occasionally provide him and his “ seers ” and
his “ prophets” with ample grounds for the belief
that the dream field was something quite other than
the waking field, and that his ultimate self enjoyed
a degree of temporal freedom denied to the waking
individual.

The proofs advanced in the present fourth part
of the book can then be dealt with on their merits.

CHAPTER XXIII

SINCE all observation is the observation of the
observer at infinity, all field 1 thinking (successive,
automatic experience of the cerebral states situated
along Time 1) is the thinking of that not always
very clear-minded individual. But is this inspection
of field 1 the only sort of thinking he achieves?
And is what is presented in that field always so
purely automatic as we have assumed throughout
the previous analysis?

This ultimate observer (who, be it remembered,
is merely your ordinary everyday self) observes in
field 2 (GH in Fig. 12) an image Db pertaining to
a brain-state bb’, which state (vertical line) has not
yet been reached by the intersection point between
GH and O’O”. In other words, you dream of a
future event, and this event is experienced, waking,
a day or two later, when field 2 has moved to G”H”.
On the morning following the dream—that is, when
field 2 has moved only to G’H’—you, for reasons
good or bad, note down on a piece of paper what
you dreamed.

The memory trace of that dream-experience of
bb’ is, clearly, not in the brain-state at cc’, where
field 1, O, is situated at the moment of writing down
the dream. Therefore,—to be extremely logical,—
it must be somewhere else.

The act of writing down the dream from that
memory is thus a plain interference with the auto-
matic sequence of cerebral events in Time 1. (How
far this interference will affect our diagrams is a
matter which will be dealt with in the next chapter. )

165

166 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

Also, the total process of reasoning which selects
certain details of that dream-memory (which is not
in field 1) as being of importance to your intellectual
investigation cannot be merely an inspection of
brain-states in field 1.

1@)
‘

; ee lt ss (ee rf | nH”
’ ; 9 ae «'

SN ae ra

ral
T.2
¢
Ti a4

FIG, f2.

We are therefore obliged to allow you the use of
memory traces and intellectual equipments which
are additional to those observable in field 1.

What can we discover about these?

‘e Consider* what happens when you fall asleep.

Your focus of attention becomes a four-dimen-
sional focus confronted with four-dimensional

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 167

presentations—presentations which cover periods,
and not merely instants, in Time 1. (For the
dreamer, of course, Time 2 is ultimate Time.)
These field 2 presentations comprise the sensory
phenomena, memory phenomena, and trains of
associative thinking pertaining to your ordinary
waking life, but all appearing as extended—more
or less, according to the degree of concentration
of your focus—in Time 1. The substratum to be
observed is, as always, stationary. The appearance
of movements proceeding in the three dimensions
of Space can be produced in the same way as it is
produced in field 1 when waking—.e., by the move-
ment of the focus of attention in the same Time 1
direction—always provided, however, that this four-
dimensional focus can be contracted in this dimen-
sion to a length not very greatly in excess of that
which it has when, during the waking hours, it is
following, and centred about, a truly three-dimen-
sional focus in field 1.

But that travelling three-dimensional focus is not
there as a guide when, as in dreams, observer I is
inactive; and the absence of that travelling concen-
tration mark must make it rather difficult for you
to keep your four-dimensional focus concentrated
almost to nothing in the Time 1 dimension and
travelling steadily in that dimension.

This reference to your ability to concentrate is
an assertion, of course, that you are more than a
purely passive observer; but since we have allowed
you the power of intervening, we can hardly refuse
you that power of concentrating attention which
would be bound to be employed in such inter-
vention.

Now, it must be admitted that the conditions
above described account very accurately for the

168 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

characteristics of dream-phenomena as directly
observed. Throughout your dream you endeavour
to interpret the dream scenery as a succession of
three-dimensional views similar to those which you
experience in field 1. And always the excessive
Time 1 length of your focus defeats you. Nothing
stays fixed to be looked at. Everything 1s in a
state of flux. For always your view comprises the
just before and the just after of the instant of
Time 1 sought for. And, because of the continual
breaking down of your attempts at maintaining a
concentrated focus, the dream story develops in
a series of disconnected scenes. You start on a
journey .. . and find yourself abruptly at the end.
You are always trying to keep attention moving
steadily in the direction to which you are accustomed
in your waking observation,—+.e., forward in Time
1,—but always attention relaxes, and, when you re-
contract it, you find, as often as not, that it is
focussed on the wrong place and that you are re-
observing an earlier scene in the dream story. You
begin to follow up what you would recognize, were
you awake, as a train of associated images; but
your attention relaxes slightly in the middle of the
journey, so that what 1s actually perceived may be
the first image in the train followed instantly by
the last. And thus you get that curious blending
of associated but (really) several-links-apart images
known (vide Part I.) as an “integration.” That
you seem to enter houses without passing through
the walls is, of course, one of the most common-
place of happenings in a four-dimensional world.
It is very seldom, however, that you have a per-
fectly unbroken sleep. The brain stirs, every now
and then, to a random current of nervous energy—
which means that field 1 comes upon something

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 169

observable. Forthwith, attention (1, 2, and the rest
of them) is focussed at the spot, and, as attention I
fades again, there appears among the dream images
the four-dimensional image of which the field 1
image has just been the centre, field 1 having moved
on again to a blank space. The proceeding here
is precisely the same as that which occurs at the
moment of falling asleep. Bodily feelings, such
as pain and cold, which make themselves felt in
field 1, are, moreover, confused with the true dream
images, as attention in field 1 comes into and goes
out of existence. If attention to such experiences
persists, you discover that you are awake.

It is a remarkable fact, however, that you never
find pain or any acute bodily feeling mingling with
the dream images unless you are actually experi-
encing such feelings in field 1 at that very moment
of absolute Time. And this despite the fact that
your attention is travelling among brain-states, past
and future, in which bodily discomfort was, or will
be, distinctly present to you when awake.

The reason of this may not be far to seek. It 1s
a well-known fact that intensity of bodily feeling
depends very largely upon degree of concentration
of attention. The soldier in battle often does not
know that he has been wounded; you are unaware
of toothache when you are running a race; attention
to a bad pain will cause a smaller one to vanish.
While, if you concentrate attention on even a very
minor discomfort, this waxes until it becomes almost
unbearable. Now, in the absence of the travelling
three-dimensional focus of field 1 as a mark, all
the other foci of concentric attention become, on
our present supposition, less concentrated. Hence,
in dreams—the true dreams of unbroken sleep—
you are never dazzled by bright suns, deafened by

170 - AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

loud noises, irritated by uncomfortable garments,
scorched or frozen or fatigued. Dreams, although
they seem real enough, lack all these unpleasant
intensity-characteristics of waking life; we are
barely aware of the presence of our bodies.

Pain, of course, is, according to the modern view,
a sensation as distinct from other sensations as are
light or sound. It has a separate neural apparatus
of its own, and must not now be confused, as in
the past, with that feeling of discomfort which
accompanies the over-stimulation of sensory organs
of other kinds. Pain in the eyes is something
different to exceptionally brilliant light. The
modern view may be expressed by saying that pain
is the most disagreeable of sensations rather than
that it is the sense of disagreeableness. Like all
other sensations, its range of experienceable
intensity must be limited. One cannot perceive
colours down to an unlimited degree of dulness, or
up to an unlimited degree of vividness. That one
does not experience pain of less than a certain
degree of intensity is obvious to any experimenter ;
that unconsciousness intervenes when the intensity
of that sensation rises to a certain limit was the
outstanding difficulty of the medieval torturer.
Pain’s extreme unpleasantness, and the fact that
it partly distracts attention from other sensations,
does not mean that this range of observable
intensity, from the just perceptible to the abso-
lutely unbearable, is a long one. Certainly it is
not a range which, like that of colour, contains a
great number of separately distinguishable degrees.
The fact, then, that pain is not apparent at all to
an observer using the relaxed field 2 focus of
‘“‘ dreamland ” may mean merely that the range of
observable intensity pertaining to this unpleasant

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 171

and overbearing phenomenon is considerably shorter
than the range which pertains to the observable
intensities of the sensation of light.

Now, throughout your dream, you think about
that dream, just as you think about your sensory
experiences in waking life. You estimate the sig-
nificance of what you see in the dream; you make
naive plans to cope with the dream situations; you
remember what has happened immediately before
in the dream. And this is that additional, non-
field-1 thinking and remembering which we are try-
ing to examine.

It would be going too far to say that it is, in
every sense, the thinking of a little child, for it
involves conceptions which pertain to adult life,—
such as, for example, political ideas. But we may
all admit that it is thinking of an extraordinarily
feeble kind as compared with that which accom-
panies the inspection of the successive brain-states
in field 1. Yet it 1s, very clearly, thinking of the
same general character as that of our waking specu-
lations. It is, as we have seen, based upon the
idea that the perception of a succession of three-
dimensional aspects is the only possible method
of observational experience; it ignores the little
before and the little after of the Time 1 instant
sought for, regarding this as being mere instability
in what is observed; it memorizes what is past in
the dream in the same would-be-three-dimensional
fashion; and it causes attention, when concentrated,
to travel in the accustomed Time 1 direction, despite
the fact that Time, for the thinker in question, is
at right angles to that dimension.

It is true that one does not ascertain all this from
observation of the dream, but from observation
of the memories of the dream, after waking. But it

172 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

is not observer I who is inspecting those memories.
They are not in is field. Such remembering, when
awake, of what you saw in the dream and of how
you thought about it during the dream is something
which you accomplish without the assistance of
observer I.

Let us consider here the imaginary case of a
purely automatic observer 2 whose remembering
and thinking were completely analogous to those
of our first-term observer. This supposed super-
individual would be equipped with memory traces
extending in an associational network at right
angles to Time 2. His thinking would consist of
the wanderings of attention over this associational
plexus—wanderings to and fro in Space and back-
wards and forwards in Time 1. _ It would be think-
ing of a glorified, four-dimensional kind, in which
Time 2 would be the only apparent Time dimen-
sion, and in which the four-dimensional way of
regarding the substratum would be the natural and
obvious way. This observer might be aware that
all four-dimensional things were composed of an
infinite number of three-dimensional sections; but
he would never perceive, or try to perceive, as we
do in dreams, one of those sections as unique, and
the remainder as unstable, confusing additions.

Now, the records of the wanderings of the real
observer 2’s attention in dreams—the records which
enable you to remember those dreams—must be
traces extending in four dimensions (Time I and the
three ordinary dimensions of Space). And, whether
these traces be in the cerebral substratum or in the
Time-travelling observer 2 (who is a four-dimen-
sional entity distinct from the substratum over
which he moves), or anywhere else, they are bound
to constitute some sort of an associational network.

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 173

So we are confronted with the case of an observer
who actually does possess the mental structural
equipment adapted to the viewing of presentations
in their four-dimensional entirety, but who en-
deavours, nevertheless, to regard such presentations
as merely three-dimensional phenomena.

Your thinking, in the absence of observer I,
involves, therefore, something over and beyond the
mere inspection of a four-dimensional associational
structure. It involves interpretation of that
structure.

So it begins to look as if Professor W. McDougall were
right in one main particular. For nearly all his arguments
in favour of the existence of the animus amount to an
insistence that what he calls “ meanings” are interpre-
tations by the animus of what is presented in the way of
imagery by the brain. Yet it would be difficult for us to
accept McDougall’s view in its simple entirety. There
is an opposition theory too strong and too eminently
reasonable to be ignored. It is, I think, best expressed
by Professor J. S. Moore, who declares that “ Meaning is
context,’ and proceeds to argue that the meaning of a
specific idea is simply the fringe of associated ideas which
constitute that context.

The answer given by Serialism seems to be that Moore
is right, but that McDougall, nevertheless, is not wholly
wrong.

If meaning is given by context,—by attendant associa-
tions,—it must be given by the fringe of a partially relaxed
attention. And this is borne out by the fact that, when
our attention to an object is greatly concentrated, we
notice the quality and form of that object at the expense
of noticing its meaning. Now, the attention of observer 2,
when surrounding and following that of a waking ob-
server I, is, on our theory, kept concentrated in the Time
I dimension; and changes in concentration take place
mainly in the three dimensions of Space. So that con-
texts, to the waking observer, are mainly relations of spacial
position and spacial motion. And that is certainly true

174 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

of the meanings which he attaches to what he perceives.
The contexts supplied by the very slightly overlapping
fringe of attention in the fourth dimension are those which
exhibit the Time-travelling of observer 1, and a hint of
Time I pattern in the substratum.

All of which fits in very nicely with Moore’s definition.

But to our imagined automatic observer 2, thinking—
in the absence of observer 1—in four-dimensional fashion,
contexts in the fourth dimension should be interpretations
as clear as are those in the three dimensions of ordinary
Space. Yet it is just these fourth-dimensional contexts
which are not, to the real observer, clear interpretations.
And they are not clear—to him—because they are them-
selves mistnterpreted—by him. Instead of being regarded
as fourth-dimensional associational extensions, they are
regarded as_ perplexing three-dimensional instabilities.
And backward travellings of attention, from the future
to the past of Time 1, are simply not noticed at all. In-
terpretations of that kind must be interpretations by the
observer of the context fringes concerned.

Here an analogy may be of service. Consider
a child who, through a certain amount of experience
in reading two-dimensional sheets of printed music,
has acquired the habit of interpreting those sheets
as arrangements of one-dimensional chords to be
followed by attention in succession from left to
right. When reading such a sheet he is in the
position of an observer employing field 1. To
extend the analogy so as to exhibit him in the
position of an observer during sleep, we should
have to imagine him equipped with a focus of vision
which could not be concentrated enough to admit
of its containing one chord only at a time. But we
can get over that difficulty by supposing him, now,
to be provided with a sheet in which the chords,
instead of being clearly separated, are so crowded
together that each partly interlocks with its imme-
diate neighbours to right and left, the result being

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 175

that no chord can be seen singly by itself. Now,
none will deny that the child, presented with such
a sheet, would begin by trying to read the puzzling
thing in the old, accustomed way, or that the habit
which compelled him to this would be, not in the
sheet, but in his mind. So it is that the habit of
three-dimensional interpretation which afflicts us in
dreams is not a feature of the four-dimensional
phenomena observed, but a characteristic in our-
selves as observers. As for our inability to notice
in dreams the movements of our attention back-
wards in Time 1, the habit of interpretation estab-
lished in the ultimate thinker is amply sufficient to
account for this. No child, reading a sheet of
music, observes what his eyes pass over when he
moves them back to the beginning of a new line.
You (I hope) have read every word from the
beginning of this book, and your gaze has flashed
thousands of times from the right edge of the page
to the left; but never once have you read a line
backwards, or even noticed what the backward
aspect of a line looks like. In fact, even now that
you try, you cannot perceive that* aspect; and the
nearest approach to a realization thereof that you
can achieve is that which you obtain by viewing a
word written backward, but still from left to right
—looking-glass fashion. And the habit which blinds
you to that aspect is not in the printed page, but
in yourself.

So we are driven to the interesting conception of
an ultimate thinker who is learning to interpret
what is presented to his notice, the educative process
involved being his following, during the waking
hours, with unremitting, three-dimensional atten-
tion, the facile, automatic action of that marvellous
piece of associative machinery, the brain.

176 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

This, admittedly, is a complete reversal of the
old-time animist’s conception of the “ higher ”
observer as an individual of superlative intelligence
producing the best effect he can with the aid of a
clumsy material equipment. But it seems to me
there is no getting away from the plain evidence
afforded by the character of our dream thinking.
Whatever capacities for eventually superior intelli-
gence may be latent in the observer at infinity, they
are capacities which await development. At the
outset brain is the teacher and mind the pupil.
Mind begins its struggle towards structure and
individuality by moulding itself upon brain.

Evolution has worked for possibly eight hundred
million years towards the development of brain.
To-day, as Professor McKendrick points out,
nearly all the functions of our bodies are operating
towards the end of the adequate nutrition of the
grey matter, And it now appears that, apart from
its self-sustaining and self-developing activities, the
brain serves as a machine for teaching the embry-
onic soul to think.

We are now in a position to consider what is
the origin of the habit which keeps the ultimate
observer’s attention focussed in field 1.

In field 1 he has to deal with merely a simple
succession of three-dimensional phenomena in a
three-dimensional field. But in field 2 he is con-
fronted with a view of four-dimensional phenomena
in a four-dimensional field. And, in addition, he
has these four-dimensional phenomena duplicated.
For example, he may find at a (Fig. 11) a memory
revival of a preceding event in Time 1. And he
has also, somewhere between G and a, the original
event which originated the memory traces subse-
quently revived. In field 3 the substratum (see

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 177

Fig. 10) is crowded with five-dimensional phe-
nomena (containing, however, none that are not
already represented in simpler four-dimensional
form in field 2); and these phenomena, owing to
the less concentrated area of the focus of attention,
are of less intensity than are those in either field 1
or field 2. And the intelligibility of the presen-
tations gets worse, and their vividness gets less, as
we proceed up the series.

It is in field 1, then, that, for the infant, phe-
nomena first become distinguishable at all. And
his attention stays where there is something to be
attended to.

Next, we know that, even within the limits of
field I, an adult’s attention may be attracted from
without as well as directed from within. We know,
also, that the directing of attention away from a
point of attraction is a process which has to be
learned, painfully, at the schoolroom desk. The
young child’s attention must be, therefore, largely
at the mercy of attraction. And we know that the
greatest attractors of attention are the cruder bodily
pleasures and bodily pais. These exist only in
field 1. Thus pain performs a service other than
purely physiological.

Finally, the child learns quickly enough that in
field 1 he can intervene to obtain those pleasures
and avoid those pains. And that, very rapidly,
becomes the dominating aim of the man.

« mK * * *

Reviewing the foregoing parts of this chapter,
we see that ultimate Mind—the Mind which can
appreciate only the most elementary aspects in the
complex structural equipment at its disposal—must
always exhibit itself as something external to any

178 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

structural conception thereof that we can attempt
to form.

a * a * so

In Part I of this book we carefully refrained
from tackling the question as to whether the
internal directing of attention was to be attributed
to the ultimate observer, or to be regarded as
originating in the purely automatic internal con-
dition of the brain. We contented ourselves with
noting that, if we regarded the ultimate observer
as the responsible agent, we should be according
him the status of an animus, with power of inter-
vention, since the concentrating of attention is
known to have a marked effect in the formation
of memory traces.

It would be best, however, in order to avoid any
possible trap for an incautious thinker, to show
that such directing of attention—such intervention
—must be attributed to the observer at infinity.

The question is, really, whether, in any higher
field, attention may be bound to coincide with
some feature in the substratum analogous to the
“maximum flow of cerebral energy ” in field 1.

We saw, earlier, that the analysis had brought to
light no law which compelled attention to direct
itself upon any particular phenomenon in any par-
ticular field. It was pointed out that attention,
which is referable to the observer at infinity, was
sharply distinguished by the analysis from that
which was presented to attention; that is, from the
contents of the substratum. Now, “ maximum flow
of cerebral energy,” or anything analogous thereto
in any higher field, is a substratum feature, and, as
such, categorically distinct from ‘ focus of atten-
tion.” Theoretically the two things may be

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 179

separated. And that this theoretical distinction is
a practical, real distinction, and not merely a bit
of metaphysical hair-splitting, is shown by the
“waking experiment.” For there the one thing is
present and the other is absent.

There is one great difference between the con-
ditions in this waking experiment and those which
obtain in dreams. In the former case the cessation
of field 1 attention, which sets free field 2 attention,
1s not accompanied by the cessation of body-main-
tained cerebral activity. The eyes may be open,
transmitting to the cerebrum light-stimulations
differing in intensity at different parts of the field
of vision. Noises of various degrees of loudness
are assailing the ears. Cerebral action is flooding
associational tracts, presenting those hosts of
associated images to which attention (this, as we
saw, is the very essence of the waking experiment)
must be determinedly refused.

This shows that the the theoretical distinction
between the focus of attention of the observer at
infinity and any line in the substratum which it may
habitually follow is a real one, and so we are bound
to regard it as always possible for such focus to
be separated from any such line. And, where the
two things do coincide, the observer at infinity must
be regarded as an accessory, passive or active, to
that coincidence.

All of which, of course, is to admit that the
observer at infinity is an individual potentially
capable of exercising what is called “ freewull,’”*
though how far he may be said to have developed
that capability is quite another matter.

That he can, and does, direct attention in field 1

* Nobody means by “ free” will a thing actuated by no
motive whatsoever.

180 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

is now plain enough. But his control in field 2
seems to be as limited as is his comprehension of
that area. We may note, however, that, throughout
his dreams, his rudimentary intelligence is extremely
active in attaching interpretations to that which he
observes. (Indeed, as I remarked earlier, he is a
master-hand at attaching wrong ones.) And it isa
matter of common knowledge that he employs this
function of interpretation in weaving a dream story
—a drama of personal adventures—out of the
various presentations upon which his attention
becomes focussed. If he can direct his attention
at all in this field, he can modify the trend of that
story; can, in fact, build the drama to please him-
self. He has an almost unlimited wealth of
material. He is, as we have seen, potentially
capable of exercising that control, and, judging
from my own experience, I am disposed to think
that he does do so to a small extent, and that his
effectiveness in that respect increases with practice.
Adults, I fancy, are not so much at the mercy of
their dreams as are children; they can (certainly I
can), occasionally, alter a situation which fails to
please.

These, however, are matters for the psycho-
analyst. But perhaps when we have learned to
interpret fourth-dimensional contexts as “ present ”
wholes,—to think four-dimensionally,—and to
master the movements of our attention, we may find
field 2 of greater interest than field 1. But that
development in comprehension and control is not
likely to occur so long as we continue to spend
nineteen hours out of the twenty-four in practising
three-dimensional attention in field 1.

We must live before we can attain to either
intelligence or control at all. We must sleep if we

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 181

are not to find ourselves, at death, helplessly strange
to the new conditions. (The universality of sleep
is a remarkable feature in Nature’s plan.) And
we must die before we can hope to advance to a
broader understanding.

CHAPTER XXIV

CONSIDER, now, the situation represented in Fig. 13.
When (in absolute Time) field 2 is at GH, the
substratum between a and H comprises an ordered
arrangement of three-dimensional cerebral states, all
in the future part of Timer. That ultimate thinker
who is the observer of dreams—which involve the
observation of field 2 as present—observes, let us
say, at that moment, one of these future states b’.
After waking, when field 2 is at G’H’, and field 1
is at O, this thinker intervenes at O. That inter-
vention we will suppose to be due to his memory
of the dream; just as every word which I write in
this book is intervention due, originally, to my
memories of similar dreams. (The diagram, how-
ever, will serve equally well to illustrate the results
of an act of intervention originating in any other
activity of the ultimate observer’s partially trained
mind.) Now, we have to note that such an act of
intervention may result in the complete alteration of
part of observer 1’s future career. Taking the train
to Dover instead of the express to Southampton
may lead to his being decapitated by Russian
politicians instead of being clubbed by a New York
policeman. So he may never encounter the cerebral
event represented by bb”’,—the event perceived in
the dream,—and may, instead, when field 2 1s at
G’H”, encounter a totally different event, c.

In the sort of life led by the average civilized
man, intervention has seldom any very great effect
in altering future experience. We live too much
in ruts for that. A man may, on Monday, take a

182

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 183

ticket for a Saturday matinée, and he may, during
the next few days, perform countless little acts of
intervention; but these will not necessarily prevent
his occupying his seat on the Saturday, or prevent
his seeing on the stage a scene of which he may
have dreamed on Monday night. The intervention

van

CG os H

7:2

T.! 3 iA

Fic. 13.

at O may, thus, alter some of the events between
O and H’ while leaving others unchanged. In fact,
if we represent the alterations by breaks in the ver-
tical lines, just above OH’, the result would be the
sort of thing shown in the figure.

It is to be noticed, however, that these breaks
in the verticals are to be regarded, not as fixed sub-

184 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

stratum features which exist before (in absolute
Time) observer 1 reaches O, but as changes in that
substratum which occur at the instant when (in
absolute Time) this observer reaches that point,
This means that the breaks are being represented
as due to intervention, and consequent upon the
ultimate thinker’s interpretation of the event which
he has, in his dream, perceived at 0’. (We saw in
the last chapter that such interpretation cannot be
represented as any sort of context or trace in the
substratum.) To regard the breaks as pre-existing
(in absolute Time) ffixities in the Time-map
travelled-over would mean that the ultimate thinker
would encounter the new event whether he had the
dream of the old one or not: the breaks would not
be occurring as the result of the dream.

We saw in the last chapter that all movements
of attention require passive consent or active inter-
vention on the part of the observer at infinity.
Where such movements involve a departure of at-
tention from that line in the substratum which rep-
resents the flow of maximum cerebral energy, we
have active intervention accompanied by substratum
changes similar to those shown in Fig. 13. But, con-
sidering the degree of intelligence which the inter-
vener exhibits when the brain is dormant and not
employable as an aid to his reasoning, we cannot con-
ceive that his interference with cerebral thought
processes amounts to very much more than an in-
sistence that the machine in question shall operate
towards a certain end of his own. The intervener,
in fact, is analogous, not to a skilled musician com-
posing with the aid of a piano, but to the amateur
user of a pianola, whose interferences with the com-
plex performances of that instrument is limited to
the changing of one perforated roll for another.

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 185

That the change in the substratum takes place
all along OH’ instantaneously (in absolute Time)
is obvious enough when we regard the effects of the
intervention from the standpoint of our more cus-
tomary, three-dimensional philosophy. None can
deny that, when he takes a step to prevent an other-
wise probable event from occurring, the probability
of that event (however distant) being encountered
is altered at the precise instant when he takes that
step. Translating that into the language of four-
dimensional philosophy, it means that the prob-
ability of observer I encountering the event bb”
when (in absolute Time) he arrives at c is changed
at the “ precise instant when ” he intervenes. That
“precise instant’ is an instant in the Time which
times his travel along O’O”, which Time is Time 3
—the absolute Time for the diagram. The breaks
occur, therefore, when (in absolute Time) observer
I reaches O, which is when (in absolute Time) field
2 reaches G’H’. The altered course between O and
H’ will be, in all its parts, a mechanical sequence
just as perfect as before.

It is clear that the alteration of the substratum along
OH’ must affect also that extension of that line as a plane
(perpendicular to the paper) which represents the line’s
endurance in Time 3. The “future” part of that plane
must change with the change in the line. And so on
through all the futures ahead of O in all dimensions of
Time. Consequently, nowhere in our serial Time-maps
can we pick out a path ahead of O which is absolutely
determinate in all its parts.

It is, perhaps, unnecessary to point out that the
ultimate ‘“ observer ” and the ultimate “thinker ”
are, throughout the analysis, the observer and the
thinker who remain unaccounted-for at the comple-
tion of each stage of that analysis,—the individual

186 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

who is travelling over the last Time dimension
shown in diagrammatic form. They are, thus, al-
ways one and the same entity.

He He ae He *

The present writer cannot know how the reader
feels about the matter, but at this point he himself
would be grateful for ten minutes’ interval in which
to sort out and rearrange the pile of information so
far provided by the investigation.

The result of that process, in his view, must ex-
hibit itself as follows.

Serialism is the perfected statement of the rela-
tion between observer and observed.

To analyze that relation, you must begin by re-
garding both the related parties (observer and ob-
served) as objects to yourself, the thinking
subject,—you must put both into your picture.
Consequently, you are obliged to take, as the ob-
server for analysis, not yourself, but another,
imagined, individual, who is assumed to be similar
to yourself. Let us call him, for the sake of brevity
and euphony, Jones.

You begin by studying Jones as a conscious in-
dividual. All that you here discover is that he
cannot possibly be conscious unless he is serially
conscious.

Noting this, you proceed next to examine him as
an individual who experiences in succession all the
states of that which he observes. This involves your
making your picture one dimension larger than
Jones. Whereupon, the analysis exhibits Jones to
you as a conscious, psychical individual travelling
along a Time dimension. But it gives no indica-
tion that he is anything more than an automaton.

You find, however, that, in proceeding thus far

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 187

in your analysis, you have logically committed your-
self to enlarging your canvas by yet another dimen-
sion. Whereupon, Jones I appears to you as ob-
served by another, larger-dimensioned observer,
who, however, is not yourself, but still Jones,—
Jones 2,—while Jones 1 now definitely exhibits him-
self to you as the mere perishable automaton which
materialism has always held him to be. Jones 2,
however, appears as imperishable. |

Continuation of the analysis shows you a series
of Joneses each observing the Jones of the next
lower term. All these are imperishable except the
first; and all are automatons except the last, about
whom you do not yet know enough to dogmatize.

Here you pause to revise your work, and to con-
sider, in particular, the legitimacy of the steps in
your analysis. But you can find no flaw. Nowhere
have you slipped unwittingly into an attempt to
analyze yourself. Nowhere have you substituted
yourself for the objective observer you are consider-
ing. You have stuck throughout to Jones; and
Jones is fair game.

You note, next, that this serial Jones is serially
conscious in exactly the way demanded by your
initial conclusions regarding consciousness.

Now, Jones is similar to yourself. Consequently,
you should be able to check the accuracy of your
hitherto purely logical discoveries regarding Jones
by reference to your own experiences.

A serial Jones must be able to observe the actual
passage of himself along a Time dimension. Since
this would apply equally to yourself, you have an
explanation of how it is that all men, educated and
uneducated, and all children, are agreed about the
passage of a fundamental but indefinable “ Time.”

You note that, when Jones’s brain is entirely in-

188 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

operative, Jones 2 should be able to observe images
of the experiences successively provided to him by
the brain when in its active state. This, certainly,
would be a very curious happening. Nevertheless,
on turning to your own experiences, you find that,
when your brain is apparently asleep, you “ dream,”
and do experience images of waking events.

You make the still more startling discovery that
the images perceived by Jones in such “ dreams”
should include some relating to his future waking
experiences. You test this on yourself and find it
true.

You have discovered, during the analysis, that the
focussing of attention is a function of the ultimate
Jones (the last Jones considered in the series), that
attention thus focussed is a psychical element
entirely distinct from that feature in Jones’s sub-
stratum upon which such attention happens to be
focussed, and that there is no law in nature which
compels attention to be focussed anywhere in partic-
ular in the substratum. This suggests that, when
attention 1s focussed anywhere in that substratum,
such focussing must be due to the action of the ulti-
mate Jones. If that is indeed the case, the ultimate
Jones should be able to shift attention from field 1
to field 2 even when the waking brain is supplying
experiences to Jones 1. You test this upon your-
self by means of the “ waking experiment,” and
find that it holds true.

Since the ultimate Jones can direct attention, he
can intervene to alter the course of mechanical
events. You prove the truth of this in your own
case by making the mechanical waking action of
writing down one of your dreams of future experi-
ence.

From a study of the mental operations involved in

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 189

this last action of yours, you conclude that your
observer at infinity must be capable of remember-
ing and thinking without employing the assistance
of the brain. You realize that, in this case, such
remembering and thinking should be apparent when
the brain is asleep and observer 2 is inspecting the
fixed cerebral states arranged elsewhere along Time
I,—4.€., is dreaming. Experiment satisfies you that
you do, in fact, when dreaming, think about your
dreams and remember previous events in those
dreams. |

Examination of your dream-thinking and dream-
remembering shows that, though your brain is-
asleep, you, as the ultimate observer of your series,
try to continue both observing and remembering in
the same three-dimensional fashion as you do when
the brain is awake and you are observing its succes-
sive states presented in field 1. This, you realize
(since your dreaming attention is four-dimen-
sional ), is bound to result in a curious and confusing
temporal instability in the images observed and re-
membered,—an instability which must render the
dream images much less definite than are those other
“images”? which you can produce in waking
imagination. Experiment shows that this is true.

From that you are bound to conclude that the
ultimate observer’s mind is moulding itself through
observation of the successively presented states of
the brain, and is, therefore, learning to think in
three-dimensional fashion. All of which insists that
your dream-thinking must be, at the present stage
of your life, inferior to your waking thinking
(when, as the ultimate observer, you, with your
power of intervention, are utilizing the assistance of
the brain). Examination of the degree of lucidity
of your dream-thinking bears this out.

190 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

The results of the analysis assure you that,
in dreams,—Jones’s or yours,—bodily sensations
should be much less intense than they are in waking
life. Experiment shows that this is the case.

You discover excellent reasons why the ultimate
Jones should keep his attention focussed upon Jones
I so long as the brain is providing Jones I with
anything to observe. This, you find, is what you
do yourself.

Here you make a conjecture. But it is your first
and only one; and the point involved is of quite
minor importance. In the absence of anything ob-
servable at the place in Time 1 where Jones I
happens to be, Jones I ceases to provide a travelling
guide-mark for Jones 2; and it seems to you likely
that, in these circumstances, the movements of
Jones 2’s attention in field 2 are likely to be ex-
tremely erratic. This, you find, agrees with your
own experience in dreams.

Finally, the conception of the observer which you
have so far obtained provides you with satisfactory
teleological reasons for the eventualities of birth,
three-dimensional life, pain, sleep, and death.

* a a x x

The ultimate thinker or interpreter—the member
of the series whose thinking is something over and
beyond mere observation of the contents of his field
—is that observer who, like the ultimate Time,
remains unindicated in each diagram of the series.
In the first term—exhibited in Figs. 7 (a) or 7 (b)
—he is observer 1; in the second term he is observer
2, his field being pictured in Fig. 9. And so on
to infinity. It is essential that we consider the
series so far as to include the second term, other-
wise the serial relation will not be fully disclosed.

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME IgI

But there is no practical object to be achieved by
considering the remoter terms. You will find that
no new kinds of relation between observer and
observed become apparent in the third term. Carry-
ing the analysis further means merely pushing back
the ultimate observer and thinker, with all his
peculiar functions, and the insertion of additional
reagents, all reacting to the contents of the sub-
stratum, and all unconscious save where this ulti-
mate observer employs them to gain an acuter view.

It is sufficient, then, for you to picture the world
as containing observer 2; that is, as the field 3 of |
Fig. 9. This gives you the complete serial relation.

CHAPTER XXV

[NoteE.—Unless the present reader is interested in the
science of physics, he is recommended to skip this
chapter. |

Physics, shortly before the Relativitist landslide
had begun to make itself fully felt, suffered from
two shocks of great magnitude—so great, indeed,
that the damage done has not even yet been fully
determined. In the first of these, matter, after
standing for centuries as the most fundamental of
all things, was swept aside, leaving the “ Electron”
exposed as, apparently, the true basis of the objec-
tive universe. But the second shock, which resulted
from the discovery of a curious entity called the
“Quantum,” effected an even profounder change
in the situation.

The quantum appeared to correspond in some
cryptic fashion to the actual atom of a certain phy-
sical quantity which had for long (even in the days
when it could be thought of as nothing more con-
crete than mathematico-physical expression) been
recognized as by far-and-away the most fundamen-
tal thing of its kind. This physical quantity is called
“ Action.” It must not be confounded with
“action ” in the conventional sense. It is a quantity
which involves in some queer way kinetic energy
multiplied by Time, or momentum multiplied by
Space; but the general reader need not perplex him-
self concerning the meanings of these very curious
expressions. In the present state of physics, any-
one who tries to make a mental picture of what is
signified by “ action ” is simply seeking for trouble;

192

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 193

_and the layman would be well advised to settle with
himself that the word, when encountered, means
merely a known, but as yet unidentified, funda-
mental entity.

“Action,” says Professor Eddington, “is gen-
erally regarded as the most fundamental thing in
the real world of physics, although the mind passes
it over because of its lack of permanence; and it is
vaguely believed that the atomicity of action is the
general law, and that the appearance of electrons is
in some way dependent on this. But the precise
formulation of the theory of quanta of action has
hitherto baffled physicists.”

It is clear enough, however, that if we consider
any atoms of “action” in terms of Serialism, we
must think of these as little entities dotted (so to
say) along Time 1 and enduring in Time 2—that
is, as real entities in field 2, as real as are the
electrons in field 1.

Before the discovery of the quantum, a principle
called the “ Principle of Least Action” had firmly
established itself as one of the great basic general-
izations of the science of physics. The principle
relates to the paths followed by bodies possessing
““mass ”’ when they change from one grouping to
another later on in Time. And it lays down that
these paths will be such that the “action” (the
energy multiplied by Time quantity) will be the least
possible in the circumstances. The principle is,
thus, capable of prophetic application.

There is another exact science which can claim to
be prophetic. It is a purely mathematical one,
differing from physics in that it assumes that the

calculator has no means of ascertaining what, if any,

laws of mechanical cause and effect are involved in
his problem, and so ignores all such and arrives at

194 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

his result by the estimation of “ probability.”
Physics can prophecy the path immediately ahead
of a planet by the “ Principle of Least Action”:
this other science—the mathematical science of
“ Probability ’’—can prophecy the same thing just
as accurately by means of what is called the “ Prin-
ciple of Greatest Probability.’ The man-in-the
street is employing this science unwittingly when
he says, regarding some future event: “The
chances in its favour are so great that its occurrence
is a moral certainty.” The science in question re-
gards all future events as “ probabilities,” and what
it tells you about them is their degree of probability.
When this is so great as to make the occurrence a
certainty, the science becomes as truly prophetic as
is physics.

To the exponent of this mathematical science,
there is one, and one only, future condition of the
universe—that which, considering all the present
circumstances, has the “ Greatest Probability.” To
the physicist, there is also one, and one only, future
condition of the universe—that which, taking all
present circumstances into account, will involve the
“Least Action.”

Since the future condition envisaged is the same
for both sciences, we are here considering two prin-
ciples leading us to one and the same conclusion by,
apparently, totally different routes. And we should
have good reason to suspect that these two principles
must be merely different ways of regarding some
single, underlying principle in the construction of
the universe.

Now, it so happens that Eddington, delving in
the realm of mathematical physics, noticed that a
certain very unique feature was apparent in both
a ‘“‘ probability ” and in “action.” This suggested,

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME _1g5

not only that the two things were related, but that
the relation must be of a certain very definite
mathematical character. Then came the confirma-
tion. This mathematical relation had been arrived
at without taking into consideration the two “ Prin-
ciples’; but, on applying it to the mathematical
expression of those principles, he found that it
actually converted the “‘ Principle of Greatest Prob-
ability ” into the ‘“‘ Principle of Least Action,” and
vice versa. These became, therefore, merely two
different ways of expressing one and the same
underlying fact.

To sum up, Eddington identifies “action” with
what is called a “ function” of a “ probability.”
“ Action,” he holds (the general reader need not
worry about understanding the mathematics), 1s,
“minus the logarithm of the statistical probability
of the state of the world which exists.” (“ Exists ”
means, exists at the place in Time considered, with-
out reference to whether that place be past, present,
or future. )

The reader may not understand anything about
logarithms; but he will be able to see that the prob-
able “ state of the world ”’ envisaged in the sentence
is not a probable state of the “action.” For, if
so, the statement would assert that “action” was
minus the logarithm of the statistical probability
of the state of itself! What sort of a world, then,
does Eddington mean by “ the world which exists,”
seeing that it is not a world of “action”? The
answer can only be (since Eddington’s identifica-
tion depends upon “ action” being regarded as the
most fundamental entity) that it is a world con-
sidered as comprised of certain entities less funda-
mental than “‘ action.”

Having determined this point, we are in a position

196 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

to consider what the identification signifies when ex-
pressed in non-mathematical language.

In the first place, we have to bear in mind that
Eddington is writing as a Time-dimensionalist, and
that, to him, units of action are entities existing in
a positive, present universe. On the other hand,
“‘ probabilities’ are expressions employed in a
science which regards Time as a mere abstraction.
So that the “probable” future groupings which
it has in mind are groupings of certain entities
pertaining to a world of fewer dimensions than
Eddington’s.

Hence the identification is a statement reconciling
two sciences—one dealing with probable groupings
of three-dimensional entities, and the other with
existing groupings of higher-dimensional entities.
And it means this: Wherever we (thinking in terms
of three-dimensional science) consider that there
are, in the future of imaginary Time, events of max-
imum probability, we must (when we think in terms
of any Time-dimensional science) consider that
there are, in a present, existing Time-field, units of
action (real configuration of more fundamental en-
tities) arranged as pertains to a condition of least
action.

To us, it is obvious, at once, that the statement
about the “‘ probable groupings ” is a statement con-
cerning what would be thought of as “ things ” by
a physicist who was considering our field 1 as being
his present, existing world. While the statement
about the corresponding “action” is a statement
concerning what would be regarded as things by a
physicist who was considering some field higher in
our series as being the present, existing world.

The substratum with which we have been con-
cerned in our earlier chapters is of a very simple

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 197

kind: it grows merely by the straightforward
addition of dimensions of Time. All the com-
plicated part of the serialism in our diagrams—the
system of observers, fields, and reagents—is purely
psychical. If we reject the hypothesis of the
atomicity of action, our substratum is a multidimen-
sional continuum of the following kind. The
atoms of matter—or, let us say, the electrons—
separated in Space, would extend in Time I as
unbroken world-lines, which, in turn, would extend
in Time 2 as world-planes. On that continuum we
should have to (as we have done) impose our
psychical system of travelling fields. The result
would provide us with all that is essential to that
Serialism which this book is attempting to expound.
If, however, we adopt the belief that there are
atoms of action more fundamental than electrons,
we can no longer regard the contents of field 2 as
simply the contents of field 1 temporally extended
—for the action atom configuration involves a
temporal atomicity which not only breaks up any
such attempted world-lines, but shows them as
streams of atoms more fundamental and higher-
dimensioned than are those of field 1. That
modification would not, however, invalidate the
results we have obtained in previous chapters by
analysis of the psychical side of the picture.

He x aK aK aK

There is, of course, no reason why a Relativitist
should not regard the field 2 of Fig. 9 as deform-
able. This would make field 3 deformable in those
four dimensions. But that would not affect the
validity of the Serialist’s argument. Field 3 might
be deformable in all five dimensions without
troubling him. It seems to me, however, that the

198 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

simplest combination of Serialism with a Relativitist
view is that of regarding field 2 as the Relativitist’s
real world of “ point-events ”—his world which is
the same for all observers and so across which all
psychical observers move with a common Time
dimension and share a common field 1. Field 3
would extend upwards in Time 2 upon that four-
dimensional base.

CHAPTER XXVI

It is to be feared that the observer’s power
of interference does not suffice to make him
wholly master of his fate. For there are other
observers, employing similar capabilities. | While
our friend is in bed, dreaming of the happy prob-
abilities of his future, some enemy, afflicted by this
mania for intervention, may proceed to fire the
house and reduce those probabilities to might-have-
beens. (They would always remain, of course,
entities in the substratum past of Time 2, but
entities never encountered by field 1.) And, if the
observer may owe his Time I end to the inter-
vention of other observers, it is fairly certain that .
he owes his beginning to nothing else. Before his
birth he can be nothing but a probability in the
future of the race.

This brings us to the question of how the fields
of different observers are related.

Our knowledge that such observers can intervene
helps us to see that their respective field 1’s must,
in their motions along Time 1, keep very nearly
in line. For, if the field of an observer A lagged
behind that of an observer B, and A were to inter-
vene in B’s career at that point in B’s substratum
which was level with A, then B would find his
experiences in his field 1 miraculously altered. In
fact, he might find himself miraculously dead,
having been slain by A, unknown to himself, some
little way back. And that sort of thing does not
happen in our experience.

Now, these field 1’s are merely the intersections

199

200 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

of the fixed diagonal reagents by the field 2’s.
Since, then, the field 1’s move approximately in
line, the fixed diagonals must lie in approximately
the same plane. But it also follows that the
field 2’s, in moving up Time 2, must maintain a
fairly even “ dressing.”

Relativity does not, at present, deal with the
movements of these field 1’s at all. It concerns
itself merely with maps of the substrata over which
these fields move.* If, however, we were to apply
Serialism to Relativity theory, we should find,
perhaps, that our fixed diagonals in two dimensions
of Time could not be regarded as being strictly
in the same plane. But the extent to which the
fields or diagonals could be out of exact alignment
would be considerably limited by a law which
insisted that, if any observer’s intervention in his
field 1 consisted in his sending a light-ray to
another observer, that light-ray would have to
arrive at the second observer’s field 1.

Let us consider, however, the case of a mother
and her child. It is clear that, at the moment of
the child’s birth, the field 1’s of these two indi-
viduals must coincide. This involves that their
field 2’s are, at that point, in contact and at the
same instant in Time 2. It also involves that their
respective diagonal reagents are, at that point, in
contact and directed along the same diagonal plane.

Suppose, then, that we were to draw a plane
diagram of the “ family tree ” of the entire human
race, employing one dimension of the paper as
Space and the other as Time 1. The result would
be a network with numerous points of intersection
representing marriages, and numerous branchings-

* Maps from which it derives a common-to-all map of
“* point-everits ” separated by “ intervals.”

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 201

off representing births. And you would find that
you could trace in that network an unbroken con-
nection between any two points that you chose to
select; human families are all related in that
fashion.

If we were to assume that this diagram exhibited
only the cerebra of the individuals concerned, it
would be the first, stage 1, temporal extension in
a Time analysis in which we were dealing with all
human observers together, instead of with one
alone. It would represent, therefore, in the second
stage, the connected field 2’s of all the observers
concerned.

Along the lines of this universal field 2 network
there would travel the individual field 1’s. These
last would be defined solely by the points where the
lines in the travelling field 2 network intersected
with corresponding lines in the similar but fixed
network extending diagonally in Time 1 and
Time 2, and composed of the connected diagonal
reagents of the individuals in question.

Here we may depart from the essentials of our
discussion so far as to glance at a rather interesting
question. Is this field 2 network, with wide Space-
gaps between its lines, the nearest approach to a
universal field 2; or is there a field 2 which fills
all Space, including those gaps?

Consider again the network of this universal,
“family tree,” cerebral substratum, a portion of
which we may suppose to be exhibited, in perspec-
tive, by the connected lines AB, BC, and BD in
Fig. 14.

These three lines will endure upwards in Time 2
in the forms of the planes AA’B’B, BB’C’C, and
BB’D’D. These planes will be intersected by
the respective reagents AE, EC’, and ED’,

202 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

and also by the respective field 2’s (shown at
the top of the figure, for simplicity) A’B’, B’C,
and B’D’, constituting the portion of the field 2
network A’B’C’D’. Now, it is plain enough that
the lines of the field 2 network must conform to
the shape of the substratum figure. If, for example,
when the field 2 network is at the bottom of the
figure, intervention alters the trend of the sub-
stratum lines, so that B’C’ and B’D’ depart from

ee eee
Wf]

te ereceagh

Fic, 14.

each other at a narrower angle than do BC and BD,
then the corresponding field 2 lines must close up
to conform. Otherwise we should have no field 1’s
at C’ and D’ when the field 2 network arrived at
the top of the figure. But this conforming of the
field 2 lines to the changing shape of the sub-
stratum figure can only be accounted for by regard-
ing those lines as the intersections of that substra-
tum with a universal, Space-filling field 2 such as is
represented by efgh. Similarly, there must be a

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 203

universal, Space-filling, diagonal reagent (not
shown in the diagram, to avoid complications),
whose intersections with the changeable substratum
constitute the changeable individual reagents AE,
EC’, and ED’. And the place of intersection
between this universal field 2 and this universal
reagent must be a universal field 1, fh.*

But now we have to ascertain why it is that each
of these deflectable lines where the deflectable
substratum is intersected by the universal field 2
should be conformed to throughout its deflections
by a particular conscious observer 2 whose field 1
attention cannot move outside that shifting line.
For this individual observer, be it remembered, is
not the substratum contents of his field. The
analysis has shown that he is an independent
entity, who consciously observes, and, in a rudi-
mentary way, interprets and thinks about, those
substratum contents. Why, then, is he tied to
them through all their spacial windings and through
all their interventional changes in spacial position.

“Obviously,” it may be replied, “ because
a travelling ‘ field of presentation ’ is merely a name
for that part of an observable substratum which
coincides with—is, so to say, covered by—the
position of a travelling observer. The general,
Space-filling field 2 is therefore the area covered
by a general observer who observes everything that
exists, and the individual conscious observers are
merely places in that general observer where he
happens to be intersected by those particular chang-
ing parts of the substratum which are the complex
cerebra of living organisms.”

* So far as I can see, this field, in Relativity theory, would
be an absolute field travelling over the Relativitist’s absolute
substratum of point-events.

204 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

We must admit that this is indisputable so far
as it goes, and we may note that, since the reagents
are conscious only where they are intersected by
that universal observer, and since the lines of inter-
section between the cerebral substrata and the uni-
versal observer may change within the area occupied
by that observer, he must be capable of conferring
consciousness anywhere within that area.

But all this does not completely answer our
question. It tells us that the individual observers
are merely parts of the general observer, but it does
not plainly tell us why they are tndizidual.

It is clear that the only things which confer indi-
viduahity on those parts of the general observer
which happen to be intersected by changing lines
in the general network of the cerebral substratum
are . . . those changing cerebral lines. Now, we
have seen that the ultimate thinker in the series per-
taining to each individual observer is learning to
think in terms of mechanical brain-thinking. So the
general observer must be, throughout his Space-
filling area, the unknown element which lies at the
bottom of consciousness and mind, and he is differ-
entiating himself in certain widely separated places
as a connected network of individual thinkers. We
shall see, in a moment, what that implies.

But first we must note that the universal field 1,
to which we referred earlier, will be, of course, the
field 1 of the universal, Space-filling observer ;
for he must be just as serial as are the individual
observers. He, with them,—for they are parts of
him,—must be traceable up the series to one super-
lative general observer at infinity.

We may note here that the individual conscious
observer comes into existence when the universal
field 1 of this superlative observer reaches that

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 205

point in the network of the cerebral substratum (a
“ point-event ”) where the individual’s body-line (a
changeable line of probabilities) becomes distinct
from the parent stem.

Now, since the field 2 of this superlative general
observer embraces the Time I extension of the
whole genealogically connected cerebral substratum,
his attention must be capable of traversing that
network throughout its whole Time 1 length.

Again, since he is the provider of consciousness
to all those parts of himself which constitute the
individual observers at infinity—and so the provider
of their conscious observation—and since those
individuals have, as we have ascertained, that
ability to intervene which is a function of concen-
trated conscious observation (attention), we must
regard this superlative observer as the ultimate
provider of the mdividual’s ability to intervene.

We may sum up, therefore, by saying that this
superlative general observer is the fount of all that
consciousness, intention, and intervention which
underlies mere mechanical thinking; and that he,
in his intersections with the cerebral substrata, is
incarnate in all mundane conscious life-forms, in
every dimension of Time; and that he must—owing
to the unity of the network thus formed in himself
and the ability of his attention to range over that
network’s full extent—contain in himself a distinct
personification of all genealogically connected
conscious life. And we may add that this “ personi-
fication’ must be capable of thinking on a scale
rendered ampler than ours by the immense Time-
range and Space-range of his field 2, and by the
immense length of his experience as an “ ultimate
thinker ” in that field.

We have wandered from our main task into what

206 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

appears to be a_ region for exploration by the
theologian. Let us leave it to him (he will find an
extraordinary number of dicta which fit the case),
and get back to our proper business.

ss x x * x

Disciples of Nietzsche will note that cyclic-return
theories (whether these be justified or unjustified) take
on very different aspects when viewed in the light of
Serialism. Assuming, for the sake of argument, that a
return to some past configuration of the universe of matter
occurs, it no longer follows that such return is a recom-
mencement of a cycle similar to that which we are actually
experiencing now. For intervention can operate towards
the avoidance of unsatisfactory configurations. One
result of such interference with the purely automatic
sequence of events would be, of course, to increase
enormously the length of the cycle. But the most im-
portant effect would be the shortening of this longest
possible cycle into one which the interveners—general and
particular—regarded as satisfactory.

Then, again, it must be borne in mind that similar
corporeal configurations separated in Time 1 would
pertain to different observer 2’s—to different souls. (This
would have pleased Marion Crawford.) And if there were
repetitions, in Time 2, of the four-dimensional configura-
tions of one of these observer 2’s, those repetitions would,
by analogy, pertain to different observer 3’s (parts of our
originally considered individual observer 3, in the same
way that observer 2’s separated in Time 1 are parts of a
general observer of the field 2 network). And so on to
infinity.

* * * *

This book is not intended to be anything more
than a general introduction to Serialism as a theory
of the universe. Every such theory must have its
psychological, its physical, its theological, and its
teleological aspects. At each of these we have
glanced briefly, yet long enough to show us how
large and how promising is the field for investigation

AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME 207

opened up by the new method of analysis. But
exploration proper in these several regions has been
regarded throughout as the province of specialists
more directly concerned.

The man-in-the-street, however, will expect
something in the nature of a summarized statement
as to how he is to regard Serialism as affecting him-
self. Such statements are not always advisable—
for reasons which will be clear enough to the judi-
cially minded. But, in the present case, all the points
which do directly affect the man-in-the-street have
had to be touched upon in the course of the book,
since it so happened that none of these points could
be omitted from consideration without breaking off
the argument at a critical place and leaving the
theory, so-to-say, in the air. There can be no harm
in summarizing in one place what has already been
said in odd paragraphs throughout preceding pages.

Putting it roughly, then, I should say:

I. Serialism discloses the existence of a reason-
able kind of “ soul ”’—an individual soul which has
a definite beginning in absolute Time—a soul whose
immortality, being in other dimensions of Time,
does not clash with the obvious ending of the indi-
vidual in the physiologist’s Time dimension, and
a soul whose existence does not nullify the physiol-
ogist’s discovery that brain activity provides the
formal foundation of all mundane experience and
of all associative thinking.

2. It shows that the nature of this soul and of its
mental development provides us with a satisfactory
answer to the “ why ” of evolution, of birth, of pain,
of sleep, and of death.

3. It discloses the existence of a superlative
general observer, the fount of all that consciousness,
intention, and intervention which underlies mere

208 AN EXPERIMENT WITH TIME

mechanical thinking, who contains within himself
a less generalized observer who is the personifica-
tion of all genealogically related life, and who is
capable of human-like thinking and prevision of a
kind quite beyond our individual capabilities. In
the superlative observer we individual observers,
and that tree of which we are the branches, live
and have our being. But there is no coming
“absorption ” for us; we are already absorbed, and
the tendency is towards differentiation.

4. It points to the existence of a common-to-all
field 1 filling all Space (not incompatible with Rela-
tivity theory). This would provide us with, at any
rate, the primary essential for the production of
anything in the nature of real telepathic inter-com-
munication. Moreover, the inter-connection of the
lines in the tree-like field 2 network seems to pro-
vide another kind of possibility in this respect.

: UOUNARREOEL
3 0000 007 118 205

eee

\

———

a

_——ea

ae Fr 7 ia) _ ie 2 = — (SOUT Mirve » -teteth-d Geta th
= oe or ee wee eh ee

=
' : Pate 8 NO Rae F988 Be
*.
Oe ay
~*~
« ad
”
° . -
]
. - oo Ai er ta ahem Aal
uw ** , “ow 4 :
. Vy seh we Siete olbthe bomen, sive,
saad rte ’ ‘ ‘ >» se ‘—— +8 6.) or.
view +0 ‘? ; aa PAS} ewer oe eee oe |
| . ee ey '
ae- -f é Tele ,
oy ,
aa - : ve *)@ @ ae wee wae

‘
:

—_e "708
’ ae iM ' . .
" H *s@.0-te we
, Bee” ae
rv) ¥ ' : -
. wy bape ’ ea’
Maee | ‘ '
*) +
on, ee
.
- ~~ .
e wren ‘
‘ ee re P
- yey . e%
~ ~~. ‘ ‘
rr oni Ty) . "1
7 eet oe 4 ®
. reo. .
Le .
-- ' ”~
« s
’
= e-* ~
.
: ‘ are
‘ ,
* ‘
i»
. ; "
+
. or
‘ ,
' a
eras
‘
a "an
”
4 ,
4.4
. ’ . . head ow ie
i o-7 * eee prt eee weees
. ’ 4 7 VN omg,
| i 8 1.4 ne ee
: ‘ 2 suet * FP! | ee mem
? ® ee ee | eft 086m preg e
. rhe bh.e ter ae
' we ret seh a. ‘0 08 pen te
oe | nd R _ ~- “0h mney
+ *
w
’
'
, eee | e +4 Oat
' > 4 J? to OF ’ Se?
ey ae a rr ewe ca
. eH. e et bp O>eoll auived O-4
“<n hae la Le ee
ay? Mas ear
‘ ‘ ate ’ uel
) , > . e 4
a oh 1%
t< Orta ern hae
a
ote, >
-
a oe
ane orm tee oa
4% op : — © &.
0 Ee ee rete + Cerhhe Or
~ we ome ie ~ 9 Va ore one aor
Te Utetw Oe ate & weleebeo
en Ore «+ hee “eer fete o*
. eet one OY es dt a)
i pda tay tee (ee Vrtenm or
° 7 oF et ry ~ 09 oe et gr Per elain®
Fa ee a ee ee | ’
40-44% hah a ae a we ee)
chant adecetth eM iceden tk a eT ree. tee
+ be “Ore Pedr, 4 « i <" "ee es 2 Mhew
Se i ek Ae oe el od to ey Pree -
cern 24 2) Oe ee ea Oe Ct @s i+ P ‘ee
ee Fee OPE Re es oo. et ‘ vot 2° te wld one eeSe (Serhae
ee ee oe ek Pee ee eee ‘ i) ‘« ete
Do OOo ee eee areas -e at PO OOO. ber eete a
Fed oe ae 400-48 Ae.g 6-6-4 -8 or rt etenet ule ater
hte "er -e® Ow ~ 4a ve 2 re © Pere & a e “eee
eo “te? ade oe | on i * to ee wre’ re
hwre Gee r-wre ae ey O° eee Ob weno, (ae “Ph on
Wy <r ey eee eG Ore. ¢-han 4 wee
Retin “ey “eee 4k + 4+) « tose * t-t—4- — &etee ©
: Phe bt 6-9 oer Ow we : oe!
Fw O's tw a emwe Oe > 2°O* 7-0 “HOOP” Hw + teres ae «
Eh lh Pe ol oe ee ere oe en
| owt 6 a . AOA OO @ O°* HF e-G ae werner ¢
‘ CB-AY + 6-08 bg oe rds ten Ok thee te ote’
be OE ee Or © rey eee OEM) bemoans
OTT OOS Pree ot Oey ped Ge Ore SF 6 Oa wterare >
‘ OS EOe Sh EHO omg 9 Pr eee Ore HI HE Ope ae
Oe OOOO HOw Aare Ow 4 OE Oe Oem etme -
er oe ee ee oe ee i ere ‘ ones fora o
tne eee ree fe ou Fe -* A Re
indi de eine 2) ok Eo OG own
te tae thie ee te ea te ke et a. bile k Lee
ee 0 88 8 Pree rb me ie Oat aes ed
6 RE Oh ed Reid be Ore Oe grt ander int nee | +
a SEO PN PORTO Ory orp ay Oped oe ee oe: LORtye,
. PE OOO OE Ee eH mdr tet Ee © ee Ree eer OT bee we
tas 0 8 epee oy EO Oli) CERO we Ot be eee boby now
= htete Atte eae fe Le Pe et Lote ae
jal t | SEE FE OD Rte ae ee ee are een ek a> | ite ame
FFD O eS e'E OY) « yoga w Tee eh eg erm “TU &
POO OO He Br ad ew bn we eo TO Oe
a —————E OO OOO Oe OP Led wore Se ee oe) ea
. ES ee. rk 8 ee reer reer ears oo er ee oh oe ee © bore eae OO eT
[Dedeechiadin Ina sthcdiaein nalts Meek antes POE OE PO 88 OO -e Os eS eee Se OO ek ke OOS ete we
oe at aR ee ee ee ‘ EE LR IMS rem mee bE hn we ee hee” PeONeyed © ¢
we [SPO BO mt ete eee ee ete a ee i OOO eee eh ene 24 ck aed
Noe FEM e Hee et hy etig tee 9 &-G Oe nt A See rr \S-2-0.)4 are oy |
[0 ee re ge cee ows yrwrns - ae ee eS D4 O38 wrAn de rear |
POE Emm ms Oe ey we ORE +H “4% ne Wee 2 4 Ore ee at eee ®
bt OP Ore te + Fe © eee ee a ied. | Ek oe el ere an ae
Sere EEF? eres aesereecdrets | RETO ee ee UP rier a. le ee
= yruen ore Re Oy Oe ewe Of ee mig ~ ohne
LJ Pet a" er7 oOr8- eee oe Cee oo 2 eee a a ee sone ae
= (Cen erewe - Pe OF ted re Oe eR Ome | eh eRe eee or em we
ep warh 2am rT Se P arOrt eae ew
R Ae nba thdannh teae! | ee eee ne ea
bE oe | Oonierete “eee -q-~s 3 ome oe La ee 2 ee ee ee a te Ae ee) a eed aed
eo aP Srere ere oe} eae ae a deeded Peli Bee ee ee ee ee el beh
‘ wy Sen 8a owed oe ede eo ee ee “oe eee 1 eh Oye eee ae wteheh ofS
- | oe 2 oe a FF ee ere ern ae FR eet ee th tem 20d OOF
etter eae SOO ATO RE BOF Be eh Le ree oe ee ere eH rene —
Bee Oe oe * Pe pda diied di ey eh ee te Te eee
er . tapetive ieee Here wiewee . o* Pied ww
| a ee eae Oe a Seed ee ee eee
: h Pe Srere-er4 CFO EPO OE OE Rete ee ewe re ee oe Oe ee
aes Stal ree 7 FERRE ENO Poe 0 UL ee HL anpT et ener
ret foresa'e) — Ree ee = ee OF hel Fert aE e- Oe-O tee a mae ree *E
a ~~ e +h 81. 6 eow ead oe er eee ie? eo wy!
Leis eiaet | el Tita Mada deglidieth held tet hone tt hath ed tes, hal et pee?
Rec thctaestl ON Fe eer ete ee heme Oe Oe Ow Fe erage oe tee A
2 = ene 1h ee ee Whee eo rome t gen me eee
ree — [4 e 090 2 Olen dre Ore oF Ot et he De Oe
ee | eee ee Bint @ arm mien ere © 6
LI =n a De ee ee ee hee i bw Oe
eo Hehe ee ete re ers eh Oeere Ht en oe |
oo | PAS ee Er ecert oe ett tre ee 0-7 hee wee —
. i ee ee oe oe 2 ot one,
Pa oa’ a ae Oe Ore He }
= . hit Matlin Liat atid 8 OR Oe ee oe Owe
PN did teint paddle tide tom ae TP ee Were i
. - wD OOD ee OF One we Bs eee Oe
“~~ SET Oe OTe FERS Hee wet he peewee A mee oor!
- Le beret eee ye hy Atal Medd adele tude LD ae er oo“
7 terrae Cae Oe ee weeks Fee entr
' —_ - ad sede attdatateindh daded et
- bok Math devtt ele Ne de dh nee ee ee ’
nde ee oot 2 2 ee
ere oe Pte ere eee
= = | 960 ie BN C9880 1 OO OO Oo * ea eb sore ea tee
~ wo Pane Pree oO 4m ee es od 4%
. o- os ted tnd atte edd Tt ee
ore 1S 8 “yay Na ee ee sme ’
rT] = ‘ (eo 8 © * ereeeere eh aerwee
- = | | i Aiea et Ln he
