Experiences in Spiritualism with Mr. D. D. Home (Viscount Adare (later Earl of Dunraven), 1869)
===============================================================================================
Viscount Adare (later Earl of Dunraven) — Lord Adare's 1867–69 séance diary with D. D. Home — the aristocratic eyewitness record of the great medium. Public domain. Scan via IAPSOP archive — 1869 original private printing, via IAPSOP archive.

EXPERIENCES
IN

SPIRITUALISM
WITH

MR. D. D. HOME.

BY

VIS 0 0 UN T

AD ARE,

WITH

INTRODUCTORY REMARKS
BY THE

EARL OF

DUNRAVEN.

LONDOlll:
PRINTED BY THOl\IAS SCOTT1 WARWICK COURT,
HOLBORI!I.

INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.

THE su~ject of Spiritualism was first brought under my notice
about fifteen years ago, by reading two or three accounts of the
occurrences which were taking place in America. To some
extent I was prepared for the fair consideration of very strange
and startling phenomena, from having previously examined
fully into the subject of mesmerism. The result of this enquiry,
carried on for several months, under most favourable circumstances, was a thorough conviction of the reality of the
phenomena of mesmerism, from the simple sleep up to clairvoyance. At that time, scientific men in general, and the
medical profession in particular, were loud in condemnation of
what they considered sheer imposture ; and one of the most
eminent of the profession, the late Dr. Elliotson, lost a considerable portion of his very extensive practice by his bold and uncom·
promising assertion of the truth of mesmerism and its great
importance as a curative agent. Since then a great change has
taken place in the opiniqn of the public on this· subject. Judging
by the literature of the day, as well as by the remarks current
in society, the general phenomena of mesmerism, are widely
accepted as true ; and even those who believe in the higher
phenomena, including clairvoyance, are no longer necessarily
considered to be the victim.s of imposture.
When table turning became one of the amusements of the
day, I witnessed and tried various experiments which clearly
demonstrated the inadequacy of Professor Faraday's explanation
of the manifestions by involuntary muscular action. I was also
present at a seance, where Mrs. Hayden was the medium, and an
attentive examination of what took place sufficed to satisfy me
a2

IV

that the subject was worthy of careful examination, to be made
whenever an opportunity should occur for a full investigation
into a class of phenomena, opening a new field of research of a
very strange and startling description. This opportunity has
been afforded by Lord Adare's acquaintance with Mr. Home,
which commenced in 1867. I soon perceived from his letters,
that the manifestations were so remarkable that they deserved
to be duiy chronicled and preserved. At my request he has
carefu1ly noted, as fully as could conveniently be done, the
occurrences of each day, and has permitted me to print the
whole series for· private circulation. Publication is out of the
question, as much that is interesting and a valuable portion of
the record, relates to private domestic affairs, and to near
relatives or intimate friends.
Even after the unavoidable suppression of some curious and
instructive details, it was not without much reluctance that we
made up our minds to give even a very limited circulation to
this series of seances j but, after full consideration we have
deemed it best to print-as nearly as we possibly could venture
to do-the entire record; notwithstanding the pain, to ourselves
and otlters, which necessarily accompanies the mention of communications professing to come from those whose memories call
up the deepest and tenderest feelings of our nature. It is
obvious that the chief value of such a record must depend upon
the trustworthiness of the narrator. Fidelity of description is
very rare, even where honesty of purpose is undoubted. I
believe that in the present case scrupulous accuracy, a retentive
memory, and an unexcitable temperament are combined in an
unusual degree, forming just such a combination of qualities as
is indispensable for one who undertakes to record phenomena
of this exceptional and startling character. In several of the
latter seances, portions of them have been written by both Lord
Adare and myself, and then carefully compared; some were
looked over by more than one of the persons present : thus
everything has been done to ensure the greatest accuracy. In
addition, each of those mentioned. as present at the seances
(except a few who are not within reach) has received a copy of
the printed account, and replies have been received from all
.

'

v
affirming the accuracy of the reports. A list of these names
will be given further on, and thus the following pages, it is
hoped, will be found to contain the fullest and best authenticated
account of the phenomena of Spiritualism which has as yet
appeared in this country.
It must be borne in mind that an actual record of facts, and
not the adoption or refutation of any particular theory, is the
main object in view. Spiritualism, will, therefore, in the ensuing
remarks, be regarded chieHyin its scientific or phenomenal aspect,
and I have purposely avoided expressing any decided opinion on
questions so complicated, and about which at present such conflicting opinions prevail, as upon the character of the phenomena,
the source from which they proceed, and the tendency of the
teaching to be derived from them.
The whole subject of Spiritualism is one which must soon command the attention of thoughtful men in this country, as it has very
fully done in America, and to some extent in France and other
countries of Europe. In America, the belief in Spiritualism may
be considered as a fait accompli. Its adherents are said to be
reckoned by millions ; varying from three to eleven, according
to different accounts ; but, even should the lowest calculation be
beyond the exact truth, as is probably the case, there can be no
doubt that a considerable portion of the people of the United
States, including many men eminent in science, literature,
politics, &c., (among whom was to be reckoned the late
President Lincoln) believe that a means of communication is
now open between the inhabitants of this world and intelligent
beings belonging to a different state of existence; thus affording
a new and astounding evidence for the reality of another life,
and of a spirit-world. It is remarkable that this new source
of evidence should be discovered at a time when materialism,
and the denial of a future state are on the increase, apparently
in all parts of the world, and are said to prevail to an alarming
extent in America, the country, be it remarked, where first these
manifestations occurred on a large or striking scale. The timidity
or apathy of men of science in England on this subject is to be
deplored. A remarkable example of the former was seen in the
case of the late Sir David Brewster. He was present at two

Vl

seances of Mr. Home's, where he stated, as is affirmed on the
written testimony of persons present, his impression that the
phenomena were most striking and startling, and he does not
appear then to have expressed any doubt of their genuineness,
but he afterwards did so in an offensive manner. The whole
discussion may be read in Mr. Home's book entitled, "Incidents
in my Life." I mention this circumstance, because, I was so
struck with what Sir David Brewster-with whom I was well
acquainted-had himself told me, that it materially influenced
me in determining to examine thoroughly into the reality of the
phenomena. I met him one day on the steps of the Athenreum;
we got upon the subject of table-turning, &c.; he spoke most
earnestly, stating that the impression left on his mind from what
he had seen, was, that the manifestations were to him quite
inexplicable by fraud, or by any physical laws with which we were
acquainted, and that they ought to be fully and carefully
examined into. At present I know of only three eminent men of
science in England, who have gone fully into the subject; and
in their case the enquiry has resulted in a conviction of the
genuineness of the phenom~na. I allude to Mr. De Morgan
the mathematician, Mr. Varley the electrician, and Mr. Wallace
the naturalist, all, as is well known, men of high distinction in
widely differing departments of science.
In investigating this subject, the greatest patience is required.
As in the somewhat analogous case of clairvoyance, the recurrence of similar phenomena is most uncertain, owing partly
to the varying physical conditions of the medium, partly to
the physical state of one or more of those present, or even to the
state of the atmosphere ; partial or even total failures must,
therefore, occasionally be expected. I remember at a seanCB
held to witness the clairvoyant phenomena of Alexis, how the
effect of the presence of one lady sufficed nearly to obliterate his
power; she, fortunately for us, left the room in disgust at what
she designated as humbug, as Alexis's power returned almost
immediately after her departure, and we had a most interesting
and beautiful seance. A very analogous example in the case of
Spiritualism will be found at p 110 of the following seances.
Great caution must, therefore, be observed, and great allowances

Vll

made, wherever a bona .fide desire to arrive at truth is the real
object of the enquirer.
Taking a general view of the subject, there are five
hypotheses, three of them widely accepted, for explaining the
so-called spiritualistic phenomena. The first, adopted by the
world at large, maintains that they are the result of tricks or
clever contrivance ; in other words, that the mediums are
impostors, and the whole exhibition humbug. According to the
second, which is advocated by some scientific and medical men,
the persons assisting at a s~ance become, then and there, the
victims of a sort of mania or delusion, and imagine phenomena
to occur, which have no real objective existence. The third
maintains that the manifestations are referable to cerebral
action, conscious or unconscious. This theory is evidently
incapable of embracing the whole of the phenomena, and is
not very widely advocated. The fourth, adopted almost unanimously by Spiritualists, is that the manifestations are caused by
the agency of the spirit.s of departed human beings; and, generally
speaking, by those who profess to be present. According
to the fifth, which is held chiefly by believers in dogmatic
Christianity, and also by many of the Low Church and Calvinistic school, the phenomena are supposed to be due to the
agency of evil spirits or devils, personifying departed human
beings, who have obtained this new power apparently for the
purpose of undermining that conception of Christianity which
has hitherto been almost universally received.
No amount of written or oral testimony seems to be
sufficient to carry conviction on this mysterious subject to the
minds of the vast majority of persons; yet a candid enquirer,
reading a record such as that contained in the following pages,
embracing so great a variety of phenomena, witnessed under
varying circumstances and conditions, an~ attested by so many
persons, can hardly avoid, without putting aside the narrator's
testimony as utterly untrustworthy, admitting the possibility
that some of the occurrences here recounted are the work of an
agency beyond that of the persons present. The examples are
so numerous that it would be difficult to make a selection for
illustration ; but the reader's attention may be called to those

viii
instances where Mr. Home had never before entered the room
in which the seance was held; as for exampie, at No. 5,
Buckingham Gate, mentioned in p. 8; or where, as in &ance
No. 1, and indeed many of the others, he had no possible
opportunity of making any preparatory arrangements. It is
perhaps as well here to mention, that we have not, on a single
occasion, during the whole series of slances, seen any indication
of contrivance on the part of the medium for producing or
facilitating the manifestations which have taken place. The
larger has been our experience, and the more varied the
phenomena, the more firmly have we been convinced that a larg-e
portion of them are but explicable on the hypothesis that they
are caused by intelligent beings, other than the persons in the
room; the remainder being probably due to the action of
physical laws a.s yet unknown.
The phenomena may be divided into two classes :-Physical
manifestations; and communications or messages. The former
are divisible again into those which are solely or partly due to
physical forces acting by a law-not yet ascertained-and
those which imply a power exercised by an invisible and
intelligent agent. To the first division of the physical manifestations, certain movements and vibrations of the table, or
other articles of furniture may be referred; and perhaps the
cold currents of air so often felt at the commencement of
seances. As an example of the second may be mentioned the
case of the table rising above our heads, described in page 131 ;
but a. more decided illustration is afforded at page 137, where
a table was raised (no one touching it) and placed most carefully
upon another table ; also may be cited those occasions on which
the accordion was played, when not held or touched by mortal
hands. One very curious example of vibration of the table will
be found at the end of Seance No. 51, p. 100, where the
manifestation can only be referred to an intelligent agent, or to
fraud on the part of some one present. I was so struck by the
synchronism of the vibration with each stroke of the clock, as
indicating an intelligence at work somewhere, that I examined
closely but failed to detect any indication tbat it was caused by
any one of those sitting at the t.a.ble.

lX

The communications may be divided intQ six elasses ; those
which come through the alphabet; through the planchette ;
writing by the influenced hand ; direct spirit-writing ; audible
spirit-voices; and, lastly, by the medium in a trance. The
first and last methods are those employed in the following
s~ances. Those delivered by the medium in a trance are
obviously unsuited to convince persons of the existence of
spirits ; generally they afford no actual proof of the utterances being other than the thoughts of the medium ; there are,
however, exceptional cases, as where a communication is made
to some person present, detailing circumstances unknown to
the others, and of which the medium is almost certainly
ignorant. Generally, but not always, these examples may
be referable to the powers of mind-reading, similar to that
manifested by clairvoyants. A genuine message, spelled out
by the alphabet, is best suited to produce conviction that a
communication is really from a spirit, especially where the
raps, indicative of the letters which compose the words, are
made at a distance from the medium, or are of such a nature as
to have rendered it impossible for him to have caused them.
The most striking cases are those where the mode of marking
the letters is unknown to the medium or to any one present,
except the person addressed. Examples will be found at pp. 111,
112, and 121, where the letters were indicated by my being
touched on the knee. Not only are the two modes of communication of very different value as to their power of producing
conviction in the reality of the phenomena, but likewise as to
the reliability of the messages sent ; and this must be carefully
borne in mind when judging of the tendency of, or teaching
derived from the communications. When Mr. Home speaks in
a trance, there is no certainty whether his utterances are those
of a spirit alone, or how far they may be mixed up with his
own ideas or principles. Sometimes the communications are
striking, at other times vague, sometimes trivial. Messages
through the alphabet, on the other hand, carry at least a strong
probability that they convey the thoughts of a spirit; although
even they too in some cases exhibit indications of being affected
by the medium, and are therefore not quite reliable.

X

The foregoing remarks will suffice to shew that in my
opinion the first of the five hypotheses is utterly untenable. The
second is disposed of by auch cases as are detailed in pp. 137,
141. In the first example, the table lifted up and placed upon
that at which we were sitting remained in the same position
after the seance was broken up. In the second, the traces of
the snuff which had been poured out on the shelf under the
window were visible after supper. The third hypothesis requires
no particular comment, being held by a very limited number
among those who believe in the reality of the phenomena.
Only two, therefore, need occupy the reader's attention, namely,
that by which the manifestations are supposed to be caused by
deceased human beings, or that which affirms them to be entirely
due to the agency of lying spirits or devils. It is worthy of
notice how the majority of the communications can be pressed
into the service of either hypothesis.
The probability of the latter of the two theories being the
correct one, extravagant and repulsive as this must appear to so
many in the present day, results from the difficulty of reconciling the announcements of Spiritualism with the belief in
certain doctrines hitherto uniformly maintained by all portions of
Christendom. The necessity of a sacrificial atonement through
Christ to obtain our salvation; the separation of mankind at
death into two classes, the saved and the lost; the former
destined to live for ever in union with God and in happiness,
the latter in perpetual separation from Him, in punishment and
misery ; and the existence of a personal devil, and of fallen
angels, whose unceasing efforts are directed to procure the loss
of men's souls, are beliefs or doctrines which have been universally
held by all churches. Now, the first and most important of
these doctrines, one which has been regarded almost as the basis
of Christianity, is seldom if ever alluded to in the following
s~nces, while the two others are absolutely denied by Spiritualists in all countries. 'l'hus, too, the miracles of the Old a.nd
New Testament are referred to natural laws, as exemplied,
p. 74, in the passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea; and in
p. 83, where the phenomena which occurred on the day of
Pentecost are imitated. More might be cited havinl! the same

Xl

tendency, as for example the views put forward in p. 56; but, as
has been already stated, the principal object here is to place on
record a series of actual occurrences and communications, and
then to indicate very slightly such points as are most worthy of
the attention of an enquirer into their bearing upon the prevailing opinions of the day, on questions of social and religious
importance. It should, however, be borne in mind that the
majority of the statements here alluded to were made by the
medium in a trance, and cannot be regarded as so probably the
sayings of spirits, as if they were derived from messages through
the alphabet. I must also observe that I have read many
communications received through writing and drawing mediums
which are distinctly Christian in their teaching, they are full of
reference to our Lord and to his office as the Mediator of mankind; but all, as far as my knowledge extends, have a latitudinarian character about them. Most fearful pictures are drawn
of the consequences of sin, and of the way retribution must be
made for evil done in this world. Many Spiritualists affirm that
communications coming from these sources are of a higher kind
than those conveyed through the ordinary physical means, such
as raps, table tiltings, &c.
In other important particulars there is an apparent contrast
between Christianity and the tendency of Spiritualism. In the
New Testament, submission to authority and child-like obedience
are inculcated as qualities peculiarly appertaining to the Christian
believer, whereas the teaching of the spirits, as here recorded,
seems rather to bring everything to the test of our reason. The
spirit of Christianity has generally been antagonistic to the
spirit of the world, and frequently to what may be called the
spirit of the age. Latitudinarianism ; opposition to ecclesiastical
rule and authority; and dislike of forms as well as dogmas, are
characteristic of the present day; and these principles are in
accordance with the general teaching of Spiritualism, which is
decidedly latitudinarian, and in harmony with the spirit of antisacerdotalism as opposed to that of dogmatic Christianity.
The reader of the following pages will not fail to perceive that
a high and pure morality is taught in them ; that the love of God,
the value of prayer, and the importance of cultivating a truthful

xii
spirit are strongly inculcated; the terrible effects of sin, and the
necessity of leading a good life in this, in order to occupy a high
place in the next world, are forcibly pointed out. But what
must perplex an orthodox Christian reader of these seances is the
startling fact, that all reference to our Lord's office and work,
as the sole passport to heaven, is practically omitted, and that
He, whom all Catholics and most Protestants recognize as the
sun of their religion, and the centre of their worship, seems to
form so small a part of the thoughts or teaching of the spirits
that here speak to us from beyond the grave.
That every variety of religious opinion, and all forms of
Christianity are taught by spirits, is fully shown in an excellent book on Spiritualism, designated by rather .an ill-chosen
title, "Planchette; or, the Despair of Science." This, however,
is quite in accordance with the general belief of Spiritualists,
namely, that spirits hold various views because they retain in
the next world their complete individuality, and to a certain
extent their ignorance ; they do not therefore know for certain
that one system is better than another. They teach immortality;
a living Providence ; the possibility of communicating with us;
that God has condemned no one to an eternity of punishment;
and they usually imply that a good life m itself, rather than as
springing from our union with Christ's merits, is the passport to
a happy position in the next world. If what Spiritualists
affirm be true, that the spirits are really those of departed
human beings, and not demons, no harm can be done by
narrowly scanning the tendency of some of their announcements in an opposite direction; and on the contrary, if they
are demons or devils, the importance cannot be overrated of
warning those who are interested in the subject, lest they find
themselves implicated in the adoption of a system, which must
on that hypothesis be looked upon as a very formidable
conspiracy against the Christian religion, as hitherto believed
in all countries.
It must, however, be evident to a thoughtful peruser of these
pages, (and still more should he extend his reading to larger
works on Spiritualism; such, for example, as the " Life of the
Seeress of Prevorst,") that the evil-spirit or devil hypothesis is

xiii
surrounded by such formidable difficulties, that hasty judgments and rash conclusions cannot be too strongly deprecated.
Not to go so far back as the opposition made to Galileo and
others, when their discoveries appeared to militate against the
letter of Scripture; how many of us remember the sensation
caused, and the alarms expressed by pious and learned persons,
when the discoveries in geology demonstrated the impossibility
of the world being created in six days, a few thousand years
ago, but that it has existed and been peopled with animals
for millions of years. Again, the universality of the Flood,
so clearly declared in the words of Scripture, is found to
be incompatible with the results of careful observation of
the actual state of the surface of the earth. Among the
beliefs exploded by geological research, may be mentioned the
doctrine that pain and death, not only in man but in animals,
are the result of Adam's sin. The fact being that the remains
of animals, fitted to prey upon and kill each other, are found in
strata formed millions of years ago, and in many cases the
smaller creatures which were devoured are found within the
stomachs of those by whom they were killed and eaten. Later
still, the short amount of time during which man has existed on
the globe, a.'l deduced from even the longest Scripture chronology,
is irreconcilable with recent researches in geology, in archreology,
and in philology; the accuracy of which is every year more and
more confirmed by additional observations, clearly indicating
that man has inhabited this world for a period, not to be reckoned
by thousands but by tens of thousands of years. This subject
might be pursued much further, and additional illustrations
given, tending to inculcate the necessity of modifying preconceived opinions on questions of great importance. To mention
only one-that of miracles ;-certain phenomena which have
been universally considered as miraculous, or, to use the current
expression, supernatural, are identical with those which are
manifested by clairvoyants. How far this may extend cannot
at present be known, but sufficient is established to render it
advisable to pause betore denouncing those who deny that certain
phenomena are miraculous; some of which are, and others may
be, referable to physical laws that have only recently been

xiv
included within the domain of natural science, and which are as
yet only partially understood. I would also point to the
wonderful healing powers of certain mediums, as affording a
subject of most serious consideration and reflection, but which
need not be entered upon here as not bearing upon the following
siances.
Arguing by analogy, it need not surprise us to find, as must
be the case should the announcements of Spiritualism be true,
that the conceptions hitherto held by Christians of all denominations, of the state of existence in the next world, may require
considerable modification. We are informed that the spirit-world
is very analogous in some respects to this ; that it is one of continued progression ; that we are not suddenly brought to the full
knowledge of religious truth ; that the belief we hold here we
shall in all probability, at least for a time, retain there, in
proportion as we are more bigoted in this life, and consequently
more difficult to teach in the next. We are told, p. 38, "There t's a
contest" going on, "same as on eartk;" but, "purity wllenfreeii
from the mortal is strongest, as truth overcomes error." At different
epochs of the world, the same subject is regarded from very
different points of view. For example, the idea of the punishment of hell being a material fire was for many ages almost
universal ; it certainly is not so at present, even among the
most orthodox believers in the doctrine of eternal punishment.
A difficulty of another kind, one not easily got over, stands
in the way of the adoption of the evil-spirit theory, namely the
fact that conversions have been made by the agency of Spiritualism, from Atheism and from simple Deism to Christianity. To
take one instance; Dr. Elliotson wa.s a strong materialist,
and unbeliever; he was converted, through Mr. Home's mani~
festations, to Christianity. In accordance with this fact we·
have a message from a spirit purporting to be his, (vide sAance
No. 10) "I now know that my Redeemer liveth,~ &c. Again
others, among whom are four or five of my own acquaintance,
have been led by the same means from Unitarianism to a belief
in the divinity of Christ. Still more striking are the cases
where persons have been brought into the Church of Rome,
several examples of which have occurred in America, and a few

XV

in England. The case of Dr. and Mrs. Nichols (Americans)
affords a most remarkable instance in point; and it would be
strange could any of these individuals be brought to believe that
their advance from a lower to a higher religious creed was due to
the agency of the devil ; nor can the express testimony be overlooked of some pure-minded, earnest persons, as to the elevating
effect of the belief in Spiritualism upon their hearts and souls.
Take for example the interesting and striking account of the
closing years and death of a very beautiful character, the late
Mrs. Home, as described by Mrs. Howitt and Mrs. S.C. Hall,*
where the happiness and the blessings which Spiritualism has
produced, not only in her case, but in their own, are portrayed
in a tone strikingly earnest and yet quite free from anything like
excitement or exaggeration. To ascribe such peace and joy in
believing, such love of our Lord, and resignation to His will as
led the Bishop of Perigueux-who administered the last sacraments to Mrs. Home-to remark, " Though he had been present
at many a deathbed for heaven, he had never seen one equal to
hers ;"-and she a professed Spiritualist, and the wife of one of
the most noted mediums in the world I-To ascribe, I repeat, such
results to the agency of the father of lies and the arch enemy
of mankind, must appear as impossible to many, as it must be
revolting to the two gifted writers whom I have quoted, and
who ~ar such strong testimony to the blessed influence which
Spiritualism has exercised upon their own lives and faith.
Attention should also be called to the s~ances at Homburg,
especially Nos. 19, 21, 22, where the action of the spirits was
decidedly exercised in various ways to promote bodily health
and comfort, and also to inculcate and reiterate the advantage of
good practices, such as examination of conscience at night ; still
more striking was the evident anxiety on their part to prevent
and counteract grievous sin, as must be quite clear to those who
read these accounts with attention. Remarks upon this subject
might be considerably amplified ; but enough has been pointed
out to indicate some of the difficulties which surround the
adoption of the evil-spirit hypothesis. Indeed the only answer

* Vide Mr. Home's

11

Incidents in my Life," chap. x.ii.

xvi
which can be given, by those who maintain this view, is that
Satan is allowed an unlimited power, of which he makes copious
use, of transforming himself into an angel of light.
Setting aside the religious question, and admitting even
that the spirits are those of departed human beings, the difficulty
of identification renders the whole subject in its present stage
rather unsatisfactory. This opinion, I know, is to a considerable
extent shared in by persons who have been for several years
believers in ~piritualism. Among those who took part in the
following soo'llces, some seem to find little or no difficulty in
believing that the spirits in communication with them are the
relatives or friends they professed to be. I confess in this confidence I cannot share. To take an extreme case, the idea that
the former possessor of Adare Manor should be present at a
sMnce, and yet only manifest that 'presence by shaking his
son's chair (No. 57, p. 116), seems as improbable as absurd.*
Whatever view be taken of the source of the phenomena,
the subject is one deserving serious treatment, and careful inves
tigation. The tone of levity which prevails in some amateur
siances, and the fashion now prevalent among young ladies of
playing with planchettes, cannot be too strongly deprecated. A
power, which practically may be looked upon and treated of as
new, has almost suddenly been developed among men; a power
which may be fraught in many cases with serious consequences.
Are we in a position at present to pronounce from what sources
this power proceeds? The veil which separates this world from
the next is partially raised ; can we say why this partial unfolding of the future is permitted ; into what extent it may be
developed, or what is the main purpose for which this unexpected
source of knowledge, or deception as the case may be, is
revealed? A partial but decisive answer may be given to some
of these questions. A proof, derived from a physical and material
source is opened to men of an existence beyond the grave.
The tendency of the present age being materialistic and sceptical,

* Since these B~ancea have taken place, communications have been made to
Lord Adare (vide p. 164) which, if genuine, would acoount for and explain why
none were given at the time from the source mentioned; the probability, howuer
of identity is scarcely stl"engthened, in my mind, by the teuot of these latet
oommunications.

xvii
the evidence of the senses is required as a ground tor belief, to
a degree far surpassing what has hitherto been the case; that
evidence is now afforded for the most important of beliefs,
namely, that of a future existence. The true answer to those
who require the cui bono of Spiritualism wo~ld appear,
therefore, to be, that through its instrumentality an incontrovertible proof is afforded to all who will fairly, fully, and
patiently investigate a world of spirits. This teaching stand!
out clear and unmistakable above any confticting theories as to
the kind of spirits who are the source of the communications.
That Spiritualism is not unaccompanied by danger is allowed,
even by its most earnest believers. This chiefly springs from
the! great power of deception which may be exercised by spirits,
while the power of identification remains so unsatisfactory as it
is at present. For example, messages are sent, or communica·
tiona in the trance state given, purporting to come from deceased
members of a family, commenting on family affairs; it is obvious
that this may be a source of serious mischief. If, as is allowed
by all Spiritualists, bad and lying spirits can and do communicate, what is to secure one from being deceived by them
in a particular case? A friend of mine believed that a spirit
present at a seance was a gentleman wlio had been lately
poisoned ; he asked if B-- was concerned in the matter and
was answered in the affinnative. This he appeared to believe,
and thus B--, who lives in his parish, to some extent lies
under the imputation of being concerned in a murder; and this
on the declaration of a spirit whose identity seemed to me to rest
on no solid ground.
One of the most remarkable features in these stances is the
frequency of Mr. Home's trances. This peculiar phase of his
power has become much developed of late; while others, such as
his being raised in the air, have comparatively diminished. To
those who are familiar with mesmeric trances, the genuineness
of Mr. Home"s is easily admitted. To me they are among the
most interesting portions of the manifestations which occur
through his mediumship. The change which takes place in him
is very striking ; he becomes, as it were, a being of a higher
type. There is a union of sweetness, tenderness, and earnestness
b

xviii

in his voice and manner which is very attractive. At first sight
much might appear to bo skilful acting ; but after having so
frequently witnessed these trance states, I am fully convinced
of their truthfulness. Sometimes his utterances are most
impressive; the language beautiful, conveying his thoughts in
the most appropriate words. That he is posseBBed by a power
or spirit, not his own, and superior to himself, a very little
experience will suffice to render manifest. I can most fully
endorse the statement in Lord Adare's preface-of the very
imperfect conception of the impressiveneBB of some of these
sdances as conveyed by our meagre reports. They are, as it
were, mere skeletons, as for example,. No. 55 ; no one could
imagine the beauty and interest of that seance, from the vtlry
inadequate account given there of what occurred. To be
appreciated or realized they must be witnessed, and that
under favourable circumstances. Those who have been present
will, I am sure, agree with me that some of them are very
touching and beautiful. A pure, lofty, and religious tone more
or less pervades them. The solemnity which is always manifested at the name of God is remarkable. Mter reading Mr.
Chevalier's pamphlet I was anxious to apply the test of using
the invocation of the Trinity. I never mentioned this to
Mr. Home ; but it was unexpectedly suggested by him when
entranced during the sAance, No. 59, and with a totally opposite
result, as the reader will see.* The effect produced upon
Mr. Home by PreBsenc~'s "Life of Christ" was very striking.
I have never seen such reverence paid to the Bible in real life ;
it reminded one of the devotion exhibited by a Catholic to the
BlaBBed Sacrament.
Another very remarkable feature and well worthy of attention, is the account given by the spirits of the mode by which
they are able to make manifestations, as isd etailed in pp. 54,126,
and other places; also the extreme difficulty experienced in
making them, and the slight causes which interrupt the power.
In fact, when one considers the number of favourable conditions
• Mr. Chevalier states that when he asked the spirit who it was, using the
names of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost ; the word " Devil" was spelled out.

xix
necessary in order that manifestations should succeed, the
wonder is that they do not oftener fail. Nothing can be plainer
than that the power of spirits over matter is one of degree,
varying each night, and indeed almost every minute. 'l,his is
the answer to those who are constantly remarking " If they can
do this, why cannot they do that? If a spirit can raise an
object an inch, why not a yard? If Mr. Home could float in
the air last week, why can he not to-day? " and so forth. The
causes of failure are well exemplified in the last seance at
Garinish, No. 63, when apparently, numbers were present, and
evidently they had intended giving us a series of manifestations
as a wind up to the seances in Ireland ; but thts design was
partly frustrated by the state of the weather and Mr. Home's
health, as well as our own rather unfavorable condition.
A very common misconception on the general subject ought
to be here pointed out. The idea seems very prevalent that Mr.
Home invokes or evokes spirits. This notion is totally destitute
of foundation. Neither Mr. Home, nor any medium, as far as I
know ever professes to call up spirits. Several persons sit
round a table, and Mr. Home, while deprecating levity,
desires to promote cheerful and social conversation on general
matters, without any premeditated design or wish expressed
that particular things should happen or particular spirits be
-present. Some Spiritualists begin every sitting with prayer,
and generally with a chapter in the Bible. I was at one lately,
where, as soon as the presence of spirits was announced by raps,
they were asked, should we begin by reading a chapter; " Yes,"
was the reply ; and they were then asked, what chapter it should
be, and they rapped out, "Acts, xi. chapter, verses, 5 to 18."
One more appropriate could not readily be selected.
Before concluding these introductory remarks, I would
remind the reader, that the primary object of this little work
is to place on record a series of observed facts upon a very
mysterious and startling subject. It is only by such means,
pursued under varying circumstances, as to time, place, and
mediums, multiplied by different observers, that a conclusive
answer can be hoped for to the question, Will the result of
Spt'rituaUsm be good or evil'! is the tendency of the movement as
b2

XX

a whole to the glory of God, and the happiness of mankind in
the next world, or, is it a great system of deception, carried on
by the powers of darkness, and fraught with danger to our souls?
Setting aside the great majority of the world, who refuse all
enquiry into a. subject which they consider to be imposture, or
ridiculous nonsense, unworthy of serious thought, many shrink
from it as the work solely of evil spirits; others, from a fear of
the danger derived from the difficulty of identification, and the
consequent deception which may be practised; and others again
from an instinctive dread of communing with the departed, and
from an intense pain caused by the idea that the state of those
whom they have loved should be so widely different from, and
apparently so much lower than what they have fondly believed
in, through the traditionary teaching under which they have
been brought up. Nor can we omit in fairness the opinion of
many of the opponents of Spiritualism who maintain, that the
examples of its being productive of good effects are exceptional,
and that the system must be judged by its general results,
which, as developed in America, are, they say, drifting away
from anything like orthodox Christianity. This statement
I am not in a position to be able to pronounce upon one way or
the other.
Without attempting to conceal my own state of doubt as to
the source from which the phenomena of Spiritualism proceed,
and my decided impression of the danger which in some
respects seems possibly to accompany its pursuit or adoption,
I have been most desirous not to bias unduly those who
are anxious to investigate a very interesting and most curious
subject of enquiry; especially as Lord Adare takes a more
favourable view than I can at present conscientiously hold, of
the points about which such opposite opinions are entertained
by men of earnest and truth-loving character. Why then, it
may be asked, take any part in enquiring into a subject, the
tendency of which seems so difficult to determine? The answer
is simple :-Chiefly, to examine for my own satisfaction; next,
to enable others, who may consider a similar spirit of enquiry
advisable or interesting, to have the benefit of the experience
derived from the following seances l and also, to shew to

xxi
those who are already struck by, or much occupied in, the
pursuit of this mysterious subject, the dangers by which it is
surrounded, through the possible tendencies of its teachings,
or the deceptions practicable by bad or mischievous spirits.
I maintain that we are entitled to investigate all the physical
phenomena. which may come before us, provided we do so
earnestly and with a desire to arrive at truth. Acting upon
this principle, I enquired into the remarkable phenomena of
mesmerism and clairvoyance, when the propriety of so doing
was doubted by some for whom I entertained the highest respect.
Upon the same principle I now avail myself of the opportunity
which Lord Adare's acquaintance with Mr. Home has afforded, of
investigating the still more interesting and startling phenomena
of Spiritualism ; content that time will clear up that which is at
present so perplexing, and enable honest enquirers to decide
whether the subject is one which they can with propriety
continue to pursue, or one which they feel themselves bound, as
sincere followers of Christ, and for the safety of their souls, to
abandon.

DUNRAVEN.

xxii

NAMES OF PERSONS PRESENT AT THE SEANCES
[All the persons present at the following Bhances, with the exception of
three or four to whom access cannot be obtained, have received a copy of
the account of the seances which they witnessed, with a request that if the
report coincided with their own recollection of what took place, they
would kindly allow· their names to be appended, as testifying to jts
accuracy. Every answer has been in the affirmative as to the correctness
of the accounts ; but a very few have, for prudential reasons, preferred
that their names should not appear. By accuracy is meant, that nothing
has been inserted that did not occur, or has been exaggerated. A great
deal has necesll&l'ily been omitted.l

a.

Mr.
JENCKEll, Barrister-at-Law, Temple.
Mrs. HENNiliGS, 9, Thicket Road, Norwood,
Mrs. ScoTT RusSELL, Norwood.
Miss GALLWEY, 7, Lower Belgrave Street.
Mr. S.C. HALL, 15, Ashley Place.
Mrs. S. C. HAu.,
,
,.
Mr. H. T. HuMPHREY, 11 Clifford's Inn.
Mr. IIAMu.TON, Sundrum, Ayr.
Mrs. HAMILTOli',
,.
,
Miss HAMILTOlll,
,
,
Mrs. Cox, Stockton House.
Miss Baoou, ,
,
Mr. IoN PzanroABIB, 2, Heathcote Villas, Twickenham.
Mrs. MAINWARING, Ashley House, Victoria Street.
Countess DE MEDINA DE PoMAB, Grafton Hotel, Albemarle Street.
Mrs. Hoi!IEYwoon, 5'l, Warwick Square.
Dr. GuLLY, Malvern.
Mr. Joi!IE&, Enmore Park, South Norwood.
Mrs. MAcKDOUGALL GBKGOBY, 21, Green Street, Grosvenor Square.
Lady FAJBF.u, 45, St. George's Road.
Major DBAYSOI!I, 6, York Crescent, Woolwich.
Mr. IIABT, SO, Duke Street, St. James's.
Mr. SAn, 45, Comhill.
Mr. J. CoLLills, Royal Military Academy, Woolwich.
Miss SMITH, Adare Manor, Ireland.
Miss BzRTOLACOJ, Vine Cottage, Fulham Road.
,
,
Miss E. BEBTOLACOI,
Bon. F. LAWLESS, Ma1·itimo, Black Rook, Ireland.

xxiii
Capt. CH.A.s. WYNNE, Lissadell, Sligo.
Mrs. C. WYNKE,
,
,
Mr. B. Ds C. N1xoN1 1, Queen's Gate Gardens.
Mrs. B. DE C. Nrx:oN,
,
,
Mr. JAMES GoRE BOOTH, R.E., Aldershot.
Sir RoBT, Gou BooTH, Bart., 71 Buckiugbam Gate.
Miss Gou BoOTH,
"
,
A. BHITH BARBY, M.P., 26, Chesham Place.
The Hon. The MAsTER oF LINDsAY, 9, Grosvenor Square.
Major BLAOKBURlll, 35, Beaufort Gardens.
Mrs. BLAOKBURN,
,
,
Mrs. WYNNE, Corris, Bagnalstown, Ireland.
,
Miss WYNNE, ~·
Mr. J. BERGHEIM, 84, Hill Street, Knightsbridge.
Mr. H. A. RoDALL 1 17, Langham Street.
Mr. F. FuLLER, 12, St. James's Place.
Miss DouGLAs, 81, South Audley Street.
DoWAGER DuouEss OF ST. ALBAN's; 4, Princes Gate.
Hr. CHu. BLAOJtBWN1 Park Field, Didsbtuy, Manchester.
Capt. GIIIBABD SMITH, Soots FllSilier Guards, 13, Upper Belgrave Street.
Mr. 8TAJILBY J. MACKENZIE, 32, Bemard Street.
Mrs. 8ToPFOBD, 7, Grosvenor Gardens.

.xxiv

CLASSIFICATION OF PHENOMENA.
Axm.u.s, t'nture state or, 91.
Accordion played, no one touching it, 111, 136.
--supported without human hands, 9, 111.
Arrow brought through the air, 108.
Abbey, Adare, strange scene at, No. 57, 113.
Alphabet, drawn and decorated, 129.

Ba.umY, glass o~ emptied and 11.11ed, 77.
- - essence extracted from, 78.
CLAJJIVOYAKOE of the medium in a trance,

58, 99, 128, 129, 149, 174.

Fx.ow.ERB, scent withdrawn from, 68, 90.
-brought through the air and given to persona, 17, 58, 59, 89, 90, 92, 108,
108, 122, 123, 124, 135, 142, 145.
Fire teat, 67, 68, 147, 178, 179.

H4111', chords of, played, 121.
Home, Mr., elevated, 77, 78, 821 86, 99, 114, 138, 174.
--elongated, 18, 23, 39, 48, 82, 86, 99, 146, 153, 154.
- g o e s from one window to the other, 82.
places his face in the fire, 68.
- - h i s head or hands becomo luminous, 17, 86, 113.
- - ~ case of second sight, 43.
- - case of vision, 49.
Identity tests, 34, 111, 144.
LioBT!, visible, 18, 38, 62, 60, 66, 76 83, 88, 89, 114, 124.
Lemon, taste, essence, &c., extracted from, 90, 96.
MUSIC heard,

241 35.

OB.nwra, luminous, 36, 41, 175.
-moving by themselves, 2, 8, 8, 21, 26, 60, 71, 81, 86, 88, 89, 92, 98,
95, 101, 104, 112, 121, 135, 187, 140, 141, 145, 146, 148, 155, 168,
170, 171, 172, 174, 175, 176.
PIDlrBOOST, phenomena of, imitated, 88.
Pencil writing by itself, 113.
Piano raised ofF the ground, 13, 123.

XXV

Rus, stream of, like electric sparks, 5, 107.
SECOKD BIGHT, aase of in Mr. Home, 43.
Sign of the Cross made by table, 9, 103.
Sounds, 8, 61 87, 113, 115, 142, 143.
Spirit forms visible, 2, 25, 28, 35, 46, 52, 65, 76, 80, 81, R3, 89, 93, 95, 114
115, 118, 145, 156, 172, 175, 176, 177.
Spirit-hands visible, 251 41, 71, 92, 98, 111, 135, 136, 137, 141, 172 1 175, 177.
- - - touching persons, Ill, 25, 58 1 59, 65, 88, 89, 91!, 93, 1031 105, 109.
111, 112, 121, 122 1 lSG, 137, 168, 169, 178,
Spirit-laughter, .3, 93.
Spirit-voices, 6, 35, 37, 76, 88, 93, 120, 137, 142.
TABLE raised in the air, 5, 6, 21, 26, 92, 93, 102, 103, 105, 109, 111, 112, 130,
131, 184, 145, 171, 175.
Theological views, allusions to, 20, 33, 38, 54, 55, 56, 61, 64, 711, 74, 80, 84,
96, 116, 120, 124.

PREFACE.
personally acquainted with Mr. Home, and
having resided for some little time with him in
London during the autumns of 1867 and 1868, and
having travelled in his company in Germany in the
summer of 1868, I have had considerable opportunity
of witnessing the phenomena of Spirz~ualism, not only
at regular seances, but also at times when we were
quite alone, and without any premeditation on our
part.
My father, being interested in the subject, requested
me to write him a short account of anything remarkable that occurred. I did so, and of the letters so
written the following narrative is composed. At the
time I wrote them I had not the slightest notion that
my letters were destined to be printed; had I thought
so, .I would have endeavoured to express myself with
greater clearness. Frequently remarkable incidents
followed each other in such rapid succession, that
without transgressing the bounds of ordinary correspondence, I had scarcely time or space to give my
father a full account of what took place. In preparing
the letters for the press, I have found the statements
in many instances much curtailed and embodied in
language not so carefully chosen as it should have
BEtNG

xxviii

been had I known that they were to be submitted
even to private cit·culation. I have however thought
it better not to interfere with the originals, and the
following pages are printed nearly word for word
from the letters that I wrote to my father immediately
after each occurrence took place. There are four
things I wish to mention :lat.-It has been my object throughout to divest
my accounts of all the sensational element; and
partly for the sake of brevity, partly from a fear of
exaggerating in any particular, in writing to my
father I simply recorded the bare facts I witnessed.
I know that in so doing, I have not treated the
subject fairly. Take any interesting and exciting
incident, a shipwreck-or a fearful railway catastrophe-put down the bare facts on paper, that a
goods train ran into an excursion train, so many
people were killed, and so many legs and arms broken,
and the story seems very prosaic. Hear it recounted
by an eye-witness and participator in the danger, and
you will carry away a very different impression. For
this reason, the reader may consider the following
accounts rather stupid and uninteresting, and sometimes they may appear even trivial. I can assure
the reader that to those engaged in the investigation,
they did not appear so, and were they clothed in
language sufficiently powerful to produce upon the
mind of the reader the same impression that was
produced at the time upon those who witnessed the
phenomena, they would appear not trifling, but full
of interest, and worthy of the deepest attention.

xxix

2nd.-To put down on paper accurately, even the
substance of what Mr. Home says when speaking in
a trance, is extremely difficult. Unless a writer be
acquainted with some method of short-hand writing,
it is impossible to keep pace with a speaker deliveting
a long discourse with ordinary rapidity of utterance.
This difficulty is further increased by the fact, that
in many cases the addresses were delivered in a
partially darkened room. I am well aware that in
some cases I have represented Mr. Home as talking
with little connection between the sentences, and
sometimes the meaning is obscure, and the ideas
badly expressed; this is the result of the impossibility of transmitting his utterances accurately to
paper without the assistance of a short-hand writer.
In all cases of trance-speaking witnessed by me,
Mr. Home has expressed himself with perfect clearness, his language has been remarkably well chosen
and to the point, frequently interspersed with truly
poetic ideas and symbols. In some cases when my
notes were very imperfect, I have contented myself
with merely saying that Mr. Home spoke on such
and such a subject. On other occasions I have
endeavoured to write down, as well as I could, the
sub.stance of what he said. In one case, I have
requested Mr. J encken to write out some sentences
delivered by Mr. Home in a trance, as I was quite
unable to make out the meaning of the notes that
Mr. J encken succeeded in taking at the time.
37·d.-Even in the original letters to my father, I
was obliged to omit a few circumstances of great

XXX

interest; in some cases on account of their having
reference to persons who did not wish those circumstances mentioned; in others, because the communication, although referring to myself, was of such a
private nature that I preferred making no mention
of it. In looking over the letters previous to sending
them to press, I have found it absolutely necessary
to suppress certain other facts and communications.
Owing to this, the reader will find some passages
incomplete; in two cases I had an explanation given
to me of a long train of puzzling circumstances ; the
reasons for certain occurrences that took place were
told me, the object to be gained, and the result. I
was as it were let behind the scenes, to see the
"reason why" fo:r a number of strange events that I
could not previously account for. I am unable to
mention either of these cases because other people
are much involved in them. Some of the events
however are mentioned, and must appear meaningless
to the reader, as they did to me until I was furnished
with the explanation of them.
4th.-It may perhaps appear strange to some
that I did not, at the commencement of my investigations, take greater pains to determine that the
manifestations were not the result of trickery, collusion or mechanical contrivance. From what I had
heard from reliable sources, I had come to the
conclusion that the phenomena were the result of
some power or intelligence, other than that of the
medium, or any of the persons present. I had therefore little difficulty on this point; and the scrutiny that

xxxi

I did make was more to satisfy Mr. Home, and to be
able to tell others that I had done so, than to convince
myself. My father had early opportunities of testing
for himself, and soon arrived at the same conclusion.
I therefore in writing to him have generally omitted
all mention of the various tests I had seen used, in
order to save myself useless labour. It is, however,
as well now to mention, that I have witnessed many
persons make, at their first seance, every effort to
account for the phenomena by trickery and mechanical
contrivance, and failing that, to reduce them to the
effects of some unknown force. I have invariably
found them (provided of course that the seance was
successful) very soon obliged to admit that these
phenomena cannot be accounted for, except on the
supposition that they are caused by an unseen but
active and reasoning intelligence. I have printed
names in full whenever I have obtained leave to do
so, knowing how little value is generally attached to
statements unsupported by the testimony of more
than one person. It will be noticed that spirits rarely
give their names. In some instances, however, they
do so, and occasionally they fix upon some sign by
which their presence is to be. recognized. It would
be out of place in a narrative of this kind were I in
each case to enter into a discussion as to the probability of the identity being correct. I have merely
recorded that which I heard and saw. rrhe persons
mentioned in the following pages are not, therefore,
to be identified with any particular belief about
Spiritualism; but are only witnesses, if necessary,
to the correctness of the facts I have stated. I myself

xxxii

make no attempt here to offer any explanation of
the following phenomena, or to build up any theory
upon them, I only say that they occurred as I have
stated them. Many books have been published on
the subject by able and thinking men in England and
America and on the Continent, which can be referred
to by those who are anxious for information. The
object of placing my letters in this their present form
is simply to preserve a series of well-authenticated
cases of the occurrence of very wonderful phenomena.
Interesting as they are now, they are likely to become
of still greater value in the future, either as recording
a very marvellous and transitory condition of things,
or as marking the first faint indications of a great
and permanent change.

ADARE.

No.1 &ance.
Malvern, November 1867.
YESTERDAY, Mr. Earl, a total disbeliever in Spiritualism, Home

and I, went to spend the evening with Mrs. Thayer, an
American lady, a friend of Dr. Gully's. We were shown into
the back parlour, a small room, the furniture consisting of a
heavy round mahogany table, without any cover, with one leg
in the centre, and of a piano and several ordinary chairs. The
room was lighted by a fire, a large lamp standing on the piano,
and two wax candles on the table.
After Mrs. Thayer came in we sat and talked for a few
minutes by the fireside, until at Home's suggestion we sat round
the table, which was in the middle of the room. Home was on
my left, Mrs. Thayer opposite me, and Earl on my right. The
room was perfectly light. After talking on ordinary subjects for
}lerhaps ten minutes, raps were heard by us all in various parts of
the room, on the table and on the door and walls. Home requested
the raps to be made in various places and it was done. He asked
that they would rap under my feet, and I not only heard the
noise, but distinctly felt the jar while the raps were taking
place. I repeatedly looked under the table, as did also Mr.
Earl, to satisfy ourselves tha_h however they were done, it was
not by any movement on Home's part. It was quite impossible that Home could have made them, for while they
were distinctly audible, I looked under the table and could
have detected even the slightest movement of his legs or feet ;
Mr. Earl watched his hands and arms. Similar raps were
Qccasionally heard during the whole seance. At the commencement of the seance we all felt cold currents of air passing
over our hands. The table began to vibrate with the greatest
rapidity, and then was moved about and tilted up in various
directions. Mrs. Thayer had previously to this placed a pencil
and writing paper on the table. The table was repeatedly tilted
up at an ang1e I should say greater than 45°. The surface was
smooth polished mahogany, yet the candles, paper, and pencil,
did not move. Home asked that the candles might slip (as they
natura.lly would) .and they did slide down the table until near
A

2

the edge, when at his request, they remained stationary.
While the table was tilted up very high, Home said to Earl,
" Take a candle and look under the table." He took one of
the candles on the table, and in lifting it saidt _good gracious,
how heavy it is! I afterwards tried the same thing, and found
that when the table was tilted up there was a difficulty in removing the candle from the Rurface that made it appear very
heavy. The table was moved up against
chest, and as I
pushed back my chair, it followed me up until the back of my
chair was against the window, and I could go no further ; the
table was then pushed close up against me. I now felt cold
currents of air passing across my face and hands, and a. chair that
was standing against the wall, at a distance of perhaps five;ards 7
came suddenly and quickl<. out from the wall, and_place itself
beside me at the table. 'Ihe effect was startling. There was a
lady's cloak on it, which was pulled off under the table. Mrs.
Thayer said, " She could see a shadowy form standing between
Home and me." I saw nothing, but I was touched lightly on
the head, and distinctly as with a sharp tap of the finger on the
knee. I do not think it possible that anybody at the table could
have touched me. I could see all their hands, and had it been
done by a foot I must have perceived the difference of touch, and
have seen the motion. Some time previously to this Mrs. Thayer
had sent out the servant to ask a friend for an accordion, and it
had been placed upon the table. 'l.'he alphabet was called for (by
five raps) and the following words were spelled out ( 1 am not
sure tliat I remember the exact words but they were to this
effect):-" I could not come th~ other night because of H--.
Yours ever, Fred." Mrs. Thayer understood the meaning of
this messa~e it havin~ reference to a previous sbJnce, the first
one, I believe at which she had been present. After a few
minutes the alphabet was again called for, and the following
words were spelled out:-~~ M.'lf boy, I am near you." I
naturally referred this to my mother.
After thi.s 1 the accordion was moved about on the ta~Ie.
Home took it, holding it by the lower :part, with the keys hangmg
down over the edge of the table. It IS manifestly impoBBible for
a person so holding an accordion either to touch the ke)"ll 7 to
inflate the bellows, or to expel the air from it. Almost Immediately the keys were touched in an uncertain manner, and
then the accordion began to play. It played something
resembling a voluntary on the organ: the melody was perfect,
and the expression beautiful. I am sure that if I had heard it
so played anywhere, under any circumstances1 it would have
occurred to me how like the music was to what I had often
heard my mother play, when running over a few chords on the

mr.

3
piano. While the accordion was being played, I looked at it
two or three times under the table. Home was on each occasion holding it as I have stated, and the instrument was pulled
out horizontally from his hand. I could see the bellows drawn
in and out, and the keys move. At one time it was pulled
violently under the chair at my side towards me. Home asked
me to name some air. I wished to think of one that might help
me to identify whoever was playing the accordion, but I could
not. Earl asked for "The Last Rose of Summer." It was
beautifully played: first, the air quite simply, then with chords
and variations. After this Mrs. Thayer took the accordion,
and Mr. Earl also, but it did not play again. During what I
have narrated, the table was occasionally moved, and rars were
now and then heard in.different parts of the room. Al manifestations ceased when the accordion stopped playing. My
hands during the whole time were as cold as tee ; when the
manifestations ceased they became suddenly warm. I said,
"Dear me, my hands have become quite warm I" Home said,
" Oh, then I am afraid there will be nothing more." We
waited perhaps five minutes ; and, finding there were no more
manifestations, we got up and moved the table over to the fire.
Home began reading to us some poetry. The last thing he
read was descriptive of the passing away of a poor old widow ;
and, after a passage speaking of the love of Christ for her,
strong raps of approval-that is, three raps in succession-were
heard on the floor behind him. We then said Good night to
Mrs. Thayer, and went back to Tudor House. I turned into the
dining room and sat down by the fire alone. A few minutes
after, Home came in and sat down by me, and we talked about
ordinary subjects. We heard a sound that I thought was the
door creaking. He said it was not that, and asked that the sound
should be repeated, and it was. He then asked that it should rap
where I usually sat at dinner; and it did so right at the end of
the table. We were both sitting with our backs to the table.
Then came a noise as if furniture was moving. I turned but
saw nothing move. Home leoked and said a chair had moved
up to the table. I looked again at the other side of the table,
and saw that a chair was standing against it ; all the others
were against the wall. I did not see it move. We then heard
a sort of whistling sound flying up and down the room ; then a
sound as of something rushing up and down, and then, laughter,
unmistakable but not pleasant sounding laughter. Mter this
?De of t~e .servants came in, and nothing more occu_r~ed. When
m the dimng room, Home asked whether the spmt that was
there in the room was one that loved me. It answered
"Yes." By answered, I mean that three raps were given,
A 2

4

which means " Yes." He asked if the spirit would like me
to have another siance with him in London. "Yes," was
answered.
No. 2 Sknce.
About a fortnight after this I had occasion to go to London.
I went down to see Home at Mr. Jencken's, at Norwood. We
bad a seance. in the evening. There were present, Home, Mr.
Jencken, Mrs. Hennings, and myself. Nothing very remarkable
occurred; at least, I do not remember anything. The usual
manifestations took place, such as the table moving, and raps
were heard; the table, a light card table, was lifted off the
ground completely. During the first part of the seance the
manifestations seemed all directed to Home, afterwards the table
was in the same way as at the first sknce moved up against me.
The accordion was played in Home's hand. The last thing that
occurred was that my chair began to vibrate rapidly in the most
violent way; it gave me a curious tingling sensation up my arms
to the elbow, and up my legs as though I was receiving an
electric shock. Knowing that this vibration almost invariably
preceded any movement, or lifting of the table, I thought that I
was going to be raised into the air, and most unwillingly I became
very nervous and frightened. If I had not done so I think some
phenomenon would have occurred ; but as soon as I became
alarmed, the vibration of my chair ceased. 'l'hat was the last
thing that occurred that evening.
No.3 &ance.

This day week I again went down to Mr. Jencken's to see
Home. After tea we had a siance. There were present: Mr.
Jencken, Mrs. Jencken (his mother), Mrs. Hennings, Mrs. Scott
Russell, Miss D-- R-, another lady whose name I forget,
Home and myself. We sat round the card table, all except
Mrs. Jencken, who sat in her arm chair in another part of the
room. We had a very beautiful siance. Miss D-- R-had never been present at one before, and was most of the time
engaged in lookmg under the table1 and investi~ating.what took
place. Very few raps were heard. The manifestations began
by the usual vibration of the table, the floor, and our chairs ; and
by the cold currents of air passing round the table over our
hands. The table moved, and we followed it until it was in a
corner close to the wall. Home had his back to the wall. On
his left, at a little distance,, was a small square table, with a vase
of flowers on it ; and on his right was a small round table, on
which stood a large vase containing a fern.

5
The chi-ef part of the manifestations consisted in the movement of these tables. 'L'bey were brought dose to Home,
and then were sometimes raised in the air and inclined towards
him ; sometimes simply tilted on one leg, so that the flowers
touched his face. The flowers were in like manner also, as it
were, presented to Mrs. Hennings and Mrs. Scott Russell.
Before moving the small round· table up to us, it was necessary
to clear a space for it, as the table at which we were sitting was
close to the window. Our table moved a little back, and we
then saw the window curtainR drawn on one side out of the
way. This table was repeatedly raised in the air to the height
of 4 or 5 inches, Miss D-- R-- placing her bands between it
and the floor; and it was also f1·eqnen tl y inclined at such an angle,
that the vase must inevitably have fallen off under ordinary
circumstances. The flowers on the square table and the fern
on the round table were frequently agitated and moved, but
were not broken off or plucked. On flacin~ the ear against
the small table, it was found to be ful of mmute raps, like .a
current of small electric sparks.
The phenomena connected with the movement of these two
tables occupied some time, during which we talked about various
matters and subjects. Miss D-- R-- and Mr. Jencken
were talking about Hpiritualism, and he got rather excited, and
was saying something to the effect that he lost his patience
when jeople said it was all trickery and conjuring, and that
instea of that it was a great and real blessing and dispensation
vouchsafed to us by God for our comfort. Approving raps occurred
at this, and he said ''Is it not to shew us without doubt that it
is so," or some words of that sort. Assent was signified to that
remark so emphaticallr, that it made me laugh. It seemed so
energetic-first, "Yes ' was rapperl on the floor and walls, then
the small tables tilted themselves three times, and then the table
we were sitting round tilted itself up towards eaeh corner in
tum three times, and lastly, being raised right off the ground,
was moved up and down three times in the air, and then came
down with an emphatic bang that shook the floor. During this
siance, it was remarkable how the spirits joined as it were in our
conversation, two or three times signifying approval in the most
emphatic way. I noticed a remarkable circumstance in connection with the small round table. When it was inclined at a considerable angle I saw the vase move, but instead of slipping
down the slope, it moved up against it.
As I before mentioned, the small table with the fern was raised
in the air, and presented as if in greeting to Mrs. Hennings,
Home, and Mrs. Scott Russell. After this had been done several
times the alphabet was called for, and the following message

6
given (the exact words I cannot answer for): " We would do
more to shew our love; these (referring to the flowers) are
emblems of God's love." The letters were indicated sometimes
by the small table tilting, sometimes by raps on the large table.
Soon afterwards the alphabet was again called for, and the following message given :-" Sit alone in a corner with .Adare."
Accordingly Home and I left the table1 and sat in another corner
of the room at the small round table, having previously removed
the vase; immediately the table was raised up and, tilted against
my chest. 'l'he ~able had one leg terminating in three claws, one
of them just touched my_ toe, and the letters were indicated by the
claw tapping my toe. The following message was thus given :"My own boy, I go with you, fear noth·t'n,q, God wm give a
mother power to protect her own boy. 1 will yet speak to you
when alone." The table was then raised off the ground,
presented to me close to my face, two or three times, and replaced on the floor. Home was not touchin~ the table; but
during all this time was sitting beside me m an arm chair,
and I distinctly felt-and so did he-some one standing between
us. 'N e then went back to the large table and Home took the
accordion in his hand. He asked some questions, which were
answered in the affirmative by three single notes on the accordion.
Home in asking these questions became very much affected-!
do not know why-and his voice was quite broken; he asked
whether th.e spirit holding the accordion was the same that
brought the chair to me at Malvern?* Whether it had not stood
between me and him when we were sitting in ~he corner? The
accordion then played something like a voluntary on the organ.
The peculiarity being that the last few notes were drawn out so
fine as to be scarcely audible-the last note dying away so
gradually that I could not tell when it ceased. I do not think
it possible for any human hand to l'roduce a note in that way.
Sometime before this we had all heard a whistling over Home's
nead, similar to that which I had heard in the dining room at
Tudor House. It is a curious sound, something between a bird
ch~ing and th~ whistling produced by birds' wings rapidly
movm~. After 1t ceased we all heard sounds as of a voice, but
not articulate. Home then asked if a spirit was endeavourin~
to make the voice heard, and was answered " Yes " and he asked if
it would be repeated, and was answered " Perhdps." It was not
repeated until we left the table. During the time the sounds
were heard Home was talking, which I was glad of, as I wished
to feel sure the sounds were not the result of ventriloquism on

* There is no answer recorded to Home'& questions, but I believs the
answer to have been in the affirmative.

7

his part. I believe I may also safely say that we were all
engaged in couversation at the time, so that the sounds could
not have been produced by any accomplice among us. I did
not, however, observe any of the others so closely as I did
Home.
Mter the accordion had played I took it in my band, but
immediately after I had done so the alphabet was called for and
the words were spelled out, " We can do no more now." All the
manifestations then ceased. We waited a few minutes, and
Home asked if the spirits were gone. No answer was returned,
so we left the table. I have particularly noticed three things.
1st. That the commencement of each seance appears the
same, namely, currents of cold air passing over the hands of
those at the table as if some sort of chain was being formed.
Any abrupt breaking of which by some one suddenly leaving the
table will stop the plienomena.
2nd. That if the attention be too much concentrated it
prevents the phenomena. They take place best when those at
the table are keeping up a general conversation. If anything
occurs, such as a table moving, and everybody stops talking and
looks at it, it is almost sure to stop. In the last seance, I noticed
that when anything of that sort was being done, if every one
tun1ed to look at it and stopped talking, the table or some
other piece of furniture moved as it were to attract attention.
I forgot to mention that Home at the last seance was thrown
into a. trance. He remained entranced two or three minutes,
but said nothing. We foolishly all stopped talking to look at
him, and I think that broke the trance, as he awoke, passed
his band across his forehead, and remarked how quiet we all
were.
At the commencement of a trance Home generally tells the
spectators to go on talking ; not to fix their attention on him
too much at first. I think that as negative a condition of mind as
can possibly be maintained is almost a necessity to ensure strong
mamfestations. This is not however the case, I believe,
with all mediums. The presence of dogs in the room, or
much tobacco smoke, will entirely prevent manifestations with
Home as medium. The effect of these things is, no doubt,
upon the medium, not upon the spiritual influence.
Brd. That the name of God is always treated with peculiar
reverence. In spelling out a sentence, if you guess an ordinary
word, they say '' Yes ; " and go on to the next. But though
you may guess it, thev spell out each letter in the name of God,
and instead of indicating the letters quickly, as usual, it is done
in a slow manner that impresses the mind with an idea of great
reverence.

No. 4 Seance-Lcmdon, Nooember 21st-Recorded by

my Father.
Mr. Home came to my house, only Miss Gallway and Adare
being present. We sat round a small table in my study.
We talked upon indifferent subjects, which Mr. Home says is
preferable to silence, or to thinkin~ or wishing too much on
the one subject. Soon slight raps were heard, followed by
slight vibrations of the table. We all agreed that the noise in
the street was very disagreeable, so we adjourned to the dining
room, which Mr. Home had never been in. I took in the table,
and, placing it near the fire place, we sat round it. Raps soon
came again, and slight vibrations. Some one remarked that
the table was rather creaky, when Mr. Home observed, "I have
taken a dislike to this table; let us sit at another. Here, this
dining table will do." "Wha~" I said, "surely that huge
table will not move I" "Oh, 1 daresay it will," he replied.
The table was very large, above seven feet long and five feet
wide, and very heavy, requiring considerable force to move it at
all. Under it is a Turkey carpet; there were also quantitieA
of Adare's things upon it. Mr. Home and I sat opposite each
other at the sides, and Adare and Miss Gallway at the ends. Raps
were heard at different parts of the table, and near the fire
place, and on the round table we had brought in. Presently the
table vibrated very strongly-this was a most strange phenomenon, the vibration was so uniform and powerful. The table
then moved at r(ght angles to Mr. Home. I may remark that there
was a green cloth on the table, and when pressure was used,
the hand would simply slip on the polished mahogany. The table
moved towards Adare about a foot; and it soon moved towards
1\iiss Gallwey, that is, in exactly the opposite direction. She
said, "May I stop it?" "I don't think you can" Home replied.
" yes I can, II she said, as she pressed her hands forcibly against
the edge ; then suddenly withdrawing them from the table,
!t made one move, ~r rather spring forward, of nearly one foot
m length, thus shewmg the great strength of the pressure which
must have been exerted by some mysterious power. We heard
sounds from the little table1 and I saw it moving by itself. It
h~ advanced more than a toot towards Mr. Home; and it came
still nearer afterwards. He sat rather back from the table with
his hands laid lightlv on it.
'
I expressed a hope that the power would become stronget:.
These messages were given :-~' We would fain do more if
we could ; did love git•e strength? we should be strong indeed."
And then " God bliss you all!' The indications for " God"

differed from the others, being three strong vibrations of the

9

table. After this we heard or felt nothing more. As to
collusion or contrivances, none such could have taken place;
the change of room, and our close observation, rendered this
impossible. The idea of our hands being able to move such
a table is simply absurd. The table, too, moved at right
angles to where Home was sitting. The vibration was very
singular; the candles shook, and other things trembled visibly.
Once the candles very decidedly diminished in brightness for a
short time.

No.5 Sea:nce-Novembe:r 23rd-Recorded by my Fathe:r.
A s~ance was held at Norwood. Present: Mr. Home, Mrs.
Hennings, Mr. Jencken and his mother, Mrs. Scott Russell,
A dare, and myself. We sat at an ordinary card table in the
middle of the room, with two candles on the chimney piece, and
a bright fire. After about ten minutes, raps were heard: the
table vibrated a little, and soon moved in the direction of
Mr. Home, and towards the piano. We followed, and were soon
close to the broad end of the piano. Raps were lreard on and
about the table, and on a small table a few feet distant. Our
table gradually tilted up, at an angle of about 30 degrees or
more. This was done more than once. The narrow end of the
piano moved from the wall two or three times, and altogether
about one foot, and pressed Mrs. Scott Russell between itself
and the table. The floor vibrated strongly ; this was very
striking. The five raps were heard for the alphabet, and the
following sentence was spelled out:-" You are over anxious,
and not sufficiently praye:rfol." Different movements of the
table occurred, and then the following sentence was given:" On (?in) seeking .for physical facts you lose sight of God." It
was very remarkable that the indications for the word" God"
were made, not by common raps, but by the table giving sudden
movements, whilst it was either partially or wholly off the ground.
At the end it was clearly so ; and it made the sign of the cross
by moving forward and backward, and from side to side.
Before this the little table moved of itself.i and I went close
to it, and I saw it move again slightly.
t vibrated slightly
when Mr. Home did not touch itt put more stron~ly when he did.
We then got the accordion, and .Jlllr. Home held 1t just under the
table. After a little while it moved about and at last played,
but apparently at first with effort, a sort of plaintive melody,
very pretty, but nothing I had ever heard. I looked under the
table more than once while Mr. Home's hand held it, and I saw it
playin~. At one time it was held up without his aid, for he put
both h1s hands on the table, and 1 was then watching it. It

10

ana

stretched from Mr. Home towards MrsrRussell, who took it,
it played, but faintly. Home took it back. Alphabet then
called for, and the following message came:-" It was .A. wko
touched the keys." After this the accordion stretched nearly
horizontally towards me, and I took it,-and held it a long timeJ
but it did not play, though it was moved about strangely1 and
distinct raps were made on it. Before this Mr. Home satd he
distinctly saw a spirit between Mrs. Scott Russell and meJ and
before he spoke, she said she was touched in the side.-1 was
conscious of nothing. The cold currents were very sensible
to-night. After this the manifestations became feeble, and while
remarkinH this, the alphabet was called for, and the following
given :- ' Daniel is not in a good state." We waited longer, but
nothing occurred. Mr. Home on one occasion said, "There are
curious influences to-night;" and he then said his feet were
moved about in a strange way, and he was touched more than
once. Just before the seance began, Mr. Home was called
suddenly away to see a man on business, and this rather disturbed
him. When the floor was vibrating strongly some one said
it could be felt in the next house ; and it was proposed that one
of us should go in there, and note the time. Raps of approval
were given twice; but, somehow, 1\Ir. Home said nothing, and no
one went. I forgot to mention that when the sheet of paper was
on the table, Mr. Home touching one corner, the other end was
lifted up more than an inch, just at the time when Adare felt
the cold currents very strongly, as might happen if a bellows
were blown near it. 'l'he paper was also rather curled up.
No. 6 Seance.
We had a s~ance the other night at Mr. J encken 's, at Norwood.
Home went gradually into a trance; his eyes were quite shut;
he got up, moved one or two chairs, walked up and down the
room, then sat down again and began to speak. Mr. Jencken
had been telling us how one of the servants, Mallyt was ill, and
had been seeing phosphorescent balls of light in her room at
night. Home bemg in a trance, said, "It was Hans made the
lignts in Mall;r's rooms ; if you all go rresently into the next
room, he will show them to you. Mall.Y s mother will pass away
within, (I forget the exact time mentioned), Mally must not be
told this. After a pause, he turned to me and said " Do not
let Daniel leave your house on Saturday, as he wishes to do,
because your friend is coming ; we want to let you hear music
in )"OUr room, and we wish Daniel to stay." He then said2
"Adare's mother and Caroline are here." After a pause he said
again to me, " Daniel will be able to see you from time to time

11
when you are away." After sitting a little time in his chair,
in an attitude of prayer, he got up and walked round the table to
me, and stood behind me with his hand raised as in prayer, and
then proceeded to make passes over me ; I felt nothin~. He
held his hand out, made a hollow of it as if to hold a fimd, and
went throught the action of/ouring out something upon my
head ; he then walked behin me, and apparently prayed for
some time, then placing his hands upon my shoulders, he drew me
back towards him and pressed his head firmly against my back;
I felt a strong current of heat flow out of his hands mto my
shoulders~and out of his head into my back. It was very hot
indeed. .l:ie then went back to his place and sat down, then
raising his hands, as if praying, he spoke as follows :-(Mr.
Jencken took notes as well as he could of what was said, but as
Home spoke rapidly without any stop, it was impossible to put
down more than the heads of his address.)
" Father of light, we, thy children, do approach thee in all
humble reverence and confidence. We do beseech thee, Father
of love, to grant us patience, charity, love, that we may love
others who are less fortunate than ourselves. We fray that
thou mayest remove the veil that shrouds the eterna life from
our sight, and that knowledge not of earth be given us. Grant
that we may be purified in heart and body: that we may lay
asi.de our grosser earthly body and existence, and assume the
robe of our eternal being. Grant that hope be given us, hope I
that is the star that guides us ; guides us who know so little of
the great world of spirits beyond the grave. (after a pause) We,
childr{ln of God, linger near you, the spirits, guardian angels
hover around you, and guard and aid you in your hour of triJ
and suffering. To us the spirit-land of higher spheres is like a
beautiful '(llanet, luminous, sliining forth as our goal-and spheres
higher and higher still, brighten as we advance in the VIsta of
everlasting progress. V\r e cannot tell you all we know, for it is
the desire of more and more knowledge that impels you onward
and upward. As men see a star and desire to know about it, and
know that others are beyond it, and invent instruments, and
spend their lives in scientific research and in seeking after truth,
so it is with you; it would not be good for you to know all, for there
would be no object for improvement and research. We know all
your sufferings and shortcomings, and what you have to contend
with, for have we not too been mortals, have we not wearied on the
roadside, and had our times of agony and doubt; but God, at
the evening of our day, brought us home, and called in the
weary travellers. God called us into his fold and brought us home,
that we may be nearer to thee, 0 God. Our Father in creating
beautitul things on earth, created them for ever and ever, for

12
all eternity, though they ma.1 fade to our sight; so beauty,
poetry, sunlight, and all that IS harmonious are garnered up for
ever. Even sound having left the influence of this earth, !f.Oes
on for ever down the everlasting corridors of space. '1 bus
summer is again and again refined into autumn, toned and
softened down, softening down the wintry sky of the future, so
too, purer impulses, nobler aspirations, leave their impreBB for
ever upon the waves of eternity-like a wave of sound, the
impulse moves on for ever. All of you have to grope your
way in the dark paths of life, but we hover near you, ~
your minds upwards from earth, whisper to your heart that It
may learn to aspire to God. Hope and love are component
parts of the Godliead. Truth is God; waves may rise mountains
hi&'h, but the great beacon truth shines forth over all the waves to
gmde us, lighting us on our way. From the eternal source goes
forth the eternal light to which we aspire. From this great source
emanates the small particle of light called our soul, dwelling in
this body we live in-Th.e great God who is light itself, forever
light us through all etermty."
Home now spoke in a language none of us ever heard, then
said "Oh, how very wonderful, how extraordinary I" and turning
to me, he said " A spirit has been approved to go with you, sent
by a higher spirit, one who has charge of your past, your present
and your future, your high guardian spirit. He knows the country
and has hem a chieftain in it. On earth he wore a large cross of iron
round his neck, it is brilliant and shines; he was a good soul
on earth, but was in a bad soil, tended by bad gardeners; too bad
was the soil to develop~ his soul. He speaks two languages, he
is not far from you. He lived near-Oh, I cannot get the name
of the place; no matter, he has been where you are going, and is
charged to take care of you. He will save your life on two
occasions, you will know his name." Here Home spoke two
strange words. I said to M:r. Jencken, "Have you wntten that
down, for I have already forgotten it." Home smiled and said,
" You. cannot write it down, and you cannot remember it, but
you will recognize it when the time comes." " Guardian spirits
are given to those who go to foreign countries, to guide and aid
them, whereby they benefit themselves ; charity brings gooa to
those that use i~, more charity is gained by charity. Noth~g
prevents you ~omg, he has breathed on you once, he will aga~1
and once agam, when you return, then never more· he will
accompany :r,ou if nothing occurs to prevent your gohtg ; he is
verr. strong. Home now got up, walked round to me kneeled
beside me as in pra,..er, and a~ain drew me back by the sboul•
ders, and pressed his head agamst my back, and I felt the same
current How from his foreliead as before. Home stood up

13
and said," He is v-ery strong and tall," and standing there beside
me, Home grew, I should say, at least, six inches. Mr. Jencken,
who is a taller man than Home, stood beside him so there could
be no mistake about it. Home's natural height is, I believe, 5 feet
lO inches. I should say he grew to 6 feet 4 inches or 6 feet 6
inches. I placed my hands on his feet, and f~lt that they were
fairly level ou the ground. He had slippers on, and he said,'' Daniel
will shew you how it is," and he unbuttoned his coat. He was
elongated from his waist upwards, there was a space of, I suppose,
4 inches between his waistcoat and the waistband of his trowsers.
He appeared to grow also in breadth and size all over, but there
was no way of teRting that. He diminished down to his natural
size, and said, " Daniel will grow tall again;" he did so, and said,
"Daniel's feet are on the ground," he walked about, and
stamped his feet. He returned to his natural size, and sitting
down, he said, "Daniel is coming back now, sit down, and
do not tell Daniel at once what he has said." In a few seconds
he awoke. After sitting a few minutes, he said, " What can it
mean, I hear a voice saying ' Go into the next room, go into the
next room?' " We all went into the drawing room; it was quite
dark. Home sat at the piano, and played a few notes. Mrs.
Hennings sat near him; Mrs. Jencken a little way off; Mr.
Jencken and I stood near the piano. Soon we observed the light
that we had been told we should see. A small luminous ball flitting about, sometimes very brilliant ; the chords of the piano
were swept, but the keys were not touched. The piano was lifted
off the grout;td about 2 inches. I had my hand underneath, and it
was again lifted about 2 inches, and then without any effort, I
should say 8 inches higher. It was not tilted, but lifted bodily.
We now heard loud raps, the alphabet was called, and '' Good
night " spelled out. Nothing more occurred.

No. 7 Seance.
We had a seance at No. 5, Buckingham Gate, the other night.
Soon after sitting down the table be_gan to shew evidence of
some powerful influence about it. Mr. Jencken had unfortunately
to go away by the ten o'clock train. After he left, we went into
the dining room, and sat at the small round table. We had paper
and a pencil on the table, and when the table was tilted the
paper slipped off, which it does not generally do. I had been
mentioning to Brint~ley the fact that things on the table
generally remain stationary, though it be raised to a great
angle · and we were all remarking how curious it was that it
would' not do so now. The next phenomena that occurred were

14
entirely in connection with making the paper stay upon the
table. Home said in all his experience he bad never seen the
same sort of thing. His hand and arm were taken possession
of, that is to say, they became perfectlr rigid, and were moved
quite independently of his will; his :fist was so :firmly closed
that his :fingers could not be opened ; and the muscles of his
wrist and arm felt like iron. He got up, and altered the
position of one of the candles on the large table a few inches,
and removed all our hands from the table ; he then commenced to mesmerise the paper, pointing at it with the :fir8t
and middle finger-the otliers being clenched-making raJ.>id
passes over it, and making circles round it on the table w1th
great rapidity. The table was gradually tilted up till its edge
touched the floor. Being a table with one central support
it was nearly1 but not quite, perpendicular-the paper remamed
without slippmg for some little time. We requested that it might
be moved. His hand was agitated above it, and th~ edges of
the paper W'ere blown UIJ, apparently by the current caused by
his hand. '!'he paper slipped to the ground ; he took it and
rubbed it round and round on the table, and then tried to leave
it on the centre of the table. It would not, however, remain
quite fixed, sli!'ping a little. Gettin~ rather tired of this, Home
asked if we mtght not put the table m its place and all sit round
it again. We were told " Yes;" and dtd so. The followinp,
sentences were then spelled out: " We did it to gratify you,· '
" We have power to make the table heaVJI." We tried, asking
it to become heavy and light, and it did as we required. A
number of messages were then given, all having reference to
Miss D-- R--=-. None of us knew the people they purported
to come from, or anything about the circumstances they had
reference to. She had some difficulty in believing that an uncle
of hers was present as represented, and as a test of identity the
following was spelt by some one else: " He always st'gned kis
name - - --," mentioning a peculiar way in which he signed.
All the rest ·of the seance consisted in messages and answers
to Miss D-- R--, amounting to a conversation, and having
some reference to matters that we did not understand. We
were wished Good night at the end. '!'he table was sometimes
very violent in its movements.

No.8 Seance.-November, 1867.
My dear Father,-! went down yesterday to Norwood, and
dined with Mr. J encken. I was very much disappointed to fin~
that Home had settled to go up to London afterdmner, toheara

15
lecture by Miss Emma Hardinge. I should much have preferred
sl'ending the evening quietly there. We all tried to persuade
htm to stop, but in vam. However, after dinner he recited us
some poetry, and to our great satisfaction he went on until he
missed the train. V\T e then talked for some time, and had some
music. Mrs. Jencken played us some very pretty little musical
airs. While Mrs. J encken, Home, and Miss D-- R-were at the piano there ca.me raps upon it. Mr. Jencken and
I were sitting some way off at the table. Shortl~ after, Home
suggested that we should sit round the table. 'l he room was
lighted by a bright fire and two candles. Almost immediately
after sitting down, we heard raps; arrd the usual currents of cold
air were felt, also the vibration of the table and floor. We had
very little of rapping or movement of the table during the sea11ce.
The table was, however, two or three times raised off the floor,
and sustained in the air for a considerable time. We were talking
about a gentleman (a friend of the others) ; abusing him a little
for being conceited and unpleasant in different ways. Home
said, "Oh, don't let us talk about our neighbours now."
However, they went on talking about him, not in what one
would usually call an ill~natured way ; but still, cutting ·him up
a little. The table was moving slightly all the time, and at last
the alphabet was called for. The four following sentences were
spelled out, with short intervals between them: " There is one
God, He is the Father of all." " God t's tolerant-he bears with
our shortcomings." "Love and charity-God. ,qives the one and
expects the other." " We are all but mortal8." After such &
beautiful rebuke as that, I need not say that we did not talk
any more about the shortcomings of our neighbours.
I should say that Mr. Jencken had, soon after the phenomena
commenced, put out the candles. The fire-light was, however,
in a small room, quite sufficient to show everything clearly. The
name of God was, in every case, marked in a manner different
to that in which the letters in the other words were indicated ;
sometimes by the table being raised and waved about. Once,
when the table was in the air during the whole sentence, by
slow strong vibrations, instead of raps. Home now said he was
touched for the accordion, and took it, holding it in the usual
way. Almost immediately, without any apparent effort, it
began to play powertul, clear, and beautifully harmonious
chords.
It played for some considerable time when the alphabet was
called for and this was spelled:-" You are quite CO'I"rect, it was
.Augusta." I said, I did not see exactly to what the sentence
applied. The alphabet was called again, and the words " The
other night" spelled, making the sentence complete, and referring

16
to what you and I had been speaking of in the train about the
message on Saturday night, " It was A-- touched tlJe keys."
After this the accordion was again played far some little time
most beautifully, the notes being drawn out so fine, that "it was
only by bending the head and listening attentivelv, that the
harmony could be heard dying away and then swelling again.
The accordion was drawn out from under the table, Home still
holding it lifted over his head, and brought round to Miss D-R--; it was lifted up and presented towards her, the same
was done to me, and It was rested on my left shoulder, and
while there, close to my ear, it breathed out the softest sounds.
There was a noise as of some one breathing behind me, which the
others also heard, but, I think, that must have been caused by
the instrument. 'l'he accordion was in like manner presented to
Mr. and Mrs. Jencken, and then went under the table again.
A very remarkable thing now occurred, the accordion was seized
some influence that evidently could not play it, and which
disturbed that previously acting. It abruptly left off playing,
then began agam quite differently, playing three or four notes
with a powerful loud touch, and then it broke down altogether.
Home, before the change said, " Ah, there is some strange influence at work now." After the discordant notes 1 the accordion
was raised above the table, Home still holding It, he said his
arm felt quite paralyzed, and that he was obliged to follow it; it
drew him from his chair, and went near ton-:-- and remained
there some time oscillating backwards and forwards, and waving
itself about, the accordion then led him back to his chair, after
which it went under the table and recommenced playing as
before the interruption. Soon the alpha:bet was called, and the
following spelt :-" We do all we can to shew you that we do not
for9et"-and then the accordion finished the sentence by playing
"Auld lang Syne," first quietly, then with full loud chords.
Home said, suddenly, "Oh, this is a very powerful spirit." He
stood up, or rather he was raised up, and his hand was violently
agitated in the air; he then sat down, and his hand was extended
towards the flowers on the small table, the fingers pointing
towards them. His hand remained there a few seconds, and was
then brought round, and with a motion like sprinkling, cast the
perfume of the flowers towards each of us in tum ; the perfume
was so strong that there could be no mistake about it. This was
done twice. His hand was then raised a little above my head,
the fingers pointing towards me, and went through motions
something like mesmeric passes, or as I thought as though
blessing me. His hand was then placed upon mine, and stroked
my fingers gently, first one then the other· it then was carried
to his own face, and passed across it two' or three times. His

br

17
hand was now swung violently to and fro, then remained qaiet1
and presently it was extended to the flowers again. I could
distinctly see it with the fingers pointing towards the flowers,
about six inches above them; I am sure it never tou~hed them.
His hand became quite luminous, and was brought slowly round
and across the table, until it remained with the fingers still
extended, over my hand. I raised my hand towards it, and a
leaf of sweet-scented geranium fell apparently from under his
hand into mine, the leaf was not held in his fin~ers, neither
could I see it until 1t fell. (Home said, when h1s hand was
extended over the flowers, that it felt to him, as though it
was resting on a solid or semi-solid substance.) At the same
moment, the alphabet was called for and this spelled, " Take
it with you, my boy." This sentence followed immediately, " We
have done what we promised, look under the handlcerchief:"
Mrs. J encken had, on the evening they had had such beautiful
manifestations, a short time ago, asked that a flower might also
be given to her. They had announced that it would be done,
and now under her handkerchief there was a piece of geranium ;
her handkerchief had been on the table all the time, and no one
had touched it.
This sentence was now spelled," Nextfor dear D--." Home's
hand was extended again to the flowers ; it certainly was not
nearer them than 6 inches ; it became_ luminous, and a flower
was given to D-- in the same way it had been given to me.
The alphabet was again called, and this spelled\ " This is .for .vou,"
and at the same moment1 a flower dropped at Mr. J encken's
hand; none of us heard 1t broken off, or saw it, but it fell
on the table just in front of his han'd. " Our Joy" was now
spelled, and the accordion played, and then" Our thanks to God"
and it played again. The alphabet was called, and " Weep not"
spelled. Dear old Mrs. Jencken was quietly crying, not as she
said for sorrow, when the words " Weep not" were spelled, her
handkerchief was gently taken from her under the table, and
afterwards replaced upon it. After this, "Good night" was
spelled, and nothing more occurred.
No. 9 Seance-July 26th, 1868.
Present: Mrs. Jencken, Mrs. Hennings, Mr. Jencken,
Home, and myself. Physical manifestations very sli~ht, Home
passing almost immediately into a trance, in whtch he delivered the following address, purporting to come from the
sP.irit of Dr. Jencken; to prove identity several tests were
g1ven.
B

18

Dr. Jencken, during the last few years of his life, had been
quite blind, and was in the habit, when dictating, of going through
tne form of writing with great rapidity on his knee with his
finger; he also had a peculiar habit of clasping his bands
together, and speaking with his head bent very low down.
Home imitated him in both respects to the very life, and also
mentioned some circumstances that had occurred many years
before at Mayence.
The first words Home spoke were in a very low voice,
telling us to go on talking. He then got up, threw away a silk
cushion he had been sitting on, and said, "Remember, Dan
must not sit on a silk cushion while this very hot weather
lasts." He remained silent for a few minutes, and then commenced speaking with a clear voice, and in a very impressive
manner. Part of the discourse was in verse, but owing to the
partially darkened state of the room and the rapidity of his
utterance, it was quite impossible to write it down. The following notes taken by Mr. Jencken are for these reasons very
imperfect.
" There are laws which govern the approach of spititual
beings to earth and their organic life, ana there are epochs
of darkness wh~n the spiritual spheres are far removed from the
earth ; when the approach of spirits is all but impossible.
These epochs have been called by those on eart}t the dark ages j
they mark the absence of spiritual intercourse. There are also
times of near approach, not unlike your winter and summer
seasons. This alternate action is a great law; great principles
rule all things. There was such an epoch of easy approach at
the time of the Ancient Egyptians. They knew ~is an~ .under-_
stood the laws better than you do. Before that tune spmts had
not taken sufficient pains to encourage the invention of means
for the }lerpetuating of knowledge. There was no printing, nor
mechamcal contrivance, in those days. Since then, during the
period that their approach to earth was more difficult, th~y have
turned· their attention more to those matters, so that now
knowledge can never be so lost again. You are now entering
upon a peziod of very near approach. It is coming like the
tide in a river-irresistible, overriding the current, overcoming
all ; it is coming grandly and Godly. What has already been
seen is but the smallest wavelet of the tide that is coming upon
the earth. Some of you here present will see it; others among
you will have joined us, and will be helping on the great work
we have in hand. The•echoes of it are coming; they sound like
the notes of the organ rolling up the aisles of those grand old
cathedrals that men have built-notes signifying the heart-felt
prayer of an earnest soul ascending to the throne of God; never

19
lost but echoing on for ever. Spiritual truth must come ; truth
is a lighthouse, a beacon, a speck, a point, leading onward to
realms of love. We have no power, we can do so little, that
we often wonder that we are able to do any,thing for you.
Language is too imperfect, we cannot convey to you our
meaning; you cannot understand us; our state is so different
from your material state, that is it with great difficulty that we
can work upon it to make our presence known ; not that it is
painful to us-no, no, it is a labour of love. But still it is an
actual labour to us. The earth is still so imperfect-so
undeveloped-that we ha,·e much difficulty in dealing with
material objects. Why, even such a little thing as the silk
cushion that Dan was sitting on, prevented us from making
physical manifestations to-night ; yet we did succeed in giving
you each a token of ourjresence, though it was very slight.
Henry, the floor vibrate under your chair. Adare, your
chair was touched. Amelia and Mary, you both felt the current
of cold air pa~s over your hands." You all felt something.
" The earth is as yet very immature, but progressing. A
period of very near approach is at band ; after that there will be
one, probably two epochs of darkness. We are entirely dependent upon atmospherical conditions. Now, to-night, the
atmosphere is so surcharged with electricity, that it appears to
us qwte thick, like sand. It is so unlike our own, that it is
almost impossible for us to get near you'. We feel like men
wading through a quicksand-slipping back as fast as we
advance. At other times, when your earthly atmosphere is in a
natural state, it is more like our own, and we have no difficulty
in being near you. You wonder if we wish lou to be better
than you are. Yon ara aU good. The germs o good are in all.
We can see further than you can ; and know all your trials,
all your doubts and .difficulties. Were we not once mortals as
you are? We see the troubles and the thorns that beset your
path. Stretch forth your hands-thrust them through the
brambles-draw them not back or the blood will flow-stretch
them out and let them remain, there shall they find rest. We
know not of time; to us yesterday, to-day, to-morrow are all
one. Had we hours, days, years, even ages, like vou, we
should say time passes slowly, or time passes fast. We never
tire; we are eternity. Happiness is not idleness. Labour is
joy, the labour of love. Even on earth it is not the spirit that
wearies of a labour of love ; it is the poor weak body that
tires, that faints, that falls to sleep. We have work to do, to
elevate ourselves, and to draw you onward and ufward. We
constantly watch over you, and sympathize with al your cares.
We never weary ; we -do not judge you ; we were as you are.
B2

20
God alone is the Judge. You ask why we always speak of
love ; it is love that brings us to you. God is Love. Spirit
messages are always breathing love for God. God is Love.
Henry, your father is pleased that you are engaged upon
his works, he too has his work to do. He was aided in writmg,
and knows now that higher spirits aided him. Do you remember
at 1\'Iayence, how he was affected? (Here Home imitated his
peculiar mode of writing upon his knee, and manner of speaking).
An inferior spirit had got influence over him. I see him now,
he had great self-esteem, and was very opinionated, and only
wanted his own ideas to become prominent; this is very dangerous, and must be guarded against. Truth, truth-worship truth :
particle by particle build up the temple of truth ; be consistent,
for God is Truth. Here we have no narrowing creed, no four
church walls, with a cushioned pew for the rich, and a plain
board for the poor man, to limit the worship of truth. The
great four walls of eternity ; the blue ether, set with sparkling
stars, gems made by the hand of God, ever lustrous dtamonds
of the heavenly orb, peep-holes of heaven ; it is there we
worship, and through them we peer in our search for truth.
One great objection made to Spiritualism, is, that we do
not disclose all the truth-if true, why not tell all? Are you
capable of perceiving the truth? The man has not yet been
formed upon the earth fitted to know the whole truth. Immortality
is before you ! Immortality gleams upon earth-gleams like a
lighthouse, .like a beacon to yon. The future is not even understood by all of us,* but we draw nearer and nearer to God, for
here there is no one to hold you back, to say you are mad ; peals
of angel voices call you onward and upward ; cheer you in your
struggles, and aid you.
There are great laws of development that draw the organic
and the inorganic together ; you on earth witness the onward
course of all things in the organic world, rising to higher conditions, as, for instance, the development of the cbild into·

* The meaning is obscure. The words, " The future is not even understood
by all of us; but we draw nearer and nearer to God, for here there is no
one to hold you back-to say that you are mad," evidently refer to Fpirita, and
the sentence should stand: " For here there is no one to bold us back-to say
that !"'E are D?ad·" Substituting the words "us" and "we" for "you," which
i~ eVIdently Improperly uaed. It Ia an open question whether the remaining
lmes belong to the same sentence or uot ; the context would rather lend me to
suppose not. If the lines constitute one sentence with the same train or
thought runnin!f all through _it, then the word "you" should be altered to" us"
in the l&dt two lmes also, which ~hould read thus: "Peals of angel voices call
""onward and upward; cheer UBm our struggles and aid UB," But it appearH to
~e more probable that the ~fe!en~ to the state of the spirits concludeR with
hne 8, and that the two remammg hnes are an aspiration or prayer that " peals
of &';'gel voices may call yo.u" (that is, mortals) "onward and upward; cheer
you m your struggles and a1d yon."

21
manhood. Onward is the progress; onward and upward. Search,
-search for truth,-be true, be brave, be pra:yerful; ye are all
children of ~d created by Him. 'l'he time ts rapidly coming
for a great change in spiritual life; we are nearing the cycle, so
near that some of you here present will witness the change,
others will have gone to their home, to their rest, to the blessed.
Are you weary of life ? weary of the earth? The soul tires
not, it is only the body. (In answer to question by H. J.) You
are right, Henry; your father is clearer in his views now, more
to the point, sees things clearer than he did when on earth. Oh,
how much he wished to know Daniel; had he but known him 1
Yon remember how anxious he was about him."
No. 10 Seance.
Last Monday I was at a s~ance at Mr. Hall's. There were
nine present: Mr. and Mrs. Hall, Horne, the Misses Bertolacci
(mediums), a cousin of mine, two gentlemen whose first seance
it was, and myself. Almost immediately we felt the sort of
phenomena that usually take place first, such as cold currents of
air passing over the hands, table vibrating, &c. These ceased,
and for some time nothing occurred. Some one su~gested that
the young ladies should try if anything would be wntten. They
did so with the planchette, both placing one hand upon it at the
same time. These words were written "By patience, and in
the name qf Chrt'.~t." We were also told by the same means to
sit down again in the same positions we had occupied before.
After a time very strong manifestations took place, the table
Yibrating, tilting, and being raised about a foot off the ground ;
raps were heard on the table, on the floor, on our chairs, &c.
nearly every one was touched. I felt a hand between my eg
and Home's: I was sitting next to him. There was evidently
some very strong influence about Home. After a time a message
was given by raps : " I now know that my Redeemer liveth:
l1ave patience and bear all. JJani'el, I owe you many thanks.John Ellt"otson." After this, in answer to some question (I
forget what), the table was tilted three times in the four opposite directions, and was then lifted three times in the air.
Home's chair was once drawn away a little from the table, and
raised off the floor, but certainly not more than one inch. His
chair was also turned completely round, so that his back was
towards us, his feet during tbe whol~ time the ch~ir was ~oving
being off the ground. An arm cbatr moved of Itself a distance
of about a yard up against the back of my rhair. Home's
band and arm became cataleptic, and were moved about quite
independent of his will. His hand was sometimes thumped and

1

22
beaten violently against the table, but without causing him any
pain. His hand was moved to the back of my neck, and pushed
me forward in my chair. He then began to thump me violently
on the back, and to rub me across the back, commencing at
the right side. His hand also stroked and patted my head,
and was also moved to my cousin sitting at the opposite
side of the table, and stroked and patted her hands and
head.
The following message was written by- Home's hand, his
fingers being so strongly clenched, it was wtth difficulty that the
pencil was inserted between them. " We know all your discusai<»f
about A-- W-- j we are the bestjud,qes, it was a bad influence.
F--- and F---." The paper was then pushed across to my
cousin to read, neither of us could understand what F-- and
F - - meant, although we ought to have guessed, as the same
words had been used about the same subject, iu a message given
us a few days previously. Seeing that we could not make it out
the words "forqet and forgive" were written. Other messages
were written through Home and one, of the ladies present.
:Mr. Holt, a gentleman whose first sla'flce it was, became much
affected; soon after sitting down, his hands were taken possession
of and violently agitated, sometimes on, and sometimes under
the table; occasionally his arms were drawn back behind his chair1
his hands being all the time violentl,r agitated ; a pencil and
paper were given him, but though hts hand moved over the
paper with the greatest rapidity, nothing but scribbling was the
result. So strong was the influence over him, that he went and
sat alone upon the sofa at some distance from us, to try and
diminish it; when he left, the power about the table became
sensibly lessened ; he continued to be slightly agitated the whole
evening. We were all anxious to know who was endeavouring
to make him write ; two Christian names with the word
"uncl.e" between them were written throu~h Home. Home at
one time said he felt convinced that a spint was near him who
had passed from this life by being drowned. Some little time
after, Mr. Hall was telling us how one of his brothers had been
mysteriously drowned at sea, he being a very good swimmer j
Home's hand was taken possession of and wrote the worcl
" Shark" upon a piece of paper, and then pushed it to
Mr. Hall. Home and one of the ladies present went into a
trance at the same moment ; for some time they sat in their
places, occupying themselves with putting their fingers upon
the sheets of paper on the table, and then waving their hands
about, the paper adhering to their fingers; Home then got up
a.nd walkecf about the room; he took a. large sheet of paper ofF
the table, doubled it up and placed it on the piano in the next

23
room; the young lady also got up, and sat down upon the sofa,
at the other side of the room.
Home sat down in his chair, and began to talk to Mrs.
Hall in a whisper. I could not hear the exact words he used,
but they were to the effect that during their occupation of that
house, there had been a bad influence present during seances
twice only. He mentioned who one of the spirits was, and
said that the same influence had that evening turned Home
round in his chair, and had brought the arm chair up against
mine. He also told her that in the house to which they were
going, nothing but what was good and holy would come near
them. Home was elongated to the extent of, I should say,
6 inches, four times; he walked about, stamped, and shufBed his
feet, to shew that he was standing fairly upon them. He went
round to Mr. Holt, one of the gentlemen present, and made him
place his hand upon his waist that he might feel how he become
elongated and contracted. Mr. Holt said that he held his hand
fiat against Home's side; that the lower edge of his hand
was resting on his hip bone; that he felt Home's lower rib
pass under his hand, tmtil it was some inches above it; the
whole flesh and muscle apparently moving and stretching. On
the contraction taking place, he felt the lower rib come down
until it pressed against the upper edge of his hand and moved
into its ·proper position. Home said- that the young lady
had also been elongated, and would be again. She was then
standing near the table in a trance, and began swaying herself
from side to side; she was palpably elongated to the extent of,
JJerhaps, three inches. About this time a loud knock came at
the outside door. Home said, "He must come in-it is the
Master of Lindsay." Home then opened the room door,
went out into the entry, and took the gentleman by the
hand; he led him into the room; made him shake hands with
Mr. and Mrs. Hall, with the young lady who was in the trance,
and with mel we being all perfect strangers to him. Home then
said to him, 'You must go out of the room until Daniel awakes,
for if he was to awake and find you here, he would be frightened."
Shortly after this they both awoke, and the party broke up.
I arrived at home about half an hour before Home. Soon
after we had gone to bed we both heard the hall door loudly
slammed. I said, '' Oh, Dan, you have left the door open, and
some one has come in I" He declared he had locked it, and put
the chain up; however, we both got up and went down to see
what was the matter. I found the hall door locked and the
chain up, and the study and dining room doors both wide open.
I went mto the study and heard raps, I then went out to where

24

Home wll.s standing in the entry, and we heard raps on the
floor. He said, "Oh, I atn sure it is dear old Dr. Elliotson1"
" Yes," was rapped. I then said, "In that case I suppose no
burglars came in and we may go to bed again?" " Y'es," was
rapped. We went up stairs, Dr. Elliotson following us rapping
on the banisters and stairs. After we had got into bed again
we heard heavy footsteps walking about the room, and raps
in various places. Home carried on a conversation with Dr.
Elliotson for a little time, asking questions and receiving answers
to them by raps.
He (Dr. Elliotson) told us that he had not suffered pain in
passing away 1 and that he had found the other world very much
what he had expected it to be ; that he had not intended to
frighten us by making a sound as of slamming the door, and that
he would be more careful not to make so much noise in future;
but that as yet he had only imperfect control over physical
manifestations ; that he had followed Home to the house,
and was glad to be near him, &c. Home and I talked about him
for some little time, he joining in our conversation, assenting
or dissenting by means of raps.

---

Two days after this as we were getting up, about 10 o'clock,
a bright sun shining into the room. loud raps came upon the
floor, &c., and a long message of a private character was given
to Home.

No. 11 Seance-July, 1868.
Having missed the last train to London I was very glad
to accept Mr. Jones's kind offer to remain all night at his
house. Home and I carried a sofa upstairs to his (Home's)
room for me to sleep on. I did not leaYe the room after
bringing in the sofa. My clothes I placed upon a small round
table near the foot of the bed. On a chair by the sofa I placed
a pocket handkerchief, two eye glasses, and a snuff box.
During the seanre in the evening it was said that I should
hear music without any instrument that night. Home turned
off the gas previous to going to bed. A certain amount
of light entered the room from the street, so that it was not
perfectly dark. I could easily distinguish Home when he sat up
m bed; and could have seen anybody moving about the room.
We had not been in bed more than three minutes when
both Home and myself simultaneously heard the music; it
sounded like a harmonium; sometimes, as if played loudly at a
great distance; at other times, as if very gently, close by. The
music continued for some minutes, when Home got up to

25
ask Mr. Jones if any one was playing the accordion. Mr. Jones
returned with him, and we all three then heard the music. The
usual phenomena of raps and vibrations of the floor, sofa, &c.,
occurred very frequently and with great power ; the raps
sounded all over the room; on the floor, walls, even on
Home's bed; on, under, and in my sofa. My sofa occasionally
vibrated very strongly; the bed clothes on Home's bed and
on the sofa were frequently pulled and moved about. We both
several times heard sounds such as would be caused by some one
in a muslin dress moving about the room, although we could see
nothing.
After a short time I heard the chair close to my sofa moving,
and a finger touched one of my hands that was hanging over
the side of the sofa, the next moment I felt the snuff box on the
chair touch me, and found that the chair was moving, I said,
that I thought some one had touched me, but that probably I
had been mistaken, and that it was only the box; the spirits
said by the alphabet that I had been touched. The chair then
moved to the foot of the bed, and we heard the various articles
upon it being stirred about. I was sitting upon the sofa, with
one hand resting on the edge, suddenly I felt something brush
across my hand; this was repeated, and I became aware of something swinging in the air. I then heard some object brushing
backwards and forwards against the back of the sofa, inside ;
on putting my hand to the spot, my eye glass was placed in
it. I took the glass, and in drll.wing it away, I felt by the
resistance offered, that the cord was attached to something;
while feeling the resistance a hand and arm holding the end of
the cord became visible. This I saw distinctly for a second or
two it then disappeared.
i now heard a sound near the foot of the bed as if my double
glasses were being opened and shut, and 1 distinctly saw a figure,
apparently draped, standing over the foot of the bed; it held,
something, I believe the double glasses, and I could see the hand
and arm waving backwards and forwards; I could hear the eyeglass swinging in the air, but could not see it; the figure
stooped down towards Mr. Jones, and disappeared. A message
was then given : " The .fo.Jure is not the same as the one that
touched you.''

About half a minute after, I distinctly heard something
moving along the side of the sofa, and immediately my double eveglass was placed upon the back of my hand ; I felt the hand that
held it push it on, and then stroke and pat my fingers; I took
three fingers of the hand in mine, and held them for some
seconrls ; as I increased the pressure upon them, they appeared
to withdraw themselves from me; I was again touched, and my

26
hand stroked and patted, the fingers were like a delicately formed
human hand, the skin feeling perfectly natural to the touch.
A message was now given : " JVe place it there to shew you
that we do not wish you to contract a habit, pernicious, and that
can be of no poss-ible use to you." "While wondering what this
could meani my snuff box came right across the room through
the air, fa ling against my leg, where it remained. Home
saw it pass through the air in front of him. I asked who
had thrown it; and was told "Grandfotller Goold." Mr. Jones
asked if the snuff had been taken out, "No," was immediately
rapped in various parts of the room.
Mr. Jones wished that something might be done for him, and
he was slightly touched. He asked also that the chair might
be moved round to him. The chair began again to move, hut
there was not room for it to pass between the foot of the bed
and the round table. The table was raised off the floor and
moved out of the way, the top becoming slightly luminous.
While moving, it suddenly fell to the floor and rolled over. My
clothes tumbled off, the money in the pockets rolling about the
room. I said, '' I wonder how it happened; it is so unusual for
them to let anything fall." They answered, "It hoppened bg
mistake.'' I observed, "How kind it is of them to answer
questions like this." They answered, " Would you not do the
same .f()1' us." Mr. Jones said that he supposed the spirits in
the room were friends of mine. 'l'hey answered " Yes." I asked
how man,r of my own family were present. They answered
"Six." I asked if they had not come to _welcome me home
from abroad. They answered " Yes," by rapping three times
all over the room.
A message was now given: " We wish to give you the-."'
Here it broke off; and though Home repeated the alphabet
three or four times, nothing more would come. While we were
wondering at this unfinished sentence my pocket handkerchief
dropped thr.ough the air into my lap. I took it up and found
there was something hard in it. It turned out to be my latch
key that I had left in my trowsers pocket, knotted into one
corner of the handkerchief. The remainder of the unfinished
message was then spelled out: "Key to the mystery," makinf,
altogether, " We wish to give you the k6JI to the mystery.'
Mr. Jones had been telling me that the spirits were anxious to
prove to me that there was an actual intelligence at work, aud
that the phenomena were not the result of mere animal
magnetism.
After this, " Good night" was spelled out. The last sound I
heard was that of the jingling of fhe money while being picked
up about the room I put my eye-glass, handkerchief, and snuff

27
box on the floor. Mr. Jones left the rootn, and I very soon
went to sleep. In the morning I found the things on the floor
in the same position that I had left them in, the key being still
knotted to the handkerchief. The chair was near the foot of
the bed, a blanket that I had thrown off my sofa entangled
round it. The table was lying on the ground-my clothes on
the floor. All my silver I found in the pocket I had left it
in ; the gold, consisting of four pieces, I found on Home's
counterpane.
These phenomena could not have been caused by any
mechanical contrivances. In order to produce the violent ""ibrations and the raps on the sofa2 it would have been necessary to
attach some complicated machinery to it ; that was impossible, as
I -assisted to carry it up from the drawing room, never left the
room after we had brought it up, and was lying down upon it
within three or four minutes after we had placed it in the room.
It would have been also necessary to attach machinery to the
chair and table. Articles w~re taken from the chair, and conveyed to me without any human agency, for I must have seen
anyone moving in the room, and the chair was too far removed
from Mr. Jones and Home to have been reached by them by
any means.
No. 12 Seance-5 7 Buckingham Gate, .August 3rd, 1868.

One day last week Home complained of not feeling at
all well, and of being in very low spirits. I did not feel well
myself, and lay down on the sofa, where I presently went to
sleep. When I awoke, Home told me that there had been
raps on the tables, &c., but that instead of cheerin~ him they
made him feel more uncomfortable. They had given him answers
to several questions. He asked why it was that he felt so low and
ill. The answer was, " There is nothin,q Spt"rt:tualistt'c in it/ it is
rather a tinge from the thoughts of .Adare," This puzzled me very
much, as I was 9uite unaware of anything having taken place
that could give nse to unpleasant thoughts. I sat down at the
writing table and heard raps on various parts of it, They again
said that they showed their presence to "cheer Dan." Home
had said that he felt a desire to smoke a cigarette, a thing I have
never known him do before. He smoked one, owing to which1
I think, a fit of coughing was brought on. Home coughed
up a quantity of blood and !Hlemed relieved by- it; he then lay
down on the sofa. The raps continued for a short time, and I
asked if Home's indisposition was anything serious. They
answered, " No." I asked if he would be all right soon. They

28

answered, " Yes."
daylight.

This occurred about 3 p.m. in broad

No. 13 Seance-5 7 Buckingham Gate.

Two or three days subsequently, Home and I having gone
to bed after a seance here, at which we felt a few movements of
the table, we had manifestations in the bed room, consisting of
our beds vibrating strongly and of raps on the furniture, doors,
and all about the room. Home's bed was slightly moved
out from the wall. We both heard something on the dressing
table being moved about, and at the same moment we both saw
in exactly the same spot, a perfectly white column, it can scarcely
be called a figure, as the shape was indistinct. It moved from
the dressing table towards Home's bed. Home said he saw
a white ogject about the size of a child :Boating near the
ceiling above his head. I saw it also, but it appeared to me to
be in mid air, half way between the bed and the ceiling: it
was :Boating about in a horizontal position; it was like a small
white cloud without any well-defined shape. I saw it descend
close to Home., who then lost s~ht of it, hut I perceived it
come within about two feet of his head. It then slowly
:Boated to the foot of his bed and disappeared. I afterwards saw
the same appearance near the door. Home saw it intercept
the light coming in from the window against the opposite wall;
I did not. We had three messages given us : First, " We love
God best by loving you and seeking to injluenc6 you for good."
Second, " Seeing that you have been troubled to know what we
meant by its be~·n,q rathsr a tinge from the tho'!flhts of .Adare1
we wish to tell ;qou it was ow't'n!J. to sQ'IT/.etlnng in a letter
received from hi's father." The mamfestio.ns continued for some
time when the third mess'%e was given : "Now sleep." After
this we heard and saw nothing more. There was sufficient light
in the room to distinguish candles, books, &~r., on the table.
No. 14 Seance-August 6th 1 1868.
Present: Mrs. J encken, Mrs. Hennings, Mr. J encken,
Home, and myself. Very few physical manifestations, Home's
hands were ta.ken possession of, and were strongly agitated,* he
~ I have fr~quently seen pe!'p~e's hands taken posseRSion of and agitated
dunng ala~~CU m a somewhat Blmilar way. The same thing has occurred to
mvselr. In my ca~e, my hands were. !~loved about sometimes violently,
somettll!es gently, wtthout any act of vobtion on my part ; and vet in a manner
not enttrely beyond my control. In Mr. Home's case the muscles became
perfectly hard and rigid; and i fancy he can neither direct nor prevent the
movements.

29
took the accoraion and played with considerable feeling, his hands
moving and touching the keys independent of his will, during
this he went into a trance1 got UJ;l 1 walked to the piano and
played a piece of music w1th considerable execution ; he then
sat down and spoke as follows: (Dr. Elliotson speaking through
him the greater part of the time).*
"Henry, do you know that your father met Dr. Elliotson
to-day, and for the first time, and much pleased him; they are
charmed with each other, he (Dr. Elliotson) is very enthusiastic.
Thoall that are longer away from earth lose their intense interest
in it they have other calls upon them. He, like your father,
sought for development and truth, though often wrongly guided;
he did not look up to the great sunlight, but doubted and erred.
These two, have, as I said, met to-day, just now, according to
your mode of computing time. Dr. Elliotson is so delighted to
meet your father. 'Why have we not met before?' he says,
'we ought.' 'That was your fault, Dr. Elliotson; not mine.'
Then he turns back, shakes your father by the hand and tells
him he is so glad to know him. In the state that we live in
there are no restrictions; men are drawn together by mutual
sympathies. Here is no deception, no saying 'I am glad to
see you, my dear fellow,' when the heart does not mean it.
Thoughts are seen and read, and those suited to each other
are naturally drawn together.
"Dr. Elliotson is full of plans how to operate better, he wants
to invent some sort of mechanism to act with the brain, some
more powerful battery, he wants to convince the whole world;
he is very enthusiastic. There are some Physicists with large
brains who strain and wear themselves out with over work. The
brain becomes weary, loses its elasticityL disease sets in, preponderosis. This was the case with .Jijlliotson, but it was
particularly painful for him, as every morning on awaking he
knew what he was, and was uware of the state into which he had
fallen, but afterwards his brain failed him and could not act.
He is now so delighted,-delighted in stndyin~ nature; he is
particularly engaged in studying how illness· 1s generated by
mere presence without actual contact ; he has a theory also of
winds carrying diseases, and has found that the south wind carries
disease further than any other; he finds that the winds have
curative powers, and that the geographical position of winds is
important, the currents having different effects at different
altitudes.
" We can see all physical changes, and from out of them, the

* The following account of what occurred during Home's trance is compiled
from the notes taken by Mr. oTencken.

30
moral changes resulting from them, for instance, the heat and
abnormal condition of the atmosphere will in a short time produce a fermentation in the human mind and changes will follow.
It affects the human race and must find a vent in the same way
as a heated condition of body will result and ~d relief in boils
and eruptions."
Home here threw himself back in his chair, rubbed his hands
together as if very much pleased, and said, "Now, if you wish
to ask any questions I am ready to answer them."
Question (Henry Jencken).-How do you make Ull see
spirit forms?
Answer.-At times we make passes over the individual to
cause him to see us, sometimes we make the actual resemblance
of our former clothing, and of what we were, so that we appear
exactly as we were known to you on earth; sometimes we
project an image that you see, sometimes we cause it to be
produced upon your brain, sometimes you see us as we are, with
a cloudlike aura of light around us.
Question (H. J.)-l>o you use actual garments?
A118wer.-Purity is our clothing. We have no need of garments; but are enveloped in a sort of aura, or cloud of light.
Other spirits, more impure and gross, dwelling nearer earth,
have need of garments.
Quest1'on (H. J.)-How do we appear to you?
A118wer.-Mostly in pure light.
Question.-Can you see our light?
A118wer.-We can see all lights; sunlight and every colour
that it is composed of. We see the most beautiful combinations of light. Everything has its light. We see the progress
either of growth or decay that is taking place in everythUJ.g.
The table that you are sitting at was once ~rowing. We
could see every particle expanding and increasmg ; now it is
decaying; and thoQgh it is so gradual that to you it is not
app~rent, Y.et we can see the change taking place in every
particle of It.
Quest1'on.-~n moving among us, do we present an obstacle
to you ? Do you avoid us?
flnswer.- We do, and must avoid ypu. For your ether
bodie~ and t~e atmosphere that surroun~s you is, in many cases,
as solid and Impenetrable to us as gramte is to you. We can
see both the light of your spiritual bodies and of your material
bodies.
Question.-Are not the sun's rays composed of something
more than light ?
Answer.-Of light only, and an elastic wave of electricity
that precedes the light.

31
Question.-! suppose it is not possible for you to visit
the sun?
.Answer.-Most certainly we can. Why should we not?
Question.-Does· it take time for you to travel?
.Answer.-Yes.
Question.-I suppose you move in the same ratio as light?
Answer.-We can travel faster than light.
Question.- What is the appearance of your form or body?
.Answer.-Exactly like your material body, only slightly
smaller in every_respect.
Question.- How do you produce material forms?
Answer.-You produce them with and through us.
Question.-Buthave you no field for action?
.Answer.-You cannot understand us ; the material is to us
as it were spiritual. Suppose I want a fruit, I cannot create it
by thin kin~ of it ; I must go and fetch it from where it is : so if
I want an tdea I must travel into higher spheres, and seek and
find it as an actual created thing. Many things are more real
than you suppose ; thoughts, are they not almost realities? Try
and think of a house you knew long ago ; you will invariably
enter it by the door ; you go in by the door in your imagination ;
were you to entel" by the windows OJ;" the walls, you would not
understand or recognize it. That will tell you that there is
something of material reality in the idea of a house in your
mind.
Question.-Are then your flowers and fruits as actual and
real to you as those growing upon earth are to us?
.Answer.-They are as real to us as an apple or pomegranate
is to you.
Question.-Have you animals in your spheres?
Answer.-There are animals that give pleasure such as horses
and doge; nearer earth are baser animals, and those that cause
pain; some saints and holy men, being in an ecstatic state have at
times caught glimpses of what is going on near them, animals
and men, strange and curious forms all mixed up together.
'l'he only way I can at all describe it to you is to look at a drop
of muddy water under the microscope, and observe the strange
forms; you will see the tail of one protruding from another, and
so on, hence the old ideas of satyrs and creatures half man
half beast, hence the notion of devils with horns and tails, and
of a material hell. Other men have seen higher and brighter
spheres. All this is but the imperfect imagining of those
who see visions: as in Dante's Frozen Hell, he saw the frozen
zone and spiritual forms moving about, and mixed them up all
together. Bodily suffering produces mental suffering; and
mental suffering afflicts the body ; need you be told this?

32
Instance, a case where fright may produce paralysis; or where
pain, insensibility.
In answer to some !l_~ti<m.-The spirit is always sane; the
body makes insane. We can see the spirit like-what shall I say
-well-like, to use a very homely simile, a jack-in-the-box:;
we see the empty, useless casket, and the spirit' hovering above
it, the spirit bounds forth as soon as liberated by death-by
sleep.
In answer to some question.-Some spirits are removed to
other planets, in the course of formation, not necessarily as a
punishment, but that by trial they may develope and return again
at some future time P,urified. Spirits very often go voluntarily
to other planets, until they can fit themselves to be of use to
those on earth, or to dwell with other spirits in higher spheres;
tell this to Dan when he awakes, as he has often wondered why
some of his fr.iendR have not returned to visit him?
In answer to a question.-Actual substances are thrown ofF
from the earth and get entirely beyond its attraction; and
actual substances are brought from the sun to the earth by means
of the rays of lightJ substances that can be weighed-aye, and
that will be weighed some day.
In a?Zswer to a q_uestion as to punt'shments.-Why and how
are you punished? You punish yourselves if you have broken
a law of nature· for no natural law can be broken without
amends being made for its violation. Cut a vein and the blood
:flows, because you have violated a natural law.
Question.-Do you like making manifestations?
.Answer.-lt pleases us to come to you, and to make manifestations. We get so charged by remaining any time in the
earth's atmosphere, that it is a positive relief to make sounds.
There is a spirit now come into the room ; he is what we call
naturally charged. (Quantities of raps heard on the table.) Now
he cannot help doiJ:Jg that, and it is a positive {~Ieasure to him.
(Speaking to me) Elliotson did not want to frighten you the
otlier evening at your house ; he does not know yet how to
manage manifestations, hence the noise he made the other
night. He wanted to see Daniel and you too, but he did not
intend to frighten eiilier of you.*
Question (H. J.)-As to a law of predestination?
.Answer.-Yes, there is a law of predestination which is quite
true, only you could not understand it.
Question.- Infinite possibility ~ives freedom of action?
.Answer•-Yes, infinite possibility, harmonizing with pre-

* 'fhis sentence has reference to certain thinga that occurred &t No. 6
Buckingham Gate-mentioned in pp. 23, 24.
'

33
destination is the law. Oh, I wish so much some spirits from
other plan. ets could come to you, but that is very rarely allowed.
When Malle (Mrs. Jencken's servant) passed away, a spirit
from another planet passed by the open window, that was all,
and yet the room was filled with perfume for days ; if you had
thought of it, and had go\'le out into the garden, you would have
found the perfume stronger there than in the room.
" Henry, your father was inspired when he wrote his works,
remember this (grasping H.Jencken's hand). Act! Do something!
it is so very glorious to assist in the search for truth. There are
so many stubborn men to be convinced. It is your duty to say
that which you know to be true, to utter it. (taking my hand)
Oh my lord, do something ! Act I Aid the many beings yet
in darkness. There is the truth, it is onl( hid, it is there nevertheless shining forth in all its splendour.'
Dr. Elliotson,through Mr. Home, now spoke at some length
on the subject of mental and bodily disease and imperfections,
insanity and crime. He said, "It s very wrong to allow persons
to marry who are not properly fitted to perpetuate theu race.
By allowing perfect freedom of marriage, crime and disease
become perpetuated, and the lower and imperfect form becomes
too permanent. Such as are imperfect should be put aside,
cared for, pitied, but not allowed to Jlerpetuate by marriage.
Angels standing by at very many weddings, where all is rejoicing, weep and mourn-for they see the poor form that
must go out and suffer,-the outcast, the criminal, and the
murderer. But, when the soul is released, then a shout of joy
goes up to heaven that a spirit has been set free." He then
addressed us about the universal justice of God, saying, "You
hold up one book, the Bible, and you say that all those who
differ from you shall be damned, yet other nations have other
books and scrolls, and in their turn say that all those who
believe not in them, must equally be damned. There is no
damnation in that sen!'le-man is his own damnation ; it is the
evil that lies in the little troubled heart of ambitious man,
whose acts are after all but as the gurglings from the neck of :t
bottle, signifying naught."
He then spoke of the great mistake parents make in teaching their children religion without appealing to their reasoning
powers, and giving them something they could hold on to.
"Therefore is it that men are driven to take refuge in a cold barren philosophy. I doubted and told myself that all was not so,
that there was no future-no God, then there came this (rapping
with his fingers on the table, and being answered by some spirit
on the other side of the table,) one, two, three, four, nothing more
-and all was changed, and the scales fell from my eyes, and the

c

34
broad light of immortality shone upon me. I felt that I was
immortal ; by a few gentle raps only was all my scepticism
dispelled." Towards the close of this sentence Home got greatly
excited. Suddenly throwing his hand up to his forehead he
said, "Oh, Dannie I " in quite a different tone of voice, and
fell back in his chair; he presently added, "Do not be frightened,
Dan will be all right presently, but we have made too much
use of him; take his hands but do not touch his feet, and let
him stretch himself out." W c held his hands and he became
perfectly rigid all over, stretching his legs out to their full length.
After a minute he fell back in his chair, then started up and
taking Mrs. Hennings' hands said, (Dr. ElliotRon speaking
through him) " They tell me I have been too violent with Dan,
but my dear lady, I must just tell you this. You remember many
many years ago you brought me a little girl, a clairvoyant, and
1 was not goon, and would not be satisfied with the tests. I was
influenced by the other two girls ; they were very jealous. You
are not angry now, are you ? You know I meant no harm. I
mention this to satisfy you of my identity. You have had many
such tests,* and are now satisfied.
After this, Home threw himself back in his chair and awoke,
he said, "I am wide awake, but I cannot move at all." In a
few minutes he recovered, and said that he was quite well; that
he did not know what he had been doing~ but that he felt as
though he had been very happy.

No. 15.-Seance, 5, Buclcingkam Gate, Aug'UIIt1 1868.
My dear Father,-,-While staying at Dunraven the other
day I saw announced in the paper the death of Adah Menken,
the American actress with wnom both Home and I were
slightly acquainted. On the following momin~ I got a letter
from Home, saying that she had been to visit him, that.she
appeared very restless, and that she was very anxious to
come when he and I were together. On returning to London,
Home, at my request, came to stav at No. 5. All the
evening he complained of bein~ ve~y nervous and in an
unpleasant state, which he attributed a great deal to her
influence. I felt just the same, but put it down to having been
out nt two fires and not home till six o'clock the previous morni!lg. Almost immediately after we had gone to bed and put the
lights out, we both heard music much the same as at Norwood

* This scene occurred some 30 yean ago at Dr. Elliotson's studio, where
Mrs. Hennings attended with a remarkable clairvoyant named Ellen DaWBGB
Dr. Elliotson behaved very abruptly on this occasion, and punctured and injured
the child, whilst in the mesmer1c Rtate; no one present knew of this incident
and it bad even escaped Mrs. Hennings' memory until 1·eminded of it.

35
but more powerful and distinct. Home said that the music
formed words; that, in fact, it was a voice speaking and not
instrumental music. I could hear nothing but the chords like an
organ or harmonium played at a distance. Home became quite
excited because I could not distinguish the words, thinking that
if I could not hear them, it must have been his imagination. He
asked the spirits if possible to make the words sufficiently clear
for me also to hear them. They said" Yes" (by raps); and the
music became louder and louder until I distinctly heard the
words, " Hallelujah, praise the Lord ; praise the Lord God
Almighty." It was no imagination, or the result of anxiety on
my part to hear the same as Home did. Every now and then I
coula not distinguish words, although he said he could . but
y as
I repeatedly heard the words above mentioned as plain1
possible. I cannot in the least explain to you how the voice
articulated ; the words were not separately spoken, neither did
it resemble a human voice. 'l'he sound was slightly reedy and
metallic, not very unlike the Vox humana on an organ. If you
can ima~ne an organ pipe of some rather reedy stop speaking
to you, 1t will be as near it as anything I can describe. Home
said he heard the words, " Adah Isaaks Menken " pronounced j
I did not. The music or voice gradually died away. We asked
if it was Menken's voice, and they said not hers alone. There
were loud raps at different times upon the floor and walls, and
some article of furniture was moved: I heard the movement,
but could not see what it was.
The room was dark, the blind being nearly down over the
window. We both saw as it were a luminous cloud about the
middle of the room over the table, and another luminous cloudlike body floating in the air. Occasionally, I saw a luminous
form standing at the foot of Home's bed which he did not see,
and he at one time saw a similar appearance at the foot of mine
which I failed to perceive; we distinctly heard the rustling
of a silk dress moving about the room. Home and I had called
on Menken at her hotel one day last year, and she then had on
a. very heavy silk dress, it appeared as though she caused the
rustling of this dress to be heard by us. At one time I heard
some one movin~, and on looking over towards Home's bed, I
saw her quite plam (as did also Home) as a white slightly luminous body, I could clearly see the folds of the drapery. In passing
between him and the window Home said she obstructed the
light. She moved up from near the foot of his bed where I first
saw her, making as loud a rustling noise as a living woman
in a. heavy silk dress would do, to the head of his bed, bent over,
put her hands upon his head, and disappeared.
Presently Home said that she was slightly taking possession
c2

36
of him, and I heard his hands moving about on the bed clothes
in the curious way that they do under those circumstances. He
then sat up in bed involuntarily, and said she was taking
possession of him, and asked me not to be frightened at anything he might do. I felt rather nervous at this; and asked
him, if possible, to tell me before he did anything. He said
nothing, but lay down in bed again. In about a minute, he said
in quite an altered \l'oice, "I am coming over to you now,"
and I saw him get out of bed. I did not feel sure whether
he was asleep or awake, and I said, "Can you see your
way?"' He said, "Ah, I want no light to guide my steps."
I then perceived that he was in a trance, and that Menken was
speaking through him. He walked slowly o\•cr to my bed, knelt
down beside it, took both my hands in his, and began speaking.
I shall never forget the awfully thrilling way in which she spoke;;
the desolation of the picture she drew of her feelings at first.
The words I do not recollect-the effect of them I shall always
remember. She went on to speak of the wonderfnl mercy and
goodness of God; of the hopeful state she was then in ; of the
very little we know of the next world, saying that she had
thought she knew something of it. 8hc spoke a great deal
about Hom~, of his character, &c., &c., and a good deal about
herself, and mentioned a curious fact. She said that at the time
Home aud I called upon her together, she felt then what she was.
"Yes," she said, "what was I but an animal? Yet I felt and
knew that I ought to aspire to higher things, and I longed
sometimes for it." It appears as if our having called together
upon her, had some curious effect, as she said she could not well
say what she wanted, till we were tol?ether again. She spoke of
the intense desire of the spirit sometimes to communicate with,
and do good to, those on earth. She spoke in such an humble
yet happy manner, of her having been permitted to come that
night into a house where so many pure and holy beings had
been. She spoke with the greateRt pleasure of having been
allowed to go into my mother's boudoir, and said that her
greatest happiness, since she passed away, had been that
evening-in being permitted to make her voice audible to us in
praisi~g God. She went on to say, how much she wished to be
sometimes near me and near Home to watch over us; and
assured me again and again that she would do me no harm or
hurt. She then kissed my hand and said, "I must go now;
1 must not make too much use of Dan." Home then ~ot
up and walked slowly away, turning round twice, and raismg
h1s l.1ands above his head in an attitude of prayer or of
blessmg. As he went away from me his clothes became
slightly luminouR.
'

37
He got into bed and I could hear him breathing J'cg·ula.rly as
in ordinary sleep; in about five minutes he awoke and asked me
if I was asleep he said he had been asleep and wanted to !mow
whether we had been hearing beautiful music, or whether we had
been dreaming. I told him nothing about his having been in a
trance until next day. Home said he felt remarkably happy and
calm,-probably some reflection of the more calm and soothed
condition of Menken when she left us. I was in a queer state,
my fingers and feet tingled as if I had pins and needles. Every
time I dropped off to sleep I heard, or fancied I. heard, the same
strains of music. However I slept very soundly.
Now all this is to me far more wonderful than what took
place at Norwood. I was, to all intents and purposes, actually
conversing with the dead; listening, talking1 answering, and
receiving answers from Menken. Home's mdividuality was
quite gone: he spoke as Menken, and we both spoke of him as
a third person at a distance from us. Menken said something
(what I cannot remember) about her having been a Jewess, and
that events were tending gradually towards a greater unity of
different creeds.

No. 16.-Seance, Homburg,, August, 1868.
At Cologne we slept in a double-bedded room. As Home
was going to sleep, he said, " How odd." I asked him what he
meant· and he said he had heard Menken's voice sa'l, " That is
right, ban," in reference to an observation he had JUSt made to
me. She also told him that she was with us that morning when
we were talking about the probability of dogs being able to
understand each other ; that they could communicate with each
other by magnetism, by touch, and through the eye; but not at
all by sound. She added that she was going with us, and that
we should hear her voice.
At Frankfort, Home came into my room in the 1norning;
and on my asking him some question as to how he had passed
the night, said that after he had gone to bed he heard Menken's
voice say that his sheets were damp, that he had found they
were so, and had sle.Pt in a railway rug.
On Thursday mght, at Homburg, we both beard strange
raps about the room. I then felt and heard little gentle taps
upon the foot of my bed, by which I recognized the presence of
my mother. I asked if it was so, and was answ':lred "Yes."
I said to Home that I was glad my mother was there, because
I thought that she had not been near me for some time. '!'his
message came:" You must at times be allowedfore~'gn influences;
but I do not leave ,you-1 lot•e you too much for that." 'Ve

38

were talking about this sentence ; and Hom~ was saymg it was
unselfishness that induced my mother to give way to other
spirits sometimes, who were very anxious to commumcate, when
this message was given : " Tlie love of our great Creator is
uMelfish." We then began speculating as to whether there was
a continual contest going on in the next world between good
and bad, and I was answered by a messa_ge saying that "there
iB a contest the same as on earth." I made some remark
that on earth it was a great deal a matter of physical force, and
that a good weak man could not turn a bad strong one out of
his house, when this message was given: "Purity, when .freed
from the mortal iB strongest, as truth overcomes error." flome
presently said, l, There is a spirit standing in the comer, can
you not see it ? I can see 1t as a faint light increasing and
decreasing in brightness." I looked, but could not make it out j
but I saw a faint light on the other side of the room, and called
Home's attention to it. As we looked in that direction, the
light in the comer shone out suddenly, like a :flash of lightning.
It was an instantaneous perfectly bright flash of light, lasting
perhaps nearly a second.

No. 17 .-Seance.
On the 30th of August we had a sAance at Mrs. Hamilton's.
Present: Mr. Home, myself, Mrs. Hamilton, her daughter, Lady
Fairfax, and M1·s. Gre~ory.
Very soon after sttting down, a strong influence became
apparent, and raps were heard upon the table. My hands were
a good deal agitated; I felt the cold air very plainly. Home's
hands were taken possession of, and he was caused to get up.
He went behind .1\-Irs. Hamilton and began tapping her very
rapidly with both hands on the ears and back ; while doing so,
he went into a trance. He continued to tap her ears ana to
make passes over her. He then walked up and down the room1
leaning his head upon his hand as though thinking deeply, and
making gestures quite strange to him in his natural state. He
went beliind Lad)" Fairfax, stooped down, and holding her
shoulders with both hands pressed his head against her back.
He. then stoo~ behind her, pressed his hand to his side on the
re~1on ~fthe hv~r, and looked as though he was suffering great
pam or mconvemence ; he then opened the door and went into the
other room. ~'rom there he saicf, " Mary (Miss Hamilton) and
Adare, come in here." We went in and found Home on the
sofa,,leaning his head upon his hand. He said, "Adare, tak~ a
pencil and paper." I did so, and wrote down what ha satd.

39
Home said, "Mary, the drum of your mother's ear is surrounded by wax ; the nerve is not paralyzed. Take some plain
sweet oil m a phial, place it in hot water until the oil is warm,
and drop one cfrop into the ear every night. After some time a
discharge will take place, that is, the wax will become softened
and come away. It is untrue that the nerve is paralyzed.; there
is nothing wrong with that, or it would have been cured at
once. You may remember once that the hearing came back;
that was because the wax broke away slightly. Lady Fairfax
has an over secretion of bile-the liver is inactive; this causes
irritation of the nerves, great loss of appetite-in factha complete loathing of food. Take in the morning, every ot er day,
one drop of tincture of digitalis." Home then came to my
chair, sat down beside me, and pressed me close against him.
He sat down again upon the sofa, and said, " You must prepare
some little powders composed of as much cayenne pepper as will lie
upon the point of a penknife, the same quantity of ipecacuanha,
and twice that quantity of carbonate of soda: taK.e it immediately after meals. You could have it made up into pills if you
like, but the powders are best. You suffer from indigestionthe bile is faulty; that causes nervous irritability, which extends
to the braint and causes sleeplessness and other results. You
should avoid heavy suppers and strong drink late at night ;
but this, of course, must be left to your own good sense. We
have no remedy for that : lead a plain natural life.''
Home then got up, told us to go back to the other room and
not to tell him when he awoke what he had been doing. We sat
down again, and he placed himself in exactly the same position
behind Mrs. Hamilton as he had occupied when he became
entranced. He then awoke and said, " Is it not funny, all the
power has left my hands!" and sat down. We then had some
physical manifestations ; the table was moved, tilted, and raised
off the ground; my chair was a little moved, as was also Home's.
"Good night" was then said. While he was in the trance, some
one asked whether he could see. I said "No;" but, as if to prove
he did not use his eyes, he took out his handkerchief and blindfolded himselft and did not remove it until just before he awoke.
e was also elongated while in the trance.
Mrs. Hamilton has been deaf for some time ; the doctors have
declared that the nerve is injured. Mrs. Hamilton told me that
Mrs. Weldon, of London, being in a clairvoyant state, told her
that her deafness was owing to a secretion of wax, and recommended oil. Lady Fairfax is very unwell, and I had been
suffering from sleeplessness, unpleasant dreams, and nervous
uncomfortable nights.

40
No. 18.-Seance, Homburg, Monday, September 7tn, 1868.
Last Tuesday, the 1st, we had a seance at Mrs. Hamilton's, but

nothing whatever occurred. Home was not well. On Wednesday
morning Home picked up a wonderful specimen of the death'shead moth, and broul?ht it home, put it in a drawer and thought
nothing more about 1t. That night I suddenly awoke, Home
said to me, " A very curious thing has just occurred. I was fast
asleep, and so were you, all at once I turned round; awoke, and
saw a spirit-a man, standing by my bedside. He said 'You are on
no account to part with that death's-head moth, it is your good
genius, you are to give him two louis to-morrow, and he will
play with them according to his impressions at a quarter-past
twelve, and with the mone,Y he wins you will get a medallion to
put the moth in. That wmdow ·must be shut. 'l'he spirit also
said something to me about Mrs. Lyon, but I cannot remember
wliat. When the spirit had finished speaking, he moved a step
towards your bed, stretched out his hand, and immediately you
awoke." Home having a bad cold on his chest, I got up and
shut the window. (The night before this-Home being much
oppressed by difficulty of breathing-a spirit told him through
the alphabet, to lay on his right side, he did so, and found
relief.) Neither of us could go to sleep after this, and after some
time I said " I wish as the spirit awoke us, that he would send
us to sleep again." Soon after 1 felt a most curious influence,
my eyes keJ;>t shutting involuntary, and squeezing themselves
together so tightly that I could not open them. My right leg
and arms became occasionally quite rigid ; the sensation was
not the least uncomfortable. I was quite conscious, and heard
Home go to sleep, but could not sleep myself for a long time.
On Thursday, the 3rd, I had fever, palpitation of the heart,
and felt very ill. Soon after we had gone to bed, we heard raps,
and a spirit said " You have both caught cold in that gambling

room, sitt~"ng at the table in the large room nea,. the door, there is a
strong current of cold air there." I asked if it had not something
to do with Count Ronicker, they said, " Yes, his influence is too
stronfl, let him make a few passes over you and you will conquer
it." I asked, should he mesmerise me and send me to sleep, ther,
said, " No." They then said, " We have already calmed you, '

which was the case. Home then went into a trance; he got up
and came over to me and sat down on my bed; he sat for some
little time holding one of my hands in his and pressinJt!e other
joined
against my heart. I felt very calm and quiet ; he
his hands m Jlrayer and began praying, but I could not hear the
words. I said, more to mvself than him, "I will unite my prayer
to yours." He took my two hands, joined them within his and

41
we prayed together; something affected me so much that I burst
out crying, and the tears ran down my cheeks. After a minute
or two, he passed his hand across my throat, and stopped the
crying immediately ; he then made passes over my head and
down my side, took my hand and kissed it, kissed my forehead
and said1 "Good night; sleep, sleep-when you fall asleep you will
not awake." He then got quietly into bed again ; in about half
a minute the clock (a very noisy disagreeable one) struck eleven.
He got out of bed and went into the next room where he awoke
and nearly fell down; he was so much astonished at finding
himself standing opposite the clock. The clock stopped at that
moment, though I do not believe he had touched it ; in fact he
could not have reached it without getting on a chair. In a
short time I fell into a sound sleep.
The next roprning Home gave me two louis to play for a
medallion for the. moth; I went in at a quarter-past 12 and
put one on red-red won; I then put the other also on redred won again ; making therefore six louis. Something. seemed
to say to me six is enough, and I put out my hand to the rake
to take the money ; however, when I had my hand almost
on the rake, I felt a disinclination to take it. I allowed the
mbney to remain on red, and so lost. I left the table to look for
Home to tell him the money was gone; when half way down
the corridor I involuntarily stopped, turned round, and walked
back again. Something seemed to say, you must use two louis
of your own, and take them back afterwards. I did so, and
won a small sum. I took back my two louis and handed the
remainder to Home.
No. 19.-Seance.
On Friday, the 4th, we had some raps in the room, and a
spirit said, " Are you good?" We both thought, but could not
discover that we had done anything particularly wrong that
day. I aske~ "Is the question for me ?" No answer. "Or
for Dan?" No answer. "Or for both?" No answer. I said,
"Is it not for me?" Two raps came, meaning "Partly," or
" Perhaps." After a pause they said, " We do not wish to
reproach you, but at the close of the da,'l/ it is always well to
review all that you have done, so as to be able to avoid repeating the
same things, if wrong, another day." The same night we both saw
a luminous hand waving in the air at the foot of Home's bed.
On Saturday, t~e 5th, Home was not well, and a certain circumstance annoyed him. In the evening, I took him up rather
sharply about it; telling him it was absurd letting his imagina-

42
tion run wild, and supposing all sorts of nonsense. At night
Home was very ill; it was about eleven, o'clock, I was undressing, he was in bed. Count Ronicker came in and sat down.
Home became cataleptic or something having that appearance i
his :fingers were turned back, his arms and his neck twisted
round, and his whole body became as rigid as iron-for about
five minutes he did not appear to breathe. Count Ronicker
magnetized him, and did him a great deal of good. Home completely fo!got English, and said he could only speak Russian to the
Count. He spoke about me, but I do not know what he said.
After a time he got better, and went into a trance and spoke
English; but so low that I could scarcely hear. I asked him
to speak louder, he said, " We cannot-oh, do try to hear, we
cannot keep Dan long in a trance as we would wish, he is so
ill." He said, "When Dan told you to-day that he felt a
disagreeable influence, as it were, trying to separate you, he did
not tell you all ; he ought to have done so ; you were too
sharp with him ; you were too hard upon him also about
playmg; remember he is very differently situated to you ;
remember always that his nature is very sensitive, very
different from yours. You must arrange your worldly affairs
together." He then sat up in bed, and began to talk in French,
still in a trance ; he smiled and beckoned to some one at the
other side of the room. "Ah," he said, "there is such a sweet
gentle spirit here; I will tell you her name directly." He
described her, and said she had most beautiful eyes; that when
she smiled she smiled with her eyes also. He described the
colour of her hair, eyes, &c., minutely. " There is a little
child with her-ah, there are two I One passed away at its birth;
the other is older." He then shuddered and said1 "There is a
spirit here who committed suicide. Oh !" he sa1d1 and began
making passes before him, and drawing himself back as if in
horror. Soon he went on in French, and said, " Daniel is very
ill : his brain is very bad ; the influence about him is mixed
to-night. At four in the afternoon .he began to be ill, and his
friend did not talk to him or understand it, and afterwards his
friend was a little cold and hard upon him; he has also undergone
a very great trial lately, we cannot cure him of the effects at
once. We tell you that you may understand the state he is
in." He then lay down, and said to the Cotmt, " It was Sophy
who made th': raps .o~ the w~ll of your room last night. ~he
is your guardtan spmt, and 1s always about rou and carmg
for you." The Count asked "Which Sophy?" He said "Both
the younger and the elder." . After a minute he sat up again,
turned to the Count, and satd, " Where then was your faith
when you prayed to God on your knees for death? Where

43

was your faith ?-you should then rather have wished to live."
Be talked for some little time in French to the Connt, and told
him some facts which he (the Count) swore positively to me
could be known only to himself and the spirit that Home had
been describing; he then said, " When Daniel awakes we will
try and make some manifestations for you ; but Daniel is so ill
we cannot do much. You will take a chair ; but not too near
Daniel, your influence is too strong. Adare will put the candle
out." After he awoke I put the candle out, and we heard
distinct raps on the floor, walls, door, &c., and the Count felt
his head touched. The Count then went away. Soon after he
had gone, the same spirit that had told us the night before to
review our actions said, through the alphabet, ·"How about
to-dayJ" Soon after, he said, "Are you happy?'' I then heard
that Home was getting some message ; but I do not know what
it was. I heard him say "I cannot do it-oh! please don't j
you know I am so ill?" fuectly after he turned h1s head round
towards me and said that when he had told me he felt an unpleasant in~uence as though trying to separate us, he had not
told me all, and he went on to explain about a very extraordinary case of second sight that had occurred to him tha.t day.
After he had done so, he said that he felt quite comfortable
and happy. We talked for some time about second sight, and
he was explaining how one could tell by the appearance of his
e1,es when it was likely to occur to him. Suddenly he said to me,
' I am in the Kursaal, in the playing room; I will tell you what
I see." All the time he talked quite naturally, aoil knew that he
was in bed; at the same time he declared he was actually standing
on the floor of the room, and could observe all that was
going on there. " Oh !" he said, " it is horrible ! Oh, it is dreadfull My God, it is so horrible that, if it lasts long, I can never
go into that room again I I see the table, and I see crowds
of hands all about it, flying about all over it,-young hands2 old
hands,-hands of men and women,-they are dashing about
over the table, sometimes catching hold of each other, and then
throwing each other off. Oh, there is a hand with blood upon
it! There is an old man's hand, and a woman's hand that
seizes his, but he dashes hers away from him I Oh, it is too
terrible I It is changed now. I will tell you what I see directly.
There are a number of young peo~le sitting round the table, all
young, pretty and pleasant lookmg; nearly all of them are
women; they are playing, but laughing, talking and thinking of
other things also, not intent upon the game ; the others are all
driven back from the table ; they are in a varied confused sort
of crowd, there is a regular solid barrier that I can see before
them. Some are leaning over and trying to g.et across, but they

44
cannot; now the table is covered with roses: I see that they are
playing with roses. A sort of leader among them, a woman, is
getting up and says, 'Well, I suppose we must tak~ away these
lovely roses with us; it is a pity, but if these poor people prefer
money to them, why we must take them awa~.' Now It has
again changed. The table is covered with little children, they
are sitting on the table, and most of them look thoughtful; they
are such pretty, sweet little children. The crowd is still kept
back by the barrier, but some of them look as if they wanted to
caress the children. There is one man who is stretching out his
hands so eagerly towards such a rosy, prettr little fellow, and
wants to shake hands with him, but the child Is saying, 'I cannot
shake our hand, because we have all just been washed and
dresst>d, and your hands are so dirty from the money that I must
not touch them.'" After this he saw nothing more aud went to
sleep, and awoke the next day wonderfully well, considering how
ill he had been.

On Sunday, the 6th, we had a seance at Mrs. Hamilton's.
There was a strong influence ; there were raps on the table,
chairs1 &c. ; our chairs were violently vibrated ; Home's chair
moved, and there were no messages. The table was tilted, not
lifted. Count Ronicker was present, and his magnetic influence
was so strong that it made us all more or less ill, and I think
stopped the seance.
No. 20.-Seance, Friday, the 11th.
Last Wednesday night, soon after the lights were put out,
a spirit asked if our actions during the day had been as they
should be? Soon after, he said, " The atmosphere of this house
is not good for e't'ther of you ; it is very damp." I said, " Is
that the reason I always awake in the morning with a sore
throat ?" The spirit replied, " Yes." We asked where we
should go ; the answer was, " The Hesse is the hjghe&t." We
accordingly moved into the Hotel de Hesse. The house in
~hich. we lodged was, as the spirit said, in a very low and damp
SituatiOn.
No. 21.-Seance, Sunday 13th.
Last Friday, we had a seance at Mrs. Hamilton's. Present:
Mr., 1\frs., and Miss Hamilton, the Baron de Veh and his
wife, the Princess Karoli, Mrs. Watkins, Mrs. Gregory, the
Count de Mons, General Brevern, Home, and myself. We
had physical manifestations, currents of cold air, vibration
of our chairs and the table, table-tilting, &c. Home's chair
was moved slightly; Mrs. Watkins, who was sitting near

45

him, was moved also. Mrs. Watkins had suffered severely
from rheumatism, and was quite bent double by it. Home's
hands were taken possession of, and he 'was moved to get
up. He placed himself behind her chair and began tapping
her on the back and grasping her shoulders; he then sat down
and presently went into a trance. We recognized by his
manner the same spirit that had prescribed for Mrs. Hamilton, and
Lady Fairfax, and myself, on a previous occasion. He walked
up and down the room two or three times; then placed his
head against Mrs. V\r atkins's back, ~nd held it firmly there for a
minute or two. He then walked into the next room ; beckoned
to me and made a sign as of writing. I got a pencil and paper,
and went in. He was sitting down, and said," Vt'e wish you to
have a compress made-a sort of plaster of tar spread upon a
cloth, and covered with mnslin, to be placed upon the back; it
will give strength to the spine. There is want of action, and
no proper re-action ; the blood is very acid-that is the cause of
the rheumatism; that will do now." I went back to my place;
he came in and sat down, and began to speak of the different
spirits present, telling their names, and describing them, so that
their relations present recognized them. He said that with one
lady there was a sweet lit-tle girl who wanted to play with him,
and he went through the form as if playing with a child. He
then stood behind the Count de Mons ; _addressed him as his
father ; leant his head against his, and spoke to him for a long
time in a most affectionate and touching manner. He said he
could become a medium and he able to draw. Mrs. Gregory had
been very sleepy for some time. Home turned to her and said,
"We wish to take this influence away from you ; it is purely
physical-nothing spiritual about it; you live very much with
Lady Fairfax ; she is very ill; that is what affects you; you
must not be too much with her; you are not strong enough to
bear it." He then made passes over her hands for a few
minutes. Home then began talking to Madame de V eh, and
spoke to her for some time in a most kindly manner; the words
I forget, but they were to the effect that she was on no account
to let her heart grow faint ; that the future would be brighter
than the ;past; and that there was a new development coming to
her (she IS a writing medium) ; what it was they would not tell
her, but it would cause her great happiness. Home spoke to
several others and then said, " Daniel must now come back, as
we want to make some manifestations."
Soon after, he awoke. Although we sat for some time
longer, we had only slight manifestations. Two or three people
got ~ soon after he awoke, which perhaps was the reason of
it. During his trance, Home spoke sometimes in English, some-

46
times in French. When he was describing the spirits present, he
seemed not to be quite certain about the name and relationship
of one of them, and said he must go and find out. He rose up,
went into the next room, and stood there a short time by himself,
and then came back and told us about the spirit in question.
&ptember 15tk.
Last Saturday night I was very wakeful. Late at night,
Home being asleep, I heard raps on some part of the floor near his
bed. They were tolerably loud and monotonouS; going on with a
regular beat, like the ti~king of a clock, until! fell asleep.
At dinner last Saturday, Home pointed out to me a young
man sitting at the end of the table, and said, " I feel impelled
towards him-I have something, I know not what, to say to
him, or to do for him." After dinner Home went up and
~Eoke to him, and asked him to come the following evenmg to
Mrs. Hamilton's.
No. 22.-Seance.
Last Sunda~ we h~ a seance at Mrs. H~ilton's. Present:
Mr., Mrs. and Miss Hamilton; Mrs. Mamwarmg, Mrs. Spearman,
Mr. A - , Home, and myself. Soon after we sat down, there
were vibrations of the table, the chairs, the floor of the room, &c.1
and we felt cold currents of air. However, it soon ceased, and
we sat for some time without anything occurring. Some one suggested that we should have tea1 and try again afterwards. We
accordingly did so; and after the things were cleared away, sat
round the table again. We felt the cold air and vibrations of the
table. Home suddenly said that he had distinctly seen a figure
pass before the window outside. Before coming to the sbznce,
Mr. A-- had told os a curious occurrence that happened to
him the previous night. He was waiting in a garden to meet a
friend of his, a lady; and he saw her, as he supposed, walking
towards him. He got up and went to meet her; but when quite
close, he looked on the ground for a second, and on raising his
eyes the figure had disappeared. He was very anxious to know
whether what he had seen was a delusion ; and if not, whether
the figure that passed the window was the same or not.
Soon after, Home went into a trance and sat for a little
time making passes over his own eyes and head. He then went
and stood behind Mr. A--, and looked at him for some time.
"Ah," he saidt....." you are like the simoon-like a wild wind of
the Desert." lie talked to him for some little time ; I cannot
remember his words. He then said, " You have many spirits
about you who love you, and many who do not. Your atmo•
sphere is very varied; it is like your character, changeable,

47
wild, uncertain. You are pursuing a phantom." Home also
said something about marriage, but I forget what. He then sat
down. Mr. A-- had been wishing to hear something about
the apparition he had seen the previous night, but had said
nothirig aloud. Home turned to him, and said, " Yes, it had to
do with what you have in your mind. You understand very
well what I mean. When I said you were pursuing a phantom
that ought to have been sufficient answer to you. You will
have a vision at a moment when you least expect: it will be a
pleasant one. Take care that you profit by it, or you will see
one other vision which shall be terrible." Home then got up,
went close to Mr. A--, clasped his hands together, and saia
"Ah do think of what you are doing; do reason about it.' 1
He then walked up and down the room, raising his hands and
letting them fall again, as a man would who had done all in
his power and could do no more, and saying, "The ways of God
are inscrutable-the ways of God are inscrutable." He then
sat down and began explaining to us how God's creatures could
only act according to His will; and how spirits, though they
could frequently see events coming on in the future, yet could
not avert them. "We can see," he said, "the rocks in vour
path, and can sometimes strew them and cover them with
:Bowers, but we cannot remove them ; so, though we may see
misfortune-though we may see blood will be shed about it-we
cannot prevent : we can only influence, and sometimes warn."
Turning and pointin~ solemnly to Mr. A--, he said twice
"There is danger in It-there is danger in it." He then turned
to Mrs. Mainwaring, and spoke to her to the effect that she was
never to allow her mind to dwell on a certain subject that had
occupied her three times during her life, once for a whole day.
"You have got rather a low influence about you," he said
"because you are always expecting and wishing for s_pirituai
interference in the every-day affairs of life. You should take a
higher view of it than that. You wonder why the spirits do not
help you. Are you not a spirit? You are all spirits, only you
have the earthly envelope about you. Rouse yourself, ao all
you can to rouse y:ourself1 and help yourself ; do not expect
others to help you 1f you do not act yourself. It is a common
thin~ for people to sar, 'If spirits are about us, why don't they
mantfest themselves? Is not God everywhere? Is He not about
you? Why then does He not manifest Himself? Yet do spirits
mterfere in a thousand ways that you little dream of, and never
notice. God has so ordained, that though many of you spend
your lives looking for evidence of His existence, yet ever1, day you
pass by unnoticed the most wonderful and beautiful endences.
" Do not suppose for a moment that you can do anything in

48
secret; have no false modesty or false shame, and think not to
do that in private which you would not do before the world. If
it be not enough for man to know that God is everywhere, and
sees all his actions, then let him remember also, that his father,
mother, brothers, sisters and all those most dear to him, are
continually about him; do nothing therefore in private that you
would be ashamed of doing openly." Turning to Mrs. Spearman,
he said, "Louisa, when]our mother suffers from those acute pains
in her limbs, she shoul foment them with an infusion of h(i)ps,
just pour boiling water on the hops, and use it as hot as she can
bear. Hops are very good ; they not only act as a sedative,
calm the nerves and mitigate the pain, but they also strengthen
and act as a tonic." He then, after listening apparently at
.Mrs. Hamilton's ear, said, "The oil is too heavy against the drum
of the ear, that is why your deafness was increased." Turning
tO Miss Hamilton, he said," Mary, you have used more than we
ordered; we prescribed one drop only, you ou~ht not to. hav:e
used more; for the future, drop the oil on a b1t of cotton and
use a little ether with it."
Home then got up, walked round the table, taking our han~
one after the other. He was then twice elongated and shortened
to less than his natural height. He made Mr. A-- put his
foot on his feet, and place his hands, one on his chest, the other
juRt above his hips, in order that he might be sure that he was
standin~ fairly on the ground, and that he might also feel the
elongatiOn and contraction taking place. He then sat down and
turned to me, laughed, and speaking in quite a different tone of
voice, said, "A. M-- says she will come to you to-night.
She says she was with you last night, and made those monotonous
taps that you heard ; she wanted you to sleep and thought that
might send you to sleep. She says she made those slow regular
sounds, like as it were the rocking of a cradle, as a sort of
lullaby to soothe you. She says she will be able now sometimes
to make sounds like that, even when vou are alone. When Dan
said last night something about havitig been praying for you, it
was she who spoke through him ; it was not Dan who spoke at
all himself. You had better tell him this as he has been rather
wor~g ~tims~lf, thinking th~t his mind 1~ust h~ve been
wandering m h1s sleep. Dan w1ll come back now· s1t for five
or ten minutes, and we will try and make some ma~ifestations;
we want John to see some." Home then awoke and we sat for
a little time, but had scarcely anything more. 'we then broke
up and a most extraordinary thing occurred. I was standing in
the balcouy, the rest were about the table · all of a sudden the
gas went out and the room was in darkn~ss • the gas was not
turned off, but went out. They all declared' that no one was

49
near the burner ; three people, Mr Home, Miss Hamilton, and
:Mrs. Mainwaring, said that they distinctly saw a hand and arm
stretched out over their heads upon the Jet of gas and that at
that moment it went out. They said it was so distinct that
their first idea was that some one had gone suddenly crazy and
must have burned themselves.
Mr. Hamilton told me next morning that he had investigated
it, and found that at the same moment eight jets of gas went
out in the house, namely one in the room 'in which we were;
two in the next; thret;,. I think, on the landing and stairs, and
two in the kitchen. '!'he meter had not been turned off, the
meter does not communicate with the street gas, but has a
separate pipe leading to the gasometer.
·
That night we heard raps announcing, I suppose, the presence of Adah Menken; they did not last however. Just as I
was going to sleep, Home who was asleep, turned in his bed,
and said, "I have been trying but I cannot." He said it in a
different tone of voice to his own, and as if he was rather vexed
at having failed. I said, "Never mind," which awoke him, and
he asked me if he had been talking in his sleep.
No. 23.-Seance, Sunday, September 20th, 51 Bucldrtgham Gate.
Last Friday night, after we had gone to bed1•we were talking,
and I was say:ing something about how small and trivial our
lives on earth must appear after we have passed away. A spirit
joined our conversation by saying'' Yes," by three very emphatic
loud raps. Home presently had a sort of vision; being quite
awake, and knowing where he was, and describing to me what
he saw] he said, " I am in a desert, that is just at the edge of a
great desert-there is a sort of barrier between me ann it. The
desert is perfectly barren, there is no light of the sun, but a great
cross at the far side of it, and the light flowing from the cross is
lighting it all up, the cross means truth; there are a number of
pigmies all about the cross. Oh, it is so strange, they are all
working away as hard as they can, and trying to. build up blocks
of stone and rubbiBh and stuff before the cross, but as they build
them ue, the blocks become transparent, and the lig-ht from the
cross still shines through them. The pigru.ies are d1gging away
and working so hard about it, they seem to have made a desert
Q{ the place by digging out earth and stuff to hide out the cross."
Home suddenly "topped talking, and when he spoke again, was
in a trance, he said, " Now that you are quietly at home, we
wish to ex~lain to you how it was that Dan was so nervous at
Homburg.' He then exp!ained some circumstances that had
puzzled me a good deal. He went on to say, "After that Dan
D

50
caught a cold, you also felt the same influence and you caugnt s
chill, then the magnetic atmosphere of that man Romker was so
strong, that it irritated your nerves intensely, and on that night
you were on the point of having brain fever, but by the foot
bath that we influenced Dan to insist upon your having, and by
magnetizing J:OU through Da?, it was preve~ted. It was Adah
Menken that mfluenced Danm that matter.' I remarked how
thankful I was. Home said, " Oh, it was not Adah Menken
that magnetized you. She made Dan see that vision he told
you of, she is very often about you." I said that it was very
good of her to endeavour to do us good. Ah, he said, " lt
does her good I Ah, if bitter tears could wipe away the recollection
of what has been, and the knowledge of what might have
been ; well, it was not to be. It was not, therefore, it was not to
be. Adah Menken was the most suited of all the spirits about
you to interfere in that matter at Homburg that you know of;
her life had made her more capable of it, in fact-as 11he
laughingly says herself-' You must set a thief to catch a.
thief.' She says that the wish you expressed at Homburg shall
be gratified. Get her book. She says, 'If I could send it to you
or write an order for it I would, you know; but then I cannot.'
However, it is very small and not expensive, and you can very
well afford to buy .it, so if you will get it, she says she will this
winter write her name in it for you. You remember saying that
you wished to see an instance of direct spirit writing, she thinks
that will be a nice way_ to do it for you; she will do the same for
Dan." I said, "Shall I tell Dan?" "By all means Dan is
now coming back to his desert, he will not know anything about
this little episode." Having a matter on my mind, I said, "May
I ask a question?" He saic!_,_" Yes," before I spoke, having read
my thoughts and said, " }: es," again, when I asked. I accordingly asked about what I wanted to know, and received an
answer and explanation; while he was speaking he laughed,
and said, "Some spirits say we should not tell you too much,
since this is in the future." Home then awoke and took up the
thread of his description of the desert, directly after he said, "It
is beginning to fade," the vision then melted away gradually.
No. 24.-Seance.
On Saturday we had a seance at Mr. S. C. Hall's. Present:
Mr. and Mrs. S.C. HRll, Mr. Humphreys, the Comtesse Medina
de Pomare, her son, a boy of about 14 years of age, the two Misses
Bertolacci, Home and myself. Before we sat down there were
raps all about the room; immediately after we were seated
strong physical manifestations took place, violent trembling of

51
chairs, table, floor, &c., &c.; currents of cold air, very loud
raps in various directions; the table tilted, moved, and was
raised from the ground ; some questions were answered.
Home was in a very nervous state, presently he went into
a trance and said, " We are doing this to calm Dan j
talk." He then got up, walked about the room, sat down and
played the piano for a little time ; he then arose, went to the
boy and placed his hands upon his headt....patting and stroking
it; he tll.en went to the Comtesse de .t'omare, but when he
came near her he drew back, shuddered, and looked distressed,
"Ah," he said, " There is something here the spirits do
not like." Some one said, " It is because you are in mourning,
and have crape on your dress." "Yes," he said, "We do not
like that at all. He, (her husband) has pulled your dress two
or three times, as yon are aware of, he will try presently and tear
a bit of the black crape off to shew you that he does not like it."
We began to talk about the custom of wearing mourning,
and the difficulty there would be in breaking through it. Home
walked about the room ; then sat down and said something to
this effect : " If you like to put on some outward sign of woe
while those you love are in gloom before dissolution, do so; but
to put on mourning after that, when a soul has been set free,
and has risen nearer to God-yes, nearer to God-oh, no;
rather put on all that is pieasant-all that is pleasing to the eye,
and cheerful; but, if you think that soul is not worthy of
approaching nearer to God, but must be in darkness and tears,
then, if you will, put on mourning ; but wear it longer than
six months or a year." "Yes," the Comtesse remarked, "but
we do not wear mourning because we think that a soul is
unhappy; but because we ourselves are unhappy." Home said,
"Have you so little confidence in God, that you cannot trust
Him to do all for the best?" He then spoke of some of the
spirits present, chiefly addressing the Comtesse. He then turned
to Mr. Hall, and told him his sister was present ; he smiled and
said, " She is standing just there behind you-she has a communication to make to you, but she cannot make it now; she
seems so gentle and timid." Then he laughed, and said, " She
has such a funny habit of shading her eyes with her hand, as if
she was afraid the light would hurt them. Of course, it does
not; but she cannot get rid of the habit now and then, and the
others are smiling at her for it. She is doing like this now,"
and he shaded his eyes with one hand, and went feeling about
before him with the other (Mr. Hall's sister had been quite blind,
and had had the habit of shading her eyes and feeling before her,
so that was a good test of identity). Home then turned to me,
and said, " There is a spirit standing near you that went
D2

52
through a great deal of suffering before passing away, her name
is V-- · she and the other spirit (Mr. Hall's sister) seem
so much drawn to each other. They both unde1·went a great
deal of suffering, and ~hat appears to draw them to each other.
They are talking about it now, and they are speaking of their
suffering, as if it had somehow purified thelll, and as if they were
so thankful for it, and considered it to have been the greatest
blessin&"·" He told me that we should see !ights that night, and
then sa1d "Daniel is comi!lg back now." He then awoke. We
had some more physical manifestations, and the accordion was
played under the table, Home holding it in his hand. It was then
suggested to put out the lights, and try if we could see anything;
the candles were accordingly put out, and we should, I think.
have had a wonderful seance, but that the son of the Comtesse de
Pomare got so frightened and nervous we were obliged to stop.
We had strong pbysical manifestations, the table being lifted
high in the air; the window curtains were moved, one being
carried right across the table, and twined round Mrs. Hall ; the
other was drawn between Home and me, laid over my shoulder,
and across my knee. I had hold of the curtain while it was
moving, and. felt that there was a band moving it, but when I
tried to touch the hand it slid away. I and several others saw
a form moving about behind me and Home, and another form
at the opposite side of the room, and we were touched at
different times; however the boy got so frightened we had to
light the candles, and put an end to the seance.
The same night Home had to drop some lotion into his eyes,
I dropped it in for him,- and then put the lights out. Almost
immediately he said, " What a curious effect that stuff has had,
I see the most beautiful little lights before me." I said, " That.
is not the effect of the drops ; you said when in a trance that we
should see lights." "'l'hat mav be," he replied, "but, what I
see is in my eye," an.d so positive was he that he came over to
me and asked me to look into his eye, and try if I could not see
them ; of course I could not. Be went back to bed, and then
I be~an . to see the lights, and he was satisfied that they were
~ot m hts .eye. I saw the most beautiful little phosphorescent
lights movmg. I saw as many as three at a time · sometimes
there were two together like eyes, sometimes two ~ould come
together, and then dart away again from each other. We had
no other manifestations.
No. 25.-Seance at .Ashley House, October 20th.
Present :-Captain Wynne (Charlie) and his wife, Brinsley
Nixon and his wife, Home and my11elf. We sat at a small card

53
table. There were slight manifestations, currents of cold air,
vibration of the table and chairs, and raps. The alphabet was
called, and the sentence was given : " Sit at the other table." As
soon as the influence became pretty strong, the table was moved
towards the card table. After a time we got up, and as ther
evidently wished to alter the position of the table, we moved 1t
ourselves into the centre of the room, and sat down again. We
soon felt violent vibration of the floor, cnairs, and table-so violent
that the glass pendants of the chandelier struck together, and the
windows and doors shook and rattled in their frames, not only in
the room in which we were sitting, but also in the next. The card
table was moved (no one touching it) up to our table, and the
two were pressed hard together. The sofa was, under the same
conditions, moved up to our table. A sentence was soon after
given : " We had to 01,ercome the influence of the little table,
and we have accompl-ished it." Shortfy after we were told to
move the table and sofa back to their places. We had raps on
both the tables and on the floor, and the spirits joined in our
conversation two or three times by rapping " Yes" or "No."
The following message was then given : " We have made these
external manifestations to convince you all; Charlie, ask questions,
we have a work to do with you."
Charlie asked if Augusta would recover; they rapped" Yes"
emphatically. He asked if his sister would, and after a pause
they answered" Perhaps,"·by touching him twice upon the knee.
He asked if they could bring us word what Augusta was then
doing ;. and afterward.~ asked for the name of the spirit who had
touched him. " wm" was spelled, and a "w " j but the
power then appeared to cease, as we could get nothing more.
After a pause, they spelled "Father," but the power again
failed. After an interval they said, " We have not power to do
more now,· find 'violin near," referring to the fact, I suppose,
that Augusta had her violin near her. We had no further
manifestations after this. Both Emmy's and Cadly's dresses
were pulled during the evening.
After they had all ~one, Home went into a trance. "Ah," he
said, " there was nothmg wrong; no evil influence to overcome
about that little tRble. It was rather this way; you had been accustomed to sit at the other table; you had eaten off it, and always sat
at it, and it had therefore become as it were partially magnetized
by you. We were obliged to equalize the power over the room and
furniture; and we therefore brought the two tables in contact,
and moved up the sofa to inoculate them, as we might sa.r.
There was nothing evil about the card table. There is no such
thing as evil in your sense of the word. Evil is but good
perverted and distorted, gnarled and twisted out of shape. As

54
a blade springing up through the ground if it meets with a stone
that obstructs it, is forced out of its course, stunted and thwarted,
so is good changed by circumstances into what you call evil.
If evil was as you think, you would have to say that the devil
had made the world to answer his purpose, but it is not so; God
has made the world to answer his ends. You may not be able
to see how all this evil can ever harmonize and resolve into
good ; but it is nevertheless so. Because the sun rises in the
midst of clouds in the morning you do not know that it will be
cloudy all da7 ; no; so it is that though all may be dark and
cloudy now, 1t will end in brightness.
It is wonderful to stand as it were above and outside the
world, and to watch the great wheels revolving; the cogs look
all black and broken, covered sometimes with blood, and disfigured; but yet they all fit in and work on smoothly, though,
to you it appears otherwise. Yet a time will come when there
will be peace and knowledge on the earth about all those matters
that so much distract it now. The world revolves in its sphere,
turning on its axis, and will enter upon a region of greater
peace and knowledge.
You do not know the difficulties that have to be overcome
in communicating with you. Supposing now we want t.o make
manifestations, four spirits would perhaps take J>OBBeBBion of the
four corners of the room, and would begin, as 1t were, to throw
across to each other, and weave together their harmonizing
influence, so as to get everything equalized and :prepa.red for the
adoption of whatever they want to do. One spint will remain ~
the midst who will manage and direct all that is to be said-of
course, if one of the other spirits wish to communicate he would
let him do so, they are not selfish, but one must have the direction of the manifestations to ensure unity of purpose. That is
why it is so bad to wish for the presence of any .Particular
spirit ; that spirit might comel and the others not bemg selfish
would admit him into the eire e and he not being in harmony
wit? the othe~R, would destroy the whole thing. You may often
notice, espectally at the commencement of a soonce, a whole
volley of taps let off, that is a spirit discharging the electricity1
to equalize the current ; often until the whole is harmonized
we cannot stop ourselves from making raps and cannot control
them ; so that a spirit might at first, if you wanted them to
communicate before they were ready themselves, answer "Yes" for
"No," ~d "No" for "Yes." If you put your ear also against the
table whde communications are being given by raps, you will
generally hear a number of little tick:s going on · that is some
spirits are discharging the electricity to keep the cur~nt in
equilibrium, while the others communicate,

55
If we did not take all these careful precautions there could
'be no conversation, nothing but a chaos of sounds and raps. It
is this same difficulty-the difficulty of encountering the materialism of all about you, that is the cause of a great deal that you
call bad and evil influence. A spirit might be standing near you
that loved /ou very much, that was not the least imJ?ure, and
that wishe to soothe and comfort you ; and yet he Dllght only
serve to irritate you, and the more anxious he was to soothe,
the more he might irritate and distress, because he was not in
harmony with you. You can feel that yourselves; you are not
always in harmony with your best friends, and sometimes you
do not feel as much at ease with them, as you would among
strangers, and would have more difficulty in showing off any
accomplishment, such as playing, singing &c., &c., to them than
you would to strangers. Now, this case of the lady who is said
to have had her hair pulled out by the roots; it might happen
that a spirit that loved her very much was standing near perhaps
even her own father wished to soothe her and caress ber hair,
and it might have the effect of irritating intensely ; he could not
stop himself, he could not withdraw in a moment the electric
current that was set going, and the consequences might be
painful ; of course all this applies chiefly to undeveloped and
partially developed mediums.
Question.-As it is so difficult to influence men are you not
constantly endeavouring to do certain things and failing?
Ansmer.-To a certain extent,-yes. But spiritual influence
has much more to do with the affairs of the world than what you
dream of. All inspiration, poetry 1 improvising as in the case of
the old Troubadours,-all that is owing to it~verything in fact,
is set in motion by spiritual interference. To those who pray
earnestly for and seek for light and truth, light will certainly be
given; our greatest difficulty is the folly of men's hearts, and
their blindness. There are thousands of men who pray that.
rather than that Spiritualism should be understood, men should
beleive it to be the work of the devil ; to advance themselves one
day only, they would retard the progress of the world for ages.
Every prayer has its effect, and every aspiration and wish is a
prayer ; it is not necessary to go down on your bended knees to
pray. Would that you could see as we do the great black cloud
(to speak figuratively) of prayers ahd aspirations that is for ever
rising up from a populous haunt of mankind like this ~reat city
of London. Aspiration for truth and knowledge will surely
bring its answer, and as surely does every prayer to the contrary
distort and retard true progress.
Question.-! had a question put to me the other day as
regards the comparative truth of different sects, which I answered

56
according to my ability. I should be glad to know if I answered
with anything like truth.
AnswP.r.-There is truth in every religion ; even the poor
Pagan, who bbws down before his idol, possesses the germ of
truth, inasmuch as he worships something outside and beJond
himself. It is very wrong-oh, very wrong indeed, to say there
is only one portal to heaven ; were that the case, there would be
few indeed who would arrive there. You are right in supposing
that the form of religion which is best suited to a man, though it
may contain a smaller proportion of truth than another form, is
yet the best for him ; being the most adapted to his character
and mind, it is that in which he can expand and improve himsfllf
to the best advantage. A good answer for you to have given
would be: 'Spirits teach individuality of spirit.' As you leave
this world you are apt-oh very apt indeed-to contmue for a
long time. Those who seek not to raise themselves, and look
not for truth, must continue as they were until they-to use a
common expression-find it does not pay ; then they will try to
improve and will do so. There is this individqality ; and '8. man
is apt to get around him an influence agreeing with himself.
Like seeks like everywhere--it is a universal law. The crow
cannot consort with the eagle, or the magpie with the dove."
Question.--" Have we not better opportunities here than we
shall ever have hereafter of forming ourselves?" "Most certainly,
this is your time. If you strive earnestly and prayerfully here,
you enter your true life in a state fitted for it. Seek for truth
and you shall find it."
Accou11t of Manifestations at Stockton.

Little Dannie Cox died in London last Sunday the 11th
October, 1868; Home, who was his godfather, and very much
attached to him, was extremely cut up about it at first. On the
Monday morning, Home breakfasted with me at No.5. 1 was
reading the Daily Telegraph over the fire, waiting for breakfast,
and he was sitting at the writing table, we heard load raps on
the floor between us; and the following messa.ge was given*:" We wish you to take th.e bod!J t.o Stoclcton (Mr. Cox's place in
the country) to-morrow; you will place tli.e coffin in the drawin,qroom; and at half-past e(qht we will show you a spiritual funeral.
You will take care that nll the .family are there, and no one else;
if I want Mr. Bat (family lawyer) I will send for him. I invite
your friend to be present." After this, we went to breakfast, and

the same spirit rapped repeatedly on the table during breakfast,
and answered some questiOns.

* Believed to ·be by the spirit of the late Mr. Cox.

57
No. 26.-&ance.
The next morning the body was sent down ; I accompanied
Home and Mrs. Cox. The drawing-room was most prettily
arran~~d, everything being covered with white drapery, and
quantities of flowers and ferns tastefully pl:teed. The coffin was
open, and the little body entirely covered with flowers, all but
the face ; which looked very calm and peaceful.
At half-J?ast eight o'clock we all entered the room, and sat
down, formmg a sort of circle, but having uo table. Home
went into a trance, got up and fetching a chair sat down close
to the coffin; he then took Mrs. Cox's hands in his and delivered
a most wonderful discourse, taking as it were for his text, the
words, "The Lord gave and the Lord hath not taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord." He went throttgh the greater
part of the burial service, explaining and expoundin&' ; he then
apake in the most consoling manner to Mrs. Cox b1dding her
have confidence in God and in His goodness, and not to look
upon that as a separation which was not so in reality ; told her
tlie little boy would be continually with her, was there even
now ; spoke of his purity and happiness, told her to be strong
and not to give way to sorrow ; but now that her husband
and other relatives, had undertaken the development of little
Dannie, she was to devote herself all the more to th\l education
of the two remaining children. He then took Gerrie, the other
son, by the hand, and spoke to him for some time in the most
impressive manner about his future conduct through life, bidding
h.ll:n be an honest God-fearing man, and to remember that his
brother would be cognizant of all his actions and therefore not
to do that which he knew would offend or grieve him. He then
took the little girl's hand, petting and comforting her, and
giving her messages from Dannie about his pet rabbits and
things of that sort, and telling her that Dannie would often be
in communion with her in her sleep, and that she would dream
of ~oing about with him. He then walked round the circle.]
takmg each one's hand and sayin~ a kind word or two, and
standin&' up in the centre, and_pointmg to each of us, enumerated
the spints present, saying, "Your mother, your brother, and so
on." He then made a sign to signify that they were all standing
round him, and raising his hands, prayed in the most beautiful
and earnest way for some little time, and then sat down again
in his place ; he said that little Dannie would make raps, and we
heard three distinct little ticks, like electric sparks ~oing off;
he said we should recognize Dannie by the peculianty of his
raps. He then said, " We wished to have made physical
manifestations, but Dan is spiritually weak and we cannot, but

58
something will occur to-night." After Home awoke, we went
into the conservatory, and again heard little Dannie rapping on
the floor and on the glass.
At supper, at about ten o'clock, there came suddenl__y very
loud raps all around on the table, walls, floor, &c., &c. I never
heard tnem so loud before. Home was entranced, and taking
Mrs. Cox by the hand led her into the drawing-room. When
there, she heard something rustling near the coffin, and immediately felt a little hand touch her, and place betweed her
fingers a sprig of lauristinus.. Home then brought her back into
the supper room; and somebody remarked that Iauristinus meant
in the language of flowers-" If neglected, I die." Home awoke
immediately.
He and I slept in the same room. Soon after he had gone to
bed, he went into a trance ; and began discoursing about moral
principles, &c. He then said, "You tell his mother in the morning
that Dannie gave her that sprig of lauristinus, which means, ' Jf
neglected, I die;' because he wanted to show her that if she did
anything unworthy of him it would give him pain. Your-greatest
idea of pain is death; you are quite wron~ there; but that is your
idea, and therefore he put it in that way. ' I made some remark
about its bei11.g a very wonderful thing his giving her the flower.
He said, " We are going to do somethin~ still more wonderful
for you. A little later, when the house 1s quite still, you and
Dan are to get up ; you will take the slippers ; we will take
care Dan does not catch cold. You are to go down stairs, and
into the drawing-room ; Dan will stand at the door; and you
are to go alone up to that little box you call a coffin, and lift th~
lid a little ; and then return to Dan-that is all. Little Dannie's
colours are purple and white-signs of the greatest purity;
purple and white are the most perfect colours ; remember that;
and after them blue, and so on down to black which is the
lowest." Home then awoke, and presently said, " I feel impressed to open $e door." "Well," I said, "do so if :rou
like ; it can do no harm." He got up and did so ; and on his
way back to bed, I heard some spirit tap him on the ;boulder.
He said something in answer, and went into a trance; he picked
u:e_ the slippers, put them on my feet, and told me to get up.
"Do not l:le afraid," he said, "I require no light to guide my
footsteps." He took both my hanas in his and then led me
rapidly, without hesitation, out of the roo~, down the stairs,
and across .the hall, the place being perfectly dark. He conducted me mto the drawmg-room, and then stood still saying,
"Now walk straight before you to the coffin and do as you have
been told." I did ~o, raising the drapery, ~d liftin~ the lid at
the head about ~n mch. Home said " Raise it a httle higher,

59
about as high as would permit of a hand enterln~." I did so,
and heard something rustle inside. Home satd, " That is
sufficient." I replaced the lid, and returned to where Home
was standing. He, as before, took both my hands in his, led
me upstairs, and into the bedroom, closed the door, and put me
down in a chair by the window, still retaining my hands in the
same position. He said, " Little Dannie is there between you
and the light; can you not see him?" "No," I said, I cannot."
He laughed and said, " Dannie would make himself appear as
white ; but he cannot just yet ; he has so recently come to us.
He will try and make himself visible as a dark shadow to you."
I still11aid that I co.uld see nothing. "Ah, never mind l" Home
said · and holding one of my hands in his he stretched it out in
the dark, and said, "Dannie will let you play with it first." I
perceive a strong scent, as it were, blown over mel-.. and felt a
Hower touch my fingers and then withdraw itself. .t'resently, I
felt a little soft hand touch mine, and a Hower was given me.
I then felt a strong tremo1· run through Home's handR, and he
spoke as little Dannie, and said, " You must get into bed quickly;
Dan is going to awake ; if you would like very much to see
what you have got you can make an excuse to light a candle
presently." Accordingly, after Home had awoke, I lit a candle
and found I had been given a purple and white petunia that had
been placed in one of the little hands in the coffin.
No. 21.-S~ance.

The next evening we had another s~ance, this time sitting
round a table placed against the head of the coffin. The coffin
had been fastened down and covered with white drapery, most
prettily arranged with Howers and ferns. We had physical
manifestations and some messages fro~p little Dannie, the table
on which the coffin was placed was moved about, the drapery
agitated, &c. We then heard pieces of fern being plucked, we
could distinctly hear the branches broken ; a piece of fern was
given to each person present, their attention being called to it
by being touched on the knee, and the hand being then placed
beneath the table the fern was put into it. With the fern
presented to me, the following message was given :-" Birth
has given you distinction, let your lifo be the more d1'stingu1'shed

for a prayerful and earnest search after truth ; it is kind of you

to have come to the house Qf joy; truth seekers are brothers and
sisters and should share each other's sorrows andjoys." Home then

went into a trance, and took the lamp out of the room, saying we
were to see a manifestation that could only take place in the dark.

60
We presently saw a brillifmt little star, it flitted about with
an uncertain-like motion-sometimes approaching, sometimes
receding from us. We heard raps come from the star which
flashed like an electric spark at each detonation. Mrs Cox
suddenly said that a quantity of Eau de Cologne had been
thrown over her from the ceiling. Home carried a small
flask containing some which the spirits probably made use
of. Home, who was standing at some distance from us,
said, we should have the odour changed four times, and in
effect a totally different scent was blown over us four times
on a palpable strong current of air. Home then fetched the
lamp back. We heard a knocking at the door, he opened
it and appeared to invite some one to come in, but did not
succeed; he shut the door, when the knockin~ re-commenced
he opened it again, but was unsuccessful ; th1s was repeated
three or four times, at last he went and gathering some
ferns and flowers from off the coffin opened the door and held
them out; still it was in vain, the knocking again occurred at
the door, and this time he took little Ada and led her to the door,
when he Rppeared to succeed in inducing the person to come
in. He said, " 'It is - - ' (a little servant girl who had died two
days previously). "How very curious, she seems scarcely to know
that she has passed away, and says, she does not like to come
into the room where there is anybody dead. Every time I
opened the door she said, ' No thank you, I would sooner not I'
But little Dannie wanted her to come in and rapped, or rather
~ot another spirit to rap for him at the door, every time I shut
It. I took tlie flowers and ferns to shew her there was nothing
disagreeable about the room, and then I took little Ada with me,
and she has come in now and is standing there in the corner.
She will move this fern that I have placed here on the table
near her." Home/laced a fern on the table, and presently we
saw it taken up an put down again. He then awoke.
The next afternoon the little body was placed in the ground.
During the service a slight shower came on ; but just at the
conclusion, when we had lowered the coffin to its place, a bright
beam of sun11hine broke out, flooding us with light; and a
beautiful rainbow appeared in the heavoos. On our way home
every one remarked that the burial service, which is in general
so impressive, had that day while in church sounded strangely
flat and unprofitable. Mrs. Cox asked how it was that the
clergyman Jiad not used the words dust to dust, ashes to ashes1
earth to earth. We assured her he had ; but she declared she had.
not heard them, although standing as near to him as any of as.

61

No. 28.-S8ar1ce.
The same evening we had a seance, and Home was entranced-Mr. Cox speaking through him. He turned to Mrs. Cox and
said, "I was there with little Dannie to-day, but I did not like
to take him into the church; we waited outside. 'fhe reason
why the service did not impress any of you is, that there was no
spiritual presence inside the building-nothing but the bare
rafters. We mag·netized. you to prevent your hearing the wor.dsdust to dust, ashes to ashes, earth to earth. Now, if yon had
been consib"'ling to the earth this day the body of some celebrated
medireval ecclesiastic or great saint, those circumstances of the
shower of rain, the bright gleam of sun, and the rainbow, would
have been considered miraculous. Of course they were not so; it is
unreasonable to think that God's great laws should be interfered
with to give y_<>u a rainbow. Yet was it the result of interference
in thiR way. We knew by our superior knowledge of meteol"Ology,
and the laws that goveJ;D those things, that at that hour on
Thursday, there would probably be a combination of circumstances that would produce those effects. We therefore very
strongly impressed Dan to insist upon having the funeral on
Thursday instead of Friday, which was the day you had fixed
upon; and we impressed him to make you all burry. You
remember how he did hurry you all on your way to church. As
it happened, you arrived at the right time, and everything
occurred just as we expected. That is all the interference
there was." He then spoke for some time to Mrs. Cox;_ exhorting
her to have patience and courage, and to trust in liod. The
"Nameless Doctor" then took possession of Home; who after
walking about the room thinking, took little Ada's hand in
his, and said to Mrs. Cox, "This child's stomach is of more
importance now than her brain ; do not push her too much in
her studies." Dr. Elliotson then took possession of him, and he
spoke for some time to 1\Irs. Cox. Then tuminf to me he said, " I
suppose you have found out, if not lou will- know I did when
on earth-that if you try and chmb up one rung higher on
the ladder of knowledge than others, the world will scream and
say you are going to tumble down and break your neck ; but
when they find you stick there pretty safely, they will try
and scramble up after you, and endeavour to get ahead of you.
Provided your own conscience does not reprove vou, never mind
what the world says. As my friend, Mr. dqx said to you
yesterday, ' Be constant in a prayerful and earnest search for
truth; seek truth, and you will find it.'" He went on speaking
for some time, describing different phases of worldly ambition,
and warning us against them.

62
No. 29.-Seance, November 8rd, 1868.

In the account of the phe:{lomena that occurred at Homburg,
mention is made of Home finding a death's-head moth; of my
being told to play with two louis, and with the proceeds to
buy a locket for it. I took the moth to Tessier's, and ordered
a crystal medallion to be made for it. In due course it was sent
home. While Home was sitting with little Dannie Cox, dming
his last illness, the locket in his pocket was broken by a blow
from some invisible hand, or other agency. We speculated as
to the reason for this, but came to no satisfactory result. The
day before. yesterday I asked for the locket, in order to get it
mended. When I saw it, I thought that the material was glass
and not crystal. I took it to my optician, and found I wa11
correct. I then took it to Tessier's to have a proper crystal
made. Yesterday, while washing my hands before dinner, I
said to Home, " I now know why the locket was broken ; it was
to call attention to the fact that glass had been substituted for
crystal." Immediately a spirit ra~ped " Yes," very loudly, on
the dressing table. About nine o clock I was reading; Home
lying on the sofa. He said, "There is a strong spirit standing
near{ou; he is nicely made, and appears to have nice features,
but cannot see them clearly. His hair is cut very short
indeed, and has a sort of mark, not amounting to a scar, upon
his cheek bone." I could not think who it was, when it seemed
to Bash upon me that it was A-- B - , though I could not
recognize him the least by the descri'()tion. Home said, " His
name begins with an A." I said, "No; with a B if it is the
gerson I imagine." "His name begins with an A," he said,
' that is, of course, his Christian name." " Well," I said,
" that would be right." " Yes," Home said, " his name is
A--; he says he will come to us to-night." Home said it
was a case of second sight, and asked me to look at his eyes to
try and discover the film that is said to cover the eyes of a
person during second sight. I could see nothing abnormal
about them, except that the pupils were much dilated; on
a:pJ!lying light near them they contracted naturally. The
v•s•on .had nearly faded when I examined his eyes.
Later in the evening we had a slance. Present : C. and E.
Wynne, C. and B. Nixon, James Gore-Booth, Home and
myself. We sat for about an hour, and scarcely anything
occurred. We then went into the dining room to have a cup of
tea, and raps came upon the table. We returned to the other
room and sat down, but had only verr faint indications of
spiritual presence. Home said to me, ' Let you and I and

G3
Charlie Wynne go into the bed room by ourselves for a minute,
perhaps t~~y would tell us the reason why we have no manifestations." We did so, and put our hands upon a small table. 'l'he
table tilteu itself into Charlie's lap; and we had messages given
by tilts of the table, by raps on the table, and on the floor.
Message to Charlie.-" We are devel<ping you. You heard
aounds like drops of rain upon your pillow ~j you wW soon be
ohle to have rups j pe1·severe in sitttng as you have done at
home: l{ou will be rewarded b.11 manifestatiof!,,." Charlie
asked, 'Was that shaking of my bed anything spiritual?"
" Y es 1 like this table is shaken." Charlie: " Yes, that is like
it exactly; but I do not like to be shaken in bed." 'l'he table
was shaken more violently, as if to say that perhaps he would be
shaken again. Charlie : " Who shook me?" "Grandfatlter
William. We took away the pain .from Emmy the other night."
]n answer to a question, they said there was nothing antagonistic
in any of the party, but that Dan was not in a good condition.
We joined the rest again, but had no further manifestations.
After we had gone to bed, Home went into a trance ; for
some time he spoke with difficulty. He asked me who certain
people were. ' Who is Willoughby Wynne? Who is Emily ? "
he then said something about a pretty-little child and two Amys ;
and also there was an uncle of mme there who used to give
me apples out of his pocket. I asked "Wyndham?" he said
"No Goold." "Francis?" I asked; ''Yes," he said, '•Francis."
He then began to speak quite clearly, and said "We would often
like to tell you who we are, but our opportunities of communicating are so rare and so short, that we cannot generally do so.
There are so many difficulties in the way, it is like sending
messages along wires that are continually breaking and getting
out of order. We could scarcely do anything to-night. Dan
ought not to have drank a second CUJ! of tea, or that second glass
of sherry at dinner; the slightest thmg is sufficient to prevent
anything occurring. Ah, A-- has just come in; he has come
bustling into the room; you hea1·d him.' I said, 'Well, I
heard a noise ·as if the door had been opened. 'Ye.;~,' he said,
'that was him ; you will always know when A-- comes; he
will make a sound like that at the door. He is standing close
to you now, looking straight at you. He does not quite understand his position yet, poor fellow. He cannot disabuse himself
of the idea that he is ~oiog to be punished. He does not think
that according to the hfe that he led on earth he ought to be in
the company of those who are here in the same room. He says,
'I am going to help you out of a scrape, old fellow.' He has a

64
strange regret at having left the earth ; he was in love ; he will
of course soon cease to regret it· but he docs not quite
understand himself as yet. He 115keJ us why you had put your
glasses there close to you ; and when we told him in case he or
any of us made ourselves visible to you, you wished to be able
to use them, he could not understand that he could possibly
make himself ap_P,arent to you. He was a bit of a fop ; fond of
being neat and hdy, and very careful of his hands ; he had very
nice hands."
(In answer to a remark of mine). " He says he hnB nothing
to forgive. He has been a good deal with your mother ; she is
fond of him ; he is very truthful. He is very fond of his father;
he says that his father is honest in his belief, and that is more
than he can say for most people. Your mother and he, and all
of us have been consulting about you, as regards a question you
promised your father that you would ask. You had better
absolve yourself from that obligation, for your mother would
not like you to ask her about any single or partic~ar dogma
That relil$ion in which God's created creatures worship him
in spirit and m truth, forgetful of self, and casting aside worldly
ambition is a true religion, nor does it matter by what title you
choose to call it. There is too much of worldly ambition and
love of power mixed up in religion." Home then spoke to me
about some purely personal matters, and then for some time on
the subject that atonement must be made for all wrong d()ne on
earth. " Ah," be said " Many that are very high and mighty
when with you, must become very humble indeed when they
come to us ; you would scarcely think that Alexander the Great
is yet, as it were, in the position of the lowest servant; he did
certain things on earth tliat he knew to be very wrong, and he
was a very powerful man-powerful, I mean magneticall._y. Every
great general, statesman, or orator is full of magnetism. The
power of an orator, the way he draws his audience to him, is
mainly due to his magnetic attraction. We sometimes magnetise
you, and you are not aware of it. You were magnetised just
now, and you heard a spirit shout." I said, "I am not aware
that I did." "You did not notice it; you did not know what it
was, and you did not pay any attention to it ; but you heard it.
The spirit wanted to come into the room, but he knew he could
not.. He was not worthy to. come in.to the presence of those who
~e m the room, ~o one sud an~bmg to him-no one rebuked
htm; but he felt hts own unworthmess, and rushed away screaming, as you would if suffering pain ; as you, if some one were
telling you some dreadful harrowing story, would cry out to stop
tbem1 thus he felt what he was, and fled away. Now some men
would call him a devil, but he is not ; he will try and make

65
amends, and eventually all will come right. God could not
create what you call a devil."
Home then began talking about dreams. He said, " You
may think it a very curious theory, but it is true, that we are
sometimes in communion with your spirits when we cannot even
see your bodies. In sleep, sometimes, your spirits are, as it were,
nearer to us, more open to impression. Of course, as you all know,
it is the mortal body only that requires sleep; the spirit is always
awake. Now, with you, your stomach is so much out of order,
your digestion so hard, and in such a bad state, that any impression upon you in sleep takes a fleeting and painful nature."
(In answer to a Question). "Yes, you can take it with other
medicine. Take it for a fortnight, then leave off for a fortnight,
then take it again, and in two months or so we can judge of the
effect. We can only tell these things by watching the effect."
Home was then silent for a short time. When he next spoke,
he spoke as little Dannie Cox. He said, " Oh l I say l now
look here (two expressiop.s Dannie habitually used when on
earth) l I like]ou to pray, it does good, and I am fond of you.
Never you min about that fern, you shall have another one.
Perhaps you will find it yet, for I am not sure that it is
destroyed; at any rate, never yl)u mind about it ; if it is, you
shall have another. Dan is going to awake now. When he has
awoke, if fou will go and sit down on his bed for a minute I
will come.' I did so telling Home that I wanted to see if we
should have any manifestations. We heard a spirit come in and
walk about the room; and perceived a light near the ceiling.
Little Dannie Cox then came and moved away a pillow that
Home had over his feet. He stroked and pulled my feet, and
sat on them; and when Home asked him if his mother was
asleep, he bounced up and down on my feett..Eeeling just as heavy
as a child of his age would if in the flesh. We also saw the same
sort of little star we had seen at Stockton. He then said,
"Now, good night," and stood upon the foot of the bed. I saw
him distinctly as a shadowy figure, of the same size as his ruortal
body, with apparently some loose drapery on. His hand was
stretched out towards us waving about. The hand and arm
were directly between me and the window, and interrupted the
light as palpably as if made of solid flesh and bone.
No. 30.-Seance held at Mrs. Hennings' House, at Norwood.
Present: Mr. HomeL :Mrs. Henning~ 1 Mrs. Jencken, Mr.
Jencken, Mr. Saal, Mr. Hurt, and mysell. The peculiarity of
this seance was that the manifestations appear to have been
E

66
conducted with a view rather to convince the spirits present,
than the mortals.
Mr. Saal is a medium but has been accustomed to make a joke
of the whole thing ; and has latterly been a good deal troubled
and annoyed by the spirits. We had physical manifestationstilting and raising of the table, movements of the piano, currents
of air, raps, &c., &c. A series of messages were then delivered
to Mr. Saal. He was told that he should not treat spirits in a
manner that he would not dare to exercise towards mortals.
Good advice was given him, and he was told to submit all to his
reason, for it was given him for that purpose. Suppose, they
said, a spirit were to tell you to put your finger in the candle,
you would be very foolish to do so; you would be burnt ; but if
a spirit was to tell you to do this, and then magnetize you,
causing you to feel that some substance, as it wer~, had been
placed over your skin, you might reasonably think means had
been taken to prevent your being burned, and then you would
be right to try. Home then went into a trance. He walked about
the room, opened the door, and appeared to welcome a number of
people. He then seemed to be explaining to them the different
phenomena that had occurred in that room. He showed how
the table had been raised, the piano and the furniture moved1 &c.;
and apparently explained the process of elongation, pointin~ to
certain marks on the wall that had been made on a previOus
occasion to record the height to which he had attained. lie then
went to the fire-place ; stirred the coals into a blaze, and seemed
to recount how he had handled hot embers. He sat for some
time on the hearth, and then got up and walked about a little
while, and taking up from the other table Glanvill's book on
Witchcraft, he appeared distressed. He brought the book to
me, and placed my right hand flat upon the cover, supporting it
himself underneath ; rays came upon the book. He gradually
withdrew his hand unti the book was supported by one finger
only; lastly, he withdrew that also, and the book was suspended
in the air, or rather adhered to my open hand. My 1ingera
were not near the edges, my hand was extended flat upon the
cover; I could not have grasped and retained the book in any
way 1 it simply adhered to my hand. Home seemed pleased
at thts, and laughed, and turned round to the (to us) invisible
sp~ctatorst as much a~ to say, "Do you see that?" He .repea~d
thts expenment, makmg me place my left hand upon hts whteh
he placed underneath the book, in orde!19as he said, that I might
feel that his hand left the book. when
he withdrew his
hand, there was a space between it and the book of. I should
say, three inches. The book felt to me as though 'supported
from beneath by a cushion or column of air. He then

67
placed Glanvill on Witckcrtft on the table, and, leaving the
room, brought back with hun a large volume on Mythology,
which he had taken from a pe1fectly dark library ; he also
brought his own book, Reminiscences t'n My Life, and laid
them both upon the table. He then walked about the room,
and appeared to be expostulating with the spirits, then sitting
down he placed the three books before him, in the form of a
cross, and began speaking about them. "This," he said, ~acing
his hand on the mythological book, " is pure Matenalism ;
This," touching Glanvill, "Religion materialized; and this,"
taking his own book, "Materialism spiritualized. The first,
blood to appease a God; the second, blood to appease mankind;
the third, the blood of the soul to appease mankind. Though
you boast of your civilization, and though there are no longer
persecutions of fire and blood: yet is there a moral persecution,
and, in many respects, your a~e is as dark as any. Who will
dispel this darkness ? Who 1s bold enough to take the broom
and clear away the cobwebs? It must come from the material
side-from your side-we cannot do it." He spoke for a long
time, more than half an hour I should think. He likened different men's ideas of God to the different attempts we would all
make to delineate the highest peak of the Himalayas. " None
of you," he said, "have seen it; you would all draw a different
form and none of you would be right."
He was very sarcastic about the wise men of the day 1 who
he said, were afraid to investigate for fear of discovering something beyond their own philosophy 1 and which they could not
account for; and yet, not one of them could tell you why one
man's hair is light and another's dark. "You are much puzzled,"
he said, "about many things. Know that the highest angels also
are lost in wonder and awe at many things." While talking, he
appeared to become uneasy and getting up, said, " There is a
spirit here that will go on arguing with Dr. Elliotson, so that he
cannot attend to anything; I must really interfere," and he
walked to the other end of the room, where he seemed to
expostulate with some one. Coming back he said, "Dr. Elliotson
and Dr. Jencken have invited a number of spirits here, they did
not know the nature of manifestations, and were anxious to see
them. Owing to circumstances not being favourable at first we
failed to do what we wished and they are not satisfied, we will
try again now." He went to the fire, poked up the coals, and
putting his hand in, drew out a hot burning ember, about twice
the size of an orange ; this he carried about the room, as if to shew
it to the spirits, and then bt·ought it to us ; we all examined it.
He then put it back in the fire and showed us his hands · they
were not in the least blackened or scorched, neither did they
E2

68
smell of fire, but on the contrary of a sweet scent 'Yhich he threw
ofF from his fingers at us across the table. Bavmg apparent11
spoken to some spirit, he went back to the fire, and with h1s
hand stirred the embers into a flame; then kneeling down, he
placed his face right among the burning coals, moving it abOQt
as though bathing it in water. Then getting up, he held his
finger for some time in the flame of the candle. Presently, he
took the same lump of cual he had previously handled and
came over to us, blowing upon it to make it brighter. He
then walked slowly round the table, and said, " I want to see
which of you will be the best su~ject. Ah.l Adare, will be
the easiest, because he has been most w1th Dan. ' Mr.
Jencken held out his hand 1 saying, "Put it in mine," Home
said, "No no, touch it and see," he touched it with the
tip of his finger and burnt himRelf. Home then held it within
four or five inches of Mr. Saal's and Mr. Hurt's hands, and the;r.
could not endure the heat. He came to me and said, "Now, 1f
you are not afraid, hold out your hand;" I did so, and having
made two rapid passes over my hand, he placed the coal in it.
I must have held it for half a minute, long enough to have
burned my hand fearfully; the coal felt scarcely warm. Home
then took it away, laughed, and seemed much pleased. As he
was going back to the fire-place, be suddenly turned round and
said, "Why, just fancy, some of them think that only one side
of the ember was hot." He told me to make a hollow of both
my bands; I did so, and he placed the coal in them, and
then put both his on the top of the coal so that it was completely covered by our four hands, and we held it there for some
time. Upon this occasion scarcely any heat at all could be
perceived. After having replaced the coal in the fire, he went
and held his hand-the fingers being extended downwardsabout nine inches above a vase of flowers, "You will see," he
said, " That I can withdraw the moisture and scent from the
flowers." He came over to me and rubbed my hands, imparting
the odour of the flowers to them ; his fingers were quite moist as
with dew ; he also flipped the moisture, and with it the scent
from his fingers to each person. He now appeared quite
satisfied, and after speaking a little to the spirits in the room,
opened the door and bowed them out, and then resumed his seat.
"~ow," he said, "Do you all realise that you have seen what is
called a miracle, yet in reality it is no such thing. All these
phenomena only shew our superior acquaintance with natural
laws, and our power over material substances. Mankind ought
to have the same power over the material world in which he
lives; you littl~ know th~ power that is in you ; had you fa.ith 1
you could do thmgs you httle dream of." He spoke some time

69
in this strain, and then said, "Dan is going to awake now, do
not tell him what has occurred, but let him wash his hands."
When he awoke, he was much exhausted, but after washing,
appeared quite refreshed. We examined him closely; there
was no sign- not even the smell-of fire about him, neither
was a hair of his head singed.
No. 31.-Stfanee.
The other night, having been unwell for some days, I went
to bed very uncomfortable, and agueish ; I could not get warm.
Home's bed was rocked about, and he said, "I do not know
who you are, but unless there is some object in it, I wish you
would leave off rocking my bed, for it makes me dizzy. The
bed left off shaking and a spirit spelt out ".Adak." She said, "I am
here, and seek to do you good j can you t'magine my inezpressible
joy, your an,qel mother has taken my hand in hers." Home
went into a trance, got out of bed, wrapped a fur rug round his
middle, then warmed his hands at the fire, and commenced
shampooing me over my chest, stomach, legs and feet. He
then took off my fur rug, warmed it at the fire, and put it on
again, and made passes over my head, retreatin~ as he did
so to the further stde of the room. He then got mto bed and
awoke. I fell asleep soon and slept soundly.
No. 32.
Last night, the 11th, I had gone to bed about nine o'clock,
and Home an hour later. Charlie Wynne happening to look
in he sat down in the bed room and smoked. We were
tJkin~ on serious subjects, and a spirit joined in our con·
versation. Home went into a sort of half trance and spoke for
a sho11t time. After Charlie had gone, Home had a second-sight
vision. He said that he saw a wonderfully beautiful :Bower, the
stem purple, the leaves the purest white, the :Bower the deepest
crimson, turning to purple, each colour emitting a light of the
same tint. As he looked it changed and he said it had reference to what we had been talking about, namely whether
there was change in the next world. It was to shew that there
is. "You were speculating," he said, " as to whether spirits
could visit planets. They can visit them, planet after planet,
star after star, world after world, through infinity, through
space. Without change and progression they would not be
happy." He then said, "The tobacco smoke ~s very b~d, I was
gomg into a deep trance, but that prevented tt; I see tt1 not as
a cloud of smoke, but as material particles."

70
ADARE: " But it could not be helped, I could not have
stopped him."
HOME: "You might, it was only false modesty, Charlie
would not have minded."
ADARE : " But if I had stopped him when I saw you were
going into a trance it would have been too late."
HoME : "Yes, but you mifht have prevented it at first, it was
at any rate very bad for you.' Home was at this time only as it
were half entranced, he became 9.nite entranced and said, " Tell
Dan in the morning that a Turk1sh bath will be good for him."
He then got up and began blowing as if to dispel the smoke,
and artated the window blinds also, for the same purpose. He
said, 'You have a stiffness about the head yet." He got out
of bed, came to me, and began rubbin~ and kneading the back of
my head1 and the upper part of my spme, occasionally extending
his hand behind hun, and obtaining some moisture upon his
:fingers. I thought at the time that he was using a phial of
spirits of camphor, that had been on the dressing table1 ~ut I
discovered afterwards that I had been mistaken. He ttniabed
by vigorously rubbing my feet and legs ; he then got into bed,
rubbed his own chest, legs and arms, and soon after awoke.
No. 33.-SAance.

Last Sunday we bad a smnce at Norwood. Present:
Maj~r Drayson, Mr. Collins, Mr. and Mrs. Jencken, Mrs.
Hennings, myself, Home, Charlie Wynne, and a Prussian.
We had- strong physical manifestations, but none of the hi~her
sort, as two of the party were occupied in investigatiOns.
Charlie happened to mention to some one a rather curious
reason that a lady of his acquaintance had given for not
believing in Spiritualism, namely, that she had lived 50 years
in the world Wlthout hearing of it, and that therefore it could
not be true. A spirit said, " She for,qot that people Jw,d livBd
before her, and would in all probabilttylive after her. Fortuno.tel,
all have not her organism."
About ten days ago we had a seance at Ashley House with

Henry and James Gore Booth. We had good physical manifestations, which I think satisfied James.
No. 34.- October 27th.
Last night I was saying to Home, that it was curious my
meetin~ him in such an unexpected manner at Malvern and
wondenng why it was that after having known each other in Paris,
we ~hould have remained entirely separated for. so many years.
I said that there must of course be a reason for 1t. " Perhaps,"

71

I said, " my mother might not have liked my investigation of
Spiritualism." Immediately a spirit rapped on a table by my
bedside, " Yes," meaning that she would not h!tve approved of
it. Recognizin~ the raps, I asked if my mother was there, and
was told, "Yes.' Home asked, " But do :you now object to it?"
Answer, "No, it adds greatly to my happ,ness." After a pausel
"My boy; now more than ever, my own boy." We then neard
one of the ornaments upon the wall being moved, and judged by
the position of the sound that it proceeded from a benitier that was
suspended over Home's head, the benitier consist«::d of a fiat slab of
marble, with two guardian angels represented on it, and a vessel
for holy water. We heard the benitier removed from the wall.
My mother spelled out, " I bless you not with water, but by the
pure presence of a spirit;" and I then saw a hand and arm
extended over me, between me and the light of the window.
The fingers were stretched out, and the hand descended towards
me, waving in an attitude of blessing until close to my face, when
it disappeared. Home then said, " I see my Sacha (his wife);
she is standin~ near the foot of the bed, and bas got the benitier
in her hand.' I could see neither the spirit nor the benitier.
He said, " She is bringing it over to me; it is pressed against
lilY forehead; she is making the sign of the cross with it on
my face." Directly after I saw the benitier in the air, near me;
it came quite close pressed against my face, and made the
sign of the cross. I could see no figure or anything suJ?l:10rting
it. Sacha then said, " I bless you both." The bemt1er was
placed on Home's bed, near the foot, and left there. Home said,
" Do tell me, Sacha, for otherwise I would not feel comfortable
about it; did you take down the benitier because you do not like
it to be there?" Answer, " No." " Do you then like it?"
" Yes, because it is a ~ymbol of guardian sp_irits" (referring to
the figures upon it). She then said, ".Ana now a fond good
night;" and my mother added, " God bless you both."
No. 35.-Seance.
We had a very pretty seance at Mr. S. C. Hall's, the beginning
of last week. They had just come into their new house at
Ashley Place. There were only Mr. and Mrs. Hall, Home, myself
and one friend present. Home went into a trance, and as it
were, consecrated the house. He prayed most earnestly and
beautifully at the threshold, at the liearth, at the dining table,
and at Mr. Hall's writing table. It was very striking. Dr.
Elliotson then spoke for some time through Home, and said,
"I am waiting for Dr. Ashburner, it will not be long before he
joins us, and right glad I shall be when he does."

72

No.36.
Last night Home went into a trance, and spoke about two
strange spirits that were present. " Oh, there are a number of
men here, they are standing in a ring, and are writing in little
books : every now and then they dasli them down ; but they are
compelled to take them up and go on ; they are very angry
with each otherJ for each one thinks that he has found out something much to his advantage, and thlln he is disgusted to find
that the others know it. "There is Fred Goodwin and a man
called Campbell among them, and there is one who seems in a
sort of mist, he says, 'You may put me down for what you
please.'"
AD ARE: " Why they must be bettmg."
HOME: "Yes, they are betting, and they must go on although
they hate it. There is a regular oarrier between you and them,
they would be disagreeable to you if they came too close. It
seems as though your mother had by her love woven a sort of
net between you, so that you may see how horrible it is ; but
still may not be hurt by them."
I now heard a sound as of a horse galloping in the air.
HOME : " Do you hear that horse ? You will always know
that C-- D-- is near when you hear that noise. He did not
now make it himself he cannot; other spirits made it for him."
ADARE: " Will - - D-- have to keep the company of
these betting men?"
HOME : " Yes, he will for a time, and it will be painful to
him1 for oo was not by nature coarse ; all his coarseness was put
on for bravado."
ADARE: " Will he have to attend races?"
HoME : " Yes, he will; and will see all the evil, all the rascality
and misery resulting from them. He will not wish to go there;
but he will be compelled by an irresistible impulse to do so until
he becomes purified, and fitted for better things."
ADARE: "I hope that may not be long."
HoME: " It does not appear to me that it will be long; his
nature is good; he was very kind and did many good actions.
Many old and poor people to whom he was kind, and some of his
friends also who went before him, are very anxious about him,
and pray earnestly for him. Altogether it does not seem that
it will be long. C-- D-- does not quite understand himself
yet; he is conscious, but he does not know whether he is dead or not.
His mother is near him, and will be of use to him. She was
a very worldlT woman ; she would be higher than she is were it
not for that.'
Home was then silent for a short time, he
became much agitated, and said, "Oh yes, I am sure we are

·
6

73
very much obliged to you indeed, are we not, A dare? We
mortals are very much obliged to you. Oh, please don't; Oh,
don't strike him I Oh-(and there came a nOise in 'the corner
of the room like a blow struck)-did you hear that? he hit him.
Ah, they have all gone. Our mothers would not let them come
any nearer-they have gone now-they would have been disagreeable if they had been nearer-they were so very n1de and
coarse-they were boxers-they made the noise like of a horse
galloping, and then they said they had made a cursed row for
us, and that we were not thankful enough ; and they were
angry. One of them said, 'Come away, and let the chaps go to
sleep ; ' but another got very angry and got him in a corner
and hit him; you heard the blow.'l Home afterwards said,
" Of course he could not hurt him ; all these things are done
to shew you that perfect individuality exists in the other
world." Home soon after awoke.
No. 37.-Seance at .Ashley Bouse, November 20th.
Last night the Master of Lindsay dined here. A bout an
hour after dinner, the drawing-room being very full of tobacco
smoke we went and sat down at the table in the dining-room.
Immediately we had decided manifestations. The table was
strongly moved; my chair was rocked about; Lindsay and
Home heard a voice ; and we all heard a spirit moving about
the room. We were told to go back into the other room.
Nothinl{ occurred at the table. Home got very drowsy-half
unconscious. He said he could see the table covered with light,
and light coming from mr_ hands. He said, " How very curious,
I can see these words qmte plain: 'Some o1Ie in a high position
will commit suicide. He said he had taken an overdose of medicine and drugged himself.' " Mter a short time he roused himself, and got better, and presently went into a trance. He said
to me, " There are a great number of Roman Catholic spirits
about you." I asked if I knew any of them. "Yes, there is one
you knew, a priest, a very tall man. There are a great many
of them. It is curious, they seem to be going through some
sort of ceremony." He began speakin~ of the strange and
horrible influences about the Tower (Lmdsay is quartered at
the Tower). He said, "They are very dreagful, but can do no
harm ; they are obliged to remain at the Tower ; they could
not even make manifestations were a seance to be held there.
There is one among them, could he manifest himsel~ it would be
by a most horrible stench, as of corrupt flesh." He described him
as having elevated eyebrows, pointed beard, and wearing a ruftl.e.

74
We asked if he bad been a torturor, or anything of that sort.
"No," he said, "but an instigator of those things. His tools
and accomplices have all gone. He is left alone-:-quite alonewalking always round and round." "How unhappy," I said,
"he must be." "Unhappy," he replied, "Oh, he bears a
weight of misery upon htm that would crush mountains. Oh,
those who perhaps here have worn upon their heads a crown,
when they appear before God and before His throne, have to
exchange it for a weight of woe upon their brows that would
seem insupportable." He described several spirits at the Tower
in most graphic language. At last he appeared to see some
spirit that he could not endure. "Oh I go away! Go away I"
he said, " You must go away I" He sobbed convulsively; tore
open his coat and waisteoat ; took off his cravat and collar, and
appeared to be suffering ve11 much. Presently he got better,
and we enquired who the spui.t was ; he shuddered, and told us
not to seek to know. I asked why these influences were suffered
to come about us. He said, " It is good you should know that
there are two sides to the picture, for fear that you might bring
upon/ourselves such suffering as these feel." He then ~ot up;
pulle off his boots ; took a rose from a vase, and walked mto the
centre of the room. Presently he came close to me, and
apparently spoke to a spirit. " Yes," he said, " Thank you."
Then turning to me, said, "When Dan went into the middle of
the room, they took him by the throat, and tore this button off
his shirt; they threw it at you, and you heard it drop; and then
they tried to throw it in the fire, but they had to brin?c it back
to him." I asked " Why did he take off his boots?" ' Just to
typify his defenceiessness ; that is why he took the ro~~ to shew
his goodwill. It is thus that right overcomes wrong. why, even
if a beast were suffering pain, and you went up and threatened
it, you could do no good ; but if you went soothingly and gentlyJ
though at first it might resist, not knowing you, yet it woul(
soon become passive. Ah, the influence is all changed.''
Turning to Lmdsay, he said, " You will have a curious
manifestation at the Tower, quite alone." Lindsay asked him
about it. " I must not tell you anything about it. Adare,
perhaps, may be informed ; but if you were, your mind would
become too positive, and that would surely stop it." He got
up; walked about; patted me on the shoulder, saying, "You
are all right,.zou are going to get quite well soon." He sat
down and sa.t , " I see an old man with silver locks · he has on
a mantle, covered with stars." "Who is he?" I asked. " Pythagoras. He is much interested about winds and tides · he
has be~n studying the passage of the Red Sea. He says it
was qmte a natural phenomenon, and has occurred three or

75
four times before the Jews croBBed, and once since. It is a
curious circumstance, owing to a combination of wind and of
tide." I said, " Was it observed when it occurred since?" " He
says, No, he thinks not," Home replied, "But when it occurs
again, men will observe it." "Are we about correct as to the
spot where the Jews crossed ? " " Oh, yes, tolerably correct.
He (Pythagoras) was correct in his theory, that man should
never wear the skins of beasts; there is an influence in them that
is never lost. He was right; but he exaggerated. You must, for
instance, wear leather for your feetJ. the influence is so slight and
so easily counteracted by other inttuences that it does you no
harm. Cagliostro is often with Lindsay, because he takes an
interest in freemasonry. You may tell Dan that he has not been
to him for a long time; but he will come again to him. C--D-is very anxious to come to you1 but he cannot to-night. I see a
woman, she represents Fate, she has in her hand a rosebud, it
contains a worm that has eaten it to the core, she is fastening it to
a horse-the horse is galloping off-oh, he looks as if he must
break his neck. Ah, the rosebud has fallen off now. Everybody was anxious, before it was fastened to the horse, to get at
it, see it, and sniff at it ; but now there are only two or three
who have a good word to say for it." "Is this emblematic of
C--D--?" "Yes it is. The same spirit is here that foretold all
those earthquakes and convulsions of nature, he is standing a long
way off; but he seems anxious to say that there will be a great
war, or plll.g'Ue, or some national disaster of that sort before
}Qng." ''In Europe?" "Yes." "In England?" "No; it
seems rather that it is to be in France." "Is it a war between
France and Prussia?" " No ; it does not seem to be." Home
got up, walked about, sat down again, and turning to me, said" The doctor ia pleased with you, boy." " What doctor?" I
said," Why, Dan's silent doctor; he says you will get all right,
the sooner you go away for a little change the better ; but you
must not take a long journey, or cross the sea, it would be very
foolish to do so, a chill might strike in again upon your stomach.
He says that the other night, when he rubbed the back of your
neck, he did not make use of any liquid, as you thought. If
Dan's fingers had been wet, they would have felt rough to the
skin; buttheydidnot." I said "No; theyfeltoily." "Exactly;
like oleaginous matter ; still it was in reality nothing but very
strong influence. I cannot explain this to you, you would not
understand it. He saved you from very acute suffering, from
violentjain in your head ; he cut it off from your head, and
confine the disease to your stomach." Home laughed and said,
" Some of your relatives think that you have made yourself ill
by being at so many s~ances." "What am I to do to dispel that

76
idea?" " Why, do just what you are doing ; get well to be su~,
that is the best thing." Home then awoke.
No. 38.-Seance.

Last Monday we had a seance at Mr. S.C. Hall's-whichwas a
failure. We had scarcely any manifestations. At the close, the
spirits asked for a decanter of water, they directed Home and the
two Misses Bertolacci to stand UJ? and hold their hands in a
certain position above and below 1t; and we were directed to
11tand round. They held the decanter for $orne time, magnetizing
it, and were then told by the spirits to place it upon the table.
The spirits said, ".A.dare is to take a wine glass .full ni'gkt and
mO'I'ning, and witk the blessing of Okri'st, he will be cured in
siz days."
No. 39.-Seance at .Ashley Rouse, Tuesday, November 24tk.
Last Sunday Home went to Norwood; Lindsay accompanied
him. They had a seance, but scarcely any manifestations.
Lindsay came back here with Home about eleven o'clock. We
three sat round the table and had a very curious seance, the room
being nearly dark. Lindsay and Home saw spirit forms. I
did not ; but I saw, as did also the others, phosphorescent lights
about the room; balls of light would move along the floor and
touch us, feeling like a material substance and highly electrical.
Adah Menken was there, and spoke to us a good deal. She
removed her book from the table, turned a leaf down, and
brought it back~ putting it in my hand, and telling me that she
had marked a certain place. Little Dannie Cox's spirit came and
moved a small chair from the wall, and placed it near the table.
He lifted the chair (no one touching it), up in the air, brought it
to me, then carried it over the table to Home who was sittin~ at
the other side. He tried to materialise his voice so that we might
hear it. We heard the voice distinctly, and he articulated the
words " Uncle IJan."
The SJ>irits gave one message in a
curious way. Lindsay was anxious to be toU<~hed. They said,
".All in ,qood-" and then turning the hands of a clock that was
not going, so as to make it tick and strike, :finished the sentence,
"~ll i? good l?·m£." .The table we were sitting at was .twice
raised m the air so high that we could see under it wtthout
stoop;ng. It was altogether a wonderful seance. We had a
number of messages, but I forget them.

77
No. 40.-S~ance.
Last night Lindsay called; he said that he had had strong
manifestations that evening when alone, and had been told to go
to Ashley Place. About 11 o'clock Home came in. We sat
round the table and bad a most wonderful seance. The room
was nearly dark. We had physical manifestations. Home went
into a trance; be walked about the room for some time, arranging
the light, and talking to himself; he then opened the window,
drawing the curtains, so that we could see nothing bnt his head ;
and got outside the window. This frightened us, 1md Lindsay
wanted to stop him, but did not. Presently, he came back and
told us that we bad no faith whatever, or we would not have been
alarmed for his safety. He went into the next room, and we saw
him pour out from a bottle on the table about half a large
wine glass of brandy. He brought the glass back with him; then
partially covering himself with the window curtains, but holding
the glass with the brandy in it above his head, between us and
the window, so that we could see it, he was lifted off the floor
about four or five feet. While in the air, we saw a bright light
in the glasf!; presently, he came down and showed us that the glass
was empty, by turning it upside down; he also came to us and
turned it upside down upon our hands; then going back to the
window, he held the glass up, and we heard the liquid drop into it.
He began talking about the brandy, and said "It is under certain
circumstances a demon, and real devil; but if properly used,
it is most beneficial." As he said this the light became visible
in the glass, and he was again raised in the air; "But," he said,
"if improperly used, it becomes so," (the light disappeared)
"aud drags you down, down, lower and lower;" and as he spoke
he sank gradually down till he touched the floor with the
glass. He again raised the glass above his head and the liquor
was withdrawn. He then told me to come and bold my hand
above the glass ; I did so, and the liquor fell over and through
my fingers into the glass, dropping from the air above me. I sat
down and asked him where on earth the liquor went to. " Oh,"
he said, " the sririt that is makin~ the experiment is obliged to
form a materia substance to retam the fluid. He might drink
it, or hold it in his mouth ; in this case he held it in his hand."
ADARE : " When you say his hand, do you mean his own
hand or that he created a substance like a hand to hold it ; was
be obliged to be there to hold it, or could he have been at the
other side of the room ?"
HOME : " Of course he must be there ; it was his own hand
made material for the moment to hold the liquid, as a hand is
made material when you touch or feel it."

78
ADARE: "Then that story in Howitt's book of a spirit
drinking a glass beer may be true ?"
HOME: "Oh yes· certainly it may."
An ARE: " Brit could he swallow and retain it?"
HoME: (laughing) "No, he could not retain it long, he must
have held the beer for a time1 but it must have been spilled outside
If the doors and windows had been shut, so that he could not
carry it out of the room, it must have fallen upon the floor."
ADARE : " He could not then transport it through a solid
substance?"
HoME : " Oh dear no, certainly not I If, when the liquid in
that glass was retained in the air, you had put your hand there,
it would have fallen to the ground." He then said, " I am going
to take the strength from the brandy," and he began making
passes over the glass and flipping his fingers, sending a str<mg
smell of spirit through the room; in about five minutes he had
made the brandy as weak as very weak brandr and water; it
scarcely tasted at all of spirit; both Lindsay and I tasted it, at
the moment 1 and also some time after the seance was over. Home
then began to walk about and talked, or rather some ~irit
talked through him ; he turned and said to some spirit, " Well,
really I think you had better not, we don't know you, or know
anything about you; thank you, yes, that will do quite well." A
chair then moved up to the table between Lindsay and me, and
Home said that the spirit who had tried the experiments with
the brandy was sitting there; Lindsay could see him, I could·
not. Home, or rather a spirit talking through him, then began
speaking about manifestations to this spirit, but in such a low
tone, I could only now and then catch what he said. '11lis
spirit appeared ignorant of how to raise a substance in the air,
and the spirit who was talking through Home seemed much
amueed at what he said. He tried experiments with my chair,
but could not succeed, and Home laughed. He then began
talking about lifting him (Home) up, and after speaking for
some time in a low tone, arparently suggesting different ways,
he said, " Well, then, I wil lift him on to the table and sling him
right off into the air." " Oh, yes," said the other,* " and perhaps
break his leg, that will never do." They then arranged that
he was to try by lifting him first on to the back of my chair.
Accordingly, in about a minute, Home was lifted up on to the
back of my chair. "Now," he said, "take hold of Dan's feet."
I took both his feet in my hands, and away he went up into the
air so high that I was obliged to let go his feet; he was carried

* Apparently two spirits were at this time speaking alternately, through
Mr. Home, so as to let us know the meaning of what they were doiug with him,
and what the subject of their conversation was.

79
along the wall, brushing past the pictures, to the opposite side of
the room ; he then called me over to him. I took his hand, and
felt him alight upon the floor ; he sat. down upon the sofa and
laughed, saying, "That was very badly done, you knocked Dan
up agains~ the pictures." Home got up, opened the door, pulled
\lp the blmd and made the room much lighter; then sitting
down, said1 " We will lift Dan up again better presently,
and in a clearer light so that you can see better. Always
examine well, never forget to use your reason in these matters."
He was not however raised again, for some other spirits anxious
to communicate came, and those who were experimentalizing
gave way. " Ah I " Home said, " There is an unadvanced
spirit here; you perceive the earthy smell?" We both noticed
it, and asked if he had long left this world. " No, only a
abort time." We then heard the noise like of a horse galloping,
and I knew C - D-- was there. I said, " Is C--D-here ? 11 " Yes," he said " he is." Home got up and said
(C-- D-- speaking through him), "I suppose you would
think me a brute because I ask for brandy." He took the glass
of brandy, walked about with it1 and then ~ut it down and
sat down, and in answer to Lindsay said, " For some years,
with whatever medium it may be, you will always know him by
the sound of the horse. Turning to me, " You did not do as
much as you might for him. You might have advised him and
spoken to him." I said I was truly sorry ; I had not thought I
could have done him any good. " Well, he thinks perhaps you
might, but he is not sure that you could i but you might have
tried ; he was really attached to x.ou, and 1s so still. He says as
regards all this (Spiritualism), 1f' you had spoken about it, he
would have called it all damned nonsense ; that is what he
would have said then. He wanted to see if he could taste brandy,
but the others would not let him." I said "Has he any desire for those things now ? " " Well, he never did care for brandy ;
he was fosder of champagne. He does sometimes think about
those things, but he will soon cease to do so ; his desire for
them was produced by bodily weakness, and when he finds
himself suffering no longer from that feeling, he will not want
them. Ah, poor fellow, poor fellow, he is crying ; he says
he was not what he ought to have been, but he was not as bad
as he has been painted. He is unhappy; something is wei~hing
on his mind." I asked questions and received answers, gtving
me much information as to the cause of this spirit being
unhappy. He mentioned facts that I knew to be accurate,
thus affording a satisfactory test of identity; but, it being
undesirable that the identity should, in this case be known, 1
refrain from mentioning what passed. I then asked, "Can I be

80
of any use about it ?" " He says if the real person is not
found out, he will try and manage to impress you-to give
you some clue ; so that without your name coming forward,
you might be of use." (A,{teJ• a pause) "Adare, He says,
that he would not come back to earth if he could ; he feelS
that he has a better chance of improvement as he is. All
will come right, he says, in time ; he feels as if he had been
ploughed and harrowed, and torn to bits, and may now
bring forth fruits. Ah, he is off; restless, very restless. He
turns back to say, 'Adare, I would not come back if I could; I
know that all is for the best.' " We waited in hopes of Home
being lifted in the air again ; but the power was expended, and
he presently awoke, and we went into the next room. After
Lindsay had gone, Home went into a trance for a minute or
two, and spoke to me. He said that C-- D--'s coming had
prevented them doing what they had wanted. He said, "We
were in the room when Dr. Hawkesley was talking to you
yesterda,-, and we much approve of his sug~estions. It is the
quinine that caused those unpleasant feelings m your head; there
was nothing spiritual about it.
No. 41.-Seance at 5, Budcingkam Gate, Wednesday,
December 16th.
On Sunday last, Charlie Wynne (l.nd I went ov-er to Ashley
House after dinner. There we found Home and the Master
of Lindsay. Home proposed a sitting. We accordingly sat
round a table in the small room. There was no light in the
room ; but the light from the window was sufficient to enable us
to distinguish each other, and to see the different articles of
furniture. Immediately on sitting down we had _physical
manifestations and messages, chiefly from Adah Menken.
Lindsay saw two spirits on the sofa, 8.lld others in different
places. Home went mto a trance. Adah Menken spoke through
him, to what efFect I do not remember; also little l)annie Cox.
The latter having in speaking to Charlie Wynne called him
Charlie, turned to me and said," Please tell him that we always
call. people ~y their Christian na~es." Home suddenly breaking
off m the mtddle of a sentence satd, " Who is this man E-?
What does he want? Do you know him ?"
'
CHARLIE : " Yes 1 I knew him, he came to me at Lissadell,
and told me a vartety of circumstances connected with his
death."
HoME : " He is come about that. Do you object to his
doing so?"
CHARLIE : " Certainly not ; I am glad of it."

81
HOME : " Then he will sit down beside you."
A chair moved of itself from the wall up to the table between
Home and Charlie. Charlie said he could feel that there was
some one there, but he saw nothing. Lindsay perceived the
figure in the chair, and said he was leaning his arm on Charlie's
11houlder. The upstart of a long conversation between Charlie
and E--, speaking through Home, was that he, E--, would
on no account give any information that would lead to the
prosecution of . . . . . . That Charlie had been told at
Lissadell to let the matter alone; that he had not given the
information at Lissadell ; that other spirits very anxious on
the subject had done so ; that they had made some mistakes, and
that owing also to the imperfect development of the medium
other mistakes had occurred. That some of the information
was incorrect he said could be prov~d by his writing to certain
placest when he would find that no person of the name given had
been there. He hacl not been allowed to discover what became
of a certain man after his, E--'s, death. God's justice was
very different from man 'a; and God's justice would find him out.
He could not and would not have anything to do in the matter.
ADAHE: "But you do not object to human justice taking
its course?"
HOME: '' Oh dear no ; it is necessary for the well being of
society that it should do so ; in human affairs let human justice
proceed; but we cannot interfere; God's justice is so different
from man's. It is obvious also that were we permitted to
continually interfere in these matters, the result would be
extremely bad."
Home became much agitated; " Ah," he said, " he has
something weighing on his mind; poor, poor fellow!" He laid
his head upon my hand on the table and sobbed violently; two
or three tears fell upon my hand
HOME : " Do you feel how hot his tears are?"
A DARE : " Yes, I do."
HoME: '' They will leave a mark of blood upon your hand."
CHARLIE: "But at Lissadell he told me he was quite
happy."
HOME : " So he thought perhaps at the time ; but do you think
that a man can be cut off in a moment in that way, leaving his
family, who were dependant on him for daily bread, almost
totally unprovided for, without a pang of regret and sorrow?
Poor fellow, he seems to want to speak about something that has
been lost."
CHARLIE: " Is it about some missing papers?"
HOME: " Yes that is it."
CHARLIE: "Can he tell me where they are?"
F

82
HOMR: "He says that unfortunately most of them were
destroyed, but some were sent to his lawyer. He does not tell
me the name of his lawyer, but the family will know_; he says
you will find several among some receipts and other papers in a
small box over the door of his study ; there are two or three
small boxes there. 'Oh ! I wish R-- was here. I could tell
him things about my affairs that I cannot tell you, Charlie.'"
ADARE: ''If R-- comes to London would you like him to
meet Home ?."
HOME lexcited): "Oh, yes; oh, dear yes. Ah I he has gone,
poor fellow ; he is rather abrupt in his manner, is he not?. He
does not brook much delay." Horne told me to go into the
next room and look if the tears had left any mark upon my
hand. I perceived a very slight red mark. When I returned
he told me to stretch out my hand. I did so, and Dannie Cox
touched it with the tip of his finger and said, through Mr.
Home, "You will see the marks {'lainer in the morning." They
were rather plainer, but still indtstinct, when I awoke the next
day. Home then got up and walked about the room. He was
both elongated and raised in the air. He spoke in a whisper, as
though the spirits were arranging something. He then said to
us, " Do not be afraid, and on no account leave your places; "
and he went out into the passage. Lindsay suddenly satd, "Oh,
good heavens I I know what he his going to do ; it is too fearful."
ADARE : " What is it?."
LINI>SAY: "I cannot tell you, it is too honible I Adah says
that I must tell you; he is going out of the window in the
other room, and coming in at this window." We heard Home go
into the next room, heard the window thrown up, and presently
Home appeared standing upri~ht outside our window; he opened
the window and walked in qutte coolly. "Ah," he said, " You
were good this time," referring to our having sat still and not
wished to prevent him. He sat down and laughed.
CHARLIE : " What are you laughing at ?."
HOME: " We were thinking th1Lt if a policeman had been
passing, and had looked up and seen a man turning round and
round along the wall in the air he would have been much
astonished. A dare, shut the window in the next room." I got
up, shut the window, and in coming back remarked that the
window was not raised a foot, and that I could not think how
he had managed to squeeze through. He arose and said," Come
~nd see." I wer;tt with him : he told me to open the window as
1t was before, I dtd so: he told me to stand a little distance off; he
then we?t through th~ open space, head first, quite rapidly, ~is
bod;r bemg nearly horizontal and apparently rigid. He came m
agam, feet foremost, and we returned to the other room. It

83
was so dark I could not see clearly how he was supported
outside. He did not appear to grasp, or rest upon, the
balustrade, but rather to be swung out and in. Outside each
window is a small balcony or ledge, 19 inches deep, bounded by
stone balustrades, 18 inches high. The balustrades of the two
windows are 7 feet 4 inches apart, measuring from the nearest
points. A string-course, 4 inches wide, runs between the
windows at the level of the bottom of the balustrade ; and
another 3 inches wide at the level of the top. Between the
window at which Home went out, and that at which he
came in, the wall recedes 6 inches. '!'he rooms are on the
third floor. Home presently got up. again, told us not to be
frightened or to move, and left the room. Adah Menken told
Lindsay that they were going to shew us the water test; but
for some reason or other I suppose they were unable to do so,
for Home came in again directly, sat down and said "Dan must
awake now, he will be very nervous; but you must bear with
him, it will pass off." I asked Lindsay how .Adah had spoken
to him on the three occasions. He could scarcely explain; but
said it did not sound like an audible human voice; but rather
as if the tones were whispered or impressed inside his ear. When
Home awoke, he was mnch agitated; he said he felt as if he had
gone through some fearful peril, and that he had a most horrible
desire to throw himself out of window ; he remained in a very
nervous condition for a short time, then gradually became quiet.
Having been ordered not to tell him, we said nothing of what
had happened. We now had a series of very curious manifestations. Lindsay and Charlie saw tongues or jetR of flame
proceeding from Home's head. We then all distinctly heard, as
1t were, a bird flying round the room, whistling and chirping, but
saw nothing, except Lindsay, who perceived an indistinct form
resembling a bird. There then came a sound as of a great wind
rushing through the room, we also felt the wind strongly; the
moaning rushing sound was the most weird thing I ever heard.
Home then got up, being in a trance, and spoke something in a
language that none of us understood; it may have been nonsense,
but it sounded like a sentence in a foreign tongue. Lindsay thought
he recognized some words of Russian. He then quoted the
text about the different gifts of the s:pirit, and gave us a translation in English of what he had sa1d in the unknown tongue.
He told us that Charlie had that day been discussing the
miracles that took place at Pentecost ; and that the spirits
made the sound of the wind; of the bird descending ; of the unknown tongue, and interpretation therflof, and the tongues
of fire : to shew that the same phenomenon could occur
again. He spoke at length on the folly of supposing that
F2

84
God had long ago written, as it were, one little page of
revelation, and then for ever shut the book, and turned away
his face from mankind. Charlie asked questions relative to
the nature of God; the doctrine of the 'l'rinity; and God's
having once been on earth. Home spoke at great length, and
with much eloquence. I cannot remember the exact words;
but the subst~ce of it was, that it was impossible !or ~s
to comprehend It ; that nearly every man had really m his
mind a different idea of God ; that whether our conception
of Him was as a unity, duality, or a trinity, it could not be
of much consequence, provided that we recognized Him and
obeyed His laws. He spoke much of the immensity of God,
and our almost utter ignorance of Him and His works. He
described the geometrical forms and attributes of a grain of
sand, and asked us if we understood anything of that; and
then pointing to a star, he asked us what we knew of that.
He commented upon the very slight knowledge that the most
scientific men had; mentioning that not long ago the spots
on the sun had been considered to be mountains ; then water;
then faculre: but that now they knew them to be gl"eat
chasms. "But what they do not know," he said, "is, that
the sun is covered with a beautiful vegetation, and full of
organic life."
ADARE : " Is not the sun hot ?"
HoME : "No, the sun is cold; the heat is produced and
tral!'smitted to the earth by the rays of .light passing through
various atmospheres. As to God's havmg been once on the
earth, He has never left it, but is everywhere."
Charlie also asked about the divinity of Christ, and said he
wanted to know the truth about all those matters.
Home spoke to the effect that even if they could tell us the
whole truth, our minds could not understand or bear it. He said
that spirits had different views on these subjects, and that they
could not and might not unfold the truth. "You are taught," he
continued, "as much as you can bear. A common theory,
speaking figuratively, is that the heavens and earth are two
cones ; and that Christ is, as it were, the two apexes, joining
and connecting both." He recommended Charlie, if he did
or could, to hold the doctrine of the divinity of Christ in its
usually accepted form, saying that it was better for him to do
so, if it led him to a more religious frame of mind; but added,
" Follow His teaching and carry out His mission. His mission
was one of peace ; do not then cut your neighbour's throat
because he differs from you." Home then launched out into
a tirade against intolerance and persecution, lamenting over the
wickedness of mankind in supposing that bloodshed and persecu-

85
tiot~ could be pleasing to God. He spoke at great length on this

SUbJeCt.
ADARE : " But if, for a time at least the whole truth about
such important doctrines as the divinity of Christ is not perceived, do not the differences of opinion among spirits who are
much together, lead to bad results? For instance, my mother
was very religious; and especially upon that subject of the divinity
of Christ. She may be frequently with spirits who do not hold
the same views, or hold them in a modified form. Do they still
differ? Do they talk about it?"
HoM 1:: : "It cannot lead to dissension; they know that they are
not perfect, and that they have much to learn. The sort of conversation you have imagined to yourself has actually taken
place. A spirit has asked certain questions such as : ' Can you
shew me that there was a necessity for it?' ' Can you actually
prove it?' &c., &c. Andyom· motlleralways, as you know, kind
and gentle, only says, 'No; perha~s not; but I do not see any
reason why I should change the behef I always held about it.'"
Home then turned to me saying, " You have been much
troubled and disturbed; you have a difficult and tortuous path
before you, and you have thought that if there was anything in
Spiritualism it ought to be of use and comfort to you. We
know all your doubts and difficulties, and sympathize with you.
Be patient and prayerful, and all will be well. I'Jave you had
a dream?"
ADARE : "I believe I have dreamt something curious; but I
am unable to remember what it was."
HoME: "Adah has been trying to impress you in your sleep.
Your mother allowed her to do so; but she has not quite succeeded ; she will try again. What you dreamt, you could
not remember, it was this: You thought you were journeying along a tortuous, difficult path full of obstacles; at the
foot of a mountain you saw two angels; the one very bright
and pure, the other rather darker and more earthly. You were
in doubt which to choose; but thought the darker one, being
most material, would be of most use. You trusted yourself to
him; but as you ascended the mountain, the path became more
and more difficult, and the angel that guided you became himself
weary and confused; could not conduct you Any further, and at
last you were obliged to stop. You found tllen still greater difficulty
in retracing your steps than you had experienced in going up;
but at length, you arrived again at the foot of the ascent; and
you then trusted yourself to the other and brighter angel, when
the road became at once easy, and he led you up without doubt
or difficulty."

86
No. 42.-BAance at No. 5, Buckingham Gate, December 20t~.
My dear Father,-Last Tuesday wEI had a sAance at No. 7.
Present: Home, Charlie Wynne and his wife, Augusta Gore,
the Master of Lindsay, Arthur Smith Barry, and m1self. 'l'here
appeared to be great difficulty in making manifestatiOns; indeed,
the spirits said that Home was ill and therefore that they had no
power. We felt strong vibrations of the table, which was moved
about. Augusta's couch was moved, (uo one touching it) as was
the screen, at the head of her couch, (no one touchi~ it.) The
spirits also answered, and gave messages by rappmg on the
couch; altogether it was not a bad sAance for convincing sceptics.
Arthur was touched, as was also Augusta, and the latter told
me afterwards, that she had seen spirit-forms in the room.
Home was taken possessi·on of, his hands and arms became
partially cataleptic, and he made passes in this condition over
Augusta for some time, then stooping down he made passes
under the couch ; which Augusta said she felt distinctly.
Charlie Wynne, Lindsay, Arthur and I, adjourned to Ashley
House, to smoke a cigar. We sat for a short time in the little
room, and had manifestations, but Home was too weak for anything very wonderful. He was elongated slightly (I think), and
raised in the air; his head became quite luminous at the top,
giving him the appearance of havin~ a halo round it. When lie
was raised in the air, he waved h1s arms about, and in each
hand, there came a little globe of fire (to my eyes, blue); the
effect was very pretty; Adah Menken and Dannie Cox were
the only two spirits that I recognized by Home's manner.
No. 43.-SAance.
Last Friday, I went to a seance at Mrs. E--'s. Present:
Home, H. Jencken, Mrs. E--, Mrs. Honeywood, Captain
S - , General--, and myself. This seance was in many
respects the most wonderful that I have ever witnessed. Home
was in a trance the greater part of the time ; the information
that he gave was of a very private character to Captain 8--;
it was given in pantomime, not a word being spoken, in order
that some of the party should not understand. Captain S--1
for whom it was mtended, understood it, and I fancy so did I·
but as it was quite private, and for some reasons very fearfult I
do not feel at liberty to mention about it. I have since found I
was mistaken. Home, before he went into the trance said that
t~ere was a very strange influen~e about me. He p~tly made
h1m out, but by degrees, and sa1d that his name (surname) was
Thomas. Thomas of some place. 'l'hat he had been a friend of

87
my father's and of my grandfather, in fact a greater friend of the
latter than of the former; that I also had known him, that he used
to have conversations about religion with my father. He said that
he was a very strange spirit, abrupt and yet undecided iu his
manner ; " He wants to say something to you, but when I am
going to speak he stops me." "Ah !" he said, "He is going, he
says he will come again to-night." Besides the strange story
that Home in a trance acted for the benefit of Captain S--7
he also took Captain S-- and Mrs. E-- (brother and sister)
into another room, and spoke to them in private for some time.
We had at different times, pretty strong physical manifestations,
table lifted, &c., &l'. When Home was acting the story, it being
most necessary that not a word should be spoken, his jaws were
locked and as rigid as steel ; I felt them, as did others.

:No. 44.
That night I slept in Home's room at Ashley House; we had
a very beautiful manifestation. Home had been giving a public
reading the day before at Croydon, which had been a failure,
and he was much dispirited about it. A spirit (his mother I
think), said, '' Do not be cast down, Dan; serve God truly, and
his holy spirits will guard and protect you; fulfil your mission in
life, and He will not forsake ·you,-be not cast down." We then
both heard, as it were, a bird chirping about the room, and the
spirit added, ''For He careth even for the sparrows." The spirits
conver~ed with us for some little time by raps.
My mother
spoke more to me than she has ever done before; Home being in
a trance. He made use of the same expressions my mother would
have done, in a most affectionate manner. He talked of her
happiness, partly on account of an immunity from physical pain
and weakness, partly owing to the blessed calm and peace of her
existence, and her knowledge that the hearts of those she had
loved still beat with love for her, and that soon they would all
be united again together. He told me not to think that it was
through want of affection that she so seldom communicated with
me, and gave me certain reasons for it, and recited two verses of
beautiful poetry relative to a mother's love. He mentioned a.
painful peculiarity of a spirit who had taken part at the seance
that evening ; a peculiarity that I also have, and told me to take
warning, and try and break myself of it. He said that her great
wish was to see me lead so pure and elevated life that I might
make my ~xistence he:e a stepping stone to a far ~igher state of
existence m the next life. He told me not to be discouraged b;r
failure, but to strive to do what I knew was right. The spint
calling himself Thomas of (name of place unknown), came and

88
began to talk about himself. He said that since he had entered
the spirit-life, he had very much changed his views on religion.
He broke off suddenly and said he would tell me all about it
another time. It was then late, past three a.m., and my mother
said, " I will request the other influences to leave you ; you
should sleep now."
No.45.
Last night I slept in Home's room at Ashley House. I did
not go to bed till past three. Soon after I was in bed, there
were evidences of a very strong influence in the room ; and we
saw lights and heard sounds, as if some one was endeavouring
to make their voice audible to us ; and we heard a sound like
footsteps. We then had a very beautiful manifestation. There
is a plaster of Paris crucifix1 about one foot in length, hanging
on the wall over Home's bed. W ~ heard somethin~ oeing moved
on the wall, and presently saw this crucifix wavnig in the air
between us and the window. I could see nothing holding it;
it appeared to move of itself. A spirit then said, by raps on the
cross, '' It is to shew you that we do not fear the symbol of the
cross/ we should like you to kiss it." The crucifix was then
brought, or, as it appeared to me, moved of itself, close to my
face and was placed upon my lips. I kissed it, and it was
then taken awafr to Home's bed and placed upon his lips. He
did the same. They then said, " We also will now kiss it." The
crucifix was moved away some distance, and we heard a sound
of. some one kissing it three times, but saw nothing: They then
satd, through the alphabet, that they had somethmg to tell me
next Sunday; and that the same spirit that had spoken to us,
through Home, the Sunday before, would come again ; that we
were not to interrupt him by asking questions, but just to listen
to what he said, as he had something of importance to tell us.
No. 46.-Seance, Saturday, December 26th.
Last Sunday, Home and Lindsay went down to Norwood to
have a seance. They returned about 11 o'clock. Charlie
Wynne and Captain Smith came also to Ashley House. After
Home and Lindsay arrived, we went into the small room and
sat round the table; the room was dark. We had strong
physical manifestations; we were all repeatedly touched by
hands coming from under the table. Our hands when touched
were on the table. A hand took Charlie's hand, and the
moment he felt it he exclaimed, "This is ·F--'s hand; I could
swear to her peculiar touch." The same hand also touched me ;

89
playfully pinching and patting the back of my hand ; it felt
old and wrinkled. A spirit said by raps, "Yes, t"t ls F---."
The hand again touched Charlie; he also remarked the wrinkled
feeling of the skin. A spirit then said, "Yes, it feel8 to you
as it once was; now it is no lon.qer aged;" and a hand feel~
ing young and soft placed itself in Charlie's handt taking his
in the same peculiar manner, but patting him briskly as if to
shew that it was full of 1ife. G-- H-- 1 an uncle of Smith,
and H-- J--, told us by raps that they were present. I
asked if it were true that uncle Robert was conscious of their
})resence near him at night, and if he had real manifestations.
They replied, " Yes, t"t t"s true, and not imagination on his part."
I asked them if Emmy had been touched on the shoulder the
morning before or whether it was as I had declared, her
imagination. They replied, " She was t.ouched." Charlie asked
if what had happened to him in church was spiritual? They
said, "Yes, cerlat"nly, ~·t was.'' They entered a good deal into our
conversation. Lindsay fell into a trance; at first he could
not speak, but after a time in answer to a question, they
said through him, " Yes, he can see sometimes ; he will not
remember anything of it, we cannot talk through him
much yet, he is not fully developed, but he will be in
time." Lindsay when awake saw spirit~forms, I saw lights
occasionally 1 faint flashes and sparks. Home went into a trance;
he walked about the room apparently settling what was to be
done, then sat down, and turning to me, told me to go into
the next room, and place outside the window a certain vase
of flowers. I did so, putting the vase outside on the ledge,
and shutting the window. Home opened the window of the
room in which we were sitting. The flowers were carried
through the air from the window of the next room in at our
open window. We could all hear the rustling, and see the
curtains moved by the spirit standing there, who was bringing
in the flowers; Lindsay saw the spirit distinctly. A flower
and sprig of fern, or something of that sort, was now given
to each of us ; in some cases it was placed upon the hand
on the table ; others were touched, and on putting down their
hand, the flower was placed in it. I was touched strongly
on the knee, and a sprig of box was given me. Afterwards,
little Dannie said, " I wlll give you another piece of fern in
place of the one you lost ; but you must take great care of tltis ;
it is only a ve7 Nttle bit." In answer apparently to some ques~
ti.on, Home sa1d 1 "Oh yes, certainly, give it to him yourse~f."
Home told me to hold out my hand-1 did so, rather belund
me· and I felt Dannie's soft little fingers touch mine, and
pn.t' my hand, and place a little bit of maiden hair fern in

90
it. Home then made some very curious experiments with
flowers: he separated the scent into two portions-one odour
smelling exactly like earth ; the other being very sweet. He
explained what he was doingj and how there came to be the two
pnncipals, as it were1 in the Hower. I did not clearly understand
his meaning when he spoke; and I forget now what he said.
While the flowers were being given to us, Home said, " Listen ;
we did, and all heard the sprigs being broken in the next room.
While we listened, the sound ceased. Home said, " You see
the effect of the concentration of your thoughts. It is hard for
you to understand; but I assure you that the fact of your all
directing your thottghts to a certain object there, sent a solid
column of polarized light right through into the other room,
and completely changed the condition of the atmosphere there
for a time, so that they eould not continue to do what they were
about." As soon as we had all been given our little bunches of
leaves or flowers, Home told me to go into the next room, and
examine the vase. I did so, and found the window closed as I
had left it; I opened it and found that all the tall sprigs of fern,
&c., &c., had been taken away. Home never left the room we
sat in after I had placed the vase outside the window, so that
even supposing that the branches we received had been concealed
by Home on his person, still the sprigs in the vase must have
been broken off and removed somehow outside the window.
Home now left the room, saying, "Do not be frightened; Dan
is not going out of the window or anything of that sort." He
r.etumed, holding in his hand half a lemon, freshly cut L ha
handed it to each of us to taste. He lau?hed and said, " :res,
it is ver7 good, is it not? so refreshing.' He then held it up
above h1B liead, and said, " We will withdraw all the acid flavour
from it.'' A yellowish light came over the lemon; he held it uy
for some little time, and said, "Now taste again." He held 1t
out to me; but the room being rather dark, I bobbed my nose
against it, and therefore tasted nothing. All the others tasted
it, and described it as most disagreeable, having no odour, and
the flavour being a sort of mawkish alkali; some describing it as
like magnesia; others, as like washing soda. Home laughed
and said, " We will take the nasty taste away presently." He
then described what had taken place, I cannot recollect what he
said, but the substance of it was that a purely natural procesa
had been gone through. " If you were to eat the lemon " he
said, " or swallow the juice the same thing exactly would ~ccur
by natural decomposition, all the acid flavour would be freed and
would pass through the J?Ores of your skin into all sorts of f~rms
&c., &c., while the res1duum would be a substance such a~
you now tasted. It resembled soda; it is of that natur~ and that

91
is why lemon juice is so good for acidity of the stomach and
blood." We have done nothing miraculoua; by our knowledge
of natural substances and laws, we were able to hasten as it
were, a natural process, and withdraw at once the acid, instead
of its being diffused into various forms: we have retained ,it in
the air, and will now restore it to the lemon." He held the
lemon up and a rose-coloured flame, or rather light, came over it.
After a little, he gave it to those who had tasted it the second
time ; they said that it was quite good and fresh, and that all the
natural scent and flavour was restored to it.*
Home sat down and said, " It would be very nice if the
same party that are here to-ni~ht, could sit occasionally together.
You are all sympathetic, and m a very short time you would all
of you see not only sparks and flashes of light, but the whole
forms distinctly of the spirits in the room. I want also some
time br other to talk to you on a very interesting subject, namely,
when it is that the soul enters the body of an infant; at what
period of its existence it becomes a living soul. It appears a
difficult subject to vou; it is really as simple as the scent of a
flower or its colou;." Charlie then said something to him abou.t
the origin of man. " Oh, yes," said Home, " that is a subject
I want to speak to you abont ; some day I will, and of the
difference in the existences of different creatures. No creature
that crawls-that is unable, as it were, to do anything to preserve
its life here-has immortality." "Do you mean," I said, "that
they have no future?" " Oh, {es, they have indeed a very
important future before them~ mean they differ from you as
regards their individuali_!y." 1 said, "Can you tell me where
the line is drawn?" "There is no exact line; some creatures
are endowed with a greater amount of what you call instinct
than others that are apparently much above them in the scale of
creation : like, for instance, ants and bees. I cannot tell you
about it now. We have not been able to do at all what we
intended this evening. Dan must awake now, and you must not
sit any longer." Home awoke, and we went into the other room.
No. 47.-Seance at No.7, Buckingham Gate, Monday,
•
December 21st.
Present: Emmy Wynne, Charlie. Wynne, Augusta Gore
Booth, Home, and myself. We sat at a large square tea table,
one sitle of it bein~ placed against Augusta's couch. Almost
immediately on sittmg down, we felt a strong vibration of the

* I believe I am co1-rect in this account of the lemon, but I cannot swear that
Home did not leave the room after, as he said, restoring the acid principle to the
lemon, aud before he save it to them to taste.

92

table. The alphabet was called for, and the following long
message given; the first part having reference to me and something that had occupied my mind ; the latter part intended for
all of us : "A perfect submis~>wn to the crosses of earth life only
works out for you a purer and higher life, when freed from the
mortal and near1r the Dimne. YCiu 1 my dar-ling boy, did not
observe that tne ltttle branch we gave you last n~ght was in form a
cross. It has a deep significance. There are six leaves at every
point; these, too, have a meaning, which you will one day understand. .:Meanwhile, bear all; God's truth will overcome error.
Be patient, my darlings; I am indeed happy that you have been
led to investi'gate."
We had all the usual physical phenomena, though not very
strongly; the chief feature of the s~ance being the amount of
conversation carried on through the alphabet; and by spirits
assenting or differing from what we said by rapping " Yes" or
"No" upon the table, furniture, &c. Raps came on Augtista's
couch, and it was moved about, and the head part raised a little.
After these manifestations a message was given: "Darling, this
is G-- H--;" and immediately afterwards: "We all wish to
see you thus," and her couch was again raised at the head, comr,Ieting the sentence : " We all wish to see you thus raised "'P.:"
The table moved about, and was tilted up sometimes to one s1de1
and sometimes to another. A whistle that was on the table did
not move when the table was tilted in any direction, except
towards Augusta; when it was tilted towards her the whistle
rolled. In answer to a question as to the cause of this, they
said, " From a want of influence on that side." They told us
they did not withdraw any influence from Augusta, as it would
weaken her. 'l'hey afterwards turned the table round, so as to
have the side at which Emmy had been sitting next Augusta;
the side which had been next to Augusta came opposite to Home.
This equalized the magnetic influence round the table. At the same
time we were told that they were desirous of showing their
r,resence by messages rather than by phrsical manifestations.
The table was raised in the air about 18 mches, and remained
poised for some little time. Emmy's dress was pulled and shaken;
HQIDe's chair was moved. Having been told, through the
alphabet, to put the white cloth on the table, we did so. We saw,
and were touched by hands moving under the cloth. A flower in
Home's button-hole was taken away, and carried underneath the
table; I heard it moving there. Presently the same flower was
thrown from behind Augusta's couch ; it touched her face and
then fell upon the floor. It was taken up, and a hand and1 arm
came from behind her couch, and placed it gently against her
cheek, and gave it to her. Emmy said, '' 1 saw the hand and

93
A meRsage was given ' 1 A h.~nd, with the flower .frmn
K--." Home also saw the arm ; I dtd not. Some other manifestations were made about Augt1sta's couch, and the words, "It
was G - H--," given. We then heard a sharp noise that
arm."

we took to be the chirping of a bird under the table, and we
heard something moving underneath the table. 'l'he message
was g1ven-" We hope soon you will1wt req,~t're * * * ;" and
at the same moment a heavy handle, used for winding up the
couch, was raised from under the table, and placed in Augusta's
hand, implying that they hoped soon she would be able to raise
herself. The name " G-- H--" was given to shew who had
made the manifestation. We found that the chirping sound we
had heard was caused by the handle of the lever turning while
being moved under the table. '!'his chirping was imitated exactly
by a spirit at some dist-ance behind us in the centre of the room.
We now had a very wonderful manifestation. We were merry
about something or other, and we all distinctly heard a spirit
voice joining in our laughter; it sounded quite clear and loud.
Home asked if it was to shew that they liked to see us happy and
were happy themselves ; the answer was " Yes; God is so
good." t;oon after this the message was given-" Daniel is
exhausted, and all manifelltations ceased. During the seance
Emmy and Augusta saw shadowy forms, hands, and arms.
After talking a short time we went into the next room
(Uncle Robert's study). We were at supper eating, drinking,
and chattin~ very merrily, not talking of, or I believe thinking
aboutz Spirttualism when there came a knock at the door.
Charhe turned his head, and sa.id, " Come in.' The door did
not open; but the next moment there came knocks upon the
tl\ble and a chair glided out from the wall to the table (no one
touching it), and placed its~lf in the most natural manr:er
between Emmy and Home; 1t then moved up close to Horue,
and the alphabet was called for by the chair tilting .(no one
touching it). The following message was given-" 1 like you
becau~ you do ,qood to those I love .. ,
Home asked who the
spirit wa~; "G-- H--" was answered. Em my's dress
was pulled, and dra_gged strongly under the table, and a hand
was twice put into hers beneath the table. Charlie was touched
on the knee. Several questions were answered and another
message, which I forget, w~s given by raps .on the table, as loud
aR if some one had struck 1t underneath wtth a hammer. The
table was moved and tilted, and once raised completely off the
ground :61r a second or two, so slightly that I did not perceive it,
but the others did, and the spirits afterward said that 1t had been
off the groun~. It must have required grea~ power even to
move and tilt 1t1 for the table was a heavy dmmg-room table

94
covered with plates1 dishes, and decanters. Home was told that
Augusta had also had manifestations; and when we returned
to the other room, we found that she had heard raps in her
room, while we were at supper in the other. She also heard
the raps and the movement of the table in the study.
No. 48.-Feb1·uary Btk, 1869.
Last night I slept at Ashley House. Home was at a party, and
did not come in until very late. Soon after he had gone to bed
he went into a trance for a short time. He was far from well, and
the spirits said they could not make any use of him. In the
morning, about 11 o'cloCk Sacha, Home's wife, said to me,
through the alphabet.! " wifz you from my part ,qive to Florence
something?" I said 1 should be delighted. ~he said to Home,
"Dannie, my broad gold Russian bracelet.''
No. 49.-Seance, February 9th.
In the evening of the 8th, Dr. Gully came in. As we were
sitting by the fire talk.in~> Home went gradually into a trance.
He examined Dr. Gully s heart, gave him some directions as
to treatment, and told him that his head and brain were all
working beautifully; that his head had not been so clear and
in such good order for some time. He walked about the
room conversing, sometimes with us, sometimes with the spirits
in the room. He asked me to fetch an accordion from Mr. A.
C. Hall's rooms i I did so. He then said that Captain Smith
was coming, and that he had just then left his house. He
became ratber impatient at his not coming quicker ; he was
aware when he did arrive, and told me to go out and meet him,
whi,ch I did, informin~ him that ~om.e was in. a trance. W~en
Smtth entered·, Home mtroduced htm til a quamt style. Takmg
Dr. Gu1ly's hand, he said, "This is James--James Gully; and
this is William-William Smith. You are to shake hands.
They call him a doctor-there is some sense in that; and they
call you a captain, which means nothing at all."
Home satd to me, " Turn ofF some of the gas, it is too
heavy on Dan's brain-light is a regular wei~ht upon the brain,
that is why a strong light prevents our makmg manifestations ;
the brain of the medium cannot act. It is through your brains
that the atmosphere we make use of is thrown off. For the
same reason, manifestation's occur more readily at night when
there is an absence of sunlight, than in the daytime. From a
similar cause, a strong light upon the platform, as at Miss
Hardinge's lectures that you were speakmg of this afternoon

95
is very bad. Light is a ponderable substance. There is muclt
that scientific men do not yet know about the nature of ~ght ;
there is a material natural light, and a spiritual light. When
men know all about matP.rial light~ they will then tw·n their
attention to the much ~g!"eater subject of spiritual light. Everything has its light." We Iww, at Home's request, went into the
next room and sat round the table ; the room was dark with the
exception of the light from the window. Home had that
morning given me the bracelet as a present from his wife to
Florence ;-I had left it in the drawing room.
After we were seated in the small room, the attention of
the SJ?iii.ts appeared principally directed to Dr. Gully. Home
explamed something to him about the muscles of his left side1
and they gave him. several strong electric shocks. Home seemed
much pleased at this. " Oh," lie said, " that was so beautifully
done, they managed it so well, and it has answered admirably,
and done you a great deal of good." Dr. Gully had also some
mesllages from his daughter. I then felt that some one was
standing near me, and I heard something moving about my
head, and presently felt a substance brushed across my hair, and
then placed upon my head. I asked if I might put up my hand
and take it. Home said, "Wait a moment.'~ The substance was
then taken from off my head and passed across my hands on the
table ; and finally I distinctly felt a hand place the bracelet
given to Florence by Sacha into my fingers. The hand presse.d
and patted my fingers. Sacha, speaking through Home, then
addressed a few most touching and appropriate words to me, on
the subject of marriage; after w&ich we all heard a spirit move
from beside me over to the window. Home got up, placed
himself close to the window and said1 " Sacha will try and
make herself visible to Jou." Her torm gradually became
apparent to us; she move close to Home and kissed him. ~he
stood beside him against the window intercepting the light as a
solid body, and appeared fully as material as Home himself,
no one could have told which was the mortal body and which
was the spirit. It was too dark, however, to distinguish features;
I could see that she had her full face turned towards us, and
that either her hair was parted in the middle, and flowed
doWn. over her shoulders1 . or that she had ou what appeared
to be a veil. She said, through Home, that she would try and
appear to us as white light, and she did so, but the form was not
nearly so distinct as when she stood as a dark substance against
the window. Captain Smith asked me had I not intended to
have been travelling that night; 1 told him that such was my
original intention but that I had changed my plans some days
know that, but it was not intended that you
ago. He said,

"I

96
should travel to-night. I have no idea whi you were prevented,
but some day probably you will know.
was obliged (by his
hand being talteu possession of) the other day, to write down
some questions ; I sealed them up and sent them to Dan 1 some
day you are to open and answer them, I think you will find
something in them about it; I have no idea what I wrote."
Home also told me later that the spirits had not wished me to
travel that night. Smith began talkmg to me about the seanl'e
in which the lemon was used, and said that he had been thinking
deeply over it, and believed that there was· an allegorical meaning
attached to it. Home said, "Yes, there is, and in many thing$
that we do 1 we fre~uently symbolise ; and are content to know
that you will, by thmking for yourselves, find out the meaning:
it is better so. We sometimes also do things the meaning or
object of which we ourselves do not know ; we have our impulse~J
the same as you. What meaning do you attach to the story
of the lemon?"
SMITH : " I consider the lemon to have represented human
nature, and the yellow flame that surrounded it our evil pas•
sions. 'l'he yellow flame devoured and destroyed all that was
good in the lemon-the.juice and the fragrance, representing all
that is good in human nature ; and it left the lemon vile and
worthless. The red flame that then covered the lemon and
restored it to its former excellence represented the Holy Spirit
of God, by which alone our human nature, debased and de-stroyed by evil passions, can be restored to its natural purity
and beauty."
Home appeared much pleased, and said, " Yes, you have
read the parable aright : the yellow flame was the fire of e•il
passions, and the pure bright red flame was the Spirit of God."
He then talked about the various colours in, and virtues of,
different crystals, diamonds, rubies, sapphires, emeralds, &c.,
and what they symbolized. Adah Menken came and !iaid
through Home, " Many would think it horrible of such a one as
I am to come to you now ; but you, I know think otherwise
about me, and I must speak a word to you relative to the very
important step you are about to take." She spoke a little about
my marriage, and said, " I will come again to-night ; I want to
have a long chat with :r,ou, and tell you some curious things
that occurred at Adare. ' When Home awoke. he was rather
astonished to find himself sitting in the small room, and Smith
one of the party. He was entranced for nearly two hours and
was much exhausted. After the others had gone my m'other
spoke to me through the alphabet about my intended marriage.
She also spo~e ab~ut Home goin~ to Adare) one message I
remember bemg : Mortals seek jor kttowledge ; but when we

97
gi11e tlasm the 'fruie of our studies, if it does not cot'ncitle un'tla
their preconceived ideasJ we are classed as devils." Home was
so weak that she could not make much use of him, and Adah
Menken could not say anything that she had intended. The
last message was : " Dan, you are v.ery weak; }IOU must not sit
for at least a week. We take away all power f!_(Jm you for that
time.". I forgot to say that on Monday night Home spoke in a
trance to me about the diffieulties in the way of mediumshiJ! and
communicating. As well as I can remember, he said : "Very
strange occurrences often take place with undeveloped mediums;
and you are naturally much puzzled by them. These things
are allowed sometimes as wholesome trials in order that the
person may see how necessary it is to use judgment and reason,
and to approach the subject with the greatest care. Mediumship is of very slow growth; _people are too hasty, and expect
to get everything at once. '!'hey are often also told things to
make them persevere, spirits are so anxious to communicate,
and it is such a joy to fuid people to communicate through, that
they rush in, as it were, and try to encourage the medium by
pro~se.s .that apply ra~er to medi~ms in general, th~ to an7
one mdivxdually ; promises also which may take years m their
fulfilment, instead of days1 as mortals in their impatience su.rpose. You think too much of the individuality of mediumship.
Supposing a person is told that he is to be a great healer, that
he is to go forth teaching the nations, and to be as a king
among men ; that person would consider it all o.s applying
solely to himself: it applies rather to the whole subJect, to
all mediums. Mediums should be as kings, in the true sense of
the word ; they have a wonderful gift, a weighty responsibility,
and they should, if possible, set themselves apart, and lead pure,
simple, unworldly lives, that they may use their ~ift to the
best B.dvantage. This mistake as regards promises, vt"z. :
supposing t.hem to apply to a single individull.l instead of to
mediums in general, is an important fact, bear it in mind. The
discerning of spirits is important. Now if a dark, cold, low
spirit came into the room Dan would know him and he could
not stay; he would feel mean and out of place, ~nd would have
to go. Another person might not perceive what he was-to use
a. homely simile, It is something like a man making faces at you
behind your back ; he would not do so if he knew there was a
mirror m which you could see him ; when St. Paul spoke of
discerning spirits, he did not mean .seeing them only, but
discerning the differences between them, judging between the
pure and the impure. Living in au_y waJ in an atmosphere of
aeceit, holding seances on the sly, and ha.vmg anything whatever
underhand about it, is very bad and is certain to produce a bad
G

98
influence. Mediums while being developed must be very
cautious, very prayerful, very guarded against deceit ; very
}>&tient, humble, and quietly receptive of what may come to
them ; very careful and pure in life, for a calm and prarerful
state of mind is necessary for the influx of a high sp1ritual
influence, while lower influences can more easill impress themselves-are more in their element, as it were, wtth natures more
disturbed, and less exalted and pure in mind and body. If
those who are being developed as mediums will remember and
act up to this, they will arrive at. a state in which they will
know at once the pure from the impure, and be able to judge of
the influences about them."
~he following s~ances occurred at Adare Manor, and at
Gannish, a cottage of my father's, on the coast of Kerry.
For the sake of uniformity, I think it best to follow the same
familiar style, using the first person, as in the previous communications. The sea.nces recorded by my father are signed "D.";
those by me, " A."]

No. 50.-Seance at Adare Manor, February, 27th, 1869.
Mr. Home arrived yesterday, and this evening our first
seance took place. We sat in the gallery ; the party consisting
of my sister-in-law Mrs. Wynne, and her daughter, Major and
Mrs. Blackburn, Hon. F. Lawless, Captain Wynne (Charlie),
Mr. Home, Adare, and myself. During the seance there was a
strong gale of wind1 with heavY. hail showers;. and flashes of
lightning. After a short time, VIbrations and s.light movements
of the table occurred. Presently Mr. Home and Adare went to
the end of the room, and sat at a small table and asked what had
best be done. They received the following answer: " The
e:x:ternal atmosphere is not good. We are not sure that this room
will be conducive. We wish all who remain in this room to be in
the circle. Go with your father and Fred Lawless to try another
room." As Mr. Home and Adare were walking up the gallery
to tell us, Adare said "I wonder if Charlie (Wynne) may come
wit~ us?" " Yes," was rapped on a table which they were
passmg at the moment.
We went to my study, and sat at a small table. Raps were
heard, and Mr. Home soon went into a trance, and immediately
rose up and walked about the room seemingly in an uncomfortable state; his eyes were shut. He took the green shade off
my reading lamp, and then bandaged his eyes ; and after a few
turns about the room, he came back to the table. He seemed
attracted to Lawless. He placed his hand against the back of
Lawless's neck, and pressed it. Lawless felt a sensation as if a

99
hot stream flowed into him. Mr. Home then sat down; and,
pointing emphatically at Lawless, said: "You have considerable
powers: you have (or ought to have) large healing powers." He
again walked about, and seemed very uncomfortable, conveying
the impression that there was something unsatisfactory about
the state of the room. He said : " The gallery is too lar~e, and
full of different influences, the chairs even have d1fferent
influences ; and then this room is too full of business and of
figures." He went out into the hall; came back, and then went
into the vestibule. On returning he took Adare out, and asked
him to come and try the dining room. Adare said: "Why not
try the room at the end of the passage?" (his mot.her's sitting
room.) They went down in the dark, Mr. Home finding the
door, which Adare missed. They entered the room, and immediately M.r. Home said: "This is the room." He then quitted
it, returned to where we were sitting, and taking me by the
hand, he led the way rapidly back to the other room, and
walked into the middle of it, Adare coming with us. It was
pitch dark. " This," he said, " this is the room." We heard
raps in different places. He then took my hand, returned to
my studr, and sat down. He addressed me in a loud whisper:
" That 1s the room ; you will put some flowers there in
the morning, and have a fire in the afternoon. There will
be a remarkable manifestation up stairs ; you will not know
when it will happen. You may go to that old ruin on
Wednesday night, or not later than Thursday. The men
only are to go, the ladies would be frightened.* When Daniel
comes back, go and sit up stairs." Mr. Home soon after awoke.
At one time during his trance he was either elongated or raised
off the ground, fort while standing close to,the table, opposite
to me, his head and the upper part of his figure were rapidly
elevated several inches ; the lower part was concealed by the
table ; this lasted only a few seconds.
As directed we went up stairs, and sat at the large table in
the middle of the gallery. Miss Smith joined the circle; she
became slightly hysterical and left the table, but soon returned.
Fred Lawless became nearly similarly affected. Vibrations of
the tables and chairs occurred, and the usual cold currents of air
were perceived. Mr. Home and Adare felt some strong influence
between them ; the chair of the former was pulled back from one
to two feet, and M.rs. Wynne's was half turned round. The
table was tilted in different directions, and was at last raised
about one foot off the ground. After t.his nothing more
occurred.
D.
• We had been previously talking about going to the Abbey.

G2

100
No. 51.-S~a'llce, February 28tk.
As directed last night, we sat in Lady Dunraven's sitting
room :-Present, Mrs. Wynne, C. Wynne, Lawless, Adare,
Mr. Home and myself. The table was unstead7 and creaky ;
we had very slight manifestations. After some tune Mr. Home
went into a trance ; he seemed uncomfortable, and walked
about, altering the position of the different chaivs and articles of
furniture i he objected to the large stuffed chairs on which we
were sittmg, and changed them: saying, that the springs in
them had a bad effect. He drew down the blinds, and made
movements with his hands and arms as if magnetizing about
the room. He sat down near the fire, then taking out a coal,
partly red and partly black, he brought it and held it between
Mrs. Wynne and me, as if showing it to us; then, without
making any remark, he put it back in the fire. He held the
coal by the black part, which, doubtless, was tolerably hot ; yet,
still the experiment could hardly be called an example of the
fire test, such as was exhibited at Norwood, and is mentioned
in No. 30. After this he rubbed and patted several of us on
the back, and he pressed his head a~ainst me between the
shoulders ; I felt a warm current flowmg from it. He then
sat down, and said that the room was now in a much
better state. After making a few observations he awoke.
Raps were heard, and we were told to go and look for another
table; Mr. Home, in order to know who should go with him,
pointed to each in tum, and A dare and I were chosen. We
went to the hall and the library, trying different tables without
any result ; on our return through the hall, we heard raps on a
table as we were touching it, as we passed ; so we took it with us.
We sat at this table; but had only slight manifestations. We
received this message, " We are dotng our best; we hope you
will be patient." We asked, " How m~ny spirits present?" and
were told "Nine." "How many that we have known?" " Two."
I expressed a hope that Dr. Elliotson would come, and we
were talking about him when the following was given, " He
will visit tke Abbey." After a short pause we received this
message : " Tke influence is against us ,- we mea'll the e:cternal
atmosphere." And soon after the following: " We thtnkyou had
better try the same table you had last 'flight." Upon this we
aqjourned to the gallery. We were joined by Miss Wynne
MiBB Smith and Major Blackburn. The table vibrated
raps weye heard ; but not~ing remarkable took place.
'
Dunng one of the penods when the table was vibrating, the
manor clock struck twelve; the continuity of the vibration
ceased, but at each stroke of the bell a vibration took place.

and

101
When the last stroke had sounded the continuity of the
vibrations recommenced. Soon after this, the following message
was given : " We have done our best ; but find it t"n innpossible.
May God bless you all." The word God was spelled by strong
D.
vibrations of the table ; we then adjourned.
No. 52.-Seance, March lat.
We had a sea'l'lce at five p.m. :-Present, Major and Mrs
Blackbum, Mrs. Wynne Miss Wynne, Miss Smith, Captain
Wynne1 Mr. Lawless, Home, and myself. Tolerably strong
physical manifestations occurred. No messages were given,
but the s~irits ~resent occasionally joined in our conversation by
rapping ' Yes ' or " No;" and they answered a few questions
as to the number of spirits in the room, whose relatives they
were, &c., &c. The table at which we were seated was moved,
and raised in the air. A good-sized table standing at some
little distance behind Home moved of itself; and a chair
behind me moved up to me of itself. Some one asked, "How
many spirits are there present ? " Twenty raps were given.
Miss Smith, having been requested to do so, asked if any of her
relations were in the room. " Yes;" was answered. "But," she
said, " there are no relations of mine alive here ; no one is related
to me." The answer was " WE ARE the living." When
leaving the room, Home told me he had a strong impression
that Mrs. Wynne and myself were to sit with him alone sometime in the evening; after dinner, accordingly, we three went
and sat in my room round a large and tolerably heavy table.
Immediately the influence became apparent by strong vibrations
and raps on the table and floor. -rrhe room was at this time
lighted by a bright fire and one candle. The following sentences
were given with short intervals between them, there not being
apparently sufficient power to enable the spirits to spell out by
raps many words in succession: " We are pleased to have you
thus." "Alone?" I asked. " Yes." "Emily welcome." Home's
hands were influenced, and he patted and stroked his chest.
'l'he names were then given: "Richard," "James," "John,"
" Robert." " Is it Gore Booth ?" I asked. " No." We were
speculating as to who these spirits could be, as only one name
was recognized by Mrs. Wynne, and none by me, Home began
describing them ; but Mrs. Wynne, not knowing that it was of
any consequence, interrupted him, and he could not tell us who
they were; he said however that we should know later. We
now heard persons moving in different parts of the room. II1
order to be certain that we were not deceived, we asked that
the sounds might be repeated three times ; it was done as we

102

requested. Home also said he saw various figures, but not with
sufficient distinctness to be able to describe them. Raps were
constantly heard on the table, floor, and furniture, and the
spirits occasionally answered our questions. 'l'he table was
moved about slightly, and raised off the ground. Home went
into a trance, got up and walked about without speaking for
some little time ; by the attitude he assumed I perceived that
" the Doctor" was influencing him. Ho came up to me and
whispered, "Tell Dan not to eat so much sweet." Another
influence then came over him ; he walked about briskly, and
seemed happy and pleased; he spoke in a loud voice somewhat
to this effect : " As regards the seances you have been holding,
it is most difficult for us to succeed. In the first place the
external atmosphere is most unpropitious, neither have rou
approached the subject in a proper spirit and frame of mmd.
In whatever way you regard the subject, it is a most important
one, and should no\ be treated wtth levity, but should be
approached quietly and with earnest prayer. You are not
sufficiently serious. Some are actuated by curiosity, some are
wishing for one thing, others for something qmte different;
the aspirations are so various, it is almost as though you were
praying to different gods : the influences are consequently all
opposed to each other. You should come prayerfully, earnestly,
not hoping for, or expecting, anything in particular; above all
without levity. It is a solemn subject if you consider it to be a
great discovery, calculated to throw light on hitherto hidden
subjects, to overthrow many errors, and to be of great benefit
to the human race. If you do not believe that we are what we
pretend to be, and even consider us to be evil, still it is a subject
to be treated with solemnity, for you are communieating with
beings or intelligences external to yourselves, different from
you, and beyond your knowledge or control. The external
mfluences also are very numerous and strange, and are all, as it
were, touching and fingering Dan-wondering at him. It is
quite new to them ; they have never seen anything like it
before, and they do not understand it. Some of them are so
intensely anxious to communicate, to say something, others
again do not at all approve of it, and would wish to prevent
anything of the sort."
ADARE: " That is curious!"
Mrs. WYNNE: "Surely it would be more curious if they
were all agreed."
HOME: (laughing) "Why, Adare, your aunt's notions are
more correct than yours, although you have been at it so long ;
but then you spoke without thinking. Oh yes, indeed, some of
them are very much opposed to it.''

103
ADARE: "Will you give us any directions about our s6ances1"
HOME : " That is what we have been trying to find out, but

it is difficult. You see if we pick out a few, then those who are
left out are annoyed, and those who are chosen are sorry for the
otherB who are disappointed, and are affected by their influence.
It would be much better if you would settle among yourselves
for some to sit one night and the others the next ; we can tell
you what combination answers best ; we would sooner you
settled it among yourselves, then there will be no unpleasant
feeling." Home then put out the candle, and told me to lielp him
to move the table; we placed it near the window and sat down.
Soon after he awoke. There was a strong influence about the
table, it vibrated and was lifted in the air, the cloth was raised
apparently by hands moving under it, and I was touched on the
knee by ~ band ; Home said he saw hands and figures. A hand
came out from under the table, covered by the cloth and touched
ml left side, it remained there a few seconds and was then
Withdrawn. This message was given, " I took it _from my own
dear boy to gz"ve to you my dear sister, take it." We none of us
undewtood to what this referred, till I noticed that a rose bud
had been taken from my button-hole, however I made no
remark. We heard something moving under the table, and
the cloth was raised, as if by: a hand, near Mrs. Wynne. At
Home's suggestion, she put her hand down, and the rose was
placed in it. A flower in Home's button-hole was then jerked
out across the table, and fell by me. I asked who it was for,
the answer was, " For you to give to your father with love." This
message was then given, " Your happiness is ours." Then this,
'' We woultlfat."n manifest· ourselves more powl!tl'folly."
While this last message was being given, the table was
raised gently oft' the floor and moved up and down three times
in the air, then raised again a little higher, and again moved up
and down ; in this manner it was7 without ever touching the
floor, raised six or seven times, a little higher on each occasion,
until it was about three feet above the floor. I have never seen
a table sustained in the air for so long a time. Mrs. Wynne
remarked that it was delightful to have no bad influence present,
when we had this message : " Prayer to God will protect."
The table then began moving on the floor in a circle, and the
following was given : "Tke love of God encilrcling you round and
about." Subsequently this was spelled out: " We love the symbol
offaitk; 11 and the table was raised in the air, and twice made the
sign of the cross. A perfume, as of dried rose leaves and some
aromatic substance, was wafted across us and the message given:
" We m'!Ult now go." Nothing more occurred
A.

104
No. 58.-Tuesday, Marek 2nd.
On the afternoon of the 2nd. I was seated by the :fire in my
room reading, Home was writing at the long table. Suddenly
the round table, starting from the window, moved a distance of
six or eight feetJ and placed itself against the end of the long
table. We both heard a sound as of a bell tinkling. Home
began speaking about the SJ?irit J>resent, and while doing so
went into a trance. He satd 7 " Oh, he is very strange and
restleRs 7 he is a monk." I aske~t." Is that sound of the bell the
same as I heard last night?" " l es; he was here last night, and
says you ou~ht to have heard him. He has never been here
before, that ISz not since this house has been built. The soun:d
of the bell is the same also as you heard outside the house to-day
with Dan, only it is more concentrated now." I asked what the
meaning of the sound was, " Ah, he was a monk. He seems to
have committed some crime and then to have said mass, and the
crime weighed heavier on his conscience in consequence." A
dagger was then violently knocked off the table to the other side
of the room. I was not looking at Home at the moment and
cannot say whether he struck it or not. " Oh," he said " he
cannot bear the sight of that." A large pair of scissors were
then dashed on to the floor from off the round table, no one being
near 1t. Home said, " He cannot bear anything sharp and
pointed; Ah, he is trying to pick up the scissors, but he cannot
touch them because they have, as you see, fallen in the shape of
a cross. Ah, poor fellow, he says he will not hurt you he
would not sto1;1 a minute here, but that he sees you do not kte
and despise h.tm ; he will do you no harm, but you must not
mind his being rough and abrupt in his manner. He does not
wish you to speak about this to the others, but he wants you,
Charlie, and Danl to come here to-night; he has something to
say; he does not bke those seances down stairs, he is not pleased.
He c:mnot spealt to you himself, he can scarcely make manifestatiOns; he talks old Irish. He is the same spirit that Fred
saw,* he was stripped of his gown and appeared to have on a
blanket."

On the same afternoon, or the day before, I forget which,
Mr. Lawless, Home, and myself were seated on the bed in my
room ; Charlie Wynne was sitting by the fire. We heard raJ:>S
on the table, and a sound as of a hand brushing on the wall,
and the bed vibrated.
A.

* This alluded to Mr. Lawless, having told us, while on a. visit here last winter1
that he ha.d seen a ghost or spirit in the castle. I did not Jl&Y muoh attention to
his statements, supposing it to have been some illusion on his part.

105

No. 54.-Seance, March 2nd.
Present :-Mrs. and Miss 'Wynne, Mrs. and Major Blackburn,
Miss Smith, Captain Wynne, Mr. Lawless, Home, and myself.
This evenin~ we sat at a table in the gallery; very slight
physical mamfestations occurred, which soon ceased, and after
waiting some timeJ~~e party broke up. Mrs. Blackburn, Miss
Wynne, Captain Wynne, Mr. Lawless, and Home went up to
my room to try there. I followed them in about a quarter of an
hour. Before I arrived theJ.: had a message to the effect that
the spirits would do more tf they could ; afterwards we had
the. usual manifestations, currents of air, vibrationst raps,
tilting of the table, which was on two occasions also raised in the
air. At one time, Miss Wynne, Home, and I heard a very
sin~ular rumbling and rollin~ sort of sound in the air behind us,
whtch was repeated three tiiDes. We saw hands (apparently)
moving under the table cloth ; and Mrs. Blackburn, Home, and
I were touched. Mrs. Blackburn's dress was sharply pulled
two or three time~ as was also Miss Wynne's; we all saw and
heard it. Mrs. .Hlackburn was slightly under influence, and
became a good deal agitated. Home went into a trance ; walked
about, and described to Mrs. Blackburn two spirits that were
standing behind her magnetizing her and causing the agitation
she felt. He said, " TheY' will do you no harm, but on the
contrary what they are about is for a good object ; one of
them magnetized you in the same way this afternoon, but
there are now two, and it is consequently stronger. The
influence about you is very good!.....but very strong, you could
hear raps at night now." Mrs . .Hlackburn said, "Oh, please
don't l" Mr. Home replied, " Oh2 no; don't be nervous, they
will not do it; they know it would frighten you, and they 'will
never do that; but the time will come when r,ou will not be
frightened at it." Going to Mr. Lawless, he sa.J.d, "You really
must have more command over your nerves, if you cannot
control them you must not come to Beances; you will get more
and more hysterical, and it will do you physical harm ; you had
better go away for a few minutes." Then turning to me, he said,
"You did not do what you lromised last night. He is here ;
you know who I mean."
replied," Yes, I know; but Dan
said last ni~ht that he had an impression that Mrs. Wynne and
I were to stt with him; and I could not do what I promised."
Home said, " You might have done so afterwards ; liowever it
is l?erhaps as well that you did not, for you might have
attributed Dan's illness to that. He is still nere; he is not
p!eased." I aske.!k "Would it do as well to-night, or to-morrow?"
Home replied, "~o; he says he will come unexpectedly again

106
as he did the first time. Oh yes he knows that you did not
forget, he does not blame you, ~ut he is not p,leased ; he is
very much annoyed at these sittings down stairs. ' Home then
opened the window, and appeared to be debating as to whether
he should go out or not. He shut the window and said, " You
will not let us do it; you have not sufficient faith.'' He then sat
down and awoke. We had a few more physical manifestatioll81
the last being that Home's chair was drawn away from the
A.
table.

No. 55.-Seance, Marek 3rd.
This siance was held in Adare's room. Present:-Mrs.Wynne;
Adare Mr. Home, and myself. Soon after we were seated,
Mr. Home went into a trance. He got up and walked about,
remarking that the infiuence was good, and that Mrs. Wynne's
influence was very pleasant. He went to the door, opened it,
and said, " Ah, here is that stran~e s_pirit that came to Ashley
House-Thomas, your father's friend-he is very eccentric·
he says he wants to recall some conversation to your father."
said, " I hope he will do so." Adare observed that if he exhibited
the same curiously abrupt and undecided manner that he did at
Ashley House (vide No. 44, p. 87), he would probably say
nothing, at any rate this niglit." Home said, "Oh, that was
his manner ; he is very eccentric." He then walked up to
Mrs. Wynne, and made passes over her head, and held it
between his hands, and told her that her circulation was bad
(which it is), and that her liver was out of order.
He pointed to me saying, " Your infiuence is very good for
physical manifestations; you must not think that you are any
Impediment to their occurrence." I had been fancying that
probably my presence was rather adverse, and consequently I
was unwilling to attend the siance; but I had not mentioned
this to Home. He then gave Adare directions about the table.
" You will place it near the window ; your father will sit next
to Daniel, you on his other side, then Mrs. Wynne, leaving a
vacant space next to the window." We then commenCed
talking about his having had apparently some idea of going out
of the window last night (vide No. 54), and were discussing
as to whether there was any real ~er in his doing so ; some
saying they would be nervoos, while othen, myself among them,
said we should feel no anxiety whatever as to his safety; upon
which he remarked, " They will take care and see when the
conditions are right; there need be no fear." He then spoke
about one of the slances which had been held when he was not
present, and said, " We do not approve of it at all ; it is aH

I

107

wrong ; the whole thing is in confusion. That Bentettce about

B-- and the wicked devil is not right ; there is no wicked

devil in that sense. We do not wish to enter into an~ explanation, we only tell you that it is all wron~." 'I urning to
Mrs. Wynne Mr. Home said, "John says he 1s coming to you
to-night, and that lie wants to try and put his hand in yours."
Soon after this he sat down and awoke. He spoke during his
trance in a loud whisper.
We took the table over to the window and seated ourselves
as we had been directed. We soon heard a number of very
delicate raps, like a continuous stream of little electrical s:parks,
which lasted for a short time ; they were barely audible w1thout
placing the ear close to the cloth which covered the table. We
then felt vibrations, and heard raps of different kinds, chiefly on
the table, but some dull sounds like knocks, occurred elsewhere.
We had extinguished the candles, but the fire ~ave sufficient
light to see near objects we111 and distant ones famtly. In the
recess of the window was a large box or chest with papers and
other things laying upon it ; one could see them, without being
able clearly to distin~uish what they were. The alphabet being
called for, the followmg messages were given, with short intervals between them, during which there were frequent raps : "God
be with you. Your father Thomas Goold. You must not think we
fear the cross, we lovt it, we also love God." " We are allowed
to pray for you and watch over you." Soon after several loud
raps or knocks were heard, and the name " John Wynne "
was spelled out. About this time there were movements and
sounds about the papers on the box, ancl Mrs. Wynne's dress
was touched. Presently we had the following message:
" Could you but know the reality of my identily, and the unaltered and unalterable love I bear you, 1 well know it would be a
source of joy to you. I have not sent you messages, for the reason
that you could have no means of_ distinguishing the certainty ot
my_personality."* I then said, "To whom is this message sent,'
and the answer was, " You, my own." I added, " I should
like to know the name of the spirit," and was answered
".Augusta
." At this point some interruption seemed
to occur. Mrs. Wynne's dress was visibly and audibly moved
about, and Mr. Home several times saw a hand; the slight
sounds about the papers on the box recurred. Presently 7
Mr. Home's feet were moved and placed upon mine; strong

* This message clearly referred to my having several times lately remarked
upon the fact, that no messa~e ha.d, I believe, been sent to me on a.ny occa.sion
during the previous a6ancu lU London or elsewhere, by the spirit who would
most naturally under the circumstances have done so-which fact I had useil
as an argument bearing upon a particular view of the whole subject.

108
movements of his a.nns and legs took place ; his hands a{'peared
to be drawn about in different dVections, and rather vwlently
agitated. After these movements had ceased, he said, "I feel a
hand on me, pressing against my chest; and now it has, I think,
taken the flowers from my button-hole." The idea came into
my mind that perhaps these flowers were intended for me ;
I quietly laid one hand open upon my knee. Almost immediately
a flower was placed very delicately in it. I then felt another
flower, and tried to grasp the hand holding it, but did not
succeed ; it seemed to vanish, leaving the flower in my hand.
Some curious manifestations now took place. The cloth on the
table was lifted up, fully six inches as by a hand. This
occurred along the side next the window several times. Mr.
Home saw the hand. Mrs. Wynne became nervous, which was
to be regretted, as she might probably ha.ve felt the hand as had
been told her at the commencement of the seance. There were
vibrations and tiltings of the table, and various kinds of raps.
Presently, the alphabet was called for, and the following given:
" Even should u'e be taken to a distant heaven, would it not be our
greate8t jO!J to fl'V as tke--" Here the message stopped ; and
we heard a rustlmg sound about the box in the windowi which
lasted two or three minutes. Adare said, " I am sure know
what this means." My hand was on my knee. I suddenly felt
something touch it, which I laid hold of, and drew out from
under the table ; it was an arrow. We then re-commenced the
alphabet; and the word " d8acenda " was given, thus finishing
the sentence : " as the arrow d8acenda." During this manifestation, as also when the flowers were being placed in my
hand, Mr. Home was sitting quite still, with both his hands on
the table. A sheet of paper was lpng on the edg'El of the table
next the window, on wliich a pencil was placed. We presently
saw the pencil moving about on the paper. Mr. Home saw
the fingers holding it. Adare noticed it also, more than once,
but of an undefined form.
We now heard something moving upon the box by the
window, and a heavy substance fell near .A.dare's feet. Some of
us at the same moment perceived a decided smell of brandy.
Adare ~aid, " I know what it is." The following message was
then g1ven: " You must not take fiw your cold stimulantB."
Adare asked if he was to take none at all. The answer was
by two raps1 meaning, "perhaps," or "a little." We afterwards
found that It was Adare's flask which had been thrown under
the table. On examining it no brandy appeared to have escaped.
~oon ~fter this a curious manifestation occurred about the table,
JUSt like the sound and motiOn of the vibration on board a
steamer. This was succeeded by the following meBBage : " We

109
tkeply '!'egret but we have no more power. God abide with you."
During this beautifuls~nce, which lasted nearly two hours, the
table was twice raised up from a foot to eighteen inches. The
messages were spelled partly by raps and partly by tilts of the
table. I was touched on two occasions, rather delicately, on
the knee. The whole seance was quiet, soothing, and very
impressive.
D.
No. 56.-Seance, Ma1•ch 4th.
Present :-Major and Mrs. Blackburn, Miss Wynne, Lawless,
Charlie Wynne, Home, my father, and myself. We sat in my
room, which was lighted by one candle and the fire. After
sitting for some time without any movement of the table or
other indication of influence, Home went into a trance. He got
up, said in a low voice t.o me " We have put Dan into a trance
to try and equalize the atmosphere, we wish to make manifestations," ana after walking about the room magnetizing it
commenced speaking in a singularly soothing tone of voice,
his conversation being principally addressed to Mrs. Blackburn.
'' There are two Elizabeths-who are they? And Isabellashe seems to have taken care of you John, when you were
young. There is a spirit present with whom you were acquainted,
he is lame· you do not remember the name now, but you
probably ;d1 hereafter. Who was Margaret Henderson? (no
one answered). Ah, your mother would know, ask her;
she will remember about her. Talk, go on talking to each
other, your minds are much too positive; the human mind is
like a barrier to us. Your minds now are all intent, and it
makes such a confusion that I cannot see and find out what I
want; it is like looking through a shrubbery with all the
branches in motion : I cannot make out clearly what there is on
the other side." Mrs. Blackburn becoming slightly under
influence and agitated, he stood behind her and calmed her,
saying, " You must not mind it, they will do you no harm ;
when on earth they would not have hurt you, why should they
now? You must have trust ; but even if you have not confidence in them, you know that God protects you from all evilhave trust in him. Should it seem unpleasant and even evil to
y-ou, remember that God's ways are not our ways; and out of what
IS apparentl,Y, evil, much good may come ; that which you might
at first constder bad, may turn out to be the greatest good to you.
It is the influence that came over Dan when we put him into a
trance that affected you ; it was so strong-that is all." Standing
near Miss W 111ne he said, " There are two Windhams here, two
young men, Windham Goold and Windham Quin." Touching

110
Charlie Wynne on the shoulder he said, "Charlie1 Robert smys
he has not forgotten his promise, he will keep 1t1 but he has
not been able to do so yet; he is going_J;o Emmy." Home then
walked about the room and said, " When Maria has .sufficient
faith and is willing to be developed for the good of others, she
will go into trances." Mrs. Blackburn requested my father to
ask Home if it was necessary that she should be willmg, Home
said, " Do not be fri~htened, nothing will be done to harm you,
when you have sufficient faith in God's protecting power,-when
you can say, 'Thy will not mine be done,'-when you are
anxious for it for the benefit of others, and to ad vance the truth,
then it will come to you i until then the fact of your being
unwilling, of your mind bemg opposed, would prevent it. Oh
there is a Mary (or Maria) here, I like her so much. Dear me {
she has such a curious way of smiling-she smiles with her
mouth only, she is very timid. There is also a man who appears
to have been shot; who can he be? Was he your grandmother's
uncle? He seems to have been in a naval engagement.
Although Marr is so timid Maria, she is your principal guardian
spirit; there 1s a miniature or portrait of her, with some
peculiarity in the dress, do rou know it?" Mrs. Blackburn
replied1 "No." Home said,' Ah, well there is one, at any rate
there zs a black cut profile of her. There is an Alexander
present." Home went on for some time speaking about the
spirits in the .room, and then stood behind my father and told us
all to talk; while we were talking, he whispered to him, '' You
should not fast much." He said, "I do not really fast at all."
Home added " Your brain is very active and is wearing the vital
powers, and you should take nourishing food-fasting materially
would be bad, but spiritually would be good for you." Home
soon after awoke.
A.
After this we remained sitting for an hour and a quarter
without any manifestations whatever. Mr. Home said several
times, "I feel a strong influence all about me ; it is strange that
there are no physical manifestations." At last I proposed that
some of the party should leave the room, being certain that
something must be wrong. Blackburn and I went away. Mr.
Home remarked, " A few moments will shew whether their
presence was the obstruction." Still no manifestations. He
then said, " Charlie, do you and Lawless go, and send the others
back." Lawless went with the greatest reluctance. The door
had hardly closed when there were cold currents, vibrations,
and raps. I returned, and was scarcely seated, when the
alphabet was called for, and this message given: " We love
Freddy, but he is not in a state of mind or body conducive to

111
manifestations." Wynne fetched the accordion. Mrs. Blackbum was very soon after touched on the dress, and something
became plainly visible moving under the table cloth, along the
edge of the table, raising up the cloth several inches, as would
be done were a hand and arm. The hand was visible on
the cloth to Mr. Home, and I once faintly perceived it. It
touched Mrs. Blackburn's hand. This manifestation was repeated
different times. I was touched on the ankle, and several times
on the knee. Miss Wynne's dress was strongly pulled. The
table was beautifully raised in the air, by three successive lifts,
to the height of eighteen inches or two feet. Mr. Home then
took the accordion, holding it under the edge of the table with
one hand, the other resting on the table ; soon after it began to
sound, it played with considerable power as well as great delicacy,
something like a voluntary, with airs introduced. Then there
were sounds like echoes, so finet as to be scarcely audible. The
accordion was drawn out towards Mrs. Blackburn, but not put
into her hand. I expressed a wish that it might be played
without being held by Mr. Home, upon which he withdrew his
hand, placing it on the table ; the instrument was just touching
the under edge of the table, where it remained, as it were,
suspended. It began playing very gently. He cla.Pped his
hands several times to shew that he was not touching 1t. The
playing soon ceased, and he took it again. Some notes sounded
out of tune, and I said, " either wrong notes are played in the
chord, or the accordion is out of tune. " Out of tune " was_
rapped out on the instrument. It played again very :finely, and
with the tremolo effect, which struck me exceedingly. I asked,
" Will you tell us who is playing;" two raps were g!ven 7
implying doubt. Presently the alphabet was called for, and the
following given : "Remember that ; " and then "Oft in the stilly
night" was softly played. When one recalls the words:Oft in the stilly night, ere slumber's chain hath bOUtld me,
Fond memory brings the light of other days around me, &c.

how touching the message becomes, and how beautiful the
mode of representing it.* I then again asked, " Will you not
tell us the name of the spirit who has been playing." The
letters " a-u-g" were rapped out by my being touched delicately
on the knee. I guessed the completion of the word, saying, "Is
it Augusta ?" and I was touched, " Yes." I then asked whether
it would be possible for the organ to be pla7ed if the bellows were
:6.lled, and the reply "Perhaps," was g1ven. I said.!.. "I can
identify the ~layer from a particular circumstance." ~::!orne one
remarked, " Is it from what was played, or by the expression?"

* This air was, long ago, one of my greatest favourites.

112

"No," I replied, when Adare said, "Is it from the imitation of
the tremolo?" "Yes," I replied1 "that reminded me immediately of the organ ;" upon which the following was instantly
rapped out, by my being again touched on the knee : " You are
r~qkt my own." Soon after this we all heard strong sounds
which proceeded seemingly from a large oblong writing table,
which stood several feet from us ; we could perceive it movin~;
it stopped within a foot of our table, which then moved up to 1t.
We lieard first one and then another drawer opened, on the side
of the table farthest from us, and a rustling sound as if stirring
papers. After a shortfause, the followins: sentence was given,
partly, if not wholly, ( forget which) by tilting the table: "We
must cease, but not before praying_ God to bless you." We then
adjourned. During the s1tting the table was again lifted in the
beautiful manner before mentioned, reminding me very much of
the action of the bellows of the organ while being filled; and it
is verr remarkable that this occurred, as will be seen in the
foregomg description, just before the playing commenced.

D.

Having left my room, Home and I went down to the smoking
room. While he was speaking to me he broke off suddenly in
the middle of a word with a violent start and went into a
trance. Major Blackburn at that moment came into the room,
and witnessed what occurred. Home jumped up, caught me
by the hand, beckoned to Major Blackburn to follow, and led us
up to my room in a great hurry. On opening the door, he
said (apparently to some spirit in the room), "Oli, please do not
do that I" He then drew out the long writing table, placed it
near the window, put two chairs in front of tlie fire, and hung
a blanket over them to exclude the light ; then placed a chair at
each end of the table for us, and one for himself at the side of
the table opposite the window and the drawers. He drew out
one of the drawers and placed a piece of paper and a pencil in
it; then sitting down, he said, "Listen f" I listened, and
distinctly heard the sound of a pencil writing on a piece of paper
in the open drawer ; the word written was finished by three
dots. Home then threw himself back in his chair and said,
" Oh, she is so thankful that your father has seen what he has I"
He began to sob violently, and calling me over to him, he
grasped my hand, and said, " Oh, my darling I am so glad that
he has seen something ; I wish he could have been here now,
but the conditions happened to be favourable at this moment,
and we could not wait. You will give him the paper on which
I have writte~, and the pencil ; the pencil must be kept ; it may
be used agam, but only at Adare. There was a spirit here
when you came in, who damaged the conditions a little, and tho

113
writing is in consequence not very firm ; the pencil point also
broke, and the last letters are not quite distinct; the colour of
the pencil is typical of my love-pure, deep, and everlasting."
The pencil was a red one, and the word wntten was" Augusta.''
Home, on being asked afterwards about his going so suddenly
into a trance, said, " I can remember being in the smoking
room, and seeing two spirits enter by the door; rapidly
approaching, one of them stretched out his hand towards me,
and I immediately lost consciousness."
A.

No. 57.
It was now nearly 10 p.m., and my father 1 Charlie Wynne
Home and I went to the Abbey; we walked up the church,
and stood near the altar. Home shortly went mto a trance.
He took off a white comforter that he wore round his neck, ancl
tied it over his head, and began walking with rapid measured
strides up and down the church. By the expression of his face,
by his gestures, and by his moaning, he appeared to be in great
agony of mind. As he walked he made (with his mouth, I
think) a sound that appeared to us closely to resemble that of
a man walking in sandals or wooden shoes upon a tiled or
stone floor. His head became luminous, as did also his hands.
This occurred twice; the second time more faintly. An owl
flew round the church screeching; I attributed the noise to Home,
but as he passed me he said in a most awful voice, "No, it is not
so;" and as he repassed, he added, "You were mistaken."
He kneeled upon the ground occasionally, waved his arms above
his head, and appeared in great distress. He came up to us
and, in a frightened tone of voice, said, " Oh, come away~
come away!" and led us down to the other end of the chUI'ch.
He walked about a little longer, then, taking my father's arm,
he said, " Do you see that tomb-stone with the light shining
upon it? It would be better, aye, ten million times better, to lie
there in the cold dark clay, than to spend years upon years, every
moment of which is an eternity1 in wandering here. Raising
his hands above his head, he added, '' oh, I am so weary-so
weary !" Soon after this he awoke. He was rather nervous1
and said to me, " Who is that man standing by the window"
Is it Lord Dunraven ?" He seemed quite astonished when he
found we were all near him, and that none of us could see the
figure.
During the rest of the time we remainecl in the Abbey,
Home was entranced, I suppose,~ four or five times, and even in
the intervals, when he was awake and knew where he was and
what he was doing, he was under a very strong influence. He
H

114
stood talking to us for a few minutes, and then said, " The
figure is beckoning to me, I am quite awake and not the least
nervous· I must go." He accordingly moved towards the
window' and we followed him at a short distance. He left the
church by the choir door, and wentbeyond the low broken wall,
saying that he saw the figure standing against a portion of the
ruins, at some little distance from where we were standing. I
saw a dark shadow against the wall, and I saw a light flash from
it as distinctly as if some one had struck a match there; Charlie
Wynne said he saw the light flash at the same moment that I
did; my father saw the light also, but faintly. Home walked
towards the spot where he said the figure was standing, he went
behind the wall, and remained out of sight for some minutes ;
when he reappeared there was somebody, or something with
him, that is to say, I could clearly perceive some substance
moving along side of him as he walked. Presently we all saw
him approaching, and evidently raised off the ground, for he
floated by, in front of us at a height which carried him over the
broken wall, which was about two feet high. There could not
be a better test of his being off the ground, for as he crossed the
wall, his form was not in the least raised, but the movement
was quite horizontal and uniform. The distance that we saw
him thus carried, must have been at least 10 or 12 yards.
He then came back to us and we found he was in a trance. He
directed our attention to an old doorwar. near us, saying, "He
is there ; he is laying a stone ; you will hear the sound of a
trowel." We listened and heard indistinct sounds ; I cannot
say that they resembled the sound of laying a stone. Home
then awoke, and said that he remembered that, before he went
into the trance, he had been walking about with a man dressed
like a friar in a brown gown ; that they had been talking
together, but that he did not know what he had said to him;
that this spirit (the friar) was unable to leave the earth; that he
and the spirit had both been raised in the air by some other
strong influence. He described the spirit as leaning on his
shoulder. He soon left us, and apparently was again engaged
in conversation with this spirit. He then returned, and spoke
to us. This he repeated two or three times being sometimes in
a trance and sometimes awake when he addressed us. Finally,
while in the trance, he led us back into the church, kneeled on
the ground, apparently in prayer, two or three times, and then
began walking up and down the church, raising his hands above
his head, and saying, "Oh, how good I Oh, how good I" He
then came up to us, and told us that the sdirit would be better
and hapJ!ier for something_ that he had sai or done that night,
after whtch he awoke. He said that he saw a figure in the air

115
between us and the window. Charlie Wynne and I both saw a
shadow move across the window. We then returned home.
It is a fact worthy of notice that although the ni~ht was
perfectly calm, the birds appeared to be in a singularly dtsturbed
state; owls were flitting about, and some other bird flew several
times round the church, screaming,harshly. Besides night birds,
ordinary birds (judging by the sounds) were flying about; and
at one time, just as Home said he saw the figure enter a clump
of trees at some distance from us, a bird seemed to fly out,
chirping. We heard in the church a sound as of a bird flying
round whistling, and Home, being then in a trance, appeared as
if following it about, and endeavouring to catch it. I could see
nothing, and do not know whether it was a real bird or not.

A.

Accurate as is the fpre~oing account of this strange scene, it
would be difficult, indeed tmpossible, to convey by any descrip~
tion, a just idea of its solemnity. When we entered the
ruins the night was quite dark and very still. We walked
quietly up the nave and choir, and stood for some little time
near the east window. Scarce a word was spoken. We had not
the least idea what sort of manifestations were likely to occur.
While Mr. Home was walking about, what with the deep tones
of the voice so utterly unlike his own-the occasional moans and
utterances of sounds of pain' or distress-his disappearing in the
gloom and reappearing again-the li~ht shining around his head
and upon his hands1 which were occasiOnally lifted as if in prayer,
and were thus visible when the rest of the figure was lost in
darkness; his attitudes, sometimes kneeling, at others as if
searching for something near the ground-the strange sounds
which we heard, particularly a sort of chirping or unearthly
whistling, which seemed to proceed from him, and the startling
screams made by some bird, but what bird we had not light
enough to identify ; the effect produced upon us was most
thrilling, and one which we are not likely soon to forget. Before
leaving the Abbey the light from the moon, just about to rise,
enabled us to see objects; the sky too had become clear, and
the stars shone out, while an air of calmness and peace pervaded
the scene, producing a most soothing effect upon our minds.

D.

We had supper in the hall upon our return. While talking,
a curious rushing or rumbling noise was heard that we could not
account for, and my father felt his chair vibrating. Horne went
into a trance, and told us to follow him into the gallery. We
did so, and at his request stood near the piano, while he sat

H2

116
down at the instrument. The ~iano vibrated strongly. Home
played a powerful and impressive chant, and then commenced
speaking of the joys and sorrows of our life, telling us how they
(the spirits) sympathized with us. He described what he was
epeakmg of on the piano, playing discords for the sorrows and
trials of life, and harmony for the joys. He said, " There is a
merry spirit here who rejoices that you have done good," and
he played a lively air. He added, "They made that rushing
noise you all heard down stairs, to testify their happiness that
you have all done a good action in going to the Abbey to-night"
(turning to my father), "It was your father and your brother
who shook your chair in the hall." He then began speaking
about the immeasurable goodneBS and greatness of GOd, and
finally rose uf, stood in the middle of the room and delivered a
very beautifu prayer in the most impressive and earnest manner.
He then awoke. It was past three o'clock.
A.
No. 58.- Seance, March 5th.
This evening, one of the .ladies who had previously been
much interested in the subject of Spiritualism, was seized with
a sudden and unaccountable idea that the whole thing was either
demoniacal in its origin or imposture, and that it was her duty to
denounce it. She did so in such unmeasured terms that she succeeded in thoroughly disquieting the minds of more than one of
our party. After dinner we had a seance in my room: present,
Mrs. and Miss Wynne, Major and Mrs. Blackburn, Charlie Wynne,
my father, Home and myself. We had scarcely any physical
manifestations, but shortly after sitting down we received the
following message :-" The conditions are not so favourohle tMs
evening/' my father asked if the conditions were affected by
any one in the circle, the answer was " No." We soon after
obtained the following communication, having reference probably
to a conversation that had taken place that afternoon on Spiritualism, and its effect upon religion:-" We do not bid, or even
wish, you to have.faith in us, we only come to proclaim immortality,
and lhe reality and nearness qf the spiritual morld." * Home soon
went into a tranc~t. and walked about the room, magnetizing it ;
he stood by Mrs. Wynne, and said, " Your brother Windham is
near you and wishes to kiss you, his mouth is close to your forehead,
but you are nervous and that prevents it; he will come again
presently and will do it if he can." Home now sat down and
spoke somewhat as follows :-" The conditions are not affected

* Some interruption occurred, which prevented the words after "immortality
and," being written down; the remainder is supplied from memory and i~
believed to be correct.
·
'

117

by any one in particular in the circle, but by the disturbed and
agitated state of your minds; a good many unpleasant things
have occurred to-day and have caused this. '!'he possibility of
our communicating with you is much affected by the condition
of your minds ; a calm and prayerful state is absolutely
necessary for the approach of a high spiritual influence, while
in an unsettled and irritated condition you become easy of access
to the lower and less pure influences.
The human mind in its natural beauty is calm, and casts a
holy and peaceful influence on all near it; it is then like a lovely
flower, not only beautiful to the eye, but affecting all around
with its delicious fragrance. But, when disturbed and terrified
by fears and doubts, the beauty of the mind and its fragrance
are destroyed, resembling the same flower crushed and unable any
longer to shed abroad its sweet and natural odours. '!'he present
disturbed condition of some among you has a much wider effect
than you would suppose; as, if you drop a stone into the placid
waters of a lake, the ripples will spread out gradually widening
and widening until they have passed over a large portion of its
surface; so, in like manner, the waves emanating from your
minds have a wide-spread influence upon the atmosphere around
you." Home spoke to us for some time very beautifully in a
soothing tone of voice; he deprecated the idea that spirits wished
to interfere in matters of religion. "Do we," he said, "set
ourselves up as teachers, or tell you to love God less, or to be
uncharitable? Do we interfere with the every-day walk of life?"
He spoke in this strain for some little time, then saying, " the
conditions are getting a little more favourable," he arose, went
to the door, opened it, and appearing to invite some one to enter1
led the person up to Mrs. Blackburn, saying to her as he did
so, " He cannot come fast." During the address Mrs. Blackburn
hall become slightly under influence; Home took no notice of
it at the time, but he now stood by her making passes, &Ild calmed
her. He spoke to her very beautifully and earnestly en the
subject of the power she possessed of being developed as a
medium. He entreated her to have trust, not in them (the
spirits) but in God; he begged her to repeat after him "Thy
will be done," and he seemed much pleased when she did so.
He said, " Do you remember to whom these words apply?
'And he did not many mighty works there because of their
unbelief! ' " " Yes," she said, " they refer to Christ." " Then, if
the highest and ~ightiest _power had this difficulty to .contend
with, namely, their unbebef, how much more must It affect
us. Oh have faith and trust." Home then sat down and
addressed us on the same subject of mediumship, drawing a
simile from an account my father had been giving us of a fort-

118
night he had spent in Quarantine, in a place just like a prison.
He spoke somewhat as follows : " Dunraven has been telling you
how he spent some time shut up, deprived of the society of his
friends. Now if you were in prison, knowing that your friends
were without, separated from you only by a great impaBBable
wall would you not yearn-oh, so earnestly-to send them a few
words of love ; then if you found some one who was capable of
carrying a message for you, would you not think it a little hard
if that person refused. Although you might know that your
message would be distorted and confused by passing through the
hands of a third person, that you could not possibly say all that
you would wish; still would you not be intensely anxious to
send-if only one word-to testify of your existence to your
sorrowing and weeping friends. It is so with us; there is
between us and you a great barrier2 through the portals of which
we have passed; we yearn to send a few words of love to the
dear ones we have left beyond it, and when we find some one who
could carry that message, is it not just a little hard that they
should be unwilling to do so." (Turning to Mrs. Blackburn),
"Do you not love your children? Will :you not ever love them,
even when you have passed away? Thmk then of others-be
not selfish-God is not selfish in his love for us, trust in Him."
Home got up and whispered to my father, "You ought to have
taken some p.ourishing food to-day," (the day was Friday). He
then came to me and said, " Go to the Castle to-night, we may
not be able to make any manifestations, but it will do good;
you will go to the Abbey to-morrow night-ah but it will rain!"
he went to the window, looked out and said, "No, it will do, you
will go after twelve o'clock, do not have any seance before you
go; the external influence is not very good for lour nerves."
Home now walked about the room making a soun as of kissing
some one, he then sat down and awoke. Subsequently the
manifestations were slight, and we got the message : " We' think
it better to reserve tke power till later." V\T e then adjourned.
Soon after, we proceeded to the Castle, Home and I walking
a little in advance of the others. On the way he became under
influence. As we neared the Abbey I saw a whitish shadow pass
from the ruin into a clump of trees 2 Home said, " That is the
same spirit you saw there the other mght, you observe that he is
much whiter." Home ran forward on the roadiumping apparently
with delight, and when he came back said, ' I was made to do
that to shew you that he is much happier." When we were about
half-way between the Abbey and the Castle, Home said, "It all
looks peopled, they are more real to me than those," turning
and pointing to the rest of the party, who were a few yards
behind. He now became completely entranced, and said, ''Spirits

119
are sometimes compelled to revisit places that they were much
connected with when on earth. It may not be exactly a
punishment; they may be occupied about many other things,
but at certain seasons they are drawn by an irresistible impulse
to revisit such places. Now, supposing you had an estate, and
the people on the neighbouring property differed from you in
opinions or belief, and you gathered your people together and
fought against them, destroying property and even life; that
would be all very well for a time, but then you know there
comes the passing away, and you see clearly all the evil you
have done, and the misery you have caused. Such a man
was Oliver Cromwell. Of course, where a man errs through
ignorance, and acts up to the best of his knowledge and ability,
it is a different thing, but so many men are actuated by a
·desire for renown and singularity; there is as much pride in
wishing to appear different from other men, as there is m being
over anxious to conform exactly to them, the Quaker, who
puts on that peculiar costume is in reality as vain as the
fop who dresses himself in the height of fashion." We now
entered-the Castle, arid Home led us over the drawbrid~e into
the inner court, being still in a trance. He bandaged h1s eyes
with a handkerchief. saying, "There is too much light." My
father observed, "Yes, it is brighter than it was at the Abbey."
Home replied, in rather a sharp tone of voice, " Oh, not that
sort of light; but there is too much for Daniel's eyes." He
walked about, and up and down the steep slope leading to the
vaults without any difficulty, and then went into the vault.' where
it was quite dark. We heard a noise ; I was at some distance
from him, but my father, thinking that he had tumbled down
the steps, and hearing the splash of something in the well went
forward to the door feeling for him, and touched his hand. Home
said," You think that Daniel fell and was hurt, oh, no; he would
not be hurt even were he to fall from the top of the tower ; they
are here, and want to make themselves visible." My father heard
raps under his feet which I could not hear, as I was several yards
distant ; he also heard a sound like drops of water falling, and
on two occasions observing that three consecutive drops fell,
sounding like three raps, he said, "That is water." Home
r~plied, in rather a contemptuous tone of voice, " No ; does
water answer questions." Charlie Wynne asked if Dr. Elliotson
was present; and three heavy thumps were heard above, as if on
the ground over the vault. Home then came out, climbed up
on the parapet wall, and remained there some time, being
generally concealed from us by the ivy ; when he returned, he
.led my father a little in advance of us1 saying, " He is trying
to speak to you." My father could neither see nor hear

120
anything; but I saw a faint light against the wall, and heard
indistinct sounds as of some one trying to articulate. Charlie
Wynne also saw the light. Mrs. Blackburn asked Home if the
spirit was happy. "No," he said; "but unhappy in a. way you
cannot understand, he is in a kind of way_, happy in his
unhappiness ; he is not exactly going through a. punishm~nt,
but he has a great work to do-a work that he can-(drawmg
himself up, and speaking in a proud determined tone of voice)aye, and that he will accomplish ; he says he wishes to like
you, Dunraven, and to be of service to 1,ou ; but he does not
quite feel as if he was worthy enough. ' Home now walked
about the inner yard and stamped upon the ground all about a
particular spot, then calling me and my father, he said, "There
must be a well here ; I saw a blueish light over it." We stamped
upon the place, and it had a hollow sound. Home havmg
awoke we left the Castle, he and I walking on before the
others; we passed through the Abbey, but saw nothin~. Home
went into a trance, and said, "You have been thinkmg about
the lichens on the trees, you may draw a parallel between
the condition of those trees and that of the human race.
Those lichens resemble the pernicious influences that check and
retard the race from its natural progress towards perfection, as
a time comes when the trees are thus affected, so are there ages
of advance and ages of retrogression among men. It does as
you say seem hard for those who live in a period of retrogression,
but God's ways are not our ways, and the progress though it
may be slow and checked, is yet inevitable, and sure to prevail
in time; nations may pass, and their civilization fade away,
but it will be taken up elsewhere ; the creation is but in its
infancy, man is very far removed from the perfection to which
he ought-aye, and to which he will-arrive. These lichens do
not appears to have been caused by the excessive dampneBB of
the seasons, they seem to be a deep-rooted blight that has not
originated even, on the earth, but has come over it in some sort
of cloud ; it is like a contagious disease: thinning, and giving
them air, would do good. W c think that in about two years
they will get long, and the wind will blow them away to a great
extent-we mean the white ones ; the green ones are flatter, and
their roots sink deeper; some of us seem to think that a belt
of tar round the trees might do good,-the experiment would be
worth trying." Home now awoke.
We had a little supper after we got home, and then Home
proposed that we shou1d go up to the gallerr. We all did so
and sat at the large centre table, the room bemg lighted only by
a glimmer from the fire. Vibrations commenced immediately.
Home went into a trance, walked to the piano, and played

121
the same fine chant as on a previous occasion. He called my
father over, made him stand near him, and said, "I wish
one of you could note down this chant ; do you hear the
harp?" We all heard the chords _very delicately and faintly
swept, the harp being covered at the time ; Home then
removed the cover and my father heard some noise or movement about the harp and Home added, " They are trying to
tune it·" they then returned to the table, and Home awoke.
We had strong vibrations and raps, and Charlie Wynne asked
whether Dr. Elliotson was present. This was answered by three
'Very loud raps. Miss Wynne said to my father, "Did you
know him?" " Yes," was answered in the same manner. 'l'he
alphabet was then called for, and the following message,
evidently referring to my father's mesmeric experiences, was
given. " Be as true ~'n this cause as you were in bye-9one days
j01' another ·areat truth, John ElliotsQn." Mter this, raps of
different kinds were heard, and soon the following message was
given by very loud ones. " I do not ask you to promise, but
expect you to he earnest in workin9 for God.'' Some one
remarked, "Who is this message for?" " I speak to you," was
answered. " But, who do you mean by '_you?' " was asked.
"They mean me," my father said, "for I was touched three
times on the knee." Charlie Wynne having brought the
accordion, it was played in Home's hand in a different style
from the previous evening. My father held the accordion, and
it was pulled about and plared faintly. Home again took it,
and the alphabet being asked for by five notes, the following
was given-the letters being indicated by notes: " We will9i've
you a hymn qf praise." A slow measured sort of air was
played. My father was talking about Dr. Elliotson, and
observed that he had been very kind to him. This message
was immediately given: " You mean you ·were lr:ind to me." A
sofa was now moved near the table, the table also moving
towards it, but evidently with much difficulty ; which is not
to be wondered at as it was very heavy and standing on a
thick 'l'urkey carpet. My father's chair was moved nearer
to Home, who sa1d 1 "I can see Dr. Elliotson standing behind
your chair, he has both his hands upon the back of it,. and
1s causing it to vibrate." My father's chair was in effect
vibrating at the time; he inquired if Dr. Elliotson had been
at the Castle. " Yes" was answered by three raps or· rather
thuds exactly similar to those be had heard at the Castle. Soon
after this message came, " We must ,90 soon." M.y father asked,
" Will Mesmerism make progress ? it appears to be rather
in abeyance at present." "Y.es" was loudly answered; he added
"I should like to ask Elliotson some questions about Mes-

122
merism," and thi" message was given, "By tke sea 1 will come,"
alluding I suppose to our projected visit to Garinish, on .the. coast
of Kerry. In one of these messages the letters were mdtcated
by touching my father strongly on the knee. Mrs. Blackburn
was also touched on the knee. Soon " Now, God bless you all,"
was given, the letters being indicated by most beautiful chords
upon the accordion-the name of God being, as it always is,
spelled most softly and reverently. This sentence was then
given, " You will sleep all the more peacefully for knowing that
you have don.e good." The raps were much gentler and fainter
apparently made by quite a different spirit. My father said
" What does this message refer to ?" Mrs. Blackburn remarked,
"I suppose to what haJ?pened at the Castle." " Yes" was answered.
N othmg more occurrmg we left the room. The raps made by
Dr. Elliotson sounded as loud as if they had been caused by
some one· under the table striking it with a hammer.
A.

No. 59.-March 6th.
Adare dined in Limerick : after the ladies left the room
Major Blackburn, Mr. Home and I commenced talking of the
s~ances which had been held here last winter. I remarked that
probably L-- was connected with the unsatisfactory occurrences that happened, and that I should be very glad if the
matter could in any way be cleared up. We heard raps at
the north aide of the room and Mr. Home went over to a side
table near where the raps had sounded, and sitting down said,
" I wish, dear spirit, you would tell us about it." " Noz" was
answered. He added, "Lord Dunraven would be ~atified if
you would tell." The alphabet was called for, and th1s message
was given," Don't ask." Raps were then heard near the table
in the bay window ; Mr. Home sat down at this table, calling
us to join him, which we did. On the table were three flower
pots or vases with flowers, in one was a good-sized azalea; the
table vibrated so strongly that the azalea shook most visibly.
We soon received this message: "Place the flowers under t/Je
table, near John." We put down, as directed, one of the flower
pots which contained cyclamens. Raps were heard upon the
table. I said to Blackburn, "Get under the table and hold
Mr. Home's feeV' He did so, and we heard the raps distinctly
over his head. Mr. Home suddenly said, " Oh, look at the hand
near me holding a flower I" Twice he said that he saw the
hand. I, somehow, instinctively, put my hand under the table,
and il!lmediately felt. a flower placed ve~y gently in it. The
followmg was then g1ven :-" The flower M from Aupusta, with
fond love." Then another sentence was begun, whtch I could

123
not well make out, and then" a. d., No more raps occurring
after this we left the table. On bringing the paJ>er to the candles
on the dining table I found that the word I had not recognized
was (as written) "Augutata." I had made a mistake, inserting
at. The a. d. were1 I presume, initials.
In accordance With what we were told last night, we had no
s~ance this evening, but, as directed, we went to the Abbey.
Soon after arriving there, Adare joined us on his return from
Limerick. Mr. Home was very lively, and not at all impressed.
He remarked that the influence was quite different to-night. He
shortly took Adare and me to the kitchen, and after a few turns
up and down, he went into a trance. I walked with him,
holding his hands. He said he was being touched, and so
was I several times, very palpably on the back. He said
that there were no s~irits belonging to the place present,
only those connected With us ; we soon turned our steps homewards. Mr. Home and Adare walked together, and before
awaking, Mr. Home spoke something to this effect, " You
remarked how different everything felt in the Abbey to-night,
to what it did the last time we were there. To-night, although
the elements were disturbed, and the wind blowing, everything
was quiet; no birds were flying about; the whole place seemed
peaceful, whereas the other night, although it was perfectly
calm and still, :yet the birds, not night birds only, but seemingly
others, were flttting about, and the whole place seemed filled
with an unq.uiet influence. It is changed now; he (referring to
the monk) IS in a happier state, he can speak to those about you;
he has no objection to your mentioning what occurred in your
room when he first came. Oh, he does not the least mind now."
We were sitting in the hall after taking a little supper, when
Mr. Home went to the piano and played, and asked A dare to come
and sit by him. Adare now called me to join them. Mr. Home
remarked that the piano had been off the ground, which Adare
affirmed, stating that he had passed his hand under the castors;
I felt it vibrating very strongly. His playing became fainter
and fainter, and he went into a trance. He got up, said to
Adare, "Bring Emily,, and taking me bl the hand led me
quickly down the dark passage to Lady D s. sitting room the
others following. He placed chairs for us all, drew over a httle
table and sat down. It was pitch dark. Immediately a hand
was laid on the back of my head. He said, " They will touch
you with flowers." Hoth Mrs. Wynne and I felt them. He
said to Mrs. Wynne, "It was John who touched you." We heard
at a little distance the sound of flowers being stirred and broken,
and immediately some were placed in our hands. Mr. Home
said, "Take Daniel's hands, dear Emily, we want you to be able

124

to tell others that you held his hands, and felt his feet." While
Mr. Home's hands and feet were thus in contact with Mrs.
Wynne's, we all simultaneously felt flowers waved across our
faces, heads, and hands. Mrs. '\Y_ynne put up her hand to try
and grasp them, but failed. Mr. Home laughed, and said," No,
Emily, you cannot catch it-we do not wish you to yet."
Flowers were then given to us all ; Adare received a white
azalea with this message, through Mr. Home, "For Florence."
Then another flower was given us, with the message, " '!'his for
Augusta, and leaves or a flower for all the dear ones-for all the
children. We wish to say one word if you will call the alphabet1
Adare." He did so, and " Love " was given, by a flower :placed
in my handt the stalk being pulled for each letter. I tned.to
feel the hand, but the flower was drawn back by the stem1 till
my arm was stretched out. We all then observed a hght,
resemblin~ a little star, near the chimney piece, moving to
and fro ; 1t then disappeared. Mr; Home said, "Ask them in
the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, if' this
is the work of God." I repeated the words very earnestly ;
the light shone out, making three little flashes, each one
about a foot higher above the floor than the preceding. Mr.
Home said, " We are able to make it brighter and stronger,
because you asked solemnly, and in the name of God." We then
heard a sound of something moving, and a shower of flowers
fell about us. Loua raps announced the presence, as we supposed, of Dr. Elliotson. Mr. Home (or Dr. Elliotson speaking
through him), uttered a short and beautiful address, which.,
unfortunately we cannot recall ; but he made use of a simile
ending with the words1- " As the sand on the shore." I felt a
little heap of sand laid upon. the back of my hand. In his
address he said, " You have been baptized in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; be now baptized as a
truth seeker." I then felt a drop of some liquid fall on my head.
Mr. Home then said, "Emily, would you like to feel the sand?"
Mrs. Wynne replied, "Yes;" ·and a small quantity was r.Iaced
on the back of her hand. He then said," Emily, you will feel
a kiss on the brow, and also on the lips." She felt something,
which she afterwards described as more resembling two moist
fingers than an ordinary kiss. I asked, " What spirits are here ?"
Mr. Home answered, "Augusta, Emily's father, mother and
brother ; also others." Mrs. Wynne seemed grieved a.t the
absence of one very dear to her : Mr. Rome in a subsequent
seance, at Garinish, (p. 126) alluded to this. He then addressed
us and those dearest to us in very affectionate terms, and seemed
very happy ; he ended by saying, " We have been so pleased at
being able to make these manifestations. You did not witness

125
much at the Abbey, nor did we promise that you would; what
we w!LDted was to keep you up late enough for this, and it has
happened as we wished. And now, darlings, you will return to
the hall, and sit by Daniel at the piano ; Daniel's power is
becoming exhausted ; there will probably be no manifestations
to-morrow evening, but we will let him know; he is not very
well, but he does not like saying so." We then got up, went
back to the hall, and sat down as directed at the piano ; Mr.
Home awoke almost immediately. It was half-past three o'clock.
I took a candle and returned to the room we had been in ; I
found the little table and the ground about it strewed with
ftowers. The table on which the Hower pots stood was about
eight feet distant from the other; there was a good deal of sand
in the Hower pots. Adare and I went up to Mr. Home's room,
and smoked a cigarette; Mr. Home was in bed. We began
talking about Spiritualism, and I said, " I am quite sure that
L--was concerned in what went on last winter here."* "Yes"
was suddenly said by three distinct raps in a distant part of tho
room. I made other remarks, which were similarly joined in by
raps; but I was very tired, and cannot sufficiently recall them
to insert them here.
D.
No. 60.- Garinish, March 9th.
While my father, Home, and I were at dinner, we all felt a
current of cold air, and the table vibrated. This occurred two
or three times, and seemed to be interrupted by the servants
coming in and out. At about ten o'clock, Home joined me in
the dining room, where I was writing alone, he seemed uneasy
and I asked him if he was not feeling well. "Oh, yes," he said,
" I am quite well ; but there is a strange influence about that
I do not know." Shortly after, raps came upon the table, and
the following messages were given. " Owing to conditions, we
fear we shall not be able before Thursday; but we will try
to-morrow. Humphrey May." " Use this table." " Tell Uncle
(word confused) not to be over anxi<rUB." I took the messages to
my father, and he joined us in the dining room, observing
how curious it was that Humphrey May should come, that he
had never been with us before, that he had never been at
Garinish and that he could not underst~~ond why he came.
7
"There 1s one," he said, "that I should have supposed would
have come here before all others, and I should also have
thought Dr. Elliotson would have mad.e some communication,
because he told us the other night at Adare that he would do
,., I subsequently found that the occurrences to which I alluded, chiefly took
place before L - arrived at Ada.re.

126
so." We began talking about some seances that were held at
Adare, without Home, alluding particularly to one, the written
account of which Home happened to be holding in his hand.
The alphabet was called for, and this message given: "The
writing_ that you hold in ycur hand is all nonsense." Soon
after, Home went into a trance ; he got up and said, " The
light is too strong for Dan." I blew the candles out, leaving a
good fire-light in the room, and began searching for a pencil
to take notes.
He said, "The light will do nicely now,
never mind about taking notes, you will be able to record
what Dan says better without doing so ; we will endeavour
to impress you with it to-morrow, and you will remember the
substance, if' not the exact words; by trusting entirely to
us, we shall be able to assist you more than if you took notes,
and trusted to them; what I am going to say now is important you must try and remember it. Certain conditions
are necessary for us to be able to make any manifestations[·
by conditions, I mean not only the state of the extema
atmosphere, but also the state of your minds and bodies ; certain
electrical conditions are necessary. Now, it often happens that
some spirit-though possibly a perfect stranger to all of you-is
possessed of the particular quality that is necessary to supply
a deficiency and make the conditions favourable, he would
then be called in. Sometimes three or four of them club
together, and by that means supply something that is wanting,
or take away some quality that is in excess, and equalize the
atmosphere so as to be able to make manifestatioii.s. Those
spirits that love you best, that are most anxious to communicate,
that would naturally be nearest and dearest to you, may not
have the peculiar quality that is necessary to harmonize with
the conditwn of yourselves, and of the external atmosphere on
any particular day, and they cannot then make communications,
it 1s impossible, for it is all a matter of physical conditions; they
are then obliged to communicate through other spirits who
harmonize with the existing conditions. That is one reason
why Humphrey May came to-night. You often wonder why
those you love best do not come to you, it is simply because the
conditions are such that ther cannot make themselves known.
Now the other ni~ht the s;nrit that Emily was anxious about
was standing outs1de the crrcle, Emily thought it most strange
that she did not say anything to her, lmt if she had entered the
circle it would have entirely destroyed the arrangements, IW.d
there could have been. no more manifestations; it is surely better
to have any commumc11.tions than none at all. This explains
also why it is generally a bad plan to ask questions · after
things have been arranged, some spirit steps into the -circle to

127
answer a question, and not being in harmony, the whole thing
is thrown out of gear. It is like making delicate experiments
in electricity; or like photography-to go no further than that,
if, when you are mixing your chemicals in a dark room, one
single ray of light enters, all is destroyed; so it is where a
spirit enters the circle whose physical condition does not harmonize with the state of the atmosphere, and of your minds and
bodies. 'l'he conditions are very bad to-night; you saw what
difficulty we had in giving those messages, the raps were
feeble and uncertain (we had observed this), the word 'Uncle'
ought to have been 'Dunraven j 1 we spelled out 'dun,' and
then the letters became all confused, we could not indicate
the right ones. You heard those raps that came afterwardsyou would scarcely believe that they were made by Dr.
Elliotson, so different were they from those he usually makes;
yet so it was. Oh I there has been a curious influence here
all the ·afternoon-an old man, his name is Thomas-Thomas
Trench; he has a bald head-a large bald head." My father
asked if he had come with 'l'owny Trench.-" Yes, he came
with him ; he belongs to him. Dr. Elliotson says, that if the
conditions are favorable, he wants to make some experiments
on Thursday; he is so anxious about it, he wants to invent some
more perfect means of keeping up a constant communication ;
it is very doubtful if he will ever succeed. He knows your mind,
Dunraven, and he would like to make his experiments with you ;
he is very much interested in the matter, and so will you be
also wt1en you join us; you will take a great pleasure in experimentalizing." Home then went to the door of the drawing
room, made a gesture of disapproval, and said, pushing the door
open as he spoke, "No, you must not do that, please." We
heard a dull sound in the drawing room. Home laughed and
said, "That is Thomas, he does not approve of your investigations, and he thought he would make a very terrible noise in
there, that would frighten you and put a stop to it all and destroy
the conditions; but he cannot do so." I said, "Why on earth
does he disapl?rove; do you not mean Henry Thomas?"-" Oh
dear no, he 11' a great experimentalizer in electricity; no, I
mean the Thomas I told you of, Thomas Trench." I said,
"Why does he object?"-" Oh, it is entirely against his
principles, and he thought he would make a very weird horrible
noise and frighten you, and stop it." My father said, "Will
he then seek to influence Towny against Spiritualism?"" Most decidedly he will; oh, most decidedly. There is another
reason besides that which I have already mentioned, why
Humphrey May came to us to-night.
It is true that he
was never here; but his brother Arthur has been, and will

128
be here again. Arthur has, or rather had, no real religious opinions ; he was not accustomed to pray_i his heart was
not softened and lifted' to God in prayer. When he hears
what occurred to-night, it will have an effect upon him. He
knows that Dan, I mean Dan Home, could never have heard of
Humphrey, that Humphrey was never here, and was probably
the last person in the world that any of you were thinkin&: of;
and the fact of his coming will strike Arthur the more forctbly;
it will be like a little test to him. Besides this, he was very
fond of you, Dunraven, and also of Adare." After this, Home
sat by the fire making passesi and magnetizing his wrist. He
said, "Daniel's wrist is swel ing, and hurts him." He then
walked over towards the window, and stretchin~ out his arm, we
heard a sound as of some one's fingers snappmg near it. He
said," That is Dr. Elliotson magnetizing Dan's hand." Home
placed his hand upon my head, but immediately said ''No, was
~our father will do better," andjlaced it on his head. He said,
'Listen;" and my father hear raps upon the hand. Home
took the sheet on which the seance before mentioned was
written, and asked us to hold it by the corners with him ; we
did so, . and raps came upon it ; then lifting up the sheet of
paper, he said, ''It is all black now; there is a good deal that
ts not right here, there is more in it than you see. Now, do
you think that if a person were to participate and help in doing
something wrong, and, when the others were suspected, were to
keep silence, and let them bear all the blame, do you think that
person would be right?" My father replied, "No, I think they
would be very wrong." "And so do we,'' Home said, and
throwing the paper down, added, " You see where we have
thrown it?" '' On the floor," I said. " Yes, just in front of
the fire." I was going to put the paper in the fire, but my
father thought we had better keep it. Home said, " Oh
certainly, keeP. it ; it is interesting if only as a psychological
study; you will, however, lose it some day." Soon after this,
Home awoke. Although I hall blown out the candles when
Home went into the trance ; the room was well lighted all the
time by the fire.
A.

No. 61.-Slance, March 11th.
This evenin~ while Mrs. Blackburn, Home, and myself were
sitting reading m the drawing room, raps came upon the table.
Soon after, we, thu.t is .M~~:jor and Mrs. Blackburn, my father,
Home, and myself, at Home's suggestion sat round the table
that we had been told on Tuesday night to use. We had
slight physical manifestations, the table was made light and

'.

•••

>

129
heavy at request, and was tilted three times towards each of us.
The !'lpirits occasionally answered our remarks as to what they
were doing, whether they were endeavouring to concentrate the
power, &c., &c., by ~ffirmative or negative tilts. Mrs. Blackburn
becoming slifi:htly under influence, and a good deal agitated
Home asked if the spirits would take it from her ? The answer
was by two ra{ls meaning" perhaps" or "presently." He afterwards placed his hands upon hers, and the shaking left her, and
was communicated to him. Home now went into one of those
strange trances in which he is unable to speak ; he bandaged
his eyes with a handkerchief, walked about the room a little.1
the~ brought the candle, two sheets of paper and ~ pencil, and
placmg them on our table, sat down ; then spreadin~ open one
of the sheets he commenced writing the alphabet on It in large
capital letters. He proceeded with a firm bold touch as far as
the letter F, when his hand became violently tremulous, he went
on to the letter L, the shakin~ of his fingers gradually increasing1
when he made a gesture as If he could not proceed, and handed
the pa.Per and pencil to me. I finished the alphabet. He then,
followi~ the lines that I had made, traced over the letters R, 8
1
T, U, V, W, with the same tremulous motion of his hand, and
proceeded to decorate with leaves and flowers the letters A, G,
S, T, U. He drew a cross in the letter U, a heart pendant on T,
a star or double cross inS, an anchor in<!!.something resemblinga
bird in A, and marked the letters A and U with the figure 2.* He
then got up and fetched a pen, handed me a fresh sheet of paper and
the pencil, turned the alphabet towards my father, sat down and
gave us the following messages, by indicatmg the letters with the
pen. "We hope to have ,q~eat power, God being our helper." "You
see what ones tke.v are." None of us could understand what the last
sentence "You see what ones they are " referred to. Home spelled
out" The ones we have decorated." We then, on looking at the
alphabet, found that the decorated letters spelled "Augusta."
the letters A and U, which occur twice in the word, being
marked on the alphabet with the numeral 2. Home got up
and went into the dining room, where we had been smoking
after dinner, but returned immediately, much affected-as we
supposed 1 by the tobacco smoke; he appeared to have difficulty
in breathing,
was much distressed, and groped about as if he
could not see : t he caught hold of roy hand and sat down. I
observed that he was affected by something, and consequently the
spirits had lost perfect cont.rol over him; Home notlded, as much as

* A fac simile of the alphabet is here appended.
t The eft'llOt of. the tobacco smoke in partially obstructing the clairvoyant
power was very curious to witness.- D.
I

130
to say, tbat t" the case. He got up, went into the open air for a few
minutes and.returned quite righ.t. He then maae us leave our
places, moved the table close to the window, placed the accordion
on the window shelf, and spelt out by the written alphabet," Bring
tn the cloth." I accordingly brought the cloth from the dining
room, covered our table with it, and sat down. On my father
remarking that he had not spoken in the trance, Home made him
and Mrs. Blackburn feel his Jaws : they were locked and perfectly
rigid ; he then sat down, and shortly after awoke. We had a
series of curious but not very powerful manifestations i the window
curtains were drawn partially across the window, and m answer to
the suggestion of one of us that perhaps the spirits did this to
cover the accordion on which possibly they might be about to
try and play, " Yes" was rapped out. Horne saw on three or four
occasions, and my father saw once7.....~ttle flashes of light playing
over the keys of the accordion. VV e heard that a small table
behind Home was moving, and after the sOO.nce, we found it had
been lifted on to the sofa. The table was now raised in that
very peculiar manner which we had remarked at Adare, by
successive lifts (five or six of them), to the height of about two
feet, and then gently set down ; after which, ' 1 Take the insflrument" was spelled. My father remarked that we mig&t expect
music, as this action of the table-imitating so curiously that of
the bellows of the organ when being filled, usually preceded it.*
Home took the accordion, and it played for a short time, chiefly
harmonies. He then placed it on the ground, when a few chords
and notes were played. "\Y e heard raps on the table, floor, walls,
and outside the window; and the spirits occasionally joined in
our conversation by rq.pping, "Yes'' or "No." At one time
we were speculating as to how Mr. Mahony would treat the
subject of Spiritualism, and some one said that he would not
judge of it fairly, for that he would condemn it at once without
any investigation; the following message was immediately given:
"Jud,qe not lest ye be ;'ud9ed.'' I observed that the manifestations were weak ; and that there appeared to be some
obstruction, when this was given: "Be praye·rful." We
recognized Dr. Elliotson's presence by his peculiar raps. Mrs.
Blackburn remarked that they were not so loud as they had
He spelled out the word,
been in the gallery at Adare.
"servants," implying probably that if he were to rap as forcibly
he;e a~ he had done at Adare, the servants miglit hear him,
bemg m a room nearly under us.
Home again became
entranced; he got up, and put out the candle so that the room
was lighted only by a briglit fire. My fathei said to me, "It is

* That this was the object aimed at by this peculiar motion of the table
was afterwards told us, vide p.

131
curious that we have not had stronger manifestations, because
the first message we received was to the effect that they would
have great power." Home said, "You are mistaken, we said
1 we hope to have great power;' we have to harmonize and
arrange the room, we shall be able to do more another night.
Dunraven, you were remarking that when Dan was in a
trance no physical manifestations ever occurredJ· do you and
Maria (Mrs. Blackburn) come here.." He ma e them stand
by a small heavy table in the centre of the room. My
father said, "I thought Dr. Elliotson wished to try some
experiments with me." Home answered, " Yes, this is one of
the experiments ; he is very anxious also to be able to communicate with you when you are quite alone, he does not know
whether h~ can, but he will try and develope you sufficiently for
that." '!'hey then had a series of the usual manifestations, raps,
and vibrations, the table tilting in different directions, and being
twice raised slightly off the ground. Home was very particular
in making them observe closely the position of his hands and
feet, in order, as he said, "That you may be able to assure
others that Dan could not possibly have done all thia." Suddenly
the small table rose quickly into the air to such a height, that
Mrs. Blackburn and my father could no longer keep their hands'
upon it; it rose so suddenly that Mrs. Blackburn gave a start.
The table beginning to fall, Home said, " 'l'ake it, or it will
fall." When they had placed it on the ground, Home obse,rved,
" That was badly managed, it is a great pity but it is our fault;
Dr. Elliotson says he ought to have told you what he was going
to do, Maria was startled and you both let go, and therefore
the table fell ; if he had warned you, and you had allowed your
hands to slip down the legs as it rose, so as not to break the
continuity suddenly, it would probabll have left your hands,
and risen without contact with you until it touched the ceiling.*
We will try and do it again ; A dare and John, come here."
We joined them, and Home told us all to place our fingers
lightly under the edge of the table in order that we might let
them slide down the legs without ever quite taking them off it.
The table rose to a height of about three feet but came to the
ground again directly, and fell over on its side; Home told us
not to move it, but presently he said" Yes, put it on its legs we
have not power now ; the influence has returned to the large
table, go back to your places." We did so, and the Major not
finding a chair near him, and the lig~t being by this ti~e faint,
Home put one into his hand. . The Major was goipg ~o s1t down
upon nothing, as he had by nustake placed the chrur wtth the seat
• The room is about ten or eleven feet high.
I

2

132
turned away from him; Home stopped him saying, " No, no,
Major, you are going to sit on the wrong side of the chair."
We alllau~hed and Home joined in saying, " That was very
funny was It not? very funny to see John trying to sit down at
the back of the chair." Home then took his seat, and said, "Dr.
Elliotson was anxious to try the experiment, and to see
whether he could make manifestations when Dan was in a
trance, and he succeeded ; you had all the· usual phenomena,
the levitation of the table, raps, tiltings, and vibrations1 but it
required a great effort to do it ; it is much more difficult,
because the greater part of the influence is centred upon Dan
while he is mesmerised. We are just as anxious as you are,
Dunraven, to pass through the present phase of manifestations,
but we must do our appointed work, and you will find that
ultimately it is all for the best. It would be much pleasanter to
converse with you and answer your questions ; but then, however
well we might answer them, people would account for that, by
all sorts of theories, such as mind-reading, &c., &c. Now, no
amount of clairvoyance or mind-reading would suffice to raise a
table in the air higher than your heads. We must fulfil our
appointed duties and you will know some da! that it is all for
the best." Home began to laugh and said,' It was very funny
John's turning the chair the wrong way; your godmother
(speaking to Mrs. Blackburn) is laughing so about it, it recalls
another incident. You know John's mother has answered his
letterJ but she has not answered his question about Isabella ; she
and ohn 's sister purposely would not do so, because they said,
"it will never do to have John turning everything upside down in
this sort of way." It amused Dr. Elliotson very much, that did ;
he was there when they said so. Dr. Elliotson is fond of you,
Major (taking the Major's hand and shaking it cordially)J· he
likes you very much; he says you are so steadfast, an an
honest, brave, man. Dan is going to awake now." Mter
Home awoke, we had some slight manifestations, which
gradually died away. Home said he felt that the influence had
entirely gone, and that he was fatigued. In speaking about
the answer to the letter, Home referred to his having at Adare,
when in a trance, told Major Blackburn to ask his mother about
Isabella, and about Margaret Henderson (va'de p. 109). No one
had told Home that an answer had been received, or even
that the Major had written.
A.

133
No. 62.-Seance, Marek 12th.
About half-past nine o'clock, Home proposed a siance. We
placed the table by the window, in the posttion to which it had
been moved the previous night, and covered it with a cloth. The
party consisted of Major and Mrs. Blackburn, my father, Home,
and myself. We had no manifestations whatever ; and after
sitting for half-an-hour my father said he thought there was no
use in waiting anl longer, having for a certain reason a strong
feeling that nothmg would occur. Home said that although
he had often known siances to fail as regards manifestations,
yet in all his experience he never remembered a room
to feel so entirely devoid of any spiritual presence. At his
suggestion 7 we all, with the exception of Mrs. Blackburn,
took a walk out of doors for about a quarter of an hour. On
our return we again sat round the table, but Mrs. Blackburn,
not feeling very well, did not join us. We had no manifestations whatever ; and after waiting a short time gave it up
in despair. My father and Mrs. Blackburn went into the dining
room; the Major, Home, and I remained and sat at a small table,
to see if we could get any message. Almost immediately faint
raps came UJlOn the table, and the word " lmposst"ble" was
spelled out. We joined the others, and told them what had
occurred. Mrs. Blackburn went to bed, and we were sitting
round the supper table talking, when· I suddenly felt a current
of cold air. Home also perceived it, and said, " '!'here is a
strong influence about me.' We heard raps on the table and
furniture. Presently, at Home's suggestion, we returned to the
next room, and again .sat round the small table. We had faint
physical manifestations ; Home became under influence, and his
hau,ds were much agitated. He had been complaining during
the evening of a feeling of great depression ; he now said
that he felt all right. He got up, and acting under an
uncontrollable impulse, walked about the room, his hands and
arms being strangely waved about and agitated; he made
mesmeric passes over us all, and said (referring more especially
to my father), "Your brains are overworked, you have had
your thoughts too much concentrated on one subject, and have
been writing too much. (We had been engaged in recording
the seances at Adare). The atmosphere that spirits utilize in
making manifestations emanates from the head, and in consequence of your brains being overworked, there is absolutely
none flowing from you." He made passes for some time over
my father's for~head, the back of his. head, and behi~d his ears,
occasionally gomg to the table at whiCh we had previOusly been
seated, and extending his fingers over it as though withdrawing

134
some influence from it. While walking abont he suddenly:
stopped in the middle of a sentence with a violent gasp, and
sinkmg on his knees went into a trance. He got up, walked
about, apparently conversing with some one, and then, taking
each of us in turn by the hand, led us to the other table, placed
chairs for us, and signed to us to sit down. My father requested
me to bring paper and a pencil ; but Home shook his head,
and afterwards brought them himself. He then commenced
arranging the furniture in the most minute detail, consulting
apparently all the time with some one. He placed the small
round table near us and behind my father, and moved
a chair u~ to it ; he altered the position of several of
the chairs, m different parts of the room, placed the miniature
portrait of his wife on the small round table, and the case
containing little Dannie Cox's photograph on the large table
behind me, then going to the bookcase he took out several
books, looked into them and replaced them; at length he appeared
to find what he wanted, for he took out a volume, folned his
hands across it on his breast, and after standing for a few seconds
in a most reverential attitude, sunk down upon his knees and
appeared to prav earnestly ; then rising to his full height he
held the book as high as he could above his head and placed it
upon our table. On looking at the volume afterwards we found it
to be, " Jesus Christ ; His Times, Life, and Work," by E. de
Pressense. He again commenced making mesmeric passes
about the room. Coming to me he passsed his hand shafJ?lY
across my shoulders from left to right, did the same to MaJor
Blackburn, then to my father, and finally to himself; then
reversing the action, he commenced with himself making the
pass from right to left, and went over us all in the same way ;
this curious movt'mcnt he repeated three times. He now put
out the candle leaving us with no other light but that of the
fire, rubbed his hands, smiled, and nodded when I remarked
that I thought we should have some manifestations as he seemed
to be contented. Having taken his seat he altered th_e position
of two vases of flowers on the table in such a way, as to make
with the book, which he placed back upwards transversely
between them, the form of a cross. The accompanying diagram
shews the arrangement of the various articles. They are
marked by capital letters in their original positions, while the
altered places of those that were moved, are indicated by small
letters.
Home awoke, and we had all the usual physical phenomena;
very strong currents of cold air, vibrations of the table, &c., &c.
On two occasions during the seance, the table was raised about a
foot in the air and remained there poised for some time, oscillating

s
C:JF

@i£11!!1·~ .,

D

~~

0

~ A <f·(~)" 0

D
I

[g][LJ

9

PLAN
OF THE ARRANGEMENT

I E
I

c

ooCV

lf

A.
B.
C.
IJ.

L.
F.
G.
H.
I.

Tablu aJ/ wlu:clv tJw J'Um.ce- wru held,
J'77ta.lb JD.blo, pla.cuV OTI/ A, a.8 .rhewrv
o/ tJw !iJur dotB.
.Ym.al.b Ta/Jlu pl.a.c,e.(b OTI/ E a.b tY.

Ta/Jfe, on/ whiolv .Daru".eb ~ Ph.otograplv
.wu.r pla.t:w.V o/ M: .lfomu.
So&.

.AccorrJL,om 071/ tJw lfUulcw. J'hdf.
Chair movui> t.o !I·
.M:BllonuAr ~ muvul txJ lv.
.Da.nli.b ~8 J>howyraplv 7riDIIUL to v.

OF THE FURNITURE, BOOKS

tlw chon;JeQ
tll..ab.

8elm.a:t

&.o.

8~

tlu:ir diApoailLon/
d~ tJw
at/ Garini8~ Mardv 12"f!v

toolv

irv

place,-

7tf69.

K. Prim.arW .Mwv o/ tJw .lJuJw of'.AryylL.
L. PrellmBe/s Lik of' Clr.ri8f/.
MN: 8malJ., ~ lr.o~ .Flawuw.
o. .x: Horrtbe £ntu.r.
P. Lord/ .Doe CJw.ir.
Q. .Miy"or JJlaclt.hurnla OUur.
R. LorcL A •s Oz.aU:
s. JWndow. .rhdf.
T. Wa.lb of' tJw B.oorrv.
U. .Soutlv Jffiu.fDw;

· Scole. l;lru:h.1o a. Foot.

135
gently from side to side. We now all hearcl a movement about
vase N, and Home an·d I, both saw a hand upon it; I said that
the vase was moving ; Home insisted that it was not and
requested me to place my hand upon it; I did so, and found that
it was moving slowly round, but the sound we heard was caused
by the hand rubbing against the side of the vase; I saw the
hand all the time. We now heard a rustling among the flowers,
and Home said, " The fingers have closed over a flower and
taken it away." I did not see the flower taken, but the hand at
that moment disappeared, Home and I both observed a hand
rise above the edge of the table near the window, and place a
ftower u\>on it ; r then lost sight of the hand, but Home said
he saw It carry the flower across the tablei and place it near
my father; my father saw the flower al the time moving
as it were of itself, for he could not distinguish the hand
that conveyed it. He took the flower, and asked if it was
for him.
The followin~ was spelled out : " Yes and 1oe
will give you a:nother soon.' My father remarking that he was
very anxious to see a hand, the following messages were given:
"Place your hand over the flowers." He did so over vase N,
and we all heard-and my father, Home, and I, saw, a hand
moving among the flowers. " Now on them." He did so, and
the hand became much more distinctly visible to him. I said to
my father, "I suppose y6u were told to place your hand there
in order that they might draw some power from you to enable
them to make the hand sufficiently material for you to see it
di'stinctly. " Yes," was answered by three loud raps. Sacha's
(Home's wife's) miniature was now carried from table .B, and
placed upon our table ; none of us saw anything supporting
1t, but we observed it placed quietly upon Home's hands,
and then glidin~ off them it moved across the table until
it remained statwnary on the corner near the window. The
case was closed when Home put it upon table B, at the
commencement of the sean,ce j it was open when laid upon
our table. Home and I now distinctly saw a hand place
little Dannie Cox's photograph (I) on the edge of our table next
the window, and then push it a little further on to the table. It
will be remembered that this photograph was placed by Home
at the commencement of the sean~ on table D. Home and I
perceived a whole arm and ha'nd between our table and the
window, it was slightly luminous, and appeared whiter than the
white tabledoth. ~he band :pushed the accordion, F, a.long the
shelf S, and then grasping 1t1 took it ofi'J· the accordion fell,
but not heavily, to the ground. All saw an. heard th~ accordion.
Jil.oved. Rome said, "I am sure that was httle Danme, because
I saw a small figure ; his shoulders were plainly visible j ap-

136
parently he bad not power sufficient ~. enable him to carry the
mstrument gently to the ground." 'Ibts was spelled out, " Yes,
it was·Danm'e." · Previous to the accoFdion moving, the muslin
curtains were drawn out so as partia.U;r to hide it; this required
some fOI'ce to effect, as the curtain ruigs did not run eastly on
the line. A very pretty manifestation now occuFred ; Home
called my father's attention to the fact, that the reflection
of a hand was visible on the glass, covering his wife's
miniature. My father also saw it, but was not sure whether
it was the reflection or the actual hand ; he placed his own
hand just above the glass, and still saw in it the reflection
of a small hand, moving backwards and forwards. He said
"I see it distinctly, the fingers are small and delicate." He aske_d
whose hand it was and the following was spelled out " Tke
fin,qers are those of Caroline." The accoJdion was carried under
the table to Home ; he took it, and a short, but very beautiful
harmony was played. Home replaced it on the floor, and
chords were heard, when no one was touching it. In some of
the messages also the letters were indicated, by notes played on
the accordion. The foUowing was now given. Seek rather to
know th.e present condltion of the t'mmort.al soul (the word soul
being emphasised) than,"-.-here the message broke off abruptly.
Home re:peated the alphabet twice, and nothing occurrecl ; but
while saymg it over the third time, a hand placed a book on the
table; tlie message then continued, "In ,qood time, and with God's
permission1 the one will elucidate· the other." On looking at the
book, we found it to be "Primeval Man," by the Duke of Argyle.
'l'he message would therefore appear to mean, " Seek rather to
know the present condition of the immortal soul, than to speculate
about that of primeval man ; in good time, and with God's fermission, the one will elucidate the other. The book "Primeva Man"
was at the commencement of the seance lying on a table in the
centre of the room,• at a distance of six or eight feet from us. The
second flower that was promised to my father was now placed on
the table near his band; none of us saw anything supporting it1
but Home perceived the flower moving in the air. A flower
came from the direction of where Horne was sitting towards
me; it drofped on the edge of the table close to me, and fell on
the floor: saw it in the air. Home and I perceived a hand
place something on the shelf under the window, and w:e saw. a
hand with a flower raised above the side of the table next the
window ; Home stretched out his hand towards it and the
flower dropped on the floor. Both my father and Home were
repeatedly touched ; I also, on four occasions, was most palpably
touched by a hand patting my knee. Some one remarked that
Major Blackburn had not been touched, soon after he declared

137
that be felt a hand touch his kneef· he asked who it was, and
the name "John" was spelled.
said, " Do you know who
John is?" he replied, " :My_ father's name was John, but I do not
know whether it was be that touched me." The words, " Yea,
your father," were spelled; and then, " We wisk John. also to see
the .nand j p_lace '!J?"r kand ohove, and then on, the JWwera."
:MaJor Blackburn dtd so ; we all heard the flowers rusthng, and
Home and I saw the hand doing it. The Major saw nothing
while his hand was over the flowers i but when he touched them1
he also saw the hand; tbol!gh indistinctly. We now heard loud
raps ul'on the small table O,.:and loqking round, found that it had
'been lifted up and placed upon the sofa E at c • so quietly was
it done that we should not'have noticed it, h~ the spirits not
called our attention by rapping upon it. My father asked if
t:hey had moved it in the same way last night ; the answer was,
"Yea." The chair G was IJlOVed up tog, and the table B was
moved close to it. The table B was then raised in the air
(no one touching it)1...and placed gently, but without hesitation,
upon our table A. The table B has four le_gs, like a camp stool;
they rested where the four dots are marked, close to the vases,
books and portraits, without touching any of them. We now
felt very strong vibrations in our table; it was tilted from side
to side, and so strongly towards my father's side, that he yut
out his hand expecting the small table B to fall over upon btm ;
but nothing moved. A bout this time we heard ~urious sounds
in the air ; Home said, " Do you hear their voices ? I will talk
never mind what I say the more I talk the plainer you will
hear them." He went on speaking for two or three minutes1
during which time we heard strange noises like high-pitched
voices at a little distance, the louder he spoke the fonder the
sounds became, they were most peculiar ; we could not hear
any articulate words. Mrs. Blackburn, who had retired to bed
in the room under that in which we were sitting, ~old us next
day that she had heard strange sounds; and she imitated them
so well, that we at once recognised that. she really had heard the
voices. Home then went into a trance, and said, " We
are so very glad to have been able to effect what has been
done for you; but the state of the external atmosphere, and the
fact of Dan being ill, are very much against us ; we have
not been able to do by any means all that we intended.
Dr. Elliotson was most anxious that you should have some
manifestations to-night, he hopes circumstances may_ be more
favourable to-morrow; he would like to come to you Dunraven,
and talk to you, and ente.r upon serious subjects. Dan will
awake now; when he does you will stay where you are, and
A dare will get a candle, that. y_ou may note down accurately_
the position of everything. We must now go. May God

138
Almighty, in His infinite ~oodness, for ever lead and guide you
nearer and nearer to Him.' Home havin~ awoke, I brought in
a candle, and we noted down the position m which we found the
different articles that had been moved. Some doubt was
expressed as to whether a chair in the middle of the room had
been stirred; a spirit rapped three times to say " Yes," that
u~

~

No. 63.-Seance, Marek 13th.
Present :-My father, Home, and myself. Home and I had
been a good deal affected and depressed to-day by the weathera strong, drying east wind had been blowin~ for two or three
days. After dinner when seated in the drawmg room we heard
raps upon the furniture, and Home soon suggested that we should
sit round the thble. I went to my bed room to put on a dressing
gown, placing my snuff box (the same heavy silver one
mentioned at page 26 in the account of some wonderful manifestations at Mr. Jones's house, at Norwood) in my waistcoat
pocket. On returning to the drawing room, I laid the snuff
box (why, I do not know) on a bookcase standing against the
wall at the side of the room opposite to the window where
stood the table at which m7 father and Home were already
seated. We had slight phystcal manifestations, and then Home
went into a trance. As usual, he began by arranging the
furniture ; he placed the small round table between his chair
and my fath_er's, and about a foot from our table, laid his
wife's miniature upon it and arranged the two vases of Bowers
in the same positions they had occu!'ied the previous evening.
He went over to the bookcase, sat dowt:J. on the ground, and
opened several books, as if looking for one in particular. He
brought over a. small prayer book with a cross on it, which he
pla.cen on the flowers in the vase near me. He then sat down
on the sofa, (viae diagram of the room, in last ni~ht's seance),
and almost immediately put his hand on the wmdow shelf,
touching a book which was lying there. He gave a slight start,
graspea the book, felt it all over, and then with great reverence
knee1ed down, placed the book against his forehead and on thetop of his head, apparently praying earnestly ; he then slowly
rose up, and holding the book he extended his arm a.t fulllengtli;
and appeared to be raised in the air several inches. The table
hid his legs and feet, but I think it was a case of elevation not
~longa.tio~, for he appeared to be moved a little forwards, and
m becommg shorter, he seemed to alight on the Boor. He
then placed the book on the table in exactly the same positio~
~ on the previous- evening. I guessed, by the effect the book
produced--so similar to what happened last night, that it was

139
the :eame, viz.; Pressense's " Life of Christ'·' which ·turn1ld out to
lJe the cmse. He now took a hu·ge railway plaid of mine1 and
pla'Cing it over his head and gathering it IU at the waist. so
as to resemble a monk's cowl or habit, he commenced walking
about the room. He stood between us and the bookcase
with his .back to ust aud ·was apparently elongated, but only
slightly. He then bowed himself repeatedly to the ground;
and was occupied for a little while abOut his dress, and doing
something with his hands which we could not well see as he
had his back turned to us ; it appeared as if he were going
through some religious ceremony. The :plaid began slip_ping
gradu8J.ly off him, but was replaced upon hts shoulders. (Home
said afterward~ before he awoKe that the plaid had been replar.ed
by spirits, I did not notice at the time whether he touched it
himself or not, and cannot therefore vouch for the fact.) A
second time it began to slip, and fell to the ~ound; Home
appeared to be very unhappy1 and taking the plmd, he placed it
on the floor, and seating lnmself at the end of the sofa, he
retreated along the edge by starts, his countenance showing
indications of great pain, his look being fixed all the time upon
the plaid; then l~aning his head upon his hand, he rocked himself
from side to side. His distress was most painful to witness ; he
groaned and sobbed as if in despair. After a while he took the
"Lif~ of Christ,'' and .kneeling down appeared to pray fervently,
pressmg the book to his forehead. He then sat down and began
to apeak somewhat as follows, "The same spirit is here that visited
AcLire in his room, and that was in the Abbey ; he was very
anxious to come to you once more, and took this opportunity
because you are alone. What Dan has been doing is intended as
an u.llegory, he· (the spirit) wished to shew you that when he
first teok the monkish habit, it raised and elevated himband the
grlliCe of God· was in him ; then, if you remember, an was
elevated in the air; afterwards he became less worthy of it1 and
ihe habit nearly fell off Dan, but was re-placed by the spirits;
Dan did not do it himself. But he committed a great crime-a
grievous sin against God and man-and he becQID.e altogether
unworthy of the habit, and it fell from him; then you saw the
misery and remorse he felt in· thinking of what he had done, and
how he had fa;llen from his flormer position, and had lost aU the
blessings he ought to have gained ; you saw also the comfort
tha4: prayer and the contemplation of the "Life of Christ" were to
him. Jile was so anxious to come to you again, for he wishes to
thank you; he· is not happy, but he is very different to what he
was ; then all was dark, now he sees a little glimmer of the
light of hope like a star leading him on. You have prayed
for him, you have prayed for all unhappy spirits m the
like condition as himself, and it is a comfort to him; he is

140
very thankful and declares he will do all he can to be of
service to you. He says, 'I pray you 1 thanks;' he does not
talk like the others, he does not speak English as they do.
He is going now and says again, 'I pray you, thanks.'
Home repeated the words, ' I pray you, thanks,' two or three
times, his voice becoming gradually fainter and fainter, as if to
signify that the spirit was slowly leaving us." He then spoke
about our last visit to the Abbey at Adare, and our ~ing
to Desmond Castle. He said something of this sort : ' You
made a mistake in taking the females to the ruins; we told you
not to take them (vide p. 99) ; and y-ou would have had more
manifestations had you not d'o:ge so. It did not so much signify
at the Castle, where the influence is quite different from that at
the Abbey. The influence of religion does not exist there, it
was a place of warfare, blood was shed upon the ground,
but the blood has long· since passed by chemical operations
into various forms, and has disappeared ; all the associations
are gone, there was no abiding mfluence about that place ;
even the chapel was not the same as the Abbey, for it was only
in times of danger that religious services were conducted there.
The Abbey is very different, there the ~round is hallowed
and consecrated by religion and prayer, and 1t will for ever bear
their impress ; that influence can never be lost, it apP.eals to
your souls and deeply affects you ; you all felt the difFerence
because in the Abbey, in the consecrated ~round, there is an
indestructible influence whereas in the Castle all is passed.
changed, and gone." Soon after this, Home awoke. We had
slight !?hysical manifestations, which gave me the impression
that owmg to. adverse circumstances, the ~pirits were unabl~ to
do what they mtended. Home suddenly satd, "I saw somethmg
bright move across the floor this minute." My father said he
also saw it. Directly after, we all heard sounds, as if some
metallic substance was being lifted up and thrown down again on
the floor under the table and the following message was given :
" Thill ill the last time that we will reprove you about a habit tliat
can do you no possihl6 good." Neither my father or Mr. Home

could at all understand this; but the meaning struck me at
once, and I saidz '' The message is for me, and it refers to my
taking snuff." ' Yes " was the reply. I said " Do you wish me
to give it up entirelyJ' "Don't ta7ee too muck," was rapped out.
I said, " I think they have brought my snuff-box across the
room from where I left it2 and that is what we heard under the
table." " YeR," was agam rapped. I asked if they wished to
give me the box, the answer was, "Yes." I saidJ.. "Shall! put
my hand down for it?" " No," was answered. tshortly after I
saw quite distinctly an arm and hand holding the snuff-box open,
rise from under the table, and moving to the shelf under the

141
window, tilt the box over slightly, and then shake out a quantity
of snuff upon some papers that happened to be there; the arm
and hand then withdrew, still retainmg the box. The hand was
more distinct than the arm, and appeared very white, and slightly
luminous. I could see the fingers quite plainly, and also the
manner in which they grasped the box; Home also saw the
band, arm, and box, my father could not, owing to the position
in which he was sitting, but on standing up he saw a dark
beap lying on the paper. I felt the box touch my knee, and
asked if I should put my hand down for it. " Yes," was
answered, by tapping my knee three times with it. I put
my hand under the table, and the box was placed in it by
a hand; I felt the tips of the fingers, and the inside part of
the thumb quite distinctly ; the skin felt quite natural but
somewhat wrinkled, conveying the idea of an aged hand. i said
"Are the snuff-box and the message given me by my grandfather?" The following message was given : " Your jiJ ther saw
it passinJJ, so did Dan. It is from your grandfather." I asked,
"Grandfather Goold?" " Yes, Goold." My father then expressed a desire to know what spirit had written out the
ornamental alphabet last night. The following was given :
" It was directed by the same one that directed the music j the
name was i'nd%'cated by the decorated letters." After a pause, the
words " Take instrument" were spelled out. Home took the
accordion, and it was beautifully played with tremolo effects.
My- father said something about wishing that it could be played
in his hand. Home said he thought they would do so, and Shortly
after his chair was pushed back from the table, which I supyosed
was done in order to -pass the accordion to my father ; tt was
not however given to h1m. We now saw a hand approach the
vase nearest me and take a flower from it, and presently the
flower was placed upon the edge of the table, and moved across
it in little jerks, as though it were flipped by a finger ; we
could see no hand or anything supporting it. The flower was
taken off the table, and the following message was given : " We
will give you the leaf you saw leave the table." Directlr
after my father was touched on the knee, and putting his hand
down, he felt first the flower and then fingers touch him ; he
then expressed a wish to feel the whole hand. Home said, " I
am sure they will try, they generally are able at first to
make only the fingers apparent to you." A spirit assented.
He kept his hand down for some little time, but at length
took the leaf, not succeeding in feeling more than the fingers;
this however occurred two or three times. The small table
then moved of itself, close up between my father and Home,
and Sacha's portrait was taken from it, and placed upon our
table. On two or three different occasions durmg the evening,

142

we heard curious sounds ; once my fatiter and. Home heard, as
it were, some one whistling; I could not perceive it at all. At
another time, we all heard a sound as of some one trying to
articulate near the door; this also ended in a whistling. On
another occasion,: we heud some .one -~g. to make their voice
audible to us, app~ently outmde the wmdow. Home now
went into a I trance ; wliile waiting- for him to commence
speaking, my father and I were talking about the absence of
, tests; 'he appeared mthe,r. annoyed, saying, that there had
been "in fact no' real tests Qf identity g!ven, and that everybody·was remarking the same thing. I mentioned the great
difficulty of giving really satiSfactory tests, and reminded him
that one striking effect had been given i (referring: to the
imitation of the organ .bellows and tremolo) and asked why
he did not try and question them in some way that would serve
as a test; it being as easy for him to recollect some past event
or conversation as it was for them to recall one, that he also
remembered. Home began speaking about the extreme difficulty
they had experienced in mak.mg ant, manifestations. "The state
of the external atmosphere is such, ' he said, " as to render it all
but impossible. We act by using certain emanations from
yo_u, flowin.g through your brains; now, the state of the w~ather,
thiS east wmd, has dried all that up, we have next to nothing to
work with. It affects you all, more especially Dan, bu.t·you
can all feel it and com~lained to-day of being depressed and
irritated ; un~er better Circumstances you would have, seen the
hand that carried Sacha's portrait, and the hand that held
the flower. You observed also that we could not carty
the flower over the table steadily, but were obliged to push
it along the surface." He then changed the subject to that of
t-ests; speaking to my father, he said," Do not be impatient, all
will come right in time, yott shall have tests given yon, you havd
already had some; remember that what you might think an
excellent ~st to~~' on ·reflection, you _might consider to be
worth nothmg. Would you have us recall a past conversation?
~hat might be done ,by mind-reading, and would not be at all a
good test. We are the best judges of what we do; we work for
others as well as for you who are here. We have a certain appointed
work, and it must be done; we have not really been able to do
half enough yet in the way_ of physical manifestations; circumstances have been so much against us, that we have failed in
nearly all we wished to effect. We know all the difficulties and
trials that surround you ; but you do not see the difficulties that
we have to contend against. Physical manifestations are very
necessary; be _patient and some day you may arrive at other
things. We do not ask you to have faith in us; we only ask
that you will be patient and prayerful in investigating." Home

143
had apparently great difficultr in speaking; be now called me
over to him, and bidding me s1t down, said " You understand all
about this, we cannot impress Dan properly with what we want
him to sayi· circumstances are so adverse that we have scarcely
any contro over him. Ah, I see the entrance at Adare ; your
mother is standing there, she appears to be giving directions
about planning the garden and walks." My father said,
" Do you mean the lod~e ~ate ?" " No, no ; 1 mean the
little gate where the notlce 1s put up, ' These grounds are
strictly private;' she is standing there between the two clumps
of shrubs; ah, it is all confused, I cannot make it out. Your
father intends going to the Abbey some night by himself,
he wants to find out about those birds; he will see a I!Ort of bright
luminous cloud ; your mother will be there." My father said,
"But I never had any intention of going to the Abbey."
Home appeared much astonished ; " Are you sure?" he said.
"Yes," said my father, "quite sure." " Well," said Home,
" that is very strange, the idea must have been in your mind,
and you have forgotten it, for some of us had arranged what
to do the night that you went; one spirit was going to make
the same whistling sound like a bird, and you were to see
the luminous cloud." I asked, " Were they then not real
birds that we heard whistling ?" " No, the7 were not birds."
Home then threw himself back, and taking my hand, said,
" We cannot influence Dan prolerly, your father had better ask
questions." My father said, " thought Elliotson was going to
liave made some experiments." " Yes, he was anxious to, and
tried, but he could not succeed ; he attempted to make his voice
heard by the door, and instead of being like a voice, it sounded
to you like a whistle; the conditions are very bad, we have been
able to do scarcely anything to-night, besides your minds are
not favourable-they are disturbed, and out of harmony." My
father declined to put any questions, so I asked about a certain
disputed answer of Dr. Elliotson's that had been given us in the
gallery at Adare. Home said " Your father was right : he
did say 'Yes ;' afterwards he said he would come by the sea; you
were mistaken." After a pause, he said " Your grandfather is
really anxious about your taking so much snuff; he did not
like to put it any stronger than he did in saying that it
could do you no possible good; but he is anxious about it,
because he thinks it will harm your nervous system. He
says, if you like to take an occasional pinch, that will not
hurt you; but he does not like to see you take as much as
you do at present. (turning to my father) Dr. Elliotson is here
and has brought a girl with him: her name is Dawson, she is
short and appears so stooping as to be almost deformed; I cannot make out her Christian name. Harriet,-Harriet; no, that

144
is not it: she will not tell me-how very odd!" My father said:
" I have a very vague recollection of a mesmeric patient of the
name of Dawson; but I don't think her name was Harriet."*
Home now Baid, " Dan must awake, Adare, go back to your
place." Home being exhausted; we went at once into the dining
room to supper. During the whole time that I was sit.ting
by Home, I could see the shadowy form of a figure appearing
white and slightly luminous, standing close to my father.
He perceived nothing. In moving to my place, I could not
avoid passing right through the figure, but as I approached
it, it disappeared. Soon after we had gone into the dining
room, my father being at the table, and Home sitting on the
floor, near the fireplace, with his hand resting against the wall,
he suddenly said: "A dare, I hear raps for the alphabet;" and the
following was given: "Ellen JJaw-" "Oh, Dawson," my
father said. " Yes," was rapped out. Home said, "Ellen
Dawson, Ellen Dawson ; Who on earth is she? I never heard of
such a person." "Oh," my father replied, " It is the Christian
name of a mesmeric patient which you could not make out in your
trance." Now this is a curious fact. The name Ellen having been
in my father's mind for a moment, had Home mentioned it in his
trance, it mitrht have been attributed to ordinary clairvoyance
or mind-readmg on his part ; but coming as it did through raps
it could not be accounted for in that way. My father b.ad said
to me in the course of the evening, " I have not the same
confidence in what is said in a trance; it mal be accounted ·
for by mind-reading or clairvoyance ; but if a name or
a message be given through raps, even if it be read from
my mind, it must be attributed to some intelligence other
than that of the medium or any one in the room. t Directly
after the seance1 I poured the snuff back into my box, from the
paper on the ledge under the window where we had seen it
deposited. After su~per, my father said, "Let us go and see
if the snuff is there.' I said that I had already removed it ;
but we went and found remnants of snuff still on and among the
papers, quite sufficient to prove that it had been there.-A.

* My father aays that he h&d a notion Ellen was the name; however, he did
not mention this aloud.
t On reference to the Zoist, Ellen Dawson appears as a patient of Mr. Bind's
and a clairvoyant. My father recollects her at Dr. Elliotson's. She is mentioned
in a64fiC/1 No. 14, p. 84 in connection with Mrs. Hennings and Dr. Elliotson.

145

[The following occurrences were witnessed and recorded by me
after Mr. Home's return to London]:-

No. 64.-Seance, AsMey House, March 29th, 1869.
Present:-Mr. Rudall, Mr. McKenzie, Mr. Jencken, Home,
and myself. After a short time we experienced slight physical manifestations, raps, vibrations, &c., &c. The table was
raised about one foot off the ground ; it was raised a second
time about two feet, and after remainn1g stationary in the air for
some seconds, it rose to the height of at least five feet, rolling
and swaying with a movement like that of a ship at sea; it
descended slowly with a strong vibratory motion, accompanied
by a sound resembling that of a railway train. I asked if these
Eeculiar movements had any definite meaning; the answer was
' Ye.~." By asking several questions which were answered
" Yes" or " No," it appeared that the movements had reference
to me, and that I ought to understand the meaning. Flowers
and fern leaves were brought from the chimney piece and given
to us. We now~ at Mr. Rudall's suggestion, shut the folding
doors, thereby excluding all light save that entering by the
window. Home went into a trance. He clapped his hands
(the sign adopted by Adah Menken to si~nify her presence), and
going to the window, folded the curtams round him, leaving
only his head clear. We all saw a very curious appearance
form itself above his head ; it looked at first like a lace handker•
chief, held out by a stick or support of some sort ; soon however
it became more distinct and appeared to be a shadowy human
form enveloped in drapery ; 1t was about two feet in length.
Some one present remarked that it exceedingly resembled a
"vignette" heading one of Adah Menken's poems. Home said
(speaking as lfenken) " Yes, that is it, that is what I wish to
imitate; I will try and make my form visible to yon." The
surface of the wall to Home's right became illuminated three or
four times; the lignt apparently radiating from a bright spot in
the centre. Across the portion of wall thus illuminated we
rei>eatedly saw a dark shadow :Pass i it appeared to me to be
rather the shadow cast by a sohd substance than the actual form
itself. Home's collar stud dropped on the floor, and a spirit
brought it and placed it on my head, touching my brow while
doing so ; Home remarked that it was shining like a little star
upon my forehead, he told me to take care of it until Dan
should awp.ke. After Home awoke we bad some more physical
K

146
manifestations, flowers were again brought to us, we were
all touched Mr. Rudall received several messages, apparently
2
from his father, the clock was made to strike in answer to so.me
question, we heard a heavy step in the paBBage and the foldmg
doors were opened and shut, a sofa was moved from the wall to
our table, and a chair was carried acroBB the room.

No. 65.-Seance, .A.skle11 House, .A.prll Bra.
Present :-Mrs. Gregory Miss Dou~las, Mr. Charles
Blackburn Mr. FuJler the Master of Lmdsay, Home, and
myself. We had tolerably strong physical manifestations, lasting
for a short time, after which Home went into a trance. He
walked about and was elongated in the usual manner. He then
stood still before us, and stretching out his arms to their full
length, a palpable elongation took place in them. I saidi "Can
ron manage that we may test that in some way ; may stand
JUSt in front of you, or will you place yourself against the wall ?"
Home replied, "Yes, certainly, we will do both." I accordingly placed myself just in front of him, with my arms
extended along and touching his; his arms were elongated four
or five inches, the others coul~_ judge of the extent pretty well
by comparison with mine. While his arms appeared to be
increasing in length, his chest became greatly expanded, and
he said to me, " You see how it is, the extension is from the
chest." He then placed himself against the wall, and extended
his arms to their full natural length ; I made a pencil mark at
the tips of his fin~ers. His left arm was then elongated, I
held the pencil agamst the wall, suffering it to be pnshoo along
b7 his fuigers, until he told me to make another mark. His
nght arm was then elongated, and I marked the movement in
the same manner. The total elongation as ascertained by this
means, amounted to 9! inches. Home now stood by Miss
Douglas, and talked to her for a considerable time, mentioning
the sr,irits who were about her, recalling past circumstances of
her life, and impressing upon her, that it was in her power to be
of very great service to the cause of Spiritualism ; he spoke also
a good deal to Mrs. Gregory. W alkmg over to the fire-place,
he took from thence, with his hand, a red-hot glowing ember,
about the size of a small orange. Mrs. Gregory became
nervous, fearing that he would request her to take it, he
however went to Miss Douglas and said1 " Now if you have
sufficient faith, let me place this coal m your hand i " she
replied, " I have faith, but I cannot overcome the physical
dread, pray do not ask me to take it." Upon this, Home

147
said, " If you would only allow me to place it in your hand
it would not burn you ; it does not burn Dan; it would not
harm him" (pointing to Lindsay). He then placed the coal
which had by this time become black, on Lindsay's head, but
almost immediately took it off, and saying, "That is not of
much use aa an experiment1 for the natural heat has almost
left the coal,'' he crumbled It in his hand and then threw it in
the fireplace. Presently he took another red-hot ember from the
fire, and holding it in his hand, spoke a few words to :Miss
Douglas on the subject of faith. She held out her hand, and
he placed the coal in it. Miss Douglas was not in the least
burned, and said that it felt rather cold, like marble. Mter
allowing it to remain there a few seconds, Home took the coal
and requested Miss Douglas to touch it ; she placed her fingers
near it, but withdrew them immediately, saymg that it burned
her.* He then placed it in Mr. Blackburn's hand previously
asking if he had any faith, who replied that he had. Mter he
had held it a short time lte said it became hotter. Home then
took the ember, threw it away, smiled, and seemed pleased at the
success of the experiment. He now sat down and turning to
Lindsay, said4 "Ah, what a pity it was that those little soonces
that you held here in the winter were broken up (referring to
two or three occasions on which Lindsay, Captain Smith
Home, and I had sat together). We told you that we wished
to speak on some very interesting subjects, and we would
have done so ; we were anxious also to have entered upon the
subject of the origin of certain of the ceremonies of your
Church. We have such difficulties to contend with ; we had
got the conditions so very favorable at that time, the party was
harmonious and we could have done so much ; but then, you
see, when we have arranged everything on the spiritual side, it
is all broken up on the material -on your side." Turning to
one of those present, he said, "That arran~ement of seven with
which we impressed Fred (Fuller). Oh I if that could have been
managed it would have been of such use. We could and would
have conducted a series of experiments so wonderful, so clearly
proved, and so easy to record., that it would have been impossible
to doubt them." (This had reference to an impression that
seven were to form themselves into a society for the study of
occult science). In reply to Fuller, he said, "We still have
hopes about that arrangement; we think there may possibly
be a future for it." Home now spoke in a totally different

* I am informed by Miss Douglas and the Master of Lindsay that Lord
Adare has omitted to atatll that Mr Home put this coal between his coat and
shirt under the arm, and tbat no mark ot' smgeing or burning was visible on
the shirt.-D.
K2

148
tone of voice, addressing us in the same style and delivery
as in the portions of seances recorded in pages 84, 85, and
91. He said something to this effect: "You think that
baptism is a thing of to-day-a ceremony instituted but 1,800
years ago I Come with me away to the banks of the distant
Ganges, travel with me far back in the annals of time, and
I will shew you races of men dwelling there who worshipped
senseless gods of wood and stone-and yet not much more
senseless than the god that some among you worship now-and
who had the same ceremony of baptism, which was obligatory for
them before an infant could be admitted to the benefits of their
church and religion. Will you travel still further back with
me into ages long anterior to this, and see the altars dripping
with blood-aye, with human blood-and the priest decked with
flowers standing in his place and the people Iiowing down, and
the sacrifices offered. Blood I see on every page-blood! blood I
blood I True it is, that in later ages it was that of bulls and of
goats, of doves and pigeons. And what is your religion now to
many of you but blood ; still the same-blood to appease a
God I Ah, it is fearful-it is too horrible, blood I and sacrifice I
to propitiate your God, your Maker, your Father, the infinitely
perfect and loving Creator of all things." Home spoke at great
length on these subjects; but I cannot recal to mind the
exact language he made use of. Mter he awoke we had some
curious manifestations. A small camp chair was raised off the
floor and carried round the table, touching each of us in turn,
and finally was placed on the centre of the tabl~, where it remained. The sofa was moved up to us. We received no
messages during the seance.

No. 66.-.Askley House.
On the 4th or 5th of the month, in the evening, I was seated
at the table in Home's room at Ashley House writing · he was
seated at the oP.posite side, reading ; we heard .raps ~pon the
door; Home said " Your grandfather has come m, do you not
see him sittinK_in that chair yonder ? " " I see no one " I
answered ; " Which grandfather do you mean ? " " Your
father's father ; you will at any rate hear him." I heard a
sound as if some one sitting on the chair he had mentioned had
put his foot on the ground. Home, while speaking went into
a tra~ce. . The c~air moved !ery slowly up to the table (no one
touchmg It) a distance of eight feet eleven inches. ~' He is
moving the chair," Home said, " He is pleased to be able to do
that, he says you never saw a much prettier manif~station than

149
that; Ah I he has gone over there now." Another chair
moved close UJ;l to me, a distance of about a foot. Home said
"He is sitting m that chair near you; he has come because he
wishes to speak to you; you are rather in difficulties he thinks."
He then spoke to me about certain private matters. Presently
Home 'Said " Your mother does not wish you to think that she
forgot you because she said so little about your marriage; she
could not say more then, ant! after all what could she do more
than pray God's blessing upon you in this as she would in
everything that you undertake, honestly, and with a desire to
do that which was right. She bas much more to say on the
subject, but not now."

No. 61.-Ashley House.
On the night of the 6th I got home about eleven o'clock.
I found Home already in bed. He told me that he was very
unwell; that he bad left the house; on his way to Gower Street
that he bad suddenly lost consciousness on turning out of
Ashley Place, and that he remembered nothing more until he
found himself in bed. Home soon went to sleep and began to
talk and mutter ; after what he bad said I attributed it to
bodily illness, and did not pay much attention] however I soon
found that he was in a trance. The first distinct words he
uttered were "But I am not an Hindoo." The room shook
for some minutes very violently as if people were dancing
on the floor below. Home said, " Oh, do stop that dancing,
they must not do it, it is not kind." The shaking of the
floor almost immediately ceased; I asked if people had been
dancing below, but received no answer. Home turned to me
and speaking in a firm loud voice, said, " Ah, dear me the
poor little do~ has gone!" " What dog?" I asked. "Why,
little white s1ster*-she has gone just now. Are you not
sorry, Adare? They will be so gneved about it. She bas
passed from earth; but she is not destroyed, she is like
a little spark of electricity, now a small globe of light, it is
moving on, in time it will come in contact with some other
substance and be absorbed." "Absorbed into what?" I asked.
" Oh, into some higher form of animal life. Some spirits could
catch it, for although I sai.d it was li.ke a little globe of light,
still you know on leaving the body it had the appearance of the
little dog, and some spirits might capture it and keep it for a
• A little dog belonging to Mrs. S.C. Hall. Home, 1 believe, knew that
the dog was ill; but could not have heard of its death, which took place between
10 and 11 o'clock. I had no idea. tha.t the dog was even ill.

150

time, but eventually it would be absorbedi for that is the law of
nature, and they could not overrule it. t has no sensation or
consciousness now; its condition of being, its organization, was
not sufficientlr. hi~h to permit of its retaining its individuality."
" But " I sa1d, ' are there not animals in the other world?''
" Oh dear yes, God in his goodness has made variety in the
spirit world, as he has in your world; there would be no beauty
without variety ; there are dogs and horses and many animals;
The Red Indians were not wrong in their ideas of the ' happy
hunting ground,' their Seers saw these things in visions,
and they really exist." " But," I observed, "&though they
might hunt they could never kill the animals." " Oh no, of
course they could not shed their blood, but they could conquer
them ; it is difficult for you to understand, but you know yourself that the real charm of all hunting consists rather in showing
your superiority over the animal, in overcoming it, than in the
mere shedding of blood and killing." " But," I asked 1 "if
some animals retain their individuality, and continue to exiSt in
the next world under the same form that they had here, and
others are as you say absorbed, where is the line drawn? what
is it that causes one to be absorbed while another retains its..
individuality?" " Oh, I do not say that the animals in the next
world ever existed on earth, it does not seem to me that they
did, I only know that they are there, and I see that the life
of animals upon earth is eventually absorbed into other forms.
I do not know that your animals ever continue to exist in the
spirit-world."
" You heard those Hindoos dancing just now?" "Yes," I
answered, " I heard what I thought were people dancing on the
floor below us." "Oh, it was not caused by mortals, there is
no one living on that floor now; thel were spirits--Hindoos."
" What on earth do they want here," asked. " Well, they are
very anxious about their Trinity." "But why should that bring
them here?" " They do not seem to have any special object in
being here, but they are occupied with that subject, and that is
why they are on earth; they are very advanced Hindoos, and
theJ want to prove that their Trinity is not different from your
Tnnity as 7ou suppose ; there is a ~ood deal going on now in
the world m the way of investigatmg these subjects. These
Hindoos are anxious about this; they say there is not so much
difference as you think ; for instance, they assert that their
second person Christna was incarnated as yonr second person
Christ was." Question : "Had they ajersonal devil?" " Yes ·
and they sal that Christna was tempte of the devil in the sam~
way as Christ." The substance of Home's conversation after
this I forget; it led somehow to his saving, "When this zone

151
shall have become torrid, of course the forms of animal and
vegetable life, will be much changed." Question : " Do you
mean that the temperature is changing?" " Oh, ;r,es, these
will be the torrid zones, and the torrid zones will become
cooler; there is a very marked change taking place now."
Question : " I suppose the chan~e will be so gradual, that
life will not be affected?" " Life will not be affected, the
change is gradual, but it is quite apparent to us." Question:
"Has the heat of the two last seasons anything to do with
this, or was it quite abnormal?" "No, it was not entirely
abnormal, it had to do with the great change that is taking
place." Question : " Then will the frigid zones round the
poles become warmer?" " Oh yes, certainlv ; do you know
It is true that there is land to the N orih beyond where
explorers have yet penetrated, and there are tribes of men
Iivm~ there, and they ;et retain the traces of a. by-gone
civiliZation. They ace o the old Semitic or original Hebrew
race.n Question: " But how could the,Y ever get there; it
could not have been in historic times?' In answer to this
questionJ. I distinctly heard a voice quite different to Home's
say, " Uh dear, no." Home said, "Did you hear him?"
"Yes " I answered, " I heard him quite plain." " I am glad
you did;" he said "Oh dear, no." He is rather difficult to
understand, this spirit; he seems a little confused, but he declares
he has seen these people, and that he could bring the spirit of
one of them with him. He says there are distinct traces of
Hebrew to be found in their language. You know there are
traces of the old original Hebrew in the language of the
Brahmins. The ancient Hebraic tribes were a most migratory
people, always wandering and fighting; their idea even of God
was a warlike, bloodthirsty being, and they were always fighting
and quarrelling among themselves and their neighbours, and
doing so in the name of the Lord. They have wandered all
over the earth, and have left their marks in many places. There
are signs of a civilization that you know nothing of, in North
America i it was derived from the same source. Historians
have conJectured that they crossed the narrow channel of a few
miles in breadth; and they are correct. As to those people
I spoke of in the North, they penetrated there long before
history ; oh, there were lions and tigers in these latitudes
at that time. The Hebrews were very bad historians;
they kept no records; tradition served as history for them,
even in ver:y much later times ; they were ve~ careless,
and kept their records very badly." I remarked, 'What an
interestin~ thing it would be to reach these people if they
exist." ' This spirit declares that it will be done; he says there

152
is an expedition fitting out now, and he thinks it will ?e
successfuL" "Fitting out in England?" I asked. "No m
America; it seems that this spirit is interested in it, and that is
the reason why he is on earth." " Have I ever known him ?" I
e:J;J.quired, "Oh dear no, he has left the earth long ago." "How
interesting it would be," I remarked, "to ~o on such an
expedition." Home laughed at me and said, ' Yes, you look
very like going on that sort of an expedition just now; look
and feel very strong don't you, just at present; quite fit to go
through that awful bitter cold?" Home reverted to the
Hindoos, and then began speaking about Sphitualism in
general, " Oh l " he said, " what a blessing it is to know that
the world will one day be spiritualised, that mortal man in the
flesh will walk and talk face to face with his brother, who has
left the body." " Well," I observed, " I do not see much
likelihood of that time coming soon ; if it were so, death
would no longer have any terrors, it would not be even a
separation." "You cannot see it, but I can; what I say will
inevitably come true. Death ought not to be considered a
separation, death is a development, and should have no terrors;
was it not part of Christ's mission to take away the sting and
terror of death?'~
I began speculating as to the probability of the population
ever becomin~ excessive over the whole earth. Home said,
"No, that Will not be the case; when countries become much
over populated, the people are carried off by epidemics, by
emigration and other causes." But emigration," I said, " only
relieves one country at the expense of. another. If population increases as it does at present, the time must come when there will
be no outlet for emtgrants; and surely it cannot be natural or
right that people should be carried off by plagues and famines."
"Epidemics and famines are quite in the natural order of things;
and the misery resulting from them may seem much greater to
you than it in reality is." "But still," I insisted, "such things
do cause great distress." " Yes, to a certain extent you are of
course right ; and there are other causes that will eventually act
to check th~ increase of the human race. Cannot you understand
that men, b;r cultivating the intellectual qualities, the higher
organs contamed in the upper portion of the brain will arrive at
such a condition, that their sole gratification and pleasure will be
in the pursuit of all that is beautiful, harmonious, and good ?-the
upper portions of the brain will become more fully developed,
tl:i.e lower parts being neglected will become less and less, the
animal nature weaker, and man will no longer find the same
pleasure in. ~e g:ratification ~f his lusts ~d passions ; man will
become sptntualised, and will be very different to what he is

153
now." Soon after this, Home awoke. He spoke for such a
length of time, that a great deal of what he said has entirely
escaped my memory.
Allan Kardec died on Sunday the 4th. On the Wednesday
or Thursday following, as Home and I were in the dressing
room, at about 11 o'clock in the morning, we heard loud
raps on the floor between us. The alphabet was asked for and
the followin~ messa&'e given: "Bon Jour, mon ami Daniel,
Je crois q?J,e ;e me suM trompe un peu la bas en fait d'idem.t!'te,
.Allan Kardec." Home asked a few questions which were
answered by raps.

No. 68.-.Ashley House, .Aprill Oth.
Last night Mr. J - - and I walked to Ashley House with
Home from Fitzroy Square. Home complained of feeling
nervous, as is usually the case after an unsuccessful seance. He
sat down at the piano, and commenced playing ; while so engaged
he went into a trance. I ex~_guished one of the candles, and
placed the other on the floor. We heard sounds as of some one
walking up and down the passaget and raps upon the door and
walls. Mr. J - - felt, during the whole evening, a strong
cutTent of very cold air blowing about him. Home walked
about the room apparently in great distress ; he moaned and
sat down on the floor and seemed to mourn over something.
Suddenly the character of the influence changed. Home came
over to where I was sitting on the sofa, and made me lie at full
len~th upon it ; by the attitude he assumed I recognized the
spint he calls "the nameless doctor." He stood beside me
apparently lost in thought for a minute or two, then kneeling
down, made me unbutton my waistcoat, began sounding my
chest as doctors do ; he then rubbed and patted over the chest,
loins, and legs, occasionally turning round as if to ask advice
from some one ; his efforts were principally directed to my:
right side, he frequently pointed to it and turned his head as tf
to call some one's attention to that particular spot. He placed
his mouth to my right side and exhaled a deep breath; the heat
I felt was something extraordinary. When he had finished,
Home seemed pleased with what he had done, smiled and rubbed
his hands as if delighted. The first influence now seemed to
return ; he sat down on the floor evidently in great distress;
then lay flat on his back and extended his arms in the form of a
cross. His body became rigid and he was palpably elongated,
and was almost raised off the ground; he may have been com-

154
pletely off, but I think not; it wll.a evident, however, by ~e
swaying vibratory motion of his bod:r that it was not restmg
naturally on the ground,. While this was taking place two
chairs moved slightly of themselves. Home got up, knelt
upon one knee, and simulated a man endeavouring to raise
a heavy body. He appeared to fail once or twice; at last
he raised it, and supporting it on his knee1 canied it with
g-reat difficulty to a chair near at hand, where he placed
It and sat down on the floor, apJ>arently much exhausted.
He beckoned to me, and when I aJ:f!oached told me in
French to bring a chair, and sit near
; I did a~and he
spoke in French somewhat to the following effect. " VV hat we
have been trying to represent to you by acting, is the condition
of Allan Kardec. The body that was extended on the ground in
the form of a cross, and that was elongated, was his; he suffered
a good deal for truth; and in symbolism as you know, the cross
signifies truth ; but then he was not enlightened ; he refused the
light, he was obstinate_, and would not enlighten himself upon it,
and that makes him unhappy now; it seems to weigh upon him, he
cannot raise himself above his former ideas and prejudices. We
tried to represent that by the difficulty of raising the heavy
body. He is sitting here in this chair; he does not move; he
would not come into the room at first, you heard him walking
in the passage. There are many spirits here of his 'entourage.'
Of his followers, and he had many of them, some of the spirits
will not come into the roomz I know not why; you hear them in
the passage ; there are two JUSt behind here that I do not like at
all.' Presently Home gave a cry almost amounting to a scream
and shuddering pointed to the opposite aide of the room and said
in English, " Who are those fearful looking men? Oh, what are
they doing? They are eastern, their feet are bare, as also their
legs up to the knees, they will not show their faces, they cover
them with a sort of cloak ; oh this is horrible, they are hiding
and lying in wait for something They are so totally undeveloped, so earthy and material, they could shed blood, they
could take man's life." " Do you mean," I said, " to tell me that
these spirits could kill a man?" "Oh yes," he answered, "they
could, but they can do no harm here at all ; it was in a ci~ where
the sun cast broad alternate bands of light and shadow ; I can see
them among the olive trees gliding in and out ; they are so fearfully undeveloped, so material ; they could harm a man if he had
not pow;er over them; t~at must come by.prayer." I asked Mr.
J - - If he had any Idea what all this meant. He replied
"Yes, I think I kno~." .Home got up, took a striped rug ~ff
the sofa, and covermg his shoulders, nead, and face with It
began walking about the room in a stealthy manner, hiding

155
behind the furniture, and crawling about flat upon the ground,
apparently lying in wait for some one. Suddenly he put his
hand upon the candle, and left us in almost total darkness. I
could just distinguish him gliding about the room, and crawling
on the floor. At one time he stood up and was elongated; he
came close to me and saidt ~' What did they do to his brother?"
"Whose brother?" said .Mr. J--. "Why, yours." "Oh,
good gracious," cried Mr. J - - · "How strange·" and so
saying he sank back in his chair. ' Home added, " He is not
dead ; he is 9.uite safe." I spoke two or three times to Mr.
J-- after thts, but received no answer. Home said, "He is
under influence." Presently, Home sat down on the floor beside
me and said, "He is under influence; the tall strong man who
i11 influencing him will move something." A chair behind me
moved of itself. Home leaned his head against my knee ; it
appeared most extraordinarily heavr;· I placed my hand upon
it, and the wei~ht was removed. ' Did you feel," he said," the
weight on Dan s head? That was the influence of only one of
those men; they are so strong, so very material." Mr. J - became much affected; he sobbed viOlently, seemed in ~at
distress, ~poke in Arabic with great rapidity, and said, 'Oh,
S--1 S---1" (his brother's name), and then "Chalini l
chalini !" which means "Leave me I leave me!" I began asking
Home about what had puzzled me very much, namely, his having
asserted that spirits could do bodily harm to man. He said,
"Yes, they can; I will tell you later. Dan must awake to take
the influence off J--." Home suddenly awoke, and asked
what was going on. I told him that Mr. J - - was under
influence, upon which he took his hands1 and he immediately
awoke, and was much astonished at finding that he had been
crying violently.
I slept in Home's room ; after we had gone to bed he went
into a trance and said " Of course not ; why of course they could
not Adare." "Could not do what?" I asked. "Why could not
do harm here." " You are referring to those spirits," I said.
" I never thought they could do harm here; but could they hurt
as man under any circumstances?" "Yes1 they could; you see his
brother had been mixed up in some magteal incantations, where
sacrifices where offered. Now, if a man sold himself to such
spirits as those, if he gave himself to them for anyjurpose1 they
could do as they liked with him." "But," I aske ''could ther,
take his life ? Could. they for instance strike him with a knife? '
"Certainly, why not? you have seen table, chairs and heavy
objects moved by a spirit, why not a knife also." "But that
would not be fair play, he could not strike them back," I said.
" No, he could not ; but they could not touch him unless he was

156
willing. You see it would be necessary that he should have
a.llowed them to gain power over him, if for any purpose he did
that,· they could then so use their influence as to make him do
whatever they chose. They did not hurt his brother they
carried him off, it was as if he had fallen among bandits.,- There
is more truth than you suppose in the stories of the old magicians,
and the precan tions they adopted to protect them_selves from the
undeveloped and material inffuences with which they surrounded
themselves. Your mother stood just behind you when Dan's
head became so heavy against your knee ; she influenced you to
put your hand on his head, she was anxious a little about Dan,
a little fearful that he might be hurt. Of course you know no
harm could come to him." Home now awoke, he had a distinct
impression of the sort of influence that had been about him, and
said "I feel very strange so dreadfully crafty and sly, if I
were to give way to my feelings I should do all sorts of curious
things, I should hide behind the curtains, and go to Mr. J--'s
room and try to frighten him." I told Home a little of what
had occurred so as to account for these strange feelings.

No. 69.
[The following account of what occurred to Mr. J-- during
the night, was related to me by him two or three days
afterwards. He said] : "I went to bed in the spare room, but did not immediately
put out the candle. I was lying with my face turned toward's
the wall, when suddenly the bed-clothes were pulled so violently
as nearly to uncover me. I jumped up in bed, and the movement
ceased. After watching a few minutes I lay down and the
clothes were again sharply pulled. This was repeated three
times ; I could not detect anything touching the clothes, in fact
the moment I sat up to watch all movement ceased. While this
was going on I heard distinct raps all about the room. I now
turned round and saw a number of figures near the window,
moving about, apparently conversing; they were of a grey or
whitish colour, the features in profUe were very distinct, and
the hands especially so ; but I could not see how they rested on
the floor, as the lower ex~remities finished in vapour or cloud. I
used every means in my power to induce them to look at me

'* I am not certain whether this sentence conveys Home's meaning quite
correctly.

157
and answer my questions, by raps or othel'Wise, but in vain. I
begged them to speak, and exercised my will as forcibly as
I could to make them do so but they would not take the
slightest notice of m!'j I accordingly got out of bed and slowly
approached them. when I was within about three paces of
them they divided in two rows on each side of the window,
as if to allow me to pass, and turning round, bent their
heads and looked down towards me ; at the next step they
all separated, and I experienced a feeling of intense cold;
when close upon them they disappeared. I walked slowly backwards, and when I had retreated three or four yards, the forms
became visible. I went to bed but never closed my eyes;
the figures remained near the window moving about as if
in conversation, until a quarter to seven when they disappeared. After going towards them the first time, in order to
m-ake sure that I was thoroughly awake, I went to a cupboard,
opened it, and found a box of brown biscuits of which I ate
two ; I also found a Highland sporran, and read the monogram
on the hilts of the knives. After dressing in the morning, I
examined the cui>board, found the box of biscuits, and ascertained
that I had read the mono~ams correctly ; I also walked all over
the house during the mght in search of Home's room, but
could not find it. I spoke to the figures repeatedly in English
not in Arabic."

No. 70.
[The following strange story was also related to me on the same
occasion by Mr. J--. As it evidently bears upon the
occurrences related in p. 154, I have determined to break
through the rule hitherto adhered to of relating only what
took place in my own presence. I had the story direct
from Mr. J--, who received it from his brother. Mr.
J-- at my request wrote to his brother in the East, to enquire
if anything had happened to him on the Friday when the
strange occurrences mentioned in pp. 1541 155, took _place,
but no answer has as yet been received.J
"About three years ago, my brotherS. was residing in my
father's house, in the town o f - - in the East, studying
' Nahawi,' that is the grammatical Arabic, the language of the
'Koran'-quite a different tongue from the vernacular. One
day he was much astonished at receiving an answer in
'Nahawi' from a poor labouring man, to whom he had

158
addressed some question ; he entered into conversation1 and
found that this man was well educated and he also noticed that
in the evening he was dressed in a style quite incompatible with
his rank of life ; in fact he appeared much superior to the class
to which he belonged. One da(,, soon after their first meeting,
this labourer whom I will call the native' as I cannot mention
his name, told my brother that he had something of importance
to communicate if he would promise secrecy. He then mformed
him that in a field outside the town, belonging to his father,
there was something buried that he was determined to obtain
by means of what in the East is called 'magic;' he said that
he had already tried but had failed, that he was determined
to succeed even at the risk of his life, but that it was necessary
for him to obtain the co-operation of some member of the
family ; if my brother would assist him, he promised to give
up anything of value that might be found bargaining only to
be allowed to keep a certain scroll or parchment. My brother
agreed, and on the following Friday they commenced operations.
I may mention here that in Mahomedan countries it is supposed
that Friday is the only day on which magic can be successfully
practised. S. and the native left the town just before the
gates were shut, at sunset, and proceeded to the field in question ;
arrived there they sat down cross-legged on the ground, at right
angles to each other, and about four or five yards apart, the
native warning S. not to mind him, and on no account to
scream, as that would involve considerable danger to both. The
native commenced burning incense and repeating invocations or
prayers, bowing his head to the ground ; very soon loud thrusts
or blows were heard on the ground and several forms became
visible, issuing apparent~ out of the earth. These figures
commenced walking round the two men. On passing S. each
fi~e stooped down and threw a handful of dust into his face ;
h1s clothes were covered with dust afterwards. On passing the
native, each figure struck him on the head; he, however, took
no notice whatever of the·m, merely bowing his head down,
adding fresh incense1 and mumbling something to himself. After
a time the figures disappeared into the ground, and the native
said that all was over for that night.
" On the second Friday the same ceremonies were gone
through, except that the incense was of a different kind, with
like results · the forms appeared, but suddenly a tremendous
shower of dry bones fell over them. S. coula not tell where
they came .from but they appeared to come from behind him so
as to be directed against the native. The native jumped up and
said that something had occurred to interrupt the arrangements,
and that they must immediately go.

159

" On the third Friday the usual invocatio~s and incense burning
were gone through, and the figures apl'eared and commenced
walking round, and throwing dust as on the first occasion. Suddenly the figure of a gigantic black man appeared out of the
ground, armed with a great stick or club, with which he
belaboured the native in the most fearful manner; while a great
commotion took place among the other figures-instead of
moving slowly round, they were all rushing about as if in a state
of great agitation. The native took no notice at first of the
blaCk man, merely crouching himself closer to the ground,
increasing the ardour of his incantations, and adding fresh
incense. At length, however, he said in Arabic, ' Well, well,
be it so ; if you must have it, you shall.' After this, all was
quiet.
" On the following Friday they again went out ; but this
time the native carried with him a live lamb concealed under his
burnous, which, after they were seated on the ground, he proceeded to kill and skin. They went through tlie usual incense
burning, &c., &c.; and first the figures appeared, and then the
black man rose from out of the groun<f, and advanced in a
menacing attitude towards the native, preparing to strike him
with his club. The native held up the lamb to him, and the
figure took it and disappeared again into the earth. S.
declares that the earth literally opened, and that the black figure
descended, bearing the lamb through the aperture. In a few
minutes the black figure reappeared, and a conversation ensued
between him and the native; the latter seemed very angry,
declared that he had complied with all their requests, that the
black man was not the spuit that he wanted at all, and that he
had been duped. The altercation was suddenly interrupted by
a shower of dry bones, upon which the figure disappeared ; and
the native jumping up, seized S.'s arm and hurried him away,
saying that they were watched.
" It appears that my father noticed that S. absented himself
from home every Friday, and becoming uneasy he set some one
to watch him. He was seen to leave the city at sunset in
company with this native; but none would follow them, as they
did not like the idea of sJ)ending the night outside. On the last
Friday however, one bolder than the rest followed them, and
conce~g himself behind a rock, witnessed their proceedings.
On the Saturday following a formal complaint was laid before
the Governor of the town, the native was banished for life, and
S. came over to England. After an absence of two years,
my brother returned to ~e tow:n, and a f~w week~ afterwards
I received a letter from hrm, saymg: Imagme my mten~e surprise, the same native is here, but no one recognizeiJ htm, he

160
says he is determined to go on with his pr~ject if I will assist
him; I can see no difference whatever in his aypearance, he is
not disguised in any way, and yet not a soul m the town has
the slightest notion that he is the man who was banished three
years ago."

No. 71.-Askley House.
On the lOth, Home went into a trance, and said, ".Allan
Kardec,-apoplexy." " Did he die suddenly? " I asked. " Of
apoplexy-fell down.stairs. You must not sleep in the same room
with Dan at present, it is not good for either of you, your magnetism is mutually injurious, you take strength from each other;
your nerves are in an excited state, I can see them emitting a
phosphorescent light, they are stretched to the extreme verge of
tension." "They are then in an unhealthy state," I said. "YesJ
in a condition that must be checked, it is exactly as if you had
taken too much stimulant. In the daytime it does not matter
how much 7ou are together, it is at night when you are asleep
that the inJury is done; you are not well ; if you slept in the
same roon with a healthy man it would do you guod." "I have
been thinkin&'," I said, " that mesmerism might be of service
to me, what 18 your opinion?" " The magnetism of a strong
healthy man woUld do you much good, the mesmeriser should be
a fair man, a few passes every day not sufficient to induce sleep
would be of use to you, it would be good for Dan also." " I think
change would do me good," I remarked. " Travelling is very
f!;'Ood for you." I asked, after a lonf!;' pause, " Do you think
It would also suit Florence's constitution?" Home said, " Oh
yes it would not hurt her, but she has a talent that must .not be
neglected." "What is that-music?" I enquired. "Composition,
the composition of music." I said, "You would not like that to
be neglected?" " It must not be neglected." " That is rather
awkward/' I added. "No, it need not be; she would have
great facility in learning stringed instruments ; for instance the
violin ; of course they would all laugh at first, but you need not
mind that. Dear me, how curious ! Oh no, certainly not L - ought notto pass away." "L-- M-- do you mean?" I asked,
" No, L - - N--, she had more influence alm9st than any of
them over 0--; her magnetism kept him in check, she has lost
it in a great measure ~ow; he is all hoity toity Hy-awa7.
What a curious habit he has got into of tossing his head back m
that way; dear me, he is very excited, there is something all
wrong about it, when I go there it all seems confused, I cannot
make it out well !

161
" Allan Kardec says that spirits very soon forget events that
happened on earth 2 they have no way of computing time; they
e\"en forget their btrthdays; if they want to get a date they often
have to go and look for tt." "But why," I said, "should they
take the trouble to look for dates? what can it matter to them."
" Oh, they are obliged to do so sometimes for tests and things
of that sort." Home then awoke.
No. 72, Ashley House,
On, I think, the 15th, :Mr. Ward Cheeney and Mr. Arnold,
two Americans, friends of Home came to see him. Soon after
they had gone, I heard raps upon the table at which I was
seated. Home was walking about the room at the time. I
called his attention to the raps, and he came and sat down near
me. The alphabet was called for, and the name " Carry" was
spelled out. Home said to me " That is Mrs. Cheaney; "
then addressing her:" I am so glad, dear, that you have come to me again, is
Julia with 1_ou often? "
"Yes,' was answered.
" Why does she not speak to me? Does she not like me? "
" Oh yes, she is the same as eve1·, but your mission does not
alwa.ys consist of love messages bet"ng given you. When we would
do so, we are sometimes unable by reason Q{ your e:chausti'on ;
but you know, so long as f,ou a1·e true to God, your mission, and
yourself, that we love you. '
Home, pointing to me, said, "He is going to America."
Two raps were made signifying uncertainty ; Home added,
"I hope you will like him.''
" Yes," was said, and then," I hope that you may be at my
earthly habitation wlten you are there, in order that 1 may welcome
you."
Home continued, " He is going to be married; I hope you
will like his wife."
" I dont know her. What is her name? "
"Miss Florence Kerr. Will you go and see her?"
Two raps were given, signifying perhaps. "Adare will be
dining there to-night; will you go with him?
" Yes ; I shall call her Fwrence. Do f,ou 11ot find this to be a
subject .fraught with very t•ast ~"{'portance? '
" Is that message to me? I asked.
" Yes."
"Certainly 1 I consider it a subject of great importance."
" Standing on the threshold, peering through the chinks."
L

162
" Of the other world ? '' I asked.

" Yea."
Home observed "That is just like her, there was a good
deal of poetry in her nature ; I have some very pretty lines of
hers." He was interrupted by the words "Suck doggrel," being
spelled out; after this the sounds became gradually fainter, and
we had no more messages.

No. 73.-.Ashley Rouse.
On Friday, the 16th, I was present at a meeting of one of
the sub-committees of the Dialect1cal Society. The seance was
not satisfactory. The Master of Lindsay, Mr. Bergheim, Home,
and myself, afterwards adjourned to Lindsay's room, in Grosvenor
Square. We sat round a small table, and had some physical
manifestations.
Home was in an excessively nervous state.
Presently he went into a trance, and began to laugh; he spoke
to me for some time as A-- B--. Home then said "That
same spirit is here about W-- B--. It is too late now to
do all he wanted ; he wished to have prevented all this business
about X--." "Uh," sai6 Lindsay, "He could have done
nothing, for W-- could have no influence over X--." "He
says he could have succeeded." "I am sure he could not,"
continued Lindsay, "for they are not even on speaking' terms."
" Well, he says that W-- being susceptible, he would have got
such influence over him, that X--. would have noticed it,
and it would have had a good effect upon him ; however, it is
too late now, still he wants W-- to meet Dan. He will pass
away before his natural time."
"Who?" said Lindsay,
W-- ? " " Yes." " Is he then ill ? " I asked. " Oh, no ;
not in that way; it will probably be in some wild frolic or row,
or something of that sort. This spirit used to howl at W-when he was at school." Lindsay remarked, "That is very
curiuus, I bad not thought of it before, but now I remember that
W-- told me of that. Did it frighten him? " "Oh, yes; he
used to howl at him and flighten him a good deal, so much so
that one ni~ht he got up and slept with one of the other fellows ;
he was afra1d to be alone." Home turned to me and said, " You
must look out, boy, there seems to be a storm brewing for
you." "H you would tell me what it is," I said, "perhaps I
might avoid it." " It is of no great consequence ; it will
be but a storm in a coffee pot. Oh, Dan is very weak, very
weak inaeed." Home sank back in his chair, he was seized
with a violent spasm in the chest, and was in great pa.in.
Presently he said, "They are magnetizing me." He fell into a
natul'al sleep, and awoke in a short time much better. Home

163
went home, I remained some time longer. Lindsay asked .Mr.
Bergheim to mesmerise him ; he did so, and soon put him to
sleep. After he had awoke him, Mr. Bergheim asked Lindsay to
try upon him, no one having as yet succeeded in mesmerising
him. After a few passes, he went off; he became very uneasy,
placed his hand on his forehead and said, "It is all wrong."
Lindsay asked him whether there was too much weight on his
head ; whether he should take some off, or put more on. He
replied, "No, it is not that, but it is all wrong, I am being
cross-mesmerised." (This is curious, as no one else was
attempting to infl.uence1 him). As he seemed so uneasy, Lindsay
awoke hiw. He told us he did not remember saying anything
about cross-mesmerising, but that the last thing he recollected was
seeing a figure or form of some sort standing beside Lindsay. He
also saw the figure. After some time, Lindsay mesmerised him
again; as on the first occasion, he became very restless and excited;
he extended his right arm, and kept it in that position for fully
half an hour; Lindsay could not induce him to alter it. He
spoke Arabic with great rapidity in long sentences, and occasionally repeated single words which I wrote down as well as I
conld. He appeared to be, or to think. himself to be, under
some influence more powerful than Lindsay. He said among
other things, " Mabidah ('she won't'). Oh, dell.r, she won't
come. 'ra-A.li, ta-A.li ('come, come !'-word feminine and
applicable to a woman only). Rahat 1 ('she is gone'). Allah 1
(God) Bedosh, or Behash (he won't, or she won't) Hakil
Ingl~se or Hekil Ingl~se, or Yihkil Ingl~se, or Hakal,
Ingl~se, (English talkl or speak English, or he speaks English,
or he spoke English).' Lmdsay repeatedly tried to make him
speak English, but he said, "he won't let me." Lindsay
endeavoured to influence him to move, but he always replied,
"he won't let me, I would if I could; but he won't let me, he is
so strong." Presently he said, "Chalini! chalini 1 (leave me,
leave me,) don't let him come near me." Lindsay walked round
in a circle, making passes, and said, " there, he cannot come
inside that." Mr. Bergheim said," Ah, she has come," and ap:peared to stroke and caress some one's head and hair. "He
cannot speak English and won't let me." "Ah, 1.'a~Ali (oh,
come) L"'halini 1 chalini I (leave me, leave me) Rah, (he IS gone).
Oh he has gone, and she has ~one with him." He appeared
so distressed that Lindsay said, ' I will awake him." He sat up
and s&id "You cannot, he has ~one, and you cannot awake me."
•
•
" nonsense, of
LindsayI began mak.mg
upwar passes, saymg,
course I can awake you." M:r. Bergheim shouted at him, "You
cannot, you cannot, he must come back or I sball die, you cannot
awake me; oh, bring him back." Lindsay said," All right, he shall
L2

164
come". I opened the door and Lindsay added, "'fhere, he has
come." Mr. Bergheim heaved a deep sigh, and said, "Oh, yes, he
~1as come back," he became q.uite quiet and soon awoke, but was
m a nervous state for some time.*
No. 74.-Aahley House, April.
Last night soon after we had gone to bed, we both heard
raps upon the wall. The alphabet was called for and the follow.:.
ing messages given, " Corne come, Dan, cheer up! You have
been overdot~ng it lately, we t'ntend giving you a rest .from the da!f
after to-mor1·ow till tlte 29th j your power wz'll be taken from you.''
Home said, " I am sorry for it." " We tltink it best," was
answered. Home went into a trance; he said, " Your grandfather is here, he is not pleased." He spoke to me for a long
time, representing my grandfather, saying at the close of the
conversation, "You must be prepared, boy, for some change; it
seems that something will soon occur to alter your prospects."
"Can you not tell what it is," I asked. "No we cannot tell you,
Oh I it is nothing ,to do with your marriage ; no, it just seems
that something will occur to alter your plans, that is all." " I
wish to ask a question," I said. H Do so," he replied. "Dan
suddenly asked me yesterday, shuddering, to take my hand off the
table where we were both writing; when I asked him some time
after what his motive had been for doing so, he told me that my
thumb was all covered with blood. Now, there was really no
blood upon my thumb; was that merely a defect in Dan's
vision1 or the result of his imagination, or was there anything
more m it?" After a pause Home answered, "We do not know
what that could have meant, it might have been a foreshadowing
of something, or merely the reflection of the red table cloth, or
some purely physical effect of Dan's brain, or vision ; we do not
remember the occurrence-Stop I wait a minute" (after a pause),
"Ah I Sacha says it was not imagination or deception on Dan's
part, he was in one of those very curious conditions into which
he sometimes falls, and it was a foreshadowing of something that
will occur, blood will flow, you may perhaps cut your finger or
aomething of that aort, it does not follow that it will be your
thumb. Sacha aends all manner of love to Dan, and wishes you
to tell him that he must not be low-apirited, more than he can
help; it is not right1 he has never wanted as yet, she aays it is
extremely unlikely that he will be permitted to want now." I
said, "I want to ask your opinion about what occurred in

* I mention the occurrences of this evening, as although outside the present
limits of "Spiritualism," they seem to bear a strong resemblance to what took
place at Ashley House, mentioued in pp. 164, 155.

165
Lindsay's room." ''We do not know exactly to what you
refer; but we will tell you about it some time or other. Dan is
very weak and ill, we have been having a regular council about
him." " I hope you will be able to do him good," I said. " Oh
yes, we hope so, he is overworked ; and he worries himself
about leaving the house, and is distressed about a. lot of jewels
and precious stones. It is not right of him to give way
so, he should have more faith. Poor little L - will we fear
have a relapse, but she must not be cast down ; she will get
better a~a.in; she ought to be very careful not to do too
much th1s summer." "You mean in the way of society,"
I obsernd, " seeing too many people ?" " Yes, certainly.
Your mother seems anxious about you, she says your
position is not a very easy one; you have a difficult path to
follow, and must be carefhl." I said, "It seems hard that if I
am in difficult circumstances I should have lost the advantage of
her advice ; there are so few people with whom I can take
counsel." "Ah, but that is just what she does not want you to
feel. She says you have not 'lost the benefit of her advice ; she
can intluence you. If you will, when in doubt as to what
course to pursue, pray earnestly to God for guidance, and sit
down quietly to think the matter over, she says you may be
sure she will be there, and will be enabled to help you to fot·m a
right judgment. She smiles, and says, 'You may even smoke
your cigar you know, my boy, if you like; just sit down quieti)'
b7 yourselfj desiring earnestly and prayerfully to do what IS
nght, and 1 am certain to be with you, and will endeavour to
in:Huence your mind so that you may come to a right conclusion about Bergheim.' You need never be nervous at anything of that sort; no harm could have come of it; no spiritual
intluence could or would hurt him. You might have known
that ; you know how sensitive Dan is, and that he is continually
subjected to all sorts of intluences, at all times, even when
walking in the streets ; and yet you know they cannot hann
him." "But," I said 1 "you spoke the other night of spirits
having power even to kill a man : how do you mean then that
no danger could ensue from a man becoming under a strong
intluence as Bergheim was1 or as Dan often is." " Insomuch as the
man is willing, harm might come. As I told you the other night,
if anyone were voluntarily- to agree to certain conditions, were to
submit themselves to a sptritual intluence, to obtain a certain end,
harm might ensue from that, but in no other way; Bergheim
could not have been hurt, he would have awoke all right, he is
of a very nervous excitable temperament, that was the cause of
it. Danger might arise in another way,_ ~ person might thro~
himself into a deep trance. If Dan in his present very weak

166
condition were to will himself to go into a trance, he might clo
so, and the result might be disastrous, we are obliged to watch
over him very closely. Dan will not awake, he will fall into a
natural sleep now."

No. 75.-Seance, Grafton Hotel, .Albermarle Street, May 26th.
At about 10 o'clock I went to the Comtesse de Pomar, and
found already assembled and seated round the table the Comtesse
de Poma.r, Mrs. Crawford, Madame de Galiano, Mrs. H. Senior,
Mr. Bergheim, and Home; they had had slight physical
manifestations. One of the ladies was not very well, and
another was expecting to be obliged to leave every minute
-two circumstances which no doubt acted unfavourably upon
the harmony of the party. Soon after my arrival Home
went into a trance; he was apparent!~ much distre~sed by
the black crape on Madame de Poma.r s dress. Gettmg up,
he took a black shawl that she had laid on a chair, and
expressing by his countenance the greatest disgust, he opened
the door of an inner room and threw the shawl down. On
coming back he whispered as he passed me, " We do not like
it at all-there is too much black. You see there are four
what you call widows here; we cannot bear mourning." He
stroked and patted my forehead; and goin~ round to Mrs. --'s
son, he bent over him, looked into hts face and caressed
his hair. He took a small round table that was standing
in the corner of the room, and said, still in a whisper,
"Paula and Marie must not have too much confidence in
this, it is an undeveloped influence that communicates with them,
and they are not fully developed as mediums, they must not
place implicit reliance on what is .told them, but use their own
sense about it." On returning to his chair-as he passed mehe clapped his hands (Adah Menken's sign), and whispered, "I
hope you are very happy. It was not far from here that
I met you." Mr. Bergheim and I were talking, in a
very low tone, about crystals, mirrors! and eastern magic in
general, and the strange things that had occurred at Ashley
House in connection with Mr. J--'s brother. Home became
much agitated, gasped occasionally for breath, had difficulty in
speaking, and made passes before him as if waiving something
off. " Oh," he. said, " you must not talk of that, you bring
such a fea~l mfluen~e a~out you_; the moment your minds
are turned m that dtrection, the mfluence comes as it were
pouring in, I wish ~ou could unders~and this, you would
see how necessary Is prayer to bnng a good influence
about you ; and if you wjsh for that which is bad, it

167
will inevitably come. Oh, it is very dangerous, we cannot
bear you to have anything to do with magic, that. incense
of blood is fearful." I interrupted him saying " I have not
used any incense." Home continued," Oh, yes; I know, I know.
You must not have anything to do with it; you do not know
how dB.?lge~O\~s it is. ~ra:y leave that magic alone ; what is the
use of 1t? 1t 1s but cur10s1ty and can do you no good. Would
you place yourself in the power of the lowest men on earth ?
Would you bring the worst and most de~aded of mortal
influence about you? You would not ; then why do. so among
spirits ? I tell you you do not know the danger; they are so
fearfully low, the very lowest and most material of all; you
might almost call them ' accursed.' They will get a power over
you that you cannot break through. Have nothing to do with it.
Try and get a good influence about you, one that will raise and
elevate you, not one to drag you down lower and lower. You
would be afraid of the worst and most brutal of your fellow-men.
You have more cause to fear those spirits who correspond to
them if you encourage and let them gain power over you. No,
he has not found it ye~." Bergheim said to me, " Have you told
him the story? how does he kriow anything about this ?n Home
laughed, and speaking to Madame de Pomar said, " Thel are
wondering at Dan speaking about subjects with which he IS not
acquainted, as if we did not know all about it." Turning to us
he continued, "No, he has not found it, he has got your
letter; yes I think he will answer it in a little time, he does not
quite know what to do. I say again, have nothing to do with
magic. Mind I there is a storm coming, if that box arrives, if
the house is not burned or smashed to pieces it will be a wonder.
Seek by prayer to repel evil influences, do not encourage them."
Soon after, Home awoke. We had tolerably strong physical
manifestations, but nothing remarkable occurred, and afterwards
the three following ·messages were given through the alphabet,
with short intervals' between them : " We find material hindrances
impeding our manifestat't"ons." " The ~'rifliJRJnCf!!l·are toq var·ious."
" We must, though reluctantly, say' good night.'"

[The three following Seances are recorded by Lord Dunraven] :
No. 16.-Seance, No. 7, Buckingham Gate, June, 25.
Present :-Sir Robert Gore Booth, Augusta Gore Booth,
Mrs. Honywood, Arthur Smith Barry, Miss A-- P--,
Miss C - R--1 Mr. Home, and myself. In a very short
time vibrations and slight movements of the table occurred.
These were followed by raps on and about the table. Augusta

168
was lying on a low couch. close to the ground. The five raps
for the alKhabet being given, we received the following
message: ' The positiQ'Il of .Augusta absurbs our atmospkere;
ralse her." We placed her couch on a sofa, and brought it up
to the table. The sofa presently moved a few inches from the
table, which was shortly moved up to it. She mentioned that
the couch was shaken, and also that she was touched several
times. Being just then strongly touched on the knee, I
asked, "Has any one else been touched?" " You," was
immediately rapped out. Mr. Home remarking that the
influence seemed chiefly on one side, we received the followinfl
message : " We are obUqed to keep to this side of the table.'
This was on Augusta's Bide, opposite to that at which the two
young ladies sat. Mr. Home remarking, th.at, if the white table
cloth was put on the table, hands mi~t visibly move under the
cloth, we accordingly put one on. He asked if there was an
accordion in the room. Arthur Barry fetched one from the sideboard, and placed it on the table. Some movements under the cloth
were seen about the ed~e of the table near Augusta, and in other
places. As no intimatiOn was given about tlie instrument, Mr.
Home took it, holding it with one hand as usual, at the under edge
of the table. A sort of prelude was played with slight tremolo
effect. We then had the following message, the letters being
chiefly indicated by notes on the instrument: " There z's spiritual
discord-we pra9 fur harmony." The word discord was given
by a horrid discord being played; while harmony was ex.Pressed
by beautiful soft chords. While the playing was gomg on,
Arthur Barry and the two young ladies were requested to look
under the table to see how the instrument was held and moved.
Just after the last message, we received the following: " A 11
undeveloped influence prevents our" • • . • • here some
slight break occurred, and then it we;nt on, " but wt'th pra,IJ87'tJfrrnest prayer-we will dispel it." This was short!y followed
by: " We must dispel the ditJcurd; Arthur, sit opposite." He
removed to the chan- opposite Mr. Home, changing places with
Sir Robert. Mrs. Honywood was next to Mr. Hornet and Sir
Robert was next to her. Mr. Home's chair was partly turned
round, and slight movements of the table and of Augusta's sofa
took place. The alphabet being called for, the following
me.ssage, addressed to Mr. Home, was given: ".You were surprued, JJan, that you were turned round; we wtsh to convi'nce
an undevewped sptrit that you could not trick, even 'if you witJlted
to do so." "Mr. Home expressed the greatest wonder what this
could mean. '' Convince a spirit," he said1 " how very odd ·
an undeveloped spirit·; I cannot understand It
at all." He the~
reminded me of the s6ance in which he employed the fire test to

169
aath1fy spirits (No. 30). I said, "Ask if any one else understands
what thts message si~ifies." He pointed to each of us; and
when his hand was directed to me and to Mrs. Honywood,
three raps were given. Some rather undecided indications were
heard when opposite one of the young ladies. Soon after, this mesaa~e was sent: "Robert, change with Barbara'' (Mrs. Honywood).
Sbght movements were now seen under the cloth near Au~ta,
and near Sir Robert. Augusta. was touched several tlmes ;
Mr. Home remarking that this might be tor some good purpose.
We received the followin~: " It is w1:th intent to neal, and with
God's a1'd we will." Th1s was nearly all spelled out b,Y, notes
on the accordion ; each of the letters of the word " God ' being
indicated by very soft chords, and the last two words by very
loud notes. This was followed by, "Patience, darling." The
accordion was now played with great power, like a sort of
jubilant hvmn. It was pulled with such force that Mr. Home
was obliged to hold it with both hands. At one time it
was drawn away till Mr. Home's arm was stretched out; the
instrument being quite horizontal ; the arm and accordion
bending round the head of Augusta's couch. It also rested on
the edge of the couch, and was played there. Then it was
brought round across the table back to Mr. Home's bodv, and
carried under the table. 'l'his was a curious manifestation. He
placed it on the ground, and it moved about under the table,
touching me and others. Soon after this, as Mr. Home was
talking, he was arrested in the middle of a sentence-his words
died away-his half outstretched arm seemed to become rigid,
and he passed into the trance. He got up and walked about the
room, apparently in a very uncomfortable state. Going over to
the piano he played a few chords, but quickly left off, seeming
cold and distressed. He again walked about for a little while,
when, coming over to Augusta's sofa, he knelt down as if in
prayer; then taking her hands he patted. them, and made passes
down her arm. After this he went behmd Arthur Barry, and
putting his hands on his head he exclaimed, "It is much too
cold here !" He next came and stood behind me for a
few seconds1 and then nearly behind Miss C. R's. chair,
when he dehvered a short address, beautifull.Y expressed; but
of which unfortunately I retain but a shght recollection.
Every word was adm1rably chosen, referring chiefly to this
undeveloped spirit. He began something to this effect : That
a home was once opened for the souls of men ; but through
sin it was closed and sealed. From the moment a man is
born the door of heaven is closed against him; but he is
give~ a golden key which unlocks the golden gate by which he
may enter in, and let out the golden waters of the lake.

170
That key is prayel)_ through which our spirits. force their way.
before the seat of uod. That Spiritualism is not a subject for
idle curiosity, but for stedfast pursuit. Then speaking of
occupations, he said, that even such amusemt>nts as music,
drawin~, &c., if carried on too much, would lead you away
from ht~her pursuits, and ought to be resisted. He ended by
saying, ' There is much we would see altered; r,ou must pray ;
do not doubt ; it will be done ; only pray all wrll come n&'ht."
This was obviously addressed to the lady behind whose chatr he
stood. Turning to Arthur Barry he said, " You don't understand this now, but you will by-and-bye;" alluding no doubt
to what will be explained further on. Approaching Mrs.
Honywood, he said, •' Barbara, your father is here ; you have
been uneasy in your mind lately, but never mind, all shall be
made smooth." Then putting his hand on Sir Robert's
shoulder, he said, "You were touched by two hands, belonging
to two very dear to you, one large, the other smaller and more
delicate. Augusta, you felt a hand touching you, and a
small pointed finger put into your hand (which she did) ;
this was your grandmother ; she is very much plea~~ed ; they
would like to have done more, but they could not." Rapidly
approaching me, he said with emphasis; " You knew well who
was playing." After this he sat down and awoke, remarking
how very silent we all were. No more manifestations occurred
of any interest; one of the ladies left the room, and Mr. Home
soon after said he felt tired, and we broke up the seance.
At supper some one remarked that a chair was being moved
to the table; while our attention was called to this, another
chair moved rather quickly five or six feet to within a foot of the
table, near Mr. Home. This was seen by all present. His
chair was turned half round, and he took his feet off the ground
while being moved. There were no further manifestations.
The occurrences which fonn the remarkable feature of this
seance require explanation. Some days ago I had the opportunity of seeing Miss C-- R-.- write, under supposed spiritinfluence, in my presence. I obtained permission to put a few
questions. Among them I asked, " What do you think of Mr.
Home?" Miss R-=-- wrote instantly, "He has a certain degree
of power, but a vast amount of trickery." In answer to another
question was written," He (Home) deceives people by pretending
that he can call up the spirits of their friends,&c." These and other
answers made me think that this was probably a deceitful spirit.
The young lady being very anxious to be present at a seance
I inVIted lier to this one, expecting that something curious would
probably occur. I mentioned the circumstances to Mrs. Bonywood, but neither she nor I had any communication with Mr. Home

171
on the subject. At the seance he had no idea who she was. The
reader will now perceive the remarkable drift of what took place.
The first message bearing on the case was, " We are obliged to
keep to this side of the table," that is, the side opposite Miss
C-- R-. The next was, " There is spiritual discord, &c."
Then followed that about the undeveloped mfluence; and afterwards in addition, the remarkable one addressed to "Dan" (Mr.
Home) where the very word " trick" is employed which was
written by Miss C-- R-- with reference to Mr. Home.
'l'hese messages were, so to say, supplemented by the beautiful
and pointed address uttered by Mr. Home, when in a trance, standing behind Miss R's. chair. Some days previous, I had mentioned
to two friends, very conversant with spiritualistic manifestations,
the character of several of the answers written through Miss
C-- R-·, and they both pronounced them to proceed from
an undeveloped or low spirit ; one of a class which appears to be
by no means uncommon, particularly with young or incipient
mediums. 'l'hese friends were ignorant of Miss R. 's name, or
that she was to be at a seance with Mr. Home. They, it will
be observed, used the word "undeveloped," the same as was
employed in the messages this evening ; and they both recommended the same remedy, as was urged by Mr. Home in the
trancet namely earnest prayer. The table was lifted off the
ground, but only a few inches. 'l'he drawer of the table on
Augusta's side was suddenly opened.

No. 77 .--Seance, No. 7, Buckingham Gate, July 1.
Present :-The Dowager Duchess of St. Albans, Lady--,
Mrs. Honywood, Mrs. Stopford, the Honorable Mrs. - - ,
Arthur Smith Barry, Sir R. Gore Booth, Augusta Gore Booth,
Mr. Home, and myself. We sat round the same table which
we used on the last occasion, the room being li~hted as before by
one lamp, with the shade over it. We qUlckly had strong
vibrations, and raps of various kinds, some of them very loud.
I said "I wonder if it is Dr. Elliotson?" "Yes," was answered
b;y three loud raps. The table was slightly moved in different
directions, and strongly tilted; but I observed that when
inclined, objects slipped down it. The Duchess of St. Albans
was touched, both audibly and visibly to others. The Duchess's
scarf was pulled so strongly that she said had it not been for
the brooch it would have been pulled off. Mrs. - - , Mr.
Hom~ and I were also touched. The accordion was taken by
Mr. Home, and it commenced playing in the usual manner.
Mr. Home said, "If you will ask for some air they will perhaps

172
play it." The Duchess asked for " Home, sweet Home," which
was given at first by single notes and afterwards by chords.
The Duchess and Mrs. Stopford looked under the table while
the instrument was being played. It was dra·wn about outside
the table and back again. It was placed in the Duchess's hands,
and played when she alone held it. It was then put down under
the table, where it moved about, touching different persons' feet.
It came up on my legs, and I took bold of it. I asked was it
the same spirit that played the other ni?,ht, and was answered
by the alphabet, " A rude imitation only. ' After a little while
we got the following : " All present are loving frierula and
messen~ers from God. Part of this message was given by the
accordion • the word God being indicated by soft chordS. I
asked if tbey would play ~he same air as they did at Adare.
No reply was given. Mrs. Honywood's handkerchief was
taken from her. Mrs.-- felt a hand placed in hers.
Some time after this, a little pencil with which I had been
writing dropped out of my hand, much to my surprise, and fell at
my feet. I tried to find it, but could not. Shortly after, Mr.
Home said, "I see a hand moving about the Duchess's shoulder.
She felt something coming down over her shoulder, and we then
perceived a slight object on the edge of the table cloth in front
of her. I saw it come, or placed there. Some one said, " It
is a little pencil." "Oh," I said, "I dare say it is mine," which
on examination it proved to be. We then got this message :
" We took it from Dunraven for ,you j take it." I gave the
pencil to the Duchess. A drawer that was exactly opposite
Lady D--, shot out quite suddenly, so as to startle her; this
happened several times. It was also shut. Once it was opened
so lar, that although they tried they could not shut it. The
cloth was moved as if by hands under it. Mr. Home saw hands,
as did Mrs.
• She also saw dark forms behind the
screen and near the door. Presently we received the following
message, partly on the accordion : " God bless you, One who
watches over you/' and then "Oft in the stilly night" was
softly played. This was the air I alluded to when. I asked if
they would play the air they had .Played at Adare; but I was
not the least thinking of it at this time. Soon after, Mr. Home
went gradually into a trance. He got up, bandaged his eyes
and walked about. He knelt down beside Augusta, and patted
her arms sharply; and made passes down them. He canie
round, and stood behind several of us. When between Arthur
Barry and me, he spoke in a loud whisJ>er, saring that Lady D-might.become a medium if she wished it; that she had decided
mediumistic powers. I said, " Will she succeed?" "That depends," he replied, "entirely on herself, not upon us." He said

173
that a beautiful spirit was standing near her, and that her power
would be good, and the manifestations delicate in accordance with her nature, which is pure ; he added more to
the same effect. He also said to Smith Barry, "Arthur, the
spirit that touche.d you was from D--'s influence." Then in a
sort of side whisper, he said to me, "You will explain to them
that Dan always calls people by their christian names. A
a~irit, Arthur, pressed on your knee with one hand, while
p1cking up the pencil with the other." He also said to Mrs.
- - 7 " I see tlie spirit of Arthur (her husband?), standing
behind you." And he said something about George, which
was, I believe, addressed to Mrd. Honrwood. He then returned to his chair, and soon awoke. Scarcely the slightest
manifestation occurred after this, and we left the table. At
supper nothing took place. I omitted to state that the table was
raised on one occasion at least 18 inches from the floor· also
that a very curious manifestation occurred-an extraordinary
rattling inside the drawer, very strong and loud. Our chairs
also vibrated, and so did, once or twice, the floor. The variet,Y
of raps, and the strength and frequency of the vibrations at th1s
seance were remarkable. The principal object aimed at appeared
to be to convince the Duchess and Ladl D-- 7 by the physical
manifestations, of the reality of some mvisible power.
Nv. 78 -Seance, 7, Buckt'ngltam Gate, July 1tlz.
Present (in the order in which we sat) :-The Dowager
Duchess of St. Albans, Mr. Home, Mrs. Stopford, Sir R. Gore
Booth, Lady--, Capt. G. Smith, myself, Miss Gore Booth,
and Mrs. Honywood. We sat at the same table and with the
same light as before, but without the table cloth. For some time
we had but slight manifestations : they were merely vibrations
and faint cold currents. I was touched twice, and hearing some
one making a remark about being touched, I said, '' Who
was touched?" The alphabet was called for, and the word
" Dunraven " was spelled out. Mr. Home then went into a
trance; he bandaged his eyes; then walked about a little.
Afterwards he appeared as if talking to a spirit, making a good
deal of pantomime, occasionally :l>lacing his hands round the
glass of the lamp, apparently to diminish the li~ht; he then put
it on the table. He sat down and began formmg an alphabet,
as he did at Garinish; after making a few letters he pushed the
paper over to Captain Smith who completed it. He then gave
us the following message by pointing at .the letters: "We w't1l do
tlae best we can, but the conditions are not favorable." Then,
" Elizabeth " was spelled, which no one seemed to understand.

174
Mr. Home then put the Duche~s's scarf over his head and face,
but soon removed it. He took her hand and placed it to his
jaws to shew that they were locked, so that he could not speak.
He then spelled out, "You are too posz"tive /' and soon afterwards,
" There t8 a strange mia:ture Q( unbel4/, not ea:iating the last time
we met." I remarked, "I think I know what may account for
this difference·" alluding to my having in my pocket a relic
which a friend had particularly requested me to wear. He
pointed out this message : " It matters but little to 1ut; believe in
God and love each other." Then underlining some of the letters,
he put numbers, I, 2, 3, &c., to several of them. He showed
this to the Duchess, not wishing, apparently, that we should see
what be was about j however 1 she did not seem to understand
the meaning of what he did. It occurred to me to try the
effect of putting away the relic, so I got up, and walking across
the room, quietly placed it among some books on the sideboard.
.
Mr. Home then pomted out the word" Talk."
Soon after he got UJJ; walked over to the sideboard, and
returned and sat down. Then taking a piece of paper, he wrote
in large letters, "Where did you put It?" I replied, "Can't
you find it?" He went over again to the sideboard and came
back, and, sitting down, showed me a cross which he wore,
and which he partly drew out from his shirt collar. After
this he took the lamp and placed it on the sideboard, and
while there two of the party saw something in, or rather on one
of his hands, when the hand was open. This moAt have been
the relic. He afterwards returned to the chair and slit down.
Captain Smith saw the relic on the table before Mr. Home sat
down. We saw it become visible just before he placed his hands
on each side of it. He then pushed it across the table to me.
The relic is contained in a little circular box, about 1t inches
diameter. Soon after this Mr. Home awoke.
We had vibrations of the table and raps. Mr. Home's chair
was turned round ; he took his feet off the ground, and was
either lifted up bodily several inches, or elongated; but subsided
almost immediately. Mr. Home asked for the accordion. He took
it~ and some chords were played, with a discord among them.
We then received the following: " Sli'gkt want of harmony."
Mr. Home asked if any of us should change places; " Yes," was
replied. Mr. Home, by pointing to us consecutively, made out
that the Duchess was to change with him. The accordion was
moved all round Mr. Home, and played some notes, when his
arm was stretched out; it was placed at the Duchess's back,
resting on her, and was. played in that position. It was then
drawn under the table, Mr. Home holdin~ it, and given to Lady
--,who took it, and held it for a short time. Very faint sounds

175
were heard ; after which we got the message1 " Dan, take it. ' 1
It played for a little time, and he then placed it under the table.
Presently I felt a very sharp blow on the shin, and found the accordion had struck me. Mrs. Stopford being obliged to go, left
the room. Mr. Home remarked that he· was sure we should have
better manifestations now. We almost directly received the
following message by raps : " We told you that the influences were
contending; there is a change :for the better." Mrs. Stopford's
chair now moved up to the table. Captain Smith said he saw
a form move it, and then sit in it. Three notes, for " Yes,"
were sounded by the accordion.
The table was then
slowly tilted to one side, and then the other, as if they
were trying to lift it; it then ascended more than a foot,
and with two or more lifts, something like what was done at
Adare. After this the accordion was beautifully played with
tremolo effect at the end. It was then put under the table. Sir
Robert was touched by a hand that came from under the table
cloth. Captain Smith saw a spirit form and hand coming from
under the table. Mr. Home also saw hands. Captain Smith
asked who was sitting at the other end of the room. The word
"Father" was spelled out; also "William." This word was given
by Lady--'s dress being pulled. Captain Smith said, "There is
a reason why the chair moved up to the table; willlou tell us?"
No answer. "Do I know it?" " Yes" was rappe out. Then,
"Sit at a small talJle four." Mr. Home then· pointed to us all to
know who should go, and the Duchess, Lady--, Sir Robert, and
he were chosen, by raps. 'l.'he small table was tilted into Mr.
Home's lap. They then were told by raps, " Put a bit of p_aper
on the table. "This they did. They wok the cloth off, and the
table was raised above 45° on one side, when the paper slipped. It was replaced. The table was again inclined and
fhe paper was slowly moved, rather up, then in different
directions. After this the :paper became luminous ; it was
probably the hand holding It. The table was then inclined
almost :vertically, but the paper did not move. The table was
also made to feel light or heavy according to the wish of the persons present. This was done very strongly. They now sent the
following message by raps:-" They do this to let you see (a
pause) now return to the large table." Very soon we had
the folio wing :-" We are called away nearer God1 good niqlzt."
We then left the table, at which we had been Bitting for two
hours and a half. At supper we were talking about Lady--'s
glove being lost last evening, and upon some one asking
whether it had been found, some one else said, "I wish the
spirits would tell us what became of it." Then we began
talking about Mr. Home looking for the relic, and how it was

176
orought to the table, whether by him or by a spirit. The subject
continuing we were sent the following:-" He had it in Ms
hand at the side-board, but we placed it on the table." These
messages corroborated Captain Smith's oyinion that Home did
not place it there. Raps were heard al abo~yt; on the table,
near the ceiling, and in different places. We received the
following:-" 'The reason htJ could not find it was that another
spirit had taken it and brought it to the table." Then immediately followed, " And we are very good, are we not, JJan 1"
Upon which Mr. Home laughed immoderately, as did also
l\1rs. Honywood. It was all a mystery to us, but afterwards
he told us the meaning of the message. It was about the
prettiest manifestation of the evening, but unfortunately I
am precluded from givin~ any explanation. Mrs. Honywood
knew the circumstances of the case, and what the spirits meant
by their forbearance in Dan's favour.
The cross which Mr. Home wore round his neck, and which
he exhibited to me when he gave me the relic, was a Russian one,
bearing this inscription, "In Thee 0 Lord have I placed my
trust, hell and the powers thereof ma.r strive, but Thou art
mighty and shalt prevail." The relic is said to contain a
portion of the true croBS.
The following interesting details were furnished to m_e by
Captain G. Smith. ''It was quite at the beginning of the seance
that I saw an object without apparent form move near you
under the table, and approach M1ss Gore Booth." Home said,
"I think they are trying to form hands." The answer," Yes, 11
was faintly rapped out. Previous to Mrs. Stopford leaving the
room, indeed almost from the commencement I had seen a
tall ·spirit sometimes standing against the window nearest the
door, sometimes sitting in an arm chair between the window
and door. When Mrs. Stopford arose to go, he arose from
his arm chair, and swept forward to the door. I fancied he
was going out with her, but he returned to the chair. 'l'he
impression made on my mind was that, for some good reason,
he was prevented from entering the circle. When Mrs.
Stopford feft the room, the large table in the centre covered
with flowers and books moved twice, each time nearer Mr.
Home and the Duchess, and on each occasion he moved his
arm chair too ; I think no one saw this latter movement
but ~yself. It was then as ~ to frustrate any further attempts
on h1s part to enter the crrcle, that Mrs. Stopford 's chair
was taken by a spirit, (in appearance like a pillar of cloud)
and moved up to the table. When the door was opened for
supper, the spirit in the arm chair passed out in front of me."

( 177

)

ADDENDA.
No.1.
Captain Gerard Smith has kindly furnished me with the
following notes relative to the seances at which he was present :In No. 46, the hand which brought the sprig of box was
distinctly visible as it pushed the curtains aside, which partially
overhung the window, and at our request it was ag~ ~ub­
sequently shown on the table, close to where Home was stttmg.
P. 41, with regard to the foot notel I am able distinctly to
state, that the only occasions upon whtch Home left the room
were to fetch the lemon, and at the conclusion of this particular
manifestatio~ to replace it in the spot he had taken it from.
No. 49, .t'. 94, when I entered the room Home was walking
about with the accordion held in his left hand only, and it was
playing; not a distinct air, but a plaintive kind of di!ge, now
loud, and then dying away till it became inaudible. When the
spirit moved from Lord Adare's side it seemed to pass over the
table with a sound like the rustling of silver paper ; Home then
rose and stood at the window with his right arm extended, and
the spirit seemed to swee}l down until it rested with both hands
on his outstretched arm, looking up into his face. From the
position in which I sat, the profile of the face was perfectly
visible to me, and when the two faces aJ?proached each other to
kisst there was no apparent difference m the degree of density
of the two figures.
I have nothing further to add. The remainder of the manifestations which occurred when I was present, have been most
~urately and truthfully described.
GERARD SMITH,

Captain, Scots Fusilier Guards.

No.2.
I have collected: a few cases, illustrating some of the most
extraordinary of the phenomena, mentioned in the preceding
seances.
The following remarkable case of the fire test has been
kindly furnished me by Mrs. S. C. Hall :M

178
" 15, Ashle}" Place,
" July the 5th, 1869.
" Dear Lord Dunraven,-You have requested me to recall
the circumstances of a seance that took place here several weeks
ago. I have much pleasure in doing so, but I never take notes.
I am, however, certain of the facts; though I shall not be able
to place them in the order in which they occurred.
" We were nine (a greater number than Mr. Home likes) ;
we were seated round the table as usual, in the small drawing
room, which communicates with a much larger room ; the
folding doors were pushed back into the wall, and the portiers
unclosed. I think there was one lamp burning over the table,
but a very large fire was blazing away tn the large room-I know
there was a great deal of light. The Master of Lindsay, the
Rev. Mr. Y--, and his wife, Mr. Hall and myself, Mr. Home,
and the Misses Bertolacci were present. We sat for some little
time before the tremulous motion that so frequently indicat~s
stronger manifestations commenced, but it was quickly followed
by raps, not only on the table, but in different parts of the
room; the table was moved up and down,-lifted perfectly off
the ground-made 'light ' and 'heavy ' at the request of· one
or two of the gentlemen present ; and after the lapse of, I
suppose, nearly an hour, Mr. Home went into a trance. Presently
he pushed his chair, or his chair was pushed away-quite away
from the table. He got up ; walked about the room in his usual
manner; went to the fire-place ; half knelt on the fender stool;
took up the poker and poked the fire, which was like a red-hot
furnace, so as to incre!l-se the heat; held his hands -over the fire
for some time, and finally drew out of the fire, with his hand,
a huge lump of live burning coal, so large that he held it in both
hands, as he came from the fire-place in the large room into the
small room ; wher:_e; seated round the table, we were all watching
his movements. .!Ylr. Hall was seated nearly opposite to where
I sat ; and I saw Mr. Home after standing for about half a
minute at the back of Mr. Ball's chair, deliberately place the
lump of burning coal on his head! I have often since wondered
that I was not frightened; but I was not; I had perfect
faith that he would not be injured. Some one said-' Is it
not hot?' :Mr. Hall answered-' Warm, but not hot I'
Mr. Home had moved a little a"fay, but returned, still in a
trance ; he smiled and seemed quite pleased; and then proceeded
to draw up Mr-. Hall's white hatr over the red coal. The
white hair had the appearance of silver threads, over the
red coal. Mr. Home drew the hair into a sort of pyramid, the
coal still red·, showing beneath the hair ; then, after, I think,
four or five minutes Mr. Home pushed the hair back, and, ta.king

179
the coal off Mr. Hall's head, he said (in the peculiar low voice
in which, when in a trance1 he always speaks), addressing Mrs.
Y--, 'Will you have it i'' She drew back; and I heard him
murmur, 'Little faith-little faith.' Two or three attempted
to touch it, but it burnt their fingers. I said, ' Daniel, bring it
to me ; I do not fear to take it.' It was not red all over, as
when Mr. Home put it on Mr. Hall's head, but it was still red
in parts. Mr. Home came and knelt by my side; I put out
my right hand, but he murmured, ' No, not that ; the other
hand.' He then placed it in my left hand, where it remained
more than a minute. I felt it, as my husband had said, 'warm;'
yet when I stooped down to examine the coal, my face felt the
heat so much that I was obliged to withdraw it. After that
Mrs. Y-- took it, and said she felt no inconvenience. When
Mr. Hall brushed his hair at night he found a quantity of cinder
dust. Mr. Home was elongated, and all the manifestations that
evening were very remarkable ; but I believe your Lordship
requested me to relate only what I remember of the coal test.
" Dear Lord Dunraven, sincerely yours,
"ANNA MARIA HALL."

(Mrs. S. C. Hall).

No.3.
The following is an additional case of the fire test witnessed
at a seance held at Lady Louisa --'s, at Brighton, furnished
me by the Countess M. de Pomar. Lady Gomm has permitted
me to make use of her name in corroboration of .the statement
about the red-hot coal being placed in her hand.
"Mr. Home went into a trance; he walked about the room;
played the piano; stood behind Mr. Douglas's chair, who also
went into a sleep or trance ; and Mr. Home appeared to be
speaking with some one about him, and to magnetize him ; he
said it was for his good, and would remove his head-ache finally.
Mr. Home went to the fire and took out a large red-hot mass of
coal2 which he held in his extended hands, and blew upon
to keep it alight.
He walked up and down the room
with it, then went to Lady Louisa and wanted to put it
in her hands, but she drew back. He then said, 'No, you
must not have it, for if you have no faith, it will burn you.'
Lady Gomm extended her hands, saying, ' I will take it without
fear, for I have faith.' ¥r. Hom~ then placed the burning mass
m her hands, and she dtd not feel it at all, although she held it
for at least one minute. It was afterwards put on a -sheet of
pa{>er which directly began to blaze and had a great hole burned
m 1t."
