UUM RU
00153688
- = Re — in fi ME.
: - “NOT TS BE wus 5
- WITHOUT PE:
ETT
00153688
Digitized with financial assistance from
Ms.Swati Thakar
on 13 March, 2020
THE MAHABHARATA
CIN ENGLISH.)
ANUSILASANA PARVA.
ee SS
CHAPTER I.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).
aving saluted Narayana and Nara the
best of male beings as also Saraswatt, the
goddess of learning let us ery success.
udhishthira said :~
1. O grandfather, peace of mind has
been described to be subtile and of various
prms. Ihave heard--all your~-discourses,
ut have not still been able to acquire tran-
uillity of mind.
f 2, Various means of quieting the mind
ave been described by you, O sire, but
ow can peace of mind be acquired from
only a knowledge of the different sorts of
tranquillity, when I myself have been the
eans of bringing all this about ?
3., Seeing your body covered with arrows
and bad sores, I cannot get, O hero, any
Hie of mind, thinking of the evils I have
one,
4. Seeing your body, O bravest of the
brave, covered with blood, like a hill covered
B with water from its springs, I am perishing
with grief as the lotus in the rainy season,
fF s. What can be more painful than this,
that, for me, you, O grandfather have been
reduced to this condition by my people
‘fighting against their enemies on the
battle-field,
B- 6 Other princes also, with their sons
and kinsmen, have been killed on my
account. Alas, what can .be more painful
fe than this?

f 7. Tellus, O prince, what will befall us
# and the sons of Dhritarashtra, who, im-
E pelled by fate and anger, have done this
& hateful act.


F 8. O king, I think the son of Dhrita-
f rashtra is fortunate, because he does not
_ see you in this condition,


;T g. But I, who am the cause of your
& ‘death as well as of that of our friends, am
.. denied all peace of mind by seeing you on
the naked earth in this miserable plight.


10, The wicked Duryodhana, the most
infamous of his family. has, with all his
soldiers and his brothers, died in battle,
performing Kshatriya duties.


11, That wicked man does not see you
lying on the ground! Verily, for this
reason, I would prefer death to life.


ra-~13.  O hero who never forsook virtue,
had I with ray brothers met with death
before this at the hhnds of our enemies on
the battle-field, I would not have seen you
in this pitiful condition, so piercca ‘With
arrows! Sulely, O prince, the Maker had


created us to commit evil deeds, ed


14. O king, if you wish to do me good,
do you then instruct me in such a way that
I may be purged of this sin in even
another world.


Bhishma said :—
15. ‘Why, O fortunate one, do you re.
gard your soul, which is dependent, to be
the cause of your deeds? Its inaction is
subtle and imperceptible to the senses,


16—19. Regarding it is cited the old
story of the conversation between Mrityu
and Gautami with Kala and the Fowler
and the serpent. There was, O son of
Kunti, an old lady named Gautami, who
was endued with great patience and peace
of mind. One day she found her son
dead-on account of having been bitten by
a serpent.

20. An angry fowler, named Arjunaka,
bound the serpent with a string and brought
it before Gautami. We then said to her.—
This wretched serpent has been the cause
of your son’s death. O blessed lady! Tell
me quickly how this wretch isto be killed!
Shall I throw it into the fire or [shall 1 cut
it into pieces? This infamous killer of a
child should not live longer !


Gautami replied :—
21. Do you, O Arjunaka of little on-
derstanding, set free this serpent! it


2


should not be killed by you. Who is so
foolish as not to care for the inevitable
destiny that awaits him and make him-
self heavy for sinking into sin ?


22. Those who have made themsetves
light by performing virtuous deeds, manage
to cross the sea of the world as a ship
crosses the ocean. But those who have
loaded themselves with ‘sin sink into the
bottom, as an arrow thrown into the
water. :

23. By killing this serpent, this my boy
will not revive,“and by letting it live, no
harm will be caused to you. Who would go
to. the endless regions of Death by killing
this living creature ?


The fowler said :— ;
24. I know, O lady who know the dif+
ference’ between right and wrong that
great persons are pained at the miseries
of .all creatures. But these words which
you have uttered carry instruction for only
a self-contained pergon. Therefore, } must
- kill this serpent. re
25. Those who vafue peace of mind,
attribute everything ‘to the course of Time
as the cause, ut practical men soon pacify
‘their grief. People, through perpetual error,
fear loss of beatitude. Therefore, O iady,
remove your grief by having this serpent
killed (by me). ea


Gautami replied :—


26. People like us are never pained.
Good men have their souls always bent on
virtue. The death of the boy was predes-
tined : therefore, I cannot approve of the
destruction of this serpent.


27. Brahmanas do not cherish resent-
ment, because resentment leads to pain.
Do you, O goodman, forgive and set free
this serpent out of mercy.


The fowler replied :—

28. Let us acquire great and inexhaus-
tible merit in the next world by destroying
(this creature), as a man gains great merit,
and confers it on his victim as well, by
sacrifice upon the altar! Merit is won by
killing an enemy: by killing this despica+
ble creature, you will acquire great and
true merit in the next world,


Gautami replied :—

What good is there in torturing and des-
troying an enemy, and what good is ac-
quiced by not setting free an enemy in our
power? Therefore. O you of kind face,
why should we not forgive this serpent and
try to acquire merit by setting it free.


tT etn RO I IO TC ETO


MAHABHARATA;


gogo ’
The fowler replied :~
go. A great number (of creat

should be safeguarded against this or
instead of this single creature being pr&
tected. Virtuous mem quit the vicious
do you, therefore, destroy the wicked crea-
ture.


Gautami replied :—

gi. By killing this serpent, my son,
fowler, will not regain his life, nor do I se
that any other ed will be attained by it
death: therefore, do you, O fowler, set thio
living serpent free.


The fowler said :—

32. Bydestroying Vritca, Indra got the
best portion (of sacrificial offerings), and
by destroying a sacrifice Mahadeva secured
his share of sacrificial offerings: do you,
therefore, kill this serpent forthwith without
any misgivings whatsoever.


Bhishma said :—

.%3- Althoagh vepentedly urged on b
the fowler for the destruction of the serpent
the great Gautami did nor bend her min
to that sinful deed.


34. Painfully fettered with the cord,
sighing a little and keeping up its compo-
sure with great difficulty, the ‘serpent ther
uttered these words slowly, in a human
voice. 7


The serpent said :— eS

35. O foolish Arjunaka, what is. my
fanit? Ihave no will of my own, and am
not independent! Death sent me on this
work,

36. By his order have I bitten this child,
and not out of any anger or eption an my
part. Therefore,fif there be any sin in this,
O fowler, the sin is his.


The fowler said :—


37- If you have committed this evil,
urged thereto by another, the sin is your
also as you are an instrument in the act.


38. As in the making of an earthen pot
the potter’s wheel and rod and other things
are .all considered as causes, so are you,
O serpent. He whg is guilty should be
killed by me, You, O serpent, are guilty !
Indeed you confess it. if


The serpent said :—

39. As all these, vée., the porter’s wheel,
rod, and other things, are not independent 4
causes, so l am not an independent cause!’
Therefore, this is no fault of mine, you,
should admit it. - me


.


ANUSHASANA PARVA. 8


at. If you hold otherwise, then these
are to be considered as causes working with
one another, for thus working with one
. other, a doubt springs up about their rela-
tion as cause and effect.


42. Such being the case, it is no fault of
mine, nor should [ be killed on this account,
nor am IL guifty of any sia! Or,if you
think that there is sin, the sin lies in the
aggregate of causes.


The fowler said :—


43. If you are neither the principal
cause nor the agent in this matter: you are
still the cause of the death. Therefore, I
think you should be killed.


44. If, O serpent, you think that when
an evil deed is done the doer is not impli-
cated therein, then there can be no cause
in this matter: but having done this, you
should surely be killed. What more do
you think ?


The serpent said :—_
45. Whether any prime cause exists or
ot, no effect is done without an {interme-
Fiate) act. Therefore, causation being of
no importance in either case, my act as
the cause should be considered in full.


46. If, O fowler, you consider me truly,
to be the cause then the sin of this act of
killing a living being rests on the shoulders
of another who led me to do this.


’ The fowler said :—

47. {You don’t deserve life, O foolish one,
why do you then exchange so many words,
© wretched serpent? You should be
killed by me. You have done a henious
crime by killing this infant.


The serpent said :—


48. O fowler, as the priests officiating
at a sacrifice do not gain the merit of the


act by offering oblations of clarified butter.
to the fire, so should I be considered in


this matter.


Bhishma continued :—


49. The serpent directed by Death
having said this, Death himself appeared
there and addressing the serpent said :—


Mrityu said :—

50. Guided by Kala, 1, O serpent, sent
you on this ‘mission, and neither are you
nor am I the cause of this child’s death,


‘st. As the clouds are driven hither and
thither by the wind, f am, QO serpent,
moved by Kala,


52. All influences of Sattwa, or Rajas,
or ‘Tamas, originate from Kala as they
work in all creatures. :


53. AH creatures, mobile and immo-
bile, in heaven, or earth, are pervaded by
the influence of Kala. ‘The whole universe,
O serpent, is permeated by this same
influence of Kala.


54. All acts in this world and all abs-
tentions, as also all their changes, are
owing to be influenced by Kala.


55. The Sun, Soma, Vishnu, Water,
Wind, the god of a hundred sacrifices,
Fire, Sky, Earth, Mitra Jfand Parjanaya,
Aditi, and the Vasus, Rivers and Oceans,
all existent and non-existent objects, are
created and destroyed by Kala.


56—57. Knowing this, why do you, O
serpent, consider me blameable? If Iam
- te blamed for this, you are also blame-
able.


The serpent said :—

58. 1 donot, O Mrityu, blame you, nor
do I set you free from aj] blame. 1 only
say that 1am directed and influenced by
you.


59. If Kala is to be blamed, or, it is not
for me to find the fault. We haveno right
to do so,


60. As it is my duty to absolve myself
from this blame, so it is my duty to see
that Mrityu is not blamed. :


Bhishma continued :—

61. Then the-.serpent, addressing
Arjunaka said, ‘You have-heard what
Mrityu has said.. Therefore, it is not
proper for you to torment me, who am
innocent, by fettering me with this rope.


The fowler said :—

62. I have heard, you, O serpent, as well
as the words of Mrityu, but these, {O ser-
pent, do not set you free from ali blame.


63. Mrityu and you are the causes of
this child’s death. I regard both of you
to be the cause and I do not call that to be
the cause which is not truly so.


64. Accursed be the wicked and venge-
ful Death that causes misery to the good !
I shall also kill you who are sinful and
engaged in sinful deeds.


Mrityu said :— 7

66.- We both are not free, but are depen-
dent on Kala, and are ordained to do our
appointed work. You will not blame us if
you do consider this matter thoroughly.


4 MAHABHARATA.


The fowler said:

66. If you both, O serpent and Mrityu,
depend on Kala, I am curious to know how
pleasure and anger are caused. :


Mrityn said :—

67—68. Everything is done under the
influence of Kala. I have said it before,
O fowler, that Kala is the cause of all and
therefore we both, acting under the influ-
ence of Kala, do our appointed work and,
therefore, O fowler, we two Should not be
blamed by you.


Bhishma said :—

69. ‘Then Kala arrived there where
ethics were being discussed, and spoke thus
to the serpent and Mrityu and the fowler
Arjunaka assembled together.


Kala said :—

qo. ‘Neither Mrityu, nor this serpent,
nor I, O fowler, am guilty of the death of
any creature, e are merely the imme-
diate causes of the event. Arjunaka,
the Karma of this child was the exciting
cause of our action in this matter.


71. There was no other cause by which
this child met its death. It was killed by
the result of its own Karma.


jz. Ithas met ‘with death as the result
of its pristine Karma. Its Karma has
been the root of its destruction,
are subject te eur respective Karma.


73- -Karma_ is a help to salvation as
sons are and Karma also expresses virtue
and vice in man, Weimpell one another
even acts urge one another,


74. As men make from a lump of clay
whatever they wish to make, so do men
come by various.results out of Karma.


75. Aslight and shadow are connected
with each other, so are men related to
Karma. through their own deeds. =


76. Therefore, neither are you, nor am
J, nor Mrityu, nor the serpent, nor this
old Brahmana lady, is the cause of this
child’s death.


77. He himself is the cause here. Upon
Kala, O king, explaining the matter thus,
Gautami, convinced in her mind that men
suffer according to their actions, spoke thus

- to Arjunaka.


Gautami said :—

78. Neither Kala, nor Mrityu, nor the
serpent, is the cause here. This child
has met with death as the result of its own
Karma,


We all


79. I too have so acted that my son has
died. Let now Kala and Mrityu retire
from there, and do you too, O Arjunaka,
set this serpent free.


Bhishma continued :—


80. Then Kala and Mrityu and the
serpent returned to their respective places,
and Gautami became consoled in mind as
also the fowler.


81. Having heard all this, O king, do
you forego all grief, and acquire peace of
mind! Men attain to heaven or hell as
the result of their own Karma.


82. This evil has neither been of your
own creation, nor of Duryodhana’s! That
these king’s of Earth have all been killed, is
the work of Kala.


Vaishampayana said :—

83. Having heard all this, the powerful
and pious Yudiisthira became consoled in
mind, and again enquired as follows.


le neeesnanemend


CHAPTER IT.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhisthira said :—


1. O grandfather, O wisest of men, O
you who are learned in all the scriptures,
I have heardythis gseat story, O foremost
of intelligent men !


2. Lam desirous of again listening to
the recital of some history full of religious
instruction, and you should satisfy me,


3. Oking, tell me if any householder
has ever succeeded in conquering Death
by the [practice of vietue! Do you recite
this to me in full.


Bhishma said :—

4. This ancient history is narrated des-
cribing the subject of the conquest, bya
householder, of Death, by the practice of
virtue.


5. The Prajapati Manu had a son, O
king, named Ikshwaku. That -king, illus-
trious as the Sun, begat a hundred sons.


6. His tenth son, O Bharata, was named
Dashashwa, and this virtuous prince of
infallible prowess became the king of
Mahismati. .


7. Dashashwa’s son, O king, was a pious
prince whose-mind was continually devoted
to the practice of truth and charity and
devotion.


'


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


8. He was known by the name of
Madirashwa and ruled the Earth as her
master. He was continually given to the
study of the Vedas as also of the science
of arms.


9g. Madirashwa’s son was the king named
Dyutimat who was ended with great good
fortune and power and strength and energy.


10. Dyutimat’s son was the highly
devout and pious king who was celebrated
in all the worlds by the name of Suvira.
His soul was intent on religion and he
possessed riches like another Indra the
king of the gods.


11. Suvira too had a son who was invin-
cible in battle, and who was the best of
all warriors and known by the name of
Sudurjaya.


12, And Durjaya too, endued with a
body likefthat of Indra, had a son who was
radiant with the effulgence of fire. He was
the great king named Duryodhana who was
one of the foremost of royal sages.


13. Indra used to pour rain profusely
in the kingdom of this king, who never fled


* from the battlefield and was gifted with


valour like unto Indra himself.


14. Thecities and the kingdom of this
king were filled with wealth and gems and
cattle and various sorts of grain,


15. There was no miser in his kingdom
nor any person afflicted with distress ot
suffering from poverty. Nor was there in his
kingdom any person who was weak in body
or afflicted with disease.


16. This king was very intelligent, mild
in speech, without envy, a master of his
passions, of a righteous soul, full of mercy,
gifted with prowess, and not given to
boasting. :


17. He celebrated sacrifices, and was
self-controlled and_ intelligent, devoted
to Brabmanas and Truth. He never hu-
miliated others, and was charitable, and
well-read in the Vedas and the Vedanta.


18. Auspicious and sacred and of cool
waters, the celestial stream Narmada, in
her own nature, O Bharata, courted him.


19. He begot upon that river, a lotus
eyed daughter, named Sudarshana, who
was, O king, gifted with great beauty.


20. No woman, O Yudhisthira, had
been born before, who was so very beauti-
ful as that excellent lady the daughter of
Duryodhana.


21. Thegod Agni himself courted the
beautiful princess Sudarshana, and assum-
ing the shape of a Brahmana, O king,
sought her hand from the king.


5:


22. The king was reluctant to give his
daughter in marriage to the Brahmana
who was poor and not of equal rank witlr |
himself.


23-. Thereupon Agni disappeared from
his great sacrifice. ‘The king, grieved at
heart, then addcessed the Bratmanas,
saying,

24. What sin have I, ye excellent
Brahmanas, or you, have committed, that
Agni should disappear from this sacrifice,
as good done to wicked men vanishes from
their estimation.


25. Indeed, we have committed a great
iniquity for which Agni has thus disap-
peared! Bither you have committed the
sin, or I. Do you fully enquire into the
matter,


26. Then hearing the king’s words, O
foremost prince of Bharata’s race, the
Brahmanas, controlling speech, sought with
concentrated facuitics the help of the god
of fire. ;


27. The divine carrier of oblations,
effugent as the autumnal Sun, appeared
before them, covering his self in glorious
refulgence.

28. The great Agni then addressed
those excellent Bratmanas, saying,—I seek
the daughter of Duryodhana for my own


self,


a


2g. At this, all those Brahmanas were
struck with surprise, and rising on the
morrow, they told the king what had been.
said by the fire-god. :


39. Hearing the words of those Brahma-
vadins, the wise king was delighted
at heart, and said,-Be it so !--The king
sought a boon of the illustrious fire-god
as the marriage dower.—Do you, O Agni,
be pleased to remain always with us
here !


31-32. Be it so !—said the divine Agni
to that king. For this reason Agni hag
always been present in the kingdom of-
Mahismati to this day, and was seen by
Sahadeva in his Conquering expedition to
the south.


33—36. Then the king gave _ his
daughter, dressed in new raiments and
decked with jewels, to the great god, and
Agni too accepted, according to Vedic
rites, the princess Sudarshana as his bride,
as he accepts libations of clarified butter at
sacrifices. Agni was well pleased with her
look, her beauty, grace, character, and
nobility of birth, and thought of begetting
ofispring upon her. And she soon gave
birth to a son by Agni, of the name of
Sudarshana,


e. "MAHABHARATA.


37- Sudarshana, also, was, as beautiful
as the full moon, and even in his childhood
he acquired a knowledge of the supreme
and eternal Brahma.


38. Thete was also a king named
Oghavat, who was the grandiather of
Nriga. He had a daughter named Ogha-
vati, and a son, too, of the name of Ogha-
ratha born to him.


39. King Oghavat gave his daughter
Oghavati, beautiful as a goddess, to the
learned Sudarshana, for wife.


40. Sudarshana, O king, leading the
domestic mode of life with Oghavati, used
to live in Kurukshetra with her.


4t. This intelligent prince of fiery
energy took the vow, O lord, of conquering
Death by leading the life of a householder.


42. The son of Agni, O king, said to
Oghavati,-Do you never act against (the
wishes of) those who seek our hospitality.


43. You should ungrudgingly welcome
the guests, even if you haveto offer your
own body.


44. O beautiful one, I always remember
this vow, since for house-holders, there is
no higher virtue than hospitality to guests,


45- Do you always remember without
ever doubting it, if my words be any autho-
city with you.

46. O sinless and blessed one, if you
have any faith in me, do you never dis-
regard a guest, whether I be at your side
or at a distance from you.


47. Oghavati placing her clasped hands
on her forehead, replied, saying,—I shall
leave nothing undone of what you order
me.


48. Then, O king,‘desiring to over-reach
Sudarshana, Mcityu began to watch him
for finding out his short comings.


49- Once on a time, when the son of
Agni went out fetch fuel from the forest,
a graceful Brahmana sought the hospitality
of Oghavati with these words.


50. QO beautiful lady, if you have any
aith in the virtue of hospitality as laid
down for householders, then I would request
you to extend the rites of hospitality to
me to-day.


st. Thus addressed by that Brahmana,
O king, the illustrious princess welcomed
him according to the cites laid down in the
Vedas.


52. Having offered him a seat, and
water to wash his feet, she enquired, say-
ing,—What is your business? What can
Loffer you ? ee


53. The Brahmana said to her,—My
business is with yeur body, O blessed one!
Do you act accordingly without any hesita-
tion whatever,


54. If the! duties prescribed for house+
holders be acceptable to you, do gou, O
princess, satisfy me by offering up your
body to me.

55. Though tempted by the princess
with offers of various other things, the-
Brahmana, however, did not seek any -
thing else than the offer of her own person.


56. Finding him determined, that lady,
recollecting the directions given to her by
her husband, but filled with shame, said to
that excellent Brahmana,—Be it so.


57. Recollecting the words of her hus-
band .who was desirous of acquiring the
virtue of house-holders, she cheerfully
approached the twice-born Rishi.


58. Méanwhile, the son of Agni, having
collected fuel, returned to his home.
Mrityu, with his dreadful and inexorable
Nature, was always by his side, as one
attends upon his devoted friend.


59. When the son of Pavaka returned
to his own asylum, he called out for
Oghavati by name, and repeatedly ex=
claimed, — Where are you gone ?


60. But the chaste lady, devoted to her
husband, being then in the! arms of that
Brahmana, gave no reply to her husband.


61. Indeed, considering’ herself sullied,
that chaste woman became speechless,
overcome with shame.


62. Sudarshana,’addressing her fagain,
exclaimed,—Where can my chaste wife be ?
Where has she gone? Nothing can be
so very important to me than this.


63. Why does not that simple and teuth-
ful lady, devoted to her husband, alas
reply as she used to do before with swee
smiles.


64—66. Then that’Brahmana,jwho was
within the hut,thus replied to Sudarshana,—
Know, O son of fire, that a Brahmana guest
has arrived, and though'tempted by your
wife with various other offers of welcome,
I have, O best of Brahmanas, desired only
her body and this fair lady is engaged in
welcoming me with due rites! You can do
whatever you think proper on this occasion.


67.. Armed with the iron club, death
pursued the Rishi at that moment, desirous
of bringing about the destruction of one
who would, he thought, deviate from his
promise.


68—69. Sudarshana was struck with
wonder, but renouncing all, jealousy and


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


eriger by took, word, deed, or thought, said,
Do you enjoy yourself, O Brahmana!
It is a great pleasure tome! A house-
holder acquires the highest merit by
honouring a guest.


7a. The learned say that to the house-
holder, there is no higher merit than what
comes from a guest leaving his house after
having been duly honoured by him.


71. My life, my wife, and all my earthly
belongings, are all dedicated to the use of
my guests! This is the vow that I have
taken,


72. As Ihave truly made this statement,
by that truth, O Brahmana, I shall acquire
the knowledge of Self.


73—74. O foremost of the virtuous, the
five elements, vzz., fire, air, earth, water,
and sky, and the mind, the intellect and
the Soul, and time and space fand the ten
organs of sense, are all in the bodies of
men, and always witness the good and evil
deeds of men.


75. This truth 1 have spoken to-day,


and let the gods bless me for it or destroy’


me if I have spoken an untruth.


76. At this, O Bharata, there arose
from all sides, in*repeated echoes, a voice,
crying,—This is true, this is not false.


77-78. Then that Brahmana came out
of the hovel, and like the wind rising and
covering both Earth and sky, and making
the three worlds echo with Vedic recitations,
and calling that virtuous man by name,
and congratulating him, said :— :


79. Osinless one, Il am Dharma! All
glory to you! I came here, O truth-loving
one, to try you, and I am wellipleased with
you by knowing you to be virtuous.


80. You have eontrolied and conquered
Death who always has pursued you, seeking
your shortcomings. .


81. O best of men, no one in the three
worlds has: the pewer to insult, even with
looks. this chaste lady devoted to her hus-
band, far less to touch her body.


82. She has been saved from contami-
Nation by your virtue and by her own chas-
tity. There can be nothing against what
this proud lady will say. .


83. This Brahmavadin, gifted with aus-
tere penances, shall, for the salvation of the
world, be changed into a powerful river.


84. And you will acquire all the worlds
in this your body, and because the science
of Yoga is within her control, .this highly
blessed lady will follow you with only half
her body, and with the other half will she
be celebrated as the river Oghavati,


7h


85. And you will¥acquire ‘with her all
the worlds that are acquired by penances.
# 86.3 You will acquire even im this mate
rial body those eternal and everlasting
worlds from which none return,


87. You have conquered Death,‘ and
acquired the highest happiness, and by
your own power (of mind), attaining to the
speed of thought, you have transcended the
five elements.


88. By thus following the duties of a
house-holder, you have conquered. your
passions, desires, and anger. and this
ptincess, O best of virtuous men, has, by
serving you, conquered affliction, desire,
illuson, enmity and lassitude of mind.


Bhishma said :—

8g. Then, riding ina fine chariot drawn
by a thousand white steeds, the glorious
Vasava approached that Brahmana.


go. Death and Soul, alljthe worlds, all
the elements, intellect, mind, time, and
ether, as also desire and anger, were all
conquered, -


gt. Therefore, O best of men, do you
remember that a to householder there is
no greater god than the guest.


22. The Jearned say that the blessings
of an honoured guest are more fruitful than
the merit of a hundred sacrifices.


92. Whenever a deserving guest seeks.
the hospitality of a house-holder and is
not respected by him, he takes away all the
virtues of the latter giving him his sins,


94. I have now recited ta you, my son,
this excellent story as to how Death was
conquered in days of yore by a houge-
holder,


95. The recital of this excellent story
gives glory, fame, and longevity. The
man who seeks worldly prosperity should
consider it as powerful in removing all evil.


96. And, O Bharata, the learned man
who daily recites this story of the life of
Sudarshana acquires blessed regions.


CHAPTER II.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.
Yudhishthira said:—
1. If, O prince, it is so very difficult for
the other three castes to,acquire Brahmana~


hood, how then did the great .Vishwa-
mitra, O king, though a_Kshatriya, acquire


8 MAHABHARATA,


the status of a Brahmana? I desire to
‘know this, O sire! Therefore, do you
truly describe this;matter to me.


3. Osire, by virtue of his austerities,
that powerful man destroyed in a moment
the hundred sons of the great Vasishtha,


4. While under the influence of ire, he
created numberless evil spirits and Raksha-
sas of great vigour and resembling the
great destroyer Kala himself.


8. The great and learned family of
Kushika, containing hundreds of twice-born
sages in it and highly spoken of by the
Brahmanas, was founded in this world of
men by him.


6. Having been sought tobe killed as
an animalin the great sacrifice of Amva-
tisha, Shunashepha of austere penances, the
son of Richika acquired his deliverance
through Vishwamitra.


7. Having pleased the gods at a sacri-
fice Harishchandra became a son of the
wise Vishwamitra.


8. For not having honoured their eld-
est brother Devarat, the other fifty brothers
of his were imprecated, and all of them
became Chandalas,


Qg- When abandoned by his friends, and
hanging with his head downwacds in the
lower regions, lrisanku, the son of [kshaku,
was translated to heaven at the pleasure of
Vishwamitra.


10. Vishwamitra had a large river,
named Kaushiki, that was frequented by
celestial Rishis, This sacred and auspici-
ous river was frequented by the celestials and
twice-born Rishis. .


11, For disturbing his devotions, the
famous celestial! nymph Rambha, having
fine bracelets, was cursed and changed
into a rock.


12. From fear of Vishwamitra the glori-
ous Vasishtha, in days of yore, binding
himself with creepers, threw himself down
into a river and again rose released from
his fetters.


13. On account of this, that large and
sacred river became thenceforth famous by
the name of Vipasha.


14—15. He prayed tothe glorious and
powerful Indra who was pleased with him
and freed him from a curse. Remain-
ing on the northern side of the sky, he
sheds his lustre from a position in the
midst of the seven twice-born Rishis, and
Dhruva the son of Uttanpada.


16. These and many others are his feats.
O descendant of Kuru, my curiosity has
been kindled in this respect, because they
were performed by a Kshatriya.


17. Therefore, O foremost one of
Bharata’s race, do you relate this matter
to metruly! How without renouncing hig
body and taking another body of flestr
could he become a Brahmana?


18. Doyou, O sire, truly describe this
matter to meas you have described to me
the story of Matanga,.


19. Matanga was born as a Chandala,
and could not acquire Brahmanahood, but
how could this man acquire the status of
a Brahmana?


CHAPTER IV.


(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. “Listen truly in full, O son of Pritha,
how, in days of yore, Vishwamitra acquired
the status of a Brahmana, as also of a


‘Brahmana Rishi!


2. There was,”O foremost of Bharata’s
descendants, in the family: of Bharata, a
king named Ajamida, who celebrated many
sacrifices and was the best of all virtuous
men.


3. His son was the great king named
jJabnu. Ganga was the daughter of this
great prince,


4. The far-famed and equally virtuous
Sindhudwipa was the son of this prince.
From Sindhudwipa sprang the great royal
sage Valakashwa.


5. His son was named Vallabha who
was like a second Dharma: incarnate. His
son was Kushika who was illustrious like
the thousand-eyed Indra,


6. Kushika’s son was the illustrious king
Gadhi who, being childless and wishing
to have a son born to him, went to the
forest.


7. While living there, a daughter was
born to him. She !was called Satyavati,
and she was peerless in beauty on Earth.


8. The illustrious son of Chyavana,
known by the name of Richika, of the
family of Bhrigu, gifted with austere
penances, sought the hand of this lady.


g. Thinking him to be poor, Gadhi, the -
destroyer of his enemies, did not bestow
her in magriage upon the great Richika.


ro. But when the latter, thus dismissed,
was going away, the excellent king, ad-
dressing him, said,—If you can give mea
marriage dower you will have my daughter


-as your wife!


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


Richika said :— .
I-12. What dower, O king, shall f


ts)
Richika said :—


25. By my favour, O blessed one, she


offer you for the hand of your daughter? | will soon give birth to a son gifted with


Tell me truly, without any hesitation
whatsoever !—-Gadhi said,—O descendant
of Bhrigu, give me a thousand, horses
quick-coursing as the wind, and possessing
the color of moon-beams, and each having
one ear black.


Bhishma said :—


13—14. Then that powerful son of
Chyavana who was the foremost of Bhrign’s
family, besought the god Varuna, the son
of Aditi, who was the lord of all the waters.
O best of gods, I pray to youto give me
a thousand horses, all fleet like the wind
and having complexion as effulyent as the
moon’s, but each having one ear black.


15-16. ‘The god Varuna, the son of Aditi,
said to that scion of Bhrigu’s race,—Be
itso! Whenever you will seek, the horses
shallcome, As soon as Richika thought
of them, there came from the waters of
Ganga a thousand high-born horses, as
effulgent as the moon.


17. Not far from Kanyakuvja, the sacred
bank of Ganga is still famous among men
as Ashwatirtha on account of the appear-
ance of those horses.


18. Then Richika, that best of ascetics,
pleased in mind, gave those thousand ex-
cellent horses to Gadhi as the marriage


19. King Gadhi, stricken with wonder
and fearing to be cursed, gave his daughter,
adorned with jewels, to.that son of Bhrigu.


20. That foremost of twice-born Rishis
accepted her hand in marriage according
to due rites. The princes too was {well-
pleased at seeing herself the wife of that
Brahmana.


21. That foremost of twice-born Rishis,
O Bharata, was well pleased with her con-
duct and expressed a desire to grant her a
boon.


22. The princess, O excellent king,
communicated this to hee mother. The
mother said to the daughter that stood be-
fore her with down-cast eyes,—You should,
Omy daughter, secure a favour for me
also from your husband. That sage of
austere penances is competent to grant a
boon to me,—the boon, vis., of the birth of
a son to me.


24. Then, O king, returning speedily to
her husband Richika, the princess des-
cribed to him all that had been wished for
by her mother.


2


every virtue!
filled ! -


26. Of you too shail be born a powerful
and glorious son who, gifted with virtue,
shall perpetuate my race. ‘Tiéuly do I say
this to you.


27.
season, she shall embrace a pepul tree, and
you, O excellent lady, shall embrace a fig
tree, and by so doing you shall have the
fruition of your desires,


28. O sweetly-smiling lady, both she
and you shall have to partake of these two
sacrificial offerings (charvu) consecrated with
bymns, and then you shall get sons,


2g. Thereat, Satyavati, pleased at heart,
told her mother all that had been said by
Richika as also of the two balls of charu.


30, Thea the mother, addressing her
daughter Satyavati, said :—O daughter, as
I deserve greater respect from you than
your husband, do you obey my words.


31. Do you give me the charu, duly
consecrated with hymns, which your hus-
band has given you, and yourself;take the
One that has been intended for me.


32. OD sweetly-smiling one of pure cha-
racter, if you have any reverence for my
word, let us change the trees respectively
intended for us. ,


33. Every one wishes to possess an exe
cellent and pure son. The illustrious Ri-
chika too must have acted from the same
motive in this matter as will appear in the
long run.


May your request be fule


34. -Therefore, O beautiful girl, my
heart is bent upon your charu and tree,
and you too should also try to secure an
excéllent brother for yourself.


35. The mother and the daughter Sa-
tyavati having acted thus, they both, O
Yudhistuira, became big with child,


36. Finding his wife quick with child,


that great Rishi, the descendant of Bhrigu,
became pleased at heart, and addressing
her, said :— ; .


37. O excellent lady, you have not done
well in exchanging the ckarz as will soon
be seen. It is also clear that you have
changed the trees.


38. 1 had put the entire accumulated
energy of Brahma in your charu and
Kshatriya energy in the charw of your
mother, Et


When you two shall bathe in your -


lo


» Thad so settled that you would give
birth to a Brabmana whose virtues woutd
‘be farnous throughout the three worlds, and
that she would give birth to an excellent
Kshatriya,.


40-41. But now, O excellent lady, as
you have changed the order (of the charu
so), your mother give birth to an excellent
Brat.mana, and you too, O excellent lady,
will give birth to a Kshatriya of dreadful
deeds. You have not done well, O lady,
by doing this out of affection for your
mother. © :


42. Hearing this, O king, the excellent
lady Satyavati, filled-with sorrow, dropped
upon the ground tike a beautiful creeper
cut in two parts,


43-44. Regaining her senses and bow-
ing ,to her lord whh head (bent), the
daughter of Gadhi said to her husband,
that foremost one of Bhrigt’s race,—O
~ twice-born Rishi, O you who are foremost
amongst those versed in Brahma, have
mercy on me, your wife, whois thus ap-
peasing you and so order that a Kshatriya
son may not be born to me,


45. Let my grandson be such a one as.


will be famous for his dreadful feats if it be
your desire, but not my son, O Brahmana!
Do you grant me this favour,


46. Bett so,—said that Rishi of austere
penances to his wife and then, O king, she
gave birth to a blessed son named Jama-
dagni, | .

47. The famous wife of Gadhitoo gave
birth to the twice-born Rishi Vishwamitra
versed in the knowledge of Brahma, by
favour of that Rishi.


48. The. highly pious Vishwamitra,
though a Kshatriya, gained the dignity of
a Brahmana and became the founder of a
race of Brahmanas.


49. His sons became great progeni-
tors of many races of Brahmanas who
were given to anstere penances, learned in
the Vedas, and founders of many clans,


50—53. The worshipful
chhanda and the powerful Devrat, Akshina,
Shakunta, Vabhru, Kalapatha, the cele-
brated Yajnavalkya, Sthuna of great vows,
Uluka, Mudgala, and the sage Saindha-
vayana, the illustrious Valgujangha and
the great Rishi Galava, Ruchi, the cele-~
brated Vajra,. as also Salankayana,
Liladhya, and Narada, the one known as
Kurchamukha, and Vahuli Mushala as
also Vakshogriva. .


54—61. Anghrika, Naikadrik, Shilayu-
pa, Shita, Suchi, Chakraka,\ Marutan-
tavya, Vataghna, Ashwalayana, and


Madhuch-’


MAHABHARATA.


Shyamayana, Gargya, and favali, as also
Sushruta, Karishi, Safigshrutya, and Para
Paurava, and Tantu, the great sage
Kapila, Tarakayana, Upagahana, Asura-
yani, Margama, Hiranvaksha, Janyhari,
Bhavravayani, and Suti, Bibhuti, Suta,
Surakrit, Arani, Nachika, Champeya,
Ujjayana, Navatantu, Vakanakha, Sayana,
Yati, Ambhoruha, Amatsyashin, Shirishin,
Gardhavi, Urjjayoni, Udapekshin, and the
great Rishi Naradin,—these ascetics were
all sons of Vishwamitra and were versed
in the knowledge of Brahma. O king
VYudhishthira, the greatly austere and
pious Vishwamitra, although a Kshatriya,
became a Brahmana for Richila having
placed the energy of supreme Brahma (in
the charu), O foremost prince of Bharata’s
family ! I have now described to you, in
full, the story of the birth of Vishwamitra
who was gifted with the energy of the sun,
the moon, and the fire-god.


62. O best of kings, if you have any
doubt about any other subject, please let
me know it, so that I may remove it.”


—es


CHAPTER V.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. *O you who know the truths of
religion, { wish to hear of the merits of
religion, | wish to hear of the merits of
mercy, and of the marks of devout men!
Do you, O sire, describe them to me.”


Bhishma said :—


2. “Regarding it, this ancient legend,
the story ef Vasava and the great Shuka,
is cited as an illustration.


3. Inthe dominion of the king of Kashi,
a fowler, having poisoned arrows with him,
went out of his village on a hunting


‘expedition in search of antelopes.


4. Desirous of getting meat, when’in a
big forest in pursuit of the chase, he saw a
drove of antelopes near at hand, and shot
his arrow at one of them.


5. The arrow of that fowler of irrestible
arms, shot for the destruction of the ante-
lope, missing its aim, pierced a powerful
forest-tree,


6. The tree, pierced with that arrow
covered with dreadful poison, withered
away, shedding its leaves and fruits,


7+ The tree having thus withered, a


parrot ‘which had ‘lived in a hoHow of its


ANUSHASAN, PARVA, rt


trunk all his life, did not leave his nest out
of affection for that lordly tree,


8. Motionless starving, silent and
sorrowful, that grateful and virtuous parrot
also withered away with the tree.


9. The-conqueror of Paka (Indra) was
filled with wonder upon seeing that great
and generous bird thus uninfluenced by
misery or happiness and possessing extra-
ordinary resolution.

to. Then Sakra thought,—How could
this bird come to pussess such humane and
generous feelings which cannot be seen in
one of the lower animal creation ?


‘a1. There is nothing wonderful in the
‘matter, for all creatures areseen to show


kindly and generous feelings towards |
others.
ta. Assuming then the shape of a Brah-


mana, Shakra went on the
addressing the bird, said :—


13. O Cuka, UO best of birds, the grand-
daughter of Daksha has become blessed
qby having you as her offspring)! I ask
do you not leave this withered
tree


14. Thus accosted, the Shuka bowed to
bim and thus replied :—Welcome to you,
O king of the gods, Ihave recognised you
by the merit of my austere penances.


15. Well-done, well-done!—said the
thousand-eyed god. ‘Then the latter lauded
him in his mind, saying, —O, how wonder-
ful is the knowledge which he possesses.


16. Although the destroyer of Vala
knew that parrot to be of a greatly virtu-
ous character and meritorious in action, he
still enquired of him’ about the reason of
his love for the tree,


17—18, This tree is withered and it is |


without leaves and fruits, and is unfit to be
the refuge of birds. Why do you then
cling to it? “This forest toa is vast and in
this wilderness there are numberless other
good trees whose hollows are covered with
leaves and which you can choose freely
and to your heart’s content.


19. O patient one, displaying proper
discrimination in your wisdom, do you leave
‘this old tree that is dead and useless and
shorn of all its leaves and no longer capable
of any good,


Bhishma said :—

20-—21. Hearing these words of Shakra,
the virtuous Shuka, heaved a deep sigh,
and sorrowfully replied to him, saying,—O
husband of Sachi, and chief of the gods,
the ordinances of the geds should always


Earth and:


be obeyed. Do you hear of the reason of
the thiag about which you have asked me,


22. Here, within this tree, was I born:
and here in this tree have all the good
traits of my character been developed,
and here in this tree was I protected in my
infancy from the attacks of my enemies.


23. Osinless one, why are you, in your
kindness, interfering with the principle of
my conduct in life? 1 am merciful and
devoutly intent on virtue, and firm in con-
duct.


24. Kindliness of feeling is the highest
test of virtue amongst the good, and this
same merciful and humane feeling is the


- source of eternal happiness to the virtuous.


25. Allthe gods ask you to remove theie
doubts in religion, and for this reason,
O lord, you ‘have been elected their king.


26—27. You should not, O thousand-eyed
one, advise me now to leave this tree for
good. When it was capable of good, it
supported my life. How can I leave it
now? Pleased with these well-meant words
of the parrot, the virtuous destroyer of
Paka, thus said to him:—I am pleased
with your humane and merciful disposition.


28. Do youask a boon of me.—At this,
the merciful parrot craved this boon of him,
saying,—Let this tree revive. .


29. Knowing the great attachment of:
the parrot to that tree and great high cha-
racter, Indra, well-pleased, caused the tree:
to be quickly sprinkled over with nectar.


30—31. Then that tree became revived
and grand through the penanres of the
parrot, and the latter, too, O great king, at
the end of his life, acquired the companion-
ship of Shakra by virtue of that act of
mercy. .


32. Thus, O king, by communion and
companionship with the pious, people ac-,
quire all the objects of their desire even *as
the tree did through its companionship with
the parrot,” ‘


an


CHAPTER VI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—

1. “Of Exertion and Destiny, tell me.
O learned sire who are versed in all the”
scriptures, which is the more potent ?


12


Bhishma said :—~

2. Yhis ancient story of the conversa-
tion of Vasishtha and Brahman. O Yu-
dhisthira, explain this matter.


3. Indays of yore the worshipful Va-
sishtha enquired of Brahman as to which
among these two, vis., the Karma of a
creature acquired in this life, or that ac-


quired in ptistine lives (and called Destiny), -


is the more powerful in shaping his life.


4. ¥hen, O king, the great god Brah-
man, who had originated from the pri-
meval jotus, answered him in these. sweet
and well-reasoned pregnant words.


Brahmana said: —

5. Nothing springs into existence with-
out seed. Without seed, fruits do not grow.
From seeds originate other seeds. Hence
are fruits known to be sprung from seeds.


6. According to the good or bad seed
that the husbandman sows in his field,
he reaps good or bad fruits. ;


7. As, unsown with seed, the soil,
though tilled, becomes fruitless, so, without
personal Exertion, Destiny is of no use.


8. One’s own deeds are like the soil,
and Destiuy is compared to the seed. The
harvest grows from the union of the soil
and seed.


Q—I0. It is seen every day in the world
thatthe doer reaps the fruit of his good
and evil acts; that happiness results from
good deeds, and pain is the outcome of evil
ones; that acts, when done, always fructify;
and that, if not done, no fruit arises.


tr. A man of (good) acts gains merits
with good fortune, while an idler loses his
estate, and reaps evil like the infusion of
alkaline matter injected into a wound.


12. By firm application, one acquires
beauty, fortune, and all sorts of riches.
Everything can be. obtained by Exerc-
tion: but nothing can be gained through
Destiny only, by a man who lacks personal
Exertion.


13. One attainsto heaven, and all the
objects of enjoyment, as also the fulfillment
of his heart’s desires, by well-applied
personal Exertion.


14. All the luminaries in the sky, all the
gods, the Nagas, and the Rakshasas, as
also the Sun and the Moon and the Winds,
have acquired their high status by evolu-
tion from man’s status, by dint of their
own action.

15. Riches, friends, prosperity coming
down from generation to generation, as

" also the sweets of life, are difficult of attain-
ment by those whe want Exertion, |


MAHABHARATA.


_ 16, The Brahmana acquires prosperity

by holy living, the Kshatriya by prowess,
the Vaishya by manly exertion, and the’
Shudra by service.


17. The stingy, the impotent, or the
idter do not acquire riches and other
Objects of enjoyment. Nor are these ever
acquired by the man who is net active or
manly or devoted to the exercise of reli-


‘gious austerities.


18. Even he, the worshipful Vishnu,
who created the three worlds with the
Daityas and all the gods, even He is en-
gaged in austere’ penances in the heart of
the deep.


19. If one’s Karma bore no fruit, then
all actions would become fruitless, and
depending on Destiny men would become
idlers.


20. He who, without following the human
modes of action, follows Destiny only, acts
in vain, like the woman who has an im-
potent husband,


2t. The apprehension of good or evil
in this world is not so great if Destiny be
unfavorable as his apprehension of the
same in the other world if Exertion be
wanting while here.


22. Man’s powers, if properly applied
only follow his Destiny, but Destiny alone
cannot produce any good where Exertion
is wanting,


23. When it is seen that even in the
celestial regions, the position of the gods
themselves is unstable, how would the gods
maintain theic own position or that of others
without proper Karma,


24. ‘The gods do not always approve
of the good actions of others in this world,
for, fearing their own defeat, they try to
thwart the acts of others.


25. Thereis a constant rivalry between
the gods and the Rishis, and if they all
have to go through their Karma, still it
can never be said that thete is no such
thing as Destiny, for it is the latter that
introduces ali Karma,


26. How does Karma originate, if Des-
tiny is the principal motive power of human
action? By this means, -many virtues are
accumulated in the celestial regions.


27. One’s own self is his friend and his
enemy too, as also the witness of one’s good
and evil deeds.


28. Good and evil appear through
Karma, Good and evil acts do not produce
sufficient results.


29. Virtue is the refuge of the gods, and
by virtue everything is acquired. ~ Destiny


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


13


thwarts not the man who has acquired | world, is soon lost to them. Destiny does


Virtue and righteousness.


30. In days of yore, Yayati, falling from
his high position fin heaven, descended on
the Earth but was again restored to the
celestial regions by the ‘good deeds of his
pious grandsons.


3t. The royal sage Pururavas, well-
known as the descendant of Ha, attained
to heaven through the intercession of the
Brahmanas.


32. Saudasa, the king of Koshala,
though dignified by the perfornvance of
Ashwamedha and other sacrifices, came by
the status of a man-eating Rakshasa,
through the course of a great Rishi.


33- Ashwatthaman and Rama, though
both warriors and sons of Ascetics, failed to
acquire heaven by virtue of their own
actions in this world.


34. Vasu, though he celebrated a hun-
dred sacrifices, like a second Vasava, was
sent to the nethermost regions, for making
a single false statement,


35. Vali, the son of Virochana, virtuous
bound by his promise, was sent to the
regions under the Earth, by the prowess of
Vishnu.


35. Was not Janamejaya, who followed
the foot-prints of Shakra, for slaying a
Brahmana woman, checked and put down
by the gods?


27. Was not the twice-born Rishi Vai-
shampayana too, who killed a Brahmana
in ignerance, and was polluted by the
slaughter of a child, put down by the
gods?


38. In days of yore the royal sage Nriga
became changed into a lizard. He had
made gifts of kine into the Brahmanas at
his great sactifice, but this did not help
him, : . :


39.. The royal sage Dhundhumara was
possessed ‘by decrepitude even
engaged in celebrating his sacrifices, and
foregoing all the merits thereof he fell
asleep at Girivraja,

40. The Pandavas too regained their
lost kingdom, of which they had been de-
prived by the powerful sons of Dhrita-


rashtra, not through the influence of the *


Fates, but by recourse of their own heroism.


4t. Do the ascetics of rigid vows, and
given to the practice of austere penances,
denounce their curses by the help of any
supernatural power or only in the exercise
of their own power attained by individual
acts ? :


42. lf possessed by the wicked, all the


good which is gained with difficulty in this.


while’


not help the man that is full
ignorance and avarice.


43- Even as small fire, when fanned by
the wind, becomes highly powerful, so does
Destiny, when helped by individual Exer-
tion, becomes greatly potent.


44. As by the diminution of oil in the.
lamp its light is put out, so does the influ-
ence of Destiny, by the abatement of one’s
acts.


45. Having obtained riches, and woman -
and all the enjoyments of this world, the.
man who is not hard-working is unable to
enjoy them long, but the great man,
diligant in Exertion, can find riches buried
deep in the Earth and watched over by the
Fates,


46. The good man who is prodigal is
sought by the gods for his good conduct,
the celestial world beirig better than the
world of men, but the house of the miser
though full of riches is looked upon by the
gods as the house of the dead.


47. The man who does not exert himself .
is never contented in this world, nor can
Destiny change the course of a man who
has gone wrong. There is no power inhe-
rent in Destiny. As the ‘pupil follows the
preceptor, so does one’s action, guided by
Destiny, follows his own personal exertion.
Where one’s own Exertion is ‘displayed,
there only Destiny shows its hand.


48. O best of ascetics, I have thus des-
cribed all the merits of personal Exertion,
having always known in their true signifi-
cance. .


49. By the influence of Destiny, and by
showing personal Exertion, do men attain
to heaven. ‘The combined help of Destiny
and Exertion, becomes fruitful.”


of spiritual”


CHAPTER VII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued. 7


Yudhisthira said :—


t. “O best of Bharata’s family and the °
foremost of great men, 1 wish to know what
the fruits are of good deeds! Do you en-
lighten me.”


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘I shall tell you what you have asked.
Do you, O Yudhisthira, listen to this which
forms the secret knowledge of the Rishis.


3. Listen tome as IT explain what the
long coveted ends, are which befall men
after death. The fruits of whatever actions
are performed by creatures in- whatever
bodies or forms of existence, are reaped by
the doers while endued with similar bodies.
in whatever states creatures perform good
or evil acts, they reap the fruits thereof in
similar states of succeeding fives. No act
done with the help of the five organs of
sensual pereeption, is ever lost.


4—7. The five sensual organs and the
immortal soul which is the sixth, are its
witnesses. One should devote his eye (to
the service of others); one should devote
his heart (to the same); one should utter
sweet words; one stiould also follow and
worship (one’s guest). ‘This is the sacrifice
with five gifts. He who offers good food to
the unknown, and tired traveller, fatigued
by a long journey, acquires great merit,


8. Those who use the sacrificial platform
as their only bed, obtain palatial mansions
and beds (in subsequent births). He who
wears only rags and barks of trees for dress,
gets good apparel and ornaments. :


. One possessed of penances and
having his soul on Yoga, gets vehictes and
riding animals. ‘he king who lies down
by the side of the sacrificial fire, acquires
vigor and valour. :


to. The man wha casts off the enjoy~
ment of ail delicacies, acquires prosperity,
and he who abstains from animal food,
obtains children ard cattle.


tr. He who lies down with his head
downwards, ot who lives in water, or who
lives secluded and alone in the practice of
Bean ays: acquires all the desired
ends.


12. He who gives shelter to a guest .and
welcomes him with water to wash his feet as
also with food, light and bed, acquires the
merits of the sacrifice with the five gifts.


13. He who on the battle-field, lays
himself down as a warrior on a warrior’s
bed, goes to those eternal region$ where all
the objects of desire are fulfilled, ~

14. Aman, O king, acquires riches who
makes charitable gifts. One gets obedi-
ence to one’s command by the. vow of
silence, all the enjoyments of life by practice
of austerities, long ‘life by Brahmacharya,
and beauty, prosperity and immunity from
disease by abstaining from injury to others.


15. Those who live on fruits and roots
only, acquire Sovereignty, those who live on
only leaves of trees acquire Residence in
heaven. :


16. A man, O king, is said to acquire
happiness, by abstention from food. By


* MAHABHARATA,


eating herbs alone, one gets cows. By
living on grass, one acquices the celestialt
regions,

17. By avoidng all intercourse with his
wife and making ablutions three times a
day and by inhaling the air only for pur-
poses of maintenance one acquires the merit
of a sacrifice. Heaven is gained by the
practice of truth, and nobility of birth by
sacrifices. :


18. The Brahmana- of pure practices
who lives on water only, and performs the
Agnihotra continually, and recites the
Gayatri, acquires a kingdom. By abstain-
ing from food or by restricting it, one
acquires residence in heaven.

19. O king, by avoiding all but the
prescribed diet while celebrating sacrifices,
and by making pilgrimage for twelve
years, one acquires a place better than the
abodes reserved for heroes.


20: By reading all the Vedas, one is
immediately freed from misery, and by
practising virtue in thought, one acquires
the heavenly regions.


21. That man*who shakes off the long-
ing for happiness and material comforts—
a thirst that is difficult of conquest by the
foolish: and which does not abate with the
decline of physical vigour and which clings
to him like a dreadful ;disease,—is able to
secure happiness.


22.’ As the young calf is able to recog-
nise its dam from among a thousand cows,
so do the. pristine deeds of a man follow
him.

23. As the flowers and fruits of a tree,
unmoved by apparent influences, never miss
their proper season, so does Karma done in
a pristine existence bring about its fruits
in proper time.


24. With age, man’s hair grows gray ;
his teeth become toose; his eyes and ears
too become dim in action; but the only
thing that does not decline is his desire for
enjoyments.


25—26. Prajapati is pleased with those
deeds which please one’s father, and the
Earth is pleased with those acts which
please one’s mother, and Brahma is pleased
with those acts which please one’s mother,
and Brahma is adored with those acts that
please one’s preceptor. Virtue is honored
by him who honors these three. The acts
of those who despise these three do not |
help them.


Vaishampayana said :—
27. The princes of the line of Kuru


became filled with surprise upon listening
to this speech of Bhishma. All of them -


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


became pleased in mind and overpowered
with joy.

28. As Mantras applied for gaining
victory, or the performance of the Shoma
sacrifice made without proper gifts, or obla-
tions poured on the fire without proper
hymns, become fruitless and produce evil
results, so sin and evil results originate
from falsehood.


29. O prince, I havethus described to
you this doctrine of the fruition of good
and evil deeds, as recounted by the Rishis
of old. What else do you wish to hear.”


CHAPTER VIII." ¢


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1, ‘Who are deserving of adoration ?
Who are they to whom one may bow? Who
are they, O Bharata, to whom you would
lower your head? Who, again, are they


whom you like? Tell me all this, O
prince.
a. What is that upon which your mind


turn when affliction overwhelms you.
Do you describe to me what is beneficial
here, that is, in this region of human
beings, as also hereafter,


Bhishma said :—


3. I like those twice-born persons whose
highest wealth is Brahma, whose heaven
is their knowledge of the soul, and whose
penances are formed by their diligent study
of the Vedas.


4- My heart longs for those in whose
family persons young and old diligently
bear the ancestral burthens without lan-
guishing under them. nd


5-—-7. Brabmanas well-trained in several
branches of knowledge,  self-controlled,
mild-speeched, conversant ‘with the scrip-
tures, well-behaved, possessed of the
knowledge of Brahma, and’ righteous in
conduct, discourse in respeétable assem-
blies like flights of swans. ‘Tliey in a voice
deep as the muttering of clouds give vent
to alspicious, sweet, excellent, and well-
pronounced words, O Yudhishthira.- In
the courts of monarchs, they spoke these
words fraught with happiness both temporal
and spiritual, themselves being received with
honor and attention and served with res-
pect by these kings.

8. Indeed; my heart tongs after them
who endued with knowledge and all desir-
able attributes, and honowed .by. others,


15


€
listen -to such words when uttered in
assemblies or the courts of kings.


- 9. My heart, O king, always yearns
after them who, for the satisfaction of
Brahmanas, O Yudhishthira, give to them,
with devotion, food that is well-cooked and
clean and wholesome.


to, It is easy to fight in battle, but not
so to make a gift without pride or vanity.


tt. In this world, O Yudhisthira, there
are hundreds of brave men and _ heroes.
While counting them, he who is a hero in
gifts should be considered as superior.


12, O amiable one, if | had been even a
vulgar Brahmana | would have considered
myself as very great, not to speak of one
born in a good family, gifted with righte-
ousness of conduct, and given to penances
and learning,


13. There is no one, O son of Pandu,
in this world, who is dearer to me than
you, O chief of Bharata’s frace, but Bra-
hmanas are dearer to me than you, ;


14. And since, O best of the Kurus, the
Brahmanas: are very much dearer to me
than you, it is by that truth ahat [ expect
to go toall those regions of happiness
which have been gained by my father
Shantanu, '

15. Neither my father, nor my grand-
father, nor any one else connected with me
by blood, is dearer.to me than the Brahe
manas, :


16. I do not expect any fruit, small or
great, from my adoration of the Brah-
manas. d :


i7. On account of what I have done to
the Bratmanas in thought, word, and
deed, I do not feel any pain now. ~


18. People used ta call me as one
devoted to the Brahmanas. This address
always pleased me highly. -‘Fodo good to
the Brahmanas is the most sacred of all
sacred duties.


19. I see many regions of beatitude
waiting for me who have respectfully fol-
lowed the Brahmanas. Very soon shall I
go to those regions for good, O son. ,


20. In this world, O-Yudhishthira, the
duties of women depend upon their hus-
bands. To a woman, verily, the husband
is the god and he is the highest end for
which she should try. As the husband to
the wife, so are the Brahmanas to
Kshatriyas. ,


a1. If there be a Kshatriya hundred
years old,and a good Brahmana child of
only ten years, the latter should be con-
sidered as a father and the former as.a


16


MAHABHARATA,


son, for ameng the two, the Brahmana is | make gifts to Brahmanas after having pro


Superior.


22. A woman, in the absence of her
husband, takes his younger brother for her
lord; so the Earth, not having obtained
Brahmana, made the Kshatriya her king.


23. The Brahmanas should be  pro-
tected like sons and adored like fathers
or preceptors. Indeed, O best of the
Kurus, they served reverentially as people
wait with respect upon their sacrificial or
Homa fires.


24. The Brahmanas are {gifted with
simplicity and righteousness. They are
given totruth. They are always engaged
in the behalf of all creatures. Yet when
angry they are like snakes of dreadful
venom. They should, for these reasons, be
always waited upon and served with respect
and humility.

25. One should, O Yudhishthira,
always fear: these two, vts., Energy and
Penances. Both these should be shirked
or kept at a distance.


26. The effects of both are quick. There


is this superiority, however, of Penances,


vis., that Brahmanas gifted with Penances,
O king, can, if angry, kill the object of
their anger.


27. Even greatest Energy and Penances,
become neutralised if applied against a
Brahmana who has conquered anger. If
the two,—that is, Energy and Penances—
be set against each other, then both of
them would be destroyed. Again when
Energy, is set against Penances, it is sure
te be destroyed without leaving a remnant.
Penances applied against Energy cannot
be destroyed completely.


28. As the herdsman, stick in. hand,
protects the herd, so should the Kshatriya
always protect the Vedas and the Bra-
hmanas.


29. The Kshatriya should protect all
pious Brahmanas as a father protects . his
sons. He should atways look after the
houses of the Brahmanas for finding out
that the means of subsistence may not be
wanting.”


CHAPTER IX,
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.
Yudhisthira said :—
1. “O grandfather, O you of great


splendour, what do those men become who,
“through stupefaction of intellect, do not


mised to make those gifts ?


2. O foremost of all righteous persons,
do tell me what the duties are in this
matter. Indeed, what becomes the end of
those wicked men who do not give alter
having promised to give.”


Bhishma said :—


3. “The person who, after having pro-
mised, does not give, be it little or much,
has the motrofication to witness his hopes
frustraeted like the hopes of a enunch- about
children.


4—5. Whatever good acts such a person
does between the day of his birth and that
of his death, O Bharata, whatever libations
he pours on the sacrificial fire, whatever
gifts he makes, O chief of Bharata’s race,
and whatever penances he performs, all
becomes useless.


6. They who are conversant with the
scriptures hold this as their opinion, ar-
Fiving at it, O chief of the Bharatas, with
the help of a well-ordered understanding.


7, Persons conversant with the scrip-
tures also opine that such a man may be.
purified by giving away.a thousand horses
with dark ears.


8. Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course between a jackal and an ape.


g. While both were human beings, O
scorcher of enemies, they were intimate
triends. After death one of them became
a jackal and the other an ape.


10. Seeing the jackal one day eating an
animal carcase in the midst of a cremato-
rium, the ape, remembering his own and
his friend’s pristine birth as human beings,
addressed him, saying,»


tr. Verily, what dreadful sin did you
commit in your pristine birth on account of
which you are obliged in this birth to feed
in a crematorium upon such repulsive food
as the putrid carcase of an animal?


12. Thus addressed, the jackal replied
to the ape, saying,—Having promised to
give toa Brahmana I! did not make him
the gift.


13. Itis for that sin, O ape, that I have
fallen into this wretched state.of existence.
It is for that reason that, when hungry, I
am obliged te eat such food. .


Bhishma said :—

14. The jackal then, O best of men,
addressed the monkey and said,—What
sin did you commit for which you have
‘become an ape. aS


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


The ape said :—

15. Inmy former life I used to eat the
fruits belonging to Brahmanas. Hence
have I become an ape. Hence it is clear
that one ‘endued with intelligence and
learning should never take what belongs
to Bratmanas. As one should abstain
from this, one should avoid also all quar-
rels with Brahmanas. Having promised,
one should certainly make the promised
gift to them.


Bhishma said :—


16. I heard this, O king, from my pre-
ceptor while he was discoursing upon the
subject of Brahmanas. I heard this from
that pious person when he recounted the old
and sacred declarations on this topic.


17. Lheard this from Krishna also, O
king, while he wap discoursing, O son of
Pandu, upon Brahmanas,


18., The property of a Brahmana should
never be taken. They should always be
let alone. Poor, or miserly, or young in
years, they should never be dishonoured,


1g. The Brahmanas have always taught
me this. Having promised to make them
a pif, the gift should be made. A supe-
tior Brahmana should never be disappoint-
ed in his expectations.


20. A Brahimana, O king, in whom an
expectation has been raised, has, O king,
been said to be like a burning fire.


21, That man upon whoma Brahmana
with raised expectations looks, is sure,
O king, to be reduced to ashes as a heap of
straw is capable of being consumed bya
burning fire.


22. When the Brahmana, gratified by
the king, addresses the king in delightful
and affectionate words, he becomes, O
Bharata, a source of great good to the king,
for he continues to live in the kingdom
like a physician fighting against various
ills of the body.


23. Such a Brahmana is sure to main-
tain peacefully the sons and grandsons
and animals and relatives and ministers
and other officers and the city and the pro-
vinces of the king.


24. Such is the energy of the ‘Brah-
mana, like to that of the thousand-rayed
Sun himself, on the Earth.


25. Therefore, O VYudhishthira, if one

_ wishes to come by a respectable or happy

order of being in his next birth, he should,

having made the promise to a Brahmana,

. certainly satisfy it by actually making the
gift to him.


3


}


17


26. By making pgifts to a Brahmana
one is sure to acquire the highest heaven,
Verily, the making of gifts is the highest
of deeds that one can perform,


27. The gods and the departed manes
are supported by the gifts one makes toa
Brahmana. Hence one endued with know-
ledge should ever make gifts to the Bra
hmanas,


28. O chief of the Bharatas, the Brahe
mana is considered as the highest object
to whom gifts should be made. At no
time should a Brahmana be received withe
out due adoration.”


oem


CHAPTER X.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).-»
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—~


1. “I wish to know, O royal saga,
whether any sin is committed by one who
from interested or disinterested friendship
delivers instructions to a person of a low
order of birth.


2. O grandfather, I wish to hear this
explained to me in full. The course of
duty is highly subtile. Men are often seen
to be stupefied about that course.


Bhishma said :—


3. About it, O king, I shall recite to you,
in due order, what I heard certain Rishis
say in days of yore.


4. Instruction should not be given to
one who belongs to a low or degraded
caste. It is said that the preceptor who
delivers instruction to such a person come
mits great sin.


5- Listen to me, O chief of Bharatag,
as 1 recite to you, O Yudhishthira, this
incident which took place in days of
yore, O king, of the evil consequences of
imparting of instruction to a low-borna
person fallen into distress. :


6." The imcident which I shall describe,
took place in the hermitage of certain twice=
born sages which stood on the auspicious
breast of Himavat. There, on the breast
of that king of mountains, was a sacred
asylum adorned with tiees of various
kinds. s


7. Overgrown also with various species
of creepers and plants, it was the resort of
many animals and birds, Inhabited by
Siddhas and Charanas also, it was highly
delightful on account of the woods that
flowered there at every season.


'


18


8. Many Brahmacharins lived there,
and many hermits. Many Brahmanas
lived there, who were highly blessed and
whe resembled the sua or the fire in energy
and effulgence.


g. Ascetics of various kinds, observant
of varicus restraints and-vows, as also
others, O king of the Bharatas, who had
gone through initiatory cites and were frugal
in fare and possessed of purified souls,
lived there,


to, Large numbers of Valikhilyas and
many who observed the vow of Sanyasa
_also, used to live there. On account of
all this, the hermitagejresounded with the
recitation of the Vedas and the sacred
Mantras uttered by its dwellers,


tt. Once upon a time a Shudra endued
with meccy for all creatures, ventured to
come into that hermitage. Arrived at that
retreat, he was duly honored, by all the
ascetics.


12. Seeing those ascetics of diverse
classes who were endued with great energy,
that resembled the gods, and who. were
observing diverse kinds of initiation, O
Bharata, the Shudra became highly pleas-
de at heart.

13—14. Seeing everything, O chief of
Bharata’s race, the Shudra felt inclined
to devote himself tq the practice of
penances. Touching the feet of the head
of the order, O Bharata, he said to him,—
Through your favour, O foremost of twice-
born persons, I wish to learn the duties of
religion. You should, O illustrious one,
describe to me those duties and intro-
duce me into a life of Renunciation.


15. I am certainly inferior in colour, O
illustrious one, for [ am by caste a Shudra,
O best of men! LI wish to wait upon and
serve you here. Be pleased with me who
humbly seek your shelter.


The Kulapati said :—


16. It is impossible that a Shudra should
live here following the life of Renuncia-
tion. If it pleases you, you may stay here
and,serve us.


17. Forsooth, by such service you shall
acquire many regions of great happiness.


Bhishma said :—


18. Thus addressed by the ascetic, the
-Shudra began to think in his mind, O
king,—How should I now act? I have
great reverence for those religious duties
which lead to merit.


19. Let this, however, be settled, that
I shall do what would be for my behoof.


Proceeding to a spot that was distant from | thing as the Rishi directed.


MAHABHARATA,


that hermitage, he made a hut of the twigs
and leaves of trees.


20. Erecting also a sacrificial platform,
and making a little room for his sleep, and
some platforms for ihe use of the gods, he
beyan, O chief of the Bharatas, to lead a
life governed by rigid observances and
vows and to practise penances, abstaining
entirely from speech.


2t. He began to perform ablutions
thrice a day, observe other vows, make
sacrifices to the gods, pour libations on the
sacrificial fice, and adore and worship the
gods in this way.


22—23. Governing all carnal desires,
living sparingly upon fruits and roots, go-
verning all his senses, he daily welcomed and
entertained all that came to his hermitage
as guests, offering them herbs and fruits
which grew in abundan& around. In this
way he passed a very long time in that
hermitage of his. .


24. Oneday an ascetic came to that
Shudra’s asylum for making his aquaint-
ance. ‘he Sudra welcomed and adored
the Rishi with due rites, and pleased him
highly. :

25. Possessed of great energy, and a
righteous soul, that Rishi of rigid vows
conversed with his host on many: agreeable
subjects and informed him of the place
whence he had come. “


26. In this way, O chief of the Bharatas,
that Rishi, O best of men, came into the
hermitage of the Shudra in numerable
times for seeing him.


27. Onone of these occasions the Shudra,
O king, addressing the Rishi, said,—I wish
to perform the rites :that are ordained for
the Pitris. Do you show me kindness in
this matter.


28. Very well_—the Brahmana said in
reply to him, O king.


29. Then, purifying himself by a bath,
the Shudra brought water for the Rishi to
wash his feet, and he also brought some
Kusha grass, and wild herbs and fruits,
and a sacred seat, and the seat called
Veishi.


30—31. The Vrishi, however, was placed
by the Shudra towards the south, with its
head turned to the west. Seeing this and
knowing that it was against the ordinance,
the Rishi addressed the Shudra, saying,—
Place the Vrishni with its head turned
towards the East, and having purified
yourself, do you sit with your face turned
towards the north.—The Shudra did every<


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


32—35. Endued with great intelligence,
and practising righteousness, the Shudra
weceived every direction, about the Sraddha,
as laid down in the ordinance, from that
Rishi gifted with penances, marking the
manner of spreading the Kusha grass, and
placing the Arghyas, and as regards the
rites to be observed in the matter of the
libations to be poured and the food to be
offered. After the rites in honor of the
Pitris had been finished, the Rishi, was
sent away by the Shudra, whereupon he
returned to his own abode. After a long
time, the whole of which he passed prac-
tising such penances and vows, the Shudra
ascetic died in those woods. On account
of the merit he acquired by those prac-
tices, the Shudra, in his hext life, was born
in the family of a great king, and in time
became possessed of great splendour.
The twice-born Risht also, when the time
came, paid his debt to Nature.


36. In his next life, O'chief of Bharata’s
race, he was born in the family of a priest.
Thus those two, vzz., that Shudra who had
passed a life of penances and that twice-
born Rishi who had ont of kindness given
the former some instructions in the matter


of the rites performed in honour of the,


Pitris, became re-born, the one as the son
of a royal race and the other as the member
of a priestly family.


37. Both of them began to grow and
both gained great knowledge in the usual
branches of study. ‘The Brabmana became
well versed in the Vedas as also in the
Atharvans,


38. The re-born Rishi gained great
perfection in all sacrifices ordained in the
Sutras, of the Vedanga which deals with
religious rites and observances, astrology
and astronomy. He took great pleasure in
thesSankhya philosophy too.


39. Meanwhile, the re-born Shudra who
had become a prince, when his father the
king Zdted, performed his last rites; and
after .he had purified himself by performing
all the obsequial rites, he was installed by
the subjects of his father as their king on
his paternal throne.


40. But soon after his own installation
as king, he installed the re-born Rishi as
his priest. Having made the Brahmana
his priest, the king began to pass his days


happily.


41—42. He ruled his kingdom piously
and protected and maintained all his sub-
jects. Every day, however, the king, see-
ing his priest on the occasion of receiving
benedictions from him as also of the perfor-
mance of ‘religious and other sacred rites,
smiled or laughed loudly. In this way, O


19


king, the re-born Shudra who had become a
king, laughed at seeing his priest on num-
berless occasions.


43- The priest, marking that the king
always smiled or laughed ;whenever he
bappened,to look at him, became angry,


44. On one occasion he _ met the king
in a place where‘there was nobody present.
He pleased the king by agreeable conver-
sation,


45. Taking advantage of’ that moment,
O chief of Bharata’s race, the priest ad-
dressed the king, saying,—O you of great
splendour, I pray you to, grant mea single
boon.


The king said :—

46. Of ,boons, O best of twice-born
persons, Lam ready to grant you a hun-
dred, what do you say ,then of one only?
From the affection i have for you and the
reverence in which I hold you, there is na-
thing that I cannot give you.


The priest said :—

47. wish to have only one boon, if, O
king, you have been pleased with me.
Promise that you would tell me the truth,
instead of any untruth.


Bhishma said :—


48. Thus addressed by the priest, O
Yudhisthira, the king said to him—So be
it! 1f I know what you would ask me, I
shail certainly tell you truly. If, on the
other hand, I do{not know it, I shall not say
anything.


The priest said :—


49. Every day, on occasions of receiving
benedictions from me, when, again, J am
engaged in the performance of religious
rites, on your behalf, on occasions also of
the Homa and other rites of propitiation,
why do you laugh upon seeing me?


50. Seeing you laugh at me on all occa-
sions, my mind shrinks with shame, I
have made you promise, O king, that you
would answer me truly. You should not
tell an untruth,


51. There must be some grave reason
for your conduct. Your laughter cannot
be causeless, I have great curiosity to
know the reason. Wo} you’ speak truly to


me.
The king said :—
52. While you have thus accosted me,


O twice-born one, I am bound to enlighten
you even if the matter be one that -should
not be given out to you! I must tell you the


20


truth. Do you listen. to me with
attention, O twice-born one.


53. Listen, O foremost of twice-born
persons, to me as I give out to you what
took place (to us) in our pristine births. [|
remember that birth. Do you listen to me
with concentrated mind.


54. In my former life I was a Shudra
engaged in the practice of severe penances.
You, O best of twice-born persons, were a
Rishi of austere penances, :


55. O sinless one, pleased with me, and
moved by the desire of doing me good, you,
O Brahmana, were pleased to give me
certain instructions about the rites I per-
formed in honor of my departed manes,


56. You instructed me about the manner
of spreading the Viishi and the Kusha
blades and of offering libations and meat
and other food, O foremost of ascetics, On
account af this transgression of yours you
are born as a priest.


57. I have taken birth as a king, O
foremost of Brabmanas. See the changes
that Time encompasses. You have reaped
this fruit on account of your having ins-
tructed me.


58. Itis for this reason, O Brahmana,
that I smile at seeing you, O foremost of
twice-born persons. I- do not certainly
laugh at you from desire of disregarding
you. You are my preceptor. ;


59. I am really very sorry at this
change of condition. My heart burns at
the thought. I remember our former births,
hence do I laugh at seeing you.


60. Your austere penances were all
destroyed by the instructions you gave mie.
Removing your present office of priest, do
you try to regain a superior birth,


6r. Do you exert so that you may not
obtain in your next life a birth meaner than
your present one. Take as much riches
as you wish, O learned Brahmana, and
purify your soul, O best of men.


rapt


Bhishma continued :— i


62. Dismissed by the king, the Brah-
mana made many gifts, to persons of his
own own order, of riches and land and
villages,


63. He observed many rigid and severe
vows as laid down by the foremost of Brah-
manas, He sojourned to many sacred
waters and made many gifts to Brahmanas
in those places.


64. Making gifts of kine to persons of
the twics-born order, his soul became
gurified and-he succeeded in gaining a
knowledge of it. Gaing to that very


MAHABHARATA.


asylum where he had lived in his former
birth, he practised very severe penances.


65. Asthe result of all this, O foremost
of kings, that Brahmana gained the highest


success. He became an object of respect
with all the ascetics who lived in that
asylum,


66. In this way, O best of kings, that
twice-born Rishi fell into great distress.
The Brahmana should, therefore, never give
instructions to Shudras,


67. Hence, O king, the Brahmana
should avoid delivering instructions to such
as are low-born), for it was by giving ins-
tructions to a low-born person a Brahmana
came to grief,


68. O best of kings, the Brahmana
should never desire to acqnire instruction
from, or impart instruction to, a person who
belongs to the lowest order.


69. Brahmanas and, Kshatriyas and
Vaishyas, these three orders, are considered
as twice-born. By delivering instruction
to these, a Brahmana does not commit any
sia.


jo. They, therefore, who are goad,
should never discourse on any subject, for
giving any instruction, before persons of the
inferior caste. ‘The course of morality is
highly subtile and incapable of being un-
derstood by persons of uncleansed soul,


7t. It is far this reason that ascetics
adopt the vow of silence, and, honored by
all, pass through initiation without speaking
asingle word, For fear of saying what is
incorrect or what may offend, ascetics never
utter a single word.


72. Even men who are righteous and
endued with every accomplishment, and
truth and simplicity of conduct, have been
known to commit great sin on account of
words spoken improperly.


73. Instruction should never be given
on anything toany person, If on account
of the instructions given, the instructed
commit any sin, that sin attaches to the


Brahmana who gave the instruction.
4


74. The wise man, therefore, who wishes
to acquire merit, should always act with
wisdom. That instruction which is given
in exchange for money always sullies the
instructor.


-75. Requested by others, one should
say only what is correct after determining
it with the help of reflection. One should
give instruction in such a way that one may,
by giving it, acquire merit.


77»
about


I have thus told you everything
instructions, Very often persons


ANU3HASANA PARVA.


become plunged into great afflictions on ac-
count of giving instruction. Hence it is
proper that one should abstain from giving
instruction to others,”


eee


CHAPTER Xi.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—<
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—


1. ‘Tell me, O grandfather, in what kind
of man or woman, O chief of the Bharatas,
does the goddess of Prosperity always
live.”


Bhishma said :—


2. “About it, I shall describe to you
what took place and what I have heard.
Once on a time, the princess Rukmini put
this question in the presence of Devaki’s
son.


3. Seeing the goddess of Prosperity,
shining with beauty and gifted with the hue
of the lotus, the mother of Pradyumna


having the emblem of Makara on his-


banner, filled with curiosity, said these
words.
4. Whoare those beings whom you help


and whom you serve? Who, again, are
those whom you do not serve? O you who
are dear to him who is the lord of all crea-
tures, tell me this truly, O you who are
equal to a great Rishi in penances and
power.


5. Thus addressed by*the princess, the
. goddess of Prosperity, with a face beautiful
like the moon, and, actuated by grace in
the presence of the deity having the
emblem of Garuda-on his banner, said
these words in reply which were sweet and
charming.


Shree said :—


6. QO blessed lady, I always live with
him who is eloquent, active, attentive to
business, free from anger, given to the
adoration of the gods, endued with grati-
tude, has his passions under complete
restraint, and is high-minded in every-
thing.


zg. never live with one who does not
attend to business, who is an unbeliever,
who causes an intermixture by his fustful
habit, who is ungrateful, who is of impure
deeds, who uses harsh and cruel words,
who is a thief, and who cherishes malice
towards his preceptors and other elders.


8. I never live in those persons who are
gifted with little energy, strength, life, and


al


honor, who are distressed at every tile,
and who always indulge in anger. Nor d

I ever live with those who think in one wag
and act in a different way.


9. I never live also with him who never
wishes for any acquisition for himself, or
him who is so blinded as to rest satisfied
with the lot in which he finds himself with-
out any exertion, or with those who are
contented with small gains,


1o. I live with those wha perform the
duties of their own order, or those who are
conversant with the duties of virtue, or those
who are given to the service of the aged, or
those who have their passions under res-
traint, or those that are gifted with purified
souls, or those who observe the virtue of
forgiveness, or those who are able and
prompt in action, or with such women as
are forgiving and self-controlled.


11. L live with those women also who
are given to truth and sincerity and who
adore the gods. Ido not live with those
women also who do not look after house-
hold furniture and provisions scattered all
around?the house, and who always utter
words against the wishes of their husbands,


52.431 always avoid;those women who are
fond of the houses of other people and who
have no modesty. On the other hand, I
live with those women who are devoted to
their husbands, who are blessed in conduct,
and who are always adorned with orna-
ments and well-clad.


13. TI always’live with those women who
are truthful in words, who are handsome
and lovely in appearance, who are blessed
and who are gifted with all accomplish-
ments. I always avoid such women who are
sinful and unclean or impure, who always
lick the corners of their mouths, who have
no patience or fortitude, and who are fond
of{dispute and quarreling ; who are indolent
and sleepy and always inclined to lie down.


I always live in conveyances and the ani-~ |


mals that drag them, in maidens, in orna-
ments and good dresses, in sacrifices, in
clouds charged with rain, in full-blown
lotuses, and m those stars that covers the
autumnal sky. I live in elephants, in the
cowpen,.in good seats, and_in lakes adorn-
ed with full-blown lotuses.


16. I five also in such rivers as pass by
with sweet murmurs, melodious with the
music of cranes, having banks adorned with
rows of various trees, and resorted to by
Brahmanas and ascetics.


17.
which have deep and extensive waters
rendered turbid by lions and elephants


I always live in those rivers also_


22


plunging into them for bathing or satisfy-
ing theie thirst. I live also in angry
elephants, in bulls, in kings, on the throne,
and in good men.


18. I alway live in that house in which
the inmate pours libations on the sacrificial
fire and adore kine, Brahmanas, and the
gods. I live in that house where at the
proper time offerings are made, to the
gods, of flowers in course of worship.


19. I always live in such Brahmanas as
are given to the study of the Vedas, in
Kshatriyas devoted to the observance of
virtue, in Vaislyas devoted to cultivation,
and in Shudras devoted to the service of
the three upper castes.


go. I live, with a heart firm and un-
shaken, in Narayana, in my embodied self.
In Him exists virtue, full and perftct,
devotion to the Brahmanas, and the quality
of goodness.


at. Can I not say, O lady, that {do
not live in my embodied form ? That person
in whom f live in spirit increases in virtue
and fame and wealth and objects of
desire.”


CHAPTER XII. |


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

1. You should, O king, tell me truly
which of the two, vés., man or woman,
gets the greater pleasure from an act of
unjon with each other. Kindly remove
my doubt about it.”


Bhishma said :—

2. To illustrate this question, the old
discourse between Bhangaswana and
Shakra is cited in this connexion.


3. In days of old there lived a king
name Bhangaswana. He was very pious
and was known asa royal sage. He was,
however, childless, O king, and, there-
fore, made a sacrifice from desire of getting
a son.


4. The sacrifice which that powerful
king celebrated was the Agnishtuta, which
on account of the god of fire being alone
worshipped in it, is always disliked by
Indra. Yet it is the sacrifice thatis desired
by men when for the object of getting
children they seek to purify themselves of
their sins.


Learning that the king was desirous
of performing the Agnishtuta, the highly


_ablutions.


MAHABHARATA.


blessed king of the gods, o1., Indra, began
from that moment to look for the short
comings of that royal sage of well controll-
ed soul,


6. Despite all his careful watch Indra,
however, O &ing, could not find any short-
comings on the part of the great king.
Sometime after, one day, the king went on
a hunting expedition.

7. Saying to himself,—This, indeed, is
an opportunity,—Indra stupefied the king.
The king went alone on his horse, con-
founded, because of the king of the gods
having stupefied his senses.


8. Stricken with hunger and thirst, the
king's confusion was so great that he could
not see the cardinal points. Indeed,
stricken with thirst, he began to rove
about.


9. He then saw a lake that was highly
beautiful and was full of transparent water.
Descending from his horse, and plunging
into the lake, he made his’ animal to drink.


10. Tying his horse then, whose thirst
had been satisfied, to a tree, the king
plunged into the lake again for doing his
To his surprise he found that
he was metamorphosed by virtue of the


“waters, into a woman.


tt. Seeing himself thus changed in
respect of sex itself, the king became filled
with shame. With his senses and mind
completely agitated, he began to think thus
with his whole heart.


12—13. Atlas, how shall I ride my
horse? How return to my capital? On
accourt of the Agnishtuta sacrifice I have
got a hundred sons all gifted with great
strength, and all children a my own loins !
Alas, thus changed, what shall I say to
them? What shall Lsay tomy wives, my
relatives and well-wishers, and my subjects
of the city and the provinces?


14. Rishis versed in the truths of duty
and religion and other matters say that
mildness and softness and susceptibility to
extreme agitation ace the characteristics of
women, and that activity, hardness, and
energy are the characteristics of men.
Alas, my manliness is gone! For why has
femininity possessed me? On account of
this change of sex, how shall 1 succeed in
riding my horse again ?

16. Having thought thus the king, with
great exertion, mounted his horse and
returned to his capital, changed though he
had been into a woman,


17. Seeing that extraordinary change
his sons and wives and servants, and his
subjects .of the city and the provinces
were extremely amazed.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


18. Then addressing them all, that
toyal sage, that foremost of orators, said,—
I had gone out on a hunting expedition,
accompanied by a large army. Losing all
knowledge of the cardinal points I entered
a thick and dreadful forest, moved by the
fates.


tg. In that terrible forest, 1 became
very much thirsty and lost my senses. I
then saw a beautiful lake abounding with
fowl of all sorts.


20—21t. Plunging into that Jake for
performing my ablutions, I was changed
into a woman !—Summoning then his wives
and counsellors, and all hissons by their
names, that best of kings changed into a
-woman said to them these words :—Do
ye enjoy this kingdom happily. About
myself, I shall go to the forest, ye sons,


22. Having said thus to his children,
the king went to the forest. Ariived there,
she arrived at a hermitage inhabited by an
ascetic,


23—24. By that ascetic the changed
monarch gave birth to a hundred sons.
Taking all those children of hers, she
went to where her former children were,
and addressing the latter, said, Ye are the
children of my loins while 1 was a man.
These.are my children given birth to by me
in this state of change. Sons, do you all
enjoy my kingdom together, like brothers
born of the same parents.


25—26. Thus commanded by _ their
parent, all the brothers, in a body, began
to enjoy the kingdom as their joint property.
Seeing those children of the king all
jointly enjoying the kingdom as brothers
born of the same parents, the king of the
gods, filled with anger, began to reflect,—
By transforming this royal sage into a
woman, I have, .it appears, done him good
instead of an injury.


27. Saying this, the king af the gods,
viz., Indra of a hundred sacrifices, asuming
the form of a Brahmana, went to the capital
of the king and meeting alt the children
ciecernes in creating dissensions amongst
them,


28. He said to them,—Brothers never
remain at peace even when they are the
children of the same father. ‘The sons of
the sage Kashyapa, vis., the gods and the
Asuras, fell out with each other on account
of the sovereignty of the three worlds,


29. As regards you princes, you are the
children of the royal sage Bhangaswana.
‘These others are the children of an ascetic.
The gods and the Asuras are children of
even one common father.


ag


30. This kingdom, your paternal pro-
perty is being enjoyed by these children of
an ascetic,—with these words, Indra suc-
ceeded in creating disunion amongst them,
so that they very soon engaged in battle ~
and killed each other.


31. Hearing this, king Bhangaswana,
who was living as an ascetic woman, burne
ing with grief and began to bewail. The
king oi the gods, vtz., Indra, assuming the.
form of a Brahmana, came where the ascetic
lady was living, and meeting her, said,—O
you having a beautiful face, with what grief
do you burn so that you are thus bewailing ?
Seeing the Brahmana, the lady told him in
a piteous tone.


33. Two hundred sons of mine, O twice-
born one, have been killed by Time: If
was formerly a king, O learned Brahmana
and in that state had a hundred sons.


34. These were begotten by me after my
ewn form, .O best of twice-born persons!
On one occasion | went on a hunting ex-
pedition. Stupefied, I travelled amidst a
thick forest.


35. Seeing at last a lake, 1 plunged into
it. Rising, O foremost of Brahmanas, {
found that I had. become a woman, Re-
turning to my capital I installed my
sons in the kingdom and then left for the
forest, :


36. Changed into a woman, 1 bore a
hundred sons to my husband who is a
great ascetic. All of them were born in
the ascetic’s retreat. I took them to the


capital. ;


37. My children, through the influence
of Lime, fell out with each other, O twice-
born one! Thus afflicted by Destiny, f
am bewailing.


38. Indra addressed him in these harsh
words,—In former days, O lady, you gave
me great pain, for you did perform a sacrie.
fice that is disliked by Indra.;


39- Indeed, though I was present, you
did not invoke me with honors. 1 am that
Indra, O you of wicked understanding! It
is I with whom you sought hostilities.


- 40. Seeing Indra, the royal sage fell at
his feet, touching them with his head, and
said,—Be pleased with me, O foremost of
gods.. The sacrifice of which you speak
was performed from a desire of offspring.


4t. You should, therefore, pardon me.
Seeing the transformed king prostrate him-
self thus to him, Indra became pleased with
him and and wished to give him a boon.


42. Which of your sons, O king, do you
wish, should revive, those whom you gave


24


birth to as a woman, or those who were be-
gotten by you as a man,


43. Joining her hands, the ascetic lady,
answered jlndra, saying,—O Vasava, let
those sons of mine revive who were borne
by me as'a woman.


44. Filled with wonder at this reply,
Indra once more asked the lady,—Why do
you cherish less affection for those children
of thine who were begotten by you as a
man 7?


45. Why is it that you love more those
children that were borne by you in your
changed state? [I wish to hear the reason
of this difference in your love. You should
tell me everything,


The lady said :—


49. The affection that is cherished by a
woman is much greater than that which is
cherished by aman. Therefore, O Shakca,
I wish those children to revive that were
borne by me as a woman.


Bhishma said :—


47. hus addressed, Indra became
highly pleased and said to her,—O truthful
de let all your children come back into
ife.


48. Do you take another boon, O fore-
most of kings,—whatever you like, O you
of excellent vows. Do you take from me
whatever dignity you choose, that of wo-
man or of man.


The lady said :—


49-51. I wish to remain a woman, O
Sakca. In fact, I do not wish to become a
man, O Vasava.—Hearing this answer,
Indra once more asked her, saying,—
Why is it, O powerful one, that leaving
aside the dignity of manhood you seek for
that of womanhood? Thus accosted that
foremost of kings transformed into a wo-
man, answered,—In sexual intercourse, the
pleasure that women enjoy is always much
greater than what is enjoyed by men.
Therefore, O Sakra, I wish to continue a
woman,


52. O foremost of the gods, truly do I
say to youthat { derive greater pleasure
in my present state of womanhood. I am
quite content with this state of ,womanhood
that I now have. Do you leave me now, O
king of heaven.


53. Hearing these words of hers, the
lord of the gods answered,—So be it,—
and bidding her farewell, went to heaven,
Thus. O king, it is known that woman
derives much greater pleasure than men
under the circumstances you have asked.”


MAHABHARATA.


CHAPTER XIIL


(ANUSHASANA PARVA)—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. “What should a man doin order to
pass happily through this and the other
world. How, indeed, should one act?
What practices should one follow with this
view ?”


Bhishma said :—


2. “One should avoid the three deeds
which arejdone with the body, the four which
are done with words, |the three which are
done with the mind, and the ten roads of
action.


3. The three deeds which are done with
the bedy and should be wholly avoided are
the destruction of the lives of other crea-
tures, theft or misappropriation of others’
properties, and the enjoyment of of other
people’s wives.

4- The four acts which are done with
words, O king, and which should never be
done or even thought of, are evil jconversa-
tion, harsh words, giving other people’s
faults, and falsehood. ‘

§. Coveting the possessions of others,
doing harm to others, and disbelief in the
Vedas, ate thie three deeds done with the
mind which should always be avoided.


6. Hence, one should never do any evil
deed in speech, body, or mind. By doing
good and evil deeds, one is sure to enjoy
or ireap the just consequences thereof.
Nothing can be more certain than this.”


CHAPTER XIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—


1. “QO son of the River Ganga, you have
heard all the names of the oLrd of the uni-
verse. ‘Tell us, O grandfather, all the
names that are applied, O powerful one, to
Him who is called Isha and Shambhu.


2. Tell us all those names which are
applied to Him who is called Vabhru or
vast, Him who has the universe for his
form, Him who is the illustrious Lord of all
the gods and the Asuras, who is called
Shankara, and who has an origin that is
unmanifest. Tell us also of the power of
Mahadeva.”


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


Bhishnta said :—

3. Lam quite incompetent to recite the
virtues of the highly intelligent Mahadeva,
He prevades ail thinys in the universe and
yet is not seen anywhere, _ |


_ 4. He is the creator of Brahman,
Vishnu, aad Indra, and he is. their lord.
All the gods, from Brahman to the Pisha<«
chas, adore him, :


5. Heis above both Prakriti and Pa-


tusha. [tis of Him that Rishis, conversant
with Yoga and possessing a knowledge of
all subjects think and reflect.


6. He is indestructible and Supreme
Brahma. He is both existent and non-
existent. Agitating both Nature and Soul
by His energy, He created therefrom the
universal lord of creatures, vis., Brahman,


7. Who is there, who is competent to
recount the victues of that god of gods, who
is gifted with supreme Intelligence 2 Man
is sulj-ct to conception, birth, deciepitude,
and death,


8.
understand Bhava? Only Narayana, O
son, that holder of the conch, the discus,
and the mace, can comprehend Mahadeva,


g. He gifted with knowledge. He is
the foremost of afl beings in qualities. He
is Vishnu, because he prevades the uni-
verse. He is irresistible. Gifted with
spiritual vision, He is possessed of supreme
Energy. He sees ali things with the eye of
Yoga.


10. Onaécount of his devotion to the
illustrious Rudca whom he pleased, O
Bharata, in the hermitage of Vadari, by
penances, that the great Krishna has
succeeded in overwhelming the entire
universe.


1. O king of kings, itis through Ma-
heshwara of celestial vision that Vasudeva
has got the qualitiy of universal agree-
ableness,—an agreeableness. which is much
greatec than riches,


1% For a full thonsand years this
Madhava practised the austerest penances
andat last succeeded in pleasing the
illustrious and boon-giving Shiva, that
lord of all the mobile and the immobile
universe. ~ :


13. In_every new cycle has Krishna
pleased Mahadeva. In every cycle has
Mahadeva been: pleased with the great
devotion of the great Krishna,


14. Hari, who himself is above ail
decay, saw the power of the great Maha-
deva,—that original cause of the univese,
~on the occasion af his penances in the


4


Being such, what man like me cai


25


retreat of Vadari undergone for getting a
son.

18. 1 do not, O Bharata, see any one
wha is superior to Mahadeva. Only Krishna
is competent to explain the names of that
god of gods fully and without creating the
desire of hearing more.

16. This mighty-armed one of VYadu’s
face is alone competent to tell the qualities
of the illustrious Shiva. Verily, O king,
only he is able to describe fully the power
of uve Supreme god.


Vaishampayana said :—

17..-.Having said these words, the illus~
trious Bhishma, the grandfather of the
Kurus, addressing Vasudeva, said the
following words describing the greatness of
Bhava, O king. 3


Bhishma said :—
18, Yon are the Lord of aff the gods and


the Asuras. You are illustrious, You are
Vishnu, because you pervade the entire
universe. Yor should describe those sub-
jects connected with Shiva of universal form
about which Yudhisthira bas asked me.


19. In days of yore, the Rishi Tandin,
originated from Brahman, recited in Brah+
man’s region and before Brahman himself
the thousand names of Mahadeva,


19. Do you recite those names before
this assemblage of Rishis having asceticism
for their wealth, observant of high vows,
possessed of self-control, and numbering
the Island-born Krishna among them, may
hear you.


21. Doyou discourse the high blessed
ness of Him who ts immutable, who is
always cheerful and happy, who is Hotri,
who is the universal Protector, who is
Creator of the universe, and who is called
Mundin and Kaparddin. -


Vasudeva said :—

22. The very gods with Indra, and the
Grandfather Brahman numbering among
them, and the great Rishis also, cannot


understand the cotirse of Mahadeva’s deeds
teuly and full,


23. Even He is the end which all righte»
ous people gain, The very Adityas, who
are gifted with subtile sight, are unable to
see his abode. How then can one who is
merely a man succeed in comprehending
Him? ;


- 24. I shall, therefore. truly recount to
you some only of the qualities of that illus-
trious killer of Asuras, who is considered as
the Lord of all sacrifices and vows,


26


x


Vaishempayana said :-—

25. Having said these words, the illus-
trious Vasudeva began his discourse on the
qualities of the great Mahadeva gilted with
the highest intelligence, alter having puri-
hed himself by touching water.


Vasudeva said :— -


26. Hear, ye foremost of Brahmanas,
and you Yudhisthira also, O sire, and hear
you too, O River’s son, the names which
are applied to Kaparddin.


27. Hear, ye, how in days of yore. I
gained a sipht, so difficult to get, for the
sake of Shamva. Verily, in those days
was the illustrious god seen by me on
account of Yoga-abstraction.


28. After twelve years had passed from
the time when Pradyumna, the son of
Rukmini, who is gifted with great intelli.
gence, killed the Asura Shamvara in days
of yore, my wife Jamvavati addre-sed me.


29-30. Indeed; seeing Pradyumna and
Chacudeshna and‘other sons born of Ruk-
mini, Jamvavati, desirous of a son, said
these words to me, O Yudhisthira,—


go. Grant me, O you of undecaying
glory, a heroic son, the foremast of power-
ful men, possessed of the most lovely fea.
tures, sinless, and like your self. And, O,
fet there be no delay on your pact in grant-
ing this prayer of mine!


3t. There is nothing in the three worlds
which you cannot acquire! O perpetuator
of Yadu’s race, you can create other worlds
if only you wish! Observing a vow for
twelve years and purifying yourself, you
hadst worshipped the Lord of all creatures
(vis., Mahadeva), and then begotten
upon Rukmini the sons that she has got
from you, vts., Charudeshna and Sucharu
aud Charuvesha .and Yashodhana and
Charushravas and Charuyashas and Pra-
dyumna and Shambbu,


34. O killer of Madhu, do you grant me
ason like those of great prowess whom you
have begotten upon Rukmini.


35. ‘Thus addressed by the princess, [
replied to her having slender waist,—Let
me have your permission, O queen! If
shall certainly obey your command.


37-~40. She answered me, saying,—Go,
and acquire successtfand °prosperity}! Let
Brahmana and Shiva and Kashyapa, the
Rivers, those gods who preside over the
mind, the soil, all deciduous herbs, those
Cheahandas who are considered{as bearers
of the libations poured in sacrifices, the
Rishis, Earth, the Oceans, the sacrificial
presents, those syllables which are uttered
for_ completing the, cadences of Samans,


MAHABHARATA.


the Rikshas, the Pitris, the Planets, the
wives of the gods, the celestial maidens, the
celestial mothers, the preat cycles, kine,
Chandramas, Savitri, Agni, Savitii, the
knowledge of the Vedas, the seasons, the
year, the Kshanas, the Lavas, the Mubur-
tas, the Nimeshas, and the Yugas in suc-
cession, protect you, O Yadava, and keep
you in happiness, wherever you may live.
Let no danger overtake you on your way,
and let no carelessness be thine, O sinless
one.


41—42. Thus blessed by her, I took her
leave, bidding. farewell to the daughter of
the prince of monkeys. Repairing them to
the presence of that foremost of men, vis.,
my tather, of my mother, of the king, and
of Ahuka, I informed them of what the
daughter of the king of the Vidyadharas,
in great misery, had said to me. Bidding
them farewell with a sorrowful heart, [ then
went to Gada and to Rama of great power.


43. These two gladly addressed me,
saying,—Let your penances multiply with-


-out any hinderance.


Having got the permission of all of
He forthwith
Ac-


44-
them, I thought of Garuda.
came to me and took me to Himavat.
tived at Himavat, I sent him away.


45. There, on that foremost of moun-
tains, 1 saw many wonderful spectacles. I
saw an excellent, wonderful, and agreeable
hermitage for the practice of penances.


46. That charming retreat was the
property of the great Upamanyu who was
a descendant of Vyaghrapada. ‘That re-
treat is spoken highly of and respected by
the gods and the Gandharvas and seemed
to be covered with Vedic beauty.


47—49. It was adorned with Dhavas
and Ka«ubhas and Kadamvas and cocoas
with Kuruvakas and Ketakas and Jamvus
aod Patalas, with banians and Vaiunakas
and Vatsanabhas and Vilwas, with Saralas
and Kapitthas and Piyalas and Shalas and
Palmyrcas, with Vadaris and Ingudis and
Punnagas and Ashokas and Amras and
Kovidaras and Champakas and Panashas,
and with various other trees having fruits
and flowers. And that retreat was also
decked with the straight stems of the Musa
Sapsenta.


50. Truly, that asylum was adorned
with various other sorts of. trees and with
various kinds of fruits fotming the food of
various kinds of birds. ieaps of ashes
were thrown in proper places all around,
which enhanced the beauty of the scene.


5t. It was full of Rurus and apes and
tigers and lions and leopards, deer of
various species and peacocks and cals
and snakes,


ANUSHASANA PARVA. 27


52. Indeed, large numbers of other
animals also were seen there, as also buffa-
los and bears. Delicious breezes blew,
continually carrying the sweet notes of
celestial nymphs, :


§3—54. The babblings of mountain rivers
and springs, the sweet notes of winged
chorristers, the gruntings of elephants, the
delicious notes of Kinnaras, and the auspi-
cious voice of ascetics singing the Samans,
O hero, and various other kinds of music,
made that retreat highly charming. The
very imagination cannot conceive another
hermitage as charming as the one [ saw.
There were also large houses in that asy-
lum, intended for the preservation of the
sacred fire, and covered all over with
flowering creepers,


55. It was bedecked with the river
Ganga of clear and sacred water. Indeed,
the daughter of Jahnu always remained
there. It was decked also with many asce-
tics who were the foremost of all pious
persons, who had high souls, and who re-
sembled fire itself in energy.


56. Some of those ascetics lived upon
air and some upon water. Some were
devoted to the silent recitation of sacred
Mantras. And some were engaged in
purifying their souls by practising the vir-
tues of mercy and the rest. And ‘some
amongst them were Yogins devoted to the
Yoga-meditation, Some amongst them
lived upon smoke only, and some lived
upon fire, and some upon milk. Thus was,
that retreat adorned with many foremost
of twice-born persons.


57. And some there were amongst them
who had taken the vow of eating and


deinking like kine,—that is, by giving up,


the use of the hands at once. And some
used only two pieces of stone for husking
theic grain, and some who used their teeth
only for that purpose. And some lived by
drinking only the rays of the moon, and
some by drinking only froth. And some
were following the vow of living like deer.


58. And some there were who lived
upon the fruits of the Ficus religiosa, and
some who used to lie upon water and
some dressed themselves in rags and some
in animal skins and some in barks of trees.


69. Indeed, I saw various ascetics of the
foremost order observing these and other
painful vows. I wished then to enter that
asylum.


6o. Verily, that asylum was honored
and adored by the gods and all great
beings, by Shiva and others, O Bharata,
and by all creatures of pious deeds.


breast of Himavata, like the lunar disc in
the sky,


6r. The mungoose sported there with
the snake, and the tiger with the deer, like
friends, forgetting their natural enmity,
on account of the energy of those ascetics
of blazing penances and for their being
near to those great ones. ;


62—64. In that foremost of hermitages,
which was charming to all creatures, in-
habited by many foremost of Brahmanas
fully conversant with the Vedas and their
branches, and by many great Rishis well.
known for the difficult vows they practised,
I saw, as soon as [| entered, a powerful Rishi
with matted locks on head and dressed in
rags, who seemed to shine like fire with his
penances and energy. Served by his dis-
ciples and possessed of tranquil soul, that


foremost of Brahmanas was young to
look at.
65. His name was Upamanyu. He


said to me who bowed to him with my head
down :—Welcome are you, O you .of eyes
like lotus petals! ‘lo-day, by this visit of
yours, we see that our penances have fruc-
tifiede. You are worthy of our adoration,
but you worship us still. You are worthy
of being seen, but you wish to see me.


66. Joining my hands I made of him
the usual enquiries regarding the - well-
being of the animals and birds who lived in
his asylum, of the progress of his righteous
ness, and of his disciples.


67. The illustrious Upamanyu then ad~
dressed me in words which were highly
sweet and ‘deliyhtful—You shall, O
{Xrishna, obtain, forsooth, a son like your-
self.


68. Practising severe penances, do you
please Ishana, the Lord of all creatures,
Vhat divine Master called also Adhokshaja,
sports here with his wife by his side.


69. O Janarddana,, it was here that the
gods with alithe Rishis, in days of yore,
pleased that foremost of gods by their pen-
ances ahd celibacy and Truth and self-
control, and succeeded in realizing many
high hopes. That illustrious god is verity
the inextaustible source of all energies and
pen ances. ;


7t. Coming nto existence and with-
drawing once more to himself all things
fraught with good and evil, that inconceiva-
ble God whom you seek, O destroyer of
enemies, li ves here with his consort.


72. Hewho was born as the Danava
named Hiranyakashipu, whose strength was


Thus |so great that he could shake the very


addressed, it stood in all its beauty on the ; mountains of Meru, succeeded in getting


28


MAHABHARATA,


from Mahadeva the power belonging to all! 84. Pleased with such penances, Shan-


the gods and enjoyed it for ten millions of
years. |

73. He who was the foremost of all his
sons, and who was known by the name of
Mandara, succeeded, through the boon he
had got from Mahadeva, .in fighting Shakra
for a million of years.


- 74. The terrible discusof Vishnu and
the thunderbolt of Indra were botiy unable
to make the least impression, O Keshava,
in days of yore, upon the body of that great
source of universal misery.


75. The discus which you carry, O sin-
Tess one, was given to you by Mahadeva,
after he had killed a Daitya who, proud of
his strength, used to live within the waters.


76. That discus, effutgent as fire, was
creatéd by the great god having the bull
for his emblem. Wonderful and irresisti-
ble in energy, it was given to you by that
illustrious god.


97. On- account of its blazing. energy
it was incapable of being looked at by any
person except the holder of Pinaka. It
was, therefore, that Bhava named it Sudar-
shanam.


78. From that time it passed by the
name of Sudarshanam in all the worlds.
Even that weapon, 0 Keshava, failed to
make the least impression on the body of
Hiranyakashipu’s son’ Mandara, who ap-


peared like an evil planet in the three
worlds.
79. Hundreds of Chakras-like you and


_thunderbolts like that of Shakra, could not

inflict a scratch on the body of that evil
planet gifted with gréat might,* who had
acquired a boon from Mahadeva.


80. Afflicted by the mighty Mandara,
the gods fought hard against him and his


companions, all of whom had got boons.


from Mahadeva.


81. -Pleased with another Danava
named Vidyutprabha, Mahadeva granted
to him the sovereignty of the three ‘worlds.


That Danava remained the king . of
the three worlds for a hundred thousand
years.

82. And Mahadeva said to him,—You


will become one of my attendants.—Indeed,
the powerful Lord further conferred upon
him the boon of a hundred millions of
children. The Unborn Lord of all crea-
tures further gave the Danava the region
known’as Kushadwipa for his kingdom,


83. Another great Asura, named Shata-
mukha, was created by Brahman. For a
hundred years he poured on the sacrificial
fire the flesh of his own body.


kara said to him,— What can J do for you,
—Shatamukha replied, saying,—O you the
most wonderful, let me have the power of
creating new creatures and animals.


85. Give alsoto me, O foremost of alk
gods everlasting power.—Thus addressed
by him, the powerful lord said to him,—So
be it. :


-


86. Concentrating his mind in Yoga,
the Self-create Brahman, in days of yore,
made a sacrifice for three hundred years,
with the object of getting children.


87. Mahadeva granted him a_ thousand
sons having qualifications proportionate to
the merits of the sacrifice. Forsooth, you
know, O Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, him
who is, who is sung by the gods.


88. The Risht known .by the name of
Yajnavalkya is: exceedingly virtuous. By
worshipping Mahadeva he-has gained great
fame. ; * ,

89. The great ascetic who is Parashara’s
son, v3z., Vyasa bent on. Yoga, has become
famous by worshipping Shankara.


go. The Valikhilyas were on a former
occasion dishonored by Mayhavat. Filled
with anger at this, they pleased the illustii-
ous Rudra. -


oi. That lord of the universe, that fore-
most one of all the gods, thus pleased by
the Valikhilyas, said to them,—Ye shall
succeed by your penatces in creating a
bird which will rob Indra of the Ambrosia,


92, All the waters disappeared through
the anger of Mahadeva on a former occa-
sion. The gods pleased him by celebrating .
a saciifice called Saptakapala, and caused,
through his favour, other waters to flow into
the worlds. Verily, when the three-eyed
god, became pleased, water once more ap-
peared in the world,


93. The wife of Atri, who was well-read
in the Vedas, forsook her husband in
anger and said,—I shall no longer live
under that ascetic.


94. Having said these words, she sought
the protection of Mahadeva. Through
fear of her husband Atri, she passed
three hundred years, abstaining from ail
food. :


95. And all this time she slept on
wooden clubs for pleasing Bhava, ‘The
great god then appeared before her and
then smilingly addressed her, saying, —You
will have a son. ’


_96. And you will have that son without
the help of a husband, simply through the
favour of Rudra. Forsooth, that son, born
in the family of his father, shall become


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


>


known for his merit, and assume a name
after you.-


97. The illustrious Vikarna alse, O
destroyer of Madhu, full of devotion to
Mahadeva, pleased him with severe pen-
ances and got high and happy success.


98. Shakalya, too, of controlled soul wor-
shipped Bhava in a mental sacrifice that he
celebrated for nine hundred years, O
Keshava.


99. Pleased with him, the illustrious god
said to him,—You will become a_ great
author. O son, your fame shall be eternal
in the three worlds.


too. Your family also shall never come
to an end and shall be adorned by many
great Rishis born in it! Your son will
become the foremost of Brahmanas and
will make the Sutras of your work.


Yor. There was a celebrated Rishi
named Savarni in the golden age. Here
in this hermitage, he practised severe pen-
ances for six thousand years.


The illustrious Rudra said :—


1oz. I am pleased with you, O sinless
one, Without being subject to decrepitude
or death, you will become an author cele-
brated through all the worlds.


103. .In days of yore, Shakra also, ine
Baranasi, filled with devotion, O Janard-
dana, worshipped Mahadeva who has space,
alone for his dress and who is smeared
with ashes as an agreeable unguent,


104. Having worshipped Mahadeva
thus, he acquired the sovereignty of the
celestials. Narada also, in days of yore,
worshipped the great Bhava with devotion
of heart. Pleased with him, Mahadeva,
that preceptor of the celestial preceptor,
said :—

105. Noone shall equal you in energy
and penances. You will always serve me
with your songs and instrumental music.


106. Hear also, O Madhava, how Tor-
merly | succeeded in seeing that god of
gods, that Lord of all creatures, O lord.


107. Hear also in full for what object, O
you of great power, I invoked with control-
led senses and mind that illustrious god
gifted with supreme energy.


108. I shall, O sinless one, tell you fully
all that I succeeded in obtaining from that
god of gods, vts., Maheshwara.


109. Formerly in the goiden age, O son,
there was a Rishi of great fame, named
Vyaghrapada. He was celebrated for his-
knowledge and mastery over the Vedas
and their auxiliaries.


- Rishi


29


t1o—111. I was born in the son of that
and Dhaumya was born as my
younger brother. On a certain occasion,
O Madhava, accompanied by Dhaumya,
l arrived at the herasitage of certain Rishis
of purified souls. There | saw a cow
that was being milked. And I saw the
milk and it appeared to me to resemble
nectar itself in taste.


~ 112. I then came home, and actuated
by childishness, 1 addressed my mntother
and said,—Give me some food prepared
with milk,


113. There was no milk in the house,
and accordingly my mother was much
sorry at my asking for it. My mother took |
a piece of cake and boiled it in water, O
Madhava.


114. The water became whitened and
my mother placed it before us, saying that
it was milk and asked us to drink it, [
had before that drunk milkton one occasion,
for my father had, at the time of asacrifice,
taken me to the house of some of our great
kinsmen.


#15116. A celestial cow, who delights
the gods, was being milked on that occa
sion. Drinking hee milk that resembled
nectar in taste, I knew the virtues of mile,
1, therefore, at once understood the subs-
stance that my mother offered me, for milk.
Verily, the taste of that cake, O son, did
not give me any pleasure whatever.


117. Moved by chiidishness I then ad-
dressed my mother, saying,—This, O
mother, which you have given me is not
any preparation of milk.


118. Filled with grief and sorrow at
this, and embracing me from affection and
smelling my head, O Madhava, she said
to me :—


. tg. Whence, O child, can ascetics of

purified souls get food prepared with milk ?-
Such ‘men always five in the forest and live

upon bulbs and roots and fruits.


t20 Whence shall we, who live by the
banks of rivers which are the resort of the
Valikhilyas, we, who have mountains and
forests for our home,—whence, indeed,
child, shall we get milk ?


121. We, O dear child, live on air and
on water. We live in asvlums in the midst
of forests and woods. We habitually ab-
stain from all sorts of food that are taken
by persons living in villages and towns.
We are accustomed to only such food as
are supplied by the forest products.


122—124. There cannot be any milk, O
child, in the forest where there are no off-
spting fof Surabhi. Living on the banks of


30


rivers, or in caves or on mountain-breasts,.


or in shrines and other places of the kind,
we pass our time in the practice of penan-
¢es andthe recitation of sacred Mantras,
Shiva being our highest refuge. Without
pleasing the boon-giving Sthanu of unde-
caying glory,—him, whois, who has three
eyes,~ewhtence, O child, can one get food
prepared with milk and good dresses and
other objects of enjoyment in the world ?
Do you devote yourself whote-mindedly, O
dear son, to Shankaca.


125-126. Through -his favour, O child,
you ate sure to obtain all such objects of
wishes.-Hearing those words of my
mother, O destroyer of enemies, that day,
I joined my hands in respect and bowing
{o her, gaid,—O mother, who is this Maha-
deva? How can one please him ?


127. Where does that god live? How
may he be seen? With what does he be-
come pleased? What also is the form of
Sharva ? How may one succeed in know-
ing him? Lf pleased, will he, O mother,
appear,before me?


128. After I had said these words, O
Krishna, to my mother, she, filled with pa-
rental affection, smelt my head, O Govinda,
her eyes bathed in tears.


129. Gently patting my body, O des-
troyer of Madhu, my mother, adopting a
tone of great humility, addressed me in
the following words, O best of the gods.


My mother said :—

130. It is difficult for persons of impure
souls to know Mahadeva. These men are
incapable of bearing him in their hearts or
understanding him at all. They cannot
retain him in their minds. They cannot
seize him noc can they see him.


131. Wise men say that his forms are
manifold, Many are the places in which
he lives. Many are the forms of his
Grace.


132. Who is there who can understand
in full all the excellent deeds, of Isha, or of
all the forms that he has assumed in days
of yore?

133. Who can describe how Sharva
sports and how he becomes pleased ?
Maheshwara of universal form lives"in the
hearts of all creatures. -


134. While ascetics discoursed on the
auspicious and excellent deeds of [shana, |
have heard from them how, moved by
mercy towards his worshippers, he grants
them a sight of his body. —


135. For showing a favour to the Brah-
manas, the dwellers of heaven have recited
for theic information the various forms


.of yore,


‘and lizards and storks.


MAHABHARATA, |


which were assumed by Mahadeva in days
You have asked me about these.
{ shall recite them to you, O son,


My mother said :—


136. Bhava assumes the forms of Brah-
man and Vishnu and the king of the gods:
of the Rudras, the Adityas, and the Ash-
wins ; and of those gods called Vishwe-
devas.


' 137. He assumes the forms also of men

and women, of Pretas and Pishachas, of
Kiratas and Shavaras, and of aft aquatic
animals. That illustrious god assumes the
forms of also those Shavaras who live in the
woods and forests.


138. He assumes the forms of tortoises
and fishes and conchs. He assumes the
forms of those corals which are used as
ornaments by men.


139. He assumes the forms of also
Vakshas and Rakshasas and Snakes, of
Daityas and Danavas. The illustrious god
assumes the forms of all creatures too which
live in holes.


140, He assumes the forms of tigers
and lions and deer, of wolves and bears
and birds, of owls and of jackals as well.


141. He assumes the forms of swans
and crows and peacocks, of chameleons
tle assumes the
forms of. cranes and vultures and Chakra-
vakas.


142. He assumes the forms of Chasas
and of mountains also. O son, Mahadeva
assumes the forms of kine and elephants
and horses and camels and asses,


143. He assumes the forms of also
goats and pards and various other ani-
mats. Bhava assumes the forms of various
kinds of birds of beautiful plumage.


144. It is Mahadeva who assumes the
form of the Sanyasin bearing the Danda
(emblem of mendicancy), and also of the
king with the Chhatra and the Brahman
with the calabash. He sometimes be-
comes six-faced and sometimes becomes
multifaced. He sometimes assumes forms
having three eyes and forms having many
heads.


145. And he sometimes assumes forms
having many millions of legs and forms
having numberless stomachs and faces,
and forms gifted with numberless arms and
numberless sides. fe sometimes appears


surrounded by numberless spirits and
ghosts.
- 3146. He assumes the forms of Rishis


and Gandhacvas, and of Siddhas and
Charanas. He assumes a form which is


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


tendered white with the ashes he smears
on it and adorned with a half-moon on the
forehead.


147. Adored with various hymns uttered
with various kinds of voice and adored
with various Mantras fraught with enco-
miums, he, who is sometimes called Sharva,
is the Destroyer of all creatures in the
universe, and it is upon him, again, that


all creatures rest aS on theit common
basis... 5
148. Mahadeva is the soul of all crea-


tures, He pervades all things. He is the
speaker of all subjects, le lives every-
where and should be known as living in
the hearts of all creatures in the universe.


149. He knows the desire of every
worshipper of his. He becomes acquaint-
ed with the’ object with which one pays
him adorations. Do you, then, seek the
protection of that king of the gods.


150. He sometimes rejoices, and some-
times becomes irate, and sometinaes: utters
‘the syllable, Han with a very loud noise.
He sometimes arms himself with the discus,
sometimes with the trident, sometimes with
the mace, sometimes with the heavy mullets,
sometimes withghe scimitar, and sometimes
with the battle-axe.


15t. He assumes the form of Shesha
who keeps up the world on his head. He
has snakes for his belt, and his ears are
decked. with ear-rings made of snakes.
Snakes form also the sacred thread he
wears, An elephant skin is bis upper
garment. ;


152. He sometimes laughs and some-
times sings and sometimes dances most
beautifully. Surrounded by numberless
spirits and ghosts, he sometimes plays on
musical instruments. Various are the
instruments upeow which he plays, and
sweet the sounds they yield.


153. He sometimes wanders, sometimes
yawns, sometimes cries, and sometimes
‘causes others to cry. He sometimes


assumes the guise of a mad man, and
sometines of a drunkard, aud he some-
times utters sweet words.


154. Endued with dreadful fierceness,
he sometimes laughs loudly, frightening
all creatures with his eyes. He sometimes
sleeps and sometimes remains awake, and
sometimes yawns as he pleases.


155. He sometimes recites sacred Man-
tras and sometimes becomes the god of
those Mantras which are recited. He
sometimes practises penances and some-
times becomes the god for whose adoration

' those penances are practised. Ele sometimes
makes gifts and sometimes receives those


tl etl th pte en Ne


gr


gifts ; sometimes disposes thimself in Yoga
and sometimes becomes the object of the
Yoga of others.


156. Hie may beseen onthe sacrificial
platform or in the sacrificial stake ; in the
midst of the cowpen. or in the fire. “He
may not again be seen there. He maybe
seen as a boy or as an old man.


157. He sports with the daughters and
the wives of the Rishis. His hair is long
and esect. He is perfectly nude for he
has the horizon fer his dress. He has
terrible eyes.


158. He is fair, be is darkish, he is
dark, he is pale, he is of the color of
smoke, and he is red. He has eyes large
and terrible. He has empty space for his
covering and he covers all things.


159. Who is there that can truly andere
stand the limits of Mahadeva who is form-
less, who is made up of ilusion, who is
of the form of afl actions in the untverse,
who assumes the form of Hiranyagharbha,
and who is without beginning and end, and
birth.


160. He fives “iv the feart (of every
creature ). He is the vital air, be is the
mind, and he is the individual soul. He
is the soul of Yoga, and he is called
Yoga. He is the Yoga meditation into
which Yoyins enter. He is the Supreme
Soul. Indeed, Maheshwara is capable of
being apprehended not by the senses but
through only the Soul seizing his existence.


161. He plays on vatious musical ins
truments. He is a vocalist. He has a
huadred thousand eyes. He has one
mouth, he has two mouths, he has three
mouths, and he has many mouths.


162. Devoting yourself to him, fixing
your heart.upon him, depending upon hin,
and accepting him as your one refuge, do |
you, O son, worship Mahadeva and thea
all youc wishes will bear fruits !


163. Hearing these words of my mother,
O destroyer of enemies, from that day my
devotion was directed to Mahadeva, havisgg
nothing else for its object.


164. 1, then, began the practice of the
austerest penances for pleasing Shankara.
For one thousand years | stood on my. left
toe.


165. After that I passed one thousand
years, living only upon fraits. ‘he next
one thousand years [ passed, living upon
the fallen leaves of trees. The next thou-
sand’ years I passed, living upon water


only.


166. After that I passed seven hundred
years, living on air only. In this way I


32


worshipped Mahadeva fora full thousand
divine years. :

167—168. After this, the powerful Maha-
deva the Lord of all the universe became
propitiated with me, Desirous of deter-
mining whether [ was golely devoted to tim
only, he appeared before me ii the form of
Shakra surrounded by all the gods. As the
celebrated Stiakea, he had a thousand eyes
on his body and was armed with the thun-
derbolt,


169. And he rode on an elephant whicli
was entirely white, with eyes red; ears
folded, the temporal juice trickling down
his cheeks, with tcunk gortracted, dreadful
to look at, and having foue tusks. Indeed
riding on such aa elephant, the illustrious
king of the gods seemed to shine with his
energy. ith a beautiful crown on his
head and adorned with garlands round his
neck and bracelets round his arms, he
came where I was. .

17t. A white umbrella was held over
his head. And he was served by many
Apsaras, and many Gandharvas sang his
praise.

172. Addressing me he said,—O fore-
most of twice-borns, [| have been pleased


with you. Beg of me whatever boon you
wish,
173—174. Hearing these words of


Shakea f was not gladdened. O Krishna,
I answered the king of the gods in these
words,-=I do not wish any boon from you,
or from any other god. © amiable deity, [
tell you truly that it is Mahadeva only from
whom I may ask for boons.


175. True itis, O Shakea, true are those
words that [ say to you. No other words
are at all ayreeable to me except those
about Maheshwara.


176. Commanded by that Lord of all
creatures, | am ready to become a worm or
a tree with many branches. If not acquired
through the favour of Mahadeva’s boons
I would not accept the very sovereignty of
the three worlds. ~


177. I may be born among the very
Shwapakas but | will still be devoted to the
feet of Hara! Without, again, being de-
voted to that Lord of all creatures, | would
not like to be born in the palace of Indra
himself.


178. If a person has no devotion to that
Lord of the universe,—that Master of the
gods and the Asuras,—his misery -will not
terminate even if from want of food be has
to live upon only aic and water.

179. Those persons who do not Tike to
live even a’ moment without thinking of
Mahadeva’s feet, have no necessity of other


MAHABHARATA,


subjects fraught with other kinds of tigfaa
lity and righteousness,


180. When the unrighteous or sinfut
Cycle comes, one should never pass a
moment without devoting his heart upon
Mahadeva. One who has drunk the am-
brosia of the devotion to Hara; bes
comes freed from the fear of the world.


181. One, who has not acquired the fa-
vour of Mahadeva, can never sitcceed to
devote himself to Mahadeva for a single
day oe for half a day or for a moment or foe
a Kshana or for a Lava.


182. Ordered by Mahadeva [ shait
cheerfully become a worn, or an insect, but
I do nat desire for even the sovereignty of
the three worlds if bestowed by you, O
Sak ra.


183. At the word of Hata I would
become even a dog. In fact, that is my
highest wish. If not given by Maheshwara,
t would not have the sovereignty of the
very gods.


184. I do not wish to have this celestial
dominion. {do not desire to have the so- -
vereignty of the gods. I do not wish to
have the region of Brahman. Indeed, | du
not wish to have that extingjon of individual
existence which is called Liberation and
which is a complete oneness with Brahmas
But I want to become the slave of Hara.


185. Aslong as that Lord of all crea-
tures, the illustrious Mahesha with crown
on his head and body whrite like the lunar
disc, does not become pleased with me,
so long shali l cheerfulty bear all those
miseries consequent upoty a hundred re-
petitions of decrepitude,; death and bicthy,
which embodied beings come by.


186. What persons in the universe can
acquire tranquillity without pleasing Rudra
who is freed from decrepitude and death,
who is effulgent like the Sun, the Moon, oc
the Fire, who is the root or original eause of
everything real and unreal in the three
worlds, and who exists as the one indivisible ?


187. “ {fon account of -any faults, I come
by re-births, [ shall, in those new births,
devote myself solely to Bhava, .


Indra said :—


188. What are your grounds for the
existence of a Supreme Being ot.for His
being the cause of all causes ?


Upamanyn said :— :

189. E beg boons from Him whom
Brahmavadins have descsibed as existent
and non-existent, manifest andu tmanifest, ~
eternal or immutable, One and many,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


I heg boans from Him who is
without beginning and middle and end,
who is Knowledge and Power, who is
inconceivable and who is the Supreme
Soul, °


1gt._ I pray for boons from Him whence
is all Power who has rot been produced by
any one, who is immutable,
though himself not sprung from any seed,
is the seed of all things in the universe.


192. I pray for boons from Him who is
above the quality of Darkness, who is
blazing Effulgence, who is the essence of
all penances, who is above all our faculties
and which we may devote for the purpose


tgo


of comprehending him, and by knowing.


whom every one becomes liberated from
grigf or sorrow.


193. Ladore him, O Purandara, who is
conversant with the creation of all elements
and the thoughts of all living creatures,jand
who is the original cause of the existence or
creation of all creatures, who is omni-
present, and who has the power to give
everything. f
. 194—195. [ pray for, boons from Him
who cannot be comprehended by argument,
‘who is the object of the Sankhya and the
Yoga systems of philosophy, and who is
above all things, and whom all persons
conversant with the topics of enquiry,
adore, I pray for boons from Him, O Ma-
ghavat, who is the soul of Maghavat him-
self, who is said to be the God of the gods,
and who is the Master of all creatures.


196. I pray for boons from Him who it
was that first created Brahman, that crea-
tor of all the worlds, having filled Ether
«with His energy) and called into being the
primeval egg,

107. Who else than that Sitpreme Lord
could have created Fire, Water, Wind,
Earth, Space, Mind, and the principte of
Greatness.


198. Tell me, O Shalera, wito else than
Shiva could create Mind, Understanding,
Evo, the subtile elements and the senses 2
Who is there higher than Shiva ?


199. The wise say that the Grandfather
Brahman is the creator of this universe.
Brahman, héwever, got his great power
and prosperity by worshipping and gratify-
ing Mahadeva, that God of gods.


200. That great power, which is in that
illustrious Being who created Brahman,
Vishnu, and Rudra, was derived from
-~Mahadeva. Tell me who is there who is
superior to the Supreme Lord?


201. Who else than that God of gods
can bestow upon the sons of Diti lordship
and power judging by the sovereignty


5


and who,.


, 33

a
and the power of oppressing given ta
the foremost of the Daityas and the
Danavas ?


102. The cardinal’ points, Time, the
Sun, all luminous bodies, planets, wind,
water, and.the stars and constellations,—
are all from Mahadeva. ‘fell us who isythe
higher than the Supreme Lord ?,


203. Who elseis there, than Mahadeva,
in the creation of Sacrifice and the destritc«
tion of Tripura? Who else than Mahadeva
has grinded the enemies, coming into con«
tact with the Daityas and the Danavas? ~


204. What necessity, O Purandara, is
there of giving vent to tall talks full of so«
phistry when I see you of a thousand eyes,
O best of the gods.


203. You who are’ adored by Siddhas
and Gandharvas and the deities and the
Rishis 2 O best of the Kushikas, all this is
due to the favour of that God of gods, vt,
Mahadeva. :


206. Know, O Keshava, that this all,
consisting of animate and inanimate creas
tion with heaven and other unseen creation,
which are in these worlds, and which has
the all-pervading Lord for its soul, has
emanated from Maheshwara and has beea
created for enjoyment of the individual
soul.


207. Inthe worlds that are known by
the names of Bhu, Bhuva, Swah, and
Maha, in the midst of the mountains of
Lokaloka, in the islands, in the mountains
of Meru, in all things which produce hap-
piness, and in the hearts of all creatures,
O illustrious Maghavat, lives Mahadeva,
as held by persons conversant with all
the topics of enquiry. ;

208. If, O Shiakra, the gods and the
Asuras could see any other powerful Being
than Bhava, would not both of them, espe~
cially;the former when opposed and op-<
pressed by the latter, have sought the pro-
tection of that Being ?


209. In all battles of the gods, the Vak«
shas, the Uragas, and the Rakshasas,
which end in mutual destruction, it is Bhava
who gives ta those who meet with des<
truction power befitting their position and
acts. F.


210. Tell me, who elge than Maheshwara
is there for conferring boons upon, and once
more taking them away from, Andhaka
and Shukra and Dundubhi and Mahisha
and many foremost of Yakshas and
Vala and Rakshdsas and the Nivataa
kavachas? - 8


BF 2t1. Was not the seminal fluid of Ma-
hadeva, that Master of both the gcds and


34.


the Astiras, poured as a libation upon the
fire? From that seed originated a moun-
tain of: gold. Who else is there whose
seed can be said to be possessed of
such power.


212. Who efse in this world is described
as having the horizon only for his dress ?
Who else can be said to be a celibate with
vital seed drawn up? Who else is there
who has half his bedy occupied by hts dear
wife. Who else is there who has been able
1o subjugate Cupid ?


213. Tell me, O Indra,

eing possesses that high
supreme happiness which is highly spoken
of by all the deities? Who else has the
crematorium as his play ground? Who
else is there who is so lauded fot his
dancing ?


214. Whose worship and power remains
unchangeable ? Who else is there who
plays with spirits and ghosts. Tell me, O
god, who else has companious who are
possessed of strength like bis own and who
are, therefore, proud of ‘that strength or
power ?


215. Who else js there whose place is
described as unchangeable and adored with
teverence by the three worlds? Who else
is there who pours rain, gives heat, and
blazes forth in Energy ?


216. From whom else do-we get onr
precious herbs? Who else upholds all
kinds of riches. Who else sports as much
as he likes in the three worlds of mobile
and immobile things ?


217.° O Indra, know Maheshwara®to be.
the original Cause, He is worshipped by
Yogins, by Rishis, by the Gandharvas, and
by the Siddhas, with the help of knowledge,
of success, and of the rites laid down in the
scriptures. :


what other


218. He is worshipped by both the gods
and the Asuras with the help of sacrifices
by acts and the ritual laid down in the
scriptures, | The fruits of action can never
touch him for he is above them all. Being-
such, { call him the original cause of every-
thing. ;


219. Heis both gross and subtile. He
is peerless. He cannot be comprehended
by the senses. Hegis endued with qualities
and he is shorn of them. He is the lord of
qualities, for they are under his control.
Even such is Maheshwara’s place.


220. Heis the cause of the continuance
and the creation (of the universe). He is
the cause of the universe and the cause also
of its destruction. ‘He is the Past, the
Present, and the Future. He is the pa rent


region of |


WAH ABUARATAD


of all things. He is the cause of every
thing.


221. He is mutable, he is the unmani-
fest, he is Knowledge; he is [Snorance; he
is every deed; he is every omission; he ts
virtue; and he is sin. O Shakra, do I eall
Him the cause of everything. *


222. See, O Indra, in the image of
Mahadeva the marks of both the sexes.
That god of gods, av7s., Rudra, that cause of
both ¢reation and destruction, shows in his
form the marks of both the sexes as the one
cause of the creation of the universe.


223. My mother formerly told me that
he is the cause of the universe and the one
canse of everything, here is no one who
is higher than Isha, O Shakra. If it plegses
you, ‘do yor throw yourself on his kindness
and protection.


, 224. You have evidence, O king of the
gods, of the fact that the universe has ori-
ginated from the union of the sexes. The
universe, you know, is the sum of what has
qualities and what has not them and has
for its immediate cause the seeds of Brah-
man and others. Brahman and Indra and
Hutasha and Vishnu and all the other gods,
along with the Daityas and the Asuras,
having the fruition of a thousand desires,
always say that there is none who is higher
than Mahadeva.


225. Médved by desire, 1 solicit, with
controlled mind, that god known to all the
mobile and immobile universe,—him, who
is, who has been described as the best and
highest of all the celestials, and who is
auspiciousness itself,—for getting forth with
that bighest of all acquisitions, viz , Libera-
tion.


226. What necessity is there, of other
reasons? The great Mahadeva is the
eause of allcauses. We have never beard
that the celestials have, at any time wor-
shipped the emblem of any other god than
Mahadeva.


227. If Maheswara be not accepted, telt
me, if you have ever heard of it, who else is
there whose emblem has been adored or i¢
being adored by aH the célestials ?


228. That god is, indeed, the most wor-
shipful of all celestials whose embleny
Brahma, Vishnu, you, O Fndea, with alf
the other gods, always adore.


229. Brahman has for his emblem the
lotus. Vishnu has for his the discus.
Indra has for his the thunder-bolt. But ,
the creatures of the world do not bear any
of the signs which mark these celestials. On
the other hand, all creatures bear the signs


| which mark Mahadeva and his consorts


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


Hence, all creatures must be considered
as belonging to Maheshwara.


230. All female creatures, have crigi-
nated from Uma, and hence it is they


have the mark of femeniuity which charac- |
teristise Uma; while ail masculine crea- |


tures, wlio have originated frum Shiva bear
the masculine mark that marks Shiva,
out. That person who holds that there is,
in the three worlds with
immobile creatures, any other cause than


the Supreme Lord, and that which is not |
marked with the mark of either Mahadeva |


or tis wife, should be considered as very
wretched and should not be numbered with
the creatures of the universe. ,


23t. Every being having the mark.of


the masculine sex should be known to be of '


Ishana, wivile every being with the mark of


the feminine sex should be known as be- |
This universe of mobile |


fonging to Uma.
and immobile creatures is pervaded by two
forms (viz,, mate and female),


232. Itis from Mahadeva that 1 wish to
get boons.
4 would rather prefer dissolution itself,
or remain, O Shakra, as you like, O slayer
of Vala.


233. I wish to have boons or curseS
from Mahadeva. No. I shall not acknow-
ledge any other god. Nor would [ have
auy desires fulfilled from any other deity.


234. Having said these words to the
kiny of the celestials, I hecame stricken


with grief thinking that Mahadeva had sot |


been propitiated despite my severe auste-

tities, :
235—236. Within the twinkling of an

eye, however, | saw the celestial elephant I


had seen before me changed into a bull as |


white asa swan, or the Jasminum pubo-


scons, or a stalk of the lotus, or silver, Or the |


ocean of milk. Of huge body, the hair ‘of
its tail was black and the color of its eyes
was twany like that of honey,


237-


and had the hue of gold. With their very


sharp ends, whose hue was a mild red, the |


bull appeared to tear the EBacth.


238. ‘The animal was bedecked alt over
with ornaments made of the purest gold.
its face and hoofs and nose and ears were
beautiful and its waist too well-formed.


239. its flanks were beautiful, and
its neck was very thick. Its whole
form was beautiful to look at. its hump
was charming and seemed to occupy the
whole of its shoulder-joint,


240. And it looked like the summit of a
Snaw-clad ountaia or like a cliff of white


their mobile and |


Not getting this, O Kaushika, |
Go 4


Its horns were hard as adamant |


35


clouds in the sky. Upon the back of that
animal 1 saw seated the illustrious Matia«
deva with his wife Uma. -


241—~242. Mahadeva shone like the full-
moon. ‘Phe fire born of his energy shone in
effulgence fike lightning that flashes amid
clouds. It seemed as tf a thousand suns
rose there, filling every quarter with a
dazsling splendour. ‘That energy of the
Supreme Lord lookéd like the Samvartaka
fire which destroys all creatures at the end
of the Yuga. .


243. Filled to the fill with that energy,
the norizon became such that I could not
see anything on any side. Filled with


j anxiety 1 once more jthought that it could


mean,


244, That energy, however, did not per-
vade every side for a long’ time, for soon,
through the illusion of that god of gads, the
horizon became clear.


245. then saw the illustrious Sthanu
or Maheshwara, seated on the back of his
bull, ef blessed and sweet appearance and
looking like a smokeless fire.


246. And the great god was accom-
panied by Parvati of perfectfeatuces. in-
deed, 1 saw the blue-throated and great
Sthanu, unattached to everything, that ce-
ceptacle of all sorts of energy or force,
having eighteen arms, and bedecked with
all sorts of ornaments.


247. Clad in white robes, he wore white
garlands, and had white unguents smeared
upon his person, His banner, irresistible
in the universe, was white. ‘The thread
round his body was also white. /


248. He was encircled by companions
all endued with prowess equal to his own,
who were sinying or dancing or playing on-
various musical instruments.


249. Acrescent moon, of pale color,
formed his crown, and put on his foreliead
it looked like the moon which rises in the
autumnal sky. Heseemed to dazzle with
splendour on account of his three eyes
which looked like three surs,


250. The garland, of the purest white,


i that was en his body, shone like a wreath


of lotuses, of the purest white, adorned with
jewels and gems.


251. Lalso saw, O Govinda, the wea-
pons, in their embodied furms and fraught
with every sort of energy, that belong to
Bhava of peerless prowess.


252. The great god held a tainbow-
colored bow. That buw known as Pinaka
as is in reality a powerful snake.


253. Indeed, that snake of seven heads
and huge body, of sharp fangs and virulent


=


venom, of large neck and the masculine sex,
was iwined round with the cord that served
as its bowstring.


§54—255. And there was an arrow which
shoue like that of the sun or of the fire that
appears at the end of the cycle. Verily,
that arrow was the excellent Pashupata, that
mighty and dreadful weapon, which is with-
out a second, indescribable for its power,
and capable of terrorising’ every creature.
Of huve proportions, it seemed to constant-
ly emit sparks of fire.


256. Having one foot, large teeth, and a


thousand heads and thousand stomachs, it i


had a thousand arms, a thousand tongues,
and-a thousand eyes. Indeed, it seemed to
continually emit fire,


257. O youof great arms, that weapon
is superior to the Brahma, the Narayana,
the Aindra, the Agneya, and the Varuna
weapons. Indeed, it is capable of neutra-
Jising every other weapon in the uni-
verse, :


258. It was with that weapon that the
great Mahadeva had, formerly burnt and
consumed in a moment the triple city of the
Asuras. With the greatest ease, O Go-
vinda, Mahadeva, using that single arrow,
perfofmed that feat.


259. ‘That weapon, discharged by Maha-
deva’s arms, cah,; forsooth, consume in
half the time taken up by a twinkling of the
eye the entire universe with all its mobile
and immobile creatures.


260. Inthe universe there is no one in-
cluding, even Brahman aud Vishnu and the
celestials, who cannot be killed by that
weapon. O sire, I saw that excellent, won-

. derful and peerless weapon in the hand of
Mahadeva.


261. There is another mysterious and
very strong weapon which is equal or, per-
haps, superior to the Pashupata. I saw
that also. It is known in all the worlds as
the Shula of the Shula-armed Mahadeva.


262. Hurled by the illustrious god, that
weapon can rive the entire Earth or dry up
the waters of the ocean or annihilate the
entire universe,


263. Formerly Yuvanashwa’s son, king
Mandhatri, that conqueror of the three
worlds, having imperial sway and gifted


with profuse en rgy, was, with all his armies,
killed by means of that weapon.


264. Gifted with great might and great
seneryy awd resembling Shaukra himself in
prowess, that king, O Govinda, was killed
by the Rakshasa Lavana with the help of
this Shula which he had got from Shiva.


MAHABHARATA.


265. That Shula is keen-pointed. High-
ly terrible, it is capable of causing every
body’s hair stand erect. L beheld it in the
hand of Mahadeva, as if roaring with
anger, having contracted its forehead into
three wrinkles.


266. It resembled, O Krishna, a smoke.
less fire or the sun that rises at the end of
the cycle. The handle of that Shula was
made of a great snake. It is really indes-
cribable. It looked like the universal Des-
troyer armed with his noose.


267—268. I saw this weapon, O Govinda,
in the band of Mahadeva. I saw ‘also
another weapon, vig., that sharp-edged
battle-axe which, was given, formerly unto
Rama by Mahadeva for enabting him to
root out the Kshatriyas. It was with this
weapon that Rama killed in dreadful battle
the great Karttaviryya who was the king of
the entire world.


269. It was with that weapon that
Jamadagni’s son, O Govinda, was able to


root out the Kshatriyas for twenty-one
times,
270. OF blazing edge and highly terri-


ble, that axe was hanging on the shoulder,
adorned with a snake, of Mahadeva,
Indeed, it appeared on Mahadeva’s body
like the dame of a burning fire, ~


271. I saw with the highly intelligent
Maiadeva numberles other celestial wea-
pons. I have, however, named only a few
principal ones, O sinless. one.


272. On. the left side of the great gad
stood the Grandfather Brahman seated on
an excellent car to which were yoked swans
fleet-coursing like the mind.


273. On the same side was Narayana
also, seated on Garuda and bearing the
conch, the discus, and the mace.


274. Near the goddes Uma was Skanda
seated on his peacock, beating his dreadful
arrow and bells, and loolsing like another
Fire-God,


275. Before Mahadeva I saw Nandi
standing armed with his Shula and looking
like a second Shankara.


276. The Munis headed by the Self-
create Manu, and the Rishis having Bhrigu
for their first, and the gods with Shakra at
their head, all came there.

277. All the clans of spirits and ghosts,
and the celestial Mothers, stood surround-


ing Mahadeva and saluting him with
tespect,
278. ‘The gods were engaged in singing


the praises of Mahadeva in various hymns.
The Grandfather Brahman, uttering a
Rathantara, landed Mahadeva,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


279. Uttering the Jyeshtha Saman
Narayana also sang the praises of Bhava,
Shatra also did the same with the help of
those foremost of Vedic Mantras, viz., the
Shata-Rudriyam. ;


280. Verily, Brahman and Narayana
and Shakra,—those three great gods shone
there like three sacrificial fires. —


28t. In their midst was the illustrious
god like the sun in the midst of his corona,
come from autumnal clouds.


282. I saw countless suns and moons
also in the sky, O Keshava. I then lauded
the illustrious Lord of everything, the
Great Master of the universe.


Upamanyu said :—

283. I said,—Salutations to you, O illus-
trious one, O you who are the refuge of all
things, O you who are called Mahadeva!
Salutations to you who assume the form of
Shakra, who are Shakra and who disguise
yourself in the form of Shakra.


284. Salutations to you who, are armed
with the thunder, to you who are twany,
and you who are red. Salutations to you
who are always armed with the Pinaka, to
you who always bear the conch and the
Shula.


285. Salutations to you who are clad in
black, to you who are of dark and curly
hair, to you who have dark deer-skin for
your upper garment, to you who preside
over the eighth lunation of the dack fort-
night.


286. Salutations to you who are of white
hue, to you who are called white, to you
who are clad in white dress, “to you who
have limbs smeared with white ashes, to
you who are ever engaged in white deeds.


287. Salutations to you who are red in
color, to you who are clad in red dress, to
you who have a red banner with red flags,
to you who wear ced garlands and use red
unguents.


288. Salutations to you who are brown
Colored, to you who are clad in brown dress,
to you who have a brown banner with brown
flags, to you who wear brown garlands and
use brown unguents. Salutations to you
who have the umbrella of royalty held over
your head, to you who wear the foremost of
crowns.


289. Salutations to you who are adorned
with half a garland and half an aemlet, to
you who are decked with one ring for one
ear, to you who are endued with the speed
of the mind, to you who are highly efful-
gent.


290. Salutations to you who are the fore-
most of gods, to you who are the foremost


37


of Munis, to you who are the foremost of
celestials! Salutations to you who wear
halfsa wreath of Jotuses, to you who have
many lotuses on your body.


29t. Salutations to you who have half
your body smeared with sandal paste,
to you who have half your body decked with
garlands of flowers and smeared with frag-
ment unguents.


292. I bowto you who are bright-hued
like the. Sun, to you who are like the Sun,
to you whose face is like the Sun, to you
who have eyes each of. which is like the
Sun,


293. I bow to you who are Soma, to you
who are as mild as Soma, to you who bear
the lunar disc, to you who are of lunar as-
pect, to you who are the foremost of all
creatures, to you who are adorned with
most beausiful teeth,


294. I bowto ‘you who are of a dark
color, to you who are of a fair complexion,
to you who have a form half of which is
yellow and half white, to you who have a
body half of which is male and half female,
to you who are both male and female.


295—96. J bow'to you who have bull for -
your vehicle, to you who proceed riding on
the foremost of elephants, to you who are
obtained with difficulty, to you who are
capable of going to places unapproachable
by others. I bow to you whose praises are
sung by the Ganas, to you who are devoted
to the various Ganas, to you who follow the
track that is trod by the Ganas, to thee
who are always devoted to the Ganasas to
a vow.


297., I bow to you who are of the com-
plexion of white clouds, to you who have
the splendour of the evening clouds, to you
who are incapable of being described by
games, to you who are of your awn form.


298. 1 bow to you having a garland of
red color, to you who are clad in robes of
red}


299. I bow to you whose crown is set
with gems, to you who are adorned with a
cregcent, toyou who wear many beautiful
gems in your diadem, to you who have eight
flowers on your head,


300. I bow to you who have a fiery
mouth and fiery eyes, to you who have eyes
effulgent like a thousand moons, to you who
are of the form of fire, to you who are beau-
tiful and agreeable, to you who are incon-
ceivable and mysterious.


301. I bow to you who range in the sky,
to you who delight in living in pasture~
grounds, to you who walk on the Earth,


33


to you who are the Earth, to you who
are infinite, to you who are highly aus-
picious.


302. 1 bow to you who are nude, to you
who make a happy home of every place
where you may happen to be for the time
being. [ bow to you who have the universe
for your home, to you who have both Know-
ledge and Felicity for your Soul.


303, FI bow to you who always wear a
diadem, to you who wear a large armlet, to
you who have a snake for the garland round


your neck, to you who wear many beautiful


ornaments on your-body.


304. I bow to you who have the Sun,
the Moon, and Agni for your three eyes, to
you who have a thousand eyes, to you who
are both male and female, to you who are
divested of sex, to you who are a Sankhya,
to you who area Yogin.


a

305. I bow to you who are the grace of
those gods who are adored in sacrifices, to
you who are the Athacvans, to you who re-
move all sorts of disease and pain, to you
who remove every sorrow,


396. 1 bow to you who roar as deep as

the clouds, to you who display diverse kinds

. of illusions, to you who lord over the soil

and over the seed that is sown in it, to you
who are the Creator of everything.


307. | bow to you who are the Lord of
all the deities, to you who are the Master of
the universe, to you who are fleet like the
wind, to you who are of the form of the
wind,


308. [ bow to you who wear a garland
of gold, to you who play on hills and moun-
tains, to you who are adored by all who are
enemies of the gods, to you who are endued
with fierce speed and energy.


309. I bow to you who cut off one of the
heads of the Grandfather Brahman, to you
who have killed tiie Asura named Mahisha,
to you who have three forms, to you who
have every form.


3to. I bow to you who are the destroyer
of the triple city of the Asuras, to you who
are the destroyer of (Daksha’s) sacrifice, to
you who are the destroyer of the person of
Kama (the god of love) to you who hold the
rod of destruction.


3t1. I bow to you who are Skanda, to
you who are Visakha, to you who are the
rod of the Brahmana, to you who are Bhava,
to you who are Sarva, fo you who are of
universal form,


312. I bow to you who are [shana, to
you who are the destroyer of Bhaga, ta you
who are the slayer of Andhaka, to you who
are the universe, to you who are possessed


MAHABHARATA,


of illusion, to you whe are both conceivable
and inconceivable.


313. Youarethe one end of all crea-
tures, you are the foremost, you are the
heart of everything. You are the Brahman
of all the gods, you are the Red and Blue of
the Rudras.


314. You are the Soul of all creatures,
you are He called Purusha in the Sankhya
philosophy, you are the Rishava among all
sacred things, you are the auspicious of the
Yogins which, according to them, is indivi-
sible. “ ,


315. Amongst those who follow the
different modes of life; you are the House-
holder, you are the great Lord amongst
the patriarchs. You are Kuvera among
all the Yakshas, and you are Vishnu
amongst all the sacrifices.


_ 316. You are Meru amongst mountains,
you are the Moon among all luminaries of
the sky, you are Vashishtha amongst
Rishis, yor are the Sun amony the planets.


317. You are the lion among all the
beasts, and the butl adored of all among all
domestic animals.


318. Among the Adityas, you are Vish-
nu (Wpendra), among the Vasus, you are
Pavaka, among birds you are Garuda, and
among snakes you are Ananta,


319. Among the Vedas you are the Sa-
mans, among the Yajushes you are the
Shata-Rudriyam, among Yogins you are
Sanatkumara, and among Sankhyas you
are Kapila.


320. Among the Maruts you are Shakra,
among the Pitris you are Devarat, among
all the regiéns you are the region of Brah-
man, and you are emancipation amongst all
the ends of creatures.


32t. OF all eceans you are the Ocean
of Milk, among all mountains you are
Himavat, amang all the castes you are the
Brahmanas, and among all learned Brah-
manas you ate he who has undergone the
initiation.


32t You are the Sun among all things
in the world, you are the destroyer called
Kala. You are whatever else gifted with
Superior energy or eminence existing in the
universe,


323. You are endued with supreme
power. Thisis my certain conclusion. I
bow to you, O powerful and illustrious one,
O you who are kind to all your wore
shippers. :


324. 1 bow to you, O-lord of Yogins. I
bow to you, O original Cause of the uni-
verse, Be you pleased with me that am


ANUSHASANA PARVA?


your worshipper, that am very miserable
and helpless.


325. O Eternal Lord,?'do you become
the refuge of this adorer of yours who is very
weak and miserable! O Supreme Lord,
you should pardon me for all the sins L have
committed, taking mercy on me for my
being your devoted worshipper.


326. Iam stupefied by you, O Lord of
all the gods, on account of the disguise in
which you appeared before me. O Ma-
heshwara, I did not give you the Arghya or
water to wash your feet.


327. Having sung thus the praises of
Ishana, I offered him, with great devotion,
water to wash his feet and the articles of
the Arghya, and then, with joined hatds
lresigned myself*to him, ready to carry
out his command.


328. Then, O sire, an auspicious shower
of flowers dropped upon my head, carrying
celestial fragrance and bedewed with cold
water. -


32g. The divine musicians began to play
on their kettle-drums. A delicious breeze,
fragrant and sweet, began to blow and fill
me with pleasure,


330-331. Then Mahadeva accotipani-
ed by his wife, and having the bull for his
emblem, having been pleased with me, ad<
dressed the deities assembled there in these


words, filling me with great joy,—Behold, .


ye gods, the devotion of the great Upaman-


yu. Indeed, steady and yreat is that de-
votion, and entirely fixed, for it remains
usr gered. :


332—333. Thus addressed by the great
God arined with the Shula, the gods, O
Krishna, having bowed down to him and
joined their hands in respect, said these
words,~--O illustrious one, O God of the
gods, O Lord of the universe,JO Lord of all,
let this best of twice-born persons obtain
from you the fruition of all his desires!


334. Thus addressed by all the gods
with the Grandfather Brahman among
them, Sharva, otherwise called Isha and
Shankara, said these words, as if smiling,
to me,


The illustrious Shankar'a said :—


335: O dear Upamanyu, | am ‘pleased
with you. See me, O foremost of ascetics !
O learned Rishi, you are firmly devoted


to me and you have been well tested
by me. :
336. I have been very highly pleased


with you on account of this your devotion to
Shiva. [ shall, therefore, give you to-day
the fruition of your desires.


39


337. Thus addressed by the highly wise
Matadeva, tears of joy came into my eyes
and my hair stood erect.


438. Kneeling down to him and bowing
to him repeatedly, t theti with a voice that
was suppressed with joy, said to him.


_ 339. © illustrious god, it appears to me
that [ was hitherto dead and that it is only
to-day that [ have taken my birth, and that
my birth hasito-day borne fruit, since | art
standing now in the presence of Him who
is the Master of both the gods and the
Asuras !


340. Who else ig more praiseworthy
than I, since I am seeing with these eyes of
mine Him of immeasurable prowess whont
the very gods are unable to see without first
paying hearty worship ?


341—342. The learned and the wise con-
sider that as the highest of all topics, whicly
is Rternal, which is distinguished from alk
else, which is unborn, which is Knowledye,
which is indestructible, at one with you,
O powerful and § illustrious one, you who
are the beginning of all the topics, you
who are indestructible and chatlengetess,
you who know all the ordinances, you who
are the forethost of Purushas,; you who aré
the highest of the high. :


343. You who had created from yout
right side the Grandfather Brahman, the
Creator of all things, you are he who had
created from your lIelt-side Vishnu for
protecting the Creation. ss


344—345. Youare that powerful Lord
who did create Rudra when the énd of the -
cycle came and when the Creation was
once more to be destroyed ! Phat Rudra who
originated from you destroyed the Creation
with all its mobile and immobile beings,
assuming the form of highly powerfut
Kala, of the cloud Samvartaka, and of the
all destroying fire. Indeed, when the time
for the dissolution of the universe sets in,
that Rudra stands, ready to swallow up the
universe. .


346. You are that Mahadeva who is the
original Creator of the universe with all its
mobile and immobile creatures. You are
he who, at the end of the aon, stands,
withdrawing all things into yourself.


347. You are he who pervades all things,
you are the Soul of all things, you are the
Creator of the Creator of all principles.
Incapable of being beheld by even any
of the gods, you are he who exists, pervad-
ing ail principles. |


348. If, O Lord, you have been pleased
with me and tf you would grant me boans,
let this be the boon, O Lord of all the gods,


40


MAHABHARATA.


that my devotion to you may remain un- | fruits. See them bearing the flowers of


chanyed. :


349. O best of the gods, let me through
your grace, have knowledge of the Pie-
sent, the Past, and the Future.


350. I shall also, with all my Kinsmen
and friends, always eat food mixed with
milk. And let your illustrious self be for
ever present at ouc gifted hermitage.


351. ‘Vhus addressed by me, the illus-
trious Maheshwara gifted with supreme
energy, that Master of all mobile and im-
mobile creations, vig , Shiva, adored of all
the universe, then said to me these words.


The Vlustrious God said :—


352. Be free from every misery and pain
and be above decrepitude and death, Be
gifted with fame, be endued with great
energy, and spiritual knowledge.


353. You shall through my grace, be
always sought by the Rishis. Be your
behaviour good and righteous. May you
possen all attributes and universal know-
edge. Be you of agreeable appearance.


354-355. May you possess everlasting
youth, and let your energy be like that of
fire. Whenever, again, you may wish for
the presence, which ts so agreeable to you,
of the ocean of milk, (here shall that
ocean appear before you. Do you, with your
friends, always obtain food prepared with
milk, with the celestial nectar being mixed
with it. :


.356. After the expiration of an zon
you will enjoy my company, Unending
shall be your family and race and kinsmen.

357. O foremost of twice-born ones,
your devotion to me shall be eternal. And,
O best of Brahmanas, I Shail always be
present at your hermitage.


358. Live, O son, wherever you like
shorn of anxiety. Thought of by you, |
shall, O learned Brahmana, appear before
you again.

359. Having said these words, and
granted me these boons, the illustrious
Ishana; effulgent like millions of Suns,
disappeared there and then. .


360. It was even, Q Krishna, that I
saw, with the help of austere penances, that
God of gods. 1 also got all that was said
by the great God endued with supreme
inteHigence.

361. See, O Krishna, before your eyes,
these Siddhas living here and these Rishis
and Vidyadharas and Yakshas and
Gandlfarvas and Apsaras.


362. See these trees and creepers and
plants yielding all sorts of flowers and


every season, with beautiful leaves, and
spreading a sweet smell all around.


363. O you of mighty arms, all these
are gifted with a celestial nature througtt
the favour of that god of gods, that
supreme Lord, that great Deity.


Vasudeva continued :—


364-365. Hearing these words of his
and seeing, as it were, with my own eyes all
that he had described to me, 1 became
filled with wonder. I then addressed the
great ascetic Upamanyu and said to him,
Hignly praiseworthy as you are, O foremost
of learned Brahmanas, for what righteous
man is there except you. whose retreat
enjoys the distinction of being honored with_
the presence of that God of gods.


366. Will the powerful Shiva, will the
great Shankara, O chief of ascetics, grant
me also a sight of his body and show me
favour ? -


Upamanyu said :—

367. Forsooth, O you having eyes like
lotus petals, you will very soon see Mahas
deva as, © sinless one, I succeeded in
seeing him.


368. O you of immeasurable prowess,
{ see with my spiritual eyes that you will
in the sixth month from this, succeed in
getting a sight of Mahadeva, O best of all
persons.


369. You, O foremost- of the VYadus,
will obtain from Maheshwara and his@krég
twenty-four boons. | tell you what ts moe:


370. Through the favour of that Deity
gilted with supreme wisdom, 1 know the
Past, the Future, and the Present.


371—372. The great Hara has favoured
these thousands of Rishis and others. Why
will not the powerful Deity show favour ta
you, O Madhava! I always like the meet-
ing of the. gods as does one like you, who is
devoted to the Bratmanas, who is full of
mercy and who is full of faith. [I shall give
you certain Mantras. Recite them’ conti-
nuously. By this you are sure to see
Shankara!


The blessed Vishnu said :—


373. J then said to him,—O twice-born
one, through your favour, O great ascetic, I
shall see the lord of the deities, that grinder
of Diti’s numberless sons.


374. Eight days, O° Bharata, passed
there like an hour, all of us being thus
occupied with talk on Mahadeva.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


aR
ra
478. On the eighth day, | underwent
the initiation according to due rites, at
the hands of that Brahmana. I received
the staff from his hands. I went through
the prescribed shave. I took up a quantity
of Kusha blades in my hand. I wore rags
for my raiments. I rubbed my person with
clarified butter. | puta cord of Munja
grass round my loins.


376. For one month I lived on fruits.
The second month [ lived upon water.
The third, the fourth, and the fifth months
1 passed, living upon air only.

377- | stood all the while, upon one
foot, and with my arms also raised up-
wards, and giving up sleep for all the time.
i then saw, O Bharata, in the sky a light
that seemed to be as dazzling as that of a
thousand Suns.


378. Towards the centre of that efful-
gence, O son of Pandu, I saw a cloud
looking like a mass of blue hills, adorned
with rows of cranes, decorated with many
a grand rainbow, with flashes of lightning
and the fire looking like eyes set on it.


379. Within that cloud was the powerful


Mahadeva, himself of dazzting splendour, .


accompanied by his consort Uma. Indeed,
the great God appeared to shine with his
penances, energy, beauty, effulgence, and
his beloved consort by his side. -


380. The powerful Maheshwara, with
his wife by his side, shone in the midst of
that cloud. The appearance seemed to be
like that of the Sun in the midst of clouds
with the Moon by his side. a


381. The hair on my body, O son of
Kunti, stood erect, and my eyes expanded
with wonder upon seeing Hara, the refuge
of all the gods and the remover of all their
griefs.


382, Mahadeva was adorned with a
diadem on his head. He was armed with
his Shula. He was clad ‘in a tiger-skin,
bad matted locks en his head, and bore
the staff in one of his hands. He was
armed, besides, with his Pinaka and the
thunder-bolt. His teeth were sharp point-
ed. He was adorned with an excellent
bracelet for the upper arm. His sacred
thread was formed by a snake.


383. He wore an excellent garland of
various colors on his bosom, that hung down
to hisitoes. Indeed, | saw him like the high-
ly bright moon of an autumnal evening.

384. Surrounded by various clans of
Spirits and ghosts, he appeared like the
autumnal Sun difficult of being looked at
for its dazzling brightness,

385. A thousand and hendred Rudras
steed around that God of controlled soul


6


ar.


and white deeds, seated upon his bull. All
of them were employed in singing his
praises.

386. The Adityas, the Vasus, the
Sadhyas, the Vishwedevas, and the twin
Ashwins praised that Lord of the universe,
by singing the hymns,_

387. The powerful Indra and his
brother Upendra, the two sons of Aditi, -
and the Grandfather Brahman, all sang
in the presence of Bhava the Rathantara
Saman,


388—390. Numberless masters of Yoga,
all the twice-born Rishis with their children,
all the celestial Rishis, the goddess Earth,
the Sky, the Constellations, the Planets, the
Months, the Fortnights, the Seasons, Night,
the Years, the Kshanas, the Muhurtas, the
Nimeshas, the Yugas one after ancther,
all the celestial Sciences and branches of
knowledge, and all beings conversant with
Teath, were seen bowing down that Su-
preme Preceptor, that great Father, that
giver of Yoya.


391—393. Sanatkumara, the Vedas, the
Histories, Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya,
Pulaha, Kratu, the seven Manus, Soma,
the Atharvans, and Vrihaspati, Bhrigu,
Daksha, Kashyapa, Vashishtha, Kashya,
the Cchchandas, Diksha, the Sacrifices,
Dakshina, the Sacrificial Fires, the Havis
poured in sacrifices, and all the articles o€
.the sacrifices, were seen by me, O Yudhish-
thira, standing there in theic embodied
forms.


394—397. Alt the presiding deities of
the wortds, all the Rivers, all the snakes,
the mountains, the celestial Mothers, all’
the wives and daughters of the celestials,
thousands upon thousands and millions of
ascetics, were seén to bow down to that
powerful Lord who is the soul of tranquil-
ity. ‘Fhe Mountains, the Oceans, and the
Peints of the compass also did the same,
the Gandharvas and the Apsaras highly
proficient in musi¢, in celestial songs, sang
and hymned the praises of Bhava who is
full of wonder. ‘The Vidyadharas, the
Daravas, the Guhyakas, the Rakshasag,.
and al! created beings mobile and im-
mobile were worshipping, in thought, word,
and deed, that powerful Lord, ‘hat Lord
of all the gods, vig., Sarva, appeared
before me, seated in all his glory. :


398. Seeing that Ishana had showed
himself to me by being seated in glory
before my eyes, the whole universe, with the
Grandfather and Shakra, looked at me.


399. I, however, had not the power te
look at Mahadeva. The great god then
addressed me, Saying,—see, O Krishna,
and speak to me!


ae.


400. You have worshipped me hundreds
and thousands of times. {here is no one
in the three worlds who is dearer to me
than you! :


401. After had bowed to him, his wife,
vigz., the goddess Uma, became pleased
with me, I then addressed in these words
the great God whose praises are hymned
by all the gods headed by the Grandfather
Brahman.


The blessed Vishnu said i


— 402. ‘1 saluted Mahadeva, saying,—~
1 bow to you, O you who are the origin
of all things. The Rishis declare that you
are the master of the Vedas. ‘Ihe pious
hold that you are. Penance, you are Sattwa,
you are Rajas, you are Tamas, and you
are Truth.


403. You are Brahman, you are Rudra,
you are Varuna, you are Agni, you are
Manu, you are Bhava, you are Dhatri, you
are ‘Tashtri, you are Vidhatri, you are the
powerful Lord of all things, youare every-
where,


494. All beings, mobife and immobile,
have originated from you. You have
created. this world with all its mobile and
tmmobite creations.


405. The Rishis say that you are
superior to the senses, the mind, the vital
air, the seven fires, everything else which
rests upon the all-peevading Soul, and all
the celestials who are worshipped.


- 406. You, O illustrious one, are the
Vedas, the Sacrifices, Soma, Dakshina,
Pavaka, Havi, and all othec ingredients of
sacrifice.


407. The merit of sacrifices, gifts, the
study of the Védas, vows, practices of res-
traint, Modesty, Fame, Prosperity, Glory,
Contentment, and: Success, are all for ae-
quiring you,

408. Desire, Anger, Fear, Cupidity,
Pride, Stupefaction, and Malice, Pains and
Diseases, are, O illustrious one, all your
offspring. P

409. You are the acts of creatures, you
are the joy and sorrow of those acts, you
are the absence of joy and sorrow, you are
that Nescience which is the eternal seeds of
Desire, you are the great origin of Mind,
you are Power, and you are Eternity.


410. Youare the Uumanifest, you are
Pavana, you are inconceivable, you are the
thousand-rayed Suv, you are the shining
intelligence, you are the first of all the
subjects, and/you are the support of life.

411—4t2. By the words Greatness, Soul,
Understanding, Brahman, Universe, Sham-
bhu, and Self-create, as well as other


MAHABHARATA.


words seen (in the Vedas), your mature is
comprehended as being at one with Greate
ness and Soul. Knowing you as ali this,
the learned Brahmana conquers that Ignors
ance which is the root of the world.


413. You are the beart of all creatures,
and you are worshipped by the Rishis ag
Soul. Your arms and feet extend to every
place, and your eyes, head, and face are
everywhere. You hear everywhere im the
universe, and you exist permeating every-
thing.

414. You are the fruit of all acts
which are performed in the Nimeshas and
other divisions of time whieh originate from
the Sun.


415. You are the original lustre. You
are Male Being living in the hearts of alt
things. You are the successful fruits of
Yoga. << :

416. Understanding and [Intelligence
and all the worlds depend upon you. ‘Those
who are given to meditation, who are
always busy with Yoga, who are devoted
to or firm in Truth and who have eonquer-
ed their passions, seek you and depend on
you.


417. They who know you as the one
unchangeable, or one who fives in alF
hearts, or one who is endowed witty
supreme power, or one who is the
ancient Male Being, or one who is ptre
Knowledge, or one that is the effulgent
understanding, or one that is the highest.
refuge of all persons gifted with intelli-
gence, are, indeed, highly intelligent men.
Indeed, suc& persons reign supreme over
intelligence.


418. By understanding the seven subtile
principles, by comprehending your $ix ate
tributes, and by mastering the true Yoga,
the man of knowledge succeeds in entering
into your great self, :


419. After I had said these words, 0
Partha, to Bhava, that remover of grief
and pain, the universe, both mobile and
immobile, roared like a lion.


420. The numberless Brahmans present
there, the gods and the Asuras, the Nagas,
the Pishachas, the Pitris, the birds, various
Rakshasas, various classes of ghosts and
spirits, and all the great Rishis, then bowed
down to that great Deity.


42t. There then, dropped upon mv head
showers of highly fragrant celestial flowers
and sweet winds blew on the spot. 7


422. The powerful Shankara then, given
to the behoof of the universe, looked at
the goddess Uma, and the king of the
celestials and myself also, and thus spoke
to me,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


423. We know, O Krishna, that you,
© siayer of foes, are greatly devoted to
us! Do what is for your good. My love
and affection for you is very great.


424. Do you ask for eight boons. [{
shall grant them, O Krishna, O bese of all
persons. Tell me what they are, O chief
of the Yadavas. Say what you wish. You
will have them, however difficult of attain-
tent bey may be.


CHAPTER XV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)}.—
Coxtinued,


Krishna said :—

1—2, Bending low my head with a con-
trolled soul to ‘that mass of energy and
effulgence, I said ta the great god, with a
joyous heart, these words,—I ask for these
boons from you, namely, firmness in virtue,
the destruction of enemies in battle, the
highest glory, the greatest power, devotion
to Yoga, your nearness, and huadreds upon
hundreds of children.


3—4. Whereto Shankara said, so be it,
fepeating the words I had said. Alter this,
the mother of the universe, the upholdress
of all things, she who purifies all things,
wiz., the wife of Sarva that huge receptacle
of penances, said with centrolled soul, these
words to me:—The powerful Mahadeva
has granted you, O sinless one, a son who
shall be named Shamva.


5—6. Do you take from me also eight
boons which you choose. | shall, indeed,
gantthem ‘@ you. Bowing her with my
head bénded, [I said to her, O son of
Pandu,—l pray from you uniform affection
for the Brahmanas, the favour of my father,
a hundred sons, the highest enjoyments,
love for my family, the favour of my mother,
the attainment of tranquility aad peace,
and cleverness in every deed.


Uma said :—

7. You will have them, O you who are
endued with prowess equal to that of a
celestial, I never say what is untrue. You
will have sixteen thousand wives. Your
Jove for them and theirs also for you shall
be limitless.


8. From all your kinsmen also, you will
get the highest affection. You will have
a most beautiful person. Seven thousand
guests will daily feed at your palace.


‘Vasudeva continued :—
9. Having thus granted me boons, both


‘is no end or refuge like Sarva,


4B


the god and the goddess, O Bharata, dis-
appeared there and then with theic asso-
ciates, O elder brother of Bhima,


1o. All those wonderful deeds I described
fully, O best of kings, to that highly
energetic Brahmana Upamanyu. Bowing
down to the great God, Upamanyu saic
these words to me.


Upamanyu said :—

tt. There is no god like Sarva. There
There is
none who can grant so many or so high
boons. There is none who is his equal in
battle. .


CHAPTER XVI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Upamanyu said :—

IZ. ‘lhere was in the golden’cycle, O
sire, a Rishi named Landi. With devoted.
heart he worshipped with the help of Yoga-
meditation, the great God for ten thousand
years, Hear me as [ tell you the fruit or
reward he reaped of such wonderful devo-
tion. He succeeded in seeing Mahadeva
and lauded him by uttering some hymns. .


3-6. Thinking, with the help of his
penances, of Him who is the supreme Sout
and who is eternal and undecaying, Tandi
becaine stricken with wonder and = said
these words,—I seek. His refuge whom the
Sankhyas describe and the Yogins think
of as the great, the foremost, the Male
Being, the pervader of all things, and the
Lord of all existent objects, who, is the
cause of both the creation and the destruc-
tion of the universe ; who is superior to all
the gods, the Asuras, and the Munis, who
has nothing higher. who is uncreate, who is
the Lord of all things, who has neither
beginning nor end, and who is gifted with
supreme power, who is possessed of the
highest happiness, and who is effulyent and
sinless,


7—10. After he had said these words,
Tandi, saw before him that ocean of pen-
ances, that great God who is etertial and
undecaying, who is peerless, wha is incou-
ceivahle, who is eternal, and who is without
any change, who is indivisible, who is whole,
who is Brahma, who is above all attributes,
and who is gifted with attribdtes, who is the
highest delight of Yogins, who is without
decrease, who is called Liberation, who -is
the cefuge of the mind, of Indra, of Agni,
of the Wind-God, of the entire universe,


44


and of the Grandfather Brahman; who
cannot be comprehended by the mind; who
is without change of any kind, who is pure,
who is capable of being apprehended by
the understanding only, and who is imma-
terial as the mind; who cannot be compre-
hended, who cannot be measured, who is
difficult of being attained, by persons of
impure souls, who is the origin of the uni-
verse, and who is above both the universe
and the quality of darkness; who is an-
cient, who is Purusha, who is gifted with
effulgence, and who is higher than the
highest.


tt. Desirous of seeing Him who invest-
ing himself with vital airs, lives in the in-
dividual soul, in the form of that effulgence
which is called the Mind, the Rishi Fandin,
passed many years practising the severest
austerities, and having succeeded in seeing
Him as the reward of those penances, he
lauded the great God in the following
terns. ;


Tandi said :—


12. You are the purifier of all purifiers
and the cefuge of all, O foremost of all
beings gifted with intelligence! You are
tha most dreadful energy of all kinds of
energy. You are the austerest penance of
_all pevances. -


13. You, O powerful one, are the liberal
giverjof blessings. You are the supreme
Truth, I bow to you,


14. I bow to you, O you of a thousand
rays, and, O refuge of all happiness! You
ure the bestower of that emancipation for
which, O powerful one, Yatis, standing in
fear,of bitth and death, strive so hard.


15. The Grandfather Brahman, Indra
of a hundred sacrifices, Vishnu, the
Vishwedevas, the great ‘Rishis, cannot com-
prehend your real nature. Mow then can
persons like ourselves expect to comprehend
you.


16. Everything originates from you.
Upon you depends everything. You are
called Kala, you are called Purusha, you
are called-Brahma. (Celestial Rishis well-
read in the,Puranas, say that you are triune.


ig. You are Adhi-Purusha, Adhyatma,
Adhibhuta, Adhi-Daivata, Adhi-Loka,
Adhi-Vijaanam, and Adhi- Yajna,


18. Wise men, when they succeed in
knowing you that lives in themselves and
that can-be known by the very gods, be-
come freed from all fetters and enter into a
state of existence that is above all sorrow.

*


19. They who do not wish to know you,
are constrained to pass through number-
ess biths and deaths, You are the door


MAHABHARAFA.


of heaven and of Liberation. You are he
who bring all beings into existence and
withdraw them again into yourself, You
are the great giver.


20. You are heaven, you are liberation,
you are desire. You are the anger which
inspires creatures. You are Sattwa, you
are Rajas, you are ‘Tamas, you are the
nether regions, and you are the -upper
regions.


2t. You are the Grandfather Brahman,
you are Bhava, you are Vishnu, you are
Skanda, vou are Indra, you are Savitri,
you are Yama, you are Varuna, youare
Soma, you are Dnatri, you are Manu, you
are Vidhatri, and you are Kuvera the Lord
of riches.


22. You are Earth, you are Wind,
you are Water, you are Agni, you are
Ether, you are Speech, you are the Under-
standing, you are Steadiness, you are
Jotelligenee, you are the Acts, you are
Truth, you are Untruth, you are existent,
you are non-existent,


23. You are the senses, you are what
is above Nature, you are immutable. You
ate superior to existent objects, you are
superior to non-existent objects, you are
capable of being conceived, you are incapa-
ble of being conceived. :


24. You are at one with what is
Supreme Brahma, with what.is the highest
entity, with what is the end of both the
Sankhyas and the Yogins.


25. Indeed, 1 have been greatly re-
warded by you to-day on account of your
granting me a sight of -your form. I
have attained the end of the righteous. 5
have been rewarded with that end which
is prayed for by persons whose understand-
ings have been purified by Knowledge.


26. Alas, so long I was steeped in
Ignorance; for this long time I was an
insensate fool, since | had no knowledge
of you who are the Supreme Deity. you
who are the only Eternal Entity as knowa
by all persons.


27, In course of numberless lives have
I at last succeeded in acquiring that Devo-
tion towards you for which you have
shown yourself to me, O you who are ever
inclined to favour those who are devoted
to you! He who knows you enjoys
immortality.


28. You are always a mystery with the
gods, the Asuras, and the ascetics. Brahma
is concealed in a cave. The very ascetics
cannot see ot know him.

29. You are that powerful god who is
the Creator of everything and whose face
is turned towards all directions, You are


*


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


the Soul of a'l things, you see all things,
you pervade all things, and you know all
things. | :


. 30. You make a body for yourself.
You bear that body. You are an embo-
died Being. You have a body, and you
are the refuge of all embodied creatuies.
You are the creator of the vital airs, ycu
possess the vital airs, you are endued with
vital airs, you are the giver of the vital
airs, and you are the refuge of all beings
endued with vital airs,


31. Vou are that Adhyatma, which is
the refuge of all pious persons who are
given to Yoga-meditation and conversant
with the Soul and who seek to avoid re-
birth. Indeed, you are that Supreme Lord
who is at one with that refuge.


32. You distribute all ends, happy or
miserable, to all creatures. You ordain the
birth and death for all created beings.


33. You are the powerful Lord who
grants success to Rishis crowned with
success regarding the fruition of their
wishes. Having created all the worlds
beginning with Bhu, together with all
the dwellers of heaven, you uphold and
cherish them ail, dividing yourself into
your well known eight forms,


34. Everything originates from you. All
things depend upon you. All things, again,
disappear in you. You are the sole Eternal
object. .


33- You are that region of Truth which
is sought by the righteous and: considered
by them as the highest. You are that
stoppage of individual existence sought by
the Yogins. You are that Liberation which
is sought by persons conversant with the
Soul,


36. Beings crowned with success and
having Brahman amongst them have con-
cealed you in a cave for preventing the
deities and Asuras and human beings from
seeing you. ‘


37. Although you live in the heart, yet
are you concealed. Hence, stupefied by
you the deities and Asuras and men cannot
understand you, O Bhava, truly and in all
your details.


38. O you living in all heart you appear
before those persons who succeed in attain-
ing to you alter having purified themselves
by devotion,


39. By knowing you one can avoid both
death and re-birth. You are the bighest
ebject of knowledge.. By knowing you no
higher object remains for one to know.


40, You- ace the greatest object of
acquirement, The person that is truly


45


wise, who by acquiring you, thinks that
there is no higher object of acquisition. By
attaining to you who are greatly subtile
and who are the highest object of acquisi-
tion, the wise man becomes immortal.


41. The followers of the Sankhya sys-
tem, well read in their own system of philo-
sophy and possessing a knowledge of the
qualities and of all the topics of enquiry,—
those learned men who reign over the
destructible by attaining to a knowledge
of the subtile or indestructible,—succeed
by knowing you in freeing themselves from
all fetters.


42. Persons well read in the Vedas con-
sider you as the one object of knowledge
which has been explained in the Vedanta.
These men, given to the suppression of
vital airs, always meditate on you and at
last enter into you as their highest end.


43- Riding on the car of OM, those
men enter inter into Maheshwara. You
are the solar door of the celestial road.


. You are the lunar door, “of. that
which is called the road of the Pitris, You
are Kashtha, You are the points of the
horizon, you are the year, and you are the
cycles, : :


45. You are the sovereignty of the
heavens, you are the sovereignty of: the
Earth, you are the Northern and the
Southern solistices. In days of yore the
Grandfather Brahman sang your praises.
O you who are called blue and red, by
reciting various hymns and urged you to
create living creatures.


46. Brahmanas conversant with Richs
praise you by uttering Richs, considering
you as unattached to all things and as shorn
of all forms. In sacrifices, Adhyaryus, pour
libations, uttering _ Yajushes in honor of
you who are the sole object of knowledge,
according to the three well-known ways.


47. Persons of purified understandings,
who are conversant with Samans, sing you
with the help of Samans. Those twice-
born, again, who are conversant with the
Atharvans, hymn you as Rita, as Truth,
as the Highest, atid as Brahma. Yow are
the highest cause of the Sacrifice. You
are the Lord, and you are Supreme. ;


48. The night and day are your organs
of hearing and organ of sight. The fort-
nights and months for your head and arms.
‘The seasons are your energy, penances are
are your patience, and the year is your
anus, and thighs, and feet. -°


49. You are Death, you are Yama, you
are Hutasha, you are Kala, you are gilted
with speed of destruction, you are the


46


prime cause of Time and you are eternal |
Yime. :

o. You are the Moon and the Sun, with
all the stars and planets and the atmos-
phere that fills space. You-are the pole-
Star, you are the constellation called the
seven Rishis, you are the seven regions
beginning with Bhu.  ~


S51. You are Pradhana and Mahat, you
are Unmanifest, and you are this world.
You are the universe beginning with
Fratma and ending with the lowest vege-
table creation. You are the beginning of
all creatures. You are identical with the
existent and the non-existent.


52. You are theeight Prakritis. You
are, again, above the eight Praksitis.
Every thing that exists, represents a por-
tion of your divine Self,


53- Youare the Supreme Eternal Hap-
piness. You are the end cf all things.
You are the highest existence of the
Righteous. ;


54. You are that state which is free
from every anxiety. You are Eternal
Brahma. You ace that.highest state which
‘forms the meditation’ of persons well-cead
in the auxiliary branches of the Vedas:


55. You are the highest Kashtha, you
are the highest Kala. You are the highest
Success, and you are the highest Refuge.


56. You are the highest ‘Tranquility.
You are the highest stoppage of Existence.
By attaining to you, Yogins thing that
they have acquired the highest success.


- 57. Wou are Contentment, you are Suc-
_ cess, you are Shruti, and you are the
Smriti You are that Refuge of the Sout
which Yogins seek, and you are that ina-
destiuctible Prapti which men of knowledge
seek,


58. You are, forsooth, that Ead which is
sought by persons given to sacrifices and
those who pour sacrificial libations, moved
by particular desires, and who make large
presents on such occasions,


59. Youare that high End which those
persons seek who consume and s:¢ rch their
bodies with austere penances with conti-
nued recitations, with those rigid vows and
fasts which belong to their peaceful lives,
and with other means of self-affliction.


60. O Eternal One, you are the End
of those who are unattached to all things
and who have given up all acts.


61. You, O Eternal One, are that End
of those who seek Liberation from ce-birth,
who give up all enjoyments, and who desire
the annihilation of the elements,


MAHABHARATA.


62. You are that high End, O illustrious
one, which cannot be described, which is
pure, which is the immutable one, and
which is theirs who are given to knowledge
and science.


63. These are the five Ends described
in the Vedas and the Scriptures and the
Puranas, It is through your favour that
persons acquire those Ends, or, if they fail
to attain to them, it is through your favour
being denied to them.


64. It was thus that Tandi, who was a
heap of penances, lauded Isliana. And he
sang also that high Brahma which in days
of yore was sung by the Creator himself.


Upamanyu said :—

65. Thus lauded by that utterer of
Beahma, vzz., Tandi, Mahadeva, that illus~
trious and powerful’ god who was accom-
panied by his wife Uma, said these words.


Tandi said :—

66. Neither Brahman, noc Indra, nor
Vishnu, nor the Vishwedevas, nor the
great Rishis, know you. Pleased at this,
Shiva said the following words.


The Holy One said :—

67- You shall be indestructible and
eternal. You shall be freed from all sorrow.
You will have great fame. You will be
gifted with energy. You will get Spiritual
Knowledge.


68. All the Rishis shall seek you, and
your son, through my favour, shall become
the author of Sutras, O foremost of twice-
born ones. anes


y
‘6g . What wishes of yours shall I grant
to-day? Tell me, O son, what do you seek.
—At this, Tandi joined his hands and said,


—O Lord, let my devotion to you be
Steady.
Upamanyu said :—


qo. Having given to Tandin these boons
and received the adorations of both the
gods and the Rishis, the great Deity dis«
appeared there and then.


qt. When the illustrious Deity, O lord
of the Yadavas, thus disappeared with all
his followers, the Rishi came to my her-
mitage and said to me all that had taken


place. .


72. Do you hear, U foremost of men,
for your success, all those celebrated names
that Vandi said to me..

73- The Grandfather had at one time
recited ten thousand names of Mahadeva.
In the scriptures, a thousand names of the
god occur


/


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


' 94. These namés are riot known to all,
© you who is above destruction, in days of
yore, Phe Grandfather Brahman uttered
these names for worshipping the great
Deity. Having acquired them through the
favour offthe Grandtather, Tandi communi.
cated them to me.


CHAPTER XVII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).-=
Continued.


Vasudeva said :—


t. Concentrating his mind, O Yudhish«
thira, the twicesborn Rishi Upamanyu,
with hands joined together in respect,
uttered this abstract of names beginning
from the very commencement,


Upamanyu said :—

2. I shall worship that great Deity who
is worthy of the adorations of all creatures,
by uttering those names which are celebra-
ted over all the worlds,—names some of
which were uttered by the Grandfather
Brahman, some by the Rishis, and some of
which occur in the Vedas, and the auxili-
ary sciences.


3. Those names have been used by
eminent persons. They are, again, true and
fraught with success, and ase capable of
accomplishing all the objects of the utterer.
‘They have been given to Mahadeva by
“Tandi whose soul was purified by Vedic
learning and who invented those names
with the help of his devotion.


‘4. With those names that have been
uttered by many well-known pious persons
and by ascetics conversant with all the sub-
jects I shall worship him who is the greatest,
who is the first, who takes to heaven, who is
ready to give benefits upon all creatures,
and who is auspicious.;


53. Those names have been heard in the
universe, having spread from the region of
Brahman. All of -them-are fraught with
‘Truth. With those names | shall worship
him who is Supreme Brahma, who has
been described by the Vedas, and who is
Eternal,


6. I shall now tell you, O chief of Yadu’s
race, those names, Hear them with rapt
attention. You are a devout worshipper
.of the Supreme Lord. Adore the illus-
trious Bhava, knowing him above all the
deities. :

y. And because you are: devoted to him,


I shall, therefere, recite those names before


47


you. Mahadeva is Eternal Brahma. No


-one even one endued with Yoga is able to


describe, in even a hundred years, the glary:
and power of that great Deity in full. Jhe
beginning, middie, or end of Mahadeva
cannot be apprehended by the very gods.


g Such being the fact, who is there, O
Mahadeva, that can recite.the qualities of
Mahadeva in full? J shall, nowever,—~
through the favour of that illustrious su-
preme and perfectly wise Deity, extended
to me for my devotion to him,—recite bis
attributes in an abstract of few, words
and letters, :


10. ‘The Supreme Lord is incapable of
being worshipped by any one if he does not
grant his permission to the worshipper. As
for myself, it is only. when [ be¢ome fortu-
nate enough to receive his permission that §
succeed in worshipping him,


tr. L shall mention only a few names of
that great God who is without birth and
without destruction, who is the ‘original
cause of the universe, who. is gifted with
the ‘highest Soul,and whose origin is uh-
manifest. '


12. Hear, O Krishna, a few names, that


_ were uttered by Brahman himself, of that


giver of boons, that worshipful god, that
powerful one who has the universe for
his form, and who is gifted with supreme
wisdom.


13. These names that I shall recite are
taken from the ten thousard names that the
great Grandfather had uttered in days
of yore, as clarified butter is extracted from
curds.


14. As gold is the essence of rocky
mountains, as honey is the essence of
flowers, as Manda is the extract from clari«
fied butter, so have these names beet ex-
tracted from and represent the cream of
those ten thousand names that were uttered
by the Grandfather Brahman, ‘


15. ‘This abstract of names can remove
every sin however heinous, It possesses
the merit of the four Vedas. It should be
understood with care, and be kept in the
memory with concentrated soul.


16. It is fraught with auspiciousness.
It brings on advancement.” It destroys
Rakshasas. Jt is a great purifier. It should
be given only to him who is devoted to the
great Lord, to him who has Faith, to bim
who believes. Is should never be commu-
nicated to him who has no faith, him who is.
an unbeliever, him who has not conquered
his soul, |

17. That creature, O Krishna, who
entertain malice towards the illustrious
Mahadeva who is the original cause of


48
everything, wha is the Supreme Soul, and
who js the great Lord, has surely ta go to


hell with alt his ancestors before and all
his children after him.


18, This abstract of names that I shall
recite to you is regarded as Yoga-medita-
tion, his is regarded as Yoga. ‘his is
tegarded as the highest object of meditae
tion, This is what one should constantly
recite. This is knowledge. This is the
highest Mystery.


tg. If one, even on the eve of death,
recites i¢ or hears it recited to him, he
succeeds in attaining to the highest end.
This is holy, This is auspicious, this is
fraught with every sort of benefit. This
is the best of all things,


20. Brahman, the Grandfather of all
the universe, having in days of yore, com-
*posed it, gave to it the foremost place
among all excellent hymns. ;


2t. Since then, this hymn of the great-
hess and glory of the great Mahadeva,
-which is held in the highest reverence b
all the gods, is known as the king of ail
hymns,


22, This king of all hymns was first
taken from the region of Brahman to
heaven, the region of the gods. Tandi
then got it from heaven. Hence it is
known as the hymn composed by Tandi.


23. From heaven Tandi brought it
down on Earth, |t is the most sacred of
all sacred things, and is capable of re-
moving all sins however heinous,


24. O you of powerful arms, I shall
recite to you that best of all hymns, This
hymn belongs to him who is the - Veda
of the Vedas, and the most ancient of all
ancient objects.


4


25. To him who is the energy of all
energies, and the penance of all penances;
to him who is the most tranquil of all
creatures gifted with tranquility, and who
is the splendour of all splendours.


26. To him who is regarded as the
most restrained of all creatures who are
restrained, and him who is the intelligence
of all creatures gifted with intelligence ;
to him who is regarded as the god of all
gods, and the Rishi of all Rishis.


27. To him who is regarded as the
sacrifice of all sacrifices and the most atts-
picious of ali auspicious things ; to him who
is the Rudra of all the Rudras, and the
effulgence of all effulgent things..


28. To him who is the Vogin of all
Yogins, and the cause of alf causes; to
him from whom all the worlds come into


MAHABHARATA,


being, and to whom all the worlds retursi
when they cease to exist.


29. To him who is the Soul of all -
creatures, and who is called Hara of great
energy. Hear me recite those thousand
and eight names of the great Sharva.


30. Hearing those names, O foremost
of all men, you will get the fruition of alt
your desires—Om! you are Immobile,
you are Fixed, you are Powerful, you are
Yerrible, you are Foremost, you are Boon-
giving, and you are Superior.

3t. You are the Soul of all creatures,
you are celebrated over all creatures, yout
are all things, you are the Creator of all,
and you are Bhava. You carry matted
locks on your head. You put on animal
stins for your dress’ You havea crest of
matted hair on your head Hike the peacock.
You are he whohas the whole universe
for your limbs. You are the Creator of
all things. You are Hara because you
destroy all things.


32, You are he who has eyes of the
gazelle. You are the destroyer of alt
creatures. You are the supreme enjoyerc
of all things.


33. You are that Pravriti whence alf
actions originate. You are that Nivirtti ot
abstention from acts, you are observant of
fasts and vows you are Eternal, you are
Unchangeable. You live in crematoria,
you possess the six well-known lordly
powers and the rest, you live the heart of
évery creature, you enjoy all things with
the senses, and you are the grinder of alt
sinful creatures.


34. You are he who is worthy of salu-
tations of all, you are of great feats, you
are he who has asceticism for his riches,
you create all the elements at your will, you
conceal your real nature by putting on the
dress of a lunatic. You are the Lord of
alltthe worlds and of all living creatures.
You are of immeasurable form, you are of
huge body, you are of the fornrof Right-
eousness, you are of great fame, you are of
great Seal you are the Soul of all creatures,
you have the universe for your form, you
are of vast jaws.


36. You are the protector of all the
worlds, you allow your Soul to disappear
behind the darkness of Ignorance. You
are gladness. You are he whose car is
borne by mules. Youare tre who protects
individual soul from the thunder of re-bir th.
You are adorable. You are obtained by
purity and self-control and vows. You are
again the reftrge of ali kinds of vows and
ohect vances including purity and self-c on
trol,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


37. Vouare the Divine Architect who
is conversant with every art. -You are
self-create, Vouti aré.the beginning of all
creatures and things. You are Hiranya-
garbha, the Creator of all things. You are
endless power and happiness. You have
a hiindred eyes, you havé expansive
eyes. You ate Soria. You are he who
makes powerful all’ righteous creatures to
assume glorious forms for shitting in thé
sky. ; ;

38. You ate the Moon, you ate the Sun
you are the planet Saturn, you are the
descending node (of the Moon), you are
the ascéuditig tiode, youd aré Mangala
(Mars), and you are Vrihaspati (Jupiter)
and Shukra (Venus), you are Budha (Mer-
tury); yout are the worshipper of Atri’s wife,
you are hé who shot lis arrow at Saérifice
when Sacrifice fled from his anget in the
form of a deer. You are sinless. :


39. You possess penatices by which you

tan create the universe. You possess
penances .by. which you can destroy the
linivérse. You are high-minded. You
satisfy the wishes of all who dedicate them:
selves to you. You are the maker of the
year. You are Mantra. You are the
authority for all acts. “You are the highest
Penance.
- 40. -Youare given to Yoga, You are
he who merges hiniself in ‘Brahman. You
are .the great seed. You display what is
unmanifest as this manifest forin in which
the universe exists, You have infinite
Might. You are he whose seed is gold.
You ate omniscient. You are the cause of
allthings. You are he who has the seed of
action for the means of guing from this
world to the other and the ottier to this.


4t. You have teri arms. You have
winkless eyes. You have a blue throat.
You are the husband of Uma. You are the
origin. of all the infinite forms that are in
the universe. You are he whose superiority
is due to yourself. You are a hero in power
You are inert matter, You are all the
topics of enquiry, .


42. You are the.ordaitier and governor
‘of the topics, You are the chief of those
beings who serve you and are calfed Ganas.
“You cover infinite space. You are Kama
the god of love. You are conversant with
Mantras. You are the highest Mantra.
‘You are the cause of the universe: You
‘ace the universal destroyer.


43. You catry in one of your hands the
‘ealabash. In another you hold the bow.
“In another you bave artows. In another
you carry askull. You carry the thunder-
bolt. You are armed with the Shataghni.
"You are armed with the sword, You hold


7


49


the battle-axe.- You are armed with the
Shula (trident). You are worsbipfal.


44: Yow have the sacrificial 1+ d’e in one
of your hands. You trave beautiful form.
You are gifted with abundant energy.
You give most lavishly all that tends to
adorn those who are devoted to you. You
put ona turban on your head. You have
a beautiful face. You are he who is full of
splendour and power. You are he who is
humble and modest. :


45, You are exceedingly tall. Wou are
he who has the senses for your rays.
You are the greatest of preceptors.
You are Supreme Brahma. You are he
who took the shape of a jackal (for consol-
ing a Brahmana who, insulted by a rich
Vaishya, had determined to commit sui+
cide.. You are he whose objects all become
fruitful of themselves. You are one who
has a bald head. You are one who does
good to all. er -


46, Wou are unborn. You have name
berless forms. You have all sorts of frae
gtance on your body: ‘The matted locks —
on your head had sucked up the River
Ganga when it first dropped from heaven,
You are the giver of sovereignty. You até
a Brahmiacharin’ without having ever neg~
jected the rigid vow of celibacy. You are
famous fot you sexual continence. You
always lie on your back. You live in
powet,


47. You have thtee matted locks on yout
head. You are he who ‘is clad in rags.
You are Rudra. You ate the celestial
commander-in-chief, and you are all-pere
vading. Youace he who moves: about
during the day. You are he who moves
about in the night. You are of dreadful
anger. You are éendued with effulgence.”


48. You are the destroyer of the power
ful Asura who had come in the form of an
infuriate elephant for destroying the’ sacred
city of Varanasi. You are the destroyer of
Daityas soppressing the universe. You are
Kala ot Time which is the universal des-
troyer. Vou are the supreme ordainer of
the universe. You are a mine of qualifica-
tions. You are of the form of the lion and
the tiger. You are he who is clad in an
elephant skin.


49. You ate the Yogin who deceives
’ Time by getting over its irresistible ‘influ-
ence. You are the original sound.. Yort
‘ate the fruition of all desires. You ate he
who is worshipped in four ways. -You aré
a night-ranger. You are he who walks in
the company of spirits. You are he wha
walks in the company of ghostly beings,
You are the Supreme Lord of even Indra
and the ether deities, : : :


50


50. - You are-he who has muhiplied him-
self infinitely in the form of all existent and
non-existent things. You are the upholder
of Mahat and ali other compounds of the
five primal elements. You are the prime-
val Ignorance or that is known by the
name of Raha. You are infinite. You are
the supreme Kind of the liberated. You are
fond of dancing. You are he who makes
others dance. You are the friend of the
universe.


St. You are-he whose aspect is calm
and mild. You are endued with pengnces
which ean create and destroy the universe.
You are he who fetters all creatures with
your illusion. You are he who is above
destruction, . You are he who lived on a
mountain, Youare above all bonds and
are unattached to all things, like Space.
You have a thousand arms. You are vic-
tory, You are that perseverance which
brings on success or victory. You are with-
out idleness or procrastination which inter
feres with persevering activity.


52. Youarebrave. You are fear. You
are he who put a stop to Vali’s sacrifice.
You gratify the desires of all your devotees.

ou are the destroyer of Dakshia’s sacrifice.
bites are amiable. You are slightly ami-
able.


53. You are exceedingly fierce and rob
‘all creatures of their enerpy. You are the
destroyer of the Asuca Vala. You are
always cheerful. You are of the form of
riches which is coveted by all, You have
never been defeated. There is none more
worshipful than you. You are he who
emits deep roars. You are that which is
80 deep that no one can measure it. You
dre he whose power and the might of whose
Companions and bull bave never been
gauged by anybody.

54. You are the tree of the world. You
are the banian. You are he who sleeps on
a@ banian leaf wlien the universe, after dis-
solution, becomes one infinite sheet of water.
You are he who shows mercy to all wor-
shippers, assuming as you like, the form of
Hari or Hara or Ganesha or Arka or Agni

‘or Wind, etc. You have exceedingly sharp
teeth. You are of huge-proportions. You
have a mouth vast enough to swallow the
universe at once,


55. You ate he whose followers are wor-
shipped every where. You are he who re-
moved all the fears of the gods when the
prince of elephants had to be captured.
You are the seed of ‘the universe. You
ure he who has the same bull for your car-
riers that forums again the emblem on his
banner in battle, You have Agni for your
soul, You are the Sun who has green
horses yoked to his car, You are the friend


re


sce


of the individual soul. You are he who is
conversant with the proper ume for the
performance of all religious rites.


36. You are he to whom Vishnu had
paid his adorations. You are Vishnu.
You arethe ocean. You are the Mare’s
head that ranges within the ocean, cease-
lessly emitting fire and dsinking the saline
waters as if they were sacrificial butter.
You are Wind, the friend of Agni. You
are of tranquil soul dike the ocean which
remains at rest and unmoved by the mildest
air. You are Agni that drinks the libations
of clarified butter poured in sacrifices with
the help of Mantras,


57. “You are he whom it is difficult to
approach. You are he whose effulgence
spreads over the infinite universe. You are
expert in batule. You are well conver.
sant with the time when one should engage
in battle so that victory may be won. You
are that science which deals with the
motions of heavenly bodies. You are of
the form of success o¢ victory. You have
a body for all time.


58. You are a house-holder for you
have a tuft of hair on your head; you are
a Sannyasin for your head is bald; you
have matted locks on your head ; you are
known for your fiery rays; you are he
who appears in the sky of the heart encased
in the body of every creature ; you are he
who enters into the brain of every creature ;
you bear ‘the wrinkles of ages you
carry the bamboo flute ; you have also the
tabour ; you possess the musical instru-
ment caled Tali; you have the wooden
mortar used for husking grain ; you are
he who covers that illusion which covers
Yama.


539. You are an astrologer because your
understanding is always directed towards
the motion of- the wheel of Time which is
made up of the luminaries in the sky ; you
are the individual soul whose understand-
ing is directed to things that are the out-
come of the qualities of Sattwa, Rajas, and
‘Tamas; you are that in which all things
mergé when dissolutions sets in; you are
stable and fixed, there being nothing in you
which is subject to change or mutation of
any sort; you are the Lord of all creas
tures; your arms extend all over the
great universe ; you appeac in numberless
forms. which are but portions of yourself ;
you pervade all things; you have no
mouth, .


60. You are he who frees creatures from
the fetters of the world; you are easily
attainable ; you are he who appeared with
a golden mail; you are-he who appears
in the phallic emblem; you are he who
roams in the forests in search of fowls and

>


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


anitrals; you are he who roams over the
entire Barth ; you are omnipresent.


6t. You are the blare of all the
trumpets blown in the three worlds; yon
have all creatures for your relatives! yon


are of the. form of a snake; you live in
inountain caves; you are at one with the
commander-in-chief of the celestials ; you
wear garlands of flowers; you are he who
enjoys the happiness which originates from
the possession of earthly objects.


6t. You are he from whom all creatures
lave got theic three states of birth, exist-
ence and destruction; you uphold all
things which exist or occur in the three
stages of ‘Time, uvés., the Past, the Present,
and the Future; you yourself free crea-
tures from the effects of all pristine deeds
as well as the present ones and from all the
bonds of Ignorance and Desire; you are
the binder of Asura chiefs; you are the
slayer of foes in battle,


63. Yot are attainable by knowledge
alone; you are Durvasas; you are he
who is served and worshipped by all the
righteous ; you are he who brings about
the fall of even Brahman and the others ;
you are he who gives to all creatures the
one share of joy and sorrow that each de-
serves according to his own deeds; you
are peerless; you are well conversant
with the shares which ace given and ap-
propriated in sacrifices.


64. You live everywhere; you wander
everywhere; you have wretched clothes ;
you are Vasava; you are immortal 5 you
are at one with the Himavat mountains ;
you are the maker of pure gold; you ate
without acts; you uphold in yourselt the
fruits of all acts ; -you are the foremost of
all upholder,


65. You have bloody eyes; you have
eyes whose vision extends over the infjnite
universe ; you have a car whose wheels are
ever victorious; you are greatly learned ;
you are he who accepts your devotees for
your servants; you are he who restrains
and subjugates your senses; you are he
who acts; you put on clothes whose warp
and woof are made of snakes.


' 66. You are Supreme ; you are he who
is the lowest of the celestials ; you are he
who is well-grown ; you have the musicaf
instrument called Kahala; you are the
piver af every wish; you are the grace
personified in all the three stages of ‘Time,
aes., the Past, the Present, and the Future;
you are endued with power which is always
well spent; you are he who had assumed
the form of Valarama.


67." You are the foremost of all coveted
Uiags, being Liberation or the highest of


51

all ends of creatures ; you are the giver
of all-things ; your face is turned towards
all directions; you are he from whom
various Creatures have originated even as
all forms have originated trom space or:
are modifications of that primal element ;
you are he wo falle into the pit called
body; you are he who is helpless ; you


‘live in the sky of the heart.


68. You are of-terrific form; you are
the Deity called Anshu; you are the
companion of Anshw and are called
Aditya; you are endued with inaumer-
able rays; you are possessed of dazzling
effulpence ;" you are fleet like the Wind;
you have speed greater thaa ‘that of the
Wind; you are fleet like the mind;
you enjoy all things, being invested with
Ignorance, ‘


69 Youlivein every body; you live’
with Prosperity as your companion ; you
are he who imparts knowledge and instruc
tion; you are he who delivers instruction
silently ;  you-are he who observes the vow
of silence; you are he who passes out of
the body for looking at the soul; you are
he that is- well worshipped ; you are the:
giver of thousands.


7o. You are the king of birds ; you are
the friend who gives aid; you are pos-
sessed of great effulyence; you arezthe Lord
of all created beings; you ate he who
excites the appetities ; you are the god of
love; you are of the form of lovely
women who are coveted by all; yot ate
the tree of the world; you are the king of
riches ; you ace the giver of fame. *


qt. -You are god who distributes to all

creatures the fruits of their deeds ; you are .
yourself those fruits which you distribute ;

you are the most ancient; yott are com.

petettt to cover with a single footstep of
yours all the three worlds; you are the

dwarf who deceived the Asura king Vali;

you are the Yogin crowned with success ;

you are a great Rishi; you are one whoge

objects become always successful ; you are,
aSannyasin, — ~


72. You are he who is adorned with the
matks of the mendicant order; you are
he wha is without such marks; you are
he who ts above the usages of the mendi-
cant order; you are he who assures all
creatures from every sort of fear; you.
are without any passions; you are the
commander-in-chief of. the celestial army ;
you ate that Vishakha who sprang frous
the person of the celestial commander-in-
chief when Indra hurled bis thunder-balt
athim ; you are he who enjoys the sixty
subjects or heads of objects in the universe;
you are the Master of the senses. = *


52


73. You ate he whois armed with the
thunder-bolt ; you are infinite; you are
the stupefier of Daitya armies on the battle
field; you are he who moves his car in
circles among his own soldiers and who
tnakes similar circles among the foes and
devastating them returns safe and sound;
you are he who knows the lowest depth
of the world’s ocean; you are Madhu;
you have eyes whose color resembles that
of honey,


74. -You are he who has taken. birth
after Veihaspati; you are he who does
the acts which priests have to do in sacri+
fices ; . you are he who is always wor-
shipped by persons of vatious modes of
life; you are devoted to Brahma; you
roam- in the habitations of men in the
world; you pervade all beings ; you are
he who knows truth.


75. ‘You know and guide every heart ;
you are he who overspreads the entire
universe; you are he who collects or
stores the good and bad deeds fof all
creatures in ordet to distribute the fruits
thereof ; you are he who lives during even
the night that follows the universal disso-
lution; you are the holder of the bow
called Pinaka; you live in even the
Waityas whence are the marks of your
arrows ; you are the author of prosperity ;
are the powerful monkey who helped

ishnu_ in the incarnation of Rama in his
expedition against Ravana.


76. You are the master of those Ganas
who are your associates; you are each


anember of. those various Ganas ; you are
he who gladdens all creatures; you are
the ewhancer of the joys of all; you take


away the sovereignty and prosperity of
even such high beings as Indra and others;
you are the universal destroyer in the form
of Death; you are he who lives in the
sixty-four Kalas; you ate very great;
you are the grandfather.


77. You are the supreme phallic emblem
which is worshipped by both gods and
Asuras; you are of agreeable and beauti-
ful features; you are he who makes all
beings comprehend the various sorts’ of
proofs which exist as evidence of all ideas
and notions; you are the Lord of vision
and the other proofs of all ideas derived
from the senses; you are the Lord of
Yoga.

..78. You are the Lord of seeds; yon
aré the original cause of such seeds; you
act in the ways that have been pointed
out in the scriptures beginning with those
which deal with the Soul; you are he in
whom live power and the other qualities;
you aze the Mahabharata and other histo-


"MAHABHARATA.


rical works ; you are the treatises called
Mimansa; you are Gautama; you are
the author of the great work on. Grammar
named after the Moon.


79. You are he who punishes his enes'
thies ; you are he whom none can punish ;
you are be whois sincere in all his relix
gious acts and observances; you are he’
who becomes obedient to those who are
devoted to you; you are he who can subdue
others ; you are he who foments quarrels’
among the gods and the Asuras; you are
he who has created the fourteen worlds;
you ace the protector. and cherisher of all.

eings begining from Brahman and ending
with the lowest forms of vegetable life; you.
are the Creator of even the five -principal.
elements ; you are he who uever enjoys
anything. — : st


80. You are free from decay ; yow are
the highest form of happiness ; -you are
a deity proud of bis power; you are
Shakra ; you are the punishment described
in treatises on Politics and inficted on
offenders ; you are the tyranny which pre-
yails over the world; you are of pure
Soul; you are stainless; you are worthy’
of adoration; you are the world that
appears and disappear ceaselessly. :


81. You are he whose favour is of the
largest measure; you ate he wha has
good dreams ; you area mirror in which
the universe is reflected ; .you are he wha
has subjugated of all internal and external,
enemy ; you are the maker of the Veda;
you are the maker of the sayings contained:
in the Tantras and the Puranas apd which
are embodied in human Janguage ; you are.
highly learned ; you are the gtinder of
enemies in battle. :


82; You are he.who lives in the dreade
ful clouds that. appear at- the time. of the.
universal dissolution ; yoware most tertie
ble; you are he. who succeeds in subjugat-
ing all persons and all things; you: are
the great Destroyer; you are he who has
fire for his energy; you are he whose
energy is more powerful than fire; you
are the Yuga-fire that consumes all things ;
you are he who is capable of being pleased
by means of sacrificial libations ; you are
water and otheés liquids that are poured in
sacrifices with the help of Mantras.


83. You are in the form of the god of
Righteousness, the scatterer of the fruits
of acts good and bad; you are the giver’
of happiness; you are always gifted with -
effulgence ; you are of the form of fire ;
you are emerald-hued;- you are al-
ways present in the phallicemblem; you
are the source of blessedness; you cap.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


fever be defeated in the pursuit of your
objects.


84. You are the giver of blessings;
you are ef the form of blessedness; you
are he to whom is given a share of sacrificial
offerings ; you are the distributer of sacri-
ficial offerings ; you are gifted with great
speed ; you are he who is dissociated from
all things; you are he who is possessed
of the most powerful limb; you are be
who is employed in the act of generation.


85. You are of a dark hue; you are
ol a white complexion ; you are the senses
of all embodied creatures; you have huge
feet; you have huge hands; you are of
huge body; -you have wide extending
fame.


86. You have a huge head; you ar€
of huge proportion ; you are of vast vision }
you are the home of the darkness o
ignorance ; you are the Destroyer ; you
ure possessed of huge ears ; you have huge
lips; you are he who has vast cheeks.


87. You thave a huge nose; you are
of a vast throat; you have a vast neck;
you are he who tears the bond of society;
you have a vast chest; you have a vast
busom ; you are the inner soul which lives
in all creatures; you have a deer on your
lap.

88. You are he from whom numberless
worlds hang down like fruits hanging down
from a tree; you are he who stretches his
his lips at the time of the universal dis-
solution for devouring the universe; you
ate the ocean of milk; you have huge
teeth; you have huge jaws; you have
a huge tongue; you have a huge mouth.


89. You have big nails; you have
large hairs; you have very long hairs;
you have a big stomach; you have matted
locks of great length ; you are ever cheer-
ful; youare of the form of grace; you
are of the form of belief, you are he who
has mountains for his bow.


go. You are he who is full of affection
to all creatures like a parent towards his
children’; you are he who has no affection ;
you are unvanqguished ; you are highly
devoted to (Yoga) meditation ; you are of
the form of the tree of the world; you
are he who is marked out by the tree of
the world; you are never satiated with
eating; you are he who has the Wind
for. your vehicle for going from place to
place. :


gt. You are he. who ranges over hills
and hillocks; you are he who lives on the
mountains of Meru; you are the king of
the celestials ; you have the Atharyans for
your head; you have the Samans for


‘of the form


53-


your mouth; you have the thousand Riclis”
for your immeasurable eyes.


92. You have the Yajushes for your feet
and hands ; you are the Upanishats ; yon
are the rituals; you are the mobile; you
are he whose solicitatios are never usiful-—


filled; you are he who is always bent on
favouring ; you are he who is of beautiful
form. Gre te


93. You are of the form of the good.


that one does to another ;
which is dear ;
advances towards your devotees ;
gold and other precious metals held dear
by all; your effuluence is like that of
burnished gold; you are the navel; ‘you
arehe who makes the fruits of sacrifices
grow 3
and devotion which the pious


you are that


have for


sacrifices ; you are the maker the universe ; -


you arethe immobile.


you are he who always -
you are.


you are of the form of that ‘faith’


'


94. You are the twelve states through .


which you are he wha


causes fear ;


a@ person passes ;


you are the beginning of all.


things ;* you are he who unites Individual |


Soul with Supreme Brahma through Yoga ;
you are at one with that Yoga which


brings about ‘such a union between the |


Individual Soul and Supreme Brahma ;}
you are unmaifest ; you are the presiding
god of the fourth age,


95. You are eternal Time ;
of the ‘Tortoise ;
adored by the Destroyer trimself.


96. You live in the midst company ;
you admit: your devotees as members of
your Gana; you have Brahman -himself
for the driver of your car;
ashes; you protect the universe with
ashes ; you arte he whose body is made of
ashes; you are the tree that grants the
fruition of all-wishes; you are of the form
of those who make up your Gana.


you are


07, You are the protector of the four--


teen regions; you are above alt the re
gious ; you are full ;
by all creatures; you are white ;


you- are-


you sleep on.


you are worshipped -
you are”


he who has perfectly pure body, speech and-


mind ; “you are he who has attained to
that purity of existence which is called
Liberation ;
of being sullied by impurity of any sort;
you are he who has been attained to by
the great preceptors of old. .


98. You live in the form of Righteous-
ness or duty in the four modes of life ;
are that Righteousness which is. of the
form of rites and sacrifices ; you are of the
form of that skill which the Divine Archi-
tect possesses ; you are he who is worship.


ped as the primeval form of the universe; |


you are he who is incapable °


you |


54


yott have tinge arms; your fips are of a
coppery color; you are of the form of the
vast waters that are contained in the
Ocean; you are highly stable and fixed.


99. You are Kapila; you are brown;
you are allthe hues whose mixture produ-
ces white; you are the period of life ;
you are ancient; you are recent; you
are a Gandharva; you are the mother of
thé celestials in the form of Aditi; you are
Garnda, the king of birds, born of Vinata
hy Kashyapa otherwise called larkshya 7
yor are capable of being comprehended
easily 5 yeu are of excellent and agreeable
Speech.

too) You are he who is armed with the
battle axe; you are he that is desirous of
Victory ; you are he who assists others in
the accomplishment of their objects; you
are an excellent friend ; you are he who
carties a lute made of two hollow gourds ;

“you are of terrible anger; you have for
your children beings higher than men and
goods; you are of the form of that Vishnu
who floats on the waters after the universal
dissolution; you devour all things with
Qreat ferocity ; you are he who procreates
offspring ; you are family and race, con-
tinuing from generation to generation ;
you are the blare that a bamboo flute
emits } you are faultless ; you are he whose
limbs are all very beautiful; you are full
ef illusion ; you do good to others without
expecting any return ; you are Wind ; you
are Fire.


tor. Youare the fetters of the world
which bind Individual Soul; you are the
creator of those fetters ;
er of such fetters ; you are he who lives
with even the Daityas ; you tive wid those
who are the enemies of all acts ; you have
huge teeth and powerful weapons.


-‘to2. You are he who has been greatly
censured ; you are he who stupefied the
Rishis living in the Daruka forest; you
are he who did good to even your detrac-
tors, afz., those Rishis living in the Daruka
forest; you are he who removes all fears
and who removing all the fears of those
Risbis gave them Liberation; you are
he who has no wealth; you are the king
of the celestials ; you are the greatest of
the gods; you are an object of adoration
with even Vishnu; you are the destroyer
of those who are the enemies of the gods.


103. You are-he who lives in the
nethermost region ;
can be conrprehended, even as the wind
which though invisible is perceived by
every body; you are he whose know-
ledge extends to the bottom of every-
- thing and who know the inner nature
of all things; you are the object which


you are the tear--


you are invisible but |


MANABNARATA.


is enjoyed by him who enjoys it; yor are

the Ajaikapat among the eleven Rudras ¢ .
you are the king of tle entire universe +

you are of the formt cf all souls in the

universe ; you are he whrois not subject

to those three qualities { your are he who
is above all attributes and is a state of

pure existence which is incapable of being -
described witht the help of any adjective of
a language. :


104. You are the King of physicians
called Dhanwantari; you are a commet ;
you are the celestial commander-in-chief
called Skanda; you arethe king of the
Yakshas, called Kuvera, who fs your in-
separatyle companion and whro is the king
of all riches in the world ; you are Dhatri ¢
you are Shakra; you are Vishnu; you
are Mitra ; youare fashtri; you are the
Pole Star; you are the upholder all things.


You are the Prabhava amongst the Vasus.


205. You are the wind which can go
everywhere { you are Aryyaman; you are
Savitri; you are Ravi; you are that
ancient king of great celebrity known by
the name of Ushangu; yoware he who
protects all creatures in various ways;
you are Mandhatri; yer are he from
whom all creatures originate.


106. You are he who exists in various
forms; you aré he who makes the various
colours exist inthe mniverse ; you are he
who upholds all. desires and all attributes ;
you _ are he who has the fotus on your
navel; you-are he within whose womb
are ntimberless- mighty creatures 5 your
have a face beautiful asthe moon; you
are wind; you are fire.


107, You are possessed of great power ;
you are gifted with tranquillity of soul;
yor are old; you are he who is known
with the help of Righteousness ; you are
Lakshmi; yout are the maker of the field
at action 3 you are he who resides in the
field of action; you are the soul of the
field of action; you are the medicine of
the attributes of sovereignty and the others.


108. All things lie in you; you are the
master of all creatures having life-breaths ;
you are the god of the gods; you are he
who ig attached to happiness ; you are
existent ; you are tion-existent ; you are
he who possesses the best of atl things.


tog. You are he who lives on the
summit of Kailasa ; you are he who goes
to the mountains of Himavat; you carry
away ail things by you like a powerful
current’ washing away trees and other
objects standing on its banks; you are
the maker of Pushkara and other large
lakes and receptacles of natural water ;


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


you are possessed of infinite knowledge;
you are the giver of infinite blessings.


tto.
Carpenter 3 yor are the tree; you are the
tree called Vakula (dfimusops Elengt,
Linn)3 you are the sandal-wood iree
(Santalum aldum, Linn); you are the
tiee called Chechada .( Alstonta Scholaris;
syn. Lchitis Scholauris, Roxb); you are
he whose neck is very strony ; you are he
whose shoulder-joint is huge ; you are not
restless} you are the principal herbs and
plants with their produce.


11r. You are he who grants success
upon others regardiug the objects upon
which Usey bestow their heart; you are
the correct conclusions of both the Vedas
and Grammar ; you are he who sends out
leonine rears; you are endued with leonine
fangs; you ride on the back of a lion for
performing your- journeys ; you have a car
drawn by a lion,


112 You are the truth of truth; you
are he whose dish or plate is formed ‘by the
Destroyer of the universe ; you are always
engaged in seeking the well-being of the
worlds ;’ you are he who saves. all creatures
from distress; you are the bird called
Saranga; you are a new swan; -you are
he who is shown in beauty on account of
the crest on your head; you are he who
protects the place where assemblies of the
Wise sit for dispensing justice.


113. You are the abode of all creatures ;
you are the cherisher of all creatures;
you are Day and Night; youare he who
is without fault and, therefore, never cen-
sued ; youare the upholder of all crea-
tures; you arefthe refuge of all creatures ;
you ate without birth ; you are existent,


114. You are ever fruitful; you are
endued with concentration and meditation ;
you are the horse Uchchaishravas ; you
ate the giver of food; you are he.who
uphelds the vital airs of living creatures ;


you are gifted with patience; you ate
possessed of intelligence ; you are endued
with exertion and cleverness; you are


respected by all; you are the giver of the
fruus of virtue and sin; you are the che-
visher of the senses; you are the lord of
all the luminaries ; you are all collections
of objects ; you are he whose dresses are
made of cowe-hides; you are he who re-
moves the sorrow of his devotees.


115. You havea golden arm; you are
he who protects the bodies of Yoginus who
seek to enter theic own selves; you are he
who has reduced ail his foes to nothingness ;
you are he the measute of whose’ gladness


You are a merchant ; you area!


55


over the god of. love who is irresistible ;
you are he who has controlled his senses.


116, You are the note called Gaindbara.
in the musical octave; you are he who
has an excellent and beautiful home; you
are he who is ever given to penanges 5 yuu
are of the form of cheerfulness and coments
ment; youare he called vast or infinite ;
you are he in whose honor the forensust of
hymns has been composed ; you are he
whose dancing is characterised by big
strides and large leaps; you are he’ who
ts worshipped reverentially by the various
clans of Apsaras,

117. You are he who owns a vast stane
dard; you are the mountain of Mera;
you are he who roves amoeny all the sun
mits of that great mountain ; you are so
mobile that it is very difficult to catch you ;
you are capable of being explained by pre-
ceptors to disciples although you are juca-
pable of being described in words; you
are of the form of that instruction which
preceptors give to disciples; you are he
whe ca perceive all agreeable scents
simultaneously,


118. You are of the form of the porched
gates of cities and palaces ; you are of the
form of the moats and ditches that sur
round fortified towns and yive the victory
to the besieged garrison; you are the
Wind; you are of the form of -fortified
cities and towns begirt by walls and moats ;
you are the prince of all winged creatures ;
youareof the form of Garuda; you are
he who causes the creation by uniun of the
Opposite sexes ; you are thé furethost of
all in virtues and knowledge j° you are
superior to even him who is the foremost of
all in virtues and knowledge; you ate
above all the virtues and knowledge,


119. You ate eternal and immutable
as also dependent on yourself; you are
the lord and protector of the gods and
Asuras ; you are the master and protector
of all creatures ; you are he who puts on
a coat of mail; you are he whose arms
are competent'to grind all enemies; you
are an object of worship with even him ‘who
is called Suparvan in heaven.


120. You are he who gives the power of
bearing or upholding all things; you are
yourself competent to bear all things ; “you
are fixed and steady; you are white or
pure; you carry the trident that can des-
troy (all Utings) 5 you give bodies to those
that constantly revolve in the universe of
birth and death ; you are more valuable
than riches; you are the conduct of the
righteous. ’


121. You-are he who had torn the head


is very great; you are he who won victory | of Brahman after due thought; you are


56


he who is endued with all those auspicious
marks which are described in the sciences of
palinistcy,-padology, phrenology arid other
branches of. kn owledgestreating of physio-
gnomy, ete., as the indicatot of the mental
tendency ; you are that wooden bar whichiis
Called the axle of a car and, therefore, you
are he who is attached to the car represent-
e. by the body} yoli ate attached fo all
thingsl; you are gifted with very great power,
being as you.are a hero of heroes.


. 122. ¥ou are the Veda; you are the
Smritis, the Itihasas, the Puranas, and
other scriptures ; you are the illustrious
god of every sacred shrine; you are he
who has the Earth for his car; you are
the inert elements that form every creature;
you aré he who gives life into every com-
bination of those inert elements ; you are
the Pranava and other sacred Mantras that
put life into dead matter ;° you are he who
casts peaceful looks; you are severely
hacsh. :


_ 123. You ate he in whom exist number -
less precious attributes and possessions ;
you have a body that is red; you are he
who has all the vast oceans for so many

- ponds filed for your drinking ; you are
the root of the tree of the world; you are

- equisitely beautiful and shines with superior
grandeur} you are of the formn of ambrosia
or nectar j you are both cause and effect ;
you are an ocean of penances.


, 124. You are he who is desirous of
getting to the highest state of existence ;
you are he who has already acquired that
State; yott are he whd is known for the
purity of his conduct and atts and observ-
anges; you are he who is possessed of

great fame; you are the ornament of
- armies }- you are he who is bedecked with
celestial otnaments 3; ydu are Yoga; you
are he from whom origitiates eternal time
tmeasured ‘by Yugas and Kalpas ; you are
he who ‘conveys all creatures from place to
place, ae =

125. Vou ate of the form of Righteots-
hess and $jn and their compounds; you
dre great and without form; you are he
who killed the powerful Asura that had ap-
proached against the sacred city of Wara-
fasi in the form of an infuriate elephant
of, huge proportions; you ate of the
form of death; you grant all creatures
fruition of theic wishes proportionate to
their merits ; youare approachable ; you
know all things beyond the ken of the
senses ; you know the essences.


126. You ace he who continually shines
in beauty; you put on garlands from
heck to the feet; you are Hara having
the Moon for his beautiful eye; you are
the salé ocean of unmeasurable extent; you


MAHABHARATA.


‘are the first three Vugas; youd até tie
whose appearance is always {ull of advans
tage to others.


127. .You are lie who has three eyes ;
you are he whose fornts are greatly subtile ;
you are he whose ears are bored for putting
on jewelled ear-rings ; you are the bearer
of matted locks ; ‘youare the point which
indicates the nasal sound; you are thé
two dots (in the alphabet) which indicaté
the sound of the aspirated H ; you have an
excellent face; you are the arrow that is
shot by the warrior for bringing about thé
destruction of his enemy; you dre all the
weapons that are used by warriors; you
are gifted with patience capable of bear«
ing all things.

128. You are he whose knowledge has
originated from the stoppage of all physical
and mental functions; you are he who
appears as Truth on account of the cessa-
tion of all other faculties j you are that
note which, ofiginating from the region
called Gandhara, is greatly sweet to the
ear; ‘you are he who is armed with the
powerful bow (called Pinaka);. you are
he who is the tundetstanding’ ahd the
desites which exist in all creatnres,. besides
being the supreme upholder of all beings ;
you are he from whom all acts originate.

129. You ate that wind which originates
at the time of the universal dissolution and
which is capable of churning the entire
universe as the staff in the hands of the
dairy-maid. churns the milk ia the milk-pot ;
you are he who is full { you are he who sees
all things; you are the sound which arisee
from slapping palni against palm; your
palm serves fas the dish or plate whence to
take his food ; you have an adamantins
body ; you are exceedingly great.


t30. You are of the shape an umbrella ;
you are he who has an excilent umbéella j
you are well known to be at one with all
Creatures ; you are he who having put
forth three feet coveted all the universe
with two and wanted space for the third j
you have a bald head} you are he whose
form is greatly ugly and dreadful; you
are he who has undergotie many modifica-
tions and become all things in the universe j
you ate he who has the well-known badge
of Renunciation, ofz., the stick; you are he
who has a Kunda; you are he who is in-
capable of being attained to by means of
acts.


13t. You are he who is atone with the
green-eyed king of beasts; you are of the
form of all the points of the compass ; you
are he who is armed with the thunder ;
you are he who has a hundréd tongues;
you are he who has a thousand feet and


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


tiotgand heads; you are the lord sad
king of the celestials ; you are tie who is
made up of all the gods ; you are the great
Lord or preceptor.


132. You are he who has a thousand
arms; you ate he who is conipetent to get
the fruition of every wish; you are he
whose protection is sought by every one j
you are he who is the creator of all the
worlds ; you are he who is the great puri-
fier of all from every sin, in the form of
Shrines and sacred waters; you are he
who has three high Mantras ; you are the
youngest (son of Aditi and Kashyapa) ;
you are both black and twany.


133.
mana’s rod}
Sataghni, the noose, and the.dart; you
aré he who was born within the primeval
Iotus ; you are he who has a huge womb j
you are he who has the Vedas in his
Wontb; you are he who takes his rise
from that inffnite span of waters which
appears aftee the dissolution of the uni-
verse.


134. Wou are he who has the effulgent
tays; you are the creator of the Vedas;
you are he who studies the Vedas; you are
tle who knows the mteanitig of the Vedas j
you are devoted to Brahma; you are the
“refuge of all persons devoted to Brahma
you ace of numberless form; you have
innumecable bodies; you have irresistible
prowess.


You are the miaket of the Beah-


135. Youre nature trariscends the three


universal tendencies (of Sattwa, Rajas, and
‘Yamas); you ace the lord of all sentericies
you are fleet like the wind; you ate fleet
like the mind; you ate always smeared with
sandal-paste § you ate the end of the stocic
of the prinieval lotus; you are he who
brought the celestial cow Surabhi down
from a superior station to an inferior one by
imprecating a curse upon her; you are
that Brahman who was unable to see your
end.


136. You are adorned with a large gar-
tand of Karnitara flowers; you are adorned
with a diademt of blue gems; you ate the
wielder of the bow called Pinaka; you
are the miaster of the science of Brahma ;
you are he who has controlled his senses
by the help of your knowledge of Brahma ;
you are he who bearest Ganga on your
head; youarethe husband of Uma the
daughter of Himavat.


237. Wou are powerful; you are he
who protects the universe by assuming
various incarnatious; you are worthy of
adoration ; you are that, primeval Being
with the equine head who recited the Vedas
with a thundering voice ; you ate he whose


8


you are armed with ‘the.


57


favour is vety great; you are the great
subjugator ; you are he who has killed alt
his enemies; you are both white and
twany.


138. Vow have a gofd-hued body; you
are he who is of the form of pure joy ; you
are of a controlled soul; you are the basis
of Ignorance which is ealled Pradhana and
which, consistmg of the three qualities of
Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas, is the cause
whence the universe has originated ; you
aré le whose faces are turned to every
ditection ; you are -he who has three
eyes } you, are he who is superior to all
creatures, ;


13g. You aré the soul of aH mobile atid
immobile beings ; you are of the form of the
subtile soul; you are the giver of inmmors
tality in the form of Liberation as the fruit
of all acts of virtue achieved by creatures
without the desire of fruits; you are the:
preceptor of evert those who are tlre gods of:
the gods; you are Vasu tle son of Aditi j
you are he who has innumerable rays of
tight, who brings forth. the universe, and
who is of the form of that Soma which ig
drunk in sacrifices,


140. You are Vyasa, the author of the’
Puranas and other sacred histories ; you


are the cteations of Vyasa’s brain: botl


abridged and unabridged ; -you are the
sumt-total of sentiencies; you are the


Season; you are the Year; you are the
Month; youare the Fortnight; you are.


those sacted Days that end or conclude
these periods. : :


141. You are the Kalas; you are the
Kashthas ; you are the Lavas;. you are
the Matras; you are the Muhorta and
Aha and Kshapa; you are the Kshanas;
you are the soil upon which ttre tree of the -
universe stands; you are the seed of
all creatures; you are the principle of
greatness; you are the sprout of sen-


| tiency.


142. You ate existent; yow are nos
existent ; you are Manifest ; you are Un-
manifest } youare the Father; you are
the Mother; you are the Grandfather ;
you are the door of Heaver; you'are the
door of the generation of all creatures ; you
ate the door. of Liberation; you are those
acts of virtue which lead to the felicity of
heaven,

143. You are extinction ; you are the
gladdener ; you are the region of Truth ;:
you are superior to even that region of
Truth which is attainable by the pious ;
your are he who is the creator of both the
gods and the Asuras; you are the reluge
of both the gods and the Asuras, ;


58


144. You are the preeeptor of both the
gods and the Asuras; you are ever vic-
torious ; you areever worshipped by the
gods and the Asuras; you guide the
deities and the Asuras even as the Maha-
matra guides the elephant; you are the
refuge of all the gods and the Asuras,


t45. You are the king of both the deities
and the Asuras; you are the leader in
battle of both the gods and the Asuras ;
you are he who transcends the senses and
shines by himself ; you are of the form of
the celestial Rishis ; you grant bovas to the
deities and the Asuras.


146. You are, he who rules the hearts
of the gods and the Asuras; you are he
into whom the universe enters; you are
the refuge of even him who is the ruler of
the


Asuras; you are he whose body is made


up of all the gods ;. you are he who has no.


Being superior to yow of whom to think ;
you are he who is the inner soul of the


gods; you are he who has originated from
his awn self,
147, Youarceof the form of immobile


things ; you are he who covers the fhree
worlds with three steps of his; you are
possessed of great learning ; you are
stainless ; you are he whois freed from the
quality of Rajas; you are above destruc-
tion; you are he in whose honor hymns
should be sung; you are the lord of the
irresistible elephant of Time; you are of
the form of that lord of Tigers who is ador-
ed in the country of the Kalingas ; you are
he who is called the lion among the gods ;
you are he who is the foremost of men, '


148. You are profoundly wise; you are
he who first takes a share of the offerings in
sacrifices; you are imperceptible ;: you
are the collection of all the celestials ; you
are he in whom penances prevail; you are
always in excellent Yoga; you are auspi-
cious; youare armed with the’ thunder-
bolt; you are the source whence the wea-
pons called maces have taken their origin.
You are be whom your-devotees acquire in
Various ways. *


149. You are Guha (the celestial com-
mander-in-chief) ; you are the supreme
limit of happiness ; you are at one with
your creation; you are he who rescues
your creatures from death; you are the
purifier of all inchiding Brahman himself ;
you.are of the form of bulls and other
horned animals ; you are he who is fond
of mountain summits ; you are the planet
Saturn; you are Kuvera the king of the
Vakshas; you are consumniate faultless-
Ness. :


i you'are all the celestials in a body ;


hearts of both the gods and the |:


_ supplies
. Brahma.


MAHABHARATA.


You are he who gives gladitess j
you
are the cessation of all things ; you are alt
the duties that belony to all the modes of
life; you are he who has an eye on hig
forehead ; you are he who sports with the’
universe as his marble ball ; you are of the
formy of deer; you are gifted with the
energy that is of the form of knowledge and
penance.


15t. You are the master of alt immobile
things; you are he who has restrained ts
senses by various regulations and vows ;
you are he whose objtets have all been
fulfilled ; you are at one with Enberation ;
you are different from him whom we edore 5
you have truth for your penances ; you are
of a pure heart,


15a.


152. You-are he who tnrds over over alf
-vows and fasts; you are the highest ;
you are Brahma; you are the highest


refuge of your devotees ; yourare above all
fetters ; yor are freed from the corporeal
body; you are endued with every Kind of


> prosperity ; you multiply the prosperity


of your devotees; you are what is con-
tinually undergoing changes,


153. | have thus, O Krishna, sang the
praises of the illustrious god by reciting his


names in the order of their importance-
Who is there who can sing the praises of


the lord of the universe, that great Lord of


; all who is worthy of our adoratoins, worship,


and reverence, whom the very gods headed
by Brahman are unable to: praise and whonr
the Rishis also fail’ to sing.


154. Helped, however, by my devotion


' to him, and having received his permission,


I have lauded that Lord of sacrifices, that
Deity of supreme power, that foremost of alt


-ereatures gikced with intelligence.


155. By praising with these names
which increase one’s auspiciousness the
great lord of blessedness, a worshipper of
devoted soul and pure heart gains his own


‘self.


156; These names form a: hymna whicly
the best means of attaining to
With the help-of this hymn one
is sure to acquire Liberation. The Rishis
and the gods all praise the highest deity by
uttering this hymn,

157. H'ymned by persons. of eontrolled!
soul, Mahadeva becomes pleased: with: those’
who sing his praises thus, ‘he illustrious:
god is always full of mercy towards. his.
devotees. Gifted with omnipotence, he it
who gives Liberation to those who adore

im.


158. These foremost of men who are
endued with faith and devotion, hear and


ANUSHASANA’ PARVA,


wecite for others and utter with respect the
praises of that highest and eternal Lord,
wis., tshana, in all their successive lives and
worship him in thought, word, and deed,
and worshipping him thus at all times, vés.,
when they are lying or seated or walking or
awake or opening the eyelids or shutting
ahem, and thinking of him again and again,
become objects of respect with all their
fellow men and derive great pleasure and
exceeding joy.

162. When a creature, becomes purged
ot all his sins in course of millions of births
in various orders of Being, it is then that
devotion arigiaates in his heart for Maha-
dewa, :

163. Itis by good luck only that yndi-


vided devotion to Bhava who is the original
cause (of the universe) fully originates in


the heart of one who is conversant with |


every mode of adoring that great Deity.


164. Such stainless and pure devotion to
Rudra, which has singleness of purpose and
which is simply irresistible in its course, is
seldom-to be found among even the gods,
but never among men.


165. [tis through the favour of Rudra
that such devotion originates in the hearts
ot human beings. On account of such
devotion, men, identifying themselves
wholly with Mahadeva, succeeds ia ac-
quiting the highest success.


166. The illustrious Deity, who is always
bent upon showing favour to them who seek
him with humility rescues them from the
world who throw themselves whole minded-
ly upon him.

167. Save the great god who frees crea-
tures from re-birth, all other gods continu.
ally nullify the Penances of men, for men
have no other source of power that it is as
great as these,


168. It was thus that Tandi of tranquil
soul, resembling Indra himself in glory,
lauded the illustrious Master of all existent
and non-existent things, that great Deity
glad in animal skins.


169. This hyran was borne by . Brah-
Mana himself. Indeed, Brahman had
sung it before Shankara. You are a Brahe
mana. You will, therefore, comprehend it
well. :

170. This is cleansing, and washes
away all sins. This confers Yoga, Libera-
tion, heaven and contentment,


171. He who recites this hymn with
rapt devotion to Shankara, succeeds in ac-
quiring that high end which is theirs who
ate devoted to the doctrines of the Sankbya
philosophy, :


59


172. That worshipper who recites this
isymn daily for one year with singleness of
devotion succeeds in acquiring the end that
he desires.

173. This hymn is acgreat mystery, It
formerly lived in the breast of Brahman the
Creator, Brahman gave it to Shakra.
Shakra gave it to Death.


174. Death gave it to the Rudras,
From ‘the Rudras Yandi got it. Indeed,
fandi got it in the region of Brahman as
the reward of his austere penances.


175. Tandi communicated it to Shukra
and Shukra of Bhrigu’s race communicated
itto Gautama. Gautama, again, O des-
cendant of Madhu, communicated it to
Vaivaswata-Maau.


176, Manu communicated it to the
highly intelligent Narayana, numbere
among the Sadhyas and held highty deac
‘by hiea. The illustrious Narayana, num- ©
bered among the Sadhyas and endued
with undecaying glory, communicated it to
Yama.


177. Vaivaswat-Yama communicated
it to Nachiketa. Nachiketa, Q you of
Vrishai’s race, communicated it to Mare
kandeya.


178. Brom Markandeya, O Janarddana
I got it as the reward of my vows and fasts.
Yo you, O slayer of enemies, 1 communi«
cate that hymo unheard by others. -


178. This hymn leads to heaven. It
temoves disease and bestows long life,
This is worthy of.the highest praise, and is
consistent with the Vedas. ,


Krishna said :—


179-80. That person, O Partha, who
recites this hymn with a pure heart observ-
ing the vow of celibacy, and with his
senses under restraint, regularly for one
whole year, succeeds in acquiring the fruits
of a horse-sacrifiée, Danavas and Yakshas
and Rakshasas and Pishachas and Yatu-
dhanas and Guhyakas and snakes can do
no harm to him. : :


:4@


Pele ;.


CHAPTER XVIIL. -


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—.

“a, After Vasudeva had stopped, the
great Yogin, vis., {Krishna-Dwaipayana,
addressed Yudhishthira, saying,—O son,


92


Fecite this h ymn consisting of the thousand
and eight names of Mahadeva, and let
Maheshwar a be pleased with you.


2. Formerly, O son, 1 was engaged in
the practice of penances on the breast of
the mountains of Meru for getting a son,
It is this very hymn that was recited
by me,

3. As the reward of this, 1 acquired the
fruition of all my wishes, O son of _Pandu.
You wilt also, by reciting this same hymn,
get from Sharva the fruition of afl your
wishes,


4. - After this, Kapila, the Rishi ‘who
preached the doctrines of Sanklya, and
who is honoured by the gods themselves,
said,—\ adored Bhava with great devotion
for many lives. The illustrious god at last
became pleased with me and gave me
knowledge which can help one in avoiding
re-birth,


5~7. After this, the Rishi named
Charushirsha, that dear friend of Shakra
and known also as Alamvana’s son and
who is filled with mercy, said,—-1, in former
days went to the mountains ‘of Gokarna
and sat myself to practise hard austerities
for a husdred years, As the reward of
those penances, [ got from Sharva, O son
of king Pandu, a hundred sons, all of
whom were born without the agency of |
woman, of well-controlled soul, conversant
with righteousness, gifted with great splen-
dour, free from disease and sorrow, and
enduéd with lives extending for a hundred
thousand years. ,

8. Then the illustrious Vatmiki, addres-
sing Yudhishthira, said, —Once upon a
time, in course of a disputation, certain
ascetics who possessed the Homa-fire con-
demned me as-one guilty of Brahmanicide.


9. As soon as they had condemned me as
Buch, the sin of Brahmanicide, O Bharata,
possessed me. I then, for purifying myself,
sought the protection of the sinless Ishana
ho is irresistible in energy.


so. 7 became purged of afl my sins.
That remover of all sorrows, vis, the
destroyer of the triple city of the Asuras,
said to me,—You will acquire great fame
in the world. r

11. Then Jamadagni’s son, that fore-
most ofall pious persons, effulyent like the
San in the midst of that assembly of Rishis
Said to the son of Kunti.


£2. IT was possessed by the sin, O eldest
son of Pandu, of Brahmanicide for having
killed my brothers who were all learned
Brahmanas. Purifying myself, I seught
the protection, O king, of Mahadeva.


MAHABHARATA, _


13. [sang the praises of the great God
by reciting his names. At this, Bhava be-
came pleased with me, and gave me
battle-eaxe and many = other celestial
weapons.


14. And he said to me,—~you will be
freed from sin and you will be invincible
in battle. Death himself shall not succeed
in overcoming you, for you, will be freed
from disease,


15. Thus did the illustrious and crested
god of auspicious form said this to me.
Through the favour of that god of great
intelligence U got all that He had said.


16. Then Vishwamitra said,—I was
formerly a Kshatriya.. I paid my worship
to Bhava with the desire of becoming a
Beahmana. Through the favour of that
great god [ succeeded in getting the high
status, that is so difficult to acquire, of a
Brahmana,.


17-—18. Then addressing the royal son
of Pandu, the Rishi Asita-Devala said,—
Formerly O son of Kunti, through the
curse of Shakra, all the merit of my pious
deeds was destroyed. The power, Maha-
deva kindly gave me back that merit
together with great fame and a long life.


19. The illustrious Rishi Gritsamada,
the dear friend of Shakra, who resembled
the celestial preceptor Vrihaspati himself,
addressing Vudhishthira of Ajamigha’s
racé said,—


20—2t. ‘The inconceivable Shakra had
formerly celebrated a sacrifice extending
for a thousand years. While that sacrifice
was going on, | was engaged by Shakra in
reciting the Samans, Varisiitha, the son
of that Manu who originated from the eyes
of Brahman, came to that sacrifice and
addressing me, said,—O foremost of twice-
born ones, the Rathantara is not being
recited properly by you.


22. O best of Brahmanas, cease to ac-
quire demerit by reading [so faultily, and
with the help of your understanding
do you read the Samans correctly. O you
of wicked understanding, why do you per
petrate such sin destructive of Sacrifice.


23-24. Having said these words, the
Rishi Varishtha, who was very wrathful,
yielded to that passion and addressing me
oncé more, said,-—Be thou an animal! shorn
of intelligence, subject to grief, ever filled
with fear, and an inhabitant of trackless
forests destitute of both wind and water
and abandoned by other animals. Do you
thus pass ten thousand years with ten and
eight hundred years in addition. :


ANUSHASANA’ PARVA.


25. That forest in which you will have
to pass this time will be shorn of all holy
trees and will, tesides, be the haunt of
Ruru-deer and lions. Verily, you shall
thave to become a cruel deer plunged in
excess of grief.


26—27. As soon as he had said these
words, O gon of Pritha, 1 immediately be-
came changed into a deer. I then shought
the protection of Maheshwara. The great
god said to me,—You will be .freed from
disease of every sort, and besides immorta-
lity shall be yours. You will never suffer
from grief. Your friendship with Indra
shall remain unchanged, and let the sacri-
fices of both Indra and yourself multiply.


28. The illustrious and puissant Maha-
deva favors all creatures in this way. He
is always the great dispenser and ordainer
of the happiness and sorrow of all living
creatures,


29. That illustsious god is incapable of
being comprehended in thought, word, or
deed. O son, O you who are the best of
warriors, there is none who is equal to me
in learning.


go. After this, Vasudeva, that foremost
of all intelligent men, once more said,—
Mahadeva of golden eyes was pleased by
me with my penances.

31. Pleased with me, O Yudhishthira,
ahe illustrious god said to me,—You will, O
Krishna, through my favour, become


dearer to all persons than riches which is [


coveted by all.


32, You will be invincible in battle.
Your energy shall be equal to that of Fire.
Mahadeva gave me thousands of other
boons at that time, :


33. Ina former incarnation I worshipped
Mahadeva on the Manimantha mountain
for millions of years.


34. Pleased with me, the illustrious god
said to me_ those words :—Blessed be you,
do you solicit boons you wish for.


35-36. Bowing him I said these words,
s—It the powerful Mahadeva has _ been
' pleased with me, then jet devotion to him
be unchanged, O Ishana! This is the boon
that lU solicit.——The great God said me,—
Be it so !—Sand disappeared there and then.


Jaigishavya said :—

37- O Yudhishthira, formerly in the city
of Varanasi, the powerful Mahadeva, find.
ing me out, conferred upon me the eight
attributes of sovereignty !

Garga said:—
38. O soa of Pandu, pleased with me,


61


on account of a mental sacrifice which l had
performed, the great God bestowed upon
me, on the banks of the sacred tiver Saras-


wati, that wonderful science, ‘vig, the
knowledge of Time, with its sixty-four
branches.


39. He also conferred upon me a thoue
sand sons, all possessed of equal merit and
fully conversant with the Vedas. Throngh
his favour their periods of fife as also mine.
have become extended to ten millions of
years.


Parashara said :— .

4t—-42. Formerly I pleased Sarya, O
king. I then cherished the desire of get-
ting a son who would be endued with great
ascetic merit, and superjot energy, and


_addressed to high Yoga, that would acquire


world-wide fame, arrange the Vedas and
become the home of prosperity, that would
be devoted to the Vedas and the Brah-
manas, and be famous for mercy. Such a
son was desired by me from Maheshwara.


42. Knowing that this was the wish of
my heart, that foremost of gods, said to
me,—Through the fruition of that object-
of yours which -you wish to get from me,
you will have a son named Kristina,


43- In that creation which shal] be
known after the name of Savarni-Manu,
that son of yours shall be reckoned among
the seven Rishis. He shail arrange the
Vedas, and be the propagator of Kuru’s
face, .


44. He shall, besides, be the author of
the ancient histories and do behoof to the
world. Gifted with severe penances he shall,
again, be the dear friend of Shakra.


45. Freed from all sorts diseases, that
son of yours, O Parashara, shall, besides, be
immortal Having said these words, the
great god disappeared there and then.
Such is the good, O Yudhishthica, that 1
have got from that indestructible and
immutable God, gifted with the highest
pénances and supreme energy.


Mandavya said :— ght

46—47. Formerly, suspected wrongly of
theft, | was impaled. 1 then worshipped the
illustrious Mahadeva who said to me,—
You shail soon be freed and live for millions
of yours, The pangs due to imprison-
ment shall not be yours.

48—49. You will also be freed from all
sorts of affliction and disease. And since,
O ascetic, this body of yours has originated
from the fourth foot of Dharma, (v¢s.,
Truth), you will be peerless on Earth. Do
you make your life fruitful, You will,


62


withowe any sostruction, be able to bathe
in all the sacred waters of the Earth,


50—5t. And after the dissolution of
your body, I shall, O learned Brahmana,
ordain that you will enj sy the pure felicity of
heaven eternally. Having said these words
to me, the warshipful god having the bull
for his carriage, vis., Maheshwara of peer-
less splendour and clad in animal skin, O
king, disappeared there and then with ali


his companions. [


Galava said :—


52—53- .Formerly I studied from my pre-
ceptoe Vishwamitra. Getting his permis-
sion I started for home with the object of
seeing; my father. My widowed mother
stricken. with sorrow and, weeping bitterly,
said to me,—Alas, your father will never
see his son who, endued with Vedic know-
dedge, has been allowed by his preceptor
to come home and who, having all the
graces of youth, is endued with self-con-
trol. ~


54-55. Hearing these words of my
mother, { .became stricken with despair
about seeing again my father. I ‘then
paid my adorations with a rapt soul to
Maheshwara who, pleased with me, ap-
peared before me and said,—Your father,
your mother and yourself, O son, shalt all
be freed from death, Go quickly and enter
your abode; you shal) see your father
there.


56. Having got the permission of the
illustrious god, I then went home, O Yu-
dhishthira, and saw my father, O son,
coming out after having finished his daily
sacrifice,


57- And he came out, having his hands
a quantity of sacrificial-fuel and Kusha
grass ann some fallen fruits. And he ap-
peared to have already taken his daily food
foc he had washed himself properly.


58. Throwing down those things from


his hand, my father, with eyes bathed in
tears, raised me, for I had prostrated my-


self at his feet, and embracing me smelt my |


head, O son of Pandu, and said,—By good
tuck, O son, are you seen by me. You
have returned having acquired knowledge
from your preceptor.


Vaishampayana said :—
- 59. Hearing these marvellous and most
wonderful deeds of the great Mahadeva


sung by the ascetics, the son of Pandu
became amazed.

60. Then Krishna, that foremost of all
intelligent persons, then spoke once more to
Yudhishthira, that sea of virtue, ke Vish-
nu speaking to Purufuta.


MAHABUARATA,


t Vasudeva said :—


61—62. Upamanyu, who appeared to
shine tike the Sun, said to me,— Vhose_ sin-
ful men whe are sullied with impious deeds,
do not suceeed in attaining to Ishana.
Having their nature sullied by the qualities
of Darkness and Ignorance they can never
approach the Supreme Deity. [t is only
those twice-born persons who are of puri-
fied souls that succeed in attaining to the
Supreme Deity.


63 Even if a person enjoys every plea-
sure and luxury, yet if he be devoted to the
Supreme Deity he is considered equal to
hermits of purified souls.


64. if Rudsa be pleased with a person
he ‘can confer upon him the dignity of
either Brahma or of Keshaya or of Shakra
with all the gods under him, or the sove-
reignty of the three worlds,


65. Those men, O sire, who adore
Bhava even ‘mentally, succeed in freeing
themselves from all sins and live in the
celestial region with all the gods.


66. A person who raises houses to their
_foundations.and destroys tanks and lakes,

indeed, who lays waste the entire universe,
does not become stained with sin if he
adores and worships the illustrious three=
eyed god.

67. A person who is shorn of every aus-
Picious mark and who is stained by every
sin, destroys all his sins by meditating upon
Shiva,


68 Even worms, insects and birds, O
Késhava, that devote themselves to Mahar
deva, are enabled to move about fearlessly.


69. This is my belief that those men
who devote themselves to Mahadeva be-
come, forsooth, freed from re-birth,


qo. After this, Krishna again addressed
Vudhisthira the son of Dharma in the fol-
fowing words.


+


Vishnu said :--

7i—78. ‘he Sun, the Moon, Wind, Fire,
Heaven, Earth, the Vasus, the Vishwe-"
devas, Dhatri, Aryyaman, Shukra, Vrihase
pati, the Rudras, the Saddhyas, Varuna,
Gopa, Brahman, Shakra, Maras, the Upa-
nishats that teach a knowledge of Brahma,
Truth, the Vedas, the Sacrifices, Sacrificial
Presents, Brahmanas reciting the Vedas,
Soma, Sacrificer, the shares of the gods in
sacrificial offerings, clarified butter poured
in Sacrifices, Raksha, Diksha, all kinds of
restraints in the form of vows and fasts and
rigid observances, Swaha, Vashat, the
Brahmanas, the celestial cow, the foremost
acts of piety, the wheel of Lime, Strength,


ANUS ASANA- PARVA,


Fame, Self-control, the Steadiness of alt.


intelligent persons, all acts of goodness and
otherwise, the seven Rishis, Understanding
of the foremost order, all kinds of excellert
touch, the success of all deeds, the various
tribes of the celestials, those beings that
drink heat, those that are drinkers of Soma,
Likhas, Suyamas, Tushita, all creatures
having Mantras for their bodies, Abha-
Suras, those beings that live upon scents
only, those that live upon vision only, those
that control their speech, those that restrain
their minds, the pure, they who are capable
of assuming diverse forms through Yoga-
power, those celestials who live on touch,
those celestials who live on vision and those
who live upon the batter poured .in sacri-
fices, those beings who can create by their
will the objects they require, they who are
regarded as the foremost ones among the
celestials, and all the other celestials, O
Ajamida, the Suparnas, the Gandharvas,
the Pishachas, the Danavas, the Yakshas,
the Charanas, the snakes, all that is gross
and all that is subtile, all that is soft and
all that is not subtile, all sorrows and all
joys, all sorrow .that comes. efter joy
and all joy: that comes after sorrow, the
Sankhya philosophy,- Yoga; and that
which is above all objects regarded as
foremost and very superior,—all ador-
able things, ali the celestials, and all
the protectors of the universe who enters
ing into the physical forces sustain and up-
hold this ancient creation of that illustrious
Deity,—have originated from that Creator
of all creatures,


79. All that I have mentioned is grosser
than what the wise think of with the help of
Penances. Indeed, that subtile Brahma is
the cause of life. I bow respectfully to
it. Let that immutablé and indestructible
Lord, always worshipped by us, grant us
Gesirable boons, ,


80. That person who, governing his
senses and purifying himself, recites this
hymn, continually for his vow, for one
tmonth, succeeds in acquiring the merit of a
Horse-sacrifice.


- 8t. By reciting this hyma the Brah-
mana succeeds in acquiring atl the Vedas;
the Kshatriya becomes crowned with vic-
tory, O son of Pritha; the Vaishya, in
acquiring riches and eleverness; and the
Shudra, in acquiring happiness here and a
good end hereafter:


_ 82. By reciting the best of hymms that
tan cleanse every sin and that is highly
sacred and purifying, highly illustrious
persons set their hearts on Rudra. - .


83. A man by reciting this best of hymns


_ Sueceeds in living in the celestial region for


53


as niany years as there ate pores in his


ody. %


CHAPTER XIX.
_ (ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.
Yudhishthira said :—


t. I ask, O foremost of Bharata’s race,
what is the origin of the deciaration, about
satisfying all duties jointly, which is made’
on the occasion of a person’s marriage.

z. ts that declaration about satisfying
all duties together, due only to what is laid
down by the great Rishis in days of yore,
or does it refer tothe duty of procreating
children from religious motives, or has it
reference to only the carnal pleasure that is
expected from such an intercourse of the
sexes .

3. Great is the doubt that fills my mind
about. Indeed, I think that the declaration
to which f refer is contray to the natucaF
impulses which lead to a union of the sexésy _
The union in this world for perfotming
duties together ceases with death and is not.
to be seen to exist hereafter.


4. This union for doing alk duties to-
gether leads to heaven. But heaven, O
grandfather, is attained to by persons that.
are dead. ft is seen of a married couple
that only one dies ata time. Where does
the otherthen remain: Do tell me this.


5. Men obtain various kinds of fruits by
performing various kinds of duties. The
Occupations, again, to which menfotlow are
of various kinds. Various, again, are the
hells to which they go on account of such
diversity of duties and acts.

6. The Rishis have said that women, iv
particular are fatse in behaviour, Wher
human beings are such, and when women
in particular ace described in the Shastras
to be false, how, Ovsire, can there be a
union between the sexes for purposes of
performing all duties together.


7. In the very Vedas one may read’ that
women are false, The word ‘Duty,’ as
used in the Vedas, appears to have been
coined first for general application. ‘There-
fore the application of that word to the rites:
of marriage is, instead of being correct,
only a form of speech forcibly applied
where it has no application.


8—g. The subject appears to me to be
inexplicable although I think of it always,
Q grandfather, O you of great wisdom,


64


you should explain this to me fully, clearly
aud according to the Shruti. In fact; do
you explain to me what it is, what is
characteristics are, ‘and the way in which it
has come to pass.


Bhishnia said :—


10, Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course between Ashtavakea and the lady
known by the name of Disha.


tt. Formerly Ashtavakea of austere
penances, desirous of marriage, begged
the great Rishi Vadanya of his daughter.


1%. The name by which the lady was
kuown was Suprabha. In beauty she was
peerless on Earth, fn virtues, dignity,
conduct, and manners, she was superior to
all girls,

13. By a look only that girl of beautiful
eyes had robbed him of his heart even as
a delightful grove in spring, decked with
flowers, robs the spectator of his heart.


14, The Rishi addressed Ashtavakra
and said,—Yes, I shall give my daughter
to you. Listen, however, tome. Make a
journey to the sacred North. You will see
mnany things there.


Ashtavakra said :—


15. You should tell me what ft shall see
in that region. ludeed, I am ready to
carry out whatever command may be laid
laid upon me by you.


Vadanya said :—

16. Passing over the dominions of the
Lord of ‘Treasures you will cross the
Himavat mountains, You will then see
the plateau on which Rudra lives. It is
inhabited by Siddhas and Charanas,


17—t8. It -is full of the companions of
Mahadeva, frolicsome ‘and fond of dance
and possessed of various faces. It is peopled
_ with also many Fishachas, O lord, of
various forms and all daubed with fragrant
powders of various colors and daucing with
joyous hearts in accompaniment with
bLeazen instruments of different kinds. Ene
circled by these who dance with electric
tapidity or refrain at times ahogether from
furwaid or backward or transverse motion
of every sort, Mahadeva lives there.


19 «That charming spot on the moun-
tains, we have heard, is the favourite abode
of the great god, It is said that that great
god as also his companions are always
present there, ~


. 20. It was there that the goddess Uma
lad practised the severest austerities for
the sake of the three-eyed god. Hence,


MANABHARATA.


it is said, that spot is much liked by bot
Mahadeva and Uma,

Z1—22. Formerly. there, oft the summit
of the Mahapacshwa motintains, which are
situate to the north of the mountains sacred
to Mahadeva, the Seasons, and the last
Night, and many gods; and many human
beings also, in their embodied farms, had
worshipped Mahadeva. You will cross
that region also is thy northward journey.


23. You will then see a beautiful and
charming forest blue of color and resenr-
bling a mass of clouds. There, int that
forest, you will see a beautiful female
ascetic looking like tle goddess of pros-
perity herself.


24. Venerable for age and highly
blessed, she is going through the initiatory
tite, Seeing her there you should duly
adore her with reverence.


25. Returning to this place after having
seen her, you will take the hand of my
daughter in marriage. If you can make
this agreement, proceed. then on your
journey and do what I osder_you,


Ashtavakra said :—


26. So be it! I shall do your bidding.
Verily, I shall proceed to that region of
which you mention, O you of ctghteous
soul! On your side, you should make your’
words truthful.


Bhishma said :—


27. The illustrious Ashtavakra started
on his journey. He: proceeded more and
more towards the north and at last reached
the Himavat mountains inhabited by
Siddhas and Charanas. :


28. Arrived atthe Himavat mountains
that foremost of Brahmanas then reached
the sacred river Vahuda whose waters pro<
duce great merit. :


29. He bathed in one of the charming
Ticthas of that river, which was free from
mud, and pleased the gods with obiations
of water. His ablutions being over, hé
spread a quantity of Kusha grass and laid
himself down vpon it for taking rest for
some time. : ;


30. Passing the night im this way the
Brahmana rose with the day. He once
more performed his ablutions tw the sacred,
waters of the Vahuda and then lighted his
homa fire and adored it with the lelp of
many foremost of Vedic mantras.


gt. Hethen adored with the due rites
both Rudra and his wife Uma, and. rested
for some more time by the side of that lake
in the course of the Vahuda whose shores


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


hé had reached. Refreshed by such rest, he
started from that region and then proceede
ed towards Kailasa.


32. He then saw a golden gate that
seemed vo blaze with beauty. He saw also
he Mandakini and the Nalini of the great
Kuvera the Lord of Riches.


33. Seeing the Rishi arrived there, all
the Rakshasas headed by Manibhadra
who were engaged in protecting that lake
full of beautiful lotuses, came out in a body
for welcoming and honouring the ilustrivus
traveller,


34. The Rishi adored in return those
Rakshasas of tercible prowess and asked
Alvem to report, forthwith, his arrival to the
Lord of Riches,


35. Requsted by him to do this, those
Rakshasas, O king, said to. him,—ting
Vaishravana, without waiting for the news,
is coming of his owa accord to your pre-
sence, . i

36. The Wustrious Lord of Riches is
well acquainted with the object of this yaur
journey. See him,—that blessed Master,
who blages with his own energy.


37. Then king, Vaishravana, approach-
ing the innocent Asltavakra, duly enquired
about his welfare, The usual polite enqui-
ales being over, the Lord of Riches then ad-
dressed the twice-born .Rishi, saying,—

vu are welcome. Dotelli me what do you
want from me, Inform me of it, 1 shall, O
twice-vorn ove, do whatever you may order
me to accomplish.


39. Do youenter my house as alent
you. O foremost of Brahmanas. Duly
entertained by me, and after your business
fs done, you may go without any obstacles
being placed in your way.

40. Waving said these words, Kuvera
took the hand of that foremost of Brahma-
nas and conducted him into his palace.
lie offered him his awn seat as also water
to wash his feet and the present of the usual
ingredjents.

4. After the two had been seated the
Yakshas of Kuvera headed by Manibhadra,
and many Gandhbarvas and Kiauaras, also
pat down betore them.


42. After all of them had taken their
seats, the Lord of Riches said,—Under-
standing what your pleasure is, the various
tribes of Apsaras will begin their dance.


43. Itis proper that | should entertain
you with hospitality and that you should
be served with propriety —Thus addressed
the ascetic Ashtavakra said, in a sweet
voice,—Let the dance go en, :


" fe)


eanneenententtepenerreettrtnesrtlnecher cnr etine—eheteniehgenyeitenpennesasins Asean perenne tet ena rh ene ne nent


44. Then Urvara, Mishrakeshi, Ram-
bha, Urvashi, Alumvasiia,  Grritachi,
Chiura, Chitrangada, Ruchi, Manghara,


Sukeshi, Sumukhi, Hasini, Prabha, Vidyuta,
Prashami, Danta, Vidyota and Rati—these
and many other beautiful Apsaras began
to dance. Vhe G ndharvas played on
various kinds of musical instruments,


47. After such excellent music and
dance had begun, the Rishi Ashtavaitra of
austere penances unconsciously passed a
full celestial year there iu (he house of king
Vaishravana.


48. Then king Vaishravana said to the
Rishi, —O learned Biatsnana, see a little
more than a year has passed away siace
your arrival here.


49. This music and dance, especially
known by the name of Gandharva, is a
stealer of the heart-{aad of tinie). Act as
you lice, or ict this go on if that be your
pleasure.

50. Youare my guest and, therefore,
worthy of worship. This is your house.
Do you set your commands, We ace -ail
bound to you.


51. Thus addressed by king Vaishras
vana, the illustrious Asltavakra, replied-to
him, with a pleased heart, saying,—-l have
been duly honured by you. | desire now, O
Lord of Riches, to go hence.


52—53. Indeed, 1 am highly pleased.
Alt tis befits you, O Lord of Riches.
Virough your grace, O dlustrieus ove, and
according to the command ol ube great Rishi
Vadanya, 1 siall uow proceed to ty
journey’s ewd. May you enjoy prosperiry.
—Having said these words, the iiusiriaus
Rishi left Kuvera’s palace and proceeded
aorthwards, — :

54 He crossed the Kailasa and the
Mandata as atso the golden tiouniains.
Beyotid those high ang great mountains is
situate that excellent region where Maha-
deva dressed as at humble ‘ascetic was
living.


55. He went sound the spot, with a
Cumpused mind, bending his ugad in res--
pect the while. Descending tken on the
Eucth, he regarded himscti punfied foe
baving seen that holy spot which is the
residence of Mahadeva.


56. Having gone round that mountain


thiice, the Rishi with face turned towards
the hurth, went on with a joyous heart.


57. Then he saw another forest that
was very delightful. tt was adorned with
the fruits and routs of every se*sou, and it
was filled with the music of bards, -


66


58. There were many charming grbves |
in the forest. The iflustrious Rishi? then
saw a beautiful asylum,


 §9. The Risbi saw also many goldeti
hills decked with gems and possessed of
various forms. There he saw many lakes
and tanks also,


60. And he saw variows other highly
beautiful objects. Seeing these things, the
mind of that Rishi of purified soul became
filled with joy.

61. He then saw a beautiful palace
made of gold and adorned with all sorts of
gems. Of wonderful structure, that palace
surpassed the palace of Kuvera himself in
every respect,


62. Around it there were many hills and
mounts of jewels and gems. Many beauti-
ful cars and heaps of jewels also were seen
‘there.


63. The Rishi saw there the river Man-
dakini whose waters were coveréd with
numberless ,Mandara ffowers, ‘Fhere atso
were seen many self-luminous gems, and
the soil all around was decked with dia-
monds of various species.


64. -The palace which the Rishi saw
contained many chambers whose arches
were set with various kinds of stones.
‘Those chambers were adorned also with
nets of pearls interspersed with jewels and
gems of various species.


(65. Various sorts of beautiful objects,
capable of stealing the heart and the eye
surrounded that patace. That charming
retreat was inhabited by numberless Rishis.


66. Seeing these beautiful sights alt
around, the Rishi began to think of where
he would take shelter. Proceeding then to
the gate of the palace, be uttered these
words :—]


67. Let ‘those that live here know that a
guest has come.—Hearing the voice of the
Rishi, a number of maidens came oyt ina
body from that palace.


68. They were seven in number, O' King,
Of different sorts of beauty, all of them
were highly charming. Every one of those’
maidens the Rishi saw stole his heart.


69. The sage could not, with even his
utmost struggles, control his mind. Indeed,
seeing those maidens of very great beauty,
his heart lost its balance. Seeing hinvself to
give way to sneh influences, the Rishi made
a vigoreus effort, and greatly wise as he
was, he at last succeeded in coutrolling
himself,


“go. ‘Those ladies then addressed the
Rishi, saying,—Let the illustrious one enter.
—Stricken with curiosity about those highly


MAHABHARATA. -


beautiful ladies, as also of that palace, the
twice-born Rishi entered as he was come
manded. Entering the palace he saw atr
old lady, with nvarks of decrepitude, dressed
in white robes and adorned with every
kind of ornament. ‘The Rishi blessed her,
saying,—Good be to you.—The old lady
returned his good wishes in due form
Rising u'p, she offered a seat to the Rishi.


73- Having taken his seat, Ashtavakra
said,—Let all the ladies go to their respec-
tive quarters. Only Fet one stay here. Let
that one remain here who is endued witlr
wisdom and who has tranquillity of heart.
Indeed, let all the others go away as they
like.


74. Thus addressed, alf those damsels
went round the Rishi and them left the
chamber, only that aged lady remaining
there. :


#5. ‘Fhe day quickly passed and night
came. The Rishi, seated on a splendid
bed addressed the old lady, saying,—O
blessed lady, the night is growing deeper.
Do you go to sleep.

76. ‘Their conversation being thus put
a stop to by the Rishi, the old lady laid her-


self down on ary excellent bed of great
beauty.
977. Soon after, she rose from her bed


and pretending to tremble with cold, left it
for the bed of the Rishi.


47. The great Ashtavakra welcomed
her courteously. lhe lady, however, stretch-
itvyg her arms, tenderly embraced the Rishi,
O'forenrost of men.

79. Seeing the Rishi quite unmoved
and as inanimate as a piece of wood, she
became very sotry and began to convese
with him:

So. There is to pleasure, except that
from desire, which women can derive frony
a person of the other sex! [am now under
the influence of lust [ seek you for that
reason. Dio you seek me in return,


8t. Be cheerful, O learned Rishi, and
unite yourself with me! Do you’ embrace
me, O learned one, for F desire you greatly,


$2. O you of righteous soul, this onion
with me is the best and desirable reward of
those severe penances which you had
practised. At the first sight [ have become
disposed to seele you. Do you also seek
me,


83. All this riches and every other
precious article that yow see here, are’
mine. Dio you, indeed, become the master
of all this with my person and heart.


84. I shall satisfy every wish of yours {
Do you sport with me, therefore, in these


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


Aclightlal forests, O Brahmana, which can
grant every wish,


85. I shall obey you implicity in every
ahing, and you will sport with me according
to your pleasure! AH objects of desire that
are human or that belong to heaven shall
be enjoyed by us.


86. There is no other pleasure more
agreeable to women. indeed, union with a
Person of the opposite sex is the most
desirable object of joy that we can get.


87. When moved by the god of love
aomen become very whimsical. Then
4hey do wot feel any pain even if they walk
over a desert of burning sand.


Ashtavakra said :-—


88. © blessed dady, 1 never approach
another’s wife. One’s union with another
qian’s wife is condemned by persons con-
versant with the scriptures on moratity,


89. f am an uttec stranger to enjoy-
aents of every kind. QO blessed lady,
d&tnow that & have become desirous of
amattriage for getting children. iswear by
truth itself,


go. Through the help of offspring
righteously got, I shall proceed to those
wepions of happiness which cannot be
attained without such help. O good lady,
know what is consistent with morality, aud
knowing it, desist from your effuits.


The lady said :—

gt. Lhe very gods of wind and fire and
water, or the other celestials, O twice-bornr
‘ one, are not so agreeable to women as the
god of love, Indeed, women are greatly
fond of sexual union. :


gz. Amoug. a thousand women, or
pethaps, atmong hundreds of thousands,
someumes only one may be found who is
_ devoted te her husband.


93. Under the influence ef desire, they
care not foc family or father or mother or
brother or husbaud er sous oc busband’s
brother, :


94.. Seeking what they consider happi-
ness, they destroy the family even as many
givers wash away the banks that contain
them. The Creator himself had 6aid this,
marking the faults of women,


Bhishma said :—

"95. The Rishi, bent upon finding out

the faults of women, addressed that lady,

- $aying,—Cease to speak to me_ thus!
Yearning originates from fiking. ‘Tell me

what I am to do, .


67.


96. That fady then said in return.—O.
illustrious one, you will all see according
to time and place. Do you only live here (for
sometime), VG highly blessed one. and {
spall consider myself sufficiently rewarded }


97—98. Thus addressed by her, the
4wice-born Rishi, G Yudhishthira, expressed
his resoution to satisfy her request, sayiig
—I shail live with you in this piace as long
asd can venture to do so.—The Rishi then
seeing that lady possessed by decrepitude,
began to think seriously on the matter.
He appeared to be even pained by his
thongitts.


99. The eyes of that foremost of Brah-
tmanas ceuld not get any delight from those
parts of that dady’s person whereupon they -
were fixed, Qn the other fiand, his looks
appeared to he dispelled by the ugtiness
of those particular limbs.


106. This iady is, forsooth, the mistress
of this palace. Has she been made ugly
through some curse? It is not proper that
4 should qnickly determine the couse of
this. ;


fot. Thinking thus in his heart, and
curious to know the reason, the Rishi passed
the rest of that day in anxiety,


102. Fhe lady then addressed him,
saying,—O illustrious ene, look at the Sun
reddened by the evening clouds! What
service shall 1 do to you,


103. The Rishi addressed her, saying.
‘Fetch water for my abliution? Having -
bathed, [ shall cecite my evening prayers,
coutroling my tongue and the senses,’


CHAPTER XX.


{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),~=
ei _ Coutinued,


Bhishma said :—

1. Thus ordered, the fady. said,— Be.
it so !—She then brought oil and a piece of
loth for his wear during the ablutions, |


2. With the ascetic’s permission she
rubbed every part of his body with the
fragrant oil she had brought for bim.


3. The Rishi was rubbed, and when tlie
process of tubbing was over, he went te
the room set apart for the performance of
ablutions, There he sat upon a new and
excellent seat.


4 After the Rishi had taken his ses
upon it, the old -lady began to waslr his


68 MANABHARATA.


body with her own soft hands whose touch | the man who acts ashe likes. As for my-

was highly agreeable. Z self, | am able to govern my inclinations by
§—6. One after another in due course, | 5¢f-control. O good lady, return to your

the lady helped the Rishi in his ablations, | OW" bed.

Between the lukewarm water with which he 7 23,

was washed, and the soft hands which were The lady said:—

engaged in washing him, the Rishi of rigid 17. LT bow to you. You should show me

vows could not understand that the whole | your favour. O stntess one, | prostrate |

night had passed away in the work. Rising | myself before you, do yeu become my

from the bath, the Rishi became highly | refuge.


surprised. 18. IF you see sin in knowing one who is


gy. He saw the Sun risen above the | not your wife, I yield myself to you. Do
horizon on. the East. He was’surprised at | you, O twice-born one, accept my hand in
this and asked himself,—Was it realiy so | marriage.
or was it a mistake of the understanding.


8 ~The Rishi then duly adored the god
ofa thousand rays. This done, he asked
the tady as to what he should do. The
old lady prepared some food for the Rishi
sweet to the taste like ambrosia itself.


9. On account of the sweetness of that
food the Rishi could not take much. ln
takmg that Hate, however, the day passed
nway and evening set in,


iy. The old Jady thén asked the Rishi
to go to bed and sleep. An excellent bed
was given itd the Rishi and another was
taken by herself.

tt. The Rishi and the old lady oceupied
different beds at first, but when it was mid-
night, the tady left her own bed for that of
the Rishi.


Ashtavakra said :—


12, O blessed lady, } amnot inclined
for sexual union with one who is the wife of
another, Leave my bed, O- good lady.
Blessed be you do, you desist from this of
your own accord.


Bhishma said :—

13. Thus dissuaded by the Brahmana
with the help of his self-cantrol, the fady
answered him, saying,-—-| am my own
mistress! In accepting me you will
commit no sin,


Ashtavakra seid :—
14. Women can never. be their own mis-
tresses, This is the opinion of the Creator
himself, uzs., that a woman should never
be jndepent.
The lady said:—.
15. Q learned Brahmana, I am pained
by desire, Mark my devotion to you. You
coinmit sin by refusing to accept me
Fovingly. ~. oe tle :
Ashtavakra said :—
16, Various shortcomimgs drag away


19. You will incur no sin. F tell you
truly. Know that ham my own mistress.
If there be any sin in this, let it visit me
only, My heart is devoted to you. I am
my own mistress. Do you accept me.


Ashtavakra said :—


20. #low is it, O good lady, that yoirare
your own mistress? Tell me the reason
of this. There is not a single woman in
the three wortds who can be considered as
the mistress of her own self.


at. The father protects her while she is.
a maiden. The husband protects her while
shéis young. Sons protect her when she is
aged. Woman can never be independent
as long as they live.


The lady said :—

22. I have, since “my maidenhood
adopted the vow of celibacy. Do not
doubt it. Lam stilla maid. Do you make
me your wife. O Brahmana, do not kill
this devotion of mine to yon,


Ashtavakra, said :—


23. As yon are inclined to me soam I
inchned to you. There is this question,
bowever, that should be settled. It is true.
that by giving way to my inclinations I
shall not be considered as acting contrary to
what the Rishi (Vadanya) wishes.


24. This is very wonderfel. Will this
lead to what is good? Here is a maiden
adorned with good ornaments and robes!


25. Sheis highly beautiful. Why did
decrepitude hide ker beauty so lang? At
present she looks like a beautiful maiden.
I do not know what form she may assume
hereafter.


26. J shall never swerve from that cnn-
trol which I have over desire and the other
Passions or from contentment with what [
have already got. Such swerving is not
good. I shall keep myself united with truth,


Se eeeammaend


deen tne ana ep sl pi enn nmr phere nce pb anger Sonera


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


CHAPTER XXI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).~—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Tell me why had that lady no fear of
Ashtavakra’s curse although Ashtavakra
was gifted with great energy? How also
did Ashtavakra succeed in returning from
that palace ?”"


Bhishma said :—


2. Ashtavakea asked her, saving,—How
do you change your ferm so? You should
not say anything false. I wish to know
this. Do you speak truly before a Brah-
mana.


The lady said :—


3. O best of Brakmanas, wherever you
may live, in the celestial region or on Earth,
this desire. of union between the sexes is to
be observed. O you of infallible prowess,
hear with rapt attention, what it all is.


4. This trial was converted by me, O sin-
less one, for examining you aright, O you
of infallible prowess, you have conquered
all the worlds by the strength of mind.


5. Know me as the embodiment of the
Northern point of the compass. You have
seen the lightness of the female character,
Even old women are tortured by the desirs
of sexual union.


6. The grandfather himself and ali the
gods with Indra have been pleased with
you. L know the object for which your
ilustrious self has come here.


7. O foremost of twice-born persons, you
have been sent here by the Rishi Vadanya
-—the father of your bride—in order that I
may instenct you. _ According to the
wishes of that Rishi I have already instruct-
ed you.

8. You will return home safely. Your
journey back will not be toilsome. You
wilt get for wife the girl you have chosen,
She will bear you a son,


9. Through desire I had solicited you,
You gave me the very best answer. People
of the three worlds cannot get over the
desire for sexual union.


10. Return to your quarters, having
achieved such merit. What else is there
which you wish to hear (from me}? 1 shall
truly describe it to you, O Ashtavakra,.


tt. Twas gratified by the Rishi Vadanya
in the first instance for your sake, O twice-
born ascetic! For the sake of honoring
him, I have said all this to you,


i ie i ep pi tg ea er ih eee Sf gn een


69


Bhishma said :—

12. Hearing these words of hers, the
twice-born Ashtavakra joined his hands
respectiuily.. He then begeed the lady for
her permission to return. Getting the per-
mission he sought, he returned to his own
he: mitage. ,


13. Resting himself for sometime at
home and getting the permission of his
kinsmen and friends, he then, in a proper
way, went, O delighter of the Kurus, ta the
Brahmana Vadanya.


14. Welcomed with the usual enqtiries
by Vadanya the Rishi Ashtavakra, with a
well-pleased heart, described all that he had
seen.


1s. He said,—ordered by you I proe
ceeded to the mountains of Gandhamadana. -
In the quarter lying to the north of those
mountains I saw a very superior goddess.


16. I was received by her with courtesy,
She named. you before me, and also instruce .
ted me in various matters, Having tisten-
ed to her I have returned, O lord.


17. The learned Vadfhya said to him,
take my danghter’s hand according to’
due rites and under the proper constella--
tions. You are the fittest bride-groom [
can select for the girl. .


Bhishma said :—

18. Ashtavakra said,—So be it !—and’
espoused the girl. Indeed, having married
the girl, the highly pious Risii, became
filled with joy.

19. Having taken as his wife that beau.
tiful lady, the Rishi continued to live in his
own hermitage freed from every sort of
mental trouble,


CHAPTER XXII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Whom have the eternal Brahmanas
selected a proper object of gifts? Is a
Brahmana who bears the marks of the
order of life he follows to be considered as
such, or is one divested of such marks to
be so regarded. ;


Bhishma said :— ;


2. QO king it has been said that gifts
should be made a Brahmana who follows
the duties of his own order, whether he’


70 MAHABHARATA,


hears the marks of Brahhmacharyya er not, | persons of great energy, vis., the goddes,
for both are faultless, vis., he who bears | Earth, the Rishi Kashyapa, the god of fire,
such marks and he who is divested of them. } and the ascetic Markandeya.


Yudhishthira said :— - The Earth said :—

3. What sin does an impure person tt. As a clod of earth, when thrown into
commit if he makes gifts of sacrificial | the great ocean, quickly dissolves away, so
butter or food or with great devotion, to | every sort of sin disappears by the three
persons of the twiceeborn order ? high qualifications of officiation at sacti-

r ‘ : fices, teaching, and receiving of gifts.
Bhishma said :— : ;


4. He who has no selfscontrol becomes, Kashyapa said :—


forsooth, cleansed by devotion. Such a 12. The Vedas with their six auxiliae
man, becomes purified in respect of every | ries, the Sankhya phisosophy, the Puranas,
act. : and high birth, these cannot rescue a@

F . F . twice-borm person if he falls away from
Yudhishthira said ~— good conduct,


5. Ie has been said that a Brahmana oa
who is sought for the performance of a Agni said: ; .
religious rite should never be examined, 13. The Brahmana who, engaged in
‘The learned, however, hold that while per- | study and considering himself earned,
formorming rites for the Pitris, the Brah- | seeks with the help of his learning to des-
mana who is sought to be engaged, should | troy the reputation of others, falls away


be examined. from virtue and comes to be regarded as
divorced from truth. Such persons of re-
Bhishma said — fractory spirit never acquire regions of hap»


6. .As regards tWe religious rite for the piness hereafter.


Geities, these do vot yield fruits on account : wee *
of the ‘Brahmana whois engaged in doing Markandeya said: 3
them bat through the grace of the deities 14. If a thousand Hores-sacrifices and


-themselves. Forsooth, thése persons who | Truth were weighed in the balance, [I da
perform sactifices acquire the merit of | not know whether the former would equal
those acts, through the favour of the | even half of the latter in weight.


deities. - Bhi F
; ishma said :—
7. The Brahmanas, QO chief of the d
Bharatas, are always utteters of Brahma. 15. Having spoken these words, those


four persons, each of whom is gifted with.
immeasurable energy, wis., the goddess
Earth, Kashyapa, Agni, and Bhrigu’s son |


Yudhishthira said :— armed with weapons, quickly went away.


8. Why, O grandfather, are these five | Yudhishthira said:—


gig., he who is a stranger, he who is gifted ‘ .
with learning, he who g connected by mar- 16. If ere uenes oe the yon
riage, he that-is endued with penances, celibacy in this world eat, re hid the
and he who. i devoted. to the perform. | 1c; the offerings one mates during tune
ifr ry a res, ’ °
rae sacrifices, considered as proper dered well-performed if the performer ace”
tually makes over those offerings to such

Bhishma said:— ~ Brahinanas, :


9. The first three, vis., strangers, rela- | Bhishma said :—
tives, and ascetics, when endued with these : : :
17. If, having practised the vow of


altebutes; vis., purity of birth, devotion to Brahmacharyya for the prescribed period.
religious ab eee: mercy, ese ys (of twelve years) and acquired proficiency
BADGE) EM ce LPUL AM Ds BER: CONSIIETER ik the Vedas and tneir branches, a Bratir


as proper persons, The other two, v¢s., hi .

men of learning and.those given to sacrifices geri repo Mee ee wee

when gifted with five of these attributes, dered to fall way tcoed hie bows Lhe
*


vis., purity of birth, mercy, modesty, sin- Peni :
cerity, and truthfulness, are also considered mailed in che ace is wot considered as


as proper persons.
10. Listen now to me, O son of Pritha, Yudhishthira said :—
as I recite to you the opinions of these four 18 The wise hold that duty or virtue ~


The intelligent Rishi Markandeya, gave
went to these words it days of yore.


ANUSHASANA PARYA.


qt


has many ends and numerous doors. Tell { act falsely towards preceptets and elders,


‘me, O grandfather, what, however, ate the
decisions in this matter.


Bhishuta said :—

19. Abstention front injury to others:
truthfulness, the absence of anger, tMercy:
seif-control, and sincerity or candour, O
king, are the marks of virtue.


20. There are persons who wandet over
the Earth, lauding virtue but without prac-
tising what they preach and engaged ail the
while in sin, O king,


21—22. He who gives such persons gold
or gems or kine or horses has to sink in
hell and there live for ten years, on the
fzeces of such petsohs as live -upon the
flesh of dead kine and buffalos, of men
called Pukkasas, of others who live in the
outskirts of cities and villages, and of men
who give out under the influence of anger
and folty, the acts and omissions of
others.


_ 23. Those foolish men who do not give
a Beahmiana observant of the vow of Brah-
macharyya the offerings made in Shraddhas
(unto one’s deceased ancestors); have to
proceed; O king, into regions of gteat
misery.


Yudhishthira said :—


24. Yell me, O grand-father, what is
superior to Brahmacharyya? What is the
highest mark of virtue? What is the
highest kind of purity? ~


Bhishma said :—=

25. I tell’ you, O son, that abstention
from honey and meat is even superior to
Brahmacharyya. Virtue lies witht boun-
daries. ‘The best mark of virtue is Re-
nunciation, :


Yudhishthira said —


26. In what time should one practise
virtue? In what time should wealth be
sought? in what time should pleasure be
- enjoyed? O grandfather, do tet me this.


Bhislima said :—

27. One should acquire riches the first
part of his tie. Then should one acquire
virtue, atd thea enjoy pleasure, One
should not, however, be addicted to any of
these. ;

_ 28. One should respect the Brahmanas,
worship his preceptor and seniors, show
mercy to all creatures, be of mild disposition
and sweet speech. a


29g. To utter untruth in a cotirt of justice


are considered as equivalent to Brahmani<
cide.


30. One should never doan act of vio
lence to the king’s body, Nor should one
ever strike a cow. Botly these offences ate
equal to tte sin of fasticide. ,

3ts One should never quit his (Aomtay
fire. One should algo renounce the study
of the Vedas. One should never attack a
Brahmana by words of deeds. Alt these
offences are equal to Brahmanicide,


Yudhishthira said :—

32. What kind of Brahmanas should
be considered as good? Who are those
Brahmanas by making presents to whony
one may win gréat merit? What kind of
Brahmanas are they whom one should
feed? Tell me all this, O grandfather,


Bhishma said :—

33. Those Brahmanas who are fteed
from anger, who are devoted to acts of
virtue, who are firm in Truth, and who
practise self-control, ate considered as
good. By making pifts to them one acs
quires great merit.


34 One acquires great merit by making
presents to such Bralymanas as are free
from pride, capable of bearing everything,
firm in the pursuit of their objects, gifted
with mastery over their senses, devoted to
the behoof of all creatures, and disposed to
be friendly towatds alt.


35- One acquires great merit by making
gitts to such Brahmanas as aré free frow
avarice, ag are pure of heart atrd conduct,
gifted with learning and modesty, truthfat
in speech, and observant of their own duties
as Sanctioned in the scriptures.


36. ‘The Rishis have declared that Brates


} mana to be a deserving object of gifts wha


Studies the four Vedas with all their auxi-
liaries and is devoted to the six well-known
duties. One acquires great merit by makes
ing gifts to Bralymanas endued with suct
qualifications.


37- The mati who makes’ gifts to
a worthy Brahmana- multiplies his
merit a thousand fold, A single pious
Brahmana gifted with wisdom and Vedic
lore, observant of tle duties laid down in
the scriptures, and marked out by purity


_of conduct is capable to resque a whole


family.


38. One should make gifts of kine and
horses and riches and food'and other kinds
of articles to a Beahmana who is gifted with


to behave deceitfully towards the king, to ; such qualifications, By making’ such gifts


72


to stich psrsans one acquires great happi-
hese it tlie next world.


39. As 1 have already told you, even
one stitch Beahitaua can save the entire
family to whien the giver belungs. What
need | say, therefore; O dear son, of the
mente of making gifiste many Brahmanas
of such qualifications ? fn making gilts,
therefore, one should always select the ob-
ject to whom the gift is to be made.


- 49, Hearing of a Brahmana gifted with
proper Qualifications and respected by all
geod people, one should invite hiny eves if
he lives ata distance and welcowing him
when he arrives, one should adore him by
all means in his power.


ae


CBAPTER XXIII.


{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

a. LE wish you, O grandfather, to tell me
what the ordinances about the rites for the
deities and the departed wanes on ogcusions
‘uf Sheaddhas,


Bhishma said:~


_ 2. Having purified oneself and then
_performed the well-known auspicious rites,
one should carefully perform ali acis. rela-
ung to the Pitris in the afternuon,


3. What is giver to nten should be given
in the uridday with love and regard, That
“gift whieh is made untiately is taken by

_ Rakshasas.


4, Gifts of articles that have been Teapt
over by arty one, or been licked or sucked,
‘or are not given peacefully, or have beew

‘seen by women who are inipure for being tiv
their seasow do not produce ay nrerit.
Suclr gifts are considered as the portions of
-Rakshasas.


5. Gifts of articles that have been an-
nounced before many people or from which
. @ part has been eaten by a Shudra, or. that
have beer seen or licked by a dog, form
poctions of Rakshasas.


6. Food which is mixed with hair or
in which thece are worms, or which has
been spoiled with spittte or saliva or which
has been looked at by a dog or into which
tear-drops have fallen or which has been

“trodden upon, should be kuown as tor ming
the part of Ra&shasas.


‘9. Food that has been eaten by @ person’
" incompeterit to user the syllahle Ont, or


re on er ni teen tte nent ere nena nena tnfnaratnnnnernts—ntntrestrny neonate


MAHABHARATA,’


that has been eaten by’a person bearing
arms, O Bharata, ot that has been eaten by
a wicked person, should be known as due tu
Rakshasas,


8. ‘The food that is eaten by a person
fro which a part has alveady been eaten
by another, of which is eaten without a part
thereof having been offered to gods and
guests and children, is appropriated by
Rakshasas. Such impute tood, if offered tu
tre deiiies and Pitris is never accept-
ed by them but is appropriated by Rax-


-shasas.


g. ‘The food that is offered hy the three
twice-bort® classes in Shraddhas in witich
Mantras are either not uttered or uttered
tncorcectly and in which the ordinances laid
dow tn the scriptures are wot duly pec-
formed, tf given to guests and other people;
is appropriated by Rakshasas,

1o. YVhe food that is given’ to guests
without having been preciousty dedicated
to the deities or the Pitris with the help of
libations on the sacred fire, or which has
been sullied on account of a part thereof
having been eaten by a person who is
wicked or of icreligious conduct, strould be
kuown as being due to Rakshasas,


it. I have described to you the dues af
the Rakshasas. Listen nuw to me as F put
down the rules for determining the


Beatimana who is worthy of gifts.


#2. Att Beahmanas that have been out.
casted, as atso Brahnraivas who are idiots
and insane, du not deserve to be invited tu
Shraddhas in which offerings are made ta
ehher the deities or the departed manes.


13. That Brahmanas who is afflicted
with leucoderma, or he who is shurn of
generative power, or he who has got leprosy,
or he who has got phthisis, or be who suffers
from epilepsy, or he who is blind, should
not, O King, be invited.


14. Fhose Brahmanas who practise as
physicians, those who get regular pay for
adottog (ue invages of gods established by
the rich, gr live upon the service of the
gods, those who observe vows from pride
or other false motives, and those who sell
Sonra witse, do not deserve to be invited.


1§. Those Brahmanas who are, by pro-
fes>ion, vocalists, or dancers or players or
instcumental arasictans, ov recivers of sacred
books, or warriors, and athletes, should Hot,
© sing, be invited.


16. Those Brahmanas who pour liba-
tions on tlre sacred fire for Shudras, of who
tre preceptors of Shudras, or who are —
servant of Shudra masters, " should not be
invited,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


t?. That Brahmana who is paid for his
Services as a preceptor, or who attends asa
pupil upon the lectures of some preceptor
Yor ait allowance paid to him, doés not de-
serve to be invited, for both of them are
considered as sellers of Vedic learning.


18. That Brahmana who has been once
induced toaccept the gift of food in a Shrad-
dha at the very beginning, as also he who
has married a Shudra wife, even if gifted
with every sort of knowledge, should not be
invited,


19. Those Brahraanas who have no do-
Mestic fire, and-they who attend upon
corpses, they who are thieves, and they who
have otherwise degraded themselves, do not
O king, deserve to be invited, -


20. Those Brahmanas whose antecedents
Are not known or are vile, and they who are
Putrika-putras, should not, O king, be in-
vited on occasions of Shraddhas.


21. That Brahmana who gives loans of
money, or he whe fives upon the interest of
the loans given by him, or he who lives by
the sale of living creatuces, should not, O
king; be invited. ;


22. Persons who are henpecked or they
who live by becoming the paramiouts of
urchaste women, or they who do not per-
form their morning and evening prayers,
should not, O king, be invited to Shrad-
dhas.


23. Listen now tome as I say who
the Beahmana is who has been ordained
for acts done in honor of the gods and the
departed manes, Indeed, I shall tell you
what those merits are on account of which
one may becomea giver ora recipient of
gifts in Sthraddhas. , oe


24. Those Brahinahas who petfotm the
tites and ceremonies laid down in the
sctiptures, or they wha aré possessed of
Htierll, or they who know well the Gayatri,
or they who perform the ordinary duties of
Brahniahas, even if they happen ta take to
agriculttire fot a living, are capable, O
king, of being invited 16 Stiraddhas,


25. Ifa Brahmana happens to be well-
born, he should te invited to Shraddhas
notwithstanding his taking up arms for
fighting the battles of others. That Brah-
mana, however, O son, who happens to
drive a trade for a living should be
discarded,


26, That Brahmana who pours fibations
every day onthe sacred fire; or who lives
in a fixed habitation, who is not a thief and
who performs the duties of hospitality to
guests arrived at his house, should; O
king, be invited to Shraddhas.


-16


78


27. That Brahmana, O chief of Bha-


.tata’s race, who recites the Savitri morning,


noon, and night, or who tives upon chatity
begging as much as is necessary, who ts
observant of the rites and cremonies laid
down inthe scriptures for persons of his -
order, should, O king, be invited to
Shraddhas.


28. That Brahmana who having se-
quired riches in the morning becomes
poor in the afternoon, or who poor in the
morning becomes rich in the evening,
or whois shorn of matice, or is stained by
a minor fault, should, O king, be invited to
Shraddhas.


2g. ‘hat Brahmana who is shorn of
pride oc sin, who is not given to dry
disputation, or who lives upon alms got in
his rounds of mendicancy from‘ house to
house; should, O king, be invited to
sacrifices.


30. Qne who ‘does not observe vows,
or who is given to untruth, who is a thief,
er who lives by the sale of living creatures
oc by trade in general, should be invited
to Shraddhas, O king, if he happen to
subsequently drink Soma in a sacrifice,


gt. That man who having acquired
tiches by foul or crue! titeans subsequently
spends it in worshipping the gods and
performing the duties of hospitality, be~
comes worthy, O king, of being invited to
Shraddhas,


32. The riches that one has acquired by
the sale of Vedic learning; or which has
been acquired by a wortan, or which has
been gained by meanness, should never be
givett to Brahmanas or spent in making
offerings to the departed manes,


93. That Brahmana,O chief of Bha-
fata’s race; whe upot the completion of a
Shraddha that is performed with his hetp,
refuses to utter the words yukta, commiis:
the sin of swearing falsely in a suit for
land.


34. The time for celebtating the Shrad-
dha, O Yodhisthira, is that when one pets
a good Brahmana and curds and clarified
butter and the sacred day of the new moon
and the meat of wild animals sueh as deer
and others,


35- Upon the termination of a Shraddha
periormed by a Brahmana the word
Swadha should be uttered. If performed
by a Kshatriya the words that should be
uttered are—Let your departed manes
be pleased.

36—48. Upon the completion of a
Shraddna performed by a Vaishya, O
Bharata, the words that should be uttered.
are;—Let everything become endless law


74


Likewise tipon the completion of a Shraddha

_ performed by a Shudra, the word that
should be uttered ts Swasti —As regards
a Brahmana, the Punyakam declaration
should be accompanied with the utterance
of the syllable Om. In the case of a
{$shatriya, such declaration should be with-
out the ntterance of the syllable Om. In
the acts performed by a Vaishya the words,
instead of the syllable Ons, should be—
Let the gods be pleased. Listen now to me
as ft tell you the rites that should be per-
formed,’one after another, as given in the
ordinances.


39. All the rites consequent upon birth,

‘O Bharata, are necessary in the case of

“all the three castes. All these rites, O

'Yudhishthira, In the case of both Bra-

hmanas and Kshatriyas as also in that of

. Vaishyas, are to be performed with the
help of Mantras.


40. The girdle of Brahmana should be
made of Munja grass. ‘Fhat of a Kshatriya
should be a bowstring. The Vaishya’s
girdle should be made of the Valwaji grass.

This has been laid down in the scriptures.


4t. Listen now to me as [ explain to
you what forms the merits and demerits
of both givers and recipients of gifts.


42. A Brahmana violates his duty by
uttering an untruth, Such an act on his
part is sinful. A yebalriya perpetrates
four-fold and a Vaishya eight-fold the sin
that a Brahmana incurs by uttering an
uateath, Bel


43. A Brahmana sheutd not eat else-
‘where, having been previously invited by
.a Brahmana. By ating at the house of
the person by wham he has been invited
afterwards, he becomes inferior and even
incurs the sin of the slaughter of an animal
on occasions other than those of sacrifices.


44 So also, if he eats elsewhere after
having been invited by a Kshatriya or a
Vaishya,-he falls away from his. post-
tion and incurs half the sin of the slaughter
of an animal on occasions ether than those
‘of sacrifices. -


45. That Brahmana, O king, who eats
on occasions of such acts as are performed
in honor of the gods or the departed
manes by Brahmanas and Kshatifyas and
Vaishyas, withowt having performed his
ablutions, commits the sin of uttering an
untruth for a cow.


46. That Bralrmana, O king, who eats
on occasions of similar acts performed by
persons belonging to. three higher castes,
ata time when he is impure om account. of
either a birth ora death antong his cog-


MANABHARATA.


| nates, and knowing that he is impure a7


through temptation, commits the same sin.


47. He who lives upon riches acquired
under false pretences like that of sojourns
to sacred places or who begs the giver
for riches pretending that he would spend
itin religious acts, commits, O king, the
sin of uttering an untruth.


48. That ‘person, belonging to any of


‘the three higher castes, © VYudhishthira,


who at Shraddhas and on other occasions
distributes food with the help of Mantras,
to such Brahmanas as do not study the
Vedas or who do not observe vows or wha
have not purified their conduct, forsooth,
commits sin,


Yudhishthira said :—


49. I wish, O grandfather, to know who
those persons are by giving to whom the
things dedicated to the gods and the de-
partedt¢manes, one may acquire sufficient
cewards,


Bhishma said :—


50. Do you, O Vadhishthira, feed those
Brahmanas whose wives respectfully wait
for the residtte of the dishes of their hus-
bands like tillers-of the soil waiting res-
pectfully for timely showers of rain.


51. By making gifts to those Brah-
manas who are always! of pure conduct,
O king, who are liberated by abstaining
from all luxuries and even full meals, who
are given to the observance of such vows
as lead to the emaciation of the body, and
who approach givers with the object of
getting gifts, one acquires great merit.


52. By making gifts to Brahmanas who
eonsiders cenduct in the light of food, who
considers conduct in the light of wives and
children, who considers conduct. in the
light of strength, who considers ‘conduct
in the light of theie refuge for crossing this
wold and acquiring happines in the next,
and who beg for riches only when wealth
is absolutely needed, one acquires great
merit. .


53. By making gifts to those persons,
O Vudhishthira, who having lost everything
through theives or oppressors, approach
the giver, one gains great merit,


54- By. making gifts to such Brahmanas
as beg food from the hands of even a poor
person of ‘their caste who has just got
something from others, one acquires -great


r merit.


55: By making gifts to such Brahmanas
as have lost everything in times of universal
distress and as have been deprived of their
wives on such occasions, and as come to


\


ANUSISASANA PARVA,


givers with solicitations for alms, one


acquires great merit.


56. By making gifts to such Brahmanas
as observe vows, and as place themselves
voluntarily under painful rules and regula-
tions, according to the Vedic injunctions,
and as come tos licit riches for spending
it upon the rites necessary to complete their
vows and other observances, one acquires
great merit. :


57. By making gifts to such Brahmanas
as live al a great distance from the prac-
tices followed by the sinful and the wicked,
as are shorn of strength for want of ade-
quate support, and as are very poor in
earthly possessions, one acquires great
merit.


58. By making gifts te such Brahmanas
as have been deprived of all their posses-
sions by powerful men but as are perfectly
innocent, and as desice to fill their stomachs
with any and every sort of food, one ac-
quires great merit.

. By making gifts to such Brahmanas
as beg on behalf of others performing pen-
ances and devoted to them, and as are
satisfied with even small gifts, one acquires
great merit,


‘60. You have now, O foremost of Bha-
rata’s race, heard what the scriptural de-
clarations are about the acquisition of great
merit by the making of gitts. Hear from
me now of those acts that lead to hell or
heaven.


61. They, O Yudhishthira, that speak
an untruth on occasions other than'‘those
when such untruth is necessary for serving
the purpose of the preceptor or for giving
the assurance of safety to a person in fear
of his life, sink in hell.


62. They who fravish other people's
wives, oc have sexual intercourse with them,
or assist at{such sinful acts, sink in hell,


63. They who rob others of their riches
or destroy the riches and properties of other
people, or trumpet the shortcomings of
other people, sink in hell. :

64. They who spoil tanks used by
cattle for satisfying thirst, who injure
buildings used for public meetings, who
break down bridges and causeways, and
who pull down dwelling-houses, have to sink
aa-hell.


65- They who lead astray and cheat
helpless women, of girls, or aged dames,
.or such women as have been frightened,
have to sink in hell.


66. They who destroy the means of
other people's subsistence, they who root
out the habitations of other people, they


|


75


who rob others of their wives, they who
sow dissensions among friends, and they
who destroy the hopes of other people, sink.
in hell.


67. .They'who trumpet forth the faults
of others, they who break down bridges
or causeways, they who live by following
other people’s calling and they who aré uns -
grateful to friends for services received,
have to sink in hell.


68. They who have no faith in the
Vedas and show no respect for them, they,
who break the vows made by themselves or
make others to break them, and they who
fall away from their status through sin, sink
in hell, .


69 They who follow improper conduct
they who take exorbitant rates of interest,
and they who make unduly large profits on
sales, have to sink in hell.


jo. They who are given ‘to gambling,:
they who unhesitatingly perform wicked
acts, and they who are given to. killing
living creatures, have tasink in hell.”


7%. They who make the masters dismiss:
the servants that are hoping- for rewards or
are in the enjoyment of wapesior salaries of,
waiting for returns in, cespect of valuable
services already done, have to sink in hell.


72. They who themselves eat without
offering portions thereof to theic wives or
their sacred fises or their. servants or thei¢
guests, and they who do not perform the
rites laid down in the scriptures for honour-
ing the departed manes and deities, have
to sink in hell. : ;


73. They who sell the Vedas, they - who.
find fault with the Vedas, andZthey who
reduce the Vedas into writing, have all
to sink in hell. :


74. They who are out.of the limit of the
four well-known modes of life, they who
follow to practices interdicted by the
Shrutis and the scriptires, and they who
perform wicked or sinful deeds or who
do not belong to their order of Lirth, have
to sink in hell.


75. They who- live by selling hair, they
who live by selling poisons, and they who
live by selling milk, have to sink in hell.


76. They who put impediments in the
path of Brahmanas and kine and maidens,
Q Yudhishthira, have tosink in hell.


77. They who sell weapons, they who
forge weapons, they who make arrows, and
they who make bows, have to sink in hell.


1


78. They who obstruct paths and roads
with stones and thorns and holes have to
sink inhell,  .. es


76


79. They who renounce preceptors and
Servants and loyal followers without any
offence, O foremost of Bharata’s cace, have
to sink in hell. .


8», They who set bullocks to work when
the animals have not come of age, they who
bore the noses of bullocks and other ani-
mals for controlling them the better while
engaged in work, and they who keep ani-
mats always tethered, have to sink in hell.


81. Those kings who do not protect
their subjects while forcibly collect from
them a sixth share of the produce of their
fields, and they who, though able and
possessed of resources, abstain from mak-
ing gifts, have to sink in hell.


$2. They who renounce persons gifted
with forgiveness, self-control and wisdom,
or those with whom they have associated
for many years, when these are no fonyer
of service to them, have to sink in hell.


83. ‘Those men who themselves eat with-
out ‘giving parts of the food to children,
aged men and servants, have to sink in
hell, ;


84. All these men numbered above have
to go to hell. Listen now to me, O fore-
most of Bharata’s race, as 1 tell you who
those men are who ascend to heaven.


85. . The man who transgresses against a
Brahmana by obstructing the adoration of
gods, syffer from the loss of all his childre
and animals. .


86. Those men, O Yudhishthira, who
perform the duties laid down in the scrip-
tures for them, practising the virtues of


charity, self control and truthlulness, go to


the celestial region.


87. Those men who having acquired
knowledge by making obedient services to
their preceptors and performing austere
penances, are unwilling to accept gifts,
succeed in ascending to heaven.


88. Those men who save people from
fear and sin and who remove the obstacles
lying in the way of what they wish to
accomplish and poverty and the sufferings
of disease, succeed in ascending to heaven.


89. Those men who are gifted with a
forgiving disposition, who are endued with
patience, who are ready-to perform all
righteous rites, and who are of pure con-
duct, succeed in ascending to heaven.s


go Those men who astain from honey
and meat, who abstain from sexual inter-
course with the wives of other people, and
who abstain from wines and’ spiritous
liquors, succeed in ascending to heaven.


ot. Those men who help in the establish-
ment of asylumns for ascetics, who be-


MAHABHARATA.


come founders of families, O Bharata, who
open up new countries for purposes of
dwelling and implant towns and cities,
succeed in ascending to heaven.


92. Those men who distribute cloths
and ornaments, as‘also food and drink, and
who help in marrying others, succeed in
ascending to heaven.


93. ‘Those men who have abstained front
all sorts of injury or harm to all creatures,
who can endure everything, and who have
made themselves the refuge of all creatures
succeed in ascending to heaven,


94. ‘Those men who wait humbly upon
their parents, who have controlled their
senses, and who are affectionate towards
their brothers, succeed in ascending to
heaven,


°

95. Those men who master their senses
though they are rich in worldly possessions,
endued with robust constitution and gifted
with youthful vigour, succeed in ascending
to heaven.


96. ‘Those men who are kind even toe
wards the offenders who are of mild dis-
position, who have an affection for all who
are of mild behaviour, and who contribute
to the happiness of others by rendering
them every kind of service in humitity,
succeed in ascending to heaven.


97- ‘hose men who protect thousands
of people, who make gifts to thousands of
people, and who rescue thousands of people
from distress, succeed in ascending to
heaven.


98. Those men who make “gifts of gold
and of kine, O foremost of Bharata’s race,
as also of conveyances and animals, suc-
ceed in ascending to heaven,


99- Those men who give away such
articles as are necessary in marriages, as
also servants and maids, and cloths and
robes succeed in ascending to heaven,


100. Those men who make public
pleasure-houses, gardens, wells, resting-
houses, and buildings for public meetings,
and tanks for enabling cattle and men to
satisfy their thirst, and fields for cultiva-
tion, O Bharata, succeed in ascending to
heaven.


tor. Those men who give houses and
fields and populated viliages to persons
that want them, succeed in ascending to
heaven,


102. Those mein who having themselves |
manufactured drinks of sweet taste and
seeds and paddy oc tice, give them to
others, succeed in ascending to heaven.


103. ‘Fhose men who having been born
in families high or low beget hundreds of


ANUSHASANA PARVA.,


children and live long lives, practising
mercy and keeping anger under complete
control, succeed in ascending to heaven.


to4. I have thus explained to you, O
Bharata, what the rites are in honor of
the deities and the departed manes which
are performed by people for the sake of
the other world, what the ordinances are
about making gifts, and what the views
are of the Rishis of former times about
both the articles of gift and the mannec. of
giving them.


CHAPTER XXIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. O deseendant of Bharata’s race, you
should answer this question of mine truly
and ia detail. What are those ciccum-
stances under which a person may become
guilty of Brahmanicide without actually
killing a Brabmana,


Bhishma said :—


2. Formerly, O king, I had one day
requested Vyasa to explain to me this very
suvject. I shall now describe to you what
Vyasa told me on that occasion. Do you
listen to it with rapt attention.


3. Going to Vyasa, I addressed him
saying,—You, O great ascetic, are the
fourth in descent from Vaishishtha! Do
you explain to me this. What are those
circumstances under which one becomes
guilty of Brahmanicide without actually
killing a Brahmana?


4. “lhus addressed by me, the own-
begotten son of Parashara, O king, an
adept in the science of morality, gave me
the following answer at once excellent and
fraught with certainty.


5. You should know that man as guilty
of Brahmanicide who having of his own
accord invited a Brabmana of pious con-
duct to his house for giving him alms then
refuses to give anything on the pretence of
there being uothing in the house.


6. -You should, O Bharata, know that
man as guilty of Brahmanicide who des-
troys the means of living of a Brahmana
well-read in the Vedas, and all their
branches, and who is shorn of attachments
to worldly creatures and goods.


7. You should, O king, know that man
to be guilty of Brahmanicide who puts im-


77


pediments in the way of thirsty kine while
engaged in satisfying that thirst.


8. You should take that man as guilty
of Brahmanicide who, without studying
them, finds fault with the Shrutis that have
come down from preceptor to pupil for
ages and ages together, or with those
scriptures that have been composed by the
Rishis. .

You should know that man as guilty
of Brahmanicide who does nat confer upon
a suitable bridegroom his daughter endued
with beauty and other excellent qualities.


- 10 You should knew that foolish and
sinful wightought to be guilty of Brahinani-
cide who pains the Brahmanas toe the very
core of their hearts.


tr. You should know that man to be
guilty of Brahmanicide who robs the blind,
the lame, and idiots.


12.° You should know that: man to be
guilty of Brahmanicide who sets fire to the
hermitages of ascetics ot to forests or to
a village or a-town. ~


CHAPTER XXV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. tt has been said that sojourns to
sacred waters is full of merit; that ablu-
tions in such waters is meritorious; and
that listening te the excellence of such
waters is also meritorious. I wish to hear
you expatiate on this subject, O grand-
father.


2. You should, O chief of Bharata’s
race, mention to me the sacred waters
existing on this Earth. I wish, O you of
great power, to hear you describe te me
this subject.


Bhishma said :—


2. O you of great splendour, Angiras
thus enumerated the sacred waters on the
Earth. Blessed be yeu, you shoutd listen |
to it, for you will then acquire great merit.


4-5. Once on a time approaching the
great and learned Rishi Angiras gifted with
tranquillity of soul, while he was living in
a forest, Gautama of rigid vows questioned
him, saying,—O illustrious one, I have
some doubts regarding the merits of sacred
waters and shrines. I wish to hear you
describe that subject. Do you, therefore,
O ascetic, describe it to me,


98


TF


MATIABHAR ATA. ©


“6. What merits are acquired by a | brosia for food if one has still go to through |


person reyarding the next world, by bath-
ing in the sacred waters on the Earth, O
you of great wisdom? Do you explain ta
me this truly and according to the ordi-
nance,


Angiras said :—

7. A person by bathing for seven days
successively in the Chandcabhaga or the
Vitasta whose waters are always seen to
dance in waves, fasting all the while, is
sure to become purged of alf his sins and
endued with the merit of an ascetic.


8. ‘There ace many tivers in the Country
called Kashmira. All these fall into the
great river called Sindhu (Indus). By
bathing in these rivers one is sure to
become gifted with good character and


to ascend to heaven after leaving this-


world.


9. By bathing in Pushkara, Prabhasa,
and Naimisha, and the ocean, and Devika,
and Indramarga, and Swarnavindu, one is
sure to ascend where, seated. on.a celestial
car, one is sute be filled with joy on being
worshipped by the Apsatas.


10, By bathing in the waters of Hira-
nyavindu with a concentrated «mind and
respecting that sacred river, and bathing
next-at Kusheshaya and Devanta, one be-
comes purged of all one’s sins.


14. Going to Indratoya near the Moun-
tains of Gandhamadana and next to Karas
toyasin the country called Kuranga, one
should fast for three days and then bathe
in those sacred waters with a concestrated
heart and pure body. By doing this, one
is sure to acquire the merit of a Horse.
sacrifice. - ' : ;

12. Bathing in Gangadwara and {u-
shavatta..and Vilwaka: in the Blue moun-
tains, as also in Kanakhala, one is sure to
become purged of all one’s sins and then
ascend to heaven,


13. If one becomes a Brahmacharin and
control his anger, devotes one-self to truth
and practises mercy towards all creatures,
and then bathes in the Lake of Waters, one
is sure to acquire the mevit of a Horse-.
‘sacrifice.


14. That part where Bhagirathi-Ganga
flows northwards is known as the union of
heaven, Earth, and the nether regions.
Fasting for one month and bathing in
that sacred ‘lirtha which is acceptable
to Maheshwara, one can see the deities,


15. ” One who gives oblations of water to
his departed manes at Saptayanga and
Triganga and Indeamarga, obtains am-


re-birth,


16. The man who in a pure state of
body and mind performs his daily Agni-
hotca and fasts for one month and then
bathes in Mahashrama, is sure to acquire
success in one month.


17. By bathing, after a fastofthree days
and purifying the mind of all evil propens
sities, in the large lake siturte in Bhrigu-
tunga, one becomes purged ot even the sin
of Brahminicide,


18. By bathing in Kanyakupa and per-
forming one’s ablutions in Valaka, one
wins great fame among even the celestials
and shines in glory. .

19. Bathing in Devika and the lake
known by the name of Sundarika as also
in the Tirtha called Ashwini, ‘one acquires,
in next life, great persénal beauty. di

20. By fasting for a fortnight and bath.
ing in Mahaganga and Krittikangaraka,
one becomes purged of all his sins and -


ascends to heaven. :


a1. Bathing in Vaimanika and Kinki-
nika, one acquires the power of yoing
everywiere at will and becomes an object
of great respect in the celestial region of the.
Apsaras.


22. Ifa person, controlling his anger,
and observing the -vow of Brahmacharyya
for three days, bathes in the river Vipasa
at the hermitage called Kalika, he is: sure
to get over re-birth,


23. Bathing in the asylum that is sacred
tothe Krittikas and offering oblations of
water to the departed manes, and then
pleasing Mahadeva, one becomes pure in
body and mind and ascends to heaven,


24. If one, fasting for three days with a
purified bédy and mind, bathes in Maha-
pura, one becomes freed from the fear of.
all mobile and immobile animals as also of
ail two-feeted animals, .


25. By bathing in the Devadaru forest
and offering oblations of water to the de-
parted manes and ‘living there for seven,
nights with’ a pure body and mind, one
acquires the region of the celestials on de-
parting from this wold.


26. Bathing in the waterfalls at Sharas-
tamva and Kushastamva and Dronashar-
mapada, one is sure to acquire the region of
the Apsaras where one is dutifully served
by those super-human beings.


27. If one, fasting bathes’at Chitrakuta
and Janasthana and the waters of Manda-
kini, one is sure to. be gifted with regal
prosperity. :


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


283. Ry going to the retreat of Shyama
aid living there for a fortnight-and bathing
tn the sacred water that lies there, one
acquires the power of disappearing at will.


_ 29. Going to the tirtha Kanshiki and
living there with a pure heart and abstain-
ing from all food and drink for three days,
oue acquires the power of living in the
happy tegion of the Gandharvas.


30. Bathing in the charming tirtha
Gandhataraka - and living there for one
month, abstaining all the while from food
and drink, one acquires the power of dis-
appearing at pleasure and, then in twenty-
one days of ascending to heaven,


31—32. He who bathes in the lake Ma-
tanga is sureto acquire success in one night.
He who bathes in Analamva or the eternal,
Andhaka, or in Naimisha, or the tirtha
called Swarga, and offers oblations of
avater to the departed manes, controfling
his senses all the while, acquires the merit
of a human sacrifice.


33. Bathing in Gangahrada and: the
tirtha Utplavana and daily offering obla-~
tions of water there for-a full month to the
departed manes, one acquires the merit of a
_Horse-sacrifice,


34. Bathing in the confluence of the
Ganga and the Yamuna as also at the
tirtha in the Kalanjara mountains and


offering every day oblations of water to the-


departed manes for a full month, one ac-
quires the merit of ten Horse-sacrifices.


35—36. Bathing in the Shashthi lake
One acquires merit much greater than what
appertains to the gift of food. ‘Yen thou-
‘sand tirthas and thirty millions of other
lirthas come to Prayaga, O chief of Bha-
rata’s race, inthe month of Magha. He
who bathes in Prayaga, with a controlled
mind and observing rigid vows all the while,
the month of Magha, becomes purged of
all his sins, O chief of Bharata’s race,
aud attains to heaven,


37. Bathing in the tirtha that is sacred
to the Maruts, as atso in that which is
Situate in the retreat of the departed manes,
in and also in that which is known by the
name of Vaivaswata, one becomes purged
of all one’s sins and as pitre and sanctified
as a tirtha,


38. Going to Brahmasaras as to the
‘Bhagirathi and bathing there and offer-
ing oblations to the departed manes every
day‘for a full month, abstaining from food
all the while, one is sure to go to the
region of Soma.


39. Bathing in " Utpataka and then in
Ashtavakra and offer'ng oblations of water
to the departed manes eyery day for tve've


79


”


days successively, abstaining all the while


from food, one acquires the merits *of a
Horse- swcriGee.
49. Bathing in’ Ashmaprishtha and


Niravinda mountains and Kraunchapadi,
—all three in Gaya-~one becomes purged
of the sin of Brattmanicide. A bath in the
first place purifies one of a single Brahma-
nicide; a bath in the second cleanses one
of two similar offences; and a bath in the
third cleanses one of three such offences.


41. Bathing in Kalavinga, one getsa
large quantity of water. A man, by bathing
in the city of Agni, acquires such merit as
entitles him to. live at nis next birth in the
city of Agni’s daughter.

42. Bathing in Vishala in Karavirapura
and ~ offering oblations of waters to his
departed manes, and performing his ablu-
tions in Devahrada too, one becomes at one
with Brahma and shines in glory as such,


43. Bathing in Punaravarta-Nanda as
also Mahananda, a man of contfolled
senses and universal mercy poes to the
celestial garden of Nandana and served
there by the various tribes of Apsaras,


44. Bathing with concentrated soul in
the tirtha‘of Urvashi which is situate in the
tives Lohitya, on the day of fill moon of
the ‘month of Kartika, one acquires the
merits of Pundarika sacrifice,


45. Bathing in Ramahrada and offer
ing oblations of water to the departed
manes in the civer Vipasha (Beas), and
fasting for twelve days, ene: becomes purged
of all sins. L


46. Bathing in the tirtha: called Maha-
hrada withla purified heart aad after fasting
fot one month, one is sure to acquire the
status of the sage Jamadagni.


47. By exposing oneself to heat in the
tirtha called Vindhya, a- person given to
truth and endued with compassion for all
creatures should then practise austere
penances, actuated by humility. By sa
doing, he is sure to acquire. ascetic ‘success
in course of a single month,


48. Bzthing in the Narmada as also the
tirtha named Surparaka, fasting for a
full fortnight, one is sure to become in one’s _
next birth a prince of royal blood.


4g. If one proceeds with contrelled senses
and a concentrated soul to the tirtha known
as Jamvumarga, one is sure to acquire
success in the course of a single day and
night. Z


50. By going to Chandalikashrama and
bathing m the tirtha called Kokamukha,
having ‘lived for sometime on potherbs-
alone and wotn tags for raiments one is


80


MAHABHARATA:


sure to get ten beautiful maidens as his! to acquire success sind preceed to tha


wives.


gt. One who lives by the side of the
tictha known by the name of Kanyahrada
has never to visit the regions of Yama.
Such a person is sure to ascend to the re-


gions of happiness belonging to the
celestials,
52. One who bathes with controlled


senses on the day of the new moon in the
lirtha known by the name of Prabhasa, is
sure, O you of mighty arms, of acquiring
success and immortality simultaneously.


53. Bathing In the tirtha known by the
name of Ujjanaka which is situate in the
retreat of Arshtisena’s son, and next in
the tirtha which is situate in the retreat of
Pinga, one is sure to be purged of all
his sins.

54. Fasting for three days and bathing
in the tirtha known as Kulya and reciting
the sacred Mantras of Aghamarshana, one
acquires the merit of a Horsesacrifice.


55. Fasting for one night and bathing
in Pindaraka, one becomes purified on the
next day and acquires the merit of an
Agnishtoma sacrifice,


56. One who goes to Brahmasara which
is adorned by the woods called Dharma-
ranya one becomes purged of all one’s sins
and acquires the merit of the Pundarika
sacrifice.


87. Bathing in the waters of the Mainaka
thountain ahd reciting morning and evening
prayers there and living -at the spot for a
month controlling desire, one acquires the
meérit of all the sacrifices. .


§8. Starting for Kalodaka and Nandi-
kunda and Uttata-manasa, and reaching
a spot that isa hundred Yojanas remote
from any of them, one becomes purged of
the sin of festicide.


$9. One who succeeds in seeing the
image of Nandishwara, becomes purged
of all sins. Bathing in the tirtha called
Swargamarga one ig sure to proceed to
the regions of Brahman.


60. The celebrated Hlimavat ts sacred.
That king of mountains is the father-in-law
of Shankara. He is a mine of all jewels and
gems and is the resort of the Siddhas and
Charanas.


61-62. ‘That twice-born petson who is
as master of the Vedas and who, consider-
ing this life to be exceedingly unstable,
renounces his hody on those mountains;
abstaining from #lt food and drink accord.
ing to the rites laid down in the scriptures,
atter having wershipped the gods and beat
his head in worship of the ascstics, is sure


eternal regions of Brahman.


63. There is nothing which one cannat
get who fives in a tirtha, restraining lust
and controlling anger on account of stich
residence.


64. For the purpose of going to all tha
tirthasin the world, one should mentally
think of those amongst them which are
almost inaccessible or sojonrns to which {are
attended with great difficulties,


63. Sojourns to tirthas yields the merits
of sacrifices. ‘hey are competent to purify
everybody of sin, Fraught-with greatygood,
they are capable of leading tn heaven,
Yhe subject is truly a great mystery. “Fhe
very gods should bathe in tirthas, ‘lo
them also they are sin-purifying.


66. ‘This discourse on tirthas should be
delivered to Brahmanas, and tasuch honest
or pious persons as are bent upon gaining
what is for their own behoof. It should
also be recited in the hearing of one’s
well-wishers and friends and of one’s obes.
dient and devoted disciples.


67. Angiras endued with great ascetic
merit, had delivered this discourse ta
Gautama. Angiras himself had got it
from the the highly intelligent Kashyapa.


68. ‘The great Rishis consider this diss
course as deserving of constant repetition.
It is the foremost of all burifying things. Tf
one recites it regtilarly every day, he is
sure to become purged of every sin and
atter this life to proceed to heaven,


69. One who listetis to this discourse
recited in his hearing,—this discotirse, viz.,
of Angiras, which is regarded as 4
tystery,—sis sure to attain in one’s next
life to birth in a geod family and, what is
more, one would have the memory of the
pristine existence,


CBAPTER XXVI.


*“(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).
Continued,


é .

Vaishampayana said :—~

1—2. Equal: to Vribaspati in intelli-
génce and Brahman himself. in fergiveness,
resembling Shakra in prowess and the Sun
in. energy, Bhishma the son of Ganga, of
infinite might, had been defeated in battle
by Arjuna. Accompanied by his brothers
and maty other people, king Yuchishthira
asked him these questions,


ANUSHASANA PAKVA.


81


8. The old hero was tyiny on a bed; the pious Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu,


coveted by heroes, in expectation of that
sacred moment when he could take leave
of his body. Many great Rishis had come
there for seeing that foremost one of
Bharata’s race.


4-—6. Amongst them were Atri,
Vashishtha, Bhrigu, Pulastya, Puiaha, and
Kratu. There were also Angiras, Gotaina,
Avastya, Sumati of well-resirained soul,
Vishwannitra, Sthulashiras, Samvarta, Pra-
mati and Daina. There were also Vrihas-
pati. Ushanas, Vyasa, Chyavana, Kashyapa,
Dhruva, Durvasas, Jamadagni, Markan-
deya, Galava, Bharadwaja, Raibhya Yava-
krita and Tita.

7. There were Sthulaksha, Shavalaksha,
Kanwa, Medhatithi, Krisha, Narada, Par-
vata, Sudbanwan, Ekata and Dwita.


8. ‘There were also Nitambhu, Bhuvana,
Dhaunsya, Shatananda, Akritavrana, Rama
the son of Jamadagni and Kacha.


g.—10. All these great Rishis came
there for seeing Bhishma lying on his bed
of arrows. , Yudhishthira with his brothers
duly adored those great Rishis who had
come there, one after another in proper
order. Receiving that adoration, those
foremost of Rishis sat themselves down
and began to converse with one another,


11. Their conversation related ‘to
Bhishina, and was highly sweet and agree-
able. Hearing that talk of theirs about
himself, Bhishma became filled with joy
and considered himself to be already in
heaven.


12, Having obtained the leave of
Bhishma and of the Pandava princes, those
Rishis then disappeared before the very
sight of all the behoiders.


13. The Pandavas bowed again and
again and offered their adorations to those
highly-blessed Rishis even after they had-
made themselves invisible.


14. Vhey then cheerfully waited upon
the son of Ganga even as Brahmanas
versed in Mantras wait with respect upon
the rising Sun.


15. The Pandavas saw that the points
_of the compass shining on account of the
energy of their penances, and became filled
with wonder at the spectacle.


16. Thinking of the high blessedness
and power of those Rishis, the Pandava
princes began to discourse on the subject
with theic grandfather Bhishma.


Vaishampayana said :—


17. Alter that conversation was over,
as


touched Bhishina’s feet with his head and
then resuined his questions abuut morality
and virtue.


Yudhishthira said :-—


18. Which countries, which provinces,
which hermitages, which mountains, and
which rivers, O grandlather, are the fore
most in sanctity.


Bhishma said :—


19. Regarding it is cited the old conver-
sation between a Brahmana in the obser-
vance of the Shila and the Unccha vows, O
Yudhishthira, and a Rishi crowned with
ascetic merits,


20—21. Once ona time, a foremost per-
son, having travelled over this entire Earth
adorned with mountains, arrived at last in
the house of a foremost person fiving Slike
a householder in accordance with the Shila
vow. ‘The latter welcomed his guest, with
due rites. Received with such hospitality,


the happy Rishi passed the night happily


in the house of his host.


22. The next morning the Brahmana in
the observance of the Shila vow, having
finished all his morning acts and rites aud
purified himself duly, gladly approached
his guest crowned with ascetic success.


23. Meeting with each other and seated
at theie ease, the two began to take on
agreeable subjects of the Vedas and the
Upanishads.


24. “Towards the conclusion of the dis--
course, the Brahmana ia the observance
of the Shila vow respectfully addressed the
Rishi crowned with success. Gifted with
intelligence, he put this very question which
you, O Yadhishthira have put to me.


The poor Brahmana said :—

25. What are those countries, what are
those provinces, what those hermitayes,
what those mountains, and what thase
rivers, that should be considered as the
foremost in sanctity ? Do you describe this
to me, DAF oh


The Rishi said :—


26. ‘Yhose countries, those provinces,
those retreats, and those mountains,
should be considered :s the foremost ia


sanctity through which or by the side of
which shat foremost of all tivers, v2,
Bhagirathi, flows.


27. The end which acteature can at-
tain by penances, by Brahinacharyya, by
sacrifices, or by practising Renunciation,
one is sure to atiait by only living by the


32


side of the Bhagirathi and bathing in its
sacred waters.


28. These creatures whose bodies have
been sprinkled with the sacred waters of
Bhagirathi or whose bones have been laid
in that sacred stream, have not to fall
away from heaven at any time.


29. Those men, O fearned Brahmana,
who use the waters of Bhagirathi in all
their acts, surely go to heaven after death.


30. Even those men who, having com-
mitted various sinful deeds in the first part
of their lives, Five in after years by the
side of Ganga, succeed in attaining to
a very superior end.


31. Hundreds of sacrifices cannot yield
that merit which men of controlled souls
are capable of acquiring by bathing in the
sacred waters of Ganga.


32. Aperson is respected and adored
in the celestial region for as long a period
as his bones lie in the channel of Ganga.


33- Even as the Sun, when he rises at
the dawn of day, shines, having removed
the darkness of night, likewise the person
who has bathed in the waters of Ganga is
seen to shine, purged of all his sins.


34. The countries and the points ef the
compass which are destitute of the sacred
waters of Ganga are like nights without
the moon or trées without flowers.

35. Indeed, a world without Ganga is
like the different castes and modes of life
when they are shorn of virtue or like sacri-
fices without Soma.

36. Forsooth, countries and points of the


compass which are without Ganga are like
the sky without the Sun, or the Earth with-


out mountains, or the etherial region with- |


out air. .


37. All the creatures in the three worlds,
if served with the sacced waters of Ganga,
derive a pleasure the like of which they
cannot derive from any other source.


38. He who drinks Ganga water which
has been heated by the Sun’s rays, derives
merit much greater than that whieh belongs
to the vow of living upon the wheat or
grains of other corn picked up from cow-
dung.


39. It cannot be said whether, he who
performs a thousand Chandrayana . rites
for purifying his body and he who drinks
the water of Ganga, are equal.


40. Ie cannot be said whether one
who stands for a thousand years on one
foot and one who lives for only a month by
the side of Ganga are equal.


MAHABHARATA.


side of Ganga is superiot in merit to oné
who fives for ten thousand cycles with head
hanging downwards.


42. As cotton, when it comes into con-
tact with fire, is burnt off without a residue,
so the sins of the person that has bathed ir
Ganga become perfectly consumed.


43- There is no end superior to Ganga
for those creatures who, with hearts afflicted
by sorrow, seek to attain to ends which
may remove that sorrow of theirs.


44. As snakes become shorn of thei
poison as soon as they see Garuda, so one
becomes purged of all his sins as soon as he
sees the sacred river Ganga,


45. They who do not “enjoy fame for
virtue and they who are addicted to deeds
of sinfulness, have Ganga for their fame,
their protection, their means of safety, their
refuge or cover.


46. Many wretched men who commit
various sins of a heinous nature, when they
are about to sink: into hell, are rescued by
Gang a in the next world.


47. They, O foremost ‘of intelligent
men, who plunge every day in the sacred
waters of Ganga, become the equals of
great Munis and the very deities headed by
ludea.


48. Those wretched men who are desti-
tute of humility or modesty of behaviour
and who are greatly sinful, become righte-
ous and good, O Brahmana, by living by
the side of Ganga,


49. As ambrosia is to the deities, as
Swadha is to the Pitris, as Sudha is to
the Nagas, so is Ganga-water to human
beings.

50. As children stricken with hunger,
solicit their mothers for food, similarly do
people desirous of their highest good ‘seek
Ganga. :


51. As the region of the self-create
Brahman is said to be the foremost of all
places, so is Ganga said to be foremost of
all rivers for those who desire to bathe.


52. Asthe Barth and the cow are said
to be the chief sustenance of the celestials,
so is Ganga the chief sustenance of all
living creatures.


53. As the celestials support themselves
upon the ambrosia that.is in the Sun and
the Moon and that is offered: in various
sacrifices, so do human - beings* support
themselves upon Ganga-water,


54. One besmeared with the sand taken
from the shores of Ganga considers oneself
as an inhabitant of heaven, adorned with


4t Qne who lives permanently by the | celestial unguents,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


35, He who bears on his head the mud
taken from the banks of Ganga looks
efinigent like the Sun himself bent on
removing the surrounding*darkness, |


56. When the wind which is moistened
with the particles of Ganga-water touches
one’s body, it cleanses him immediately of
every sin.


57. A person afflicted by calamities and
about tosink under their pressures, finds all
his calamities removed by \the joy which
originates in his heart on seeing that sacred
river,


58. By the sweet notes of the swans and
Kokas and other aquatic fowl that play on
her breast, Ganga challenges; the very
Gandharvas and by here high banks the
very mountains on the Earth.


59. Seeing her surface teeming with
swans and various other aquatic fowl, and
having banks adorned with pasture lands
with kine grazing on them, the celestial
region herself loses her pride.


69. The high
enjoys by living on the banks of Ganga,
caa never be his who is living even in the
celestial region,


61. I have no doubt in this that the
person who is afflicted with sins perpetrated
in words and thougkt and act, becomes
cleansed on seeing Ganga.


62. By seeing that sacred river, touch-
ing it, and bathing in its waters, one res-
cues his ancestors to the seventh degree,
and his descendants to the seventh degree,
as also other ancestors and descendants,

63. By hearing of Ganga, by wishing to
go to that river, by drinking its waters, by
touching those waters, and by bathing in
them, a person rescues both his paternal
and maternal families.


64. By seeing, touching, and drinking
the waters of Ganga, or by praising them,
hundreds and thousands of sinful men be-
come purged of all their sins.


happiness which one


65. They who wish to make their birth,
life, and learning, successful, should go to
Ganga and please the departed manes and
the celestials by offering them oblations of
walter, . 3


66. The merit that one acquires b
bathing in Ganga is such that the like of it
is incapable of being acquired through the
acquisition of sons or riches or the per-
formance of meritorious acts,


67. Those who, although physically
able, do not seek to see the sacred Ganga,
are, forsooth, comparable to persons sufler-
ing from congenital blindness or those who


83


are dead or those who are benumbed
through palsy or lameness.


68. What man is there who would not
respect this sacred river that is adored by
great Rishis knowing the Present, the Past,
and the Future, as also by the very gods
headed by Indra ?


69. What man is there who would not
seek the protection of Ganga whose pro-
tection is suught by hermits and house-
holders, by Yatis and Brahmacharins
alike?


qo. The virtuous man with controlled
mind, thinks of Ganga at the time when his
vital airs are about to leave his body, suc-
ceeds in acquiring the highest end.


71. That man who fives by the side of
Ganga upto the time of his death, wor-
shipping her reverentially, becomes freed
from all fear of sin and of kings. ;


72, When that highly sacred river
dropped from the sky, Mahestiwara held it
on his head. It is that very river which is
worshipped in heaven. ;


73. The three regions, are beautiful by
the three courses of this sacred river. The
man who uses the waters of that river be.
comes certainly successful.


74 Asthesolac rayis to the gods in
the celestial region, as the moon is to the
departed manes, as the king is to human
beings, so is Ganga to all rivers.


75. One who becomes bereaved of
mother or fathee or sons or wives or riches
does not feel that grief which one feels
when he becomes bereaved of Ganga.


76. One does not get that joy throught
acts that lead to the region of Brahman, ot
through such sacrifices and rites that lead
to heaven, or through childcen or riches,
which one get from seeing Ganga.


77. ‘The pleasuce that men derive from
seeing Ganga is tantamount to what they
derive from seeing the full moon,


78. That man becomes dear to Ganga
who worship her with deep devotion, with
taind wholly fixed upon her, with a respect
that refuses to take in any other object
within its sphere, with a feeling that there
is_nothing else in the universe worthy of
similar adoration, and with a steadiness
that knows no decrease.


79. Creatures who live on Earth, in the
sky, or in the celestial region,—indeed, even
beings who are very superior,—should
always bathe in Ganga. Indeed, this is the
foremost of all duties of the righteous,


80. The fame of Ganga for sanctity has
spread over the entire universe, since she


34


eatried all the sons of Sagara, who had
been reduced to ashes, from here to the
celestial region.


81. Meén who are washed by the bright,
beautiful, high, and rapidly moving waves,
raised by the wind, of Ganga, become
‘purged of all their sins and resemble in
splendour the Sun with his thousand rays.


82. Those men of tranquil souls who
have renounced their bodies in the waters of
Ganga whose sanctity is as great as that of
the butter and other liqnids poured in sac-
vifices and which are capable of giving
merits equat to those of the greatest of sac-
rifices, have certainly attuined to a station
equal to that of the very gods.


83. Indeed, Ganga, having fame and vast
‘extent and at one with the entire universe
and respected by the deities beaded by
Indra, the Munis, and human beings, is
competent to grant the fruition of all their
wishes to them who are blind, to them who
are jdiots, and to them who are destitute of
all things. .


84, They who seek refuge with Ganga,
that protectress of all the universe, that
flows in three currents, that is filled with
water at oneé highly sacred and sweet as
honey and productive of every sort of good,
have succeeded in acquiring the beatitude
of Heaven,


85, ‘That mortal who live by the side of
Ganga and sees her every day, becomes
purified by her sight and touch. ‘To. him
the gods give every sort of happiness here
and a high end hereafter. .


86. Ganga is regarded as competent to
rescue every creature from sin and lead
him to the happiness of Heaven. She is
held to be at one with Prishni the mother of
Vishnu. She is identical with the Word
sr Speech. She is very remote and can not
be easily attained, She is the embodiment
of auSpiciousness, and prosperity. She is
capable granting the six well-known attri-
butes bepinning with lordship or power.
She is always bent upon showing her grace.
She is the displayer of all things in the
universe, and she is the great resort of all
creatures. ‘Those who seek her protection
in this life have surely acquired heaven,


87. The fame of Ganga has spread all
over the sky, and Eleaven, and Earth, and
all the points, cardinal and subsidiary, of
the compass. By using the waters of that
foremost of rivers, mortal creatures always
become crowned with high success.


88, That person who, himself seeing
Ganga, points her out to others, finds that
Ganga rescues him froat re-birth and cons
fers Liberation on him. Ganga held Guha,
the commander-in-chief of the celestial


MAHABHARATA.


army in her wamb. She bears the most
precious of all metals, vis., gold, also in
that womb of hers. YVhey who bathe in
her waters every day in the morning,
succeed in obtaining the three-fol.l ov-
jects, vis., Virtue and Worldy Profit and
Pleasure. ‘Ihose waters are, again, equal
in point of sametity to the butter that is
poured with Mantras on the sacrifical fire.
Capable of purgmg one from every sin,
she has descended from the celestial regiort
and her current is held in high regard by
every one.


89. Ganga is the daughter of Himavat,
the wife of Hara, and the ornament of both
Heaven and Earth. Sire is the bestower
of everything auspicious, and is competent
to give the sis well-known attributes begin-
ning with tordship or power. Indeed, O
king, Ganga is the one object of great
sanctity in the theee worlds and coufers
merit upon all.


go. Truly, O king, Ganga is Virtue in
liquefied form. She -is energy ina l:quid
form over the Earth. She is gifted with the
splendour or power that belongs to the
butter that is poured with Mantras on the
sacrifical fire. She is always adorned with
large waves as also with Brahmanas who
may at all times be seen making their
ablutions in her waters. Falling from
Heaven, she was held by Shiva on his head.
The very mother of the heavens, she has
originated from the highest mountain for
running over the plains and conferring the
most valuable benefits on all creatures of
the Earth.


gr. She is the highest cause of aff
things; she ts perfectly pure. She is as
subtile as Brahma. She is the hest bed
for the dying. . She takes creatures speedi-
ly to the celestial region. She carries a
large volume of water. She confers great
fame onall, She is the protectress of the
universe. She is at one with every forr,
She is very much coveted by persoms Crown.
ed with success. Indeed, Ganga is the path
to. that celestial region of those who have
bathed in her water,


92. The Brahmanas consider Ganga as
being equal to the Earth in forgiveness,
and in the protection and upholding of
those who live by her ; further, as equalling
Fire and the Sun in energy and splendcur ;
and, lastly, as always equalling Guha him.
self in the matter of showing favours to the
true-born class.


93. Those men who, in this life, even in
their minds seek that sacred river which is .
lauded by the Ristis, which has come out
of the feet of Visthuu, which is very ancient,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.,


and which is highly sacred, succeed in go-
jug to the regions of Brahman.


g4. Fully convinced that children and
other belongings, as also regions possessed
of every kind of happiness, are transitory
or frail, men of subdued souls, who are
desirous of acquiring that everlasting station
which is at one with Brahma, always pay
their adorations to Ganga with that respect


and love which are due from a son toa
mother,
95. The man of purified soul who is


desirous of acquiring success should seek
the protection of Ganga who is like a cow
that gives ambrosia instead of ordinary
milk, who is prosperity’s self, who is en-
dued with omniscience, who exists for all
creatures, who is the source of all sorts of
food, who 1s the mother of all mountains,
who is the refuge of all pious persons, who
is immeasurable in power and energy, and
who charms the heart of Brahman himself.


96. Having, with austere penances,
pleased all the gods with the Supreme Lord
(Vishnu), Bhagiratha brought Ganga down
on the Earth. Going to her, men always
succeed in freeing themselves from every
sort of fear both here and hereafter.


‘g7. Observing with the help of intel-
ligence, 1 have mentioned to you only a
small partion of the merits of Ganga. My
power, however, is inadequate to speak of
all the merits of the sacred river, or, indeed,
to measure her power and sanctity. ;

98 One may, displaying his best powers,
count the stones of the mountain Meru oc
measure the waters of the ocean. But one
cannot count all the merits of the waters of

Ganga.


99. Hence, having listened to these
particular merits of Ganga which I have
uttered with great devotion, one should, in
throught, word, and deed, respect them with
faith and devotion.


300. On account of your having listen-
ed to those merits which { have recounted,
you are sure to fill all the three regions
with fame and acquire a measure of
success that is very large and that is diffi-
cult of being won by any other person. In-
déed, you will, soon after that, sport in joy
in manv a region of great happiness creat-
ed by Ganga herself for those that respect

er. :


tot, Ganga always extends her favour
to those who are devoted to her in humble-
ness of “heart. She unites those who are so
devoted to her with every kind of happiness.
I pray that the highly-blessed Ganga may
always inspire your heart and mine with
the attributes of virtue,


85


Bhishma said :—

~ yo2. The learned ascetic gifted witlr
high soul and great slendour, and crowned
with success, having in this manner des-
cribed to that poor Brahmana observing
the Shila vow, on the subject of the infinite
merits of Ganga, then ascended the sky.


103, The poor Brahmana_ observing
the Shila vow, awakened by the words of
that ascetic crowned with success, duly
sought refuge with Ganga and acquired
great success,


104, Do thou also, O son of Kunti, seele
Ganga with great devotion, for you will
then, as the reward thereof, acquire great
and excellent success,


Vaishampayana said :—

105. Hearing this discourse from Bhishma
of the praise of Ganga, Yudhishthira
with his brothers became filled with great
Joy.

106.. That person: who recites or hears
recited this sacred topic of the praise of
Ganga. becomes purged of every sin,


CHAPTER XXVIII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. You, O grandfather, are endued with
wisdom and knowledge of the scriptures,
with conduct and behaviour, with various
kinds of excellent attributes, and also with
years,


2. You are superior to others in intel-
ligence, wisdom and penances. 1 shall,
therefore, O you the foremost of all rightee
ous men, wish to ask you questions about
virtue.


3-4. There is not another man, O king,
in all the worlds, whois worthier of being
accosted on such topics. © best of kings,
how may one, if he happens to be a
Kshatriya or a Vaishya or a Shudra,
succeed in acquiring the dignity of a Brah-
mana ? You should tell me the means. Is
it by the most austere penances or by
religious acts, or by knowledge of the
Scriptures, that a person belonging to any
of the three inferior castes succeeds~in ac«
quiring the dignity of a Brahmana? Do
tell me this, O grandfather.


Bhishma said :—


5. . The dignity of a Brahmana, O Yu-
dhishthira, cannot .be acquired by a person


86


belonging to any of the three other castes.
That dignity is the highest with respect ta
all creatures.


6, Passing through numberless orders
of existence by undergoing repeated births,
one at last, in some birth, becomes boru as
a Brahmana.


7. Regarding it is cited an old history,
O {Vudhishthira, of a conversation between
Matanga and a she-ass.


8. Once on a time a Brahmana obtain-
ed a son who, though procerated by a
pérson belonging to a different caste, had,
however, the rites of infancy and youth
performed according to the ordinances laid
down for Brahmanas. The child passed
by the name of Matanga and was endued
with every accomplishment.


9. His father, wishing to celebrate a sac-
rifice, ordered him, O destroyer of enemies,
to collect the articles required for the, act.
Having received the command of his father,
he started for the purpose, riding on a
quick-coursing ¢ar, dcawn by an ass.

to. It so happened that the ass yoked to
that car was very young. Instead, there-
foce of being reined, the animal bore away
the car near its dam, viz., the she-ass that
had brought itforth. Matanga, dissatis-
fied with this, began to strike the animal
with his goad on its nose,


11. Seeing those marks of violence on
her child’s nose, the she-ass, full of | affec-
tion for him, said,—Do not grieve, O child,
for this treatment! A Chandala is driving


you,
12. There is no harshness jin a Brahe
mana. ‘The Brahmana is said to be the


He is the teacher
Can


friend of all creatures.
also of all creatures and their ruler.
he punish any creature so cruelly,


- 13. This fellow, however, is of sinful
deeds, He has no mercy to show to even_
such a young creature. He is simply
proving the order of his birth by behaving
thus, The nature which he has derived
from his father forbids the growth of the
sentiments of pity and kindness which are
natural to the Brahmana,


14. Hearing these harsh words of the
she-ass, Matanga speedily came down from
the car and addressing the she-ass, said,—
Teil me, O blessed dame, by what fault is
my mother stained ? .


15. How do you know that I am a
. Chandala? Do you answer me forthwith.


16. How, indeed, do you know that I
am a Chandala? How have | lost the dig-


nity of a Brahman? O you of great wisdom


MAHABHARATA,


tell me all this fully, from beginniug to
end.


The she-ass said :—


17. You were begotten upon a Brahe -
mana woman worked up with desire, by a
Shudra following the calling of a barber,
You are, therefore, a Chandala by birth.
You have not the dignity of a Brahmana.


Bhishma said :—

18—19. Thus addressed by the she-ass
Matanga returned: home. Seeing him
return, his father said,—{ had engaged you
in the difficult task of gathering the requi- °
sites of my intended sacrifice! Why have
you returned without having accomplished
your charge? Is it that you are not all
cight ?


Matanga said :—

20. How can he who belongs to no deft-
nite order of birth, or to low caste be re-
garded as all right and happy? How, O
father, can that person be happy whose
mother is impure.


2t. O father, this she-ass, who seems to
be more than a human being, tells me that
have been begotten upon a Brahman
woman by a Shudra. I shall, for this
reason, practise the severest penances.


22. Having said these words to his
father, and firmly resolved upon what he
had said, he wentto the great forest and
began to practise the austerest of penances.


-


23. Beginning those penances for the
purpose of happily acquiring the dignity of
a Brahmana, Matanga began to scorch
the very gods by the severity of his asce-
ticism,

24. The king of the celestials, vzs.,
Indra, appeared to him thus practising pen-
ances and said,—Why, O Matanga, do you
pass youre time in such grief, abstaining
from all sorts of human enjoyments.

25. I shall give you boons. Do you
name the boons. Do not delay, but tell
me what is in your mind. Even if it be
unattainable, I shall yet bestow it on you.


Matanga said :—
26. Desirous of acquiring the dignity of
a Brahmana I have begun to practise these


penances. ‘After having obtained it, I
shall go home.. Even this is the boon f
pray for. ;


Bhishma said :—

27. Hearing these words of his, Puran- _
dara said to him,——The dignity of a Brah-
mana, O Matanga, which you wish to
acquire, cannot be won by you, |


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


38. Itis true, you wish to acquire it, but
then it cannot be won by persons of impure
souls.. O you. of foolish understanding,
you are sure to rtieet with destruction fF you
persist in this pursuit. Desist, theréfore,
from this vain attempt forthwith.


29. This object of your desire, vis., the
dignity of a Brahmana, which is the fores
most of everything, cannot be eVeli acquired
by penances. Therefore, by coveting that
foremost dignity, you will surely meet with
destruction,


30. One born asa Chandala can never.
acquire that dignity which is considered as
the most sacred among the celestials and
Asucas and human beings.


_ CHAPTER XXVIII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
‘ Continued,


Bhishma said :—


t. Thus addressed by Indra, Matanga.
of restrained vows and well-controfled
soul, stood for a century of years on one
foot, O you of unfading glory.


2. Highly illustrious Shakra once more
appeared before him and addressing him,
said,—The dignity of.a Brahmana, O child,
is unattainable. Although you covet it, it
is impossible for you to obtain it.


3. O Matanga, by coveting that very
great dignity you are sure to meet with
destruction. Do not, O son, betray such
rashness. This is not arighteous path for
you to follow,


4. O you of foolish understanding, it is
impossible for you to obtain it in this world,
Verily, by coveting that which is unattain-
able, you are sure to meet with destruction
forthwith,


5. 1 am_ repeatedly forbidding you.
By trying, however, to attain that high
dignity by the help of your penances,
despite my repeated admonitions, you are
sure to meet with destruction.


6. From a brute life one gains the status
of humanity. lf born as a human being,
che is sure to be born as a Pukkasha or a
Chandala.


7. Verily, one having taken birth in
that ‘sinful caste, v7s., Pukkasha, one, O
Matanga, has to wander in it for a very
long time,


87


8. Passing a “period of one thousand
years in that order, one is next born as a
Shadra. In the Shudra order, again, one
las to wander for a long tite.


9. After thirty thousand years one is
born as a Vaishya. ‘here, in that order,
one has to pass a very long tinie.


to. After a time that is sixty times
longer than what has been stated asthe
period of Shudra birth, one becomes a
Kshatriya. In the Kshatriya order one has
to pass a very long time.


11. After a time that is measured by
multiplying the period last referred to by
sixty, one is. born as a fallen Brahmana,
In this order one has to wander for a long
period,


12. After a time measured by multi-
plying the period fast named by two
huadred, one is born in the race of such a
Beahmana as lives by the profession of
arms. ‘There, in that order, one has to
wander for a long period.


13. After atime measured by multiply~
ing the period last named by three hun-
dred, one is born in the race of a Brah-
mana that is given to the recitation of the
Gayatri and other sacred Mantras,


14. There, in that order, one has to
wander for a Song period. After atime
tMeastired by multiplying the period last
named by four hundred, one is born in the
tace of such a Brahmana who knows the
entire Vedas and the seriptures. ‘Ihere,
in Chat order, one has to wander for a very
long period. ,


15. While wandering in that existence,
joy and grief, desire and hatred, vanity
and evil speech, seek to enter into him and
make a wretch of him.


16. If he succeeds in subjugating those
foes, he then acquires a high end. If, on
the other hand, those enemies succeed in
subjugating him, he falls down from that
high position like a person falling down on
the ground from the high top of a palmyra
tree,


17. Knowing this fot certain, O
Matanga, that 1 say to you, do you rame
some other boon, for the status of a Bra-
bmana is incapable of being acquired by
you,


88


CHAPTER XXIX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma gaid :—

1. Thus addressed by Indra, Matanga
refused to hear what he was commanded.
On the other hand, with regulated vows
and purified soul, he practised austerer
penances by standing on one foot for a
thousand years, being deeply engaged in
Yoga-meditation,


2. After a thousand years kad passed
away, Shakra once more came to see him.
Indeed, the destroyer of Vala and Vritra
said to him the same words.


Matanga said :—


3. Lhave passed these thousand years,
standing on one foot, with soul engaged
in meditation, and in the observance of
the vow of celibacy, Why is it that I
have not yet succeeded in acquiring the
dignity of a Brahmana ?


Shakra said :—~ et ed


4~5- One born as a Chandala cannot,
by any means, acquire the dignity of a
Brahmana. Do you, therefore, name some
other boon so that all this labour of yours
may not prove futile! ‘hus addressed by
the king of the celestials, Matanga became
filied with grief. He went to Gaya, and
passed there a century of years, standing
all the while on one foot.


6. On account of the observance of such
Yoga which was extremely difficult to bear,
he pecame very much emaciated and his
atteries and veins became swollen and
visible. tHe was reduced to only skin and
bones. We have heard that that righteous
person, while practising thase austerities
at Gaya, dropped down on the ground
from sheer exhaustion,


gz. Seeing him falling down, the lord and
giver of boens, engaged in the bethoof of
all creatures, vis, Vasava, speedily came
to that spot and held him fast.


Shakra said :-—
8. It seems,“O Matanga, that the dig-


nity of a Brahmana which you seek is
ill-suited to you. ‘That dignity is incapable
of being acquired by you. Indeed, in your
case, it is beset with many dangers.


g. A person by adoring a Brahmana
acquires happiness; while, by abstaining
from such worship, he gets grief and
misery, The Brahmana is, as regards all
creatures, the giver of what they prize or


MAHABHARATA.


' covet and the protector of what they als
ready have.


to. It is through the Brahmanas that
the departed manes and the deities become
pleased. Vhe Brahmana, QO Matanga, is
said to be the foremost of all created Beings.
The Brahmana grants all objects which
are desired and in the way they are desired.


11. Passing through numberless orders
of Being and undergoing repeated re-births,
one succeeds in some subsequent birth in
acquiting the dignity of a Brahmana.


‘12. That dignity is realty incapable of
being obtained by persons of impure souls,
Ido you, therefore, relinquish the idea’
Do you name some other boon. ‘The parti«
cular boon which you seek is incapable of
being granted to you.


Matanga said :—

13- Stricken as 1 am with grief, why,
O Shakra, do you afflict me further? You
are striking one that is already dead, by
this conduct. [| do not pity vou who
having acquired the diguity of a Brabmana
fail to retain it.


14. -lf, O you of a hundred sacrifices,
the dignity of a Brahmana be teally une
attainable by any of the three other castes,
alas, men do not adhere to it who have
succeeded in acquiring that high status ?


15. Those who having won the dignity
of a Brahmana that, like wealth, is so diffi-
cult to acquire, do not seek to keep it up,
must be considered asthe most wretched
in this world. Indeed, they ace the most
sinful of all creatures.


16. Forsooth, the dignity of a Brah-
mana is highly difficult ‘to attain, and
being attained, is difficult ‘to maintain.
it is capable of removing every sort of
grief. Alas, having got it, men do not
always seek to-keep it up,


17. When even such persons are consi-
dered as Brahmanas, why .is it that 1, who
am pleased with my own self, who am
superior to all pairs of opposites, who am
dissociated from all worldly objects, who
am observant of the duty of mercy towards
all creatures and of self-control of conduce,
should not -be considered worthy of that
dignity ?


18. How unfortunate { am, O Purandara,
that through the sin of my mother I have
been reduced to this plight, although 1 am
not unrighteous in my conduct ?


39. Forsooth. Destiny is incapable of
being warded off or conquered by individual
exertion, since, O lord, 1 am unable to
acquire, despite these persistent atiempts


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


of mine, the object for [the acquisition of
which I am trying.

20. When such is the case, O righteous
one, you should grant me some other boon
if, indeed, 1 have become worthy of your
favour or if I have a little of merit }


Bhishma said :—

21, The destroyer of Vala and Vritra
then said to him,—Do you name the boon!
Thus urged by the great Indea, Matanga
said the following words :+


Matanga said :—


22. Gifted with the power of assuming
any form at will, let me be able to journey
through}'the skies and let me enjoy what-
ever pleasures 1 may wish for. And let
me also have the willing worship of both
Brahmanas and Kshatriyas. '


23. I bow to, you by bending my head,
O god! You should do that also by
which my fame, O Purandra, may live
eternally in the world !_


Shakra said :—


24. You will be celebrated as the -deity
of a particular measure of verse and you
will get the worship of all women. Your
fame, O son, shall become peerless in the
three worlds, :


25.- Having granted him these boons,
Vasava disappeared there and then. Ma-
tanga also, renouncing his life-breaths, ac-
quired a high place.

26. You may thus see, O Bharata, that
the dignity of a Brahmana is very high.
That dignity is incapable of being acquired
here as said by the great Indra himself.

. \


CHAPTER XXX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued. ©


Yudhishthira said:i—

1. Ihave heard this great description,
© perpetuater of Kuru’s race. You, O
foremost of eloquent men, have said that
the dignity of a Brahmana is greatly diffi-
cult of acquisition,

2. Itis heard, however, that in former
times the dignity of a Brahmana had been
acquired by Vishwamitra. You, however,
O best of men, tell us that that dignity is
incapable of being won. ;


3. 1 have also heard that formerly
king Vitahavya had succeeded in acquiring


3


89


the dignity of a Brahmana. O powerful
one, I wish to hear, O son of Ganga, the
story of king Vitahavya’s promotion.

4. By what acts did that best of kings
succeed in acquiring the dignity of a Brah-


-| mana? Wasit through some boon or was


it through the virtue of penances? You
shauld tell me everything.


Bhishma said:— ©

53. Hear, O king, how the highly illuse
trious royal sage Vitahavya succeeded fore.
merly in acquiring the dignity of a Brah-
mana that is so difficult to attain and
Hel held in such high esteem by all the -
world.


6. While the great Manu in days
yore was employed in ruling righteously his
subjects, he obtained a son of righteots
soul who become celebrated under the name-
of Sharyati. ~


9. in Sharyati’s family, O monarch, two
kings were bora,.vzz., Haihaya and Tala-
jangha.. Both of them weresons of Vatsa,
O foremost of victorious kings.


8. Haihaya, O monarch, bad ten wives. -
Upon them he begat, O Bharata, hundred
sons all of whom were heroes who never
returned from the battle-field.


g. Ail of them resembled one another in
features and prowess. All of them were
gifted with great strength and all of them
were possessed of great skill in battle.
They all studied the Vedas and the science
of weapons thoroughly,


to. In Kashi also, GO monarch, there
was a king who was the grandfather of
Divodasa. The foremost of victorious
men, he passed by the name fof Haryya-
shway :


11. The sons of king Haihaya, O chief
of men, invaded the kingdom of Kashi, and
advancing to the country that lies between
the rivers Ganga and Yamuna, fought a
battle with king Haryyashwa and killed him
in it. i

12, ‘Having ‘kilied king Haryyashwa
thus, the sons of Haihaya, those great car~
warriors, fearlessly returned to their own
charming city in the country of the
Vatsas,


13. Meanwhile Haryyashwa’s son Sus
deva, who looked like a celestial in splen. |
dour and who was a second god of virtue,
was installed on the throne of Kashi as its
king. fe A

34. The delighter of Kashi, the righte-
ous-souled. prince ruled his kingdom for,
some time when the hundred sons of Viti-
havya once more attacked his tecritories
and defeated him in battle,


go


15. Having defeated king Sudeva thus,
the victors returned to their. own city.
After this, Divodasa, the son of Sudeva,
became installed on the throne of Kashi as
its king.

16. Understanding the prowess of those
great princes, vis., the sons of Vitihavya,
king Divodasa, gifted with great energy,
rebuilt and fotified the city of Baranasi at
the command of Indra.


17—18. ‘The territories of Divodasa were
full of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas
and Shudras. And they teemed with all
sorts of articles and provisions, and were
adorned with prosperous shops and marts.
‘Those territories, O best of kings, extended
northwards from the banks of Ganga to
the southern Banks of Gomati, and re-
sembled a second Amaravati (the city of
Indra).


19. The Haihayas once again, O Bha-
rata, attacked that foremost of kings as he
ruled his kingdom. °


20. The powerful king Divodasa gifted
with great splendour, issuing out of his
capital, gave them battle. The engage-
ment between the two parties terrible like


the encounter in days of old between the


celestials and the Asuras.


21. King Divodasa fought the enemy
for a thousand days at the end of which,
having lost a large number of followers and
animals, he became greatly distressed.


22. King Divodasa, O king, having fost
his army and seeing his treasury exhausted,
left his capital and fled away.


23. Going to the charming hermitage of

the wise Bharadwaja, the king, O chastiser

“of foes, joining his hands in cespeet, sought
the Rishi’s protection,


24—25. Seeing king Divodasa before
him, the eldest som of Vrihaspati, vzs ,
Bharadwaja of excellent conduct, who was
the monarch’s priest, said to him,—-What is
the reason of your coming here? Tell me
everything, O king! 1 shall do that which
is agreeable to you, without any scruple.


The king said :—

26. O holy one, the sons of Vitahavya
have killed all the children and men of my
house. I only have escaped with life,
totally discomfited by the enemy. I seek
refuge with you.


27. You should, O holy one, protect
me with such affection as you have fora
disciple! hose princes of sinful deeds
have killed my whole family, leaving myself
only alive.


MATIABHARATA.


Bhishma said :—

28. Bharadwaja of great energy said to
him who pleaded so piteously—Do not
fear! Do not fear! O son of Sudeva, let
your fears be gone.


gg. I shall perform a_ sacrifice, O
monarch, in order that you may have a son
through whom you will be able to smite
thousands upon thousands of Vitabavya’s
party.

3. After this, the Risht performed a
sacrifice with the object of bestowing a sow
on Divodasa. As the resnit thereof, to
Divodasa was born a son named Pratards
dana.


t. As soon as he was born, he grew
into a child of full three and ten years, and
quickly mastered the entire Vedas and the
whole science of arms.


32. Helped by his Yoga powers, the
highly intelhgent Bharadwaja had entered
into the prince. tndeed, collecting all the
energy of the objects of the universe,
Bharadwaja caused it to enter the body of
ptince Pratarddana.

33 Casing his person in shining mait
and armed with the bow, Pratarddana, tis
praises lauded by bards and the celestial
Rishis, shone resplendent like the Sun,


34. Mounted on his car and with the
scimitar tied to his belt, he shone like a
burning fire. With scimitat and shield and
whirling his shield, as he went, he proceed-
ed to the presence of his father. .


35. Seeing the prince, the son of Sudeva,
viz., king Divodasa, become filled with joy.
Indeed, the old king thought the sons of
his enemy Vitahavya as already killed.


.36. Divodasa then installed his son
Pratarddana as the heir-apparent, and
considering himself crowned with success
became highly happy.

37. After this, the otd king commanded
that chastiser of foes,-vig., prince Pradard-
dana, to march against the sons of Vita-
havya and kill them in battle.


38. Gifted with great prowess, Pratard-
dana, that subjugator of hostile cities,
speedily crossed Ganga on his car and
proceeded against the city of the Vita-
havyas.


39 Hearing the ctatter of the wheels of ”
his ear, the sons of Vitahavya, riding ow
theie own cars that looked like fortified
citadels and that were capable of destroy-
ing hastile vehicles, issued out of their city.


40. Coming out of their capital, those
foremost of men., vigs., the sons of Vita-


havya, who were all skilful warriors cased


ANLSHASAN 1 PARKVA,


Fn mail, rushed with uplifted weapons to-
wards Pratarddana, covering him with
showers of arrows.


4t. Surrounding him with numberless
cars, O YVudhishthira, the Vitahavyas
poured upon Pratarddana_ showers of
weapons of various sorts like the clouds
pouring torrents of rain on the breast of
Himavat,


42. Baffling thetr weapons with his
own, prince Pratarddana gifted with great
energy killed them all with arrows that
resembled the thunder-boit of Indra.


43. Their heads cut off, O king, with
hundreds and thousands of broad-headed
arrows, the warriors of Vitahavya dropped
down with biood-dyed bodies like Kinshuka
trees felled on every side by woodmen with
their axes,


44. After all his warriors and sons had
been killed in battle, king Vitahavya fled
away from his capital to the hermitage of
Bhrigu.

45. indeed, arrived there, the
fugitive sought refuge with Bhrigu. The
Rishi Bhrigu, Q monarch, assured the
defeated king of his protection.


46—47. Pratarddana followed in the
footsteps of Vitahavya. Arrived at the
Rishi’s hermitage, the son of Divodasa
said in a loud veice, Ho, listen, ye disciples
of the great Bhrigu that may happen to
be present! 1 wish to see the sage. Go
and inform him of this.


48. Knowing that it was Pratarddana
who had come, the Rishi Bhrigu himself
came out of his hermitage and adored that
‘best of kings according to due rites.


royal


49. Addressing him -then, the Rishi-


said,—Tell me, O king, what is your busi-
mess! The king, at this, informed the
Rishi of the reason of his arrival.


The king said :—

50. King Vitahavya has come here, O
Brahmana! Do you surrender him. His
sons, QO Brahmana, had destroyed my
family. ©

51. They had devastated the territories
and the wealth of the Kashis. hose
hundred sons, however, of this king proud
of his power, have ali been kiiled by me.


§2.—55- By killing that king himself I
shall to-day satisfy the debt 1 owe to my
father [—To him that foremost of righteous
men, vis., the Rishi Bhrigu, stricken with
mercy, replied by saying,—There is no
Kshatriya in this hermitage. They who
are here, are aff Brahmanas !—Hearing
these words of Bhrigu, that must, he


gt


thought, be consonant with truth, Pratard-
dana touched the Rishi's feet slowly aud,
filled with joy, said,— By this, O holy one, Tt
am, forsooth crowned with success, since
this king becomes divested of the vety
order of his birth on account of my
prowess ! Give me your permission, O
Brahmana, to leave you, and let me _ solicit
you to pray for my well-being.


56-57. This king, O founder of the
family that goes by your name, becomes
divested of the very order of his birth, on
account of my might! Dismissed by the
Rishi Bhrigu, king Pratarddana then left
that hermitage, and went te the place he
had come from, having, in the way I have
described, vomited forth the poison of
speech even as a snake vomits forth its
real poison. Meanwhile, king Vitahavya,
acquired the dignity of a twice-born sage
by virtue of the worth only of Bhrigu.


58. And he acquired also a complete
mastery of all the Vedas through the same
cause. Vitahavya had a son named
Gritsamada who in beauty of person was a
second ladra.


59—~60. Once on a time the’ Daityas
afflicted him much, taking him for, none
else than Indra, With regard to that great
Rishi, thece is this foremost of Sheutis in the
Richs, vis., There where Gritsamada is, O
Brahmana, he is held in high respect by ail
twice-born persons! Gifted with great
intelligence, Gritsamada became a twice-
born Rishi in the observance of Brahma-
charyya.


61. Gritsamada had a regenerate son
of the name of Sutejas. Sutejas had a
son of the name of Varchas, and the son
of Varchas was known by the name of
Vihavya.


62. Vihavya had a own-begotten son
who was named Vitatya, and Vitatya had
a son of name Satya. Satya hada son of
name Santa.


63. Santa had a son, wis., the Rishi
Shravas. Shravas begot a son named
lama. Tama begot a son named Prakasha
who was a very great Brahmana.


64. Prakasha had a son named Vagindra
who was the foremost of all silent reciters
of. sacred Mantras. Vagindra begot a son
named Pramati who was a perfect master
of all the Vedas and their auxiliaries.
Pramati begot upon the Apsara Ghiritachi
ason who was named Ruru. ;


65. Ruru begot a son upon his wife
Pramadvara. ‘That son was the regenerate
Rishi Shunaka. Shunaka begot a son wha
is nam ed Shaunaka,


§2


66. It was this, O foremost of. mo«
nacchs, that king Vitahavya, though a
Kshatriya by the order of his birth, ac-
‘quired the dignity of a Brahmana, O
chiet of Kshatriyas, through the grace of
Bhrigu. a


.67, I have also told you the genealogy of
the race that originated from his son Grit-
samada. What else would you ask ?


——ae ———


CHAPTER XXXI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. What men, O chief of Bharata’s
race, are wotthy of homage in the three
worlds?. Tell me this in detail, I am
never satiated with hearing you describe
these topics.


Bhishma said:-
"2. Regarding it is cited the old discourse
between, Narada and Vasudeva,


3-4. Seeing Narada on one occasion
‘adoring many foremost of Brahmanas with
joined hands, Keshava addressed him,
saying,--Wbhom da you worship? Whom
amongst these Brahmanas, O holy one, do
you worship with so great respect? If it
is capable of being heard by me, I wish
then to hear it. Do, O foremost of righte-
ous men, tell me this. ‘


Narada said :—


5. Hear, O Govinda, as to who those
are whom I am adoring, O grinder of
enemies. What other person is there in
ue world who is worthier than you to hear
this ? ' ;


-6, adore them, O powerful one, who
constantly worship Varuna and Vayu and
Aditya, and Prajanya and the deity of Fire
and Sthanu and Skanda and Lakshmi ‘and
Vishnu, and the Brahmanas, and the lord of
speech, and the Moon, and the Waters, and
the Earth, and the goddess Saraswati.


8. O foremost of Vrishni’s race, I
always adore those Brahmanas who are
endued with penances, who are conversant
with the Vedas, who are always given to
Vedic study, and who are possessed of
great worth. ~ :

9. OG powerful one, I bow down' my
head to those persons who are freed from
boastfulness, who perform with an empty
stomach, the rites in honor of the deities,


MAHABHARATA.


who are always contended with what they’
have, and who are giited with forgiveness,


to. J adore them, O Yadava, who are
performers of sacrifices, who are forgiving
in nature, and self-controlled, who are
masters of their own senses, who worship
truth and virtue, and who give away land
and kine to good Brahmanas.


tr. I bow to them, O Yadava, who are
devoted to the observance of penances, who
live in forests, who live upon fruits and roots
who never store anything forthe morrow,
and who perform all the acts and rites laid
down in the scriptures.


12. I bow to them, O Yadava, who feed
and cherish their servants who are always
hospitable to guests, and who eat only the
residue of what is offered to the deities,


13. I worship them who have become
irresistible by studying the Vedas, who are
eloquent in discoursing on the scriptures,
who are observant of the vow of Brahma-
chat yya, and who are always devoted to the
duties of officiating at the sacrifices of others


"| and of teaching disciples.


14. T adore them that ars endued with
mercy towards all creatures, and who study
the ‘Vedas till their backs are heated by the
Sun.


15. I bow to them, O Yadava, who try
to acquire the grace of their preceptors,
who labour in the acquisition of their Vedas,
who are firm in the observance of vows,
who wait, with dutiful obedience, upon their
preceptors and seniors, and who are free
from malice and envy.


16. I bow to them, O Yadava, who are
observant of excellent vows, who practise
silence, who have knowledge of Brahma,
who are firm in truth, who are givers of
libations of clarified butter and oblations
of meat.


17. Tbow to them, O Yadava, ‘who live
upon eleemosynary alms, who are emaciated
for want of adequate food and drink, who
have lived in the houses of their preceptors,
who are averse to and destitute of all enjoy~
ments, and who are poor in Earthly pos-
sessions, ‘ :


18. I bow to them, O Yadava, who have
no affection for things of this Earth, who do |
not quarrel with others, who do not: clothe
themselves, who have no wants, who have
become irresistible through the acquisition of
the Vedas, eloquent in the exposition of
virtue, and that are utterers of Brahma.


19. I bow to them who are given to the
practice of the duty of mercy towards all
Creatures, who are firm in the observance
of truth, who are self-controlled, and who
are peaceful in theic conduct.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


20. Y bow to them, O Vadava, who are
devoted to the worship of gods and
guests, who are observant of the domestic
mede of life, and that follow the practice of
pigeons about collecting their food.


21. .1 always bow to those persons, who
while doing all their works have an eye on
the three-fold objects of life, and who are
obseryant of truth and righteous behaviour.


22. I bow to them, O Keshava, who are
conversant with Brahma, who are gifted
with knowledge of the Vedas, who are at-
tentive to the three-fold objects of life,
who are free from cupidity, and who are
righteous in their behaviour.


23. I bow to them, O Madhava, who
live upon water only, or upon air. alone, or
upon the residue~of the food that is offered
to deities and guests, and who practise ail
sorts of excellent vows,


24. I always adore them who have no
wives, who have wives and the domestic
fire, who are the refuge of the Vedas, and
who are the refuge of all creatures in the
universe. :


25. I always bow to those Rishis, O
Krishna, who are the creators of the
universe, who are the elders of the universe,
who are the eldest members of the race
or the family, who are dispellers of the
darknes of ignorance, and who are the best
of all persons in the universe.


26. For these reasons, do you also, O
scion of Vrishni’s race, adore every day
those twice-born persons of whom I speak.
Worthy as they are of reverent worship,
they will, when adored, confer happiness on
you, O sinless one.


27. Those persons of whom I speak are
always givers of happiness in this world as
well asin the next. Respected by all, they
move about in this world, and, if adored
by you, are sure to grant you happiness.


" 28. They who are hospitable to -all
persons who come to them as guests, and
who are always devoted to Brahmanas and


kine as: also to truth, succeed in crossing |


all calamities and impediments.


29. They who are always devoted to
peacefulness of conduct, as also they who
are shorn of malice and envy, and they who
are always attentive to the study of the
Vedas, succeed in crossing all calamities
and impediments. :


30. They who bow to all the deities,
they who follow one Véda as their refuge,
they who are possessed of faith and are
self-controlted, succeed ia crossing all cala-
mities and impediments, =


93


31. They who adore the foremost of
Brahmanas with reverence and are firm ia
the observance of excellent yows and
practise the virtue of charity, succeed in
crossing all calamities and impediments.


32. They who are engaged in the practice:
of penances, they who are always observant
of the vow of celibacy, and they whose
souls have been purified by penances, suc-
ceed in crossing all calamities and im-
pediments,.


33. The who are devoted to the worship
of the gods and guests and dependants
as also of the departed manes, and they
who eat the residue of the food that is offer-
ed to deities, departed manes, guests and
dependants, succeed in crossing all cala-
mities and impediments. -


34. They who, having lighted the domes-
tic fire, duly keep it burning and adore it
with reverence, and they who have duly
poured libations in Soma-sacrifices, suc-
ceed in crossing all calamities and im-
pediments.


35. They who behave properly towards
their mothers and fathers and preceptors
and other elders even as you, O foremost
of the Vrishnis, do behave, (succeed in
crossing all calamities and impediments !)—
Having said these words, the celestial Rishi
ceased speaking.


Bhishma continued :—

36. For these reasons, do you also, O
son of Kunti, always adore with reverence
the deities, the departed manes, the Brah- .


/ manas, and guests arrived at your palace,


and as the outcome of such conduct you
are sure to acquire a desirable end !


CHAPTER XXXII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. O grandfather, O you of , great
wisdom, O you who are conversant with
all branches of knowledge, I wish to heac
you discourse on topics connected with
duty and Virtue. :

2. Tell me truly, O chief of Bharata’s ~
race, what the merits are of those persons
who grant protection to living creatures, of
the four castes when these pray for pro-
tection. . ; ‘


Bhishma said :— -
:3.- O- Dharma’s son of great wisdom


94


and wide-spread fame, listen to this old
history regarding the great merit of grant-
ing protection to others when protection is
humbly sought.


4. Once on atime, a beautiful pigeon,
pursued by a hawk, dropped down from
the skies and sought the protection of the
highly-blessed king Vrishadarbha.


5. The pure-souled, king beholding the
pixeon take refuge ia his lap from fear,
comforted him, saying,—Be comforted, O
bird! You have no fear!


6. Whence have you taken such great
fright? What and where have you done
it in consequence of which you have lost
your senses in fear and are more dead than
alive? -


gj. Your color, O beautiful bird,
resembles that of a fresh-blown blue lotus.
Your eyes are of the hue of the pomegra-
nate or the Ashoka flower! Do not fear.
I command you, be comforted !


8. When you have sought my protec-
tion, know that ao one will have the courage
to even think of catching you, who have
such a protector to take care of your body.


9. I shall, for your sake, give up to-day
the very kingdom of the Kashis and, if
necessary my life too! Be comforted,
therefore, do no fear, O pigeon.


The hawk said :— ar.


_. 10. This bird has been ordained to
be my food: You should not, O king,
protect him from me! I have pursued this
bird and have got him. Indeed, with great
exertion have I got at him at last.


tr. His flesh and blood and marrow and
fat will be of great good to me, ‘This bird
will be the means of pleasing me greatly.
Do not, O king, place yourself between him
and me in this way.


12. I have been possessed by a terrible
thirst, and hunger is knawing my bowels,
Release the bird and cast him off. I am
unable to bear the pains of hunger any
longer.


13. I pursued him as my prey. See,
his body is bruised and torn by me with
my wings and talons. Look, his breath
has become very weak. You should not,
O king, protect him from me!


14. In the exercise of that power which
properly belongs to you, you are, indeed,
competent to interfere in protecting human
beings when sought to be destroyed by
human beings. But you have no power
ov a sky-ranging bird, stricken with
thirst.


t


MAHABHARATA,


15. Your power may extend over youc
enemies, your servants, your relatives, the
disputes that take place between your
subjects. Indeed, it may extend over every
part of your dominions and over also your .
own senses. Your power, however, does
not extend over the sky.


16. Displaying your prowess over such
enemies as act against your wishes, you
may establish your cule over them, Your
tule, however, does not extend over the
sky-canging birds. Indeed, if you have
been desirous of acquiring merit (by pro-
tecting this pigeon), it is your duty to look
at me also !


Bhishma said :—


17. Hearing these words of the hawk,
the royal sage became stricken with
wonder. Without disregarding these words
of his, the. king, desirous of attending to
his comforts, replied to him, saying the
following words.


‘The king said :—

18. Let a bovine bull or boar or deer or
bufflao be dressed to-day for your sake !
Do you satisfy your hunger on such food
to-day.

19. Never to leave one who has sought
my protection is my firm vow. See, VO bird,
this bird does nat leave my lap !


The hawk said :—


20o--21. I donot, O king, eat the flesh
of the boar or the ox or of any of the
various kinds of fowl. What need have I
of food of this or that kind? My business
is with that food which has been eternally
ordained for beings of my order? Hawks
feed on pigeons,—this is the eternal ordi-
nance,


22. O sinless Ushinara, if you feel such
affection for this pigeon, do you then give
me flesh from yout own body, of weight
equal to that of this pigeon.


The king said :—


23—~25. Great is the favor you show me
to-day by speaking tome thus. Yes, I shaly
do what you bid.—Having said this, that
best of kings, began to cut off his own flesh
and weigh it in a balance against the
pigeon. Meanwhile, in the inner apart-
ments of the palace, the queen, adorned with
jewels and gems, hearing what was taking
place, uttered exclamations of woe and
came out, stricken with grief.


26. On account of those cries of the
ladies as also of the ministers and servants;-
a noise deep as the muttering of the clouds
arose in, the palace. The sky that had


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


been very clear became covered with thick
clouds on all sides,


- 27—28. The Earth began to tremble, as
the consequence of that act of teuth which
the monarch did. Theking began fo cut
off the flesh from his sides, from his arms,
and from his thighs, and quickly fill one of
the scales for weighing it against the pigeon.
For all that, the pigeon continued to weigh
heavier.


29. When at last the king hecame a
skeleton of bones, without any flesh, and
covered with blood, he wished to give up
his whole body and, therefore, ascended
the scale in which he had placed the flesh
that he had previously cut off.


30. At that time, the three worlds,
headed by Indra, came to that spot for
seeing him. Celestial kettleedrums and
various othec drums were struck and played
upon by invisible: beings belonging to the
sky.

3t. King Vrishadarbha was bathed in a
shower of nectar that was poured upon him.
Garlands of celestial flowers, of sweet fra~
prance and touch, were also showered upon
him copiously again and again.


32. The deities and Gandharvas and
Apsaras in large bands began to sing and
dance around him even as they sing and
dance around the Grandfather Brahman.


33. The king then ascended a celestial
car that excelled a mansion made entirely
of gold, that had arches made of gold and
gems, and that was adorned with columns
made of lapis lazuli.


34 Through the merit of his act, the
royal sage Shivi proceeded to eternal
Heaven. Do you also, O Yndhishthira,
act thus towards those who seek your pro-
tection.

35- He who fproteéts those who are
devoted to him, those who are attached to
him from love arid affection, and those who
depend upon him, and who has mercy for
all creatures, succeeds in acquiring great
happiness hereafter.


36. That king who is of righteous con-
duct and who is observant of honesty and
integrity, sueceeds by his acts of sittcerity
in acquiring every valuable reward.


37. The royal sage Shivi, of pure soul
and gifted with great wisdom and unbafiled
prowess, that king of the Kashis, became
celebrated over the three worlds for his vir«
tuous deeds.


38. Anybody who would protect in the
same way a Seeker for protection, would
certainly acquire the same happy end; O
best of the Bharatas.


95


39, He who recites this history of the
royal sage Vrishadarbha ig sure to become
purged of every sin, and the person who
hears this history recited by another is sure
to acquire the same result.


ed


CHAPTER XXXII


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Which act, O grandfather, is the
foremost of all those that have been laid
down for a king? What is that act by
doing which a king succeeds in enjoying
both this world and the next.


_Bhishma said :—


2. Even this, vs., the worship of the
Brahmanas, is the foremost of all those
deeds, O Bharata, which have been laid
down for a king duly installed on the throne,
if, indeed, he is desirous of acquiring great
happiness.


3. Even this is what the foremost of all
kings should do. Know this well, O chief
of Bhatata’s race. Yhe king should always
adore with reverence all righteous Brah«
manas possessed of Vedic learning.


4 Theking should, with bows, sweet
speeches and gifts of ail articles of
enjoyment, adore all Brahmanas endued
with. great learning who may live in his
city or provinces.


5. This is the foremost of all acts laid
down for the king. Indeed, the king
should always keep his eyes fixed on this.
He should protect and cherish these, even
as he protects his owa self or his own
children.


6. The king should adore with greater
reverence those amongst the Brahmanas
who miay be worthy of it. When such mien
ate freed from all anxiety, the whole king-
dom shines in beauty. :


7. Such individuals are worthy of ado-
ration. The king should bow his head to
such individuals. Indeed, they should be
honored, even as one honors his father
and grandfather. - ‘The course of conduct
followed by men, depends upon them as
the existence of all creatures depends upon
Vasava.

8. Having prowess incapable of being
baffled and gifted with great energy, such
men, if enraged, are capable of reducing
the entire kingdom to ashes by only their


96


will, or by acts of incantation, or by other
means.


g. { do not see. anything that can
destroy them. Theie power seems to be
uncontrolled, -being capable of reaching to
the last. end of the universe. When angry,
their looks fall upon men and things like
a burning flame of fire upon a forest.-


10, The most courageous men are struck
with fear at their name. Their virtues and
powers aré extraordinary and immeasur-
able. Some amongst them are like wells
and pits with mouths covered by grass and
creepers, while others resemble the sky
shorn of clouds and darkness,


11. Some amonest them are of dreadful
dispositions. Some are as mild and soft
in disposition as‘cotton. Some amongst
them are very cunning, Some amongst
them are given to the practice of penances.


#2, Some amongst them are employed
in agricultural pursuits. Some amongst
them are engaged in the keep of kine.
Some amongst them live upon eleemosynary
alms. Some amongst them are even
theives. Some amongst them are fond of
creating quarrels and disputes. Same,
again, amongst them are actors and
dancers.


13. Some amongst them are competent
to perform all feats, ordinary and extra-
ordinary. The Brahmanas, O chief of
Bharata's race, are of vatious aspects and
conduct.


14. ‘One should always sing the praises
of the Brahmanas who are conversant with
all duties, who are righteous of conduct,
who are given to various kinds of acts,
and who are seen to derive their sustenance
from various callings.


15. The Brahmanas, O king, who are
highly blessed, are older in respect of
their origin than the departed manes, the,
deities, human beings, the Snakes, and the
Rakshasas,


16. These twice-born persons ate in-
capable of being defeated by the deities or
the departed manes, or the Gandharvas
or the -Rakshasas, or the Asuras or the
Pishachas,


17. The Brahmanas are competent to
make him a god, thatis nota god. ‘They
can, again, divest one who is a deity of
his status as such. He becomes a king,
whom they wish to makeaking. He, on
the other hand, is crushed whom they do
not love or like.


18. Ttell you truly, O king, that those
foolish persons, forsooth, meet with des-
truction who calumniate the Brahmanas
and utter their dispraise.


MAHABHARATA,


19. Expert in praise and dispraise, and
themselves the origin or cause of other
people’s fame and ignominy, the Brah-
manas, O king, always become angry with
those who seek to injure others,


20. That man whom the Brahmanas
praise succeeds in becoming prosperous.
That man who is censured and renounced
by the Brahmanas soon meets with discom«
fiture.


21. It is on account of the absence of
Brahmanas from among them that the
Shakas, the Yavanas, the Kamvojas and
other Kshatriya tribes have become fallen
and degraded into Shudras.


22—23. The Dravidas, the Kalingas,
the Pulindas, the Ushinaras, the Kolisarpas,
the Mahishakas, and other Kshatriyas,
have, on account of the absence of Brah-«
manas from among their midst, become
degraded into Shudras. Defeat from them
is preferable to victory, O foremost of vic-
torious persons,


+


24. One killing all other living creatures
in this world does not commit a sin so
heinous as that of killing a single Brah-
mana. The great Rishis have said that
Brahmanicide is a heinous sin.


25. One should never utter the dispraise
or calumny of the Brahmanas. Where
the dispraise of Brahmanas is uttered, one
should sit with face hanging down or leave
that place.


26. That man has not as yet been born
in this world or will not take birth here


‘who has been or will be able to’pass his


life happily after quarreling with the
Brahmanas,

27. One cannot seize the wind with his
hands. One cannot touch the moon with
his hand. One cannot support the Earth
on his arms. Similarly, O king, oneis not
able to defeat the Brahmanas in this .
world.


CHAPTER XXXIV.


(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said:— —

1. One should always offer the most
respectful adoration to the Brahmanas.
They have Soma for their king, and they
it is who confer happiness and misery upon
others,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


a. They, O king, should always be
cherished and protected as one cherishes
and protects his own father and grand-
father, and should be adored with bows and
gifts of food and ornaments and other
articles of enjoyment as also with such
things as they may wish for. The peace and
happiness of the kingdom originate from
such respect shown to the Brahmanas even
as the peace and happiness of all living
creatures come from Vasava the king of
the géds..


3. Let Brahmanas of pure conduct and
Brahma-effulgence be born in a kingdom.
Kshatriyas also who are splendid car-
warriors and that are capable of defeating
all enemies, should be desired.


4. This was said to me by Narada.
There is nothing higher, O king, than this,
wig, the act of making a Brahmana of

- good birth, having a knowledge 6f morality
and righteousness, and steadfast in the
observance of excellent vows, live in his


mansion. Such an act yields every sort of
blessing.
5. The’ sacrificial offerings given to


Brahmanas reach the very gods who ac-
ceptthem., Bratmanas are the fathers of
all creatures. There is nothing higher
than a Brahmana,


6. The Sun, the Moon, the Wind,
the Water, the Earth, the Sky, and the
points of che compass, all enter the body
of the Brahmana and take what the Brah-
mana eats,


7. In that house where Brahmanas do
not eat, the departed manes refuse to eat.


8. The gods also never eat in the
house of the wretch who hates the Brah-
manas. When the Brahmanas are pleased,
the departed manes are also pleased.


9. The deities also become pleased
when the Brahmanas are pleased. There is
no doubt in this. They who give away
the sacrificial Havito the Brahmanas be-
come themselves pleased.


to—1t1, Such men never meet with
destruction. indeed, they § succeed. in
acquiring great ends. Those particular
offerings in sacrifices with which one
pleases the Brahmanas, go to please both
the departed manes and the deities. The
Brahmana is the cause’ of that Sacrifice
whence all créated things have originated.


12. The Brahamana is acquainted with
that from which this univetse has origi-
nated and to. which, when apparently
destroyed, it returns. Indeed, the Brah-
mana knows the path that leads to the
celestiat region, and the otber path which
leads to the opposite place.


13


97


13. The Brahmana is conversant with
that which has taken place and that which
will take place. ‘he Brahmana is the fore-
most of all two-legged beings. The
Brahmana, O chief of the Wharatas, is
fully conversant with those duties which
have been laid down for his order.


14. Those persons who follow the
Brahmanas are never defeated. ‘They never
meet with destruction even after death.
Indeed, victory is always theirs.


15. Those great persons,—indeed, those
persons who have subdued their souls,—
who accept the words that fall from the
lips of the Brahmanas, are never defeated.
Victory always becomes theirs.


16. The energy and power of those
Kshatriyas who scorch everything with
their energy and might, when they en-
counter the Brahmanas, becoine neu-
tralised.


17. The Bhrigus conquered the Tala-
janghas. ‘The sons of Angiras conquered
the Nipas. Bharadwaja conquered the -
Vitahavyas as also the Ailas, O chief of
Bharata’s race.


18. Although all these Kshatriyas were
capable of using various arms, yet the
Brahmanas named, owning only black deer
skins for ‘their emblems, succeeded in con-
quering them effectually. Bestowing the
Earth upon the Brahmanas and _ illuminat-
ing both the worlds byj{the brilliance of such
an act, one should accomplish acts through
which one may suceed in acquiring the end
of all things.


19. Like fire concealed within wood,
everything that is said or heard or read in
this world, lies in the Brahmana.


20. Regarding it is cited the old history
of the conversation between Vasudeva and_
the Earth, O chief of Bharata’s race. .


Vasudeva said:— ~


2t. O mother, of all creatures, O auspi-
cious goddess, I wish to ask you for a solu-
tion of this doubt of mine! By what act
does a man living like a house-holder suc-
ceed in cleansing ail his sins?


The Earth said :—


22. One should serve the Brahmanas.
This ‘conduct is purifying and excellent.
All the impurities are destroyed of that
man who serves the Brahmanas with
respect. :


23. From this (conduct), arises prosperity.
From this arises fame, From this originates:
intelligence or knowledge of. the soul. ,A
Kshatriya, by this conduct, becomes a


“98


powerful car-warrior and a destroyer of
foes and succeeds in winning great fame.


24. Even this is what Narada said to
me, vis., that one should always respect a
Brabmana that is well born, of rigid vows,
and conversant with the scriptures, if one
wishés every Kind of prosperity.


25. That man really grows in presperity
who is praised by the Brahmanas who are
higher than those who are regarded supe-
rior to all men high or low.

26. That man who speaks ill of the
Brahmanas soon meets with discomfiture,
even as a clod of unbaked earth, meets
with destruction when thrown into the
sea. ; .


27. Similarly, all acts that are hurtful to
the Brabmanas are sure to bring about dis-
comfiture and ruin. Look at the dark spots
on the Moon and the salt waters of the
ocean, ;


28. .The great Indra had at one time
been marked all over with a thousand sex-
marks. It was through the power of the
Brahmanas that those marks were meta-
morphosed into as many eyes.


29. See, O Madhava, how all these
things took place. Desiring fame and
prosperity and various regions of beatitude
in the next world, a person of pure conduct
and soul should, O destroyer of Madhu,
live in obedience to the dictates of the
Brahmanas. :


-Bhishma said :—-


30. Hearing those words of the goddess
Bacth, the destroyer of Madhu,’ O you of
Kuru’s race, said,—Excellent, Excellent !—
and honoured the goddess in due form,


gt. Having heard this discourse between
the goddess Earth and Madhava, do you,
O son of Pritha, always, with rapt soul,
adore all superior Brahmanas. Doing this,
you will surely ebtain what is higtly bene-
ficial tor you.


CHAPTER XXXV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).— -
Continued,


Bhishma said :—

t. O blessed king, a Brahmana, by birth
alone, becomes an object of worship with
all creatures and entitled, aS guests, to eat
the first portion of all cooked food.


2. From them come all the great objects
ef life. They are the friends of all crea-
ures in the universe, They are again the


MAHABHARATA.


mouths of alf the gods (far food poured inte
their mouths is eaten by the deities).
Adored with respect, they wish us prosperity
by attering words fraught with auspicis
ousness,


.3. Disregarded by our enemies, let them
be engaged with these, and let them
wish evil to those detractors of theirs, ims
precating them with severe curses.


4. About it, persons conversant with
ancient history repeat the following verses
sung of old respecting how in ancient times
the Creator, after having created thé
Brahmanas, laid down their duties,


5. A Brahmana should never do any-
thing else than what has been laid down fot
him. Protected, they should protect others,
By acting thus, they are sure to acquire
what is for their behoof.


6. By doing those acts that are laid
down for therm, they are sure to acquire
Brahma prosperity, WYeshall become the
exemplars of all creatures, and reins for
controlling them.


7. &A Brahmana endued with learning
should never do that which is laid down for
the Shudras. By doing such acts, a Bralr-
mana loses his merit. : e

8. By Vedic study he is sure to acquire
prosperity, intelligence, energy and power
competent to scorch all things, as also glory
of the most superior kind.


9g. By offering oblations of clarified


‘| butter to the deities, the Brahmanas ac-


quire high blessedness, become worthy of
taking the precedence of even children in
the matter of all kinds of cooked food, and
gifted with Brahma- prosperity.


ro, Endued with faith that is fraught
with mercy towards all creatures, and
devoted to self-control and the study of the
Vedas, you shall acquire the fruition of all
your desires, :

at. Whatever things exist in the world
of men, whatever things exist in the region
of the celestials, can all be achieved and


j acquired with the help of penances and


knowledge and the observance of vaws and
restraints.


1z, I have thus recited to you, O sinless
one, the verses that were sung by Brae
mana himself. Gifted with supreme intelli-
gence and wisdom, the Creator himself
ordained this, through mercy for the Brah«
manas. >


13. The power of those amongst them
who are devoted to penances is equal to the
power of kings. They are, indeed, irresisti«
ble, fierce, fleet like lightning, and exceed-
ingly quick in what they do,’


ANU>HASANA PARVA.


14. There are amongst them those who }


are possessed of the might of lions and those

~who are possessed of the might of tigers.
Some of them are gifted with the might of
boars, some of the deer and some of croco-
diles. :


15. Some there are amongst them whose
touch resembies that of snakes of dreadful
poison, and some whose bite resembles that
of sharks. Some amongst them are cap-
able of bringing about by words only the
Gestruction of those that are opposed to
them ; and some are competent to destroy
by a look only of their eyes.


15. Some amongst them, as already said,
are like snakes of dreadful poison, and some
that are gifted with very mild dispositions.
The dispositions, O Yudhishthira, of the
Brahmanas, are of various kinds.


17. The Mekalas, the Dravidas, the
Lathas, the Paundras, the Knowashiras,
the Shaundikas, the Daradas, the Darvas,
the Chauras, Shavaras, the Varvaras, the
Kiratas, the Yavanas and numerous other
tribes of Kshatriyas, have degenerated into
the status of Shudcas through the anger of
the Brahmanas,


19. On account ‘of their having disre-
garded the Brahmanas, the Asuras have
been obliged to take refuge in thejdepths of
the ocean. Through the favour of the
Brahmanas, the celestials have become
denizens of the happy regions of Heaven.


20, Theelement of other is incapable
of being touched. The Himavat mountains
are incapable of being moved from their
root. The current of Ganga is incapable
of being resisted by a dam. Fhe Brah-
manas are incapable of being governed.


21. Kshatriyas are incapable of ruling
the Earth without securing the good will
of the Brahmanas. The Brahman:s are
great. ‘They are the deities of the very
deities.


22. Do you always adore them with gifts
and obedient services, if, indeed, you desire
to enjoy the sovereignty of the whole Earth
encircled by seas,


23. The energy and .power of Brah-
manas, O sinless one, become abated
by the acceptance of gifts. You should
protect your family, O king, from those
Brahmanas who do not desire to: accept
gifts.


99
CHAPTER XXXVI-


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Bhishma said :— ;

1. Regarding it is cited the old history
of the discourse between Shakra - and
Shamvara. Do you listen to it, O Yudhish«
thira, :


2. Once upon atime Shakra, assuming
the guise of an ascetic with matted locks
on his head and body covered with ashes
all over, rode on an ugly cac and went to
the Asuca Shamvara.


Shakra said :—


3. Through what conduct, O Shamvara,
you have been able to become the head of
your family? Why do all people consider
you as superiors ?. Do you tell me this truly
and fully.


Shamvara said :—


4. I never entertain any ill feelings to-
wards the Brahmanas. Whatever instruc-
tions they give I accept with uuqualified
reverence. When the Brahmanas are en-
gaged in explainiug the scriptures, I listen
to them with great happiness.


5. Having heard their interpretations
[ never disregard them. Nor do [ ever
offend against-the Brahmanas in any way,
1 always adore intelligent Brahmanas. f
always seek information from them. I
always adore their feet.


6. Approaching me with confidence,
they always address me with affection and
enquire atter my well-being. If they ever
happen to be careless, I am always careful.
If they happen to sleep, I always remain
awake,


7. Like bees drenching the cells of the
comb with honey, the Brahmanas, who are
my instructors and rulers, always drench
me with the nectar of knowledge—who am
always devoted to the path pointed out by
the scriptures, who am devoted to the
Brahmanas, and who am perfectly shorn of
malice or evil passion,


8. lLalways accept with cheerful hearts
whatever they say. Helped by memory
and understanding. I am always careful
of my own faith in them and I always think
of my own inferiority to them.


9g. I always lick the nectar that is at the
end of their tongue, and it is for this reason
that I occupy a position far above that of
all others of my family like the Moon tran-
scending all the stars,


10Q"


to. The scriptural interpretations which
fall from the lips of the Brahmanas and
listening to which every wise man acts in
the world, form nectar on Earth and may,
also be likened to most excellent.


1t. Seeing the battle between the celes-
tials and the Asuras in days of old, and un-
derstanding the power of the instructions
that fell from the Brahmanas, my father
became filled with delight and wonder,


12. Seeing the power of great Brah-
manas, my father asked the Moon the
question, —How do the Brahmrnas acquire
success ?


Soma said :—


13. The Brahmanas become crowned
with success by virtue oftheir penances.
‘Yheic strength consists in speech. ‘Ihe
power of Kshatriyas is in their arms, The
Brahmanas, however, have words for theic
weapons,


14.
residence in the house of his preceptor,
the Brahmana should study the Vedas or
at least the Pranava. Freeing himself of
anger and tenouncing earthly attachments,
he should become a Yati, regarding all
things and all creatures wit equal eyes.


15. If remaining in the house of his father
he masters all.the Vedas and acquiring
great knowledge: acquires a: position that
should command cespect, people still con-
demn him as untravelled or home-keeping.


16. Like a snake swallowing mice, the
Earth swallows up these two, vs., a king
that is unwilling to fight anda Brahmana
who is reluctant to leave home for ac-
quiting knowledge.


a é - Si
17. Pride destroys the prosperity of
persons of little wit. A maiden, if she
conceives, becomes stained. A Brahmana
incurs reproach by remaining at home.


18. This is what my father heard from


the revered Soma, My father, on account of-


this, began to adore and respect the Brah-
manas. Like him, I-also worship and
adore all Brahmanas of ‘high vows!


Bhishma said :—


19. Hearing these words that fell from
the mouth of that prince of Danavas, Shakra
began to adore the Brahmanas, and as a
result thereof he succeeded in acquiring the
kingship of the celestials.


Undergoing the discomforts of a.


MANABHARATA.


CHAPTER XXXVIE


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—~


1. Which amongst these three persons,
O grandfather should be regarded as the
best for making gifts, vzg., one who isa
through stranger, or one who is living with
and known to the giver for a long time, or
one who comes to the, giver, from a lung -
distance ?


Bhishma said :-—


2. All these are equal. The fitness of
some consists in their soliciting alms for
celebrating sacrifices or for paying tlie
preceptor’s fee or for maintaining their
wives and children. The fitness of some,
for receiving gifts, consists in their follow-
ing the vow of wandering over the Earth,
never soliciting anything but receiving when
given. We «should also, give to one what
one seeks.


. 3. We should, however,"make'gifts with-
out afflicting those who depend upon us.
This is what we have heard. By afflicting
one’s dependants, one afflicts his own self.


4. The stranger,—one, that is, who has
come for the first time,—should be consi-
dered as a proper object of gilts. He who
is familiar and well-known and has been
living with the giver, should also be consi-
dered in the same light. The learned know
that he too who comes from a distant place
should be considered in an equal light.


Yudhishthira said :—


5. It istrue that we should make’gifts
to others without afflicting any one and
without going against the ordinances of
scriptures. One should, however, correctly
determine who the person is that should be
considered as a proper object for making
gifts. He should be such that the gilt
itself, when made over tobim, may vot
grieve.


Bhishma said :— -
6. If the Ritwij, the Purohita, the
preceptor, the Acharya, the discipte, the
relative (by marriage), and kinsmeh,
happen to be endued with learning and
free from malice, then should they be cons
sidered worthy of respect and adoration.


7. Those persons who do not possess
such qualifications cannot be considered as
wocthy of gifts or hospitality. Hence, one
should with deliberation examine persons

| whom one meets, .


ANUSHASANA PARVA_


8—g. Absence of anger, truthfulness of
speech, abstention from injury, sincerity,
peacefulness of conduct, the absence of
pride, modesty, renunciation, self-control,
and tranquillity or contentment of soul,—he
in whom these are by nature, and in whom
there are no wicked acts, should be consi-
dered as a proper object. Such a person
deserves honors.


to. Whether the person be one who is
well-known and familiar, or one who has
come newly, whether he has or has not
been seen before, if he happens to possess
these qualifications, he should be considered
as woithy of honors and hospitality.


11. He who denies the authority of the
Vedas, or tries to show that the scriptures
should be disregarded, or approves of all
breaches of control in society,—simply
brings about his own ruin,


12—14. That Brahmana who is proud
of his learning, who speaks ill of the
Vedas, or whois given to the science of
useless’ disputation, or who is desirous of
agquiring victory (in disputations) in as-
semblies of good men by disproving
the reasons that exist for morality and
¢eligion and attributing everything to
‘ehance, or who indulges in censuring
and ‘reproaching others or who reproves
Brahmanas, or who is suspicious of all
_ persons, or who is foolish and bereft of
judgment, or who is bitter of speech, should
be known to be as hateful as a dog.


15. As a dog meets others, barking the
while and seeking to bite, such a person is
even so, for be spends his breath in vain
and tries to destroy the authority of all
the scriptures,


16. Those practices that support society,
the duties of virtue, and all those acts
which yield benefit to one’s own self, should
‘be attended to. A person that lives, at-
tending to these, becomes prosperous for
good,


17-18. By satisfying the debt one owes
to the deities by performing sacrifices, that
to the Rishis by stu.'ying the Vedas, that to
the departed manes by procreating children,
that to the Brahmanas by making presents

.to them, and that to guests by feeding
them, in due order, and with purity of
motive, and properly attending: to the
ordinances of the scriptures, a householder
does not fall away from virtue.


-with what nature they are gifted.


CHAPTER XXXVHL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said:—


1. -O.best of the Bharatas, I wish to
hear you describe the disposition of women.
Women are said to be the root of all evil.
‘Yhey are all considered as highly frail.


Bhishma said :—


a. Regarding it is cited the old history
of the discourse between the celestial Rishi
Narada and the (celestial) courtezin
Panchachuda.


3. Once in ancient times, the celestial
Rishi Narada, having roamed over all the
world, met the Apsara Panchachuda of
faululess beauty, having her residence in
the region of Brahman,


4.’ Seeing the Apsara every limb of
whose body was highly beautiful, the
ascetic addressed her, saying,—-O you of
slender waist, I have a doubt in my mind.
Do you explain it !—


Bhishma said:—


5. ‘hus addressed by the Rishi, the
Apsara‘ said to him,—If the subject is oné
which is known to me and if you consider
me competent to speak on it, I shall certain-
ly say what is in my mind. :


Narada said:—

6. O amiable one, I shall not certainly
ask you for any task that is beyond your
power. O youof beautiful face, 1 wish to
hear from you of the disposition of women,


Bhishma said :—


: 9. Hearing these words of the celestial
Rishi, that foremost of Apsaras replied to
him, saying,—I am unable, being myself
a woman, to speak ill of women.


8. You know what women are and
You
should: not, O celestial Rishi, set me to such
atask. + ° ;


9. To her the celestial Rishi said,—It is
very true, O you of slender waist ! One
commits sin by speaking what is untrue.
In saying, however, what is true, there can
be no sin,


to. Thus addressed by him, the Apsara
Panchachuda of sweet smiles consented to
answer Narada’s question. She then ad-
dressed herself to mention what the true
and eternal shortcomings are of women,


Toz


Panchachnda. said :—~


it. Evea if bigh-born and gifted with
beauty and possessed of protectors, women
wish to transgress the restraints assigned
totbem. ‘This fault truly attaches them,
O Narada,


12. There is nothing else that is more
sinful- than women.: Verily, women are
the root of all evils. That is certainly
known to you, O Narada. ;


13. Women, even when having hus-
bands of fame and wealih, of handsome
features and completely obedient to them,
are prepared to disregard them if they get
the opportunity, —


14. This, O powerful one, is a sinful dis-
position with us women, casting off modesty,
we geek the companionship of men of sinful
habits and mtentions.


15. Women show a liking for those men
who court them, who approach theic pre-
sence, and who respectfully serve them. to
even a slight extent.


_-16. Through want of solicitation by
persons of the other sex, or.fear of relatives,
women, who are naturally impatient of ail
control, do not transgress those that have
~ been ordained for them, and remain by the
side of their husbands. ;


17. There is none whom they cannot
admit to their favours. They never con-
sider about the age of the person they are

repared to favour. Ugly or handsome,
if only the person happens to belong to the
Opposite sex, women are ready to enjoy his
companionship.

18, That women remain faithful to their
husbands is due not to their fear of sin,
not to mercy, nor to ciches nor to the affec-

_ tion that originates in their hearts for kins-
men and children.


tg. Women living in the respectable
families envy the condition of those mem-
bers of ther sex who are young and well-
adorned with jewels and gems and that
lead a free tife.

20. Even those women who are loved
by their husbands and treated with great
respect, ate ‘seen to confer their favours
upon mén who are hump-backed, who are
blind, who are idiots, or who are dwarfs,


21. Women may be seen to like the
companionship of even those men who are
inert or those men who are ugly to look at,
O great Rishi, there is no man in this
world whom women may consider as unfit
for companionship.!

22—23. Through inability to obtain per-
sons of the opposite sex, or fear of rela-


all living creatures.


MAHABHARATA.


women cemain, of themselves, under
controt, cae ,

24. They are highly fickle, for they
always hanker after new companions, On
account of their nature being unintelligible,
they are incapable of being kept in obe-
dience by loving treatment. ‘Their nature
is such that ‘they are incapable of being
controlled when- bent upon transgression.
Indeed, women are like the words uttered
by the wise.


25. Fire is never satiated with fuel.
Ocean can never be filled with the waters
that the ecivers bring to him. The Des«
troyer is never satiated with killing even
Likewise, women are
never satiated with men.


26. This, O celestial Rishi, is another
mystery about women. As soon as they
see a man of beautiful and charming
features, unfailing signs of desire appear
on their body.


27. They never show sufficient regard
for even such husbands as satisfy al! their
wishes, as always do what is agreeable to
them, and as protect them from want and
danger. :


28. Women never prize even profuse
articles of enjoyment or ornaments or other.
delightful things,,so much as they du ine
companionship of persons of the oppasite.
SEX. ;

2g. The destroyer, the god of wind,
death, the nether regions, the equine mouth
that roves through the ocean, vomiting
ceaseless flames of fire, the sharpness of
the razor, dreadful poison, the snake and
Fire,—all these exist in a,state of union in
woman.


30. Indeed from that eternal Brahma
whence the five great elements have origi-
nated whence the Creator Brahman hath
ordained the universe, and whence, indeed,
men have sprung, have women sprung into
existence. At that time, again, O Narada,
when women were created, these faults
that I have described were planted in
them. ‘


‘CHAPTER XXXIX,


(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Overcome by the illusion of the divine
Being, all men, O king, in this world,


tives, or fear of death and imprisonment, | are seem to attach themselves lo women.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


2. Likewise, women, too, are seen to
Sttach thernselves to men. All this is seen
taking place everywhere in the world. I
have a doubt on this subject.


3. Why, O delighter of the Kurus, do
men still attach themselves to women
Who, again, are those men with whom
are women highly pleased, and who are
they with whom they are displeased.}


4. You should, O chief of men, explain
to me how men are capable of protecting
women ?


5. While men take pleasure in women
‘and sport with them, women, it seems,
are engaged in imposing upon men. ‘Then,
again, if a man once falls into their
hands, it is difficult for him to escape from
them. Like kine ever liking pastures new,
women like new men one after another.


6. The women have in them the sum-total
of that illusion which the Asura Shamvara
Ciecuetey that illusion which the Asura

amuchi possessed, that illusion which


Vali or Kumbhinasi had.


7. If ‘man laughs, women langh. tf
man weeps, they weep. If the @portunity
requires, they receive the man who is dis-
agreeable to them with sweet words.


8. That science of policy which the pre-
ceptor of the Asuras knew, that science of
policy which the preceptor of the celestials,
vis., Vrihaspati, knew, is not deeper or
more subtile thatt what woman’s intelli-
gence. Indeed, how can women, therefore,
be restrained by men ?

They make a lie appear as truth,
anda truth appear as a lie. They who
tan do this,—I ask, O hero,—how can
ales be governed by persons of the opposite
sex :


_ Yo. It appears to me that Vrihaspati
and other great thinkers, O destroyer of
enemies, evolved the science of Policy from
observation of the understandings of
women. :


tt. Whether treated by men, with res-
pect or with hatred, women are seen, to
turn the heads and agitate the hearts of
men,


12, Living creatures, O you of mighty
arms, are virtuous. Even this is what we
have heard. ‘Treated with love and res-
pect or otherwise, women are seen to de-
_serve’ censure for their conduct towards
men. :


13. This great doubt fills my mind, v73.,
when their conduct is such, what man is
there that can restrain them within the
limits of virtue? Do you explain this to me,
GO highly blessed scion of Kuru’s race.


103


14. You should tell me, O chief of
Kuru’s race, whether women are truly: eap-
able of being governed within the limits
prescribed by the~ scriptures or whether
any one before our time did really succecds
ed in so controlling them.


CHAPTER XL.


~(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued .


Bhishma said :—

1. Itistrue what you say, O you of
mighty arms. ‘There is nothing untrue in
all this {that you say, O you of Kuru’s
race, on the subject of women, O mon-
arch !


2. About it I shall recite to you the old
history ef how in days of yore the great
Vipula had succeeded in restraining women
within the limits laid down for them.


3- I shall also tell you, O king, how
women were created by the Grandfather
Brahman and the object for which they
were created by Him.


4. There is no creature more sinful, O
son, than woman. Woman is a burning
fice. She is the illusion, O king, that the
Daitya Maya created. She is the sharp
edge of the razor. Ste is puison. She is
a snake. She is fire. She is, verily, all
these in a body.


5. We have heard that all human beings
are characterised by righteousness, and
that they, in course of natural progress


and improvement, attain to the dignity
of god. This circumstance alarmed the
celestials, :


6. They, therefore, O chastiser of foes,
assembled together and went to the Grand-
father. Informing Him of what was in
their minds, they steed silent ‘before him
with downcast eyes.


zg. Having learnt what was in the hearts
of thé celestials, the powerful Grandfather
created women with the help of an Athar-
van rite,


8. Ina former creation; O son of Kunti,
women were all virtuous. hose, however,
that sprang from this creation {by Brahman
with the help of an illusion, became sinful.
The Grandfather bestowed upon them the
desire of enjoying all kinds of carnal plea-
sure.


Tempted by the desire of enjoyment;
they began to pursue persons of the othet


104


sex, The powerful lard of the deities
created Anger as the c mpanion of. Lust.


to. Persons of the male sex, yielding to
the power of Lust and Anger, sought the
companionship of women. Women have
no especial acts laid down for them. ‘This
is the ordinance that was laid down.


ti—12. The Shruti declares that women
are gifted with the most powerful senses
thatthey have no scriptures to follow, and
that they are living lies. Beds, seats,
ornaments, food and drink and the
absence of all that is  tespectable
and righteous, indulgence in disagreeable
words, and love of sexual companionship,—
these were bestowed by Brahman. upon
women, Men are quite unable to restrain
them within limits.


13. The Creator himself is incapable
of keeping them within proper limits, what
need then be said of men ?


14. This, O ¢hief of men, I heard in
former days, o7g., how Vipula had suc-
ceeded in protecting his preceptor’s wife
in ancient times.


15. There was in days of yore a hiphly
blessed Rishi of the name of Devasharman
of great fame. He had a wife, of name
Ruchi, who was peerlers on Eacth in
beauty.


16. Her loveliness intoxicated every one
among the celestials and Gandharvas and
Danavas. ‘The chastiser of Paka, visz.,
Indra, the destroyer of, Vriiea, O king, was
in particular enamoured of her and coveted
her body.


17. The great ascetic Devasharman fully
knew the disposition of women. He, there-
fore, to the best of his power. and energy,
protected her. .


18. The Rishi knew that Indra had no
scruples in seeking the companionship of
other people's wives. {t was, therefore, that
he used to protect his wife, putting forth
all his power.


19. Once on a time, O son, the Rishi
became desirous of celebiating a sacrifice.
He began to think of how (during his own
absence from home) his wife could be pro-
tected.


20. Gifted with high ascetic merit, he
at last hit upon the course he should adopt.
Summoning his favourite disciple whose
mame was Vipula and who was of Bhrigu’s
family, he said as follows.


Devasharman said :—


_ at. I shall leave home in order to cele-
brate a sacrifice. ‘Ihe king of the celestials
always covets this Ruchi of mine. Do you,


MAHABHARATA.


during my absence, protect her, displaying
all your power.


22.- You shall pass your time carefully
in view of Purandara. O foremost one of
Bhrigu’s race, that Indra assumes various
forms.


Bhishma said :—

23—24. ‘Thus addressed by his pres
ceptor, the ascetic Vipula, with
restrained, always engaged in severe pe-
nances, possessed of the splendour, O king,
of fire or the sun, conversant with all the
duties of virtue, and ever truthful in speech,
answered him, saying,—So be it !—Once
more, however, as his preceptor was about
to start, Vipula asked him in these words.


Vipula said :—


25. Tell me, O Muni, what forms does
Shakra assume when he comes. Of what
kind is his body and what is his energy ?
You should tell me all this,


Bhishma said :—


26. ‘The illustrious Rishi then truly des-
cribed tofthe great Vipula all the illusions
of Shakra, O Bharata.


Devasharman said :—


27. Yhe powerful chastiser of Paka, O
regenerate Rishi, is full of illusion. Every
moment he assumes those forms that he
chooses. 4


28. Sometimes he wears a dtadem and
holds the thunder-bolt. Sometimes, armed
with the thunder-bolt and wearing a crown
on his head, he adorns himself with ear-
tings. In a moment he changes himself
into the shape and aspect of Chandala.


29. Sometimes he appears with coronal
focks on his head ; soon again, O son, he
shows himself with matted locks, his person
being clad in rags. Sometimes he assumes
a goodly and huge frame. ‘The
moment he changes himself into one of
emaciated limbs, and clad in rags. ~


30. Sometimes he becomes fair, some+
times darkish, sometimes dark, of com-
plexion. Sometimes he becomes ugly and
sometimes beautiful. Sometimes he appears
as young and sometimes as old.


3t. Sometimes he
mana, sometifnes as
times. as a Vaishya, and semetimes as 4
Shudra. Indéed, he of a hundred sacri«
fices appears at times asa person born of
impure caste, that is, as the son of a
superior. father by an inferior mother or of
an inferior father by a superior mother.


32. Sometimes he appears as a parrot
sometimes as a crow, Sometimes as a swan


appears as a Brahe
a Kshatriya, some-


senses"


next .


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


163


‘ahd ‘sométimhes ‘Asa coel. He assumes the { heard by me, is capabie of assuming any


‘forms also of *8 lion, a tigér, dr an elephant,


33. Sometimes he appears as a god»
‘sometimes as a Dditya, and sometime®
‘he assumes the guise of a king. Some-
‘times he appears as fat and plumpr
‘sometimes as one whose limbs have been
‘broken by the disordered wind in the
‘system, sometimes as a bird, and sometimes
as one of an exceedingly ugly form.


34. Sometimes he appears as a quad-
‘ruped. ‘Capable of assuming any torrh,
‘he sometimes appears as an idiot shorn of
alt intelligence. He asgatnes also the forms
‘of flies and gnats.


35. O Vipula, no one can make him out
‘on account of these numberless disguises
‘that he is capable of assuming. The very
‘Creator of ‘the universe is not equal to that
‘feat.


36. He makes himself invisitfie when he
Yikes. He is incapable of being seen except
‘with the eye of knowledge. The ting of
‘the celestidis sometimes changes himself
Ynto the wind.

87. The ‘chastiser sf Paka always
‘assumes these disguises. Do you, there-
fore, O Vipula, ‘protect this slender-waisted
wife of mine ‘with great care.

38. O foremost one of Bhrigu’s race,
‘do you take every care'for seeing that the
‘thing of the -celestjals may ‘not defile this
wife of mine like a wretched dog licking the
Havi'kept in view of a sacrifice.


39. Having said these words, the highly-
‘blessed ascetic, vts., Devasharman, intent
upon celebrating a sacrifice, started ‘from
his abode, © chief of the Bharatas.


40. Uearing these words of this precep-
tor, Vipula began to think,—t all cer-
tainly protect this lady in every respect
from the powerful king of the celestials.


41. But’ what should be the means?
What can [do for protecting the wife of
my preceptor? The king of the celestials
is endued with targe powers of illusion.
Gifted with great energy, he is difficult of
being resisted,


42. Indra cannot be kept out by en-
closing this retreat of ours or fencing this
yard, since he is capable of assuming num-
berless forms. -


43- Assuming the form of the wind, the
king of the celestials may assault the wife of
gy preceptor. The best course, therefore,
for me, would be to enter the body of this
Jady and remain there. ’

44. By displaying my prowess 1 shall
mot be able to protect the lady, for the
powerful chastisec of Paka, it has been


14


form he likes.


45. I shall, therefore, protect this one
‘from Indra. by my Voga-power. For satis-
fying my object I shall with my body enter
the body of this lady. ;


46. ‘lf my preceptor on return, sees bis
wife defiled, he will, forsooth, curse ime
‘through anger, for endued with great
ascetic merit, he is gifted with spiritual
vision,

47. This lady is incapable of being pro-
tected in the way in which other women are -
protected by men, since the king of the
celestialg is gifted with large powers of
illusion, Alas, the situation is very critical,


48. The command of my _ preceptor
should certainly be obeyed by me. If,
therefore, I protect her by my Yoga-power,
the feat will be considered by all as a waon-
derful one. :


49. By my Yoga-power, therefore, I
shall enter the body of my preceptor’s lady.
I shall live within her and yet not touch her
body like a drop of water on a lotus leaf
which ties on it yet does not drench it
at all.


5o—st. If 1 be free from the touch of
‘passion, T-cannot incer any sin by doing
what I wish to do. As a traveller, in
‘course of his sojourn, takes up his quarters
(for a while) in any empty house he finds,
1 shall, similarly live, this day within tha
body of my preceptor’s lady. . Tadeed, with
mind rapt up in Yuga, I shall live to-day in
this lady’s ‘body.

52—53. Giving his best consideration to.
these points of .virtue, thinking of ‘all the
Vedas and their branches, and with eye
directed to the penances which his precep-
tor had and which he himself also was
possessed of, and having settled itr his
mind, with a view only to protect the lady,
to enter her body by Voga-power, Viputa
of Bhripu’s race took great care (for ac-
complishing his object. Listen now to mé,
O king, as 1 recite to you what he did.


34. Gifted with great penances, Vipula
sat himself down by the side of his precep~
tor’s wife as she of faultless features was
sitting in her cottage. Vipula then began
to discourse to her for bringing hec over to
the cause of virtue and truth.


55. Directing his eyes then to bers and
untiing the rays of light that came out
from her organs of vision with those that
issued from his, Vipula entered the lady's
body even ag the element of wind enters
that of ether or space, : ‘


56. Penetrating her eyes with his eyes
and bec face with his face, Vipula lived,


106


without moving, within her invisibly, like
her shadow,

57. Restraining every part of the lady's
body, Vipula continued to live within her,
intent on protecting her from Indra. ‘Fhe
lady herself knew nothing of this.

58. It was in this way, O king, that
Vipula continued to protect the lady till the
time of his great preceptor’s return after

. accomplishing the sacrifice which he had
xone out to perform,


CHAPTER XLL
({ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


. Continued,


Bhishma said :—
1. One day the king of the telestials
‘assuming a form of divine beauty, came
to the hermitage of the Rishi, thinking that
the opportunity he had been expecting had
at last come.


2. Indeed, O king, having assumed a’


 fornt peerlers in beauty and highly tempt-
ing to women and highly agreeable to look
at, Indra entered the ascetic’s asylum.


3. He behetd the body of Vipuia stay-
ing ina sitting’ posture, immovable as a
staké, and with eyes shorn of vision, like a
picture drawn on the canvas.


4 And he beheld also Ruchi, seated
there, adorned with eyes whose ends were
highly beautiful, possessed of ‘full and
round hips, aad having a deep and swell-
ing bosom. Her eyes were large and
expansive like lotus petals and her face
was as beautiful and sweet as the full
moon,


5. Seeing Indra- come in that guise,
the lady wished to tise up and welcome
him. Her wonder having been excited at
the - peerlers beauty of form which the
person possessed, she very much wished
to ask hin as to who he was,


6, Although, however, she wished to
rise up and welcome him, yet her limbs
having been restrained by Vipula who was
living within hec, she failed, O king, to do
what she wished, In fact, she was unabie
to move from the place where she sat.

7. The king of the celestials then ad-
de ssed her in sweet words uttered with a
sweet voice, ‘ 7

3. Indeed, he said,-O you of sweet
smiles, know that I am Indra, arrived here

‘foc your sake! Know, O sweet lady, that
1 am afflicted by the god of love provoked


MATIABIIARATA.


by your thoughts. O you of beautiful
brows, I have come to.you. ‘Time passes
away.


9g. These words that Indra spoke were
heard by the ascetic Vipula. Remaining
within the body of his preceptor’s wife,
he saw everything that took place,


to. The lady of faultless beauty, though
she heard what Indra said, was, however,
unable to rise up for welcoming or honor-
ing the king of the celestials. Her senses
restrained by Vipula, she could make no
reply.


11. Judging from the marks afforded by
the body of bis preceptor’s wife that she
was not reluctant to receive Indra wittr
kindness, that scion of Bhrigu’s race, of
mighty energy restrained her limbs and
senses all the more effectually, O king, by
his Yoga-powers,


12-43. With Yoga-fetters he bound up
all her senses. Seeing her seated without
any mark of agitation on her body, the-
husband of Shachi, abashed a little, once
more addressed that lady who was stupified
by the Yoga-powers of her husband’s dis~-
ciple, in these words,—-Come, come, UO
sweet lady !—Then the lady tried to answer
him. Vipula, however, restrained the words
that she intended to utter,


14. The words, therefore, tha€ actually
dropped from her lips were,—What is the
reason of your coming bere ?— These words
adorned with grammatical refinements,
came out of her mouth that was as beautiful
like the moon.


15. Subject to the influence of another,
she gave Gent to these words, but became
rather ashamed for uttering them, Flear=
ing her, Purandara became highly dis+
spirited, :


16. Observing that awkward result, the
king. of the celestials, O monarch, having a
thousand eyes, saw everything with his
Spiritual eye.

17. He then saw the ascetic living with-
in the body of the lady. Indeed, the asce-
tic remained within the body of his precep- .
tor's wife like an image or reffection on a
mirror,

18. Seeing the ascetic gifted with the
terrible power of pemances, Purandara, O
king, fearing tle Risthi’s curse, trembled in
fear. °


19. Vipula then, gifted with great asce-
tic power, left the body of his preceptor’s
wife and returned to his own body that was
tying near. Then he addressed the terri-
fied Indra in the following words,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


Vipula said :— ;

20. O wicked Purandara, O you of sin-
ful mind, O wretch who have no control
over your senses, neither the deities nor
human beings will worship you for any
fength of time,


2t. Have you forgotten it, O Shakra,—
does it not still dwell in your remem.
brance,—that Gautama had cursed you on
account of which your body became dis-
figured with a thousand sex-marks, which
owing to the Rishi’s mercy, were after-
words changed into so many eyes.


22. I know that you are of an exceed-
ingly foolish understanding, that your soul
is impure and that you are of an exceeding-
ly fickle mind. O fool, know that this lady
is being protected byme, O sinful wretch,
return whence you came,


23. OU you of foolish soul, I do not
reduce you to-day into ashes with my
energy. Indeed, lam filled with mercy for
you, It is for this that I do not, O Vasava,
wish to burn you.

24. .My preceptor gifted with great in-
telliyence, is possessed of terrible power.
With eyes blazing with anger, he would,
if he saw you, have burnt your sinful self
to-day,

25. You should not, O Shakra, do its
like again, The Brahmanas should be
respected by you. See that you do not,
with your sons and counsellors, meet with
destruction, affliceed by the power of the
Brahmanas.


26. You think that you are an immortal
and that, therefore, are at liberty to act
thus. Do not, however, dishonor the
Brahmanas. Know that there is nothing
unattainable by penance.


Bhishma said :—


27. Hearing these words of the great
Vipula, Shakra without saying anything,
‘and covered with shame,. disappeared,


28. A moment after he had gone’ away,
Devasharman of great ascetic merit, having
accomplished the sacrifice he had intended
to perform, returned to his own hermitage.


29. When his preceptor returned, Vi-
pula, who had done a good deed, gave to
him his wife of faultless beauty whom he
had successfully protected against the ma-
chination of Indra. .

30. OF tranquil soul and full of respect
for his preceptor, Vipula respectfully saluted
him and stood before him with a fearless
heart. ;

3t. After his preceptor had rested
awhile and when he was seated with his


107


wife on the same seat, Vipula told him
everything that Shakea had done.


52. Hearing these words of Vipula,
that foremost of Munis, gifted with great
prowess, became highly pleased with hin
for his conduct and desposition, his pens
ances, and his observances. .


33- Observing Vipula’s conduct towards
himself—his preceptor~and his devotion


also, and marking his steadiness in virtue, |


the powerful Devasharman exclaimed,—
Excellent, excellent. .

34. The pious Devasharman - receiving
his virtuous disciple with a sincere welcome,
honored him with a boon,


35. Indeed, Vipula, steady in virtue,


obtained from his preceptor the boon that ~


he would riever swerve or fall away from
virtue. Dismissed by his preceptor he teft
his house and practised the most severe
austerities.


36. Devasharman also, of severe pen-
ances, with his wife, began from that day
to live in those solitary woods, perfectly
fearless of him who had killed Vala and
Vitra, F


CHAPTER XLHIL.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—+
Continued.


Bhishma said :-—

1. Having satisfed his preceptor’s com-
mand, Vipula practised the most severe pen-
ances. Gifted with great energy, he at last
regarded himself as endued with sufficient
ascetic merit.


2. Priding himself upon the feat he had
performed, he wandered fearlessly and con-
tentedly over the Earth, OQ monarch, honor-
ed by all as one possessed of great fame for
what he had done.

3. The powerful Bhargava thought
that he had conquered both the worlds by
that feat of his as also by his severe peu-
ances.


- 4, After sometime, O delighter of the


Kurus, the time came for a ceremony of ©


gifts to take place with respect to the sister
ef Ruchi. Profuse wealth and corn were to
be given away in it.

5. Meanwhile, a certain celestial damsel,
gifted with great beauty, was passing
through the skies.


6. From her body, as she passed through
the sky, some flowers dropped down on the


¥


{OB


5


Eatth. Those flowers. of celestial fragrance
tet on a spot not far from the hermitage of
Jkuchi’s husband,


7. As the flowers lay scattered on the
ground, they were picked up. by Ruchi of
Beautiful eyes. Soon after an invitation.
cate to Ruchi from. the country of the
Angas.


8. The sister, referred to: above, of
Ruchi, named Prabbavati, was the wife of
Chitraratha the king of the Angas.


Rachi, of great beauty, having
attached those ftowers to her hair,. went to.
‘the palace of the king of the Angas to-!
answer the itnvitatiot: she had: received.


to. Seeing those: flowers on- her hair,
the queen of the Angas, having beautiful
eyes,urged her sister to obtain some for
her. :

tt. Ruchi, of beautiful face,- speedily
informed her husband of that reqnest of
her sister, ‘The Rishi accepted. the prayer
of his ‘sister-in-law. |


_f2- Summoning Vipula into his presence,
PDevasharman of severe penances com-
tanded bis disciple to bring him some*
fhowers of the same sort, saying,—Go, go.


13% Accepting unhesitatingly the order
of tis prece, tor, the great ascetic Vipula.
«) king, answered,—-So be it !—and then:
proceeded to that spot whence the lady
Ruehé had: picked up the flowers. that were
wanted by her sister.


1g. Arrived at that place where the
ff »wers had fallen from the sky, Vipula saw
some others still lying scattered, They
were all as fresh as if they had been newly
piuc.ed from the plants. None of them had.
faded away.


15. He took up those exquisitely beauti-
ftil celestial flowers. Possessed of celestial
tragrance, O Bharata, Viputa got them
tere as the result of his severe penances,


16. Fhe accomplisher of his precepter’s
c mmand, having obtained thenr, he felt
reat delight and started quickly for the
city of Champa adorned with festoons of
Champaka flowers,


17, As he went on, he saw on his way
a human couple moving in a circle band it
lend.


18. One of them made a rapid step
and thereby destroyed the cadence of the
movement. Therefore, O king, a dispute-
arose between them.-


19 Indeed, one of them charged the
other, saying,—You have taken a quicker
step !—The other answered,— No.—Indeed,
as each held his own opinion obstinately,


MAMA BHARATA,


each, O king,, asserted wiiat ‘the otfier
denied, and dertied what the other asserted


20,, While thus quarrelling with eacly
other with great assurance, an oath was-
then heard: among them. Endeed, each
of thenr suddenly named Vipula in- what
they uttered.


21. Their oath was- this:—That one
amongst us two who speaks falsely, shall,
in the next world, meet with the end which:
wilt be tlhe twice-born Vipula’s.


22—23. Hearing these words. of theirs,.
Vipula’s face became very sad. He begam
to conmnune with himself,—1 have practised:
severe penances. ‘Phe dispute bet weer: this.
couple is hot. “Fo me, again,.it ts painful..
What sin have bk eommitted that both
these persons should refer to my end in
the next world: as the most painful one:
among those reserved for all creatures ?


24. Thinking thus, Vipula, O- best of
kings, hung down his head, and with a.
dispirited mind began: to recollect what sin
he had done.


25--26: Proceeding a fittle way he saw
six. other men playing with dice made of
gold and silver. Engaged: in play, those
individuals: seemed to him to be so excited:
that the hairs on their bodies stood erect.
They also were heard by Wipula to take
the same oath that he had = already
heard the first couple to take. I'ndeed,.
their words had reference inthe same way
to Vipula.

27. Hie, amongst us who,led by cupi+
dity, will act in an unfair way, shall meet
with that end whieh is reserved for Vipula
in the next world.


28. Hearing these words, however,
Vipula, although he tried earnestly to
recollect, coild not remember any sin of
his from even his earliest years, O you of
Kuru's race.


29: Indeed, he began to burn like a fire
placed in the midst of another fire. Hear«
ing that eurse, his mind burnt with grief.


go. ‘In this state of anxiety a long time
was passed. At last he recolleeted the man-
ner in which he had acted’ in protecting his
preceptor’s wife from: the machinations of
odra.


31. E had entered the beady of that lady,
placing limb within limb, face within face.
Although [| had acted in this way, | did
not yet telh my preceptor the truth,


32. This was the sin, O you of Kuru's
race, which Vipula recollected in himself,
Indeed, O blessed king, forsooth, that wag,
the sin which he had actually committed.


ARUSHASANA PARVA.


43. Coming to the city ef Champa, he
gave the flowers to his preceptor. Devoted
to superiors and seniots, he adored his
preceptor in due form.”


CHAPIER XLUE


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)}—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

Bt. Seeing his disciple retuened from his
mission, Devasharman of great energy
addressed him in words which 8 shall
yecite to you, O king.


Devasharman said :—~


2. What have you seen, O Vipula, in
course of your journey, O disciple, through
the great forest? Then whom you have
seen knew you, O Vipula. 3, as abso my
wife Ruchi, know how you had acted in the
matter of protecting Ruchi.


Vipula said :—

O twice-born Rishi, who are those
two whom I first saw? Who also are those
other six whom | saw afterwards? AH of
them know me. Who, indeed, are they to
whom youprefer in your speech to me 7—


Devasharman said :—

4. ‘The first couple, O twice-bora one,
whom you saw, are Day and Night. Phey
are ceaselessly moving like a circle. Both
cfthem know the sin you have committed.


5. ‘Fhose other men (six in number)
whom, O tearned Brahmana, you saw play-
ing cheerfully at dice, are the six Seasons.
‘Fhey also are acquainted with your sins,


6. Having committed a sin secretly, to
sinful man should cherish the assuring
thought that bis sin is knows only to chim.
self and not to any one else.


q. Wher a man commits a sinful deed
in secret, the Seasons as also Day and
Night see it always.


8. ‘Those regions that are reserved for
the sinful shall be yours. What you had
done, you did not teH me. ‘Fhat your sia
was not known to any one, was your belief,
and this conviction had filled you with joy.


. You did not inform your preceptor of
the whole truth, choosing to hide from him
a substantial portion, The Seasons, and
Day and Night, whom you have heard
speak thus, thought it proper to remind you
of your sin,


‘209


to. Day and Night and the Seasons,
do now all the good and the bad. deeds,
that are in a man,

18, ‘Fhey spoke to you in that way, O
twice-born. one, because they have fulb
knowledge of what you had. done but which
you had not the courage to inform me
of, fearihg you had done wrong.


12. For this reason you. will visit the
regions that are reserved fur the sinful.
You did not tell me what you had dene.


13. Wou were fully ¢apable, O twice
born one, of protecting my wife whose
disposition, by nature, is sinful. in doing
what you did, you did not commit any sim
LE was, for this, pleased with you


14. O best of Brahmanas, if § had
known you to have acted wickedly, 1 would,
without hesitation, bave cursed you en-
tirely. ;

15. Women become united with men,
Such union, is very desirable with men.
You had, however, protected my wife in a
different spirit. Bf you had acted other-
wise, § would have cursed. Even this is
what 5 think. :


16. You had, Oson, protected my wife
§ have known the manner in whiclt you had
done it as if you had yourself informed me
of it. Ihave, O son, become pleased with
you. Relieved of all anxiety, you shall ,o


to heaver,


17. tfaving said these words to Vipula,
the great Rishi Devasharman, ascended to
Heaven with his w fe and his disciple and
began to pass his time there in great happi+
ness,


18. In course of conversation, O king,
on a former occasion, the great ascetic
Markandeya had described to me this
history on the banks of Ganga.

19 §, therefore, recite ip to you.
Wonien should always be protected: by
you. Amongst them both kinds are to be


} seen, that is those who are virtuous and


those who are not so,


20. ‘Fhe virtuous women are highly
blessed. ‘They are the mothers of the uni-
verse. They, it is, O king, that k:-ep up


the Earth with all her waters and forests.


2t. Those women who are sinful, who
are of wicked conduct, who are the des-
troyer of their cace, and who are wedded to
sinful purposes, are capable of being as-
certained by marks, expressive of the evil
that is in them, which appear, O king, on
their persons.


22, He is thus that great persons ara
capable of protecting women. They Cannot,


110


© foremast of kings, be protected in any
other way.


23. Women, O king are fierce. They
are gifted with fierce prowess. ‘They have
none whom they love or like, so much ‘as
them that have sexual intercourse with


them.


24. ‘Women are like those (Atharvan)
Mantrams which destroy life. Even after
they have consented to live with one, they
are prepared to leave him joining others.
‘They ace never satisfied with one person
of the opposite sex, O son of Pandu.


25. Men should not love them. Nor
should they cherish any jealousy on ac-
‘count of them, O king ! Only for the sake
of virtue, men should enjoy their society,
not with enthusiasm and attachment but
with unwillingness and absence of attach-
ment.


26. By acting otherwise, a man is sure
to meét with destruction, O delighter of
the Kurus. O foremost of kings, reason

‘is respected at all times and. under ail
circumstances. ,

27. Only one man, vis., Vipula, bad
succeeded ia protecting woman. . ‘There is
none else, O king, in the three worlds whe
can protect women. :


se


S emaatinedenemdd


CHAPTER XLIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


t, Tell me of that, O grandfather,
which is the root of all duties, which is
the root of kinsmen, of home, of the
departed manes and of guests. :


z. 1 think this should be considered
as the foremost of all duties. Tell me,
however, O king, to what sort of a person
should one give his daughter, ~


3. Having enquired into the conduct
and nature of the person, his learning and
acquirements, his birth, and his acts, good
people should then confer their daughter
upon accomplished bridegrooms.


4. Allrighteous Brahmanas, O Yudhi-
shthira, act thus. ‘This is known as the
Brahma marriage, O Yudhishthira.


5. Selecting a befitting bridegroom, the
father of the girl should make him marry
his daughter, having, by various presents,
induced the bridegroom to that act. This


MATABNARATA.


form of marriage, forms the eternal prac«
tice of all good Kshatriyas.


6. When the father of the girl, without
consulting his own wishes, confers his
daughter upon a’ person whom the
daughter likes and whe reciprocates the
gicl’s sentiments, the form of marriage, O
Yudhishthira, is called Gandharva by-
those versed in the Vedas.


7.. The wise have declared, O king, to
be the practice of the Asuras, uzz., marry-
ing a gicl after buying her at a high cost
and after gratifying the cupidity of her
kinsmen.


8. Killing and chopping off the heads
of weeping kinsmen, the bridegroom some-
times forcibly takes away the girl he
marties. Such marriage, O son, passes by
the name of Rakshasa.


g. . Of these five, (viz., the Brahma, the
Kshatra, the Gandharva, the Asura, and
the Ratshasa), three are righteous, O
Yudhishthira, and two are unrighteous.
The Paishacha and the Asura fortns should,
never be followed.


to. The Brahma, Kshatra, and Gan-
dharva forms are righteous, O prince of
men! Pure or mixed, these forms should
forsooth be followed.


11. The Brahmana can take three
wives. The Kshatriya can take two wives.
‘The Vaishya should take a wife from only
his own caste. ‘The children born of these
wives should all be considered as equal.


12. OF the three wives of &€ Brahmana.
she taken from his own caste should be
considered as the foremost. Likewise, of
the two wives permitted to the Kshatriya,
she taken from his own caste should be
considered as superior, Some say that
persons belonging to the three higher.
castes may take, only for purposes of en-
joyment, wives from the lowest or the Shudra
caste. Others, however, forbid the practice.


13, The righteous condenin the: practice
of begetting children upon Shudra women.
A Brahmana, by begetting children upon
a Shudra women, becomes subject to the
liability of petforming: an expiation,.

14-- A person of thirty years
should marry a girl of ten years
wearing a single piece of cloth. Or, a
person of one and twenty years of age
should marry a girl of seven years of age. |


15. That girl who has no brother nor
father should not be married, O chief of
Bharata’s race, for she may be intended for
giving-birth to the heir of her father,


16. After puberty, it in, the girl (if
not married) should wait for three years.


of age-
of age


ANUSHASANA PARVA


On the fourth year, she should look for a
husband herself.


17. The children of such a girl do not
lose their respectability, nor does union with
such a girl become disgraceful. If, instead
of selecting a husband for herself, she acts
otherwise, she gets the reproach of Praja-
pati herself.


18. One should marry that girl who is
not a Sapinda of his mothet or of the same
family with his father, ‘This is the usage
which Mauu has declared.


Yudhishthira said :—


19. Desirous of marriage some one
actually gives a dower to the girl’s kinsmen ;
some one, the girl’s kinsmen consenting,
promises to give a present} some one says,
—I shall carry away the girl by force ;—
some one simply shows his riches; some
one, again, actually takes the hand of the
girl with rites of marrriage. Lask you, O
grandfather, whose wife does the girl ac-
tually become? You are the eye to those
who wish to know the truth,


Bhishma said :~


2i. ‘The deeds of men approved by the
wise, are seen to yield good. False speech,
however, is always sinful,


22. The girl herself who becomes wife,
the sons born of her, the Ritwijas and pre-
ceptors and disciples and Upadhyayas
present at the marriage all become liable
to expiation if the gil pives hec hand toa
person othec than he whom = she had
promised to marry. Some are of opinion
that no expiation is mecessary for such
conduct. — -


23. Manu does not speak highly of the
practice of a girl living with a perso whom
she does not like. Living as wife with a
person whom she does not like, produces
disgrace and sin. No one commits sin in
any of the following cases.

24. In forcibly carrying away for mare
tlage a gist that is bestowed upon the ab-
ductor by the girl's relatives with due rites,
as also a girl for whom dower has been
paid and accepted, there is no great sin,


25. Upon the girl’s kinsmen having


given their consent, Mantras and Homa.


should be restored to. Such Mantras
truly accomplish their purpose, Mantras
and Homa recited and performed in the
case of a girl who has not been given away
by her kinsmen, do not accomplish their
purpose. 7

26. The engagement made by the rela-
tives of a girl is, no doubt, binding and


rif


sacred. But the engagement that is made
by the bride and bride-groom, with the
help of Mantras, is very much more so.


27. According to the injunctions of the
scriptures, the husband should regard. his
wife as an acquisition due to his own pris-
tine deeds or to what has been ordained
by God. One, therefore, commits no sin
by accepting for wife a girl who had been
promised to another by her kinsmen or fot
whom dower had been accepted by them
from another.


Yudhishthira said :—~


28. When after the receipt of dower for
a gicl, the girl’s father sees a more eligible
bride-groom,—one, who is endued with the
three-fold objects, does the girl’s father
commit sin by rejecting the person from
whora dower had been received in favor of
him who is more eligible ?


29. In such a case either alternative
appears to be sinful, for to discard thé
person to whom the girl has been promised
can never be honorable, while to reject the
person who is more eligible can riever be
good. I ask, how should the father act so
that he might be said to dothat whict is.
beneficial? ‘To us, of all duties this seems
to deserve utmost deliberation.


39. Weare desirous of determining the
truth, You, indeed, are our eyes. Do you
explain this to us. I am never satiated
with listening to you. :


Bhishma said :—

31. The gift of the dower does not maka
the girl wife. This is well-known to the
person paying it. Ile-pays it simply as the
price of the girl. Then again the good
never bestow their’ daughters, induced by
the dowers that others may offer.


32—33. When the person desirous of
marrying happens to be gifted with such
qualities as do not go down with the girl’s
Kinsmen, it is then that kinsmen demand
dower from him. ‘he person, however, who
won over by another’s accomplishments,
says,—Do you marry my girct, adorning her
with proper ornaments of gold and gems,—
and that person who satisfies this request,
cannot be said to demand dower or give it,
for such a transaction is not a sale. The
bestowal of a daughter upon acceptance of
what may properly be considered as gifts is
the eternal practice.


34. In matters of marriage, some fathers
say—lI shall bestow my daughter upon such
and such a person; some say—l shall not
bestow iny daughter uppn such a one.—
Some, again, say forcibly—I must bestow

\ my daughter upon such an individual,


i112


35- These declarations are ‘not tanta-
‘mount to actualmarriage. People are seen
to solicit one ancther for the hands of
‘maidens. Villthe hand is actually ‘taken
with dae ‘rites, marriage does not happen.

e have heard that even this was the boon
granted to men formerly by the Maruts
about maidens.


36. The Rishis have laid the command |


‘upon all men that maidens should never be
bestowed trpon persons unless the father are
‘eligible. The daughter is the root-of desire
‘and of descendants of the collateral tine.
This is what d thing.


3%, ‘The practice of sale and purchase of
the daughter, has been known to human
beings for atong time. On accouet of such


familiarity with the practice, you may be |
‘able, upon careful examination, to find |


innumerable faults in it. The gift or


acceptance of dower alone could not be |


considered as creating the relation of hus-
band and wife. Listen to what I say on
this head,


38. Formerly, having defeated all the
Magadhas, the Kashis, and the {Koshalas,
¥ brought away by ferce two maidens for
Vichitraviryya. .


39. One of those two maidens was
married with dae rites. he other maiden
was not formally married on the
ground that she was one for whom dower
fad been paid in the shape of chivalry
My uncle of Kurn's race, #18, king
Valbika, said that the maiden so brought
away and not married with due rites
should be liberated. That maiden, there-
fore, was recommended to Vichitraviryya


for being married by hin according to-


‘due rites,


40. Doubting my father’s words { went
to others for asking their opinion. |
thought that my father was exceedingly
punctilious in matters of morality.


41. Tthen went to my father himself,
© king, and addressed him these words
from. desire of knowing something about
ithe practices of pious people in respect of
marriage: —! wish, O sire, to know what
in truth the practices are of righteous
people !—t repeatedly expressed my wish.
Such was my eagerness and curiosity, that
1 expressed my desire several times,


42—43. Alter [ had uttered those words
that foremest of pious men, vis., my
father Valhika, answered me, -saying,—
lf in your opinion the relation of -hus-
‘band and wife belongs to the gift and
2cceptance of dower and not to the actual
taking of the maiden’s hand with due
rites, the father of the maiden would show
himself to be the follower af a creed other


MAHABHARATA,


t than that which comes from the ordinary
scriptures. This is what the accepte
Scriptures say.

44. Persons conversant with morality
and duty do fot hold that their words are
at all authoritative who say that the
relation of husband and wife arises from
the gift and acceptancé of dower, and not
from the actual taking of the hand with
due rites.


45. The saying is well known that the
relation of husband and wife is created
by actual bestowal of the danghter by the
father. The relation of wife is not former
through sale and purchase. They who
consider such status to be due to sale and
the gift of dower are persons who aré
certainly unacquainted with the scrip
tures.


46. No one should bestow his daughter
upon such persons. in fact, they are not
men with whom one nmtay marry his
daughter. A wife should never be ‘ptirs
chased, Nor should a father sell his


daughter. -


47. Qnty those sinful persons who are
possessed, besides, by cupidity, and who
sell and purchase femate slaves for making
them servants, consider the relation of
wife as capable of originating from the
gift and acceptance of dower.


48—49. On this subject some people on
one occasion had asked prince Satyavat
the following question s—If the giver of a
dower to the kiasmen of a maiden happens
to die before marriage, can another person
take the hand of that maiden in marriage ?
We have doubts on this matter. Do you
‘remove these doubts of ours for you are
gifted with great wisdom and are honored
by the wise.


$o—5t. Be you the eyes to ourselves
who are desirous of Jearning the truth.~*
Prince Satyavat answered, saying, The
kinsmen of the maiden should bestow her
upon him whom they consider proper,
‘There seed be no scruples in this. The
righteous act thus without caring for
the giver of the dower even ifhe be alive;
while, about the giver who is dead, there
is not the slightest doubt.


52. Some say that the virgin wife ov
widow,—=one, whose, marriage has not
been consummated with her husband by
actual sexual intercourse on account of
his absence or death,—-may be allowed to
unite herself with her nushand’s younger
brother or snch other relation. The hus.
band dying before such consummation,
the virgin-widow may either surrender
herself to her husband’s younger brother
or practise penances. i


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


83. Ln the opinion of some, the younger
brother of the husband or such other rela-
tion may thus use the virgin wife or widow,
though others hold that such practice,
though it is frequent, originates from desire
instead of being a scriptural ordinance.
They who say so are clearly of opinion that
the father of a maiden has the right to
bestow her upon any eligible person, dis-
regarding the dower previously given by
another and accepted by himself.


54. If after the hand of a maiden has


been promised ail the initial rites before


marriage be performed, the maiden may
still be piven to a person other than the one
to whom she had been promised. Only the
giver commits the sin of falsehood ; So far,
however, as the relation of wife is concern-
ed, no injury can occur thereto.


55. The Mantras of marriage accom-
plist their object of bringing about the
indissoluble union of marciage at the
seventh step. The. maiden becomes the
wife of him to whom the gift is actually
made with water.


56. The gift of maidens should be made
in the following way. The wise know it
forsooth. A superior Brahmana should
marry a maiden who is not unwilling, who
belongs to a family equal to his own in
purity or dignity, and who is given away by
her brother. Such a girl should be married
in the presence of fire, with due rites,
’ causing her, amongst other things, to go
round the bridegroom for the usual number
of times.


eee)


CHAPTER XLV...


‘(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. If a person, after having given

_ dower for a maiden, goes away, how should

the maiden's father or other kinsmen who

can bestow her, act? Do tell me this, O
grandiather.?


Bhishma said :—

2. Such a maiden, if. she be the
daughter of a sonless and rich father,
should be maintained by the father. Indeed,
if the father does not returnthe dower to
the kinsmen of the giver, the maiden should
be considered as belonging to the giver of
the dower. :


3. She may even raise children for the
iver by any of those means that are laid
own in the scriptures. No person, how-


113


4. Commanded by her father, the prin-
cess ‘Savitri had in days of old chosen a
husband and united herself with him. This
act of hers is praised by some}; but others,
conversant with the scriptures, condemn i's


8. Others who are righteous have not
acted thus. Others maintain that the con-
duct of the righteous should ever be consi~«
dered as the foremost evidence of duty oc
morality.


6. Upon this subject, Sukeatu, the
grand son of the great Janaka, the king
of the Videhas, has declared the following
opinion.


g. There is the well-known injunction
of the scriptures that women can enjoy
freedom at any period of their life. If this
were not the path of the virtuous, how could
this scriptural saying exist ? As regards the
pious, therefore, how can there be any ques
tion or doubt about it? How ean people
condemn that saying by choosing to cone
duct themselves otherwise ?


8. The impious violation of eternal
practice is considered as the practice of
the Asuras. We never hear of such practice
in the conduct of the ancients.


9. The relationship of husband and
wile is very subtile. It is different from the
natural relationship of male and female
which consists only in the desire for sexual
intercourse. This also was said by the king
of Janaka’s race.


Yudhishthira said :—


to. Under what authority is the property
of men inherited (by others when they
happen to have daughters)? As for her
father the daughter should be considered
the same as the son,


Bhishma said :—


11. The son igeven as one‘s own self,
and the daughter is like the son. How, .
therefore, can another take the riches when ,
one lives in his ownself in the form of his.
daughter ?


12. Whatever is the own property of the.
mother, is due to the maiden daughter. If
the maternal grandfather happens to die ~
without leaving sons, the daughter’s son
should inherit it.


13. The daughter’s son offers funeral -
cakes to his own father and the father of
his mother. Hence, for the ends of justice,
there is no difference between the son and
the daughter’s son.


14, When a petson has got only a
daughter and she has been invested by him
with the positien of a son, if he then hap-.


ever, can marry her according to due rites, \ hens to have a son, such son shares the


5


or


i


ri4


inheritance with the daughter. When,
again, a person has got a daughter and
she has been invested by ‘hin with the
position of a son, if he then happens to
take a son by adoption or purchase, then
the daughter is considered superior to such
son. .


15. In the following case 1 do nat see
any reason why the daughter’s sot should
be considered as the proper heir. ‘Vhe
case is that.of the daughter who has been
sold by her father. ‘he sons born of a
daughter who has been sold by her sire for
actual price, belong exclusively to their
father. Such sons can never belong, even as
daughter’s sons, to their maternal grand-
father on acconnt of his having sold their
smother for price and lost all bis tights i
or to her by that deed. :


16. Such sons, again, become full. of
malice, impious in conduct, the~ misappro-
priators of other peaople’s riches, and full
of deceit and cunning. Having originated
from that sinful form of marriage called
Asura, the offspting becomes wicked in
conduct.

17. Persons acquainted with ancient
history, conversaiit with duties, devoted to
the scriptures and firm in maintaining the
restrictions therein laid down, recite in this
connection some verses sung in days of yore
by Yama,


19. This is what Yama had sung. That
man who acquires tiches.by selling his own
son, or who bestows his daughter - after
accepting a dower for his own livelihood,
has to sink in seven dreadtul hells one after”
wnother, -known: by the’ name of Kalas.
There that wretch has-to, feed
and utine and stools during that period.


20 In that form of marriage which is
called Arsha, the person who marries has
to give’ a bull and a cow and the father of
the maiden accepts the gift. Some charac-
terise this: gift as a dower (or price), while
some are of opinion that it should not be
considered in that light. The trne opinion,
however, is that a gift for sucty a purpose,
be it, of small value’ or large, should, O
king, be considered as dower or price, and
the bestowal of the daughter under such
circumstances should be considered as a
sale,


2t. Despite the fact of its having been
practised by a few persons-it can never be
taken as the eternal practice. Other forms
of marriage are seen, practised by men,
such as marrying. girls after carrying them
away-by force from, amidst theic kiuasmen,


22, hose persons who have sexual in-
tercowse with a inaiden, by force are con-


upon sweat -


MAHABHARATA.


sidered as perpetrators of sin. They have’


tao sink in darkest hell.


' 23. Even a human being who is not a
relation of blood should not be sold. What
need then be said of one’s own child ? With
the riches that is acquired by doing sinful
deeds, no mesitorious deed can be per-
formed,


CHAPIER XLVL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA) —
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. They who kuaow the ancient history
recite the foHowing verse of Daksha the
son of Prachetas, ofs.,—That maiden, for .
whom nothing is taken by her kinsmen tt
the fornr of dower, cannot be said to be
sold.


2. Honor good treatment, and every~
thing else which is agreeable, should all
be given ta the maiden whose hand is
taken in matriage.


; 3. Her father and brothers and father=
in-taw and husband’s brothers should show
her every respect and adorn her with ornas
ments, if they be desirous of reaping bene-
fits, for such conduct on their part always
produces considerable happiness and ade
vantage.


4. Uf the wife does not like her husband


or tails to please him, from such dislike and


absence of joy, the husband can never
have children for increasing his family.


5. Women, O king, should always be
adored and treated with love. There where
women ace treated with honor, the very
gods are said.to be propitiated.

6. There where: women are not adored,
all acts become fruitless. If the women of;
a family, on account of the treatment they
receive, indulye in grief and tears, that
family soon becomes extinct,


9. Those houses which are cursed by
women meet With: desteuction and ruin as
if s¢orched by some Atharvan rite. Such
houses lose their Splendour. ‘Their growth
‘and prosperity cease, O king.


8. Manu, on the eve of his departure
from this world, made over women to the
care and protection of men, saying that
they ate weak, that they fall ain easy prey
to the seduction of men, disposed to accept
the love which is offered thei, and devoted
to truth,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


g. There are others amang them who
are full of matice, covetous of honors,
fierce in nature, unfovable, and impervious
to reason. Women, however, deserve to
be respected. Do ye men show them
honor, :


10. The virtne of men depends tpon
women. All pleasures and  enjoyments
also entirely depend upon them. Do ye
serve them and adore them. Wo ye bend
your wills before them.


tt. The begetting of children, the nur-
sing of children already born, and the ac-
complishment of all deeds necessary for
the needs of society, see, all these have
women for their cause,


12, By respecting women, ye are sure to
acquire the fruition of all objects. Regard-
ing it a princess of the house of Janaka
the king of the Videhas, sang a verse, It
ts this -—

13. Women have no sacrifices ordained
for them. ‘There are so Shraddhas which
they are called upon to perform. They are
not required to oberve any fasts. To serve
their husbands wish respect and. willing
obedience form their ouly duty. Through
the satisfaction of that duty they succeed in
conquering Heaven,

T4.
her. ‘The husband protects her in youth.
When she becomes old, her sons protect
her, At no périod of her life is woman free.


15. Women are deities of prosperity.
The person that desires affluence and
prosperity should honor them. By cherish-
ing women, O Bharata, one cherishes the
goddess of prosperity herself, and by afflict-
thy her, one is said to pain the goddess of
prosperity,


ee


CHAPTER XLVU,


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


x. You know fully well the ordinances
of all the scriptures. You are the foremost
of those who are acquainted with the
duties of kings. Wou are celebrated over
the whole world as a great remover of
doubts,

2, { have a doubt, do you explain it to
me, O grandfather. As regards this doubt
that has originated in my mind, L shall not
ask any other person for its solution.


3. You should, O you of mighty arms,


expound as to how aman should act who


father that a Brahmana


In childhood, the father protects |


a1§


is desirous of treading along the path of
duty and virtue,


4. Tt has been laid down, O grand.
can take four
wives, #/s., one who belongs to his own
caste, one who is a Kshatriya, one who is 4
Vaishya, and one who is a Shudra, if the
Brahutana wishes to satisfy the desire of
sexual intercourse. ;


5. Tell me, O best of the Rurus, which
amongst those sons should ‘inherit the
father’s riches one after Another,


6 Who amongst them, O grandfather
shall take what share of the piternal
wealth?) I wish to hear this, wz¢., how the
distribution tas been ordained amongst
them of the paternal property,


Shishma said :—


zg. VYhe Brahmana, the Kshatriya, and
the Vaishya are considered the three twices
born castes. fo marry in these three castes
has been ordained to be the duty of the
Brahmaua, O Vudhishthica,


8. Throagh erroneous judgment or cupi-
dity or fast, GQ destroyer of enemies, a
Brahmana takes a Snudra wife. He is not
competent to take, according to the scrip-
tures, such wife. 3 :


g. A Brahmana, by knowing a Shudra
woman comes by a tow end in the nexc
world. He shauld, having done such an
act, perform expiation according to the
rites laid down in the scriptures.


to.. That expiation. must be | twice
heavier or severe if on account of such an
act, O Yudhishthira, the Brahmana gets
childrea, 1 shall now tell you, O Bharata,
how the(paternal) ‘wealth is to be distributed.


tt. Phe son born of the Brahmani wife
shall, in the first place, appropriate. from
his father’s wealth a bull of good marks,
and the best car or vehicle.


12, What remains of the Brahmana’s
property, O Yudhishthira, after this, should
be. divided into ten equal parts, he son by
the Brahmani. wife shall take fouc of such
parts of the paternal property. “


13. The son that is‘bora of the Kshae
triya: wife-is,' forsooth, possessed .of the
status of a Brahmana. ‘On account, how-
ever, of the distinction attaching to his
mother, he shall take three of the ten shares
into which the property has been divided.


14, The son who has been Borrof the
wite belonging te the third caste, vig., the
woman of the Vaishya caste, by the Brah-
mana fathér, shall take, O Yudhishthica,
two of the three remaining shares- of the
father’s property, :


116


15. It has been said that the son who
has been begotten by the Brahmana father
upon the Shudra wife should not take any
portion of the father’s property, for he is
not to be considered an heir. A little, how-
ever, of the paternal property should be
given tothe son of the Shudra wife, hence
the one remaining share should be given to
him out of compassion.


16. Even this should be the order of the
ten shares into which the Brahmana’s
wealth is to be distributed. Al! the sons
that are born of the same mother or of
mothers of the same caste, shall share
equally the portion that is theirs,


17. The son born of the Shudra wife
should not be considered as invested with
the dignity of a Beahmana on account of
his being unskilled (in the scriptures and
the duties ordained for the Brahmana).
Only those children who are born of wives
belonging to the three higher castes should
be considered as invested with the dignity
of Brahmanas.


18, It has been said that there are only
four castes and there is no fifth. The son
by the Shudra wife shall take the tenth part

his father’s wealth,


19, That share, however, he is to take
only when his father has given it to him.
He shall not take it if his father does
not give it to him. Some portion of the
fathee’s riches should, forsooth, be given, O
Bharata, to the son of the Shudra wife. -


20, Compassion is one of the greatest
virtues. It is through compassion that
something is given to the son of the Shudra
wife. Whatever be the object about which
compassion arises, as a cardinal virtue it is
always productive of merit.


21. Whether the father happens to have
children (by his wives belonging to the
other castes) or to have no children, to
the son by the Shudra wife, O Bharata,
nothing more than a tenth pact of the
father’s wealth should be given.


22. If a Brahmana happens to have
more riches than what is necessary for
maintaining himself and his family for three
years, he should with that riches celebrate
sactifices. A  Brahmana should never
acquire riches for nothing.


23. The highest sum that!ithe husband
should give the wife is three thousand coins.
This wealth that the husband gives to the
wife, the latter may spend or dispose of as
she likes.


24. Upon the death of the childless hus-
band, the wife shall enjoy alt his riches.
‘The wife should never take any portion of
her husband’s riches,


MAHABHARATA,


23. Whatever riches, O Vudhishtlira,
the Brahmani wife may acquire by gift from
her father, should be taken by her daughter,
for the daughter is like the son.


26. The daughter, O king, has been
ordained in the scriptures to be equal to
the son, O delighter of the Kurus. Thus
has the law of inheritance been ordained, O
foremost of Bharata’s family. Remembers
ing these ordinances about the distribution
and disposal of wealth, one should never
acquire riches uselessly.


Yudhishthira said :—


27. Ifthe son bora of a Shudra woman
by a Brahmana father has been made in
the scriptures to be disentitled to any pro-
perty, by what exception of the rule then is
a tenth part of the paternal property to be
given to him ? ;


28. A son born of a Brahmani wife by a
Brahmana is unquestionably a Brahmana.
One born of a Kshatriya wife or of a
Vaisttya wife, by a Brahmana husband, is
likewise a Brahmana,


29. Why then, O best of kings, are
such sons to share the paternal property
unequally? All of them, you have said,
are Beahmanas, having been born of.
mothers that belong to the three higher
castes equally entitled to the name of the
twice-born. 7 :


Bhishma said :—


30. O destroyer of enemies, all wives in
this worfd are called by the name of Dara.
Although that name is applied to all,
yet there is this great difference tobe
obseryed. 3


3t. Ifhaving married three wives be-
fonging to the three other castes, a Brah-
mana takes a Bralimani wife the very last
of all, yet shall she be considered as the
fiest in rank among all the wives, and as
being worthy of the greatest respect. In-
deed, among all the co-wives, she shall be |
the foremost.


32. Inher apartments should be kept
all necessary articles for the husband’s
baths, personal decorations, washing of
teeth, and application of collyrium to the
eyes. In her apartments should be kept the
Havya and the Kavya and all else that the
husband may need for the performance of
his religious acts.


33. Ifthe Brahmani wife is in the house,
no other wife is entitled to attend to these
needs of the husband. Only the Brahmanj
wife, O Yudhishthira, should help the twus-
band in these acts,


~ ANUSHASANA PARVA.


84. The husband’s food and drink and
ga:lands and dresses and ornaments,—all
these should be given by the Brahmani
wife to the husband, for she is the fore-
most in rank among all the wives of the
husband.


35. These are the .ordinances of the
scriptures as laid down by Manu, O
delighter of the Kurus! This, O king, is
seen to be the course of eternal practice.


36. If a Brahmana, O Yudhishthira,
actuated by lust, acts in a different way, he
shall come to be considered as a Chandala
among Brahmanas.


37. The son born of the Kshatriya wife
has been said to be equal in dignity ta the
son born of the Brahmani wife. For all
that, a distinction attaches to the son of the
Brahmani wife on account of the superiority
of the Brahmana-wife to the Kshatciya wife
in respect of the order of caste.


38. The Kshatriya wife cannot be con-
sidered as equal to the Brahmana wife
in point of birth. Hence, O best of kings,
the son bern of the Brahmani wife must
be considered as the first in rank and
superior to the son born of the Kshatriya
wile.


39. Because, again, the Kshatriya wife,
is not equal in point of birth to the Brah-
mani wite, hence the son of the Brahmani
wife takes, one after another, all the best
things, O Yudhisthira, among his father’s
property.

40. Likewise, the Vaishya wife cannot
be considered as the equal of the Kshatriya
wife in point of birth. Prosperity, kingdom


and treasury, O Yudhisthira, belong to the |


Kshatciyas.


41. Ali these have been ordained for the
Kshatriya. The whole Earth, O king, en-
circled by seas, is seen to belong to him.
By following the duties of his own caste,
the Kshatriya acquires immense riches.


42. The sceptre of royalty is held by
him. Without the Kshatriya, O king,
there can be no protection, {he Brah-
manas are highly blessed, for they are the
gods of the very deities.


43. Following the ordinances laid down
by the Rishis, the Kshatriyas should adore
_the Brahmanas according to. due rites.
This is the eternal usage.


44. Coveted by thieves and others, the
properties of all men are protected by
Kshatciyas following the duties of their
order. Indeed, riches and wives and every
other possession owned by people would
have been forcibly taken away but for this
protection that the Kshatriyas give.


117


45. The Kshatriya, as the king, becomes
the protector or rescuer of all the castes.
Hence, the son of the Kshatriya wife shall,
forsooth, be held to be superior to him that
is born of the Vaishya wife. ‘The son of
Kshatriya wife for this, takes a larger share
of the paternal property than the son of
the Vaishya mother.


Yudhishthira said :—


46. ‘You have duly said what the rules
are that apply to Brahmanas. What, how.
ever, are the rules that apply to the others ?


“Bhishma said :—


47. The Kshatriya, O delighter of the
Kurus can take two wives. ‘The Kshatriya
may take a third wife from the Shudra .
caste. Such practice prevails, it is true, but
it is not sanctioned by the scriptures.


48. ‘This should be the order, O Yudhi-
shthira, of the wives of a Kshatriya. The
property of a Kshatriya should, O king,
be divided into eight shares.


49. Theson of the Kshatriya wife shall
take foue of such shares of the paternal
Property. The son of ;the Vaishya wife
shall take three of such shares.,


50. The remaining one or the eighth
share shall be taken by the son of the
Shudra wife. ‘The son of the Shudca wife,
however, shall take only when the father
gives but not otherwise.


51. The]Vaishya can take only one wife.
He can take a second wife from the Shudra
caste. Such is the practice, no doubt, but it
is not sanctioned by the scriptures,


52. If a Vaishya has two wives one of
whom is a Vaishya and the other a Shudra.
there is a difference between them in res-
pect of position.


53- The riches of a Vaishya, O chief of
Bharata’s race, should be divided into five”
portions. I shall now speak of the sons of
a Vaishya by a wife of his‘ own caste and
by one belonging to the inferior caste, as
also of the manner in which, O king, his
property is to be distributed among those -
children.


5 The son barn of the Vaishya wife —
shall teke four of such shares of his pater
nal property. The fifth share, O Bharata, |
has been said to belong to the son born of ©
the Shudea wife.


55. Such son, however, shall take when
the father gives. He should not take any-
thing unless the father gives it-to him.
The son who is begotten on a Shudra wife
by persons of the three higher castes should

ways be considered as disentitled to any
share of the father’s wealth.


118


56. The Shudra should take only one
wite from his own caste. He can, «ander no
circumstances, take any other wife. Even
if he happens to have a hundred sons by
this wife, all of them share equally the
property that he may leave behitd.


57.’ As for all the castes, the children
born of the wife taken from the husband's
own caste shall, it has been laid down,
share equally the father’s wenltlts


58. he eldest son’s share shall be
greater than that of every other son, for he
shall take one share more than each of his
brothers, ‘comprising the best things of this
father. This is the law of inheritance, O son
of Pritha, as declared by the Self-create
himself. —


59. Amongst children all born of th
wite taken from the husband’s own caste’
there is another difference, O king! In
marrying, the elder ones should always
precede the younger ones.


60. The wives being all equal in respect
of their order of bisth, and the children
also being all equal in respect of the posi-
tien of theie mothers, the son that is first-
born shall take one share more than each
ot his other brothers. The son who is next
in point of age shall take a share that is
next in value, while the son who is young-
est shall take the share which belongs to
the youngest.


61, Thus among wives of all castes, they
who belong to the same caste with the hus-
band are considered as the first. This is
what was declared by the great Rishi

-Kashyapa the son of Ms atichi.


“CHAPTER XLVIII.
(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—


Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—

“t. The intermixture of castes is brought
about through inducements offered by rich-
es, or through mere lust, or through igner-
ance of the true order of birth. >


2, What, O grandfather, are the duties
of persons who are born in the mixed
classes and what are the acts laid down for
them? Do you describe them to me.


Bhishma said :—


3. In the beginuing, the Lord of all |
Creatures created the four castes and taid
down thete respective duties, for the sake of |
sacrifice,


MAHABHARATA.


4. The Beahmana may take four wives,
one from each of the four castes. In twa
of them, he takes birth himself. Those sons,
however, who are begotten bv him on the
two other inferior, (vfs., Vaishya and
Shudra), are inferior, their position being
settled not by that of their father but by
that of their mothers.


5. The son begotten by a Brahmana
upon a Shudra wife is called Parashava,
meaning one born of a dead body for the
Shudra woman's body is as inauspicious as
a dead body. He should serve the persons
of his (father’s) race. Indeed, it is not
proper for him to renounce the duty of
service that has been laid down for him,


6. With all means in his power, he
should maintain his family. Even if he
happens to be elder in age, he should still
dutifully serve the other children of his
father, who in age may be younger to him,
and give them whatever he may succeed in
acquiring.

7; A> Kshatriya may take three wives.
In two of them, he takes birth himself, His
third wife being of the Shudra caste, is
considered as very inferior, The son that
he begets upon her is called an Ugra,


8. The Vaishya may take two wives, [n
both of them, he takes birth himself. The
Shudra can take only one wife, from his
own caste. The son.begotten by him upon
her becomes a Shudra,


g. A son whto takes birth under circume
stances other than those mentioned above,
is considered as a very inferior one. If a
person of a lower caste begets a son upon
a woman of a superior ‘caste, such son is
regarded as outside the pale of the four
pure castes, Indeed, such son becomes an
object of eri: with the four principal
castes,


10. If a Kshatriya begets a son upon
a Brahmani woman, such son, without
being included in any of the four pure
castes, comes to be considered as a Suta.
The duties of a Suta consist in reciting
eulogies and encomiums of kings and othec
graat men. The son begotten by a Vaishya
upon a woman of the Brahmana, order,
is known as a Vaidehaka, ‘Their duties
consist iW taking charge of bars and bolts
for protecting the privacy of women of
respectable families. Such sons have uo
purifying rites laid down for them.


11. If a Shudra knows a woman be-
longing to the foremost of the four castes,
the son that % begotten is.called a Chans.
daia. Endued with a dreadful disposition,
he must live tu the outskirts of cities and
yowns and tis duty -is that of the public


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


executioner. Such sons are always con-
sidered as wretches of theie race. ‘hese,
O faremost of intelligent persuns, are the
offspring of intermixed castes.


12. The son begotten by a Vaishya
upon a Kshatriya woman becomes a Vandi
or Magadha. His duties are eloquent
recitations of praise. ‘The son begotten
through transgression, by a Shudra upon a
Kshatriya woman, becomes a Nishada and
his dutiés consist in the catching of fish. ©


13. Ifa Shudra happens to know a
Vaishya woman, the son begotten upon
her comes to be called Ayogava. The
duties of such a person are those of a car-
penter, he Brahmana should never
accept gifts from sueh a person. They
are not entitled to pussess any kind of
riches.


14. Persons belonging to the mixed
castes beget upon wives taken from their
owh castes children invested with their
position, When they procreate children in
women taken from other inferior castes,
such children become inferior to their
fathers, for they become invested with
the position of their mothers.


15. Thus as regards the four pure castes,
persons beget children invested with their
own position upon wives takea from their
own castes as also upon them that are
taken from the castes immediately below
their own, When, however, offspring is
begotten upon other wives, they are re-+
garded as invested with a position that is,
principally, outside the pale of the four
pure castes. :


16. When such children beget sous in
women, taken from their ow classes, those
sons take the pasition of sheiesathers.. ‘ft is
only when they take wives frou castes
other than their -own,: that the children
they beget, become jnvested with inferigr
position.


17, Asan example of this it may be
said that a Shudra begets upon a woman
belonging to the most superior caste a son
that is outside the pale of the four castes.
‘The son that is outside the pale of the four
castes, by uniting with women belonging
to the four principal castes, begets off-
spring that is further degraded in point of
position. -


18. From those outside the pale of the
four castes and those again that are further
outside that limit, children multiply on
account of the union of persons with women
of classes superior to their own. ‘Thus, from
persons of inferior position classes spring
up, altogether fifteen in number, that are
equally low or still lower in dignity,


ftg


Fg. Ic is only from sexual union with
women of persons. who should not have
such union with them that mixed castes
originate. Among the classes that are
thus outside the lint of the fouc principal
or pure castes, children are beyotten upon


woman belunging to the class called
Sairindbri by men of the class called
Magadha.


zo. ‘The occupati.n of such children is
the adorement of the bodies of kings and
others, ‘hey are well acquainted with the
Preparation of unguents, the making of
varlands, and the manufacture of articles
used for the decoration of the body,
Though free by the position that belongs
to them by bicth, they sivould live like
Servants. From the union of Magadhas of
a [certain class with women of the caste
called Sairindhri, another caste originates,
called Ayopava. Their business. con-
sists in the making of nets. Vaidelas; by
knowing Sairindbri women, beget children
calléd Maireyakas whose business is the
manufacture of wines and spirits.


21. From the Nishadas orivinate a caste
called Madgura and another known by the
name of Dasas whose business ‘is plying
beats. From the Cnandalas originates a
race called: Shwapaka whose business lies
in keeping guard over the dead.


22. The women of the Magadhi caste,
by union with these jfoar castes of wicked
nature, produce four others who live by
deceitful means. ‘Jhese are Manysa, Swae
dukara, Kshaudra, and Sougandha,


_ 23.. .From the Vaideha originates cruel
and sinful caste ‘that. lives by. practising
deception,... From the Nishadas agisin
originates the Madranabba. caste whose
members are seen to ride oy cars drawn by
asses. . - - ;
.24. From the Chandalas originates the
caste. galled Pukkasa whose members are
seen to eat the flesh of asses, horses and
elephants. - “These are clad in clothes, pro-
cured by stripping human corpses, They
are again seen to eat off broken earthene
ware.


25. These three castes of very low
origin, are born of women of the Ayogava
caste (by fathers taken from different
castes), The caste called Kshudra origi«
nates from the Vaidehaka. “The caste
called Andhra which lives in the outskirts
of towns and cities, also originates (from
the Vaidehakas).


26. ‘Then, again, the Charmakara,
knowing woman of the Nishada caste,
begets tiie class called Karavara, From
the Chandala, again, originates the ‘caste
known Ly the name of Pandusaupaka


120


whose business is to make baskets and
other things with cleft bamboos.


27. From the union of the Nishada with
a woman of the Vaidehi caste, originates
one who is called by the name of Ahindaka.
‘The Chandala begets upon a Saupaka
‘women a son who does not differ from the
Chandala in position or occupation.


28. A Nishadi woman, by union with a
Chandala, produces a son who lives in the
outskirts of villages and towns. Indeed,
the members of sucha caste live in cre-
matoria and are considered by the very
lowest orders as incapable of being classed
among them.


29. Thus do these mixed castes origi-
nate from improper and sinful union of
fathers and mothers belonging to different
castes, Whether they live hidden or open-
ly, they should be known by theic occupa-
tions.


30; The daties have been laid down in
the scriptures of only the four principal
castes. About others, the scriptures are
entirely silent. Among all the castes, the
members of those castes that have no duties
assigned to them by the scriptures, need
entectain no fears as to what they do.


31. Persons unaccustomed to the per
formance of sacrifices or for whom sacrifices
have not been laid down, and who are de-
prived of the company and the instructions
of the pious, whether classed among the four
principal castes or out of their limit, by
uniting themselves with women of other
castes, led not by considerations of virtue
but by uncontrolled lust, cause numerous
mixed castes to originate whose occupations
and houses depend on the circumstances
connected with. the irregular unions from
which they spring. :

32. Having recourse to such places
where four roads meet, or crematoria, or
hills and mountains, or forests and trees,
they build their houses. The ornaments
they wear are made of iron,


33. Living in such places, openly, fol-
lowing their own occupations for acquiring
livelihood. They may be seen to live thus,
adorning their persons with ornaments and
engaged in the work of manufacturing
various domestic and other utensils.


34. Forsooth, by assisting kine and
Brahmanas, and practising the virtues of
abstention from cruelty, compassion, truth.
fulness of speech, and forgiveness, and, if it
is necessary, protecting others by sacrificing
their own lives, persons of the mixed castes,
may acquire success. I have no doubt, O
king that these virtues become the causes of
their success. ,


MATIABHARATA,


36. Hewhois gifted with intelligence,
should, taking everything into consideration,
beget children according to the scriptural
injunctions, upon women that have been
declared as proper or fit for him. A son
begotten upon a woman belonging toa de-
graded caste, instead of rescuing the father,
brings him to grief even as a heavy burden
brings to grief a swimmer desirous of cross-
ing a pool of water.


37. Whether a man is learned or other-
wise, lust and anger are natural tendencies
of humanity in this world. Women, theres
fore, may always be seen to drag men into
the wrong path.


38. The disposition of women is such that
man’s contact with her produces misery.
Hence, wise men do not allow themselves to
be excessively attached to women.


Yudhishthira said:—


39. There are men who belong to the
mixed castes, and who are of very impure
birth. Putting « respectable appearance,
they are, in sooth, disrespectable., On
account of those external signs we may not
be able to know the truth about their birth.
Are there any signs, O grandfather, by
which the truth may be Known about the
origin of such men ?


Bhishm a said:—

vo. A person who is born of an irregular
union shows various features of disposition.
O ne’s purity of birth, again, is tobe deter -
mined from one’s acts which must resemble
the acts of those who ace admittedly good
and pious.


4t. A disrespectable conduct, acts op-
posed to those laid down jin the scriptures,
crookedness and cruelty, and abstention
from sacrifices and other scriptural acts
that lead to merit, show one’s impurity of
birth,


42. A son inherits the disposition of
either the father or the mother. Some-
times he inherits the “dispositions of both.


A person of impure birth can never succeed


in conceating his true nature.


43. As the cub of a tiger resembles its
father. and dam in form and in stripes or
Spots, $o a person cannot but show the cir-
cumstande of his origin.


44. However secret may one’s birth be,
if that birth happens to be impure, its
character or nature is sure to show itself
slightly or largely.


45. A person may for. purposes of his
own, choose to follow an insincere path,
practising such conduct as seems to be
pious. His own nature, however, in the


ANUSHASANA PARVA, !


raatrer of those acts that he does, always
announces whether he belongs to a good
taste or to a different one.


46. Creatures in the world are gifted
with various kinds of disposition. They are,
again, seen’ to be employed in various
kinds of acts. {Amongst creatures thus
engaged, there is nothing that is so good or
valuable as pure birth and rigtteous
conduct, :


47. Uf a person be born im a low caste,
good understanding originating from a
study of the scriptures fails to rescue his
body from low acts. Absolute goodness of
understanding is of different degrees. it
thay be high, middling, and low. Even if
it appears ina person of fow birth, it dis-
appears like autumnal clouds without pro-
ducing any result. On the other hand, good-
ness of understanding which, according to
its measure, has ordained the position in
which the person is born, shows itself in his
deeds.


48. If a person happens to belong to a
supertor caste but still if he happens to be
divested of good conduct, he should receive
ho respect or worship. One may adore
even a Shudra if he knows his duties and
is of good conduct.


49. A person proclaims himself by his
own good and bad deeds and by his good
- or bad nature and race of birth. if ones’
race of birth Happens to be degraded for
any feason, one soon raises it and makes
it resplendent and famous by his deeds.


.§0. For these reasons the wise should
avoid those women among these various
castes mixed, upon. whom they should not
beget children. .


; CHAPTER XLIX. noe


_ (ANUSH ASANIKA PARVA).-=
. Continued.


Yudhishthira said:—~


_1. Describe to us, O sire, the orders
and classes separately, what kind of son
is begotten on what women, who is en-
tiled to have whom for sons, and what
kinds of sons are there.


2.. It is known that disputes frequently
take place about sons. You should, O
king, remove the doubts of our mind.
indeed, we are stupefied about this subject.


Bhishma said :—


3. One’s own begotten son conaltered
as his own self, The son that is begotten


16


21


upon one’s wife by a person whom he has
{nvited for it, is called Niraktaja. ‘The
son that is begotten upon one’s wife by


somebody without his permission, is
Prastitaja.
4. The son begotten upon his own wife


by a person degraded from his position is
called Patitaja, here are two other, sons,
vtz., the son given, and the son made,
‘Lhere is another called Adhyuda.


5. The son born of a maiden in her
father’s house is called Kanina. Besides
these, there are six kinds of sons called
Apadhwansaja and six others that are
called Apasadas. These are the several
kinds of sons mentioned in the scciptures,
know, O Bharata.


Yudhishthira said:—

6. Who are the six that axe called
Apadhwansaja? Who also are the Apa-
sadas? You should fully explain all this
to me.


Bhishma said :—~


7-8. ‘The sons that a Brahmana be-
gets upon wives taken from the three
inferior castes, those begotten by a
Kshatriya upon wives taken from the two
castes inferior to his own, O Bharata, and
the sons that a Vaishya begets upon a
wife taken from the one caste that is infee
tior to his,—are all called Apadtwansas.
They are, as thus explained, of six kinds.
Listen now to me as | tell you who the
Apasadas are.


9. The son that a Shudra begets upon
a Brahmani woman is cafled a Chandala,
Begotten upon a Kstiatriya woman by a:
person of the Shudra order, the son is
called. a Veratya. He who is born of a
Vaishya woman by a Shudra father is
called a Vaidya. These three kinds of
sous are.called Apasada.


to. The Vaishya, by knowing a woman
of the Brahmana order, begets a son that
is called a Magadha, while the son that he
begets upon a Kshatriya woman is called
a Vamaka. The Kshatriya can beget but


one kind of son upon a woman of a
superior caste, >
In -Indeed, the son begotten by a


Kshatriya upon a Brahmana woman, is
called a Suta. ‘These three also are called
Apasadas. It cannot be said, O king, that
these six kinds of sons are no sons,


Yudhishthira said :—


12. Some say that one’s son is he who
ts born, in his soil. Some, on the other
hand, say that one’s son is he who has
been begotten from his seed, Are. both


122


“MAHABHARATA. ~


these kinds of sons equal? Whose; again, ; and feared, and in whose case tieither the


is the son tobe? Do you tell me this, O
grandfather. :


Bhishma said :—


“13. Hisis the son from whose seed he
has sprung. If, however, the owner of the
seed discards the son born of it, such son
then becomes his upon whose wife he has
been begotten. The same rule applies to
the son called Adhyuda. He belongs to
the person from whose seed he has sprung.
lf, however, the owner of the seed forsakes
him, he becomes the son of the husband of
his mother. Know this is what the law
declares.


Yudhishthira said :-— .


14. We know that the son becomes his
from whose seed he has takn birth
Wheace does the husband of the woman
who gives birth to the sou derive his right
to the latter? Likewise the son called
Adhyuda should be known to be the son
of him from whose seed he has sprung.
How can they be the sons of others on ac-
count of the engagement about owning and
rearing them having been broken 7


Bhishma said:—


c


15. He who, having begotten a son of his


own loins,gforsakes him for some reason or
other, cannot be considered as the father of
such son, for vital seed only cannot create
sonship. Such son must be held to belong
ve te person who is the master of the
soil. .


16. When a man, desiring to have a son,
marries. a girl quick with child, the son
born of his wife must belong to him, for it
isthe fruit of his own soil. ‘The person
from whose vital seed the son has sprung,
can have no right to such son.


17. Theson whois born in one’s soil
but not begotten by the owner, O chief of
Bharata’s race, bears all the marks of the
father that has actually begotten him. The
son thus born is incapable of concealing the
evidences of physiognomy. Heis at once
known by eyesight.


18. As regards the son made, he is
sometimes considered as the child of the
person who has made him ason and who
brings him up. In his case, neither the
vital seed of which he has been born nor
the soil in whictr he has been born, becomes
the cause of sonship.


Yudhishthira said :— .

19. What kind of son is that who is
said to be a made son and whose sonship
originates from the fact of his being taken


vital seed nor the soil of birth, O Bharata,
is caused as the cause of sonship.


Bhishma said :— .


20. When one takes up and rears a son
who has been cast off on the road by his
father and mother, and when the person
thus taking and rearing him cannot find out
his parents after search, he becomes the
father of such son and the latter becomes
what is called his made son.


it. Not having anybody to own him, he
becomes vhis who ‘rears him. Such son,
again, comes to be considered as belonging
to that castes to which his owner or cearer
belongs, — :


Yudhishithra said:—


22. How shoutd the purifactory rites of
such a person be performed? Jn whose
case what sort of rites are to be performed ?
With what girl should he be married?
Vell me all this, O grandfather,


Bhishma said :—

23, Therites of purification for such a
son should be performed according to the
usage of the person himself who rears: him,
tor, renounced by his parents, such son gets


‘the caste of the person who takes him and


rears him,


24. Indeed, O you of unfading glory, the
rearer shonld perform all the purificatory
rites for such son according to the practices
of his own family and kinsmen, As re-
gards the girl also, O Yudhishthira, that’
should be bestowed in marriage upon such
a son, she should belong to the caste of the
rearer himself,


‘25. All this is to be done only when the
caste of the son’s true mother cannot be
Jearnt. Among sons, he who ts born of a
maiden and he who is born of a mother
who had conceived before her marriage but
brought him forth subsequent to that act,
aré considered as very disgraceful and
degraded.


26—27. Even these two, however, should
receive the same rites of purification that
are sanctioned for the sons begotten by the
father in lawful marriage. In respect of the
son who becomes his fathers on account of
his birth in the father’s soil, and of those
sons who are called Apsadas, and those
conceived by the wife in her maidenhood
but brought forth after marriage, Brahe
manas and others should apply the same
rites of purification that are in vogue in their
own castes. These are the conclusions that


are seen in the scriptures about the different


_ trust.
ia


ANUSHASANA PARVA’


castes. I have thus told you everything of
your questions. What else do you wish to
hear ?


.


CHAPTER L.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

1. Whatis the nature of the compassion
or pity that is felt at seeing the misery of
another? What is the nature of that com.
passion or sympathy that one feels for an-
other on account of his living in the com-
panionship of that other? What is the
natuce of the supreme blessedness of kine ?
You should, O grandfather explain all this
to me.


Bhishma said :— ~

2. I shall, O you of great effulgence,
recite to you in this connection an ancient
tracrative of a conversation between Nahu-
sha and the Rishi Chyavana.


3. Formecty, O chief of Bharata’s cace;
the great Risht Chyavana of Bhiigu’s race,
always practising high vows, became desir-
ous of leading for sometime the mode of


life called Udavasa, aud ‘sed himself to |


commence it. P

4- Reouncing pride, anger, joy and
grief, the ascetic, pledging himself to ob-
serve that vow, set himself to live for
twelve years, according to the cules of
Uddvasaz :

5. The Rishi inspired all creatures with
And he iuspired similar confidence
all creatures living in water. ‘The
powerful ascetic resembled the Mvon him-
-self in his conduct to all.


6. “Bowing to all the deities and having


purged hitnself of all sins, he entered the


water at the confluence of Ganga and
Yamuna, and stood there like an inanjmate
post of wood.

7. Placing his head against it, he. bore
the fierce and roaring current of .the two
rivers united together,—the current whose
speed resembled that of the wind itself.


8. Ganga and Yamuna, however, and


‘the other rivers and lakes, whose waters


unite together at the confluence at Preyaga,
‘instead of afflicting the Rishi, went beyond
“him. : '


g. Assuming the attitude of a wooden
post, the great Muni sometimes faid himself
down in the water and slept at ease. And


123


sometimes, O chief of Bharata’s race, the
intelligent sage stood erect.


to. He became quite agreeable to all
creatures living in water. Without the
least fear, all these used to smell the Rishi's
lips, :

it. In this way, the Rishi passed a long
time atthat grand confluence of waters,
One day, some fishermen came there,


12. With nets in their hands, O you of
great effulyence, those men came where the
Rishi was. They were many in number
and all of them were bent upon catching
fish. 4

13. Well-formed and broad-chested,
gifted with great strength and courage,
and never returning in fear from water,
those men who lived upon the earning by
theic nets, came there, resolved ta catch
fish,


14. Arrived at that water which con-
tained many fish, those fishermen, O chief
of the Bharatas, tied all their nets together.


1§. Desirous of fist, those innumerable
Kaivartas, united together and surrounded -
a portion of the watersof Ganga and Ya-
muna with their nets,


16. Indeed, they threw upon the water
their ne¢ which was made of new strings,
capable of covering a large space, and
having sufficient length and breadth.


“17. Getting down into the water, all of
them began to drag with great force that
net which was very lacge and had been
well-spread over a large space.,


18. Al of them were free from fear,
cheerful and fully determined to da one
another’s bidding. They had succeeded in
catching a large number of fish and other


aquatic animals.


tg. And as they dragged their net, O
king, they easily draggad up Cnyavana the
son of Bheigu, along with a large number
of fish. °


20. His body was overgrown with the
river-moss. Hits ‘beard and matted Jocks
had become green. And all over his body
could be seen conchs and other mollusca
attached with their heads. '


2t. Seeing that Rishi who was a master
of the Vedas dragged up by them from the
water, all the fishermen stood with joined.
lands and then laid themselves low,en the
ground and repeatedly bent their heads. ,


22. Through fear and pain caused by
the dragging of the net, and on account of
their being brought upon the land, the
fishes caught in the net died.


124


23.. Seeing that great onslaught of
fishes, the ascetic became filled with jcom-
. passion and sighed repeatedly.


The fishermen said :—


24. We have perpetrated this sin un-
willingly. Be pleased with us f What wish
of yours shall we fulfil? Command us, O
great ascetic.


Bhishma said :—

25. ‘hus addressed by them, Chya-
vana, from among that mass of &shes
atound him, said,—Do ye with eapt atten-
tion hear what my most cherished wish is.


F 26. & shalt either die with these fishes
or do ye sell me with them.  § have lived
with them. for a tong time within the water.
1-do not wish to leave them at such a time !

27. When he said these words to them,
the fishermen became greatly terrified.
With pale faces they went to king Nahusha
and iafotmed: him of all thas had: occurred.


° CHAPTER LE.
(ANUSIEASANIKA PARWA).—
Continued.
Bhishma said :—


t. Hearing the strait into. which Chya-
vana was reduced, King Nahusha speedily
went there, accompanied by his ministers
and: psiess. :

2 Having purified himself duly, the
king, with joined hands aud rapt attention,
introduced himself to the preat Chyavanra,

3 The king’s priest then adored with
due ceremonies that Rishi, O. king, who
wags observant of the vow of truth and.
gited with a great soul, and who resem-.
bied a god himself. ,


Kahusha said :—

4- ‘Tell me, O best of twice- born ones,
wat act shalt we do that may be pleasing
to. you? However difficult that deed may
be, there isfrothing, O noly one, that [shalt
not be able to du a’ your command,


Chyavana said :— -

‘These men who live by catching fish,
have ali been exhausted with fatigue. Do
vou pay them the price that may be fixed
upos me along with the value of these
tish,


Nhusha said: .
6. Let my priest give to these Nishadas


MAHABHARATA.


a thousand coins as price for buying this
sacred one as he himself has ordered.


Chyavana said:

7. A thousand coins ig not my price,
The question depends upon your discretion.
Give them.a fair price, settling with your
discretion. Give them a fair price, settling
with your own. intelligence what it should
be.


Nahusha said :—

8 Let, O learned Brahmana, a hundred
thousand coins be given. to. these -Nishadas.
Shall this be your ‘price,.O holy one, of
do- you think otherwise.


Chyavana said :—
g- & should not be bought with a hunk


dred: thousand coins, O- best ot kings f
Let a proper price be given.to. these! Du.


; you consult with your ministers.


Nahosha said :—


to. Let my priest give to these Nishadas.
a crore of coins. Uf evers this does nog
cover your value, let, more be paid to them.


Chyavana said :-—
tr. Ofking, hk am not with a erore
of coins. or even more. Let that price be


‘given to these men which would be fair of
proper. Do you consult with the Brahe


tnanas,


; Nahusha said :—


12. Let half my kingdom of even the


‘whole be given. away tu these Nishadas.


E think that would be your price. Wat,
however, do you think, O: twice-born. one 7


| Chyavana said:—


13. L do not deserve to. be purchased
with half your kingdom. or even the whole


of ix, O Bing! Let that price which is.


proper be yiven to these men. Do you


- Consult with. the Rishis


Bhishmea continued :—


14. Hearing these words of the great
Rishi, Nahusha became stricken. with. great


‘gorrow. With his ministers and priest he


began to. think on the mattec.


15. There then came to. king Nahusha
an ascetic’ living in the forest and subsist~
ing upon fruit and eoots and born of a
cow.


16. That best of twice-born persons,
addressing the king, O monarch, said these |
words :—I shall soon satisfy you. The Rshi
also will be satisfied.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


17, {shall never speak a fatsehood,—no,
not even in jest, what then need } say of
other occasions 7? You should uishesitating-
ly do what I bid you. ;


Nahusha said :—


18. Do you, O illustrious one, say what
the value is of that great Rishi of Bhrigu’s
race. O, save me from this terrible difff-
culty, save my kingdom, and save my
family.


19. If the holy Chyavana become angry,:


he would destroy the three worlds; what
need [I say then of my poor self‘ who is
destitute of penances and who depends
upon the power only of his arms ?


20. O great Rishi, do you become the
raft to us who have all fallen into a fathom-
less deep with all our counsellors and. our
priest! Do you settle what the value should
be of the Rishi f


Bhishma said :—

ai. Hearing these words of Nahusha,
the ascetic. born of a cow and gifted with
great energy spoke thus, gladdening the
monarch with all his counsellers :— :


22. Brahmanas, O king, belong to the
foremost of the four castes. No value,
however great, canbe fixed upon them.
Kine also are invaluable. ‘Therefore, O
king, |do you regard a cow,as the value of
the Rishi! :


23. Hearing these words of the great
Rishi, Nahusha became, O king, filled
with joy alony with all his counscllers and
priest.


24. Proceeding then to Bhrigu’s son
Chyavana of rigid vows, he addressed hin
thus,JO monarch, for satisfying bimjto the
best of his power,


Nahusha said :—


25. Rise, rise, O twice-born Rishi, you
have been purchased, O son of Bhrigu,
with a cow as your pricef O foremost
of righteous persons, even this, I think, is
your price f°


Chyavana said :—

26. Yes, O king of kings, 2 do rise up.
I have been properly purchased by you, O
siuless one. § do not, O-you of unfading
glory, see any riches that is equal to
kine. f

27. Fo speak of kine, to hear others
speak of them, to make gifts of kine, and to
see kine, O king, are acts,.that are alk


praised, O hero, and that are highly -aus--


-picious and purifying.


125


28. Kine are always the root of prose
perity. Uhere is io fault inkine. Kine
always give the best food, im the form of
Havi, to the deities. : .


29. The sacred Mantras, Swaha and
Vashat, are always established upon kine.
Kine are the chief conductresses of Sacri-
fices. They form the mouth of Sac: ifice.


30. ‘Fhey bear and yield excellent and
strengtl-pgiving ambrosia. They receive
the adoration of all the worlds and are
considered as the source of nectar.


3t. On Earth, kine resemble fire in
energy and form, Indeed, kine represent
bizh energy, and are conferrees of great
happiness upon all creatures.


32. That country where. kine placed by
their owners, breathe fearlessly, shines in
beauty. ‘Lhe sins also of that country are
all removed, if


33. Kine form the stairs leading to
Heaven. Kine are worshipped in Heaven
itself. Kine are goddesses that can give
everything and grant every wish, There
is nothing else in the world that is so bigis


| OF sO superior.


Bhishma said :-—

34- This is what = say to yod on the
subject of the glory and superiority of kine,
O chief of Bharata’s race. 1 am competent
to describe a part only of the merits of the
kine. | have not the ability to exhaust
the subject.


“fhe Nishadas said :—


35° O ascetic, you have seeh us and
have also spoken with us, ft has been said
that ftiendship, with the youd, depends
upon only seven words. Dv you then, O
lord, show us your favour, :

36. The blazing sacrificial fre eats alt
the oblations of clarified butter poured upon
it. Of pious soul, and gifted with great
energy, you ace among men, a blazing fire
im energy»

37. We propitiate you, O you of. great
learning. We surrender ourselves to you.
Do you, for showing us favor, take back
from us this cow. .


| Chyavana said :—


38. The eye of a poor or distressed
person, the eye of an ascetic, or the eye
of a snake of dreadful poison, consume a
man with his very roots even as a fire,
that burning with the aid of the wind
and consumes a stack of dry grass. of
straw.


39. FE shalf accept the cow that you wish
to present me.—Ye fishermen, freed from
every sin, go ye to heaven forthwith, witly


126


these fishes also that ye have caught with
your nets. . ;


Bishma said :—

40. After this, on account of the energy”
of that great Rishi of purified soul, those
fishermen along with all those fish, through
virtue of those words that he had uttered,
went to heaven. tS


4t. Seeing the fishermen ascénditig to
heaven with those fishes in theic company,
became filled with wonder,’ Q’ cliief of
Bharata’s race.. core Bee ate

42. After this, the two Rishis, v7s., the
one born of a cow and the other who was
Chyavana of Bhrigu’s race, pleased king
Nahusha by granting him many boons.


43. Then the highly energetic king
Nahusha that lord of all the Earth, filled
with joy, O best of the Bharatas, said,—
Sufficient. % .


- 44. Like a secondjIndra the king of the
celestials, he accepted the boon about his
‘own steadiness in virtue. The Rishis
having’ granted him the boon, the de-
lighted king adored them both with great
réspect, :

45. As regards Chyavana, his . vow
having been completed, he returned to his
own hermitage. The. Rishi who bad taken
_ his birth from the cow, and who was gifted
with great energy; also -proceeded to his
own hermitage.


46. The Nishadas~ all ascended to
heaven as also the fishes they had caught,
Q king, king Nahusha too, havirg got
those valuable boons, entered his own
city. ; . : ;

47—~—48. 1 have thus, O son, told you
everything about what you had asked me.
‘The affection that is caught by the sight
alone of others as also by the fact of living
with them, O Yudhishthira, and the high
blessedness of kine too, and the ascertain-
ment of true virtue, are the subject |_have
described. ‘Tell me, O hero what else is in
your mind. . :


CHAPTER LIL.


‘ (ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued, -


Yudhishthira said :—


1. O you of great wisdom,'1 have.a doubt
which is very great and which is as vast
as the ocean itself. Listen to it, O mighty-
armed one, and having learnt what it is,
you should explain it to me.


- ‘MAHABHARATA.


2. [have a great curiosity about fantae
dagui’s son, O lord, vig., Rama, that fore-
most of all pious persons. You should
satisfy that curiosity.


3. How was Rama born who was gifted
with prowess incapable of being baffled 7
He belonged by birth to a family of twice-
born Rishis. How did he become a fol-
lower of [Kshatriya practices 7


4. Do you then, O king, recite to me
in full the ciccumstances of Rama's birth,
How also did a son of the race of
Kushika, who was Kshatriya become a
Brahmana ? :


Great, indeed, was the power of the
high-souled Rama, O chief of men, as also
of Vishwamitra.


6. Why did the grandson of Richika
instead of his son become’ a Kshatriya ?
Why also did the grandson of Kushika
and not his son become a Brahmana?
Why did such untoward incidents befall
the grandsons of both, instead of their,” .
sons? You should explain the truth ‘of -
these circumstances. cae


Bhishma said :— Ses De
7. -Regarding it is cited an old history.
of the discourse between Chyavana and


Clad


F Kushika, O Bharata! + >


8. Gifted with’ great intelligence,—
Chyavana of Bhrigu’s race, that best of
ascetics, saw“(with bis spiritual eye) the
stain that would affect his own race.


Reflecting upon the merits and faults:
of that incident, as also its strength and’
weakness, Chyavana having asceticism for
his wealth, became desirous of consuming .'
the race of the Kushikas,


to. Going than to the presence of king
Kushika, Cnyavaaa said to him,—O sinless ,
one, the desire has arisen in my heart of —
living with you for sometime. .


Kushika said :—


it. O holy one, to live together is-a
deed which the learned ordain for girls
when these are given away. Yhe wise
always speak of the practice in such con-
nection only. ; :


12, O Risht having asceticism for your’
wealth, the residence which you seek. with
me is not satictioned by the ordinance.
Yet, however opposed to the dictates of
duty and virtue, 1 shall do what you may
be pleased to order.


a


Bhishma said :—


13. Ordering a seat to be placed for the
great ascetic (?Chyavana, king Kushika,


y accompanied by his wife, stood before him,


ANUSHASANA: PARVA,


14. Bringing a little jar of water, the
king offered bim water for washing his
fee He then, through his servants, caused
all the rites to be duly performed in honor
of his illustrious gttest.


1g. The illustrious Kushika, wits: Was
observant of restraints and vows, then
cheerfully presented, in due forms, the
ingredients consisting of honey and the
other things, to the great Rishi and asked
him to accept the same.


16. Having welcomed and honored the
learned Brabmana thus, the king once more
addressed hip and said,~We two await
your orders! Command us what we are
to do for you, O holy one, -


17. Tf it is oue kingdom or ‘riches or
kine, G you of rigid vows, or all articles
that are given away in sacrifices, which you
want, tell us the word and we shall bestow
all upon you.


18. This. palace, this kingdom, this seat
of justice, are at your disposal. You are
the master of all these! Do you rule the
Earth! As regards myself, | depend en-
tirely upon you.


tg. Addressed in these words by the
king, Chyavana of Bhrigu’s race, filled with
great joy, said to Kushika these words in
reply.


Chyavana said :— .

20. I do. not, O king, covet your king-
dom, nor your riches, nor the damsels you
have nor your kine, nor your provinces, nor
articles needed for sacrifice! Do you listen
to me.


at. If it pleases you and your wife, I
shall begin to observe a certain vow. {
wish you and your consort to serve me
during that period unhesitatingly.


22. ‘hus addressed by the Rishi, the
king and the queen became. filled with de-
light, O Bharata, and answered him, say-
ing Be it so, O Rishi.


23. Pleased with the Rishi’s werds, the
king led bim to an apartment of the palace.
It was anv excellent one, agreeable to see.
‘The king showed him everything: in that
room,


The king said :—

24. This, O holy one, is your bed. Do
you live here as you please! O you having
asceticism for your wealth, myself and my
queen shall try our best to give you every
comfort and every pleasure.


25- While they were thus conversing
with each other, the sun was over the meri-
dian. The Rishi ordered the king ‘to bring
him food and drink,


~


‘


129


26. Bowing to the Rishi, King Kushika
asked him, saying.—What kind of food is
liked by you? What food, indeed, shall be
brought for you. -


27. Filled with joy, the Rishi answered
that king, O Bharata, saying ,—Let food
that is proper be given to me, *


28. Receiving these words with respect,
the king said,—So be it !—»and then offered
to the Rishi food of the. ;proper kind.


29. Having finished his meals, the holy
Chyavana, knowing every duty, addressed
the fing and the queen, saying,—=1 wish 10
sleep, O powerful one, sleep hinders me
now. -


30. Proceeding thence to a room that
had been got ready for him, that best of
Rishis then laid himself down upon a bed,
The king and the queen sat down,


31. The Rishi told them,—Do not, while
I sleep, awake me! Do ye keep yourself
awake and continually press my feet. as
long as I sleep.


- 42—33. [Kushika, conversant with every,
duty, unhesitatingly, said,—So be it! In«
deed, the king and the queen kept thems
selves awake all night, duly engaged in
tending and serving the Rishi in the man-
ner directed. - ‘Ihe royal pair, O king, ace
complished the Rishi’s order with earnests
ness and attention,


34. Meanwhile ‘the holy Brahmana,
having thus commanded the king, slept
soundly, without changing his posture or
turning even once, for one and twenty days.


35. The king, O delighter of the Kurus,
abstaining from food, along with his wife,
sat joyfully the whole time, engaged in
tending and serving the Rishi.


36.° On the expiration of one and twenty
days, the son of Bhrigu rose of his own
accord, The great ascetic then went eut
of the room, without speaking to them at
all.


37. Famished and toil-worn, the king
and the queen fellowed him, but that fore
most of Rishis did not please to cast a
single look upon any of them.


38. Proceeding a little way, the son of
Bhrigu disappeared in the very sight of the
royal pair, At this, the king, struck with
grief, dropped down on the Earth.


39. Comforted, he rose up soon, and
accompanied by his queen, the king pos-
sessed of great splendour, began to search
everywhere for the Rishi,


2128
CHAPTER LIT


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—®
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


a. After the Rishi had disappeared,
what did the king do and what also his
highly-blessed wile? Tell me this, O
grandfather.


Bhishma said :—


2. Not seeing the Rishi, the king,
stricken with shame, toil-worn, and losing
his senses, returned to his palace, accom-
panied by his queén.


3 Entering his mansion in a dejected
spirit, [he spoke not a word with any
one. He thought only of trat conduct of
Chyavana.


_4. With a despairing heart he then went
to his root. here he beheld the son of
Bhrigu stretched as before on his bed.


5. Seeing the Rishi there, they wonder-
ed much, Indeed, they began to think
upon that very strange incident. The sight
of the Rishi removed their fatigue.


6. Seated once more by his side, they
again began to gently press his feet as
before, eanwhile the. great ascetic con-
tinued to sleep soundly as.before. Oaly, be
now lay on another side. ;


7. Gifted with great energy, he thus
passed another twenty-one days. Moved
by fear, the royal pair showed no change in
their attitude or sentiment towards the
Rishi,


, 8 Awaking then fromt-his sleep the as-
cetic addressed the king and the queen,
saying,—Do ye rub my body with oil, | wish
to have a bath.

g. ‘ Famishing and toil-worn though they
were,,forthwith they volunteered their ser-
vices and soon approached the Rishi with
a cich oil that had been prepared by
boiling it a hundced times,


to. While the Rishi was seated at his
ease, the king and the queen, silently, con-
tinued to rub him. Guted with great asce-
tic merit, the son of Bhrigu did not once
utter the word Sufficient.


11, Bhrigu’s son however saw that the
royal pair were totally unmoved. Rising
up all on a sudden, he entered the bath
reom. :


12-~13. The various articles necessar
for a bath and such as were fit for a king’s
vse, were ready there. Without using, any
of those articles, the Rishi onee more dis-
appeared there and then by his Yoga-


MAHABHARATA.


power, before king Kushika (and hfs wife),
this, however, O chief of Bharatas, failed
to disturb the equanimity of the royat
pair.

14. The next time the powerful Rishi
was seen seated, after a bath, on the throne.
it was from that place that he then showed
himself to the Bing and the queen, O dee
lighter of the Kurus. °


15. With a cheerful face, king Kushika,
together with his wife, then offered the
Rishi cooked fvod with yreat respect.
Gifted with wisdom, and with heart totally
unmoved, Kushika made this offer.


The Ascetic said :—


16. T.et the food be brought. Assisted


by his wife, the king soon brought there the
food.


17. There were various kinds of meat
and different preparations also thereof,
Thére was a great variety of vegetables also
and potherbs. .


18, There were juicy cakes too amonk
those dishes and several agreeable kinds o
confectionery, and solid preparations of
milk. Indeed, the viands were different in
kinds and taste. Among them there were
also some food—forest .produces—such as
ascetics liked and took,


1g. Various sweet fruits fit to be eaten
by kings, were also there. here were
Vadaras and [ngudas and Kashnmaryyas
and Bhalatakas.


20. The food that was offered contain
ed such things as are taken by house-holiers
as also such things as are taken by the
forest-dwellers. Through fear -of the
Rishi’s curse, the king had caused all kinds
ot food to be gathered and got ready for
his guest. -


21—22, All this food, brought from the
kitchen, was placed before Chyavana. A
seat was also placed for him and a.bed too
was Spread. ‘Ihe dishes were then caused
to be covered with white cloths. Soon, hows
ever, Chyavana of Bhrigu’s race put fire to
all the things and reduced them to ashes,


23. Gifted with great intelligence, the
royal pair showed no anger at this conduct
of the Rishi, who once more, after this,
disappeared before thé very eyes, of the
king and the queen.


24. The royal sage Kushika thereupon
stood there in the same posture for. the
whole night, with his wife by his side, and
without speaking a word. Gifted swith
gteat prosperity, he did not yield to wrath.


25—26. Every day, good and pure food
of various sorts, excellent beds, profuse


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


articles needed for bath, and cloths of
various sorts, were collected and kept
ready in the palace for the Rishi. Indeed,
Chyavana could not find any fault in the
conduct of the king.


27. Then addressing king Kushika, the
twice-born Rishi said to him,—Do you with
your spouse, yoke yourself to a car and
take me on it whereever I shall direct.


28 Unbhesitatingly, the king answered
Chyavana haying asceticism for wealth,
saying,—So be it !—And he further enquir-
ed of the Rishi, asking,—-Which car shall
Lbring ? Shall it be my pleasure-car for
making pleasure-journeys or, shall itbe my
war-chariot ?


29~-3t. Thus addressed by the delight-
ed and contented king, the ascetic said to
him,—Do you promptly get ready that
chariot with which you attack hostile. cities !
Indeed, that war-chariot of yours, with every
weapon, with its standard and flags, its
darts and javelins and golden columns and
poles, should be made ready. Its rattle
resembles the tinkling of bells. It is adorned
with numberless arches made of pure gold.
It is always furnished with hundreds of high
and excellent weapons !—The king said,—
So.be it,—and soon made his great war-
chariot ready.


32. And he yoked his wife thereto on
the left and his own self on the right. And
the king placed on the chariot, among its
other articles, the goad which had three
handles and which bad a point hard as
adamant and sharp as the needle.


33. Having placed every article upon
the car, the king said tothe Rishi,—O holy
one, where shall the chariot proceed? QO, let
the son of Bhrigu issue his order,


- 34-~35. This your chariot shall proceed
to the place which you may be pleased to
direct! Thus addressed, the holy man
replied to the king, saying,—Let the car-go
hence, dragged slowly, step by step. Obey-
ing my will, do ye.two proceed in such a
way that I may not feel any exhaustion.


36. EF should be borne away pleasantly,
and let all your people see this march that
I make through their midst. No person
that comes to me, as 1 proceed along the
road, should be driven away. J shall distri-
bute riches among all.


37- To the Brahmanas who may ap-
proach me on the way, 1 shall grant their
wishes and bestow upon all of them gems
and riches without stint, ?

38—40.| Let all this be done, O king,
and do not entertain any scruples !—Hear-
ing these words of the Rishi, the king called
his servants and told them,—Ye should


47


129


without any fedr, give away whatever the
ascetic will command.—Then profuse jewels
and gems and beautiful women, and. pairs
of sheep, and coined and uncoined gold,
and huge elephants resembling hills oc
mountain summits, and all the ministers of |
the king, began to follow the Rishi as he
was carried on that chariot.


4t. Cries-of Oh and Alas arose from
every part of the city which was plunged in
grief at that extraordinary spectacle. The
Rishi struck the king and the queen sud-
denly with that goad having a sharp point.


42. Though thus struck on the back
and the cheeks, the royal pair still showed
no sign of agitation: Qn the other hand‘
they continued to carry the Rishi on as
before, .


43. Trembling from head to foot, for
ne food had passed their lips for fifty nights,
and exceedingly weak, the heroic pair
somehow succeeded in dragging that ex-
cellent chariot.


44. Repeatedly and deeply cut by the
goad, the royal pair became covered with
blood. Indeed, O king, they then looked
like a couple of Kinshuka trees in the |
flowering season. :


45. Seeing the plight to which theic
king and queen had been reduced, the citi-
zens became afflicted with great grief.
Filled with fear of the curse of the Rishi,
they kept silent under their misery. :


46. Collected in masses they.said to each
other,—See the might of penances! Al-
though all of us are angry, we are still
unable to look at the Rishi.

47. Great is the energy of the holy
Risti of purified soul! See also the ens
durance of the king and his royal spouse..


48. Though exhausted with fatigue and
hunger, they are still carrying the car!—


.The son of Bhrigu, despite the misery he


caused to Kushika and his queen, could see


no. sign of dissatisfaction or agitation in


them.


Bhishma said:—

49, The perpetuater of Bhrigu’s race,
seeing the king and the queen totally un-
moved, began to distribute wealth very
largely as if he were a second Lord of
Treasures.


50. At this deed also, king Kushika
showed no mark of dissatisfaction. He
did as the Rishi ordered. Seeing alt this,
that illustrious and best of ascetics became
pleased. ;

5t. Descending from that excellent car,
he unharnessed the royal pair. Having
freed them, he addressed them duly,


130


52. -Indeed, the san of Bhrigu, in a
soft, deep, and delighted voice, said,—1 am
ready to give an excellent boon to you
both.


53. Delicate as they were, their bodies
had been pierced with the goad. Moved
by affection, that best of ascetics softly
touched them with his hands whose healing
virtues resembled those of ambrosia itself,
O chief of the Bharatas.


54. Then the king answered,—Mvself
and my wife have felt no exhaustion,~In-
deed, all their fatigue had been removed
through the power of thé Rishi, and hence it
was that the king could say so to the Rishi.


55. Pleased witte their conduct, the ill-
ustrious Chyavana said to them,—I have
never before spoken falsehood, {t ‘must,
therefore, be as | have said.


56. ‘This spot on the banks of Ganga
is very charming and auspicious, { shalf,
observing a vow, live for a fittle while here,
O king.

57. Do you return to your city. You
are exhausted } Your shall come again, | ‘Yo-
morrow, O king, you shall returning with
your wife, see me here. ;

58. You should not give to anger or
grief. “he titie is come when you shall
reap a great reward! That which is covet-
ed by you and whiclr is in your heart wiil
indeed be done.


59. Thus addressed by the Rishi, king
Kushika, with a pleased heart, replied to
the Rishi in these pregnant words.


' 60. I have entertained no anger or grief,
O highly blessed one! We have been
cleansed and sanctified by you, O holy
one! Wehave once more become youth-
ful. See our bodies have become greatly
beautiful and possessed of great strength.


61. [donot anylonger see those wounds
that were caused by you on our bodies”
with your goad! Verily, with my wife, I
am in good heaith.


62, I see my goddess become as beauti-
ful in -body as an Apsara. Indeed, she is
endued with as much beauty and splendour
as she had ever been before.


63. All this, O great ascetic, is due to
your favour. Indeed, there is nothing
» wonderful in all this, O holy Rishi of power

ever unbaffled, :

64. Thus addressed by the king, Chya-
vana said to him.—You shall, with your
-wafe, return here to-morrow, O ging.

65. With these words, the royal sage

Kushika was sent away. Saluting the Rishi,


MANABHARATA,


re'urned to his capital like a second king
of the celestials.


66. The counsellers then, with the
priest, came out to welcome him. His
troops also and the dancing women and alt
his subjects, did the same.


67. Surrounded by them all, king Kue,
shika, shining in beauty and splendour,
entered his city, with a delighted heart,
and his praises were sung by bards and
encomiasts,


68. Having entered his city and per-
formed all his morning rites, he ate witly
his wife. Gifted with great splendour, the
king then passed the night happily,


69. Each saw the other ta te possessed
of fresh youthfiiness. All their sufferings
and pains having ceased, thev saw eacly
other to resemble a celestial. Gifted witlr
the splendour thev had got ag a boon from
that foremost of Brahmanas, and possessed
of exceedingty lovely features and beautiful
forms, both of them passed a happy night
ix their bed. :


go. In the interval spreader of the feats
of Bhrigu’s race, viz., the Rishi having
penances for his wealth, converted by his

oza-power, that charming wood on the
bank of Ganga into a retreat full of wealth
of every kind and adorned with every
Wariety of jewels and gems on account of
which it excelled in Heauty and splendour
the very abode af the king of the celestial.


See eanened


CHAPTER LIV. °
~ (ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.


Bhishma said :—


1. When that night passed away, the
great king Kushika awoke and performed
his morning rites. Accompanid by his wife
he then went towards that forest which the
Rishi had selected for his residence.


2. Arrived there, the king saw a palatial
mansion made entirely of gold. Having a
thousand columns each of which was made
of gems and precious stones, it looked like
a mansion belonging to the Gandharvas,


g—4. Kushika saw in every part of that
building signs of celestial design. And
he saw hills with charming valleys, and
lakes with lotuses on their bosom; and
mansions full of rich and curious articles,
and gateways and arches, O Bharata,


the king, endued with a handsome body, | And the king beheld many open glades


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


and open spots carpeted with grass, and


resembling fields of gold. -


5. And he saw many Sahakaras adorn-
ed with blossoms, and Ketakas and Udda-
lakas, and Dnhavas, and Ashokas, and
blossoming Kundas, and Atimuktas,


6. And he saw there many Champakas
and Tilakas and Bhavyas and Panasas and
Vyanjulas and Karnikacas adorned with
flowers.


7. And the king saw many Shyamas
and Varanapushpas and the creepers called
Astapadika, all clipt properly and beauti-
fully.

8. And the king saw trees on which
Totuses of various species bloomed in alt
theic beauty, and some of which bore
flowers of every season. And he saw also
many mansions that looked like celestial
cars or like beautiful mountains,


o—10, And at some places, Q Bharata,
there were tanks and takes full of cool
water and at others were those that were
full of warm or hot water. And there were
various kinds of excellent seats and costly
beds and bedsteads made of gold and
gems and overlaid with beautiful cloths and
carpets, There were profuse viands and
edibles, all well-dressed and ready for use.


t1—12.—And there were talking parrots,
she-parrots, Bhringarajas, Kokilas, Shata-
patras with Koyashtikas and Kukkubhas,
and peacocks and cocks and Datyuhas and
jJivajivakas and Chakoras and monkeys
and swans and Sarasas and Chakravakas.


13. Here and there he saw bevies of
rejoicing Apsacas and conclaves of happy
Gandharvas, O monarch,


14. And he saw other Gandharvas at
other places rejoicing with their dear wives.
‘Lhe king sometimes saw these sights and
sometimes could not see them,


15. The king heard also sweet notes of
vocal music and the sweet voices of pre-
ceptors engaged jn lecturing their disciples
on the Vedas and the Scriptures. And
the king also heard the harmonious notes
of the geese sporting in the lakes.


16. Seeing such highly wonderful spec-
tacles, the king began to ceftect inwardly,
saying,—Is thisa dream? Or, is all thts
due to'an alienation of my mind ?* Or is
it all real?


17. O, T have, without renouncing my
body, attained to the beatitude of Heaven,
‘This land is either the sacred country of
the Uttara-Kurus, or the abode, called
Aunravati, of the king of the celestials,


131


18. O, what are. these wonderful spec-
tacles that | see !—Reflecting thus, the king
at last saw that foremost of Rishis,


1g In that golden palace having columns
made of jewels and yems, the son of Bhrigu
lay stretched on a costly and excellent bed.


20. With his wife by his side, the king
Approached, with an exulting heart, the Rishi
as he lay on that bed. Chyavana, how-
ever, speedily disappeared at this, with the
bed itself upon which he lay.


21. The king then’ saw the Rishi at
another part of that forest, seated on a mat
made of Kusha grass, and mentaily engaged
in the recital of some high Mantras,


22. Through his Yoga-power, thus did
that Brahmana stupefy the king. In a
moment that«charming forest, those bevies
of Apsaras, those bands of Gandharvas,
those beautiful trees, all disappeared.


23. The bank of Ganga becameas silent
as usual, and appeared as befure coveres
with Kusha grass and anthills.


24. Having seen that highly wonderfu.
spectacle and its quick disappearance also,
king Kushika, wit his wife, became filled
with wonder, :


25. With a delighted heart, the king
addressed his wife saying, see, O ami-
able one, the various agreeable scenes and
sights, occurring ‘nowhere else, which we
two have just seen.


26. .All this is due to the favour of
Bhrigu’s son and the power of his penances.
By penances one attains all which cherishes
in his imagination,

27-~28. Penances are superior to even
the kingdom of the three worlds. With
penantes well-performed, Liberation itself
may be acquired, Mark, the power of the
great and celestial Rishi Chyavana derived
from his penances! Hecan, at his plea«
sure, create even other worlds,


29. Only Brahmanas are born ia this
world for uttering and understanding sacred
deeds, Who else save Chyavana could da
all this ? a


30. Sovereignty may be acquired easily®
But the’ dignity of a Brahmana is not
attainable. It was through the power of a
Brahmana that we were harnessed to a car
like well-broken animals, :

3t. These thoughts that pasaed through
the king’s mind, became known to Chya+
vana. Ascertaiming the king’s thougtits,
the Rishi addressed him and said,~eCome
here quicklys

32. ‘Khus addressed, the king and the
queen approached the great ascetic; and


[132


bending their heads they adored him
who were worthy of adoration. -


33. Uttering a benediction upon the
king, the Rishi, gifted with great intelli-
gence, O king, comforted the king and said,
—Sit down on that seat.


34-35. After this, O monarch, the son
of Bhrigu, without guile or insincerity of
any sort, pleased the king with many soft
words, and then said,—O king, you have
completely subjugated the five organs of
faction and the five organs of knowledge
with the mind as their sixth. For this you
have come out unhurt from the fiery ordeal
I had prepared for you.


36. I have been properly honored and
adored, O son, by you, O foremost of all
persons gifted with speech’ You have no
sin, not even a minute one, in you.


37. Give me leave, O king, for I shall
now proceed to the place 1 came from. I
have been highly pleased with you, O king.
Pray accept the boon | am ready to give !


Kushika said:—

38. Before you, O holy one, [ have
staid like one staying in the midst of a fire.
‘That Ihave not yet, QO chief of Bhrigu’s
race, been reduced to ashes is sufficient.


39. Even this is the highest boon that
I have got, O delighter of Bhrigu! That


you have been pleased by me, O Brahmana, |:


and that I have succeeded in rescuing my
race from destruction, Q sinless one, are
in my case the best boons,


40. This I consider, O learned Brah-
mana, as a distinct mark of your: favour.


“Ihe object of my life has been accomplished. .


Even this is what 1 consider the very object
of my sovereignty. This is the highest fruit
of my penances.


4t. If, Olearned Brahmana, you have
been pleased with me, O  delighter of
Bhrigu, then do you remove some doubts
which are in my mind.


-& 5
CHAPTER LV,


( ANUSHASANA PARVA).—
-' g - Continued.


Chyavana said :— ne
1.-.Do you accept a boon from me.
Do you also, O king, tell me. what the
doubt is that is in your mind. I shall
certainly accomplish all your purpo-<-


MAHABHARATA.


Kushika said :—


2. If you have been pleased with me,
O holy one, do you then, O son of Bhrigu,
tell me your object in living in my palace
for sometime, for I wish to bear it. What
was your object in sleeping on the bed
I assigned you for, one and twenty days
continuously, without changing sides.


3. O foremost of ascetics, what also was
your object, again in going out of the room
without speaking a single word.

4. Why did you, again, without any
reason, disappear and once more become
visible? Why, O learned Brahmana, did
you again lay yourself down on the bed,
and sleep, as before, for one and twenty
days.


5. Why did you go out after you were
rubbed by us with oil for your bath? Why,
also, after having made various kinds of
food in my palace to be collected, did you
consume them with fire ? :


6. What was the cause of your sudden
journey through my city on the car? What
was your object in giving away so much
riches? What was your motive in showing
us the wonders of the forest created by
your Yoga-power,

7. ‘What, indeed, was your motive in
showing, O great ascetic, so many palaces
made of gold and so many bed-steads
supported on posts of jewels and gems 7


8. Why also did all these wonders dis-
appear from our sight? I wish to hear
the cause of all this. Thinking of all these
acts of yours, O perpetuater of Bhrigu’s
race, | became stupefied.:


g. I cannot comprehend -your motive.
O' you having penances for wealth, I wish
to hear the truth about all those acts of
yours in full.


Chyavana said :— :

to. Listen to me as I tell you fully the
reasons which had moved me in all these
acts of mine. Asked by you, O king, I
cannot refuse to enlighten you.


tr, In days of yore, on one otcasion,
when the deities -had assembled together,
the Grandfather Brahman said some words.
I heard them, O king, and shail now repeat
them to you. :


12. On account of a quarrel between
Brahmana and Kshatriya energy, there
will occur an intermixture in my race.—-
Your graudson, O king, will become endued
with great energy and power,


13. Hearing this, f came here resolved
to exterminate your race, Indeed, I came,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


O Kushika, seeking the utter extermina-.
tion of your family, in fact, for reducing
to ashes all your descendants.


14. Moved by this motive I came .to
your palace, O monarch, and said to you,—
I shall observe some vow. Do you attend
upon me and serve me dutifully.-


15. While living, however, in your house
1 could not see any shortcomings in you.
it is for that reason, O royal sage, that
you are still alive, for otherwise you would
have by this been dead. .


16. It was with this resolution that 1
slept for twenty-one days in the hope that
somebody would awake me before I arose
out of my own accord.


17. You, however, with your wife, did
_not awake me. Even then, O best of kings,
I became delighted with you.-


18. Rising from my bed I! went out of

the chamber without speaking to any of
“ you. I did this, O king, in the hope that
you would ask me and thus I would have
an opportunity of cursing you.


19. [ then disappeared, and again
showed myself in the room of your palace,
and once more following Yoga slept for one
and twenty days,


‘20. My motive was this. . Exhausted
with toil and hunger you two would be
angry with me and do what would be un-
pleasant to me. [It was from this motive
that I caused yourself and your wife to be
afflicted with hunger.


21. In ‘your heart, however, O king, the

slightest feeling of anger or vexation did

* not cise. For this, O king, | became higly
pleased with you.


22. When I caused various: kinds of
food to be brought and then set firé to
them, I hoped that yourself with your wife
would yield to anger at the sight. Even
‘that act, however, of mine was tolerated
by you. ~ ;

23——24. I then’ ascended the car, O
king, and addressed you, sayingj=—Do you
with your -wile bear me!—You did what I
ordered, without the least scruple, O king !
I became delighted at this, ‘The gifts of
riches I made could not excite your anger.


_ 25. Pleased with you, O king, I created
with the help of my Yoga-power that forest
which yourself with your wife did see here.
Listen, O king, to the object 1 had.


26. For pleasing you and your queen I
made you to have a glimpse of Heaven, Ail
those things which you have seen in these
woods, O king, are a foretaste of Heaven.


27. O best of kings, for a little while I


133


made you and your wife behold, in even
yuur earthly bodies, some sights of Heaven.


28. All this was done for showing the
power of penances and the reward that is
in store for virtue. The desire that arose
in your heart, O monarch, at sight of those
delightful objects, is known to me. .


29. You became desirous of obtaining
the dignity of a Brahmana and the merit of
penances, O king, disregarding the sover-
eignty of the’ Earth, nay, the sovereignty
of very Heaven.


30. You thought this, O king. The


‘status of a Brahmana is highly difficult to


get; having become a Brahmana,: it is
highly difficult to obtain the status of a
Rishi; having become a Rishi it is difficult
to become an ascetic. ae


3t. I telt you that your desire will be
fulfilled. From you, O Kushika, will origi-
nate a Brahmana who shall be called after
your name. The person that will be the
third in descent from you shall obtain the
status ofa Brahmana,


. 32. Through the energy of the Bhrigus,
your gctandson, O king, will be an ascetic.
gifted with the splendour of fire.


33- He shall always strike all men, in-
deed, the inhabitants of, the- three worlds,
with fear. 1 tell you the truth.

34.. O royal sage, do you accept the
boon that is now in your mind. [I shalb
soon start for a sojourn to all the sacred
waters. Time is expiring. ’


Kushika said :—

35. This, O great ascetic, is a high boon
in my case, for you have been pleased with
mel! Let that take place which you have
said ! Let my grandson become a Brahma-
na, O sinless one.


36. - Indeed, let the dignity of Brahmana-
hood attach to my family, O toly one!
This is the boon 1 pray for ! I wish to once
more ask you in full, O holy one.


37. In what way, O delighter of Bhrigu,
will the dignity of Brahmanahood attach to
my family? Who will.be my friend ? Who
will have my affection and respect ?


eee
‘CHAPTER LVI. .
( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—
. Continued.


Chyavana said :—
1. I should certainly, O king, tell you
evetything about the ciccumstance for


134


MAHABHARATA,


which, O monarch, | came hither for exter- « manahood will attach to one who is third


tuinating your race,


2, ‘This is well-known, O king, that the
Kshatriyas should always have tue help of
the sons of Bhrigu in the matter of sacci-
fices. ‘Pheough an irresistible decree of
destiny, the Kshatriyas and the Bhargavas
will quarrel.


3. The Kshatriyas, O king, will kill all
the descendants of Bhrigu.
nance of fate, they will root out the race
of Bhrigu, not sparing even infants in their
mothers’ wombs.


4. There will then be born in Bhrigu's
race a Rishiof the name of Urva. Gift-
ed with great energy, he will in splendour
certainly resemble fire or the sun.


“5. He will cherish such anger as will he
sufficient to consume the three worlds. He
will be competent to reduce the whole
Earth with all her mountains and forests
into ashes.


6. For a little while he will put ont the
flames of that fiery rage, throwing it into
the Mare’s mouth that wanders through
the ocean..


7~—9. He will have a son of the name of
Richika. ‘The whole science of arms, O
sinless one, in its embodied form, will come
to him, for the extermination of the entire


Kshatriya caste, through a decree of Des--


tiny. Receiving that science by, inward


light, he will, by Yoga-power, communicate [''


it to his son, the highly blessed Jamadagni
of purified soul. That foremost of Bhsi-
gu’s race will bear that science in his mind.


to. O yow of righteous soul, Jamadagni
will marry.a girl, taking her from your
race, fot spreading its glory, O chief of the
Bharatas.


tt, Having obtained for wife the daugh-
ter of Gadbi and youe grand-daughter, O
king, that great ascetic will beget a twice-
born son gifted with Kshatriya accom-
plishments, mate sts :


12. In your cace will be born a son, a
Kshatriya gifted with the virtues of a Brah-
mana. Possessed of great virtue, he will
be the son of Gadhi. Known by the name
of Vishwamitra, he will in energy come to
be considered as the equal of Vrihaspati
himself, the preceptor of the celestials,


13. The illustrious Richika will geant
this son to your race, this Kshatriya who
willbe endued with high penances.*> ‘Iwo
women will be the cause in the matter of
this exchange of sons.


14. All this will take place at the
command of the Grandfather. It will
mever be otherwise, Lhe status of Brah-


By an ordi-°


.from himself,


in descent from you. You shall become a
relative of the Bhargavas!


Bhishma said :—


15. Hearing these words of the great
ascetic Chyavana, king Kushika became
filled with joy, and answered as follow :—


16—17 Indeed, O best of the Bharatas,
he said,—So be it!—Gifted with hign
energy, Chyavana once more addressed
the king, and urged him to accept a boon
The king replied,—Very
well, From you, O great ascetic, 1 shall
obtain the fruition of my wish.


18—19—20. Let my family become inves«
ted with the dignity of Brahmanahood, and
let it always set its heart upon virtue !—
The ascetic Chyavana, thus solicited,
granted the king's prayer, and bidding
tarewell to the king, started on his intended
sojourn to the sacred waters, I have now
toid you everything, O Bharata, relating
to your questions, wiz., how the Bhrigus
and the Kushikas became connected with
each other by marriage. Indeed, O king,
everything took place asthe Rishi Chya-
vana had said. “lhe birth of Rama (of
Bhrigu’s cace) and of Vishwamitra (of
Kushika’s race) happened in the way that


Chyavana had said. —


CHAPTER LVI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—~ '

1.. 1 am stupefied, O grandfather, to
hear yout words! Vhinking that the Earth
is now destitute of a very large number
of kings all of whom were gifted with great
Picaperltys my heart becomes filled with
grief.


2. Having conquered the Earth and
acquired hundreds ut kingdoms, O Bharata,
I curn with gcief, O grandfather, at the
thought of the millions of men I have
killed.


3. Alas, what will the condition be of
those foremost ladies who have been de-
prived by us of husbands and sons and
maternal uncles and brothers?


4. Having killed those Kurus,—-our
kinsmen, that is, and our friends and well-
wishers,—we shall have to sink in hell
with heads hanging downwards, There
is no doubt of this.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


g. t wish, O Bharata, ta afflict my body
with severe penances. With that end
in view, O king, | wish to receive instruc-
tions from you. .


Vaishampayana said :—

6. The great Bhishma, hearing these
words of Yudhishthira, refleeted upon
them acutely with the help of his..under-
standing, and addcessed Yudhishthira in
reply. ; :


Bhishma said :—


7. Hear what I say to you. It is highly
wonderful and is a great mystery. . The
subject is the ends that creatures acquire
after death as the rewards of particular
acts or courses of conduct they foliow,


8. One goes to Heaven by penantces.
By penances one acquires fame. By
penances, O mighty king, one lives long
and_-gets all articles of enjoyment.


g. By penances one acquires knowledye,
. science, health and freedom from disease,
beauty of person, prosperity, and blessed-
ttess, O chief of Bharata’s race.


_to. By penances one acquires: riches.
y observing. the vow of silence one
succeeds in bringing the whole world
under his sway, By making gifts one
gets all kinds of enjoyable articles. By
observing the rite of Diksha one acquires
birth ina good and high family. i


11. Those who spend their lives living
upon only fruits and roots succeed. in
acquiring kingdom and sovereigaty. ‘Those
who live upon the leaves of plants and
trees as their food sucgeed in going to
Heaven, - i


12. One who live upon water only
attains to Heaven. By making gifts one
simply increases his wealth. By serving
with reverence his preceptor, one acquires
learning. By performing Shraddhas every
day in honor of his Departed Manes, one
acquires a large humber of children.


13. By observing Diksha upon potherbs
and vegetables, one~ acquires a large
uumber of kine. Those who live upon
grass and straw. succeed in going to
Heaven, By bathing thrice every day
with the necessary cites, one acquires a
large number of waves. By drinking the
air alone, one acquires cesidence in the
regions of Prajapats.

14. The Brahmana who bathes every
day and recites sacred Mantras in the
two twilights, becomes possessed of the
position of Daksha himself. By adoring
the deities in a forest or desert, one ac-
quites a kingdom or soversignty, and by


135


observing the vow of relinquishing the body
by a long fast, one goes to the celestial
region,

15. One having penances for wealth and
always passing his days in Yega obtains
good beds and seats and vehicles. Re-
nouncing the body by entering a burning
fire, one becomes an object of respect iu
the region of Brahman.


16. ‘Those who lie on the hard and bare
ground acquire houses and beds. ‘hose
who clothe themselves in rags and barks


get good dresses and ornaments.

17. By avoiding the several agreeable
tastes one succeeds in winning great prose
perity. By abstaining from meat and fish,
one gets long-lived childen.


18. One who passes sometime in Udas
vasa, mode of life, becomes the very lord of
the celestial region. ‘The.man who speaks
the truth, O best of men, succeeds in sport-
ing happily with the celestials themselves,


1g. By making gifts, one acquires great
fame on account of his high achievements.
By abstention from cruelty, one acquires
heaith and freedom from disease, By serv<
ing the Brahmanas with respect, one acquires
kingdom and sovereignty, and the high
position of a Brabmana.


20. By making gifts of water and other
drinks, one acquires eternal fame on ac-
count of high achievements. By making
rifts of food, one acquires various articles


of enjoyment.


_21. One who gives peace to all crea+
tures, (by refraining to do them any injury),
becomes freed from every region, By serve
ing the gods, one obtains a kingdom and
celestial beauty. -


22. By presenting lights at places which
are dark and frequented by men, one ac-
quires a good eyesight. By giving away
good and beautiful objects, one acquires a
good memory and understanding.


23. By distributing scents and garlands,
one acquires far-reaching fame. ‘Those
who abstain from shaving off their hai¢
and beards, get excellent children.


24. By observing fasts and initiation
and baths, O Bharata, for twelve years one
acquires a region which is superior to that
attainable by unreturning heroes,

25. By conferring one’s daughter on
an eligible bridegroom according to the
Brahma form, one gets, O best of men, male
and female slaves and ornaments and fields
and houses, ; 2 :

26. By celebrating sacrifices and ob-
serving fasts, one goes to the celestial
region, Q Bharata, The man who gives


136


" away fruits and Aowers succeeds in gaining
sacred knowledge. :


27. ‘The man who gives away a thousand
kine with horns bedecked with gold, suc-

ceeds in acquiring Heaven. ‘his has been
declard by the very deities in a celestial
assemblage.


28. One who gives away a Kapila ¢ow
with her calf, with a bragen pot for milking,


with horns bedecked with gold, and pose‘:


sessed of various other accomplishments,
obtains the fruition of all his desires from
that cow.


29. Such a person, on account of that
act of gift, lives in the celestial region for
as many years as there are hairs on the
body of the cow and rescues in the next
world his sous and grandsons and all his
family to the seventh degree.


30. That man gets to the regions of the
Vasus who gives away acow with horns
beautifully decorated with gold,
panied with a brazen jar for milking, along
witlr a piece of cloth embroidered with gold,
a wneasure of sesame and a sum of money as
gt te


31. A gift of kine rescues the giver in
in the next world when he finds himself
falting into the deep darkness of hell and
fettered by his own deeds in this world,
fike a boat with sails that have caught: the
air rescuing a person drowning in the
ocean,


32. He who confers a daughter accor-
ding to the Brahma form upon an eligible
person, or who makes a gift of land toa
Brahmana, or who gives food according to
due rites, succeeds in attaining to the region
of Indra,


33. That man who presents a house,
furnished with: every sort of furniture to a
Brahmana given to Vedic studies and en-
dued with every accomplishment and good
behaviour, lives in the country of the Uttara-
Kurus. ~


34. ‘By making gifts of draft bullocks, a
person acquires the region of the Vasus.
Gift of gold secures Heaven. Gift of pure
gold yields greater merit still.


35- By making gift of an umbrella, one
acquires a palatial residence. By making
gift of a pair of sandals or shees, one ace
quires good cars, The reward of cloths,
is personal beauty, and by making gifts
of scents, one gets a fragrant body in
next life.


36. One who gives flowers and fruits
and plants and trees to a Brahmana, ac-
quices, without any toil, a palatial residence


accom |


MAHABHARATA.


tontaining beautiful women and plenty of
riches.


37. The giver of food and drink of


‘different tastes and other articles of enjoy-


ment succeeds in acquiring profuse supply
of such articles. The giver, again, of houses
and cloths get articles of a similar nature,
There is no doubt in this.


38. That person who makes gifts of
gaclands and incense and scents and un-
guents and the articles needed by men
after a bath, and garlands to Brahmanas,
becomes freed from every disease and,
possessed of personal beauty, sports in joy
in the region reserved for great kings. ~


39. That man, QO king, who presents to
a Beahmana a house that is stored with
grain, furnished with beds, full of riches,
auspicious, and delightful, acquires a pala-
tial residence.


40. He who gives to a Brahmana a
good bed perfumed with fragrant scents,
covered with an excellent sheet, and pillows,
gets without any effort on his part a beau-
tiful wife, belonging te“& respectable family
and of agreeable manners,


4t. The man who takes tq a hero’s bed
on the field of battle becomes'the equal of
the Grandfather Brahman himself, There
is no end that is higher than this. Even
this is what the great Rishis have said.


Vaishampayana said:— °

42. ' Hearing these words of his grand-
father, Yudhishthira, the delighter of the
Kurus, becatne anxious to get the end
ceserved for heroes and no longer expressed
any disgust for leading a domestic mode of
life.


+ 43- Then, O foremost of men, Yudhish -

thicra, addressing all the other sons of
Pandu, said to them,—Let the words
which our grandfather has said, command
yout faith.’


44. At this, all the Pandavas with the
famous Draupadi amongst them, highly


‘| spoke of the words of Yudhishthira and said


$ yes.’
——


CHAPTER LVIII.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said —


1. I wish, O Bharata, chief to hear from


‘you what the rewards are, O best of the


Kurus, of the planting of trees and the
digging of- tanks,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


Bhishma said :—


2. A piece of land on a best sight,
fertile, situate in the midst of charming
adorned with various kinds of metals, and
inhabited by all sorts of creatures, Is con-
sidered as the foremost of spots.


3. A particular portion of such land
should be chosen for digging a tank,
shall tell you, in due order, the different
kinds of tanks. I shall also tell you what-
the merits also are of the digging of tanks.


4. The man who causes a tank to be dug
becomes entitled to the respect and adora-
tion of the three worlds.


5. A tank full of water is as agreeable
and beneficial as the house of a friend. It
fs gratifying to the Sun himself. It also
helps the growth of the celestials. It is the
foremost of all things that lead to fame.


6—7. The wise have said that the exca-
vation of a tank brings on. Virtue, Profit and
Pleasure. A tank is said to be properly
excavated, if it is made on a piece of land
that is inhabited by respectable persons.
A tank is said to be necessary for all the
four purposes of living creatures. ‘lanks,
again, are considered as forming the ex-
cellent beauty of a country.


8. The -celestials, human beings, Gan-
dharvas, Departed Manes, Uragas, Raksha-
sas, and even immobile beings, all cesort
to a tank full of water as their refuge,


g. I shall, therefore, recite to you the
merits attached to tanks as described by
great Rishis, and] the rewards in store for
persons who cause them to be excavated.


to. The wise have said that that man
acquires the merit of an Agnihotra sacrifice
in whose tank water is held in the season of
‘ains.


tr.. The high reward in the world that
is reaped by the person who makes a gift
of a thousand kine is acquired by that man
in whose tank water is held in the season of
autumn.


12, That person in whose tank water
lies in the cold season acquires the merit
of the wight who performs a sacrifice with
profuse gifts of gold.


13. That person in whose tank water
lies in the season of dew, acquires, the wise
have said, thé merits of an Agnishtoma
sacrifice.

14. That man in whose well-made tank
water lies in the season of spring acquires
the merit of the Atiratra sacrifice.


15. That man in whose tank water lies
in the season of summer wins, the Rishi
say, the merits of a horse-scrifice.


18


137


f

16. That man rescues his whole race in

whose tank kine are seen to satisfy their

thirst and from which pious men draw their
water.


17. That man in whose tank kine satisfy
their thirst as also other animals and birds,
and human beings, gains the merits of a
horse-sacrifice.


18. Whatever quantity of water is drunk
from one’s tank and whatever qiantity
is taken therefrom by others for purposes of
bathing, all become stored for the benefit
of the excavater of the tank and he enjoys
the same eternally in the next world.


19. Water, especially in the other world,
is difficult to get,O son, A gift of drink
yields eternal happiness.


20. Make gifts of sesame here. Make
gifts of water. Doyou also give lamps.
While alive and awake, do you sport happie
ly with kinsmen. These are acts which you
shall not be able to achieve in the other
world,


at. The gift of drink, O chief of men,’
is superior to every other gift. In point of
merit, it is superior to all other gifts. Theres
fore, do you make gifts of water.


22, Thus have the Rishis described the
high merits of the excavation of tanks, I
shall now describe to you the planting of
trees,


23. Of immobile objects, six classes
have been spoken. They are Vrikshas,
Gutmas, Latas, Vallis, Twaksaras, and
Tcinas of diverse kinds,


24. ‘These are the several kinds of.
vegetables. Listen now to the merit of
their planting. By planting trees one
acquires fame in the world of men and
auspicious rewards in the next world.


25. Such a man is applauded and rege
pected in the world of the Departed Manes,
Such a man’s name -does not die even
ey he goes to live in the world of celes«
tials,


26. The man who plants trees rescues
the ancestors and descendants of both his
paternal and maternal lines. Do you,
therefore, plant trees, O Yudhishthira,


27, The trees that a man plants bee
come the planter’s children. There is no
doubt in this. Departing from this world,
such a man goes to the celestial region.
paceen he enjoys many eternal regions of

1SS, : 7


28. Trees please the deities by their
flowers; the Departed Manes by their
fruits; and all guests and stcangers by the
shadow they afford,


138


_2g. Kinnaras, Uragas, Rakshasas, deities
Gandharvas, and human beings, as also
Rishis, all resort to trees as their refuge.


30. Trees that bear flowers and fruits
please all men.
saved in the next world by the trees he
planis like children saving their own
father.


31. Therefore, the man who is desirous
of achieving his own good, should plant
trees by the side of tanks and rear them
like his own children. The trees which a
man plants are, according to both reason
and the scriptures, the children of the
planter,


33. That Bralrmana who excavates a
tank, and he wiio plants trees, and he who
performs sacrifices, are all adored in the
celestial region as men who are devoted to
truthfulness of speech.


be excavated and trees to be planted, adore
the deities in diverse sacrifices, and speak
the truth > ee es


CHAPTER LIX,


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Amongst all those gifts mentioned
in the work other than the Vedas, which
gift, O chief of Kuru’s rage, is the most
superior, in your opinion ?

2, O powerful one, great is my curiosity
in this matter. Do you describe to tne that
gift which follows the giver to the next
world ?. ; .


Bhishma said :—

3—-4. An assarance to all creatures of
love and affection and abstention from
every sort of injury, acts of kindness and
favor done to a person in distress, gifts of
articles made to one who solicits with thirst
and agreeable to the solicitor’s wishes, and
whatever gifts are made without the giver’s
ever thinking of them as gifts made by him,
form, O chief of Bharata’s race, the high-
est and best of gifts. ‘


5. Gift of gold, gift of kine, and gift of
earth,--these aré considered as sin-clean-
sing. ‘bey rescue the giver from his evil
deeds.


6 O king, do you always make such


gifts to the cighteous. Forsooth; gifts
rescue the giver from all his sins,


The planter of trees is.


MANABUARATA.


4. That person who wishes to make hig
gifts eternal, should always give to persons
gifted with necessary qualifications whate
ever articles are desired by all and whate
ever things are the best in his louse.


8. The man who nrakes gifts of agree-
able things and who does to others what is
agreeable to otlrers, always succeeds in
getting things that are agreeable to him-
self, Such a person certainly becomes
agreeable to af, both here and hereafter.


g. That man, O Yudhishthira, is @
cruel wight, who, through vanity, does not,
to the extent of his means, attend to the
wishes of the poor and helpless who solicit
assistance.


10. He is, indeed, the forenrost of mer
who shows favour to even an helpless enemy
fallery into distress when such enemy comes


_and prays for help,
3%. Hence, one should cause tanks to’ |


tt No man is equal to him who satisfies
the hunger of a person who is ermaciated,
possessed of fearning, destitute of the
meaus of support, and wealsened by misery.


12. Q@ne should always, O son of Kunti,
remove by ever means in his power, the
distress of the pious observant of vows and
acts, whio,'‘though having no sons and wives
and plunged into misery, do not yet solicit
others for any kind of help.


13—t4. Those persons who do not utter
blessings upon the dejties and men, who are
worthy of respect and always contented,
and who live upen such alms ag they get
without begging, are considered as verit«
able snakes of virulent poison. Do you, O
Bharata, always protect yourself from them
by making gifts to them. ‘hey are cap-
able to make the foremost of Ritwijas.
You are to find them out by means of your
spies and agents,


15. You should honor those men by
gilts of good houses furnished with every
necessary article, with slaves and servants,
with good dresses and vestments, O son of
Kuru, and with all articles bringing on
pleasure and happiness.


16. Righteous men of righteous: deeds
should make such gifts, moved by the
desire that it is their duty to act in that way
and not from desire of reaping any rewards
therefrom. Indeed, good men should act
in this:way so that the virtuous men des-
cribed above might not, O Yudhishthira,
feel any disinclination to accept those gifts
sanctified by devotion and faith.


17. There are persons bathed in learn-
ing and bathed in vows, Without depend.
ing upon anybody they get their means of
living. ‘These Brahmanas of rigid vows


j are given to Vedic study and penanecs


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


without proclaiming their practices to any
one,


18. Whatever gifts you may make to
those persons of pure conduct, of thorough
mastery over their senses, and always
contented with their own married wives, are
sure to acquire for you a merit that will
accompany you in all the worlds into which
you may ge.


19. One reaps the same merit by mat-
ing gifts to twice-born persons of controlled
souls which one acquires by properly pour-
ing libations te the sacred fre morning and
evening.


20. This is the sacrifice spread out for
you,—a_ sacrifice that is sanctified by devo-
tion and faith and that is accompanied with
Dakshina! It is superior to all other sacri-
fices. Let that sacrifice ceaselessly flow
from you as you give away.


21. Performed in view of such men, O
Vudhishthica, a sacrifice in which the water
that is sprinkled for dedicating gifts forms
the oblations in honor of the Departed
Manes, and devotion and worship rendered
to such superior men, serves to free one of
the debts he owes to the deities.


22. Those persons who do not give way
to anger and who never desire to take even
a blade of grass belonging to ‘others, as
also they who are of sweet speech, deserve
to receive from us the most cespectful
adorations.


23. Such persons and others never pay
thew regards to the giver. Nor do they try
for obtaining gifts.
be maintained by givers as they maintain
their own sons, I bend my head to them.
from them also proceeds fearlessness.


24. Ritwijas, Priests and Preceptors,
when well-read in the Vedas and: when
behaving mildly towards disciples, become
such. Forsooth, Kshatriya energy loses its
se upon a Brahmana when it meets him,


5.' Thinking that youarea king, that you
are gifted with greatZpower, and that you
have riches do, not, O Yudhishthira, enjoy
your affluence without giving anything to
the Brahmanas.


26. Observing the duties of your own
caste, do you adore the Brahmanas with
whatever riches you have, O sinless one, for
purposes of adornment or sustaining your
power. .


27. Let the Brahmanas live in whatever
way they like. You should always bend your
head to them with respect. Let them always
rejoice in you as your children, living
happily and according to their wishes,


.28. Who else save you, O best of the
Kurus, can provide the means of livelihood


They should, however, |


.me than the Brahmanas,


139


for such Brahmanas as are gifted with
eternal contentment, as are your well-
wishers, and as are pleased with only a
litle ?


29. As women have one eternal duty, in
this world, viz., dependence upon, and the
obedient service of, their husbands, and
as such duty forms their only end, so is the
service of Brahmanas our eternal duty and’
end,


30—31. If on seeing cruelties and other
sinful deeds in Kshatriyas, the Brahmtanas,
O son, unhonored by us, leave us all, I say,
of what use would life be to us, in the
absence of all contact with the Brahmanas,
especially as we shall then ave to carry on
our existence without being able to study
the Vedas, to celebrate sacrifices, to hope
for worlds of bliss hereafter, and to per-
form great deeds ?


32. 1 shall, about it, tell you what the
eternal practice is. Formerly, O king, the
Kshatriyas used to serve the Brahmanas.


33. The Vaishya likewise used jin those
days to adore the Kshatriya, and the.
Shudra to adore the Vaishya. This is what
is heard, he Brahmana was like a burn-
ing fire. Without being able to touch him
or approach his presence, the Shudra used-
to serve the Brahmana from a distance.


34. It was only the Kshatriya and the
Vaishya who could serve the Brahmana by
touching his body or, approaching his
presence. ‘The Brahmanas are gifted with
a mild disposition. They are truthful ia
conduct, ‘They are followers of, the true.
religion.

35. When angry, they are like snakes
of dreadful poison. Such being theic
natuce, do you, O Yudhishthira, serve and


j attend them with obedience and respect. .


The Brahmanas are superior to those who
are higher than the high and the low.


36. The energy and penances of those
Kshatriyas who blaze forth with energy and -
power, become powerless and neutralised
when they gcome in contact with the Brah-
manas,


37. My father himself is not dearer to
My mother is not -
dearer tome than they. My grandfather,
(0) king, is not dearer, my own life is not


dearer,,O king, to me than the Brahmanas,


38. On Earth there is nothing, O Yu-
dhisthira, that is dearer to me than you.
But, O chief of Bharata’s race, the Brah-
manas are dearer to me than even you.


39. I tell you truly, O son of Pandu!
I swear by this truth, by which I hope to .
acquire all those blissful regions that have
been Shantanu’s,


140


40. 1 see those sacred regions with
Brahma shining conspicuously before them.
1 shall go there, O son, and live in them
eternally,

41. Seeing these regions, O best of the
Bharatas, I am filled with joy at the
thought of all these acts which I have done
in aid and honor of the Brahmanas, O
king.


CHAPTER LX.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.


Yudhishthird” said :—

1. To which of two Brahmanas, when
both happen to be equally pure in ¢onduct,
equally gifted with learning and purity, of
birth and blood, but differing from each
other in only this, v79., the one solicits and


the other does not,—I ask, O grandfather,


would a gift be more meritorious ?


Bhishma said :— ;
2 It has been said, O son of Pritha,
that a gift made to an unsoliciting person
yields greater merit than-one made toa
person who begs, One endued with con-
tentment is certainly more deserving than
that person who is shorn of that virtue and
is, therefore, helpless amidst the storms and
buffets of the world.


3. The firmness of a Kshatriya consists
in the protection he gives to others. The
firmness of a Brahmana consists in- his
refusal to beg. The Brahmana endued
with steadiness and learning and content~-
“ment gladdens the celestials. ==


4. The wise have said that an act of
begging on the part of a poor man isa
great reproach. Those persons who solicit
others are said to annoy the world like
thieves and robbers. :


_ §S- The person who solicits is said to
meet with death. The giver, however, is
said not to meet with death. The giver is
said to give life to him who solicits, By an
act of gift, O Yudhishthira, the giver is
said to rescue his own self also,


6. Mercy is a very high virtue. Led by
mercy people make gifts to those who
solicit. Those, however, who do not beg
but are sunk into poverty and distress,
should be respectfully invited for receiving
help. ;

7» \such Brahmanas, who must be
considered as the foremost of their order,
Jive in your kingdom, you should consider
them as fire covered with ashes,


MAHABHARATA,


8. Burning with penances, they are
capable of consuming the whole Earth.
Such persons, O son of Kuru’s race though
not generally adored, should still he cone
sidered as worthy of adoration in every
way. :

9.” Gifted with knowledge and spiritual
vision and penances and Yoga, such persons
always deserve our adoration. O scorcher
of enemies, do you always offer adoration
to such Brahmanas,


10. One should go of his own accord to
those foremost of Brahmanas who do not


_| solicit any body and make gifts to them of


various kinds of wealth in abundance. fhe
merit that comes from properly pouring
libations on the sacred fire every mocning
and evening, is acquired by the person who
makes gifts toa Brahmana endowed with
learning, with the Vedas, and with high and
excellent vows.


11—12. You should, O son of Kunti>
invite those foremost of Brahmanas, who
are cleansed by learning and the Vedas
and vows, who live in independence, whose
Vedic studies and penances are concealed
without being announced from the house
top, and who observe excellent vows, and
honor them with gifts of well-built and
charming houses containing servitors and
robes and furniture, and all other articles
of pleasure and enjoyment.


43. Knowing all duties and possessed of
minute vision, those foremost of Brahe
manas, O Vudhishthira, may accept the gifts
offered to them with devotion and respect,
thinking that they should not refuse and
disappoint the giver.


14. You should invite those Brahmanas
whose wives wait for their return like tillers
in expectation of rain. Having fed them
well, you should present additional food to
them so that upon their return home their
expectant wives might be able to distribute
that food among their children who had
clamoured for food but who had been con-
soled with promises.


15. Brahmacharins of controlled senses,
O son, by ‘eating’ at one’s house in the
forenoon, cause the three sacrificial fires to
be pleased with the householder at whose
house they eat. .-


16. Let the sacrifice of gift proceed in
your house at midday, O son, and do you.
also distribute kine and gold and dresses.
By acting thus, you are sure to please the
king of the celestials himself.


17. That would constitute your third
sacrifice, O Yudhishthira, in which offerings
are made to the deities, the Departed


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


Manes and the Brahmanas. By such sacri-
fice you are sure to please the Vishwedevas.


18. Let mercy to all creatures, giving to
all creatures what is due to them, control-
ling the senses, renunciation, firmness, and
teuth, form the final bath of that sacrifice
which is formed by gift. :


19. This is the sacrifice that ts sprea
out for you,—~a sacrifice which is sanctified
by devotion and faith, and who has a large
sacrificial gift attached to it. This sacrifice
which is formed by gift is superior to all
other sacrifices. O son, let this sacrifice be
always celebrated by you.


CHAPTER LXI.


(ANUSHASANI KA PARVA).=-<=
"Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


tem2. I wish to know fully, O Bharata,
where one gets the high rewards of gifts
and sacrifices. Are those rewards acquired
here or hereafter? Which amongst these
two (viz., Gift and Sacrifice) yields superior
merit? To whom should gifts be made?
In what manner are gifts and sacrifices to
be made 2? When also are they to be made?
{ask you this, O learned sire? Do you
discourse to me on the duty of gifts!


' 3. Do you tell me, O grandfather, what
brings on the highest reward, v7s., gifts
made from the sacrificial platform or those
made out of that place ?


Bhishma said :—

-4 © son, a Kshatriya is generally en-
gaged in deeds of fierceness. In his case,
sacrifices and gifts, are considered as clean-
sing or sanctifying him.


5. The good and righteous, do not ac-
cept the gifts of persons of the royal order,
who perpetrate sinful deeds. ‘Therefore, the
king should celebrate sacrifices with pro-
fuse gifts in the form of Dakshina.


6. If the good and righteous would ac-
cept the gifts made to them, the Kshatriya,
O king, should continually make gifts with
devotion and faith to them. Gifts yield
great merit, and are highly cleansing.


q7- Observing vows, one should celebrate
sacrifices and please with wealth, such
Brahmanas as are friends of all creatures,
endued with righteousness, conversant of”
the Vedas, and pre-eminent for acts, con-
duct and penances,


141


8. If such Brahmanas do not accept
your gifts, no merit will vecome yours,
Do you celebrate sacrifices with profuse
Dakshina, and_ make gifts of good and
agreeable food to the righteous.


g- By making an act of gift you should
consider yourself as performing a sacrifice.
You should, with gifts, worship those Brah-
manas who perform sacrifices. By doing
this you will acquire a share in the merits
of those sacrifices of theirs.


10. You should suppert such Brahmanas.
as have children and as are capable of
sending people to heaven. By acting thus,
you are sure to getalarge progeny,—in
fact, as large a progeny as the Parjapati
himself,


11. The righteous support and advance
the cause of virtue. One should, by giving
up his all, support such men as also those
who do good to all creatures.


t2. Yourself being rich, do you, O
Yudhishthira, make gifts to Brahmanas of
kine and bullocks and food and umbrellas
and robes and sandles or shoes.


13. Do you give to sacrificing Brah-
manas clarified butter as also food, and
cars and vehicles with horses harnessed
thereto, and dwelling houses and mansions
and beds.


14. Such gifts yield prosperity and
affluence to the giver, and are considered
as pure, O Bharata. Those Brahmanas
who are not censurable for anything they
do, and who have no means of support
assigned to them, should be found out.


t5. Covertly or publicly, do you main-
tain such Brahmanas by giving to them
the means of support. Such conduct al-
ways gives higher benefit to Kshatriyas than
the Rajasuya and the Horse-Sacrifices.


16. Purged off of sin, you are sure of
attaining to Heaven. Filling your treasury,
you should do good to your Eingdom.


17. By such conduct you are sure to
acquire immense riches, and become a Brah-
man (in your next{life). Do you, O Bharata,
protect your own means as also the means
of otber people’s livelihood.


18. Do you support your servants as
your own children, Do you, O Bharata,
protect the Bramanas in the enjoyment of.
what they have and make gifts to them of
such articles as they have net.


19. Let your life be devoted to the
Brahmanas. Let it never be said that.
you do not grant protection to the Brah-
manas. Much. wealth, when possessed by


142


MAHABHARATA.


a Bralimana; becomes a source of evil to { vis.,—Fie on that king in whose kingdom a


him.


20. Constant association with riches
and prosperity is sure to fill him with
ptide and cause him to be? stupefied.
If the Beahmanas become stupefied and
steeped in folly, virtue and duties are sure
to suffer destruction. Forsooth, if virtue
and duty come to an end, it will lead to the
destruction of all creatures, -


a1. That king who having amassed
tiches makes it over to his treasury officers
and guards, and then begins to again
plunder his kingdom, ‘saying to his officers,
—Do ye bring me as much riches as you
can extort from the kingdom.


22. And who spends the riches that is
thus collected at his behest-under circums-
tances of fear and cruelty, in the perfor-
mance of sacrifices, should know that those
sacrifices of his, are never highly spoken of
by the pious.


23. The king should celebrate sacrifices


with such money as is willingly paid to his-


treasury by prosperous and wnpersecoted
subjects, Sacrifices should never be
_ Celebrated with money got with severity and
” extortion,


24. The king should
great sacrifices with large presents in the
shape of Dakshina,. when on account of
his being devoted to the behoof of his
subjects the latter bathe him with copious
showers of riches brought willingly by
them for the purpose.


25. The king should protect the riches
of those that are old, of those that are
minors, of those that.are blind, ‘and of
those that are otherwise disqualified. The
king should never take any -money from
his people, if they, in a season of drought,
succeed in growing any corn with the help
of water obtained from wells. Nor should
he take any wealth from weeping women,


‘26. The riches taken from the poor and
the helpless is sure to destroy the kingdom
and the prosperity of the king. The king
should always present to the righteous all
enjoyable articles in abundance. He
should. certainly remove the fear of famish-
ing which those men may have.. .


27. There ace no men more sinful than
those upon whose food children look wist-
fully without being able to eat them duly,


; : ; :
_ 28 EE withis: your kingdom any learned
Brabmana dies with hunger like any of
those children, you shall then incur the
sin of feeticide for having allowed such an
act.


29. King Shivi himself had said this, |


then celebrate


‘friends and well-wishers, O


Brahmana or even any other man starves,


30. That kingdom in which a Brahmana
of the Snataka class starves, becomes overe
whelmed with adversity. Such a kingdom
with its king also incurs reproach. § -


31. That king is more dead than alive
in whose kingdom women are easily
abducted from their husbands and sons
uttering cries and groans of indignation
and grief,


32. The subjects should arm themselves
for killing that king who does nat protect
them, who simply plunders their riches,
who confounds all distinctions, who is tin-
capable of taking their lead, who is without
mercy, and who is considered as the most
sinful of kings. :


33. That king who tells his people that
he is their protector but who does not or is
unable to protect them, should be killed
by his subjects in a body like a dog that is
affected with the rabies and has become
mad.


34. A fourth part of whatever sins are
committed by the subjects visits that king
who does not protect, O Bharata.


35- Some authorities say that the whole
of those sins visits such a king. Others
are of opinion that a half thereof visits him.
Beating in mind, however, the saying of
Manu, it is our opinion that a fourth pact of
such sins visits the unprotecting king.


36. That king, O Bharata, who affords
protection to his subjects gets fourth part
of whatever merits his subjects win by
living under his protection.


37. Do you, O Yudbishthira, act ia
such a way that all your subjects may seek
refuge with you as long as you are alive,
as all creatures seek the refuge of the god
of rain or as the birds seek the refuge of -
a large tree.


33. Let all your kinsmen and all your
scorcher of
enemies, seek refuge with you as the
Rakshasas seek Kuvera or the gods seek
Indra as theirs.


CHAPTER LXIL.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


‘1, People accept with respect the say- |


ings of the Shrutis which say,—This is to be
given.—This other thing is to be given !— |
As regards kings, again, they make gifts


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


of various things to various rheh. What,
however, O grandfather, is the best or
foremost of all gifts?


Bhishma said :—

2. Of all kinds of gifts, the gift of earth
is said to be the first. Earth is immovable
and indestructible, It is capable of giving
to him who possesses it all the best things
upon which he may like to have.


3. It gives dresses and vestments, jewels
and gems, animals, paddy, and barley.
Amongst -all creatures, the giver of earth
grows rich for ever and ever.


4. As long as the earth lasts, so long
does the giver thereof grow rich, There
is no gift that is higher, O. Yudhishthira,
than the gift of earth.


5. We have heard that all ’men have
given a little quantity of earth. All’men
have made gifts of earth, hence all.men
enjoy a little of earth, =~


6. Whether in this or in the next world,
all creatures live subject to their own deeds,
Earth is Prosperity’s self. She isa power-
ful goddess. She makes him her lord
who makes gifts of her in this life to other
people.


7. That person, O best of kings, who
gives away earth, which is indestructible,
as gift, is born in next life as a man and
becomes also a lord of Earth.


8. The quantity of one’s enjoyment in
this life is equal to one’s gifts in a pristine
life. This is the conclusion pointed out by
the scriptures. For a Kshatriya should
either give away the Earth in gift or
renounce his life in battle.


g. This is the highest source of pros-
perity to Kshatriyas. We have heard that
earth, when given away, cleanses and
sanctifies the giver.


10. The man who is of sinful conduct
who is guilty of Brahmanicide and of
falsehood, is purified by a gift of earth.
Indeed, such a gift rescues even sucha
sinner from all his sins.


11, The virtuous accept gifts of earth
only and no other thing from sinful kings.
Like one’s mother, earth, when given away,
purifies the giver and the taker.


12. This is an eternal and secret name
of earth, wis., Priyadatta. Given away
or accepted in gift, the name that is dear
to her is Priyadatta.


13. The gift of earth is desirable,
That king who makes a gift of earth to a
learned Brahmana, gets from that gift a
kingdom. "22:


143


14. Upon being born again in this
world, such a man, forsooth, attains toa
position equal to that of a king. Hence, a
king, as soon as he gets earth, should make
gifts of earth to the Brahmanas.


13. None but a lord of Earth can make
gifts of earth. Nor should one who is not
a worthy person accept a gift of earth.


16. They who desire earth shduld act
thus, That person who takes away earth
belonging to a pious person never gets any
earth. J


17. By making gifts of earth to the
righteous, one gets good earth. Of vir
tuous soul, such a giver acquires great fame
both in this world and in the next.


18, That pious king about whom the
Brahmanas say,—We live on earth given to
us by him,—ts such that his very enemies
cannot utter the feast reproach about his
kingdom.


19. Whatever sins a man commits from
want of the means of livelihood, are all
washed off by gift of only so much earth
as is covered by a cow-hide.


20. ‘Those kings who are mean in their
acts or are of fierce deeds, should be taught
that gift of earth is highly purifying and
is at the same time the highest gift.


21. The ancients thought that there is
always very little difference between the
man who celebrates a Horse-Sacrifice and
him who makes a gift of earth to one who
is righteous.


22. The learned doubt the acquision of
merit which all other pious acts yield. The
only act about which they are dead certain,
is the gift of earth which, indeed, is the
foremost of all gifts.


23. The wise man who makes gifts of
earth, gives away all these, wiz., gold, silver
cloth, gems and pearls and precious stones.


‘24. Penances, sacrifice, Vedic learning,
good conduct, absence of cupidity, firmness
in truth, adoration ‘of elders, preceptors,
and the deities, all these live in him who
makes a gift of earth.


25. They who ascend tothe region of
Brahman by renouncing their lives in battle
after having fought without any consider-
ation for themselves for securing the behoof
of their masters,—even they are unable to
go above the merit of those who make gifts
of earth. .

26. Asthe mother always nourishes her
own “child with milk from her breast, so
does earth please with all the tastes the
person that makes a gift of earth,


27. Mrityu, Vaikinkara, Danda, Tama,
Fire, who is highly fierce, and all heinous


r


44


and terrible sins are incapable of touching
the person who makes a gift of earth.


28. That man of tranquil soul who
makes a gift of earth pleases (by that act)
the Departed Manes living in their region


and the deities also hailing from the region’


that is theirs,


2g. The man who makes a gift of earth
to one who is weak and cheerless and desti-
tute of the means of life and famishing
with weakness, and who thereby supplies
one with the means of sustenance, de-
serves the honor and merit of celebrating a
sacrifice. -


30. Asan affectionate cow runs towards
her half, with full udders dropping milk,
similarly the highly blessed Earth, runs to-
wards the person who makes a gift of earth.


3t. That man who makes to a Brahmana .


a gift of earth which has been_tilled.~gr
sown with seeds, or which contains standing
crops, or a palace well furnished with every
necessary 2@ficle, succeeds in becoming the
accenyplisher of the wishes of everybody.


J 32. ‘The man who makes a Brahmana
aaving the means of life, possessing a
domestic fire and of pure vows and prac-
tices, accept a gift of earth, never falls into
any danger or distress.


33. As the moon increases day by day,
so the merit of a gift of earth increases
every time such earth produces crops.


34. Those persons conversant with
ancient history sing this verse regarding
the gift of earth. Hearing that verse
Jamadagni’s son (Rama) gave away the
whole Earth to Kashyapa. ;


35. The verse to which I refer is this.—
Receive me in gift. Give me away. By
giving me away, you (O giver) will obtain
me again! That which is given away in
this life is reeacquired in the next,

36. That Brahmana who recites this
great saying of the Vedas at the time of
a Shraddha get the highest reward.


37. A gift of earthis a great expiation
for the sin af those powerful men who per-
form Atharvan rites for injuring others.
Indeed, by making a gift of earth one
rescues ten generations of his paternal and
maternal families. ;


38. That person who knows this Vedic
saying about the merits of a gift of earth,
succeeds in rescuing ten genetations of
both his paternal and maternal families.
Earth is the original source of all creatures,
It has been said that the god of fice is the
presiding genius of earth.


39. After the coronation ceremony has
been performed of a king, this Vedic say-


MAHABHARATA,


ing should be recited to him, so that he
may make gifts of earth and may nevet
take away earth from a pious person,


40. Forsooth, the entire wealth owned
by the king belongs to the Brahmanas. A
king knowing well the scietice of duty and
morality is the first requisite of the king-
dom’s prosperity.

4t.. Those people whose king is une
righteous and atheistic in conduct and be+
lief, can never be happy. Such people can
never sleep or wake in peace.


42—43. On account of his deeds of
wickedness his subjects become always filled
with anxiety. Protection of what the sub-
jects already have and new acquisitions
by faie means are events that are not seen
in the kingdom of such a king. Those
people, again,-who have a wise and righte-
ous king, sleep happily and waké ‘up ia
happiness,

44. By the Blessed ‘and righteous acts
of such a king, his subjects become shorn
of anxiety. The subjects, restrained from
wicked deeds, grow in prosperity through
their own conduct. Capable of -keeping
what they have, they go on making new
acquisitions. :

45, That king who makes gifts of earth,
is considered as well-born. He is con-
sidered as aman, He isa friend. He is
cighteous in his acts. Heisa giver. He
is considered as possessing prowess.


46. Those ren who make gifts of ampte
and fertile earth to Brahmanas knowing
the Vedas, always shine in the world, on
account of their energy, like so many suns.


47. As seeds'scattered On the soil grow,
and yield a goodly crop, so all one’s wishes
become successful on account of his making.
gifts of earth. ; EON


48. The:Sun, Varuna, Vishnu, Brahman,
the Moon, the {Fre-God and the illustrious
and trident-bearning Mahadeva, all praise
the man who makes a gift of earth.


49. Living creatures originatefrom Earth
and it is to the Earth that they return
when they disappear. Living creatures
which are divided into four classes have
Earth for theie primordial essence.


50. The Earth is both thé mother and
father of the universe of creatures, O king.
ThereSis no element, O king, that can com-
pare with Earth.


51. About it is cited the old discourse
between the celestial preceptor Vrihaspati
and Indra the king of Heaven, O Yudhish-

. my 13


thira.


52. Having worshipped Vishnu in a
hundred sacrifices each of which: was


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


famous for plentiful gifts, Maghavat put
this question to Vrihaspati, that foremost
of all orators. ;


Maghavat said :—

53. O itlustrious one, by what gift does
one succeed i coming to the celestial region
and acquiting beatitude? O foremost of
speakers, d> you tell me of that gift which
yields high and eternal merit.


_ Bhishma said :—

54. ‘Thus addressed by the king of the
celestials, the preceptor of the gods, vis.,
Vrihaspati of great energy, said these words
in reply to him of a hundred sacrifices.


Te, eee ee
Vrihaspati said :—

$5. Gilt of gold, gift of kine, and gift
of earth,—by these, O destroyer of Vritra,
one becomes cleansed, O you of great
wisdom, of all sins.


56. ‘Thereis no gift, O king of the celes-
tials, higher than the gift of earth, O
powerful one. I consider this gift as the
most superior, according to what has been
declared by the wise.


57. Those heroes who, fearless of battle,
give their lives in battles: with’ enemies,
come to Heaven. How high sever their
end, none of them can get over the giver
of earth.


58. Those men who, disregarding their
bodies, give their lives in battle while work-
ing for the behoof of their masters, ascend
to the region of Brahman himself. But
even they are unable to get over the giver
of earth. j


59. By making a gift of earth one res-
cues these eleven, viz., five generations of
ancestors and six generations of descet-
dants.


60, That person, OQ Purandara, who
makes a gift of earth rich with jewels and
gems becomes purged off of all his sins and
is highly respected in the celestial region.


61. If a person, O king, makes a gift
of rich and Aertile earth that is capable of
granting every wish he succeeds in attain-
ing to a position of a king of kings (in
his next Hife). A gift of earth, therefore,
is the foremost of all gifts.


_ 62. That person, O Vasava, who makes
a gilt of earth capable of satisfying every
wish with fruition is considered as making
a gilt of every object in the world.


63. That man who gives away a cow
endued with every accomplishment and
granting the fruition of every desire, suc-
deeds, O you of a thousand eyes, in attain-
ing the celestial region,


19


14$


64. The giver of earth, O king of the
celestials, is pleased when he comes to
Heaven, by hundreds of rivers which run
honey and ghee and milk and curds.


65. A king, by making gifts of earth,
is purged off of all his sins. There is no
gift, therefore, which is superior to the gift
of earth.


66. That king who gives away the Earth
bounded by the ocean, after having con-
quered it with the help of his weapons, is
talked of by all men and his memory lasts
as long as the mountains last on the sutface
of Earth.


67. Gifted as he is with the merits that
belong to the gift of earth, the region of
happiness reserved for the person who
makes gift of. such earth as is auspicious
and rich with every taste, never become
exhausted.


68. That king, O Shalra, who wishes to
have prosperity and who wishes to acquire
happiness for himself, should always make
gifts of earth, with due rites, to worthy
persons.


69. If after committing numerous sins
a person niakes gifts of earth to the twice-
born class, he leaves off all those sins like
a snake casting off its slough.


go. The person who makes a gilt of
earth is said to make gifts of everything,
that is, of seas and rivers and mountains
and forests,


71. By making a gift’of earth, the person
is said to give away lakes and tanks and
wells and sivers, On account of the
moisture of earth, one is said to give away
articles of various tastes by making a gilt
of earth,


92, The man who makes a gift of earth
is considered as giving away herbs and
plants possessed of high and efficacious
virtues, trees adorned with flowers and
fruit, charming forests, and hillocks.


73- The merit which a person acquires


‘by ‘making a gift of earth is incapable of


being acquired by the performance of even
such great sacrifices as the Agnishtoma and
others with profuse gifts in the shape of
Dakshina.


74. The giver of earth, it has been al-
ready said, rescues ten generations of both
his paternal and maternal families. Like-
wise, by taking away easth that was given
away, one sinks himself into hell and casts
ten generations of both one’s paternal and
maternal lines into the same place of
misery. ;

95. That man who having promised to
make a gift of earth does not actually mak¢


146


it, or who having made a gift resumes. it,
has tq pass a long time, in great misery on
account of being tied with the noose of
Varuna at the command of Death.


76. Those men have never to go to
Vama who honor and adore those foremost
of Brahmanas who pour libations every day
on their domestic fire, who are always
engaged in the performance of sacrifices,
who have seanty means of livelihood, and
who receive with hospitality every guest
seeking shelter in their houses.


77. The king, O Purandara, should free
himself from the debt he owes to the Brah-
manas and protect the helpless and the
weak of the other castes,


78. The king should never resume, O
chief of the gods, earth that has been given
away by another toa Brahmana, O king,
of the éelestials, who is destitute of the
means of life.


79. The tears that would drop from the
eyes of such cheerless and destitute Brah-
manas on acgount of their’ lands being
resumed, are capable of destroying the
ancestors and deseendants to the third
generation of the resumer,


_ . 80, That man who re-instates a Ring
driven away from his kingdom, gets resi+
dence in Heaven and is much honored by
the denizens thereof.


8:1—82. That king who succeeds in
making gifts of earth with such crops
standing thereon as sugarcane or barley or
wheat, or with kine and horses and other
draft cattle,—earth that has been acquired
with the might ef the giver’s arms,—that
has mineral in its bowels and that is covered
with every kind of wealth on the-surface,
acquires unending regions of happiness in
the next world, and sucha king it is that
is said to celebrate the earth-sacrifice.} :

83. That king who makes a gift of earth
is purged off of every sin and, and, therefore,
is pure and liked by the righteous. In this


world he is highly honored and praised by


all rightecus men.


84. The merit of a gift of earth in-
creases every time the earth given away
bears crops for the benefit of the owner,
asa drop of oil, falling upon water, is seen
to extend on every side, and cover the
watery surface.


85. Those heroic kings and ornaments
of assemblies who give their lives in battle
with faces towards the foe, attain, O Shakra,
to the region of Brahman. ~ ;


86. Beautiful ladies skilled ia music and
Gancinz and adorned with garlands of
flowers, approach, O king of the


MAHABHARATA,


deities, the giver of earth as he comes te
Heaven departing from the Earth.


87. That king who makes gifts of earth
with due rites to persons of the twice-borm
order, sports in bliss in the celestial regions,
worshipped all the while by the celestials
and Gandharvas.


88. One hundred Apsaras, adorned with
celestial garlands, approach, O king of the
deities, the giver of earth as he ascends to
the region of Brahman.


85. Sweet-scented flowers, 'an “excellent
conch and excellent seat, an umbrella and
excellent horses with good vehicles, are
always ready for the person who makes gifts
of earth. : :

go. By making gifts of earth a king
ean always command fragrant flowers and
heaps of gold, Having all kinds of wealth,
the commands of such a king can never be
disobeyed anywhere, and cries of victory
welcome hin whereever he may go.


gt. The rewards of the gifts of earth
consist of residence in the celestial region,
O Purandara, and gold, and flowers, and
plants and herbs of medicinal virtue, and
Kusha and mineral wealth and verdant
grass, A person by making a gift of eartit
wins in his next life nectar-giving eatth,

g2. There is no gift equal toa gift of
earth, There is none worthy of greater ~
respect-thar the mother. There isno duty —
higher than truth, There is ao riches
more valuable than that which is giver
away.


Bhishma said:—


93. Hearing these words from the sor
of Angiras, Vasava made a gift to him of
the whole Earth with allher jewels and
gems and alt her riches.


64. If these verses describing the merit
of the gifts of earth be recited on the
occasion of a Shraddha, neither Rakshasas.
nor Asuras can succeed in getting any
share of the offerings made in it.


95. Forsooth, the offerings one makes.
to the departed manes at such a Shraddha
‘become unending. Hence, on occasions
of Shraddhas, the learned man should:
recite these verses on the subject of the
merits of the gifts of earth, in the presence
and hearing of the invited Brahmanas
when engaged it eating. ;

96. I have thus, O chief of the Bharatas,
described to you that gift which is the
foremost of all gifts. What else do you
wish to hear ?


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


CHAPTER LXIIL, -


q ANUSHASANA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. When a king wishes to make gifts
an this world, what, indeed, are those gifts
which he should make, O best of the
Bharatas, to such Brahmanas 4s are endued
with superior accomplishments? What gift
is that by which the Brahmanas become
readily pleased? What fruits do they
give inreturn? O you of powerful arms,
tell me what is the high reward which can
be won through the merit of gifts.


3. What gifts, O king, yield rewards
both in this world and in the next? I wish
to hear all this from you. Do you describe
to me ali this in detail.


_Bhishma said :—


4. These very questions were formerly
put by me to Narada. Hear me as |
recite to you what that celestial sage had
told me in reply.


Narada said :—

5. The celestials and all the Rishis
speak highly of food. he course of the
world and the intellectual faculties have all
been fixed on food.


6. There has never been, nor will be,
any gift equal to the gift of food. Hence,
men always wish particularly to make gifts
of food. — ;


7. In this world, food is the root of |


energy and strength. The vital airs are
established on food. Itis food that keeps
up the wide universe, O powerful one.


8. «All classes of men, house-holders and
mendicants and ascetics, live upon food,


‘The vital airs depend upon food. ‘Fhere
is no doubt in this.
g. Afflicting one’s relatives, one, if


desirous of his own prosperity, should make
gifts of food to a great Brahmana or a
person of the mendicant order,


to. That man who makes a gift of food
to an accomplished Brahmana who begs
the same, secures for himself in the next
world wealth of great value,


11. The house-holder who seeks his
own prosperity should receive wit respect
a deserving old man who is worn fout with
toil while proceeding on his way far from
home, when such a man comes to the houses
holder’s house,

12. That man who, shorn of irrepres«
- sible anger and becoming righteous in
nature and freed from malice, makes gifts


| titled to the first part of every food.


147


of food, is sure to acquire happiness, O


| king, beth in this world and in the next.


13. The house-holder should never dis-
regard the man who comes to his place, nor


1 should he insult him by sending him away.


A gift of food made to even a Chandala
or a dog is never lost.


14. That man who makes a gift of clean
food to a person on the way who is fatigued
and unknown to the giver, is sure to win
great merit,


15. The man who pleases with gifts of
food the departed manes, the deities, the
Rishis, the Brahmanas, and guests arrived
at his house, wins great merit.


16. That person who having commitied
even a heinous crime makes a yift of food
to one who solicits, or to a Brahmana in
special, is never stupefied by that ‘hein-
ous sin.


17. A gift of food made to a Brahmina
becomes eternal. One madeto a Shudra
yields great merit, Thisisthe difference
between the merits ef the gifts of food
made to Brahmanas and Shudras. .


18. Solicited by a Brahmana, one should
not enquire about his family or conduct or
Vedic learning. Asked for food, one stiould
give food to him who asks.


19. There is no doubt in this, O king,
that he who makes gifts of food gets both in
this world and in the next many trees
giving food and every other object of desire.


20. Like cultivators expecting auspicious
showers of rain, the departed manes always
expect that their sons and grandsons would
present food to thei,


2t. The Brahmana is a great being.
When he comes into one’s honse and
solicits, Saying, —Give me!—the owner of
the house, whether actuated or not by the
desire of gaining merit, is sure to win great
merit by listening to that prayer.


22--23. The Brahmana is the guest of
all creatures in the universe. He is en- .
That
house increases in prosperity to which the
Brahmanas go from desire of getting alms
and from which they return honored on
account of their desires being satisfied.
The owner of such a house is born in his
next life in a family, O Bharata, that has
all the comforts and luxuries of life. =.


24. A man, by making gifts of food jn
this world, is sure to acquire an excellent
place hereafter. He who makes gifts of
sweetmeats and all food that is sweet, gaits
a residence in heaven where he is honored
of all the deities and other denizens.


148


25. Food forms the life-breaths of men. |
Everything rests upon food. He who makes
gifts of food géts many animals, many
children, profuse riches (in other shape),
and all articles of comfort and luxury in
profusion,


26. The giver of food is said to be the
giver of lifé. Indeed, he is said to be the
giver of everything. Hence, O king, such
a man acquires both strength and personal
grace in this world.


27. H food be given duly to a Brahmana
come to one’s house as a guest, the giver
acquires great happitiess, and is adored by
the very celestials.


28. The Brahmana, O Yudhishthira, is
agreat Being. He is also a fertile field.
Whatever seed is sown on that field yields
an abundant crop of merit.


29. A gilt of food readily yields the
happiness of both the giver and the re-
calves All other gifts produce unseen
fruits. :


80. From food originate creatures. From
food springs happiness and joy, O Bharata,
Know. that virtue and worldly profit both
spring from food. ‘The cure of disease or
health also comes from food.


3t. Ina formec Aon, the Lord of all
creatures said that food is ambrosia or the
source of immortality. Food is Earth, Food
is fleaven, Foodis the Sky. Everything
. tests on Food.


32. In the absence of food, the five
elements that form the body cease to exist
ina state of unision. From want of food
the strength of even the strongest man is
seen to fail,


33. Invitation and marriages and _sacri-
fices all cease for want of food. “Ihe very
Vedas disappear when there is no food,


34. All the mobile and immobile creatures
of the universe depend oa food. Virtue
and, worldly profit, im the three worlds,
depend on food. Hence the wise should
make gifts of food.


35- The strength, energy, fame and
achievements of the man who makes gifts
of food, always multiply themselves in the
three worlds, O king. 4


36. The deity of wind, places above the
clouds (the water drawn by the Sun), The
water thus taken to the clouds is, caused by
Shakra to be poured upon the Earth,
© Bharata. eZ :


37. The Sun, by means of his rays,
draws up the moisture of the Earth. The
god of wind causes the moisture to fall
down from the Sun, |


sack.


MAHABHARATA.


38. When the water comes down from
the clouds upon the Earth, the goddess
Earth become moist, O Bharata.


39. ‘Then do people sow various kinds
of crops upon whose outturn the universe
of creatures depends. It is from the food
thus produced that the flesh, fat, bones and
vital seed of all beings originate. :


40. From the vital seed thus made, O
king, spring various kinds of living crea-
tures, Agni and Soma, living within the
body, create and maintain the vital seed.


4t. Thus from food, the Sun and the
god of wind and the vital seed spring and
All these are said to form one element
or quantity, and it is from these that all
creatures originate.


42. That man who gives unto one who
comes to fis house and begs it, is said,
O chief of the Blaratas, to contribute both
life and energy to living creatures,


Bhishma said :—-


43. ‘hus addressed by Narada, O king,
1 have always made gifts of food. Do you
also, therefore, freed from malice and with
a cheerful heart, make gifts of food.


44. By making gifts of food, O king,
worthy Brahmanas with due rites, you may
be sure, O powerful one, of attaining to |
Heaven,


45. Hear me, O king, as I tell you what
the regions are reserved for those who
make gifts of food. The mansions of those
great persons shine with respiendence in
the regions of Heaven.


46. Bright as the stars in the sky, and
supported upon many columns, white as
the disc of the moon, and adorned with
many tinkling bells, and cosy like the
newly risen suf, those palaces are either
fixed or movable. -


47+ Those mansions are filled with hun-
dreds and hundreds of things and animals
that live on land and as many things and
animals living in water, Some of them
are effulgent like Japs lasuli and some are
resplendent hike the sun. Some of them
are wade of silver and some of gold.


48. Within those mansions are many
trees capable of satisfying every desire of
the inmates. Many tanks and roads and
halls and wells and lakes are all there.


49. Thousands of vehicles with horses
and other animals harnessed thereto and
with wheels whose caluter is always loud,
are all there. Mountains of food and all
enjoyable articles and heaps of cluths and
vinaments are also there.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


- yo. Numerous rivers that run milk, and
hills of rice and other edibles, fare also
there. Indeed, many palatial residences
looking like white clouds, with many beds
of golden splendour, are in those regions,


St.
make gifts of food in this world. Do you,
therefore, become a giver of food. Indeed,
these.are the regions reserved for those
great and righteous persons who make gifts
of food in this world. For these reasons,
men should always make gifts of food in
this world.


CHAPTER LXIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


vain said :-—


1. I have beard your discourse about
the ordinances for the gift of food. Do you
describe to me now about the conjunctions
of the planets and the stars in relation to
the subject of making gifts,


Bhishma said :—


2, Regarding it is recited this ancient
discourse between Wevaki*and Narada,
that foremost of Rishis,


3. Once on a time when Narada of
god-like features and knowing every duty
arrived at Dwaraka, Devaki asked him this
question, :


4. The celestial Rishi Narada replied
to her question in the following words. Do
-you hear as I recite them.


‘Narada said :—

5. By pleasing, O blessed lady, worthy
Brahmanas with pudding mixed with ghee,
under the constellation Krittika, one ac-
quires regions of great happiness.


6. Under the constellation Rohini, one
should, for freeing himself from the debt
he owes tothe Brahmanas, make gifts to
them of many handfuls of vension along
with rice and clarified butter and milk,
and other kinds of edibles and drinks.


7. One giving away acow witha calf
under the constellation called Somadaivata
tor Mrigashiras), proceeds from this human
region to a region in Heaven . great
felicity.


8. One undergoing a fast and giving
away Krishara mixed with sesame, gets
over all difficulties in the next world, in-
‘cluding those mountains with rocks sharp
‘aS razors,


All these are won by those men who |


149
9. By making gifts, O beautiful: lady,
of cakes and other food under the coustel-
Jation Punarvasu, one gets personal beauty
and great fame and takes birth in his next


life in a family in which there is profuse
food.


1o. Making a gift of wrought or un-
wrought gold, under. the constellation
Pushya, one shines like the Moon himself
in regions of surrounding darkness.


it. He who makes a gift, under the
constellation Ashlesha, of silver or a bull,
becomes freed from every fear and ac-
quires riches and prosperity.


12. By making a gift, under the cons-
tellation Megha, of earthen dishes filled
with sesame, one gets children and animals
in this world and acquires happiness in the
next.


13. By making gifts, while fasting, to
Bratmanas, under the constellation called
Purva-Phalguni, of food mixed with Phani-
ta, the reward is great prosperity both here
and hereafter.


14. By making a gift, under the cons-
tellation called Uttara-Phalguni, of clarified
butter and milk with rice called Shaslr-
thika, one wins great honors in Heaven.


15. Whatever gifts are made by men
under the constellation of Uttara-Phalguni
yield great merit, which, again, becomes
unending. ‘his is very certain,


16. Observing a fast, the person who
makes, under the constellation Hasta, a
a gilt of a car witn four elephants, acquires
regions of great happiness that are capable
of granting the fruition of every wish,


17. By making a gift, under the cons.
tellation Chittra, of a bull and of good per-
fumes, one sports in bliss in regions of
Apsaras like the deities sporting in the
garden of Nandana.


18. By making gifts of riches under the
constellation Swati, one acquires such ex-
cellent regions as one desires and ‘wins,
besides great fame.


19—20. By making gifts, under the con-
Stellation Vishakha, of a bull, and a cow
giving profuse milk, acart full of paddy,
with a Prasanga for covering the same, and
also cloths for wear, a person pleases the
departed manes and the deities and ac-
quires external merit in the other world.
Such a person never meets with any cala-
mity and certainly reaches Heaven.


21. By making gifts the Brahmanas of
whatever articles they want, one acquires
such means of subsistence as he wishes,
and becomes rescued from Hell and every
calamity that befall sinners alter death.


’


450
This is the certain conclusion of the
Scriptures. :

22. By making gifts, under the constel-


lation Anuradha, of embroidered cloth and
other dresses and of food, observing a fast
all the while, one becomes honored in
Heaven for a hundred cycles,


23. By making a gift under the cons-
tellation Jyeshtha, of the potherb called
Kalashaka with the roots, one acquires
gteat prosperity as also such an end as is
desirable.


24. By making to Brahmanas a gift
under the constellation Mula, of fruits and
roots, with a controlled soul, one pleases the
departed manes and attains to a desirable
end, ;


25—26. By making, under the constella-
tion Purvashada, a gift, to a Brahmana
knowing the Vedas’and of good family and
conduct, ef cups filled with curds, while
observiig a fast, one is born in his next
life in a family having abundant kine. One
secures the fruition of every desire, by
making gifts, under the constellation Utta-


_ vashda, of jugs full of barley-water, with


clarified -butter and juice of sugar-cane in
abundance. :

27., By making a gift, under the conjunc-
tien called Abhijit, of milk with honey and
ghee unto men of wisdom, a tighteous
person attains to Heaven and becomes an
object of adoration and honor there.


28. By making, under the ‘conjunction
Shravana, a gift of blankets or other cloth
of thick texture, one passes freely through
every region of happiness, riding on a white
car of pure resplendence,


29. By making with a controlled soul
under the constellation Dhanishtha, a gift
of acar with bulls yoked thereto, or masses
of cloths and riches, one at once acquires
Heaven in his next life. ;


30. By making gifts, under the con-
stellation Shatabhisha, of perfumes with
Aquilaria Agallocha and sandal wood, one
acquires in the next world the companion-
ship of Apsaras as also eternal perfumes of
various sorts,


3t. By making gifts, under the con-
stellation Purva-Bhadrapada, of Raja-
masha, one acquires great happiness in
next life and comes by a profuse supply of
every kind of food and fruits.


32. One who makes, under the constella+
tion Uttara, a gift of mutton, pleases the
departed manes by such an act and ac-
quires unending merit in the next world.,


33. Tf one makes a gift, under the con-
stellation Revati, of a cow with a vessel of


MAHABHARATA. *—


white copper for milking her, tle cow so
given away approaches him in the next
world, ready to grant the fruition of every
desire.


34. By making a gift, under the con-
stellation Ashwini, of a car with horses
yoked thereto, one is born in his next life
in a family possessing abundant elephants .
and horses and cars and becomes gifted
with great energy.


35- By making, under the constellation
Bharani, a gift to the Brahmanas of kine
and sesame, one attains in his next life
great fame and abundant kine.


Bhishma said :—


36. ‘Thus did Narada describe to
Devaki the subject of what gifts should be
made under what ¢onstellations. Devaki
herself, having heard this account related
it in her turn to her daughters-in-law.


CHAPTER - LXV.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—


t. The illustrious Atri, the son of the -
Grandfather Brahman, said, —They who


| make gifts of gold are said to make gifts


of every thing in the world.


2, King Harishchandra said that the
gift of gold washes off sins, leads to long
life, and yields inexhaustible merit to the
departed manes.


3. Manu has said that a gift of drink is.
the: best of all gifts: therefore should a
man cause wells and tanks and lakes to be
excavated, ©


4. A welf full of water and from which
various creatures draw water, is said to
take off half the sinful deeds of the person
who'has excavated it,


The entire family of a person is
tescued from hell and sin in whose well
or tank or lake kine and Brahmanas and
pious people constantly satisfy theie thirst.


6. That man gets over every sort of
calamity from whose well or tank every
one draws water without restraint during
the summer season,


7. Clarified butter is said to please the
illustrious Vrihaspati, Pushan, Bhaga, the
twin Ashwins, and. the god of fire.

8. Clarified butter .is possessed of high
medicinal virtues. [t is a high requisite
of Sacrifice. It is the best of all liquids,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


_ The merit a gift of clarified butter yields
is very Superior. :


g. That man who wishes for the reward
of happiness in the next world, who wishes
foe fame and prosperity, should, with a
purified heart and having purified himself,
make gifts of clarified butter to the
Brahmanas.


10, The twin Ashwins, pleased, confer |


personal beauty upon that man who makes
gifts of clarified butter -to the Brahmanas
in the month of Ashwin.


it. Rakshasas never invade the house
of that man who makes giftsto the Brah-
manas of pudding mixed with clarified
butter.


12, That man never dies of thirst who
makes gifts to the Brahmanas of jars filled
with water. Such a person gets every
necessary of life in profusion, and has
never to suffer from any calamity or dis-
tress.


13. That man, who with great devotion
and controlled senses makes gifts to the
foremost of Brahmanas, is said to take a
sixth part of the merits acquired. by the
Brahmanas by theie penances.


14—15. That man who makes presents,
to Brahmanas having the means of life, of
fire- wood for purposes of cooking as also for
enabling them to drive cold, finds all his
purposes and all his acts successful. Such
a one is seen to shine over all his enemies.


16. The illustrious god of fire becomes
pleased with such a man. -As another
reward, he never becomes divested of
cattle, and he is sure to win victory in
battle.


17. The man who makes a gift of an
umbrella gets children: and great pros-
perity. Such a person never . suffers
from any eye-disease. ‘The merits also
that originate from the performance of a
sacrifice hecome his.


18. That man who makes a gift of an
umbrella in the season of summer or rains,
has never to suffer from any heart-burning
on any account. : :

19—20. Such a man quickly succeeds
in freeing himself from every difficulty and
obstacle. The highly blessed and illustri-
ous Rishi Shandilya has said that of all
gifts, the gift of a car, O king, is the
greatest. :


1st
. CHAPTER LXVI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

-1. I wish to hear, O grandfather what
the merits are of that person who makes
the gift of a pair of sandals to a Brahmana
whose feet are burning or being scorched
by hot sands while walking.


Bhishma said :~


2. The man who gives to the Brahmanas
sandals for the protection of their feet, suc
ceeds in crushing all thorns and gets over
every sort of difficulty.


3—4. Such a man,O Yudhishthira, stands
over the heads of all his enemies, cars of
pure splendour, with mules yoked thereto
and made of gold and silver, O monarch,
approach him. He who makes a gift of
sandals is said to a¢quire the merit of
making the gift of acar with well-broken
horses yoked thereto.


Yudhishithra said :—


3. Tell me fully once more, O grand-
father, of the merits of gifts of sesame and
land, and of kine and food.


Bhishma said :—


6. Hear, O son of Kunti, what the merits
are of the gift sesame. Hearing me, do
you then, O best of the Kurus, make gifts
of sesame according to the rites,


7. Sesame seeds were created by the
Self.create Brahman as the best food for
the departed manes. Hence, gifts of sesame
seeds always please the departed manes
greatly.


8. The man who makes gifts of sesame
seeds in the month of Magha, to the Brah-
manas, has never to see Hell which is full
of all dreadful creatures.


9. He who worship, the departed manes
with offerings of sesame seeds is considered
as worshipping the deities in all the sacri-
fices. One should never make a Shraddha
with offerings of sesame seeds without en-
tertaining some purpose.


10. Sesame seeds sprang from the limbs
of the great Rishi Kashyapa. Hence, in
the matter of gifts, they have come to be
considered as possessed of great efficacy,


tt. Sesame seeds confer both prosperity
and personal beauty cleanse the giver of
all his sins. It is for this reason that the
gift of sesame seeds is superior to the gift
of every other article


152


12. The highly intelligent Apastamva,
Shankha and Likhita, and the great Rishi
Gautama, have all gone to the celestial


region by having made gifts of sesame.


seeds,


13. Those Brahmanas who make Homa
with offerings of sesame, abstain from
sexual intercourse, and are observant of the
religion of Acts, are considered as equal to
vaccine Havi.


14. The gift of sesame seeds is superior
to all gifts. Amongst all gifts, the gift of
sesame is considered as yielding unending
merit.


15. Formerly when Hfavi (clarified
butter) on one occasion could not be pro-
cured, the Rishi Kushika, O scorcher of
enemies made offerings of sesame seeds to
his three sacrificial fires and succeeded in
acquiring an excellent end.


16. Ihave thus said to you, O chief of
the Kurus, what the regulations are about
the excellent gift of sesame seeds, It is on
account of these regulations that the gift


of sesame seeds has come to be considered [-


as fraught with very superior merit.


17. After this, listen to what I would
say. Once on a titne the gods, desirous of
making a Sacrifice, went, O king, to the
ptesence of the Self-create Brahman.


18. Having met Brahman, desirous as
they were af celebrating a sacrifice on the
Earth, they begged him for a piece of sacred
earth, saying,—We want,it for our sacrifice.


The deities said :—

tg, O illustrious one, you are the lord
of alt the Earth as also of all ttte 3!
With your permission, O highly blessed
one, we wish to perform a sacrifice.


20. The person who has not got by
lawful means the earth whereon to make
the sacrificial altar, acquires not the merit
of the sacrifice he performs.


21. You are the Lord of all the universe
consisting of its mobile and immobile
Objects. ‘Therefore, you should grant -us a
Piece of earth for thé sacrifice we wish to
make,


Brahman said :—

22, Ye foremost of gods, I shall give
you a piece of earth whereon, ye sons of
Kashyapa, you shall celebrate your in-
tended sacrifice.


The gods said :—

23. Our wishes, O holy one, have be-
come successful. We shall celebrate our
sacrifice even here* with large gifts. Let,


MAHABHARATA.


however, the ascetics always worship this
piece of Earth.


24. Then there came to that place
Agastya, Kanwa, Bhrigu, Atri, and Viisha«
kapi, Asita and Devala.


25. The great deities then, O you of
unfading glory, celebrated their sacrifice.
‘Those foremost of gods finished’ it in due
time.


26 Having completed that sacrifice of
theirs on the breast of that foremost of
mountains, wis, Himavat, the celestials
attached to the gift of earth a sixth part
of the merit originating from their sacrifice.


27. The man who makes a gift of even
a span of earth with reverence and faith,
has never to suffer from any difficulty and
has never to meét with any calamity.


28. By making a gift of a house that
prevents cold, wind, and sun, and that
stands upon a piece of clean land, the giver
attains to the region of the celestials and
does not fall down even when his merit
becomes exhausted. :


_ 29. By making a gift of a house to live
in, the giver, endued with wisdom, lives, O
king, happily in the company of Shakra.

uch a person receives great honors in
the celestial region. :


30. That persow in whose. house a
Brahmana of controlled senses, well-read
in the Vedas, and belonging by birth toa
family of preceptors, lives in contentment,
succeeds in attaining te and enjoying a
region of great happiness,


31. Likewise, O best of the Bharatas,
by giving away a shed for the shelter of
kine that can prevent cold and rain and
that is substantial in structure, the giver
rescues seven generations of his race.


32. By giving away a piece of earth fit
for cultivation, the giver acquires great
prosperity. By giving a piece of earth
containing mineral riches, the giver ad-
vances his family.


' 33. One should never give away earth
that is barren or thatis burnt; nor should
one give away any earth that is neara
crematorium, or that has been possessed
and enjoyed by a sinful person before suct
gift.


34. When a man performs a Shraddha
in honor of the departed manes on earth
belonging to another person, the departed
manes render both the gift of that earth
and the Shraddha itself fruitless,


35-._ Hence, a wise man should buy even
a small piece of earth and make a gift of
it. The funeral cake that is offered to


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


bhe's ancestors on earth that las been duly
durchased, becomes endless.


36. Forests, mountains, rivers, and
irthas, are considered as havitig no
owners. No eartl need be baught here for
performing Sliraddhas.


37. This has been said, O king, ori the
subject of the merits of makig gifts of
earth. After this, O sinless one, I shall
esta to you the subject of the gift of

ine.


38. Kiné are considered as superior to
all the ascetiés. Arid therefore, the divine
Mahadeva practised penances in their com-
pany.

39. Kine, O Bharata, live in the region
of Brahman, in the company of Soma.

orming, as it does, tthe highest end, the
twice-born Rishis, crowned with success,
try to attain to that very region.


4. Kine benefit hunian beings with
milk, clarified butter, curd, dung, skin,
bones, horns, and hair, O Bharata.


4t. Kine do not feel cold or heat. They
always work. Even the rainy season, can-
hot afflict them at all. .


42, And since kine attain to the highest
end, in the company of Brahmanas, there-
fore do the wise say that kine and Brah-
manas are equal.


43. Formerly king Rantideva celebrated
@ geand sacrifice in which an immense
number of kine were offered up and killed.
From the juice that was secreted by the
skins of the slairi animals, a river was
formed that passed by the namie of Char-
manwati:


44—4§. Kine no longer are animals fit
for sacrifice. ‘hey now are animals fit
for gilt. That king who presents kine to
foremost of . Brahmanas, O king, is sure to
get over every danger even if he falls into it.
‘The man who presents a thousand Kine has
not to go to lel.


- 46. Such a person, O king, wins victory
everywhere. The very king of the celestials
had said that the milk of kine is nectar.


47. Therefore, one who presents a cow
is considered as making a gift of nectar.
Persons, well-read in the Vedas, have de-
clared that the clarified butter, manufac-
tured from cow's ntilk, is the very -best of
all libations poured upon the sacrificial
fire.

48—49. Therefore, the ian, who pre-
sents a cow, is considered as making a gift
of alibation for sacrifice. A bull is the
embodiment of Heaven. e who makes
the gift of a bull to a qualified Brahmana,
receives great honors in the celestial


20


153


region, Kine, O chief of Bharata’s race,
are said to be the vital airs of living
creatures.


go. Therefore, the mat, who makes the
gift of acow, is said to make the gift of vital
airs. Persons, conversant with the Vedas,
have said that kine are the great refuge of
living creatures,


§1. The man; who makes tlie gift of a
cow, is considered as making the gift af
whatis the high refuge of all, creatures,
Lhe cow should never be given away for
slaughter; nor should the cow be given to a
tiller of the soil ; nor should the cow be given
away toan atheist. The cow should not
also, O chief of the Bharatas, be given to
one whose occupation is the keep of kine.’


52. The wise liave said that the person,
who gives away the cow to any of such
sinful persons, has to sink in eternal Hell.


53. One should never give to a Brah-
mana a cow that is lean, or that produces
dead calves, or that is barren, or that is
diseased, or that is defective of limb, or
tiat is worn out with toil. is


54. The man, who gives away ten thou-


| sand kine, attains to Heaven and sports in


bliss in the company of Indra. The man,
who makes gifts of kine by hundred thou-
sands, wins many regions of eternal happi«
ness.


5§- Thus have I recited to you the
merits of the gift of kine and of sesame, as
also of the giftofearth. Listen now to me
as I describe to you the gift of food, O
Bharata. .


56. The gift of food, O son of Kunti; is
considered as a very superior gift. For-
merly king Rantideva ascended to the
celestial region by having made gifts of
food,


57. That king, who makes a gift of food
to one who is toileworn and hungry, ac«
quires the region of supreme happiness be«
longing to the Self«create. :


58. Men cannot, by gifts of gold and
dresses and of other things, win that
happiness which givers of food succeed in.
winning, O you of great powér.


59. Food is, indeed, the first article,
Food is considered as the highest pros-
perity. It is from food that life origi-+
nates as also energy and prowess and
Strength. or —


60. He, who always makes gifts of ‘food,
with attention, to the righteous, never
suffers any distress. This has been said by


Parashara.


61. Having adored the deities duly,
food should be first dedicated to them. i€


154


has been said, O king, that the kind of food
that is taken by particular men is taken
also by the gods those men worship.


62. That man, who makes gifts of food
in the light half of the month of Kartika,
succeeds in getting over every difficulty
here and acquires endless happiness here-
after. .


63. That man, who makes a gift of food


toa hungry guest arrived at his house,:


acquires - all those regions, O cliief of
Bharata’s race, that are reserved for
persons acquainted with Brahman.


64. The man, who makes gifts of food, is
sure to get over every difficulty and distress.
Such a person gets over every sin and
purges himself of every evil act.


65. I have thus deseribed to you the
merits of making gifts of food, of sesame,
of earth, and of kine.


+ ence simmay


CHAPTER LXVIL. -


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—~


rt. I have heard, QO sire, of the merits
of the different kinds of gift which you
have described to me. 1 understand, O
Bharata, that the gift of food is especially
praiseworthy and superior.


2. What, however, are the great merits
of making gifts of drink. I wish to hear
of this in full, O grandfather.


Bhishma said :—
3- I shall, O chief of Bharata’s race,
relate to you this subject. Listen to me,
- O you of unbafiled prowess, as I speak to
you,


4—5- |} shall, O sinless one, describe to
you gifts beginning with that of drink.
The merit that a man wins by making gifts
of food and of drink is such that the like of
it, I think, is incapable of being acquired
by any other gift. There is: no gift,
superior to that of either food or drink. It
is from. food that all living creatures are
able to exist. ; :


6. Therefore, 'food is considered as a
very superior object in all the worlds.
From food the strength and energy of
living creatures continually increase.


7. Hence, the master of all creatures
has himself said that the gift of food isa
very superior gift. You have heard, O son
of Kunti, what the auspicious words are of
Savitri herself,


MAHABHARATA,


8. You know why those words were said,
what those words were, and how they were
said in course of the sacred Mantras, O
you of great intelligence. A man, by
making a gift of food, really makes a gift
of life itself.


g. There is no gift in this world which is
superior to the gift of life. You are not
unacquainted with this saying of Lomasha,
O you of mighty arms.


10. The end that was attained to former-
ly by king Shivi on account of his having
granted life to the pigeon is acquired by
him, O king, who makes a pift of food to a
Brahmana.


13 Hence, we have heard that they
why give life attain to very superior region
of happiness in after life. Food, O best of
the Kurus, may or may not be superior to
drink.


12. Nothing can exist without the help
of what comes from water. ‘lhe very lord
of all the planets, vég., the illustrious Soma,
has originated from water.


13. Ambrosia and Suddha and Swadha
and milk,‘as also every sort of food, the
deciduous herbs, O king, and creepers
originate from water.


14, From these, O king, the vital airs
of all living creatures ftow, VYhe deities
have nectar for their food. The Nagas
have Sudha,


15. The departed manes have Swadha
for theirs. ‘The animals have herbs and
plants for their food. ‘The wise have said
that rice, &c., form the food of human
beings.


16. All these, O king, originate from
water. Hence, there is nothing superior to
the gift of water or drink. :


17. Tf a person wishes to get prosperity
for himself, he should always make gifts of
drink, The gift of water is considered as
very laudable. It brings on great fame
and bestows long fife on the giver,


18. The giver of water, O son of Kunti,
always stands over the heads of his enemies.
Such a person obtains the fruition of all
his desires and acquires everlasting fame,


19. The giver, O king, becomes purged
of every sin and obtains unending happi-
ness hereafter as he proceeds to the celestial
region. O you of great splendour, Maru
himself has said that such a person acquires
regions of endless bliss in the other world,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


CHAPTER LXVIIL.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Do you describe to me once again, O
grandfather, the merits of the gifts of sesame
and of lamps for lighting darkness, as also
ef food and clothes.


Bhishma said :—

2. Reyarding it, @ Yudhishthira, is
récited the discourse that took place formerly
between a Brahmana and Yama.


3. In the region lying between the rivers
Ganga and Yamuna, at the foot of the hills
called Yamuna, there was a large towa
peopled by Brahmanas.


4. The town was known by the name of
Pacnashala and was very charming, O king.
A large number of learned Brahmanas
lived in it.


5—6. One day, Yama, the king of the
dead, commanded a messenger of his, who
was clad in black, having blood-red eyes
and hair standing erect, and possessed of
feet, eyes, and nose all of which resembied
those of a crow, saying,—Go you to the
town inhabited by Brahmanas and bring
hiere the person known by the name of
Sharmin and born in the race of Agastya.


7. He is intent on mental tranquillity
and gifted with fearning. He teaches the
Vedas and his practices are well-known.
Do not bring me another person belonging
to the same race and living in the same
Neighbourhood.


8. This other man I want is equal to him
in virtues, study, and birth. As for children
and conduet, this other resembles the in-
telligent Sharmin,


. Do you bring the individual I want
He should be adored with- respect.—The
messenger, going there, did the very re-
verse of what he had been ordered to do.


io. Attacking that person, he brought
him who had been forbidden by Yama to
be brought. Endued with great energy,
Yama rose up on seeing the Brabmana
and adored him duly.


11-12, The king of the dead then
ordered his messenger, saying,—Let this
one be taken back, and let the other one be
brought to me.—When the great judge of
the dead {said these words, that Brahmana
addressed him:'and said,—I have finished
my study of the Vedas and am no longer
attached to the world. Whatever period
may yet remain of my life, wish to pass,
- Fiving here, O you of unfading glory.


155


Yama said :—

13. I cannot determine the exact period,
ordained by Time, of one’s life, and hence,
unurged by Time, [I cannot allow one to
live here. I take note of the acts of virtue
(or otherwise) that one does in the world.


14. Do you, O learned Brahmana of
great splendour, return forthwith to your
house. ‘Tell me what also is in lyour mind
and what 1 can do for you, O you of un-
fading glory. :


Brahmana said :—


15. Bo you tell me what those acts are
by doing which. one may acquire great
merit. O best of all beings,. you are
the foremost of authorities in the three
worlds.


Yama said :—


~- 16. Do you hear, O twice-born Rishi,
the excellent ordinances about gifts, ‘The
gift of sesame seeds is a very superior gift.
it yields everlasting merit.


“17. UO foremost of twice-born ones, one
should make gifts of as much sesame as one
can. By making gifts of .sesame every
day, one is sure to acquire the fruition of
his desires.


18. The gift of sesame at Shraddhas is
highly spoken of. The gift of sesame is a
very superior gift. Do you make gifts of
sesame to the Brahmanas according to the
rites laid down in the scriptures.


19. One should, on the day of the full
moon. of the month of Vaishakha, make
gifts of sesame tothe Brahmanas. ‘They
should also be made to eat and to touch
sesame on every occasion that one can
afford. ;


20. They, who are desirous of seeing
their well-being, should, with their whole
minds do this in their houses. Forsooth,


'men should likewise make gifts of water


and set up resting places for the distribu-
tion of drinking water,


2t. One should make tanks and lakes


and wells to be excavated. Such acts are.
rare in the world, O best of twice-born’


persons,


22. Do you always make gifts of water.
This actis full of great merit, O best of
twice-born persons, for making {such gifts
you should put up resting places along the
toads for the distribution of water.


23. After one has eaten, the gift to one
should especially be made of water
drink,


*


ki


156


Bhishma said :—


24. After Yama had said these words
to him, the messenger who had borne him


from his house conveyed him -back to it.


The Brahmana, on his return, obeyed the
instructions he had received.


25. Having thus conveyed him back to
Nis abode, the messenger of Yama fetched
Sharmin who had really been sought by
Yama. Taking Sharmin to him, he in-
formed his master. ©


26. Endued with great energy, the judge
of the dead adored that pious Brahmana,
and having conversed with him for some
time dismissed him for being taken back
to his house, e


27. To .bim also Yama gave the same
instructions. Sharmin too, returning to the
world of men, did all that Yama had said.


28. Like the gift of water, Yama, from
desire of doing good to the departed manes,
applauds the gift of lamps to light dark
places, for it is considered as‘ benefiting the
-departed manes,


29. Hence, O best of the Bharatas, one
should always give lamps for lighting dark
places. The giving of lamps increases. the
power of vision, of the deities, the Pitris,
and one’s own self,


30. [t has been said, O king, that the
gitt of gems is a very great gift. The
Brahmana, who having accepted a gift of
gems, sells the same for celebrating a
sacrifice, commits no $in.


3t. The Brahmana, who having accepted
a gife of gems, makes a gift of them to
Brahmanas, wins endless merit bimself and
confers endless merit upon him from who
he had originally received them.


32. Knowing every duty, Manu himself
has said that he who, observant of proper
control makes a gift of gems to a Bra-
hmana observant of proper restraints, wins
inexhaustible merit himself and confers


_ inexhaustible merit upon the recipient.


33. The man, who is content with his
own married wife and who makes a gift of
aressess, acquires an excellent complexion
and excellent dresses for himself,


‘, 34. have told you, O foremost of men,


what the merits are of gifts of kine, of gold
and of sesame, according to various pre-
cepts of the Vedas and the scriptures.

i 35- ‘One should marry and procreate
offspring upon one’s married wives. Of
all acquistions, O son of Kuru’s race, that
of sons is considered the foremost.


eS


‘| through the midst of kine.


MAHABHARATA,


CHAPTER LXIX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
: Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Do you, O foremost one of Kuru's
family, describe to me once again the excel-
lent ordinances about gifts, with especial
reference; O you of great wisdom, to the
gift of earth.


2. A Kshatriya should make -gifts of
earth to a pious Brabmana; sucha Brah- ,
mana should accept the gift with due rites,
None else, however, save a Kshatriya can
make gifts of Earth. i


3. You should now tell me what those
objects are that persons of all classes caw
freely give if actuated by the desire of ace
quiring merit. You should also tell me
what has been said in the Vedas on this
subject. :


Bhishma said :—


4. There are three gifts that pass by
the same name and that yield equal merits.
Indeed, these three. confer the fruition of
every desire. The three objects whose gifts
are of such a character are kine, earth, and
knowledge.


5. That person, who tells his disciple
words of good meang drawn from the
Vedas, acquires merit equal to that which
is acquired by making gifts of earth and
kine.


6, Likewise are kine praised j There is
no object of gift higher than they. Kine
are supposed ta confer merit forthwith
‘They are also, O Yudhishthira, such that a
gift of them cannot but yeild great merit,


7. Kine are the mothers of all creatures.
They grant every sort of happiness. ‘The
person, who seeks his own prosperity, should
always make gifts of kine,


8. No one should.kick at kine or pass
Kine are god-
dessess and homes of auspiciousness.
‘Therefore they always deserve worship. -


g. Formerly, the deities, while tilling
the earth whereon they celebrated a sacri-
fice, used the goad for striking the bullocks
yoked to the plough, Hence, in cultivating
earth for such a purpose, one may, with-
out incurring censure or sin, apply the
goad to bullocks. In other acts, however,
bullocks should never be struck with the
goad of the whip.


10. When kine are grazing or lying
down, ua one should tease them in any
way. When thirsty and they do not get
water, kine, by merely looking at sucha


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


person, can destroy him with all his rela-
tives and friends,


1t. What creatures can be more sacred
than kine when with the very dung of kine
altars, whereon Shraddhas are performed in
honor of the departed manes, or those
whereon the deities are adored, are cleans-
ed and sanctified ?


12.°"Epat man who, before eating him-
‘self, gives-every day, for a year, only a
_ hahdful of grass to a cow belonging to
another, is considered as practising a vow
or observance which bestows the fruition
of every desire, ;


13. Such a person acquires children and
fame and wealth and prosperity, and re-
moves all evils and bad dreams.


Yudhishthira said :—


14. What should be the marks of those
kine that deserve to be given away? What
are those kine that should be looked over
in the matter of gifts? What should be
the characters of those persons to whom
should kine be given? Who, again, are
those to whom kine should not be given ?


Bhishma said :—


15. ‘A cow should never be given to one
who is not pious in conduct, or one that is
sinful, or one that is covetous, or one who is
a liar, or one who does not make offerings
to the departed manes and celestials.


16. A person, by making a gift of ten
kine to a Brahmana learned in the Vedas,
poor in earthly riches, possessed of many
children, and owning a domestic fire, attains
numerous regions of great happiness.


17. When a man performs any meritori-
ous act, assisted by what he has got in gift
from another, he acquires a portion of that
merit. :

18. He who procreates a person, he who
rescues a person, and he who assigns the
means of livelihood to a person, are con-
sidered as the three fathers.


19. Services dutifully done to the pre-
ceptor destroys sin. Pride destroys even
great fame. The possession of three chil-
dren removes the reproach of childlessness,
and the possession of ten kine removes the
reproach of poverty.


_ 20-21. To one who is devoted to the
Vedanta, who is gifted with great learning,
who has been filled with wisdom, who has a
complete mastery over his senses, who ob«
serves the restraints laid down in the scrip-
tures, who has withdrawn himself from all
worldly attachments, to him who = says
agreeable words to all creatures, to him
who would never do an evil act even when
actuated by hunger, to one who is mild or


157


possessed of a peaceful disposition, to one
that is hospitable to all guests,—ta such a
Brahmana, should a man, possessed of
similar conduct and having children and
wives, assigir the means of livelihood,


22. Yhe merit of the gift of kine toa
worthy person is exactly equal to the sin of —
robbing a Brahmana of what belongs ta
him. Under all circumstances anything
belonging toa Brahmana should be avoided
and his wives kept at a distance.


CHAPTER LXX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. Regarding it, O perpetuater of Kuru
race, is recited by the righteous the narra
tive of the great calamity that befell king
Nigra on account of his taking what had
belonged to a Brahmana.


2. Sometime before, certain youths of
Yudu’s race, while searching for water,
came to a large well covered with grass and
creepers, —

3. Desirous of drawing water from it,
they worked hard for removing the creepers
that covered jts mouth. After the mouth
had been cleaned, they saw within the well
avery large lizard living within it. The
youths made strong and repeated efforts for
rescuing the lizard from that plight.


5, Resembling a very hill in size, the
lizard was sought to be freed by cords and
leathern tongs. Not succeeding in their
attempts, the youths then went to Janard-
dana.


6. Addressing him they said.—-Covering
the entire space of a well, there is a very
large lizard to be seen. Despite our best
efforts we have not succeeded in rescuing it
from that plight. This was what they said
to Krishna.


7. Vasudeva then went there and took
out the lizard and questioned it as who it
was. ‘The lizard said that it was the soul
of king Nriga who had flourished in days of
eds and who had celebrated many sacri-

ces.


8. To the lizard that said those words, .
Madhava spoke :—


You had done many pious deeds. You
committed no sin. Why then, O king,
have you come by sucha distressful end?
Do you explain what is this and-why has
it been caused ? ;


158


g We have neard that you did repeatedly
make gifts to the Brahmanas numberable


kine. Why, therefore, have you come by
this end.
to. Nriga then replied to Krishna, say-


ing,—On one occasion a cow belonging to
a Bratunana who regularly adored his
domestic fire, escaping from the owner’s
house while he was absent from home, en-
tered my flock.


11. The keepers of my cattle included
that cow in their list of a thousand. In
time that cow .was given away by me to
a Brahmana, wishing for happiness in
lieaven.


t2. The true owner, returning home,
sought for his lost cow and at last found it
in the house of another. Finding her, the
owner said,—TVhis cow is mine.— .


13. The other person contested his claim,
till both, growing wroth came to me. Ad-
dcessing me, one of them said,—You gave
this cow.—The other one said,—You have
robbed me of this cow because she is
mine,


t4. I then begged the Brahmana to
whom I had given that cow, to return the
gift in exchange for hundreds and hundreds
of other kine, Without yielding to my
earnest solicitations, he addressed me
saying, —The cow I bave got is well suited
to time and place. She gives profuse milk,
besides being very quiet and very fond of us.
The milk she gives is very sweet. She is
lauded in my house.


16. She is nourishing, besides, a weak
child of mine that has jast been born.
I ‘cannet, therefore, part with her.—
Having said these words, the Brahmana
went away.


17. I then begged the other Brahmana
offering him an exchange, and saying,—Do
you take a hundred thousand kine for this
one cow.


18. The Brahmana, however, replied to
me saying,—I de not accept gifts from
Kshatriyas. I am able to support myself
without aid. Do you then, fforthwith, give
me that very cow which was mine. Thus,
O slayer of Madhu, did that Brahmana
speak to me,


19. I then offered to make gifts to him of
gold and silver and horses and cars. ‘Yhat
foremost of Brahmanas refused to accept
any of these gifts and departed.


. 20, Meanwhile, urged by Time’s irresis-

tible power, I had to depart from this world.

Going to the region of the departed manes

; was taken before Yama the king of the
lead,


MATIABITARATA.


' 28. Adoring me duly, Yama addressed
me saying,—The end cannot be determined,
O king, of your righteous deeds.


22. There is, however, a little sin which
was unconsciously committed by you. Do
you suffer the punishment for that sin now
or afterwards as you like.


23. You had sworn that you would pro-
tect (all persons in the enjoyment of their
own.) ‘This oath of yours was not rigidly
kept by you. You took also what belonged
toa Brahmana. This has been the twofold
sin you have perpetrated.


24. I answered, saying,I shall first
suffer the distress of punishment, and when
that is over, I shalf enjoy the happiness that
is in store for me, O lord!—After I had
said these words to the king of the dead, I
dropped down on the Earth,


25. Though fallen down I! still could
hear the words that Yama said to me very
loudly. ‘Those words were,—Janarddana
the son of Vasudeva, will save you.


26. Upon the completion of a full thou-
sand years, when your sin will be dissi-
pated you shall then attain to many regions
of unending happiness-that have been ac-
quired by you through your own pious -
deeds.


2j. Falling down I found myself, with
head downwards, within this well, changed
“into a creature of the intermediate order.
Memory, however, did not leave me.


28. By you I ,havejbeen saved to-day.
What else can it testify than the power of
your penances ?_ Let me have your permis-
sion, O Krishna. I wish to ascend to
the celestial region.


29. Permitted then by Krishna, king
Nriga bowed his head to him and then
mounted a celestial car and went to
Heaven,


30. After Nriga had thus proceeded to
the celestial region, O best of the Bharatas,
Vasudeva jrecited this Verse, O delighter,of
the Kurus,


31. Noone shoutd knowingly misappro-
priate anything belonging to a Brahmana.
fhe property of a Brahmana, if taken, des-
troys the taker even as the Brahmana’s cow
destroyed king Nriga!


32. I tell you, again,"O Partha, that a
meeting with the good never proves furtile.
See, king Nriga was rescued from Hell
through a meeting of his with one that is
good. :

33- Asa gift yields merit, so an act of
Spoliation brings on to demerit. Hence
also, O. Yudhishthira, one should avoid

i doing any injury to kine,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


CHAPTER LXXL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).~~
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :~


1. Ovsinless one, do you describe to me
more fully the merits of making gifts of
kine. O you of mighty arms, I am never
satiated with your words,


Bhishma said :—

2. Regarding it is cited the old discourse
between the Rishi Uddalaki and Nachi-
keta,


3. Once onatime the Rishi Uddalaki,
gifted with great intelligence, approaching
his son Nachiketa, said to him,—Do you
wait upon and serve me.—


4—5. Upon the completion of the vow he
had observed, the great Rishi once more
said to his son,—-Engaged in performing my
ablutions and deeply busy with my Vedic
study,! have fergotten to bring with me the
fire-wood, the Kusha blades, the flowers,
the water-jar, and the potherbs I had col-
lected. Bring me those things from the
river-bank.


6. The son went there, but found all the
articles washed away by the current. Re-
turning to his father, he said :—‘' I do not
see the things.” :


7. Stricken as he then was by hunger,
thirst, and fatigue, the Rishi Uddalaki of
great ascetic merit, in a sudden anger
cursed his son, saying,—meet with Yama
to-day.

8. Thus struck by his father with the
thunder of his speech, the son, with joined
hands, said,‘ Be pleased with me.—Soon,
however, he dropped down on the earth
dead. .


9g. Seeing Nachiketa prostrated upon the
earth, his father became senseless with grief.
He, too, exclaiming,—Alas, what have I
done !—dropped down on the earth,


® 10. Filled with grief as he bewailed for
his son, the rest of that day passed away
and night came.


it. Then Nachiketa, QO son of Kuru’s
race, drenched by the tears of his father,
showed signs of returning life as he lay ona
mat of Kusha grass. His regaining of life
under the tears of his father resembled the
sprouting forth of seeds when drenched with
good showers.


12, The son, just restored to life, was still
weak. His body was smeared with scents
and he looked like one just awaking from a
deep sleeps ‘The Rishi asked him, saying ~


159


13. Wave you, O son, acquired auspici-
ous regions by your own deeds? By good
luck, you have been restored to me. Your
body does not seem to be human.


14. Thus asked by his great father, Na-
chiketa who had seen every thing with his
own eyes, answered thus in the midst of the
Rishis.—


15. In obedience to your command I
proceeded to the vast region of Yama which
is possessed of a charming effulgence.
There I saw a palatial mansion which ex-
tended for thousands of Yojanas and emlt-
ted a golden splendour on every part.


16. As soon as Yama saw me approach-
ing with face towards him, he ordered his
attendants, saying,—Give him a good seat.
~Indeed the king of the dead, for your
sake, adored me with the Arghya and
other ingredients,


17. Thus adored by Yama and seated in
the midst of his counsellors, [ then asked
him mildly,—I have come to your house,
O judge of the dead. Do you assign
me those regions which I deserve for my
acts.


18. Yama then answered me, saying,—
You are not dead, O amiable one. Gifted
with penances, your father said to thee—
Meet with Yama.—The®energy of your
father is like that of a burning fire. f
could not possibly falsify that speech of
his.


19. You have seen me. Do you go
hence, O child. ‘The author of your body
is bewailing for you. You are my dear
guest. What wish of yours shall 1 fulfill ?
Solicit the fruition of whatever desire you
may have.


20. Thus addressed by him, I replied
to the king of the dead, saying,—I have
arrived within your territory from which no
traveller ever returns. If. I am worthy of
your attentions, | wish, O king of the dead,
to see those regions of great prosperity
and happiness that have been reserved for
doers of virtuous deeds.


21. Thus addressed by me, Yama made
me mount a vehicle effulgent as the Sun
and to which were yoked many excellent
horses. Taking me on that car, he showed
me, O foremost of twice-born ones, all those
charming regions that are reserved for the
pious.


22. T saw in those regions many efful.
gent palaces intended for great persons,
Those mansions are of various forms and
are adorned with every kind of gems.


23. Bright as the lunar disc, they are
ornamented with cows of tinkling bells,


‘160


Hundreds among them are many-stotied.
Within them are charmitig groves and
gardens and transparent pools of water.


24. Effulgent like apis lazuli and the
Sun, and made .of silver and gold, their
color resembles that of the morning Sun.
Some of them are fixed and some movable.


25. Within them are many hills of foods
any enjoyable articles, and dresses and
beds in abundance. Within them are
many tress capable of granting the fruition
of every desire.


26. There ate also many rivers and
roads and spacious halls and lakes and
large tanks, Thousands of cars with ratt-
ling wheels may be seen there, having
excellent horses yoked to them.


27. Many rivers of milk, many hills of
clarified butter and large pieces of trans-
parent water are there. Indeed, | saw
many such regiotts, never seen by me
before, of happiness—and joy, approved by
the king of the dead. .


28. Seeing all those objects, 1 addressed
the ancient and powerful judge of the
dead, saying,—For whose use and enjoy-
ment have these rivers with eternal currents
of milk and clarified butter been ordained ?


Yama said :—-


2g. These rivers of milk. and clarified
butter are for the enjoyment of those pious
persons who make gifts in the world of men.
Other eternal worlds there are which are
filled with such palaces free frowi every sort
of sorrow. These are reserved for those
persons who make gift of kine.


30. The mere gift of kine is not lau-
dable. There are. considerations of fitness
ot otherwise about the person to whom kine
shoutd be given, the time for making those
gifts, the kind of kine and the rites that
should be observed in making the gifts.
Gifts of kine should be made after knowing
the qualifications af beth Brahmanas and
the kine themselves. [Kine should not be
given to one in whose house they are likely
to suffer from fire or the sun.


gt. That Brahmana, who is endued with
Vedic learning, who is of austere penances,
and who celebrates sacrifices, is considered
as worthy of receiving kine in gift. Those
kine which have been saved from distressful
situations, or which have been given by
poor householders from. want of sufficient
means to feed and cherish them, are, for
these reasons, counted as of great value.


32. Abstaining from all food and sub-
sisting upon water alone for three nights
and sleeping the while on the naked earth,
one should, having properly fed the kine


MAHABHARATA.


intended to be given away, give thent td
Brahmanas after having pleased then als
(with other gifts).


33- The kine, given away, should be ad-
companied by their calves. They should;
again, be such as to bring forth good
calves at the proper seasons. They should
be accompanied with other articles. Have
ing completed the gift, the giver should live
for three days on only milk aud abstaining
from food of every other kind.


34. He, who gives a good cow that
brings forth good calves at proper time;
and that does not fly away from the owner’s
house; and accompanieswssuch gifts with a
vessel of white brass for milking her, enjoys
the divine happiness for as many years
as are measured by the number of hairs
on the animal’s body. He who gives a bull
to a Brahmana, that is well-broken and
capable of carrying loads, strong and young
in years, disinclined to do any mischief,
large-sized and powerful, enjoys those re-
gions, approved of the righteous, that are
reserved for givers of kine.


35—35. He is considered as a proper
person for receiving a cow in gift who is
known to be mild towards kine, who takes
kine for his refuge, who is grateful, and


-who has no means of livelihood assigned


to him. When .an old man becomes ill,
or when a famine takes place or. when a
Brabmana intends to celebrate a sacrifice,
or when one wishes to till for agriculture,
or when one gets a son through the efficacy
of a Homa performed for the purpose, ot
for the use of one’s preceptor, or for the”
sustenance of a child, one should give away
a loved cow. These are the considera-
tions that are spoken highly of about place
and time. The kine worthy of being giver


. away are those that give profuse mil&, or


those which are well-knowa, or those that
have been purchased for a price, or those that
have been acquired as honoraria for learning,
or those that have been obtained in exchange
by offering other living creatures, or those
that have been got by prowess of arms, o¢
those that have been got as marriage-dower,


Nachiketa said :—


3, Hearing these wotds of Vaivaswata,;
the Regent of the dead, I once more address-
ed him, saying,—What are those objects
by giving which, when kine cannot be had,
givers may yet go to regions reserved for
men making gifts of kine.


38. Accosted by me, the wise Yama


| answered, explaining further what the end


is which one wins by making gifts of kine.
He said,—In the absence.of kine, a person
by making gifts of the substitute of kine,
acquires the merit of making gifts of kine.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


39. Tf im the absence of kine, one makes
B gift of a cow made of clarified butter, ob-
servant of a vow the while, one gets for
one’s use these rivers of clarified butter all
of which approach one like an affectionate
mother approaching her loved child.


4o. If, in the absence of even a cow,
made of clarified batter, one makes a gift of
a cow made of sesame seeds, observing a
vow the while, one succeeds with the help of
that cow to get over all calamities in this
world and to enjoy great happiness here-
after from these rivers of- milk that you
see.


40. If a cow made of sesame seeds,
is not available, one makes a gift of a cow
made of water, he succeeds in coming to
these happy regions and enjoying this river
of cool and transparent water, that can
grant the fruition of every desire.


42. The king of the dead explained to
me all this while I was his guest, and, O
you of unfading glory, areat was the joy
that 1 felt on secing all the wonders he
showed me.


43. 1 shall now tell you what would
certainly be agreeable to you. I have now
got agreat sacrifice whose performance
‘does not require much riches. That sacri-
fice may be said to originate from me, O
sice. Others will obtain it also. “It is not
quite of a piece with the ordinances of the
Vedas.


44. The curse that you had imprecated
on me was no curse but was in sooth a
blessing, since it enabled me to see the
great king of the dead. ‘There I have seen
what the rewards are of gifts. I shall
henceforth, O you of great soul, practise
the duty of gift without any doubt about its
rewards.


45- And, O great Rishi, the righteous
Vama, filled with joy, repeatedly told me,—
One who, by making repeated gifts, has
succeeded in acquiring purity of mind
should then make gifts of kine in parti-
cular. ‘


46. This subject is fraught with sanctity.
Do you never disregard the duties of gifts.
Gifts, again, should be made to worthy
persons, when time and place are suitable.
jo you, therefore, always make gifts of
kine. Never entertain any doubt about it.


47. Devoted to the path of gifts, focmer-
jy many great persons used to make gilts of
kine, Fearing to practise austere penances,
they made gifts according to their power.
- 48. In time they shook off all sentiments
of pride and vanity, and purified their souls.

ugaged in performing Shraddhas in honor
of the departed manes and in’ all religious


2i


TG


acts of righteousness, they ased to make,
according to their power, gifts of kine,
and as the reward of those acts they have
attained to the celestial region and are shin~
ing in effulgence for such @irtue,


49. One should, on the eighth day of the
moon that is kuown by the name of Ka-
myashtami, make gifts af kine, properly
got, to the Brahmanas, after determining
the fitness of the recipients. After making '
the gift, one should then live for tea days
together upon only the milk of kine, theic
dung and their urine.


50. The merit that one acquires by
making a gift of a bull is equal to that of
the divine cow. By making a gift of a
couple ef kine one gains, as the reward
thereof, a mastery of the Vedas. By
making a gift of cars and vehicles with kine
yoked thereto, one wins the merit of baths
in sacred waters. By making a gift of a
cow of the Kapila kind, one becomes purged
of all his sins.


5t. Indeed, by giving away even a single
cow .of the Kapila kind that has been.ac- -
quired by fair means, one becomes purged
of all his sing. There is nothing highet
than the milk which is given by kine. - Phe
gift of a cow is truly considered as a very
superior gift. A ‘

52. Kine, by giving milk, rescue-all the
worlds from calamity. It is kine, again,
hat produce the food upon which creatures
live. Qne who, knowing the extent of the-
service that kine do, does not entertaia in
his heart love for kine, is a sinner who is
sure to sink in Hell. :


53- If one gives a thousand or a hun-
dred or ten or five kine,. indeed, if one
gives toa pious Brahmana even a single
cow which brings forth good calves at
proper seasons, he is sure to see that cow
approach him tn Heaven in the form of a’
river of sacred water capable of granting
the fruition of every desire.


54. About prosperity and the growth
that kine confer, in the matter also of the
protection that kine grant to all creatures
of the Earth, kine are equal to the very
rays of the Sun that fali on the Earth.
‘The word that signifies the cow means also
the rays of the Sun. The giver of a cow
begets a very large progeny inhabiting a
large part of the Earth, Hence, be who
gives a cow shines like a secend Sun in
effulgence. ee


i
. 55. The disciple should, in the matter of
making gifts of kine, select his preceptor.
Such a disciple is sure to go to Heaven
everytime, The selection of a preceptor’ is
considered as 4 high duty by persons know-
ing the ordinances. This is, indeed, the


162


initial ordinance. Al} other ordinances de-
pend upon it.

56. Selecting, after examination, a fit
person among the Brahmanas, one should
make to him the gift of a cow that has been
acquired by fair means, and having made
the gift make him accept it. ‘Ihe deities
and men and ourselves also, in wishing
good to others, say,— Let the merits of gifts
be yours on account of your virtue ?


57. Thus did the judge of the dead
speak to me, O twice-born Rishi. I then
bowed my head to the tighteous Yama.
Getting his permission I left his kingdom
and have now come to the sole of your feet.


CHAPTER LXXIE


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


“g. You have, O grandfather, describe to
me the topic of gifts of kine in speaking of
the Rishi Nachiketa. You have also, related
O powerful one, the efficacy aad pre-emin-
ence of that act. .


2. You have also told me, O grandfather,
of great intelligence, the exceedingty pain-
ful character of the misfortune that befelt
the great king Nriga on account of a single
transgression of his.


3. He had to five for a tong time at
Dwaravati_ (in the form of a mighty lizard)
and how Krishna became the instrument
of his rescue from that miserable con-
dition.

4 have, however, one doubt. About
the regions of kine. 1 wish to hear parti+
cularly about those regions which are re-
served for the residence of persons who
make gifts of kine.


’ Bhishma said:—

5. Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course between Him who sprang from the
primeval lotus and him who performed a
hundred sacrifices.


Shakra said :—


6. I see, O grandfather, that those who
Tive in the region of tine transcend by their
effulgence the prosperity of the celestial
dwellers and pass them by. This has
created a doubt in my mind.


q. Of what kind, O holy one, are the
regions of kine? Tell me all about them,
O sinless one. Indeed, what is the nature


MAHABHARATA.


of those regions that are inhabited by givers
of kine? I wish to know this,


8. Of what kind are those regions 7
What fruits do they yield? What is the
highest oBject there which the inhabitants
thereof succeed in acquiring? What are its
virtues. How also do men, shorn of anxiety,
succeed in going to those regions,?


9g. For what period does the giver of a
cow enjoy the frutts of his gift? How mav
persons make gifts of many kine and how
may they make gifts of a few kine ?


to. What are the merits of the gifts of
many kine and what those of the gifts of a
few only. How also do persons become
givers of kine without really giving any
kine? Do you tell me all this, ,


11, How does one making gifts of even
many kine, O powerful lord, become the
equal of one who has made gifts of only a
few kine? How also does one who has
made gifts of only a few kine equal one who
has made gifts of many kine?


12. What kind of present is considered
as distinguished for pre-eminence in the
matter of gifts of kine? You should, O
holy one, describe to me all this according
to truth.


CHAPTER LXXIIT.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ),.—
Continued,


The grandfather said :—

1. he questions you have put to: me
about kine, beginning with their gift, are
such that there is none else in-the three
worlds, O you of a hundred sacrifices, who
could put them.


2. Phere are many kinds of regions, O
Shakra, which ate invisible to even you.
Those regions are seen by me, O Indra,
as also by those women who are chaste
and who have been devoted to only one
husband.


3. Rishis observe excellent wows, by
means of their deeds of virtue and piety
and Brahmanas of righteous souls, suc-
ceed in going there in even their human
bodies. ;


4. Men who perform exeellent vows:
see those regions which resemble the bright
creations of dreams helped by their purified
minds and by that (temporary) liberation
which succeeds the loss of one’s conscious«


| ness of body.


“ANUSHASANA PARVA.


& O you, of a thousand eyes, hear me
fs 1 tell you what the attributes are of
those regions. Phere the very course of
Time is stopped. Decrepitude is mot there,
nor Fire which is onanipresent in the uni-
verse. There is slightest transgression does
not take place, nor disease, nor weakness
of any sort. :


6. The kine which live there, O Vasava,
‘acquire the fruition of every desire which
they cherish in their hearts. .1 have direct
experience of what I say to you.


7. Capable of going everywhere at will
and actually going from place to place with
ease, they enjoy the fruition of desire after
desire as it arises in their minds, Lakes,
tanks, rivers, forests of diverse kinds,
mansions, hills and all kinds of delightful
objects,—are to be seen there. There is no
region of happiness that is superior to any
of these of which F speak.


g_ All those foremost of men, O Shakra,
who are forgiving to all creatures, who
endure everything, who are full of love for
all things, who render dutiful obediertce to
their preceptors, and ‘who are freed from
pride and vanity, go to those regions of
supreme happiness.


to—1I. He who abstains from every
kind of flesh, who is possessed of a pure
heart, who is gifted with righteousness, who
worships his parents with respect, who is
endued with truthfulness of speech and
conduct, who attends with obedience upon
the Brahmanas, who is faultless in conduct,’
who never behaves with anger towards. kine
and towards the Brahmanas, who. performs
every duty, who serves his preceptors with
reverence, who is devoted for his whole life
to truth and to gifts, and who is always
forgiving towards all transgressions against
himself, who is mild and self-controtled, who
is full of respect for the celestials, who is
hospitable to all guests, who is gifted with
mercy,—indeed, he who is adorned with
these -attributes,—succeeds in attaining to
the eternal region of kine.


13—14. He who is sullied with adultery,
sees not such aregion; nor he who is a
destroyer of his preceptor; nor he who
speaks falsely or indulges in idte vaunts ;
nor he who always disputes with others ;
nor he who acts with hostility towards the
Brahmanas. Indeed, that wicked man who
is sullied with such faults cannot -even see
these regions of happiness ; nor he who in-
jures his friends; nor he who is guileful;
nor he who is ungrateful; nor he who is a
cheat ; nor he who is crooked in conduct;
nor he who is a disregarder of religion;
nor .he who is a slayer of Brahmanas.

Such men cannot see in even imagination


163


the region of kine that is the abode of. only
the pious.


15. I have told you every thing parti-
cularly about the regions of kine, O king of
the celestiats. Hear now, O you of a hun-
dred sacrifices, the merit of persons who are
engaged in making gifts of kine.


16. He who makes gifts of kine, aftee
purchasing them with money obtained by
inheritence or acquired by fair means, até
tains, as the fruit of such an act, to many
regions of endless happiness.


17. He who makes a gift of a cow,
having acquired it with money, won at dice,
enjoys happiness, QO Shaka, for ten thous
sand celestial years.


18. He who acquires a cow as his share
of ancestral riches is said to acquire her legi-
timately. Such a cow may be given away,
They who make gifts of kine so acquired,
obtain innumerable endless regions of
eternal happiness,


Ig. ‘fhat person who having acquired a
cow in gift makes a gift of hee with a pure
heart, succeeds, forsooth, O lord of Sachi, ia
obtaining eternal regions of beatitude.


20. That person who with controlled.
senses speaks the truth from his birth and
who endures everything at the hands of his
preceptor and of the Brahmanas, and who
practises foryiveness, gains an end that is”
equal to that of kine,


21. Improper words, O ford of Sachi,
sheuld never be addressed to a Brahmana,
One, again, should not, im even his mind,
do an injury to a cow. One should, in his
conduct, imitate the cow, and show mercy
towards the cow,


22. Hear, O Shakra, of the fruits which
truthful persous enjoy. If such a person
gives away a single cow, that oire cow be-
comes a thousand-fold. ak


23. Hf a Kshatriya endued witlr suclt
qualifications, makes a gift of a single cow,
his merit equals that of a Brahmana’s.
‘That single cow, lister, O Shalera, whiclr
such a Kshatriya gives away produces as |
much merit as the single cow that a Bralr-
mana gives away doves. under similar cir-
cumstances. This is the issue of the scrip-
tures. :

24. Hf a Vaishya, endued with similar
accomplishments, were to make a gift of a.
single cow, that cow would equal five hun-
dred kine. Ef a Shudra endued with humility
were to make a gift of a cow, such cow
would be equal to a hundred and twenty-
five kine. ; :


- a5. Given to penances and truth, versed
in scriptures through dutiful services done to


164


bis preceptor, gifted with forgiving nature,
engaged in the adoration of the deities,
possessed of a tranquil soul, pure, enligtr-
tered, observant of all duties, and freed
frony every sort of egotism, that man who
makes a gift of a cow to a Brahmana, for-
sooth, acquires great merit through that act
of his, o¢., the gift, according to proper
rites, of a cow giving profuse milk. Hence,
one, with singleness of devotion, observant
of truth, and engaged in humbly serving
his preceptor, should always make gifts of
kine.


27. Hear, O Shakra, what the merit is
of that person who, duly stedying the
Vedas, shows respect for kine, who always
becomes gtad on seeing kine, and who
since his birth always bows his head to
kine.


28. ‘Fhe merit which one wins by cele-.
brating the Rajasuya sacrifice, the merit
that one acquires by making gifts of heaps of
gold, that high merit is acquired by a person
who shows such respect ior kine, Virtuous
Rishis and great persons crowned with suc-
cess have said so,


29. Given to truth, possessed of a tran-
quil soul, free from cupidity, atways truth-
ful im speech, and behaving witl respect
towards kine with the steadiness of a vow,
the man who, for a whole year, before him-
self taking any food, regularly presents
some food to kine, acquires the merit, by
sach an aet, of the gift of a thousand kine.


go. That man who takes only one nteal
a day and who gives away the entire quan-
tity of his other meal to kine,—that man,
who thus respects kine with the steadiness
of a vow and shows such merey towards
them,-enjoys for tem years unlimited
happiness,


3t. That man who takes himself onty
One meal a day and with the other: meal
saved for some time purctases a cow and
makes a gift of it, acquires, Utrough that
gift, O you of a hundred sacrifices, the
eternal merit of the giftof as many kine as
there are hairs on the body of that single
Cow so given away.

32. These are sayings about the tmerits
that Brahmanas acquire by making gifts of
kine. Listen now to the merits that Ksha-
triyas may acquire. It has been said that
a Kshatriya, by purchasing a cow in this

“manner and making a gift of it toa Brah-

mana, acquires great happines for five
years. A Vaishya, by such conduct, wins
only half the merit of a Kshatriyas, and a
Shudra, by such corduct, wins half the
merit that a Vaishya does. ;


33. That man who sells himself and
with the proceeds thereof purchases kine


ss


MAHABHARATA. -


and gives thent away to Brahmanas, enjoys
happiness in Heaven for as long a period as
kine are seen on Earth.


34—35 Ft has been said, O highly
blessed one, that a region of eternal happi-
fess exists in every hair of such kine a$ are
purchased with the proceeds obtained by
selling oneself, hat man who having ae-~
quired kine by battle makes gifts of then,
acquires as much merit as he who makes
gifts of kine after having bought the same
with the proceeds of selling oneself. “That
man who, ta the absence of kine, makes a
gift of acow made of sesame seeds, con-
trolling his senses the while, is saved by
such a cow front every sort of calamity or
distress. Such a man -sperts in great
happinesg.

36. The mere gift of kine is not fraughy
with merit. ‘fhe considerations of worthy
recipients, of tinve, of thé kind of kine, and
of the ritual to be observed, should be seen.
One should determine the proper time for
thaking a gift of kine. One should also
determine the distitctive qualifications of
both Brahmanas and of kine themselves.
Kine should not be given to one in whose
house they are likely to suffer from fire or
the sun. .


37. One who is rich in Vedic tearning,
who is of pure birth, who is gifted with @
tranquil soul, who is given to the celebration
of sacrifices, who fears the perpetratiow of
sin, who is gifted with varied knowledge,
who js compassionate towards kine, who i9
mifd in conduct, who gives protection to alt
who seek it of him, aad who has no meang
of livelihood assigned to him, is considered
as a proper person for receiving a gift of
kine,


38. Toa Brahmana who has no means
of livelihood, to him while he is want of food
for purposes of agriculture, for a child born
on account of Homa, for the purposes of his
preceptor, for the sustenance of a child borir
should a cow be given. Indeed, the gift
should be made at a proper time and in a
proper place.


39. Those kine, O Shakra, whose dispo<
sitions are well known, which have been
won as honoraria for knowledge, or whiclt.
have been bought ia exchange for other
animals (such as goats, sheep, etc)., of:
which have been got by prowess of arins, or
obtained as marriage-dower, or which have
been acquired by being rescued from situa-
tions of danger, or which, their poor owners,
being unable to Maintain them, have been
made over by careful keep, is one’s house
with the wish of remaining there, are, for
such reasons, considered as proper objects
of gift.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


40. Those kine which are strong of body, +


which have good dispositions, and which
emit a sweet fragrance, are highly spoken
of in the matter of gifts. As Ganga is the
foremost of all rivers, s0 is a Kapila the
foremost of all kine. .


41. Abstaining from aff food and sub-
sisting only upon water for three nights, and
sleeping for the same time upon the naked
earth, one should make gifts of kine to
Brahmanas after having pleased them with
other presents, Such kine, freed from
every vice, should, at the same time, be ac-
companied by healthy calves. Having
made the gift, the giver should live for the
next three days successively Jon food con-
sisting only. of the products of the cow.


42. By giving away a good-natured
cow, that quietly allows herself to be milked,
that always brings forth living and healthy
calves, and that does not fly away from the
owner’s house, the giver enjoys happiness
in the next world for as many = years
-as there are hairs on her body.


“43. Likewise, by giving toa Brahmana
a bull that is capable of carrying heavy
loads, that is young and strong and quiet,
that quietly bears the yoke of the plough,
and that is possessed of such energy as is
sufficient to undergo even great labour, one
acquires such regions as are his who gives
away ten kine.


44. That person who rescues kine and
Brahmanas in the forest, O. Kaushika, is
himself cescued from every sort of danger.
Hear what his merit is.


45. The merit such a man wins is equal
to the eternal merit of a-Horse-sacrifice.
Such a person acquires whatever end he
desires at the hour of death.


46. For such an act a man acquires
many.a region of happiness,—in fact, what-
ever happiness he seeks in his heart.


47. Indeed, such a man permitted by
‘kine, lives honoured in every region. of
happiness. That man who follows tine


every day in the forest with this intention,
himself living the while on grass and cow-
dung and leaves of trées, his heart freed
from desire of fruit, his senses controlled
from every improper ‘object, and his mind
purified,—that man--O you of a hundred
sacrifices, lives happily freed from the con-
trol of desire in my cegion or in any other
region of happiness that he wishes, in the
company of the celestials.


165
CHAPTER LXXIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—-
Continued.


Indra said :—

1. EI desire to know, O Grandfather,,
what the end is of his who consciously
steals a cow or who sells one from -motived
of cupidity.


The Grandfather said :—


2. Hear of the consequences that befall
those persons who sfeal a cow for killing her’
for food or selling her for money, or making’
a gift of her toa Brahmana. ‘


3. He who, without being governed’ by
the restraints of the Scriptures, sells a cow,
or kills one, or eats the flesh of a cow, or
they who, forithe sake of money, allow a
person to kill kine,—all these, v¢z., he that
kills, he that eats, and: he that allows the
destruction,—rot in hell for as mamy years
as there are hairs on the ney of the caw
so killed.


§. Oyou of great power, those sins and
those kinds of |faults that have been said ta
attach to one which obstructs a Brahmana’s
sacrifice, are said to attach to the sale and
the theft of kine.


6. That man who having stolen a com:
makes a gift of her to a Brahmana, enjoys.
happiness in Heaven as the reward of the
gift but suffers misery in Hell for the sin of,
theft for the same period.


7. Gold has been said to form the pre-
sent, O you of great splendour, in. gifts of,
kine. Indeed, gold has been said to be
the best present in all sacrifices.


8. By making a gift of kine one is said:
to rescue his ancestors to seventh depree as
also this descendants to the seventh degree.
By giving away kine with the presents of
gold, one tescues his ancestors and. de-,
scendants of double the number.


g. The gift of gold is the best of ane
Gold is, again, the best present. Gald is a
great purifier,,O Shakra, and is, indeed,
the best of all purifying objects.


to. O you of a hundred sacrifices, gold.
has been said to be the purifier of the
entire family of him who gives it away. fF
have thus, O you of great splendour, told
you in brief of Dakhsina.


Bhishma said :—


11, This was said by the Grandfather to
Indra, O chief of Bharata’s race. Indra‘
delivered it to Dasharatha, and Dasharatha
in his turn to his son Rama.


166


12, Rama of Raghu’s,raee gave it to his
dear and illustrious brother Lakshmata,
While living in the forest, Lakshmana im-
parted it to the Rishis. a


13. It has then described from genera-
tion to generation, for the Rishis of rigid
vows held it amongst themselves as also the
pious kings of the Earth. —

14. My preceptor, O Yudhishthira,
communicated it to me. That Brahmana
who recites it every day in the conclaves
of Brahmanas, in sacrifices, or at gilts of
kine, or when two persons meet together,
acquires hereafter manyeregions of unend-
ing happiness where he always-lives with
the celestials as his companions.

16. The holy Brahman, the supreme
Lord, had said so.


eed


CHAPTER LXXV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :-—
1. Thave been greatly assured, O you
of power, by you thus discoursing lo me of


duties. I shall,, however, express the
doubts { have. Explain them to me, O
grandfather.


2. What are the fruits, described in the
scriptures, of the ‘vows that men observe.
Of what nature are the fruits, O you of
great splendour, of observances of other
kinds? What, again, are the fruits of one’s
Vedic studies.


3. Whatare the fruits of gifts, and what
those of keeping the Vedas in memory ?
What are the fruits of teaching the Vedas ?
I wish to know all this.


4. What, O grandfather, are the merits
of the non-acceptance of gifts in this world.
What fruits does one enjoy who makes gifts
of knowledge ? ;


5. What merits do persons enjoy who
perform the duties of theit order, as also
do heroes who do not retreat from the
battle-field. What are the fruits of the
observance of purity and of the practice of
Brahmacharya ?


-6. What are the merits of serving the
parents, What also are the merits of
serving preceptors and teachers, and what
the merits of mercy and kindness 7


7. Iwish-to know all this, O grand-
father, in sooth and in particular, O you,
who are conversant with all the scriptures.
Great is my curiosity,


MAHABHARATA.


Bhishma said :—

8. He enjoys eternal regions of happf-
ness, who, having properly commenced @
Vrata (vow) completes its observance ac
cording to the scriptures. .


9g. The fruits of restraints, O king, are
visible even in this world. These rewards
that you have acquired are those of Niya-
mas and sacrifices.


Io. The fruits of the Vedic studies are
seen both in this world and the next. The
person who is given:to the study of the
Vedas is seen to sport happily both in this
world and in the region of Brahma.


11. Listen now to me, O king, as [I telt
you in detail what the fruits are of self-
control. ‘The self-controlled are happy
everywhere. The self-controtled always
enjoy that happiness which results from: the
absence or subjugation of desire.


12. The self-controlled can go every-
where at will, ‘Fhe self-controtled cat
destroy every enemy. Forsooth, the self-
controlled succeed in getting everything:
they seek.


13. The self-coatrolled, O son of Pandu, _
obtain the fruition of every desire, ‘The
self-controlled and the forgiving share
the happiness that men ehjoy in Heaverr
through penances and prowess, (in arms),
poouee gift, and through various sacri-/
CES. : ‘


14. Self-control is more meritorious thar,
gift. A giver, after making a gift to
the Brahmanas, may yield to the influence’
of anger. A self-controlied.man, however,
never giyes way to anger. Heuce self-con-.
trol is superior to gift. That man who
makes gifts without yielding to anger, ‘suc
ceeds in acquiring eternal regions of happi-+
ness.


16. Anger destroys the merit of a gift.
Hence self-control is superior to gilt.


17. There are ten thousand invisible
places, O monarch, in Heaven. Existing
in all the tegions of Heaven, these places
belong to the Rishis. Persons, leaving this
world, attain tothem and become changed
into deities, ;


18. O king, the great Rishis repair
there, helped only by theic sélf-control, and
as the end of their efforts to attain to a
region of superior happiness, Hence, self«
control is superior to gift. :


19. The person who becomes a precepe- -
tor, and who duly adores the fire taking
leave of all his miseries in this wosld,
enjoys endless happiness, O king, in the


-tegion of Brahma.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


167


go. That man who, having himself read | “31. A thousand Horse-sacrifices and


the Vedas, imparts a knowledge thereof to
A iia disciples, and who praises the acts
of his own preceptor, acquires great honors
in Heaven.


at. That Kshatriya whe is given to the
studies of the Vedas, to the celebration of
sacrifices, to the making of gifts, and who
rescues the lives of others in battle, similar-
ly acquires great honors in Heaven.


22. The Vaishya who, observes the
duties of his caste, makes gifts, reaps as the
fruit of those gifts, a crowning reward.
‘Tbe Shudra who duly observes the duties
of his order, acquires Heaven as the reward
of such services,


23. Various kinds of heroes have been
spoken of. Listen to me as I explain to
you what the rewards are that they attain
to, The rewards are fixed of a hero be-
longing to a heroic race.


24. ‘There are heroes of sacrifice, heroes:
of self-control, heroes of truth, and others
equally entitled to to the name of hero.
‘There are heroes of battle, and heroes of
gift or liberality among men.


25. Thete are many persons who may
be called the heroes of the Sankhya faith,
‘there are many others that are called
heroes of Yoga. ‘There‘are others who are
considered as heroes in the forest-life, of
domesticity, and of renunciation.


26. Likewise, there are others who are
called heroes of the intellect, and also
heroes of forgiveness. ‘here are other men
who live ia tranquillity and who are consi-
dered as heroes of virtue.


27, There are various other kinds of
heroes who practise various other kinds of
vows and observances. There are heroes
given to the study of the Vedas, and heroes
devoted to the teaching of the,same.


_28. There are, again, men who come to
be regarded as heroes for the devotion with
which they wait upon and serve their pres
ceptors, as indeed, herces in respect of the
respect they show for their fathers. ‘There
are heroes in obedience to mothers, and
heroes in the life of mendicancy they lead.


29. There are heroes in the matter of
hospitality to guests, whether living as
hermits or as house-holders, All these
heroes attain-to very superior regions of
happiness which are, of course, acquired by
them as the rewards of their own deeds.


30, Keeping all the Vedas in memory,
or ablutions performed in all the sacred
waters, may or may not be equal to telling
the Truth every day in one’s life.


Truth were once weighed in the badance.
It was seen that Truth weighed heavier thare
a thousand Horse-sacrifices.


32. It is by Truth that the Sun is giving
heat; it is by Truth that fire burns ups itis
by fruth that the winds blow; indeed,
everything rests upon Truth,


33. It is Truth that pleases the deities,
the departed mane’, and the Brahmanas.
Truth has been said to be the highest
duty. Therefore, no one should ever-
transgress Truth.


34. he Munis are all given to Truth.
Their prowess depends upon Truth. They
also swear by Truth. Hence Truth is
pre-eminent. All truthful men, O chief of
Bharata’s race, succeed by their truthful-
ness in acquiring Heaven and sporting
there in happiness.


35. Self-control is ~the attainment of
the reward that attaches to Truth. J have
described it with my whole heart. The
man of humble heart who is endued with
self-control, forsooth, acquires great honors
in Heaven.


36—37. Listen now to me, O king as
I explain to you the merits of Brahma-
charyya. That man who practises the vow
of Brahmacharyya from his birth to the
time of his Death, know, O king, bas
nothing unattainable! Many millions of
Rishis are living in the region of Brahma,


3839. All of them, while here, were
given to Truth, and self-control, and had
their vital seed drawn up. The vow of
Brahmacharyya, O king, duly observed by
a Brahmana, is sure to dissipate all his
sins. The Brahmana is said to be a burns
ing fire, {a those Brahmanas that are
given to penances, the deity of fire becomes
visible,


40. Ifa Brahmcharin gives way to
anger on account of any slight, the chief
of the deities himself trembies in fear,
This is the visible fruit of the vow of Brahe -
macharyya that is observed by the Rishis.


4t—42. Listen tome, O Yudhishthira,
what the merit is of the worship of the
father and the mothers He who dutifully
serves his father without ever provoking him
in anything, or similarly serves his mother
or (elder) brother or other senior or precep-
tor, it should be known, O king, acquires a
residence in Heaven. ‘The man of purified
soul, on account of such service done to his
seniors, has never to even see Hell,


168


: CHAPTER LXXVIL.


*-{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—=
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. L wish, O king, to hear you discourse
in detail upon those high ordinances which
regulate pifts of kine, for it is by making
gifts (of kine) according ta those ordinances
that one acquires innumerable regions of
eternal happiness.


Bhishma said :—

2. There is no gift, O king, that is
higher in point of merit than the gift of
kine. A cow, lawfully acquired, if given
away, immediately rescues the entire family
of the giver...


3. That ritual which sprang for the
benefit of the ‘pious, was subsequently
declared for the sake of all creatures, That
rilual has come down fram. primeval time.
It.existed even before it was declared. In-
deed, O king, listen to me as E recite to
you that citual which affects the gift of

ine. ;


-4. Formerly, when a number of kine was
brought (before him), king Mandhatei,
filled with doubt about the ritual he should
observe, properly questioned Vrihaspati for
an explanation of that doubt.


Vrihaspati said :—

5. Duly obsecving restraints all the while,
the giver of kine: should, on the previous
day, properly honor the Brahmanas and
appoint the time of gift. As for the kine
to be given away, they should be of the
class called Rohini.


6. The kine also should be addressed
with the words—-Samange and Vahule—
Entering the fold wliere the kine are kept,
the following Shrutis shonld be uttered :—


-7 The cow is my mother. The bull is
my father, (Give me) Heaven and Earthly
prosperity. The cow is my refuge.——En-
tering the fold and acting thus, the giver
should pass the night there. He should
again utter the formula when actually giving
away the kine,


8. The giver, thus living with the kine in
the fold without doing anything to cortrol
their freedom, and lying down on the naked
earth, becomes readily cleansed of all his
sins on account of lus bringing himself down
B a condition of perfect similitude with the
kine.


g. When the Sua-rises in the morning,
you should give away the cow, accompanied
by her calf anda bull. As the reward of


MAMABUARATA.


such a ‘deed, you will surely attain to the
celestial region.- You will also enjuy the
blessings shown by the Mantras. ;


to. The Mantras contain these refer-
ences to kine: Kine are gifted with strength
and energetic exertion. Kine are also wise.
They are the root of that immortality which
sacrifice yields. They are the root of alt
energy. They are the steps by which
earthly prosperity is gained. hey are the
eternal! course of the universe. ‘hey multi-
ply one’s race.


tr. Let the kine dissipate my sins.
They have in them the nature of both the
Sun and the Moon. Letthem help me in
the attainment of the celestial region. Let
them come to me, as a mother takes to her
children. May 1 enjoy ail other blessings
which have not been namned in the Mantras
I have uttered.


12. For alleviating or curing phthisis
and other wasting diseases, and for achiev-
ing freedom from the bady, if a person takes
the help of the five products of the cow, kine
confer blessings upon the person like the
tiver Saraswati—Ve kine, ye are always
conveyers of all sorts of merit. Pleased
with me, do ye assign a desirable end for:
me.


13. I have to-day become what ye are.
By giving you away, I really give myself
away.—Ye do not belong to him who gives
you away. Ye have now become mine,
Possessed of the nature of both the Sun and
the Moon, do ye cause boththe giver and
the receiver to shine with all kinds of pros-
perity.-

14. The giver sliould duly utter the
words found in the ficst part of the above
Verse. ‘Ihe twice-born recipient, conver
sant with the ritual regulating the gift. of.
kine, should, when receiving the kine in
gift, utter the words found in the latter half
of the above Verse.


1g. The man who, instead of a cow, gives
away the usual value thereof or cloths or
gold, is considered as the giver of a cow.
The giver, when giving away the usual-
value of a cow, should utter the words,—'
This cow with face upturned is being given
away. Do you accept her.—The man who
gives away cloths should utter the words,
—Bhavitavya—(this should be rezarded
as representing a cow), The man who
gives jaway gold should utter the word,—
Vaishnavi t.e., the gold is of the form and
nature of a cow.


16. These are the words that should be
uttered according to the kind of gift men-
tioned above. The reward that was reaped
by making gifts of kine is residence in the
celestial region for six and thirty thousand


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


years, ‘eight thotsand years, and twenty }
thousand years respectively.
17, These are the merits, respectively, of |
gifts of things as substitutes of - kine. |
While, about him who gives an actual cow
all the merits that attach to gifts of kine |
Become his at only the eighth step of the
recipient. : ee
- 18. He who gives an actual cow ‘be-
comes giffed with righteous conduct in this |
world. He who gives the value of a cow
becomes freed from every sort of fear.’ He
.who gives a cow never suffers from sorrow.
All the three, as also they who regularly |
.petform their ablutions and other acts at
early dawn, and he who is well ‘conversant
with the Mahabharata, it is well known
altain to the regions of Vishnu and Soma.


19. Having given away.a cow, the giver
should, for three nights, adopt the vaccine
vow, and pass one night with kine. Begin-
ning again from that lunation, numbering
the eighth, named Kamya, he should pass
nee nights, living exclusively on milk and
‘the urine and dung of the cow. 7 | *

20. By giving away a buil, one acquires
the merit of Brahmacharyya. By giving
‘away two kine, one acquires the mastery of
Vne Vedas. That man who celebrates a
sacrifice and makes gilts of kine according |
‘to the ritual Jaid down, attains to many
‘great regions, ‘These, however, are not at-
lainable by the person who does not know
that ritual. ae


21. That man who gives away even a
single cow. which -gives profuse milk, ac-
‘quires the merit of giving away all desirable
objects on Earth collected together. What
more should be said of the gift of many
such kine as give Havya and Kavya onac-
count of their fall udders? The merit which
belongs to the gift of superior oxen is greater
Ahan that of the gift of kine.


* 22. One should not, by. giving a know-
ledge of this ritual, benefit a perso who is
not his disciple or who does not observe
vows' or who is bereft of faith or who is
possessed of a trooked understanding.
Indeed this religion is. a mystery, which
many people du- not know. One who
knows it should not speak of it everywhere.


23. There are, in the world, many men
who have no faith, There are among men
many persons who are mean and who
resemble Rakshasas. This celigion, if
given to them, would lead to evil. It would
produce equal evil if given to such sinful
men as are atheists. : :

24. Listen to me, O king, as I recite to
you the names of those pious kings who
have attained to regions of great happiness
as the reward of those gifts of kine which


22


i6g


they made according to the instructions: of
Vrihaspati.. ; ;

25. Ushinara, Vishwagashwa, Nriga,
Bhagiratha; the celebrated Mandhatri the
son of Yuvanashwa, king Muchukunda,
Bharidyumna, Naishadha, Somaka. Puru-
ravas, emperor Bharata to whose race


-belongs ail the Bharatas,’ the heroic Rama


tha son of Dasharatha, and many other
celebrated kings:af great deeds, and aiso
king Dilipa of widely-known deeds, all,
on account of their gifts of kine according to
the ritual, attained to Heaven. King Man«
dhatri, was always observant of sacrifices,
gifts, penances royal duties, and gifts of
kine. aaee ‘


18. Therefore, @ son of Pritha, do vou


j also keep in mind, those instructions of


Vrihaspati which { have fecited to you,
Having obtained the kingdom of the -
Kuras, do you, with a cheerful heart, make
gifts of good kine to, foremost of Brah-
manas, :


Vaishampayana said :—

‘29. ‘Ihus addressed by Bhishma on the
Subject of properly making gifts of kine,
king. Yudhishthira. did all that Bhishma
desired. Indeed, king Yudhishthira bore in


mind the whole of that religion which the


preceptor of the gods imparted to the Royal
Mandhatri.


30. YVudhishthira from that, time began
to always make gifts of kine and to main-
tain himself with grains of barley and cow-~
dung as both his food and drink, The king’
also began to sleep from that, day on the-
naked earth, and possessed of controlled
soul and resembling a bull in conduct, he
became the foremost of monarchs.

gt. The Kuru king from that day. be-
came ‘very attentive to kine and always
adored them, singing ‘their praises. From
that day, the king gave up the practice. of
yoking kine to his cars. -Wherever he had
occasion to go, he proceeded on cars drawn
by horses of good breed,


inne ay


CHAPTER LXXV1II


(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—
Continued, :


Vaishampayana said :—~ |

1. King Yudhishthira gifted with thumi-
lity, once again asked the royal son of
Shantanu on the subject of gilts of kine ia
full.


170


The king said :—

2. Do you, O Bharata, once more des-
cribe to me in full the merits of giving away
kine. Indeed, O hero, { have not been sa-
ti-ted with hearing your nectar-like words.


Vaishampayana said :—

3 ‘Thus accosted by king Yudhishthira
the just, Shantanu’s son began to describe
to him once again, in full, the merits of the
gilt of kine.


Bhishma said :—


4. By giving to a Brahmana a cow
having a calf, gifted with docility and other
virtues, young in years and covered round
with a piece of cloth, one is purged of all his
sins, : ;


5. There are many regions which have.
‘no sun. One who makes the gift of a cow.


has not to go there.


6. That man, however, who gives to a.


Brahmana a cow that cannot drink or eat,


that has her milk dried up, that has.
weakened senses and that is diseased and.


‘overcome with decrepitude, and that may,
therefore, be compared to a tank whose
water has been dried up,—indeed, the man


who gives such a cow to a Brahmana and,


thereby inflicts only pain and disappoint-


ment upon him, has certaiuly to enter into,


dark Hell,


7. That cow which is wrathful and vici-
ous, or diseased, or weak, or which has been
brought without the price agreed upon
having been paid, or which would only


afflict the twice-born recipient with distress.


and disappointment, should never be given.
The regions such a man may acquire would
not give him any happiness or energy.


8. Only such kine as are strong, gifted
with good behaviour, young in years, and
possessed of odour, are highly spoken of by
all. Indeed, ‘as Ganga is the foremost of
all rivers, so is a Kapila cow the foremost
of ail kine.


Yudhishthira said:—~


g. Why, O grandfather, do the righte-
ous highly speak of the gift of a Kapila cow
when all good kine that are given away
should be considered as equal? O you of
great power, 1 wish to hear what the
superiority is of a Kapila cow. You are
indeed, competent to discourse. to me on
this subject. ;


Bhishma said :—


to. Ihave, O son, heard old men recite
this history about the ciccumstancess under
which the Kapila cow was created, I shall
recite that old history to yous ‘


MAHABHARATA,


it. Formerly the Self.create Brahman
commanded the Rishi Daksha, saying,
Do you create living creatures.—For doing
good to creatures, Daksha, first of all
Created food.


12. As the deities live upon nectar, so
all living creatures, O powerful one, live
upon the food assigned by Daksha,


13. Among all objects mobile and immos
bile, the mobile are superior. Among mo«
bile creatures, Brahmanas are surecior.
‘The sacrifices are all set upon them.


14. It-is by. sacrifice that Soma is got,
Sacrifice has been fixed upon kine. ‘The
gods become. pleased through. sacrifices,
‘The means of livelihood. were created first,
Creatures came next.


18. As soon as creatures were born,
they began to cry aloud for food. All of
them then approached their creator. who
was to give them food, like children ap-
proaching their parents,


16. Approved of the desire of all his
Creatures, the holy lord of all creatures,
vis., Daksha, for the sake of his creatures,
himself drank a quantity of nectar.


17. He became pleased with the nectar,
he drank and thereupon an erucation came
out, spreading an excellent odour all around,
That erucation, Daksha saw gave birth to a
cow which he named Surabhi. This Sura-
bhi was thus a daughter of his, that had
come out of his mouth,


18. That cow called Surabhi gave birth
to a number of daughters who became the
mothers of the world. They were gold-hued,
and were all Kapilas. ‘hey were the means
of livelihood for all creatures,


19. As those kine, whose complexion re
sembled that of nectar, began to pour milk,
the forth of that milk arose and began to
spread on all sides as when the waves of a
running river dashing against one another,
sufficient froth is produced that spreads on
all sides. ;


20. Some of that froth. fell, from the
mouths of the calves that were sucking,
upon the head of Mahadeva who was then
sitting on the Earth. The powerful Maha-
deva thereupon, stricken with anger, lovked
at those kine. :


2t. With that third eye of his which
adorns his forehead, he seemed to burn
those kine as he espied them, Like the Sun
living masses of clouds with various colors,
thé energy that, came out from the third eye
of Mahadeva produced, O king, various
complexions in those kine. Those amongst
them, however, which succeeded in es«
caping from the looks of Mahadeva by
entering the region of Soma, remained of


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


the same color with which they were born,
f or no change was produced in their color.
Seeing that Mahadeva had become highly
wroth, Daksha, the lord of all creatures,
addressed him, saying,—You have, O great
deity, been drenched with nectar. ‘Ihe
milk or the froth that escapes from the
mouths of calves sucking their dams is
never considered as impure. ‘he Moon,
after drinking the nectar, pours it once
more. It is not, therefore, regarded as
impure,


25. Likewise, the milk that these kine
give, being born of nectar, should not be
considered as impure. ‘The wind can never
become impure. Fire can never become
impure. Gold.can never become impure.
The Ocean can never become impure.


26. The Nectar, even when drunk by
the gods, can never become impure. Like-
wise, the milk of a cow, even when her
udders are sucked by her calf, can never
become impure. These kine will support
all these worlds with the milk they will
give and the clarified butter that will be
made from it.


27. All creatures wish to enjoy the
sacred wealth, at one with nectar, that kine
possess,--Having said these words, the lord
of creatures, Daksha, made. a present to
Mbadeva of a bull with certain kine.


28. Daksha pleased Rudra, U. Bharatas
with that present. Mahadeva, thus pleased,
made that bull his career. And it was after
the form of that bull that Mahadeva adopt-.
ed the emblem on the standard floating on
his battle-car. Therefore itis that Rudra
came to be Knows as the bull-bannered
deity. ; ; :

' 29. Tt was on that occasion also that the
celestials, in a body, made Mahadeva the
ford of animals. Indeed, the great Rudra
became the Master of kine and is named as
the bull-emblemed deity.

"30. ‘Hence, O king, the gift of kine is
considered as primarily desirable of Kapila
kine which are endued with gréat energy
and possessed of unchanged colour.


3te Thus are kine the foremost of all |-


creatures in the world. [t is from then
that thejfood of all the worlds has emanated.
They have Rudra for their lord. They
yield (nectar) in the form of milk. They
are auspicious and sacred, and grantors of
every wish and givers of life. A person by
making a gift of a cow is considered as
making a gitt of every article that is.to be
enjoyed by men. .


32. That man who, wishing to acquire
prosperity, reads with a pure heart and
body these Verses on the origin of kine, be-


171


comes purged of all his sins and acquires
prospecity aud children and wealth and
animals, .


33. He who makes a gift of a cow, O
king, always succeeds in winning the merits
of gifts of Havya and Kavya, of the offer of
obiations of water to the departed Manes, of
religious acts whose performance brings”
peace and happiness, of the gift of vehicles
and cloths, and of cherishing of children
and the old. :


Vaishampayana said :—

34. Hearing these words of his grand-
father, Pritha’s son, vis., the royal Yudhish-
thira of Ajamida’s race, uniting with his
brothers, began to make gifts of both bulls
and kine of different colors to foremost of
Beahmanas.


35. Indeed, for getting regions of felicity
in the next, and acquiring great fame, king
Yudhishthira celebrated many sacrifices
and, as sacrificial presents, gave away hint-
dreds of thousands of kine to such Brah-
manas.


.


CHAPTER LXXVIIE.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
‘ Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1—2. Formerly, king Saudasa born. of
Ikshaku’s race, that foremost of eloquent
men, on one occasion approached his family
priest, wis., Vashishtha, that foremost of
Rishis, crowned witht ascetic success, capa-
ble of passing througty every region, the
receptacle of -Srahma,-.and- gifted - -with
eternal life, and put to him the following
question. . sa .


Saudasa said :— 7

O holy one, O sinless one,what_ ts
that in the three worldswhich is sacred and
by seciting which at all times'a man may
win high merit ? : 5


Bhishma said:—
4.. Having first bowed to kine and puri-
fied himself, the learned Vashishtha des-
cribed to king Saudvsa who Stood belory
him with head bent in reverence, the mystere
about: kine, a subject that is fraught with
results highly beneficial to all persons.


‘Vashishtha said :—~


5. _ Kine, are always fragrant: The per
fame of the-Amyris agallochum comes out -
of their bodies, {Kine are the great refuge


172


of all creatures. Kine form the greet.
source of blessings to all, _ ‘


6. Kine are the Past and the Future.
Kine are the root of eternak growth. Kine
are the root of Prosperity. Anything given.
to kine is never lost. -


7. Kine from the highest food. They
are the best Havi for the celestials. The
Mantras called Swaha and Vashat are for-
ever established in kine. shee


8. Kine form the fruit of sacrifices. Sac-
rifices are established. in. kine. Kine are
the. Future and the Past, and the Sacrifices
rest on them.


9. Morning and evening kine give to
the Rishis, O foremost of men, Havi
for use in Homa, O you. of great efful-
gence.


to. They who make gifts of kine suc-
ceed in getting over all sins which they may
have committed. and. all kinds of dangers
into which they may fal}, ne ree great
power. ; t


11, The man possessing, ten kine and
making a gift of one cow, One possessing a-
hundred kine and making a gift of ten. kine,
and one possessing a thousand kine and:
making a gift of a hundred kine, all acquire
the same measure of merit.


12, That man who, having hundred:
kine, does not establist a domestic fire for
daily worship," that ‘man who though. pos-
sessed of a thousand kine does not celebrate
sacrifices, and that man who though having
riches acts as a miser, are alt three consi-
dered as not worthy of any respect.


13... Those men who make gifts of Kapila
kine with their- calves and with vessels of
white brass for. milking them,-—kine, which:
are not vicious and which, while given away,
“are wrapped round with cloths,—conquer-
both this and the next world.


14—15. Such persons as make gift of a
young bull,.that has all its senses, strong,
and that may be considered ag the foremost,
one among hundreds of herds, that has
large horns adorned with ornaments, toa
Brahmana endued with Vedic lore, succeed,
O scorcher of foes, in acquiring great pros-
perity and riches each time they are born in
the world,


16, One should never go to bed. without
reciting the wames of kine. Nor should one-
rise from bed in the morning without simi-
larly reciting the names of kine. Morning
and evening one should bend one’s head
respectfully to kine. As the result of such
deeds, one is sure to acquire great pros-
perity.


7


|
|


‘Vashishtha said :-—


MAHABHARATA. .


17. One should never feel any repugs
nance for the urine and the dung of the
cow. One should never eat the meat of
kine. As the result of this, one is sure to
acquire great prosperity. ;

18. One should always recite the names.
of kine. One should never show any dis-
regard for kine in any way. Ff evil dreams
are seen, mett should recite the names of
kine.


1 t

19: One should always bathe, ising cows.

dung. One should sit on dried cowdung.

One should never pass urine and: excreta

and other secretions on cowdung. One
should nevér obstruct kine in: any way..


20. One should, eat, sitting oma cowhide.
purified by dipping it in. water, and then
look towards the west. Sitting with con-
trolled speech, one should eat clarified,
butter using the bare earth as his dish.
One reaps, on. account of such deeds, that
prosperity of ‘which. kine are the root.


21, One-should.pour libations on the fice,
using clarified butter for purpose. One
should make Brahmanas utter blessings
upen. one by presents. of clarified. butter.
One should make gifts of clarified butter.
One should also eat clarified butter. As.
the reward of such deeds one is sure. to-
acquire that prosperity which ‘kine grant,


22, That man who inspires a cow’s form
made of sesame seeds by uttering the Vedic.
Mantras named Gomati, andthen adoras.
that form. with every sort of gems and
makes a gift of it, has never to suffer any
grief-on account of all. bis deeds of omise
sion and. commission.


23 Let kine which give " profuse ‘mille
and which have borns adorned with gold,-—
kine viz., that are Surabhis or the-daugtiers.
of Surabhis,—approach me even. as tivers.
approach the ocean.


24. & always foolk at kine. Let kine.
always look at me. Kine are ours. We
are theirs. We are there where kine are.


25.. Thus, at night or day, i in weal or: :
woe,—at timés of even great fear,—should.
a man exclaim. By uttering such words,
fear! is sure to become freed. from every
ear.” :


‘€HAPTER LXXIX,
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


‘


t. The kine which had been created in
a former age practised the hardest penan-
ces for a hundred thousand, years with


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


173


the object of acquiring a position of great | witha piece of cloth, one acquires great


pre-eminence.


2. Indeed, O scorcher of enemies, they
said to themselves,—We shall, in this
world, become the best of all kinds of
presents in sacrifices, and we shall not be
liable to be sullied with any fault.


3-4. By bathing in water mixed with
our dung, people shall become purified. The
celestials and men shall use our dung for
the purpose of purifying all creatures
mobile and immobile. They also who will
give us away shall acquire those regions of
happiness which will be ours,


5. Appearing to them at the termination
of their austerities, the powerful Brahman
gave them the boons they sought, saying,—
your desire will be fulfilled. Do you rescue
all the worlds.


6. Crowned with fruition of their desires,
they all rose up,—-those mothers of both
the Past and the Future. Every morning,
people should bow respectfully to kine. As
the result of this, they are sure to acquire
prosperity. :

7. At the termination of their penances,
© king, kine became the refuge of the
world.}t is therefore that kine are said to be


highly blessed, sacred, and the foremost of


all things. It is therefore that kine are said
to stay at the very head of all creatures.


8. By giving away a Kapila cow with a
calf resembling herself, giving profuse
milk, free from every vicious habit, and
covered with a piece of cloth, the giver
acquires great honors in the region of
Brahma. : :


g. By giving away a red cow witha
calf. that resembles herself,
free from every vice, and covered with a
piece of cloth, one acquires great honors in
the region of the Sun,


to. By giving away a cow of variegated
hue, with a calf similar to herself, giving
milk, free from every vice, and covered
with a piece of cloth, one acquires great
honors in the region of Soma.s


tt. By giving away a white cow, with a”


calf similar to herself, giving milk, free
from every vice, and covered with a piece


of cloth, one acquires great honors in the


region of Indra,


12. By giving away a cow of dark hue,
with a calf similar to herself, giving milk,
free from every vice, and covered with a
piece of cloth, one acquires great honors
in the region of Fire-God.


13. By giving away 2 smoke-colored
cow, with acalf similar to herself, giving
milk, free from every vice, and covered


giving milk,”


: honors in the region of Yama.


14. By giving away’ a frothy-coloured
cow,with a calf and a vessel of white brass.
for milking her, and covered with a piece
of clath, one acquires the region of Varuna.


15. By giving away a dust-coloured
cow, with a calf and a vessel of white brass
for milking her, and covered with: a piece
of cloth, one acquires great honors in the
region of the Wind-God.


_ 16. By giving away a gold-hued cow,
having eyes of a tawny color, with a calf
and a vessel of white brass for making
her, and covered with a piece of ‘eloth, ome


enjoys the happiness of the region of
Kuvera. 4
17. By giving away a cow of the hue


of the smoke of straw, with calf and a vesseP
of white brass for milking her, and covered
with a piece of cloth, one acquires great
honors in the region of the departed Manes,


18. By giving away a fat cow with the
flesh of its throat hanging down and ac-


companied by her calf, one acquires easily


the high region of the Vishwedevas.

1g. By giving away a Gouri cow, with
@ calf similar to her, giving milk, free from
every vice, and covered with a piece of cloth,
One acquire the region of the Vasus.


20. By giving away a cow of the hue
of a white blanket, with a calf and a vessed
of white brass, and covered with a piece of.
efoth, one acquires the segion of the
Saddhyas. ;


2%. By giving away a bull with a huge
hump and adorned wih every jewel, the.
giver, O ‘king, acquires the region of the,
Maruts.


22. By giving away a, blue-coloured
bull, that is full-grown in years and adorned
with every ornament, the giver acquires the
regions of the celestial musicians. and
hymphs, ; ; ;

23. By giving away a cow with the
‘flesh of her throat hanging down, and
adorned with every ornament, the giver,
shorn of grief, acquires the region of
Prajapati himself. .

24. That ‘man, O king, who habitually. -
makes. gifts. of kine, proceeds, passing.
through the clouds, .om a sunny cas to: the
celestial . region and shines there in


splendour,


25, That man who habitually makes
gifts of kine ts considered as the foremost of
his kind. Wher thus proceeding to celestial
region, he is received by a thousand celes-
tial damsels of beautiful hips and adorned
with handsome dresses and ornaments.


174


These girls serve him there and minister
to his detight.


26. He sleeps there ia peace and is
awakened by the musical laughter of those
gazelle-eyed maidens, the sweet notes of
their Vinas, the soft strains of their lutes,
aud the sweet tinkle of their Nupuras.


27. The man who makes gifts of kine
lives in the celestial region and is honored
there foc as many years as there are -hairs
on the bodies of the kine he gives away.
Falling off from the celestial region (upon
the termination of his merit), sucha man
is born as a man and, in fact,.in a superior
family among men. ; ;


CHAPTER LXXX.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
a Continued,


Vashishtha said :—


1. Kine give clarified butter and
milk.ajfhey are the sources - of clacified
butter and they have originated from
clarified butter. ‘They are rivers of clarified
butter, and eddies of clarified butter. Let
kine ever be in my house.


2. Clarified butter is always in my heart.
Clarified butter is even established in my
navel. Clarified butter is in every limb of
mine. Clarified butter fives in my mind.


3.’ Kine are always at my [ront. Kine
are always at my rear. Kine are on every
side of my body. I live.in the midst of
kine. cd


4. Having purified’ oneself’ by touching
water, one’ should, morning and. evening,
recite these "Mantras every day.
one is sure to-be purged of all the sins one
may commit in course of the day.


‘5. They’ who make gifts of a thousand
kine, leaving this worid, proceed to the
regions of the Gandharvas and the celestial
nymphs: where there are many palatial
buildings made of gold and -where the
celestial Ganga, called the current of Vasu,
runs.


6. Givers of a thousand kine go there
where run many rivers having milk for
their water, cheese for their mire, and curds
for their floating moss.


7. That man who gives hundreds of
thousands of kine away according to the
ritual laid down in the scriptures, acquires
gteat prosperity (here) and great houors in
the celestial region.


By this, -


MAHABHARATA.


_ 8. Such a man causes both his paternaf
and maternal ancestors to the tenth degree
acquire regions of great happiness, and
sanctifies his whole race.}


g. Kine are sacred. They are the
foremost of all things in the world. They
are indeed the refuge of the universe,
They are the mothers of the very celestials.
They are indeed incomparable. They
should be‘dedicated in sacrifices.


to, When going on journeys, one should
leave the kine to his lelt. Determining the
proper time, they should be given away to
worthy persons,


11. By giving away a Kapila cow,
having large horns, accompanied by a calf
and a vessel of white brass for milking
her, and covered with a piece of cloth, one
freed from fear, enters the palace of Yama
that is;so difficult to enter. .


1z. One should always recite this sacred
Mantra, viz.,—Kine are of beautiful form.
Kine are of various forms. They are of
universal form. They are the mothers of
the universe. O, let kine approach me.


13. There is no gift more sacred than
that of kine. There is no gift that yields
more blessed merit. There has been nothing
equal to the cow, nor will there be anything
that will equal her,


4 With her skin, her hair, hee horns*
the hair of her tail, her mitk, and hee fat,—
with all these together,—the cow maintains
sacrifice, What thing is there that is more
useful than the cow.? : ‘


“15. Bending my head to her with res-
pect, I worship the cow who is the mother
of both the Past and Future, and by whom
the entire universe of mobile and immobile
creatures is sustained.


‘16. O best of men, I have thus recited
to you only a portion of the great merits of
kine. ‘Theré is no gift in this world that is
superior to that of kine. “(here is also no.
refuge ia this world that is higher than
kine. ;


Bhishma said}:—

17. Considering these words of the
Rishi Vashishtha as bighly important, that:
great giver of land, king Saudasa, then
made gifts of a very large number of kine
to the Bralhmanas, controlling his senses all
the while, and as the result of those gifts,
the king succeeded in acquiring many
regions of (happiness in the next world.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


CHAPTER LXXXL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)==
Continned.


Yudhishthira said :—

1. Tell me, O grandfather, what {s that
which is the most sacred of all satred things:
in the world, other than that which has been
already mentioned, and which is the great-’
est of all purifying objects,


Bhishma said:—
2, Kine are the foremost of all objects.
They are highly sacred and they save men.
ith their milk and with the Mavi manu-
factured therefrom, kine sustain all creatures
in the universe, .


- 3 O best of the Bharatas, there is no-.
thing that is more sacred than kine. ‘he
highest of all things in the three worlds,
kine are themselves sacred and capable of
purifying others.


4. Kine live in a region that is eve’


Gree than the region of the cefestials.
hen given away, they save their givers,
Wise men succeed:in acquiring the celestial


tegion by making gifts of kine.


5. Yuvanashwa’s son Mandhatri, Yayati,
and Nahusha, used always to give away
kine in thousands.


6. As the reward of those gifts, they
have acquired such regions as are unattain-
able by the very celestials, ‘here is, about
it, O sinless one, a discourse delivered of
yore. IU shall cecite it to you.


7—8. Once on a time, having finished
his morning rites, the intelligent Shuka
approached with a controlled mind his
father, that foremost of Rishis, ‘v7s., the
Island-born Krishna, who knows the dis-
tinction between the superior and the in-
ferior, and saluting him, said,—What is
that sacrifice which appears to you.as the
foremost of all sacrifices ? °

9. What is that act by doing which wise
men succeed in acquiring the highest
region ? What is that sacred deed by which
the celestials enjoy divine happiness ?


10. What forms the character of sacri-
fice as saccifice ?_ What is that. upon which
sacrifice rests ? What is that which is con-
sidered as the best by the deities? What
is that sacrifice which is above the sacrifices
of this world? Do you also. tell me, O
father, what is that which is the most sacred
of all things.


11, Having heard these words of his
son, O chief of Bharata’s race, Vyasa, the
foremost of all persons knowing duties, said
as follows to hims


173


Vyasa said =.

12, Kine form the support of all creas
tures. Kine are the refuge of ‘all creatures.
Kine are the embodiment of virtue. Kine
are sacred, and kine are putifiers of all.


13. Formerly kine were hornless as we
have heard. For getting horiis they adored’
the eternal and powerful Brahman.

14. Seeing the kine paying ‘their ado-
tations to him and sitting without food,
the powerful Brahinan granted to each of
them what each desired.


15. Thereafter their horis grew and
each got what each wished, Of various
colors, and gifted with horns, they began
to shine beautifully, O: son !


16. Bavored by Brahman himself with,
boons, kine are auspicious: and givers of
Havyaand Kavya. ‘hey are the embodi-
ments of, virtue. They are sacred’ and
highly blessed. They have excellent forat
and qualities. Z


17—18. Kiné form high and excellent
enecgy. The gift of kine is highly spoke:
of, Those good men who, shorn of pride;
make gifts of kine, are considered as doers
of righteous deeds and as givers of- all
articles. Such men, O sinless one, ace
quire the highly sacred region of kine.


19, The. trees there yield sweet fruits,
Indeed, those trees are always bedecked
with excellent flowers and fruits. Those
flowers, O best of twice-born persons, have:
celestial fragrance, i


a0.. The entire soil of that region is
formed of gems. The sands there are al]
gotd. The climate there possesses the
excellencies of every season. ‘There is no
mire, no dust. It is, indeed, highly sacred.


2t. The rivers there shine in resplette,
dence for the ced lotuses. blossoming upon
their bosoms, and for the jewels, geris and
gold that are on their banks atid which
display the effulgence of the morning Sun.


22. There are many fakes also on whase.
breasts are many lotuses, mixed here and
there with Nymphoea stellata, and having
their petals made of costly gems, and
their filaments gold-hued.


23. They. are also bedecked with flower-
ing forests of the Nerium odorum with
thousands of beautiful creepers twining
tound them, as also with forests of Santa+
nakas bearing flowers.


24. There. are rivers whose banks aré
variegated with many bright pearls and
shining gems_and gold. .


25. Parts of those regions are covered
with excellent trees: that are decked with


4976


jewels atid gems of every sort. Some. of
them are made of gold and some of them
are effulgent like fire.


26. ‘Shere stand many mountains madé
of gold, and many hills made of jewels and
gems. These shine in beauty on account of
their tall summits made of all sorts of genis.


27. The trees that bedéck thdse regions
always put forth flowers and fruits, and are
always covered with dente foliage. ‘The
Howers always yield a celestial fragrance
and the Iruits are greatly swéet, O chief of
Bharata’s race. : ;

28. Te righteous persoiis, O Vudhish-
thica, always sport thete happily. Freed
from grief and anger, they spend their tire
there,. crowned With thé fruition of every
desire. _ eae : eee
_ 29. Pious and illustrious Pergois Sport
here happily, moving from place td placé,
2 Bharata, on delightlul arid highly beauti-
ful card. :


’ . go. Bevies of celestial nymphs always
amuse there, with music aiid datice. Indeed,
Yudhishthira, a person goes to such re-
gions as the fruit of his making gifts of
kine.- 4 we ;


3132, Those. regions whiclt are owned
by Pushan, and the Maruts of great power;
are acquired by givers of kine. lit riches the
royal Varuna is Considered as_ pre-eminent.
The giver of kine acquires riches like that
of. Varuna himself, One should, with the
steadinesS of a vow, daily ‘ecite these
Mantras sung by Prajapati himself, vis ,—
Yugandharah, Stirupal, Vahurupah, Vi-
shwatupah, and Matara. - :


33. He who serves kine with respect dnd
who follows them with humility, succeeds
int Betting Many invaluable boons from
Kine who becotne pleased with him.


34. One should never, even in his heatt,
injure; kine. Que should, indeed, always
confer happiness otf them. One should
always respect kine and adore them, by
bending low his head.


35. He who does this, controlling his sen-
ses all the while and filled with cheerfulness,
succeeds in acquiring that happiness whiclr
_. is enjoyed by kine, One should for three
days drink the hot urine of the cow. For
the next three days one should drink the
hot milk of the cow. ‘


36.. Having thus drunk for three days
hot milk, one should next drink hot clarified
butter for three days. Having thus drunk
hot clarified butter for three days, one
should live for the next three days on air
only, : oats .

37. That sacred thing by whose help the


MABABHARATA,


celestials enjoy regions of happiness, that
which is the most sacred of all sacred things;
vis., clarified butter, should then be carried
on the head. .


38. With the help of clacified. butter;
one should pour libation3 dn the sacred fire.
By making gifts of clarified butter, one
should make the Brahmanas utter bene«
dictions on otteself. One should eat clari-
fied butter and make gifts of clarified butter.
As the reward of this conduct; one may
then acquire that prdsperity, which belongs
to kine.


39. That man who, for a month, lives
tipon the gruel of barley picked up every
day from cow-dung, becomes purged of
sins aS heinous as Brahmanicide.


4o. After their defeat at the hands of
the demoris, the deities practised this ex-
piation. It was on account of this expiation
that they -succeeded in regaining their
position as celebtials, Indeed, it was
through this that they regained their
strength aind became successful.


4t. Kine are sacred. They are efits
bodiments of virtue. ‘hey are higt and
thost efficacious purifiers of all, By making
gifts of kine to the Brahmanas one acquires
the celestial region. :


42. Living in a pute staté, in the midst


| OF kine, one should mentally recite thosé


sacred
ing pure watets
comes purified.


43—44. Brahmanas of righteous deeds,
who have been purified by knowledge, study
of the Vedas, and observance of vows,
should, otily in the midst of sacred fires or
kine or coriclaves of Brahmanas, impart td
their disciples a knowledge of the Gomati
Mantras which are in évery way like a
Sacrifice. One should observe a fast for
three nights for receiving the boon formed
by a knowledge of the meaning of the
Gomati Mantras.


45. The man who wislies to get a sort
may obtain it by worshipping these Mantras.
He who wishes to acquire riches may have
his desire fulfilled by worshipping these
Mantras. The girl desirous of having a
good husband may have her wish fulfilled
by .the same means, In: fact, one may
acquire the fruition of every desire he
may cherish, by worshipping these sacred
Mantras. :


. 46. When kine are pleased with the
service one renders them, they are, forsooth,
capable of granting the fruition of every
desire. Evenso, kine are highly blessed.
They are the essential articles of sacrifices.
They are grantors of every wish. Know
that there is nothing superior to kine,


antras nanied Goniati, after touch- .
By doitig ‘this, one bes


ANUSUASANA PARVA,


BPhishma said :—


47. Thus addressed by his great father, ;


Shuka, gifted with great energy, began
from that ‘time to adore kine every day.
Do you also, U son, act thas.


CHAPTER LXXXilt.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,
Yadhishithra said :—


1. 1 have heard that the dong of the
‘cow is gifted with prosperity. 1 wish to lrear


‘how this ‘has been occasioned. 1 have doubts, ‘ €
} vows, that the popular proverb is true, o7¢.,
| thatit iscertain that when one comes to
| another of his own accord and without


O grand father which you should remove.


Bhishma said :-—


2. Regarding it is cited the old story, O°


king, of the conversation between kine and
nin ot prosperity,

haratas. .

3. Onte on a time, assoming a very
‘beaatiful form, the goddess Shree entered
a herd of kine. Seeing her
kine beca'me filled. with wonder.


The Kine said: ;
4. Who are you, O goddess? Whence
have you becomne nonpariél on Earth for


beauty? O highly blessed goddess, we,


have been filled with wonder at your
beauty. reas in
_%. We wish to know who - you are.
Who; indeed, are you? Where will you
proceed 2? O yau of very great beauty, do
tell us in detail all we wish to know 1— -


Shree said :—

6. Blessed be ye, 1 am dear to ail
treatares. Indeed, 1 am known by the
name of Shree. Forsaken by me, the
‘demons have been lost for ever.


7. The celestials, vis., Indra, Vivaswat,
Soma, Vishnu, Varuna, and Agni, having
‘obtained me, are sporting happily and will
do so for ever. *

8. Indeed, the Rishis and the -cefestials,
only when they are endued with me, become
successful. Ye kine, those beings meet with
destruction into whom { do not enter, s


9. Virtue, Prosperity, and. Pleasure,
only when endued with me, become sources
of happiness. Ye -kine who are’ givers of
happiness, know that Lam gifted with such
energy,


to. 1 wish to always live in every one
of you. Going to your presence, I solicit
-you. Be all of you gifted with Shree. ;
23


| good forms.


OG. best of the’


beauty the’


177


4 The kine said:


1t. You are fickle and restless, You
allow yourself to be enjoyed by many per-
sons. We do not wish to have you!


} Blessed be you, go wherever you like.


12. As regards ourselves, ail of us have
d What need have we with
you? Go wherever thou like. You have


already pleased us greatly.


| Shree said:— - ,


13. Is it proper with you, ye kine, that
you do not welcome me? [am difficult of
being attained. Why then do you not
accept me ? :


14. It appears, ye creatures of excellent


being sought, he is not much respected. :


1%. The gods, the Danavas, the Gane
‘dharvas, the Pishachas, the Uragas, the
Rakshasas, and haman beings succeed in
‘getting me only after practising the severest
austerities, © |


16. Ve who have sech. energy, do ye"
take me? Ye atniable ones, 1 am never
‘dishonored by any one im the three worlds
‘ot mobile and immobile creatures,


The kine said :—~

17. We do not disregard you, O god-
‘dess!| We do not slight you! You are
fickle and of a very restiess heart. It is for
this only that we take teave of you.


18. What need” of mach talk? Go
wherever you like. AN of ws have ex-
cellent forms, What need have we with
you, O sinless one ? :


Shree said :—~ es

19. Ye givers of honors, renounced by .
you thus, I shail certainly be an object of
disregard with ali the world! Do ye show
me grace.

20. Ye are all highly blessed. Ye are
ever ready to grant protection to those who :
seek your protection. I have come to you.
soliciting your refuge. 1 have no fault,
Do you rescue me.


2t. Know. that [£ shall always be de-
voted to you! 1 wish to live in any part
of your bodies, however repulsive it may be.
Indeed, I wish to live even in your rectum,


22. Ve sinless ones, f do not see that’
ye have any: part in your ‘bodies that may
be considered as repulsive, for ye are sacred, —
and purifying, and highly blessed! Do ye,
however, grant my prayer. Do ye tell me
ia which part of your bodies shall I live,


“


178


Bhishma said :—

23. ‘Thus addressed by Shree, the kine,
always auspicious and bent. on showing
kindness to all who are devoted to them,
patleyed with” one another, - and then


addressing Shree, said to her, Q king,


these words.


The kine said :-—


24. O you of great fame, it is certainly


desirable that we should honor you! Do.


you. live in our urine and dung. Both


these are sacred, O goddess.


Shree said :—


25. By. good luck, ye have shown me
much favour. Let it be even as you say!
Blessed be you all, {1 have really been
honored by you, ye givers of happiness.


‘Bhishma said: |" «

26. Having, O Bharata, ‘made this
contract ‘with ,kine, Shree, theré and then,
before those kine, disappeared.


27. f have thus told you, O son, the
glory of the dung of kine. | shall once
again describe to you the glory of kine.
Do you listentome, ©” ‘


‘CHAPTER EXXXHL.
(ANUSHASAN}KA PARVA}—


Continued.


- Bhishma said :—
‘t, “Fhey who make gifts of kine, and
- who live upon the remnants of things offer-
ed as libations on the sacred fire, are con-
sidered, O Yudhishthira, as always per-
forming sacrifices of kind.


2. No sacrifice. can be performed with-
out the help of curds and clarified butter.
‘The very character as sacrifice which sacri-
fices have, depends upon clarified butter.
Hence clarified butter, is considered as the
very root of sactifice.


“3. Of all kinds of gifts, the gift of kine
is spoken highest of. Kine are the foremost
of all things. ‘Themselves sacred, they are
the best of purifier. i ;


4. People should cherish kine for getting
prosperity and even peace. ‘The milk,
cutds, and clarified butter that kine yield
are capable of tpurifying one from every
kind of sin. oan


5. Kine are said to represent -the high-
est energy both in this world and the next.


MAHABHARATA,


purifying than kine, O chief of the Bhaa
ratas. eee


6. Regarding it is recited the ancient
discourse between the Grandfather and
chief of the celestials.


7. After the demons had been defeated
and Shakra had become the lord of the
three worlds, all creatures grew prospers
ous and became devoted to the true reli+
gion, : :


8—tro. Then, on one occasion, the
Rishis, the Gandharvas, the Kinnaras, the
Uragas, the Rakshasas, the Deities, the
Asuras, the winged: creatures, and the
Prajapatis, GO you of Kuru’s race, all-
assembled together and worshipped the —
Grandfather. There were Narada and
Parvata and Vishwavasu and Haha- Huhu,
who sang celestial songs for worshipping
that powerful. Jord. of all. creatures. ‘The
god’ of wind bore there the fragrance of
celestial flowers, -


t1—13. The Seasons also, in their
embodied forms, bore, the fragrance of
flowers peculiar to each, to that assemblage
of celestials, that gathering of all creatures
of the universe, where celestial maidens
danced and sang in accompaniment with
celestial music. In the midst of that


| assembly, Indra, saluting the Lord of all


the celestials and bowing his head to him
with respect, asked him, saying,—I wish, O


_| Grandfather, to know why the region of


kine is higher, O holy one, than the region
of the ‘celestials themselves who are the


-| lords.of all the wortds.


14. What austerities, what Brahma«
charyya, QO. lord, did kine perform on acs ‘
count of which they are able to live happi-
ly in a region thattis even above that of
the celestials, :


15. Thus addressed by Indra, Brahman
said to the destroyer of Vala,~-You have
always, O destroyer of Vala, disregarded
kine. va


16. Hence, you are not acquainted with
glorious pre-eminence of kine. Listen now
to me, O powerful one, as I explain to you
the great energy and glorious pre-eminence
of kine, O king of the celestials, .


17. Kine have been said to be the limbs
of sacrifice. They represent sacrifice itself,
O Vasava! Without them there can be
no sacrifice.


18. With their ‘milk and: the Havi pro-
duced therefrom, they sustain all creatures.


19. Their male children are engaged in:
helping the cultivation and thereby produce.


There is nothing that is more sacred or { various kinds of paddy and other seeds.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


20. From them ortginate sacrifices and
Havya and Kavya, and milk and curds and
clarified butter. Hence, O chief of the
celestials, kine are sacred. Stricken with
hunger and thirst, they carry various bar-
thens,


at. Kine support ascetics. They sustain
all creatures by various acts. Q Vasava,
kine are guileless in their conduct on ac-
count of such conduct and of many well-
pecformed acts, they are able to live always
tn regions that are even above ours.


22, I have thus explained to you to-day,
O you of a hundred sacrifices, the réason,
QO. Shakra, of kine living in a place that is
high above that of the celestials.


23. Kine got many excellent forms, O
Vasava, and are themselves givers of boons.
They are called Surabhis. Of sacred deeds
and gifted with many auspicious marks
they are highly purifying.

24. Listen to me also, O destroyer of
Vala, as I teli youin full the reason why
kine,—the children of Surabhi,—have
descended on the Earth, O best of the
celestials.


25-——26. Forgserly, O son, when in the
golden age the great Danavas became lords
of the three worlds, Aditi performed the
Severest austerities and got Vishon within
her womb.’ tudeed, O chief of tle celestials,
she had sto.d upon one leg for many long
years, desirous of having a son.


‘27-28. Seeing the great goddess Aditi
thus practising the severest austerities, the
daughter of Daksha, vis., the illustrious
Surabhi, herself given to virtue, likewise
_practised very severe austerities upoti the
breast of the charming mountains of
Kailasa that are resorted toa by both the
eclestials and the Gandiarvas.  —


‘29. Established on the highest Yoga,
she also stood upon one leg for eleven
thousand years, oat


30. The celestials with the Rishis and
the great Nagas all bécame scorched with
the severity of hee penances. Going there
with mé, all of them began to worship that
auspicious goddess.


3r. I then addressed that goddess
gifted with penances, and said,—O god-
dess, O you of faultless conduct, for what
purpose do you practise such severe
austerities.


32, Ohighly-blessed one, Iam pleased
with your penances, O beautiful one! Do
you, O goddess, beg what boon you wish
to have. I shall grant you whatever you
may ask !~~Fhese were my words to her, O
Purandara, :


179


"33235: Thus addressed by me, Surabhi
answered mé, saying,—I have no need, O
grandfather, of boons, O sinless one, that
you have been pleased with me isa great
boor to me. To the illu-trious Surabhi, O
chief of the -celestials, who said soto me,
© ford of Sachi, I answered thus,—O
goddess, I have been highly pleased with
this your freedom from cupidity and desire,
and with these penances of yours, O you
of beautiful face. I therefore, grant you
the boon of immortality. °


36. You will live in a region that is


| higher than the three worlds, through my


favour, That region shall be known to all
by the name of Goloka. .


37. Your offspring, ever engaged in
doing good deeds, will live in the world of
men. In fact, O highly blessed one, your
daughters will live there.


38~39. You will readily get all kinds
of enjoyment, celestial and human, that.
you may think of, You will get whatevic,
happiness exists in the celestial rezion, O
blessed one! The regions, O you of a
hundred eyes, that are Surabhi’s are re-
plete with means for the satisfaction of
every desire, Neither Death, nor Decre-
pitude, nor fire, can overcome its inhabi-
tants.


40. No ill-luck, O Vasava, exists there,
Many charming forests and delightful
ornaments and objects ef. beauty may be
seen there, ' 1


4i—42. There may be seen many
beautiful cars, all excellently equipt. and
which move at the will of the +iders O
Vasava. O you having eyes like lotus
petals, it is only by celibacy, by penances, by
Truth, by self-control, by gifts, by various
kinds of righteous deeds, by sofonrits to
sacred waters, ‘iw fact, by severé austerities
and righteous deeds well-performed, that
one can attain to Goloka. ne


mH,


43- You had asked me, O Shakra and
{ have answered you in full. O destroyer


kine ! :


Bhishma said :—


44. Hearing these words of the self-
create Brahman, O Yudhishthira, Shakra
of a thousand eyes began from that time to
adore kine every day and to show them the
greatest respect. nat“ ,


45—-47. Ihave thus told you everything
about the purifying character of kine, O
you of great splendour, I have expounded
to yoathe sacred and high pre-eminence


_and glory of kine, that is capable of purify-.


ing one from every sin, O chief of mea,


180


That man who with senses withdrawa. from
every other object will recite this account to
Brahmanas, on oecasions when Havya and
Kavya are offered, or at sacrifices, or on

_ occasions of worshipping the departed
manes succeeds in conferring upon his an-
cestors an endless happines fraught with
the fruition of every desire,


48. The man who its devoted to kine
succeeds in getting the fruition ef every
desire of his. Indeed, even those women
who are devoted to kine sacceed in securing
the fulfilment of every desire of theirs,


49. He who wishes for sons obtains them.
He who desires daughters obtains: them.
He who desires riches sueceeds in aequir-
ing wealth, and he who desires religious
merit succeeds in winning it.


50. te who desires knowledge acquires
it, and he who desires happiess succeeds
in acquiting happiness. Endeed, O Bharata,
there is] nothing which one devoted to kine
cannot obtain.


eT


CHAPTER LXXXIYV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued, | ,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. You have, O grandfather, expounded
to me the highly meritorious gift of kine.
In the case of kings performing their duties,
that gilt is most merttorious.


‘2. Sovereignty ts always painful. It 4s
incapable of being borne by persons of
impure souls. Generally bings fait to ac-
quire auspicious ends,


3. By always making, however, gifts of
earth, they succeed in parifying themselves.
You have, O prince of Kuru’s race,. des-
cribe to me many duties.


4. You have descrited to me the gifts
of kine formerly made by king Nriga.
The Rishi Nachiketa, in ancient times, had
described the merits of this act.


_. 5 The Vedas and the Upanishads also
have laid down that in all sactifices,—-in
fact, in all sorts of religious rites,—the
sacrificial present should be earth or kine
or gold,


6. The Shrutis, however, dectare that of
all presents, gold is very superior and is,
indeed, the best. I wish, O grandfather,
to,hear you describe truly this subject.

7. What is gold? How did it spring
up?) When did it come into existence 2?
What is its essence? Who is its presiding


MANABUAR ATA,


god? What are its froits Why is i¢
considered as the foremost of all things 7

8. Why do wise men applaud the gift
of gold? Why is gold considered as the
best of presents in all sacrifices 7


9g Why also is gofd considered as a
purifier superior to earth itself and kine 7
Why, indeed, is i comsidered so superior
as a sacrificial present ? fo you, O grand-
father, describe to me all this.


Bhishma said:—

to. Listen, O king, with rapt attention
to me as fk recite to you in detait the cir-
cumstances: ¢onnected with the origin of
gold as understood by me.


ts. When my highly energetic father
Shantanu died, F proceeded to Gangadwata
fer performing his Shraddha.


tz. Arrived there F began the Shrad-
dha of my father. My mother Janhave
coming there, gave me great assistance. _

13. Enviting many ascetics crowned
with success and making them take their
seats before me, § begar the priliminary
rites consisting of gifts of water and of other
things. ; .

14. Having with a concentrated mind
performed all preliminary rites as faid down


im the scriptuces, began to duly offer the


obsequial cake.


15. Ethen saw, O king, that a beautiful
arm, adorned with armlets and other ornae


| ments, rose ap, piercing the ground, throngt


the blades of
spread.


16. Seeing that arm rise from the
ground, I became stricken with wonder.
Indeed, O chief of Blarata’s race, §
thought that my father had come himsel€
for accepting the cake I was about to
offer. : 7 ss

17—20. Reflecting then, by the light of
the scriptures, | became convinced thatt e
ordinance is in the Wedas that the cake
should not be presented to the hand of him
whose Shraddha is performed. My con-
viction was that the obsequial cake should
never be presented tn this world by a man
to the visible hand of the man whose obse-
quial rites are performed. Fhe departed
Manes do not come in their visible forms for
taking the cake. On the other hand, the
ordinance lays down that tt should be pre-
sented on the blades of Kusha grass spread
on the earth for the purpose. [| then, dis
regacding that hand which was the mark of
my father’s presence, and recollecting the
true ordinance of the scriptures regarding
the mode of presenting the cake, offered the
entire cake, O chief of the Bharatas, upon


Kusha grass which } had


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


those blades of Kusha grass that were
spread before me.


21. Know, O king, that what f did was
perfectly consistent with the scriptural
ordinance, After this, the arm of my
father, O monarch, vanished in our very
sight.

22—23. On that night as } slept, the de-

arted Manes appeared to me in a dream.

leased with me they said, O chief of
Bharata’s race, these words,—-We have been
pleased with you, for the mark you have
shown to-day of your adherence to the
ordinance. It has pleased us to see that you
have not deviated from the injunctions of
the scriptures. The scriptural ordinance,
followed by you, has become more authori-
tative, O king.


24—25. By such conduct you have
honored and maintained the authority of
yourself, the scriptures, the Vedas, the
Pitris and the Rishis, the ‘Grandfather
Brahman himself, and those elders, viz., the
Prajapatis. Adherence to the scriptnres
has been upheld. You have to-day, O chief
of the Bharatas, acted very properly.


26—28. You have made gifts of earth
and kine. Do you -make gifts of gold.
The gift of gold is very purifying. O you
that are well-conversant with duties, know
that by such acts both ourselves and our
fore-fathers will all be purged of all our
sins. Such gifts rescue both ancestors,
and descendants to the tenth degree of the
person who makes them !—These were the
words that my ancestors, appearing to me
in a dream, saidtome. I then awoke, O
king, and become filled with wonder.


29. Indeed, O chief of Bhacata’s race, I
determined upon making gifts of gold,
Listen now, O king, to this old history.


' 30—32. It is highly praiseworthy and
it gives longevity to a man who listens to it.
It was first recited to Rama the son of
Jamadagni. Formerly Jamadagni’s son
Rama, existed with great anger, rooted out
the Kshatriyas from off the face of the
Earth for twenty-one times. Having sub-
jugated the entire Earth, the heroic
Rama having eyes like lotus petals
began to make preparations for celebrating
a Horse-Sacrifice, O king, that is lauded
by all Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and that
i eebeble of granting the fruition of every
esire.


33. That sacrifice purifies all creatures
and increases the energy and splendour of
those who succeed in celebrating it. Gifted
with great energy, Rama, by the celebra-
tion of that sacrifice, became sinless.


34. Having, however, celebrated that
foremost of sacrifices, the great Rama


383


‘-could not
heart.


35~-37- Going to Rishis conversant with
every branch of Jearning as also the celes-
tials, Rama of Bhrigu’s race questioned
them. Filled with repentance and mercy,
he addressed them, ‘saying,~O highly
blessed ones, do ye declare that which
“purifies men engaged in terrific deeds ?7—
‘Thus addressed by him, those great Rishis,
fully read in the Vedas and the scriptures,
answered him, saying,-O Rama, guided
by the authority of the Vedas, do you
honor all learned Brahmanas. Acting
thus for sometime, do you once more ask
-the twiceeborn Rishis as to what should
be done by you for purifying yourself.


38.—39. Follow the. advice which those
highly wise persons would give! Going
then to Vashishtha and Agastya and
Kashyapa, that delighter of the Bhrigus,
gifted with great energy, asked them the
very question—Ye foremost of Brahmanas,
even this is the wish that has originated in
my heart. How, indeed, can I purify
myself,


40. By what acts and rites may. this be
engendered? Or, if by gifts, what is that
article by giving away which this wish of
mine may be satisfied, O foremost of righte-
ous persons, if you are bent upon doing
me a favour, then do tell me, ye who have
asceticism for wealth, what is that by which
I may succeed in purifying myself !—~


The Rishis said :—


41. O delighter of the Bhrigus, the
mortal that has committed sin becomes
purified by making gifts of kine, of earth,
and of riches. This is what we have
heard. :


42. There is another gift that is consi-
dered as a great purifier. Listen to us, O
twice-born Rishi, as we discourse on it!
That article is excellent and is wonderful
if look at and is, besides, the offspring of

ire. ;


43. Formerly the god Agni burnt all the
world. We have heard that{ from his
seed sprung gold of bright: complexion.
It passed by the name of the good-com-
plexioned. By making gifts of gold you are
sure to have your wish fulfilled. ‘


44. Then the illustrious Vashishtha in
especial, of rigid vows, addressing him,
said,—Hear, O Rama, how gold, which is
effulgent-like fire, first came into being. .


45. That gold will confer merit on you.
In matters of gifts, gold is highly spoken
of. 1 shall also tell you what is gold, whence
it has come, and how it has come to be
endued with superior attributes.


acquire’ perfect ‘ightness of


46,.. Listen to me, O you of mighty arms,
as I describe these subjects, Know this as
certain that gold is of the essence of Fire
and Moon. *° ; .


47-48. The goat is Fire, the sheep is

aruna; the horse is the Sun; elephants
are Nagas; buffalos are Asuras ; cocks and
boars are Rakshasas;, O delighter of the
Bhtigus; earth is sacrifice, kine, water,
and Soma., These are the declarations of
the Smritis. , i
* 49.. Churning’ the entire universe, a
mass of energy was found, That energy
as gold. Hence, O twice-born Rishi, com-
pared to-all these objects gold jis surely
superior.
excellent. ——. 4


' §0. It is therefore that the celestial and
Gandharvas. and Uragas and Rakshasas
and Auman beings and Pishachas hold it
with care. .

51. All these beings, Q son of Bhrigu’s
tace,'shine in splendour, with the help of
gold, after converting it into crowns and

’ arenlets and various ornaments,


52. ‘It is also. for this reason that gold
is considered as the most purifying of all
cleansing things such as earth and kine and
ail other kinds of riches, O king. ;

53. The gift of gold, O powerful king,
isthe highest gift. It is superior to the
gift. of, earth, of kine, and of, all other
things, 1, |, oon tons

54- O you who are ‘effulgent like an
immortal, gold is an eternal purifier. Do
you maké' gifis’ df it to the foremost of
Brahmanas as it is the foremost of purifying
things. aie ;

*‘gs. Ofall kinds of presents, gold is the
best. They who make gifts of gold are
said to be givers of all things,

§6, Indeed, they. who make gifts of gold
are considered as givers of celestials. Agni
is all the deities in. one, and gold has Agni
forits essence. ;
_ 57. , Hence it is that the person who
makes gift of gold gives away all.the celes-
tials, Hence, O king, there is no gift
higher than the gift.of gold. ae


Vashishtha said:— nee i

58. Hear once more, O twice-born Rishi,
as [ describe, the “superiority of gold, O
foremost of alt wielders of weapons.

59.. I heard this formerly in the Purana,
O son of Bhrigy’s race. it represents the
speech of Prajapati himself,

60-63. After the marriage was over of
the illustrious and great Rudra armed with
he trideat, O.son of Blirigu’s race, with


‘It is a valuable thing, high and:


MAHABHARATA.


the goddess who became his consort, on thé
breast of that foremost of mountains, vis.)
Himavat, the illustrious. and great deity
wished to unite himself with the goddess,
lhereupon all the celestials, stricken with
anxiety, approached Rudra. Bending their
heads with respect and pleasing Mahadeva
and his boon-giving consort Uma, both of
whom were seated together, they addressed
Rudra, O perpetuator of Bhrigu’s race,
saying,--This union, O illystrious and
sinless one, of you with the goddess, is *
union of an ascetic with another. Indeed,
‘ft isthe union, O ford, of one energetic
petson with another equally so. You, O
jlustrious one, are of. irresistible energy.
The goddess Uma also is gifted with energy
that is equally irresistible.


64. The offspring that wilf result from a
union like this, will, forsooth, QO illustrious
deity, be gifted with very great might.
Indeed, O powerful lord, that offspring wilt
consume all things in the three worlds with-
out leaving a residue. .


65.. Do you then, O lord of all the uni-
verse, O you having large eyes, grant to
these celestials prostrated before you, a
boon from desire of benefiting the three
worlds.

66. Do you, O powerful one, restrain
this great energy of yours which may bee
come the seed of offspring.


‘67. Indeed, that energy is the essence of
all forces’ in the three wertds. Ye two, by
an ‘act of congress, aresure to scorch the
universe, ; oe aL


68—69. Vour offspring will certainly be
able to afflict the celestials. -Neither the
goddess Earth, hor-the Sky, not. Heaven,
O powerful one, nor all of them together,
will be able to bear your energy, we firmly
believe,. ‘he entire: universe is certain
to be burnt through the force of your
energy. - «4 :

zo. You should, O powerful one, show
us favour, Q illustrious deity’. That. favor
consists in your not begetting a son, O
foremost of the celestials, upon the goddess
Uma, ea ae ,

‘71. Do you, patiently govern your. fiery
and powerful energy.—To the deities that
Said so, the holy Mahadevajhaving the bull
for his sign, O twice-born Rishi, answered,
saying,—So be it!—Having said so, the
deity that has the bull for his vehicle, drew
up hisivital seed.’ + :


. 73. From that time he passed by the
name of Urddharetas {one that has drawn
up the vital seed). At this attempt of the
celestials to stop procreation, the consort of
Rudra became highly wroth.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


9400096, On account of her being of the
Opposite sex, she used harsh words :—Since
ye have opposed my lord in procreatiug arr
Olispring when he was desirous of procreat-
ing one upon me, as the cesult of this act,
ye celestials, ye all shall become soniess.
Indeed, since ye have opposed the birth of
an offspring from me, therefore, ye shall
have no offspring of your own.—When this
curse was imprecated, O perpetuator of
Bhrigu’s- race, the deity of fire was not
there. : ;

77. It is.om account of this curse of the
goddess that the deities have become ehitd-
less, Rudra,begged them, beld in himself
his energy of incomparable power,,


78. A ‘small .quantity, hewever, that
came-out'o fhis body dropped on the Barth.
That seed, falling on the Bacth; leaped into,
a burning fire and there began to. grow most
wonderfully, « ' :

‘99-82; Fhe energy of Rudra, ‘coming: in
contact with another energy of great power,
became -one with it in essence.
while, all the celestials headed by Indra
were scorched by the Asura named Taraka.
The Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the
Maruts, the Ashwins, and the Saddhyas
all became greatly afflicted on account of
the prowess of that son of Diti. All the
regions of the celestials; their beautiful
cars, and their palaces, and the asylums
of the Rishis, were snatched away by the
Asuras. Ther the celestials and
Rishis, with depressed hearts, sought the
protection of the illustrious and powerful
Brahman. of unfading glory.


—T
CHAPTER LXXXvV.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued, oy gan
The Deities said :—
1. The Asura named Taraka who has
received’ boons from. you, O powerful: one,


is assailing the celestials and the Rishis:
Let his death be ordained by you.


2. O Grandfather, we, fear him- greatly.


O. illustrious one, do you gave us! We
have. ao other refuge than you..


Brahman said :—

3. [treat all creatures equally, 1 cannot
however, approve of sin," Let ‘Paraka,
that enemy of the celestials and Rishis,
‘be speedily destroyed. ;

4. The Vedas and the eternal duties
shall not be rooted out, ye foremost of
celestials, 1 have ordained what is proper,


Mean-


the [|


183°


in’ this matter. Let the anxiety of youre
hearts be removed.


The Celestials said:
For. your having granted him bagtis, .
that son of Diti has been proud. of bia
power. He is incapable of being killed
by the deities. -How then ‘will ‘his’ death
be engendered? ~ : i mee
6. The boon which, O Granfather, he,,
has obtainad from you is that he should,
not, be killed by celestials gx Asuras, or
Rakshasas. ete ek es


7. The celestials: have also been cursed '
by the wife af Rudra on account, of theic
attempt to stop propagation, ,, fhe curse
imprecated by her has been, O lord of |
the universe, this, vzg., that they are nat 4o |
have any offspring. . :


Brahman said :—~


" 8—t1o, Ye foremost of celestials, Agni was
not there at the time the curse was given
by the goddess. He will beget a child for
the destraction of the enemies of the gods,
Superior to allt the’ deities, Danavas,
Rakshasas, human beings, Gandharvas,
Nagas andfeathery creatures, the son of
Agni with ‘his dact, whicty in his hands,
will be a weapon incapable of being baffled
if once hurled at the enemy, will destroy
Taraka whom you fear. Indeed, all other
enemies of yours will also be killed by him,


tr. Will is eternal. That Will is
known by the name of Kama and is at
one with Rudra’s seed a portion of which
fell into. the burning form of Agni. ‘


12, That energy, which is. a powerful
substance, and which resembles a second.
Agni, will be cast by Agni into Ganga
for producing a -child upon ber in order
to bring about the destruction of the ene-
mies of the gods. ,


13. Agni did not come within the range.


} of Uma’s curse, he eater of ‘sacrificial ,


libations was not present there when the


curse was imprecated.


: os to. '

14. Let the god of fire, -therefore, be.
searched out. Let him now be set-to this
task. Ye sinless ones, I have tald you
the means for the destruction of Taraka.  _.


tg. The curses af the energetic cannot
produce any -effect upon ‘the energetic, ’
Forces, when they come into: contact with °
a stronger force, become weakened...


16. They who are endued with penances :
can destroy even the boon-giving deities
who are indestructible. Will, or Like,’
or "Desire sprang in former times and-is
the most eternal of all creatures,


184.


17s Agni is the Lord of the universe.
He is incapable of being apprebended or
described. Capable of going everywhere
and present in afl things, tre is the Creator
of all beings. He lives in the hearts of
all creatures. Gifted with great power,
He is older than Rudra himseté.


18-19. Let that eater of sacrificial liba-
tions, who is a mass of energy, be found
out. That illustrious deity will fulfill this
desire of your hearts.’ Hearing these words
of the Grandfather, the great gods then
proceeded to find out the god of fice with
cheerful hearts on account of theie purpose
having been crowned with success.


20. The gods and the Rishis then
searched every portion of the three worlds
their hearts being busy with the thought
of Agni and eagerly desiring to see him.


a1. Gifted with penances, possessed
of prosperity, celebrated over alt the worlds,
those great ones, all crowned with ascetic
success, sojourned over every part of the
universe, GO foremost one of Bhrigu’s race.


22-424. They could not find out the
eater of sacrificial libations who had
. concealed himself by merging his self inta
self. At this time, a frog, living in water,
got on the surface from the nethermost
regions, with cheerless heart on account
of having been scorched by the energy of
Agni. The title creature addressed the
celestials who had -become stricken with
fear and who were all very eager to see
the god of fire, saying,—VYe gods, Agni is
now living in the nethermost regions.
Scorched by the energy of that god and
unable to bear it longer, T have come here,


25. The Wlustrious bearer of sacrificial
offerings, ye gods, is now under the waters,
He has created a mass of waters within
which he is tiving. All of us have been
scorched by his energy. _-


26. If, ye gods, you wish to see him,


if you have any business with him,—go to


him there,


27. As regards ourselves, we shall fly
from this place, O celestials, from fear of
Agni!—Having said this much, the frog
dived into the water.


‘28. The. eater of sacrificial
came to know of the treachery of the ‘frog.
Coming to that animal, he cursed the whole
race, saying,—-Ye will be deprived of the
organ of taste.


29. Having made this curse on the frog,
he left the spot immediately for living else-
where. Indeed the powerful celestial did
not show himself.


go. Seeing the condition to which the
frogs were reduced for having done them a


libations .


MATEABHARATA.


service, the celestials, O best of the Bhrigus,
showed favor to these creatures. I shall
telf you everything about it. De you heat
me, O mighty+armed hero.


The Deities said =


31. Though deprived of tongues through
the curse of Agut and, therefore, of the
sensation of taste, you will be able to utter
various kinds of words. é

32. Living within holes, deprived of
food, shorn of consciousness, wasted and
dried up, and more dead than alive, the
Earth will yet hold you all.


33. Ye shall also be able to move about
at night-time when everything is covered
with thick darkness !—Having said this to
the frogs, the celestials once more journeyed
over every part of the Earth for finding out
the god of fire. Despite all their: endeavours -
however, they could not find him out,


34. Then, O  perpetuater’ of Bhrigu’s
tace, an elephant, as large and powerful
as the elephant of Shakra, addressed tue
gods, saying—Agni is now living within
this Ashwattha tree !


33. Worked up with anger, Agni cursed
all the elephants, O descendant of Bhrigu,
saying,~Your tongues will be bent back.


36. Having been pointed out by the
elephants, the God of Fire cursed all ele-
phants thus and then went away and entered
the heart of the Shami tree for living withia
it for sometime.


37. Listen now, O powerful hero, what
favor was shown to the elephants, O fore-
most one of Bhrigu’s race, by the celestials
of unbaffled prowess who were all pleased
with the service one of their representatives
had rendered them.


The Deities safd:—

38. With the help of even your tongues
bent inwards you shall be able to eat all
things, and with even those tongues ye
shall be able to utter cries which will only
be indistinct.


39. Having blessed the eleptiants thus,
the inhabitants of the celestial region once
mote began to search Agni. Indeed, having”
come out of the Ashwattha tree, the Gad
of Fire had entered the heart of Shami.


40. This new residence of Agni was
made known by a parrot. The gods theres
upon went there. Enraged with the cons
duct of the parrot, the God of Fire cursed
the whole parrot .race, saying,—VYe shall
from this day be deprived of the power of
speech, i \
i ;


.


ARUSHASANA PARVA.


ar—42. Tndeed, the eater-of sacrificial
clferings turned up.the tongues of all the
parrots. Seeing Agni at the place pointed
tout by the parrot, and beholding the curse
imprecated upon him, the gods, moved by
mercy for the poor creature, blessed him,
saying, on account of your being a parrot,
you shall not be whoily deprived of the
power of speech. Though your tongue
has been turned backwards, yet you will
only be able to speak the fetter K.


43—44. Bike that of a child or an
old man, your words shall .be sweet and
indistinct and wonderful.—Having said
these words to the parrot, and seeing the
god of fire within the heart of the Shami,
the gods made Shami wood a sacred fuel fit
for producing fire in all religious rites. {t
was from that time that fire is seen to live
in the heart of the Shami.


45. Men began to consider the Shami as
a proper means for producing fire {in sacri-
fices), “Ihe waters that are in the nether-
most regions had come into contact with the
god of fire.


46. Those heated waters, G you of
Bhrigu’s race, are vomited forth by the
mountain springs. On account, of Agni’s
having lived in them for sometime, they
became hot through his power. .


47- Meanwhile Agni, seeing the gods,
became grieved. Addressing the celestials,
he asked them,—Why have you come
here?


48. To.him the celestials and the great
Rishis said,—-We wish to engage you
in a particular work. You should per-
form it.


49. When done, it will redound greatly
to your credit.


Agni said:—


50, Tell me what your business is, I
shall, O gods, accomplish it. Lam always
willing to do anything for you. Do not,
hesitate, therefore, to command me,


The celestials said :—

5t. There isan Asura of the name of
Tacaka who has been filled with pride on
account of the boon he has obtained from
Brahman. By his power he is able to op-
pose and discomfit us. Do you bring about
his destruction, :


52. O sire, do you rescue these celestials,


these Prajapatis, and these Rishis, O highly
blessed Pavaka.


53. O powerful one, do you beget a
heroic son possessed of your power, who
will remove, O bearer of sacrificial libations,
our fears from that Asura,


24


1B5


54. We have been cursed by the great
goddess Uma. There is nothing else than
your power which can be our refuge’ now.
Do you, therefore, O powerful deity, rescue
us all.


&5. Thas addressed, the illustrious’ and
irresistible bearer of sacrificial’ libations
answered, saying,—Be it so !—1nd he thea
proceeded towards Ganga otherwise called
Bhagiratht.


56.. He knew her and caused her to cons
ceive. Indeed, in the womb of Ganga the
seed of Agni began to grow even as Agni
himself grows. ,


57. With the energy of that god, Ganga
became greatly moved at heart. Indeed,
she suffered great distress and became un-
able to bear it,


53. When the deity of fz cast his seed
gitted with great energy into the womb of.
Ganga, a.certain Asura uttered a terrific
toar.


59. On account of that dreadful roar
uttered by the Asura for purposes of his
own, Ganga became very much terrified and
her eyes rolled in fear and -betrayed her
agitation.


,60. Shorn of consciousness, she could
‘not bear her body and the seed within ber
womb. ‘The daughter of Janhu, carrying
the energy of the illustrious god, began ‘to
tremble.


61. Overwhelmed with the energy of the
seed she held in her womb, O learned Brah-
mana, she then addressed the god of fire,
saying,—I cannot any longer, O illustrious
one, bear your seed in my womb.


62. Indeed, Lam overcome with weal~
ness by this seed of yours. The health I
had in days before, is no. longer mine. If
bave been greatly agitated, O' ijiustrious
one, and my heart is dead withia me, O
sinless one.


63. O foremost of all persons gifted with
penances, 1 cannot bear youre seed any
longer, I shall throw it off, induced by the
distresgthat has befallen me, and not by


capri
- * 6 re has been no actual contact


of my “body with your seed, QO. illustrious

deity of fire. Our union, having for its -
cause the distress that has befallen the

celestials, has been subtile and not of the

flesh, O highly effulgent one,


65. Whatever merit_or otherwise they
may be in this deed, O eater of sacrificial
offerings, must belong to you. Indeed, I
think, you will be visited by virtue or sin ot
this deed, :


\


186


66. ‘To her thé god of fire said,—Do you
carry the seed. Dv, indeed, bear the foetus
endued with my power. it will produce
great results.


67—~68. You are, indeed, capable of
beating the entire Earth. You will gain
nothing by not holding this energy. That
foremost of tivers, though thus disstiaded
by the deity of fire as also by all the other
celestiais, cast off the seed on the breast of
Meru, that foremost of all mountairis.


69. Capable of bearitig that seed, yet
oppressed by the power of Rudra, she


- could not hold that seed longet on account


of its burning energy.


go—_71. After she had cast it off,
through sheer distress, that burning seed
having the splendour of fire, O perpetuater
of Bhrigu's race, Agni saw her, and asked
that foremost of rivers,—Is it all right with
the foztus you have cast off? Of what
complexion has it been, O goddess? Of
what form does it look? With what energy
dees it seem to be gifted? Do you tell
me all about it.


Ganga said :=
- 72. The foetus is of gold-hue. In energy


. itis like you, UO sinless one! Of an excel>


lent color, perfectly stainless, and burning
with splendour, it has lighted the entire
mountain.


73- O foremost of all persons gifted
with penances, the fragrance of it résem-
bles the cool perfume that is scattered by
lakes adorned with lotuses.


74- With the splendour of that foetus
everything around it seemed to be changed
into gold as_all things on mountain and
low land seem to be changed into gold by
the cays of the Sun.


75. The splendour of that fostus, spread-
ing far and wide,
and tivers and-spiings.


76. it seems that the three worlds,~
with all their mobite and immobile crea-
tures, are being lighted up by it.- Such
is your child, © illustrious _ bearerof- sacri-.
ficial offerings. pen.

97. Like the Sun or your % fk: self,
in beauty it is hike a second Soma!+Having


- ‘said these words, the goddess disappeared.


- 78. The highly energetic god of fire
also, “having pecformed the business of
the celestiale, proceeded to the’ place he
liked, O delighter of the Bhrigus.


79. It was on account of the result of
this-act that the Rishis and the celestials-
bestowed the name of Hiranyaretas upon
the gods of fire, :


falls upon mountains |-


‘MAHABIIARATA:


So0—81, Aiid betatse™ the Hartt held
that seed she also came to be called by
the rtame of Vasumati. Meanwhile, that
fodtus, which had orlginated from the god
of fire arid been lield for a time by Ganga,
having fallen on a forest of reeds, beyan
to grow atd at last assunied a wonderful
form. ‘The presiding goddess of the cons-
teHation Krittika saw that forrd resembling
the rising Sun.


82. She henéeforth begangto bring up
that thild as her Sori with the milk of her
breast. For this reason that highly efful»
geht child came to be called Kartikeya
after her name. ‘


83 And because he grew from seed
that fell out. of Rudra’s body, he came to
be called Skanda. The incident also of
his birth having taken place in the forest
of reeds, concealed from every body‘s
view, gave him the name of Guha. It was
thus that gold came into existence as the
offspring of the god of fire


84. Hence it is that gold came to be
regarded as the foremust of all things and
the ornament of the very gods. It was
from this incident that gold came to be
called by the name of Jatarupam.


85. It is the foremost of all preciotis
things, and among ornaments also. it is
the foremost. ‘The purifier among all
purifying things, it is the most sacred of
all sacred objects. . er ee


86. Gold is truly the illustrious Agni,
the Lord of all things, and the foremost
of all Prajapatis. ‘The mist sacred of all
sacred things is gold, O foremost of twice-
born ones. Indeed, gold is said to have
for its essence Agni and Soma.


Vashishtha said :—

87. Formerly f also heard this history,
O Rama, called Brahma-darshana, about
the achievement of the Grandfather Brahman
who is at one with the Supreme Soul.


88—89. To a sacrifice performed for-
merly by that forémost of gods, vis.,.the
Lord of Rudra, O you of great power,.who
on that occasion had assumed the farm of
Varuna, there came the ascetics and all the
celestials headed by Agni. There also
came to that sacrifice all the sacrificial
limbs (in their embedied forms), and the


‘Mantra called Vashat in bis embodied


form. 3


go. All the Samans also and all the
Yajushes, in thousands and in their em-
bodied forms, came there. The Riz-Veda
also came there, adorned with the rules of
orthoepy.


ANUSHIASANA PARVA,


gr. The Lakshanas, the Suras, the
Tomas, the Niruktas, the- Notes arranged
in rows, and the syflable Om, as also
Nigraha aud Pragraha, all came there and
lived in the eye of Mahadeva.


g2. The Vedas with the Upanishads,
Vidya, ‘and Savitri, as also, the Past, the
Present, and the Futuré, all came there and
were held by the illustrious Shiva.


93. The powerful Lord of AN then
poured libations himself into his own self.
indeed, the holder of Pinaka caused that-
Sacrifice of multifarious form to look highly
beautiful,


gt He is Heaven, Sky, Earth, and the
Welkin. tHe is catled the Lord of the Earth.
He is the Lord whose cule is acknowledged
by all obstacles. He is gifted with Shree
and He is at one with the God of Fire.


95. That illustrious god
various names. He is Brahman,
Rudra, Varuna, Agni and Prajapati.
is the auspicious Lord of all creatures.


96—97. Sacrifice, Penance, alt the rites,
the yoddess Diksha burning with rigid ob-
servances, the several Points with the pre-
siding deities, the consorts of all the deities,
their daughters, and the celestials mothers,
all came to Pashupati, O perpetuater of
Bhrigu’s race, together in a body.


98. Seeing that sacrifice of the great
Manadeva who had assumed the form of
Varuna, all of them became highly pleased.
Seeing the celestial ladies of great besuty,
the seed of Bralinan came out and dropped
upon the Earth.


99. On account of the seed having fallen
on -the dust, the Sun took up ‘that dus¢
nyixed with the particles of seed from the
Hath with his hands and’ cast it into th


a


is called by
Shiva,
He


gacrificial fire.


too. Meanwhile, the sacrifice with the.
sacred fire of burning flames «was com-
. menced and it went on.. Brahman was
pouring libations on the fire. While thus
engaged, the Grandfather became worked
up with desire,


tot. As soon as the seed came out, he
took it up with the sacrificial ladle and
poured it asa libation of clarified butter, O
delighter of the Bhrigus, with the necessary
Mantras, on the burning fire.


102. From that seed, Brahman of great
power caused the four orders of creatures to
come into being. ‘That seed of the Grand-
father was endued with the three qualities
of Goodness, Darkness, and Ignorance.
From that element in it which represented
the quality of Guodness, sprang all mobile


Creatures gifted with the principle of action. | called the Muhurtas.’. The blvod


187


103. From the element of ‘Ignoran:e
in it, sprang all immobile creatures. ‘The
quality of Goodness, however, which lived
in that seed, entered both kinds df existence.
That quality of Goodness is of the nature
of Light. It is eternal and of it is unending
Space.


tog. In all the creatures the quality of
Goodness is present and is at one with that
light which shows what is right and what is
wrong. When the seed of Brahman was
thus poured as a libation on that sacrificial
fire, there came from it, OQ powerful one,
three beings into existence.


105. They were three male persons,
gifted with bodies that partook of the nature
of the circumstances from which they res-
pectively originated. One arose first from
the fire (called Bhrik) and hence he passed
by the name of Bhrigu. A second came
from the burning charcoals and hence he
passed the name of Angiras.


106. The third originated from a heap
of extinguished charcoals and he passed
by the name of Kavi. kt has been already
said that the first came out with flames
issuing from his body and hence he was
called Bhrigu. :


107. From the rays of the sacrificial fire
originated another called Marichi. From
Marichi (afterwards) sprang Kashyapa.
{t has been already said that from the
(barning) charcoals originated Angiras.
Yhe dwarf Rishis called Valikhillyas origi
nated from the blades of Kusha grass
spread out it that sacrice.


08—109. From the same blades of
KKusha geass, O you of great power origi-
nated Atri. From the ashes of the fire
originated the: twice-born Rishis, ofs., the
Vaikhanashas, endued with penances and
given to Vedic learning and all of excellent
qualities.


110. Fiom the eyes of Agni originated
the twin Ashwins endued with great beauty.


At tast, from his ears, otiginated the
Praj tpatis,
1i1—112. The Rishis:-originated | the


pores of Agni’s body. From his sweat orie
ginated Chhandas, and from his: strenytt
originated Mind, Therefore Agni has been
said to be all the celestiats in his individual
self, by Rishis endued with Vedic learning,
guided by the authority of the Védas. The
pieces of wood that keep alive.the flimes .
of Agni are considered ag. the -Months.
the juices. the fuel yields ‘form the Forte
nights, Et te ;

113. Fhe liver ‘6f Agni is called the
Day and Night, and jhis fierce light is
Agni


are mine !


188


is’ considered as the souree of the Rudras.
From his blood originated the gold-hued
celestials cabled the Maitradevatas,


. 114. From his smoke originated the
Vasus. From his flanes originated the
Rudras as also the (twelve) Adityags of
great effulgence.


115—117. The Planets and Constella-
tions and other stars that have been set in
their respective orbits in the sky, are con-
sidered as the (burning) charcoals of
Agni, The first Creator of the universe
declared Agni to be Supreme Brahma and
Eternal, and the giver of all desires. ‘This
is, indeed, a mystery. “ After alk these
births had taken place, Mahadeva who had
assumed the form of Varuna (for his
sacrifice) and who had Pavana for his
soul, said,—Vhis excellent Sacrifice is mine.
1 am the Grahapati in it. The three beings.
that first originated fram the sacrificial fire
are ming! Forsooth, they should be con-
sidered as my children. Know this, ye gods
who range through the skies! ‘hey are
the fruits of this Sacrifice. ;


8. ''—Agni said, —These_ ehildren
have originated from my limbs. ‘They
have all Bepended upon me as the cause of
their being. They should, therefore, be
considered as my ‘childten. Mahadeva. in
the form of Varuna has erred in this
matter.


119. After this, the Master of all the
worlds, the Grandfather of all creatures,
viz., Brahman, then said,—These children

The seed which I poured upon
the sacrificial fire was mine, . :


120. I am the performer of this Sacri-
fice. 1 poured on the sacrificial fire, the
seed that came out of myself. He who
has planted the seed always enjoys the
fruit. ‘The principal cause of these births is
my seed.


121-124. The celestial went to the
Grandfather and kaving bowed their
heads .to him and joined their hands in
respect, they said to him,—Al!l of us, O
illustrious one, and the entire universe of
mobile and immobile creatures, are your
offspring, O sire, let Agni of burning flames,
and the ilustious and powerful Mahadeva
who has, for this sacrifice, assumed the
form of Varuna, have their wish, At these
words, although born of Brahman, the
_ powerful Mahadeva in the form of Varuna,
the king of all aquatic creatures received the
fir-t-born one, viz., Bhrigu effulgent as the
Sun, as his own child. ‘Yhe Grandfather
then intended that Angiras should become
the sun of Agni.

-425. Knowing the truth, the
father then took Kavi as his


Grand-


own son,


MAHABHARATA.


Busy with procreating creatures for peopf-
ing the Earth, Bhrigu who is considered a3
a Prajaspati thence came to be called as
Varuna’s offspring. :


. +
126. Gifted with every prosperity,
Angiras passed as the offspring of Agni,
and the celebrated Kavi came to be known
as the child of Brahman himself, Bhrigu
and Angiras, who had originated from the
fire and the charcoals of Agni respectively,
became the procrzators of ex ensive races.
and tribes in the world.


127. Indeed these three, vis, Bhrigu
and Angircas and Kavi, considered as Praja-
pati, are the progenitors of many races and
tribes. All are the children of these three,
Know this, O powerful hero. -


128—129. Birigu beyat seven .sons all
of whom beeame equal to him in merits
and qualities. “heir names are Chyavana,
Vajrashirshan, Suchi, Urva, Shukra, that


giver of boons, Vibhu. and Savana,
These are the seven. ‘They are ehildren.
of Bhrige and are hence Bhargavas,


They are also called Varunas on aceaunt
of their ancestor Bhigu having beet
adopted by Mahadeva in the form
of Varuna. You belong to the race of
Bhrigu.


130—131. Angiras begot eight sons.
They also are known as Varunas. Their
names are Vrihaspati, Utatthya, Payasya,
Shanti, Dnira, Virupa, Samvarta, and
Sudhanwan“the eighth. These eight are
considered also as the children of Agni.
Freed from every evil, they are devoted
to knowledge only.


132. ‘The sons of Kavi who was adopted
by Brahman himself are also known as
Varunas. Eight in mumber all of then
beeame progenitors of races and tribes.


Auspicious by nature, they all knew
Brahma.
133. The names of the eight sons of


Kavi are Kavi, Kavya, Dhrishou, Ushanas
endued with great intelligence, Bhrigu,
Viraja, Kashi, and Ugra knowing every
duty.

-134. These are the eight sons of Kavi.
By them the whole world has been peopled,
{hey are all called Prajapatis, and they
have procreated many offspring.


435. Thus, O chief of Bhrigu’s race;
has the whole world been peopled with ihe
children of Angiras, and Kavi and Birigu,


136. The powerful and supreme Lord
Mahadeva in the form of Varuna which
he had assumed for his sacrifice had first,
O learned Brahmana, adopted both Kavi
and Angiras. Hence, these two are cousi-
dered as of Varuna


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


137. After that the eater of sacrificial
libations, vis., the god of fire, adopted
of Angiras. [Hlence, all the children of
Angiras are known as belonging to the
race of Agni. :


138. The Grandfather Brahman was,
formerly propitiated by all the deities who
said to him,—Let these lords of the
universe save us all, _


139. Let all of them beeome progenitors
of offspring. Let all of them become en-
dued with genances. Through your favour,
let all these rescue the world.


140. Let them become procreators and
extenders of races and tribes and let them
increase your power. Let all of them
become thorough masters of the Vedas


and let them be performers of great deeds.’


14t.. Let all of them be friends ‘to the
divine cause. Indeed, let all of them be-
come gifted with auspiciousness. Let them
become founders of extensive races and
tribes and let them be great Rishis. Let
all of them be gifted with great penances
and let all of them be devoted to high
celibacy. ;

142.. All of us, as also all these, are
your offspring, O you of great power. You,
O Grandfather, are the Creator of both the
celestials and the Brahmanas. .

, 143. Marichi is your first offspring. All
these also that are called Bhargavas are
your progeny. Looking at this fact, O
Grandfather, we shall all help and suppers
one another,


t44—145. All these shall, thus, multiply


their progeny and establish yourself at the
beginning of each zon after the universal
destruction. Thus addressed by them,
Brahman, the grandfather of all the worlds,
said to them,—So be it! I am pleased
with you allf—Having said so to the
celestials, he proceeded to the place he had
come from.


146. This is what took place in days
of yore in that sacrifice of the great
Mahadeva, that foremost one of all the
celestials, in thé beginning of creation,
when he for the purposes of his sacrifice
had assumed the form of Varuna.


147. Agniis Brahman. He is Pashu-
pati. Heis Sarva. Heis Rudra, He is
Prajapati. It is well-known that gold is
the offspring of Agni. —


148. When fire is not to be had, gofd
is used as a substitute. Guided by the
marks of the auditions of the Veda, one
who is conversant with authorities and who
snows the identity of gold with fire, acts
thus,


189


149—150. Putting a piece of gold on
some blades of Kusha grass spread out on
the ground, the sacrificer pours libations
upon it. If libations are poured upon also
the pores of an anthill, upon the right ear
of a goat, upon a piece of level earth,
upon the waters of a Tirtha, or on the
nand of a Brahmana, the illustrious god
of fire becomes pleased and considers it
as a source of his own advancement a$
also that of the celestials through his.


151. Hence, itis that we have heard
that all the celestials consider Agni as
their refuge and are devoted tohim. Ayni
originated from Brahman, and from Agni
originated gold. ‘

152, Hence, we have heard that those
virtuous persons who make gifts of gold
are considered as giving away al) the
cities, '

153. The man who makes gifts of gold
acquires a very high end. Regions’ of burn-
ing effulgence are his. Indeed, O Bh r-
gava, he becomes installed as the king ‘of
kings in the celestial region,


154. That person who, at sun-rise,
makes a gift of goid according to the ordi
nance and with proper Mantras, succeeds
in warding off the evils foreshadowed by
ominous dreams. : :


155. ‘The man who, as soon as the Sun
has risen, makes a gift of gold becomes
purged of alt his sins. He who makes a
gift of gold at mid-day destroys fall his
future sins, *


156. He who, with controlled soul, makeg
a gilt of gold at the second twilight suc.
ceeds in living with Brahman and the go
of wind and Agni and Soma in their res-
pective regions,


157. Such a man acquires fame in re-
gions of great happiness that belong to
Indra himself. Acquiring great fame in
this world also, and purged of all bis sins,
he sports in joy and happiness. ,


158. Such aman acquires many other .
regions of happiness and becomes peerless
for glory and: fame. His course perfectly
unobstructed, he succeeds in going every-
where at will,


159 He has never to fall down from the
regions which fhe acquires, and the glory
he attains to, becomes very great. Indeed,
by making gifts of gold one acquires tium-
berless regions of happiness all of which hé
enjoys for good, :

“160. That man -who, having lightéd a
fire at sunrisé, makes gifts of gold in view
of the observance of a particutar vow, suc
ceeds in acquiring the fruition of all his
desires, ae . =


“190


163. It has been said that gold is at one
with Agni. The gift of gold, therefore, yields
great happiness. ‘The gift of gold leads to
the possession of those merits and qualities
that are desired, and purifies the heart.


162. f have thus told you, O sinless one,
the origin of gold. O you of power, know
how Kartikeya grew up, O delighter of
Bhrigu’s race.

163. After a long time Kartikeya grew
up. He was then, O perpetustor of
Bhrigu’s race, chosen by all the celestials

_ with Indca at their bead, as the com-
mander-in-chief of the celestial forces.


164. He killed the Daitya Taraka as
also many other Asuras, at the command of
the king of the celestials, O Brahmana, and
moved also by the desire of benefiting ‘all
the worlds. oY

165. I have also, O you of great power,
described to you the merits of making gifts
of gald. Do you, therefore, O foremost of
all speakers, make gifts of gold.


Bhishma said :—-


166. ‘Thus addressed by Vashishtha,
Jamadagni's son of great power then made
gifts of b big to the Brahmanas and became
Cleansed of his sins,


167. [ have thus told you, O king,
everything about the merits of the gifts of
gold and about its origin also; O Yudhist-
thira.

168. . Do you also, therefore, make pro-
fuse gift of gold to the Brahmanas. Indeed,
O king, by making such yifts of gold, you
will sutcly be purged of all your sins,


ee


‘CHAPTER LXXXVE.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


¥Yudhishthira said :—

‘x. You have, O grandfather described
to me fully the merits of ‘the gift of gold ac-
cording to the ordinances laid down in the
scriptures and the Veda.


2. You have also described the origia of
gold. Do you tell me aow how Taraka met
with destruction. :

3- You have, said, O king, that that

- Asura had become unslayable by the gods.
Do you telt me fully how his destruction
was brought about. * ae


4. O perpetuator of Kuru’s race, 1 wish
to hear this from you, I mean the details of


_MATLABIARATA,


Taraka’s destruction. Great is my curio
sity to hear the narrative.


Bhishma said :—

5. ‘The gods and the Rishis, O bing, re-
duced to great distress, urged the six
Krittikas to rear that child.


6. Amongst the celestial ladies there
were none, except these, who could by theic
power, bear the seed of Agni in theie


wombs.
q. The god of fire became highly
pleased with those goddesses for theic.


readiness to sustain the conception. causeck
by the seed of Agni which was gifted with
his own great power,


& When the energy of Agni, O king,
was divided into six parts and placed.
within the channels, the six Krittikas began
to nourish the portion that each held in hee
womb,


@ As the great Kumara, however, began
to prow within their wombs, their bodies.
being possessed by his energy, they could.
not get peace anywhere.


to. Filled with energy as their bodies.
were, the time at last came for delivery.
All of them, it so happened, O priace of
men, delivered simultaneously.


11. Though held in six different wombs,
yet when all the parts, as they came out,
united into one. Ihe goddess Earth held
the child, taking it up from a mars. of gold.


ta Indeed, . the child, possessed of a
beautiful form, shone like the god of Fire,
Of beautiful features, he began to. grow itt
a charming forest of reeds,


13, The six Krittikas saw that child of
theirs looking like the morning Sun. Filled
with affection for him,—indeed, loving hine
very much,—they began to rear lim with
their mille, ;


14. On-acconnt of his having been bora.
of the Krittikas and reared vy them, he
was knowa in the three worlds by the name.
of Kartikeya, Having originated from the
seed which had fallen- off from Rudra he
was named Skanda, and because of his
birth ina solitary forest of seeds he was.
called Guha.


1513. Fhe thirty-three gods, the points.
of the compass together with their presid+
ing -deities, and Rudra, Dhatri, Vishnu,
Yama, Pushan, Aryyaman, Bhaga, Angsha
Mitra, the Sadhyas, Vasava, the Vasus,,
the Ashwins, the Waters, the Wind, the.
Firmament, Chandramas and all the Cons«
tellations and the Planets and the Sun, and
all the Richs and Samans and Yajushes in,
their embodied forms, came there to see


ANUSHASANA PARVAY


that wotiderful child Who Was the son of
the god of Fire.

18. The Rishis sang hymns of praise
and the Gandharvas sang in honor of that
child called Kumara of six heads, twelve
eyes, and greatly devoted to the Bral-
imanas. '


19—2¢. His shoulders were broad, and-


he had twelve arins, and the splendour of
his body resembled that of fire and Aditya.
s he lay stretched on aclump of heath, the
gods with the Rishis, seeing him, became
filled with great joy and considered the
great Asura as already killed. ‘I'he celestials
‘then began to bring him various kinds of
toys and articles that could amtise him.


21. As he played like a child, various
sorts of toys and birds were given to him.
Garuda of excellent feathers gave to hima
child of his, vis., a peacock having plumes
of variegated color.


22. The Rakshas gave to him a boar
and a buffalo. Aruna hitiself gave him a
tock of fiery splendour.


23. The Moon gave him a sheep, and
the Sun gave him some dazzling rays of his.
The mother of all kine, viz , Suvabhi, gave
fim kine by hundreds and thousands.


24. Agni gave him a goat having many
eis qualities. Ila gave him profuse
owers and fruits. Sudhanwan gave bim
a riding chariot and a car of the great
Kuvara. ;


25-26. Varuna gave him many auspi-
cious and good products of the Ocean, with
some elephants. ‘The king of the celestials
gave him lions and tigers and pards and
various kinds of the birds of the air, and
many terrible beasts of prey and many um-
breilas also. Many Rakshasas and Asuras
began to follow that powerful child.


27. Seeing: the son of Agnt grow up,
‘Taraka sought, by various means, to bring
about his destruction, but could not do any-
thing to that powerful deity. :


28. The gods in time invested Agni’s
son born a solitary forest with the com-
mand of their army. And they also in-
formed him of the oppressions made upon
them by the Asura Taraka.


29. The commander-in-chief of the
celestial army grew up and became poss-
essed of great energy and power. In time

bei killed ‘Taraka, with his irresistible
are.


30. Indeed, Kumara killed the Asura as
easily as if in sport. Having brought about
the destruction of ‘laraka the re-established
the king of the celestials in his sovereignty
of the three worlds. : +s


1g!


31. Gifted with mighty power, the celes-
tial general shone in beauty and splendour.
‘The powerful Skanda became the protector
of the telestials and did what was apree-
able to Shankara.


32. ‘The illustrious son of Pavaka had
a golden form. Indeed, Kumara is
always the leader of the celestial arms.


33. Gold is the powerful enetgy of the
god of fice and was born with Kartikeya.
Hence is gold highly sacred, valuable, and
excellent atid has untetiding merit.


34. Thus, O son of Kuru’s race, did
Vashistha recite formerly this topic to Rama
of Bhrigu’s race. Do you, theréfore, O
king of men, try to make gifts of gold.


35. By making gilts of gold, Rama
became purged of all his sins, and finally
acquired a high place in Heaven that is
unattainable by other men.


CHAPTER LXXXVII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—=
Continued, :


Yudhishthira said :—


1, You have described'to me, O you
of righteous soul, the duties of the four
castes. Do you, similarly, O king, des-
cribe to me now al] the ordinances regare
ding the Shraddha. :


Vaishampayana said :—

2. Thus addressed by Yudhisthira, the
son of Shantanu began to recite to him
the following ritual, consistent with the
ordinances, of the Shraddha,


Bhishma said :—

3. Listen, O king, with rapt attention,
tome as 1 describe to you the ritual of
the Shraddha, That ritual is auspicious,
laudable, productive of fame and progeny,
and is considered as a sacrifice,O scorcher
of enemies, in honor of the departed Manes,


4. Gods or Asuras or human beings,
Gandbarvas or Uragas or Rakshasas,
Pishachas or Kinnaras, every one should
always adore the departed Manes.


. It is seen that people adore the
departed Manes first, and please the celes-
tials next by offering them their worship,
Hence, one should always adore the depar-
ted Manes with every care.

6. Itis said, O king, that the Shraddha
per formed in honor of the departed Manes
is™performable afterwards, But this general
rule has a special restraint,


492


7. The (deceased) grandfather become
gratified with the Shraddha that may be
performed on any day. I shall, however,
tell you now what the merits and demerits
are of the respective lunar days.


8. Lshall describe to you, O sinless one,
what fruits are attained on what days by
performing the Shraddha, Do you listen
to me with rapt attention.


_ 9. By worshipping the departed Manes
on the first day of the light fortnight, one
obtains in his abode beautiful wives capable
of producing many children all endued with
desirable accomplishments.


10. By performing the Shraddha on the
second day of the light fortnight, one gets
many daughters. By performing it on the
third day, one acquires many horses. By
performing it on the fourth day, one gets a
large herd of smaller animals in his house.


m1. They, O king, who perform the
Stiraddha on the fifth day, get many sons.
Those men who perform the Shraddha on
the sixth day, acquire great splendour,


12. By performing it on the seventh
day, O king, one wins great fame. By
performing it on the eighth day one, secures
great profits in commercial pursuits.


13. By performing it on thefninth day,
one, acquires many animals of uncloven
hoofs. By performing it on the tenth day,
-One acquires many valuable kine.


14. By performing jt on the eleventh
day one gets valuable cloths and utensils.
Such a man also.gets many sons all of
whom become endued with Brahma
-Splendour, : .


15. By performing the Shraddha on the
twelfth day, one always sees if he desires
various sorts of beautiful silver and gold
articles,


,, 16-17. By performing the Shraddha on
the thirteenth day, one reigns supreme over
his kinsmen. Forsooth, all the young men
in the family of him who performs the
‘Shraddha on the fourteenth day die. Such
a man becomes entangled in war. By
“performing the Shraddha on the day of the
‘new moon; one gets’ the fruition of every
desire. ae ,


18. In the dark fortnight, all the days
beginning with the tenth, leaving only the
fourteenth day out, are good days for’ the
performance of the Shraddha. Other days
of that fortnight are not so.

19. Then, again, as the dark fortnight is
better than the light one, so the afternoon
of the day is better than the forenoon for
the Shraddha. -


——


- MAHABHARATA.


; CUAPTER 1 €XXVIit-


(ANUSHASANIKA_ PARVA).
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—

1. O you of great power, tell me what
that object is which if dedicated to the
departed Manes, becomes inexhaustible !
What Havi, again, (if offered) lasts for all
time? What, indeed, is that which bes
comes eternal 7 ‘


Bhishma said :—


2. Hear me, O Yadhishthira, what those
Havis are wilich persons conversant with the
ritual of the Shraddha consider as suitable
for the Shraddha and what the fruits are
of each.


3. With sesame seeds, rice, barley, Masha
water, root and fruits, if given at Shraddhas,
the departed Manes, O king, remain pleased
for a month. :


4. Manu has said that if a Shraddha is
performed with profuse sesame, such Shrad-
dha becomes inexhaustible, Of all sorts of
food, sesame seeds are considered as the
best.


’
g. With fishes offered at Shraddhas, the
departed Manes remain pleased for two
months, With mutton they remain pleased
for three months and with the flesh of the
hare for four, '


. 6. With the flesh of the goat, O king,
they remain pleased for five’ months,- with
becon for six months, aud with the flesh of
birds for seven.


7. With venison got from those deer
that are called Prishata, they ‘remain
pleased for eight months, and with that
obtained from the Ruru. for ning months,
and with the meat of the Gavaya for ten
months, .


8. With the meat of the buffalo. they
remain pleased for eleven months. With
beef presented at the Shraddha, they re
main pleased for a full year. ;


g. Payasa mixed with clarified butter
is as much as acceptable to the departed
Manes as beef. With the meat of the
Vadhrinasa the Fitris remained pleased
for twelve years. ;


10. The flesh of the Rhinoceros, offered
to the departed Manes on the anniversaries
of the lunar days on which they died, be-
comes endless. Ihe potherb called Kala«
shaka, the petals of the Kanchana flower,
and meat of the goat also, thus offercd,
prove inexhaustible,


ANUSHASARA PARVA.


‘193


ty. Regarding it, O Vudhishthira, there ; doing it under the Maghas: one gains


are some Verses, originally, sang by the
‘departed Manes, that are now sung (in the
world). Sanatkamara communicated them
to mé in former days.


12. He who has taken birth in our
‘race, should give us Payasa §mixed {with
‘clarified butter of the thirteenth day (of
the dark fortnight), ander the constellation
Magha, daring the San’s southward course.


113. One born in ote race, should
‘under the constellation Magha, as if in the
observance of a vow, offer the meat of
goat or the petals of the Kanchana flower.
One should also offer us, with due rites,
Payasa mixed with clarified butter, dedica-
ting it on a spot covered by the shadow of
an elephant.


14. Many sons should be coveted so that
‘even one may go to Gaya, where stands the
banian that is celebrated over all the worlds
and that makes all offerings made ander its
branches endless,


15. Even’ a litde of water, roots, fruits,
meat, and rice, mixed with honey, if offered
‘on the anniversary of the day of death,
‘becontes ‘endhess. '


eels,


CHAPTER LXXXIX. © .-
{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continaed,


Bhishma said :— ;

t. Hear me, O Yudhishthira, as 1 tell
‘you what those optional Shraddhas are that
should .be performed under the different
constellations and that were first spoken of
by Yama to king Shashavinda.


2. That man who always performs the
Shraddha under the constellation Krittika
is considered as performing a sacrifice after
establishing the sacred fire. Such a person,
freed from fever, goes to Heaven with his
children. .


3. He who is desirous of children should
perform the Shraddha under the constellay
tion Robini, white he who is desirous of
power should do it under the constellation
Mrigashicas. By performing the Shraddha


under the consteHation Ardra, a man be-


comes the doer of terrific deeds.


4. Aman ,by performing the Shraddha
under Punarvasu, makes much gain by
agriculture. The man who is desirous of
growth and advancement should perform
the Shraddha under Pushya. .


5. By doing it under the constellation
Ashlesha one begets heroic children, By


25


superiority over kinsmen,


6. By dothg it ander the (prior) Phas
fgunis, one gains good fortune. By doing


the Shraddha under the later Phalgunag .


one gets many Children; while by pecform-


ing it undeec Hasta, one gets the fruition of


his wishes. . '


y. By performing it under the constella~
tion Chitra one gets beautiful children,
By -doing it under the constellation Swati,
one makes much profit by trade,


8. The man who desires thildren, acquires
the fraition of his desire by performing the
Shraddha under the constellation Vishakha,
By doing it under Anuradha, one becomes
an Ensperor. 7


9. By making offerings in honor of the
departed Manes under the Constellation
Jeshthya, with devotion and humility, one
acquires sovereignty, QO foremost one o
Kuru’s race. * . .

10, ' By doing the Shraddha under Mula,
one gains health, and by -doing it under the
prior Ashada, one acquires excellent fame.
By performing it under the later Ashada,
one succeeds in travelling over the whole
would, freed from every sorrow,


11. By doing it-under the constellation
Abhijit, one acquires great knowledge. By
doing it under Shravana, one, after death,
altaing to a very high end. :


12. The man who performs the Shradha
ander the constellation Dhanistha becomes
a king. By doing it under the constellas
tion presided over
Shatavisha), one becomes a_ successful
physician. :

13. By performing the Shraddha under
the constellation of the prior Bhadrapada,
One acquires many goats and sheep: while


by Varuna. (vis., ,


by doing it ander the later Bhadcapada, -


one acquires thousands of kine,


14. By performing the Shraddba under
the consteflation Revati, one acquires many
utensils of white brass and copper. By
doing it under Ashwini, one acquires many
horses, while under Bharani, one lives long,


1§. Listening to these ordinances about
the Shraddha, king Shashavindu acted
accordingly, and succeeded in easily con-
quering and ruling the whole Earth.


194"


CHAPTER XC. ’


(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira, said :~


“a. You should, O foremost one of Kuru's
race, tell me to what kind of Brahmanas, O
grandfather, should the, offers made at
Shraddhas, be given away,


Bhishma said :-—

2.. The Kshatriya who is conversant
with the ordinances about gift, should never
examine Brahmanas. to all matters, how-
ever, relating to the worship of the deities
and the -departed Manes, an examination
has been said to be proper.


‘3. The deities are adored on Earth
by men only when they are filled with
devotion originating from the celestiais
themselves. Hence, one should, approach-
ing thea, make pifts to all Brahmanas,
respecting such gilts as are made to the
celestial themselves.


4. la Shraddhas, however, O king, the
man of intelligence should examine the
Beahmanas. “Sueh examination should be
about their birth, conduct, age, appearance,
and learning. 5 :


‘5. Amongst the Brahmanas there are
some who pollute the line and some who
purify it,” Listen to me, O king, as | tell
you who those -Brahmanas are that should
be excluded from the line.


6—11. He who is wily, or he who is
guilty of: feeticide, or he who is ill of con--
sumption, or he who keeps animals, or he
who has no Vedic study, or is a common
servant of a village, or lives upon usury, or
he who is. a singer, or he who sells all
articles, or he who is guilty of arson, or he
who is a poisoner, or he who is a pimp by
profession, or he who sells Soma, or he who
teaches palmistry, or he who is in the em-
ploy of the king, er he who is a seller of oi},
or he who is a cheat and false swearer, or
he who has a quarrel with his father, or he
who tolerates a paramour of his wife, or. he
who has been cursed, os he who is a thief,
or he who lives by some mechanical art, or
he who puts on disguises, or he who is de-
‘ ceitful in his conduct, or he who is hostile to
those he calls his friends, or he who is an
adulterer* or he who is a preceptor of
Shudras, or he who has taken up the pro-
fession of arms, or he who wanders with
dogs (for bunting), or he who has been bit
by a dog, or he who has married before


his elder brothers, or he who seems tg.pave
undergone circumcision, be, 2
the bed of his preseptor, he Srempaeneyae “teed


or tnime, he why lives by seting sp mee


MAHABHARATA,


and he who lives by calculating thé cane
junctions of stars and planets and asterisms,
are considertd as fit to be excluded from
the tine.


> 12, Persons knowing the Vedas say that
the offerings made at Shraddhas, if eaten
by such Brahmanas, go to fill the stomachs
of Rakshasas, O Yudhishthira.


13. ‘That person who having eatefti at a
Shraddha does not abstain that day from
Vedic studies, or who has known that day a
Shudea woman, must know that ‘his de~
parted Manes on account of -such deeds
of his, have to lie for a month on his: own
excreta.


14—15. The offerings: made at Shrad-
dhas if presented toa Brahmana wha sells
wine, become converted into human excreta ;
if presented toa Brahmana who practises
as a physician, they become converted into
puss and blood; if presented to one who
lives by setting up an idol, they fail to pro-
duce any fruit; if presented to one who
who lives pon usury, they lead to infamy ;
if presented to one who is engaged in trade,
they become productive of no fruits either
in this world or in the next. If presented
toa Brahmana who ig born of a widowed
mother, they become as fruitless as libations
poured on ashes.


16. They who present the Havya and
Kavya to such Brahmanas who do not per-
form the duties ordained for them and who
do not observe those rules of good conduct
that persons of their order should observe,
find such presents productive of no merits
hereafter, ,


‘17, That little-witted man who makes
gifts of such articles to such men knowing
their dispositions, obliges, by such conduct,
his departed Manes.to eat human excreta
in the next world, .


18 You should know that these wretche
Brahmanas deserve to be excluded from the
fine. ‘FYhose Brahmanas also of hitle
energy who are engaged in instructing
Shudras belong to the same class.


19. A Brahmana_ who is blind stains


sixty individuals of the line; one - who
is destitute of manly powers stains a
hundred; while one who is affiicted


with white leprosy stains as many as he
looks upon, O king.


20. Whatever offerings made at Shrad-
dhas are eaten by owe with his head wrap.
ped round witha cloth, whaiever is eaten
by one with face southwards, and whatever
is eaten with shoes or sandals on, all goes
to please the Asuras. :


21, Whatever, again is given with ma-
ice, and whatever is given without respect,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


have been ordained by Brahman himself
[ the portion of the king of Asuras (viz.,
ali.)


‘22, Dogs, and such Bralimanas as are
polluters of fines, should not be suffered
to look upon the offerings wade at Shrad-
dhas. ‘Therefore, Shraddhas should be
performed at a place that is properly
hedged around or concealed from the view.
That, spot should also be covered with
sesame seeds.


23. That Shraddha whichis done with-
out sesame seeds, or that which is done by
a person in anger, has its Havi cobbed by
Rakshasas and Pishachas,


24. ‘According tothe number of Brats-
manas seen by one who deserves to be ex-
cluded from the line, is the loss of merit he
causes of the foolish
Shraddha who invites him to the feast.


25. Asthall now, O chief of Bharata’s
race, teH you who are purifiers of the tine.
Do you find thet out by examination,


26. All those Brahmanas who are puri-
fied by knowledge, Vedic study, vows and
observances and they who are of good and
righteous conduct, should be known as_
purifiers of everything.


27. 1 shall now tell you wha deserve to
sitin the line. Wou should know them to
be such whom I shall mark out presently,
He who is conversant with the uUiree Na-
chiketas, he who has set up the five sacrift-
cial fires, he who knows the five Suparnas,
he'who knows the six branctes (called
Angas) of the Veda, he who is a descen-
dant of fathers who were engayed in teach-
ing the Vedas and is himself engayed «in
teaching, he who is well conversant witlr
the Prosody, he who is acquainted with the
Jeshthya Saman, he who is obedient to his
parests, he who is conversant with the
Vedas, and whese ancestors have been so
for ten generations, he wh» knows only his
mucried wives and this at their seasons,
and he who has been purified by knowledge,
by the Veda, and by vows and obser-
vances,—even such a Brahmana,—puiifies
the line.


30-32. He who reads the Atharva-
shicas, who is given to the observance of
Beahmacharyya practices, and who is
steady in the observance of righteous vows,
who is truthful and of pure conduct, and
who duly satishes the duties laid down for
his order, they also who have undergone
fatigue and labour for bathing iti the sacred
waters, who have done the final bath after
celebrating sacriftces with proper Mantras,
who. are freed from anyer, who are “not


performer of tlie


‘ta ,be conversant with


195


who - are self controlled “masters of theie
senses, and they who are devoted to the
behoof of all creatures,—these should be
invited to Shraddhas.


33- Anything given to these, becomes
endless. These, indeed, are purifiers of
lines. There are others also, highly blessed, -
who should be considered as purifiers of the
line.


34. They are Yatis and those who are.
conversant with the religion of Emancipa- -
tion, and they who are devoted to Yoga and
they who properly observe excellent VOWS, .
and they who, witl collected mind, recite
(sacred) histories to foremost of Brah-)
mauas.


35—30. They who are conversant witlt
commentaries, they also who are given to
grnummatical, studies, they who -study the:
Puranas and they who study, the. Dharma-
shastras, and having studied them act up to
the standard laid down in them,’ he who has:
lived in the house of his preceptor, he who!
is truthful in speech, he who ts a giver of
thousands, they that.are foremost in Vedic:
lore and (in the knowledge ol) the scriptural’
and ‘philosophical aphorisins,—-these purify
the lines as far they took at it,


38. And because they purify all who sit
in the line, therefere are they called: puri-,
fiers of lines. Utterers of Brahma say that,
even a sinyle person wl happens. to be the
descendant of Ancesters who’ .wece teachers,
of the Veda and who is himself a Vedic,
teacher, purifies full seven miles around
him.


39 «fhe whois nota Ritwil and that’.
is nut a Vedic teacher takes the foremost
seat in a Shraddha, with even the perniis-'
sion of the other Ritwiks there: present, he
is said to take the sins of all wie ymay be
sittay be the line.


4. Hf, on the other hand, te hussaans


the! Vedas. and’
freed from alt those faults which are consis
dered as capable of polluting the line, he
shall not, O king, be considered as fallen

Such a man would thea be really a puro”
of the line.


41. For these reasons, ee
should properly examine the ”
before inviting them to Sh
should invite only such ar
devated to the dutier
order, and as. are b-
as are gifted wi’


42... He”
feeding
doer


rae


restless, who are endued with forgiveness, | §”


.
o


196


43.
relatives only on the occasion of the [
Shraddha he performs, fails to proceed
(after death) by the celestial path. Yhe ian
who converts the Shraddha he, performs,
into an occasion for only collecting his


friends, never succeeds in ascending to |


Veaven. The man whe converts the
Shraddha inte an oceasion for treating his
‘friends, becomes alienated from Heaven
even like a bird dissociated from the perch
when the chain tying it breaks.


44. Therefore, he who performs a
Shraddha should not honor his frieuds.
He may make gifts of riches to them on


other occasions by colleeting them together.


The Havi and the Kavi offered at Shrad-
Ghas should be served to them who are
neither friends nor enemies but are only
indifferent or neutral,


45. -As seed sown on a barren soil does
not sprout forth, or as one who has not
sown does not get fa share of the produce,
-so that Shraddha the offerings in which are
eaten by an unworthy person, yields no
fruit either in this world or in the next.


46. That. Brahmana who is destitute of


Vedie study, is like a fire made by burning }


grass or straw ; and becomes soon put out
evea like sucha fire. ‘Ihe offerings made
at Shraddhas should not be given to tim
ever as libatioris should not be poured on
the ashes of the sacrificial fire.


47. When the offerings made at Shrad-
@has are exchanged by the performers with
one another, they become Pishacha presents.
Such offerings please neither the gods wor
the departed Manes. Instead of seaching


the other world, they wander about even


here like a cow which has lost her ealf
wandering about within the fold.


48 As those libations of clarified butter
that are poured upon the extinguished ashes
of a sacrificial fire never reach either the
gods or the departed Manes, similarly a gift

.that is made to a dancer or a singer or a
akshina presented to a lying or deceitful
vg, BENSON, yields no merit.


g. Fhe present that is given toa lying
*eceitful person destroys both the giver
“Ne, receiver without benefiting them
“a, Such a present is destructive
*“ensurable. The Pitris of the
“it have to fall down from

Sy
“w, them to be Brah-
“~ OQ Yudhishthira,
Rishis who
firns faith
ae


midst of conclaves.
_ be vilified, they would destroy three genera-


MAHABHARATPA.


He who collects his friende and x to Vedic study, to knowledge, to- penanees, |


and to- acts, O Bharata, should be knowl
as Rishis.


52, The offerings made at Shiraddhas,


‘should be given to. those who are devoted


to knowledge. Indeed, they are to be cons
sidered as men who never speak ill of the:
Brahmanas. | <


53 Those men should never be fed om
occasions of Shraddhas who speak ill of
Brahmanas in course of conversation in the
ff Brahmanas, O king,


tions of the caluminater.
54. This is the saying, O bing, of the
Vaikhanasa Rishis.. Brahmanas knowing.


the Vedas should be examined fram: ™
‘distance.


55- Whether one Kkes them or not, one:
should give to. such Brahmanas the offer-
ings made at Shraddhas. That man who
feeds thousands upon thousands . of un-
worthy Brahmanas acquires merit that is.


“attainable by feeding even one Brahmana


if the fatter happens to be endued with a
knowledge of the Vedas, O Bharata


.


CHAPTER XCt.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.
Yudhishthira said :—


“3. By whom was the Shraddha first
conceived and at what time? What also


fis its substance? In tbe thne when the


world was imbhabited by only the descen-
dants of Bhrigu and Angiras ; who was the
Muni who established the Shraddha ?


2. What deeds should not’ be done at
Shraddha? What are those Shraddhas ie
which fruits and roots are to be offered 7
What kinds also of paddy should be avoided
in Snhraddhas? ‘Tell me all this, O grand-


father,


Bhishma said -~—
3 Listen to me, O fking, as F tel you
how the Shraddha was introduced, the
tine of such introduction, the essence of
the rite, and the ascetic who conceived it.


4- (From the Self-Create Brahman sprang
Aui, O you of Kuru’s race. In Atri'’s


‘family was born a Muni named Dattatreya,


5. Dattatreya got:a son named Nini
having asceticism for wealth, Nimi got a
son named Shrimat who was gifted with
gteat beauty of pessot.


+


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


Tr fs for this reason also that in making
offerings at Shraddhas a share is first
offered to the God of Fire, O king.


12, If a portion of the offerings be first
made to the God of Fire ata Shraddha,
O king, Rakshasas of twice-born origin
cannot then do any injury ,to sucha
Straddha.


13. Seeing’ the God of Fire at a
Shiaddha, Ra«shasas fly away fromjit. Ihe
ritual of the Shraddha is that the cake
should first be offered to the (departed)
father. Next, jone should be uffered to the
grandfather,


14. Next should one be offered to the
great-grandfather. This is the ordinance
telatings to Shraddha, Over every cake
that is offered, the offerer should, with
fapt attention, utter the Savitri Mantras.


15. This other Mantra also should be
uttered, viz., to Soma who is fond of the
departed Manes. A woman that has be-
come impure on account of her season, or
one whose ears have been cut off, should
not be allowed to remain where a Shraddha
is being done, Nor should a woman be
brought from a family other than that of
the person who is performing the Shraddha.


16. While crossing a river, one should
offer oblations of water to his Pitris, naming
them all. Indeed, when one comes upon a
river one should please his Pitris with
oblations of water.


17. Having offered oblations of water
first to the ancestors of his race, one
should next offer such oblations to his
departed friends and relatives.


18. When one crosses a river on a car
to which is yoked a couple of oxen of
variegated color, or from them that cross
a river on boats, the departed Manes ex-
pect oblations of water. - :


19. Those who know this always offer
oblations of water with rapt attention to the
departed Manes. Every fortnight, on the
day of the New Moon, one should make
offerings to his departed ancesters.


20—21. Growth, longevity, energy, and.
prosperity become aj} attainable through
devotion to the departed Manes. The
Grandfather Brahman, Pulastya, Vashish-
tha, Pulaha, Angiras, Kratu, and the great
Rishi Kashyapa,—these, O prince of Kuru’s
Tace, ate considered as great masters of


Yoga.


" 22, They are numbered among the de-
parted Manes. Even this is the bigh ritual
in the matter of Shraddha, O king. Through
Shraddhas performed on Earth, the. de-
ceased members of his race become, freed’
{rom a poison of misery, fhe


at


199°


23. Ehave thus, O prince of Kuru’s race,
explained to you, according to the scrips
tures, the ordinances relating to Shraddbas,.
i shall once more discourse to you on
gifts.


ikem
i CHAPTER XCHL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued. —


Yudhishthira said :—

t. If Beahmanas who observe a vow.
(vtg., fast) eat, at the invitation of a Brahe
mana, the Havi, can they be charged with
the sin of violating their vow? Tell me this,
O Grandfather.


Bhishma said :—


2. Let those Brahmanas eat, moved by
desire, who observe such vows as are tut
laid down in the Vedas. About those
Brahmanas, however, who observe such
vows as are laid down in the Vedas, they
are considered as guilty of a breach of their
vow, O Yudhishthira, by eating the Havi
of a Shraddha at the request of him who
performs the Shraddha, : ,


Yudhishithra said :—


3- Some people say that fast is a pene _
ance. Is penance really at one with fast
or is it not. so? Tell me this, O grande
father.


Bhishma, said :~-

4. People do consider a regular fast for
a month or a half month as afpenance, ‘The
truth, however, is that one who mortifies his
own body is not to be considered, either
as an ascetic or as ene conversant with:
duty. - ;

5. Renunciation, however, is considered
as the best of penances, A Brahmana,
should always abstain from food, and -ab%
serve the vow of celibacy.


a is

5. A Brahmana should always” practise
selt-denial controjling even, speech, and
recite the Vedas. The Brafimana should
marry and surround himself with children
and relatives, from desire of acquiring vir-.
tue. He should never sleep.

7. Heshould rbstain from meat. He
should always read the Vedas and the
scriptures. He should always speak the
truth, and-practise self-control. He should
eat the residue, (vzz., of what remains after.
Serving the deities and guests). Indeed, he
should be’ hospitable towards all that come


Lat” dto-his houses " He should always eat nectar,


rod


200


¥ie should duly observe all rites and tele-
brate sacyifices. _


Yudhishthira said:—

8. How may one come to be considered
as always observant of fasts? How may
vire become observant of vows? How, O
king, may one come to be an eater of the
residne? By doing what may one be said
10 be fond of guests.


Bhishma said :— .

9. He who takes food only morning
and evening at fthe appointed hors
and abstains from ali food during the


interval, is said to be an abstainer from
food.


tt. -He who knows only his married wife
and that only at her season, is said to be
observant of the vow of celibacy. By
always making gifts, one-comes to be con-
sidered ag truthful in speech,


12, By abstaining from all meat obtain-
ed from animals killed for nothing, one be-
tomes an abstainer from meat. By tasking
gitts one becomes purged of all sins, and by
Spee es from. sleep during day time, one
comes to be considered always awake.


13. He who always eats what remains
after serving the guests and servants, Know,
O Yudhishthira, is said to always eat
nectar. : :


« 4. He who abstains from eating till
Brahmanas have eaten, is considered as
conquering Heaven by such abstention,


-1§. He who eats what remains after
serving the celestials, the departed Manes,
and: relatives and dependants, {s said to
eat Vighasa or the residue, sO


16. Such men acquire many regions of
happiness in the abode of Brahman him-
self, ‘There, O king, they live in the
company of Apsaras and Gandbarvas,


17. Indeed, they sport and enfoy in
those regions, with the celestials and guests
andthe departed Manes in their company,
and surrounded by their own children and
grandchildren. Even such becomes their
high end.


Yudhishthira said —

18. People are seen to make various
kinds of gifts to the Brahmanas, What,
however, ts the difference; O grandfather,
between the giver and the receiver ?


Bhishma said :—


t9. The Brabmana accepts gifts from
him who is righteous, and from bim who
is sinful. If the giver happens to - be
Virtuous, the receiver commits little sin, “If,


MANABHARATA,


on the other hand, the giver happens to bé/
impious, the receiver sinks in hell. - ;


20. Regarding itis cited an old histary
vf the conversation between Vrishadarbhi
and the seven Rishis, O Bharata. 1


2i—22. Kashyapa, Atri, Vashishthay
Bharadwaja, ‘Gautama, Vishwa nitra,
Jamadagni, and the chaste Arundhati (the:
wife of Vashishtha), all had a common
maid-servant whose name was Ganda. A
Shudra named Pashusakha married Ganda
and became beg trusband. i


2%. Kashyapa and others, formerly,


observed the austerest penances and roved


over the world, -desirous of acquiring
the eternal region of Brahman by the help
of Yoga-meditation.


24. About that time, O delighter of the
Kurus, there took place a severe drowtghte.
Stricken with hunger, the whole world of
living creatures become greatly weak,


25. At a sacrificé which had been pers
formed formerly by Shivi’s son, fie had
given away tto the Ritwilks a son of his as’
the sacrificial present. - ;


26. About this time, long-lived as the
princé was, he died of starvation. Tne
Rishis named, afflicted with hunger, appro»
ached the dead pritce aid sat encircling
him.


27. Indeed, those foremast of Rishis,
seeing the son of him at whose sacrifice
they had officiated, O Bharata, thus dead
of starvation, began to couk thie boty in a
vessel, actuated by the pangs of hunger.


28. All food having disappeared from
the world of men, those ascetics, desirous of
saving their lives, had recourse, for purposes
of living, to such a miserable end.


‘29. While they were thus engaged,
Vrishadarbha’s son, vés., king Shaivya, in
course of his roving, caine upon those
Rishis. Indeed, he met them on his way,
engaged in cooking the dead body, moved
by the pangs of hunger.


The son of Vrishadarbha said:—


go, The acceptance of a gift ‘will im-
mediately relieve you all. Do yau, there-
fore, accept a gift for the maintenance of
your bodies! Ye ascetics having penances
for wealth, listen to me as I declare what
wealth | have. z


_3t. That Brahmana who solicits me is
ever dear to me. Indeed I shall give
you a thousand kine of white hair, foremost
in speed, eagh accompanied by a bull, and
each having a well-born calf, and, there-
fore, giving ‘milk.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


32, 1 shall also give you a thousand
bulls of white color and of the best species
and capable of carrying heavy loads. I shall
also give you a targe number of kine, of


good nature, the foremost of their kind, all |


fat, and each of which, having brought
forth her first calf, is quick with her second.


39. Tell me what else 1 shall give of
foremost villages, of grain, of barley, and
of even the rarer and more precious jewels.
Do not seek to eat this food that is medible.
Vell me what should 1 give you for the
maintenance of your bodies.


The Rishis said :—


34. O king, to accept gifts from a
monarch is very sweet at first but it is
poison in the end, Knowing this well, why
‘do you, O king, tempt us then with these
offers ?


35+ The body of the Brahmana is the
divine field. By penance, it is purified.
Vien again, by pleasing the Brahmana,
‘One pleases the celestials. °


36. {f a Brahmana accepts the gifts
made to him by the king, he loses, by such
acceptance, the merit that he would other-
wise win by his penances, that day. Indeed,
Such acceptance destroys that merit asa
burning fice destroys a wilderness.


37- May you be happy, O king, as the
result of the gifts you make to those who
solicit youu—Saying these words to them,


they left that piace, proceeding by another |


way,


38. The flesh those great ones had in-
tended to cook remained uncooked. In-
‘deed, abandoning that flesh, they went
away, and entered the. forest in search of
food.


39. After this, urged by - their master,
the ministers of the king,-entered those
woods and plucking certain figs tried to
give them away to those Rishis.


40. The officers of the king filled some
‘of those figs with gold and mixing them
with others tried to induce those ascetics to
accept them.


4t. Atri took up some of those figs,
and finding them heavy refused to take
them. He said,—We are not shorn of
knowledge. We are not fools,


42. We know that there is gold within
these figs. We have our senses about
us. Indeed, we are awake instead of
being asleep. If accepted in this world,
those will yield bitter results hereafter.
He who seeks happiness both in this world


and in the next, should never accept these. *


26


a01
Vashishtha said :—= 1


43. If we accept even one pold coin,
it will be counted as a hundred or even
athousand, If, therefore, we accept many
coins, we shall surely attain to an unhappy
end in the next worid,


Kashyapa said:—

44. All the paddy and barley on Earth,
allthe gold and animals and women that
are in the world, are incapable of satisfying
the desire of a single person. Hence, a
wise man should, removing cupidity, adopt
tranquillity. : :


Bharadwaja said :—


45. The horns of a Ruru, when they
first appear, begin to grow with the growtl
of the animal. ‘lhe cupidity of man is like
this. It has no }imit.


Gautama said :—

46. All the objects which exist in the
world cannot satisly even a single person,
Man is like the ocean, for he can never*-be
filled (2.e., satisfied.)


Vishwamitra said :—~


47. When one desire cherished by a
person becomes satisfied, there originates
immediately another whose satisfaction
sought and which pierces him like an
arrow.


Jamadagni said :— ;
48. Abstention from accepting gifts sup-

ports penances as their root. Acceptance

however, destroys that. .


Arundhati said :—


49. Some people hold that things of the
world may be stored for spending them
upon the acquisition of virtue. FY think,
however, that the acquisition of virtue: is
better than that of riches. :


Ganda said :~~

50, When these my fords, who sre
gifted with great energy, are so very much
afraid of this when seems to be a great
terror, weak as | am, I fear it the more,


Pashusakha said :-— :

§t. Phe value of virtue is very superior,
There is nothing superior to. it. That
wealth is known to the Brahmanas. I wait
upon them as their scivant, only for learn-
ing to prize that wealth. ;


The Rishis said :—


52. May he be, as the result of the gifts
he makes, who.is the king of the people of


-


20%


this land. Let his gift bear fruit who has
sent these fruits to us, enclosing gold within
them. :


Bhishina said :—


53. Having said these’ words, those
Ristss of steadfast, vows, abandoning the
figs having gold within them, left that place’
and proceeded where they liked.


The ministers said :—

"54. O king, coming to know of the ex-
istence of gold within the figs, the Rishis
have departed, Let this be known to
you.


Bhishma said :—


55. Thus addressed by his ministers,
king Vrishadarbhi- became stricken with
anger against all those Rishis, Indeed, to
take vengeance upon them, the king entered
his own apartment. :


56. Practising the austerest of penances,

he poured on his sacred fire libations of

clarified butter, accompanying each with
Mantras uttered by him.


57. From that fire there then originated,
as the outcome of the incantation, a form
capable of striking every one with fear.
Vrishadarbhi named her as Yatudhant.


58. That form which had originated
from the incantations of the king, looking
as dreadful as the Last Night, appeared
with joined hands before the king. Ad-
dressing king Vrishadarbhi,. she said,—
What shall I do?


Vrishadarbhi said :—


59. Go and follow the seven Rishis, as
also Arundhati, and the husband of their
maid-servant, and the maid-servant herself,
and undestand what the meanings are of
their names.


60. Having learnt their names, do you
kill all of them. After killing them you
may go wherever you like. acon


Bhishma said :—


61. Savxing,—So be it.—The Rakshasi
who had been named Vatudhani, in her
proper form, went to that forest in which
the “great Rishis, travelled in search of
food.


62. Indeed, O king, those great Rishis,
with Atti among them, roamed within the
forest, living upon fruits and roots.


63- In course of their travel they saw a
mendicant of broad shoulders, and plump
arms and legs and well-grown face and
abdomen, Of limbs that were all adipose, ,


MAHABHARATA,


he was travelling with a dog in his com-
pany.


64. Seeing that mendicant whose limbs
were all well-developed and beautiful, Aran-
dhati exclaimed, addressing the Rishis,—-
None af you will ever be able to show such
well-grown features.


Vashishtha said :—


65. ‘Phe sacred fire of this pesson is not
like ours, for while he is able to pour lba-
tions on if, morning and evening, none of
uscan do the same. It is therefore that
we see both him and his dog so webll+
formed,


Atri said :—


66. his man does not like us, feel the
sufferings of hunger. His energy has not
suffered, like ours, any decrease. Ac-*
quired with the greatest difficulty, his
Vedas have not, like ours disappeared.
fence it is that we see both him and his
dog so well-grown. ?


Vishwamitra said :—


67. This man is not, like us, unable to
observe the eternal duties laid down in the
scriptures, I have become idle. f feel the
sufferings of hunger, I have tost the know-
ledge [ had acquired. This man is not like
us in this matter. Hence I see both him
and his dog so well-grown,


Jamadagni said :—


68. This man has not tothink of storing
his annual grain and fuel as we are to do.
Hence I see both him and his dog so well«
formed, :


Kashyapa said :—


66. This man has not, ke us, four bro«
thers of the same blood who are begging
from house to house, uttering the words,—~+
Give—Give!—Hence it is that 1 see him
and his dog so well-grown,


Bharadwaja said :—


7o. This man has no regret like ours for
haying condemned and cursed his wife.
He has not acted so wickedly and foolishly,
Hence I gee both him and his dog so- well+
formed,


Gautama said :—


91. This man has not like us only three
pieces of covering made of Kusha grass,
and a single Ranku skin, each of which,
again, is three years old. Hence it is
that I see both him and his dog so well-
formed, .


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


Bhishma continued s—


72. Seeing those great Rishis, the wan-
dering mendicant, approached them, and
accosted them all by touching their band,
according to the practice.


73. Conversing then with each other
about the difficulty of getting sustenance in
that forest and the consequent necessity of
undergoing the pangs of hunger, ail of
them left tttat place,


74. Indeed, they traveled through that
forest, all bent upon a common object, viz.,
the plucking of fruits and the extraction of
roots for maintenance.


75. One day, as they were travelling,
they saw a beautiful lake filled with fotuses,
Its banks were covered with trees which
stood thickly near one another, ‘The waters
of the dake were pure and transparent.:


76. Indeed, the lotuses that adorned
the lake were all of the cofor of the rising
san. ‘Yhe feaves that floated on the water
were of the color of lapis lazull,


77. Various kinds | of acquatic “towle
were sporting on its bosom. There was
but one path leading to it. The banks
were not covered with mire and the access
to the water was easy.


78. Urged by Vrishadarbhi, the Rak-
shasi of dreadful appearance who had
originated from his incantations and who
had been named Yatudhanui, guarded the
lake,


79. Those foremost Rishis, with Pashu-
sakha in their company, went towards the
Like, which was thus guarded by Yatu-
dhaui, for the object of collecting some
lotus-stalks,°


80—81. Seeing Vatudhani of’ fearful
aspect standing on the banks of che lake,
those great Rishis addressed her, saying,—
Who are yeu who thus stand alone in this
solitary forest? For whom do you wait
here? What, indeed, is your purpose ?


What do you do here on the banks ef .this


lake adorned with lotuses ?


Yatudhani said :—


82. It matters‘not who Lam. I deserve
not to be accosted. You having ascetic
wealth, know that I am the guard set to
watch this lake.


The Rishis said :+ .

83. All of us are hungry. We have
nothing else to eat. With your permission
_we would.collect some lotus-stalks.


Yatudhani said :—


. 84. According to agreement, do you take
he lotus-stalks as you please, Ye must,


203


one by one, give me your names. You


may then, without. delay, take the stalks !


Bhisma said :—

85. Ascertaining. that her name was
Yatudhani and that she stood there for
killing them, Atri, who was famishing with
hunger, addressed. cher, i.and said these
words,


Atri said :—

86. I am called Atrit because I purify
the world from sin. For, again, thrice
studying the Vedas every day, } have atade
days of my nights. That, again, is no
night in which [ have not studied the
Vedas. ‘Iherefore also I ant called Atri,
O beautiful lady !


"Yatudhaul aide


87. O you of-great effulgence, the ex-
planation you have given me of your name
is incapable ofgbeing understood by. me.
Do you, therefore, go and plunge into this
tank filled with lotuses.


Vashishtha said :—


88. - I am gifted with Yoga powers, I tive
again, as a householder, and am consi-
dered as the foremost of alt persons that
lead such a mode of life. On account of
ny: being gifted with (such) powers, of my
living as a householder, and of my being
considered, as the foremost,of all house-
holders, I am called Vashishtha,


Yatudhani said :—

89. The etymological signification of
your name is simply incomprehensible to
me inasmuch as the inflections which the
original roots have undergone are uanin-
telligible, Goand plunge into thie lake of
lotuses. ,


Kashyapa said :—

go. I always protect mry body, and or
account of my penances | have become
gifted with effulgence, For thus protecting
the body and for this effalzence.that is due
to my penances, 1 pass “by the name of
Kashyapa.


Yatudhani said :—

gt. O you of great effulyence, the
etymological signification you have given of
your name is what | cannot comprehend,
Go and plunge-into this lake filed witlr
lotuses..


Bharadwaja said :—


92. I always-support my sons, my dis-
ciples, the celestials, the Brahmanas, and


- 294


MARABHARATA.


my wife. On account of my thus support- ' account of the inflections the roots have


ing all with ease, I pass by the name of
Bharadwaja. :


Yatudhani said :—


93. The etymological signification you
have given me of your name is what I
cannot fully understand, on account of the
many inflections the root has undergone.
Go and plunge into this lake filled with
fotuses.


Gotama said :—

“ou. E have conquered Heaven and Earth
by the help of self-control. For my consider-
ing all creatures and objects impartially, I
am like a smokeless fire. Hence F am in-
eapable of being subjugated by you. When,
again, I was born, the effulgence of my
body removed the surrounding darkness.
For these reasons I am called Gotama.


Yatudhani said :-—


93. The explanation you have given me
of your name, O great ascetic, is beyond
the range of my comprehension, Go and
plunge into this lake of lotuses.


Vishwamitra said :—

96. Thecelestials of the universe are my
friends. I am _ atso the friend of the
universe. Hence, O Yatudhani, I am
called Vishwamitra.


Yatudhani said :—


97, The explanation, you have given of
your natne is a puzzle to me, on account of
the inflections the root has undergone. Go
and plunge inte this lake of lotuses.


Jamadagni said :—

98. I have originated from the sacri-
ficial fire of the celestials, Hence am }
called Jamadagni, O you of beautiful
features, :


Yatudhani said :—

99. ‘Fhe etymoloyical signification you
have given, O great ascetic, of your name,
passes the range of my comprehension.
Do you go and plunge into this lake of
lo uses.


Arundhati said :—


too. I always live by the side of my
husband, and hold the Earth jointly with


him I always incline my husband’s heart
towards me. 1 am, therefore, called
Arundhati.


Yatudhani said :—
to1. ‘The explanation you have given of
your name is beyond my understanding, on


undergone. Go and plunge into this lake


of fotuses.


Ganda said :—


102. The Ganda means a_ portion of
the cheek. As Ihave that portion a little
elevated above the others; Ik am, O you who
have originated from the sacrificial fire of
Shaivya, called by the name of Ganda.


Yatudhani said :—


403. ‘The explanation whieh you have
given of your name is perfectly incompreh- n-
Sible to me, on account of the inflections
which the root has undergone. Go and
plunge into this lake of lotuses.


Pashusakha said :—

104. # protect and tend alf animals F
see, and f am always 2 friend to all animals.
Hence am | called Pashusakha, O you who
have originated from the (saccificial) fire
(of bing Vrishada: bhi).


_Yatudhani said :—


105. ‘The explanation you have given of
your name is what I cannot wnderstand, on
account of the inflections which the roots
have undergone. Go and plunge into this
lake of lotuses.


Shunasakha said :—


106. I cannot explain the etymology of
my name like these ascetics, But know,
Q Yatudhani, that F am called by the name
of Shunasakba, ,


Yatudhani said :—

107. You have mentioned your name
only once. FE have not been able to under.
Stand the explanation you have given, do
you, therefore, mention it again, O twice-
born one, ;


Shunasakha said :—

108. Since you have not been able to
catch my name on account of my having
mentioned it only once, FT shall strike you
with my triple stick! Struck with it, be


you reduced forthwith into ashes,


Bhishma continued :—


109. Struck then, on the head, by the
Sannyasin, with his triple stick which resem-
bled the punishment inflicted by a Brah-
mana, the Rakshasi who had originated
from the incantations of king Vrishadarbhi
dropped down on the Earth and became
reduced to ashes.


1to. Having thus killed the powerful


Rakshasi, Shunasakha thrust his. stick into


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


he earth and sat himself down on a grassy
plot of land.


111, The Rishis then, having, as they
Hiked, plucked a number of lotuses and
taken up a number of lotus-stalks, came
up from the lake, filled with joy.


112. Throwing on the ground the mass
of lotuses which they had collected with
great Labour, they plunged once more into
it for offering oblations of water to the de-
parted Manes.


113 Coming up, they went to that side
of the bank where they had placed the
lotus-stalks. Reaching that place, those
foremost of men found that the stalks were
nowhnre to be seen.


The Rishis said :-—


114. What sinful and cruel men has
stolen away the lotus-stalks collected by our
hungry selves from desire of eating.—


Bhishma said :—


115. Those foremost of twice born
persons, suspecting one another, O des-
troyer of enemies, said,—We shall each
have to swear to our innocence. :


116. All those ascetics then, exhausted
with hunger and exertion, agreeing to the
proposal, took these oaths,


Atri said :—

117. Let him who has stolen the lotus-
stalks touch kine with his foot, pass urine
facing the sun, and study the Vedas on ex-
cluded days, P


Vashishtha said :—


118—t1g. Let him who had stolen the
lotus-stalks abstain from reading the Vedas,
or leash hounds, or be a wandering mendi-
cant tinrestrained by the ordinances laid
down for that mode of life, or be a destroy-
er of persons who seek refuge with bim, or
live upon the proceeds of the sale of his
daughter, or solicit riches from those who
are low and vile. ,


Kashyapa said :—

t20—-121. Let him who has stolen the
lotus-stalks give vent to all surts of words in
all places, give false evidence in a court of
law, eat the flest of animals not killed in


sacrifices, make gifts to unworthy persons.


or to worthy persons at unseasonable times,
and have sexual connection with women
during daytime.


Bharadwaja said :~ .


122-123. Let him who has stolen the
lotus-stalks be cruel and sinfal in his con-
duct towards women and kinsmen and kine.


205


Let him humitiate Brahmanas, in disputa-
tions, by showing his superior knowledge
and skill. Let him study the Richs and
the Yajushes, disregarding his preceptor.
Let him pour libations upon fires made
with dry grass or_straw.


Jamadagni said :~


124-125. Let him who has stolen the
lotus-stalks be guilty‘of throwing filth and
dirt on water. Let him be’ filled witlr
enmity towards kine. Let him be guilty of
having sexual union with women at times
other than their season. Let him incur the
hatred of all persons. Let him gain the
living from the earnings of his wife. Let
him have no friends and tet him have
many enemies. Let him be another's guest
for getting in return those acts of hospitality
which he has done to that other.


Gotama said :—


126—-127. Let him who has stolen the
lotus-stalks be guilty of throwing away the
Vedas after having read them. Let hin
renounce the three sacred fires. Let him be
a seller of the Soma (plant or juice). Let
him live with that Brahmana who lives in a
village which has only one well from whicty


‘water is drawn by all classes and who has


married a Shudra woman,


Vishwamitra said :—~


128, Let him who has stolen the lotus.
stalks be doomed to see his preceptors and
seniors and his servants maintained by
others during his own life-time. Let bim
not have a good end. Let him be the
father of many children,


129 Let him be always impure anda
wretch among Brahmanas. Let him be
proud of his riches. Let him be a tillec of
the soil and let him be filled with malice,


130. Let him wander in the rainy season.
Let him be a paid servant. Let him be the
priest of the king. Let hies assist at the
sacrifices of such impure persons who are
not worthy of being assisted at their sacri-
fices.


Arundhati said :—


131. Let her who has stolen the lotus~-
stalks always humiliate hee mother-in-law,
Let her be always vexed with her husband.
Let her eat whatever good things come to
her house without giving a part to others,.


132. Discegarding the kinsmen of her
husband, let her live in her husband’s house
and eat, every evening, the flour of fried
barley! Let her come to be considered as
unenjoyable, Let her be the mother of a
heroic son.


266


Ganda said :—

' 133. Let her who has stolen the lotus-
stalks be always a speaker of untruth. Let
her always fall out with her kinsmen! Let
her give away her daughter in marriage
for money. ;


134. Let her eat the food which she has
has cooked, alone and without giving a part
it to of anybody ! Let her pass her whole life
asastave. Indeed, let her wio has stolen

~ the lotusestalks be quick with child on
account of sexual union under circumstances
of guilt, :


Pashusakha said :—


135. Let him who has stolen the lotus-
stalks be born of a slave-mother. Let him
why have many unworthy children, And let
him never bow to the celestials.


Shunasakha said :—


. 136, Let him who has removed the
Jotus-stalks acquire the merit of bestowing
his daughter in marriage upon a Brahmana
who has studied all the Samans and the
Yajushes and who has. carefully observed
the vow of celibacy.’ Let him perform the
final ablutions after having read all the
Atharvans ! 2


All the Rishis said :—


137. ‘The oath you have taken is no oath
at all, for all the deeds which you have
‘mentioned are very desirable for the
Bralmanas! It is evident, Shunasakha,
.that you have appropriated our lotus-stalks,


‘Shunasakha said :—


138. Not seeing the lotus-stalks deposie
‘ted by you, what you say is indeed true, for
‘itis I who. have actually stolen them,


* 139. Before you alll have made those
stalks disappear. Ye sinless ones, the
_act was done by me for testing you.


140. I came here for protecting you.
‘That woman who lies killed there was
‘called Yatudhani. She was ofa dreadful
disposition. Originated from the incan-
tations of king Vrishadarbhi, she had come
here from the desire of killing all of you,


14t. Ve ascetics having penances for
-wealth, begged on by that king, she had
-come-but | have killed her. ‘That wicked
--and sinful creature, originated from the
- sacrificial fire, would otherwise have taken
your lives. 3


142. It was for killing her and saving
you that I came here, O ye learned
_Brahmanas. Know that | am Vasava! you
_ have entirely got rid of the influence of cupi-
dity. On account of this, you have acquired
many eternal regions fraught with the


MAMABUARATA,


fruition of every desire as soon as it fises fr
the heart! Do you rise, forthwith from this
place and go to those regions of beatitude,
O twice-born ones, that are reserved for
you.


Bhishma said: —


143. The great Rishis, highly pleased at
this, replied to Purandara, saying,—So be
it!—They then ascended to the celestial
region the company of Indra himself.


144—145. Thus, those great persons,
though worn out with hunger and though
tempted at such a time with the offer of
various kinds of enjoyable articles, refrain-
ed from giving way to temptation, As the
outcome of such self-denial, they attained
to the celestial region. It appears, therefore,
that one should, undec all circumstances,
renounce cupidity.


146—147. Even this, O king, is the
highest duty. Cupidity should be renounced.
The man who recites this account in assem-
blies of men, succeeds in acquiring riches,
Such a man has never to come by a distress-
ful end.’ The departed Manes, the Rishis,
and the celestials become all pleased witlr
him. Hereafter, again, he becomes gifted
with fame and religions merit and riches,


od


CHAPTER XCIV.


(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said:—

1. Regarding it is cited the old history
of the oaths on the Occasion of a sojourn to
the sacred waters.

2. O best of the Bharatas, the act of
theft had -been committed by Indra, and
the oaths were taken by many royal and
twice-born Rishis.


3. Oncean a time, the Rishis, having


assembled toyether, pruceeded to the west-


ern Prabhasa. They held a consultation
there which resulted in a determination on
their part to sojourn to all the sacred waters
on Earth. :

4. Yhere were Shakra, Angiras, the
highly learned Kavi, Agastya, Narada and
Parvata; and Bhrigu and Vashishtha and
Kashyapa and Gautama and Vishwamitra
and Jamadagui, O king.


5. There were also the Rishi Galava,
and Ashtaka and Bharadwaja and Arun-
dhati and the Valixhilyas; and Shivi and
Dilipa and Nahusha and Amvarisha and
the royal- Yayati and Dhuodhumara and
Pura... :


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


6. These foremost of men, headed the
great performer of hundred sacrifices, the
slayer of Vritra, sojourned to all the sacred
waters ove after another, and at last reach-


ed the highly sacred Kaushiki on the
day of the full moon in the month of
Magha.


7. Having purified themselves of all sins
by ablutions performed in all the sacred
waters, they at last proceeded to the very
sacred Brahmasara. Bathing in that fake,
those Rishis gifted with fiery energy began
to gather and eat the stalks of the lotus,


8. Amongst those Brahmanas, some had
extracted the stalks of ‘the lotus and some
the stalks of the Nymphee: stellata. Soon
they found that the stalks extracted by
Agastya had been taken away by some-
body.


g. The foremost of Rishis, Agastya, ad-
dressing them all, said,—Who has taken
away the good stalks which I had extracted
and deposited here? I suspect some one
antongst you must have taken them. Let
him who has taken them away return them
tome. You should not thus misappropriate
my Stalks.


10. {t is heard that Time attacks the
energy of virtue. ‘That Time has come
upon us. Hence, virtue is afflicted. It is
proper that I should go to Heaven for good,
before sin assails the world and establishes
itself fully here.


11. Before the time comes when Brah-
manas, loudly uttering the Vedas, within
the precincts of villages and inhabited
places, cause the Shudras hear them, before
the time tomes when kings offered against
the rules of virtue from motives of
policy, [| shall go to the celestial region
for good.


12. Before men cease to regard the digs
tinctions between the lower, the middle, and
the higher classes, I shall go to the celestial
region for good, -Before Ignorance attacks
the world and covers all things in dark-
ness, I shall go to the celestial region for
good,


13. Before the time comes when the
strong begin to oppress the weak and treat
them as slaves, | shall go to the celestial
region for ever. Indeed, I dare not remain

on Barth for seeing these things.


14. The Rishis, much concerned at wide
he said, addressed that great ascetic and
said,—-We have not stolen your stalks!
You should not cherish these suspicions
against us, O great Rishi, we shall take
the most dreadful oaths. ’


15. Having said these words, conscious


as they were of their own innocence, and


alone any good food.


207


desirous of upholding the cause of virtue,
those Rishis and royal sages then began to’
swear, one after another, the following
oaths,


Bhrigu said :—

16, Let him who has stolen your stalks.
censure when censured, assail when assaile,
ed, and eat the flesh that is attached to the
back-bone of animals,


Vashishtha said:— — -


17. Let him who has Stolen your stalks
neglect his Vedic studies, leash hounds,
and having taken himself to the mendicant
order live in a city or town,


Kashyapa said:-

18. Let him who has.stolen your stalks
sell all things in all places, misappropriate
trusts, and give false evidence !


Gotama said :~


rg. - Let him who has stolen your stalks
live, showing: pride in all things, with ant
understanding that does not see al) crea-
tures with an equal eye, and always giving
way to the influence of desire and anger,
fet him be a cultivator of the soil, and let
him be moved by malice


Angiras said :—

‘20.° Let him who has stolen your stalks
be always impure! Let him be a censurable
Brahmana. Let him leash hounds, Let
him be guilty of Brahmanicide. Let him
be averse to eaplations after having com.
mitted sia.


Dhundhumara said i—

21. Let bim who has stole your stalks
be ungrateful to his friends! Let him take
birth in a Shudra woman | Let him eat


'


Dilipa said :—


22. Let.him who has stolen your stalks
attain to -those regions of misery and i ine
famy which are reserved for that Brahmana
who lives in a village having but-one well
and who knows a Shudra woman.


Puru gaid:—


23. Let him who has stofen your stalks
practise as a physician! Let. him be sup-
ported by the earnings of his wife! Let him
draw his maintenance from his father-in«
law }


‘


Ps


Shokra ssid:— . me


24,, Let him who has stolen your apt
eat the flesh of animals not killed


£08


sacrifices! Let him have sexual union at
day-time! Let him be a servant of the
king.

Jamadagni said i—

_ 25. Let him who has stofen your stalks
study the Vedas on fordidden days or
occasions. Letihim feed friends at Shrad-
dhas performed by him! Let him eat at the
Shraddha of a Shudra.


Shivi said :—

- 26. Let him who has stolen your stalks
die without having established a fire (for
daily worship)! Let him be guilty of
obstructing the celebration of sacrifices by
others! Let him fall out with those who
practise penarices !

Yayati said :~

27. Let him who has stolen your stalks

e guilty of having sexual union with his-
wife when she is not in her season and when
he is himself in the observance of a vow
and bears matted locks on his head! -Let
him also disregard the Vedas !

Nalhusha said :—

28. Let him ‘who has stolen your stalks
live in domesticity after having betaken
himself to the vow of mendicancy !. Let him
act in whatever way he pleases, after having
performed the initiatory rites in view of a
sacrifice or some solemn observance! Let
him take pecuniary satisfaction for teach-
ing his disciples.


Avarisha said i-


29. Let him who has stolen your stalks
be cruel and sinful in his conduct towards
women and Kinsmen and kine! Let hin be
guilty also of Brahmanicide !

‘Narada said:

go. Lethim who has stolen your stalks be
one who identifies the body with the soul !
Let him study the scriptures with an un-
worthy preceptor. Let him chaunt the
‘Vedas, violating: at each step ‘the rules of
orthoepy ! Let him ‘disregard all his elders. .


‘Nabhaga said :—

3t. Let him who has stoten your stalks
always speak untruth and quarrel with
those who are pious. Let him bestow his


‘daughter in ‘marriage after accepting a.


“pecuniary satisfaction offered by his son-

‘din-law.

Kavi said :— ;
32. Let him who has stolen your stalks

be guilty of striking a caw with his foot.

Let him pass urine, facing thefsun! Let him


‘renounce the person who seeks shelter at
‘his bands, ‘ :


MAHABHARATA,


Vishwamitra said :—


33. Let him who has stolen your stalke
become a servant who acts deceitfully to-
wards his master! Let him be the priest of
aking! Let him officiate as the sacrificial
priest of one who should not be assisted at
his sacrifices !


Parvata said :—


34. Let him who has stolen your stalks
be the head of a village. Let him make
journeys on asses. Let him leash hounds
for maintenarce.


Bharadwaja said:—~


35. Let him who has stolen your stalks
be xuilty of all the transgressions of him,
who is cruel in conduct and untruthful in
speech.


Ashtaka said :-—


26. Let him who has stolen your stalks
be a king shorn of wisdom, capricious and
sinful in his conduct, and disposed to rule
the Eatth impiously.


Galava said :—


37. Let him who’ has stolett your stalls
be more infamous than a sinful man. Let
him be sinful in his deeds towards his kins-
men and relatives. Let him proclaim the
gilts he makes to others,


Arundhati said :—
38. Let her who has stolen your stalks
speak ill of her mother-in-law. Let her


dislike her husband. Let her eat alone any
good food that comes to her house.’


The Valakhilyas said :—


39 Let him who has stolen your stalks
stand on one foot at the entrance of a vil-
lage. Let him, while knowing all duties, be
guilty of every transgression.


Shunasakha said —


40. Let him who has stolen your stalks
a Brahmana who sleeps happily having
neglected his daily Homa. [Let him, after
becoming a religious mendicent, act itt
any way he likes, without observing any
control.


Surabhi said :—

41. Let her who has stolen your stalks
be milked, with he, (hind) legs bound with
a rope of human hair, and with the help of
a calf not her own, and, while milked,
let her milk be held in a vessel of white
brass. ' :
Bhishma said :—


42. After the Rishis and the royal
sages had taken various oaths, O Kuru


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


king, the thonsand-eyed chief of the celes- |
tials, filled with joy, looked at the angry
Rishi Agastya. .

4g. Addressing the Rishi who was very
‘angry at the disappearance of his lotus
stalks, Indra thus declared what was pass-
ing in his mind. Hear, O king, the
‘words Indra spoke in the midst of those
twice-born and celestial Rishis and royal
sages.


Shakra said :—

44. Let him who has stolen your stalks
Pequire the merit .of ‘him who bestows his
daughter in marriage upon a Brahmana
who has duly observed the vow of Brahma-
‘charyya or who has duly studied the
Samans and the Yajushes. Let him also
have the merit of one who takes the final
bath after completing his study of the
Atharva Veda.


45. Let him who has stolen’ your stalks
acquire the merit of having studied all the
Vedas. Let him be observant of all duties
and righteous in his conduct. Indeed, fet
him go to the region of Brahman.


Agastya said :—

46. You have, U destroyer of Vala,
tattered a benediction instcad of a curse;
Give them to me, for that is the eternal
duty.


indra said :—


47. O holy one, I did’ not remove your
Stalks, moved by cupidity. Indeed, I
removed them from desire of hearing this
assembly recite what the duties are that we
should observe. You should not yield to
‘anger.


« 48. Duties are the foremost of Shrutis.
Duties form the eternal path. I have
listened to this discourse of the Rishis (on
duties) that. is eternal and immutable, and
that is. above all change.


_ 49. Do you then, G foremost of learned

Bratimanas, take back these stalks of yours.

O holy one, you should forgive my trans-
Gi resins © you who are free from every
ault.


Bhishma said :~


50. ‘Thus addressed by the king of the
celestials, the ascetics vig, Agastya, who
had been very angry, took back his stalks.
Gifted with intelligence, the Rishi became
cheerful.


51. After this, those dwellers of the
forest went to various other sacred waters.
indeed, going to those sacred waters they
performed their ablutions everywhere.


52. The man who reads this discourse


27


- 209


Avith rapt attention on every Parva day, will
not beget{an ignorant andgui:ked son. He
will never be shorn of tearning, ;


% No calamity will ever befall him.
He will, besides, be free from every sort
of sorrow. He will never suffer from
decrepitude and decay. Freed from stains
and evil of every sort, and gifted with
merit, he is sure to acquire Heaven.


54. He who studies this Shastra ob-
served by the Rishis, is sure, O king, to
attain to the eternal region of Brahman that
is full of happiness.


CHAPTER XCV.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued,
Yadhishthira said :—
1—3. O chief of Bharata’s race, by


whom was the custom of giving umbrellas
and sandals at Shraddhas introduced ? Why
was it introduced and for what purpose are
those gifts made? They are given not
only at Shraddhas, but also at other re-
ljigious rites. They are given on many
occasions with the view of winning religious
merit. 1 wish to know, in full, O twice-
born one, the true meaning of this practice.


Bhishma said :—

4- Do you, O prince, attentively listen
to the details 1 shall recite about the cus-
tom of giving away umbrellas and shoes
at religious rites, and as to how and by.
whom it was introduced.


5. I shall also tell you in full, O prince,
how it acquired the force of a permanent
observance and how it came to be con-
sidered as a meritorious act.


6. I shall in this connection, recite the
conversation between Jamadagni and the
great Sun, Formerly the illustrious Jama~.
dagni, O powerful king, af Bhrigu’s race,
was engaged in practising with his bow.

y—10. Taking his aim, he shot arrow
after arrow. His wife Renuka used to pick
up the arrows when he shot and repeatedly


-bring them back to that descendant, gifted


with the burning energy of Bhrigu’s race.
Pleased with the whizzing noise of his
arrows and the twang of his .bow, he
amused himself thus by repeatedly shooting
his arrows which Renuka brought back te
him. Qne day, at noontide, O monarch,
in that month when the Sun wai in Jyes-
thamula, the Brahmana, having shot all
his arrows, said to Renuka,--O large-eyed


ato


lady, go and fetch me the arrows 1 have
shot from my bow...


ti—14. O you of beautiful eye-brows !
1 shall again shoot them with my bow [=
The lady proceeded on het errand but was
compelled to sit under the shade of a tree,
on account of her head and feet being
scorched by the heat of the Sun. Yhe black-
eyed and graceful Renuka, having rested
for only a moment, feared the curse of her
husband and, therefore, began to collect
and bring back the arrows. ‘Taking them
with her, the celebrated lady of beautiful
features came back, distressed in mind and
her feet smarting with pain. ‘Trembling
with fear, she approached her husband.


15. The Rishi, stricken with anger, re-
peatedly addressed his fair-facéd wife, say-
ing,—-O Renuka, why have you been so late
in returning ? ‘


Renuka said :—


16. O you, having penances for wealth,
my head and feet were scorched by the
rays of the Sun! Oppressed by the heat,
I took shelter under the shade of a tree!


-17. This has been the cause of the
delay! Informed of the cause, do you, O
ford, cease to be angry with me.


Jamadagni said :—.

18. O Renuka, this very day shall I des-
troy, with the fiery energy of my weapons,
the star of the day with his burning rays,
who has afflicted you thus.


Bhishma continued :—


19. Drawing his celestial bow, and taking
up many arrows, Jamadagni stood, turning
his face towards the Sun and watching him
as he moved on.


20. Then O son of Kunti, seeing him
ready for fight, the Sun approached him in
the guise of a Brahmana, and said to him,--
What has the Sun done to offend you ?


a1. Passing through the {sky, he draws
up the moisture from the Earth, and in the
form of rains he pours it down once more
on her.


22. [t is through this, O  twice-born
one, that the food of human beings springs
up,—food that is so agréeable to them!
The Vedas say that it is food that forms
the vital airs.


23. O Brahmana, hidden in the clouds
and encompassed by his rays, the Sun
drenches the seven insular continents with
showers of rain,


24< O powerful one, the moisture, thus
poured, spreading itself into the leaves and


a


‘MAHABHARATA.


fruits of vegetables and herbs, is changed
into food.


253—26. O son of Bhrigu, the rites
consequent on birth, religions observances,
investiture with the sacred thead, gifts of
kine, marriage, all articles in view of sacri-
fices, the’ rulés for the governance of men,
gifts, all sorts of union, and the acquisition
of riches, originate fram food! You know
this well !


27. All the good and sweet things in
the universe, and all the efforts made by
living creatures, originate from food. [
duly recite what is well known to you!
Indeed, you fully know all that I have
said. m


28. Do you, therefore, O  twice-born
Rishi, appease your anger! What will you
gain by annihilating the Sun ?”


CHAPTER XCVI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. What did that foremost of ascetics,
vig., Jamadagni gifted with great energy,
do when thus besought by the Sun?


Bhishma said :—


+2. O descendant of Kuru, inspite of all
the prayers of the Sun, the sage Jamadagni,
effulgent like fire, continued to cherish his
anger. ae


3—4. Then, O king, the Sun, in the
guise of a‘Brahmana, bowed his head ta
him and addressed him, with clasped kands,
in these sweet words,-O twice-born Rishi,
the Sun is always moving! How shall you
pierce the Lord of day who is continually
moving forward ?


Jamadagni said :—

5. With the eye- of knowledge I know
you to be both moving and motiontess! I
shall surely read you a lesson this day.


6. At midday you appear to stay in the
firmament for a moment. [It is then, O
Sun, that I shall pierce you with my arrows !
‘There is no swerving from this resolution
of mine. ‘


Surya said :—

7. O twice-born Rishi, forsooth, yotr
know me, O best of archers! » But, O
holy one, though } have offended, see f
pray for your protection.


ANUSHASANA PARVA:


Bhishma said :— ‘

8. At this, the worshipful Jam- dagni
sinitingty addressed the Sun, saying,—O
Sun, when you have sought my protection,
you have nothing to fear,


g—1o. He would get over the simplicity
that exists in Brahmanas, the stability that
exists inthe Earth, the mildness existing
in the Moon, the gravity existing in
Varuna, the effulgence existing in Agni,
the brightness of Meru, and the heat of
the Sun, who would kill a suppliant for
Protection,


tt. The man who can kill a suppliant
is capable of violating the bed of his
preceptor, of killing a Brahmana and of
diinking alcohol.


12. Do you, therefore, think of some
temedy for this evil, by which people may
be relieved when heated by your rays.


Bhishma continued :—


13. So saying, that excellent descéndant
of Borizgu remained silent for some. time,
and the Sun immediately gave him ar
umbrella and a pair of sandals.


Surya said :—~

14. Do you, O great Rishi, take this
umbrella with which the head may be pro-
tected and my cays warded off. Phis pair
of sandals is made of teather for the
protection of the feet.


15 From this day the gift of these
articles in all religious rites shall be
established as a custom,


Bhishma continued :-—


16. This custom of giving umbreffa and
shoes was introduced by the Sun. O
descendant of Bhasata, these gifts are re+
garded meritorious in the three worlds.


17. Do you, therefore, give away um-
brellas and shoes to Brahmanas. 1 have
no doubt that you will then acquire great
religious merit by the deed.


18—19. O foremost one of Bharata's
race, he who gives away a white umbrella
with a hundred ribs toa Brahmana, ac-
quires eternal happines after death and
lives in the segion of Indra, respected by
Brahmanas, Apsaras, and Devas. :


a
20. O powerful one, he who gives shoes
to Snataka Brahmanas as also to Brahma-
nas practising the rites of religion whose
feet have become sore with the heat of the
Sun, acquires regions coveted by the very
celestials.


21, Such a man, O Bharata, lives


21t


Happily in the- highest Heaven after his
death. :


23. O foremost one of Bharata’s race, I
have thus recited to you, in full, the merits
of.giving away shoes and umbrellas at reli-
gious ceremotics, :


CHAPTER XCVIE


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
° Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. O foremost one of Bharata’s race, do:
you describe to me all the deities of the
hotusehotd mode and tell me all that a man
should do in order to acquire prosperity tn
this world.


Bhishma said:—

2. O Bharata, I shall, in this connec.
tien, recite to you the old story of Vasudeva
and the goddess Earth.


3. The powerful Vasudeva, O excellent
prince of Bharata’s race, after singing the
praises of the goddess Eirth, accosted her
about this very subject that you have re-
quired about,


Vasudeva. said :—~

4. Having adopted the domestic mode
of life, what acts should I, or one like
me, do and how are such acts to yield
success.


The goddess Earth said :—


5. O Madhava, the Rishis, the celestials,
the departed Manes, and men should be
adored, and sacrifices should be performed
by a householder,


6 Do you also learn this fron me that |
the celestials are always pleased with sacri-
fices, and men are pleased with hospitality.
Therefore, the householder should please
them with such objects as they desire.


9. By such aets, O destroyer of Madhu,
Rishis also are pleased. ‘I'he thouseholder,
abstaining from food, should daily attend
to his sacred fire and to his. sacrificial.
offerings.

S—10. The cefestials, O destroyer of
Madhu, are pleased with such deeds. The
householder should daily offer: oblations
of food and water, or of fruits, roots and
water, for the satisfaction of the departed
Manes, and give boiled food to the Vaishwe-
devas, and oblations of clarified butter to
Agni, Soma, and Dhanwantari,


252


vi—12. He should offer separate and
Gistinet oblations to Prajapati. He should
make sacrificial offerings duly ; to Yama
tm the South, to Varuna in the West, to
Soma in the North, to Prajapati within the
homestead, to Dhanwantari in the
East, and to Indra in the East.


13. He should offer food to nen at the
entrance of his house. These, O Madhava,
are known as the Vali offerings. The Vali
should be offered to the Maruts and the
. deities in the interior of one’s house.


14. To the Vishwedevas it should be
offered in open-air, and to the Rakshasas
and evil spirits the offerings should be
made at night,


15. After making these offerings,. the
householder should make offerings to Brah-
manas, and if no Brahmana be *present,
the first portion. of the food should be
thrown into the fire.


16. When a man wishes to offer Shraddha
to his ancestors, tre should, wher the
Sheaddha ceremony is done, please his
a and then make the Vali offerings
duly.


17. He shonid then make offerings to
the Vaishwedevas. He should next invite
Brahmanas, and then properly entertain
guests arrived at his house, with food.


18. By this act, O prince, are guests
leased, fe who does nat live in the house
ong, or, having come, goes away after a
short time, is called a guest.


rg~20. To his preceptor, to his father,
to his friend and to a guest, a householder
should say, 1 have got thisin my house
to offer you to-day !—And he should offer
it acordingly every day.


21. The householder should do whatever
they would order him to do. ‘This és the
established custom. ‘fhe ltrouseholder, O
Krishna, should take his food the last of aH,
aftec having offered food to aff of them.


22, The householder should adore with
offerings of honey, etc., his ing, bis priest,
his preceptor, and his father-in-law, as also
Snataka Brahmanas even if they were to
live in his house for whole year. z


23. In the morning as well as.in the
evening, food should be offered on the


ground to dogs, the cooks for dogs and |


birds. This is called the Vaishwedeva
offerings.


24. The householder, who performs these
ceremonies with mind shorn of passion,
obtains the blessings of the Rishis in this
world, and after death acquires the heavenly
egions, i


North+ |,


‘MAHABNARATA,


Bhishma said :—

25. Having heard all this from the god'-
dess Earth, the powerful Vasudeva acted
accordingly. Do you also act in the same
way.

26. By performing these duties of a
householder, O king, you shall acquire fame
in this world and Heaven after death |


CHAPTER XCVIIE.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—
Continued,


‘Yudhishthira said :—


rt. OF what kind is the gift of light, O
chief of Bharata’s race? How did this gift
originate? What are the merits of it?
Do you tell me all. this.


Bhishma said :-~


2. Reyarding it, O Bharata, is recited
the old discourse between Manu, that lord
of creatures, and Suvarna.


3. Vhere was formerly an ascetic, O
Bharata, named Suvarna. Fis comp'exiun
was like that of gold and hence ne was
called Suvarna.


4. Gifted with good birth, geod conduct
and good qualities, he had mas‘ered all the
Vedas. Indeed, by the accomplishments.
he possessed, he succeeded. in excelling
many persons of noble birth.


5- One day that learned Brahmana be-
behetd Manu, the lord of all creatures, and
approached him. Meeting each other, they:
made the usual polite enquires.


6. Both of them were im the truth,
Havirg met each other, they sat down or
charming breast of the golden mount Meru,


7. Seated there they began to. talk wit
each ather on various subjects about the
great deities and twice-bora Risiis andk
Daityas of ancient times.


8. hen Suvarna, addressing the Self-
create Manu, said these words -~—Youwr
should answer one question of mine for the
behoof of all creatures,


9. O ford of all creatures, the celestials
are*seen to be adored with presents of
flowers and other good scents. What is
this? How has this praetice come into
operation? What also are the merits of it 7
Do you describe this sybject to me.


Manu said :—
10. Regarding it is recited the old-dis«


ANUSMASANA PARVA.


course between Shukra and
(Daitya) Vali.


t1. Once on a time, Shukea of Bhrigu’s
race approached Vali the son of Virochana
while he was ruting the three worlds.


13. Having adored the descendant of
Bhrigu with the Arghya, the king of the
Asuras, that profuse giver of sacrificial
presents, sat down after his guest had
seated himself.


13. This ‘very subject which you have
introduced regarding the merits of the gift
o! flowers and incense and lamps, came up
on the occasion, Indeed, the king of the
Daityas put this high question te Shukra
that most learned of all ascetics.


Vali said :—

14. O foremost of all persons conversant
with Beahma, what, indeed, is the merit of
giving flowers and incense and lamps?
You should, O foremost of Brahmanas,
describe this to me.


Shukra said :—


15. Penance first sprang into existence.
Afterwards came religion. In the interval
many creepers and herbs sprang up.


16, ‘Their species were inumerable. All
of them have the Mooa for their lord.
Some of these creepers and herbs came to
be considered as Ambrosia and some came
to be considered as Poison. Others that
were neither this nor that formed one class.


17. That is Ambrosia which gives im-
mediate pleasure and joy to the mind,
‘Yhat is Poison which tortures the mind
greatly by its smell. <


18. Know again that Ambrosia is highly
auspicious and that Poison is highly in-
auspicious. All the herbs are Ambrosia.
Poison is born of the energy of fice.


19. Flowers please the mind and confer
prosperity. tience men of pious deeds
bestowed the name Sumanas on them.


the great


zo. That man whoin a state of purity
offers flowers to the celestials finds that the
celestials become pleased with him, and as
the result of such ‘satisfaction confer pros-
perity upon him,


21, O king of the the Daityas, those
celestiats to whom worshippers offer flowers,
O lord, uttering their names the while, be-
come pleased with the offerers on account of
their devotion.


22: The (deciduous) herbs are of various
kinds and possess different qualitie. They
should be classed as fierce, mild, and
powerful,


21g


2. | Lister: to me as f reli you which trees

are useful for purposes of sacrifice and
which are not so. Hear also what gar-
lands are acceptable to Asuras, and
what are beneficial when offered to the
celestials, .


24. I shalf also set:forth in due order
what garlands are liked by the Rakshasas,
what by the Uragas, what by the Yakshas, .
what by human beings, and what by the
Geparted Manes, in proper order.


25. Flowers are of various kinds. . Some
are wild, some are from trees which grow
in the midst of human dwellings; some
belong to trees which never grow unless.
planted on well-cultivated soil; some are
from trees growing on mountains ; some are
from trees which are not prickly ; and some
from trees which are prickly. Fragrance,
beauty of form and taste also make grounds.
of classification.


26. ‘The scent of flowers is of two kinds,
agreeable and disagreeable. ‘hose flowers
which have sweet smeH should be offered
to the celestials. 2


27. The flowers of trees whieh have no
thorns are generally white in color. Such
flowers are always acceptable to the celes-
tials, O lord. . ;


28. A wise man should offer garland
of aquatic flowers, such as the lotus and the
like, to the Gandharvas and Nagas and
Yakshas. ae


29. Such plants and herbs as produce
red flowers, as have keen scent, and as are
prickly, have been laid down in the Athar-
vans as fit for all acts of jncantation foe
injuring enemies. a

30. Such flowers as have keen energy,
as are painful to. the touch, as grow on
trees and plants having thorns, and as are
either bloody-red or black, should be
offered to (evil) spirits and uneasthly
beings. : Pa


ar. Such flowers as please the mind and
heart, as are very agreeable when pressed,
and as are of beautifiil form, have been
said, O lord, to be worthy of being offered
to men.


32. Such flowers as grow on cemeteries
and crematoria, or in places dedicated to
the celestials, should not be brought and


used for marriage and other sites having


growth and prosperity for their object, or
for acts of pleasure in secrecy.


33- Such flowers as grow on mountains
and in vales, and as are beautiful to look at
and sweet-scented, should be offered to the
celestials. Sprinkling them with sandal.


-| paste, such sweet flowers should be duly


aid


offered according to the scriptural ordi-
nances.


34. The celestials become pleased with
the scent of flowers; the Yakshas and
Rakshasas with their sight; the Nagas
with their touch; and human beings with
all three, vta., scent, sight, and touch.


' 35. Flowers, when offered to the celes-
tials please them immediately. They are
capable of accomplishing every object by
merely wishing its accomplishment. As
such, when pleased with devotees offering
-them flowers, they cause all the objects
cherished by their worshippers to be imme-
diately achieved. ’


36. Pleased, they gratify their worship-
pers. Honored they make their worship-
pers enjoy all honors. Disregarded and
insulted, they make those vilest of men to
be ruined atid consumed. :


37. I shall, after this, speak to you of
.the merits of the ordinances about the gift
of incense. Know, O king of Asuras, that
sincenges are of various sorts. Some of
them are auspicious and some inaus-
Picious. :
38. Some incenses consists of exudations.
‘Some are made of fragrant wood set on fire.
And some are artificial, being made by the
hand, of various articles mixed together.
. Their scent is of two sorts, vzz., agreeable
‘and disagreeable. Listen to meas I des-
cribe the subject fully. .


39. All exudations except_that of the
Boswellia serrata are agreeable to the celes-
tials. lt is, however, certain that the best of
all exudations is that of the Balsamoden-
dron Mukul.


40. Of all Dhupas of the Sari class, the
Aquilaria Agallocha is the best. [tis very
acceptable ta the Yakshas, the Rakshasas,
and Nagas. The exudation of the Bos-
wellia serratta, and others of the same class,
are much acceptable to the Daitayas.


41. Dhupas made of the exudation of the
Shorea robusta and the Pinus deodara,
mixed with various spirits of strong scent,
are, O king, acceptable to human beings.


42. Such Dhupas are said to imme-
diately please the celestials, the Danavas,
and spirits. Besides these, there are many
other kinds of Dhupas used by men for
purposes of pleasure or enjoyment.


43. The offer of flowers and the gift of
such Dhupas as yield gratification are equal
in merits. — .


44. I shall now speak of the merits of
- the gift of lights, and who may give them
at what time and in what manner, and


MAHABHARATA.


rwhat should be the kind of fights that
should be offered,


4§. Light is said to be energy and fame
and goes upwards. Hence the gift of light,
whichis energy, inereases the energy of
men.


46. There is a hell named Andhatamas.
The period also of the Sun'‘s southward
sowrse is considered-as dark. For avoiding
that hell and the darkness of this period,
one should give lights during that period
when the Sun isin northern solistice. Suctr
an act is highly spoken of by the good,


47. Since, again, light has an upward
course and is considered as a remedy for
darkness, therefore, one should give lights,
This is the conclusion of the scriptures.


48. It is by’ giving lights that the
celestials have become gifted with beauty,
energy, and resplendence. By abstention
from such a deed, the Rakshasas have be-
come gifted with the opposite attributes.
Hence, one should always give lights.


49. By giving lights a man becomes
gifted with keen vision and resplendencee
One who gives lights should not be looked
with: jealousy by others. Lights, again,
should not be stolen, nor put out when
given by others.


50. One who steals a light becomes
blind. Such a man has to grope througtr
darkness and becomes shorn of resplend-
ence. One who gives lights shines in
beauty in the celestial regions like a row
of lights.


5t. Among lights, the best are those
in which clarified butter is burnt. Next
in order are those in which the juice of
deciduous herbs is burnt. One seeking
prosperity and growth should never bur
fat or matrow or the juice that comes from
the bones of creatures.


52. The man who desires his own
aggrandisement and prosperity should al«
ways give lights at descents from mountains,
in roads through forests and inaccessible
regions, under sacred trees standmg in the
midst of human dwellings, and in cross-
ings of streets.


53. The man who gives lights always
iMumines his race, acquires purity of soul
and effulgence of form. Indeed, such a
man, after death, lives in the company of
the luminous bodies in the sky.


54. I shall now describe to you the
merits, with the fruits they bring about, of
Vali offerings made to the celestials, the
. Yakshas, the Uragas, human beings, spirits
and Rakshasas.


55. Those unscrupulous and wicked men


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


who eat without first serving Brahmanas
and celestials and guests and children,
should be known as Rakshasas.


56. Hence, one should first offer the food
one has got ready to the celestials after
having adored them duly with controlled
senses and rapt attention. One should
offer the Vali to the celestials, bending his
head in respect.


57. Thecelestials are always supported
by food that householders offer. ‘They bless
such houses in which offerings are made
tothem. The Yakshasas and Rakshasas
and Pannayas, as also guests and all house-
less persons, are supported by the food
offered by householders.


58. Indeed, the celestials and the de-
parted, Manes derive their sustenance from
such offerings. Pleased with such offerings
they please the offerer in return with longe-
vity and fame and riches.


59. Clean food, of sweet scent and look,
mixed with miik and curds, should, along
with flowers, be offered to the celestials.


60. The Valis that should be offered to
Yakshas and Rakshasas should be rich
with blood and meat, with wines and spirits
accompanying, and adorned with fried
paddy,

6t. Valis mixed with lotuses and Utpalas
- are very acceptable to the Nagas. Sesame
seeds, boiled in raw sugar, should be offered
to the spirits and other unearthly Beings.


62, He who never takes any food with-
out first giving a part of it to the Brah-
manas and celestials and guests, becomes
entitled to first portions of food. Sucha
man becomes gifted with strength and
energy. Hence one should never take any
food without first offering a portion thereof
to the celestial after adoring them with
tespect,


63. One’s house always shines in beauty
on account of the household deities that
live in it. Hence, he who desires his own
advancement and prosperity should adore
the household gods by offering them the
first portion of every food.


64. Thus did the learned’ Kavi of
Bhrigu’s race discourse to Vali the chief
of the Asuras. ‘That discourse was next
recited by Manu to the Rishi Suvarna, Su-
varna, in his turn, recited it to Narada. .

65. The celestial Rishi Narada recited
to me the merits of the several acts men-
tioned. Informed of those merits, do you,
O son, perform the several acts mentioned.


215


CHAPTER XCIX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—:
Continued,


Yudhishthira said':— 5


1, I (have, O chief of the Bharatas,
heard what the merits which presenters o
flowers and Jincense and lights acquire. £
have heard you speak also of the merits
of,a due observance of the ordinances in
respect of the presentation of the Vali. You
should, O grandfather, discourse to me once
more on this subject.


2. Indeed, tell me, O Sire, once more of
the merits of presenting incense and lights,
Why -are Valis offered om the ground by
‘householders,


Bhishma said: —


3. Regarding it is recited the old dis
course between Nahusha and Agyastya and
Bhrigu. .


4. The royal sage Nahusha, O monarch,
having penances for wealth, acquired the
sovereignty of the celestial region by his
own good deeds,


5. With controlled senses, O king, he
lived in the celestial region, engaged in
doing diverse acts of both human and celes-
tial nature.


6. From that great king flowed various
kinds of buman acts and varivus kinds of
celestial deeds, also, O king.


7—8. The-various rites with respect to
the sacrificial fire, the collection of sacred
fuel and of Kusha grass, as also of flowers,
and the presentation of Vali consisting of
food adorned with fried paddy, and the
offer of incense and of light,—all thee, O
monarch, occurred daily in the house of
that great king while he lived in the celes«
tial region, Indeed, though living in the


| celestial region. he celebrated the sacrifice


of recitation and the sacrifice of meditation.


g. And, O chastiser of foes, Nahusha,
although he had become the king of the
deities, yet adored all the deities, as he used
to do formerly, with due rites and cere+
monies. :


"10. Sometime after, Nahusha realized
his position as the king of alt the deities.
This filled him with pride. From that time
all his deeds were suspended. :


11. Filled with pride on account of the
boon he had received from all the celestials,
Nahusha caused the very Rishis to ‘bear
him on their shoulders. On account, how.
ever, of his abstention from all religious.
acts, his energy began to wane,


240


. 12, The time was very tong for which \
Nahusha, filled with arrogance, continued
to employ the foremast of Rishis, having
penances for wealth, as the bearers of his
_ vehicles.


13. He make the Rishis perform by
tarns this humiliating work. |The day came
when it was Agastya’s turn to carry the
vehicle, O Bharata.


‘Wg-mts. Af that time, Bhrigu, that fore-
most of all persons conversant with Brahma
went to Agastya while the latter was
‘seated in his hermitage, and addressing him
said -O great ascetic; why should we
patiently suffer such. indignities inflicted on
us by this wicked Nahusha whe has become
the king of the deities.


Agastya said :—

_16. tow van JY succeed in cursing
Nahusha, O great Rishi? You know how
the Boon-giving (Brahman) himseif has
given Nahusha the best of boons.


17. Coming to the celestial region, the
boon that Nahusha prayed for, was that,
whoever would come within the cange of his
vision would, deprived of all energy, come
within bis controt.


18 The Self-born Brahman granted
him this boon, and it is therefore that
niether yourself nor I have been able
to consume him. Forsooth, it is for this
Yeason that none one efse amongst the
foremost of Rishis has been able to consume
vor throw him down from his elevated posi-
tion. :


19. Formarly, O lord, nectar was given
by Brahman to Nahusha for drinking.
Therefore we can do nothing to him.


20. The great god, it appears, gave that
boon to Nahusha for plunging all creatures
into grief, hat wretched man behaves
most unrighteously towards the Brah-
manas.


- 2%. O foremost of aff speakers, tell us:
what should be done under the circumstan-


ces. Forsooth, t shall do what you will
advise.
Bhrigu said :— ;

22. Itis at the command of the Grand.


father that I have come to you with the
view of counteracting the power of Nahu-
sha who is gifted with great energy but who
has been stupefied by fate.


23. That exceedingly wicked being who
has become the king of the celestials, will
to-day yoke you to his car. With the help
of my power [ shall to-day hur! him down
from his position as Indra on account of
his having transcended all restraints.


MAHABHARATA,


24. 1 shall fo-day, in your Very sight,
re-establish the true Londra in his position, —=
him, wis., who has celebrated a htindred
herse sacrifices,—-having hurted the wicked
and sinful Nahusha from that seat.


25. That impious king of the celestials
will to-day insult you by a kick, om account
of his ‘understanding being afflicted by fate
and for bringing about his own downfall.


26. Enraged at such an insult I shall
to-day curse that sinful wretch, that enemy
of the Beahmanas, who has transcended all
restraints, saying,—Be you metamorphosed
into a snake. *


27. Before your eyes, O great ascetic, [
shall to-day hurl down .on the Earth the
wicked Nahusha who shall be deprived of
all power on account of the cries of Fie that
will be uttered from all sides.


28. Indeed, [ shall bur! down Nahusha
to-day, that sinful man, who has, besides,
been stupefied by lordship and power. I
shall do this, if you like it, O ascetic.


39, Thus addressed by Bhrigu, Mitra»
varuna’s son Agastya of unfading power
and glory, became highly pleased and freed
from every anxiety.


—


CHAPTER C¢,
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).=


Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


t. How was Nahusha plunged into dis-
tress? How was he hurled down on the
Earth? How, indeed,.was he deprived of
the sovereignty of the celestials? You
should recite euerything to me.


Bhishma said :—

2. Thus §did those two Rishis, o%e.,
Bhrigu and Agastya, talk with each other.
{ have already told you how Nahusha,
when he first become the king of the celes-
tials, acted ina proper way. Indeed, that
great royal sage-performed all human and
celestial deeds.


3-—-4. Nahusha who had become the
king of the celestials, made gifts of light,
and properly deserved all other rites of a
similar nature,—the due presentation of
Valis, and all rites as are performed on
especially sacred days. Pious acts are
always -done by wise men, in both the
world of men and that of the celestials.
Indeed, © foremost of kings, if such acts
are observed, householdersjalways succeed in
acquiring prosperity and aggrandisement,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


&. Even such is the effect of the gift of
lamps and of incense, as also of bows and
prostrations, to the celestials,


6. When food is cooked, the first por-
tion thereof should be offered to a Brah-
mana. The particular offerings called Vali
should also be presented to the Mousehold
gods. The deities become pleased with
such gifts.


9. It is also well known that the mea-
sure of gratification which the celestials
derive from such offerings is a hundred
times as great as that which “the house-
holder himself gets from making them.


8. Pious and wise persons make offering
of incense and lights, accompanying them
with bows and prostrations. Such acts
always yield advancement and prosperity
to those that do them,


g. Those rites which the learned per-
form in course of their ablutions, and with
the help of waters, accompanied with bows
to the gods, always contribute to the satis-
faction of the celestials.


to. When adored with proper rites, the
highly-blessed “departed Manes, Rishis
having asceticism for wealth, and the house-
hold deities, all become pleased.


tr, Filled with such ideas, Nahusha,
that great king, when he obtained the
sovereignty of the celestials, observed all
these rites and duties fraught with great
glory.

12. Sometime after, the good fortune of
Nahusha decreased, and as the outcome of
it, he neglected all these observances and
began to act in defiance of all control in
the manner I have already described.


13. The king of the celestials, on ac-
count of his abstention from observing the
ordinances about the offers of incense and
dight, began to decline in power.


t4. His sacrificial rites and’ presents
were obstructed by Rakshasas. It was at
this time that Nahusha yoked that foremost
of Rishis, vs., Agastya, to his car.


15. Possessed of great strength Nahusha
‘Smiling alt the while, set that great Rishi
speedily to the task, commanding him to
bear the vehicle from the banks of the
Saraswati. . At this time, Bhrigu, possessed
of great energy, addressed the son of

. Mitravaruna, saying :—- “Pe


_ 16-17, Do you shut your eyes till I
enter into the matted locks on your head.—
Having said this, Bhrigu of unfading glory
and great energy entered into the matted
locks of Agastya who stood still like a
wooden: post, for hurling king Nahusha
from the throne of Heaven. - Soon alter


28


217


Nahusha Saw Agastya approach him for
bearing his car.


18. Seeing the king of the celestials,
Agastya addressed him, saying,—Do -you
yoke me to your vehicle forthwith! ‘To
what region shall I bear you.


19. O lord of the celestials, I shall bear
you to the spot which you may be pleased to
direct !—Thus addressed by him, Nahusha
caused the ascetic to be yoked to his car.


20. Bhrigu, who was living within the
matted locks of Agastya, became highly
pleased at this act of Nahusha. He took
care not to look at Nahusha. age


21. Fully acquainted with the powec
which the illustrious Nahusha had acquired
on account of the boon which Brahman had
granted him, Bhrigu acted thus. Agastya
also though treated by 'Nahusha in this
way, did not yield to anger. .


22—28. Then, O Bharata, king Nabusha
urged Agastya on with his: goad. The
pious Rishi did not still yield to anger.
lhe lord of the celestials, himself enraged,
then struck Agastya on the head with his
left foot. , When the Rishi was thus struck
on the head, Bhrigu, who was living within
Agastya’s matted locks,became incensed and
cursed the sinful Nahusha, saying,—Since
you have struck with your foot on the head
of this great Rishi, do you, therefore, fall
down on the Earth, changed into a snake,
O wretch of wicked understanding !—Thus,
imprecated by Bhrigu who had not been
seen, Nahusha, forthwith became transform-
ed into a snake and dropped down on the
Earth, O chief of Bharata’s race !—If, O
monarch, Nahusha had seen Bhrigu, the
latter, would not then have succeeded, by
his power, in hurling the former down on the
Bart, On account of the various gifts that
Nahusha had made, as also his penances
and religious observances, though hurled
down on the Earth, O king, he succeeded
in keeping his memory, He then began to
propitiate Bhrigu with a view to get rid
of the curse. :

29. Agastya also, filled with mercy joined
Nahusha in pacifying Bhrigu for the termi-
nation of the curse. At last Bhrigu felt
metcy for Nahusha and arranged for the
working out of the curse.


Bhrigu said'> ee
30. There wiil.appear a king (on Earth)
of the name of Yddhishthira, the foremost
of his race. He ‘will rescue you from thia
curse Having? séfd this, the Rishi dis-
appeared from tee presence of Nahusha.


31. Agastya also, of great energy,
having thus performed the business of the


-


218


acue Indra, that arbitrator of a hundred
Sacrifices, returned to his hermitage, adored
of all members of the regenerate order,


.. 32. You have, O king, rescued Nahusha
from Bhrigu’s curse. Rescued by you, he
‘ascended to the region of Brahman before
your eyes. |

33. As regards Bhrigu, having hurled
WNahusha on the Earth, be went to the re-
gion of Brahman and informed the Grand-
father of it.


34. The Grandfather having called
Indra back, addressed the celestials, say-
hing,—Ye celestials, through the boon I had
grauted him, Nahusha had obtained the
sovereignty of Heaven.

35. Deprived, however, of that sover-
eignty by the: enraged Agastya, he has
been hurled on the Earth, O celestials,
you will not succeed in living without a
king. eee
36-38. Do you, therefore, once more
install Indra as the king of Heaven.—The
telestials filled with joy, O-son of Pritha, ree
plied to the Grandsire, who said so to them,
Saying,«So be it: Brahman then, O best
wi kings, installed Indra in the sovereignty
wf Heaven. Made once more the king of
the celestials,. Vasava began to shine in
beauty and resplendence. This is what
took place formerly through the transgres-
sions of Nabusha,


39. On account, however, of the merits
he had acquired through deeds of the kind
I have mentioned, Nabusha succeeded in
once more regaining his lost position.
Hence, when evening comes, huuscholders
should give lights. ;

40. ‘The giver of lights is sure to win
celestial vision after death. Givers of light
become as resplendent as the full moon,


4t. The giver of lights becomes gifted
with beauty of form and strength for years
corresponding with the number of twinkles
ie which the tights given by him burn or
AZO


‘CHAPTER €L


(ANUHASANIKA PARVA
_ Continued.
Yudhishthira said :—
1. Where do those foolish, wretched,
and. sinful men go, O king, who steat or


misappropriate such articles as belong to
Brahmanas ?


ew


MAHABHARATA,


t Bhishma said :—


2. I shall, about it, O Bharata, recite té
you the conversation between a Chandala
and a low Kshatriya,


This Kshatriya said :—

3. You seem, O Chandata, to be old in
years, but your conduct appears to be hike
that of a boy! Your body is besmeared
with the dust raised by doys and asses, but
without minding that dust you are anxious
abont the litle drops of mills that have fali-
en upon your persons.


4. It is plain that such acts as are cen-
sured by the pious are ordained for the
Chandala. Why, indeed, do you seek to
wash off the spots of milk from your
body.


The Chandala said :~


5—6. Formeity, O king, certain kme
belonging to a Brahmana were stolen.
While they were being carried away, some
milk from their udders dropped upon a
number of Soma plants that grew by the
road-stde. Those Brahmanas who drank
the juice of the plants thus bedewed with
‘milk, as also the king who celebrated the
sacrifice in which that Soma was drunk, had
to sink in hell. Indeed, for having thus
appropriated something belonging to a
Brabmana, the king with al the Brah~
anes who had helped him had to go to

ell,


7. All those men also, Brahmanas and
Kshatriyas, who drank milk or clarified
butter or curds, in the palace of the king
who had stolen the Brahmana’s kine, had
to fall into hell,


8. The stolen kine also, shaking their
bodies, killed with their milk the sons and
grandsons of those who had stolen them, as
also the king and the queen although the
latter treated the animals, with great care
and attention,


9. As for myself, O king, IT used to
live the life of a celibate in that place
where these kine were placed after they had
been stolen away. ‘The food | had got by
begging became sprinkled over with the-
milk of those kine. .


10. Having taken that food, O Ksha-
triya, I have, in this life, become a Chan- -
dala. The king who had stolen the kite
belonging to a Brahmana came by a
wretched end,


tr. Hence, one should never steal or
appropriate anything belonging to a Brah-
mana. Mark, te what state I am reduced
on account of my having eaten food that


oe eee ae ne ee


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


had been sprinkled over with milk belong~


tng to a Brahmana.


12. {tis for this reason that Soma plants
should never be destroyed by wise men.
They who self the Soma plant are held in
fow esteem by the wise.


13. Indeed, O son, they who purchase
Soma and they who selt it, both sink in
the hell called Raurava after death. ¢

14.
ledge of the Vedas, duly sells Soma, be-
comes in his next life a usuec and speedily
meets with destruction.


13—16. For three-tundred times he has
to sink into hell and become changed into
an animal which subsists upon human
excreta. Serving a low person, pride, and
rape vpon a friend’s wife, if weighed
against one another in a balance, would
show that pride, which is above all restraints,
is the heaviest. Mark this dog, so sinful
and disagreeably pale and jean.


17-23. It is through pride that living
Creatures come by such a miserable end.
As for myself, [ was born in a large
fsmily in a former birth of mine, O
lord, and { was a perfect master of all
beanches of knowledge and all the sciences.
I knew the immensity of all these faults,
but moved by pride, 1 became blinded and
ate the meat attached to tke vertebral
columns of animats. On account of such
conduct and such food, [ have come by
this state. Mark, the reverses engendered
by Time! Like a person whose cloth
has caught fire at one end, or who is
pursued by bees, see, 1 am running, filled
with fear, and smeared with dust! The
house-holders are rescued from all sins by
a study of the wise. O Kshatriya, a sinful
Brahmana becemes rescued from ail his
sins by a study of the Vedas, if he becomes
a forest-recluse and abstains from attach-
ment of every kind. O chief of Kshatriyas,
1 am, in this life, born in a sinful caste.


24. {% cannot see clearly how I may
succeed in purifying myself from all sins.
On account of seme meritorious deed of a
former life, 1 have not lost the memory of
tay previous births.


25. O king, I throw myself on your
mercy! L ask you. Do you remove my
doubt. By what auspicious course of


tonduct should 1 wish to acquire my fibe-~
tation? O foremost of men, by what means


shall I succeed in getting rid of my
Chandalahood,

The Kshatriya said:—
.26. Know, O Chandala, the means b


which you may be able to acquire libera-


That man who, possessing a know-


219


tion. By renouncing your life for the sake
of a Brahmana, you may come by a
desirable end.


27. By throwing your body on the fire
of battle as a tibation to the beasts and
birds of prey for the sake of a Brahmana,
indeed, by renouncing your life thus, you
may achieve liberation. By no other
means will you succeed in acquing it.


Bhishma said :—


* 28. Thus accosted, that Chandala, O
scorcher of enemies, poured his life-breaths
as a libation on the fire of battle for the
sake of protecting a Brahmana’s riches
and as the result of that act attained toa
very desirable end,


29. Hence, O son, you should always
protect the property of the Brahmanas, if,
QO chief of Bharata’s race, you wish, O you
of mighty arms, an end consisting of eternal
happiness.


CHAPTER Cif,


(ANUSHASANA PARVA)—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. O grandfather,’ it has been said
that all righteous men attain to the same
region after death, It is true, O Bharata,
that there is difference of position among
them ? :


Bhishma said :—


2. By different acts,O son of Pritha,
men acquire different regions. ‘They who
are righteous in conduct acquire blissful
regions, while they who are sinfyl acquire
miserable cegions.


3. Regarding it is cited the old discourse,
OG son, between the ascetic Gautama and
Vasava


4 A certain Brahmana named Gau-
tama, mild and self-centrolled and with alt.
his senses under complete control, saw an
infant elephant that had fost his mother
and that was highly chee:less on that
account,


5. Full of mercy and steady in the ob-
servance of his yows, the ascetic nursed
that infant animal, After along time the
little beast grew up into a large and power-
ful elephant, :


6. One day, Indra, in the guise of king
Dhritarashtra, seized that powerful elephant


229 °


which was as huge as a hill and from whose
rent temples the juice was trickling down. ©


7--8. Seeing the elephant dragged
away, the great. ascetic Gautama of rigid
vows said to king Dhritarashtra,—O un-
grateful Dhritarashtra, do not rob me of
this elephant. It is considered by me asa
* son and [ have reared it with much pain.
It is said that between the pious, friendship
is formed by metely the exchange of seven
words. You should see, O king, that the
.sin ef injuring a friend does not affect you.


Gautama said :—


Q—10. You should not, O king, take
.away by force this elephant which brings me
my fuel and water, which protects my her-
mitage when] am away, which is exceed-
ingly decile and obedient to his instructor,
which carefully does what his preceptor
commands, which is mild and well-broken,
and which is grateful and very dear to me.
Indeed, you should not take it away without
caring for my protestations and cries.


Dhritarashtra said :—


tr. I shall give yoy a thousand kine, a
hundred maid-gervants, and five hundred
pieces of -gold.: I shall also, O great Rishi,

ive you various other kinds of wealth.
hat use can Brahmanas have with ele-
phants ?


Gautama said :—


12. Keep, O kihg, your kine and maid-
servants and coins ‘of gold and various gems
and various other kinds of riches, What, O
king, have Brahmanas to do with riches.


Dhritarashtra said :—-


13. Brahmanas have no use for ele-
phants, Indeed, O learned Brahmana,
elephants are intended for: Kshatriyas. In
taking away an animal, vis., this foremost
of elephants, for my use, } cannot be consi-
dered as committing any sin. Do you
cease obstructing me thus, O Gautama.


Gautama said :—

14. Q illustrious king, going éven' to
that region of Yama where the pious live
happily and the sinful in grief, 1 shall take
from you this my elephant.


Dhritarashtra said :— ;

1§. They who are destitute of religious
acts, they who have no religious faith and
are atheists, they who are sinful and are
always engaged in pleasing their appetites
only they have to go to the region of Yama
and suffer the misery he inflicts. Dhrita-
rashtra shall go to a higher region and not
there. ;


.


MAHABHARATA,


Gautama said :—

16. Men are restrained in the region of
Yama. No falsehood can be told there.
Only truth prevails in that place. There
the weak persecute the strong. Going
there I shall compell you to yield up this


elephant to me.


Dhritarashtra said :—


17, Only those persons who, intoxicated
with ptide, treat their eldest sister and
father and mother as enemies, have to go, O
great ascetic, to such a region. I shall go to
a higher region. Indeed, Dhritarashtra
shall not have lo go there,


Gautama said :—


13. Those highly blessed ones go to the
region called Mandakini, of king Vaishra-
vana for enjoying joy and comfort. There
live Gandharvas and Yakshas and Apsaras.
Going even there, O king, I shall compell
you to yield up this elephant to me.


Dhritarashtra said :-—


1g. Those persons who consider hospita-
lity to guests as a vow, who observe good
vows, who give shelter to Brahmanas, and
who eat what remains after distribution
among his dependants, adorn the region
called Mandakini of Kuvera. [ shall not
go there, fora higher region is reserved
for me.


Gautama said:—- .


20. If you goto those charming woods,
decked with flowers, which stand on the
summit of Meru, which eclio with the melo-
dious notes of Kinnaris, and which are
graced with beautiful Jamvus of wide-
spreading branches, I shall proceed even
there and campell you to yield up this ele-
phant to me.


Dhritarashtra said :—


21—22. ‘Those Brahmanas who have mild
dispositions, who are devoted to truth, who
are endued with scriptural knowledye, who
are compassionate -to all creatures, who
study, the Puranas with all the histories, who
pour libations on the sacred fire and make
gifts of honey to the Brahmianas, go to such
regions, O great Rishi! I shall go toa
higher region. Indeed, Dhritarashtra shall
not go there. If you are acquainted with
any other well-known region of happiness,
speak to me, for I shall go even there,


Gautama said :—

23. If you go to the woods owned by
Narada and held dear by himj which are
adorned with flowers and which echo with
the melgdious songs of the prince of


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


Kinnaras, and which are the eternal habi-
tation of Gandharvas and Apsaras, I shall
follow you there and compell you to yield
up this elephant to me.


Dhritarashtra said :—


24. They who never beg, they who culti-
vate music and dancing, and always move
about happily, proceed to such regions, O
great Rishi, I shall goto a region which is
higher.
have to go there. : 2


Gautama said :—


25—26. If you go to that region where
the Uttara-Kurus blaze in beauty and pass
their days happily, O king, in the company
of the very celestials, where those beings
who originate from fire, those who originate
from water, and those who originate from
mountains, live happily, and where Shakra
rains down the fruition of every desire,
and where women live in perfect freedom,
uncontrolled by rules of any kind regulating
their conduct or motions, and where there is
no feeling of jealousy among both the sexes,
—if you go there, even there shall I go
and compell you to yield up this elephant
to me.


Dhritarashtra said :—


27—28. Those men who are freed from
desire for all articles of enjoyment, who
abstain from meat, who never take up the
rod of punishment, and never inflict the least
harm on mobile and immobile creatures, who
have formed themselves the soul of alli crea-
tures, who never accost others by pronoun-
cing blessings upon them, who are enfirely
freed from the idea of mineness, who are
shora of attachments for every thing, who
view profit and loss as also praise and
blame in equal light, only those men, O
great Rishi, go to such regions. 1} shall go
to a higher region. Indeed, Dhritarashtra
shall not go there.


Gautama said :—


29. Next to these shine in beauty those
eternal regions, full of excellent perfumes
which are free from passions of every kind
and which are destitute.of sorrow. These
form the abode of the great king Soma. If
you go there, even there shall I proceed
and compell you to yield up this elephant
to me,


Dhritarashtra said :—


go—3!. Those men who always make
ats without receiving any gift, who never
accept any service from others, who possess
nothing which they cannot give to a worthy
person, who are hospitable to all creatures)


Indeed, Dhritarashtra shall not’


221


who are inclined to show. favour to every
one, who are of forgiving dispositions, who
never speak ill of others, who protect all
Creatures by covering them with mercy,’
and who are always righteous in their cons.
duct, only those men, O great Rishi, go*
to such regions, I shall go to a higher
region. Indeed, Dhritarashtra ‘shall not
go there. re


Gautama said :—


32. Nextto these shine in beauty other.
regions thatare eternal free from passion
and Darkness and sorrow, and which lie at
the foot of the great Sun-God. If you go:
there, even there shall I go and compell you
to yield up this elephant to me.


Dhritarashtra said :—


33—34. Those men who attentively:
study the Vedas, who are given to the ser-
vice of their preceptors,. who observe pene:
ances and excellent vows, who are firm in
truth, who never utter words of disobedience
or en.nity to their preceptors, who are always
alert, and ever ready in the service of elders
and preceptors,—they go,, O great Rishi,
to such regions, they who are pure who are
gifted with cleansed souls, who are of cone
trolied speech, who are firm in truth and
who are well versed in the , Vedas. 1 shall
proceed to a higher region. Indeed, Dhri+
tarashtra shall not go there.


Gautama said :—


35. Next to those are the’ eternal regions
which shine in beauty, which, are full of
excellent perfumes, which are free from
passion, and which are destitute of every
sorrow. They form the abode of the great
king Varuna. If you proceed there, even
there shall I go and compell you to yield up:
this elephant to me.


Dhritarashtra said :—


36—37. Those men who adore the celes+
tials by observing the vow called Chature
masya, who perform a hundred and ten
sacrifices, who pour libations every day on
their sacred fire with devotion and faith for .


‘three years according to the ordinances


declared in the Vedas, who perform without
hesitation of all duties, who walk steadily:
along the way trod by the pious, who
steadily sustain the course of conduct fol-
lowed by the righteous-souled,—only they
goto such regions, I shall go to a higher
region. Indeed, Dhritarashtra shall not go
there.


Gautama said :— 3 :
38. Above them are the regions of Indra,

free from passion and sorrow, which are

difficult of access and coveted by all men,


222


Going even to the abode of Indra himself
of great energy, [ shall, O king, compel you
to yield up this elephant to me.


Dhritatashtra said :—


39. He who lives for a hundred years,
who is gifted with heroism, whe studies the
Vedas and who celebrates sacrifices with
devotion, indeed, such men proceed to the
tegion of Shakra. I shall go to a higher
region, Indeed, Dhritarashtra shall not go
there. 7


Gautama said :—

40. Above the firmament are the regions
of the Prajapatis, of superior happiness,
abounding in every happiness, and shorn of.
sorrow. Belonging to those powerful ones
from whom the creation has originated, they
are coveted by all persons. If you go there,
even their shall 1 go and compell you to:
yield up this elephant to me.


Dhritarashtra said :— .


4t. Those kings who have bathed upon
the termination of the Rajasuya sacrifice,
who are gifted with rigtteous souls, who
have protected theic subjects properly, ‘and
who have washed their limbs with purified
water upon the termination of the Hurse-
sacrifice, go te such regions. Indeed
Dheitarashtra shall not go thece.
|
i


Gautama said :—


42. Next to those, shine in beauty those
eternal regions, full of delicious perfumes,
freed from passion, and transcending all
sorrow, ‘Those are the regions of kine, very
hard to get in, where oppression can never
be. If you go there, [ shall go even there
and compell you to yield up this elephant
to me. ;


Dhritarashtra said :— ©


43—44. He who, having a thousand
Kine, gives away a hundred kine every year,
or having a hundred kine gives away ten
every yeac to the best of his power, or
possessing only ten or even five kine gives
away therefrom one cow, and they who give
a mature. old age practising the vow of
celibacy all their days, who obey the in-
junctions of the Vedas, and who, gifted with
energy of mind, go to sacred waters and
shrines, live happily in the region of kine.


45-48. ‘They who go to Prabhasa and
Manasa, the lakes of Pushkara, the large
lake called Mahatsara the sacred forest of
Naimisha, Vahuda, Karatoya, Ganga,
Gayashiras, Vipasha, Sthulavaluka, Krishna,
the five rivers (of the Punjab), the extensive |
Jake called Mahahrada, Gomati, Kaushiki, |
Champa, Saraswati, Drishadwati, and Ya-


| drawn by excellent. horses,


MAHABHARATA.


muna,—indeed those illustrious Brahmanag,
firm in the observance of vows, who go to
these sacred waters,—go to the regions of
which you speak. Gifted with celestial
bodies and adorned with celestial garlands,
those blessed individuals, always emitting
the sweetest perfumes, goto the regions of
joy. Indeed, Dhritarashtra shall not go
there,


Gautama said :—


49-51. Next to these are regions where
there is no fear of the least cold or heat, no
hunger, no thirst, no pain, no sorcow, no joy,
no one who is agreeable or disagreeable, no
friend, and no enemy, no decrepitude and no
death, and where there is neither virtue nor
sin. Going, even to that region which is
freed from passion, which is full of happi-
ness, and where there is- wisdom and the
quality of Sattwa,—indeed, going to even
that sacred abode of the self-create Brah-
man,—I shall compel you to yield up this
elephant to me.


Dhritarashtra said :—


52—53, -Ihey who are shorn of all ate
tachments, who-are gifted with purified
souls, who steadily observe the foremost
vows, who are given to Yoga which is the
outcome of the pacification of the mind, and
who have acquired the happiness of Heaven
—those persons possessed of the quality of
Sattwa—come to the sacred region of Brah-
man. QO great ascetic, you shall not be
able to discover Dhritarashtra there.


Gautama said:— _

54. There where the foremost of Ra-
thantacas is sung, where altars are covered
with the sacred Kusha blades, for the cele-
bration of Pundarika sacrifices, there where
Soma-drinking Brahmanas sojourn on cars
going even
there [| shall compel you to yield up this
elephant.


55. 1. think you are the destroyer of
Vritra, wés., the pod who has celebrated a
hundred sacrifices, engaged in passing”
through all the regions of the universe,
hope I have not, through mental weakness,
committed ‘any fault by the words I have
addressed you.


The God of a hundred sacrifices
said :—

59. Yes, I ‘am Maghavat. I came on
éacth for seizing this elephant. I bow to
you. Do you command me. I shall im-
mediately accomplish all that you may be
pleased to say.


Gautama said :—
56.- Do you give me, O king,


‘of the


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


telestials, this white elephant that is so
young, for it is only ten years of age. I
have raised it as a child of my own, Living
in this forest, it has grown under my eye
and has beet to me a dear companion. Do
you set free this my child that you have
seized and wish to take away.


The god of a hundred sacrifices
said -—

88. This elephant that has been a son,
to you, O foremost of Brahmanas, comes to
you looking wistfully at you. See, it smells
your feet with its nostrils. My salutations
toyou. Do you pray for my well-being.


Gautama said :—

59. Oking, of the celestials, I do always
think of your good, I always offer you
worship. Do you also, O Shakra, impart
your blessings to me. Given by you, I ac-
cept this elephant.


The God of a hundred sacrifices

said :— ,

60. Amongst all those great. and fore-
most of Rishis who firmly follow truth and
who have the Vedas planted in their heart,
you alone have been able to recognise me.
Therefore 1 am exceedingly pleased with
you. ,


61. Do you, therefore, O Brahmana,
come with me speedily, accomyanied by
this your son. You are worthy td going to
vacious regions of great happiness, without
the delay of even a single day.


Bhishma said:— :

62. Having said these. words, the holder
of the thunderbolt, taking Gautama with
him and placing bim before, atong with his
son, vis., that elephant, went to Heaven,
that is difficult of attainment by even the
pious, ,

63. He who would listen to this history
every day or would recite it, controlling his
senses all the while, will go to the region of
Brahman even as Gautama himself. -


CHAPTER CIIL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said:—_


1. You have described (o us the various
kinds of gift, tranquillity of soul, ‘Yruth,
mercy, contentment with one’s married wife,
and the merits of gift.


234


2. You know very well, O grandfather,-
that there is nothing whose power is supe-
rior to that of Penances. You- should ex-
plain to us what forms the highest pen-
ance. ,


Bhishma said :—


3. | tell you, O Yudhishthira, that one
acquires a tegions of happiness according
to the nature of penances he practises.
This is what I bold, O son of Kunti, that
there is no Penance superior to abstention
from food. = ‘


4. Regarding it is recited the ancient
discourse between Bhagiratha and the illus«
trious Brahman.


5. We have heard, © Bharata, that
Bhagiratha attained to that region which is
superior to that of the celestials of kine, and
of the Rishis,


6. Seeing this, O manarch, the Grand-
father Brahntan, addressing Bhagiratha,
said,—How, O Bhagitatha, have you. at-
tained to this region that is so hard to
get at.


7. Neither the celestials, nor Gandhar-
vas, nor mankind, O Bhagiratha, succeed
in coming here without having performed
the severest austerities. How, indeed, have
you come by this region, core


Bhagiratha said :~


8. I used to make gifts of hundred thous
sands of gold coins to the Brahmanas prae-
tising the vow of celibacy alt the while. Pe
is not by dint of the merit of those gifts,
O learned one, that { have acquired this
region,


9. 1 celebrated the Ekaratri (one-
night’s ) sacrifice (consisting of fasts agd
gifts) for ten times, and the Pancharatri
(five -nights’) sacrifices for as many times.
1 perf ormed eleven times the Ekadashratri
sacrifice. I performed a hundred times
the great sacrifice of Jyotishtoma. It is
not, however, through the merits of those
sacrifices that I have acquired this region
of happiness,


to. For a hundred years I lived continu-
ously by the side of the sacred Jahnavi, all
the while performed the severest austerities.
There I made gifts to the Brahmanas of
thousands of males and numberless female
slaves. ° :

1r, By the side of the Pushkara lake I
made gifts to the Bralimanas, for a hundred
thousand times, a hundred thousand horses,
and two hundred thousand kine.


12, I also gave away a thousand women
of great beauty, each adorned with golden
moons, and sixty thousand more, decked


224


with ornaments of ptire gold. It is not,
. however, through the merits of those deeds
that | have suceeded in acquiring these
regions. :


13. O lord of the universe, performing
those sacrifices known as Gasava,.I gave
away ten Arvudas of kine, presenting each
Brahmana. with ten kine, each of whom
was accompanied with her calf, each of
whom gave milk at the time, and with each
of whom were. given a vessel of gold and
one of white brass for milking her,


14. Celebrating many- Soma. sacrifices,
1 gave away to each Brahmana ten kine
each of whom gave mill, and each of whom
had brought forth only her first calf, besides
making presents to them of hundreds of
kine belonging to that kind whith is known
by the same of Rohini,


1§. ft also gave away to the Brahmanas
twice ten Prayutas of other kine, alf giving
milk, It is not through thé merit of those
gifts, O Brahman, that I have succeeded
in acquiring to this regiot: of “happiness.


16. [also gave away a hundred thou-
sand horses of the Vathika breed, all of
white complexion, and adorned with garlands
of gold, {ft is not, however, through the
merits of those deeds‘that I have acquired
this region.


17. 1 gave also eight crores of golden
coins to the Brahmanas, OQ Brahman, and
another ten crores also, in each sacrifice that
I celebrated. It is ‘not, however, through
the merits of those deeds that I have ac-
quired this region of happiness.


18. Lalso gave away seventeen crores of
horses, O Grandfather, each of green color,
each having black ears, and each adorned

‘with garlands of gold. |


19. Lalso gave away seventeen thou-
sand huge elephants having teeth as large
as plougheshares, each having those whirls
on its body, which are called Padmas, and
each bedecked with gatlands of gold.


20. I gave away ten ‘thousand cars, O
Grandfather, whose parts were made of gold,
and which were adorned with various ocna-
ments of gold.


21. JI also gave away seven thousand
other cars with horses yoked to each. All
-the horses that were yoked to them were
adorned with ornaments of gold. Those


cars represented the presents of a sacrifice |


and were of exactly that kind which is indi-
cated'in the Vedas.


22, Inthe ten great Vajapeya sacrifices
that I celebrated, f gave away a thousand
heroes each gifted with the power of Indra
‘ himself, judged by their prowess and th
- sacrifices they had celebrated. ~- :


MAHABHARATA.


23-24. Spending a vast sum of money,
O Grandfather, atid celebrating eight
Rajashya sacrifices, I gave away to the
Brahmanas who officiated in them, a thou-
sand kings whose necks were adorned
with garlands of gold, after having defeat-
ed them in battle. It is not, however,
through the merits of those deeds that I
have acquired this regicea,


25. In those sacrifices, O Lord of the
universe, I made presents as profuse as the
stream. of Ganga herself. Each Brahmana
I gave two thousand elephants decked with
gold,. as many horses adorned with golden
ornaments, anda hundred villages of the
best kind.


26-27. Indeed, I gave these thrice to
each Brahmana observant of penances,
living on. regulated diet, adopting tran-
quillity of soul, and controlling speech, I
lived for a fong time on the breast of
Himavat by the side of that Ganga whose
irresistible current was borne by Maha-
deva on his head. It is not through the
merit of these deeds, O grandfather, that
I have acquired this region.


28. Throwing the Shami, [ worshipped
the gods in numberless such sacrifices as
are completed in course of a single day, and
such others as take twelve days for coms
pleting, and others still as can be completed
in thirteen days, besides many Pandarikas,
I have not acquired this region through the
merits of any of those sacrifices,


29. I gave to the Brahmanas eight
thousands of white bulls, each possessed of
a beautiful hump, and each having one of
its horns covered with gold. To them I
also gave beautiful wives whose necks. were
adorned with chains of gold.


30. I also. gave away masses of gold
and wealth. of other kinds. I gave away
hills of gems and valuable stones. I gave
away Villages, thousands in number and
filled with wealth and corn,


3:. With all. my senses about me, f
gave away the Brahmanas a _ hundred
thousand kine each of whom had brought
forth only her ficst calf, at many great
sacrifices which 1 celebrated. It is not,
however, through the merits of those deeds
that f have acquired this region.


32. I worshipped the -celestiafs in a
sacrifice that is completed in eleven days.
Twice I worshipped them in sacrifices that
are completed in twelve days. I worshipped
them also many a time in the Horse-sacri-
fices. I performed the Arkayana sacrifice
sixteen times. It is not through the merits
of those deeds that I have acquired this
region, Ta


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


83. Valse gave-each Brahmana a forest |


of Kanchana trees extending for a Yojana
on every side, and with each free adorned
with jewels and gems. It is not througty
the merits of that deed that thave acquired
this region.


34. For thirty years, with heart perfect-
ly freed from anger, | observed the Tura-
yana vow that has very superior merit, and
gave away to the Bralimanas every day
nine hundred kine.


35. Indeed, O Lord of the universe,
every one of those kine belonged to the
Rohini species and gave milk at the time
I gavethem away. {t is not through the
merits of those deeds, O king of the deities,
that [ have acquired this region.


36. 1 adored thirty fires, O Bratmian,
every day. { ‘wotshipped the celestialsin
eight sacrifices im which the fat of all
animals was poured on the fire. 1 wortship-
ped them in seven sacrifices in which the
Ae of human beings was pet on the

re,


37. 1 adored then’ ih a shenisind and
twenty-eight Vishwajit srcrifices.
through the merits of those -sacrifices, O
king of ail the celestials, that 1 have ac-
quired this region,


’


38. On the banks of Sarayu and Vahuda
and Ganga, as also in thé foresf of Nai-
misha, | gave away millions of kine to- the
Brahmanas. It is not through the merits
of those deeds that I have acquired this
region.


39. The vow of fast had been known to
Indra.
‘Shukra, the descendent of Bhrigu, gained a
Knowledge of it by means of spiritual sight
acquired through penances. «. Burning with
energy as he does, it is Ushanas who first
made it known to the universe.
that vow, O boon-giving Deity.


40. When I finished that very superior
vow, the Brahmanas became all pleased
with me. A thousand Rishis came there.


4t. Alt those Brahmanas and Rishis, O
powerful lord, pleased with _me, said,—Do
you go to the region of Brahman tlt is
on account of the merits of that vow that
I have succeeded in acquiring this region of
very superior happiness, There is no doubt
in this. :


42. Asked by the Supreme Creator of
all things, I have duly explained the merits
of the vow of fast. In my opinion, there
is no penance higher than fast. I bow to
you, -O foremost of all the celestials. Be
propitiated with me.


29


Land


{Lt is not:


He had, however, kept it a secret. -


L observed.


225°


Bhishma saidi—- - —-

43. King Bhagiratha, who had said $9
and whd was worthy of every honor, waa,
on the conclusion of his speech, ,honared by,
Brahman according.to the rites ordained
for that purpose.


44. Bo you, therefore, O Yudhishthira, -
observe the vow of fast and adore the Brah-
manas, every day. ‘he words uttered by
Brahmanas can do every thing. both in thts
world and in the next.


45. indeed, the Brahmanas .should ever .
be pleased with gifts of dresses and food~
white-complexioned. kine and good,
dwelling houses and palaces. ‘The very
celestials should please the Brabmanas.
Freeing .yourself from cupidity, do you
practise this vow of very ‘Superior merit
that is not mown to all,


ns ¢
oy


CHAPTER ‘CIV.
CANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Z ; Continued. :
Yuadhishthira said :— es
1. Man, it is said, is gifted with a period
of life extending for a hundred years, and
with great energy and power. Why then,


O grandfather, do human beings die even
in their youth ? ‘


“By what does a man become long-"

lived, and’ by what is his life shortened ?
Through what does a man acquire te fame
that depends upow great deeds? Through
what does one acquire wealth and phase:
petity ?
' 3. Is it by penances, or celibacy’ o¢
silent’ recitation’ of sacred Mantras, ot
drugs? Is it by his deeds, or ‘mind, of
speech? Dv you uxplais to me Ale: 16
grandfather, : ;


Bhishma said:— ..
4. 1 shall tell you what you ask mes ta


fact, I shall tell you what the reasgn is for


which one becomes short lived, aud what,
the reason is for which one becomes longe
jived. - .


5. [shall atso explain to jou the reason


| for which one-succeeds in winning the faore


that depends on great deeds, and the reasoy:
for which one succeeds in acquiring richas
and prosperity. Indeed; I shall enlighten,
you about the manner in which one must
live in order.to be possessed of. what j is good
for him. '


6. It is by conduct that one acquires
a long life, and it is by conduct that one


226


acquires riches and prosperity. Indeed,
it is by conduct that one acquires the fame
that depends upon great deeds both in this
world and in the next.


7- The manwhose conduct is improper
or wicked never acquires a lony life. All
creatures fear such a man and are oppressed
by him.

8 Ul, therefore, one wishes his own ad-
vancement and prosperity, one should, in
this world, follow the path of righteousness
and conduct himself properly. Good con-
duct succeeds in removing the inauspicious-
ness and misery of even one that is sinful.


9. Virtue is singled out by conduct.
The good and virtuous are so on account of
the conduct they follow. The marks, again,
of good conduct are afforded by the deeds
of those that are good or righteous.


to. People regard that man who acts

righteously and who does good acts even if

hey only heas of him without actually seeing
se


11. The atheists, they who are destitute
of all acts, they who are disobedient to pre-
ceptors and violate the injunctions of the
-scriptures, they whe are unacquainted with
and, therefore, unobservant ot duties, and
they who are wicked of condust, become
short-lived.


12. They who are of improper conduct,
they who violate all restraints, they who are
unscrupulous about sexual congress, become
sree here and have to go to Hell here-
alter.


13. Even those men live for a hundred
years who, though destitute of all accom-
plishments, follow propriety and righteous-
ness of conduct and become endued with
faith and freed from malice.


34. He who is free from anger, who is
truthful in speech, who never does any in-
jury to any creature in the universe, who is
shorn of malice and croukedness and insin-
cerity, succeeds in living fer a hundred
years, 4

15. He who always breaks little clods of
earth, or tears up the grass that grows
undec his feet," or cuts off his nails with
his teeth, or is always impure, or very
testless, never succeeds in living long.


16. One should wake up from steep at
the hour known as the Brahma Mahurta
and then think of both religion and worldly
profit, Getting up from bed, one should
then wash his face and mouth, and joining
his hands in an attitute of respect, then say
the morning prayers, i


17. In this way, one should when evening
ets yt, say his evening prayers also, con-


| collyrium


MAHABHARATA.


trolling speech the while. One should
never look .at the rising sun, nor at the
setting sun.


28, Nor should one look at the sun when
he is in eclipse; nor at his image in the
water, nor at midday when he is at tie
meridian. The Rishis, on aceount of their
worshipping the two twilights, with great
regularity succeeded in acquiring longevity.


1g—20. Hente one should, controlling
speech, say his prayers regularly at the two
twilights. As regards those Brahmanas
who do not say their prayers at the twa
twilights, a righteous king should set thems
to perform such deeds as are ordained for
the Shudras, Persons of every caste should
never have sexual congress with other
people’s wives.


21. Thereis nothing that shortens life
so effectually as sexual union with other
peopie’s wives.

22, The adulterer shall have to live in
Hell for as many thousand years as the
number of pores on the bodies of the
women with whom he may commit the
offence.


23. One should dress one’s hair, apply
to one's eyes, and wash one’s
teeth, as also worship the celestials in the
forenoon,


24—27. One should not gaze at urine or
feeces, or tread on it or touch it with one’s
feet. One should not see out on a journey
at early dawn, or at mid-day, or in the
evening twilight, or with a companion that
is unknown, or with a Shudra, or alone.
While passing along a road, one should
standing aside, always give way toa Brah-
mana, to kine, to kings, to an old man, toe
one that is loaded with a burthen, to a woman
big with child, or to one that is weak.
When one meets a large tree that is known,
one should walk round it. Oneshould also,
when coming .upon the crossing of four
roads, walk round it before pursuing his
journey. At mid-day, ot at midnight, or
at night in general, or at the two twilights,
one should not proceed to the crossings of
the four roads. One should never wear
sasdals or clothes that have been worn by
another.


2830. One should always observe the
vow of celibacy, and should never cross his
legs. .One should observe the vow of celi-
bacy on the day of the new moon, as also,
on that of the full moon, as also on the eighth
lunar day of both fortnights. One should
never edt the flesh of animals not killed in
sacrifices, One should never eat the flesh
of the back ef an animal. One shéuid
avoid censuring and caluminating others,
as also all kinds of deceitful conduct,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


* gt. One should never eut others with
wordy atrows. Indeed, one should never
utter amy cruet speech. One should never
accept anything in gift from 2 person whoa is
tow and vulgar. One should never utter
such words as pain other people or
as are inauspicious or as are sinful.


32. Wordy arrows falt from the mrouth.
Pierced therewith, the victim grieves day
and night. The wise man should nevet
shoot them for cutting the vitats of ottrer
people,

33. A forest, pierced with arrows or cut
down with the axe, grows again. ‘The man,
however, who is pierced with words unwisely
spoken, becomes tlre victim of wounds that
fester and bring on death. ’


34. Barbed arrows and Nalikas and
broad-headed arrows are capable of being
extracted from the body. Wordy arrows,
however, are incapable of being extracted,
for they lie embedded im the very heart.


35. One shonld not tant a person who
is defective of a limb or who has a limd in:
excess. or one who is shorn of tearning, or
one who is mriserable, or one who is tgly
or poor, o¢ one who is shorn of strength.


35. One should avoid atheisny, vilifying
the Vedas, censuring the celestials, nyalice,
pride, arroganee, and harshness.


37. One should mot angrity, take up
the rod of punishment for laying it upon
another, Only the son or the pupil, it has
been said, can be mildly reprimanded for
purposes of instruction.


38. One should not, vilify Brahmanas ;
nor should point at the stars with one’s
fingers. _ If asked, one should not say what
the lunation ison a particular day. By
telling it, bis life becomes shortened.


39. Waving answered calls of nature
or having walked over a road, one should
wash his feet. One should also wash his
feet before gitting to reece the Vedas or

~ to eat any food.


40. These are the three thimgs which are
considered as pure and sacred by the celes-
tials and as such fit for the Brabmana’s
use, vis., that whose impurity is unknown,
that which has been washed in water, and
that which bas been well spoken of.


4%. Samayava, Krishara, meat, Shasha-
kuli, and Payasa should never be couked
for one’s ownself. Whenever cooked, these
should be offered to the celestials.. —


42. One should attend every day to his
sacred fire.-One should every day give
alms. One should, controlling speech the
while, clean his teeth with the touth-stick, .


227


“49—44- One should never be in bed
when the sun is up. Ff one fails any day
to be up with the sun, be should then pers
fornr ar expiation. Rising from bed, one.
should first salute his pareats, and. precep-
tors, or other elders worthy of respect, By |
so doing one acquires a long life..#h¢ tooth
sticts should be thrown off when done with,
and a new ore should be used every day.


45- One should ‘eat food which ‘ig aot:
forbidden im the scriptures, abstaining frony
food of every Rind on days of the. new
moon and tite full moon. Otre should, with
senses controlled, answer calls of nature,
facing the rorth,


46—47. One should wot adore the cefess
tials without having first washed his teeth.
Without also adoring the celestials first,
one shoufd never repair to: any persow
except his preceptor or one who is old in
years oF one who is righteous of one who
is wise. Wise men shoutd never see thems
selves ity arr unpolished oc dirty mirror. -


4%. Olive should never know a woman
that is unknown or with: one that is big
with child, :


49: One should’ never sleepy with head:
turned towards the nerth or the west, “One
should’ not He down upon a broken. bed.
stead.


50. One stoufd not seep oma bed witlr
out having examined’ it first with the help
of a light, Nor should one sleep: on a bed
with another. by his side. One should never
sleep in a transverse directiow. One should
never make an ayreement wittr atheists ov
do anything in conjunctior witty thenr


51. One should never drag a seat with
the foot and’ sit on it, One should never.
bathe im a-nude state nor at night. ae


52. Am intelligent person shoild wrever


allow his’ limbs ta: be rubbed or pressed’


alter bathing: One should never smear
unguents upon his body without havimg
first gone througtr bath, faving bathedy
one should! never wave his cloth iv the air..


gy One should not wear wet clothes
every day. One should never take off his
body the garlands of flowers one may wear.
Nor should one wear such garlands. oves-
his outer garmenté,


54. One should never everr tafk with x


| woman during the period: of her menses.


One should not answer a cail of nature on
a field er ata place too near aw inhabited ~ “
village.’ '


55. One shoufd never answer a calf of -
nature on a piece of water. One should
first wash his mouth thrice with water
before eating any food.


228


‘56. “Having finished hig meals, ore
should’ wash his mouth thrice with water
wud twice again. One should eat, with
§4ce turned’ eastwards, his food, controlling
speech the while and without censuring the
jood that is eaten.


57. One should always leave a cage
ei the food that is placed before one for
eating, Having finished his meals, one
don Mentally touch fire. Hf one eats with
ice turned eastwards, he becomes long-
ited. By eating with face turned south-
wards, one acquires gréat fame.


58. By eating with face turned west-
wards, one acquires great riches. By eat-
ing with face turned northwards, one be-
eames truthful in ‘speech. Having finished
his meals, one should wash ail the upper
holes of one’s body with water.


‘


‘so. Likewise, all the bimbs, ‘the navel, ;


usa the palms of the hands should be
washed with water, One should never sit
spon husk of corn, oc upon hair, or upon
#5ues, Or upon bones.

6. One should, never use the water tha!
hos been used by another for bathing.


tJue should always perform the Homa ‘for


: pee Waloe the celestials, and recite the
davitii Mantras. ;


61, One should always eat ia a squad
pesture. One should never eat while walk-
riage. One should never answer a call of

“nature standing. |
w call of nature on ashes o¢ in a cowpen. -


62. One should wash his feet before
siting to one’s meals. One should never
sitor lie down for sleep with wet feets’ One
who sits to his meals after having washed
his feet, lives for a century.


63. One should never touch these three
things, while one is in an impure sjate, uzz.,
fie, a cow, anda Brahmyana. By observ-
ing this rule, one lives long. :


64. "One should not, while he is in an
impute state, cast one "s eyes on these three

sings, viz., ane ‘sun, the myoon and the
Siaee b. i


‘ 63. ‘The. life-breaths of a young man go
u pwacds,, when an old and venerable. person
ae to bis house, He gets them, back

iy standing up aud propery saluting the
p Ucote : “


66. Old men should always be saluted.
(ine should, upon seeing them, offer Seats
wib his own hand. After the old man has
taken bis seat, a person should sit and
remain with hands joined in respects When
#n old inan goes along the road, one
ssould always follow him instead oF walk-
ing aliead.


te .


One should never answer


7


MAHABIIARATA.


67. One shoutd never sit on a torn or
broken seat. One should, wittrout usitryg it
any longer, throw away a broken vessel of
white Urass. Oue should, never eat wittr-
out a piece of upper garment covering his
body. Oue Mould never bathe in a nude
state. *,


63. One'should never sleep in a naited ,
state. One should never ever touch the!
remnants of other people’s dishes and
plates. ‘One should never, while he is im
avy impure state, touch another’s head, for
itis. said ithe scriptares Urat the vital airs
are all concentrated in the bead.


6g. One should nevet strike another on
the head or seize another by the hair. One,
should fot join his bands: together for
scratching tis head. j


°9o. One should not, while bathing, re."
peatedly dip his head in water, By so
doing one shortens one’s tife. Ote who has
bathed by dipping the head in water should’
not, afterwards put oil to any part‘ of his
body.


qt. One should never take his meals
without eating some sesame. One should
never teach {the Vedas or any scriptures) -
at atime when he is impure. Nor should
one study whiie is impure.


72—74. When a stoim rises or a bad
smell spieads itself in the atmosphere, he
should never tiink of the Vedas. Persons.
kiowing ancient history recite a G-tha sung
by Yama in, days of yore. He who ruins
while impure or studies tlhe Veda under
similar circumstances, indeed, that twice-
bora Brahinan who studies the Veda af
facbidden times luses his Veda and shortens
tris life.


4

7376. Hence, one should fever " study
the Veda with rapt attention at forbidder
times, They who answer a call of .naturce,
with Yace towards the sun or towards a
burning fire, or towards a cow, or -towards
a twice-burp person; or Ou the road, be-
came shurtlived. At day time both calls
of mature should be answered with face
turned towards the worth.


F778. At night, those. calls should be
answered_ facing the south. By so doing
one does nat shorten his life. One who
wishes to five tong should -uever disregard
or insult any of these three, however weals
or eimaciated they may appear to be, viz,
the Brahmana,.the Kshatriya, and the
snake. Allihree are gilted- with dreadful
poison. ‘The snake, if angry, burns the
victim with only a look of its eye. .


79. he Kshatriya also, if angry, burns
the object uf his anger, a8 soon as he sees
him, with tis energys » Fhe Brahmana,


ANUSHASANA’ PARVA,


stronger than any of these two, destrdys, ,
tot only the object of his anger but his‘
entire family as well, not by looks alone but
by thought alsa.


80. A wise ‘man should, therefore, tend:
these three carefully. One should never’
engaye in avy disputation with his Pre-
ceptor.


81. O Yudhishthira, if the preceptor
becomes angry, he should always be paci-
fied with due honors. If the preceptor is
entirely in the wrong, sull one should follow
and honor him.


82. Forsooth, calbmnnlonsts sayings against
the preceptor always consume the lives of
those who utter them. One should always
auswer a call of nature at a spot far
distant. from his’ dwelling place. One
should wash his feet at a’distance from his
dwelling place.


83. QOneshould always throw the rem-
nants of his dishes and plates at a spot
distant from his dwelling place... Indeed,
he who wishes for his own behoof should do
all this. Oue should uot wear garlands of
red flowers. Indeed, the wise should wear

. gatiands of white flowers.


84. Rejecting the lotus and the lily, O
you of great might, one may bear on his
head, however, a flower that js red, even if it
be an aquatic one,

85. A gattand of gold can never become

impure, After ohne bas bathed, O king, he
Should use perfumes mixed with water. .


86 One should never wear his upper
Zarment for covering the lower limbs or
the lower garments for covering the upper
oves. ‘Nor ‘should one wear clothes used
by another. One should not, again, wear a
piece of cloth that has not its fringes.


87. When one goes to bed, O king, he
should wear a different piece of cloth.
When passing along a road, one should
wear a different piece’ of cloth. So also,
when adoring the celestials, one should wear
a different piece of cloth.


8$. ‘The intelligent man should - “smear
his limbs with unguents made of | Pri-
vyanyu, sandal wood, Vile, ‘Tagaca, and
Keshara.


" 8g. In observing a Sau one should puri-
fy himself by a bath, and adorn his body
‘with ornaments and unguents. One should
“always abstain from sexual union ‘on days
of the full moon and the new moon,


go. One‘should never, O king, eat off
the same plate with another even if he be of
his’own or equal rank. Nor should one
ever eat-any food that has been prepated
by a woman in her menses, .


t “ aes


| eating.


229


gt. One'should never eat any food or
drink any liquid whose essence’ has beew
taken: off. Nor should one eat anything.
without giving a part thereuf to persons whe
wistfully gaze at the food that one happeus
totake. The intelligent man should never
sit near an impure person. Noe should one
sit near persons who are foremost in virtue.


92—93. All food that is forbidden in reli-
givus rites should never be- taken even ‘on
other occasions. The fruits of the Ficus
religiosa and the Ficus Benyalensis as alse
the leaves of the Crotolaria Juncea, and the
fruits of the Ficus glamerata, should never
be eaten by one who seeks his own good.
‘The flesh of goats, of kine, and the peacock,
should never be eaten.


94—95. One should also abstain from
dried fles) and ali flesh that is stale. Yhe
intelligent man ghould never eat any salt,
taking jt up with his band, Nur should he
eat curds and flour of fied barley at night.
One should abstain also from flesh of
animals not killed in sacrifices. , One
should, with capt attention, eat once on
the morning and once in the evening,
abstaining entirely from all food in the
interval,


096. One should never eat any food in
which he may find out a hair. Nor ‘should
One eat at the Shraddha of an enemy. One
should eat silently; one should never eat
without covering his body with an upper
garment, and without sitting down,


97—109. One should never eat any food
placing it on the naked ground. One
should never eat except in a sittings posture..
One should never make any noise while
The intelligent man ‘should first
offer water and then food to one who has
become his guest, and after having secved
the guest thus, should then take his meals
nimself. He who sits down to dinner ina
line with friends and himself eats any food
without giving thereof to his friends, is
said to eat dreadful poison. As regards
water and Payasa and flour of fried barley
and curds’ and clarified butter and heney,
one should never, after drinking or eating
these, offer the residue thereof to others.
One should never, O king, eat any food
hesitatingly.


lol. One seeking. one’s own good, should
never drink curds finishing his meal. After
the meal is finished, one should wash his
mouth and face with the (right) ‘hand only,
and taking a litue water should then dip ie
toe of the right food in it.


102. After washing, one should touch
the crown of his head with the (right) hand.
With rapt attention, one should next touch
fire, :


230


tog ‘the man who knows tow to ob-
serve all these ordinances carefully suc-
ceeds in acquiring the foremost place
among his kinsmen. One should, after
finishing his meals, wash his nose and eyes
and ears and navel and both hands with
water. :


tog. One should not, however, keep his
hands wet. Between the tip and the root
of the thumb is situate the sacred ‘Tirtha
known by the name of Brahma.


t05 -7106. On’ the back of the Hitle
finger, it is said, is situate the Deva-lirtha,
The intervening space between the thumb
and the forefinger, O Bharata, should be
used for performing the Pitré rites, after
touching water according to the ordinance.
One should never vitify other people. Nor
should. oné ever utter anything that is
disagreeable.


to7.- The man who desires his own good,
should never seek to bring on ‘himself
the wrath of athers. One should never
seek to talk with an ontcaste. The very
sight of such a person should be shunned.


108. One shauld never come in contact
with a degraded person. By avoiding such
contact one succeeds in acquiring a bony life.
One should never indulge in sexual inter-
course at day time. Nor should one know
@ maiden, or a harlot ner a barren woman.


tog—= sto. One should ‘never know a
woman who has not bathed after the ex-
Piry of her menses. By avoiding such acts
one succeeds in acquiring a tong life.
After washing the several Fimbs directed,
in view of religious acts, one should wash
his lips thrice, and once more twice. By
doing this, one becomes purified and fit
for religious rites. The several organs of
sense should each be washed once, and
water should also be sprinkled over the
entire body.


" t41~-112, Having done this, one should
perform the adoration of the departed
Manes and the celestiats, according to the
ordinances of the Vedas. Listen to me,
O you of Kuru’s race, as E tell you what
pirificatioa is cleansing and beneficial for
a Brahmana. Before beginning to eat and
after finishing the meal, and in all deeds
requiring purification, the Brahmana should
rinse his mouth with water placed on the
limb called the Brahma-tirtha.


113-114. After ejecting any matter from
the throat or spitting, one should wash
his mouth before he can become pure. A
kinsman who happens to be old, or a friend
who happens to be poor, should be acco-
modated in one’s house and his comforts
looked alter as if he were a member of the
family. By doing this, one succeeds in


MAHABHARATA,


winning both fame and longevity. To keep
pigeons as also parrots both ovale and
female, in one’s house is highly blessed.


115—116. Ef these live im one’s house,
they succeed in removing calamity. The
same is the case with cockroaches. If fires
flies and vultures and wood-pigeons and
bees enter a house and live in it, acts of
propitiating the celestials should be per.
formed. Uhese are creatures of evil omen,
as also ospreys.


#17. One should never give out the
secrets of great men ; oire should never have
sexual union with a forbidden woman. Nor
should one ever have such union with the
consort of a king of with wonren who are the
friends of queens.


51$—t20, One should never nrake friends
with physicians, of with ehildren, or wit!»
persons who are old, or with one’s servants,
O Vudhishthira. One should always proe
vide for frierds, for Brahnwanas and foe
such as seek his protection. By doing this,
O king, owe aequires a long life. A wise
man should five in such a bouwse as has beew
constructed with the help of a Brahmana
and an engineer skilled in his calling, if,


_indeed, O king, he seeks for his own hee


hoof. One should mat, O king, sleep at the
evening twilight, Nor should one study ae
such aty hour for acquiring any branch of
knowledge,


#21. An intelligent man should revere
eat also at such an hour, By acting thus,
one acquires a long lite. Une should never
perform any actin honor of the departed
Manes at night time. One should not
adorty his body after fnishiny his meals,


12z. One should not bathe at night, if he
seeks his own aggrandisement. One should
also, O Bharata, always abstain from the
flour of fried barley at night.


123. The residue of foodand drink, a
also the flowers with which one has adored
the celestials, should never be used. Invite
ing a guest at night, one should never, witlr
excessive courtesy, compell him to eat te
bis fill, Nor should one eat to his fill, at
night.

424-125. One should not kill a bird
(for eating it), especially after having fed it,
A wise man should espouse a maiden born
in a high family, gifted with auspicious
marks, and of fullage. Begetting children
upon her and thus perpetuating his race


/ by that means, one should make over his


sons to a good preceptor for being educated
generally, O Bharata, as also in the especial
customs of the family, Q monarch, The
daughters that one may beget should be
married to youths of respectable families,
who are again possessed of intelligence,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


to). Sons should also be settled and a
portion of the family imheritance piven to
them, O Bharata, as their provision, One
should bathe by dipping his head in water
before be slis down to perform any act
in tonwor of the departed Manes or the
deities.


128. One should never perform a Shrad-
dha under the constellation of his nativity,
No Shraddha should be performed under
any of tte Bhadrapadas (prior or later).
noc ander the constellation Krittika, O
Bharata.


126. The Shraddha should never be
performed under any of those constellations
that are considered as dreadful (such as
Ashlesha, etc,) and any of those that upon
calculation, seem to be hostife. Indeed, in
this matter, all these constelfations should
be avoided which are forbidden in astrology.


130. One should sit facing either the east
or the north while being shaved by a barber.
By so doing, O great king, one succeeds in
tiving long.

13t.. One should neither vilify others nor
reproach himself, for, O chief of the Bha-
tatas, it is said that calumny is sinful
whether of others or of oneself,


132. In marrying, one should avoid a
woman who is deficient of any limb. A
maiden too, if such, should also be avoided. |
A woman of the same Pravars should also
be avoided; as also one who is ill-forraed
in body; as also one who hag been born
im the race to which one’s mother belongs.


133. A wise man should never know
a@ woman who is old, or one who has given
up the domestic mode of life for entering
the forest mode, or one who is faithful te
her husband or one whose organs of gene-
ration are uot healthy or well-formed.


434—136. You shonld not marry a
woman who is of a yellow color, or one
who is attacked with leprosy, of one born
in a family in which there has been epilepsy,
or one that is low in birth and habits, or
ene that is born in a family in which the
disease called leprosy has appeared, or
one belonging by birth to a family in which
there are early deaths. Only that maiden
who is gifted with auspicious indications,
and who is accomplished for all sorts of
qualifications, who is agreeable and beauti-
ful, should be married. One should marry,
O Yudhishthira, in a family who is higher
or at Jeast equal to his own. s


137—138. One who is desirous of his
own prosperity, should never marry a
woman who is of an inferior caste or who
has fallen away from the caste of her birth.
Carefully lighting up the fire, one should


23%


perform alt those atts which have been
ordained and declared in the Vedas or
by the Brahmanas. One should never
seek to injure women. Wives shuuld
always be protected. :


139. Malice always shortens life.
Hence, one should always abstain from
entertaining malice. Sleep at day time
shortens life. ‘To sleep after the sun-tise
shortens life. ..


140.. ‘They who sleep at any of the
twilighis, or at nightfall, or who goto sleep
in, a state of impurity, have their -lives
shortened, Adultery always shortens life.
Une should not remain in a state of ime
purity after shaving.

14t. Qne should, O Bharata, carefully
abstain from reading or reciting the Vedas,:
and eating, and bathing at eventide.


142. When the evening twilight. sets
in. one should collect his senses for meditas
tion, without ‘duing any act. One should
collect his senses for meditation, without any
act. One should, O king, kathe and thea
adore the Bralmanas,


143144. Indeed, one should bathe
before adoring the celestials and reveren«
tially saluting the preceptor. One should
Never go to a_ sacrifice unless invited.
Indeed, one may go there without an ine
vitation, if he wishes to only see how the
sacrifice is conducted. If one goes to a
sacrifice without an invitation and if one
does not on that account, receive proper
adoration from the sacrificer, his life bee
comes shurtened. One should never go
alone on a journey to foreign parts. Nor
should one ever go alone to any place at
night. : ;


145—146. Before evening ¢ets in, one
should return to his house and remain
within it. One should always obey the
commands of his parents and preceptor,
without at all judging whether -those com-
mands or good not.- One should, O king,
attend carefully to the Vedas and the ~’
military science. i


147. Do then, O king, carefully attend
to the practice of riding an elephant, a
horse and a war-chariot. The man who
attends to these with care, succeeds in ac-
quiring happiness. i

148. ‘Such a king succeeds in becoming
unconquerable by enemies, and govern his
servants and kinsmen without any of them
being able to subjugate him. The king who
attains to such a position and who carefully
attends to the duty of protecting his sub
jects, has never to incur any loss.


149. You should, O king, be proficient
in logic, as also the science of words, the


232


science of music, and the four and the sixty
branches of knowledge known by the name
of Kala.. hs : '


*150,° Oné should every day’ hear the
Puranas and the histories and alf the other
Narratives that exist, as- also the, biogra-
Phies of all great men. . '


“451. When one’s wife is in her season,
one should’ never know her, nor even sum-
mon her for conversation. A: wise man
may take her into his company on the fourth
day after the bath of purification,


152. If one’ holds sexual union on the
fifth day from the first appearance of the
cataminal flaw he gets a daughter. By
holding it on the sixth day, he gets a son.
A wise man should, in the matter of sexual
intercourse atiend to this rule. o3

153. Kinsmen and relatives by marriage
and friends should all be treated with. res-
pect. Qne should, to the best of his power,


worship the: cefestials in sacrifices, giving |


away -various kinds of articles as sacrificiat
presents. oof ,

154. After the period laid down’ for the
domestic mode of life, one stiould, Y king,
become a hermit. EF have thus told you


briefly all: the characteristics of persons who


succeed in living long.


155. What I have not told you should be
heard by you from the mouths of persons
well-versed in the three Vedas, O Yudhish-
thira, You should know that conduct is
the root of prosperity. Conduct increases
fame.


156. Itis conduct which prolongs life,
It is conduct which destroys all calamities
and evils, Conduct has been said to: be
superior to all the branches of knowledge.


157. It is conduct which begets virtue,
and it is virtue which prolongs. hfe. Con-


duct gives fame, long. life, and Heaven.


Conduct is the most efficacious rite ‘of

ropitiating .the celestials. ‘Ihe Self-create
Brahinan himself has said that one should
Show mercy to all orders of men.


CHAPTER CV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Tell me, O chief of Bharata’s race,
how the eldest brother should treat his
younger brothers, and how the’ younger
brothers should behave towards theic eldest
Brother. :


*MANABNARATA.:


Bhishma said :=-


‘2. Do you, O son, always behave towards
your younger brothers as their eldest brother
should. You are always the eldest of alt
these your brother$. You should ahvays
treat your younyer brothers-in the way in
which a preceptor treats his disciples. =


3. If the preceptor happens to ube h-
wise, the disciple cannot possibly behave
towards him in a respectfulor proper way.
If the preceptor is possessed of purity and
good conduct, the disciple alsa succeeds in
acquiring conduct of the same find, Of
Bharata. ‘|' :


4. The eldest brother should at times’
not notice the acts of his younger brothers,’
_and though possessed of wisdom should at
; times act as if he does not understand their
iacts. If the younger brothers be guilty of
Sany sin, the eldest brother should correct?
“them by indirect ways and means.


5. If there be good understanding
among brothers and if the eldest brother
seeks to correct his younger brothers by’
direct or ostensible means, persons who are
enemies, O son of Kunti, who feel pain on
seeing such good understanding and who,
‘therefore, always seek to bring abouta dis«
union,.try to disunite the brothers and sow
dissension among them. :


7. Wt is the eldest brother who increases
the prosperity of the family-or destroys it
entirely, If the eldest brother happens,
to be not gifted with sense and wicked in
conduct, he encompasses the destruction of,
the whole family. .


7. Thateldest brother who injures his
younger brothers ceases to be considered ag.
the eldest and ‘forfeits his share in the
family property and deserves to be checked
by the ging. Ox .

8.. That man who acts deceitfully, bas,
forsooth, to go to the regions of .grief’ and
every kind of evil. ‘The birth of such a
person is of no avail like the flowers of the
cane. : es 3

9. That family in which a sinful person
is born becomes subject to every evil. Sucty
a person brings about infamy, and all the
good deeds of the family disappear. ,


to. Such among the brothers as are ad-
dicted to wicked deeds forfeit their shares
of the family property. . In such a case, the
eldest brother may appropriate the entire
joint property without giving any portion
thereof to his younger brothers. :


tr. If the eldest brother makes any
money, without using the paternal property
and by going to a distant place he may ap-<
propriate for his own use, such wealth with


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


233


out giving any share thereof to his younger { castes to be taken as acquiring any merit by


brothers.


12. Wf brothers wish (during the life-time
ot their father) to partition the family pro-
perty, the father should give equal shares
to all his sons.


13. 4f the eldest brother happens to be
a vicious man and without any accom-
plistments, he may be disregarded by his
younger brothers. Lf the wife or the younger
brother happens to be sinful, her or his good
must still be looked after.


ty. Persons convervast with the efficacy
‘of righteousness hold that-vittue is the high-
est good, ‘The Upadhyaya is superior to
even ten Acharyyas. Uhe father is equal to
ten Upadhyayas.

15 The mother is equal to ten fathers or
even the whole Barth, There is ne senior
equal to the mother, Lndeed, she is above
all in respect of the reverence due to her.


16 itis, therefore, that people regard the
mother to deserve sg much respect. After
the demise of the father, O Buarata, the
eldest brother should be considered as the
father.


17. ftisthe eldest brother who should
assigu to them their means of support and
protect and maintain them. All the younger
brothers should bow to him and obey his
command,


18. Indeed, they should depend upon
fim, as they did upon their father during
tus life-time. So far as the body is con-
cerned, O Bharata, it is the father and the
mother who creates it.


19. ‘What birth, however, which the
Acharyya ordains, is considered as the true
birth which is, really unfading and immortal.
‘The eldest sister, O chief of Bharata’s race,
is like a mother.. ‘he wife of the eldest
brother atso is like tie mother, for the
younger brother, jn infancy, receives nur-
sing frum her,


CHAPTER CVI.


(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—
Continued. ;


Yudhishthira said :—


1. OU grandfather, all the orders of men,
including che very Miechchhas, are natural-
iy disposed to observe fasts. We, however,
do not know the reason thereof.


2. We have heard that only Brahmanas
and Kshatriyas should observe the vow of
fasts, How, O grandfather, are the other


3?


Oe tte nent Huhne meena ht eesti veneete eNeaft Snes AR I i Rr


the observance of fasts ?

3- ‘
observed by persons of all castes, U king ?
What is that end which one devoted to tha
observance of fasts, acquires ?


4. It has been said that fasts are greatly
meritorious and that fasts are a grean
refuse, O king, what is the fruit that is
acquired in this world by the man who abe
serves fasts? :


5. By what means is one purged of his
sins? By what means dues one acquire
virtue. By what means, QO best ot the
Buaratas, does one succeed in acquiring
Heaven and merit.


6. After having observed a fast, what”


should one give away, O king? O tell me,


what those duties, are by which one may -


succeed in acquicing objects leading to
happiness. .
Vaishumpayana said :—

7. Kaunti’s son begotten by the deity of
Dnarma, who was couvetsant with every
duty and who said so to him, Shantanu’s
son, Bhishmia, who knew every duty, an=
swered in the following words.


Bhishma said :—


8. Formerly, O king, 1 heard of these
high merits, O chief of Bnarata’s race, as
belonging to the observance of fasts ac~
cotding to the o:dinance,


9


Angiras of great ascetic merit, the very
same questions which you have asked me
to-day. :


to. Accosted by me thus, the iflustrious
Rishi, who originated ‘from cie sacrificial -


fire, answered «me evei thus sbout the
observance of fasts accoidiug (to the ordis
nance, — us


Angiras said :— Say) BEO®

11. Fasts for three nights together, are
ordained for Brahmanas and Kshatriyas,
O delighter of the Kurus. Indeed, O
king, a fast for one night, for two nights,
and for three nights,, may be observed oy
them. ; : .
12. Fast for one night is ordained foe
Vaishyas and Shudras. Hf they observe
fasts tor two or three nights by mistake,
such fasts never bring on their advance-
ment. .
13. Fasts for two nights have been ore
dained fur Vaishyas and Shudras (on cere
tain special occasiens), Fasts for three
nights, however, have not been ordained
for thein by persons knowing duties,


How have vows and fasts come to be.


1 had, O Bharata, asked the Rishi -


,


ae


14-15. the wise man who, with his
senses and sout under restraint, O Bharata,
fasts, by abstaining from one of the two
nieals, on the fifth and the sixth days of
the moon as also on the day of the full
moon, becomes gifted with forgiveness and
personal beauty and knowledge of scrip-
tures. Such a person never becomes child-
fess atid pour. are


16—~18. He who celebrates sacrifices for
worshipping the deities on the fifth and the
sixth days of the moon, becomes superior
to all the members of his family artd stic-
ceeds in feeding a large number of Brah-
manas, He who observes fasts on the
eighth. and the fourteenth days of the dark
fortnight, becomes freed from diseases and
possessed of gréat energy.
abstains front one meal every day through-
ot the month catled Margashitsha, should,
with respect and devotion, feed a number
of Brahmanas. By so doing he becomes
freed from all his sins. Such a man bee
comes gifted with prosperity, and all sorts
of grajtt become his,


.. 1g. He becomes gifted with energy.
In tact, such a person reaps ptofuse harvest
from his fields, acquires great riches and
mauch corn.

20. That man, O son of Kunti, who
passes the whole month of Pausha, abstain-
ing every day from one of two meals,
becomes a gainer of good fortune and
Pleasant featurés and great fame,


2t. He who passes the whole month of

agha, abstaining every day from one of
the two meals, ts born in a high family and
Altains to a position of eminence among
his kinsmen,


22. He who passes the whole month of
Bhayadaivata, confining himself every day
to only one meal, becomes a favourite with
women who, indeed, readily acknowledge
‘his sway.

23. He who passes the whole of the
month of Chaitra, taking every day one
theal only, is born in a high family and
becomes rich in gotd, gems, and pearls.


24. The person, whether male or female,
who passes the month of Vaishakha, taking
himself or hersell every day one meal, and
keeping his or ber senses under restraint,
succeeds ia altaining to a position of emi-
fence among kinsmen.


25. The person who passes the month
of Jaishthya taking himself every day oné
meal, succeeds in acquiring a position of
eminence and great riches. If a woman,
sshe reaps fhe same reward.


* 26.. He who passes the month of Asha+
_daking himself one meal a day and


The man who F


MAHABHARATA.


with senses steadily concentrated upon fs
duties, becomes possessed of much corn,
great riches, and a large progeny.


27. Hewho passes the month of Srae
vana, taking himself one meal a day re-
ceives the honors of Abhisheka wherever be
may happen to live, and attains to a pusi-
tion of eminence among kinsmen whom he


supports.


28. ‘That man who takes himself only
one meat a day for the whole month of
Proshthapada, becomes possessed of great
riches.


29. The man who passes the month of
Ashwin, taking himself one meal a day,
becomes pure in soul and body, possessed of
many arimals and vehicles and a large
progeny.

go. He who passes the month of Kare
tika, taking himself one meat every day,
becomes possessed of heroism, many wives
and great fame.


31. Ehave now told you, O king, what
the fruits are that are obtained by men by
observing fasts for the two and ten months
in detaih. Listen now, O king, to me as f
tell you what the rules are about the lunar
days,

32. The man who, abstaining from it
every day, takes rice at the termination of
every fortnignt, becomes pussessed of a
great many kine, a large progeny, and a
tong life.


33- He who observes fasts for three
nights every month and acts thus for two
and ten years, acquires a position of emi-
nence among his kinsmen and friends, with-
out a rival to contest his claim and without
any anxiety caused by any one trying to
rise to the same height.


34. These rules which I speak of, O
chief of Bharata’s race, should be observed
for twelve years. Be disposed to do it.


35-35. That man who eats once in the
forenoon and once after evening and abs«
tains from drinking at the interval, and who
shows mercy towards all creatures, and
pours libations of clarified butter on his sa-+
cred fire every day, acquires success, O
king, in’ six years. There is no doubt in
this. Such a man acquires the merit of
the Agnishtoma sacrifice.


37. Gifted with merit and freed from
every sort of stain, he acquires the region
of the Apsaras which echo with the sound
of songs and dance, and passes his days in
the company of a thousand highly beau-
tiful ladies.


38. Herideson a car of the color of


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


metted gold and receives great hondrs in the
region of Brabma.


39—40. After the exhaustion of that merit,
such a person returns to Earth and acquires
elevated position. ‘That man who passes one
whole year, taking himself every day only
one meal, acquires the merit of the Atiratra
sacrifice. He ascends to Heaven after
death and receives great honors there.


41—42. Upon the termination of that
merit he returns to the Earth and acquires
a position of eminence. He who passes one
whole year fasting for three days in succes-
sion and,taking food on every faurth day,
and abstaining from injury from every sort,
adhering to truthfutness of speech, and


keeping his senses under control, acquires |


the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice.


43—44. Such a person ascends to Heaven
after death and receives great honors there.
That man, O son of Kunti, who passes a
whole year observing fasts for five days and
taking food on only the sixth day, gains the
merit of the Horse sacrifice. The chariot
he rides, is drawn by Chakravakas.


45-46. Such a man enjoys every krnd
of happiness in Heaven for full forty thou-
sand years. He who passes a whole year
observing fasts for seven days and taking
tood on onty every eighth day, gains the
merit of the Gavamaya sacrifice. The
chariot he rides, is drawn by swans and
cranes,


47—48. Such a person enjoys all kinds
of happiness in Heaven for fifty thousand
years. He who passes a whole year, O
king, taking food only at intervats of a fort-
night, gains the merit of a continuous fast
for six months. ‘This has been said by the
illustrious Angiras himself. Such a man
lives in Heaven for sixty thousand years,


49. He is roused every morning from
his bed by the sweet notes of Vinas and
Vallakis ahd flutes, O king.


50. He who passes a whole year, drink
ing only a little water at the termination of
every month, acquires, O king, the ‘merit of
the Vishwajit sacrifice.


5t. Such aman rides a chariot drawn

by lions and tigers. He lives in Heaven

: for seventy thousand years in the enjoyment
ef every sort of happiness.


52. No fast for more thats a month, O
king, has been ordained. Even this, O son
of Pritha, is the ordinance about fasts that
has been declared by sages conversant with
duties.


53. That man who,
disease and free from every malady, ob-
serves a fast, indeed acquires, at every step,
the merits of Sacrifices,


unafflicted by


— 935


54. Such a man ascends to Heaven on a
car drawn by swans. Gifted with power,
he enjoys every sort of happiness in k Hleayen
for a hundred years.


55. A hundred Apsaras of the most
beautiful features, wait upon, and sport with
him.


56. He is roused front his bed every
morning by the sound of the Kanchis and
the Nupuras of those tadies.


57. Such a person rides on a car drawn
by a thousand swans. Living, again, in
a region teeming with hundreds of the
most beautiful ladies, he passes his time in
great joy.

§8—59. The person who seeks Heaven,
does not want strength when he becomes
weak, or the cure of wounds when te is
wounded, or the administration of medicine
when he is ill, or soothngs by others when
he is angry, or the mitigation, by the ex-
penditure of money, of sorrows caused by


‘poverty.


Go. Leaving this world, where he suffers
alt sorts of privations, he proceeds ta
Heaven and rides on cars bedecked with
gotd, his body adorned with all sorts of
ornaments. ‘There, in the midst of hun-
dreds of beautiful ladies, he enjoys all sorts
of pleasure and tappines, cleansed of
every sin.


Gi. Indeed, abstaining from food and
enjoyments in this world, he renaunces this
body and ascends to Heaven as the fruit of
his penances. ‘There purged of all his sins,
he enjoys heatth and happiness ‘and alt his
wishes become crowned wit!r success,


62—63. Such a person rides ow a celes~
tial car of golden color, effulyent like the
morning sun, set with pearls and lapis
lazuli, resounding with the music of Vinas
and Murajas, adorned. with banners and
lamps, and echoing with the sounds of celes~-
tial bells.


64 Such a person enjoys alt sorts ‘of
happiness in Heaven for as many HERES: as
there are pores in his body. |


65. There is no Shastra superior to_ the
Veda.- ‘There is no person more worthy of
respect than the mother. here is no ac-
quisition superior to that of virtue, and | no
penance superior to fast.


66. ‘There is nothing, more sacred, in
Heaven or Earth, than Brahmanas, Simi-
larly there is no penance that is superior “to


the observance of fasts.


67. It was by fasts that the celestials,
have succeeded in becoming dwellers; of
Heaven. ‘ft is by fasts that the ‘Rishis”


have acquired high success. oad


236
- 68. Vishwamitra passed ‘a thousand
celestial years, taking one meal a day, and


as .the. consequence thereof acquired the
status of a Brahmana.


69. Chyavana, Jamadagni, Vashishtha,
Gautama and Bhrigu—all these great
Rishis gifted with the virtue of forgiveness
e~have attained to Heaven through the
observance of fasts.


70. Formerly Angiras declared so to the
great Rishis. ‘The man who teaches an-
other the merjt of fasts, bas never to’ sufter
any sort of misery, : :


. 7% The ordinances about fasts, in their
‘due order, O son of Kunti, have originated
from the great Rishi Angiras. he man
who daily reads these ordinances or hears
them read, becomes freed from all sins.


72. Not only is such a person freed
from every calamity, but his mind rises
above all sorts of shortcomings. Such
_® person succeeds in understanding the
sounds of all creatures other than human,
and acquiring eternal fame, becomes the
foremost of men.


CHAPYER CVII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued. -


Yudhishthira said :—

t. O grandfather, you have duly des-
Cribed to us the subject of Sacrifices, inclu-
ding the merits in full that attacn to them
both here and hereafter.


2. It should be remembered, however, O
grandfather, that Sacrifices are incapable of
being celebrated by poor men, for these re-
guire a large store of various articles.


3. Indeed, O grandfather, the merit
attaching to Sacrifices can be acquired by
ouly kings and princes. ‘That merit is in-
capable of being acquired by those who
have no wealth and power and who live
alone and are helpless.


Do you tell us, O grandfather, what
the ordinances are about those acts that are
fraught with merit equal to what belongs to


Sacrifices and which, therefore, are capable


of being performed by poor men.


Bhishma said :-—


6. Listen, O Yudhishthira! Those
ordinances that [have told you of,—those,
vis., that were first promulgated by the
great Rishi Angiras, and that have refer-


ence to meritorious fasts for their suul,—are -


considered as equal to Sacrifices.


MAHABHARATA,


7—8. That man who takes one meal in
the forenoon and one at night, without:
taking. any food or drink during the inter-
val, and who observes this regulation for a
period of six years successively abstaining
all the while from injuring any creature and
regularly pouring libations on his sacred fire
every day, attains, forsooth, to success,
Such a man acquires hereafter a car of the
color of heated gold, and acquires a resi-
dence, for mitlions of _years, in the region of
Prajapati, in the company of celestial
ladies, that ever echoes with the soun? of
music and dance, and shines with the effu'~
gence of fire.


9. He who passes three years, taking
one meal a day and abstainmy all the
while from intercourse with any other
woman except his own married wife, attains
to the merit of the Agnistitoma sacrifice,


to—14. Such a man is considered as
having performed a Sacrifice. with plenty
of gifts in gold, that is dear to Vasava
himself. By practising truthfulness of
speech, making gifts, respecting the Brah-
manas, avoiding malice, becoming forgiving
and self controlled, and conquering anger,
a man acquires the highest end. Riding on


_a car of the color of white clouds that is


drawn by swans, he lives, for millions and
millions of years, in the company of Apsaras.
Fasting for a whole day and taking only
one meal on the second day, he who pours
libations upon his sacred fire for the period
of a whole year,—indeed, he who observes
such a fast and attends every day to his
fire and rises every day trom bed before
sunrise, acquires the merit of the Agni h-
toma sacrifice. Such a man acquires a car
drawn by swans and cranes. .


t


ts—17. Surrounded by the most beauti-
fut ladies, he lives in the region of Indra.
That man who takes only one meal evary
third day, and pours libations every day
on. bis sacred fire for a period of a whole
year,—indeed, he who, thus attends to his
fire every day and wakes up from sleep
every morning before sun rise, acquires the
high merit of the Atiratra sacrifice. He
acquires a car drawn by peacocks and
swans and cranes.


18. Proceeding to the region of the
seven Rishis, he tives there, surrounded by
Apsaras of great beauty. It is well-known
that such residence lasts for full three
Padmas of years. i


19—20. Fasting for three days suc-
cessively, he who takes only one meal every
fourth day, and ypours fibations every dav
on his sacred fire, acquires the great merit
of the Vajapeyd sacrifice. Phe car he


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


acaitires ts graced by highfy beautiful celes-
tral ladies who have Indra for their father.


2t. He lives in the region of Indra for
millions and millions of years, and enjoys
great happiness by witnessing the sports of
the king of the gods.


22—23. Fasting for four days  sue-
cessively he who eats only one meal every
fifth day, and pours libations on the sacred
fire every dav for the period of a whole
year, and who lives withowt cupidity, telling
the truth, respecting -the  Brahmanas,
abstaining from every sort of injury, and
avoigmg malice and sit, acquires the merit
of the Vajapeya sacrifice, :


24. The car he rides, is made of gold
and drawn by swans and, effulgent like
many suns rising together. He acquires,
besides, a palatial building of pure white.


25 He lives there happily for full one
and fifty Padmas of years.


26——-27. He who fasting for ftve days,
takes food only on the sixth day, and
pous hbations om this sacred five every
day for one year, and who perfocors three
ablations in course of the day for purifying
bierselt and saying his prayers and paying
his aduratiun, and wiv leads a celibate life,
divested of malice in tia conduct, acquires
the merit of the Gomedia sacrifice.


28. He acquires an excellent car adorn-
ed with pure yold, effutgent like a blazing
fire and drawn by swaits and peacocks.


29 He sleeps on the lap of Apsaras and
is awasened every morning by the melo~
dious sound of Nupuras and Kanchis,


30. He leads such a happy life for ten
-thousand millions of years and three
Vhousand millions besides and ‘eight and
ten Padmas and two Patakas.


3t. Such a man lives also, honored by
all, in the region of Bralina for as many
years as there are hairs on the bodies of
five thousand bears.


32-34. Fasting for six days, he who
takes only one meal every seventh day and
pours libations on the sacred fire every
day, for a full year, controlling speetlr
all the while aud observing the vow of
celibacy and abstaining from the use of
flowers and unguents and honey and meat,
acquires the region of the Maruts and of
India. Crowned with the fruition of every
wish as it originates in the mind, he is
waited upon and adored by — celestial
ladies. :

35. He acquires the merits of a sacrifice
in which profase goid is given’ away. Pro-
ceeding ty the regions named, he lives there
for wumberless years in the enjoyment of
greatest happiness,


|


}


inane rinsing rt RR A A


237°


3 7. He who shows mercy to alb
and fasting for seven days eats on every
eighth day for a whole year, and, pouring
libations every day on the sacred fire, wor-
ship the eelestials, regularly, acquires the
great merits of the Paundarika = sacrifice.
Uhe car be rides is lotus-nued.


38  Forsooth, such*a_ man acquires also
a large number of youmg and beautiful
ladies, some having complexions that are
dark, some with complexions like that of
gold, and some that are Shyamas, whose
looks and gestures are of the nrust agreeable
kind.


39-49. He wha fasts for eight days and
tases only one meal on every ninth day for
One full year, and pours libations on the
sacred fire every day, wins the great mrerits
vf a thousand Horse sacrifices. - ‘The car
he rides in theaven is beautiful like a lotus.


4t. He always journeys, on’ that car,
accompanied by the daughters of Rudra
bedecked wiih celestial garlands and gifted
with the effulzence of the midday sun or
of frres of burning flames.


42. Acquiring the regions of Rudra, he
hives there in great happiness for’ number-
less years.


43—44. He who fasts for nine days and
takes only one meal every tenth day fora
whole year, and pours libations on his
sacred fire every day, gains the high merit
of a thousand Horse sacrifices and’ attains
to the companionship of © Beahmana’s
daughters whose beauty charm thé hearts
of alb creatures.


45- These ladies, possessed of such
beauty, and some of;them. possessed of cylor
of the lotus and some like that of the same
flower of the blue variety, always keep him
in joy. ‘ i.

46. He acquires'a beautiful car which


‘moves in beautiful circles and which looks


like the dense cloud called Avarta, resem
ble also an ocean wave,


47. ‘That car cesounds with the constant
tinkle of ruws of pearls and gems, and the
melodious sound of conchs, and is adorned
with columms made of crystals and dia-
monds, as as also with an altac constructed
of the same minerals.


- 48 fle cides such a car, drawn by
swans and cranes, and lives for millions and
milhions of years in great happiness ,in
Heaven.


49—5!. He who fasts for ten days and
eats only clariBed butter on every eleventh
day for one full yéar and pours Hbations on
his sacred fireevery day, who never, in word
or thought, seeks the company of other


238 :


people's wives, and who never utters a false-
hood even for. the sake of his mother and
father, succeeds in ‘seeing Mahadeva of
great power seated on his car.’ Such a
person acquires the great merit of a thou-
sand Horse sacrifices. ~ oan


52. He. sees the car of the Self-create
Bcrahman himself approach for taking him
ov it. He rides on. it, accompanied by
celestial ladies gifted with great beauty, and
complexions as effulgent as that of pure
gold. ;


id . s
53. Gifted with the blazing splendour
of the cycle fire, he lives for many years in
a celestial mansion in Heaven, full of
every happiness. :


54. For those numberless years he
experiences the joy of bending his head in
respect to Rudra. worshipped by the celes-
tials and Danavas.


"55-56. Such a person sees every day
the preat god, That man who having fasted
for eleven days, eats only a tittle clarified
butter on the twelftti, and acts thus for a
whole year, succeeds in acquiring the merits
of all the Sacrifices. ‘Fhe car he rides, is
effulgent like a dozen suns.


37—58. . Adorned with costly gems and
pearls and corals, émbellished with rows of


swans and snakes atid of peacocks and |


Chakravakas uttering their melodious notes,
and beautified -with large domes, is the
qtacter to which he attains in the region of
Brahman.


59 That house, O king, is always filled
with men aud women. This is what the
highly blessed’ Rishi Angiras, knowing
every duty, said. ‘


6% That man who, having fasted. for
twelve days, eats a little clarified butter
on the thirteenth, anid acts thus for a
whole year, succeéds in acquiring the merits
_of the divine sacrifice.


61. Such a mati gets a car of the color
of the new-blown lotas, adorned with pure
gold and heaps of jewels and gems.


62. He goes to the regions of the Maruts
which ace full of celestial ladies, which
are adorned with every kind of celestial
ornament, which are filled with celestial!
perfuntes, and which contain every element
of happiness,


63 Countless is the number of years he
lives in those happy regions.


64. Soothed with the sound ‘of music
and the sweet voice of Gandharvas and the
sounds and blare of drums and Panavas,


years.


MAHABHARATA,


65. That man who having fasted for
thirteen days, eats a little iclarified butter
ov the ‘fourteenth day, and acts thus for a
full year, acquires the merits of the Maba-
medha ‘sacrifice.


66. Celestial tadies of indescribable
beauty, and whose age cannot be deter-
mined, for-they look ever young, adorned
with every ornament and with armlets of
blazing effulgence, wait upon him with many
cars and follow him in his journeys.


67. He is waked every morning from
his bed by the metodious note of swans, the
tinkle of Nupuras, and the highly agree-
able jingle of Kanchis. Indeed, he fives in
a superior house, waited upon by sucir
celestial ladies, for years as countless; as the
sands on the shores of Ganga.


68—70. That man who, keeping his
senses under restraint, fasts for a fortnight
and takes only one meal on the sixteenttr
day, and acts thus for a whole year, pour-
ing libations every day on his saered fire,
acquires the great merits of a thousank
Rajasuya sacrifices. The car he cides, is
highly beautiful and is drawn by swans
and peacocks.


7i—73- Riding on such a car which is,
besides, adorned with garlands of pearis
and the purest gold and graced witl:
bevies of celestial ladies decked with orna-
ments of every sort, having one column
and four arches and seven altars exceed-
ingly auspicious, having thousands of
banners and echoing with the sound of
music, celestial and of celestial attributes,
set with gems and pearls and corals, and
effulgent like lightning, such a man lives
in Heaven for a thousand cycles, having
elephants’ and chinoceroses for dragging
that car of his.


74. ‘That man who having fasted for
fifteen days takes one meal on the sixteenth
day and acts thus for one whole year,
acquires the merits of the Soma sacrifice.


75. Proceeding to the celestial region, he
lives in the company of Soma’s dau szhters.
His body fragrant with unguents whose
perfumes are as sweet as those of Soma
himself, he acquires the power of going”


‘immediately to any place he likes.


76. Seated on his car he is waited upon
by beautiful damsels of agreeable manners,
and conimands all articles of enjoyment.


77. He enjoys such happiness for many -


78—79. That man who having fasted
for sixteen days, eats a little clarified butter


he is constantly pleased by celestial ladies | on the seventeenth day, ard acts thus for a


of great beauty.


| whole year, pouring iba tions every day on


ANUSNASANA PARVA,


Wis sacred fire, proceeds -to the regions of
Varuna and Indta and Rudra and the
Maruts and Ushanas and Brahman him-
self.


80. There he is waited upon by celestial
ladies and sees the celestial Rishi called
Bhurbhuva and sees the entire universe.


8t. The daughters of the king -of the
deities gladden him there. hose damsels,
of agreeable manners and adorned with
every ornament, are capable of assuming
thicty-two forms.


- §82. As long as the Sun and the Moon
move in the sky, so long does that wise man
five in those regions of happiness, living


pon the succulence of ambrosia and
nectar,
83. That man who. having fasted for


Seventeen days, takes only one meal on the
eighteenth day, and acts thus for a whole
year, succeeds in seeing the seven regions
‘of the universe.


$4. While making his journeys of his
car, he is always followed by a large -train
of cars producing the most agreeable rattle
and ridden by celestial ladies shining with
ornaments and beauty.


83. Enjoying the greatest happiness, the
car he rides, is celestial and endued with the
greatest beauty. [tis drawn by lions and
tigers, and produces cattle as deep as the
muttering of the clouds. «


86. He lives in such happiness for a
thousand aons, living upon ambrosia that
is as sweet as nectar itself,


87. That man who having fasted, for
eighteen days, eats only one meal on the
nineteenth day and acts thus for a full year,
succeeds in perceiving all the seven regions
of the universe.


§8. The region to which he attains is
peopled by various tuibes of Apsaras and
resounds with the sweet-note of Gandharvas,
The car he rides is effulgent like the sun.


89. His heart shorn of every anxiety,
he is waited upon by the foremost of celes-
Aial ladies. Decued with celestial gailands,
and possessed of beauty, be lives in such
happiness for millions and millions of years.


go—gt. That man who having fasted
for nineteen days, eats only one meal on
every twentieth day, and acts thus for a
full year, observing all the while ctruthful-
ness of speech and observance of other
(excellent) cituals, abstaining also. from
ameat, leading a celibate life and devoted
to the beboof of all creatures, acquires the
extensive regions of great happiness, be-
longing to the Adityas. as AS


92, While making his journeys on his


239


v®
own car, he is followed by a large train of
cars ridden by Gandharvas and Apsaras
decked with celestial garlands and per-
fames.


93—94. ‘That man who having fasted


for twenty days, takes a single meal on the’


twenty-first day, and acts thus for a full
year, pouring libations every day on his
sacred fire, acquires the regions of Ushanas
andjShakra, of the Ashwins and the Maruts,
and lives there in uninterrupted happiness
of great measure,


95. Unacquainted with all sorrows, he
rides the foremost of cars for making his
journeys, and waited tpon by foremost of
celestial Jadies, and possessed of power, he
sports in joy like a celestial himself.


g6—97. That man who having fasted
for twenty-one days, takes a single meal on
the twenty-second day, and acts thus for a
full yeat, pouring libations on his sacred
fire every day, abstaining from injuring any
Creature, observing truthfulness of speech,
and freed from malice, acquires the regions


rof the Vasus and becomes endued with


solar effulgence.


g8. Gifted with the power of goinz every
where at will, living upon nectar, . and
riding onthe foremost of cars, his body
decked with celestial ornaments, he sports
in joy in the company of celestiat ladies.


g9—100. ‘That man who having fasted
for twentystwo days, takes a single meal on
the twenty-thied day, and acts thus fora
full year, thus regulating his diet and keep-
ing his senses under restraint acquires the
regions of the Wind-God of Ushanas and
of Rudras. Capable of going everywhere
at will, and always roving at will, he is
adored by various tribes of Apsaras.


tort. Riding on the foremost of cars and
his body decked with celestial ornaments,
he sports for numberless years in great
happiness in the company of celestial ladies,


to2—103. ‘Fhat man who having fasted
fer twenty-three days eats a little clarified
butter on the twenty-fourth day, and acts
thus for a full year, pouring libations ou
his sacred fire, lives for countless years in
great happiness in the regions of the
Adityas, his body decked with celestial
dresses and garlands and celestial perfumes
and ungueuts.


104. Riding on an excellent car, made
of gold and gifted with great beauty and
drawn by swans, he sports in joy in the
company of thousands and thousands of
celestial ladies.


105.. That man who having fasted for
twenty-four days, takes a single meal on the


| twenty-fifth day, and acts thus for full year,


ane


. : 6%
succeeds in getting acarc of the foremost
Kind, full of every object of enjoyment.


196-108. He is followed in his journeys
by a large train of cars drawn by lions and
tigers, and producing a sound as deep as
the muttering of the clouds, ridden by celes-
tial ladies, and alf made of pure vold and
endued with great beanry. Himselt riding
on an excellént celestial car endued with
great beauty, he lives in those regions for a
thousand zons, in the company of hun-
dreds of celestial- ladies, and living upon
ambrosia that is sweet as nectar itself.


iog—t12. That man who having fasted
for twenty-five days, takes only one meal
on the twenty-sixth day, and acts thus for a
full year in the observance of such a regu-
lation about diet, keeping his senses under
restraint, freed from attachment, and pour-
ing libations, every day on his sacred fire,
that blessed man,—adored by the Apsaras,
acquires the regions of the seven Maruts
and the Vasus. When making his journeys,
he is followed by a targe train of cars
made of excellent crystal and adorned with
ail sorts of gems, and tidden by Gandhar-
vas and Apsaras who show him every
honor. He lives in those regions, in enjoy-
ment of such happiness, and gifted with
celestial energy, for two thousand cycles.


Tig—114. That man who having fasted
for twenty-six days eats a single meal on
the twenty-seventh day, and acts thus for a
full year, pouting libations every day on his
sacred fire, acquires great merit and pro-


ceeding to the celestial region, receives


honors from the deities. Living there, be
subsistson nectar, freed frou thirst of every
kind, and enjoying every happiness.


115. His soul purified of every dross and
Making his journeys on a celestial car of
great beauty, he lives there, O king, acting
like the celestial Rishis and the royal
sages. ;


116. Gifted with great energy, he lives
there in great happiness in the company of


celestial ladies of hignly agreeable manners,


for three thousand cycles and z ns.


117—118. That man who having fasted
for twenty-seven days, takes a single meal on
the twenty-eigith day, and acts thus fera
full year, with soul and senses under perfect
restraint, acquires very great merit, which,
in fact, is equal to what is acquired by the
celestial Rishis. Having every article of
enjoyment, and gifted with great energy,
he shines with the effulgence of the midday
sun. Z


ttg—120. Sportive ladies of the most
delicate features and gifted with splendour
of complexion, having deep bosoms, taper-
ing thighs and full and round hips, decked


MAMABHARATA,


with celestial ornaments, please him with
their company while he rides on a delihtiat
and excellent car effulgent like the sun and
equipped with every article of enjoyment,
for thousands and thousands of suns.


12{—123. ‘that man who having fastet


‘for twenty-eight days, takes a single meal on


the twenty-ninth day, and acts thus tor a
full year, observing all the while truthful-
ness of speech, acquires auspicious regions,
of great happiness that are adored by celes-
tial Rishis and royal sages. Phe car be
obtains is effulvent like the sun and the
moon, made of pure gold and adorned with
every:sort of gem, tidden by Apsaras and
Gandharvas singing melodiously.


124. hereon he is attended by auspi-
cious ladies adorned with celestial oruas
ments of every sort. Gifted with sweet
dispositions and agreeavle features, and
endued with great energy, these gladden
hias with their company.


125. Kndued with every article of enjoy»
Ment and with great energy, and possessed
of the splendour of a burning fire, he shines
like a celestial, with a celestial form having
every excellence.


126. he regions he attains are those of
the Vasus and the Maruts, of the Saddiyas
and the Ashwins, of the Kudras and of
Brahman himself.


(27. Phat maa who having fasted for a
full month, takes a single meal on tne first
day of the following month, and acts thus
for a full year, loocing un all things im-
pactiaily, attains to tue regions of Braliman
himself.


128. here he lives upon ambrosia.
Gifted with a beautiful form highly agreeable


-to all, he shines with energy and prosperity


like the sun himself of a thousand rays.


129. Devoted to Yuga and adorned with
celestial dresses and garlands and smeared
with celestial perfuines and unguents, he
passes his time in great happiness, not ex-
periencing the least sorrow, He shines on
his car attended by ladies that blaze forth
with effulgence emitted by themselves,


430. Those ladies the dauuhters of the
celestial Risbis and the Rudras, worship
him with veneration. ;


131. Capable of assuming various forms
that are highly delightful and highly agree-
able, their speech is charactecized by
varivus kinds of sweetness, and they are
able to please the person they wait upos
in various kinds of ways.


132—133. While making his journeys,
he sides om acar that luoks like the sky
itself in color, in his rear ace cars which


‘


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


look like the Moon; before bin are those
which resemble the clouds; on bis right
are Cars that are red ; bélow,him are those
that are blue; and above him are thost
that are of variegated color. He is always
worshipped by those who wait upon him,


134. Gitted with great wisdom, he lives
in the region of Brahman for as many
years a5 are measured by the drops of rain
that fall in course of a thousand years on
the insular continent of Jamvudwipa.


35. Indeed, gifted with the effulgence
a deity, he lives in that region’ df unalloyed
happiness for as many years as the drops
of cain. which fall upod the Bartle ia the
rainy season. ’ .


136.' The fran’whd, having fasted fof a
whole month, eats onthe first day of the
following miowth, and acts thus for ten years,
acquires the status of a preat Rishi. He-
has not to undergo any change of form
while going to the celestiat region for enjoy-
ing the rewards of his deeds in this life.


137, Indeed, this is the status which one
acquires by coritrolling speech, practis-
fny self-denial, subjugating anger, sexuat
appetite, and the desire to eat, ‘pouring
libations on the sacred fire, and regularly
worshipping the two-twilights. ot Se


' 138. ‘That man who purifies himself by
the observance of these and similar vows
and practices, and who eats in this way, be-
comes as pure as ether and gifted with
solar effulgence, ;


139. Such a mar, O king, proceeding
to the celestial region ia even his own cor-
poreal frame, enjoys all the, happiness that
is there like a celestial at his will. -

140. 1 have thus told you, O chief of
the Bharatas, what the excellent ordinances
are about sacrifices, otie after another, as
dependent upon the fruits of fasts. ’


141-142. Poor men, O son of Pritha,


“may, nevertheless, acquire the fruits thereof


(by the observance of fasts). By observing
these fasts, even a poor man may acquire
the highest end, O foremost one of Bharata’s
race, devoting himself all the while, besid-s,


‘to the worship of the celestials and the


Brahmanas. I have thus recited to you
in full the ordinances about fasts,


143. Do not entertain any doubt about
those men who so observe vows, who are
so heedful and pure and gteat, who are so
freed from pride and malice, who are en-


dued with such devoted understandings,:


and who pursue their end with such firms
ness and fixity of purpose without ever
deviating from their path,

oe


31


241.


CHAPTER CVI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued. *


Yudhishthira said :— .

rt. Telt me, O grandfather, of that which
is considered as the foremost of all Tirthas.
Indeed, you should expound to me what
that Virtha is which conduces to the greatest -
purity. ;


Bhishma said := :

2. Forsooth, all Tirthas are possessed of
merjt. Listen, however, with attention to
me as { tell you what the ‘irtha, the
cleanser, is of men gifted with wisdom. .


4. Following eternal Truth, one should
bathe in the Yirtha called. Manasa, whicl.
is unfathomable, stainless, and pure, and
which has Truth for its waters andthe
understanding for its lake.


4. The fruits, in the form of cleansing,
that one gains by bathing «in that Tirtha,
are freedom fram cupidity, sincerity, truth-
fulness, mildness, mercy, abstention from
injuring atty cteature, self-control, and
tranquillity, ;


5. Those men who ate freed from at-
tachments, who are shorn of pride, who are
above all pairs of opposites, who have no
wives and children and houses and gardens,
etc., who are gifted with purity, and who
live upon the alms given to them by others,
are considered as Tirthas, ‘


6. He who knows the truths of all things
and who is freed from the idea of mineness,
is said to be the highest Tirtha, In finding
out the marks of purity, your gazé should
ever be directed towards these q:alities.


7—8. Those persons from whose souls
the qualities of goodness, darkness, and
ignorance have been washed off, they who,
not caring for purity and ‘impurity, pursue
the ends they have proposed to themseives,
they who have renounced everything, they
who are possessed of omniscience and gifted


! with universal sight, and they who are


of pure conduct, are considered as Tirthas
possessing the purifying power.


9g. That man whose limbs only are wet
with water, is not considered as one that is
washed. He, on the other hand, is con-
sidered as washed who has’ washed himself
by self-denial. Even sucha person is said
to be pure both internally and externally.

10. They who never busy themselves
with what is past, they who feel no attach-
ment for present acquisitions, indeed, they


_who are free from desire, are said to be
possessed of the highest purity.


242


it. Knowledge is said to form the
especial purity of the body, So also free-
dom from desire, and cheerfulness of mind.


12. Purity of conduct forms the purity of
the mind. The purity that one acquires,
by ablutions in sacred waters is considered
as inferior, Indeed that purity which ori-
ginates from knowledge, is considered as
the best.


13, Those ablutions which one performs
with a burning mind in the waters of the
knowledge of Brahma in the Tirtha called
Manasa, are the true ablutions for truth.
knowing persons, :


14. That man who is endued with trne
purity of conduct and who is always given
to the preservation of a proper attitude to-
wards all, indeed, he -who is gifted with
attributes and merit, is considered as truly
pure, : aoe ‘
"45. These that I have mentioned have
beeh said to be the’ Tiritas of the body.


Lis‘en to me as.1. tell. you what those |


sacred ‘Yirthas are that are situate on the
Earth also. . ' 1


16. As special attribytes' of the body
have been said to be sacred, so there are
particular sp ts on Eatth as well, and- par-
ticular waters, which are considered sacred.


17. By reciting the names of the Tirthas,
by performing ablutions there, and by offer-
ing oblations to the departed Manes in
those places, one’s sins are dissipated.
Those. men whose sins are thus dissipated,
succeed in acquiring the celestial region,
when they leave this world.


18. On account of. their association with
pious persons, ertae i the special efficacy
of the earth itself, of those spots and of
particular waters, there are certain portions
of the Earth that have come to be con-
sidered as sacred.


19. The mental Tirthas are separate
and distinct from those of the Earth, ‘That
person who bathes in both, acquires success
forthwith, :


2o—21. As strength without exertion,
or exertion without strength can never per-
form anything, singly, and as these, when
combined, can do all things, so one that
becomes gifted with the purity that is con-
tributed by the ‘Tirthas in the body as also
by that which is contributed by the ‘Tirthas
on the Earth, becomes truly pure and ac-
quires success, ‘That purity which is de-
tived from both sources is the best.


’ MAMABHARATA.


CHAPTER CIX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).==
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. You should, O grandfather, tell mre
what is the highest, the most beneficial,
and the most certain fruit of all sorts of
fasts in this world.


Bhishma said :—


2. Listen, O king, to what ws recited
by the Self-create himself and by doing
which a person, forsovth, acquires the
highest ha ppiness.


3- That man who fasts on the twelfftt
day of the moon in the month called Margae
shira and: adores Krishna as Keshava
for the whole day and night, acquires the
merits of the Horse sacrifice and becomes
purged off of all his sins.


4. He who, similarly, fasts on the twelftty
day. of the moon in the month of Pausia
and adores Krishna as Narayana, for the
whole day and night, acquires the merits
of the Vajapeya sacrifice and the highest
success.


5 He who fasts om the twelfth day of

the moon in the month of Magha and
adores Krishna, as Madhava, for the whole
day and night, acquires the merits of the
Rajasuya sacrifice, and rescues his own
family.
’ 6. He who fasts on the twelfth day of
the moon im the month of Phalguna and
adores Krishna as Govinda, for the whole
day and night, acquires the the merit of
the Atiratra sacrifice and goes to the region
of Soma. .


qj. He who fasts on the twelfth day of
the moon in the month of Chaitra and
adores Krishna as Vishnu, for the whole
day and night, acquires the merit of the:
Pundarika saetifice and proceeds to the
region of the cefestials.


8. By observing a simifar fast on the
twelfth day of the month of Vaishakha and
adoring Krishna as the destroyer of Madhu °
for the whole day and night, one acquires
the merits of the Agnishtoma sacrifice and
proceeds to the region of Soma,


9. By cbserving a fast on the twelfth
lunar day in the month of Jaishtha and
adoring Krishna as him who had covered
the universe with three steps of his, one
acquires the merits of the Gomedha sacri-
fice and sports with the Apsaras in great
hap piness. nee r —

to. By observing a fast on the twelfth
day of the moor in the month of Ashada


ANUSHASANA PAR VA.


and adoring Krishna as the Dwarf, one
acquires the merits ‘of the Naramedha
Sacrifice and sports in happiness with the
Apsaras. ‘


1s. By“observing a fast for the twelfth
funmar day of the month of Shravana and
adoring Krishna for day and night as
Shreedhara, one acquires the merits of the
sacrifice called Panchayajna and acquires
a beautiful car in the celestial region where-
on he sports in joy.

12. By observing a fast on the twelfth
day of the moon in the month of Bhadra-
pada and adoring Krishna as Hrishikesha
for the whole day and night, one acquires
the merits of the Sautramani sacrifice and
becomes purged off of ail sias.


13. By observing a fast for the twelfth
day of the moon in the month of Ashwin
and adoring Krishna as Padmanabha, one
acquires, forsooth, the merits of that sacri-
fice in which a thousand kine are given
away. j

14. By observing a fast for the twelfth
day of the moon in the month of Kartixa
and adoring Krishna as Damodara, one
acquires, forsooth, the combined merits of
all the sacrifices. .


15. He who, in this way, worship
Krishna for a whole year as Pundari-
kaksha, acquires the power of recollectin
the incidents of his pristine births pea
acquires much wealth in gold.


“16. Likewise he who adores Krishna
every day as Upendra, acquires oneness
with him. After Krishna has been adored
thus, one should, at the conclusion of his
vow, feed.a number of Brahmanas or make
@ilts of clacihed butter to them.


17. The illustrious Vishnu, that ancient
Being, has himself said that there is no
fast which possesses superior merits.


CHAPTER CX.


(ANUHASANIKA PARYVA ).—
* Continued. ; £


Vaishampayana said :~ :

t. Approaching Bhishma venerable in
years, vts., Bhishma, who was then lying
on his bed of arrows, the highly wise
-Vudhishthira put the following questions,


Yudhishthira said :—
2. How, O grandfather, does one acquire
beauty of form and prosperity and sweet-


243


ness of disposition? How, indeed, does
one acquire religious merit and wealtt and
pleasure 2 How does one wia happiness?
Bhishma said :—

3—9. In the month of Margashira, when
the moon comes in conjunction with the
asterism called Mula, when his two feet
are united with that very asterism, O king,
when Rohini is in his calf, when his knee-
joiats are in Ashwini, and his thighs are in
the two Ashadas; when Phalguni makes
his anus, and Krittika his waist, when his
navel is in Bhadrapada, his ocular region
in Revati, and his back on the Dhanishthas,
when Anuradha makes his belly, when with
his two arms he reaches the Vishakhas, ©
when his two hands are indicated by Hasta,
when Punarvasu, O king, makes his fingers,
Ashlesha his nails, when. Jyeshtha makes
his neck, when Shravana makes his ears,
and Pushya his mouth, when Swati is said -
to make his teeth and lips, when Shata-
bhisha is his smile and Magha his nose,
when Mrigashiras is known to be in his


eye, and Chitra in his forehead, when his


head is in Bharani, when Ardra forms his
hair, O king, the vow called Chandra-
vrata should be taken in hand. Upon the
termination of that. vow, gifts of clarified


; butter should be made to Brahmanas con-


versant with the Vedas,


to. As the fruit of that vow, one acquires
prosperity, personal beauty and that good
luck which brings ‘about knowledge. In-
deed; one becomes, on account of such a
vow, as full of attribute as the full Moon
‘himself, »


CHAPTER CXI. -


| (ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).«
: Continued.


Yudhishthira said:—.


1. O grandfather, O greatly wise one,


| conversant with all the scriptures, I wisty


to know those-excellent ordinances by which


| mortals have to travel through their rounds
of ce-birth. es


z. ‘What is that conduct by following
which, O king, men succeed in acquiring


‘high heaven, and what is that conduct -by


which one siaks in Hell ?
3. When, renouncing the dead body


-| that is as inect as a piece of wood or clod


of earth, people proceed to the other world,
what are those which follow them Wiese 7 +


244 -
’ Bhishma said :—'


4., Yonder comes the- illustrious - and
highly intelligent Vrihaspati: Do you ask
his blessed self, ‘The subject is an eternal
my stery. — :

5. None else is capable of explaining
the matter. There is no speaker like
Vribaspati.


Vaishampayana said _


6. While the son of. Pritha and the son
of Ganga were thus conversing with each
other, there came at the spot from the sky
the illustrious Vrihaspati of purified soul.


7. King Yudhishthica, and all others,
headed by Dhritarashtra, stood up and
received Vrihaspati with proper honors.
Excellent was the worship they offered to
the preceptor of the celestials.


8. Then approaching the illustrious
Vrihaspati, Dharma’s royal son, Yudbish-
thira, asked him ‘the question in proper?
form, desirous of knowing the truth. , :


Yudhishthira said:—


g. O illustrious one, you ate conversant
with all duties and all the scriptures. J
you tell me what is truly the friend of,


mortal creatures? |"


to. Is the father, or mother, or son, or,
preceptor, or kinsmen, or relatives, or those
called friends, that may be said to truly
form the friend of: a mortal creature? One

oes to the next world, leaving his dead
body that is like a piece ‘of wood or a clod
of earth, Who.is it that follows him
there? : :


Vrihaspati said: |

tt. One is born alone, O king, and one
dies alone; one crosses alone the difficulties
one meets with, and one alone meets what-
ever misery falls to his lot.


12-13. Ore has really no companion
in these deeds. ‘The father, the mother,
the brother, the son, the preceptor, kinsmen,
relatives, and fcieids, leaving the dead
body as if it were a piece of wood or.a cold
of earth, after having mourned for only a
moment, all turn away from it and mind
their own affairs.


14, Only virtue follows the body that
is thus left by them all. It is, therefore,
piain, that virtue is the only friend and
that virtue only should be sought by all.


ts. A virtuous man would acquire that
high end which is formed by Heaven. If
sinful, he goes to Hell.


. 16. Hence, an intelligent man should
always seek to acquire virtue through


MAHABHARATA.


wealth acquired by fair means. Virtue is
the one only friend which creatures have
in the next world.


17. Moved by cupidity, or stupefaction,
or mercy, or fear, one shorn of knowledge
is seen to do unfair deeds, for the sake of
even another, his judgment thus stupefied
by cupidity. :

18. Virtue, wealth, and pleasure,—these
three form the fruit of life. One should
win these three by means of being freé from
impropriety and sin.


Yudhishthira said :—


19. 1 have carefully heard the words
spoken by your illustrious self,—these words
that are fraught with virtue, and that are
highly beneficial, I wish now to know of
the state of the body (after death).


20., The dead body of man becomes
subtile and unmanifest.: It becomes inviv
sible. How is, it passible for virtue to fol-
low it ? y


Vrihaspati said :+ ;
+ 2t——22., Eacth, Wind, Ether, Water,
Light, Mind, Yama (the king of the dead),
Understanding, the Soul, as also Day and
Night, all together witness the merits of
all living creatures. With these, virtue fol,”


lows the creature (when dead). _ :
+


23. When the body becomes bereft of
life, skin, bones, flesh, the vital seed, and
blood, Jeave it simultaneously.


24. Gifted with merit , (and demerit),
individual soul (after the destruction of this
body) comes by another, body. After the
attainment by individual soul of that body
the presiding deities of the five element
once more witness all his deeds, goo
and bad. a pL. ed


be

25. What tlse do you wishto hear? [f
gifted with virtue, individuat soul enjoys
happiness. What other subject, belonging
to this oc the other world, shall I describe
to you ?


Yudhishthira said: *

+ 26. Your illustrious self has explained
how ‘Virtue follows individual soul. I wish
to know how the vital seed i¥ originated.


Vrihaspati said :—

27—~28. The food that ‘these gods, O
king, who live in the body, vzs., Earth,
Wind, Ether, Water, Light and Mind, eat,
pleases them. When those five elements
become pleased, O monareh, with Mind
numbering as their sixth, their vital seed
ve becomes generated, O you of purified
soul,


‘


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


29. When an act of anion takes place
between male and female, the vital seed
comes out and causes conception. I have
thus explained to you what you had asked.
What else do you wish to hear.


Yudhishthira said :—


30. You have, O illustrious one; said
how conception takes place. Do you ex--
plain how the individual oyl that takes
birth, grows. ‘


Vrihaspati said :-—


3. As soon as individual soul enters the
vital seed, he becomes overwhelmed by the
elements already mentioned. When indivi-
dual soul become disunited therewith, he
is said to- attain to the other end (vés.,
death). a


32.* Gifted with these eléments, the in-
dividual soul comes by a body. ‘The deities
that preside over those elements, witness
all his deeds, good and bad. What else do
you wish to hear.


Yudhishthira said:— |


33 Living off skin, bone and flesh, and
becoming destitute of all those elements,
in what does individual soul reside, O illus.
trious one, for enjoying and suffering hap-
piness and misery ?


*
e


Vrihaspati said — .


34. Endued with all his acts, individual
sout quickly enters the vital seed, and avail-
irig of the menstrual flow of women, takes
bicth in time, O Bharata, =


35. After birth,-individual soul receives
woe and death from the- messengers of
Yama. Indeed, he goes through anieeey
and a painful round of re-byth.


“36. Endued with fife, O king, individual
soul in this world, from the moment of his
birth, enjoys and’ suffers his own (pris-
tine deeds), depending upon virtue (and its
reverse).


37- If individual soul according to the
best of his power, follows virtue from the
day of his birth, he then succeeds in enjoy-
ing unintecruptedly, when ce-born, happi-
ness, :

38. If, on the other hand, without
following virtue without interrution, he acts
sinfully, he reaps happiness at first as the
reward of his virtue and suffers misery
after that.


39. Endued with sin, individual soul has
to go to the dominions of Yama and suffer-
ing great misery there, he has to take birth
in an intermediate order of being. ‘<


245


4o—4t. Lister to me as f tell you, what
the different acts are by doing which indivi-
duals soul, stupefied by folly, has to take
birth in different orders of being, as declar-
ed in the Vedas, the scriptures, and the
histories. Mortals have to go to the dread-
ful regions of Yama. In those regions, O
king, there are places which are fraught
with every merit and which are worthy on
that account of being the habitations of the
very celestials,


42. There are, again, places in those
regions that are worse than those which are
occupied by animals and birds. Indeed,
there are places of these kinds in the abode
of Yama which is equal to the region of
Brahman himself in merits.


43—44. Creatures, fettered by their
deeds, suffer various kinds of misery. [
shall, after this, tell you what those acts
and dispositions are on account of which
a person acquires an end that is fraught
with great misery and terror,


45. If a twice-born person, having studied
the four Vedas, becomes stupefied by folly
and accepts a gift from a fallen man, he
has then to take birth in the order of asses.


46. He has to live as an ass for fifteen
years. Shaking off his assinine form, he
has next to take birth as an ox and which
state he has to live for seven years.


47. Throwing off his bovine form, he
has next to take birth as a Rakshasa of the
twice-born order. Living as a Rakshasa
of the twice-born order for three monthg,
he then regains his status of a Brahmana.


48. -A Breahmana, by officiating at the
sacrifice of a degraded person, has to take
birth as a vile worm. In this form-he has
to live for fifteen years, O Bharata.


49- Feeed from his worm. birth, he is
next born as an ass. Asan ass he has to
live for five years, and then asa hog, in
which state also he has to remain for as
many years,


50. After that, he is born as a cock, and
living for five years in that form, he is
born as a jackal and lives for as many
years in that state. He is then born asa
dog, and living thus for a year he regains
bis manhood.


5!. That foolish disciple who offends
his preceptor by injuring him, has cere
tainly to undergo three changes in this
world,


52. Such a person, O king, has in the
first instance to become a dog. He has
then to become a beast of prey, and then
an ass. Living his assinine form, he has to
wander for sometime in great, misery as a


246


spirit. After the expirati n of that -time,
he is born as a Brahmana.


53. That sinful disciple who even in
thought knows ‘the’ wife of his preceptor,
has, on account of such ‘a sinful heart, to
undergo many dreadful shapes in this
world. ‘ eas ;

54. First taking birth in the canine
order he has to liye for three years. ‘Throw-
ing off the canine form when death comes,
he is born asa vile vermin. © ~


55. In this form he bas to live fora
year. Renouncing that form he succeeds in
regaining his status as a human being of
the twice-born order. ;

56. If the preceptor kills, without reason,
his disciple who is even as a son to him,
he has, on account of such a wilful deed of
sin on his part, to take birth as a beast
of prey. :

57- That son who disregards his father
and mother, O king, is born after renoun-
cing bis human form as an ass, -

‘58. Assuming the assinine forin he has
to live for ten years. Alterthat he is born
as a crocodile, in which form he has to live
for a year. After that he regains the
human form.


59. That son with whont his parents
become angry, has, on account of his evil
thoughts towards them, to take birth as
an ass.


60. As an ass he has to live for ten
months. He is next born as a dog. and has to
remain as such for fourteen months. After
that he is born asa cat and living in that
fone for seven months he cegains his human

orm.


61. Having spoken ill of parents, one is
born as a Sarika, Striking them one is
born, O king, as a tortoise.


62. Living as a tortoisé for ten years,
he is born asa porcupine. After that he
has to take birth as a snake, and living
for six months in that form he regains
human form.

63. That man who, while living upon
the food that his royal master supplies,
commits deeds injurious to the interests of
his master, stupefied by folly, has, after
death, to take birth as a monkey.


64. For ten years he has to live asa
monkey, and after that for five years as a
mouse. After that he is born as a dog,
and living in that form for six months he
succeeds in regaining his human form.

65. That man who misappropriates
what is deposited with him in trust,
to undergo a hundred births, He at fast
takes birth as a vile worm.


MAHABHARATA.


66. Im that order he has to live for
fifteen years, QO Bharata. Upon the exe
haustion of his sin in this way, he succeeds
in regaining his human form.


67. That man who has malice towards
others, has, after death, to take birth as a
Sharngaka. That wicked man who becomes
guilty of breach of teust has to take birth
asa fish.


68. Living as a fish for eight years, he is
born, O Bharata, as a deer. Living as a
deer for four months, heyis next born as
a goat.


69 6After the expiration of a full year, |
he renounces his goatish body, and is
then born as aworm. After that he suc-
ceeds in regaining his human form.


yo—7t. That shameless insensate man
who, through stupefaction, steals paddy,
barley, sesame, Masha,. Kulattha, oil-seeds,
oats, Kalaya, Mudga, wheat, Atasi, and
other kinds of corn, is born as a mouse.


72. After leading the life for sometime;
he is next born asahog. As soon as he
is bora as a hog he has to die of disease.


73. On account of his sin, that foolish
man has next to take. birth as a dog,
O king. Living as a. dog for five years,


be then regains his human form.


94. Having committed an act of adul-
tery with the wife of another man, one is.
born as a wolf. After that he has to as-
sume the forms of a dog and jackal and
vulture. He has nextto take birth as a
snake and then as a Kanka (a bird of prey)
and then as a crane,


75. ‘That sinful wight who, out of foolish-
ness, knows his brother’s wife, has to take
birtty as a male Coel and to live in that
form for a whole year, O king.


76. He who, through lust, knows the
wife of a fciend, or the wife of preceptor,
or the wife of his king, has after death ta
take the form of a hog. ;


77. Hehasto live in this form for five
years and then to assume that of a wolf
for ten years. For the next five years he
has to live as accat and then for the next
ten years as a cock.


78. He is next born as an ‘ant, for three
months and then as a worm for a month.
Having undergone these births, he has next
to live as a vile worm for fourteen years,


79. When his sin becomes exhausted
by such punishment, he at last regains the .
humar form. cee

8a. When a marriage is about to take
place, or a’ sacrifice, or an act of gifts is
about to be made, O you of great power,


ARUSHASANA PARVA,


the man who puts in any impediment, has


to take birth in bis next life as a vile worm.”


80. Assuming such a form he has to
live, O Bharata, for fifteen years, hen
his sin is exhausted by such suffering, he
te-gains the human form.

8t.
in marriage upon a person, he who seeks
to bestow her again upon a second husband,
is compelled, O king, to take birth among
vile worms.


83. Assuming such a form, O Yudhsh--


thira, he has to live for thirteen years.
Upon the exhaustion of his sin by such
suffecance, he re-gains the human form.


84. He who eats without having per-
formed the rites in honor of the celestials
or those in honour.of the departed Manes
or without having offered (even) oblations
of water to both the Rishis and the departed
Manes has to take birth as a crow.


85. Living as a crow for a hundred
“years, he next assumes the form of a cock,
His next change is that of a snake for a
imenh; After this, he regains the human
‘orm, :


86. He who disregards his eldest brother
who is like a father, has, after death,
to take birth as a crane. .


Ws Having assumed that form he has
to live in it for two years, Renouncing
that form at the conclusion of that period,
he re-gains the human form.


88. That Shudra who knows a Brahmani
woman, has, after death, to take birth as
a hog. : : :

89. As-soon as he takes birth in that
order he dies. of disease, O king. The
wretch has next to take birth as a dog,
O king, on account of that sinful deed.


go. Renouncing his canine form he re-
gains, upon the exhaustion of his sin, the
human form. The Shudra who begets
offspring upon a Brahmani woman, leaving
off his human form, is born again as a
mouse. ‘


gt. The man who becomes guilty of
ingratitude, O king, has to go to the regions
of Yama and there to suffer very painful
and severe treatment at the hands of the
emissaries, provoked to fury, of the grim
king of the dead.


92~—93. Clubs with heavy hammers and
mallets, shat p-pointed lances, heated jars,
dreadful sword-biades, heated sands, thorny
Shalmalis,—these and many other engines
of torture such’a man has to suffer in the
regicns of Yama, O Bharata,


Having once bestowed his daughter


247


94. O chief of Bharata’s race, having
suffered such dreadful treatment in the
‘regions of the grim king of the dead, the
ungrateful person has to return to this
world and take birth among vile vermin.


95. He has to five as a vile vermin for a
period of fifteen years, O Bharata. He has
then to enter the womb and die prematurely
before birth.


- 96. After this, that person has to enter
the womb a hundred times successively.
Indeed, having undergone a hundred ree
births, he at last is born asa creature in
some intermediate order between man and
inanimate nature. .


97. Having suffered misery for a great
many years, he has to take birth asa haire
less tortoise. oF:

98. A person who steals curds is born
as.a crane. . One becomes a monkey by
stealing raw fish. That intelligent man
who steals honey, is born as a gadfly.


g9. By stealing fruits or roots or cakes,
one becomes an ant. By stealing Nishpava,
one becomes a Halagolaka,


too. By sealing Payasa, one becomes,
in his next birth, a Tittiri bird. By stealing
cakes, one becomes a screech-owl,


tor.’ That fittle-witted man who steals
iron, has to take birth as a cow. That mat
who steals white brass, is born as a bird
of the Harita species.


- 102. By stealing a silver vessel, one
becomes a pigeon. By stealing a golden
vessel, one has to take birth as a vile
vermin, -


.103. By stealing a piece of silken cloth,
one becomes a Krikara. By stealing a
piece of cloth made of red silk, one bee
comes a Vartaka, ;


104. By stealing a piece of raustin, one
becomes a parrot, By stealing a piece of |
cloth that ts of fine texture, one becomes &
duck after renouncing his human body,


10§. By stealing a piece of cloth made
of cotton, One becomes acrane. By steale
ing a piece of cloth made of jute, one bee
comes a sheep in his next life.


106. By stealing a piece of linen, one fs
born asa hare. By stealing different sorts
of colouring matter, one is born as a pea
cock. : -


107—108. By stealing a piece of red
cloth one is born as a bird of ‘the Jiva-
jivaka species, By stealing unguents (such
as sandalpaste) and perfumes in this world,
the avaricious man, O king, is born asa
mole. Assuming the form of a mole one
has to live in it for fifteen years,


248


tog. After the exhaustion of his ‘sin by
such suffering, he regains the human form.
By stealing milk, one becomes a crane.


tio. That man, O king, who, through
stupefaction of the understanding, steals
oit, is born,. after renouncing this body, as
an animal who lives upon oil as his form.


irr. That wretch, who, himself well-
armed, kills another while that other is un-
armed, for getting his riches or out of
hostile feelings, has, after renouncing his
human body, to take birth as an ass,’


tt2. Assuming that assinine form, he
has to live for a period of two years and
then he is killed by a weapon. Renoun-
cing. his assinine body, he has to take
bisth, in bis next life, as a deer always
anxious (for fear of being killed).


1131t4.; Upon the expiration of a
year from the time of tits birth as a. deer,
he is killed by a weapon. Thus renouncing
his form of a deer, he next takes birth as.a
fish and dies on aceount of being dragged
up in a net, on the expiration of the fourth
month. He has next to take birth asa
beast of prey. He has to live in that form,
for ten years and then he takes birth as a
bird in which form he has to liye for five
years. : :


tts.- Actuated by the change that is
occasioned by time, he then renounces that
form, and, his sin having been exhausted,
he re-gains the human form,


116. That man of little understanding
who slays a woman, has to go to the regions
of Yama and to suffer various kinds of
pain and misery. He then has to pass
through full twenty-one transformations.


117. After that, O king, he has to take
birth as a vile vermin. Living as a vermin
for twenty years, he regains the human
form. .


118119. By stealing food, one has to
take birth as a bee. Living for many
months in the company of other bees, his
sin become exhaustedtand he re-gains the
human form. By stealing paddy, one be-
comes a cat.


120. That man who steals food mixed
with sesame cakes, is in his next birth born
as @ mouse large or small according to
the largeness or smallness of the quantity
stolen.


12r. He bites human beings every day
and, therefore, becomes sinful and passes
through a varied round of re-births. That
foolish man who steals clarified butter has
to take birth as a gallinule., - :


122. That wicked man who steals fish
has to take bicth asacrow. By stealing


MAHABHARATA.


salt one kas to take birth as an imitating
Parrot.


123. That man who misappropriates
trust-property, bas to suffer a diminution iri
the period of his life, and dying has to take
birth among fishes,


124. Having lived for sometime as a
fish, tie dies arid re-gains the human form.
Regaiing, however, the human form he
becomes short-lived.


128. Indeed, taving perpetrated sins, O
Bharata, one has totake birth in an order
ititermediate Between that of humanity and
vegetables. Those people do not knaw
the principles of virtué who take their own,
hearts for their guide. cas

126. Those’ men’who ‘tdmimit various
sinful deeds, and then seek to expiaté
them by continuous vows and observances
of piety, enjoy happiness and suffer misery
and live in great anxiety of heart.


127. Those sinful men who yield to the
influence of cupidity and stupefaction,:are
surely born as Mlechchhas who are un-
worthy of being associated with.


128. Those men, on the other hand, who -
abstain from sin all their lives, become
free from disease of every sort, gifted with
beauty of form, and possessed of riches.


129. Women also; when they: act in this
way, attain to births of.the same kind.
litdeed; they lave to take births as the
males of the ahimals I lave mentioned. |


130. | have told-you all the faults of the
misappropriation of others’ properties. [
have described to you very briefly the sub-
ject, O sinless one,.'-° ?- h P ‘ < Fe

131-132. In connection with some other
subject, O Bharata, you will again hear of
those faults. -l heard all this, O king
formerly from Bhrahman himself, and I
asked all about it in a proper way, when hé
described it in the midst of the celestiat
Rishis. I have told you truly and in detait
‘all that you had asked nie, >


133- , Having. listened to all this, O king,
do you always set your heart on virtue,


*
*


= dhiermentimtnt


CHAPTER CXIL.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—=
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :— ;

t. You have told me, O twice-born one,
what the end is of virtue or sin. 1 wish
now to hear, O foremost of speakers, of
what the end is of virtues


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


3. Having committed various sinful
Weeds, by what acts do people succeed in
acquiring an auspicious end in this world?
By what acts also, do people acquire auspici-
ous end in the celestial region ? 7


Vrihaspati said :-—~


3. By committing sinful deeds witli per-


verted mind, one gives way to the influence


of sin, and accordingly goes to Hell.


4. That man who, having perpetrated
sinful deeds through stupefaction of mind,
feels the pangs of repentance and sets his
heart on meditation (of the deity), has not
to suffer the consequences of his sins. |


5. One becomes freed ftom his sins in-
asmuch as he fepents for them.


6. If one, having committed a sin, O
king, mentions it before Brahmanas conver-
sant with duties; he speedily becomes freed
from the obloquy arising from his sin,


7. Accordingly as one mentions his sins,
fully or otherwise, with concentrated mind,
he becomes cleansed therefrom fully or
otherwise, like a snake freéd from his
diseased slough. :


8. By making, with acencentrated mind,
gifts of various kinds to a Brahmana, and
concentrating the mind (on the deity), one
attains to.an auspicious end.


I shall now tell you what those gifts
are, O Yudhishthira, by making which a
person, even if guilty of having committed
sinful deeds, may become gifted with
merit. :


10. Of all kinds of gifts, that of food is
considered as the best. One desirous of
acquiring merit should, with a sincere Weart,
make gifts of food.


11. Food is the vital air of men.
it ali creatures originate. All the worlds of
living creatures are established upon food.
Hence food is highly spoken of.


12. The deities, Rishis, departed Manes,
and men, all praise food. Formerly king
Rantidéva, proceeded to the celestial region
by making gifts of food,


13. Good food that has heen acquired
hy faic means; should be given; with a cheer-
ful heart, to Brahmanas possessed of Vedic
learning.

14.
cheerful heart, is taken by a thousand
Brahmanas, has never to take birth in an
intermediate order.


15. A person, O king, by feeding ten
thousand Brahmanas, becomes cleansed of
sin and devoted to Yoga practices.


16. A Brahmana knowing the Vedas,
32


From.


That man, whose food, given with a,


#49


by giving away food acquired by him as
alms, toa Brahmana devoted ta the study
of the Vedas, succeeds in acquiring happi-
ness here.


17—18. That Kshatriya who, without
taking anything belongitig to a Brahmana,
protects his subjects lawfully, and makes
gifts of food, obtained by his strength. ta
Brahmanas foremost in Vedic knowledge,
with concentrated heart, succeeds by such
conduct, O you of righteous soul, in cleans-
ing himself, O son of Pandu, of ail his
sinful deeds, : -

19 That Vaishya who divides the groo
duce of his ficlds into six equal: parts and
makes a gift of one of those shares to Beata
manas, succeeds by such conduct in cleans-
ing himself from every sin.


zo. That Shudra who, acquiring faod
by hard labour and at the fist of life: itself,
makes a gift of it to Brahmanas, bectomes
purged off of every siti.


21. ‘That man who, by dint of bis physi«
cal strength, acquires food without doing
atty act of injury to any creature; and
makes gift ef it to Bralimanas, succeeds in
avoiding all calantities.


22. A person by cheerfully making gifts
of food acquired by fair means to Brah-
manas pre-eminent for Wedic learning; *
becomes purged off of all his sins,


23. By treading in the path of the pious,
one becories freed from all sins. A person
by making gifts. of such food as creates
great energy, beconies himself endued with
great energy,


24. The path made by charitable pere
sons, is always trod by the wise. ‘They who |
make gifts of food, are.considered as givers
of life. The merit they acquire by such
gifts, is eternal,

25. Hence; a persoti should, under all
circumstances, seek to acquire food, by. fair ,
means, and having got it to make always
gifts of it to worthy men.‘ Food is the
great support of living creatures,


26. By making gifts of food, one has
never to go to Hell. Hence, one should
always make gifts of food, having got it by
fair means,


27. The house-holder- should always try ©
to eat after having made a gift of food toa
Brahmana. Every man should make the
day fruitful by making gifts of food.


28-29: A person by feeding, O king, a
thousand Brahmanas who are all conversane
with duties and the seriptures and the
sacred histories, las not to go to Hell and te
return to this world for going through


250


re-bicths, Gifted with the fruition of every
desire, he enjoys great happiness in the next
world. :


30. Gifted with such merit, he sports
in happiness, freed from every anxiety,
possessed of personal beauty and great
fame and endued with wealth.


gt. FT have thus told you all about the
great merit of gifts of food. This is the
root of all virtue and merit, as also of all
gifts, O Bharata, :


——— ee


CHAPLER CXIII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

1. Which amongst these is more effica-
cious to a person, namely, abstention from
injury, the observance of the Vedie ritual,
meditation, control over the senses, penances
and obedient services rendered to the pre-
ceptors.


YVrihaspati said :—

2. Allthese six are meritorious. They
are different doors of virtue. I shall dis-
course upon them now. ‘Do yoy listen to
them, O chief of the Bharatas !


3. E shall tell you what forms the highest
good of a human being. ‘That’ man: who
practises the religion of universal mercy,
acquires his highest good.


4. ‘That man who keeps under restraint
the three passions, vs., lust, anger and
avatice, by throwing them upon all creatures,
acquires success.


5. He who, for his own happiness, kills
Other innocent creatures with the rod of
punishment, never acquires happiness in the
next world,


6. That man who considers all creatures
as his own self, and treats them as his own
self, laying aside the rod of punishment
and completely controlling his anger, suc-
ceeds in acquiring happiness,


The very celestials who are desirous
of a fixed habitation, become stupefied in
ascertaining the road of that person who
forms himself the soul of all creatures and
considers them all as his own self, for such
a person leaves no track’ behind.


8. One should never do that to another
which he considers as injurious to his own
self. ‘This, in brief, is the rule of virtue.
One by acting in a different way by giving
way to desire, becomes guilty of sin.


MAHABHARATA.


9. In refusing and giving, in weal and
woe, in the agreeable and the disagreeatile,
one should judge of their effects by con-
sidering his own self.


10, When one injures another, the in-
jured in return injures the injurer. Like-
wise, when one cheristres another, that other
cherishes the cherisher. Oue should form
his own rule of conduct according to this.
I have told you what virtue is even by this
subtile way.


Vaishampayana continued :—

tt. The preceptor of the celestials endued
with great intelligence, haviny said this to
king Yudhishthira the just, ascended up-
wards for proceeding to the celestial region
before our eyes.


CHAPTER CXIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA}~—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—~


1, After this, king, Yudhishthira gifted
with great energy, and the foremost of
eloguent men, addressed his grandfather
lying on his bed of arrows, i the folowing '
words, :


Yudhishthira said :—

2. -O you of great intelligence, the Rishis
and Brahmanas and the celestials, led by
the authority of the Vedas, aH speak highly
of the religion of mercy.


3. But, O king, what F ask you is this z
how does a man, who has perpetrated acts
of injury to others in ward, thought and
deed, succeed in purifying himself from
misery.


Bhishma said :—


4  Brahmavadins have said that there
are four kinds of mercy or abstention - from
injury. If even one of those four tinds be
not observed, the religion of mercy, it is
said, is not observed.


5 As aH qnadruped animals are in-
capable of standing on three legs, so the
religion of mercy cannot stand if any of
those four divisions or parts be wanting.


6—7. As the foot-prints of all other
animals are sunk in those of the elephant,
so all other religions are said to be con ~
tained in that of mercy. A person becomes
guilty of injury through acts, words, and
thoughts,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


8." Discarding it mentally in te begin-
ning, one should next discard it in word
and thought. He who, according to this
rule, abstains from eating meat is said to
be purified in a three-fold way.


g_ {tis heard that}{Brahmavadins point
out three causes (for the sin of eatiny
meat). ‘That sin may attach to the mind,
to words, and to deeds.


to. lt is, therefore, that wise men who
re gifted with penances refrain from eating
meat. Listen to me, O king, as I teli you
what the faults are which attach to the
eating of meat.


11. The meat of other animals is like
the flesh of one’s son. That foolish person,
stupefied} by folly,#who eats meat is con-
sidered as thejvilest of human beings.


12, The union of father and mother
produces children. Similarly the cruelty that
a helpless and sinful wretch commits, pro-
duces its progeny of repeated re-births
fraught with great misery.


13. As the tongue is the cause of sensa-
tion of taste, so, the scriptures declare,
attachment proceeds from taste.


14. Well-dressed, cooked with salt or
without salt, meat, in whatever form one
may take it, by and by attracts the mind
and enslaves it, :


15. How will those foolish men who live
_ upon meat succeed in listening to the sweet
music of celestial drums and cymbals and
tyres and harps? 1


16. They who eat meat highly speak of |


it, allowing themselves to be stupefied by its
taste which?they declare to be something
inconceivable, undescriable, and unimagi-
nable.


17. Such praise even of meat is sinful.
Formerly, many pious men, by giving the
flesh of their own bovies, protected the flesh
of other creatures and as a result of such
deeds of merit, have proceeded to the

. celestial region.


18. In this way, O king, the religion of
mercy is surrounded by four considerations.
1 have thus declared to you that religion
which contains all other religions within it.


CHAPTER CXV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).~
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. You have told it many times that
abstention from injury is the highest Religion.
Iv Shraddhas, however, that are performed
in honour of the departed Manes, persons
for their own behoof, should make offerinzs
of various kinds of meat.


2. You have said so while discoursing
formerly upon the ordinances about Shrad-
dhas. Huw can meat, however, be pro-
cured without killing a liviag creature ?
Your declarations, therefore, appear to me
to be contradictory.


3. A doubt has, therefore, sprung in ouc
mind about the duty of abstaining from
meat. What are the sins that one commits
by eating meat, and what are the merits
that one acquires ?


4. Whatare the demerits of him’ wha
eats meat by himself slaying a living crea
wre? What are the merits of him who
eats the meat of animals, slain by others?
What the merits or. demerits of him who
kills a living creature for another 2? ‘Or of
him who eats meat buying it of others ?


5. I wish, O sinless one, that you should
describe to me this subject in full. I wish ta
ascertain this eternal Religion with certainty.


6. How. does one acquire longevity ?
How does one acquire strength ? How does
one acquire faultlessness of Jimbs? Indeed,
how does one become gifted with excellent
matks ?


Bhishma said :—


7. _ Listen to me, O scion of Kuru’s race
what the merit is of abstention from meat.
Listen to me as | declare to you what the
excellent ordinances, in sooth, are on this
subject.


8. Those great men who desire beauty,
faultlessness of limbs, long life, understan-
ding, mental and physical strength, and

memory, should abstain from acts of injury


Qe
beetween the


Numberless discourses took place.

Rishis, on this subject, O
s, ion of Kuru’s race. Listen, QO Yudhish«
ira, what their opinion was.


to. The merit acquired by that person,
O Yudbisithira, who, with the steadiness
of a vow, worship the celestials every
month in Uorse-sacrifices, is equal to nina


who discards honey and meat.


254


tr. The highly wise seven celestial
Rishis, the Valakshillyas, and those Rishsi,
who drink the cays of the sun, all speak
highly of abstention from meat.


ta. The Self-create Manu has said that
man who does not eat meat, or who does
not kill living creatures, or who does not
cause them to be killed, is a friend of all
creatures, :


13. Such a man is incapable of being op-
pressed by any creature. He enjoys the
confidence of all living beings. He always
enjoys, besides, the praise of the pivus.


14. The victuous Narada has said that
that maa who wishes to multiply his own
flesh by eating the flesh of othe: creatures,
meet with disaster.


15. Ycihaspati bas said that that man
who abstains from honey and meat, gains
the merit of gifts and sacrifices and
penances.. :


16. In my view, these two persons are
equal, vis., be who worships the celestials
every month in a Horse-sacrifice for a
century and he who abstains fiom honey
and meat.


17. On account of abstention from meat,
one is considered as one who always wor-
ships the celestials in sacrifices, or as one
who always makes gifts to others, or as_ one
-who always practises the severest auste-
tities.

18. That man who having eaten meat,
gives it up aiterwards, wins merit by such
a deed that is so great that a study of all
the Vedas or a performance, O Bharata,
of all the sacrifices, cannot give its like.


to. It is very difficult to abstain from
meat after ohe has known it staste. Indeed,
it is extremely difficult for suct.a person
to observe the great vow abstention from
meat, a vow that assutes every creature
by removing all fear,


20. That learned person who gives to all
living creatures the gift of complete assur-
ance, is forsooth, regarded as the giver of
life-breaths in this world.

zt. This is the high Religion: which
wise men esteem very highly. The vital airs
of other creatures are as dear-to them as
those of his own self,


22. Men gifted with intelligence and
purified souls should always treat others as
they themselves wish to be treated.


23. It is seen chat even those men who
are endued with learning and who seek to
acquire the greatest good in the shape of
Liberation, are not free from the fear of
death, ;


MAHABHARATA.


23. What necessity. there be said o
those innocent and healthy creatures pilted
with love of life, when they are sought to
be Billed by sinful wretches living by
slaughter ?


24. Therefore, O king, know that the
discarding of meat is the highest refuye of
Religion, of the celestial region, and of
happiness,


25. Abstention from injury is the high-
est Religion, [t is, again, the highest
penance. It is also the highest truth from
which all duty emanates.


26. Flesh cannot be had from grass or
wood or stone. Unless a living creature is
killed, it cannot be procured, Hence is the
fault in’ eating flesh.


_ 27. The celestials, who live upon Swaha,
Swadha, and nectar, are given to truth
and sincerity. Those persons, however,
who are for satisfying the sensation of taste,
should be known as Rakshasas pervaded
by the quality of Darkness. :


28—29. That man who abstains# from
meat, is never put in fear, O king, by any
creature, wherever he may be, vis., in
tertible forest or inaccessible fastnesses, by
day or by night, or at the two twilights, in
the open squares of towns or in conclaves
of men, from upraised weapons or in places
where there is great fright from wild
animals or snakes.


30. All creatures seek his protection.
He is trusted by all. He never causes any
anxiety in others, and himself has never to
become anxious,


3t. If there were nobody who ate flesh
there would then, be nobody to slay living
creatures. The man who slays living crea
tures kills them for the sake of the person
who eats flesh, =


32. If flesh were not considered as
food, there would then be no destruction of
living creatures. It is for the sake of the
eater that the destruction of living crea-
tures is carried on in the world. :


. 33. Since, O you of great. splendour,
the period of life is shortened of persons
who Bill living creatures or cause them
to be killed, it is clear that the person
who seeks his own, behoof, should give up
meat altogether, ‘


34. Those dreadfnl persons who are
engaged in the destruction of living crea-
tures, never find protectors when they are
in need. Such persons should always be
molested and punished even as beasts of
prey. :

35. Through cupidity or stupefaction
Of sense, for the sake of strength and


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


energy, or through association with the
sinful, men Show tendency for commiting
sin.


36. That man who seeks to miltiply
his own flesh by (eating) the flesh of
others, has to live in this world in great
anxiety and after death has to take birth
in indifferent races and families,


37. High Rishis given to the obser-
vance of vows and self-control have said
that abstention from meat is worthy of
praise, productive of fame and Heaven, and
a gteat satisfaction itself.


38. This I heard formerly, O son of
Kunti, from Markandeya when that Rishi
discoursed on the sins of eating flesh.


39. He who eats the flesh of animals are
who desirous of living but who have been
slain by either himself or others, commits
the sin of slaughter for his this act of
cruelty,


40. He who purchases flesh, kills living
creatures through his money. He who
eats flesh, kills living creatures through
such act of eating. He who binds or Seizes
and actually kills living creatures, is the
slaughterer. “[hese are the tkree sorts of


slaughter, each of these three acts
being so.
41. He who does not himself eat flesh


but approves of an act of slaughter, be-
comes stained with the sin of slaughter.


42. By abstaining from meat and
showing mercy to all creatures. one be-
comes incapable of being molested by
any creature, and acquires longevity, perfect
health and happiness.


43- The, merit won by abstaining from
meat, we have heard, is superior to that
of one who makes presents of gold, of
kine, and of land.


44. One should never eat meat of
animals not dedicated in sacrifices and
that are, therefore, killed uselessly, and
that has not been offered to the gods and
depatted Manes with the help of the ordi-
nances, There is not the least doubt that
a person by eating such meat goes to Helf.


45. If one eats the meat that has been
sanctified on account of its having been

rocured from animals dedicated in sacei-
fos and that have been killed for the
purpose of feeding Brahmanas, one incurs
a litle fault.
becomes stained with sin.


46. That wretched man who Bills living
creatures for the sake of those who would
eat them, commits great sin. The eater’s
sin is not so great,


By behaving otherwise, one,


253


47. That weetchsed man who. following .
the path of religious cites and sacrifices
laid down in the Vedas, would kill a living
creature from desire of eating its flesh,
would certainly go to Hell,


48. That mao who having eaten flesh
abstains from it afterwards, acquires great
merit on account of such abstention from
sin.

49


He who arranges for obtaining


i flesh, he who approves of those arrange


ments, he who kills, he who buys or sells,
he who cooks, and he who. eats, are all
considered as eaters of flesh.


50. [shall now cite another authority,
depending upon the saying of the ordainer
himself, that is ancient, worshipped by the
Rishis, and established in the Vedas.


5t. Ithas been said that that religion
which has acts for its marks, has been
ordained for house-holders, O chief of
kings, and not for those men who are
desirous of Liberation,


52. Manu himself has said that meat
which is sanctified with Mantras and
properly dedicated, according to the ordi-
nances of the Vedas, in sites performed
in honor of the departed Manes,—is pure,


§3—34. All other meatiis useless slaughter,
and. is, therefore, inedible, and leads to
Hell and infamy. One should never eat,
O chief of Bharata’s race, like a Rakshasa,
any meat that has been procured by
means not sanctioned by the ordinance.
Indeed, one should never eat flesh obtained
from useless destruction and that has not
been sanctifigd by the ordinance,


55. Fhat man who wishes to avoid
disaster should abstain from the meat of
every living creature,


56. It isheard that in the former Aton
persons, desirous of acquiring regions of
merit hereafter, celebrated sacrifices with
seeds, regarding such animals as dedicated
by them.


57- Doubtful about the propriety of
eating flesh, the Rishis asked Vasu the
king of the Chedis, for removing their
doubt. ing Vasu, krowing. that flesh
should not be taken, answered that it was
edible, O king.


. §8. From that moment Vasu dropped
down from the sky on the Earth. Alter
this he once more repeated his opinion, with
the result that he had to go down below the
Earth for it.


59- Desirous of doing good to al] men,
the great Agastya, by the help of his pen-
ances, dedicated, once for all, alt wild deer


| to the celestials,


254


60. Hence there is no longer any neces-
sity of purifying those animals for offering
them to the eelestials and the departed
Manes. Served with flesh according to the
ordinance, the departed Manes become
pleased. :


61, Listen to me, O king of kings, as 1

tell you this, O sinless one. There is ab-
solute happiness in abstaining from meat,
O king. ;
_ 62. tle who practises severe austerities
for a ¢entury, and he who abstains from
meat, are both equally meritorious, ‘This
is my opinion. cae "

63. In the light half of the month of Kar-
‘tika in especial, one should abstain from
honey and meat. It has been ordained,
that there is greet merit in it.


64. He who abstains from meat for the

four months of the rainy season, acquires

_the blessed achievements, gvis., longevity,
fame, and power. Pa: ;


65. He who abstains for the whole
month of Kartika from meat of every kind,
gets over all sorts of woe and lives in com-
plete happiness. - :


66. They who abstain. from flesh by.
either months or fortnights, have the region
of Brahma ordained for them on account of

_ their abstention from cruelty. . :


67. Formerly many kings, O son of
Pritha, who had formed themselves the
‘souls of all creatures and who has knowa
the truths of ail things, vzz., Soul and Not-
Soul, had abstained from flesh either for the
whole of the month of Kafiika or for the
whole of the aight fortnighe in that
month,


68—70. They were Nabhaga, Amvarisha,
the great Gaya, Ayu, Anatanya, and
Dwilipa, Raghu, Puru, Kartavirya, Ani-
ruddha, Nahusha, Yayati, Nriga, Vighwalee
sena, Shasavindu, Yuvanashwa, Shivi the
son of Ushinara, Muchukunda, Mandhatri,
and Harishchandra.


7t. Do you always speak the ‘truth.
Never speak an unteuth. ‘ruth. is an
eternal duty. It is- by truth that Harish-
chandra roves through the sky like a
second Moon, 23 :


72—77. These other kings also, vis.,
Shyenachitra, © monarch, and Somaka,
Vrika, Raivata, Rantideva, Vasu, Srinjaya,
Dushmanta, Karushma, Rama, Alarka,
Nala, Virupashwa, Nimi, intelligent Janaka,
Aila, Prithu, Virasena, Ikshaku, Shambhu,
Shweta, Sagara, Aja, Dhundhu, Subahu,
Harvyashwa,Kashupa and Bharata, O mon-
aich, did not eat flesh for the month of


MAMABHARATA,


Kartita, and, therefore, attained to the celes«
tial region, and gifted with prosperity, blaze
forth with effulpence in the region of
;Brahmana, worshipped by Gandlarvas
; and succounded by a thousand, beautiful
ladies.


-78. Those great men who practise this
excellent Religion which is marked out by
abstention from injury, succeed in living in
the celestial region.


79. ‘Those pious men who, from the time
of birth, abstain from honey and meat and
‘wine, are considered as ascetics.


‘80, That man who practises this religion
consisting of abstention from meat or who
recites it for making others hear it, will
never have to go to Hell, even if he bea
“great wicked man.


81—82. He, O king, who always reads
these ordinances about abstention from
meat, that are sacred and worshipped by
the Rishis, or hears it read, becomes purged
off of every sin and acquirea great happi-
ness on account of the fruition of every
desire. Forsooth, he acquires an eminent
position among kinsmen.


83. When afflicted with ‘calamity, he
immediately gets over it. Wher obstructed
with obstacles, he succeeds in freeing him-
self from them with the utmost ease. When
suffering from a disease, he becomes quick-
ly cured, and afflicted with sorrow he
becomes liberated from it with greatest
ease.


84. Such a man has never to take birth
in the intermediate order of animals or
birds. Born in the order of men; he attains
to great personal beauty. Gifted with great
prosperity, O chief of Kuru’s race, he ac-
quires great fame as well.


85. I have thus told you, O king, all
that should be said about the subject of
abstention from meat, together with the
ordinances about both the religion of action
and inaction as framed by the Rishis,


CHAPTER CXVIL.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.
Yudhishthira said :—
1. Alas, those cruel men, who not


caring for various other sorts of food, want
only flesh, are really like great Rakshasas.


2. Alas, they.do not relish various kinds
of cakes and diverse sorts of pot-herbs and


ANUSHASANA PARVA. 255


various species of Khanda with
flavour so much as they do ficsh.


3. 1 cannot understand this at all. I
think they feel that there is nothing so
tasteful as meat. —~


4. I wish, therefore, O powerful one, to
hear what the merits are of abstention from
flesh, and the sin about the eating of flesh,
O chief of Bharata’s race.


You know every duty. Describe to
me, in full, according to the ordinances on
duty, this subject. Do tell me what, indeed,
is edible and what inedible 2?


6. Tell me, O grandfather, what is flesh,
of what substances it is, the merits of absten-
tion from it, and the sins for eating meat.


Bhishma said :—


7. Omighty-armed one, what you say
istrue! ‘Yhere is nothing on Earth that
is superior to meat in taste.


8. There is nothing that is more bene-
ficial than meat to persons who are lean,
or weak, or afflicted with disease, or ad-


juicy


dicted to sexual union or exhausted with


travel.


9. Meat quickly increases strength. It
ordains great development.: There is no
fuod, O scorchec of enemies, that is superior
to meat,


to, But, O delighter of the Kurus, those
who abstain from it, win great merits.
Listen to me as I describe it to you.


11, That man who wishes to increase
_ his own flesh by the meat of another living
creature, is such that there is none meaner
and more cruel than he. ~


12. In this world ‘there is nothing that
is dearer to a creature than his life. Hence,
one should show mercy to the lives of others
as he does to his own life. + ;


13. Forsooth, O son, flesh has its origin
in the vital seed. There is great sin at-
taching to its eating, as, indeed, there is
merit in abstaining from it,


14. One dees not, however, commit any
sin by eating flesh sanctified according to
the ordinances of the Vedas. The Shruti
says that animals were created for sacrifice,
They who eat flesh in any other way are
said to follow the Rakshasa practice.


15. Listen to meas I tell you what the
ordinance is for the Kshatriyas. ‘hey do
not commit any sin by eating flesh that has
been acquired by power.

16. All wild deer have been dedicated
to the celestials and the departed Manes
in days of old, O king, by Agastya. Hence,
the bunting of deer is not censured,


v


17% There can be no hunting without
risk of one's own life. Phere is equality
of risk between the killer and the «killed.
Either the animal is killed or it kills the
hunter,


18. Hence, O Bharata, even royal sages
take to hunting. By such conduct they do
not become stained with sin, Indeed, the
practice is not considered sinful.


19 There is nothing, O deligiter of the
Kurus, that is equal in point of merit,
either in this world or in the next, to the
practice of mercy to all living creatures.


20. The merciful man has no fear.
Those innocent men who are endued with
mercy, have both this world and the next,


zt. Persons conversant with duty. say
that that Religion is worthy of being called
Religion which is characterised by absten-
tion from cruelty. ‘The man of purified
soul should do only such acts as have mercy
for their soul.’


22. Vhat flesh which is dedicated in
sacrifices performed in honour of the deities
and the departed Manes, is called Havi.
That man who is given to merey and who
behaves with mercy towards others, has no
fear to entertain from any creature.


23—24. It is heard that all creatures


abstain from causing any fear to sucha


creature. All creatures protect him when
he is wounded or fallen down or prostrated
or weakened or bruised. Indeed, they do
so, under all circumstances, whether he is
on even or uneven ground. Neither snakes
nor wild animals, neither Pishachbas nor
Rak shasas, ever kilt him.


25: When circumstances of fear origi«
nate, he becomes freed from fear who frees
others from situations of fear. There has
never been, nor will there ever be, a gift
which is superior to the gift of life.


26. Itis certain. that there is nothin
dearer to oneself than his life. Death,
Bharata, is a disaster to all creatures:


27—29. When the time comes for Death,
a trembling of the entire body is seen in all
creatures. Undergoing birth in the uterus,
decrepitude, and sufferings of all sorts, in -
this ocean of the world, living creatures
may be seen to be continually going forward
and coming back. Every creature is afflice
ted. by Death. While living in the uterus, all
creatures are cooked in the fluid juices,
that are alkaline and sour and bitter, of
uritie and phlegm and fzces,—juices which
produce painful sensations and are difficult
to bear. There in the uterus, they have to
live in a state of helplessness and are even
repeatedly torn and pierced.


256


30. They who are covetuous of meat, are
suen to be repeatedly cooked in the uterus itt
such a state of helplessness. Going through
all sotts of birth, they are cooked in the Hell
called Kumbhipaka.


gt. They are assailed and killed, and in
this way have to travel again and apains
There is nothing ‘so dear to one as his life
when one comes to this world.


32—35: Hence,a person of purified soul
should be merciful té all living creatures.
‘That man, O king, who abstains from every


kind of meat from his birth, forsooth, ac--


quires a large space in the celestial region.
They who eat the flesh of animals who are
desifous of life, are themselves eaten by
the animals they eat. This is my opinion.
Since he has eaten me, I shall eat him in
return, this, O Bharata, forms the character
as Mansa of Mansa. The destroyer is
always slait. After bim the eater meets
with the satie fate.


36—37. He who acts with tiostility to


wards another, becomes the victim of similar
deeds done by that other. Whatever acts
one does in
suffer the consequences thereof in those
bodies. Abstetition from cruelty is the
highest Religion. Abstention ftom cruelty
is the greatest self-testraint, :


38. Abstention from critelty is the high
est gift. Abstention from cruelty is the
highest penance -Abstention from cruetty
is the highest sacrifice. Abstention from
cruelty is the highest power.


39. Abstention from cruelty is the great-
est friend. Abstention from cruelty is the
greatest happiness. Abstention from cruelty
is the bighest truth. Abstention from
cruelty is the highest Skruté.


40. Gifts made in all sacrifices, ablutions
performed in all sacred waters, and the
merit which one acquires from making all
kinds of gifts mentioned in the scriptures,—=
all these do not equal abstention from
Cruelty in merit.


4t. The penances of a man who abstains
fiom cfuelty are endless. The man who
abstains from cruelty is considered as
always performing sacrifices. ‘Fhe man
who abstains from.cruelty is the father and
mother of all creatures. :


42.
fre some of the merits of abstention from
cruelty. Altogether, the merits of it are so
many that they are incapable of being ex-
lhausted even if one were to speak fora
century,


whatever bodies, he has to-


Even these, -O chief of Kuru's race,-


MAHABHARATA.


CHAPTER CXVIt.


1( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—
, Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Wishing to die and wishing to live;
Many persons surrender their lives in the
great sacrifice (of battle). Tell me, O
gecandfather, what is the end that these at-
tain to.


2-3. To give up life in battle is frau zrht
with sorrow for men. O you of great wis-
dom, you know that to give up life is d-ffi-
cult for men whether they are rich or poor;
ot are in happiness or misery. In my opi-
nion, you are gifted with oniniscience. Da
you tell me the reason of this.


Bhishma said :—


4. In prosperity or adversity, in weal o¢
woe, living creatures, O king, coming
into this world, live according to a parti-
¢ular method.


g Listen ta nia as TF exptain the reason
to you. Phe question you have put to me;
is; indeed, excelient, O Yudhistthira !


6. Regarding it, O ting, F shall explain
to you the old discourse that took place
formerly between the Dwaipayana Rishi
and a crawligg worm, ;


9. Formerly when that learnét Brah- °


mana, vig, the Krishna Dwaipayana,
havitig identified himself .with Brahma,
roamed over the world, he saw on a road
over which cars used to pass, a worm
Moving guickly.


8. The Rishi knew the course of every


creature and the language of every animal:
Gifted with ontiniscience, Ne addressed the


. worm he saw in these words,


Vyasa said :—

9 O worm, you appear to be. greatly
alarmed, and to be in great haste, ‘leit
tiie, where do you run, and whence havé
you been afraid ?


The worm said :—

lo. ¥ am stricken with fear on hearing
the rattle of that large car. © you of great
intelligence, it makes a fearful roar, It is
almost come.


11. The sound is heard. Will it not kilt
me? I am flying away for this, I hear
the sound of the bulls,


1z. They are breathing hard under the
whip of the driver, as they are carrying the
heavy load. 1 bear also the various sound
made by the men who are driving the bulls.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


14. Creatures which like us are born as
worms, cannot bear such sounds. It is,
therefore, that I am flying from this situation
of great fright.

14. Death is considered by all creatures
as painful. Life is an acquisition difficult
to make. Hence, I fly away in fear, I do


not wish to pass from a state of weal to ;


one of woe.


Bhishma said :—
15. Thus addressed,


Dawipayana Vyasa said :—

O worm, whence can be your happiness ?
You belong to the intermediate order of
being. I think death would be of happi-
ness to you.


16. Sound, touch, taste, scent, and
various kinds of excellent enjoyments are
unknown to you, O worm! [ think death
will prove a benefit to you.


The worm said :—

17. A living creature, however circum-
stanced he may be, becomes attached to it,
In even this order of being I am happy,
{1 think, O you of great wisdom! It is for
this that 1 wish to live.


18, In this condition, every object of
enjoyment exists for me according to the
necessity of my body. Human beings and
those creatures which originate from immo-
bile objects have different enjoyments,


19.
being.
Shudra.
manas,
usurer.


20. 1 was harsh in speech. 1 consi-
dered cunning as wisdom. I hated all
creatures. ‘Taking advantage of pretexts
in agreements made between myself and
others, I used always to take away what
belonged to others.


In my former life I was a human
O powerful one, I was a wealthy
I was not devoted to the Brah-
I was cruel, vile in conduct, and a


2t. Without feeding servants and guests
arrived at my house, [I used to fill, when
hungry, my own stomach, proud, covetous
of good food, cruel as I was,


22. Greedy as! was of riches, I never
dedicated, with faith and respect, any food to
the celestials and the departed Manes,
although duty required me to dedicate food
to them. .


23. Those men who moved by fear, came
to me, for seeking my help, I sent adrift
without giving them any protection. I did
not extend my help to those who came te me
with prayers for removing their fear,


33


257


24. I used to feel unreasonable envy at
seeing other people's riches, and corn, and
wives held dear by them, and articles of
drink, and good palaces.


25. Seeing the neppiness of others { was
filled with envy and I always wished them
poverty. Acting thus which promised to
crown my own wishes with fruition, I sought
to destroy the virtue, riches, and pleasures
of other people,


26. In that past life of mine, f committed
various deeds moved by cruelty and such
other passions. Recollecting those deeds I
am filled with repentance aod grief, as one
is filled with grief at the loss of his dear son.


27. On account of those deeds of mine,
I do not know what the fruits are of good
deeds. 1, however, adored my old mother
and on one occasion adored a Biahinana:


28. Gifted with birth and accomplishe
ments, that Brahmana, while -travelling,
came to. my house once as a guest,
received him with cespectful hospitality. ‘On
account of the merit of that deed my
memory has not forsaken me.


2g. IU think that on account of that deed,
I shall once more succeed in regaining
happiness.- O you having asceticism for
wealth, you know everything, Tell me
please what is for my behoof. ~~


dammeocacen


CHAPTER CXVIII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)
Continued, ,


Vyasa said =

1. On account of a meritorious deed,
O worm, that you, though born in the inter
mediate order of being, are not stupefied.
For a deed of mine, O worm, you are not
stupefied,


2, On account of the power of my
penances, I am able to rescue a being of
sin by granting him a sight only of my
body. There is no stronger power than
that of. penances.


3. I know, O worm, that you have taken
birth in the order of worms through ‘the
evil deeds of your past life. If, however,
you think of acquiring virtue and merit,
you may again attain to it.

4. Deities as well as beings crowned
with ascetic success, enjoy or suffer the
consequence of deeds done by them in


' this field of action, Men perform acts of


258


merit from desire, of fruit. The very ac-
complishments. that one seeks to acquire
are sought from desire of the happiness
they will produce. OS

5. Learned or ignorant (in a previous
existence) the creature that is, in this life,
shorn of speech and understanding and
hands and feet, is really shorn of every-
thing,

6. He who becomes a superior. Brah-
mana worships while alive, the deities of the
Sun and the Moon, uttering various sacred
Mantras. O worm, you will come by that
State of existence.-


7... Acquiring that status, you will enjoy
all the elements converted into articles of
enjoyment. Wher you have acquired that
state, EL shall impart ‘to you Brahma. Or,
if you wish, 1 may place you in any other
status. 4 oon

8. Agreeing to the words of Vyasa, the
worm did not leave the.road, but remained
on it. Meawhile, the large car which was
coming in that direction came there.


ie r i

9—t1. Torn to pieces by the assault of
the wheels, the worm died. Born, at last
in the Kshatriya order through the grace of
Vyasa of immeasurable power, he proceed-
ed to see the great Rishi. He had, before
becoming a Kshatriya, to pass through
various orders of birth, such as hedge-hog
and Iguana and boar and deer and bird,
and Chandala and Shudra and Vaishya.
Having given an account of his various
changes to the truth-telling Rishi, and re-
membering the Rishi’s kindness for him,
the worm (now with joined hands fell at
se Rishi’s feet and touched them with his

ead.


The Worm said — :


t2. My present status is that great one
which is coveted by all and which only
persons having ten well-known attributes,
can get. Indeed, | who was formerly a
worm have thus acquired ‘the status of a
prince.

13. Elephants of great strength, decked
with golden chains, carry mé on their backs,
‘Yo my cars are yoked: Kamvoja horses
of high mettle. ; car

14. Numerous cars to which are attached
camels and mules, bear me. With all my
telatives and friends 1 now eat food rich
with meat.

15. Adored by alf, I sleep, O highly
blessed one, on rich beds in charming rooms
to which disagreeable winds cannot blow.


16, Towards the dawn, bards and en-
comiasts sing my praises even as the deities


MAHABHARATA.


utter the agreeable praises of Indra their
chief,


17. Through your favour who are firm
in truth and gifted with immeasurable
energy, | who was before a worm have now
become a Kshatriya.


18. I bow my head to you, O you of
great wisdom. Do you command me as ta
what I should now do. Ordained by the
power of your penances, I have come by
this position,


Vyasa said :—

19. I have to-day been adored by you, O
king, with various words expressive o
respect. Changed into a worm, your
memory had become clouded. That memory
has again appeared, :


20. The sin you had committed in a
pristine life, has mot yet been dissipated,—
that sin, vés.,;which was acquired by you
while you were a Shudrea covetous of riches
and cruel in .conduct and hostile to the
Brahmanas.


21—-22. You were ableto obtain a sight
of my body. That was an act of merit to
you while you were a worm. On account
of your having saluted and worshipped me,
you shall rise higher, for, from the Ksha-
triya order you shall rise to the status of a
Brahmana, if only you die on the field of
battle for the sake of kine or Brahmanas.

23. O prince, enjoying much happirress
and celebrating many sacrifices with profuse
presents, you shall attain to Heaven and,
changed into eternal Brahma, you shall
enjoy perfect beatitude. #


24, Those who take birth in the inter«
mediate order, becomé Shudfas. The Shudra
rises to the status of the Vaishya; and the
Vaishya to that of the Kshatriya. The
Kshytriya who takes a pride in the dis-
charge of the duties of his caste, succeeds
in acquiring the status of a Brahmana.
The Brahmana, by foilowing a righteous
conduct, acquires Heaven which is full of
happiness,


CHAPTER CXIX.
( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. ‘Having renounced the status of a
worm and taken birth as: a Kshatriya of '
great ‘energy, the person remembering his .
previous changes, O monarch, began to
practise severe austerities.. ;


J


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


2. Seeing those severe austerities of the
Kshatriya who was well conversant with
Religion and Profit, Krishna-Dwiapayana,
that foremost of Brahmanas, went to him,


Vyasa said :— :

3. The penances, O worm, of the Ksha-
triyas consist of the protection of all crea-
tures. Consider these duties of the Ksha-
triya to be the penances [aid down for ‘you.
You shall come by the status of a Brahmana.


4. Ascertaining what is right and what
is wrong, and purifying your soul, do you
duly cherish and protect all creatures, judi-
ciously satisfying all good desires and
correcting all that is unholy.


5. Be you of purified soul, ‘be contented
and be devoted to the practice of virtue.
Acting thus, you will then, when you die,
become a Brahmana,


Bhishma said :—


6. Although he had retired into the
forest, yet, O Yudhishthira, having heard
the words of the great Rishi, he began to
cherish and protect his subjects righteously.


7. Soon, O best of kings, that worm,
on account of the duty of protecting his
subjects, became a Brahmana after re-
nouncing his Kshatriya body.


8. Seeing him changed into a Brah-
mana, the celebrated Rishi, v7s., Krishna-
Dwaipayana of great wisdom came to him.


Vyasa said :—

9. Ochief of Brahmanas, O blessed one,
be not troubled. He-who acts piously,
comes bya respectable birth. He, on the
other hand, whoacts impiously comes
by alow and vile birth. .O you who are
conversant with virtue, one attains to misery
according to the measure of, his sin. fe


to. Therefore, QO worm, do not be
troubled through fear of death. The only
-fear you should entertain, is about the loss
of virtue. Do you, therefore, go on prac-
tising virtue. ;


The worm said :—

11. Through your favour, O Holy One,
{ have attained from happy to. happier
positions! Having obtained such pros-
perity as is established in virtue, I think my
demerits have been lost.


Bhishma, said :—

12. The worm having, at the command
of the holy Rishi, acquired the status of. a
Brahmana that is so difficult to attain,
caused the Earth to be marked with a
thousand sacrificial stakes.


259


13. -That foremost of all persons con
versant with Brahma then gained a resi-
dence in the region of Brahman himself.
indeed, O son of Pritha, the worm acquired
the highest status, vés., that of eternal
Brahma, as the result of his own deeds done
according to the counsels of Vyasa.


14. Those foremost of Kshatriyas, also,
who have renounced their life-bréaths,
exerting their energy all the while, have all
acquired a meritorious end. Therefore, Q
king, do not mourn on their account.


CHAPTER CXX.


(ANUSHASA NIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


t. Which amongst these three is
superior, viz., Knowledge, Penances, and
Gifts? I ask you, O foremost of pious'men.
Fell me this, O grandfather. ;


Bhishma said :—


2. Regarding it is cited the old conver-
sation between Maitreya and Krishna~
Dwaipayana '

3. Once ona time, Krishna-Dwaipayana,
O king, while wandering over the world in
disguise, proceeded to Baranasi and waited
upon Maitreya who belonged by birth to'a
race of ascetics. ; -

4. Seeing Vyasa arrive, that foremost
of Rishis, vig., Maitreya, gave him a seat’
and after adoring him with due rites, entec=
tained him with excellent food, a


§. -Having eaten that good food whicl
was very wholesome and which gave every


kind .of gratification, the great Krishna,


become highly pleased and as he sat there,
he even laughed aloud.


6. Seeing Krishna faugh, Maitreya
addressed him, saying,—Fell me,
Righteous-Souled One, what the reason is
of your laughter ! You are an ascetic, gifted
with power to control your emotions.
Great joy, it appears has come over you.


7. Saluting you and adoring you with


bent head, { ask -you this, wze., what the.


‘power is of my penances and what the high


blessedness is that is yours,


8. The acts I do, are different from
those of yours. You are already eman-
cipated though alive. I, howeveg, am not
yet freed. For all that, 1 think that there


260


isnot much difference between you and
me. Iam, again, distinguished by birth,


Vyasa said ~~

g. This wonder that has filled me, has
originated from an ordinance which appears
like a hyperbole, for the comprehension of
of the people, The declaration of the
Vedas seems to be untrue. But why should
the Vedas say an untruth?


to. It has been said that there are three
roads which form the best vows of a man.
One should never injure; one should always
tell the truth ; and one should make gift.


11, The Rishis of old said this, follow-
ing the ordinances laid down inthe Vedas.
These injunctions of yore, should certainly
be followed by us even in our times.


12. Even a small gift, made under the
circumstances laid down, yields great fruits.
You have given a little water with a sincere
heart to a thirsty man.


13. Yourself thirsty and hungry, you
have by giving me such food, conquered
many high regions of happiness, O power-
ful one, as one does by many sacrifices.

14. F am greatly delighted with your
very sacred gift, as also with your penances.
Your power is that of virtue. Your appear-
ance is that of virtue.


15~—16. The fragrance of virtue, is
about you. I think that all your acts are
pecformed according to the ordinance. O
son, gift is superior to ablutions in sacred
waters and to the accomplishment of all
Vedic vows. Indeed, O Brahmana, gift
is more auspicious than all religious rites.
Mf it be not more meritorious than all reli-
gion rites, there can be no question about
-its superiority.
‘29. All those rites laid down ‘in the
Vedas which you highly speak of, do not
equal a gift, for, gift is undoubtedly fraught
with very superior merit.


18, The road-that has been made by
those men, who make gifts is the road that


is trodden by the wise. They who make |


ifs ace considered as givers of even the
ife-breaths. The duties that form virtue
are established in them. :


19. Asthe Vedas when well-studied, as
the controlling of the senses, as a life of
universal Renunciation, so is Gift which is
fraught with very superior merit.

20. You, O son, will cise from joy to
greater joy (for performing the duty of
making gifts.) ‘The intelligent man cer-
tainly rises from joy to greater joy.

2t. We have undoubtedly seen many
instances of this,


Men gifted with pros. |!


MAHABUARATA.


perity succeed in acquiring riches, making
gifts, celebrating sacrifices, and acquiring
happiness ‘as the result thereof.


22. It is always observed, O you of great
wisdom, to happen naturally that happiness
is followed by misery, and misery is fol-
lowed by happiness.


23. Wise men have said that human
beings in this world have three kinds of
conduct. Some are righteous; some are
sinful; and some are neither righteous nor
sinful.


24. The conduct of the person who is
devoted to Brahma is not considered either
way. His sins are never considered as sins.
So also the man who is devoted to the
duties laid down for him, is considered as
neither pious nor sinful.


25. Those men who are devoted to sacri-
fices, gifts, and penances, are considered
as pious. These, however, who injure other
creatures and are unfriendly to them, are
considered sinful.


26. There are some men who approe
tiate others’ properties. These certainly
all into Hell and meet with misery. All
other acts that men do are indifferent, being
considered as neither righteous nor sinful,


27. Do you sport and grow and rejoice
and make gifts and celebrate sacrifices.
Neither men of knowledge nor those gifted
with penances will then be able to get the
better of you.


CHAPTER CXXI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—
Continued,


Bhishma said :—

1. Thus addressed by Vyasa, Maitreya,
who was a worshipper of deeds, who had
been born in a family gifted with great
prosperity, who was wise and endued with
great learning, said to him these words.


Maitreya said :—


2. O you of great wisdom, it is what
you have said. O powerful one, with your
permission I wish to say something.


Vyasa said :—

3. Whatever you wish to say, O Maitreya
in what way so even, do you say, O man
of great wisdom, for I wish to hear you.


Maitreya said :—
‘4. Your words on the subject of Gift
are faultless and pure. Forsooth, your soul


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


has been purified by knowledge and


penances,


§. On account of your soul being puri-
fied, even this is the great advantage I reap
from it. With the help of my understand-
ing E see that you are gifted with high
penances,.


6. As regards ourselves we succeed in
acquiring prosperity through only seeing
personages like you. I think, that is due
to your favour and originates from the
nature of my own acts.


7. Penances, knowledge of the Vedas,
and birth in a pure family, these are the
causes of the status which one acquires of
a Brahmana. When one is possessed of
these three qualities, then does he come to
be called a twice-born person,


8. If the Brahmana be pleased, the de-
parted Manes and the deities also are
pleased. ‘There is nothing superior to a
Brahmana possessed of Vedic learning.


9. Without the Brahmana, all would be
Garkness. Nothing would be known, The
four castes would not exist. ‘lhe dis-

. tinction between virtue and sin, Truth and
Untruth, would disappear.


to. Men, when they sow on a well-culti-
vated field, reap an abundant harvest.
Even so, one reaps great merit by making
gifts to a Brahmana endued with great
learning. ;


11. If there were no Brahmana gifted
with Vedic learning and good conduct
for accepting gifts, the wealth possessed by
rich men would be useless.


12. The ignorant Brahmana, by eating
the food that is offered: to him, destroys
what he eats. The food also that is eaten
destroys the eater. That is called food
which is given away to a worthy man, in all
other cases he who takes it, makes the
douor’s gift thrown away and the receiver
is likewise ruined for his unduly taking it.


_t3. The Brahmana endued with learning,
becomes the subjugator of the food that he
eats. Having eaten it, he begets other
other food. The ignorant maw who eats. the
food offered to him, loses his right to the
children he procreates, for the latter become
his whose food has enabled the progenitor
to beget them. This is the shortcoming of
persons eating other people’s food when
ey, have not the power to conquer that
ood.


14. The merit which the giver wins by
making the gift, is equal to what the taker
acquires by accepting the faod. Both the
giver and the taker depend equally upon each
other. This is what the Rishis have said,


261


15. There where Brahmans exist, gifted
with Vedic learning and conduct, people
are enabled to acquire the sacred fruits of
gifts and to enjoy them both in this world
and the next.


16. Those men who are of pure birth,
who are devoted to penances, and who make
gitts, and study the Vedas, are considered .
as worthy of the most respectful adoration..


17, It is those good men who have
chalked out the path by treading on which
one does not become stupefied. It is those
men who take others to the celestial region.
They are the men who carry on their
shoulders the burthen of Sacrifices and live
for good. ; ae


CHAPTER CXXII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—<
Continued.


Bhisma said :—

1. Thus addressed, the Holy One replied |
to Maitreya, saying,—By good luck, you are
gifted with knowledge. By good luck, your
understading is of this Bind. Pry


2. Good men highly speak of righteous
qualities. By your good fuck you are. not
overwhelmed by personal beauty, . youth
and prosperity.


3. This favour done to you is due to
kindness of the celestials. Listen to me, as {
describe to you what is even superior to gift.


4. All scriptures, religious treatises, and.
rites that are seen in the world, have all
originated from the Vedas, according to
their due order. :


5. Following them I highly speak of gift.
You highly speak of penances and. Vedic
learning. Penances are sacred. Penances -
are the means by which one may acquire
the Vedas and the celestial region.


‘6. With the help of penarices and of
knowledge, one acquires the highest fruits.
It is by penances that one dissipates his
sins and ali else that is evil. a ee

7. We have heard that with whatever
purpose in view one performs penances, one
acquires the fruition thereof on account of
those penances. The same may be said of
knowledge.

8. Whatever is difficult to do, whatever
is difficult to conquer, whatever is difficult to
attain, and whatever is difficult to cross, can
all be done with the help of penances, Of


262


alt things, penances are of very superior
power,


9. Theman who drinks alcohol, or he
who takes forcibly other men’s properties,
or he who is guilty of featicide, oc he who
violates the bed of ‘his preceptor, succeeds
_ in crossing with the help of penances. In-

deed, one becomes purged off of all these
sins through penances.


10.
therefore, having true vision, and an ascetic
of whatever kind, are equal. One should
always bow to these two.


an. All meu who have the Vedas for
their wealth should be adored. Likewise
all men gifted with penances deserve to be
adored. They who make gifts get happi-
ness in the next world and much prosperity
in this world,


12. By making gifts of food, righteous
men of this world obtain both this world
and ‘that of Brahman himself with many
other tegions of superior happiness.


13. Those men who are worshipped by
all, themselves worship him who makes
gifts. ‘Those men who ace honored every-
where, themselves honor him who makes
pi Wherever the giver goes, he hears
Limself his own praise.

14. He who does acts and he who
omits to do them, gets each what is -pro-

ortionate to his acts and omissions,

hether one lives in the upper regions or
in the nether, one always acquires those
places to which one becomes entitled by
his deeds.


ts. Asregards yourself, you will cer-
tainly obtain whatever food and drink you
may covet, for you are gifted with intelli-
gence, good birth, Vedic learning and
mercy.

16. You are possessed of youth, O
Maitreya! You are observant of vows.
Be devoted to virtue. Do you take ins-
tructions from-me about those duties -which
you should first -follow,—the duties, véz.,
of householders.


17. That house in which the husband
is pleased with his married wife, and the wife
pleased with her husband, all auspicious
results ensue,


18 As filth is washed away from the
body with water, as darkness is removed
‘by the light of fire, so is sin washed off
by gifts and penances.


tg. Bless you, O Maitreya, may
you have palaces! I depart hence in.peace.

0 you remember what I have said. You
shall then be able to-reap many advan-
tages! :


One gifted with all knowledge and,


MATIARIIARATA.


20, Maitreya then walked. round his
illustrious guest and bowed his head to him,
and joining his hands in respect, said,—Let
blessing be to you also, Q Holy One!


CHAPTER CXXIIE


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. O you who know all duties, t wish
to hear, in full, what forms the excellent
conduct of good and chaste women. Do
you, O grandfather, describe this to me!


Bhishma said :—


2—4. Once on a time, in the celestial
region, a lady named Sumana of Kekaya’s
tace, addressing Shandili gifted with great
energy and conversant with the truth re+
garding everything and gifted with omni-
science, said,—-By what conduct, O auspi-


‘cious lady, by what course of deeds, have


you succeeded in acquiring the celestial
region, purged off of every sin? You shine
with your own energy like a flame of fire.
You appear to bea daughter of the Lord
of stars, come to Heaven in your own
effulgence.


5. You put on dresses of pure white,
and are quite cheerful and at your ease.
Seated on that celestial car, you shine, O
auspicious dame, with energy multiplied a
thousandfoid.


6. You have not, I understand, attained
to this region of happiness by great penan-
ces and gifts and vows. Do you .tell me
the truth !


7. Thus questioned sweetly by Sumana,
Shandili of sweet smiles, addressing her
fair interrogatrix, thus answered her
silently, I did sot wear -yellow robes;
nor barks of trees. I did not shave my
head; nor did I keep matted locks on my
head. It is not on account of these deeds
that I have acquired the -status of a
celestial.


9. I never carelessly addressed any
harsh words to my husband.


to. I wasalways devoted to the adora-
tion of the celestials, the departed Manes,
and the Brahmanas. Always careful {
waited upon and served my mother-in-law
and father-in-law.


11. This was my resolution ‘that [
hould never act decvitfully. I never useds


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


‘fostay at the door of our house nor did 1.
speak tong with any body.


12. I never did any evit deed. I never
laughed aloud; 1 never did any injury,

never gave out any secret. Thus did 1
myself act.


13. When my husband, having left home
pon any business, used to return, I always
served him by giving him a seat, and
adored him with respect. ‘


14. I never ate food of any kind which
was unknown to my husband and with
which my husband was not pleased.


13. Rising early in the morning I did
and caused to be done whatever was
brought about and required to be done for
the sake of relatives and kinsmen.


16. When my husband feaves home for
going to a distance place on any errand, I
remained at home engaged in various kinds
of auspicious deeds for blessing his enter-
prise.


17. During the absence of my husband

never use collyrium, or ornaments; I
hever wash myself properly or use garlands
and unguents, or adorn my feet with lacdye |
or body with ornaments.


18. When my husband sleeps in peace
1 never awake him even if important busi-
hess wanted his attention, I was happy
to sit by him lying asleep.


1g. 1 never urged my husband to work
hard for acquiring riches to support his
family and relatives. I always kept secrets
without ging them out to others, I used
to always keep our premises clean.


20. That woman who, with rapt atten-
tion, follows her duty, receives profuse
honors in the celestial region like a second
Arundhati.


Bhishma said :—


21. ‘The illustrious and highly blessed
Shandili, of pious conduct, having said
these words to Sumana on the subject of
woman’s duties towards her husband, dis-
appeared there and then.


22, That man, O son Pandu, who reads
this discourse at every full moon and new
moon, ‘succeeds in acquiring the celestial
region. and enjoying great happiness in the
bowers of Nandana.


263


CHAPTER CXXIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. In which is superior efficacy, Cons
ciliation or Gifts? Tell me, O chief af


Bharata’s race, which of these two is
superior in efficacy.
Bhishma said -~ rt


2. Some become pleased by Conciliation;
while others are pleased by Gifts. Every
man, accotding to his own nature, likes
the one or the other. :

4. Listen to me, O king, as T explain
to you the merits of Conciliation, O chief
of Bharata’s race, so that the ‘most furious
creatures may be cooled down by it. |


4. Regarding it is cited the ancient
narrative of how a Brahmana, who had
been seized in the forest by a Rakshasa,
was freed.


§. A certain Brahmana, gifted with ‘elod
quence and imtelligence, fell into pistress,
for he was seized in a lone forest by @
Rakshasa who wished to feed on him.


6. The Brahmana, gifted as he was with
understanding and learning, was not at alt
moved. Without allowing. himself to be
stupefied at the sight of that terrible canni-
bal, he resolved 4o appty Conciliation and
see its effect on the Rakshasa,


97. Respectfully saluting the Brahmana
with words, the Rakshasa put to him this
question: You shall escape, but tell me
why I am so pale and lean,


8. Reflecting for a short time, the
Brahmana accepted the question of the
Rakshasa and replied in the following well-
spoken words, -


The Brahmana said :—
9. Living in’ a place distant from your


house, moving in a sphere that is not your
own, and deprived of the company of your


‘friends and kinsmen, you are enjoying vast


riches, It is, therefore, that you are so pale.
and lean.


to. Indeed, O Rakshasa, your friends,
though -well-treated by you, are still not
well-disposed towards you on account: of
their own vicious nature. It is for this that
you are so pale and lean. :


tr, You are gifted with merit and wis«
dom and a well-controlled soul. Yet it is
your lot to see others who have merit and
wisdom honored in preference to yourself,
It is for this that you ate so pale and Jean,


264


12, Persons having riches much greater
than yours but inferior to you in merit, are,
indeed, disregarding you.  [t is for this
that you are so pale and lean,


13. Though distressed for want of the
means of support, yet you ate actuated
by the greatness of your mind to disregard
such means as areopen to you for getting
your sustenance. It is for this that you are
so pale and lean.


t4. On account of your virtuous nature
you had deprived yourself for doing good
to another, This person, O,. righteous
Rakshasa, considers you deceived and
defeated. It is for this that you are so pale
and lean.


15. 1 think you are grieving for those
persons who with souls possessed by lust
and anger, are suffering misery in this
world. it is for this that you are so pale
and lean. , a :


16. Though wise, you ate ridiculed by
others who are entirely destitute of it.
Persons of wicked conduct are vilifying
ou. It is for this that you are so pale and
lean.


17. Indeed, some enemty of yours, with
a friendly tongue, coming to you behaved
at first like a pious man and then has
left you, beguiling you like a knave. It is
for this that you are so pale and lean.


18 You are well conversant with the
course of world’s affairs. You are well-
skilledin all mysteries. You are gifted with
power. ‘Those who know you to be such do
not yet respect and praise you. It is for this
that you are so pale and lean.

tg. Staying in the midst of bad men en-


gaged together in some business, you had
discoursed to them, removing their doubts.


Still they did not admit your superior
merits. ie is for this that you are so pale
and lean.


20. Indeed, though destitute of riches
and intelligence and Vedie learning, you
wish yet, with the help of your energy
alone, to accomplish something great. It
is for this that you are so pale and lean.


2t. It appears that although you are
tesolved to practise severe austerities by
retiring into the forest, yet your kinsmen
are not favourably disposed towards this
Project of yours. It is for this that you are
so pale and lean.


22. Some rich neighbour of yours, en-
dued with youth and handsome features,
covets your dear wife. It is for this that
you are so pale and lean.


23. The words spoken by you, even
when excellent, in the midst of rich men,


desirous of living,


MANABHARATA,


are not regarded by them as wise of wells


timed. It is for this that your so pale and
lean.
24. Some dear kinsman of yours, shorn


of intelligence though repeatedly instructed
in the scriptures, has become angry. You
have not been able to pacify him. Itis fot
this that you are so pale and lean,


25. Indeed, somebody, having first set
you to the accomplishment of some object
desirable to you, is now trying to deprive you
of the fruit thereof. It is for this that you
are so pale and leat,


26. Though possessed of excellent quali-
ties and adored by allon that account, you
are yet ‘considered by your kinsmen as
adored for their sake and not for youc own,
It is for this that you are so pale and lean.


27. Indeed, through shame you are un-
able to give out some purpose in yout
heart, moved also by the inevitable delay
that will take place in its accomplishment.
It is for this that you are so pale and lean.


28. Indeed, you wish with the help of
your intelligence, to control various persons
with various kinds of understandings and
inclinations. It is for this that you are so
pale and lean.


2g. - Shorn of learning, without courage;
and without much riches, you seek such
fame as is won by knowledge and prowess
and gifts. Indeed, it is for this that you ard
so pale arid lean.


go. You have not been able to get
something which you have long been seek-
ing for. Or, what you try todo is sought
to be undone by somebody else. It is for
this that you are so pale and lean.


31. Indeed, without being able to seé
any fault on your part, you have been
cursed by somebody. It is for this that
you are so pale and lean. .


32. Having no wealth and accomplish«
ments you try in vain to remove the. grief
of year friends and the sorrows of sorrowing
pen: "It is for this that you are so pale and
lean.


33. Seeing virtuous persons fiving like’
householders, unrighteous’ persons tiving
according to the forest mode, and liberated:
persons attached to domesticity and fixed
abodes, you have become so pale and Jean.


34. Indeed, your acts connected with
Virture, Profit, and Pleasure, as alsa the
well-timed words spoken by you, do nof
produce fruit. It is for this that you are
80 pale and lean.


35. Though gifted with wisdom, yet
you live with wealth


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


‘ohtained by you in gift from somebody of
evil conduct. It is for this that you are
30 pale and lean. :

36. Seeing sinful persons multiplying on
every side and virtue languishing, you are
filled with grief. It is for this that yoa are
so pale and lean.


37, Urged by them you seek to please.


‘all your friends even when they are quarrel-
ling and opposing one another. It is for
this that you are so pale and lean.


38. Seeing persons gifted with Vedic
Yearning engaged in improper deeds, and
learned persons unable to keep their senses
‘under control, you are filled with grief, It
js for this that you are so pale and lean.


39. Thus praised, the Rakshasa adored
that learned Brahmana in return, and
making him his friend and bestowing suffi-
cient riches upon him in gift, sent him away.

aa


mrwneeeie


CHAPTER CXXV.
4 ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said:— ;


t. Tellme, O grandfather, how should
@ poor man, desirous of achieving his own
behoof, act after having acquired the status
fot humanity and come into this region ot
acts that is so difficult to acquire.


2. Tell me also what is the best of all
gifts, and what should be given ‘under what
circumstances? Tell me, O son of Ganga,
who are truly worthy of honor and adora-
tion. You should describe these mysteries
to us.


,Vaishampayana continued :—

- 3. Thus accosted by that famous king,
vig., the son of Pandu, Bhishma explained
to that king these great mysteries about
duty. i, oleae Ps 7 !

4 >

Bhishma said :—. : toe

4. Listen ‘to me with rapt attention, O
king, as I explain to you,-O Bharata, these
niysteries of duties, as the holy Vyasa had
explained them to me formerly. F

§. This subject is a mystery to the very
celestials, O king. Wama: of. pure -deeds,
with the help vows, well. observed and
Yoga meditation, had acquired the know-

“ledge of these mysteries as the high fruits

of his penances, : ae


6—8. What pleases, what deity, what
pleases the departed Manes, the Rishis, the


34


265


companions of Mahadeva, the goddess Siri,
Chitragupta, and the powerful Etephants
which rnte the cardinal points of the: com-
pass. what forms the religion of the Rishis,
‘the religion, o7s., which has many mis-
teries and which yields high fruits,—the
merits of what are called great gifts, and
the merits of all the sacrifices, he who knows
these, OG sinless one, and knowing ‘acts
according to‘his knowledge, becomes freed
from stains if he has stains, and acquires


the merits indicated. :


One oilman is equal to ten butchers,
Equal to ten oilmen is one drinker of
alcohol. . Equaito ten déinkers of alcohol
is one harlot. Equal to'ten harlots is a
single king. -

to—t1, A greatking is said to be equal
to half of these all. Hence, one should
not accept gifts fram these. On the other
hand, one should attend to the sciencéd,
which is sacred and which has viftue for
its marks, of the threefald objects’ of life.
Amongst these, Wealth and Pleasure are
naturally attractive. Hence, one should,
with rapt attention, listen to the sacred
expositions of Religion, ,for the fruits of
listening to the mysteries of Religion are
very great. One should certainly, hear every
subject bearing on Religion as ordained by
the celestials themselves.


12. In it is contained: the ritual about
the -Shraddha in which have been, declared
the mysteries of the departed Manes. The
mysteries about the’ deities have aiso bean
explained there, ., ta


13 It contains the duties anid: practices,
productive of great merit, oi. the Rishis also,
together with the mysteries attaching: to
them. — [ct contains an , exposition ‘of the
merits of great sacrifices and all kinds -of
gifts. |


14. Those men ‘who always read the
scriptures about these subjects, those who


Ce] toy ”


-bear them propertly in their mind, and he


who, having listened to them,, follows them
in practice,. are alf considered to. he as
holy and sinless as the poweriul Narayana


‘himself.


% . ' ’ ome ,
.1§, The merits of the gift of kine, those
that belong to the performance of ablutions
in sacred waters, those that are acquired
by the eelebration of sacrifices,—all these
are acquired by that man who treats guesis
with respect.


sb

16—17. They who listen, to these scrip-
‘tures, they who, are gifted with faith, and
they who have a pure heart, it is well
known, conquer. many regions of felicity.
Those: pious men, who are gifted. with faith,
become cleansed of ail sins and no sin can
touch them. Such men aiways increase ia


266


virtue and succeed in’ attaining to the
celestial region. ;


18,. Once on a time, a celestial messen-
ger, coming to the court of Indra of his
own accord, but remaining invisible, ad-
dressed the king of the deities in these
words :—


tg. At the command of Ashwini Kumars
(the celestial physicians) and who are gifted
with every desirable quality, I have come
to this place where | see human beings the
departed Manes and the celestials as-
sembled together.


, 20. Why, indeed, is sexual intercourse
interdicted for the man who performs a
Shraddha and for him also who eats at a
Shraddha? Why are three rice-balts offer-
ed separately at a Shraddha ?


- 2. To whom should the first of those
balls be offered? ‘Io whom should the
‘second one be offered? And whose has
it been said is the third or the remaining
one? I wish to know all this!


22, After the celestial messenger had
said these words connected with virtue and
duty, the celestials who were seated towards
‘the east and the departed Manes: also,
praising that ranger of the sky, began as

ollows,


The Pitris said :— eH
‘ 23. Welcome are you, and blessings
upon you! Do you listen, O best of ail
rangers of the sky! The question you
have put isa high one and fraught with
deep import.

24. The departed Manes of that man
‘who indulges in sexual intercourse on the
day he performs a Shraddha or eats at a
Shraddha, have to lie for a whole month
on his vital seed.


25. We shall explain’ the classification
of the rice-balis offered at a Shraddha.
The first rice-ball should be thought of
‘as being thrown into the waters.


26. The second ball should be given to
"one of the wives to eat. The third ball
should be thrown into the burning fire.


27. This is the ordinance about the
Shraddha. This is the ordinance of the
rites of religion. The Pitris of that man
who acts according to this ordinance be-
come pleased with him and remain always
cheerful.


28. The progeny of such a mat in-
creases and he always commands endless
riches.


The Celestial Messenger said :-—


29. You have explained the division of
‘the rice-balls and theic consignment one


MAHABHARATA,


after another to the three, together with the
reasons thereof.


30. Whom does that rice-ball which fs
thrown into the waters, reach 2? How does it,
by being so thrown, please the deities, and
how does it rescue the departed Manes ?


3t. ‘The second ball is eaten by the wife,
‘That has been laid down in the ordinances
How do the Pitris of that man become the
eaters thereof ?


32. ‘The tast ball goes into the burning
fire. How does that baJ) succeed in finding
its way to you, or who is he to whom it
goes? ‘

' 33. FT wish to hear this,—that is, what
are the ends attained by the balls cffered
at Shraddhas when thus disposed of by
being thrown into the waters, given tothe ,
wife, and thrown into the burning fire.


The Pitris said :—


34. The question which you have asked
is of deep- import. It involves a mystery
and is wonderful. We have been highly
pleased with you, O ranger of the sky.


35. The very celestials and the Munis
applaud acts done in honor of the departed
Manes. Even they do not know what the
certain conclusions are of the ordinances
about the acts done in honor of the Pitris.


36. Excepting the great, immortal, and
excellent Markandeya, that learned Brah-
mana of great fame, who fs ever devoted
to the Pitris, none amongst them is cone
versant with the mysteries of the ordinangées
about the Pitris.


37. Having heard from the-holy Vyasa
what the end is of the three rice-balls
offered at the Shraddha, as explained by
the Pitris themselves in reply to the ques-
tion of the celestial messenger, I shali ex-
plain the same to you. Do you hear, O
king, what the conclusions are about the
ordinances about the Shraddha,


38. Listen with attention, QO Bharata,
to me as I explain what the end is of the
three rice-balls. ‘Yhat rice-ball which goes
into water is considered as pleasing the
deity of the Moon.


39. That deity being pleased, O you of
great ‘intelligence, gratifies in return ‘the
other deities and the Pitris also with them.
it has been laid down that the second rice
ball should be eaten by the wife.


40. The Pitris, who always wish for
progeny, bestow ‘children on the woman of
the house. Listen now to me as I tell you
what becomes of the rice-ball, that is thro wn
into the burning fire,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


41. With that baft the Pitris are pleased,

_ and as the cesult thereof, grant the fruition

af all desires to the person offering. §

have thus told you everything about the end

ef the three rice-balls offered at the

Stiraddha and consigned to the three (vsz.,
water, the spouse, and the fire).


42. That Brahmana who becomes the
priest at a Shraddha forms himself, by that
deed, the Pitri of the person performing the
Shraddha. Hence, he should abstain that
day from sexuab intercourse with even his
own wife.


43. O best of all rangers of the sky,
the man who eats at a Shraddha should
remain pure for that day. By acting other-
wise, one surely commits the sin Ff have
indicated. Ht cannot be otherwise.


44 Hence, the Brahmana who ts in-
viied to a Shraddha for eating the offer-
tnys, should eat them after purifying him-
self by a bath and remain pious for that
day by abstaining from every kind of in-
jury or evil, The progeny of such a person
niultiplies and he also who feeds him gets
the same reward,


Bhishma said sa . St


45. After the Pitris had said so, a
Rishi of austere penances, tamed Vidyut-
prabla, whose form was effulgent tike the
Sun, spoke,


46—47. Having heard those mysteries
of religion as explained by the Pitris, he
addressed Shakra, saying,—Stupefied by
‘folly, men kill numerous creatures born in
the intermediate orders, such as worms,
ants, snakes, sheep, deer, and birds. hey
commit a great sin by these acts,- What,
however, is the remedy ?


48. When this question was asked, all
the gods and Rishts having penances for
wealth and the highly blessed Pitris, praised
that ascetic, , :


Shakra said:—- ~~

49. Vhinking in one’s mind of Kuru-
kshetra and Gaya and Ganga and Prabhasa
and the lakes of Pushkaca, one should dip
his head tm a piece of water.


* go. By so doing he becomes purged off
of all his sins like the Moon freed from Rabu.
He should thus bathe for three days suc-
cessively and then fast for every day.


51. Besides this, he should touch (after
bathing) the back of a cow and bow his
head to her tail, Vidutprabha, after this,
once more addressing Vasava, said,—I shall
describe a rite that is more subtle. Listen
to me, O you of a hundred sacrifices,


267


-§2, Rubbed with the astringent powdee
of the hanging roots of the banjan and
annointed with the oil of Priangu, one
should eat the Shashtika paddy neixed with
milk. By so doing he becomes purged off
of all his sins,


53. Listen now to another mystery un, .
known to many but which was discovered
by the Rishis with the help of mediation.
} heard it from Vrihaspati while he recited
it before Mahadeva.

54i—55- O king of the celestials, do you
hear it with Rudra in your company, O lord
of Shachi. Ha person, ascending a moun-
tain, stands there on one foot, with arms
upraised and joined together, and, abstain-
ing from food, books at a burning fire,—he
acquires the merits of severe penances and
obtains the rewards of fasts. ;


56. Heated by the rays of the Sun, he
becomes purged off of all his sins. One who
acts thus in both the summer and the winter
seasons, becomes freed from every sin.


57. Purged off of every sin, one acquires
a splendour of complexion far all time. Such
@ man burns with energy like the Sun of
shines in beauty like the Moon. -


58. After this, the king of the celestials
viz., he of a hundred sacrifices, seated in
the midst of the gods, then sweetly ad»
oe Vribaspats, with these excellent
words :— ;


59. O Holy One, do you deseribe those
mysteries of religion which are fraught with
happiness to human beings, and what the
faults are which they commit, together. with
the mysteries of them,


Vrihaspati said :—

60—61. They who pass urine, facing the
Sun, they who do not show respect for the
wind, they who do net pour libations on the
burning fire, they who milk a cow whose
calf is very young, actuated by the desire of
obtaining from her as much milk as pos-
stble, commit many sins. § shall describ
what those faults are, O lord of Shachy.
Do you hear me. :


62-63. The Sun, Wind, the carrier of
sacrificial gblations, O. Vasava, and kine
who are the mothers of all creatures, were
created by the Self-Create himself, for res-
cuing all the wortds, O Shakra. ‘These are
the deities of human beings. Listen all
to the conclusions of religion. ‘

64, Those wicked men and wicked
women who pass urine facing the Sun, live
in great infamy for eighty-six years.

65; That man, O Shakra, who cherishes
no fespect for the Wind, gets children that
come out ptematurely from the womb ef


pate:


268


; his Wife,’ Thése men who do not pour liba-
tions on’ the bin ning fire; fin that the fire,
when they do hyht it ap. for’ such rites as
they wish to perform, refuses to eat their
libations. - *


66. Those men who drink the, milk of
kine whose calves are very young, | never
get children for per petuating their races.

t


67. Such men see their children die and
their famities string. [hese are fhe conse-
quences of the acts refeited to, as observed
by twice- born persons, venerable for age ren)
their respective families.’


68. Hence, one. should oe avoid
that which , has been interdictea, and. do
only that which’ has Been divected tw be
done, if oue is desirous of’ securing — his


prosperity, ‘This that L say to you is yery
Urpie.
, 69—70. After the | celestiat preceplar


hau said this, the highly blessed ceclesuials,
with the Maxzuts, and the highly biessed
Rishis questioned the departed Mane , say-
ing; Ye Pitris with what acts of numan
beings, who are generally gifted with hule
tuderstandings, do you become pleased ?
What gifts, made in course of such rites as


are . periormed for improving the’ position.


of deceased persons in the other world,. be-
come inexnaustible,in efficacy 3 -

“a1. ‘By doing ‘what: acts’ can inen. be-
come freed from the debt they owe to their
ancestors? Weowist to hear this. Great is
pur. eenoeiey: : eH ey 4


The. Pitris said:— .» BS


72. Ve highly cee’ ones, the douwht
existing in your minds. bas been properly
explained. Listen as we describe the deeds
of righteous mea with wine we- become
pleased;


73. Blue-hued Bulls shontd be liberated.


Gitts should ve imade to us, ofthe day “of |.


the new muon, of sesame seeds and water.
“In the season of rains, lamps should be
lighted. By these deeds of nien, they can
“tree themselves frome the debe they: owe to
their ancestors.


74. Such gifts never become vaing On
the other hand, tney yield great aud end-
less fruits. Nhe gratification we ‘derive
“trom Vanni is cousidered to be inexhaustible.

75s ‘Those men, who giited’ with faith,
Sever ¢fispring, cescue their’ deceased
-abcestorg trum miserable Heil.


i


76—77. Hearing these words of the Pitris,
"Viiddha-Gargya, endued with penances
and hiyh energy, became filled with wonder
su thar the hair on bis budy stood ereet. Ad-
dressing them te said—-Ye having penarnces
“toe wealth, teli_as what the metits are of,


MAHABHARATA, -


setting free Bulls having blue complexions,
Woat merits, again, are of the gift of lamps
i the season of rains and the gift of watel
with sesame seeds ?


The Pitris said :— ,


78. If a bull of blue complexion, upon
being Kberated, raises a (sm sll) quantity of
water with its tail, the Pitcs becumd
pleased with that water for full sixty pene
sand Years. >


7 “The mud such a bull raises with its
horns from the banks (of a river or lake),
succeeds, forsooth, in sending the Pitris. Lo-
the region of Soma,


"Bo. . By giving lamps in the season of
fains, one shines with effulgence like Soma
Kawselt. “The mans woo gives lamps 1s
vever subject to. the quality of Darkness,


” 81-82. Those men who make gifts, on
the day of the new moon, of sesame seeds.
and water, mixed with honey. and using a
vessel of copper, O- you having penances.
for wealth, are considered as. duly performe
ing a Shraddha with all its mysteries,
‘Phese men yet children. of sound heaith.
and cheectulk minds.


83 The merit acquired. by the giver of
the Pinda takes the form. of the growth of
his family. Indeed, he who performs these
acts with faith, becomes freed frum the
debt he owes to- the ancestors.


84. Thus have been laid down the pro-
per time for the performance of the
Shraddha, the ordinanées about the rites.
to be observed, the proper person that
should be fed at the Shraddha, and the
merits that belong to it. 1 have described
everyting to you in due order, |


. -


‘CHAPTER CXXVE


€ ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).— ,
: ') Continued, -


| Bhishma said — .

1. The king of the celestials, ofg., Indra,
after the Pitris had ceased to speak, ad-
dressed the , powerful Hari, saying,-—)
‘Lord, what are those deeds woich please
you ? How, indeed, do men succeed in
pleasing you ?


Vishnu said:— .. uw


2. That which - greatly hate, is ‘the
‘detraction of Brahmanas. ‘ Forsooth, if the
' Bralmanas ‘are’ adored; I consider myself
adored. °°


doen .


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


3. Atl superior Brahmanas should al:
ways be saluted with respect, after feeding
them with hospitality. One should respect
his own feet atso fin the evening). tam
pleased with men who act thus, as also with
those who worship and make cflerings to
the whirl that is noticeable on cowdung.


4-6 They who see a Brahmana that
is a dwarct in stature, or a boar that has
just rises from water and that bears on his
bead a quantity of mud taken up from the
bank, have never to meet with any evit,
‘They become freed from every sin. “Fhat
‘mah who adores every day the Ashwattha
(Ficus religtosa) and the substaree called
*Gorochana and the cow, 1s considered as
adoring the whole universe with the celesti ils
and Asuras and human beings. Indeed,
staying withia these, b accept, in my own
form, the adoration that is offered to them,


9. Fhe worship that is off.-red to these,
‘Is the adoration ¢«ffered to me. Vhis has
been so as long as the worlds have been
created. “Those hitthe-witted men who adore
me ju a different way, worship me in vain,
tor the worship of that kind I never accept.
budeed, the worship of other kind is not
at all pleasing to me. :


Indra said :—


8. Why do you speak highly of the
(shcular marks on cowdung, the feet, the
boar, the Brahmana that is a dwarf in
Stature, and mud raised up trom the soik?


. 9 It is you who Create all creatures and
itis youwho destroy them. You are the
glernal, nature of all transitory things.


Bhishma said:— ae. 8

10, Hearing these words of Indra,
Vishnu smiled a little and then said,—kh
was with my circular dise that the Daityas
were killed. It was with my two feet that
the world was covered. ‘


‘I. Assuming the form of a boar 4
killed Hiranyaksha. Assuming the form of
a dwart | conquered king Vali,


42. ,Fhose great men who adore these,
. gratify me. knudeed, they who who worship
me in these forms never meet with defeat,


13. Ef one, seeing a celibate a Brah-
mana arrived at-one’s- house, offers to him
the first portion of his food that belongs as
of right té-.a Brahmana, and eats the
residue, he is consided as eating Amrita.


14. ‘IF one, after worshipping the’ morn-


’ ’ -


twilight, stands with. face directed towards.l.
| has


the Sun, he reaps the merjt that belongs to
the performance of ablutions in alt Lirthas
1 and. becomes purged off of all sins.


the observance’ ot


Dharma saidt— 11 1. 1+


l marries a Shudra wont? ‘


26g
‘
wealth, I have, told -you. in detail. what formes.
a greatanystery, Oo what else shall 1 diss
course to you? “Tell me your dopbts |


Valadeva said :— - eee
- 16. Listen wow to attiorher great mnys-
tery that ytelds happiness to men, "Unadt
guainted with it, ignorant persons suff '&
mich disteess trom other creatures, ee
17, That man who, rising at early dawn,
touches a cow, clarified, butter, and, cugdy,
as also mustard seeds’ ani the largee
variety thereof called Priyayt,, becomes
pur,ed off of all-tus sins. , yg a 2
18. As regards..Rishie ‘having. penancas
for wealth, they always pvgid; all creatures.
both befoie, and behind, as also all that
is impure, while performing Shraddhas, *!
SESS. ec : ’ “®
The deities said :— . i eal
19-20 fi a person, taking a vesset of
copper, filling it with water, and facing the
East, determines’ upon ‘a fast or the obger-
vattce of a particular vow, the celestials
become pieased with him and all his wishes
become crowned with fortune, By observing
fasts or vaws jigny,otbes way, hithe-vwitked


Man gain nothing,


’ n.

21—22.° fu uttering the ‘résolution atroyt
( asts and in Tnaking

offerings to the — ceélestials,”, the’ yse ‘of i
vesse} of copper is preferable. In presen -
ing the offerings to the celestials, in (giving
and aceepung) aliiis, ‘th “presening the ine
gredients of the Aryhay sand in ~afferitns
oblations of water”” mixed "with “sesame
seeds to the departed Manes, a~ vesse}
of copper should be'used. By doing | these
acts in any other way, gne acquires little
merit, These anysteries have been lait
down about how'the Yeities are pleaved,
an) ee ee i

tts
23-24. The offerings’ made in all'ritds
in bonour of ‘the ‘celéstialS and in those iin
honor of the departed Manes, :hoild’ never
be given away to a. Brahmana’'whd has
accepted service under’ the king, or wio
rings the belf of 4ftends to minor duties tn
actsof worship or at Sheaddhas, .or who
keeps kine, or who drives a trade, “or” who
follows some art as a profession, or who is
an actor, of who quarrels with friends; oc


who is destitute of Vedic. studies,’ or who
er


25. The performer of the Sheaddha who
gives away such offerings to such;a Brab-
mana, loses prosperity and multiplies not
race. He fails, again, to gratify, is
Pitris by doing sich anact, | |
1 26 “From the hbuwse sof


a?


that | person


~ 50 Ve. Rishis. -haying- penances «for |, whence a guest returns : ultsatisfied, uthe


270


Pitris, the deities, and thé sacred fires, all
fetuen disappointed on accont of such
treatinent of the guest. :


. 27. - Phat man who does not perform
the duties of hospitatiry towards the guest
arrived at his house, comes to be considered
as equally sinful with those who are sliyers
“of women or of kine, who are ungrateful
towards benefactors, who are slayers of
tahmianas, or who are violators of the beds

of their preceptors,


Agni said :—-

28—30. Listen ye with rapt attention.
1 shall describe the demerits of that man otf
wicked understanding who lifts up his feet
for striking therewith a cow or a highly
blessed Brahmana or a burning fire. The
intamy of such man spreads throughout the
world and reaches the boundary of Heaven
-itself. His Pitris become filled with fear.
The deities also become highly dissatisfied
wt bim. Gifted with great energy, Fire
fce-useS lo accept the libations poured by
hin. : :


3t. For a hundred fives he has to rot in
Hell. He is never rescued at any time.


32—33- One should, therefore, never
touch a cow with his feet, or a Brahmana: of
high energy, or a burning fire, if he is gifte:
with faith and seeks his own ‘behoof. These
are the demerits declared by me of one
who lifts up his feet towards these three. °


Vishwamittra said :—


34-36. Listen to a great mystery that
is unknown to most of men and which is
connected with religion. He, who offers to
the departed’ Manes, rice boiled in milk
and sugar, sitting with face directed to the
south at noontide, in the shade caused by
an elephant’s body in the month of Bhadra-
pada, under the constellation Magha,
acquires great merits. Hear of those merits.
The man who makes such an offering to
the Pitris under such circumstances, is con-
sidered as performing a great Shraddha
each year for thirteen years successively.


The kine said :—


37—39. That man becomes purged off of
all his sins who worships a cow with these
Mantras,,—vis.,-O Vahula, O Samanga,
© you who are fearless everywhere, O you


who are forgiving and full of auspicious- [°


ness, U friend, O source of all,plenty, in


the region of Brahman, formerly you were |


present with your calf in the sacrifice of-


Indra the holder of the thunderbolt! You |


were stationed in the sky and in the path of
Agni! The celestials with Narada among


MAHABHARATA.


| by calling you Sarvamsaha !—Such a man
attains to the region of Purandara. He
acquires, besides, the merits that belong to
kine, and the splendour of the Moon also.


49. Such a man becomes freed from
every sin, every fear, every grief. At the
end, he acquires residence in the happy
region of the Fhousand-eyed Eudra.


Bhishma said :—

4t. After this, the highly blessed and
illustrious seven Rishis, headed by Vashi-
shtha, rose and going round the Lotus-
born Brahman, stood around him with
hands joined in respect.


42. Vashishtha, that foremost of all
Persons conversant with Brahma, became
their spokesman and put this question which
conduces to the behoof of all creatures but
especially to the Brahmanas and Kshat:iyas,


43. By doing what acts may virtuous
men who have no worldly belongings, suc-
ceed in acquiring the merits of sacrifices ?


44. Hearing this question of theirs, the
Grandfather Brahman began to say what
follows,


Brahman said :—

45. Excellent is this question, ye highly
blessed ones! It is at once auspicious and
high and full of mystery. This question
that you have put is subtile and conduces to
the well-being of mankind.


46. Ye Rishis having penances for
wealth, [ shall recite everything toa you in
full. Do you listen with attention to what f
say as to how men acquire the merits of
sacrifices, :

47~48. Inthe lighted fortnight of the
month of Pousa, when the constellation
Rohini is in conjunction, if one, purifying
himself by a bath, lies, under the canopy of
heaven, clad in a single piece of cloth, with
faith and rapt attention, and drinks the rays
of the Moon, he wins the merits of great


sacrifices. ‘


49. Ye foremost of twice-born persons,
this is a great mystery that 1 declare it to
you in reply to your question, you who
know the truths of all subjects.


CHAPTER CXXVIL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
"Continued.


Jibhavasu (the Sun) said:—
t—2. There are two offerings. One of


them worshipped you on shat occasion these consists of a palmlul of water and the


ANUST:ASANA PARVA.


other talfled Akshata tonsists of rice- grains
with clarified butter. One shouid, on the day
wef the full moon, stand facing that bright
orb and make to him the two offerings
mentioned, vz., a palmfal of water and the
tice-grains with clarified burter called
Akshata. ‘he man who presents these
offerings is said to worship his sacred fire.
indeed, he is considered as one who has
Pause fibations on the three (principal)
res. : ,


3. That man of fittle understanding who
cuts down a large tree on the day of the
new moon, becomes sullied with the sin of
Brahmanicide. By killing even a single
leaf one tommits that sin.


4. That foolish man who chews a tooth-
brush on the day of the new moon is ton-
sidered as injuring the god of the moon by
such adeed. ‘lhe departed Manes of such
a person become annoyed with him.


5. The celestials do not accept the liba-
tions poured by such a man on days of the
full moon and the new moon. His de-
parted Manes become enraged with him,
and jis family become extinct


Shree said :~-


6~7. The celestials and departed Manes
leave that sinful house, in which eating and
drinking vessels and seats and beds lie
scattered, and in which women are beaten,
Without accepting the offerings made to
them by the owners of such houses, the
celestials and the departed Manes fly away
from such a sinful house.. °


Angiras said:—


8. The offspring of that man multiplies
who stands every night for a full year under
a Karanjaka tree with a lamp for lighting
it, and holds in his hands the rvets of the
Suvarchala plant. © Z


Gargya said :~+

g. One should always do the duties of
hospitality to his guests. One should give
lamps in the hall or shed where sacrifices
are celebrated. One should avoid sleep
‘during the day, and abstain from all sorts
of flesh or food.


to. One should never injure kine’and
Brahmanas. One should always recite the
names of the Pushkara lakes and the other
sacred waters. Such a course of duty is the
foremost. Even this forms a high religion
with its mysteries. If observed in practice,
- it is sure to yield great results,


at. If a person celebrates even a hun-
dred sacrifices, he is doomed to see the
exhaustion of the merits belonging to the
libations poured therein, ‘The duties, hows


aot


ever, which | have mentioned are sweh that
when observed by persons having faith,
their merit becomes endless,


1213. Listen now to another great
mystery unknown to many. The celestials
do not eat the libations on occasions
Shraddhas and rites in their: honor or on
occasioits of those rites which are perform-d
on ordinary fdnar days or on the espically -
sacred days of the full mioon and the new
moon, ff they ste a woman in her menses
or one wha is the daughter of a mothet
suffering from leprosy. .


14. ‘The ancestors of the man who allow:
such a woman to come near the place where
the Straddha is being performed by him,
do not become pleased with him for thirteen
years.


«5, Clad in white clothes, and becoming
pure in body and mind, one should invite
Brahmanas and make them utter theft
benedictions. On such occasions one should
also recite the the Bharata. It is by obsere ,
ving all these that the offerings made at
Shraddhas become endless.


Dhaumya said :— —

16. Broken utensils, broken bedsteads,
cocks and dogs, as also such trees as have
grown within dwelling houses, are all ins
auspicious objects.


17. tia broken utensil exists Kali him-
self, while ina broken bedsteid is oss of
money. When a cock or a dog is seen, the
celestials do not eat the offerings made to
them. Scorpions and snakes find shelter
under the roots of a tree. Hence, one
should never plant a tree withia his house


‘


Jamadagni said :—


18—1g. That man whose heart is hot
pure, is sure to go to Hell even if be wore
ships the celestials in a Horse-Sacrifice or in
a hundred Vajapeya Sacrifices, or if he
practises the severest austerities with head
down most, Purity of heart is considered
as equal to Sacrifices and lruth.


20, Avery poor Brahmana, by giving
only a portion of powdered barley with a
pure heart to a Brahmana, acquired the
tegion of Brabman himself. hid is a
sufficient proof,


Bea
CHAPTER CXXVGL


OV hE a@e s ols ee +
( ANUSHASANIK,A PARVA p=
Continued.
ea ee |
Vayu said i—
ts. £ shall recite: some daties the obser.
varveeof which produces happiness to mane
tind.’ Do you histen also, with rapt atten-


tion, to certain transgressions upon woich
they depend, eb e  &


24. ‘That man who cffers for the four
months of the rainy ‘Season sesame and
water(to the: Pitris}, and food, according
tw the-best of bis power, to a Brahmana
thoroughly expert jirdaties, whd-duly pours
libations on itve «sacred fire, and makes
offerings of rice boiled in sugared milk, who
gives. lamps in honor of, the ancestors, witht
sesame and water, ‘indeed whe who does all
this, with faith and rapt’ attention, acquires
alt the merits ‘of a hundred sacrifices in
which animals are offered up to the celes~
tials. feats


5 Listen to this, other grea mystery
that is unknown to all, That man who
thinks it all-right when-a Shudra fights up
the fice:upon which he is ¢9 pour libations
oc who does not see any fault when women
who are incompetent to assist al Shraddhas
and other cites are allowed ‘to assist at them,
commit a sin, ;

6. ‘The three’ sacrificial
enraged with such a -persen.
life he is born as a Shudras
Manes, together with
never pleased with bun.


fires become
fer his next
His departed
the celesiials, are


7. Ushall now. recite what the expiatians


are which one must perform for purifying |


himself from such sins, Listea‘te. mé with
attention, By petforming those expiatory
rites, one penomies happy -and free from
fevers, +. me ist

8- Pasting all the white one should, for
three days, with rapt attention, pour jiba-
tions, on the sacred fire, uf.the urine of the
cow mixed.with cowdung.and. milk and: cla-
rified butter,


o- The ‘celestfals ‘accept,t the offerings « of
suciy a man on the expiration of a full year,
Hiis departed Manes also, when the time
comes for him for’ performing. the Shraddha,
become pleased with him.


To. { have thus recited what is righteous
and what unrighteous, with all tieir un-
known details, about human beings desirous
of attaining to Heavea..~ Men who abstain
from these sins or who having committed
them perform the expiatory rites puinted
eut, succeed in attaiming to the celestial
region when they leave this world.


{ lamps


. MAHABHARATA.


. . CHAPTER. CXXIX -


CANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—
Continued,


Bomasha said :-—


“The departed Manes of sivass men
Sho: without having wives of their own,
know the wives of other people, are disap.
pointed when the time for the Shraddha
comes.


2 He who tmows the wives of othe
people, he who indulges In sexual union
with a barren woman, and be who appro-
priates woat belongs to a Brahmana, are
equally sinful.


3. Forsooth, the departed Manes of sich
people cui them off without wishing to have
any intercourse: with them. The offerings
they make fail to please the celestials and
the departed Manes.


4. Hence, one should always abstain
from sexual union with women who are the
lawtul wives’.of others, as also with wometr
whd are ‘barren. he man who Seeks his
own good, should not appropriate what
belongs to a Brahmana.


§. Listen now to another, mystery, un-
knewn to all, about Religion. One should,
having faith, always do the command of bis
preceptor and other elders,


6. On the twelfth lunar day, as also on
the day of the full moon, every month, one
should make gifts to Bralhmanas of clarified
butter and ot Akshata, Listen to me as I
say what the measure is of the merit that
such a person wins. -


7- By such a deed one is s said to increasé
Soma and the Ocean. Vasava, the king of
the celestials, confers upon him a fourth
part of the merits of a Hurse-Sacrifice.


8. By meking such gifts, a person he-
comes gifted with great enerzy and prowess.
Well-pleased with him, the divine Soma
grants him the fruition gt his desires,


g Listen now to another duty, together
with the foundation on which it depends,
which yields great merits. In this age of
Kali, Usat duty, if performed, gives much
happiness tu men,


‘:1omsit., That man sehen tising at ‘dawn
and purifying himself by a bath, dresses
himself in white cloches and with concentra»
‘ted attention makes gifts to Brahmanas of
vessels full of sesame seeds, who makes
offerings to the departed Manes of water
with sesame seeds and honey, and who gives
as aiso the food called Krishara,
acquires .gregt merits. Listen to me asf
Jay whaf those merits are,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


- 12-13. The divine chastiser of Paka
has attributed these merits to the gift of
vessels of copper and brass filled with
sesame seeds. He who makes gifts of kine,
he who makes gifts of land which yield
eternal merit, he who performs the Agni-
shthoma sacrifice with profuse presents in
the form of Dakshina to the Brahmanas are
all considered by the celestials as acquiring
merits equal to those which one acquires
by making gifts of vessels filled with sesame
seeds,


14. Gifts of water with sesame seeds are
considered by the departed Manes as yield
ing eternal gratification to them, The
grandfathers all become highly pleased-with
gifts of lamps and Krishara.


15. {have thus recited the ancient ordi.
nance, faid down by the Rishis, that is
highly spoken of, by both the departed
Manes and the celestials ia their respective
fegions,


oo


CHAPTER CXXX.


CANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).-=
Continued.


Bhishma said :—


1. ‘Lhe diverse Rishis there assembled
together with the departed Manes and the
deities, then; with rapt attention, asked
Arundhati who was gifted with great asce-
tic merit. io & .


2. Having penances for ‘wealth Artn-
dhati_ was equal to ber husband the high-
souled Vashishtha in energy, for both in
vows and conduct she was: her hasband’s


equal, - '


3. Addressing her, they said,—We wish |


to hear from you thé mysteries of duty
and religion. You should, O amiable lady,
tell us what you consider as -a great mys-
tery,


Arundhati said :—


4—5. The great progress f have been able
to make if penances. is dwing to your con-
sideration for me in thus remembering my
poor self. With your gracious permission |
shall now describe duties that are eternal,
and are great mysteries. I :shall describe
them. with the ¢auses on which they depend.
“Listen to me as I describe them to you in
‘full. A knowledge of these should be. com-
“municated to him only who-has faith er who
hay a@ pure heart. ‘ ,


6. These four, vig., he who is bereft of
faith, he who is~fuit~of pride, he who is


33


273


guilty of Brahmanicide, and he who violates
the bed of his preceptor, should never be
talked to. Religion and duty should never
be communicated to them,


7—8. The merits acquired by a person’
who gives away a Kapila cow every day for
twelve years, or by a person who worships
the deities every month in a sacrifice, or by
him who gives away hundreds of thousands
of kine in the great Pushkara, do not equal
those that are his with whom a guest’ is
pleased.


9. Listen now to another duty whose ob-
servance yields happiness to mankind. It
should be observed with its secret ritual by
a person having faith. Its merits ace cer-
tainly high.


to—t2. Listen to what they are. Ifa
person, rising at dawn and taking with hint
a quantity of water and a few btades of
Kusha grass, goes to a cowpen and, arrived
there, washes a cow’s horns by sprinkling
thereon that water with those blades ‘of
Kusha grass_.and then causes the water ta
drip down on his own head, he is considered,
on account of: such a bath, as ene!who has
performed his ablutions in all .the sacred
waters that the wise have heard to exist iw
the three worlds‘and that are honored and
resorted to by the Shiddhas and Charanas,


13%. After Arundhutt - had. said these


| words, all the deities and ancestors ap+


plauded her, saying,—Excellent, Exceltent.
~«Indeed, all the beings there were highly


| pleased and allof them adored Arundhati.


Brahman said :— ;

14. O highly blessed. one, excellent is
the duty that you have described, together
with its. secret. ritual. Praise be to you!
1 grant you this boon, wis., that your
penances will continually increase, |


Yama said :—


15. 1 have heard from you ah excellent
and agreeable subject. Listen now to what
Chitragupta has said and what is agreeahle
to mé,


16. Those words touch on duty with its
secret ritual, and.are worthy of being heard
by the great Rishis, as also.by men baving
faith and desirous of achieving their own
good. i are te

19. Néthing is lost of either virtue or
sin that is committed by creatures, On
days of the fulf moon and the new moon,
those acts ate taken to the San where they
rest.


18. When a mortal’ goes into the regiona
of the dead, the Sun wi tn estes all his decds


274


He who is virtuous, acquires the fruits of his
virtue there.


19—20. I shail now tell you of some atspi-
cious duties that are approved of by Chitra.
gupta, Water for drink, and lamps for
lighting darkness, should always be given,
as also sandals and umbrellas and Kapila
kine with due rites. In Pushkara especially,
one should riake the gift of a Kapila cow
to a Brahmana convesant with the Vedas.


2t. One should also always maintain hig
Agnihotea with great care. Here is ano-
ther duty which was proclaimed. by Chitra-
gupta,

22. The best of creatures should listen
to what the merits are of that duty sepa-
rately, In course of time, every creature is
destined to undergo dissolution. :


23. The little-witted meet with great
distress in the regions of the dead, for they
become stricken with hunger and thirst.
Indeed, they have to rot there in pain.
Thece is no escape for them from such a
disaster.


24. - They have to enter into a thick
darkness. 1 shall now tell you of those
duties by discharging which one may suc-
ceed in getting over such disasters,


28. The performance of those duties
costs very little but yields great merit.
Indeed, such performance yields great
happiness in the other world. The merits
of the gift of water for drink, are excellent.
In the next world, in especial, those merits
are very great. @


26. A large river full of excellent water
is ordained in the other world for them who
make gifts of water for drink. Indeed, the
water contained in that river is endless and
cool and sweet as nectar,


27. He who makes gifts of water in this
world, drinks from that river in the next
world when he goes there, Listen now to
the profuse merits accruing from the gift
of lamps.


28. The man who gives lamps in this


world, has never to even see the thick dark-
ness (of Hell). The Sun and the Moon and
the God of Fire always give him their light
when he goes to the other world.


29. The celestials ordain that on every
side of such a person there should be burn.
ing light. Indeed, when the giver of lights
‘goes to the world of the dead, he. himself
Phi in pure effulgence like a second

uA,


30. Hence, one should give lights while
here and water for drink in especial. Listen
now to whatthe merits ace of the person


MAHABHARATA.


who makes the gift of a Kapila cow toa
Brahmana knowing the Vedas, especially i
the gift be made in Pustkara.


31. Such a manis considered as having
made a gift of a hundred kine with a bull—
a gift that yields eternal merit.


32. The gift of a single Kapila cow is
capable cleansing whatever sins the giver
may be guilty of, even if those sins be as
grave as Brahmanicide, for the gift of a
single Kapila cow is considered as equal in
merit to that of a hundred kine.


33. Hence, one should give away a
Kapila cow at that Pushkara which is con-
sidered as the senior, on the day of the full
moon in the month of Kartika. Men who
succeed in. making such a gift have never
to meet with distress of any kind, or sorrow,
or thoras giving pain.


34. That man who gives away’a pair of
sandals to a superior Brahmana who is
worthy of the gift, acquires similar merits.
By giving away an umbrella, a person gets
comfortable shade in the next world.


38» A gift made to a worthy person
never goes for nothing. It is sure to yield
agreeable results to the giver. Hearing
these opinions of Chitraguta, the Swn’s
hairs stood erect,


36. Gifted with great splendour, he
addressed all the celestials and the departed
Manes, saying,—VYe have heard the myster-
ies about duty, as explained by the great
Chitragupta.

37. Those human beings who, gifted
with faith, make these gifts to great Brah-
manas, become freed from fear of every
sort.


38. These five kinds of men, sullied with
vicious deeds, have no escape. Indeed,
these wretched men of sinful conduct, should
never be talked to. Indeed, they should
always be avoided. F


39. Those five are he who is the destroys
er of a Beahmana, he who is the destroyer
of a cow, he who is addicted to sexual
union with other peopte’s wives, he who is
bereft of faith (inthe Vedas), and he who
maintains himself by selling the virtue of
his wife. ; :

40. These men of sinful conduct, when
they go to the region of the dead, rot in hell
like worms which live upon puss and blood.


41. These five are avoided by the depar-
ted Manes, the celestials, the Snataka
Brahmanas, and other twice-born persons
who are given to the practice of penances,


ANUSHASANA PARVA


CHAPTER CXXXL.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued, ‘


Bhishma said :— :

1—2. ‘Then all the highly blessed celes-
tials and the departed Manes, and the
highly-blessed Rishis also, addressing the
Pramathas, said,—Ye are all highly blessed
beings. Ye are invincible night-rangers.
Why do you afflict those men who are vile
and impure and that are unclean ?


3. What acts are considered as obstacles
to your power? What, indeed, are those
acts on account of which ye cannot afflict
men? What are those acts that are des-
tructive of Rakshasas and which prevent
you from influencing the dwellings of men ?


4. Ye night-rangers, we wish to hear all
this from you.


The Pramathas said :—


5—6. Men are rendered unclean by acts
of sexual intercourse. They who do not
purify themselves after such deeds, they
who insult their elders, they who from stu-
pefaction eat different sorts of meat, the
man also who sleeps at the foot of a tree,
he who keeps any animal matter under his
pillow while lying down for sleep, and he
who lies down or sleeps putting the head
where his feet should be placed. or his
feet where his head should be placed,—these
men are cansidered by us as unclean.
Indeed, these men have many holes.


7—8. Those also are classed amongst
those who throw their phlegm and other
uncle an secretions inté the water, Forsooth,
these men deserve to be killed and eaten up
by us. Indeed, we afflict those human beings
who are endued with such conduct. Listen
now to what those acts are which are con-


sidered as antidotes and on account of-


which we fail to do any injury on men.


g—tr. Those men on whose body are
marks of Gorochana, or who hold Vachas
in their hands, or who make gifts of clarified
butter with Akshata, or who place clarified
butter and  Akshata on their heads, or
those who abstain from meat, are incapable
of being afflicted by us. That man in
whose house the sacred fire burns day and
night without being ever extinguished, or
who keeps the skin or teeth of a wolf in his
house or a_ hill-tortoise, or from whose
house the sacrificial smoke is seen to curl
upwards, or who keeps a cator a goat that
is either tawny or black in colour, is free
from our power.


12. Those householders who keep these
things in theic houses always find them free


275


from the attacks of even the most dreadful
spicits that live on cacrion. ~


83. Those beings also, that like us range
through different worlds seeking pleasure,
are unable to do any harm to such houses.
Therefore, should men keep such articles in
their houses as are destructive of Rakshasas.
We have thus told you everything in solu-
tion of your great doubts. ~


CHAPTER CXXXIL.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).~
Continued.


Bhishma said :— 2054.

1—2. After this, the Grandfather Beah-
man, sprung from the primeval lotus and
resembling the lotus (in agreeableness and
fragrance), addressed the celestials headed
by Vasava, the husband of Sachi,—Yonder
sits the powerful Naga who lives in the
nether regions. Gifted with great strength
and energy, and with great prowess also,
his name is Reauka. He is certainly a
great being. ;


3-5. Those powerful elephants of great
energy and power, who hold the entire


‘Earth with her hills, waters, and lakes,


should be seen by this Renuka at your
request. Let Renuka go to them and ask
them about the mysteries of religion or
duty !—Hearing these words of the Grand-
father, the celestials, well-pteased, sent (the
elephant) Renuka to where those upholders
of the world are,


6. Going where those elephants are,”
Renuka addressed them, saying,—Ye
powerful creatures, [| have been command-
ed by the celestials and the departed
Manes to question you about the mysteries
of retigion and duty! 1+ desire to heat you
discourse on that subject in detail. Ye
highly-blessed ones, do ye discourse on the
subject as your wisdom may dictate.


7. Standing in the eight quarters, the
elephants said,—On_ the sacred eighth day
of the dack fortnight in the month of
Kartika, when the constellation Ashlesha is
in the ascendant, one should make gifts of
treacle and rice.


8-11. Renouncing anger, and tiving
on regulated diet, one should make these
offerings at a Shraddha, uttering these
Mantras,—Let Valadeva and other Nagas
endued with great strength, let other power-
ful snakes of huge bodies that are indesr
tructible and eternal, and let all the othe»


276


great snakes that have taken their birth
in theic family, make Wali offerings to me
for the increase of my strength and energy.
Indeed, let my strength be as great as that
of the blessed Narayana when he raised
the submerged Earth. Uttering these
Mantras, one should make Vali offerings
upon an anthill, After sunset, offerings of
raw sugar and rice should be made on
anthill selected. “he amthill should previ-
ously be strewn with Gajendra flowers.
Offerings should atso--be made of
clothes and fragrant unguents.


33. Hf offerings are made thus, those
beings that live in the nether regions, car-
rying the weight pf the upper regions upon
their heads or shoulders, become well-
pleased and gratified. - As for ourselves, we
also do not feel the exertion of upholding
the Earth, on ‘account of such offerings
being made to us.


14. Afflicted with the burthen we bear,
this is what we think (beneficial for men),
without the slightest selfish end. By obser-
ving this rule for a full year, fasting on each
occasion, Brahmanas Kshatriyas, and Vai-
shays and Shudras, acquire great merits
from such gifts.


15. We think that the making of such
Vahi offerings on the anthill is really fraught
with very superior merits.


16, By making ‘such offerings, one is
considered as doing the duties of hospitality
for a hundred years to all the powerful
elephants which exist in the three worlds.


17. Hearing these words of the powerful

- elephants, the celestials and the departed

Manes, and the highly-blessed Kisiuis, all
spoke highly of Renuka,


- CHAPTER CXXXIIL


CANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued. ‘


Maheshwara said:~ z


. 1 You have recited excellent duties from

yout memory. Listen all of “you now to me
as | declare some mysteries about religion
and duty. ,


2. Only those persons whose understand -
ings have been fixed ov religion and who are
endued with fajth, should be instructed
about those mysteries of duty and religion
that are fraught with high merits.


3. Hear what the merits are that become


blue |


:


MAHABHARATA.


food every day, for a month, to kine, and
¢ontents himself with one meal a day
throughout such period.


4. The kine are highly blessed. They
are considered as the most sacred of alt
sacred things.- Indeed, it is they who are
upholding the three words with the celestials,
Asuras, and human beings.


5. Respectful services done to them,
yield great merit and grave results. ‘That
man who every day gives food to kine daily,
acquires accumulated religious merits.


6. Formerly, in the golden age, I had
expressed my approval of these creatures.
Afterwards Brahman, sprung from the
primeval lotus, requested me (to show kind~
ness towards kine),


7. it is, therefore, that emblem of bull
stands on my standard overhead. TF always
Sport with kine. Hence, should kine be
adored by all.


8. Kine are endued with great power.
They are givers of boons. If adored, they
would yrant bosons, “Fhat person who
gives food to kine even for a single day,
receives from thuse beneficent creatures, for
that deed, a fourth part of the merits he
may acquire by all his good aets in hfe.


Sanam


CHAPTER CXXXIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—=
Continued.


Skanda said :—

it——2. | shall now describe a duty that
is approved of by me. Do ye listen to tt with
rapt attention. That person who-takes a
little eacth from the horns of a bull of blue
color, smears his body therewith for three
days, and then performs his abtutions, wins
great merits. Hear, what those merits are.
By such a deed he would wash away every
stain and evil, and acquire sovereign sway
hereafter.


3. Every time he is born in this world,
he becomes celebrated for his heroism.
Hear of another mystery unknown to all,


4. Taking a vessel of copper and placing
therein some cooked food after having
mixed it with honey, one should offer it as
offering to the rising Moon on the evening
of the day when that luminary is at full.


56. Do ye learn, with faith, what the
merits are of the person who acts thus. The
Saddhyas, the Rudras, the Adityas, the


his, who, with heart shorn of anxiety, gives; Vishwedevas, the twin Ashwias, the Matuts,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


and the Vasus, all accept that offering. By
such an offering, Soma increases as also
ocean, that great teceptacle of waters. This
duty that is declared by me and that is un-
known to all, if performed, certainly yields
great happiness.


Vishnu said :—


7-8. That person who, gifted with faith
and {creed from malice, listens every day
with rapt attention to the mysteries about
religion and duty that are preserved by the
great deities and those mysteries also of
the same kind that are preserved by the
Rishis, has never to succumb to any evil,
Such a person becomes also fred from
every fear,


g. That man who, with his senses under
thorough restraint, reads these sectiuns des-
cribing these auspicious and sneritorious
duties, together with their mysteries,—
duties that have been described (by the
previous speakers),—acquires all the merits

- of their actual performance,


10. Sin can never lord over him. In-
deed, such a man can never be stained with
faults of any sort. Indeed, one acquires
profuse merits by reading these mysteries,
_ OF by reciting thera to others, or by hearing
Yhem recited.


11. The celestials and the departed
Manes eat for ever the Havi and the Kavi
offered by such a creature. Both these, on
account of the virtues of the offerer, become
inexhaustible. Even such is the merit of
the person who, with rapt attention, recites
these mysteries to foremost of Brahm snas
on days of the full moon or the new
moon,


iz. Such a person, on account of such a
deed, becomes steady in the performance
of all duties. Healso enjoys personal beauty
and prosperity. He succeeds, besides this,
in becoming the favourite for all time, of
the Rishis and the celestials and the depart-
ed Manes.


13. fa person becomes guilty of all sins
except those which are classed as grave or
heinous, he becomes purged off of them all by
only listening to the recitation of these mys-
teries about religion and duty,


Bhishma said :—


14-15. Even these, O king, are the
mysteries about religion and duty living in
the breasts of the deities. Held in high
esteem by all the celestials and- promul-
gated by Vyasa, they have now been de-
clared by me for your behoof. One who is
conversant with religion and duty thinks
that this excellent Ktowledge is even


277


superior to the entire. Earth full of riche:
and wealth. '


16. This knowledge should not be give"
to one who has no faith, or to one who is an
atheist, or to one who has fallen away from
the duties of his caste, or to one who is
shoin of mercy, or to one who is given to
the science of empty disputations, or to one
who is hostile to his prec-ptors, or to one
who thinks all creatures to be different from
oneself,


CHAPTER CXXXV._


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Who are those persons, UO Bharata
from whom a Bratmana in this world may
take his food? From whom may a Ksha-
triya, a Vaishya, and a Shudra take their
food respectively ?


Bhishma said :-—


2. A Brahmana may take his food from
another Brahmana, or foe a Kshatriya, oc
from a Vaishya, but he must never take food
from a Shudra. '


3. A Kshatriya may take his food from
a Brahmana,a Kshatriya, or a Vaishya,
He must, however, not take food given by
Shudras who are given to evil ways and
who partake of all sorts of food without any
hesitation. , :


4. Brahmanas and Kshatriyas cas par-
take of food given by such Vaisihyas as serve
the sacred fire every day, as are faultless in
character, and as perform the vow of Cha-
turmasya.


5. But the man who accepts food from a
Shudra, swallows the very abomination of
the Earth, and drinks the excretions of the
human body, and partakes of the filth of all
the world, as


6. He partakes of the very filth of the
Earth whotakes his food thus from a Shudra.
Indeed, those Brahmanas who accept their
food from Shudras, take the dict of the
Earth.

gq. If ome engages in the service of a
Shudra, he is doomed to perdition, though
he may duly perform alf the rites of his
caste. A Brahmana, a Kshatriya, of a
Vaishya, so engaging, is doomed, although
given to the propet performance of religious
TILES, © : ,


278


8. It is said that a Brahmana's duty
consists in studying the Vedas and seeking
the behoof of humanity ; that a Kshatriya’s
duty consists in protecting men, and that a


‘Maishya’s in promoting their material pros--


perity.

9g. A Vaishya lives by distributing the
fruits of ‘his own deeds end agriculture.
The breeding of kine and trade are the le-
Ritimate duties in which a Vaishya may
‘engage without feac of censure,


to. The man who gives up his own pro-
per occupation and does that of a Shudra,
should be regarded as a Shudra, and, on
no.account, should any food be accepted
from him, --- \


tt. Professors of medicine, mercenary
soldiers, the priest who acts as warder of the
house, and persons who devote a whole
year to study without any profit, are all to
be regarded as Shudras.

12—13.
take of food offered at ceremonials in a
Shudra’s house, suffer from a dreadful
disaster. On account of partaking such
forbidden food, they loose their family,
Strength, and energy, and acquire the
Status of lower animals degenerating to the
position of dogs, faflen in virtue and devoid
of ail religious observances,


14. He who takes food from a physician,
takes but an excrement;. the food of a
harlot is like urine; that of a skilled mecha-
nic is like blood. :


15. Ifa good Brahmana takes the food
of one who lives by his learning, he is con-
sidered as taking the food of a Shudra, All
good men should avoid such food.


16. The food of a person who is censured
by all, is said to be like.a drink from a pool
of blood. The acceptance of food from a
wicked person is as heinous as the killing
of a Brahmana.


17. One should not accept food if he is
slighted and not received with due honors
by the giver. A Bratmana, who does so,
is soon possessed by disease, and his family
soon becomes extinct.


18. By accepting food from the warder
of a city, one degenerates to the Status,
of the lowest outcaste.


19. «ff a Brahmana accepts food from
one who is guilty of slaying either a cow or
a*Brahmana, or from one who has com-
mitted adultery with his perceptor’s wife,
or from a drunkard, he helps to promote
the family of Rakshasas.


20. By taking food from a eunuch, or
from an ungtateful person, or froma one


And those who foolishly par- |


MAHABHARATA.


who has misappropriated money entrusted
to his care, one ts born in the country of the
Savaras situated- beyond the limit of the
middle country.


2t. Ihavethus duly described to you
the persons from whom food may be ac~
cepted and from whom it may not. Now
tell me, O son of Kunti, what else do you
wish to hear from me to-day.


CHAPTER CXXXVI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—
Continued,


‘Yudhishthira said —


1. You have told me fully of those from
whom food may be taken, and of those from
whom it should not be taken ?


2. But I have grave doubts on one point.
Do you, O sire, enlighten me; do you
tell me what expiation a Brahmana should
make upon accepting the different kinds of
food, those especially offered in honor of the
celestials and the oblations made to the
departed Manes,


Bhishma said :—


3. {shall tell you, O prince, how great
Brahmanas may be freed from all sins in-
curred by accepting food from others.


‘4. [nm accepting clarified butter, the
expiation is made by pouring oblations
on the fire, reciting the Savitri hymn. In
accepting sesamum, O Yadhishthira, the
same expiation has to be made.


5. In accepting meat, or honey, or salt,
a Brahmana becomes purged off of all sins
by standing ull the rising of the Sun.


.


6-7. If a Brahmana accepts gold from
any one, he becomes cleansed of all sins
by silently reciting the great Gayatri, and
by holding a piece of iron in his hand,
before the public. In accepting money or
clothes or women or gold, the purification
is the same as before.


8. In accepting food, or rice boiled in
milk and sugar, or sugarcane juice, or
sugargane, or oil, or any sacred thing, one
becomes purified by bathing thrice during
the day, vig., at morn, noon and eve.


If one accepts paddy, flowers, fruits,
water, half-cipe barley, milk, or curdled
mils, or anything made of meal or flour, the
expiation is done by reciting the Gayatri
ptayer a hundred times. .


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


to. In accepting shoes or clothes at


279


24. In such cases, expiations should be


obsequial ceremonies, the sin is dissipated | performed, and propitiatory rites should be


by reciting devoutly the same hymn a hun-
dred times. .


11. The acceptance of the pift of land
dating an eclipse or during the period of
impurity, is expiated by observing a fast
during three successive nights.


12, The Brahmana who partakes of ob-
fations offered to departed Manes, in course


of the dark fortnight, is purified by fasting


for a whole day and night.


13. Without performing his ablutions a
Brahmana should not recite his evening
prayers, nor engage in religious meditation,
nor take his food a second time. By so
doing he is purified.

14. Therefore the Shraddha of departed
Manes has been ordained to be performed
in the afternoon and then the Brahmana
who has been invited beforehand should be
treated with food. ”

15. The Brahmana who’ takes‘ food at
the house of a dead person on the third day
after the death, is purified by bathing three
times daily for twelve days.


16. After the expiration of twelve days,


and performing the purification ceremonies:


duly, the sin is-dissipated by giving clarified
butter to Brahmanas. i


17. Uf a man takes any food in the house
of a dead person, within ten days after the
death, he should perform all the expiations
before mentioned, and should, recite the
Savitri hymn and perform the sin-destroy-
ing Ishti and Kushmanda penances, , ,


18—19. The Brahmana who takes his
food in the house of a dead person for
three nights, becomes purified by perform-
ing his ablutions thrice daily for seven days,
and thus gains all the objects of his desire,
and is never troubled by misfortunes. «


ry ! hoy

20, The Braimana who takes his food
in the company of Shudras, is purged from
all impurities by duly performing the cere-
monies of purification. :


at. The Brahmana who takes his food
in the company of Vaishyas, is purged off of
all sins, by living on alms for three ‘succes-
sive nights, ee


22." If a Brahmana takes his ‘food with
Kshatriyas, he should perform expiation by
bathing with his clothes on.


23. By eating with a Shudra on the
same plate, the Shudra Joses his family pres-
-tige; the Vaishya by eating on the same
plate with a Vaishya, ‘loses his cattle. and
friends. The Kshatriya loses his prospe-
rity; and the Brahmana, his effulgence and
power,


observed, and oblations offered to the celes-
tials. The Savitri hymn should be recited
and the Revati rites and Kushmanda pen-
ances should be performed for destroying
the sin. ¢ P


25. If any of the above four castes par- —
take of food partly eaten by a person of
any other caste, the expiation is, forsooth,
made by smearing the body with sacred
articles like Rochana, Durba grass, aud
turmeric,


he


CHAPTER CXXXVIL.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).~>
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. O Bharata, kindly tell me which of
thé two is hetter, vts., charity or devotion ?
By this expeli a great doubt from off ny.
mind.


Bhishma said a


‘2.. Listen to meas I recite the names of
the princes who having been devoted to
virtue, and having purified their hearts by
péenances and practised gifts nnd other acts
of virtue, undoubtedly acquire the differs
ent celestial regions, ,

3. The Rishi Atreya respected of all,
attained, O king, to the excellent . celestial
regions, by imparting the knowledge of the
limitless Supreme Being to his pupils.

4. ‘By offering the life of his dear son,
for the behoof of a Brahmana, King Shivi
the son of Ushinara was taken from this


world to the celestial region.


g. Pratardana the king of Kashi, secured
to himself unique and eternal fame_ in this
as well as in the other world by giving his
son toa Brahmana, ‘


6. Rantideva, the son of Sangkriti, at-
tained to the highest heaven by duly, making
gifts to the great Vashishtha.


7. Devavriddha, too, went to the celes-
tial region by giving a hundred-ribbed and
excellent golden umbrella to a Brahmana
fora sactifice, oe :

8. The worshipful Amvarisha, too, has
acquired the celestial region’ by making a
gitt of all his kingdom toa highly powerful
Brahmana. >


‘ g. , King Janamejaya of the solar race,

went to the highest heaven by making a
ift of earrings, fine vehicles, and cows to
tahmanas,


280


10, The Royal Sage Vrishadarvi went te
the celestial region by making gifts of vari-
ous jewels and beautiful houses to Brah-
manas. ‘


11. King Nimi of Vidarva, acquired the
celestial region with his sons, friends and
cattle, by giving his daughter and kingdom
to the great Agastya,


12. The illustrious Rama, the son of
Jamadagni, acquired the eternal regions,
tar beyond his expectatioy by giving lands
to Brahmanas, ‘


13. Vashishtha, the greatest of Brah-
tmanas, saved all the creatures at a time of
great drought when the Rain God did not
bestow his grateful showers -upm the Barth,
and for this deed he has secured eternal
bliss for himself,


14. The highly-illustriaus Rama the son
Dasharatha, acquired the eternal regions by
making gifts of riches at saccifices.


15. The illustrious Royal Sage Kaksha-
sena went to the celestial region. by duly
making over to the great: Vahsishtha the
wealth which he had deposited with tim.


16. Forthwith Marutta the son of Abi-
Kshita and the grandson of Karandhama, by
giving his daughter in marriage to Angiras,
went to the celestial region.


17. ‘Phe highty devout king of Panchala,
Brahmadatta, attained the blessed way by
giving away a valuable cenchshell,


18. King Mitrasaha ascended te Heaven
by giving his favourite wife Madayaati to
the great Vashishtha,


19. Sudyumna, the son of Manu, attained
tothe most blessed regions by duly punishing
the high-souled Likhita.


20. The celebrated Royal Sage Saha-
Strachitta went to the blessed regions by
sacrificing his dear fife fora Brahmana,


2t. The king Satadyumna went to
heaven by giving to Maudgala a. golden
Palace filled. with all the objects of desire.


22. Formerly, King Sumanyu:by giving
to Shandilya heaps of food resembling a
hill, went to the celestial region.


23. The Shalwa prince Dyutimat of
gteat effulgence attained to the highest
regions by giving his kingdom to Richika.


24. The Royal Sage Madirashwa went
to the region of the celestials by. giving his


slender-waisted daughter to Hiranyahasta,


25. The lordly Lomapada attained’ all
the objects of his desire by giving bis
“daughtet Shanta in marriage to Rishya-
shringa, oe ne


MAHABHARATA.


~ 26, The Royal Sage Bhagiratha went to
the eternal regions by giving his famous
daugiter Hansi ia marriage to Kautsa.


27. King Bhagiratha acquired the most
blessed regions by giving vundreds and
thousands of kine with their young ane
to Kohala,


28. hese and many other men, O
Yudhishthira, have attained to the celestial
tegion, by the merit of their charities and
penances and they have also returned from
there again and again.


29. Their fame will last as long as the
world will last. I have related to you, O
Yudhishthira, this story of those good -
householders who -have attained to eternal.
regions by virtue of their charities and
penances.


30. -These peopla have acquired the
celestial region by their chariues and by:
performing sacrifices and by procreating
children. :


gt. O foremost scion of Kuru’s race,
these men devoted their virtuous intellects
to the celebration of sacrifices and charities
by always performing acts of charity.


32. O powerful prince, asnight thas set
in. If shall explain to you in the morning.
ioe ied doubts may spring. up in your
mind.


CHAPTER CXXXVIII.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).=«
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


t. I have heard from you, O sire, the
names of those kings who have ascended to
the celestial region, Q you whose power is
great in the obse: vance of the vow of truth,
by following the religion of gift.

2. How many kinds of gift aré there ?
What are the fruits of the severat kinds of
gifts respectivety.


3. For what reasons what kinds of gifts
made to what persons yield merits 7 Indeed,
to what persons should what gifts be made ?
For what reasons are how many kinds of
hited to be made? [ wish to hear all this in

ull. :


Bhishma said :—

4 Listen, O'sen of Kunti, in full to me,
© sintess one, as I describe the subject of
gifts. Indeed, I shall tell you, O Bharata,
how gifts should. be made to all the orders


' of men, Rs


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


5. Gifts are made from desire of. merit,
from desire of profit, from fear, from free
choice, and from pity, O Bharata! Gifts,
therefore, should be known to be of five
sorts. Listen now to the reasons for which
gifts are thus divided into five classes,


6. With mind shorn of malice, one should
make gifts to Brahmanas, for by making
wifts to them one wins fame in this world
and great happiness in the next.


y. He is in the habitof making gifts;
or he will make gifts; or he has already
made gifts to me. Hearing such words
from solicitors, one gives away all kinds of
riches to a particular solicitor.


8 1 am not his, nor is he mine. If dis-
regarded, he may injure me. From such
motives of fear even a learned and wise
man may make gifts to an ignorant wretch.


g. ‘This one is dear to me. I also am
dear to him. Actuated by considerations
fixe these, an intelligent person, freely and
with alacrity, Makes gifts tu a Friend.


10. The person who solicits me is poor.
He is, again, satisfied with a little. From
considerations such as these, one should
always make gifts to the poor, moved by
pity. .

11. These are the five sorts of gift. They
inccease the giver’s merits and fame. The
Lord of all creatuces has said that one should
always make gifts according to his power.


CHAPTER CXXXIX,


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
‘ Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. O grandfather, you are endued with
great wisdom. Indeed, you are fully con-
versant with every branch of learning. In
our great family you are the only individual
who have mastered sciences.


2, I wish to hear from you discourses of
Religion and Profit, which bring on happi-
ness in the next world, and that are fraught
with wonder to all creatures,


3. The time that has come is full of dis-
tress. ‘he like of it does not generally
come to kinsmen and friends. Indeed,
except you, O foremost of men, we have
now none else who can take the place of an
instructor.


4. If, O sinless one, I with my brothers
deserve your lavour, you should answer the
questions I wish to ask you.

36


x


281


5. This one is Narayana who is gifted
with every prosperity and is honored. by all
the kings. Even he waits upon you, show.
ing you every indulgence and honoring you
greatly,


6. You should describe it to me, through
affection, for my benefit as also for that of
my brothers, in the presence of Vasudeva
himself and of all these kings.


Vaishampayana said:— —

7. Hearing these words of king Yu-«
dhishthira, Bhishma, the son of the river
Ganges, filled with joy on account of his
affection for the monarch and his brothers,
said what follows.


Bhishma said :—

8. I shall certainly recite to you dis-
courses that are charming on the subject, O
king, of the power of this Vishnu as display-
ed in days of yore and as I have heard
(from my preceptors).


g. Listen to me also as I describe the
power of that great god who has a bull for
his emblem. Listen to me as I describe also
the doubt that filled the mind of the wife of
Rudra and that of Rudca himself.


to. Once on a time the virtuous Krishna
observed a vow extending for two and ten
years. For seeing him who had performed
the rite of initiation for the observance
of his great vow, there came to that
place Narada and Parvata, and {rishna«
Dwaipayana and Dhaumya, that foremost
of silent reciters, Devala, Kashyapa, and
Hastikashyapa.

12. ‘Other Rishis aiso, gifted with initias
tion and self-restraint, followed by their
disciples and accompanied by many Sid-
dhas and many ascetics of great merit, came
there.


13. The son of Devaki offered them
such laudable honors of hospitality as are
offered to the gods alone.


14. Those great Rishis sat themselves
down upon seats some of which were green
and some were gold-hued and some were
made of the plumes of the peacock and
some were perfectly new and fresh.


15. Thus seated, they began to converse
sweetly with one another on subjects of
Religion and Duty as also with many royal
sages and celestials.


16. At that time the energy, in the
form of fice, of Narayana, rising from the
fuel that consisted of the cigid observance
of his vow, came out of the mouth of
Krishna of wonderful deeds.


17. That fire began to consume thosg
mountains with their trees and creepers ang


-gBz


little plants, as also with their birds and
deer and beasts of prey and reptiles.


38. Soon the summit of that mountain
presented a distressing and pitiful sight.
Inhabited by animals of various kinds which
began to utter eries of woe and pain, the
‘summit soon became bereft of every living
creature.


19, That fire of powerful Aames, having
couvsumed everything without living a re-
sidue, at last returned to Vishnu and touch-
ed his feet kke a docile disciple. -


20. That crusher of enemies, vis.,
Krishna, seeing that mountain burnt, cast
a benignant look upon it and thereby
brought it back to its former condition.


at. That movntain thereupon once more
became bedecked with flowering trees and
creepers, and once more echoed with the
notes and cries of birds amd deer and
animals of prey and reptiles.


22, Seeing that wonderfwi and incon-
ceivable spectacle, all the ascetics became
filled with wonder. Their hair stood erect
and their vision was disturbed with tears.


23. Seeing those Rishis thus stricken
with wonders, that foremost of. speakers,
Narayana, addressed them in these sweet
and refreshing words :-—


24. Why, indeed, has wonder filled the
hearts of this collection of Rishis, these
ascetics who are always free. from attach-
ment of every kind, who are divested: of the
idea of mine-ness, and who.are fully con.
versant with every sacred science.


25. These Rishia having penances for
wealth and freed from every. stain, should
explain to me truly this dovbt which has
originated in my, mind,


The Rishis said :—

26. You are the ereator of all the-worlds,
and the destroyer of them again. You are
Winter, yoware Summer, ard you are the
Season of Rains.


23. Of all the creatures, mobife aud im.
mobile, that exist on Earth, you are the
father, you are the mother, you are. the
master, and yow are the origin,

23. Even this, O- destroyer of Madhu, is
a matter of wonder and doubt with us. O
source of albauspiciousness, you should ex-
plain to us that dowbt, vaz., the issue. of fite
from your mouth,

2 Our fears being removed, we shall
then, O Hari, recite to you what we have
heard and seen.


Vasudeva said -—
30. The fire that came out from my


~ MAHABHARATA.


mouth and that resembles the all-destroy-
ing Yuga-Fire in splendour, and by which
this mountain has been crushed and score
ched, is nothing else than the power of
Vishnu. ‘


3t. Ye Rishis, ye are persons who have
governed anger, who have brought your
senses under complete control, who are
gifted with wealth of penances, and who
are very gods in power. Yet you have
allowed yourselves to be ayitated and dis~
tressed,


32. Lam now engaged wholly with the
observances about a rigid vow. Indeed,
on accouht of my observing the vows of arn
ascetic, a fire came out from my mouth,
You should not allow yourselves to be agi-
tated therefor.

33. It is for observing a rigid vow
that I came to this charming and sacred
mountain. The object that has brought
me there is to acquire, by the help of
penances, a son that would be my equal in
power.


34. On accormt of my penances, the
Soul existing in my body became changed
into fire and came out of my mouth. That
fire had gone to see the boon-giving Grand-
father all the universe.


35- The Grandfather, ye foremost of
ascetics, told my son! that half the energy
of the great god having the bull for his


+ emblemr would take birth as my son.


36. That five returning from its mission,
has come back to me and approached my
feet like a disciple desirous of attending to
me dutifully, Indeed, renowneing its
fury it has come back to its own proper
nature. .


37. E have thus told you, in brief, 4 mys
tery belonging to Him who has the lotus


for his origin and who is gifted with great


intelligence. Ye Rishis having penances
for wealth, you should not yield to fear.


38. You are gifted with far-reaching
vision, Yow can proceed ro every place
without any obstacle. Radiant with vows
observed by ascetics, you-are adorned with
knowledge and science.


3m E new ask youto tell me something
that is highly wonderful which you have
heard of or seen on Earth or in the celes-
tial region.

40. Eam anxious to taste the honey of
words which will drop from your lips, and
which, I am sure, will be as sweet asa ~
jet of nectar itself,


41., If I see anything on Earth or in the.
celestial. region, which. is highly delightful.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


and wonderful but which is unknown to all
of you, O god-like Rishis, that is on ac-
count of my own supreme Nature which is
iygcapable of being obstructed by anything.
Anything wonderful which 1 Kuow “by na-
ture or by my own inspiration, ceases to ap-
pear wonderful to me.


43. Anything, however, that is recited
by pious persons and that is heard from
those who are good, deserves to be accept-
ed with respect and faith. Such discourses
exist on Earth for a long time and will Jast
like characters engraved on rocks.


44. { wish, therefore, to hear at this
meeting of ourselves, something dropping
from the fips of persons whoare good and
who cannot fail to be productive of good to
men.


45. Hearing these words of Krishna,
all those ascetics became filled with wonder.
They began to look at Janarddana with
those eyes of theirs that were as beautiful
and large as the petals of the lotus.


46. Some of them began to glorify him
and some began to adore him with respect.
Indeed, all of them then sang the praises
of the destroyer of Madhu with words
whose meanings were adorned with the
eternal Richs,


47. Atl those ascetics then appointed
Narada, that foremost of all persons con-
versant with words, to satisfy the request of
Vasudeva.


The Ascetics said :—

48—~49. You should, O Narada, describe
in full, from the beginning, to Heishikesha,
that wonderful and inconceivable incident
which took piace, O powerful one, on the
mountains of Himavat and which, O ascetic,
was seen by those of us who had gone there
in course of our sojourn to the sacred waters.
Indeed, for the behoof of all the Rishis here
collected, you should recite that incident.


50. Thus addressed by those ascetics,
the celestial Rishi, viz., the divine Narada,
then recited the following story whose
incidents had taken place sometime before.


CHAPTER CXL,


(ANUS HASANIKA PARVA. —)
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. Then Narada, that holy Rishi, that
friend of Narayana, recited the following
discourse that took place between Shankara
and his wife Uma,


283
. Narada said :—


2. Once on atime the pious lord of alf
the celestials, vis., Mahadeva having bull
for his emblem, practised sevete penances,
on the sacred mountains of Himavat the
tesort of Siddhas and Charanas.


3. That charming mountain is over-
grown with various kinds of herbs and
aducned with various flowers, At that time
they were inhabited by the different tribes
of Apsaras and crowds of ghosts.


4. There the great god sat, filled with
joy, and encircled by hundreds of ghostly
beings who presented various aspects to the
eye of the beholder. Some of them were
ugly and awkward, some were very beauti-
ful, and some presented the most wonder+
ful appearances.


5. Some had faces like the lion’s, some ~
{ike the tiger's, and some like the elephant’s.
In fact, the faces of those goblins presented
every variety of animal faces.—~Some had
faces resembling that of the jackal; some
those of the pard’s; some like the ape’s ;
some like the bull’s.


6. Some of them had faces like the
owl’s; some like the hawk’s; some had
faces like those of the deer.


7. The great god was also encircled by
Kinnaras and Yakshas and Gandharvas
and Rakshasas and various other created
beings. The retreat of Mahadeva also
abounded with celestial flowers and shone
with celestial rays of light.


8. tt was perfumed with celestial sandal,
and celestial incense was burnt on all sides.
And it echoed with the sounds of celestial
instruments.


g-_ Indeed, it resounded with the beat
of Mridangas and Panavas, the biare of
conchs, and the sound of drums, it was
full of goblins of diverse tribes that danced
in joy and with peacocks also that danced
with plumes outspread.


to. It was the resort of the celestial
Rishis, the Apsaras danced there in joy.
The place was exceedingly beautiful to look
at. It was exceedingly beautiful, resem-
bling Heaven itself. Its view was wonder-
ful, and, indeed, its beauty and sweetness
was beyond description,


tz. With the penances of that great god
who sleeps on mountain breasts, that king
of mountains shone with great beauty.
It resounded with the chaunt of Vedas
ttered by learned Brahmanas given to
Vedic recitation. Echoing with the hum
of bees, GQ Madhava, the mountaia be-


| came peerless in beauty.


28.4


12.
fierce form and who looks lixe a great festi-
val, the ascetics became filled, O Janard-
dana, with great joy.


“13—-14. All the highly blessed ascetics,

the Siddhas who have drawn in their vital
seed, the Maruts, the Vasus, the Saddhyas,
the Vishwedevas, Vasava hiniself, the
Yakshas, the Nagas, the Pishachas, the
Regents of the world,. the several sacred
Fires, the Winds, and alf the preat crea-
tures lived on that mountain with minds
concentrated in Yoga.


15. Ali thé Seasons were present there
and filled those regions with all sorts of
wonderful flowers. Various kinds of burn-
ing herbs illuminated the woods and forests
on that mountain,


. 16. Various species of birds, filled with
joy, danced about and sang merrily on
the charming. breast of that mountain.
Those birds were exceedingly loveable on
account of the notes they uttered.


17. The great Mahadeva sat, beauti-
fully on one of the peaks that was adorned
with excellent minerals, as if it served the
purposes of a fine bedstead.


18. Round his loins was a tiger-skin,
and a lion-skin was his upper garment.
His sacred thread consisted of a snake.
His arms were decked with a pair of red
armiets.


19. His beard was green. He had mat«
ted locks on his head. Of dreadful features
he fills with fear the hearts of all the enemies
of the gods. He removes the fear of all
éreatures. He is adored by his worship-
pers asthe deity having the bull for his
emblem.


20. The great Rishis, seeing Mahadeva,
bowed to him by touching the ground with
their heads. Gifted with forgiving souls,
they all became freed from every sin and
thoroughly purified.


21. ‘The retreat of that lord of all crea-
tures, filled with many terrible forms, shone
with a peculiar beauty. Abounding with
many large snakes, it was unapproachable
and unbearable.


22. Within the twinkling of the eye, O
destroyer of Madhu, everything there be-
came highly wonderful. Indeed, the house
of that great deity having the bull for
his emblem began to blaze with a terrible
beauty.


23. To Mahadeva seated there, came
his wife the daughter of ‘Himavat, sur-
rounded by the wives of the ghostly beings
who are the companions of the “great god.
Her dsess was like that of her husband


MAHABHARATA.


Seeing the great god, who has a: and the vows she observed, were like those


of his. =


24. She held a jar on her loins that was
filled with the waters of every ‘Tirtha, a
was accompanied, by the presiding god dess
of all the mountain rivers. Those auspici-
ous ladies followed her.


25. The goddess came, raining flowers
on all sides and various Kinds of sweet per-
fumes. She who loved to live on the breast
of Himavat, advanced in this guise towards
her great husband.


26. With smiling lips and desirous of
playing a jest, the beautiful Uma covered
from behind, with her two beautiful hands,
the eyes of Mahadeva.


27. Assoon as Mahadeva’s eyes were
thus covered, all the regions became dark,
and life seemed to be extinct everywhere in
the universe. The Homa rites ceased.
Che universe became suddenly deprived of
the sacred Vashat also.


28. All living creatures became dispi-
rited and filled with fear. Indeed, when
the eyes of the lord of all creatures were
thus closed, the universe appeared sunless.


29. Soon, however, that besetting dark.
ness disappeared. A powerful and burning
flame of fire came out from Mabhadeva’s
forehead. 2


30. A third eye, resembling another sun,
appeared (on it). That eye began to shine
like the Yuga-Fire and began to consume
that mountain.


31. Seeing what took place, the large-
eyed daughter of Himavat bowed her head
to Mahadeva gifted with that third eye
which resembled a blazing fire. She stood
there with looks fixed on her husband.


32—33. When the mountain forests burn-
ed on ail sides with their Salas and other
trees of straight stems, and their deliyttful
sandals and various excellent medicinal
herbs, herds of deer and other, animals fill-
ed with fear, came quickly to the place
where Hara sat and sought his protection.
With those creatures almost filling it, the
hermitage of the great deity shone witha
sort of peculiar beauty.


34. Meanwhile that fire, swelling wildly,
soared up to the very sky and endued with
the splendour and unsteadiness of lightning
and looking like a dozen suns in power and
effulgence, covered every side like the all-
destroying Yuga-Fire.


35. In a moment the Himavat moun-
tains were consumed, with their minerals
and sumunits and blazing herbs,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


36. Seeing Himavat crushed and con-
sumed, the daughter of that king of moun-
tains sought the protection of the great
deity and stood before him with her hands
joined in respect.


37. Seeing Uma overcome by womanly
mildness and finding that she was reluctant
to see her father Himavat reduced to that
pitiable condition, then Sharva cast kind
looks upon the mountain, :


38. In amoment the whole of Himavat
regained his former condition and became
as beautiful to look at as ever. Indeed, the
mountain displayed a cheerful aspect. Atl
its trees became bedecked with flowers,


39. Seeing Himavat restored to his
natural condition, the goddess Uma, dives-
ted of every fault, addressed her husband,
that master of all creatures, v7g., the divine
Maheshwara, in these words.


Uma said :—

49. O Holy One, O Lord of all creatures,
O God holding trident, O you of high vows,
a great doubt has filled my mind! You
should remove that doubt of mine.


41. Why has. this third eye appeared
in your forehead? Why also was the
mountain consumed with the forests and
all that belonged to it ?


42, Why also, O illustrious god, have
you restored the mountain to its former
condition? Indeed, having burnt it once,
why have you again filled it with trees ?


Maheshwara said :—

43. O goddess. without any fault, for
your having covered -my eyes through an
act of indiscretion, the universe became in
a moment devoid of light.


44, When the universe became sunless
and, therefore, all became dark, O daughter
of the prince of mountains, | created a third
eye for protecting all creatures.


45. The great energy of that eye crushed
and consumed this mountain. For pleasing
you, however, O goddess, I once more res-
tored Himavat to his pristine condition. for
making good the injury.


Uma said :—

46. O Holy One, why are those faces of
yours which are on the east, the north, and
the west, so beautiful and so agreeable to
look at like the very moon.


47. And why is that face of yours which
is on the south so dreadful? Why are
your matted locks tawny in colour and so
erect? Why is yout throat blue like the
peacock’s plumes ?


285


48. Why, O illustrious god, is the Pinaka
always in your hand?) Why are you always
a Brahmacharin with mated locks ?


49. O lord, you should explain all these
tome. fam your wife who seeks to follow
the same duties with you. Further, | am
your devoted worshipper, O deity having
higbly the bull for your emblem,


Narada continued :—


59. Thus addressed by the daughter of
the king of mountains, the illustrious holder
of Pinaka, the powerful Mahadeva became
highly pleased with her.


51. The great god then addressed her,
saying,=-O blessed lady, heac as I explain
with the reasons thereof, why jmy forms
are so.


Sas


CHAPTER CXLI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—
Continued, ,


The Blessed and Holy One said :—


1. Formerly a blessed and foremost of
women, was created by Brahman, called
Tilottama, by collecting beauty from every
beautiful object in the universe, _


2. One day, that lady of beautiful face,
peerless in the universe for beauty of form,
came to me, O goddess, for circumambu-
lating me but, in sooth, moved by the desire
of tempting me. ahs


3. .In whatever direction that lady of
beautifal teeth turned, a new face of mine
instantly appeared. All these faces of mine
became handsome to look at.


4. Thus,3-on account of the desire of
seeing her, | became four-faced, through
Yoga-power, ‘Thus 1 showed my high
Yoga-power in becoming four-faced.


5. With that face of mine which is turn-
ed towards the east, I exercise thé sove-
reignty of the universe, With that face of
mine which is turned towards the north, [I
sport with you, O you of faultless features.


6. That face of mine which is turned
towards the west is handsome and auspi-
cious. With it I ordain the happiness of
all creatures. ‘That face of mine which is
turned towards the south is dreadful, With
it 1 destroy all creatures,


z. 1. live as a Brahmacharin with matted
locks on my head, for doing good to al}
creatures. ‘the bow Pinaka is always in


286


my hand for accomplishing the work of the
celestials,

8. Formerly, Indra, desirous of acquir-
ing my prosperity, had husled bis thunder-


bolt at me. With that weapou my throat
was scorched. Therefore | have become
blue-throated.


Uma said :—

9. When, O foremost of all creatures,
there are so many excellent beautiful cars,
why have you selected a bull for your
vehicle ? :


.


Maheshwara said :—


to. Formerly, the Grandfather Brahman
Created the celestial cow Surabhi- giving
profuse milk. After hee creation there
sprang from her a large number of Kine
all of which gave sufficient quantities of
milk sweet as nectar.


tt. Once on a time a quantity of froth
felt from the mouth of one of her calves on
my body. f was enraged at this and my
anger scorched all the kine which there-
upon became diversified in colour,


12. I was then pacified by the Lord of
all the ‘worlds, vis., Brahman, conversant
with all subjects. It washe who gave me
this bull both as a car for bearing me and
as device on my banner.


Uma said :-—

413. You have many houses, in the celes-
tial region, of vacious forms and possessed.
of every comfort and luxury. Why, O Holy
One, do you live in the crematorium, aban-
doing all those delightful palaces.


‘14. The crematorium is full of the hair
and bones (of the dead), abounds with vul-
tures and jackals, and is covered with
hundreds of funeral pyres.


t5. Full of carcion and muddy with fat
and blood, with entrails and bones scattered
all over it, and always echoing with the
howls of jackals, it is certainly an impure
place.


Maheshwara said :—


16. I always travel over the whole Earth
in search after a sacred spot. I do not,
however, see any spot that is more sacred
than the crematorium. ‘


17. Therefore, of all houses, the crema-
torium appears to me to be the best,
shaded as it generally is by branches of the
banian and adorned with torn garlands of
flowers.


18. O you of sweet smiles, the multitudes
of goblins that are my companions love to


‘sacred house to me.


MAH ABHAKATA,


live in such spots. I do not like, O goddess,
to live anywhere, without those goblins by
my side,

19. Therefore, the crematorium is @
Indeed, O auspicious
lady, it appears to me to be very Heaven.
Highly sacred and endued with great
merit, the crematorium is much praised
by persons desirous of having holy abodes. ,


Uma said :—


20. O Holy One, O lord of all creatures,
O foremost of all observers of duties and
religious rites, | haye a great doubt, O hold-
er of Pinaka, O giver of boons.


2t. These ascetic’, O powerful Jord, have
practised various kinds of austerities. In
the world are seen asceitcs wandering every-
where under various torms and clad in
vacious kinds of dress.


22. For benefitting this large number
of Rishis, as also myself, do you kindly
cemove, O chaister of all enemies, this doubt
of mine.


23. What are the characteristics of
Rehgion or Duty? How, indeed, do men
unacquainted with the details of Religion or
Duty succeed in observing them. O powers
fullord, O you who are conversant with
Religion, do you tell me this.


Narada said :—

24. When the daughter of Himavat, put
this question, the assemblage of Rishis there
present, adored the goddess with words
adorned with Richs and with hymns fraught
with deep meaning.


Maheshwara said:
25. Abstention from injury, truthfulness.


; of speech, mercy towards all beings, tran-


quillity of soul, and the making of gifts to
the best of one’s power, form the foremost
duties of the householder.


26—27.  Abstention from sexual union
with the wife of other men, protection of the
riches and the woman committed to his care,
reluctance to appropriate what is not given:
to one, and avoidance of honey and meat,—~
these are the five chief duties. Indeed,
Religion or Duty has many branches all of
which yield happy results. “These are the.
duties which those embodied creatures who
consider duty as superior, should observe
and practise. These are the sources of
merit.


Uma said :—
28. O Holy One, I wish to ask you
another question about which [ entertain,


ANUSHASANA PARVE.


Preat doubts. You should answer it and
temove my doubts. What are the meri-
torious duties of the four castes.


29. What ate the duties of the Bralr-
mana? What of the Kshatriya? What
are the duties of the Vaishya? And what
are the duties of the Shudra.


The Holy Oue said :~


30. O highly blessed lady, the question
you have put, is a very proper one. ‘Those
persons who belong to the twice-born order,
are considered as highly blessed, and are,
indeed, gods on earth.


3t. Forsooth, the observance of fasts, is
always the duty of the Brahmana. When
the Brahmana succeeds in properly ob-
serving all his duties, he becomes at one
with Brahma.


32. The proper observance of the duties
of Brahniacharyya, O goddess, are his
ritual, ‘The observance of vows and the
investiture with the sacred thread fornr his
other duties. It is by these that he becomes
truly twice-born.


33- He becomes a Brahmana for ador-
ing his preceptors and other elders as also
the celestials, Indeed, that religion which
has for its soul the study of the Vedas,
is the source of all virtue. Even that is the
religion which those embodied creatures
who are given. to virtue and duty, should.
observe and practise.


Uma said :—

34. O Holy One, my doubts have not
been removed. You shotdd explain in de-
tail what the duties are of the fauc respec-
tive castes of men.


Maheshwara said :~


36. Listening to the mysteries of religion
and duty, observance of the vows laid) down
in the Vedas, attention to the sacred fire,
and accomplishment of the business of the
preceptor, leading a mendicant life, always
bearing the sacred thread, constant recita-
tion of the Vedas, and rigid observance of
the duties of a celibrate life, constitute the
duties of the Brahmana.


37. After the student life is over, the


Brahmana, at the behest of his preceptor, | |
| tion, O goddess, for I shall now tell you


should leave his preceptor’s abode for
returning to his father’s house. Upon
his return he should duly marry a proper
wife. f a .

38. Another duty of the Brahmana con-
sists of avoiding the food prepared by the
Shudra. Walking along the path of virtue,


always observing fasts and the practices of


Brahmacharyya, form his other duties,


287


39. The householder should keep up his
domestic fire for daily adoration. He
should study the Vedas. He should pour
libations in honor of the departed Manes
and the celestials, He should keep his
senses utider proper sestraint. He should
eat What temains after serving gods and
guests and all his dependants, He should
be abstemious in food, trathful in words,
and pure both in body and mind.


40. Attending to guests is another duty:
of the householder, as also the keeping up
of the three sacrificial fires, The house-
holder should also attend to the or inary
sacrifices catled Ishti and should also dedi-
cate animals to the deities according to the
Otdinances.


4t. Indeed, the celebration of sacrifices
is his gteatest duty as also a complete abse
tention from injury to all creatures. Never
to eat before serving the celestials and
guests and dependants is another duty of
the householder. ‘Ihe food that remaing
alter serving gods and guests and the de«
pendants is called Vighasa. ‘Ihe houses
holder should eat Vighasa,


42. Indeed, to eat after the members of,
his family including servants and other des
pendants, is considered as one of the espes
cial duties of the twice-born householder,
who should, besides, be conversant with the

edas,

43. The conduct of husband and wife, in
the case of the householder, should be equal.
He should every day make offerings of
flowers and other articles to those celestials*
who preside over domiesticity. .


44. The householder should see that his
house is every day properly rubbed with
(cowdung and water). He should also ob«
serve fasts every day. Well-cleaned and
well-cubbed, his house should also be every
day fumigated with the smoke of clarified
butter poured on his sacred fire in honor
of the ceiestials and the departed Manes.


45. Even these are the duties of a twices
born householder. ‘Those duties really up-
hold the world, ‘Those duties always and
eternally emanate from those pious persons
among the Brahmanas who live lise house-
holders, ss


46. Do you listen to me with ra pt atten-


what the duties are of the Kshatriya and
about which you have asked me.


47. From the beginning it has been said
that the duty ef the Kshatriya is to protect
all creatures. ‘Iheking gets a fixed share
of the merits acquired by his subjects. By
that means the king becomes gifted with


righteousness, ;


288


48. The king who rules and protects his
subjects piously, acquires, by virtue of the
protection he offers to athers, many regions
of happiness in the next world.


49. The other duties of a Kshatriya con-
. sist of self-control and Vedic study, the
Pouring of libations on the sacred fire, the
making of gifts, study, the bearing of the
sacred thread, sacrifices, the performance of
religious rites, the support of servants and
dependants, and preseverance in acts that
have been undertaken, :


51—52. Another duty of his is ta give
punishments proportionate to the offences
committed. Itis also his duty to celebrate
sacrifices and other religious rites accord-
ing to the ordinances laid down in the Vedas.
Properly judging the disputes of litigants
before him, and truthfulnes of speeth,-and
interference for helping the distressed, are
the other duties by doing which the king
acquires great glory both in this world and
in the next. tle should also sacrifice his
life on the field of battle, having shown
great prowess on behalf of kine and Brah-
manas,


53- Such a king acquires in the celestial
fegion such regions of happiness as are
capable of being acquired by the perfor-
mance of Horse-Sacrifices.


.§4- The duties of the Vaishya always ate
the keep of cattle and agriculture, the pour-
ing of libations on the sacred fire, the
making of gifts, and study.


* 55. Trade, walking in the path of virtue,
hospitality, peacefulness,self-control, welcom-
ing of Brahmanas, and renouncing things
are the other eternal duties of the Vaishya.


§6. The Vaishya, engaged in trade and
walking in the path of virtue, should
hever sell sesame and perfumery and
juices or liquid substances. He should per-
form the duties of hospitality towards all.


57. He is at liberty to pursue virtue and
profit and pleasure according to his means
and asmuch as is judicious for him. The
service of the three twice-born classes
forms the high duty of the Shudra.


58. That Shudra who.is truthful in
speech and who has controlled his senses, is
considered as having acquired meritorious
penances. Indeed, the Shudra, who having
gota guest, performs the duties of hospi-
tality towards him, is Considered as acquir-
ing the merit of great penances.


59. ‘That intelligent Shudra whose. con-
duct is virtuous and who adores the deities
and Brahmanas, gets desirable rewards of
Virtue.


60. O beautiful lady, I have thus recited
to you what are the duties of the four castes,


MAHABHARATA,


Indeed, O blessed lady, f. have told vau
what are their respective duties, What
else do you wish to hear ?


Uma said :—

6t. You have recited to me what are
the respective duties of the four castes, aus-
Ppicious and beneficial for them. Do you
now -tell me, O Holy One, what are the
common duties of the all castes.


Mahéshwara said :—


62. The foremost of all beings in the
universe, wts., the Creator Brabmana,
always seeking righteous accomplishments,
created tle Brahmanas for rescuing all the
worlds. Among all created beings, they
are gods on Barth.


63. I shalt at the begining tell you what
are the religious acts which they should da
and what are the rewards which they
acquire through them. ‘The religion of the
Branusanas is the foremost of all religions.


64. For the sake of the virtue, three
teligions were created by tie Self-Create,
Whenever the world is created, those Reli-,
gions are created by the Grandfather. Do
ye listen.


*63. These are the three eternal Reli«
gions. The Religion prescribed in the Vedas
is the greatest; that of the Smritis is the
next in the order of importance; the third
in importance is that which is based upon
the practices of the virtuous.


66. The Brahmena, endued with learns
ing, should have the three Vedas. tHe
should never make the study of the Vedas.
He should devote himself to the’three well-
known deeds (of making gifts, studying the
Vedas, and performing sacrifices). He
should be above the three (véz., lust, anger,
and cupidity). He should be the friend of
all creatures. A person who possesses these
qualities is called a: Brahmana,


67. The lord of all the universe de+
clared these six deeds for the observance of
Brahmanas. Listen to those eternal duties.


68. The celebration of sacrifices, officiat-
ing at the sacrifices of others, the making
of gifts, the acceptance of gifts, teaching,
and study, are the six deeds by doing which
a Brahmana acquires religious merit.


69. Indeed, the daily study of the Vedas
is a duty. Sacrifice is (another) eternal
duty. The making of gifts according to


his power and the ordinance, is, in his case,
much praised.

70. Tranquillity of mind is a great. duty
that is in vogue among the righteous.
Householders of pure mind are capable of
acquiring very great merit, :


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


7i-m72. Indeed, he who purifies his soul
by the performance of the five sacrifices,
who is truthful in speech, who is shorn of
malice, who makes gifts, who treats with
hospitality and hanor all regenerate guests,
who lives in well-cleaned houses, who is
shorn of pride, who is always sincere in his
dealings, who uses sweet and assuring words
towards others, who takes a pleasure in
serving guests and others arrived at his
house, and who eats the food that remains
after the requirements have been satisfied
of all the members of his family and depen-
dants, acquires great merit.


73. That man who offers water to his
guests for washing their feet and hands,
who presents the Arghya for honoring him,
who duly gives seats, and beds, and lamps
for lightning the darkness, and shelter to
those who come to his house, is considered,
as highly righteous.


974. That householder who rises at dawn
and washes his mouth and face and gives
food to his guests, and having honored
them duly dismisses them from his house
and follows them for a little distance, wins
eternal merit.


75. Hospitality towards all, and the pur-
suit of the three-fold objects, are the duties’
of the householder. The duties of the
Shudra_ consist in the pursuit of the three-
fold objects.


76. ‘The Religion laid down for . the
householder has action for its chief charac-
teristic. Auspicious, and beneficial to all
creatures, I shall explain it to you.


77. The householder should | alwavs
make gifts according to his power. He
should also perform sacrifices frequently.
Indeed, he who wishes to secure his own,
good, should always achieve meritorious
acts.


78. The householder should acquire
tiches by fair means, The riches thus ac-
quiced should be carefully divided into three
parts, keeping the requirements of virtue in
view.


79. With one of those portions he should
accomplish all acts of virtue. With another
he should seek to satisfy his carvings for
pleasure The third portion he should lay
out for increasing.


80. The Religion of Renunciation is dif-
ferent. I[t exists for Liberation. { shall
tell you the conduct that constitutes it.
Listen to me in full, O goddess. . , .


81. One of the duties inculeated by
that Religion is Mercy towards all creatures.
The man who follows it should not live in
one place for more than a day. For ac-
quiring Liberation, the fellowers of | this


of


289


Religion free themselves from the fetters of
hope (or desire).

82. They have no attachment to habi-
tation, to the Kamandalu they bear for the
the keep of water, to the clothes that cover
their loins, or the seat whereupon they rest,
or the triple stick they bear in their hands,
or the bed they sleep on, or the fire they
want, or the chamber in which it lies,


83. A follower of this Religion fixes his
heart upon the workings of his soul, His
mind is devoted to Supreme Brahma. He
is filled with the idea of attaining to
Brahma. He is always devoted to Yoga
and the Sankhya philosophy.


84. He seeks for no other shelter than
the foot of a tree, He lives in vacant
houses of men. He sleeps on the banks of
rivers. Hetakes a pleasure in living by
such banks.


85. Heis freed from every attachment,
and from every bond of affection. He
merges the existence of his own soul into the
Supreme Soul.


86. Standing like a stake of wood, and
abstaining frem all food, he does only such
deeds as point to Liberation. Or, he may
wander about, devoted to Yoga. These
are the eternal duties of a follower of the
Religion of Renunciation,


87. He lives aloof from men. He ie
freed from all attachments. He never lives
in the same ptace for more than a day.
Freed from all fetters, he roves over the
world. Freed from all ties, he never sleeps
on even the same river-bank for more than
a day.

88. This is the Religion of persons cone,
versant with Liberation, as declared in the
Vedas, ' This is the righteous path that is
trodden by this virtuous. He who follows in
this path, leaves no vestige behind.


89. Vikshus (mendicants) are of four
kinds. They are Kytichakas, Vahudakas,
Hansas, and Paramhansas, ‘The second is
superior to the first, the third to the second,
and the fourth to the third. *


9% There is nothing superior to the
Paramhansa; nor is there anything in-
ferior to it or equal to it or superior to it.
It is a condition shorn of sorrow and happi-
ness; auspicious and freed fram decrepitude
and death, and without any change. ‘


Uma said :—~ i

ot: Vou’ havé described thé Religion of
the householders, that of Liberation, and
that which is based upon the observances
of the pious. These paths are noble and
highly beneficial to the world of living
creatures, ; : .


2go


92. O you who are coriversant with
every tcligion, | wish to hear what the high
Religion is of the Rishis. | always have a
liking for those who live in hermitage.


93- ‘The perfume that comes out of the


the smoke of the libations of clarified butter |
poured on the sacred fire, seems to pet vade


ali the hermitages and make them delight-
ful. Seeing this, O great god, my heart
becomes always filled with joy. «


94~93 O powerful god, I have doubts
about the Religion of the Ascetics. You are
conversant with the details of all religions.
Do you enlighten we, O god of gods, in
detail about this subject truly about which
1 have asked you, O great god.


The Blessed and Holy One said :—~


96. Yes, I shall recite to you the high
and excellent Religion of the Ascetic. By
following the dictates of that. Religion, O
auspicious lady,’ the Ascetics acquire suc-
cess through the severe penances they
practise, 7


97- QO highly blessed one, do you hear,
from the beginning, what are the duties of
those: pious Rishis who know every duty
and who are known by the name of
Phenapas. ,


98. The Grandfather Brahman drank
some nectar. ‘That water had flowed in
the celestial repion from a great sacrifice,


99. ‘The froth of that water is highly
sacred and it partook of His own wature.
Those Rishis who: live upon the -measure
of fvoth that thus came out are called
Phenapas (Froth-eaters). ‘Yhis is the con-
duct of those. pure Rishis, O lady having
penances for wealth! Listen now to me
as 1 explain to you who the Valikhillyas
are.

100, The Valikhillyas are ascetics who
have acquired success by their panances.
They live in the solar disc. Living ‘like
birds, those Rishis, conversant with every
duty of righteousness, live according to the
Uneha mode.


101. Their dress consists of deer-skins
or barks of trees. Freed from pairs of oppo-
sites, the Vatiklillyas, having penances for
wealth, walk in this track of virtue.

102. ‘hey are as big asa digit of the
thumb. Divided into classes, each class
lives in the practice of its duties. “They
wish only to practise penances., ‘Fhe merits
they acquire by their righteous conduct are
very great.

103. ‘Vhey are considered as having ac-
quired an equality with the gods and exist
tor the fulfilment of the purposes of the
gods. Having dissipated all their sins by


MAHA BRARATA,


severe penances, they shine in effulgence,
lighting up all the points of the compass. «


104. Others, called Chakracharas, are
gifted with cleansed souls and devoted to the
practice of mercy, Righteous in thei con-
duct and possessed of great purity, they
live in the region of Soma.


tos. Thus living near enough to the
region of the departed Manes, they duly
live by drinking the rays of Soma. Vhere
are others called Samprakshalas and Ashe
makuttas and Dantolukhalas.


106. ‘These live near the Soma-drinking
celestials and others that drink ffimes of
fire. With their wedded wives and witlr
passions under complete restraint, they toe
tive upon tie rays of Soma.


raz. ‘They pour libations of clarified
butter on the sacred fire, and worship the
departed Manes under proper forms. They
also celebrate the well-known sacrifices,
‘Vhis is said to form their religion.


408. Vhis religion of the Rishis, O
goddess, is always observed by those who
are houseless and who are free to go
through every region including that of the
celestials. ‘here are, again, other classes
about whom F shall speak now. Dv you
listen.


tog. It is necessary that they who ob-
serve the different religions of the Rishis,
should control their passions and know the
Soul. Indeed, in my opinion, lust and anger
should be completety comrotted.


tro—11t. With corn (wealth) acquired
by the Uncha mode, they should perform
the following duties, viz., the pouring of
libutions on the sacred fire, occupying a fixed
seat employing oneself during the time in the
‘sacrifice called Pharmaratri, performance
of the Soma-Sacrifice, acquisition of especial
knowledge, the giving of sacrificial presents,
which forms the fifth, the daily performance
of sacrifices, devotion to the worship of the
ancestors and the deities, hospitality to~
wards all.


112—113. Abstention from all tuxurious
dishes prepared from cow's milk, taking a
~pleasuce in tranquillity of heart, lying on
naked socks or the earth, devotion to Yoga,
eating potherbs and leaves of trees, and
living upon fruits and roots, and wind and
water and moss, are Some of pratices of the
Rishis by which they acquire the end that
belongs to persons unsubjugated,


tr14—115. When the smoke has ceased
to curl upwards from a house, when the
busking machine has ceased to ply, when
the hearth-fire has been put out, when all
the inmates have taken their food, when
dishes are no longer carried from room to


ANUSTIASANA PARVA,


shom, when mendicants have ceased to walk
the streets, itis then that the man who is
devoted to the Religion of Truth and tran.
quillity of soul, wishing to have a guest,
should eat what remnant of food may still
remain in the house. By acting thus, one
becomes a practiser of the Religion of the
Munis.


116. One should not be arragant; nor
proud; nor cheerless and discontented ;
nor wonder at anything. Indeed, one should
treat his friends and enemies alike. Indeed,
one who is the foremost of all persons con-
versant with duties should treat all creatures
like friends, ;


CHAPTER CXLII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Uma said :—

1. Hermits live in charming regions,
among the springs and fountains of rivers,
in bowers by the sides of rivers and rills, on
hills and mountains, in woods and forests,
and in sacred places full of fruits and roots.


2, With rapt attention and observing
vows and cules, they live in even such
places,


3. I wish, O Shankara, to hear the
sacred ordinances which they follow. These
hermits, O god of all gods, are persons who
depend, for the protection of their bodies,
upon themselves alone,


Maheshwara said :—


4. Do you hear with rapt attention what
are the duties of Hermits. Having listened
to them with one mind, O goddess, do you
fix your heart upon virtue.


5. Listen then to what the acts are that
-should be practised by righteous hermits
crowned with success, observant of rigid
vows and rules, and living in woods and
forests.


6—7. Performing ablutions thrice-a-day,
adoring the departed Manes and the celes-
tials, pouring libations on the sacred fire,
performing of those sacrifices and rites
called Ishti-Homa, picking up the grains of
Nivara-paddy, eating fruits and roots, and
using oil that is pressed out from Inguda
and castor seeds, form their duties.


8. Having performed the practises of
Yoga and become crowned with (ascetic).
success and freed from tust and anger, they
should seat themselves in the attitude
called Virasana. Indeed, they should tive


2gt


in those
cowards.


g—to. Observant of the excellent ordi-
nances about Yoga, sitting in summer
in the midst of four fires on fonr sides with
the sun overhead, duly practising what is
called Manduka-Yoga, and always seated
in the attitude called Virasana, and tying
on naked rocks or the earth, these men,
with hearts fixed upon virtue, must expose
themselves to cold and water and fire.


11. They live upon water or air or moss,
They use twofpieces of stone only for husking
their corn. Some fof them use their teeth
only for such a purpose. Phey do not keep
utensils of any sort.


12. Some of them clothe themselves with
rags and barks of trees or deer-skins. Thus
do they pass their lives for the time allotted
to them, according to the ordinances.


13. Remaining in woods and forests,
they wander within woods and forests, live
within them,.and are always to be found
within them, Indeed, these hermits enter-
ing into woods and forests live within them
as disciples, obtaining a preceptor, live
with him. ;

14—16. The performance of the rites of
Homa and the observance of the five sacri-
fices are their duties: A due observance
of the rules about distribution of the fivefold
sacrifices as Sordained in the Vedas, devo-


places which are inaccessible to


tion to sacrifices, forming the eighth, obser- -


vance of the Chaturmashya, performance
of the Paurnamashya and other sacrifices,
and performance of the daily sacrifices, are
the duties of these celibate men, freed
from every attachment, and cleansed from
every sin. Indeed, they should live thus
in the forest. .


17. The sacrificial ladle and the water-
vessel are their chief properties. They are
always devoted to the three fires, Virtuous
in their conduct and adhering to the path
of victue, they acquire the highest end.


18. These Munis, crowned with success
and ever given to the Religion of Truth,
acquire the highly sacred region ef Brah-
man, or the eteenal region of Soma.


19. O auspicious goddess, I have thus
recited to you, in brief, the outlines of the
religion that is followed by hermits and
that has many practices in detail.


Uma said :—

20. “O Holy Que, O lord of all creatures,
O you adored of all beings, I wish w
hear what is the religion of those conclaves
of ascetics who are followers of the scriptures
describing ascetic success. Da you tecite it
to me.


292


2t. Living in woods and forests and well-
accomplished in the scriptures of success,
some amongst them live and act as they
like, without being controlled by particular
practices; others have wives. How, indeed,
have theic practices been ordained.


Mahadeva said :—


22. O goddess, the shaving of the head
and the wearing of the brown robes are the
characteristics of those recluses who rove
about freely; while the characteristics of
those who sport with wives consist in pass-
ing their nights at home.


23. Performing ablutions three times a
day is the duty of both the classes, while
the Homa, with -water ahd wild fruits,
belongs to the married recluses as performed
by the Rishis in general. Absorption in
Yoga-Meditation, and performance of those
duties which form righteousness and which
have been laid down as such, are some of
the other duties prescribed for them,


24. Al! those duties also of which I have
spoken to you before as belonging to re-
cluses living in forests, are the duties of
these algo.
observed, they who observe them acquire
the rewards of severe penances.


25. Those forest recluses who lead mar.
ried lives should indulge in the gratifica-
tion of their senses with these married wives
of theirs.
with their wives at only those times when


their seasons come, they perform the duties }


which have been laid down for them,


26. The religion which these virtuous
men are to follow is the Religion that has
been laid down and followed by the Rishis.
With their eyes set upon the acquisition, of


virtue, they should never pursue any other |
object of desire from a sense of uncontrolled |


caprice. :

27. That man who gives promises of
safety to all creatures, freed as, his soul
becomes from the stain of malice or harm-
fulaess, becomes gifted with virtue.


28. Indeed, that person who shows
mercy to all creatures, who adopts as a vow
of sincere conduct towards all creatures,
and who forms himself the soul of all crea-
tures, becomes gifted with virtue.


29. A bath in all the shrines, and sincere
conduct towards all creatures, are regarded
as equal in point of merit; or, perhaps, the
latter is a little distinguished above the
other in point of merit, -


3@. Sincerity, it bas been said, is Virtue ;
while insincerity or crookedness is sin,
That. man who acts sincerely becomes
imducd with Virtue,


Indeed, if those duties are |


MAHABHARATA.


31. The man who is always devoted to
sincerity of conduct, succeeds in acquiring
a residence among the celestials. Hence,
he who wishes to achieve the merit of virtue,
should be sincere,


32. Gifted with a forgiving nature and
self-control, and with anger under complete
subjection, one should transform himself
into an embodiment of Virtue and become
freed from malice. Such aman, who be-
comes devoted, besides, to the discharge of
all the duties of Religion, beco:nes indued


_with the merit of Virtue.


33. Freed from drowsiness and procras -
tination, the righteous person, who follows
the path of Virtue to the best of his power,
and becomes possessed of pure conduct,
and who is venerable in years, comes to
be considered as equal to Brahma itself.


Uma said :—


34. By what course of duties, O god, do
those ascetics who are attached to their res-
pective retreats and have penances for
wealth, succeed in becoming indued with
great splendour ? ;

35 By what acts, again, do kings and
princes who are immensely rich, and others
who are poor, succeed in getting high re«
wards ?


36. By what acts, O god, do dwellers of


P , : h the forest succeed in acquiring that place
By indulging in sexual) union | q 5 P


which is,eternal and in adorning their per-
sons with celestial sandal-paste.


37- O illustrious god of three eves, O
destroyer of the triple city, do you remove
this doubt of mine about the auspicious sub-"
ject of the observance of penances by telling
everything in full.


The illustrious Deity said :—


38. ‘Those who observe the vows of fasts


F and control theic senses, who abstain from


injury of any kind to any creature, and who
practise truthfulness of speech, acquire suc-
cess and ascending to the celestial region.
sport in happiness with the Gandharvas as
their companions, freed from every kind of
evil, :

39. That pious man who fies down in
the attitude of Manduka-Yoga, and wha
properly and according to the ordinance
performs meritorious deeds after having
been duly initiated, sports in happiness in
the.next world in the company of the Nagas


40. That man who lives in the company
of deer and lives upon such grass and veger.
tables as drop from their mouths, and who
has undergone the initiation and attends to
the duties attached to it, succeeds in going


.to the capital of Indra,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


41. That man who lives upon the moss
he pathers and the fallen leaves of trees
that he picks up, and puts up with all the
severities of cold, acquires a very bigh
place.


42. That man who lives upon either air
or water or fruits and roots, acquires in the
next life the affluence that belongs to the
Yakshas and sports in happiness in the
company of the various tribes of Apsaras.


43. Having practised for twelve years,
according ta the rites laid down in the ordi-
nanees, the vow relating to the endurance
of the five fires in the summer season, one
becomes in his next life a king.


44. That man who, having observed
vows about food, practises penances for
twelve years, carefully abstaining from al}
interdicted food, and forbidden hours as
well, during the period, becomes in his next
life a king. a


45. That man who sits and lies on the
bare ground with the canopy of heaven
over his head, observes the course of duties
of initiation, and then cenounces his body
by abstaining from all food, acquires great
happiness in the celestial region.


46—5t. The rewards af one who sits and
lies down upon the naked ground are said to
be excellent cars and beds, and rich palaces
effulgent like the moon, O lady. That man
who having lived upon abstemious diet and
observed various excellent vows, lives de-


pending upon his own self and then renoun- |


ces his body by abstaining from all food,
succeeds in ascending to Heaven and en-
joying all its happiness. That man who
having lived in entire dependence upon his
owa self, observes for twelve years the duties
of initiation, and at last renounces his body
on the great ocean, sueceeds in attaining to
the regions of Varuna after death. ‘rhat
man, who living in entire dependence upon
his own self observe the duties of initiation
for twelve years, and pierces his own feet
with a sharp stone, acquires the happiness
of the region that belongs to the Guhyakas.
He who cultivates self with the help of self,
who frees himself from the influence of all
paics, of ‘opposites, who is freed from every
sort of attachment, and who mentally ob-
serves for twelve years such a course of con-
duct after initiation, attains to Heaven and
enjoys every happiness with the celestials as
his companions,


52. He who lives in entire dependence
upon his own self and observes for twelve
years the duties of initiation and finally
renounces his body on the fire as an obla-
tion to the celestials, acquires the region of
Biahman and is held in high esteem there.


. 293


53—55. That twice-born man, O god-
dess, who having properly performed ini-
tiation keeps his senses under control, and
placing his Self on Self frees himself from
the sense of mine-ness, desirous of achieving
virtue, and sets out, without a covering for
his body, after the due observance of the
duties of initiation for twelve years and
after having placed his sacred fire on a tree,
and walks along the path of berges and lies
down inthe attitude of heroes, and always
acts like heroes, certainly acquires the end
that is reserved for heroes. . :


56. Such a man goes to the eternal
region of Shakra where he becomes crowned
with the fruition of a) his desires and where
he sports in joy, his body decked with gar-
Jands of celestial flowers and celestial
perfumes. .


57—58. Indeed, that pious person lives
happily in Heaven, with the celestials as
his companions. The hero, following the
practices of heroes and devoted to that Yoga
which belongs to heroes, fiving in the
practice of Goodness, having renounced
everything, performed the initiation, con-
trolled his senses, and observing purity of
both body and mind, is sure to acquire
that path which is reserved for heroes.
Eternal regions of happiness are his. = 3


59. Riding on acae that moves -at the
will of the cider, he passesi through all |
happy regions as he likes. Indeed, living
in the regions of Shakra, that blessed
person always sports in joy, freed from
every calamity.


a


CHAPTER CXLIIL.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).— ‘.
Continued.


Uma said -—  <
1. O Holy One, O you wha had torn. off
the eyes of Bhaga and the teeth of Pushan,
O destroyer of the sacrifice of Daksha, O
three-eyed deity, I have a great doubt.


2. Formerly, the illustrious. Self-Create
created the four castes. ‘Through the evil
result of what deeds does a Vaishya be
come a Shudra ? :


3. Through what acts doesa Kshatriya
become a Vaishya and a Brahmana be-
comes a Kshatriya? By what means may
such degradation of castes be warded off 7


4. Through what deeds does a Brahmaria
take birth in his next life, in the Shudra
caste? ‘Through what acts, O powerful
deity, does a Kshatriya also come down to
to the status of a Shudra ? <


294


5. O sinless one. O lord of all created !
beings, do you, O illustrious one, remove
this doubt of mine. How, again, can the
three castes naturally succeed in acquiring
the status Brahmanhood ?

|


The Illustrious One said :—

6. The status of a Brahmana, O god-
dess, is highly difficult to attain. O auspi-
cious lady, one becomes a Brahmana through
creation or birth. Similarly the Kshatriya,
the Vaishya, and the Shudra, all becomes
so through original creation, This is my
opinion,

7- He, however, that is born a Brah-
mana goes down from his status through
his own evil deeds. Hence, the Bralmana,
after having acquired the status of the first
order, should always protect it.


8. If one whois a Kshatriya or Vaishya
performs those duties which are assigned
to the Brahmana, after the manner of a
Brahmana, he becomes a Brahman,


9g. That. Brahmana who renounces the
duties of his order for following those of the
Kshatriya, is considered as one- who has
fallen away from the status of a Brahmana
and who has become a Kshatriya.


1o~mtt. That little-witted Brahmana,
who, moved by cupidity aad folly, follows
the practices assigned to Vaishyas, forget-
ful of his position as a Brahmana that is
highly difficult to attain, comes to be consi-
dered as one who has become a Vaishya.
Likewise, one who is a Vaishya by birth
may, by following the practicesof a Shudra,
become a Shudra. Indeed, a Brahmana
falling away from the duties of his own
order, may go down to the status of even a
Shudra.


12, Sucha Brahmana, degraded from
the order of his birth and outcasted, with-
out attaining to the region of Brahman,
sinks into Hell, and in his next birth be-
comes born as a Shudra.


13-14. A highly blessed Kshatriya or
a Vaishya, who renounces the duties of his
order, and follows the practices of a Shudra,
falls away from his own order and becomes
a person of mixed caste. Itisin this way
that a Brahmana, or a Kshatriya, or a
Vaishya, comes by the position of a
Shudra.


15. That man who has acquired clear-
hess of vision{through practice of the duties
of bis own caste, who is gifted with know-
ledge and science, who is pure (in body and
mind), who knows every duty and is devo-
ted to the practice of all his duties, is sure to
enjoy the rewards of virtue.


MAHABISANATA.


16. I shall now recite ta you, O goddess,
a Saying uttered by Brahman on this sub-
ject. The virtuous and those who are
desirous of acquiring merit always pursue
with firmness the culture of the soul.


17. The food that comes from cruel and
fierce persons is censurable. So also is the
food that has been cooked for serving a
large number of persons, The same is said
of the food that is cooked for the first
Shraddha of a dead person. So also is the
food that is sullied for the .usual faults and
the food that is supplied by a Shudra.
These should never be taken by a Brah-
mana at any time.


18. ‘The food of a Shudra, O goddess, is
always disapproved of by the great deities.
This, ] chink, is the authority enunciated by
the Grandfather with his own mouth,


19. If a Brahmana, who has set up the
sacred fire and who performs sacrifices, were
to die with any portion of a Shudra’s food
remaining undigested in his stomach, he is
sure to be bern a Shudra.


20. On account of those remains of a
Shudra's food in his stomach, he falls away
from the position of a Brahmana. Such
a Bralhmana becomes surely a Shudra.


2t. The Brahmana in his next life comes
by the position of that order upon whose
food he lives through life or with the un-
digested portion of whose food in his
stomach he dies.


. 22. That man who having acquired the
sacred position of a Brahmana which is sa
difficult. to acquire, disregards it and eats
forbidden food, falls away from his high
status.


23—24. That Brahmana who drinks
alcohol, who becomes guilty of Brahmani-
cide or mean in his conduct, or a thief, or
whe breaks his vows, or becomes impure,
or unmindful of his Vedic studies, or sinful,
or characterised by cupidity, or guilty of
cunning, or a cheat, or who does not ob-
serve vows, or who marries a Shudra woman,
or who derives his livelihood by pandering
to the lusts of other people, or who sells the
Soma ‘plant, or who serves a person of a
low caste, falls away from his status of
Brahmanhood.


25. That Brahmana who violates the bed
of his preceptor, or who cherishes malice
towards him, or who takes a pleasure in
speaking ill of him, falls away from the
status of Brahmanhood even if he knows
Brahma.


26. By these good deeds again, O god-
dess, when performed, a Shudra becomes a
Bratmana, and a Vaishya becomes a
Kshatriya.


ANUSHASAWA PARA.


27. The Shudra shoutd perform allt the
duties sanctioned for him, properly and ac-
cording to the ordinance. He should al-
ways serve, with obedience and humility,
persons of the three other castes and serve
them with care.


28. Always following the path of virtue,
the Shudra should cheerfully do alk this.
He'should honor the celestials and twice-
born persons. He should observe the vow
of hospitality to all persons.


2g. With senses kept under control and
becoming abstemious in food, he should
never approach his wife except in her
season, He should ever seareli after persons
who are holy and pure. As regards food,
be should eat that which remains after the
needs of all persons have been fulfilled. -


go. If, indeed, the Shudra wishes to be
a Vaishya (in his ext life), be should also
abstain from meat of animals not killed
in sacrifices. Hf a Vaishya wishes to be a
Brahmana (in bis next life), he should per-
form these duties. He should be truthful
in speech, and shorn of pride or arrogance,
He should be above all pairs of opposites.
He should observe the duties of peace and
tranquillity.


31~34. He should worship the celestials
in sacrifices, attend. with devotion to the
study and recitation of the Vedas, and
become pure in body and mind. He should
keep his senses under control, honor the
Brahmanas, and seek the behoof of all the
orders. Living like a householder and
eating only twice a day at the appointed
hours, he should satisfy his hunger with only
such food as remains after all the members
of his family with dependants and guests
have been fed. He should be abstemious
in food, and act without being actuated by
the desire of reward. He should be free
from egotism. He shoutd worship the
deities in the Agnihotra and pour libations
-according to the ordinance, Performing the
duties of hospitality towards ali persons,
he should, as already said, eat the food
that remains after serving all others for
whom it has been cooked. He should, ac-
cording to the ordinances Jaid down, adore
the three fires. Such a Vaishya of pure
conduct is born in his next life in a high
xXXshatriya family.

35. Ifa Vaishya, after having taken
bicth as a Kshatriya, performs the usual
purificatory rites, becomes invested with the
sacred thread, and betakes himself to the
observance of vows, he becomes, in his next
life, an honored Brahmana.


+ 36. indeed, after his birth as a Kshatriya,
he should make presenis, worship the
deities ini great sacrifices with profuse pre-


295


Sents, study the Vedas, and desirous of
attaining to Heaven, should adore the three
fires.


37- He should interfere for removing the
soirows -of the distressed, and should al-
ways righteously cherish and protect his
subjects. He should be truthful, and do
all true works, and seek happiness in
cunduct like this.


38. He should administer proper punishs
ments, without laying aside the rod of
punishment for good. tle should induce
men to do righteous deeds. Guided by
considerations of policy, he should takea
sixth of the produce of the fields. ;


39. He should never indulge in sexual
pleasure, but live cheerfully and independ-
ently, well-conversant with the science
Wealth or Profit. Of righteous soul, he
should seek his married wife only in her
season,


40. He should always observe fasts, keep
his soul under restraint, devote himself ta
the study of the Vedas, and be pure it
body and mind. He should sleep on blades
of Kusha grass spread out in his fire=
chamber.


41. He should pursue the three-fold ob
jects of life, and bz always cheerful. He
should always say “it is ready” to Shudras
desirous of food.


42. He should never wish for anything
from motives of gain or pleasure. He
should adore the ancestors and gods aud
guests.


' 43. In his own house he should live the
life of a mendicant. He should duly wore
ship the deities in his Agnihotca, morning,
noon, and evening every day, by pouring
libations according to the ordinance. ~


44. With his face tarned towards the ,
enemy, he should renounce his life-breaths
in battle fought for the behoof of kine
and Brahmanas. Or he may enter the
three fires: sanctified with Mantras and re«
nounce his body. By doing all this he is
born jn his next life as a Bralunana.


45. Gifted with knowledge and_ science,
purified from all dross, and fully conversant
with the Vedas, a pious Kshatriya, by his
own deeds, becomes a Brahmana.


46. It}s with the help of these deeds, O
goddess, that a person, who has originated
from a degraded caste, vtg., a Shudra, may
become a Brahmana purged off of all sins
and possessed of Vedic learning. -


47. One who is a Brahmana, when he_
becomes wicked in conduct and observes no
distinction about food, falls away from the


296


status of Brahmanhdod’ and becomes a
Shudra.


48. Even a Shudra, O goddess, who has
Purified his soul by pure deeds and who has
controlled all his senses, deserves to be
waited upon and served with respect as a
Brahmana. [his has been said by the
Self-Create Bratunan himself.


49. When a pious nature and pious
deeds are seeti:in even a Shudra, he should,
according to my epinion, be held superior
to a person of the three twice-born classes.


go. Neither birth, nor the purificatory
tites, ‘nor learning; nor offspring, can be
considered as grounds for conferring upow
one: the dignity of a twice-bora person,
Indeed, conduct is the only ground,

‘st. All “Brahmanas-in this world are
Brahmanas on account of conduct. A
Shudra, if he is of good conduct, is consi-
dered as-equal to a Bralimana.


‘ §2. ‘The position of Brahma, O aus-
icious lady, is equal wherever it exists.
lrhis is my opinion. He, indeed, is a Brahe
mana in whom the dignity of Brahma
exists,ethat condition which is bereft of
qualities and which has no stain attached
to ity
_ §3- The boon-giving Brahman, while he
created all creatures, himself said that the
division of human beings into the four orders
‘as dependant ov birth is only for purposes
of classification.


g4. The Brahmana is a great field in
this world,—a_ field having feet, for it
moves from place to place. He who plants
seeds in that field, O beautiful lady, reaps
the corps in the next world,


55. That Brahmana who, wishes to
secure his own good, should always live
‘upon the remains of the food that may
‘remain in his house after satisfying the
needs of all others. He should always
follow the path of virtue. Indeed, he should
tread along the path of Brahma.


56. He shouid live, engaged in the study
of the Samhitas, and remaining at home he
should perform all the duties of a house-
holder. He should always be given to the
study of the Vedas, but he should never
derive the means of livelihood’ from such
study.


87. That Brahmana who always acts
thus, following the path of virtue, adoring
his sacred fire, and engaged in the study of
the Vedas, comes to be considered as
Brahma.


58. Having acquired the position of a
Brahmana, it should always be protected
with caré, O you of sweet smiles, by avoid-


MAHABHARATA.


ing the stain of contact witli persons borti
in inferior castes, by abstaining from the
acceptance of gifts, and by other acts ltaid
down in the scriptures.


59. Ihave thns told you a natystery, v2.,
the manner in which a Shudra may become
a Brahmana, or that by which a Brahmaina
falls away from his own pure position and
becomes a Siudra.


CHAPTER CXLIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Uma said :—~


1. O Holy One, O ford of all beings, O
you adored of deities and Asuras equally,
tell me what are the duties and decilections
of men. Indeed, O powerful one, remove
my doubts.


2. it is by these three, wes., thought,
word, and deed, that men become fettered
with bonds. [tis by the same three that
they become freed from these fetters.


3. By following what conduct, O god,—
indeed, by what kind of acts,—by what
behaviour and qualities and words, do men
succeéd in ascending to Heaven ?


The God of gods said :~—


4. O goddess, you are well conversant
with the true meaning of duties. You are
ever devoted to Virtue and Sctf-Control.
The question you have asked me is fraught
with the benefit of all creatures. Ht ine
creases the intelligence of all persons. Da
you, therefore, listen to the answer.


5. Those persons who are devoted to the
Religion of Truth, who are righteous and
destitute of the indications of the several
modes of life, and who enjoy the wealth ac-
quired by faic means, succeeds in ascending
to Heaven.


6. Those men who are freed from all
doubts, who aré gifted with omniscience,
and who have eyes for seeing all things, are
never fettered by either virtue or sin. Those
men who are shorn of all attachments, can
never be fettered by the chains of action.


7. They who never injure others in
thought, word, or deed, and who never
attach themselves to anything, can never
be fettered by deeds.


8. They who abstain from killing any
creature, who are gifted with sighteous con
duct, who have mercy, who treat friends and
foes -equaily, and who are self-controlled,
can never be fettered by acts.


‘ANUSHASANA PARVA.,


9. Those men who are gifted with mercy
towards all beings, who succeed in creating


the confidence of all tiving creatures, and |.


who have shaken off malice in their conduct,
succeed in ascending to Heaven.


to, Those men who have no desire to
appropriate others’ properties, who never
associate with the spouses of others, and who
enjoy only such wealth as has been acquired
by fair means, succeed in ascending to
Heaven.


11. \Those men who treat the wives of
other people as their own mothers and sis-
‘ters and daughters, succeed in attaining to
Heaven.


12. Those men who abstain from mis-
appropriating others’ things, who are per-
‘fectly contented with what they themselves
possess, and who live depending upon their
own destiny, succeed in ascending to
Heaven. :


13. Those men who never know other
peoples’ wives, who are masters of their
senses, and who are given to righteous con-
duct, succeed in ascending to Heaven.


ty. This is the path, created by the
gods, that the pious should follow. This is
the path, freed from passion and aversion,
sanctioned for the pious to follow. =~


t5. Those men who are devoted to their
own wives and who seek them in only their
seasons, and who do not indulge in sexual
pleasure, succeed in ascending to Heaven.


16. For the sake of multiplying theic
merit or for acquiring their means of liveli-
hood, the wise should follow charity, pen-
ances and purity of both body and mind.


17. hose who wish to ascend to Heaven,


shoulda follow in this tract and not any.


other.


Uma said :— ;

18. ‘Telt me, O illustrious god, O sinless
ford of all creatures, what are those words
by whichtone becomes fettered and what are
those words by speaking which one may be
freed from fetters.


Maheshwara said :—

tg. Those men who never tell falsehood
for either themselves or for others, or in jest
or for exciting laughter, succeed in ascend-
ing Heaven. :

20. They who never tell lies for acquir-
ing theic livelihood or for acquiring merit
or through mere caprice, succeed in ascend
ing to Heaven. . ; .


2t. They who utter words which are
smooth and sweet and faultless, and who


38


2977


with sincerity” welceme™all whom they meet
with, succeed in ascending to Heaverm


22. They who never utter words whicti
are harsh, bitter and cruel, and who are free
feom deceitfulness and evil of every kind,
succeed in ascending to Heaven.


23. Those men who never utter deceitful
words which create disuhion between friends
and who always speak what is true and
what promotes good feelings, succeed in as
cending:to Heaven,


24. Those men who avoid harsh words
and abstains from quarrels with others, who
areSequal in their conduct to all creatures,
and who have governed their sogls, succeed
in ascendingfto; Heaven.


25. They who abstain from evil speech
or sinful conversation, who avoid disagree«
able speeches, and who utter only auspici-
ous and agreeable words, succeed i ascend+
ing to Heaven.


26. They who never utter, under anger,
such words as cut others to the quick, and
who, even when under the influence of
anger, speak words. that are peaceful
and, agreeable, succeed in ascending to
Heaven.


27. This religion, O goddess of speech,
should alwaysjbe followed by men. It is
auspicious and characterised by Truth.
The wise should always avoid untruth.


Uma said:

28. Tell me, O god of gods, O holder of
Pinaka, O you who are highly blessed,
what those thoughts are by which a person
may be fettered.


Maheshwara said :—


29. Gifted with merit that originates
from mental acts, O goddess, one ascends
to Heaven. Listen to me, O auspicious
one, as I recite to yau what those acts are.


30. Listen to me, O- you of sweet face,
how also a mind of ill-regulated features,
becomes fettered by ill-regulated or evil
thoughts.


gr. Those men who do ngt seek; even
mentally, to take other peoples’ thiags even
when they lie in a lone forest, succeed in
ascending to Heaven.


32. Those men who care not others’
belongings, even when they see it lying in
a house or a village that has been deserted,
ascend to Heaven.


33. Those men who do not seek, even
mentally, to associate with the married
wives of others, even when they see them in
deserted places and under the influence of
desire, succeed in ascending to Heaven,


208


733. Those “men “who, meeting “with
friends« or enemies;tibehave ‘inf the same
friendly way towards all, succeed in ascend-
ing to lleaven.


45.° Those men who are possessed of
_learning and! mercy, ‘who are pure in body
and mind, who are fiem ia truth, and who
are contented with whit -belungs to them,
succeéd in asgending fo Heaven, |
36.- Those! men who do not bear ill-will
to any creature, who do not stand in ‘need of
labour for their livelihood, who bear friendly
hearts towards ali beings, and who ent rtain
mercy ‘towards all, succeed in ascending
to Heaven, ;


37. Those men who have faith, who have-


merey, who are holy, who seck the company
of holy men, and who know the distinctions
between tight and wrong, succeed in as-
cending to Heaven. i.


38. Those men, O goddess, who know
the consequences of
succeed in ascending ite Heaven.


39.' Those men who are just in all theic
derlings, whohave desireable accomplish-
nients, who are dévotéd tothe deities and
the Brahmanas, and who are persevering
in, doing all good acts, succeed in ascending
tu Heaven, :

40. Albthese men, O goddess, succeed
in ascending to Heaven through the meri-
torious results of their deeds. What else
do you wish to hear ?- < :


Uma said:—
4t.


You should explain it to me carefully. .


42, By what deeds does a man succeed,
O powerful deity, in acquiring a long life ?
By what penances also dogs one acquire a
long life ? Ns


By what acts does one become


43.
short-lived on EBatth? > O you who are_


perfectly stainless, you should tell me what
ate the consequences of acts,


44- Some have great good fortyne and
sume Suffer from misfortune. Some are
possessed of noble, and some are of ignable,
bistis. ’


‘45-° Some have such. repulsive features


as it they ate made of wood, while others”


look very handsome at even the first sig ht.


46. Some appear to have no wisdom,
while others are “possessed of it. Some,


gain, ace Seen gifted with high intelligence.


and wisdum, enlightened by knowledge and
science.


47. Some have te suffer little pain,


ood and bad deeds,


4 tion,


1 have a great doubt, O Mahesh- |
wara, on a $gubject about human beings! :


MANABHARATA.-


; while others there are that are-loaded with
heavy calamities. Such diverse sights are
seen of men. OQ illustrious one, you should
tell me the reason of all this !


The god. of gods said :—

48. Indeed, U goddess, I shall describe .
to. you the fruits of acts. It is by them
that all human beings in this world enjoy
or, suffer the consequences of their acts.


49—5t. That man who assumes a dread~
ful aspect for the purpose of taking the
lives of other creatures, who arms himself
with strong sticks for injuring other crea-
tures, who is seen with uplitted weapons,
who kills Jiving creatures, who is shorn of
mercy, who always ‘causes tribulation to
living beings, who refuses to grant protec-
tion to even worms and ants, who is cruel,
one. who is such, O goddess, sinus in Hell.
One who has an opposite disposition and:
who is righteous in deeds, becomes but as
a handsome man. ‘ e


52. The man who is cruel, goes to Hell,
while he who is merciful, ascends to Heaven.
The man who goes to Hell, has to suffer
great misery.

53. One who, having sunk in Hell, rises
therelroni, takes birth as a short-lived man.


54-57. That man who is given to
slaughter and injury, O goddess, becomes,
through his sinful. deeds, liable to destruc-
Such a person becomes disagreeable
to all creatures and short-lived. ‘That man
“who belongs to what is called the: White
class, who abstains from the destruction of
living creatures, who has thréwn away alt
weapons, and never inflicts any punish-
ment on any body, who never injures any
creature, who never causes anybody to
kill creatures for him, who never kills or
strikes even when struck .or attempted
to be killed, who never sanctions or ap-
proves an act of destruction, who is gifted.
with meccy towards aH creatures who treats
others as his own seif,—such a superior
man, O goddess, succeeds in acquiring to
the dignity of a celestial, Filled with joy,
such a man enjoys various kinds of luxurks
ous articles,


58. If such a person is ever born in the
world of ‘men, he becomes long-lived and
enjoys great happiness. «


“59. ‘This is the way of those who are
of righteous conduct and righteous deeds,
and who are blessed with longevity, the
way that was marked out by the Self-Create
Brahman himself and which is marked by
abstention from the destruction of living
creatures, ; :


.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


CHAPTER CXLY.


{ ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Uma said — 5

t. By what nature, what conduct, what
deeds, and what pifts, does a man! succeed
‘in attaining to Heaven.


Maheshwara said :-~


2-6. He who has a liberal disposition,
avho shoners Brabmanas and treats them
with hospitality, who makes gifts of food
and drink and clothes and other articles of
wajoyment to the destitute, the blind and
the distressed, who makes yilts of houses
erects halls, digs wells, constructs shelters
whence pure and cool water is distriuuted,
excavates tanks, makes arrangements for the
free distributions of gifts every day, gives to
all comers what each prays for, who makes
wills of seats and beds and vehicles, wealth,
jewels and gems, houses, all kinds of corn,
kine, fields, and women,—he who always
anakes these gifts with a cheerful heart, be-
‘comes a denizen, O goddess, of the celestial
“region. | aes :


6. He fives these for along time, en-
joying vatious kinds of superior articles.
Passing his time happily in the ‘comipany of
the Apsaras, he sports in’ the garden of
Nandana and other delightful regions.


7. After the exhaustion of his merits he
falls down from the celestial region’ and
takes birth in the order of humanity, in a
tich family, @ goddess, which has a large
command of every article of enjoyment, ©”


8. In that life he gets all articles for
gratifying his wishes and appetites. In-
deed, blessed with the possession of such
articles, he gets riches and a well: filled
4reasury.


§ ‘TheiSelf-Create Bralnuan himself. de-
clared it formerly that it is even such per-
sons, O goddess, who become highly bless-
ed-and possessed ot liberal dispositions and
handsome features.


10. There are others, O goddess, who
ace incapable of making gifts. Gifted‘with
‘small understandings, they cannot ‘make
gifts even when solicited by Brahmanas and
possessed of immense ciches, .


11. Seeing the destitute, the blind, the
distressed, and: mendicants, and even guests
arrived at their houses, those persons always
filled with:the desire of pleasing the organ
of taste, turn away, even when expressly
solicited by them. ;


12, They never make gifts of wealtt: or


299


“dresses, or viands, ‘or gold, or kine, ot any


kind of food.


13. Those men who are disinclined to
relieve the distress of others, who are [ull uf
cupidity, who have no faith in‘the scriptures,
and who do not mike yifts—verily, these
men of little anderstanding, O goddess,
have to sink in Hell. :


14. In course of time, when their suffer.
ings in Hell, terminate they take birth in the
order of humanity, in poor families,


15. Always suffering from hunger and
thirst, excluded from all decent society,
hopeless of ever enjoying all goodly things,
they lead wretched lives.


16. Born in families which are destitute
of all articles of enjoym®€nt, these men never
succeed in enjoying the goodly things of
Kaith, Indeed, O goddess, it is ‘throuzts
deeds that persons became wretched and
poor, _—_

17. There are others. who are arrogant
and proud for the possession ‘of griches.
‘Those senseless wieiches never offer seats to
worthy persons, os


18. Gifted with litde «understandings,
they do not give way to them who deserve
such aa honor, Nur do they give water for
washing the feet ta persuas to whoa at
should: begiven. - 2


19. Indeed, they do not honor, accord-
ing w the ordinance; with gifts of: the
Arghya, such persons as desetve: to be
honored therewith. hey do not offer water
for washing the mouth to suth as dese ve
to. have that honor. ;

20—21, They do not’ treat’ their very
preceptors, when the latter arrive at’ theic
houses, in the manner in which preceptors
should be tre: ted. Living iv cupidity and
pride, they refuse to treat theie elders and
aged men with love and affection, even ins
sulting those who deserve to be honored
and asserting their superiority over thens
without showing reverence and bamility.
Such men, O goddess, sink in Hell.


22. When their sufferings terminate
after.many years, they rise from Hell, and
take birth as.men, in low ,and wretched
families, he os : cn aie

23. Indeed, they who humiliate their
preceptors and seniors, have to take birth
in such {castes as those of Swapakas and
Pukkasas who ace greatly vile and berefe
of intelligence. = : Bod


24-728. He who is not arrogant or filled
with pride, who is a worshipper of the
deities and Brahmanas, who enjoys the
esteem of the world, who bows to every one
.whe deserves his reverence, who utters


300


smooth and sweet words, who benefits:


persons of all castes, who is always devoted
to the behoof of all beings, who does not
feel hatred for anybody, who is sweet-
tongued, who is an utterer of sweet and
cooling words, who gives way to one who
deserves to have way, who worships ‘bis
preceptors in the manner in which precep-
tors deserve to be adored, who welcomes
all creatures with propet courtesy, who does
not bear ill will towards any creature, who
lives, adoring elders and guests with such
honors as they deserve, who is ever bent
upon having as many guests as possible,
and who adores all who honor his house
with their presence, succeeds, O goddess,
in ascending to Heaven, Upon the exhaus-
tion of his merit, hesis born asaman ina
high and respectable family.


29. In that life he gets all articles of
enjoyment in profusion and jewels and gems
and every kind of ciches in abundance. He
gives to worthy persons what they deserve.
He performs every duty and every act of
virtue.


go. Honored of all creatures and re-
ceiving their respect, he obtains the fruits
Gf his own deeds.


3t. Even such. a person acquires a
high bicth in this world. ‘This that I have
recited to you, was said by the Ordainer
(Brahman) himself formerly.


32-34. That man who is fierce in con-
duct, who creates terror in all creatures,
who injures other beings with hands or feet
or cords or sticks, or brick-bats or clods of
hard clay, or other means of wounding and
paining, O beautiful lady, who practises
various kinds of deceit for killing living
Creatures or vexing them, who chases
animals and causes them to tremble ia
fear,—indeed, that man, who acts thus, is
certain to sink in Hell.


35- If in course of time he is born as
maa in a low and wretched family which
meets with obstacles of every kind on every
side. ,


36. He is hated by all. A wretch among
men, he becomes so for his own deeds.


37-38. Another, who is possessed of
mercy, Casts his (benign) eye on all creatures.
Gifted with a friendly vision, treating ali
creatures as if he were their father,
shorn of every hostile feeling, with all his
passions under complete restcaint, he never
vexes any creature and never fills them
with fear by means of his hands or feet
which are always under his control. He
inspires the confidence of all ‘beings..


_39- He never afflicts any creature with
either cords or clubs er brick-bats or clods


MAHABLARATA.


of hard earth or weapons of any sort. His
deeds are never fierce or cruel, and he is
full of mercy,


40. One who is given to such practices
and conduct, certainly ascends to Heaven
There he lives like a god in a celestia
palace full of comfort.


4t. If, upon the exhaustion of his merit,
he has to take birth as a man, he becomes
born as a man who has not to fight with
difficulties of any kind or to meet with any
fear. Indeed, he enjoys great happiness.


42. Happy and not compelled to work
for his livelihood, he lives freed from every
kind of anxiety. Even this, O goddess,
is the path of the virtuous. In it there are
no obstacles or affiictions.


Uma said :—

43- In the world some men are masters
of inferences and the premises teading to
them. Indeed, they are masters of science
and knowledge, have large progeny, and
are gifted with learning and wisdom.


44. Others, O god, are shorn of wisdom,
seience, and knowledge, and are marked
out by folly. By what particular acts does
a person become endued with wisdom ?


45. By what acts, again, does one be-
come of lithe wisdom and distorted vision ?
Do you remove this doubt of mine, O you
who are the foremost of all beings knowing
duties.


46. Others there are, O god, who are
blind from the moment of their birth.
Others ‘there are who are diseased and
impotent. Do you, O god, tell me the
reason of this.


Maheshwara said :—


47—48. Those men who always enquire
about what is for their behoof and what is
eto their detriment, of Brahmanas learned
in the -Vedas, crowned with success, and
knowing ali duties, who avoid all tinds of
evil deeds, who achieve only such deeds as
are good, succeed in ascending to Heaven
after leaving this world, and enjoy great
happiness as long as they live there,


49. Indeed, upon the exhasution of ‘their
merit, when they take their bicth in the
order of humanity, they becotne born as
men endued with gceat intelligence, “They
enjoy every kind of happiness and aus~
piciousness on account of that ‘intelligence
with which they are born. :


50. Those men of foolish understand
standings who cast wicked eyes upon the
marcied wives of other men, become cursed
with congenital blindness on account of
that sinfulness of theirs. ‘


ANUSHIASANA PARVA,


81. Those men who, moved by desire
in their hearts, cast their eyes on naked
women, those men of wicked acts take
bicth in this world to pass their whole lives
in one continuous disease.


52. Those men of foolish and wicked
acts who indulge in sexual union with
women of castes different from their own,—
those men of little wisdom,—have to take
birth in their next lives as persons shorn, of
the virility.

53. ‘Those men who cause animals to be
killed and those who violate the beds of
their preceptors, and those who indulge in
promiscuous intercourse have to take birth
in their next lives as persons shorn of man-
hood.


Uma said :—


54. What deeds, O foremost of the
celestials, are faulty, and what deeds are
faultless? What, indeed, are those deeds
by doing which a man succeeds in acquir-
ing what is for your highest good ? :


Maheshwara said :—~


5§- ‘That man who ts desirous of deter-
ming what is righteousness, and who wishes
to acquire prominent virtues and qualities,
and who always puts questions to the
Brahmanas with a view to find out the path
leading to his highest good, succeeds in
ascending to Heaven. ,


56. Uf, heis born as a man, he becomes
gifted with intelligence and memory and
great wisdom.

67. This, O goddess, is the line of
conduct that the pious are to follow
and that is fraught with great good. I have
told you of it for the behoof of human
beings. ; f


Uma said :—-

88. There are men who hate virtue and
who are gifted with little understandings.
"“Fhey never wish to approach Brahmanuas
knowing the Vedas. :


59. There are others who observe vows
aud who are given to:'the duty of perform-
‘ing Shraddhas. Others, again, ‘are desti-
‘tute of all vows. ‘They do not care for
observances and are like Rakshasas_ in
conduct.


6o. Some there are who are given to
the performance of sacrifices and some who
do not care for Homa. For what deeds do
men become possessed of these different
natures,


Maheshwara said :—
61. Through the Vedas, the limits have


30!


been laid out of afl the acts of human beings.
Those men who acts thus according to the
authority of the Vedas, are seen to became
devoted to the observance of vows.


62—63. Those men, however, who being
influenced by folly accept unrighteousness
for its reverse, become destitute of vows,
transgress all restraints, and come to be
considered as Brahmarakshasas. Indeed,
it is these men who do not care for Hama,
who never utter the Vashat and other
sacred Mantras, and who come to be
considered as the lowest and viliest of
men,


64. Thus, O goddess, have I explained
to you the entire ocean of duties of humaa
beings for the sake of removing your
doubts, not omitting the sins of which they
become guilty.


CHAPTER CXLVI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)— —
Continued,


Narada said :—

1. Having said these words, the power-
ful Mahadeva himself became desirous of
hearing, and with that view he questioned
his dear wife who was seated by his side
and was bent upon doing his will.


Mahadeva said :—


2. You, O goddess, know what is Su-
preme and what is not so. ‘You know ali
duties, O you who love,to live in the retreats
of ascetics. You are gifted with every
virtue, possessed of beautiful eyebrows, and
hair ending in the fairest curls, O daughter


.of Himavat, the king of mountains.


3. You are skilled in every work. You
are gifted with] self-control and look jimpar-
tially towards all creatures. Divested of
the senses of mine-ness, you are devoted to
the practice of all the duties. O yeu of
beautiful features, I wish to ask you (about
something). I wish that, asked by me, you
will describe to me that subject.

4. Savitri is the chaste wife of Brah-
man, The chaste Shachi is the wife of
Indra. Dhumorna is the wife of Markan-
deya, and Riddhi of (king) Vaishravana.

. Varuna has Goury for his consort, and
the Sun-God has Suvarchala. Rohini és the
chaste wife of Shashin, and Swaha of Vi-
bhavasu.

6. Kashyapa has Aditi, All these con-
sider their husbands as their gods. You


302


have, O zaddess, conversed and associated |


with all of Luem every day.


7. ivis, therefore, O you knowing every
duty, that T wish to question you about the
duties of women, O you whose words are
glways censisient with righteausness. I
wighto hear you. descrive i ae a from
the beginning. ,- :
» 89" You practice all the dates of virtue
with ide. Your conduct is exactly like mine,
aud the vows you observe are the same that
ase observed ‘by me. Your power and
éeucepy are equal ‘tolmine, and you have
practised the austerest penances.


tg) ‘he subject, whet described by ‘you
wik becume highly meritorious. Indeed,
thav¥ subjegt will chen become | authoritative
ie the worids


ro, Women, in especial, arejthe hizhest
refuge of women, O you of beautiful hips,
athong buman beings the’course of conduct
laid guwn by you will be followed fiom
geveiativts i fo g geu eration, , fer


11. Half of my body is “made up of half
youc bedy,, You, are always, engaged in
doing the work of the cefestials, and. it is you
are the cause of have peupling the Earth.j


12. O auspicious lady, you kuow all the
eternal duties of women. Do you, therefyre,


tell me ia full what the duties ace of your


sex, ; ; |
Uma said —, Fee, Shox
13. O holy one, O lord” of ‘all created


things, O source of ait that.is past, present, |


and future, itis throug your, favonr that
the words, lam pea ace orig bisdoy, in
any mind. 2 8

1 44. All these Rivers (ehabare of my aes
©: vod of gods, having the waters ol .all the,
‘licihas, -é approaching your presetice tor:
enabling ¥ su 40 perforin youe! ablations in|

- fhem. 4


15. Alter consulting: them I shall describe
ah subject in due order, Phat person who,
abougis capable. is sti! free from egotism, is
fighdy called a Purusta.s: + 6+


“1G. As for wainen, © lord of all beings,
‘she follows persons of her sex. By consult-
ing these foremost of Rivers, they will be
dionoured by me, ,


' 47. ‘fhe sacred Saraswati is the foremost
riser ofall civers. She goes towards the
oc“un ated is teuly the fest of all civers. -


2 43—20. ,Vipasha,. also, is- here,* and
Vitasta, Ghandrabhaga, [ravati, Shatadcu, |
the river Devika, Kaushiki, and ,Gomati,
aud this celestial . River who has, in|
“peer all the sacred ‘Titthas, v2¢., the.
‘goadess Ganga, whu having originated:


MAHABHARATA.


from the celestial region has descended
on the Earth and is considered as the
foremost of all rivers —Having said this,
the wife of that pod of pods, that foremost
of all pious persons, sinilingly addressed
all thuse Rivers of. her sex.


2t. Indéed, the wife of the great god,
devoted to the performance of all duties,
questioned athuse individuals of her sex
about the duties of wunten. Andeed, thos+
foremost of rivers, having Ganga for theic


first all know the duties of wuimen.


Uma said :— :

22. Ihe illustrious god has asked a ques-
tion. about.the duties of women.. § wisi to
answer Shankara after having consulted
with you.


23. [I do not find any branch of know-
ledve'on Earth.or Heaven that is capable
of being mastered by any individual without
your help. ° Ye rivers that run. towards the


ocean, ‘it is, therelore, that I seek your
@pinions.
24. [twas in this way that those fore-


most of Rivers, all of whom ‘were auspicious
and highly sacred, were accusted by Shiva’s
wife, Then the celestial River Ganga, who
adored the daughter of the king of moun-
tains in retuen, was selected for auswering
me sein


‘Indeed, she of sweet smiles is held
as Pealhag with various kinds of under-
standing and well conversant with the duties
of women. *‘Mhe sacred yoddess, capable of
removing all fear of sin, gifted with humility
: dn coubequence. of her intelligence, well
{| acquainted with all duties,-and endued with
an eXceedingly comprehensive intelligence
sweetly smiling, uttered these. words rr,


27. O goddess, you are always given to
the due performance of all duties. You
have favored me highly by hue questioning
me. Q sinless one, you are honoured by
the entice universe, yet you ask me that am
but a River. ©


: That person who, though himself
dampuient yet asks another, or who pays a
graceful tribute, ta. another, certainly de-
serves, I think, to be, considered as righte-
gus-souled, Indeed, such,a pecsou deserves
to be called learned and wise.


2g..: That persou. never falls into disgrace
‘who asks such speakers as are gifted with
knowledge and science and as are well con-
versant with preiniges and inferences.


30. A provd man, even when gifted with
intelligence, by speaking in the midst of an
assembly iotherwise, finds himself, uttering
only words of weak tneanings ~~


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


gt. You are gifted with spiritual insight.,
You are the foremost of -all the celestials.
You have taken your rise accompanied by
various kinds of excellent merit. You, O
goddess, are fullytcompetent to describe the
duties of women. © >


32. Inthis way, the geddess Uma was
adored by Ganga and honored with the
ascription of many high merits. The beau-
tiful goddess, thus praised, theft began'to
discourse upon all the duties of women in
full. I


Uma said :— oA 4g
33. I shall, according to the ordinance,
describe the subject of women’s duties as
far as they are known to me. : Do ye-ail
listen with rapt attention.: ‘ :


34. ‘The duties of women begin when
created by'kinsmen in the cites of wedding.
Indeed, woman becomes, in the. presence
of the nuptial fice, the companion of her
husband in the performance of all righteous
acts. ‘ ~

35-41. . Gifted with a good disposition,
endued with sweet speech, sweet conduct,
and sweet features, and always looking at the
face of her husband and deriving as much .
joy from it as she doesjfrom looking’ at the’
face of her child, that chaste woman who
regulates her deeds by observing the pres-*
cribed restraints, comes to be considered as
truly righteous in her conduct. Listening’
to the duties of married life, and perform-
ing all those sacred duties, that woman who
considers virtue as the foremost of all ob-
jects of pursuit, who. observes the same
vows: as those which: are observed by. her.
husband, who, adorned with chastity, looks,
upon her Lusband as a god, -who waits upoa
and serves him as if he is a god, who
surrenders her own will completely to that:
of her husband’s, who is cheerful, who ob-
serves excellent vows, who is gifted with
good features, and whose heart is com.
pletely devoted to her husband insomuch
that she never thinks even< of any other
man, is considered as truly righteous in
conduct. ‘That wife who, even -when: ad-
dressed harshly and looked upon with angry
eyes by her :-husband, appears cheerful to
him, is said to be truly devoted to her hus-
band. ‘She who does not cast her eyes upon
the Moon or the Sun ora tree that has a
masculine name, who is worshipped by het
husband and who is gifted with beautifut
features, is considered as truly righteous.
That woman who, treats her husband with
the affection which one shows towards her
child, even when he happens' to ‘be -‘poor or
diseased ‘or weak cr worn out with the toil of
travelling, is cousideréd as truly righteous
in her conduct. ‘ ;


1


. 403


.42—45 That .woman who js. gifted-withy
selt-control, who has given birth to thildran:
who Serves her husband with devotion, and
whose whole heart is devoted ta him,‘is enone
sidered as truly righteous in het conduct.’
VYhat woman who waits upon and serves her!
husband with a cheerful heart, who is:alway¢
cheerful of heart, and who! is’ gifted! witht
huntility, is considered as truly’ righteous in
her conduct. ‘That woman who always sup
portshis kinsmen and relatives by giving,
them food, and. whose desire for gratifying,
her wishes or for artictes of enjoyment, er-fer
riches or for happiness, falls shert of: her
devotion to her husband, is considered as
truly cighteous in her conduct. =< '


46—48. ‘That woman who always takes #
pleasure in rising early in the morning, who
is devoted to the satisfaction of all houses
hold duties, who: always: keeps. her house
clean, who rubs her house daily with cows
dung, who always attends to the domestic
fire, who never neglects to make offerings of
flowers and other articles~te the celestials;
who with her husband satisfies. the deities
and guests and all servants and dependants
of the family with that-share of, food which,
is theifs by the ordinance, and who always
takes, according to the ordinance, for herself
what food remajns in the house after the
needs of gods and guests and sertzfts, have
been ‘satisfied, and who pleases’ all people
who come in contact with her family arid
feeds them to their fill, succeeds in acquiring
great merit. ; i ae 3

49. ‘That woman who is gifted with ac-
complishments, who_ salutes the feet of her
father-in-law and’ mother-in-law, and who
is always devoted to his father and mother,
is considered as’ possessed of ascetic merit.

5a... That wamar who supports with food
Brabmanas who are weak and helpless, who
are distressed or blind or destitute, comes to
be considered as entitled to share the merits

. ae


of her husband.


ee ttan : ‘
$1. That woman' who , always' ‘observes,
with with alight heart, vows' which‘ are diff: ©
cult of observance, whose heart is devoted
to her husband, and who always ‘seeks ‘the
behoof of her husband, is considered as en-
titled to share the merits of ber iusband. *
. 52., Devotion to ber husband is womiin’s
merit; it is her penance; it is her’ carhal
Heaven. Merit, penpuces and Tiea hen
come hers who considers her husband ns her
all in all, and wie gifted with chastiiy, se%f?s
te ‘devote jierself to her Buc’ aad ine all
things, © ; ° boa
, 53. The hesband is “the dod whist
women-have. ‘lhe husband is their’ ‘friend.
‘Yhe husband is their great refige. Wetrzh
have no refuge that cane smpare ‘with tpeir
oe oot Pook


304


husband, and no god that can compare with
him.

54. A woman considers husband’s grace
and Heaven as equal; or, if unequal the
inequality is very trivial. O Maheshwarat
i do not wish Heaven itself if you are not
satisfied with me. ,


§5. ifthe husband that is poor, or dis-


eased or distressed, or fallen among enemies, -


or afflicted by a Brahmana’s:curse, were to
command the wife to accomplish anything
that is improper or unrighteous or that may
bring on the destruction of life itself, the wife

, without any hesitation, accomplish it,
guided by the code whose propriety is sanc-
tioned by the Law of Distress,


57. I have thus, O god, explained at
your command, what the duties of women


are. Indeed, that woman who acts thus,
becomes entitled to a share of the merits ac-
quired by her husband.

Narada said :~—


58. Thus addressed, the great god highly
spoke of the daughter of the king of moun-
. tains and :then;¢dismissed all persons who
had assembled there, together with all his
‘own attendants,


59. The various tribes of ghostly beings,


as also all the embodied Rivers, and the.


Gandharvas and Apsaras, all bowed their
beads to Mahadeva and departed for re-
turning to the places whence they had
come.—


CHAPTER CXLVIE


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


The Rishis said:—

t. O holder of Pinaka, O tearer of the
eyes of Bhaga, O you adored of the entire
uliiverse, we .wish to hear the glory of
Vasudeva.


a


Maheshwara said :—
a. Hari is superior to the Grandfather
himself, He is the Eternal Purusha. Other-
wise called Krishna, He is endued with
the splendour of gold and gifted with solar
effulgence.

3e Having ten arms, He is gifted with
gteat energy, and is the Destroyer of the
enemies of the celestials. He has a whirl
on His breast, and curly locks of hair on
His head. He is adored of all the celestials.


4- Brahman has ‘sprung from his abdo-
men, [I,have originated from his head,


MAHABHARATA.


All the luminaries in the sky have origi-
nated from his hair. From the bristles on
his body have originated all the gods and
demons,


5. From his body have originated the
Rishis as also all the eternal worlds. He
is the abode of the Grandfather and of
all the gods.


6. He is the Creator of this Earth, and
He is the Lord of the three worlds. He is
also the Destroyer of all creatures mobile
and immobile.


7. He is, indeed, the Foremost of all the
celestials. He is their Master. He is the
Chastiser of all enemies. He is gifted with
Omaiscience. He exists in everything. He
is capable of going everywhere. He per-
meates everything.


8. He is the Supreme Soul. He is the
Worker of all the ‘senses, He covers the
universe. He is the Supreme Lord. There
is nothing in the three worlds which is
superior to Him.


Q—-1t.. He is Eternal. He is the des-
troyer of Madhu, and is otherwise called
Govinda. The Giver of honors, He wilt
cause all the kings of Earth to be killed
in battle, for securing the purposes of the
celestials, taking birth in a human form,
The celestials, abandoned by Him, 4re
unable to do their work on Earth. With-
out Him as their leader they cannot do
anything. He is the leader of ‘all creatures
and is worshipped by all the gods.


1213. Within the abdomen of this
Master of the gods Who always does celes-
tial work, of this One Who is at one with
Brahma, and Who is always the refuge§ of
the twice-born [Rishis, lives Brahman.
Indeed, the latter lives happily in Hari’s
body which is his abode. 1! myself, that
am called Sharva, also live happily in that
happy abode of mine.


14. All the celestials, too, live happily
ia His body. Gifted with great effulgence,
He has eyes which resemble lotus petals.
‘Fhe goddess of prosperity lives within Him
and He lives always in her company.


1s—17. The bow called Sharanga and
the discus (called Sudarshana) are his
weapons, as well asa sword. He has the
emblem of the enemy of all the snakes on
his standard. Heis distinguished by ex-
cellent conduct, by purity, by self-control,
by prowess, by energy, by the most beauti-
ful form, by tallness and well proportioned
limbs, by patience, by sincerity, by riches,
by mercy, by the beauty of form, and by
power. He shines, having all celestial
weapons of wonderful form and make.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


18. Hehas Yoga for his illusion. He
has a thousand eyes. He is free from
every stain or fault. He is high-minded.
He is gifted with heroism. He is an object
of pride with all his friends. He is dear
to all his kinsmen and celatives and they
are dear to him.


19. He is gifted with forgiveness. He
is t1ee from pride or egotism. Heis de-
voted to the Brahmanas and is their leader,
He removes the tears of all persons stricken
with fear, tie increases the joys of all his
friends,


20. He is the refuge of all creatures.
He is ever engaged in protecting and che-
rishing the distressed. Having mastery
ever all the scriptures and every kind of
affluence, He is adored by all beings.


2t. Knowing all duties, He is a great
benefactor of even enemies when they seek
His protection. Conversant with policy and
endued with policy, He is an utterec of
Brahma and has all His seuses under per-
fect restraint,


22——23. For duing good to the celestials,
Govinda will take birth in the family of the
great Manu. Indeed, gifted with great in-
telligence, He will take birth in the auspici-
ous and righteous family of that Prajapati.
Menu will have a son named Anga. Alter
Anga will come Antardhbaman,


24. From Antardhaman will come Ha-
virdhaman, that lord of all creatures, free
from every stain. Havirdhaman will beget
an illusttious son named Pracbina- Varhi.


25. He will have ten sons having Pra-
Chetas for their first. Prachetas will have a
sun named Daksha who will be regarded as
a Prajapati. Daksha will beget a dauginter
named Dakshayani.,


26. From Dakshayani will spring Aditya,
and from Aditya will spring Manu. Manu
will beget a daughter named ila and a son
named Sudyumna.,


27. Ha will. nave Vudha for her husband,
and from Vudha will spring Pururavas,
From Purcuravas will spring Ayu. From
Ayu will spring Nabusha, and Nahusha will
beget a son named Yayati.


28. From Yayati will spring a powerful
son named Yadu. Yadu will beget Krosh-
tri. Kroshtei will beget a powerful son
named Vrijinivat.


29. Vrijinivat will beget the invincible
Ushadgu. Ushadgu will beget a son named
Chitraratha.


30—31. Chitraratha will have a younger
son of the name of Shura. Indeed, in the
family of these powerful men of energy known


39


308


all over the world, gifted with excellent con-
duct and various accomplishments, given ta
the performance of sacrifices and pure in
behaviour,—in the pure family honored by
the Brahmanas, Shuru will take his birth.
He will be a foremost Kshatriya, giited with
great energy, and possessed of great fame.


32. Shura, that giver of honors, will
beget a son, the perpetuator ef his family, of
the name of Vasudeva, otherwise called
Anakadundhuvi.


33. Vasudeva will have a son of name
Vasudeva. He will have four hands, He
will be greatly liberal, and will honor the
Brahmanas greatly. ¥dentical with Brahma,
he will love and like the Brahmanas, and
the Brahmanas will fove and like hii.


34. That scion of Yadu’s race will libe-
rate many kings confined in the prison of
the king of the Magadhas (Jarasandha)
after defeating Aim ia his capital buried
among mountains.


35. Gifted with great energy, he will be
rich with the jewels and gems of all rulers of
the Earth. Indeed, in energy he will be
peerless on Earth.


36—39. Possessed of great prowess, he
will be the king of all kings of the Earth.
Foremost among all the Surasenas, the
powerful one, living at Dwaraka, will cule
and proteet the entire Earth after defeating
all her kings, conversant as he will be with
the science of policy. Assembling togethec
do ye alt worship Him, as ye adore the
Eternal Brahman, with speech, flowers, and
excellent incense and perfumes. He who
wishes to $ee me or the Grandfather Brah-
man should first see the illustrious Vasu-
deva of great power. If He is seen [ am
seen, as also the Grandfather Brahman,
that foremost of all the celestials.


40—~42. I donot find any difference in
this. Know this,O Rishis haying asceti-
cism for wealth. That person with whom
the lotus-eyed Vasudeva becomes pleased,
is liked by all the deities with Brahman
amongst them. That man who will seek the
protection of Keshava will succeed in ac-
quiring great achievements and victory and
Heaven. He will be an instructor in reli-
gion and duties, and will acquire great reli-
gious metit.


43. All persons knowing religion and
duties should, with great readiness; bow
down to that Lord of all the gods. By
adoting that powerful one, one will acquire
great merit. ,


44. Gifted with great energy, that god
with the desire of benefiting all creatures,
created millions of Rishis for the sake of


_ Virtue,


ANU SHASANA PARVA


causes all things to be displayed (ccLxv—
UOLXXIY) ;


43. He who is gifted with great might,
evergy, and splendour; He who displays
Himself in visible forms.to His adorers, He
whe scorches the unrighteous with his burn-
ing energy, He who is gifted with the sixfold
attributes, He who imparted the Veda to
the Grandtather Brahman, He who is of
the form of the Samans, Richs, and Yaju-
shes, He who soothes His adorers burning
with the afflictions of the world like the rays
of the moon cooling all living creatures of
the world, He that is gifted with burning
effulgence like the Sun (CCLXXV—CCLXXXIJ);


44. He from whose mind has originated
the Moon, He who blazes forth in His own
effulzence, He who nourishes all creatures
even like the luminary marked by the hare,
He who is the Master of the celestials, He
who is the great medicine for the disease
of worldly attachment, He who is the great
causeway of the universe, He who is gifted
with Knowledge and other qualities that are
never futile and with prowess that is incap-
able of being baffled (CCLxxx1lI-—-CCL-
XXXIX) ;


45. He who is solicited by all creatures
at all times, He who rescues his worshippers
by casting kind looks upon them, He who
sanctifies even them who are sacred, He
who merges the life-breath in the Soul,
He who assumes various forms for protect-
ing both the Liberated and the Non-Libera-
ted; He who kills the desires of those that
are Libecated, He who prevents evil desires
from arising in the minds of His worship-
pers, He who is the father of Kama, He
who is most agreeable, He who is desired
by all creatures, He who grants the fruition
of all desices, He who has the ability to
accomplish all deeds (coxc—ccxcix) ;


46. He who sets the four Cycles to begin
theic course, He who causes the Cycles to
continually revolve as ov a wheel, He who
is gifted with various kinds of illusion, He
who is the preatest of eaters, He who is in-
capable of being seized, He who is manifest,
He who subjugates thousands of foes, He
who subjugates innumerable foes (ccc—
CCCVIIE) j

47. He who is desired, or He who is wor-
shipped in sacrifices), He who is distin-
guished above all, He who has is desiréd
by the wise and pious, He who has an
ornament of (peacocok’s) feathers on his
head-gear, He who stupefies all creatures
with His illusion, He who showers His
favour on all His worshippers, He who
kills the anger of the Righteous, He who
fills. the Unrighteous with onger, He whe
is the accomplisher of all deeds, He who


40


a i me er oA at a aN SF aye


313


holds the universe on his arms, He whe.
upholds the Earth (cccix—cccexvity) ;


48. He whe transcends the six well-
known modifications, He who is gifted with
great celebrity, He who causes all living
creatures live, He who gives life, the
younger brother of Vasava, He wht is the
receptacle of all the waters in the universe,
He who covers all creatures, He who is
never careless, He who is established on
His own glory (CCCXIX--CCCXXVIJ) ;


49. He who flows in the form of nectar,
He who dries up all things, He who up-
holds the path of Virtue, He who bears the
load of the universe, He who gives desir-
able boons to those who solicit them, He
who causes the winds to blow, He whois
the son of Vasudeva, He who is endued
with extraordinary lustre, He who is the
orivinating cause of the deities, He who
pierces all hostile towns (cccxxviI—ccc-
XXXVI) ;


50. He who is above all sorrow and
grief, He who leads us safely across the
ocean of ‘life or the world, He whe rémoves
from the hearts of all His worshippers the
fear of re-birth, He who is possessed of
infinite courage and ‘prowess, He who is
an offspring af Shura’s race, He who is the
master of all living creatuces, He who is
inclined to show His favour to all, He who
has come on Earth for a hundred times,
He who holds a lotus in one of his hands,
He whose eyes resemble the lotuspetals
(CCCXXXVII-~CCCXLVI)}


51. He from whose navel originated the
primeval lotus, He who is seated upona
lotus, He who has eyes resembling lotus
petals, He who is adored by even worship-
pers as one seated within the fotus of their
hearts, He who assumes the fori of em-
bodied soul, He who is gifted with power
of every kind, He who grows in the form
of the five’ primal elements, the Ancient
Soul, He who is endued with vast éyes,
He who has Garuda sitting on the standard
of His car (CCCXLVII~CCCLY) ;


52. He jwho -is peerles, the Sharabha
{the lion-killing animal), He who strikes
the wicked with terror, He who knows
everything that has taken place in Time,
He who accepts, in the forms of the celes-
tials, the butter poured on the sacrificial
fire, He who-is known by all kinds of evi-
dence or proof, He upon whose breast sits
Prosperity always, He who is victorious in
every battle (CCCLVI--CCCLXIV) ;


53. He who is above destruction, He
who assumes a red form, He who is an
object of search with the Virtuous, He who
is at the rox of all things, He who has
the mark of the string around his abdomen,


}


,


314


He who bears or forgives all injuries, He


who upholds the Earth ia the form of her.


mountains, He who is the foremost of all
objects of adoration, He who is gifted with
great speed, He who swallows vast quanti-
ties of food (CCCOLXV—CCCLxxIVv) ;


54. He who caused the creation to start
into being, He who always agitates both
Nature and Soul, He who shines with
resplendence (or, sports in joy), He who
has power in his stemach, He who is the
Supreme Lord of all, He who is the mate-
rial out of which the universe has been
made, He who is the cause er Agent who
has made the universe, He who is indepen-
dent of all things, He who ordains variety
in the universe, He who is incapable of
being comprehended, He who renders
Himself invisible by the screen of illusion
(COCLXXV—-CCCLXXxY) ;


55. He who is understanding divested of
all qualities, He on whom all things rest,
He in whom all things live when the uni-
versal dissolution comes, He who assigns
the foremost place to those who .worship
Him,. He who is durable, He who is gifted
with the highest power, He who has been
glorified in the Vedanta, He who is conten-
ted, He who is, always full, He whose
glance is auspicious (CCCLXXxVI—CCCXCY) ;


56. He who fills all Yogins with joy,
He whe is the end of all creatures, He who
is the faultless Path, He who is, in the
form of Sentiency, lead to Liberation, He
who leads (Jiva to Emancipation), He who
has none to lead Him, He who is endued
with great might, He who is the foremost
of all Beings possessed of might, He who
upholds, He who is the foremost of all
Beings knowing duty and religion (cCCxcv1
—CDIV) ;


. 57: He whe joins, at the time of creation,
the disunited elements for forming all
objects, He who resides in all bodies, He
who causes all creatures to act in the form
of Kshetrojna, He who creates ail creatures
after destroying them at the universal dis-
solution, He to whom every one bows with
respect, He who is extended over the entire
universe, He who owns the primeval goiden
egg as His abdomen whence everything pro-
ceeds, He who destroys the enemies of the
celestials, He who over-spreads all things,
He who spreads sweet perfumes, He who
disregards the pleasure of the senses (Chv—
CDXV) ;


58. He who is at once with the seasons,
He at whose sight alone all adorers succeed
in obtaining the great object of their wish,
He who weakens all creatures, He who
lives in the sky of the heart, depending
upon His own glory and power, He who is


MAHABHARATA.


capable of being known everywhere, He
who fills everyone with dread, He in whonr
all creatures live, He who is clever in
doing all acts, He who forms the Rest of
all creatures, He who is more powerful than
other Beings (CDxvVI—CDxxv) ;


59. He in whom the whole universe is
spread out, He who is himself immobile and
in whom all things rest for ever, He who is am
object of proof, He whe is the ndestructible
and unchanging seed, He who is soughe
by all, He who has no desire, He who is
the great case (which covers the universe),
He who has all sorts of things to enjoy, He
who has great wealth wherewith to secure
all objects of desire (CDxxVI—CDXxxIV) ;


60. He who is above despair, He who
exists in the form of Renunciation, He who
is without birth, He who is the stake to
which Virtue is bound, He who is the great


embodiment of sacrifice, He is the nave


of the starry wheel that revolves in the sky,
He who is the Moon among the constel-
lations, He who is competent to perform.
every feat, He who stays in His own soul
when all things disappear, He who-
cherishes the desire for Creation (cDxxxv—
€DXLIV) ;


61. He who is the embodiment of all
sacrifices, He who is adored. in ali sacrifices.
and religious rites, He who is the most
adorable of all the deities present in the
sacrifices that men perform, He who is the
embodiment of all such sacrifices in which
animals are offered up. according to the
ordinance, He who is adored by persons.
before they take any food, He who is the’
Refuge of those who seek Liberation, He
who sees the acts and omissions of all crea+
tures, He whose soul is above all attri-
butes, He who is possessed of omniscience,.
He who is identical with knowledge that is
unacquired, unlimited and capable of doing
everything (CDXLV—CDLIV) ;


62. He who is observant of excellent
vows, He who has a face always full of joy,
He who is exceedingly‘ subtile, He who-
utters the most agreeable sounds, He who.
gives happiness, He who does good to
others without expecting any return, He
who fills all creatures with joy, He who
has subdued anger, He who has mighty
arms, He who tears the impious (CDLvV—=
CDLXIV);


63. He who causes those persons who.
are destitute of knowledge of the soul to
be steeped in the deep sleep of His illu-


| sion, He who relies on himself, He who


overspreads the entire universe, He who
exists in infinite forms, He who is engaged
in vocations infinite in number, He who
lives in everything, He who is full affec-
tion towards all His worshippers, He who


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


is the ttniversal father, He who holds in


the form of the vast Ocean, all jewels and


gems in His abodemen, He who is the
Lord ef all treasures (cpLx¥—CDLXxIV) ;


64. He who is the protector of Virtue,
He who accomplishes all the duties of
Virtue, He who is the substratum of Virtue,
He who is existent for all time, He who is
non-existent, ble who is destructible, He
who is indestructible as Chit, He who is, in
the form of Jiva, destitute of true know-
ledge, He who is in the form of the Sun,
gifted with a thousand rays, He who
erdains, He who has created all the Scrip-
tures (CDLXXV--CDLXXXvV);


65. He who exists, in the form of the
Sun, as the centre of innumerable rays of
light, He who lives in all creatures, He
who is endued with great prowess, He
who is the Master of even Yama and
others of similar power, He who is the
oldest of the deities, He who exists in His
own glory, renouncing all conditions, He
who is the Lord of even al! the deities,
He who is the ruler of even him who up-
holds the deities (vég., Indra) (CDLXXxVI—=
CDxCl11) ;


66. He who transcends birth and death,
He who tended and protected kine, He
who nourishes all creatures, He who is
approachable by knowledge alone, He who
is Ancient, He who upholds the elements
which form the body, He who enjoys and
suffers, He who assumed the form of a
huge Boar, He who gave plentiful presents
to all in a grand sacrifice performed by Him
(CDXCIV——DII) ;


67. He who drinks Soma in every sacri-
fice, He who drinks nectar, He who in the
form of Soma (Chandramas), nourishes all
the herbs and plants, He who conquers
enemies in a moment when even they are
infinite in number, He whois of universal
form and is the foremost of all existent
bodies, He who is the chastiser, He who
is victorious over all, He whose purposes
ate never baffled, He who deserves gifts,
He who gives what His creatures have not
and who protects what they have (p111I—
DXII) 3 ; é

68. He whe holds the life-breaths, He
who sees all His creatures as objects of
direct vision, He whe never sees anything
besides His ewn Self, He who gives Libera-
tion, He whose footsteps covered Heaven,
Earth, and the Nether regions, He who is
the receptacle of all the waters, He who
overwhelms all Space, all Time, and al!
things, He who lies on the vast éxpanse of
waters after the universal dissolution, He
who causes the destruction of all things
(DX11I1-—-DXx]) ; :


315


69. He who is without birth, He who is
exceedingly adorable, He who appears in
His own nature, He who has conquered
all enemies, He who delights those who
meditate on Him, He who is joy, He who
fills others with delight, He who swells
with all causes of delight, He who has
Truth and other virtues for His indications,
He whose footsteps are in the three worlds
(DXXIb—DXxxX) ;


qe. He who is the first of Rishis, He
who is identical with the} preceptor Kapila,
He who is knower of the universe, He who
is Master of the Earth, He who has three
feet, He who is the guardian of the celes-
tials, He who has large horns, He who
exhausts all acts by causing their doers
to enjoy or suffer théit fruits (Dxxx1—
DEXXVIII);


7t. The great Boar, He who is under.
stood or apprehended by the help of the
Vedanta, He who has beautiful troops, He
who is adorned with golden armlets, He
who is conceald, He who is deep, Hée who
is difficutt of access, He who transcends
both word and thought, He who is armed
with the discus and the mace (DxXxIx—~
DXELVII) ;


72. The Ordainer, He who is the cause
(in the form of helper) of the universe, He
who has never been defeated, He who is
the Island-Born Krishna, He who is endur-
ing, He who mows all things, and is «“Him-
self above decay, the Varuna; the son of
Varuna, He who is immovable as a tree,
He who is shown in His own true form in
the lotus of the heart, He who creates,
preserves, and destroys by His will (pxivi11
—DLVIII) ;


73. He whois possessed of the sixfold
attributes, He who destroys the sixfold
attributes, He who is felicity, He who is
adorned with the triumphal garland, He
who is armed with the plough, He who
took birth from the womb of Aditi, He
who is endued with solar effulgence, He
who endures all pairs of opposites, He who
is the foremost-Refuge of all things (DLIx—
DLXVII);; m


74. He whois armed with the best of
bows (called Sharnga), He who was di-
vested of His battle-axe (by Rama of
Bhrigu’s race), He whr is fierce, He who
is the giver of all objects of désire, He wha
is so tall as to touch the very Heavens with
his head, He whose vision extends over the
entire universe, He who is Vyasa, He
who is the Master of .speech or all learning,
He who has come into being without the
intervention of genital ergans (DLXVIII—
DLXXVI) j


"316 |


75. He who is hymned with the three
(foremost) Samans, He who is the singer of
the Samans, He who js the Samans, He
who is the Extinction of all worldly attach-
ments, He who is the Medicine, He who
is the Physician, He who has ordained the
fourth or last mode of life called Renuncia-
tion, He who causes the passions of His
worshippers to be controlled, He who is
contented, He who is the Refuge of devo-
tion and tranquiility of Soul (DLxxvu—
DLXXXV)j; +


76. He who is possessed of beautiful
limbs, He who is the giver of tranquillity of
soul, He who is the Creator, He who sports
in joy on the bosom on the Earth, He who
sleeps (in Yoga) lying on the body of the
prince of snakes, Shesha, after the universal
dissolution, the Benefactor of kine, the
Master of the universe, the Protector of
the universe, He who is endued with eyes
like thdse of the bull, He whe cherishes
Virtue with love (DLXxXvI--Dxcv) ;


77. He who is the unreturning hero, He
whose soul has been withdrawn from all
attachments, He who reduces to a subtile
form the universe at the time of the univer-
sal dissolution, He who does good to His
afflicted worshippers, He whose name, as
soon as heard, purges the hearer of all his
sins, He who has the mystic mark (Shribatsa)
on His breast, He in whom lives the god-
dess of Prosperity for ever, He who was
chosen by Lakshmi as her husband, He
who is the foremost one of all Beings gifted
with prosperity (DXCvI-=DCIY) ;


78. He who gives prosperity to His
worshippers, the Master of prosperity, He
who always lives with those who are endued
with prosperity, He who is the receptacle
of all kinds of prosperity, He who gives
prosperity to all persons of righteous deeds
proportionate to their virtue, He who holds
the goddess of Prosperity on his bosom,
He who confers prosperity upon those that
hear of, praise, and meditate on Him, He
who is the embodiment of that condition
which represents the attainment of umattain-
able happiness, He who is possessed of
every kind of beauty, He who is the Refuge
of the three worlds (DCv—=DCxIv) ;


79. He who has beautiful eyes, He who
has beautiful limbs, He whois a hundred
sources of delight, He who represents the
highest delight He who is the Master of
all the luminaries in the sky, He who has
subjugated His soul, He whose soul is not
governed by any superior Being, He who
is always of beautiful deeds, He whosé
doubts have all been removed for He sees
the whole universe as a myrobalam in His
palm (pcXv—DCXx111) ;


MAHABHARATA.


80. He who is above all creatures,
He whose vision extends in all directions,
He who has noe Master, He who at all times
is above all changes, He who (in the form
of Rama) had ‘to lie down on the naked
earth, He who adorns the Earth, He whois
power incarnate, He who is above all grief,
He who removes the griefs of all his wor-
shippers aS soon as they remember Him
(DCXXIV—DCxxx}1) ;


8t. He whois possessed of effulgence,
He who is adored by all, He who is the
water-pot, He who is of pure soul, He
who purifies all as soon as they hear of
Him, He who is free and unrestrained,
He whose car never turns away from bat-
tles, He who has immense riches, He
whose prowess is incapable of being mea-
sured (DCXXXxIII—DCXLI!).


82. He who is the destroyer of the Asura
named Kalanemi, He who is the Hero,
He who has taken birth in the family of
Shura, He who is the Lord of all the
celestiats, the Soul of the three worlds; the
Master of the three worlds, He who has the
solar and lunar rays for Hig hair; the des-
troyer of Keshi, He who destroys all thing
(at the universal dissolution (DCXLII—DCL) ;


83. The deity from whom the fruition of
all desire is sought, He who grants the
wishes of all, He who has desires, He who
has a handsome form, He who is endued
with perfect knowledye of Shrutis and Smri-
tis, He who is possessed of a form which
is indescribable by attributes, He whose
brightest rays overwhelm Heaven, He who
has no end, He who (in the form of Arjuna
or Nara) acquired immense riches on the
occasion of his campaign of conquest (DCLI
—DCLX) ; :

84. He mho-is the foremost obiect of
silent recitations of sacrifices, of the Vedas,
and of all religious deeds, He who is the
creator of penances and the like, He who is
of the form of Brahman, He whois the
augmentor of pettances, He who is conver-
sant with Brahma, He who is of the form
of Brahmana, He who has for His limbs
Him who iscalled Brahma, He who knows
all the Vedas and everything in the uni-
verse, He who is always fond of Brah-
manas and of whom the Brahmanas alsa
are fond (DCLKI—DCLXxX) ;


85. He whose footsteps cover vast areas,
He whose feets are mighty, He who is
gifted with great energy, He whois at one
-with Vasul& the king of the snakes, He
who is the foremost of all sacrifices, He
who is the foremost of all sacrificers, He
who is Yapa, the first of sacrifices, He whe
is the foremost of all offerings made in sa-=
crifices (DCLXXI—DCLXXVIII) ;


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


86. He who is hymned by all,, He who
loves to be hymued, He who is Himself
the hymns uttered by His worshippers, He
who is the very act of hymning, He who is
the person who hymos, He who is fond of
fighting wih the evil, Ue whois full in
every respect, He who fills others with every
kind of affluence, He who destroys all sins
as soon as He is rememberede He whose
acts are all righteous, He who is above all
surts of disease (DCLXXIX—DCLXXXIX) ;-


87. He who is fleet like the mind, He
who is the creator and promulyator of all
kinds of learning, He whose vital seed is
gid, He who is the giver of wealth, He who
takes away all the wealth of the Asuras,
the son of Vasudeva, He in whom ali
creatures live, lle whose mind lives in all
things, He who takes away the sins of «I
who seek refuge in Him (pexC—bDcxevill) ;


88. He who is attainable by the pious,
He whose acts are always good, He wha
is the one entity in. the universe, He who
shows Himself in various forms, He who
is the refuge of all truth- knowing persons,
He who has the greatest of heroes for his
troops, He who is the foremost of * the
Vadavas, He whois the abode of the pious,
He who sports in joy in the banks of
Yamuna (DCXCIX -~DCCVI!) ;


89. He in whom all created .things live,
the deity who overwhelis the universe with
His Maya (illusion), Me in whom all fore-
most of Beinus become merged, He whose
hunger is never satiated, He wha humbles
the pride of all, He who fills the Rigtte-
ous with just pride, He who swells with
joey, He who is incapable of being seized,
He who has never been defeated (DCCVILI—
DCCXVI);


go. He who is of universal form, He
who is of vast form, He whose forn shines
with energy and cffulgenve, He who is
without form, Hie who is of diverse forms,
He who is unmanifest, He who is of a
hundred forms, He who is of a hundred
faces (DCCXVII—DCCXXIv) ;


gt. He who is one, He who is many,
He who is full of happiness, He who forms
the one grand subject of investigation,
He from whom is this all, He that is called
THAT, He who is the highest Refuge,
He who confines Jiva within material
causes, He who is -coveted by. all, He
who took birth in the family of Madhy,
He who is exceedingly affectionate, towards
His worshippers WCCxxv—DCCXXXY) ;


92. He who is of golden hue, He whose
limbs are like gold, He who has beautiful
limbs, He whose person is adorned with
Angadas made with sandal paste, He wha
is the destroyer of heroes, He who has


4i


317


no peer, He who is like cipher, He who
stands in need of no blessings, He who
never swerves from His own nature and
power and knowledge, He who is’ mobile
in the form of wind (DCCXXxVI—DCCXLY} ;,


93. He who never identifies Himielf
with anything that is Not-Soul, He: who
confers honors on His worshippers, He who
is honored by all, Ele who is the Lord of
the tiree worlds, He who upholds the
three worlds, He who is gifted with. ins
telligence and memory capable .of holding
in His mind the eyntents of all treatises,
He who took birth in a sacrifice, He who is
worthy of the highest. praise, He . whose
intelligence and memory are never futile,
fie who upholds the Earth (pCCXLVI—~»
DCCLY) ;


y

94. He who pours forth heat in the form
of the Sun, He who has great beauty
of limbs, tHe who is the foremost of, all
holders of weapons, He who accepts the
flowery and leafy offerings made to Him
by His worshippers, de who has controlled
all his passions and grinds all His enemies.
He who has none to walk before Him, Lie
who has feue horns, Jie who is the elder
brother of Gada (DCCLV1—DCCLXIV) ;


93. He who has four forms, He who
has four arms, He from whom the four
Pucushas have originated, He who is the
refuge of the four modes of life and tha
four orders of men, He who. is. of four
Souls, He from whom springs the four
objects of life, vis., Virtue Wealth, Pleasure,
and Liberation, fe who is conversant with
the four Vedas, He who.bas shown only a
pact of His power (OCCLXV—DCCLXX11);


06. He who sets the wheel of the world
to revolve round and round, Lie whose soul
is dissociated from alt worldly attachments,
He who is incapable of being: defeated,
He who cannot be transcended, He who is
exceedingly difficult of being altained, He
who is difficult of being approached: He


- who is difficult of access, He who is difficult


of being brought within the heart by even
Yogins), He who kilis even the most powete
ful enemies (DCCLXXIII—DCCLXXXI) ; .


97. He who has beautiful limbs, He
who takes the essence of alf things in the
universe, He who has the most beautiful
warp and woof, He who weaves ‘with
ever-extending warp and woof, He whose
works are done by Indra, He whose works
are great, Hfe who has no act undone, He
who has composed all the Vedas and scrip+
tures (DCCLXXXII—~DCCLXXXIX) ;


g8. He whose birth is high, He who is
exceedingly beautiful, le whose heart is full
of mercy, He who has precivus gems in his
navel, He who has excellent knowledge fol


oe.


418


his eye, He who is worthy of adoration by
Brahman himself and other foremost ones
in the universe, He who is the giver of food,
He who assumed horns at the time of the
universal dissolution, He who has always
subjugated His enemies most wonderfully,
He who knows all things, He who is ever
victorious over those who are of irresistible
prowess (DCCXC—DCCxCIx) ;


99. He whose limbs are like gold, He
who is incapable of being agitated, He
who is Master of all those who are masters
of all speech, He who is the deepest lake,
He who is the deepest pit, He who trans-
cends the influence of Yime, He in whom
the primal elements are established (pccc—
DCCCV));


too. He who gladdens the Earth, He
who grants fruits which are as agreeable as
the Fasmimm pubesceus flowers, He who
gave away the -Earth to Kashyapa, He
who removes the three kinds of misery like
a rain-charged cloud cooling the heat of the
Earth by its down-pour, He who purifies
all creatures, He who has none to urge
Him, He who drank nectar, He who has
an undying body, He whois possessed of
omniscience, He who has face and eyes
turned towards every direction (pcccvu—
BCCCXVI) 5


101. He who is easily won, He who has
performed excellent vows, He who is
crowned with success by Himself, He who
is § victorious over al) enemies, He who
scorches all enemies, He who is the ever-
growing and tall Banian that overtops all
other trees, He who is the sacred fig tree,
He who is the Ficus religiosa, (or, He who
3s not durable, in consequence of His being
all perishable forms in the universe even as
He is all the imperishable torms which exist,
He who is the slayer of Chanura of the
Andhra country (DCCCXVII—DCCCXxv) 5


302. He who is endued with a thousand
rays, He who has seven tongues, He who


has seven flames, He who has seven horses:


for carrying His vehicle, He who is form-
less, He who is sinless, He who is incon-
ceivable, He who’ removes all fears,
He who destroys all fears (DCCcxxvi—
DCCCXXXIV) 5


103. He who is minute, He who is
gross, He who is emaciated, He who is
adipose, He who is gifted with attributes,
He who is above all attributes, He who is
unseizable, He who suffers Himself to be
easily seized (by His worshippers), He who
has an excellent face, He who has for His
descendants the people of the accidental
regions, He who extends the creation cone
sisting of the fivefold primal elements
(DCCCXXXV—DCCCKXLYY) 5 =


MAHABHARATA,


104. He who bears heavy weights (in
the form of Ananta), He who has been
declared by the Vedas, He who is devoted
to Yoga, He who is the Lord of ali Yogins,
He who is the giver of all desires, He wha
affords an asylum to those that seek it, He
who sets Yogins to practise Yoga anew
after their return to life upon the conclusion
of their blessed life in Heaven, He who
invests Yogins with power even after the
exhaustion of their merits, He who has
goodly leaves, He who causes the winds to
blow (DCCCXLVII—DCCCLY)) ¢


105. He who is armed with the bow, He
who is conversant with the science of arms,
He who is the rod of punishment, He who
is chastiser, He who executes all sentences
of punishment, He who has never been
defeated, He whois competent in all acts,
He who engages all persons in their respec-
tive duties, He who has none to set Him to
any work, He who has no Yama to kill
Him (DCCCLVII~DCCCLXV!) ;-


106. He whois gifted with heroism and
prowess, He. who has the quality of Sattwa
(Goodness), He who is identical with ‘lruth,
He who is devoted to Truth and Virtue, He
who is sought by those who are determined
upon acquiring Liberation, He who deserves
to have all objects which His worshippers
present to Him, He who is worthy of being’
adored, He who does good to all, He who
increases the delights of all (pcccLxvii—
BCCCLEXY) ;


107. He whose track is through the sky,
He who shines in His own effulgence, He
who is gifted with great beauty, He who
eats the offerings made on the sacrificial
fire, He who lives everywhere and is gifted
with supreme power, He who sucks the
moisture of the Earth in the form of the
Sun, He who has various desires, He who
brings forth all things, He who is the
parent of the universe, He who has the
Sun for His eye (DCCCLEXVI—-DCCCLXXXV) ;


308. He who is Infinite, He who accepts
all sacrificial offerings, He who enjoys
Nature in the form of Mind, He who gives
happiness, He who has_ taken repeated
births, He who is the First-Born of all
existent things, He who is above despair,
He who forgives the pious when they trip,
He who its the foundation of the universe,
He who is most wondesful (DCCCLXxxvI-—
BCCCXCY) 5


109. He who is existent from the begin«
ning of Time, He who is existing from
before the birth of the Grandfather and.
others, He who is of a tawny color, He.
who assumed the form of the great Boar,
He who exists even when all things are
dissolved, He who is the giver of all bless«


.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


ings, He who creates blessing, He who is
identifiable with alf blessings, He who enjoys
blessings, He who is able to scatter bless-
ing (DCCCKCVI—CMV) ;


ito. He who is without anger, He who
lies enscanced in folds, He who is armed
with the discus, He who is gifted with great
prowess, He whose sway is governed by the
great precepts of the Shrutis and the
Smritis, He who is incapable of being des-
cribed by speech, He whom the Vedantas
have tried to express with the help of
speech, He who is the dew which cools
those who are afflicted with the three kinds
of grief, He who lives in all bodies, gifted
with the power of removing darkness
(CMVI—CMXIV) ;


1tt. He who is shorn of anger, He who
is expert in doing all acts by thought, word,
and deed, He who can do all acts within
the shortest time, He who destroys the
wicked, He who is the foremost of all for-
giving persons, He who is foremost of all
persons gifted with knowledge, He who is
above all fear, He whose names and deeds,
heard and recited, lead to virtue (cuaxv—
CMXXIL) 5


«12. He who rescues the Virtuous from
the tempestuous ocean of the world, He
who destroys the wicked, He who is Virtue,
He who cemoves all evil dreams, He who
destroys all bad paths for leading His
worshippers to the good path of Liberation,
He who protects the universe by staying
in the quality of Goodness, He who walks
along the good path, He who is Life, He
who exists overspreading the universe
(CMXXIII—CMXXxx1) ;


113. He who is of infinite forms, He who
is gifted with infinite prosperity, He who
has subdued anger, He who destroys the
fears of the pious, He who gives just fruits,
on every side, to sentient beings accor-
ding to their thoughts and deeds, He who
is of immeasurable Soul, He who bestows
various kinds of fruits on worthy persons
for theie various deeds, He who issues
various commands, He who attaches to every
deed its proper fruit (CMxxxII—-CMXL) ;


114. He who has no begining, He who
ts the receptacle of all causes as well as of
the Earth, He who has the goddess of
Prosperity always by his side, He who is
the foremost of all heroes, He who is adorn-
ed with beautiful armlets, He who produces
all creatures, He who is the original cause
of the birth of all creatures, He who is the
terror of all the wicked Asuras, He who is
gifted with terrible prowess (CMxLI—
CMXLIX) ;


115. He who is the receptacle and abode
of the five primal elements, He who gulps


319,


down His throat afl creatures at the time of
the universal dissolution, He whose smile:
is as pleasant as the sight of flowers, He
who is always wakeful, He who stays at
the head of all creatures, He whose cone
duct consists of those acts which the Pious
do, He who who revives the dead, He who
is the mystic syllable Om, He who has
ordained all pious deeds (CML—CMLVIIL) 5


116. He who displays the truth about the
Supreme Soul, He who is the abode of the
five life-breaths and the senses, He who is -
the food which maintains all living crea-
tures, He who causes alf living creatures ta
live with the help of the vital aie called
Prana, He who is the great subject of every |
system of philosophy, He who is the One
Soul in the universe, He who is above birth,
decrepitude, and death (CMLIX—CMLXv) ;


117, He who rescues the universe on
account of the sacred syllables Bhuh, Bhu-
vah, Swah, and the others with which
Homa-offerings are made, He who is the
great rescuer, He who is the father of all,
He who is the father of even the Grand-
father (Brahman), He who is of the form
of Sacrifice, He who is the Lord of all sa-
crifices, He who is the sacrificer, He who
has sacrifices for His limbs, He who
upholds all sacrifices (CMLXVI—CMLXXV) ;


118. He who protects sacrifices, He
who has created sacrifices, He who is the
foremost of all performers of sacrifices, He
who enjoys the rewards of all sacrifices, He
who causes the celebration of all sacrifices,
He who completes all sacrifices by accepting
the full libation at the end, He who is at
one with such sacrifices as are performed
without desire of fruit, He whois the food
which sustains all living creatures; He who
is also the eater of that food (CMLxxviI-—
CMLXXXIV) ;


119. He who is Himself the cause of His
existence, He who is self-born, He wha
penetrated through the solid Earth, He
who sings the Samans, He who is the de-~
lighter of Devaki, He who is the Creator
of all, He who is the Lord of Earth, He
who is the destroyer of the sins of His wore
shippers (CMLXXxV—CMKXCII) ;


120, He who bears the conch (Pancha-
janya) in His hand, He who bears the
sword of knowledge and illusion, He who
sets the wheel of the cycles to revolve cease-
lessly, He who invests Himself with con-
sciousness and the senses, He who is gifted
with the mace of the most solid understand-
ing, He who is armed with a cac-wheel,
He who is incapable of being agitated, He
who is acmed with all kinds of weapons
(comxcii1—™).


OM, Sarurations to HIM,


320


rat. Thus I have recited to you, without
any exception the thousand excellent names
of the great Keshava whose glory should
always besung. .


“122. The man who hears these names
every day or who recites them every day,
never meet$ with, any evil either in, this
world or in the next.


123. If a Brahmana does this, he suc-
ceeds jn mastering the Vedanta; if a Ksha-
triya does it, he becomes always victorious
in'battle. A Vaishya, by doing it, becomes
possessed of riches, while a Shudra acquires
great happiness.


424. Tf one becomes desirous of acquir-
ing the merit of virtue, one succeeds in ac-
quiring it. If it is riches which one desires,
one succeeds in acquiring them. So also
the man who wishes tor the gratification of
the sensés, succeeds in enjoying all kinds of
pleasures, and the man desirous of children,
acquires them,


’ :

125-126. That man who with devotion
and perseverance and heart wholly turned
towards him, recites these thousand names
of Vastideva every day, after havihg puri-
fied himself, succeeds in winning gréac fame,
an,eminent position among lis kinsmen, en-
during prosperity, and lastly, that which is
of the highest good to him (vis., Emancipa-
tion itself).


327. Sucha man never meets with fear
at any time, and acquires great prowess
and energy. Disease never afflicts him ;
sheen of complexion, strength, beauty, and
accomplishmeyts, become his.


128. ‘Fhe sick become sound; the afflic-
ted become freed from their miseries; the
affrighted become freed from fear, and he
who is plunged in calamity becomes feed
from calamity. 7 :

12g. The man who sings the praises of
that foremost of Beings by reciting His
thousand names with devotion succeeds in
Speedily getting over all difficulties.


190, Fhat mortal who takes refuge in
Vasudeva and who becomes devoted to
Him, becomes freed of all sins and acq tires
eternal Brahma.


gi. ‘Fhey who are devoted to Vasudeva
have never to meet with any evil, They
become freed from the fear of birth, death,
Gecrepitude, and disease.


132. That man who with devotion and
faith recites this hymn succeeds in acquir-
ing. beatilude, forgiveness, prosperity, in-
telligence, memory, and fame.


133. Neither anger, nor jealousy, nor
cupidity, nor evil understauding, ever ap-


MAHABHARATA.


pears in those virtuons men who are devoted
ato that foremost of Beings.


134. The sky with’ the sun, moon, and
stars, the points of the compass, tne Earth,’
and the Ocean, are all held and supported
by the might of the great Vasudeva.


135. The entire mobile and immobile
universe with the celestids, Asuras, and
Gandharvas, Yakshas, _Uragas and Ras
kshasas, is under the sway of Krishna.


126. The senses, mind, understanding,
life, energy, strength, and memory, it has
been said, have Vasudeva for their root,
Indeed, this body that is called Kshetra,
and the intelligent soul within, that is called
the knower of Kshetra, also have Vasudeva
for their root.


137. Condnet is said to be the foremost
of all subjects treated of in the scriptures,
Virtue has conduct for its root. The un-
fading Vasudeva is said to be the Lord of
Virtue. .

138. The Rishis, the manes, the celes-
tials, the great (primal) elements, the
metals, indeed, the entire mobile and im-
mobile universe, has originated’ from
Narayana.


139. Yoga, the Sankhya philosophy,
knowledge, all mechanical arts, the Vedas,
the various scriptures, and all learning,
have originated from Janarddana.


149. Vishnu is one great element or
substance which has spread itself out into
various forms, Covering the three worlds,
He, the soul of all things, enjoys them alk,
His glory Knows uo decrease, and He it is
that is the Enjoyed ot the universe.


igt. ‘Fhis hymn in praise of the iflustri~
ous Vishnu, composed by Vyasa, should be
recited by that person who desires to ace
quire happiness and that which is of the
biyhest benefit (o%s., Emancipation).


142. Those persons who worship and
adore the Lord of universe, that Deity who
is unborn and endued with blazing effal-
gence, who is the origin or cause of the
universe, who knows no decay, and who has
eyes that are as large and beautiful as the
petals of the totus, have never to meet with
any disco fituce, :


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


CHAPTER CL.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. O grandfather, O you of great wis-
dom, O you who know all branches of know-
ledge, what is that subject of silent recita-
tion by recititing which every day one
may win the merit of virtue in a large
measure ?


2. What is that Mantra for recitation,
which gives success, if recited on the occasion
of starting on a journey or in entering a
new building, or at the beginning of any
undertaking, or on the occasion of sacrifices
in honor of the deities or of the manes ?


3. You should tell me what, indeed, what
Mantra it is, which propitiates all malevo-
lent influences, or brings on prosperity or
growth or protection from evil, or the des-
truction of enemies, or the dispelling of
fears, and which, at the same time, is con-
sistent with the Vedas.


«=


+


Bhishma said :—


4. Hear, O king, with rapt attention,
what that Mantra is which was declared by
Vyasa. It was ordained by Savitri and is
highly excellent. It is capable of purifying
a person forthwith of all his sins.


5. Hear, O sinless one, as [I recite to
you the ordinances about that Mantra. In-
deed, O chief of the sons of Pandu, by
listening to those ordinances; one becomes
purged of all his sins.’


6. One who recites this Mantra day and
night hecomes never sullied by sin. [ shall
now declare it to you what that Mantra is.
Do you listen with rapt attention.


7. Indeed, the man who hears it becomes
gitted with longevity, O prince, and attain-
ing to the fruition of all his desires, sports
happily both in this life and in the next.


8. This Mantra, O king, was daily re-
cited by the foremost of royal sayes per-
forming Kshatriya ditties and steadily ob-—
serving the vow of truth.


g. Indeed, O foremost of kings, those
monarchs who, with controlled senses and
tranquil soul, recite this Mantra every
day, succeed in winning unrivalled pros-
perity.

to. Salutations to Vashishtha of high
vows, after having bowed with respect to
Parashara, that Ocean of the Vedas. Salu-’
tations to the great snake Ananta, and
salutations to all those who are crowned
with success, and who are of undecaying


glory, '


428


be os
Him who is the Highest of the High, the
god of gods, and the giver of boons to alt
those that are foremost.
Him of a thousand heads, Him that is most
auspicious, Him who has a thousand names,
vis., Janatddana.

12—13. Aja, Ekapada, Ahivradhna, the
unvangnuished Pinakin, Rita, Pitrirupa, the
three-eyed Maheshwara, Vrishakapi, Sham-


Salutations to the Rishie, and te’


Salutations unto '


bhu, Havana, and Ishwara,—these are the -


celebrated eleven Rudcas, who are the lords
of all the worlds.

14—15.
have been mentioned as a bundred
Shatarudra (of the Vedas).
Bhaga, Mitra, Varuna the lord of waters,
Dhatri, Aryaman, Jayanta, Bhaskara,


in the


These eleven “high-seuled ones ©


Angsha, «


“


Tashtri, Pushan, Indra, and Vishnu. are °


said to comprise a tale of twelve, These
twelve are called Adityas and they are
the sons of Kashyapa as the Shruti de-
clares.


16. Dhara, Dhruva, Soma, Savittra,
Anila, Anala, Pratyusha, and Prabhava,
are the eight Vasus, named in the aries
tures,


17. Nasatya and Dasra are said to be
the two “Ashwins. They are the sons of
Martanda born of. his wife Samjna, from
whose nostrils they emanated.


18. After this I shall recite the names of ©


those who are the witnesses of all deeds in
the worlds. ‘hey take note of all sacrifices,
of all gifts, of all good deeds,


19—20. ‘Those lords among the deities
see everything although they. are invisible,
Indeed, they see all the good and bad deeds
of all beings. ‘They are Mritvu, Kala,- the
Vishwedevas, the Pitris having forms, the
great Rishis having penances for wealth, the
Munis, and others crowned with success and
devoted to penances and Liberation.


21. These of sweet smiles, confer various
benefits upon thosé men who recite their
natnes.. Indeed, gifted as they are with
celestial energy, they confer various regions
of hapoiness created by the Grandfather
upon such men,


22. ‘They live in allthe worlds and ate
tentively mark all deeds.- By reciting the
names of those lords of all living creatures,
one always becomes gilted with righteous.
ness and wealth and enjoyments in profuse
sion.

23. One acquires hereafter diverse ree
gions of auspiciousness and happiness creas
ted by the Lord of the universe.

24—28. These thirty-three deities, who
are the tords of all beings, as also Nandi-
shwara of huge body, and that pre-eminent


322


one who has the bull for the emblem on his
banner, and those masters of all the worlds,
wis., the followers and associates.of him
called Ganeshwara, and those called Sau-
myas, and those called the Raudras, and
those called the Yogas, and those who are
known as the Bhutas, and the Juminaries
in the firmament, the Rivers, the sky, the
king of birds (wviz., Garuda),- all those
persons on Earth who have become crowned
with success on account of their penances,


and who are existing in an immobile or |


mobile form, Himavat, all the mountains
the four Oceans, the followers and compa-
nions of Bhava who are gifted with prowess
equal to that of Bhava himself, the illustri-
ous and ever-victorious Vishnu and Skanda,
and Amvika,—these are the great souls by
reciting whose names with controlled senses,
one becomes purged of all his sins,


29—30. After this, I shall recite the
mames of those foremost Rishis who are
known as Manavas. They are Yavakrita,
and Raibhya, and Arvavasu, and Paravasu,
and Aushija, and Kakshivat, and Vala
the son of Angiras. Then is Kanwa the
son of the Rishi Mandhatithi, and! Vari-
shada. A,


3t. All these are gifted with the energy
gf Brahma and have been spoken of as
creators of the universe. They have origi-
nated from Rudta and Anala and the


Vasus. By reciting their names people get
great benefits.
32. Indeed, by doing good deeds on


Earth, people sport happily in the celestial

region, with the celestials, These Rishis

iP the priests of Indra. They live in the
ast.


33 That man who, with rapt attention,
recites the names of these Rishis, succeeds
in ascending to the regions of Indra and
getting great honours there.


34-35. Unmuchu, Pramuchu, Swas-
twyatreya of great energy, Dridhavya,
Urdhavahu, Trinasoma Angirag, and


Agastya of great energy, the son of Mitra-
varuna,—these seven are the Ritwijas of
the Yama the king of the dead, and live in
the southern quarter.


36—37. Dridheyu, Riteyu, illustrious
Parivyadha, Ekata, Dwita, and Trita,—
the last three gifted with solar effulgence,
—and Atri’s son of rigeteous soul, vis., the
Rishi Saraswata,—these seven who had
acted as Ritwijas in the great sacrifice of
Varuna~have taken up their abodes in
the Western quarter. -


38—39. . Atri, ihe illustrious Vashishtha,
the great Rishi Kashyapa, Gotama, Bha-
tadwaja, Vishwamitca the son of Kushika,


MAHABHARATA.


and Richika’s fierce and energetic son
Jamadagni,—these seven are the Ritwijas
of the Lord of treasures and live in the
Northern quarter. ,


40. There are seven other Rishis who
live in all directions without being confined
to any particular one. They, it is, who give
fame and of all that is beneficial to men,
and they have been sung as the creators of
the worlds.


41. Dharma, Kama, Kala,’ Vasu,
Vasuki, Ananta, and Kapila,—these seven
are the upholders of the world.


42. Rama, Vyasa, Drona’s son Ashwate
thaman, are the other Rishis, ‘These are
the great Rishis as divided into seven
groups, each group consisting of seven.


43. ‘They are the creators of that peace
and good which men enjoy. They are
said to be the Regents of the quarters,
One should turn his face to that direction
in which one of these Rishis live if one
desires to adore him.


44-—45. Those Rishis are the creators
of all creatures and have been considered
as the purifiers of all. Samvarta, Meru-
Savarna, the cighteous Markandeya, and
Sankhya and Yoga, and Narada and the
great Rishi Durvasas,—these are gifted
with severe penances and great self-control,
and are celebrated over the three worlds.


46. There are others who are equal to
Rudra himself. ‘They live in the region of
Brahman. By naming them with respect a
sonless man obtains a son, and a poor man
acquires riches.


47-48. Indeed, by naming them, one
acquires success in religion, and wealth and
pleasure. One should also take the name
of that celebrated king who was Emperor
of all the Earth and equal to a Prajapati,
vis., that foremost of monarchs, Prithu, the
son of Vena. The Earth became_ his
daughter. One should also name Purue
ravas, of the Solar .race and equal unto
Mahendra himself in power.


49. He was the son of Ila and celebrated
over the three worlds, One should, indeed,
take the name of that dear son of Vudha.


50—s1. One should also take the name

of Bharata, that hero celebrated over the

three worlds. He also who in the golden

age worshipped the gods in a grand

Gomedha sacrifice, viz., the illustrious Ranti-

deva, who was equal to Mahadeva himself,

should be named. Gifted with penances, ©
possessed of every auspicious mark, the

source of every kind of good to the world,.
he was the conqueror of the universe.


52, One should also take the name of
the royal sage Shweta of illustrious fame,


.ANUSHASANA PARVA.


He had pleased the great Mahadeva and
it was for his sake that Andhaka was killed.


53- One should also take the name of
the illustrious royal sage Bhagiratha, who,
through the favour of Mahadeva, succeeded
in bringing down the sacred river from the
Celestial rigion.


$4. It was Bhagiratha who caused the
ashes of the sixty thousand sons of Sagara
to be washed with the. sacred waters of
Ganga and thereby rescued them from their
sin, Indeed, one should take the names
of all these who were gifted with the blazing
effulgence of fire, great beauty, and high
energy.


55. Some of them were of awe-inspiring
forms and great power. One should take
the names of these deities and Rishis and
kings, those lords of the universe,—who are
multipliers of fame.


56-57. Sankhya, and Yoga which is
highest cf the high, and Havya and Kavya
and that refuge of all the Shrutis, v7z.,
Supreme Brahma, have been declared to be
the sources of great good to all creatures.
These are sacred and sin-purifying, and
have been spoken of very highly. These
are the foremost of medicines for curing all
diseases, and are the givers of success in
all deeds.


58. Controlling one’s senses, one should,
O Bharata, take the names of these, morn-
ing and evening. It is these who protect.
It is these who shower rain. I[t is these
who shine and give light and heat. It is
these wlio blow. It is these who create all
things,


59. These are considered as the foremost
of all, as the leaders of the universe, as
highly clever in the performance of all
things, as gifted with forgiveness, as com-
plete masters of the senses, Indeed, it has
been said that they remove all the evils to
which human beings are subject.


60. These great ones are the witness
of all good and bad deeds. Rising up in
the morning one should take their names,
for by this one is sure to acquire all that is
good. 4

6t. He who takes the names of these,
becomes freed from the fear of fires and of
thieves. Such a man never finds his way
obstructed by any obstacle, By taking the
names of these great ones, one becomes free
from bad dreams of every kind,


67~—-63. Purged of every sin, such men
take birth in auspicious families. That
twiceeborn person who, with controlled
senses, recites these names on occasions of
performing the initiatory rites of sacrifices
ahd other religious practices, becomes, as


reciting them within a field,


323


the outcome thereof, gifted with righteaus-
ness, devoted to the study of the soul,
possessed of forgiveness, and self-control,
and free from malice. If a man suffering
from disease recites them, he becomes freed
from his sin in the form of disease.


64. By reciting them within a house, alf
evils are removed from the inmates. By
the. growth

of all kinds of crops is helped.. ;


65—68. Reciting them at the time of
starting on a journey, or while one is away
from his home, one meets with good fortune.
These names lead to the protection of his
ownself, of his children and wives, of his
wealth, and of his seeds, and plants. The
Kshatriya’ who recites these names at the
time of joining a battle sees destruction |
overtake his ememies and good fortune
crown him and his party. The man who
recites these names on occasions of pere
forming the rites in honor of the deities or
the manes, helps the manes and the deities
eat to the sacrificial Havya and Kavya.
the man who recites them becomes freed
fcom fear of disease and beasts of prey, of
elephants and thieves,


69—70. His burden of anxiety becomes
lightened, and he becomes freed from every
sin. By reciting these excellent Savitri
Mantras on board a vessel, or in a car, oF
in the’ courts of kings, one acquires high
success, There where these Mantras are
tecited, fire does not burn wood, .


qt. There children do not die, nor
snakes live.- Indeed, at such places, there
can be no fear of the king, nor Pishachas
and Rakshasas.


72. Indeed, the man who recites ‘these
Mantras ceases to have any fear of fire or
water or wind, or beasts of prey.


73. These Savitci Mantras, recited duly
bring on the peace and well-being of all the
four castes. Those men who recite them
with respect become freed from every sorrow
and at last acquire a high end,


74. Even these are the results acquired
by them who recite these Savitri Mantras
which are of the form of Brahma. ‘That
man who recites these Mantras in the
midst of kine, sees his kine become fruitful.


753-76. Whether when starting on a
journey, or entering-a house on returning,
one should recite these Mantras on every
occasion, ‘Fhese Mantras torm a_ great
mystery of the Rishis and are the very
highest of those which they silently recite.
Such are these Mantras to them who
practise the duty of recitation and pout
libations on the sacrificial fire.


374


77. This that I have said to you, is the
“excellent opinion of Parashara. [t was
‘recited formerly to Shakra himself. Re-
presenting, as it does, Truth or Eternal
Brahma, | have declared it fully to you.


98—79. {It forms the heart of all crea-
tures, and is the highest Shruti, All the
princes of the solar aud lunar families,
wiz., the Raghavas and the Kuravas, recite
these Mantras every day after having puri-
fied themselves. Fhese form the highest
end of buman creatures. One becomes
freed from every trouble and calamity by
-Gaily reciting the names of the celestials,
of the seven Rishis, and of Mibruva.
Judeed, such recitation speedily frees one
‘fiom distress,


$o. The sages of olden times, 7s.,
Kashyapa, Goama, and otners, and
Bhrigu, Angiras and Atri and others, and
Shugra, Agastya, and Veihaspati, and
others, allof whom are regenerate Rishis,
have worshipped these Mantras. Approved
‘of by the son of Bharsdwaja, these Min-
“tras were attatned by the sous of Richika.
Having acquired them again fram Vashish-
tha, Shakea and the Vasus went forth to
battle and succeeded in vanquishing the
Dinavas.


81. That man who makes a present of a
hundred kine with their horns covered with
plate of gold to a Brahmana gifted with
much learning and well-conversant with the
Vedas, and he who causes the excellent
Bharata story to be recited in his house


“every day, are said to acquire equal
merits,
82. By reciting the name of Bhrigu,.


one’s virtue becomes enhaiced. By bow-
ing to Vashishtha, one’s energy becomes
enhanced. By bowing to Raghu, one be.
comes victorious in battle. By reciting the
praises of the Ashwins, one becomes freed
from diseases.


83. [ have thus, O king, told you
of the Savitri Mantras which are at
ove with eternal Brahma. If you wish to
Question me on any other subject, you
‘way do so. | shall, O Bharata, answer
you.


CHAPTER CLL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

t. Who are worthy of being- adored?
Who are they to whom we should bow ?
How, indeed, should we behave towards


|


|
i


MAHABHARATA.


whom ? What course of conduct, O grands
father, towards what classes of persons is
considered faultless ?


Bhishma said :—

2. Vhe humiliation of Brahmanas would
hamiliate the very celestials, By bowing to
Brahmanas, one does not, O Yudhisthira,
commit any fault.


3. They, indeed, deserve to be adored,
They deserve to have our vows. You
should behave towards them as if they are
your sons. Indeed, it is those wise meu who
upholds all the worlds.


4. The Brahmanas are the great cause-
ways of Virtue about all the worlds. “Mheic
happiness consists in renouncing all kinds
of tiches. ‘They are devoted to the vow of
controlling speech,


5. Vhey are agreeable to all creatures,
and observe varivus excellent vows. hey
are the refuge of all creatures in the uni-
verse. ‘They are the authors of all the
regulations which govern the worlds, ‘They
are endued with great fame. °


6. Penances are always their great
tiches. ‘heir power consists in  speectt.
Their energy emanates from the duties they
observe. Knowing all daties, they are
gifted with minute vision, so that they are
cognizant of the subuest considerations,


7. They are of righteous desires, They
live in the observance of well-done duties,
‘bey are the cause-ways of Virtue. ‘The
four kinds of living creatures exist, depen-
ding upon them as their refuge.


8. They are the path or road along
which all should go. hey are the guides
of all. Yhey are the eternal upholders of
all the sacrifices, ‘They always uphold the
heavy loads of fathers and grandfathers.


g. They never droop under heavy loads
even when passing along difficult roads, like
strong cattle. They are attentive to the
requirements of manes and déities and
guests, They are entitled to eat the first


portions of Havya and Kavya. -” '

10, By the very food they eat, they
rescue the three worlds from great fear.
‘They are, as it were, the Island for all
wotlds. They are the eyes of all persons
gifted with sight.


rt. The wealth they possess consists
of ail the branches of knowledge known by
the name of Shiksha, and all the Shrutis.
Gifted with great skill, they are conversant
with the most subtile relations of things.
They know the ends of ali things, and their
thoughts are always engaged upon the
science of the soul.


y


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


35


_}3. They are gifted with the knowledge ; sidered as deserving of honors. Indeed,


Of the beginning, the middle, and the end of
all things, and they are persons in whom
doubts no longer exist on account of the
certitude of their knowledge. They are
fully aware of the distinctions between
what is superior and what is inferior. They
it is who acquire the highest end.


13, Shorn of attachments, purged of all
sins, getting over all pairs of opposites,
they are unattached to all worldly things.
Deserving of every honor, they ate always
esteemed by persons gifted with knowledge
and high souls.


14. They cast impartial looks on sandal
paste and filth or dirt, on what is food and
whatisnot food. They see with an equal
eye their brown dresses of coarse cloth and
fabrics of silk and animal skins.


15. They would live for days together
without partaking of any food, and dry up
their limbs by such abstention. They de-
Vote themselves eartiestly to the study of the
Vedas, Controlling their senses.


16, They would make gods of those who
are not gods, and not gods of those who are
gods, Enraged, they can create other
worlds and other Regents of the worlds
than those who exist.


17, “Vhrough the curse of those great
ones, the ocean became so saline as to be
undrinkable. The fire of their anger yet
burns in the forest of Dandaka, unquench-
ed by time.

18, They are the gods of the gods, and
the cause of all causes. They are the
authority of all authorities, What mani of
intelligence and wisdom is there who would
seek to humiliate them,


19. Amongstthem the young and the
old all deserve honors. ‘They honor one
another on account of distinctions in respeet
of penances and knowledge,


20. Even the Brahmana who is destitute
of knowledge is a god arid is a great instru-
tment for purifying others, | He amongst
them, then, who is posseseed of knowle ige
isa much higher god and like the ocean
when full (to the brim).


2t. Learned or unlearned,
mana is always a great deity.
not, Fire is ever a great god.


22. A blazing fire, even when it burns
on a crematorium, is not considered as
sullied on account of the character of the
spot whereon it burns, Clarified butter
fooks beautiful whether kept on the sacri-
ficial altar or in a chamber. -


23. So if the Brahmana be always
engaged in evil deeds, he is still to be con-


42°


the Brah-
Purified or


kriow that the Brahmana is always a great
god.


Sainte


CHAPTER CLIL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)~—
Continued.
Yudhishthita said: |
1. ‘Tell us, O king, What is that res
ward of the worship of Brahmanas, seeing
which you adore them, O you of supériot
intelligenéé! Indeed, what is that success, ©


emanating from their adoration, guided by
which you worship them ? :


Bhishifia said :—


2. Regarding it is cited the conversa-
tion between Pavana and Arjuna, O
Bharata, ;


3. Gifted with a thousand arms and
great beauty. the powerful Kartavirya,
formerly became the lord of all the world,
He had his ‘capital in the city of Mahish«
mati.


4. Of unbaffled prowess, that king of
the Haihaya race of Kshatriyas governed
the whole Earth begirt by seas, together
with all her islands and all her precious
mines of gold and-gems. 3


3. Respecting the duties of the Kshae
tciya order, as also humility and Vedic
learning, the king made large gifts of
weaith to the Rishi Dattatreya,


6. Indeed, the son of Kritavirya thus
worshipped that great ascetic who, be-
coming pleased with him, asked him to
solicit three boons, : <n


7s Thus requested by the Rishi. fo
boons, the king addressed him, saying,=«
Let me have a thousand arms when I am
in the midst of my elders. While, hows’
ever, I remain at home let me have, as
usual, only two arms, We


8. Indeed, let combatants, when fights:
‘ng, see me possessed of a thousand arms.
Observant also of high vows, let me succeed
in subjugating the entice Earth by my
prowess. - a oes

g. Having acquired the Earth ‘tightes
ously, let me govern her with vigilance, -
There is a fourth boon which, O foremost ©
-of twicesborn persons, 1 solicit: thee to
grant, io
10, O faultless one, being disposed ta
favor me, you should grant it to me!-
Dependent as I am on you, whenever §


“326


may happen to go wrong, let pious men
come forth to instruct and set me right,


it. Thus addressed, that Brahman
replied to the king, saying,—So let it be f
thus were those boons acquired by that
king of burning eflulgence,


tz—14. Riding then on his car which
was effaigent like ‘fire or the Sun, the king,
blinded by his great prowess, said,—Who,
indeed, is there who can be considered as
my equal in patience and energy, in fame
and heroism, in prowess and strength 7—
After he had uttered these words, an invi-
sible voice in the sky, said,—-O ignorant
wretch, do you not know that the Brahmana
is superior to the Kshatriya?. The Ksha-
triyay helped by the Bralimana, rules all
creatures, :


15. When pleased, 1 am able to create
many creatures. When angry, £ am able
to destroy allt. In thought, word, and deed,
3 am the foremost. ‘he Brahmana_ is
certainly not above me.


16. The first proposition here is that the
Brahmana is superior to Kshatriyas. ‘The
counter-proposition is that the Kshatriya
is superior, You have Said, that the two
are united together. A distinction, however,
is observable in this,

ry. It is seen that Brahmanag
vefuge with Kshatriyas. ‘he Kshatriyas
mever seek the refuge of Brahmanas, In-
deed, throughout the Earth, the Bra-
hmanas, accepting: such refuge under the
pretence of teaching the Vedas, get their
maintenance from the Kshatriyas,


18. The duty of protecting alk creatures
lies with the Kshatriyas. It is from the
Kshatriyas that the Brahmanas derive their
livelihood. How, then can the Brahmana
be superior to the Kshatriyas ?

- 19, Well, I shatl, from to-day, bring
under my subjection, your Brahmanas who
are superior to al} creatures but who have
mendicancy for their occupation and, who
are so self-conceited,

20. What the virgin Gayatri has said
from the sky is not true. Robed ia skins,
the Brahmanas move about in indepene
dence. 1} shall bring those independent
men under my subjection,


2t. Deity or man, there is none in the
three worlds who can throw, me off from the
sovereignty L enjoy. Hence, fam certainly
superior to the Brahmanas,.


take


22. This woeld that is now considered as.


having Brahmanas for its foremost dwellers,
shall soon be made such as to have Kshatri-
yas for its foremost dwellers. ‘There is none
who is cap..ble of withstanding my power in
battle. :


MAHABHARATA.


23 Hearing these words of Arjuna, thé
sky-ranging goddess became moved.

24. Then the god of wind, addressing
the king from the sky, said,—Renounce this
sinful attitude. Bow to the Brahmanas.
By injuring them you wilk bring aboat
troubles on your kingdom,


25. The Brahmanas will etther kill you,
king, though you are, or, endued with great
might as they are, they will dceive you away
from your kingdom, despoiling you of your
energy.


26. Wearing this speech, the king ad-
dressed the speaker, saying,— Who, indeed,
ate you?—The god of wind answered,—t
am the god of wind and the messenger of
the celestials. I say to you what is for your
benefit.


Arjuna said :—

27. Oh, I see that you have to-day showy
your devotion and attachment to the Bra=
hmanas. ‘Tell me now what Kind of earthly
creature js the Brahbmana.


28. Tell me, does a superior Brahmans
resemble the Wind in any respect? Ory
is he like Water, or Fire, or the Sun, oc the
Ficmament ?7—


CHAPTER CEIIT.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—~
Continued.


The god of wind said :—

1. Hear, O deluded man, what the atv
tributes are of Brahmanas who have all higlt
souls. ‘She Brahmana is superior to alk
those which, O king, you have named.


2. Formerly, the Earth, indulging. in a
spirit of rivalry with the king of the Angas,
forsook her character as Earth. The re-
generate Kashyapa caused destruction to
befall her by actually paralysing her.


3s The Brahmanas are. always uncoor
querable, O king, in Heaven as also on
Kacth. Formerly, the great Rishi Angi-
ras, through his energy, drank off all the
waters,


4 Having drunk off all the waters.as if
they were milk, the great Rishi did not feeF
a his thirst te be satisfied. He, there~
ore, once more caused the Earth to be
filled with water by raising a mighty wave.


5. On another oceasion, when Angiras
became enraged with me, I fled away,
leaving the warld, and fived for a long time
concealed in the Agnihotra of the Braluna-


, nas, through fear of that Rishis


ANUSHASANA -PARVA.


6. The illustrious Purandara, an account
of his having coveted the body of Abhalya,
was cursed by Gautama, yet, for the sake of
Virtue and wealth, the Rishi did aot destroy
outright the king of the celestials.


7. The Ocean, O king, that was full
in former days of crystal water, cursed
by the Brahmanas, became saline in taste.


8. Even Agni who is gold-hued, and
who blazes with effulgeace when destitute ef
smoke, and whose flames uniting together,
burn upwards, when cursed by the angry
Augiras, became divested of ali these qua-
lities.

g. See, the sixty thousand sons of Sa-
gara, who came here to worship the Ocean,
have all been pulverised by the] Brahmana
Kapila of golden hue,


to. You are notequal to the Brahmanas.
Do you, O king, seek your own good.
The Kshatriya of even great power bows to
Brahmana children who are sta in their
mothers’ wombs. ;


11. The large’kingdom ofithe Dandakas
was destroyed by a Brahmana. The power-~
ful Kshatriya Talajangha was destroyed by
a single Brahmana, #s., Aurya,


12, You, too, have acquired a large
kingdom, great might, religious merit, and
Jearning, which are all difficult of acquire-
ment, through the grace of Dattatreya. -

13. Why do you, G Arjuna,-adore Agni
everyday whois a Brahmana? He is the
bearer of sacrificial libations from every
part of the universe. Are you ignorant of
this fact. ,


14. Why, indeed, do you allow yoursel
to be stupefied by folly when you are
not ignorant’ of the fact that a superior
Brahmana is ‘the protector of all creatures
in the world and is, indeed, the creator of
the living world 2?


15. The Lord of all creatures, Brahman,
anmanifest, gifted with power, and of un-
fading glory, who created this vast -urniverse
with its-mobile and immobile creatures, (is a
Brahmana),


16. Some ignorant persons there are, who
say that Brahman was born of an Egg.
. Brom the original Egg, when it opened,
‘mountains and the cardinal points and the
waters and the Earth and the Heavers all
came into existence.


* 17, No one had seen this birth of the
creation. How then can Brahman be
said to have taken his birth from the origi-
nal Egg, when especially he is said to be
Unborn? It is said that vast increate Space
is the original Egg. ft was from this in
«reate Space that the Grandfather was born.


$77


18. If you ask,—Whereon would the
Grandfather, after his bicth from increate
Space, rest, for there was then nothing else 7
the answer may be given thus. -lhere is
an existent Being of the name of Conscious-
hess. That mighty Being is gifted with
great energy. ’

1g. Thereis no Egg. Brahman, how-
ever, is existent. He is the Creator of the
universe and is its King !—Thus addressed
by the god of wind, king Arjuna remained
silent,


CHAPTER CLIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


The god of wind said :— te

1. Once on a time, O king, a king
named Anga wished to give away the
entire Earth as sacrificial present to the
Brahmanas. At this, the Earth became
stricken with anxiety.


2. 1 am the daughter of Brahman. 1
hold all creatures. Having obtained me,
alas, why does this foremost of kings wish
to give me away to the Brahmanas ?


3- Renouncing my character as the soil,
I shall now go to my father. Let this king
with all his kingdom meet with destruction !
—Forming this conclusion, she departed
for the region of Brahman.


4. Seeing the goddess Earth about te go,
the Rishi Kashyapa himself immediately
entered the visible body of the goddess,
renouncing his own body, by the help of
Yoga.


5. Thus penetrated by the spirit of
Kashyapa, the earth grew in prosperity
and became full of all kinds of vegetable
produce. Indeed, O king, for the time the
Kashyapa pervaded the earth, Virtue
ecame foremost everywhere aud all feacs
‘ceased.


6. Thus, O king, the earth remained


-penetrated by the spirit of Kashyapa for


thirty thousand divine years, fully alive
to all those functions which it used to dis-
charge while it was penetrated by the spicit
of Brahmana’s daughter.


7. Upon the expiration of this period, the
goddess returned from the region of Bra-
bman and arrived here bowed to Kashyapo
and from that time became the daughter of
that Rishi.


8. Kashyapa is a Brahmana, ' This was
the feet, O king, that a Brahmana_ did,


428


Tell me the name of the Kshatriya who is
superior to Kashyapa. :


9. Hearing these words, king Arjuna
remained silent. The god of wind once
more said to him,—Hear now, O king, the
story of Utathya who was born in the family
of Angiras.


to. The daughter of Soma, named Bha-
dra, came to be considered as peerless in
beauty. Her father Soma regarded Uta-
thya to be the fittest of husbands for her.


11. The famous and highly blessed
maiden of faultless limbs, observing various
vows practised the severest austerities from
the desire of getting Utathya for her hus-
band...


12. After some time, Soma’s father Atri,


inviting Utathya to his house, bestowed
upon him the famous maiden. Utathya,


who used to give away sacrificial presents’


in profusion, duly received the girl for his
wife.


-13. Itso took place, however, that the
beautiful Varuna had, from a long time
before, caveted the girl. Coming to the
forest where Utathya lived, Varuna stole
away the gicl when she had plunged into
the Yamuna for a bath.


* .

14. Abducting her thus, the Lord of the
waters took her to his own house. That
mansion was wonderful. It was adorned
with six hundred thousand lakes.


15. There is no patace that can be con-
sidered more beautiful than that of Varuna,
It was adorned with many places and by
the presence of various tribes of Apsaras
and of vatious excellent articles af enjoy-
ment,


16—_17. There, within that palace, the
the Lord of waters, O king, sported with
the damsel. A little while after, Utathya
came to know of the ravishment of his wife.
Indeed, having heard all the facts from
Narada, Utathya addressed the celelestial
Rishi, saying,-Go, Q Narada, to Varuna
and speak with due severity tohim. Ask
jiim as to why he has abducted my wife,
and, indeed, tell him in my name that he
should give her up.


18. You may tell him further,—You are
® protector of the worlds, O Varuna, ard
mot a destroyer. Why then have you
abducted my wife bestowed upon me by
Soma?


19. Thus requested by Utathya, the
celestial Rishi Narada went to where
Varuna was and addressing him, said,—
Do you liberate the wife of Utathya, In-
deed, why have you abducted her ! ;


MAHABHARATA.


20. Hearing these words of Narada,
Varuna replied to him, saying,—This timid


girl is very dear to me. I dare not let
her go.
21—22. Receiving this reply, Narada


went to Utathya and cheerlessly told him,—
O great ascetic, Varuna has driven me from
bis house, catching me by the throat. He
is reluctant to restore to you your wile. Do
you act as you please.


22. Hearing these words of Narada,
Angicas became enraged. Having pe-
nances for wealth, he solidified the waters
and drank them off, by his energy.


24. When all the waters were thus
drunk off, the Lord of that element became
very dispirited with all his friends and
kinsfolk. For all that, he did not still give
up Utathya’s wife.


25. Then Utathya, that foremost of
twice-born persons, filled with anger, com-
manded Earth, saying,—O amiable one, do
you show land where there are at present
the six hundred thousand lakes.


26—~27. At these words of the Rishi, the
Ocean receded from the spot marked out,
and land appeared which was bighly ster le,
To the rivers which flowed through that
region, Utathya said,--O Saraswati, do you
become invisible here. Indeed, O timid lady,
leaving this region, go you to the desert.
O auspicious goddess, let this region, desti-
tute of you, cease to become sacred.


28. When that region became dry, he
repaired to Angirasa, taking with him
Utathya’s wife, and made her over to him.


29. Getting back his wife, Utathya be-
came cheerful. ‘Then, O chief of the
Haihaya family, that great Brahmana tes-
cued both the universe and. the Lord of
waters from the situation of distress into
which he had reduced them.


30—31. Knowing every duty, the highly
energetic Rishi Utathya, after getting back
his wife, O king, ae | to Varuna,—I have
recovered my wife, O lord of waters, with
the help of my penances and after iuflicting
such distress.on you as made you cry aloud
in pain. Having said this, he went home,
with that wife of his.


32. Even such, O king, was Utathya,
that foremost of Brahmanas. Shall I go
on? Or, will you yet persist in your
opinion? What, is there a Kshatriya that
is superior to Uiathya ?


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


CHAPTER CLV.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—
Continued,


Bhishma said :—

1. Thus addressed, king Arjuna remain-
ed silent. The god of wind once more
spoke to him,—Listen now, O king, to the
greatness of the Brahmana Agastya.


, 2, Once on a time, the gods were defea-
ted by the Asuras upon which they became
very dispirited. ‘The sacrifices of the deities
were all robbed, and the Swadha of the
manes was also misappropriated.


3-: Indeed, O chief of the Haihayas, all
the religious acts and observances of human
beings also were stopped by the Danavas.
Shorn of their prosperity, the celestials
wandered over the Earth as we have heard.


_ 4 One day, in course of their wanderings,
they met Agastya of high vows, that Bra-
hmana, O king, who was gifted with great
energy and solar splendour.


5—6. Saluting him duly, the celestials
made the usual polite enquiries. They then,
O king, said. these words to that high-souled
one,—We have been defeated by the
Danavas in battle, and have, therefore, been
deprived of affluence and prosperity. Do
you, therefore, O foremost of ascetics, rescue
us from this situation of great fear.


7. Thus informed of the condition to
which the celestials had been reduced,
Agastya became highly enraged. Highly
energetic, he at once blazed forth like the
all-consuming fire at the time of the uni-
versal dissolution. .


8. With the burning rays which then
came out from the Rishi, the Danavas
began to be burnt. Indeed, O king, thou-
sands of them began to drop down from the
sky. 7

9. Burning with the energy tof Agastya,
the Danavas, abandoning both Heaven and
Earth, fed towards the south.


to. At that time the Danava king Vali
was celebrating a Horse-Sactifice in the
nether regions. ‘hose gteat Asuras who
weré with him in those regions or who were
living in the bowels of the Earth, were not
burnt.


11. Thecelestials, upon the destruction
of their enemies, then regained their own
regions, their fears entirely removed. En-
cquraged by what he did for them, they
then begged the Rishi to destroy those
Asuras who had taken refuge within the
bowels of the Earth or in the nether
regions. “


329


12, Thus requested by the gods, Agas-
tya replied to them, saying,~Yes, I can
consume those Asuras who are living under.
neath the Earth; but if [ achieve sucha
feat, my penances will suffer decay. Hence,
i shall not exert my power. ;


13. Thus, O king, were the Danavas
consumed by the illustrious Rishi with his
own energy. ‘Thus did Agastya of purified
soul, O monarch, accomplish that deed with
the heip of his penances. ;


14. O sinless one, so was Agastya as
described by me. Shall 1 continue? Or,
will you say anything in reply? Is
there any Kshatriya who is greater than
Agastya ?— °


Bhishm, said :—

15. Thus addressed, king Arjuna ree
mained silent. The god of wind once more
said,—Hear, O king, one of the great feats
of the illustrious Vashishtha, :


16. Once ona time the celestials were
engaged in celebrating a sacrifice on the
shores of the lake Vaikhanasa. Knowing
his tpower, the sacrificing gods thought of
Vashishtha and made him their priest in
imagination. : .

17. Meanwhile, seeing the gods reduced
and emaciated on account of the initiation
they were undergoing, a rac® of Danavas,
of the name of Khalins, of statures as gigans
tic as mountains, wished to kill them,


18. Those amongst the Danavas -that
were either disabled or killed in the fight
were plunged into the waters of the Manasa
lake and en account of the boon of the
Grandfather they immediately came back
to vigour and life, ; ; :

19. Taking up huge and terrible moun+
tain summits and maces and trees, they
agitated the waters of the Jake, making
them swell up to the height of a hundred
Yojanas. ‘


20. They then ran against the celestial
numbering ten thousand. Afflicted by the
Danavas, the gods then sought the refuge
of their king Vasava.


21. Shakea, however, was soon afflicted
by them. ‘In his distress he sought the pro-
-tection of Vashishtha. At this, the holy
Rishi Vashishtha assured the celestials,
femoving their fears,


22. Understanding that the gods had
become greatly dispirited, the ascetic did
this through mercy.. He displayed his
energy and burnt, without any exertion,
those Danavas called Khalins. ; ;

23. Having penances for wealth, the
Rishi brought the River Ganga, who had
gone to Kailasa, to that spot," Indeed,


33°


Ganga appeared, piercing through the
waters of the lake.


_ .24 The take was penetrated by that
river. And as that celestial river piercing
through the waters of the lake, appeared, it
flowed on, under the mame of Sarayu. The

tace whereon those Danavas fell came to
e called after them.


25. Thus were the dwellers of Heaven:
leaded by Indra, rescued from great dis-
tress by Vashishtha. It was thus that
those Danavas, who had received boons
from Brahman, were killed by that great
Rishi.

26. O sinless one, I have described to
ee the feat which Vashishtha accomplished.

hall 1 goon? Or, will you say anything ?
Was there a Kshatriya who could be jsaid
to excel the Brabmana Vashishtha ?


CHAPTER CLVI.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :-—

“a, Thus addressed, Arjuna remained
silent. ‘The god of wind once more ad-
dressed him, Saying,—Hear me, O foremost
ene of the Haihayas, as | describe to you
the achievement of the great Ai.


a. Once on atime as the gods and Da-

navas were fighting each other inthe datk,

~ Rahu pierced both the Sun and Moon with
his arrows.


3. The gods, overwhelmed by darkness,
began to fall before the poweriul Danavas,
O foremost of kings.


4—3- Repeatedly struck by the Asuras,
the celestials began to lose their strength.
‘They. ‘then saw the learned Brahmana Atri,
having penances for wealth, engaged im
the observance of austerities. Addressing
that, Rishi who had all his senses and in
whom anger had been extinguished, they
said,—See, O Rishi, these two, v72s., the
Moon and the Sun who have both been
pierced by the Asuras with their arrows.


6. On account of this, dackness has
overtaken us, and we are being struck down
by theenemy. We do not see theeni of
our troubles,
(power, rescue us from this great fear.


‘TheRishi said:— .

'_ 97. How, indeed, shall I protect you ?—
They answered, saying,—Do you become
the Moon. Do you also become the Sun,
and do you begin to kill these robbers,


Do you, O lord of great.


MAHABHARATA.


8. Thus begged by them, Atri assumed
the form of the darkness-destroying Moon.
Indeed, on account of his agreeable dis-
position, he began to luck as beautiful and
delightful as the Moon himself.


9g. Seeing that the real Moon and the
real the Sun had become darkened by the
arrows of the enemy, Atri, assuming the
forms of those fuminaries, began to shine
forth over the field of battle, helped by the


-power of his penances.


10. Indeed, Atri made the universe
shine in light, removing all its darkness.
By displaying his power, he also subjugated,
the vast multitudes of those enemies ‘of the
celestials.


11. Seeing those great Asuras bornt
by Atri, the gods also, protected by Atri’s
energy, began to despatch them quickly.


12. Displaying his prowess and collect+
ing all his energy, it was thus that Atri
illumined the god of day, rescued the celes~
tials, and killed the Asuras.


13. This was the feat that that twice
born one, helped by his sacred fire—that
silent reciter of Mantras, that one clad in
deer-skins,—performed ! See, O royal sage,
the act achieved by that Rishi who lived
upon fruits only.


14. I have thus described to you, in full,
the feat of the great Atri. Shall L goon?
Or, will you say anything? Is there a
Kshatriya who is superior to this twice-born


Rishi? ;


1s. Thus addressed, Arjuna remained
silent. The god of wind once more spoke
to him.—Hear, O king, the feat achieved
by the great Chyavana,


16. Having made his promise to the
twin Ashwins, Chyavana addressed the
chastiser of Paka, saying,—-Do you make
the Ashwins drinkers of Soma with all the
other celestials.


Indra said :—


17. The Ashwins have been outcasted
by us. How, then, can these be admitted
into the sacrificial circle for drinking Soma
with the others? They are not classed with
the cetestials. Do not, therefore, tell ‘us
$9.


18. O you of great vows, we do not wish
to drink Soma in the company of the
Ashwins! Whatever other commands you
may be pleased .to utter, O learned Bra-
hmana, we.are ready to do.


Chyavana said :—
19. The twin Ashwins shall drink Soma
with all of you. Both of them are gods, O


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


kine of the celestials, for they are the sons
of the Sati.
ao. Let the gods do what I have said,
y acting according to those words, the
gods will reap great advantage. By acting
’ otherwise, evil will overtake them.


Indra said :—
21. 1 shall not, O foremost of twice-born
peas drink Soma with the Ashwins.


et others drink with them as they please.
As for myself, | dare not do it.


Chyavana said :—


22. If, O destroyer of Vala, you will not
obey my words, you shall, this very day,
dink Soma with them in sacrifice, compeil-
ed by me.


The pod of wind said :—

23. ‘hen Chyavana, taking the Ashwins
with “him, began a great religious rite for
theic benefit. The gods all became stupe-
fied by Chyavana with the help of his Man-
tras,


24. Seeing that feat undertaken by
Chyavana, Indra became enraged. ‘Taking
up ; huge mountain he ran against that
Rishi.


25. The king of the deities was also
armed with the Thunderbolt. ‘Then the
illustrious Chyavana, gifted with penances,
cast angry looks upon Indra as he ad-
vanced. :


26, Throwing a little water at him, he
paralysed the. king of the deities with his
Thunderbolt and mountain. As the result
of the religious rite he had begun, he created
a tetrible Asura hostile to Indra. :


27. Made of the libations he had poured
on the sacred fire, that Asura was called
Mada, of mouth gaping wide. Such was
the Asura that the great ascetic created with
the help of Mantras. ‘There were a thou-
sand teeth in his mouth, extending for a
hundred Yojanas.


28. Of terrible appearance, his fangs
were two hundred Yojanas in length. One
of his cheeks rested on the Barth and the
other touched the sky.


29. Indeed, all the gods with Vasava
seemed to stand at the root of that great
Asura’s tongue, as fishes when they enter
into; the. wide open mouth of a leviathan,


30. While Panding within the mouth of
Mada, the gods consulted.speedily and then
addressing Indra, said,—Do you soon bend
your head in respect to this twice-born per-
sonage.


31. We shall without any hesitation


331


drink Soma with the Ashwins in oue come
pafy,—Then bowing down his head to
Chy avana, Shakra obeyed his command.


32. Thus did Chyavana_ make the
Ashwins drinkers of Soma with the other
gods. Calling back Mada, the Rishi then
assigned him his work.


33. Soma was ordered to live in dice, in
hunting, in drinking, and in women,
Hence, O ‘king, those men who betake
themselves to these, forsouth, meet with
destruction.


34. Hence, one should always renounce
these faults toa great distance. hus, O
king, 1 have described to you the feat ace
hieved by Chyavana. Shall 1 go on? Or,
will you say anything in reply? Is tere a
Kshatriya who is higher than the Brahinana
Ghyavana ?


‘pean emma


“CHAPTER CLVII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Bhishma said :—~


1—2. Hearing these words of the god of
wind, Arjuna remained sifent. At this, the
god of wind once more addressed him say-
ing,— When the dwellers of Heavem, headed


by Indra, found themselves within the
mouth of the Asura Mada, at that ‘time,
Chyavana took away from them the
Earth.


_ 3. Deprived previously of Heaven and
now of the Earth also, the gods. became
very dispriited. Indeed, those great ones,
afflicted with grief, then threw themselves
unreservedly upon the Grandfather’s pro-
tection,


The gods said:—
4. O-you who are adored by all: creas


tures of the nniverse, the Earth has been
taken away from us by Chyavana, while we


-have been deprived of Heaven by the Kae


pas, O powerful one,


Brahman said :—


5. Ye dwellers of Heaven, do you, with
Indra, repair speedily and seekx the protec
tion of the Brahmanas. By pleasing them
you will succeed in regaining boty the ree
gions as before. -_


6. Thus instructed by the Grandfather,
the deities went to the Brahmanas and
begged for their protection. ‘The Brah-=
manas replied, enquiring,— Whom shall: we
subjugate ?-~Thus asked, the celestials said
to them,—Do ye subjugate the Kapas,


-


332


7. The Brahmnanas then said,—Bringing
them down on the Earth first, we shall
quickly subjugate them.—After this, the
Brahmanas began a rite having for its
object the destruction of the Kapas. As
soon as this was heard of by the Kapas,
they immediately sent a messenger of theirs,
named Dhani, to those Brahmanas,


8. Dhani, coming to them as they sat
on the Earth, thus communicated to them
the message of the Kapas,—The Kapas are
like you all, Hence, what will be the results
of these rites which it appears you are de-
termined upon ? .


9. Of all them are well conversant with
the Vedas and gifted with wisdom. All of
them care for sacrifices... Ali of them have
Truth for their vow, and for these reasons
all of them are considered as equal to great
Rishis. :


fo.
among them, and they, in their turn, sup-
port her with respect. They never know
their wives uselessly, and they never eat the
flesh of such animals as have not beéu kill-
ed in sacrifices.


11. They pour fibations in the bacrificial
fire (every day) and obey the commands of
their preceptors and elders. All of them
are of souls under perfect restraint, and
never take any food without dividing it duly
among ®heir children.


12. They always proceed on cars and
ather vehicles together. They never know
their wives when the latter are in menses.
They all act in such a way as to acquire re-
gions of happiness hereafter. Indeed, they
are always righteous in their deeds.


13. They never eat anything themselves,
when enciente women or old men have
not eaten. They never indulge in
play or sports of any kind in the forengon.
They never sleep during the day.


14. When the Kapas have these and
many other virtues and qualities, why, in-
deed, would you seek to subjugate them ?
You should abstain from the attempt. In-
deed, by such abstention you would achieve
what is for your good,


The Brahmanas said :—


15. Ob, we shall subjugate the Kapas.
In this matter, we are quite of a piece with
the celestials. Hence, the Kapas deserve
to be killed by us. As regards Dhanin, he
should return whence he came,


16. After this, Dhanin, returning to the
Kapas, said to them,—The Brahmans are
not disposed to do you any good.—Hearing
this, all the Kapas took up their weapons

*and went towards the Brahmanas.


The goddess of Prosperity sports


MAHABHARATA,


17. Seeingthe Kapas advancing against
them with the standard of their cars upraised,
the Brahmanas immediately created certain
fires for the destruction of the vital airs of
the Kapas,


18. Having brought about thé destruc
tion of the Kapas, those eternal fiires,
created with the help of the Vedic Mantras,
began to shine in the firmament like so
many clouds.


19. The gods having assembled together
in battle, killed many of the Danavas.
They did not know at that time that it was
the Brahmanas who had encompassed their
destruttion.


20, Then éGorting there, O king, the
highly energetic Narada informed the
deities how their enemies, the Kapas, had
been really killed by the Bratmanas of
mighty energy.

21. Hearing these words of Narada, the
dwellers of Heaven became highly pleased.
They also lauded those regenerate and
illustrious allies of theirs.


22. The energy and prowess of the
celestials then began to inérease, and adored
in all the worlds, they acquired also the
boon of immortality.


23. After the god of wind had said these
words, king Arjuna adored him duly and
addressing him answered in these wards.
Hear, O mighty-armed king, what Arjuna
said,


Arjuna gaid:—

24. O powerful god, always and by all
means do I live for the Brahmanas. De-
voted to them, I adore them always,


25. Through the favour of Dattatreya lt
have acquired this might of mine. Through
his favor I have been able to perform
great feats in the world and acquire high
merit.


26. Oh,I have with attention, heard the
achievements, O god of wind, of the 3ta-
hmanas with all their interesting details as
described by you truly.


The god of wind said :—

27. Do you protect and maintain the
Brahmanas, by performing those Kshattiya
duties which are yours by ‘birth, Do you
Protect them even as you protect your own
senses. There is danger to you from the
family of Bhrigu. All that, however, will-
happen ona distant day. ~


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


ar. As the sacred fire waits for liba<
tions te be poured upon it when the hour
for Homa arrives, so a woman, when her
period is aver, expects sexual union with
her husband.


42. One, who never knows his wife at
any other time except after the period of
menses, is said ta observe the vow of Bra-
bmacharyya. Amrita (nectar), Brahmanas,
and kine—these three are considered as
equal,


43. Hence, one should always adore,
with due rites, Brahmanas and kine. One
does not commit any fault or stain by eat-
ing the meat of animals killed in’ sacrifices
with the help of Mantras from the Yajur
Veda. :


44. The flésh of the back-bone, or that
of animals not killed in sacrifices, should
be avoided even as one avoids the flesh of
his own son. One should never cause his
Quest to go without food whether he
lives in his own country or in a foreiga
land.


45. After completing his study one
should. give the due present to his pre-
ceptor. When one sees his preceptor, he
should receive him with respect and adoring
him present him a seat.


46. By adoring his preceptor, one in-


creases the period of his life as also his-


fame and prosperity. One showld never
censure the old, nor send them on any
business.


47-49. One should never be seated
when any one that is old is standing.
By acting thus one protects the duration
of his life. One should never cast his
eyes on a naked woman, nor a naked
man. One should never indulge in sexual
congress except in privacy, One should
eat also without being seen by others.
Preceptors are the foremost of shrines;
the heart is the foremost of all sacred
objects; Knowledge is the foremost of all
objects of search; and contentment is the
foremost of all happiness. Morning and
evening one should listen to the grave coun-
sels af the aged.


50. One acquires wisdom by constantly
waiting upon the aged. While reading
the Vedas or employed in eating, one
should use his right hand.


5t{—52. One should always keep his
speech and mind under perfect contral, as
also his senses. With well-cooked frumen-
ty, Yavaka, Krishara, and Havi (clarified
butter), one should adore the departed
manes and the celestials in the Shraddha
called Ashtaka. The same should be used
in adoring the Planets, One should not


343


undergo a shave without calling down a
blessing upon himself. If one-sneezes, one
should be blessed by those present. AU,
who are ill or suffer from diseases, should be
blessed. The extension of their lives should _
be prayed for. .


53. One should never address an emi-
nene person familiarly. . Under even the
greatest difficulties one shonid never do this.
To thou such a person and to kill him are
equal. Learned persons are degraded by
such a manner of address.


54. Such a word can be used to those
who are inferior, or .equal, or to disciples.
A sinful man always speaks of the sius te
has committed.


55. Those men, who have deliberately
committed sins, meet with. destruction by
trying to conceal them from the good. Ins
deed, the confirmed sinners try to conceal
thair sinful deeds from others.


56. Such persons think that their sins
are seen neither by men nor the celestials.
The sinful man, laden with his sins, takes
birth in a miserable order of being. :


57. The sins of such a man continually
grow, even as the interest charged by an
usurer daily multiplies itself. [f having
committed a sin, one seeks te have it
covered by virtue, that sin becomes
destroyed and feads to virtue instead of to
other sins.


58. I€ a quantity of water be poured
upon salt, the latter is immediately dissol-
ved. So when expiation is performed, sin is
dissipated. 8


59. For these reasons one should never
conceal asin. Concealed, it fis sure to in«
crease, Having committed a sin, one:
should confess it before the good. They
would then destroy it forthwith.


“60, Uf one does not enjoy in good time
what he has stored with hope, the result is
that the stored wealth passes inte another
man’s hands after the death of him who has


stored it.


61. The wise have said that the mind of
every creature is the true test of virtue
Hence, alt creatures in this world have an
innate tendency to achieve virtue.


62. One should achieve virtue alone or
single-handed. Indeed, one should not
proclaim himself virtuous and walk with
the standard of virtue upraised for purposes
of show. They are said to be traders in
virtue who practice it for enjoying its
fruits,


63. One should worship the celestials
without giving way to sentiments of pride.
Similacly, one should serve his preceptor


344
without deceit. One should make arrange
ments for tecuting to himself ] invaluable
riches in yhe next ,world which consists in
gifts made here to wotthy persons. :


ees


CHAPTER. CLXIU.


4{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Itis’seen that if a person happens
to be unfortunate, he fails to acquire riches
how gpreatsoever his strength. On the
other hand, if he happens to be fortunate,
he-amasses riches, even if be be a weak or
a foolish wight.


2. Wher, again, the time does not come
for acquisition, one cannot make an ac-
quisition, even if he tries his best. When,
however, the time. comes for acquisition,
one. acquires great wealth without any
exertion, ;


3. Hundreds of men .may be seen who
gain no result even when they try their
best. Many persons, again, are seen to
make acquisitions without any exertion.


4.- If riches were the result of exertion,
then one could, with exertion, acquire it
forthwith, Indeed if the case were so, no
learned man could then be seen to. take the
protection for the sake of his livehood, of
one destitute of learning. —


5. Among men, that which is not to be
attained, O chief of the Bharatas, is never
attained. Men are seen to fail in gaining
results even if they try their best.


"46. One may be seen to seek riches by
htindreds of means (and yet failing to
acquire it); while another, without at all
seeking it, gets it, Men may be seen doing
evil deeds continually (for wealth) and yet
they do not gain it.


g. Others get wealth without doing any
evil act whatever. Others, again, who
follow the duties assigned to them by the
scripture, are without wealth. One may
be seen to be without any knowledge of the
science of ethics and polity even after he


has {studied all the treatises on that
science.
8 One, again, may be seen appointed


as the prime ministec of a king without
having at all studied the moral and political
sciences. A learned man may be seen who
has wealth. An ignorant man may be
seen having weakh. Buth kinds of men,
again, may be seen who has wealth,


MAHAEHARATA,


g. If by the acquisition of learning one
could acquire the happiness of riches then
no man of learniag coul i be found living,
for the very means of his livelihood, under
the protection of one shorn of learning.


to. Indeed, if one could obtain, by the
acquisition of tearning, all desirable objects
like a thirsty individual having his thirst
satisfied upon getting water, then none in
this world would have shown idleness in
acquiring learning.


tt. If one’s time has not come, one
does not die even if cut {with hundreds of
shafts. On the other hand, one dies if his
hour has come, even if it be a blade of
grass with which he is struck.


Bhishma said :—


12. If one,‘by performing arduous works,
fails to acquire wealth, be should thea
practise severe austerities. Unless seeds
be sown, no crops appear.


13. It is by m-king gifts that one gets
numerous objects of enjoyment ; one becomes
endued with intelligence and wisdom by
waiting ‘upon the elders. he wise have
said that one becomes long-lived by practi-
sing the duty of abstention from cruelty ta
all creatures.


14. Hence, one should make gifts and
not soficit and one should adore individuals.
Indeed one should be sweet-speeched to-
wards all, and always do what is agreeable
to others. One should seek to atiain to
purity; one should always abstain from
doing injury to any creature.


15. It is but proper, O Yudhishthira,
that you should be possessed by peaceful
sentiments,. since their deeds and Nature
are the ruling causes of happiness and
misery to even insects and ants, 7


CHAPTER CLXIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)=—=
Continued,


Bhishma said :—


1. If one does good deeds or causes
others to do them, he should then expect to
attain to the merits of virtue; likewise if one
does evil deeds and causes others to do
them, he should never expect to attain to
the merits of virtue. :

2. Atall times, itis Time, which enter-
ing the understanding of all creatures, sets
them to deeds of victue or sin and then
confers happiness or misery upon them.


ANUSHABSANA PARVA.


3. When a person, seeing the fruits of
virtue understands virtue to be superior, it
is then that he inclines towards virtue and
puts faith in it. One, however, whose un-
derstanding is not firm, cannot place faith
in it.


4. As regards faith in virtue, it is this.
To place faith in virtue is the mark of the
wisdom of all persons. One, who is ac-
quainted ewith what should be done and
what should not be done, with a view to
opportuneness, should, with care and
devotion, do what is right.


5. Those virtuous men, who have in this
life been blessed with riches acting of their
own accord, take particular care of their
souls so that they may not, in their next
lives, have to take birth ‘as persons with
the quality of darkness predominating in
them.


6. Time can never make the cause of
misery. One should, therefore, know that
the soul which is virtuous is certainly pure.


7. As regards sin, it may be said that,
even when it is very great it is incapable of
even touching virtue which is always pro-
tected by time and which shines like a
burning fire.


8. These are the two results achieved by
virtue, viz., the purity of the soul and un-
susceptibility of being touched by iniquity
Indeed virtue is fraught with victory. Its
effulgeiize is so great that it lights up the
three worlds: * ~.


g. A wise man cannot catch hold of a
sinful person and forcibly make him pious.
. When seriously urged to act piously;the sin-
ful only act with hypocrisy, moved by fear.


“to. Even the righteous among’ the
Shudras never betake themselves to such
hypecrisy under the pretext that pefsons
of the Shudra order are not permitted to
live according to any of the four prescribed
modes.


11. T shall tell you particularly what the
duties truly are of the four castes. So far as
theic bodies are concerned, the individuals,
belonging to all the four castes, have five
primal elements for their constituent in-
gredients ; they are ; ll of the same substance
in this matter,


- 12. For all that, their practices relating
10 life or the world and the duties of virtue,
vary despite these distinctions, and sufficient
liberty of action is left to them by which all
individuals may altain to an equality of
condition.


13. The regions of happiness which
represent the results or ,rewards of virtue
are not eternal, for they are destined to


ane oe a hc ls a ni eS NL,


345.


come to an end. Victue, however, és eternal
When the cause is eternal, why is the effsct
not so? The answer to this is as follows.
Only that vietue is eternal which is not
prompted by the desire of fruit or reward.


14. All men are equal as regards
theie physical organism. All of them,
again, have souls which ace equal in nature.
When dissolution comes, all else dissolves
away. What remains is the desire for
acquiring virtue. ‘That, indeed, re-appears
(in next life) of itself.


15. When such is the result, the in-
equality of condition, seen among human
beings, cannot be considered in any way
anomalous. So also, it is seen that those
creatures that belong to the intermediate
orders of existence are equally subject, about
their acts, to the influence of example.


CHAPTER CLXV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

t. Desirous of acquiring the merit which
destroys sins that perpetuator of Kurn’s
race, vig., Yudhishth ira the son of Pandu,
questioned Bhishma who was lying on a
bed of arrows saying.


Yadhishthira said :—


2. What, indeed, is beneficial for a
person in this world? What is that by
doing which one may acquire happiness 7
By what may .one be purged of all his
sins? Indeed, what is that which destroys
sins ? :


Vaishampanana. said :—

3. On this subject, the royal son of
Shantany, O foremost of men, duly recited
the names of the celestials to Yudhishthira
who was desirous of hearing. ;


Bhishma said :—


4. O son, the following names of the
celestials with those of the Rishis, if duly
recited morning, noon, and evening, destroy
all sins.


5—6. Acting with the help of his senses,
whatever sins one may commit by day or
by night or by the two twilights, willingly
or unwillingly, one is sure tobe cleansed
thereform and become thoroughly pure by
reciting these‘names. One, that takes those
names, has never to become blind or deaf;
indeed, by taking those names, one always
succeeds in getting what is beneficial.


*


346


- 7. Such aman never takes birth in the
intermediate order of being, never goes to
helt and never becomes a buman being of
any of the mixed castes. He has never
to fear any calamity. When death comes,
be never becomes stupefied.


8. The master of all the celestials and
Apsaras, resplendent with effulgence, ador-
ed of all creatures, inconceivable, indesc:ib-
able, the life of all living beings, and unborn
is gthe Grandfather Brahman, that Lord of
the universe. His chaste wife is Savittri.
Then comes that origin of the Vedas, the
creator Vishnu, otherwise called Narayana
of immeasurable power.


19—+34, Then comes the three-eyed
Lord ot Uma; then. Scanda the comman-
der inschief of the celestial army, then
Vishakoa ; tuen Agni the eater of sacrifi-
cial libations; then Vayu the god of wind ;
then Chandramas ;, then the sun-god, gifted
with effulguce ; then the illustrious Shakea
the husband of Sachi, and Yama with
his wife Dhumorna; and Varuna with
Gaui; Kuvera the lord of riches, with his
wife Riddhi; the amiable and illustrious
cow Surabhi; the great Rishi Vishravas ;
Sankalpa, Ocean, Ganga ; the other sacred
Rivers; the Maruts; the Valakhillyas
crowned with success of penances; the is-
land-bory Krishna, Narada, Parvata;
Vishwavasu; the Hahas; the Huhus;
Tumvutu; Chitrasena; the celestial mes-
senger j; the bighly-blessed celestial mai-
dens; the celestial Apsaras; Urvashi,
Menaka, Ramva, Mishrakeshi, Alamvasha,
Vishwachi, Ghritachi, Panchachada, ‘Yitot-
tama, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Ashwins,
the Pitris; Dharma, (Righteousness) ;
Vedic learning, Penances, Diksha, Perseye-
rance (in religions acts), the Grandfather,
Day and Night, Kashyapa, the son of Ma-
ticht, Shukra, Vrihaspati, Mangala the son
of Earth, Vudha, Rahu, Shanaishchara,
the Constellations, the Seasons, the Months,
the Fortnigits, the Year, Garuda the son of
Vinata, the several Oceans, the sons of
Kadru, vig, the Snakes, Shatarudra, Vi-
pasha, Chandrabhaga, Saraswati, Sindhu,
Devika, Peabhasa, the lakes of Pusikara,
Ganga, Mahanadi, Vena, Kaveri, Nar-
mada, Kaulampuna, Vishalya, Karatoya,
Amvuvalhini, Sarayu, Gandaki, the great
river Lohita, Yamra, Aruna, Vetravati,
Parnasa, Gautami, Godavari, Veha; Krisn-
navena, Dwija, Drishadvati, Kaveri, .Van-
khu, Mandakini, Prayaga, Prabhasa, the
sacred Naimisha, the spot sacred to Vish-
weswara or.Mahadeva, vis.,Kashi, that lake
of crystal water, Kurukshetra, full of ‘many
sacred waters, the foremost of oceaus (uis.,
the ocean of milk), Penances, Gifts, Jamva-
macga, Hiranwati, Vitasta, the river Plak-


MAHABHARATA.


shavati, Vedasmriti, Vedamati, Malava,
Ashwavati, all sacred spots on Earth, Gane
gadwara, the sacred Rishikulya, the river
Chitravaha, the Charmanwati, the sacred
tiver Kaushiki, the Yamuna, the river
Bhimarathi, the great river Vahuda, Mae
hendravani, ‘Tridiva, Nilika, Saraswati,
Nanda, the other Nanda, the large sacred
take Gaya, Phalgutictha, Dhagmaranya
(the sacred forest) inhabited by the celes-
tials, the sacred celestial river, the lake
created by the Grandfather Brahman,whict
is sacred and celebrated over the three
wotlds and auspicious and capable of purify-
ing all sins, the Himavat mountain having
excellent herbs, the Vindhya mountain
variegated with various kinds of metals,
containing many ‘Tirthas and evergrown
with ‘medicinal herbs, Meru, Mahendra,
Malaya, Shweta gifted with silver, Shringa-
vat, Mandara, Nila, Nishadha, Dardura,
Chitrakuta, Anjanabha, the Gandhamadana
mountains, the sacred Somagiri, the various
other mountains, the cardinal points of
the compass, the subsidiary points, the
Earth, all the trees, the Vishwedevas, the
Fiemament, the Constellations, the Planets,
and the Deities,—let these all, named and
unnamed, rescue and purify us,


33. The man, who takes the names of
these, becomes purged of all his sins. By
singing theie praises and pleasing them,
one becomes freed from every fear.


36. ‘Indeed, the man, who delights in
singing the hymns in laudation of the
deities, becomes pu g-d of all such sins as
lead to birth in impute orders.


37-—~38. After this recital of the deities,
[ shali name those learned Brahmanas
crowned with ascetic merit and success and
capable of purifying one of every sin. They
are Yavakrita and Raibhya and Kakshivat
and Aushija, and Bhrigu and Angiras and
Kanwa and the powerful Medhatithi, and
Vachi endued with every accomplishment.
These all belong to the Eastern region.


39~—49. Others, wi¢., Unmuchu, Pra-
muchu, Mumuchu, all highly blessed, the
highly energetic Swastyatreya, the highly
powerful Agastya, the son of Mitra and
Varuna; Dridhayu and Urdhavahu, those
two foremost and celebrated of Rishis,—
these live in the Southern quarter.


4t—43.—Listen now-to me as IT name
these Rishis whe live in the Western
quarter. They are Ushangu with his
uterine brothers, greatly energetic, Dir-
ghatamas, Gautama, Kashyapa, Ekata,
Dwita, Trita, the righteous-souled son of
Atri (vis.. Durvasas), and the powerful
Saraswat. Listen now te me as I name


ANUSHASANA PARVA,.


those Rishis who adore the celestial in
sacrifices, living in the Northern region.


44—47.. Yhey are Atri, Vasishtha,
Shaktrt, Parasara’s son Vyasa of great
energy; Vishwamitra, Bharadwaja, Jama-
dagni, the son of Richika, Rama, Audda-
faka, Shwetaketu, Kohala, Vipula, Devala
Devasharman, Dhaumya, Hastikashyapa,
Lomasha, Nachiketa, Lomaharshana, Ugra-


sheavas, Bhrigu’s son Chyavana. his
is the number of Rishis gifted with Vedic
learning.

48. ‘They are primeval Rishis, O king,


whose names, if taken, are
purifying one of every sin
shalt recite tne names of
kings.

49~—58. They are Nriza, Yayati, Nahu-
sha, Yadu, highly energetic Puru, Sagara,
Dhundhumara, Dilipa of great prowess,
Krisashwa, Yauvanashwa, Chitrashwa,
Satyavat, Dushmanta, Bharata who became
av ilustrious Emperor over many kings,
Dasharatha, the heroic Rama, that des-
troyer of Rakshas,Shashavindu, Bhagiratha,
Harishchandra, Marcutta, Dridharatha, the
highly fortunate Alarka, Aila, Karandhama,
that foremost of men, Kashmica, Daksha,
Amvarisha, Kukura, highty illustrious
Raivata, Kuru, Samvarana, Mandhatri ot
unmitigated fae the royal sage


capable of
After this I
the principal


Muchukenda, Jahnu whe was much favour-
ed by Janhavi (Ganga), the first (in point
of time) of all kings, vfz., Prithu the son
of Vena, Mitcabhanu, . Priyankara, rasa
dasyu, Shweta that foremost of royal sages,
the celebrated Mahabhisha, Nimi, Ashtaka,
Ayu, the royal sage Kshupa, Kaksheyu,
Pratarddana, Divodasa, Sudasa, Koshalesh-
waca, Aila, Nala, the royal sage Manu,
that lord of ali creatures, Havidhra, Prisha-
dhra, Pratipa, Shantanu, Aja, the senior
Vachi, Ikshaku of great fame, Anaranya,
Janujangha the royal sage Kakshasena,
and many others not named (in history).


59. That man, who rising early in the
morning, takes the names of these kings at
the two twilights, véz., at sunset.and sunrise,
with a pure body and. mind and without
distracted attention, wins great religious
merit. : an


60, One should sing the: praises of the
celestials, the celestial Rishis, and the royal
sages and say,<rThese lord of the creation
will ordain my growth, longevity and fame.


61. ~ Let no calamity visit me, let no sin
defile me, and let there be no opponents or
enemies of mine. Fo:sooth, I will always
have victory and an auspicious end here-
after, ;


347 —


CHAPTER CLXVI.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.
Janamejaya said :—
1-2. When that foremost person


among the Kauravas, vis, Bhishma, was
lying on a bed of arrows—a bed that is
always coveted by heroes—and when the
Pandavas were sitting around him, my
gteat-grandfather Yudbishthira of | much
wisdom, heard these expositions of mys-
teries about the subject of duty and had
ali bis doubts removed.


3. He beard also what the ordinances
are about gifts, and thus had all his doubts
removed about the topics of virtue and
wealth. You should, O learned Brahmana,
tel me now what ‘else did the great -
Pandava king do.


Vaishampayana said :—


4. When Bhishma became silent, the
entice body of kings became’ perfectly
silent. Indeed, they all sat motionless


there, like figures painted on canvass.


5—6. Then Vyasa.the son of Satyavati,
having thought for a moment, addressed
the royal son of Ganga, saying,—-O king,
the Kura king Yudbishthira has been res-
tored to his own nature, with all bis brothers
and followers.


7. With highly intelligent Krishna by
his side he bends his head in respect to you. ,
You should give him leave for returaing -
to the city, .


8 Thus addressed by the holy Vyasa,
the royal son of Shantanu and Ganga diss:
missed Yudhishthira and his counsellors,


. Addressing his grandson in a sweet
vaice, the royal son of Shantanu, also said,
Do you return to your city, O King. Ley
the fever of your heart be reinoved. :


to. -Da you adore the celestials in vari«
ous sacrifices distinguished by large -gifts”
of food and riches like Yayati bimseli,-O
foremost of kings, gifted with devotion and.
self-control, ; Os


11. Devoted to the practices of the
Kshatriya do you, O son of Pritha, please
the departed -‘manes and the ‘celestials.:
You shall then acquire great benefits. Ins’
deed let the fever of your heart be ree
moved. ‘


12. Do you please all your subjects.
Do you assure them and establish peace
among all. Dotyou falso honor all your.
well-wishers with such rewards as they.
deserve.


348


13. Let all your friends and well-wishers
live, depending on you for their means, as
birds live, dependiny for their means upon
a full grown tree laden with fruits and
standing ona sacred spot.


14. Wien the hour= comes for depac-
ture from this warld, do you come here,
VU «ing. EL shall relinguisti my body when
the Sun, stopping ia nis southward course,
wil begin co return northwards.


15 The son of Kunti answered,—‘ So
be it!” and saluted his grandfather with
fespect and then started with all his rela-
tives and followers, for the city of Hastina-
pur.


16—~17. Headed by Dhritarashtra and
also Gindhari who was greatly devoted
to her’ husband and accompanied by the
Rishis and Keshava as also by the citizens
and the inhabitants of the country and by
bis counsellors, OQ monarch, that foremost
one of Kuru’s race entered the city of
Hastinapur,


CHAPIER CLXVIL.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).-—=
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :

t. Then having duly honored the
citizens and the inhabitants of the province,
the royal son of Kunti dismissed thein to
theie respective homes,


2. The Pandava king then consoled
those women, who had lost their heroic
husbands and sons in the battle, with pro-
fuse gifts of wealth.


3. Having recovered his kingdom,
Yudhishthira caused himself to be duly
installed on the throne. ‘That foremost of
men thert assured all his subjects by various
deeds of good will.


4. That foremost of righteous men set
himself to acquire the substantial blessings
of the Brahmanas, of the foremost military
officers, and the leading citizens,


5. Waving passed fifty nights in the
capital, the blessed monarch recollected the
time indicated by his grandfather -as the
hour of hts departure from this world.


6. Accompanied by a number of priests
he then left the city of Hastinapur having
seen that the sun, ceasing to ga southwards,
had begun to proceed in his nomhward
course,


7~8. Vudhishthira, ‘the son of Kunti,
took with him a large quantity of clarified


MAHABITARATA,


, butter and floral garlands and scents and
i silken cloths and excellent sandal wood and
!Aquilaria Ajrallocha and dark clove, wood,
| fer cremating the body of Bhishina, Vari-+


ous kinds ef rich yarlands and gems also
i


were ainong those stores.


9-11. Placing Dirritarashtra at the head
and queen. Gandhari celebrated for her
virtues, and his own mother Kunti }d all tis
brothers also the highly intelligent Yudiisis-
thira, accompanied by Krishna and wise
Vidura, as also by Yuyutsu and Yuyu-
dhana, and by his other relatives and fol«
lowers forming a large train, proceeded, his
praises sung the while by eulogists and
bards. he sacrificial fires of Bhishma,
were also borne in the procession.


12. ‘Fhus accompanied, the king started
from his city like a second king of the celes-
tials. Svon he came upon the spot where
the son of Shantanu was still lying on bis
bed of arrows.


13-16. He saw his grandfather waited
upon with reverence by Parashara’s
intelligent, Son Vyasa, by Narada, O
royal sage, by Devala and Asita, and
also by the surviving unslain Kings
assembled from various parts of the coun-
try. lnadeed, the king saw that his great
grandfather, as he lay on his heroic bed,
was guarded on all sides by the warriors
appointed for that duty. Getting down
trom his car, king Yudhishthira, with his
brothers, saluted his grandfather, that
chastiser of all enemies. hey atso saluced
we Rishis with the Island-bora Vyasa at
their head, Ehey were saluted in return
by them.


17. Accompanied by his priests each of
whoin resembled the grandfather Brahmart
himself, as also by hts brothers, Yudhish«
thira, of undecaying glory, then approached |
that spot whereou Biishina Jay on his bed
of arrows surcounded by those reverend
Rishis,.


18—~19. Then king Yadhishthira the
just with all his brothers, addressed ‘that’
toremost ome of Kuru’s race, the son of
the River Ganga, as he lay on that bed of
his, saying,—I ain Yudbhishthira, O king.
Salutations to thee, O son of the River
jJanhavi. Hf thou beacest: me still, O, tett
me what ] am to do for thee,


Zo—~2t. Carrying with me thy sacrificial.
fires, lhave come here, O king and wait
upon thee at the hour appointed. Precep-
tors of all branches of learning, Brahmanas, |
Ritwifas, all my brothers, thy son the king
Dhritarashtra of great energy, are all here
with my counsellots as also Vasudeva of
great prowess,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


22. The rerinant of unstain warriors,
wand all the denizens of Kurujangala, are
also here. Opening thy eyes, QO chief of
Kurw’'s race, do thou see them.


23. Whatever should be done on this
occasion have all been arranged and pro-
vided for by me. Indeed, at this hour
which thou badst spoken of, all things have
been kept in‘readiness,


Vaishampayana said :—

24. Thus addressed by the highly intel-
figent Kunti’s son the son, of Ganga opened
his eyes and all the Bharatas assembied
there and stood around him.


25. The mighty Bhishma then, taking
the strong hand of Yudhishthira, address-
ed him, in a voice deep as that of the
clouds.


26. By good luck, @ son of Kunti, you
have come here with all your counsellors,
Q = VYudhishthira. The ~ thousand-rayed
maker of day, the holy Sun, has begun his
nortliward course. :


27. {have been lying on my bed here
for fifty-eight nights. Stretched on these
sharp-pointed arrows, I have felt this period
to be as long as if it was a century.

28. O Yudhisthira, the lunar menth of
Magha has come. .This is, again, the
lighted fortnight and a fourth part of it
ought by this (according to my*calculations)
be over.


29. Waving said soto Yudhishthira ‘the


son of Dharma, Ganga’s son Bhishma then”


saluted Dhritarashtta and said to him as
follows.


Bhishma said :—


30. Oking, you know well the duties.
All your doubts, again, relating to the
science of wealth, have been well solved.
You have served many learned Brahmanas.


31. You know the subtile sciences con-
nected with the Vedas, all the duties of
teligion, O king, and the whole of the four
Vedas. :


32. You should not grieve, therefore, O
soa of Kuru. ‘That which was pre-ordained
-has come to pass. It could not be other-
wise. You have have heard the mysteries
relating to the deities from the lips of the
Island-born Rishi himself.


33- Yudhisthira and his brothers are
morally as much your sons as are the sons
of Pandu. Following the duties of religion,
cherish and protect them. In their tura,
they are always devoted to the service of
their elders.


48


349


34. King Vudhishthira, the just, is pure® .
souled. He will always be obedient to
you. 1 know that he is given to the virtue
ef mercy or abstention from injury. He is
devoted to his elders and preceptors.


35. Your sons wore all wicked-souled,
They were full of anger and cupidity.
Overwhelmed by envy they were all of
wicked conduct. You should not grieve for
them,


Vaishampayana said :—~

36. Having said this much to Dhrita-
tashtra of great wisdom, the Kurn chief
then addressed Vasudeva of great arms,


Bhishma said :—


37. Oholy one, O god of afl gods, O'.
thou adored by all the deities and Asuras,
C thou who didst cover the three’ worlds
with three steps of thine, I bow unto thee,
“O wielder of the conch, the discus, and the
mace, :


38. Thou art Vasudeva, tho art of.
golden body, thou art tle one Purusha (or
active agent}, thou art the creator (of -the
universe), thou art of huge proportions, Thow
art sentiency. Thou art subtle. ‘Thou art
the Supreme and Eternal Soul. 7


39. Do thou, O loius-eyed one, save me,
O foremost of ail beings.


40, Do thou give me permission, O
Krishna, to depart from this world, O thou
who art supreme happiness, O foremost of
all beings. Thou shouldst always protect
the sons of Pandu. ‘Thou art, indeed,
already their sole refuge.


41. Formerly, 1 spoke to the foolish Duce
yodhana of wicked understanding that there
is Virtue where Krishna is, and that there
is victory where Virtue is. -


42. I further advised him that depen-
ding on Vasudeva.as his refuge, he should
make peace with the Pandavas. Indeed,
I repeatedly told him,—*‘ This is the fittest
time for you to make peace.’


43. The foolish and wicked Duryodhana
however did sotdo what I said. Having
caused a great havoc on Barth, at last, he
himself gave up his life.


44. 1 Enow thee, Ojillustrious one, to be
that ancient and best of Rishis who lived
for many years in the company of Nara, in-
hermitage of Vadari.


45. The celestial Rishi Narada told me
this, as also Vyasa of austere penances.
Even they have said to me that,.. Thyself
and Aijusa are the old Rishis Narayana
and Nara born among men.


350


46. Do thou, O Krishna, grant me leave.
1 shall renounce my body. Permitted by
thee, I shall attain to the highest end,


Vasudeva said :—

47. I give you leave, O Bhishma, O
king, to attain to the status of the Vasus.
O you of great splendour, you have not
been guilty of a‘single sin, in this world.

48. O royal sage, you are devoted to
your father. Vou are, therefore, like a
second Markandeya. It is, therefore, that
sree depends upon your pleasure like a
slave.


Vaishampayana, said :—
- 49. Having said these words, the son
of Ganga once more addressed the Panda-
vas headed by Dhritarashtra, and other
friends and well-wishers of his.

You


50 I wish to renounce my fife.
should give me leave. You should ‘strive
for attaihing .to truth. Truth forms the
highest power.

$t, You should always live with Brah-
manas of righteous conduct, devoted to
penances, ever abstaining from cruel con-
duct, and who have their souls under res-
traint.


$2. Waving said these words to his
friends and embraced them all, the intelli-
ent Bhishma once more addressed Yu-
hishthira, saying,—''O king, worship all
Brahmands, especially those who are gifted
with wisdom, ithem who are preceptors,
those who are priests capable of assisting
at sacrifices. oar ge


CHAPTER CLXVIII.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA )—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

t. Having said so to all the Kurus,
Bhishma, the son of Shantanu, remained
silent for some time, O chastiser of
enemigs,

2. He then held forth his life-breaths
successively in those parts of his body
which are indicated in Yoga. he vital
airs of that great one, restrained duly, then
rose up.

3. Those parts ofthe body of Shan.
tanu’s son, on account of the adoption of
Yoga from which the vital airs went up,
became soreless one aftec another.


4. In the midst of those great persons,
including those great Rishis headed by


MAHABHARATA.


Vyasa, the sight seemed to be a strange
one, O king.

5. Within a short time, the entire body
of Bhishma became arrowless and soreless.
Seeing it, all those great personages, headed
by Vasudeva, ad all the ascetics with
Vyasa, became filled with wonder.


6. ‘The vital airs, restrained and unable
to escape through any of the outléts, at last
passed through the crown of the head and
proceeded upwards to Heayen.


gj. The celestial: kettle-drums began to
play and floral showers were rained down.
The Siddhas and regenerate Rishis, filled
with delight, exclaimed,—Excellent, Ex-
cellent,


8 The vital airs of Bhishma, piercing
through the crown of his head, shot up
through the sky like a large meteor and
soon became invisible.


g. O great king, thus did Shantanu’s
son, that pillar of Bharata’s race, unite
himself with eternity.


10. Then the great Pandavas and
Vidura, taking a Jarge quantity of wood
and various kinds of fragrant scents, gnade
a funeral pyre.


tt—12, Yuyutsu and others stood as
spectators of the preparations. Then
Yudhishthira and the great Vidura wrap-
ped Bhistima’ body with silken cloth and
floral garlands. Yuyutsu held an excellent
umbrella over it.


13. Bhimasena and Arjuna both held
in their hands a couple of pure white yak~-
tails. The two sons of Madri held two
head-gears in their hands,


14. Yudhishthira and Dhritarashtra
stood at the feet of the body, taking up
palmyra fans, the wives of the lord of the
Kurus stood around the body and began ta
fan it softly, The Pitri sacrifice of the
great Bhishma was then duly performed.
Many libations were poured upon the
sacred fire. ‘Ihe singers of Samans sang
many Samans, :


16—17, Then covering the body of
Ganga’s son with sandal wood and black
aloe and the dark wood and other fragrant
fuel, and setting fire to the same, the Kuruy,
with Dhritarashtra and others, stood on the
right side of the funeral pyre.


18. Having thus cremated the body of
the son of Ganga those foremost ones of
Kuru’s race proceeded to the sacred Bhagi«
rathi, accompanied by the Rishis,


19. They were followed by Vyasa,
Narada, Asita, Krishna, by the ladies of
the Bharata family, as also by such of the


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


citizens of Hastinapore as had come to the
place, ;


20, All of them, arrived at the sacred
river, duly offered oblations of water to the
great son of Ganga.


21. After those oblations of water had
been offered by them to her son the goddess
Bhagirathi, rose up from the river, weep-
ing and distracted by sorrow.


22. In the midst of her famentations,
she addressed the Kurus, saying,—Ye sin-
fess ones, listen to me as I say to you all
that took piace.


23. Gifted with royal conduct and dis-
position, and endued with wisdom and
high birth, my son was the benefactor of
all the elders of his family. fe was devo-
ted to his father and was of high vows,


24. He could not be defeated by evey
Rama of Jamadagui’s race with his high-
fy powerfut celestial weapons; alas, that
hero has been kitled by Shikhandin.


25. Vekirgs, forsooth, my heart is made
of adamant, for it does net break even at
the disappearance of that son from my
view.


26. At the Swayamvara at Kashi, he
defeated on a_ single car the assembled
Kshatriyas and carried away the three
princesses.


27. There was no one on Earth who
equalled him in power; alas, my heart does
not break upon hearing the slaughter of that
son of mine by Shikhandin.


35t


28-30. Hearing the goddess of the
great river thus bewail the powerful Krishna
consoled her with many soothing words.
Krishna said,''O amiable one, be come
forted. Do not give way to sorrew, O you
of beautiful features. Forsooth, your son has
gone to the highest region of happiness.


31. He was one of the Vasus ef great
energy. ‘Through a curse, O you of beaue
tiful features, he had to take birth among
men. You should not grieve for him.


32. According to Kshatriya duties, he
was killed by Dhananjaya on the field of
battle while engaged in battle. He has not
been killed, O poddess, by Shikhandin.


33. The very king of the celestials hime
self could not kill Bhishma in battle when
he stood with stretched bow in hand.


34. O you of beautiful face,’your son has
happily gone to Heaven. All the gods
assembled together could not kill him in
bate.


35- Do not, therefore, O goddess Ganga,
grieve for that son of Kuru’s race. He
was one of the-Vasus, O goddess, your son
has gone to Heaven. Let the fever of your
heart be removed.” ‘


Vaishampayana said ‘—

"36. Thus addressed by Krishna that
foremost of all rivers cast off her grief, O
great king, and became consoled.


37. OG monarch, having honored that
goddess duly all the kings there presemt,
headed by Krishna, received her permission.
to go away from her banks, :


Finis ANUSHASANA PARVA.


A PROSE ENGLISH TRANSLATION:


OF


THE MAHABHARATA.


(TRANSLATED LITERALLY FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT TEXT).


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.
VOL. XIV.


EDITED & PUBLISHED B¥


MANMATHA NATH DUTT, (Stasirt) M.A., M.RB.AS.
RecTor, K&SHUB ACADEMY ;


Author of the English Translations of the Ramayana, Vishnu Puranam,
Srimad-Bhagavatam, Kamandakiya, Nitisara, Bhagavad-Gita,
and many other works.


40, Navan Chand Dutt’s Street, Calcutta,


CALCUTTA:


Printep sy H. C. Dass, Ezysrum Press,
40, Nayan Chand Dutt's Street.


1905.


ASHWAMBEDHA PARVA.


TABLE OF CONTENTS,


CuaPrer f.—VYudhishthira's grief and
consolation by Dhrif4rashtra—p. 1.


Cuaprer I1.—The conversation between
Yudhishthira and Krishna—p. t.

CuHarrer I1].—Consolation offered by
Vyasa—p. 2.

Cuarter |1V.—The story of the Royal
Sage Marutta—p. 3.

Cuarters V to X.—The story of Marutta
and Vrihaspati continued—p. 4.


CHAPTER X1.—The story of Vritra and
Indca—p. 13.

Cuarrer XIf.—Mental and Physical
Diseases as described by Krishna—p. 13.


Cuarrer XIII.—The Means of Salvation
as described by Krishna—p, 14.

CHapPrer XIV.—The exhortation of the
Rishis to Yudhishthira for going to Hima-
layas—p. 16.

Cuarter XV.—Krishna’s desire of going
to Dwarka—p. 16,

CuaPter XVI.—The story of Anugita—
p- 17.

CHAPTER AVII.—The dissofution of the
body and the acquirement of another. The
attainment of the Soul to Brahman—p. 19.


CuaPrer XVUL—The fruits of human
actions—p. 21.

Cuarrer XIX.—The characteristics of
a Liberated Person-——p. 22.

CuHarrerR XX.—The discourse of the
married couple. The description of Brah-
man—p. 25.

CuHartier XXL—The ten Hotris and two
Minds—p. 26.

CuaprerR XXI1—-The seven sacrificing
presents—p. 27.

CuHaPTER XXIil—The five sacrificing
Priests—p. 28.

Cuaprek XXIV.—The first creation in
a creature born—p, 29.

CuArrer XXV.—The Chaturhotra Sacri-
fice—~p. 30.

CuapTer XXVII.—The extensive forest
of Brahma described—p. 31.

CuarTer XXVILL—Nature described—
BP. Bae


Cyapren XX1X.—The discourse between
Kartavirja, Arjuna and the Ocean=«p. 33-


CaarTeR XXX.—Alacka’s — discourse
about controlling the various organs of the
body—p. 34-

Cuaprek XXXL—The three enemies—~
Pp. 36.

Cuaprer XXXIL—The Means for dese
troying Egoism. ‘The discourse of Janaka
—p. 30.

CuaPreR XXXIIL—The Knowledge of


' Self-—37.


Cuyarren XXX1V.—The Source of the
Knowledge of Self—p. 38.

CuaPreR XXXV.—An account of Brahe
ma—the highest object of Knowledge—p. 38.


CuarreR XXXVI.~The three qualities
and the means of improvement-~p. 4o.


CuapreR XXXVIL-—The quality of
darkness—p. 42.

Cuaprer XXXVII].—The quality of
goodness—p. 42.

Cuarrer XXXIX —The united. state of
the three qualities described~ep. 43.


Cuarter XL.—An account of the Great -
Soul—p. 44,

Cuarrer XLI—The principle of Greats
ness~-~—p, 45°

Carrer XLIL.—The five great elements, _
—P- 45>

Cuaprer XLIH.—The foremost objects
in Nature are enumerated—p. 47. -


Cuarrer XLIV.—The creation of Day,
Night, Stars, etc.—-p. 49»

CuaprerR XLV.—-The Wheel ‘of Life~-
p- 50.

Cuaprer XLVI.—-The Conduct of the
Twice- Born—p. 51.

Cuaprer XLVIL.—An account of Renun-
ciation—p. 53.

CuapreR XLVIII.—The relation between
Nature and Soul—p. 54.

Cuaprer XLIX.—Description of Duty—
Pp. 55-

CuarrerR I..—Abstention from Injury.
Association and disassociation of Soul and
Nature—p. 56.


4


ii CONTENTS.


_ Cuapter LI.—The Mind and the Dissolu-
tion of the Body described—p. 58.

Cyarprer LIl.—The departure of Krishna
=p. 60.

Cuaprer LIII.—The meeting of Krishna
and Utanka-—p. 62.

Cuaprer LIV. Spiritual Science descri-
bed by Krishna to Utanka—p. 63.

Cuarter LV.—-Krishna shows his
supreme form to Utnaka—p. 64.

Cuaprers, LVI to LVIL—The story of
Utanka and Saudasa—p. 66.

CuHaprer LIX.—The return of Krishna
to Dwarka—p. 71.

Caarrer LX.—Krishna describes the
wonderful battle—p. 72.

Cuarrgr LXI.—An account of Abhi-
manyy’s death—p. 73.

Cuaprer LXII.—QObsequial offerings of
Abhimanyu-~ p. 75-

Cuaarrers LXUL ta LXV.—Vudhish-
thira’s acquisition of wealth turned into earth
by Marutta—p. 75-

Cuarten LX VI.--Krishna’s return to
Hastinapur—p. 78.

_Caaprer LXVIL.—Subhadra’s lamenta-
tion—-p. 79. :

Cuarrer LXVII.~-Keishaa is requested
to restore Abhimanyu’s san to life—p. 80.


Cuaprer LXILX.~—Krishna restores, him
to life—p. 81. :

Cuarrer L.XX.—Great rejoicing—-p. &2.

CHAPTER LXXI.—=The return of the Pan-
davas—p. 82.

Cuarrer LXXH.—Yudhishthira’s desire
for Horse-Sacrifice—p. 83.

Caarter LXXII1.-=The horse is let loose
and Yudhishthira is initiated—p. 85.


Cuarter LXXIV.—The fight between
Arjuna and Trigartas—p. 86,


CuarTeR LXXV,—The fight between
Arjuna and Bhagadatta—p. 87.

Cuarrer LXXVI.—The defeat of Bla-
gadatta——p. 88.

CuapTteR LXXVII.—The battle between
Atjuna and the remaining Saindhavas

CuarTeR LXXVIIL.—The speech of
Dusshala—p. go. 2s

CuapTer LXXUX.—The arrival of Arjuna
at Manipur. Hearing of the death of her
husband and son, Chitcangada goes to the
field—p. g2.

Cuarrer LXXX.—Ulipi, the daughter
of Naga king, also, goes there. She revives
Arjuna—p. 93-

CHaprerR LX XXI1.-She gives an account
of the whole thing—p, 95.

CHapter LXXXIL.—The return of the
sacrificial horse homewards-—=p. 97.

Cuaprer LXXXHI.—The return of the
sacrificial horse to D.warka—-p. 98.

Cuaprer LXXXIV.—The battle between


| Arjuna and Gandhara king—p. 9%


Cuarren LXXXV.—The beginning af


| the ttorse-Sacrifice of Arjuna—-p. 100,


CuartER LXXXVI.—tThe arrival of a
messenger from Arjuna—p. fot.


Cuarrer LXXXVIt.—-Yudhishthira goes


F out to receive Arjuna—-p. 102.


Cuarrer LXXXVILL—PFhe arrival of


| Babruvahana, Chitcangada and Ulupi-—


Pp. 103.

CuarTeER LXXXIX.—The ceremony
begins—p. 105.

Crarter XC.—A_ description. of the-
sacrifice—p. 106.

Cuarter XCI.—The ordinance about
the sacrifice—p. Luk. -

Cuarrer XCIi.—The highest end of al


| sactifices—p. 113.


THE MAHABHARATA
(IN ENGLIsB), |


ASHWAMEDHA PARva.,


Se ne


CHAPTER I.


Having saluted Narayana and Nava the
best of male beings as also the Goddess of
Learning, let us cry success.


Vaishampayana said :—

t—2. After the king Dhritarashtra had
offeredMlibations of water, the mighty-armed
Vudhishthira, with his senses bewildered,
keeping the former in his front, ascended
the banks (of the river), his eyes filled with
tears; and dropt down on the bank of the
Ganga like an elephant pierced by the
hunter.


3. Then, asked by Krishna, Bhima took
him up siuking. ‘This must not be so, said
Krishna, the grinder of hostile armies,


4. The Pandavas, O- king, beheld
Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma troubled
and lying on the ground, and also sighing
again and again.


5. And seeing the king despondent and
feeble, the Pandavas, over laden with grief,
sat down, surrounding bim.


6. And gifted with high intelligence,
and wise vision, king Dhritarashtra greatly
afflicted with grief for his sons, addressed
the king, saying,—=' Rise up, O foremost of
. Kurus.


7. Do you now satisfy your duties, O
Kunti’s son, you have conquered this
Earth like the Kshatriyas. ;

8 Do you now, O king enjoy her with
your brothers ‘and friends. O foremost of
the pious, 1 do not see why you- should
giieve. O king, having lost a century of
sons like wealth got ina dream, it is
Gandhari and 1, who should mourn,


. Not having listerted weighty words
of the great Vidura, who sought our well-
being, I, of perverse senses, (now) repent.


10. The vistucus Vidura, gifted with


divine insight, “had told me,—your family
will be extinct for the sins of Duryodhana.


ti—13. O king, if you wish for the well
being of your family, act up to my advice.
Renounce this wicked. king, Suyodhana,
and let not either Karna or Shakuni by
any means see him. Put down their gam-
bling too, and anoint the pious king Yudhi-
shthica. That one of controlled senses
will righteously govern the Barth.


14—415. If yeu would not have king Yue.
dhishthira, son of Kunti; then, O monarch,
do you, celebrating a sacrifice, yourself take
charge of the kingdom, ‘and regarding all
eceatures impartially, O king, do a let

ty


your kinsmen, O you advancer you
kindred, subsist on your bounty,
16. When, O Kunti’s son, the fare


sighted Vidura said this, foolishly I follows
ed the wicked Duryodhana. a
. 19. Having paid no heed to the sweet
words of that sedate one, I have obtained
this powerful grief as a consequence, and
have been plunged in an ocean of misery.
18. See your old father and mother, O
king, era bee in misery. But, O master
of men, I find no reason for your sorrow.


ateicaenigeclly
CHAPTER II.


( ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.)=
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

1. Thus accosted by the inteHigent king .
Dhritarashtra, Yudhishthira, gifted with
underststanding, became calm. And then
Keshava (Krishna) said to tim.

2. If'a person indulges excessively jr
sorrow for bis departed manes he grieves
them.


2 MAHABHARATA,


3. De you (now) celebrate many a sacri-
fice with suitable presents to the priests ;
and do you please the celestials with Soma
juice and the manes of your {crefathers,
with their. due food and drink.


4. Do you also please your guests with
meat and drink and the poor with gifts
after their hearts. A person of your high
intelligence should not act thus.


5. You know what ought to be known,
you have performed what ought to be done,
and you have heard. the duties of the
Kshatriyas, recited by Bhishma, the son
of Bhagirathi, by Kcishna Dwaipayana,
Narada and Vidura, :


6. Therefore you should not act like a
stupid; but following the course of your
forefathers, sustain the bucther (of the
.Empire). ‘ :

97. It is ‘proper that a Kshatriya should
attain the celestial region for certaia by his
(own) renown. Of heroes, those who eame
to be killed never shall have to turty away.


8 Renounce your grief, O powerful
king. Indeed, what has taken place ws
destined to happen so. You can in no
way see thyse that have been killed in this
war. es oS

9. Having said this’ to Vudhishthira,
prince of the pious, the high-spirited
Govinda - stopped; and  Yudhisbthira
answered him thus.


io, ‘O Govinda, I know full well your
fondness for me. You have ever favoured
me with your love and friendship.


tt. And, O holder of the mace and the
discus, O scion of Yudu’s raee, O . glorious
one, if (now) do you gladly permit me to re-
tire Into the woods, then you would do what
is greatly desired by me.

‘iz, After having killed my grandfather,
and that foremost of men, Karna, who
never fled from the field of battle, F ind no
peace. ;


13. Do you, O Janarddana, so ordain
that I may be freed from this heinous sin
and that my mind may be purified,

13. .As Pritha’s son was speaking thus,
the bighly energetic Vyasa, knowing the
duties of life, soothing hiny, spoke these ex-
cellent words, —~ :

15. My child, your neind . is not yet
calmed; and: therefore you aré again
stupefied by childish feelings. And where-
fore, O child, do we over and over again
threw our words to the winds ?. =


16; .You know the duties .of the Ksha«
triyas, wha jive by warfare. A king who
has done his duty, should not allow himself
to be overwhelined by grief.


17. You have faithfully fistened to the
entire doctrine of salvation; and 1 have
repeatedly removed your misgivings origi-
nating from desire.

18. But not paying due heed to what
I have unfolded, you of perverse under-
standing have doubtless forgotten it clean.
Be itnot so. Such ignorance is not worthy
of you.

1g. O sinfess one, you are cognizant
of all kinds of expiation; amd you have
also heard of the virtues of kings, as well
as the merits of gifts.


20. Wherefore then, O Bharata, know-
ing every form of morality and versed ir
all the Agamas, are you overwhelined (withy
gtiet) as if from ignorance.


CHAPTER If.


t{ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.Yy~
Continued,


Vyasa said:—

1. O Yudhishthira, your wisdom,
conceive, is not sufficient. None does 2
work by his own power.,


2. Ht is God who engages him in deeds,


good or bad, O bestower of honor. What
is the cause then for repentance ?

You consider yourself as having
perpetrated impious deeds. Da you,


therefore, O Bharata, listen to the way in
which sins, may be removed. i


4 O Vudhishthira, those who commit
sins, can always free themselves from then>
through penance, sacrifice and gifts.


§ O king, O foremost of men, sinfuk
people are purified by sacrifice, austet ities
and charity.


6. The. great celestiats and Asuras
¢efebrate sacrifices for acquiring religious
merit ; and therefore sacrifices are of preat
importance.


% {tis througl+ sacrifices that the great
celestials had grown.so wondrously pawer-
ful; and having celebrated rites. did they
defeat the Danavas.


8. Tio you, O Yudhishthira, prepare
for the Rajasuya, and the Horse-Sacrifiee,
as well as, O Bharata, for the Sarvamedha
and the Naramedha.


g-—te. Awd as Dasharatha’s son, Ramar
or as Dushmanta’s and Shakuntala’s sour


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA. 3


your ancestor, the lord of the Earth, the
exceedingly powerful king Bharata, had
done, do you according tothe ordinance
celebrgtethe Horse-Sacrifice with presents.


ar. .Vudhishthira replied :—Undoubted-
ty, the Horse-Sacrifice purifies princes. But
§ have a purpose of which you should
hear,

12, Having caused tis ‘huge slaughter
f kindred, 1 cannot, G best ofgthe twice-
born ones, dispense gifts even on a smaft
scale, I have no riches to give.


13. Nor can I for riches solicit these
young sons of kings, living wretchedly with
their wounds yet green, and undergoing
suffering.


14. How, QO foremost of “twice-born
‘ones, having myself destroyed the Earth,
can I, everwhelmed with sorrow, Jevy dues
for celebrating a sacrifice?


15. Through Duryodhana’s folly, O best
of ascetics, the kings of the Earth have met
with destruction, and we with ignominy.


* 16. “Duryodhana hath wasted the Earth
for money ; and the treasury of that wicked
son of Dhritarashtra is empty.


17. (In this sacrifice), the Earth is the
sacrificial gift; this is the rule that is pres-
cribed in the first instance. The Jearned
observe the usual reversal of this rule though
sanctioned.


18. Nor, O ascetic, do I like to have a
substitute. In this matter, Q reverend sir,
you should favor me with your advice.


1g. Thus addressed by Pritha's son,
Krishna-D waipayana, thinking foc a while,
spoke to the righteous king. his treasury,
{now) exhausted, shall be full. Q@ son
of Pritha, in the mountaia Himavan
(Himalaya) there is gold which had been
left behind by Bratimanas at the sacrifice of
the great Marutta.


22. Yudhishthira asked: How in that
sacrificed celebrated by Marutta, was so
much gold collected 2? And, O foremost of
speakers, when did he reign? -


Vyasa said :—

23. If, O Pritha’s son, you are anxious
to hear, about that king of the Karandhama
dine, then listen to meas I tell you when
that highly powerful king having immense
siches reigned,


CHAPTER IV.
( ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA,)—


Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Qrighteous one, I wish to hear the
history of that royal sage Marutta. Do you
GO Dwaipayana, describe this to me, O sin-
Jess ene, '


Vyasa said :— :

2. O child, in the golden age Manu was
ford wielding the sceptre. His son was.
known under the name of Prasandhi.


3. Prasandhi had ason named Kshupa-
Kshbepa’s son was. king [kshwaku.


4. He,O king, had a hundred sons pos-
sessed of pre-eminent piety. And al? of
them were made monarchs by king Iksh-
waku. ,


5. The eldest of them, Vinsha, became
an ideal bowman. Vinsta’s son, OQ Bha-
tata, was the auspicious Vivinsha. !


6. Vivinsha, O king, had fifteen sons;
alt of them powerful archers, respecting
Brahmanas and speaking the truth, gentle
and ever-speaking fair. ‘The eldest brochec
Khaninetca, oppressed all his brothers.


8. And having conquered the entire
kingdom shorn of all troubles, Kianinetra,
could not retain his supremacy; nor were
the people satisfied with him. .


9g. And dethroning him, they, O fore-
most of kings invested his sen Suvarcha
with the rights of -sovereiynty, and ex-
perienced joy. ,

ro—11. Seeing the reverses of his father
and his expulsion from the empire he was
ever busy with encompassing the well-being
of the people, being devoted to Brahman,
speaking the truth, practising purity and
controlling his senses and thoughts. And
the subjects were well-pleased, with that
great one constant in virtue. ;


12. But he being constantly engaged in
virtuous works, his treasures and, vehicles
became greatly reduced. And on his
treasury having become exhausted, the
feudatory princes gathered round him and
began to give him trouble.


13. Being thus oppressed by many ene-
mies while his treasury, horses and vehicles
were imapoverisined, the king suffered great
tribulation along with his retainers and the
citizens,


14. Although his power decreased great-
fy, yet the enemies could not kiil the king,
for his power, O Yuihishthira, was esta-
blished in virtue,


£ * MAHABHARATA.


ty) =6Aad when he had reached the worst
point of misery along with the citizens, he
blew his hand, and from that there appear-
ed a supply of forces.


16, And then he defeated all the kings
living along the borders of his dominions.
And from this. incident, O king, he hath
been celebrated as Karandhanra.


17. His son, Karandhama was born at
the commencement of the Treta age, equal-
ling Indea himself,igifted with grace, and
invincible even by the immortals.

+ 48,"
under his fconttgt; aad alike by virtue of
his riches and of prowess, he became their
emperor,

19. In short, the righteous king Avikshit
became like Indra himself in heroism ; and
he was | dee to sacrifices, delighted in
virtue and held his senses under control.


ao. And in energy he resembled the sun
and in patience, Eacth herself ; in inteli-
gence, he was like Vrihaspati, and in
calmness the mountain Himavan himself,

at. And that king pleased the hearts of
his subjects by act, thought, speech, self-
control, and forbearance.


- a2. The lords who celebrated hundreds
of Horse-Sacrifices ; and whom the.powerful


and learned Angira himself served as
priest.
23. His son gxcelled his father in the


ossession of good qualities; named

arutta, that lord of kings was righteous
and of great fame; having the power of
ten thousand elephants, and lize unto
Vishnu’s second self,


24~—25. -Desirous of celebrating a sacri-
fice, that virtuous king, coming te Mount
Meru on the northern side of Himavat,
made thousands of shining golden vessels
tobe forged. There on a huge golden bill
he performed the cites.


26. And goldsmiths made numberless
basins and vessels and pans and seats. =


27. And the sacrificial ground was near
this place. And that righteous king
Marutta, with othee princes, celebrated a
sacrifice there. °


CHAPTER V.
(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.}a=
Continued.


. Yudhishthira said :—_

1. © best of speakers, how that king
waxed so powerful? And how, O twice-
born one, did he get so much gold ? -


At that time ali the kings were


2. And where now, O reverend sire, is
all his wealth? And, O ascetic, how can
we secure the same?


Vyasa thereupon said :— be

g—5. As the numerous children’ of the
Prajapati Daksha, the Asuras, and the
Celestiais challenged each other, so in the
same way Angira’s sons, the highly energe-
tic Vrihaspati aud the ascetic, Samvartta,
of equal vows, challenged each other, O
king. Vecihaspati began to worry Samvartta
again and again.

6. And always troubled by his elder
brother, he, O Bharata, renouncing his
riches, went to the forest, with nothing to
caver his body except the open sky.


7—9. (At that time), having defeated
and destroyed the Asuras, and gained the
sovereignty of the celestial regions, Vasava
had appointed as his priest Angira’s eldest
son, that best of Brahmanas, Vrihaspati.
Formerly Angira was the family-priest of
king Karandhama ; peerless among men in
might, power and character ; powerful like
Shatakratu. righteous-souled and of rigid
vows.


to—1t. Oking, he had vehicles, and
warriors, and many adherents, and _beauti-
ful and rich bédsteads, produced through
meditation by the breath of his mouth.
And by his native virtues, the king had
brought all the princes under his control.


12--13. And having lived as long as he
desired, he ascended the celestial region in
his bodily form. And his son named Avik-
shit—-conqueror of enemies—righteous like
Yayati, brought all the Earth under his*
sway. And both in merit and power the
king resembled. his father.


14. He had a son named Marutta,
gifted with energy, and resembling Vasava
himself, ‘This earth clad in oceans felt here
self attracted towards him.


15. He always used to defy the king of
the celestials ; and, O son of Pandu, Vasava
also defied M srutta.

16. And- Marutta—master of Earth—
was pure and perfect. And despite his
striving, Shakra could not prevail over
him. :


17. And unable to control him, he riding
on the horse, along with the celestials
summoning Vrihaspati, spoke to him thus.


1819. O Vrihaspati, if we wish to do
what is agreeable to me, do not perform
pristely offices for Marutta on behalf of the
celestials or the departed Manes. I have,
O Vcihaspati, obtained the sovereignty of
the three worlds, while Marutta is merely
the king of the Earth.


ASHWaA™MAVitg ATVA 5


20, How, O Brahmana, having acted as
priest to the immortal king of the celestials,
will you unhesitatingly act as a priest to
Marutta subject to death ? :


2%. May you fare well. Either take up
my side or that of the king, Marutta, or
forsaking Marutta, gladly come ovec to
me.


22. Thus addressed by the king of the
Vrihaspati, thinking for a moment, replied
to the king of the celestials.


23. You are the Lord of creatures, and
in you are the worlds established. And you
have killed Namuchi Vishwarupa and
Vala.


24. You, O hero, alone, bring about the
highest prosperity of the celestials, and O
slayer of Vala, you sustain the earth as well
as the celestial region.


25. How, O foremost of the celestials,
having officiated as your priest, shall 1, O
destroyer of Paka, serve a mortal prince
and listen to what I say.


26. Even if the god of fire cease to
cause heat and warmth, or the earth
change its nature, or the sun cease to give
light, [ shall never deviate from the truth.


Vaish ampayana said :-— ;

27- On hearing these words of Vrilias-
pati, Indra became freed from his envious
feelings, and then lauding him he repaired
to his own palace.


CHAPTER VIL.


(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA)—
Continued, ;


Vyasa said:
. 4. Regarding it is cited the ancient
legend of Vrihaspati and the wise Marutta |


2. On hearing of the agreement made
by Angirca’s son Vrihaspati with the king


of the celestials, king Marutta made the.


necessary preparations for a great sactifice.


3. (Marutta) having canceived the idea
of a sacrifice in his mind the eloquent
grandson of Karandhama went to Vrihas-
pati and spoke to him thus.


4—5- QO worshipful ascetic, I have
intended to celebrate the sacrifice which
you did propose to me once on a previous
occasion, according to your instcuctions,
and | now wish to appoint you, as officia-
ting priest at this sacrifice, the materials
whereof 1 have collected, O excelent one,
you are our family-priest, therefore do you


take those sacrifital things and eelebrate
the sacrifice yourself.


Vrihaspati said :-—

6. O king, I do not wish to perform
our sacrifice, 1 have bean appointed as
Priest by the King the Celestials and I have _

promised to him to act as such.


Marutta said :—


z7- You are our heriditary family-priest,
and therefore | cherish great regard for
you, and [ have acquired the right of being
helped at sacrifices by you, and therefore
it is proper that you should officiate as
priest at my sacrifice.


Vrihaspati said :—

8. Having, QO Marutta, acted as
priest to the celestials, how can I act as
such to mortal men, and whether you do
leave this place or stay here, I tell you
[ have ceased to act as priest to any but
the celestials,


9. O you of mighty arms, I am unable
te act as your priest now. And according,
to your own desire, you can appoint any
one as your priest who will perform your,
sacrifice,


Vyasa, said :— eee:
to. Thus told, king _Macutta became
confounded with shame, and while retura-
ing home with hjs mind stricken with
anxiety, he met Narada on his way.


11-12. And on seeing the divine Rishi
‘Narada, that king stood before him with
due salutation, and with his hands clasped *
together, and then Narada addressing him
thus said,—O royal sage, you appear
to be not well-pleased in your mind, is all
well with you, where have you been, O sin-
less one, and why is this your mental dis-
quietude ?


13. And, O king, if there be no objee-
tion to your telling it to me, do you, © best
of kings, disclose to me, so that, O prince,
I may remove the disquietude of your mind
with all my efforts. -


Vaishampayana continued :— .

14, Thus addressed by the great Rishi
Narada, king Maruta informed him of the
refusal he had received from his religious
preceptor.


Marutta said :—

15. Trying to find out a priest to offici-
ate at my sacrifice, I went to that priest of
the Immortals, Vrihaspati, the .son of
Angiras, but he did not choose to accept
my offer,


6 MAHABHARATA.


_. 1& Having met with this refusal from
him, I have no-desire to live any longer
now, for by his abandoning me thus, I have,
O Narada, become sullied with sin.


' Vyasa said :—

i7. Thus told by that king, Narada,
O powerful prince, made this reply to him
with words which seemed to cevive that
son of Avikshit.


Narada said :— ;

18—19 ‘The virtuous son of Angiras,
Samvarta by uame, is travelling over all the
earth in a nude state to the amazement
all creatures ; do you, O prince, go to him,
if Veihaspati does not wish to officiate at
your sacrifice, the powerful Samvacta, if
pleased with you, will perform your
sacrifice.


Marutta said:


2o—2i. 1 feel as if filled with new life,
by these your words, O Narada, but, O the
best of speakers, do you tell me where I
can find Samvarta, and how I can remain
by his side, and how I am to act so that he
may net leave me, for 1 do not wish to Hve
if I meet with a refusal from him also,


Narada said :-—

23. Desirous of seeing Maheshwara,
O prince, he roves about at his pleasure in
the city of Varanasi dressed as a maniac.


23—24. And having reached the gate of
the city, you must place a dead bedy some-
where near it, and the man who shall turn
away on ‘seding the dead body, do you, O
prince, know that man to be Samvarta,
and knowing him, do you follow his foot-
steps wherever that powerful man wishes to
go, and finding him (at length) in a_ lonely
place you must seek his protection with your
hands clasped together.


25. And if he acquire of you as to the
Person who has given you the information


abeut his own self, do you tell him
that Narada has informed you about
Sanv irta,


« 25. Andif he should ask you to follow
me, you must tell him unhesitatingly that
have entered into the fire.


Vyasa said :—

26. Having signified his consent to the
Proposal of Narada, that royal sage after
duly advring hie and with his permission,
went to the city of Varanasi, and having
reached taere, that famous prince did as he
bad been asked, and remembering the
,words of Narada, he placed a dead body
at the gate of the city.


‘29. And by coincidence, that Brahmana
also entered the gate of the city at the same
time. Then on seeing the dead body, he
suddenly turned away.


go. And on seeing him turn back, that
tince, the son of Avikshit followed his
ootsteps with his hands joined together,
and with a view to receive instruction from
him,


3t. And then finding him in a fonely
place, Samvarta covered the king with mud
and ashes and plilegm and spittle.


32. And though thus worried and op-
pressed by Samvarta, the king followed
that sage with his hands joined together in
prayer and endeavouring to please him.


33. At length overcome with fatigue,
and reaching the cool shade of a fig tree
with many branches, Samvarta desisted
from his course and sat down to rest.


CHAPTER VII.


(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Samvarta said —


1. How have you come to know me, and
who has referred you to me, do you tell this
to me truly, if you desire me to do what is
good to you. t


2. And if you speak truly, you wi
gain all the objects of your heart, and should
you tell a lie, your head shall be cut intoa
hundred pieces.


Marutta said :—

3. I have been told by Narada, wander-
ing on his way, that you are the son of our
family-priest, and this. (information) has
bent my mind (towards you), with great sa-
tisfaction,


Samvarta said :— :

4. Youhave told this to me truly, he
(Narada) knows me to be a performer of
sacrifices, now tell me where is Narada
living at. present.


Marutta said —

_ 5. That king of celestial saints (Narada)
having given me this information about you,
aud commended me to your care, has enter=
ed into the fire. .


Vyasa said :—
6. Hearing these words of the king
Marutta, Samvarta was highly pleased, and


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA. y |


me said { t tco am perfectly able to do all
hat. eee °


7—~—9. Then, O prince, that Brahmana,
taving like a maniac, and continually scald-
tng Marutta with rude wards, again accos-
ted him thus, I am afflicted with a brain
disorder, and, I always act according to the
fretfat caprices of my own mind, why are
you then bent upon having this sacrifice
performed by a priest of such a peculiar
hature; my brother is able to officiate at
sacrifices, and .he has gone over to Vasava
(Indra), and is engaged in celebrating his
sacrifices, do you therefore have your sacri-
fice performed by him,


to-—-1r. My elder brother has taken
away by force from me all my household
articles and mystical gods, and sacrificing
clients, and has now left to me only this
physical body of mine, and, O san of Avik-
shit, as he deserves all respect from me,
I cannot by any means officiate at you sacri-
fice, unless he permits me.


12, You must therefore go to Vrihaspati
first, and taking his permission you can
return to me, if you have any desire to cele-
brate a sacrifice, and then only shall I
officiate at your sacrifice,


Marutta said :—


13. Do you listen to me, O Samvarta, I
did goto Vrihaspati ficst, but wishing the
patronage of Vasava, he did sot wish to
ha¥e me as his gacrificer.


14—15. He said—Having secured the
Priest-hood of the Immortals, 1 do not wish
to act for the mortats, and, | bave been
forbidden by Shakra (Indea) to officiate at
Marutta’s sacrifice, as he told me_ that
Marutta having become king, was always
filled with a desire to rival him. And to
this your brother agreed by saying to the
destroyer of Vala (Indra), Be it so.


16, Know, O best of ascetics, that as he
had succeeded in getting the protection of
the King of the Celestials, | went to him
with gratified heart, but he did not agree
to act as my priest.


17. And thus repulsed, I now wish to
spend all I possess, to have this sacrifice
performed by you, and to outstrip Vasava
by the merit of your good offices.


18. As I have been repulsed by Vrihas-
pati for no fault of mine, | have now no
desire, U Brahmana, to go to him to seek
his help in this sacrifice,


Samvarta said :—


1g—-20. I can certainly, O- king, do all
that you wish, if only you agree to do all
that I shall ask you to do, but 1 apprehend


*


that Vrihaspati and Par: ndara (Indra}
when they will learn that | am engaged iv
celebrating your sacrifice, will be filled
with anger, and do all they can to injure
you. :


= a1. Therefore, do you assure me of your
steadfastness, so as to ensure my cdolness
and constancy, as otherwise, if f am filled
with anger against -you, | shall reduce
(destroy) you and your kindred to asties..


Marutta said :—


27-23. If ever I forsake you, may I
never attain the blessed regions as long as
the mountains shall exist, and the thousands
rayed sun continue to pour heat; if [ fore
sake you, may I never gain true wisdom,
and remain for ever addicted to worldly
(material) works.


Samvarta said :—~


24—25. Listen, O son of Ayikshit, ex<
cellent as is your inclination to perform this
act, so too, re king, have fin my mind the
ability to perform the sacrifice, [ tell theey
O king, that your good things will become
imperishable, and that you shall lord it over
Shakra and the Celestials with Gane
dharvas.


26. For myself, I have no wish to hoard


| tiches or sacrificial presents; { shall only


do what is disagreeable to both Indra and
my brother,


27. ¥ shall certainly make you attain
equality with Shakra, and I tell: you
truly that I shall do what is agreeable
‘to you. ; :


CHAPTER VIII.


(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.)—~
: Continued.


Samvarta said :—


1. There is a peak named Munjaban_ on
the summits of the Himalaya mountains,
where the worshipful husband of Uma
(Mahadeva) is constantly practising austere
penances,


2—3. There the powerful and worshipfi
god of great power accompanied by his wife
Uma, and armed with his trident, and sure
rounded -by wild goblins of many sorts,
following his random wish er fancy, cons-
tantly lives in the shade of huge forest trees,
ec in the caves, ot on the rugged peaks of
the great mountain, ra


8 _ KIRWABHARATA.


: 2
4—6. And there the Rudtas, the Sad-
dhyas, the Vishwedevas, the Vasus; Yama,
Varuna, and Kavera with all his followers,
- and the spirits and globins, and the two
Ashwins, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, the
Yakshas, as also the celestial sages, the
Sun Gods,-as well as the gods presiding
over the winds, and evil spirits of all sorts,
adore the great lord of Uma, gifted with
diverse characteristics. é


4. And there, O king, the adorable god,
Sports with the wild and playful followers of
Kuvera, having weird and ghastly appea-
fances,


- 8. Shining witk its own splendour, that
mountain looks resplendent as the morning
sun,


g. And no creature with his natural: eyes
made of flesh, can ever see its shape or
figure, and neither heat nor cold prevails
there, nor does the sun shine or the winds
blow. e


-1o. And, O king, neither does senility,
nor hunger, nor thirst, nor death nor fear
afflict any one there,


‘12, And, O foremost of conquerors, there

exist mines of gold, resplendent as the solar
says on all sides of that mountain, And, O
king, desirous of doing good to him, the at-
tendants of Kuvera protect these mines of
gold from intruders, with uplifted arms.


, 18--31. Come here, and appease that
adorable god whois known by the name of
Sarva, Bedha, Rudra, Shitikantha, Sucupa,
Suvarcha, Kapardi, Karala, Haryyaksha,
Varada, ‘Yryaksha, Pushnodantabhid,
Vamana,. Shiva, Yamya, Avyaktarupa,
Sadvritta, Shankara, Kshemya, Harihesha,


Sthanu, Purusha, Harinetra, Munda,
Krista, Uttarana, Bhaskaca,  Sutirtha,
Devadeva, _Ranha, Ushnishi, Suvaktra,


Sahascaksha, Midhvan, Girisha, Prashanta,
Yata, Chiravasa, Vilwadanda, Siddha,
Sarvadandadhara, Mriga, Vyadha, Mahan,
Dhbanesha, Bhava, Vara, Somavaktra,
Siddhamantra, “Chakshu,  Hiranyavahu,
Ugra, Dikpati, Lelinana,, Goshtha, Shid-
dhamantra, Vrishnu, Pashupati, Bhutapati,
Veisha; Matribhakta, Senani, Madhyama,
Sruvahasta, Yati, Dhanwi, Bhargava, Aja,
Krishnanetra, Virapaksha, Tikshnadansh-
tra, Tikshna, Vaishwanaramukha, Maha-
dyuti, Ananga, Sarva, Dikpati, Bilohita,
Dipta, Diptaksha, Mahauja, Vasuretas,
Suvapu, Prithu, Krittivasa, Kapalmali,
Suvarnamukuta, Mahedeva, Krishna, Try-
amvaka, Anagha, Krodhana,’ Nrishansa,
Mridu, Vahusali, Dandi, Taptatapa, Akru-
rakarma, Sahasrashira, Sahasra-Charana,
SwadhaswaR-upa, Vahu-Rupa, Danshtri,
Pinaki, Maha-Deva, Maha- Yogi, Avyaya,


Trishulahasta, Varada, Tryamvaka, Bhu-
vaneshwara, Tripuraghna, Trinayana, [rie
lokesha, Mahanja, Sarvabhuta-Prabhava,
Sacvabhuta- Dharana, Dharanidhara,Ishana
Shankara, Sarva, Shiva, Vishweshwara,
Bhava, Umapati, Pashupati, Vishwarupa,
Mahesawara, Virupaksha, Dashabhuja,
Vrishavadhwaja, Ugra, Sthanu, Shiva,
Raudra, Sharva, Girisha, Ishwara, Siti-
kantha, Aja, Shuéra, Prithu, Prithuhara,
Vara, Vishwarupa, Virupaksha, Vahurupa,
Umapati, Anangangahara, Hara, Shae
ranya, Mahadeva, Chaturmukha.


‘32. There bowing to that deity, you must
seek his protection. And thus, O prince,
making your submission to that great Ma-
hadeva of great energy, you will acquire
that gold.


33. And the men who go there thus,
succeed in getting the gold. Thus instruc.
ted, Marutta, the son of Karandhama, did
as he was advised.


34. He made superhuman arrangements
for the celebration of his sacrifice. And
qieens made golden vessels for that sacri+

ice,


38—36. And hearing of the prosperity
of Marutta, eclipsing that of the gods, Vri-
haspati, too, became greatly sorry at heart,
and, distressed at the thought that his rival
Samvarta should become prosperous, be-
came sick at heart, and the glow of his
complexion left him, and his body became
emacited. . *

37. And when the king of the gods came
to know that Vrihaspati was .much aggrie-
ved, he went to him attended by the Ime
mortals and spoke to him thus.


N


CHAPTER IX.


(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.,)-
Continued.


Indra said :—

1. Do you, O Vrihaspati, sleepin peace,
and do you like your servants, do you seek
the welfare of the celestials, and do the
celestials, O Brahmana, protect you,


Vrihaspati said :—

2. 1 dosleep in peace, in my bed, O
Lord of the celestials, and my servants are
to my liking, and I always seek the welle
being of the celestials, and they cherish me
weil, . :


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA. : 6


Tudra said :—

Whence then is this pain, mental or
physical, and why are you pale and changed
in appearance at present, tell me, O Brah-
mana, who those people are, who have
caused you pain, so that may slay them
all.


Vrihaspati said :—

4. O Indra, I have heard that Marutta
will celebrate a great sacrifice at which rich
presents will be given by him (to Brahma-
nas) and that at his sacrifice Samvarta will
act as the officiatiny priest, and, therefore,
do I wish that he may not officiate as priest
at that sacrifice.


Tiidra said :—

5. You, O Brahmana, has attained all
the objects of your desire when you have
become the excellent priest of the celestials,
versed in al] the sacred’: hymns, and have
got over the influence of death and de-
crepitude, what can Samvarta do to you
now?


Vrihaspati said :—~ .

6. Prosperity of a rival is always painful,
and do you, therefore, with your atten-
dant gods persecute the Asuras with theie
kith and kin, And Slay the most prosperous

" among them ; hence, O Lord of the gods,
am | changed in appearance at the thought
that my rival is prospering, therefore, O
Indra, do you, by all means, restrain Sam-
varta and king Marutta,.


Indra turning to Agni said:—

8. Do you, O Jataveda, following my
direction, go to king Marutta to present
Vrihaspati to him and say to him that this
Veibaspati will officiate at his sacrifice and
make him immortal.


Agni said:—

g. Ishall presently, O worshipful one,
go there, as your messenger, to present
Vrihaspati to king Marutta; and to make
Indra’s words true, and to shew respect to
Vrihaspati, Agni departed.


Vyasa said—

to. Then the great Fire-God went on his
errand, laying waste all the forests and
trees, like the powerful wind, roaring and
revolving at random at the end of the
winter season, .


Marutta said :—

11. See! I find the Fire-God come in
his own embodiment, this day, therefore,
do you, O Muni, offer him a seat and water,
and a cow and water for washing the feet,


a


e


Agni said =~
12, I accept your offerings of water,
seat, and water for washing the feet, O
sinless ane, do you know me as the mes
senger of Indra, come to you as ordered


Marutta said :—

13. O Fire-God, is the glorious King
of the Celestials happy, and is he pleased
with us, and are the other celestials toyal
tohim? Do youenlighten me duly on ail
these matters.


Agni said :—

14. O king, Shakra is perfectly happy,
he is pleased with you, and wishes to make
you free from decrepitude, and all the
other gods are loyal to him, do you, O
king, listen to the message of the King of
the Celestials, :


15. And the object for which he has
sent me to you is to present Vrihaspati to
Marutta; O prince, let this priest perform
your sacrifice, and make you who are only
a mortal, attain immortality,


Marutta gaid:—


16. This twice-born Brahmana Sam-
varta will perform your sacrifice, and I
pray to Vrihaspati, that he having acted
as priest to Mahendra it does not appear
well for him now to act as priest to mortal
men, ,


Agni said :—

17. If this Vrihaspati officiate as your
priest, then you will by the blessings of the
King of the Celestiais attain the highest
place in the celestial mansjon and acquiring:
fame you will, forsooth, conquer the heavenly
region.


18. And, O king, if Vrihaspati act as
your priest you will be able to conquer .
all the regions inhabited by men, and the
heavenly regions and all the highest re-
gions created by Prajapatt and even the
entire kingdom of the celestials, ©


Samvarta said :—


19. You must never come again thus
to present Vrihaspati to Marutta; for know,
O Pavaka, (Agni), if you do, 1 losing my
temper, will burn you with my fierce evil
eyes,


Vyasa said :--

20. ‘Then fearing destruction by fire,
and trembling Jike the leaves of the
Ashwattha tree (Ficus religiosa), Agni. re-
turned to the gods, and thé great Shakra


i@


seeing that carrier of oblations (Agni) in the
company of Vrishaspati said as follows


Indra said:—

2t. You, O Jataveda (Agni), went to
present Vrihaspati to Marutta according to
my direction, now what did that sacrificing
king say to you, and did he accept wy
cominand ?


Agni said :—

22. Your message was not acceptable
by Marutta and when urged by me, he
clasping the hands of Vribaspati, said again
and again, that Samvarta would act as his
priest. ’


23. And he also observed that he did
not wish to attain the woldly and the
heavenly regions, and all the highest re-
gions of Prajapati, aud that if be were so
winded, he would accept the terms of
Indra.


Indra said :-—


24. Do you retuen to that king and
meeting him, tell him these words of mine,
full of meaning and if he obey them not,
1 shall strike him with my thunderbolt.


Agni said :—

25—:6. Let this king of the Gandharvas»
go there as your messenger, O Vasava, for
lam afraid to go there myself. Know, O
Shakia, that highly encaged Samvarta,
aduicted to ascetic practices, told me these
words in anger. ‘1 shall burn you with my
fierce evil eyes if you on any account come
again here to present Vrihaspati to king
Macutta.’


Shakra said :—


27. O Jataveda, it is you who burns
all other things aud there is none else who
‘can reduce you, to ashes; al the world
is afraid to came in contact with you, O
cartier of oblations, these words of yours
are worthy of no credence,


Agni said:—

28. You, O Shakra, have encompassed
the dominion of the heaven and the earth
and the sky by the strengtn of your own
arms, but even thus how could Vritra (ot
old) wrest from you the sovereignty of tue
celestial regions ?


Indra said :-—


29. I can reduce my enemies to sub-
Misstun and can even reduce the size of a
ouutain to an atom, if I will it. But, O
Vaini, as Ido not accept the libation of
Soma drink if offered by an enemy, and


MAHABHARATA.


as I- do not strike the weak with my
thunderbolt (Viitra got the better of me for
atime.} But who amonz mortals can live
ny peace by creating enmity with me.


30. Ihave banished the Kalakeyas to
the earth, and removed the Danavas trom
the celestial region, and have terminated
the existence of Prahlada in heaven, can
there be any man who can leave in peace by
exciting my enmity,


Agni Said :—

3t--32. Do you, O Mahendra, re-
member that formerly when the sage Chya-
vana officiated at the sacrifice of Sharyatt
with the twin gods Ashwins, and himself
appropriated the Soma offering alone, you
were filled with anger, and when bent upon
preventing Sharyati’s sacrifice, you did vio-~
lently strike Chyavana with your thunder-
bolt, that Brahmana, O Purandara, yield
ing to anger, was able by the power of his
devotions to seize and hold fast your hand
with your thunderbolt in it.


33-—36. And in anger, he again created
a terrible looking enemy of yours, the Asura
named Mada : ssuming all shapes, on see+
ing whom you did shut your eyes with fear,
whose one huge faw was placed on earth,
and the other extended ,to the celestial
regions, and who hooked terrible with his
thousand sharp teeth extending over a hun-
dred Yojanas, and had four prominent ones
thick a set, and shining like a: pillar of
silver, awd extending over two hundred
Yojanas. And when grinding his teeth he
followed you with his terrible and uplifted
pike with the object of staying you, you on
seeing that terrible monster, presented @
(pitiful) sight to all the bystanders. ‘hen,
O destroyer of Panavas, overcome witly
fear of the monster, with your hatrds. ¢lasp-
ed in prayer, you did seek the protection. of
the great sage.


37. The power of Brahmanas, O Shakra,
is greater that that of the Kshatriyas, none
are more powerful than Brahmanas and
knowing duly, as | do, the power of Brab-
manas, I do not, O Shakra, wish to quarred
with Samvarta.


CHAPTER X.


( ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA. )—
: Continued.


Indra said,—

1, Vhe-power of Brahmanas is, indeed
great and there are none more powerful
than Brahmanas; but [ can never beac


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


patiently the insolent pride of Avikshita’s
‘sort, and so shall I grind him with my thun-
derbolt.


2. Therefore, O Dhritarashtra, do you
according to my direction go to king Ma-
tutta, attended by Samvarta, and deliver
this now to him—'do you, O prince, accept
Vsihaspati as your spiritual preceptor, as
otherwise, [ shall strike you with my dread-
ful thunderbolt”


Vyasa said :—

3. Then Dhritarashtra went to that
monarch’s court and delivered this news to
him from Vasava.


Dhritarashtra said :-—


4—5. Oking, know that I am Dhrita-
vashtra the Gandharva, come here with the
‘object of delivering to you the message of
Yndra, do you, O foremost of kings, listen
to the words which the great lord of ali the
worlds meant for you,—-that one of incom.
‘prehensible deeds (Indra) only said this
much—‘do you accept Vrihaspati as your
officiating priest for the sacrifice, or if -you
do not comply with my request. 1 shall
‘strike you with my dreadiul thunderbolt.’


Marutta said :-—


6. You, O Purandara, the Vishwadevas,
the Vasus and the Ashwins ye all know, that,
dn this world there is no escape for the results
‘of-playing false to a friend, itis a great sin
like that of Beahminicide.


7. ‘Let Vrihaspati (therefore) officiate as
priest to that Mahendra the supreme Deva
“4yod), the highest one holding the thunder-
doit, and, O prince, Samvarta will act as my
‘priest, as neither his ({ndra’s) words, nor
thine commend themselves to me.


The Gandharva said :—


8. Do you, O foremost of kings, listen to-
the terrible war-cry, of Vasava rearing in
the sky, assuredly and openly will Mahen-
dra hurl his thunderbolt at you, do you,
therefore, think of your well-being, for this
is the time to do it.


Vyasa said :—

g. Thus addressed by Dhritarashtra,
and hearing the roar of Vasava, the king
communicated this news to Samvarta firm
in devotion and the highest of all virtuous
meu.


Marutta said :—

to. Indeed this rain-cloud floating in the
air, indicates that Indra must be near at
present, therefore, O prince of Brahinanas, I
seek shelter from you, do you, QO best of


'
en re Ye ce


tr
this fear of Indra


Brahmanas remove
from my mind.


tt. The Uolder of the Thunderbolt is
coming encompassing the ten directions of
space with his dreadful aud superhuman
refuigence and my assistants at this sacri-
ficial assembly have been filled with fear.


Samvarta said :—


. 42. O foremost of kings, your fear of
Shakra will soon be removed, and I shall
‘soon remove this terrible pain by means of
my magic (incantation), be calm and have
no fear of being overpowered by Indra.


13. Yo have nothing to fear from the
‘Goud of a Hundred Sacrifices, 1 shall use my
staying charms, O king, and the weapons of
all the gods will avail them not.


14—15. Let thedightning flash in all the
directions, and the winds entering into the
clouds pour down rain m the midst of the
ferests, and the waters deluge the heavens
and the flashes of lightning that are seen
will avail not, you have nothing to fear, let
Vasava pour down the rains and plat his
terrific thunderbolt where he will, floating
among the masses of (clouds) for your des-
truction, for the god Vahni (Agni) will pro-
tect you in every way, and make you attain
all the objects of your desire.


Marutta said :—


16, This dreadful crash of the thunder-
bolt together with the rearing of the winds,
seem Sreedfal to my ears and my heart is
stricken again and again, O Brahmana, —
and my peace of mind is gone at present.


Samvarta said :—


17. O king, the fearin your mind from
this terrible thunderbolt will leave you im-
mediately. I shall remove the thunder by
the help of the winds, and setting aside all
fear from your mind, do you accept a boon
from me according to your heart’s desire,
and I shall do it for you.


Marutta said :-—


18. I wish, O Brahmana, that Ludra all
of a sudden should come bodily at this sacti-
fice, and accept the oblation offered to him,
and that all the other celestials also come -
and take their appointed shares of the offer-
ings and accept the libations of Soma offer-
ed to them.


Samvarta said :—


19. I have, by the power of my incanta-
tions, attracted Indra bodily to this sacrifice.
See, O king, Indra coming with his barses,
and adored by the other celestials hastening
to this sacrifice.


42 MAHABHARATA.


Agni said :-—~

20. Then the King of the Celestials at-
tended by the other deities and riding in
his chariot drawn by the must excellent
horses, approachad the sacrificial altar of
hat son of Avizshit and dcank the Soma
bations of that peeriess king. .

ar. And king’ Marutta with his priest
rose to receive [Indra comiag with the host
of celestials and weil-pleased in mind, he
welcomed the King of Deities with due


and foremost honors according to the
Shastras.
Samvarta said :— '

22. Welcome to you, O Indra, by your


presence here, O learned one, this sacrifice
has been made grand, O destroyer of Vala,
and Vritra, do you, again, drink this Soma
juice produced by me to-day.


Marutta said :—

23. Do you look with kindness upon me,
I bow to vou, O India, by your presence,
my Sacrifice has béen perfected, and my
life tuo blessed with good results. O
Surendra, this excellent Brahmana, the
younyer brother of Vrihaspati is eagaged
in celebrating my sacrifices,


Indra said :—.

24. I know your priest, this highly ener-
getic ascetic, the younger brother of Vrihas-
pati, at whose invitation -1 have come to
this sacrifice, | am, O king, well-pleased
with you, and my anger against you is
gone.


Samvarta said :—

25. If, O King of the Celestials, you are
pleased with us, do you yourself give all the
directions for this sacrifice, and, O Surendra,
yourself ordain the sacrificial portions (tor
the gods), so that, O god, all the world may
know that it has been done by you.


Vasava said :—

25. Thus addressed by the son of Angira,
Shakra himself gave directions to all the
celestials to erect the hall of assembly, and
a thousand well-turnished excellent rooms

looking grand as in a canvass, and quickly
to complete the staircase massive and dur-
abte, for the ascent of the Gandharvas and
Apsaras and to furnish that portion of the
saccifici:! ground reserved for the dance of
the Apsacas, like the palace of Indra in the
celestial regiun,


- 28—29. O king, thus dirertcd, the re-
mowned denizens of heaven quickly carried
out the d rections of Shakra. And then, O
king, Indra w-l-pleased and worshipped,


oa |
thus said to king Marutta,—O prince, by
associating with you at this saccfice, your
ancestors who have gone before you. as
well as the other celestials pave been
highly pleased and accepted the oblations
offered by you.


30. And now, 9 king, Tet the foremost
of twice-born cnes, cffer on the sacrificial
altar a red bull belonyviny to the Fire-God
aud a sacred and duly cunsecrated biue
bull with a variegated skin, belunging to
the Vishwedevas.


3t. Then, O king, the sacrificial cere-
tony grew in splendour, wherein the
celestias themselves collected the food, and
Shakra the King of the Celestials, possessed
of horses, and adored by the Brahmanas,
became all assistant at the sacrifice.


32. And then the great Samvarta ascen-
ding the aitar, and looking radiant as the
second embodiment of the Burning Fire,
loudly addressing the celestials with satis
faction, offered oblations of clarified butter
to the fire with incantation of the sacred
hymns,


-33. And thenthe Destroyer of Vala first
drank the Soma juice, and then the assembly
of other celestiats who drank Soma, and
then in bappiness and with the king’s per-
mission they returned home well-pleased
and delighted.


34. then that king, the destroyer of
his enemies, with a delighted heart, placed
heaps of gold on various spots, and distri-
buting the immense riches to the Brahe
manas, he looked glorious like Kuvera the
King of Riches.


- 35. And with a pleased heart, the king
filled his treasury with different kinds of
wealth, and with the permission of his
spiritual preceptor, be returned (to his
kingdom) and continued to cule the entire
kingdom extending to the limits of the sea.


36. So virtuous in this world was that
king, at whose sacrifice such an enormous
quantity of gold was collected, and now, O
prince, you must collect that gold and
adoring the gods with due rites, do you
celebrate this sacrifice.


Vaishampayana said :—

37. Phen the Pandava prince Yudhish-
thiia was delighted on hearing this speech
of the son of Satyavati (Vyasa), and desi-
rous of celebrating his sacrifice with those
tiches, he consulted again and again with
his ministers.


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


CHAPTER Xt,


( ASH\WAMEDEIKA PARVA, )—
Continued,


Vaishampayana said:—

1—3. When Vyasa of wonderful deeds
had cuouciuued his speech to the king, the
highly powertul sou of Vasudeva (Krishna)
also addressed iim. Knowing tie king,
the son of Pritha, afiicted in miad, aud
bereft of his relatives at.d kinsmen kiled in
battle, and appeating crest-fallen like the
sun darkened by eciiose, or fire smothered
by smoke, that support of the Vrishai
race (Krishna), comforting the son of
Dharma, tried to address him thus.


Vasudeva said :—


4. All crookedness of heart brings on
destruction, and all rectitude leads tu
Brahma. ‘his and this only is the aim and


object of ali true wisdom, what can meatal
distraction do (to him). =


5. Your Karma has not yet been des-
troyed nor have your enemies been sub-
jugated, for you do not yet know the
enemieés that live within your own body.


6. I shall (therefore) relate to you truly
as I have heard it; the story of thagwar of
Indra with Vritca as it happened.


7~—8. Formerly, the Earth, O king, was
encompossed by Vritra, and by this abstrac-
tion of earthly matter the seat of ail smell,
there arose bad odors on all sides, and the
Pecformer of a Hundred Sacrifices ({ndra),
~ being much incensed by this deed, hurled
his thunderbolt at Vritra.


. And being deeply wounded by the
thundecbolt of powretul Indra, Vritca euter-
ed into the (wate.:s), and by doing so, he
destroyed their property.


to. The waters being seized by Vritra,
their Jiquid property leit them, At this
Indra became wroth and again smote him
with his thunde: bolt.


tt, And he (Vritra) smitten by the
thunderbolt by the most powerful Indra
went to the luminous matter aud abstracted
its inherent property. ©


12—14, The luminous matter being over-
whelmed by Vritra and its property, color
and form being thereby lost, the angry
Indra ‘again hucled his thunderbolt at bim.
Aud thus wounded again by Indra of great
power, Vritca entered all on a sudden into
the gaseous matter, and thereafler made
away with its inherent property.


1g——16. And this matter being over-
powered by Vritra and its property, touch


13
being fost. Indra became again angry
and flung his thunderbolt at him. And


wounded therein by the powerful ([ndra),
he overwhelmed the ether, and took away
its inheret property, atid the ether bsing
overwhelmed by Vritra, and its property,
sound, being destroyed. the God of a
Hundred Sacrifices highly enraged, again
smote hint with his thuderboit.


17, And thus smitten by the powerful


Indra, he suddenly encced ite iis
(Shsakra’s) body, ard wok away iss
essential attributes,

18—20. And overtaken ty Vuirea, he
was filled with great ilusien, Asd, OF


venerable sir, the most nowe ful of ahs. ala’g
race, we have heard that Vashishva -core
forted Indra and that the God o: a Heundi ed
Sacrifices killed Veitra in his body by means
of his invisible thunuderdolt, and krow, O
prince, that this religious mystery was
recited by Shakra to the great sages, and
they in tuco told it to me.


CHAPTER XIU.
( ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.}~}


Continued.
Vasudeva said :—
1. There are two kinds of diseases,


physical and mental. They are prodaced
by the mutual action of the budy and mind
on each other, and they never originate
without the interaction of the iw. :


2. The disease that is produced in the
bady, is called physical, and that which is’
produced in the mind, is called mental. ;


3. The cold, the warm (phlegm and
bite) as well as the windy humours, O
king, are the essential changes created ‘in’
the physical body, and when these bu-
mours are equally distributed, and are’
present in due proportions, they indicate
good health.


4—5-. The warm humour is influenced
by the cold. and the cold by tne warm,
Goodness, Darkess and [grorance are
the attributes of the soul, and it is said by
the learned, that their presence in equal
parts, indicates health (of the mincy. Bat
if any of the three preponderate, . some
temedy is taid down. ; ‘


6. Happiness is overcome by sorrow,
and sorrow by pleasure. Some people vhile
afflicted by sorrow, wish to recall (pasty
happiness, while others, while in the ene
joyment of happiness, wish to recail past
Sorrow.


’


14


7.—tr. But you, O son of Kunti, do
neither wish to recall your sorrows. nor
your happiness, witat else do you wish to
recall barring this delusion of sorrow. Or,
perchance, O son of Pritha, it is your
innate nature, by which you are at present
Overpowered. You do not wish to recall
to your mind the painful spectacle of
Krishna standing in the hall of assembly
with @ply one piece of cloth to cover her
body, and while she was in her menses and
before all the Pandavas. And it is not
Propec that you should brood ovet your
departure from the city, and your exile
with the hide of the antelope for your
dregs, and your wanderings in the great
forest, noc should you recall to your mind
the affiiction from Jatasurca, the fight with
Chitrasena, and your troubles frum the
Saindhavas,


_12—13. Nor it is meet, O son of Pritha,
and conqueror of your foes, that you should
recall the incident of Kichaka’s kicking
Draupadi, during the period of your exile
passed in absolute concealment, nor the in-
cidénts of the fight which took place
between yourself and Drona and Bhistma.
The time has now arrived, when you must:
fight which each must do single-handed with
his mind.


14. Therefore, O chief of Bharata’s race,
you must now prepare to carry the struggle
against your mind, and by dint of abstrac-
tion and the merit of your own Karma, you
must reach the other side of the mysterious
and unintelligible (mind).


15. In this wae there will be no need for
any weapons nor for friends nor attendants.
The battle which is to be fought alone and
single-handed has now arrived for you.


16. And if defeated in this struggle, you
shall find yourself in the most wretched con-
dition, and, QO son of Kunti, knowing this,
and acting accordingly, shall you attain
success,


17. And knowing this wisdom and the
destiny of all creatures, and following the
conduct of your forefathers do you duly
govern your kingdom. ;


CHAPTER XIII.


(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA. )—
Continued.


Vasudeva said :—

1. O foremost of Bharata’s race, salva-
tion is not attained by removing the exter-
nal things (like kingdom, etc.), but by


MAHABHARATA.


giving up things which satisfy the flesh
(body).

2. The virtue and happiness which one
attains who has renounced only the external
objects, but who at the same time possessed
by passions and weakness of the flesh, let
these be the portion of our enemies.


The word with two Ictters is Mrityu
(death,) and the word with three letters is
Shashwata Brahman, or the eternal spirit.
fhe consciousness of ego, or the state of
being addicted-to worldly objects is Death,
and the absence of that feeling is immorta-
lity.

4. And these two, Spirit and Death, O
king, have their seats in the souls of all
creatures, and remaining unseen, they, for
sooth, rage war with each other,


5. And if, O Bharata, it be true that no
creature is ever killed, then one commits na
sin for the death of a creature by destroying
its body.


6. What matters the world toa man, if
having acquired the sovereignty of the entire
earth with its mobile aed immobile creation,
he does not become attached to it.


7. But if the man who having renounced
the world, has adopted the forest mode of
fife, livmg on wild roots and edibles, O son
of Pritha, has a craving for the earthly
things, and is addicted to them, he may be
said to bear death in his mouth.


8 Do you, O Bharata, watch and ob-
serve the character of your external and
internal enemies. And the man who is
able ta perceive the nature of the eternal
reality is able to get over the influence of
the great fear (perdition).


Q—1i. Men do not like the conduct of
those who are engrossed in earthly desires,
and there is no deed without having a desire
(at its root} and all desires are, as it were,
the limbs of the mind. ‘Therefore, wise
men knowing this, control their desires.
The Yogi who communes with the Supreme
Spirit, knows Yoga to be the perfect way
ta salvation by reason of the practices of his
many pristine births, And remembering
that, what the soul wishes, is not condu-
cive of piety and virtue, but that the con-»
trol of the desires is at-the root of all
true virtue, such men do not engage in the
practice of ,charity, Vedic learning, asceti-
cism, Vedic rites, whose object is attain-
ment of earthly prosperity, ceremonies,
saciifices, religious rules and meditation,
with the desires of securing any advantage
thereby. BS) -8g


12. As an illustration of this truth, the
sages, well-read in ancient learning, recite


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA. 15


these verses called by the name of Kama-
gita, do you, O Yudhishthira, listen to the
recital of them in full.


13. (Kama says,), No creature is able to
destroy me without following the proper


methods (vig., subjugation of all desires and


ptactice of Yoga, etc.)


14—15. If a man’ knowing my power,
tries to destroy me by muttering prayers,
etc., 1 prevail over him by deluding him
with the belief that Iam the ego within him,
If he desire to destroy me by means of
sacrifices with many presents, I deceive him
by appearing in his mind as a most virtu-
ous creature amonyst the mobile creation,
and if he wish to destroy me by mastering
the Vedas and its auxiliaries, I overreach
him by appearing to his mind to be the
soul of virtue amongst the immobile crea-
tion,

16—19. And if the man whose streagth
lies in truth, wish to overcome me by
patience, | appear to him as his mind, and
thus he does not perceive my existence, and
if the man of austere religious practices,
wish to destroy me by means of asceticisin,
lappear in the dress of asceticism in his
mind, and thus he is prevented from know.
ing me, and the man of learning, who with
the object of attaining salvation wish to
destroy me, I frolic and laugh in the face of
such a man intent on salvation. [ am the
everlasting one without an equal, whom no
creature can kill or destroy.


20. Therefore, you too, O prince, divert
your desires (Kama) to virtue, so that, by
this means, you may attain what is for your
good,


21. Do you, therefore, make preparations
for the due performance of the Horse-Sacri-
fice with presents, and various other sacri-
fices of great splendour, and accompanied
with presents,  -


22, Let not, therefore, grief overpower
you again, on seeing your friends lying kil-
led on the battle-field. You cannot see the
men killed in this battle alive again,


23. Therefore, should you perform mag-
nificent sacrifices with presents, so that you
may attain fame in this world, aud reach
the perfect way in the next.


CHAPTER XIV.


(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said —
1. ‘Those preat ascetics

royal saint Yudhishthira,

friends, with these words,


2—4. And, O monarch, that king ex-
horted by the worshipful) Vishtarastraba
himself, and by Dwaipayana (Vyasa),
Krishna, Devasthana, Narada, Bhima,
Nakala, Krishna (Deaupadi), _Sahadeva,
and the sharp-witted Vijaya, as well as by
other great men, and Beahmanas versed
in the scriptures, became relieved of all
mental suffering and sorrow originating
from the death of his dear relations, ~


consoled = the
bereft of bis


5. And that king YVudhishthira after
performing the obsequial ceremonies of
his departed friends, and honoring the
Brabmanas and the celestials, brought tne
kingdom of the earth with its girdle of
oceans, under his sway.


6. And. having regained his kingdom,
with a tranquil mind, that prince of Kuru’s
tace thus addressed Vyasa, Narada and
the other sages who were present,


7. Uhave been consoled by the words of
So great, ancient and aged saints as your-
selves, and | have now no cause leit for
the feast sorrow.


8. And likewise, I have attained great
riches, with which I may adore the celes- ~
tials, therefore, with your help, | shall now
celebrate the sac: ifice.’


g—to. O the best of the twice-borns, we
have heard that those (Himalayan) regions -
are full of wonders, therefore, O Brahmana
saint and grandfather do you so ordain
that under your protection we may safely
reach the Himalaya, mountains, th: perfor-
mance of my sacrifice being entirely within
your control, and then the worshipful
celestial saint Narada and Devasthana
have also addressed exquisite and well
meaning words for our behuof.


11." No unlucky man in times of great
sorrow and distress, has ever the good
fortune to secure the services of such pre-
ceptors and friends approved of all vir-
tuous men,


12—13. Thus addressed by the king,
those great saints, commending the king
and Krishna and Arjuna to go the Hima-
layan tegions, then and there vanished
before the assembled multitude, and the
king, the royal son of Dharma, then seated
himself there for some time.


16


14-16. And the Pandavas then an
account of the death of Bhistma, were
engaged in celebrating his funeral cere-
monies. And their time, while thds en-
goged, seemed tog tony in passing, and
performing the last rites for the bodies of
Bhishma, Karna and other foremost
Kauiavas, they gave away large presents
to’ Brahmanas. And then the foremost
descendant of Kuru, again performed with
Dhritarashtra the funeral rites, and having
distributed profuse richés amongst the
Brahmanas, the Pandava chief with Dhrita-
rashtra in advance, entered the city of
Hastina Nayar, and consoling his uncle,
having eves of wisdom, that virtuous prince
continued to govern the earth with his
brothers,


CHAPTER XV.


(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVAJ)—
: Continued.


Janamejaya said :—

¥.: O- best of the twice-borns, when the
Pandavas had reconquered and pacified
their kingdom, what did the two warriors
Vasudeva and Dhananjaya do?


Vaishampayana said :—

2—4. UOking, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya
were nighly pleased when the Pandavas had
succeeced in regaining and: pacifying their
kingdoms, and they deported themselves
with great glee, like Indra and his wife in
the celestial regions, and amidst picturesque
forest sceneries, and tablelands of moun-
tains, and sacred places of pilgrimage, and
lakes and rivers, they travelled with great
pleasure Jike the two Ashwius in the Nan-
dana garden of Indra.


5. And, O Biarata, the great Krishna
and the con of Pandu (Dhananjaya) enter-
ing the beautiful hall of assembly at Indra-
prastha, passed their time in great merri-
ment,


6. And there, O prince, they paséed
their time in describing the stirring incidents
of the war, and the sufferings of their past
lives. . : :


7. And those two great ancient sages,


pleased, recited the genealogy. of ‘the races
of saints and gods. '


8. Then Keshava, knowing the full
Significance of all matters, addressed Partha
in sweet and beautiful words of excellent
Style and meaning.


MAHABHARATA.


9. And then Janarddana consoled thé
son of Pritha afflicted by the death of bis
sons, and thousands of other relatives.


to. And he of great ascetic merit and
knowing the science ‘of all things duly
comforting him, rested for a while, as if a
great burden had been removed from his
own body.


tr. Thert Govinda (Krishna) comfor-
ting Arjuna with sweet speech, addressed
these well-reasoned words to him.


Vasudeva said :—


12, Q Arjuna, the terfor of your
enemies, this eritire earth has heen con-
quered by the king, the son of Dharma,
depending on the power of your arms,


13. -And, O best of men, the virtuous
king Yudhishthira now enjoys the sover-
eignty of the earth withoitt a rival, by the
power of Bhimasena and the twin brothers;


14—17. O you, who know what virtue
is, it was by virtue alone, that the king bas
been able to regain his kingdom shorn of all
enemies, and it was by the action of virtue;
that king Suyedhana has been slain in
battle, and, O son of Pritha and pillar of
the Kuru race, the wicked sons of Dhrita-
rashtra, avaricious, always rude in speech,
and bent upon a sinful course of conduct,
having been rooted out with their followers,
the king, the son of Dharma and lord of the
earth, now peaceably enjoys the entire king-
dom of the earth with your help, and 1 too,
O son of Pandu, have been pleasantly pas-
sing away my time in your company, amidst
woodland scenes, ;

18. O terror of your enemies, what
more need I tell you, but that where you
and Pritha, and the king, the son of
Dharma, and the powerful Bhimasena and
the two sons of Madri are, there am 1
drawn with exquisite delight.


t9—20. O descendant of Kuru, in these
delightful and sacred and celestial halls of
assembly, a long time has gone away in
your company without my seeing Vasudeva,
Valadeva and other leaders of the Vrishni
race.


2t. And now I am desirous of going
to the city of Dwaravati. Do you, therefore,
O most courageous of men, assent to my
departure. :


22. When king  Yuadhishthira was
stricken heavily with sorrow, [ with
Bhishma, have recited to him many appro-
priate legends suited to the occasion with a
view of dispelling his grief, and the pliant
and great Yudhishthira, though our sover-
eign, and versed in ait learning, paid due
heed to our words.


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


17


“3304. That son ef: Dharma-honors| 2. The son of Pritha (Acjuna), having


truth, and is grateful and virtuous, therefore
will his victue, and good sense and the stabi-
lity of his powee always endure, -


25. And now, O Arjuna, if it pleases you,’


do you go to that great prince and tell him
‘of my desire to leave this place.


- 26~=31. For, O you of mighty arms, even’


“Gt death comes to me, f am celuctant to do
anything that may displease him, what to
~ speak of, my going to the city of Dwaravati,
Oson of Pritha, and descendant of. Kuru,
I now tell you truly desiring to do only
-what is good and agreeable to you, and
there can be nothing equivocal in it in any
way, that the necessity for my staying here
no longer exists, when, Arjuna, that
monarch the’son of Dhritarashtra, has been
killed with his armies and attendants, and
the earth, my friend, with its belt of seas,
and its mountains and woods and forests,
and the kingdom of the Kuru king’ filled
with various gems, have passed under the
control of that wise son of Dharma. And,
O foresaost prince of Bharata's, race, may
that virtuous prince govern.the entire king-
dom of the earth in virtue, and with the
respect and approbation of numerous great


Siddhas, and having bis praises always


extolled by the panegytists.


32. Doyou, O pride of Kuru’s race,
accompany me to-day ta the king, the great
advancer of the Kuru race, and sound him
‘of *ny intended return to Dwacaka,


33. As Yudhishthira the great king of
the Kurus, always commands my love and
respect, { have, O son of Pritha, placed this
my body and all the riches that I have in
my house, at his disposal. :

34.: And, O prince, Partha (son of Pritha)
when this earth has come under
trol and that of the worshipful Yudhishthira
of excellent character, there no. fonger fe-
mains any need for my staying here. except
for my love for you. ~ .


35- And, O-king. when the, redoubtable
Arjuna had been thus addressed by the
noble-hearted, Janarddana, he, shewing all
the honors due to him, sorrowfully replied
by merely saying ‘be it so.’ :


CHAPTER XVI
(ANUGITA PARVA)
Janamejaya said :—
1. When the great Keshava and Arjuna
after killing their enemies went to the’ as-


sembly rooms what conversation, O twice
bofn one, took place between thei ?


3


your’ con-.


recovered his own Kingdom, spent, bis time
gladly, without doing anything else, in the
company of Krishna, his heart filled with
joy,'in that palace of celestial beauty. :


.~ 3+ One day, ‘those two listlessly went to
a@ particular part of the palace that looked,
O king, like a veritable portion of the celes»
tial regions Themselves filled with joy,they
were then sucrounded by theic relatives and
attendants.

4. Pandu’s son Arjuna, filled with joy in
the company of Krishna, saw that ‘delight «
fal palace, ‘and then addressed: his com«
panion, saying,—‘O" mighty-armed one,
youc greatness became ‘known to me upotr
the approach of the battle: ° , :


5. O son’ of Devaki, your form alsa, as
the Lord ‘of the universe, then became
known to me. eee, :

6. What your holy’self said to me at
that time, O Keshava, through love, has all
been forgotten by me, O chief of men, on’
account of the fickleness of my mind, © ~

7. However, { have been ‘curious, again
and again on the subject of those truths. You,
too, O Madhava, will go te Dwaraka soon,


'


Vaishampayana said— _ x
8. Thus addressed by him, Krishna of,
great energy, that foremost. of speakers,
peed Phalguna and replied to him as
ollows, oe a , ;


Vasudeva said: «

Qg. I made you listen to truths that: are -
considered as. mysteries. I conferred on you
eternal truths. Indeed, | described to you
Religion in its true form and on all thé
eternal regions, (= . ~

10... It is greatly disagreeable to me ‘to
learn that you did. not, from folly, receivé
what I gave. The recollection of all that [
told you. on that occasion ‘will not come to
me now. : , Sate


11. Forsooth, O son of Pandu, you are -
destitute of faith and your understanding is
uot good. Itis impossible for me, O Dha-
nanjaya, to repeat, in full, all that I said ou: ~
that occasion, ay agin a

12. That religion is more than sufficient
for undefstanding Brahma. { cannot-dess
tribe it again in‘detail. ~~ wT

13. I described to you, O Supreme
Brahma, having concentrated myself in
Yoga. I shall now, however, recite to you
an old history upon thé same subject. ‘


| 14. O foremost of all persons knowing
duty, listen to everything I now say, so that,
with an understanding adapted to my


18


teaching, you may succeed in attaining (to
the highest eid. -


15. O chastiser of enemies, on one oc-
casion, a Brahmana came to us from the
celestial regions. Of irresistible energy, he
came from the regions of the grandfather.
He was duly respected by us. eat

16. Listen, O. son of Pritha, wnhesitae
tingly to what he, O chief of Bharata’s race,
said, in answer to our enquiries, according-
to heavenly forms, . J


Brahmana said:— $0

17—-18, - That which you ask me, O
Keishna, about the religion of Moksha
(Eneancipation),.. led “by your compassion
for all creatures,—that, indeed, which des-
troys all delusion,--O yow gifted with Su-
preme power, 1 shalt now tell you duly, O
destroyer of Madhu, Do you listen with
rapt attention as 1 discourse to you, O
Madhava.


19. A Brahmana named Kashyapa,
possessed of penances and the foremost of
all persons knowing duties, came to a cer-
tain other Brahmana who had become con-
Versant with all the mysteries of religion, ~


20. Indeed, the fatter had mastered
all the knowledge which the scriptures teach
about the departure and reappearance of
beings and possessed that direct knowledge
of all things which Yoga gives. He was
well-skilled in the truths of all subjects
relating to the world. He had mastered

the truth about pleasuré and pain.


at, He knew the truth about birth and
death, and understood the distinctions be
tween merit and demerit. He had seen the
ends attained @o by embodied ‘creatures
high and low on account of their deeds, .


22—24. He lived tike one freed from the
world. Crowned with ascetic success and
gifted with perfect tranquillity of soul, he
had all his senses under complete control.
He seemed to shine with the resplendence
of Brahma. and capable of going every=
where at will. He knew the science of
‘ disappearing at will from before the eyes
of all, He used to move about in the
company of invisible Siddhas: and celes-
‘tial musicians, He used to sit and talk with
them on some spot retired from the bustle
of humanity.. He was as unattached to all
things as the wind, Kashyapa having
heard of him truly, wished to see him,
Gifted with intelligence, that foremost of
all Brahmanas approached the sage.”

. 25 Himself possessed of penances,
Kashyapa, moved hy the wish of acquiring
merit, fell, with a capt heart, at the feet


derful attributes, *


of the sage when he had seen all these won- |


a


MAHABHARATA.


26. Stricken with wonder at the sight of
those extraordinary qualities, Kashyapa
began to wait upon that foremnst of alt
Brahmanas, with the dutiful respect of a


disciple waiting upon his preceptor and suc~.


ceeded in pleasing him.

27. By his devotion, O scorcher of
enemies, rendering to him the obedience due
from a disciple to a preceptor, Kashyapa
pleased that Brahmana who possessed alt
these qualities and was gifted, besides with
seriptural learning and excellent conduct.


28. Pleased with Nashyapa, the Brah-
mana one day addressed him cheerfully and
spoke as follows, having the highest success
in view, Listen to those words, U Janard'«
dana, as F repeat them.


The successful Ascetic said :—


By various deeds, O son, as also by
the help of merit, nrostal, creatures attain to
diverse ends here and residence in Heaven,


go. Nowhere one can enjoy the highest
happiness; nowhere one can five for good.
‘There are repeated fails from the highest
segions acquired with such sorrow,


gt. On accout of my indnuigence iv
sin, | had to come by various miserable and
inauspicious ends, filled as £ was with Just
and anger, and deluded by cupidity.


32. Lhave repeaterdty undergone deatty
and re-birth. I have eaten various kinds uf
food, { have sucked at variows breasts,


33. [have seen various kinds of mothers,
and various. fathers dissimilar to one
another, - I have come by various Ktinds of
happiness and misery, O sinless one.


34. On various’ occasions have f been
separated from what was agreeable and
united with what was disagreeable. Having
acquired wealth wit® great labour I have
bad to put up-with its loss,


35. I have-received from king and rela-
tives insults and excessive misery. 1 have
suffered from severe mental and physical
pain. - . ‘ '

35. I have undergone humiliations and
death and imprisonment under circum.
stances of great severity. J have had falls
into Hell and have suffered great tortures
in the domains of Yama,


37- | have, again and again, suffered
form decrepitude and: diseases, and front
frequent and great calamities. In this
world [ have repeatedly ‘suffered from all
those afflictions which arise from a percep-


- tion of all pairs of opposites.


38. After all this, one day; laden with
Sorrow, despair came upon me, i tools
a: z Ph ge i


ASHWAMEDHA @ARVA.


eefuge in the Formless. Suffering from
great distress, 1 gave up the wocid with all
its joys and sorrows, .

"39. Finding out then this path. I exer-
ised myself in it in this world. Afterwards,


through tranquillity of suul, 1 acquired the |


Success you see, ‘


40. 1 shall not have to come to this
world a-ain. Indeed, til 1 attain to ab-
Sorption into eternal: Brahma, till, in fact,
the final dissolution of the universe, 4 shall
Jook on those happy ends that will be mine
and on these beings and that form this uni-
verse.

4l.
cess, I shall, after departing from this wordd,
proceed to what is above it and thence to
what is higher. ;

42. Indeed, i shall come by the condi-
tion, which is anmanifest, of Brahma. -Do
not doubt this. @ scorcher of enemies, |
shall not return te this world of mortal
creatures,


43. Q yon of great wisdom. I have be-
come pleased with. yeu. ‘Tell me what I
shall do for you.. The time bas come for
the accomplishment of that purpose for
which you have come here.


44. UL know that. object for which you’


have sought me, 1 shall soon depart from
this world. Hence itis that 1 have given


you this hint. :
45. @ vou of: great wisdom aad ex-
erience, 1 have been highly. pleased with
you for your behaviour. Do you question
me! 4 shall. discourse on what is bene+
ficial to you as desired by you. :

. 46.. T think, your intelligence is great.
indeed, I speak highly of it, for it was with
the help of that intelligence that you were
able to recognise me. jSucely, O Kashyapa,
yo ate endued with great intelligence,


ane)


«


CHAPTER XVII.


_ -{ANUGITA -PARVA).—
Continued. r


Vasudeva said :—

1. Touching the feet of that sage. the
Brahmana asked him some very difficult
questions. That foremost of all pious per-
sons then described those duties that were
referred to, ‘


Kashyapa said :—
2. How does the body dissolve away,
aad how js another is acquired? How does


Having acquired this excellent suc-”


gether from food, -.-..5


one become liberated after passing through
@ repeated rouad of painful ce-bieths? |
3. Enjoying Nature for sometine, how
does the Individual Soul cast off the parti-
cular body ? How does the Individual Soul,
freed from the body, attain to what is
different froas.it, (zis., Brahman) ? ;


4- Hew does a human being enjoy the
good and bad deeds done by hia? Whee


do the acts exist of one that is devuid of ,
body? . *.


4


The Brahmana said :—
5. Thus urged by Kashyapa, the Libe-


‘rated Sage answered those questions one


after another. Do you listen to me, O
hero .of the Vrishni race, as 1 recite to you
the answers he gave.


The Liberated Sago said:— -

6—7. Upon the exhaustion of those
deeds capable of prolonging life and bring-
ing en dame which are done in a particular
body that the individuat Soul assumes, the
embodied Jiva, with the span of his life
shortened, begins to do acts hostile to life
and heakh. Qn. the approach of destruc-
tion, his anderstanding deviates frvu the
Proper course,


8. The man of impure soul, after even’
a correct understanding of his constitution
and strength and of the season of both his
own Kfe and of the year, begins to eat.at


itcegilar intervals and to eat such food as:


r)


is hostile to him. -
g Atsuch a time he does practices that


are greatly harmful. ‘He sometimes eats :


excessively and sometimes abstains alto-


* Jo.
takes bad drinks, or food that has ‘been
made up of hostile ingredients. ‘Ho eats
food that is heavy: and more than what is


beneficial, -or ibefore the food previously ©


taken, has been. digested.

11. He indulges in physical exercise and
sexual pleasure in excess, o¢ through avidity
for work, suppresses the urgings of his cor-


‘poreal organism even when they become


pronounced. , us F
12. Or, he takes juicy food or indulges
im sleep during daytime. Food that is not


properly digested, of itself excites the faults, -


when the times comes. : aw


13. Frofm such excitement of the faults.


in ‘his body, he gets disease ultimately
bringing on death. Sometimes the person
engages in unnatural deeds:Iike strangling.


14. Through these causes the living
body of the creature dissolvesaway, Une


He eats bad ‘food or bad meat or


19.


-20.
cs


derstand correctly the mannet a8 1 declare
it to you, : ane


15. Urged on by the Wind which be-
coines violent, the heat in the body, be-
cotiing excited, and reaching every part of
the body one after another, restrains all the
vital airs. ak ,


16, Know truly that excited all over the
body, the heat becomes very strong, and
pierces every vital pact where life may be
said to live. ~


17—-18. On account of this, the Individual
Soul, feeling great pain, quickly takes leave
of the body. Know, O foremost of twice-
born ones, that when the vital parts of the
body become thus afflicted, Individual Soul
passes away from the body, suffering from
great pain. All living creatures repeatedly
suffer from birth and death.


19~—-20. It is seen, O chief of Brahmanas,
that the pain which is felt by a person when


renouncing his bodies is like to what is felt ,
by him when first entering the womb or.


when coming out of it. His joints become
almost dislocated and he derives much dis-
tress from the waters, :


3 .
at. Moved by. (another) violent wind,
the wind in the.: body. becomes excited,
through cold, and dissolves away the union,
of maiter into its five primal elements. :


22, That wind which lives io the vital
airs called Prana. arid ‘Apana occurring.
within this compound of the five primal ele-
ments, rushes upwards, from a situation of
distress, leaving the embodied creature.


23. It .is thus that the wind leaves the
body. Then is seen breathlessness. The.
man then becomes. destitute of heat, of
breath, of beauty, and of consciousness.

24.
said to be dead. By those canals through
which he perceives all sensuous. objects,
the bearer of the body ao longer perceives
them. ooo ee


25. The Individual Soul creates in the
body in those canals the vital airs formed
by the food. : -


” 26. The elements gathered together be-
come in certain parts firmly united. Know
that those parts are called the vitals of the


body. It is said sq in the Shastras,;


27. When those vital parts are cut, the
Individual Soul, rising up, enters the heart
‘of the living. creature and: gesttains the
principle of animation forthwith. |


28. The creature then, ‘though still
possessed of consciousness, fails to know
anything. Tbe vital parts being all worked
up, the the knowldge of the living creature
becomes overwhelmed by darkuess,


Deserted -by Brahma, the person is”


MAHABHARATA.


29—30. The Individual Soul then, whe
has been deprived of everything upon which
to stay, is then agitated by the wind. He
then, deeply breathing a long and painful
breath, goes out speedily, making the in-
animate body to tremble. Separated from
the body, the Individual Soul, however, is
surrounded by his deeds. ©


31-34. He becomes equipped on all
sides with ali his auspicious deeds of merit
and with all his sins. Brahmanas gifted with
knowledge and equipped with the certain
conclusions of the scriptures, Know him,
from marks, as to whether he is possessed
of merit or with its demerit. gEven as men
having eyes see the fire-fly appearing and
disappearing in the midst of darkness, men
having the eye of knowledge and crowned
with success of penances, see, with spiritual
vision, the ladividual Soul as he leaves the
body, as he is re-born, and as he enters the
womb. It is seen that the Individul Saul
has three regions assigned to him eternally.


35- This world where; creatures tive is
called the field of action. Performing
acts, good or bad, all embodied creatures
attain to the fruits thereof,


36.. On. account of their own. deeds,
creatures acquire even here superior or in-.
inferior enjoyments. Doers of evil deeds
here, on-account of those deeds of theirs,
attain to Hell. =~ oS


37. This condition of sinking with head.
downwards, in which creatures are boiled
is one of great misery. It is such that a
fescue therefrom is highly difficult. Indeed,
one should try hard for saving himself from
this misery. eat


38. Those regions where creatures live
when they ascend from this world, I shalt
now declare truly. Do you listen to me’
attentively. ° :


39-40. By listening to what I say, you
will acquice firmness. of. understanding and
aclear apprehension of deeds, Know that
even those are the regions of all creatures
of righteous. deeds, ovs., the stellar worlds
that shine in the sky, the lunar disc, and
the solar disc as well ‘that: shines in the
universe in its own light,


4t. Upon the termination, again, of
their merits, they fall away from those re~
gions repeatedly. ‘There is distinction of
inferior, superior: 4nd middling happiness
even ia the celestial region. :


42. There is discontent at sight.of pross
petity more burning than one’s own even
in the celestial region. Even these are. the
goals which 1 have mentioned in full,


ed wees


ASNWAMEDUA PARVA.


43 1 shalt, after this, describe to you
the attainment by the Individual Soul of
the condition of residence in the womb.


44. Do yow hear me, with rapt attention,
O twice-born one, as I speak to you.


CHAPTER XVIII


{ ANUGITA. PARVA.)—. -
Continued,


The Brahmana. said :—


t. The acts, good and bad, that the |


Individual Soul, ..does-are sot subject to
destruction. Upon attainment of body after
body, those deeds yield fruits corresponding
with them, ;

2, As a feuit bearing tree, when the
season for production comes, yields a large
quintity of fruit, merit, achieved with. a
pure heart, likewise yields a large measure
of happiness. , te ee a

3. Similarly, sin, committed with a sin-
ful heart, produces a large -quantity of
misery. The Individual Soul, placing the
mind a head, performs action. | :

4.: Hear then how the Individual Soul,
equipt with all his deeds and overwhelmed
with lust and anger, enters the womb. °

5 The vital seed, mixed ‘with blood,
enters the womb of females and becomes
the field (of the Individual Soul), good. oc
bad, born of (his) deeds. - | -

6. On account of his subtlety and the
condition of beings unmanifest, the Indivi-
dual Soul does not become attached to
anything ‘even after coming ‘by a body.
Therefore, he'is called Eternal’ Brahma.

‘7-8. That (vis., Jiva or Brahma) is the
seed of all creatures. It is on account of
Him that living creatures tive. ‘That: the
individual Soul, entering alt the limbs of the
foetus part by part, accepting: the’ attribute
of mind, and living within all the regions
that belong to vital aie, supports (life). On
account. of this, the foetus, becoming pos-
sessed of mind, begins to move its limbs. .

- 9. -As liquified iron, poured (into -a
mould), takes the form of -the -mould;-'so
is the entrance of the Individual Soul. into
the foetus, —- a :

to. As fice, entering a mass of iron,
heats it greatly,-.so is the manifestation of
the Individual Soul in the feetus. m

x1. As, a, lamp,.burning in a coom, dis-
covers (all things within it), so does the
mind discover the different limbs of the
body,


2


12. Whatever deeds, good or bad, the
¥ndividuat Soul: does ina former body,
Hey certainly to be enjoyed or endured by

im. y ee Se Hg ‘

13. By such enjoyment and endurance,
former deeds are exhausted, and other
deeds, again, accumulate, till the Individual
Soul -succeed in acquiring a knowledge of'
the duties included in that contemplation
which leads to Liberation. 7 :

14. Regarding this, | shall tell you those,

' deeds by which the Individual Soul, O best.


+ of men, while passing through a repeated,


round of re-bicths, becomes happy.
"15-18. Gifts, observances. of austerity,,
Celibacy, bearing Brahma according te the.
ordinances laid down, self-control, tran
quiltity, mercy for all creatures. restraint o
passions, . abstention from cruelty as alsa
trom appropriating others’ properties, re-
fraining from doing even' mentally all deeds
that are false and injurious to living .
creatures on the Earth, respectfully, serving
mother. and, father, honoring the celestiala
and guests, adoration of preceptors, pity,
purity, constant control of all organs, and
causing of all good deeds are said to form
the conduct of the good, From observance
of such ‘conduct, originates’ victué which


protects all creatures eternally.


.19,, Such conduct one. would always. see.
among good persons, In » such con4
duct lives there for good... ‘That course of
pfacticys which persons. of -tcanquil souls
flotlow, indicates Virtue. nen wept

20. Among them is, thrown that course
of practices which forms eternal Virtue, He
who would follow virtue would nevec have
to come by a miserable end. .. \

2t. It is by the conduct of the good that
the world is restrained io the paths of Virtue
when it falls away, He who is a, Yogin is-
Liberated, and is, therefore, distinguished,
above these (viz., the’'good). nd

22, Deliverance from the world occurs;
after a long time, :of one -who. acts righte-
ously and well, on, every occasion as be
should. Loe ok grr be kt ee |

23. A living creature thus always: meets
with his pristine deeds. All these deeds
form the cause in consequence of which he
comes into this world in a state different
frem his trueforay. 1. 0/02)

24. There is a doubt in the world about
this question. By what was the acceptance
(by the Individual, Soul) of a body first
determined. 7s . ae ,

25. H aving first forined--a~ body” of “his
own, the Grandfather. of all the worlds gis.,
Beahman , then created the three worlds, of
mobile and immobile: creatures. an


22°


26. fiavieg first: himselt taken a body,
he then created Pradhana. That Pradhana
és the material cause of all embodied crea-)
tures, by whom is all this covered, and
whom ail came to know as the greatest.

27. ‘This which is seen is said to be des-
tsuctible; while the other is immortal and
gadestructible. ‘This which (is seen) is said
to be Kshara (the destructible); that, how-
ever, which is the other is the Immortal (as
also) Akshara (the Indestructible). Of each
Pucusha taken separately, the whole i is dua-
lity among these three.


28. Sceu first (to appear in an embodied
furm), Prajapati (then) created all the pri-
mal elemenis and al immobile creatures.
This is the ancient Shruti.


29.. Of that (acceptance of bedy), the
Grandfather put dowa a limit about time,
and migrations among _vatious cspalunes
and return or ca-birth, .


30. All that I say is proper and correct,
at a person who has intelligence and who
has seen his Soul, would say on this subject
of previous births,


3t-—32. That person who considers plea-
sure and pain as inconstaut, which, indeed,
is the correct view, who regards the body
as an unholy Collection, and destruction as
ordained in action, and who remembers
that what litle of pleasure there is, is really
all pain, will succeed in crossing this terrible
ocean of worldly migration. which is so diffi-
cult to cross,


- 33. Though attacked by decrepitude and
death and disease, he who understands
Pradhana sees with an equal eye that Con-
sciousness which lives iu all penne gifted
with Cunsciousness.

34- Seeking the supreme seat,. he then
becomes: utterly indifferent ‘to all’ (other)
things. ‘© best of men, I-shall now deliver
instcuction to you, mecording to tag con
cerning this. ; '

35. ‘Dv you, O lesened Sechuasaas une
derstand in full what form the‘ excellent
knowledge, as I declare Hy ot thas oder
meu seats Say


omnenrenensd t
_ CHAPTER XIX.
‘(ANUGITA PARVAJ=
4 Continued.


The Brahmana said :—


1. He wha becomes immerged in. the
one receptacle (of all things), freeing him-
self from even the fought of his own
identity with all things,—indeed, ceasing


MAHABHARATA.


to think of even. his own existence
gradually renouncing Jone after  anather,.
will succeed in crossing his bonds’


2. That man whois the friend of all, wha


‘| endures all, who is attached to tranquillity,


who has conquered. all bis senses, who is
shorn of fear and anger, aud who is of cone
trolled soul, succeeds in liberating himself.


3. He who treats all creatures as his
ownself,-wha is. restrained, pure, free from
vanity, and shorn of egoism, is considered
as liberated from everything.


4. He also is liberated who considers
in the same light - -life and death, pleasure
and; paia, gain aad, haa agreeable and
disagreeable,


5. He is in every ay liberated who
does not covet others’ properties, who never’
disregards any body, who is above al! pairs
of opposites, and whose soul is shorn of
attachments, .


: 6 He-is liberated who has no enemy,
no kinsman, aid no child, who has cast off
religion, riches:‘and pleasure, and who is
(ceed from desire or cupidity. -


9. He-becomes liberated who acquires
neither merit: nor demerit, who casts off


.the merits and demerits accumulated in


pristine births, who wastes the elements of
his body for attaining. to a tranquillised
soul, and who. .gets over. all  pairs{ of


opposites, -,


: 8g, He who abstains from all deeds,
who i is free from desire or cupidity, who
considers the universe as unenduring or as
like an Ashwaitha tree, ever gifted with
birth, death, and. decrepitude, whose un-
derstanding is,fixed on renunciation, and
whose eyes are always directed towards his
own faults, soon succeeds in freeing him-
self from the fetteis phat biod him.


10. He who sees. -his soul void of smell,
of taste and touch, of .sound, of belang-
ings, of vision,.and unknowable, becomes
liberated. 9 500 is


‘81. \He who sees ‘his soul shat of the
attributes of the five elements, to: be with-
out. form and cause; to-be really destitute
ef attributes though enjoying them, be-
comes liberated...


12.- Abandoning, with: the help of the
understanding, all purposes relating to
body and mind, one gradually attains to -
cessation of separate existence, like a fire
unfed with fuel, ,. 4 ’


“13. One who is‘ freed-from all impres- |
Sions, who is above all pairs of opposites,

who is destitute of all belongings, and who

uses all his senses under’ the guidance lo

penances, becuines libecated.


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA. —


14. Having become freed from all im-


pressions, one then attains to Brahma which -


is Eternal and supreme, and tranquil, and
stable, and enduring and indestructible.


15. After this I shall describe the scienee
of. Yoga .than which: there. is nothing
superior, and. how. Yogins, .by concentra.
tion, see the perfect soul. ; “>


16. shall communicate the instructions
about it duly. Do you tearn from me those
doors by which. directing ‘the - soul: within
the body one sees that which .is without
beginning and end.


17. Withdrawing the senses from their
objects, one should fix the mind upon the
soul; having previously practised the
severest austerities, ane. should practise
that concentration of mind which leads to
Liberation. ! _


18. Observant of pewances and always
ractising corcentration of :mind, - the
earned Brahmana, gifted with intelligence,

shoutd observe the precepts. of the Science
of Yoga, seeing the. soul in the body.


-. 3g. If the good man succeeds in con-


centrating the mind: on the soul, he. .then,.


used to exclusive. meditation, sees the
Supreme Soul in his own soul, -


20. Self-controfled and‘ always cancen-
trated, and with-all his ‘senses completely
conquered, the man of purified soul, on
account of such .complete - concentration of
mind, succeeds in seeing the soul by soul.

2t.. As-a person seeing: some -unseen
individual in a dream recognises him, say-
ing.—-This is he,—when ; he sees him after
waking, similarly the good man having
seen the Supreme Soul in the deep contem-
piation of Samadhi recognises it, upen
waking from Samadhi. :


. 22, As one sees. the fibrous pith after
extracting it from a blade of the Saccha-
wum Munja, so the Yogia sees the Soul,
extracting it from the body, | 7
23. The body has -been. called the
Seccharum Munjga aad the filbrous pith is
called the Soul. [bis is the excellent illus-
tratjon given by persons knowing Yoga, |


‘ 24. When the bearer of a body adequa-
tely sees the Soul is Yoga, he then has no
ore to master him, for ‘he then beeomes the
ford of three worlds) © 6 © |

oe :


25-..He,.succeeds in assuming various
bodies, according as he wishes. Turning
away decrepitude and death, he neither


grieves norexukts. os


' 26.’ Phe selt-controlled ‘man, concen-
trated in Yoga, can create (for himself)
the godship of the very gods. Renouncing


2


8


‘his teansient body he attains to immutable


Brahma. © “


27. He does not fear even at.on seeing
all creatures falling victints te destruction,
When all creatares are affficted—he can
never be afflicted by any one. « :


28. Devoid of desire and gifted with a
tranquil mind, the person in Yoga is never.
affected by pain and sorrew and fear and
the dreadful’ effects of attachment and
affection, F -

-29. Weapons never pierce hinr; deatt:
does not exist for him.- Nowhere in the
world can be seen any one wha is happiee
than he, :


.30. Having adequately concentrated his
soul, he lives firmly on himself. Turningtofg
decrepitude and. pain and pleasure, he
sleeps at ease. . e

. gt. Renouncing this human body he
attains to (other) forms accerding to his
pleasure. While one is enjoying the sove~
reignty that Yoga bestows, one should never.
fall away from devotion to Yoga. eat

gz. When one, after adequate devotion.
to Yoga, sees the Seal in his ownself, he
then ceases to have any regard for even hint _
of a hundred sacrifices (udra).


33--37- Hear now how one, habituzs |
ting’ himself to exchnive meditation, suc
ceeds m attaining to Yoga, Thinking of.
that point of the compass which has the:


. Sun behind it, the mind should be fixed,


net outside, but in the interior of that.
palace in which one may happen to live,
Living within that palace the mind should
then, with all it outward and inward
(operations), see in that pacticular room in
which one may five. At that time when,
having deeply meditated, one sees the
All (vis., Brahma, the Sout of the Uni«
verse), there is then nothing. external to
Brahma where the mind may five. Controle ©
ling all the senses in a forest tlrat is free
from noise and that ig wninhabited, with
mind fixed thereon, ene should meditate ort
the All. both outside amd inside his body,
One should meditate om the teeth, the
palate, the tongue, the throat, the neclt
likewise ; one. should also oteditate on the
heact and the ligatures of the heart,


The Brahwana said:~
"38. hus addressed by ime, that intellt
gent disciple, O destroyer of Madhu, once
more asked me about this religion of Libe«
ration that is so difficult to explain.

39. How does this food’ that is esten
from time to time become digested in the
stomach? How does: it become changed
into juice? How, again, into blood ?-


a


B4
40. How does it’ nourish the flesh, the
narrow, the sinews, the..bones.? How do
all these limbs. of embodied creatures grow ?
‘4t. How does the strength grow of the
Rgrowing man? How takes place the escape


of all such ‘elements as are not nutritive,
and of alf impucities separately ?


1


42. ‘How does this one inhale and again,


ekhale} Stayiivg ‘upon ‘what particular
part does the Soul live in the body ?

' 43. Mow does the Individuat Soul, exer-
ting himself, bear the body? Of what colour
aud of what kind is the body ia which he
lives again ? S


‘a4. Oholy one, you should telf me all
this accurately, O sinless one !. ‘Thus was 1
accosted by ‘that ‘learned - Brahmana, O
Madhava? ,
“45~46. 1 replied to him, O you of
thighty arms, as | ‘myself had heard, O
chastiset of all enemies! As ‘one, placing
some precious object in ‘his : store-room,
should keep-his mind on it, so placing the
tind within. one’s owa body, one should
then, controlling all the senses, seek alter
the Soul, avoiding all carelessness. :
47. One weald, becoming always assidu
ous in this way and. pleased with his own
self, within a very short time, attain to that
Brahma by seeing which one would become
conversant with Pradhana.


‘48 Heis not capable of being appre<«
tiended by the eye; nor even by ail the
senses, it ‘is only with the lamp of the
thind that ‘the gceat Soul can be seen, .


; 49. He has tiands and feet on‘alf sides;


he has ears on all sides; he lives, pervading
all things in this world, | _ ;

&4. The Individual Soul beholds the Soul

us extracted from: the body. Then renouncing

Beahma as invested with form, by holding

“Uhe mind in the body, he sees Brahma as

freed from all qualities. ;


_St. ‘He’ sees’ the Soul with ‘his mind,
smiling ‘as it were at the time. ‘ Depending
Upon that Brahata, he then attains -to Libe-


Yation in me,
* 52. O foremost. of ‘twice-bern ones, all
this mystery has now been declared by me,
1 ask your permission, for shalt leave this
place.. Do’ you (also) go wherever you like.
s §3- -Thus addressed by me, O Krishna,
on that occasion, that disciple of mine, gift<
ed with austere penances, that Brahmana
of rigid vows, wettt away according to his
pleasure, '* 7 °


W asudeva said :—-
54. QO son df Pritha, having said these


words to me, on that occasion, about the


'


MAHABHARATA,


” Religion of Emancipation, that best of Braha


Manas disappeared then and there.


55. Have you heard this discourse, U
son of Pritha, with mind directed solely to-
wards it? . This you did hear om that occa~
sion while you were on your car. :


56. I think, O son of Pritha, that this is
difficult of being comprehended by oné whose
understanding ts confused, of who has ac-
quired no wisdom by study, or who eats food
not suited to his’ body, or whose Soul is not
purified. ~


§7. © chief of Bharata’s race, this fs a
great mystery among the celestials that has
been declared. At no time or plate, O
son of Pritha, has this been heard by man
in this world.


58, O sinless one, save yourself no other
man is worthy of hearing it. It is not, at
this time, capable of being easily understood
by one whose inner soul is confused,


89. The world of the celestials is ‘filted,
O soh of Kunti, with those who follow the
religion of actions. ‘The cessation of the
body is not liked by the celestials.

60, That goal,'O son of Pritha, is the
highest which is formed by- eternal Brah-
man. where: one, renouncing the body,
attains to immortality and becomes always
happy. 1 Spe a

61. By'following this religion, eveh they


‘who'are of sinful birth, such as women and


Vaishyas and Shudras, come by the highest
goal. ‘ ; .
‘62. “What need be Said then, O son of


: Pritha, of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas en-


dued with great learning, always devoted


‘to the duties of their own orders, and who


are intent on the region of Brahma ?

63. | This has been laid dowh ‘with the
réasons 5 and also the means for its acqui-
sition; and its coniplete attainment and
fruit, vts., Liberation and the ascertainment
of the truth about pain gar at

64—65. Ochief of Bharata’s race, there is
nothing else which yields happiness greater


| than this: ‘That mortal, O son of. Pande,
| who, gifted with intelligence, atid faith, and


prowess, renounces as unsubstantial what is


| considered as substantial by the world, suc»


ceeds-within a short time in obtaining the
Supreme by these means.

66. This is afl that is to be  seid,—=there
is nothibg else ‘which is tigher thar this.
He, O son of Pritha,-who devotes himself
to its constant practice for a period of six
months, succeeds ia attaining to Yoga. -


ET


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


CHAPTER XX.


YANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Vasudeva said :—


1. Regarding it is cited the old narrative,
O son of Pritha, of the discourse that took
place between a married couple. °


2—3, Acertain Brahmana’s wife, seeing
the Brahmana, her husband, who was a
complete master of every kind of knowledge
and wisdom, seated in seclusion, said to
him,—Into what region shall I go, de-
pending on you as my husband,—you who
are Seated, having cast off all (religious)
acts, who are harsh in your conduct towards
me, aud who are so undiscerning ?


4. Wehave heard that a wife attains to
those regions which are acquired by her
husband, What, indeed, is the goal that I
shall attain, having obtained you for my
husband.


5. Thus questioned, that Brahmana of
tranquil soul then said to her, smilingly,—O
blessed dame, I am not offended with these
words of yours, O sinless one.


6. Whatever acts exist which are
adopted with the help of others, which are
seen, and which are true, are done, as acts,
by men devoted to acts.


7. Those persons who are destitute of
knowledge, only store delusion by deeds.
‘reedom from acts, again, cannot even be
momentarily attained in this world.


8. From birth to the attainment of a
different form, action good or bad, and
accomplished by deeds, mind, or speech,
exists in all beings.


g- Those paths (of action) which are
characterised by visible objects (such as
Soma-juice and clarified butter for libations)
being destroyed by Rakshasas, turning
away from them ! have perceived the seat
{of the soul) that isin the body, with the
help of the soul.


to. There lives Brahma transcending
all pairs of opposites; there Soma with
Agni; and there the mover of the under-
standing, (vs, Vayu) always moves, up-
holding ali creatures.


tt. I¢ is for that seat that the Grand-
father Brahman and others, concentrated
in Yoga, adore the Indestructible. It is
for that seat that men of learning-and ex-
cellent vows, of tranquil souls, and of senses

‘ completely controlted, strive.


12, That is net capable of being smelt
by the sense of smell; nor tasted by the


4


25


tongue ; or touched by the organs of touch.
It is by the mind that that is attained.


13. It is incapable of being conquered
by the eye. Itis above the sense of hear~
ing. It is shorn of scent, taste, touch, and
form as attributes.


14—15. It is that from which proceeds
the well-ordained universe, and it that
upon which it depends. The vital airs called
Prana, Apana, Samana, Vyana and Udana,
flow from it, and it is that into which they
again enter. The vital airs Prana and
Apana move between Samana and Vyana.


16 When the soul sleeps, both Samana
and Vyana are absorbed. Between Apana
and Prana, Udana lives, pervading all.


17. Hence, Prana and Apana do not
desert a sleeping person. On account of
its controlling ail the vital airs, the controll-
ing breath is so called Udana,


1g—22. Hence, utterers of Brahma
practise penances which have myself for
their goal. In the midst of all those vital
airs which swailow up one another and
move within the body, shines forth
the fire called Vaishwanara made up of
seven flames. ‘The nose, the tongue, the
eye, the skin, the ear which numbers the
fifth, the mind, and the understanding,—
these are the seven tongues of that Vaish-
wanara’s flame. ‘That which is smelt, that
which is seen, that which is drunk, that
which is touched, as atso that which is
heard, that which ig thought of, and that
which is understood,-~these are the seven
sorts of fuel for me. That which smells,
that which eats, that which sees, that which
touches, that which sees, that which touches,
that which hears, numbering the filth; that
which thinks, and that which under
stands,—these are the seven great officias
ting priests.


23—26. Mark, O blessed one, learned
sacrificers duly casting seven libations in
seven ways in the seven fires, ois., that
which is smelt, that which is drunk, that
which is seen, that which is touched, as
also that which is heard, that which is
thought of, and that which is understood,


create them in theie own wombs, Earth,
Wind, Ether, Water, and Light num- .
bering as the fifth, Mind and Undere


standing,~-these seven are called wombs
(of alt things). All the attributes which
form the sacrificial offerings, enter into
the attribute that is born of the fire;
and having lived within that dwelling be-
come teborn in their respective wombs.
There also, vis., in that which generates
all beings, they remain absorbed during the
period for which dissolution lasts.


26


27—28. From that is produced smell,
from that is produced taste, from that is
produced color, ard from that is produced
touch; from that is produced sound ; from
that %rig*nates doubt ; and from that is pro-
duce  resolutios. Thus is what is known
25 the sevenfold creation.


29. Itis thus that all this was compre-.
hended by the ancients. By the;three full
and final fibations, the full become full
with light


CHAPTER XXL


(ANUGITA PARVA,)—
Continued.


The Brahmana said :—


1. Regarding it is cited the following
ancient story. Do you understand, of what
kind the institution is of the ten Hotris
(sacrificing priests).

2. The ear, the skin, the two eyes, the
tongue, the nose, the two feet, the two
hands, the genital organ, the tower duct,
- and speech,—these, O beautiful one, are the
ten sacrificing priests, .


3. Sound, touch, color, taste, scent,
speech, action, motion, and the discharge
of vital seed, of urine, and of excreta, are
the ten libations, ;


4. The points of the compass, wind,
Sun, Moon, earth, fice, Vishnu, Indra,
Prajapati, and Mitra,—these, O beautiful
one, are the ten (sacrificial) fires.


5-6. The ten organs (of knowledge and
actiony are the sacrificing priests, ‘The
libations, O beautiful one, are ten. The
objects of the senses are the fuel that are
thrown into these ten fires, as also the
mind, which is the ladle, and the wealth
(utz., the good and bad acts of the sacri-
ficer.) What remains is the pure, highest
knowledge, We have heard that all this
uviverse was well differentiated (from know-
ledge).

7. All objects of knowledge are Mind.
Knowledge voaly perceives it. Tho Indiyi-
dua Soul, encased in subtle form, lives with-
in the gross Lody that is praduced by the
vita seed.

8. The bearee of the body is the Garha-
patya Be, From that is produced auother.
Mind is the Ahavaniya fire. Into it is.'
peured the oblation. fate

9. Frdm that was produced the Veda
o: Word); (twen was born Mind); Mind
(desitous of creation) sets fitself on the


MAHABHARATA.


Veda (or the Werd.} Then arises form ot
color) undistinguished by particular colors,
Itruns towards the Mind,
She Brahmana’s wife said :—

to. Whiy did Word first xrise and why
did Mind arise afterwards, seeing that
Word comes into being after having beer
thought upon by Mind?


11, Upon what authority can it be said
that Mati (Prana) takes refuge in Mind.
Why, again, in dreamless sleep, though
separated from Mind, does not. Prana ap-
prehend (all objects) ? What is that whicly
controls it then ?


The Brahmana said :—

12. The Apana air, becoming the lord,
on account of such lordship over it, makes
it at one with itself. That restrained
motion of the Prana air has been said to
be the motion of the mind. Hence the
mind depends upon Prana.


13. But sinee you ask me a question
about word and mind, FE shall, therefore,
describe to you a discourse between them,


14. Both Word and Mind, repairing to
the Soul of matter, asked him,—Do you
say who amongst us is superior. Do you,
O powerful one, remove our doubt. .

15. On that occasion, the holy one made
this answer,—The mind undoubtedly (is
superior) !—To him Word said,—I grant
you the fruition of all your desires.


The Brahmaua said :—

16. Koow that I have two minds, in
movable and movable. ‘That which is im-
movable is, indeed, with mej; the movable
is in your dominion.

17. “That mind is indeed called movable
which, in the form of Mantra, letter, ot
voice, is referrible to your doininion. Hence,
you are superior. 7

18. But since, coming of your own
accoid, O beantiful one, you enter into the
engagement, therefore, filling myself with


brevth, 1 viter you,


19. The goddess Word used always to
live between Prana and Apana, But,.O
biessed one, sinkingg into Apana, though
urged upwards, on account of becoming
dissociated ‘rom Prana, she ran to Prajapati
and said,—-Be pleased with me, O holy
one, aoe


20. Then Prana appeared; once ‘more


‘fostering Word. Hente, Word, encounter-


ing deep exiialation; never utters anything.


Word always comes as endued with
Amongst


2i.
uaerance or ungnudued with it,


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


a7


those two, Word without utterance is | knowledge. ‘These seven never suceded in
4 apprehending or knowing the qualities of


seperior to Word with utterance,


22. Like a cow having milk, she vields
various kinds of meaning. This one always
gives
speaking of Brahma.

23.
A cow, en accornt of her power which is
both divine avd not divine. See the dis-
tinction of these two subtle forms cf Word
that flow.


O you of beautiful smiles, Word is


The Bramana’s wife said :—

24. What did the puaders of Wora
then say, formerly wien, though moved by
the wish to spealc, speech could not come
out ?


The Brahmana said :—


25. The Word that is made in the body
by Prana, then attains to Apana from
Prana. Then changed inte Udana and
coming out of the body, it covers all the
quarters, with Vyana,


26. After that, she lives in
Even thus did Word formerly speak.
Mence Mind, on account of being im-
movable, is distinguished, and the goddess
Word, on account of beia
also distinguished.


Samana.


g movable, is


CHAPTER XXII. -


CANUGITA PARVA.J—
Continued, :


The Brahmana said :—


1. Regarding it is cited the ancient
story, O biessed one, of what the institution
is of the seven sacrificing priests.


2. The nose, the eye, the tongue, the
skin, and the ear numbering the fifth, the
mind, and the understanding,—these are
the seven sacrificing priests standing dis-
tinctly from one another.


3. Living in subtle space, they do not
perceive one another. Do you, O beautiful
one, know these sacrificing priests that are
seven by their nature.


The Brahmana’s wife said :—

4 How is it that living in subtle space,
these do not perceive one another? What
are their (respective) natures, O holy one ?
Do you tell me this, O lord,


The Brahmana said :—
5. Not knowing the qualities is igno-
fance; while knowledge of the qualities is


the Erernal (viz.,, Emancipation),


one another.


6. The tongue, the eye, the ear too, the

skin, the mind, and the understanding, do
Not sitcceed in apprehending sinetls. It is
the nose alone which apprehendis them.:
_ Tue nose, the eye, the ear too, the
sini, the mind, and the understanding,
never succeed in apprehending tastes, ‘The
tongue alone apprekends them,


8. The nose, the tongue, the ear also,
the skin, the mind, and the understunding,
never succeed in apprehending colors. it
is the eye alone which appreheads them..


g. The nose, the tongue, the eye too,
the ear, the understanding, and the niind,
never succeed in apprehending sensations
of touch. Itis the skin alone that appre-
hends them. | :


10. The nose, the tongue, the eve, the
skin, the mind, and the understanding,
never succeed in apprehending sounds. It
is the ear alone which apprehends them.


at. The nose, the tongue, the eye, the
skin, the ear, and the understanding, never
succeed in appreheng doubt. It is the
mind which apprehends it.


12, The nose, the. tongue, the eye, the
skin, the ear, and the mind; never succeed
in apprehending determination. It is the
understanding alone which apprehends it. :


13. Regarding it is cited, O beautiful
lady, this ancient discourse between the
senses and the mind. .


The Wind said :—


14-15. The nose does not smell with-
out me., (Without me) the tongue does
not apprehend taste. The eye does not
perceive color, the skin does not fee! touch,
the ear does not apprehend sound, when
deprived of me. [I am the eternal and
foremust one among «line elements. -  -


16. It always occurs (oat without my-
self, the senses never--shicc ite habis-
tions empty of inmates or fires whose fla..25
have been quenched. -


17. Without me, all creatures cannot
apprehend qualities...d objects, with even
the se+ses exerting thetns-ives,.as fuel that
is wet and dry cannot catch fire:


18. Hearing these words, the Senses
saidThis what you think would be true,
if, you could enjoy pleasures without either
ourselves or out objects. : ;


19—20. If, when we are no mgre, there
be gratification and support of life, and a
Continuation of your enjoyments, then what
you think would be true; or, if, when we


*


28


are absorbed‘and objects are existing, ‘you

can’t have your enjoyments by your desire

aor as truly as you have them with our
elp.


af. If, again, you consider your power


over our objects to be always complete, do |


you then seize color by the nose, and taste
by the eye.

22. Do you also take smells by the ear,
and sensations of touch by the tongue. —Do
you also take sounds by the skin, and like-
wise touch by the understanding.


23. The powerful do not acknowledge
the control of any rules. Rules exist only
for the weak. Oo you seize enjoyments
unenjoyed before; you should not enjoy
what has been tasted before (by others).

24-25. Asa disciple goes toa preceptor
for the sake of the Shrutis, and then, having
acquired the Shrutis, lives on their meaning,
so do you regard as yours those objects
which are showy by us, past or future, in
sleep or in wakefulness.


26. Of creatures, again, who have little
intelligence, whe their mind becomes
distracted and cheerless, life is seen to be
upheld upon our objects discharging their
functions. ;


27. It is seen also that a creature, after
having made many purposes and indulged
in dreams, when afflicted by the desire
to enjoy, runs to objects of sense alone.


28. One entering upon enjoyments
depending on purposes alone and uncon-
nected with actual objects of sense, always
meets with death upon the exhaustion of
the vital airs, like an enkindled fire upon
the exhaustion of fuel.


29. True it is that we have connections
with our respective attributes; true it is,
we have no knowledge of one anothe’rs
attributes. But without us you can have
no perception. Without us no happiness
Can come to yon.


EY


CHAPTER XXIIL


(ANUGITA PARVA, )—


; Continued.


The Srahmana said:— _.


1. Regarding it, O blessed lady, is cited
the ancient story of what kind the institution
is of the five sacrificing priests.


2. Tlee learned know this to be a great
principle that Prana and Apana and Udana
and Samana and Vyana are the five sacri-
ficing priests.


' MAHABHARATA.


The Brahmana’s wife said :—


3. | naturally believed that there are
seven sacrificing priests. Let the great
principle be declared to me as to how,
indeed, the number is five of the saccificing
priests.


The Brahmana said :—


4. The wind nursed by Prana afterwards
takes birth in Apana. The wind nursed in
Apana then becomes developed into Vyana.


5. Nursed by Vyana, the wind is then
developed into Udana. Nursed in Udana,
the wind is then generated as Samana,


6. Those good beings formerly asked
the firsteborn Grandfather, saying,—Do
you say who amongst us is the foremost.
He alone will be our chief.


—Brahman said :—


7. He upon whose extinction all the
vital airs become extinct in the bodies of
living creatures, he upon whose moving
they move, is, indeed, the foremost. Do
you go where you like.


—Prana said :—

8. Upon my extinction all the vital airs
become extinct in the bodies of living
eceatures. vee my moving they once
more move. I am the foremost. See, I go
into extinction.


’


The Brahmana said :—

9Q—10. Prana then became extinct and
once more moved about. Then Samana
and Udana also, O blessed one, said these
words,—You do not live here, pervading
all this, as we do. You are not the fore-
most amongst us, O Prana! (Only) Apana
is under your dominion !—Prana_ then
moved about, and to him Apana spoke.


—Apana said :—

11, When I become extinct, all the
vital airs become extinct in the bodies of
living creatures. When I move about,
they again move about. I am, therefore,
the foremost. See, I go into extinction,


The Brahmana said :—


12. To Apana who said so, both Vyana
and Udana said,—O Apana, you are not
the foremost. (Only) Prana is under your
dominion.


13. Then Apana began to move about.
Vyana once more addressed him, saying,—
t am-thegforemost of all, Listen, for what


2


reason.


14. When 1 become extinct, all the
vital airs become extinct in the bodies ot


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


living creatures.
once more move about. I am (therefore)
the foremost. See, I go into extinction.


The Brahmana said :—

1§—-17. Then Vyana became extinct
and once more began to move about. At
this, Prana and Apana and Udana and
Samana addressed him, saying,—You are
not the foremost among us, O Vyana!
(Only) Samana is under your dominion.—
Vyana then began to move about and
Samana said to him,—{ am the foremost
of you all! Listen, for what reason. When
I become extinct, all the vital airs become
extinct in the bodies of living creatures.
When I begin to move about, they once
more move about, Hence, I am the foremost.
See, I become extinct.


18. Then Samana began to move about.
To him Udana said,=I am the foremost of
all the vital airs. Listen, for what reason.


19. When I become extinct, all the vital
airs become extinct in the bodies of living
creatures. When I move about they once
more move about. Hence, 1 am the fore-
most. Behold I become extinct.


20. Then Udana, after having become
extinct, began to once more move about.
Prana and Apana and Samana and Vyana
_ said ta him,—O Udana, you are not the
foremost one among us. (Only) Vyana is
under your dominion, ~


The Brahmana said :—

2%. To them assembled together, the
Lord of creatures, Brahman, said. Ye are
all foremost and not foremost. Ye are all
gifted with the attributes of one another.


22, All are foremost in their own
spheres, and all possess the attributes of
one another!—The Lord of all creatures,
thus said to them, that were assembled
together.


23. There is one that is unmoving, and
one that is moving. On account of special
attributes, there are five vital airs. My
own self is one,
into many forms,


24. Becoming friendly to one another,
and pleasing one another, depart in peace,
Blessings to ye, do ye up held one another.


When I move about, they


That one accuniulates |


CHAPTER XXIV.


( ANUGITA PARVA. )=


Continued.


The Brabmana said :—


t. Regarding it is cited the ancient dis-
course between Narada and the Rishi
Devamata.


Devamata said :—~

2. -What, indeed, comes first into exist-
ence, of a creature that takes birth? Is
it Prana, or Apana, or Samana, or Vyana,
or Udana?


Narada said :-—


3. By whatever the creature is created,
that first comes to him which is other. ‘The
vital airs are to be known as existing in
pairs, vis., those which move transversely,
upwards, and downwards. !


Devamata said :— :

4. By whom is a creature produced ?
Who (amongst) them comes first? ‘Tell
me what the pairs are of the vital airs,
which move transversely, upwards, and
downwards,


Narada said :—

5-. From wish originates Pleasure, It
also arise from sound. It arises also from |
laste; it arises too from color. :


6. From the semen, united with blood;
first originates Prana. Upon the semen
being modified by Prana, fows Apana.


7. Pleasure originates from the semen
as well. It arises from taste atso. This
is the form (effect) of Udana. Pleasure is
produced from union.


8-9. Semen is formed by desire. From
desire is produced the menstrual flow. In
the union of semen and blood, generated
by Samana and Vyana, the pait that con-
sists of Prana and Apana, enters, movin
transversely and upwards, Vyana an
Samana both form a pair which move
transversely. :


to. Agni (fire) is all the celestials. This
isthe teaching of the Veda. The know-
tedge of Agni arises in a Brahmana, with
intelligence. ~

10. The smoke of that fire is of the
form of Darkness. The quality that is
known by the name of Passion is in its
ashes. The quality of goodness originates
from that portion of the fire into which the
oblation is poured. , :


11. They who are conversant with
sacrifices know that Samana and Vyana


30


are from the quality of Goodness. Prana

and Apana are portions of the oblation

a clarified butter), Between them is the
ire,


12. That is the excellent form (or seat)
of Udana, as the Brahmanas know. Listen
as.f say which is distinct from the pairs.


- 13. Day and Nieht form a pair.
tween them is the Fire. That is
excellent seat of Udana as the Brat Site
know.


14. The existent and the non-existent
form a pair. -Between them is the Fire,
That is the excellent seat of Udana as
the Brahmanas know.


1S. First is Samana. Then Wont: Thee
Jatter’s function is managed through it
(ais., Samana). ‘Then, secondly, Samana,
once more comes to work.


the


16. Only Vyana exists for tranquility.


Tranquillity is eternal Brahma. .Uhis ,
the excellent seat of Udana as the Brahe
manhas know.


. >


CHAPTER XXV.
(ANUGITA PARVA.)—


" rey


Continued,’ fs


The Brahmana said : —
1. Regarding: it is recited the ancient

story of what the institulion is of the

Chaturhotra (sacrifice), '


2. The’ ‘ordinances are now: being duly
Geclared in full. Listen to me, O fair lady,
as I describe this wonderful mystery,


3. The instrument, the action, the agent
and liberation,—these, O beautiful ‘lady,


are the four sacrificing priests by whom |


the nniverse is covered.


4—~7. Hear fully of causes. The noise,
the tongue, the eye, the skin, the ear for
the fifth, the mind and the understanding—
these ‘seven should be understood as the
causes of qualities. Smell, taste, color,
sound, touch, numbering the fifth, the ob-
jects of the mind, and the objects of the
understanding.—these are the seven causes
of action. He who smells, he who eats, he
who sees, he who speaks, he who hears;
numbering the fifth, he who thinks, and he
who understands,-~these seven should be
known as the causes of action. Endued
with qualities, these enjoy their own quafi-
ties, agreeable or disagreeahle.

8—9. As regards the soul, that is des-
titute of qualities. These seven are the
Gauses of Liberation, With, them who are


as '


$


|


!
{


Be. |


t


MAHABHARATA.


learned and gilted with sufficient tnder.
standing; the qualities, which are in the
position of celestials, eat the oblations, each
in is proper place, and according to what
has been ordained. ‘I'he person who is
shorn of dearninz, eating various kinds of


{nod, becomes se'zed with tne sense of
egotism, 1
10. Digesting food far himself, he be


comes rined throuvh the sénce ot evoism
Phe eating of food that should not be eaten
and the drinking of wine, ruin him.


vit. He destroys the ford (he takes}, and
having destroved that foad ha becomes
destroyed himself. The Jearned man, how-
ever,, gifted with power, destroys his food
for reproducing it.


12—-14. The minutest sin does not arise
in him from the food he takes. Whatever
is thought of by the mind; whatever is
uttered ty words, whatever is heard by the
ear, whatever ‘is seen-by the eye, whatever
is touched iby touch, whatever is smelt by
the nose, form oblations of clarified butter
which should all, ‘after controlling the
senses with the mind numbering the sixth,
be poured into’ that fire of high merits
which burns within the body, vis., the Soul.


15. The sa¢rifices formed by Yoga is
going on as ‘regards ‘myself. The spring
whence that sacrifice proceeds is that which
gives the fire of knowledge,- The upward
vital air Prawa is the Stotra of that sacri-
fice. ‘The downward vital air Apana is its
Shastra. Tne renunciation of everything
is the excellent present of that sacrifice.


“16. Consciousness, Mind, and Under-
standing, which are all Brahma, are its
Hotri, Adhwaryyu, and Utigatri. The
Prashastri, fis Shastra, is truth. Cessation
of separate existence (or Emancipation) is
the Honorarium.’


17. People conversant with Narayana,
recite some Richs on this subject. Former-
ly animals were offered to the divine
Narayana.

18, Then are sung some Samans. There
is an authority on this subject. O timid
one, know that the divine Narayana is the
Sout of all.


eaeerere
' * Pace ”


CHAPTER XXVI.
(ANUGITA PARVA.)—<
Continued.


The Brahmana said :—


1. There is one Ruler. There is no
second beside him. He who is Ruler fives


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


in the heart. 1 shall speak now of him.
Moved by Him, I move as directed like
Water along an inclined plane.


2. There is one Preceptow. There is no
second but him. He lives in the heart, and
of bim | shall now speak. Instructed by
that preceptor, all snakes in the world are
always possessed of feelings of enmity.


3. There is one kinsman, There is no
second except him. He lives in the heart
of him | shall now speak. Instructed by
him, kinsmen become possessed of kins-
men, and the seven Rishis, O son of
Pritha, shine in the sly.


4. There is one dispeller, There is no
second but him. fle lives in the heart.
OF him I shall now speak. Having lived
with that instructor, under the proper mode
of living with an instructor, Shakra gained
the sovereignty of all the worlds.

5. There is one enemy... There is no
second but him. He lives inthe heart. Or
him I shall now spealk. Instructed by that
preceptor all snakes in the worid are always
possessed of feelings of enmity.

6. Regarding it is cited the ancient story
of the instiuction of the snakes, the celes-
tials, and the Rishis by the Lord of all
creatures, x :


y—8. The celestials and the. Rishis, the
snakes and the Asuras, seated around the
Lord of all creatures, asked him, saying,—~
Let that which is higbly beneficial for us
be said. —To them who enquired about what
is highly beneficial, the holy -one uttered
only the word Om, which is Brahma in one
syllable. Hearing this, they ran away in
Various directions,


Amongst them that thus ran in all
directions from desire of sélf-instruction,
the tendency for biting first‘arose in’ snakes.


to. Fhe tendency for ostentatious pride
first arose in the Asuras. The celestiais
betook themselves to gifts, and the great
Rishis.to self-control, | vere tee
1a. Having gone to one teacher, and
having been -instructed (refined) by one
, word, the snakes, the .celestials, the Rishis,
and the Danavas, all betook themselves te
various different dispositions, — -
1z. It.is that one who hears himself
when speaking, and unuderstanas it duly.
Ounce, again, is that heard from him when
he speaks, There is no second preceptor.
13. ;
action afterwards Griginates. ‘The insuruc-
tor, the apprehender, the heareg,, and. the
euemy, ace placed within the heart...


14.. By acting sinfully in the world, it is
he who ‘becomes a person of sinful deeds,


It is in obedience to his advice that |*


gi


By acting auspiciously in the world,i is he
‘who becomes a person of auspicivus de eds?
‘1g, It_is he who becomes a person of
controlled’ conduct by becoming addicred
to the pleasures of sense, moved by desire.
‘it is he:-who becomes a Brahmacharin
‘by always devoting himself to the control
of his senses, : ;


16. it is’ he, ‘again, who casts off vows
and actions and takes refuge on Brahma
alone.” By moving in the world, identity.
ing himself the while with Brahma, he
‘becomes a. Brahmacharin. — : oa

17. Brahma is his fuel; Brahma is his
fire; Brahma is his origin ; Brabma is his
water; Brahma is his preceptor ; he is im
merged. in: Brahma. eat d

18. Brahmacharyya is even so subtle,
as understood by the wise. Having under-
stood. it, they followed it, insiructed by the
KAshetrajaa., , :

: . ——

CHAPTER XXVIL

‘(ANUGITA. PARVA. J==
‘Continued.


The Brahmana said:—. :
. -¥2i UHaving: crossed’ that impassable
fortress (of the world). which -has. put poses
for its gadflies’ and mosquitoes, grief and
joy for its cold and heat, heedlessixess for -
its blinding darkness, cupidity and disease$
‘or its reptiles, wealth for its one danger
‘on the road,‘and last and anyer its robbers,
“1 have entered the extensive forest (of
Brahma). -


“he wife of the Brahmana said :—
3. Where is that foremost, O you of
‘Rreat wisdom? Whrat are its trees ? What
‘are itS.rivers? ‘What its mountains. and
“hills? How far is that forest?
Fhe Brahmana said i— .
4. There exists nothing that is separat
from it. .: There is- nothing more delightful
than it, There is: nothing that is une
separated’ from it. There is nothing more
afflicting than it.
5. There is nothing smaller than that,


wii : , :
‘Uhere is nothing huger than that. There
cis poring minuter than that. There is no


+


hapgibess that can resenible it, ~
6. ‘Ywice-born persons, entering into it,
tse ia :
fat onée pet over both joy -and sorrow.
Fhey {they never stand in feae of: any
creature, nor- does any creature stand in
1 fear of them,


32


. gs» in that forest ave seven large trees,
seven fruits, and seven guests, There are
seven hermitages, seven (forms of) Yoga
concentration, and seven (forms) of initia-
tion. ‘This is a description of that forest.


8. The teees which stand filling that
forest, yield excellent flowers and fruits of
five colors.


9. The trees which stand there filling
that forest, yield flowers and fruits which
are of excellent colors and which are,
besides, of two kinds.


to. . The trees which stand there filling
that forest, yield fragrant flowers and fruits
of two colors,


11. The trees which stand there filling
that forest, yield fragrant flowers and fruits
of one color.


12, The two trees which stand filling
that forest, prediee ‘many flowers and fruits
which are of unmanifest colors.


13. There is one fire here, possessed of
a good mind. That is connected with
Brahman. ‘The five senses are the fuel
here. The seven forms of Liberation ori-

inating from them are the seven forms of
nitiation. The qualities are the fruits,
and the guests eat those fruits.


14. There, in various ‘places, the great
Rishis accept hospitality. When they,


having been adored become annihilated, |


then another forest shines forth,


1s. In that forest, Intelligence is the
tree; Liberation is the fruit; Tranquiflity
is the shade of which it is possessed. It
has knowledge for its resting house, con-
tentment for its water, and the Kshetrajna
for its sun.


16, Its end cannot be determined up-~-
‘wards, downwards, or horizontally.


17. Seven females always live
‘with faces downwards, endued with efful-
gence, and the cause of generation. The’
take up ail the different tastes from ai
obey ala even as ‘insconstancy sucks up
truth.


18. In that itself five, and from that
emerge, the seven Rishis who are crowned
with ascetic success, having Vashishtha
for their foremost.


19. Glory, effulgence, greatness, en-
lightenment; victory, perfection, and
energy,—these seven always follow this
same like rays following the sun.


zo. Hills and mountains also exist
there, in a body; and rivers and steams
‘earrying waters in their course, waters
that are born of Brahma.


there,


MAHABHARATA. .


2t. And there is a confluence also ot
rivers in the secluded spot for sacrifice,
‘Thence those who are contented with their
own souls proceed to the Grandfather.


22. They whose wishes have been re-
duced, whose wishes have been directed
to excellent vows, and whose sins have
been consumed by penances, merging
themselves in their souls, succeed in attain-
to Brahma.


23. Tranquillity is lauded by those who
are conversant with the forest of know-
ledge. Keeping that forest in view, they
take birth so as not to lose courage.

24. Such is that sacred forest that is
understood by Brahmanas, and under-
standing it, they live as directed by the
Kshetrajna,


CHAPTER XXVIII.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)==
Continued.


The Brahmana said :—


t. I do not smell scents. I do not get
tastes. [ donot see colors. I do not likee
wise hear the various sounds Nor do I en-
tertain purposes of any kind.


2. It is Nature which desires such ob-
jects as are liked ; it is Nature which hates
such objects as are disliked. Desire and
hatred originate from Nature, like the
upward and the downward vital airs when
souls have entered animate bodies.


3- Separated from them are others; in
them are eternal dispositions; Yogins
would see in the body, the soul of all
creatures. Living in that, I am never
attached to anything through desire and
anger, and decrepitude and death.


4. Not having any desire for any object
of desire, and not having any hatred for
atry evil, there is no taint on my natures,
as there is no taint of a drop of water on
the lotus. :


5—6. Of this fixed (principle) which
looks upon various natures, they are fickle
possessions. Though actions are per-
formed, yet the collection of enjoyments
does not attach itself to them, as the collec-
tion of rays of the sun does not attach to
the sky. Regarding it is recited an ancient
discourse between an Adhwaryu and a
Yati. Do you hear it, O glorious lady.

7. Seeing an animal sprinkled with
water at a sacrifice, a Vati said to the
Adhwaryu seated there these words in
censure,—This is destruction of life,


ASIIWAMEDITA BARVA,


_. B&B Tolfim the Adhwarya replied, —This l
goat will not’ be destroyed. Phe animal
‘meets with yvreat good, if the Vedic de-
claration on this subj -et be true.


g. That part of this animal which is of
earth will go to earth. hat part of this
one which is of Water, will enter into water.


10, His eye will enter the sun? his ear
will enter the various points of the horizon ¢
his vital airs will enter the sky. [ who
follow the scriptures Cominit no sin.


: '
The Yati said :—
tt. Lf you see such good to the goat in
this.dissociation with (his) vital airs, then
this sacrifice is for the goat. What need
have you for it?


tz Let the brother, father, mother, and

friend yive you their approval in this.

Paring him (to them) do you co rsult them.
Pins goat is especially dependent.


#3, You should see them who can give
> there consent te this, After hearing their
consent, the matter will become a worthy
topte tor consideration,


14. The vital airs of this goat have been
ide to retuca to their cespectite sources.
Unly the foanimate body remains behind,
‘This is what l think,


15. Of those who wish ta enjov pleasdre
by means of the inanimate body (of an
animal) which can be compared ‘with fuel,
the trel (of sacis&ce) is alter all the anim al
himselt.


16. Abstention fram cruelty is the fare.
most of all daties. Chis its the teaching of
the elders. We know that no crtel action
should be done. “


ty. Yhis is the prap sition, vis..—No


18. Always abstaiding from cruelty to
all cteatues is what is’ laided,. We
establish ‘this from what is dicectty pert


destruction (of living creatuces.—ii Laay.
ceptible. We-do not rely on what is be-
yond direct perceptiot.


wnything further, then yariour. kinds ‘
fanlty actions are capaule of being done
» by you,
|
The Adhwaryu said:

1920. You enjoy’ the properties of!
sthell which “beteng, to the “earth. Yau’
drink thé tastes which belong :to water.
You seé colors which belong. to luminous ;


bodies. You touch the properties whict |
ciiginate from wind, you hear the sounds.


which originate from ether. You think
thoughts with the mind. All these entities, |
you hold, have life.


)


| forming


33


2t. Vow do not then abstain from taking
life. Really, you are engaged in slaughter.
‘There can be no moventent without des-
truction,. Or, what do you think, O twice
born one.


The Yati said:—

22. The Indesteuctible and the Des«
tructible form the twofold manifestation
of the soat. Of these the Indestructible is
existent. he Destructible is said .to be
exceedingly non-existent.


2%—~24, The vitat air, the tongue, the’
mind, the quality of goodness, along with:
the quality of passion, are all existent. OF
him who is freed from these existent ob.
jects, who is above all pairs of opposites,
who does not cherish any expectation, who
is alike to all creatures, ‘who is freed from
the idea of mineness, who bas governed his
self, awd who is released from all his
surroundings, no fear exists from any
source, : ‘


The Adhwaryu said :—-
| 2§. O foremost of intelligent men, one


phould live with the good. Hearing youc
ppinion ny inderstanding shines with light,


26. O illustrious one, I come to yon,
believing’ you to be a god; and I say f
have no fault, O twice-born one, by per-
these rites with the help of
Mantras.


The Brahitana said :—.
27. With this conclusion,- the Yatl ree


miined silent after this. “The Adhwaryn
also went on with the gréat sacrifice, freed


| from delssion.


28. ‘The Brahmanas understand Libeca+
tien, which is exceedingly , subtle, to, be
of this kind; and having understood it,.
they live accordingly, directed by the.
Kshetrajna, that ‘sect of all topics,


CHAPIER XXIK.

“  {ANUGITA PARVA.)—
: \ Continxed.
The Brahmana said :—

t.. About’ it ‘is ecited the ‘ancient story,
O lady, -of the discourse between Kartiae
viryya and the Oceait, ;
{ 4. ‘There was a‘kiag ‘named Kartia.
viryya-Arjuna who had & thousaud arms,
‘He -conquered,,, with, his bow, tha Earte
‘extending to the ocean,


34


We have heard that, once on a time,


3


as, he was walking on the shores of the sea, .


proud of bis power, he showered hundreds
of arrows on that vast receptacle of waters,

§. The Ocean, bowing down to him,
said, with joined hands,—Do not, O hero,
discharged your arrows (at me)! $ ony what
shall [ do to you.

With these strong arrows shot by you,
ee creatures which have taken shelter in
rm are being killed, O foremost of kings!
Ly you, O lord, grant them security.


Arjuna said :—


6. If any holder of the bow exists that
is equiakto ‘me in battle, and that would


stand against me in the ficid, do you name”


him to me,


The Ocean as


7. If you have heard, O king, of the
great Rishi Jamadagni, his son is competent
to daly receive you as 4 guest. | ;


8. Then that king proceeded, becoming
Highly irate,
found Rama himself.


9. With his kinsmen he began to do
many deeds- while were hostile to Rama,
and caused much trouble to that great hero.

‘yo. Then the energy, which was im-
measurable, of Rama shone forth, burning
the troops of the enemy, Q. lotus- eyed one.


11. Taking up his’ battlesaxe, ‘Rama
suddenly displayed his power, and hacked
that thousand-armed | hero, like a tree of
tnany branches,°


12. Seeing him killed and laid low, on
the earth, all his kinsmen, ‘collected in #
hedy, and taking up their darts, rushed at
Rama, who was then seated, from all sides,


13. Rama atso, taking up his bow and
qinckly getting on his car, discharged
showers of arrows and punished ue ony
of the king.


14 ‘Then, some of the ahatrlyae,
stricken wih the terror of Jamadagni’s
son, entered mountain fastnesses, like deer
afflicted by ure Hop.:,

15 Of them that were unable, through
fear of Rama, to perform the duties ordain.
ed for their order, the progeny became
Vasnilas owing to their inability to find
Biahinanas.


16.5 Thus the Dr avidas and Abhiras and
Pundras, together with the Shavaras, be-
epme Vrishalas through these men who
had Kshatsiya duties assigned to them, fall-
ing away (from them).


17. Then the Kshatriyas that were


Arrived at that hermitage, he..


MAIABH \RATA:


' begotten by the Brahmanas upon Kohatriya
women who had fost their heroic children,
were repeatedly destroyed by Jamadagni’s


son.


18-19. The destruction proceeded one
Fand twenty times. At ms conclusion a
bodiless voice, sweet and coming from the
celestial region, and wich was heard
by all people, spoke ta Rama,--O Rama,
O.Rama, stop! What merit do you sea,
O son, ‘in thus destroying repeatedly these
inferior Kshatriyas ?

20. Thus, O blessed dame, his grand-
sires, headed by Richika, ‘addressed that
great one, saying,—Do you, desict.

2%. Rama, however, unable to forgive
the destruction of his father, replied to thuse
Rishis, saying, you should not forbid me.


‘22. The departed manes then said,—
O foremost of all victorious men, you
should not’ kill these inferior Kshatriyas !
It is not proper that your self, being a
Brabimana, should kill these kings.


eee


CHAPTER XXX.


( ANUGITA PARVA, )—
Continued.


The Pitris said :—


1. Regarding it is cited this old, hinatys .
Having: heard it, you should act accord


r ‘


ing to it, O forenvost of all twice-born
persons.
2. There was a tov sage, named of


Alacka gifed with the austerest of penances.
He knew all duties, was truthful in) speech,
of high soul, and exceedingly firm in his
vows. Having with his bow, conguered the
whole E.rth extending to the seas, and
thereby performed a highly difficult feat, he
set his mind on that which is subtle.


4 While siting at the root of a tree,
his thoughts, O you of great intebigence,
abandoning all those great deeds, turned
towards that which is subile !


Alarka said :—~


5. My mind has become. ‘strong.
Having ‘conquered the mind, one’s con-
quest becomes permanent. PFhough sur-
rounded by enemies, I shall (henceforth)
discharge my arrows at other objects.


6. Siuce oa account ofits uasteadiness,
m sets alt mortals to per orm acts, I shal}
shoot very sharp- pole atcows at the
mind!


ASUWAMEDHA PARVA.


The mind said :—


7. These arrows, O Alarka, will’never
cut me through, They will pierce only
your own vital pacts. Your vital parts
being pierced, you shail die.


|


3. ° Do- you took ‘out for ‘other “arraws
with which to kill: ne leHearing these
words and and ‘reflecting upon them, jhe
said as follows. :


. Alarka said :—
Smelling many “perfumes, (the nose)
bankers after them only. Hence { shall,
discharge whetted arrows at the nose. 4


The nose said :~
10. These arrows will never pass through
me, O Alarki! They will pierce only.
your own vital parts, and your vital parts
being pierced, you shall die. .


tt. Do you look for other arrows. with
which to destroy me!—Hearing these
words and thinking upon them, he said
as follows.


Alarka said :—

tz. This one enfoying* “savoury” tastes,
hankers after them only, Hence [ shall
discharge whetted arrows at the tongue,


The tongue said :— -

13. These arrows, O° Alarka,” will not
cut through me. They will only. pierce |
your own vital .parts and. your vital pacts
being pierced, you. shall: die.


14. Do you took for other arrows with
which to ktil me!—Hearing these words
and thinking upoa them, he said as
follows. ae . a Se


Alarka said :—

‘1g. The skin, ‘touching various objects
of touch, hankers after them only. Hence,
1 shall tear off the skin with various arrows
equipt with the feathers of the Kanka,


The skin said ios


16. Vhese arrows will ‘aot, O Alarka,
pass through me. They will pierce your
ewn vital parts only, and your vital parts
being pierced, you shalt die.


417. Da you took for other: atrows with
which to kill me !—Hearing these -words
and thinking on them, he beat as follows,


Alarka said:—

‘18. Hearing various: sounds, (the ear)
hankers after them only. Henee, I shail
discharge whetled shafis at the ear,


| The eye said:— -


35


The ear said :— :

19. These arrows will not, 0 Alarka
pass through me. They will pierce your
own vital parts only, and your vital Parts
being pierced, you shall die,


20. Do you then look for othef arrow’
with which to kill mef—Hearing thee
words and eting: seam. then, he said as
| follows. ;


Alarka said: —


a1. Seeing many colors, the eye ones
for them only. Hence, [ shall destroy the
eye with sharp-pointed arrows,


nN


22. These arrows will not, O Alarka,
Pass through me at all. Ehey. wil pierce
your own vital parts fonly, and your vitat
parts being cut, you shall die.


23. Do you then look for other arrows,
with which to kill me!—Hearing these
words and reflecting upos ree he said
as follows.


Alarka said :— 7


24. “This forms many determination
with the help of ‘ratiocination, -ifence, f
shall discharge whetted acrows s the
understanding,


The understanding said: —

25. These arrows will not, xe) Alacka,
pass through me at all.” ‘They will pierce
your vital parts only, and your’ vital parts
being pierced, you shall die. 10 you then
looks for other arrows with which to’ kill me.


The Brahmana said :—:


26. Thew Alarka, engaging himeeff, even
there, on penances difficult to perform and
greatly austere, failed to obtain, 'by the high
power (of his-penances) arrows for- casting
at these seven. . :


27—28. Gifted with power, h then, with
mind well concentrated, began to reff ct.
Then, O best of twice-born ones, Alar ka,
that taremost of intelligent men, harivg
thought for a long time. could not obtain
anything better than Yoga. Setting his
miad-on one object. he remained. perlectly
still, eagaged in Yoga.


29. Gifted with energy, he speedily kill-
ed all the senses. with one arrow, having
entered by Voga into his soul and _ thereby
acquired the highest success.


30. Stricken with wonder, that royal
sage then sang this verse: Alas it ise
pity that we should have pe: formed all 2 ats
thrat are external,


36
gt. Alas, that we should have, gifted
with the thirst for énjoyment, courted
novercignty before now ! 1 have learnt this


afterwards! here is no happiness that is
higher than Yoga,


Do you Bnow this, O Rama! Cease
to kill the Kshatriyast Oo you practise
the austerest of penances! You will then
attain to what ié good,


33- Thus addressed by his grandfathers,
Jamadagni’s son performed the ayoterest
penances, and having practised rhem,- that
highly blessed oné acquired that success
whieh is difftcult- to reach.


ro


CHAPTER XXXt.


(ANUGITA PARVA).—
: Continued,


The Brahmana said :—


1. ‘There are three enemies in the world.
They are said to be ninefold, according
to their qualities. Exultation, ‘satisfaction,
and joy,—these three qualities belong to
Goodness,


2. Cupidity, anger and hatred, these
three qualities «re said to bebong Darkness.
Lassitude, procrastination ‘and delusion,
thesethree qualities belong to Ignorance.


3. Cutting these with showers of arsows,
the intelligemt man, free from idleness
possessed of a tranguil soul, and with his
senses under control, ventures to defeat
others. :

4. About it, persons conversant with ;
ancient cycles recite some verses which were
. surg formerly by king Amvarisha who had
acquired a tranquil soul,


5. When various kinds of faults were
reigning svoreme and when the righteous
were afflicted, the illustrious Amvarisha
put forth his strength for, assuming sov-
ereignty.


6. Sybduing his own faults and adoring
the righteous, he acquired great success and
a1 g these verses,


7. have controlled many fauks. IT have
slain all enemies. But there ‘is one, the
Rreatest, vice which deserves to be des-
troyed but which has net been destroyed
by me.

8. Urged by that fault, this individual
soul fails to attain to freedom from desire.
Possessed by desire, one runs into ditches »
without knowing it, -


9. Urged by that fa: ult, one indalges i in’


MANABIARATA. ,


forbidden deeds. D> you cut off. cut off,
that cupidity with sharp-edged swords.


to. From cupidity originates desire.
From desire originates anxiety. The mat
who yields to desire acqiires many qualities
which belong to Darkness.


at. When these have been acquired, he’
gets many qualities which belong to by-
noranee.


12. On account of the qualities, he re-
peatedly takes birth, with the fetters of
body united, and is moved to action. Upon
the expiration of hfe, with body becoming
separated and scattered, he once meets witty
€eath which is due to birth itself.


13. Hence, duly understanding this, and
governing cupidity by inteHigence, one
should ‘dese for sovereignty i his soul.
his is (true) sovereignty. ‘Fhere is no
other sovereigmy bere. The soul properly
understood, is the bing. :


14. Even these were the verses sung by
the Hlustious king Amvarisha, on the suber
ject of sovereignty which he kept before
him—that king who had severed the one
foremost fauk, vis., cupidity.


CHAPTER XXXUL.


(ANUGLTA PARVA )—
Continued.


The Brahmana said :—


1. Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course between a Biabinana and (king)
Janaka.


2. King Janaka (on a certain oceasion),
desirous of punishing bim said to a Brahe
mana who had become guilty of some
offence,—You shall not live within, my
dominions,


3. ‘Fhus addressed, the Brahmana re-
plied- to that best of kings, saying ,—~ Telt
me, O king. what the Himits are of the
territories subject to yoi.


4. 2 wish, U lord, to Hive within the
dominions of another airs Indeed, EF wish
to obey your command, O king, according
to the seriptures. : ;


‘5. -Thus addressed by that celebrated
Brahmana, the king, hearing repeated and
hot sighs, said not a word in reply.


6. Like the planet (Rahu) possessing
the Sun, a cloudedness- of understanding
suddealy overwhelmed, that king of in-
comparable erergy as, he sat plunged j ja


thought. =


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA. ;


37


J. When that cloudedness of under- | fore, the earth, subjugated by me, ts alway


etanding departed and the king became
comforted, he spoke after a short time
these words to that Brahmana.


Janaka said :—


8. Although a (large) inhabited domi-
nion is subject to me within this ancestral
kingdom of mine, yer 1 fail to find my
dominion, searching through the whole
Eurth.


9. When I could not find it on the
Earth, 1 then searched Mithila (for it).
When I could not find it in Mithila, I then
searched for it among my own children.


10. When Icould not find it even there,
a cloudedness of understanding came over
me. After that cloudedness of understand-
ing departed, intelligence came back to me.


_ tt. Then 1 thonght that 1 have no
dominion, or that everything is my domi-
nion. This body is not mine, or the whole
Earth is ming, .

1a. Atthe same time, O best of twice-
born persons, 1 think that that is as much
mine as it is of others. Do you, therefore,
live (here) as long as your choice leads
you, and do you enjoy as long as yeu
please,


The Brahmana said :—~


13. When there is a targe inhabited
tract in your ancestral kingdom, tell me,
depending upon what understanding, has
the idea of mineness been got rid of by
you.


. 14. What also is that. uoderstanding
depending upon which you have come to
the; conclusion that everything forms your
dominion? What, indeed, is the notion
through which you have uo dominion, or
everything is your dominion }


Janaka, said :—

15. All conditions here, in all affairs,
1 -understand, are Hable to come toan end.
Hence, I could not find that which should
be called mine,


16. (Considering) whose is this, } thought
of the, Vedic text. about, anybody’s property:
I could not, therefore, find, through my
understanding, what should be (called)
mine. ; :


17- Depending upon this notion, I got
rid of the idea of mineness. Hear: now
what that notion is depending upon which 1
arrived at the conclusion that | have domi-
nion, everywhere.


18. Ido not wish for my own self those
smells which arg even in my aose. There-


Ul


under me. :


19. Id) not wish for my oww self. those
tastes which exist in contact with even my
tongue. ‘Therefore, water, subjugated by
me, is always under me.


20. 1 do not wish for my own self the
color or light which belongs to my eye.
Therefore, light subjugated by we, is ale
always under me. ,

21. 1 do not wish for my own self those
sensations of touch which are in contact
with even my skin. ‘Therefore, the wind,
subjugated by me, is always under me.


22. I do not wish for own Self those
sounds, which are m contact with even my
ear. Therefore, sounds, suvjugated by me,
are always under me.


23. I do not wish ‘for my own self the
mind that is always in my mind. There-
fore the mind, subjugated by me, is undet
me,


24. All these acts of mine are for the
sake of the celestials, the departed manes,
the Bhuttas, together with guests.


25. ‘The Brahmana then, smiling, once
more said to Janaka—Know that I am
Dnarma, who come here to-day for examin-
ing you.

26. You are indeed the one person for
setting this wheel in nidtion,—-this wheel
that has the quality of Goodness far its
circumference, Brahma for its nave, ana
the understanding for its. spokes, and which
never turns back !


CHAPTER XX¥XHT..


(ANUGITA. PARVA. )—
Continued:


The Brahmana said :—


t. I donot, O timid one, move in tia
world in the manner which you, aceording
to your own understanding, cétisuré. Tam
a Brabmana endued witty Vedic knowledge,
lam liberated. I am a hermit, I follow thé
duties of a householder. I obsérve vows.


2. Lamnot what you see me in good
and bad deeds, E pervaded. everything
that exists in this universe. :


I am the destroyer of all creatures
that exist in the world, mobile or immobile,
as fire destroys all kinds of woad..

4. Sovereignty over the whole! Barth ‘ot
over the Heaven can be compared with thig


_ knowledge of my. oneness with. ‘the. unis


verse). This knowledge is my wealth.


38


MANABHARATA. |


3. This fs the ore path for Brahmanas ; Those whose understandings have not been


by. which they ‘who understand it proceed
A0 domesticity, or, abodes in the ferest, or
residence with’. preceptors, among mendi-


cantss 8, es oo at

6. Witti.ntimerous unconfused symbols,
only one knowledge is adored. . Those who,
Whatever thé symbols and modes of life
which they follow, ha¥e acqyired ai under-
standing having tranqiillity for its essence,
attain to that one entiy-a@s numerous rivers
all meeting tlie Ocean. * -

7. his path can be trodden. with the
help of, the understanding and not of the
body. Actions have both beginning and
end, and the body has actions for its fetters.


8. Hence, O blessed lady, you need
have no fear about the world to come. With
your heart intent upon the real object, it

_ is my soul into which yog will come!


at »


CHAPFER XXXIV.


(ANUGITA PARVA)—
Continued.


The Brahmana’s wife said :—

1, This cannot be understood by a weak-
minded person as also by one whose soul
has not been pe My | intelligence is
very little, and contracted, and confused,


2. ‘Tell me the means by whicl' the
knowledge may be acquired. I wish to learis
feom you the source from which this know-
ledge comes.


The Brahmana’s said :—~

3. Koow that intelligence about Brahma
is the lower Arani; the preceptor is the
upper Arani; penances and conversance
with the scriptures are what niake attrition,
From this is originated the fice of kaow-
ledge. .


The Brahmana’s wife said :—
4. About this symbol of Brahma, which
is designated Kshetrajna, where, indeed,
is a desctiption of it by which it is capable
of being seized ? : i


The Brahmana said :—

5. Heis without symbols, and without
qualities. Nothing exists that may be con-
sidered as his cause. [| shall, however,
tell you the means by which he can be
apprehended or not.

6 A good means may be found; which
is perceived as by bees. That means consists
of an understanding purifigd by actiun.


so purified consider that entity, througl:
their owt ignorance,. as invested with the
properties of knowledge and others.


7. Itis not laid down that this should
be done, or that this should not be dome, in
the rules for acquiring Liberation, —thae
that is, in which a kno vielge of the soul
originates only in him who sees and hears,


8. One should understand as many parts,
unmanifest and manifest, by haudreds and
thousands, as one is capible of compre-
hending . here. ,


9g. Indeed, one should comprehen i
various objects of various significancies, and
all objects of direct’ perception. hen
will come, from practice, that above which


nothing exists. ;
The holy one said :—~
to. Then the mind of that Brahmana’s


wite, wpon the destruction of the Kshetrajna,
became that which is beyond Kshetrajna,
on account of the knowledge of Kshetra.


Arjuna said :—

tt. Where, ind eed, is that Brahmana’s
wife, O Krishna, and ‘where is that fore~
most of Brahmanas, by both of whom was
such success acquired. ‘Tell me about them,
O you of undecaying glory.


‘The blessed and holy one said :-~

12. My mind is the Bralimana, and that
my understanding is the Brahmana’s wife,
He who has been spoken of as Kshetrajna
is I myself, O Dhananjaya..


CHAPTER XXXV.


(ANUGITA PARVA).—
Continued.


Arjuna said :— ;

t. You should explain Brahma to me,—«
that which is the highest object of know-
fedge. Through your favour, my mind is
delighted with these subtle disquisitions, ©


Vasudeva said :—
2. Regarding it is recited the old-dise
course between a preceptor and his diss
ciple on the subject of Brahma,
3. (Once on a time, O. destroyer o
enemies, an intelligent ‘disciple questioned
a certain Brahmana of rigid vows who was
preceptor, as he was seated, ‘saying,—
What, indeed, is the highest good? *


a


ASHWaMEDHA PARVA,


4. Desirous of acquiring that which


forms the highest good, I throw myself at |


your feet, O holy one! O learned Brah-
mina, | solicit you, bending my head, to
explain to me what I ask. ;

§ Yo that disciple, O son of Pritha,
who said so, the preceptor said.—O twice-
born one, I shall explaim to you everything
about which you may have.any doubis,


6. .Thus addressed, O foremest one of
Kurcu’s race, by his preceptor, that disciple
who was greatly devoted to his preceptor,
spoke as follows, with joined hands. D»
‘you hear what he said, O you of great
intelligence.


The Disciple said :—

7. Whence am 1? .Whence are you?
Explain that which is the highest truth.
Fiom what source have originated all
Creatures mobile and immobile ?


8. By what -do creatures live? What
is the limit of their life? Woat is truth ?
What is penance, O learned Brahmana ?
What are called qualities by the good ?


g—to, What paths are to be called
auspicious? What is happiness? What
is sin? O holy one, O you of excelent
vows, you ‘Should answer these questions
of mine, O Jearned Rishi, correctly,
truly, and accurately. Who. else is there
in this world than you who is capable of
answering these questions ?


‘


tt. Do you answer them, O foremost
ofall persons knowing duties! My curio-
sity is great. Ypu are celebrated in all the
worlds as one well-skilled in the duties
about liberation, . <


12. There is none else save you who can
remove all kinds of doubts. Alrajid of
worldly life, we have become desirous of
acquiring Liberation.


Vasudeva said :—


13-14. To that disciple who had humb-
ly sought his instruction and put the ques-
tions duly, who was devoted ta his precep-
tor and endued with tranquillity, and who
always acted in a manner that was agree-
able (to his instructor), who lived so cons-
tantly by the side of his instructor as to
have almost become his shadow, who. was
self-contralled and who had the life of a
Yati and a Brahmacharin, O son of Pritha,
that preceptor gifted wiih intelligence and
observant of vows, duly explained all the
questions, O foremost of Kuru’s .race, O
chastiser of all enemies.


The preceptor said :-—-


‘15. All this was, declared by Brahman


39.


himself. sApplauded. and practised by the
foremost of Rishis, and depending on Vedie
knowledge it involves a consideration of
what forms the real entity. j


1623. We regard knowledge to be
the highest object, and renunciation as the
best penance. He who, certainly, knows
the true object of knowledgé which is in»
capable of being modified by circumstances,
vigs., the soul living in all creatures, succeeds
in going wherever he likes and comes to be
considered as the highest. “Phot learned
man who sees the residence of all things is
one place and their severance as well, and
who sees unity in diversity, suceeeds in
treeing himself from misery. He who does
not long for anything and does not cherists
the idea of mineness about any thing, comes
to be considered, although living in this
world, as being at one with Brahma. He
who knows the truth about the qualities of
Nature, acquainted with the creation of all
existent objects, divested of egoism, and
without pride, succeeds, for sooth, in
freeing himself. Understanding properly .
that great tree which has the unmanitest
for its seedsprou', and the understanding
for its trunk, and high consciousneéss
of self for its branches, and the senses
for. the cells whence its twigs issue, and
the (five) great elements for its flower
‘buds, and the gross elements for its smaller
boughs, which has feaves, which always
puts forth flowers, and upon which all
existent objects depend, whose seed is
Brahma, and. which is eternal,—ind cut-
ting all subjects with the shacp sword of
knowledge, ene acquires ramortality and
renounces birth and death, -. ‘


24—25 The conclusions about-the past,
present, and future, etc., and religion,.
pleasure, and profit, which are all well»
known to Siddhas, which belony to remote
ages, and which are, indeed, eternal, I shall
declare to you. O you of great wisdom |
These form what is called Good, Wise Men,
understanding them in this world, acquire
success. :


26—27. Formerly, the Rishis Vrihas«
pati Bharadwaja, Gautama Bhargava,
Vashishtha, Kashyapa, Vishwamitra and |
Atci, assembled together for the purpose of |
asking one another. They thus assembled
together after having travelled over all
paths and after they had got tired with the _
deeds each of them had done. : oT


ya


28. Those twice-born persons, headed by
the sage son of Angiras, proceeded to the
region of the Grandfather. There they
saw Brahman pelectly purged_of all sin, ,


29. Bowing theie -heads to that great


‘one who was seated at,their ease, the great


40


Rishis, gifted with humility, asked hin this -
grave question about the hizhest good,

go. How should a good man act? How |
would one be freed from sin?) What paths |
are auspicious for us? What is truth, and
what is sin ? : :


31. By what action are the two paths, :
northern and southern, obtained 2? What
is destruction 2 What, Liberation? What |
is birth and what death. of all existent
objects ?


32, T'shall tell you, O disciple, what the
Grandfather; thus addressed,’ said to them,
according to the scriptures. De you listen.


—Brahman said :—

; It is from Truth that all creatures,
Mobile and‘immobile, have been born.
‘They tive by penastce (or action), Under-
‘stand ‘this, O ye of excellent vows! On
account of theit own actions they live,
- transcending their own origin.


34.. For Truth. when united with quali-
ti¢s,. becomes. always possessed of five
marks... Brahman. is -‘Truth. , Penance: is-
truth. Prajapati is truth.


35-37. It is'from Teuth thatall crea-
tures have--otiginated. Truth ‘is. the -uni--
verse -of: being. Lr ois:for this that: Bras
hmanas.who are ‘always devoted te Yoya;'
who have got ever anger and ‘sorrow, and
who always consider Religion asthe cause-
way, take refuge ins Vruth., FP csball: now:
speak of those: Brahmans “who ‘are con.
trolled by one: another amt endued with
knowledge, of the orders, and: of those who
belong to the four modes: of tife:


38.° The ‘wise say that-Religion or-duty
is.one,. having. four quarters) Ye twice-:
born ones, | shall speak to you now of that!
path which is auspicious and- yields good.


39. ‘That path ‘has constantly been trad
over by wise mien in order to acquire an
identity with Brahina, 1 shall speak now
of that path which is the highest and which
is highly difficult of being understood.


40. Do you understand, in all its fullness,
ye highly blessed ones, what is the highest
seat. he first step has been said to be
the mode of life that belongs to Brahma.
charins,

4t, The Second step -is domesticity,
Alter this is the residence in the forest.
After that it should be known is the highest
step, vim, that belongs to ‘Adhyatma:


42. Light, ether, sun, wind, Indra, and
Prajapati,~-one sees ttiése’ as long as one
does not acquire Adhyatma.


43-44: . F shall ‘declate the means; Do
ye first-understand themi- The forest ‘mode


| good and wise by their acts.


MAHABHARATA,


of Hife that is followed by Abcettes liviity it
the forest and subsisting upon fruits and
toots and air is latd down for the three
twice-born classes. [he doim-stic mode of
life is ord sined for all the orders.


45. he wise say that Religion or duty
has Faith for its characteristic mark.  Thas
have I declared to you the paths leading to
the celestials. Vhey are adupted by the
‘Those paths
ate the causeways of piety.


46. That person of rigid vows who follows
any one of these modes separately, always
succeeds in time to understand the produce
tion and destruction of all creatures.


47. 1 shall now déclare, accarately-and:
with reasons,. the elements which livé int
parts in all objects.

48—~—49: The’ great'soul, the unmanifest,
ezoism, the eleven organs‘ (of khowledgé
and action), the five great. elements,! thd
characteristics of the five: elemrents,~these :
form the eternal creation, ‘Che number of
elements has been said:to be twenty-four,
and one (more),


50." ‘That wise persoa who ‘understands
the production and dest: nection of all these
elements, that min among: iall‘ creaturey
bever meets with delusion.

. §t. He whd' understands the elements |
accurately, altthe qualities; all tive celestials, '

succeeds in purilying himself’ of’ alt ‘stu.

Freed from all fetters, such a mat suc-

ceeds if exjoying all tegions of spotless:
purity, ,


CHAPLER XXXVL-


(ANUGITA PARVA.,)~<
Continued. :


—Brahman said :—

1. ‘That which ‘is unmantfeét, “whith is |
indistinct, all-prevading," everlastiog, iin
mutable, should ‘be known to become thd
city of nine portals, possessed of three
qualities, “and “consisting ‘of five ‘ingres
Gients,'


2.. Encompassed: by eleven’ indludiiig |
Mind which distinguishes (objects); -and
having Understanding for the valet, this' is’

* aniaggregate of eleven:


3. The three ducts that are in it, support
it always, These -are the: three Nadis,
They run. continually, and havé the threa
qualities for cheit essence, ~


ASHWaMEDHA PARVA,


4. Ugnorance, Darkness, and Goodness,
these are called the (three) qualities. ‘hese
are connected with one another. They exist
depending on one another. :


5. They take refuge in one another, and
follow one another. ‘They ace aiso joined
with one another. The five (principal) ele-
ments are marked by (theae} three qua-
lities. ;

6. Goodness is also the match of Igna-
rance. Of Goodness the match is Darkness.
Goodness is also the match of Darkness,
and of Goodness the match is Ignorance.


7. There where Ignorance is restrained,
Darkness is seen to flow. ‘There where
Darkness is restrained, Goodness is seen to
flow.


8. Darkness should be known to have the
night for its essence, It has three marks,
and is (otherwise) called Delusion. -It bas sin
also for its mark, andit is always present in
all sinful deeds. ‘This isthe nature of Ig-
norance and it appears also as confined with
others,


g. Darkness is said to have activity for
its essence. [t is the cause of successive
deeds, When it predominates, its mark,
among all beings, is production.


10. Splendour, tightness, and faith
these are the form, that is light, of Goodness
among all creatures, a& considered by ail
good men,


11, The true nature of their marks will
now be declared by me, with reasons, These
shail be stated in aggregation and separa-
tion. Do ye understand them, .


,, 12-18. Complete delusion, Ignorance,
illiberality, indecision about action, sleep,
haughtiness, fear, cupidity, grief, censure of
good deeds, loss of memory, unripeness of
judgment, absence of faith, violation of alt
cules of conduct, want of discrimination,
blindness, vileness of conduct, boastful ase
sertions of performance when there has been
no petfarmance, presumption of knowledge
in ignorance, unfriendlinegs (or hostility),
evilness of disposition, absence of [aith,
Stupid reasoning, crookedness, incapacity


for association, sinful action, senselessness, |


stolidity, lassitude, absence of self-control, |


degradation,—all these qualities are known
as belonging to Ignorance. Whatever other
states of mind, connected with delusion,
exist in the world, all belong to Ignorance,
Frequent ili-speaking of other people, cen-
suring the celestials and the Brahmanas, illi

berality, vanity, delusion, anger, unforgive-
ness, hostility towards ali creatures, are
considered as the characierestics of Igno-
ance.


G


|
|
|


41


19. Whatever undertakings exist which
are unmeritorious, what gifts there are
which are unmeritorious, vain eating,—
these also belong to Ignorance. .


20. Indulgence in calumny, unforgive-
ness, animosity, vanity, and absence of
faith are also said to be characteristics of ©
ignorance. ; :


21. Whatever men there are in this
world, who are characterised by these anid
other faults of a similar kind, and who
break through the restraints are all con-
sidered as belonging ta the quality o
Ignorance.


22. I shall now declare the wombs where
these men, who are always of sinful deeds,
have to take their birth, Ordained to go
to hell, they sink in the order of being.
Indeed, they sink into the hell of the brute
creation.


23—24. They become immobile entities,
or animals, or beasts of burden; or carni-
vorous creatures, or stakes, or worms,
insects, and birds; or creatures of the
oviparous order, or quadrupeds of various
species, or lunatics, or deaf or dumb human
beings, or men who are afflicted by dread-
fub maladies and considered as unclean.


25. These men of evil conduct, always
show the marks of their deeds, sink in
Ignorance. Their course is always down-
wards. Belonging to the quality of ignor-
ance, they sink in Ignorance.


26. Ishall, after this, declare what the
means are of their improvement and ascent ;
indeed, by what means they succeed in
acquiring the regions which exist for men
of pious deeds. -


27-28. Those men who take birth in
orders other than human beings, by grow~
ing up in view of the religious ceremonies
of Brahmanas devoted to the duties of
their own caste and desirous of doing good
to all creatures, succeed through the help
of such purificatery rites, in ascending up-
wards. Indeed, struggling, they at last
attain to the same regions with these pious
Brahmanas, indeed, they go to the celestial
region, This isthe Vedic Shruti,


29. Born in orders othergthan humanity
and growing old in their respective deeds,
even thus they become human beings that
are, of course, ordained to return.


3031. Coming to sinful births ‘and
becoming Chandalas or human beings that
are deaf or who Hlisp indistinctly, they attain
to higher and higher castes, one after
another in proper turn, getting above the
Studra order, and other (consequences of)
qaclities whic belong to Ignorance anu


42


who abide in it in course of migrations
this world. ee :


32. Attachment to objects. of desire is
cousidered as yreat delusion.
and Muuis and celestials become deluded,
desirous of pleasure.


33. Ignorance, delusion, the great delu-
sion, the great obscurity called- anger, and
death, that blinding obscurity. As regards
unger, that is the great obscurity.


34. With respect then to its color, its
characteristics, and its source, I have, ye
earned Brahmanas, declared to you, ac
curately and in due order, everything, about
Ignorance. . : :


35. Who is there that truly gets over
it? Whois there who truly sees it? That.
indeed, is the characteristic of Ignorance,
wig., the seeing of reality in what is not
real.


36. The. qualities of Ignorance have


been declared to you in various ways. Duly’


has Ignorance,- in its higher and lower
forms, been described to you. ‘That man
who always bears in mind the qualities
mentioned here will surely succeed in be-
coming freed from all marks which belong
to Egnorance. :


CHAPTER XXXVIL


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued,


Brahman said :—


t. Ye best of beings, I shall now declare’


to you accurately what (the quality of)
Darkness is, Ye highly blessed ones, do
you understand what those qualities are
that belong to Darkness. ;


2—14. Injuring (others), beauty, toil,
pleasure and pain, cold and heat, lordship
(or power), war,.peace, argument, dissatis-
faction, endurance, power, valour, pride,
anger, exertion, quarrel (or — collision),
jealousy, desire, naalice, battle, the sense of


mineness, protection (of others), destruction.


fetters and affliction, buying and selling,
lopping off, cating, piercing, and cutting
off the coat of mail that another has worn,
fierceness, cruelty, vilifying, poiuting out
the faults. of others, thoughts entirely
devoted to wordly affairs, anxiety, ani-
mosity, vilification of others, false speech,
false or vain gifts, hesitancy and doubt,
boastiulness of speech dispraise and praise,
Jaudation,’ prowess, defiance, attendance,
obedience, service of ministtations, hace
beuring of “thirst or desire, Cleveraess or


Here Rishis_


MAHABHARATA.


dexterity of conduct, policy, carelessness, .
contumely, possessions, and varivus deco-
rations which prevail in the world among
men, women, aninal@, inanimate things,
houses, grief, incredulousness, vows and re=
ulations, actions with expectation (of pood
results), various acts of public charity, the
rites of Swaha, salutations, rites of Swadha
and Vashat, officiating at the sacrifices of
olbers, imparting of instruction, perfor
mance of sacrifices, study, making of gitts,
acceptance of gifts, rites of expiation,
auspicious acts, the wish to have this and
that, affection caused by the merits of the
object for which or whom it is felt, treachery
deception, disrespect and respect, theft,
killiag, desire of concealment, vexation,
wakelulness, ostentation, pride, attachment,
devotion, contentment, exultation, game-
bling, indulgence in scandal, all relations
arising out of women, attachment to dan-
cing, instrumental music, and songs,—all
these qualities, ye learned Brahmanas,
have been said to belong to Rajas or
Darkness.


15. Those men on Earth who meditate
on the past, present, and the future, who are
devoted to the threefold fobjects of life,
vis. Religion, Profit, and Pleasure, who,
acting from the impulse of desire, exult on
acquiring riches in respect of every desire,
are Said to be covered by Darkness. These
men have downward courses.


17, Repeatedly rebora in this world,
they addict themselves to pleasure. ‘hey
covet what belongs to this world as also all
those fruits of the world to come. They make
gifts, accept gifts, offer oblations to the
departed manes, and pour libations on the’
sacrificial fire.


18. The qualities of Darkness have
(thus) been declared to you in their manis
told aspects. ‘he course of conduct also tu
which it leads has been properly described
to you. The man who always understands
these qualities, succeeds in always libera-
ting himself from all of them = which belong
to Darkness. ;


CHAPTER XXXVIE


(ANUGITA PARVA. )—=
Continued.


Brahman said :—.


1. I shall, after this, describe to yor
that excellent quality which is the third.
kt is beneficial to all creatures in the world,
and uablamable, and forms the conduct of
the good,


ASHUWAMEDHA PARVA.


2~3.. Joy, satisfaction, nobility, enligh-
tenment, and happiness, absence of stingi-
ness, absence of fear, contentment, disposi-
tion for faith, forgivéness, courage, absten-
tion from injuring any creature, equability,
truth,  straightforwardness, absencé of
anger, absence of malice, purity, cleverness,
prowess, belong to the quality of Good-
ness.


4. He who is devoted to the’ duty of
Yoga, considering knowledge to + be vain,
conduct to be vain, service ta be vain, and
mode of life to be vain, attains to what is
highest in the next world.


5. Freedom from egoism, freedom from
expectations, looking on all impartially, and
freedom from desire,—these form the eter-
nal religion of the good.


6—g. Confidence, modesty, forgiveness,
tewunciation, purity, absence of laziness,
absence of cruelty, absence of delusion,
mercy to all creatures, absence of the dis-
position to calumniate, exultation, satis-
faction, rapture, humility, good conduct,
pirity in all acts baving for their object
the attainment of tranqnilitv, righteous
understanding, liberation, indifference, celi-
bacy, complete renunciation, freedom from
the idea of mineness, freedom from expec-
tations, unbroken observance of virtue,
belief that gifts are vain, sacrifices are vain,
study is vain, vows are vain, acceptance of
gifts is vain, observance of duties is vain,
and penances are vain,


to. Those Brahmanas in this world,
whose conduct is marked by these virtues,
who follow virtue, who abide in the. Vedas,
are said to be wise and possessed of correct-
ness of vision.


“11. Freed from sins and grief, those
wise men attain to the celestial region and
create various bodies (for themselves).


12. The power of governing everything,
selfecontro!, minuteness, these great ones
make by operations of their own mind, like
the gods themselves living in the celestial
region.

13. Such men are said to have their
courses directed upwards. They are veri-
table gods capable of modifying all things.
Attaining to the celestial region, they
modify ail things by their very nature,


14. They get whatever objects they
desire and enjoy them. Thus have I, ye
foremost of twice-born ones, described to
you what that conduct is which belongs to
the quality of goodness. Understanding
these duly, one acquires whatever objects
one desires.


15. The qualities which belong to good-
ness have been declared particularly. The


cn


43


conduct which those qualities form, has alsa
been properly described. That man whoa
always understands these qualities, succeeds
in enjoying the qualities without being
attached to them,


‘CHAPTER XXXIX,


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
; Continued,


Brahman said :— .

tr. The qualities are incapable of being
described as completely separate from one
another.- Darkness and Goodness and
Ignorance are seen existing in a state of
tinison, ,
They are attached to one another.
The have
They like-


2.
They depend ‘on one another,
one another for their support.
wise follow one another. -


3. As long as goodness exists, so long
does ‘Darkness exist. ‘There is no doubt in
this, As long as Ignorance and. Goodness
exist, so long does Darkness exist.


4. They travel together, in union, and
moving collectively, ‘They move ina body,
when they act with cause or without cause.


5. ‘Of all these which work with one
another however much they may differ in
their developement, the manner in which
their increase and diminution take place
will now be described.


6. There where Ignorance exists in an


‘increased measure, in the lower creatures


(for example), Darkness exists in a smaller
measure and Goodness in a still lesser
degree.


q. There where Drakness predominates,
in creaturs of middle course, Ignorance
exists in a smaller measure and . Goodness
in a still smaller quantity. :


8. There where Goodness predominatese
in creatures of upward -courses, Ignorance
should be known to exist in a small measur,
and Darkness in a still lesser quantity.


- g. Goodness is the spring which catses
the modifications of the senses. It is,
again, the great enlightener. No duty has
been laid down that is higher than Good-'
ness,

10. They who abide in ‘Goodness pro-
ceed upwards, They who abide in Dark-
ness remain in the middle. They wha
abide in Ignorance being characterised by
qualities that are low, sink downwards,


4
4+


4


11. Ignorance is in the Shudra; Dark-
neas in the Kshatriya; and Guodness,


which is the highest, in the Brahmana. |


“‘Yhe three qualities exist thus jn the three
Castes,


12, From a distance, the three qualities
of Goodness, Darkness and lyacrance,
are seen to exist in a state of unton and
more collectively. hey are never seen ia
a state of separation,


13. Seeing the Sun rising, men of evil
deeds become filled with fear. Vravellecs
on their way become afilicted with heat, and


suffer distress.


14, The Sun is Goodness developed ;
men of evil deeds represent Ignorance ;
the heat which travellers on their way fecl,
is said to be a quality of Darkness.


15, The Sun représenting light is Good-
ness; the heat is the quality of Darkness;
the shading (or eclipse) of the Sun on
Parvan days, should be known to represent
Ignorance.

16. Thus, the three qualities exist in all
Juminous bodies. ‘They act by tyrns in
various places in various ways,


17. Among immobile objects, the quality
of Ignorance predominates. Yhe qualities


belonging to Darkness are those pro-
perties of theirs which suffer constant
changes. . Theic oleaginous qualities belong


ro Goodness.


18. The Day should be understood as
threefold. The Night has been ordained
to be threefold. _So also are fortnights,
months, years, seasons, and conjunctions.


19. The gifts are threefold, Threefold
is sacrifice. Lhreefold are the worlds;
threefold the celestials; threefold is know-
ledge; and threefold the path or end.


20. The Past, the Present, and the Fu-
lure, Religion, Profit and Pleasure, Prana,
Apana, and Udana, these also are per-
aneated by the three qualities,


2t. Whatever object exists in this world,
everything. in it, is fraught with the three
qualities. The three qualities act by turns
in all things and in all circumstances.


22, Indeed, the three qualities always
act in an unmanifest form. ‘The creation
of those three, wig., Goodness, Darkness
and Ignorance is eternal.


23—24. The unmanifest. cansisting of
the three qualities, is said to be darkness,
unperceived, holy, constant, unborn, womb,
eternal, Nature, change or modification,
destruction, Pradhana, production, and
absorption, undeveloped, not small (i.e,
vast), unshaking, immovable, fixed, exist-
ent, and non-existent,


|


MAHABHARATA,


25. All these names should he known
by those who meditate on matters about
the soul,


26. That person who accurately knows
all the names of the unmanifest, and the
quilities, as also the pure actions, well con-
versant with the truth about all distinctions
and freed from the body, becomes emans
cipated from all the qualities and enjoys


| absolute happiness.


CHAPTER XL.


(ANUGIITA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Brahman said :—


1. From the unmanifest first originated
the Great Sout, gifted with great intelli-
gence, the source of all the qualities, That
ts said to be the first creation.


2—3. The Great Soul has these synonye
mous words,—the Great Soul, Intetligence,
Vishnu, Jishnu, Shambhu of great valour,
the Understanding, the means of acqui-
ring knowledge, the means of perception, as
also fame, courage, and memory, Knows
ing this, a learned Brahmana has never to
meet with delusion.


4.‘ It has hands and feet on every side.
It has ears on every side. It pervades every
thing in the universe.


. Of great power, that Being is station-
ed in the heart of all. Minuteness, Light-
ness, and Affluence, are his. He is the
ierd af all, and at one with effulgence, and
knows tiv. Gecay.


6—7. In Him are all those who com-
prehend the nature of the understanding,
all those who are devoted to goodness of
disposition, all those who practise medita-
tion, who are always devoted to Yoga, who
are firm in truth, who bave governed their
senses, who are gifted with knowledge,
who are freed from cupidity, who have
conquered anger, wha are of cheerful
hearts, who are gifted with wisdom, who
are liberated from ideas of mine and thine, -
and who are devoid of egoism.


8. All these, shorn of all attachmentst
attain to the status of Greatness. Tha,
persoa who understands that holy and high
goal, vis., the Great Soul, becomes freed
from delusion.


9. The self-create Vishnu becomes the
Lord in the primary creations, He who
thus knows the Lord lying in the cave, the
Supreme, Ancient Being, of universal form,


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


45


the golded one, the highest goal of alt ! solution takes place in an order that is the


persons gifted with understanding,—that
intelligent man lives, transcending the
understanding, :


CHAPTER XLI.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—<
Continued.


Brahman said : —

1. That Mahat or principle of great-
ness who was first produced is called
Egoism. When, it originated as I, it came
to be called as the second creation.


2. That Egoism ig said to be the source
of all creatures, for these have originated
fcom its modifications, It is pure effulgence
and is the supporter of consciousness. It
is Prajapati.

3. It is a deity, the creator of deities,
and of mind. It is that which creates the
three worlds. Itis said to. be that which
feels—/ am all this.


4. That is the eternal world existing for
_those sages who are contented with know-
ledge about the soul, who have meditated
on the soul, and who have acquired success
by Vedic study and sacrifices.


5. By consciousness of soul one enjoys
the qualities. That source of all creatures,
that creator of all creatures, creates thus.
It is that which causes ali changes. It is
that which causes all beings to move. By
its own light it lights up the universe
likewise. .


CHAPTER XLII.


( ANUGITA PARVA.)=
Continued.


Brahman said :—~

1. From Egoism were, indeed, born the
five great elements. They are earth, air,
ether, water, and light numbering the fifth.


2. In these five great elements, in the
matter of the operations of sound, touch,
color, taste, and smell, all creatures become
deluded.

3. When at the close of the destruction
of the great elements, the dissolution of
the universe comes, O wisemen, a great fear
possesses all living creatures.


4. Every existent object is dissolved into
that from which itis produced. The dis-


reverse of that in which creation occurs.
Indeed, as regards birth, they are born.
from one another,


5. ‘Then, when all existent objects,
mobile and immobile, become dissolved,
wise men possessed of a powerful memory
never dissolve.


6. Sound, touch, colour, taste, and smell
numbering the fifth, are effects. They are,
however, inconstant, and called by the
name of deiusion,


9—~9. Generated by the production of
cupidity, not different from one another,
without reality, connected with flesh and
blood, and depending upon one another,
existing outside the soul, these are all heip-
less and powesless. Prana and Apana, and
Udana and Samana and Vyana,—these five
vital airs ace always closely attached {o the
soul, ‘Together with speech, mind, and
understanding, they form the universe of
eight ingredients,

to—11, He whose skin, nose, ear, eyes,
tongue, and -speech are controiled, whose
mind is pure, and whose understanding
deviates not (from the right path), and
whose mind is never burnt by those eight
fires, succeeds in acquiring that auspicious
Brahma than which nothing superior exists,


12. I shall now, O twice-born ones,
mention [particularly, those which have.
been called the eleven organs and which
have Originated from Egoigm. ;


13. They are the ear, the skin, the two
eyes, the tongue, the nose for the fifth, the
two feet, the Jower duct, the organ of
generation, the two hands, and speech
forming the tenth,


14. These form the group of organs, with
mind numbering as the eleventh. One
should first subdue this group. Then will
Beabma shine forth (in him),


i5. Five amongst these are called organs
of knowledge, and five, organs of action,
The five beginning with the ear are cons
nected with Knowledge.


16. The rest, however, which are cone
nected with action, are without distinction.
The mind should be considered as belonging
to both. The understanding is the twelfth
in the top. ,


17. Thus have been enumerated the
eleven organs in due order, Learned men,
having understood these, think they have
done everything. ,


18. I shall, after this, enumerate all the
various orgains. Space (or Ether) is the
first. As connected with the soul, it is
called the ear,


46


1g. As Gonnected with objects, it is
sound. ‘The presiding deity (of this) is the
quarters. The Wind is the second. As
connected with the soul, it is known as the
skin.


20. As connected with objects, it is
known as objects of touch; and the pre-
siding deity there is touch. The third
is said to be Light. As connected with the
soul, it is known as the eye.


at. As connected with objects, it is color;
and the sun is its deity. The fourth sheuld
be known as' Water. As connected with the
soul, it is said to be the tongue.


22.- As connected with objects, it is taste,
and the presiding deity there is Soma,
The fifth is Earth. As connected with the
soul, it is said to be the nose.


23. As connected with objects it is scent ;
and the presiding deity there is the wind.
Thus has the manner been described of
how the five entities aré divided into sets
of three.


24. After this I shall describe every-
thing about the various (other) organs.
Brahmanas knowing the truth say that
the two feet. are mentioned as connected
with the soul.


25. As conneced with objects, it is
motion; and Vishnu is there the presiding
deity, The Apana air, whose motion is
downward, as connected with the soul, is
called the lower duct.


26. As connected with objects, it is the
excreta ‘that is ejected; and thé presiding
deity ‘there is Mitra, As connected with
the ‘soul, the organ of generation is men-
tioned, the producer of all beings.


27. Asconnected with objects, it is the
vital seed; and the presiding deity is
Prajapati. The two hands are mentioned
as connected with the soul by persons know-
ing the relations of the soul.


28. As connected with objects, it is
actions; and the presiding deity there is
Yndra. Next, connected with the soul is
speech which relates to all the celestials,


29. As connected with objects, it is
what is spoken. ‘he presiding deity there
is Agni. As connected with the soul, the
mind is mentioned, which moves within the
soul of the five elements,


30.
mental operation; and the presiding deity
is the moon.- As connected with the soul

- is Egoism, which is the cause of the entire
course of worldly life. - :


jt. As connected with objects, it, is
consciousness of self; and the presiding


As connected with objects, it is the.


MAHABUARATA.


deity there is Rudra. As connected witht
the soul is the understanding, which moves
the six senses.


32. As connected with objects, it is
that which is to be understood, and the
presiding deity there is Brahman. Three
are the seats of al] existent objects. A
fourth is not possible.


33- These are land, water, and ether.
The birth is fourfold. Some are born of
eggs ; some are born of germs which spring
upwards, passing through the earth; some
are born of filth; and some are born of
fleshy balis in wombs.


34. Thus the birth of all living creatures
is of four kinds. Now, there are other ine
ferior beings and likewise those which
range the sky: Ce


35. These should be known to be born
of eggs as also those which crawl on their
breasts. Insects are said to be born of
filth, as also other creatures of a like des-
cription.


36-40. Thisis said to be the second
mode of birth and is inferior. “hose living
creatures which take birth after the lapse
of sometime, bursting through the earth,
are said to be germ-born beings, O foremost
of twice-born persons! Creatures of two
feet or of many feet, and those which move
crookedly, are the beings born of wombs.
Among them are some which are deformed,
ye best of men! The eternal womb of
Brahma should be known tobe of two kinds,
wts., penance and meritorious acts. Sucly
is the doctrine of the learned. Action
should be understood to be of various kinds,
such as sacrifice, gitts made at sacrifices,
and the meritorious duty of study for every
one that is! born; such is the teaching of
the ancients. He; who duly understands
this, comes to be considered as possessed
of Yoga, ye chief of twice-born persons,


4t. Know also that such a man becomes |
freed too from all his sins. I have thus des-
cribed to you duly the docrtrine of spiritual
Science,


42. Ve Rishis knowing all duties, a
knowledge of this is gained by those who
are considered as persons of knowledge.
Uniting all these together, v7z., the senses,
the ‘objects of the senses, and the five great
elements, one should .keep them in the:
mind. -


43. When everything is immersed in


-the mind, one no longer regards highly the


pleasures of life. Learned men, whose une:
derstandings are furnished with knowledge,
consider that as true happiness.’


44 1 shall, after this, tell you of re«
nuneiation aboutall entities by means gentle


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


and hard, which produces ‘attachment to
subtle. topics and which ig fraught with
auspicioustiess. ‘

45. ‘That conduct which consists in ‘trea-
ting the qualities as not qualities, which is
shorn of attachment, whichis living alone,
which does not recognise distinctions, and
which is full of Brahma, is the rcot of all
happiness.


46. The learned man who takes all
desires into himself from all sides like the
tortoise withdrawing all its fimbs, who is
devoid of passion, and who is freed from
everything, becomes always happy.


47. Controlling all desires within the soul,
killing his thirst, concentrated in medita-
tion, and becoming the friend of good heart
towards all creatures, he succeeds in be-
coming fit for assimilation with Brahma.


48. Through suppression of all the
senses which always hanker after their
objects, and abandonment of inhabited
places, the spiritual! fire blazes forth in the
man of. contemplation,


49. As a fire, fed with fuel, becomes
bright on account of the burning flames
it puts forth, so, on account of the repres-
sion of the senses, the great soul puts forth
its effulgence. -


$0. When one with a tranquil soul sees
ali entities in his own heart, then, lighted
by tuts own effulgence, one attains to that
which is subtler than the subtle and which
is peertess in excellence.


_ 51-53. It is settled that the body has
fire for color, water for blood and jother
liquids, wind for sense of touch, earth for
the hideous holder of mind (viz., flesh and
bones, etc.), space (or ether) for sound ; that
it is pervaded by disease and sorrow ; that
it is overwhelmed by five currents; that it
is made up of the five elements; that it
has nine doors and two deities; that it is
full of passion; that it is .unfit to be
seen; that it made up of three qualities ;
that it has three elements, (vrs., wind,
bile, and phlegm); that it is delighted with
attachments of every kind; that it is full of
delusion, : ,


" 54. It is difficult of being moved in this
mortal world, and it rests on the under-
standing as its stay. That body is, in this
world, the wheel of Time that is continually
revolving.


55. That (body), indeed, is a terrible and
untathomable ocean and is called delusion,
It is this body which stretches forth, con-
tracts, and awakens the universe with the
immortals,


ay


56. By controlling the senses, one re»
nounces lust, anger, feag, cupidity, enmity,
and falsehood, which are eternal and, ergy
fore, highly difficult to renounce,


57. He who has controlled these in thig
world, vis., the three qualities and the-five
elements of the body, has the Highest for
his seat in the celestial region, By him is
Infinity attained., :

58. Crossing the river which has -the
five senses for its steep banks, the mentat
inclinations for its powerful waters, and
delusion for its lake, one should control
both just and anger,


59. Such a man, freed from all faults,
then sees the Highest, concentrating the
mind within the mind and seeing self in-
self, :


»

60. Understanding all things, he sees
his self, with self, in af! creatures, some»
times as one and sometimes as various,


changing form from time to time. F


6t. Forsooth, he can perceive numerous
bodies like a hundred lights from one light.
Iudeed, he is Vishnu, and Mitra, and
Varuna and Agni, and Prajapati. :


62. He is the Creator and ‘the ordainer 5
he is the powerful Lord, with taces tusned
in all directions. In him, the heart of allt
creatures, the great soul, becomes resplen-
dent. : ;

63. All the learned Brahmanas, ‘celes»
tiais, Asuras, Yakshas, Pishachas, the de
parted manes, birds, Rakshasas, goblins,
and ail the great Rishis, laud Him.


CHAPTER XLUE


(ANUGITA PARVA, )—~
Continued,


Brahman said :—

1~-2. Among men, the royal Kshatriya
is gifted with the middle quality. Among
vehicles, the elephant (is suv); and among
dwellers of the forest the lion; among all
(sacrificial) animals, the sheep; among all
those that Jive in holes, is the snake ; ainong
cattle, the bull; among females, the male,


“3. There is no doubt in this that jn this
world, the Nyagcodha, the Jamvu, the
Pippala, the Shalmaili, the Shinshapa, the
Meshasbringa, and the Kichaka,’ are the
foremost ones among trees.

45. Himavat, Paripatra, ‘Sahya,
Vindhya, Trikutavat, Shweta, Nila, Bhasa,
Koshthavat, Guruskandha, Mahendra, and


48


Malyavat,—these are the foremost of moun-
tains, Likewise the Maruts ace the foremost
of the Ganas. =


6. ‘The Sun is the lord of all the planets,
and the Moon of all the constellations.
Yama isthe tord of the departed manes;
Ocean is the ford of all rivers.


7 Varuna is the king of the waters.
indra is said to be the king of the Maruts.
Arka is the king of all hot bodies, and
Indra of all juminous bodies.


8 Agni is the eternal lord of the
elements, and Vrihaspati of the Brahma-
- anas. Soma is the lord herbs, and Vishnu
is the foremost of all that are gifted with
might.


9. Tashtci is the king of Rudras, and
Shiva of all creatures. Sactifice is the fore-
most of all initiatory rites, and Maghavat
of the celestials.


‘to. The North is the lord of all the
points of the compass ; the energetic Soma
is the lord of all learned Brahmanas,
Kavera is the lord of all precious gems,
and Purandara of all the celestials.


at. Such is the highest creation among
all entities. Prajapati is the lord of all
creatures. Of all entities whatever, I, who
am full of Brahma, am the foremost.


42. There is no entity that is higher
than myself or Vishnu. The great Vishnu,
who is full of Brabma, is the king of kings
over all. Know him to be the king, the
creator, the uncreated Hari.


13. Heis the culer of men and Kin-
maras and VYakshas and Gandharvas, and
snakes and Rakshasas, and celestials and
Danavas and Nagas.


14 Among those that are followed by
persons full of desire igs the great goddess
Maheswari having beautiful eyes.


15. She is otherwise called by the name
of Parvati. Know that the goddess Uma
is the foremost and the most auspictous
of women. Among women who area
source of pleasure, the foremost are the
Apsaras who are endued with great
splendour,


16. Kings are desirous of acquiring
piety, and Brahmanas are causeways of
piety. ‘Therefore, the king should always
gftive to protect the twice-born ones.


17, Those kings in whose kingdoms
good men languish are considered as bereft
of the virtues of their order. Hereafter
they have to go into wrong paths.


18, Those kings in whose territories
good men are protected, rejoice in his
world and enjoy bappiness in the next,


MAHABHARATA.


#9. Indeed, those great ones attain to
the highest seat. Understand this, ye fore~
most of twice-born ones! 1 shall after this
describe the eternal characteristics of duties.


zo. Abstention from injury is the highest
duty. Injury is a mark of sin. Splendour
is the mark of the deities. Men have acts
for their characteristics.


a1. Ether (or space) has sound for its
characteristic. Wind has touch for its
characteristic. “fhe characteristic of lumi-
nous bodies is color, and water has taste for
its characteristic.


22. Earth, which holds alf entities, has
smell for its characteristic. Speech has
words for its charactcritic, refined into
vowels and consonants.


23. Mind has thought for its charac-
teristic, ‘Thought has, again, been said to
be the characteristic of the understanding.
The things thought of by the mind are
determined with accuracy by the under-
standing. :


24. There is no doubt in this, viz., that
the understanding, by perseverance, per-
ceives all things. Lhe characteristic of mind
is meditation. The characteristic of the
good man is that he does not allow his acts
to be noticed.


25. Devotion has acts for its charace
teristic. Kuowledge is the characteristic of
renunciation. Therefore, keeping knows
ledge before his view, the man of undere
standing should practise renunciation.


26. The man who follows renunciation
and who is endued with knowledge, who is
above all pairs of opposites, as also dark«
ness, death, and decrepitude, attains to the
highest goal.


27. I have thus described to you duly
what the characteristics are of duty. £


| shall, after this tell you of the comprehen-


sion of qualities.


28. Smell, which belongs to earth, is
seized by the nose. The wind, which dwells
in the nose is likewise appointed (as an
agent) in the perception of smell.


20. ‘Taste is the essence of water. That
is perceived by the tongue. Soma, who
lives in the tongue, is appointed hkewise in
the perception of taste.


30. The quality of a lighted body is
color, That is apprehended by the eye.
Aditya who always lives in the eye has
been appginted in the perception of color.


gt. Touch always belongs to the wind
(as its quality). Thatis perceived by the
skin. Whe wind that always lives in the
skin has been appointed in apprehending
touch,


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


, 32. The Quality of a ether is sound.
That is seized by the ear, Afi the quarters,
which live in the ear, have been appointed
‘jn apprehending sound.


The Quality of the mind is thoaght.


TPs is seized by the understanding, ‘Tie
upholder of consciousness, living in the
beart, has been appointed in apprehending
‘the mind.


34. The understanding is apprended in |


‘the form of determination or certitude, and
poneple of Greatness in the form of know-
ledge. The unperceived (Nature) has been,
it is evident, appointed for the seizure of aii
things after certitude, There is no doubt
in this.


35. The Kshetrajna which is eternal and
‘is shorn of qualities about its essence, is
incapable of being seized by symbols.
Hence, the characteristic of the Kshetrajna,
Which is without symbols, is purely know-
ledge.


36. The manifest lives in the symbol
called Kshetra, and is that in which the
‘qualities are produced and absorbed.
always see, know, and hear it (though) it
-is hidden.


37. Purusha knows it; therefore is he
talied Ksheterajna. The Kshetrajna per-
‘ceives also the actions of the qualitiés and
absence of their actions.


38. The qualities, which are created re-
peatedly, do not know themselves, being
unintelligent, as entities to be created and
gifted with a beginning, middie, and end.


39. No one else, but the Khsetrajua,
comes by that which is the highest and
gyeat and which is above the qualities and
those entities which are born of the qualities.


40. Hence, one who understands duties,
renouncing qualities and the understanding,
and having his sins destroyed, and trans-
vending the qualities, emvers the MKshe-
trajua,


4t. One who is free from all pairs of
opposites, who never bends his head to any
one, who is divested of Swaha, who is
immovable, and homeless, is the Kshetrajna.
He is the Supreme Lord.


a9


CHAPTER XLIV.


(CANUGITA PARVA.)—=
‘ Continued.


Brahmana said :—

1. 1 shall now telt you truly about alt”
that which has a beginning, middle, and
end, and which has name and characteris
tics, together, the means of apprehension,


2. it has been said that the Day came
first. Vhen' came Night. The Months are
said. to have the lighted fortnights first.
The constellations have Sheavana for their
first; the Seasons have that of dews (vis.,-
Winter) for their first.


. Earth is the source of all smells ; and
Water of all tastes. ‘Thesolar light is the
source of all colours; the wind of all sensa~
tions of touch,


4. Likewise of sound the source fs space
(or Ether). These are the qualities of ele-
ments. 1 shall, after this, describe that
which is she first and the highest of alf
entities.

5. The sun. fs the first of all luminous
bodies. Fire {8 said to be the first of alt
the elements, Savitri is the first of alt
branches of learning, Prajapati is the first’
of all the celestials.

%. The syllable Out is the first of all the
Vedas, and the vital air Prana. is the first
of all winds. Savitri is the first of all celi-
gious observances.

3. The Gayatri is the first of all metres.
goat is the first of all (sacrificial) animals,
Kine are the first of all quadrupeds. ‘The
twice-born ones are the first of all humau
beings, :

8 The hawk {5 the first of all birds,
Of sacrifices the first is the pouring of
clarified butter on the fire. Of all reptiles
the first, O foremost of twice-born ones, i
the snake, s

9. The Krita is the first of all the cycles ;
there is no doubt in this, Gold is the: first
of all precious things. - .


_ 10. Barley is the first of all plants:
Bood is the first of all things to bé éaten
or swallowed. Water is the beat of all
liquid substances to be drunk.


tt. Of allinimobile objects without dis-
tinction, Plaksha is said to be the first, that
ever holy field of Beahinan, = + \.


12. Of all the Prajapatis J am the frst,
There is no doubt in this. Of inconcei«
vable sout, the self-existent Vishnu is said
to be my superior, ‘ ;


50


13. Of all the mountains the . great
Meru is said to be the first-born, Of all
the cardinal and subsidiary points of the
horizon, the eastern is said to be the fore-
most aad first-born.


14. Ganga having three courses is said
to be first-born of all civers. Likewise, of
all wells and reservoirs of waters, the ocean
is said to-be the first-born,


15. Ishwara is the Supreme Lord of all
the celesiials and Danavas and ghosts and
Pishachas, and snakes and Rakshasas, and
human beings and Kinnaras and Yakshas.


16. The great Vishnu, who is full of
Brahma, than whom there is no higher
being in the three worlds, is the first of all
the universe.


. 17. Of all the modes of life, that of the
householder is the first. Of this there is no
doubt. The Unmanifest is the source of all
the worlds as well asis the end of every
thing. .

18. Days end with the sun’s setting and
Nights with the sun’s rising. The end of
pleasure is always sorrow, and the end of
sorrow is always pleasure. ;


19. All collections have expenditure for
their end, and aj} ascents have fails for their
end. All associations have dissociations
i their end, and life has death for its
end,


20. All action ends in destruction, and
all that is bern is certain to meet with
death. Every mobile and immobile thing
in this world is fickle.


at. Sacrifice, gift, penances, study, vows,
observances,—all these have destruction to
their end. Of Knowledge, there is no end.


22. Hence, one who has a tranquil soul,
who has subjugated his senses, who is freed
from the sense of mineness, who is devoid of
egoism, is freed from all sins by pure
knowledge.


CHAPTER XLV.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued,


Brahman. said :—


it. The wheel of life moves on. It has
the understanding for its strength ; the mind
for the pole; the group of senses for its
fetters, the (five) great elements for its nave,
and home for its circuinference.


MAHABHARATA.


2. It is possessed by decrepitnde and
sorrow and it has diseases and calamities
for its progeny. ‘That wheel relates in tifne
and place. it has toil «nd exercise for its
noise,


. Day and Night are the rotations
of that wher}, It is encircled by heat and
cold. Pleasure and pain are its joints, and
hunger and thirst are the nails fixed into
it.

4. Sun-shine and shade are the ruts.
It is capable of being moved during even
such a short space of time as is taken up
by the opening and the closing of the eye-
lid. lt is covered with the dreadful waters
of delusion. It is ever revolving and void
of consciousness,


5. It is measured by months and half-
months, It is not uniform (being evers
changing), and moves through all the
worlds. Penance and vows are its mud,
Passion’s force is its mover.


6. It is lighted up by the great egoism,
and is sustained by the qualities. Wexa-
ions are the fastenings that bind it around.
it revolves in the midst of grief and
destruction.


7. It has actions and the instruments
of action. It islarge and is extended by
attachments. it is rendered unsteady by
cupidity and desire. It is produced by
variegated Ignoranee.


8. It is full of fear and delusion, and
is the cause of the delusion of ail beings.
ft moves towards joy and pleasure, and has
desire and anger for its possession.


g. It is made up of principtes begin-
ning with greatness and ending with the
gross elements. It is marked by produc-
tion and destruction going on ceaselessly.
Its speed is like that of the mind, and it
has the mind for its limit.


10, This wheel of life which is connected
with pairs of opposites and devoid of con-
sciousness, the universe with the very im-
mortals should east away, abridge, and
check.


1, That man who ever understands
correctly the motion and stoppage of tlris
wheel of life, is never seen to be deluded,
among all creatures.


12, Freed from all impressions, divested
of all pairs of opposites, freed from all sins,
he attains to the highest goal.


13. Fhe householder, the Brahmachacin
the hermit and the mendicant,——ihese f > ac
modes of life have all been said to .47:
the householder’s mode for theic root.


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


t4. The observance of every system of
tules is prescribed in this world. Such ob-
secvance has always been highly spoken of.


15. He who has been first purified by
ceremonies, who has duly observed vows,
who belongs by birth to a family of high
qualifications, and who understands the


Vedas, should return (from his preceptor’s j.


house).


16. Always devoted to his married wife,
acting like a good man, with his senses
uader control, and full of faith, one should
in this world perforin the five sacrifices.


18—17. He who eats the residue after
feeding celestials and guests, who is given
to the observance of Vedie rites, who duly
celebrates, according to his means, sacri-
fices and gifts, who is unduly active with
his hands and feet, who is unduly active
with his eye, who is devoted to peuances,
who is not unduly active with his words
and limits, comes under the category of
Shista or the good.


19. One should always bear the sacred
thread, wear white (clean) clothes, observe
pure vows, and should always mix with
good men, making gifts and practising self-
coutrol,


20. One should govern his lust and
Stomach, practise universal compassion,
and be characterised.-by good conduct. One
should bear a bamboo-stick, and a water-
pot filled with water.


2t. Having studied, one’ should teach
Tikewise should celebrate sacrifices himself
and officiate at the sacrifices of others. One
should also make gifts made to oneself,


Indeed, one’s conduct should be marked by


these six deeds.


22. Know that three of these acts
‘should form the livelihood of the Brah-
manas, vie., teachiug (pupils), officiating
at the sacrifices of others, and the accep-
tance of gifts from a person who is pure.


23. As tothe other duties which remain,
numbering three, vis., making of gifts,
study, and sacrifice, these are accompanied
by merit.


24. Observant of penances,  self-con-
trolled, practising universal mercy and
forgiveness, and looking upon all creatures
impartially, the man who is conversant with
duties should never be careless about those
three acts.


25. The learned Brahmana of -pure
heart, who leads the domestic mode of life
and. practises rigid vows, thus devoted and


st
thus performing afl duties to the best of


his power, succeeds in conquering the
celestial region.


CHAPTER XLVI.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued.


- Brahman said :—


1—3. Properly studying thus to the best


' of his power, in the way described above,


and likewise living as a Brahmacharin, one
who performs the duties of his own order,
endued with learning, observant of pestances,
and with all the senses under control, de-
voted to what is agreeable and beneficial to
the preceptor, steady in practising tie duty
of uth, and always pure, should, with
the permission of the preceptor, eat his.
food without decrying it. He should eat
Havishya made from what is got in alms,
and should stand, sit, and take exercise
(as directed).


4- Heshould pour libations on the fire
twice a day, having purified himself and
with concentrated mind, He should always
carry a staff made of Vilwa or Palasha.


5. The raiments ofthe twice-born maa
should be linen, or of cotton, or deer-skin,
or a cloth that is entirely brown-red,


6. There should also bea girdle made
of Munja-grass. He should bear matted
locks on head, and should perform his
ablutions daily. He should bear the sacred
thread, study the scriptures, divest himself
of cupidity, and be steady in the observance
of vows. :


7. Heshould also satisfy the celestials
with oblations of pure water, his mind
being controlled the while. Such a Brahma-
charin is worthy of being lauded.


8. With vital seed drawn up and mind
concentrated, one who its thus devoted,
succeeds in conquering the celestial region.
Having attained to the Highest seat, he
has not to return to birth.


Cleansed by all purificatory rites and
having lived as a Brahmacharin, one should
next go out of his village and next live as
an ascetic in the forest, having cast off
(all attachments).


1o. Clad in animal skins or barks of
trees, he should perform his ablutions
morning and evening. Always living within
the forest, he should never return to an
inhabited place. : :


45


-1t. Honoring guests when. they come,
he should give them. shelter, and himself
Rive upon fruits and leaves and common
roots, and Shyamaka,


12, He should, without being idle, live
on such water as he gets, and air, and all
forest products. He should live upon. these,
in due order, according to the regulations
of his initiation.

13. He should honor the guest that
comes to him with alms of fruits and roots.
He should then, without idleness, always
give whatever other food he may have.


14. Controlling ‘speech the while, he
should eat after satisfying celestials and
guests. His mind should be shorn of
envy. He should eat little, and depend
always on the celestials.


35. Self-controlled, practising universal

mercy, and endued with forgiveness, he

should wear both beard and hair. Celebra-~
ting sacrifices and devoting himself to the

study of the scriptures, he strould be steady

in the observance of the duty of truth.


16. With body always in a state of
purity, gifted wit cleverness, ever living
an the forest, with concentrated mind, and
senses in subjection, a hermit, thus devoting
himself, would conquer the celestial region.


17. A householder, or Brahmacharin, or
forest-recluse, who would wish to acquire
Liberation, should have recourse to that
which has been called the best course of
conduct.


18, Having granted to all. creatures the
pledge of utter abstention from harm, he
should renounce all action. fe should
contribute to the happiness of all creatures,
practise universal friendliness, govern’ all
his senses, and be an ascetic.


19. Living upon food got without ask-
ing and without trouble, and that bas come
to him spontaneously, he should make a
fire. He should go for alins to a place
whence smoke has ceased to curl up and
-where ail the inhabitants have already
eaten.


20. The person who is conversant with
the conduct that leads to Liberation should
seek for alims after the vessels (used in
cooking) have been washed. He should
never rejoice when he gets anything, and
never lose heart if he gets nothing.


at. Seeking just what is necessary for
supporting life, he should, with concentra.
ted mind, yo about for alms, waiting for
the proper time. He should not wish for
earnings in common with others, nor eat
when honoured. F


- MAHABAHRATPA,


22. The mendicant should conceal hime
self for avoiding gifts with honour. Wohiie
eating, be should not eat the residue of
another’s dish, nor such food as is bitter,
or astringent, or pungent.


23, He should not also eat such kinds
of food as have a sweet taste. He should
eat only so much. as is necessary to keep.
him akve.


24—26 The person conversant with.
Liberation should obtain his  kvelihood
without obstructing any creature. In his
rounds of mendicancy he should never
follow another. He should never show
his piety ; he should move about in as oli-
tary place, freed from passion. Ae should,
resort to either an empty house, or a forest,
or the fect of some tree, ora river, or &
mountain-cave for shelter. kn summer he
should pass only one night in an inhabited
place ;. in the rainy season he may live in
one place.


27. He should move about the world
like a worm, having his path pointed out
by the Sun. Fram mercy for creatures,
he should walk on the Earth with bis eyes
directed towards it.


“28. He should-never amass riches and
should avoid living with friends. The
man knowing Liberation should every day
do all his acts with pure water.


29-—30. Such a man should always pes-
form his ablutions with water that has been.
taken (from the river or tan’). Abstention
fsom harm, celibacy, truth, simplicity, free-
dom, from anger, freedom from decrying
others, self-control and habitual freedom
from back-biting ; with senses controlled,
he should steadily pursue these eight vows,


33. He should always practise a sinless
mode of conduct, which is not deceptive or
creoked. Shorn of attachments he should
always make one who comes aS a guest eat
(at least) a morsek of food.


32. He should eat just enough for live»
hihood, the maintenance of life. Efe should
eat only such food as has been got by fair
means, and should not pursue the dictates.
of desire,


33. He should never accept any other
thing than food and clothing only, He
should, again, aecept only as much as he
Can eat and nothing more.


34. He should not be induced to accept
gifts from others, nor should he make gifts
to others. Owing to the helplessness of
creatures, the wise man should always share
with others. .


35. He should not misappropriate others’
belongings, nor should jhe take anything


asi IWAMEBHA PARVA.


“without being asked. He should not,
having enjoyed anything, become so attach-
ed to it as to seek for it once more.


36. One should take only earth, water,
pebbles, leaves, flowcss, and fruits, which are
Rot owned by any body, as they come,
when one wishes to do any act.


37- One should not live by the occupa-
tion of an artisan, nor should he covet yold.
One should not hate, nor teach ; nor should
one have any belongings.


38. One should eat only what is conse-
erated by faith. One should shun contro-
versies. One should follow the sectarine
course of conduct. One should never be
attached to anything, and should never
enter into relations of intimacy with any
creature.


One should not perform, nev cause
to perform, any such deed as involves
expectation of fruit or destruction of life
or the hoarding of ciches or articles,


40. Rejecting all objects, content with a
very little, one should move about (home-
less), pursuing an equal conduct towards
all creatures mobile and immobile,


4t. One should never annoy another
being ; nor should one be annoyed with
another. He who is trusted by all crea-
tures is considered as the foremost of those
persons who understand Liberation.


42. One should not think of the past
mor feel anxious about the future. One
should disregard the present, biding time,
with fixed mind.


43. One should never defile anything
by eye, mind, or speech. Nor should one
do anything which is wrong, openly or in
secret.

44. Withdrawing his senses like the
tortoise withdrawing its limbs, one should
govern his senses and mind, cultivate a
thoroughly peaceful .understanding, and
seek to master every subject.


45. Freed from all pairs of opposites,
mever bending his head in respect, abstains
ing from the rites requiring the utterance
of Swaha, one should be free from mine-
ness, and-egoism. With purified soul, one

_ should never seek‘to acquire what one has
not and protect what one has,


46. Free from expectations, shorn of
qualities, endued with tranquility, one
should be free from alf attachments and
should depend on none. Attached te one’s
own self and understanding all subjects, one
becomes, forsooth, liberated.


47—49. Those who perceive the self,
which is without hands and feet ard back,


53


1 which is without head and without stomach,
| which is free from the action of alk qualities,
| which ts absolute, untainted, and stable,
which is without smell, without taste and’
touch, without color, and without sound,
which is to be comprehended (by close
study,) which is anattached, which is without
| flesh, which is free from anxiety, unfading,
and divine, and, lastly,, which though
living in a house resides in all creatures, .
succeed in escaping death.


50. here. the understanding reaches
not, nor the senses, nor the celestials, nor the
Vedas, nor sacrifices, nor the regions (of
superior bliss), nor penance, nor vows.


51. The attainment to it by those who
are endued with knowledge is said to be
without comprehension of symbols. Hence
. the man who knows the properties of that
which is shorn of symbols, should practise
the truths of piety.


52. The learned man, living as a house=
holder, should adopt that conduct which is
| conformable to true knowledge. Though
tndeluded, he should practise piety like
one that is deluded, without finding faul€
without it.


53. Without finding fault with the
practices of the good, he should act in such
a way for practising piety as may induce
others to always dissegard him.


54-57. Yhat man who is gifted: with
such a conduct is said to be the foremost
of ascetics. ‘The senses, the objects of the
senses, the (five) great elements, mind,
understanding, egoism, the unmanitest.
Purusha also, after comprehending these
duly with the help of correct inférences,
one attains to the crlestial region, released.
from all fetters. One conversant with thé
truth, understanding these at the time of the
termination of his life, should meditate, ex«
clusively resting on one point. Then, dee

ending on none, one acquires Liberation,
Breed from afl attachments, like the wind
in space, with his boarded up means ex-
hausted, without distress of any sort, be
attains to the highest goal.-


CHAPTER XLVI.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)=
Continued,


‘Brahman said :—

4. The ‘ancients who always used to
speak truth, say that Renunciation ts
penance. Brahmanas, living in that which
has Brahma for its origin, understand
Knowledge to be high Brahma,


54


2. Brahma is very far off, and its attain-
ment depends upon a knowledge of the
Vedas. It is free from all paics of opposites,
it is shorn of all qualities; it is eternal ;
it is gifted with unthinkable qualities ; it
is supreme,


3. It is by knowledge and penance that
those gifted with wisdom see that which is
the highest. Indeed, they who are of un-
sullied minds, who are purged of every sin,
and who have transcended all passion and
darkness (succeed in seeing it.)


4. They who are always given to re-
nunciation, and who are conversant with
the Vedas, succeed in attaining to the
supreme Lord who is at one with the path
of happiness and peace, by the help of
penance,


5. Penance, it has been said, is light,
Conduct leads to piety. Knowledge is said
to be the highest. Renunciation is the best
penance. 3


6 He who understands self through
accurate determination of all subjects, un-
distucbed, which is at one with Knowledge,
and which lives in all principles, succeeds
in going everywhere.


7- That learned man who sees associa-
tion and dissociation, and unity in diversity,
is freed from misery. ,


8. He who never desires for anything,
who despises nothing, becomes eligible,
even when living in this world, for assimila-
tion with Brahma.


9g. He who is conversant with the truths
about qualities of Greatness, and under-
stands the Pradhana as existing in alt
principles, who is free from mineness and
egoisin, forsooth, becomes liberated.


Yo. He who is freed from all pairs of
opposites, who does not bend his head to
any body, who has got over the rites of
Swaha, succeeds by the help of tranquility
alone in attaining to that which is free from
pairs of opposites, which is eternal, and
which is shorn of qualities.


11. Renouncing- all action, good or bad,
developed from qualities, and casting off
both truth and falsehood, a creature, for-
sooth, becomes liberated.


12—15. Having the unmanifest for the
seed of its origin, with the understanding
for its trunk, with the great principle of
egoism for its collection of boughs, with
the senses for the cavities of its little sprouts,
with the (five) great elements for its large
branches, the objects of the senses for its -
smaller branches, with leaves that are ever
present, with flowers that always embellish


MAHABHARATA.


it, and with fruits both agreeable and dis-
agreeable always produced, is the eternal
tree of Brahma which forms the support of
all creatures. Cutting and piercing that
tree with knowledge of truth as the sword,
the wise man, abandoning the fetters which
are made of -attachiment and wiich cause
birth, decrepitude, and death, and freemy
himself from mineness and egvism, forsooth,
becomes liberated.


16. These are the two birds, which are.
immutable, which are friends, and which
should be known as unintelligent. That
other who is different from these two is
called the Intelligent.


17. When the inner self, which ts shorn
of knowledge of nature, which is (as it were)
unintelligent, becomes conversant with that
which is abeve nature, then, understanding
the Kshetra, and gifted with an intelligence
that is above all qualities and apprelends
everything, becomes released from all sins.


CHAPTER XLVIIE.


( ANUGITA PARVA. )~
Continued.


Brahman said :—


1. Some consider Brahma as a tree.
Some consider Brahma as a great forest.
Some consider Brahma as unmanifest,
Some consider it as transcendant and freed
from every distress.


a—s5. They think that all this is pro-
duced from and absorbed into the unmani-
fest. He who, even for the short space of
time covered by a single breath, when his
end comes, becomes equable, attaining to
the self, fits himself for immortality. Con-
trolling the self in the self, even for the
space of a wink, one goes, through the tran-
quility of the seif, to that which forms the
endless acquisition of those that are endued
with knowledge. Restraining the vital airs
again and again by controlling them accor-
ding to the method called Pranayama (sup-
Pression of vital airs), by the ten or the
twelve, he attains to that which is beyond the
four and twenty. Thus having first acquired
a tranquil soul, one attains to the fruition
of all his desires.


6. When the quality of Goodness pre-
dominates in what originates from the
Unmanifest, it becomes fit for immortality.
They who are conversant with Goodness
speak higly of it, saying that there is nothing
superior t@ Goodness.


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


». By inference we ‘know that the Purusha
is dependent on Goodness. O best of
twics- born ones,. it is impossible to attain
to Purusha by any other means.


_ "8. ° Forgiveness, courage, abstention
from injury, equability, truth, sincerity,
knowledge, gift, and renunciation, are said
to be the marks of that course of conduct
which arises out of Goodness,


. g It is by this inference that the wise
believe in the oneness of Purusna and Guod-
ness, | There is no doubt in this,


10. Some learned men that are devoted
to knowledge hold that Kshetrajna and


Nature are one. This, however, is not
correct.
tr. If it is said that Nature is different


from Purusha, that also will indicate a want
of consideration.


12. Distinction and ‘association should
be truly known,
likewise laid down, ‘hat is the doctrine of
the learned, Even both unity and diversity
are seen in the gnat and Udumvara.


13. Asa fish in water is different from it,
So is the relation of thet two (ozs., Purusha
and Nature.) Indeed, their relation is like
that of water drops on the feaf of the lotus,


The preceptor said:~ ~—

14.
manas, who were the foremost of men, felt
some doubts and (therefore) they once more
suestioned the Grandfather.


——


CHAPTER XLIX,


(ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued.


The Rishis said :—


1. Which among the duties is considered
to be the most worthy of being performed ?
.The various modes of duty, we see, are con-
tradictory.


2. Some say that it continues after the
body (is destroyed). Others say that it
does not exist. Some say that everything is
doubtiul. Others have no doubts.


3. Some say that the eternal (principle)
is not eternal. Some say that it exists, and
some that it exists not. Some say it is of
‘one form, oc twofold, and others that it is
mixed.


4. Some Brahmanas who are conversant
with
sider it to be one. Others, that it is distinct ;
and others again that it is manifold,


Unity and diversity are’


I'hus addressed, those learned Brah--


Brahma and utterers of truth con-°


53


s§. Some say that both time and space
exist s others, that it is not so... Some bear
matted locks on their heads and are clad in
deer-skins. Others have shaven heads and
go entirely naked.


6. Some abstain'entirely from bathing,
and some are for bathing. Such differences
of views may be seen among celestials aud
Brahmanas conversant with Brahma and
gifted with preceptions of truth. -


7. Some are for taking food ; while some
are given to fasts. Some speak highly of
action. Others speak . ‘highly of perfect
tranquility,


8. Some applaud Liberation,
various sorts of enjoyments, -


9. Some desire various kinds of riches.
Some, poverty, Some say that means
should be resorted to. Others, that this is
not so.


to. Some are given toa life of absten-
tion from injury, Others are inclined to
destruction, Some are for merit and glory.
Others say that this is not so.


1t. Some. are devotéd to goodness.
Others are established on doubt. Some
are for pleasure. Some are for: ‘pains
Other people say that it is meditation,


Some,


12. Other learned Brahmanas say ‘that
it is Sacrifice. Others, again, say that it
is gift. Others speak highly of penances.
Others, the study of the scriptures.


13. Some say that knowledge and re-
nunciation (should be followed). Ochers
who ponder on the elements, say that it is
Nature. Some speak too much of every
thing. Others, nothing,


14. O foremost of the celestials, duty

being thus contased and full of contradic-
tions of various kinds, we are, deluded and
unable to arrive at any conclusion,
_ 15. People stand up for acting, saying
This is good,— his is good,—lie who follow
a certain duty speaks highly of that duty as
the best.

16. ‘Therefore our understanding breaks
down and our mind is distracted. We,
therefore, wish, O best of all beings, to
know what is good.


17. Yow should declare to us, after this,
what is (so) mysterious, and’ what is the
cause of the connection between the Soul
and Nature.

18, Thus addressed by those learned
Brahmanas, the illustrious creator of the
worlds, endued with great intelligence and:


possessed of a righteous soul, described to


them accurately what ney asked, ay


Veemeares oa


CHAPTER L.
‘CANUGITA PARVA,)=
Continned,
Brahman said :-—
1. Well then, U shall describe to you


what you ask. Learn what was told by a
preceptor to a disciple who came to him.


_ @ Hearing it all, do you settle properly
{what it shoald be). Abstention from in-


jucing any creature is considered as the
foremost of all duties. : :
3. That is the highest seat, shorn of


anxiety and forming a mark of holiness,
The ancients who had seen the certain
trath, have said that knowledge is the
highest happiness,

4—6. Hence, one becomes freed of all
sins by pure knowledge. They who are
engated fn destruction and harm, they who
are infidels i) conduct, have to go to Hell
on account of their being gifted with cupi-
dity and delusion. Those who, without
idleness, perform acts, moved thereto by
expectation, become repeatedly born in this
world and sport in happiness. ‘Those men
who, gifted with learning and wisdom, per-
form acts with faith, free from expectations,
and possesséd of toncentration of mind, are
said to perceive clearly.

7—--8. I shall, after this, describe how the
association and the disassociation takes
place of Soul and Nature. e best of men,
fisten. The relation here is said to-be that
between the object and the subject.


gy. Purusha is always the subject; and
Nature the object. It has been ex-
piained, by what has been said in a pre-
vious part of the discourse where it has
been pointed out, that they exist after the
manner of the gnat and the Udumvara,


to. An object of enjoyment as It is,
Nature is unintelligent and knows nothing.
He, however, who enjoys it, is said to know
it, Sou! being enjoyer, Nature is enjoyed.


at. The wise have said that Nature is
always made up of pairs of opposites. Soul
is, on the other hand, destitute of pairs of
opposites, devoid of parts, eternal, and free,
about its essence, from qualities.


t2. He lives in everything alike, and
waiks with knowledge. He always enjoys
Nature as a lotus leaf (enjoys) water.


13. Endued with knowledge, he is never
tainted even if brought into contact with
all the qualities,

14. Forsooth, Purusha is unattached like
the unsteady drop of water on the lotus.


MAHABHARATA.


leaf. This is the eertaia éonclision that
Nature is the property of Purusha.

1516. The relation between these twd
(vtz., Purusha and Nature) is like that
existing between matter and its maker. As


“ft owe goes into a dark place carrying. a light


with him, so those who wish for the
Supreme, proceed with the light of Nature.
As long as matter and quality exist, so long
the light shines.


17. The flame, however, becomes put
out when matter and quality (or oil and
wick) are exhausted. Thus Nature isemani-
fest; while Purusha is said to be un»
manifest. ;


18. Understand this, ye learned Brah-
manas! Well, t shall now tell you séme=
thing more. With even a thousand (ex-
planations), one who has a bad understan-
ding succeeds not in acquiring knowledge,


rg. One, however, who is gifted with
intelligence succeeds in acquiring happiness,
through only a fourth share (of explana-
tions), Thus should the accomplishment of
duty be understood as dependent on means.


20. For the intelligent man, having know-
ledge of teans, succeeds in .acquiring
supreme happiness.

21. As some man travelling along a road
without provisions of his journey, proceeds


‘with great uneasiness and may even niecet


with destruction before he reaches the end
of his journey, so should it be known that ia
deeds there may or ntay not be fruits.


22—24. The examination of what is
agreeable and what disagreeable in one’s
own Self, yields benefit. ‘The progress in life
of a man who is devoid of the perception
of truth is like that of a man who rashly
journeys ots a long road unseen before,
fhe progress, however, of those who aré
gifted with intelligence, is lize that of mer
who journey along the same road, ridin
on a car to which are yoked (fleet
horses and which moves with swiftness.
Having ascended tothe top of a mountain,
one should not cast his eyes on the surface
of the earth.


25. Seeing a man, ever though travels
ling on a car, afflicted and rendered inseri«
sible by pain, the intelligent man journeys
on a Car as long as there is a car-path.


26. Thelearned man, when he sees the
car-path end, abandons his car for going
on. Thus does the intelligent man who
knows the ordinances about truth and Yoga,
proceed. .

27.. Knowing the qualities, such 4 tran,
proceeds, comprehending what is next and
next. ‘


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


$3-e%9. As one who plunges, without a
boat, into the terrible ocean, with only one’s
two aris, through delusion, undoubtedly
wishes for destruction ; while the wise man
conversant with distinctions, goes into the
water, with a boat having oars, and ston
crosses the lake without fatigue, and having
crossed it gets ta the other shore and leaves
off the boat, freed from the thought of
inineness.


30. ‘Thishas been already explained by
the illustration of the car and the pedestrian,
One who has been overwhelmed by delusion
on account of attachment, sticks to it like a
fisherman to his boat.


31. Overcome by the idea of mineness,
One wanders within its narrow cange, After
embarking on a boat itis not possible in
moving about on land.


32. Likewise, it is not possible in moving
about on water after gue has‘ got on a car.
There are thus various actions about various
objects.


33—34- And as action is performed in
this world, so does it result to those who
perform them. ‘That which is void of smell,
void of taste, and void of touch and sound,
that which is meditated upon by the sages
with the help of their understanding, is said
to be Pradhbana. Now, Pradhana is an-
manifest. A development of the -unmani-
est is Mahat. .


35. A development of Pradhana when it
has become Mahat is Egoism., From
egoism emanates the great elements.


36. And from the great elements res-
pectively, the objects of sense proceed.
The unmanifest is of the natuce of seed. It
produced its essence.


37. We have heard that the great soul
has the victues of a seed, and that is a pro-
duct, Eyoism is of the @ature of seed and
is a product again and again.


38—39. And the five great elements are
of the nature of seed and products. The
objects of the five great elements are gifted
with che nature of seed, and yield products.
These have intelligence for their property.
Among them, space has one equality ; wind
is said to have two.


4o. Light, it is said, is gifted with three
qualities ; and water as. possessed of four
qualities. Earth, consisting of mobile and
immobiles, should be Known as possessed of
five qualities. ;


source of all entities and abounds with |!


examples of the agreeable and the disagree-
sble. Sound, likewise touch, color, taste,
and smell for the fifth,—thesé ate the five


g


or


qitalities of earth, O foreniast of twice-born’ :
ones. Smell atways belongs te earth, and
smell is said to be of various kinds.


43- I shall describe at length the numer’
ous qualities of smell. Smell is agreeable
or disagreeable, sweet, Sour, pungent,
diffusive and compact, oily and dry, and
clear.

44 Thus smell, which belongs to tha -
eacth, should be known as of ten sorts.


45. Sound, touch, color, and taste hava


. been said to be the qualities of water.


[ shall now speak of the qualities of
Taste. ‘Taste has been said to be. of vari«
ous kinds, ; :


46. Sweet, sour, pungent, bitter, astrine
gent, and saline likewise. Taste, which. has
been said to belong to water, is thus of six
varieties. =


47. Sound, touch, and. color,—these: are
the three qualities of light.. Golor: is the
quality of light, and coler is. said. to be .of
varsOus sorts. ‘


48-49. White, dark, red, blue, yellow,
and grey also, and short, long, «winute,s
gross, square and circular, of these twelve
varieties is color which appertains to light.
These shouid be understood by Brahmanas
venerable for years, knowing duties, and
teuthful in speects. ,


50. Sound and touch should be known
asthe two qualities of wind, “Touch has
been said to be of various sdrts.


51—52. Rough, cold and hot, tender
and clear, hard, oily, smooth, slippery,
prinful and soft, of twelve kinds is touch,
which is the quality of wind, as said by
Brahmanas crowned with success, know-
ing’ duties, and possessed of. a sight of
truth. a “

53-@Now, space has only one quality,
aud that is said to be sound. 1 shall
speak at length .of the numerous qualities
ef sound. Sots nee


$4. Shadaja, Rishabha, together with
Gandhara, Madhyama, and likéwise Pan.
chama ; after this should be known Nishada,
and then Dhaivata, besides these, there are
agreeable sounds and disagreeable” sounds,


: compact, and of many ingredieits.


‘thus be kaown to be of ten sorts,

‘the highest of
Eo vay ‘is above it.

4142. She is a goddess who is the |! ;


should
, Space is
the (five) elements, Egoisia


§3. Sound which is bora of ge §


$6. Above egoism is understanding,
Above understanding is the soul, Above
the soul is the Unmanifest. Above the Uns
manifest is Pucusha. - . a


58


57. One who knews which is superior
and inferier ameug existent creatures, who
is conversant with the ordinances abeut
all deeds, and who forms himself the
ahs all creatures, attains to the Uufading

Qui.


ame efoto


CHAPTER Lt,


(ANUGITA PARVA,)—
Continued,


Brahmans said :~


1. Since the mind is the ruler of these
five elements, for controlling and bringing
them forth, the mind, therefere, is the soul
of tha elements, te


a. The mind always presides over the
great: elements. The understanding pro-
eigims power, and is called the Seul..


The mind yokes the senses as a
charioteer yokes good horses, The senses,
the mind, and the understanding are always
joined to the Soul. :


4- The individual soul, mounting the |


chariot to which big horses are yeked and
which haa the understanding fer the reins,
drives about on all sides,


With all the senses attached to it
(for steeds), with the mind for the -charie-
teer, and the understanding for the eternal
reins, existe the great Brahma-car,:  ~


“6, Indeed, that man gifted with learning
and wisdom whe always understands the
Brahma-car in this way, is never possessed
by delusion in the midst of all entities.


.g~g. This forest of Brahma begins
with the unmanifest and ends with gross
objects. It includes mobile and im@obile
objects, and gets light from the sadiance
of the san and the moon, and is decorated
with planets and censtellations.. It is
decked, again, on all sides with nets of
tivers and mountains.. It is always em-
bellished likewise by. “various kinds of
waters. It is the means of Sivelitoed for
all creatuces. ft is, again, the end of all
living creatures. In that forest the Kshe-
trajna always moves about.


“40. Whatever exist in this wostd, mobile
and immobile, are the very frst to be dis-
soled away. After this fare dissolved)
those qualities which compose all entities.


11-12, After the qualities (are dis-
solved) the five elements. Such is the
eradation | of entities. Celestials, men,


MANABHARATA.


Gandharvas, Pishachas, Asuras, (and)
Rakshasas, have all originated from Nature,
and not from actigns, nor from a cause.
The .Brahmanas, who are creators of the
universe, are born here again and again,


13. All that originates from them dis-
solves, when the time cones, in those very
five great elemonts fixe billows in the
ocean.


14. All the great elements are beyond
those elements which form the universe.
He who is released. from those five elements
goes to the highest goal.


15. The powerful Prajapati created
all this by the mind only, Similarly Rishis
attained to the status of celestials by the
hetp of penance.


16. Likewise, those who have acquired


‘perfection, who were capable of the con-


centration of Yoga, and who five on fruits
and roots, likewise perceive the triple world
by penance.


137. Medicines and herbs and all the
various sciences are acquired by means of
penance alone, for all acquisition has
penance for its root,


28. Whatever is difficult of acquisition,
difficult to leacn, difficult to defeat, difficult
to pags through, can all be acquired by
penance, for penance is irresistible.


tg. One who drinks alcoholic liquors,
one who kills a Brahmana, ove who steals,
one who destroys a fosus, one who violates .
one’s preceptor’s bed, becomes cleansed ef
such. sin by penanee well performed.


20-21, Human beings, departed manes,
deities, (sacrificial) animals, beasts and
birds, and all other ereatures mobile and
immobile, by always devoting ‘themselves
to penances, become successful by penance
atone. Similarly the celestials gifted with
great powers of Hlusion; have attained to
the celestial region, =~ :


22. Those who without idleness perform


deeds with expectations, being ‘full of
egoism, approach the presence of
Prajapati. ;


23. Those great ones, however, who are


: devoid of mineness and freed from egoisnt


through the pure ‘contemplation of Yoga,
Sequire the great and highest regions,


23. Those who understand best the
self, having acquired Yoga contemplation
and having their minds always cheerful,
enter imte the unmanifest accumulation of


| happiness.


25. ‘hose persons who are freed from
egeisms and who are ce-born after having


ASHWANEDHA PARVA.


attained to the fuloess of Yoga contem-
plation, enter into the highest region re-
served for the great, vis.; the Unmanifest.


26-27. Born from that same unmani-
feat (principle) and attaining to the same
once more, freed from the qualities of Dark-
ness and Ignorance and adhering to only
the quality of Goodness, one becomes
freed from every sin and creates all things.
Such a one should be known to be {Kshe-
trajna in’ perfection. tie who knows him
knows the Veda, os


28. Attaining to pure knowledge from
(restraining) the mind, the ascetic should
sit self-controlled, One necessarily becomes
that on which one’s mind is set. This is
an eternal mystery.


. 39. That which has the unmanifest for
its beginning and gross qualities for its
end, has been said to have Ne-science for
its mark. But do you understand that
whose nature is shorts of qualities.


30. GF two syllables is Mritya (death) ;
of three syllable is the eternal Brahma.
Mineness is death, and the opposite of
snineness is the eternal.


- 3f. Some men who are led by bad under-
Standing speak highly, of action, ‘Those,
however, who are unmbered among the
great ancients never speak highly of action.


33. By action is acreature born with
body which is made up' of the sixteen,
(True) Knowledge | swallows up Purusha,
This is wirat is highly acceptable to eaters
of ambrosia.


. 33- ‘Therefore, those whose vision ex-
tends to the other end have no attachment
to actions. This Purusha, however, is full
of knowledge and not full.of actioa.


| 34. He dies not who understands Him
who is immortal, immutable, incomprehen-
sible, eternal aud indestructible—Him who
is the restrained Soul and who is abuve all
attachments,


' 35. He who thus understands the Soul
to which there is nothing prior, :which is
uncreated, immutable, unconquered; and
incomprehensible: even to those who are
eaters of nectar, certainly becomes himself
incomprehensible and -immostal through
these means..


. 36. Removing all impressions aia cone

: ‘trolling the soul in the-soul, he _ understands

that auspicious Brahma than wiles hothing
greater exists.


2. 37+ Upon the understanding taceunlny
.elear, ha succeeds in acquiring tranquillity.
The,.mack of tranquillity is like that-what |
takes place in a dream,


59.
33. This is the end of these berated
ones who af— intent on knewledge, They


see all those movements which are born ak
successive developmeitts,


39. This is the end of those whe are
unattached to the world. ‘fhis ig the eterual
practice, This is the acquisition ef men of

nowledge. Thisis the uncensured aa
of conduct.


40. This end is Siaiity of being ite
tained by one who is.alike to all creatures,
who is without attachment, who is without ;
expectations, aod who looks equally on all
things. .


at. I have now described everything to
you, O' feremost of twice-born Rishis! Do
you act thus immediately, you will thew
acquire success,


The Preceptor said :—

42. Thus addressed by the predeptoe
Bralinan, those great sages acted accord-
ingly and thea attained to many happy
tegions.


43- Do you also, O blessed one, duty
act according to the: words of Brahman as
deseribed by me,-O you of- pure soul.
You will then acquire success.


Vasudeva said :—
44. ‘Phus iusteucted in the principtes of
high celigion by the preceptor, the pupil,


O sow of. .Kunti, did everything srondngty
and thea attained to Liberation,


45. Having done all that he should have ;
done; ihe pupil, O perpetuater of Kuru’s
race, attained to that seat t going where one
has-not to grieve. *


Arjuns said:

“46: Who, indeed, was that Brahnana,
Oo Keishna, and who the pupil, O Janard-
dana! ‘fruty, if am worthy: of hearing it,
do you then tell me, OLerd! — .


Vasudeva said :—

“47. LT am the preceptor, O mighty~ .
armed one, and know that the mind -is ys
pupil, “Through my affection for you, |
Dhananjaya, * i have described this mystery
te you, mn


48. If you have any love. for me, O
perpetuator of, Kura family, do you then,
after having heacd. these instructions abgut
the Soul, always act culy, O ) you of excellent
vows.


49. Then: when. this seligion ‘hes - been
duly practised, ‘0. destroyer: vf: foes, yeu
will become freed fronr afl, your: ‘gis. =
attain to perfect liberacivan,


r


“60.


‘$0 Formerly, when the hour of battle
Cane, this very religion, (@) yo@of mighty-
arms, was described by me, Do you, there-
fore, set your mind on it.

51. And now, O chief of Bharata’s race,
it is long since that t saw the lord my
father. I wish to see him again, with your
Jeave, O Phalguna,


Vaishampayana said:—

52. Dhananjaya replied to-Krishng who
had said so,—We shall go to-day from this
town to Hastinapur,


533. Meeting king Yudhishthira of virtu-
ous soul there, and informing him you shall
then go to your own city;


ny


CHAPTER LI.


; (ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued.
Vaishampayana said :— °
1. After this, Krishna ordered Daruka,


saying,—‘Let my car be yoked.’ Within
‘a very short space of time Daruka inform.


ed (his master), saying,—'It has been
yoked.’ :
2, The son of Pandu then ordered. all


his attendants, saying.—‘Prepare your-
selves and be ready. We shall go to-day to
Hastinapur. -


3. Thus addressed, O king, the army
got themselves ready, and informed Pritha’s
son, of immeasutable energy, saying,—
Everything is ready.’ .


4. Then those two friends, vzs., Krishna
and the son of Pandu, ascended their cat
and. proceeded on the journey, engaged in
deligitful conversation,


5+ To Vasudeva seated on the car, the
highly energetic Dhananjaya once more
said these words, O chief of the Bharatas.


_. 6°° O perpetuator of the Vrishni race, the
king has got vietory through your grace,
All his enemies have been killed, and he has
tecgvered his kingdom without 4 thern in it.


7. O.jdestroyer of Madhu, on. you the
Pandavas have got’ a’ powerful protector
Having obtained you for our raft we have
crossed the Kurt ocean.

8:° OQ you who have this universe for
your handiwork, salutations to you, O Soul
of \he-universe, O best of all’ beings in ‘the
universe. I know you in that measure in
which | am approved by you.


‘|


’ MAHABHARATA.


9 O. destroyer of Madhu, the seul of
every creature is always born of your
energy. Playful spart is yours.; Earth
and sky, VU lord, are your illusion.


to. This entire universe, ® consisting of
mobile and immobile objects, is established
on you. You create, by modification, the
four orders of Being.


11. You create the Earth, the Sky, and
Heaven, O Destroyer of Madhu. The
stainless lunac. light is your smile. The


seasons are your senses,


12. The Sever-moving wind fis your
breath, and, death, existing eternally is your
anger. In your grace is the goddess of
prosperity. Indeed, Sheee is always estas


.blished in you, O you of the highest intelli-


gence.


13. Vou are the sport; you are their
contentment; you their intelligence, you
their forgiveness, you their inclinations,
youtheic beauty. You are the universe
with its mobile and immobile objects. At
the® end of the age, it is you, O sinless one,
who are called destruction,


tg. 2am incapable of reciting’ all your
qualities in course of even a long period.
You ate the Soul andthe Supreme Soul.
bow to you, O you of eyes like the (pctals
of the) lotus.


15—~18. O you who are irresistible, I have
Jearnt it from&Narada and Devala and the
island-born (Vyasa), and the Kuru grand. -
father also, that ail this (universe) rest«


on you. You are the one Lord of, alt
creatures. his, O sinless one, Sthat you
have desciibed to me on account of


your favour for myself, I shall duly accom-
plish in full, OQ  Janarddana! Highly
wonderful is this whicti you have done from
desire of doing what is agreeable to us,
vis., the destruction in battle of the Kau-
fava (prince), the son of Dhritarashtra,
That army bad been burnt by you which
I (subsequently) defeated in battle.


1g—20. That feat was achieved by you
0) account of which victory became mine !
By the power of your intelligence was shown
the means by which was duly effected the
destruction of Duryodbana in battle, as
also of Karna, as of the sinful king of the
Sindhus, and Bhurishravas. :


21, 1 shall accomplish. all that which,
O sonfoi Devaki, pleased with me you have.
declared to myself. I do not entertain any
doubt in this.”


22. Going to king Vudhishthira of
righteous soul, I {shall, O sinless one, urge
him to dismiss you, O you whd are con


versant with every duty.


+


ASHWAMEDIIA -PARVA.


-23. © lord; I approve of departure for
Dwaraka. You shall soon see my maternal
uncle, O Janarddana.


24. You shall also see the irresistible
Valadeva and other chiefs of the Vrishni
race !'—Thus conversing with each other,
the two reached the city of Hastinapur.


25. They then, with cheerful hearts, and
without any anxiety, entered the palace of
Dhritarashtra which resembled the mansion
of Shakra,


26—28. They then saw, O monarch, king
Dhritarashtra, and highly intelligent Vidura,
and king Yudhishthira ; and the irresistibly
Bhimasena, and the two sons of Madri by
Pandu; and king Dhritarashtra seated;
and the unvanquished Yuyutsu; and
Gandhari of great wisdom, and Pritha,
and the beautiful Krishna, and the other
ladies of Bharata’s race with Subhadra
for the first. , ,


29—31. They also saw all those ladies
who used to wait upon Gandhari, ‘Then
approaching king Diritarashtea, those two
chastisers of enemies announced their names
and touched his feet. Indeed, those great
‘ones also touched the feet of Gandhari and
Pritha and king Yudhishthira the just,
and Bhima. Embracing Vidura also, they
enquired after his well-being.


32—33- In the company of all those
persons, Arjuna and Krishna then ap-
pioached king Dhritarashtra (again).


Night came and then the intelligent king
Dhiitarashtea dismissed all those perpe-
tuaters of Kuru’s race as also Janarddana
for retiring to theie respective roums. Per-
mitted by the king, all of them entered
their respective apartments. ~


34-36. Kuishna of great energy pro-
ceeded to the apartments of Dnananjaya.
Adored duly and furnished with every
object .of comfort and enjoyment, Krishua
of great intelligence passed the night in
happy sleep with Dhananjaya as his com-
panion. When the night passed away and
morning came, the two heroes, finishing
their morning rites and adoring their
persons properly, proceeded to the palace
of king Yudhishthira the just, ‘There
YVudhishthira the just, of great might, sat
with his ministers,

37. The two great ones, entering that
well-adorned chamber, saw king Yudhish-
thira the just like the two Ashwins seeing
the chief ot the celestials. + j


38 Meeting the king, he of Vrishni’s
race, as also that foremost hero of Kuru’s
race, getting. the permission of Yudhish-
thira who was highly pleased with them,
sat themselves down,


Gr


39. Then the king, gifted with great
intelligence, ~ seeing those- two friends,
became desirous of ‘addressing them. Seon
that best of kings, that foremost of speakers,
addressed them in the following words,


Yudhishthira said :—

40. Ye heroes, ye foremost ones of
Yadu’s and Kuru’s cade, it appears that.
ye two are desirous of saying something to..
me. Do ye say what is in your mind. [,
shall soon satisfy it. Do net hesitate.


41." Thus addressed, ‘ Phalguna, welt.
conversant with speech, tumbly approached .
king Yudhishthira the just and then said
these words, :


42, Highly powerful Vasudeva here,
O king, is long absent from home. He:
wishes, with your permission, to see his sires.


43. Let him go, if you think it proper,
to the city of the Anarttas! You should,’
O hero, grant him permission.


Yudhishthira said :—

44. O lotus-eyed one, blessed. be you {
O slayer of Madhu, do you go this very day.
to the city of Dwaravati for seeing, O
powerful one, that foremost ene of Sura’s,
race. “ oe
45- O mighty-armed Keshava, your
departure is approved by me! You have
not sees my maternal uncle as also the
goddess Devaki for a long time. :


46" Meeting my maternal uncle and
going to Valadeva also, O giver of honors,
you will,, O you of great wisdom, adore
both of them at my word as they deserve: .


47. ‘Do you also think of me daily as
also. of Bhima, that foremost of powerful
men, and of Phalyuna and Nakula and
Sahadeva, O giver of honours, :


48. Having seen the Anarttas, and
your father, O mizhty-armed one, and the
Veistnis, you will return to my hborse-
sacrifice, O sinless one! ane


49 Do you then ge, taking with you
various kinds of gems and ¥arious sorts of
wealth, Do you, O hera of the Satwata
race, also take with you whatever else you
like. woos Weg i

50. It ia through your grace, O:: Keshava
that that the whole Earth, O hero, has
come. under our sway aud ail our enemies
have been killed,


st. When king Yudhishthira the just
of Kuru’s race said so, Vasudeva, that
foremost of men, said these words (ie


ceply)}.


62
Vasudeva said »— be
52. O mighty-armed one, .all- jewels
and gems, all ricifes and the entice Earth,


Lelong to you alone, Whatever wealth.
axists in’ my house, you, ° terd,
tre always the owner thereof,


“53. To him Yudbishthira, the son of


Dharma, ‘said,—'Be it 30’—and then duly.


adored (Krishna) the eldest brother, gifted
with great energy, of Gada. Vasudeva
then proceeded to his paternal aunt (Kunti).
Duly honouring her, he cicumpulated her
body. aa
54. He was properly accented: by hie
in return, and then by all the others having
Vidura for their first. The four-armed


eldest brother-of Gada- then started from |


Nagapura on his excellent car.


53. Placing his sister, the lady Sutihedes;
on the car, the mighty-a¢med Janarddana,
then, with the permission of both Yudhish-
thira and (Kunti) bis paternal aunt, started,
accompanied by a large train of citizens.


6.
ile on his banner, as also Satyaki,-and
the twe sons of Madtavati, and Vidura
of incomparable intelligence, and shima
himself whose tread resembled that of a
prince of elephants, all followed Madhava,


57. Janarddana of great energy, causing
alt chose extenders of the Kuru, kingdom
and Vidura also ‘to return, addressed
Daruka, and Satyaki, saying,—* Urge the
horses to:speed.’


56. Ther that grinder of enemies, vis.,
Janarddana of great prowess, accompanied
by Satyaki, the foremost one of Shini’s race,
proceeded te the city of the Anarttas, alter
having killed all his enemies, like He of a
hundred sacrifices proceeding to the “Gales
ual region. :


ots 4


CHAPTER LUI. |


_( ANUGITA PARVA.)<
Continued. ;


Vaishampayana. said: — sa

t. “As ‘he :of Vrishni’s family was going
to Dwaraka, these feremost: princes. of
“<Bharata’s race,- those  chiastisers - of
‘enemies, embraced him and fell back-with
their attendants.


-:) a. Phalguna repeatedly embraced the

* Neishni hera, and as long as he was_ within

- the range of eye-sight he repeatedly turned
his eyes towards him. .


The hero who had the foremost:of


gress


- MAHABAHRATA.


3. With great difficulty, the son of
Pritha withdrew his leok that had faller
en Govinda. The undefeated Krishna
also (did the sams).


(4 The marks which were displayed on
the occasion of that great one’s departure,
{ shall now fully describe. Do you listen to
me. -


5. The wind blew with great force be-
fore the car, clearing the path of sand-
grains and dust and thorns,


6. Vasava rained pure and fragrant
showers and celestial flowers. before the
holder of Sharanga.


7. As the mighty-armed hero went ow
he came upon the desert ill-supplied with
weter.. There he saw that foremost of
ascetics, named Utanka, of immeasurabie
energy.


8. Fhe hero of iniee eyes and great
energy adored that ascetic. He was then
adored by the ascetic in return.
Vasudeva ‘then enquired after Wis well-
being. |


-g. «That foremost of Brahmanas, vis.,
Utanka, politely accosted by Madhava,
honoured him duly and then addressed
him in these words.


to. O Shaurin, having gone to the
palaces of the Kurus and the Pandavas,
have ‘yeu succeeded in establishing a
durable understanding between them such
as -should exist ‘between brothers? You
should tell me every thing.


.1t. -Do you. come, O Keshava, after
having united them in peace,—them who are
your telatives and who are ever dear to
you, O foremost one of Vrishni's race.


12, Wilf the five sons of Pandu, and
the ‘children of Dhritarashtra, O destroyer
of enemies, sport in the world in joy with
‘you? -


13. Willall the “kings enjoy. happiness


“in theie, respective kingdoms, on account


of the pacification of the Kauravas - eECHEN
about -by you ? ;

143 -Has’ that +trisst, oO son, ‘Which ¥ had
always. réposed: on you, pone ibard about
the -Kauravas ? ‘


‘fhe blessed and holy one gaid: ne ,


ue 15716, FE triedi:my best.at first, foribring
ing about a good understanding, about the
Kauravas, When I could - not - by -any


- means establish them an peace, it happened


that all .of them, . with their relatives and
kinsmen, died. It is impossible -to trans-
‘destiny. by either . inyelligence, or
power,


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


+}. O great Rishi, O sintess one, this
Also cannot be unknown to you. They
(the Kauravas) disregarded which Bhishma
and Vidura gave them referring to me.


18. Encountering one another they ‘then
became guests of Yama’s palace. Only the
five Pandavas farm the remnant of the un-
slain, all theie friends and.all their children
having been destroyed. All the sons
Dhritarashtra also, with thelr children and
kinsmen, have been killed,


19. - When Keishna had said these words,
Utanka, filled with anger, and with eyes
expanded in rage, addressed him in these
words. | ;


Utanka said :— ee oe
ao. Since, though able, O Kristina,
you did not rescue those foremost ones
of Kuru’s race, who were your relatives
and, therefore, dear to you, [ shall, for-
sooth, curse you, . ‘


21. Since you did not forcibly compel
them to forbear, therefore, O destroyer of
Madhu, I shall, filled with anger denounce
a curse on you,


22. It seems, O Madhava, that, though
fully able (to save them), you were in-
different to these foremost of Kurus who,
overwhelmed by insincerity and hypocrisy,
have-all met with destruction,


Vasudeva said':— :

23. O scion ef Bhrigu’s race listen,
to what I say in full. Do you accept my
apologies also. O you of Bhrigu’s race,
you are an ascetic ! :


_ 24. After having heard my words about
the soul, you. may then utter your curse.
No man is able, by alittle ascetic merit,
to put me down,


_ 28. O foremest of ascetics, 1 do not
wish to see the destruction of all, youre
penances! You havea large tmeasure of
blazing penances. You have passed your
preceptors and seniors. Ste 5%


36. O foremost of twice-born ones.. 1
Knew that you have observed the rules
of Brahmacharyya from your infancy. I do
not, therefore, wish the luss or diminution of
your penances acquired with so much
pain!


63
CHAPTER LIV. -


(ANUGITA PARVA. j=
- Continued,


Utanke said:— ;

1, Do you, O Keshava, telf me that
faultless spiritual science. Having heard
your discourse I shall ordain what is for
your good or jmgrecate a curse to you
O Janarddana! - ,


_ oe
Vasudeva said :— ;

a. Know that the three. qualities - of
Ignorance, Darkness and Goodness exist,.
depending en me as their refuge. So also,.
O twwice-born one, know that the Rudras
and the Vasus have originated from me. _


3- In me are all creatures, and inall.
creatures do ! exist; know this. Let no’
doubt arise in your mind about this.


4. So also, O twice-born one, know
that all the tribes of the Daityas, all the
Yakstias, Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Nagas,
Apsaras, have originated from me,


§- Whatever has been called existent.
and non-existent, whatever is manifest, °
and not-manifest, whatever is destructible
oo indestructible, all have me for their
soul, * :


6. Those fourfold courses of duty which,


1 O ascetic, are known te attach to the


(four) modes of fife, and all the “Vedic
duties, have me for their soul, a


7. Whatever is non-existent, whatever
is existent and non-existent, and whatevet
is above that which is existent and not
existent~all these which form the universe
~~are from me, There is nothing higher.
(or beyond) me who am the eternal god
of gods. a .


8 O perpetuater of Bhrigu’s race,
know that ail the Vedas begmning with (the
original sytlable) Ox are: at one with me.
Know, O son of Bhrign’s race, that Lam
the sacrificial stake; | authe Soma (drusk
in sacrifices); 1 am the Charu (cooked in
sacrifices for being offered te the deities) ;  -_
am the Homa (that is performed); 1 am
those deeds which sacrificers perform for
pleasing the celestials; 1 am even the
pourer of the sacrificial libation ; and 1 am
the Havi or libation that is poured. 1 am
the Adhyartyu. Iam the Kalpaka; and {
am the highly sanctified sacrificial Havi.
It is me whom the Udgatri, in the great
sacrifice, bymns by the sound of his songs.
In all rites of expiation, O Brahmana, the
utterers of auspicious Mantras and bene-
dictions fraught with peace sing my praises.


64 ©


who am the artificer, O foremost of twice-
born ones, of the universe. —


it. Know, O best of twice-born persons,
that Dharma is my elcdest-born offspring,
originated from my mind, O learned Brah-
mana, whose essence is mercy for all crea-
tures.


t2. Constantly changing myself, I take
birth in varieus wombs, O best of men, for
upholditig that son of minw, with the help of
men now existing in or departed from the
world, Indeed, { do this fer protecting Vir-
tue and fer establishing it. ;


13. In those forms that I assume for the
purpose, | am known, O son of Bhrigu’s
race, in the three worlds as Vishnu and
Brahman and Shakra. [ am the origina
and {am the destruction of all things.


‘tq. I -am the creator. of aiff existent


objects and-{ am their: destroyer.- Know. -


ing no change myself, | am. the destroy-
er of all those creatures that live in sinful-
ness.


.15. Inevery cycle} have to repair the
causeway of Virtue,.entering into. various:
kinds of wombs from desire of doing good
te my creatures, 3 . :


16, When, O son of Bhrigu’s race, 1
live in the order of the celestials, | then in-
deed, act in every respect as a celestial. _


17. When I live in the. order of the
Gandharvas, 1 then, O son of Bhrigu’s
race,.act in every respect as a,Gandharva.


18 When I live in the order. of the
Nagas [ then act as a Naga, and when |
live in the ordec of Yakshas or that™ of.
Rakshasas, I act after the manner of that
order. ‘


19. Born now in the order of men 1
must act a human being. 1 appealed to
them (the Kauravas) most piteously. But
stupefied as they were and deprived of their
senses, they refused to take my words.


ao. I frightened them, filled with angers
referring to some,.great fear. ‘But once.
more | showed themselves my usual human
form. : 2 :
-at. Possessed'as they were of unrighte-
ousness, and assailed-by the virtue of -lime,
all of them have been righteously killed in
battle, and have, forsooth, gone to the celes-
tial region.

22. The Pandavas alse, O best of
Beahmanas have acquired great fame. |
have thus told you all. that you had asked
me,


MAHABHARATA.


CHAPTER LV.


(ANUGITA PARVA)—
Continued.


Utanka said :—


1. I know you, O Janarddana, to be the
creator of the universe. Forsooth, this
knowledge that I have is the result of your
gtace towards me.


2. O you of unfading glory, my heart
is possessed. of cheerful tranquillity on ace
count of its being devoted to you. Know, O
chastiser of enemies, that my heart is no
longee inclined to curse you.


3. If, O Janarddana, I deserve the least
grace from you, do you then show me once
your supreme form.


Vaishampayana said :—

4 Pleased with him, the hely one then
showed Utanka that eternal Vaishnava
form which Dhananjaya of great intelli-
gence had seen.


5: Utankasaw the great Vasudeva of
nmversal form, gifted with mighty-arms.
The effulgence of that form was like that
of a burning fire or a thousand suns. It
stood before him filling all space. It had
faces on every side.


6. Seeing that high and wonderful
Vaishnava form of Vishnu, in fact, seeing
the Supreme Lord in (that guise) the


Brahmana Utanka became filled with
wonder,
Utanka said :—


7. O you whose handiwork is the uni-
verse, [ bow to you, O sout of the universe,
O parent of all things! With your feet
you have covered the entire Earth, and
with your head you fill the fiemament.


8. That which lies between the Earth:
and: the firmament has been filled by your
stomach, All the points of the compass are
covered by your arms. QO you of unfading
glory, you are ail this.


9.. Do you withdraw this excellent and
indestructible form of yeurs. I wish to see
you now in your own (human) form which,
too, is eterrial,


Vaishampayana said :—

to—1t, Tohim, O Janamejaya, Govinda
of contented spirit said these words,—Do
you ask fer some boon! To him Utanka,
however said, this is a sufficient boon from
you for the present, O you of great splen-
dour, in that, O Krishna, I have seen this
form of yours, O foremost of all beings! -


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


t3. ferishiia, however, oince mote said
to hini,—'Do not scruple in this matter !
This must be done! A sight of my form
cannot be fruitless !


Utanka said :—


13. LT ‘must accomplish that, O lord,
which you think should be done! If wish
to have water wherever my wish for it may
arise. Water is scarce in such deserts !


14. Withdrawing that energy, thé
Supreme Lord then said to Utanka,—
Whenever you will require water, think
of me!’ Having said so, he proceeded
towards of Dwaraka.


15. Subsequently, one day, the illustrious
Utanka, solicitous of water and greatly
thirsty, wandered over the desert. {n course
of his wanderings he thought of Krishna
of unfading glory. CNS ee


16. The intelligent Rishi then saw in
that desert a naked hunter (of the Chandala
class), all besmeared with dirt, surroun-
ded by a pack?of dogs.

17. Extremely fierte-looking, he catried
a sword ahd was atmed with bow and
arrows. That foremost of twice-born ones
Saw copious streams of water issuing from
the urlnary organs of that hunter,


18. As soon as Utanka had thought
of Krishna, that hunter smilingly ad-
dressed him, saying, —O Utanka, O you. or
Bhrigu’s race, do you accept this water
from me, ;


19. Seeing you afflicted by thirst f have
felt great mercy for you! ‘Thus ad-
dressed by the hunter, the ascetic showed
no inclination to accept that water.


20. The intelligent Utanka even began
to blame Krishna of undecaying glory. Yhe
hunter, however, again and again addressed
the Rishi, saying, Drink P


212522 The ascetic refused to drink the
water thus given. On the other band; with
heart stricken with hunger and thirst, be
even became angry. Disregarded by the
great Rishi through that conviction, the
hunter, O king, with bis pack of dogs, dis-
appeared there and then, Seeing that dis-
appearance, Utanka felt himself ashamed.


23—27. He even thought that Krishna,
that destroyec of enemies, had beguiled
him. Soon after, the holder of the conch
and discus and mace, gifted with grea
intelligence, came to Utanka by the way

“(along which the hunter had come). Ads
@ressing Krishna, the Brahmana said,~
‘O foremost of beings, it was hardly propet
for you to offec water to foremost of Bralima-


9


65


fias -in the form of a hunter’s urine, O
lord! WUtanka who said these words,
Janarddana of. great intelligence replied,
comforting him with many soft words,—
‘That form which it was proper to assume
for offering you water, in that form was
water was water offered to you! But,
alas, you could not understand it! The
holder of the thunderbolt, Purandara, was
requested by me for your sake. :
ate :


28. My words to that powerfut celestiat
were,—Do you givé nectar in the form
of water to Utanka.—The king of the celes-
tials replied to me, saying,—It is not meet
that a mortal should become immortal !


29. Let some other boon be granted
to Utanka!—O son of Bhrigu’s race,
these words were ‘cepeatedly addressed
to me. The husband of Shachi, however,
was once more requested by me in these
words, vig., even nectar should be given
to Utanka!


30-32. The king of the celestials thet,
comforting nie, said,—lIf, O you of great
intelligence, nectar is to be given to him,
{shall then assume the form of a hunter
and give it to that great descendant ef
Bhrigu. If that son of Bhrigu accepts it
thus, I then go to him, O lord, for giving
ittohim! {f, however, he sends me away
from disregard, 1 shall not thén give it
to him by any means,


33-36. Having made this agteement
with me, Vasava appeared before you,
in that disguise, for giving thee nectar.
You, however, did disregard him and send
him away, seeing that the illustrious one:
had put on the guise of a Chandala. Thy
fault has been great. Once more, about
your desire, I am prepared to do what is
in my power. Indeed, this painfnl thirse
of yours, 1 shall arrange, shall be satisfied.
On those days, O twice. born one, in which
you wilt feel a desire for water, clouds well.
charged with water will rise over this


desert. ‘Those clouds, O son of Bhrigu’s
race, will give you savoury water ta
drink. Indeed, those clouds will become


known ia the world as Utanka-clouds.


37. Thus addressed by Krishna, Utanka
becanie glad, and to this day, O Bharata,
Utanka-¢louds (appear and) shower rain
on arid deserts. ‘


66
CHAPTER LVI.


(ANUGITA PARVA,)—
Continued.


Janamejaya said :—

-1. With what penances was the great
Dianka endued so that he entertained the
wish, to imprecate a curse on Vishnu him-
self, who is the source of all: power ?


Vaishampayana said :—

2. O Janamejaya, Utanka was gifted
with austere penances. He was devoted
to his preceptor. Gifted with great energy,
he abstained from adoring anybody else.


3. All the children of the Rishis, O
Bharata, entertained even this desire, v#s.,
that their devotion to preseptors should
be a8 great as that of Uianka,


4. Gautama’s gratification with and
affection for Utanka, among his number-
less disciples, were very great, O Janame-
jaya.

5. Indeed, Gautama was greatly pleased
with the seifecontrol and purity of conduct
that marked out Utanka, and with his aets
of prowess and the services he did to him.


6. One after another, thousands of dis-
“viples received the preceptor’s permission


te return heme. On acceunt, however, of his-


great affection for Utanka, Gautama could
wot permit him to leave his hermitage.


y. Gradually, in course of time, O son,
decrepitude overtook Utanka, that great
ascetic, ‘he ascetic, however, on account
of his devotion to bis preceptor, was net
censcious of it.


8. One day, he started, O king, for
fetching fuel for his preceptor. Soon after
Utanka brought a heavy load of fuel.


g. Toil-worn and hungry and afflicted
by the load he carried on his head, O
chastiser of enemies, he threw the toad
down on the Earth, O king.


10. One of his matted locks,. white as
silver, had become entangled with the load,
Accordingly, when the load was thrown
dowa, with it feH on-the eatth that matted
Jock of hair.


11. Oppressed as. he had beey: by that
load and overcome by hunger, O° Bharata,
Utanka, Seeing that sign of old age, be-~
gan to bewail aloud from excess of sorrow.


12—13. Knowing every duty, the
Gaughter of his preceptor then; who had
eyes resembling lotus petals, and hips
that were fulh and round, at the com-
maed ¢ her father, sought, with down-


- those tear-drops that she held.


MAHABHARATA.


1 east face, to hold Utanka’s tears in het


Her hands seemed to burn with
Unable,
accordingly, to hold them longer, she
was compelled to throw thenr down on the


hands.


Earth.


14—15. The Earth herself was unable
to hold those tear-drops of Utanka. With
a pleased heart, Gautama then said to the
twice-born Wtanka,—' Why, O- son, is


| your mind so afflicted with grief to-day 7


Tell me calmly and quietly, Q learned


Rishi, for } wish to hear it in full.
Utanka said :—
16~—17, With mind entirely devoted to


you, and wholly bent upon doing what is
agreeable to you, with my heart’s devotion


“turned to you, and with thoughts entirely


living on you, (I have lived here till) decre-
pitude has overtaken me without my know-
ing it at aH, Fhave not, again, known any
happiness. Though I havejlived with you
for a eentury yet you have not granted me
permission te depart.

18. Many disciples of yours, who were’
my juniors, have, however, been permitted
by you to return. Indeed, hundreds and
thousands of foremost Brahmanas have,
gifted with knowledge, been favored with:
your permission,


Gautama said :—

‘19. Through my love and affection for
you, and on account of your dutiful services:
to me, a long time has passed without my
knowing it, O foremost of Brahmanas.


20. H, however, O-you of Bhrigu’ race,
you desire to leave this place, do you go
without delay, with my permission,


Utanka said. :—


21. What shall I present to my precep-
tor? Tellme this, O best of twice-born-
persons. Having brought it, 1 shall go


henee, O lord,. with your permission,


Gautama said :—

22. ‘The good say that the satisfaction of
the preceptor is the final fee, Forsooth, O
twice-borh one, have been highly pleased.
with your conduct.


23-—~24. Know, O perpetuaterof Bhrign’s-
race, that I have been highly pleased with
your conduct. “Know, 5 pérpetuater of.
Bhrigu’s race, that lL have been: very much’
pleased with you-for this. If you become a
young man to-gay of sixteen years, 1 shal
confer on you; QO twice-born one,. this my
own daughter for becoming your wife. No
ether woman except this one is capable of
waiting upon your exergy.


" exy—26. At these words of Gautama,
‘tanka once again. became a youth and
accepted that famous maiden for his wife.
Receiving the permission of his preceptor,
he then addressed his preceptor’s wife,
saying,—What shall I give you as final fee
for my preceptor? Do you command
me. I wish to do, with riches, or even
my life, whatis agreeable and beneficial
to you.

27. Whatever gem, exceedingly won.
derful and of great value, exists in this
world, Ijshall bring} for for you with the
help of {my penances. [ have no doubt in
this.


Ahalya said :—
28. I am highly pleased with you, O
dearned Brahmana, with your unceasing?
devotion, O sinless one. This is enough.
Blessed be you, go wherever you like,


Vaishampayana said :—

29. Utanka, however, O king, once
more said these words,—Do you command
me, O mother. Itis proper that 1 should
do something that is agreeable to you,


Ahalya said:—

30. Blessed be you, bring for me those
celestial ear-rings ,which ace worn by the
wife of Saudasa. ‘That which is due to


your preceptor will then be  well-dis-
charged.
gt. Replying her,—‘So be it,’—Utanka


went away, O Janamejaya, determined
upon bringing those ear-rings for doing
what his preceptor’s wife liked,


32. That foremost of Brahmanas,
Utanka, proceeded forthwith to Saudasa
who had become a cannihal, in order to
solicit the ear-rings from him.


23. Gautama meanwhile said to his
wife—'Utanka is not .to be seen jto-day.
Thus addressed, she informed him how he

‘had gone for fetching the jewelled ear-rings
(of Saudasa’s queen). ;


34. At this, Gautama said,—~‘You have
not acted wisely. Cursed (by Vashishtha),
that king will, indeed, kill Utanka.


Ahalya said :—

45. Without knowing this, GO holy one:
I have engaged Utanka in this task. He
shall not, however, come by any danger
through your grace.

36. Thus addressed by her, Gautama
said,—‘Let it be so.’ Meanwhile, Utanka
wet king Saudasa in a deserted forest.


$7


CHAPTER LVI.


(ANUGITA PARVA)—
Continued.


Yaishampayana said: —~

1 Seeine the king, who had become sa,
of frightful appearance, wearing & long
beard smeared with thé blood of human
beings, the Brahmana Utanka, OQ king,
did not become moved, :

23. That highly energetic monarch,
inspiring terror in every breast and flocking
like a second Yama, rising up, addressed
Utanka, saying, —‘By goed luck, O best of
Brahmanas, you have come to meat the
sixth hour of the day when I am in search
at food. .


Utanka said :—


4. O king, know that I have come here
in course of my wanderings for the sake of
my preceptor. The wise have said that
while one is engaged for the sake of ane’s
preceptor, one sliould not be injured.


The king said :— -

5. O best of Brahmanas, food has been
ordained for me at the sixth hour of the
day. 1 am hungry. I cannot, therefore,
allow you escape to-day. |


Utanka said :—~—


6. Let it be so, O king! Let this agree-
ment be made with me! After 1 have
ceased to wander for my preceptor I shall
once more come and put myself within your
power. eae ona te


I have heard, GO best of tings, that
the object I seek for my preceptor is under
your control, GO king, therefore, O king, I
beg you for it.


8. You every day give many foremost
of gems.to superior Brahmanas. You are
a giver, O king, from whom gifts may be
accepted.. Know that 1 too ama worthy
object of charity present before you, @
best of kings, -


9~1to.. Having accépted from you ia
gift that object far my preceptor, which is
tinder your control, I shall, O king, on
account of my agreement, once more come
back to you and put myself. under your
power. I assure you truly of this. There
is no falsehood in this. Never before have
1 spokes any falsehood, no, not even in jest
What shall { say then of other occasions ?


Saudasa said :—~ —
tt. If the object you seek for your
ptecepter is capable of being placed ia


68


youc hands by me, If I be considered as
one from whom a gift may be accepted, do
you then say what that object is !


Utanka said :—


12. O foremost of men, O Saudasa, in
my éstimation you are a worthy person
from whom gifts may be accepted. I have,
therefore, come to you for ,begging of you
the jewelled ear-rings (worn by your
queen).


Saudasa said :—


13. Those jewelled ear-rings, O learned
and twice-born Rishi, belong to my wife,
They should be asked from her. Do you
therefore, solicit some other things from me.
I shall give it to you, O you of excellent
wows ! ;


Utanka said!:;—


14. If we be considered as any autho-
rity, do you cease then to urge this pretext.
Do you give those jewelled ear-rings to me.
Be truthful ia speech, O king,


Vaishampayana said :—

1g—~16. ‘Thus addressed, the king once
more addressed Utanka and said to him,—
Do you, at my word, go to my venerable

yeen, QO best of men, and ask her say-
ing,—-'Give !'—She of pure vows, thus beg-
ged by you will certainly, at my command,
give you, O foremost of twice-born persons,
‘xhose jewetled ear-rings of hers without
doubt.


Utanka said :—


17. Where, O king, shall I be able to
meet your queen? Why do you not your-
seif go to her?


Saudasa said :— :

18. You will find her to-day near a
forest fountain. J cannot see her to-day
_as the sixth hour of the day has come,


Vaishampayana said :—

19. Thus addressed, Utanka, O chief
of Bharata’s race, then left that place.
Seeing Madayanti, he informed her of his
object.


20. Hearing the order of Saudasa,
that lady of large eyes replied to the high-
ly intelligent Utanka, O Janamejaya, in
these words.


21. It is even so, O twice-born one.
You should, however, O sinless one, assure
me that you do not say what is-untrue !
You should bring me some signet from
my husband,


MAHABHARATA.


22. These celestial ear-rings of mine,
made of rich getns, are such that the
celestials and Yakshas and great Rishis
always watch for opportunities for taking
them away.


23. If placed at any time on the Earth,
this costly article would then be stolen by
the Nagas. If worn by one who is impure
on account of eating, it would then be
taken away by the Yakshas. If the wearer
falls asleep, the celestials would* then take
them away.


24. O best of Brahmanas, these ear-
rings are capable of being taken away,
when such opportunities come, by celestials
and Rakshasas and Nagas, if worn by a
careless person.


25. O best of twice-born ones, these
ear-rings, day and night, always produce
gold. At night, they shine brightly,
attracting the rays of stars and constella-
tions.


26. O holy one, if worn by any one, he
would be freed from hunger and thirst and
fear of every sort. rhe wearer of these
ear-tings is freed also from the fear of
poison and fire and every kind of danger.


27. If worn by one of short stature,
these become short. If worn by one of
tall stature, these grow in size.


28. Even of such virtues are these ear-


tings of mine, They are tauded and
honoured everywhere. Indeed, they are
known over the three worlds. Do you,


therefore, bring me some sign,


CHAPTER LVIIL.


( ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

%. Returning to king Saudasa who was
always well-disposed tewards all his friends,
Utanka solicited him for some sign. That
foremost one of Ikshaku’s race then gave
him a sign.


Saudasa said :—


2. This my present condition is intoler-
able. I donot see any refuge. Knowing
this to be my wish, do you give away the
jewelled ear-rings,

3. Thus addressed by the king, Utanka
teturned to the queen and reported to her
the words of her husband. Hearing those
words, the queen gave to Utanka hee

1: jewelled ear-rings.


ASUWAMEDHA PARVA,


4. Having get the ear-rings, Utanka
returned to the king and said te him,—‘l
wish to hear, O king, what the meaning is
of those mysterious words which you said
as a sigu to your queen,


Saudasa said :— a

5. Kshatriyas are seen to honour the
Brahmanas from the very beginning of the
creation. ‘Towards the Brahmanas, how-
ever, many offences originate (on the part
of the Kshatriyas).

6. As for myself, 1 am always bent in
humility before them. I am overtaken by
a calamity through a Brahmana. Posses-
sed of Madayanti, I do not see any other
refuge.

7. Indeed, O foremost of all persons,

having a high goal, I do not see any other
refuge for myself in the matter of approach
ing the celestial gates or in continuing here,
O best of twice-born ones.
. 8. It is impossible for a king that is
hostile to Brahmanas to continue living in
this world or in acquiring happiness in the
next.


g. Hence have I given you these my
my jewelled ear-rings which were coveted
by you. Do you now keep the agreement
which you have made with me to-day.


Utanka said :—


to. O king, I shall certainly carry out
my promise. I shall truly return and place
myself under youc power. ‘There is, how-
ever, a question, O scorcher of enemies
which I wish to ask you. ;


Saudasa said :—


11. Say, O learned Brahmana, what is
in your mind. [| shall certainly reply to
your words. I shall remove whatever doubt
may be in your mind. I have ao hesitation
in this.


Utanka said :—


12. Those who are skilled in the rules of
duty, say that Brahmanas are of controlled
speech. One who acts wrongly towards
friends is considered as vile as a thief,


13.
my friend to-day.


You, again, O king, have become
Do you then, O foremost


of men, give me such advice as is approved.


by the wise. %

14. As for myself, I have now obtained
the fruition of my wishes. You, again, are
a cannibal. Is it proper for me to return
to you or not. :


Saudasa said:-—


15. IE it is proper (sor me), O foremost


Bg


| of superior Brahmanas, to say what you


ask, I should then, O best of twice-born
ones, tell you that you should’ never return
to me. :

16. O perpetuater of Bhrigu’s race, by
acting thus, you will secure your well-being.
If you return, O learned Brahmana, you
will surely meet with death.


Vaishampayana said :—

17. Thus addressed by the intelligent
king about what was beneficial for him,
Utanka took leave of the king and set out
for the presence of Ahalya.”


18. Desirous of doing what was agree-
able to the wife of his prerceptro, he took
the ear-rings with him and started with
great speed for reaching the hermitage of
Gautama.


19. Protecting them even in the manner
directed by Madayanti,—that is, binding
them within the folds of his black ;deer-
skin,—he proceeded on his way.


20. After he had proceeded for some
distance, he became stricken with hunger.
He. there saw a Vilwa tree covered down
with the weight of (ripe) fruits, He clim-
bed that tree. °


21. Causing his deer-skin, O chastiser
of enemies, to hang on a branch, that fore-
most of twice-born ones, then began to.
pluck some fruits, ~


22——23. While he was engaged in pluck-
ing those fruits with eyes set towards them,
some of them dropped, O king, on that
deer-skin, in which those ear-rings had
been carefully tied by that foremost of
Brahmanas. With the strokes of the fruits,
the knot became loosened,


24. Suddenly that deer-skin, witlh the
ear-rings in it, dropped down. When the
knot being unfastened, the deer-skin fell
down on the ground, a snake who was there
saw those jewelled ear-rings,


25-27. That snake belonged to the
tace of Airavata. Promptly he took up


.the ear-rings in hig mouth and then entered


an ant-hill. Seeing the ear-rings taken
by that snake, Utanka, filled with anger
and in great anxiety of mind, came down
from the tree. Taking his staff he began
to pierce that ant-hill,

28. That best of Brahmanas, burning
with anger and the desire for revenge, con-
tinually busied himself for thirty-five days
in that work.

29. The goddess Earth, unable to bear
the force of Utanka’s walking staff and
with body toza therewith, became greatly
anxious.


+


é

go-—23t. To that twice-born Rishi then,
who continued to dig the Earth feom desire
ot making a path to the nether regions in+
habited by the Nagas, the king of the celes-
tials, armed with the thunder, came there,
on his car drawn by green horses, Gifted
with great energy, he saw that foremost of
Brahmanas, a$ he sat there engaged in his
task,


Vaishampayana continued :—

32. Looking like a Brahmana stricken
with the sorrow of Utanka, the king of the
celestials addressed him, saying,—‘This
(purpose of thine) is impracticable of being
accomplished, ;


33. The regions of the Nagas are thous
sands of Yojanas removed from this place.
I think that your purpose is impossible of
being achieved with your walking staff,


Utanka said :—


34. Hf, O Brahmana, the ear-rings be
not recovered by me from the regions of the
Nagas, I shall renounce my life-breaths
before your eyes, O foremost of twice-bor
persons. a


Vaishampayana said :—

35- ‘When the thunderrarmed Indra
could not divert Utanka from his purpose,
hé united the lattec’s walking staff with
the force of thunder. abe

36. Then, Q Janamejaya, the Earth,
opening with those strokes having the farce
of thunder, gave way to the (nether) regions
inhabited by the Nagas. :


37. By that path Utanka entered the
world of Nagas. He saw that that region
lying thousands of Yojanas on all sides.


38. Indeed, O blessed one, it had raany
walls made of pure gold and decked wit
jewels and gems.


39. There were many fiue tanks of
water furnished with flights of stair-cases
made of pure crystal, and many rivers ef
clear and transparent water. He saw also
many trees with various species of birds
perching on them.

40. That perpetuater of Bhrigu’s race
saw the gate of that region which was full
five Yojanas high and a hundred Yojanas
in width.


41. Seeing the regions of the Nagas,
Utanka became very dispirited. Indeed,
he despaired of getting back the earsrings..


42. Then there appeared to him a black
horse with a white tail. His face and eyes
were of a coppery colour, O you of Kuru’s
race, and he seemed to blaze forth with
energy.


MAHABHARATA,


43. Addressing Utanleg, he said,—'Ds
you blew into the Apana duct of my body.
You will then, O learned Brahmana, get
back your eac-rings which have been taken
away by a descendant of Airavata’s cace.


44. Do not hate to do my order, O son.
You did it often at the hermitage of
Gautama in former days.


Utanka said :—


45. How did I know youin the asylum
of my preceptor? Indeed, I wislt to hear
how I did in those days what you order me
to do now.


The horse said »


46—17. Know, O learned Brahmana,
that I am the preceptor fof your preceptor,
fer f am the blazing Jatavedas (deity of
fice), By you EF was often adored for the
sake of your preceptor, O child of Bhrigu’s
race, duly and with a pure heart and body.
I shall therefore accomplish what is for
youc well-being. Da my bidding forth-


with,
48. Thus addressed by the god of
fire, Utanka did as he was ordered.


The deity then, pleased with him, blazed
up for consuming everything.


49. From the pores ‘of his body, O
Bharata, on account of his very nature, a
thick smoke came out threatening tercors
to the wortd of Nagas.


50. With that powerful and wide.
spreading smoke, O Bharata, everything
became covered with darkness, so that
nothing, O king, could any longer be
seen in the world of the Nagas.


5t. Cries of woe were heard through.
out the palace of the Airavatas, uttered by
the Nagas headed by Vasuki, O
Janamejaya. :

52. Covered by that smoke, the palaces
could no longer be seen, Bharata.
These resembled forests and hills over-
whelmed by a thick frost.


53. With eyes that were red on account
of that smoke, ard afflicted by the energy
of-the god of fire, the Nagas came out of
theit palaces to the greet son of Bhrigu’s
race far determining what was the matter.


84. Having heard what the matter was
from that ascetic of incomparable energy,
all the Nagas, with fear depicted on their
eyes, offered him theie adorations accoc<
ding to due forms.


55. Indeed, all the Nagas placing the
old and the young ones before them, bowed
to him with their heads and joining their
hands addressed him, saying,—' Be pleased


-with us, QO holy one,’


4&SIBWAMEDHA BARVA,


56. Having pleased that Brahmana
and offered him water to wasb his feet
and the ingredients of the Arghya (for
honouring him), the Nagas gave him those
celestial and highly-adored eac-rings.


87. Thus honored by thet, Utanka of
great prowess, going round the god of
fire, started for the hermitage of his
preceptor.


‘58. Indeed, going quickly to Gautamia’s
hermitage, O king, he pfesented those ear-
tings to the wife of his preceptor, O Sistess
one. :


59: That best of Brahmanas also told
his preceptor everything about Vasuki and
the other Nagas that had occurred.


60. It was thus, O Janamefaya, that
the great Utanka, having wandered through
the three worlds, fetched those jewelled
ear-rings (for his preceptor’s wife).

61. Of such ptowess, O chief of
Bharata’s race, was the ascetic Utanka.
So austere were the penances with which
he was gifted. E have thus told you what
you had asked me,


‘nin as


CHAPTER LIX,


¢ANUGITA PARVA, <=
Continued.


Janamejaya said :-—

1. Attec having conferred that boor on
Utanka, O foremost of twice-born persons,
what did the mighty-armed Govinda of
great celebrity next do? :


Vaishampayana said:—~


2. Having granted that boon to Utanka,
Govinda, accompanied by Satyaki, went to
Dwaraka on his ear, drawn by his large
quick-cougsing horses. ;


3» Passing many lakes and rivers and
forests and hills, he at last came.upon the
charming city of Dwaravati.

4. It was at the time, O king, when the
festival of Raivataka had begun, that he
having eyes like lotus-petals arrived with
Satyaki as his companion. ;

5. Adorned with many beautiful things
and Covered with vartous Koshas made of
jewels and gems, the Raivataka hilt shone,
O king, with great splendour. .

6—~—7. That high mountain, decked with

excellent garlands of gold amd gay festoons
of flowers, with many large trees whict
oosed hikes the Kitga trees of Indca's


| ess,


rL


garden, and with many. golden poles ont
which were lighted lamps, shane i beauty
through day and night. By the caves
and fountains the light{ was so gteat that
it appeared like a broad day.


8, On alt sides. beautiful flags waved otf
the air with Kittke bells that jingled cons
tinuously. The eutire hill resounded with
the sweet songs of men and women.


G—10. Raivataka presented a most-
delightful appearance like Meru with alf
his jewels an gents: Men and women ex
eked and filled with delight, O Bharata,
sang aloud. The swell of music whicty
thus rose from that foremost of mountaing
appeared to touch the very heavens.
Everywhere were heard spouts and loud
whoops of men who were it) all forms of
excitement. :

tt, The cackfe of thousands of voices
trade that mountain delightful and charm¢
ing, It was adorned with many shops and
Stalls filled with various foods and enjoyable
articles.

rz. There were heaps of cloths and gar-
fanrds, and the music of Vinas and flutes”
and Mridangas was heard everywhere.


Food mixed with wines of various kinds: wag


stored here and there.

13. Gifts were being continually given to
those that were distressed, or bling or helpe |

For ali this, uve festival of that moun's

tain became highly auspicious, : :

14, There were many sacred houses
built on the breast of that mouutain, O -
hero, within which Hved many pious men,
Even thus did the Vrislini heroes sport
in that festival of Raivataka,


15—18. Equipt with those palaces that
mountain appeared like a second Heaven.
At the-arrival Keishna, O chief of Bharata’s
race, that prince of mountains. resembled
the blessed mansion of Indra himself,
Adored (by his relatives), . Krishna then
entered a@ beautiful palace. Satyaki also
went to his own quatters with a-delighted
soul, Govinda entered his residence after
a long absence, having accomplished deeds
of great difficulty fike Vasava amid the

nava host. The heroes of the Bhoja,


Vrishni, and Andhaka races, all came


forward to reeeive that gredt ene like the


L deities advancing to receive the deity of


a hundred sacrifices.
‘1g. Gifted with great intelligence, he
honoured thenr in returm and enquired


| after their well-being. With a pleased heart


he then saluted his father and mother.


20. The mighty-armed hero was em-
braced by both of them and comforted -


72


too. He then took Kis seat with all the
Vrishnis sitting around him.


at; Having washed his feet and re-
thoved his fatigue, Krishna of mighty
energy, as he sat there, thei described the
cheif events of the great battle in answer
to the questions put to him by his father.


CHAPTER LX,


(ANUGITA PARVA,)-—<
Continued,


Vasudeva said:

i. O you of Vrishni’s race; I have
tepeatedly heard men speaking of the
wenderful battle.

a. You, however; O mtighty-arnied ote,
have seen it with your own eyes. Do you,
therefote, © sinless gue, deseribe the battle
in full.


g—¢. Indeed, teil me how that battle
took place between the great Pandavas
and Bhishma add Karna and Kripa and
Drona and Shalya and others, between,
in fact, numerous other Kshattiyas welt-
skilled in arms, differing from one another
i cofiduct and dress. and comitig from
various kingdoms. = *


Vaishampayana saids—-

5. Thus addressed by his father, he
~ Raving eyes like lotus-petals, described, in
the presence of his mother also, how the
Kaurava heroes had been killed int batie.


Vasudeva said :—

6. ‘Fhe feats were highly wonderfut
which were achieved by those great Ksha-
triyas. On account of their large number,
they are incapable of being described in
even hundreds of years.


7. ¥ stall, however, mention only the
foremost of them. Do you listen, therefore,
to me as I mention in brief those feats won
by the kings of Eacth, O youw of godlike
splendour,

8. Bhishma of Kuru’s raee became the
Commander-in-chief, having eleven divi-’
sions of the Kaurava princes under his
command, like Vasava of the celestial
forces,

9. Highly intelligent Shikhandin, pro-
tected by the blessed Arjuna, became the
leader of the seven divisions of the sons of
Pandu.


1o. The battle between the Kurus and
the Pandavas went on for tem days. ft


MAHABAHRATA.


was so dreadful as te niake one’s hair starid
erect.


tr. Thett Shikhandin, in great battle,
Nelped by the holder of Gandiva, killed,
with innumerable arrows, the son of Ganga,
fighting bravely.


12. Lying of a bed of arrows, Bhishma
waited like an ascetic till the sun leaving
his southward path entered on his northerly
course when that hero died.


13. The Drona, that foremost of all
persons conversant with arms, that greatest
of men under Duryodhana, like Kavya
hintiself of the lord of the Daityas, became
tte Commander-in-chief,


14. That foremost of twice-born persons,
ever boasting of his prowess in battle, was
supported by the residue of the Kauravas
army consisting then of nine Akshauhinis,
and protected by Kripa and Vrisha and
others.


t§. Dhrishtadyumna familiar with many
powerful weapons, and gifted with greece
intelligence; became the teader of the
Pandavas. He was protected by Bhima
tie Varuna protected by Mitra. .


16. That great hero, always desirous of
comparing his strength with Drona, sup
ported by the Pandava-army, and recol-
tecting the wrongs infticted (by Drona) on
his father (Drupada, the king of the Pan-
chalas) performed great feats in battle.


#7. In that battle between Drona and
the son of Prishata, the kings assembled
from various realms were nearly rooted
out.


18, That furious battle lasted for five
days. At the conclusion of that period,
Drona, exhausted, succumbed to Dtirishta<
dyumna,


‘ag. After that, Marna became the Com
mander-in-chief of Duryodtana’s forces.
He was supported in battle by the residue
of the Kaurava<army which numbered five
Akshauhinis,


zo. Ofthe sons of Pandu, there were
then three Akshaubinis, After the destruc-
tion of innumerable heroes, protected by
Arjuna, they came to battle.


2%. The Suta’s son [éarna, though a
dreadful warcior, €ncountering Partha,
canre to his end on the second day, like aw
insect encountering a burning fire.


22. After the fall of Karna, the Kauras
vas became dispirited, and lost all energy.
Numbering three Atshauhinis, they gather
ed round the king of the Madras. .


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


23 Huoving lost many €at- warriors and
elepnants and horsemen, the residue of the
andava army, numbering one Akshadhini


and overtaken with depression, supported |


by VYudhishthira.

24. The Kurd king Yudhishthira, in the
Wattle Uhat took place, accomplished the
most difficult feats and killed, before half
the day was over, the kiny of the Madras.


45. After the fall of Shatya, the great
Sahadeva, of immeasurable prowess, killed
Shakuni the man who had brought about
the quarrel.

26. After the fall of Shakuni, the royal
son of Dhritarashtra, whose army had suf-
fered an extensive carnage and who on that
account had become greatly dispirited, fled
from the field, armed with his mace,


_ 27. Then Biimasena of great prowess,
filled with anger, pursued him and disco-
Vered him within the waters of the Dwaipa-
yana lake.


_ 28. With the residue of theic army, the
Pandavas surrounded the lake and, filled
with joy, met Duryodhana concealed within
the waters. =


29. Their wordy arrows, penetrating
Yhrough the waters, pierced Duryodhana.
Rising up from the lake, the latter ap-
proached the Pandavas, armed with his
mace, desirous of battle.


30. Then, if the great battle that took
place, the royal son of Dhritarashtra was
killed by Bhimasena, displayed his great
prowess, in the presence of many kings,


31. After this the residue of the Panda-
Va-army, as it slept in the camp, was killed
at night time by Drona’s son who was
tunable to put up with the destruction
‘af his father (at the hands of Dhrishta-
‘dyumna.)

32. Their sons killed, their forces killed,
their friends killed, only the five sons of
Pandu, are alive with myself and Yuyu-
dhana. :


33. With Kripa and the Bhoja prince
X<ritavarman, the son of Drona represents
the unkilled residue of the Kaurava-army.
Dhritarashtra’s son Yuyutsu also has es-
caped slaughter on account of his having
adopted the side of the Pandavas.


34. Upon the destruction of the Kaurava- |


“king Suyodhana with all his followers and
allies, Vidura and Sanjaya have come to
the presence of king Yudhishthica the just.


35. Thus did that battle take place, O
ford, for eighteen days. Many kings of
Earth, killed therein, have ascended the
celestial region. aos


16


73


-Vaishampayana continued :—

36. The Vrishnis, as they heard, O king,
that dreadful account became filled with
grief and sorrow and pain,


CHAPTER LXI.
{ ANUGITFA PARVA.}—=


Cantinied.


Vaishampayana said :~

t—~—2. After the great Vasudeva of great
prowess had finished his narration of the
great battle of the Bharatas before his
father, it was plain that that hero had pass-
ed over the destruction of Abhinsanya. The
motive of the great one was trat his father
might not Neat, what was highly unpleasant
to him. ‘


Indeed, the intelligent Krishna did
not wish that his father Vasudeva should, .
on hearing the dreadful intelligence of the
death of his daughtet’s son, be afflicted with
sorrow and grief,

4. (Hig sister) Subhadra, noticing that
the slaughter of her son had nat been men-
tioned, addressed her brother, saying,—Do
you Yarrate the death of my son, O
Krishna !—and dropped down on the earth
(in a swoon).


§. Vasudeva saw his daughter fallen on
the ground. As soon as hé Saw this, he
also fell down, deprived of his senses by
grief. j

67. (Regaiting his senses) Vasudeva,
affticted with grief at the death of his.
daughter’s son, O king, addressed Krishna,
saying,—O lotus-eyed one, you are famed
on Earth for being truthful in speech.
Why, however, O deStroyer of enemies, da
you not tell me to-day of the death of my
daughter’s son? - :

8. O powerful one, tell me in full of the
destruction of your sister’s son! Having
eyes resembling thine, alas, how was he
killed in battle by enemies. °

9g. Since my heart does not from grief
break into a hutidred pieces, it seems, O
you of the Vrishni race, that it does not
die with men when its hour does not come.


10. Oh, at the tite of his fall, what
words did he give utterance to, addressing
his mother? O lotus-eyed one, what did
that darling of mine, having restless eyes,
say to me?


11. | hope he has not been killed by
enemies while retreating from battle with


74 MAHABAHRATA.
his back towards them? I hope, O, 25. When she met Draupadi, she asked
Govieda, that his face did not become [| her in grief,—O reverend lady, where are


sheerless while fighting 7


12, He was possessed, O Krishna, of
great energy. From a spirit of childishness,
ahat powerful hero, boasting (of Lis prowess)
jn my presence, used to speak of his skill
{in battle),


13. 1 hope that boy does not lie on the
field, killed deceitfully by Drona and
Karna and Kripa and others? Do you
tell me this.


¥4. That son of my daughter always
used to challenge Bhishma and that fore-
most of all powerful warriors, vis., Karna,
jn battle.


15—16, His father who, from excess of
grief, bewailed thus, Govinda, more afffic-
ted than he, answered in these words,—His
face did not become cheerless as he funyht
in the van of battle. Dreadful though that
battle was, he did not turn his back upon
at.


17. Having killed hundreds and thov-
sands of kings of Earth, he was distressed
by Drona and Karna and at last was
killed by the son of Dushasana.


18. If, O ford, be had been encountered,
one to one, without intermission, he was
incapable of being killed in battle by even
the bolder of the thunder. bolt.


¥9. When his father Arjuna. was with.
drawn from the main body by the Samsap-
takas, Abhimanyu was surrownded by the
enraged Kaurava-heroes headed by Wrona
in battle,


20. Then, O father, after he had killed
a very large humber of enemies in battle,
your dauyhter’s son at last suecumbed to
the son of Dushasana.


2t. Forsooth, he has gone to the celestial
region! Kill this grief of thine, O youof |
great intelligence! They who are of puri-
fied understandings rever languish when
they meet with any calamity,


22. He by whom Drona and Karna and
others were checked in battle,—heroes whu
were equal to Indra himself in. power—why
would not he ascend to the celestial region.


23. O trresistible one, do: you kit this
grief of thine! Do not alow yourself to be
swayed by anger. That conqueror of
nostile cities hag attained to that sanctified
end which depends upon death at the edge
of weapons.


24. Afrer the fall of that hero, this my
vister Subhadra, stricken with grief, be-
wailed aloud, when she saw [Centi, like a [
emale as prey.


all our sons? Ef wish to see them.


26. , Hearing her lamentations, all the
iX<aurava-ladies embraced her and wept
sitting around her.


27. Seeing (her daughter-in-law) Uttara,
she said.~-Q blessed girl, where has your
husband gone?) When he returns, do you
without losing a Moment apprise me of it.


28. Alas, O daughter of Virata, as soon
he héard my voice, be used to come out of
his chamber without the loss of a moment,
Why does not your husband come out to-
day.

2g. Alas, O Abhimanyu, your maternal
uocles—powerful — car-warriors—are al?
hale. ‘They used to bless you when they
saw you come here prepared to go out for
battle,


30. Do you tell me the incidents of
battle to-day as before, O chastiser of
enemies. Ob, why do you not answer me
to-day—me who ans weeping so bitterly 7


31—32. Hearing these [amentations of
this daughter of the Vrishnierace, Pritha,
deeply strickem with grief, addressed her
and slowly said,—O Subhadra, though
protected by Wasudeva and Satyaki and
by his own father, your youthful son has
yet been killed. Phat slaughter is due to
the inffuence of ‘Time.


33. O daughter of Yadu’s race, mortat
your son was. Bo not grieve. Irresistible
in battle, your son has, forsooth, attained to
the highest end,


34. You are born iw a high family of
great Kshatriyas. Dro not grieve, O you of
restless glances, © girl of eyes like lotus~
petals F i


35- Do you cast your eyes on Uttara,
who is quick with child. O blessed lady,
do not give way to grief. ‘This auspici-
ous girl will soon bring forth a son to that
hero!


36-39: Having comforted her, thus, |
Kunti, knowing every duty, O perpetuater,
of. Yadu’s tace, casting off her grief, O
irresistible one, made arrangements for
Abhimanyu’s obsequial rites, with the per-
mission of king Yudhishthira and Bhima,
and the twins (vis, Nakula and Sahadeva}
who in prowess resembled Yama himself.
She also made many presents tothe Brah-
manas, and bestowed upon them. many kine,
O perpetuater of Yadu’s race. ‘Khen the
Viishniedame (Kunti), comforted a little,
addressed the daughter of Virata, saying,—
O faultless daughter of Virata, you should
not gtieve! For the sake of your husband,


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


#5


© you of round bips, protect the child in , gcief be given up! O famous lady, a son


your womb.


40. Having said these words, O you of
great splendour, Kunti ceased. With her
permission { have brought Subhadra here,


4t. It was thas, O giver of honours,

that your danghter’s san was killed. Cast

off your burning grief, O irresistible one!
* Indeed, do not set your heart on soreow.


CHAPTER LXI.


(ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. Having heard these words of his sen,
Vasudeva, that descendant of Shura, of
wighteous soul, renouncing grief, made ex-
cellent obsequial offecings (to Abhimanyu).


a. Vasudeva also performed those. rites
foc the ascension (to Heaven) of bis great
nephew, that hero whe was ever the darling
of his father (Vasudeva).


3. He duly fed six millions of Brahma-
nas, gifted with great energy, with edibles
possessed of every recommendation.


4-—-5. Presenting many clothes te them,
Krishna satisfied the thirst for wealth of
those Brahmanas. Wonderful were the
heaps of gold, the number of kine aad of
beds and cloths, that were then given
away. ‘The Brahmanas loudly declared,—
Let (Krishna’s wealth) increase.


6. Then Vasudeva of Dasharha’s race,
and Valadeva, and Satyaki, and Satyaka,
each performed the obsequial rites of
Abhimanyx.


7. Greatly stricken with grief, they could
find no comfort. The same was the case
with the sons of Paudu ia the city of Hasti-
mapore,


8—9.- Deprived of Abhimanyu, they
could get na peace of mind. ‘Phe daughter
of Virata, U king, for many days, totally
abstained from all food, greatly afflicted by
grief on account of the death of her hus-
band. At this all her relatives, became
plunged into excess of grief. hey were
all afraid that the embryo ia hee womb
might be destroyed.

to—12. Then Vyasa, ascertaining the
state of things by his spiritual vision,
arrived there. The highly intelligent Rishi,
gifted with great energy, arrived (at the
palace), addressed Pritha of large eyes,
as also Uttara herself, saying,—-Let this


gifted with great energy will be bora to you,
through the power of Vasudeva and at my
word. That son will rule the Earth aftec
the Pandavas.

13—14. Seeing Dhananjaya, he said to
him, in the hearing of king Yudhishthira,
the just and pleasing him with his words,
© Bharata,—Your grandson, O highly bles-
sed one, will become a great prince! He
will righteously govern the whole Earth to
the verge of the sea. .


Therefore, O foremost one of Kuru’s
trace, renounce this grief, O mower of
enemies! Do not doubt this! ‘fhis wilt
truly take place,


16. That which was wttered by the
Vrishni-here on a former occasion, will,
surely, happen! Do not think otherwise.


17. As regards Abhimanyu, he has gone
to the regions of the celestials, conquered
by him with his own deeds. ‘That hera
should be grieved for by you or, indeed, by
the other Kurus.


18. Thus addressed by his grandfather,
Dhananjaya of righteous soul, O king, re-
nounced his grief and even became cheerful.


19. Your father, O prince, who are con-
versant with all duties, began to grow ii
that womb, O you of great intelligence,
dike the Moon, in the lighted fortnight.


15.


20. Then Vyasa urged the royal son of
Dharma for celebrating the Horse-Sacrifice.
Having said so, ke made himself invisible
there and then.

21. The inteiligent king Vadhishthira,
the just, hearing the words of Vyasa, set
his mind ow the journey for bringing
wealua, -

)


nt


CHAPTER LXIIL


(ANUGITA PARVA,)~=
Continued.


Janamejaya said :—

1. Having heard these words, O twice
born one, that were spoken by the great
Vyasa about the Horse-Sacrifice, what steps
were taken by Vudhishthira.

z. ‘Tell me, O foremost of twice-born
ones, how the king succeeded in obtaining
the riches which Marutta had buried in
the Earth !


Vaishampayana said :—
3-6. Having heard the words of the
Island-born ascetig king Yudhishthica


76


the just, summoned all his brothers, vis.,
Arjuna and Bhimasena and the twin sons
of Madri, in proper time and then said
to them—Ye heroes, you have heard the
words whiek the highly intelligent and
great Krishna has said from his fsiend-
ship for and the desire of doing good to the
Kurus! Indeed, you bave heard those words
that have been uttered by that ascetic of
profuse penances, that great sage desirous
of conferring prosperity on his friends,
that preceptor of righteous conduct, viz.,
Vyasa of wonderful feats! You have
heard what Bhishma also said, and what
Govinda too of great intelligence has
uttered,


y Remembering those words, ye sons
of Pandu, I wish to obey them duly! By
obeying those words of theirs great blessed-
ness will belong to all of you.


8 Those words spoken by those utters
of Brahma are certain (if obeyed) to
produce considerable benefit, Ye per-
petuaters of Knru’s race, the Earth has
become divested of her riches,


Q—~17. Ye kings, Vyasa, therefore,
informed us of the wealti) of Marutta. If
you think that wealth abundant or sufficient,
how shall we bring it? What, O Bhima,
do you think about this? When the king,
O perpetuater of Kuru’s race, said these
words, Bhimasena, joining his hands, said
these words in reply,—-The words you
have said, O you of mighty arms, on the
subject of bringing the riches indicated
by Vyasa, are approved by me? [f, O
powerful one, we succeed in getting the
tiches kept there by the son of Avikshita,
then this sacrifice, O king, purposed by us
will be easily accomplished! ‘Lhis is what
Tthink. We shall, therefore, bowing our
heads to the great Girisha, and offering due
adoration to that deity, bring that wealth.
Blessed be you. Pleasing that god of gods
as also his companions and followers, in
words, thought, and deed, we shall, for-
sooth, obtain that wealth. Those Kianaras
of dreadful appearance who are protecting
that treasure will certainly yield to us if
the great deity having the bull for his sign,
becomes pleased with us! Hearing these
words uttered by Bhima, O Bharata, king
Yudhishthira the son of (harma, became
highly pleased. Yhe others, headed by
Arjuna, at the same time, said,—So be it.


18. The Pandavas then, having resolved
to bring that wealth, ordered their forces
to march under the constellation Dhruba
and on the day called by the same name.


19 Making the Brahmanas utter bene-
dictions on them, and having duly adored


MAHABH \RATA.


the great god Maheshwara, the sons of
Pandu started (on their enter prise).


20. Pleasing that great deity with
Modakas and frumenty and with cakes
made of meat, the sons of Pandu started
with cheerful hearts.


21. While they thus started, the citizens,
and many foremost of Brahmanas, with
cheerful hearts, uttered auspicious blessings
(on their heads).


22. The Pandavas, going round many
Brahmanas who daily adored their fires,
and bending their heads unto them, procee+
ded on their journey.

23-24. ‘Faking the permission of king
Dhritarashtra who was stricken with grief
on account of the death of his sons, his
queen (Gandhari),. and Pritha also of large
eyes, and keeping the Kaurava-prince
Yuyutsu, the son of Dhritarash'ra, in the
capital, they started, adored by the citizens
and by many Grahmanans endued with
great wisdoin,


CHAPTER LXIV.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)~
Cantinued.


Vaishampayana, said :—

1. They then started with cheerful hearts,
and accompained by men and animals all
of whom and which were equally cheer-
ful. ‘Ll-ey filled the whole Earth with the
loud clatter of their wheels.


2. Their praises sung by eulogists and
Sutas and Magadhas and bards, and sup-
ported by their own army, they appeared
like so many Suns adorned with their own
rays.

3. With the white umbrella held over
his head, king Yudhishthira shone with
beauty like the lord of the stars on the night
whew he is at full.


4. That foremost of men, the eldest son
of Pandu, accepted, with due forms, the
blessings and cheers of his gladdened sub-
jects as he went on his way.


5. About the soldiers who followed the
king, their confused murmurs seemed to fill
the entire sky.


6. That army crossed many lakes and
rivers and forests and pleasure gardens.
They at last came upon the mountains.


7. Arrived at that region ‘where that
wealth was bucied. O king, Yudhishthira
fixed his camp with all his brothers and
traps,


‘ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


$—13. The region selected for the pur-
pose, O chief of Bharata’s race, was per-
fectly level and auspicious. There the king
- pitched his camp, placing in his van such
Brahmanas as were gifted with penances
and learning and self-control, as also his
priest Agniveshya, O you of Kuru’s race,
who was well-conversant with the Vedas
and all their branctes. Then the royal
sons of Pandu, and the other kings, and the
Brahmanas and priests well-skilled in
sacrificial rites, baving duly performed same
propitiatory ceremonies, spread themselves
all over that spot. Having duly placed the
king and his ministers in the middle, the
Brahmanas caused the camp to be pitched
by laying out six roads and nine divisions.
King Yudhishthira caused a separate en-
campment to be duly made for the in-
furiate elephants who accompanied his
army, When everything was complete, he
addressed the Brahmanas, saying,—Ye
foremost of Brahmanas, do that which you
think should be done in view of the matter
at hand. Indeed, let an auspicious day
and constellation be fixed for it. Let not a
long time pass away over our heads as we
wait in suspense here. Ye foremost of
learned Brahmanas, having formed this re-
solution, do what should be done after this!
Hearirg these words of the king, the Brah-
manas with those amongst them who were
well-skilled in the performance of religious
rites, became filled with gladness and
desirous of-doing what was agreeable to
king Yudhishthira the just, said these
words in reply,—This very day is an aus-
picious one with a auspicious constellation.
We shall, therefore, try toa celebrate thase
high rites we propose. We shall to-day, O
king, live upon water alone. Dv you all
fast also to-day,


16, Hearing those words of those fore-
most Brahmanas, the royal sons of Paadu
passed that night, abstaining from all food,
and lying confidently on beds of Kusha-
grass, like butning fires in a sacrifice.


17. And the night wore away as they
listened to the discourses of the learned
Brahmanas. When the cloudless morning
came, those foremost of Brahmanas addres-
sed the royal son of Dharma, (saying as
follows).


sige
CHAPTER LXV.
( ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued,


The Brahmanas said :~


t. Let offerings be made to the great
Muhadeva of three eyes, Having duly


77


dedicated those cfferings, O king, we shall
then try to gain our object..


a. Hearing these words of those Brah-
manas, Yudhishthira caused offerings to be
duly made to that deity who loved to lie
down on mountain-breasts.


3- Pleasing the (sacrificial) fire with
(libations of) sanctified butter according
to the ordinance, the priest (Dhaumya)
cooked Charu with the aid of Mantras and
performed the necessary rites.


4. He took up many flowers and sane.
tied them with Mantras, QO king. With
Modakas and frumenty and meat, he made
offerings to the deity.,° —


5. With various kinds of flowers and
with fried paddy, of very superior kind,
Dhaumya, well-versed in the Vedas, per-
formed the remaining rites,


6. Henext presented offerings accord-
ing to the ordinance to those ghostly beings
who formed Mahadeva's train. And
offerings were next made to Kuvera the
king of the Yakshas, and to Manibhadra
also.


7—~8. To the other Yakshas also
and to them who were the foremost. ones
among the ghostly companions of Mahdeva,
the priest offered due adoration, having
filled many jugs with food, with Krisharas
and meat: and Nivapas mixed with sesame
seeds, ‘Ihe king gave away unto the
the Brahmanas thousands of kine.


9—16. He then directed the presen-
tation, according to due rites, of offerings
to those night-ranging beings(wha live
with Mahadeva). Surcharged, as it were,
with the scent of Dhupas, and filled with
the fragrance of flowers, that region, sacred
to the deity of deities, O King, became
highly delightful, Uaving performed the
adoration of Rudra and of all the Ganas,
the king, placing Vyasa ahead, went towards
the place where the treasure was buried.
Once mare adoring the Lord of riches, and
bowing to him with respect aid saluting
him properly, with various kinds of flowers
and cakes and Krishara, having adored
those foremost of gems, vis, Shankha and
Nidhi and those Yakshas who are the
lords of gems, and having adored many
foremost of Brabmanas and caused them
to utter blessings, the king gifted with
great power, strengthened by the energy
and the auspicious benedictions of those
Brahmanas, caused that spot to be excava-
ted. Then numerous vessels af various
and delightful forms, Bhringaras, Katahas,
Kalasas, Bardhamanakas, and innumers
able Bhajanas of beautiful forms, were
dug out by king Yudhishthira the just,


78


The wealth thus dug out was placed in large
‘as Karaput’ (wooden chests united with
each other by chains or cords, and carried
by bullocks or camels) for protection.


17. A portion of the wealth was caused
to be carried upon the shoulders of men
it stout balances of wood with baskets
slung like scales at both ends. Indeed, O
king, there were other methods of con-
veyance there for carrying away that wealth
of the son of Panda.


18, There were sixty thotisands of camels,
and a hundred and twenty thousand horses,
and of elephants, O king, there were one
huadred thousand.


1g. Of cars there were as many, and
of carts too as many, and of she-elphants
as many. Mules and men were of unlimited
number.


20. That wealth which Yudhishthira
caused to be dug out was even so much.
Sixteen thousand coing were placed on the
back of each camel; eight thousand on each
car; and twenty-four thousand on each
elephant.


21—22. Having loaded these vehicles
with that wealth and once more adoring
the great deity Shiva, the son of Pandu
started for the city of Hlastinapur, with
the permission of the Island-born Rishi,
and placing his priest Dhaumya in the van.
That foremost of men, g¢s., the royal son
of Pandu, made short marches of four
miles every day.


23. That powerful army, O king, afflicted
with the weight they bore, returned, car-
rying that wealth, towards the capital,
phasing the hearts of ail those perpetuaters
of the Kuruerace.


CHAPTER LXVI.


CANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. Meanwhile, the highly energetic Vasu-
deva, accompained by the Vrishnis, came
to the city of Elastinapore,


2, While leaving that city for return-
ing to his own Duwaraka, he had been reques-
ted by the son of Dharma to come back.
Hence, knowing, that the time fixed for
the Horse-Sacrifice bad come, that foremost
of men returned to Hastinapore.


3—4. Accompained by the son Rukmini,
by Yuyudhana, by Charudeshna, by
Shamva by Gada, by Kritavarman, by the


MAtMIABHARATA,


heroic Sarana, by Nishatha and by Une
mukha, Vasudeva came, with Valadeva at
the head of the train, and with Subhadca
also accompanying hin.


5. Indeed, that hero came for seeing
Diaupadi, Uttara and Pritha and for com-
forting those renowned Kshatriya-ladies
who had been bereft of many of theic
protectors. :


6.- Seeing those heroes come, king
Dhritarashtra, as also the great Vidura,
received them with due honours.


7. That foremost of men, vts., Krishna
of great energy, worshipped by Vidura and
Yuyutsu, continued to live in the Kuru
capital,

8. it was while the Vrishni heroes, O
Janamejaya, were living in the Kuru-city,
U king, that your father, that destroyer of
hostile heroes, was born.


9. The royal Parikshit, O monarch,
afflicted by the Brahma-weapon of Ashwat-
thaman), vpon coming out of the womb,
Jay still and motionless for he had no life,
By his birth he had pleased the citizens but
soon plunged them into grief,


to. The citizens, learning of the birth
of the prince, uttered a Ieonine shout. ‘That
noise proceeded to the utmost limit of every
point of the compass. Soon, however, that
noise ceased.


it. - Krishna, his senses and mind cone
sider: bly affected, with Yuyudhana in
his company, entered speedily the inner
apartments of the palace.

12. He saw his own paternal aunt
(Kunti), coming, loudly weeping and cal-
ling upon him repeatedly.


13. Behind her were Draupadi and the
famous Subhadra, and the wives of the


relatives of the Pandavas, ail weeping
piteously.
14. Meeting Krishna, Kunti, that


daughter of the Bhoja race, said to him ia
a voice choked with tears, O feremost of
mouarchs,


15. O Vasudeva, O mighty-armed hero
Devaki, by having borne you, has come to
be considered as an excellent genetrix !
You are our refuge and our glory! This
race (of Pandu) depends upon you for
its protector.


16. O Yadava hero, O powerful one
this child of your sister’s son, has com,
out of the womh, killed by Ashwatthamane,
O Keshava, do you revive him !


17. O delighter of the Yadavas, this was
vowed by you, powerful one, when
Ashwatthaman had inspired the blade of


ASuWAMEDHA PARVA, -


@tass into a Brahma-weapon of great eners
py! Indeed, O Keshava, your words were
these :—I shall revive that child if he comes
out of the womb dead!


18—19.' That child, OQ son, has been
born dead! See hii, O foremost of men,
Vou should, O Madhava, rescue ttara
and Subhadra and Draupadi and myself,
and Dharma’s son (Yudhishthira), and
Bhima and Phalguna, and Nakula and the
irresistible Sahadeva.


2o—2t. In this child are fettered the
life-breaths of the Pandavas and myself !
O you of the Dasharha-tace, on him de-
pends the obsequial cake of Pandu, as also
of my father-in-law, and of Abhimanyu
too, blessed be you, that favourite nephew
of yours who was so very like you! Do
you do to-day what will be beneficial
to all these! I urge you earnestly, O
Janarddana. .


22. Uttara, O destroyer of enemies,
always repeats the words said to her by
Abhimanyu. Forsooth, O Krishna, those
words were highly agreeable to her.


23. QO you of the Dasharha-race,
Arjuna’s son said to this daughter of
Virata,—Your son, O blessed gitl, will go
to my maternal uneles,


24. Taking up his quarters with the
Vrishnis and Andhakas, he will obtain from
them the science of arms, indeed, various
wonderful weapons and the whole of the
science of polities and morality.


25. These were the words, O son, that
that destroyer of hostile. heroes, viz, the
son of Subhadra, that ieresistible heto, said
to Uttara from his love for her,


26. O destroyer of Madhu, bowing
our heads to you, we pray you for making
those words of Abhimanyu true! In view
also of the time that has come, do you
accomplish what is highly beneficiak

27. Wlaving said these words to that
hero of the Vrishni’s race, Pritha of large
eyes, raised her arms upwards and with
the other ladies in her company, dropped
down on the Earth,


28. All of them, with eyes rendered
muddy by tears, repeatedly explained, say-
ing,—Alas, the son of Vasudeva’s nephew
has been born dead.

29. After Kunti had said so, Janarddana
took hold of her, O Bharata, and gently
raising ‘het from the Earth, comforted her
as follows. >


| 79
CHAPTER LXVII.


( ANUGITA PARVA.)~
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

1—2. Alter Kunti had sat up, Subltadca,
seeing her brother, began to weep aloud,
and stricken with excessive grief, said,—O
you having eyes lke Jotus-petals, look at
the grandsow of Atjuna of great iatelli-
gence! Alas, the Kuru-race baving been
thinned, a child has,been boin that is feeble
and dead.


3. Yhe blade of grass, uplifted by
Drona’s son for bringing about the destruc-
tion of Bhimasena, fell upon Uttara and
Vijaya and myself.


4 Alas, that blade, O Kesliava, is still
existing (unex'racted) in me, after having
pierced my heart, since I do not, O irresis«
tible hero, see this child with my son.


5. What will the righteous-souled king
Yudhisthira the just say? What witt
Bhimasena and Arjuna, and the two song
of Madravati alse -say 7


6. Hearing that Abhimanyu's son was
born and dead, the Pandavas, O you of
Vrishni’s race, will consider themselves as |
imposed upon by Ashwatthaman,


7. Abhimanyu, O Krishna, was, forsooth,
the minion of all the Pandava-brothers.
Hearing this intellhgence, what will those
heroes, defeated by the weapon of Drona’s
son, say ? ; . ~

8. What grief, O Janarddana, can be
greater than this, uts., that Abhimanyu’s
son should be born and dead ?


9g. Bowing to you with my head, O
Krishna, I seek to please you to-day! See
O foremost of men, these two standing
here, v/s., Pritha and Draupadi.


tomt1. When, O Madhava, the son of
Drona tried to destroy the embryos even
in the wombs of the ladies of the Pandavas,
at that time, O grinder of enemies, you said
in anger to Drona’s son (even these words),
—O wretch of a Brahmana, O vilest of men,
I shall disappoint your wish! I shali res
vive the son of Kivitin’s son.


12, Hearing these words of yours and
weil-knowing your power, I seek to gratily
you, O irresistible hero! Let the son of
Abhimanyu be revived.


13. If having pledged yourself previously
you do not accomplish your auspicious vow,
do you then know for certain, O chief of
the Vrishni race, that | shall put an end
to my life,


8d:


14. If, O hero, this son of Abhirianyd
does not revive when you, O irresistible one,
are alive and near, of what dtltier dse will
you be to tne?

18. Do yoti, therefore, O irresistible dne,

Fevive this son of Abbimanyu,—this child
who has eyes siriilar to his,—even as a
rain-charged cloud revives thé lifeless crops
(on a field).


16. You, O Keshava, are righteois-
souled, truthful, and of prowess incapable
of being baffled. You shold, O chastiser
of enetnies make your words truthful.

17. TE only. you wish ft, you can revive
the three Worlds (of being) if dead | hat
heed, | say, therefore, of this darling child,
born bit dead, of your Sister’s son

18. 1 know your power, O Krishna!
“Therefore, do I solicit you ! o you slow
this great favour to the sons of Pandu.

19 You Should, O migtity-arined otie,
show mercy to this ttara, or to ime,
thinking that I am your sister or even a
thother who has lost her son; and one whio
has thrown herself upon your protection.


- 3


CHAPTER LXVIE.
(ANUGITA PARVA. )=
Continued,

Vaishanipayaiia said :—

t. Thus addressed, O king, the des-
‘troyer of Keshin, greatly posse3sed by sor-
tow answered,—So be it!—TVhese words
were uttered with sufficient loudness and


they pleased all the inmates of the inner
apartments of the palace.


32. The powerful Krishna, that foretost.


of melt, by uttering these words, pleased
all the people assembled there, like one
pouring cold water on a person afflicted
with sweat, .


3-5. He then quickly entered the lyiiig-
in-room in which your father was born.
fe was duly sanctified, O king, with many
arlands of white flowers; with many well-
led water-pots arranged en every side;
with char-coal, soaked in clarified butier of
Tinduka-wood; and mustatd-seeds, O you
of mighty arms; with shining weapons
properly arranged arid several fires on
every side. And it was filled with many
agreeable and aged dames summoned for
waiting.

6—7. It was also Surrotiided by many
well-skilled and clever physicians, O you
vf great intelligence! Gifted with great


MAHABHARATA.


energy, he also beheld there alf articles
that are destructive of Rakshasas, duly
placed by persons knowing the subject.
Seeitig thé lying-in-room in which your
father was born thus equipt, Hrishikesha
became very glad and said,—Excellent,
Excellent |’


8—g When he of Vrishni’s race said
30 and presertted sich a cheerful look,
Draupadi, going there quickly, addressed
the datighter of Virata, saying,—O blessed
lady, here comes to you your father-in-
law, the destroyer of Madhu, that ancient
Rishi of incdnceivable soul, that Uunvan=
quished ore.


to. Virata’s daugliter, cliecking her tears
said these words irk a voice chocked with
grief. Covering herself properly, the pincess
waited for Krishna like the celestials re=
verentially waiting for hit.

tt. The helpless lady with heart agitated
by sorréw, seeing Govinda conting, be=
wailed, saying ,—

12. O fotus-éyed ote, see tis two
deprived of our child! O Janarddana,
both Abhimanyu and myself have bees
equally killed.

13. O you of Vrishni’s race, O des
troyer of Madhu, I seek to please you by
beiiding my head; O hero, to you! Do you
revive this child of mine who has been
consumed by the weapon of Drona’s son.


i4—1t5. If king Yudhishthira the just,
or Bhimasena, or yourself, O lotus-eyed
vite, had, oi) that occasion, said,—Let the
Blade of grass destroy the unconscious
tother,—O powerful one, then I would
have been destroyed and this would not
have takett place.


i6. Alas, what beiefit lias been reaped
by Drona’s son by doing this cruel deed,
vig., the destruction of the child in thé
womb by his Beattrtia- weapon.


17. That self-same miother now seeks
to please you, O slayer of enemies, by
beriding her head! Surely, O Govinda,
I shall kill myself if this child does not
revives

18. Ti hits, O righteous one, I placed
many Jexpectations! Alas, when these have
been frustrated by Drona's son, what
necessity have I, O Meshava, to carry on
the burden of life ?


19. IE hoped, O Krishna, that with my
child on my lap, O Janarddana, I would
salute you with respect! Alas, U Keshava,
that hope has been destroyed.


zo. O foremost of all beings, at the
death of this heir of Abhimanyu of rest
less eyes, all my hepes have been destroyed.


‘ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


Abhimanyu of restless eyes, O des-
Madtu, was exceedingly dear to
killed by


2t.
troyer of
you. Behold this child of his
the Brahma- weapon.

22. This child is very ungrateful and
very heartless, like his father, for, see, dis-
regarding the prosperity and’ affluence of
the Pandavas, he has gone to Yama’s
house.

23. I had, before this, vowed, O Keshava,
that if Abhimanyu fell on the field of
battle, O hero, I would follow him im-
mediately,

24. 1 did tet, however, keep my vow,
cruel that I am and fond of life! If 1 go
to him now, what, indeed, will Phalguua’s
gon say?


CHAPTER LXIX,


( ANUGITA PARVA, )==
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. The helpless Uttara, desirous of
getting back her child, having thus be-
wailed, dropped dowh in sorrow on the earth
like a demetited creature.


2. Seeing the princess fallen on the
earth deprived of her son and with her
body uncovered, Kunti as also all the
(other) Bharata-ladies, deeply afflicted,
began to weep aloud.


3. Resounding with the voice of Jamen-
tation, the palace of the Pandavas, O
king, was soon converted into a house of
sorrow where nobody could remain,


4. Greatly stricken with grief on ac-
count of her son,
king, seemed to be struck down for some.
time by sorcow and cheerlessness,


5. Regaining consciousness, O chief of
Bharata’s race, Uttara took up her child
on her lap and said these words.


6. You are the child of one who knew
every duty. Are you not conscious then
of the sin you commit, since you do not
salute this foremost one of the Vrishni’s
race ?

4¥—8. O sen, going to your father tell him

these words of mine, vzs.,—It is difficult
for living creatures to die before their time
comes, because through rett of you, my
husband, and now deprived ef my child
also, 1 am yet alive when 1 should die,
unendued as I am with everything awspici-
ous and everything valuable,


It


Virata’s daughter, O-


Sr.


9. O mighty-armed one, with the
permission of king Yudhishthira the just,
I shall swallow some dreadful poison of
cast myself on the burning fire.


1o. O father, difficult of destruction is
my heart since, though I am deprived of
husband and child, that ‘heart of mine does.
not break into a thousand pieces. --


tt. Rise, O son, and see this youre
afflicted greatgrandmother! She is deep
ly stricken with grief, bathed in tears, ex-
ceedingly cheerless, and plunged in an
ocean of sorrow,


12, See the reverend princess of Pans
chala, and the helpless princess of the
Sattata race! Laok at myself, exceedingly
afflicted with grief, and resembling a deer
pierced by a hunter.


13. Rise, O child, and look at the face
of this king, who is gifted with great wis+
dom, and possessed of eyes like lotus-petals °
and resembling your father of restless
glances.


14. Seeing Uttara, whe bewailed thus,
fallen on the earth, all those ladies, raising
her, caused hec to sit up.


15. Having sat up, the daughter of the
king of the Matsyas, summowing her pa»
tience, joined her hands in respect and
touched the earth with her head fer
saluting Keshava having eyes like lotus
petals.


16. Hearing those heart-rending lamen-
tations of hers, that foremost of persons
touched water and withdrew the (force of
the Brahma- weapon.


17-018. That hero of undecaying glory,
belonging to the race of the Dasharhas,
promised to revive the child. en he of
pure soul, said these words in the hearing
of the whole universe,-"O Uttara, I never
utter a falsehood. My words will prove
true. I shall revive this child before alt
creatures,


19. Never before have ! uttered a false.
hood even in jest. Never have I turned
back from battle. (By the merit of those
deeds) let this child revive..


ao. As virtue is dear to me, as Brah.
manas afe especially deat to me, let Abhi«
manyu’s son, who is born dead, revive,


at. Never has a_ misunderstanding
arisen between me and my friend Vijaya,
Let this dead child revive by that truth.


2z. As truth and virtue are always
established in me, let this dead child of
Abhimanyu cevive,


82


' 43. As XKansa and Keshi have been
tighteously killed by me, let this child
revive to-day by that truth, =


24. After these words were uttered by
Vasudeva, that child, O foremost one of
Bharata’s family, became animate and
began gradually to move, O king.


CHAPIER LXX.


(ANUGITA PARVA,)—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said -—

1, When the Brahma-weapon was with-
drawn by Krishna, at that time, the lying-
in-room was lighted up by your father with
his energy.


2. All the Rakshasas were forced to
Jeave the room and many of them were
Killed, In the sky a voice was heard, say-
ing,— Excellent, O Keshava, Excellent.


3. The burning Brahma-weapon then
returned tothe Grandfather. Your father
got back his, O king,

4. Thechild began to move according
to his energy and power. The Bharata-
jadies became all filled with joy.


5. At the command of Govinda, the
Brahmanas were made to utter benedic-
tions. All the ladies filled with joy, lauded
Janarddana.


6. Indeed, the wives of those Bharata-
heroes, viz, Kuntiand Drupada’s daughter
and Subliadra and Uttara, and the wives of
other leading men, like (ship-wrecked)}
persons who have reached the shore after
having got a boat, became greatly pleased.


6—8. ‘then wrestlers and actors and
astrologers and those who engnire after the
sleep (of princes), and bands of bards and
eulogists all uttered the praises of Janard-
dana, while uttering benedictions filled with
the praises of the Kurus, O chief of the
Bharatas. ;

9 Uttara, rising up at the proper time,
with a pleased heatt and bearing ber child
in her arms, reverentially saluted the de-
Jighter of the Yadus.


to-—-14. Refoicing greatly, Krishna
made gifts tothe child of many valuable
gems. Fhe other chiefs of the Vrishni-race,
did the same. Then the powerful Janard-
dana, fimly following truth, bestowed a
name on the infant who was your father, O
monarch,—'Since this child of Abhimanyu
bas beem born. at a time when this family


| please all the people, O Bharata,


MAHABHARATA.


has become nearly éxtinct, let his nanre be
Parikshit.’ This is what he said. Ther
your father, O king, began to grow, and
a, Wher
your father was a month old, O hero, the
Pandavas returned to their capital, bring-
ing with them abundant riches. Hearing:
that the Pandavas were near, those fore<
most ones of the Vrislhni-race went out.


15. The citizens decked the city of Has-
tifapur with many garlands of flowers,
with beautiful pennons and standards of
various kinds,


16. The citizens also, O king, adorned
their respective palaces. Desirous of doing
what was beneficial to the sons of Pandu,
Vidura ordered various kinds of adoration
to be offered to the celestials established in
their respective temples. The principal
streets of the city were adorned with
flowers --


18—21. Fndeed, the city was filled with
the noise of thousands of voices which resem-
bled the softened roar of distant ocean waves.
With dancers all engaged in their business,
and with the voice of simgers, the (Kuru)
city then resembled the palace of Vaishra-
vana himself. Bards and eulogists, O king,
aceompanied by beautiful women, were
seen to adorn various retired spots in the
city. Ihe pennons were made by the wind
to float gaily on every part of the city, as i€
bent upon showing the Kurus the southern
and the northern points of the eompass.
All the officers also of the government
loudly proclaimed that that was to be a day
of rejoicing for the whole kinzdom as a
mark of the success of the enterprise for
bringing a profusion of gems and othes
valuables.


CHAPTER LXXE.


€ ANUGITA PARVA. )—=
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

4. Hearing that the Pandavas were near,
that destroyer of enemies, viz., Vasudeva,
accompanied by his ministers, went cut for
seeing them.


4, The Pandavas thea, uniting with the
Vrishnis according to the ususal formalities,
together entered, O king,.the city of Histi-
napur.


3. With the voices and the clatter of cars
of that powerful host, the Earth and tlre sizy,
and the firmament itself, became, as.it wore,
entirely filled, =


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


4. With rejoicing hearts, the Pandavas,
accompanied by their officers and friends,
entered the capital, plucing that treasure in
their van,


5. Going, according to custom, to king
Dhritarashtra first, they adored his feet
’ y ’

announcing their respective names,


6. Those foremost ones of Bharata’s
race, O chief of kings, then paid their res-
pectful salutations to Gandhari, the daughter
of Suvala, and to Kunti.


7. They next adored (their uncle) Vidura
and Yuyutsu, the son of Dhritarashtra by
his Vaishya wife. ‘Those heroes were then
adored by others and they shone forth in
‘beauty, O king.


8. After this, O Bharata, those heroes
heard the news of that highly wonderful
and marvellous and gladsome birth of Four
father.


9. Hearing of that feat of the highly
intelligent Vasudeva, they all adored
Krishna, the delighter of Devaki, who was
every way worthy of adoration,


to. Then, after a few days, Vyasa, the
son of Satyavati, gifted with great energy,
came to the city of Hastinapur,


11. ‘he perpetuaters of Kuru’s race
adored the great Rishi according to the
usual custom. Indeed, those heroes, with
those foremost princes of the Vrishini and
the Andhaka-races, worshipped the sage.


12—13. After having conversed on
various topics, Dharama’s son Yudhishthira
addressed Vyasa and said,—This treasure,
O holy one, which has been brought
through your favour, I desire to devote to
that great Horse-Sacrifice.


14. O best of ascetics, 1 wish to have
your permission, We are all, O Rishi,’ at
your disposal, and at that of the great
Krishna.


Vyasa said :—

15. I give you permission, O king. Do
what should be done after this. Do you
adore the deities duly by performing the
Horse-Sacrifice with profuse gifts. ;

16. The-Horse-Sacrifice, O king, is a
purifier of allsins. Forsooth, having adored
the deities by that sacrifice you will surely
be purged of all sins.


Vaishampayana said :—

17. Thus addressed, the Kuru-King
VYudhishthira of righteous soul, O monarch,
began to make the necessary preparations
for the Horse- Sacrifice,


18.—19. ‘Having represented all this to
the Island- bog, Krishna, the king gifted


83


with great eloquence, approached Vasudeva
and said,—Q foremost of all beings, the
goddess Devaki-has, through you come to
be considered as the: most fortunate of
mothers. O you of undécaying glory, do
you perform what I. shall now tell you, O
mighty-armed one.


20. O delighter of the Kurus, the various
enjoyments we enjoy, have all been acquised
through your power, The whole Eactn has
been subjugated by you with the beip of
your prowess and intelligence,


2t. Do you, therefore, cause yourself to
undergo the rites of initiation. You'are ouc
highest preceptor and master, If you per-
form the sacrifice, O you of the Dasharha-
race, I shall be purified from every sin,


22. You are Sacrifice! You-are the
Indestructible! You are ‘this Allf You
are Virtue! You are Prajapati! You are
the goal of all creatures! This is my
certain conclusion,


Vasudeva said :—


23. O-mighty-armed one, what you say
is worthy of you, O chastiser of enemies!
You are the goal of all creatures, This is
my certain conclusion,


24. Of the heroes of the MKuru-race,
you shine to-day in great glory for your
virtue! They have all been cast into the
shade, O king, by you! You are our
king, and you are our senior.


25 With my approval freely granted,
do you worship the celestials in the sacrifice
suggested, Do you, O Bharata, appoint
us to whatever task you like. Truly, da
{ pledge myself that i shall accomplish ali,
O sinless one, that you mayst bid me ac-
complish. ;

26. Bhimasena and Arjuna and the two
sons of Midravati will be sacific'ng whea
you, O king, sacrifice. ’


pe


CHAPTER LXXIP,


(ANUGITA PARVA.j)—
Continued.


Yaishampayana said: —

1. Thus addressed by Krishna, Yu-
dhishthira, the son of Dharma, gifted with
great intelligence, saluted Wyasa and said
these words :—~ ohn

2. Do you cause me to be initiated when
the proper hour, as you truly know, come
for that rite. This my sacrifice entirely
depends on you,


84
Vyasa said :—

“3. Myself, O son of Kunti, and Paita
and Ve jnavalieva, shall, undoubtedly,


achieve‘every rite atithe proper time.

‘4. The rite of initiating you will be per-
formed on the day of full moon belonging
to the month of Chaitra. Let all the
necessaries of the ‘sacrifice, O foremost of
men, be got ready.


5. Let Sutas well-versed in the science of
horses and let Brahmanas also possessed of
the same learning, select, after examination,
a worthy horse in order that your sacrifice
may be completed.


6. Loosening the animal according to
the injunctions of the scriptures, let him
. wander over the whole Earth with her belt
of seas, showing your eéffulgent glory, O
king.


Vaishampayana said :—

y. Thus addressed (by the Rishi), Vu-
dhishthira, the royal son of Pandu, answer-
ed,— ‘So be it !’—and then, O monarch, he
accomplished all that that uteerer of Brahma
had said.


8. All the articles necessary for the sa-
crifice, O king, were duly procured.


g. The royal son of Dharma, gifted with
immeasurable soul, having procured all the
necessaries, informed the  Island-born
Krishna of it,


10. Then the highly energetic Vyasa said
to the royal son of Dharma,—'As regards
ourselves, we are all prepared to initiate
‘you in view of the sacrifice.


ty. Let the Sphya and the Kurcha and
all the other articles that, O:you of Kuru's
race, may be necessary for your sacrifice, be
made of gold.


’ ® 12, Let the horse also be loosened to-day,
for wandering on the Earth, according to
the ordinances of the scriptures. Let the
animal, duly protected, wander over the
Earth,’


Yudhishthira said :—


13. Let arrangements be made by you,
O twice-born one, about loosening this horse
for enabling it to wander over the Earth at
its will.


+ 14. You should, O ascetic, say who will


protect this horse while roaming over the
Earth freely according to its will.


Vaishampayana continued :—
1516. Thus addressed (by king
Vudhishthira), O king, the Island-born
Kristina said,— He who is born after Bhima-
sena, who is the foremost of all bowmen, who


MAHABAHR ATA.


is called Jishnu, who is gifted with great
patience and capable of overcoming all_re-
sistance,—he will protect the hoarse. That
destroyer of the Nivatakavachas can con»
quer the whole Earth,


17. In him are all celestial weapons,
His body is like that of a celestial in its
powers of endurance. His bow and quivers
are celestial. He will follow this horse.


18. He is well-versed in both Religion
and Profit. He is a master of all the scien-
ces. O foremost of kings, he will, according
tothe scriptures, cause the ltorse to roam
and graze at its will.


19. This mighty-armed prince, of dark
color, is endued with eyes resembling lotus-
petals. That hero, the father of Abhi-
manyu, will protect the horse. .


Zo. Bhimasena also is gifted with great
energy. That son of Kunti is possessed of
immeasurable power. He is competent to
protect the kingdom, helped by Nakula, O
monarch,


21. Gifted with great intelligence and
fame, Sahadeva will, O you of Kuru’s race,
duly ‘attend to all the relatives who have
been invited to your capital.

22. Thus addressed by the Rishi, that
p’ rpetuator of Kuru’s race, vis., Yudhish-
thira, performed every injunction duly
and appointed Phalguna to attend to the
horse.


Yudhishthira said :—


23. Come, O Arjuna, let the horse, O
hero, be protected by you. You alone


are competent to protect it, and none
else.
. 24. Those kings, QO mighty-armed hero


who will come forward to enceunter you, try
O sinless one, to avoid batiles with them to
the best of your power,


25. You should also invite them all to
this sacrifice of mine. Indeed, O mighty-
armed one, g> forth buat try to establish
friendly celatians with them.


| Vaishampayana said :—


26. Having said so to his brother
Savyasachin, the  righteous-souled king
Yudhishthira commanded Bhima and Na-«
kula to protect the city.


27. Withthe permission of king Dhrita-
rashtra, Yudhishthira then set Sahadeva,
that foremost of warriors, to wait upon .all
the invited guests.


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


CHAPTER LXXIL.
(ANUGITA PARVA.)==


Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

t. When the hour for initiation came,
all those great Ritwijas duly initiated the
king for the Horse-Sacrifice,


2. Having finished the rites of binding
the sacrificial animals, the son of Pandu,
wis., king Yudhishthira the just, gifted with
great energy, the initiation being over,
shone with great splendour along with those
Ritwijas. :

3. The horse that was brought for the
Horse- Sacrifice was let loose, according to
the injunctions of the scriptures, by that
ulterer of Brahma, vis., Vyasa himself of
great energy.


4. Then king Yudhishthira the just, O
king, after his initiation, adorned with a
garland of gold around his neck, shone like
a burning fire.


5. Having a black deer skin for his
upper garment, carrying a staff in hand,
and wearing a cloth of red silk, the son of
Dharma, gifted with great splendour, shone
like a second Prajapati seated on the sacri-
ficial altar.


6. All his Ritwijas also, O king, were
clad in similar dresses. Arjuna also shone
like a burning fire.


7. Dhananjaya, to whose car were yoked
white horses, then duly prepared, O king,
to follow that horse of the complexion of a
black deer, at the command of Yudhish-
thira.


8. Repeatedly drawing his bow, named
Gandiva, O king, and casing his hand in a
fence made of iguana skin, Arjuna, O
monarch, prepared to follow that horse, O
king, with a cheerful heart.


g. All Hastinapur, O king, with the
very children, came out at that spot from
desire of seeing Dhananjaya, that foremost
of the Kurus, on the eve of his journey.


to. So great was the crowd of specta-
tors that came to see the horse and the
prince who was to follow it, that on account
of the pressure of bodies, it seemed a fire
was created,


tz. Loud was the noise which arose from
that crowd of men who assembled together
for seeing Dhananfaya the son of Kunti,
and it seemed to fill all the points of the
compass and the entire sky.


12. And they said,—There goes the son
of Kunti, and there that horse of burning


85


beauty. Indeed, the "mighty-armed ‘hero
follows the horse, having armed himself
with his excellent bow.


13. These were the words which*‘the in-
telligent Jishnu heard. The citizens also
blessed him, saying,’ Let blessings be
yours’, Go safely and return, O Bharata.’


14. Others, O chief of men, uttered
these words :—‘ So great is the crowd that
we do not see Arjuna. His bow, however,
we see.


15. That is the celebrated bow Gandiva
of terrible twang. Blessed be you. Let
all dangers fly from your path. Let feae
nowhere inspire you.


16. When he returns we shall see him,
for it is certain that he will return, The
great Arjuna cepeatedly heard these and
similar other sweet words of men and
women, O chief of the Bharatas. A_ disci-
ple of Yajnavalkya, who was well-versed in
all sacrificial rites, and who was 2 complete
master of the Vedas, proceeded with Partha
for performing auspicious rites in favour
of the bero. Many Brahmanas aise, O
king, all knowing Vedas, well, and many
Kshatriyas too, followed the great hero, at
the command, Q monarch, of Yudhishthira
the just.


20. The horse then travelled, O foremost
of men, wherever be liked over the Earth
already conquered by the Pandavas with .
the power of -ihcir weapons.


21. In course of the horse’s wanderings,
O king, many great and wonderful battles
were fought between Arjuna and many
kings, ‘These [ shall describe to you.


22. Thehorse, O king, travelled over the
whole Barth, iKnow, O monarch, that from
the north it turned towards the East.


23. Grinding the kingdoms of many
kings that excellent horse wandered, And
it was followed slowly by the great car-
warrior Arjuna of white horses,


24. O monarch, many Kshatriyas and
kings, who faught with Arjuna on that
occasion, were rendered miserable for having
lost their kinsmen on the field of Kurus«
kshetra.


23—~26. Many Kiratas also, O king, and
Yavanas, all excellent bowmen, and various
tribes of Mlechchas ton, who had been
discomfited before (by the Pandavas on the
field of Kurukshetra), and many Aryan
kings, possessed of soldiers and animals
gifted with great alacrity, and all irresistible
in ight, met the son of Pandu in battle.


27. Thus took place innumerable battles
in various countries, O monarch, between


86


Acjuna and the kings of various realms .
who came to encounter him.


28. I shall, O sinless king, describe to
yon those battles only which raged with
great fury and which were the principal
oues amoung all he fought.


none


CHAPTER LXXIV.


( ANUGITA PARVA,)—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

t. A battle took place between the
diadem-decked (Arjuna) and the sons. and
grandsons of the Trigartas whose hostility
the Pandavas had incurred before and all
of whom were well-known as powerful car-
warriors,

2. Having learnt that that foremost af
horses, which was intended for the sacrifice,
had come to their kingdom, those heraes,
w@ccoutering themselves in coats mail, sur
‘rounded Arjuna.


3. Mounted on their cars, drawn by
excellent and well-decked steeds and with
guar: on their backs, they sucrounded
that horse, O king, and tried to capture
it.

4. Thinking of that attempt of theirs,
“the diadem-decked Arjuna, forbade those
heroes, with conciliatory words,. O chastiser
of enemies. .

5. Disregarding Arjuna’s message, they
atracked him = with their arrows. ‘fhe
.diadem-decked Arjuna resisted those war-
:tiots who were under the control,of darkness
and passion.


6. Jishnu,, addressed them — smilingly
and said ,—‘ Desist, ye unrighteous .ones !
Life is a blessing.’

y. Atthe time of his starting, he had
been earnestly ordered by king Yudbish-
thira the just not to kill those Kshatriyas
whose kinsmen had been killed before on the
field of Kurukshetra.


8. Remembering these behests of king
Yudhishthira the just who was gifted with
great intelligence, Arjuna asked the Tri-
gattas to. forbear. But they disregarded
Arjuna’s injunction,

9. Then Arjuna defeated Suryavarman,
the king of the Ttigartss, in battle, by


shooting countless arrows at him = and
laughed in scorn.
to. The Trigarta’ warriors, however!


MAHABHARATA.


their cars and car-wheels, rushed towards
Dhananjaya,


tr. Then Suryavarman, showing great
lightness of hand, pierced Dhananjaya with
hundceds of straight arrows, O king !


12, The other great bowmen, who follow-
ed the king and wha were all desirous of
bringing about the destruction of Dhanan-
jaya, shot showers of arrows on him.


13. With numberless arrows shot from
his own bowstring, the 80n of Pandu, O
king, cut off those clouds :of arrows upon
which they fell down,


14. Gifted with great? energy,” Ketuvar-
man, the younger brother of Suryavarman,
and gifted with youthful vigour, fought, for
the sake of his brother, against Pandu’s
son endued with great fame.


15. Seein Ketuvarman approaching
towards him for battle, Vibhatsu, that dese
troyer of hostile heroes, killed him with
many sharp-pointed arrows.


16. Upon Ketuvarmana’s fall, the power-
fal car-warrior Dhritavarman, rushing on
his car tuwards Arjuna, showered a per-
fect downpour of arrows on him,


17, Seeing that lightness of hand shown
-by the youth Dhritavarman, Gudakesha of
gteat energy and great prowess became
highly pleased, with him.

18. The son of Indra coutd not see
when the young warrior took out his arrows
and when he placed them on his bowstring
aiming at him. He only .saw showers of
arrows in the air, . ;


19. For a brief space of time, Arjuna
pleased his enemy and mentally:admired
his heroism and skill.


20. The Kuru hero, smiling the while,
fought with that youth who took after an
angry snake. The mighty-armed Dhanan-
jaya, glad as he was in seeing the courage
of Dhritavarman, did nat take his life.


21. While, however, Partha of im-
measurable energy fought mildly with him
without wishing .to killbim, Diritavarman
shot a burniny arrow at him.


22. Deeply pierced in the hand by that
arrow, Vijaya became stupefied and his
bow Gandiva: dropped down on the Earth
from bis celaxed grasp.


23. The form of that bow, O king,
when it fell from the grasp of Arjuna, re-
sembled, O Bharata, that of the bow of
Indra,


24. When that great and celestial bow
dropped down, O king, Dhritavaiman


filling the ten puints with the sound o' | laughed loudly in batile.


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


25. At this, Jishnu, worked up with
tage wiped the blood from his hand and
once more taking up his bow, showered a
perfect downpour of arrows. .


26. Then a loud and confused noise
arose, filling the sky and touching the very
heavens, as it were, from various creatures
who spoke highly of that feat of Dhanan-
jaya.

27—28. Seeing Jishnu inflimed with
wrath andjlooking like Yama himself as he
appears as the end of the cycle, the Trigarta
wartiors hastily surrounded him, rushing
from their posts and desirous of rescuing
Dhritavarman, Seeing himself surrounded
by his enemies, Arjuna became more angry
than before.


2g. Hethen quickly despatched eighteen
of their foremost warriors with many arrows
of hard icon which resembled the arrows
of the great Indca himself,


30. The Trigarta warriors then began
to flv. Seeing them retreat, Dhananjaya,
quickly shot many shafts at them which
resembled angry snakes of dreadful poison,
and laughed aloud.


3t. The powerful car-warriors of the
Trigattas, with dispirited hearts, fled in
all directions, greatly afflicted by Dhanan-
jaya with his arrows,

32. They then addressed that foremost
of men, that destroyer of the Samsaptaka
army, saying,—' We are your slaves! We
yield to you.

33. Do you command us, O Partha!
Lo, we wait here as the most docile of your
servants !—O delighter of the Kurus, we
shall execute all your commands.’

34. Hearing these words expressive of
their submission, Dhananjaya said them,—
*Do ye, O kings, save your lives, toand
accept my dominion.’


cer eer


CHAPTER LXXV.


(ANUGITA PARVA. =
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—


1. That foremost of horses then pto.
ceeded to the kingdom of Pragjyotisha
and began to wander there. At this,


Bhagadatta’s son, who was greatly Courage.

ous in battle, came out.
2. King Vajradata,

Bharatas, finding


O chief of the
the (sacrificial) horse


arrived within bis kingdom; fought (for.


detaining it), :


87


g. The royal son of Bhagadatta, coming
out of his city, afflicted the horse which
was coming (and seizing it), marched baci”
towards his own place.


4. Marking this, the  mighty-armed
chief of the Kuru-tace, speedily stretched
his Gandiva, and suddenly rushed towards
his enemy.


5. Stupefied by the arrows shot from
Gandiva, the heroic son of Bhagadaita,
letting loose the horse; Bed from Partha.


6. Once more entering his capital, that
foremost of kings, irresistible in battle,
cased himself in nrail, and mounting on his
prince of elephants, came out.


7.. That powerful car-warrior had a
white umbrella held over his head, and
was fanned with a milk-white yak-tails,


8. Moved by childishness and folly, he.
challenged Partha, the powerful car warrior
of the Pandavas, fained for dreadful deeds
in battle, to an encounter with him.


9. The enraged prince then urged to-«
wards Arjuna that élepbant of his, which
resembled a veritable mountain, and from
whose temples and mouth canie out streams
of juice showing excitement,


10. Indeed, that elephant’ showered its
secretions like a great mass of clouds pour-
ing cain, Capable of resisting hostile feats


‘of its own species, it had been equipped


according to the ordinances of the treatises
{on wareelephants), Irresistible in battle,
it had become so infuriate as to be beyond
control,


11. Urged on by the prince with the
iron-fhook, that powerful elephant ther
seemed as if it would cut through the sky
(like a Aying hill.


12. Seeing it advance towards him, O
king, Dhananjaya, filled with anger and
standing on the earth, O Bharata, met the
prince on ns back.


13. Filled with anger, Vajradatta quicke
ly shed at Arjuna a number of broad+
headed arrows gifted with the energy of
fire and resembling (as they coursed
through the air} a cloud of speedily~
moving locusts.


14. Arjuna, however, with arrows sped
from: Gandiva, cut off those arrows, some
into two, and some into three, pieces. He
cut them off in the sky itself with those
atrows of his passing through the sky.


15. The soh of Bhagadatta, seeing his
broad-headed arrows thus cut off, quickly
sped at Arjuna a number of other arrows in
a continuo’s line, :


88


16. Filled with anger at this, Arjuna
thore quickly than before, shot at Bhaga-
datta's son a number of straightly coursing
atrows equipped with golden wings.


17. Vajradatta of powerful energy,
Struck with great force and pierced with
these arrows in that fierce encounter, fell
down en the Earth. Consciousness, hows
ever, did not leave him.


18. Mounting on his prince of elephants
again in the midst of that battle, the son of
Bhagadatta, desirous of victory, very coolly
shot a number of arrows at Arjuna.


19. Fiiled with anger, Jishnu then shot
at the prince a number of arrows which
Jooked like burning flames of fire and
which appeared to be g0 many snakes of
g eadfal poison,


20. Pierced therewith, the powerful ele.
phant, emitting a large quantity of blood,
looked like a mountain of many springs
discharging cillets of water coloured with
ted chaile,


CHAPYER LXXVI.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Vaishampayana siad :—=

1, Thus went on that battle, O chief of
the Bharatas, for three days between
Arjuna and that prince like the encounter
between him of a hundred sacrifices and
Vritra,


2-3. On the fourth day, Vajradatta
af great power laughed loudly and ad.
dressing Arjuna, said these words t-—' Wait,
wait, O Arjana! You shall not escape
me alive! Killing you I shall duly discharge
the water-rite of my father.


4. My aged father Bhagadatta, who
was the friend of your father, was killed by
you on account of his weight of years. Do
you, however, fight me who am but a boy.


5. Having said these words, O you of
Kuru's race, king Vajradatta, filled with
anger, urged his elephant towards the son
of Panda.


6. Urged on by the highly intelligent
Vajradatta, that prince of elephants, as if
desiorous of ‘cutting through the sky, rushed
towards Dhananjaya. :


g. That best of elephants drenched
Arjuna with a shower of juice emitted from
the end of his trunk, like a mass of blue
Glouds drenching a hill with its down-pouc.


8. Indeed, urged on by the king, the
elephant, repeatedly roacing like a cloud,


MAHABHARATA.


tushed towards Phalyuna, sending forth
deep noise froin its moutti,


9g. Indeed, urged on by Vajradatta that
prince of elephants quickly moved towards
the powerful car-wacrior of the Kurus, with
the tread of otse that seemed to dance in
excitement.


to. Seeing that beast of Vajradatta ad«
vance towards him, that destroyer of
enemies, viz,, the powerful Dhananjaya,
telying on Gandiva, stood, his grourd withs
out shaking with fear.


it. Recollecting what an obstacle Vajra-
datta was proving to the performance of
his task, and remembeting the old enmity
of the house, the son of Pandu became
greatly excited with rage against the king.


12, Worked up with rage, Dhananjaya
impeded the course of that beast with a
shower of arrows like the shore resisting the
Surging Sea.


1%. That best of elephants and beautiful
in appearance, thus impeded by Arjuna,
stopped in its course, with body pierced with
many an arrow, like a porcupine with its
quills erect.


14. Seeing bis elephant impeded in its
course, the royal son Bhagadatta, deprived
of sense by anger, shot many whetted
arrows at Arjuna.


1g. The mightysarmed Arjuna baffled
all those arrows with many foe-destroying
arrows of his. ‘he feat appeared to be
exceedingly wonderful.


16. Once more the king of the Pragjyos
tishas, worked up with rage, forcibly urged
his elephant, which resembled a mountain,
at Arjuna,


17. Seeing the beast once more advans
cing towards him, Arjuna shot with great
strength an arrow at it which resembled a
veritable flame of fire.


18, Cut to the quick, O king, by the
son of Pandu, the beast suddenly droppep
down on the Earth like a mountain-summit
loosened by a thunder-bolt.


19. Stcuck with Dhananjaya’s arrow,
the elephant, as it lay on the Earth, looked
like a huge mountain-cliff lying on the
ground, laosened by the bolt of Indra.


20, When the’ elephant of Vajradatta
was ptostrated on the ground, the son of
Pandu, addressing the king who had falled
down with his beast, said,—‘Do not fear.’


zt. Indeed, Yudhishthira of great energy
said to me while commissioning me for this
task even these words, vis., You should
not, O Dhananjaya, kill those kings (whe
may give you baitie).


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


22. © foremest of men, you should con-
sider your task as accomplished if only you
disable those hostile kings! You should
not also, O Dhananjaya, kill the warriors
of those kings who may come forth to
fight you. -


23. ‘They should: be requested to come,
-with all their Kinsmen and friends, to the
Horse-Sacrifice of Yudhishthira,


24. Having heard these commands of
my brother, | Bhail not kill you, O king!
Rise up; let no fear be yours; return to
your city safe and sound, O king.


25. When the day of full moon in the
month of Chaitra comes, you shall O
great king, go to that sacrifice of king
Vudhishthira the just, for it takes place
on that day !


26. Thus addressed by Arjuna, the
royal son of Bhagadatta, defeated by the
son of Pandu, said,—‘ So be it,’


CHAPTER LXXVIT.


(ANUGITA PARVA,)==
Continued.


Vaishampayana said:—

t. There took place a great battle be-
tween the diadem-decked Arjuna and the
-hundreds of Saindhavas who still lived
alter the destruction of their clan. 3


2. Hearing that he of white horses had
entered their territories, those {Kshatriyas
came out against him, unable to bear that
foremost one of Pandu’s race.


3. Those wartiors who were as terrible:
as dreadful poison, finding the horse within


their dominion, seiged it without being
filled with any fear of Partha who was the
younger brother of Bhimasena,


4. Advancing against Vibhatsa who
waited on foot, armed whith his bow, upon
the sacrificial horse, they attacked him froin
A near point.

53. Defeated in battle before, those
Kshatriyas of great energy, moved by the
desire of victory, surrounded that foremost
of men.


6. Proclaiming their names and families
and their various feats, they showered theif
arrows on Partha. .


7. Pouring showers: of arrows of such
fierce energy as were capable of obsiruc-
ting the course of hostile elephants, those
cheroes sufrounded the son of Kunti, desir-
ous of defeating him in battle,


a2


49


8. Themselves seated on ears, thay
fought Arjuna of dreadful feats who was
on foot.


g- From every side they began to strike
that hero, that destroyer of the Nivata«
kavachas, that destroyer of the Samsaptakag,
that destroyer of the king of the Sindhus.


to. Surrounding him oa afl sides ae
within a cage by-means of @ thousand care
and ten thousand horse, thosé brave ware
riors expressed their joy.

r1~12. Recollecting the destruction by
Dhananjaya of Jayadratha in batt, O
you of Kuru’s race, they poured heavy
showers of arrows on that hero like a mas#
of clonds showering a leavy, downpour.
Overwhelmed with that arrowv shower,
Arjuna looked Jike the sun covered bya
cloud,


13. That foremost: son of Pandu, ia
the midst of that cloud of arrows, re~
sembled: a bird in the midst of an iron cage,
O Bharata. .


14. Seeing the son of Kunti thus afflicted
with arrows, cries of of and alas were
uttered by the three worlds, and the Sua
himself became shorn of his splendour.


15. Then, O king, a terrible wind began
to blow, and Rabu swallowed up both the
Sun and the Moon simultaneously.


16. Many meteors struck the solar dise-
and then shot in different directions. The
prince of mountains, vt2., Kailasa, began
to tremble, -


17. The seven (celestial) Rishis, as alsa
the ether Rishis of Heaven, stricken with
fear, and afflicted with grief and sorrow,
breathed hot sighs,


a8, Piercing through the sby, those
meteors fell on the lunar dis¢ as well. All
the points of the compass became filled witts
smoke and assumed a strange aspect.


19 Reddish clouds, with flashes of
lightning playing in their midst and the
bow of Indra measuring them front side to
side, suddenly covered the sky and poured
flesh and bloods on the Barth.


zo. Such was the aspect which all nature
assumed when that hero was overwhelmed
with showers of arews. Indeed, wher
Phalyuna, that foremost one among the
Bharatas, was thus afflicted, those marvels
were witnessed.


21. Overwhelmed by that dénse clovd
of arrows, Arjuna became stupefied. His
bow, Gandiva, fell down from his relaxed
giip and his leathern fence alyo dropped
down,


22. When Dhananjaya became stape-
fied, the Saindhava watiiors -once’ more


‘ge


‘shot forthwith at that senseless warrior,
‘numberless other arrows.


23. Understanding that the son of
Pritha was insensible, the celestials, with
hearts stricken with fear, began to seek his
well: being by uttering various benedictions.


24. Then the celestial Rishis, the seven
Rishis, and the twice-born Rishis, became
engaged in silent recitations from desire
of giving victory to the. highly intelligent
son off Pritha’s.

‘a5. When at last the energy of Partha
blazed forth through those deeds of the
dwellers of the celestial region, that hero,
who was conversant with celestial weapons
of great efficacy, stood immovable like a
hilt,


26. The delighter of the Kurus then
drew his celestial bow. And as he repea-
tedly stretched the baowstring, the twang
that followed resembled the loud sound of
some strong machine.


27.. Like Purandara pouring rain, the
powerful Arjuna then, with that bow of his,
poured incessant showers of arrows on his
enemies,


a8. Pierced by those arrows, the Saind-
lava warciers with their ciefs became
invisible like trees covered with lucusts.


‘ 2g. ‘Yerror-stricken at the very sound
of Gandiva and fiited with consternation
they fled away, in grief ef heart they shed
tears and cried aloud, ;


go. The powerful warrior moved amidst
that host of enemies with the celerity of a
fiery wheel, all the time piercing
wartiors with his arrows,


gt. -Like the great Indra, the holder of
the thunder-bolt, that destroyer of enemies,
vis., Arjuna, shot from his bow in every
direetion that shower of arrows which
resembled a sight produced by nvagie.


32. The Kaurava hero, piercing the
hostile army with showers of arrows looked
resplendent like the autumnal Sun when he
disperses the clouds with his powerful rays.


CHAPTER LXXVULE


{ANUGITA PARVA.J—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. The irresistible holder of Gandiva,
ready for battle, stood immovable on the
ficid like Elimavat himself, cH


those.


MAHABHARATA.


2. The Saindhava warriors, once more
tallying, showered in great rage repeated
down-pours of arrows on him.


3. The mighty-armed hero, laughing
at his enemies, who had once more rallied
but who were on the point of death,
addressed them in these soft words :—


4. Do ye fight to the best of your power
and do ye try to defeat me. Do ye, how-
ever, accomplish all necessary deeds, for a
great danger awaits you all,


g. See, 1 fight all of you, baffling your
clouds of arrows! Bent as you are on
battle, wait a little. 1 shalt soon quell your
pride.

6. The holder of Gandiva, having said
these words in anger, recollected, however,
the words, O Bharata, of his eldest brother.


7—8. Those words were —<You should
not, O child, kill those Kshatriyas who
will come against you for battle! They


should, however, be defeated by you!
That foremost of men, Phalguna, had been
thus addressed by king Yudhishthira the
just, of great soul. He, therefore, began
to reflect thus. Thus was I commissioned

my brother. Warriors advancing
against me should not be killed.


9. 1 must act in such a way as not to
falsify the words of king Yudhislrthira the
just.


to. Having arrived at this conclusion,
Phalguna, that foremost of men, then said
to those Saindhavas who were all dreadful
in battle, these words ;


tt. I say what is for your benefit.
Though staying before me, } do not wish
to kill you. He amongst you who will say
to me that he has been defeated by me and
that he is mine, will be spared by me.


12, Having heard these words of mire,
act towards me in that way which nvay best
secure your well-being. By acting in a
different way you will place yourselves in a
situation of great fear and danger.


13. Uaving said these words to those
heroic warriors, the chief of the Kurus
began to fight them. Arjuna was worked
up with rage. His enemies, desicous of
victory, were equally enraged,


14. The Saindhavas then, O king, shot
hundreds and thousands of straight arrows


| at the wielder of Gandiva.


13. Dhananjaya, with bis own whetted
arcows, cut off those atrows of sharp and
terrible points, resenvbling snakes @{ dread-
fat poison, before they could comme up to


hin.


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA: |


16. Having cut off those sharp arrows
bedecked with Kanka-feathers, Acjuna
pierced each of the warriors opposed to him
with a whetted arrow.


17. The Saindhava Kshatriyas, recol-
lecting that it was Dhananjaya who bad
killed their Bing Jayadcatha, then hurled at
him darts and javelius with great force.


18. The diadem-decked Dhananjaya of
great power baffled their aim by cutting
off, all those weapons before any of them
could reach him. At length the son of
Pandu became highly angry.


1g. With many straight and broad-
headed arrows, he cut off the heads of
many of those warriors who were cushing at
bim f10m desire of victory.


20. Many fled, many rushed at Arjuna ;
many moved not; all of them, however,
uttered such a loud noise that it resembled
the coar of-the ocean.


2t, As they were killed by Partha of
immeasurable power, they fought him, each
according to his strength aud prowess.


22. Their animals being all exbausted,
Paciha succeeded in depriving a large
number ot those warriors of theic senses by
means of his sharpest arrows in that battle.


33. ‘Then Dusshala, their queen, the
daughtec of Dneitarastra, knowing that
they were cendered cheerless by Arjuna,
touk her grandsya in hec arms and went to
Arjuna.

24. ‘The child was the son of Suratha
(the son of Jayadratha). The brave prince
proceeded to his maternal uncle on his cac
tor the safety of all the Saindhava wacuors.


25. ‘The queen, arrived before Dianan-
jaya, began to weep in surrow. Seeing her,
the powerlul Dhananjaya cast off his bow.


26—27. Leaving off his bow, Partha
duly received his sister and enquired of her
as to what he could do for her, Lhe queen
cepled to him, saying,—U chief ot the

~ Buaratas, this child is the son of your sister’s
son. Hesalutes you, GO Partha. Look at
him, O foremuvst of men, .


28. ‘Thus addressed by ber, Partha
enquired after his’son (Suratha}, saying.—~
Wuere is he ?


29. Dusshala answered him, saying,—
Burning with grief on account of the des-
truction of chis father, the heroic father of
this child died broken-hearted, Listen to
me as té bow he died,


30-33. xe) Dhananjaya, he had treard
betore that his father Jayadratha had been
willed by you, O sinless.one. Exceedingly


afRicted with grief at this, and hearing of your


3 §


arrival here ac the follower and pretector
of this sacrificial harse, he at once fell down ~
and gave up his life. Indeed, deeply afflic~ |
ted with ycief, as he was, as soon as he
heard of your arrival, he gave up his life.
Seeing him prostrate on the Eerth, O lord,
1 tuok his infant son with me and have come
to you, seeking your protection. Havin
said these words, the daughter of Dhrita»’
rashtra began to lament in deep sorrow,


34. Arjuna stood before her in great
cheerlessness of heart. Hig face was turned
towards the Earth. ‘The cheerless sister
then said to her brother, who was equally
cheecless, these words: See your sister.
See the child of your sister’s son.


35: O perpetuater of Kuru’s race, O
you who are fully conversant with every.
duty, you should show mercy to this child,
forgetting the Kuru prince (Duryodhana)
and the wicked Jayadratha,


36. As that destroyer of hostile heroes,
Parikshit, has been born of Abhimanyu,
so has this mizhty-armed child, my grand-
son, originated from Suratha,


37. Taking him with me, O king, I have
come to you desirous of the safety of ait
the warriers! Do you listen to these words
of mine.


38. This child of that wicked enemy
of yours has now come to you, O mighty+
armed here.’ You should, therefore, show
mercy to this infant. ‘


39. O chastiser of enemies this infant
seeks to please you by bending his head,
He solicits you for peace! O mightye.
armed hero, be inclined to make peace.


40, O you who know every duty, be.


pleased with the child whose friends and
kinsmen have all been killed and who him.


self knows nothing of what has tate
place. Do not yield to anger, :
4t. Forgetting his disreputable and’


cruel grandfather, who offended against you
so highly, itis but fit that you should extend
your grace towards this child,


42. Recollecting queen Gandhari and
king Diwitarashtra, Dhananjaya, afflicted
with grief, addressed Dusshala who had
said so to him, and answered her, censuring:
Kshatriya practices all the time. ;


43. Fie on Duryodhana, that mean -
person, covetous of kingdom and ‘full of.
vanity! Alas, it was for him that all my
kinsmen have been sent by me to the abode
of Yama, = -


44. Having said so, Dhananjaya com=
forted his sister and became inclined to
make peace, Cheerfully, he embraced hee


7


ad


and then dismissed her,
return to her palace.


45. Dasshata asked all] her warriors to
Gesist fram that great battle, and adoring
Partha, she of beautiful face returned to-
wards her palace.


. 46. Having defeated those heroes, vis.,
the Satudhavas, thus, Dbananjaya began
to follow that horse which ranged at its
will,


47. The heroic Arjuna duly followed
Mhat sacrificial terse even as the divine
holder of Pinaka had in days of yore follow-
e@ the deer through thé sky.


48. The horse, at its will, passed through
various kingdoms successively, multiplying
the feats of Arjuna,


49. In course of time, O king, the horse
wandering at its pleasure, at last arrived
Within the kingdom of Manipura, fellowed
by the son of Panda,


ence


CHAPPER LXXIX,


(ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

t Hearing that his father Arjuna had
arrived within his kingdom, the king of
Manipura, Vabhravahana went out with
humility, with a numbec of Brahmanas and
some treasure in his van.


z. Remembering, however, the duties

of Kshatriyas, the highly intelligent Dhanan-
jaya, seeing the king of Manipura arcive in
that guise, did not approve of it.
3 The righteous-souled  Phalguna
angrily said,—Your conduct is not proper.
You have certainly fallen away from Ksha-
atciya duties.

4. Ihave come here as the protector of
Vudhishthica’s sacrificial horse. Why, O
won, will you vot Aght me, seeing that 1
have come within your territories ?


Fie on you, O you of foolish un-
derstandiuy, fie on you who have deviated
trom Kshatriya duties! Fie‘on yeu who
would receive me peacelufly even though |
have come here for fighting with you,


6-8. In thus receiving me peacefully
you act lice a weman. O you of wretched
videistanding, if I had come to you, leav-
ivg aside my arms, then wou'd this conduct
er yours have been fir, O worst of men!”
Leuning that these words were addressed
by ber husband, the daughter of the


asking ker ey


Snake King, vis, U.upi, unable to tele. ate |


MAHABHARATA,


it, pierced ithrough the Earth and came np
there. She saw her son standing there
perfectly cheerless and with face hanging
down.


g—to. Indeed, the prince was repeatedly
rebuked by his father who was desirous of
battle with bim, O monarch! The daughter
of the Snake, possessed of beautiful limbs,
vis., Ulupi, said these words consistent with
righteousness and duty to the prince who
himself was conversant with righteousness
and duty. Kaow that I} am your mother
Ulupi that am the daugiter of a snake.


11. Do you perforin my order, O son’
fer you would then acquire ‘great merite
Fight your father, this foremost one o
Kuru'’s race, this hero who 3s irresistible in
battle.


12. Forsooth, he will then be pleased
with you. Fhus was king Vabhruvabana
incited against his father by ‘his (step)
mother,


1314. At last, gifted as he was with
great eneryy, he made up his mind, O chief
of the Bharatas, to fight :Dhananjaya.
Putting on his armour of bright gold and
his shining head-dress, be got upon an
excellent car which had hundreds of quivers
ready on it. ‘hat ear was equipt with
trecessaries for battle and had horses yoked
to it which were fizet like the mind.


15. It had excellent wheels and a strong
Upashkara, and was adorned with golden
Q:taments of every sot. Raising his
standard which was decorated most beautt-
fully and which bore the device of a hon in
gold, the beautiful prince Vabheuvahana
preceeded’ against this father for battle.


16, Coming upon the sacrificial horse
which was protected by Pattha, the hervic
Pritce caused it to be seized by persons
well-versed in veterinary science.


17. Seeing the horse seized, Dhananjiya
became filled with joy. Standing on the
Earth, that hero began to oppose the ad-
vance of his son who was on his car,


18. The king afflicted the hero with
repeated showeis of arrows gifted with
whetted points and reseuvliag snakes of
dreaditul poison. ; :


19. Incomparable was the battle which
teok place between the father and son. It
resembled the battle between the celestials
and the Asuras of old. Each was pleased
with oWtaining the other fer an antagonist,


go. ‘Then Vabhruvahana, laughing, cut
the diadcm-decked Arjuna, that foremost
of men,.in the shoulder with a straight
arrow, ; 4


ASHWAMBOHA PARVa,


a1, Equipt with feathers, that arrew
penetrated Atjuna’s body fike a snake
penetrating on an anthill. Piereing the son
ef Kuti through, the acrow went deep into
the Earth,


22. Feeling acute pain, the intelligent
Doananjaya rested awhile, supporting him-
self on lis excellent bow, He stood, having
recourse te his celestial energy and seemed
externally like one dead.


23-24. That foremost of men, then
Fegaining consciousness, lauded his son
highly. Possessed of great splendour, the
son of Sbakra said,—Exceilent, Excellent,
O mighty-armed one, O san of Chitran-
gada! O son, seeing this feat, so worthy
ot you, | am highly pleased with you.

25. I shall now discharge these arrows
at you, Uson! Stand for fight (without
running away). Having said these words,
that destroyer of enemies shot a shower of
arrows on the prince.


26. King Vabhruvahana, however, with
his own broad-headed ariows, cut all those
arrows, which were discharged from
Gangiva and which resembled the thunder-
built ot Ludea in splendour, some in two, and
sume into three, parts.


27. Then the standard, decked with
goid and resembling a golden palmyra, on
the king’s car was cut off by Partha with
some excellent arrows of his,


' 28. The son of Pandu, laughing, next
killed the Bing’s horses of large size and
gieat speed,


29.. Descending from his car, the king,
wuiked up with cage, fought bis father on
tuot. :


30. Pleased with the prowess of his son,
that foremost one of the sons of Pritna,
vigs., the son of thefwielder of the thunders
buit, began to afflict him greatly,


3t. The powerful Vabhruvahatia, think.
ing that his father was no longer able to
tace him, again afflicted him with many
atrows resembling snakes of dreadtul
pyisyn,


32. From a spirit of childisliness he then
vigorously cut bis father in the breast with
a whetted arrow having excellent wings,


33—35- That arrow, O king, penetrated
the beouy of Pandu’s son and reacuing his
‘very vitals caused hiin great pain, The
delightec of the Kucus, Daauanjaya, deep-
ty pierced therewith by hts soa, then
aropped down in a swoon on the Earth,
‘UO king! When that hero, that bearer of
the burthens of the Kurus, fe down, the
son -of Ctitrangada’ also became. uncon.
scious. Lhe Jaer’s awyya Was owing to


| not grieve for iny killed son!


93
his exertions in battle as also to his grief at’
seeing his father killed. :

35. He had been pierced deeply by
Arjuna with clouds of arrows, -He, there-
fore dropped down at the van of battle
etwbracing the Earth.

37. Hearing that her husband had been
killed and that her son had fallen down os:


the Earth, Chitrangada, in great agitation
of mid, went to the field of battle.


38. Her heart burning with sorrow,
weeping piteously the while, and trembling
ail over, the mother of the king of Manipura
saw her killed husband,


&.


CHAPTER LXXX,


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. Ynat lady having eyes like lotuse
petals, having bewailed muck, ated buraing
with yrief, at last lost heer senses and
dceopped down on we Barth.


2—3-. Regaining consciousness and seee
ing Ulupi, the dauginter of the Snake-Chief,.
queen Cnhitrangada gifted with: celestial
beauty, said to her these words :—See,
Uiupi, out ever victorious husband killed
in battle, through you, by ty son of Leader
years,

4 Do you know the practices of the
respectable 2? Are you a wite devoted to
youc husband? It is through -your deed,
that. your husband is laid iow, slain in
battle.


5- If Dhananjaya has offended against
you fn. every respect, do you forgive tim !
t solicit you, do you revive that hero,

6, O righteous lady, you know piety,
Youu are, U blessed one, known (tor your
virtuesy over the three worlds! How is it
that having caused your husband to be
killed by yyur son, you du not indulge ja
grief ? .
yg. O daughter of the Saake-Chief, I da
L geieve for
only my husband who has received this
hospitality from his son.


8—g. “Having said these words to the
queeniy Ulupi the daughter of the Snakes
dying, the ilusurioas Chitcangada went to
where her husband lay on the Kacth and ad-
dresomy him, said,—lise, O dear husband,
you occupy the forerrost place in the affec.
tions of- the -Kucu-King- (Yudhishttfirayt


94


Here is that horse of yours! {t has bees
liberated by me.


to. Indeed, O powerful ene, this sacri-
ficial horse of king Yudhishthira the just,
should be followed by you. _Why then do
you lie still on the Earth.


tt. My life-bréaths depend on you, O
delighter of the Kutus. How is it that he
who is the giver of other people’s life-


breaths, renounces his own  life-breaths
to-day ?
tz. See, O Ulupi, this beautiful form of


your husband lying prostrate on'the ground.
How is it that you do not grieve, having
caused him to be killed through your sos
whom you did excite with your words ?


13. It is fit that this boy should yield to
the power of death and tie thus on the
ground besides tis own father. Oh, let
Vijaya, let him that is called Gudakesha,
let this hero with reddish eyes return to life.


14. O blessed lady, pulygamy is no
fault with men, Women only commit sin
by taking more than one husband. Do
not, therefore, cherish’ such thoughts (of
vengeance).


15. his relationship was ordained by
the Supreme Creator himself. It is, besides,
ay eternal and unchangeable one. Do you
attend to that relationship, Let youc union
(with Dhananjaya) be made true.


16. Hf, having killed your husband
through youe son, you do net revive him
to-day before my eyes, | shall. then re-
nounce my own life-breaths,


17. Fortseoth, O reverend lady, afflicted
as lam with grief and deprived as I am
of both husband and gon, [ shall sit here
to-day in Praya-vow before your presence,


18. Having said so to the daughter of
the Snake-Chief, who wasa co-wife with ber
to Arjuna, the princess Chaitravahini sat in
Praya, O king, cestraining speech,


Vaishampayana said :—

19. Ceasing to lament, the cheerless
queen, taking upon her lap the feet of her
husband, sat there, sighing heavily and
desiring also for the restoration of her son
to life.


go—2t. King Vabhruvahana then, re-
gaining consciousness, saw-his mother jsea-
ted in that guise on the {field of battle,
Addressing her be said,—What can be
more painful than the sight of my mother,
who has been brought up in huxury, lying
on the naked Earth beside her heroic hus-
band stretched thereon.


22. Alas, this destroyer of all enemies,
tlus foremost of all wielders of weapons, has


MAHABAHRATA, ,


been killed by me in battle. It is clear
that men do die, tilt their hour comes.


23. Oh, the heart of this princess seems
to be very hard since it does not break
even on seeing her mighty-armed and
broad-chested husband lying dead on the
grouad,


24. It is clear that one does not die tilk
one’s hour comes, since neither myself, noc
my mother is deprived of life.


25. Alas, alas, the golden coat of mail of
this foremost hero of Kuru’s race, killed by
me, his son, knewingly, is lying on the
ground, cut off from his body.


26. Alas, ye Brahmanas, see my heroic
father lying prostrate on the Earth, on a
hero’s bed, killed by his son.


27. What benefit is done to this hero,
killed by me in battle, by those Brahmanas
who were commissioned to attend upon this
foremost one of Kuru’s cace engaged ia
following the horse ?


28. Let the Brahmanas direct what ex-
piation should now be done by me, a ciuel
and sinful wretch, who has killed his own
fathec in battle,


2g «Having killed my own father, £
should, suffering every sort of misery,
wander over the Earth, cruel that I am,
covering myself with his skin.


30. Give me the two halves of my sire’s
head to-day, for there is no other expiation
for me who have killed my own father.


gt. See, O daughter of the foremost of
Snakes, your husband killed by me. Indeed,
by killing Arjuna in battle I have accoms
plished what is pleasant to you.


32. §£ shall to-day follow in the traci


by which my father has gone. O blessed
oue, t cannot comfort myself.


33. Be happy té-day, O mother, seeing


| myself and the wielder of Gindiva both


embrace death ta-day.


1 swear to you by
truth itself,


34—35 “Having said these words, the
king, sorely afflicted with grief, O monarch,
touched water, and exclaimed in sorrow,—
Let all creatures, mobile and immobile,
listen to me! Do you also listen to me, O
mother! [ say the truth, O Best of all
daughters of the snakes.


36. If this best of men, Jaya, my fathec
does not rise up, | shall emaciate my owr
body, sitting on the field of battle.


37. Having killed my father, there is no
rescue forme. Afflicted as { am with the
sin of patricide, L shall, forsooth, have to
sink in Heil, :


ASHWAMPDHA PARVA.,


98) Be killing a heroic Kshatriya one
Hecomes cleansed by m-king a gift of a
thundred kine. By killing my father, how-
ever, so dreadful has beeti my sin that my
rescue is impossible.


39 «This Dhananjaya, the son of Pandy,
was the one hero gifted with mighty energy.
Possessed of righteous sonf, he was the
creator of my being. tow can I be
tescued after having killed him ?


40. Having bewailed thus, the great son
of Dhananjaya, king Vabhruvahana, teuch-
ed water and became silent, vowing to
starve himself to death.


Vaishampayana said :—


41—42. When the king of Maniputra, that
chastiser of enemies, afflicted with grief, along
with his mother, sat down to starve: himself
to death, Ulupi then thought of the gem
that has the virtue of reviving a dead man.
The gem, the great refuge of the Snakes,
thus thought of, arrived there.


43. The daughter of the Prince of
Snakes, taking it up, uttered these words
which highly gladdened the combatants
standing on the field.


44. Rise up. O son! Do not grieve!
Jishnu has not bean vanqnished by you!
"This hero is incapable of being defeated by
men as also by the celestials headed by
Vasava himself.


45. I have exhibited this illusion, de-
ceiving your senses, for the benefit of this
foremést of men, vis., your illustrious
father.


46. O you of Kuru’s race, desirous of
ascertaining the prowess of yourself, his
son, this destroyer of hostile heroes, O-
king, came here for fighting with you.


47. it was, therefore, O son, that you
were urged by me to fight. O powerful
king, O son, do not suspect that you have
committed any, even the least, fault, by
his challenge.


48. He is a Rishi, of a powerful soul,
eternal and indestructible.
Shakca himself is ingapable of defeating
him in battle.


49. This celestial gem has been brought


by me, O king. kt always revives the
snakes as often as they die.
50. O powerful king, do you place this


gem on the breast of your father. You |


shall then see the son of Pandu revive.


§t. Thus addressed, the prince who had

.€ommitted no sin, moved by love for his

father, then placed that gem on {he breast
of Pritha’s son ef incomparable energy,


O dear son, |


93


2. After the gem had been placed on
his breast, the heroic and powerful Jishou
became revived. Opening his red eyes, he
rose up like one who had slept long.


$3. Seeing his father, the great hero of
in exhaustible energy, restored to conscious-
ness and quite at his ease, Vabhruvahana
adored him with respect.


84. When that foretost of men, O
powerful one, awoke from the slumber of
death with every auspicious sign of hfe,
the chastiser of Paka rained down celestial

owers. :


5§ Kettle-detitts struck by nobody,
produced theic music deep as the muttering
of the clouds. A foud uproar was heard
in the sky consisting of the words-~Excel-
lent, Excellent. é


86. The mighty-armed Dhananjaya,
rising up and well-comforted, embraced
Vabhruvahana and smelled his head,


57-858. He saw sitting at a distance
from his son, this latter’s mother stricken
with grief, in-the company of Utupi.
Dhananjaya asked,—Woy is it that every
thing in the field of battle seems td bear
the marks of grief, wonder and joy? If
O destroyer of enemies, you know the cause,
do you then tell me.


gg. Why has your mother come to the
field of battle? Why, also, has Ulupi the
daughter of the Prince of Snakes, come


r here ?


60. | know that you had fought this
battle with me at my ewn command,
wish to Knew what the cause is which has
brought out the ladies. ;


61. Thus questioned by Dhananjaya,
the intelligent xing of Manipura gratified’
him by bending his head in respect, and
then said,—Let Ulupi be asked.


Se oaeceeeal


CHAPTER LXXXL.


{ANUGITA PARVA.)-—~
Continued,


Arjuna said :—

1. What brings you-here, O datighter
(-in-law) of Kuru’s race, and what, also, is
the cause of the arrival on the field of baule
of her who is the mother of the king of
Manipura ?

2, Vo you entertain friendly motives
towards this king, O daughter of a snake ?
O yeu af restless glances, do you wish good
to me too ?


96


MAHABHARATA,


% 1 hope, O you -ef ample hips, that : blessed son who, youthful as he fs, is the


netiher E, nor thie Vabravahana here, have,
O beautiful lady, done any injury to you
unconsciously 7


4. Has Chitrangada of faultless limbs,
descended from the line of Chitravahana,
done you any wrong ?

5. Tohim, the daughter of the Pringe of
Snakes answered smilingly,—You have not
offended me, nor bas Vabhruvahana done
‘me any wrong. -


6. Nor this prince’s mothet who is always
obedient to me as a hand-maid. “Listen,
how all this has been caused by me. |.


7. You should not be angry with me.
Indeed, I seek to please you by bending my
head in respect." O you of Kuru’s race, all
this has been done by me for your good, O
powerful one!


810. O mighty-armed Dhananjaya,
Hear all that I have done. In the great
battle of the Bharata-Princes, you had
killed the royal son of Shantans by unfair
ways. What I have done has expiated
your sin. You did not overthrow Bhishma
while fighting with yeu t ;


It-=14. tHe was engaged with Shikandin.
Relying on him as your help, you did bring
about the overthrow of Shantanu’s son. 1f
you had died without having expiated your
sin, you would then have fallet, fersooth, into
Hell on account of that sinful deed of yours.
Even this which you have got from your son
is the éexpiation of that sin !


13. Formerty, O king, 1 heard this said
by the Vasus while they were it, the com-
pany of Ganga, O you of great intelligence.

14—15. After the fall of Shantanu’s son,
these celestials, vig., the Vasus, coming
to the banks of Ganga, bathed in her waters,
and calling the goddess of that stream, they
uttered these terrible words having the
sanction of Bhagiratt herself, vfs »—Shan-

. tanu’s son Bhishima has been skilled by
Dhananjaya.

16.
was engaged with another, and had ceased
to fight. For this fault we shall to-day
imprecate a curse on Dhananjaya !


17. To this, the goddess Ganga readily
agreed, saying,— Be it so !—Hearing these
words | became very much distressed and
penetrating into the nether regions represen-
ted everything to my father.


18—1g. Informed of what. had taken
place, my father became plunged in grief.
" Going to the Vasus,” he begged them for
your sake, again and again gratifying
them by every means in his power, They
then said to him,— Dharanjaya has a highly


-| incapable of defeating you In battle.


‘} quainted with every duty !
Indeed, O goddess, Bhishma then |


ising of Manipura,


20. He will, standing on the field of
battle, cast Dhananjaya down on the Barth.
When this will take place, O Prince of
Snakes, Arjuna will be freed from our
curse | ;


at. Do you teturn t=Thus addressed
by the Vasus, he came back and informed
me of what had taken place. Having
learnt all this, O hero, | have freed you
from the curse of the Vasus in thus.


22. The ting of the celestials himselfis
‘The
son is one’s ewn self, It is for this that you
have been defeated by him.


_ 24. Lcannot be held, O powerful one, ta
have committed any sin. How, indeed,
would you hold me censurable ?


24. Thus addressed (by Ulupi), Vijaya
became cheerful of heart and said to her,—=
All this you have done, O goddess, is
highly agreeable to me,


28—26. After this, Jaya addressed his
son, the king of Manipura, and said to
him in’ the hearing of Chitrangada, the:
daughter (-in-law) of [Kuru’s race, ‘the
Horse-Sacrifice of Yudhisivthira will take
ptace on the day of full aiaan in the coming
month of Chaitra, Come there, O king,
with youre mothee and your counsellors and
fficers |"


27-28. Thus addressed by Partha, king
Vabhruvahana of great intelligence, with
tearful eyes, said these words to his father,
—‘O you who are.conversant with every
duty, I shalt certainly ga, at your command,
to the great Horse-Sacrifice, and take uport
myself the task of distributing food among
the twice-born ones !


2g. For, however, showing your grace
towards me, do you enter your own city
with your two wives. Do not cherish any
scruple about this, O you who are fully ac-
oe


30. O lord, having lived for one night in


‘your own palace in happiness, you may


then fotlow the horse, O foremost of victori-
ous warriors !


31—32.. The ape-bannered son of Kunti,
thus addressed by his son, answered the
child ef Chitrangada, saying,—You know,
mighty-armed one, what vow I am obsers
ving? O you of large eyes, till the ter-


smination of this my vow, I cannot enter


your city. -


33- O foremost of men, this sacrificial
horse wanders at will. Blessings on you.
Lmust go away. I have no place to rest
for even a short while!


ASHWAMEDHA .PARVA,


4 The son of the chastiser of Paka
then, duly adored by his son and obtaining


97-
arrows, the ape-bannered hero shot a num-
ber of burning arrows at his enemy whick


the permission of his two wives, ieft the | resembled snakes with fiery mouths. _


Spot and proceeded on his way.


leis


CHAPTER LXXXIL.


(ANUGITA PARVA. )=
Continued. ,


Vaishampayana said :~- :

1. The (sacrificial) horse, having wan-
dered over the entire Karth bounded by
the ocean, thet ceased and turned his face
towards the city of Hastinapore.


2. Following as he did that horse, the
diadem-decked Arjuna also turned his fate
towards the Kuru capital. Wandering at
his will, the horse then came to the city of
Rajagriba,

4 Seeing him arrived within his king-
dom, O monarch, the heroit son of Saha-
deva, following Kshatriya duties, challeng-
ed him to battle. ;


4. Coming out of his city, Meghasandhi,
mounted on his car and equipt with bow
and arrows and leathern fence, rushed to-
wards Dhananjaya who was on foot.


5. Gifted with great energy, Megha-
sandhi, approaching Dhananjaya, O king,
said these words froma spirit of childish-
ness and without any still,


6. This horse of yours, O Bharata,
seems to move about, protected by women
only! [ shall take away the horse, Do
you try to free him. :


7. Althoughmy sires did not teach yot
in battle, I, however, shail do the duties
of hospitality to you. Do you strike me,
for I shall strike you. ;


8—g. ‘Thus addressed, the son of Pandu,
smiling the while, anwered him, saying,
‘Yo resist him who obstructs me is we vow
imposed on me by ny eldest brother. For-
sooth, O king, you know this, Do you
strike me to the best of your powet. I have
No anger, ;

to, ‘Thus addressed, the king of Magadha
first. struck the son of Pandu, showering
his arrows on him like the thousand-eyed
Indca showering a heavy downpour of
rain,

it, Then, O chief of Bharata’s race, the
theroic wielder of Gandiva, with arrows shot
of that excellent bow, bafffed all the arrows
shot carefully at him by tits adversary,


42, Having -thus bafficd that cloud of
a3


et ar eS


13. These arrows he shot at his flag and.
flag-staff and car and poles and yoke and
the horses sparing the body of his enemy
aud his car-deiver. :


14. Though Partha who was capable of
shooting with the bow with the left-hand (as
well as the right) spared the body of the
king of Magadha, yet the latter, thinking
that his body was protected by his. own
prowess, discharged tnany afrows at Partha.

15. he wielder of Gandiva, deeply —
struck by the king of Magadha, shone like
a blossoming Palasha (Butea frordosa) in
the season of spring. y er


16. Arjuna had no desire of killing the
king of Magadha. It ‘was jfor this that,
having struck the son of Pandu, he suce
ceeded in remaining before that foremost
of beroes:

17. Then Dhananjaya, becoming angry,
drew his bow with great force, and killed
his antagonist’s horses and then struck
the Nt\ead of his car-diiver,


18. With a ragor-headed arrow he then
cut off Meghasandhi’s large and beautiful
bow, and then his leathern fence, “Hhew
cutting off his flag and flag-staff, he caused
it to fall down, ee

1g. The king of Magadha greatly afflice
ted, and deprived of horses and bow and
driver, took up a mace and rushed witty.
great speed at the son of Kunti.


20. Arjuna, then, with many arrows of
his equipt with his vulturine feathers, cut off
igto pieces, that mace of his advancing
enemy which was adorned with bright
geld, ay . :

2t. Thus cut off into pieces, that mace,
with its jewelled bonds and kitots all severs
ed, fell on the Barth, like a she-snake help»
lessly hurled down by somebody, "ys


22, When his enemy became deprived
of his car, bis bew, and his mace, that
foremost of his warrjors, vig., the intelti«
gent Arjuna, did not wish to strike hin.


3324. The ape-bannered hero then,
comforting his cheerless enemy who had
beert observant of Kshatriya duties, said ta
him these words:—O son, you have suffi-
ciently shorn your adherence to Kshatriya
duties. Go wow. Great have been the
feats, O king, which you have accomplished
in battle although you are very young it
yeats.


25. The command [{ received from
Yudhishthira was that kiugs wha oppose
me should not be killed, itis for this you


08


Five yet, O monarch, although you have
offended me in battle.


-26. Thus. sddressed, the king of
Magadha considered himself defeated and
spared, Thinking thea that jt was his duty
to do so, he approached Arjuna and join-
ing his hands in respect adored him.


27. And he said,—Defeated have I been
by you! Blessed be you, I do not venture
to continue the battle.. “Fell me what I am
to do now for you! Consider your com-
mand as already carried out,’


28. . Comforting him again, Arjuna once
more said to him,—You should go to the


Horse-Sacrifice of our king which takes.


place at the coming full moon of Chaitra,


- 29. Thus addressed by him, the son of
Sahadeva said,—So be it,—and then duly
adored that horse as also Phalguna, that
foremost of warriors,


go. The sacrificial horse then, having
beautiful manes, proceeded at his will alony
the seacoast, going to the countries of the
Bangas, the Pundsas, and the Koshalas, -

31. In those kingdoms Dhananjaya,
with his bow Gandiva,.O king, defeated
numberless Miechchha armies one after
another.


eemmen
CHAPTER LXXXIE.


( ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued,


Vaishampayana continued :—-

1, Adored by the king of Muagadha,
Paneu's. son having white horses yoked tu
his car, proceeded along the south, follow-
ing the (sacrificial) horse.

2. Turning round in course of his
wanderings at will, the strong horse came
upon the beautiful city of the Chedis called
aiter the oyster,


3.. Sharabha, the son of Shishupala,
gited with great strength, first met Arjuna
in battle and then adored him with due
honours.


4 Adored by him, O king, that best of
horses then proceeded to the kingdom of the
Kashis, the Angszs, the Koshalas, the
Kiratas, and the Tanganas. F


5. Receiving due honours in all those
kingdoms Dnananjaya turned his course.
Indeed, the son of Kunti then proceeded
-bo the country of the Dasharnas,

6. he ‘uler of that people was
Chitrangada who was gifted with great
Strength and..was a crusher of enemies.


MAHABHARATA.


Between him and Vijaya took place a very
dreadful battle.


7. Bringing him under his contro} the
diadem-decked Arjuna, that foremost of
men, went to the kingdom of the Nishada
king, vis., the son of Ekalavya.


8. The son of Ekalavya received Arjuna
in battle! “Fhe encounter took place be-
tween the Kuru hero and the Nishadas was
so furious as to make the hairs stand erect.


9g. Uavanquished in battle, the brave son
of Kunti defeated the Nishada king who
proved an impediment to the sacrifice.


10. Having subjugated the son of
Ekalavya, O Bing, the son of Indra, duly
adored by the Nishadas, then proceeded
towards the southern ocean. :


t1. In those regions battles took place
between -the diadem-decked hero and the
Dravidas and Andhras and the dreadful
Mahishakas and the hillmen of Kolwa.


12. Subjugating those tribes without
having to perform any terrific feats, Arjuna
proceeded to the country of the Surasturas,
his footsteps guided by the horse.

13. Arrived at Gokarna, he went thence
to Prabhasa. Lhen he proceeded to the
beautiful city of Dwaravati protected by the
heroes of the Viishai race.


14 When the beautiful sacrificial horse


4 of the Kucu king reached Dwaravati, the


Vadava youths, used force
foremost of horses.


15—16. King Ugrasena, however, soon
went out and furbade those youths from
doing what they thought. Yhen the king
of the Veishnis and the Andhakas, issuing
out of his poe with Vasudeva, the
maternal uncle of Arjuna, in his company,
cheerfully met the Kuru hero and received
him with due rites,


17. The two elderly chiefs honoured
Arjuna. duly. Getting their permission, the
Kuru prince then proceeded to where the
horse he followed led him.


18... The sacrificial horse then proceeded
along the coast of the western ocean and at-
last. reached the coustry of the five waters
fullof population and prosperity.


19. Thence, O king, the horse proceeded
to the country of the Gandharas. Arrived
there, it roamed at will, followed by the son
of Kunti. a


30.' Then took place a dreadful battle
between the diadem-decked hero and the
king of the Gandharas, uis., the son of
Shakuni, who trad a biter remembrance of
the grudge his father bore to the Pandavas.


against that


aR


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA, "9p


CHAPTER LXXXIV.


{ANUGITA PARVA.)— -
, Continued.


Vaishampayana said :-—

t. Theheraic son of Shakuni, who was
@ powerful car-warrior among the Gan-
dhacas, accompanied by a large army, pro-
ceeded against the Kuru hero of curly hair,
That force contained elephants, horses and
cars, and was adorned with many flags and
banners.


2. Unable to bear, and, therefore, burn-
ing to avenge, the destruction of theic king
Shakuni, those warriors, armed with bows,
rushed together at Partha.


3. The unvanquished Vibhatsu of victu-
ous soul addressed them peacefully, but
they were reluctant to accept the beneficial
words of Yudhishthira,


' 4 Though forbidden by Partha with
sweet words, they still gave themselves up to
anger and ‘surrounded the sacrificial horse,
At this, the son of Pandu became filled with
tage. 7

5. Then Arjuna, carelessly shooting from
Gundiva many arrows with razor-like heads
that blazed with splendour, cut off the heads
of mary Gandhara warciors, .


6. While thus killed by Partha, the
Gandharas, O king, exceedingly afflicted,
diberated the horse, moved by fear and
desisted from battle,


7.  Resisted, however, by those Gan-
dhara combatants whe still surrounded him
on all sides, the son of Pandu, gifted with
great energy, cut off the beads of many,
previously naming those whom he thus
killed,


8. When the Gandhara warriors were
thus being killed all around him in battle,
the reyal son of Shakuni came forward to
resist the son of Pandu.


9. To the Gindhara king who was
fighting with him, moved by Kshatriya duty,
Arjuna said,—1 do not intend to kill the
sings who fight with me, on account of the
commands of Yudhishthica, :


to. Cease, O hero, to fight with’ me.
Do not seek defeat.


1t. Thus addressed, the son of Shakuni,
stupefied by folly, disregarded that advice
and covered with many swift shafts the
Kuru hero who resembicd Shakra himself
in the feats te performed in battle.


12. Then Partha, with a crescent-shaped


arrow, cut off tne head-gear of his enemies.
Qt immeasurable soul, he also caused that


head-gear t6 be borne along a great diss
tance like the head of Jayadratha.


13. Seeing tits feat, all the Gandhara
warriors became stcicken with wonder.
They full weli understood that Arjuna
voluntarily spared theic king. |


14. The prince of the Gandharas then
began ta fly away from the field, followed
by all his warriors who resembled a flock
of frightened deer, -


15. The Gandharas, through fear, lost
their senses atid wandered over the field,
unable to escape. Arjuna, with his broad-
headed arrows, cut off the heads of many.


16. Many there were who lost their
zems on account of Arjuna’s arrows, but so
stupefied were they with fear that they were
not aware of the loss of that limb. Indeed,
the Gandhara army was: greatly afflicted
with those large acrows which Partha dis-
charged from Gandiva. j


17. That army, which then consisted of
frightened meu and elephants and horse,
which lost many wartiors and animals, and
which hag been disordered and routed, began
to wander and wheel about the field again
and again. m

18.. Among those enemies who were thus
being killed, none could be seen standing
in front of the Kuru hero famed for fore-
mast of feats, Noone could be seen who
was able to bear the prowess of Dhananjaya,

1g. Then the mother of the king of the
Gandhacas, filled with fear, and with all
the aged ministers of state, came out of hee


city, taking an excellent Ayghya for
Arjuna, .
20, She forbade her brave son of steady


heart from fighting any longer, and pleased
Jishnu who was never fatigued with -toil,


22. The powerful Vibhatsu adored het
and became inclined to show mercy toward$
the Gendharas, Comforting the son of.
Shakuni, he said,-You have nat, O mighty»
acmmed hero, done what is agreeable to me
by adopting these hustile measures! O
destroyer of heroes, you are my brother,
O sinless one.


23. Recollecting my mother Gandhari,
and for the sake of Dhritarashtra also, {
have not taken your life. itis for this, O
king, that you live still, Many of your


followers, however, have been killed by


me. =


“24. Let not such a thing happen again.
Let hostilities cease. Let not your under.
standing again ge wrong. -You sheuld go
to the Horse-Sacrifice of our king which
takes place on the day of full nivon of the
month of Chaiirca, -


"g00
CHAPTER EXXXV.


( ANUGITA PARVA. j—
2 Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

+a. Having said these words, Partha
started, following the horse which roamed at
will, The sacrificial horse then turned to-
wards the road Jeading to the city of Hasti-
apur,


2. Vudhishthira} heard from his intelli-
gence-bearers that the horse had turned


_, back. And hearing also that Arjuna was |


hale and hearty, he beeame filled with joy.


- 3. Hearing also the feats, performed by
Vijaya in the country of the Gandharas as
also in other kingdoms, the king became
hhighly pleased. -.


4~6. In the cantina; seeing that the
twelftly day of the lighted fortnight in the
month of Magha had come, and marking
also that the constéllauion was favourable,
king Yudhishthira the just sutnmoned all
his brothers, v¢., Bhima and Nakula and
DSahadeva, Gilted with great energy, the
king, OF you of iKuru’s race, that foremost
of all persons knowing duties, said these
words in proper time. bndeed, that fore-
smost of all speakers, addressing Bhima, the
first of all snviters, said,


7- Your younger brother (Arjuna), O
Bhimasena, is retucniug with the horse.
Nave learnt this fi our those men who had
tollowed Arjuna,


8. -The time is come. The saerificial-
horse is near, The day of full moon of the
month of Magha is also near. “Phe month
is about tv expice, O Vrivodara.


9. Let, therefore, learned Brahmanas
knowing the Vedas foul for a sacrificial
spot for the celebration of the Horse-Sacri-
fice, :

to. Phus addressed, Bhima obeyed the
royal command. He became very ghad upon
hearing that Atjuna of curly hair was abvut
to reluri.


fan ‘Then Bhima. went out with a number
of men fenowing the cules of faying out
sacrificial grounds and constructing build-
ings. And he took with him many Brah-
mauas well-versed in all the cites of sacti-
tices.


* tz. Bhima selected a beautiful place and

"caused it to be duly measured out for laying
‘the sactifictal compound. Numbertless
houses and mansions were Constructed on
itand high atid broad roads also were laid
cut.


MAL ABHARATA.


23. Soon enough the Kaurava hero filled
that ground with thundreds of excellent
palaces. The surface was levelled and
made smooth with jewels and gems, and
adorned with various golden structares,


14. Columns were raised, ornamented
with bright gold and high and wide
tuiumphat arches abso were nvade on that
sacrificial cormpound. fel) these were made
of pure gold.


15. The righteous-souled prince also
caused apartments to be duly constructed
for the accomodation of ladies and of the
numerous kings who, coming front many
kingdoms, were expected to grace the
sacrifice with their presence.


16. The son of Kunti also caused many
palaces to be duty erected for Bratimanas
who were expected to come from various
kingdoms.


17. Then the mighty-armed Bhimasena,
at the command of the king, sent ous
messengers to Lhe great kings of the Earth,


18, Those best of kings came to the
Horse-Saerifice of the Kuru king for doing
what was. agreeable to him. And they
brought many gems with them and many
female slaves and horses and,wea pons.


19. The sounds which arose from those
great kings who lived within those pavilions
touched the very heavens and resembled
the noise made by the roaring ocean,


ao. King Yudhishthira, the deligtter of
the Kurus, assigned to the ‘monarchs who
thus came to his sacrifice various kinds of
food and drink, and beds‘also of celestial
beauty.

2t. The chief of the Blryratas, vez.,
bing VYudhishthira the just, assigned several
stables well-filled. with different kinds of
corm and sugar-cane and milk to the
animals.


22, ‘To that great sacrifice of king
Yudhishthira the just who was gifted wittr
high intelligence, there also came a large
number of ascetics all of whom were utters
ers of Brahma,

23. Indeed, O king, alt the foremost
ones among the twice borngclass that were
then alive, ¢ame to that saccifice, accoin-
panied by their disciples, ‘Yhe, Kuru kiag
received them all.


24. King Yuchishthira of great energy,
renouncing all pride, himself followed alt
his guests to the .pavitions that had been
assigned tor their residence.


25. Then all the mechanies and en-
gineers, having completed the acrange-
ments of the sactifice, informed king
Yudhishthira of it


ASUWAMEDIIA PARYA,


26. Wearing that everything was ready,
king Yudhishthira the just, full of alertness
and attention, became highly pleased alony
me his brothers all of whom honoured him
duly, i


Vaishampayana said :—
- 27. When the great sacrifice of Yudhish-
thira began, many eloquent  dialecticians
started diverse propositions and disputed
theceon, desirous of defeating one another.
28. The (invited) kings saw the ex-
cellent preparations of that sacrifice, resem-
bling those of the king himself of the
celestials, made, O Biarata, by Buimasena.


29. They saw many triumphal arches


made of gold, and many beds and seats and |,
other articles of enjoyment and luxury, and |


ciowds of men collected at @fferent parts.


go. ‘There were also many jars and
vessels and cauldrons and jugs and lids and
covers. The invited kings saw nothing
there that was not mage of gold. - te


3t. Many sacrificial stakes also were
set up, made, according to the directions
of the scriptures, of wood, and adorited
with gold. Gifted with great effulgence,
these were duly planted and dedicated
«with scriptural Mantras).


32. The kings, again, saw ‘all animals
of land and water, collected there on the
occasion, ; ;


3344. And they also saw many kine
and many buffaloes: and many old women,
aud many aquatic animals, many beasis
of prey, and many species of birds, and
many specimens of viviparous and oviparous
creatures, and many that are filth-born,
and many belonging to the vegetable
kingdom, and many animale and plants
which live or gtow on mountains.


- 35. Seeing the sacrificial compound thes
adorned with animals’ dnd kine and cogn,
the invitedskings became filled with wonder,


. 3G. Large masses of costly sweetmeats
were kept ceady for both the Brahmanas
and the Vaishyas. And when’ the feeding
was over of a hundred thousand Brahmuanas,
drums and cymbals were beat.


37- And so large was the number fed
that the sounds of drums and cymbals were
heard again and again. Indeed, those
sounds continued from day to day.


. 38. ‘Thus was performed that sacrifice
_of the intelligent king Yudhishihica. Many
hills of food, O king, were dedicated on the
occasion. Many large tanks were seen of
curds and many lakes of clarified butter,


' 39. Ta that great sacrifice, O monarct,
was seea the entire population of Jamva-


101


dwipa, with all its kingdoms and provinces,
elected together. ;

40-— 1. Thousands of nations and races
were there. A large number of men, O
chief of Bharata's trace, adorned with
garlands and wearing bright earerings wade
of gold, taking numberless vessels ju their
hands, distrivuted the food to the tvice-
born classes by hundreds and thousands,.


42. The attendants of the Pandavas
gave away to the Brahmanas various kinds
of food and drink which were, besides, so
costly as to be worthy of being eaten and
drunk by kings themselves. ‘


CHAPrER LXXXVI.
(ANUGITA PARVA.)=.,


” Continued.
Vaishampayana said :— :

1—2. Seeing those kings—lords of
Earth—all conversant with the Vedas,
acrive, , king Yudhishthira, addressing
Bhimasena, said,—O chief of men, les


proper honors be paid te these kings who
have come, for these foremost of men are
all worthy of the highest honors.


3. ‘Thos addressed by the  illestrious
bing Yudbishtiica, Pandu’s son Bhimasena
of anighty energy did as he was ordered,
assisted by the twins.


4. The foremost of all men, os.,
Govinda, came there, accompanied by the
Viishnis, and with Valadeva in the van,


5. He was accompanied by Yuyudhana
and Pradyumna and Gada,{ and Nishatha
and Shamva and Kritavarman.


6. .The powerful car-warrior Bhinva
offered them the most respectful adoration,
Those princes then entered the palaces,
adorned with gems, which were assigned to
them.


7. Atthe end of a conversation he had
with Yudhishthira, the destroyer of Madhu
referred to Arjma who had been enjaciated
on account of many fights.


8. The son of Kunti repeatedly asked
Krishna, that chastiser of enemies, about
Arjuna. ‘To Dharma’s son, the lord of ald
the universe began to speak abvut Jishnu,
the son of Shaka,

g. Oking, a confidential agent of mine
living in Dwaika came tome. He had seen
Arjuna, that foremost of Pandu’s sons.
Indeed, the hatter has been very mueir
emaciated with the fatigue of many,battles.

> &


10z
ro. O powerful monarch, that agent of
mine informed me that the mighty-armed


hero is very near to us. You begin to cele-
brate your Horse-Sacrifice,


tt. Thus addressed, king Yudhishthita
the just said him,—By good luck, O
Madhava, Arjuna comes back safely !


12. I wish to ascertain from you, O de-
lighter of the Vadavas, what has been said
in this matter by that mightiest of heroes
amongs the sous of Pandu!


13—~14. Thus addressed by king Yudhish-
thira the just, the ford of the Vrishnis
and the Andhakas, that foremost of eloquent
men, said these words to that monarch of
sighteous ‘soul—My agent, reported the
words of Partha this to tne, O great king, —
Vudhishthira, O Krishna, should be told
these words of mine when the time comes |

15. O ohief of the Kauravas, many kings
will come (to your sacrifice}! When they
airive, high honours should be paid to them.
This would, indeed, be worthy tor us.


16—i17. O givec of honours, the king
should tucther be informed at my request
that he should do what is necessary for
preventing a distinction similar to what oc-
curred at the time of presenting the Arghya
(on the occasion of the Rajasuya-Sacrifice).
Let Krishna also approve ot this. Let not,
O king, through the ill-feeling of kings, the
people be destroyed. ;


18. My man further reported, O king,
these words of Dhananjaya, Listen as I
repeat them, —

19. O monarch, the king of Manipura,
my dear son Vabhruvahana, will come at
the sacrifice. , : :

‘20. Do you honour him duly for my sake,
O powerful one, he is always attached and
deeply devoted to me, ;

at. Hearing these words, king Yudhish-


thira the just approved of them aud said as
follows, :


CHAPYER LXXXVIL


( ANUGITA PARVA., }=


Continued.


Yudhishthira said:—


1. [T have heard, O Krishna, your
agreeable words, They are worthy of you.
Gladsome atid sweet as nectar are they.
Indeed, they fill my heart with great joy, O
powerful one.


$3 O Hrishikesha, I have beard that |


‘son Jishnu.


MAHABHARATA,


Vijaya has fought numberless battles witty
the kings of the Earth.


3. Why is Partha, always dissociated
frum ease and comfort? Vijaya is exceed-_
ingly intelligent. This, theretore, pains my
heact very much.


4. Latways, O Janarddana, think, when
Lam withdrawn from business, of Kunti’s
Ihe lot ef that deli ghter of the
Pandus is highly miserable,


§. His body has every auspicious mark.
Whaat, however, O Krishaa, is that siga in
his excellent body for which he has alway$
to suffer misery and discomfort 7


6. Thatson of Kunti has to bear a large
share of misery. I donot see any censure
able mark in tis body. You should explain
the cause to me if | deserve to hear it.


+7. Thus addressed, Woeishikesha, that
enhancer of the plory of the Bhoja_ princes,
having thought for along time, ansavered as
follows :—I do not see any censurable, mark
in this prince, except that the cheek-bones
of this foremost of men are a little tou high. |


9. For this that that foremost of men has
always to be on the road. I really do not
see anything else fer which he could be
made so unhappy.


to. Thus answered by the intelligent
Krishna, that foremost of men, vis, king,
Yudhishibira, said to the chief, of thg
Veishnis that it was even so, ,


11. The princess Draupadi, however,
fooked angrily and askance at [{rishna,
The destroyee of Keshi, vis., Urishikeshs,
approved of that mark of love (for his. friend)
which the prineess of Panchala, who alsa
was his friend, showed.


312. Bhimasena and the other Kurrus, °
including the sacrificial priests, who heard
of the agreeable triumphs of Arjuna in
course of his following the horse, became
highly pleased.


13. While they were still engaged in
talking about Arjuna, a messenger came
from that great hero Déacing message frous
him. : :

14. Going to the presence of the Kuru
king, the intelligent messenger bowed his
head in respect and informed him of the
arrival’ of that foremast of men, vis,
Phalguna, :


15. On receipt of this news, tears of joy
covered the King’s eyes. Luirge gifts were
made to the messenger for the very sweet
tidings he had brought.


16. On the second day from that date,
a loud din was heard when that foremost of
men, that chief of the Kurus, came.


ASHWAMEOHA PARYA.,.


17. The dast raised’by the hoofs of that
horse as it walked close to Atjina, looked
as beantiful as that raised by the celestial
horse Uctchaishravas. :


18. And as Arjuna advanced, he heard
many pleasing words uttered by the citizens.


By good luck, O Partha, you are out of |.


danget. Praise to king Yudhishthira. ~


1g. Who else than Arjuna could return
after having caused the horse to wander
over the whole Earth and after having
defeated ail the kings in battle ?


20. We have not heard of such a feat
having been done by even Sagara and
other great kings of yore. | .


a1. Future kings also will never be able
to perform so difficult a feat, O foremost
ene of Kuru’s race, as this whiich you have
done.


22. Listening to such words, agreeable
to the ear, of the citizens, the righteous
souled Phalguna entered the sacrificial
compound,


23. Then king Vudhishthira with all his
ministers, and Krishna, the delighter of the
Yadus, placing Diritarashtra in their van,
went out for,receiving Dhananjaya.


24. Saluting the feet of his -uncle
(Dheitarashtra), and then of wise king
Vudhishthira the jist, and then adoring
Bhima and others, he embraced Keshava.


25. Adored by them all and worship-
ping them in return according to due rites,
the mighty-armed hero, accompanied by
those princes, took rest like a ship-wrecked
man tossed on the waves resting on reach-
ing the shore.


26. Meanwhile the wise king Vabhru-
vahana, accompanied by his mothers (Chi-
trangada and Ulupi), came to the Kuru
capital.


27. The mighty-armed prince duly salut-
ed all his elders of Kuru’s race and the
other kings present there, and was honored
by them all in return. He then entered
the excellent abode of his grandmother
Kunti,


S ocsitamrnenes)


CHAPTER LXXXVIUE. '


(ANUGITA PARVA., )=
a Continued.
Vaishampayana said :—
1. Entering the palace of the Pandavas


‘ the mighty-armed prince saluted his grand-
mother in soothing and sweet words, —


| you,


103


2. Then queen Chitrangada, and (Ulupi)
the daughter of (the snake) Kauravya,
together humbly -approaehed Pritha and
Keishna. They then met Subhadra and the
other fadies of the Kuru race with due
formalities. 5


Kunti gave them many gems and
costly things, Draupadi and Subhadra
and jthe other ladies of Kuru’s race all
made presents to them.


4. The two ladies took up their resi«
dence there, using costly beds and seats,
treated with affection and honor by Kanti
herself from desire of doing what was
ayreeable to Partha, "ne


5. King Vabbruvahana of great energy,
duly honored (by Kunti), then met Dhritae
cashtra accordiug to;due rites.


6. Going then to king Yudhishthira
and Bhima and the other Pandavas, the
mighty. prince of Munipura saluted them
all with humility. 3


7. They all embraced him with great
Jove and honored him duly. And those
powerful cart-warrior highly pleased with
him, made large gifts of wealth to him.


8. The king of Manipura then humbly
approached Krishna, that hero armed with
the discus and the mace, like a second Pta-~
dyumna approaching his father. Krishna
gave to the king a very costly and excel.
lent car adorned with gold and to which
were yoked excellent horses.


to. Then. king Vudhishthica the just,
and Bhima, and Phalguna, and the twins,
each separately honored hin and made
costly presents to him. :


tt-—-12. On the third day, the sage
Vyasa the son of Satyavati, that foremost
of eloquent men, approaching Yudhishtliira,
said,—From this day, O son of Kunti, do
you begin your sacrifice. The time for it
has come! The moment for undertaking
the rite is at hand. The priests.are urging


13. Let the sacrifice be performed in
such ‘a way that ‘to -limb may become
defective. On account of the very large


| quantity. of gold that is required for this


sacrifice, it has come to be called the sacri-
fice of profuse gold. -


14. ‘Do you also, O great king, make


‘tthe Dakshina of this sacrifice three times


of what is enjoined. Let the merit of your
sacrifice increase . threefold. ~ ‘The Brah-
manas are competent for the purpose.


15. Acquiring the merits then of three
Horse-Sacrifices, each with profuse presents,
you shall be freed,°O king, from the sin of


és


having killed your kinsmen,


104.


16. The bath which one performs upon
completion of the Horse-Sacrifice, O king,
{s highly powerful and productive of the
highest merit. ‘That mery will be yours, O
king of Kurw’s race. ;

17. Thus addressed by Vyasa af tncom-
Reare intefligence, the righteous-souled

udhishthira of great energy anderwent
the initiation for
Sacrifice. ;

V8. The mightysarmed king then per-
formed the great Horse-Sacrifice ¢characte-
rised by gifts of food and presents in profas
sion and capable of fructifying eVery desire
and producing every merit. :

19. The priests, well-conversant with
‘the Vedas, did every cite, duly, moving
about in all directions. They were all
well-trained, and possessed of omniscicnce.


20, {un nothing was there any deviation
from the ordinances, and nothing was done
{mproperly. Those foremost of twice-born
persons followed the procedure as laid down
as it should be followed in. those points
about which no directions are given.


2t, Those best ef twice-born ones, having
first performed the rite called Pravatgya
otherwise called Dharma, then duly per-
formed the rite of Abtisnava, O king.


#2. ‘Those foremost of Soma: Drinkers.O
monarch, extracting the juice of the Soma,
then performed the Savana rite, following
the injunctions of the scriptures, .


23. Among those who ‘came to that
Sacrifice none could be seen who was Ccheer-
less, none who was poor, none who was
hungry, none who was plunged into grief,
and none that seemed to be yulgar,


24. Bhimasena of great energy, at the
command of the king, caused food to be
ceaselessly distributed among those who
desired to eat,


25. Following. the injunctions, of the
scriptures, priests, well-versed in sacrificial
rites of every lind, performed every day all
the acts necessary to complete the great
sacrifice.


26. Amongst the Sadasyas of king
Yudhishthira of great intelligence there was
none who was not a mastec of the six
branches of (Vedic) learning. “Yhere was
boue among them who was not ar observer
of vows, none who was not an Upadhaya ;


tone ,who*was not well-versed in-dialectical |


disputations, BoP aps


27. When the time came for erecting


the sacrificial stake, O chief of- Bharata’s!


race, six stakes were set up which were made
of Vilwa, six,which were made of Khadica,
and six which were made of Sarvayarnin,


performance of the Horse-


MAHABAHRATA.


28. Two stakes were set up by the
priests which were thade of Devadsru in
that sacrifice of the Kuru king, and one
witich was made of Shieshotataka.


29. At the behest of the king, Bhima
caused some other stakes to be set up, for
the sake of beauty only, which were made
of gold.


390, Adorned with fine cloths supplied
by the royal sage, these stakes shone there
like Indra and the deities with the seven
celestial Rishis standing around them in
Heaven.


3U. A aumber of golden bricks were
madé for making therewith a Chayund.
The Chayana made resembled in beauty
that which had been made for Daksha,
the lord of creatures.

32. The Ghayara measured eight and‘
ten cubits and bad four stories or lairs.
A golden bird, of the shape of Garuda,
was then made, haviny thtee angles.


33- Following the injunctions of the
scriptures, the priests endued with great
learning thea duly tied to the stakes both
animals and birds, assigning each to its
particular deity. :


34. Bulls, possessed of such marks as
are mentioned in the scriptures, and
aquatic animals were properly tied to the
. stakes after the rites of the sacrificial fire
had been perforined.


3§. tn that sacritice of the great son of
Kunti, three hundred animals were tied
to the stakes set op, including that fores
most of horses;


. 36. That sacrifice lodked greatly beautis
ful as if adorned with the celestial Rishis,
with the Gandbarvas singing ia chorus and
the various tribes of Apsaras dancing in
merriment. :


37. It teemed, besides, with Kimpuru-
shas and was adorned with lKinnaras,
All around it were houses of Brahmanas
“crowned with ascetic success.


38. ‘There ‘were daily seen the disciples
of Vyasa, those foremost of twice-botn
ones, who are compilers afj all branches of
learning, and welt conversant ,with sacri«
ficial rites. .


39. There was* Narada, and there was
Tumvuru of great splendour. There were
Vishwavasi and Chitrasena and othetsy
all of whom were proficient in music.


40. At intervals ‘of the sacrificial rites,
those Gandharvas skilled in) music and
well-versed in dancing, used to please the
Brahmanas who were engaged itv: the
sacrifice, | :


commer, a


ened


ASHWAMEDHA BARVA.


CHAPTER LXXXIX.


( ANUGITA PARVA.)—=
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

t. Having cooked, according to due
tites, the other excellent animals which
were sacrificed, the priests then sacrificed,
according to the injunctions of the scrip-
tures, that horse (which lad wandered
over the whole world).


a. After cutting that horse inte pieces,
according to scriptural directions, they
caused Draupadi of great intelligence, who
was possessed of the three requisites of
Mantras, things, and devotion, to sit near
the divided animal.


3. The Bratmanas then, with cool
minds, taking up the marrow of that horse,
cooked it duly, O chief of Bharata’s' race.


4. King Yudhishthira the just, with
hil his younger brothers, then smelled,
according to the scriptures, the smoke,
capable of purging one from every sin,
of the marrow that was thus cooked


t § The cemaining limbs, O king, of
hat horse, were poured into the fire by the
ixteen sacrificial priests possessed of great
wisdom.


6. Having thus completed the sacrifice
of that monarch who was gifted with the
energy of Shakra himself, the illustrious
Vyasa with his disciples eulogised the king
greatly.

9. Then Vudhishthira gave away to the
Brahmanas a thousand crores of golden
nishkas, and to Vyasa he gave away the
whole Earth,


8—9. Satyavati’s son Vyasa, having
accepted the Rarth, addeessed that fore-
most one of Bharata’s race, ows., king
Vadhishthira the just, and said,—O best of
kings, the Earth which you have given me
I return to you! Do you give me the
purchasing value, for Brahmanas are desir-
ous of wealth,


10, The great Yudhishthira of great

intelligence staying with his brothers in the

_ midst of the kings invited to his sacrifice,
said to those Brahmaues :-—


ts. The Dakshina ordained in the scrips
tures for the great Horse-Sacrifice is the
Rarth. Hence, ( have given away to the
sacrificial priests the Earth conquered by
Arjuna,


ta. Ve foremost of Brahmanas, I shall
-efiter the forest. Do. ye divide tha Eartt
among yourselves! Indeed, do you divide


14


ros


the Earth into fowr parts aceording to what
is done in the Chatuthotra-Sacrifice.


33. Ye best of twice-born ones, f d@


| net wish to appropriate what now belongs


te the Brahmanas.


14. This, ye learned Brahmanas, hag
been the intention of myself and my
brothers, Whea the king said these
words, his brothers and Draupadi alsa
said,-—' Yes, it is even so.’ Great was the
sensation created by this announcement.


1§. Then, O Bharata, an invisible voice -
was heard in the sky, saying,—‘ Excellent,
Exceltent! he murmurs, also, of crowds
of Brahmanas as they spoke, arose,


17. The Island-born Krishna, highly
applauding him, once more addressed
Yudhishthira, before the Brahmanas, say~
ing.—‘ The Earth has been given by you
tome! 1, however, give her back to you!
Do you give to these Brahmanas gold.
Let the Earth be yours !’


18. ‘hen Vasudeva, addressing king
YVudhishthira thé just, said,-You should do
as you are ordered by the illustrious
Vyasa.’

tg. Thus addressed, that foremost one
of Kuru's race, atong with all his brothers,
became pleased and gave away millions of
golden coins, in fect, trebling the Dakshina
otdained for the Horse-Saczrifice.


20. No other king will be able to
accomplish what the Kucu king did on that
occasion like Marutta.


21. Accepting that wealth, the Island~
born sage, Krishna, of great learning, gave,
it to the sacrificial priests, dividing it inte
four parts. :


22, Having paid that wealth as the price
of the Each, Yudhishthira, purged of his
sits and assured of Heaven, rejoiced with
his brothers.

23. The sacrificial priests, having got
that unlimited quantity of ciches, distri-
buted it among the Brahmanas gladly ang
according to the desire of each recipient.


24. The Bratimanas, alsa divided amongst
themselves, according to Yudbhishthira’s
permission, the various ornaments of gold
which were in the sacrificial compound, in-
cluding the triumphal arches, the stakes,
the jars, and various kinds of vessels,


25. After the Brathmanas had taken as
much as they wished, the wealtis that ree
mained was taken away by Kshatriyas and
Vaishyas and Shudreas and various tribes


“of Mlechchbas, '


25, Thus pleased with presents made by
king Yudhishthira of great intelligence, the


168°


Bichmanis, "filed with } joy, returned te
their respective abodes,


“997, The holy and illustrious Vyasa
respectfully presented his own share; which
was very large, of that gold to Kunti.


-28. Receiving that gift of affection from
her father-in-law, Pritha became pleased
and devoted it to the perloimance of vari-
ous acts of merit.


29. King Vudhishthira; having bathed
at the conclusion of his sacrifice and be-
come purged of all his sins, shone in the
midst of his brothers, honoured by all, like
the king of the deities in the midst of the
dwellers of the celestial region.


go. ‘The sons of Pandu, surrotinded by
the assembled kings, looked as beautiful,
O king, as the planets in the midst ef the
Stars. ,

‘gt. To those kings they made presents
of various jewels and gems, and elephants
and horses and ornaments of gold, and
female slaves .and cloths ahd. immense
“quantity of -gold.


32. Indeed, Pritha’s son, by distributing
that untold riches among the invited kings,
shone, O king, like Vaishravana, the totd
of riches,


33. Summoning next the heroic king
Vabhravahana, Yudhishthica, gave to him
vatious kinds of wealth in profusion and
gave him permission to return home.


34. The son of Pandu, for pleasing his
sisict Dusshala, established ber infant
graadson in his paternal kingdont.


33. The Kuru king Yudhishthira; having
atuil mastery over his senses, than dis-
missed the assembled -kings all of whom
had been preperly classed and hoftoured by
him,


36~—37. The illustrious son of Pandu,
that chastiser of foes, then duly adosed the
gteat Govinda and Valadeva of great
power and the thousands of other Vristini
heroes having Pradyumna for their first.
Assisted by his brothers, he then dismissed
them for returning to Dwaraka.


38. Thus was celebrated that sacrifice
of «ing Yudhisthira the just, which was
distinysished by a profusion of flyuod and
wealth and jewels and gems, and oceans of
win-s of different kinds.


39. There were lakes whose mire con-
stated of clarifted butter and mountains of
tood, Uhere were, also, O chief of Bharata’s
fase, miry rivers made of drinks having
the six kinds of taste.


49, Ol men employed in | making and
eaung the swWeetmeats calied Khandava-


MAHABANRATA, *


tagas, and of aivitnals killed for food, theré
was noend, ,


41. Thé vast compound was Alled with
men inebriated with wine, and with young
tadies filled with -joy. The extensive
grounds constantly echoed with the sounds
of drums and the blare of conchs. With
all these, the sacrifice became highly
delightful.


42. ‘Let agreeable things be given .
away,’—'Let agreeable food be eaten,’
These were the sounds which were re-
Ppeatedly heard day and night in’ that
sacrifice. It was like a preat festival, fult
of rejoicing and contented men. People
of various kingdoms speak of that sacrifice
to this day.

43. Having showered wealth in torrents,
and various objects of desire, and . jewels
arid gets; and drinks of various kinds, the
foremost one of Bharata’s race, purged of
all bis sins, and his purpose ‘fulfilled, entets
ed his capital,


CHAPTER XC.


{ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued,


Jaziamejaya said :—

1. You should tell me of any wonderful
incident which took place in the sacrifice of
my grandsire:


Vaishampayana enid : i


z. Hear, O chief of kings, of a most
wonderful event which took place, O powers
ful menarch, at the conclusion of that great
Horse-Sactifice.


3-3: On all the foremost of Brahmianas
and all the kinsmen and relatives and
friends; and all the poor, the blind, and


. the helpless ones, being gratified, O chief of


Bharata’s race, when the gifts made in
profusion were being spoken of on all sides,
indeed, when flowers were rained down om
the head of king Yudhishthira the just; a
blue-eyed mungoose, O sinless one, with
one side of his body converted into gold,
came there and spoke in a voice that was as
loud and deep as thunder.


6—7. Repaatedly uttering such deep
sounds and thereby frightening all animals
and birds, that proud dweller of a hole,
with large body, spoke in a human voice
and said,—'Ve kings, this great sacrifice
is riot equal to a prastha of powdered bailey
given away bya liberal Brahmana of Kurue -
kshetra who was obseving the Unchcha vows


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


8: Hearing’ these words of the mungdose,
© king, all those foremost of Brahmanas
became stricken with wonder,


Qe, Approaching the mungoose, they
then asked him, saying,—‘ Whence have
you come to this sacrifice, this resort of the
good and the pious?


10. What is the extent of your power ?
What your learning? And what your
refuge? How should we know you who
thus censure this our sacrifice ?


11, Without having disregarded any
portion of the scriptures, everything that
‘should be done has been done here accord-
‘ing ‘to the fscriptures amd according to
reason, with aie help of various sacrificial


rites,


12. Those who are deserving of adora-
tion, have been duly adored here according
to the way: pointed out by the - scriptures,
Libations have been poured on the sacred
fire with the help of proper Mantras, That
which should be given, has been given away
without pride,


13. The twice-born class. have been
pleased with gifts of various kinds. The
Kshatriyas have been pleased with battles
fought according to just methods. The
epee have been, pleased with Shred:

has.


14. The Vaishyas have been sive by
the protection offered to them, and many
foremost of women have been pleased by
accomplishing their desires. The Shudras
have been pleased by kind speeches, and
others witin the residue of the profuse wealth
collected on the spot,

15:
pleased by the purity of conduct shown by
ouc king, The celestials have becn pleased
by libations of clarified butter and acts of
mecit, and dependants and followeis by
protection,


16. That, therefore, which is true, do


~ you truly- declare to these Brahmanas.


.


m


Endeed, do you declare what is according
to the scriptures and to actual experience,
asked by the’ Brabinenas who are eager lo
know.


17. Your words are creditable. You are
wise. You have-have, also, a celestial farm.
You have come into the midst of learned
Brabmanas. You should explain yourself.’


18. Thus addressed by those twice-born
persons, the mungoose, - smiling, answered
then as fullows.—' Ye twice-barn ones, the


, words I have uttered are not false, Neither


have I spoken them from pride.


1g ‘Yau have all beard what I have
said. You foremost of twice-born persons,


Kinsmen and relatives have been


cit


°7


this sacrifice is not equal in. enferit te the
gift of, a prastha of powdered barley.”


20. Forsooth, I should say this, O feres
most of Brahmanas, Listen to me with
tapt ‘attention as | truly destribe to you
what tcok place.


21. Wenderful -and excellent was the
event that happened. It was seen by me
and its consequences were felt by me, ‘The
incident relates to a jiberal Brahwana
living in Kurukshetra in the observance of
the Unchcha vow.


2a. On account of that ineident he at-
tained to Heaven, O twice-bors ones, along
with his wife.and son and -daughter-in-law.
And in consequence of what then took
place half my body became changed into
gold. Zi


The Mungoose continued :—


23. O twice-bori ones, I shall presently
tell you what the excellent fruit was of the
gift, made by a Brahmana, of a very litle
measure (of powdered barley) acquired by
fair means.


4


24. On that righteeus. spot of ground


| known by the name of Kurukshetra, which


is the habitation of many righteous persons,
there lived a Brahmana observiag the Un-
chcha vow. ‘What mode of living is dike that
of the pigeon,


He lived there with his wife and
sow and daughter-in-law and practised
penances. Of righteous seul, and with
senses completely controtied, he adopted
the: mode of living whichis followed by a
patiot,


, tot
26—28.- Of excellent vows, he used ta.
eat every day at. the sixth division. LE
there was nothing to eat at the’sixth divi-
sion of the day, that. excellent Brahmana
would fast for that day and eat the nexe
day at the sixth division, On one occasion,
ye. Brahmanas, there took - place !a dread -
ful fansine in the land, During’ that time
there was nothing stored in the abode of
that righteous Brahmana. The herbs and
plants were all dried up and the ene
kingdom becaine void of food-stores, *


2900 «When the habitual hours came for
eatmg, the Brahmana had nothing to eat,
"Fhis happened day after day, All the
members of his family were. stricken with


hunger but were obliged to pass the ;aaya


as best they could.


3% One day, in the month of Jaishtha,
while the Sun was in the meridian, the
Beahmana was engaged in picking up grains
of cori., Afflicted by heat and. hunger, he.
was practising this penance. ["


”


108


_MANABHARATA.


3t. Unable to obtain grains of corn, the | of twice-born persons be pleased and fet


Brahmana soon became exhausted with
hunger and toil. Indeed, with all the
members of his family, he had ne food
to éat. : ne

32. That best of Brahmanas passed the
days in terrible suffering. Que day, after
the sixth division came, he succeeded in
getting a prastha of bailey.

33~—34- ‘That barley was then reduced


by those ascetics to powder for making
what is called Saktu of it. Having finished


their silent recitations and other daily rites, .


and having duly poured libations on the
sacred fire, those ascetics divided that little
quantity of powdered barley amongst them-
Selves sq that the share of each came up to the
measure of Kudava (twelve double handiuls)
As they were about to sit down for eating,
there came to their abede a guest.


33. Seeing the person who came asa
uest, all of them became highly pleased.
ndeed, seeing him, they saluted bim and
made the ysual enquiries of health and
happiness.


36. They were of pure minds, seélf-con-
trolled, and gifted with faith and control
over the passions. Freed from malice, they
Yalconquered anger. Possessed of piety,
they were never pained at seeing other
people’s happiness.


37-38. They had rencunced pride and
haughtiness and and anger, Indeed, they
knew every duty, O foremost of twice-born
ones! Informing theic guest of their own
penances and of the race or family to which
they belonged, and ascertaining from him
in return those particulars, they caused
that hungry guest of theirs to enter their
cottage. Addressing him they s:id,—Whis
is the Arghya foe you. This water is for
ene your feet. There are scattered
some Kusha grass for your seat, O sine.
kss one.


39- Here is some clean Saktu acquired
by lawful means, O powerful one { - Given
by us, O foremost of twice-born persons,
do you accept it.


40. Thus addressed by them, that Brah-
mana accepted the Mudava (twelve double
handfuls) of powdered barley which was
offered to him and ate it all. But his
hunger, O king, was not satisfied with
what he ate,


4t. The Brahmana while observing the
Unchcha vow, seeing that his guest’s hunger
was still unsatisfied, began to think of what
other food he could place before him for
pleasing him.


e


42. Then his wife said to him,—Let my
share be given te him! Let this foremest


him thew go wherever he will.


43. Knowing that his chaste wife who
said so, was herself stricken with hunger,
that best of Brahmanas could not approve
of her share of the powdered barley being
given to the guest.


44-46. “Indeed, that best of Brah-
manas endued with learning, knowing from
his own state that his aged, toil-worn, cheere
less, and helpless wife was herself afflicted
by hunger, and seeing that lady who had
been emaciated into mere skin and bones,
was quivering with weakness, addressed
hee and said,—=' O beautiful one, with even
animals, with even worms and insects,
wives are fed and protected. You should
not, therefore, say so. he wife treats her
husband with kindness and feeds and pro-
tects him.


47. Everything connected with  refi-
gion, pleasure, and wealth, careful nursing,
offspring for perpetuating the race, are all
dependent on the wife. Indeed, the merits
of a person himself as also of his deceased
ancestors depend also on her.


48. The wife should know her husband
by his deeds. Indeed, that man who fails to
protect his wiife, earns great infamy here
and goes into fell hereafter. Such a man
falls down from even a position of great
fame and never succeeds in acquiring
lappy regions hereafter.


49. ‘Thus addressed, she answered him,
saying,~O: twice-born one, our religious
acts and wealth are united. Do you take
a fourth of this barley! Indeed, be pleased


with me,


- §0,. Truth, pleasure, religious merit, and
Heaven, as acquirable by good qualities, of
women, as also all the objects of their
desire, O foremost of twice-born ones, de-
pend on the husband.


51. In the production of children the
mother contributes her bluod. be father
contributes his seed. The husband is the
highest deity of the wife. ‘Fhrough the
favoue of the husband, women get both
pleasure and offspring as the reward,


32. You are my Pati (lord) for the
protection you give me. You are my
Bnartri for the means of sustenance you
give me, You are, again, boon-giver to me
on account of your having presented mea
sor. Do you, therefore, take mv share of
the barley and give it to the guest.


53. Overcome by decrepitude, you are
of advanced years. Afflicted by hunger,
you are greatly weakened. Worn out with
fasts, you ate very much emaciated, :


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


§4. Thus addressed by her, he took her
share of the powdered barley and addres-
sing his guest, said,~'O twice-born one,
O best of men, do you accept this quantity
of powdered barley as well. .


§5. The Brahmana, having accepted
that quantity, immediately ate it up, but his
hunger was not yet satisfied. Seeing him
ungratified, the Brahmana in the obser-
vance of the Unchcha vow became thought-
ful.


56. His son then said to him,—'O best
of men, taking my share ef the barley do
you give it to the guest! 1 consider this
act of mine as one of great metit. There-
fore, I do it.


57- You should be always maintained
by me with great care. Maintenance of
the father is a duty which the geod always
covet.


58. The maintenance of the father in
his old age is the duty laid down for the
son. This is the eternal Shruti (audition)
current in the three worlds, O fearned
Rishi.

59 BY SP detaed :
of practising _penances, ‘The life-breath is


the great deity which lives in the bodies of
all embodied creatures.’


The father said :—~


60. If you attain to the age of even a
a thousand years, you will still seem to me
to be only a little child. Having begotten
a son, the father achieves success through
him.


61. O powerful one, I know that the
hunger of children is very strong. I am
old. I shall somehow succeed in holding
my life-breaths. Do you, O son, beeome
strong.


62. Old and decrepit as 1 am, O son,
hunger scarcely afflicts me. 1 have, again,
for mauy years, practised penances. I have
no fear of death. .


The son said :—

63. I am your offspring. The Shruti
declares that one’s offspsing is called Putra,
because one is rescued by him. One's own
self, again, takes birth as his son. Do you,
therefore, rescué yourself by your own self,


- The father said :~


64. Inform you are like me. In con-
duct and in self-contro!, also, you are my
like. You have been examined on various
occasions by me. [I shall, therefore, ac
your share of the barley, O son } -


65: Having said this, that foremost of


By living on barely you are capable.


109


twice-born persons cheerfully teak his son's
share of the barley and siniingly presented


it to his twice-born guest.


66. Waving eaten that barley also, the
guest’s hunger was not satisfied. The
righteous-souled host in the observance of
the Unchcha vow became ashamed.


67-68. Desirous of doing. what was
agreeable to him, his chaste daughter-ia-
Jaw then, bearing her share of the barley,
approached him and said,~-Uhrough your


sou, O learned Brahmaita, | shall obtain.


ason. Do you, therefore, take my share
of the barley and give it to this guest.


69. Through your grace, numerous re-


gions of beatitude will be mine for eternity.
Through a grandson one obtains those ree
gions going where one bas not to suffer any
kind of misery. ms


qo. Like the three-fold objects of life
beginning with Religion, or the three-fold
sacred fires, there isa triple aggregate of
everlasting Heavens, depending upon the
son, the grandson, and the great-grandson.


7t. The son is called Putra because he
frees his ancestor's debt. Through sons and
Brandsons one always enjoys the happiness
of those regions which are reserved for the
pious and the good.


The father-in-law said :—

72-73. O you of excellent vows and
conduct, seeing you wasted by wind and
sun, deprived of your very complexion,
emaciated, and almost destitute of conscious-
ness through hunger, how can | be such
a transgressor against the rules of virtue
as to take your share of the barley? O
auspicious damsel, you should not say sq,
for the sake of those auspicious results
for which every family must try.


74. -O auspicious lady, how ean I held
you at even this, the sixth division of the
day abstaining from food and observing
vows? You are gifted with purity and
good conduct and penances. Alas, even
you have to pass your days in so much
misery.


75. You area ehild, afflicted by hunger,
and belong to the softer sex. You should
be always protected by me! Alas, | have
to see you worn out with fasts, O you whe
are the delighter of all your kinsinen,


The daughter-in-law said:—

96. Wou-are the senior of my senior,
since you.are the deity of my deity, You
are, indeed, the gad af my god. De you,
therefore. O powerful one; take my share


-of the barley,


,


tio


77. My bedy, life-breaths, -and religious
rites, have all one object, vis., the service of
my elite: Threagh your favour, O learned
Brahmana, I, shall obtain many regions of
happiness hereafter.


78. 1 deserve to be looked alter by you.
Know, O twice-born ene, that Lam wholly
devoted* to you. ° Cheristing ‘also ‘this
thought, ofs!, that my happiness ‘is your
concern, you should take this my share of
thé barley.


The father-in-law said :—

79: O chaste lady, on account of such
.Gonduct of yours you will for ever shine ia
glory, for endued with vows and steadiness
in celigious rites, your eyes aré directed to
that corduct which should be observed to-
wards elders. .


80. ‘Therefore; O iduaehters in-law, I
shall take your share of the barley. You
deserve not to be deceived by me, consider-
ing all your virtues. You are truly, O
blessed damsel, the foremost of all persons
observing the duties of righteousness. ~


81, -Having said so to her, the Brahmana
took her ‘share of the barley and gave it
to his guest, At this the guest became
pleased with that great Brahmana gifted
with great piety.


82—83. With ‘gratified gout, that first
of twice-born persons, endued with great
eloquence; who was none else than the
deity “of Virtue in a human form, then
addressed that foremost of Brahmanas and
said~—-‘O best of twice-born ones, } am
highly pleased with this pure gift of: yours,
this gift of what was acquired by fair means
by you, and which you did freely part with,
according to the rules of virtae.


84. Indeed, this gift of yours is being
beuited about in Heaven By the dwellers of
that happy region. ' Mark, flowers have
been cained down from the sky om the
Barth, Pas


48. The, celestial Rishis, the deities,
the Gandharvas, those who walk befare the
deities, and the celestial messengers, are
all lauding ‘ydu, struck with wonder at
your gift.

, 86. The. twice-born Rishis who live in
the regions of Brahma,, seated ontheir


cars, are anxious to see yon. O foremost
of twice-bérn persatis, gmto Heaven, *


' 89.° The Pitris living?! ire their awn teagon,


have all’ been rescued by them. ¢ Others,”


alsay: whe have not attained to the position
‘of Pitta have equally bees rescued PY. you
for countless cycles,


alighe merit.


| all his righes, gave a small


MAUABLARATA,


88. Bor. yeur Brahmacharyya, your
gifts, your sacrifices, your penances, and
your acts of piety done witha pure heart,
go yoy te Heaven.


89. O you of excellent vows, you prace
tise penances with great devotion. Your
gifts have, therefore, pleased the deities
highly, O best of twice-born ones.

go. Since you have made this gift, in a
seasen of great difficulty, with a pure heart,
you have, by this act of yours, conquered


she celestial region.


or. Hunger destroys one's wisdom and
drives off one’s righteous understanding,
“One whose intelligence is overwhelmed by
hunger renounces all fortitude.


92. - He, therefore, who conquers hunger,
conquers Heaven, fersooth. One’s righte-
ousness is never destroyed as long as he
cherishes the inclination of making gilts.

. 93. Disregarding filiat. affection, disre-
garding the affection one feels for his wife,
and reckoning virtueas the foremost, you


~have paid na attention to the cravings of


nature,


94. The acquisition of riches is an act of
Its gift ‘to a worthy person

fraught with greater merit. Of stil
Bresice merit is the (proper) time. Lastly,


devotion is fraught with the higheste merit.


95. ‘Fhe door of Heaven is very difficult
to see, Through garelessness men canngt
see it. The bar of Heaven's door has cupi-
dity for its seed. That bar is kept fastened
by desire and affection. Indeed, Heaven's
door is unapproachable.

96. Those men who have subdued anger
and conquered their passions, those Brahe
manas who ace gifted with penances and


-whe make gifts according to the extent of


their ability, succeed in seeing it.


97. Jehas beewsaid that he whe. gives

away a hundred, having a thousand, he who
gives away ten, having a hundred, and he
who gives a handful of water, having no
money, are all equal as regards the merit
they acquire.
* 98. King ‘Rantideva, when divested of
quantity of
water with a pure heart. Through this
gift, O tearned Brahmana, he went to the
celestial region. :


99. The deity of righteousness i is never
pleastd so.much with laige gifts of costly


pibings as with gifts of even worthiess things,


if acquired. peers and. given away witha
deyouon and faith.. 4


100. King Nriga. had. made eilts of
thousands of- kine io the twice-born class»


ASL WAMEDHRA: PARVA,


By giving away only one GoW which Sid
not belong to him, he fell into Hell.


tot. Ushinaca’s son Shivi of excellent
vaws, by giving away the flesh of bis own
body; is rejoicing in the celestial region,
having attained to the regions ef the pious,


10%. Mere wealth is not therit. Good
men acquire therit by exerting to the best
of theie power and with the fielp of righte-
ousness. One does not acquire,such merit
by'means of even various sacrifices as with
even a little wealth that has been acquired
by fair means,

103. . Through anger, the fruits of ‘gifts
are destroyed. Through cupidity one fails
to go tothe celestial region. Oné conver-
Sant with the merits of gift, and leading a
just course of . conduct, succeeds, through
penances, ih enjoying the celestial region.


104. The fruit, O Brahmana, ef this
gift made by you (of a prastha of powdered
barley) is much greater than what one
acquires by maity Rajasuya-Sacrifices with
profuse gifts or many Horse-Sact ifices.


105. With this Srastha of powdered
barley you have conguered the eternal
region of Brabinan. Go you in happiness,
O learned Brahwaaa, to the house of Brah-«
man who is without the staiii of darkness,


106. O foaemost of twice-born persons,
a celestial car is here for all of you. Do
you ascend it as you please! O Brah-
mana, | am the deity of Righteousness,
Behold me! - we


to7. You have rescued your body. The
fame of yotir achievement will last int the
world. With your wife, your sén, and your
daughter-in-law, go now to the Celestial
region,


108. After the deity of Righteousness
had said these words, that Brahinanaj with


his wite, son, daughter-in-law, proceeded


to the celestial region.

_ Yog. After that learned Brahmana kriow-
ing all duties, had thus ascended to the
celestial region with his son, daughter-in-


law, and wife numbering the fourth, | came.


out of my hole.


11e—112. There with the scent of that
powdered barley, with the mire caused by
the water (which the Brahmana had given
to his-guest), with the contact (of my body)
with the celestial flowers which had been
rained down, with the particles of the barley
powder, which that good man had given
away, and the penanees of that Bralmana,
my head became gold. .See, on account. of
the gift of that Brahmana who was firm in
truth, and his penances half: ef this my


ample bedy has become goldens. 2.


Tit.
* 413: @ twice-borri aties, for gonvVerting
therrest of my body into gold I repeatedly
go, with a cheerful heart,.to the hermitagées
of ascetic3 and. satrifices perlermed by.
kings. | ;

i14. Hearing of this sacrificé of the
Kuru king, gifted with great wisdom, I camé
herewith hopes. I have not, hawever; beet -
made gold. ;


118. © fdremost of Brahiaiiag, ft :was-
for this that I] uttered uiose words, vtz.,
that this sacrifice can by no means éompare
with (the gift of) that prastia af powdered
barley.


116, Wigh the grains of that Jrastha f

powdered barley, | was made gold on that
occasion. ‘This great, sacrifice, however,
is not equal to those grains. This is my
opinion. ;
- 119. #Having sald those words to all thosé
foremost of Brahmanas, the mungoose. dis
appeared from their view. Those Braba
manas thed .returned to their respective
homes.


Vaishaiiipayaiia said:= —

118, O conquerer of hostile towns, I
have now told yoii all abelit that wortderlul-
incident which took place iit that grear
Horse- Sacrifice, ;


119 You showid hot, O king, thine
highly of sacrifice. Millions of Rishis have
ascended to the teléstial region ‘with the
help of only their penances. ,


120. Abstention from injury to.all crea,
tures, contentment, conduct, sincerity,
penances, self-control, truthfulness, and
gifts, are, each equal in, point of ttierit te
sacrifice. Be


CHAPTER XCI. -


(ANUGITA PARVA.)-
Continueds


Janamejaya said > ' '
1. QO powerful Rishi, kings are attached .
to sacrifices, Vhe great Rishis are attached
to penances, Learned Brahmanas observe .
tranquillity of mind, peacefulness of conduct
and self-control, ,


; , * 34
2..3 Hence it sues that nothing can be
seen, in this would which can compare with
the fruits of sacrifices., This is my convic- _
tiun,, That conviction, again, seems to be
suiely cocrects, :


112


3. Numbertess kings, O best of twice-
born persons, havitiy adored the celestials
in sacrifices, acquired high fame here and
obtained the celestial repion hereafter.


4. Gifted with great energy, the powet-
ful king of the detties, vts., Indra of a
thousand eyes, obtained the sovereignty
over the deities through the many sacrifices
he performed with gifts in profusion and
attained to the fruition of all his desires.


5-6. When king Vudhishthica, with
Bhima aud Arjuna by bim, resembled the
king of the deities himself in prosperity
and prowess, why then did that mungoose
depreciate that great Horse-Sacrifice of the
teat monarch,


Vaishampayana eaid —

7. Do you listen to me, O king, as 1
describe to you duly, O Bharata, the excel-
fent ordinances about sacrifice and the
fruits also, O king, that sacrifice yields,


8. Formerly, on one occasion Shakra
celebrated a particular sacrifice. While the
linibs of the sacrifice were spread out, the
Riwwijas became busy in performing the
Vatious cites ordained in the scriptures.


g—t0. The pourer of libations, possessed
of every qualification, became engaged in
pouring Itbauons of clarified butter, The
great Rishis were seated around, The
celestials were summoned one by one by
‘contented Brahmanas of great learning
uttering scriptural Mantras in sweet voices.
Those foremost of Adhwaryyus, not fatigued
with what they did, recited the Mantras
of the Yajurveda in soft accents.


11. The time came for killing the
animals. When the animals selected for
Sacrifice were seized, the great Rishis, O
King, felt mercy for them. —


12. Seeing that the animals had all be-
come dispirited, those Rishis, gifted with
wealth of penances, approached Shakra
and said to him,—' This methed of sacrifice
is not auspicious.’


13. Desirous of winning great merit
as yeu are, this is, indeed, a mark of your
ignorance of the rites of sacrifice. O Puran-
dara, animals have not been ordained to
be killed in sacrifices,


1g. O powerful one, these preparations.


of yours are destructive of merit! This
sacrifice is not consistent with virtue. The
destruction of creatures can never be said
to be an act of virtue !

t5. I€ you wish it, tet your priests
.pertorm youc sacrifice according to the
Agama. By performing 2 sacrifice accord-
ing to the scriptural ordinances, great will
be the merit acquired by yous


MAHASHARATA,


16. O you of a hundred eyes do you
perform the sacrifice with seeds of grain
which have been kept for three years. This,
O Shatra, would be fraught with great
vietue and productive of fruits of-high
efficacy.


-49. The deity of a hundred sacrifices,
however, maved by pride and overwhelmed
by stupefaction, did not accept these words
uttered by the Rishis.


18. Then, O Bharata, a great dispute
arose in that sacrifice of Shakra between
the ascetics as to how sacrifices should be
performed, that is, should they be performs
ed, with mobile creatures or with immobile
objects.


19. All of them were exhausted with
disputation, The Rishis, then, those bee
holders of truth, having made a compact
with Shakea, asked king Vasu.—


20. O highly blessed one, what is the
Vedic declaration about sacrifices? Is it
preferable to perform sacrifices with animals
or with seeds and juices.


21. Hearing the question, king Vasu,
without at all judging the merits of the
arguments advanced on both sides, at once
answered, saying,—' Sacrifices may be pers
formed with any of the two kinds of objects
ready.’

22. Having answered the question thus,
he had to enter the nether regions. Indeed,
the powerful king of the Chedis had ta
undergo that misery for having answered
falsely. ‘


23. Therefore, when a doubt arises, no
person, however wise, should singly decide
the matter, unless he be the powerful and
self-born Lord himself of creatures.


24. Gifts made by a sinner with an ime
pure heart, for this, even when very facge,
become lost. Such gifts go for nothing.


25. By the gifts made by a person of
unrighteous conduct,--one, that is, who is
of sinful soul and who is a destroyer, just
fame is never acquired either in this world
or in the next,


26. That person of little intelligence,
who, from desire of acquiring merit, cete-
brates saccifices with wealth acquired bv
unfair means, never succeeds in acquici: g
merit.


27. That low wretch of sinful soul, who
hypocritically assuming a garb of virtue
makes gifts to Brahmanas, only creates the
conviction in men about his own virtue.


28. That Brahmana_ of uncontrolled
conduct, whe acquires wealth by sinful


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


Weeds, overwhelmed by passion and stupe-
faction, attains at last to the goal of the
sinful. 7

_%9. Sothe one, overwhelmed by cupi-
dity and stupefaction, becomes bent on
“storing riches. He is Seen to persecute alf
treatares, urged by a sinful and impure
understanding.

‘30. He who, having acquired riches by
such means, makes gifts or performs
sacrifices thérewith, never enjoys the fruits
of those gifts or sacrifices in the other
world on account of the wealth having
been acquired by unfair means,


31. Men having wealth of goalie
by giving away, to the best of their power,
yrains of corn picked up from the fields or
roots or fruits or potherbs or water or
Yeaves, acquire great merit and proceed
to the celestial region.


32—33. Such gifts are fratght with
virtue and equal to high austertties. Such
gilts, as siso mercy to all creatures, and
Brahmacharyya, trathfntness of speech,
and kindness, and fortitude, and forgive-
ness, form the eternal foundations of
virtue which itself is eternal. We hear of
Vishvamitra and othee kings of ancient
times.

34—35. Indeed, Vistmvamitra, and
Asita, and king Janaka, and Kakshasetia
and Arshtisena. and king Sindhudwipa,
these and many other kings, ee with
wealth of penances, having tnade gifts of
articles acquired by fairne3s, have attained
to high suécess,

.36. Those atidngst Brahmanas- and
Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and- Shudras, who
perform penances, O Bharata, and who
purify themselves, by gifts and other deeds
of righteousness, proceed to thé celestial
tegiva, : ;
oe


CHAPTER XCIl.


(ANUGITA PARVA,)<
a : Concluded.


Janamejaya said :—


t. _If, O illustrious oe; celestial region


is the fruit of riches atquired by fair means,
do you fully describe it to me. You are
walloconbareant with the subject atid, it is,
therefore, proper for you to explain it.

"2. Otwice-born one, you have said to
me what the high fruit was that accured
to that Brahmana, who tived according


to the Unchcha mode, through his gift of
powdered barley. Forsooth, all you have
said is true. * : ;


15


oa


113


3. In what way, however, was the attain=
ment held certain of the highest end in all:
sacrifices 2 foremost of twice-bern
persone, you should fully expound all this,
ee :


Vaishamipayana said :—~

_ 4 Regarding it is cited this ofd tarras .
tive, O chastiser of enemies, of what took
place formerly in the great sacrifice of
Agastya.

5. Formerly, O king, Agastya of great:
energy, devoted to the well-being of all
creatures, entered into a Diksha extending :
for twelve yéars. ;

6. In that sacrifice of the great Rishi
many Hotris were engaged who resembled
blazing fires in the splendour of their bodies.’
Among them were men who lived upon’
roots or fruits, or who used two pieces of
stone only for husking their corn, or who
were supported by only the rays (of the
moon). :

g. Among them were also men who
never took any food unless it was placed
before them by others desirous of feeding
them, and those who never ate anything
without bavieg first served the celestials,:
the departed Manes, and guests, and those:
who never washed the food which they took,:
There were also Yatis and Vikshus among:
them, O king. :

8. All of them were men who had obtain«
ed a sight of the deity of virtue in his em«’


-bodied form. They had subjugated anget


alid acquired a comiplete mastery over alt.
their senses. Living in the observance of
self-control, they wete freed from pride and:
the desire of injuring others.


9. They wete always observant of a pure
conduct and weére never obstructed by their
genses. Those great, Rishis attended that
sactifice and performed its various rites.


to. The illustrious Rishi (Agastya) ace
quired the food which was collected in that
sacrifice and that came up to the required
quantity, by lawful nieans according to the
best of his power.


1113. Numerous other ascetics at that
time celebrated large sacrifices. As Agas+
tya, however, was engaged in that sacrifice
of his, tle thousatid-eyed Indra, O best of
the Bharatas, teased to pour rain (on the
Earth). At the intervals, O king, of the
sacrificial rites, this talk. took place among
those Rishis of purified souls about the
great Agastya, vtz.,—’ This Agastya, en-
gaged in sacrifice, is making gifts of food
with Heart purged of pride and vanity.


14. The deity of the clouds, however,
_has ‘ceased to pour rain. How, indeed


14. _° ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


will food grow? This sacrifice of the Rishi,
ye Breahmanas, ig great and extends. for,
twelve years, E be am
15-20. The deity will not pour rain’
for these twelve years. ‘Thinking on this;-
you should do some favour to this Rishi of,
yreat intelligence, vis, ‘Agastya of severe
penances.’. When these words -weré: said,
Agastya of great prowess, , pleasing ,all
those ascetics by. bending his. head, saidj-.
‘Tf Wasava does not pour rain for these.
. twelve years, I shall, then perform the-
mental sacrifice. This isthe eternal ordi-.
nance. If Vasava does not’ pour rain for |


these twelve years, I shall then perform the |


Touch-Sacrifice. This is the eternal sacri-.
fice. If Vasava does not pour rain for
these twelvé years,’ 1. shall,’ then, putting:
forth, all my exertions, make arrangements
for other sacrifices characterised | by’ the
observance of the most difficukh and severe’
vows. This present sacrifice of mine, witli’
seeds, has been arcanged. for by me with’
Habour of many years, ee


at. } shalt, ‘with seeds,-do much“ good.
No obstaele will atise. This ‘my* sacrifice |
is incapable of being bafffed.:  - '


22-23. Ht matters Hittle whether’ ‘the.
deity pours rain or no downpours come. ,
Indeed, if -Indra does not, of his own will,
show any regard forme, FE shall, in that
case, Change myself into Indra and keep
aH creatures alive. Every creature, on
whatever food he has been nourished, will
continue to be nourished on it as‘before,
24.
different order of things. Let gold and,
whatever else of riches there is, come to
this place to-day,


25—-27, Let aff the wealth. which is in
the three worlds come here to-day of its,
own accord! Let all the tribes of celestial
Apsaras, all the Gandharvas along with.
the Kinnaras, and Vishwavasu, and others
there are (of that order} approach this
sacrifice of mine! Let all the wealth which
exists among the Northern Kurus, come of


their own aceord to these sacrifices. ‘Let |


Hleaven, and all those wha have Heaven
for their home, and Dharma himself, come
here.’ _ an :


28 After the ascetic had uttered these
words, everything took place as he desired,.
by virtue of his penances, for Agastya was
gifted with a mind which resembled a burn-
ing fire and was possessed of extraodinary


energy.
29. The Rishis who were there saw the


power of penances with rejoicing hearts.
Filled with. wonder they then said these


words of grave siguificance, : ai


l can even repeatedly create a {


cons


| away.


The Rishis said:— —

‘30. We-have been highly pleased with
wards you have uttered. We do not, how-
ever; wish that your penances should suffer
any diminution. Those sacrifices are ap-
proved by us which are performed by fair
means. Indeed,’ we.wish duly those sacri«:
fices which rest on lawful means,


gt. Acquiring our food by lawful means
and observant of our respective duties, we-
shall.seek -to go: through. sacrificial initias
tions sand ‘the pouring: of tibations on the
sacred fire and ‘the other religious rites.


32-33. We should worship the celestials,
practising Brahmactaryya by lawful means.
Completing the period of Brahmacharyya
we have come out of our ‘house, observe
ing lawful methods. That understanding,
which is freed :from the desire of inflicting .
any kind of injury on others is approved
by -us.,, h | o oy


34« Yau should, always, O powerful one,’
commend such abstention from injury in
all sacrifices. We shail then be highly
pleased, O foremost of twice-barn ones.
Alter the consptetiot of - your sacrifice, when
dismissed by you, we shall then, leaving:
this place, ga away.

35. As they were saving these words,
Purandaraj «the. king of the deities, gifted
with great ‘energy, seeing the ipower of:
Agastya’s penanees, poured rain, +


36. Indeed, O' Janamejaya, till the com-
pletion -of thé sacrifice of that Rishi of
great prowess, “the deity of rain poured
tain which met the wishes of men both
about quaatity and time,

37. Placing Vrihaspatt before him, the
king of the deities came there, O coyat
sage, and pleased the Rishi Agastya.


at


38. On the termination of that sacrifice,-
Agastya, filled with joy, adored all those
great Rishis duly and then sent them ald


Janamojaya said j— '

. Who was that mungoose with 2
golden head, which said all those words it
a human voice? Asked by me, do you.
tell me this.


Vaishampayana said:—- ,

40. You did not ask me before and, -
therefore, I did not tell you: Hear as 1:
tell you who that mungoose was and why


.| he could assume a human voice.


4t. Formerly, the -Risht Jamadagni
desired to perform a:‘Shraddha. His
Homa-Cow came to hiny and the Rishi
milked her himself, . .


s


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


42. He then placed the milk in a vessel
which was new, durable, and pure. The
deity Dharma, assuming the form of anger,
entered that vessel of milk. ;


43. Indeed, Dharma was desirous of
determining what that foremost of Rishis
would do when seeing some injury done
to him. Having thought thus, Dharma
spoiled that milk.


44. Knowing that the spoiler of his milk
was Anger, the ascetic was not at all en-
raged with him. Anger, then, assuming
the form of a Bralhmana lady, showed him-
self to the Rishi.


45. Indeed, Anger, finding that he had
been vanquished by that foremost one of
Bhrigu’s race, addressed him,: saying,
*‘O chief of Bhrigu’s race, | have been
conquered by you. There is a saying
among men that the Bhrigus are very
wrathful. I now find that that saying is
false, since I have been subdued by you.

46. You are endued with a powerful


soul. You are endued with forgiveness.
I stand here to-day, acknowledging your


sway. I fear your penances, O righteous
one! Do you, O powerful Rishi, show me
favour. :


Jamadagni said :—
47. -Lhaveseen you, O Anger, in your
embodied form. Go you wherever you like,


11g


without any anxiety. You have not done
me ary injury today. I have no grudge
against you. :

48. Those for whom I had kept this
milk are the highly blessed Pitris, Present
yourself before them and ascertain theit
intentions,


49. Thus addressed, stricken with fear,
Anger vanished from the sight of the Rishi.
Through the éurse of the Pitcis he became
a mungoose.


50. Hethen began te please the Pitris
in order to bring about an end of his curse.
By them he was told these words :—' By
speaking disrespectfully of Dharma you
shall attain to the end of your curse.’


gt. Thus addtessed by them, he wan-
dered over places where sacrifices were
performed and over other sacred places,
employed in censuring great sacrifices. It
was he who came to the great sacrifice of
king Yudhishthira.


g2. Dispraising the son of Dharma by
a teference te the Pvastha ot powdered
barley, Anger became freed from his curse,
for Yudhishthira (as Dharma’s son) was
Dharma’s self.


3. This is what took place in the saeri«
fice of that great king. The mungoose dis-
appeared there in owt very presences.


Finis ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


A PROSE ENGLISH TRANSLATION
OF


THE MAHABHARATA.


(TRANSLATED LITERALLY FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT TEXY).


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.
VOL. XV.


EDITED & PUBLISHED BY


MANMATHA NATH DUTT, (Stasir’) MLA, MBAS,
Rector, KesHuB ACADEMY};


Author of the English Translations of the Ramayana, Vishnu Puranam,
Srimad-Bhagavatam, Kamandakiya, Nitisara, Bhagavad: Gita, .
and many ether works.


40, Nayan Chand Dutt’s Street, Calcutta.


CALCUTTA:


Printzp sy H. C. Dass, Exysrus Press,
40, Nayan Chand Dutt's Street.


1905.


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA:


TABLE OF CONTENTS,


Cuaprer {.—The conduct of the Pan-


davas after regaining their kingdom—p. 1.

Cuarrer [[.-The cespectful treatment
ef the Pandavas towasds Dhcritarashtra—
P. 2

Cuarter Iff.—Cruel act of Bhima, the
gtief of Dhritarashtra and Yudhishthira—
P- 3

CuaprzerR IV.—Vyasa’s consolation to
Dheitarashtra—p. 6.

Crarter V.—Dhritarashtra's advice to
Yudhishthira—p, 7.

Cuarrer VI.—Royal duties described by
Dhritarashtra—p. 9.

Crarrer Vij.—Instcuctions about wart
aud peace—p. 10.


Cuaprer VIUt.—Dhricarashtra settles


about returning into forest—p, 1.

Carrer 1X.—-Dhritarashtra announces
his intention and apologizes to the citizens—a
P. 12.

Cuarter X.—~—The history of the war as
described by a Brahmana—p. 14

Cuarter XL-Dhritarashtea distributes
Money—p. 14.

Cuarrer Xlf.—Arjuna advises Bhima,
to give up his hostile feelings—p. 15.

Carter XIIL.—Vidura communicates
to Dhritarashtra, Yudhishthica’s apology
for Bhima’s conduct—p. 16, - .

CHarrer %IV.—Distribution of giftsas
Pp. 17.

CHAPTER XV.~Dhritarashtra’s depar-
ture for the forest—p. 7.

Cuarrer XVI.—Kunti’s determination
to follow the blind king—~p. 18.

Crarrer XVIf.—Kunti’s ceply to her
sons—p. 19,

Cuarrer XVIL—The arrival of the
party at the forest—p. 20.

Cuarrer X1X,.—Arrival at Vyasa’s hers
mitage—p. aie


CHAPTER ~The ‘arrival of asceties
to see the king*—p. 22.

Cuarren XXL—The sorrows of the
Pandavas—p,. 23.

Cuaprer XXI1.—<Vudhishthira goes with
his party to see the king in the forest—p 24.

Cuarrer XXIL—~-The royal marcch—
Pp. 25.

Cuarter XXIV.—The meeting of ibe
Pandavas with their mother and the blind
king=-p. 26,

Sam XXV.--The same ocontinued—
p. 26.

Cyarrer XXVI.~Dhritarashtra enqui-
tes Yudhishthira of his well-being and
the latter's reply—p. 27.

Cuaprer XXVII.—The passing of a day
in the forest by Yudhishthira—p. 29.

Cuaprsr XXVill-The history of
Vidura—p. 30.

Cuaprer XX1X.—The conversation of
Nyase and other ascetics—p. 3I.

- CHanrgr XXX.—The history of Karna
described by Kunti—p. 33.

Caaprers XXXI~-XXXIUBL--Gandhari
sees her sons—p. 34.

CaarrerR XXX1V.—How persons whose
bodies have been Genroyed re-appear——
P- 37-

CHAPTER XXXV.—Janamejaya sees his,
father—p. 38.

CuarteR XXXVEL—Vyasa
Dhritarashtca—p. 38.


Cuarren XXXVIL—Narada comes to
Vudhishthira and describes the death of
Dhritarashtra, Kunti, and others—p. 40.


Cuarren XXXVILL—Yudhishthira’s
lamentations—p. 42.


Cuarrer XXXIX.~-Narada describes
the history of the death—p,. 43.


consoles


THE MAHABHARATA.
(IN ENGLIS B),
ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.


Oe en


CHAPTER I. -


Having saluted the Supreme Deity (Nara- to—1t. Yudhishthira gave the king
yuna) and the highest of all male beings | costly beds, dresses and ornaments, and
(Nara) and also the Goddess of Learning | food and drink and other enjoyable articlesg


(Saraswati), let us cry success. in profusion and of such superior kinds
; ; as were worthy of royal use. Likewise
Janamejaya said :— Kunti behaved towards Gandhari as to«
1. Alter having gained their kingdom, | wards a senior,
how did my grandtathers, the great Pan- 12. Vidura, Sanjaya, and Vuyutsu, O
davas, treat the high-souled king Dhrita- you of Kueu’s race, used to always wait
rashtra ? upon the old king whose sous had all beem
2. How, indeed, did that king who had | billed.
all- his counsetiors and sons killed, who was 13. The dear brother-in-law of Drona,


without a support, and whose wealth had | yg), the very superior Brahmana, Kripa, .
vanished, behave? How also did the illus- | that powerful bowman, also, attended upon


trious Gandhari act ? the king,

_ 3 For how many years did my noble | ~ 44. ‘fhe holy Vyasa also used to often
grandfather tule the kingdom? You should | meet with the old king and recite to him
tell me ail this, the histories of old Risthis and celestial


ascetics and Pitris and Rakshasas.


1g. Vidura, under the orders of Dhrita-
rashtra, superintended the performance of
all religious acts and the administration of
the law.


16. Through the excellent policy of
Vidura, by the expenditiire of very little
money, the Pandavas got numerous agree-
able services from their feudatories and
followers.


Vaishampayana said :—

4 Having regained their kingdom, the
great Pandavas, their enemies all killed,
ruled the earth, placing Ducitacashtra at
theic head.


8 Vidura, Sanjaya and the highly in-
tellipent Yuyutsu, who was Dohritarashtra’s
san by his- Vaistya wife, used to wait, upon
Dhritarashtra,

6. ‘The Patidavas used to consult that
king in all matters. tndeed, for fifteen
years, they did all things under the advice
vf the old king.


- 7. TDhose heroes used very often to go
to that king and sit beside him, after having
adored bis feet, according to the wishes
of king Yudbishthira the just.


17. King Dhritarashtra freed prisoners
and pardoned those-who were condemned
to death. King Yudhisbthira the just never
said anything to this,

18. On those occasions when the son of
Amvika went on pleasure trips, the highly
energetic Kuru king Yudhishthira used to
give him every article of enjoyment.


8. They did.all things under the com- 19. Aralikas, and juice-makers, and
mand of Dhritarashtra who smelt their | makers of Ragakhandavas waited on king
heads in love. ‘Lhe daughter of king Kunti- Dhritarashtra as before.


bhoja also obeyed Gandhari in all matters, 20. Pandu’s son collected costly dresses


‘ g. “Draupadi and Subhadra and the and parlands of various kinds and duly
. other ladies of the Pandavas treated the | _ Offered them to, Dhritarasttia.

old king and the queen as if they were 2t. Maireya wines, fish of vasious kinds,

bheir own failie:-in-law and mother-in-law. and sherlets aud honey, and various kinds of


2 MAHABAHNRATA,


food ‘agreeably prepared by the admixture, {


of many articles, were caused te be made for
the old King asin his prosperous days.


22.. Those kings who came there one
after another, all used to wait upon the old
Kuru king as before.


23—26. Kunati, Draupadi, and she of the
Sattwata race possessed of great fame,
and Ulupi the daughter of the Naga king,
and queen Chitrangada, and ‘the sister of
Dirishtaketu, and the daugitter of Jara-
sandha,—these and many other ladies, O
king, used to wait upon the daughter of
Suvala like maids of all work. Yudhisthira
always enjoined ypon his brothers that
Dhritarashtra, who was deprived of all bis
children, might not feel himself unhappy in
any way. They also, on their part, listening
to these pregnant commands from king
Yudhishthira, showed particular obedience
to the old king. :


27. There was one exception, however,
It was Bhimasena, Ali that had followed
from that match at dice which had been
brought about by the wicked understanding
of Dhritarashtra, did not go away from
tle heart of that hero,


Seater


CHAPTER Il.
(ASHRA AVASIKA PARVA,)—


; Continued.
Vaishampayana said :—

1, Thus adored by the Pandavas, the
royal sen of Amvika passed his time happily
as befere, waited upon and honoured by
the Rishis.


2. That perpetuater of Kuru’s race used
to make those foremost of offerings which
should be given to the Brahmanas, The
royal son of Kunti always placed those
articles at Dhritarashtra’s command, *


3—4. Shorn of malice as kiag Yudhish-
thira was, he was always affectionate
towards his unele. Addressing his brothers
and ministers, the king said,—‘ King Dhrita-
rashtra should be honoured both by myself
and you all, He, indeed, is a well-wisher
of mine who obeys tlre"commands of Dhrita-
rashtra,


5—6. He, on the other hand, who treats
hind otlierwise, is my enemy,
sheuld certainly be punished by me. On
days of performing the rites ordained for
the Pittis, as also in the Shraddhas pesform-

-ed for his sons and all well-wishers, the
great Kuru king Dhritarashtra, gave


Such a man [|


away to Brahmanas, as each deserved
immense quantity of weaith after his heart,


yg. King Yudhishthira the just, and
Bhima, and Arjuna, and the twins, desirous
of doing what was liked by the old king,
used to execute all his commands,


8. They always took care that the old
king who was afflicted with the destruction
of his sons and grandsons,—with, that is,
grief caused by the Pandavas themselves,—
might not die of his grief.


g. Indeed, the Pandavas treated him
in such a way that that Kuru hero might
not be deprived of that happiness and all
those articles of enjoyment which he had
during his sons’ life-time,


1a. The five brothers, vis., the sons of
Pandu, treated thus Dhritarashtra, living
under his command;


1%. Dhritarashtra also, seeing them so


‘humble and obedient to his commands and


acting towards him as_ disciples towards
receptors, treated them also like a loving
preceptor in return.


12. Gandhari, by performing the vari-
ous rites of the Shraddha and making gifts
to Brahmanas of various objects of enjoy-
ment, became freed from the debt she owed


} to her slain children,


13. Thus did that foremost of righteous
men, vis., king Yudhishthira the just,
endued with great intellizence, along witit


his brothers, adored king Dhritarashtra, 4 -


Vishampayana said :—

14. Endued with great energy, that
perpetuater of Kuru’s race, via., the ald
king Dhritarashtra, could not see any ill-
willin Yudhishthira,


15. Seeing that the great Pandavas
were int the observance of a wise and
tighteous conduct, king Dhritarashtra, the
son of Amvika, became pleased with them.


16. Suvala’s daughter, Gandhari, re«
nouncing all sorrow for her (slain) children,
began to show great love for the Pagdavas
as if they were her own children,


17. Gifted with great energy, the Kuru
king Yudhishthira never did anything that
was disliked by the royal son ef Vichitra~
viryya. On the other hand, he always
treated him in a highly agreeable way,


18—19. Whatever acts, grave or light,
were directed by king Dhritarashtra or
the helpless Gandhari to be done, were all
done with respect, O monare¢h, by that
destroyer of hostile heroes, vis., the Pane
dava king,


“ASWRAMAVASIKA PARVA. TR


20. The old king became highly pleased
with such conduct of Vudhishthica. Indeed,
he¢ was grieved at the remembrance of his
own wicked son. ;


2t. Rising every day at early dawn, he


purified himself and went through his reci-_


tations, and then blessed the Pandavas by
wishing them victory in battle.


22. Making the usual gifts te the Brah-
manas and making them utter benedictions,
and pouring libations on the sacred fire,
the old king prayed for long life to the
Pandavas.


23. Indeed, the king had ‘never derived
that great happiness from his own sons


which he always did from the sons of
Pandu.
24. King Yudhishthira at that time


became as agreeable tothe Bralimanas as
to the Kshatriyas, and the various bands of
Vaishyas and Shudras of his kingdom.


a5. -King Yudhishthira forgot whatever
wrongs were done to him by the sons of
Dhritarashtra, and saluted his uncle.


26—27. [f any man did any thing that was
not liked by the son of Amvika, he became
thereby an object of hatred to the intelli-

ent son of Kunti. Indeed, through fear of
Vudhistthica nobody could talle of the evil
deeds
rashtra,


28. Both Gandhari and Vidura also
were well pleased with the power which
the king having no enemies showed for
bearing wrongs. They were, however, not
so pleased, O destroyer of foes, with Bhima.


of either Duryodhana oc Dheita-


29. Dharma’s son Yudhishthira, was
truly obedient to his uncle, Bhima, how-
ever, on seeing Dhritarashtra, became very
dispirited.

39. That destroyer of enemies, - seeing
Dharma’s ‘son pay his respects to the old
king, saluted him outwardly with a very re-
luctant heart,


CHAPTER HI.


( ASHRAMAVASAIKA PARVA.)— _


Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

1. The people who fived in the Kuru
kingdom could not mark any - difference in
the cordiality which existed between king
Yudhishthira and the father of Duryo-
giana.


2. When the Ruru king resolected hig
wicked son, he then could not but feel une
friendly, in his heact, towards Bhima.


3. Bhimasena alse, O king, moved by a
wicked heart, was unable to put up with
king Dhritarashtra.


4. Vrikodara secretly did many deeds
that were disagreeable to the old king.
Through deceitful servants he caused the
commands of his uncle to be disobeyed.


5—7. Recollecting the evil advice of the
old king and some deeds of his, Bhima, one
day, in the midst of his friends, slapped his
armpits, in the hearing of Dhritarashtra
and of Gandhari. The angry Vrikodara,
recollecting his enemies Duyrodhana and
Karna and Dusshasana, gave way toa fit
of passion, and said these harsh words :—
‘ The sons of the blind king, capable of fight
ing with various kinds of weapons, have alf
been despatched by me to the other world
with these arms of mine whic resemble a .
pair of iron clubs, :


8. Indeed, these are those two arms of
mine, looking like maces of iron, and invin-
cible by enemies, ceming within whose clasp
the sons of Dhritarashtra have all been
killed.


g. These are those two well-developed
and round arms of mine, resembling a pair
of elephantine trunks, Coming within theie
clasp, the foolish sons of Dhritarashtra -
have all been kilted. .


to. Smeared with sandal-pabte and de-
serving of that adornment are those twa
arms of mine by which Duryodhana has been
sent to the other world along with all his
sons and kinsmen.’.


11. Hearing these and many ether words,
O king, of Vrikodara, which were so many
darts, king Dhritarashtra gave way te
cheerlessness and sorrow,


12, Queen Gandhari, however, who was
conversant with every duty and endued
with great intelligence, and who knew what
Time brings on its course, considered them
as untrue.


° 13. Then, after fifteen years had passed
away, O monarch, king Duritarashtra,
afflicted (constantly) by the wordy arrows
of Bhima, became stricken with despair and
sorrow. .


14. King Vudhishthira the son of Kunti,
however, knew it not; nor Arjuna of white
horses; nor Kunti; ner Draupadi posses-
sed of great fame; nor the twin sons of
Madri, knowing every duty and who were
always engaged in acling after the wislres
of Dhritarashtra.


a - MAHABHARATA.


-


15. Employed in doing the behests of the
king, the twins never said anything that
was disagreeable to the old king. ‘Then
Doritarashtra one day honoured his friends
by his confidence. Addressing them with
tearful eyes, he said these words.


Dhritarashtra said :—

16. You know how the destruction of
Kurus has happened. All that was brought
about by my fault, though the Kauravas
approved of all my counsels,


¥7. Fool that FE was, °F installed the
wicked-minded Duryodhana, that enhancer
of the terrors of kinsmen, to rule over the
Kurrus.


18—20. Vasudeva had said to me,—‘ Let
this sinful wretch of wicked understanding
be slain along with all his friends and
sounsellers.’—I[ did not sten to those words
of great significance. All wise men gave
me the same beneficial advice. Vidura,
Bhishma, Drona, and Kripa said the same
thing. The holy and great Vyasa repea-
tedly said the same, as also Sanjaya and
Gandhari, Overwhelmed, however, by
filial affection, | could not follow that advice.
Bitter repentance is now my lot for my
neglect.


at. Lalso repent for not having bestowed
Bhat blazing prosperity, derived from sires
mand = grandsires on the great Pandavas
possessed of every accomplishment.


22. Yhe eldest brother of Gada foresaw
> the destruction of all the kings ; Janarddana,
however, - considered that destruction as
highly beneficial. :

23. So many battalions of troops:
helonging to me, have been destroyed *
Alas, my heart is pierced with thousands
E darts on account of all these results.


24. Of wicked understanding as I am,
now, after the lapse of fifteen years, 1 am
arying to expiate my sins.

25. Now at the fourth diviston of the
day or sometimes at the eighth division,
with the régularity of a vow, | eata little
food for simply satisfying my thirst. Gan-
a@hati knows this.


26. All my attendants believe that I eat
‘as usual. Vhrough fear of Yudhishthira
alone I concealed my deeds, for if the eldest
son of Pandu came to know of my vow, be
he would feel great pain,


27. Clad in deer-skin, I lie down on the
Earth, spreading a small quantity of Kusha
yrass, and pass the time in silent recitations
‘The illusteitivus Gandhari, also, passes her
Lime in the observance of similar vows.


28. ‘Thu, do we both act, we who have


‘the princess of Yadu's race!


Jost ahundred sons nore of whom ever
retreated frony battle. I donot, however,
grieve for those children of mine. ‘They
have all died while performing Kshatriya
duties. :


2g. Having said these words, the old
king then addressed Yudhishthira im parti-
colar and said,—'Blessed be yau, O son of
Listen now
to what F say.


30. Cherished by you, O son, F have
Hived these years very happily. IF have
(with your help) made large gifts and per-
formed Shraddhas repeatedly.


3t. I have, O son, to the best of my
power, acquired merit largely. ‘This Gan-
Ghari, though destitute of sons, has lived
with great fortitude, booking all the while
at me,


32. Fhey who infficted great wrongs
on Draupadi and robbed you of your
affluence,—those cruel men—have all left
the world, killed in batthe according to the
practice of their order.


_ 33. | have nothing to do for them, O
delighter of the Kucus! [Killed with their
faces towards battle, they have attained to
those regions which are reserved for the
wielders of weapons,


34. E should now, do what is beneficial
and meritorious for, me as also for Gandhariy
O great king, you should grant me per-
Mission. .

35. You are the foremost of all righteous
persons, You are always devoted to virtue.
Ihe king is the preceptor of all creatures
it is for this that § say so.


36.. With your permission, O hero, 4}
shall retire into the forest, clad in rags
and batks, O king, along with this Gan-
dhatsi.


37—38. 1 shall live tn the forest, always
blessing you. It is proper, O son, for the
members of our family, lo make over sove~-
reignty, when old age eomes, to children
and fead the forest mode of Hfe. Living
there on air alone, oc abstaining from alb
food, I shalt, with this wife of mine, O hero,
practise severe austetities.


39. You shall be a sharer of those pe-
nances, O son, for you are the king. Kings
are sharers of both auspicious and inauspie
cious acts done in their kingdom,


Yudhishthira said :—

492. When you, O king, are thus subject
to yrief, sovereignty does not please me at
all. Fie on me who am of wicked un-
derstanding, devoted to the pleasures of


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA 5


A °


tu'e, and absolutely negligent of iny true |


concerns,


4%. Alas, 1, with all my brothers, was
ignorant of yourself having so long been
Stricken with grief, emaciated with fasts,
abstaining from food, and lying on the
naked earthy


42. Alap, foolish that I am, I have been
deceived by you who have great intelligence,
inasmuch as, having filled me with confi-
dence at first you have latterly undergone
such grief.


43. What need have I of kingdom or of
articles cf enjoyment, what need of sacti-
fices or of happiness, when you, O king,
have undergone so much affliction.


44. lI consider my. kingdom as a disease,
and onyself falso as afflicted.  Plunged
thongh I am in sorrow, what, however,
is the use of these words that ] am addies-
ing you ?.


45. You are our father, you are our
mother; you are our foremost of superiors.
Deprived of :your presence, how shall we
live. :


46.- O best of kings, fet Yuyutsu, the
son of your loins, be made king, oc indeed,
anybody else whom you may wish.


47. I shall go into the forest. Do you
rule the kingdom. You should not burn me
who am already burned by wfamy,


48 fT am not the king. You are the
king. I am dependent on your will, How
can [ dare grant permission to you who are
my preceptor ?


49. O sinless one, I eherish no resent-
ment in my heart on account of the wrongs
done to us by Suyodhana. It was ordained
that it should be so. Both ourselves aad
others were stupefied (by fate).


50. We are your children as Duryo-
diana and others were. My conviction is
that Gandhari is as much my mother as
Kuati.


51. If you, O king of kings, go to the
forest leaving me, I shall then follow you.
I swear by my soul.


52. This Earth, with her belt of seas, so
fuil of riches, will not be a source -of joy
to me when | am deprived of your pre-
sence.


53. All this belongs to you. Bending my
head low I make my obesiance. We are all
dependent on you, O king of kings. Let
the fever of your heart be removed.


§4. I think, O king, that all this that
has come upon you is due to destiny, By
good luck, I had thought, that waiting upon
you and executing your commands obe-


dently, 1 would rescus-you front the fever of
your heart. -


Dhritarashtra said :—


55. O delighter of the Kurus, my mind
is hxed, O son, on penances. O powerful
one, it is proper for our family that 1 should
retire into the forest. -


56. I have fived tong under your pro-
tection, O son.~I have for many years
been served by you with respect. | am
now old. You should, O king, grant me
permission.


Vaishampayana said :—

57—58. Having said these words to
king Yudhishthira the just,. king Durita-
rashira, Ue son of Amvika, trembting all the
while and with hands joined together, fur-
thee said to the great Sanjaya and the
great car-warrior Kripa, these words :—
§ wish to solicit the king through you.


59 My mind has become dispirited,
my mouth has become dry, through the
weakness of age and the exertion of speak-
ing.

60. Having said so, that perpetuator of
Kuru's race, 72., the pious old king, biessed
with prosperity, leaned to Gandhari and
suddenly looked like one dead,


61. Seeing him thus seated like one’
shorn of consciousness, that destroyer of
hostile heroes, vis., the royal son of Kuutt,
became penetrated by a piercing grief.


Yudhishthira said :—


62. Alas, he whose strength was equal
to that of a hundred thousand elephauts,
alas, that king sits to-day, leaning on a
woman, >


63. Atas, he by whom the iron image of
Bhima on a former occasion was reduced to
pieces, leans to-day.on a weak, woman.


64. Fie on the who am exceedingly in.
tightéous. Fie on my understanding. Fie
on my knowledge of the scriptures. Fre en
me for whom this king lies to-day in a.man-
ner that is not worthy of him,


65. I also shall fast even as my precep~
tor. lIodeed, 1 shall fast if this king and
Gandhati of great fame abstain from
tood.


Vaishampayana said :—

66. ‘The Pandava king, knowing every
duty, using his own hand, then softly” rub-
bed with cold water the breast and the face
of the old king,


67. At the touch of the kiny’s hand
which was auspicious and fragrant, and


6 MAMIABIFARATA,


on which were jewels and medicinal
hecbs, Dhritarashtra regained his censci-
ousness,


Dhritarashtra said :—

68.
Pandu, with your hand, and do you em-
brace me. O you having eyes like lotus
petals, | am restoted to my senses through
the auspicious touch of your hand,


69. O ‘king, { wish to smell your head.
The clasp of your arms is highly gratily-
ing to me,


7a. This is the eighth division of the
day and, therefore, the hour for taking my
food, For not having taken my food, O
scioh of Muru’s cace, | am so weak that I
cannot meve,


71. Great has been my exertion while
soliciting you. Rendered cheeriess by it,
O son, Lt had fainted.


72. O perpetuator of Kuru’s race, |
think that receiving the touch of your hand,
which is like nectar in its vivifying effects
I have been restored to niy setses,


Vaishampayana said :—

73. ‘Thus addressed, 18) Bharata, by the
eldest brother of his father, the son of
Kunti, from affection, gently touched every
part of his body.


74. Regaining his fife, king Dhrita~
rashtra embraced the son of Pandu with his
arms and smelled his head,


75. Vidura and others wept aloud in
great sorrow. On account, however, of the
poignancy of their sorrow, they said nothing
to either the old king o¢ the son of Pandu.


76. Gandhaci, knowing every daty, bore
her sorrow with patience, and loaded as
her heart was, O king, said nothing.


77. The othec ladies, Kunti among them,
became greatly afflicted. They wept, shed-
dine profuse tears, and sat surrounding
the old king.


78. Then Dhritarashtra, once mote ad-«
dressing Yudhishthira, said these words :—
‘Do you, O king, permit me to practise
penances.

79. By speaking repeatedly, O son, my
mind becemes weakened. You should not,
O son, afflict me after this.

80. When that foremost one of Kuru’s
race was saying soto Yudhishthira, a loud
sound of wailing arose from all the warriors
there present.

81—82. Seeing his royal father of great
splendour, emaciated and pale, reduced to


Do you, again, touch me, O'son of |


a state ‘unwarthy of him, worn out with
fasts, and looking like a skeletow covered
with skin, Dharma's son Yudhisthira shed
tears of grief and once more said these


_ words.


83. *O foremost of met, I do not wish
for life and the Earth! QO scorcher of
enemies, f{ shall engage myself in doing
what is pleasant to you.


84. HE Eodeserve your favour, if I am
Gear to you, do you eat something. 1 shall
then know what to do.’

85. Gifted with great energy, Dhrita-
cashtra then said;to Yudhishthira,—-‘1 wish,
O son, to take some food, with your per-
mission,


86. When Dhritarashtra said these words
to Yudhiskthira, Satyavati’s son Vyasa
came there and said as follows.


CHAPTER IV.


(ASHRAMVASIKA PARVA.,)—
Continued.
Vyasa said :—
t. O mighty-armed Yudhishthira, de


unhesitatingly what Dheitarashtca of Kuru’s
family has said.


z. This king is old. He has, again, been
made sonless, {think he will not be able


| to bear his grief long,


3. The highly blessed Gandhari, endued
wit great wisdom and kindly speech, bears
with fortitude her excessive grief owing to
the loss of fer sons.


4. I also tell you (what the old king says.)
Do you obey my words. Let the old king
have your permission. Let him not die an
inglorious death at home.


5. Let this king follow the path of royal
sages of old. Indeed, all royal sages retire
into the waods at last.


Vaishampayana said :—


6—7.—Thus addressed at that time by
Vyasa of wonderful deeds, king Yudhishe
thira the just, gifted with mighty energy,
said to the great ascetic these words,-——
‘;Your holy’ self is held’ by us in great re-
verence. You alone are our preceptor. You
alone are the refuge of this our kingdom
as also of our family.


8. Iam your son, ! You, O holy one, are
my father! You are our king, and you are
our preceptor! ‘The son should, as dic-
tated by every duty, Obey the commands
of his father,


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA,


“Vaishampayana said :— -

Q—to. Vhus addressed by the king,
Vyasa, that foremost of all persons know-
ing the Vedas, that foremost of poets
gifted with great energy, once more said
to Vudhishthira these words,‘ It is so, O
mighty-armed one! It is as yousay, O
Bharata! ‘This king has reached old age.
He is now in the last stage of lie.


11. Permitted both by me and you, let
this king do what he wishes. Do not stand
as an obstacle in his way.


12, This is the highest duty, O Yudhish-
thira, of royal sages. ‘They should die
either in battle or in the forest according to
the scriptures.


13. ‘Your royal father, Pandu, O king
of kings, respected this old king as a dis-
ciple reveres his preceptor.


‘14. (At that time) he worshipped the
celestials in many great sacrifices with
profuse gifts consisting of hills of wealth and
jewels, and ruled the Earth and protected
his subjects wisely and well.


15. tlaving obtained a good number of
children and a prosperous kingdom, he en-
joyed great riches for thirteen years while
you were in exile, and gave away much
wealth, ;


16. Yourself also, O king, with your
servants, O sinless one, have wershipped
this king and the famous Gandhari with
that ready ebedience which a disciple pays
to his preceptor,

17. Do you grant permission to your
father. ‘The time has come for him to
attend to the practice of penances,
does not cherish, O Yudhishthira, even the
slightest anger against any of you.’


Vaishampayana said :—

18. Having said these words, Vyasa,
soothed the old king. Yudhishthira, then,
answered him, saying,—' So be it.’ The
great aseetic then left the palace for pro-
Geeding to the forest.


1g-—21. After the haly Vyasa had de-
parted, the royal son of Pandu softly said
these words to his old father, bending him-
self in humility,—' What the holy Vyasa
has said, what is your own purpose, what
the great bowmen Kripa has said, what
Vidura has said, and what has been asked
for by Yuyutsu and Sanjaya, I shall quickly
do. All these deserve my respect, for all of
them are well-wishers of our family.
* 22. This, however, O king, I beg of you
by bending my head. Do you first eat and
afterwards go to your forest- retreat,”


Cee el


‘ee


He


CHAPTER V.


(ASHRAMVASIKA PARVA. j-=
* Conéinued,


Vaishampayana gaid :—

t. Having received the king’s permis«
sion, the highly energetic hing D)ritarastra,
then, went to his own palace, followed by
Ganhari. :


2. “With weakened strength and slow
motion, that highly intelligent king walked
with difficulty, like the leader, exhausted
with age, of an elephantine herd...


3. He was followed by the highly learn-
ed Vidura, and his charioteer Sanjaya, as
also that powerful bewman Kripa the son
of Sharadwata.


4. Entering his palace, O king, he per-
formed the morning rites and, after pleasing
many foremost of Brahmanas, he took some
feod. ‘ ,


g. Gandhari knowing every duty, as
also the highly intelligent Kunti, adored
with offers of various articles by . theic
daughters-in-law, them took some food, O ,
Bharata.


‘6. After Dhritatashtra had eaten, and
Vidura also and others had done the same,
the Pandavas, having finished their meals,
approached and sat around the old king.


4--§. Then the son of Anivika, O
monarch, addressing Kunti’s son, who was
seated neac him, and touching his back with
his hand, -said,—" You should always, O ©
delighter of the Kucus, act vigilantly about
everything connected with your kingdom
consisting of eight limbs, O foremost of
kings, and in which the claims of virtue
should ever be kept foremost.


You are, O son of Kunti, endued with
intelligence and learning. Listen to me, O
King, 1 tell you what the means are by
which, O gon of Pandu, the kingdom is
capaple of being righteously protected.


10, You should always, O Yudhishthira, .
‘honour these persons who are old in learns
ing. You sheuld listen to what they would
say, and act accordingly without any seruple,

11, Rising early in the morning, O-
king, adore them with due rites, and when
the time comes for action, you should con.
sult them about your (intended) acts.

12, When, led by the desire ef knowing
what woyld be beneficial to you about your
measures, you honour them, they will, O
son, always declare what is for your behoof,
O Bharata! .

13. You should always keep your senses ~
as you keep your horses, They will thea


8 MAHABHARATA.


prove beneficial to you, like riches that is
not wasted,


14. You should employ only those minis-
ters who have passed the tésts of honesty,
who are hereditary officers of state, possessed
of pure conduct, self-cqntrolled, expert in the
discharge of business, and endued with
righteous conduct.


15. You should always gather infor-
mation through spies in various disguises,
whose faithfulness have been tested, who
are natives of your kingdom, and who
should not be known to your enemies,


16. Your citadel should be properly
protected with strong walls and arched
gates. On every side such walls, . with
watch-towers on them standing close to one
another, should be made as will admit six
persons walking side by side on theie top.


17. ‘The gates should all be large and
sufficiently strong, Keptin propec places,
those gates should be carefully guarded.


18-19. Let your purposes be accomplish.
ed through men whose tamities and conduet
are well-known, You should always pro-
tect your bedy also with care in matters
connected with your food, O Bharata, as
also in the hours of sport and eating and
in matters connected with the garlands
you weac and the beds you lie upon. The
ladies of your household should be properly
protected, looked over by aged and trusted
servitors, of good conduct, well-born, and
possessed of learning, O Yudhishthira.


20. You should make ministers of
Brahmanas possessed of leaming, endued
with bumility, well-born, knowing religion
and profit, and adorned with simplicity of
behaviour.


at, You should hotd consultations with
them. You should not, however, admit
many persens into your consultations. On
patticular occasions you may consult with
me whole of your council or with a portion
of it.


22. Entering a chamber or spot that is
well- protected (from inteuders) you should
hold your consultations, You. may hold
your consultation in a forest that is divested
ef grass. You should never consult at
night time,

23. Apes and birds and other animals
which can imitate human beings should
atl be excluded from the council chamber,
us also idiots andlame and palsied indivi-
duals. . :

24. Lthink that the evils which originate
from the divulyence of the counsels of kings
are such hat they cannot be remedied,


23> You should repeatedly refer, in the
midst ef your counsellors, to the evils which
arise from the divailgence of counsels, O
chastiser of enemies, and to the merits
which flow frém counsels propecly kept.


26. You should, O Yudhishthira, act
in such a manner as to determine the merits
and faults of the inhabitants of your city
and the provinces.


27, Let your laws, O king, be always
administered by trusted judges placed ta
charge thereof, wha should also be cone
tented and of good conduct. Their acts
should also be ascertained by you throught
spies.

28. Let your judicial officers, O Yudhish-
thira, mete. aut punishments, according ta
the law, on offenders after careful detecs
Mining the gravity of the offences.


29-30. They who take bribes, they wha
are the violaters of the chastity of othec
people’s wives, they who inflict heavy
punishments, they who are liars, they who
are revilers, they who are stained by
cupidity, they who are aurderers, they wha
ate doers of cash deeds, they who aré cis-
uirbers of assemblies and the sports of
others, and they who bring about a cons
fusion of castes, should, according to con-
siderations of time and place, be punished
with either fines or death.


3t. In the morning you should see those
who are employed in making your  dis-
bursements. After that you should look
to your toilet and then to your food,


32. You should next supervise your
arms, pleasing them on every occasion.
You should devote your evenings to envoys
and spies,


33. The latter end of the night should
be devoted by you to settle what acts
should be done by you in the day. Mid-
nights and middays should be ‘devoted to
amusements and sports. At all times,
however, you should think of the means
for the execution your projects,


34 At the proper time, adorning your
body, you should sit prepared to make gilts
in profusion. The turns for different deeds,
O son, céaselessly revolve like wheels.


35- You should do yout best to fill youre
treasuriés of various kinds by fair means,
You should avoid all unlawful means for
that purpose, :


36. Learning through your spies who
youc enemies zare .who are bent on finding
out your shertcoming, you should, througts
trusted agents, cause thea to be destroyed
from a distance, ;


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.


:


4). Exantning their conduct, you should, | march, halt, sowing dissensions, and cons


perpetuatec of Kuru’s race, appoint your
servants. You should cause all your deeds
to be accomplished thraugh your servitors
whether they are appointed for those acts
or not.


38. The commandant of your army
should be of firm conduct, courageous,
capable of bearing hardships, loyal, and
devoted to your well-being.


39. Artizans and mechanics, O son of
Pandu, living in your provinces, should
always do your acts like kine and asses.


40. You should always, O. Yudhish-,
thica, be careful to ascertain your own,
shortcomings as also those of . your enemies.
The shortcomings also of your own men
as also of the men of your enemies should
equally be known,


4t. Those men of your kingdom, who
are wellsskilled in their respective callings,
and are devoted to your good, should be
patronized yby you with adequate means
of support.


42. A wise king, O chief of men, should
always see that the accomplishments of his
subjects might be kept up. They would
then be firmly devoted to you, seeing that
they did not fall away from their skill, .:


Same nemeeneel


CHAPTER VI.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.)-—> :
Continued,


Dhritarashtra said:—- 2...

1. You should always ascertain the
Mandalas which belong to you, to your
enemies, to neutrals, and to those who dre
disposed equally towards — ‘you and your
enemies, O Bharata.


2, The Mandalas also of the four kinds
of enemies, of those calted Atatayins, and
of allies, and the allies of enemies, should
be cers by you, O cousher of.
enemies.: - -


3. You ‘should see that the ministers of
state, the people of the provinces, the gat-
tisons of forts, and the forces, O foremost
one of Kuru’s race, are not tampered with.

4. The twelve (enumerated above), Oo
son of Kunti, form the principal concerns of
kings, ‘These twelve, as also.the ‘sixty,
having Ministers for their foremost, | should
be looked after by the king.


. Politicians call these by the name
of Mandala. Understand, oO Yadhish+
‘thira, that the six incidents (of peace, war,


a


ciliation) depend upon these,


6. Growth and diminution ‘should also
be understood, as, aiso the condition of
being stationary. The attributes of the
sixfold incidents, O you of mighty arms, as
resting on the seventytwo {already enu-
mer ated), should also be carefully under-
stood,


7. When one’s own side has become
strong and the side of the enenty has be«
come weak, it is then, O son of Kunti, that
the king should fight against the enemy and
try to acquire victory.

8. When the enemy is strong and one’s
own side is weak, then the weak king, if
he has intelligence, should try to make
peace with the enemy.


9- The king should collect a targe
quantity of articles (for his commissariat) «
When able to march out, he should on 90
account make a delay, O Bharata.


to,, Besides, he should on that occasion
set his men to work for which they are fit, ,
without being nmroved by any other con-
sideration, He should, (when obliged to
part with a portion of his territories), give
his enemy such fand as are not productive
of a plentiful harvest.


tt. (When obliged to pay. coins), he
‘should give gold containing much base
metal. (When obliged to surrender a
‘portion of his army), he should give such
imen as are not noted for strength, On


- | whois skilled in treaties should, when taking”


land‘ or gotd or men from the enemy,
take what is’ possessed of attributes the’
feverse of this.


1213. In mating “treaties of peace,
ithe son of the king should be demanded as
a hostage, O chief of the Bharatas. A
‘contrary couse. of conduct, would not be
wholesome, QO son. If.a, calamity come
over the king, Jhe shauld, with knowlsdce
‘of means and caunsels, try to liberate hig.
‘self from jite; The king, O foremost of
‘kings, should maintain the cheerless and
the destitute among his people,


14. Himself protecting his own kihg«
doin, the king, endued with great might,
should’ diréct all his efforts, either gue
after atrather or simultaneously, against his
enemies. He should afflict” ana obstruct
them and seek te drain their treasury.


.


15. The king who desires his -owa
advancement, should never injure the sub-
ordinate chiefs who ave under his sway, O
son af Kunti, you should never try your
Strength with that king who js desirous of
conquering the whole Earth, °


1
’ "6-17. “You shonid try to steal a
march by producing, with the help your
tmisisters, dissensions among fis aristo-
cracy and feudatery chiefs. A powerful
king should never seek to root out weak
kings, for these do’ good to the ‘world by
cherishing the good and punishing the
wicked.’ O foremost of kings, you should
live, conducting yourself like a cane.

13. If a‘sirong king advances against
2 -weak one, the latter should make him
désist, by adopting ‘conciliatory and other
mbdez-- 3 Sits pe. ew

ig. If these measures fail, he should,


then, with thehelp of those who are inter--


ested in his welfare fail upon the enemy for
fighting him out. Indeed, - with his minis-
ters, treasury and citizens, he should thus
adept force against the invader.


-20. If the issue of the battle turns against
him, he should, then, fall, sacrificing all his
tesources one after another.


‘30. Renouning his life in this way, he
will acquire freedem from all sorrow, :


CHAPTER VII.


‘(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA,}«
Continued.


Dhritarashtra said :—


1. O best of kings you shonhd, also,
reflect properly on war and peace, Each
is of two kinds. ‘fhe~ means are various,
and the circumstances also, under which
war or peace may be made, are various, O
Vudhishtbica, ‘


z © you of Kuru’s race, you should,
with coalness, reflect on the two (vis., thy
Strength and weakness) with regard to your-
self, You should not suddenly march
against an enemy who has contented and
healthy soldiers, and who is gifted with
intelligence. On the othec hand, you should
funk carefully of the means of defeating
hint. ;


.3- You should macch against an enemy

who is not provided with contented and
healthy combatants. When everything is
tavourabie, the enemy may be beaten.
Alser that, however, the victor should re-
tire. .

4. He shonld next cause the enemy to
be plunged into various calamities, and
sow dissensions among his allies, He
should afflict the enemy and inspire terror
He his heart, aad, attacking him, weaken his
orces. *


‘| are overtaken, is of many forms.


.& good


“MAHABHARATA.


5. The king, conversant with the scrips
tuces, whoa marches against an enemy,
should think of the three kinds of strength,
and, indeed, reflect on his own strength
and the strength of his enemy.


6. Only that king, OQ Bharata, who ia


’ gifted with alacrity, discipline, and strength


of counsels should march against an enemy.
When his position is otherwise, he should
avoid offensive works,


7. The king should provide himself with
power of wealth, power of allies, power of
foresters, power of paid soldiery, and power
of the mechanical and trading classes, O
powerful one.


8. Among all these, power of allies and
power of riches are superior to the rest.
The power of classes and that of the stand+
ing army are equal,


g- The power of spies is considered by
the king as equal in efficacy to either of the
above, on many occasions, when the time
comes for applying each.


to. Calamity, O king, with which rulers:
Listen, O
you of, Kuru’s race, as to what those various
forms are.


as. Indeed, calamities, O son of Pandy, |
are many. You should, always, count them,
distinguishing theie forms, O king, and
try to meet them by applying the well-
known ways of conciliation and the rest.


32. ‘The king should, wher possessed of
army, march (out against a foe),
O scorcher of enemies. tte should, afsa,
mark the considerations of time and place,
while preparing to march, as also the forces
he has collected and his own merits.


13. That king who seeks his own growth
and advancement should not march unless
he has cheesful and healthy warriors.
When strong, O son of Pandu, he may
march in even an unfavourable season.


14. ‘The king should make @ river
having quivers for its stones, horses and
cars for its current, and standards for the
trees which cover its banks, and which is
miry with foot-soldiers and elephants. Sucir
ariver should the king apply for the des-
tcuction of his enemy.


1s. According to the science known to
Ushanas, arrays called Shekata, Padma,
and Vajra, should be formed, O Bharata;
for fighting the enemy. ;


16. Knowing every thing about the
enemy’s strength through spies, amd ex%-
amining his ownistrength himself, the king
should begin war either within his own
territorfes ec within those of his enemy.


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.


should, always, plezse, his
army, and hurl all his strongest warriors
(against the enemy). First determing the
state of his kingdom, he should apply con-
Ciliation ar the other well-krowa means,


c= 8. By all means, O king, should the
body be protected, One should do what
is highly benefieial for one both in this
world and in the next,


19. The king, O monarch, by acting
properly according to these ways, attains to

eaven hereafter, after culing his subjects
piously in this world,


20. O foremost one of Kuru’s race, it is
thus that you should always seek the well-
being of your subjects for attaining to both
the worlds, tae


at. You have been instructed in all
duties by Bhishma, by Krishna, and by
Vidura, I should, also, O best of kings,
from the affection I bear yeu, give you these
instructions.


22. O giver of profuse presents in sacri-
fices, you should duly do all this. You
shall, by acting thus, become dear to your
subjects and acquire happiness in the celés-
tial region.

23- That king who worships the celese
tials ina hundred horse-sacrifices, and he
who rules his subjects piously, acquire merit
that is equal.


17. The kin
: A


CHAPTER VIfl.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. )—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :-—


t. O king, € shall do as you order me.
O foremost of kings, I should be further
instructed by you.


_2. Bhishma has ascended to Heaven.
The destroyer of Madhu, has departed (for
Dwaraka). Vidura and Sanjaya, also (will
accompany you to the forest).- Who else,
therefore, save you, will teach. me.


3s: L shall, certainly, follow those instruce
tions which you have toeday given, desirous
of doing good to me. O lord of Earth. Be
you-assured of this, O king. | | oe


Vaishampayana said :—


4. Thus addressed by the highly ine


telligent and just king Yudhishthica, the
voyal sage, Dhritarashtra,-O chief of the


Bharatas, wished to obtain the king’s per- |


mission, é


at


ie <i


5. And he said,—‘Cease, O son. E have
been tired greatly.’ Having said these -
words, the old .king entered the appart-
ments of Gandhari. aa


6—-7. Pious Gandhari knewing the ope
portune moments, said these timely words
to that husband of hers who resembled a
second Lord of all creatures, while resting
on a seat}:—'You have got the permission of
that great Rishi, vés., Vyasa himself.
When, however, will you go to the forest,
with the permission of Yudhishthira ? ,


Dhritarashtra said :—~ bool


8. O Gandhari, I have received: the
permission of my great sire. With the pers
mission of Yudhishthira (next obtained), f
shall soon. retire into the forest. - 4


9. f wish, however, to give away some
riches capable of following the status of
Preta, for att those séns of mine who ware
addicted to calamitous dice. Indeed, I
wish to make those gifts,; inviting all tha
People to my palace.


Vaishampayana said :—

to. Having said so (to Gandhari,.
Dhritarashtra sent fore Yudtishthira, The
latter, ordered by his uncle, brought all the
articles necessary.


11. Many Brahmanas living in Kurue.
jangala, many Kshatriyas, many Vaishyas,
and many Shudras also, came to Dhtrita-.
tashtra’s palace, with gratified hearts.


tz, The old king, coming dut of tha
inner apartments, saw them all as also his
subjects collected together.


13—15. Seeing all those assembled and,
citizens and inhabitants of the provinces, and
his well-wishers also thus{collected together,
and the large number of Brahmanas arrived.
from various kingdoms, king Dhritarashtra
of great intelligence, O monarch, said these’
words :=——"jYe ail and the Kurus have lived’
together for many long jyears, well-wishers
of each other, and each doing good to the,
other. :


16. What I shall now say in: view of the’
opportunity that has come, should be done
by you all ever as disciples accomplish the
orders of their preceptors.


17. 1 have set my heart upon retiring
inte the forest, along with Gandhari as my
companion, Vyasa has approved of this,


| also the son of Kunti.


18—-19. Let me have your permissi-n
too. Do not hesitate in this. That good.
will, which has always existed between you
and us, is not to be seen, f believe, in othée
kingdoms between ths culers and. the ruled,


a2


1 am worn out with age on my head, 1
am destitute of children.


20. Ye sinless ones,’ l.am emaciated
with fasts, along with Gandhari. ‘The
kingdom having passed to Yudhishthira,
i have enjoyed great happiness.


21. Ye forerhost of men, I think that
happiness has been greater|than what I could
expect from .Duryqdhana’s  sovereingty.
What other refuge can $ have, old as l am
and destitute of childcen, except the forest 7
Ve highly blessed ones, you should grant
me the permission | seek, , eg


22. Hearing these weeds of his, all the
residents af Kucujangala bewailed aloud,
© best of the Bharatas, with voices choked,
by tears, :


23. Desirous of telling those grief-
stricken people something more, the highly
energetic Dhritarashtra once more addres-
sed them and said as follows,


«
ee


‘CHAPTER 1X,


ood 7 F : Loy
1 (ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA,)—
Continued. * sae


Dhritarashtra said :—


+1. Shantanu duly riled this Earth.
Likewise, Vichitraviryya also, protected by
Bhishma, tuled you, Forsooth, you know
all this.


2. You know also how Pandu, my bro-
ther, was dear to me as also to you. He
also ruled you duly,


3. Ye sinless ones, £--have also served.
you. .Whether those secvices have come up
to the ideal or fallen short of it, you should
forgive me, for I have attended to my
duties carefully,


- 4. Duryedhana also enjoyed his “king-


doin without a thorn.-in his side. Foolish
as he* was and _ pessessed of wicked
understanding, he did not, however, do ad
wrong to you.


1§ Through she fault, however, of that
prince of wicked - understanding, and
through his pride, as also through~“my own
impolicy, a great destruction of the Ksha-
triyas has taken place.


6. Whether I have, j in that aiatter, acted
rightly or wrongly, { pray you with joined
hands to remove ail recollections of it from
your hearts.

7. This one is old; this ohe has lost-alf
his children; this’ one’ We stricken ‘with
sortrew; this one was our Ring 5° this one


MAHABAHRATA,


is a descendant of former kings ;—~consi-
derations like these shopld induce you to
forgive me.


8. ‘This Gandhari, also, is dispirited and
old. She, too, has lost ber children and is
helpless. Stricken with grief for the loss of
her tens, she solicits you with me.


9. Knowing that both of us are old and
afflicted and destitute of children, grant us
the permission we seek. Biessed be you,
we seek your protection.


to. This Kuru king, Yudhishthira the
son of Kunti, should be Jooked after by you
all, in weal and woe.


11. He who has, four such brothers of
abunant prowess, for bis counsellors will
never fall into distress. All of them are
conversant with both Virtue and Profit, and
resemble the very guardians of the world.


. 12, Like the illustrious Brahman hime
self, the Lord of the universe with all its
creatures, this Yudhishthira of great energy
will rule you,


. 13. ‘That which should certainly be said
is now said by me. | make ovee to you this
Yudhishthira here as acharge. TF entcust
you, also, to the hands of this bero.


14.. You should all forget and forgive
whatever injury has been dope to you by
those sons of mine who afe no fonger alive,
or, indeed, by any one else belonging
to me.


15 Ye never cherished any anger against
me on any previous occasion, J join my
hands before you who are famous for loyal-
ty. Here, I bow to you all.

16. Ye sinless one, I, with. Gandhafi! by
my side, beg your pardon now for anything
done to you by those sons of mine, of rest-
less understandings, . sullied .by ‘cupidity,
and ever acting as their desires prompted.’


'.17. Thus address d by the old king, all
those citizens and dwellers of the provinces,
filed with. tears, said nothing but only
looked at one another, *


CHAP TER X.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARV A. jas
_ Continued,


Vishampayana said :—

t. Thus’ addressed, Oo you of “Kuru’s
race, by the old king, the citizens and the
inhabitantsof the provincés stoed— somes.
time like men shorn of Consciousness. ©


ASURAMAVASIKA PARVA.


a-—~3. King Dhritarashtra, finding them
silent, with their throats choked by ‘grief;
once more addressed them, saying,—' Ye
best of men, old as | am, and sonless and
through cheerlessness of heart, bewailing
along witb this my wedded wife, I have ob-
_ tained the permission, in the matter of my
* retirement into the forest, of my sire, the
Island-born Krishna himself, as also of king
Yudhishthira, who knows every duty, ye
righteous dwellers of this kingdom.


5. Ye sinless ones, I, with Gandhari.
repeatedly Solicit you with bent heads,
You should all grant us permission,


Vaishampayaua said :—

6. Hearing these pitiable words of the
Kuru king, O monarch, the assembled
dwellers of Kurujangala all began ta weep.


7. Covering their faces with their hands
aud upper garments, all those men, burning
with grief, wept for a while as fathers and
mothers would weep.


8. Bearing in their hearts, from which
every other thoughts had been removed, the
sorrow born of Dhritarashtea’s~desire to
leave the world, they looked like men shorn
of consciousness,


g. Checking that agitation of heart’ due
to the announcement of Dritarashtca’s
desire of going to the forest, ttay gradually
were able to address ove another, expres-
ing their wishes.

10.
they charged a certain Brahmana therewith
and thus ceplied to the old king.


11. That learned Brahmana, of.. good
conduct, chosen . by unanimous consent,
conversant with all subjects, master of all
the Richs, and named Samba, tried to
Speak, iy


12. Taking the permission of the whol
sassembly and with its full approbation, that
learned Brahmana of great __ intelligence,
conscious of his own powers, said these
words to the king.


13. ‘O monarch, the answer of this as-
sembly has been committed to my care.
I shall speak it out, O hero! Do you re-
ceive it, O king. rae


14. What you say, "O king of kings, is
all true, O powerful one. There is nothing
in it that is in even slightly tinctured with
untruth, you are our weil-wisher, as, indeed, ,
we are yours,


_ 15. Indeed, in this royal. family, there
“never was a king who coming to ‘ule his
subjects, became unpopular with them, =~


16, ‘Ye have culed us-like fathers or


(


Settling their words briefly, O kina, |


73.


brothers: King Dury®dhana
angwrong. «+ ‘ ‘ : .

17. "Do that, O king, which that tighte-
ous-souled ascetic, the son of Satyavati,
has said. He is, indeed, our foremost of
instructors.


, 18. Left by you, O king, we shall have
to pass our days in grief and sorrow, tee
membering hundreds of virtues possessed
by you.


19 —20. We were well-pratected and
culed by king Duryodhana even as we had
been ruled by king Shantanu, or by Chitran-
gada, or by your father, O monarah, whe -
was protected by the prowess of Bhishma,
or by Pandu, that culer of Earth, who was
overlooked by you in all his deeds.


at. Your son, O monarch, never did us
the slightest wrong. We lived, depéading
on that king as trustfully as on our own
father. .

22. It is known to’ you how We ‘livd
(under that rulec). Similarly we have
enjoyed great happiness, O-king, for thou-
sands of years, under the tule of Kunti’s
son of great intelligence:and wisdom. *

22—23. This righteous-souled’ king‘ who
celebrates sacrifices with profuse gifts,
follows the conduct of the royal sages of
old, belonging to your race, of meritorious
deeds, having Kura and- Samyara ‘and
others- and. the highly intelligent: Bharata
among them, ‘ soe

25... There is: nothing, O manatchythat
is even slightly censurable in thé 'mstter “of
this Yudhishthistta’s ‘rule. Protected and


never did us
: .


mt


.tuled by you, we have alt: lived in great


happiness. ’


26—27. The slightest omission cannét
be faid at your doors and yoursons. Reé-
garding what you have said about Duryos
dhana in the matter of this destruction af
kinsmen,. | beg you, O delighter of ,the
Kurus, (to listen to me).’ E ‘


.
4


The Brahmana continued:—- ss,
28. The carnage that has aovertaken the
Kurus was not caused by Duryodhana,
It was not bronght about’ by you. “Nor
was ‘it brought ‘ about ‘by “Karna atid
Suvala’s son. ee ete ee nee
‘a9. We know that it was encompassed
about by Destiny,. and that it ‘was Jin-
capable of - being counteracted.! Destiny is .
not capable of being; resisted--by buman
exertion, _ a 2 ,


30—32. , Eighteen Akshauhinis of sol-
diers, O menarch, were collected. {n eigh-
teen days. that.army was-destroyed by the
foremost of Kuru. warriors, vis. ~Bhishma


ar


and Drona and others, and the great
Karna, and the heroic Yuyudhana end
Dhvitadyumna, and by the four sons of
Pandu, that is, Bhima and Arjuna and


the twins. This destruction, O king, could
not happen without the influence of
Destiny.


33. Forsooth, by Kshatriyas in particular,
should enemies be killed and death encoun.
téred in battle. By those foremost of men,
gifted with science and might of arms, the
Karth has been exterminated with her
horses and cars and elephants.


35: Your son was not the cause of that
destruction of great Rings. You were not
the cause, nor your servants, nor Karna,
noc Suvata’s son.


36. The destruction of those foxemost
ones of Kuru’s race and of kings by thou-
sands, know, was engendered by Destiny.
Who can say anything else in this.


37. Wouare regarded as the preceptor
and the master of the whole world. We,
therefore, in your presence, absolve your
trighteous-souted son.


38. Let that king, with all his associates,
obtain the regions reserved for heroes.
Permitted by foremost of Brahmanas, let
him sport blissfully in the eclestial region.


39. You, also, shall attain to great merit,
and unswerving steadiness in. virtue.
you of excellent vows, follow fully the dutiés
laid dowo in the Vedas.


40. It is not necessary for either you of
ourselves to look after the Pandavas.
are capable of ruling the very Heavens,
what need thay be said of the Earth ?


41. O you of great intelligence, in weal
as in woe, the subjests of this kingdom,
O foremost one of Kuru’s race, will obey
the Pandavas whe have conduct for their
ornament. : rae


42 The son of Pandu makes those valit-
able gifts which are always te be made to
foremost of twice-born persons in sacrifices
and in obsequial rites, after the manner of
all the great kings of yore.


43. The great son of Kunti is mild, and
selt-controlled,, and is always Wisposed to
spend as if he were a second Vaishravana,
Re has great ministers who attend on him.


44. He is compassionate to even his
enemies. Indeed, that foremost .one of
Bharata’s race is of pure conduct. Gifted
with great intelligence, *he is perfectly
straightforward in his dealings and rules
and protects us like a father his children.


45. From association with him who is
the son of Dharma, O royal sage, Bhima


They ’


. MAHABHARATA, -


and Arjima and others will never wrong us
in the least,


46. They are mild, O you of Kuru's
race, to them that are mild, and fierce like
snakes of dreadful poison to them who are
fierce, Endued with great energy, those
high-souled ones are always devoted to the
well-being of the people.


"47. Neither Kunti, nor your (daughter-
in-law) Panchali, nor Ulupi, nor the
princess of the Sattwata race, will do the
least wrong to these people.


48.' The affection which you have shown
towards ‘us and which in Yudhishthira ts
seen to exist in astill larget measure, is
incapable of being forgotten by the people
of the city and the provinces, -


49. Those powerful car-warriors, vss.,
the sons of Kunti, themselves devoted to
the duties of virtue, will protect and cherish
the people even if these happen to be
unrighteous,


50. Do you, therefore, O king, removing
all anxiety of heart on account of Yudhish-
thira, set yourself to the accomplishment
of all meritorious deeds, O foremost of
men. :


‘Vaishampayana said :—


5t. Hearing these words, fraught with
virtue and merit, of that Brahmana snd
approving of them, every person in that
assembly said,——' Excellent, Excellent’ and
accepted them as ha own.


52. Dhritarastitra, also, repeatedly speak
ing highly of those words, slowly dismissed
that assembty of his subjects. ° ;

53-' Thus fionoured by them and looked
upon with auspicions looks, the old king,
O chief of Bharata’s race, joined his hands
and honoured them all in return. ;


54. He, then, entered his own palace
with Gandhari. Listen now to what he
did after that night had passed away.


CHAPTER Xt.
( ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. =»
. , Continued,


Vaishampayana said :-—~

s: After that night had pissed away,
Dhritarashtra, the son of Amvika, sent
Vidura to Yudhishthira’s palace.

2-3. Gifted with great energy and the
foremost of all persons endued with intelli-
gence, Vidura, having arrived at Yudhish= —
thica’s palace, addressed that foremost of


ASHRAMAVASIRNA PARVA


ten, that king of undecaying glory, in
these words : —'King Dhritarashtra has per-
formed the preliminary rites fer accom-
plishing his purpose of retiring into the
forest. He will start for the woods, O king,
on the coming day of full moon of the
month of Kartika.


4—§. He now solicits from you, O fores
most of Kuru's race, some money. He
wishes to perform the Shraddha of the
great son of Ganga, as also of Drona and
Somadatta and Valhika of great intelli-
gence, and of all tiis sons as also of all
other wishets of his who have been killed,
and, if you permit it, of that wicked king
of the Sindhus. ‘


6. Hearing these words of Vidura, both
Vudhishthira, atid Pandu's ser Arjuna of
curly hair, became very glad and applaud-
ed them highly. ‘


3—9. Bhima, however, of great energy
and an unappeasable anger, did not accept
those words of Vidura its good spirits, re-
collecting the acts of Duryodhana. Under-
standing the thoughts of Bhittasena, the
diadem-decked Phalgtna, slightly bends
ing his face downwards, addressed that
foremost of men in these wordsi— *O
Bhima, our royal father who is old, has
resolved to retire into the forest.


10. He wishes to make gifts for ad-
vancing the happiness of his killed kinsmen
and well-wishers now in the other world.
O you of Kuru’s race, he wishes to give
away wealth that belongs to you by
conquest. .


1t--13._ Indeed, O mighty-armed one,
it is for Bhishma aud ethers that tle old
king is desirous of making those. gifts.
You should grant your permission. By
good luck it is, O you of mighty arms, that
Dhritarashtra to-day begs wealth of us, he
who was formerly begged by us. Mark
the reverses brought about by time. That
king who was before the lord and protector
of the whole EKasth, now wishes te go into
the forest, his kinsmen and associates all
killed by enemies. O king, let’ not your
views deviate from granting the permission
asked. od Sao :

14. O mighty-armed one, refusal, be-
sides bringing infamy, will yield demerit.
Do you learn your duty in this matter-from
the king, your eldest brother, who is lord
of all.- fi Snake:
£5.
O chief of Bharata’s cace !’
was saying so was applauded by king
YVodhishthira the jast.- —s


You should give instead of refusing,


16-918, Yielding te anger Bhimasena
said these words :—'Q Phalguna, it is we


Vibhatsu: whe |


3


that shall mske gifts. in. the matter of
Buishma’s obsequies, as also of king Soma-
datta and of Bhurishravas, of the royal
sage Valhika, and of the great Drona, and
of all others. Ouc mother Kunti shall make
such obsequial offerings for Karna. O fores
most of then, tet not Dhritarashtra pet form
those Shraddhas. :


tg. This is what I think. Let not out
enemies be gladdened. Let Duryedhana
and others sink from a miserable to a more
miserable position,


gumegt. Alas, it was’ those wretches of
their family who caused the whole Barth to
be exterminated ? How have you been able
to forget that anxiety of twelve long years,
and our Jliving in deep *forest in cognita
that was so painful to D:iaupadi? Where
was Dhritarashtea’s affection for us then ?


a2. Clad in a black deer-skin and
divested of all your ornaments, with the
Princess of Panchala in your Company, did
you not follow this king t

23. Where were Bhishma and Drond


then, and where was Somadatta? You
had to live for thirteen years. in the


forest depending os the products of the.


wilderness,


24-23. Wour eldest father did nat ther
Jook at you with eyes of parental aff-ctiot,
Have you forgotten, O Partha, that it was
this wreteh of our family, of wicked under«
standing, who enquired of Vidura, when
the match at dice was geing on,=' What
has been won?’ Hearing thus far, king
Vudhishthiea, the son of Kunti, gifted ‘with
great intelligence, rebuked him and teld
him to be silent,


CHAPTER XII.


‘ CASHRAMAVASIKA PARYVA. )-s
Contintted.


Arjuna said :—

1. O Bhima, you ate my efder brother
and, therefore, my senior and preceptor. {
dare not say anything more than what 1
have atready said. Vhe royal-sage Dhrita-


| rashtca deserves to be henoured by us in


every way. | ‘ ot
12. ‘Fhey who, are good, they who ave
distinguished above the common level, they
who break not the distinctions which
characterise the goed, remember not the
wrongs done to them but only the bencfits
ghey have gets :


26


$—$.-+ Hearing these words of the great
Phalpuna, the cighteousssouled Yudhish-
thira, the son of Kunti,. addressed Vidura
and said these words,‘ Instructed by me,
O-Kshautrt, do you say to the Kura king
that [ shall give bim as much wealth from
my treasury as' lie wishes to pive away for
the obsequies of his sons, and of Bhishma
and others among his well-wishers and
benefactors. Let nat Bhima. be dispirited
atthis, — :


Vaishampayana said:

6. Having said .these words, king
Yudhisthira the just highly apptauded
Arjuna,
cast angry looks at Dinananjaya,


7. Then Yudhishthira, gifted with great


Intelligence, once more addressed Vidura.


and said,—-King Dhritarashtra should not
be angry with Bhimasena. ,


8. ‘This Bhima of great intelligence was


greatly afflicted by cold and-rain and heat


and by @ thousand other gtiefs while living
in the forest, All this you know.


« Do. you, however, instructed by me,
Say to the king, O foremost one of Blarata’s
family, that he may take from my house
whatever articles he wishes and in what-
ever. measure also he likes, é


+ to. Vou shattl atso tell the king that he
should not suffer bis heart to remember this
show of pride in which Bhima, deeply
afflicted, has indulged.

-1%. Whatever wealth { have and whats
evec Arjuna has in bis’ house, the owner
thereof’ is king Dhritarashtra, This you
should tell him. Sof

12, Let the king make gifts to Brah-
manas! Let him spend as largely as he
likes. Let him liberate himself from the
debt he awes to his sons and well-wishers,

13. Let him be told besides,-='O monarch
this very body of mine is at your disposal,
and all the riches I-haye! Know this. and
let chere be no doubt int this,’


CHAPTER XII.


‘( ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. )—
Continued,
Vaishaimpayana said :—


{—-2.


thira, Viduea, that foremost of intelligent


persons, returned to Dhritarashtra and said |


to him these} words qf great significance,
‘Tat’ first “reported your message to king
Wudhishthica. -Reflecting of your words,


Meanwhile Bhimasena begat -to |’


Thus addeesied by king Yudhbish- :


: MANABIARATA,


Yudhishthira of great’ splendour spoka
highly ef them.


3. The highly energetic Vibhatsu, also,
places all his palaces with all the riches
therein, as also bis very life-breaths, at
your disposal.


4. Your son, king Yudhishthira, too,
offers you, O royal sage, his kingdom and
life-breaths and riches and all else which
belongs to him.


8. Bhima, however, of mighty-arms, re-
Coltecting all his numberless sorrows has
with difficulty given his consent, breathing
many heavy sighs,


6. That mighty-armed hero, O monarch,
was solicited by the righteous king’ as also
by Vibhatsu,- and induced to -treat you
cordially.


q—8. King Yudhishthira the just has
prayed you not to be displeased for the
improper conduct which Bhima has shown
at the recollection of former hostilities.—<«
This is generally the conduct of Kshatriyas
in -battle, O king, and this Vrikodara is
devoted to battle and the practices of
Kshatriyas.


- g—=t0. Both myself and Arjuna, O king,
repeatedly beg you for pardoning Vrikos
dara. Be gracious to us.» You are our
ford, O king, you can give away as yout
tke whatever money we have. You, O
Bharata, are the master of this kingdom
and of all lives in it.


1112, Let the foremost one of the Kuru
race give away for fthej obsequial rites of
his sons, all those foremost of gifts which
should be given to the Brahmanas. Indeed,
tet him make those gifts to persons of the
twice-born caste, taking away from our


| palaces jewels, gems, and kine, and slaves


both mate and female, and goats and
sheep. Let gifts be made ta also those
who are poor or blind or in great distress,
selecting the objects of his charity as he
likes. oo

13. Let, O Vidura, farge pavilions be
made, rich with food and drink of various
tastes collected in abundance. Let reser-
voirs of water be made for enabling kine
to drink, and let other meritorious works be
done.’ : 7

14. These were the words said to me
by the king as also by -Pritha’s son:
Dhananjaya. You should say what should
be done next. | - : a

“as. ‘After, Vidura had said these words,
O. Janamejaya, Dhritarashtra expressed hjs
satisfaction at them and oiade up his mind
for making large presents on the day of


‘fall meon in the menthof Kartikay-


ete


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA,


CHAPTER XIV.


¢ ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. )—=
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :-—

xr. hus accosted by Vidura, king,
Dhritarashtra became highly pleased, O
monarch, with the act of Yudhishthira and
jishnu.


2—6. Inviting then, after proper exami-
nation, thousands of worthy Brahmanas
and soperior Rishis, for the sake of
Bhishma, as also of his sons and friends,
and causing a large quantity of food and
drink to be prepared, and cars and other
vehicles and clothes, and gold and jewels
and gems, and slaves both male and female,
and goats and sheep, and btankets and
tich articles to be collected, and villages
and fields, and other kinds of wealth to be
kept ready, as also elephants and horses
decked with ornaments, and maty beautt-
firl maidens who were the best of their sex,
that foremost of kings gave them away for
the behoof of the dead, naming each of
them in due order as the gifts were made.
Naming Drona, Bhishma, Somadatta,
Valhika, and king Duryodhana, and each
one of his other sons, and alf his well-
wishers with Jayadratha as the first, those
gifts were made in due order. ;


zg. With the approval of Yudhishthira,
that Shraddhassacrifice became ‘marked by
large gifts of wealth and profuse presents
of. jewels’ and gems and other - kinds . of
riches. ;


1 8g. Tellers and scribes on that
occasion, under the orders of Yudhishthira,
ceaselessly asked the old king,—Do you
command, O &ing, what gifts should be
_made tothese, All things are ready here!
+-As soon as the king spoke, they gave
away what he directed. ;
ao. A thousand was given te him that
was to receive a hundred, awd ten thowsand
was piven to him that was to receive a


. thousand, at the corimiard of the royal son


of Kunti. , b, ;

11. Like thé clouds refreshing the crops
with theic downpours, that royal
pleased the Brahmanas by downpours of
riches. :


12. Aftet all those gifts had beéh dis-.


tributed, the king, O you of great intelli-
gence, then deluged the assermbled guests
of all the four castes with tcepeated surges
of food and drink of various tastes. ~~


t3—14. Indéed, the Dhritarashtra.
ocean, swelliig high, with jewels and gertis
for its waters, rich with the villages and


3 ;


Yof précious articles for


cloud.


iF


fields arid other foremost of gifts ‘making
its verdant islands, heaps of variows kinds
its rich caves,
elephants and horses for its alligators and
whirlpools, the sound of Mridangas for its
deep roars, and clothes and wealth and
oe stones for its waves, deluged the
arth. : 2


15.,It was thus, O king, that that monarch
made gifts for the behoof, in the other world,
of his sons fand grandsons and departed
manes as also of himself and Gandhari.


16. At last when he became tired with
the work of making such profuse gifts, that
great Gift-Sacrifice ended. -


17. Thus did that king of Kuru’s race
celebrate his Gift-Sacrifice. Actors and
mimes continually danced and sang on the
occasion and contributed to the pleasure of
all the guests. Food and drink of various
tastes were given away in profusion.


18. Making gifts in this way for ten
days, the royal son of Amvika, O chief of
Bharata’s race, became liberated from. the
debts he owed to his sons and grandsons,

iain :


—f CHAPTER XV.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.)— .

Continued, ;
Vaishampayana said :—~

1. Having settled the hour of


°


his


| departure for the forest, the royal son of -


Auvika, dfs., Dhritarashtra, summoned


those heroes, the Pandavas. -


2—3. Endued with great intelligence,
the old king, witl Gandhari, duly accosted
those princes. Having caused the mitor
tites to be performed, by Brahmanas know-
ing the Vedas, on that day which was the
day of full moon in the month of. Kartika,
he caused the fire -which- he adored daily
to be taken up. Casting off his proper
dress he wore deer-skins and barks, and
accompanied by his daughtérs-in-law, he
left his palace. Bs

4. -When the royal son of Vichitraviryya
thus started, the Pandava and the Kaurava
ladies as also other women belonging to the .
Kaurava raee, began to bewail aloud. ,

§. ‘the kitg adored the palace in which
he had lived with fried paddy and excellent
flowers of various kinds. Heé also honoured
all. bis. servants with gifts of wealth, and
then leaving that house set out on -his
journey. ‘


6. Then, O son, king VYudhishthira,
trembling all over, with words choked by


8


tears, said these words In a foud voice,’
vis.-'Q righteous king, where do yot
go ?’~-and fell down in a swoon.

qe Arjuna; burning with great grief,
sighed repeatedly. ‘That foremest of
Bharata princes, telling Yudhishthira that


he shéuld not behave thus, stood cheeclessly .


and with heart plunged into distress.


8. Vrikodara, the heroic Phalguna, the
two son§ of Madri, Vidura, Sanjaya,
Dhritarashtra’s son by bis Vaishya wife,
and Kripa, and Dhaumya, and ether Brah-
manag, all follewed the old king with voices
choked in grief.


9. Kunti walked first, carrying on her
shoulders the hand of Gandhari who walked
witn her bandaged eyes. King Dhritarash-
tra walked confidently behind Gandhari,
placing his hand on her shoulder,

10. Drupada's daughter Krishna, she
of the Sattwata race, Uttara the daughter-
in-law of the Kauravas, who had recently
become @ mother, Chitrangada, and other
ladies attached to the soyal house, ali fol-
lowed the old king,


11. The wail they uttered at that time,
© king, from sorrow, resembled the loud
lamentations of a swarm of | she-ospreys,
Then the wives of the citizens—Brahmanas
and Kshatriyas, and Vaishyas and Shudras,
-~also Came out into the streets from alt
sides. ais .

tz. At Dbritarashtra’s departure, O
king, all the citizens of Hastinapore be-
came as distressed as they had been, O
monarch, when they had seett the departare
of the Pandavas in former days after their
defeat at the match at dice. |

33. Eadies who had never seen. the san
er the moon, came out into the streets on
that occasion, in great sorrow, when king
dete ae proceeded towards the great
orest,


SRT


CHAPTER XV}


¢(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. }—
Continued. ;


Vishampayansa said :—

1. Great was the uproar, at that time,
© king, of both men and women standing
on the terraces of palaces or on the Earth,

2, Endued with great intelligence, the
old king, with joined hands, and trembling
with weakness, passed with difficulty alon;


he principal street which was crowded |


with persons of both sexes.


‘ MANABHARATA.


3. He feft the city of Hastinapur by
the principal gate, and then repeatedly
asked that crowd of people to return to
theie homes.


4- Vidura had made up his mind for
going to the forest with the king. The
Suta Sanjaya also, the son of Gavalyant,
the chi-f minister of Dhritarashtra, was of
the same heart.


8. King Dhritarashtra, however, caused
Kripa atid the powerful car-warriot
Yuyutsu to refrain from following tim. He
made thetn over to Yudhishthira’s hands.


6. After the citizens had ceased follows
ing the monarch, king Yudhishthira, with
the. ladies of his house, prepared to stop,
at the command of Dhritarashtra.


‘9. Seeing .that his mother Kunti was
desirous fof retiring into the forest, the king
said to her,—*" | shall follow the old king.
Do you desist.


8. You should, O queen, retarn to the
city, accompanied by these your daughters~
in-law! This king, goes to the forest,
determined upon practisingSpenances.


9. Though king Yudhishthira said these
words to her, with his eyes bathed in tears,
Kunti, however, without answering him,
continued to go, tatehing hotd of Gandhari.


Kunti said :—
10. Oking, never neglect Sahadeva. He


is vety mech attached to me, O monarchy
and to you also always.


¥t. You should always beat in mind
Karna who never retreated from battle.
‘Through my folly that hero has been killed
in the field of battle. ‘


ta. Surely, nty sort, this heart of mine
is made of steel, since it does not break
into a hendred pieces at not seeing that


child born of the Sun-God.


13. When such has been the case, O
chastiser of enemies, what can I now do?


| Fam very much to blame for not having


said the treth about the birth of Surya’s
chitd, ‘ . :

tg. Occusher of enemies, F hope yow
will, with alf your brothers, make excellent
gifts for the sake of that som of the Sun-


ty O mower of enemies, you should
always do what is, agreeable to Draupadi.
You shonid Took after Bhimasena, and
Arjuna and Nakula amd Sakadeva. The
eharge of the Kurw rage have now faller
on you, O king.


16, shall live in the forest with Gan~
dhari, besmearing my body with filth, ea


“ASHRAMAVASIKA 'PARVA,


gaged in the practice of penances, and
devoted to the service of my father-in-law
and mother-in-law.


Vaishampayana said :—

17. Thus addressed by her, the virtu-
ous Yudhishthira, with passions under
complete restraint, became, with all his
brothers, plunged into great sorrow. Gifted
wild great intelligence, the king said not a
word.


18. Having thought for a moment, king
YVudhishthica the just, dispirited and plung-
ed in anxiety and sorrow, said to his
mother, saying,-~

19 What, indeed, ts your object 7? You
should not do it. I can never grant you
permission! You should show us mercy.


zo. Formerly, when we were about to
leave Hastinapore for the forest, O you
of agreeable features, it was you who, re-
citing tous the story of Vidula’s instcuc-
tions to her son, stimulated us to exertion.
You should not leave us now.


21. Having killed the kings of Earth, |


¥ have acquired sovereignty, guided b
your wise words communicated throug
asudeva.


22. Where now is that understanding
of yours about which 1 had heard from
Vasudeva? Do you wish now to deviate
from those Kshatriya practices about which
you had instructed us 7


23- Leaving ourselves,
and = this illustrious daughter-in-law of
. yours, bow will you live in the inaccessible
forest? Do you relent.
240 Kunti, with tears in her eyes, heard
these words of her son, but continued
to go hec way. Then Bhiina addressed
her, saying,—


. 25. When, O Kunti, sovereignty has
been acquired, and when the time has
‘come for you to enjoy that sovereignty thus
acquired by your children, when the duties
of zoyalty await discharge by you, whence
has this desire entered into your mind 7


26. Why then did you cause us to
exterminate the Earth? Why would you
leave all and Wish to take up your residence
in the forest f

27. We were born in the forest. Why
then did. yaw bring us ffrom the forest while
‘we were children? See, the two sons of
Madri are overwhelmed with sorrow and
‘grief.


28. Relent, O mother! O you of great
fame, do not go into tke forest now! Do
you enjoy that prosperity which, acquired


this kingdom, |


ie


by ‘power, has become Yudhishthira’s
to-day.

29 Firmly resolved to retire into the
forest, Kunti distegarded these lamenta-
tions of her sons, ‘


go. Then Draupadi, with a cheerless
face, accompanied by Subhadra, followed
her weeping mother-in-law who was proceed=
ing on from desire of going into the forest.

gt. Highly wise and firmly resolved on
retirement from the world, the blessed dame
walked on, frequently looking at ber weep-
ing children.


32. The Pandavas, with all their wives
and servitors, continued to follow her.
Restraining then her tears, she addressed
her children in these words, .


CHAPTER XVII.


( ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. }=«
Continued.
Kunti said :-—
3, What you say, O mighty-armed son
of Pandu, is, indeed, true! O kings, for-


merty, when you were all dispirited, indeed,
I excited you alt. . .


2. Seeing that your kingdom was taken
away from you by a match at dice, seeing
that you alt fell from happiness, seeing that
you were governed over by kinsmen, t in
stilted courage and high thoughts into youc
rainds,

3. O foremost of men, I encouraged you
so that the sons of Pandu might not be
lost, so that their fame might not be lost.


4. . You are all equal to Indra. Your
prowess reseimbtes that of the very celestials,
} acted thus so that you might not live,
depending upon others,


5. 1 instilted courage into your hearts so
that you who are the foremost of all
righteous persons, who are equal to Vasava,
might not again go inte the forest and
live in misery.

6. | instilled courage into your hearts
so that this Bhima who has the strength of
ten thousand elephants and whose prowess
and manliness are widely tnown, might not
sik into insignificance and ruin.


7- J instilled courage into your hearts
so that this Vijaya, who was born after
Bhimasena, and who is equal to Vasava
himself, might net be cheerless.


36


8. ,L instilled courage inte your. hearts so
that Nakula and Sahadeva, who are al-
ways devoted to their elders, may not be
weakened and rendered  cheerless by
hunger.


g. I acted thus in erder that this lady
of well-developed forms and of large eyes
might net suffer the wrongs inflicted on her
in the public hall without being avenged.


to—11. Before you all, O Bhima, trem-
bling alt over like 4 plaintain tree duringfher
catamenial period, and after she had been
won at: dice, Dusshasana, through folly,
dragged her ag if she were a slave. . 1 knew
all this. Indeed, the family of Pandu had
been subjugated (by-foes)..


12, he Kurus, véz., my father-in-law
and others, were cheerless ‘when she,
desirous of a protector, bewailed like a
she-osprey, ‘

13. When she- was-dragged by her fair
locks by the sinful Dusshasana without little
intelligence, 1 lost my sevses, Q king.


14. Know, that: for increasing your
energy, I instilled that courage into your
hearts by ceciting the words of Vidula, O
my sons, ; a 3


15. I instilled courage into your hearts,
O my sons, so that the family of Pandu,
represented by my children, might not be
lost.


16. The sons‘ and grandsons of that
person{whojbrings a family to infamy never
succeed in acquiring the regions of the
righteous. Indeed, the ancestors of the
KXaurava race, were in danger of losing
those happy regions which had become
theirs.


* 17. As for myself, O my sons, I have,
before this, enjoyed the great fruits of that
sovereignty which my husband had won.
1 have made large gifts. 1 have duly
drunk the Soma-juice in sacrifice.


18. it was not for my own sake that
J had urged Vasudeva with the stirring
words of Vidula. It.was for your sake that
1 had asked you to follow that advice.


19. Omy sons, I do not wish for the
fruits of that sovereignty which has been
acquired by my children. O you of great
power, I wish to attain, by my penances,
to those happy regions which have been
acquired by my husband. :


20. By rendering obedient service to my
father-in-law and mother-in-law both of
whom wish to take up. their residence in
the forest, and by penances, I wish, O
Yudhishthira, to exhaust my body.


21. Do you cease to follow me, O fore
- most one of Kuru’s cace, along with Bhima


MAHABHARATA.


and others. Let. your. understanding be
always devoted to virtue. Let your mind
be always great,


CHAPTER XVUHI.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA., )—~
; Continued,


Vaishampayana said :~

I. Hearing these words of Kunti, the
sinless Pandavas, O best of kings, became
ashamed. ‘They, therefore, desisted, alony
with the princess of Panchala, from follow
ing her.


2. Seeing Kunti determined upon going
into the forest, the ladies of the Pandavas
family uttered loyd lamentations,


‘3. The Pandavas then went round the
king and saluted him duly, They ceased
to follow further, having failed to persuade
Pritha to return.


4~-5. Then Amvika’s energetic son, viz.,
Dhiitarashtra, addressing Gandhari and
Vidura and supporting “bimself on them,
said,—-Let tlie royal mother of Yudhish-
thira cease to go wrthhus! What Yudhish-
thira has said, is all very true,

6. Renouncing this high prosperity of
her sons, abandoning those high fruits chat
may be hers; why should she go into the
inaccessible forest, teaving her children
like a person of little intelligence ?


qz.. Living in the enjoyment of sovereignty,
she is Capable of practising penances and
observing the great vow of gifts, Let her,
therefore, listen to my words,


8. O Gandhari, I have been much
pleased with the services rendered to me
by this daughtersin-law of mine. Conver«
sant as you are with all duties, you should
command her to return.


9 ‘Thus addressed by her husband, the
daughter of Suvala repeated to Kunti all
those words of the old king and added her
own words of grave meaning.


10, She, however, could not make Kunti
to desist inasmuch as that .chaste lady,
devoted to virtue, had determined upon
living in the forest. '


t1, The Kuru ladies, understanding how
firm bér resolution was about her retire-
ment into the forest, and seeing that those
foremost ones of Kuru’s race (vis., their
own lords), had ceased to follow her, began
to bewail aloud, :


ASHRAMAVASIKA ’ PARVA. at


12, After allthe sons of Pritha and all
the ladies had returned homewards, the
higly wise king Yudhishthira continued his
journey to the forest.


13. The Pandavas, exceedingly cheer-
less and stricken with grief and sorro
accompanied by their wives, returned to the
city, on their cars. ~


14. At that time the city of Hastina-
pore, with its entire population of men,
both old and -young, and women, became
dispirited and plunged into grief.
festivals of rejoicing were observed.


15. Afflicted with grief, the Pandavas
were shorn of energy. Abandoned by
Kunti, they were deeply afflicted with grief,
like calves destitute of their dams.


16. Dhritarashtra reached that day a
place far distant from the city, The power-
ful king arrived at last on the banks of the
Bhagirathi and tool: rest there for the
night.


17. Brahmanas knowing the Vedas duly
ignited their sacred fires in that retreat of
ascetics. Surrounded by tose foremost of
Brathmanas, those sacred fires shone forth
in beauty. The sacred fire of the old king
was also lighted up.


18. Sitting near his own fire, he poured
Hibations on it according to due rites, aud
then adored the thousand-rayed sun as he
was on the point of setting. :


19. Then Vidura and Sanjaya made a
bed for the king by spreading sane blades
of Kusha grass. Near the bed of that Kuru
hero they made another for Gandhari.


20. Near to Gandharl, Yudhishthira’s
mother Kunti, observant of excellent vows,
happily laid herself down. ‘


21. Within hearing-distance of those
three, slept Vidura and others, The Yajaka
Brahmanas and other followers of the king
laid slept on theie respective beds. :


22. The foremost of Brahmanas, who
were there, chaunted aloud many sacred
hymns, The sacrificial fires blazed forth
‘all around, That night, therefore, seemed
as delightful to them’as a Brahmi night.


23. When the night passed away, they
all arose from theic beds and. performed
their morning acts. Pouring libations then
on the gacred fire, they continued their
juurney, "


24. Their first day’s experience of the
forest proved very painful to them of
grieving hearts,—them who were grieved
by the inhabitants of both the city ‘and the
provinces of the Kucu kingdom.


Semen d


No *


’


CHAPTER XIX.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.)—
Continued. :


Vaishampayana said :— -


1. Acting according to the advice of
Vidura, the king took up his residence on
the banks of the Bhagirathi which were
sacred and deserved to be inhabited by the.
righteous.


2. Fhere many Brahmanas who had -
taken up their residence in the forest, as
also many Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, and
Sbudras, came to see the old king.


3. Sitting in their midst, he pleased
them all by his words. Having duly adored
the Brahmanas with their disciples, he dis-
tnissed them all,


‘

As evening came, the king, and the -
illustrious Gandhari, both descended into
the stream of the Bhagirathi and duly per-
formed their ablutions for purifying them-
selves. .


. The king and the queen, and Vidura
and others, O Bharata, having bathed in
the sacred river, performed the usual rites
of religion. : ;


6. After the king had purified himself
by a_ bath, the daughter of Kuntibhoja,
gently conducted both him who was to her
as her father-in-law, and Gandhari, from
the-water into the dry bank.

7. The Yajakas had ‘made a sacrificial
altar there for the king. Devoted to.truth,
the latter poured libations then on the fires


8. From the banks of the. Bhagicathi
the old king, with his followers, observing
vows and with senses controlled, then pro-
ceeded to Kurukshetra, 7


g. Endued with great intelligence, the
king arrived at the hermitage of the royat
sage Shatayupa ‘of great wisdom and saw
him. : ae


10. Shatayupa, O scorcher of enemies,
had been the great king of the Kekayas.
Having made over the sovereignty of his
kingdom to his son, he had come into the
forest.


11. Shatayupa received king Dhrita-
rashtra with due rites. Accompanied by
him, the latter went to the hermitage o!
Vyasa. . :


12. Arrived at Vyasa’s hermitage. the
delighter of the Kurus received his, mitae
tion into the forest mode of life. Returning
he took up his residence in the hermitage
of Shatayupa,


oF


13. The great Shatayupa instructed
Dhritarashtra in all the cites of the forest
mode, at the command of Vyasa. -


14 Thus the great Whritacashtra set
Vimself to the practice of penances, and all
his followers also to the same course of con-
duct.


#5. Queen Gandhari also, O monarch,
along with Kunti, put on barks of trees and
deer-skins, and began to observe the same
vows as her husband. :


#6. Restraining theie senses in thought,
words, and deeds, as well as by eye, they
began to perform severe austerities.

17.

king Dhritarashtra began to practise vows
and penances like a great Rishi, reducing
his body to skin and bones, for his flesh
was all dried up, bearing matted locks on
head, and his person clad in barks and
skins.


18. Vidura, conversant with the true
interpretations of Virtue, and gifted with
great intelligence, as also Sanjaya, waited
upon the old king with his wife. Both of
them with souls under control, Vidura and


Sanjaya also reduced themselves, and wore .


barks and rags.


CHAPTER .XX.
(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.)—


Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. Those foremost of ascetics, vtz.,
Narada, Parvata and Devala of austere
penances, came there to see king Dhrita-
sashtra.


- 2. The Island-bern Vyasa with all his
disciples, and other persons gifted with
great wisdom and crowned with ascetic suc-
cess, and the royal sage Shatayupa of ad-
vanced years aad possessed of great merit,
also came.

3- Kunti adored them with due rites, O
king. All those ascetics were highly
pleased with the adorations offered to them.

4. ‘Those great Rishis pleased the high-
souled king Obritarashtra with discourses
on religion and virtue.


5. Atthe conclusion of their converse,
the celestial Rishi Narada, seeing all things
as objects of direct perception, said the
following words.

Narada said :—


6. There was a king of the Kekayas,
possessed of great prosperity and perfectly


Shorn of alt stupefaction of mind,


MANABAHRATA.,


fearless. His ‘manfe was Sahasrachitya
and he was the grandfather of this Shata-
yupa.

7. Resigning his kingdom to his highly
virtuous eldest son, the virtuoks king
Sahasraehitya retired into the forest.


‘8. Reaching the other end of blazing
penances, that king, gifted with great splen-
dour, attained to the region of Purandara
where he continued to live in his come


"pany,


‘9. On many occasions, ‘while visiting the
tegion of Indra, O king, | saw that mon-
arch, whose sins had all been consumed by
penances, living in Indra’s palace.


to. Similarly, king Shailalaya, the
grandfather of Bhagadatta, attained to the
region of Indra by the power alone of ‘his
penances,


11. There was another king, O monarch,
of the name of Prishadhra who resembled
the holder of the thunder-bolt himself.
That bing also by his penances proceeded
from the Earth to the celestial region.

12. In this very forest, O king, that
king, vis., Purukutsa, the son of Mandhatri,
acquired great success.


13. That foremost of rivers, v¢s., Nare
mada, became the consort of that king.


{| Having practised pénances in this very


forest, that-king proceeded to the celestial
region. _

14. There was another king, highly
righteous, of the name ef Shashaloman.
He, too, performed severe austerities in this
forest and then ascended to the celestial
region.

15. You also, O monarch, having are
rived at this forest, shall, through the grace
of the Istand-born, attain to avery high
end and which is difficult of attainment.


16. You also, O foremost of kings, at the
termination of your penances, shall become
gifted with great prosperity and, accom-
panied by Gandhari, attain to the end
reached by those great ones. -

17. Living in the presence of the des-
troyer of Vala, Pandu thinks-of you always.
He will, O monarch, certainly. assist you
in the attainment of prosperity.


_ 18. Through serving you and Gandhari,
this daughter-in-law of yours, possessed of
great fame, will attain to residence with her
husband in the other world. we


19 Sheis the mother of Yudhishthira
who is the eternal Dharma,. .We gee all
this, O king, with our spiritual vision.


20. Vidura will enter into the high-
souled Yudhishthira. Sanjaya also, through


ASHRAMAVASIRA PARYVA,


tneditatlon, will ascend from this world into
the celestial region.


Vaishampayana said :—~

ai. That great chief of Kuru’s. rate,
endued with learning; having, with his wife,
heard these words of Narada, praised them
and adored Narada with unprecedented
honors,


22. The assembly of Brahmanas thete
present became filled with great joy, and
desirous of pleasing king Dhritaraslitra, O
monarcli, themselves worshipped Narada
with great respect.


23—24. Those foremost of twite-botn
persons also lauded the wotds of Narada,
‘rhen the royal sage Shatayupa, addres+
sing Narada, said,—Youc holy self has


Increased the devotion of the Kuru king,


of all those people here, and of myself alse;
O you of great splendour.


25. I wish to ask you something. Listen,


to me as I say it. lt is about king, Dicitas
tashtra, O celestial Rishi, that are adored
of all the worlds.


26. You know the truth of every affair,

ifted with celestial vision; yout behold, O
twicé-born Rishi, what the vatious tends
are of human beings, *


27. You have said what the énd has
been of the kings mentioned by you; vis.,
association with the king of the celestiats;
You have not, however, O great Rishi,
declared what those regiorts ate which will
be acquired by this king.


28. O powerful ore, I wish ta hear from,


you what region will be acqtiired by the
toyal Dhritarashtra. You should tell me
truly the kind of tegion that will be his
and the time when he will attain to it.

2g. Thus addressed by him, Narada of
telestial vision and endued with austere
penances, said in the midst of the assembly


these words highly agreeable to the minds,


of all.


Narada said :—. - ,
_ 30. Going at my will to the palace of
Shakra, f have seen Shakra the ford . of
Sachi; and there, O royalsage, I have seen
king Panda. . :

3t. There isa tall. arose, O monarch,


about this Dhritarashtra and those highly.


austere penances which he is performing.
3z. There ¥ heard from the lips of
Shakra himself, that there are three years
yet of the period of life of this King. :
33. After that, king Dhritarashtra, ac-
companied by, his wife Gandhart,- will go


to the regions of Kuvera and be highly


£3


honored by that king of kings. He will.
po. there ion.a tar moviag at his will, his
body adorned with celestial ornantents, :

44~=95. He is the surt of a Rishi; he Is
higily blessed; he has exhausted all his
sitis by his penantes. Gifted with a rightes
ous soul; the will roam at will through the
tegtots of the telestials, the. Gandlarvas;
and the Rakshasas. That, about Which you,
fave enquired, is a mtyStery to the gods,
Through my affection for you, I have said
this bigh tcuth,

36. Woy all ate passeseed af, the, wealth.
of Shrutis and have burnt all your sins. by .
your periatices. ‘


Vaishantpayana said :—=
| 97. Hearing these sweet wotds of tle -
celestial: Rishi; all the persons there assem-
bled, as also king Dhritarashtra; became
gteatly pleased. ate

48. Havitig cheeted Dheitarashtra at
great wisdom with such talk, they left the
place, going away by the path that belotigs .
to those who are crowned with success:


Ceram
CHAPTER ¥Xh_


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA., )=
Continueds


Vaishampayana said :—~

t. Upon the retiremerit of thé King of
the Kurus_ into the forest, the Pandavag,
O king, afflicted besides by grief'on account .
of their. mother, becamte very dispirited.j |

Zz. The citizens also of Hastinapord
were possessed by deep sortow. The Braltis
Manas always talked of the old king.


4. How, indeed, with the Kittg, who has
become old, .five in .the solitary forest 7
How will the highly blessed Gandhari, and
Pritha, the davghtee of Kuntibboja, tive
there 7

4. The royal sage has always fived.in
the enjoyment of every comfort. He. will
certainly be very miserable. Arrived in
the deep forest, what is. now the condition.
of that personage of. royat descent, who. isy
again, bereft of vision 7

§. Difficult is the feat that Kuntt has
performed by separating herself from her
sons. Alas, renouncing royal prosperity,
she chose q Hife im the forest. :

6, What, again, i the condition. of
Vidura, who is always, devoted to the
service of his elder brother? How also ia.


., 24,


the Intelligent son of Gavalgani who is 1
so fajthful-to the salt given him by his
master ?


7. The citigens, including even the
minors, meeting together, asked one another
these questions.


8 The Pandavas also, greatly stricken
with grief, bewailed for their old mother,
and could not live iq their city long.


g. Thinkiag also of their old sire, the
king, who fad fost_all his children, and
the highly blessed Gandhari, and Vidura
of great intelligence, they could not enjoy
peace of mind.


10, They had ho pleasure in sovereignty,
tor in women, wor in the study of the
Vedas,


11. Despaie entered their souls as they
thought of the old king and as they repeat-
edly thought of that tertible destruction of
kinsmen,


- 1213. Indeed, thinking of the des-
truction of the youthful Abhimanyu on the
field of battle, of the mighty-armed Karna
who never retreated from fight, of the
sons of Draupadi,,and of other friends
of theirs, those heroes became highly dis-
pirited.


14. They could not get peace of tind
upon repeatedly thinking that’ the Barth
had become divested of both her heroes and -
her riches.


1§. Draupadi had lost all her children,
and the beautiful Subhadra also had be»
come childless, hey, too, were of _cheerless
hearts and grieved greatly.

16. Seeing, however, the son of Virata’s
daughter, vis., your sire Parikshit, your
grandsires somehow lived, 2


~


CHAPTER XXIL.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.)=
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. Those foremost of men, the heroic
Pandavas,—those delighters of their mother
became greatly stricken with grief,


2. They who had formerly been always
engaged in royal offices, did not at that
time attend to those deeds at all in their
capital.


3. Stricken with deep sorrow, they could
not find pleasure from anything. If any
body asked them, they never honored him
with an answer,


MAHABHARATA. :


4. Althowgh thdse irresistible tetdes
were grave like the ocean; yet they were
now deprived of their knowledge and theif
very senses by the grief they felt. =


5. Thinking of theiec mother, the sons of
Pandu became anxious as to how their
emaciated mother was serving the old
pair.

6. How, indeed; is- that king; whose
sons have all been killed and who is without
refuge, living alone, with only his wife, in
the forest haunted by beasts of prey ?

9. Alas, how does that highly blessed
queen, Gandhari, whose dear ones have alt
been killed, follow her blind husband in the
solitary forest.

8. Such was the anxiety shown by the
Pandavas when they talked with one another.
They ther set their heatts upon beholding


“the king in his forest asylum,


g. Then bowing down to the king, Sahas
deva said,—' 1 think you wishto see out
sire.


10. From my tegpect for you, however,
I could not speedily speak on the subject of
our jourthey to the forest, ‘Lhe time for
that sojourn is now come.


11. By good luck [ shall see Kunti pers
forming penances, with matted locks on het
head, practising severe austetities, and emaa
ciated by sleeping on blades of Kusha and
Kasha. ~


12. She was brought up is palaces, and
nursed in every comfort and luxury. Alas,
when shall I see my mother who is now toil-
worfi and plunged into great misery.


13. - Forsooth, O chief of Bharata’s race,
the ends of men are exceedingly uncertain, .
since Kunti, who is a princess by birth, is
now living in misery in the forest.’


14. Leadon. these words of Sahadeva,

> wa Draupadi, that foremost of all women
uly honoting the king, said, with propet

salytations,—« :


1g. Alas, when shall I see queen Pritha,
if, indeed, she is alive! I -shall consider
my life as not passed in vain if } succeed in
seeing her once more, O king. .


16. Let this sort. of understanding be
ever firm in you. Let your mind always
take a pleasure in such virtue as is involved ,~
O king of kings, in your desire of grants -
ing suck a high boon onus, ©.


ty. Know, O king, that all these tadies
of your house are staying with their feet
raised for the journey, from desire of seeing
pats and Gandhaci, and my’ father-ine
awe 2 - :


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.


48. Thus addressed by queen Draupadi,
the king, O chief of Bharata’s race, sum-
tnoned all the leaders of his army to his
presence and told them.— :


19 ‘Cause my army, full of cars and
elephants, to march out. E shall see king
Dhritarashtra who is now living in the
forest.


go. ‘othe officers in charge of the ladies’
ward, the king gave the order,—'Let various
kinds of conveyances be properly equipt,
as also ail my closed litters counting by
thousands.


a1. Let carriages and granaries and
wardrobes, and treasuries, be equipt and
ordered out, and fet mechanics have the
command tomarch out. Let men in charge
of treasuries yo out on the way leading to
the ascetic hermitage of Kurukshetra,


22. Whoever amongst the citizens wishes
to see the kiny, is allowed to do so without
any restriction, Let him proceed, . properly
protected.

23. Let cooks and superintendents of
kitchens, and the whole culinary establish-
tnent, and various kinds of edibles and
viands be ordered to be borne out on carts
and conveyances.


24. Let it be proclaimed that we march
ont toemorcow, Lndeed, let no delay take
place. Let pavilions and cresting ‘houses
of varivus kinds be erected on the way. .

25. These wece the commands which
the eldest son of Pandu gave, with his
brothers. When morning came, O monarch,
the king stared with a large following of
women and old men,

26. Going out of his city, king Yudhish-
thira waited five days for such citizens as
might accompany him and then went to-
wards the forest,


ssl


CHAPTER XXIN,


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA ).—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :— ;

-t. That foremost one of Bharata’s race,
then ordered his troups, which were protect
ed by heroes whg were headed by Asjuna,
and who resembled the very guardians of
the universe, to march out.

2. tmmediately a loud clamour arose
consisting of the words—'Equip, Equip’ !—
of hotse-meu, O Bharata, engaged in equip-
ping Useic horses. .


4


Ag


3. Some proceeded on carriages and
vehicles, some on quick-coursing horses,
and some on cars made of gold and efful«
gent like blazing fires,


4- Some proceeded on powerlul elephants
and some on camels, O king. Some pro«
ceeded on foot, which belonged to that
class of combatants which is armed with
tiger like claws.


5. The citizens and inhabitants of the
ptovinces, desirous of beholding Dhrita«-
rashtra, followed the king on various kinds
of conveyances,


6. The preceptor Kripa also, of Gotama’s
race, that great leader of army, taking
all the forces with him, proceeded, at tha
command of the king, towacds the old
king’s hermitage,

g—8, The Kura king Yudhishthira, that
Perpetuater of Kuru's race, surrounded by
a large number of Brahmana’s, his praises
lauded by a large band of Sutas and
Magadhas and bards, and with a white
umbrella held over his head, and surround«
ed by a large ‘number of cars, stacted on
his journey, © :

g. Vrikodara, the son of the Wind-God,
went on an elephant huge asa hill, equipt
with strong bow and machines and weapons
of attack aad defence,

to. ‘The twin sons of Madri went on twa
quick-coursing herses, well cased in mail,
well-protected, and equipt with banners,


it. Arjuna of great energy, with senses
under restraint, proceeded on an excellent
car effulgent like the sun to which were
yoked excellent white horses,


12. ‘Fhe royal ladies headed by Deaupadt _
proceeded in closed litters protected by the
superintendents of women, ‘They scattered
showers of wealth as they went on.


13. Teeming with cars and elephants
and horses, and echoing with the blare of


‘trumpets and the music of Vizas, the Pan«


dava army, OQ monarch, shone with great
beauty.


4. Those chiefs of Kuru's race pros
ceeded slowly, resting by delizhtiul banks
of rivers and lakes, O monarch,


15. Yuyutsu of great. energy, and
Dhaumya, the priest, at the command of
Yudhishthira, wece engaged in protecting
the city,


16—17. By slow marches, king Yudhish-
thira, reached Kurukshetra, and then,
crossing the Yamuna, that highly sacred
tiver, he saw from a distance the hermitage,
O you of Kuru’s race, of the royal sage
of great wisdom and of Diwitaraslitra,


26


18 Then all the men became filled. with
joy and quickly entered the forest, filling
it_ with loud sounds of joy, OQ chief of
Bharata’s race.


camenienninemeal


CHAPTER XXIV.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. )—
; Continued. —


Vaishampayana said :—

% The Reseaves get down at a distance,
from their cars and proceeded on foot to
the hermitage of the king, bending them-
selves in humility.


2. All the combatants also, and the
Citizens and the wives of the Kuru chiefs,
followed them on foot. |


3. The Pandavas then reached the sacred
hermitage of Diritarashtra which abounded
with herds of deer and which was adorned
with plantain plants,


4. Many ascetics of rigid vows, filled
with curiosity, came there for seeing the
Pandévas wh had arrived at the hermi-
tage.

5. The king, with tears it his ‘eyes,
asked them, saying,~-'Where has my eldest
Bire the perpetuater of Kuru’s race,
gone? :

6. They answered, O monarch, telling
him that he had gone to the Yamuna, for
his ablutions, as also for fetehing flowers
and waters,


7. Proceeding quickly on foot along the
path pointed out by them, the Pandavas
saw all of them froma distance.


8. Desirons of meeting with their sire
they walked rapidly, Then Sahadeva ran
quickly towards the spot where Pritha
was.


Q Touching the feet of his mother, he
began to weep aloud. With tears running
down her cheeks, she saw her darling
child, .

_ to. Raising her son up and embracing
him with her arms, she infornved Gandban
of Sabadeva’s arrival. i


11, Then seeing the king Bhimasena,
Arjuna, and Nakula, Pritha tried to ad-
vance quickly towards them. :


12. She was walking in advance of: the
childless old pair, and was dragging trem
forward. Seeing her, the Pandavas fell
down on the earth,


13. ‘The powerful and the great monarch,
gilied with great intelligence, recognising


: is the illustciows Draupadi 7”


MAHABHARATA.


them by their voices and also by touchy,
comforted them one after another.


14. Shedding tears, those great princes,
with due formalities, approached the old


king and Gandhari, as also theie ‘own
‘mother,
15. Indeed, regaining their senses, and


once more consoled by their mother, the
Pandavas took away from the king and
their aunt and mother the jars full of water
which they had been carrying.


16. The ladies of those leading men,
and all the women of the royal household,
asalso all the inhabitants of the city and
the provinces, then saw the old king.


17. King Yudhishthira presented all
those individuals one after another to the
old king, repeating their names and fami-
fies and then himself adored his eldest
sire with respect.


18. Surrounded by them all, the old
monareh, with eyes bathed in tears of joy,
considered himself as once more staying in
the midst of the city of Hastinapore.


tg. Saluted with respect by all his
dauvhters-in-law headed by Krishna, king
Dhritarashtra, gifted with great imtelli-
gence, with Gandhari and Kunti became
filled with joy. °


zo. He then reached his forest-retreat


‘which was highly spoken of by Siddhag


and Charanas, and that then was filled up
with vast ccowds of men alf desirous of
seeing him, like the sky teeming wih my-
riads of stars,


CHAPTER XXYV.


€ ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. )—~
Continued, : ’


Vaishampayana said :—

x The king, O chief of Bharata’s race,
with those foremost of men, vis., his bro~
thers, who alt had eyes resembling lotus~
petals, took his seat hi the hermitage of his
eldest sire, ©


2. There sat around hiny many highly~
blessed ascetics, coming from various re-
giens, from desire of seeing the sons of that
lord of Kurcw’s race, véz., the Pandavas of
wide chests.

3. They said,—‘ We wish to know who
amongst these is Yudhbishthira, who are
Bhima and Arjuna, who the twins, and who


‘


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA, 27.


4. Then the Suta, Sanjaya, in answer to
their queries, pointed out to them the Pan-
davas, naming each, and Draupadi too
as also the other ladies of the Kururace.


Sanjaya said :—

5. This one fair like pure gold, who is
endued with a body which looks like that of
a full-grown tion, who is possessed of a
large aquiline nose, and wide and expan-
sie eyes of a coppery hue, is the Kuru
king.

6. This one whose tread is like that of
an infuriate elephant, whose complexion is
as faie as that of heated gold, whose frame
is of large and expansive proportions, and
whose arms are long and stout, is Vriko-
dara, See him well.


7. The powerful bowmen who sits be-
sides him, of darkish color and youthfal
frame, who resembles the leader of an ‘ele-
phantine herd, whose shoulders are as high
as those of a lion, who walks like a sporting
elephant, and whose eyes are as expansive
as the petals of a lotus, is the hero called
Arjuna,


8. Those two foremost of men, wha are
sitting beside Kunti, are the twins. resem-
bling Vishnu and Mahendra. In the entire
world, they have not their equals in beauty
and strength and excellence of conduct.

9g. This lady having eyes expansive as
lotus-petals, who seems to have touched
the middle age of life, whose complexion
resembles that of the blue lotus, and who
looks like a goddes4, is Krishna, the embo-
died form of the goddess of prosperity.


to. She who sits besides her, possessed of
the complexion of pure gold, who looks like
the embodied rays of the moon, in the midst
of other ladies, O foremost of twice-born
Ones, si the sister that unrivalled hero who
holds the discus.


tt. This other, as fair as pure gold, is
the daughter of the Naga king and wife of
Arjuna. This other whose complexion is like
that of pure gold or like that of Madhuka
flowers, is the princess Chitrangada.


12. This one, whose complexion is like
an assemblage of blue lotuses, is the sister
of that monarch, that lord of hosts, who
used to always challenge Krishna. She is
the focemost wife of Vrikodara,


#3. This is the daughter of the king of
Magadha who was. known by the name of
Jarasandha. — Possessed of the complexion
of an assemblage of Champakuas, she is the
wife of the youngest sou ot M idravati.


- 4. Possessed of a complexion dark as
the blue lotus, she who sits thece on the


,


earth, and whose eyes are aS expansive as
lotus-petals, she is the wife of the eldest:
son of Madravati. i
15.
fair as that of heated gold and who sits
with her child on her lap, is the daughter
of king Virata. She is the wife of that
Abhimanyu who, while divested of bis car,


This lady whose complexion is as -


was kHled by Drona and others fighting.


from their cars.


16. These §ladies, tthe hair on whose
heads shows not the parted line, and who
are clad in white, are the widows of the
killed sons of Divitarashtra. ‘They are the
daughters-in-law of this old king, the wives
of his hundred sons, now deprived of both
theic husbands and children who have been
killed by heroic enemies. :


17. L have now pointed them out in the
order of precedence. On account{ of their
devotion to Brahmanas, theic understand-
ings and hearts are divested of every kind
of crookedness. Possessed of pure souls,
they have alt beet pointed out by men,—
these princesses of the {iXaurava line,—
in answer to your queries.


Vaishampayana said :—


18. Thus that aged king of Kuru’s race,
having met with those sons of him that
was a_ celestial among men, enquired
about their well-being after all the ascetics
had departed.


19 ‘Whe warriors who had accompanied
the Pandavas, leaving the retreat, sat them-
selves down dt a Sittle distance, getting
down from their cars and the animals they
rode.. Indeed, after all the crowd, viz., the
ladies the old {men aind the children, had
been seated, the old king duly addressed
them alter making the usual polite en-
quiries.


CHAPTER XXVI.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA. PARVA,.)—
; Continued,
Dhritarashtra said :—
1. O Yudhishthira, are you in peace and


happiness, with all your brothers and the
dwellers of the city and the provinces ?


2. Are they who depend on you also
happy ? © Are your ministers, and servitors,
and all your seniors and preceptors also,
happy ? -

3. Are those also who live in your bing-
dom free from fear? Do you fellow -the
oid aid traditional conduct of kings ? ~~ + ~


28.


% Is your treasury filled without dis-
regarding the restraints imposed by justice
and equity? Do you behave as you should
towards fees, neutrals, and allies ?


-5—6. Do you duly look alter the Brab-—


manas, always making them the first gifts ?
What need I say of the citizens, and your
servants, and kinsmen, are your foes; O
chief of Bnarata’s race pleased with your
conduct? Du you, O king of kings, adore
with devotion the Pitris and the deities? -

7. Do -you adore guests with food and
drink, O: Bharata? Do the Brahmanas in
your kingdom perform the duties’ of their
order, walk along the path of virtue ?

8. Do the Kshatriyas and Vaishyas and
Shudras also within your kinkdom, and all
your relatives, perform their respective


duties? 1 hope the women, the cirildren, |


and the old, among your subjects, do not
grieve (under distress} and not beg (the
nicegsaries of fife}. :


9. Are the ladies of your household duly:


honoured in your house, O best of men?


I hope, O king, that this ra@ee of yoyal-


sages, having got you for theie king, have
not fallen. away from fame and glory ?


Vaishampayana said :—

t ye. ‘To the old king who said so, Yudhish-
thira, knowing morality and justice and
welleskilled in acts and speech, spoke as
follows, putting some questions about his
well-being. ue


Yudhishthira said :—


11, Does your peace, O king, your self-
control, your tranquillity of heart, grow ?
Js this my mother able to serve you without
fatigue and trouble.


12—13. Will, O king, her residence in
the forest yield ftuit? L hope this queen,
who ig my eldest mather, who is emaciated
with (exposure to cold and wind and the
toil of walking, and who is’ now given to the
practice of severe austerities, no longer
yields to grief for her children of great
energy, all of whom performing the duties
of the Kshatriyas, have been killed on the
field of battle.


:14. Does ste accuse us, sinful wretches,
who are tesponsible for their destruction?
Where is Vidura, O king? We do not see
him here. I hope this Sanjaya, performing
penances, is in peace and happiness,
Vaishampayana said:— ‘|

15—16. Thus addressed, Dhritarashtra,
answered “king Yudhishthira, saying,—O
son, Vidura is well, He is practising aus-
tete penances, living on aic alene, for he


MAHABHARATA, —


abstains from all other food. He is ema
ciated and his arteries and uerves have
become visible. Sometimes he is seen 3
this empty forest by Brahmanas.


17. While Dhritarashtra was saying this,
Vidura was seev at a distance. We had
matted locks on his head, and gravels im his
mouth, and was greatly emaciated, He
was perfectly naked. Hlis body+ was be-
smeared all over with filth, and with the.
dust of various wild flowers. *


tS. When Kshattei, was seen from a
distaree, the fact was communicated to
Vudhishthira. Vidura suddenly stopped,
O king, looking towards the retreat.


19g. Ring Yodbishthica pursued him
alone, #s he ran and entered the deep forest,-
sometimes seen and.sometimes not seen by
the pursuer. . ;


+ ga, ) Hel. said: aloud, —'O Vidura, O


Vidura.. F cam. king? Yudbishthira, your:
tavewite’—Exclamiing thus, Wudbishthira,


with gréat exetties; followed Vidura.


8, Having‘redched a solitary spot in’
the forest, that foremost of intelliyent men,”
vis., Vidura, stood still, feaning against a
tree. : :

22. He was greatly emaciated. Ue re-
tained onty the shape of a human being.
Yudhishthira _of great intelligence reeog-"
vised him, however,


2%. Standing before him. Yudhishthira
addressed him saying,—' F am Yudhish-
thira.’ Indeed, adoring | Vidura property,
VYudhishthira said these words in the


‘hearing of Vidura,
_ 24.


Meanwhile Vidura looked at the
king steadfastly. Casting his look thus en
the king, he stood motionless in Yoga.


25. Endued with great intelligence, he.
then (by his Yoga-power) entered the body
of Yudhishthira, limb by limb. He united
bis vita) airs with those of the king, and
his senses with the king’s senses. ,


26. Indeed, with the help of Yoga-po ver,“
Vidura, butning with energy, thus entered
the body of king Yadhishthira the just.


27. Meanwhile, the body of Vidura con-
tinued to lean against the tree, with eyes
fixed. The king s00n saw that life had
fled out of it. ; :


28—2z9 At the-same time, he felt that he
himself bad become stronger than before
and that he had yained many-additional
virtues and accomplishments. Gifted with
great learning avd energy, O monarch,.
Pandu's son, king Yudhishthira the just,
then recoliected his own state before his
bicth among men, Possessed of mighty


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARYVA,


age"


energy, he had heard of Yoga practice from: 4. Indeed, those fherocs passed=.thnt


Vyasa.

30-31, King Yudhishthira the just,
endued with great learning, became desir-
ous of doing the last rites to the body of
Vidura, and wished to cremate it duly. An
invisible v@ice was then heard, saying,—'O
king, this body which belonged to him
called Vidura should not be cremated. In
him is your body also. He is the eternal
deity of Virtue.


32. Those happy regions which pass by
the name of Santanika will be his, O Bha-
rata. He pertormed the duties of Yatis.
You should not, O scorcher of enemies,
grieve for him at all.


33. Thus addressed, king Yudhishthira
the just returned from the place, and repre-
sented everything to the royal son of Vichi-
traviryya. : .


34: At this, that effulgent king, all those
men, and Bhimasena and others, became
filed with wonder. ‘


33. Hearing what had taken place, king
Dhritarashtra became pleased and then,
addressing the son of Dharma, said,—‘Du
you accept front me these gifts of water
and roots and fruits! It has been said,

' O king, that one’s guest should take what
one takes bimseif.’


36. Thus addressed, Dharma’s son
answered the king, saying—‘So be it!" The
mighty-aroied king ate the fruits and roots
which he gave.

37. Then they all spread their beds


under a tree and passed that -night thus
having eaten fruits and rooty and druvok


the water that the old monarch had given |


then.


’


CHAPTER XXVIL
(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.)—


Continued.


Vaishampayana said :-~


1. They passed that night which was
marked out by auspicious constellations
thus, O king, in that heftmitage of pious
ascetics. :


2. The conversation that took place was
marked by many reflections on morality


and wealth. Consisting of delightful and_


sweet words, it was graced with various
citations from the Shrutis. fe

3. The Pandavas, O king, leaving costly
beds, laid themselves down, wear their
m other, on the naked earth,


night, having eaten the food which was the
food of the great king Dhritarashtra.


5. After the night had passed away,
king Yudhishthira, having performed his
morning rites proceeded to survey that
hermitage in the company of his brothers.


6. With the royal tadies, the servants,
and his priest, the king roved about the
hermitage in all directions as he pleased,’
at the command of Dhritarashtra. ,


7. Hesaw many sacrificial altars with
sacred fires burning om them and with
many ascetics seated en them, who had.
performed their oblations and poured liba-
tions in honour of the celestials. ,


8. Those altars were covered with fruits
and roots of the forest, and with heaps of
flowers. ‘The smoke of clatiffed butter
curled upwards from them. ‘They were
graced, besides, with many ascetics pose.
sessed of bodies which appeared like tbe:
embodied Vedas and with many laymen,


9. Herds of deer were grazing or reste -
ing here and there, shorn’ of fear. Count>
less birds also were there, engaged in
uttering their sweet notes, O king !


10. The entire forest seemed to resound
with the notes of peacocks and Datyuhas
and Kokilas and the sweet songs of other’ -
warblers, ;


it. Some spots were echoed with the
chaunt of Vedic hymns recited by learned
Brahmanas. Some were adorned with large
heaps of fruits ard foots gathered from
the forest. :


32—13. King Vudhishthira then distri-
buted, amongst those ascetics golden or
copper jars which he had brought for them,
and many deer-skins and blankets and
wooden sacrificial ladles and Kamandalus
and wooden platters, and pots and pans,
QO Bharata.


14. Various kinds of vessels, made of.
iron, and smaller vessels and cups of
various sizes, were also given away by the
king, the ascetics taking them away, each
as many as he liked.


1g. Pious king Yudhishthira, having
thus roved throngh the forest and seen the
various retreats of ascetics and made many.
gifts, returned to the place where his uncle
was.

16, Hesaw king Dhritarashtra, seated
at ease, with Gandhari besides him, after
having finished his morning cites.


17. The tighteous-souled monarch be-
held also pis mother, Kunti, seated not


4


30


much remote from that place, like a disciple ,


with bent head, gifted with humility.


18. Hesaluted the old king giving his
name, ‘Sit down,’ were the woyis the old
king said. With Dhritarashtra ’s permis-
sion, Yudhishthira sat himself down ona
mat of Kusha grass.


19. Then the other sens of Pandu with
Buima among them, O you of Bharata’s
tace, saluted the king atid touched his feet
and sat themselves down, with his order,


20. The old Kuru king, surrounded by
them looked highly beautiful, Indeed, he
blazed with a Vedie splendour Kke Veihas-
Pati ia the midst of the celestials.


at. After they had sat themselves down,
many great Rishis, yts., Shatayupa, and
others, who were inhabitants of Kurukshetra
Came there. ;


22. The illustrious and learned Vyasa,
gilted with great energy and respected
by even the celestial Rishis, showed himself
at the head of his numerous disciples to
Yudhishthirca.


23. he Kura king  Dhritarashtea,
Kunti’s son Vudhishthira ef great energy,
and Bhimasena and others, stood up and
going a few steps, saluted those guests,

24. Approaching near, Vyasa, surround:
ed by Shatayupa and others, addressed
king Dhritrashtra, saying,—‘Be seated.’


25. he illustrious Vyasa then took an
excellent seat made of: Kusha grass placed
upon a black deer-skin and covered with
a piece of silken cloth, hey had reserved
that seat foe him.


26 After Vyasa had been seated, all those
foremost of twicesborn persons, gifted with
profuse energy, sat themselves down, With
the permission of Krishna- Dwaipayana,


Cael
.


CHAPTER XXVIIL


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. )—
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

i—2. After the noble Pandavas had all
been seated, Satyavati’s son Vyasa said,—
‘O Dhritarashtra of mighty-arms, have you
been able to achieve penances? Is your
mind, O king, pleased with your living in
the forest ? ‘ é


3. Has your grief begotten of the des-
teuction of your sons in battle; disappeared
from your heart? Are all your percep-
tious, O sinless one, nowclear? =.


{ Strain 2?


MAHABHARATA.


4. Do you practise the ordinances of
forest-life after having made your heart
firm? Does my daughter-in-law, Gan-
Ghari, suffer herself to be overwhelmed by
grief ?


5. She is endued with great wisdom.
Endued with intelligence, that queen under-
stands both virtue and profit. She is welt
conversant with the truths which relate to
botlY prosperity and adversity. Doves she
still grieve 7


-6. Does Kunti, O king, who far her
devotion to the service of her seniors, left
her children, attend to your wants and
serve you with ali humilicy?


7. Have the high-minded and great
king Yudhishthiea, the san of Dnarma, and
Bhima and Atjuna, and the twins, beer
sufficiently comforted 7 ~ ;


8. Do you feet delight at seeing them 7?
Has your mind become freed from every
tas your disposition, O king, be-
céme pute on account of the increase of
your knowledye ?


9 These three, O king, are the fore-
most of all concerns, O Bharata, vis,
abstension from injury to any creation,
truch, and freedum trom anger.


to. Does your forest-life any tonge®
Prove painful to you? Are you able to


‘acquire with your own exertions the pro-


ducts of the forest for your food? Do
fasts pain you now ?


it. Have you learnt ‘O king, how the
great Vidura, ‘who was Dharma’s self, leit
this world ?


12. Through the curse of Mandavya,


the deity of Virtue became born as Vidura.


He owas gifted with great intelligence.
Endued with high penances, he was great
and high-minded. :


13. Even Vrihaspati among the celes-
tists, and Shukra among the Asuras, had
not intelligence like that foremost of persons.


14. The ‘eternal deity of Virtue was
stupefied by the Rishi Mandavya with an
expenditure of his penances acquired for a
long time with great care.


15. Atthe command of the grandfather .
and through my own energy, the highly
intelligent Vidura was procreated by me
upon a soil owned by Vichitraviryya,


16 A deity of deities, and eternal, he
was, O king, your brother. . The learned
know him to be Dharma on account of
his practices of concentration and abstrac-.
tion,


17. He grows with truth, self-restraint,
tranquility of heact, mercy, and gifts, He


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.


s always engaged In penances; and is
eternal.


18. From that deity of Virttte, through

oga-Power, the Kuru lting Wudhishthira
also toole his birth, YWudhishthira, there-
fore, O king, is Dharma of great wisdom
and immeasuraple intelligence,


t3. Dharma exists both in this world
and ia the next, and is like fice or wind or
water or earth or space,


20. He is, O king of kings, capable of
Poing everywhere and exists, pervading the
entire universe. {be is capable of being
seen by only those who are the foremost of
the deities and those who-are purged of
every sin and crowned with ascetic success,


2t. He whois Dharma, is Vidura; and
he who is Vidura is the (eldest) son of
Pandu. That son of Pandu, O king, is
capable of being perceived by you. He is
before you as your servitor,


22. Gifted with great Yoga- Power, your
high-souled brother, that foremost of in.
telligent men, seeing the  high-souled
VYudhishthira, the son of Kunti has entered
into his body,


23. O chief of Bharata’s race, I shall
unite you also with great benefit. [uow, O
son, that { am come here for removing your
doubts.


24. I shall show you some feat which has
nevec been accomplished before by any of
the great Rishis—some wonderful effect of
my penances.


25. What object is that, O king, whose
accomplishment you wish: from me? ‘Tell
me what is that which you wish to see or
ask or hear? O sinless one, L shall accom-
plish it.


CHAPTER XXIX.
(PU TRADARSHANA PARVA).


Janamejaya said :—

t—}. Tell me, O learned Brahman, what
that wonderful feat was, which the great
Rishi Vyasa of great energy accomplished
after he had his atade promise to the old king,
when Dhritarashtra, that foremost one of
Kuru’s race, had taken up his cesidence i
the forest, with his wife, and with his daugh-
ter-in-law Kunti; and after, indeed, Vidura
had left his own body and entered into
Yudhishtlira, and at the time when all the
sons of Pandu were living in the hermitage.

4. For how many days did the Kuru
king Yudhishthira of undecaying glory, stay
with his men in the forest. :


at


3. Of what food,.O powerful one, did the
great Pandavas support themselves with
their men, and wives, while they lived in the
forest? O sinless one, do you tell tne this,


Vaishampayata said :—


6—7. With the permission of the Kurit
king, the Pandavas, O monarch, with their
troops and the ladies of their household,
lived on various Kinds of food and drink
and passed about a month in gteat happi-
ness in that forest, fowards the close of
that period, O sinless one, Vyasa came
there. ;


8. White all thase princes sat around
Vyasa, engaged in conversation on various
topics, other Rishis came there.


g. They were Narada, Parvata, Devala
of austete penances, Vishwavasu, Tumvuru,
and Chitrasena, O Bharata. :


10. Gifted with sevece pettarices, the
Kuru king Yudhishthira, with the permiss
sion of Dhritarashtra, adored them accords
ing to due rites,


11. Having got that worship. from
Yudhishthira, all of them sat down of
sacred seats (made of Musha grass as also
on excellent seats made of peacock feathers.


12. After they had all been seated, the
Kuru king of great intelligence took his
seat there, surrounded by the sons - of
Pandu. a ee


13. Gandhari, Kunti.attd Draupadi, ard |
she of the Sattwata race, and othrre jadies
of the royal household also sat down,


14. , The.conversation which then arose
was excellent and had ceference to subjetts, _
connected with piety, and the Rishis of old,
and the celestiats agd. the Asuras, :


ts—<2t, At the close of that conversation
the highly energetic Vyasa, that foremost
of eloguent men, that first of all persons
knowing the Wedas, highly pleased, ade
dressed the blind monarch and once more
said,— Burning as you are with grief on
account of your children, f know, O king of
kings, what object is cherished by you ia
your heart. | know the sorrow which
always exists in the heart of Gindhari, that
which exists in the heart of Kunti, and that
also whtich is cherished by Draupadi in her
heart, and that burning grief, on’ account of
the death of her son, which Krishna’s sister
Subhadra also cherishes, ‘Hearing of this
meeting, O king, of yours with all these
princes aud princesses of your house, I have
come here, O delighter of the Kauravas, for
removing your doubts, Let the celestialg
and Gandharvas and all these great Rishis,
see to-day the energy of those penance


as


which T haved ac§dired for these long years.
Therefore, O king, tell me what wish of
‘yours 1 shalt grant to-day. : é
22-25. Lari powerful etotigh to grant
you a boon. See the fruit of my penanees,’
‘Thus addressed by Vyasa of great under-
standing, king Dhritarashtra thought for


a moment and then prepared to speak.
He said,—‘I am greatly fortunate. Lucky
am I in obtaining your favour. My life


is crowned with success to-day,since this
meeting has taken place between me and
you all of great piety. [o-day [ shall attain
to that highly happy end which is reserved
for me, since; ye ascetics who have
enances for wealth, ye who are equal to
raha himself, t have succeeded in
obtaining this meeting with you all. ‘Lhere
fis’ not the least doubt that this sight that
t have obtained of you all has purged me
of every sia. 7
26-=27. O sinless anes, t have tio loiger
any fear about my end in the next world.
Full as & am of love for’ my children, I
always cemembee them. My tind,
however; is always pained by the recollec-
tion of the various acts of wrong which my
wicked son of exceedingly evil understand-
ing perpetrated.
standing, he always persecuted the inno-
cent Pandavas, . :


28—4o. Alas, the whole Barth has been
devastated by him, with her horses
elephants and men. Many great  kiigs,
tulers of vatlous kingdoms, ¢éame for help-
ing my son and succumbed to death.
Alas, leaving’ their beloved father and
wives and theic very life-breaths, all those
herdes have become guests of the king’ of
the dead. What end, O twice-born one,
has been attained by those men who have
killed, for the sake of their frierid, in batde?
What end also has attained by my sons and
geandsons who have fallen in the ‘battle ?
My heart is always pained at the thought
of my having brought about the destruc-
tlon of the powerful Bhishma, the son of
Shantanu, and of Drona, that foremost of
Brahmanas, through my foolish and sinful
s0n who was an injurec of his friends.


33. Desirous of getting the sovereignty
of the Earth, he caused the Kusu_ race,
blazing with prosperity, to be annihilated.
Thinking of all this, [ burn day and night
with grief, :


34- Deeply afflicted with pain and grief,
1 am unable to get peace of mind. Indeed,
O sire, thinking of all this, 1 have no peace
of mn’,


Vishampayania said ‘—
35. Hedring these lamentations expres-


-


J father-in-law.


Having a siaful under-


" MAHABANRATA,


sed in varios ways, df that royal sage, th
grief, O Janamej ya of Gandhaci, becant
fresh,

36. The grief, also, of Kunti, of the
daughter of Drupada, of Subhadra, and
ef the other members; male and female,
and the daughters-in-law, of the royal house
of Kuru became equally green,


97-38. Queen Gandhari, with bandas
ged eyes, joming her hands, addressed her
Deeply afflicted with grief
on account of the destruction of her sons,
she said,—="O foremost of ascetics, this king
has passed sixteett years grieving for the
death of his sous and shorn of peace of
mind,


49. Afflicted with grief on aceount af
the destruction of his children, this king
Dhtitarastura, always breathes heavily,
and never sleeps at night, O great Rishi.


40. Throttyh the power of your penances
you ate competent to create new worlds,
What ueed I say ther about showing this
king his children who are now ia the othet
world ?


4tu. This trishwa,

cupada, has fost all her kinsmen and
children, ‘Lhereture, she wha is the dearest
of my daughtets-in-law grieves greatly.


42. The sister of Krishna, d/s., Subhas
dea of sweet wotds, burning with the loss
of her sou, grieves as deeply.


‘43. ‘Phis lady who ts respected by all,
who is the wife of Bhurishravas, stricken
with grief on account of the fate of her
husband, always indulges in heart-rending
lamentations.


“44. Her father-in-law was the intelligent
Valhika of Kuru’s race. Alas, Somadatta
also was killed, along with his father, in
the great battle,


43, Alas, a hundred sons, heroes who
never retreated from battle, belonging to
this son of yours, this kiuy of yreat -intelli-
gencé atid great pfosperity, has been
killed in battle.


46.. The hundred wives of those sons
are all grieving and repeatediy increasing
the grief of botit the king and myself. O
great ascetic, stricken by that great
onslaught, they have gathered round me.


47. Alas, those great heroes, those great
car- warriors, ‘my fatiers-in-law, Somadatta
and others,—alas, what end has been theirs,
O powerful one.


the daighter of


48. Through your favour, O holy one,
that will take place for which this king, my
self and this daughterin-law of yours, vs.,
Kunti, shall all become freed from our grief,


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA,


4g. After Gandhari had said so, Kunti,
Whose face had become wasted through
‘observance of many hard vows, began to


think of her secret-bori son gifted with
solar effulgence. .
s0. The boon-giving Rishi Vyasa,


€apable of both seeing and hearing what
took place ata remote distance, saw that
the royal mother of Arjuna was afflicted
with grief.

5t. To her Vyasa said,—‘Tell me, O
blessed éne, what is in your mind. Tell me
what you wish td say.’

52. Atthis, Kunti, bending her head
to her-father-in-law, atid overcome with
bashfulness, said these words to hint, re-
Counting the past incidents of her life.


nied


CHAPTER XXX.
(PUTRBDARSIIANA PARVA. )=
Continued.


Kunti said :—

1. O-oly one, you are my father-in-law
and, therefore, my deity of déities. You
are my god of gods. Hear my words of
truth. : 1

2—3. A twice-born asceti¢ named Dur-
vasas, who is full of anger, came to my
father’s house for begging alms. I suce


ceeded in pleasing him by the purity of thy-


conduct and of my minds as also by refusing
to notice the many wrongs he did. I did
hot yield to anger although there was much
in his conduct quite capable of exciting that
passion. -

_ 4 Served with care, the great ascetic
became highly pleased with me and dis-
posed to grant mea boon. ‘ You must ac-
‘cept the boon I shail give,’ were his words
to me. :


. §—6. Fearing his curse, { answered
him saying,-—'So be it.’ The Rishi once
more said to me,—'O blessed damsel, O
you of beautiful face, you will become the
mother of Dharma. Those deities whom
you wilt samaion will obey you.’

_ 7. Having said these words, the twice-
born one vanistied away from my, sight.” I
becaine filled with wondet. The Mantra,
however, which the Rishi gave, has lived in
my vueiiiory at all times. :

8. One day; sitting within my chamber
saw the sun risirig. Desiring to bring
the maker of day before me, I cecullected
the words of the Rishi,


A


33


9. Without any Gonsciousness of the
fault I commiitted, | called the deity from
mere childishness. The deity, of a thoue
sahd rays, catne before mie.


10. He divided himself in two parts.
With one portion he was in the sky, and
with the other hé stood on the Earth before
me. With sne he heated the worlds and
with another he canie to me.


11, He told me, while I was trembling
at bis sight, these words :—‘Do you ask a
boon of me.’ Bowing to him with my head
{ Asked him to leave mie.


12. He replied to nie, saying,—~"] dais
not bear the idea of coming to you fruit«
lessly, I shall consume you as also that
Bralimana who gave you the Mantra as a
boon,

13. 1 wished to protect, from Surya’s
curse, the Brahmana who had done {na
evil. 1, therefore, said,—' Let me have a son
like you, O god.’

14. The deity of thousand rays ther
efttered me with his energy and stupefied
me completely. He then said to me,-' You
will have a son,’ and then returned to the
firmament,


18. f continued to live im the inner
aparimients and desirous of saving thé
honour of my father, I cast into the waters
my infant son named Karna who thus caine”
into the world secretly, oy ;


16 Forsooth, through the grace of that
god, I once more became a virgin, O twice«
born one, even as the Rishi Ducvasas had
said to mé.


17, Foolish that { am, althougti tie knew
me for his mother when he grew up, yet £
did not try to. acknowledge bim, This
burns nie, O Rishi, as is well-known te
you.

18, Whettier it if sinful or not $a, I have
told you the truth, You should, O holy
one, satisfy the craving 1 feel for seeing
that sori of mine,


19. O foremost of ascetics, let this king
also, O sinless one,'obtain ttié;fruition to-day
of that desire of his which he cherishes in
his bosom and Which has become known ta
you,’ + ;


go. Thiis addressed by Kunti, Vyasa,
that foremost of all persons, said to lec iw
teply,—‘Blessed be you, “all that you hava
Said to me will fiappen,


21. You ace not to blame at all. You
were restored to virginity, The deities are
possésséd of (Yoga) power, They are able
enter human bodies,


_ 22. There are many deities. They be-
get (offspring) by thought alone, By word,
by sight, by touch, and by sexual union,
‘also, they beget children. ‘These are the
five methods, ;


23. You belong to the order of humanity.
You have no fault. Know this, O Kunti!
‘Let the fever of your heart be removed.


24. Everything is becoming for those
whe are mighty. Everything is pure for
those that are mighty. Everything is meri-
torious for chose that are mighty. - Every-
thing is theie awn for those who are
mighty.’ ,


‘CHAPTER XXX1.


(PUTRADARSHANA PARVA.)==
. Continued.

Vyasa’said -~

- 1. Blessed be you, O Gandharl, you

shall see your gons and brothers and friends


and kinsmen along with your sires this
night like men risen from sleep.


2. Kunti also shall see Karna, and she
of Yadu's race shall see her son Abbimanyu.
Draupadi shall see her five sons, her fathers
and her brothers also.


. 3. Even before you had asked me, this
was the thought ia my mind. 1 enters
tained this purpose when [ was urged to
that effect by the king, by you, O Gandhari,
and by Kunti J ;


‘ 4. You should not grieve for those fore-
most offmen. They met with death on
account of their devotion to the practices of
Kshatriyas.


gs. O-fauitless one, the work of the gods
could not- but be done. It was for accom-
plishing that object that those heroes came
down on earth, They were all portions of
the celestials,


- 6~7. Gandharvas, Apsaras, Pishachas,
Gubyakas and Rakshasas, many pure
persons, ‘many individuals crowned with
success (of penaices). celestial Rishis, deities
and Danavas, and heavenly Rishis of spot-
Tess character, met with death on the battie-
field of Kurukshetra, ;


8. Itis heard that he who was the ine
telligent king of the Gandharvas, and named
Dhsitarashtra, took birth in’ the. world of
men as your lord Dhritarashtra.


9. Know that Pandu of unfading glory
and distinguished above all others, erigi-
nated from the Maruts. Kshattri and
Yudhishthica are both portions of the deity
of Virtue,


MAHABAHRATA,


ro. Know that Duryodhana was Kall,
and Shakuni was Dwapara. O you of good
features, know that Dusshasana and others
were all Rakshasas.


tr, Bhimasena of great power that
chastiser of enemies, is from the Maruts.
Know that this Dhananjaya, the son of
Pritha, is the ancient Rishi Nara.


12—14, Hrishikesha is Narayana, and
the twins are the Ashwins. That foremost
of Sheat-giving ones, vtz., Surya, having
divided his body in two parts continued
with one portion to give heat to the worlds
and with another to live as Karna. He


.who was born as the son of Arjuna, that


gladdener of all, that heir of the properties
of the Pandavas, who was killed by six
car-warriors (fighting together), was Soma.
He was of born Subhadra. Through Yoga-«
power he had divided himself in two parts.


15. Dhrishtadyumna who originated with
Draupadi from the sacrificial fire, was
an auspicious portion of the deity of fire.
Shikhandin was a Rakshasa.


16. Know that Drona wasa portion of
Vrihaspati, and that Drona’s son is born
of a portion of Rudra. MKaow that Ganga’s
son Bhishma was one of the Vasus whe
became born as a man.


17. Thus, O you of great wisdom, the
deities had taken birth as human beings,
and after having accomplished their purc-
poses have returned to the celestial region.


18,. I shall to-day, dispel that sorrow
whictr is in the hearts of you all, about the
return of these to the other world.


19. Do you all go towards the Bhagi-
rathi, You] will then see all those who have
heen killed on the field of battle.


Vaishampayania said :—


zo. Allthe persons there present having
heard the words of Vyasa, raised a loud
leonine shout and then went towards the
Bhagirathi. :


21. Dhritarashtra with all his ministers
and the Pandavas, as also with. all those
foremost of Rishis and Gandharvas who
had come there, started as directed.


22. Arrived at the banks. of Ganga, -
that sea of men took up ‘their abode as
pleased them. : :


23. The king, erdued with great intelli« .
gence, with the Pandavas, took up his
abode in a desirable spot, along with the
ladies and the aged ones of his household.


24. They passed that day as if it were a
whole year, waiting for the approach of the
night when they would see the deceased
princes, ;


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.


25. The Sun then reached the sacred
mountain in the west and all those per-
sons, having batlied in the sacred river
finished their evening rites.


CHAPTER XXXII.


( PUTRADARSHANA PARVA. )—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

r. When night came, all those persons,
having finished their evening rites, appro-
ached Vyasa.


2. Dhritasashtra, with purified body and
with mind solely directed towards it, sat
there with the Pandavas and the Rishis in
his company.


3. The royal ladies sat with Gandhari
in a secluded spot. All the citizens'and the
inhabitants of the provinces ranged them-
selves according to their years.


4--5. Then the great ascetic, Vyasa, of
great energy, bathing in the sacred waters
of the Bhagirathi, summoned all the decea-
sed warriors, viz., those who had fought on
the side of the Pandavas, those who had
fought for the Kauravas, including highly
blessed kings belonging to the various king-
doms.


6. Atthis, O Janamejaya, a deafening
uproar was heard to arise from within the
waters, resembling that which had formerly
been heard of the armies of the Kurus and
the Pandavas. -


7. Then those kings, headed by Bhishma
and Drona, with all their armies, arose by
thousands from the waters of the Bhagi-
rathi.


8. There were Virata and Drupada, with |


their sons and forces. There were the sons
of Draupadi and the son of Subhadra, and
‘Rakshasa Ghatotkacha.


g. There were Karna, Duryedhana, and
the powerful car-warrior Shakuni, and the
other children, possessed of great strength,
of Dhritarashtra, headed by Dusshasana.


to. There were the son of Jarasandha,
Bhagadatta, Jarasandha of great energy,
Bhurishravas, Shala, Shalya and Vrishasena
_with his younger brother.


11. There were prince Lakshmana, and
the son of Dhrisbtadyumna, and all the
children of Sikhandin, and Dhrishtaketu
with his younger brother.


12. There were Achala, Vrishaka, the
Rakshasa Alayudha, Valhika, Somadatta,
and the king Chekitana.


35°


13. These and innumerable others,
appeared on “that ‘occasion. All of them
rose from the waters of the Bhagirathi, with
shining bodies.


14. Those kings appeared, each clad in’
that dress and equipt with that standard
and that vehicle which he had while fighting
on the field. -


15. All of them were dressed in celestial
vestments and all had brilliant earrings.
They were free from all anitnosity and pride
and divested of anger and jeaiousy.


16. Gandharvas sang theie praises, and.
bards waited on them, ‘chaunting their
deeds. Robed with celestial raiments and
wearing celestial garlands, each of them was
waited upon by bands of Apsaras.


17. Atthat time, through the power of
his penances, the great ascetic, the son of
Satyavati, gratified with Dhritarastra, gave
him celestial vision.


18. Gifted with celestial knowledge and
strenyth, the illustrious Gandiari beheld all
her children as also all those who had been
killed in battle,


19. All persons assembled there saw with
steadfast gaze and hearts filled with wonder
that amazing and inconceivale scene which
made the hairs stand erect.


20. It looked like a high carnival of
pleased men and women. ‘That wondrous ~
scene looked like a picture painted on the
catvass.


2t. Dhritarashtra seeing all those ‘aang
with their celestial vision obtained through
the favour of that sage, became full of joy,
O chief of Bharata’s race,


CHAPTER XXXII.


( PUTRADARSHANA PARVA. aa
Continued... ~


Vaishampayana said :-—

1—2. Then those foremost of men, shorn
of anger and jealousy, and purged of every
sin, met with another, according to thase
high and auspicious ordinances which have
been laid down by regenerate Rishis. All
of them were happy of hearts and looked
like celestials moving in celestial regions, .


Son met with father oc mother, wives
with husbands, brother with brother, and
friend with friend, O king.


4. The Pandavas full of joy, met with
the powerful bowman Karna as als? with
the son of Subhadra, and the. einldren:, ‘of
Desupets


fi


5. With pleased hearts the son of Pandu
approached Karna, O king, and became
reconciled with him.


6, All those warriors, O chief of Bhara-
ta’s race, meeting with one another through
the favour of the great ascetic, became re-
conciled with one another. s


* 9. Renouncing all unfriendliness, they
became established on amity and peace. It
was thus that all those foremost of men,
wiz., the Kauravas and other kinsmen of
theirs as also with their children. They
passed in great happiness the whole of that
night.


9—12. Indeed, the Kshatriya warriors,
on account of the happiness they experien-
ced, considered that place as Heaven itself.
There was no grief, no fear, no suspicion,
no discontent, no reproach in that region,
as those warrjors, O king, met with one
another on that night. " Meeting ~with their
sires and ibrothers and husbands and
sons, the ladies renounced all grief and felt
great joy. Having sported ‘with cne ano-
ther thus for one night, those heroes and
those ladies, embracing one another taking
@ne another’s leave, came back-to the
places they had come from. Indeed, that
toremost of ascetics dismissed that collection
of warriors, - ;


13—15. Within the twinkling of an eye
that larpe crowd disappeared in the very
sight of all those persons, ‘Those great
persons, plunging into the sacred river
Bhagirathi, proceeded, with their cars and
standards, to their respective abodes. Some
went to the regions of the gods, some to the
region of Brahman, somé to the region of
Varuna, and some to the region of Kuvera.
Some among thosé Kings went to the region
of Surya.


16. Amongst the Rakshasas and Pisha-
chas, some proceeded to the country of
the UttarasKurus. Others, moving delight-
fully, went in the company of the celes-
tials.


17~-20. Thus did all those great persons
disappear with their vehicles and animals
and with all their followers. After all of
them had departed, the great sage, who was
standing in the waters of the sacred rivers,
viz., Vyasa of great virtue and energy, that
benefactor of jthe Kurus, then addressed
those Kshatriya ladies who had become
widows, and said these words,—‘ Let those
amongst these foremost of women who are
desirous of attaining to the regions acquired
by their husbands cast away all idleness and
quickly plunge into the sacred Bhagirathi.’—
Hearing these words of his, those foremost
ladies, placing faith in them, took the per-


MAHABHARATA.


mission of their father-in-law, and then
plunged into the waters of the Bhagirathi.


2t. Freed- from human bodies, those
chaste ladies then went, O king, with there
husbands to the regions acquired by the
latter, .


22. Thus, those {ladies of various con-
duct, devoted to their husbands, entering
the waters of the Bhagirathi, became freed
from their mortal bodies and attained to
the companionship of their husbands in the
regions acquired by them,


23. Possessed of celestial! forms, and
adorned with celestial ornaments, and wear~
ing celestial garments and garlands they
proceeded to those regions where theie
husbands were living.


24. Endued with excellent conduct and
many virtues, their anxieties alf removed,
they were seen to ride on excellent cars,
and gilted with every accomplishment, they
found those regions of felicity which were
theirs by right. ~


25. Devoted to the duties of piety,
Vyasa, at that time, becoming a giver of
boons, granted to all the men there colect-
ed the fruition of the desires they respec-
tively cherished.


26. People of various kindoms, hearing
of this meeting between the hallowed dead
and living human beings, became highly
pleased.


27. That man who duly listens to this
discourse meets with everything that is
dear to him. Indeed, he obtains all agree-
able objeets both in this world and in the
next.


28—29.% That man of learning and science
that foremost of pious persons, who recites
this narrative for the hearing of others
wins great fame here and an ausp‘cious
end hereafter, as also aunion with kins-
men and all desirable objects Such a man
has not to work hard for his maintenance
and meets with all sorts of auspicious ob-
jects in life. ‘These are the rewards reaped
by a person who gifted wi.h devotion to
Vedic studies and with penances, recites
this narrative in the hearing of others,


30—31t. Those persons who endued with
good conduct, devoted to self-control, purged
of all sins by the gifts they make, endued
with sincerity, having tranquil ,souls, freed
from falsehood and the desire of injuring
others, adorned with faith, belief in the
scriptures, and intelligence, listen to this.
wonderful book, surely attain to the highest
end hereafter. ‘


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA


CHAPTER XXXIV.


(PU fRADARSHANA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Santi said :-—

1. Hearing this story of the reappearance
and departure of his forefathers, the highly
intelligent king Janamejaya became greatly
Pleased.


2. Filled with joy, he once more asked
Vaishampayana on the subject of the re-
appearance of dead men, saying,‘ How is
it-possible for persons whose bodies have
been destroyed to reappear in those very
forms ?


3. Thus asked, that foremost of twice-
born persons, viz, the disciple of Vyasa,
that first of speakers, possessed of yreat
energy, thus answered Janamejaya.


Vaishampayana said :— ’

4. This is certain, wi, that acts are
never destroyed. Bodies, O king, are bora
of acts; so also are features.


5- The great primal elements are eternal
on account of the union with them of the
Lord of all beings, They exist with what
is eternal. Accordingly, they have no
destruction when the non-eternal are des-
troyed.


6. Acts done without exertion are true,
and foremost, and yield real fruit. ‘The
soul, united, however, with such acts as re-
quire exertion for their performance, enjoys
pleasure and pain.


z- Though united so, yet it is 4 certain
inference that the soul is never modified by
them, like the reflection .of creatures ina

“mirror, It is never destroyed.


8. As long as one’s deeds are not ex-
hausted (by enjoyment or endurance of
their fruits good and bad), so long does he
consider the body to be his ownself. The
man, however, whose acts have been ex-
hausted, without considering body to be
self, takes the self to be something other-
wise.

9. Various existent objects, attaining to
a body, become united as one. ‘Those very
abjects become eternal to men of knowledge
who understand the difference.


10. In the Horse-Sacrifice, this Shruti is
heard in the matter of the killing of the
horse. ‘The certain possessions of embodied
creatures, vis., their vital airs (and the
senses, etc..) exist eternally even when they
are borne to the ather world. :


1, [ shall, you what is beneficial, if it
be agreeable to you, O king. You have,


ea


while employed in your sacrifices, heard of
the celestial paths. :


12. When preparations were made for
any sacrifice of yours, the celestials became,
beneficially inclined to you. When, indeed,
the celestials were thus disposed and came
to your sacrifice, they were lords in the
matter of the passage.


1%. Therefore, the eternal ones (utss,
Jivas), by adoring the deities in sacrifices,
succeed in attaining to excellent ends.
When the five primal elements are eternal,
when the soul also is eternal, he called
Purusha is equally so.


14. When such is the case, he who sees
a'creature as disposed to take various forms,
is considered as having an erroneous une
derstanding. He who indulges in too
much grief at separation, is, E think, a
foolish person. :


15. He who sees evil in separation
should give up union, By standing aloof,
no unions are formed, and sorrow is ree
nounced, for sorrow in the world is born of
separation. ;

16. Only he who understands the dis-
tinction between body and self, and not
another, becomes freed from the erroneous
belief. He who knows the Jother vfz. self)
attains to the highest understanding and
becomes freed from error.

17. As regards creatures, they appear
from an invisible state, and once more dis-
appear into invisibléness, 1 do not know


him. He tatso does not know me. As
regards myself, renunciation is not yet
mine.


18. He, who is not possessed of power,
enjoys or endures the fruits of all his deeds
in those bodies in which he does them.

19. I€ the act be a mental one, its fruits
are enjoyed or endured mentally ; if it be
done with the body, its results are to be
enjoyed or endured in the body.


CHAPTER XXXV.


(PUTRADARSHANA PARVAJ—
Continued, .


Vaishampayana said :—

1. King Dhritarashtra had never seen
his own sons. Getting eye-sight through
the favour of the Rishi, he saw for the
first time, O perpetuater of Kuru’s race,
those children of his who were very like his
own self,


ay


+


z. That foremost of men, vis., the
Kuru Ring had learnt all the royal duties
as also the Vedas and the Upanishadas,
and had acquired certitude of understand-
ing. L

3. Highly, wise Vidura acquired great
success through the power of his penances.
Doritarashtra also acquired great success
foc having met the ascetic Vyasa.


Janamejaya said :—

If -Vyasa, dispdsed to grant me a
boon, kindly jshow me my father in that
form which he had, clad as he used to be
clad, and as olf as he was when he
fefe this world, 1 may then believe ail that
you have told-me.


. §+ Such a« sight will be miost agreeable
to me. Indeed, I shall consider myself
crowned with success, 1 shall have gained
acertdinty of conclusion. O let my iwish
be satisfied through the favour of that
foremost of Rishis!’


Sauti said :—


6. After king Jandmejaya had said
these words, the’ highly energetic andSintelli-
ae Vyasa, showed his favour and brought

arikshit.


7. King Janamejaya saw his royal
father possessed of great’ beauty, brought
down from the celestial region, in the same
form that he had and of the same age as
he was (at the time of leaving this world),


“ 8. The“great Shamika also, and his son
Shringin, were similarly brought there. All
the {counsellers and ministers of the king
saw them.


9. King Janamejaya, performing the
final bath’ in his sacrifice, became highly
pleased. He poured the sacred water on his
father even as he caused it to be poured
on himself.


to-11t. Having performed the final bath,
the king addressed the twice-born Astika
who had originated (from the race of the
Vayavaras and who was the son of Jarat-
karu, and said these words:—‘O Astika,
this sacrifice of mine is fraught with many
wonderful ‘incidents, -since this my sire
has been seen by me, he who has removed
all my sorrows.


Astika said:—


12, The performer of that sacrifice in
which thelancient Rishi, Dwaipayana Vyasa,
that vast receptacle of penances, is present,
is sure, O foremost one of Kuru’s race, to
conquer both the worlds.


' 13. O son of the Pandavas, you have
heard a wonderful history, ‘Fhe snakes


MAHABHARATA.


have been reduced into ashes and have
followed the footsteps of your father.


14. Through your truthfulness, O king,
Takshaka has with difficulty escaped a pain-
ful {fate. ‘The »Rishis have been all adored.
You have seen also the end that has been
acquired by your great father.}


15. Having heard this sin-cleansing


| history you have acquired abundant merit,


The knots of your heart -have been (untied
through seeing this foremost of persons.


16. They who are the supporters of the
wings of Virtue, they who are of good con-
duct and excellent disposition, they on
seeing whom sins disappear, we should all
bow to them. -


Sauti said :—


17. Having heard this from that fore-
most of twice-born ones, king Janamejaya
adored that Rishi, repeatedly honouring
him in every way.


18. Knowing all duties, he then asked
the Rishi Vaishampayana of undecaying
glory fabout the sequel, O best of ascetics,
of king Dlcitarashira’s residence ia the
forest.


CHAPTER XXXVI. °
(PUTRADARSHANA PARVA.)—


Continued.


Janamejaya said :—

1. Having seen his sons, and grandsons
with ali theic friends and followers, what,
indeed, did that king, vis., Dhritarashtra,
and king Yudhisthira also, do ? :


Vaishampayana said :—


2. Seeing that highly wonderful spec-
tacle, viz., the re-appearance of his children,
the royal sage, Dhritarastra renounced his
grief and returned to his hermitage.


3. The common people and all the great
Rishis, sent away by Dhritarashtra, came
back to the places they respectively wished.-


4. The great Pandavas,faccompanied by
their wives, and with a small retinue, went
to the hermitage of the great monarch, °


5—7. Then Satyavati’s son, who was
honoured by twice-born Rishis and all other
persons, arrived at the hermitage,’addressed
Dhritarashtra, saying,—‘O mighty-armed
Dhritarashtra, O son of Kuru’s race, listen
to what I. say! You have heard .- varios
discourses from Rishis of great knowledge


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA,


tand sacred deeds, having penances for
wealth and excellence of blood, knowledge
of the Vedas and their branches, of piety
and years, and of great eloquence.


8. Do not set your mind again on
sorrow, He who is wise is never moved at
i Juck. You have also heard the mysteries
of the deities from Narada of celestial
form.


9. Your children have all attained,
through performance of Kshatriya practices,
to that auspicious end which is sanctified
by weapons, You have seen how they
move about at will in great happiness.


10. This Yudhishthira of great intelli-
gence is awaiting your permission with all
his brothers and wives and kinsmen.


11. Do you send him away. Let him
return to his kingdom and rule it! They
have passed more than a month in thus
living in the forest. F


12. The station of sovereignty should
always be well-guarded, O king! O you of
Kuru’s race, kingdom has many enemies.’


13—14. Thus addressed by Vyasa of
incomparable energy,the -Kurt king, well-
versed in words summoned Yudhishthira
and said to him,—‘O you having no enemies,
blessings on you! Do you listen to me,
with all your brothers! ‘Fhrough your grace,
O king, grief no longer stands in my way.


_ 1§. Tam living as happily, O son, with
you here as if | were in the city of Hastina-
pore. With you as my protector, O learned
one, | am enjoying all agreeable objects.


16. 1 have obtained from you all those
services which a son renders to his sire.
J am highly pleased with you. I have not.
the least dissatisfaction with you, O mighty-
armed one. Go now, O son, without wait-
ing here any longer,


17. Meeting with you, my penances are
being slackened. This my body, gifted with
penances, I have been able to sustain only
on account of my meeting with you.


18. These two mothers of yours, living
now upon fallen leaves.of trees, and observ-
ing -vows similar to mine, will not live
long. -

19. We have seen Duryodhana and
others, wha have become dwellers of the
other world, through the power of Vyasa’s
penances and through (the merit of) this
my meeting with you, F

20. O sinless one, I have gained the ob-
jecttof my life. I now wish to practise the
austerest of penances. You-should grant
me permission.


21. The obsequial cake, the fame and


a
achievements, and the family of one ans
cestors, now depend upon you entirely, O
mighty-armed one, do;you then go either
to-morrow or this very day. Donot tarry,
O son.


22. O chief of Bharata’s race, you have
repeatedly heard what the duties are of
kings. I do not see what more I can say to
you, [have nolonger any necessity with
you, O you of great power.’


Vaishampayana continued :—=

23. King Yudhishthira replied to the
(old) king who said so, saying, —“O you wha
know every rule of virtue, fyou should not
cast me off in this way. lam guilty, of no
fault.


24. -Let all my brothers and followers
go as they like. With steadfast vaws ft
shall wait upon you and upon these two
mothers of mine.’ 3


25. Gandhari then said te him,—'O
son, let it not be so, Listen, the family of
Kuru is now dependant on you. The
obsequial cake also of my fathersin-law |
depends on you. Depart then, O sen,


26. We have been sufficiently honoured
and served by you. You shonid do. what-
the king says. Indeed, O son, you should
obey the command of your sire.


Vaishampayana continued :—

27. Thus addressed by Gandhari, king:
Yudhishthira, rubbing his eyes whicty were
bathed in Nears of affection, said these
words bewailingly.


28. The king is tenouncing me; as-also.
the illustrious Gandhari, My heart, hows
ever, is bound to you. How shall I, stricken
as I am with sorrow, leave you. ;


29. I do not, however, at the same time,
venture to obstruct your penances, O rightea
ous lady! There is nothing higher than
penances. It is by penances that one ace
quices the Supreme,


30. O queen, my heart no longer turns
as of old towards kingdom. My mind is
wholly set upon penances now,


gt. The entire Earth Is empty now. O
auspicious lady, fshe -does not please me
any longer! Our kinsmen have been rey
duced in number. Our, strength is no
longer what it was before. ;

32. The Panchalas have been wholly.
rooted out. Only nominally they exist. O
auspicious lady, I do not-see any one who
may assist at their re-establishment and
growth, : ;


23. All of them have been reduced to
ashes by Drona on the field of, battle,


-


#s


The remnant were killed by Drona’s son
at night. ;

34. The Chedis and the Matsyas, who
Were one friends, no longer exist.
the tribes of the Vrishnis are all that re-
main, Vasudeva having kept them up.


_ 38. Seeing only the Vrishnis I wish to
live. . My desire of life, however, is due to
my wish of acquiring merit and not riches
or enjoyment, Do you cast auspicious
looks “upon us all. lt will be difficult for
us to see you.


46—47. The King will commence to
Ptactice the most austere. and unbearable
of penances!’ Hearing these words, that
king of-battle, the 'mighty-arrmed Sahadeva
with eyes bathed in tears, addressed
Vudhishthira, saying,—* O chief of Bharata
race, I dare aot leave my mother,


38—39. Do you return to the capital
soon, I shall practise penances, O power-
ful one! Even here I shall reduce my
body by penances, engaged in serving the
feet of the king and of these my mothers !’
To-Kunti, after embracing that mighty-
armed hero, addressed him thus,—Depart,
O son! Do not say so.

40. Obey my behest’! Do all of you go
hence. Let peace by yours! Ye sous, tet
happiness be yours! :


41. By your stay here, our penances
will be impeded. Fettered by the ties of my
affection for you, I shall fatl off from my
high penances,


_ 4% Therefore, O son, leave us. Short
ts the period of our, existence, O you of
great power.


43. By these and various other speeches
of ¢Kunti, the minds of Sahadeva and king
Yudhishthira were composed. ‘Those fore-
most ones of Kuru’s race, having received
the permission of their mother as also of the
(old) monarch, saluted the latter and began
to take his leave.


Yudhishthira said :—

44. Delighted by auspicious blessings,
we shall return tothe capital, Indeed, O
king, {having received your permission,
we shall leave this hermitage freed from
every sin.


45. Thus addressed by the great Ring
Yudhishthira the just, that royal sage, viz,
Dhritarashtra, blessed Yudhishthira and
gave him permission.


46. The king comferted Bhima, that
foremost ef all persons gifted with great
strength. Gifted with great energy and
great intelligence, Bhima showed his sub-
missiveness to the king,


Oily.


MAHABHARATA.-


4y. Embracing Arjuna and claspiig
those foremost of men, viZ., the twins also;


‘and blessing them repeatedly, the Kurd


king gave them permission to ga.

48-49. They adored the feet of Gan-
dhari and ceceived her blessings also. ‘Theit
mother Kunti then smelt their heads, and
dismissed them. ‘They ther went round the
king dike calves, when prevented from suck-
ing, their dams, Indeed, they repeatedly
walked coutid him, looking steadfastly at
hini.

~go. Then all the ladies of the Kaurava
household, headed by Draupadi, adored
their father-in-law according to the rites
laid down in thé scriptures, and dé-
patted,


gt. Gandhari and Kunti emibraced each
of them, and blessing them bade them go.
Their mothers-ini-law instructed them as td
how they stiould behave themselves. Get+
ting leave, they thenjideparted, with thei?
husband.


52. Then loud sounds were heard;
uttered by the charioteers that said,—='Yoke;


| yoke,’—as also of camels that grunted aloud


and of horses that neighed briskly.


53- King Yudhishthica, with his wives
and troops and alt his kinsmen, started {or
Hastinapura,


CHAPTER XXXVIL.
( NARADAGAMANA PARVA. )=s


Vaishumpayana said :—

1. After two years had passed front the
date of the return of tlre Pandavas (fron
the retreat of their sire), the celestial Rishi,
Narada, O' king, came to Yudhishthira.


a—3. The mighty-armed Kuru king, that
foremost of speakers, vizs., Yudhishthira,
having duly adored him, made him take
a seat. After the Rishi had résted awhile,
the king ‘asked him,{saying,—‘It ts after a
long time that E see your holy self arrived
at my court. Are you in peace and happis
ness, U learned Bhimasena ?


4 What ace those countries which you
have passed through? What can I do fer
you? Do youtellme. You are the fore~.
most of twice-born ones, and you are out
highest refuge.


Narada said :—

5. I have not seen you for a fong time,
Hence it is that | have come to you from
my asylum, I have seen many sacred


_ AsitaisAVasiicn PARVA


waters, and the sacred rivers Ganga, also,
oO king.


Yudhishthiza gaid —


6... People living on, the Banks of ‘Ganga
report that the great Dhritarashtra is prac-
tising the austerest of penances.


_ 7» Have you seen him there? .Is that
Perpetuater of Kuru’s race iv peace?. Are
Gandhari,and Pritha, and the Suta’s son
Sanjaya also, in peace ? ;

3. How, indeed, js that royal ‘sire
‘of mine doing? 1 wish ta hear this, O holy
one, if 5 you have seen the king.


Narada said : — ,


\ ‘


. 9. Listen, O king, with calmness to me -


as I tell you what I have heard and seen id
that asylum,


4. 10. After your return from Kurukshetra,
O delighter of the Kucus, your sire, O king,
proceeded towards Gangadwara.. rae


it. That intelligent king took with him
his (sacred) fife, Gandhari and his daughter-
in-law Kunti, as also Sanjaya of the Suta
taste, and all the ‘Vajakas. :


an Having, penances for wealth, your
sire set himself tg, the practice of severe”
usterities. He held pebbles of stone in
fie raouth, and had air alone for his food,
and abstained altogether from Speech.


. ade Engaged in severe -penances, be, was
dored by all the ascetics in the forest.
ie six months ‘the king was reduced to
only a skeleton, |


14. Gandhari, ‘lived, on water Sie:
white Kunti took a little food at intervals
of a month. Sanjaya, O Bharata, lived,
eating a little every sixth diy.


The sacred: fire, re] monarch, "hee
Jonging to the. Kuru king), was duly adored
by the sacrificing assistants who , were with
him, with libations of clarified butter, poured
on it, They did this whether the king saw
the rite or not.


..16, The kirig Had no fixed dwelling.

e became a wanderer through those
orests. The two queens; aS also Sanjaya,
ollowed him.


4 17. Sanjaya acted as the guide. on even
nd uneyen land.. The f ultless Pritha,. ©)
ing, became the eye of Gandhari, .- |


18. One day, that best.of kings went té
paper on the margin of Ganga. He then
athed in the sacred river and finishing bis
ablutipns turned his face towards Pes nes
initage.


ig: The wind tose high: ik fierte wild
6


a


fire set in. ft began td Burn that forest alt
around, :


20. When .the herds of, aniciats were
being burnt all around, as also the poke
which inhabited that region, herds of wil
boars began: to take, themselves to the
nearest marshes and waters.


‘21, When that forest was thus afflicted
on all sides dnd such distress came upon.
all the living: creatures living there, the king,
who: had taken’ no food, was ivcapable of
moving or exerting himself at all, 6,


22-~23, Your two mothers, also, exceed-
ingly emaciated, could not move, The sing,
seeing the fire approach hind from ali sides,
addressed the Suta Sanjaya, that foreniost
of skillful chariotéers, saying, — ‘Go, .O
Sanjaya, to suchia place where the fire
may not burn you.


+ 2d 23." As regards otirselves, we shalt
allow our Bodies to be destroyed .by this
fire and attain to the greatest end. To.him,
Sanjaya, that foremost of speakers; said.— -
‘ O.Ring.:. this | death, . brought, on by a fire
that is not sacred, will prove calamitous
to you. Ido not, however, see any means
by which y you can escape from this fire. '


. 26—28. That . which should next. Be .
done should. ibe. ‘marked by. you... Thus
addcessed by.. Sanjaya the king once
more. said,—* This ‘de ath cannot be cala-
mitous, to- us, for, we, have left our, home
of our own accord: ' Water, ‘fire, wind,
and tabstention. from food; ate, laudable
far ‘ascetics, ° Do -yauj. therefore, leave ms,.
O Sanjaya, forthwith. Having said: these
words to Sanjaya, -the king coneertirated
his mind. ° :


29. Facing the east, hé Sat down, with
Gandharj_ and Kunti, Seeing him in that
attitude, Sanjaya walked round him.


- $0. Gifted with inteltigencé, Sanjaya


act


said" Do you concentrate fyour mind,


O powerful one !’ | The son af a Rishi, and
himself . endued ‘with great wisdom, the
king acted as he was told.


31. Governing all the senses, he re-
‘mained like a post of wood. The highly
blessed Gandhari, - and your mather Pritha
too, remained in the same attitude.


32. Then your royal sire was overtaken
by the, wild-fire. Sanjaya, -his wivistet,
succeeded i in escaping f from that fire.


Ae saw him -on_ the. banks of Ganga,
jn. the, mhidst of ascetics. - Gifted with’.
great energy and great intelligence, rhe
bade them, farewell. and thea .started fox
the, mduntains af: Himavat. eo, ee


3t. Thus the ; reat Rud king met. with.
his deatti, aid ‘it ‘was’ this that Gandhas


qa
n


and Kunti, your two mothers,
with death, O monarch.


35. In course of my wanderings at will,
Y saw the bodies of that king and those
two queens, O Bharata,


{"4°36. Many ascetics’came to that asylum,
having heard of the erd of king Dhrita~
sashtra, Vhey did not at all grieve for
that end of theirs,


37. There, O best of. men, I heard all
the details of how the king and the two
queens, © son of Pandu, had been burnt.


33: O king of kings, yous should not
grieve for him. ‘The monarch, of his own
will, a9 also Ganchari and your mother,
got that contact with fire.


also met


Vaishampayana saidi— :

39. Heacing of tne departure of Dhrita-
rashuira feom this world, the great Pandavas
all bewai'ed.


40. Loud sounds of wailing were heard
within thef inner ppartments of the palace.
‘Yhe citizens aise, heaving of the end of the
old king, bewailed aloud. Fs

4t. 'O fie,’ cried king Yudhishthira in
great agouy, raising bis arms aloft, Think-
ing of bis mother, he wept like a child.
Ail bis brothers too, headed by Bhimasena,
did the same,


* 42. Hearing that Pritha had met with
such a fate, the coyal ladies bewailed aloud
in grief, ; :

43. Alb the people grieved upon hearing
that the ofd king, who had become chitd-
less, had been burnt to death and that the
helpless Gandhari too had shared his fate.

43. When those sounds of wailavg ceased
for a while, king Wadhishthira the- just,
stopping his wears by summoning alt his
patience, Said these words,


CHAPTER XXXVI.


{ NARADAGAMANA PARVA. j=
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1-2. When sucha fate overtook that

great king who was engaged in austere pe-
Mances, despite the fact of his baving such
\kinsmen as ourseives all alive, it seems to
ine, O twice- bornjone, that the end of human
beings is difficult to guess. Alas, who
would have thought that the son of Vichi-
travisyya would thus be burat te death,


MAHABHARATA.


3. He had a hundred sons each gifted
with ntighty-arms and possessed of great
prosperity! The king himself had’ the
strenzth of ten thousand elephants: Alas,
even he has been burit to death in a wild
fire. as

4. ‘Alas,‘he who had fermerly been
fanned with palm leaves bythe fair hands
of beautiful women, was fauned by vultures
with their wings afree hé had been bursit
‘to death in a wild fire.


5. He was formerly roused from sleep
every morning by bands of Sutas and
Magadhas had to sleep on the naked earth
through the acts of my Sinful self.


6. 1 donot grieve for the famous, Garte
dhari who had been deprived of all her
children. Observinig the same vows as het
husband, she has achuired tliose very
regions which have become his. *


7. J grieve; however, for Pritha who, re-
ntouncing the blazing prosperity of her sons,
became desirous of living in the forest. ,


8. Fie on this sovereignty of ours, fie
on otic prowess, fie on ‘the practices of
Kshattiyas! Yhough alive, we are really
dead. :


9. © fotemost of superior Brahmanas,
the course of ‘Time is very subtle and difft-
cult to understand, inasmuch as Kunci,
casting off sovereignty, became desirous of
living in the forest. :
“ to. How is tt that she who.was the
‘mother of Yudhishfhira, of Bhima, of Vijaya,
was burnt to death like a hepless creature ?
‘Thinking of this ] become stupefied. ‘


“2t. fn vate was the god’ of fire ‘pleased
at Khandava by Arjona fl Yugrate that’ he
is, forgetting that service, he has burht té&
death the mother of his benéfactor. 7 ~


ta. Alas, how coald that deity Burn the
mother of Arjuna! ‘Putting: on ‘the guise
of Brabmana,’ he had formerly comé to
Arjuna, for begging a favour! Fie en the
deity of fire! ' Fie on the celebrated success


of Partha’starrows. ;
13—14. This is another incident, O holy


F one, which appears to me to be productive


of greater. misery, for that king, met witly
death by union with a fire that was not
sacred! How could such a death overtake
that royal sage of Karu’s family ‘who, afte


| having governed the whole Earth, was en-


gaged in the practice of penances! Jn that
great forest there were fires that had been
sanctified with Mantras. Alas, my father


,has made his departure from this world,


coming in contact with an unsanctified fire.


15. F suppose that Pritha, emaciated


}and reduced to a form i which all her


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.


‘nerves bécatiie visible, must have trembled
ih Year and cried aloud, saying,—-O son
Yudhishthira!—and awaited the terrible
approacts of the fire. . ;

16. She must have also said,—O Bhima,
Save tne from this danger !—when she, my
mother, was surrounded on all sides by that
“dieadful fire, . :

* 17. Among all her sons, Saliadeva was
her darling. Alas, that heroic soit, of
Madravati did not rescue her !? ‘

18. Hearing these bewailings of the
king, all those persons who were present
there began to weep, etnbeacing each other.
In fact, the five son’ of Pandu were so
Stricken with grief that they resembled
living creatures at the tinie of the dissolution
of the universe, on


19. The sound of Jamentations ittered
by those weepitig heroes, Billig the spacious
chambets of the palace, escaped therefrotm
and penetrated the very sky.


ee


CHAPTER XXXIX.


(NARADAGAMANA PARVA.,)
Concluded.


Navada said =


t. The king has not heeh biriit to death
by an unsanciified fire. [ have heard thid
there. 1 tell yo, O Bharata, suth has riot
been the face of Vaichitraviryya,


2. We have heard- that when the old
king gifted with great intelligence and
living on air alone entered “the fotest (after
his return from Gangadwara), he caused
his saciificial fires to be duly ignited.
Having performed his sacred rites there
with, lie abanduned thiern all.


3. Then the Vajaka Bralimanas he had

with him cast eff those fires in a solitary

| part of the forest and went away as they
hiked, O foremost one of Bharata’s rate.


4. The fire that cast off grew in the
forest, It then produced a general corfla-
pration in the forest. ‘This is what E have
heard from the ascetics living en the banks
of Ganga, :

5. United with that (sacred) fire of his
own, O chief of the Bharatas, the king, as
I have already said to you, met with death
on the banks of Ganga.

6. O sinless one, this is what the as-
cetics have told me, those, e¢s., whom J
saw on fhe banks of sacred Bhagirathti,
O Vudhishthiza, _-


a3
} *
9» Thus, O lord of Barth, hing Dhrita>
vashtra, céoniing into coritact with his oon
sacred fire, depatted from this worid-and


attained to that high énd that has been his.


8 Throdgh gervice réndered by her td
her seviors, your mother, O king, has ac-
quired very gréatBiietes’, Thre is Hot thé
slightest doubt of this.

6. You shdild, O hiig sf kings, nov
periorni the rites-of Water to thelr lonottr,
with all. your Brother’, Let, theréfore, 1hé
necessary steps Be taBeds .
Vaishandipayaiia daidi= .

16. ‘Thed that lord of Barth; that féres
most of ries, that iipholder of the ee
of the Pandavas, Went out, acconipanier
by all. his brottiers as well a3 tlie tadies of
his household.

11, The idtiabitarits of the, clty 4s also
thése of the proviticés, actuated by thei¢
loyalty, also went out, They all Broceeded
towards the banks of Ganga, every one
clad in only a single pievé of ctoth.


+


"14. ‘Phea atl -those forentoat of ied;


having plunged inta the river, place:
Yuyutsu at thelv head, and Began to offer
Sblations of water té the great king. And
they also gave sidijlar ablations to Gan-
dhasi and Prittia, nantisie eacti separately
atid nientioning tliele fastiilies.

13. Having finished those rites which
purify the living, Uiey tetiirned but without
eiitertiig their capital lived ontside of it,
They also gent 4 siuttibet df trdsted people
well conversant with the orditandés celatirig
io the Crerisation of tle dedd, id Gangas
dwara whete lie old &hig tiad bet buriit td
death. ;

14. THe king; liavitig tewarded those
men beforeliand, commanded theni to pera
form those sites of cremation whith the


bodies of Dhritarashtra and Gandtidti and
Kunti still awaited. .


15. On the twelfth day. the king, pros
perly purified, duly perforiied the Shra-
ddbas of his deceased relations; Whiclr
weré marked by profuse gitis.


16. Referring to Dhritarashtes, Wudhi«
shthira made many gifts of gold std silvery ..
of kine and costly beds.


17. Urtering the names of Gandhari!
and Pritha, the king, gifted with greaf
éuergy, made many exceélient gifts. .


18. Every man reteived what thing
he wished and as mach of it as he wished,
Beds and foods, and cars and conveyances,
and jewels and gems, and other weakly
were given away profusely.


re MAHABHARATA,


y


1g. Indéed; the king; teletring to his
two, mothers, gave away cars and convey.


ances, dresses and toverlets, various bind, -


of food, dhd female Slaves adorned with
various ornaments. wy Se
26, Havirig ihds dinde iiany kinds of
itt in profusion, that king theti éritered his
Eapital named. Hastindpore. , ..
_ 21. Those tiem-tien Who had gone to
the banks of Ganga at the. command of
the king, having disposed of (by cremation)
thé remains of the king and the two queens,
teturned to the city. +. 7
23. Having .duly honoured those re-
mains with garlands aiid scents of various
inds attd disposed-of them, they informed
udhishthira of. the : accompli8htnent of
their task. a


4g. The gteat-Rishi Natdda; tiaving


comtorted king Yudhishthira of righté
Soul, went away to where he liked.

24. Thus did king Dhritarashtea ma
his departure from this world after havi
passed three years it the forest and fittee
years in the city,

28. Having lost all his children in batt!
he had made many gifts in honour of hi
kinsrien, relatives, and friends, his brethe
and own people.

26. King Yudhishthira; after the deat
of his uncle, becarie very cheerless. De
prived of ,his Kinsmen and relatives, h
somehow bore the burthen of sovereignty.


27. One should fisteri with attention t


‘this Ashraniavasita Parvan, and havin


heard it recited, one should feed Brahmanas h
with Habishya, hionoiiritig tlie with sceiits »


and garlands.”


“Finis AnSRAMAVASIKA PARVA.


COU UT LI
00153688


Digitized with financial assistance from
Ms.Swati Thakar
on 13 March, 2020
