MU Nm Hi
000580
994.2
Kign Sam
S80
POT TTT
00058017
Digitized with financial assistance from
Shri Brinad Bhartiya Samaj
on 31 October, 2019
MANU SAMMUATTA.
[English Transiation)
PUBLISHED FOR
THE SOCIETY FOR THE RESUSCITATION OF
INDIAN LITERATURE,
58017
ac:
FOUNDED 8Y
>’ MANMATHA NATH DUIT, (shastri), M. A.
Rector, Keshub Academy,
Author of the English Translations of Thé Rémdyana, Mah.
Bharata, S'rimadbhadgavatam, Mahdnirvdna-Tantram,,
Harivams'a, Markandéya Purdnam, &c., &e.
3, Furrrapukur Street P. O., Swa¥pazar:
} # 4
-: Gg e te ae
eee
CALCUTTA N
Pawrep AND PUBLISHED #'’ H. C. Das, Exystum’ Pris’
=
¢
3, FurriaPukuk Street.
Te eateanmmenanl
4909
TABLE OF CONTENTS,
Manu Samhita.
Susjecre, Pacis
Cuatrer I,
The holy sages interrogate Maria about the sources of
Law~—Manu’s reply to them—Cesmogony—Bhrign
expounds the Law by the order of Manu—Different


Cycles of time—Duties of the fout social ofders
- General plan of the book discussed = a ory}


Cuarrer It.
The four proofs ef Vittue—Rules of the ordet of
Brahmachdrin—Duties.of pupils—The mode of salut-
ing the preceptor, ect. see vo 3379


CraPrer Ml.
Rules of matriage for the members of the fout secial
ordéers—Eight forms of martiage and their descrip-
tions, the five daily great (household) sacrifices—
Hospitality to guests and ¢harice arrivals in the
hous¢—The eternal metit of S’rdddhd offerings, ete, 80—134


Cuarrsr IV.
Rules for the “ene of Houséhelders, etc. Household
duti¢s wee wee we vos 13200170 |
GHAPTER vv


Descriptions of commendable and forbiddeg food—
Beridds, of nse nace of defiled
articles--Duties of wiv es Pet on evs. 370-209
Cuarrtr Vip ®
Duties of the dierent social orders ate yey 209-0232


ii ‘CONTENTS.


Cuaprer VII.
Duties of kings—Expedients for the protection of »
kingdom eee ose eee eee 232—258


‘CuaPrer VIII.


‘Composition of ‘tribunalsjof jastice, law suits, sources of
litigation, law ‘relating to evidence, to punishment,
excufpiating nature of punishment, ect. tte 253-3

Cratter TK.


‘Duties of men and ‘women, Law ef Inheritance, Gatn-
‘bling, appréhension of thieves, duties of Vais’yas


and S’udras ose eee coe ue 315 —368
‘CuaPror X.
Origins of mixed castes—Means of subsistence of the
‘members of ‘the four castes in times‘of distress. ... 365-383
Cuaprer XI.
xpiatory pensnces dee ove wre 394492
Cuaeter XI,
433


@ .
Rebirths, Knowledge and Self Emancipation eee


MANU SAMHITA’.


CHAPTER I.


(UNTO). Manu,* blissfully seated with his mind abstrac-
téd from the world of the senses, came the great sages.
Having worshipped him, they, conformably to reason
and propriety,t interrogated him in the following
manneér. (1)


Kulluka substantiatés his statement regarding the highest
authority of the Institutes of Manu among the Dharma S'astras
of ancient India by making quotations from the Chhdndogya
Bréhmana, Brihaspati, &d the Mahabharatam.

Whatever Manu said is medicine to those, who rieed medica-
tion (for their impiety)

Chhandogya Brdhmana.

The superiority of Mazz lies in its being founded on the true
import of the®Vedas. Tie Smriti, which is contradictory to the

teachings af. Manu, is no Smrits at all. So long does the science
of reasonjng or Grammar shine as long as Manu, the preceptor in
matters of virtue and salvation, does not appear in the field.

: Brihaspatt.

The Purdnas, the listitutes of Manu, the Vedas with their
allied sciences, and the A’yurveda are the four (branches of
study), which ate, by themselves, authoritative, and which should
not be destroyed by means of sophisticated reasoning (like that of
the Buddhists). :

Mahabharatam.

® The first couplet begins yith the term “ Manu” in accordance

‘vith gn established precept of Sanskrit Rhetoric, that ‘‘all literary

undertakings must Degin with a term of auspicious import, or

signifying Dey,” Manu being,the name of Agni (fire-god), or of
PrajApati (creator accordimg to others!.—Kulluka.

t The text has Vathd-nydyam -gIn copformity wéth the rules
of Logic or propriegy, to ask agi absurd or improper question being
interdicted by the rules of our Dharma S'astras.—Kulluka,


Manu Samhita.


Be pleased, O thou, who art possessed of the six
kinds of opulence, to expound to us, in due order,* the
duties of all the (four) social orders, as well as those
of the members of the mixed castes.t (2)

Thou alone art cognisant, O lord, of the imports
and regulations :of the self-origined Vedas, incompre-
hensible in (their meaning) and innumerable (in their
ramifications), as well as ofthe rites (enjoined to be
(performed), and truths inculcated, (therein.){"(3)

He§ of imponderable prowess, being thus interro-
gated by the magnanimous Rishis, replied, hear, O ye
great sages. (4)


* Anupurvas'ah :—In due order, that is, commencing with the
rite of $data Karma (post-natal rite: and,eafter that, dealing with
the successive rites in the order in which they are celebrated in
hite—Kulluka. ;

¢ Antara-Prabhavandncha i.e. sons begotten by members of
superior castes on wivés of inferior castes, and wzce versa, as Well
as those who are the offspring of unions ‘sith foreief women.—

_Kylluka.

} Kavya-tativartha-vit :—MrEpDHa’TITHI, a bigoted advocate of
the Vedic rites, explains the passage as “cognisant of the meanings
of the principles of Vedic rites and sacrifices.” We, however, have
thought -fit to follow Kur_uxa BxaTra in our translation, inas-
much as Mepua’rirur’s construction of the text excludes many’ @
cardinal point of the Vedic doctrine, such asthe knowledge of
Brahma, etc., narr@ws the general scope of the Vedas, and restricts
the enquiry to the discussion of a single topic —7Z+.

§ The use .of the pronoun in the third person, singular, in the
present couplet, cay raises the presumption that the Manu
Samhita, as we have it now, is mot what it was originally wsitter*
by its author dfenw but is merely.a recengion:of the original
work by a disciple of that greag patriarch, moStg probably by"
Bhrigu. The probability amounts almose to a certainty when we
think that it might have been guite within the province of Bhrigu,
who revised the old Vedic ‘system of Astrongmy, to recast and
revise the Vedic codes of Ethics and Laws, which were céllated


Manu Samhita. 3


(Originally) was* this. universe enveloped in dark-
ness,t invisible to the sight, without any sign to indicate
—————————eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee ee
and codified by Manu. Others, on the contrary, assert that, it was
common practice with our ancient masters to mention their
names in the third person instead of saying ‘‘I so and so shall
now discourse on such and such a topic,” and quote an aphorism
of Jaimini in support of their statement. -

Manu’s description of the creation of the universe in answer
to the query of the Rishis regarding the Laws of virtue and.
good conduct, etc, should not be regarded as unseasonable or
out of place. MepHa’tITHI holds that the description of the evolu-
tion of the universe has been here introduted to show that the
different forms of existence, from the lowest animalculum to the -

“most exalted Brahma, are but the effects of different degrees of
piety. Hence, this topic has a distinct and special bearing upon
the main thesis of the Samhita, inasmuch as it unfolds the succes-
sive stages of evolution of the individualised self (fiva) and
marks the order in-which it works up its progression upward,
or is constrained to descend into the lower planes of life. Govinpa
‘Raya (anothey commentator of the Samhita) subscribes to the
same opinion, and says that, the description of this evolution
Of the universe is for the ascertainment of Brahma, the real
cause off the universe, the knowledge of Brahma being held
as the Summum bonum of life, and its acquisition, imperatively’
obligatory on all, as so unequivocally enjoined by the’ holy
Yajnavalkya, Vadarayana, and the author of the Mahdbharatam.
Nor are the S’rutis silent on the point, but rather’ they inculcate
the knowledge of Brahma as the highest virtue 1 man—Kulluka.

* (A’sid}~—From the unknowable and invisible nature of the
universe, enveloped in primordial gloom, it, must not be presumed
that nothing existed prior to it, that it was evolved out of pure
Nothingness. . Chhandogya Upanishad has an express text on the
‘subject, *O beloved, there was the only Real @8rahma) in the
beginning.”

{ Tamobhutam :—-The glosm of Primal Nature, Praksitz, re-
sulting from the latent or potentigl exigtence -of gill ideas in
her body, the staje of equipose among. the qualities of Sattoa,
Rajgs and Tamas. ;


4e Manu Samhita.


its existence, unknowable,* and beyond the inference of
reasoning or logic—as if hushed all round in one univer-
sal sleep.t (5)

After that, the self-origined Deity, though unmanifest
himself, caused this universe to be gradually manifest-
ed, by transmuting his energy to the twenty-four cate-
gories such as, the primordial elements of indomitable
prowess—etc., and gave the first impetus to Nature
to be evolved out.t (6)


* Unknowable even by means of inference (Arthapatti)—
DHARANIDHARA.

+ Prasuptam :—Lulled in sleep, as opposed to death, indicating
in its midst the potential existence of life, awaiting progressive
evolution and manifestation.

¢ By dint of his will, the Supreme Brahma, the underlying
substratum or reality of the universe, ‘gave the first impetus to
Nature to thaké off her state of primal equipose, and to be gradu-
ally and successively evolved out in those categories and elements,
which were necessary for the constitution of the present universe.
Nature alone, in the absence of a guiding, controlling Will to shape
her. course and destiny, might not have been sufficient t®@ evoke a
universe into being. The fortuitous congregates of atoms could never
have got themselves weighed and arranged in different. groups and
measures for the formation of different objects without the precon-
certed scheme of a devising Genius. ‘he mad whirl-gig of mole-
cular combines wauld never have been timed with such majestic
rythm of motion and harmony as we find in the marches of .the
stars without the control of a master Harmonist. Inertia, and
a few other forms of pifsical force may account for the; perpetual
motion we see everywhere in the unfverse, but who gave the. first
impetus to motion is a question which cannot be answered without
admitting the existence of another reality behihd the universe,

The Indian Rishis were fi@y aware of the” absurdity of
creating a system of philosophy, which tries to account for the
evolution ofthe univérse without the intervention of this un~
known reality, endeavours to dethréne God frém His throne, and


Manz Samhita. 5


He,. who is beyond the cognisance of the senses,
subtile, -unmanifest, eternal, and imponderable, and
who runs through all created things, originated by: him-
self (7)

He, wishing to create various kinds of creatures from
out of his own bodv.* first created water.t and cast his
seed therein. (8)

That egg had a golden colour, resplendent like the
(aggregative) effulgence of a thousand suns :—In_ that.
(egg) Brahma} himself was born—Brahmé, the grand-

father (progenitor) of all creatures and regions. (9)


places Nature on it in His stead. The Bhagavad Gité lends its
authority to this interpretation of Kuttuxa when it says,
“Through my ageacy Nature gives birth to the mobile and the
immobile.””
Both Govinparaja and MEDHATHITHI explain the term Tamo-
nudu as dispeller of gloom, we have followed Kuttuka’s inter-
.pretation “ Prakriti-Pravartaka.” eee


-* The immaculate or unmodified Prakriti (Nature', before the
commencement of the process of evolution, pregnant with the po-
tential%seeds of the five material elements, the five cognitive senses,
the five operative senses, the mind, life. .(vitality) acts, knowledge
and desire, etc, is called the body. of Brahma. in the parlance
of Vedantism, and, as such, not having a separate existence from
that of Brahma It is through the workings of the innate forces
of his Self that Brahma is transformed ia the shape of the
universe.—-Kulluka.

ft The first material element evolved out after Mahat, Egoism,
and the five Tanm@tras (subtle sensiblef etc.

£ In the previous cycl® of evolution of the universe, Brahma
contemplated himself as Hivanyagaybha, who was both identical
with, and separate from, him. ‘lhe astral body of this Hiranya-
garbha, which survived the dsolution of the universe as a thought-
form in Brahma, was reanimated, when Brahma again enterec
-it inthe form of-life in the beginning of the olution of ow

.  @

present Universe,—Kulluka. -


6 Manu Samhita.


The water is called Nara, inasmuch as it is the first
ofispring of Nara.(the supreme self),* and inasmuch as
water was the first receptacle of the Supreme Self,
manifested as Brahma, the Supreme Self is called
Naréyana (10)

* That which is primal, unmanifest, eternal (principle),
encompassing both the real and the phenomenal, the in-
dividual created by that principle is called Brahmd. (11)


In that. egg that divinity, having lived for one
(Brahma) year, thought, “let the egg be broken in
halves,” -and the egg was so divided. (12)


Out of those two parts he created the heaven and
the earth, and in their midst he eternally placed the sky
and the eight quarters, and the seas all around. (13)


He recovered the mind, which partakes of the
nature of the Supreme Self, and embraceth both the
character of the noumenon and the phenomenon. Prior.
to the evolution of the mind, (he recovered) the principle
of Egoism, the real incentive to all works. (14)


_ Prior ta the evolution of the principle of Egoism,
was evolved the. principle of Mahat (principle of
apprehension). All these categories (products of evo-
lution) are possessed of the three qualities (of Sattwa, —
Rajas and Tamas), ‘Gradually he created (caused to be
NN nN eT =

The astral bodies or immutable thought-forms exist in the
eternal consciousness of Brahma, and they become re-animated
or re-deceased according to the influx or out-flow of life into, or
from, them, according to the exigencies of the evolution or involu-
tion of Prakriti, er to express it in the langmage of every day
life, at the creation or dissolution ofgthe universe.


*The text has Nava-Sunava, the offspring of Nara, the supreme
Self, the term Nava, water being derived from “ Nara” coupled
with the affix ‘‘an”’ denoting filialty.


Manu Samhita. 4


@volved out) the five cognitive senses, the recipients of
the sound, light, taste, and smell.* (15)

By combining the subtlest parts of the principle of
Egoism, and the five TanmAtras, with their modifica-
tidhs, the sensés, and the five material elements, he
created all creatures. (16)

Inasmuch as the subtle particles of thesé six prin-
plés (Egoism and thé five Tanmétras), which con-
trive to conipose the body of Brahma, erifolded . by
Prakriti (Nature); aré connected with the five elements °
as their effect, the wise call the person of Brahma as
his body (S’¢7iram), front the fact of its being composed
of these six (shat) principles. (17)


From Brahma, manifested in the form of the five
Tanm itras, were produced the great (material) elements,
together with their functions ;f (and) the deathless
Mind, which is the procreating cause of all creations,
together with its subtle functions of inclination, anti-
pathy, etc. was produced from Brahma, evolved out as
thé priaciple of Egoism. (18)

From the subtle particles of these seven Purusha-
like} principles of irrepressible energy viz., the princi-
ples of Mahat, Egoism and the five Tanmdtras has
originated this universe. From the real has proceeded
the phenomenal. (19)


* The particle “ cha” includes the five gperative senses and the
five Tanmdtras as well.—Kulluka.

The function of A’kAs’a (ether) is space-giving, that of Vayu is
motion or-arrangement, that of fire is transformation (lit heating
or -cooking); that -of gvater, “aggregation or mass-making, and
that of Earth is receptivity —Kulluka


. ° .
} Because the, Purusha yyas transformed into them at thé
outset.


8, Manu Samhita.


Of thése elements, each successive one partakes of
the virtues of the preceding element, or in other words,
the virtues of an element is corresponding to the num-
ber which is placed against it in the list.* (20)

The names and functions and professions of all
creatures he (Hiranyagarbha) separately ereatedf ac-
cording to the directions of the Vedas. (21)

The Lord created the Devas, who formed the limbs
(as it were) of the religious rites,f and the Devas pos-
sessed of life, the hosts of subtle Devas, the Sédhyas,
and thé éternal sacrifice. (22)

The three Vedas, distinguished by the names of
Rik, Yayush and Séman, he milched from the Fire, air
and the sun for the performanceg of religious sacri-


fices. (23)


* Ether or A’kas’a, which stands first in thelist, has only the
one property of sound ; air which occupies the second place in the
list has two properties vis, sound and- touch; the ghird element
(fire) has three properties, o#z., sound, touch and sight, (colour',
the fourth element water has the four properties of sound, touch,
sight (colour) and taste, while the earth, which stands fifth in the
list, has the five properties of sound, touch, sight (colour), taste
and smell.—Kulluka.

+ The Vedas, which eternally exist, are merged in Brahma at
the time of the dissolution of the universe only to be patent in
the beginning of the next cycle of its evolution, furnishing
Hiranyagarbha (the spirit of the burning egg or globe of primal
cosmic matter) with forms and patterns of a former cycle for the
guidance cf his work of Qniversal creation.

The priority of the Vedas to the birth of the universe is also
asserted in the. Sertraka Sutvam.

S'abda iti Chenndtah Prabhavat Pratakshanu magabhyam.

¢ He created two classes of divinities animate such as Indra
and others, and inanimate such as (ladles, etc., the wtensils
which are employed inthe course of a Vedic gacrifice aud are
invested with a kind of divinity — Kulluka.


Manu Samhita. 3


He created Time, the divisions of Time, the stars,
‘the planets, the rivers, the seas, thé mountains, the
plains, and the uneven grounds. (24) On

Contemplation (7apas), speech, satisfaction of the
mind, desiré and anger. Wishing to create these crea-
tures, he thus created this creation. (25)

For thé classification of acts, hé distinguished virtue
from vice, and connécted the creatures with the pairs
of opposite, such as pleasure and pain, (heat and cold),
etc. (26)

With the five subtilé and transformiig Yanmétras,
he created this universe, in dué order, (from the subtilé
to the gross, and from thé gross to the grosser, and so
on). (27) |

To the work, for which lis, the lord, ordained a
creature in the beginning, it spontaneously reverted in
its successive incarnations. (28)

To acts of love or crueity, of mildnéss or ferocity,
or of virtue or vice, it should spontaneously revert,
which hg ordained for it in the beginning. (29)

As the characteristic features of a season of the year
appear at the advent of that séason, so the“acts of
embodied creatures spontaneously assail them (in the
proper time). (30)

For the furtherarnicé of thé (good of the) world, he
created Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vais’ya, arid S’udra from
his mouth, arms, thighs, and legs.* (4g)


* Phe division of castes, according to the social economists of
ancient India, Has igs basis, on the four broad, distinctive func-
tions in the egonomy of the dgvine organism. The cogitative,
the protective, the sustent@tive and the operative functions, which
are so vitally essential to the conginuance of eache individual
organism, the ‘living envelop eof each individual’ Selt or F/va,
must have their prototypes in similar functions of the divine body

2


to Manu Samhita.


of Bramha, the direct motive principle of universal Evolution. A
man, orabeing, inorder to live, must think, and reason, and
desire, Me must have some facelty within him which might help
him to anticipate his wanis, to profit by the lessons of the past, to
co-ordinate his innumerable relations with his environments, and to
develop the deeper possibilities of his nature; and to this function
or principle, which is governed by the Laws of his prototype’s being,
the ancient A’chdryyas gave the name of Bramhana. Similarly,
there must be in man some function exclusively set apart for com-
bating the hidden foes of his organism, to help and accelerate a
cure in the case of disease ; another function, to store up and manu-
facture energy from the ingredients of ingested food, or from thé
physical elements of Nature, and another function to ungrudgingly
and unremittingly serve the other three functions in the discharge
of their works, ¢.¢, to be at the the beck and call of Ideation. .
(8rahmana), Protectiveness (Kshatviya,) and sustentative func-
tion (Vués'ya). They respectively gave thefi the names of Ksha-
triya (soldier), Vais’ya imerchant or fatmef) and y’udva {artisan or
setvyant.. S’udrvavtam is held identical with Karmatvam, work,
action, or service. Originally a S’udra meant an evangelist of
service to mankind, although by an unfortunate degeneration of its
meaning, ,it subsequently came to be synonymous with something
low or vile.

As in the body, so in the body politic ; as in the body pelitic, so
in the universal body politic, and hence the ancient A'’charyyas
came to look upon these relations of Brdhmana, Kshatriya, Vais'ya
and S’udra, this classification of the units of society for the fur-
therance of the common weal, like the classification of functions
in the divine organism of which they are the exponents, to be
eternally existing in the social economy of man, whenever and
wherever occurring.


These distinctions of castes have nothing of the hatered and
the sense of inequality, which prompted many a civilized society
of modern timewto lay down an arbitrary barrier between *man
and man, to create an artificial gulf between the classes and the
masses, only on the basis of money-qyalification.” The framers
af the ancient Samhitas recognised the inevitable necessity of
ganiging a “division of labour among the several orders of the
society The caste system had its origin in the principle of ce-


Manu Samhiti. TY, .


Having divided his body into two parts, He, the
tord (Brahm4), became male by means of the (one half,


operation and reciprocal help, and not in contempt and spitefulness
as it is now erroneously believed in certain quarters. A good
S’udra (an artisan) was as much free and as much honourable as
any Keshatriya, or any Vais’ya, ‘or even any Brahmana in ancient-
India. ‘The Rishis took them under their own spiritual clanship
“(Pravara), and sages like the holy: K4s’yap3, Angirasa, Pilakyapa’
(vide the Agnipuranam) wrote books ‘on sculpture, architecture,
veterenary medicine and other: branches of art entirely for the
training and guidance of the S'udras of their age. In the caste sys+
tem the Rishis solved once for all the problem of capital and labour,
which so badly threatens the modern industries of the West. It
was not the-out-come of monopolies or vested-interests for in the
primitive societies of comsmunistic enjoyment man had the instinc-
tive wisdom to exclude all exclusiveness, either in acquisition or
possession, for the mere continuance of his race and being. if
for nothing else. It was not based on the superior rights of
conquest, for a S'udra, if not otherwise morally disqualified,
used to enjoy all the civic rights and privileges in common with
2 member of the twice-born order. It was not established’ with
the imprgcations and anathemas ofa crafty priesthood, for ‘some
ef the authors of the ancierit Samhitis (Vishnu Ch. 57, V. 16)
authorised the BrAhmanas to partake of boiled rice cooked by the
S'udras. For reasons stated above, the Rishis advised the society
to protect the interests of its different orders with certain limit2-
tions. Unqualified equality is impossible in society, and the Rishis,
as the best possible alternative, promulgated feneral equality in
civic rights among individuals, and- specific limitations of privileges,
as of a class against class. The Rishis honegly believed: that there
can be no society without such distinctions, and they did not err in
theirebelief.


Kulluka subscrifes to this view when he says that, Crdhmanas
etc , arose ou®of the divisions of the divine energy (Daivyds’chA
S'akty4) as expressed by‘his different organs such as, the face, etc.,
(Maukhadibhyah) and quotes a 5’rtti; the Brdhmana was in, his

mouth.


2 Manu Samhita.


and female by means of the other,* and on that female
he begat Viraj.t (32)


* He begat Vairaj ie. by means of sexual reproduction—
Kulluka.


+ We can not sufficiently bring home to the minds of our’
readers the fact that these couplets (32—34) reflect a knowledge
of Embryology and the principle of sexual diamorphism in our
ancient masters, which amounts almost to the superhuman, when
we read these verses in the light of modern science, and with:
the help of the kinder light of the Ayurveda. Bramhd, the-
prototype of all creating agents in this world, first divided his-
body into. two. equal parts, of which the one was endued with the-
male and the other with the femate sexual virtues. Then by
uniting these two parts or principles-he progenerated Viraj. Thus:
we find the three modes of reproduction i.e. reproduction (by
fission or division’, sexual reproduction as- in hermaphrodistic:
creatures, and sexual reproduction by the union of parents of
distinct sexual characters plainly contemplated in the lines of the:
couplet. It is indeed a far cry from the birth of Vairaj to the
evolution of distinct sexual characters in man and woman. Pro-
fessors Geddes and Thompson in their excellent work on the-
« Evolution of sex” have delineated for general readers the long:
series of animal existence through which the distinct sexual cha-
racters of our species have beer evolved out, and the mahy attempts.
of Nature to take a retrograde step towards a lost type, but we can:
not but contemplate the fact with the greatest complacence that
it is Manu, who fifst promulgated the -doctrine that the distinct
sexual characters have evolved out of a state of original her-
maphrodism, as now demonstrated by the savants of modern:
science. :


The Vishuupurdnam fills up the deficiency im the ‘statement by-
explicitly saying that the left part, was endued with the female:
seXual characteristics and the rigigt half with the male ones, and
these two opposite polarities of life, fhe PitrikAs’akti and the
MaAtrikds’algi, according to tae Ayurveda, predominate in the right
and left halves of the body of eachenan and weman,


Banu Sanhita. Hy,


Having practised Zupas, whom the Virat-Indi-
vidual himself created, him, O ye, foremost of the:
twice-born ones, know to: be Manu, my (humble) self,
the (second; or immediate creator of all. (things and
beings). (33)

I, having wished to progenerate creatures; practised:
the most austere 7apas, and at first created the ten.
great Rishis, the: lords of creatures, (named:as} Marichi,.
' Atri, Angirasa, Pulasta, Pulaha, Kratu, Prachétas,.
Vas’istha, Bhrigu and Narada.* (34—35)

These (Rishis) of indomitable’ prowess. created, in:
their turn, seven other .Manus,t and divinities other
than those whom Brahma had created, together with
their celestial abodes, and: great sages of irresistible:
prowess. (36)


[And]. Yakshas, Rakshas, Pis’4chas, Gandharvas,,
Apsarasas, Asuras, Nagas, serpents, birds (such as:
Garuda) and the several classes of Pitris. (97):


* Ayanpa Giri in his commentary. on the Brihad A’ranyaka
Upanishad (Ch. 1.—Brahmana (Udgitha)—S. -VIIi.] explained the:
term Angirasa as a compound of Anga meaning. members, causes-
and effects, and Rasa meaning essence, substance ; the whole mean-
ing is therefore the substance on which the cause and effects:
depend. ‘

Marichih is light, Pulasta is dimensiveftess, Pulaha is con-
tractibility, Kratuh. is moral laws, Prachetas is self-conscious
ness, Vas’istha is-confo: mability to- Law, girigu is buoyancy or
supportiveness (Gravitation-?), Ndrada is water giving or vitali-
sing principle.

‘Ihe ten Prajigatis then are the ten fundansental principles of
the materialguniverse.


+ The term Manu®here indicates the office of Manu; each:
Manu takes his birth in the cysle of time he ix intended to
preside over. Kalluka.


rf Manu Samhita.

Lightnings, thunders, clouds, shafts of varied colour-
ed: light,* rainbows, falling meteors, meteoric claps
or reports,t luminous bodies with trailing banners of
light,t and: other luminous bodies.§ 138)

Kinnaras, monkeys, fish, various species of birds;
beasts, deer, men, and beasts with two rows of.
teeth. (39)

Insects, worms, flees, lice, parasites, all kinds of
gnats and stinging flies, and. the different kinds of trees.
and climbing plants. (40)

Thus these (Manus), through the merit of the
Tapas they had practised, and. in conformity with my:
ordination, created all the mobile and immobile. things,.
each in the. womb, best suited to it in. consideration of.
the mission. of its life.|j (41).

Now I shall relate to you the work and the nature
of origin of each of these creatures, as narrated [by the:
masters of old J. (42)

Quadrupeds, deer, wild beasts, those provided with
two rows of teeth, RAkshasas, Pis'achas and men, who.
are viviparous (placental) in their origin. (43).

All birds, serpents, alligators, turtles, and fish and’


* The text has Rohita, KuLLuxKa explains it as shafts of refract-
ed light of prismatic colours.

t+ Nirghéta:- which fiterally means the report of any dis-
turbing physical phenomenon occurring in the earth or heaven.
such as, that of a meteoMor earthquake.—Auliuka.

$ Ketumscha :—Trailing light of any falling heavenly body
such as a meteor, etc.

§ Fvotimshi :—KutiuKks explagps it as Dhruvddn, the pole
star, etc,. .

| Yathdé-Barma Tapo Yogét:—The nature of the work a
creature is intended to perform in life™—Kulluka®


Manu Samhita. ry
heii like, whether amphibious or aquatic in their habits,
‘are oviparous, (44)
Gnats, Mosquitos, lice, flees, and such other insects,
which originate from heat (decomposed matter) are
‘called Sveduja. (45)


All vegetables, which sprout from seeds or graftings,
‘are called Udbdhit (Zt. bursting out of the ‘earth, while
those (plants', which die as their fruit (corns) are ripe
‘and bear a large humber of flowers and éars,aré called
Oshadhis (cereals). 46)

Those trees, which bear fruit without blossoming,
are called Vumnaspatis, while those which béar both
fruits and flowers are called !’riéshds. (47)

There aré varioas kinds of shrubs and bushy plants,
and vaiious kinds of weeds and grass, creé,éers and
trailing plants, some of which grow rom sé¢ds and
others fiom grafts, (48:

Variously enshtouded by the quality of Tamas,
(Ignorancé, or Non-consciousness), the effects of their
own &cts, they retain their consciousness inward, sus-
“eptible to pleasure and pain. (49 *


Even the most cursory reader of ‘this Samr/ta can not bu
be impressed with the deep insight of its author into the natur:
of things, which strongly favours the hypothesis that the truth
the Rishis preached were clear perceptiye truths and not mer
deductions from entpirical knowledge. Huxley has demonstrate
the“act that the ‘difference between the vegetable and animal lif
is one of quantity.@ind not of quality” (Turee Essays: and Pre
‘fessor J. C. ose Response ing the Living and Non-Living: ha
startled the world by‘his epoch-making discovery that the tissue
of plants give almost the samg respanse under, pressure o
stimulus.


16 Manu Samhiia.


Thus (I have) related the origin of all forms of
existence from Brahma downward, which occur in this
miserable world of éonstant change, tossing with its
waves of birth and death. (50,*


* These fifty couplets from the beginning represent the
accepted, orthodox view of Brdhmanism regarding the evolution
of the universe, and a$ the view of Manu on the stibject, is re-
garded as the reconciliation between the two opposite schools
of Brdhmanic thought, vis., the Sénkhya and the Vedanta, it will
not be amiss if we try to undersand here thé real significations
of the terms or concepts occurring in the text, divested of their
metaphors and allegories

A’nanpa Girt in his commentary on the (Brihad A’ranyaka
Opanishad, Brahmana, I. S. IX.) says that, creation pre-supposes
non-creation and herice the manifest cre@or entails the necessity
of admitting the existence of a non-produced creator, asthe “five
produced fires” necessarily indicate a non-produced one from
which they have originated. This unntanifest spirit, from which
Hiranyagirbha or I’svara (supreme ruler, the first produced, or
manifest seed of the universe) originated, is called Brahma from
the all-pervading Nature of its Self This Brahma, or unmanifest,
absolute spiritaality, is the receptacle of Prakriti or Universal
Nescience. Prakriti is inherent in Arahma, the absolute conscious-
jess, as “my sleep” is inherent in “my consciousness.” They are
not two sep2rate eritities, but united co-relatives, perfect Science
and absolute Nescience. When that Rrahma rouses up from sleep
‘state of quiescience after the involution of the Universal Nature,
chat Nescience, or that unconsciousness of sleep of the nen-manifest
Spirit is naturally transformed into the principle of Apprehension
Mahat Tattoam). Now,the human mind is so constructed that it
cannot think of any apprehension without referring it to a Self or
Ego. “I feel,” “I think,” “I perceive.” As there must be *the
factor of “ L” or sftineness in all acts of percepti&n or cognition, the
principle of Mahat was transformiedginto dhantdra thé principle of
mine-ness. With the serise of Egoism arists the necessity of per-
ception, and so from Ahankdgt originated the five subtile Tan-
M{dtras, the atoms of perception, if wemay be Warranted ta use


Manu Samhita. 7


guch a term. With perception there arose the necessity of intel.
lection, and the next category we find in the list is the Manah
or mind, from which the J/ndrtyas or the senses originated. ‘As
thinking implies action, and action means the contact with the
non-self (the external world), the five Tan-mdtras, in their turn,
were transformed into the gross elements of ether, air, light,
water and earth, to supply the /ndriyas with their respective
objects. Hitherto we do not find any creator or creation, these
categories of Mahat, Ahankara, Pancha-tanméatvas, the Mind,
*the senses and the elements being the modifications of Prakriti,
or the universal Nesctence.

Then what are these? A’ninda Giri in his commentary on the
Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad (Brahmana, IIT.) says that “what-
‘ever is in the effect must also be in the cause.” Now, accord-
ing to the Vedanta, the individual soul or self is encased ina subtile
body consisting"of four ‘sheaths or Koshas vis., the Vijnanamaya
Kosha (Intellectual Sheath), t the Manomaya Kosha (the Mental
Sheath), the Prdnamaya Kosha (the Sheath of Vital airs’ and the
Annamaya Kosha (the Sheath of nutriment). The first is composed

_ of intellect and the five intellectual senses. The second is formed
by the mind ‘and the five organs of action or operation, the third
consists of the five vital airs governing the processes of inspiration,
respiration, circulation, etc. The fourth is formed by the gross
matter. In the same manner the principles of Mahat (apprehen-
sion’, Shankara (mineness), the Tan-matras and the mind, etc.,
formed the body of Brahma on the eve of the evolution of the
universe. The Sheaths or the subtile organism of he individual
self is inseparable from it as long as it has to undergo transmi-
grations; the subtile organism (S’ariram) of the universal self is
inseparable from it as long it has to undatgo transformations
in the form of Hiranyagarbha (the first embodied self) etc., the
Ahankara in either case being transformed into three distinct
kinds such as, the Vazkarika (phenomenal, the creator of mind),
the, Taijasa (thermic, the creator of the we and the Bhutad:
(the creator of Ergss matter).

In the pext stage of Evolution we find that Apa (lit. water),
whose property is massemiking, has been created, and on it the


N. B. For “ander pressure or stjmulus.’s @ (v. 15,1, e) read under
‘pressure or stimelus as the tigsues of animals.”


3 :


18 Manu Samhita.


seed or egg of Brahma, resplendent with the aggregative efful-
gence of a thousand suns, is lying afloat. We need hardly say
that this egg, the conglomeration of Paramdnus (atoms) of the
Vais'eshika philosophy, is the globe of the first cosmic matter
from which the worlds and systems of the universe have subse-
quently evolved out, and we need not wonder at the statement
that the material atoms have come into being out of the im-
material components of the body of Brahma, if we consider the
modern Scientific definition of atoms, ‘‘as projections of units
of consciousness into space.” (Maxwell.)

These twenty four categories then’ were the body’ of Brahma,
or im which Brahma’ (the universal substance) was successively
transformed immediately before this material universe was called
into existence, as Jay4ditya has expressed it in his work. We
need hardly say that, the Sézkkya philosophy starts with this
unmodified Prakriti as the prime cause of this: universe; and the’
Vais’eshika, with. this resplendent egg af Hiranyagarbha, the
conglomeration of atoms (Pavamdnupunja) as the first condition:
of creation, though with the difference of meanings of these’
two terms. The Mula Prakriti of the Sankhyas and the
primeval gloom of Manu, which enveloped the supreme Self before
the creation, are both negative entities. But the Mula Prakriti,
the state of quiescience of the three qualities of Sattwa, Rayas
and Tamas (knowledge, desire and Ignorance) is an original gntity,
self-existing, and eternal. The Sdnthya dismisses all further’
enquiries into the final cause by saying, it is impossible to ask the
origin of that#which is original (Mule Mulabhavat Amulam
Mulam) and supplies that starting place to the huntan mind with-
but which it can not exercise its reasoning about cause and effect.
The Vais'eshikas, of the,other hand, say that, the atoms are
eternal, and their combinations and conglomerations as the only
mediate condition of thg evolution of the universe, are effected
through the agency of an unseen cause (Adrishta), which is un-
known, and unknowable, and which, like the final cause ofeall
agnostic philosophits, partakes of the nature of “date” or “ Neces-
sity.” Beyond this stage there is nagmaterial difference of opinion
among the exponents of the different schodts of Brahmanic philo-
sophy as regards the psocess gnd order of the evolution of the
universe.


Manu Samhita. t


Now to return to the Samhitd: From out of the body of
Brahma, the unconditioned Self, was produced Apa (lit, water) and
in that he cast his seeds which were formed into an egg, bright as
a thousand suns Then by dit of contemplation, Bramhdé trans-
formed himself into Hivanyagarbha, the first embodied soul, and
in that egg Hiranyagardha or Brahm’ was born. (See note { p. 5.)

Now let us examine what did the Rishi mean by Nara (water);
we learn from the SamhitA that it is a kind of principle, which
emanated from the body of Nara, the universal substance whose
function is fluidity and masg-making (Samat), and in that prin-
ciple, the first maaterial force (Sak¢i-rupma- Kulluka) he cast his
seed. His seed developed itself into an egg resplendent as a thou-
sand suns, the primal globe of burning cosmic matter. Brahmi
(Prajapati of the upanishads) by means of his objective mental
qualities entered that egg and was born in it as Brahm4 or
Hiranyagarbha. The passage of the text elucidates that life was
inherent in the primal cosmic matter, or as Anandagiri in his
commentary of the Brihad Avranyaka Upanishad (Brahmana III,
S, 22) expresses it, “this is likeness (identity) of life. This
identity is not merely found in the lifferent bodies in proportion
to their size, because life has no shape and is everywhere.”

Why this seed was called an egg? Because, like the impreg-
nated ovum, it was divided simultaneously with the commence-
ment of tts evolutien, and was subjected to the influences of two
polarities of life, motion or vibration, the Upasarpani. and the
Apasarpani of the Vais’eshika philosophy, the centrifugal and
centripetal forces in the material plane. fhe universal egg was
divided and broken in parts with which the first embodied soul
created the sta®¥and the solar systems, etc. The text here is only
a poetic representation of the doctrine of the Vazseshika, the atomic
theory of ancient India, in which connection it may be said that
Kanada, the founder of the Vais’eshika, by®pouring a few drops of
oil in a basin of water and by stirring it with a stick, first demons-
trated the origin of the worlds out of a primal globe of cosmic
matter. Perhaps the term “Apa” (water) in the text, the vehicle
of the primordial atOMs,gis so nied after the water of Kanada’s

experiment-basin.
Lhe notion of Viva7, dividingeh% own substance iro male and
female, occurs in more than ohe Purdna, But the Manu Samhita


Zo Manu Samhita.


Having thus created me and all (the universe), He
of imponderable prowess vanished in Himself, by
oppressing (destroying) the time (of evolution) with the
time of Dissolution. .51)

When that effulgent Being awakes, the universe is
animated; when He of reposeful mind sleeps, the uni-
verse is folded up (vanishes). (52)

When he reposes in hiinself, ~the selfconscious,
embodied selves, with their bodies, the fiuits of their
acts, cease their respective activities, and the mind,*
divested of its functions, reposes languid. (53)

When the all (whole universe) is simultaneously
merged in it, then this universal spirit, divested of all its
works, happily sleeps the dreamlessesleep.t (54)

The individualised Self, with its senses, long continues
in a state of unconsciousness, ceases to perform any
act, then it passes over from its former body in its
true appearance.f (55)


makes Viraj to be the issue of such a separation of persons and
Manu himself to be his offspring. The Brihad Aranyaka Upani-
shad relates the allegory of an incestuous marriage and intercourse
of the first Manu with his daughter S’atarupa (8. A. Upanishad.
Brahmana IV, S. 4.

* Yhe text has Manas which means the mind with all its
functions and the senses and their faculties,—Kulluka,

t Nrivitah :—~Devoid of the states of wakening or sleep It
may be questioned that how can there be any such thing as
dreamless sleep in the®supreme Self, whose nature “is perfect
knowledge and felicity. The answer is that this is merely an
analogy based upon the functions of animal life (anthropomorph&m,
Fiva dharma.) —Rulluka.

f Acts (Karma)—~acts ‘of resration and such lixe bodily
functions. he astral body of the individual leaves and goes out
of its former gross boi? and ths life vitality) and the senses
follow and overtake it in its next “rebirth, a® stated in the
Brihad A'’ranyaka i


Manu Samhita. at.


When being extremely attenuated (subtile) in form,
the individual Self (va), in combination with the
(eight categories),* enters into the seed of a mobile
or immobile being, then it is said to assume a gross
form. (56)

And thus he (Brahma), though himself deathless,
by his wakening and sleep, is constantly vitalising and
killing all the mobile and immobile (creatures). (57)

Having framed this, (code) at the beginning of crea-
tion, he (BrahmA) taught it to mein conformity with
the rites laid down in the S’astras; and I, in my turn,
comnunicated it to Marichi and other Munis.t (58)

This Sage Bhrigu will narrate to you the code,
inasmuch as he haw learnt it in entirety from my
own self. (59)


“Him going out (leaping over, follows life, and the flying life
do the senses follow.” —Kulluka.

* Samsrishta—Ia combination with the eight ¢ategories of
the five subtile elements, the senses, the mind, the intellect, desire,
Vayus, ac and the Nescience. The astral body (Linga S’arira)
goes out in company of these.—Kulluka. :

+ Mgpuarrrur asks how is it that, the authorship of this code,
which was actually framed by Brahm4 himself, came to be attri-
buted to Manu? He answers the question by explaining the term
S’astvam as “injunctions and prohibitions as disclosed by the true
meaning of the code.” Hence these injunctions and prohibitions
were ordained‘by Brahm& and Manu subsequently wrote a Code
of Laws based on those ordinations, etc@ in verse. Kulluka
subscribes to the same opinion and says that hence it is no con-
tradicfion to say that, “Brahm originally composed a Samhita
containing a hundred’ thousand couplets and taught it to Manu,
who, in his tn, summrised Me work and wrote it out again
‘in his own languzge.” Hence it is not at all contradictory to the
couplet of Ndrada,

He recollected® this code® composed of a hundred thousand

verses,—Narada,


22 Afanu Samhita.


Having been thus commanded by him (Manu), the
great sage Bhrigu complacently told them all, hear,
O ye Rishis. +60)

In the line of this Manu, the son of the self-begotten
one (Brahma), six other Manus* were born; those mag-
nanimous Manus) of great .prowess procreated their
respective progenies.t (61)

Svarochisha, Auttami, Tadmasa, Raivata, Chikshusa
of great energy, and the son of Vivasvan (Vaivasvat)
{these are the six Manus.] (62)

These seven Manus of great prowess, beginning with
Sviyambhuva, in their respective cycles, created all
this universe (/c#.) mobile and immobile things.) (63)

Eighteen Nimeshast (twinkleg of the eye) make
one Késhthd, thirty Késthés make one Ka/é, thirty
Kalis make one Muhurta (forty-eight minutes), and
thirty Muhurtas make one day and night. 64)

The sun divided the day and night of the Devas and
men, The night is for the sleep of creatures, and the
day is for the performance of works. (65)

One month of men makes one day and night of
the Pitris, each fortnight of men being equal to a day
or a night of theirs. The dark fortnight of men is the
working time (day) of the Pifris, the light fortnight is
the time for their sleep (night of the manes). (66)

One full year of men makes one day and night of
the Devas. The Worthern solstice is their day, the
Southern solstice is their night. (67)


* Suvah Suah *Prajéh—Their own progenies in their respective
times, i.e., cycles of time over wh®h they, respectively ruled,
Kullaka.
+ The tite taken by spont@iwougfy opening and closing the
tye-lid is called Nimesha.—Kulluka,


Manu Samhita. 23


The duration of one day and night of Brahni4, as
well as that of each cycle of time such as the Satyam,,
etc., now hear me briefly narrate in succession. ‘68)

The rita Yuga consists of four thousand years
(of the Devas); four hundred such years form the
Sandhya* (dawn) of that cycle, and four hundred such
years form its Sandhyams’at (eve). (69

Of the remaining yugas, the duration of each suc-
ceeding yuga and its Sandhydé and Sandhydims'a, are
respectively less than those of its predecessor by one
thousand and one hundred years.} (70)

Twelve thousands of such four Yugas, as computed
before in their order of enumeration, count as one
yuga of the Devas. (71)

A thousand yugas*of the Devas count as one day
of Brahma and his night is of a similar duration. (72)

[The wise], who know such a thousand yugus to be
a day of Brahm’ and another such &@ thousand yszpas
to be his night, are called the knowers of true day and


night. (73)


* Sandhya here means the forepart of a cycle of time; and
Sandhyams’a its closing part.—Kulluka.

+ A period of as many hundred years is its Sandhy4 and a
similar period is its Sandhyams’a and the period that intervenes
between the Sandhya and Sandhyams'a is called the yuga.

Vishnupuranam.


{ The text has Zkapdyena Vartante—the amplification of its
meaning would be that the Tveta Yuga consists of three thousand
(divine syears, its Sandhya and Sandhyams'a being respectively
composed of three huffdred years The Dedpara Yuga consists
of t:vo thousand®/divine: years andgits Sandhya and Sandhyams’a
being composed of two bfindred years each. The Kali Vuga
is composed of one thousand (divigg) years, its Sanihya and
Sandhyams’a respectively consiseing of a hundred such years.


24 Manu Samhita


At the expiry of his day and night, he wakes up
from his sleep, and awake, creates the mind, which
partakes of the nature of both the real and the pheno-
menal.* (74)

Impelled by (its) desire of creation, the mind (or
Mahat creates (begins the work of creation), and the
A’k4s’a (ether) is created therefrom (in the order des-
cribed before)t whose property is sound. (75)

From the modification of the ether is born the
pure, mighty air, the carrier of all kinds of smell, and
whose property is touch. (76)

From the modification ofthe air is born the <illumi-
nant, gloom-dispelling, effulgent light, whose property
is sight. (77)

From the modification of light(heat) was born the
water, whose property is taste, (and) from the water was
born the Earth whose property is smell. This was the
creation at the out-set.t (78.


* The text has Svijaté Manah which being literally translated
means created the mind. Kutruka says, that by thettegn Svijati
(creates) is meant that he engaged his mind in creating the three
regions of Bhu, Bhuba and Sva, and quotes a Pauranic text in
support of his statement.

Manah Srisikshaya-yuktam Sargaya Nidadhe Punah.

Again he engaged his mind, teeming with the desire of creation,
in the act of cre&ting. ,

Manah here is identical with the principle of Mahat (apprehen-
sion) into which the gnergy of the Supreme Brahma was trans-
formed after the dissolution of the Universe ; what Mahat is to
Brahma in the first cycle of unspecified creation, thé Magiah is
to Brahma in respect of the subsequent specéfic creations. J

+ In the order of Egoism gr Mineness (Akaskara), the five
tanmatras and so on.—Kulluka.

£ Srishtiraditah.e Creatign of material elements in the begin-
ning of creation, ze, after the diasolution ofthe TIniverse) and


Mani Sanihiid. 2&


Sevénity-one of such Divine yugas, each corisisting
of twelve thousand years as mentioned before, coris-
titute the period of a Manvantara (the ruling time of
a Manu). (79)

Innumerable such Manvaxtaras, innumerable erea-
tions and dissolutions of the universe,* the Supremet
Being makes out ef sport.t (80)

Virtue was four-footed,§ atid Truth, in special, was
éntire in the Arita Yuga. [In that age] men did not
earn anything by vicious means.|| (81)

In the other Yugas, Virtue, on account of the foul-
ness] of means by which money or knowledge was
acquired in them, became successively divested of its


es?
vith these elements the various worlds or regions were subse-


juently created.—Kulluka:

* Though only fourteen Manvantaras have been enumerated
nthe Puranam, in fact there had been innumerable Manvantaras,
and innumerable times the universe had been created and des-
‘troyed.— Kulluka.

{ Thetext has Paramehsth7, lit., ie, who is not qualified by
iny name, form, or attributes (Anduritta-Lakshane tisthati itt
Parameshthi).—Kulluka. ;

* This is another instance of the anthropomorphic virtues
being attributed to Brahnia, which in fact have no room in his real
nature, Lokavattu Lild Kaivalyam (Hunran-like is his sport, (crea-
tion) and emancipation (dissolution of the universe), S'drivaka
Sutram.

§ Virtue is represented as a bull in the @’gamds, its four feet
respectively consisting of Tapas (contemplation), knowledge, cele-
bratiog of ‘sacrifice ( Yajna), and gift-making (DAanam).—Kulluka.

\| NddharmendgaMa--KuLLUKa explains Adharmena as “by
means not san@ioned by the Veda,”

{| A’gamdt :—Vicious $r dishonest means—Kutiuxa. Mepua«
TITHI and GovinpaRAj explain it peal * Vedat,” (frome¢he Vedas,
the whole meaning, &ccording t# them, being the virtue, which is
earned by living in conformity with the teachings of the Wedas.


4


26 Manu Samhita.


one foot in each. On ‘account of theft, untruthfulness
and dissimulation, the virtue, which is earned by pur+
suing an honest profession, successively became less by
a quarter [in each Yuga.] (82)

In the Avita Yuga (golden age) men knew no
disease, and uscd to witness the realisation of all their
desires.* The duration of human life was four hun-
dred years.t In each of the [three succeeding ages]
such as the 7retd, etc., the life-duration of man respec-
tively became less by a quarter. (83)

The duration of human life, the fruits of acts done
by the mortals,j and the energies (moral force) of
embodied creatures§ "are proportionate (to the ethical
forces) of each age. (84)

Of one kind is the virtue in the Krita Yuga,
different is it in the 7yre¢é. Of one kind is it in the
Doedpara and different is itin the Xali Yuga, succes-
sively and proportionately decreasing according (to the
spirit of) each age. (85)

The practice of Tapas (divine contemplatign and
communion) was the greatest virtue in the age of Arita ;
knowledge (of Self) was the highest virtue in the age
of 7reta (the age of three-quarter virtue) ; performance

* Sarva-Siddharthéh :—Successful in all their undertakings.
They knew no faifure as vice, which wards off and opposes all
success, was absent in that age.— Kulluka.

¢ S'atayu Va Pur®sha (the duration of human life is a
hundred years) is the S’vuti, which lays down, according to
Ko tiuxa, the extent of human longevity im the present Kaliyuga ;
or Satam ia hundred) is here indefinitely usedor a large number.
Hence the text is not at all contradfctory to the S’rut&

} A’s’tshas’chaib Karmanam—Fruits SE Vedic rites performed


for the fruitign oi any desire.—Kylluka.
§ Prabhavas’cha S'areerinkm—C&pacity of Btahmanas to make
their imprecations or benedictions effective.—Kulluka.


Manu Samhita. 27


of religious sacrifices was the highest virtue in the
Dvdpara (age of two-quarter virtue), and gift-making
or charity is the highest virtue in the Ka/i-Yuga. (86)

For the preservation* of all this creation, He of
great effulgence, laid down separate duties for those
originated from his mouth (Brahmanas), from His arms
(Kshatriyas), from His thighs (Vais’yas), and from His
legs (S’udras). (87)

Study (of the Vedas), teaching, performance of sacri-
fices, officiating as priests at other men’s sacrificés, gift-
making, and acceptance of gifts are the duties of
Braéhmanas. (88)

Protection of the people, gift-making, performance
of sacrifices, study eof the Vedas, and abstention from
luxuryt are, in general, the duties of Kshatriyas. (89)

Rearing of cattle (sheep, etc.,) gift-making, perform-
ance of sacrifices, study (of the Vedas), merchandise,
money-lending and agriculture are the duties of
Vaisyas. (90)

Only one work did the lord ordain for S’udras,
viz., to ungrudgingly serve the three above-said social
orders. (91)

Sacred is the whole person of a man, more sacred
is the part of his body, which lies above his navel, and


* Guptyartham—Each contributing to the well-being of all,
and all jointly contributing to the welfare gf each in the manner
of libations of clarified butter cast in the fire by the celebrant of
a saczifice (Agnau Prds’tahutih). The vapours of clarified
butter cast in the eacrifcial fire ascend the sur® god. The sun
god, thus progitiated, sends dogn the rain. The rain greatly
favours the growth of fSod-crops, and food gives sustenance to
the living creatures.—Kulluka.

{ Vishayeshvaprasaktis’cha :.e-Non-attachment to music,,women,
dancing and articles of luxury. —Kulluka,


28 Manu Samhita.


most sacred is his face (head); this is what the self-
origined (Brahmé) has said. 192)

From the fact of his having originated from the
mouth, for the reason of his being the eldest born -of
Brahma), for the reason of his being the repository
of the Vedas, Brahmana is the ruler of all the creation,
in asmuch as he lays down the duties [of all the social
orders.] (93)

Him, the self-origined one, having practised Tapas,
created from out of his mouth, for the preservation of'
creation, and in order that the Pifris (manes) and the
Devas (celestials: might obtain their (portions of the
sacrificial) oblation. 94)

Through thé mouth of this (Brahmana), the celes-
tials eat their Havyas ‘oblations), and the manes, their
Kavyas (oblations.)* (95)

Of the created things the animate creatures are the
highest ; of the animate creatures the intelligent ones
are the highest, of the intelligent creatures. men are
the highest, and among men the Bréhmanas are the
highest. (96)

Among Brahmanas the erudite ones are the highest,
among the erudite Brdhmanas those, who think it
their duty to perform the S’asfric rites,t are the highest,
among the latter those, who perform such rites, are
the highest, and among the performers of rites the
knowers of Brahma are the highest. (97)


* Havya: oblations offered.unto the deities arg called Havyas,
while those offered unto the manes arescalled Kavyas.—Kulluka.

f Krita-Buddhayah—thgse, who have the notion (Buddhi) of
duty z¢., those who are aware of the intperatively obligatory
nature of the performance of Vedic rites.—Kulluka.


Manu Samhita. 29


The Brahmana has originated as the eternal embodi-
ment of virtue. His origin is for the furtherance of
virtue ; he becomes of the essence of Brahma. (98)

Born as a Brdhmana, he wields the supremacy of
the world, the ruler of all creatures, the custodian of the
treasure of virtue.* (99)

Whatever property (wealth) is in this world belongs
to the Brdhmana. For the fact of his being the eldest
born (of the creator),t all wealth legitimately belongs
to the Brahmana. (100)

Whatever does a Braéhmana eat, whatever does a
Bréhmana wear, whatever does a Brahmana receive,
is his own property, even if it belongs to another, in
asmuch as it is through the kindness of Brahmanas do
the other ,castes) enjoy. (101:

For the classification of the works (duties) of the
Brdhmana and other castes of society in the order of
their enumeration, the wise Manu, the grandson of
the self-origined one,} framed this code. (102)

This,:code: should be diligently read and taught
in its entirety to his pupils by an erudite Brahmana, and
not by (a member of) any other (caste .§ (103)


* Dharma-Koshasya Guptaye—The Brdhmana is virtually the
ruler of all the other social arders, inasmuch as it is he who
formulates the duties of men and_ teaches them of God and
religion.—Ku/luka.


+ S'vaisthendabhijanena : for the reason Gf his being prior to
the Kshatriya, Vais'ya, and S'udra in respect of time,
.


+ Svayambhuba, er the Manu of the first #anvantar, the
grandson of the self-origined Brapmda.


§ Kuriuxa interprets” the “passage to mean that, all the twice-
born orders are competent to read ppis Samhfta, and sgys that if
authorises only a B@dhmana to feach it to his pupils, condemning
the interpretation of Medhat:thi who holds the concluding par'


30 Manu Samhita.


A Brahmana, who, while observing the vow of self-
control, continence, etc., reads this code, is not tainted
by the daily acts of iniquity done by his mind, speech
and body. (104)

He ‘sanctifies the row (pankti;* and the seven
generations of his ancestors and descendants. He is
fit to be honoured even with the gift of the whole
earth. (105)

This code (z.¢., the reading of this code) is the great-
est of all auspicious rites.t It improves the intellect (of
its reader), imparts fame and longevity, and is superla-
tively auspicious. (106)

In this (code) are :described) virtues (duties) in
their entirety, merits and demerits of acts, and the
eternal rules of conduct, which govern the four social
orders. ( 107)

Conduct is the highest virtue, as inculcated by the
Smriti and the S’ruti (Vedas). Hence, a Braéhmana,
with his senses under control, shall always conform to
rules of conduct. (108)


of the couplet to be an intentional repitition, specically disqualify -
ing the other three castes (Kshatriya, Vais’ya and Sudra) to read
the Samhita, or to use his own language it isa mere Anuvada (i.e
an explanatory repetition or reference to what is already mention-
ed, and which ilystrates or explains a /2dhi or direction previously
laid down, but does not itself lay down any direction.)

* Pankti:—means the row of Brdhmanas with whom he may
chance to sit down to a S’vaddha repast.

+ The text has Svastyayanam which literally means a rite or
an undertaking in which lies( Vayanam) thecontinued enjoyment
or non-destruction of a wished & object. Muttergngs of Mantras
Homas (burnt fofferings), etc. are u@ually included within the
Svastyayanam (benegictory rites) in as much as they are calculated
to oppos@ the advent of eviltag to ensure¢he continuance of a
blessing already received and enjoyed.—Kulluka.


Manu Samhita. 3t


Devoid of conduct,* a Brdhmana does not obtain
the merit of reading the Vedas, Possessed of (good)
conduct, he reaps the entire fruit (of such study). (109)


Having thus observed the origin of virtue from
(good) conduct, the sages accepted conduct as the basis
of all austerities.t (110)


The origin of ‘the universe (/agat),t the sacramental
rites (Samskdras),§ the performance of vows (Vratas)
and the rules of ceremonial ablutions.|| (111)


Rules as to visiting one’s wife, conditions and forms
of marriage, the mode of performing’the great sacrifices
(Maha-yajnas),§ and the eternal S’réddha. (112)


* The text has Achar ddvichyutah, which literally means “ fallen
from conduct.”


{ The text has Zapasa which here includes not only contem-
ation in the manner of Yoga but austere penances, and’ ex~
piatory rites such as, the Chandrayanam, etc.—Kulluka.


f{ The term Fagat (universe) emphatically demonstrates the
fact that the Rishis, who first used the term, were fully cognisant
of the perpetually moving, changing character of every thing
included within it. ‘Lhe motion of our earth, which was known
to the Acharyas, at least two or three centuries before the
Christian era, is but a necessary corrolary deduced from the denota-
tion of the term Fagat. ‘


§ Such as the rites of tonsure, post-natal purification, ete.
=—Kulluka.


{| Such as the vow of celibacy (Brahmacharyayam etc.)
—Kullu%a.

Sndénasya Paramam Vidhim—The mode of performing the
ceremony of ablution by a Spudent fer returning from ‘his pre
ceptor’s house.—Kulluka.

| Maha-Yajnas, the five daij€acrifices of the hou8eholder
such as the Vais'vadeva, etc.—Kulluka.


32 Manu Samhita.


Descriptions of professions, the vows of Sxdtakas,
*articles which ought or ought not to be eaten, purifi-
cation of articles.* (113)

Means by which females can earn virtue, penitential
austerities, emancipation of thé Self, asceticism, duties
of kings, and laws relating to money-debts. (114)

The mode of examining witnesses, duties of wives
and husbands, divisions of shares, laws of gambling,
and the punishment of thieves, etc. (115)

The specific duties (works) of Vais’yas ‘and S’udras,
as well as those of the members of mixed eastes, duties
in times of distress, and the mode of performing ex~
piatory penances. (116) ;

Re-births according to the merits of three kinds of
works,t means of self-emancipatfon, and the ascertain-
ment of goodness and badness of acts, (117)

The duties of citizenship, duties peculiar to one’s
caste, and the eternal family-duties, and the duties of
Pédshandas—these are the subjects lord Manu described
in this code.{ ((118) ©

The Code, as Manu, interrogated by me, first nar-
rated, that you shall hear from me to-day. (119)


* Subjects included within asterisks are treated in the fourth
chapter.

| Trividham Karma-Sambhavam :—According to the merit
of any of the three kinds of acts such as good, middling and bad.
—Kulluka.

+ Pdshandas—Men, who follow scriptures other than theeVedas |
and do forbidden acts.—Kulluka.


CHAPTER I.


THE virtue, which pious men, well read (in the Vedas)*
and free from attachment and aversion,t have followed
from time immemorial, (for the reason of its being
based on the Vedas, the eternal repository of truth),
and as to the truth or falsity of which the dictates of
the heart are the concluding proof:t now hear me
describe that virtue. (1)


What is virtue? Kanada, the founder of the Vais’eshtka
system of philosophy, answers, that, which gives prosperity
(cessation of wants) in this life and the highest success (Self-emanci
pation) hereafter, is called virtue (Yatobhyudayo Nis’veyasa Siddhi
Sa dharma iti.)

Ha’rita says :—~Now I shall discourse on Virtue. That which
is sanctioned by the S’rutis (Scriptures, both Vaidic and Tantrik)
is virtue (S’rutt Pramdnaka Dharma.)

Jarmint says :—The object indicated (as good) by a Scriptural
Commandment is Virtue (Chodand-lakshanortho Dharma, ttt).

The Bhavishya Puranam observes, “virtute is synonymous with
good (S'repa), and “good” denotes prosperity. There are five
kinds of the eternal virtue which has its basis in the Vedas.

* The text has Vidvatbhih, Kutiuxa explains it by Veda-
vidbhi, men well-versed in the Vedas.

{7 The text has Avdgibhih,—which means that it should not
be pursued out of any desire or greed. Virtug is the offspring
of an unsullied soul and should be pursued withlan unstained
heart, and for its own sake only.

£ ‘The text has Hridayendbhyunujnato :—KutiuKa explains
it by “which the mind, as charmed by its sweetness, freely
approves.”

GovinDARAJ explains it as “ that about which the mind” does
not entertain any doubt.” »

Yhat, by pursuing which the mind, free,from all doubt and
scepticism, ,naturally ,enjoys a stage tt self-complacency, \s_calle<
Dharma or Virtue,


5


34 Manu Samhita.


Not commendable is the spirit of desire in man,
nor the total absence of such a spirit (in him) is
detected in this world. The study of the Vedas and
the performance of the Vazdie rites and sacrifices fall
within the boundary of acts with a desire.* (2)

Desire is based on volition or determination,t
and the religious sacrifices are based on solemn deter-
minations. All vows, Niyamas (self-control), and
religious duties{ are said to be born of desire or
determination. (3)


No action is found, in this world, of a man without


Mevua’ritH! explains “ Hridayam” (heart) by “notions derived
from perusing the Vedas, the whole eaning, according to him,
being that to which the mind, pregnant with notions originated
from the study of the Vedas, gives its unstinted sanction.

The true meaning of the couplet, we venture to suggest, is
that “ Virtue which does not spring up from the passions of the
mind, which, like the religion founded by a‘false, designing prophet,
does not live only an ephemera! existence, which, for the reason
of its being based on the teachings of the eternal Vedas, pious
men have been pursuing from time immemorial, which the pious
ritualists, with minds, purified by the teachings of the Vedas, and
equipped with testimonies and evidences of its truth, have been
adoring ever since the birth of creation, andJabout the truth of
which the dictates of the heart furnish the conclusive proof, now
hear me discourse on that virtue.”

* Acts performed for the fruition of a desire cannot be com-
mended, in asmuch'as it is these acts which bind the Self of a
man to the necessary chain of re-births, while daily (Nitya) and
accidental (Ngcmzttika) religious rites lead to salvation y illu-
mining self-knowledge.—Kulluka.

+ The text has Samkalpa which means volition or desire, as
well asa golem vow €0 perform a religious ceremony.

ft Sick as the duties of snatars, etc, deswibed in the fourth
~ tapter of this Samhiti.Kulluka.


Manu Samhita. 35


desire, Whatever act a person does is but the effort
of his desire. (4)


A man, by properly doing the acts enjoined to be
performed in the Vedas,* attains to the state of
Brahma ;t even in this world he may obtain all his
wished-for objects.{ (5)


The entire Vedas,§ the law codes framed by men,
well versed in the Vedas, from their recollections, ||
as well as the rules of life observed by them, the


* The desire or greed for the fruit of a virtuous act is here
condemned, but not the desire or wish to perform such an act
without an eye to its merit.


+ The text has Amaralokatim (it. state of the immortals)—
Kutiuxka explains it by B¥ahma-bhdvam, the state of Brahma.


f{ As in the Chhandozya,” when he wishes to attain to the
region of the manes, the manes appear unto him simultaneously
with his desire (Sa Vadd Pitriloka-kdmo Bhavati, Samkalpa-


devadsya Pitarah Samuttishthanti.)


§ The Rik, Sama, Vajus, and Atharva Vedas, as containing
all precepts (Vidhis), explanatory remarks recommending a pre~
cept by stating the merit arising from its proper observance
(Arthavada) and Mantvas.—Kulluka.


\\ Smriti S'ile Cha {Tadvidim. The recollections of Sages
well-versed in the Vedas, as recorded in the Law Codes bearing
their names, and which are collectively called the Swrcti (things
remembered).


{| S’tlam—-Observance of rules of life suchas Brahmanism, etc.
=—Kulluka.

Ha,rita observes that, there are thirteen kinds of Slam
such as, devotion tcethe gods and manes, amiabilaty, non-aggres-
siveness, non-waliciousness, mildness, smoothness (of temper),
friendliness, sweet-speakhg, gratitude, protectiveness, kindness,
and contentment.

Govinparay exPlains S’ilarMby absence of attachment and
aversion, etc.


36 Manu Samhita


costumcs* etc., of the pious, and the feeling of seif-
complacency? are the groofs of virtue. (6)

The duties, which Manu has described as obligatory
on any particular person, have been so ordained in
the Vedas, for he (Manu) is ommiscient.t (7)

Having observed all the Sastras,§ allied with the
Vedas with the eye of knowledge, the erudite one
shall perform the duties (peculiar to his order) in
conformity with the proofs of the S’ruti. (8)

By practising pieties inculcated in the S’ruti and
the Swriti, a person acquires fame in this life and
excellent happiness in the next. (9)

The Veda is called the S’ruti, and the Dharma
S’astra is called the Smritz. Their teachings should
not be put to the test of logic,|| for virtue has emanated
from these two. (10)

The Brahmana, who by dint of logic, tries to bring
these S’dstras into disrepute, shall be excommunicated


* A’chéra, costumes, etc., of the ascetics such as the blankets,
barks of trees, etc.

¥ The text has Atmanastushti satisfaction of the mind in cases
of alternatives (Vikalpa). As for instance, there is a regulation
that burnt offerings may be made either at sunrise or at sunset.
The satisfaction of the mind which the offerer derives by making
such offerings gither at morning or evening is the satisfactory
evidence that the offering has been rightly made. Garea says
that, in such casgs of alternatives Self-satisfaction is the test
(Vaikalpike Atmatushtis'cha.)

 Savvajndnamayo hi sah. Govinpar4J parses it as an adjec-
tive to Veda, @xplaining it by “inasmuch asthe Veda is the reposi-
tory of all knowledge.”

§ Such as the Grammar, Miménsa, ete.—Kulluka.


]] Their imports should no&ybe miscongyrued by sophistry
(Kutarka.)~Kulluka.


Brann Samitta. 3


from the society, as a heretical* calumniator otf the
Vedas, (11)

_ The Vedas,the Smriti, good conduct, and self-
complacency of one’s own, the wise call these four as
the positive proofs of virtue. (12)

The sense of virtue germinates in those, who are
non-attached to desire and wealth. To all ,enquirers of
virtue the 5S’ruti is the highest (conclusive) proof. (13)

In a case of two conflicting S’rutis, both of which
are equally authoritative, the wise have called both of
them as virtues of equal authority.t (14)


[As for example, there are two] Vaidic S’rutis that,
Homas should be performed before sunrise, and Homas
should be performed after sunrise. These two times
are different, but Homas may be performed at either of
them [according to the privilege of the offerer and
the nature of the deity to whom the libations are
offered]. (15)

He, whose all life, from the rite of Nisteka to that
of funerad, is governed by the regulations of the S’astras,
is alone competent to read, or to hear this S’Astra, and
no other. (16)

The tract of country, which lies between the
Sarasvati, and the Drishadvati, the two celestial rivers,
that god-built country is called Brakhmavartam. (17)


The conduct of life, as it obtainsfrom generation
to generation in that country among the twice-born


* Naéstika is the term which occurs in the text; literally it
means an athiest, although,it is often used in the sense of sceptic,
agnostic, etc,


+ In the conflictgof two Syv#ts of equal authority Bither of
them may be followed as an alternative.— Gautama,


38 Manu Samhita.


and the mixed castes, is called Sadéchér (good con-
duct) (18)

Kurukshetra, Matsya, Panchala and Surasenaka are
called the land of the 8rahmarshis, they are inferior to
Brahmavartam (in respect of sanctity).* (19)

From a Brahmana, born in this country, every one
in this world should learn his own proper duties. (20)

The tract of land, which extends between the
Vindhya and the Himalaya, and lies to the east of
Vinas’anat and west of Praydga,t is called Madhya-
Des’a (central country). (21)

The tract of land, lying between the eastern and
the western seas and included between the Vindhya
and the Himalaya, is called A’rygvarta (the country of
the A’ryans) by the wise. (22)

The country, in which black antelopes are found to
roam about in nature, should be understood as.a
sacrificial country, the rest is the country of the
Mlechchhas& (23)

These countries, the twice-born ones shall.be care-
ful to make their home; a S’udra, in quest of a living,
may adopt any country as his own. (24)


* Kurukshetra~an extensive tract of land near Delhi ex-
tending from the south of the Savasvati to the north of the
Drishadwati.

Matsya is the name of a country lying to the west of modern
Dholpur. Its capNal Virat is probably same as Bairat, forty miles
north of Jeypur.

Panchala, the modern Gangetic Doab.

Suvasenaka is the country around Muttra.

+ Vinas’ana, the country * whichgthe river Savasvatt. is lost
in the desert.

£ Peayaga is modern Allahabad.

§ Vajniya Deshak i.e., land in which religious sacrifices may
be performed and celebrated,—Kulluka.


Manu Samhitd. 3g


Thus has been briefly described the source of virtue,*
as well as the origin of all (the universe). Now hear
me describe the respective duties of the different social
orders. (25)

With the auspicious Vedic rites, the. purification
ol ‘ft bodies of twice-born ones shall be effected, as
'tunplfied in) the rites of Garbhadhinam, ete.

‘hese Vedic rites are purifying both in this life and
the next. (26)

By means of the Vedic rites of consecration of the
womb, post-natal purification, tonsure, and initiation
with the thread, the sin of the twice-born ones, per-
taining to the seed and womb (of their parents), is
absolved. (27)

The study of the three Vedas, Vows,t burnt offer-
ingst /jas,§ sons, the great sacrifices,|| and sacrifices{
make the soul of a man** competent to. attain, to

-Brahma. (28)


. * The text has Dharmasya Yoni,--KULLUKA explains it as the
revealer of virtue, ze. the Vedas, as disclosed by the couplet
Vedokhila Dharma Mulam,—GovinDaraJ explains it by “origin
of virtue, ze, the different acts of piety such as, the rites of
S’raddhas, Ashtakas, etc, as contemplated by the first verse of
this chapter.

t+ Vratas or vows of forswearing meat, wine, etc.

} Homas or burnt offerings known as the Savitri Homa, Charu
Homa, etc., as well as those daily offered at morning and evening.

§ /jas~rites of propitiating the gods, R&his and manes with
libations of water by a student (Bvahmachérin); 2a man is debtor
to the "Devas by the f/edic study, to the Rishis by gacrifice, and to
the manes by the son.

i] The great sacrifices age the five Brahma Yajnas.

{| Yajnas or sacrifices such as the F yotestqma, etc.

** The text hag Tanu, whigy literally means body, -eKuLLUKA
explains it by “embodied soul”


go Manu Samhita,


The rite of ¥é¢atarma (post-natal purification) shall
be done unto ajmale child before the cutting of its
umbilical cord; and at that time, it should be fed with
honey, clarified butter, and gold-leaf. (29)

The rite of nomenclature shall be done unto it, in
the tenth or twelfth month, onaday marked by an
auspicious star,. or by an auspicious phase of the meey,
or by a good Muhurta. (30)

The name of a Braéhmana shall be a term of blissful
import, that of a Kshatriya shall be one denoting
strength, that of a Vais’ya shall be one connected with
a term denoting wealth, (and) the name of a S’udra shall
be a term implying vileness. (31)

The name of a Brihmana shall be prefixed to
“S’arman,” that ‘of a Kshatriya‘shall be coupled with
a term denoting protection, the name of a Vais’ya shall:
be prefixed to a term denoting prosperity, and that of
a S'’udra shall be a term prefixed to one denoting
service, (32)

Of women, the names shall be terms whic can be
easily pronounced, not of any cruel import, explicit
in their meanings, sweet, of auspicious significations,
ending in long sounds, and coupled with terms imply-
ing bliss or benediction. (33)

In the fourth month* shall be done the rite of
showing the child to the sun; in the sixth month. the
rite of feeding the child with boiled rice, or according
to the custom obtaining in the family. (34)


For virtwe, the rite of tousure,ein respect of all


* In the third momth according to Yama, the name of the rite
(Niscram@nam) literally means Waking the echild out of the
room.


Manu Samhita. 41


‘the twice-born orders, shall be doné unto the child in
its first.or third year,* as ordained by the »’rééi. (35)

The rite of initiation awith the thread shall be done
ufito a Brahmana boy iir his éighth year, unto a
Kshatriya boy in his eleventh year, and unto a Vais’ya
boy in his twelfth year, counted from the day of
conception. (36) 7

Wishingt the energy of Brahma, a Brahmana (boy)
should be’ initiated with the thread in his fifth year ;
wishing stréngth,§ a Kshatriya boy should be. so
initiated in his sixth year; and wishing wealth, @
Vais'ya boy. should be initiated with the thread in ‘his
eighth year. (37)

The time for initiation with the thréad (Savitrz) in
respect of a Bréhmana lasts till his sixteenth year ;||
that of a Kshatriya, till his twenty-second year; and
that of a Vais’ya,.till his twenty-fourth year. (38)

Henceforth (beyond these age-limits) these ‘three
twice born ones, not duly initiated with the thread,


* In the third year the rite of tohsure, or atcording to the
family customh —A’s'wdlayana's Grihya sutram.

+ Though such a desire on the part of the child is impossible,
its father is supposed to cherish them in his heatt.—Kulluka.

¢ Brahma Varchasam—The spiritual force or energy which is
derived from the study and right understanding of the Vedas
—Kulluka.

§ Balarthinah—1.e., strength of kingdom, and that derived
from the possession of horses, elephants, etc.

|| The Yext has A’-S'’edashat ; the prefix A’ in this*instance, ac-
‘cording to Kuiiuyg, has the force of ¢ till the completion (of” the
‘sixteenth year). Others, on t&e contrary, relying on the opinion of
Yama, “after his fifteenth year, a Brahmana, not Snitiated With the
thread, becomes degraded, ” say that@the force of the prefix A’ in
A’S'odashat is “up to the limit of.” We, however, have followed
KULLUKA in our translation


6


‘4a ‘Manu Samhita.


‘become Vrdtyas (of broken vows), and are degraded
‘from the society of the Aryans. (39)
, A Br&hmana, even in the time of distress, must
‘not hold any connection with these Vrdtyas, not duly
‘expiated according to the regulation,-either by marriage,
‘or by (Vedic) study. (40,
“The Brahmachdérins (Of the three ‘social orders)
‘shall respectively wear hempen, silken, and wooler
“cloths,” and put on ‘upper sheets (wétariyas} respec-
tively made of the skins of the antelope, Rurw (a species
of deer) and goat* (41)

‘The girdle of-a Bréhmava (student) shall be madé
‘of three strings of AZunjé grass, evenly «and spoothly
‘tied, that of a Kshatriya shall*be made of d/urva
fibres tied -in the shape of-a bow-string,-and that oi
a Vais'ya shall-be made of “hemp-twists. (42)

. "In .the absence of A%uxjé grass, etc. the girdles
‘of (Brabmanas, Kshatriyas and Vais’yas) ‘shall be res-
iectively made of the fibres of Kusa, Ashmantuka
‘and Valvaja, consisting of one, three, :or five ties,
(according to the family-custom',-each tie being tied
with three strings of such fibre-thread. (43)

‘fhe holy thtead of ‘a Brahmana’shall be made with
‘three stringst of cotton ‘thread, that of a Kshatriya


Soto ts


* A Brdhmana @udent shall wear a cloth made of hemp twists
atd put on an antelope-skin as his upper sheét. A Kshatriya
Brahmacharin shall put-on a silk-cloth and an tipper sheet made
of the skin of2 Reru deer, and a Vais'fa Brahmacharin shall
put on a woolen cloth and an®upper sheet made‘ef ‘the poat’s skih
~Kulluka.

} Trevit (lit , thrice rounded) is the term that occurs in the
text. But although Manu ordains that the Roly thread of a twice
‘Porn one, Whether Brdhmana, Kshatriya’ or Vais'ya. must consise


Manu Samhita: 43


with three. strings of hempen thread,. and“ that of a-
Vais'ya with three strings of woolen thread, suspended
from the upper (part of the body). (44)

For virtue, a Braéhmaga. shall carry a staff made of
the Vz/va or the Palas’a wood ;* a Kshatriya, one made
of the Vaéa or the Catechu wood; and a Vais'ya, one
made of the Prlx or the.Audumvara wood. (45)

' The-staff of a Brahmana (religious. student) shall.
be made of a height. so as to reach to the hair of his
head, that of a.Kshatriya -(student) shall of a height
soas to reach his forehead, while that of.a Vais’ya
(student) shall be.of a height so as to reach up to the
tip of his nose. (46) :

The staff shall be straight, whole-barked, net eaten.
into by worms (/¢¢.. unulcerated), beautiful to look at,
unburnt, and uncreative of terror to any person.t (47)

With such a desirable staff in his hand, and. having
worshipped the sun_and thrice circumambulated the.
fire, he (a. religious student) shall go forth asking for
alms, as lgid down in the regulation., (48)

_ The foremost. of the twice-born ones (a Bréhmana.
student), duly initiated with the thread, shall beg alms


of three strings of thread, yet in practice it is. made-to consist
of nine strings, each three of them, being. fastened* with a knot.
or Granth? on the authority of the Chhéndogya Paris’ishtam.

Devata too says that the holy thread must consist-of nine
strings (yajnopavitam kurvita sutrani nava tantavah).

% The text has_Viiva and Paldsa staffs: But here only either
of these staffs sgould be carried as gtated in the Vasishtha, Vailua
Palas'o va Danda (a staff either of the - Vilva or. the Palas'a wood)
we Kalluka.

{ An-udvega-kar®, Nrinam—ith which he must not threaten.
os;terrorise any personmKulluka.


44 Manu Samhita:


by. pronouncing the term “ Ahzavat” in the: first part,*
a Kshatriya, by uttering it in the middle part, and a.
Vais'ya, by uttering it at the: end, (of his begging.
formula). (49)

He: shall beg alms: first of his own: mother, or sister,.
er mother’s sister,f or of any other woman, who might
not insult him with a refusal. (50)

Having collected so much alms’ as necessary and!

-undeceitfully made over the same to his preceptor,.
he shall sip. water: and. pure ip body, heshall eat his-
meal, sitting with his: face towards the east. (51)

He; who eats his- meal with his face:towards the-
east, acqitires. longevity ; by eating. his meal with his:
face towards the south, a.person acquires fame. Hej.
who eats. his meal with his faee:- towards the west,.
acquires opulence; by eating with his face: towards:
the north, he:acquires truthfulness. (52).

Having sipped. water, a. twice-born one. shall eat.
his meal, each day, selfcontrolled.; having eaten, he:
shall again. sip. water and.touch the external orifices of
his-organst with water. (53):

Each day, having. worshipped it, and. without speak-
ing ill of it, he shall eat his. food. Let him rejoice at


* The formula for a Brdhmana is Bhaban Viksham dehs, you:
(be pleased) to. give me alms, that fox a Kshatriya student is
Viksham Bhaban® deht (alms you. be pleased to give), and that for:
a Vais’ya student is: Vekshdm deht Bhavan, give me alms, O thow
revered oné.

7 In the absence of his mother; he shall beg of his sister ; im
the absence of a sister he shall beg of his. mother’s sister® in the-
absence of a mother’s sister he shall beg. of 2 woman, who might

- not refuse him. the alms, —Kull®a :

¢ The text has Khant, which means the external orifices of
the organg. The mouth, the eyes, the nostrils, and the ducts of the
ears are what is here contemplated.—Kullukas


Btanu Samhita. 45,


the sight of his entire food, (44, boiled-rice, -and
propitiate it, and. pray it to be available, each day.*. (54)

Food, daily worshipped, gives strength, and. vitality.
Unworshipped. food. destroys both the worlds—of. its.
partaker.t 155)

Let him not eat the leaving of any hody’s (food),t.
nor take a (third) meal during the interval .of his morn-.
ing and.evening ones§ Let him avoid ovar-eating. He.
must not go any where without. washing his mouth,
after eating. (56)

Over-eating brings on ill-health, shortens the duration,
of life, proves hostile to acts (sacrifices) which lead to,
heaven, is sinful and condemned by men. Hence, let_
him avoid over-eating. (57)

Always shall a. Brahmana. sip’ water with the,
Brahma-tirtham, with the Kdya, or with. the Dawwa-.
tirtham, but never with the Pitri-tirtham. (58)

The region about the ball of the:thumb.is called ithe,
Brahma-tirtham, the Kaya-tirtham lies at the root,


* As iwis said inthe A’pipura’NAM, “in.as mu¢h.as it is heard:
in the S’rutz that focd is Vishnu himself, let a person, seeking.
Nitality, constantly meditate upon.me, worship me, eat me with
joy, rejoice at my sight, propitiate me, pray me to.be available
each day, and ronounce, at my sight, his grief from, whatsoever
cause arisen,

+ Both Mepua’rirHt and Govinpara’sja Observe that, this.
worship is daily obligatory like the rites of Sandhyd, and as it is,
adaily obligatory duty (Nitya Karma), its vf lation entails sin,
although its performance does not give any merit. This enumera-.
tion of teenefits of the worshipped food isa praise of the food, a.
mere Arvthavdda and i’ not here introduced to. rouse. up the desire
of the partaker®for securing those fruits or-benefits in the manner
of a Kémya Karma (act for the fruition of a desire).

t{ Hereby the giving of leavings even;to a Studra is prohibited,

§ For the purposts of the vow of a Sndtaka,


46. Manu. Samhita.


of the small finger, the. Daivam-tirtham. ties at: the:
tips of-the. fingers, and; the. Prtri-tirtham (sacred to.
the manes) lies between the. middle. parts: of the. index-
and’the:small fingers (59)

First, let him thrice, sip water, and,then twice rub,
his closed,lips. with the tip of his wet thumb. After
that, let him, touch his. organs, chest,* and head with.
water. (60)

A person, conversant with virtue, and. seeking puri-
fication, shall sit in a. lonely place, facing towards.
the east or the. north, and, constantly do the rite of
Alchamanam (sipping water) with cool,t frothless. water
by the aid of the (above-said) Zirthas. (6%)

{In connection’ with the. rite of A’chamanam]. a,
Bréhmana.. is-purified.by sipping water, enough to reach
down to. (the- region of) his- heart ; a Kshatriya, by:
sipping water enough.to-moisten his-throat ; a Vais’ya,
hy sipping. enough..water to moisten his-mouth ; and a-
S’udra, by sipping a quantity sufficient to moisten his
lips and:the.tip of his tongue. (62).

A_twice-born one.is said.to be .upaviti (wearing the.
holy thread. in the. usual way).when the holy thread:
or-the upper sheet lies suspended from his left shoulder
on his right pip, leaving the right arm. untouched
and (frée). Similarly, when the same lies, suspended.
from his left, shoulder, he is called, Préchindviti, when.


* The text has. A’tmdnam which meaps Self. Self or the
soul, according to the Upanishads, is located in, the heart;
hence it is the practice to touch the chest with water in an aet of
A'chamanam.

} Acc8rding to A’pastambha hot or boiled water may be used ;
hy a sick or, diseased person,


Warn Samhita. 47


t. hangs round his -neck (like a necklace}, he-is called
Niviti. (63 *

A torn girdle (Mekdalé), -antelope-skin (Ajiza), or
‘holy thread, as well ‘as a broken staff, or ewer should
~be cast in the water, and a new one should be taken by
‘consecrating it with the Mantra. (64)

The rite of Kes’dnta* should be done unto a Brah-
‘mana in his sixteenth year, unto‘a Kshatriya in his
‘twenty-second year, and unto a Vais’ya ih his twenty-
fourth year. (65)

For the. purification of ‘their persons, flee rites,
‘excepting that of initiation with ‘the thread, shall be
~done unto women,-in due time, and ‘in due order, with-
out any Vaidic Mantras. (66)

The sacrament of" marriage is to a-female, what ini-
‘tiation with the thread is to-a male. The service of
-the husband is to the wife, what his residence in the
-preceptor’s house, as a religious student, is to the hus-
‘band; the household duty is to a woman, what the
‘making of burnt offerings is to-a man. (67)

Thus is described the regulation of initiation with
‘the thread in respect of the twice-born ones, the sacred.
‘initiation which is as a second birth unto them, Now
‘hear me describe the -acts and duties (Karma-Yoga)
which are obligatory on them, after initiation. (68)

Having initiated a pupil, let the preceptor teach
‘him ‘the rules of purification and good conduct, as
well as the mode of ‘doing burnt offerings and
“Sandayas, (69)

For the end of studying the Vedus,let a student,
:self-controlled, clad sin a light garment, and looking


Sei ee ha
* This stanza is but a paraphrase of the opinion of Gob/ila on
the subject,


48 Manu Samihitt,


‘towards the north,* do the rite of A’chamanam, ane
‘unite his palms in the manner of a Brahmdnjali,t
-after which, lessons shall be given to him. (70)

At the commencement and at the close of his Vedic
‘study, a student shall catch hold of the feet of his
spreceptor. He shall read with the palms of his hands
‘united. This is called Brahménjali (the united palms
of Brahma or Vedic study.) (71)

With his arrhs parallelly outstretched, he shall
‘make obeisance unto his preceptor, by touching his
(preceptor’s) right-foot with the right, and his left-foot
‘with théMeft hand of his own.t (72)

Let {the preceptor, free from laziness, address his
pupil, at the time of teaching, a$ “©, do you read
now,” and end his (day’s) lesson by saying, “lef there
be a stop here.” (73)

‘Let a Bréhmana utter Pranava -at the ccramence-
merit and at the end of-his study. Praxava, not
uttered at the commencement, leads to the destsuction
‘of the reading; not pronounced at the close, it kills
the remembrance of the studied subject. (74)

‘Seated on a (mattress) of Kus’a grass, with their
‘tops. directed towards the east, and purified by taking
thold of the Kusyz blades in his hands, let him purify

* On his right han® side the pupil, looking towards the east or
‘the north.— Gautama:

} Brahmanjalig—Drawing up the hands @ little in a flexed
\posture and then by uititing the pajms—this is called: Brahmdn-
jalii—Kulluka,

} Laying the palms*of his outstretched hands on their back


‘on the ground let him catch hold of his preceptor right foot with
his right hand and Ris left foot with his left hand —Pacthanemi.


Mau Samhita. ts)


‘hiniself by practising three Prdndydmas,* after which.
‘he shall become competent to utter the Pranava. (75)
Akara(&:, Ukéra (U) and Makdra (M), (the com-
ponent letters of the Mantra, Om), Prajépati, (the
creator of the universe), milched from the three Vedas,
together with the (Vydéhrrti Mantras) Bhurbhuvah


and Suvah.t +76)


* Priniyama—Regulation of the breath ina particular manner.
‘He shall purify his bedy by three Praxdydmas, consisting of fifteen
Matras (i. e., lasting for atime necessary to utter fifteen short
‘vowels).— Gautama. .

+ We find both in the Upantshads and the Puranas that, this
‘material, phenomenal universe, with its life and living inmates, has
‘evolved out of the eternal “Om,” the exponent of vibrations of
‘the primordial ether. The inspired rhapsodists of the Rik Veda
chant that, there is only ene substance in the world, and the
Tantrikas and Tuttyavddins (knowers of Zattvas) aver that, tha
‘different forms of matter have originated from that one substance
through the variations of atomic vibrations, or to express it in
their own terms, through the action of the different Matrix sounds
(fatrika Vagnas). Sound is the first expression of a thought or
idea, and therefore the Matrix sounds were the first realisation, of
the idea of universal evolution. ;

Now the component scunds of “Om” (A +U-+M) represent
all the sounds, both vowel and consonant, of the Sanskrit Alphabet,
and hence they are the matrix sounds or vibrations that ushered into
‘being all forms of existence. A (4) is the first, vowel sound

_as well as the lirst letter of the Alphabet, and U (3) is the middle
vowel sound; or in other words, the rest of the vegvel sounds are
‘but the modifications of A \%) and U (3). M(@) is the last
consonant sound, the last letter of the five Vargas or groups of
principal consonants, the semaining consonants being Sonly auxt-
liary or intermedigte sounds (Antas@ras and Ayugavéhas). Thus
we see that the component of Om represent the three whole
gamuts of existence, the Vydhritis, or the Bhur dhuva and Suvah
ithe spheres of being, ebecoming and Self). Prajupati milched
hjs Om, with tle three Vyé4rstrs , from the three Vedas, re he


Z


50 Manu Samhita.


Frajdpati, the inmate of the supremé sphere, 1é-
‘covered each (of the three feet of the) Géyatri, con-
sisting of the Azks, running as Zad, etc., from the
three Vedas. (77)

The Veda-knowing Brdhmana, who mutters this
three-footed (Tripida) Géyatri, preceded by the
Pranava* and the Vyahrit?: Mantras, at meetings of
the day and night, becomes associated with (obtains)
the merit of reading the entire Vedas. (78)

-A. twice-borh oné, who mutters these three Riks
‘a thousand times, each day, is able to cast off all sin
within a month, as a-snake casts off its slough. 79)

A Brahmana, Kshatriya, or a Vais’ya, who becomes
dissociated with this Azch (Gdyatri), or deviates from
performing his religious duties in proper times, is
condemned by the virtuous. (80)

. The three great eternal Vyéhritis, appended to the
‘Omkdra, and the three-footed Géyatr7 form the mouth
of Brahmat (81) |

He, who unremittingly mutters these 4/antras for
three years in succession, attains to the Supreme Brahma,
becoming all-coursing like the air, and unaffected and
all-embracing like the universal expanse of ether. .82)

The single-lettered (AZantra, Om) is the Supreme

Aves cas


recovered this knowledge of the eternal economy of things from
the three Vedasthe repository of eternal knowledge.

* Pvanava is same.as the “ Om or Omkara.”

ere ey o

{7 Vyahttis, the three Vyéhviits, sech as, the Bhuh, Bhuvak
and Svah,

¢ Brdhmana-mukham (/7f. mouth ot Brahma), KucLuKa explasns
: . .@ F we ;
at by ‘the chief means of attaining to Brahma, or the mouth of


the Vedas, t.¢, ta be muttered before Pommencing the study ot
the Vedas.


Manu Samhctu. aL


Brahnd, Prandyamas* are the highest.austerity, there
is nothing greater than the Sdévitri (Gayatri) Mantra,
and truthfulness is greater than silence. (83)

All the Vazdie rites such as, the fapas, Homas, ete.,.
do perish in time,t but eternal (/:t. decayless) is. the
Pranava, since Pranava is identical with: Brahma.
Prajépati. (84)

A Fapa-yajna (muttering of a Mantra) is ten. times:
more meritorious than a Vidhi-yajnua (Ritualistic sacri-
fice). The muttering of a Mantra in.a.low or inaudible
tone (Updms’u Japa) is a hundred. times, and a. Maénasa.
apa (mental repetition of a. Mantra) is. a. thousand
times as much meritorious. (85)

The four Péka-yajuas,t if. added. to. the Vidhi-.
yajnas,§ cannot count a sixteenth part of a ¥apa-yajna
in respect of merit. (86):

Undoubtedly by means of ¥afa alone, a Brahmana
achieves success (becomes liberated), no matter whether-
he‘performs any other Vaidic sacrifice or not; since:
a. Brdhmama.is said.to.be a friend||.of Brahma. (87)


* Dharanidhara reads.the text as: Ekakshara-param Brahma,
Pranayama-pavam: Tapah, meaning Brahma is symbolised by the
single lettered Afantra (Om\. Tapas essentially consists in prac
tising Pranayamas, We- have adopted Kutnuka’s reading who has
followed M&DHA’TITHL.


+ Perish after their fruits are exhausted:—K’ ulluka.


+ The four: Paka-yajnas (iit, sacrifices in which rice is cooked}
ether than the one known: as. the Brahma yajna (study of the
Vedas) ar@ the Vais’vadqpas, Homas, Vali-karmas, d@ly Sr’addhas
and Atitht-puja (hospitality to- Atithgs).

§ Such. as. Darsa-PaurnoMasi and the like sacrifices —Kulluka.


e

|| The text has. Maztro Brahmana Uchyate~Ku.vuxa gxplains.

it by Brahmanah Sambandhi related to. Brahma i, e., he is merged,
ein the supreme self, as narrated.in the A’gamas.


oe Manu Sarnntica


The senses, spontausously running towards their
attractive objects of tgratification, the erudite one
shall control, as a charioteer controls his. (harnessed)
horses, *(88);

_ Of the eleven senses, enumerated. by the’sages of
yore, I shall discourse on each of them in detail and
im due ordey* (89)

The ears, the skin, the eyes, the tongue, the nose:
which is. the fifth, the anus, the reproductive organ,.
the hands, the legs, and the speech which is the tenth,
(these are the ten senses). ‘90;

The: first five, in due succession, commencing with.
the ears, are called the cognitive senses. (@uddhin-
driyani), the (second) five, comnsencing with. the. anus;.
are called the operative senses (Karmendriydnt.) (91)

The mind is known as the eleventh (sense’, which
partakes of the nature of both the cognitive and the:
operative senses, and by conquering which, one is
enabled to. conquer the (other) ten (senses). (92) ;

(A person), through the contact of his sen8es (sense:
organs) with their objects of gratification, undoubtedly-
acquires sin.* Hence, by controlling them, one achieves
success (obtains liberation.) (93)

Never is Mesire extinguished by enjoying the vb-~
jects’ of desite ; ‘like. the fire: fed. with libations, of)
clarified butter, it doubly burns up.t 194!


* Compare S’enkara’s commentary, on the Arihad A’ranyaka
Upanishad Cy. 1. Brahmana II. (Udgithay For by corffact, which
is their connection with -the special work, mich they. well per--
formed, they were allied with the sin @f the demens.

+ Compare the saying of Vaydti in the Vishuu-purdnam.
Food gfain, gold, animals, and women that exjst in this world, desire
even in respect of a single one of these objects of enjoyment is
never satiated, hence let a man renounce inordinate desire, with


tang Samhita: 535


Of oue- who has obtained. all. the objects of his.
dusire- and the other who has renounced.all the objects .
of desire, the man of renunciation is. superior to. hime
of, enjoyment. 195)

These-senses, attached’ to. their respective: objects,.
cannot be so effectively controlled. by means of inanitions
(2.e., by withholding them from their objects} as: by
the cultivation: of knowledge:* (96)

The study of the (Vedas), renunciation, the-perform--
ance of religious: sacrifices, self-control ‘and: devotional:
austerities, made by him, O' Brahmana; who is wicked at-
heart, can never be successful.t (97)

The man, who, having heard, touched, seen, eaten-
or smelled anything (whether good. or bad), does not.
feel pleasure. or ‘pain, is: said to. have conquered his.
senses. (98)

Ofali the senses (of a man), if only-one sense ‘manages.
bo leak out, thereby all his: wisdom: leaks:out, like- the:
water of a water-bladder (through its only outlet.) (99)

Having controlled. the: concourse: of (the: external)
sense-organs. and: having subdued: the. mind, let him:
work out all his ends, averting the- pain of the. body-
by means of Yoga. (100)

During the morning Sandhy4, he (the. votary). shall


thee mind attached to objects of the. senses, I have’ lived a.
thousand years complete, still my. thirst does, not abate—Vishnu
Puranam.


*® Fydnena :—by constantly thinking of the unstable character-
of prosperity, the tfansitoriness of human life, nd the obnoxous.
nature of thefiuman body whiches a bag of bones and muscles,
etc —Kulluka.

+ The text has Dushta-bhavasya, which literally means of a,
man of bad or sullfd feelings and ideas. Kurituxa expfains it as
whose mind is tainted by. the object of the senses,


4 Manu Samhita.


mutter the Séuitri (Mantra), standing, until the-sum
is seen (on the horizon), During the evening Sandhyé.
he shall mutter the: Mantra, in. a sitting posture, until
the stars do appear (in the heaven).* (ror)

By muttering the Mantra in a. standing position:
during the rite. of morning. Saxdhy4, one: is absolved.
of the sin accumulated in the night. By muttering
it in a sitting posture in the evening, one: is absolved. of
the sin acquired during the day.t (102):

He, who. does not stand by his morning: Sandhyd,.
nor. worships in: the evening, shall be disqualified from:
performing all Brahmanic rites, like unto a S'udra. (103)

Incapable of reading a large portion: of thé. Vedas,
he, conforming to the regulation Of daily reading
the. Vedas, shall. mutter, self Controlled, and with.
undivided attention, the Sévitri Mantra, coupled. with
the Vyéhritis, on- the shere of a river or pool ina.
lonely forest. (104)

There is no prohibition in respect of reading the
allied branches of the: Vedic study (such as. the-Prosody,.
Grammar, rules. of pronounciation, etc:,) or in respect
of the Homa Mantras, or in respect of that portiom
of the Veda which should be read each day (7.e., the
Sandhyé Mantras), during the period in which the study
of the Vedas ig ordinarily interdicted. (105).


* MeDHa’TITHI Bives prominence to the postures taken- by the-
votary during the performance of the Sandhya prayer as the-
primary factor in imparting merit :

f Sandhyz, according to, Yajna-Valkya,. lasts for a Mahurta
(orty-eight minutes) at either meeting of the day and the night.

+, Compare. Vajua-Valkya ; the sin unknowingly committed by-
2 man, either in the day or night, is expiated bY thrice performing.
Sandhya, each. day.


Manu Samhita. %%

This prohibition does not extend to the daily rites of
"“‘Fapas, Homas, etc.), in asmuch as they are called the
Brahma Satram* (the sacrifice of Brahma) ; the offering
‘of Vaidic recitation, made during the continuance of the
period of non-study, which is symbolised by the Mantra,
Vashat,t produces auspicious fruits. (106);

Unto him, who, pure and self-controlled, studies
the Vedas, according to the regulation, continuously for
a year, (the study) sheds, milk, milk-curd, clarified
khutter and honey,{ each day. (107)

A Vaidic student |Brahmachérin}, until he returns
to his father’s house, shall kindle the fire at morning
and evening, beg alms, lie on the bare ground, and do
what is conducive to the good of his preceptor,t each
day. (108)

The son of the preceptor, one who is devoted to

‘service, a virtuous person, one who is pure, a relation,
one who is capable of comprehending the (meaning of
the Vedas), an honest youth, a son, and a paying
student, ¢hese ten are fit to be taught. (109)

Without being asked, one must not speak anything


* KULLUKA amplifies the term Brahma Satram as Brahma
(Veda) eva Satram, i. e , the sacrifice of Brahma, tke preposition
“of” having an appositive sense in this instance.


+ Vashat is the term that is uttered at th® close of a Vatdic
lesson. Hence the term is here figuratively used fer the suspense
‘of Vedic study, or in other words it is her€ used to denote the
period during which the study of the Vedus is forbidden.


+ TM text has @ Payo-dadhi-ghritam Madhy (milk, curd,
clarified butter,and honey) which, gaccotding to the technicalities
of the Hindu Sdstra, m@ans_the satisfaction of the gods and the
manes. Compare Yajna-valkya, the twice-born one, who reads
the Rig-Veda, evew day, is said to satisfy the gods evith milk
and honey, and the mancs with honey and clarified butter


56 ‘Mann Saiithita


‘to-ahy person,s nor should he speak if any questidh
is put to him without decorum. In such cases, the in
‘telligent one shall behave like a dumb person.* (110)

He, who ‘puts an improper question, or he who
‘answers an improper one, either of them meets his
“doom, or incurs the enmity of the either. (111)


Where there is no virtue or.gain, or where there is
ino prospect of a counter-balancing service, there know-
dedge should not be imparted, like a good seed i ina

‘barren soil. (112)


Even ii the absence of a means of livelihood, rather
det a Vedic preceptor die with his knowledge than
4mpart it to an unworthy recipient (pupil) (113)

The presiding deity of kndwledget came to a
'Brdéhmana and said, “ preserve me, I am thy highest
treasure. Do not impart me to a malicious person,
thereby my potency will be kept unimpugned.t (114)

To him, whom thou. shalt know to be pure, per-
fectly continent, and free from the follies of the world,
to that Brahmana, to that custodian of the treasure of
- knowledge, shalt thou impart me.”” (115)

He, who acquires the, knowledge of the Véedus
(lessons in the Vedas) from a studying pupil, or from a
*eaching preceptor, without his permission, stands guilty
‘of the theft of Brahma and goes to hell for his
‘crime. (116)


* The text has ¥adavat, gv hich literally means like a fool
‘or an idiot. Kuntuxka explains it bg Muka-tva, like a dumb
person.

+ The text has védyd, the presidin: go@dess of knowledge
Compare Vaistha Ch. II, vs. a5


Manu Samhit2. 89


Him, from whom one has acquired any sécular,
Vaidic, or spiritual knowledge,* he shall reverentially
accost without waiting to be first spoken to. (117)

A Brdhmana, who, knowing only the Géyatrr
Mantra, conforms to the rules of conduct as laid down in
the Ordinance, is superior to a Brahmana, who, although
well-versed in the three Vedas, eats forbidden food and
sells things which ought not to be gold.t (118)

He, who sits on a bed or a cushion on which his
preceptor (or superior) is uséd to sit, shall find no
good (prosperity) in this world. Happening to sit on
a bed or cushion (at the time), he shall stand up, leaving
his bed or cushion, and accost his preceptor at his
advent, (119)


At the advent of an old man, old in years and
wisdom), the vital airs of a youth heave up and attempt
to leap over to him; they are restored to their normal
condition by his rising up from his seat and duly wel-
coming him in. (120)

The duration of life, fame, and bodily strength, these
four (things) of him, who sits in the assembly of the
old{ and serves them faithfully, each day, are found to
increase. (121)


Having accosted an elderly person, a Brahmana,


* A spiritual teacher is more venerable than a Vaidie precép-
tor, anda Vaidic preceptot is more venerable than an imipatter of
secular knowledge.—Kulluka.

+ The text has Sarvds't and SarvasVikrayi which litetally
means eater of all kinds aof food and seller of all articles of sale.
Kuttuxa explains it by Nishiddha-bhojana-s'itm and Pratishiddha
Vikveté which we haye adpoted in our translation.


t In the assembly of pteceptors or superiors —~Kulluka.


8


58 Manu Samhita


after the accosting, shall enumerate his own name as,
I am that so and so who accost you.* (122)

If the person, accosted, chances not to know
Sanskrit (the usual language of accosting), then the
accoster shall address him as, I am so and so; likewise
ladies in general should be thus accosted. (123)

At the time of accosting one shall utter the term
“Bho” (O) at the end of his name, inasmuch as that
term, in common with the name of a person, signifies
the fact of addressing. (124)

A Brahmana accoster shall be re-accosted as, “be
long-lived, O you, handsome-looking one,” and the
last vowel sound of his name, in the event of its ending
in a vowel sound, shall be prénounced in 2 Pluta
voice.t (125)

A Bréhmana, who, having been accosted, does not
know how to return it (.e., does not know the formula :
of re-accosting), shall not be accosted .at all by the
erudite. He is like untoa S’udra. (126)

In meeting a Braéhmana, his spiritual good willJbe the
first thing that shall be enquired; similarly, the world-
ly peace of a Kshatriya, the opulence of a Vais’ya, and


* Both Medhatithi and GovinpaRajJa hold that, the accoster
shall couple his*own name with the term of accosting or wel-
come. ,

Let him acco® (a superior) by mentioning his own name as,
J am so and so that accost you.—Gautama.

O, Iam that so and so, let him thus mention his own. name.—
Sémkhydyana.

+ The final vowel of the name of a Brahmana (Ms’udra), or if it
does not terminate jn a vowel sound, the one immediately preced-
ing thedast letter of the name should be uttered in a thrice pro-
lated or protracted manner at the time of addressing or accosting

a Brahmana (Teh pluta Udatta-Panint).


Manu Samhita. 59


the good health* of a S’udra are the things that shall
be asked after the first meeting. (127)


A virtuous man shall not address a person, engaged
in celebrating a sacrifice, although his younger in years,
by his own name. He shall address him as, ‘ Bho”
(O), “ Bhabat” (revered one), etc. (128)


One shall address another man’s wife, not related
to him by marriage, as Bhabati (revered lady), etc.,
he shall address his younger sister as, O thou fortunate
one (Subhage). (129)

One shall stand up in the presence of one’s uncles,
father-in-law, maternal uncles, priests (Rittviks) and
preceptors, although younger than him in years, and
welcome them as, d am that so and so, etc, (that
accost you). (130)

A mother’s sister, the wife of a maternal uncle, or
a father’s sister shall be revered as the wife of a Guru.
All these are equally venerable as the preceptor’s
wife. (Z 31)

One shall accost a wife of his élder brother, belong-
ing to his "own caste, by clasping her feet, on returning
from a distant country ; one shall accost his aunt and
mother-in-law by clasping their feet. (132)

One shall behave unto his elder esister, mother’s
sister, or father’s’ sister as his own mother; but his
mother is the most venerable of them “all. (133)


* A’pastamva says that these,forms of addressing may be used
in accosting one’s junior @r equal in age. GOVINDARAJA Says that, in
as much as these terms (Kshema, etc.) are-synonymous, what is
contemplated here, is that, these different terms should %e used in
accosting persons of different castes,


60 Manu Samhita.


Among inmates of the same village or town, persons*
younger than one another even by ten years are equal;
among professional dancers and musicians, persons youn-
ger than one another even by five years are equal. Among
Brahmanas well-versed.in the Yedas, even three years’
youngers shall be treated as equals. Among blood-
relations it is only a small desparity of age that makes
one entitled to respect and veneration. (134


A Brdhmana, ten years old, anda Kshatriya of a
hundred years of age, shall be considered as a father
and a son; the Brahmana shall be treated as the father
of the Kshatriya. (135)

Wealth (honestly acquired) friends ‘relations’, age,
work, and erudition (knowledge) which forms the fifth,
these are the sources of honour, each succeeding one
being more honourable than the one preceding ‘it in
the (order of enumeration.) ‘136)

Among members of the three castes, he, who has
the best of the five abovesaid qualifications, is entitled
to the highest honour. Even a S’udra of ninety
‘years completet shall be respected by the twice-
born ones. (137)

[On the road] one must give way to a carter, toa
man of more than ninety years of age, toa sick folk,


* An educated man living in the same town or village with an
illeterate gees ae than him even by ten years, shall n@® show
any special marks of respect to him for his years, as he is bound
to do to an equally uneducated fellow, citizen of ‘his, older than
him by more than ten years.—Kulluka.

+ Thettext has Das'amimgatah which literelly means” in his.
nineties.” Kualluka. ;


Rann Santhiée. 68


to a carrier of weights, to a woman, to a Sudteha,* to
the king, and to a bridegroom.f :138)

When all these meet together (on the road), great-
est preference shall be shown to the king and the
sndtaka, Of a king and a sxdtaka, the first shall
give way (show respect) to the last. (139)

A Brdhmana, who having initiated a pupil with the:
thread teaches him the Vedas with all its mysteriest
and ceremonials, is said to be an A’chéryaya unto that
pupil. (140)

He, who, in consideration of fees, teaches a portion
of the Vedas and any of the Vedangas (allied branches
ofi Vaidic study) to a pupul, is said to be the Upadhyaya
of the latter. (141)


He, who does the (consecrating) rites of Nisheka
etc., unto a child according to the ordinance, and. ‘main-
tains him with food (and raiment), is said to be his Guru
(father). (142)


A Braéhmana, who, being appointed by another, does
for him the’religious sacrifices, called the 4gnyddheyam§


** The text has Sndtaka, which means a Brahmana religious
student returning from his preceptor’s house after finishing his
student's career.


+ Vava here means a bridgroom on his way to, or from the
bride’s house before, or after the marriage is formally solemnized
—Kulluka.


t The text has Sakalpam Savahasvamcha. Kalpa means the
branch of Warde literature which deals with cer@monials and
the celebration of religious sacrifices, Rahasyam lit mysteries;
is the transcendental truth® inculcated in the Upanishads.—
Kualluka.


§ The rite of first @ndling the sacred fire in which oblations, or
Wjbations of melted hytter are fit to be offered— Kulluka,


62 Manu Samhita.


Pika-yajna, Agni-Stoma, etc., is said to be his Rettvik
(priest).* (143)

He, who fills the ears of a person with the eternal
truths of the Vaidic Mantras, is said to be his father
and mother ; against him he shall not rebel. (144)


An A’charyaya excels ten Upadhyayas, a father
excels a hundred A’chéryayas, and a mother excels a
thousand fathers, in respect of veneration.t (145)


* A Rittutk, otherwise devoid of the qualifications of a Brahma-
chavin (such as the vow of continence, etc.) should be revered
as a Brahmacharin—Kulluka.


An A’chdryaya is more venerable than ten UpAdhy4dyas ; a
father is more venerable than a hundred A’chdryayas, and a mother
is more venerable than @ thousand fathers.—Kulluka.

It is held by certain western Scholars that, the sentiment ex-
pressed in this couplet dates from the time when the sanctity and
obligations of marriage, as a social institution, were but very
partially observed and discharged by men, or when but a very
crude form of marriage was adopted in society. After the days
of promiscuity, the first attempt at forming a domestic economy
must siecessarily be a (government by the mother). The
mother was the queen, the protectrix, the fooi-earning agent
in the first house of man. In the days of promiscuous intercourse
the mothers of men, like the mothers of beasts, had to take the
sole care of the child; and hence with the arduous nature of the
maternal duties.there arose the sense of the child’s obligation to its
mother. In that stage of society it was natural for the primitive
man to look upow his father as a mere progenitor whom perhaps he
had very little chance of seeing in his life, and to consider the
mother as a thousand times more necessary and valuable for. the
rearing of hi§life, from the days of his helpless infancy’ to those of
his resourceful adolescence. @But the 7axtriks, qa the other hand,
relying solely on their admirable embryology hold that, the:func-
tion of the paternal element is only to call the life force latent in
the ifipregnated ovum into being, and that the maternal element
is the real manufucturer of life. Beyond this evoking of lifg


Manu Samhita. 63


Of one’s own progenitor and imparter (teacher) of
the Vedas, he, who teaches him the Vedas, is superior
to his progenitor, since the birth of a Bradhmana through
the Vedas is his eternal existence both in this world
and the next. (146)

The birth of a man through the lustful meeting. of
_his parents in his mother’s womb is the birth which he
has in common with the beasts. (147)

The birth, which the A’chéryaya, well-conversant
with the Vedas, procreates for him through the Savitri
initiation, according to the Regulation, is his real, decay-
less, immortal birth (z.e., birth in immortality). (148:

@Him, who benefits a man by imparting to hima
lesser or greater amouut,of Vazdic knowledge, let that
man revere as his preceptor (Gurz), on account of im-
parting that much knowledge of the Vedas. (149)

A Bréhmana, who, although of a tender age, causes
the initiation of an old man in the Vedas, and teaches
him his religious duties (by explaining their true import),
him such &n old man is in duty bound to venerate as
his own father. (150)

Even the infant son of Angira, whose vision ex-
tended far into the depths of the unseen mysteries,*
taught his own fatherst and used to address them as
sons. (151)


force in the ovum the paternal element is perffttly inoperative
and hence they decree that a mother is a thousand times more
venerable tan a father.

* The text has Kavz. Sdyana explains it in &. renowned
sia to the Rigveda by Kranta-darshi “of a far-reaching
vision.’


¢ The text has Aitvin, Kulluka explains by Pitmvyan,
Ritrivya putran, paternal uncles and sons of paternal uncles.


64 Manu Samhita.


Having been thus addressed by A’ngirasa, they, mad
with rage, demanded its reason of the Devas, and the
assembled Devas said unto them, “the boy has not
spoken indecorum.” (152)

An ignoramus* is veritably a boy, the imparter of
the Mantras is like unto a father, for since the ancient
time it has been the practice to a call an ignoramus a
boy and an imparter of the A7uxtras a father. (153)

Neither by years (age) nor by grey hairs, neither
by wealth nor by friends (relations) does one become
great. The Rishis made a compact of yore that, “he
of us who will study the entire Veda with the allied
branches of study} will be called great. (154)

(Elderliness) among the Byihmaaas is according to
knowledge, that among the Kshatriyas is proportionate
to prowess, that among the Vais’yas is proportionate
to wealth,§ and that among the S’udras is proportionate
to age (/i¢ date of birth.) ‘155)

Grey hairs do not make an old man; @ young man,
who has studied, the Devas designate hin? as really
old. (156)


* The text has Ajna, which lterally means “an ignoramus”.
Kulluka explains it by ‘one ignorant of the Vedas.’


+ Mantrad@ is the term that occurs in the text, its literal
meaning being the imparter of the Mantra. Kulluka explains
it by teacher of the Vedas.

* The text has Anuchanahk. Kulluka explains it by Sanga
Vedadheyatag the reader of all the Vedasewith the allf@d_ branches
of knowledge, such as the prgsody, grammar, rulgs of ceremonials,
rules of pronounciation, astronomy and Mimansa (exigetic disser-
tations on the Vedas)


§ The text has Dhana-dhanyatah i.e. a®ording to one’s posses-
sion of food grains, animals etc.


Stan Samhita. 65


“Like whto a wooden elephant or a leathern deer,
‘@ Brdéhmana, who has not studied, bears only the namé
‘of a Brahmana. (157)

As a eunuch is (séxually) fruitless (unsuccessful) in
yespect of a woman, as (sexually; fruitless is the meet-
ing of two cows, as fruitless is the gift to an ignoramus,*
‘so fruitless {is the life of a) Brahmana who has not
‘studied the Azks (7.e., the Vedas)e (158)

The good of creatures should be effected with kind
‘and sympathetic means ;} desiring virtue, one shall use
‘sweet and gentle words under the circumstancés. (559)

He, whose speech and mind are always puret and
fully restrained,§ derives all the benefits enumerated in
the Vedénta.|| (160)

Persecuted or oppressed, one must not hurt the
feelings of others. Let him wish or do no injury to
any body. Let him not use a harsh word, that bars the
gate of heaven, to any body. (161)

Let a Bréhmana shun worldly honours, like a poison,


* The text has Ajna which means an ignorant person ; certain
‘commentators explain it by “a mad person.”

+ The text has Bhutanam * * S’veyo'nus'dsanam, the
Nteral rendering of which has been given above. Kutzuxa explains
Bhutdndm by “Sishydndm (of pupils),” and S’veyo, by ‘‘instruc-
tion,” the whole meaning, according to him, j& that instructions
‘should be given with the help of compassionatg means. —

t The text has S’uddhi (pure). Ku tuxa explains it as speech,
unsullied by untruthfulness, and mind, free from desire, aversion,
hatred, @c,

§ The text has Samyag-gupig, Kuttuka explains it as mind
restrained from walking ig forbidden paths.


| Veddntopagatam phalam. te, lordliness of the universe,
‘and emancipation Sof Self, etc., described inthe Vedanta, as the
result of practising its tenets.


9


66 Manu Samhita.


throughout his life. Desiring immortality, let him court
humiliation all through his days. (162)

He, who habituates himself to bear humiliation,
happily sleeps, happily wakes (from sleep) and travels
in the path of duty.* The humiliator suffers a double
death.t (163)

Let a duly initiated Brahmana, by dint of gradual
practice, acquire, while residing in the house of his
preceptor, this Tapas (penitential austerity), which
would enable him to fully comprehend the import of
the Vedas.t (164)


By means of special austerities and various (other)
vows practised according to the Regulation, a twice-
born one (Braéhmana) shall master all the Vedas with
et Oe

* The discomfiture, which a man suffers for having had to bear
with humiliations, ceases to torment the person, who, from his
very childhood, learns to look upon honour and dishonour with
equal indifference, and thus robs humiliation of its sting. In the
armoury of the petty vexations of life there is no dart keen enough
to hurt him under his mail of healthy contempt for lgtleness.
There is nothing in this world to disturb his night’s repose, or to
cloud the gladness of life which returns to him, each day, with the
morning song and sunshine. With his head touching the stars in
the conscious glory of a larger manhood, he treads triumphant in
the path of duty, without casting a look at the shady by-paths of
life, or lending his ears to the siren-songs of pleasure. The glory .
of this world, at its best worth, is but a mist, a vapour, and the
commercial success Oflife may, in reality, be the very opposite
of success.


+ The text has Vinas’yati, Kutiuxa explains it by “goubly
dies out of self-reZroach.”

{ The text has Brahmadhighmikam, tapah whfth may also
mean penitential austerity that enables one to attain to Brahma.
KuLiuka has explained Brahma by Veda, and we have adopted
KuLzuka’'s interpretation.


Manu Samhité. 67


their Ruahasyas (i.e, the mystic transcendentalism as
inculcated in the Upanishads), (165)

Let the foremost of the twice-born ones. (Brah-
manas) constantly commit the Vedas to memory, in-
asmuch as the study (recitation) of the Vedas is said
to be the highest 7apasyé* for a Brdhmana. (166)

Even he, who indulges. in such articles of luxury
as, the garland of flowers, etc., by studying the Vedas,
each day, according to his might, acquires such an
efficiency in Jafas that its (energy) surcharges his
whole body from the tips of his finger-nails to the
crown of his head. (167)

A Bréhmana, who not ‘having studied the Vedzs,
tries to acquire othere forms of (secular) learning,t is
degraded to the status of a S’udra with all his progeny,
even in his life-time. (168)

The first birth of a Brihmana is in the womb of
his mother, his second birth is through his initiation
with the oly thread, and his third birth lies through
his initiation in the Vaidic sacrifices (Jyotishtoma, etc.)
as ordained by the S’rutz.t (169)

In respect of the birth of a Brdhmana im Brahma,
of which the wearing of the holy girdle (Mekhala) is
the symbol, the Sévitri (Gayatri Mantra) is his mother
and the preceptor (4’charyaya) is. his father. (170)


* Tapas means austerity with communion witn the supreme
Self.

¥ The text has Anyetya Kurute ’vamam. Kutiuya explains it
by “forms of pau other than the »smrti an@ Vedangas.”
Compare Sankha® “Before qhe studying the Vedas, let him not
study any other subject of study.”

£ Which the priests (Rittviks) perform to make him competent
for the celebration of the Vatdie sacrifices, to make him initiated
in the sacrifice; through that he takes birth again.—3’rutz.


68 Banu Sanihirla.


Before his initiation with the thread, a Brd4hmane
is not competent to- perform any kind of religious.
rites ;* hence, for the fact that, the A’chdryays im-
parts to. him the knowledge of the Vedas, the A’char-
yaya is:his called father. (171)

A Bréhmana, until he is again born in the Vedas,
continues like unto a S’udra. Let him not utter any:
Vaidic Mantras except those of the S’rdddha,t before:
his initiation. with the thread. (172)

To.a Brahmaaa, duly initiated with the thread, shall.
be given instructions, regarding the practice of vows,f.
gradually and. in conformity with the. Regulation; he:
shall be made to get by heart the (different portions§ of
the) Vedas. (173)

The. kinds of skin, thread, staff and girdle, which,
have. been ordained. for a. \Brahmachdrin). at the. time:
of initiation. with the thread, shall be. likewise used. by;
him in connection with practising a.vow.|| (174)


_


* The text has. Karma, Kuctuxa. explains it by Svauta or
S'marta Karma, i. e., acts.enjoinéd to.be performed in. the. S’ruté.
(Vedas) and Smriti.

} Svadh& is the term. that occurs in: the text. Svadha is.
the word which is uttered at the time of offering, oblations to»
the manes. Hete it figuratively stands for the S’raddha Mantras.
KuLiuka explains it by “ dfantras which are recited. during the-
celebration of a frst (ava), S’vaddha ceremony.”

{ The text has. Vratades’an,, KuLLuka explains it by, “command-
ments to. practise the vows. which, he promised to #ndertake at
the time of shitiation, vis., I will collect fuel for the sacrificiak
fire, I will not sleep in the da, etc.


§ Brahmana, the successive portions of the Vedas such. as,.
the Mantra Brahmanas, etc.—Kulluka.


|} Such. as the penances of Govarta, Chandrayanam, etc,


Manw Samhita. 8g»


A Brahmachérin, while residing with his preceptor,.
shall control his senses and. observe these rules:
of conduct for the augmentation of his psychic:
power. (175)

Let him be pure, let hint bathe each day,* sicaprtauas
the gods and manes with libations of water, worship-
the deities, and cast sacrificial twigs (Samid) in the:
fire, each morming and evening. (276)

- Let him forswear the use of honey, meat, scents,.

~ garlands of flowers, and articles of sweet taste which,

acquire. an acid flavour when stale. Let him refrain:
from visiting women and killing animals. (177)

Let him forswear the use of anointments (unguents),.
collyriums, shoes, and umbrella ; let him renounce lust,..
anger, greed, dancing, singing and music : ( 178)

Gambling with dice, idle gossips, scandal, falsehood,
embracing, and casting lustful eyes on females, and
doing injury to others. (179)

He must sleep always alone, and let him not cast.
his seed (by-any unnatural méans.) A luStful casting
of seed kills one’s vow. (180)

A Bréhmana religious student, who has uninten~
tionally spent himself in sleep, shall bathe and. wor-
ship the sun fand thrice mutter the Azé running as.
Lunarmam, (181)

He shall fetch pitchers-ful of water, flowers, cow-.
dung, clay and Kus'a grass asmuch a8 his preceptor
might require, and beg alms, every day. (182)


e SE,


* Morning and evening, let himebathe each day.—Vishnw.

_ Though daily baths are* forbidden by Gautama in respect of
Brahmacharins, this prohibition extends only to wanton bathing,
as Baudhayana expresses it. Let him not bathe (many tifves) out

eof a spirit af bravado.—Baudhayana.


70 Manu Samhita.


Of house-holders, who celebrate the Vaidic sacri-
fices and complacently perform the duties peculiar
to their order, a Brahmachérin, pure in body and spirit,
shall beg alms, each day. (183)

He shall not beg alms of his preceptor’s family,
nor of his cognates and relations. In the absence of
any other house-holder, he shall beg alms, leaving each
preceding one of these persons. (184)

In the absence of (fit persons of whom the Vedas
gives a Brahmacharin the sanction to beg alms), let
him, silent and self-controlled, beg alms of the whole
village (2. ¢., of all the four castes) without repeating the
proper formula of begging. (185)

Let him collect fuels (Samiq) for the sacrificial fire
from a distant forest* and place them in the open;
with them he must punctually offer the burnt offer-
ings, morning and evening, each day. (186)

In health, ifa @rahmuchérin fails to beg alms, or to
kindle the sacrificial fire with the fuel of Samid twigs,
for seven days in succession, he must do thé penance”
of an Avakirni (of broken vow). (187)

A Brahmachérin, having been invited to a repast
given in connection with a S’rdddha offered to the
deities, may take to his satisfaction (articles of food)
which do not ¢oil the vow) of a vowist ;f invited to a
repast in connection with a »’rdddha offered to the
manes, he may take to his satisfaction such food, which


* The dry @wigs of trees which have been mentioned in the
Vedas as holy and fit to be us with the burnt @fferings. They
should be collected from a distance’as it is evident from the:
use of the term Durat in the text.


tT The text has Vratabat, i.e, all articles of food excepting
ment, honey, etc., Madhu Mamsa-Var; fam —Kulluka.


Manu Samhita. 9t-


a Rishi may eat* without impugnity, even if without
incurring the sin of eating the food given by one and the
same person ; thereby his vow is not nullified. (188—-89)

Wise men have ordained alms-begging as equally :
obligatory on Brahmachdrins of all the twice-born
castes (Brahmana, Kshatriya, and Vais’ya), but a Ksha=
triya ot a Vais'ya Brahmachérin is not authorised
to partake of a S’rdddha repast given by a single

person. (190)

Goaded by his preceptor or not, he shall take
special care of his lessons and evince a specia! interest
in things conducive to his preceptor’s benefit, each
day. (191)

Controlling his body (physical propulsions), speech,
intellect, senses and mind, let him sit with the palms of
his hands, united together, looking at the face of his
preceptor. (192)

Covering his body with the upper sheet ‘of garment
in a manner so as to leave) the right arm free and un-
covered, Jet kim sit, meek and self-controlled, each day,
in the front of his preceptor, after being told by him,
“ sit down here.” (193)

By the side of his preceptor he shall eat food and
wear garments inferior to those of his preceptor: After
him he shall go to, and prior to him heeshall leave
ehis bed. (194)

Comfortably .lying in bed or seated on a cushion, or
with his face turned back, he must not hear his precep-
tor’s order, ffor speak to him. (195)

If his preceptor orders him fowany thing when he
is seated, he shall rise up ;*if he does that standing, he.


®
* Rishivat, ie, Niva¥%a grains and such like food-stuff which
a hely sage usually eats in his hermitage.—Kulluka,


BR Manu Samhita.


‘shall advance a few steps towards him; if hé does that
while strolling, he shall follow him ; and if he does that
while going away, he ‘shall run after him and receive
that order or speak to him. (196)

The preceptor happening to look at any other side,
he shall stand in front of him; the preceptor happening
to be at a little distance, he shall go unto him; and his
preceptor happening to be in bed or seated, he shall
hung down his head and receive his order and speak
‘unto him. (197)

By the side of his preceptor he shall alwais
‘occupy a-lower bed or seat; within the sight of his
preceptor he must not sit in an easy or careless
posture. (198)

.He shall not utter his preceptor’s name even at
his back. He must not mimick his gait, speech or
voice. (199)

Let him shut up the ducts of his ears in a place
where his preceptor is calumnised or spoken ill of, or he
must go elsewhere from that place. (200)

A calumniator of his Guru shall be born as an ass,
and a vilifier of his Gurz shall be a dog, in his next
birth, For having wrongfully enjoyed the property of
his Guru, he shall be born as a worm; one envious of
his Gurx’s excellence shall take ‘birth as an insect in
his next incagnation. (201)

He shall not worship his Gurx (with garlands of
flowers, sandal-pastes, etc ,) from a distance,* nor when

e. : had :
angry orein the company of I&dies. Happening ta
meet his Guru from a @ar or from (raised seat, he shall
get down and pay him respect. (202)


Gee po oe ea cee a
* He shall not send such offerjngs of fowers, etc , to his Gurz


through a third person from a distance.—K1/fuka:


Manu Samhita. 43


He must not sit with his Guru when the wind will

ee blowing from his direction to that of his Guru,*

‘or the contrary ; while in his company, he must not say
anything which is inaudible to his Gurz. (203)

In a bullock cart, in a cart drawn bya horse or
a camel, on the terrace of a buiiding, in a courtyard, on
a large mattress of reeds, on a stone-slab, in a boat he
may sit by the side of his preceptor (Guru). (204)

In the event of the (preceptor) of his preceptor
being near, he must behave unto him as unto his own
preceptor; while residing in his preceptor’s house, he
(the pupil) shall not accost even his own parents without ©
first having obtained the preceptor’s permission. (205)

Unto his preceptor, (teacher) and superior relations
such as uncles, etc.), unto counsellors of good, and
unto those who dissuade him from evil ways, he shall
always thus behave. (206) .

As well as unto his elders in virtue and wisdom :
likewise unto his preceptor’s sons and friends and
relations thus he shall constantly behave. (207)

A preceptor’s son, if he be his younger or equal in
age, or if he be a disciple of his in respect of the cele-
bration of a religious sacrifice, he (the pupil) shall res-
pect as his own preceptor, in the event of that (son)
having taught him the Vedas. (208)


He shall not rub the person of his preceptor’s son,


* The text has Prattudte Anuvdte. The wind is said to be
Prativdta when it blows ‘rom the direction of the Guru to that
of the pupil, and Anuvdta when it blows from the direction of the
pupil to that of the preceptos. A pupil is forbidden to sit by
his Guru, when the wind blows from either of these directions,
lest the particles of saliva, etc., from his mouth, while sperking,
might not fall upon his precepter’s body.

10


74 Manu Samhita.


nor help him in bathing, nor eat the leaving of his food,
(as he shall do in the case of his preceptor). (209)


The wives of a preceptor of his own caste shall be
revered (by a pupil) as the preceptor himself. His
wives of different castes shall be honoured with mere
accosting and by rising from the seat. (210)


A pupil shall not anoint the person of his preceptor’s
wife, nor help her in her bath, nor rub her person, nor
comb her hair. (211)

A pupil, twenty years old, (or) who has attained the
age of discretion, shall not accost his preceptor’s wife, if
she be a youthful one, by clasping her feet. (212)

To defile men is the nature of women, hence the
wise are never infatuated nog un-circumspect about
them. (213)

Man, by nature, is subject to lust and anger; women
are quite competent to lead even the wise men astray,
not to speak of fools, (their easy victims). (214)

One shall not reside in a solitary place even with
his own mother, sister or daughter. Powerful are the
passions (Ji* senses) of a man, and they sometimes over-
whelmn even the wise. (215)

If desired, the young pupil may accost a youthful
wife of his preceptor, according to the Regulation,* by
mentioning @is name as I am so and so (that accost
you). (216)

Having returned from a distant country,'’he, bearing
in mind the rules of good couduct, shall accost (an
elderly) wafe of his Guru by cla8ping her feet, on the
first day ; on all subseqfent days, he shall simply accost
her without clasping her feet.) (217).


I te, ee
That is without clasping her feet.—-Kulluka.


Manu Samhita. 75


As by digging (the earth) with a digging instrument,
one gets water, so by faithfully serving him, a pupil
acquires (all) the knowledge which is contained in his
Guru (preceptor). (218)

A Brahmachérin, whose head is clean -shaved, or
who wears clotted hair, or grows a single tuft of
clotted hair on his crown, let not the rising or setting
sun find within the precincts of: a village.* (219)

If the sun rises, seeing him asleep, out of wilful
laziness, or goes down finding him resting in bed out
of ignorance, let him mutter the Géyatri Mantra and
fast fora whole day. (220)

A sleeping (Lrahmachérin), roused up from his
sleep by the sun, if he fails to do this penance, is asso-
ciated with a gat sin. (221)

Both in the morning and evening, let him, pure and
self-controlled, mutter the Géyat7i, and pray, sitting in
a holy place, as laid down in the Regulation. (222)

Even if a woman or a S’udra advises him to do any
good act, letshim do that, or whatever his mind approves
of, (if that is not hostile to the S’dstra.) (223)

Some say that virtue and wealth are the only good
in life, others aver that wealth and desire are the
highest good, some hold that virtue is the only good,
others say that wealth is the only good in fe: virtue
wealth and desire combinedly form the good in life.
This is the conclusion. (224)

The preceptor is the living image of Brakma, the
father is tha? of Prajégati (creator) ; the motlfr is the
living image of the earth, and t&e uterine brother is
one’s own image (second s®if) (225)


* He must be in his torest-home before the sun sets, nor quit
° : ae :
t for a village before he rises in the morning.


76 Manu Samhita.


Hence, a man, and specially a Bradhmana, even being
hardly oppressed by them, shall not insult a father,
a mother, or an elder brother. (226)

Even in the course of a hundred years, a son can
not repay the trouble which his parents have under-
gone for the purpose of bringing him up. (227)

Let him constantly do what is good to his parents,
and specially what conduces to the comfort of his
preceptor. The satisfaction of these three is the con-
summation of all 7apfas (penitential austerities) (228) {

Serving these three constitutes the highest Zzpas ;
without their permission, let him not practise any —
other piety. (229)

These three represent the three Regions,* the three
orders of the society. They®are the tgree Vedas, they
are the three fires. (230)

The father is the household fire, the mother is the
southern fire, and the preceptor is the sacrificial
fire, These three fires are the most glorious in the
world. (231)

A house-holder, who does not commit any folly
in respect of these, conquers the three regions; efful-
gent as a god, he, even in his mortal frame, is enabled
to enjoy the felicity of heaven. (232)

By means of devotion to his mother one conquers
this world, by devotion to his father ke conquers the
middle wofld (firmament), and by devotion to his pre-
ceptor he attains to the region of Brahma. (233)

He adores all the virtues,,who adgtes all these-
three ; Ale, who belitgles these three, belittles all the
vigtues. (234)

Ps Trayo Lokéh, the earth, the firmament, and the heaven.


Trayo As’ramah the order of Brahn.ociivin (the religious
student), the order of the house-hulder, and the order of hermits.


Manu Samhita. Wi


So long as these three live, let him not practise
any other virtue (piety) ; let him tenderly serve them
and always do whatever is good and pleasant to
them. (235)

Whatever other virtues does he practise by mind,
speech and acts, for his good in the other world,
he shall inform them thereof. (236)

To serve them tenderly is the highest and most
manifest consummation of his duty, all other pieties*
are minor virtues. (237)


Respectful, let him acquire an auspicious knowledget
even from a S’udra; the highest virtue,}: even from a
man of vile caste; and a good wife,§ even from a bad
family. (238)

Ambrosia may be taken even out of poison; a
good, word, even from an infant ; a good conduct, even
from an enemy ;|| and gold, even from an unhallowed
person, (239)

Women (wives), gems, knowledge, virtue, purity,
good words (counsels), and the various kinds of art
may be acquired from anywhere. (240)

In times of distress, a Brdhmana student may take


Apadhayma is the term that occurs in, the text, Kuntuxa
explains it by Vasdic sacrifices such as the Agneshtoma, etc.

+ S'ubham Vidydm—knowledge of manif&t, or tested power
and potency, such as the Gérudi Vidyd (drugs and incantations
for the cere of a snake-bite).—Kudluka.

{ Param Dharmam, means libgration of the soul.—Kulluka.

§ The’ text has Stri®vatnam which literally means “a gem
of a woman.”


| Amitradapi Sadorittam i.¢., even the good conduct of one’s
enemy should be imitated —Kulluka.


78 Manu Samhita


his lessons from a non-Bréhmana* preceptor, and he
shall serve his Guru teacher) only so long as he shall
actually study.t (241)

Wishing the most exalted existence (z.e., liberation
of self), after death, let not a Brahmana student live
for good in the house of a non-Braéhmana preceptor,
or in the house of a Brdhmana who has foresworn
good conduct, and renounced his function of a Vaidic
teacher. (242)

A (ritualistic) Brahmachdrin, if he desires to live
for good in the house of his preceptor, must render
him services to the last day of his life. (243)

A Bréhmana, who, to the last day of his life, thus
serves his preceptor, attains by his own spiritual energy
to the eternal abode of Brahma. 0244)

Let not a virtuous Vaidic student pay any (money)
to his preceptor ere he returns from his house after
finishing his career. After having bathedt with the
permission of his Guru, he must pay him a honorarium
according to his pecuniary circumstances. (245f


* The text has Abvahmanat which literally means from a
non-Brd4hmana. Kuiiuxa explains it by “in the absence of a
Brdhmana, he may study under a Kshatriya; and in the absence
of a Kshatriya, under a Vais’ya preceptor.”


t+ Render all ‘other services except that of washing his: feet
and eating the leavfhg of his food, etc.—Kulluka.


Brahmana students shall serve a Kshatriya imparter of the
Mantra (teaches of the Vedas) by such actseas following*him etc.
A Brahmana even who hasfacqujred knowledge from him shall be
regarded by a (Kshatriya) as his Guru.—s/yas’a.

t Ablution at the close of his student’s career, Which formed,


as it weve, a signal for quitting the piccept®. § roof for that of
his paternal home.


Manu Samhita. 79


A plot of land, gold, a cow, a horse, an umbrella,
a pair of shoes, paddy, vegetables,* clothes, or whatever
he is capable of giving him, with that he shall evoke
the pleasure of his preceptor. (246)


On the death of his preceptor, unto a qualified
son of his, or unto his (widowed) wife, or unto a cognate
of his he shall behave as his preceptor. (247)


In the absence of all these three, let him, making
use of his preceptor’s seat and cushion, offer burnt
offerings, (morning and evening, each day), and thereby
make his Self competent to attain to Brahma. (248)


A Bréhmana, who thus undeviatingly practises the
vow of a ritualistic Brahmachérin, obtains an excellent
status,t after death, #nd stands not under the necessity
of reverting to human existence. (249)


* In return of the knowledge acquired from him, he shall give
unto his preceptor afew vegetables even if his wordly circum-
stances do not admit of his giving any other thing. A gift how-
ever precious or costly is no adequate return for the benefit |
which a preceptor accords to his pupil. Compare,

There is no such thing in this world, by gifing which a pupil
can discharge his debt toa preceptor, who hes taught him, no
more than a single letter of the alphabet.—Laghu Harita,


+ Inthe absence of a qualified son of his Guru he shall behave
unto (render services) 0 his widowed wife as his epreceptor, and
even in the absgnce of such a widowed wife he shall extend the
same differential treatmer& to a surviving cognate of his (such as
an uncle, etc—Kulluka.


e
£ The text has, *Utitamam Sthaxam, Kutiuxa explains it by
e« he goes to the vicinity of Brahma.”


80 Manu Samhita,


CHAPTER III.
In his preceptor’s house, a Brahmachérin, having prace
tised the vow of (studying) the three Vedas« for thirty-
six ‘years, or for a half or a quarter of that period,t ot
for a period necessary to fully comprehend them. ; (1)

Or having studied (all) the Vedas, or two Vedas, ot
asingle Veaat in the proper order of Mantra, Brah-
manas{ etc., without the least deviation from his
vows,§ shall enter the order of the householder.|| (2)

A (youthful) Brahmachdrin, renowned for the com-
pletion of his vow of a Vaidice study, and who has
Studied the Vedas from his father or preceptor, and is
about to enter the order of the house-holder,{ shall be


* Tvaivedikam Vratam, literally means the “vow of three
Vedas ;” but although the three Vedas (Rik, Saman and Vajus)
have been here specifically mentioned, we shall have to understand
the four Vedas (vis., the Rik, Saman, Yajus, and Athavvan) by
the term Tvaivedikam, the Atharvan being included within the
Rig Veda. Hence we find in the Vishnu Puranam, “The
allied branches of Vaidic study and the four Vedas (Angan¢
Vedds’chatvarah, etc).

+ Compare Vajnavalkya —The vow of a Brahmacharin for
twelve or five years in respect of (studying) each Veda (Prati-
vedam Brahmacharyayam Duadas’avdam Pancha vd.)

f According tg the Sakha (school) of the Vedas he belongs
to.—Kulluka.

e

§ Mantras, Brahmanas are the different divisions of the
Vedas.

|| The vow %f perfect continence and apstinence frem honey,
meat, etc.

q The text has Garhasthyas’vama\the order of the house-
holder) z.e., he shall impose upon Limr'F tte vbligations of
matrimohy and discharge the duties uf masried life, marriage,
being the first step to house-keeping.—Valivia,


Manu Samhita. 8


presented with a cow, and a cup of honey,* when he,
decorated with garlands of flowers, will be found seated
in his bed. (3)

Having bathed with the permission of his Guru at
the termination of his vow, a Brdhmana shall ‘marry a
wife of his own caste, possessed of auspicious signs, (4)

For the purposes of marriage and sexual intercoursé,
a girl, not related to his mother by the tie of Sapindat
relationship, nor to his father as a Sagotrat (cognate),
is as well recommended in respect of a Brahmana. (5)

However great (illustrious), or opulent with (the
possession of kine, goats, sheep, money and paddy),
they might be, (the following) ten families should be
avoided in respect of taking a bride from (any of)
them. (6)


* The father or the preceptor shall thus worship (offer) him
with a cow and a cup of honey (Madhu-parkam).


} Sapinda-relationship is extinguished in the seventh degree
of descent,


{ Sagotra means persons belonging to the same spiritual clan-
ship, or descendants from a common ancestor.

According to the Dharma Sdastrva one cannot marry a female
Sapinda relation of his mother, though he can marry a female
Sagotra relation of hers.

The particle “cha,” includes father’s sisters and their
daughters who are not his Sagotras. Vydsa, on the other hand,
forbids the marriage with a mother’s Sagotva girl.

Some desire not marriage with a mother’s sagotra girl. In
a case when the name of the girl’s family is not known, one can
marry her without the leSst hesitation.— Vyasa.

Having married a daughter of Mis maternal uncle, or a girl
belonging to his mother’s SagStra, or a girl belonging to the same
Gotva or Pravara (spiritual clanship) with his father, or having
gifted a girl in such afnarriage, a Brahmana shall do a Chéndra-
yuna penance by way of expiation.— Vasistha.


{I


82 Manu Samhita.


A family of doers of mean acts, a family in whiclt
no male child is born, a family of men devoid of
Vaidic knowledge, a family of hairy men and women,
and a family in which consumptive, epileptic, leprous or
leucodermic members are born, these are the ten
families in which one is forbidden to marry. (7)

Let him not marry a'girl of brown complexion, or
one with a limb in less or excess, or one who is a pro-
nounced invalid, or a hairy one, or one devoid of hairs
on her body, or a garrullous one, or one whose eye-balls
are brown or yellow. (8)


Nor a girl who hasa name implying a star, tree,
river, mountain, bird, serpent or servilence, nor one
whose name denotes a dreadful object. (9)


A well-formed girl, without hairs on her limbs, and
having a sweet name anda gait resembling that of a
swan or an elephant, slender, with small pearly teeth,
and a crown of thin, silky hair, he shall take for his
wife. (10)

A girl, who has no uterine brother of her own, or*
whose father’s name is unknown, shall not be married
out of the apprehension of a Put*ikdt compact. (11)


* A girl mgrried on the express condition that the son of
her womb will be a son unto her father; or given in marriage
with such an ntention is called a Putrikd. Abhisandhi-métrat
Putrika —Gautama.


+ Govingaraja explains the verse by referring the term
Putrika di®&rma Sankayd to both the clauses, “who has no
uterine brother’ and “whose father’s name is*not known.” We
have adopted KuLtuxa’s interpretation as being more consistent
with, reason. Kuriuxa says that the prohibition as regards
marrying a girl of unknown parentage is for the apprehension
lest she might be a Ioundling or an illegitimate one.


Manu Samhita. 83


A girl belonging to his own caste is recommended
to a Brahmana for-holy wedlock ; for desire,a wife he
may take from any of the three remaining castes, her
precedence being according to her caste. (12)


A S’udra woman is the wife of a S’udra; a Vais’ya
can marry a S’udra or a Vais’ya wife, a Kshatriya
can take a S’udra, a Vais’ya or a Kshatriya wife; and
a Brahmana can marry a S’udra, Vais’ya, Kshatriya
or a Brahmana wife. (13)


In no history or chronicles can be found that, even
in the time of distress, a Brdhmana or a Kshatriya has
(awfully) married a S’udra wife. (14)


By marrying a low caste woman through the intoxi-
cation of desire (passiop), a twice-born one* degrades
himself, with the nine generations of his progeny, to
the status of a S’udra. (15) .


He, who marries a S'udra woman, becomes de-
graded. This is the opinion of A¢rz and of (Gautama,)
the son of Utathya. By visiting a S'udra wifet for
the purpose of begetting offspring on her, a twice-born
one becomes degraded; this is the opinion of S’anaka,
The fathership of his S’udra children degrades a twice-
born one. This is the opinion of Bhrigu. (16)


* Whether a Brahmana, or a Kshatriya, or a Vais’ya.—Kulluka.


{ The text has 'Sutotpattya (by procreating children) and
Tad-apatyataya (on account of his having z.e, begetting Suira
children), BSth MepuatgrHt and GovinpaRAJA explein the first
(Yutopattya) by “visiting a S’udra wifg, accidentally Married out of
ignorance, on thé fourth day of her menses for the purpose of
procreating a child as enjoined in the Sastra, even if there be no
offspring of that uniog, and the second (/adapatyatayd) byewil-
fully and knowingly begetting children on a S’udra wife.


&4 Manu Samhita.


By lying with a S’udra woman in his bed, a Brah-
mana falls into a degraded existence; by begetting
a child on her, he stands divested of his Brahman-
ism. (17)

The oblations, offered by a twice-born one who is
assisted by a S’udra woman in the capacity of his
principal married wife in the rite of a Pitre or Daiva
S'réddha ceremony, neither the manes, nor the divini-
ties partake of. Even by practising hospitality to
Atithis,* he cannot ascend to heaven, after death. (18)

By sucking the lips of a S’udra wife, by inhaling
her breath, or by begetting children on her person, a
twice-born one can never find any succour. (19)

Now hear me discourse on the eight forms of
marriage, which contribute té the good, or to the evil
of the four castes of men in the next world. (20)

They are known as the Bréhma, Daiva, A’rsha,
Prijépatya, A’sura, Géndharva, Réakshasa and Pat-
sacha, which forms the eighth, (21)

Now I shail discuss all the forms of marsiage which
are proper for each of the social orders, the merit and
demerit which appertain to each such form, and the
benefit or otherwise which the offspring of each form
can accord (to its parents). (22)

The six forms (of marriage) commencing with the
first one (Brahma) are proper for Brahmanas; the four
forms count@d from the end (Pais’écha) are not sinful
for Kshatriyas, and the same set excepting that of
Reaitshasa shall be regarded as proper for V@is’yas. and
S‘udras. (23)

The four forms (of Marriage) the seers have ordained
as proper for Brahmanas; only the Rakshasa form as


* Atithis ¢.e., chance guests or chance arrivals at his house.


Manu Samhita. 85


proper for Kshatriyas, and the A’sura form as proper for
Vais’yas and S’udras.* (24)

Thus out of these five formst of marriage, threet
are lawful, and two are sinful (unlawful). Let a man
never marry a wife either in the Pis’Acha or in the
A’sura form, since these two forms are prohibited. (25)


A marriage, whether effected in the pure Gandharva,
or in the pure Rakshasa form, as described before, or in
a mode which is a combinztion of both of them,§ is
(primarily) lawful for a Kshatriya. (26)


The form (of marriage) in which a well-attired
bride, decorated with ornaments, is given in marriage
to an erudite, good-charactered bridegroom, especially
invited by the bride’s father himself to receive her,
is called Brahma. (27)


* These are the forms of marriage which a Brahmana,a Ksha-
triya, a Vais’ya and a Sudra shall respectively consider as the most
approved forms of taking a wife, and think of marrying in any
other fashion wheu the marriage cannot be effected in any of
these modes.—Kulluka.


+ The five forms of marriage referred to in the text the Praja-
patya, the A’sura, the Gandharva, the Rakshasa and the Pisacha.

}{ The three lawful forms are the Prajapatya, the Gandharva,
and the Rakshasa, the Prajapatyad form is lawful for Brahmanas ;
the Gandharva, for members of all the four social orders ; and the
Rakshasa, for Vais’yas and Sudras.—Kulluka.


§ The text has Mis'vam (mixed) the form of marriage in which
the bridegrgom, conscious of his well-returned or swell-requitted
love, carries away the bfide by force or conquest, iw called Mis’ra
or Gandharya-Rgékshasa—Kulluka.

The marriage of Dushm&nta and S’akuntal4 furnishes the illus-
tration of a pure Gandharva form of marriage; that of Vichitra-
virja and Ambica, of a Rakshasa form, and that of Arjuna and
Subhadr4, of a mixed GAndharva and Rakshasa form. —


86 Manu Samhita.


The form of marriage in which the bride is gifted
(Z.e., given in marriage) to the person duly officiating
as a priest at a Vaidic sacrifice, which is being cele-
brated, is called Daiva by the holy sages. (28)

The lawful form (of marriage) in which a bride, on
the receipt of an ox and a cow, or of two oxen and two
kine for the performance of religious sacrifices, is duly
given in marriage to fhe bridegroom, according to the
ordinance, is called A’vsha (by the wise.) (29)


The form, in which after having worshipped the
bridegroom, the bride is given to him in marriage with
the injunction, “let both of you jointly discharge the
duties of a house-holder, is called Prajapatya. (30)

The form, in which the bridegroom, on paying
money to her father and to herself, out of the prompt-
ings of his own desire,* receives the bride in marriage,
is called A’sura.* (31)


* The text has Svachchh-andyat, which means out of his own
selfish wish, in direct contravention of the provisigns of the
S'astra. It may be set down to the ‘credit of our ancient Rishis
that, they were the first to condemn, and to rule out of court,
this commercial element of the matrimonial compact. In all
primitive sacieties, the father had absolute proprietary rights
in his sons and -daughters, and accordingly he missed no oppor-
tunity to make a good capital out of his daughters, by selling them
to the highest “bidders in the matrimonial market. Thus in the
very nature of t@ings the daughters came to be looked upon as ex-
cellent marketable commodities, and the dearest purchasers of their
charms and favour as the most eligible bridegrooms. No wonder
then that husfands, in their turn, learnt to*look upon their wives as
a kind of moveable property, class of slaves whom they had to
purchase for money or its equivalené. Thus we see in the earliar
societies of the Roman empire, for any encroachment on the con-
jugal “rights of a husband, the trespasser hed to pay a fine to him
just in common with an ordinary trespasser on land or on any otheg


Manu Samhita. $7


The form, in which, for the reason of a reciprocal
marriage of hearts, the bridegroom is mated with the
bride, is called Gandharva. It originates from a couple’s
passionate desire of being united with each other.* (32) ©

The form of marriage, in which the bridegroom,
by killing or hurting the guardians or relations of the
bride, and by forcing open the door of her house,
forcibly carries her away, weaping and screaming, is
called Rakshasa. (33)

The form in which the bride, when alone, asleep,
senseless, intoxicated, or delirious with wine, is ravish-
ed by the bridegroom, js called Pis’icha, the eighth and
the most sinful form of marriage. (34)

The marriage of a Brahmana must be preceded by
the rite of water-gifting, the marriage of a member
of any other caste may be preceded by (negotiated
with) a formal betrothal, ifthe parties mutually desire
it so. (35)

O Brahmanas, now hear me fully describe the
virtues (nferits) of these different forms of marriage as
narrated by Manu of yore. (36)


civic rights of hs neighbour. But the Rishis in their perfect
wisdom foresaw the evils of this form of legal marriage, which
is but a modified form of slave-trade, and restricted it to Vaisyas
(Merchants) and Sudras jartisans) alone whose*compulsary stays
in foreign or distant countries many times lef it the only form
of marriage, open to them among strangers. From its name
we can legitimately presume that this form of marriage was in
vogue amomg the Asgyrians (Asuras ,and moreeso, when we
consider that in ancient Chaldea ang Babylon it was quite honour-
able for a girl t° earn her qmarriage-dowry even by selling her
favours.

* The consummagion of marriage by the lovers, everebefore
it is formally solemnized, is mot condemned in the Gandharva
form of marriage.


38 Afanu Samhita


The male offspring of a Brdima form of marriage,
if he does good works, succours his own self, as well
as his ten ancestors* and fen descendantst from (the
effects of) sin. (37)

The male offspring of a Daiva form of marriage
succours this own self and) his seven ancestors and
seven descendants; and that of an d’rsha form of
marriage succours (his own self) and his three ancestors
and three descendants, while that of a Présdpatya
form of marriage succours (his own self, and his six
ancestors and six descendants, (from the effects of)
sin. (38)

Sons born of the four forms of marriage, conse-
cutively counted from the G@réhma form, become
possessed of the energy of Brah’mat and are recognised
(as well-born) by honest men. (39)

Handsome looking, wealthy, renowned, possessed
of fortitude and good qualities, virtuous and amply
provided with all the objects of enjoyment, these sonst
live for a hundred years, (40)

Sons of the remaining (four) low (forms of marriage)
are born cruel, untruthful, and hostile to the religion
of Brahma (i.e., to the Vedas). (41)

Sons begotten on commendable wives$ are born
with commengable traits (in their character) ; sons, the


‘ Das’a Purvan—Ten ancestors such as the father, the grand-
father, the great-grand-father, etc. and Dasa Paran means ten
descendants sock as the son, the grandson,¢he great gPandson, etc.

+ Qualitie? which mark ghe ‘spirit of a union (¢e., form of
ei are inktrited by its offspring. —Kulluke.

¢ Offspring of these four forms of marriage, wiz, Brahma,
Divine A’vshah and Praygdapatyah.
§ Good wives married’ in any of the four preceding commen-
dable forms of marriage.


Manu Samhita. 89


offspring of uniohs with condemnable wives, are born
‘with condemnable traits in their character. Hence,
let a man avoid a vile form of matrimony. (42)

In a marriage between a man and a woman of the
same caste they shall join their hands, while in the one
contracted between a bride and a bridegroom of differ-
ent castes the following rules should be observed. (43)

In her marriage with a Braéhmana, a Kshatriya girl
shall clasp a shaft; a Vais’ya girl, a goading stick ;*
and a S’udrd4, the frill of his cloth with her hand, during
tthe ceremony. (44)

Always faithful to her, for sexual pleasures, let him
visitt his wife during her menstrual period, avoiding
the days of the farva,t and when not observing a


vow.§ (45)


* The text has Pratoda which means a stick, or a rod used by
& cow-herd in goading the kine of his flock.

The brides shall respectively clasp an artow, a goading-stick,
etc., carried by the bridegroom in his hand during the cere-
mony.——-Kulluka.

+ This regulation is for one who has not procreated a son,
the procreation of a son being obligatory ‘on every one for dis-
charging his debt to the manes.

Cf. By his birth a Braéhmana is a debtor by three debts.

By sacrifice he discharges his debt to the deities, by pro-
creating a son he discharges his debt to the manes, and by studying
the Vedas he discharges his debt to the Rishis.—Sruti.

Also compare.—He who visits not his wife after she has bathed
(on the fourth day of her menses,) commits the sin of fosticide.—
Parésava

For the end of begetting a male child he shall qvisit his wife~
on the even days during her menstrvel period.—Sushruta.

} Parvas, such as the day of the full or new moon, etc

§ A vowist, as well as, one who has begotten a son, stands
not under the obligation of visiting his wife during her menstrual
period.

12


go Manu Samhita


The menstrual period of a woman naturally lasts
for sixteen nights (days) inclusive of the four days of
flow, which are condemned by the wise.* (46)

Of these (sixteen days), the first four, and the
eleventh and the thirteenth “are condemned by the
wise for sexual purposes, the rest ten days are com-
mended. (47)

Sons are born on the even days and daughters on
the odd ones (of the menstrual period.) Hence, one,
desiring the birth of a son, shall visit his wife on an
even day. (48)

Even on an fodd day, a comparative excesst of the
paternal element gives rise to the birth of a male child,
a comparative excess of the maternal element gives
rise to the birth of a daughtew. A sexless child, or a
twin (a‘son and a daughter) is born when the paternal
element is equal to the maternal one. (49)

Leaving these (six condemned days) and eight days
out of the commended ten days, a person, to whatso-
ever order he might belong, who visits his wife on
these two days alone, shall be regarded as a Brahma-
chérin.= (50)

An erudite father of a girl shall not take ahy thing
by way of »’x/ka from her bridegroom. By taking


* The first four days of the flow.


t The “ Sukya-bahulyam” or A’vtava-bihulyam of the text
denotes the preponderance of the Katabolic (Pitrika S’akti) or
Anabolic energy (Mdtrika »’akti) in the impregnated ovum through
the greater intgnsity of the father’s or motper’s desirewat the time.

Mepua’tiri® holds that two days are allowed to a man, be-
longing to any order of the soviety whatsoever, fo®the enjoyment
of conjugal pleasures, and says that. thereby his vow of conti-
nence ig not broken. GovinparajA hofds that the license is given
to a man after the death of his only son.


Manu Samhita. gi


a dowry out of greed, he becomes the seller of his off
spring. (51)

The friends and relations of a woman,* who, out
of folly or avarice, live upon the property belonging to
her,t or the wicked ones who oust her of the en-
joyment of her own belongings{ such as cloth, etc.,§
go to hell, (after death), /52)

Even the acceptance of a bovine pair (by the father
of the bride from the bridegroom) is designated as
a dowry by certain authorities, (the acceptance of) a
dowry be it costly, or be it of insignificant value,
constitutes the sale of the girl.{[ (53)


* Bandhavah ‘friends and relations: is the term that occurs
in the text. Kulluka explains it by “Pati- Pitradaya,” father,
husband, etc. _

+ The text has S'tridhanam (woman’s property) which
consists of dowries given to her by her friends and relations at
the time of marriage, or on such-like occasions —Kulluka. 7

t Vari yandni is the term that occurs in the text, Kutiuxa
explains it By “horses, slave girls, etc.’

_§ Vastram (cloth). It lays down that it is sinful to dispossest
her even of her most insignificant belonings such as, a cloth or <
garment.— Kulluka.

|| Govinparaja, grounding his statement on the view ex
pressed in the preceding couplet, opines that, the verse 290
this chapter, which authorises the bride’s father go take a dawry o
a bull and a cow from the bridegroom, does not reflect the opinioi
of Manu on the subject, but is merely an extract from anothe
Code, quoted to be subsequently discussed and refuted. Th
acceptance of a dowry, however small and inexpgnsive, by th
bride’s father, or by the father of the bridegroong spells as th
price paid for the hands of the bifide or of the bridegroom, an
gives a commercial aspec® to the transaction, transforming ~
into a veritable contract of buy and sale.

MepHATITHI is evNently puzzled by this apparent contradictio
and retires without being able to satisfactorily account for it,


92 Manu Samhita.


A marriage in which the bride’s relations do
accept* the dowry (voluntarily presented by the bride-
groom’s father, etc.,) is no sale (of the bride), since
such a present is but an adoration of the bride, done
out of love or affection.t. (54)

Seeking many a blessing (.e., God’s gifts) in life, her
father, mother, husband, or husband’s younger brother
shall maintain a bride witht a respectful love,t and give
her ornaments for the decoration of her person. (55)

[The deities smile on the family] where the females
are honoured (held in respect); fruitless are the acts§$
(in the family) where they are dishonoured. (56)


KULLUKA says ‘that, there is no cantradiction at all between
these two verses. Inthe A’rsha form of marriage although the
bride’s father is authorised to take a bull anda cow in the shape
of a dowry from the bridegroom, the dowry is accepted to help
the married couple to celebrate religious sacrifices (Dkarmatah)
and not for any specific gain or benefit of the bride. Under these
circumstances it is no dowry ’at all, inasmuch as it is misnomer to
call a benefit benefit that is not actually derived or enjoyed.
Marriage, according to the Rishis,is a holy sacrament, a kind
of psychic transformation, the two parties to it being blended
together in spirit, and for all eternity,‘the two parties to it being
transformed into that “human centaur” which is called man and
wife. To turn it into a mere social or commercial contract is to.
transform Psychednto a shop-girl.

« ™ Néddadate ige. do not appropriate it to their own use, or
derive any benefit from it. :

+ The text has Anris’amsyancha which literally means “out
of compassion.® ‘

t Pujyah 1iferally means tg be adored or worshipped, Kutiv-
KA explzins it by “shall be respectfully supported with delectable
articles of fare. ete. ;

§ Vephald Kriyé The religious rites, evgn duly performed, fail
to bear their fruits.


Manu Samhita. 93


Prosperity reigns supreme in the family where
females do not grieve; the family, in which they grieve,
suffers a speedy destruction.* (57)

Like a fiend-cursedt home,~ utterly perisheth the
house, which its daughters,t through suffering mortifica-
tions, do but (sadly) imprecate. 58)

_ Hence they should be satisfied with presents of
food, raiments, ornaments, etc, by men seeking pros-
perity, on festive and ceremonial§ occasions. (5 9)

In the family where the husband is contended with
the wife, and the wife with the husband, steadfast is.
the blessing of the deity. (60)


If even with garments and ornaments the wife fails
to be attractive, or if the husband does not find any
pleasure in her, no progeny of the husband is possible
on account of the lack of that pleasure. (61)


A charming wife lends her charm to every thing
and makes the whole world look attractive to her
husband, a charmless|| wife robs the world of its
charm, ($2)


* The text has Jamaya. Both Mgpua’rirut and GovINDARAJA
explain the term by newly married daughters-in law, daughters,
ete. (Duhitri Navoda Snushédaya.)

1 Kritychatani:—Kritya is a kind. of female fiend ,evoked
by murderons incartations.

t Famaya, daughters, sisters, daughters-iielaw described in
the preceding stanza.

§ Satkdweshu Such as the festivities of Keumgdi (night ofthe
full moon in thé month of A’s’vzza,) etc.—Kulluke

“@

{| The text fas Arochamand which leterally means charmless,
Kulluka explains it by Bhartr- Vidveshataya Narantara Sam-
parkat Mélinam a wife who through her hostility to the husband
and her intrigue with another man makes the house rloomy.


94 Manu Samhita.


By abad marriage, by the extinction of religious
ceremonies, by the non-study of the Vedas, and by
insulting a Brahmana, the prestige of a good family is
annihilated.* (63)

By pursuing handy craft* or agriculture, by begetting
children on a S’udra wife, by trafficking in cows, horses,
or carts, by entering the king’s service, by officiating
asa priest at the sacrifice of one who ought not to
be so served, by living in opea hostility. to the Vedas,
and by their non-study, men (Brahmanas) degrade their
families.t (64—65)

Families, rich in the opulence of Vaidic studies and
in the performance of Vaidie sacrifices, even if they
be poor in the riches of the world, are counted among
the illustrious families (of the lamd) in point of renown
and dignity. (66)

In the nuptial firet a house-holder shall perform,
according to the ordinance, all the house-hold rites,§ as
-well as the five great sacrifices ;]| likewise over that fire
shall be cooked the (daily) food of the househgld. (67)


* The text has Kulanya kulant Fanti—which literally means
families become no families. Kulluka says that a bad marriage,
extinction of the religious ceremonies, neglect of Vaidic studies
and a wilful affront to a Brahmana arethe factors, which, being
done in a family, kill its good name and position in the society.

“+ The text hae Nastikyena which literally meens by living
the life of an athigst. We have adopted Kulluka’s explanation. ;
ft The text has Bibahtke’guau i. e. in the sacred fire kindled
on.the occasion of his nuptial ceremony as opposed to the A’ha-
vaniya (sacrificml) fire. ©

§ Grihyam Kerma—the burt offerings offered, each morning
and evening, as well as the rites of Ashtaka S*Paddhas (to be
described later on).—— Kulluka

| Pagcha-yajnas—the five daily sacrificial rites such as, the
offerings to the Visvadevas (i. e. to all the duties) etc.———Kulluka, |


Manu Samhita. 05


A householder has five places where animal lives
are destroyed; they are the hearth, the grinding stone,
the broom-stick, the pestle and mortar, and the stool
for the water-pitcher. These five, when performing
their proper functions, kill animal-life. (68)

For the expiation of the sin committed by him in
each, of these five places, the great sages have ordained
that, the householder-celebrants of sacrifices (¢.2., house-
holders) shall daily perform the five great sacrifices
(Pancha-Vajnas\. (69)

The sacrifice of Brakma consists in teaching the
Vedas, offering oblations or libations to the manes is
called a Pitrz-yajna, burnt offerings to the deities con-.
stitute a Dazva-yajna ; offering oblations (food) to the
animals is called a S/uta-yajna, while hospitality to
chance-guests is called a Vri-yajna. (70)

By not suffering the daily performance of these five
sacrifices to ~be omitted, a householder, even living in
his house, is not associated with the sin committed
in the five [ife-killing places in the household (Pancha-
sunda.) (71)

He who does not feed the deities, the chance-guests,
the beasts, the manes, and his own self, each day, by
performing the five great sacrifices, is a dead man, even
though he breathes. (72)


The five great sacrifices are called dhutam, Hutam,
Prahutam,, Bréhma-hutam and Présitam (73)


A Brahma-yajna or muttering of Mantras is called
Ahutam ; offering oblations (food) to the beagts is called
Prahutam ; hospitality to men, ohance-guests and Brah-
manas, in special, is calle@ Braéhma-hutam, and offering
oblations tothe manes ‘(in connection with the daily
S'raddas) is called “Présitam. (74)


96 Manu Samhita.


{In the event of his incapacity of practising hospi-
tality to chance-guests, etc.], let him be constantly
engaged in studying the Vedas, and in making burnt
offerings to the divinities. He, who constantly engages
himself in doing the works of the deities, supports all
the universe. (75)

Libations of clarified butter duly cast in the sacri-
ficial fire ascend to the. sun ; from the sun originates
the rain ; from the rain, do the provisions; and from the
provisions, the creatures. (76)

As all creatures live by taking recourse to the air,
so all the.different orders (of mendicants, forest-dwellers
and anchorites) depend a i the householder for their
existence. (77)

As the three orders of ascetics are maintained by
the householder with the gifts of food and knowledge
of the eternal Vedzs, the householder is the foremost of
all the four orders. (78)

Desiring eternal heaven, and happiness in this “life,
one shall assiduously discharge the duties ef a house-
holder. A weak mind and the uncontrolled senses are
the barriers against the proper discharge of these
duties. (79)

The Rishis, manes, animals, guests and relations
expectantly look upon the householder (for mainte
nance, etc.) ence, a wise householder shall properly
discharge theejuties he owes to them. (80)

Let him satisfy the Rishés with his Vaidic studies
the deities with the proper burnt offerings ;*the manes
with the S*-ddaha offerings ; the guests, with food
and the animals, with oblationssoffered unto them. (81)


Tet him constantly celebrate*the (Parvana) S'raddhe
ceremonies by offering fruit, (edible) roots, boiled rice


Manu Samhita. 97


Waler and vegetables, etc., unto his manes, and evoke
their satisfaction in special. (82)

in connection with the celebration of a S’riddha
‘ceremony included within the five daily sacrifices, let
him feed a single Brahmaga; he need not feed any
Brabmana in connection with the celebration of a
Vais'vadeva sacrifice. (83)

Let a Brihimaua offer, each day, oblations of conse=
‘crated boiled rice, cooked over the household fire,
wnto the following deities according to the Regula-
tion, (viz. (84)

Unto Agni, unto Soma, unto Agni and Soma com-
‘ined, unto all the deities, unto Dhanvantaii, unto
Kuhu, unto Aaumati, unto Prajdpati, unto the earth
and firmament, and unto Svistakrit at thé end. (85—86)


Having thus duly offered oblations unto each of
these deities, he shall circumambulate them from the
east by the south and wes: to the north as follows :~—
Obeisance to Indra and obeisance to the attendants of
Indra in thé east, obeisance to Yama and obeisance
to the attendants of Yaina in the south, obeisance to
Varuna and obeisance to the attendants of Varuva in
‘the west, aud obeisance to Soma and obeisance to the
‘attendants of Soma in the north. (87)


Then at the threshold of the sacrificial ehamber he
Shall offer oblatiuns unto the Maruts, unto the “ water”
in the water, and unto the Vanaspatis (lords of the
forest) in the gestle and mortar. (88)

‘On the head of the Vastupurugha he shall 8ffer obla-
tions unto the gdidess S’ri, by saying, “ obeisance unto
Sti, at his foot to the goddess Bhadrakali, by saying
“ obeisance unto Bhadrakali,” unto Brahma inside tie
chamber, by saying, “ obe:sance unto Brahma.” and


43


98 Mana Samhita.


finally unto the presiding deity of the household, by
saying, “ obeisance unto Vastudevatd.”’ (89)

Unto all the deities, unto ghosts that are abroad by
day, and unto those that roam about in the night he
shall offer oblations in the sky. (90)

On the ground, at his back, he shall offer oblations
unto all the ghosts, by saying, “oblations unto all the
. spirits,” and the residue of the food (boiled rice), thus
offered unto the ghosts) he shall collect, and offer
to the manes in the south, by saying, “ obeisance to the
manes.” (91)

Unto dogs, unto the degraded, unto Chanddlas* and
persons afflicted with diseases which are the out-come
of sin,f and. unto crows and worms he shall offer
oblations of boiled rice on the ground, taking care that
they may not be soiled with dust. (92)

A Brahmana, who thus daily worships all creatures
with food, assumes a resplendent body, and goes by the
straightest road to the abode of supreme bliss.{ (93)

After offering these oblations, a householder shall
first feed the Azitht guests arrived at his house, and
then dole out :alms§ to Brahkmachérins and mendi-
cants. (94)

A Brdéhmana householder obtains the same merit


The text® has “ S’vapachas”’ which literally means cookers

or eaters ot di&’s flesh.

+ Thetext has Papa-roginam i.e. persons afflicted with le
prosy, phthjsis, and kindred affections. ~——Kulluka,

{ The text has Sa Gachchhati Param Sthdnam. Kulluka
explains it by “he is merg@d in the supreme Byzhma.

§ The text has Bhiksha, which®means a morsel of grain given
to a poor man as alms.

Giaidnbed Bhavet Bhiksha (A motsel of food is the quan-
tity that shall be given as alms to a beggar)—-S'atatapa.


Manu Samhit&. 69


by giving alms to beggars as a Brakmachdrin does by
making the gift of a “cow to his preceptor in confor-
mity with the ordinance. (95)

Let alms, or pitchers, full of water, be gifted to a
Brdéhmana, thoroughly conversant with the meanings of
the Vedas, by one duly worshipping him, and mutter-
ing words of benediction. (96)


Oblations offered unto the manes and deities by
men, who, ignorant of the true spirit of gift-making,
make gift unto burnt out® Brahmanas, certainly do
perish. (97) .

Oblations cast in the mouth-fire of a Braéhmana,
kindled with the energy of Vazdic study and peniten-
tial austerities, succour,one from gréat danger and from
great sin as well. (98)


Let a householder’ give a cushion, and water for
washing his feet unto an Afzfhz, arrived at his house
(without ‘invitation), and duly offer him cooked rice
with curries etc., according to his might. (99)


A Bréhmana guest, happening to remain unfed and
unattended to even in the house of a householder, who
daily lives upon the pickings of the field, or worships
the’ five fires,t carries away the merit of all his pious
acts. (100)


* The text has Bhasmibhuta which literaly means burnt
down to ashes. Kuttuka explains it by “Brahmanas who are
devoid of Vaidie studies and do not offer oblations to the manes
and deities, and hence de like unto the extinguished? charcoal,

+ The text'las Panchdgninapi Puhvatah: The worshipper of
thelfive fires, #.e., an extrenfly indigent Brahman. The five fires
are the Tretagni (the triadof fires, , the Avasekhydagni and the
Sabhya, Sabhya beitg the fire-which one uses in warming*himself

*( in want of clothes.) —Kulluka.


160 Manu Samhita


Hays,* ground,f water, anda sweet word, whicfs

-forms the fourth (in the list:, are never wanting in the
houses of the good. (101)
_ A Braéhmana, wh» resides for a single night in the’
house (of another), is called an Azitht (chance guest ;
since there is no certainty of his staying (there, the:
next day) he is called an Atzthz.t (102)

A Brahmana living in the same village with him,
or one who lives on his wits, even if he calls at the
house of a man living with his wife and. (sacred) fire.
therein, must not be called an Atithi. (103)

Householders, who, ignorant of the demerit of
eating food given by others, stroll about in a village:
other than his, own, out of a greed for sharing other
men’s hospitalities, become the domestic beasts of those:
whose hospitalities they then partake of. (104)

An Atithi arrived after sunset§ at the house must.
not be discarded under any circumstances. An Atith¢
(guest), whether arrived at the houve in the proper:
or improper time, must not be kept unfed.|} (10%)


* The text has. Trindni (hays) i, hays for a bed—Kulluka.
+ The text has Bkumti, ground: Kutiuka explains it by-


A’sanam, a cushion.


qt Atithi is derived from “A,” without and “ Sthiti,” stay t.e.,.
one, whose stay in tise house is uncertain for more than one night.


§ The text has €xryodhah, literally earried' or borne by the sun..


In the proper time ie. at the time of the performance of
the Vais'vadeva yale (offerings to all the deites:)

GovinpaRAJA holds that it isa special provision for hospitalities:
to Atithis discarded on the score“of not arriving at tle time of the
Vais’vadeva offering or of arriving at night fall.

Cf. O king, the sin of discarding an Attthi after sunset is eight
times grester than- what is incurred by not practising hospitality: tor
an Afri: in the day.— "ishuupuranam.


Manu Samhita. 103


Let not {a householder) eat that himself which his
Atich: has not partaken of; hospitality to an Atithe
brings on wealth, fame, and longevity, and ensures
heaven te him who practises it. (406)

Cushions, bedsteads. beddings, following* and wor-
ship should differ according to the stations of Adzthzs.
Better cushions, etc., should be given to AZzthis of
superior status, ordinary ones to AfZithis of equal rank
with the host, and inferior ones to Atithis of inferior
ranks (in life). (107)

If a guest (Atith?) arrives at his house after the
completion of the Vais'vadeva offering, and after another.
guest has previously arrived, he shall duly cook and
effer food (boiled rice) éo the second 4Zithi, but there
is no need of making a:second offering to the Vais’va-
devas.t (108)

Let not a Brihmana mention his own name and
family for enjoying one’s hospitality ; he, who eats by
giving out the name of his owm self and family, eats:
egesta. (109)


A Kshatriya, Vais’ya, or S’udra guest in the house:
of a Brahmana, as well‘as a preceptor ora relation, hap-
pening to call at his house, is not called an Atithi. (410).

But even if a Kshatriya calls (at the, house of a
Brahmana).as an A¢:th7,t the master of theghouse shall


* The text has Ann ovazydm which means an act of respectfully
following a reveged guest af the time of his departure.*Kulluka
e


4+ In connection with the sacred gct of hospitality it is en-
joined in the S'ast®% that offqgings should be made to all the
deities ( Vis’vadevas) before feqding the Atithi.

t The text has Atitit-Dhaymena which means a Kshatriya,
a resident of a distant or different village, seeking the hospitali-
ty of the house for the dav.—Kulluka.


102 Manu Samhita.


feed him sumptuously after the Brahmana Aézthis have
been repasted, (111)

If Vais’yas and S’udras arrive at his (Brahmana’s)
house as AZithis, he, out of compassion, shall feed them
in the company of. his own servants.* (112)

His friends and relations happening to be guests
in his house out of love or affection, he (Brahmana)
shall feed them with cooked food, as his circumstances
would admit of, in the company of his own wife.t (113)

Newly married daughters and daughters-in-law,}
infants, sick folks and pregnant women in the house
he shall unhesitatingly feed before} feeding the
Atithis, (114)

He, who without having fed*the abovenamed persons
and the AZithis in the house, first eats anything himself,
does not know that, his body will be devoured by dogs
and vultures, after death. (145)

Let the master and mistress of the house eat what.


* The text has Kutumva which literally means dependants.
Kutiuxa explains it by “in the company of the servants.of the
house after the Kshatriya Atithis have been fed and before the
master and mistress of the house have taken their repast. 11e

t+ The text has Saha-Bharjyaydé ¢.e. in the company of his-
wife. Kunvuxa says that it is only another mode of saying that
at the time When the master of the house will eat his. meal, for
it is laid down in the S’astra that the meal time of the master
is the same gvith that of the mistress of the house Il:


t The té&t has Swudsgnih which literally means well clad
girls. We have adopted Kuldiuka's explanatione


§ MepuaTiTHI reads the line gs Atithibhyonvagevaitan, Si-
muftaneously with feeding the Azithis (guests.) We have how-
ever adopted Kutiuxka’s reading and explanation in our rendering.
of the text. “154


Manu Samhita. 103


remains after feeding the Briahmanas (guests), relations
and servants. (116)

After worshipping the deities, Rishis, guests, manes
and the household divinities* with oblations of boiled
rice, let a householder eat his food at the end. (117)

He, who cooks food for his own sole use,t eats sin;
food, which is the residue of sacrificial oblations, is
recommended by the virtuous. (118)

. One’s King,t Rittuika, Sndtaka,§ preceptor, son-in-
Jaw,|| father-in-law or maternal uncle, happening to
call at his house after the lapse of a year, he shall
well come by first offering him a cup of honey (Madhu.
parkam). (%19)

A king or a Snétaka, happening to call at his house
even within a year (of éhe last visit) on. the occasion
of a sacrificial ceremony, he shall welcome in the
method of Madhuparkam, and not otherwise; this is
the conclusion. (120)


Each evening, the housewife shall offer oblations of
cooked re, without muttering any Mantras, to the


* The text has Grihyds’cha Devataéh KULLuKA says tha’
the Bhuta- Yajna ,(offering oblations to beasts) is also includec
within the meaning of the term.

+ Of. Kevalégho Bhavati Kevaladah (he who eats alone be
comes associated with sin.)—S’rutz.

} A duly crowned Kshatriya—Kulluka.

§ He who observes the vow of ceremonial®ablution simply
as a vowist or for studying the Veas.—Kulluka.

|| The tegt has Priya, Kuiuxa explains it by “Famata, :
son-in-law.

q The text hgs Parsimvatasarat® after the expiry of a yea
The prefix Pari in this instatice has, according to Jayaditya, th
sense of “leaving aside.”

.Mepua’rirat reads it as iParisamvatsarén, ie, those wh
have come back after the lapse of a year.


NOL Manu Samhita.


Vais’vedevas, inasmuch as such offerings are enjoined
to be made, each) morning and evening. (121:

Let a Brahmana, who is a keeper of (the sacred) fire,
offer a Pinda Sraéddha to his manes on the day of the
new moon, and after ithat perfurm the Pinddénvahérya»
kam S’réddha from month to month. (122)

Monthly s’rdéddhas offered by men to their manes
ate called Axvahiryam by the wise; commendable
meat-offerings should be made to them on these occa-
sions. (123)

O-ye foremost of Brahmanas, now I shall fully des-
¢ribe who shall be invited to, and who shall be avoided
in, a S’rdddha repast, as well as the number (of Brah-
nianas) to be invited and the nature of food with which
they are to be fed. (124)

Two Brahmanas shall be fed on the occasion of a
Daiva S’raddha ceremony; and three, on the occasion
of a Pitri S’rdddha; or one Brahmana on each such
occasion. Even prosperous enough to feed many Brah-
manas, he shall not exceed the number, (fixed)e(125)

In cases of feeding a large number of (Brahmanas),
proper attendance to them, and ascertainment of their
purity, impurity, and the place and time of repasting
(invitation; are the five factors that are destroyed
{apt to suffer). (126)

This rite (gf offering oblations to the manes) on
each néw moon* day is said to be conducive to the


ae


* The text has Vidhu-kshaye (i. e. on the last day of the moon’s
wane) which is the reading adopted by KuiLLuxKa, Beanparaja and
Mepua’tiTHI. GOVINDARAJA reads it as Pidhi- -kshaye and explains
it as thig i is the rule (Vedhi) on the last days: of the moon’s wane
(Kshaye), 2¢, such S’rdddhas sould be offered to the manes on
the day of the new moon, each month. We hare adopted


Banu Satnhite. 10%


Senéfit of the manes. He, who is constantly engaged in
performing this Smaréta* rite, acquires opulence.t (127)
Givers shall give unto Brahmanas, well-read in the
Vedas, the oblations of food they have offered to the
manes and deities; given to the most deserving reci-
pients (Brahmanas), they bear great fruits. (128)

A Brahmana shall feed a single Brihmana, conversant
with the /edas, on the occasion of a S’ruadha oficred
to the manes or deities; great is the merit which he

_ shall acquire by feeding such a single (Brihmana), there
being no merit in feeding a large number of Brahmanas
who are ignorant of Vazdic Mantras. (129)

The parentage,t etc., of a Veda-knowing Brahmaua
shold be far enquired into; Vatdic Brahmanas,. sons
‘of anscestors who had been well conversant with the
Vedas, are the vehicles} for conveying the oblations to
the manes and deities. Gifts made unto such Brahmanas
‘are as meritorious as gifts made unto AZ¢this.|| (130)

Intthe »’rdéddha where thousands of Bréhmanas,

ignoranteof the Vedas, are fed; if a single Veda-know-


‘KuLiuxa’s reading as being identical with those of the ancient
commentators of the Samhita,

* The.text has Laukiki, Kuituxa explains it by Smarta, ie.
a rite enjoined to be performed in the Smrztz.

{ The text has Preta-Krityé, KuLLuxa explains it by Pitro-
pakévartham, t.e., conducive to the benefit of the manes, and hence
imparting wealth, good progeny ete. to the performer by way of
reward.

_ | Durdgeva Pariksheta, the parentage, piety, erudition of these
Brdhmanas and their rémote ancestors should be enquired so as
‘to determine gwhether they hav@ acquired their excellence by
‘heredity or not.

§ Tirthas: Lit. landihg places.

|| The same metit which one acquires by practising huspitality
‘and making gifts to Atithis.

i4


106 Manu Samhita.


ing Brdéhmana therein is satisfied with the S’réddhe
repast, the merit of feeding such thousands on the
occasion is acquired by feeding that Brahmana
alone, (131)

Oblations offered to the manes and deities should
be given to Brahmanas who are the most excellent in
respect of knowledge; blood-stained hands are not
washed pure with blood. (132)

A Brahmava, ignorant of the Vedas, shall have
to eat as many morsels of burning spear-heads, after
death, as he eats of the 5’xddaha oblations to the manes
and deities, in life. (133)

Some Brahmanas are devoted to (the cultivation
of) self ‘knowledge, others are devoted to the prac-
tice of penitential austerities ; some there are who are
devoted to the study of the Vedas and to penitential
austerities, while others are devoted to work. (134)


Oblations offered to the manes shall be given to
Brabmanas devoted to the knowledge of self to eat,
oblations offered to the deities should be duly Siven to
all these four classes of Brahmanas. (135)


Of a Brahmana: who is well-versed in the Wedas
and whose father was ignorant of the Vedas, and one
who is himself ignorant of the Vedas but whose father
was well-versed in them, the ignorant son of the Veda-
knowing father should be regarded as a worthier guest
(in respect of a »’rdddha repast); but since adorable
are the Mantras of the Vedas, a Veda-knowing son
of a father, igrtgrant of the Vedas, shduld be as well-
honoured (with an invitatfn to a S’raddha repast,
(136—137)

No, ene, out of friendship, should sbe invited to a
S’raddha repast, friends?ir chould he shown with other


Manu Samhita, 107
acts and monetary (presents). Let him invite a Brah-
mana to the S’raddha repast whom he neither knows
to be his friend or foe. (138) -


A S’raddha,* offered by a person to his manes or
to the deities, in connection with which it is mainly
his friends that are repasted, fails to bear any fruit in
the next world. (139)


A person (Brahmana), who, out of ignorance, tries
to make friendship through the instrumentality ofa
Sriddha repast, that worst of Brahmanas, for acquir-
ing such S7dddha friends, falls from heaven.t (140)


A Sréddha repast, given to one’s friends and rela-
tions, is called a fiendish repast by the Rishis. Like
blind cows huddled together i in one pen sucha repast
may contribute to cement friendship in this world, but
gives no benetit in the next. (141).


As a sower, by sowing seeds in an alkaline soil,
reaps ng harvest, soa giver, by giving. oblations (7 e.,
feeding) to a Brahmana, ignorant of the Vedas, (in con-
nexion with a S’raddha), derives no benefit. (142). ;


A honorarium, duly given to an erudite (Veda-
knowing) Brahmana, makes its giver and recipient
* GovINDaRaJa asserts that feeding Brdahmanas is the essential
factor of a 3"rdddha ceremony, the offering of @indas being only
its minor and accessory feature. Kuituxa, following A'pastambha
and others, asserts that the offering of oblations or offerings to the
manes and the subsequent acceptance of those ®fférings by the
Brdhmanas, present, form what is cglled a S'réddha.


+ The heaven-giving merit of a S’rdddha is described by
Vajnavalkya,
Longevity, progeny, opulence, erudition, heaven, sflvation,


ehappiness and kingdom, do the manes, satisfied with S'’rdddhe
offerings; impart.


308 Manu Samhita


entitled. to religious merits* both in this world and the:
next. (143)

{In the absence of a qualified Brahmana], better it.
is to feed a friend or a relation than to feed an erudite.
foe on the occasion of a S’rdéddha ceremony, as.
oblations offered to a foe fail to bear any fruits in the:
next world. (144)

On the occasion of a “°véddha repast, let him care-
fully feed a Brahmana who has studied the Rik, Vajus,,
or the Sama Veda with all its sub-divisions (such as the.
Mantras, Bréhmanas, etc). (145). .

The satisfaction, which the seven generations of his
ancestors who feeds any such Brahmana (on the oc~
casion of a S’réddka ceremony). gerive from the act;
Jasts for all eternity. (146)

The aforesaid Veda-knowing Brahmanas (S’rotriyas),
should be regarded as the worthiest recipients of
S’*riddha obiations, offered by aman to the manes or
deities, the following are their substitutes whgm the.
wise shall feed when such S’rotriyas would be unavail-
able. (447)


One’s mother’s father, mother’s brother, sister’s son,,
father-in-law, preceptor, daughter’s son, son-in-law,
and sons of mother’s or father’s sisters priest, and dis-


The text hasePhalabkdginah * * “% Pyetyachehacha.
Both MepHaTirHt and [GovinDARAJA explain it by “honorarium-.
duly given to 2 Veda-knowing Brahmana accords spiritual benefit
to the donor in ghe next, and , fame and *good name etc., in.
this world. KuLtuxa explains®that such a gift gocords fame
etc.,, to the donor in this world and selvation, etc., in the next,
as described by Vajnava/kya, and the re&ipient of the donation,
by celebr&ting religisus sacrifices therewith, *acquires spiritual
benefit and the fame of: carning honest money in this world, as
a sacrifice celebrated with ill-gotten gain fails to bear any;fruits.


Manu Samhita. 1095


giples should be fed on the occasion of a S’réddha.
repast in the absence. of (the ten aforesaid S’rotriyas),
(148)

Fitness, erudition, etc. of Brahmanas, to be. fed on:
the occasion of a°Daiva S’réddha ceremony, must not
be tested, which shall be carefully done. in respect of*
those. to be fed on the occasion of a 9’réddha offering-
to the manes. (142)


Those Brahmanas, who are gold-stealers, degraded,,
sexless, or athiests must not be invited on ‘the oc-
casion of a Srdddha, offered to the manes, or to the:
deities, this is the dictum of Manu. (150)

Brahmachérins who. wear clotted hairs,* or who are-
ignorant of the Vedas, Brahmanas who are afflicted,
with skin diseasest or are gamblers, or officiate as:
priests at many men’s sacrifices must not be fed on the:
occasion of a ‘’rdddha ceremony. (151)


Brahmanas, who are professional physicians, or live:
by worshipp tig divine images, or are meat-sellers, or-
carry on any kind of trade, should be avoided on the
occasion of a S’réddha, offered to the manes, or to the
deities. (162)

Servants of the king or of a village community,
those. afflicted with bad nail, black teothed ones, those
‘who are hostile to their preceptors, and tose (Brah-
manas) who have renounced, their sacred fires and
teligious, rites (enjoined to be performed in) the Vedas
and Smriti, or live by usury. (1 5}
eg ee eR a ee

* The text has (‘7télam, Kottuga explains it as Brahma.


chérins who wear clocted, hair or clearly shave their heads.


J The text has. Durbalam, weak. “WULLUKA explains it by
Brahmanas suffering from cutaneous affections,


110 Manu Samhita


Brahmanas suffering from phthisis, those who rear
cattle for livelihood, or marry before their elder
brothers have been married, or have renounced the
performance of the five (daily house-hold) sacrifices, or
are inimically disposed towards the Brihmanas, or
suffer their younger brothers to marry before them, or
are incumbents upon endowments (whether money or
monasteries) made by others for the public weal. (154)

A Bréhmana, who is a professional dancer, a Yati
or a Brahmachérin whose vow of continency has been
soiled by the contact of a woman, the (Brihmana)
husband of a S’udra woman, one begotten on a re-
married widow,* the son of a woman born before her
marriage, and one who lives with a faithless wife. (155)

He who teaches the Vedas for money, as well as
he who learns them from him, he who has got S’udra.
disciples or teaches S’udra students, a harsh tongued
(Brahmaua), and sons born in adultery during the life
time or after the death of their mother’s hugband. (156)

One who has wrongfully deserted his parents, or
preceptor, as well as those who are associated either in
‘Vedaic study or through marriage with those who have:
been degraded in life. (157)

One who is guilty of poisoning or of incendiarism,.
one who selfs thé Soma plant, one who partakes of
the food of a man born in adultery,t a sea-faring:


* The th has Punarbhava. It may also mefe the son of a
woman born in adultery afteg the demise of her husband.


+ The text has Kundah, a sow born in adultery during the
life-time of her mother’s. lawful huSband. Kuztuxa holds that.
the tWo kinds of incestuous offspring mentioned in the preced~
ing couplet are here contemplated by the term Kundah, which
includes both Kundah and Gelakah.


Manu Samhita. tat


Brahmana, a professional eulogist, an oilman, and a
forger of documents or a falsifier of weights. (158)

One who quarrels with his father,* a deceitful one,
a drunkard, one afflicted with a (foul) sinful disease or
under an imprecation, an arrogant (Brahmana), as well
as the one who deals in any kind of sweet sap such as,
(sugarcane juice, etc.) (159)

A (Brahmapa) who constructs bows and arrows,
one who marries a girl with an unmarried elder sister,
one who injures his friends, one who lives by gambling
with dice, and he who has learnt the Vedas from his
son. (160)

One afflicted with epilepsy, scrofula, or leucoderma,
or one who is wicked, insane, or blind, or speaks evil
of the Vedas. (161)

_ A trainer of cows, horses, camels or elephants, a
professional astrologer, a tamer of beasts and one
teaches the science of war. (162)

One who obstructs a water course or diverts it in
another channel, a professional mason or architect, one
who plants trees, or goes on errands for money. (163)

A dog-player, one who lives by training falcons, a
defiler of girls, one who kills animals, one who is
in the service of a Sudra, and one who serves all
classes of society as a priest. (164)

. One who does not observe the rules of’ good con-
duct, a sexless (Brahmana), one who daily begs, or lives


* The text has Pitra Vivddamandh, KULLUKA explaies it, one
Who quarrels with hjs father whether for arguing a point of
S’astru or for any worldly object. ®

+ Several editions read K ekarah, squint-eyed.

t Madyapa ie. one who drinks any form of intoxicating liquor
other ehan.ourd (wine),


yi Manik Samhita.
by -agriculture, one afflicted with elephantisis of the
legs, and one condemned by honest men. (165)

A Brahmana who rears sheep or buffalloes fora
living, one who has married a girl previously wedded
to another, and one who carries corpses for money, all
these Brahmanas should be studiously avoided on the
occasion of a S’raddha ceremony. (166)

A good and erudite Bribmana must avoid all these
(ze. the aforesaid) vile and condemnable Brahmanas,
who disgrace the row of eaters in a S’rdddha re-
past. (167)

A Brahmana, who has not studied the Vedas, is
dike unto a rush. fire that is soon extinguished, to him
oblations ‘must not be offered, as no one casts fire:
offerings in the ashes. (168)

The merit which the giver acquires in the other
world by giving oblations unto Brahmanas, unfit to be
given access to a row of diners, .in connection with a
»’riddha offered to the manes, or to the deities, now
hear me describe in detail. ,169)


Whatever is eaten by Brahmanas who are non
observant of the Vazdic or S’éstric vows, or by those
‘who are guilty of the sin of Parivetta, or by Brahmauas
who are unat to sit in the row of diners (.:pankteyas)
ina o’rudgza repast, is vaten by monsters. (170)

A younger brother, who marries or kindles tlfe
sacred fire before his elder (brother) has married or
kindled such a fire, is called,a Parivettd, the latter a
farivitta. (171)

A Purivetta, a Pariviéta, the bride given away in
such a marriage, the giver of the bride and the priest
who solemnizes the marriage Ceremony, ail these five,
go to hell, (after death). (172)


Manu Samhita. 123


He, who, otherwise than under an appointment of
begetting a son on her, visits the widow-of his deceased
elder brother, out of passion, is called the husband of
a deceased elder brother’s widow. (173)

Sons begotten by a man on another’s wife are
called either Kuxdas or Golakas, The son ofa
woman, born in adultery, during the life time of her
lawful husband, is called a Kunda, while a son begotten
on a widow, after the demise of her husband, is called
a Golaka. (174)

S’réddha oblations* offered to either of-these twa
kinds of sons, (incestuously) begotten on another man’s
wife, destroy all the merits of their donors (both in this
world and the next. (175) ,

If a Brahmana, unfit to be invited toa S’rdddha
repast (4pdankteya),t sees a number of competent
Brihmanas eating their meal (in connection therewith.),
the unfortunate giver of the repast is deprived of the
merit of feeding that number of Brdhmanas, seen
eating by*the Apankteya one. (176)

[In the event of the dinner being] thus looked
at} by a completely blind Apdnkteya, the giver of the
repast is deprived of that much merit as is acquired by
feeding ninety Brahmanas ; looked at by one, blind in the
one eye, he is robbed of the merit which is acquired by


——  ?
Any oblation whether offered to the manes, or to the deities
on the occasign of a S’rdddha ceremony.
+ Such as Brahmanas, guilty of gold stealing ete
+ How can aiblind man see? ‘Fhe meaning is that, if a blind,
Apdnkteya intruder can regsonably infer from sounds, etc. that
the repast is going on. , Kutiuxa explains that a blind, Apdmbteya
onlooker, sitting at a place whence it is possible fur one with
eyes to writness the repast.


ee)


z14 Manz. Samirita..


feeding sixty Brahmanas; looked at by a leper (leuco-
dermic Brahmana) or by one’ afflicted with a sinful
malady, he is robbed of the merit which is acquired by
feeding a hundred or a thousand Brahmanas. (177)

If a Brahmana, who is the priest of S’udras, touches
with his limbs any number of worthy Brihmanas,
eating a S’réddka repast in the same row with him,.
‘the giver of the repast is deprived of the merit of
feeding the Brahmanas so touched (by the priest of
S’udras). (178)

Even @ Veda-knowing. Brahmana, who has accepted,
out of greed, {any gift from a Brahmana who serves
as the priest of S’udras, shall meet his doom, like an
unbaked. clay-pot (immersed; in wgter. (179)

A gift made unto a (Brahmana) seller of Soma plant
is like unto excreta,* a gift made unto a professional
physician is like unto pus and blood, Destroyed is the
gift which is made to a paid worshipper of a village
deity (Dcvala), while that which is given toa usurer
(Brahmana) can not standt before the deity. (180)


The gift made to a trader (Brahmana) is of no bene-
fit either here or hereafter. Like libations of clarified.
butter cast in the ashes is the gift made to a Brahmana
who is the son of a faithless widow, born after her hus-
band’s demise. (8

Oblations offered to the manes and deities, if they,
are given to the aforesaid impious and condemnable
Brdhmanas whe are not fit to be invitéd to a »’réddha

-_ Oo —c—nhvnKwKgwRO OT 0
* Can never be acceptable to the mangs or aeities—KULLUKA,


+ Th text has Apratishtham‘u which literally means has no
Joeus standi, KuLLuKA eXplains it by” Ands’raystaya Nishpha-
Tam, futile as it is not supported (ceuntenanced) by the gods.


Manu Samhita. 115


repast, are like unto blood, fat, flesh, marrow, bones
etc.,* this is what the wise men say, (182)

Hear . me speak in detail of those foremost of
Brahmanas whose presence sanctifiesa row (of diners)
in a S’vaddha repast which has been sullied by the
presence of an Apénkteya Brahmana, (not fit to sit in
the row). (183)

Those (Brahmanas), who are foremost (z.e., well read)
in alithe Vedas and Vedéngas,t and whose ten ances-
tors{t were well conversant with the Vedas, are called
sanctifiers of the row (Panktipavanas) \184)


He who has taken the vow ef reading the 7rind-
chiketa,§ or the three Suparnas,|| or has studied the six
allied subjects of Vedic study, or sings the Fyeshtha
Sdman, or keeps the five sacred fires, or is the offspring


* KuLLuxKa says that in the opinion of the wise these oblations
are transformed into many an abominable thing, such as raw fat,
meat, etc. which their giver to the worthless Brahmanas is obliged
to partake of in the next world; or he is necessitated to take
dirth in a family in which such impure things are eaten.

+ The text has Pravachaneshucha. Pravachanam means any
branch of knowledge which serves to illucidate the meaning of
the Vatdic text. Yama includes Nydya philosophy and the six
allied branches of Vaidic study within the Pravachanam in as
much as he extends the privilege of Panktipavana to a student
of Nydya philosophy or of any of the Shadangas (@X sub-divisions)
of Vaidic study. Nydyavichcha Shadangavit.

} The texg has \’votriyanvayhajschéd which means descend-
ants of (S’rotviya) Veda-knowing ancestors. The rgcaning adopted
in the translation is based on an afhorism of Usana, Chhandaséd
S'uddha Dasa Purusha, tew generations of ancestors purified by
Vardic study.

§ The fore part of the Yajur Veda.

|| Tacthiriya Aranyakam XK. 48—50.


116 Manu Samhita.


of a marriage celebrated in the Brahma form (is a sanc-
tifier of the row. (185)

A knower of the Vedas, an expositor of Vedic
doctrines, a religious student, a maker of many gifts,
and a centenarian, should be known as sanctiliers of
the row. (186)

On the occasion of a S’rdddha, at least three Brah-
manas possessing the aforesaid qualifications should be
respectfully invited on the day of the ceremony, or on
the previous day, (187)

A Brahmana, on being invited toa repast given in
connexion with a .8’rdddha offering to the manes, shall
observe perfect continence and refrain from studying
the Vedas; the celebrant’ of the 5s’réddha ceremony
shall as well observe the same (rules of) conduct. (188)

The manes do invisibly enter the persons of Brah-
manas invited (on the occasion of a 5’rdddha), follow
them like the air,* and sit by them when they are
seated (189)

Even the foremost of Brahmanas, who, having ac-
cepted an invitation (to a S’rdddha repast), wilfully
violates his pledge (to attend it), is sure to incur
sin, and will be reborn as a hog in his next birth. (190)

He, who, having been invited toa S'réddha repast,


The text has Vayuuachanuguchchhati gfollows like the
air. Ku.tuka explains “Vayu” ye “Prana Vayu" vital airs,
the whole meaning according to him being that, “Pitris (manes)
ente® the organisms of the Brahmana guest$ just as souls of men
enter the secds in their parents’ bodies,


Manu Samhita. V7


sexually knows a S'udra wife,* is associated with all the
sin done by the giver of the repast.t (191)

The manes are wrathless, cleanly (in their habits ,
and magnanimous,{ are prior to the gods, and have laid
aside their arms. 192

‘Lhe source of their :manes’ origin, those who con-
stitute this region of the manes, and the mode of wor-
shipping their Pitris (progenitors) now hear me describe
in detail. 193)

The Pizris are the sons of Rishis, Marichi, etc., who
are the sons of Manu, the son of Hiranyagarbha. (194)

OF these, Somasadas, the sons of Virat, are the manes
of the Sadhyas ; and Agnishattas, the sons of Marichi,
who are renowned in the three regions, are the manes
of the deities. (195)

Barhishadas; the sons of Atri, are the manes of
Daityas, Danavas, Gandharvas, serpents, R4kshasas,
Kinnaras and birds. (195)

Somapas (Soma-drinkers) are the manes of Brah-
manas, Hdvirbhujas (eaters of oblations) are those of
Kshatriyas, Ajyapas (drinkers of clarified butter) are


* The text has Vvishali which means a S’udra wife. Both
MepuatitHi and Govinparaja hold that, intercourse even with
his Brahmana wife by a man, invited toa Svaddha repast, is for-
bidden. They give the etymotogy of the tasm Vvishalz as
Vrthasyante chapalayati Bhartdram, one who coves her husband
and makes him restive,” in short, an amorous wife.” Perfect
continence on the part of the guest on the occasion is what is
contemplated by the t&t. For other’ meanings eof “ Vrishali”
see Apastambha.


®
7 The text has PratipaWyat, that is, all sin of the giver of
the repast is transferred to the incontinent guest.


t The text has Mahabhagah z.e. possessed of the eight
mforal virtues of clemency, etc. Kulluka


18: Manu Samhita.


the manes of Vais’yas, and Sukddinas are the manes of
S’udras. (197)

The sons of the celestial bard (Bhrigu) are called
Somapas, the sons of Angira are called Havirbhujas,
Ajyapas are the sons of Pulastya, and SukAlinas are the
sons of Vasishtha. (198)

Agnidagdhds, Anagnidagdhds (lit, not burnt in fire’,
Kavyas, Barhishadas, Agnishattés, and Saumyds should’
be known as the manes of Brahmanas. (199)


Thus the principal ones among the manes have been
described, infinite are their sons and grand-sons in this
universe.* (200)

From the Rishist have originated, the Putris
(manes) and from the manes have sprung the races
of demons and divinities, and from the deities have
originated all things in the order of immobile, mobile,
and so on. (201)


Water, reverentially offered to the manes in a silver
vessel, or in a vessel plated with silver? gives them
infinite satisfation. (202)


The performance of Pitrs S’raddhas (i e., S’raddhas
offered to the manes) is more specifically obligatory
on the twice-born ones than the performance of Daiva
S'\raddhas (i.g. S’réddha-offerings made to the deities).


* The Markandeya PurAdnam describes these sons and grandsons
of the Piters as the manes of lower animals qgich as the cow,
the horse, ete

{ Celestial sages such as Marichi, etce Hence even in
S'vdddha ceremonies of one’s ow father, grandfather, or great
gragdfather, the Somapa manes should be as well worshipped, in
as much as they are the remote descendants of such soma-drinking
Pitvis—Kulluka.


Manu Samhita. itg


A Daiva S’réddha is held only as a prelude* to a Pitri
d’réddha (ceremony). (203)

For the protection of a Pitri S’raddha ceremony
it should be preceded by a Dasva S’réddha offerfng.t
A S’réddha, not protected in this manner, is destroyed
by monsters. (204)

Hence the Vis’vedevas should be invoked at the
outset, and formally bid adieu at the close, of a Pitri
S’raddha ceremony, the manes should not be invoked
or dismissed in a S’rdéddha. before the invocation and
dismissal of the Vis’vedevas. He perisheth with his
progeny who invites the Brahmanas or dismisses the
Bréhmana representatives of his manes ina S’r@ddha
ceremony without first yorshipping the Vis’vedevas
(as directed above.)} (205)

Let him seek out a solitary and holy§ plot of
land for the performance of a 5’rdddha (thereon) and.
plaster it with cow-dung; the ground must be (artifi-
cially) made to slope towards the south, if it is not
so by nature. (206)

S’raddhas offered to the manes on river-banks, in”
solitary "places, in recesses of forests,* ete., satisfy them
to the greatest degree. (207)


« A Daiva S'radiha forms only a’preliminary and auxiliary
function of the Pitri S'vaddha ceremony.

f Invocation and offerings to the Vishvadevas @7.e., all the
deities).

+ All rites dong unto Brahmanas in connection with a Svaddha
offering to the manes must be preceded by similay rites being
@one unto the Vis’ vedevas—Devala.

§ Tho text has vuchi, sacredeKULLUKA explains it by free from
bones and charcoals. :

{| The text has Avakds*eshu choksheshu, KuLLUKA explains %t
by Swabhdnenas’uchayo'ranyadiprades tinteshu, Recesses of natur-
ally sacred places such as, forests. etc.»


120 Manu Samhita


There, after they have bathed and duly sipped water,
the invited Brdhmanas shall be seated, each on a
separate cushion, containing Awsha grass.* (208)


Thus having seated these commendable Brdhmanas
on comfortable cushinons, they should be worshipped
with the offerings of saffron, sandal paste, and garlands
of sweet-smelling flowers, those who represent the
deities being first worshipped, and after them the re-
presentatives of the manes. (209)


Then having offered the water of veneration
(Arghyc), containing sesame and Kus’a grass, he shall,
with their permission, make fire offerings in the manner
following. (210)

At the outset let him satisfy’ Agni, Soma, and Yama
with libations of clarified butter, and, after that, offer
oblations unto his manes. (211


In the absence of the sacred fire,t let him (the
celebrant) offer the oblations on the hands of the
Bréhmanas. “ Fire is the Bréhmana,” thus Brahmanas,
well-versed in the Vedas, have said. (212)


The foremost of the twice-born ones (Bréhmanas),
devoid of all irascible feelings, ever graciously disposed,
the oldest born in the economy of the universe, and per-
petually engaged to promote the weal of the world, have
——

On each of the cushions of Brahmanas who are the represen-
tatives of the Vis’vadevas shall be placed two blades of kus’a grass
with their tips directed towards the ea#, on eachf the cushions
of the Brahmanas who repr@ent the manes shall be placed a single
blade of kusa grass with its op poinged towards the south—Devala.


+ Asis probable in the case of af unmarried religious student,
duly initiated with the thread, who has*finished his study and
returned from the house of his preceptor, ur of a widower.=-

Kulluka.


Manu Samhita. - 121


been déscribed by the Rishis as the proper recipient
deities of S’réddha offerings {oblations). (213)

All acts* in connection with the fire-offering must be
done by the offerer, seated in, or looking towards, the
south, with his right hand. He shall sprinkle water on
the ground on which the oblation will be offered. (214)

Let him make three Pindas (oblations) out of the
remnants of oblations cast in the fire ; and facing the
south, with his whole soul bent thereon, let him offer
the same on the Aus’a blade, with the Fitri: Tirthat of
his right hand, (215)

Then having offered the Pindas on the Kus’a
blades conformably to the rules (of his own school
of Grihya Regulation), let him rub his hand over the
Kus’a roots for the satisfaction of his three generations
of ancestors, starting with his great grand-father,
in the ascending line, who are fond of such pasty
scrapings of oblations.{ (216)

Then having directed his face towards the north, he.
must sip water, and gently practise three Prandyamas,
and make obeisance to the six seasons of the year and
to the manes.§ (217)

The residue of water, contained in the water-vessels,
shall be gently poured out near each of the Pindas


Such as Paryukshanam, (silently sprinkling water over the
fire without muttering any Mantra, etc.~—Kulluka.

} Part of the hand between the fore-finger and the thumb,
sonsidered sacred to the manes.

t{ On the kus’a mots let him scrape the sticky paste (of oblation)
from his hand—Vishnu.

§ Respectively runniag as “I make obeisance to spring” (Vasan-
tdya Namastubhyam) and “ obeisance to you, manes” (Namo Vah
Pitarah)—Kulluka.

16


122 Mann Samhita’


(oblations), and the Pindas shall be smelled in the order
in which they have been offered. (218)

After that, let him take a small portion from each
of the oblations offered to the fathers, etc., and give
them first to the Brahmanas, present, to eat. (219)

In the event of his father living, let him (the
celebrant) offer S’rdddhas to his three ancestors pre-
ceding his father,* or feed his own father instead of the
Bréhmana, who is usually appointed to represent him
in the ceremony. (220) ,

But he whose father is dead, but whose grand-father
is alive, let liim offer a -S’rdéddha first to his daoeased
father, and after that, to his departed great grand-
father.t (221)

A living grand-father can eat the oblation himself
instead of the Brahmana representing him (in connec-
tion with a S’réddha offered by his grandson), or the
grandson may perform the ceremony in any way he
likes with the permission of the grand-father. (222)

Then having given. water and Kws’a ‘grass in the
hands of the Brahmanas, let him offer the first
pickings from the oblations thereon, by muttering the
Mantra, oblation to the manes “(Pitri Svadhd).” (223)

There, carrying the plate of boiled rice with his
hands, he, meditating on his departed ancestors, shall
place it neag the Bréhmanas for serving the boiled rice
to ete, (224)


= Grandfather, great grandfather, gr@at great grandfather.

A son is priv ikeged to pstorm S’raddhas, which are accessory
to ap expiatory rite (Prayas’chittqm) even in the life time of his
father.

+ Govindaraja, following Vishnu, explaias it as, “Ete whose father
and [great-grand-father are dead, let him first offer a Pinda
\(S’réddha) to his two’ancestorg, preceding his grand-father.


Manu Samhita. 123


The boiled rice, contained in a plate which is not
carried with the two hands, or is served out only
with a single hand, is robbed by the malignant Asuras
(demons). (225)

[Plates, containing] vegetable curries or soups, milk,
curd, honey and clarified butter, must be carefully
deposited on the ground before serving them to Brah-
manas out of the same. (226:

Articles of confectionary, sweet porridge,* edible
roots, fruit, palatable preparations of meat, and aromatic
cordials. (227)

These should be gradually brought near the Brah-
manas with undivided attention and served to them by
commending the actual quantity served out at a
time. (228)

One must not shed tears at the time of serving out
the dishes (to the Brahmanas), nor give vent to afiger,
nor speak falsehood, nor scatter the bailed rice, nor
touch it with his feet. (229)


Tears shed by one, at the time of serving the boiléd
rice, augment the satisfaction of ghosts; a fit of
anger at the time leads to the pleasure of . one’s
enemies, a falsehood spoken at the time, augments
the satisfaction of dogs, boiled rice, trampled undér
feet, ‘leads to the satisfaction of monsters, and
scattering boiled rice, leads to the satisf€ction of
miscreants. (130)

i Orr
e * The text has Bhakshyam, anything ghat is eaten by chewing,
and Bhojyam, anythtmg which ig taken in the manner of a sweet
porridge or thick barley gruel, ett, KuLLuKA explains Bhakshyam
by Modakdadi (confections etc. and Bhojyam, Payasadi, ric
cooked with milk and sweetened with sugar, and such like
preparations.


124 Manu Samhita.


Articles of food, to which the Bréhmanas show a
fondness at the time, must be unstintedly served out
to them; a discourse on the supreme Self at the time
leads to the satisfaction of the manes. (231)

During the S’rdddha repast Vedas, Purdnas,*
ftihésas and Khilast should be recited to the Brah-
mana guests, when they would be eating. (232)

In a cheerful frame of mind, he, (the giver of the
repast), shall satisfy the Brahmanas, feed them gently,
and repeatedly ask them to partake more and more of
the (proferred) dishes, etc,. by dilating on their ex-
cellence, (233)

Let him assiduously feed a religious student, related
to the deceased ‘to whom the S’rdéddha is offered; as
a daughter’s son, and honour him with the present of
a blanket,t and scatter sesame on the ground of the
S'raddha. (234)

Three things are. sacred in a S’raddha, viz, a

- daughter’s son, a blanket and sesame; three things are
commended in a S’réddha ceremony Yia., Cleanliness
(purity of mind and body), non-irascibility and absence
of hurry. (235)

Let the Brahmanas silently eat all the cooked food,
luke warm, in a $’ré4ddha repast. Repeatedly asked to
pronouncg on their excellence or otherwise, they must
not opeg their mouths. (206):

As long as the food remains warm, as long as the


* In Mis commentary on Brihad A’ranyaka, S’ankara describes
Purénas, as works dealing with the creatiorgof the universe.
e
+ Khilas, KuLtuxa explains it by S’visuktas, S’iva San-
kalpas, etc.
¢ The text has Kutapam, Kuvuxa explains it by “Vepdla
kamoalam,” a blanket mamifactured in the country of Nepala.


Manu Samhita. 125


Brahmanas eat that in silence, as long as they do
not remark on the excellence of the food, so long do
the manes eat. (237)

What the Brahmanas eat with their heads, covered,
whatever do they eat with their faces towards the
south, whatever do they eat with their shoes on, the
monsters (and not the manes) eat all that. (238)


Let not a Chandala, a hog, a cock, a dog, a woman
in her menses, or a enuch see these Bréhmanas eating
a (S’raddha repast). (239)

Any thing looked at by (any of these creatures)
in the course of a fire-offering, gift-making, repast,
or a S’raddha in honour of the manes or deities, pro-
duces contrary effect, (240)

A hog by his scent, a cock by flapping his wings,
a dog by his sight, and a vile-caste man by his touch,
destroys a S’raddha, (241)


A lame or one-eyed man, or one who has a limb in
less or® excess, even if he chances to be a servant of
the giver of the repast, must be removed from the
place of the 'S’rdddha. (242) ;

A householder or a mendicant Brahmana, if he
happens to ask for a meal on the occasion, he shall
feed, according to his might, with the permission of the
Brdhmanas, who are the eaters of the S’raddha re-
past. (243)

All kinds of gooked curries and bojled rice etce,,
blended together and mixed vith water,®shall be depo-
sited on Kus’a blages before the repasted Brdah-
manas. (244)

These leavings deposited on the Kus’ (grass) are
unfit to be cast in the-fire: thev form the portions of


126 Manu Samhita.


Spirits of deceased infants, and of faithless wives who
had left their husband’s familes in life.* (245)

The leavings of food cast on the ground ina
3’raddha repastlis laid down as belonging to the portion
of. artless and energetic servants of the house. (246)

S’raddhas, which should be offered to the spirit
of a newly deceased person till the performance of the
Sapindikaranam rite, should be performed without
offering oblations to the Viskvedevas ; and only a single
Brahmana, a single oblation, and a single blade of Kus’a
gtass are necessary for each of them.t (247)

After the performance of his Sapindikaranam,
the sons of the deceased, whose funeral rites have been
done according to the Regulation, shall offer oblations
to his spirit on the day of his dtath{ in the manner
of a Parvana S'raddka§ (248)

Having eatena S’raddka repast, the foolish one,
who gives the leavings of his plate to a S’xdra, falls
headlong into the hell of Ké/a S’utram (thread of
time). (249)

In the excreta of him, who has sexually known a
woman within twenty four hours of eating a S’rdddha


* The text has Tydgindm—KuLLuxa explains it by Gurvddi-
Tydginém who have abandoned their husbands and superiors.
We have adopted Govindraja’s explanation in our translation.

} With only a°single Arghya offering, devoid of oblations to the
deities, invocation and fire-offerings, and with a single Kus’a blade
should be perfarmed such an Ekoddishta'S’gdddha (1.8) a S’raddha
offered to the #pirit ofa pegson who has recently departed this
life—Ydjnavalkye.

} On the day marked by the same Iupar phase in each month
ofiegyear. _

§ Pérvana S'rdddha isa S’raddha offered to the manes on the
day of the full or new moon (Parva).


Manu Samhita. 127


tepast, shall his manes lie for a motth from that
date. (250)

Having asked the Brahmanas, “have you well eaten ?”
or “have you been repleted ?”, he shall ask them to wash
their mouths and hands, and after they have so washed,
request them to take rest, saying “rest yourselves
O, Brahmanas.” (251)

After rest, the Brdhmanas shall say, “Svadha Ast’”
(let the manes be satisfied);* in all rites of S’rdddha it is
the highest benediction. (252) ,

After that, he shall ask the Br&hmanas in which
way the residue of food (prepared on the occasion) to
to be distributed. He shall give it to persons as they
will direct him to do. (253)

In all S’raddhas offered to one’s father or mother, he
sliall enquire about the satisfaction of the Br&ahmanas,
by asking, “have you well eaten ?”; in those offered to
all the ancestors (goshthi) by asking, “have you well
heard ?” in those offered on auspicious occasion(A’ dhyu-
daika) by ‘asking, “isjit well: done ?”, and in those offered:
to the deities, by asking, ‘‘does it please ?””. (254)

An auspicious afternoon,t Aws’a grasses, plastering.
the house with solution’ of (ffesh) cowdung, sesame
seeds, unstinted gifts (to the Brahmanas), purifica~
tiont and cooking of the edibles, gnd acquisition

* The full meaning is that, let the manes be satisfied and let
blessing accrue therefrom to the celebrant of the 3’raddha
ceremony.

+ Afternoon in cases of S’rdéddigs offered onthe day of the
new moon. Actording to another Switz, S’rdddhas to be
offered: on auspicious occaffons (dbhyudaiyaka) should be done
in the morning. ,

e £ Theitext| has Samskéra, which means either purification of or
cooking curries, boiled rice, confegtion etc,


128 Manu Samhita.


of row-sanctifying (Paxkti-pdvanas) Bréhmanas, these
are:the blessed auxiliaries of a S’rdddha ceremony. (255)

Kusa’ grass, Mantras, morning, Havishyannam and
things, which have been enumerated as sacred before,
are the blessed accessories to a S’rdddha offered to the
deities. (256)

Food grains used by MMunis (divine contempla-
tors),* milk, Soma-juice, raw meatt and non-alkaline
saltst’are’called natural oblations. (257)

Having dismissed the Brdhmanas, let him, pure,
silent and self-controlled, longingly cast his look towards
the south, and pray the manes as follows : (258)

May the number of gift-makers, O ye manes, in-
crease in our family, may our progeny and wisdom in the
Vedas grow from more to more, may veneration to-
wards the Vedas never depaxt from our family, and
may we have many things fit to be gifted away. (259)

Having thus performed the S’raddha .and at the
close of the prayer, the oblations (Pixdas) should be
caused to be eaten by a cow, or by a Brahmana, or bya

‘goat, or they should be cast in the water or fire. (260)


Several authorities advise to offer the Pindas to the
manes after the Brdhmanas have been fed; others advise
to give the oblations to the birds to eat, others advise

to cast them in the fire or water. (261)


* S’ankara in his commentary on the Brikad Aranyaka
Upanishad defines * Muni” as manandt Muni, from minding the’
supreme Self his called Muni. The text has Munyanndni that
is the kind of food grains whi®h is eaten by hermits in ths forest,
such as Nivdra etc.

¢ Flesh of an animal which is not forbidden to be eaten, such
as venison, hare’s flesh,or goat’s flesh. which mav be offered to the
manes as oblations.

t Such as Rocksalt, sea salt, etc.


Manu Samhita. 129


The second oblation* (P:izda) should be given to a
faithful and lawfully married wife, eager to worship the |
manes and desirous of conceiving a male child.* (262)

[Thereby] she will give birth to a long-lived, intelli-
gent, well-renowned, opulent, and virtuous son, spiri-
tually disposed, (who, in his turn). will be the father of
a large family. (263)

Thus having washed his hands and sipped |water,
he shall, with the greatest attention, feed his father’s
cognates, and after that, the relations on his mother’s
side. (264)

Let not the leavings be removed till the Brdhmanas
have departed from their seats; and after that, let him
make the household offerings, this is the Regula-
tion. (265)

Now I shall describe the kinds of oblations, which,
being duly offered to the manes, give them satisfaction
which lasts for a long time, or for all eternity. (266)

Sesame,, barley grains, Vrihi grains, kidney beans,
water, fruits, and edible roots, duly offered to the
manes, keep them satisfied for one month. (267)

Pathina fish (keeps them satisfied) for two months ;
venison, for three months ; mutton, for four months ; and
flesh (of clean) birds, for five months; (268)

Goat’s flesh, for six months ; flesh of a*spotted deer,
for seven months ; the flesh of an Ena deer, for eight
months; and the flesh of a Ruru deer, for nine
months, (269)

Flesh of the buffalo or rhinocéros satisfies the manes


* The text has Madhyamah Pindah (ie) the oblation offe€t.
by, herjhusband to his deceased grandfather, and duly consecrated
with the Grihya mantras.


17


130 Manu Samhita,


for ten months; the flesh of a hare or tortoise, for
eleven months; (270)

Preparations of cow-milk, and Péyasa for one full
year; the flesh of a white, old goat, for twelve
years. (271)

The satisfaction, which they derive (from) Ké/a-
s’dka (a kind of vegetables), large scaled fishes, flesh of
the rhinoceros or of red goat, honey, and food grains lasts
for all eternity. (272)

Anything mixed with honey, which is offered to
them on the thirteenth day of the fortnight, marked
by the asterism A/agh4,* leads to their satisfaction for
eternal time. (273)

“May he be born in our fgmily, who will offer us
Péyasa offerings, mixed with honey and clarified butter,
on the day of the thirteenth phase of the moon, marked
by the asterism M/agh4, or under the auspices of Kunjara-
chchhhyé.t (274)

Anything, which is reverentially offergi to the
manes, gives them infinite and eternal satisfaction in the
next world. (275)

The days of the fortnight, from the tenth day to
the day of the new moon, excepting the day of the
fourteenth day of the moon’s wane, are auspicious, for
the performang¢e of S’riddhas. (276)


* The 7vayodashi (the thirteenth day of the moon’s wane)
is specifically mentioned, the thirteenth day of the moon’s wane
in the month of ghadra should be considéted as meant—as Sankha
opines.

+ When the sun is in the asterism Hast& in the month of

*shvin, the thirteenth day of the lunar wane in the month of
Midkhya Bhédra in connection therewith, ‘marked by the asterism
Magha, is called Kunjava-Chchhayé, see Vishnu. Cp.
LXXVItI—s2, 53.


Manu Samhité. 131


S'raddhas, offered under the auspices of even
numbered asterisms (such as, the second, fourth lunar
mansions), or of the even numbered phases of the moon,
grant the fruition of all desires ; while those, offered under
the auspices of odd numbered asterisms, or lunar phases,
grant a family of opulent and erudite sons. (277)

As the dark fortnight is more auspicious than the
light one for the purposes of S’raddha offerings to the
manes, so evening is better than forenoon for that
end. (278)

With the holy thread placed on his right shoulder,
and the us’a grass in his hand, let him assiduously
perform all rites in connection with a S’raddha to the
manes with the help of the P2tri-tirtha of his right
hand. (279)

Let him not offer a S’réddha offering in the night ;.
night is the time for monsters, nor they should be offered
at either meeting of the day and night, nor just at sun-
rise. (a8o).

In the event of his inability to offer S’rdddhas, each
month, let him in this manner offer three S’raddhas
in Summier, Rains, and fore-winter (Hemanta). (281)

The fire offering to be made ina S’raddha must
not be made in any other fire than that in which Vedic
and Smérta rites are performed; a Brghmana keeper
of the sacred fire must not offer a S’réddhaen any other
day in the dark fortnight except on the day of the
new moon. 4282)

The foremost of Brahmagas obtain® the same
merit by offerihg libations of water to the manes after
his bath, as is acquired by instituting the Pity.
yajnas (i.e, S’radihas, Zit. sacrifices offered to tha
manes;) (283)


132 Mann Samhita


The Rishis call the (heirarchy of) fathers as Vasus,
the (heirarchy of) grand-fathers as Rudras, aud the
(heirarchy of) great grand-fathers as A’dityas (284)

Every day, eat the residue of cooked food left after
first feeding the Brahmanas (Vishvasa); eat, every day,
ambrosia. The first is called Vzshvasa, the second is
the residue of food left after performing a sacrifice
therewith. (235)

Even the eternal S’ruti has aknowledged the divi-
nity of the manes. Thus I have told you alli about
the mode of performing the five daily sacrifices, and
all rites in connection therewith. Now hear me des-
cribe the means by which the twice-born ones shall
earn their livelihood. (286)


CHAPTER IV.


A TWICE-BORN one shall reside for the first quarter
of his life* in the residence of his preceptor, and the
second quarter (thereof) in his own house as a married
man. (1)

A Brahmana, other than in the time of distress,
shall earn his livelihood and maintain his family by a
means, which does not clash, or clash very,little, with
other men’s iftterests.t (2)


* The text has Chaturthamdyusho Rhagam, aequarter part
of the duration life, z.e. twenty five years, since according
to the S’vuti, a hundred years is the ordained gpace of human
existence. S’etayurvat Purushah.
omeJn short by teaching, by celebrating sacrifices on behalf of
their celebrants, and by receiving gifts from the pure and the holy,
etc, Vasanadijyipana-Vis'uddha-prats grahadibhiheKuliuka.


Manu Samhita, 133


He must earn money, enough for his merest exist-_
ence, by works which do not disgrace the social order |
he belongs to, and which do not entail much physical
labour or hardship. (3)

Let him live by Rizam and Amzitam, or by Mritam
or Pramitam, or by Satyaénritam, but never by the
avocation of a dog.* (4)

Picking up grains, of paddy from the stubbly
fields (uxcha vritti), or collecting the ears of paddy
constitutes what is called Ritam.

Anything obtained without solicitation is . called
Amritam (lit, nectar); to live by begging is called

Mritam (death), and to live by apriculte is called
Pramritam. (5)

Trade is called Satyduritam, and itis good that a
man should live by trade. Service is called the
vocation of a dog, hence it should be shunned. (6).

Eithey be a Kus’ala-dhényikat,or a Kumbhi-dhan-
yaka,t or, store up enough to support the family for
three days, Or only enough for the morrow. (7)

Of these four kinds of Brahmana house-holders
(hus’aladhanyaka etc), each succeeding one is more
meritorious than the one immediately preceding it
(in the list), inasmuch as on account of the compara-
tively greater poverty of their resources they are com-
pelled to practise self-abnegation (lit, Self control)
by which they are enabled to conquer the whole
world. (8)


* The text has S’va-writtyd by the avocatio@of a dog, ze
by accepting serviee.

+ One who has got food grflins stored i in his house, enough for
three years’ consumption,of his family.

{ One who has stored up food grain enough for a year’s
covsumption of the family.


134 Manu Samhita.


A householder (with a large family) may earn a
living by six acts,* one (with a smaller family than the
former) by three acts, one (with a small family)
by two acts,t and one with a very small family by
teaching alone. (9)

A Brahmana, living by S’2/a or Uncha means of
livelihood, should only be devoted to the keeping of..
the fire, and do the sacrifices which are enjoined to be’,
performed at the end of a Parva or Ayana, (10)

For a livelihood, let him (Brahmana) not take to
any, (vile) means, (usually) adopted by.ordinary men,§
let him maintain himself by a profession which is h onest,
artless, holy and worthy of a Brahmana. (11)

Resting in contentment, a seeker of happiness must
restrain himself from pursuing more and more wealth,
Happiness is rooted in contentment, misery is. based

_ on discontent,* (12).

Following. any, of the aforesaid professions, a
Sndtaka Brahmana should observe the following rules
of conduct and vows, which impart fame ané longevity
in this life and lead to heaven (after death.) (13)

By unremittingly discharging his duties alone, as
ordained in the Vedas, to the best of his ability, one
comes by the most elevated status. (14) .


* Such as Nitam, obtaining without solicitation, begging,
agriculture, trade and money-lending.

} Priesthood, teaching, and gift taking.

t Teaching gad officiating as priesfs at sacrifices celebrated
by others.


§ The text has Na. Loka VrittamyKuttuxa explains it as “not

falsehood, deceit, sycophancy, self advertisement, and imitation
of the dress and manners of one’s master as is usually done by
common men.


Manu Samhita. 135°


He shall not earn money by acts which enthral
the senses of man, nor by means forbidden by the
Vedas: In the event of his possessing**money, or in
want, one must not endeavour to earn mioney from
atiy source, without discrimination.* (15).

Let him not wilfully addict himself to any object
of sense-gratification; in case of extreme attachment
he must counteract it by?means of his will-force. (16)

Acquisition (of wealth, etc),¥hostile to his Vediac
studies, must be avoided; if he:can study his Vedas,
each day, by any how supporting his family, that is his
success in life. (17)

His dress, speech, and his ‘discernment (feelings)
must be in conformity witp his birth,} wealth, age and
Vediac knowledge. (18)

He shall peruse, each day, S’és¢ras whose perusal
serves to improve the intellect, as well as those which
treats on the art of money-making.t Likewise, he shall
study. the Nigamas which illucidate the (true) import
of the Vedas.t (19)

A man acquires proficiency in the S’dstras he reads,
each day; and illuminated with their light, his general
knowledge increases. (20)

Let him not omit performing the Rishi-yajna,
Deva-Yajna, Bhuta-Yajna and Pitri-Yajea$ accord-
ing to the best of his might. (21)


* “ Prasangeng” is the term that occurs in the text, Kurtuka
examplifies it by “dance and music” (NritydgitadiTiy
e + DhanyAni, the science of money ming, such as the works
of Ushanas and Brikaspati. :f{ The Upanishads, etc.*

§ Rishi-yajna, i.e. study of the Vedas, Deva-yajua, t. e. five
Offerings to the deities, Shuta-yajna oblations to animals, Nrie
yajng, t.e, hospitalities to men; and Pitri-yajna, S’rdddha offer-
ings to the manes.


136 Manu Samhita.


Some there are, who, though conversant with ths
‘mode of performing both external and internal yajnas,*
perform these five kinds of yajxas, by withdraw-
ing the five senses from their respective objects of
gratification. (22)

Several wise householders, knowing that immortal
is the fruit of performing sacrifices with speech and
vital airs, constantly cast offermgs of speech in the
vital airs, and those of vital airs in the speech.t (23)

Several other Brahmanas, possessed of the know-
ledge of Brahma, constantly perform these five sacri-
fices by means of their knowledge of Brahma; with
their sight of wisdom (Upanishad), they behold that
knowledge is the primary end of all (religious) acts. (24)

Let five offerings in confection with the Agnt-
hotra sacrifices be offered in the fore-part of the day
or night, or in the first or last part of the day, or in
the first or last part of the night. At the close of the
dark fort-night he shall perform the Darska sacrifice,
and at the close of the light fort-night the’one known
as Paurnamisa. (25)

A Brahmana must celebrate the (Agrayana)
sacrifice on the harvesting of the new crops,{ the


* Véhya Abhyantara yajnas, Vahya yajnas are religious rites
or ceremoniajs, while Adhyentava yajnas consist in practising
yoga with its accessories,

+ Mutter the Mantra, “I cast the offering of speech in the
fire of vitality, gshile not speaking ; andthe one ruhning as, “I cast
the offering of life in speeqi” at the time of speaking.

f The text has S'asyénte, which litewally means after
the stock of the previous year’$ food grains has run out.
"MuLLUKA, grounding his statement on the aphorism of the
Sutra-Kdva, Sivadt Navdnnam, the harvest-sacrifice in S’rat
(October-November), asserts that the sacrifice must be performed


Manu Samhita. 137


(Chdturm4sya) sacrifice at the close of a season,* the
animal sacrifice at the beginning of a Ayana,t and the
Soma-yajnas at the close of the year.t (26)

A Brdhmana, with the sacred fire, wishing a long
life, shall not partake of newly harvested food grain, or
cooked meat without first performing the Navdnnam
(new food grain) and animal sacrifices.§ (27)

The fire consumes the vitality of the gluttonous
Brahmana (with the sacred fire), if he partakes of the
newly harvested food grains and meat without first
offering them as oblations to the fire. , 28)

Let not an Atithi (guest), unpropitiated with a
cushion, bed, food, water, fruit or edible roots to the
best of his might, reside in his (Brahmanas) house. (29)

Let him not welcome with speech even (guests)
who go Contrary to the Vedas, or live by professions
other than those peculiar to his order, or are cat-
natured|| or dispute the doctrines of the Vedas by


after the harvest of the new grains has been gleaned, no matter
whether the stock of the previous year’s food grains has been ex-
hausted or not, as Otherwise a rich householder, with several years’
provisions in his store, will be discharged from the obligation of
of celebrating this sacrifice.

* A Rituh (season), according to Kuttuxa, tonsists of four
months, a year is divided into three seasons, a fact which shows
that, this celebrated commentator of the Manu Samhita was a
resident of northern India.

+ Ayana means the period when the sun is either in the nor-~
thern, or in the sopthern solstice.

$£ The text has Samante, (lit, at the close of {Meyer} 2.@., itt
Spring, inasmuch as the Vediac year whith used to be computed
with the first:day the lunar Ponth in Chaitra was considered
complete with winter.

§ Soma Yajnas such as, Agnishtoma etc.,

\| The text has Vatddla Vrittikan and Vaka Vratins 7.e. men,
who are deceitful as cats, or carry cloaks of religion.

18


138 Manu Samhita.


false logic, or have no faith in the Vedas, or are crane-
natured.* (30)

Let him honour the house-holders, who have per-
formedthe rites of ceremonial ablutions at the comple-
tion of the Vedic study, or at the close of a vow, of
both, with oblations offered to the gods and manes, and
avoid those who are otherwise qualified.t 31)

A householder shall give cooked food to Brahma-
chérins etc.,t who do not cook their meals; and after
keeping enough food for his relations and dependents,
he shall distribute the residue among the birds and
beasts. (32)

A Snétaka householder, famished with hunger,
shall ask money of the king, or of his pupils and disci-
ples, but of no other men. This is the conclusion. (33)

A Snétaka Bréhmana must on no account sufier
himself to be overwhelmed with hunger ;§ and possessing
money, he must not wear a torn or dirty cloth. (34)


* Cf Vishnu. Chapter LXXXII. Aphorisms 5 and %.

+ Let him invite them on the occasion of a S'vaddha, offered
to the gods or manes.

t Mepuatirar and Govinparaja, on the basis. of the couplet,
Bhikshancha Bhikshave dadyat Vidhibat Brahmacharine, etc.
say that, Shikshus, Paribrdjakas, S8rahmacharins, etc,
have “been provided for in the above quoted couplet, and hold that
this stanza gpntemplates the giving of cooked food to mendicants
of other pursuasions, or to those who denounce the authority of
the Vedas (Pdshandins\.

f Even r should be given t® trees anf plants, each day,
by a Brahmana householdgr. r

§ The text has Na Sidet Sndtaka Viprae NKULLUKA explains
that a fully educated Snataka enjSys the privilege of receiving
bifts from proper persons, so he need nok beg any thing of the king,
as he has many ether substantial means of keeping the wolf from
ihe door without depending upon the bounty of the state.


Manu Samhita. 139


With his hair and beards cleanly clipped and_ his
finger nails decently paired, he, pure in body and
spirit, self-controlled and clad in a white garment,
shall study the Vedas, and be mindful of his own
benefit.* (35)

Let him carry a bamboo stick i in his hand, an ewer,
full of water, his Veda, and the holy thread, and wear
a pair of beautiful, golden ear-rings. (36)

He must not gaze on the rising or setting sun,
nor look at the sun in the mid sky, nor during an
eclipse, nor at his reflected image in the water. (37)

He must not leap over the tether of a calf, nor run
while it is raining, nor look at his image in the water.
This is the ‘injunction (of the Sastra). (38)

A heap of earth, a cow, a divine edifice, a Brahmana,
clarified butter, honey, a crossing of roads, and large
forest trees, these he shall circumambulate (frem right
to left.) (39)

Even extremely heated, he must not visit his wife
during the three forbidden days of her periods, nor
share the same bed with her. (40)

Intellect, vigour, strength, eye-sight, and vitality
of a man, who goes unto a woman in her menses, are
impaired. (41)

Of him, who avoids a woman in her menses, the
intellect, vigour, strength, eye-sight and qitality are
_improved. 142)

Let him mot eat,in the company of his wife, nor
see her eating, nor while she is yawning ca or
* sitting (en dishedille) at ease. (43)

—. tt
* The text has 4A’tmahiteshucha, KuLtuxa explains it by
“taking special care of‘his own health with the help of suitable


medicines, if necessary, and by avoiding unwholesome and indigex
table food,”


340 Manu Samhita.


Nor while she is applying collyrium along her
eye-lids, or anointing her uncovered person with oil;
nor while she is giving birth to a child, his wife should
be looked at by the foremost of Brahmanas, seeking
vigour. (44)

Wearing a single cloth, he must not eat his meal,
nor bathe stript of all clothes. He must not pass
urine on the road, or in a pasture-ground, or on the
ashes. (45)

Nor ina ploughed field or in the water, nor in 2
cremation ground, nor on the mountain, nor in a
dilapidated temple, and never on,an ant hill. (46)

Not in a hole dwelt by an animal, neither when
walking, nor staying, nor having arrived at a river bank,
nor on the summit of a mountain, (47)

Facing the wind, fire, a Brahmana, the sun, the
water, or a cow, lét him never evacuate urine or
excreta. (48)

Covering the earth with wood, clods of eagth, leaves,
or. weeds, with covered head and body, silent, and
baving washed his mouth, {let him evacuate urine and
excreta, (49)

In the day he shall evacuate stool and urine with
his face turned towards the north, looking towards the
south he must, do it in the night ; at either juncture
of. the day a™d night he must do it as in the day. (50)

In the night, in the event of the stars,*etc., being
enveloped by ghe cloud, in timeg of peri? to life, let
a Brahman evacuate sto@l and urine, facing any quarter
of the heaven he pleases. (51)

Facing the wind, the fire, the sun, or the moon, or
looking at a cow, or a Brahmana, he, who evacuateg
stool or urine, is robbed of hig intellect. (52)


Manu Samhita. 14}


Let him not cast any unholy thing in the fire, nor
warm his feet over it. Let him not blow a fire with his
mouth, ror look at his naked wife. (53)

Let him not keep a fire underneath his bedstead,
nor leap over a fire. He must not place.a fire at his
foot, nor do any thing that imperils life. (54)

At either meeting of the day and night, let him not
eat any thing, or lie down, or walk (z.e., go any where).
He must not dig lines in the ground, nor himself re-
move the garland of flowers he has worn. (55)

In the water he must not evacuate stool or urine,
ndr cast sputa, poison, blood, or any thing smeared
with any excreted organic matter. (56)

He must not sleep alone in a solitary chamber, nor
rouse up a superior from his sleep. Let him not speak
with a woman inher flow, nor go to a religious cere-
mony without invitation. (57)

He must keep his right arm free, and uncovered
by his upper sheet of apparel, in the chamber of the
sacred fire, in a pasture ground, in the company of
the Brahmanas, at the time of reading the Vedas, and
at the time of eating his (meal). (58)

He must not ‘restrain a cow from drinking water
or suckling her calf, if he sees her in the act; nor
shall he report it to any body. An intelligent person,
who has behéld a rainbow in the sky, mu8t not show
it to others. (59)

Let him “not long reside in an impityg village, nor
in one infected with any dis@ase. He must not go
alone ona long journey, nor stay long on a mountain
summit. (60)

. Let him not reside in a S’udra kingaom, nor in ore
teeming with an. ungodly population. He must not


142 Manu Samhita


live in a country abounding in revilers of the Vedas, not
in that which is infested by vile-caste wien. (61)

He must not eat any thing whose oleaginous
essence has been taken out,* nor over-load his stomacht
with. food; and let him not eat any thing too early
in the morning or evening, nor take any thing in the
night, if he has been over-repleted in the day. (62)

Let him not make any futile attempt,{ nor drink
water with the united palms of his hands; he must
not eat any ithing by placing it on his thighs, nor be.
needlessly inquisitive about any matter. (63)

He must not sing a;tune, or dance a measure, 6r_
play on a musical instrument, prohibited in the science
of music); he must ‘not vauntipgly stroke the muscles
of his upper arms, nor gnash his teeth, nor bray
like an ass out of an exuberance of) emotional
feeling. (64)

He shall never wash his ;feet in a vessel of white

. brass, he must not éat in a cracked plate, nor in a vessel,
repugnant to his sensibility. (65)

A holy thread, an ewer, a coth, a garland of flowers,
an ornament, and shoes, previously used by another, he
must not wear. (66)

He must not ride on a wild (unbroken), hungry,
diseased, beast ef conveyance, nor on one with pierced
hoofs and mftilated tails, or broken horns. (67)

He shall travel by (horses or elephants) that are


* Such as PigfMka, mustard cake, etc.,— Kulluka.
+ Fill half of the stomach with food, its quarter part with
water, and leave a quarter part of its cgvity free for the circulation
of air.—Vishunpuranam. ‘
} The text has Na kurvita Vrithé Cheshtam, tae. he must
not spend his physical energy todo an act which does not bring
him any good either immediate or grospective .


Manu Samhita. 143


fastgoing, quiet, handsome and good coloured animals,
possessed of auspicious features, sparing the mace or the
whip as much as possible. (68)

The heat of the autum sun,* the smoke of a crema-
tion ground, a cracked or fissured seat,’ he must avoid;
he must not tear his hair or finger nails, nor cut his
finger nails with his teeth. (69)

He must not wantonly grind clay or clods of earth
with his hands, nor cut weeds with his finger nails ;
let him not attempt a futile act, nor do any thing which
may create troubles in the future.ft (70)

He, who (wantonly) grinds earth (with his paste
or tcuts his finger nails (with his teeth), as well as
a malicious calumniator, and one, who neglects his
pearsonal cleanliness, seon meet destruction. (71)

He must not Jay any wager (as regards mattérs of
S°4stras or concerns of life), nor go out wearing a
garland of flowers round his neck ;{ in every way. it
is condemnable to ride on a bullock. (72)

Let hfm not enter a (walled) village or a house by
any other entrance than the ‘front: door (or gate); he
shall avoid from a distance the roots of trees in the
night.§ (73)


* The text has Valatapah, some commentators explain it by
“ray of the merning sun.” It really means th® heat of the sun
when it remains in the sign of Kanya (Virgo).

+ This stanza is not 2 mere repetition of stanza 63, there
Cheshta mearf% physicaleexertion ; the present Senza contemplates
all mental acts, such as planning, willjng etc., for the performance
of an act which qes not confer any benefit on its deer.

} He must keep it coffcealed under his upper sheet of gar-
ment, when going out. Kulluko.

§ Hefm ust not think of lying or taking shelter under a tree in
the night.


144, Manu, Samhita.


He must not play a game with dice, nor carry in his
hand the shoes he wears; let him not gradually eat a
morsel of food he has taken in his hand, nor by placing
the plate (of food) on a cushion. 74)

He must not eat any preparation of sesame, or any
thing, containing sesame, after sunset; let him not lie
down entirely naked in the bed, nor go any where
‘without washing his mouth after eating. (75)

He must eat in wet feet, but he must not lie
down in wet feet; he, who eats in wet feet, acquires
longevity. (76)

Let him not go toa place, which is not easily ac-
cessible and which is beyond sight ; he must not look at
the excreta, nor swim across a river with his arms, (77)

A person, wishing to live a léng life, must not stand
on the ashes, on skeletal bones, on bits of broken, baked
earthen vessels, on heaps of cotton-seeds, nor on husks
of paddy. (78:

For a moment even, let him not associate with the
degraded, with Chandélas, with Pukkas’as,* with the
illiterate, with the purse-proud, and with low caste men
(Antyavasdyins), (79)

He must not give any worldly advice, or the leaving
of his food,t or the residue of the fire-offering to a S’udra ;
let him not give: religious instructions to a S’udra, not
grant him (S’udra) sanction to practise a vow. (80)


The Brahmana, who gives religious instructions to
a S'udra, or advises him to practige a religous vow, is
Ba ae gM a


* Ason of a S’udra wom@n bya Brahmana is called a Nishdda,
The son which a Mishdda begets on agSudra woman is called a
Pukeas’., and the son begotten by a Chanddéla on a Nishdde wife
is called an Autyavasayin.


+ He can g.ve the leaving of his food to his S’udra servant.


Wana Samhita. 145


‘drowned with that S’udra in the hell of Asamoritam
(unrestrained darkness). (8%)

Let him ‘not scratch his head with his united hands,
nor touch it without washing his mouth, after ‘eating,
‘nor bathe without immersing his head in the water. (82)

He must not ‘strike any one on the head, nor pull
him by his hair; after bathing, head-anointed, let him
mot touch oil with any other part of his body. (83)

He ‘muSt not ‘accept the gift of a king, who is not
the son of a Kshatriya, nor of him who lives by selling
meat,* nor of an oi--presser,ft nor of a wine-seller,t not
of him who lives upon the income of prostitution. (84)

-An oil-presser is ten times as vile as a butcher
(meat-seller), a wine seller is ten times as vile as an
oil-presser, an enjoyer ®f the earnings of a prostitute is
ten times as vile asa wine-seller, and a non-Kshatriya
king is ten times as vile as the enjoyer of a prostitute’s
earnings. (85!

A non-Kshatriya king is like unto a butcher, who
keeps ten thousand slaughter-houses going; and hence,
to accept the gift of such a king is a deadly sin. (86)

He, who accepts the gift of a greedy king, who
does not tule in conformity with the Regylation, goes
to the twenty one hells in succession, known as, (87)

Tamtsram (hell of darkness), Andha-tédmisram (hell
-of sable darkness), Makd-rauravam (te great howling
hell), Aéla-sutram (the hell of the thread of time)
and Mahd-narakam (the great hell). (88;


* The text has Saunt which qeans a butcher, from Sund,
a place of slaugkéer.

7 Chakram—an oil-press.

£ The text has Divajin, Dhavja means a pennon, a wine-sellem
is called Dhvajiz, because in ancient India a pennon is used to be
hung down on the doer-way of each wine-shop.


J9


146 Manu Samhita.


The Sanjivanam (animating hell), Mahdvichi (hell
of great billows), Zapanam (burning hell), Samprata-
panam (extremely heating hell), Senghétam (the; crush-
ing hell). Sakdékolam (hell with crows and ‘owls)
Kudmalam, Putimrittikam (hell of foul-smelling
soil). (89)

Loha Sanku (hell of iron tongs), Rijisham (frying),
Pantha, Shélmali, Nadi, Asipatravanam (sword-leaied
forest) and Lohadérakam (iron-breaking). (90) :

Erudite, Br&hma-knowing Brahmanas, aware of
these things, do not accept gifts from (such) a king,
for their good in the next world. (91)

He must leave his bed at the Brahma Muhurta*
(forty-eight minutes before the sun-rise), meditate on piety
and worldly interests, ponder ovér the form of physical
labour by which they can be secured, and ascertain
the true import of the Vedas.t (92)

Having left his bed and attended to the calls of
nature, he, well washed, and pure in spirit, shall, with un-
divided attention, mutter the morning Géyatri and the
Géyatris, which are connected with the other Sandhyé
rites as well. (93)


* GOVINDARAJA interprets the term Brahma Muhurtta to
mean the latter end of the last watch of the night.

+ The injunction, ordaining the contemplation of the real
import of the Vedas at that time, is for the fact that, intellect be-
comes fresh ang clear in the morning, which leads to a clear cow
ception of the divinity which hedges round our daily duties in
life. All our acts ape subdrdinated to the will,of the Providence, we
live in God and live for God qply, and all our works are His works
This is the true import of the teachings of the \edas, and there
can be no better moment for thinking &f this‘divine nature of our

wamission in life than the cool and calm hourseof the morning, thus to
begin life, each day, with the thought and conviction of divine
help and contact.


Manu Samhita, 1Az


The Rishis were long-lived because they used to
devote greater lengths of time to their rites of daily
Sandhyé (prayer), and for this they obtained fame,
progeny, celebrity, and the energy of Brahma. (94)

Having performed the rite of Updkarma* on the
day of the full moon in the month of S’rdvana or
Bhddra,he shall devotedly read the Vedas for four
months and a half. (95)

After that period, under the auspices of the asterism
Pushyé (in the month of Paxushka), he shall, out-side
the boundary of his village, do the rite in connection
with the completion of his Vedic study, or do it on the
forenoon of the first.day of the light fortnight in the
month of Méagha.t (96)

Having duly performed the rite of bidding adieu
to the Vedast at the out-skirt of his village, he shall
refrain from studying the Vedas for that day and night,
or for that day and night and the next day only
(Pakshini). 497)

“After that, let him study the Vedas during the
whole of the light fortnight, and the allied branches of
study (Vedangas such as Grammar, Prosody, Astro-
nomy, etc.,) during the entire dark fortnight. (98)

He must not indistinctly read the Vedas, nor read
them near a S’udra; tired with reading the Ved.s
in the, last watch of the night, let him®not sleep
again. (99)


* The rite of Upakarma consists in making’a fire-offering for
ghe worship and glorification of the Achdryaya, preceptor)

+ Those who fave performed the Upakarma on the full moon
day of Bhadra must do this rite in the first day of the light
fortnight in Magha.

< Fire offerings made after finishing the study.of the Vedas
for four months and 2 half.


148. Mane Samhita,


In the aforesaid manner, a Brihmana shall devotedly
read the metrical Mantra portion of. the: Vedés ; and iw
the absence of distressing circumstances, he: shall devo~
tedly read their J/antra and. Bribmana portions: as
well, (100)

Both the reading student andi the-teaching preceptor:
must not read the Vedas under the following circum-
stances of non-study (Anadhydyam). (101)


In the rainy season, when: the- wind. is heard: roaring:
in the night, or when the: wind is seen raising clouds of
dust in the day, (as. they are: the: circumstances, which:
the learned, acquainted with rule of Vediac study,,say as:
occasioning the non-study (of the: Vedas). (toz)


When it rains: with thunder and: lightning, and whene
showers of meteors fall from the skies, are the circums-
tances, said to eccasiom the accidental non-study of the
Vedas (from that time:to the next day). 1 his. is: what.
Manu has ordained. (103)


If these phenomena. (thunder, lightning, etc.,) occur:
at the time of kindling the: oma fire in the evening:
during the rainy season, they should not be regarded. as:
occasions of non-study, but in other seasons:of the:
year the appearance of clouds at the time: of kindling:
the Homagfiré will occasion. non-study. (104)


Earth-quakes, with rumbling sounds in the earth,
and eclipses aé the sun and: moon,*even if fhey happen in
their proper seasons,, should. be regarded as. occasioning
periods of non-study. (105):


If lightning and claps of thunder happen to be seen
and heard at the time of kindling the Yome-fre, the-
period of non-study will ast till the extinction: of the


Manu Samhita. FAG


lwminary,* while it shall extend for the whole day and!
night, if it happens to rain after the occurrence of either-
of the aforesaid phenomena. (106)

For: extremely pious men, thestidy of the: Vedas in.-
a crowded village, or in places, always full of foul smell,
is prohibited.f (107)

Ina village from which a dead body has not been:
removed, by the side of an extremely impious: person,{-
in a crowded place, or in a place. where the crying:
sound is heard, the Ved«s shall never be studied. (108).

In the water, at mid-night,§ at the time of evacuating:
stool and urine, in unwashed mouth after eating, and:
after having eaten a S’raddha. repast, let, him not con-.
template (the Vedas) in his mind: (109)

An erudite Brahmaha, on accepting an invitation, to.
an Ekoddishta S’raddha repast, must not read the Vedas:
for three days (from the date of such acceptance) ; (simi~
larly), he must not read them for three days on the birth
of a king’g son, or on the occasion of a solar or lunar:
eclipse. 1110)

So long as the scent or-residue of safforn-pastes etc.,.
with, which his body has been smeared on the occasion,


* Till the sun sets, if it happens: in,the-day, and till the stars:
disappear in heaven, if it happens in.the night.

} The text has Dharma-naipunya-Kamittah, Kureuma ex-
plains it by: Dharmatis'aydrthinah, those who seek. the highest:
form of virtue.

t The texPhas Vris®ala, Kutuuxa explaingit by: Adharmikah,
impious person, and not a S’udra.

§ The text has Madhyardtre, KULLUKA explains it by. Muhurta-
chatushiaya, 192 minutes in the midnight, and he is supported by,
Gédutama, “ Nis'’dydme Chaturmuhurta, for 192 minutes. in the
mid-night. GovinpaRaja explains it by Duiprahara, at the second
Prahara of the night, a Prahara_being equal to.three hours,


150 Manu Samhita.


of an LZkoddishta S'raddha, remains on his person,
an erudite Brdhmana must not read the Vedas. (111)


Lying, or sitting on his haunches, or with his thighs
uncovered, after eating cooked flesh, or boiled rice
(food) soiled by a birth or death-uncleanness, he must
not read the Vedas. (112)


In a forest, on hearing the sound of flying arrows,*
at either juncture of the day and night, and on the day
of the new or full moon, as well as on the eighth and
fourteenth days of the fortnight, and on the occasions of
Ashtakds, he must not read the Vedas. (113)


The day of the new moon destroys the preceptor,
the fourteenth day of the fortnight kills the disciple
(student), Ashtaka’s and the day ef the full moon lead
to the loss of their (Vedas) memory ; hence, these days
should be avoided in reading the Vedas, (114)


In dust storms, on the appearance of a meteoric light
on the horizon, when the jackals howl, and dogs bark,
or the asses bray, and camels scream, as well as ina’
company, let not a Brahmaua read the Vedas. (315)


Let him not read (the Vedas) at a cremation ground,
at the outskirt of a village, in a pasture ground, wear-
ing the dress he had on when he visited his wife, and
on accepting a S’rdddha gift. (116)

Having agcepted a S’riddha gift, whether animate
(such as a cow, etc.,) or inanimate, he must not read the


* The text has Véna S’avde, several commentators explaim

anana, which ordinarily means an arrow, by Wind Visesha, a kind

harp or lyre, the whole mearing according te them being on,
‘hearing the notes of a harp.


Manu Samhité. 1st


Vedas, inasmuch as the hands of a Brihmana are said
to be like unto his mouth.* (117)

A terror of thieves and blazes breaking out in the
village, as well as all abnormal phenomena of nature
must be understood as occasioning periods of nonstudy
(of the vedas). (118)

The period of non-study lasts for three nights at the ©
close of the rite of Updkarma or Utsarga ;t that in
connection witht an Asataéé or the completion of a
season of the year is one day and night. (119)

Let him not read (the Vedas: on horse-back, nor
while riding on an elephant, or sitting on the bough of
a tree, nor while riding an ass’or a-camel or going in a
boat or a vehicle, nor standing. on a barren, waterless
ground. (120) 3

Nor while wrangling or fighting, nor near a troop
of soldiers, nor in a battle-field, nor immediately after
eating,§ nor while suffering from indigestion, nor after
vomiting, gor after a sour rising. (121)

Nor without taking permission of a guest (Azith:) in
the house, nor while the winds are violently blowing,
nor after bleeding from any part of the body, nor after
a cut from a weapon. (122)


* The text has Panydsyah, lit, hand-mouthgd, the meaning is
that acceptance of a gift by a Brahmana with h® hand is like
unto hig eating the same.


+ For Utsagga and (Ypdkarma, see Note. under V. go of this
chapter.


}{ Ashtakds—The eighth days of the moon’s wane during the
three months commencing fith the day of the full moon in the
month of Agrahayana.

im) Cf, Vasishtha, Vavadérdrapaniriti,” as long as the (washed)
hands remain wet after a meal.


#52 Mann Samhita


He must hot read the Rit, and Vajush (Veduas\'as lovg
ag the chants of the Sema Veda will remain audible,
mor any other Veda, after completing the reauing of
‘one Veda with its (allied) A’vanyakam. (123)

The gods are the presiding deities of the Rig-Veda,
men are those of the Vajush,* and the manes are
those of the Sdéma Veda ; hence, unholy are the chants
‘of the Sdma Veda.t (124)

Knowing these (tutelary gods), the erudite ones first
mutter the Pranava, the Vyahriti and the Géyatri, the
tessence of all the Vedas, and read the Vedas after
that. (125)

A cow, étc.,f a toad, a cat, a‘dog, asnake, a mun
goose or a mouse, happening to pass between (the pre-
ceptor and his disciple) at thé time of teaching the

vedas, the period of non-study shall be deemed as ex-
tending for one day and night. (126)

Theimpurity of the place of Vedaic study,$ and
personal uncleanness of the reader, these {wo are the
permanent causes of nons-tudy ; let a Brahmana carefully
avoid these two occasions of non-study. (127)

A Snétaka Brdhmana must shun the bed of his wife
‘on the day of the full or new moon, as well as on the


* Religious yjtes and sacrifices to be performed by men
and the modesof performing them form’ the main thesis of the
Yujurveda.

+ The Bhagavad Gitd, on the “other hand, gives the highest
precedence to th@Sdman among the four Vedas.

Cf Vedinim Sémavedo$ni, I (supreme deity) am the Sama,
Veda among the Vedas.

t The text has Pas’u, which literally means a beast, KuLLuKa
explains it by Gavddi, hoarned zattle, etc:

§ Such as defilement of the floor of the study with leaving of
rood, ete.


Banu Samhité. 153


‘eighth or fourteenth days of the moon’s wane ‘of
‘increase, even if his wife be in her menstrual period* at
‘the time. (128)

He must not bathe after eating, nor while ill,t nor
at midnight{ nor with a large number of clothes on,§ nor
dn an unknown tank or reservoir of water. (129) _

Let him not wilfully leap over the shadow of his
king or preceptor, nor that of a divine image, nor that
of a cow, nor that of a Sxdé¢aka, nor that of an initiator,
nor that of a brown ‘cow, nor that of an initiated
_person. (130:

‘He must not long tarry at a cross road at midday
‘or midnight, nor after eating meat in a Srdddha repast,
nor at either meeting of the day or night. (131)

Let him not wilfully touch with his feet used cosmatic
pastes, || bathing water, excreted matter, blood, mucous,
sputa and vomited matter (lying on the ground). (132)

Let him not associate with (z.e., serve) his enemies,
with the frjends of his enemies, with impious men, with
thieves and other men’s wives. (133:

Nothing so shortens the life of a man in this world
.as the act of (clandestinely) visiting another’s wife. (134)


* Twelve days from the fourth day of her period.

+ An institutor of a religious ceremony, happening to fall ill
and hence incapable of bathing, must bathe withofit igmersing his.
head in water and by rubbing his body with a wet towel. Favala.

£ Not forbidden in the case of touching a Chandala, or a low-
caste man.

§ Except those forms ‘of cerem@tial ablutions which are
tnade for the aihon of any specific desire, like those performed
ander the auspices of a lunar etlipse,. etc.

| The text has Udvartanam, Kuxiuxa explains it as Abhyanga
maldpakarshana pishtakam, pasted tumeric, Emblic myrobalans
‘etc mixed with oil, with which the body is rubbed for removing
‘its impurities.

20


154 Manu Samhita


A man, however prosperous in life, must not insult
a Kshatriya, a profoundly erudite Brahmana, or a
serpent,: (thinking him to be too weak to retaliate) ;
likewise one must not humiliate the weak and the
defenceless, 1(135)

_ These three, insulted by a man, verily consume
him (like fire); hence, the intelligent one must not
insult them under any circumstances whatsoever.* (136)

Let him not disparage himself on account of his
past failures or misfortunes; let him pursue fortune
even to the last day of his life and never think her
beyond his reach. (137)

He must speak truth, and truths that are pleasant;
he must not speak an unpleasant truth nor a pleasant
lie. This is the eternal virtue.t (138)

Even in cases of ungentle dealings he must say
“that’s good,”} “that’s good,” or he shall say “ good”
to all; he must not engage in a futile quarrel, nor create
a barren enmity, with any person. (139.

In the early dawn or evening, or at midday, he must
not go anywhere, nor with a man of unknown character
and parentage, nor with a low born miscreant.§ .140)

Persons possessing limbs in less or excess, old men,


* The textehas Buddhimana KuiiuKa explains it by
Kalyéna Buddhi which may mean one graciousiy disposed, or
seeking his own good.

+ The text has Na manyet Durlabham. He must not think
that it is too late or impossible for him to acquire a fortune.

iy The text has “ Shadvam” Bhadram iti Bruyat Bhadram
ityeva. KuxiLuKa says that the efirst “Bh&drant (good) meaifs
instances of ungentle behaviour, or unfair treatment

§ The text has Vrishala, ‘Kurtuxa explains it by “S’udra,”
we ho vever find no reason to interpret it in any other sense than
that in which it has been use&jn Stanza 108 of this chapter.


Manu Samhita. 155


illiterate persons, those devoid of personal beauty and
worldly possessions, and men of low birth, he must not
taunt for their (unfortunate) deformities or privations
(141)

Without washing his mouth, after eating, he must
not touch a Bréhmana, a cow or fire with his hand. Im-
pure, when in health, he must not gaze upon the lumin-
aries (2. e. stars etc.,) in the heaven. (142)

Happening to touch a cow, etc., while he is in an
impure conditon, he must sip water and touch the ex-
ternal orifices of his organs (such as the nose, ears, etc.)
and his umbilicus with water. (143)

Not otherwise ill or indisposed, he must not wantonly
finger the external ducts of his organs (such as
the nostrils, etc.,) nor handle the private hairs of his
body. All these should be avoided. (144)

Always he must be of aupicious conduct ;* pure in
body and spirit and self-controlled, let him unremit-
tingly muttgr the sacred Mantras and make the fire-
offerings. (145)

Calamitiest befall not those who constantly be of
auspicious conduct, nourish a clean spirit in a clean
body, constantly mutter the sacred Mantras,and do the
fire-offerings. (146)

Let him diligently study the Vedas,t avhenever he
finds an opportunity; that is the highest duty. of a


* The text has Mangalachdra Kuxtvuxa explains it by Gora-
chanddi dharanam,. According to hin, putting of totems of
pasted Gorochana’ (gall stores of oxes) on the forehead; etc: is also
in¢luded within Manghlachéra.¢

+ Vinipdta, Kutiuxs explains it by physical’ disturbances
(such as earthquakes, diseas&, or breavements

t The text has Vedam Kuruuxa explains it by “ the Vyahritis
Pranava,. ete.


136 Manu Samhtta.


Brihmana, all other being his minor or accessory”
duties. (147)

Constant study of the Vedas, cleanlinessof the body
and mind, contemplation, austerities (7apas) and:
compassion towards all creatures are’ what bring to a
man the remembrances of his past existences (/éti-
smara, (148)

Remembrances of his past births make him apathetic:
to the world and its concerns, and lead; him to attain:
the Supreme Brahma ; and: by existing in this supreme:
self (Brahma)* he enjoys infinite and eternal’ happiness:
(beatitudes). | 149)

On the day of the full or new moorg.he must make:
the fire-offerings known as the Sdavitrior Santi
flomas, and. worship the manes with Sréddha-offerings:
on: the days of Ashktakds and Anvashtakas. (150)

The stool and urine should be voided at a distance:
from the fire chamber; at a distance from the fire:
chamber should be cast the washings of feet,.Jeavings of
food, and the semen. (151)

' Voiding stool, performance of toilet, bathing, clean—
ing the teeth, applying colyrrium along the eye-lids:
and worshipping the deities must be performed before:
sun-rise at the close of the night. (152):

On the: day of the Parva (such as the day of the:


Brahmabhyasena is the term. that occurs in the text.
Kutiuxas explains Brahma by “Vega”. Thig is however’
another instance of the atgempt to further Veda at: any costs and:
even in cases where the terms admit of another’ kind of interpre- |
tation. Even, men lisé S’ankara, RAmAnuja,*Savara Svami, and.
Kumarila an ‘not free from the fault of advocating their respec-
tive cults even at the cost of distorting the true meaning of the:
text. we, however, find no reason. to-alter our-dicision as regards.
the true meaning of the stanzas


Manu Samhita. 157


full or new moon), he must go to pay respect to a
divine image, to a protecting king, and to his parents:
and superiors. (153)

He must welcome the elders (on their arrival to:
his house), give them eushions to sit upon with his owm
hands, sit before them with the palms of his hands:
meekly united together, and follow them when they
shall go out. (154)

Unremittingly he must observe the rules of good
conduct, commended in the Vedas and Smritis as:
proper to the social order he belongs to, as the-fountaim’
source of all virtues. (155) 7

Through (observing: good conduct one acquires %
long life, through conduct one: acquires a desirable:
progeny ; through good conduct one acquires a decay-
less wealth, and good conduct kills: all the inauspicious:
(bodily) traits of a person.* (156)

A man of misconduct is condemned ‘in the world,
suffers perpetual misery, is afflicted with disease, and
dies a premature death. (157)

Even devoid of all auspicious traits, a man of good
conduct, believing (in God) and envying no one, is:
enabled to live for a hundred years. (158)

Works, which make one dependent on others, he
must studiously avoid ; works, which are enfirely under
his own control, he must diligently pursue. (159)

Liberty (in all respects) is happiness and depen-
dence, (in il matté¢:) is misery. Tise know to be:
the general definions of happings and misery. (160)

A work, by doing which the inner man is satisfied,
do by all means, avoid the contrary. (161)


V.B.—For Sakakolam (crows and owls) read Sakdkolam (helt
of rayens.)—p. 145.


158: Manu Samhita.


An Achaéryaya, an expounder of the Vedas, one’s ow
parents or superiors, Brahmanas, cows, and 7apasvins
fasceties) one must not any wise hurt or injure.”(162):

Let him avoid atheism, reviling the gods and the
Vedas, arrogance, vanity, anger, and harshness. (163)

Let him mot raise a club to any body, nor strike
any body with a club, excepting his son and disciple
for the purposes of discipline. 1164).

With a desire to kill, if a twice borm one raises 2
club to.a Brahmana, he shall livé fora century in the
hell of extreme darkness (4ndha Témisram). (165)

For wilfully striking a Brd&hmana, out of anger,
even with a weed, the striker shall be reborn for
twenty one existences in vile wombs. ‘166)


He, who draws blood out the body of a non-
fighting Bradhmana, suffers extreme misery for that
piece of his folly in the next world. (167)


For as many number of years the: assaulter is eaten
by dogs and jackals in the hell as the number of
particles of dust on the ground which are soaked by
the (spilt) blood of the Brahmana. (168)

Hence the erudite one shall not raise his suvn wa
Brahmana, nor strike him (even with a weed, nor draw
blood from his person (by assulting). (169)

An impious man, he whose wealth is ill-gotten, he
who is constantly envious of others, any of these men
can not enjoy haffpiness in this worRE (170)

Seeing the reverses of the dishonest and. the un-
godly, let him not, in moments of scafcity or mone-
tary wants, turn his thoughts to dishonest gain. (171)


Like seeds sown in the earth, iniquities do not
take fruit, the same day;-but fully evolved out it


Manu Samhita. 159


course of time, they cut the root (é. e. completely des
troy) their perpetrators. (172)

The iniquities of a sinner will bear fruit it his sons or
grand-sons even if they fail to be fruitful in his own
self. They can never be fruitless. (173)

By iniquity (dishonesty) a man may thrive, may see
many a good in life, may conquer his enemies, but
ultimately iniquity is sure to completely overwhelm
and destroy him. (174:

Let him, with his tongue, arm, and belly properly
controlled, constantly devote himself to truth, piety
good conduct and purity, and govern his disciples ac
cording to the rules of the S’dstra, (175)


Let him avoid mtoney, and desires which are bereft
of virtue, let him not practise a virtue by practising
which he incurs the enmity of others, or which brings
him trouble in the future. (176)


He must avoid all fickleness of hands, feet, eyes,
and speech, do what is straight and honest, and never
think of doing any hostility to any body. (177)

In virtues of conflicting authority, let him take
to the pathiadopted by his fathers and grand-fathers ;
by adopting that path, he will not incur enmity of any
man. (178)

He must not quarrel with his priests, Rittvigs (/.e.,
celebrants of sacrifices on his behalf), preceptors and
maternal uficles, A%zthkt guests, depéhdants, servants,
infants, ‘old men, sick folks, physicians, \cognates,
matriage-relations and relations. (179)


Nor with his parents, sisters, daughters-in-law, sons’
wives, and brothers, and slaves. (180)


By avoiding quarrels with these, a house-holder may


160 Manu Samhita.


‘be exonerated of all sin; by conquering these, a house
holder can conquer all these worlds. (181) ;


A (propitiated) preceptor leades him to (//¢. is the
master of) the region of Brahma, a satisfied father
leads him to the region of Prayépati; a well-pleased
Atitht guest leads him to the region of Indra, anda
satisfied Ai¢tv‘k leads him to the region of gods. (182)


His well-pleased daughters (and daughters-in-law)
yead him to the region of the Apsarasas, his friends
tead him.to the region of the Vis’vedevas, his brothers-
in-law lead him to the region of Varuna and the
influences of his mother and maternal uncles are upon
the earth. (183)

Satisfied old men, infants, weaklings, and sick folks
lead him to the region of the firmament, he shall res
pect his eldest brother as his own father, and consider
his wife and children as parts and parcels of his own
self. (184)


He shall look upon his slaves as his own shadow
and his daughter as the respectacle of highest affec-
tion; worried by them, he must patiently bear with
such a worry. (185)

Even capable of accepting a gift, he must give up
all attachment «to gift-taking ; gift-taking speedily
extinguishes the energy of the supreme self which is
in a Brdhmana. (186)

Ignorant of fhe regylations of the Séstra as re-
gards the taking of gift articles,a (Brahmana), over
whelmed with hunger, must notetake a gfft. (187)

Gifts of gold, horses, Jands, cows, food grains,
clothes and sesame seeds, made to an ignorant Brdhmana,
are consumed, like a wood cast in the fire. (188)


Manu Samhita. 16%


The life-duration of an ignorant Brdhmaya suffers,
¥f he accepts a gift of gold or food grains; by accep~
ting the gift ofa land ora cow he suffers in health;
for accepting the gift of a horse he is deprived
of his sight, for accepting the gift of a cloth his
skin suffers, for accepting the gift of clarified butter
his energy, and for accepting sesame, his progeny are
consumed. (189)

A Brihmana, whois devoid of all ascetic virtues,
is unread in the Vedas and very fond of gift-taking, if
he takes ta gift, is drowned with its donor, ¢ike a stone
taft with its rider. (190)

Hence, let an erudite (Srahmana) be afraid of ac-
cepting a gift from all and sundry; even by taking
a small gift, a Brahrfana is drowned like a cow in
the mire. (191)

A virtuous man must not make even an insignificant
gift to a Brahmana, who is cat-natured (selfish), or carries
a cloak of religion (Vazavraéa,) or is not read in the
Vedas. (192)


By giving a well-gotten wealth to any of these
three kinds of Brahmanas, both the donor and
the receiver of the gift come to grief in the next
world. (193)


Like a man, attempting to cross (a giver) with the
aid of a stone raft, both the ignorant donor afid acceptor
of a gift are drowned. (194)

He who? thougl? extremely covétous of wealth,
carries a cloak of religion, is deckitful (lit, dissimulating),
arrogant, and eitvious, and can not bear the praise of
others, and hence tries to snub down all men, is called
cat-natured ( Vidéla-vrataka). z.@. He is like unto a
cat, who assumes meekness only to decoy his prey out

au


162 Manu Samhita.


of his safe-hold and then pounces upon it with all the
native fury of his soul.) (195)

With eyes cast down, to conceal his ferocious pur-
pose, he, who to gain his own ends, roams about in
deceit and falsehood, like a crane, is called Vaka-vratt
(crane-natured.) (196)

Those Brahmanas, who are cat-natured or crane-
natured, fall into the hell of extreme darkness through
the effects of their (treacherous deeds). (197)

After cqmmitting a crime, let him not practise the
expiatory penance in the pretext of practising a virtue,
for the purpose of duping females and S’udras. (198)

A vow or a penance practised in the way of a pretext
goes to the monsters; those Bréhmanas, (who are cat-
natured or crane-natured), are condemned by the
Brahma-Vadins. (199)

A person, who tries to earn a livelihood by falsely
wearing the badges or marks of an order he does not
belong to, robs all ‘the sin of that order, antl is reborn
in the womb of beasts. (200)

Let him not bathe in another’s tank (not endowed
for the public use) ; by so bathing, he is partly associated
with the sin of its owner. (201)


He must not use without its owner’s permission a
vehicle, a dedj a cushion, a well, or a tank, belonging to
another; by so doing, he becoines associated with a
-quarter part of, its owner’s sin. (202)

Let him always bathe in rivers, in natural reservoirs
of water, such as tanks, ponds, Gartas (lakes less thar
eight miles in length) and fountains. (203)


Let him constantly practise* self&control and not
vows only ; he, who practises vows only, but no eelf-
control, meets his fall. (204)


Manu Samhitd. 163


Let not a Brdhmava eat anything in a religious
sacrifice wherin fire offerings have been performed by a
Brdéhmana, ignorant of the Vedas, or who serves as a
village priest, or by a woman or eunuch. (205)

A religious sacrifice in which such persons perform
the fire-offerings tends to destroy the prosperity of the
Brdhmanas, and is not liked by the gods; hence, it
should be avoided. (206)

Let him not eat the food offered by an insane,
angry, or diseased person, nor that containing hair and
flies, nor that which has been wilfully touched by one
with his feet. (207)

Nor the food looked at by a feeticide, nor that
touched by a ,;woman in her menses or biked at by
a bird, nor that touchéd by a dog. (208)

Nor that smelled by a cow, nor that which has been
offered to the hungry and the indigent by proclamation,
nor (that of a monastery, nor that offered by a courte-
san, nor that condemned by the wise. (209)

Nor that of a gold-stealer, nor that of one who
lives by singing, nor that of a Zakshana, nor that of
an usurer, nor of one initiated in a sacrifice (without
performing the Agni Somiya yajna), norjthat of a
miser, nor of a chained prisoner. (210)

Nor that of an accursed person, por that of.a
eunuch, nor that of a corrupt woman, nor“that of an
arrogant person, nor the food, containing sweet, that has
acquired are acid taste, nor -fhat which is stale or
has been prepared over night,* nor that which is the
leaving of a S’adra’s foad. (211)

Nor that of a physician, nor that of a hunter, nor
that of a cruel person, nor that of one who eats leaving,
nér that of one engaged in dreadful acts, nor


164 Manu Samhita


that of a newly parturient woman, nor of those
Brdhmanas who continue eating, after a diner in their
row has finished eating and washed his mouth
(Parjachanta), (212)

Nor what has been slightingly offered, nor the
flesh which has not been formally offered to the deities,
nor the food of an unprotected woman, nor of an
enemy, nor that of a city, nor that of the degraded,
nor that which has been sneezed over. (213)

Nor that of a scandal-monger, nor that of one who
bears false witness, nor that of one who sells the
merits of religious sacrifices for money, nor that of
a professional actor, nor that of a tailor, nor that of
an ungrateful person. (214)

Nor that of a black smith, nor that of a Nishkdda,
nor that of a stage-manager, nor that of a gold smith,
nor that of one who manufactures bamboo articles,
nor that of one who sells weapons. (215)


Nor that of a keeper of dogs, nor that of a wine-
seller, nor that of a dyer of clothes, nor that of a
washerman, nor that of a cruel person, nor that of
one whose wife’s paramour lives disguisedly in his
heuse. (216) .


Nor that of one who connives at the misconduct
of his wife, por%hat of an extremely oxorious person,
nor that of one who is affected by a death uncleanness,
nor that which fails ta give satisfaction. (217)


Food, given by a king, robs its (partaker) of his
spirit and energy, that given by a Sipdra robs the
Bréhma energy (of its partakér) ; ; food given by a
gold smith impairs the vitality, and that offered by a
cobbler (leather-seller), destroys the good name (of their
partakers). (218)


Manu Samhita. 165


The food of an artisan kills the progeny, that of a
dyer kills strength ; the food of a hotel, or ofalcourtesan
leads to the fall of its partaker from the heaven (he
has acquired by his acts). (219)

The food, given by a physician, is like unto pus; the
food given by a corrupt woman is like unto semen,
the food given by a usurer is like unto excreta, and the
food given by a weapon-seller is like unto mucous, (220)


The food, offered by those whose food is unfit to
be taken as mentioned above, should be deemed as
respectively like unto their skin, hair and skeletal
bones. This is what the learned have said, (221)


Having unwillingly partaken of the food of any
of these persons, one *must fast for three ‘nights.
Having knowingly eaten (food of any of these), he
must practise a Chéndrayanam penance. The same
is the penance for eating excreta. (222)


An erudite Brdhmana must not eat'the cooked
food of a S’udra, devoid of Srdddhas; but he may
take his uncooked food, enough to last him for a single
night. (223)

One is a Veda-knowing miser ; and another, a usurer,
though charitable ; deciding about these two persons,
the gods came to the conclusion thatethg food of
these two is equally (defiling). (224)


But Brahma came unto the gadses d said, “do not
consider the “food of these twogvirtually possessed of
gontrary virtues, as of like nature; the food of the
charitable usurer is purified by kindness, but the food,
offered by a miserly Veda-knowing Brahmana, is/offered
with reluctance, and, hence it is defiled. (225)


Let him with proper feelings unremittingly de


166 Manu Samhita.


the /shta and Purta works.* These works, done with
the honest money, bear decayless fruits.t (226)

On obtaining a fit recipient of gift, let him
do the /shta and Purta works with the greatest self-
complacence and to the best of his means. (227)

Let him practise small gift-makings without any
feeling of anger or vexation; by them he shall some
day obtain a gift-taker who will be able to succour
him in every way. (228)

‘A giver of water enjoys (lit acquiresy satisfaction,
a food-giver enjoys decayless felicity ; a giver of sesame
seeds obtains a desirable progeny, and a giver of lamps
(lights) obtains a commendable sight.{ (229)

A gifter of land acquires a landed property, a gold
gifter obtains gold; A gifter of houses obtains splend-
ed. buildings, a giver of silver is blessed with personal
beauty. (230)

A giver of clothes attain to the region of the moon-
god, a giver of horses ascends to the region of As’vis;
a giver of bullocks enjoys prosperity, a Coweet goes.
to the region of the sun. (231)

A giver of a bed or cushion obtains (a good and
handsome) wife ; a giver of refuge acquires an unbounded
wealth; a giver of paddy enjoys eternal felicity, and

a giver of the Vedas attains the supreme Brahma. (232)

Of all *vifts, whether they be of water, cowl, cloth,
sesame, gold or clarified butter, a gift of the Vedas
stands premineysI¥ th&most merigorious. (233) __


* Religious sacrifices,

+ Endowment of wells, tanks qf water, gardens, etc., for thé?
publicjweal are called Purta Kaéryayas.

{ The text has Dipadas'’chakshuruttamam, which may alao
mean that a gifter of lights is blessed, with a stipersensous vision
in his next existence.


Manu Samhita. 167.


A gift, which one makes out of a certain miotive*
in this life, shall be returned to him in his next life,
honoured with the fulfilment of that motive. (234)

He, who, being duly honoured, makes the gift, as
well as he, who, being duly honoured, accepts the gift,
both of them go to heaven; if otherwise, they go to_
hell. (235)

He must not wonder at, nor be proud of the powers
(he has acquired by dint of Yoga and austerities, nor speak
untruth on celebrating a religious sacrifice ; even highly

' oppressed by him, let him not speak ill of a Bréhmana,
nor brag of the gifts he has made. (236)

One’s sacrifice is decayed by falsehood ; (one’s merit
of) Yoga and penitential austerities, by (his: wonder
(at the success, achieved). Duration of life is shortend
by calumniating a Brahmana ; and one’s merit of gift-
making, by (his) vaunting of it. (237)

Little by little let him store up virtues, as white ants
build up @n ant-hill, for his benefit in the next world,
without creating hardship on any creature. (238)

In the next world, neither his wife ‘and children,
nor his parents and relations will be of anyvavail;
it is virtue alone that stands by him (in the next
world). (229)

Alone a creature comes into being, fone does he
meet his death; alone he enjoys the merits of his good
deeds, and the consequence of Jiewmisdeeds does he
suffer alone, (240)

Leaving behind him his dead body, like a log of
Wood, or a clod éf earth, on the?ground, his friends and

* The text has VenaeYena tu bhavena (7.¢., out of that, that
motive), KULLUKA explains it by the motive out of which a


gift fs made in this life, either for the enjoyment of celestial bliss,
or self-emancipation, etc.


168 Manu Samhita,


relations go away turning their backs on it ; it is virtue
alone that}follows him (in the darkness of death). (241)

Hence, inorder to have virtue as his ally, let him
little by little store up virtue} with the help of virtue
a man sails across the shoreless darkness. (242)

The effulgent, ethereal body of a man of dominant
virtue, who has extinguished his sin by practising peni-
tential austerities, Virtue herself will swiftly carry up to
the other world, after death. (243)

For the elevation of his own family, let him create
relationships with nobler families, and avoid those
that are mean and humble. (244)

By creating relationships with families that are pro-
gressively nobler and nobler and by avoiding connec-
tions with low ones, a Brahmana obtains elevation ;
by, doing the contrary, he becomes (degraded as) a
S'udra. (245)

A thorough worker (in the line of good deeds), mild,
self-controlled, and bereft of envy, he who does not
associate with the miscreants, conquers by his gifts and
and self-control. (246)

Fuel, water, edible roots, offered without solicita-
tion,fas well as honey and refuge (protection), may be
accepted from all.* (247)

Gifts, offered without solicitation, and to which ho
previous feference has been in any way made, may be
received even from the miscreants. this is what Brah-
mé has acknowedge®. (248)

His manes do né@t eat his oblations, nor the fire
convey his oblations to the Jeities, who insult (refuse)
to accept) these gifts. (249)


- Excepting ‘corrupt women, eunuchs, etc,, as laid down by
Yajnavaikya—Kulluka.


Manu Samhita. 169


Gifts of beds, houses, Azws’a grass, scents, water,
flowers, gems, milk-curd, fried rice, fish, milk, flesh,
and s’akas, these, if offered without solicitation, must
not be refused. (250)

For supporting his parents, preceptors, guests,
servants, wife, and family, as well as for the purposes
of worshipping the deities, he can accept gifts from! any
person whatsoever, but not for anywise benefiting his
own self. (251)

On the death of one’s parents, or in the event of
his living separate from them, even when they are
alive, he must always accept gifts from honest persons
for his subsistence. (252)

Among S'’udras, a Brdhmana may partake of the
cooked rice of one who cultivates his fields, or of one
who is an ancient friend of his family,* or of one who
keeps his cows, or of his slave or barber, as well as
of him who has surrendered himself to his protec-
tion, (253)

Let him give out to a proper person his true nature,
the kind of work he intends doing, and the extent'of.
service he is capable of rendering him, (254)

He, who gives himself out to honest persons as
something different from what he really is, is called the
worst of miscreants; truly he isa thief, inasmuch a
he dissimulates his real self. (255)

All things are inherent in the meanings of (spoken)
words, all thtngs are founded fn speech, all things
emanate from speech (words) } he, who speaks false-
food, is said te be a guniversal thief (stealer of.all
things.) (256)


» The text has Kulamitram, i.e, the descendant of a S’udra-
family living in amity with that of his own from a long time,
22


170 Manu Samhita.


Having duly discharged the debts to the great sagés,
to the manes and deities, and entrusted all things to his
son, let him live unattached (indifferent) to all things
of the world. (257)

Seated in a solitary place, let him always ponder
over the good of his Self; by contemplating in a
solitary place, he will obtain the supreme bliss. (258)

Thus the eternal duties of a Brihmana house-holder,
as well as the duties of the order of Sxataka, which
augment the quality of Sa¢tva in men, have been
formulated, (259)

A Veda-Knowing Brahmana, who maintains him-
self by means, laid down in the S’astra, is absolved of
all sin and is glorified in the region of Brahma. (260)


CHAPTER V.


Tuus having heard the duties of a Sné¢aka* as duly
promulgated before, the Rishis asked the fire-origined
Bt rigu as follows, (1)

Brdhmanas who are well read in the Vedas and
thus duly discharge the duties of their order, how
can Death assail them, O lord, (before the appointed
Nhwig2} ? (2)

He, the “rue-sould Bhrigu, the son of Manu, said
to the great sages, hear for what fault doth Death des-
troy the Brahm Pt

* Sndtaka—A Brahmana, who after the completion of the
vow of a religious student, has performed the ce®emonial ablution.

+ The text has Azala-prabhavam, i.e, the fire-origined one.
Cf. S’ruti.—His first seed, which lay effulgent, was transformed
into the primival sun (Aditya), and its residue took embodiment
in Bhrigu,


Manu Samhita, W71


Through non-study of the Vedas, through non-
observance of the rules of conduct, through idleness, and
through partaking of unwholesome food, Death destroys


the Braéhmanas. (4)
The garlic, turnip, onion, and mush-room are the


three (vegetables), unfit to be eaten by Brdhmanas, (inas
much as) they are originated from impurities (unclean
things.* (5)

Hard, red (gummy) exudations of trees, exudations
(obtained by making) incisions in trees,t the She/x
(fruit) and the milk of a newly parturient cowt should
be carefully avoided. (6) .

Krisaras,t Samyévas§ and cakes, not offered to the
deities, unconsecrated meat, and offerings not offered to
the deities, and clarifie@butter before being used in a
fire-offering. (7)

The milk of a newly parturient cow within ten days '
of her parturition, the milk of a she-camel, or that of a
female animal with unbifurcated hoofs,|] the milk of an


Cf. Inasmuch as they are cultivated with manure prepared
from excreta, Vidjdtani according to Ydjnavalkya.

Cf. Atho Khalu Ya Eva Lohito, yo vé Bras’chandnnir-
yasati tasya ndsya Kdmamanyasyeti—Now, the red exudations
of a tree, as well as that which exudes from a cut in the tree
should not be taken, exudations of trees other than these should
be taken.—Tatttireya S’ruti,

} The milk of a newly parturient cow, before The tenth day
of her parturition, is formed into hard lumps when cooked.
—Kulluka.

} Krisara is a kind of preparatin of rice and sesame (Fila

eTandula-samparkaét Krisara So’ bhidiyate —Chhandogya-paris ish-
tam.

§ Samya’va—a cooked compound of clarified butter, treacle,
milk, and wheat-flour.

4| The text has Ekas’apha, such as a mare, etc.


292 Manu Samhita.


ewe, or of a cow in her heat,* or that of a cow without
her calf. (8)

The milk of all wild female beasts except that of a
she-buffalo, the milk of a woman, and all naturally
sweet articles (Suétas) that have acquired an acid taste
(in the course of time). (9)

Of Swktas, milk curd and articles prepared from
curdled milk,f as well as Suétas prepared with the addi-
tion of auspicious fruits, flowers, edible roots, etc., may
be eaten. (10)

The flesh of all kinds of carnivorous birds, the flesh
of a village fowl, the flesh of an unconsecrated{
animal with unbifurcated hoofs, and the flesh of a
Tittibha bird must not be eaten (lit, avoided’. (1)

(Similarly,. the flesh of aeXalavinka, of a diving”
swan, of a swan, of a Chakravika, of a domestic fowl,
of a crane, of a Rajjuvalé, of a Dyatuha, of a S’uka
and of aS’érika. (12)

(And) Pratudas, ‘web-footed birds, Koyashtis,’
Vishikiras, diving fish-catchers, butchers méat and dry
meat must be avoided. (13) ;


* The text has Sandiniz, which means a cow that seeks a bull.
KuxLiuKa forbids the use of Sandizi-milk, on the ground that
it is ncthing but transformed menstrual blood.

+ The text has Dadhisambhavdén, ie. articles prepared from
milk curd sug as, Whey, butter, etc. .

£ The text has Anirvdishtéms’chatkas'aphan, te, the flesh of
animals with unbifur ops, not slayghtered Qn the occasion
of areligious sacrifice. Th Horse-sacrifice of the Rig or the

Yajur Veda is capable of. bearing another interpretation thang
what is usually put upon it. A hotse-sacrifite, or the use of

horse-flesh as an article of fare ought to have been repugnant to

the finer sensibilities of the ancient Aryans, and points to the

Scythian origin of the practice or ceremony.


Manu Samhita. 173


Nor a crane, heron, jackdaw, Khanjaritaka, nor,
fish-eating animals, swine that eat excreta, and all
species of fish. (14)

He, who eats the flesh of an animal, is called the
eater of that animal; he who eats fish eats the flesh of
all animals, hence let him forswear eating fish. (15)

Pathina, Rohita, Rdjiba, and Sakula fish, and all
large-scaled fish may be eaten, but all those should
be first offered to the gods and manes_ before
being eaten. (16)

He must not eat the flesh of animals that move-
about alone (like a snake), nor of those beasts and birds
whose name and nature are not known, nor of those
whose flesh is not forbidden, nor. of those which are
possessed of five nails. (17)


o


An attempt to ascertain the true meaning of the term As’va
medha and the nature of the ceremony which, the Vedadc Rishis
used to celebrate under that denomination, may not be out of the
sphere of a commentator of the Manu Samhitdé, as it will help us
to some extent in fixing the date of its recension by Bhrigu,


or in other words, of the “Institutes of Manu” as we -have it
at present.


The term As’va-medha according to its usual acceptation
means a horse-sacrifice, a sacrifice in which a horse is slaughtered
as an offering to the sun-god. By a fiction of Vediac cerem
the horse is supposed to absorb in his self she pigints and pfayers
of the celebrants and is sent to the sun-god as an atonement for
their sin. Even before his immolation and at the time he is being
brought to tee sacrifictal ground, Y ibiogd a bleating multi--
coloured goat, the priests sing a hYmn the first part of which
ends with “ may this vigorous horse bring us exemption from
wickedness,” [Rig-Veda Renee IL S. VI (CLRIL)]. According
(to the Vajush XXIV. 58) and the Kéatydyana S’utra (98 etc.), a
black goat, a victim sacred to Agni, is tied to the front of the
horse at the sacrificial post, and is first immolated.


174 Manu Samhita


The Porcupine, Shalyaka, lizard, (Godha), rhinoceros
tortoise, and hare, may be eaten among the five-nailed
animals; of animals possessed of only one pair of teeth,
the flesh of a camel-may be eaten (on the oceasion of
a religious sacrifice. (18)


According to the Kédtydéyana, Silva twenty-one posts of
various kinds of wood, each twenty-one feet long, are to be set
up to which the different animals are to be fastened, amounting
to three hundred and forty-nine, besides two hundred and sixty
wild animals, making altogether six hundred and nine. The text
in the Rigveda does not warrant such a multiplication of posts
and seems to say that a single post is intended. We wish to
conclude this paragarph with the observation that, the horse, the
victim in the sacrifice, must be possessed of thirtyfour ribs,
according to the text of the Rigveda, whic& run as Chatustrins’ah
Vajinu deva-bandhoryamkrivas’vasya suvadhitih sameti, may the
axe fully penetrate the thirtyfour ribs whlch lie on both sides of
the swift goer, the beloved of the gods. (Rigveda, II Ashtaka,
162 Sukta 13 Rk.)

- Such isthe interpretation of the sian and of Yaska,
Sayana, a and Mahidhara. Wilson says that, “although some of the
express! Ons are obscure, and perhaps contradictory, yet itis un-
deniahle that the hymn describes the actual sacrifice of a horse.”

. Another section of Sanskrit scholars, who hold that the Sarga of
to Weuiar Lishis is Mongolid of our modern geography and
tue Lrukmarshi Desa was a country which was situated to the
uteetagf modern Siberia along the Artic Sea, which was then
habitable, finds @n Rik II of this Sukta, the first domestication
of the horse which was first found in Tartary (the Sarga of the
Vedas) and its ee of man. ‘‘ Yagienadattam
Trita enamayunagindram pam prathamo adhya-tishthat.
Gandharvo asya ras'anamagribhuat surddas'vam Vasabe
nirtishthat.

These two sets of opinion practically exhaust all in favour
of holding the actual sacrifice of a horse; or interprating the
term, A’sva in the usually acceptation of the term, (horse).


Manu Samhita. 175


By wilfully eating a mushroom, a domestic -pig, a
parlic, a domestic cock, an onion, or a turnip, a twice-
born one becomes degraded (z.¢. loses the privileges of,
his order. (19)

‘ fe oP ks

Agni (the name of a Vediac patriarch) gave it (horse) to
Vayu, who yoked it to the chariot, and Indra (the king of Sarga)
tode first int this chariot. Gandharva (Soma) took the reins of
this horse in his hands, and O ye Vasus, you originated him
from the sun (Rik. If. Suskta 162. Ashtaka II).


We, on the other hand, beg to differ from the views of these
illustrious glossits and commentators, and make bold to say that,
the actual immolation of a horse was never contemplated by the
inspired singers of these Rs. All shades of religious opinion in
India and all forms of creed, whether Paurdnik, TAntrika, or
pure Vedéntik, trace théir origin and draw their inspirations from
the Mantras of the Vedas and Brahmanas. Even the Vémdcharin
Tantriks find the essential tenets of their cult presaged in the
musings of Agastya and Lopamudra (A I. Sukta 172). and in the
concluding chapter of the Brihad Aranyakam (Adhoyajna. Br. 4
Ch. 6 ; and manifestly the doctrines of the Vedanta ‘and Sankhya
philosophies are found in embryo in the Sukta 164 of the second
Ashtaka of the Rikveda. These things show thatthe Riks may
admit of different or contrary interpretations in many instances,
and it may be that contrary interpretations have been made at
different times in order to extort sarictions out of them for some
new customs or newer forms of worship or sacrifice, which the
increased contact of our forefathers with the neighbouring nati
and principalities added to the national code ofrituals un
accretions,

Thus we find the Anukramanikd enjoys that, the reputable
Purusha Sifktam, the muttering fee coorsing to the later-
day Dharmas'astras, forms the afonement for many a deadly sin,
to be read out om the occasion of a human sacrifice. We fail to
detect why should it have been so enjoned, when it is capable of
bearing a truly grand meaning, a meaning which at once illuci-
Gates the loftiest aspirations of the Upanishads, and more so, when
we consider that the whole spirit of the Vedaie mantras is


176 Manu Samhita.


Having unintentionally eaten these six things, (as
are mentioned in the preceding stanza), he shall practise
a Krichcha Sintapanam penance (which lasts for seven
days) or a Yati-chéndrdiyanam, For eating any thing
other than the six preceding ones (such red gummy
exudations of trees, etc), he shall fast fora day and
night. (20)


absolutely antagonistic to such cruel and barbarous rites. It
sounds totally absurd when weconsider that the Veda was a song of
the gladness of life, sung by men with whom life was a joy, a blessing
of.God to be thankful for, and who would never have denied that
gladness to the humblest of creatures that trails on earth. With
them it was a high preoragative of man to witness the glorious
birth of each song-girdled Day on verdant fields and golden
hill-tops, and such atrocities need mugt have been entirely
foreign to their simple understanding when we consider that an
act of kindness done to a peafowl has been made use of in the
Vedas as a mechanism of setting the sympathy of the Universal
Heart in favour of its doer, Vediac civilisation was singularly
conservative of life and its offerings were absolutely blood-less.


Now let us see in which connection does these two Richas
occur so that, in accordance with the recognised rules of inter-
pretation ( Tatrayukte) such ag inference (Uh4), concord (etc), we
will beable to determine the disguised meaning ofa term, if it bears
any such disgnise. The preceding Suktam (CLXI, A. II) is in
housur of the Ribhus, the solar rays, the personified leaders of
Srmess, who reside in the umnapprehensible sun (Aguhyasya -
A'ditya-ya)], for t!® purpose of fertilising the earth. Indeed, the
ienth verse of this Suktam contains a reference, according to
Sdyana’s interpretation, Hes molation @f the victem and the
quartering of its body, but thi too may be explained in a
different way; S’rondmekam Udakam may as well mean yellow
coloured water as blood (Rudhiram), which is Sayana’ $S explana-
tion. The succeeding Suktam is the 165, the same one which
is called the parent of Vedantism and which will help us much
in our attempt at explaining the so called Horse-Sacrifice Riks.


Manu Sambvita. 47


“Even a cursory acquaintance ‘with ‘the Vediac literature will
Bisclose the fact that, the explanations of Richas had undergone
‘changes in the hands of different commentators, most probably
to suit the spirit of their ‘contemporary times, Jand fto squeeze
sanctions out of them for some religious rites or ceremonies that
might have been newly added to the code of rituals of the prevail-
ing Brahmanism. Yaska’s Nirukata deals only with that aspect of
their meanings which has its exponents inthe physical phenomena
of the universe. The causation of rain, the births and deaths of
Days, the March of seasons, and such like physical incidents of
Nature are, accordiag to him, form the inner meanings of all obscure
verses of the Rigveda. In his work we completely lose sight of
that grand metaphysical spirit of the ancient masters in interpreting
the Vediac Mantras, which is so markedly prominent in the Upa-
nishads like Brihad A’ranyaka and Chhandogya, etc. Sayana, on the
other hand, mainly contents himself with giving the lexicon mean-
ings of the Richas, quoting ffom the Nirukiam instances where it
differs from his explanations. A Rik of the first Ashtaka of
the Rigveda may serve as an illustration of Sayana’s commen-
tary where Vrika, which Yaska has explained as Brinhttasvas’
mis'chudramd, masardhamdsasamvatsaradikartt2z, (the  thick-
rayed moon, the creator of months, half months, seasons and
full years, etc, he (Sdyana) explains by Avanyas’va, (forest dog 2.e.,
wolf), However, the genius of Brahmanic philosophy can not lie
asleep for good even in Sayana, the scholarly premier of prince
Vakkn; and hence, we find him tagging at times philosophical in-
terpretations to those by Yashka and his self, as inthe Rik, striyah
sateestan Ume pumsa ahuh, etc., (Rik. 16, Suktar64, Ashtaka IT.
Rig). Lastly, let us consider the interpretations put upon thy»
Vedtac mantras by the immortal S’ankara in his Ccomm@ntaries or
the Upanishads, several quotations from which have been given in
the preceding pages, and we will find t tyey were made at a
time when the doctrine of Vedantienffeigacs supreme in India.
And all these fully substantiate eur theory that, the Vediac
Shantras have beentvariouslyednterpreted in diverse times to meet
the exigencies of the then prevailing forms of faith, and that
all of them are capable of bearing metaphysical meanings. In fact,
it would be highly interesting to trace the gradual changes in
the faith and religious ceremonies of India, if we can hit upon the


23


78 Mana Samhita.


exact dates of ‘the Ramayanam, Mahabharatam, and YAshka. We
shall.presently show that, there might have been no:actual immola-
tion ofa horse inthe Vediuc As'uumedha, and that the descriptions:
ef the sacrifice, as contained in the Ramayanam’ and Maha-
bharatam, strongly intimate the probability that, horse-killing sacri-
fices were. imported from our ancient Scythean neighbours. Most
‘probably when the Scythean or Hungarian settlers in the country
came to be assimilated in the Brahmanic faith, the contemporary
Brahmanism, by way of a compromise, or concession to the
national ceremonies of its new proselytes, had to invent some
sort of theological fiction by which they could be shown to have’
directly carried their sanctions from the Vediac text, but which;.
Vike all such fictions: and stratagems, only serve to: disclose the
truth by its attempted’ concealment.

Let us: now procted to examime more closely how far we are
justified in holding this view. We all know that, the terms
“Vrisha” (bull) and “As’va” (hérse) denote, according to the
Brahmanas, the soul of the universe (vis’vasya atma) and also
its prototype entombed in‘ the human body: The Tatttiriyam
is sufficiently explicit on the subject when it says; A’dttya
‘erishas'va itt (the sum is the bull or the horse), Thus we see that,.
the bull, the horse, the self, and the sun‘ ave all synonymous in the’
mystic phraseology of the Vediac seers. Moreover, we learn from:
the Sukta 164, Rik. &I of the second Asitaka of the Aigvedv
that the horses of the Sun: (1.e., the solar rays),.though seven im
number, are virtually one : the one horse represents the collective’
rays of the sun, or the entire manifesting factor (Saptan yuutjants

vathamekachakrameko As'va Vahati saptanama).


Epuipped iwgth these clear cut definitions of ‘‘ As’ya,”’ we must’
now proceed to discuss’ the natyre of the horse, for’ whose’
immolatiom in the sacriice our opponents find such an unequivocal
and unmistakablge sf™@won im these, Riks (16g—164, Suktas, If
Ashtaka of the Rigned®. The third Rie of the 163rd Sukta’
addresses the alleged horse as; “O thou aot (Arvan}, thou es
Yama (fire), thou. art A’ditya (sun$, thou. art’ rita by a mystic ony
(Asi yamo Asyadityo Arvannasi Trita guhyena V vatena); Thou
art associated with Soma (Ast 'somena “samuya viprikta), thou haste
three binding ‘places i in. heaven, thus say the wise, (A’huste trind
dtwi bandhanant}y. Sdyana: explains this mystic act by “durdinena’”™


Manu Samhita. 179


me, ona cloudy day,or by dint of yoga (yogudisadhana rupena)
%he sun is transformed into 7rita.

We ask, how Trita, who, according to Sdyana, is a Rishi or sage,
«an be transformed into a horse or the sun’ on a cloudy day, or
‘by dint of Yoga? The whole explanation is absurd, but.the’
meaning becomes intelligible enough, if we explain Tritah
(Tra and Ita) as Trignunopetuh Manushyah, man er the
human soul, enveloped by the three qualities of Sativa, Rajas
and Tamas as its upadhi or distinctive attributes, in contra-
‘distinction to the A’ditya or the universal self (Vis’vdtma), The
whole meaning then runs as something like this, O Goer (ie,
human ‘soul,) thou art one in substance with the fire, thou art
identical with the- universal self (Aditya) ia mature, who is
transformed in to thy own self through the mysteries of Yoga
and psychic transformation. This explanation is further borne out
iby “ Trint Bandhanani” etc., (\it) thy three binding places, three
in heaven, three upon earthfand three in the firmament. How car
,a mere horse have three{binding places in heaven, and three in the
firmament? Sayana, not to be perplexed by any thing, explains
“Bandhanani” by “Utpatti karanani” (causes of origin), pro-
bably in the light of the tenth Rik of the next Sukta (164. c 22. M.
I, Ashtaka Il.) where TJisvo Matrristrinpitrrinbibhvadeka urdha-
stathau (Not befriended by any, he, the one (absolute) sun, who,
having three mothers and three fathers, is borne up on the high)
is’ explained by Sdyana as three mothers, the three regions of the
earth, firmament and heaven (kshitvadi Luka trayam); and three
fathers, by “ air, fire and sun, the supporters of the three regions.
The sun stands on high, according to Sayana, as the causal agent of
the past, present and future (Bhutubhavishyadédydtmané). We wi
to understand why the same acceptation may note extended
to the trini bandhanani. What would be the harm, if we explain it
by Sattva Raja tamdnst, ge. (qualities cdeSatgva Rajas and Tamas,
which govern the entombing body of§he soul on earth, in heaven
and in the astral plain (antariksha) ? We know the human body is
called Tristhunam® Tridandie(three posted exponent of the three
preceding principles.) And continuing the metaphor of a horse,
self or goer-—drvaz, Will it not be absolutely legitimate. to call.
the three fundamental principles of its body as its binding. stakes.
or places? It is superfluous to add that, a smattering of Brahmanic.


180 Adanu Samhita.


philosophy will convince a man that the Sattva, Rajali and Tamas.
are identical with the future, present and past, or ether (air), fire:
and water in the parlance of Brahmanic philosophy.

The term Apsu (Jit. in the waters) in the Rik, which Sdyana.
explains by earth, may Be interpreted-to-mean all created beings.
(sarvam Bhuta gramam) as he himself has done in.the Rik XII.
Ch, VIL. 3 An.S. (24). As (Apas’chana praminanti Vratam
Vam) where “Apas” is used by mytonemy. “for all beings.”
And if this view be correct, the three binding, places (Trini
Bandhanani) can not have any other meaning than. the qualities.
of Sativa, Rajas and Tamas.

The Vishnupuranam [Ch. I. V.] explicitly enunciates that, the
Purusha includes earth, irmament, heaven, etc., and on the basis
of its‘authority we can safely say that, “As’va” of the As’vamedha
is the Purusha of our subsequent philosophical systems.

We will conclude this portion of our dissertation by enquiring
a’ little more into the nature and ogigin of the As’va, ag set.
forth in the Richas themselves. In the Rik 1, Sukta 162, we
find that the coursing supfa (which may mean a mover ex."
pander or the horse) is originated from the energies of all
the gods (Vdjino Deva jatasya sapte). The As'va is identical-
with various !divinites. The various parts of the As’va. consists.
of the energies of various divinities, the Dawn goddess form-
ing its head (Ushé wd as’vasya medhyasya Stra iti—Sruti).
A little knowledge of the Upanishads ‘will be enough to disclose:
that, various divinites, such as Agni, Aditya, Prajdpati etc. form.
(i. e., preside over) the different senses and organs of an indivi-
dualised self (Sapta), which, like its supreme prototype, is ever
egganding. Even for once we could have entertained the idea of.
explaining “#ts'va’* by horse, if the {Richas had given it thirty-six
or thirty eight ribs instead of thirty four. It is our duty now to.
see if we can explain it gg.any other way.


Our present contetion is Phat, how can a horse have thirty four
ribs? We cannot deny the Vedsac Rishis the knowledge ol
veterinary anatomy, if we once adm® that a h€rse was used to be
immolated in the As’vamedha sacrifice ; since the different parts
and members of the quartered body of a sacrificial victim have been
enjoined to be carved and quartered in the peculiar fashion. The
Aitireya Brahmana fully bears out the point. How ean we then


Manu Samhita. 181,


account for: this anomaly? Sayana explains away the difficulty
by saying that, “other animals such as, the goat, etc., have twenty-
six ribs, while the horse has thirty-four ;” and this is manifestly an
error based on the ignorance of veterinay anatomy.

First taking As’va to mean the sun (Surya, the motive force or
soul of the universe, Sarvvasya: prevayitd) the thirty four ‘ribs
may be explained as the thirteen months, consisting of the twelve
solar months and the intercalary one, the fifteen Tithis, and the six
seasons. As regards the existence of the thirteenth month, we can
refer to the Rik XV of the Suktam 164. Ch. XXII. M. 1. Asht II.
of the Rigveda (Samkajanam Saptatha méhureka, some assert
that there are seven seasons, born of the sun etc.,) where Sdyana
quotes from the S’ruti, “there is a thirteenth month” (Aste
trayodas’o mdsa sti). Now let us see if we can reconcile it to
A’sva in its acceptance of se/f or human soul. The thirty four
panjaras or essential components of an individualised self are
the seven fundamental organic principles of lymph chyle, blood
etc., the three Dhatus of Vayu, Pittam and Kaphah recognised by
the Veda(Cf. Tridhdtu S’arma Vahantam), the ten sense organs,
the ten senses, the five material elements, the. five tanmdtras
(elementals), and Manah, Buddhi and Ahankér {sense of mineness)
making thirty-four, together with the self.

The essential components of the individualised Self have been
differently computed by different philosophers of India. The
holy Agnivesha asserts that, the five elements, together with cons-
ciousness, are called the Purusha (Individualised Self, Cons-
ciousness alone, according to others, forms the Purusha. On the
other hand, the twenty fonr categories such as, the mind, the ten
organs, the objects of the senses, etc., are collectively called the
Purusha (Khédayaschetand dhatu ShashthastuePurusga Smritn ;
Chetana dhaturapyekah smritah Purusha samjnakah. Punas’cha
dhatubhedena Chaturvins’atikah smvritah; Mano das’endriyan-
yarthah Prakr®i s'chashthdhatukee (Gharak& S’arira, Ch. I. Vs.
14—15). From this if will appear that, the method of computing

‘the constituents af the Puyusha (individual Self) which we have
adapted is not only legitimate and carries the sanction of the
ancient masters, but that it would give a total of thirty four,
if the common factors are eliminated from these different lists.


,


Tt will thus be seen that, the above exaplanation precisely fits


482 Maru Samhita.


in with the number given im the text, and it has this additional
advantage that, it does away with the necessity of hypothecating al
agnorance of the veterinary anatomy in the Rishis of these Mantras ;
an ignorance, if they admit, will at once knock off the bottom

.of the arguments of our opponents, endeavouring to prove the
actual immolation of a horse in the As’vamedha\-


Now let us see who is the immolator of, the so called As’va.
The ninteenth Rik of the Suktam 162. runs as follows: there is
one immolator of the radiant As’va, which is Time, there are two
that hold him fast, z. ¢., the day and night, or the earth and heaven
(Ekastashtu ras’ vasyé Vis’astd dud yamtarad bhavatastatha rituh).
SAyana explains the second line of this Rik by “ those of thy limbs
which I cut ‘up* in due season, I offer them made into balls (of
meat) upon the fire (yd te gatranamritutha krinomi tata
pindandm pra juhomyagnan). We should rather explain it by
“‘the waste which your limbs and organs etc. have suffered in
the course of time, them I offer as oblatéons in the vital fire.” This
view has been adopted even by Sdyana in his commentary on
the Rik 14 of the Suktam, where he explains the five hotris
dofferers) of Soma as the five vital airs which Trita, a yogin,
for the acquisition of super-human powers, suppressed and
concentrated with the Chakra or umbilical plexus. The line
of the Rik under reference runs as Trito ma yan panchahotrin
abhishtaye ayavarttad avaran chakriya avase. He made the
vital airs, desirous of issuing from himself. to turn back into his
own presence and to concentrate with umbilical plexus, for
the entire completion of the rite) those airs such as Prana, Apana
and the rest constituting the five ministering priests. These Riks
clearly. demonstrate the fact that, the Rishis had a’ precise
knoWledge O@the existence of spiritual plexuses in man, and that
. they used to perform a rite some what analogous to the Tantrik
Shatchakva Bhedu (penetrating through the six occult plexuses)
which most probably the went by® the defomination of
As'vamedha. How easily a confusion of the two different
meanings of the term (As’vamedhay may anise may be illus-
trated from the last named Rik alone. If we explain Chakrena
by lance or spear Risktitakhyene A’yudhena) instead of
explaining it by’ umbilical plexus, the Panvanik conception of the
rite (Eerse sacrifice) will become irresistably patent ; and to the


Manu Samhsta. 133


thind, blinded by the legendary practice of horse-killing, tle true and
flobler meaning of these Richas will be utterly incomprehensible.

We find no reason which should hinder us from’ giving the

preceding rendering, especially whem we know that “Juhomi” in the
sense of maintaining the metabolic fire of the orgaimsm either by
the ingestion of food, or through the effect of the constructive or
destructive metabolism of the body, occurs both ir the Charaka and
Sushruta, and that Lat (present temse) is used for the past and alt
the preterites (Lang, Ling, Lung, Lut, etc) im the Vedas, What
can be more natural for an institutor of an As’vamedha (sacrifice
to the soul, to address his soul as, “ the wastes of my body, O self,
which have been made in the course of time, have been cast in the
fire of life, (which is but thy inseparable exponent) as oblations
im a fire-offering and have been re-absorbed and re-assimilated
in thy essence? The origin and merging of the body with its
environments from, and in, the Self is sung in the, Riks, XXX and
XXXII, of the suktam 164,°portions of which have been enjoined
by the Anukramanika to be used iw the middle portion of the,
As'vamedha, which means, accerding to our view, a sacrifice
‘fnstituted for the glorification or honorification of the soul (As’1a

self, medhyate, pujyata, is worshipped or glorified, Asmiz herein).

The self, continuing unchanged and undecaying amidst the
meessant changes of its organic embodiment, was fitly made the
highest object of veneration in the As’vamedha. Those who
doubt the identity of Sclf with Aditya we only refer to the R. 5 of
the Sukta 164. the seven threads (/hatus, Somayajnas according.
to Sayana) which the sages have spread to envelop the sun, Baskaye’
t.e. the container ef reality, the abode of all (Vatse Baskaye'dht

Sapta Tantun)

We admit that there are Riks im the Sukta 16%, such as ache
Riks IX, X, X!, XHI, XV. which apparently indicate the actual
immolation of 5 a horse gn contain references: to the cooking of
its flesh, to shen distribution of the brcth, to the caldron, odoriferous:
with its boiling contents, to its (horse’s. grease smeared upon the
brush or the axe.

But there is no ground for holding that, even these Richas, if they
are not actual interpolations, are not capable of bearing. a meaning,
which may not shake our faith in the bloodless character of the
As'vamedha. In the Rik 34. Sukta 164 Ashtaka II. of the Rig Veda


184 Mann Samhrta


the Rishi asks what is the seed of this showering sun (Prichchham
Vrishno As’vasya retah) and the answer to this query is supplied
in the Rik XXV of the same Sukta, in the statement that this Soma
is the seed of the horse (sun) (Ayam soma Vrishno As'vasya
retah), The Rik 44 of the same suktam says, the three tresses
(of the universal self,) fire, ait and the sun in proper seasons looks
over the earth, one of them shears the tresses, (the cereals, herbs
and forest leaves) at the end of the ear (Trayah keshina ritutha
wi chakshati samvatsare vapata eka esham), and in the same
Suktam occurs the Rik which says, the priests cook the soma ox as
their primary duty (ukshanam Pris’nimapachania virah prathama-
nirasyan.) Now, considering that ox is identical with horse which
signifies the sun or the self, and that soma plant is the body of
the ox or horse, and further that the Soma is called the seed
of the horse, and the cereals etc. are his tresses, are we not
warranted to suppose that the cooking of the different limbs
and bodily principles of the As'va, ‘degcribed in the Riks of the
Suktam 162 of the Rigveda, is only a poetical mode of describing
the fermentation of the Soma beverage, whose soul-exhilarating
properties had been many times eulogised in the Vedas, and which
especially in the glorification sacrifice offered to the self (As'sa-
medha) might naturally seem to them to be the only fit and
adorable offering to the Real in man? We have seen in the Rik
XI. of the Suktam CLXUI. that the hairs of the -horse's manes
are the flames of the fire which are tossed in manifold directions
and spread in the forests (Tava S’ringaniy Puratra-ranyeshug
chavanti R. rr. S. 163. V22. A TL.

Now even if we, like Yaska, confine ourselves only to that kind
of interpretation of the}Riks which reflects only the occurrance of
certain phy@ical phenomena, we will be quite justified in holding
that, the quartered members of the As’vas body are nothing more
than the cereals, foodgrains and Soma plants, which have been
figuratively described as thy limbs and organic principles of the
A'sva, or the sun, or the fire incarcerated in the soil and the womb.
of the Earth.

We know that in the mystical language of the Brdhmanas the
sun (Aswa-goer) or Indra (the burning éne) is the soul of the
universe; by a poetical analogy and with a little difference of
meaning all these terms Indra (the holder of the senses) Asva (the


Manu Samhita. 185


Beer the reality that goes out of the body at death’, the Surya
(the impellor) were extended to denote its human prototype.
Prishni the mother of the sun or gods is the Firmament. |
Prishni, the Soma plant is the seed of the Ashva (Self and
Soma is the name of the most important of the organic vital
principles (protoplasmic albumen) which has been described by
the Rishis as the quintessence of life, and which is contained in
the heart and the viscera (Hridaveva Kukshaya Somadhéné.)
According to their view the sun, the Self and the fire, whether
called by the epithet of horse or bull, represent the three different
“aspects of the same substance, if it be right to call force a subs-
tance, Similarly, the Soma (pretoplasniic albumen), the Soma
(plant, the seed of the Self) are the food of both the gross and subtle
life, The yellow juice of the red or yellow species of Soma, and
twenty four of them are recegnised in the Ayurveda :And now
this divine Soma may be divded into twenty four species accord-
ing to the difference of its hgbitat, virtue, potency, structure,
colour, etc.— Atha Khalu Bhagavan Somah Sthanakritigunavir~
yaya vis'eshaischatur-vims'atidha bhavati—Sushruta, Chik. C.
29—C3.) have been termed as the blood, its bruesed stem as flesh,
and these may account for interpretations which have been put
upen theae- terms in the As’vamedha Suktam, and which have
led many level headed scholars to come to a positive dicision
about the actual immolation of a horse in the As’vamedha.
The next point that our opponents may urge against our mode
of interpretation is that actual cooking etc of horse flesh has been
-wnequivocally described in these Richas. But their contention falls
to the ground if we say that these terms, the derivatives of the
root pacha ‘to cook) may also unequivocably mean to grow mature
to continue in existence. Adlah (Time) Pachat: (matures) Béeudtnt
(all beings) is a Sanskrit maxim which known even to a veritable
Tyro in Sanskrit, ihe caldron, the ladle etc. which occur in jthese
Richas may also {be mere consis¢ently explained as the “ caldron of
time, the ladle of seasons,’ and scores of instances can be quoted
fro Omghe Rigveda where ghamasau, two ladles, have been called
the yons of the sacrifice and of all creatures in the shape of Earth
aad Heaven.
The Singers of the As’vamedha Richas were not. a race of
ptimitiveenomads. They were far advanced in the arts of


24.


186 Mann Sambrts


civilisation and knowledge. Astronomy, prosody, grammar did @
rudimentary form of Logic, together with works on ceremonialy
and ‘medicine, are found to have been frequently mentioned id
the Rig Veda. In fact, the fundamental principles of each
abstruse system of philosophy such as, the Sankhya and Vedanté
were presaged in the Suktam 164, the next one to the As’vamedhs
Suktam. There is an unequivocal reference to the Prakriti
(Nature) of the SAnkhyas in Asthndvantam Yadanasthé Bibharti
(one with bone i.e. the primal self, is borne by the boneless (illusire
Prakriti). For the first time we find the oneness of the universal
self wtth the individual soul clearly enunciated in the Rik. (18}
of this Suktany which runs as, “he who knows the protector of this
universe as the inferior associated with the superior, and the
superior associated with the inferior,” Avah parena Pitaram yo
asydnuveda para evdvarena; and intthe Rik XX of the sam
Suktam: running as, two birds associated together, and two friends
(as they are) take refuge in the safe tree; one of them (individul
Self) eats the sweet Pippala fruit, the other ( Supreme Self)
eating not, mrerily looks on (Dvd saparnd Sayujd Sakhiyt
Samdnam Vriksham parishasva Fati; Tayoranyah pippalan
Svddvattyanas’nannanyo abhi Chakasheeti.) The famous dictutt
of the Upanishad regarding. the sexless character of the Selfif
but the echo of the Rik, Striyak Sateestma Ume pumsa dhu de
In short, all forms of philosophic ideas had their origin in the
Vedas. Under these circumstances, are we not warranted td
assert that, the mysticisims of the Yoga likewise originated from
the metaphysics of the Vedas? We have shown’ above that,?
rite analogous tothe rite of 7dntrika yoga, commonly known a
Shat chakra Bheda, was not unknown to the Rishis of the second
Ashtaff of the Rig Veda, and we must say that, from the metaphy-
sical meaning which the As’vamedha Richas are capable of bearing
the Asvamedha(the sacrifice for the glorification of Self), in its
original inception, must have beer somewhat identical with this
Shatchakva bhedah. This spiritual or mystic character’ of the
rite was not lost sight of evan at thesttime whem Bhrigu cde
his famous recension of the Manu Samhita. Later om in this
chapter we shall come acrossa couplet, which lays down that, 2
non-killer of animal life (abstaimer of meat diet) is as much meri
torious as a performer of a hundred horse sacrifices. This couplet


Manu Samhita. 187


would have been ridiculously absurd, if As'vamedha had entailed in
fact the immolation of six hundred and nine animals. For in that
case the couplet would mean something like this, v7s., to for-
swear meat is as meritorious as killing six hundred and nine
animals, a hundred times multiplied. Or in other words, the
merit of forswearing false-hood is equal to that of telling 2
hundred thousand lies. :

The greatest obstacle to the acceptance of our view of inter-
pretation is thé description of the horse-sacrifice in the
As’vamedha Parva of the Mahabharatam (Anugita Parva Ch. 88
VS 27-35 and Ch. 89. VS 1—5.). Before proceeding further
with this dissertation, we must add that, the arguments, which we
shall adduce to account for its description in the Mahabharatam,
shall apply mutatis mutandis to the description of the As'vamedha
contained in the Ramayanam. One thing, which strikes us most
in the sufercial view of the matter, is that both inthe Rig Veda
and Mahabharata the s’vamedha is associated with deep and
abstruse metaphysical disquisitions. Inthe Rig Veda the philosophi-
cal Suktam follows the As’vamedha Richas, in the Makabharatam
the philosophy precedes the description of the As’wamedha. In
the Mahabhatam, the A’svamedha was instructed to be instituted
primarily for expiating the sin of a disastrous civil war ; but the
actual eating. of horse-flesh by the priests or the institutor of the
sacrifice, as seems to be sanctioned by the Sayana’s commentary,
was dispensed with in the Mahabharatam. King Yudhishthira
then smelled the smoke, capable of purging one of his sin, of the
marrow of the horse that was thus cooked (Asvamedha Parva.
Ch. 89. V. 4). In the Mahabharata the sacrificial horse was
made to wander all over the world for the purpose of collecting
tributes from the kings of countries through which it had :passed.
The launching of a campaign of world-wide conquest as a preli-
minary to the institution of the A’svamedha was never contem-
plated in the Richa€ of the Rigveda. & little knowledge of the
ancient history of thé world will help us to point out the source
from which ths Horse-sacrifice was imported into Brahmanism, and
to trace the steps taken by her priesthood to celebrate this Horse
sacrifice with the Mantras, relative to the soul-worship of the
Vedas. We know that the ancestors of Huns or Hungarians were
proverbially fond of horse-flesh, both literally and metaphorically.


198 Manu Samhita.


These worshippers of the fierce, tawny coloured god, Rudra, who,,
in the shape of the bull, begot Maruts on Pris’ni, disguised as a
brindled cow (Europa ?), used to celebrate their victories in war
with horse-sacrifices. The descendants of these Huns, after their
conquest of, and settlement in northern India, came to be assimilated
in Brahmanism, And Brahmanism, in its turn, to please the fancy of
the conqueror and to prove his lineage from the Vediac gods, sanc-
tioned the sacrifice as a Vedaic sacrifice, adopting and altering the
sense of the Mantras to the exigencies of the ceremony, to con-
ceal its character of a foreign and imported innovation. ,

Several eminent authorities, both Indian and European, hold
certain parts of the Mahabharatam such as, the Bhagavad Gitd etc.,
to be interpolations; and there is nothing to show to the contrary
that, the AnugitdparvAdhydya, containing the description of the
horse-sacrifice, is not a subsequent addition to that immortal epic,
as it gives but the contemporary view of the meanings of the
As’ vamedha Richas as it was understood and celebrated in that age.

We can assert without the least fear Sf contradiction that, the
Vedas have been explained in different times according to the
genius and intelligence of each age. Yashka’s Nirukta, which reads
the description of rain, thunder, lightning, or storm in each Rsk,
must have been written at an age when the Brahmanic genius,
devoid of its keen-sighted and subtle philosophy, began to look
upon the physical phenomena as the highest manifestations of
the Divine. The early Sutvakdras and Mimansa (rules of
interpretation of Vedaic mantras), were written at a time when
the divine authorship of the Vedas came to be first seriously
doubted. Sankara’s interpretation of the Mantras, contained in
the Upanishads, could not help being metaphysical in the face
of such a keen and potent Buddhistic opposition of the age (tenth
century). Say#ha’s commentary (t4ath century A. D.) reflects
the spirit of an age in which the reconquest by Brahmanism
was once more completegand all the differem forms of interpreta-
tion could be equally authoritative and obligatory, and which,
discarding none, tended to augment the literary fame of its
erudite author. It is impossible within fuch a narrow compass to
fully advance and elucidate all the arguments that favour the
mode of interpretation we have adopted. We have given only
the main heads of our argument and the line by which we have


Manu Samhita. 189


To remove the doubt whether he has eaten. any
unclean article of fare or not,-a twice-born one shall
practise a Kvichchha penance, once within a year. Having
knowingly eaten any forbidden articles of fare, he must
practise penances, especially enjoined to be performed.
for expiating the sins of eating those articles. (21)

For the purposes of a religious sacrifice, or forthe |
maintenance of his dependants, a Brahmana can kill
the commendable beasts and birds, as did Agastya of
yore, (22)

In religious sacrifices instituted by the Rishzs, Brah-
manas, and Kshatriyas of yore, oblations of meat-cakes
used to be made of the flesh of beasts and birds, (there-
in immolated.) (23)

Commendable articles of food, even after they have
become stale, may be eaten with the addition of any
oleaginous substance ; residue of oblations (such as sacri-
ficial porridge, etc.,), left-after the performance of a
fire-offering, may be eaten (even without such addition
of clarified butter, etc.) (24)

Articles made of barley or. wheat flour, all modifica-
tions of milk, even after they have become stale, or
if prepared a long time ago, may be eaten by twice-
born ones (25)

Thus the commendable and forbidden articles of
diet in respect of twice-born ones have been specifi:


arrived at that explanation and leave it to our readers, if they
approve of our view, to carry ,on the investigation for them,
selves.

The discrepaneies found.in Sayana, Mahidhara, and Maha-
bharata, etc. regarding the mode of celebrating the actual cere-
mony, a¢e enough to show that the Asvamedha originally meant
something other than a mere horse-sacrifice.


190 Manu Samhita.


cally described, now hear me describe the mode of
using or forswearing meat-diet. (26)

Residue .of meat-oblations, cast in the fire in a re-
ligious sacrifice, as well as that offered ina S’rdddha
repast, may be eaten ; flesh may be eaten at the request
of Brdhmanas, and in diseases, or under circumstances
which imperil life. (27) |

Whatever exists in the world, all’ that Prajdpati
has ordained to be the food of living tbeings; all, both
mobile and immobile, is the food of creatures: (28)


' The immobile are the food of the mobile (creatures),
the toothless ones are the food of the toothed creatures ;
the handless, are that of the and-possessed ones ; and
the timid, that of the brave. (29)

An eater, eating an animal and thinking ‘it to be his
legitimate food, does not commit any sin, inasmuch as
the ordainer has created some animals as eaters and
the other as their food. (30)

The eating of flesh on the occasion of a religious
sacrifice is the divine ordination, to eat flesh for any
other purpose is a monstrous practice. (31)

He, who, having brought, or procured, or received
the gift of, the flesh (of an animal), eats it after having
first offered it to the manés and deities, is not defiled -
thereby. (32)

[Otherwise than in times Of distress,] a Brahmana,
who eats the flesh (of an animal) ina manner con-
demned by the Regulation, -is{eatenedefenceless, by that
animal in the next world. (33),

A huntsman, who kills animals for money, does nat.
acquire the same demerit in after life, as ome who
eats flesh in violation of the ordinance. (34)


Manu Samhita. 16%


But the person, who being appointed to do 4 réli=
pious sacrifice, does not eat thé (consecrated) flesh,
will be re-born asa beast for twenty-one births in
buccession. (35)

Let a Brdhmana never eat the flesh of an animal,
unconsecrated by Mantras; conforming to the eternal
ordinance, he must always eat thé consecrated flesh. (36)


Desiring to eat fiesh. rather let him eat its effigy
made of dough and clarified butter than eat the un-
consecrated flesh of #ii animal, not immiolated in a
religious sacrifice. (37)


For as many number of times does the watiton killer
of animal life meets death iti his successive re-births
hereafter as there are hairs on the body of the immo
lated animal. (38)


For the purposes of réligious sacrifices the beasts
were created by the self-origined one, the sacrifice ig
for the elevation of the whole universe, hence killing
is not killing in a religious sacrifice (yajna). (39)

Cereals, beasts, trees, arlimals of the tortoise species
and birds, immolated on the occasion of a religious
sacrifice, obtain the eternal status. (40)

A Madhupatka,a Sraddha, offered to the ‘manes »
and deities, and a religious sacrifice are the occasions
on which a beast should be sacrificed, and_on no,ther

4 ea : °
oscasion. This is the dictum’of Manu. (41)

By kiljing beagts on these odcgsions, a Brahmana,
conversant with the inport of the vedas, accords a
more elevatgd status both to his own self and to the
self of the (immolated) beast. (42)


Even in timeg of distress, a self-controlled Brah-
*mana, whether residing in the forest, or in the house


£O2 Manu Samhita.


of his own, ot of his preceptor, must not do an act
of killing not sanctioned in the Vedas. (43)

Acts of killing which the Vedas have sanctioned
in the universe should be regard as acts of non
killing, in. as much as all virtue has emanated from the
Vedas. (44)

* He, who in quest of his own pleasure kills the
harmless animals, does not’ obtain any happiness,
whether dead or alive. (45)

He, who does not wish to inflict on any animal
the pain of death or captivity, is said to be the well-
wisher of all, such a man obtains perfect felicity. (46)

Whatever he contemplates, whatever he strives for,
whatever he puts his heart upon, he gets that without
effort, if he doés not kill any animgl life. (47)

Flesh cannot be obtained without killiug a beast,
animal-killing does not lead to heaven; hence, a man
must forswear (eating flesh. (48)

Considering the origin of flesh (which is a kind
cf transformed menstrual blood) and the pangs of
death and incarceration the beast suffers, he must
forswear eating all kinds of flesh, (whether approved
of or prohibited by the ordinance). (49)

He, who does not eat flesh, like a monster, in viola-
tion of the ordinance, becomes a favourite with all
and é not afflicted, with any disease. (50)

He who sanctions the killing of an animal, he who
quarters its slaughgered body, the, actual jmmolator,
the seller and buyer of its flesh, the man who cooks
the flesh, he who serves that cooked flesh to the eaters,
and he who eats it are called the killers. (51)


He, who otherwise than forthe purposes of
S’raddhas offered to the manes and deities, tries to*


Manu Samhita, 193


‘augment the flesh of his body with the flesh of a
beast, is the greatest of all'sinners. :(52)

The merit of him, who forswears the use of meat,
is equal to‘that of ene whe performs the As’vamedna
‘sacrifice, each year, for a century. (53)

By living on fruit, bulbs, or food grains used by the
holy sages, a man doves not acquire the same religious
merit as he does ly torswearing thé use of meat. (54)


He, whose flesh I eat in this life, shall eat my flesh
in the next; this is the essential attribute of flesh, as
disclosed by its etymological signification, according
to the wise. 55)


No sin is attached to wenching, flesh-eating, or wine-
drinking ; these are the natural propulsions of Man, but
. ° :
abstinence bears greater fruits. (56)


Now I shall discourse on death-uncleauness, as it
affects the members of the four social orders .in the order
of the enumeration, as well as on the mode of purifying
the defiled articles. (57)


The Bandhus (t.e., Sapindas and Samdnodakas) of
a male child, dead before, or after cutting his teeth, or
at the age of tonsure or initiation with the thread, be~
‘come unclean on his death; likewise his Sandhus
‘become unclean on the birth of a male child. (58)


Death-uncleanness continues foreten gays #nong
Sapinaas, or until the bones are collected (i.e., for four
‘days as ig the case of a fire-keeging Brahmana), or
for three days, or for an entire day and night. (59)

The Sapéxda-relationship is extinguished in the
‘seventh generation; ‘aménodastu-relationship lasts for
all eternity, being extinguished only when the name
and Gotra are not known. (60)

25


194 Manu Samhita.


The term of death-uncleanness, herein laid down,
should be also regarded as holding good in respect of
birth-uncleanness among Sapzzdas, desirous of obtain-
ing perfect purity. (61)

Personal impurity during the term of a death-un-
cleannes is equal among all the Sapi:ndas; but in res-
pect of a birth-uncleanness, the mother of the (new
born) child remains unclean for ten days, while its
father regains his purity on bathing. (62)

Having wantonly cast his seed, a man shall regain
his purity by bathing; but having cast his seed in a
woman other than his married wife, he shall remain
unclean for three days. (63)

A Brahmana, who has touched the dead body of a
Sapinda relation, shall remain;unclean for three times
three days and one day ; a Brahmana, who has touched
thé dead body of a samdnodaka relation, shall remain
unclean for three days. (64)

A disciple, happening to: perform the funeral rites
unto his deceased preceptor, ‘shall remain unclean for
ten days like the Sap/nda relations of the latter. .65)


In a case of abortion or miscarriage (of pregnancy
from within three to six months), purification will be
effected after the lapse of days, equal in number to that
of t®® moths ofepregnancy, (the period of uncleanness
being three days in respect of an abortion before three
months); a chastg woman in her pienses w will be pure
by bathing after the cessation of her flow. *(66)

(Sapinda relations of a) boy, dead before his rite
of tonsure, shall remain unclean for one day and night ;
while on the death of one, dead after the rite of
tonsure (and before his initiation with the thread),

. they will remain unclean for three nights (days). (67)


Manu Samhita. 105


His relations shall bury the corpse of a child,
dead before completing the second year of his exist-
ence, in a pure ground at the out-skirt of the village,
fully decorated, without performing the rite of bone-
collecting. (68)

His (its) corpse must not be cremated, nor libations
of water must be offered to his (its) spirit ; leaving it
in the forest, like a log of wood, they (¢e., relations)
shall pass three days in uncleanness. 69)

On the death of a boy, less than three years of
age, his relations must not do the rite of (offering
libations of) water unto him. The departed spirit ef
an infant, dead after cutting his teeth, or after his
rite of nomenclature, becomes happy with such a water-
rite, though its perfermance is not obligatory on his
relations. (70)

The period of uncleanness, incidental to the death |
of one’s fellow-student (of the /’edas), is one day only,
while on the birth of one’s Samdnodaka, one should
be regarded pure on the expiry of three days «from
the date of the birth.) (71)

On -the death of a betrothed, (though) unmarried
girl, her friends (such as her affianced husband, father,
etc.) become purified after the expiry of three ddys; her.
Sapinda relations also become purified after the expiry
of the same period. (72)


During the term of a (death-uncleanness they shall
eat their meals without any (artificial) salt, must bathe
on each of the three days of uncleanness), forswear
meat-diet, and sleep separately ‘on the ground. (73)

The mode of observing a death-uncleanness (by
Bandhus and relations), residing in the vicinity, has
Been described; the following should be known as the


196° ; . Mane Samhita


mode of observing it by Bandhus and relations, re-
siding at a distance. (74)

Happening to hear of the death. of.a relation in a:
distant _ country, within ten days of its occurrence, he:
shall remain unclean for the unexpired portion of. (the:
period of ten days. (75)

If he hears it after the expiry of ten days, he shall.
remain impure for three days only. tiappening to
learn it after one year of its occurrence, he shall.
regain his purity by bathing. (76)

Happening to hear of the birth of his son, or of
the death of his relation, ten days after its occur-
rence, a man becomes. purified by bathing with his-
clothes on. (77):

On the death-of a Samdnodaka relation, or of. a.
child dead before teething in a distant. country, he. shall
be purified by bathing with all his clothes on, (78)

A birth or death uncleanness, cccurring, within the:
term of a pre-existing one, must abate with the expiry
of the da¢ter (t.e., the previous uncleanness (79):

It is said that, one’s uncleanness, incidental to the
death of his preceptor, lasts for three days; that on
the death of a preceptor’s son or wife is for one day
and night. (80).


Tn the death of one’s fellow student of the
Vedas in the same house, the period of unc'eanness
is three days: Og the death of ope’s brother, disciple
or priest, he shall remain impure for two days and
the night between them (Pakshini). (81).

On the death of the king o1 tne country where-
in he resides, let him observe a death-uncleanness for
the day or night in which the death has: occurred.
The neriod of uncleanness in resnect of the death of


Manu Samhita. kO7;


of a Veda-ignorant, or Veda-knowing preceptor, is for
the entire day or night in which the} death has.
occurred. (82).

A Brahmana shall regain his.purity after ten, days.;.
a Kshatriya, after twelve days; a Vais'ya, after fifteen.
days ; and,a Sudra, after a month. .83)

Let him not extend the period. of uncleanness, nor:
eease to make. the Vediac fire-offerings ; if he vets them.
done by a Sapizda proxy, he does not become im—.
pure. (84)

riappening to touch a Chandala, a woman in her
flow, a degraded person, a (newly). parturient woman,
a dead body, or a person who-has touched a corpse,.
one shall regain his purity by bathing. (85)

Having seen an unholy sight after the perfor--
mance of 4’chamanam (sipping water) in connection
with a daily religious rite, one must diligently mutter
the Mantras sacred to the sungod, or any other sacred.
Mantras, to the best of his. ability. (86)

Happening to. touch a human skeletal bone,
smeared with grease or marrow, a Brahmana shall.
regain his purity by bathing; having touched such a.
dry bone, he shall purify himself by touching a cow,,.
or by looking at the sun. (87)

A religious student (Bralkmacharing, befoge fulgsl-
ing his vow, must not do obsequious rites unto the.
spirits of his departed, relations; after the completion.

of his-vow he shall observe a death-uncleanness for
three days, and thereafter regain his purity by offer-
ing libations of water unto them. (88)


Unto the (souls sof ) persons of hybria castes (pe-
gotten by men of inferior castes on women of superior
castes) and unto the souls of ascetics and of men. who:


-3198 Manu Samhita.


have committed suicide libations of water must not be
offered, after death. (89)

(Similarly), not unto the spirits of atheists, defilers
of the Vedas, moral wantons, and wives who had
been drunkards, or faithless to their husbands, or guilty
of committing abortions of pregenancy. (90)

For carrying, or cremating the dead body of his
own initiator in Bréhmanism, or of his preceptor, father,
mother, or of any other superior relation, a religious

‘student (Brahmacharin) must not be considered as
: dis-associated (z. e. to have broken) with his vow. (91)

The corpse of a deceased S’udra must be carried out
of his house through the eastern door of its southern
portion; that of a Vais’ya, through the western door,
that of a Kshatriya through the northern door, and that
of a Brahmana torough the eastern exit. (92)

Kings (2. e. crowned and duly anointed sovereigns

-of the Kshatriya caste), Brahkmachérins, and celebra-
tors of Vediac sacrifices are never affected by death or
birth-uncleanness, inasmuch as the kings are the re-
presentatives of Indra (on earth), and the two last
named ones are those of Brahma. (93)

In respect of a king, seated on the glorious cushion
of sovereignty, the (period of) uncleanness is laid down
as one day only, the reason being that sovereignty exists
Tor th? protettion and welfare of the subjects.* (94)

No uncleanness exists in respect of the death of
persons, kille® in a battle net condusted by the king,


* Kings are not governed hy’ ordinawy Laws of uncleansesé
as their persons must be kept always pure inorder to leave them
morally competent to make gifts and to do other prophylactic rites
for the welfare of their subjects in cases of emergency guch as.
famine, etc—~Kulluka. :


Manu Samhita. 199.


or struck dead by lightning, or killed in execution of
the sentences of royal tribunals (lit, king’s commands),
as well as in respect of the death of those who have
surrendered their lives for the protection of kine and
Brahmanas, or of those whose deaths by the king’s
command should not give rise to such uncleanness. (95)

The king is the embodiment of the (energies of the)
eight lords of regions such as; the Moon, the fire, the
air, the sun, Indra, the lord of wealth (Kuvera), the lord
of waters (Varuna) and Yama. (96;

Sovereignty is founded on the energies of the lords
of the eight regions; hence, a king is not affected by
uncleanness, How can he, whose commands make
mortals subject to cleanness and uncleanness, be him-
self affected by uncleannéss ? :97)

A person, killed with an uplifted weapon (such
asa sword, etc) in battle in discharge of the duties
of a Kshatriya, instantaneously acquires the merit of
(an Agnishtoma) sacrifice, and is at that moment
purged of uncleanness. (98)

(After the performance of the S’raddha and at the
expiry of the period of uncleanness', a Brahmana is
purified by sipping water; a Kshatriya, by touching a
weapon and a charger ; a Vaisya, by touching a goading
stick and the reins (of a horse); and a Sudra, by touch-
ing a stick. (99)


O you foremost of Brahmanas, thys I have related
to you the rulés of cleanness among th® Sapinda rela-
tions of the decased, now hear me describe the rules
Of cleanness to bt observed by the Asapinda relations
of the deceased. (100)


A Brahmana, having carried and {cremated the
corpse of an Asapinda relation, like a relation, he-


266 Maun Semhita,


‘comes pure after a threedays’ uncleanness. Similarly,
having carried and cremated the corpse of a deceased
‘and intimate relation (uterine brother or sister of his
mother), he shall ebserve a period of three day’s un-
‘Cleanness, (102)

Having partaken of the food in the house of his
decased Asapinda relation (during the term of: un-
cleanness), a Brahman shall remain unclean for ten
days, his mere residence in the heuse: without partaking
of the food (of the family) will make him unclean for
one day only. (£02)

Having followed the corpse of a deceased person,
whether related to him as a cognate or not, a man shall
effect his purification by bathing with all his clothes
on, by touching fire, and {by drinking clarified butter
{after that). '103)

In the event of his having had relations of his own,
“the corpse of a deceased Brahmana must not be
carried by S’udras; such a corpse (lit, bodily oblation
to death), defiled by the touch of the S’udras, leads
not its spirit to heaven. (104)

Knowledge (of Brahma), yoga and __ penitential
austerities «Zapas), the fire, food, the earth, conviction,
water, pastes and unguents, the air, deed, the sun and
Time are the purificators of embodied creatures. (105)

Ofvall purifications ‘or, purities the purification or
purity of the, mind is the greatest purification or
purity. He Who is pure in Mtent (thought or idea) is
truly pure, purification with the help of clay and
water is no (real) purification. (106)

Through forbearance the erudite are purified, through
gifts wrong-doers are made pure. Sinners in secfe&
are purified by muttering or mentally repeating (yapya,


Manu. Samhita. 201


the sacred Mantras, and the foremost of Veda-know-
ing Brahmanas are purified through the practice of
penitential austerities. (167)

Things to be purified are purified with clay and
water; a river is purified by its current; a woman,
by her flow; and the best of Brdhmanas, by
asceticism. (108)

Water purifies the ‘limbs and bodily members (of a
person); truthfulness purifies the mind ; the individua-
lised Self is purified by knowledge and penitential
austérities ; and intellect (Discriminative faculty) is
purified by knowledge. (109)

Thus the mode of purification in respect of your
persons has been descibed; now hear me discourse on
the mode of purifying various articles (and sub-
stances). (I10)

The purification of all gems, metallic articles, and
things made of stone should be effected with the
help of water, ashes and earth. This is what has
been said by the wise. (111) —

A golden vessel, bereft of smear (7. e, not
smeared with grease or any unclean paste), is purified
by washing it with water; the same rule holds good
in respect of articles made of stone, of aquatic subs-
tances, and of unstriated articles of silver. (112


Silver and gold have originated from the fire and
water, hence the purification of golqand silver should
be effected “with fire and water, their parent subs-
tances: (113)


Articles, made of copper, iron, bell-metal, brass,
zinc, or lead, should be respectively purified with alkali
(ashes), acid and water, as suited to each of them
(See Brihaspati Samhita). (114)

26


202 Manu Samhita.


All fluid substances (such as oil, clarified butter,
etc., defiled by a crow, or by a fly) should be purified
by stirring them (with a ladle). Articles, made of the
combination of several other things, should be purified
by sprinkling water over them, and wooden articles
should be purified by scraping them. (115)

During the celebration ofa religious sacrifice,
sacrificial vessels are purifed by rubbing them with
the palm of hand, while ladle and spoons are purified
by washing them. (116)

Sacrificial porridge, and sacrificial spoons and ladles,
known as Svuk and Sruva, are purified by wash-
ing them with hot water ; winnows, carts, pestles and
mortars are purified by washing them with hot
water. (117)

A pile of paddy or clothes, (defiled by any impure
contact), is purified by sprinkling water over it; a
small quantity of paddy, or 4 small number of clothes
is purified by washing it with water. (118)

The purification of Bamboo articles, as well as
of those made of leather should be effected in the
manner of clothes; whereas the purification of
Sékas, fruit and bulbs should be made in the manner
of paddy. (119)

Wearing stuffs, made of the threads of silk-worm-
cocoons (Kausfeya), and stuffs made of sheep’s wool
must be purified, with alkali; blankets, such as are
manufactured in fhe country of Nepal, mu%t be purified
with Nimva leaves; cloths made of flax and Jute-twists
must be purified with Vilva fruit, while those made’
of bark-twists (Kshauma) must be purified with white
mustard seeds. (120)


Let the knowing one effect the purification of


Manu Samhita. 203


articles made of horns,- conch-shells, bones, or teeth
(tusks) in the manner of Xshauma cloths, or with
water and cow’s urine. (121)


Wood, weeds, straws, etc., are purified by sprink-
ing water over them, a room is purified by washing and
plastering it (with cowdung, etc , while earthen vessels
are purified by baking them again. (122)


Earthen vessels, defiled by the touch of urine,
feeces, sputam, pus or blood, are not purified by re-
baking them. (123)


A ground, (defiled by stool, by urine, or by the
residence of a Chanddé/a thereon and such like causes),
is purified by brooming, plastering, washing, and
scraping it, or by keepin kine thereon. (124)


An article, nibled by a bird (whose: flesh may be
eaten), or smelled by a cow, or spitted upon, or trampled
under foot, or defiled by the touch of an insect or
hair, is purified by throwing earth over it. (125)

An article, smeared with any impure substance,
must be rubbed with earth and washed with water
until the smear and its foul smell are removed. This
is the rule in respect of the purification of all
articles. (126)

The gods have ordained three things as Dure.for
Brahmanas, vz., those which have not been found to
be any wise polluted, those washedg with water, and
those declared as pure by speech (word. (127)

That quantity of water, which is enough for a cow
to quench her thirst wifh, if it stays oa the ground,
not bereft of (its proper; smell and colour, and un-
defiled by the contact of any impure thing, should
be regarded as pure, (128)


204 Manu Samhita.


Always pure is the hand of a maker of flower-
garlands, always pure in the shop is an article spread
out for sale, and always pure is the article of gift in the
possession of a Brakmachérin. This is the conclu-
sion of the Sastras. 1229)

Always pure are the faces of women, pnre is the
bird in the act of felling down a fruit; pure is the
mouth of a calf at the time of milching a cow, and pure
is the mouth of a dog in catching a game in
a hunt. (130)

Pure ,is the flesh of an animal killed by a dog;
as well pure is the flesh of an animal killed by a
Chandéla, or by a carnivorous beast. This is what
Manu has said. (131)

At all times pure are the external ducts of organs
situated above one’s umbilicus, always impure are the
ducts of organs situated below the navel, as well as
the refuse matter which are secreted or discharged
through them. (132)

Flies, particles of saliva escaped out of the mouth,
a shadow, the cow, the horse, the rays of the sun,
dusts carried in the air, earth, fire and air have been
held as pure in respect of their touch. (133)

Earth and water, enough for the purpose, should
be used purifying the parts after defication or urina-
tionsemeiier thedischarge of any of the twelve afore-
said bodily excretions. (134)

The fat, semfén, blood, marfow, urine, faeces, the
waxy deposits in the ears and nostrils, phlegm
(mucous) tears, sweat and the mucous deposit ‘in the’
comers) of the eyes, these are the twelve refuse products
of the bodies of men. (135)


A person, wishing purification, must rub his genitals


Manu Samhita. 205


once, his anus thrice, his left hand ten times, and
his both hands seven times, with earth (clay) and
water. (136)

This is the (rule of) purification for house-holders ;
Brahmacharins, forest-dwelling hermits, and anchorites
(Yatis) shall respectively double, treble and quadruple
the number (of purificatory measures laid down in the
preceding couplet). (137)

After defecation or urination, after having’eaten his
meal, or wishing}to study;the Vedas, he shall sip water
and touch the apertures of his organs. (138)

Desiring the purification of his body, he must thrice
sip water and thrice wash his mouth with water. Only
once must a S’udra and a woman do each of these
things. (139)

Following the path of equity, S’udras must shave
their heads once, each month, follow the rules. of puri-
fication laid down in respect of the Vais’yas, and eat
the leavings of Brahmanas’ food. (140)

Particles of saliva falling on the limbs, hairs of the
beard getting into the mouth, and the particles of food.
retained in the interstices between the teeth must not
be regarded as leavings of food (Uchchhishtam). (141) -


Drops of water, falling down on the feet of one at
the time of helping another to rinse his mouth with
water, should be regarded as pure as tht wate@fifg on
the ground. (142)

A persor®, with ah article in hi8 hand, happening
to be touched by the leaving of food, shall recover his
personal purity* by sipping water, without placing the
same article on the ground. (143)

, After putgation or emesis (induced by a medicine)
a person shall bathe and drink clarified butter; having


206 Manu Samhita


belched after taking his meal, he must sip water in
the manner of an Achamanam. It is said that, after
visiting the beds of their wives, men must purify their
persons by bathing. (144)

After having slept, sneezed, eaten, spitted, drunk
water, or spoken a lie, or before commencing his Vedzac
study, let him assiduously do an Achamanam, (145)

Thus the mode of effecting the personal purifica-
tion, as well as that of purifying (various) defiled
articles) has been elaborately and exhaustively des-
cribed ; now hear me discourse on the duties of women
of all the (four) social orders. (146)

A girl, or a maid, or an old woman must not do
any thing independently (7.e., at her own will) in the
house. (147)

In childhood let her remain under the control of
her father, ander the control of her husband in youth ;
and under the control of her son after the demise
of her lord in old age. A woman must not assume
igdependence under any circumstances whatever. (148) \

She must not wish separation from her father,
husband or sons; a woman living separate from these
(relatives) becomes condemnable in both families. (149)

Skillful in her household. duties, let herjmaintain
a happy and cheerful frame of mind, keeping the furni-
ture heat thd tidy, and avoiding extravagance. (150)

During the life-time of him upto whom her father,
or her brother, with her father’s consent, ‘might have
given her in marriage, him she must (devotedly) serve,
and make no transgression against Him, after his
demise. (151)

The religious sacrifice, known as the Prajépat-
Ytfea and other bliss-giving rites should be instituted


Manu Samhita. a7


3h the occasions of their marriage) ; for adspiciousness ;
a.e., for fruition of the object of marriage); the formal
giving away (betrothal, or giving of word according
to Kulluka) creates}the right of husbandship. (152)

The lawfullymarried husband, the doer of the rite
of consecration by Mantra (z.e., Marriage) ; is at liberty
to visit his wife during her menstrual period, or at any
other time, since it is he who gives pleasure to the
wife both in this world and the next. (153)

Like a deity, a chaste wife shall always serve her
husband, even if he be found devoid of learning, charac-
ter and conjugal fidelity. (154)


A wife has no other religious-rite or vow of her own
than an unflinching deyotion to her lord, whereby she
will be glorified in heaven. (155)

A virtuous wife, desiring to attain the region of
the husband, must not do any thing unpleasant to her
lord, in life or death. (156)

After the demise of her lord, let her control her
passion by living on auspicious flowers, bulbs, and. fruit,
and never dream of taking the name of another
man. (157)

Forbearing, self-controlled, and emulating the excel-
lent virtues of chaste wives, let her pass her whole
life in the constant practice of asceticism, ‘OMSWwear-
ing meat, honey, wine and sexual intercourse, etc.) (158)

Many thousands of celebrated Brahmachérins (such
as, Sanaka, Bélakhilyas, ete.) and thousands of
Braéhmanas have gone to heaven (even) without (the
(merit of) proereating children. (159)


, After the demise of her lord, a virtuous wife, by
taking to the life of asceticism, may go to heaven,


208 Manu Samhita.


even though not blest with a child, like the Brahma-
chdérins. (160)

Out of a greed for progeny, a wife, who makes
transgressions against her lord, acquires infamy in this
life and is ousted of the region of conjugal felicity
(4c¢. region where virtuous wives are re-united with’
their husbands after death.) (161)

A son, begotten by a man on another’s wife, and
vice versa: can never be called a son, and nowhere a
virtuous woman has been advised to take a second hus-
band (zx the Sastra.) (162:

A woman, who, discarding a former though inferior
husband of her own, marries a better and greater
husband, (for the second (time), is condemned in society.
and is called a fore-enjoyed wife %Parapurvd,) (163)

For acts of infidelity to her lord, a wife becomes
condemnable in society; she will be reborn as a
she-jackal, afflicted with many a foul disease (such as
leprosy, etc). (164).

Controlled in her speech, body and mind, a wife, who
transgreeses not her lord, attains the region of the
husband and is glorified as a chaste woman by the
world. (165)

Controlled in her speech, body and mind, and by
thus faithfully discharging the duties of.matrimony, a
a worte™twife) acquires glory in this life and attains
the region of the husband, after death: (166)

A true-born ont (Brahmana), shall crémate the
corpse of such a dutiful wife, dead before him, in the
Agni Hotra fire, together with the woodef utensils used
in that sacrifice. (167)


Having thus cremated his deceased wife, the sur>
viving husband shall again marry a second wife, or


Manu Samhita. 209


tess ‘the vemainder of his life in doing fire-offers
ings. (168)

A house-holder must not abandon the performance
‘of the five daily sacrifices, confurmably to.the rules
‘stated before, and shall reside married in his house for
the second division of his life. (169)


"CHAPTER Vi.


HAVING ‘thus duly discharged the duties of the house+
holder, a Sndtoka Brdhmana, with all the passions
‘of his heart sobered, and tranquilised, shall live, self
‘controlled, in the forest. (1)

A house-holder, when he will find his hairs tumed
grey and the skin of his body furrowed with lines and
wrinkles and see the son of his own son, shall resort
to the forest. (2)

Forswearing the use of all kinds of food-grains,
‘as well as that of vehicles and wearing apparels used
%y (men) in the Village, and placing his wife under
the protection of his son, or ia her company, let him
take refuge in the wood. (3)

Taking the S’rauta and the Grihya-fires, together
‘with the spoons ‘and ladles, etc., fed in the Agnt-
Aotra offerings, with him, let him come out of the
Village, and live, peaceful and self-controlled, in the
forest. (4)

With food-grains used ‘by Munis (divine contem-
plators) and holy roots, fruit-and S’zkas, let him duly.
perform these five great sacrifices. (5)

27


210 Manu Samhita.


Let him be clad in skin, rags, ot barks of trees,
bathe morning and evening, each day, wear beard,
mustache and clotted hair, and grow finger-nails. (6)

Out of his own food let him make offerings and
gifts to the best of his might to the poor, and worship
(serve) the guests in his hermitage with offerings of
water, fruit and edible roots. (7)

Always devoted to the study of the Vedas, with
all his senses under control, beneficient and compas-
sionate to -all, let him ceaselessly make gifts without
receiving them from any one, and exert for the good
of all creatures, (8)

He must do the Vaiténika Agnihotra*® fire offer-
ing according to the Regulation, and perform the
sacrifices on the days of the fyll and new moon in
turn. (9)

Successively he shall institute the religious sacrifices,
known as Rikshishte, Agrayana (the harvest offer-
ing), and Chaturmasya, as well as those which are
respectively to be instituted under the auspicies of the
two solstices (Uttardyana and Dakshindyana). (10)

Let him separately offer oblations of sacrificial
porridge, etc., cooked with food grains used by Munis,
in Spring and Autumn, which he himself must glean
for the purpose. (11)

Haging, first offered oblations of holy forest-grains
(such as Nivara, etc.,) duly cooked, to the deities, let
him eat the residuf thereof, and guise’ the salt which
he himself has manufactured. (12)


* The consecrated fire which a house-holder guly. inaugurates
onthe altar in the house is called Garhapatydgni. The mixing
of this fire in the pit with the southern fire sis called Vitdnam and
Vaiténika Agnihotra consists in casting libations of clarified
butter in this fire,


Manu Samhita. Qin.


Flowers, fruits and edible roots, whether grown on
land or water, and the fruit of holy forest trees, as well
as oils pressed out of wild seeds he shall take. (13)

Let him avoid honey, flesh, mushrooms, Bhuséri-
nam, Shigru and Shleshmataka fruits. (44)


In the month of As’vina, he must give away his
store of food grains, fit to be eaten by A/unts, and
which he might have collected in the previous year, and
cast away the old clothes and fruits, bulbs and Sdéas,
collected in the previous year. (5)

Let him not eat any thing grown on a ploughed
field even if it be voluntarily offered; even under
the most pressing circumstances, he must not eat any
bulb or fruit, grown in awillage. (16)


He must eat his food by cooking it over fire, or
fruits spontaneously ripened in course of time, or by
grinding the edible things) with stone, or by simply
grinding, or chewing them with his teeth. (17)

He must store up food grain enough for a day's,
month’s, half year’s, or year’s use. (18)

Collecting it to the best of his ability, let him eat.
his food in the day or night, or om the night of the
second day after a fast of the previous day, or on the
night of the fourth day(after fasting for the thregesre-
ceding days. (19)

Or he shajl live zs laid down id respect of the
Chandréyana penance in the light or dark fortnight,
eg at the close ef the fortnight (.c., on the day of the
full or new moon) he must drink barley gruel only one
time. (20)

@r he shall live on fruit, roots and flowers alone,
en ro those which have ripened, or witherd in


aIZ Manu Samhita.


course: of time; or live: the life: of a forest-dwelling:
hermit. (21)

He shall either stroll on the-ground, or stand: on: the:
tips of his toes during the day,.or gently ramble: inithe:
place of his staying, ands bathe at morning,, noom
and evening; (22);

In summer let him practise: the: five’ penances,* He:
in the open during the rainy season. and. wear wet:
clothes in the fore part of winter.. Thus let him. gra—

‘ dually increase his penitential austerities. (239

Thrice bathing, and eff€ring libations of: water unto:
the gods, Rishis and manes, each day, let him purify his:
Body by mears of austere penances such as fasting. for’
a month or fortnight.at a time). (24)

Having duly installed. the satrificial fire-om His’ own
self, as is praetisedi by the forest-dwelling hermits, he:
must observe the vow of silence; and houseless. and
unpossessed of fire, he must live on fruit and. edible:
roots (of the forest.)jr.(25)

Apathetic to the objects of pleasure, and' continent,
he must lie on the bare ground, knowing no other house:
than the tree-shade, and despising any. other place ofi,
refuge. (26)

Of 7Zapasvins, forest dwelling er house holder
Brahmanas he shall beg his necessaries. of life (daily’
foot 7):

Or having: qpllected' it from the village, he shalli
eat eight morsels thereof in the wood, placing the
same in the holow of his. palm,, er in a. chip of bark,.
or in.a cup of tree-leaf, (28):


* The text has Panchatapah which: ‘sonsists in. placing ones
self amidst five fires, i.e. the four fires blazing on his fourssides
and the sun shining over-head.—7'r anslaton.


btanu. Sauntita NF,


Thus: living im the wood; a: forest hermit shall‘ dis~
earge these duties .ofi his order); for the: realisatiom
and. correct knowledge: ofi his:own Self he: shall ponder
over the S7utrs which. apertain: to. the science: of
(Brahma), (29)

With aview toaugment their penance: andi know-
‘ledge, and for the purification. off their persons, Rishis,,
Brahmanas andi .evem) householder Brahmanas have:
made use off (lit, served) these: Upanishads. ' 30

On the advent of an. incurable disease, ‘let him,,
living on air and water, andi with his.Self sapt in Yoga,
go straight to the north east until he quits this mortal,
life. (31)

By quitting: his. body in any of these modes of the:
great sages, a Brdhména, void of fear: and grief, is:
glorified inthe region. of Brahma. (32)

Thus. living in the forest, he shall ‘pass ‘he thirds
period of his life; and forswearing company,. he shalk.
dedicate the fourth period of his. life to. the. practice:
of asceticism. (33):

Thus having successively passed from: one- order of
life. over to another, he, the conqueror of. his senses,
and instifutor of many a fire-offering,, tired: with: the
labour of begging and offering oblations, shall augment
or increase his pleasures in the next world by taking
to asceticism. (34)

Having discharged his three debts, let him devote
his thought °to Self-Emancipation ; Striving to attain
emancipation without dicharging these debts, a man’
obtains a degratled status. (35)

Having studied the Vedas according to the Regu-.
fation, procreated sons according to’ the rules of.
virtue, and performed the religious sacrifices, to the.


214 Manu Samhita.


best of his ability, let him turn his thought to Self-
Emancipation. (36)

For seeking the emancipation of self, without
having studied the Vedas, and procreatéd children and
performed the sacrifices, a Br4hmana shall obtain a
very degraded status in the next world. (37)

Having studied all the Vedas and paid honoraria to
his preceptor, and performed the Prajapatya sacrifice
and installed the sacrificial fire on his own self, a
Brahmana must abandon his home and take to the
life of asceticism. (38)

Those Braéhmanas, who, declaring protection to all
creatures, leave their homes and take to asceticism
attain the effulgent regions. (39)

The soul of a Bréhmana who gives no cause of
terror to any creature, does not obtain a fright from any
créature in return, after escaping from his body. (40)

' ‘Having abandoned his home, tet him, observing the
vow ‘of.silence and carrying the holy paraphernalia of
asceticism (such as, a staffand an ewer*), betake the
life of an ascetic, apathetic to all objects of desire (such
as, palatable food, etc.) (41)

Alone and unfriended, let him roam about for work-
ing out the emancipation of his self Having thus
alone achieved success, he will neither abandon, nor
“will fe"abandoneG, in his turn, by, any body.t (42)


* The. text has Pavitropachitah. Medhatithi explains it by
“ Pavitrairmantra Fapaivathavd pavanai Krichchhrayadibhih
t.e., associated with the sacred Mantras gad attached to the practice
of austere penances.— fr.


+ Apathetic to feelings of pleasure and pain. He will not.
miss.the absence of his sons and relations, nor will be missed Ay
them.—Tr


Manu Samhita. 215


Houseless, bereft of the sacred fire, apathetic and
speechless, let him, maintaining the perfect equanimity,
enter the village for begging his food. (43)

The carrying of alms bowl, the housing about the
roots of trees, companionlessness, the wearing of rags
and non-destinction of friends and foes are the charac-
teristics of an emancipated individual. (¢44)

Life or death he must not court; like a servant
waiting for the receipt of his salary, he must bide the
time of Death (45)

With his sight he must purify his each foot-step,*
drink water which has been strained through a piece
of linen, speak the speech which truth has purifie,
and do whatever his conscience would approve of. (46)

* Dispassionately he emust bear with his. revilers,
nor offer affront to any one ; let him not, for the sake
of this (frail and pathogenic) body, create enmity with
any person whomsoever. (47)

Let him not enrage an already angry or infuriated
person, speak sweetly and gently to one who is not
angry, and refrain from uttering any word about any
temporal subject through any of the seven speaking
appliances of the mind* (z.e., speak about nothing but
Supreme Brahma). (48)


* The text has aptadvdravakirnéncha, lit promulgated
through the seven doors of the mind, whick, accordifff'to the
Vedanta comprise the eye, the nose, the ear, the tongue, the skin,
the intellect, and discriminagion. Govinduray@ on the other hand,
explains it by speech originating from its seven objects such as,
virtue and wealth, desire and virtue, wealth and desire, and virtae
afd desire. Certain®:uthorities explain it by “seven regions,” as
correlated to speech. In short, the meaning is that he must not
-speak of any object of sight, touch, taste, smell etc., which belongs
to the earth and is earthly, and does not appertain to Brahma, the
only reality in the universe—Tr.


26 Wann Santitta


Always brooding upon the thought of Brahma, nom
‘attached to ‘any thing of this world, and desiring
nothing ‘both here and hereafter), let him in the eon~
pany of his self alone roam about in the world for the
pleasure ef emancipation. '(49)

He must not desire to obtain gifts by reading
portends and ‘omens, nor by practising {divination of
astrology, nor by reading physiognomy, nor by inter
preting and preaching S’astras. (50)

_ He ‘taust not enter a room, crowded by hermits,
Brdhmanas, birds, beggars or others. (51)

_ With his hair, beard and fimger-nails clipped, and
- @arrying a Staff and an ewer, be shall wander without
‘creating hardship on any creature. (52)

His ewers, ‘etc., shall be made of unbroken nott+
metallic (vegetable) substances; like that of sacrificial
Jadles during the celebration of a religious sacrifice,
their purification should be made with water. (53)

Vessels ‘made of gourds, wood, earth or bamboo,
should %e used by the fourth erdet of ascetics (yatis).
This is what Manu has said on the subject. (54)


Once a day, let him stroll out, for begging alms
‘and refrain from attempting to secure a large quantity
of fgadstuff by begging; through attachment to a
larger alms-collecting, a yati (ascetic) may ultimately
become attached go things of thasenses. (55).

After (the hearths of house-holders) have ceased
to emit smoke, after pestles and matars have been
laid aside for the day, after the hearth-fires have been
extinguished, after the house-holders have all eaten
their meals, and plates with leavings have been cast


Manu Samhita. 217


away, let an ascétic stroll out for alms, each day (in
the evening). (56)

He must not %e sorry, if he obtains no alms, nor
rejoice at its receipt; collecting alms (food), enough
for the purposes of barest existence, he must free him-
gelf from the sensibilities of contraries, pleasure, pain,
heat, or cold, ete.) (57)

By all means, let him condemn gifts (alms), given
with honour; by such glorifying gifts, a ya¢i, though
emancipated, #s enchained again. 58)

By taking small food, and by residing in solitude,
he must withdraw his senses from ‘their attracting
objects of enjoyment. (59)

By restraining the senses, by annihilating love and
aversion, by extending compassion to all creatures,
{a yati) attains immortality. 60)

He must ponder ‘on the sufferings of human life,
brought about through the effect of evil: deeds such
‘as, the consignment of (souls) to the tortures of hell,
and the dreadful sufferings therein to be endured. (61)

On separation from objects of love and association
with those who are loathsome, on the ravages of age
and imbelicity, and affliction from desease. (62)

On the exit of the soul from the body, and its re-
birth in another womb, after death, and on the transmi-
gration of this inner spirit through tens of miiiuns of
‘wombs. (63)

On the affliction Which is endured’ by" all embodied
creatures through the predominance of sin, and on the
eternal felicity they enjoy through the effect of their
virtue and virtuous wealth. (64)

By means of yoga he must comprehend the des-
embodied self of supreme Brahma, which, in its gross

28


218 Manu Samhita.


from, runs through all types of living beings, good of
bad, high or low. (65)

Placed in whatsoever station of society, and (how-
soever) defiled, Jet him practise virtue and be equally
(compassionate) to all creatures. The mere cloak of
virtue (Garb of holy orders) is no virtue. (66)


It is the (actual contact of) a Kataka seed which
tends to clear water of its impurities, the mere mention-
of its name can not make (tur bid) water, clear. (67)


In day or night, and even in disease, he must,
for the protection of (small) animals such as, the ant,
etc.) walk by carefully observing the ground. (68)

For expiating the sin of unconsciously or unknow-
ingly killing animal lives in the night, a yati must
bathe, and six times suppress his breath in the manner
of a Pranayama. (69)

Even three Prdandyémas, coupled with Pranava
and Vydéhritis and duly practised, should be under-
stood as forming the highest penance ofa _ Brah-
mana. (70)

As. burning metals are purged off their dross, so the
impurities of the senses are burnt off by practising the
Prantydma. (71)

Let him Burr down the defects of his senses
(mental propulsfons) with Pranayama; sin, by con-
centrating his mind on Self; attachment to the world,
by withdrawing the senses from the: external objects ;
and ungodly attributes of his self, by means of
divine contemplation. . 72)

The all-pervadingness of this Inner Self; which
runs through all creatures, whether -high. or low, is
unintelligible to untrained and uncultured intelletts,


Manu Samhita. 219


let him witness this all-pervadingness by means of
communionstic contemplation (DAydéna Yoga). (73)

Him, who has fully witnessed this (all-pervadingness
of supreme) Self, the acts do not enchain; bereft of
this witnessing, a man shall revert to this world. (74) -

Universal compassion, annihilation of all killing
and injuring (desires,) control of the ‘senses, institution
of: religious rites enjoined in the Vedas, and practice
of austere penances are the factors by which one can
realise the Supreme Self in life. (75)

Supported by the pillars of bones, bound by liga-
ments, plastered over with flesh and blood, and covered
with skin, this body should he understood as the foul-
smelling refuge of urine and excreta. 76) .

He shall have to* quit thls bodily frame, subject
to age and imbecility, the abode of diseases, afilicted
with pain and suffering, the transitory embodiment of
material elements, characterised by the quality of
Rajas. (77) .

' As a tree tumbles. down from the bank of a river
as a bird quits a tree (at day break), so the self, like au
aquatic animal freed from the jaws of an aquatic mons-
ter (crocodile,) with the greatest difficulty, becomes
liberated from this body. (78)

Leaving his good to his dear ones and his evil to his
enemies,* let him, by dint of contemplation, attain the
eternal Brahma. (79)

When through tke effect of contemplation he will
be entirely desireless about things of the world, then
———<§_________¢_______... eee

* Let him leave the good he has done to his friends and the
evil which he has sufferéd at the hands of his enemies work out.
thgir: respective effects in them, and let him not any wise associate
his Self with them and banish their thoughts from his mind.—Zr.


220 Mann Samhita.


he shall acquire eternal felicity both here and here
after. 480)

Thus by gradually abandoning all associations, and
becoming .free from pairs of contraries, his self wilk
merge in Brabma,. (81:

‘All these aforementioned, (latent possibilities of his:
nature such as, the knowledge of identity of his self
with Supreme Brahma, extinction of all feelings of
mineness, etc.,; bocome patent only through the prac-
tice of meditation; he who has. not acquired the know-
ledge of this identity will not obtain the highest good
emancipation of self) through meditation, (82)

' He must constantly mutter the sacred mantras
which are related to the performance of Vediac sacri-
fices, or to the adoration of Vediac deities, or to the
knowledge. of self, as well as those of the Vedanta
which treats of eternal realities.* (833

. This Brahma is the refuge of all knowing as well
as ignorant beings. It isthe final goal of the aspira-
tions of all heaven-desiring individuals. 84)

_ _ A Br&hmana, who, following these graduated steps,
takes to asceticism, shakes off all sin and attains the-
supreme Brahma. (85)

‘Thus haye I disclosed to you the duties of the self-
controlled yatis (fourth order of ascetics), now hear
me promulgate the duties Vediac Sannydsikas.¥ (86)


" * The. text has Adhiyajnem which means the spirit of
Vishnu tall-pervading “self) residing as*the tutilasy divinity of
religious sacrifice in his eternal and infinite embodiment. Compare
Adhtyajnohamevatradche (1 am Adhiyajna in this body).

Bhagavadgita.—Tr.

zt Veda Samnydsikas, cottage-dwilling, anchorites who have

abandoned the performance of Agni-hotras and other religious
sacridces enjoined to be performed in the Vedas.—Tr.


Manu Samhita. 921


Brahmacharins, house holders, forest dwellers andi
yatis fourthworder of ascetics, all these four several
orders have sprung from the order of house holder, (87)

_ All these orders, adapted and gone through accord~
ing to the Regulation, lead a Brahman, who has duly
discharged the duties they respectively entail, to. the
supreme status. (88)

Of all these orders, the order of householder is ‘said
to be the highest according to the ordinance of the.
Vediac Law code, since it is the order of householder
that supports all the other three orders. (89)


As all rivers, whether bearing masculine or feminine
names, finally draw their support from the ocean, so
all the orders (of ascetic, Brahmacharins, etc.,) draw
their maintenance frofm the order-of householder. (90)


By Br&hmanas, belonging to all these four
orders, should be assiduously pursued the ten-attributed
virtue. (91)

Contentment, forbearance, non-attachment to world-
ly concerns, non-avarice, purity, subjugation of the
senses, knowledge of the immutable principles, erudition,
truthfulness, and non-irascibility, are the ten specific.
attributes of virtue. (92)

Brahmanas, who having throughly learnt of these
ten attributes of virtues, practise them in. life, attain
the most exalted status. (93)

A Brahmana, kaving discharged the three-fold
-debt of life and practised the ten-attributed virtue
and heard tke discourse on Vedanta according to: the.
Rugulation, must be take to asceticesm. (94)

Having abandéned all acts. and annihilated: the
demerit arising from ‘work,: let him -constantly. study


222 Manu Samhita.


the Vedas, living in the maintenance of his
son. (95)

Bereft of all work, apathetic to the pleasures of
heaven as factors of enchainment, on account of.the pri-
vilege of witnessing his Self, and by constantly brooding
over Brahma, a Brahman ‘attains the highest bliss. (96)

Thus the fourfold Virtue of Brahmanas, auspici-
ous and bearing eternal fruits, has been narrated to you.
now hear me discourse on the duties of kings. (97)


CHAPTER VIL


Now I shall relate the rules of “conduct which should
‘be followed by the king, and the mcde by which he
“shall achieve the highest success, ‘(1)

The protection of all should be justly and lawfully
made by a Kshatriya (king), intiated with all the
initiatory rites-inculcated in the Vedas, according to
the laws of his own realm and in the exercise of the:
functions peculiar to his own order). (2)

Out of terror all creatures run about when the
world suffers anarchy ; hence, the lord created the king:
for the protection of all. (3)

Out of the etemnal essence of the deities, Indra, wind.
god, Yama (Death', Sun, Fire, Varuna (water god’,.
Moon, and Vitteshd ‘the lord of riches.) (4p

Since the king has been made out of the essence of
Indra, and such like deities, his energy overwhelms all
creatures in the world. (5)

Like the sun, he dazzles the sight and mind ; no one:
“can look at his face in this world. (6)


Manu Samhita. 223°


In his energy he is like unto Agai (fire) Vayx (wind
fod) Arka (sun Soma rhoon , the lord of virtue .Yamay
Kuvera, Varuna and the great Indra. (7)

The king, if he be an infant, taust not be belittled
in the knowledge of his human birth, he is the great
divinity manifest in the shape of a man. (8)

Fire doth consume a man who may unconsciously
come in its contact, the fire of king’s wrath burns
down one’s whole family with all its animals and
possessions. (9)

He (the king), in due consideration of the exigen-
cies of the work, force, country and time, assumes
diverse attributes under diverse circumstances for the
realisation of the inceptive principle of his  exist-
ence.* (10)

He, in whose grace dwelleth the goddess of opu-
lence, in whose prowess resides victory arid in whose
wrath abideth death, needs must be full of all energy
(7. e. all effulgent.) (11)

He, who, out of folly, incurs the enetnity of the
king, certainly meets his doom ; speedily doth the king
resolves his destruction, 112)

Hence, let not a man violate the gracious or ungra~
cious command of the king which he might be pleased
to make in respect of his friends or foes. (14)

For the achievement of his (kigg’s) end, the lord
(Brahma) created, out of his own essence, his son, thé
punishing red of sovéreignty for the protection of all
creatures. (14)

Out of feaw of that ,(rod), all created things, whether
mobile or unmobile, are enabled to enjoy ‘their’ respec+
tive enjoyments ahd do not diviate from theif specific
dfities in life, (15)


224 Manu Samibita.


In due consideration of the time, place, knowledge

and specific nature of his offence he must infliet proper.
punishment on an offender, (16)
: That rod of sovereignty is in fact the sovereign ; he
is said to be the leader and regulator (of society,) the
surety for ‘the due discharge of their duties by (the
members of) the four social orders. (17)

The rod of soverignty governs the subjects, the rod
of punishment protects all the subject people; it is
the rod of punishment that wakes up by the side of
those who are asleep, the etudite ones call punishment
the embodiment of virtue. (18)


Punishment, justly inflicted after due deliberation,
endears all subjects ; unjustly inflicted, it destroys them
all. (19)

When the king fails to unremittingly inflict punish-
ments on offenders, the powerful will torture the weak,
like fishes fried on gird irons. 20)

(Had there been ho terror of punishment), crows
would have drunk the sacrificial porridge, the dogs
would have licked off sacrificial élaritied butter, no one
‘would have had the right of ownership in any thing -
and the miscreants would have been paramount in
society. (21)

Men are dominated by the fear of punishment, rare
is the man who i$ moral for the sake of morality ; it is
the terror of punishment that engbles all men to enjoy
their earnings or possessions. (22)


Even gods, and demons, Gandharvag, Rakshas, and
celestial serpents and birds, dominated by the fear of
divine retribution, tend to discharge their respective
duties (for the advancement of the universe). (23)


Banu Samhita, 225


Extinction, ot anomaly of, punishment will vitiate all
the social orders, cauxe all bridges to be broken down,
and create a panic among all ranks of the society. (24)


Subjects are not agitated (in the country where
stalks the blue-coloured, red-eyed rod of punishment,
if its wielder (king) fails not to see things in their true
dight. (25)

Such a truthful, intelligent, inflictor of punishments,
who is possessed of good deliberations and understands
the principles of virtue. desire and wealth, men call
the king. (26)

The three categories (of virtue, desire and wealthy
‘of the sovereign, who justly and properly inflicts punish-
ment, become augmented; while punishment des-
troyeth a self-seeking, sensuous, deceitful, and atrogant
‘king. (27)

This mighty rod of punishment, which is ‘too heavy

to be ‘borne by an uncultured king, will destroy, with
his friends and relations, a sovereign, whe has deviated
from the path of virtue. (28)
_ After that (¢.e., after the complete ruin of an iniqui-
tous king with his progeny, etc.,), an unjustly inflicted
punishment (will) lead to the destruction of his kingdom,
forts and subjects, both mobile and immobile, and
then proceed to oppress the gods and holy sages, who
reside in heaven, (by making the offering of oblations
‘to them impossible). (29)

Devoid of the co-operation of nis allies (ministers,
generals, priests* etc.,!, foolish, greedy, uncultured, and
attached to the Pleasures of the senses,. such a king
Becomes incapable ‘of inflicting punishments in proper
cases. (30)

29


226 Manu Samhita.


A pure, truth-seeking, intelligent king, Possessed of
good allies (cohorts) and acting conformably to the
teachings of the Sgstra, is alone capable of exercising.
the rod of punishment. (31) ,

‘Let him be just and equitable in his own dominion,
hard-hitting in respect of his enemies, straight in his
dealings with his friends, and,forbearing to,the peaceful
Brdéhmanas. (32)

The fame of a king of such conduct, even if he
lives on fares of poverty, shall expand in this world,
like oil-drops on water. (33)

The fame of aking of (contrary conduct, who hag
not controlled his senses, shall contract in this world,
like drops of clarified butter on water.. (34)

Of the members of all tke (four) several castes.
in their order of enumeration, true to the duties of
their respective orders, the king has been created the
protector, (35)

Now I shall enumerate to you in due order the
duties of the king. and his servants in protecting the.
subjects. (36)

A king, leaving his bed at early dawn, shall wor-
ship old Brahmanas, well-versed in the three Vedas;
and abidé by their instructions, (37)

Daily he shall abide by the instructions of pure,
old, and Veda-knowing Brahmanas; a king, who acts
according to the instructions of the old, is certainly
and always worshipped even by Rakshas. .(38)

Even though humble in spirit, he must learn humi-
lity from them (Brahmanas), each day ; 4a king, who ig
humble in spirit, can never be destroyed. (39)

_ Many kings, with their progenies, have been des-
froyed through arrogance (hauteur); and kings, «vbo


Manu Samhita. 227


had been exiles in forests, have regained their kingdoms,
through humility. (40)

Vena, king Nahusha, Suddsa, Yavani, Sumukha and
Nimi were destroyed through hauteur. (41)

Through humility, Prithu and Manu regained their
kingdoms ;. through humility Kuvera obtained wealth
and opulence; and the son of Gddhi (Vis’vA4mitra), the
status of a Brahmana. (42)

From Brihmanas, well-versed in the three Vedas,
he must learn the three Vedas, the eternal principle
of punishment, the science of reasoning, the science
of Self-knowledge, the principles of trade, agriculture,
and cattle rearing, and the science of wealth. (43)

Day and night, he must be engaged in conquering
his senses; a king, who has conquered his senses, is
enabled to keep his subjects under control. (44)

Let him assiduously avoid the ten evil habits, which
originate from desire (lust), as well as those eight,
which result from anger, and which are sure to end
in grief. (45)

A king, addicted to vices resulting from desire
(lust), becomes dis-associated with virtue and wealth ;
addicted to those which result from anger, he meets
his doom. (46)

A hunting excursion, a game with dice, Ain yealbep:
calumny, promiscuous intercourse (lit, a large concourse
of wives), intoxication, singing, danéi ing, music, and
idle rambling, these are the ten vices which originate
from desire. 47)

Deceit, or crookedness of temper, rashness, the
seeking of othér men’s discomfiture, envy, the spirit of
fault-finding, the robbing of other men’s money or- non-,
payment of just debts; use of abusive language, and


228 Manu Samhita


battery, these are the eight vices which originate from
anger. (48)

Assiduously he must conquer that greed which al
erudite men have described to be the parent of these
two sets of vices. (49)

Abuse of wine, gambling with dice, promiscuous
sexual intercourse, and a hunting excursion, these four
should be successively regarded as the most inveterate
of vices originating from desire. (50)

Battery with a club, use of abusive language, and
encroachment on other men’s wealth, these three
should be always regarded as the most inveterate of
vices resulting from irascibility (anger,) (51)

A self-controlled king must know these seven con-
comitant evils (such as, the abuse of wine, gambling with
dice, promiscuous intercourse, hunting exeursion, as-
sault, use of abusive language, and encroachment om
other men’s wealth) of the two (preceding) sets of vices
-as most heinous, each preceding one being more heinous
than the one immediately following it in the list. (52)


Of vice and death, vice is more painful, in as‘much
as a vicious man, after death, will sink down to a lower
and lower status, whereas a non-vicious man will ascend
to heaven. (53)


He shall select seven or eight ministers of tested
virtue and ability who would be conversant with the
prices of lands, well-versed in the Sastras, valorous,
and born of noblé families, with unmigsing aims in
archery or in the use of arms. (54)

Even @ work, which may be easily accomplished,
may appear difficult to an unaided man to accomplish ;
how cana kingdom, which involves so many mighty
“issues, be governed by a single, unaided persor? (55)


Manu Samhita. 229;


With them he must deliberate on all general topics
of treaty and war, on the maintenance of forces,:“om
the state of the. exchequer, on the capacity of the
capital and the kingdom as regards the location and
food-supply of their inmates, on ways and,means, on
the protection of his person and kingdom, and the dis-
tribution of revenue among its worthy recipients
(public officers) (56)

Having heard the several and independent’ opiniens
of these counsellors, let him carry that much of those
opinions into practice which conduces to his wel-
fare. (57) ;

The King shall deliberate with the most erudite
Br&hmana among these concillors on the most impor
tant topic regarding the six predicatives of the:kingdom
(vis. treaty, war, expedition, etc.), (58)

Having been confident of his integrity, let him
entrust all works to him (z.e., ot the Brahmana premier)
and undertake all works, after first having deliberated
with him. (59)

Other councillors, pure, intelligent, affluent in wealth,
and of tested virtue and comprehension, he shall also
appoint. (60)

Kings shall appoint so many skillfal, intelligent and
hard-working officials, as may be considered necessary
for the due discharge of their kingly duties. (61)


Out of these he must appoint “skillful, valorous
men of noble parenjage in protecting the wealth of
the kingdom, and in supervising the mines (sources of
revenue); and conscientious men he shall appoint in
matters of dofnestic economy. (62)


An ‘intelligent, .pure-hearted man of noble family,
sficiené, well-versed in all the S4stras, and capable of


230 Manu Samhita.


interpreting other men’s feelings from their meins and
demcanours he shall appoint as an ambassador. (63)


A person, handsome-looking, intelligent, skillful,
pure-hearted, devoted to his person, capable of judging
the spirit of the place and time, fearless and eloquent;
is recommended to be the ambassador of the king. (64)

' The forces of the realm, as well as the maintenance:
of its internal peace should be in the hands of the
General (AmA4tya) ;. the government and treasury in the
hands. of the king, and° the ‘declaration of) war and
treaty ia the hands of the ambassador. (65)


The ambassador is fit to create or break an alliance ;
he does that, by which those who are not united are
united in alliance, and those who. are. allies are: severed!
from one another. (66)


He (the ambassador),shall ascertain from the ges~
tures and demeanours of the intimate friends (associates)
and relations of a ‘foreign king), as well as from those
of his servants, the scope and nature of his: works andi
undertakings. (67)

Having ascertained the nature and scope of the:
works (of a foreign king), he shall so deport himself
(in his realm) so as not to. any wise imperil his personal
safety. (68),

He, (the king} must live im a dry, fertile country,
(enjoying much of sun light and bereft of swamps and
jungles), containing large stores of food-grain and.a large:
population of Aryan settlers, clear (free fom disease
and disturbing physical phenomena), beautiful with
shady trees ‘and creepers, bordered by (adjacent to the,
territories of his submissive vassals, and which offers
méans of livelihood ‘(bv trade or acticulture. (60)


Manu Samhita. 231


He shall live by taking refuge either in a. fort
tgirdled by deserts), or in a land-fort, or in a water-fort,
‘or in a wood-fort, or in a fort composed of men (i.e,
guarded by troops of soldiers). (70)

By all endeavours let him take refuge in a hill-
fortress; a hill-fort is the best of all forts for its many
excellent features and advantages. (71)

Of these, the first three forms of forts are respec-
tively inmated by quadrupeds, hole dwelling animals,
and aquatic creatures, and the remaninig three are res-
pectively inmated by. monkeys .quadtumanas), men and
deities. 72)

As huntsmen can not hurt these animals, while

residing in these fortresses, so his enemies cannot assail
a king who has taken fefuge in any of them. 173)
_ Since from behind the battlement of a castle an
archer can fight a hundred archers, and a hundred
archers can fight a ten thousand archers, so the building
of a castle is imparatively obligatory (on a king.) (74)

The fort should be equipped with weapons, money).
food grains, transport-animals, Brahmanas, artisans,
engines, forage and water. (75)

Within this fort the king shall cause his palace to be.
built, commodious, secret, white, fit. for all seasons of
the year, and provided with trees and water. (76)

Residing therein, he must marry a wife, beautiful,
accomplished, possessed of commendable bodily fea-
tures, born of noble parentage, and belonging te his.
own caste. (77)

He shall appoint a priest and a Ritvik, who will
respectively perform his domestic sacrifices and the
Veitdnike fire-offerings. (78)


232 Manu Saminrta.


The king shall institute various sacrifices, and pay
honoraria to priests officiating at them; for the acquisi-
tion of virtue likewise he shall make gifts of money and
articles of enjoyment to Brahmanas (79)

At the end of the year, he shall collect revenue
from men appointed to collect it (from his subjects) ;
and he shall be like a father unto persons, true to the
Sastra, and residing in his dominion. (80)

And in those matters he will appoint efficient super-
visers (agents ?), who will superintend the works of
men (appointed by the king. (81)

The king must be the worshippet (pecuniary helper)
of Brdhmanas, returned from the houses of their pre+
ceptors. This (worship) is said to be the eternal
treasure of a king in Brahma. (8@)

That treasure) the thieves steal not, nor enemies
destroy; hence a king should deposit that eternal
treasure in Brahmanas. (83)

Oblations (food) cast in the mouths of Brahmanas
are superior (in respect of merit) to those offered in
Agnihotra fire-offerings, inasmuch as they do not
deteriorate, nor wither, nor decay. (84)

A gift, made to a non-Brahmana, bears ordinary
merit; those made to a degraded Braéhmana, to a
well-read one, and to a Veda-knowing Brahmana
respectively bear double. hundred thousand and eternal
merit. (85)

Through the difference of clfaracters of its reci«
pients, and the variation in the sincerity of feeling with
which it is offered, a gift acquires a greater or lesser
merit in the next world. (86)

A king, protecting his subjects, ifcalled by an equal. '
ly powerful or more or less powerful adversary to


Manu Samhita. 233


battle, must not be reluctant to fight in consideration
of his martial duties (87)

A non-reluctancé to fight, the protection of subjects
and serving the Brdhmanas are the most auspicious
duties of kings. (88)

Of two kings, trying to kill each other with superior
forces, the one, who doés not turn his back on the
battle-field, goés to heaven, after déath. (89)


Fighting, he must not kill his enemies in battle with
hidden weapons, nor with barbed, poisoned, burning or
fire-mouthed arrows. (90)


Himself riding in a chariot, he must not kill an ad-
versary, standing on the ground, nor one who is.a
eunuch, or prays for life, or surrenders himself. (91)


Nor one who is asleep or unarmoured, nor one
who is unarmed or stript of clothes, nor one who is
a mere non-fighting on-looker, or is engaged with
another. (92)

Nor one whose wéapon is broken, or who is bemoan-
ing the loss of a killed relation, or is seriously wounded ;
nor one who is afraid of life, or flying from the battle-
fitld in consideration of his martial duties. (93)

Afraid of life, if oné, while flying from the field of
battle, is killed by the enemy, he acquires all the deme-
iit of his master (employer) (94)

All ‘the merit, which such @ run-away (from battle)
might have acquired for heaven, his master will acquire.
in the event:of his being killed during flight. (95)

- A car, a horsé, or an ‘elephant, as well as paddy,
wealth (money), women and all. other articles, or any
me tal other than gold or silver, whatever one might have
conquered (captured in war), would be his own. (96)
30


234 Manu Samhita.


“The residue shall go to the king” is the dictum of
the Vediac law on the subject; a thing, which has not
been captured by any particular man (z.¢., all such arti-
eles), he (king) shall divide anrong all the soldiers. (97)

The eternal and commendable duty of a warrior is
(thus) described ; a Kshatriya, while engaged in killing
his adversaries in battle, must not deviate’ from this
duty. (98)

(A king) must covet what has not been acquired,
assiduously protect what has been acquired, augment
what has been kept and protected, and distribute
this augmented wealth among worthy recipients (i. e.,
spend it on worthy projects.) (99)

The preceding four acts he*must regard as the high-
est good in his life; and hence, assiduously he must do
them from day to day. (1ooy

A king shall covet a thing, ungained, by means of
force ; keep the acquired wealth by giving. due’ atten-
tion to its increase (¢.¢., the acquired wealth with
interest accrued thereon), and pay over the increase to
worthy recipients, (101)

Each day, he must maneuver his forces; each day,
he must manifest his prowess; each day, he must conceal
the performances of incantationary rites ; and each’ day,
seek the weak “points (watch the’ discomfitures) of his
enemies. (ro2)

The world is overwhelmed with the terror of a king,
who daily maneuvers his forces‘ hence, he must bring
to submission all the world’ with the (show of his)
might. 1103)

Secret in his design, he must be straight-forward ir
his dealings, and never live by deceit; but he must be


Manu Samhita. 235


wise enough to understand the stratagem of his adver-
sary. (104)

He must not let his enemies know of his weak-
points, but he must learn them of his adversaries; like
a tortoise hiding his limbs'(within the cavity of its shell),
he must conceal his own weaknesses (lit, holes.) (to5)


(Patiently, and concealed,) like a heron, he must
watch his own interests (z.e., the discomfiture of a fish-
like fickle adversary), attack his enemy (even if big like
an elephant) with the courage and prowess of a lion,
dart upon (his prey) like a leopard, and beat outa
retreat (with the fleetness and subtility of) a hare. (806)


Those, who will (dare) being the enemies of such a
conquering king, he must bring under his control with
the appliances of conciliation, ete. (107)


If thy do not stand (z.e., can not be conquered with)
the application of the first three appliances (conciliation,
buying off ,and division,) he must conquer them at once

or gradually with his forces, (108)


Of the four expedients (of Government such
as, conciliation, buying off, division and war), wise men
fecommend the adoption of conciliation and war for
the advancement of the kingdom. (109)


As a weeder weeds out the weeds and preserves the
paddy plants in the field, so a king mast protect the
kingdom (loyal subjects) and destroy its enemies. (110)

A king, Who has indiscriminately ploughed (the
field of) his kingdom, shall be ousted thereof; he shall
mheet destruction® with his relations (progeny, etc). (111)
, As the vitality of a man ebbs away (on account of
the aggravation of his bodily humours) through fasting
(and such like depletory causes), so the life of a king


236 Manu Samhita.


ebbs away through the enragement of his sub-
jects. (112)

This measure should be always adopted for the
management of the state; a king whose kingdom is
well-managed (well-ordered) attains happiness. (113)


For the orderly management of the state, he shall
appoint governing -officers over each circle (gulma) of
one hundred, two hundred, three hundred, or five
hundred villages. (114)


He shall appoint a head man of each village, a
headman over ten villages, a headman over twenty
villages, a headman over hundred villages, and a head
man over a thousand villages. (115)


The governor of the village shall try all cases of
offence occurring therein; cases which he is not
competent to decide, he shall refer to the governor
of ten villages. In cases of doubt or incompetency,
the lord of ten villages shall refer to the lord of
twenty villages ; and the latter, to the lord of a hundred
villages ; and he too, under similar circumstances, to the
lord of a thousand villages, 116—117)


The king’s daily dues from the inmates of a
village, (such as articles of food or drink, and fuel etc.,)
the governor of the village shall receive (enjoy', each
day. (118)

A governor of ten villages ghall enjoy a Kuda mea-
sure* of land ; a governor of twenty villages, five Kudas;
a governor of a hundred villages shall enjoy a village; a
governor of a thousand villages, a towif. (119)


* The measure of land which a cultivator can plough with &
plough yoked with six bullocks, in a day (morning and evéning)
of six hours.-


Manu Samhita. 237


Other confidential ministers of the king shall
assiduously supervise the works of these village-
governors and other works as well. (120)


In each city the king shall appoint officers, mighty
like the mighty planets, seen among the stars in the
higher spaces of heaven,{who will think of all matters
relating to its government. (121)


He (city governor) shall go out on tours, inspecting
the works of headmen of villages, and of the works of
these city-governors the king shall be cognisant through
spies. (122)

The king’s servants, connected with the government
of the realm, are often found to be exacting and
deceitful; the king shell protect his subjects from (the
exactions of) these officials. (123)


The king shall excommunicate from the country
corrupt officials, who would receive undue gratifications
from suitors (at their courts), and confiscate their goods
as well, (124)

Maids, messengers, and minials, engaged in the king’s
,service, shall be daily paid their wages at rates varying
according to the nature of their posts and services. (125)


One Pana (Anna) should be the daily wages of
menial servants, and six Pamas those of higher ones.
Each menial should get one Drona of paddy, every
month ; and \a higher servant, six Dronas; each menial
should obtain a cloth, every six month, while a higher
servant should get six pieces (three pairs). (126)


Taking into consideration the baught-price as well
vas the sale-price of his goods, the cost of conveyance,
the costs of his daily living, and other contingent
expenses, as well as the cost of ensuring safety to


238 Manu Samhita


his goods (yoga-kshema), the cost of policing the
forests, rivers, hill-passes, etc.) he shall levy taxes on
merchants. (127)

The king, after due deliberation, shall always im-
pose taxes on profits of traders and cultivators, as
well as on those of the state. (128)

As leeches, calves and bees, little by little, draw
their respective sustenances, so the king shall draw
his revenue from his realm, little by little, each
year. (129)

A fiftieth part of its value should be the tax on
gold or animal; and a sixth, eighth or twelfth part of
its value on food-grain, according to circumstances,
should be collected by the king, each year, from his
‘subjects. (130)

He shall take a sixth part of profits derived from
trees, honey, clarified butter, scents, cereals, saps,
flowers, roots and fruits. (131)

As well as of that derived from leaves, s’éas,.weeds,
leather, bamboo-made articles, earthen vessels, and all
kinds of stone-ware. (132)

A king, even at the point of death, must not receive
any revenue from a S’rotriya Brahmana; nor must
he suffer a S’rofriya, living in his territory, to be
oppressed with hunger. (133)

The kingdomeof a king, wherein a S’ro¢riya is over~
whelmed with hunger, is soon consumed by that
hunger. (134)

Informed of his Vediac knowledge and holy rituals,
the king shall provide for his proper*means of subsi
tence; and like a son of his own Igins, he shall protect
him (.S’votriya) from thieves, etc. (135)

The religious rites which a S’rotriya, protected


Manu Sanikitta. 239


by the king, performs every day, tend to increase the
longevity, riches, and territories of the king. (136)

The king shall levy a nominal tax on poor men,
living by plying small trades in his kingdom. (137)

The king shall cause each artisan, manufacturer,
S’'udra and labourer, to work for him for a day, each
month, (138)

Out of affection for his subjects, he must not bring
about his own ruin by forswearing to collect his revenue
from them, nor cause their ruin by his greed ; by so’
bringing about his own ruin, he will become an op-
pressor of his own self, as well as of his subjects. (139)

The king must be mild or sharp (hard) according to
the exigency of each cgse. Endeared to all is the king
who can be thus mild and hard, (140)


Tired or incapable of personally attending to the
affairs of the state, the king shall place in his own
stead (7. ¢., delegate his authority to) his wise, nobly-
born premier, who has controlled his senses. (141)

An energetic sovereign, free from folly, thus for-
.mulating and ascertaining his duties, shall protect his
subjects. (142)

The king, who with his ministers and officials, sees
and suffers his subjects to be harassed by thieves and
robbers, is a dead, and not living, king? (143) |

The highest dutys of a Kshatriya (king) is the pro-
tection of his subjects; a king, who enjoys the just
and properly levied revenue (of his realm), becomes
associated with (7. e., acquires) virtue. (144)

Having left his béd in the fast watch of the night,
and attended to the calls of nature, and carefully
washed himself, he, after having cast oblations in the


240 Manu Samhita.


fire and worshipped the Brahmanas, shall enter the
auspicious hall of assembly. (145)

Seated in that (assembly-hall', he shall graciously
speak to and (courteously) dismiss his subjects; and
having dismissed them all, he shall deliberate with his
ministers. (146)

On the hill-top, in the solitary chamber of his
palace, or in the dense solitude of a lonely forest where
even birds cannot penetrate, he miust deliberate (with
his ministers: without letting his resolution being in any
way detected (by them). (147)

A king, whose counsels the vulgar can not detect,
is enabled to enjoy the whole world, even if he be
bereft of treasure. (148)

He must avoid the (presenceeof) idiots, of dumb or
deaf cnes, of birds (such as parrots, etc.), of extremely
old men, of women, of A//echchhas (barbarous people),
of sick folks, and of those who have got limbs in
less. (149)

It is fickleness, and parrots and women in special,
who disclose the counsels of kings; hence, they should
be studiously avoided iat the time of delibera:
tion). (150)

Reposed and refreshed, either alone, or in their
(z, e., ministers’) company, he must ponder on (themes)
of vittue, desire and wealth at midday, or at mid-
night. (151)

Acquisitions of virtue, desire ahd wealth, which do
not conflict with one another, should be made; the
daughters should be married ; and,sons, protected. (152)

The sending of spies (into the realm of his
atlyersary), the execution of acts already undertaken,
the ‘contemplation of deportments of the female


Manu Samhita. 24


immates of the palace,* as well as of the endeavours
ef his spies in foreign countries, should be made (by
the king). (153).

His entire eight-fold duty,t his five-fold espionage
{Varga),t love and aversion! of (his subjects, and
the usages of his country he must ponder on. (154)

He must ‘assiduously watch the expansion of a


ene Ee Ee en


* His queen killed king Viduratha with a weapon, which she
previously kept concealed within. the braid of her hair, and the
‘queen of the knig of Kasi killed her lord with the contact of her
poisoned anklets (Nupur).


{ A’dinecha Visargecha tathépraisha-nishedhayoh; Pancha-
mechdrtha-vachane Vyavahdrasya chekshane. Danda s'uddhyok
sada Vuktastendshtagatikon#ipah.—Ushand.

Collection’ of revenue, disbursement of the revenue in the
shape of salaries to state-officials, restraint on ministers and offi-
cials in affairs of the state, declaration of injunctions in respect of
bostile acts done by the king’s servants, supervision of the admi-
nistration of justice, infliction of punishment, and the institution of
purificatory rites for expiating the sin of an iniquitous act, these
are the eight duties of the king. Kulluka gives the above extract
from Ushand in support of the explanation he has offered. Medhd-
dithi, on the other hand, describes the duties of sovereignty as
andertaking of acts not already undertaken (Akritdrambha), com-
pletion or execution of those, already undertaken (Kritdnaushthd-
nam), specification of aa act already executed (Anushthita~
wisheshanam).

Construction of roads, faravans and bridges, the building of
forts, repairing ferts and other public buildings already constructed,
‘capture of elephants, working of mines, construction of barracks
bs soldiers, and clearing of ‘ren, according to others,

+ Appointment , To spies such as, those who disguise themselves
qs (i) students (Kapatikes), or (2) Yannydsins, or (3) peaceful
householders, (4) or Merchants (Vusdehkikus) ox aS (5) shaven
headed ascetics (Tapusuins)


gr


Biz ‘Manu Samhita.


Madhyama,* ot Udésinat sovereign, and the movements
vof a Visigishu king (/it., of a king bent on conquest
4. e., the central monarch). (155)

These four sovereigns (Prakritis) collectivly form
the basis of the circle of sovereignty (M/andalam, balancé
of powér). Together ;with the eight other Prakritis,*
they are twélve in number, and constitute the Prakritis
(constituent elements of the state and allies, etc.) (156)

Each of ,thesé twelve Prakritzs (sovereigns, allies)
has five Prakritis (essential constituents of the state) of
their own such as, ministers, government, forts, treasury,
and punishment (administration of justice), thus form-
ing seventytwo in all. (157)

The king, whose realm adjoins that of his own, (2)
he mast reckon as his advers&ry (Avrz), as well as him
who is the ally of that adversary; him whose realm is
contiguous to that of his foe as his ally (A/t¢ram); and

; him who is other than these two (foe and ally) as in-
different (Udasina.) (158)

With the expedient meaures of state-craft such 4s,
concilliation, division (breach-making among. allies),
etc., either jointly or severally applied, or with
prowess or diplomacy, he must bring these (sovereigns)
under his control, (159)


* A king whos®territory lies between the realm of a conquest-
intending sovereign (¢.e., central monarch: and that of his adver:
sary (Ari) and who is capable of doing good to them when com-
bined, but is powerful enough to subdue them severally when not
allied with each other, is called a (4fadhyama, intermediate) sove-
reign—Kulluka.

} Oddsina (lit. indifferent) means zg sovereign who is capable
of benefiting or suppressing the Madhyama, Ari and Vizigishu
kings at will, whether they are combined or uncombined—
Kulluka.


Manu Samhita, 243.


He must constantly ponder on the six politicak
expedients of treaty, war, military expedition, toleration
(.e., waiting for opportunity), dividing the army
and attacking the enemy in detachments,’ and making
alliance with a more powerful king (when attacked by
an enemy). (160) :

According to circumstances, he (the king) mast take-
recourse to the expedients of toleration, expedition,
treaty, war, guerilla skirmishes (Dvaidhi), or alliance:
with a more powertul sovereign. (168)

Of twofold nature is Treaty, of twofold nature is
War, of twofold nature is expedition, of twofold nature
is toleration (waiting for opportunity), and of twofold.
nature is an alliance with a more powerful ally. (162)

A treaty entered intoby two sovereigns, for offen-
sive (and defensive) purposes for the time being, is
called Samdna-ydna-karmé; while the one, which is
entered into for a prospective benefit and which takes
effect in some future time, is called Viparita, These
are the two forms of treaty. (163)

A war, whether declared in the proper or improper
season,t bya king for his own good, and @ war so
declared by him for the protection of his ally (illustrate)
the two kinds of war. (164)


Twofold is the nature of a military expedition
(campaigning) according as it is undertaken at will by a


* The text ha Duaidhibhévam, which, according to several:
authorities, implies double-dealing, #.¢. keeping am apparently
fyjenely relation with the eyemy. We, however, have adopted
Kulluka's explanation.

« ¢ Akéle (tit, at an improper time) i.e. in any month of the year
itherthan that of Mérgas’ivsa—Kulluka.

Kale (at the proper time), ze. When the enemy is in distress,


244 Mann Samhita,


king alone (om the sudden discomfiture of lis enemy}
or in combination with an ally. (165).

Twofold. igs the nature of A’sanam (toleration of,.

er bearing with, the rising supremacy of his enemy’,.
according as it is either made by a king on account of
the loss. of his forces through his past follies or as
the effect of sin of his former birth; or as it is-
resorted to by a capable or powerful sovereign at the:
request (and for the welfare) of his ally): (166)
' Twofold. is the nature of the division of the army;.
accordingly as’ it is made for the achievement of
the object (of the war), or for the protection of the:
sovereign. This is what has been said. by experts or
the six expedients of state-craft. (167)

Twofold is said to be fhe: nature of alliance:
with a more powertiul ally, according as it is made- by
(a sovereign) hardly pressed by his enemy at the. time;.
or only as a pretext to intimidate his future and. in-
tending invaders. (168)

A. sovereign, when he shall find:that, at the cost of
an inconsiderable pain or loss for the present, he cam
purchase his permanent superiority in fulure, must
then enter into a treaty even at the cost of that little:
pain or loss (payment of money). (169)

A king, when he shall find: his subjects and allies:
fully contente@(with his gifts and honours, ete.), and
himself in a very exalted pasition in respect of his-
forces (@e., at the head of a spirited and well-equip-~
ped army), shall then declare war (with his adver
sary). (170)

When he shall find his: forces exhilarated and
‘largely augmented and those of his adversary in‘ a
contrary condition, then the king must go out cam

| paigning against him. (171)


Manu Samhita. 245)


Having Tost his forces and transport animals, he
shall gradually concilliate his enemy, and enter into:
a:defensive alliance with a more powerful ally. (172)

The king, when he shall consider his: adversary
more powerful than his own self in every respect, thetn
having divided his: army into divisons, shall proceed to
achieve his own purpose. (473)

The king, when he shall apprehend to be made:
a captive by the forces. of his adversary, shall then:
enter into, ‘an alliance with (//#. place himself under
the protection of) a virtuous, powerful sovereign
(ally). (174}

Him (7e., the ally), who is capable of punishing:
both the subjects (generals ministers, etc., through.
whose infidelity his*capture was made possible) and
the adversary, the king must daily and assiduously
worship as his preceptor. (275)

If he detects any treachery in that ally, let him
fearlessly wage an honourable war* against him. (176)

By means of all political expedients, a king, well
versed in the laws of state-craft, shall so exert that,
his allies, foes, and indifferent sovereigns may not.
acquire a higher supremacy than his own Self. (177)

He must righly ponder on all works (of the
state) in their relations to the past, present and future,
as well as on thé good or evil accrujng therefrom (178)


* The taxt has Suykddham, Kulluka explains it by Sobhanam
yuddham, honourable war. Though there is little chance of his
coming victorious out of the contest with such a powerful, though —
treacherous alfy, and atthough there is every probability of his
being killed in the conflict, yet it is infinitely more honourable to
die like hero, than to put up with affronts offered by a cowardly

‘though powerful potentate, who can violate the laws of hospi-
tality and take advantage of an ally in distress.


°


246 Mans Samhita.


, A king, who can rightly and speedily ascertain the
good. or evil ef all past, present, or future issues, suffers
no discomfiture at the hands of his adversary. (179)

The king shall so arrange all matters that, neither
his enemies and allies, nor indifferent kings (Udasinas)
may deceive him (surprise him unprepared). This is:
the synopsis of the Law of state-craft. (180)

When the lord (king) shall mareh on the capital
of his adversary in a campaign, he shall slowly
approach it by arranging all matters in the aforesaid
manner. (181)

In the auspicious month of Margas*irsha (November
December), or in the month of Phalguna (February
March), or in Chaitra (March-Apuil), the king, at the
head of (the four divisions of} his army, shall march
out (aginst his adversary). (182)

In seasons (months) other than the aforesaid ones,
he the king) shall break all treaties, march out with his
forces against his adversary, if he will find the prospect
of a sure victory, or the (internal) distress of his enemie’s.
(realm: due to the infidelity of his, ministers, etc). (183)

Conformably to all rules which should be followed
in respect of the protection of his own realm at the
time of marching,* and having won over the servants
and officials of that part his enemie’s territory wherein
he intends to mobilise; and having stationed spies in
due order, 184).

And having cleared the three kinds of ways, and


Strengthening the fortifications of his own kingdom, protec-.
tion of the rear of his realm with trustworthy rear-guard allies:
(Parshingrahas), distribution of proper farces for the preserva-
tion of its internal peace, collection of food, forage, water, transe.
port animals, armours, and arsenals, etc.


Manu Samhita. 249


Wurified the six kinds of his own forces, he (the king),
fully equipped with all the munitions of war, shall
‘slowly march into the kingdom of his adversary. (185)

An ally, who'secretly serves the adversary, and who
‘had once béen openly in alliance with the enemy but
‘has again been ‘won over to his side, thus serving as a
link between the two beligerents, should be regarded
by aking as the more dreadful (treacherous, of the
two enemies. (186)

With his forces drawn up in the array, known as
Danda,* S’akata,t Variha,t Makara,§ Suchi|| of
‘Garuda-vyuha,f he shall march that way (7. e. on the
xoad to his objective) (187)

He shall extend the (front of his forces in the
‘quarter from whencé he will apprehend any danger,
‘and shall himself remain in the midst of the .corps


* The array, in which the general (Balddhyaksha) leads the
van; the king, the centre; and the lieutenant general, the rear of
the army. and each of its wings is composed of elephant-men,
‘cavalry soldiers and infantry in the order of their enumeration
viz., first the elephant-men, flanked by the cavalry, and the cavalry,
flanked by the infantry, is called the Dundaka Vyuha.

+ The array, in which the van of an army is drawn up ina
narrow and compact order, its rear expanding in extended columns
ike the back of an Indian cart (S’akata), is called the Sakata

Vyuha (cart array.)


f The array, in whigh the army is drawn up in the order,
narrow at the®van and rear, and thick and extended at its centre, is
called the Vardha Vyuha (boar-array).

§ The reverse of Vardha Vyuha is called the Makara Vyuha,


|| The array of soldiers in extended columns, one man, follow-
ing one another like a swarm of ants, is called the Suchi Vyuha.
°g The array, in which the centre of thejarmy is thick, and
bulges out both ways, is called the Garuda Vyuha,


Bq4s Manu Samhita


‘guarded by soldiers, drawn up in the array, known a3
Padma Vyuha* (188)

Let him place Senapati and Baladhyakshast in all
quarters, frst placing them in that quarter from whence
the danger is apprehended. (189)

He shall place piquets or patrols of trusted (Gu/ma)}
troops, to fall in at the sound of any particular instru-
ment, expert in fighting as well as in covering the
retreat, valorous and incorruptible, (for the purpose
of guarding the entrance of hostile soldiers into the
line). (190)

He shall fight, placing’ the soldiers of lesser fight-
ing capacities in compact squads, and placing the
veterans in extended lines; drawing up his troops in
the Sxcht (needle) or Vajra (thunder-bolt) array,* he
shall fight (the hostile army). (191)

On the even ground he shall engage his charioteers
and cavalry, in swamps he shall engage his elephant
riders, on the water he shall engage his flotilla, on
grounds covered with trees and shrubs he shall engage
his archers, and on the level ground he shall engage his
bucklers and swordsmen. (192)


* The array, in which the king is protected by troops drawn up
in circles, within a compact square of soldiers, is called Padma
(lotus) array).

} The leader of oge elephantman, one horseman, and ten foot-
soldiers is called a Wattika. An officer who commands ten such
Patiikas is called a Sendpati, the leader 8f ten Sendputis is called
a Balddhyaksha (general).

t 9 Elephant-soldiers, 9 charioteers, 27 horsemen, and 45 foot-
soldiers from a Gulma ‘group.

For a better knowledge of the formations of brigades, army-
corpses, battle-arrays, and orders of attack and retreat, the reader
is referred to the English translation of the Agnipuranam (Wealth
of India series), Vol. II, CH. CCXLIL, pp. 871—88u.


Manu Samhita, 249


He shall fight placing in the front line of fighting
such tall and light-limbedrsoldiers as men of Kuruk-
shetra, Matsya, Panchala and Surasena countries. (193)

Drawn: up in the batt!e array, let him supervise and
encourage his troops and ascertain their feelings to-
wards the enemy. (194)

Let him closely besiege the enemy and harass
his territories; likewise he must constantly vitiate
‘envenom) its food stuffs, forage and water. (195)


Let him demolish fortwalls and cut down the banks
of dvkes and water-tanks (of the enemie’s country);
safely ehcamped for the night, he must constantly
harrow his enemy with terror. (196)


Having severed those isuch as, ministers of the
enemy who would be‘capable of being severed (from
the cause of their master) and ascertained the inten-
tion of the enemy, he (the king), fearless and intending
to win the victory shall fight his enemy on the auspi-
cious moment (/. e., watched by auspicious stars). (197)

With concilliation, payment, and breach-making,
severally or combinedly applied, he must endeavour
to conquer his enemy ; and never by fighting. (198)


Since, dubious is victory ina battle between two
belligerents; and since, defeat in battle is sometimes
seen, let him accordingly avoid war. (199)


In cases when the three aforeSfid expedients (of
conciliation etc.,) would be unavailing, let him, fully
equipped, so fight his enemies that, Victory might cer-
tainly wait on gis banner. (200)

Having won the victory, he must worship the
‘deities and virtuous Brihma as, give gratuities to the
inhabitants of the conquered country (for the advance-

32


250° Manu Samhita


ment of the public weal), and declare’a general pardori
(amnesty). (201)

Thus having ascertained the intention (of the
ministers, etc:, of the conquered: king), he shall re-
instate a scion of that family on the throne of the
country, and determine (formulate) his duties and obli-
gations. (202)

He shall verify their laws and usages, and glorify’
the (newly-appointed) king and his ministers with pre-
sents of gems. (203)

Unpleasant is the non-giving (confiscation or with-
holding) of the desired objects (of individuals) and
pleasant is their giving ; but such withholding is recom-
mended under certain circumstances. (204)


All these works are contingent on the laws of mer
and gods:; unthinkable (unscrutable) is the divine dis-
pensation, while measures are possible in’ respect of
human affairs, (205:

Having found the three kinds of benefit such as,
land or territory (ceded to him, gold, and:an ally (ir
the person of the conquered sovereign\, let the king
depart with his (forces and: allies) after assiduously
making the treaty. (206)


Having judged the attitude of the hostile king in
the rear of his realm (Pdrshnigrdha), as well as that
of one (A*éranta), whose conduct controls the actiorm
of the former, and from their amity or enmity, let hinv
infer the success of the expedition. (207)


With the acquisition of gold or tefritory a king daes
not prosper so much as with the acquisition of a true
and steady ally, who can be powerful in future. ¢208)°


An ally, virtuous, grateful, contented, devoted, and -


Manu Samhita. 251


wesolute in his undertakings, even if he be weak, is
recommended (as worth-having). (209)

An enemy, who is intelligent, well-born, valorous,
efficient, grateful, munificent and possessed of a good
comprehension, the wise call the most inveterate of
foes. (210)


Urbanity, with a knowledge of men, valour, gene+
rosity, and munificence in gifts, are the excellent
traits in an Uddsina (indifferent) sovereign ally; ‘and
hence, the alliance of such a one should be always
courted.) (211)


A king, in consideration of his own safety (7.e., in
the absence of any. other means of selfprotection),
shall unhesitatingly give up a land (country), possessed
of auspicious traits, feftile (i.e., well-watered by rivers),
and always affording excellent facilities for the rear-
ing and increase of cattle. (212)


Let him preserve money for (times “of) distress,
protect (his) wives at the sacrifice of wealth, and
always protect himself at the cost of wealth and
wives. (213)

Finding all dire distresses to be simultaneously pre-
sent, let a wise man apply. these expedients either
severally or combinedly. (214)

Considering his own self (his own capacity’, the
nature of the object to be obtained, amd the expedients
(to be appligd for its’ realisation), he must proceed to
achieve his own end, (215)

The king, heving thys deliberated on all these sub-
jects with his ministers and taken physical exercise,
shall enter the seraglio to eat his meal at mid-
day. (216)


Mina Samitta.


Sy
aaa
9


There he “shall eat his meal, well-tested (as to its.
being free from poison) by trusted, incorruptible (dé. in-
separable) ,,cooks, 3 who are acquainted with the hours
of his, meals, by *consecrating it with J7antras of anti-
toxic virtues, {217)

All articles of his (royal) use should be protected .
with ithe admixture of anti-toxic drug-compounds
(Agadas), and he must always bear on his” person gems
of venom-destroying properties. .218

Respectful and well-dressed ladies, well-examined.
(that they do not secrete any weapon or poison in the:
folds of their ‘garments), shall fan him, and ‘carry
his water goblets, and buri (fragrant; incense before.
him. +219)

Thus he must exercise caution in respect of his:
vehicles, beds, seats, baths, toilet, and all personal
decorations. (220)

Having eaten his meal, he must sport in the com-
pany of the ladies of the seraglio; and having reposed:
@ little, he must again ponder on the affairs of the
state). (221)

Decorated, he must inspect his troops, arsenals,
animals of transport and conveyance, and all weapons
and ornaments (7.¢., state jewels, etc) (222)

Having perfornsed his Yand4yt (prayer), he, armed
with weapons, shall hear tales, of wonder and the
reports of his spies in an inner chantber of the
palace. (223)

Then having entered another chambe? and directed
them (spies) as to their fresh “ungertakings, he, sur-
rounded by the ladies (of the palace), shall enter it
again to take his (night, meal, (224)


Manu Samhita. 253


‘hen having eaten, and been exhilarated for a while
with the sounds of music, he shall go to bed and
leave it, fully refreshed, at the proper time (/.e., at
early dawn.) (225)

The king (/¢¢. lord of the world) shall observe these
tules of conduct in health; and in disease he shalt
delegate these duties to his servants. (226)


CHAPTER VIII.


WISHING to see (i.e. attend to: adjudications of) law
suits, the king, in the ‘company of Brd&hmanas and
ministers, versed in elaw (/c¢. judgment or’ delibera-
tion), and in a gentle mein, shall enter the assembly
(court). (1)

Seated in, or staying at, that (assembly) in plairz
(?.@., as opposed to gaudy or majestic) garments and
ornaments, he shall supervise the cases of suitors. /2)

Each day, conformably to the rules of the S’éstra
and usages of the country, he shall severally adjudi-
cate (cases arising from) the eighteen sources of law-
suits (subjects of legal eontest such as, the non-payment
of a money debt, etc.) (3)

Of these (subjects,of contention), the non-discharge
of a debt, creation of a trust, sale of property by one
other than itg lawful owner, co-partnership transactions
(mercantile causes, resumption of a gift, non-payment
of his salary to a servant, non-performance of a promise
‘or contract, non-delivery or non-claiming of a good
bought or sold, dispute between a cowherd and an
ower of cattle, dispute in respect of a boundary,
assault and use of abusive language, theft, rash. act


ase Manu Samhita.


(robbery); adultery, duties of liusbands and wives, the
division of an ancestral estate, gambling with dice, and
wagers‘in respect ‘of animal-fights, form the eighteen
legs (subjects of law suits). (4—7:

In these matters of men, variously contesting with
ond ahother, he, conformably to the eternal Law,
shall adjudicate. (8)

When the king can not himself attend to the ad-
judication of a law’suit, he must delegate his authority
to an erudite Bréhmana for its decision. (9)

He the appointed Brihmana), accompanied by
three other jurors, shall enter the assembly-room
(court room); and there, either seated or standing,
they shall witness these transactions, (10)

(Fhe-assembly), wherein are ‘present (seated) three
Veda-knowing Brdhmanas and an official of the state
(judge) is‘called'a Brahma assembly. (14)

All the members of the tribunal, in which truth
(or justice) is conquered by falsehood (or injustice}
and falsehood is not pierced by the needle of justice,
should be regarded as smitten with impiety.. (12)

. Rather oné should not attend a tribunal, but once
there; he’ must speak’ nothing but truth; by keeping
silent or speaking falsehood in a tribunal, a man be-
comes guilty of vice (13)

The members of a tribunal, wlerein truth is killed
by untruth, and virtue by vice, are killefl by that
(partial or. prejudiced) sight. (14)

Virtue }ijustice), killed, kills (in its furn); virtue,
(justice), preserved, protects (in its turn); hence, virtue
should nat, be destroyed; may not killed virtue (7.¢,,
failure of justice) destroy us all. (15)


Manu Samhita. 433


Virtue (justice) is the showerer;* he, who impedes
the (full working of virtue, istcalled Vrishala ; hence,-
Virtue should not be obliterated. (16

Virtue is the one true friend of man who follows
him even after death; with the death of (his) body all
other (friends) fall off. «17)

A quarter part of the (sin of) injustice is attached
to the person making the false complaint, a quarter
part is attached to his false witnesses, a quarter
part is attached to the members of the tribunal, and
another quarter part is attached to the king, (18)


The king becomes sinless, the members of the
tribunal. are absolved of the sin, and sin goes to its
perpetrator, when the offender is righly condemned
(punished). (19)


The. Judicial officer of a king must be a Brahniana,
even if he be a mere Brahmana by birth (and bereft
of the virtues of his order), or a mere professional
adjudicator of issues, and not a S’udra under any cir
cumstaces whatsoever. (20)

The realm of a king, wherein a S’udra official
administers justice, is destroyed under his very eyes,
like a cow merged in the mire. (21)

The kingdom, wherein S’udras abound and which is
infested with an atheistic, non-Brahmana population, is
soon destroyed in its entirety, amicken with famine
and pestilence. (22)°


* Vrisha (hich usually means a bull) is the term that occurs
inthe text. Vriska here means a showerer of desired benefits,
Kamanim Varshité. «The whole meaning of the couplet is that,
by birth alone a min does not become a S’udra’; a man of easy
virtue is as much a S’udra_as one born of. S’udra_parents,


256 Manu Samhita.

Seated on the judicial seat, the king, with his body
well-covered, and having made oheisance to the lords of
the quarters of heaven, sl ice to witness the
affairs of the court (adjudication.  ‘aw-suits), (23)

Rearing In mind the good (of the protection of
subjects) and the evil (of their destruction’, and piety
(justice) and impiety (injustice) alone, (so that they may
not clash with each other), the king shall attend to the
(judicial) matters in court, and take up cases in
preference to the castes of the suitors. (24)

From external features such as, their meins, de-
meanours, tones of voice, gestures, and looks, he shall

ascertain the inner feelings of men. (25)

From meins, gestures, movements, deportments,
tones of voice, and expressions @f faces and eyes should
be comprehend the inner mind. (26)

The estates of fiiendless orphans the king shall
keep in his custody for so long as they do not come up
to age and marry. (27)

So shall he protect the estates belonging to sterile
or sonless women, to women who diave not got any
Sapinda relation (and whose husbands are absent in
distant countries , to widows, and to chaste but sickly


wives. 28:

A virtuous king shall punish, like thieves, those of
their male ( elations) who might have attempted to
rob them ‘of the™ estates) during their life-times. (29)

For three years, the king shall hokl in trust a
property whose rightful owner cannot be ascertained ;
after three years, he shall confiscate,it (by law of
escheat.) 30)

“Saying it mine,” he, who shall claim such #
treasure, must give its exact (measure and description,


Manu Samhita. 257


‘and if they be found correct, the king shall make it
‘over to him. (31)

Failing to give the correct colout, size, and des-
‘cription of the lost article which he has claimed, as well
‘as the time and place of its loss, the king shall fine
‘him its‘équal value in money. (32)

The king shall receive from the owner of a lost
‘article in case of its recovery,'a sixteenth or twelfth
part of its value according to the superior, middling,
“or‘inferior status of its owner. (33)

The king’s official shall make over to the king all
fost‘articles which-might have come into their posses-
‘sions, and the king shall cause‘all thieves caught (in his

- realm) to.be (trampied down) killed by elephants. (34)

From the man, who ghall truly claim a lost treasure
tas his own, the king shall realise a sixth or twelfth part
‘of its value. ‘(35)

In the event, of one’s falsely claiming ‘such a lost
article, the king shail fine him an eighth pait of its
value, or a lesser fine in the case of doubt. (36)

‘An erudite Brahmana, having received a treasure
previously - given by another, shall take the whole of
it; inasmuch as he is the lord of all (wealth). 137)

The king having found an old treasure, buried
‘underneath the ground, shall give a half thereof to
Brahmanas, and half he shali deposit in his treasury. (38)


Of old treasures, and metals (and minerals, etc.,
fornd undermesth the soil, the king shal! retain a
moiety thereof, inasmuch as he is the owner and pros
peckor (of mines). , 39)

* The king shall recover from thieves all articles they.
have stolen, and make them over to their respective
owners without any distinction of castes; a king, by

33


258 Manu Samhita.


enjoying such stolen articles, acquires the sin. of a
thief. (40)

The king, cognisant of laws, and in consideration
of the duties of. the (four) several orders of society,
as well as of usages and customs of different localities,
guilds, communities and families, (not incompatible
with the doctrines of the Vedas) shall discharge his
own duties (z.e., enact and enforce laws, recognizing
the valid authority of those customs and usages). (41)

Men, discharging their own specific duties, even
if they happen to be remote, become endeared to the
world for the factiof theirjbeing true to their respec-
tive works (duties). (42)

The king, or king's officials (judges, etc.) shall never
fabricate a false case, (or instityte a false law-suit) out
of greed,* nor put off (//¢. be indifferent to the hearing
of a case for (illegal) gratifications. (43)

As a huntsman traces the wounded. quarry to its lair
by means of its blood-streaked foot-prints on the ground,
so the king shall administer justice (7.e., adjudicate
cases) by meats of inference (and positive proof. (44)

The king, presiding over a tribunal, shall ascertain.
the truth and determine the correctness of the (alle=
gation regarding) the subject of the suit, the correctness’
of the testimonies of witnesses, the description, time,
and place (country) of the transactiom (or incident)
giving rise tomthe case, as well as: its usages, and
prononnce the true judgment in consideration of the
merit he will acquire (in heaven by so doing). (45)


* The king, out of partiality or greed, must “not {drag n@n-
litigant men into alaw suit; he must not fabricate false cases,
nor falsely start law suits against his subjects for monty.
Katyana,


Manu Samhita. F<)


Whatever has been done by good men, or what
ever has been done by the virtuous Br&hmanas, should
be regarded as valid, if they be not contrary to the
law and usages of (their country:, and the king shall
shall give judgment in conformity therewith. (46)

If a creditor makes an allegation (institutes a suit)
against a debtor for the recovery of his money, the
king, after the debt has been proved, shall cause_such
money to be realised from the debtor, and make it over
to the creditor. (47)

By those means, by which the creditor can realise
the amount of claim from the debtor, the king shall
cause it to be realised from the debtor and make it
over to the creditor. (48)

By means of friendly pursuasion,* by getting its
payment assured by ‘a bond or oath,t by means of
fraud,} by arresting the person of his son, etc, or
by employing force,’ which forms the fifth means, a
creditor can realise the money from his debtor. (49)

He, who will thus realise his money from his
creditor, must not be indicted by the king for his
having realised the same. (50)


* The text has. Dharma, Suhrit Sambandhi-sandishtaih
Samena Chaénugamenacha ;. Prayena Vaé vint dapyo dharma esha
Udahritah.

Realisation of a debt by a creditor from a debtor by means of
gentle pursuasion, or by following him, or tgrough the pursusion
of his friends is called Dhgymahk. ”

{ The hypathecation of his property to, or execution of a bond
by him in favour of, his creditor by a debtor is called Vyavahdra.

} As by seizng another man’s money kept with or in the posses-
sion of the debtor *(Anyahrittad: Vahritya dapyate tatva sopadhth},-

q| By dragging him bound to his (creditors) own house and inti-
midating him with. sticks and cudgels (Baddhd Svagrikaminiya
tddunddyairupa Kramaih),


260 Mann Samhita


If a debt or does not adntit the debt, and if that.
debt be subsequently proved ‘in court (by means of
‘documents, etc), the king shall recover and make over
the debtal amount to the creditor, and) impose a
small fine upon the debtor according to his pecuniary
circumstances. (51)

In the event of the debtor not admitting the debt
‘even after the tribunal has ordered him to pay it off,
the complainant shall substantiate his elaim with
‘documents {and witnesses), and the king, after the:
proving of the debt, shall impose a fine upon the
debtor for this fraudulent denial. (52)

“The king shall dismiss the suit, instituted by] a
plaintiff who has cited witnessess who can not be
possibly present at the time of the transaction (2.2.
payment of the money, or has purposely failed to
produce witnesses, he has already cited, or does not.
understand that his later allegations contradict his
former ones.

Or tries to amend a former statement by alleging
a new and different fact,* or who, relevently interro-
gated by the court, refuses to give any answer. (54)

Or consults with his witnesses in a solitary place
where he should not so consult, or does not answer


* As for example, having said that, the debtor took a Palam
weight (four tollas) @ gold from my | hand” the creditor or the
plaintiff corrects himself afterwards, e yes, the debtor took a
Palam weight of gold from my son.”—Kulluka.

+ The text has Samyak Prunihilanchartham ‘t.e. interrogated
as to why did he lend that money if the darkness of the night
and iw the absence of any witness, the plaigtiff does not give any
reply (Kasmat tvayd rétrévasdkshikam cattamityevaméadt prad-"
vivekena prishtah Sanna Samsdhatte) —Kulluka.


Manu Samhita. 261


questions by the court, or hurriedlv leaves the premises
of the court. (55)

Or refuses, when asked (by the court to speak out,
or fails to prove his allegation, or. understands not
what is required to be proved and the means by which
that proof can be established.. In such cases cre-
ditors shall not be entilled to recover from debtors
their claims. (56)

- And for these teasons the judge shall dismiss the
suit of a plaintiff, who, having alleged to have wit-
nesses, shall fail to produce them in court, after being
so directed by it to do. (57)

A. complainant who refuses to depose any ; thing f in -
court after filing his written statement (plaint or com-
plaint) shall be punished with death (ina complaint of
grave and serious nature), or with a lighter penalty
(in a light cast) ; and his case shall he dismissed if he
refuses to answer for three weeks. (58)

If a (defendant fraudulently disowns a true debt,
or if a plaintiff sets up a false claim, in court, the king
shall fine them double the amount, so fraudently dis-
owned or claimed. (59)


If a debtor (defendant), interrogated by the judge\
denies the debt, then he shall have to prove his non-
indebtedness before the king and Brahmanas with
(the testimony of at least) three witnesses. (60)


Now I shall discourse on witffesses by whom
creditors shal$ get their transactions attested, and the
mode in which they shall bear the true testimony. (61)


Kshatriya, Vais’ya and Sudra house-holders who
are residents of the, same village or town’ with the
creditor, are fit to be witnesses. In times of distress
any person may be a witness. (62) : ,


262 Manu Samhita.


In all matters, trustworthy, non-avaricious men, who
are conversant with all forms of virtue, should be
made witnesses ; and men of contrary characters should
be avoided. (63)

Persons having pecuniary relations with the parties:
(or having any interest in the transaction), or their rela-
tions, dependants (cohorts), or enemies, as well as sick
folks or persons degraded for any heinous crime, or
those who have known to bear false witnesses, should:
not be made (¢.e., cited as) witnesses. (64)

The king, an artisan, a professional actor, a musician,
‘a S’rotriya Brahmana, an ascetic, and a religious men-
dicant can not be called as witnesses. (65)

A born dependant, a man of condemnable character,
a highway robber, a miscreant, gn infant, an old man or
one deprived of any bodily organ (must not be cited
as a witness). (66)

A man in bereavement, an intoxicated person, one
afflicted with thirst or hunger, a fatigued, angry, or
sexually excited person, and a thief, (must not be made
witnesses). (67)

Women shall be the witnesses of women (in money
transactions etc.,) and members: of twice born orders-
shall be the witnesses of men of their respective orders ;.
virtuous S’udras shall be witnesses on “behalf of S’udras
and members of vile orders, on behalf of men of
their own casteay(68)

Any one, who is aware of the acts of the litigants,
done in a room or forest, or at the time of death, is
competent to bear witness. (69)

In the absence of any other available evidence, a
woman, -an infant, an old man, ‘a disciple, a friend, a
slave, or a servant may bear testimony. (70)


Manu Samhita. 263


The faltering ; speech i is thé indicator of an old mat,
Ynfant, or a sick folk deposing any thing false; under
these circumstances their réal mind should be infarrad
from gestures and demeanours, (71)

In all cases of violence,* theft, kidnapping, ‘or
elopement of females), abuse, assault, or battery, wit-
nesses (of aforesaid qualifications) should not be cre
garded) and examined as the only i wit
ness.t (72).

In cases of conflicting testimonies (lit, herein
witnesses contradict one another) the king shall cause
the evidences of many witnesses to be takén down}
in cases of equal number of testimonies (on each side ,
testimonies of witnesses of tommendablée qualifica-
tions will prevail, and in cases where their (qualified
witnesses’)-number is etjual, the testimonies of excellent
Braéhmanas shall prevail. (73)

_ The testimony of an eye-witness in respect of a
fact which can be seen, or the hearing by a witness of
a matter which can be heard, should be regarded as
valid; a witness by spea king truth ,in respect thereof
is not disassociated with virtue and wealth (and does
hot become liable to a fine ¢ of money penalty). (74)

A wi witness, who has spoken in the assumbly of
venerables (in court) any thing other than what he
has actually seen or heard, shall be ousted of heaven,
and fall headlong into hell, after deat. (75)


: _* Such as acts of incendiarism, poisoning (administration of
poison, etc)—Rulluka.

+ In these cases the court mtist not refuse to record the testi-
mony of men whe are not possessed of the qualifications mention-
ed in verse 632 of this chapter, but is at liberty to taken down
‘evidences given by infants, old men, in short by all persons consi-
dertd able to give material informations.-Tr.


264 Manu Samhita,


A person, (present in court) must depose truly a8
to what he has seen or heard, when asked, even
though he may not have been cited as a witness (by
any party to the suit). (76)

A single non-avaricious mule witness should be
regarded as enough and competent for testitying to a
fact, while a host of virtuous women should not be re+
garded as competent witnesses owing to the fickleness
of the female temperament. Likewise, those, who beat
stigmas on their characters, (whether male or female),
are net competent to be witnesses.. (77)

Whatever a witness has spontaneously (2 e.,- volun-
tarily) alleged shall be taken cognisance of for the
adjudication of a case by the court) ; his allegations of
a contrary character (¢.e., those made out of fear, or
through inducement or pursuagion etc.,) should be
rejected as worthless. (78)

The presiding officer of the court (Pradviveka);
shall interrogate the witnesses, present, in the presence
of the complainant and defendant, courteously address-
ing (lit, consoling) them in the manner following. (79)

Speak truly what you know regarding the deal.
ings between the plaintiff and the defendant which
form the subject of the present suit you have been
cited as a witness in this matter. (80)

A witness, who alleges truth in his deposition,
attains the exalted gfgions after death and acquires an
excellent fame in this life; this fs a statement which
Brahma has approved of .2i¢,, woishipped). (81)

A witness, for giving false testimony, ° shall be
oppressed, a captive, for a hundted existences, under
water, tied with the serpent nooses ®f Varuna (water
god); hence, a witness must speak truth. (82)


Manu Samhita. 205


Truth purifies a witness, and it is Truth that
augments virtue (justice); hence, “Witnesses” of all
castes must ust speak truth. (83)

His Self (soul) is the witness to his own self (¢.¢4
to all his acts); Self is the refuge of self; hence, by
bearing false witness, one must not insult his own self,
{the omiiiscient and eternal witness to all inci-
dents). (84)

Miscreants think that, there is none to witness
their secret vices; the gods and their inner Selves are
the witnesses to their misdeeds. (85)

The two worlds (Heaven and Earth), the -water, the
heart, the sun, the moon, the lord of Death, the
wind-god, the night, the two, junctures of the day and
night, and virtue are,cognisant of the thoughts of
all creatures. 85)

In the presence of the gods (divine images)
and Brahmanas, let him, pure (in body and mind), ques-
tion the pure Brahmana witnesses, with their faces
turned towards the north or the east, about the truth,
in the forepart of the day. (87)

He @. e. the judge) shall say unto a Brahmana (wit-
ness “speak,” “speak truth” unto a Kshatriya; by the
sin of stealing a cow, gold or seeds he shall charge a
Vais’yu witness to speak truth; and a Sudra (witness),
by all sins. 88)


To regions, which gre said to be¥éserved for killer:
of Brahmanas and women, for infanticides, for the
violators of friendship, and fer the ungrateful, go (the
souls of) those who speqk falsehood, (after death). (89)

O thou gentle gne, may the (merits of) virtues.
-which thou hast practised since thy birth, all go to the
dog’, if thou speakest falsehood. .90)

34


266 Manu Samhita.


Think not, O thou gentle one, that, “I ant the soul,
and nothing exists but my own self;” for, the eternal
witness to virtue and vice always dwelleth in the
heart. (91)

If you quarrel not (by telling lies) with the
Supreme Self, the representative of the sun and Death,
which is ensconced in the heart (.e. conscience), you
need not go to the sacred) Ganges or Kurukshetra (for
the expiation of sit). (92)

~ Bare-bodied, shaven-headed, blind, and oppressed
with thirst and hunger, shall he go (to the doors of) his
enemies for begging his. food, {who shall bear false -
witness. (93)

In respect of ascertaining the truth (/¢, virtue), the
sinful one, who, being duty, interrogated, shall speak
falsehood, shall fall headlong into the hell of extreme-
darkness (Andhé-tdmisram). (94)

He, who being summoned to court (/¢. present in
the tribunal) alleges distorted facts, or facts which he
has not personally witnessed, (in consideration of bribes
offered to him), does not know that his conduct is like
that of a blind man attempting to eat a fish with its
bones. (95)

A greater being than the Self of a man, which at
the time of his deposing (in court) never apprehends
that, he will speak falsehood, the gods know not in
this world. 6S )


O thou beloved one, hear me degcribe the specific
kinds of falsehood avd the numbers -of his ancestors
which one kills by telling lies. (97)

By telling a lie in respect of an animal, one kills ve
(generations of; his ancestors; ten (generations of his
ancestors, by telling a lie) in respect of a cow; a hun-


Manu Samhita. 267


dred (generations‘of his ancestors,{by telling a lie) in
respect of a horse ;{ and a thousand generations of his
ancestors by telling a lie){in respect of a person. (98)


By telling a lie in respect of gold, one kills ali his
ancestors and unborn (descendants); by telling a lie in
respect of aland one commits the sin of killing ali
creatures, Hence, one should not tell a lie lor a
land. (99)


False evidence given in respect of ‘waters (7.e., tanks
ponds, etc.), carnal knowledge of a woman, gems, or
any kind of stone-ware is as sinful as a lie spoken in
respect of land. (100)


Considering these evils of giving false evidence (/:#.
speaking falsehood), you must speak what you have
actually seen or heard. (01)


Brahmanas, who live by tending cattle, as well as
those (Brahmanas) who-are traders, artisans, profes~
sional actors or musicians, money-lenders, or are in
the service (of any body), should be treated as. S’udras,
(if summoned to a court as -witnesses). (102)

A witness, who, out of compassion, has knowingly
gtated a fact otherwise than it is in reality, shall not
be ousted of heaven therefor, since such a speech
(statement) is called a divine allegation, (103)


In cases where the allegation of truth would lead to
the (lawful execution (/it. death) fofPeS'udra, Vais’ya,
Kshatriya or, Brahmaua, a witness is warranted; to
speak falsehood. In such a case,'a lie is ereaier than
truth. (104)


_ Such (false) ‘witnesses shall worship the deity fof
Speech with offerings‘of sacrificial porridge, that being
a good expiation for the sin of speaking such lies.3(105)


268 Manu Samhita.


Qc muttering the Kushménda Mantra, or -the
three Richas running as Uditi, or the three Richas
sacred to Varuna, he shall duly cast libations of
clarifiedjbutter in the sacrificial fire. (106:

A witness in health (¢.¢., not incapacitated by disease:
or sickness), having refused to depose in respect of a
tmoney-debt in court, shall pay the equal amount of the
debt to the creditor anda tenth part thereof to the:
king. (107)

The witness, "who, within a week of his deposition
in court, is found to be punished with a disease, or with
the death of a relation, or with the burning of his.
house by fire, shall be liable to pay the debt (e.,
the amount in claim) and a fine to the king.* (108) _

In a suit without witnesses, the truth should be:
ascertained by causing the contending parties (litigants)
to swear or affirm on oath. (109:

The gods and great sages have sworn for deter-
mining the truth (in suspicious cases) ; Vas’ishtha swore
in the court of king Paiyavanat (of yore), (1101-

A wise man shall never wantonly swear for a small
thing; by unnecessarily swearing a man is destroyed
both in this world and the next. (111)

A swear (falsely made by a husband of many wives
as to his preference to one of them, present at the
time), as well as that made in respect of a matrimonial


* Such calamitia&, are ‘considered to be the effects of divine
retribution for the false evidence of tle witness, ene must “make
good the amount of money which the defeated” creditor might
have lost in conrt, and also pay a fine to the king for perjury.

J Once on a time, Vis’vamitra accused Vas’ishtha of having
eaten a hundred sons of his own. Vas’ishtha to exculpiate himsel
swore to his own innocence in the court of king Suddmé4, the
son of Piyavana.


Manu Samhita. 269


(negotiation) in respect of forage for cattle, in respect
of fuel, or the one made for the advancement of a
Brdhmana, does not entail any sin. (112)

A Brahmana shall be. caused to swear by truth; a
Kshatriya, by his weapons and riding animals; a
Vais’ya, by his cattle and seed-grains; and a S’udra,
by the sin of all the crimes. (113)

Or he (s’udra) shall be caused to carry fire* in his
hands, or to be drowned in water,t or to swear by
touching the head of his son or wife. (114:

Him, whom a well-kindled fire burns not, nor water:
ean drown, nor disease does strike, should be speedily
pronounced innocent in an ordeal. (115)

Of Vatsa, who was accused (of his S’udra origin)

. by his younger (step) brother of yore, the fire, in con-
gnisance of the good of the world, did not burn the
hair, on account of the truth of his assertion. (116)

In all litigations (“e. partly heard or adjudicated
suits) in which false evidence would be subsequently
detected, all orders and proceedings must stay, and
whatever has been done (in connection therewith) must
be regarded as undone. (117)

False evidence is said (to emanate) from greed,
ignorance, fright, friendship, desire, anger, foolishness,
and juvenile (fickleness.) (118)

I shall enumerate in due order the punishments
to be inflicted on a witness who gifes false evidence
under circumstances (7. 2., out of reasons) other than
these, (119)


* A red hot iron ball, weighing fifty Palas and to the girth of
ight fingers, should be carried on the palm, strewn over with
Asvatha leaves.


+ As regards other forms of ordeals see Vishnu Samhita,


a70 Manu Samhita


For giving false evidence out of greed, out of mental
agitation, out of terror, or out of affection, one shall
be respectively punished with a fine of a thousand,
two hundred and fifty, one thousand, and a thousand
Panas. (120)

For giving false evidence out of lust (7. e., sexual
obligation) one shall be punished with a fine of two
thousand and five hundred Peanas; for giving false
evidence out of anger or spite the penalty shall bea
fine of three thousand Pazas, for giving false evidence
out of ignorance one shall be punished with a fine of
two hundred Pazas, while the penalty for giving false
évidence through inadvertance shall be a fine of a
hundred Panas. (121)

For guarding against the failure of justice, and
for repressing crime, wise men have laid down these
penalties for giving false evidence. (122)

A virtuous sovereign shall punish false witnesses of
the three social orders in the aforesaid manrer and banish
them from the country; while he shall simply exile
a false witness of the Brahmana caste from the realm
(without punishing him with a money-pena:ty). (123) °

Unhurt even in those ten places (limbs), on which,
the self-origined Manu has directed that punishment
should to be inflicted, a Brahmana offender shall be
banished fiom the country. (124)

The reprodustjve organ, the} tongue," hands, legs
which (stand) ‘fifth (in the listf, the eye, the nose, the
ears, property and body (are. the ten places of punish-
ment. (125) ~

Considering the wilful repétition (i. e., wilful anat
repeated perpetration) of a crim& by (an offender),‘ag
well as the time,'place, and circumstances of its perpe~


Manu Samhita. 27%


tration, the light or serious nature of the offence
committed, and the bodily strength (and pecuniary
circumstances of the offender to bear the penalty),
punishment should be inflicted on an offender. (126)
An unlawful punishment destroys fame and renown
‘and shuts out the};heaven in the next world; hence,
(the king) shall withold an illegal punishment, (127)


By punishing those -who should not be punished,
and by not punishing those who ought to be punished,
the king acquires a great infamy and goes to hell, after
death. (128) :


A first offender should be let off with a (warn-
ing ,a second offender (/.e. one who. has committed
the same offence for the second time) should be let off
with a strong censyre; one, who has committed the
same offence for the third time, should be punished
with a fine; while death (corporeal punishment, or
mutilation of a limb) should be the penalty for one
who has committed the same crime for the fourth
time. (129)

In cases where corporeal punishment. would not
prove sufficiently deterrent, all these four forms of
penalty should be simultaneously inflicted on the
offender, (130)


Now 1 shall enumerate the measures of copper,
silver, and gold as they are kngwn in daily use (z.¢.,
barter or exchange hy men), and by which names they
are current in the world. (131)


The smallest particle of dust, which is seen to float
in a ray of sun-beam, admitted through a hole in
the window, is called a Zasra-renu. (132)


Ei htsuch Zusra renus make a Liksha; three


292 Manu Samhita.


Likshas make a Rdja-Sarshapah; and three Raja Sar-
shapas make one Gaura Sarshapah. (133)

Six (Gaura) Sarshapas make one Yavamadhya, .
and three Yava-(madhyas) make one Krisknalam
(Ratti); five Krishualakas make oné Masha, and six-
teen Mdskas make .one Suvarna weight of a (Gold
mohur). (134)

Four Suvarnas make one Palam, ten Palas make
one Dharanam; two Krishnalas of equal weight make
one Raupya-mishaka, (135)

Sixteen such Raupa (silver) mashakas make one
Dharanam or Raupa (silver) purdnam; one Karshika
(eighty Aattis or a quarter Palam) of copper is called
a Panah or Kérshapanah, (136)

Ten Dharanams make one Raupya (silver) Séta-
maua and four Suvarnas make éne Nishka. (137)

. Two hundred and fifty Paxas constitute what is
called Prathama Séhasa; five hundred Panas, Madh-
yama Sahasa;and a thousand Panas, Uttamaséhasa.
(138)

In the event of the debtor acknowledging his debt
to the creditor, the king shall fine him (at the rate of)
five Panas for each hundred Panas of the debtal.
amount ; while in the case of his falsely denying the
debt (the king shall fine him) double the amount (ze.
ten Panas for each hundred Panas of the amount in
claim.) This is Pa injunction of Manu. (139)

A fodey lending creditor shail charge interest (on
the money lent and advanced on a mortgage) at the
rate fixed by Vasishtha, i.e. an eightieth part of each
hundred per mensum. (140)

Conformably to the practice ‘of virtuous men, let.
him take interest at the rate of two Panas for each


Mann Samhita. 273


hundred Panas per mensum; by charging interest at
the rate of two Panas for a hundred Panas per
mensum, a man does not commit any sin. (141)


Interests shall be respectively charged from ‘(the
nembers of the (four) social orders in the order of their
snumeration at the rates of two, three, four and five
Panas for a hundred Panas, per mensun, (142)


No interest shall accrue when the debtor will
borrow money by assigning the use of the mortgaged
property to the creditor; and the mortgaged premises,
for being long held in mortgage, shall not be considered
as any thing other than a mortgage, and as such, in-
capable of being sold. (143)

A creditor, forcibly. enjoying a mortgaged property
which ought not to bé so enjoyed, shall remit the
interest on the money (lent and advanced) and satisfy
the debtor with the price thereof; in default whereof
he shall be punished as a stealer of the mortgaged
property (article). (144)

An article, held in trust or under a mortgage, should
be returned to its owner on demand without the least
delay; even after the long continuance of such an.
article in trust or mortgage, its return or reconveyance
to its owner must not be withheld, (145)


It may be. necessary to make use, out ‘of amity, by
t person of a cow, horse or camel,» gnade over to
1im to be tamed or brolen to harness* but such an use
vill not extifiguish the right of its owner in the
inimal. (146)

If the owner of a smal property (money), knowingly
lonnives z at its possession and enjoyment by another
or ten years, he. shall not be competent to recover

35


374 Manu Samhita.


or claim it back: as his own‘ after the lapse of that -
period.:(147)

If the owner of such a property be not an idiot
or &% minor, an uninterrupted possession thereof by a
person (holding it in adverse possession) will create
his right of ownership therein. (148)

Enjoyment: of a mortgaged article, of a boundary
land, of a minor’s property, of a trust property, of a
(sealed) deposit, or of a woman, does not extinguish
the right of ownership. (149)

A foolish mortgagee, who without the consent of its
owner (the mortgager) has enjoyed (the mesne profits
of?) a mortgaged;property, shall have to remit a moity
of interest to him by way of compensation. (150)

Principal and interest, simultaneously recovered at
one time, must not double thé amount (originally lent
and advanced); in respect of paddy, fruit, wool and
animals of conveyance five times the quantity or
number (originally lent) may be recovered, and not
more, (151)

A: rate of interest other than what has been laid
down in the S’astra (in respect of the members of
a certain caste), if agreed upon (by. them), must not

be held as valid, in other instances interest may be
charged at the rate of five percent (as sanctioned by
Manu.) (152)

A creditor shall not recover from a debtor interest
‘accrued due off money advanced by him) not later
than a year,* nor at rates disallowed by the Sastra


* The text has Ndtisamvatsgrim Vriddhim, 1t.e. a creditor,
who has agreed to receive interests after three, four or six mons,
must not let it accrue due for mére than one year. He gh@ll
demand and receive it within that period.


Manu Samhita. 275


-such as, Chakravriddhi (compound interest), Kd/a-
vridhi,* Karitat} and Kayika.t (153)

A debtor, incapable of discharging his debt and
willing to renew the bond, must pay off ;the whole
amount of interest accrued due thereon and execute a
fresh one in the favour of the creditor. (154)

Failing to pay off the whole amoant of interest,
he shall add up the principal and the balance of in-
terest, and execute a bond (in favour of the creditor)
entering therein the consolidated amount as the prin-
cipal). (155)

A (carrier) wno has stipulated to carry (a thing) for
a certain time, or for a certain distance (/¢. place) in
consideration of fares, charged at the rate of compound
interest, shall not be entitled to it (compound interest), if
he fails to carry it for that much time or distance.* (156)

In such cases, the rates of interest on fares, which
traders by land or sea (/i#., seafaring merchants),
conversant with the laws of time, place and fares,
might have thought fit to lay down and fix, shall
prevail. (157)

He, who stands surety for the appearance of a debtor
(in court), is bound to discharge the debt with his own
money, if he fails to make the debtor enter appear-
ance, (168)

A son is not bound to discharge the gambling debt
of his father, or the unrecovered balance of a fine
gee

* Kdlavriddh, i.e., the interest must not double the amount
originally lent and advanced, no matter how long the debt might
have been standing unrealised.

} Kavita, the heavy rate of interest which a debtor in distress

ay be agreed to pay.
o } Kdyika, the exorbitant rate of interest which is exacted
from & debtor by means of threat or violence.


276 Manu Samhita.


. imposed upon him, nor to pay off the money, due from
him for standing surety for another (money recognisance)
or a gift made by him to a unworthly person. (169)*

’ The rule in respect of one’s standing a surety for
the appearance of another has been stated above;
in the event of the death of one who has stooda
surety for goods, his heirs shall pay off ae recognisance-
Money, )160)

(If it be asked) why should the heir of a person
who has entered into a recognisance for the appearance
of another or for (the delivery of) goods, pay the
recognisance money, (the answer is) that, on the death
of one who has stood such a surety on having received
a proper sum of money from the debtor (or the
defendant) his ,heirs are bound, to refund it to him (i.4
debtor.) (161)

In the event of the surety having received enough
money from the debtor to pay off his recognizance,
his heirs shall pay ityback to the ‘debtor out of their
own funds. (162)

An act (money-transaction), done by an insane,
intoxicated, or diseased person, or by an infant or old
man, or by one, not duly authorized in that behalf, can,
never be valid. (163)

A deed of agreement or contract, (containing pro-
visions) contrary to law (Dharma) and confirmed

usages, if it bes @xecuted by one, must not be held as
valid. (164)

A mortgage, sale, gift, acceptance, or trust, if found


" # The text has Vrithdddnam, Kut.uxa explains it by parihdsa-
nimittam Bhandddibhyo- deyatvena pityangikritam, money: gift
promised by the father to fools and jesters, etc., for jokes qr
foolings.


Manu Samhita. 277


to be fraudently done, shall abate, and all proceedings
made under it should be regarded as unmade. (165)

If one dies after having made a debt for (the mainte-
nance of the) family, then all the members of that
family, whether joint or divided, shall discharge that
debt out of their own funds. (166)

A debt, contracted by a slave for the maintenance
of his master’s family, the master, whether residing in
that or in a distant land, is bound to acknowledge and
approve as one contracted by himself. (167)

- Anything given, or written (executed) through the
application of force, or forcibly enjoyed, (as well as)
all acts done under force, should be considered: as
undone ; this is what Manu has said. (168)

A witness, a surety, and an umpire are the three
(persons) who suffer Pain for the sake of others ; and
a king, a capitalist (/7¢. rich man),a Brahmaua, anda
merchant are the four (persons) to whose thriving do
the others contribute. (169)

A king, even in direst need, must not take what
ought not to be taken; even when most affluent in
wealth he must not give the veriest trifle of what
ought not to be given. (170)

By taking what ought not to be taken,.and by giving
what ought not to be given, the weakness of a king is
proclaimed ; he perisheth both here and hereafter (171)

By receiving his just dues, by preyenting the inter-
mixture of castes, aid by protecting the weak, the
strength of*a king is augmented; he thrives both in
this world and the next. (170)

Hence, the king shall conquer his anger and. senses ;
and forswearing pergonal love and derison, he shall be.
like unto death, impartial to all. (173)


278 Manu Samhita.


The bad-souled king, who fails to administer even
handed justice out of greed or folly, his enemies soon
do subjugate. (174)

Him, who, with his anger and desire fully control-
led, administers justice. (/i¢., adjudicates cases), do the
subjects fondly follow, like the rivers, following the
sea. (175)

Ifa debtor lodgesa complaint against a creditor,
endeavouring to realise his just money from the former,
the king shall punish the debtor with a fine, equivalent
to a [quarter part of the debtal amount, and realise,
and make over to the creditor, his just dues. (176)

If the debtor be of the same caste with the creditor
or belongs to a caste inferior to that of the creditor,
he shall pay off the debt by bodily work (compatible
with his social order); while a‘debtor, belonging toa
caste superior to that of the creditor, shall repay his
debt by easy instalments. (177)

Conformably to the aforesaid rules, the king shall
decide law-suits between the parties thereto with the
help of witnesses, and testimonies, etc. (178)

A wise man shall deposit money in trust witha
high-born, good charactered, virtuous, truthful and
opulent person with a large family (of sons and rela-
tions. (179)

In the same manner, in which aman will deposit
any money in the hand of another, will it be returned to
him on demand. A8% the deposit #&, the refund is. (180)

On the deposit-holder failing to refund the trust (Zé.
deposit) money to the depositor on demand, the latter
shall apply to the judge, and the judge, at the back
of the depositor, shall demand the money of the
trustee, (182) :


Manu Samhita. 279


In the absence of any witness-in such a transaction,
the judge, for the determination of truth, shall cause
a handsome looking attendant (officer of the court)
disguised so as to conceal his identity, to deposit gold
with the alleged (deposit-holder) and to demand the
same of him. (182)


If the holder of such a deposit can return the gold
in the same form and in the same condition (z.¢., sealed
or unsealed) in which it was originally deposited, it
shall be presumed that he does not hold the deposit
as alleged by the complainant (plaintiff). (183)


But if he fails to return the deposit (gold) made by
his attendant in its original form and condition, the
judge shall recover from him both the deposits (7.¢.,
gold and the article or,money alleged to be deposited
by the plaintiff) This is the decision of law. (184)


One shall not give an article, mortgaged to or
deposited with him, to his heir, inasmuch as either in
his life-time or after his demise (such a giving may
lead totthe probable destructiou of such a pledge or
deposit article. (185)

If after the demise of the depositor, the holder of _
the deposit, out of his own motion, returns the deposit
article to his (depositor’s lawful) heir, the relations of
the depositor shall not be competent to bring an action
against him (i.e., the holder of the dapgsit) in the king’s
court (on the allegatich of the exisfnce of more such
deposits with him.) (185)


On the institution of such a suit (/i¢. after the filing
of such a complaint), the king, forswearing all dupli-
city, shall endeavourjto recover the deposit article with
amicable means; and in_consideration of the character


280 Mann Samhita


of the deposit-holder he shall achieve his end with
concilliatory appliances. (187)

This rule holds good in respect of realising all kinds
of deposit articles; if the deposit-holder returns a sealed
deposit article with the seal intact, or does not take
anything out of it, he shall not be indictable. (188)

A deposit-holder is not liable to make good the
deposit article in the case of its being stolen by a thief
or in the event of its destruction by water or fire. (189)

(The king shall) examine the stealer of a deposit-
article, as well as the one who fraudently demands an
article that has never been deposited as a trust, by
means of all the aforesaid expedients (of concilliatory
measures, etc.,) as wellas by means of ordeals men-
tioned in the Vedas. (190)

He who refuses to give bagk a deposit article, and
he who demands an article without having kept it as
a deposit, both of them should be punished as thieves,
and the value of such an article should be recovered
(from either of them.) (191)

The stealer of a deposit article shall be punished
with a fine equal in value to that of the article deposited
with him* and the king shall punish a stealer of a

- pledged article with a fine, equal to its value, without:
any distinction of caste or person.* (192)
He, who on a falset pretext robs another of his


* This couplet is got a mere repetion of what has been stated
in the preceding verse®but contemplates cases where Brahmanas,
who were above all corporeal punishments, would be guilty of
offences enumerated here in—Kulluka.

+ The text has Upadhabhisha on a false pretence. Kulluka
exemplifies it by illustrations such a8, when a man goes to his.

neighbour and says “the king is angry upon you,- pay me so
much money atid I shall shield you from the king’s wrath.


Manu Samhita. 2st


Ynoney, shall be punished, together with his abettor,,
with any of the various corporeal punishments* (men-
‘tioned before. :193)

An article {such as gold, ete.,) doposited with a mat
in the presence of a witness, should be returned to the
depositor (on demand) in thé same quantity or measure
in which it was deposited ; and such a witness, deposing
falsely to its (original measure or quantity), shall be
liable to punishment. (194)

An article, which as been deposited and received
in secret, should be secretly returned (to its depositor
‘on demand); like the deposit is the taking back. (195)

The king, without anywise ‘oppressing the deposit-
holder, shall ascertain the fact whether the article is
actually a deposit, or a pledge, or a deposit out of love
or affection.f (196)

The king shall never accept tne testimony of him,
who, without having any right of. ownership in jit, sells
an article without the consent of its rightful owner,
and who, although a‘thief ‘in reality, does not consider
himself as such. (197)

Such a person, who is equally culpable as a thief,
‘if he happens to belong tothe family of the rightful
owner, should be punished with a fine of six hundred

.Panas; otherwise he shall be held guilty as a thief and
punished with the penalty for theft. @ 98)

A sale or mortage of a thing y a person other

than its right and lawful owner, as well as all acts


* Imprisonment, or muwlation of any limb or organ such as,
he hand, leg, ete.—K ullyka. :

{ The text has Prityopanthitacya. That is, an article
deposited with 2 person, out of love by the depositior, for its
temporary use by the former. Kulluka.

34


283 Man Samhita

dine by him (in connection’ there with) must_ bé
regarded as invalid (lit, not done). This is the deci-
sion of Law. (199:

In the case where possession (of a property by
oné) is evidenced, but not the means (right or littlé)
under which he has come by it, the title will determine
the right of ownership therein and not the possession.
This is the decision of law. (100)

At a public auction, thé man, who purchases a
property (lit, wealth) for a (good) value in tie presencé
of legally competent witnesses, is said to lawfully come
by it, since (a good) value or consideration purifies the
property z.e. removes any defect ini its little after the
sale.) (201)

If the auction-ptrchaser (vender of an article or
property), on his failure to produce (lit, show) the
vendor,* can prove (the fact of his purchasing the
same at a public [lit, open auction and] its consequent
purity for its being so purehased, he shall not be
punishable for purchasing it from oné who is not its
rightful owner; but the rightful owner of the article
in such a case shall have jit back on payment of half
the consideration to the purchaser. (202)

An article (of one species) mixed with another of
a different (species), a pithless substance, an article
weighing less tharfits surface or manifest weight, and
an article that is under a cover or lies at a’ distance.
must not be sold. (203)

If by showing a (more handsome) bride (at the
time of fixing the dowry) another (of more homely


* As in the event of his death, or departure to a distant
country.—Kulluka,


Manu Samhita. 283


features) is given in marriage, than the bridegroom.
shall be entitled to marry both of them on pay-
ment of that (single; dowry); this is what Manu has.
said. (204)


He who gives away in marriage an insane girl; or
one who is not virgin, or is affiicted with.any. form: of:
cutaneous affections, without informing (the bride.
groom) of her such disqualification shall be liable to:
punishment. (205)


If a réttvik (priest) duly appointed to officiate at a
religious sacrifice, abandons his office, the institutors.
of.the rite shall be bound to pay him his honorarium:
(Dakshind) proportionate to. the: work he. has per-
formed. (106);


Having officiated’ as a priést at’ a: sacrifice till the_
payment of the honorarium (z.e., nearly up to the com#
pletion of the-rite), if he is compelled to abandon hfs
office, he shall be entitled to the entire-amount of;
Dakshind, and to get the remaining rites done by..
another. (107):


The query is whether in respect ofa religious rite;
for the performance. of each part whereof a separate.
Dakshind (Honorarium) has been sanctioned by the-
S’dstra, persons who have respectively performed those
parts shall each obtain a Dakshin4 or shall they apor~
tion among themselvés the entire Pakshinza (paid in one.
lump sum @& the close of the ‘sacrifice ? (208)


(Among the follgwers . of.certain branches of the-
Vedas the practice is that) the Adhvarju shall obtain:
a chariot, the- Brahma shall receive a swift-going-
horse, the Hofé shall obtain a horse, and the Udgded.


284 Manu. Samhita.


(chanter of the Samveda) shall obtain the cart it: whicl
the Soma plants have: been carried.* (209):


-(In. a Jyotishtoma sacrifice the Dakshina (which.
consists of a hundred kine should be distributed among
the sixteen: priests-as follows, vz.,) the (four) principal
priests (Hoté, Adhvaryu, Brahma and Udgétd) shalk
each receive a Dukshiné of a dpzen kine, those
known. as) Afaitrdvaruna, Pratistotdé, Brahmanan-
chchhansi and Prastoté shall each receive a half. of the,
Dakshiné of the former (4e., six kine each); the priests,
of the third set. (4chchhdvak, Nashtrt, A. nidhra
and :Pratikartd) shall each have a third part of the
Dakshiné (of a principal priest, ze., four kine each),
and the priests of the fourth set (Grduastut, Unnita,
Potdé and Subrahmanya) shall eacp have a quarter part
of the. Dakshind of a principal priest. 7.e., they shall.
have-three:- kine each.f (210)


* The text Chdpyanakkraye, which Kulluka explains by
Soma-vahana-Sakatam, a.cart.or barrow. employed to. bring the
soma: plant to. the hall of sacrifice. In-the Rick 19 of the Sukta,
IX (XLD of the second Ashtaka (Eighth Adhyaya of the Rigveda,
we. find. a reference to these carts or harrows which are placed in.
front, of the hall of sacrifice; north and south, of an alfar erected:
_outside.. The Sakatas are requested, according to Sayana, to
proceed'to the west part of the northern. Vedi, or altar; accord:.
ing to KAtydyana, they are also termed Havirdhdnas, oblation-.
containers, and:-part of the ceremony consists in dragging them.
into different positions @ different periods accompanied by-appro-.
priate Mantras. which are given in Yajar Veda. V. 14-31,


} The sixteen are thus enumerated: by. KutiuKa Buatra, in
the order and proportion in which they are entitled to share ina
Dakshina of a hundred cows, being arranged in four classes;
of {which the first four- are severally the heads, and the.
others subordinate to them, inthe same course of succession :;-
I. Hetri, Adhwaryu, Udgairi and Brahman, are to have


Manu Samhita, 285,


The shares of several men, jointly doing a work
in this world, should be respectively determined
by applying the above-said principle (of division of
Dakshina: (211),


twelve each, or forty-eight in all. 2, Maitravaruna. Pratistotri.
Brahmanachchhansi,, and. Pratiharttri, six each, or twenty-
four. 3. Achchavaka, Neshtri, Agnidhra and. Pratiharttrt, four-
each, or sixteen ; and 4. Gravadut, Netri, and Subrahmanya, three,
each, or- in all twelve; making. up the total of one hundred:.
Ramandatha, in. his. commentary on the Amara .Kosha, Vu.. 17,
also gives the names of the sixteen priests, with a few variatiogs
from KunLuxa. Gravastut is, his reading, instead of Grévadut,
and it is the more usual one; and in place of the Prastotvi Netri,,
and Potri, he gives, Prasthatvi, Prasastri: and Balachchha: We
have -the Potri repeatedly named-in,the text of the Rich, as wells
as the Prasastri. In the Aitareya Brahmana b, vu..I, the sir-
teen priests to whom.portions of the offering.are assigned are alsa

enumerated with some modifications, having, instead of the

Praiisiotri, Gravadut, Netri, and Subrahmanya, ofthe first lists,
Pratiprasthatri, Upagatri, A’treya, and Sadasya. The same

authority, however, adds as. priest not included: in.the sixteen,

Gravastut, Unnetri, Subrahmanya, and the Samitvi, immolator,

when a Brahman. In Madhava’s commentary, on the Nydya

mala vistara Of Fuimini, for an extract from. which Iam in-.

debted to-Dr. Goldstucker, he enumerates. the- sixteen, priests as:
classed in four orders, following the-authority of Kumaril Bhatta,

much to the saine effect as. Kuttuxa; they are: 1. The Adhwaryx,.
Pratiprasithatri, and Unnetri; 2, the Brahma, Brahmanachch-.
hansi, Agmdhra and,Potrt ; 3.the Udgatri, Prastotri,Pratiharitri,.
and Subrahmanya 3 and 4. the Aptri, Maitgrmruna, Achchhi-

waka, and Gravastut. The four. first are especially charged ‘with.
the ceremonial of the. Yajur-Veda; the next four superintend

the whole according to. the ritual of the three. Vedes ; the third

class chant the hymns, espegially. of the Sama Veda,. and;the

fourth repeat the hymns ofthe Aich; the head of each class.
receives the entire. Dakshina, or gratuity ; the second, one-half;

the third, one-third; and-the fourth, a quarter:.the several: funca

tions are not very explicitly described;


286 Manu Samhita.


One,. who has: given, or has promised to give a
small) sum of money to.a person for a religious-rite,
shall; get back the money- or withhold the gift in the
event of the-latter’s failure to perform the same. (212)

If the supplicant, out gf greed or. foolishness, fails-
to refund the money to the giver, the king shall fine.
him. a, Suvarna (gold mohur) for-the theft. (213)

Thus is described the law. relating to malefeasance-
in respect of trusts or deposits ; now I shall discourse
-on (the law relating ;to) non-payment of wages (to.
servants, etc.) (214)

A servant, working for a stipulated pay, if-he re-
fuses to do, without being sick or indisposed, the work-
agreed, upon: out: of insolence or impertinence, shall be
punished with a fine, of. eight érishnalas of gold; and.
the wages shall not be paid to him. (215)

(But) if. he-had.been really ill; and if after recovery-
he .resumes.his-work as-originally agreed upon, he shall.
be entitled to his pay, due.to him for howsoeverlong-
a-period (216)

He, who fails. (to. get the stipulated-work done by-
others); when ill, or refuses to do it himself when well,
shall. get no. wages, even if,a very. small:part of tlie.
‘work-is left undone. (21,7)

Thus the law-relating to the-payment of wages has
been fully-set fosth, now I shall discourse on the law
relating to breacff of. promise ér contract. (218)

Him, who, having promised-on.oath to abide by the
tules of the guild or assembly of- his village-or country,
breaks that promise-(i.2., transfresses.the. rules) out of.

greed; (the king) should banish from,the. couutry. (219)


Haying thus. punished’ the breaker of promise, (the,


Manu Samhita, 287


‘king shall impose upon him) a fine of four suvarna’ ‘or
six Nishas, or one hundréd silver coins. (220)

A virtuous king shall adopt this law of penalty ‘7.z.,

inflict these penalties on) in respect of persons who
“have violated their compacts with théir caste-guilds
or village-assembliés. (227)

H:, who, having purchased or sold an article répénts
his sale or purchase, must return it (to the seller or
purchaser) within ten days of the sale or bargain.* (222)

After the expiry of ten days such an article must
not be given or taken; for giving or taking it (aftér
the lapse of ten days) the king shall punish the giver
or the taker) with a fine of six hundred Panas. (223)

Him, who gives a faulty girl in marriage without
mentioning the defect, Jet the king punish with a fine
of ninety-six Panas. (224)


He, who, out of spite, calls a virgin, unVirgin, shall
be fined a hundréd Pazas, on his failure, to substantiate
his statement. (225)


Nuptial Mantras are related to (/it., established
on: virgins,* and they are never applicable in respect
of unvirgined brides, inasmuch as they stand outside
the pale of (Zit. are bereft of) all religious rites. (226)


* The text has Kanya which Kuntuxa has explained by
Akshatayout, which is ordinarily interpreted to mean 4 girl
who has not menstruated, It would hive been far more
desirable, if the celebrated commentator could have used
any other term less equivocal and less confounding. The
intention of the author is plain enough, and we would prefer to
explain Kanyd by Akshugna-Sati-Chchhadé (a girl with un-
ruptured hymen, which is the recognised evidence of virginity
jp a girl). The marriage ofa girl, after menstruation, is not con-
demwed by Manu, nor does his Samhita depict her status asa
wife in any way inferior to that of one married before the age


e


288 Manu Semhita.


The nuptial M4/axtras impart the. status of a wile,
‘and the rite of Suptapadi (walking seven steps). gone
through by the bride, completes thé creation of wife-
hood. (227)


In whatsoever transaction (¢.¢., not only ina sale,
or purchase, or payment of wages), him, who shall have
any cause of complaint. the king shall givé this equit-
able relief in accordance with the abovesaid rules. (228)


o


‘of puberty. Inthe verse XC of the IX. Chapter we find that, an
unmarried girl, after menstruation, is enjoined to live for three
years in her father’s house, and to seek out a husband thereafter ;
and the verse XCIIL. of the same Chapter exempts a man, marrying
such a girl, from the obligation of paying a dowry to her father.
The right of using Vedive Mantras in marriages of pregnant
brides, and the privilege of recognising such marriages as sacré:
ments were not denied to the parties thereto by Manu, as would
from. Ya Garbhint Samskriyati or Vadhu Kanyd Samudbhabam
etc. In respect of the Gandharva form of marriage, which
may be solemnised even. after its actual consummation by the
couple, Devala enjoins that Vediee Mantras and rités should be
respectively recitcd and gone through on the occasion of its
solemnization before the nuptial fire. (Gdudharveshu Vivdheshu
panar Vaivahika Vidhih ; Kartavyas'cha tribhivvarnaih Samaya-
ndgni Sdkshikah), The couplet in the ninth chapter of this
Samhita which lays down that 4 man of thirty should marry a
handsome girl of twelve (7rinsadvarsho-dvahet Kanydm hridydm
Doddas’avarshikim) does not necessarily suggest that girls should
be married before puberty, since menstruation has been known to
occur’ in ‘many cases @arlier than tit age. What the couplet
does at best ig to fix the highest desparity of age allowable
between the matried couple. The intention of the Samhita is to
ensure the highest sanctity of marriage and this verse evidently
contemplates that a bride must be a ch&ste virgin in order to be
consecrated with the sacrament of marriage. (Dharmay Vivdaha\,
which the loss of her virginity before the wedlock does not entitle *
her to claim.


Manu Samhita. 284


Now I shall duly discourse (on the law relating to)
‘disputes between owners and keepers of cattle, arising
‘out of their (respective) short-comings (7.e., negligence,
‘or omissions). (229)

The keeper of an animal, made over to him for
tending, shall be answerable for any injury done to it
during the day, while its owner shall be answerable for
‘an injury done to it in his house during the night ; but if
the terms of tending be otherwise (7. e., for the day
‘and night) the keeper shall be answerable for injuries
‘done to it both in the day and night. (230)

A cowherd, who has agreed to take milk in lieu
of his wages, shall milch with the consent of the
owner, the ‘bést ore among (each group of) ten cows.
In the absence of a stipulation for any other form of

wages, this should be held as the (standard) wages of
cow-keepers. (231)

If an animal strays out of sight, or is killed by a
reptile or, by falling into.a pit (//¢ uneven ground)
through the wilful negligence of the kecper of his
duties, the keeper shall be bound to make good its loss
(to the owner of the beast. (232)

: If a beast be stolen by a gang of thieves, who have
perpetrated the crime with the beat of drum, the
keeper of the flock shall not be liable to make good its
loss if he informs its owner of the fact at the proper
‘time and place. (233)


If a beast dies a natural death, its keeper shall cut
off its ears, skin, hairs, bladuer, sinews, gall-stones, or
other bodily appendages which may testify to its natural
fleath, and show them to its owner (for his vetter
conviction). (23.4)


In the absencé of the flock-k eever, if a wil attacks
37


290 Manu Samhita,


the flock and carries away a beast, the flock-keepet
shall be answerable for, and liable to make good the
loss of, that animal to its owner. |2 35)

But if a wolf darts upon and kills one of the animals,
grazing in flocks in a wood in his presence, the flock-
keeper shall not be answerable (for the death of that
animal to its owner.) (236) ,

A strip of land to the extent of four hundred cubits
or to the width of three large sticks at the outskirt of
a village should be set apart for pasturage ; a ground of
thrice as much measure should be kept reserved for the
purpose at the outskirt of a town or city. (237)

If the cattle graze on and destroy the crops stand
ing on an unfenced ground, adjoining the pasture-land,
the king shall inflict no penalfy on the cattle-keepers
(for such destructions of crops.) (238)


Such a land (¢.e, the one adjoining or close to the
pasture ground) should be enclosed with a fence or en-
closure over which a camel would not be able to see,
and too dense to allow a dog or a hog to thurst its nose
or snout into it. (239)


If a flock of cattle, attended by its keeper, tres-
passes on an enclosed field near the road side, or at the
outskirt of a village, or close to a pasture ground (and
grazes upou the growing crop), the king shall fine him a
hundred paness, the owner of the field is bound to keep
them off, if the cattle, unattended by the keeper,
attempt to enter upon it. (240)


If the cattle trespass and graze on fields other
than those described above, the keeper shall be punish-
ed with a fine of one Pana and & quarter; but under a
circumstances he shall be liable to make good the lés¢
to the owner of the field. (241)'


Manu Samhita. 2gt


No penalty exists in respect of the destruction of a
_crop by a cow within ten days of her parturition, or by
a bull branded with the sign of a discus or trident, or
by a bull, dedicated to a deity, whether attended by the
the cowherd or otherwise. This is the decision of
Manu. (242)

In the event of the destruction of the crop through
the negligence-or omission of the owner of the field,
he shall be punished with a fine of ten times the
measure of grain payable (as revenue) to the king (in
respect of that field) ; and half of the above fine shall
be the penalty when the loss will occur through acts’ of:
the owner’s servants and without his-knowledge. (243) -

Conformably to these rules the virtuous king shall
settle disputes between keepers and owners of animals,
arising out of their respective omissions or short-
comings. (244)

In.a dispute as to boundaries between two villages,
‘the boundary should be determined in the month of
Faishtha (May June) after the border embakments have
become fully apparent (on the recedence of water, (245)
Trees such as the Nyagrodha, Ashvattha, Kins'uka,
‘S’almali, Séla, Tala, and Kshevi should be made. (é.e.,
planted to demarcate) boundaries. (246)


Boundaries, demarcated by shrubs, bamboos, various:
kinds of Shamis,. ( ), creepers, mud-pillars, or
Kuvjaka plants are nevér obliterated? (247)

At the meeting of boundaries, tanks, ponds, foun~
tains or reservoirs of water should:be made, or divine
temples should be erectéd. (248)


Considering the “blunders: committed’ by men in:
determining or ascertaining boundaries, other hiddem
signs of boundary-demarcation. should be made, (249)


292 Man. Samhita.


Stones, bones, cow’s hairs, husks of paddy, ashes,,
bits of broken pottery, dried cow-dung cakes, bricks,
charcoals, broken bits of baked clay and sands. (250)

(Or in other words: all things which the earth may.
not consume in course of time should be buried under-.
neath the soil for the. purpose of fixing the boun-.
daries. (251) 7 ,

The king shall lay down the boundary between the.
two contending (villages) by the abovesaid demarcating.
substances, having determined it by previous. possession,
and (the existence of) water-courses. (252)


In the case where the jexistence of. boundary-marks,
would give rise to a suspicion the testimony of witnesses,
would settie the dispute as to the boundary. (253)

He (i.e., the king) shall interrogate the witnesses.
as to the bonndary marks in the presence. of the dis-.
putants and the inmates of the same.village. (254)


Statements made. by the witnesses regarding the
determination of boundaries, together with their names,
the king shall cause to be entered into the boundary-
paper (record). (285)

The. witnesses, clad in red garments, decked with
garlands of red flowers round their necks, and carrying
loose earth on their heads, shall swear as to the cor-.
rectness of thg dboundary. by their respective good,
deeds. (256)

Their true testimony shall purify these truthful:
witnesses, but. the king shall punish each of. them,
with a fine of two hundred pézas, if. they give false
evidence. (257)

In the absence. of. witnesses, four. persons, living.

at. the four angles of the village (S’amantas), shall.


Manu, Samhita, 293.


assiduously determine. the boundary. in. the. presence.
of the king (258),

In the absence of Samantas, persons who are the
members of old-established families in the village shall
be cited as witnesses, and, in cases where even, they
would be unavailable. the. foresters, [such as trappers,

‘ fowlers, cowherds, “Kazvartas' (fishermen), herb-collec-
tors, snake-catchers, and, grain-pickers]. shall be inter-
rogated. (259—260) . ;

Interrogated. by him, whatever they will say as to
the mode. of demarcating the boundary between, the.
two villages the king shall lay.down the boundary in
accordance therewith. (261)


‘ In demarcating the, boundaries. of: a field, well, pond,
orchard, or a house, the testimony of a man, living in
the neighbourhood and, cognisant- thereof, shall be.
taken. (262)

The king shall punish each. of these. witnesses with
a fine of Madhyama Séhasa, (five hundred Panas), if
they give false evidence in, respect of. the. boun-.
dary. (263),

For having wrongfully taken possession of-a house,
or orchard by intimidation, one. shall be punished: with
a fine of five hundred Pazas, for- having unknowingly
taken possession thereof one shall be punished with.
a fine of two.hundred*Panas. (264°

In the. case. where.it will be impossible. to. (rightly),
demarcate the. boundary, the king.shall go to the spot
in person and allot fhe. lands (in dispute) to such (of
the disputants) to whom they may be most useful. (265)


¢ Thus the. law (e., procedure) relating to boundary.
disputes has been laid down in its entirety,; henceforth,


294: Manu Samhita,


I shall: discourse. on the. law; relating: to. the- use: of
abusive. language. (266).

For. having: used, any abusive. language to a Brah-
mana, a.Kshatriya, shall be-punished, with a fine of one-
hundred, Panas ; whereas for the-:same- offence.a Vais’ya,
shall be punished: with a fine. of. one- hundred and fifty-
or two. hundred, Panas ; and.a.S-udra, with a corporal,
punishment (flogging, etc.) (267:

‘For having used abusive language-to a Kshatriya a.
Brahmana shall be punished with q.fine of: fifty Panas;
while for having used abusive. language toa Vais’ya.
or-S'udra he shall be punished with a, fine: of twenty-five-
or-twelve Panas. (268)

In the. case of abusive.language.among members of:
the. twice-born castes, the. offgnder shall be punished’
witha fine:of twelve. Panas, while inthe event of filthy
language. being used: the. offender shall be- punished.
with a fine.of double value(twenty four Panas.) (269)

If a Studra uses any offensive. language .to.a member
of the twice-born. caste-(Brahmana), his: tongue: shall be
slipped off, inasmuch as he (S’udra} has’ originated from.
a vile place (of, the body of Supreme-Brahkma). (270)


If a S'udra abuses a member of. the twice-born. order
by mentioning his name and caste, a burning tong
to the length of ten fingers. shall, be inserted. into. his:
mouth, (271),

If a Studra. insolently- gives. any religious:or moral;
-advice.to-a Brahmana, the-king shall cause. hot oil to,
be-poured into his:mouth, and. ears. (272).

For haying cast unjust aspersions.on one’s’ learning,,
country, caste, deeds, or bodily’ features, the king:
shall punish, the offender with a fine of two hundred!
Panas, (273);


Manu Samhita. 295


For having taunted a man for his physical deformity
(2i#. for having ‘called a lamé man, lame, anda blind
‘man blind) or for having Committed a similar offence out
‘of insolenee, the king shall punish the offender with a
fine of ohne Karshé Panam (sixtéen Panas. (274)

For having used abusive language to his mother,
father, wife, brother, or son, and for not having given
‘way to his preceptor, the king shall punish the offender
‘with a fine of one hundred Panas. (275)

In the casé where a Bra4hmana has uséd abusive
language to a Kshatriya, and vice versa, the king shall
punish the Brahmana with a finé of the Prathama
Sahasa class (one hundred Paxas) and the Kshatriya
with a fine of the Madhyama Sahasa class (two
hundred and fifty Panay. (276)

‘For such a (quarrel) having occnrréed between a
Vais'ya and aS’udra, the Vais’ya shall be punished
with a fine of the Prathama Sihasa class, and the
S'udra, without having had his tongue clipped off, shall
be punished with a fine of the Madhyama Séhasa class.
This is the decision of law in respect of punishment
(foi these offences). (277)


Verily thus the punishment for the use of abusive
language has been described. Now I shall discourse
on the law relating to assault or battery. (278)


The limb with which a member of g vile caste shall
assault a member of & supérior cAste shall be cut off.
This is the injunction of Manu. (279)


If a member of a vile caste raisés his hand against,
or assaults, a member of ,2 superior caste with his
hand, his ‘hand shal be cut off by way of punishment ;
if he commits the same offence with his leg out of
anger, his leg shall be cut off. (280)


296 Manu Samhita.


If a vile person attempts to sit on the same seat
‘or cushion with a man of superior caste, the king shall
punish him by branding his waist and exiling him from
‘the country, or by lopping Off his hips: (281)


If any one insolently spits on the person (of a
Brahmana) the king shall causé his lips to be cut off;
if any one urinates or passes flatus (out of insolence)
on the person of a Brahmana: the king shall cause his
penis or regtum to be cut Off. (282)


If any bédy pulls him (Brahmana) by the hair or
beard, the king shall cause his (offender's) hand or leg
to be cut off, if any body pushes him (Brahmana)
by the neck the king shall causés his testes to bé
severed. (283)

A Breaker of skin or drawer ®f blood (on the body
‘of oné of his own casté) shall be punished with a fine
of oné hundred Panas,a piercer of flesh, with a finé
of six Mishkas ; and breaker of bone with exile. (284)

Any oné injuring thé factors by which the trees
and vegetables may be used and enjoyed (such as
fruits, flowers, etc.) shall be punished with penalties
determined according to the gravity or lightness of his
offencé, (285)

If mén or beasts aré griéviously hurt, let (the
offender) bé punished with a punishment proportionate
to the greviousits$ of thé hurt. {286)


In (a casé of assault attendéd with) tRe injury of «
limb or organ, or with a wound or bleeding, the king
shall causé the assaulter to payso the assaulted person
the costs of the medical; tréeatnient necessary for his
cure; in default whereof he shall be punished with a
fine, ddublé of such costs in value. (287)


Manu Samhita. 397


For having knowingly or unknowingly done any
‘thischief to aiother’s property (or goods), the offender
‘shall satisfy the injured party by paying off its price or
‘by replacing the same, and also he ‘shall pay a fine
‘of equal value to the king. (288)

For having knowingly or unknowingly destroyed
‘a leather, ora leathern article, a wooden or earthen
vessel, ora flower, bulb or fruit, (belonging to another)
‘one shall pay a penalty of five times its value. (289)


Except under the, ten circumstances (hereunder
‘mentioned) the carman, passenger and the owner of a
car shall be liable to punishment. (290)


If a mischief happens to any beast or person (on the
road) on the breaking of the nosé-tope (of a bullock
yoked to & bullock cast), on the breaking of the shaft
{of a horse car), on account of the uneven nature of
the ground, on the breaking of a wheel or its spoke,
on the breaking of the straps, reins, or headrope, or
even after being loudly warned of the danger, (the
carman, or carowner etc ,) shall not be liable to punish~
ment. This is what Manu has said (on the subject.)
(291—292)

If for the inefficiency of the driver any mischief (or
accident) happens (to a person or beast), the owner of
‘the car shall be punished with a finé of two hundred
Panas (for having employed an unskilfyl carman. (293)


If the dréver (car-man) be an efficient one, he alone
shall be liable to a fine of two hundred Panas; other-
wise the riders, car gwner etc., shali be each liable to
a fine of one hundred Panas. (294)

If for beiig obstructed in his way by beasts or carts,
a ‘charioteer, while driving his chariot, happens to kill

38


298 Manu Samhita,


any creature, he shall be summarily punished (for that
rash act.) (295)

For thus having killed a man, he shall be summarily
punished with the penalty for theft (e., with a fine
of one thousand Panzas and not with the punish-
ment for man-slaughter), while the penalty shall be
half as much (2.¢., five hundred Panas) if he chances to
kill a large quadruped such as, a cow, elephant, horse
or camel) (296)

Two hundred Pawas shall be the penalty for killing
small beasts under the circumstances, while that in res-
pect of kiliing an auspicious beast (such as, deer) or bird
(such as a parrot, etc., is fifty Panas. (297)

Five Méshas (of silver) is the penalty for (thus) kill-
ing as ass, goat or lamb, while 4 Mésha of silver is the
penalty for killing a dog or a hog (under the circum-
stances) (298)

A wife, son, servant, disciple, or uterine brother,
found guilty of an offence, should be punished with a
chord or with (a foliated) bamboo stick. (299)

They shall be chastised on the lower parts of their
bodies, and never upon the upper limbs. For having
flogged them in any other fashion one shall be liable to”
punishment for theft.. (300)

Thus the law relating to assault and battery has
been fully set forth ; now I shall discourse on the law
rélating to theft. (gor)

The king shall assiduously endeavour fo repress the
thieves in his kingdom; by repressing theft the fame
and kingdom of a king are augmented. (302) -

Always worshipped is the kingswho grants protec-,
tion from thieves (to his honest subjects); verily

auginenteth his sacrifice (of sovereignty) which grants


Manu Samhita. 299


perpetual protection (to his subjects) as its Dakskinds
(honorarium) (303)

The king receives a’sixth part of the religious merit
of. his subjects whom he in every way protecteth, and
a sixth part of their sins if he fails:to properly pro-
tect them. (304)

Whatever Vediac studies do his subjects do, what-
ever sacrifices do they perform, whatever gifts they
make, and whatever prayers they offer to the deity,
through his properly protecting them he enjoyeth a
sixth part of the merit thereof. (305)

By lawfully protecting his subjects, and by punish-
ing those who deserve punishment, the king acquires
the merit of a sacrifice which is performed daily with a
Dakshind of a hundred thousand cows. (306)

The king, who without protecting his subjects rea-
lises from them a sixth part of the produce of their
fields, revenue, duties, royalties* and fines, goes to hell
after death. (307)

The wise have called such a king, who realises a
sixth part (of the agricultural products of his subjects
without giving them the safety of life and property, as
the filth-taker of all. (308)


A law-breaking, avaricious, non-protecting, oppres-
sive, king who sucks up the life-blood of his subjects
(i.e. squeezes out their substance Ry means of unjust
and oppressive taxes) should be reSarded as one (al-
ready) doomed to a vile existence (after death.) (309)


By the three lawful expedients of imprisonment,


* The text has Pratibhagam, KuLiuxa explains it by Phela-
skusuma, S’aka-trinddyupayanam Pratidinagrahyam Tolls or
royalties of fruits, flowers, edible bulbs, hays, etc, daily paid to
the king.


500 Manu Samiiita.


enchainment and’ various forms of corporeal punish
ment ‘such as the mutilation of a limb, etc.,) let hinx
assiduously repress the miscreants. (310

By repressing the wrong doers and encouraging:
the virtuous, kings are constantly purified as Brah-
manas are purified by the performance of religious.
sacrifices. (311)

A king, seeking his own. welfare: shall always tole--
rate the calumnious remarks made by suitors, defend-
ants, infants, old men and sick folks. regarding him-
self, (312)


He who bears:with ill-reports: (adverse criticisms)
made by the aggrieved is glorified in heaven ; he who.
out of pride of wealth can not tolerate: such. criticisms:
goes to hell for that. (313)

A thief, with his hairs dishevelled, must run to the
king, confessing his own guilt and asking him to punish
his self. ($14)

Carrying a cudgel, or a club of catechu wood, or a
sharp spear, or an iron rod on his shoulder. (315)

Killed, or alive after being punished by the king, a
thief is exonerated from his crime; but the king who
lets off a thief without punishment himseif acquires
the guilt of theft. (316)

The sin of # f&jicide is. tragsferred to the person
who partakes of his food, the husbandsof a. faithless:
wife obtains the sin of her adultery, the sin of the dis-
ciple 'is contaminated to his preceptor, and the sin of a
yajémana (institutor of a religious rite) is transmitted:
to the priest officiating at the ceremony. (317)

After having committed crimes, men, punished’
by the king, become free from impurity and go to.


Manu Samhitd. 301


heaven after death as honest and virtuous men
do. (318)

He who has stolen a pitcher from a well, or broken
down a water house,* shall be punished with a fine of
one Masha and liable to return the stolen good to its
owner. (319)

For having stolen paddy of more than ten Aumbhat
measures a person shall be punished with death (corpo-
real punishment or mutilation of a limb); for having
stolen paddy of a lesser measure he shall be punished
with a fine of eleven times the quantity of the stolen.
paddy, which should be restored to the owner (320)

Capital punishment should be inflicted on a thief
for having stolen a fu/a weight of gold or silver or
precious (silk) cloths, weighing more than a hundred

palas, (221)

Mutilation of a hand should be the punishment for
stealing the abovesaid articles, numbering more than
fifty and less than one hundred. For stealing less than
fifty (pieces of cloth) the penalty should be eleven
times their value. (322)

Death should be the punishment for stealing jewels
and precious gems belonging to high born ladies and
men. (323)

For stealing large quadrupeds, weapons, and ‘medi-
cines, the king shall inflict proper punishments in consi-
deration of the hardness of the tinfe and the gravity
of the offence or otherwise. (324)


Half of the leg of a thief should be cut away for


* The text has Prepa [which means a house where water is
given to the passers.

‘} Two hundred Palas make one Drona, and twenty Dronas
make one Kumbha.


302 Manu Samhita.


having stolen and threaded the nose of a Brdhmana’s
cow, or for robbing an animal intended to be immolated
in a sacrifice. (325)

For the theft of cotton-threads, cotton, enzyme,
cow-dung, treacle, milk-curd, thickened milk, whey,
cordials or hays. (326)

(Or of} bamboo made vessels, salts, earthen vessels,
earth and ashes as well. (327)

(Or of all kinds) of fish, birds, oil clarified butter,
meat, honey, or any other animal produce. (328)


Or of other articles, wines, intoxicating drugs,
articles of food, or confection, the penalty shall be a
fine double the value of the article, stolen. (329)

For the theft of green paddy, of a shrub or creeper,
or of any other kind of unthreshed grains the penalty
shall be a fine of five érishnalas. (330)


For the theft of threshed paddy, 5é£as, edible roots
or bulbs, or fruits by one who is not related to their
owner the punishment shall be a fine of one hundred
Panas, whereas the fine shall be fifty Panas, if the
offender is found to be a relation of the owner. (331)


The forcible taking or carrying away of a thing
(with the knowledge and in the presence of the owner)
constitutes what is called Sdhasa (robbery), taking
away ot a thing in the absence of its owner constitutes
Steyam, and the hiding of a thihg after having stolen
it is called Chauryam. (332).

Him, who has stolen any of.the abovesaid articles
made suitable for human -use of has robbed the sacred
fire from the fire-chamber, the king shall punish with
a fine of the Prathama Séhasa class (i.e., one hunded


Panas.) (333)


Manu Samhita. 203


With whatsoever limb of his body one shall at-
tempt to commit theft, the king, for checking the
recrudescence of that crime, shall cause that limb to
be cut off. (334)


A father, preceptor, relation, mother, wife, son or
priest, who fails to discharge his specific duties, should
be punished by the king. (335)

For the offence for which an ordinary person would
be punished with a fine of one Xérshdpanam, a penalty
of one thousand Kdshépanam should be inflicted on
the king, if he is found guilty thereof. This is the con-
clusion. (326)


For having committed theft, a S’udra, cognisant
of the law, shull be punished with a fine eight times
the usual one in valtie; a Vais’ya, with a fine sixteen
times ; a Kshatriya, with a fine thirty-two times; anda
Braéhmana, with a fine sixty-four, hundred, or hundred
and twenty-eight times the usual one in value.
(337-338)

The taking of fruits and roots of trees, fuel wood
for fire, and hays for cattle, if they belong to others,
does not constitute theft. (339.


A Brahmana, if he wishes to take even his just fees
for teaching (a pupil) or performing a religious sacrifice)
from the hand of one whom he knewg to be a thief
(and which money he ‘knows to Mave been obtained
by theft) shall be liable to punishment as a thief. (340)

For having taken two pieces of sugar cane and two
edible roots from anothe?’s field, an indigent, way-faring

eBrahmana, shall not be liable to punishment. (341)


Wrongful detainers of stray cattle, as well as those
who let loose the horses tied to their posts in a stable


ROL Man Samhita.


and those who rob slaves, horses and chariots should
be punished as thieves (/:#. are guilty of theft.) (342)

A king, by thus repressing the thieves (in his realm)
acquires renown in this world and enjoys perfect
felicity in the next. (343)

Wishing to attain the status of Indra (king of the
deities) and an etrnal fame, let the king show not the
least indulgence for a moment to a robber. (344)


A robber should be regarded a8 a worse miscreant
than a thief, assaulter or foul-mouthed person (345)

The; king who tolerates (the depredations of a
robber soon incurs the ill will (of his subjects) and
meets his doom. (346)

Let not @ king, out of feelings of friendship, or in
consideration of a large pecuniary gain, let off unpunish-
ed robbets, who are the dread of all creatures. (347)

When (the practice of) virtue is obstructed (by
tyranny), when the eternal division of castes is any
wise jeopardised, Brdhmanas may wield arms (for the
preservation of law). (348)

He, who destroys life (commits shateatuanien for
the defence of his life and property, in a just and fair
fight, or for the protection of women and Brdhmanas,
does not become thereby morally condemmable. (349)

A preceptor, old man, infant, Brdahmana, or vastly
erudite person, coming as an Mtatdyin,* must be killed
without the least hesitation, (350) =


* Agnide Garadas'chaiva S'astrapdni Dhandrpahak kshetra
davdpaharicha S'adeti dtatayinah.° He who administers poison,
sets fire to his house, comes to assaulte him with a weapon, Of»
robs him of his treasure, or defiles his mother or wife are said
to be the siz Atatyanis (mortal enemies) of a man.


Manu Samhita. 305


By killing an A’tatiyin the killer acquires no de-
mecit, inasmuch as it is anger that kills anger in fact
in‘such a case. (351)


The king, having clumsily mutuatea their persons,
shall cause the de‘ileis of other mea’s wives to be bani-
shed from the country. (352)

Since it is through such miza that hybridisation
of tastes is effected ; and intermixture of castes is the
primal cause of vice waich leads to universal destruc-
tion. (353)

Aman, who is known te have held incests with
other men’s wives before, if found conversing in soli-
tude with another’s wife, should be punished with a


fine of the Pruthama Séhasa class (2. e., one hundred
Panas). (354)


But a man, whe is not impeached with an act of
previous incest, if found conversing in solitude with
anothers wife for any just reason, shall not be liable
to punishment; inasmuch as there is no delinquency
‘en his part. 4355)

If one accosts, and converses with another’s wife in
-ia lonely wood or forest, or at a holy pool or confiuence
of rivers, he shall be guilty of the offence of adultery
punishable with a fine of one thousand Panas, (356)


Sending presents of scents and, flower-garlands to
another's wife, cutting jokes witl, or embracing her,
touching her*ornaments and catching hold of her wear-
ing apparel, and eating, or sharing the same bed-stead,
with her are acts which are said to constitute Stri-
samgraha (adultery with another’s wife) (357)

A woman who tolerates being touched at het pri-
vate é/t., untouchable) parts by a man, and a man who


39


306 Wann Samhita.


tolerates being similarly touched by her aré said to be
-guity of adultery by mutual consent. (358)

A non-Braéhmana (Sudra:, found guilty of adultery,
‘shall be punished with death, inasmuch as it is incum-
‘bent on men of all the four castes to protect their wives
‘above (all other possessions). (359)

Beggars, proféssional panegyrists, men initiated in a
‘sacrifice, and artisans (such as cooks, etc.,) may, if not
otherwise forbidden, speak with other men’s wives
(while alone) (360)

Forbidden to speak with another’s wife, one must
not converse with her. For thus conversing inspite of
the warning the offender shall be liable to a fine of one
suvarna {gold Mohar.) (361)

This rule does not hold good in respect of wives
of Chdraxas (professional actors or musicians), A’tmopo-
jivins,* and of those who sell their wive’s embraces for
money, inasmuch as they deck out their wives for the
embrace of others, or lie concealed to help them (to
carry on their obnoxiops trade.) '362)

For having conversed with the above said females,
maid-servants, and false female ascetics (nuns) in
solitude, the offender shall be liable to pay a very.
small fine. (363)

He, who defiles a maid, not amatively disposed,
should be punished (with the mutilation of his repro-
ductive organ), buf for having visited an amorous maid
of his own caste one shall not be liable to corporeal
punishment. (364)

For sharing the bed of a man of superior caste,
a maid must not pay any fine, for having carnally


* Those who ccnnive at the adultery of their wives for money
and live upon the earnings of their infidelity.


Manu Samhita 307:


known a man of inferior caste she should be kept in-
carcerated.in.the house: (365):


For having. visited. a woman of superior caste a:
man of inferior caste must be punished with death ;
but if for having visited a. girl of his own caste, the-
father of the. girl asks for a money eompensation:
(lit, duty) he shall have to pay it to the-father. (366)


The: fingers of him who. forcibly ruptures the-
hymen of a virgin therewith shall be clipped off, and.
he shall be further liable:to pay a. fine of. six. hnndied.
Panas. (367)

A man, found guilty off destroying the virginity:
an amorous girl of his own caste with his fingers, shall’
have his fingers clipped off; and for checking the
recrudescence of the: crime, the offender shall be
punished with a fine of two hundred Pazas. (368)


A girl committing the same offence upon another
girl shall be punished with stripes and-afine-of. two:
hundred Panas; she shall be (further. liable to pay a.
compensation of double valie (four hundred. Panas).
to the father of (the deflowered girl). (369).


A woman found guilty’ of committing the same:
offence. on the person of a girl shall have her head.
shaved and fingers clipped off; and. thus mutilated);
she shall be perambulated on. ap ass (round the:
town). (379)

A wife, who out of pride of personal beauty and:
opulent relationship, has made. transgressions against:
her husband, the kin shall cause to be devoured by
ferocious dogs in a well-crowded. locality. (371)


»The king shall cause the male miscreant (adulterer)
to, be laid. down on.a hot bed of iron.and the public


308 Manu Samhita.


executioners shall cast logs of wood in the fire-bed
till his body is consumed to ashes. (372)

A person, found guilty of adultery within one year
of his having been punished for the same offence, shall.
be liabie to double the penalty; for sexually visiting
a girl of unconsecrated caste (!’rdtya} the penalty is.
the same as that for carnally knowing a Chandila
woman. (373)

For having sexually visited a woman of any twice-
born caste, whether protected. or unprotected by her
husband, a S’'udra shall be punished with the mutila-
tion of his reproductive organ anda confiscation of
all his goods and estates in the first named instance
(7.e., for knowing an unprotected twice-born woman),
and in the last named case he shall pay the penalty
with his life and all his ‘goods and estates) will be
escheated to the sovereign. 374) ;

A Vais’ya, found guilty of carnally knowing a pro-
tected Brahmana woman, shall be punished with im-
prisonment for one year, after which all his estates
will be escheated to the king A Kshatriya, found
guilty of the same offence, shall be punished with a
fine of one thousand Pazas and his head shall be’
shaved with urine. (375)

A Vais’ya and a Kshatrity found guilty of carnally
knowing an unpgotected Brahmana woman shall be-
respectively liableto pay fived ‘hundred and one thou-
sand Panas (to the king.) (376)

Either of them, found guilty of carnal knowledge
of a protected Brahmana womah, shall be punished as a
S’udra guilty of the same offences and burnt in a hav


fire. (377)
¥or having forcibly ravished a protected Brahmana.


Manu Samhita, 309.


woman,.a Brahmana shall be punished with a fine of
ene thousand /aaas, for having known sucha Brah-
mana woman with her knowledge andi consent he shalh
be punished with a fine of five hundred Panas. (378)

In respect of a Brahmana a death sentence must.
be commuted to one of shaving the hair of his
head; death-sentences may be passed.on members of,
all other castes. (379)

Let him (king) not kill a Brdhmana even if he
be found guilty of all the crimes ; he.must banish him
(Brahmana) from the realm unhurt and, with all his

ossessions. (380) eae a
ae heinous sin exists not inthis world than:
murdering (killing) a Brahmana; let not a king even
think of such a project jn his mind. (382)

Ifa Vais’ya is found guilty of the carnal knowledge
of a protected Kshatriya woman, or if a Kshatriya is
found guilty of visiting the bed ofa protected Vais’ya
woman, either of them must be. punished with the
penalty laid down for the carnal knowledge of an un-
protected Brahmana woman. (382)

For having visited the bed ofa protected Vais’ya
er Kshatriya woman a Brahmana shall be punished
with a fine of one thousand Panas; a Vais’ya or a
Kshatriya, guilty of the carnal knowledge ctf a pror
tected S'udra woman,, shall be fingd,one thousand
Panas. (383)

For having carnally known an _ unprotected
Kshatriya woman, a Vais’ya shall be punished with
a fine of five hundred Penxas; a Kshatriya, guilty of
the same offence, shall have the hair of his head
"shaved with (ass’s: urine, or he shail pay a fine of
five hundred Panas. (38 4)


310, Manu: Samhrta..


For having: visited; the. bed: of an: unproteetedi
Kshatriya, Vais’ya, or,S’udra woman, a. Brahmana shall
be punished. with a fine of five hundred; Panes; for:
having gone unto a vila-caste woman, he shall be- liable:
to a fine-of one thousand Panas. (385);

The. king in whose realm there exists nota thiefy.
a defiler of another’s wife, a foul-mouthed. person, a,
robber,, or- an assaulter attains;the region of. Ihdra (the-
king of the celestials). (386)

The repression; ofthese five kinds (of; miscreants):
by a.king in his own,realm grants:him suzerainty over-
his- compeers (contemporary sovereigns) and a high,
fame in this world. (387)

Ejther of the: Yajamdna (institutor- ofja religious:
ceremony) who unjustly renounces,a priest, capable:
of performing (that sacrifice), or the priest who re-.
nounces a Yayamdna, not in any way defiled. or
degraded, should be liable to pay a, fine. of ane:
hundred Panas. (388))

It is not proper (for a man) to. desert .his mother,.
father, wife, or son; for having deserted, any of them,.
not in any way: degraded, the: king shall punish him;
with a,fine-of six-hundred, Panas. (389):

In a dispute among Brahmanas regarding the-proper:
interpretation, ofa procedure. of ritual’ (lit, domestic:
sacrifice) the cing, for the rgason of} his own well~
fare, shall refrain from. passing any decisiye opinion on,
the subject. (399);

In such a case- the king having: properly. honoured:
the Brahmana, (disputants), and appeased, their anger
by conciliatory words must proceed to give. the propey
interpretation of their duties with the. help.of. (other).
Brahmanas (of. his court). (391),


Manu Samhita. art


Yh connection with %n auspicious rite fh which it is
mecessary to feed twenty Brdhmanas, if a Brahmana
feeds others in exclusion ‘of his neighbours and the
Ynmates of his house, he shall be Hable to pay a fine
of one Masha (of silver to the king.) (392)

A S'rotriya (i.e, Veda-knowing) Brahmana, failing
to feed a virtuous S’retriya (neighbour or inmate of his
house) om the occasion of a rite of prosperity (Jit.
that which e¢onfers progeny and prosperity such as,
marriage, ete.) shall give him twice as much food, and
a fine of one Masha (of gold to the king.) (393)

A blind or lame man, an idiot, one above séventy.-
years of age, and one who does any benefit to a Veda>
knowing Brdhmana must be exempted from paying any
tax (or revenue to the king). (394)

Let the king always do honour to (é.¢. provide
for) a S’votriya, sick man, invalid, or infant, as well
as to the indigent, high-born and the revered. (395)

A washerman must gently wash the clothes on a
smooth-board of S’almali (Bombax Malabaricum) plank,
he must not mix ones clothes with another’s, nor give
one’s clothes to another for use or wearing. 396)

For each ten Palam weight of cotton thread given
to a weaver, he must return eleven Palam weiglit of
manufactured cloth; otherwise he shall be liable to
pay a fine of twelve Paxas. (397)


At toll stations or ctistoms hougés, the king shall
‘receive a twentieth part of the profit on the price of
an article, determined by men, expert in fixing the
prices of commodities. (398)

The king shall copfiseate all the goods (estates etc.,)
of him, who, out of greed, sliall attempt to sell a
conimodity which is the kitig’s tionopoly, or to export


312 Manu Samhita.


commodities which are forbidden to be expotted
{contra-bands) to foreign countries. (399)

For having avoided the pnblic highway or sold his
‘goods in the night, or given out a lesser number (2. e¢.,
a false manifest of) of his goods with a view to
defraud the toll duties er customs, one shall be liable
to pay a fine eight times the value of the defrauded
‘duties. (4oo.

In consideration of the distance from which an
article has tome or to which it shall be despatched,
and for which periods: must it be kept in stock and
what prices it will obtain thereby, and the expendi-
‘tures to be incurred under these heads the king shall
fix the prices of artic:es of merchandise (401)

At the end of each fifth day, or at the close of each
fortnight, the king in the presence of the appraisers of
prices and in consideration of their stock in the market
ssnall lay down the prices of commodities. (402)

Weights and measures of trade let the king
personally determine and lay down, and let him examine
those weights and measures at the end of each six
months. (403)


The freight for taking a vehicle across a ferry is
one Pana, that for taking a load, which can be carried
by a man, across a ferry is half a Puna, the freight for
taking a beast or a woman acrossa ferry is a quarter
Pana, and that*éor taking man without luggage is
one-eighth Pana (Zit. half of the latter @mount ) (404)

Ferry tates in respect of vehicles, full of goods
of merchandise, should be determined according to
the preciousness or otherwise .of those commodities,
those in respect of indigent persons and empty sacks
and guny-bags, must be very small. (405)


Manu Samhit2. 313


‘The hire of a boat should be proportionate to the
‘distance of the journey and must be determined in
consideration of the nature of the season and the
current of the river. No rule exists in determining
freights of sea-going vessels. (406)

Pregnant women till during the second month of
gestation, sages who have taken the vow of asceticism,
Brahmanas, and Brahmachérins (religious students) are
exempted from paying ferry-tolls. (407)

Whatever loss the passengers of a boat might sus-
tain through the fault of the crew, the crew must
make that good out of their respective shares (in
freights). (408)

Thus the law relating to boatmen has been set
forth ; any thing lost in water through the fault of the
crew must be made good by them, who are not liable
for any thing destroyed by an act of providence. (409)

The king shall cause a Vais’ya (7.e. members of the
Vais'ya ccste) to carry on trade, money-lending, agri-
culture and cattle rearing; anda S’udra, to serve the
Brahmanas. (410)

A Braéhmana shall lovingly support a Vais’ya and a
Kshatriya, incapable of maintaining themselves, by
engaging them in their proper works or profes-
sions. (411)

For having compelled an initiated J Brahmana to
serve as a servant inspite of hisedisinclination for
such service, # Brahmana shall be punished by the king
with a fine of six hundred Pdnas. (412)

A S'udra, whether a slave purchased or otherwise,
emust be employed im service, inasmuch as it is for
stving the Brahmana that he has been created by the
self begotten one. (413)


40


314 Manu Samhita.


Even set at liberty by his master, a S’udra‘can tof
be liberated from service: service is his vocation by
nature; who shall emancipate him from that? (414)

A captive of war, a slave for maintenance, the son
of a female slave, one purchased for money ,a slave
obtained as a present, a hereditary one, and one
condemned to slavery for any offence, these are the
seven kinds of slave (/:¢., sources of slavery). (415)

A wife, a son, and a slave can never acquire any
property for themselves ; whatever they earn go to him
to whom they belong. (416)

Let a Brahmana unhesitatingly appropriate to him-
self whatever (his) S’udra (slave) has earned, inasmuch
as nothing can belong to tne latter, he being himself an
enjoyable good of the Brahmana. (417)

Let (the king) assiduously cause the Vais’yas and
S’udras faithfully discharge their proper and specific
duties, since their non-performance tends to oppress
(disturb) the whole world (1.2. social economy.) (4:8)

At the close of his’ duties, let the king regularly
supervise his income, expenditure, treasures and mines,
each day. (419)

A king by observing these rules (/:¢. fulfilling these
duties) becomes exonerated from all sin and acquires an
exalted status (after death). (420)


amen)


Manu Samhita. 315


CHAPTER IX.


I SHALL discourse on the eternal duties of the hus-
band and wife, leading a virtuous life, as well as on
those which are obligatory on them when they live
together or apart.* (1)

Men should never give any license to their wives in
day and night; by keeping them engaged in com-
mendable pursuits,t they should keep them under their
own control. (2)

The father protects her in infancy ; the husband, in
youth ; and sons, in old age ; a woman does not deserve
independence. (3)

Condemnable is the father who does not marry his
daughter at the Proper age; condemnable is the hus-
band who does not visit his wife (during her menstrual
periodt); and condemnable is the son who does not
maintain (/:# protect) his mother after the demise of
her lord. (4)

Women should be especially protected from the
slightest of corrupting influences (such as, a bad com-
pany etc.,) since an unprotected woman aggrieves the
two families (z.e., those of her farher and husband). (5)


* Kottuxaistates that, the duties of married life, although not
falling within the purview of the ordinary legal duties of an jndi-
yidual, have been dealt with in this chaptet as Such, because their
violations are punishable by law as crimes, and the king’s coutt has
jurisdiction to take cognisance of cases in which the rights or
obligations, which these duties entail, are sought to be established
or enforced.

+ The text has Vishayeshu cha Sajyantyah, Kutiuxa explains

it by Anishtddheshvapt ruparasddi- Vishayeshu in not condemna-
ble‘objects of sight, hearing, etc.

} Within eight days of the cessation of her flow.


316 Manu Samhita


This (protection of wives) forms the highest duty of
the members of al] the four social orders, Even weak
(7.e., diseased or physically deformed). husbands, should
endeavour to protect their wives. (6)

By assiduously protecting his wife, a man protects
(the purity of his) progeny and family, as well as his:
character, Self, and virtue. (7).

The husband, by entering (into the body of) the
wife, takes birth as the foetus in her womb, a wife is:
called Jaya (Jenetrix), inasmuch as the husbaed is again
born in her. (8)

A wife gives birth toa child similar (in every res-
pect) to the man who impregnates her; hence, for the
purity of his progeny, one must assiduously protect.
his wife. (9)

Wives (/c¢., women) cannot be kept, by force ; it is:
by the application of the following expedients that.
they can be kept under control. (10)

They should be employed in storing and spending
money (i.e. in looking after the expenses of the house-
hold), in maintaining the cleanliness of their persons:
and of the house, and in looking after the beddings,

: Wearing apparels, and household furniture. (11)

Imprisoned in the house and closely guarded by
their male relations, (ba) women are not sufficiently.
protected (i.e. they can find opportunities to gratify
their evil propéhsittgs). Womerf who guard themselves
are said to be truly guarded (and protected). (12)

Wine-drinking, evil company, separation from the
husband, idle rambling, sleep at ¢he improper time, and
residence in another’s house are the six factors which
tend to defile a woman. (13) :

They do not care for the personal beauty or young


Manu Samhita. 317


age; women only long for sexual intercourses with
men, whether they be good-looking or bad looking. (14)

On account of the germination of erotic fancies in
their minds at the mere sight of men, and on account
of the inborn absence of affection and innate fickle-
ness of heart, women, though well protected by their
husbands, make transgressions against them. (15)

Thus having known their god-givencnature (/i¢., as
created by the creator of universe, Prajapati), let a man
protect his wife to the best of his endeavours. (16)

Fondness fer ornaments, beds and cushions, intense
erotic feelings, anger, crookedness,- and scandal are
natural to women in the opinion of Manu. (17)

The purificatory rites of women are (7.e., must be
performed) withoat the Vediac Mantras; this is the
decision of the law code. And for this disqualification
of Mantra-less-ness, women are like unto inorganic
things. This is the conclusion. (18)

The proneness of women to infidelity has been
largely sung in the Vedas and Nigamas. Now hear
what has been said in the Vedas regarding the expiation
of their incestuous sin. (19)

“Inasmuch as my mother, faithless to her lord, used
to stroll about'in quest of other men’s {embraces,) may
my father purify her ovum; defiled by her incests with
others).” This (Mantra of the Veda) serves as an
illustration (of what has been said’in “the preceding

couplet). (20)°

For the expiation of the sin which a woman com-
mits by contemplating transgressions against her lord,
however'slight, this A/antra has been enjoined to be
employed. (21)


’ As a river in contact with the sea becomes briny,


318 Manu Samhita.


so a woman acquires traits of mind and character
similar to those of the man she is united with. (22)

Though born of vile castes, Aksham4la, united with
Vas’ishtha, and S’4rangi, wedded to Mandapala, became
highly glorified. (23)

These and other women of low origin acquired
excellent traits of character through contact with
the auspicious mental traits of their respective hus-
bands. (24)

Thus the rule relating to the auspicious living of
men and women (husbands and wives) has been laid
down; now hear me ‘discourse on the law relating (to
the right in’ children* which is conducive to happi-
ness both in this world and the next. (25)

For conceiving progeny, wives, the lights of house-
holds, the repositories of bliss and auspiciousmess,
should be honoured with presents of apparels and orna-
ments). No distinction exists between the wife and
the goddess of fortune in the house (26)

Wife is the manifest source of procreation and
bringing up of children, and of the performance of the
duties of every day life as well.f (27)

Giving birth to children, performance of reli-*
gious sacrifices (Agni Hotra, etc.), nursing, excellent
(sweetest) love, and the acquisition of heaven by one
and his manes,are, contingent op his wife. (28)

She, who, pure %nd controlled in her mind, speech
and body, transgresses not her lord, attains to the re-


* Whether the son belongs to Ns natural father, or to the
husband of its mother? (Kim Kshetrino'patyamuta Bijinah).—
Kulluka.

+ Such as hospitality to Atithis, and feeding his friendstand
relations (Atitht nittra-bhojanadch.)J—Kulluka.


Manu Samhita. 319


gion of the husbands (Patiloka) and is called chaste
by the virtuous. (29)

Through transgressions against her lord, a wife
becomes condemnable in this world, takes birth in
the womb of a-she-jackal in her next existence, and
is afflicted with diseases of sin. (30)

Now hear me relate the anecdote regarding the
procreation of a son which the great sages of yore.
had narrated for the good of the universe. (31)

The son belongs to the father, but regarding the
denotation of “ father” there are two contrary dicta
of the S’ruzi (¢.e., Veda). Some call the actual pro-
genitor of the son as his father, while others aver that,
the man on whose wife the son is, begotten is his:
father. (32)

The woman is said*to be like unto a field, and:
the man is like unto a seed; the origin of all creatures
is (in) the union of the seed and the soil. (33)

In some cases the pre-eminence is of the seed,* and
in others the dominance is of the soil; commend-
able is the offspring where the seed and the soil are
equally dominant. (34)

Of the seed and the soil the predominence is said:
to be of the seed, inasmuch as the births of all created


* The birth of Budha illustrates a case of this kind. Soma,
without any appointment Megat Budha op*theerson of Ila and
claimed him as hjs son in opposition to the tawful husband of
his mother.


} Procreation of children on the widows of Vichtravirya by
Vyasa, under an appointment, furnishes an example of the pre-
eminence of the ‘soil, where the sons of the unien, (Pandu and
®britarashtra; became the lawful sons of the deceased hnshand
of their mother.


320 Manu Samhita.


‘things aré marked by the (spécific) traits of theif
seéds. (35)

Like the séed, which ig sown in a cultivated field
in the proper séason, is the sprout that germinates there-
from, marked by its (seed’s) spécific features. (36)

This earth is said to be the eternal womb of all
created things; but at no stage of its development a
plant ig seen to partake of the spécific properties of
the soil. (37)

Different kinds of seeds, sown in the same field by
husbandmen in the:proper season, are sen to sprout
up in different forms according to the specific natural
variations of their species. (38)

Brihi, Salis, Mudga, sesame, kidney beans, garlics
and ‘sugar-cane sprout up according to the nature of
their seeds, (39)

From the seeds of one kind sprouts of another
kind (of vegetables) are not seen to germinate: like
sprouts germinate from the like species of seeds. 4o.

Hence, a wise, modest, man of sicience and erudi-
tion, seeking longevity, must not sow his seeds in
another’s field (wife). (41)

Men, learned in history, recite a verse on the subject, .
framed by Vayu, which forbids men to sow their seeds
in other men’s wives. (42)

As an arrow, hit by one into the aperature of an
arrow on the’ body of an animal previously shot by
another, becomés futile,* so the fruit of ¢he seed, cast
by one in the wife of another, does not belong to
him. (43) >

Historians say that, this earth is called Prithivi
from the fact of her first being the. wife (z.e., enjoyed.
by) king, Prithu ; a field is named after the person who


Manu Samhita. 324


first Clears it of the jungle, and a game belongs to him
‘who hits it first. (Hence, a son procreated on another's
‘wife does not belong to his progénitor.) (44)

It is only with his wife and progeny that a man
becomes complete. Hence, the wise call the husband
‘and wife as identical. (45)

By sale or separation (abandonment) the husband
‘and wife can not be liberated (severed) from each other ;
we know this law to have jbeen originally made by thé
‘creator of the universe. (46)

Only once can the partition of an estate be made,
only oncé can a girl be given away in marriage, and
only once can a thing be gifted. Each of these three
‘things can be made only for once. (47) .

_ As in respect of gows, mares, shie-caméls, female
‘slaves, she-buffalos, she-goats and ewes the young ones
do not belong to their progenitors, so sons begotten
‘on other men’s wives do hot belong to their natural
fathers. (48)

Seed-owners, without fields of their own, who sow
their seeds in other men’s fields, can never be entitled _
‘to the crops raised therefrom. (49) .

Even if a bull procreates a hundred calves’ on
another’s cows, all {those calvés shall belong to
the owner of the kine; in vain the bull has spent
his seed ! (50)

Similarly, the seed cast by ‘one in another's field
(wife) contributes to the benefit of the owner of the
field, the caster of the seed does not obtain the fruits
(offspring) thereof. (51)

In the absence ‘of any éxpréss agreement between
the owner of the field (husband of the woman) and the
easter of the seed regarding the right in the fruits

4


422 Manu Samhita.


(offspring or issues of the union), the fruits shall mani-
festly belong to the former, inasmuch as in such an
instance the womb has a greater preeminence than
the seed. (52)

But if there bea previous compact of giving the
fruit to the caster of the seed, then both the caster
of the seed and the owner of the field (z.e., the husband
of the woman) shall be equally entitled to enjoy the
fruit (offspring). (53)

If a seed, carried away by the wind ora stream
of water, sprouts in another’s field, the owner of the
field shall have it and not the sower of the seed. (54)

This is the law relating to (the right in the) off
spring of a cow, mare, female slave, she-goat, ewe and
a female bird. (55)

Thus the synopsis of the lag relating (to the rela-
tive pre-eminence of) the seed and the womb have beet
promulgated; now hear me discourse on the duties of
women on the failure of issues. (56)

The wife of an elder brother is said to be like a
preceptor’s or superior’s wife unto his younger brother,
and the wife of a younger brother is said to be like
unto a daughter-in-law to his elder brother. (57)


Except in the case of a failure of issues, an elder,
by going unto the wife of his younger brother, ora
younger brother, by going unto the wife of an elder
brother, even ander an appoi&tment, becomes deé-
graded. (58)

In the absence of a son, a woman wishing to obtain
a progeny, shall lie jdown, under an appointment, with
a younger brother, or with a Sapinda relation, of her
husband for the procreation of a son. (59)


re ° ey @
Aman, appointed to procreate a son on a widow,


Manu Samhita. 323


shall anoint his person with clarified butter and silently
procreate a son on her in the night; but he must not
procreate a second son under any circumstances what-
soever. (60)

Men, wise in the knowledge of procreation of children,
aver that one with a single child must be regarded as
almost sonless ; hence, a man (z.e.,a Sapinda or younger
brother of her husband), under an appointment, may
procreate two children on a woman. (61)

After the procreation of a son on a widow iby a
younger or an elder brother (of her deceased husband)
he shall revere or look upon her as a preceptor’s wife or
a daughter-in-law as the case may be. (62)

An elder brother er a younger brother, who trans-
gresses the rules ofe appointment out- of amorous
exuberance, commits the sin of defiling the bed of a
daughter-in-law or of a preceptor’s wife. (63)

Brdhmanas shall never allow a widow of their own
to get a son procreated on her by any one under an
appointment ; by so engaging her one kills the eternal
virtue. (64)

Procreation of children by appointment on another’s
wife (Niyoga) has nowhere been mentioned in the
Mantras of nuptial rites, nor the marriage of a widow
has ever been mentioned in the Sést¢ra. (65)

This beastly cust$m, which fisst prevailed among
men during, the reign of king Vena, is condemned by
the erudite Bradhmanas. (66)

That foremost of kings (Vena), having enjoyed the
whole earth, with his mind clouded by erotic feelings,
introduced this custom (procreation of children under
appointment on another’s wife) of yore among men
which led to the intermixture of castes, (67)


324 Manu Samhita.


Since that time, he, who has. appointed a widow
to get a son: procreated on her by another man, has.
been condemeed by the virtuous. (68)

A girl whose betrothed husband has been dead after-
the betrothal her (deceased) husband’s brother shall;
take (marry) in the following manner. (69)

He, having married her, pure in body and mind:
and clad in a white cloth, shall visit her once in each
month during her menstrual period. (70)

Having married a girl to one, let not a wise
man marry her again to another; by so doing a man,
commits sin. (71)

Even having formally accepted the gift of (ce.,,
married) a girl, possessed of any inauspicious physical
features, diseased, deflowered, or ,fraudulently given in
marriage by suppressing a physical deformity, one.
may abandon her (before the rite of seven steps is
gone into). (72)

If a miscreant gives away a faulty girl in marriage.
without giving out the nature of her defect, the gift
of such a miscreant (z.¢., the marriage bond of the.
girl) may be cancelled. (73)

A man of business must go to a foreign county
after first having made provisions for the maintenance
of his wife ; an honest wife may be compelled to take.
to the evil path in want of a suitable provision. (74)

In the event of her husband having made suitable.
provisions for her before leaving the courftry, let her
live with the greatest propriety; in the absence of
any such provision, let her liveeby plying any com-
mendable art (such as weaving, spinging, etc.) (75)

For eight years a wife shall wait for her husband,
absent in a distant country for prosecuting an object


Manu Samhita. 425


of virtue; for six years shall she bide her time for a
husband, absent in a distant’ country for study or for
achieving fame, and three years for a husband, absent
on a visit to a co-wife in a distant country, (after which
she shall go to her lord). (76)

A husband shall wait one year for a hostile wife ;
after the lapse of a year, if her hostile feelings still
continue, he shall take back what he might have given
her, and marry a second wife. (77)

‘Of a wife who slights her husband for his sickness,
or for his addiction to wine or gambling, the husband
must forswear the bed for three months, and she must
not be allowed to use her beddings and ornaments
during that period. (78)

But a wife failing to nurse an insane, degraded,
sexless or seedless husbaiid, or one afflicted with a sin~
ful disease, is not fit to be abandoned by the husband
for that hostile conduct, nor the things which he might
have presented to her can be taken back from{her. (79)

In the event of one’s wife becoming a drunkard or
faithless, hostile, invalid, extremely hot-tempered or
spend-threft, one shall marry a second wife. (80)

The husband of a sterile woman shall remarry on
the eighth, the husband of a wife whose children die
in infancy on the tenth, and the husband of a wife
who has given birth to daughters only on the eleventh
year of their respective ‘marriages, while the husband
of a harsh-tongued wife may remarry without the least
delay.* (81)


* Such a harsh-tongued wife, if she has given birth toa male
child, may be abandoned by the husband, but he will not be
tompetent, in pursuance of a prohibition by A’pastambha, to marry
during her life-time, in asmuch as by giving birth to a son she


326 Manu Samiuta.


If a wife of good conduct, who is attached to the
good of her lord, happens to be afflicted with (an
incurable) disease, let her husband marry again with
her consent} but he must not insult (or neglect) her
under any circumstances whatsoever. (82)

But if the first wife of a remarried husband (at-
tempts to) leave his house out of anger, he must either
keep her imprisoned (in the house) or send her to her
father’s family for good. (83)

The wife (of one other than a Brahmana),"who,
being prohibked to drink wine in a marriage-festival,
drinks it, or attends a public dancing party, should be
punished with a fine of six Krishnalas. (84)

If members of twice-born castes happen to marry
wives of other castes, their precedence, honour, and
dwelling-houses should be according to the superiority
of their castes. (85)

A wife belonging to his own caste must attend to
the physical comforts of a man having many wives and
shall be his cohort in practising virtues (performing
religious rites): a wife who is not of the same caste
with her husband must never do these things. (86)

He, who, having a wife of his own caste, causes,
out of foolishness, a wife of another caste to perform
these‘duties, is said to be by the ancient sages like unto
a Brdkmana Chandatla (i.e. a son begotten by a S’udra
on a Brahman’ Woman). (87)

A girl, even before having attained fhe proper age
of marriage, should be duly married to a handsome,
qualified husband of her own caste, (if sueh an oppor-
tunity occurs). (88)


has acquired the privileges of a Dharma Patni (indefesible fight
of wifehood).


Manu Samhita. 327


Rather should a girl, who has attained puberty,
stay unmarried in her father’s housé for her whole
life-time than she should be wedded to a non-eligible
(Zit. disqualified) husband, for any- consideration what-
soever. (89)


A girl, who has attained puberty, shall wait (un-
married in her father’s house) for three years (after
the appearance of her first flow}; after that, she shall
take a husband of her own caste and status (without
waiting for the consent of her guardians.) (90)


For taking a husband herself, a girl, not given away
in marriage‘at the proper time by her-[father, acquires
no demerit, nor does the man who takes her as his
wife. (91)

A girl, who through hee own endeavours has taken
a husband,’ must not take away the ornaments, etc.,
given to her by her father, mother or brother, inas
much as by so doing she will be guilty of theft. (92)


For having married a girl who has attained her
puberty, one must not pay any money to her father,
inasmuch tas for having impeded conception during the
menstrual period his right of fatherhood (Furis peters)
in the girl has been extinguished. (93)


Let a man of thirty years marry an amiable girl
of twelve years of age, ora man of twenty-four year.
marry a girl of eight years of age.* @One*may marr


* This couplet does not lay down the minimum age limit of
marriage, but enjoins that the highest desparity of age allowable
between the husband and “wife. Under no circumstances, the
ag@? of the wife should be less than one-third of that of the
husband.


428 Manu Samhita.


earlier, if délay be detrimental to one’s religious
duty.* (94)

Through the ordaination of the gods one obtains
a wife and never by his own willing.t Let him always
maintain such a virtuous wife and (thereby) do the
pleasure of the gods. (95)

Women are created to conceive pregnancies, and
men_are created to impregnate women. Hence, like the
act of procreation, the religious duties of the husband
and wife are correlated.{ ~This is said in the Veda. (96)

If the (betrothed husband) of a girl happerts to die
after he has paid the price for her hand (/:¢. marriage
duty) to her guardian, she should be married to a
younger brother of the deceased, if she approves (of
such a marriage). (97)

Even a S’udra must not take any price (/:¢. duty or
pecuniary consideration) for the hands of his daughter
when giving her away in marriage. Such acceptance
of money constitutes a sale of the girl in disguise. (98)

Honest men of yore, never did, not the virtuous
men at the present do marry a girl to another after
having agreed to marry her to one. .99)


* As in the case of a BrAhmana who has finished his Vedaic
study before the age of twenty-four and thus stands under the
obligation of settling in life as a hguse-holder.—Kulluka.

‘+ The gods sigh as Bhaga, Aryaman (the presiding deity of
day) ‘and Savita (the sun-god Ji#, impeller ef the universe) of
mighty iritelleet have given me a wife to discharge the duties of
the household (Bhagoryama Savita Purandhi Mahyam Vadhur«
garhapatydya, etc., S’ruti).

t The wife must be the companion of the husband in doing
religious sacrifices|: “clad in a silk cloth, let the wife, and
the husband kindle the sacred fire (Kshaume Vasindvagninds
dadhiyatam—S'ruti).


flanu Samhita. 1329


‘Even in my past existences neyer did I thear of
tthe disguised sale of a girl in the form of a marriage
‘on the acceptance of money (by her father.) (100)


There should be mutual fidelity (between the hus-
‘ipand and wife) till death. This should be known as the
primary duty of the husband and wife in brief. (11)


A married man and woman should always so
‘endeavour as not to live separate from, and make trans-
gressions against, each other. (102)

Thus the loving duties of the husband and wife to-
wards each other, as ‘well as those, which are obligatory
(on them) for the procreation of sons in their absence,
have been formulated; now hear me discourse on the
Jaw relating to the division of paternal estates. (103)


After the demise of their father or mother, let the.
brothers congregate and equally partition the paternal
(or maternal) estate among themselves: during his (or
her) life-time they are not the lords thereof (ie. have
no fight therein.)* (104)


{if the brothers wish to live undivided], let the
eldest one take the whole of the paternal estate, and
the rest (Ze, the other brothers) shall depend upon
tobtain from) him for their maintenance as they did
on their father (before). (105)


The moment one’s veldest born gomes into being
one becomes possessed of a son 4nd discharges the


* But in a paternal estate partitioned by the father among
hs sons during his life-tim$ the sons have all rights of owner-
ship.—Cf.

» Ifthe father voluntarily makes a division of his estate, let him
partition it among his sons (Vibhagancha pita Kuryat ichghhayé«
Vibhajet Sutdn).—Vdjnavalkya,


42


330 Manu Samhisa.


debt to his manes (Pitris); hence the eldest son is
entitled to receive the entire (paternal estate.) (106)


He (ze. the eldest son) on whose birth the debt
(to the manes) is discharged and the father obtains
immortality is called the son according to virtue
{Dharma-putra), the rest are sons of (i.e., begotten in)
lust. (107)


Like a father must the eldest brother maintain his
younger brothers, and the younger brothers must live
in obedience to him as to their father. (108)


Inasmuch as the eldest brother can exalt the family
(by his noble conduct), or bring ruin upon it (by sett-
ing a bad example to his youingers), the eldest brother
is the most revered ; and the virtuous younger brothers
should not condemn their eldest brother. (109)


The eldest brother, who stands unto his youngers as
their father or mother, is like a father or mother
unto them; failing to discharge these duties, him they
should respect as a friend ,relation). £110)


Thus they (brothers) should live undivided ; or seek-
ing the furtherance of virtue,* they should be separate
and separately perform the (five great daily house-hold)
sacrifices. (111)


A twentieth part of the paternal property, together
with the best of articles is the portion of the eldest
son, a fortieth patt (of the paternal estate) forms the
portion of the second son, and an eighi@th part (of the


* Cf, Brihaspati—Of brothers living in commensality the rite of
worshipping the maues, Brahmanas and gods should be one (and
joint); living separate, each of them ‘should perform these rites
in. his separate house: Eka pdkena vasatdm pitrideveduisd
uchanam ; Ekam bhabet bibhaktanim tadeva syéd grihe grike.)


Manu Samhita. 331


paternal estate) forms the portion of the youngest
gon.* (112)

The portions which should fall to the eldest and
youngest sons have been laid down; sons intermediate
between them should all have the portion of the
second son (¢.¢., a fortieth part of the whole paternal
estate. (113) ;

The eldest son} shall take the best one of the
articles (left by the father), as welkas the best one of
each ten animals (such as, cows} etc.) (114)

Among sons equally discharging the ten religious
duties of (Vediac study, etc., i.e., equally qualified) the
sldest one shall obtain no (preferential) excess share,
but a little in excess should be given to him for his
honour, (115)

After the division of the paternal state in the afore-
said manner, the brothers shall equally apportion the
residue among themselves? or in the alternative, they
shall partition it in the manner following. (116)

The eldest son shall take one share and one share
in addition thereto (7.e. two shares,) the second son
shall take one and a half share, and the other younger
,sons shall take one share each. This is the decision - of
Law. (117)

The brothers shall separately give quarter parts out
of their respective shargs to their unmarried sisters ;


* The residye of the estate should be equally divided among
them (Avashishtam dhanam Samam Kritva wibhajaniyam,
Kulluka,

+ Ia the event of the eldest son being possessed of excellent
qualifications and the ther sons being devoid of them.—
Kulluka
, P Cf. Dasdta Pas’undm (the best one of eachten animals
Gautama,


334 Mann Samhita.


and failing to give:them (sisters) such shares, they shall.
become degraded in life. (118).

A goat, a lamb, or an animal with. unbi-furcated:
hoofs, remaing odd after the division, shall fall. to the:
share of the eldest son. (119)

A son, begotten by a younger brother on the wife off
his eldest brother under an appointment, shall have an,
-equal share -with his uncles (at the time of the division.
of the paternal estate among them).* This is the. deci-
‘sion of Law. (120):

& son begotten on the wife ofthe eldest brother
can not be lawfully called the son of the eldest{brother,.
inasmuch as the preeminence is of the progenitor in:
Fespéct of the procreation ofa child. Hence, he-should.
be discarded.t (121)

If a doubt arises as to how shall the division of the:
paternal ‘estate be made, if the eldest son is begotten,
-on the youngest wife, and the youngest son is begotten:
on the eldest wife of a man :— (122)

The son of the eldest wife (in such a case); shall.
take the best bullias his preferential share (although he
is the youngest son of his father), and the sons of other
co-wives, though they be his elders, shall take compara-,
tively inferior bullocks according to the juniority of
their respective mothers. (123).

The eldest SON, begotten on, the eldest wife, shall
take fifteen edws 4nd one bullock (as his share), and: the.
other sons shall take according to the precedence of
their respective mothers. This is the decision. (124)


# He must not claim an excess share under the husband of his
mother, the eldest son of his grandfather,

+ ae. he can not élaim an excess or additional share undeér the
husband of his mother as the lawfully begotten son of the eldest
brother,


Manu Samhita. 333


The seni ority atnong son’ of co-wives of the same
caste is said to be according to their births, and
hot according to the priority of their respective
mothers. (125)

[ The invocation of Indra in the Agnishtoma sacri-
fice] by the Mgntra, known as Sva bréhmrana, should
be made by the eldest brother; and in respect of
twin-born sons, the one, that is first delivered of the
womb, should be regarded as the elder. (126)

If a sonless man marries his daughter to another on:
the stipulacion that, “sons born of her womb shall do
my S’réddkas and offer me oblations,” that daughter is
called a Putriba, (127)

In this way /utrikt (compacts) were created of
yore for the increase of his progeny by the patriarch
(lit, lord. of creatures) Daksha himself. (128:

Decked with ornaments, ten (of his daughters) he
complaeently gave to Dharma (the god of virtue);
thirteen to Kas’yapa; and twenty seven, to king
Soma, (129)

@ne’s Self is Mdentical with his son, and a daughter
ig like unto a son: in the presence of one’s (putrik4)
daughter, who ig ideritical with his self, who else shall
take Kis property /é¢. wealth)? (130)

Fhe mother’s dowry shall be the portion of (ker)
daughter, and his daugkter’s son shall take the entire
estate of a Sonless man. (331)

(His) daughter’s son shall, take the entire estate of
a. sonless father, and he (¢.e. daughter’s_ son) shall offer
two oblations (Piadas), one to his (own deceased) father,
and another to (his deceased) mother’s father. (132).

, Virtually there exists no difference between a son’s
son and a daughter’s son in this world, both their


334 Manu Samhita.


respective father axd mother have originated from the
body of one and the same man. (133)

In the event of the birth of one’s son after the crea-
tion of the Putvi#é (compact), that son and the son of
the Pufriké daughter shall have' equal shares in his
estate, in asmuch asa female can not have’ the privi-
leges of) eldest-born-ship. (124)

On the death of a sonless Pufriké daughter, her
husband shall unhesitatingly take the entire estate left
by her (¢.¢., her father shall have no right in her pro-
perty on the strength of that Putrié4 compact.) (135)


By the son, whom one’s daughter, whether married
with or without the Putria compact, gives birth
to, her father becomes possessed of a son; such a
daughter’s son shall offer (S’*Zddha) oblations to her
(deceased, sonless), mother’s father, and take (inherit)
his estate. (136)

By a son one conquers the worlds, by a son’s son
one attains ths infinite, by the son of a son’s son one
attains the region of the sun. (137)


Since a son succours his father from the hell called
Put; hence, the selfbegotten one (Brahma) has called
a son, Putra (it, deliverer from the hell of Put.) (138)


No distinction is found between a son’s son and a
daughter’s son in this world, in asmuch as ja daughter's
son, like a s@n’seson, can Succour a man from
hell. (139)

The son of a Putrizé daughter shall first offer an
oblation (Pinda) to his (deceasqd) mother, then to his
mother’s father, and then to her father’s father. (140) _

A Dattaka (adopted) son, possessed of all cgm~
mgndable qualifications, though born of another


Manu Samhita. 335


Gotra (family, shall take the estate of his putative
father.* (141)


An adopted son must not take the property or
Gotra (family title) of his natural father. The Pinda
tollows the estate and the property, ;t hence, an
adopted son must not offer S’r4ddhas unto his natural
father. (142).


The son, begotten on a girl without an appointment
from her guardians, and the son, begotten on a woman
with a son by her husband’s younger brother even
under an appointment, shall have no shares (in the
paternal property), inasmuchas they are bastards, and
offspring of lust. (143)

A son, begotten on a woman under an appointment
gut not conformably to the rules, shall not be compe-
ent to inherit (his) ancestral property, inasmuchas he
1as been procreated by a degraded person. (144)


A son, begotten on one’s wife by another under an
xppointment, shall take an equal share in the estate (left
vy him) like a son born of his own loins; in asmuch as
the seed virtually belongs to the owner of the field
(husband of the woman) in such a case, and the son thus
pegotten is his legitimate son. (145)


* Ekevaurasah putrah pitrasya Vasunah praphuh. (only the
son of one’s own loins,is the lord of (heir,to) the whole ancestral
estate. KuLLuKa quotes the preceding m@xim and says that, in the
presence of a son of one’s ewn loins his adapted son is not entitled
to his whole property but must take a sixth part thereof as his
own share like a Kshetraja son. GoviINDARAJA, on the other
hand, holds that, one’s adapted son is heir to the whole estate
left by him even in the presence of a son of his loins, if any.


* ¢ A man obtains (is heir to) the wealth and family title (Goti‘a) !
of him unto him he offers S’raddha oblations (Pindas).


336 Manu Sambita.


He who maintains the estate and widow of a de+
ceased elder brother shall procreate a son on the person
of that widow and give his (deceased brother's) estate
to the son, thus begotten. (146)

The son of her, who, even under an. appointment
from her guardians gets him procreated on herself by
the younger brother of her deceased husband, or by any
(of his male Sapenda relations) out of lust,* is called
lust-begotten and invglidly procreated; such a son
shall take no share in (the paternal estate). (147)

This should’ be understood as the law relating to
the division (of the paternd| property) among uterine
brothers of the same caste, now hear me expound the
law relating to the divisiow (of the paternal property)
among sons begotten by one gnd the same man on. |
women of different castes. (148)

If a Brahmana has had wives belonging to the fout
(different) castes in the order of their eumeration,
the division of the estate among sons of those
wives should be made conformably to the following
rule. (149)

One tiller, a cow, a bull, the house (or room),
ornaments and the best portion of other estates shall
go to the son of the Brahmana wife as his (UVddhéra)
preferential share. (150)


Out of the ymajning estate three parts shall go fo
the Brahmana son, two to the Kshatriya gon, one and
ahalf part to the Vais'ya son, and one part to the
S‘udra son. (151)


* Cp. Narada Mukhat mukham pariharan piratigueeietden
Spris‘an; Kule tadavasheshecha santdndrtham na kamata iti
‘without touching her face and limbs with his face and limbs, Tet him
Procrezte a son (on her) for progeny and nof out of lust, etc.


Manu Samhita. 837


{Or instead of giving a preferential share (excess)
to the Brahmana son], let the-versed-in law divide the
whole estate into ten (equal’ parts, and allot them (to
the sons) in the following lawful manner :—(152)

Let the Brihmana (son) take four (such) shares; the
Kshatriya (son), three ; the Vais’ya (son), two; and the
S'udra (son), one. (153)

But let him not in consideration of virtue give more
than a tenth share to his S’udra son, whether he be a.
good son or otherwise. (154)

The son of a Brahman, Kshatriya, or Vais’ya by a
Sudra wife is not entitled to take any share in his
property ; whatever his father’ will give shall be the
portion of (such a S’udra son).* (155)

Of sons of twice-born ones by wives of their own
castes, let the youngei*sons give preferential shares to
their (respective) eldest brothers and then equally
divide the estate among themselves. (156)

A S’udra is not competent to marry any other wife
than one of his own caste, and sons begotten on her,
even if they number a hundred, shall take equal shares
(in their paternal property). (157)

Of the twelve kinds of sons of men, as said (re-
cognised) by the self begotten Manu, six are heirs and
Bandhus, and six are neither heirs nor Bandhus. (158)

The Aurasa (a son of gne’s own loins), Kshetreja (a
son procreated on one’s wife or widcaw by another),

_ Datta (adopted son), Kritrima (fifated son), Gudhof-
panna (ason secretly procreated on one’s wife) and


* This is not contradictory to provisions laid down in the
preceding verses (t51, 153 and 154). KuLiuxa says that, this rule
shall hold good in respect of sons of twice-born ones by S’udra
wonten who are not their married wives.


43


338 Manu Samhita.


Apaviddha (taken and adopted) these are the six song
who are both hdfrs and Bandhus. (159)

Six sons (such as), Kdninah, Sahodah, Kritah,
Paunarbhava, Svyamdatta, and S’audra (son by 4
S’udra wife) are no heirs (to their paternal property),
although they are Bandhus (i.e., competent_to offer
libations of water, etc., to their fictitious, deceased
father.)* (160)

Disastrous is the result of attempting to cross over
the darkness of death with the help of a bad son like
unto that of sailing across a river with a badly made
raft.t (161)

Though one’s Kshetraja son and a son of his own
loins are both heirs to one and the same property
(7.¢., to the estate left by him), yet each of them shall


* The text has Shadadiyddabindhavah. Mupwatitur ex-
plains it by ‘ Shgdndayad “abdndhavih” in as much as these six
sons are not competent to inherit the estate of}their deceased
father, they are abandhavah, 7. e. not competent to offer 1 ibations
of water, etc. tovhis spirit. Baudhdyana, however, confirms our
view of interpretation and asserts that, although these six sons
are not heirs, they are not disqualified from offering water etc.,
to the spirit of their deceased father by fiction; and hence, they
are Bandhus.

Cf. Kdninancha Sahodancha Kritam paunarbhavam™ tathd ;
Svayamdatiam Nishddancha Gotrabajah prachakshate. Sons
such as, Kantna@Saheia, Kreeta, Patnarbhava, Suyamdatta and
Nishada (son of a Bralfman by a S’udra wife) partake of the
gotras of their. ‘fathers, ie. they are competent to do-the water-
rite etc. to his spirit.

+ A son of inferior status such as, Ashetraja son (t.e. a SON
begotten on one’s wife by another under an appointment), like a
foolish or illiterate son Zof one’s own loins, fails to do the fullest
spiritual benefit to the spirit of his fictitious father.


Manu Samhita. 339


take the estate of his own natural father, and no
other.*® (162)

Only the son’ of one’s own loins is the owner of
(heir to) the paternal estate ; with a view to create no
hardship on theth, let him give maintenance to other
sons (of inferior status. (163)

The son of one’s own seed, while dividing the pater-
nal estate, shall give a fifth o1 sixth part thereout to the
Kshetreja son (of his father) as his share. (164)

One’s Ashetraja and Aurasa (son of his own loins)
sons are heirs to (/’¢, sharers of) the paternal estate ; of
the ten remaining (kinds of) sons (such as, the Dattaka
etc.,.) who share the Gotra of their father; each suc-
ceeding one shall take a share in (¢.¢., inherit) the
paternal property in tlfe absence of one immediately
preceding him in the list of enumeration. (165)

A son begotten by a man himself on a lawfully
married wife of his own caste should be known as his
Aurasa (son), the foremost of sons in respect of status
or pre-eminence. (166)

A son procreated on the wife of a sick or impotent
person or on the widow of a deceased individual under
an appointment by another, is called a Kshetraja or


* In the light of the dictum of Yajna-Vglkyae “Virtually, he is
the heir, and shall offer Pindas to bo#h of them,” Ubhayora-
pyasau vikthee finda-ddtécha dharmatah.

The couplet contempletes the case where after the procrea-
tion of ason on one’s wife by another under an appointment,
‘ one of his own loins is born. Both MepHatirui1and Gcvinpa-
raya explain Aurasam in the couplet by a son procreated by one
on another’s wife without an appointment, which is manifestly
absurd, inasmuch as such a son is not competent to take a
share in his estate.


3460 Manu Samhita.


Talpaja (procreated in the bed of) son (of that sick,
impotent or deceased person.) (167)

The son whom his (natural: father or mother gladly
gives to one of his own caste during the distress of his
son-less-ness (7 e. gives him to be filiated by one on the
failure of one’s issue), by consecrating him with water,
is called a Dattaka or Datrima) son. (168)

The son whom a knower of merits and demerits*
takes out of his own caste and entrusts him with the
duties of atson is called a Kritrima (it artificial
one. (169) a

The son who is begotten on one’s wife in his own
house{by an unknown’ man is called a Gudhotpanna
(secretly born) one; asason, he belongs to him in
whose bed he is procreated. (179)

The son, who deserted by his parents, or given by
either of them is adopted as such by one, is called an
apaviddha son to the latter. (171) ‘

The son who, is secretly procreated on one’s wife
before her marriage in her father’s house‘is called his
Kénina son, the offspring of the girl whom he has
married. (172)

The man who "marries a ‘chants wife, either with or
without the patent signs of pregnancy, is. said to be the
father of that sahoda (lit., got with the marriage) son,
born in thé womb at the;time ofgthe marriage. (173)

The son,} “whont eone buys for filiation from his
parents, is said to be his Kreeta (pufchased) son,
whether he be of his own caste or otherwise.* (164)


SSS eee


* According to Yajnavalkya all these filiated sons must be of,
the’ same caste with their putative fathers. (Svajattyeshvayam
brekia stanayeshu mayé vidhih). According to Manu, all kinds


Manu Samhita. 341


The son, whom one’s widow, or deserted wife volun-
tarily gets procreated on her person by her second
husband, is said to be the Paunarbhava (lit, the son
of a remarried woman) son of the latter. (175)


If that wife, with unruptured hymen, takes another
husband,then let the second husband lawfully marry
her again ; similarly if a wife, after having deserted the
husband of her girlhood and known another man,
returns to her husband of girlhood, then let that first
husband lawfully marry her again, (176)


’ The son, who in the absence of his natural parents,
or being deserted by them without any reason, gives
himself up to a man as: his son, is said to be the
Svayamdatta (self-given: son of the latter. (177)


The son whom a Brahmana procreates out of lust
on his S’udra wife is like unto a corpse (S’ava) even
when alive (p4rayana,) and is accordingly called a
Parasdva (lit, a living corpse). (178)

The son of a S'udra by a slave girl, or by the wife
of a male slave, shall take an equal share in his estate
with the sons of his married wives, ifhe (the father) so
desires it. This is the decision of law. (179:


~The sages have enumerated (recognised) these
eleven kinds of sons such as, the Kshetraja etc., ag
proxies of the aurasawon.to guard against the extinc-
‘tion of the rites of Srdddha, etc.e(180)


e
Excepting the Kshetreja son, {sons, procreated by
other men’s seeds (on one’s wife) and incidentally
mentioned in connectfon herewith, should be -regarded


of* filiated sons, excepting the one called Kreeta (purchased),
must be of the same caste with their’ putative fathers,


342 Manu Samhita,


as the sons of those from whose seeds they have origi-
nated, and of no other.* (181)

If one among several uterine brothers gets a son, by
that.son all of them shall be possessed of a son. This
is what Manu has said on the subject. (182)

Of several co-wives, if one of them gets a son, then
by that son all of them will be possessed cf a son.
This is what Manu has said. (183)

In the absence of ason of superior status, one of
the immediately inferior status shall be entitled to
(the paternal) property ;,of several sons of equal or
‘similar status each shall have a share (in the paternal)
property, (184)

Sons shall take (inherit) the property of their father,
and not his (7. e. father’s uterine) brothers or ancestors
(grand-father etc.,) shal] inherit his property; but the
father shall take (inherit) the property of a son-less
son,t and in his (father’s) absence the brothers of the
son shall take (his property . (185)

Let a man do the water-rite and offer oblations to
his three ancestors (i.e. father, grand-father and great
grand-father), ao Safinda relation-ship exists between
the offerer of such oblations and his fifth ancestor (i.e.
great great grand-father.) (186,

. Ofthe Sapinda-relations, one nearest to the deceased
shall inherit thg property (in ¢@xclusion of one more


a oo


* As the wise use oil as a substitute for clarified butter, so
these eleven kinds of sons are only proxies for Aurasa and
Putvika ones. Ajyam Vind yatha tdilam Sadbhi pratinidht
Rritam, Tathaikadas’a putrastu putrikaurasayorvina Briddha
Brihaspati.

} #. ¢ of_a son, dead without leaving a wife, daughter, or a son
of any kind.


Manu Samhité. 444


fériote ; in the absence of one’s Sap:ndas one’s Samduo-
dakas shall inherit his property, and in the absence of a
Samdnodaka his preceptor, and in the absence of a.
preceptor his disciple (shall inherit his property.)* (187)


_n the absence of a son of any of the eleven kinds the line
Of succession shall be as follows: widow of the deceased, in her
absence the Aputrika daughter, in her absence the father or
mother of the deceased, in their absence the uterine brothers, in
their absence their sons, in their absence the father’s motfier, in
. the abseice of the sons of the grand father, then the sons of
the great- grand father, in their absence Samanodakas, in their
absence his disciple.

MepuHatITHI says that, 2 widow is disqualified from inheriting
the estate of her deceased husband, but the following express
provisions of the several ancient law codes. will serve tn con-
clusively demonstrate the errgr of his view. 187


UTS ATATEAT |
Wat tfeacaa foatpataceat |
aqeainasniay: fas, gamatica: |
WHATS YS I WAVTTHUAT |
wae Was was fafa: |


aeafarais |


wrata afar, 4 MAT ATS w afcfa: 1
way AAT ATAT garry we eat!
aT atacen WAT 3 zee aw wate}
saan? | waa: GATT AY:
agufaamy facatewariate: |
mMyIeT MAAS Wal aatretfraiy |


344 Manu Samhita.


qaudlafadid eA wa fcaeaa |
faeq ufaszat ard wh ws waaay: |
Aya wat 2a FA VAAN |
Wars awAsers araaTe fanny
faraqedifeara we SeaaTgary |
yaa aarguieat saratarfaaia fea: |
aqafrusrarsaarat & aar: afcafaa: |
feadaria atatat Srezala wreay |
Aung: |
WIA Wad wa: UTaAzAT ae feet
"a 1a earaa far? aaa aka & |


Wife (widow), daughters, father, ‘notied: brothers, their sons
Gotraja (of the same family), Bandhus, disciple and Brahmacharins
of the same school, each succeeding one is heir in the absence of the
person immediately preceding him in the order of enumeration~
‘This is the law in respect of the inheritence to the property of a
sonless deceased Persons of whatsoever caste.

Fajnavalkya

- In the Veauai Smritis, and Tantras as well as in common parl-
ance of the world the wise men call the wife the half of her
“husband.

He who has left a widow surviving him has got the half of
his- body verily alive, and when half of his body is alive. who else
shall take his propgrty?, - * ° * =
The king should punish’ aw thieves, the Sapinda relations of her
deceased husband, attempting to rob her inheritancé, (her husband’s
estate) or to oust her thereof.

Brihaspatt,

A chaste widow, seil-controtied ana preserving the sanctity of
the bed of her deceased husband. shall® offer him oblations and
take his entire estate.

Briddha Manu


Manu Samhita. 848


Yn the absence of all these relations, Brihmanas,
Well-versed in the three Vedas, puré, and with theiz
‘senses fully controlled, shall take (the) estate, whereby
virtue will not be impaired, (188)

Unacceptable (7.2. uninheritable) is the estate of
‘a Brahmana by the king under all circumstances; on
the failure of all these heirs (successors), let the king
take the estate of a deceased person of whatsoever
‘other caste. (189)

Let the widow of a dekessed: sonléss man get a sort,
procreated on her person by a man of her husband's
Gotra (1.e., his younger brother, or a Sapenxda relation),
‘and let the entire estate of that deceased person ba
anvested in that son. (190)

Of two sons, begotten on the same woman by two
‘different men, contending for the paternal estate, let
‘either of them take the property left by his own
(natural) father and no other. (191)

On the death of their mother, let all the uterine
brothers and their whmiarried sisters equally partition
the maternal estate among themselves, and let ther
give quarter parts of their respective shares to theis
married sisters. (192)

To the (unmarried) daughters of these ‘(married
daughters should be lovingly given out of the estate
of their (deceased) grandmother (7.e.,, mother’s mother
a little as worthy of each of them. ¢193)

Presents given toa woman before the nuptial fire
(Adhyagni), those given to her at the time of hei
going to her husband’s family from her father’s house
(Adhyavéhanikam), those given to her on happy rites
(74, ceremonies of gladness), and those respectively
given to her by her father, mother and brother form

44


346 Manu Samhita.


the six kinds of Stridhanam (it. woman's ptd-
perty). (194)

Estates, given to her after her marriage by her
parents, husband's parents, and relations (Anvdédheyam)
as well as thoge given to her by her husband out of
love, let her sors divide among themselves, if she
happens to die in the life-time of her-husband. (195)

Estates received by the wife in the Brahma, Daiva,
A'rsha, Géndharva, ot Préjépatya form of marriage
(ie., the six kinds of Stvidhanam) her husband shall
take, if she dies sonless in his life-time. (196)

Whatever property is given to a woman in the
Asura, etc., forms of marriage, her mother, and (in her
absence), her father shall take, if she dies sonless in her
or his life-time. (197)

Any thing given to his co-wives (of different castes)
by her father, the daughter of his Brahmana wife shall
take ; and in her absence, her son. (198)

Out of the estate jointly belonging to many of their
relations, wives shall not be competent to create their
Stridhanas, nor out of the estates of their respective
husbands without their consent ; (otherwise the estates
shall not be regarded as (Stridhanas). (199) .

The ornaments which a woman has worn during
the life-time of her husband his heirs shall not take;
by so-doing ghey shall be degsaded, (200)

A eunuch, a degraded person, a born blind or deaf
‘man, an idiot, or those devoid of any Organ, shall not —
take any share in the paternal property. (201)

But. ample and adequate maintenances should be
given to them according-to;the fesources of the estate ;


a non-giver of such maintenances shall be degiaded. in
life. (202)


Manu Samhita, R47


But if these eunuchs, etc, ever feel inclined tao
marry (i.e., get rid of their sexual incapacities), sons
begotten by them (on theiri wives) shall have shares in
the paternal proptrty. (203)


After the demise of their father, however small
aproperty the undivided eldest brother may acquire,
the educated youngest brother shall take a share
therein. (204)


In the property acquired by the exertions of the
illiterate younger brothers, even if that be not the
paternal estate, all of them. shall have equal shares.
This is the decision. (205)


The wealth which one’s acquires by his skill or
knowledge (Vidyé-dhanam),* the wealth which one
obtains from his friends (Mattrya-dhanam), the wealth
which one obtains on’ his marriage, and the wealth
which one obtains as a present of honour on the occa-
sion of a Madhuparka (offering of a cup of honey)
shall be exclusively his own. (206)

If a brother, capable of earning money (7/z#. wealth)
by his own skill or exertion,t does not wish to take his
share in the paternal estate, then his other brothers |
shall give him something for his maintenance out of his


® VidyddhanameKatyAyana explains it by the wealth which
one acquires by his knowledge acquired from another by staying in
the house and eating the food of the latter? The wealth which one
acquires hy sudh knowledge can not be partitioned. Para bhakta
pradanena praptd vidya yadanyatah, taya praptamcha vidhing
widya-priptam taduchyate. Upanyasti cha Vallabdham Vidyaya
pan :puvvakam Vidya dhunantu tadvidyat vibhagena vibhajyate,


} Such as by enterifig the king’s service, etc., (Rajdnugamandds


* Kaymana)—Kulluka, ae .


348 Manu Samiita.


own share, make him separate, and divide the residue
among themselves.* (207)

Whatever one has earned by his own labour withoué
impairing (//¢. destroying) the paternal’estate, one may-
not give a share of that self-acquired property to
‘another, if he so desires it. (203)

A son, who has managed to recover an ancestraE
property which his father. had failed to do in his:
life-time, must not divide the same among his owm
brothers; if he does not so desire it. (209)

Divided brothers, if after having lived jointly @.e-
joint in food and funds) for a. while, ’again wish to
partition their estate, they shall partition it equally
among themselves; in such a case there exists no
preferential (excess). share for the eldest brother, (210):


Of brothers, ‘some of whom, whether the: eldest ot
the youngest, are absent at the time of the division of
the estate, the shares of the absent brothers therein
will not be extinguished for their absence. (211)

His’ uterine brothers shall congregate and divide
such shares (of their dead, absent, or ascetic brothers)
among themselves,t andthe joint and undivided (step)
brothers and uterine sisters shall divide such shares:
among them. (212)

The eldest brother, who, out of greed, deprives his
younger brothgs (of their patetnal property} is not
worthy of the honoer of €ldest-born-ship, has no right


* The sons of such a separate brother shall not claim any
share in the paternal property, to which he has voluntarily
relinquished his right.—Kulluka.


‘| Inthe absence of ason, wife, daughter, father or mother
of the absent or defunct brother.


Banu Samhita. S40


to claim the preferential (excess) share of the eldest-
born, and deserves:to-be punished by the king. 213)

Brothers, addicted to. vices, shall have no shares;
(in the paternal “estate); the: eldest brother, without.
giving their shares to. his: younger brothers, must not.
make any exclusive property of his. own out of the
paternal estate, (214)

If the brothers live undivided with their father-
and all earn money, then at the division’ of the estate:
the father must not give an excess share to any of
‘them, (215)

A son born after the partition of his paternal estate:
shall have his share therein; if the brother live. un=
divided, he shall obtain his share from the undivided
brothers, (226)


The estate of an unmarried son, deceased without
an issue, shall go.to his mother; in the absence of the
mother, his father’s mother shall get the same. (217)

After the due division of the paternal estate, if any
debt or assets of the father be found out, then let
the brothers equally divide the same among them-
selves. (218)


Clothes, leaves, ornaments, articles of confectionary
(Kriténnam), slave girls, priests, and pasture grounds
are said to be indivisible. (219)


Thus I have descfibed to you (thedaw relating to)
the division ,of property and th® procedure of (pro-
creating) Xshetreja sons, etc; now hear me discourse
on the law (for the prevention of) gambling with dice
(Dyutam). (220)

_ Let afking banish gambling with dice (Dyutam)
and betting on fighting animals (Samdéhvaya) from his


‘350 Manu Samhita.


realm ; both these (vices) tend to destroy the kingdons
of a sovereign. (221)

Gambling with dice, or betting on fighting animals
is a theft, openly ‘committed; the king should always
endeavour to repress these two ‘crimes). (222)

Gambling with inanimate things (such as dice, rods,
etc.,) is:called Dyuéam ; betting on (fighting) animals is
called Saméhvaya. (223)

All of them, who engage themselves, or cause others
to engage in gambling with dice, or in betting on fight-
ing animals, the king shall kill, as well as those Sudras
who wear the insignias of Brihmanas (224)

The king shall speedily banish from his realm
gamblers, street-dancers and singers, men of cruel
deeds, revilers of the Vedas, miscreants, and wine-
brewers. (225)

By staying in the realm, these (miscreants), who
are thieves in disguise, daily cheat the honest sub-
jects of the king (of their earnings), and thus prove a
source of torment to them. (226)

Gambling has been known to create great enmities.

’ of yore; hence, a wise man must not gamble with dice
even out of fun or sport. (227)

On him, who shall openly or secretly gamble with:
dice, the king shall be. competent to inflict an ample
and condign punishment according to the gravity of his

- offence. (228)
A Kshatriya, Vais’ya,.or S’udra, incapable of pay-
" ing the penalty, shall pay it by the labour of hisibody ;
a Brdhmana, similarly cireumstanced, shall pay it off
by easy instalments. (229)

‘Women, infants, old or insane persons, poor men,

and sick folks, incapable of paying the penalty,« thé


Mann Samhiia, 581


Ming shall punish with stripes of bamboo-twists, of
With chords, or by binding them. (230)

Officers in the,king’s service, who, in consideration
of bribes (it. affected by the heat of wealth), have
destroyed the affairs of suitors, the king shall make
Stript of all their possessions. (231)

Falsifiers of the king’s mandates, corrupters of the
king’s ministers, killers of women, of infants, and of
Bréhmanas, and met in allegiance with the enemy the
king shall cause to be killed. (232)

Whatever has been lawfully adjudicated in accords
ance with the instructions of the S’dstra (res judi=
cata ?) the king shall prohibit the revival thereof (in the
court.) (233)

Whatever the counsellors ot judges, employed in
hearing suits, shall wilfully adjudicate in the [wrong
way, the king shall re-adjudicate himself and shall
punish them with a fine of one thousand Panas,
each, (234)

A killer of a Bridhmana, a wine-drinker, a thief,
anda defiler of his preceptor’s or superior’s bed should
be respectively known as Mahdpatakins (great
sinners). (235)

Any one of these four kinds of Mahdpétakins,
failing to perform the expiatory penances, the king
shall punish with fineg as well as with corporeal punish
ments. (236)

The [mark of a female generative organ should be
branded on the forehead of a defiler of his preceptoi’s
bed; that of a wine-bowl, on the forehead of a wine-
drinker; that of a dog’s foot, on the forehead of a
gold-stealer; and that of a headless human body, on thé
forehead of the killer of a Brahmana, (237)


B52 Manz Samhita.


No one shall eat with them, or serve them 2%
priests, or teach them the Vedas, or marry theit
daughters to them; they must wander, miserable in this
world, ousted of all forms of. virtue. (238)

Their relations shall renounce these cruel mis+
@reants, branded with the aforesaid signs and unte
whom no one shall make obeisance. This is the ordi-
nation of Manu. (239)

But these (sinners), after having done the proper
‘expiations according to their castes, shall not be brand=
‘ed with the aforesaid signs on their foreheads ; but they
shall pay a penalty of the Uttama Séhasa class to the
king. (249) ,

A Brahmana, accidentally (74. unwilfully) guilty of
‘any of these great sins (7ahépétakas), shall pay a fine
‘of the Madhyama séhasa class fo the king; wilfully
guilty of any of these crimes, let the king banish
him from the country with all his clothes and belong-
ings. (241) ;

Others (se. Kshatriyas ete.), accidentally guilty of
any of these great crimes, shall be dispossessed of all
their possessions ; wilfully guilty, they shall be banished
from the country. (242)

Let not {the virtuous king take the wealth of a
Mahdpitakin; by taking it out of greed, he is associated
with that (great) sin. (243)

The fine realfSed from a Mahipstakin (great sinnér)
shall be thrown into the water as an eoffering to
Varuna \the god of water:, or it should be given toa
BrAahmana, well read in the Vedas. . (244)

Varuna is the lord of punishment, he wields the
rod even over kings; a Brdhmana, well-versed in the
Vedas, is the lord of the universe, (245)


Manu Samhita. 353


Ya the country, where the king does not accept the
Wealth of the miscreants, long-lived men aré born at
proper times (i.2, no premature birth or death o¢curs
therein). (246)

There the Vais’yas fully harvest the several crops,
as they sow (during the year, children do not die in
infancy, and babes are not born- deformed. (247)

A Sudra, guilty of wilfully tormenting a Bradhmana
fet the king put to death by the painful mutilation oJ
his limbs or organs. (248)

In respect of the impartial administration of justice
(dit, infliction of punishment), a king commits the same
«rime by punishing an innocent man as he does by


suffering a guilty person to go unpunished. (249)

Thus the procedure relating to suits between twa
litigent parties, which are divided into eigteen branches,
has been fully described. (250)

Let the king, fully discharging these duties, covet
the country which he has not conquered (/it. ob-
tained) and protect that which he has conquered. (251)

Building forts according to the S’astra in a well
populated country and residing therein, let the kin,
assiduously wéed out the thorns (exterminate th
caitiffs, etc ,) of his realm. (252)

___ Kings, always eager th protect their subjects, go t
‘heaven by protecting the virtuoue and punishing th
wicked /:¢, by clearing the realm of thorns.) (253)

The king, who receives the revenue from his suk
jects without punishing the thieves (and miscreants
produces a source of terror in his realm and become
dtprived of heaven, (after death.) (254)


The kingdom of the king, under the protection ¢
"48


384 Manu Samhita.


whose strong arms the realm becomes free from terror,
thrives like a tree watered, each day. (255)

The king, who sees through his spies, must detect
two kinds of thieves ; those who openly rob other men
and those who rob them in secret. (256:

The open deceivers are those several kinds of trades-
men (who openly steal by means of false weights and
exorbitant prices), while the secret thieves are those
who rob people in forests, (or by boring holes in the
walls of their houses.) (257)


Bribe-takers, those who extort money from others
by intimidation (robbers), cheats,* deceivers,t false
soothsayers, palmists, men of secret vices, trainers of
elephants who train them badly or inadequately, half
educated physicians, professiongl artists (painters, etc.),
adepts’ in the traffic of females, and non-aryans who
use the insignias of Aryans, these should be known
as the open thorns (thieves) of the realm. (253—260)


The king, by encouraging spies, stationed in many
places, and ostensibly carrying on the same professions
with these miscreants, shall bring them under his con-
trol. (261)

The king, by proclaiming the offences of these*
(open and secret thieves) in their respective trades, shall
punish them according to their bodily strength and
pecuniary citcumgtances. (262


Since, without punishment these evij-minded ones,
wandering meekly in the disguise of honest men, can


* Vanchaks, such as those who give gui'ded metals in ex-
change of gold.—Kzlluka.


{ Kitabas, such as those who gamble with dice, or bee upon
fighting animals,—Aulluka.


Manu Samhita. 355


not be dissuaded from carrying on their nefarious
trades. (263)

The king shall cause public assembly-rooms, water-
chambers,* cake-shops, wine shops, houses of infamy,
hotels (/:#. food-shops), crossings of roads, grounds
underneath the famous trees, trysting places, places of
public shows or spectacles (Prekshanant), . dilapidated
gardens, forests, houses of artisans, deserted rooms,
orchards, artificial bowers, etc., to be searched by spies,
or by stationed or moving columns of foot-soldiers for
repressing the thieves. (264—266,

He (ze. the king) shall detect and destroy them
(i.e, thieves) with the aid of skilful former thieves,
who had been their abettors or accomplices, and
who are fully acquairited with their practices and loca-
tions, etc, (267)

They shall decoy them out of their retreats with
prospects of feasts (/:¢. food and eatables etc.,) or of
seeing holy Brahmanas, or of witnessing deeds of
valour, and have them congregated (at a previously
appointed place). (268)

Those (thieves), who shall not congregate there, or
being warned by the spy-thieves of the king shall avoid
their company, let the king forcibly attack and kill with
their friends, cognates, and relations. (269)

Let not the virtuous king kill a thief caught without
his booty (or implement of boring holes in the walls) ;
caught with these, let him kill the thief (without) the
least hesitation. (270)

Them also, who shall knowingly give food and
shelter to thieves, or give them utensils of (daily use),


¥, The text has Prapd which literally means a chamber where
water is given to the way-farers and passers by. :


356 Manu Sanhita.


the king shall kill (for their indirect complicity in
the crime.) (271) ,

Those who are entrusted with the duty of policing
the realm, as well as those who guafd its boundaries, if
found implicated with planning thefts (or robberies},
shall be punished as thieves by the king. (272-

The king shall punish the swerving of a man of
virtuous living (@e. Brahmana) from the path of his:
duty. (273)

Them, who on hearing that a village is being looted,
or a bridge is being hewd down, or a theft is being:
committed by thieves, do not chase them-for their ap-
prehension to the best of their might, let the king:
banish. fronr the country, with all their belongings (24.
unstript of their cloths. (274)

Stealers of king’s treasure, those who-are hestile to
him, as well as those who secretly contrive to advance:
the cause of the king’s enemv, he (z.e. the king) shall
kill by inflicting various punishments.on them, (275)

Of thieves, who. commit thefts in the night by
borning holes (in. the walls of houses), let the king
cut off the hands; and. after that, place them on the
tops of sharp pointed pikes. (276)

- Those who: steal by cutting knots of clothes (¢.e:
things tied up in knots aj the ends of cloths):
should: be: punished with the mutilation of fingers
om the first conviction, with the mutisation of hands.
and legs on the second, and with death on the
third. (277)

Them, who shall knowingly give fire, food, tools or
shelter to thieves, or secrete their stolen articles in their
houses, let the king punish as actual thieves. (278)


Manu Samhita. 357


He who has cut away the entbankment (/:, des-
troys) a tank should be killed, or killed by being
drowened in water; but in the event of his duly
repairing the same and making it as before, he shall pay
a fine of the Uttama Sahasa class to the king. (279):

Those, who break open a royal store-house, or
a treasury, or a divine temple, or am arsenal. as well as
stealers of king’s elephants or horses, should. be punish-
ed with death without the least hesitatiorm. (280)


He, who has destroyed the entire water of a tank,
dedicated to public use, or has stopped the channek
ef a running water course by means of an embank-
ment, shall be punished with a fine of the Prathama
Sahasa class. (281)

One, found guilty, of defecating, except in the time
of distress, on the king’s high way, shall be punished
with a fine of two Karshdpanas; moreover he shall be:
eaused to remove the feces himself. (282)


But a distressed person, an infant or an old man,
found guilty of the same offence, shall be liabe to:
to remove the feces. This is the decision, (283).

Physicians, found guilty of making wrong medical
treatments in respect of beasts and men, shall be res-
pectively punished with fines of the first Séhesa and
middling Sahasa clasg. (284)

A breaker of.a flight of steps, df a banner post,
or of a divine image shall be punished with a fine of
five hundred Panas; he shall be liable-to reconstruct.
and replace the same, (285)


For having adulterated an unadulterated article,
or having bored a gem which ought not to. be bored, or
for having bored it at the.wrong place, one shall be


358 Manu Samhita.


punished with a fine of the Prathama Sdahasa
class. (286) :

He, who sells unequally (mixed) goods to one who
has paid the proper price for the superior quality, or
sells articles of equal value to one for a'greater and to
‘ another for a lesser value, shall be liable to pay a
fine of the middling Séasa class to the king. (287)

Houses of incarceration (Prison houses) should be
situated near the public high way, so that the en-
chained miscreants may be seen in their miserable
plight by the passeis by. (288)

_A house-breaker, a filler of a ditch, and a breaker of
a wall-door shall be instantaneously banished from
the country. (289)

For having practised a fatal incantation (7.e. a spell
practised ‘for one’s death), forehaving hypnotised (/¢,
subjugation of one’s mind) one who is not his in-
timate relation,* or for having practised an incantation
for the distraction of one’s mind, the offender shall
be punished with a fine of two hundred Pannas, \if
death of its victim has not resulted therefromt) (290)

For having sold devitalised seeds or bad seeds as
good ones, or for having obliterated (lit demolished)
the boundary marks of a village), one shall be
punished with mutilation of organs (such as the nose,
ears, etc), (291)


- © The text has Andpta, which means not by his own people.
A wife, mother or a father is at liberty to hypnotise her husband
or his or her son; but one attempting to hypnotise another with
a view to make him make large gifts in his favour, or to extort
money from him, is guilty of the offence, dealt with in this
couplet.

_ ¥ If death-resuits from such an incantation, its practiser shalt °
be punished as a murderer.—Kulluka.


Manu Samhita. 359


The gold smith is the worst of all thorns of the
realm (i.e. thieves) ; hence, a gold smith, found guilty
of treading the path of iniquity 17. ¢., of stealing gold)
should be put to death by cutting him to pieces with a
razor. (292)

For having stolen implements of agriculture, or
weapons, or medicines, the king shall punish the
offender in consideration of the hardness of the time,
and the motive of his crime. (293)

The soverign, the premier, the capital or palace,
the kingdom, the treasury, the army, and the ally,
these are the seven essentials (Prakriti; of govern-
ment; and :hence), a kingdom is called a seven-limbed.
(polity). (294)

Of these seven limbs of government, the destruc-
tion of each precedin¥ one is more diresome (moment-
ous) than that of the one immediately succeeding it
in the order of enumeration. (295) -

As there is no difference of importance among the
three staves (of an ascetic bound together to form one),
so these seven limbs of government, though contrary
to one another in their virtues (7. e. ends and nature),
are co-operative; one does not excel another in res-
pect of eminence or importance. (296)

In those works, which are effected by any particular
limb of government, should be judged its specific
pre eminence. (297)

By means of‘ secret spies, by encouraging his army,
and (by the ability, to institute works (of public utility)
the king must judge his own strength as well as that af
his enemy. (2y8)

In consideration of the prevalence of dreadful epide-
mics in his (ehemy’s) country or of any other distress


380° Manu Samhita.


therein, as well as of the great or small disturbance
in his state polity, let the king make war or peace
with his adversary. (299)

Tired -of (.2., unsuccessful in) his attempting to
increase his territory and conquer the kingdom of his
adversary, let the king put forth new efforts (lit,
undertake fresh works) to that end. The goddess of
fortune embraces the man who has _ undertaken
a work. (390)

[The different cycles of time such as] the Kritam,
Treta, Dudpara and Kali are but the undertakings
of kings. (e. they consist of the incidents of royal
lives). Herice, the king is called {the embodiment of)
a yuga (cycle of time. (301)

When the king sleeps remains idle and inoperative)
he is the Ku/i Yuga, when he is awake (i.e., without
undertaking any sort of exploit., he is the Dodpara,
when he energetically undertakes an exploit he is the
Yreté, and when he is on the move, (fully operative
and wakeful) he is the Kritam (golden age.) (302)

, The divine energies of (the deities) Indra, Arka (the

sun’, Vaéyu (the wind’, Yama (the god of death), Varuna:
(the god of oceans), Chandra (the moon), and Agni
(the fire), which enter into the composition of his
self the king shall call into play (in his works in
life.) (303)

As Indra the lord ef rains) pours showers of rain
on the earth for four months in the year, so the king,
by showering gifts and riches on his subjects for four
months, shall practise the vow of Indra i.e., imitate
the conduct of Indra.) 304)


As the sun-god soaks up water (from the earth) with °
his rays during the eight months in the year, so the


Manu Samhita, 361


xing shall extract the revenue from his subjects, this
is what is called acting like unto the sun (Arka
Vratam.) {305)

As the air runs through all created things, so ‘the
king shall penetrate into the hearts of all his subjects
with the help of his spies. (306)

As Yama {the lord of death) deals impartially with
all (irrespective of his votaries or revilers), so the king
shall administer even-handed justice to all his sub-
jects; this what is fcalled Yama Vratam (i.e., acting
like unto Death.) - 307) ,

As Varuna (the god of ocean) is seen to bind (the
sinners) with his noose, so the king shall punish the
miscreants (with imprisonment, etc.). This is what
is called the Varuna Vratam (acting like unto
Varuna. (308)


As men rejoice at thesight of the full moon, so
the king, in whom stayeth the delight of his subjects,
is called the moon-vowed one. (309)

Mighty, and full of indomitable prowess, the king,
who constantly consumes the miscreants and the re.
fractory vassals of his own, is said to act like unto the
fire (Agneya Vratam). (310)


As the Earth supports all creatures on her (buoyant)

“body (in the air), so (he king supports all his subjects.

This is what is called his acting like thto the Earth
(Pérthiva Vratam). (311)

Always energetic and possessed of these expedients,
let the king suppress,the caitiffs both in his realm and
in other countries. (312)

,Even having obtained (7.e. fallen in) the direst dis-
tress, let him not enrage Brahmanas; (inasmuch as)
46


362 Manu Samhita.


enraged, they may instantaneously kill him with his
army and riding animals. (313)

Who may not meet his doom by enraging the
Brahmanas, who made the fire, the eater of all things
(clean and unclean), the great ocean, undrinkable,
and the wasting moon, full again? (314)

Who can prosper by insulting the feelings of
Brahmanas, who in fits of anger can create separate
worlds with their presiding deities, and undeify the
gods 7* (315)

Who, loving life, shall oppress Brdhmanas on whom
do the worlds and deities constantly depend for their
existence, and whose only treasure is Brahma ?t (316)

As the fire is the great deity, whether consecrated
or unconsecrated ; soa great deity is the Bréhmana,
whether he is erudite or unread. (317)

The mighty-prowessed fire is not defiled even in
the cremation ground; but fed with libations (of
clarified butter, and other offerings) in a saerifice, it
becomes freshly augmented. (3181

And so, even if Brahmanas betake to all kinds of
evil acts, they should be regarded as (prototypes of)
the supreme deity. (319)

The Brahmana is ‘capable of making full reprisals
for wrongs done by an extremely spirited (arrogant)
.Kshatriya on Brahmanas (by means of imprecation,
etc.) The Kshasriya has originated from (the arm of)
Brahma (320),


* i.e, Can divest them of their divinities. Many deities of
tthe Brahmanic pantheon, such as Indra, etc., are known to have
been changed into mortals under imprecations of holy sages.


“ + KutLuxa explains Bxahma by Veda.


Manu Samhita. 363


From the water originated the fire, from Brahma
“emanated the Kshatriyas, and from stone originated
iron; they are stbdued by their respective sources of
origin. (321)

The Kshatriya without the Brahmana (2. e., force
without intellect) and the Brahmana without the
Kshatriya can never thrive; acting in co-operation
with each other they prosper in this’ world. (322)

Having given all money realised as fines from
miscreants (other than Maképakins) to Brdhmanas, and
made over the throne to his son, let the king, (afflict-
ed with an incurable disease), go to and die in a
battle.* (323)

The king, discharging all the duties, (laid down in
this chapter), shall employ all his servants for con-
stantly doing good to his subjects. (304)

Thus all the acts and eternal duties of the king
have been fully described, now hear me expound the |
duties of Vais’yas and S’udras in succession. (325)

A Vais’ya, initiated with the holy thread, shall
marry, and daily attend to agriculture and cattle-
rearing. (326)

Prajépati (consciousness embodied by the uni-
verse) created the beasts and gave them to the Vais’ya;
and all the creatures. he gave to the king and the
Brahmana. (327) ;

The Vais’ya must not desire to keep no beasts;
if the Vais’ya desires to keep beasts (7e., to rear
animals’, let none else do that. (328)

Let the Vais’ya appraise (cultivate the knowledge
of) the prices and ‘qualities of gems, pearls, corals,


# Or to quit his life by starvation in the absence of a battleen
Sangrémd sambhave tvanas’anddind)—Kulluka.


364 Mann Sambrta.


metals, woven stuffs, scented things (such as camphor,
etc.,) and salts. (329)

Likewise, he must possess the knowledge of sow-
ing seeds, of the specific traits of” the soil, of the
measures of (z.¢., the rules of measuring) lands, and the
rules of weighing articles. (330)

(As well as) defects or excellences of articles, the
good or evil traits of countries, profits or losses in
manufactured articles and the increase of animals (the
method of rearing cattle, etc.) (331)

He must know the wages of artisans and workmen,
and languages of different races of men, shall be able
to forecast the increase or decrease in the prices,
and amelioration or deterioration in the quality, of an
article at a particular place and time, as well as the
mode of selling or buying. 332°

He shall constantly try to multiply his riches by
_ honest means and give food to animals out of all
creatures. (333)

Serving the renowned house-holder Brahmanas,
well-versed in the Vedas, forms the highest virtue
(duty) of Sudras. (334)

Pure in body and mind, of gentle speech and
demeanour, a S’udra, by living under the shelter of a
Brahmana, attains a considerably higher status (éz/.
caste) among his fellow S’udras. $335)

Thus the awspicjous duties of the Members of the
four castes in times*of peace (/.c., not in,times of dis-
tress , have been described; now hear me discourse
on their duties in times of distress. (336)


Manu Samhita 365


CHAPTER X.


THE members of the three twice-born orders, attend-
ing to the specific duties of their castes, shall read
(the Vedas), but *the Brdhmanas alone shall teach the
Vedas, and none else, this is the conclusion (1)


Cognisant of the modes of livelihood of all castes
of men, and discharging the specific duties of his own
order, let the Brahmana advise on the same to mem-
bers of all (the four) castes. (2)


By the excellence of his specific duties, by the
loftiness of his birth (from the face of Brahma), and
by his comprehension of the Vedas,* the Brahmana is
the lord of all the castes. (3)


The Brahmana, Kshatriya, and Vais’ya are the three
twice-born castes ; the S’udraiis the fourth, there being
no+,sub-castes among- S’udras, and there is no fifth
caste, (4) 2

Sons, begotten by members of the (four several)
castes on lawful married wives, belonging to their
respective social orders (castes) in the due order of
enumeration, and with unraptured hymens (at the
time of marriage, should be regarded as the best (of
sons). Sons, begotten by twice-born ones on wives
not belonging to their respective castes, do not bceome
of the same castes with their fathers; they belong to
different castes. Sons*begotten by members of twice-
born castes on wives belonging {dé their next inferior
castes (in thé order of enumeration) are said (by Manu)
not obtain the castes of their fathers owing to-the
degraded castes of their mothers. (5—6)


* The text has MNiyamasya cha Dharandt. GOVINDARAJA
sexplains it by “for his practising the vow of Suatakas, etc.,
® .
Sndtaka Vratadidharandt.


366 Manu Samhita.


Thus the status of sons begotten by fathers on
wives respectively belonging to their next inferior
castes has been described; now hear me discourse on
' the status of sons, begotten by men on wives belonging
to the next but one, or next but two inferior castes of
their own. (7)


Sons begotten by ‘Brahmanas on their lawfully
married Vais’ya wives, are called Ambashthas ; sons
begotten by Brahmanas on their S’udra wives are called
Nishadas ot Pérés'avas (lit. living corpses). (8)

* Sons begotten by Kshatriyas on their S’udra wives
are called Ugras; they become cruel in deeds and
temperaments owing to the natural mental traits of
their respective parents. (9)

Sons begotten by Brahmanagon wives of the next
three (inferior) castes (¢e., Kshatriya, Vais’ya and
S’udra), those begotten by Kshatriyas on wives of the
next two inferior castes, and by Vais’yas on wives of
the next inferior caste (Sudra’, in their order of enu-
meration, should be regarded as six inferior (Apasada)
sons. (10)

A son begotten by a Kshatriya on a Brahmana
woman becomes a Suta by caste; sons begotten by
Vais’yas on Kshatriya women are called Mdgadhas, and
sohs begotten by Vais’yas on Byihmana women are
called Vaidehas.%11)e


Sons begotten by S’udras on Vais’ya women are
called Ayogavas, those begotten on Kshatriya women
by them are called Xshattés, and ‘those which they
ebeget on Brahmana women are called Chandalas, the
most abominable creatures. Thus the mixed casteg
are originated. (12)


Manu Samhita. 367


Sons begotten by men on wivies, belonging to castes
ext by one to those of their own, computed in the order
of enumeration such as, the Amébashtha and Ugra, bear
the anology witht Ashatta and Vaidehas, which are
begotten by fathers on wives belonging to castes next
by one to those of their own, counted’ in the inverse
order of enumeration. (13)


Sons of the twice-born ones, begotten by them on
wives belonging to the next inferior castes to those
of their own as described before, are called Ansar
Fanmés, owing to the defects (inferior castes) of their
respective mothers. (14)


Sons begotten by a Brdhmana on Ugra, A’mbastha
and d’yogava women. are respectively called Avrita,
Abhira and Dhigvana, ‘15)

The Ayogava, Khat?i and Chandéla, the lowest of
men, inasmuch as they were begotten by S’udras on
women respectively belonging to superior castes im the
inverse order of enumeration, should be regarded as
extremely low castes. (16)

. The Magadha and Vaideha, begotten by the Vais’ ya,
and the Sufa, begotten by the Kshatriya, should be
regarded as of vile castes, inasmuch as they have been
begotten by their fathers on women (of their superior
castes) reckoned in the inverse order of enumeration, (17)

A son begotten bya Nishéda ona S’udra woman,
becomes a Puhkasa by caste; a eon,*begotten by a
S’udra on a Ashéda woman is called a Kukkutaka. 1181

A son, begotten by a Xshatté on an Ugra woman,
is called a S'vapéka ; a son, begotten by a Vaideha
on an Ambastha women is called a Vena. (19)

Sons begotten by twice-born ones on wives of their
Own castes, and devoid of the rites of initiation with the


366 Manu Samhita.


thread, etc., are called Vrétyas (lit. broken vowed
ones.) 20:

Sons begotten by Vratya Brahmanas on law-
ully married wives of their own castes, are called
Bhurjakantakas ; they are also known by the desig-
nations of Avantyas Vatadhanas, Pushpadhas and
S’aikhas also. (21)


Sons begotten by Vratya Kshatriyas on lawfully
Amarried wives of their own castes, are called /hal/as,
Mallas, Natas, Karanas, Khasas and Dravidas. (22)

Sons begotten by Vratya (uninitiated) Vais’yas on
wives of their own castes, are called Sadhanv, acharyaya
Kérusna, Vijanma, Maitréd and Svatata. (23)


Through the intermixture of castes, through’ in-
termarriages among forbidden, castes, and through
renunciation of their specific duties by (members of
the four several) castes, that the hybrid ones are
born. 124%

Now I shall describe in detail the castes of low
origin which spring up from sexual intercourses among
members of the four several) castes, reckoned in the
usual or inverse order of enumeration. (25)

| Sutds, Vaidehakas, Chandalas, the vilest of men,
Migadhas, Kshattés and Ayogavas are the six hybrid
castes, (begotten by fathers on mothers, respectively
belonging to) castes, counted in the inverse order of
enumeration (Pratilomaja’. -26)

Members of these six hybrid castes beget on women
respectively belonging to their superior castes, or to
castes of their mothers, or to their own castes, sons
who become of their own castes. (27)

As sons begotten by a Brahmana on a Vais’ya or
Kshatriya wife, or on his Brdhmana wife are superior


Manu Samhita. 269


to his sons by a S'udra wife, so among membets of
inferior castes, sons begotten by Vais’yas on Kshatriya
women, or thos? begotten by Kshatriyas on Brihmana
women are a little more honqurable than sons
begotten by S’udras on women, belonging to their
(superior) castes, reckoned in the inverse order of
enumeration. _ (28)

Sons begotten by members of the six ‘hybrid 4astes,
such as the Ayogavas, etc., on women belonging
to their immediately superior or inferior castes, (/7.
castes reckoned in the usual or inverse order of
enumeration) should be respectively reckoned as viler,
and more condemmable; and’ more deprived of the
privilege of doing religious rites. (29)

As S’udras begot the vilest Chandé/as on Brah-
mana women, so the vilé sons, begotten by members of
the vile hybrid castes on women respectively belong-
ing to the four castes, shall be regatdédj as extremely
vile, degraded and condemnable. (30)

Sons begotten throvgh intermarriage by the
members of the six hybrid castes such as, the Ayogavas,
etc., among their own castes, are divided into (grouped
under) fifteen castes; (and) they are moréj degraded
than their progenitors, (31)


Sons, begotten by members of the robber castes on
women of the Ayogavd caste are called Sairindhras ; '
they are expert in dressing hair, and although not
actually serv@nts (Jit. slaves, Ddsas), they live by
service and by capturing birds and beasts. (32)

Sons begotten by Vazdehas on Ayogava women
are called Maztreyass they lavishly sing the eulogies
of the king at dawn, and rouse him from sleep by
ringing bells (in the morning). (33)

47


378 Manu Samhita.


Sons, begotten by?Vishédhas on Ayogava women,
are‘called M/drgavas, who live by-working as boatmen :
the inhabitants of Aryavarta call them Katvartas. (34)

Of women “of the Ayogava} caste, who wear -the
clothes of corpses and eat the leavings ot other men’s
food, are bom the three vile castes (Sairandhra,
Maitreya and Mdrgava) who do not obtain the castes
of their fathers. (35)

Of Karévara women by MNishddas are born the
Charmakéras (cobblers), and of Kdrdvara and Nishdda
‘women by Vaidehdkas are respectively born the
Andhras and Medas, who live outside villages, (361
- Of Vaidehika women by Chandélas are born
Pandapakas, who manufacture bamboo-made arficles
and of Vaideha women by wishadas are born the
‘Anindakas. (37:

Of Pukkasa women by Chandalas are bom the
loathsome, villainous Sopiéas, who live by working as
public executioners (/it, by executing criminals punished
with death.) (38)

Sons begotten by Chandilas on Nishida women
are called JAntyivasayins, who live by working as
attendants at cremationvgrounds, andj,they are the
vilest of all vile castes: (39)

-Fathersfandj ‘mothers of the€e hybrid castes have
‘been setgforth, th&se of unknown parentage should be
detected by their respective works. 4 40)

Of sons begotten by twice-born ones (Brahmanas
and Kshatriyas) on wives of their own castes, or on
wives belonging to castes next, or next by one to those
of theirg own,®six castes (of Sons) have the righ{ of
being initiated with the thread (/:¢. the privilege of


Manu Samhita. 372


twice-bornship), and the rest are S’udras, partaking of
the status and privileges of S'udra. (41)


But in each cf¥cle of time, these men (such as
Vis'vAmitra, etc.) (¢.e., those born of parents belonging,
to the same caste or contrary), by dint of peniten-
tial austerities, and through the excellence of their
(Beejas)- paternal elements (such as, Rishyas’ringa, etc.) .
acquire. higher castes, (and through contrary causes).
are degraded to viler castes in life. (42)


The following Kshatriya castes, through the extinc-
tion, (non-performances) of their proper religious rites,
and on account of not seeing (7.e.,in the absence of
their gontact with) Braéhmanas, have been degraded to
the S’udra caste in this world. (43)

[ They are] the Paundrakas, Andras, Dravidas,
Kamvojas, Javanas, Sakas, Parandas, Pandavas, Chinas,
Kiratas, Daradas, Kashas. [Kshatriyas of these countries
have become S’udras for having renounced the religious
Tites.} (44)

Members of castes, respectively originated from the
face, arms, thighs and legs of Brahman (1.e., Brah-
mana, Kshatriya, Vais’ya and S’udra) who have been
comprised eutside the pale of these four castes for
the extinction of their religious rites, are all called
Dasyus, whether they speak an Aryan or a non-Aryan
(Mlechchha) tongue. (45)

Castes begotten by the twice-born ones on women
belonging to their next inferior castes in the due order
of enumeration (4pusadas , as- weil as those begotten
by men on women belonging to castes, counted in the
inverse order of their enumeration, shall live by -doing
fowly works, which the Brdhmanas are incapable of
doing. (46)


372 Manu Samhita


Sutas shall live by working as charioteeis; Ambash~
thas. by practising medicines ; Vaidehakas, by guarding
the harems of kings, and Mégadhas by trading. (47) ,

Nishédas shall live by killing fishes; 4yogavas, by
doing carpentry; and Medas, Andhras, Chunchus,.
and Madgus, by killing wild beasts. (48)

Kshallas, Ugras and Pukkasas shall live by killing
or capturing hole-dwelling animals; curing of leather
(cobbler’s work) is the ‘profession of: Dhigvanas, and.
drum-beating, etc, is that of the Venas. (49)

' Doing their proper works, these castes shall live
in the forest, or about cremation-grounds, or on hill
“tops, or underneath the lordly trees. '50)

Chandalas and Svapachas (lit. dog-eaters). shall ive
at the out-skirts of villages, they shall use no utensils ;.

dogs and asses being their only ‘wealth. (51).

They (Chandiilas, etc.,\ shall wear the apparels. of
corpses, eat out of broken pots, wear ornaments of
steel, and live a nomadic life. (52)

One, while doing a religious rite, must not see, or
speak to them (Chandd/as) ; they shall carry on their
monetary or matrimonial transactions among members.
of their own caste. (53)

One shall cause food to be given to them through
his servants in broken saucers; and they must not
be allowed to voam, about in a viliage in the night. (54)

Stamped with the*signs of king’s permits on their
persons, they shall enter the village on business (7.¢.,
for the sale or purchase of goods) in the day; and the.
decision is that, they shall remove the corpses of the.
friendless deceased (from villages). 55)


They shall kill, according to the rules of the sastra,
criminals punished by the king with death, and take


Manu Samhita 373


the beddings and wearing apparels of the executed
conyicts. (56)

In respect of ascertaining the Aryan or non-Aryan
origins of men of vile parentage, who- stand outside
the pale of the four castes, their respective works
(acts or tondtict) should fromi~the criterion <r" judg-
ment (7). =

Meanness, cruelty, malice, and doing improper acts
(i.e, improper deeds) point to the vile origin of a
man, (58)

A-son partakes of the nature-of his father or mother
or of both of them;aman of vile descent can never
conceal his origin. (59)

Born in a noble family, the son of a faithless
mother, bred in adultery, partakes more or less of the
wicked nature of his vile progenitor. (60)

The kingdom, wherein such ruinous hybridisérs of
castes are born, soon perisheth with all its inmates. (61)

By voluntarily laying down their lives without any
consideration of gain or reward for the good (succour)
of Brahmanas, kine, infants or women, these (castés)
men ascend to heaven (after death . (62)

Annihilation of killing propensities (¢.e., compassion
to all), truthfulness, non-stealing, purity and subjuga-
tion of the senses, these fonr, Manu described as the
general duties of all the four castes. (63)


If the daughter of a Bra4hmana by his S’udra wife
is married toa Bréhmana, and the daughter of that
union is again married to a Bréhmana, and so on un-
interruptedly up tothe seventh generation in the
female line, then at the seventh generation the issue
of such union is vested of its Pd as’ava caste and
becomes a Brahmana. (64)


374 Mann Samhita.


Thus a S’udra may obtain the caste of a Brihmana
and a Brahmana may obtain the caste of a S’udra;
similarly, the sons of Kshatriya or Yais’ya fathers may
acquire higher or lower castes. (65)

Of sons, begotten out of lust by Brahmanas on
non-Aryan women, and sons begotten by non-Aryans
on Brahmana women, whose is the preference ? (66

Certainly the sons begotten by Aryans on non-
Aryan women become possessed of the privileges (of
instituting Paka-Yajnas, etc., t.¢., they become Aryans),
while sons begotten by non-Aryans on Aryan women
‘become non-Aryans. This is the decision. (67)

Owing to the defects (degraded nature) of their
births, both these two kinds of sons (:.e., sons begotten
by Bréhmanas on non-Aryan women and sons begotten
by non-Aryans on Aryan women) are divested of the
rights of being initiated with the thread, etc., (/7#.
of the right of purificatory rites being done unto
them.) (68)

As (from) good seeds, sown in a good soil, excellent
cereals sprout up, so the son, begotten by an:Aryan
on an Aryan woman is ‘worthy of (/#. acquires the
privilege of, all purificatory rites being done unto
him. (69)

Several wise men assert the pre-eminence of the
soil; others, of the seed; while some there are who
speak of the eqiah importance of both the seed
and the soil. In such cases of conflicting opinions
the following is the decision of law (.e., criterion.of
judgment.) (70)

Sown in a barren soil, a seed diés before sprouting,
while a good field without seeds. is but a hard fallew°
(Sthandtlam.) (71)


Manu Samhité. 375


Since -through their excellent. energies (potency),
seeds, cast in the wombs of beasts (by the holy sages),
fructified in the shapes of human beings, who became
howoured and commendable Rishis* in life; the seed
is commended (as of greater importance in an act of
fecundation). (72)

In respect of anon-Aryan, who does the acts of
(behave like) an Aryan and an Aryan who deports
himself (/if. does the works of) like a non-Aryan, the
ordainer, after deliberation, ordained the fact that, they
are neither equal nor unequal. (73)

_Brahmanas, addicted to the contemplation of Brahma,
who discharge the duties peculiar to their order, shall
(alone) earn their livings by doing the six following
acts. (74)

Study of the Veda# teaching the Vedas ‘to pupils),
performances of religious sacrifices, officiating as priests
at sacrifices instituted by others, gift-making, and ac-
ceptance of gifts, these six are the vocations (/:¢. works)
of the eldest borns of creation (?.e., Brahmanas). (.75)

Out of these six acts, by officiating as priests at.
other men’s sacrifices, by teaching the Vedas, and by
accepting gifts from: clean gift-makers, let the Brah-
manas earn their livelihood. 76)

Teaching the Vedas, officiating as priests at other
men’s sacrifices and gift-taking, which forms the third,
are ithe three acts which shall never® revert to the
Kshatriya asagainst the Brahmava.t (77)


;

* The holy sage Rishyas’ringa was procreated by Vibhandaba
in the womb of a she-deeg.

+ The text has Brafmanat Kshatriyam pratt, te. a Kehatriya
shall never be competent to take gifts from a Brahmans, er to
teach him the Veda, or to officiate as a priest at a sacrifice insti-
tuted by a Brahmana.


376 Manu Samhita.


Similarly, these privileges (/i#. acts) must not be
claimed by the Vais’ya against the Brahmana, inasmuch
_as the lord of the universe (Prayépati) did not ordain
these duties (of gift-taking, etc.) for the Vais’ya- and
the Kshatriya. This is the decision. (78)

A Kshatriya shall earn his living by wielding arms
and weapons; and a Vais’ya, by trade, agriculture and
cattle-rearing. For virtue (and not for a living) they
can study the Veda, make gifts, and institute religious
sacrifices. (79)


Of works stated before, the study of the Vedas

forms the specific duty of Brahmanas; protection
of subjects forms the specific ;duty of Kshatriyas ;
and agriculture forms the special vocation of the
Vais’ya. (80)
_ Failing to earn a living by his specific vocation, let
a. Brshmana earn his livelihood by doing the duties~~
of a Kshatriya, since the vocation of a- Kshatriya is
more kindred to that of his own (than any other
calling). (81)

Failing to earn his livelihood by either of these two
callings, how shall a Bréhmana obtain a living? Let
him earn} his living (in that case) by following the |
voeation of 2a Vais’ya, (vss. agriculture and cattle-
rearing). (82)

Failing to edn adiving by following the vocation
of a Vais'ya, let not’a Braéhmana, or a Khatriya live
by prosecuting agriculture, which is dependent (on
bullocks). and entails the destruction of many (under
ground) lives. (83)

Many people consider agriculture to be a com-
mendable vocation, but, in fact, it is condemned by the


Manu Samhit2. 377


‘Virtiious, inasmuch as the iron-bound furrow penetrates
4nto the earth and destroys many terrestrial lives. (84)

A Braéhmasa, or a Kshatriya, failing to earn his
livelihood by his proper vocation, and thereby happen-
ing to infringe the Law, shall live by selling the un-
‘condemnable and wealth-augmenting articles of trade out
‘of those which are (ordinarily) sold by a Vais'ya. (85)

He must not sell edible articles of all tastes, con-
‘fection made with sesame seeds, stones, salts, beasts
‘and men (slaves). (86)

-[As well as] clothes woven with réd-coloured
‘cotton twists or with hemp. twists, silk-cloths, cloths
made of sheep’s wool, fruits and edible? roots, and
medicinal drugs (herbs). (87)

(As well as! water, weapon, poison, flesh, Some plant,
‘all kinds of scented things, milk, bee’s wax, milk curd,
clarified butter, oil, honey, treacle and Xxs’a grass. (88)

[And] all kinds of wild beasts, the fanged ones
in'special, birds, wines, indigo, shellac, and all beasts
with unbifurcated hoops. (89) .

Having wilfully raised a crop of sesame seeds by
himself cultivating the soil, let him speedily sell those
holy (seeds) only for the purposes of religious sacri-

- fices. (90)

For having sold sesaine seeds for the purposes of
food, unguents and &ifts, he, with his manes, shall be
merged (born) as worms in the excrota of dogs. (91)

By selling flesh, Jac-dye, of salt, he shall be degradec
‘on the very day of the sale; by selling milk a Brah.
mana shall become a S’udra in the course of three
days. (92)

For having wilfully sold other articles of trade,
a Brahmana, in the course of seven nights (days), shall

43


378 Manu Samhita.


assume the nature of a Vais’ya (i.e, he shall be de-
gtaded to the status of a Vais’ya in a week). (93) |

Saps (such as treacle, etc.,) may be.given (or taken)
in exchange of (emolient: saps such as milk, clarified
butter, etc)., but sap must not be taken in exchange
of salt ; similarly, raw rice may be taken in exchange
of cooked rice, and sesame of paddy. (94)

Rather should a Kshatriya in distress live by fol-
lowing all these trades; but ugder no circumstances,
should he embrace the vocation of a Brahmana. (95)

_ Him, who, though of an inferior caste, shall adopt,
out of greed, the vocation of his superior caste for a
living, let the king banish from the country, stript of
all his belongings. (96)

_ It is better that one should live by doing the vile
works allotted to his own ¢aste than embrace the
vocation of a superior caste for livelihood; living by
adopting the vocation of another caste, one becomes
degraded the very day. '97)

- .A Vais’ya, incapable of earning a living by doing
the vocation of his caste, shalk do the works of a
S’udra in exclusion of the condemnable ones; when
capable, let him resume the vocation of his own
otder. (98)

A S’udra, incapable of securing the services of
Brahmanas, shall live ‘as an attisan_ to prevent the
death of his wife aifd children by starvation. (99)

Let him (/.¢., S’udra) do such varied works of arti-
sanship (such as painting, carpentry, etc.,) by which
the Brdhmanas are best served ¢.e., those which are
of*daily use to Brahmanas). (100)

Let a Brahmana, discharging the duties of kis
own order \/:#, keeping to his proper path in life) with-


Afans Sambita. 379


out living by the vocation of a Vais’ya, do the ¢follow-
ing) works (it. duties for his livelihood), oppressed by
the absence of any means of living. (101)

-Let him succtssively accept’ gifts from all men,
(condemnable, more condemnable.and the most condem-
nable in their order of enumeration), A holy thing
can never be virtually called defiled by the contact
of an unclean substance.* (102)

‘In times of distress, Brahmanas, by teaching the
Vedas to the unworthy, er by officiating as priests. at the
religious sacrifices of their degraded institutors, or by
accepting the gifts of the vile, are not degraded, in as
much as they are like unto the water and the fire @.¢.,
above all defilement). (103)

By taking his food at a place: (however sinful or un-
holy), a [Brahmana onethe point of death, like unto the
ether purging off all dust, shall not be associated. with
the sin. (104)

The hungry (age) Ajagarntah, for having: attempted
to kill his son (s’unahs’epha) in order to appease his:
hunger (with his. flesh), was not associated with the
sin (of child killing). (105)

The famished Vémadevah, the kuower of sin and
virtue, for having wished to. eat jdog’s flesh inorder
to avoid death from starvation, was not associated with
the sin (of eating dog's flesh. (306)


Opressed by hunger in a lowefy forest, the (holy)


* As the water of the holy Ganges can. never be defiled by
the touch of running and°unclean water-chansiels from the road, so.
a Brdhmana, true to*his own duties; can never be degraded by ‘
accepting gifts even from the vilest of persons for his.living—~
Kulluka.,


Zo Manu Samhita.


Bharadvaja of great austerity, together with his son;.
was not associated with the sin (of taking vile gifts):
for having accepted the gift of a large number of
Kine from Vridhu who was a carpenter. (107)

Oppressed by hunger, the holy Vis'vémitra, the:
knower of merits and demerits, for having accepted the:
gift of the fiesh of a:dog’s thigh from. the hand. of a.
Chandala, was not associated with sin. (108)

[Of sins], of teaching the Vadas (to- the. unworthy),.
of officiating as priests (at the sacrifices of the:
degraded), and of accepting (vile gifts), the last.
‘named one shonld be regarded as the mosts degrading:
for a Brahmana in his life after death. (109):

In times of distress let the Bréhmanas. teach the:
Vedas to, and officiate as priests at sacrifices insti-.
tuted by, the twice-born ones and. accept gifts from.
Sudras. (tro)

He gets rid of the sin. of teaching the unworthy’
and doing sacrifices on behalf of the degraded by-
means of ¥apas and Homas, that which is incidental.
to his taking (vile gifts) he shall get rid of by means. of
penitential austerities and by renunciation. (2.¢. by
renouncing the articles of gift. (111)

A Brahmana, living any where he pleases (¢¢.,. im
a dale or a valley withot living by*his proper vocation),.
shall live by practising S’s/a and. Uncha ; Sila (described.
before) is, better than gift-taking, and. Uncha (to live:
by picking up grains from fields or stubbles) is more:
meritorious than »’i/a. (1r2)

Snétaka Bréhmanas, in the’absente of \their; proper:
means of livelihood, may begi{for paddy,. food grains,
wearing stuff, or any metal, other than gold or ‘silver,


Manu Samhita. 382


ef the king; if the king refuses tomake these: gifts.
they should not be asked the second time.* (113)

Unprepared (uncultivated) fields are less sinful (as
gifts) than those prepared: (cultivated by men), and
of kine; goats, sheep, gold, paddy and cooked. food
each preceding one is less. sinful (as.a gift). than. one:
immediately following it in the order of enumera-.
tion. (E14):

Inheritance, presents (ftom friends), purchase, con-
quest,} ‘accretion by interest, ‘investment in (trade or-
agriculture), and taking gifts from the worthy form the
seven lawful (honest or virtuous) sources of pecuniary:
income (/it- access of wealth). (115)

Teaching sciences other than the Vedas (//#. educa-
tion,) art, service, doing other men’s behests, cattle-
rearing, trade, cultivation (done by one’s own-self),,
contentment, (¢.e., resting content with little what is:
obtained), alms-begging, and money lending are the tem
means of livelihood in times of distress.t (116)

A Brahmana or a Kshatriya must not lend: money
for interest; but for the purposes of virtue he may


* The text has tyégamarhati. Both Mepuatirul and Govin-
DaRAJA explain it by ¢asya de’se na Vastavyam—let them not
live i in his country.

T ‘The first three should be understood as the. honest sources,
of.wealth in respect .of all the four orders of spciety. Conquest
is only lawful for a Kshatriya. Money; lending and investment
in trade and @griculture are open only to Vais’yas, while gift-
taking from worthy donors is lawful for Brdhmanas. only.—
Kulluka,

- ¥ Of these, means of living, which are unlawful for a particular
caste under ordinary circumstances (Anépadi), may be embraced,

‘or ,adopted. by it under emergency or in times of distress
(A’ padi) —Kullukas


382, Manu Saminta,


lend money to a miscreant at a very small rate of,
interest. (217)

In times of emergency, a king, full< protecting his.
subjects by his miglity prowess, shall not be guilty of
the sin (of exacting rack-rents), if he takes a quarter part.
of the agricultural produce from each of theth. (318)

Conquest (of foreign countries, is the proper duty-
of the king, let him not dissuade from battle (when.
called upon to fight): by protecting the Vaisyas with.
his arms, let him collect. the proper revenue (from.
them.) (119)

In times of emergency, let the king receive an eighth:
part of the (stored up food grains and.a twentieth part.
of each Karshdpanam (of collected money) from the:
Vais'yas.* S’udras, artisans, and confectioners (Keraaas),
etc., should be made to work in Keu of revenue. (120)

’ [If by serving a Brahmana he fails to obtain an
adequate living], let, the Sudra take the services of a
Kshatriya or of a rich Naisya and thereby earn his.
livelihood. (121) :

For the acquisition of heaven (after death), or both
for heaven and a living, let the Sudra serve the Brah-
mana; the significance of the term $dta-Brahmana
(4. born for serving the Brahmanas) which denotes:
a Sudra, will be thereby fully realised. (122)

‘Serving the Brahmanas fornts the Summum bonun
(highest duty) of a Sudra’s life ; whatever else he does.
is futile, (123)

In consideration of the skilfulness of their, services,
their capacity of work, and the number of their


* A twelfth part of his grains should be taken froma Vais’ya
is the injunction. In times of extreme emergency the king, is«
privileged to take 4 fourth part,


Mann Samhita. 383


dependants, let him (Brahmana) adequately fix the
salaries of his Sudra ‘setvants). (124)

He shall give him the leavings of his food, * his old
aa cast off clothes, and his old beddings and grainless
paddy for his bed. (125)

“A Sudra commits no sin by (eating the prohibited
articles of fare , he.can not be initiated with the thread,
he is not privileged to institute (Vediac) sacrifices, nor
he is precluded from doing the (Péka-yaynas). (126)

But S'udras, who are the knowers of virtue and
seek to acquire virtue, commit no sin by imitating the
‘doings of the virtuous in exclusion of the Vediac
‘Mantras; rather they become commendable by so
doing. (127)

Non-malicious Sudyas proportionately acquire like
‘commendations and elevations in this world and the
next as. they do comparatively better deeds in this

life. (128) .

A Sudta, even capable of “earning money, must not
accumulate . wealth, lest in pride of his riches he might
“oppress a Brahmana. (129)

Thus I have described to you the duties of the,
four social orders in times of distress, by faithfully
dischatging which men acquire exalted status. (130)

Thus I have fully described the duties of the
four social orders, now I «shall disoourse on the
mode of doing the auspicious, expiatory rites (Prayas-
chittam). (131)


* The previous prohibition in respect of giving leavings of
nis food by a Brahmana to a S'udra (Va S'udrdya Matim dadyét.
“noekchhishtam, etc.', holds good only in the case of a S'udra,'
who is not his servant.


3b4 Manu Samhrta.


‘CHAPTER XI:

"THOSE who matry only for the purpose of procreat-
‘ing children (Santinikhs), those whe desire to com
plete religious sacrifices already instituted by them
{Yakshyand), itinerant Brdhmanas, those who have gifted
away all their belongings, [as Dakshinas (fees) fot
Vis'vasit sacrifice J, those who beg for the purposes of
‘supporting their parents or preceptots, or for defraying
‘the costs of theit Vediac studies, sick folks (Brahmanas)
who beg for paying the costs of their medical treat-
taent—these nine Snftakas must be known as mendi-
cants for virtue (Dharma Vikshus), To these indigent
persons (Brahmanas) must be made gifts* preferentially
according to their eruditions. (1—2)

To those foremost of Bragmanas should be mide
gifts of food (raw food-grains, etc.,) and money, and
to others gifts of cooked focd should be made outside
the sacrificial platform. (3) . :

Let the king make gifts of all kinds of gems as well
as of fees (Dakshinds) for religious sacrifices to these
Brahmanas and to those who are well versed in the
Vedas. (4)

A married man, who.marries a second wife by : beg-
ging money of another, enjoys only the benefit of
sexual gratification in her (7.e., the second wife); sons
of her wonily belong te him who has paid him the ex-
pense of the marriage. (5)

But let a man give money according to his might
to }Veda-knowing Brahmanas, as well as to those who


* Inasmuch as charity (gift-making: isethe primary form of ex-
oiation for ail kinds] of misdeeds (Odnend-Karya-Karinah|, the
‘ramer of the code has thought fit to describe the nine puopet .
-ecipients of gifts at the commenceniént of the present chapter.


Manu Samhita. 385


‘have renounced thé order of house-holder, whereby he
shall acquire heaven, after death. (6)

He who has got three years’ provisions of his family
‘and the wages of his servants for three yéars, stocked
and stored up in his housé, is alone competent to drink
the Soma juice (i.e., to do the Soma Yajna. (7)

A Bréhmana, with a smaller provision, who has
‘performed a Soma, sacrifice, has not acquired the full
merit of the performance. (8)

The gift by one, who can find meaus vo give to other
indigent persons in the presence of his own péoples
suffering from penury, may seem to him sweet and
virtuous for the time being, but it will be like unto
poison in the end. That (gift) is but the shadow of
virtue. (9) .

Whatever virtue (Zt. any thing dong for, his
elevation in thé next world) one practises by creating
hardships on his dependants becomes a source of tor-
ment to him both here and hereafter. (10)


In the event of there being a king, if a part of a
religious sacrifice instituted by a virtuous Kshatriya,
or by a Brahmana, in special, stands unperformed for
want of funds; let him for the performance thereof
forcibly catry away that much money from the hotise
a non-sacrificing Vais'ya, who, although possessed of
alarge number of animals, does not grink-the Soma
Juice (7 e,, performs the Soma Yapna.) (t1—t12)


In the absence of such a Vais’ya, let him forcibly
carry those articles from the house of a S’udra in the
event of two or thrée limbs of his Kéma Yajna (a
sacrifice instituted ‘for the fruition of definite desire)
‘standing unperformed : gifts shall | not be; taken from
a S’udra for the’ purposes sof. a religious ,sacrifice,


49


436 ttdng Samhita.


his hou-e). (13)

MoréovVer, from a (Brahmana or. Kshatriya) relatiort
of his, who, although nét a keeper of the sacred firt, is
possessed ofa hundred kine, and -from a (Bréhmana
or Kshatriya) rélation who, although a keeper of the
sacred fire, does not* perform the tediac sacrifices,
although he is possessed of a thousand. kine—from
these two relations, let him. unhesitatingly take the
articles requisite for his sacrificé. 114

From him, who daily accumulates money by taking
‘gifts but doés not ssend it ir religious sacrifices or in
works of public utility, Jet hini forcibly take the
articles necessary for the performance of his sacrifice,
whereby .his fame and virtue will be augmented. (15)

Having fasted for three day$ in want of food, a mat
in the forepart of the fourth day may ‘steal a day's
provision from the hous¢ of a miserly misereant. (16)

He shall steal those food-grains from the thrashing
floor, frony the field, or from the granary (of such a
miscréant , or from any other part (of his house), con
venient,; and if he ititerrogatés him (2.e., the stealét
about the theft), let him speak thé reasoh thereof. (17)

A Kshatriya (as well as a Vais*ya or a S'udra must
hever steal what belongs to a,Brahmana ; but froma
Brahmana, who is the autho of bad deeds and does.
not perform the Pediac sacrifices, a Kshatriya may steal
articles necessary for the performance” of a sacrifice
in the event of it standing unperformed for their
want. (18)

He, who having taken (stolefi or extorted) money
from -miscréants give it to the virtuous (Bréhmanas),
Verily converts himself into a raft whereby he takes


fc harm ‘theré ‘exists in forcibly taking articles from.


Mann Samhita, 387


bath its recipients ana ois own, self across the ocean
of misery. (19)

The wealth of ‘those. who -regularly institute reli«
giou’ sacrifices. fs "called the divine. property, by the
wise, the wealtli of nou-sacrifigers is called demoniac,
wealth, (20)

The virtuous ‘king must not inflict punishment on.
a person who has stolew or forgibly garried. away, the
wealth (of a non-sacriliger), sines it, is through the
foolishness of the Ksnatriya, (king: that hunger over-
whelms a Bréhmana. (23)

Having ascertained the number of his ¢.e., starving:
Brahmana’s) dependents, and. the extent of his erudi-
tion and piety (7+. good conduct), the king must, oral
him a. stipend from his own treasury. (22)

Having provided hit with a stipend, let the king:
protect him in every way from thieves, for such, pro-.
tections the king receives.a sixth part, of his religious,
merit. (23).

For the purposes ‘i.e., completion of) of a religious,
sacrifice a Brahmaya must never beg money of a,
Sudra; for having performed a religious sacritice with
such money: he shall be. born as a, Chandadla, in his,
next ingarnation.*: (24),

A Brahmanya, who, having obtained money, by heg=
ging for the performafice of, a religious sactifice, does,
not spend it all for that purpose, becomles, a.crow or
a, Bhdsa_ bird tn his next birth for a “hundred years, (25)

The miscreant, who, out of greed, robs the property
ef a god, or of a Bréhmana, shall live on the leavings of


g , r
, * Only begging is prohibited; a Brdéhmana is not precluded,
from instituting @ religious sacrificg with maney voluntagily:
given, by a Sudra.—Kulluka,


383 Manu Samhita.


vultures (rotten carcases): all through: his. life in. his
hext birth. (26)

' For expiating the sin of his not having. performed
the animal sacrifice or Soma Yajna, a Brahmana thay:
take money from a S'udra to: institute a Vais’vduara
sacrifice therewith at the close-of the year.* (27):

A. Bréhmana, who. in the time of safety does a
religious. rite in the manner laid down. for its. perform~
ance: in times of distress, shall not acquire the merit.
thereof in heaven. This is the decision. (28).

Vis’vedevas, SAdhyas (am order of celestial beings);
Brahmanas, and the great sages: have done the
Vais’vanart sacrifice by proxies under circumstances,
perilous to life. (29)

The evil-minded. one, wtlo, although capable: of
instituting a religious. sacrifice “in person (/i¢. as a prin--
cipal), does. it by proxy, does not obtain the merit.
thereof in the next world. (30)

A virtuous Brdhmana must not complain of any
wrong done: to him. to. the king; he shall punish the:
wrong-doer by means of his own. ((psychic). powen (31)

The Brahmanic (psychic force) is stronger than:
the royal prowess; hence, let a Bréhmana punish his:
enemies by means of his. own (psychic): powers. (32):

Without the least compunction in his. mind he. shall.
secite the A’ngirasi S'ruti, as laid down in the Atharvan
(z.2., practise deadlf ipeantations). Word is the weapom
of a Bréhmana, let him kill his enemies thtrewith. (33)

A Kshatriya shall get. rid of his. trouble by the
prowess. of his arm; a Vais’ya er a S’udra, by the aid


** According to.a certain calendar the. Vediac year used to cam=
mence with the light fortnight of Chattra..


Manu. Samhita. 388


of his wealth; and a good. Brahmana, by: meaas: of:
Japas and Homas. (34)

» An institutor of proper religious: rites;* governor
of ‘sons: and disciples, expounder (of spiritual or moral
truths, or of Law Codes), equally compassionate to
all creatures, is called a Brahmana ; a harsh or abusive
language must not be used unto. him (such a Brah-
mana. (35)

An unmarried girl, a youthful matron, an unread
Brdhmana, one of small learning, one-afflicted with a
disease, or uninitiated with the holy thread. must not.
perform the Agnihetra Homat (fire offering). (36)

For haying cast such libations in the: fire, these
(unmarried girls, etc.) shall go to hell, together with, the
person on whose behalf they’ do such fire-offerings ;
hence, a Bréhmana, w®ll-versed.in the Vedas and in, the
art of performing such fire-offerings, shall act as a
Hoté (i.e., offerer of the libation, or doer of the fire-
offering.) (37)

He, who, having had the: means to. give- a horse-
which is sacred to Prajipati, to the officiating priest:
(Rittvik) as his: Dakshind (fee) on the occasion. of first
establishing (kindling). the sacred fire, does not give it,
to him, remains as.one who has not kindled the sacred
fire, and fails to obtajn the merit of the-rite. (38),


Let not one, believing and self-centrolled, doing.
other religjous rites, performe sacrifices by giving


* The text has Vidhdta which may also. mean, an ordainer of
laws.

+ They are not [competent to perform. the Homas enjoined td
ye performed in the Vedas by a Brahmana, morning and. evening,
each day (S’rautén Sayam pratar homan na Kuryuh)r—Kulluka.


398 Mana Samhita.


small amounts of fees. (Dakshind) to the officiating:
priests). 139)

A sacrifice, performed with a small amount of fees,
(paid to the priest), destroys the progeny, (domestic»
animals, fame and the senses of its institutor, shortens.
the duration, of his life, and acts asa bar against his.
Heaven, Hence, let no one perform.a sacrifice with,
gsmall amount of money. (40)

_ An Agnihotri; (performer of the Agnihotra fire-.
offering) Bréhmava, who wilfully neglects to do the
fire-offering, morning and evening. each day, shall do
the penayce of Chandrayana for a month, inasmuch as
the sin (thereby committed), is equal to that of killing
(one’s own) son. (41)

' They, who having obtained emoney from, S’udras,
do the -gnzhotra fire-offerings, are, condemned. by the,
Brahmavadins as the priests of S’udrag. (42)

Resting his, feet on the heads of those. foolish,
Rittviks {sacrificers) who do the’ fire-offerings, with the.
help of money obtaigeq, from him, the. S’udra donor,
(of the money) shall rise up from, and get rid of,
hell. (43)

For having done improper acts and failed, to do the.
commendable ones (rites), and for having been attached,
to, objects of the senses, a man stands under the obliga-
tion. of doing an expfatpry penance. (44)

(Several) wise men assert that, atonement 1s possible
enly, for sins, involuntarily committed; while others,
grounding their decision on precedents in the Vedas,

“nold that, expiation is possible even ifi respect of sins,
deliberately committed. (45)
,4 sin, unwittingly committed, is atoned by reading-


Menu Samhita. got


Xhe Vedat; thosé, wilfully committed, requiré separate
‘expiatory penances for their atonement. (46)

Having incurred thé obligation of doing an expia+
tory penance for’ sin accidentally (unwittingly com-
mitted in this life, or for oné qoné in his previous
existence’ a Bréhmana must not associate with other
(pure) Bréhmayas Before hé has made the atone-
ment. (47:

‘Of miséreants, sonie through finisdeeds doné in this
life, and othérs through sins committed in their previous
existencessbecome deformed in their persons. (48)

A gold-stealer is (born with) bad nails; & winé-
drinker, with black teeth ; a Brahmanicide is afflicted
with consuniption; aid a defiler of his préceptor’s bed;
with skin-troubles (/:¢. bad skin) +49)

A true calumniater is born with fetid nostrils (2z.,
is afflicted with foul-smelling nasal catarrh); a false
calumniatér, with abad smell in his mouth; a paddy-
stealer is born with a limb in less; and a mixer
(adulterer of graiiis. ét¢.), with 4 limb in éxcess. (50)

A stealer of food is (punished With) a sluggish
appétite; aiid a stéaler of words,* with dumbness; 4
cloth-stealér is born with léucoderma, and a horse=
stealer is born maimed. (51) |

A lamp (light)-stealér is borti blind ; an éxtinguisher
of light, Blind in thé®one eye; akiller of animal lives ig
(punished with) miany diseasés (in tlfis life) and a
ravisher ofeanothér’s wife, with (a nervous swéllitig of
thé linibs (due to ftervous disorder) (52).

Thus (througti the dyiiamidics of) different misdéeds


ay ae eine aaa ss.

 * The text has Vagdpuhdrakah. Kurtuka explains it by
U Ananujnatudhydin,’’ oe who leatns the Veda by hearing it
recited by another without the premission of_a preceptor.


¥gz Manu Samhita.


men are bon idiotic, deaf, dumb, blind, deformed; ot
“possessed of limbs in less or excéss, abhorred by thé
‘virtuous (53).

Thus for the purification of Self, expiating penanceés
should ‘be alwayse practised; unexpiated sinners are
born with condemnable bodily traits (54):

Killing a Bréhmana, wine-drinking, gold-stealing,
‘and defiting the bed of a preceptor are said to be the
great sins, the company of these sinners being the fifth
(great sin). (55)

False ‘speaking with a ‘view to give out one’s self
‘as belonging to a superior caste, accusing one before
the king of a crime punishable with death, and false
‘allegation (calumny) in respect of one’s own pre-
‘ceptor tantamount to killing a Brdéhmana ‘(Brahma-
hatya) (56)

Forgetting the Vedas thtough non-study (on the

{ part of a Brdhmana), reviling the Vedas, bearing false
witness in a court of justice and eating unclean things
are equal to wine-drinking /57).

Stealing an article held in trust, and stealing a man,
horse, land, diamond or gem are said to be équal to
gold-stealing (58)


Casting seed it one’s own uterine sister (Svayont),
fin an unmarried girl, ‘in a Chanddla woman, in one’s
own daughterin-law, or in a friend’s wife is equal to

defiling the bed of “owe’s own preceptor. (59)

Cow-killing, officiating as a priest at a sacrifice in-
stituted by an unworthy person, incest with another’s
wife, abandoning one’s own parehts, preceptor, or son
(z.e., omission to do purificatory rites unto him), as well
as renouncing the study of the Vedas and non-perform-
ances of fire-offerings. (60).


Manu Samhita. 303
* ‘Marriage of a younger brother before the tarriagé
of his elder, an unmarried elder brother suffering his
younger to marry before him, giving a girl in marriage
to-either of two such brothers, and officiating as a
priest at such a marriage ceremony. (61)

Defiling an unmarried girl (with the fingér),* living
by usury, bréaking the vow (of ¢ontinence), and selling
one’s tanks, orchards, wives, arid sons. (62) ©

Failuré to initiate a child with the thréad (before
he is sixteen years of age), abandonitig oné’s’ relations,
teaching the Vedas for mori¢y, studying: the Vedas
under a precéptor who takes féés for his teaching,
and sélling things which ought not to be sold. (63)

Working in all kinds of mines (under thé king’s
command, raising large dams or émbankments, dés-
truction of medicinal °plants, living by the éarnings of
the prostitution of one’s dwn wife, practising deadly
incantations, and hypnotising by means of drugs. (64)

Felling down unwithered trees for fuéls, cooking
for dne’s own self (and not for the gods or manes), and
eating condéemnable (prohibited) articlés of fare. (63).

Omission to establish the sacred firé, gold-stealing,
urdischarging the debts due to the gods, to the Rishis
and to one’s own manes, cultivation of prohibited
sciences, and adopting the profession of a songster, or
of a musician. (66)

Stealing paddy, animals, iron and copper etc.,f
going unto a drunk woman, killing a Vais’ya, Sudra,


*® The text has Kanydya+dushananchaiva ; Kuniuga explains
it by Maithuna Varjqmanguli prakshepidind which would not
bear translation.


” yf The text has Xupyam which signifies any metal other than
gold or silver.


59


394 Manu Samhita.


Kshattiya or a woman, and atheism (non-confoimity to
-the doctrines of Vediac religion)—all these are called
minor sins .(Upapatakas). (67)

{Each of the following acts such as,] assaulting a
Brdhmana with a club, etc., smelling wine or any other
unclean substance which ought not to be smelled,
crooked dealings, and committing unnatural offence
on a man, constitutes cast-degrading (/éti-Bhransa-
kara) sin.* (68)

Killing an ass, horse, camel, deer, elephant, goat,
lamb, fish, snake or a buffalo constitutes Sanari-
karanam (hybridising) sin.t (69)

Receiving money from the condemnable, trading,
serving a S’udra, or speakitig falsehood constitutes a sin
which is known as Apdtrikaranam.} (70)

Killing a worm, insect or a bird, eating fooa brought
on the same plate with wine, stealing fruits, flowers,
fuels, or feeling agitated at the slightest cause of dis-
turbance constitutes a sin which is called Malivaham
or (mind-soiling’sin.) (71)

These sins have been separately and specifically
described, now hear me discourse on the expiatory
penances which should be respectively practised for
their atonement. (72)

For the purification of his self .a Brdhmanicide
shall stay for twelve years* in th® forest, building a hut
therein, living $n fgod obtained by begging, and carry-
OO


A person guilty of any of these crimes becomes degraded
from his caste.


_ + A person, guilty of killing any ofthese animals, will have a
mixed caste (Sankara Fatz) in his next existence,


t Apdtvikaranam i,e.,4 sin which makes one unworthy of re-°
2eiving gifts.


Manu Samhita. 395


ing the cranium of a human skeletén as the token of
his (fell crime).* (73)

Or he shall voluntarily make himself the target.of
arrows shot by “archers with unfailing aims; or he
shall thrice cast himself in a burning fire with his head
downward so that death may ensue. (74)

_Or he shall institute any of the following Vediac
sacrifices, viz., the As’vamedha, the Sarjit, the Gosava,
the Vzs’vajit, the Trivrit, or the Agaishtut. (75)

For the expiation-of the sin of killing a Brahmana,
he, self-controlled, and sparing in his diet, shall travel
a hundred Yojanas (i e., eight hundred miles’, mutter-
ing any of the Vedas.t (76)

Or he shall make over all his -belongings to a
Brihmana, well-versed in the Vedas, or shall give
him a well-furnished louse and ample wealth for his
living. (77) .

Or living on a vegetable diet, he shall walk along
the shore: of the river, Sarasvati from its source to its


® This is only in respect of an accidental killing of a Brdhmana.
According to the Bhavishya Puranam a man (Brahmana) of
superior qualifications, having accidentally killed an unqualified
(foolish and impious) Brahmana, shall do this penance for twelve
years. For having wilfully killed a member of his own caste, a
Brdhmana shall do this penance for double the aforesaid period
e., twenty-four years). A Rshatriya, a Vais’ya, or a S’udra, guilty
“of unwillingly killing ‘a BrAhmana, shall gespettively do this
penance for twegty-four, thirty-six, and farty-eight years.

+ This ‘is the expiation for accidentally killing a man, who is
merely a Brdhmana by caste, and when the killer is either a
Brahmana, Kshatriya or Vais’ya. The Bhavishyapuranam reads
and interprets the passzge as, if a Veda-knowing Brdhmana,
a regular institutor of the Apnihotra fire-offering, accidentally
kills: one, who is a mere Br4pmana by caste, then this is the
expiation for him.


396 Manu Sanheta,


place. of junction with the sea, or observing moderation
in food he shall thrice recite a Vedaic Samzité, each.
day. (78)

Or (at the end of the twelfth yéar), ‘he, with his,
head cleanly shaven, and finger-nails parid off, shall,
live at the out-skirt of a village, or in a cow-shed, or.
in a hermitage, or underneath a tree, devoted to the
good of kine and Brahmanas. (79)

Or by laying down his life for the succour of a
cow, or of a Brahmana, he shall be exonerated from the
sin of killing a Brdhmana;. by succouring a cow or a
_ Brahmana, (before the lapse of the twelfth year), he

shall be free from the sin of an act of Brahmana.killing,
even if he does not die in the attempt. (80)

Or by thrice fighting with the robbers for the re-
covery of the goods (they havestolen from the house
of a Brdéhmana), or by recovering the goods in a single
fight, or by giving an equal amount of wealth to the
robbed Braéhmana attempting: to kill himself for its
loss, he shall be exonerated from the sin (of killing a
Bréhmana. (81)

- Thus having practised these austere penances, and
lived an absolutely continent life for twelve years, he
shall be- exonerated from the sin of killing a Brah-
mana. (82)

Or having ,confessed his guilt at the close of an
As’vamedha sacrifice, jnstituted by the king, and per-
formed the ceremonial ablution (Avadbhrifa Snénam)
it the end of the ceremony, he shall be from the sin
of Brdhmana killing. (83)

The Brahmana is the root of virtte, the Kshatriy:
8 its fore part; hence, by confessing his guilt in thei
issembly, a man becomes free ffom sin. (84)


Manu Samhita. 307


On his very birth the Bréhmana becomes the god
of the gods and the authority fin matters of virtue)
in this world. The Veda testifies to the source of
his authority. (85)

Whatever three of these Veda-knowing Braéhmanas
shall speak ,in respect of the expiation of one’s sin
shall be his perfect expiation ; holy is the speech of
the erudite (Veda-knowing Braéhmanas). (86)

The self-controlled Brahmana, with his mind fixed on
God, shall impartially* practise any of these penances
for the expiation of the sin of Brahmana-killing. (87)

For having unwillingly killed a foetus in the womb,

.a Vais’ya or qa Kshatriya engaged in performing a re-
ligious sacrifice, ora woman in her menses, one shall
practise the same expiatory penance, (88)

As well as for saving borne false witness, or.
calumnised his preceptor, or robbed an article held by
him in trust, or killed a friend or a woman. (89)

Thus the penance is laid down for expiating the sin.
of accidentally (unwillingly) killing a Bréhmana; na
expiation there exists for the sin of wilful Bréhmana-
killing, (90)

For having drunk (Pa¢shtz) wine,t one shall atone
his sin by drinking a cup of burning wine; he shall be


* Without showing any Berference to any particulag form of penance.
Or in other words, he must not choose and ohserv® a light penance, if
his guilt requires the practice of a severe cae.


+ The Bhabishya-puranam interprets Sura by Paihkti wine (i.e,,
wine made from pasted rice) and asserts that the expjatory penances
laid down in respect of wine-drinking in the Many apply to drinking.
Paishti wine alone in exglusion of ather species of wine such as Gaudi,,
Médhvi, ete.

» Suré cha Paishti Mukhyokta na tasyd stvitaresame, Paishtydh pane
tu chaitdsdus prdyas' chittam nivodha me.


398 Manu Samhita.


free from the sin after his inner organism has been
burnt by that wine (7.¢., after death from drinking hot
wine. (91)

Or he shall live on flame coloured. cow-urifie,
water, milk, clarified butter, and cow-dung serum till
death. (92)

For the expiation of the sin of wine-drinking, let
him, clad in a woolen cloth, wearing clotted +hair,
and carrying the mark of a wine-bowl on his fore-
head, live for a year .by eating sesame-cake or broken
bits of rice, once in the night. (93)

Wine (Surd) is the impure essence (/it. refuge

matter) of grains, and sinful is a refuge matter ; hence,
let not Bréhmanas, Kshatriyas and Vais’yas drink
wine (Suré). (94)
Gaudi (treacle wine), Paish¢d(wine of pasted rice)
and Mddhvi (wine made from the flowers of Mahua
tree) are known to be the three species of wine; all of
them, like any, must not be drunk by the foremost
of Brahmanas. (95) *

Flesh, wine, and fermented saps are the food of
Yakshas, Rakshas, and Pisachas; they should not be
eaten or drunk by Bréhmanas, who partake of the
oblations of thé gods. (96)

An intoxicated Bréhmana may fall on an impure
ground, or recjte the Vediac mantras, or do any other
improper acts under*thg influence of wine. (97)

, He,.in whose body the encased Brahma is washed
with the stream of wine, stands divulged of his Brak-
maniac energy and becomes a S’udsa. (98)

Thus the excellent expiation for the sin of wine-
drinking has been described ; now J shall discourse on,
the expiation for the sin of gold-stealing. (99)


Manu Samhita. 399


A Brahmana, who has stolen gold, shall go to the
king ;:and confessing his guilt, he shall say, “ punish
me, O King.” (100)

>The king, taking hold of a club, shall kill him
(the gold stealer) with one blow, inasmuch as death
purifies a gold-stealer ;* a Brdhmana gold-stealer shall
effect his purification by dint of penitential auste-
rities. (101)

A Br&hmana, wishing to exculpate the sin of gold
stealingt by means of penitential austerities, shall, clad
in rags, practise the expiating penance, laid down for an
act of Brahmana-killing, in the forest. (102)


Brahmanas (/:/., twice-born ones) shall exculpiate
themselves of the sin of gold-stealing by means of
these penitential austerities; from the sin of de-
filing the béds of thtir preceptors they shall kikewise
exonerate themselves by means of these purificatory
penances. (103)


A Brahmana, guilty of defiling the bed of his pre-
ceptor (z.e. of incest with his own step mother), having
confessed his guilt, shall lie down in a red hot iron bed,
holding in his embrace a burning female figour of iron,
till death he is purified by his death. (104)


* Dead, or surviving, it almost dead, he (gold-stealer) shall be
purged off of his sin. —~Yajnavalkya.


+ Stealing gold weighing eighty Ratis ar more constitutes the sin
of Steyam accarding to Manu, and if the®gold belongs to a Brahmana,
theft of five Krishnalam or sixteen mashas weight, thereof would
constitute the offence, The Bhavishya Puranam, on the other hand, in-
creases the weight of gold jn such cases to five Nishkas. Says it--("Men
belonging to) three castes, commencing with the “ Kshatriya,’ happeny,
ing to cob an amply qualified Brahmana of gold to the weight.of five
HishkasisvvesescorseesShall regain his purity by immolating his body
in fire, ie


400 Mann Samhita.


Or after having cut off his reproductive organs and
ield them in the hollow of lis blended palms, let him
lowly go towards{the south-west, until he falls down
and expires. (105)

Stamped with the figure ofa bedstead on his fore-
head, let him, clad in rags and growing a beard, practise
the penance of Krichcha-vratam for a year in the
forest, with all hisSsenses fully brought. under his con-
trol.* (106)

Or for expiating the -sin\‘of (accidentally, -visiting
the bed of his own step-mother, (/it. elder’s or pre-
céptor’s wife) he shall live on barley gruel, or on 4
Habishya (vegetable) diet, and parctise, self-controlled,
the Chéndrdyanam penance for three nionths (in
succession.) (107)

The sin of great sinners (Malatpatakins) should be
expiated by practising these penances ; persons, guilty
of minor sins { Upapatakins), shall practise the following
purificatory penances by way of atonement. (108)

One, who has comntitted the minor sin of killing
a cow, shall live on barly gruel during the first
month of his penance, and having cleanly shaved his
head, beard and .moustache, shall live in the pas-
ture ground, clad with the skim of the cow he has
killed. (109)

[During the second and third ménths of his penance}
self.controlled, he ghall eat. a mioderate quantity of
food with (any sort of non-alkaline salt in the evening
of each second day, after having fasted on the previous
one, and bathe with cow’s urine. (rro:


' * The expiatory penance owing to its comparatively lesser austere
tharacter seems to contemplate the case in which a man visits the
ved of his own step-mother, mistaking her for his own wife —Kulluke,


Manu Samhita. 4or


In the day he shall follow the kine (to the pasture
ground), inhale the dusts risen by their hoofs from the
ground, and tend them with care; and after having -
made ‘obeisance to them, he shall sit up in the night in
the posture, known as the Virdsanam*® (111)

Bereft of all feelings of vexation or pride, he shall
stand when the kine will remain standing, sit down:
when they will lie down, and follow them when
they will roam about. (112)

By all means he must succour them, whether afflict-
ed with any disease, or frightened by tigers and thieves,
etc, or fallen in the mire, or in any unfavourable pre-
dicament. (113)

In heat, in rain, in cold, or ‘when a strong wind is
blowing, he must not protect his person before provid-
ing a suitable shelter for ¢hem (kine) to the best of his
ability. (114)

Having seen a cow grazing on a field, or on a thras-
thing floor, whether of his own or of%another, or having
seen a cow suckling her calf, he must not speak of it to
any body. (115)

A cow-killer, who follows a cow in this manner for
three months in succession, becomes free from the sin

of cow-killing. (116)

Having thus well-practised the purificatory penance,
he shall make a gift 8f a bullock and ten kine toa
Veda-knowing Brahmana; or in their,abstnce he shall
make over all his belongings to such*a Brahmana. (117)


Brahmanas, who have ‘committed the minor sins
(Upapatakins), excepting those who have broken


%
* Virdsanam-—~Sitting on hams, with his right knee flexed and right
foot ,placed on the left thigh and with left knee flexed, and left thigh
placed on the right thigh.—Vas'isktha. :


5!


402 Manu Samhita.


their vows (Avakirnis), shall practise the (abovesaid)
penances, or the Chandrayanam penance for purifica-
tion. (118)

A vow-breaker shall sacrifice an ass, blind in the’one
eye, at a crossing of roads, to the deity, Niri¢i, in the
night, by uttering the Maztras of the Pakayajna. (119)

Then having done a fire-offering (with the flesh
of the immolated) ass unto the deity, Niriti, he shall
offer libations of clarified butter unto Véyu, Indra,
Brihaspati and Agni in the fire, by mutt@ring the
Rik, running a (Sama Sinchantu Maruta, let Maruta
sprinkle with water, etc.) (120)

The Srahmavédins, the knowers of the Law, aver
that, by violating his vow, and by wilfully casting his
seed (during its observance), a Bramachirin (re-
ligious student) becomes guilt of the sin of vow-
breaking (4vahirnz). (121)

The Bréhmanic energy of a religious student, which
has originated from his study of the Vedas, etc., ascend
to (i.e. are merged in) the (deities) Maruta, Puruhuta
(Indra), Guru (Brihaspati) and Agni, after he has
broken his vow.* (122)

' Having committed such a sin, let him (the vow-
breaker), clad in the skin of an ass, beg. alms at seven
houses, confessing his guilt. (123

For a year he shall -live taking, once a day, food
obtained by “beggin as above described, and bathe
thrice, every day, whereby he shall be free from his
sin. (124)

Haysng. wilfully commited any of the caste-
degrating (Erp ranean) sins,,he shall practise a


* Hence a vow-breaking Brahmachérin shall offer libations of chari-
fied butter unto these deities.


Manu Samhita, 403


Rrichchhra Sdntapanm penance; for the expiatjon
of any of such sins involuntarily committed, he must
practise a Prd;dpatyam penance. (125)

Having commitfed a gin of the. hybridising (San-
fart Karanam) or Apdtri Karanam group, he_ shall
practise for a month the Chdéudrdyoxam penance for
its expiation ; having committed a crime of the mind-
soiling (Malini Karanam) group he shall live on barley
gruel for three days in succession, (126)

For having wilfully killed a (good natured) Ksha-
triya, one shall practise the quarter part of the expia-
tory penance (z.e. for three years) laid down in respect
of an act of Brahmana-killing; and a sixteenth part of
the same penance should be practised for the expiation
of killing a sacrificing Vaisya, and a S’udra respet-
tively. (127)

The foremost of Braéhmanas, having accidentally
killed a Kshatriya, shall duly practise the expiatory
penance, and make ;the gift of one bullock and a thou-
sand kine to a Braéhmana (at its end.) (128)

Or self-eontrolled, and wearing clotted hair, he shall
practise the expiatory penance laid down in respect of
an act of Brdhmaga-killing, living remote from the
village and under a tree, (129)

For having accidentally killed a Vais’ya, engaged in
performing a sacrifice, ‘Jet these foremost of Brdhmanas
practise the (preceding) penance for a year and make
the gift of éne hundred kine +6 a Brdbmana at its
close, (130)

For having killed.a S’udra, let him (do the same
expiatory penance for six months, and give a Dakshind .
of one bullock and ten white kine to a Brdh-
mana. (131) _


404 Manu Samhita.


For having wilfully killed a cat, an ichneumon,
a Chasa bird, a frog, a dog, a lizard (Godha), an owl, or
a crow, let him do the penance, lajd down for expiation
of the sin of killing a S'udra. (132)

{For having accidentally killed a at, etc.,] he
shall live for three days on a milk-diet ; or shall travel
one Yojanam, each day, for three days; or shall bathe
in a running stream of water for three days; or recite
the (Apohista, etc.) Suktam of the Veda for three
nights. (133)

Having killed a snake, let the foremost of Brdh-
manas give a sharp-pointed steel rod to a Brdéhmana;
for having killed an impotent person, he shall make the
gift of a Bhara of straw, and of a Masha weight
of lead. (134)

‘For having killed a boar, ‘he shal make the gift of a
pitcher, full of clarified butter, and of a Drona measure
of sesame; for having killed a peasant or parrot, he
shall make the gift of a calf, two years old; of a calf,
three year old, he shall make a gift, for having killed a
heron. (135)

For having killed a crane, a swat, a duck, a pea-
cock, a monkey, a falcon, or a Bhasé bird, he must

‘make the gift of a cow to a Brihmana. (136)

For having killed a horse, ke must give a cloth to a
Brnhmana 9 and five Nila bullocks, for having killed ax
elephant ; for having killed a goat, or a sheep, he must
give a bullock to a Brdéhmana; for having killed an ass
he must make the gift of a calf, one year old, to a
Bréhmana. (137)


For having killed a carnivorous beast, let him give
a milch cow to a Brdhmana; for having killed a ,hér-
bivorous:animal, he must give a calf to a Brahmana, and


Manu Samhita 405


for having killed a camel, he shall make the gift of a
rati of gold to a Brahmana. (138)

For having killed a faithless wife, belonging to any
‘of the four castes, a Brdhmana shall make the gift of a
leather bag; a Kshatriya, of a bow; a Vais’ya, of a
goat;; and a S’udra, of a lamb. (139)

A Bréhmana, incapable of expiating his sin of snake-
killing, etc., by means of gift, shall do a Prajapatya
penance for the expiation of each of such sins. (140)

For having killed one thousand of vertebrate
animals, one shall do the penance for an act of S’udra-
killing; the same penance should be practised for
having killed a cart-load of invertebrate animals. (141)

For having killed a (small) vertebrate animal, one
shall give a small Dakshina to a Bréhmana; having
killed a small vertébrate animal, one regains his purity
by doing a Pranayama. (142)

For having filled a blossoming, fruit-yielding tree,
creeper, shrub or plant, one shall mutter a hundred Az&
mantras. (143)

For killing parasites which germinate in food grains
or-in sweet sapg (such as treacle, etc.,) or in fruits and
flowers, arin of clarified butter should be known as
the expiation. (144)

For having cu down cereals, growing on a cultivated
soil, as well as those which spontanepusly grow in un-
cultivated fields, one shall reggitPhis purity by living on
a milk-diet for a day and by following the cows to the
pasture-ground, (145)

_ By means of these penances, the sin, originated from
acts of killing,“should.be expiated; now hear me ts-
course on the expiatory penances to be done for eating
improper food, whether wittingly or unwittingly. (146)


406 Manu Samhita.


Having unknowingly drunk Véruni wine,* one
must be re-initiated with the holy thread; for having
knowingly drunk it, one shall atone for, his sin by his
life, this is the decisian. (147)

Having drunk water kept in a wine bowl, or ina
cup (of that species of wine which is called) Suré,
oné shall live on milk cooked with Sankhapushpi
(creeper) for five days in succession. (148)

Having touched, or given wine (to any body,) or
having duly accepted a gift, or having drunk water,
previously tasted by a S’udra, one -shall live on the
washings of Ku’sa grass for three nights. (149)

A Soma-drinking Brahmana, having smelled the
breath of a drunkard, shall do three A’chamanams and
three Préndydmas in water, and shall effect his purifi-
cation by drinking clarified buttef. (150)

Members of the three twice-born castes, having
unknowingly tasted excreta or anything defiled. by
the touch of wine, deserve re-initiation with the
thread. (151)

The shaving of the head, (wearing of) the holy
girdle, carrying the staff, alms-begging, and practising
the vow (of !a Brahmachdrin) tig oboe with in
such re-initiations of the twice-born ones. (152)

Having eaten the food of thgse whose food ought
not to.be eaten, or having eaten the leavings of S’udras’

or of women’s foodgor having eaten the flesh of probi,
bited animals, one shall live on barley gruef for seven
nights, (153)


* Véruus is a kind of wine prepared fram fermented ricerboil-

+ iugs, For having drunk any of the nine species of wine, mention-

‘ed by Pulastya, other than Paishti, MAdhavi, and Gaudi the expiae
tion consists in being reinitiated with the thread.


Manu Samhita. 407


Having taken Suééas (cordials: which acquire an
acid taste when stale) and decoctions of astringent
drugs (such as Chebulic myrobalans etc:,} one ‘shall
remain impure until they are not evacuated from his
bowels. (154)

Having taken the stool or urine of a domestic pig,
of a bear, of an ass, of .a camel, of a jackal,-of a
monkey, or of a erow, a Br&hmana shall-do jthe. Chaz.
drayanam penance (for his purification.) (155)... _-

Having eaten dry meat, earth-born mushrooms,
butcher’s meat, or the flesh of an unknown animal, one
shall do the same penance (i.¢. Chandriyanam.) (156)

For having eaten the flesh of a carnivorous animal,
of a boer, of a camel, or of a cow, or having eaten the
flesh of a man, of a crow, or of an ass, the performance
of the 7apta Krichchtam penance should be understood
as (the proper) purification. (157)

A Braéhmana, who before having completed his
Vediac study shall eat a monthly S’raddha feast shall
fast for three days, one of which he shall pass by sit-
ting in water. (158,

A religious student who has somehow eaten flesh
or has ,taken hiéjey, shall complete the residue of
his vow (of Brakmacharyam) by doing a Krichchha
Prijapatyam penance. (159)

Having eaten the leavings of the fogd of a cat, of a
crow, of a rat, of a dog, or of an‘ichneu-mon, as well
as boiled rice infested with insects and hairs, one shall
Grink Brahma subarchalé (a kind of consecrated lin-
seed gruel.) (160)

One, valuing the purity of his ownself, must no?
partake of any kind. of forbidden food; having un-
knowingly. eaten sucha fare, one must immediately


408 Manu Samhita.


belch that out, or adopt any other kind of purifying
measure. (161)

The varions purificatory penances for the expiation
of sins, incidental to eating prohibited food, have been
described ; now hear me discourse on the expiatory
penances to be practised for acts of gold-stealing. (162)


The foremost of Brahmanas, having wilfully stolen
paddy (food-grains), food or money from the house of a
member of his own caste, shall be purified by practising
a Krichchhkra penance for a yedr. (163)


For having stolen a man (slave, a woman, a
house, or a field, or the water ‘of a tank or well,
the Chandrayonam should be understood as the proper
expiation. (164)


For having stolen an article or gubstance of insigni-
ficent value (such as, lead, etc.) from the house of
another, he shall make over the same to its owner, and
do the Krichchhara Santapanam penance for the puri-
ficotion of his self. (165)


For stealing articles of food which are eaten by.
chewing, or any kind of liquid food, as well as for
steating a bedding or a cushion, hicle, a fruit, a
root, or a flower the drinking of Panchagavyam com-
pound is the proper expiation. (166)

°

For having stglen kay, wood, trees, treacle, dry food
grains, cloths, hydes, and flesh, one shall fast for three
days (/i¢., three day’s fast is the expiation). (67)

For having stolen gems, pearls, corals, _ copper,
silver, iron, white copper and stones, one shall live on
amgruel of particles of broken rice. (168)

For having stolen cloths made Zof cotton, silk or
wool or an animal with bifurcated or unbifurcated hoofs,


Manu Samhita. 409


birds, scents, cereals or camphor, one shall live on {milk
for three days. (169)

By these (expiatory) penances a Brahman (Jit,
twice-born fone) shall purge off his sin of stealing ; the
sin of carnally knowing a forbidden woman should be
expiated by the following ones (penances). (170)

For casting his seed in the womb of his own
uterine sister, of a friend’s wife, or of his daughter-
in-law, or of an unmarried girl, or of a woman of vile
(Chandéla) caste. (171)

Or for carnally*knowing a daughter of one’s own
father’s or mother’s sister, or a daughter of the brother -
of one’s own mother, one shall doa Chéndrayanam
penance. ¢172)


Let not the intelligent one covet any of the (preced-
ing) three :kinds of sisters for his wife, inasmuch as
they are unobtainable (unmarriageable) on account of
their tie of agnateship ({x4titvam); by going unto
such a (sister), one becomes degraded. (173)

For having cast his seed in a man, in a she-animal
(other than a cow), in a woman in her menses, in
any part of the {female -body other than the proper
channel), or in water, one shall practice a Krichchara
(severely austere) Ségtapanam (penance). (174)

After having carnally known a mat or a woman,
or after having copulated (anyyvitre, whether) in a
bullock cart’(or otherwise), a Badhmana must bathe,
with all his clothes on, in water. (175)

By carnally knowing a Chandéla ora vile caste
woman, by partaking of their food, or by accepting
gifts from them, without the knowledge of their vile
caste, a Brahmana becomes degraded; by wilfully

53


4lo Manu Samhita.


doing all these acts, he becomes of the same’ cast
with them. (176)

_ A wilfully faitniess wie tet the husband keep
imprisoned in‘ta chamber, divested of all her: wifely
duties ; and let him cause her practise the penance laid
down in connection with the sin of a man’s carnal
knowledge of another’s wife’ (177)

If she, solicited by a man of her own caste, suffers
herself to be defiled by him, in that case the perform-
ance of a Krichchra Chandravanam penance is the
proper expiation (17

The sin which a Brdhmana commits by sexually
knowing a Chandala woman* is expiated by his living
for three years on food obtained by begging, and by
muttering the sacred (Sévitrt) mantra (during all that
period) (179)

Thus the purificatory rites for the expiation of |
sins of the four kinds of sinnerst have been described) ;
now, hear me describe those which should be done for
the expiation of sin, incidental to one’s associating with
the degraded (180)


By sharing the same bed, or cushion, or by riding in
the same car with, or by eating in the company of
a degraded person for a year, a man becomes degraded ;
by teaching the Vedas to such a person, or by officiat-
ing as a priest a a sacrifice instituted by him, or by


* The text has Vrishali; Kuxttuxa explains it by Chanddla
woman. The term may also mean a vile-caste or S’udra woman,
an unmarried girl in her menses, an of woman, or a married
‘woman in her flow.

+ Killers of animal lives, eaters of prohibited articles of food, *
gold-stealers, and those who hold sexual intercourse with prohi-
bited female relations or forbidden women.


Manu Samhita. 4It


contracting any :marital relation with him, one be-
comes degraded on the same day (181)

He, who associates with a degraded person, must
practise the sanie penance for his purification, as.is
laid down for the expiation of the sin through which
that person has become degraded (182)


The Sapindas or Bandhus%relations) of a degraded
person shall do the water-rite unto him in his life time,
at the outskrit of their village, and in the presence
of his cognates (Jndtis), priest and preceptor, on the
evening of a condemnable day of the lunar month
(such as the ninth day of the moon’s wane or
increase). (183)


A slave-girl of theirs shall kick off a pitcher, full
of water, as if he had been dead; and after that, his
Sapindas (and Saméanodakas) shall fast and observe
uncleanness for a day with his Bandhus. (184)


From thence all dealing, speaking, association, or
sitting with that degraded person by others shall cease ;
the patrimony of such a person shall not be given to
him (185).

The right of eldest-bornship, ihe honour due to
him as such, and the right to a preferential excess
share as the eldest born (of his father) shall be ex-
tinguished as fair 2s such a degraded (eldest brother)
is concerned; a-more qualified younger brother shall
take the ghare (in the patermwl property) due to him
(z.e., degraded eldest brother: (186)

Having done (the proper) expiatory penance, he
(the degraded ,person) in the company of his
Sapindas and Saménodaka relations) shall bath ina
*tank and cast a_new pitcher, full of water. therein. (187)


412 ‘Mann Samara.


Having cast the pitcher Iw the water, he. shalt
enter his house, and thence forward discharge all the
duties of relationship with his cognates ( /ua¢i) (188)

All these measures should be adopted in respect
of women who have become degraded; but they should
be provided with food and raiments, and allowed to
live close to their houses (189)

Let no one have any dealings with an unexpiated
sinner, nor in any way calumnise the one who has
made the proper atonement for his sin. (190)

Let no one associate with an infanticide, with a
treacherous person, with a. woman-killer, or with one
who has killed a manjtaken under his protection, even
after he has done the proper expiatory penance. (191)

Twice-born ones, who have not3been initiated with
the Gayatri at their respectively proper ages (of initia-
tion), shall first practise three Krichchkra penances ;*
thereafter they should be initiated with the holy
thread. (192)


Brahmanas, who do improper acts,t and who,
though initiated with the thread, are ignorant of the
Vedas, if they wish to do the expiatory penance, should
be likewise advised to practise the same penance (7 ¢,
Krichchhra Vratam) (193!


The sin which a Brahmana cemmits by earning
money by vileemeans is expiated by his muttering the
purifying Mantras andeby renouncing the same. (194)


* Vratyastoma penance according to Vajnavalkya, the nature
of the expiatory penance should be determined in these cases with’
= eye to the physical capacity of the penitent to do the same—
ulluka-
# Such as taking gifts fram S’udras, or serving them in ang
capatity whatsoever—Kulluka.


Manu Samhita. 413


By mtfttéring, self controlled, the Sévitri mantra
three thousand times, by living in the pasture ground
on milk only for one month, a Braéhmana becomes
exonerated from the sim of accepting the gift of an
unworthy person (195)

Returned from the pasture ground, depleted with
fasting and fully subdued, him (Bréhmana) they must
ask, “well, beloved do you wish to be on an equal
footing with us ?* (196)

Having said “yea” to the Brdéhmanas, he shall
scatter grass before the cows; after the cows have
commenced eating that fodder in that land, converted
into a temporary sanctuary (on account of the cows.
eating there on), they (the Bréhmanas) shall accept
that agreement (as to his future good conduct) (197)

Having officiated gs a priest at a sacrifice in stituted
by a Vratya (a twice born one not initiated with the
thread within the proper age limit) for the expiat ion
of his sin (¢.e. at a Vratya Stoma sacrifice), or having
attended the funeral rites of one (other than his parent
or preceptor), or having practised any deadly incanta-
tion (such as S’yena ydga, etc), or done the Akina
sacrifice,t one shall be free from sin by doing three
Krichchra penances (198)

A Brahmana, who although capable, has not given
protection to its seeker, or has taught the Vedas.

, to one who should not be so taught, shall expiate his
sin by eating barley corn for a year. (199)


* i.e, do you promise not to accept gifts of the unworthy in
futurel? :
t Ahina sacrifice if a Vediac sacrifice in which fermented
Soma, juice was used to be drunk in large quantities for three da¥%
inine according te others) in succession. To officiate as a priest at
an Ahina sacrifice is defiling—Srutt. .


414 Manu Samhita.


Having been bitten by a village dog, jackal, ass,
nan. horse, camel, or,a boar, a Brahmana shall purify
iimself by doing a Préudyama. (200)

For having eaten in the same rowsjwith diners, not
fit to sit therein (Upankieyas), for a month, one shall
take food on the evening of each fourth day, fasting on
the days previous, and read the Saskitas and do fire-
offerings, each day, for his purification. (201)

Having wilfully riden in a carriage drawn by an
ass, or by a camel, a Brihmana shall purify himself by
bathing stript of all clothes, and by practising a Pré-
néiyama. (202)

Aman, afflicted with a natural urging for stool or
urine, having mictirated or defecated without water,*
or in water, shall regain his purity by bathing with all
his clothes on in a running stream at the out-skirt of
a village, and by touching a cow as well. (203)

For omission to perform the daily religious*rites
enjoined to be performed in the Vedas, as well as for
sreaking the vow of a Sxataka (the rite of ceremonial
xblution’to be performed by a Brahmacharin) fasting
for an entire day and night is the expiation. (204)

For having arrogantly ordered a Bréhmana to keep
silence, or for having bethoued one’s preceptor, the
penitent shall bathe and fast for the day, and thereafter
appease the insulted (Brahmana owpreceptor) by catch-
ing hold of hisefeet. (205)

For having assafiltgd a Brahmana even with a straw,
or for having fastened his throat with a piece of cloth,
or for having defeated him in a dispute, one shall
appease him by prostrating himselé at his feet. (206)
—

* Having not washed himself with water after micturation
w defecation.


Manu Samhita. 415


For having raised a club (rod) with the intention
of assaulting a Brahmana, one goes to hell for a hundred
yeass}; for having assaulted him therewith he. lives in
hell for three thousand years. (207)

For as many thousands of years as the particles
‘of dust which are stained by his blood, the. assaulter
of a Bradhmana shall live in hell. (208)

For having threatened a Brahmana with a stick, one
shall do a Krichchhram (Prajaépatyam) penance, for
having beaten him with a stick one shall do an 4#i-
Krichchhra penance; and for having drawn blood on
his body, one shall do a Krichchhréti Krichchham
penance. (209)

For the expiation of sins in respect of which no
purificatory measures have been specifically laid down
(in this code), expiatory penances should be advised
in consideration of the lightness or gravity of the sin
and the capacity of the penitent to do the same, (210)

Measures, by adopting which men are exonerated
from their sins and which had been embraced (of
yore) by the manes and deities, I shall presently des-
cribe to you. (211)

A Bréhmana, doing a Prajfpatyam penance, shall
eat his meals in the day (during the first three days
of its term), at the Evening (during the second three
days), shall live on food obtained without solicitation
{and arrived at any part of the day (during the third
three days), and fast for the (last) three days (of its
term.)* (212)


cae nil


a
* On the first three days he shall eat twenty-six morsels of,
food, each as large as a hen’s egg, [on the second three days he
shall eat such twenty-two morsels of food in the evening, and


such twenty-four-morsels ef food on the third three days.—
Paydséra.


416 Manu Samhita.


A Krichchhra Sdntapanam penance is said to con-
sist in living on 2 compound of cow-dung, cow’s urine,
cow-milk, curdled cow-milk, clarified cow-butter and
the washings of Kus’ grass ott the first day, and in
observing a fast on the day following. (213)


A Brahmana, doing an 4ti-Krichchhram penance,
shall eat one morsel of food, each day, for the first
three days of its term as described before, and fast
on the succeeding three days. (214)


A self-controlled Brihmana, doing a Tapia Krick-
chham penance, shall bathe once a dy and drink hot
water during the first three days, hot milk during the
second three days, hot clarified butter during the third
three days, and hot air during the fourth three days
of its term. (215)


A Paréka penance, which consists in one’s fasting
for twelve consecutive days with his senses fully
“brought under his control, removes all sin. (216)


Let him bathe thrice and partake of fifteen morsels
of food on the ‘day of the full moon, diminish the
number of morsels by one on each successive day,
‘observing a fast on the day of the new moon, and
thereafter increase the number of morsels by one, each
day, till it again reaches fifteen om the next full moon-
day. This penance is called the Chéndréyanam..»(217)


e

The same rule sifould be followed inerespect of a
Chandréyanam of the Yava madhya (barley-middled)
kind with the exception that, the morsels of food should
be increased by one, each day, cémmencing from the
first day of the moon’s increase, [till the number of
morsels reaches fifteen on the full-moon day, and’
thereafter decreasing it by one, each day, during the


Manu Samhita. 4t7


dark fortnight, the penitent fasting on the day of the
next new moon. (218)

A Brahmgna, ,doing a Yati Chaindrdyanam, shall
partake of eight morsels of vegetable food, each day,
self-controlled, for a month. (219)

Let a self-controlled Brahmana eat four morsels of
(vegetable) food after sun-rise, and four such morsels
after sun down, each day. This is what is called the
S'is’u Chandréyanam. (220)

He, who, self-controlled, eats thrice eighty morsels
of vegetable food in the course of a month, ascends
to the region of the moon-god, (:.e., the region of the
lunar Pitris.)* (221)

(Eleven) Rudras, (twelve) A’dityas, (eight) Vasus,
Maruts and the holy sages, for the extinction of
all discordant elements (in their souls), practised this
Chandrayanam penance of yore. (222)

Each day, during its performance, the penitent shall
personally do the fire-offering, known as the Mahé-
Vyahriti Homa, and live a life of absolute simplicity,
truthfulness, and non-irascibility, free from all killing
propensities. (223)

[For a month] daily he shall bathe with all his
clothes on, thrice in the day and thrice in the night,
abjuring all talk withy»women, with S’udras and with the
degraded. (224)

Ww orshipping the gods, Brébmahas and preceptors,
continent, and carrying the staff, etc., let him, day and


* According to the Brahmanic Cosmogony the region, whence,
the soul, roused from its sleep of repose, and acted upon by th»
y dynamics of acts of its former incarnation, is drawn towards the
plane of human existence, and wherein it stays until it enters the
life-energy of the creator of its organic frame on earth.


53


418 Manu Samhita.


night, sit up awake ; incapable of sitting up, let him lie
down on the bare ground. (225)

He shall mutter the Sdvitri and other sacred
Mantras to the best of his ability ; (Hence), muttering
of these Mantras is commended in connection with
practising all kinds of expiatory penances. (226)

Thus Brdhmanas shall purify themselves of sins
which they are pnblickly known to have committed ;
sins,, they have done in secret, they must expiate by
means of Homas (fire-offerings) and /apas (mutterings
of sacred A/antras). (227)

By confession, by repentance, by penitential austeri-
ties, (and) by (Vediac) study, a sinner is absolved oi
his sin; of asin committed in time of distress one is
absolved by gift making (charity.) (228)

Whenever a man confesses the sin he has himself
committed, he casts it off as a snake casts off his
slough. (229) ,

Whenever his mind censures the misdeed (he has
done) his body becomes free from that sin. (230)

Having repented for his sin, he becomes absolved
thereof; the mind becomes purified by the determina-
nation to desist from it in future. (231)

Having pondered in his mind on the fact that one
has to suffer the effects of goed or bad deeds in
the next workl, let him be engaged, body and soul, in
doing good deeds, éaca day. (232)

Wishing to be free from the consequences of mis-
deeds, which he might have wilfully or unwilfully
committed, let him refrain from daing it for the second
time (in future.) (233)

If after having done an expiatory penance, one does’
not acquire the idesired) ease (/z¢. lightness) of spirit,


Manu Samhité. 419


“he must dontinue to do the penance until his mind be-
comes fully relieved of its burden. (234)

Tapasyé (devotional austerity and divine commu-
nin) is the root of all happiness which is to be found
in heaven or on earth; in Zafasyé doth it stay and
in Zapasyé does it merge. This has been said by
the Veda-knowing wise. (235)

Knowledge is the Zapas of a Brahmana, protec-
tion of subjects forms the Zapas (highest duty) of a
Kshatriya, agriculture, trade and cattle rearing fotm the
Tapas of a Vais’ya, and service forms the Zafas of
a S’udra. (236) _—

The self-controlled Rishis, who live on fruits, roots
or air, by means of Yapasyé alone, behold the three
regions (ze. the universe) with all its inmates, both
mobile and immobilee (237)

' Medical knowledge, knowledge of Antidotes to
poisons, knowledge of Brahma and residences in various
regions of heaven are attained by means of 7apasya,
Tapasyé is the only instrument through which they
are realised. (238)

Whatever is insurmountable, whatever is unacces-
sable (/#. unavailable), whatever is impassable, and
whatever is impossible to be performed, is easy of ac-
complishment by 7apasyé alone ; verily irresistible is
the prowess (energy of) Lapasyd. (239)

Mahipdtakiny ang other miscreants become free from
sin by means of austere peniterMial austerities. (240}

Insects, flies, beasts and birds, and immobile things
ascend to heaven through the energy of Zapasyd. (241)

Sin which a man may commit by his body, mind agd
, Speech, Zapasvins (practisers of penitential austerities)
can speedily consume by their 7zfas. (242)


420 Manu Samhita.


Of a Brahman, purified by penitential austerities,
the gods accept the offerings and fulfil his desires. (243)

By dint of Tapasyé the lord (Prajapati created
this Sastras (framed this code) and ‘by Tapasya the
sages obtained the Vedas. (244)

The gods, observing the highest merit of 7apasyd
pronounces 7afasyé to be the greatest fortune (of
man}. (245)

Daily reading of the Vedas according to one’s
ability, performance of the five daily sacrifices, and
forbearance tend to destroy the sin, incidental to.
the commission of any of the great sins (dJahd-
patakas.) (246)

As fire speedily consumes its fuels with its own
energy, so a Veda-knowing (Bradhmana) consumes all
his sins with the fire of knowledge. (247)

Thus I have described conformably to the Regula-
tion the expiatory penances in respect of sins; now
hear me describe the purificatory penances for the
expiajion of, sins committed in secret. (248)

By practising sixteen Prdéndéydmas, each day, accom-
panied by the Gydtri S’tra Mantra coupled with
Pranava and Vyéhritis, one becomes absolved even
of the sin of killing a Brahmana in the course of a
month. (249)

By muttering sixteen times, each day,.for a month
the Mantra rinnigg as A’pa ma 5’os'uchad, ete.,*
first sung by’ Kuésa,®or the Mantra Pratistomehi
rushasam, etc., first sung by Vasistha, the Méhttramt
or the »’uddhavatyat Rik, a wine-drinker becomes
tree from his sin. (250)


* Apo na S'os'uchadagham, etc.
} Mluhttreendmadho’-stri, etc.
¢ Saddhavatya etautndram Stavamahe.


Manu Samhita. 420


By orice muttering the Vediac Suktam, Vamiyam*
etc, or the S’ivasamkalpat Mantra, a gold stealer
becomes speedily free from his sin. (251)

>By muttering for a month the Mantra, Havishanta,
etc., or Natamaniho, or the Purusha Suktam, a defiler
of his preceptor’s bed becomes free from his sin. (252)

A great sinner (Wahdépatakin), seeking absolution
from his sin, shall mutter, for a year, any of the following
Suktas, vis-, Avati Helo Varunayo, etc., or Yatkimchid
Varanadevo etc., or /tz me manah, etc. (253)

Having accepted a gift from a vile or degraded
person, one shall mutter for three days the (four) Riks,
running as ¢arat Samandu dhdvati, etc., whereby he
shall be purified.’ (254) :

By bathing in a running stream and by muttering
for a month the Rik, sunning as soma Rudrd, atc., or
the (three) Riks, running as A’ryayamanam Varunam
Mitrancha, etc. one becomes free from varied
sins. 1255)

By mnttering for six months the seven Richas
commencing with Jndra Mitram Varuna, etc. a
penitent becomes free from all sin; by living on food
obtained by begging for a moth after having evacuated
the excreta of of his body in water, a man becomes
sinless. (256)

By making fire-offerings with libations of clarified
butter accompanied by the recitation ‘of the Stale
Mantra (rsuning as Daivakritsyainasa) for a whole
year, or by muttering fora year the Mantra, Nama
Indras’cha, etc. one becomes free from a Mahd-
patakam. (257)


ornate


* Asya Vamtyamasya Vamasya patitasya etat, etc,
J Yaszagrato du’ram, etc.


422 Manu Samhita.


A great sinner-"(/ahépdtakin) shall live on tood
obtained by begging, and follow the kine to the pasture
ground, reciting the Pavamdni Mantra, each day, for a
year, whereby he shall be freed from his sin. (258)

Or by practising three Paraka penances, and by
thrice reciting, self&controlled, any of the Vediac
Samhitas, he becomes free from all sin. (256)

Let him fast for three days, thrice bathe each day
and recite the Aghamarshanam Suktam, at morning,
noon, and evening, whereby he shall be free from all
sin. (260)

As the As’vamedha, the king of religious sacrifices,
tends to absolve all sin, so the recitation of the
Aghamarshanam Suktam is sin-absolving in its
effect. (261:

Sin toucheth not a Brdhmanawho well remembers
his Vedatc Mantras even if he destroys the three
regions, or eats his food at unclean places (/:t. here,
there and any where.) (262)

By reading the Rik, Yajus or Séma Samhita to-
gether with the Upanishads, a Brahmana, self-con-
trolled, becomes free from all sin. (263)

As @ brick-bat, thrown into a large lake, soon sinks
into its bottom, so all sins are merged in the three-
fold (Trivrit) Veda. (264)

The Rik Veda, the Yujur Veda and other various
kinds of Sama Manfras are collectively called the
three-fold Veda (Trivrit Veda); a Brfhmana who
knows this is called a Veda-knowing one. (265:


The Mystic Pranava Mantra(Om), the beginning
of all the Vedas, as well as_ their stay, which consists
of three letters, is also called the 7rivrzt Veda; he who
knows it well, is also called a Veda-knowing one. (266)


Manu Samhita. 423


CHAPTER XII.


O tHowU sinless one, you have discoursed on the duties
of members of for social orders, flow truly describe
to us the effects of acts, done by men in their former
births. (1)

Unto them, Bhrigo of virtuous soul said, hear me
(describe) the true effects of all such acts. (2)

It is the auspicious or inauspicious effects of acts,
bom of mind, speech and body, which impart to
mén superior, middling, or inferior status, according to
their respective natures. (3)

The mind should be understood as the impellor of
these three-fold (superior, middling or inferior) and
three-located (7.e., born of speech, mind and body) acts
of an embodied self, which are possessed of the ten
following attributes. (4)

Coveting other men’s goods, planning evil to others,
and false* notion as to the next life, etc.) are the three
inauspicious mental acts. (5)

Harsh speaking, false speaking, speaking ill of
another at his back, and idle gossiping are the four
inauspicious lingual acts. (6)

Receiving what has not been given, killing animal
life (not according to the Regulation) and incest
with another’s wifa are the three inauspicious bodily
acts. (7)

A man. enjoys through his; m%nd, speech and body
the effects of acts he had done by his mind, speech
and body respectively in (his former existence). (8)

Through the dynamics of his (inauspicious) bodily


——__*___.
ra
* The text has Vitathdbhi niveséh :—KvLiuxa explains it by
“ Na’sti Paralekah, deha eva a’tind, eti,” is such notions as
there is no next life, the body is self, etc.


424 Manu Samhita.


acts a man takes birth as an insensate thing; through
the dynamics of his inauspicious lingual acts, he shall
be born as a beast or bird, and it, is through the
dynamics of his inauspicious mental acts that he shall
be born as a man of vile caste in this world. (9)


He who has conquered his body, mind and speech
and has the faculty in his intellect of keeping them
under restraint is said to be the man of three restraints
(Tridand@in). (10)

Controlling his lust and anger, he who can exercise
these three kinds of rods (restraints) in respect of all
- creatures, obtains emancipation. (11)


He who causes the body to be operative is called

| Kshetrajna (individualised self) and the body which per-

forms these acts is called Bhutémés (material organism)
by the wise. (12)

Another self there is who takes birth with each
individual creature, and through the angency of whom
pain and pleasure are perceived (by them) in their
(successive) re-births. (13)

This Kshetrajna (individualised self) and Mahat
(Soul as distinct from the body and the individualised
consciousness) are intimitaly associated with the five
material elements, and ensconced iw the bodies of all
creatures, high aad low, they depend upon the Supreme
Soul for their existerfce., (14)

Innumerable (subtle) embodied Selves (Kshetrajnas),
which fall off like sparks from the eternal body of this
Supreme!Soul, make the bodies ofall creatures, high
‘afidjlow, animative and operative. (1 5).

Truly out of the subtile ‘essences of the five kinds
of material elements subtile bodies are formed with


Manu Samhita. 425


which ‘the selves of miscreants are clothed, after death,
‘for the purpose of suffering pain. (16)

Lying merged in the subtile essences of the five
‘elements of their gross material frames, after death,
‘they (miscreant selves) suffer the pangs which the
-great Law (Yama) has ordained for them. (17)

Having suffered pangs for its attachment to for-
‘pidden pleasures of sight, taste, touch, etc., in life, the
‘Self (encased in the gross, subtile and causal bodies)*
‘becomes purified again and attaches itself) (Ze., be-
comes merged in) to the Afahat and Kshetrajna. (18)

These two (Muhat and Kshetrajna) with sleepless
‘eyes witness the good or bad deeds of the individual,
through the effects of whith he enjoys pleasure, or
suffers pain, after death. (19)

if he had done %reater good than evil in life, ha
‘should enjoy the pleasures of Paradise, clothéd with
those thaterial elements, (¢.e., with a material frame)
“after death. (20)

If he had done greater evil than good in his life,
she, forsaken by those elements (devoid of a material
‘body), should suffer the pangs which the Law has
ordained for hitn.t (27)
en enna ca nEnn Ve nena One

* ‘According to thg Vedanta each individual has three kinds
of bodies, vis., Bhuta (gross material frame), Sukshma (made of
the subtile essences of the five clemegts of the gross body) and
Linga (caugal). After the destrucfion of his gross bedy, the
self of a man centinues in his subtile and causal bodies. KuLLUKA
explains its by Bhuta-Sukshma-Linga-S'ariravachchhinna.

+ The text has Yagistd Vatandh+ which is usually translated
as pangs ‘inflicted by Yama, the lord of Death. We have theught
fit to interpret Yama by Niyama, the Law, the ordanier. In the
Pauranic literature this Law has been ‘deified and invested with
a body perhaps to bring home ‘to the minds ef its readers the


“S4


426 Manu Samhita:


Fiee from sin, for having undergone those pangs
of existence, after death, the individual Self again at>
taches itself to the five material elements. (22)

Pondering ‘over these pangs or pleasures of th’
individualised self through sin or virtue, let him engage
his mind in the performance of virtue. (23) ’

The Satéva (manifestation), Razas (desire) and Tamas
(nescience) are the three qualities of Self, with which
Mahat (Consciousness converted into intellection),
covering all becomings (created things), exists. (24)

Out of these, the quality which predominates in
an individual imparts its characteristic virtue to his
self (character). (25)

Sattva is knowledge, Rajas is attachment and ‘aver>
sion, and Zamas is nescience ; these qualities permeate
the bodies of all created things. (20)

The pure, illuminating peace in the soul should be
understood as the Sattva. (27)

That, which is assoiciated with misery, is un~
pleasant to the soul, and creates in embodied crea-
tures an attachment to the objects of the’ senses,
should be understood as the irresistible Rajas. (28)

That, which is unmanifest, devoid of the discrimina-
tion of good and evil, creates an attachment to the
objects of the senses, unknowable and unscrutinisable,
sheuld be understood as Tamas. (29)

Now I shall fully describe the superior, middling and
inferior effects of these (Phree kinds of) qualits. (30)

Studying the Vedas, practising penitential austerities,
cultivating knowledge (of the Sastras), purity, subju-
gajion of the senses, performances of religious rites,


Vedantic Law of Karma in a concrete and comprehensible form.
we Translator.


Manu. Samhita, 427,


and contemplation of Self are the indications of the:
quality of Sa¢iva (manifestation . (31)

Undertaking acts (for the fruition of a definite:
desixe), impatience, performance-of forbidden acts, and.
a constant enjoyment of the objects of the senses, are-
indications of the quality of Rajas (desire). (32):

Greed, somnolence, want of fortitude, cruelty, God-
lessness, embracing forbidden: voeations, beggaty, and.
folly are the indications of the quality. of | Zamas.
(nescience.) (33):

Of these three qualities, which exist’ through all
eternity, past, present and: future; the following
should be understood as the collective indications. of:
attributes (34),

An aet, having done; or doing, or intending to-do
which a man becomes ashamed: of himself, is called
as marked by the properties of the quality of Zamas:
(darkness. or nescience by the wise: (35)

An act, by doing which one: acquires:a high renoww
m this world, and on. the: failure to. complete which
he.does not feel any grief, should. be: understood as:
marked, by the quality of. Rajas (369

An act, about which every one wishes to-know,.
and. by doing which one does not feel any shame and
the inner-self feels. cor&placent, is said.to emanate: from
the quality of Sativa. (37)

Lust is: the effect of Tamasewealth is the object
of Rajas, and virtue: is the indieation of Sattva; of
these each succeeding (quality) is higher than the-
preceding one in respett of merit. (385

’ Now I shall brieflysdescribe-in due order the status-
hich.a man acquires through the working of eaek:
‘of these three qualities, (39):


428: Maau Sanchita,


Beings;. possessed’ of the-quality of S#ttva, acqutte:
divinity, those- marked: by the quality of Ra/as.take:
births as men, and those marked. by the quality: pf
Tamas are born as beasts. Thus the three-fold exist-
ence (through: the dynamics: of these qualities) is. des-
cribed. (40)

This three-fold. existence admits of a (further).
secondary, three-fold. division. such as, superior, mid--
dling and: inferior, according to the acts and. know-
ledge, etc., of beings (respectively marked. by these:
qualities.) (4:

Births as immobile-things.(trees, etc.), worms, insects,.
fishes, snakes, tortoises, beasts and. deez are- the: effects:
of the inferior or worst kind of 7amas. (42)

Births. as. elephants, horses, §'udras, condemnable:
Mlechchhas, lions, tigers, and. boars, are. the effects of
the. middling kind. of .7amas. (43)

Births as dancers, arrogant men (black. legs),.
Rékshasas, and Pis’achas are: the effects of. the. superior.
(most refinedy kindof Tamas. (44)

Births as ¥hallas (clubs-men), Madas. (wrestlers),.
actors, armsemen, gamblers, and drunkards. are the:
effects of the inferior kind of Rajas. (45):

Births as anointed kings. of ccuntries, priests of:
kings, and. wrestlers are the effect? of the:middling kind.
of Rajas. (46)

Births as: Gandhdtrvas, Guhyakas, Yagshas, atten~
dants of the gods, and: 4fsurasas. are: the effects-of the:
superior kind of Rajas. (47).


‘Births as Tapasas. (practisers: ‘of penitential austeri-.
ties), Yatis, Braéhmanas, the. scalers. of heaven,. stars;
and Daityas are the effects of inferior Sativa. (48)


Births. as celebrants. of religious. sacrifices, (sages)i


Manu, Samhita 429)


Vedfac- gods, embodied: deities, stars-such as-the-pole.
star, etc, years, Pitris and. Sadhyas are: the. effects of
the- middling kind: of: Satéva. (49)

Births as. Brahma, Marichi, Prajapati; the embodied.
virtue, tne-embodied: principle. of intellection(Mahat), or-
the unmanifest Nature- are- the: effects of. the-superior;
kind of Satzwa. (50)

Thus: I: have-fully described; the- kinds of: acts (such,
as, mental, lingual and. bodily).and. the-three-kinds of
existences which originate from them, (marked by the-
qualities of Sattwa Rajas and Tamas), and the exist-.
ences (in detail which all creatures obtain according
to their three-fold character (superior, middling andi
inferior). (51>):

By indulging jm pleasures ef the senses, by not
instituting the religious'rites (such as, the. rites of. puri-.
fication, etc.) the foolish miscreants gbtain sinful exis-
tences. (52);

Now hear me describe: the wombs in. which the:
individealised. Self is constrained to take. its successive.
births in this world and. the acts through which it gets,
such existences. (53,)

For many years having suffered. pangs in hell, the.
souls of Mahapqtakins (great sinners) are born in the.
following wombs in this world. (54),

A Bréhmana-killer is born m the womb of a bitch,,
sow, she-ass, she-camel, cow, ewe, she-dear, hen bird,
Chanddéla woman and Pukkasa woman. (55)

A wine-drining Bréhmana is born in the wombs of
worms, ihsect8, filth-eating birds and ferocious beasts,
of the forest. (56)


For a thousand times a gold-stealer Brahmazia is


430: Mapu Samhita,,


born in the. wombs of spiders, snakes, lizards, crocodiles:
and malignat. Pis'’achas. (57)

For a hundred. incarnations a defiler of his pre-.
ceptor’s. bed. is. born, as.a weed. a bush, a. creeper, as &
flesh-eating and, ferocious beast, and. a fanged. beast of
the forest, given to. killing (such as, a liomor tiger. 158:

Killers off animal lives: are re-born as beasts. that:
eat. raw flesh; eaters of forbidden. food. are. re-born as.
vile worms; thieves are re-born as beasts.that eat each,
other’s flesh:;, and those who go unto vile-caste women,,
are re born as Pretas (ghosts). (59),

By keeping the company of the degraded, by carnal--
ly knowing another's wife, by stealing a Brahmana’s.
property; one is re-born as a Brakma-Réakshasa.. (60)

For having stolen jems, pearls, cora)s and. various:
kinds of'gems out’ of greed, one shall ¢ake birth. in. the:
womb. of a gold-smith’s wife. (éx)

For having stolen paddy (food grains), one: shall be.
reborn as a mouse; for having stolen. white brass, he:
shall be reborn asa diving bird; for haying stolen. honey,,
he shail be.reborn as a stinged fleé; for having stolen
milk, he shall. be: reborn. as a crow ; for having: stolen:
any kind of sweet sap, he shall be reborn as-a dog} andi
for having stolen clarified butter, he. shall be reborn
as an ichneumon. (62) |

For having stoleg flesh, he shall become a vulture ;:
for having stolen lard, adiving crane; for having-stolen.
oil, a cockroach;. for having stolen salt, a Chirtvak-
insect; and for having stolen milk-curd; a small
heron, (63)

Fer having stolen a silk cloth: he shall become »
Titteri bitd; for having stolen a cloth of vegetable:
fibres, a frog ;, for having stolen a cotton cloth, @ heron ;


Manu Samhita. 43%


for having ‘stolen ‘a cow, ‘a lizard (GodhA); and for
‘having stolen treacle, a bat. (64)

For having, stolen, ;scents he shall become a-mole }
for having stolen edible leaves, a‘ peacock; for having
stolen confection, a porcupine; and for having stolen
an uncooked article ot tood, a S’alyaka. (65)

For having stolen fire, he shall become a heron;
for having stolen a household impliment (such asa
winnow, etc), a Grikakari bird (a species of bird which
builds its nest with clay, weeds, etc.; and for having
stolen a red cloth, a Chakora bird. (66)

For having ‘stolen a deer or an elephant, he shall
become a wolf; for having stolen a horse, a tiger; for
having stolen fruit or roots, a monkey; for having
stolena woman, a bear; for having stolen drinking
water, a Chitaka bird ; for having stolen 4 cart, a camels
and for having stolen any other kind of beast, a
goat. (67)

For having forcibly stolen any thing, belonging to
another, or clarified butter not offered as a libation, he
‘must needs takes birth as a beast. (68)

For having stolen these things, women also acquire
demerit and are teborn as wives of the aforesaid
beasts. (69)

For not having discharged the proper duties of theit
respective orders, in times of p&ace (Jit. undistress),
members of the four social orders take births in the
wombs of the following beasts and become’servants of
their enemies in theit next births.. (70)

A Braéhmana, who has swerved from his duty in Ife,
shall become a ghost, living on egesta, and vomiting
flames of fire ; a Kshatriya, for the same offence, shall


"432 Manu Samhita.


‘live inthe ‘hell of Kutaputana, eating excreta and
putrid carcasses. (71)

A Vaishya (for the same offence) Shall become a
Maitraksha- Joyotika ‘(anus-mouthed) Ghost, (lit. ‘eaf-
Ying, the vermins, lite; etc., of worn cloths. 72)

The senses, through which sensuous men most enjoy
“the sensual pleasures, become the keenest, after death,
‘and prove @ source of torment to them. (73)

By. dint of practising those acts, (souls of foolish
‘men suffer) pangs in this ‘world and are re-born in
those wombs. (74)

They ‘suffer torments.in thé hell ‘of darkness, in the
hell of the forest of sword~leaves, and in the joint-
‘splitting hell. (75)

They suffer vatious kinds of torments, are devoured
_ by crows fand" owls, are made to walk on hot sand
‘banks, and are whirled in the whirling torrents of the
hell of Kumbhipaka. (46)

They take births in the wombs of beasts and con-
stantly suffer the pangs of those miserable existences,
‘subjected to.the torments of heat and cold, and seeing
many frightful visions. (77)

Frequent residences in wombs, frequent painful
births, pains of incarceration (as beagts), and servitude
of others they arg constrained to suffer. (78)

Separation from fifends and dear ones, association
with the miscreants, acquisition or loss of tRings, and
creation of friends and enemies (torment them). (79)

Helpless old age(imbecility), affliction with diseases,
vatious kinds of pain (such as hunggy, thirst, etc.,) and
the .unconquerable death (add to their torments in
life). (80)


Kanu Samhita. 433


The feeling, with which a man does an act in life,
imparts to his self'a suitable body for the enjoyment
of the fruit *thereof in the ‘next world, and- the
nature of which is determined by the nature of that
feeling. (81)

Thus all the ‘dynamical energies of acts have been
fully described ; now hear me discourse on those duties
of Bréhmanas, by doing which they can attain the
highest good (emancipation), (82)

Studying the Vedas, practising penitential austerities
(divine contemplation and realising one’s oneness with
the Supreme Self), knowledge, subjugation of the
senses annihilation of all killing propensities, and serving
the elders are the acts which lead to the highest
good. (83' :

Of all these auspicious acts, which oné brings the
highest good to the individual ? (84)

Ot these, the knowledge of self is the highest duty,
that is the foremost of all knowledge, since through it
one attains immortality. (85) .

Of the six (aforesaid) acts, the institution of Vediac
rites should bé understood as the most benificial in
this life and the next. (86)

All those acts are intimately connected with the
institution of Vediac rites (7.2. they Jead to self-know-
ledge. (87)

Vedi&e acts may be divided unto two classes, such
as the Pravrittam and Nivrittam ; by Pravrittam acts
one enjoys happiness and prosperity (elevation), by
Nivrittam acts one acquires emancipation. (88)


! e . . i 0°
An act or rite, done or instituted for the fruition of
a definite object either in this life or in the next, is
called Pravrittam; an acts voluntarily done without


55


aig Manu Samnita.


‘any prospect of gain or reward, is called a Nivrittam
one, (89) .

-By doing Pravrittam acts, one attains gquality with
the gods; and by doing Nivrittam acts one gets con-
‘trol over the material elements. (90)

Seeing his Self equally in all things, and all things
in his Self, a celebrant of the Sacrifice of Self attains
the kingdom of ‘self (emancipation). (91)

‘The foremost of Bréhmanas, by abjuring all acts
enjoined to be -performed in the Sastra, shall strive
to subjugate his senses, to study the Vedas, and to
‘acquire the knowledge of Self. (92)

This is the highest success in the life of a Brdhmana
in special, achievement of any other kind of success
is not his success in life. (93)

The Vedas are the eternal eyes ofthe gotls, manes,
‘and men; the Vedas have no’ human authors and are
ndependent of all logie or argument. This- is the
‘decision. (94)

Smritis which are not based on the Vedas, and.
‘S’4stras which are hostile to the Vedas and are founded
on sophistry, are worthless in respect of the next life.
They emanate from the quality of Zamas. (95)

$'4stras, which are not founded on the Vedas and
are framed by men, aré coming into being and vanish-
ing. They are false and worthless. (96)

The four castes, the theee regions, the foug orders
of house-holder, etc.) the past, present ,and future are
founded on the Vedas. (97)

Sound, touch, sight, taste, and smédil, which is the
fifth, have originated from the Vewas; the Veda has
given birth to every thing according to its nature and
function, (98)


Manu Samhita. 435,


The eternal) Vedzk embraces all created: things ;:
hence, the wise-call it the-greatest instrument of realisitig:
the highest good of human life (emancipation.) (99)

A. Veda-knowing: man is fit to be: entrusted with.
generalship, sovereignty, or the highest judgeship:
of the land, nay, with the- over-lordship of all the:
regions, (100.

As a: fully kindled: fire: consumes eyen, the. moist.
trees, so.a Veda-knowing man by. dint of his (right).
knowledge: burns all the demerit, born of. his.acts. (101).


A Brahmana, a knower of the true imports: of
the Vedas, in whichsover order of. life he may be:
staying; happens to.be one with. Brahmé,, even. in, this,
life. (102)

A reader: of books. is greater than an.illiterate:one,.
one.who has got those: books by his heart is -better than.
a: mere: reader ;,.oné who. has got a.true-knowledge: of.
their contents is greater than:one-who remembers them,,
and one’ who. acts! according: to: that knowledge is:
greater than one-who-has merely gained.a. knowledge of.
their contents. (103)

Tapasyé and’ self-knowledge are-the -higtiest good of.
@Braéhmana: T7apasyé consumeth. sin, self-knowledge:
giveth. him: immort4l life. (104)


He-who wishes to.know. the:true: -principle- of! virtue:
must know all the:sciences: which’ are based’ on posi--
tive: observation; inference: and. the: teachings: of the:
Vedas. (105)

He, who.disqusses' the: ethical teachings: of the: Vedas:
and: of: the: veda-Based: Smritis. with processes. “Ot:
reasoning not hostile to their tenets-is alone enabled’ to,
know the tight principle of virtue and.no one else. (105),


CIMT TTL
00058017


Digitized with financial assistance from
Shri Brinad Bhartiya Samaj
on 31 October, 2019
