THE
AGNI
PURANAM
VOLUME 111
[ PURCHASED^
REDISCOVERING INDIA
AGNI PURANAM
DUTT M.N.
Vol. 8 (iii)
COSMO PUBLICATIONS
9M
i^3i r
V'g
H'J
First Published 1904
This Series 1987
Published by
RANI KAPOOR (MRS)
COSMO PUBLICATIONS
24-B, Ansari Road, Daryaganj
New Delhi ! 10002 (India)
'MPUTER13ED
d 6847
Printed at
M/S Taj Offset
New Delhi
iHt AbiAiicsuuitn
CALCUTTA-70001®
AlO. No .
INTRODUCTION.


The Purana which describes the occurrences of the

•n» K *' 1 " “ d w “ "'“' d b r A * ni '•

' Vuislha, i< oiled Agneya. It consist.

of sixteen thousand stanzas distributed in three hundred
and eighty-three chapters. The Puranas have obtained the
name of Panchalakshana because their contents generally
embrace five topics namely (I) Primary creation, or cosmo-
gony, (2) secondary creation, (3) genealogy of gods and
patriarchs, (4) reigns of the Manus, (5) history ot the solar
and lunar dynasties. The definition does not however neces-
sarily signify that the Puranas exclusively deal with these
topics only. On the contrary, every Purana dwells at length
on one or more particular subjects and in some, these five
primary topics occupy a very subordinate position. Our re-
mark is particularly applicable to Agni Purana more than
three-fourths of which have no connection however with
the five principal topics. In the introduction Suta describes
the subjects of knowledge, and therefore, the subject matter
of this Purana, is two*fold— namely Parividya, sacred
knowledge or theology and Apart Vedya, profane know-
ledge or the arts and sciences known to the people. The
subject matter of the Agni Purana is thus described in the
Introduction

AGNI said Vishnu is the fire of universal dissolution
and 1 am Rudra. I will communicate unto thee the essence of
learnings, the Purana, that is the cream of all sciences and
the cause of all ; (13) [Containing an account of] creation
and dissolution, of various families, periods of Manu and
genealogies. The Lord Vishnu assumes the forms of fish,
tortoise &. There are two sciences, superior and inferior.

0 twice*bora one, the Vedas, RiJc, Yayusb, Soman and
1


[ ii ]

Atharvan, the six auxiliaries of the Vedas, namely (Sikshl),
the science of proper articulation and pronounciation,
(Kalpa) ritual or ceremonial, (Vyakarana) grammar,
(Nirukta). etymological explanation of difficult Vedic words
(Jyotish) astronomy, (Chhandas) science of prosody,
(Abhidhkna) lexicon, Mim 9 nsS, Dharma Sastras, Pura*
nakas, Nyaya, medical science, musical science, the science
of archery and Political economy— these all are the inferior
sciences. The superior science is that by which Brahma is
comprehended (14—17). I will describe unto thee the great
Purana, Agni, containing the great and eternal science of
Brahma, that which is invisible, incomprehensible, stable and
eternal ; and is the cause of fish and other forms, recounted
unto me by Vishnu and unto the celestials in the days of yore
by Brahm& (18—19).

In the general treatment of the subjects the author, how*

ever, does not stick to the five principal
The general character. to pj cg w l ) { c | 1 should constitute a Purana.

He even loses sight of the two- fold knowledge, divine and
secular set forth by him originally in the introduction. He
lias introduced a number of topics, useful to men, without
aoy system or method. His work is more like an Encyclo-
pedia, containing a varilty of useful topics bearing on later
Sanskrit learning for Vedic rituals are seen no where in the
book.

The contents of this Purana clearly show that it has no
sectarial leaning. It impartially treats of Vaishnava, Sarva,
And Sakta forms of worship. It is more a compendium of
Sanskrit learning than the advocacy of any particular form
of religion. It is classed among the Tamtta or the delusive
division of the Puranas. Professor Wilson thus remarks on
the general character of this Purana.

“ From this general sketch of the Agni Parana it is evi-
dent that it is a compilation from various works ; that conse-
quently it has no claim in itself to any great aatiquity,


[ Hi ]


although from the absence any exotic materials, it might be
pronounced earlier, with perhaps a few exceptions, than the
Mahomedan invasion. From the absence also of a contro-
versial or sectarial spirit, it is probably anterior to the
struggles that took place in 8th and 9th centuries of our era
between the followers of Siva and Vishnu. As a mere corn*
pilation however, its date is of little importance, except as
furnishing a testimony to that of the materials of which it is
composed. Many of these may pretend no doubt to con-
siderable antiquity, particularly the legendary accounts of
the Avataras, thesection on tegal policy and judicature and
genealogical chapters, how far the rest may be ancient is
perhaps questionable, for there can be little doubt that the
Purana, and comprehending such incongruous admixtures,
is not the entire work as it at first stood. It is not unlikely
that many chapters were arbitarily supplied about 8 or 9
centuries ago, and a few perhaps even later, to fill up the
chasms which time and accident had made in the original
Agneya Purana.”

He again remarks in his introduction to the Vishnu
Purana : —

The cyclopaedical character of the Agni Purana, as it is
now described, excludes it from any legitimate claims to be
regarded as a Purana, and proves that its origin cannot be
very remote, It is subsequent to the Itihasas, to the chief
work on grammar, rhetoric, and medicine, and to the intro-
duction of the Tantrik worship of Devi. When this latter
took place, is yet far from determined ; but there is every
probability that it dates tong after the beginning of our era.

The materials of the Agni Purana are, however, no doubt,
of some antiquity. The medicine of Susruta is considerably
older than the ninth century; and the grammar of Panini
probably precedes Christianity. The chapters on archery
and arms, and on regal administration, are also distinguished
by an entirely Hindu character, and must have been written


t «* ]

long anterior to the Mahomedan invasion. So far the Agni
Parana is valuable, as embodying and preserving relics of
antiquity, although compiled at a more recent date.

Professor Wilson gives the following summary of the
contents of this Purana which will give
Summary. our readers some idea of the numerous

subjects treated of in this work.

The early chapters of this Purana describe the Avataras,
and in those of R3ma and Krishna, avowedly follow the
Ramayana and Mahabharata. A considerable portion is
appropriated to instructions for the performance of religious
ceremonies; many of which belong to the Tantrik rituals
and are apparently transcribed from the principal authorities
of that system. Some belong to mystical forms of Saiva
worship, little known in Hindusthan, though perhaps, still
practised in the south. One of these is the Diksha or inita-
tion of a novice : by which with numerous ceremonies and
invocation, in which the mysterious monosyllables of Tantras
are constantly repeated, the disciple is transformed into a
living personation of Siva, and receives, in that capacity,
the homage of his Guru. Interspersed with these are chapters
descriptive of the earth and of the universe, which are
same as those of the Vishnu Purana ; and Mahatmyas or
legends of the holy places, particularly of Gaya. Chapters
on the duties of kings and on the art of war then occur,
which have the appearance of being extracted from some
older work, as is, undobtedly, the chapter on judicature,
which follows them, and which is the same as he text of the
Mitakshara. Subsequent to these we have an account of the
distribution and arrangement of the Vedas and Puranas and,
in a chapter on gifts, we have a description of the Puranas,
which is precisely the same and in the same situation, as the
similar subject in the Matsya Purana. The genealogical
chapters are meagre lists, differing, in a few respects, from
those commonly received, as hereafter noticed, but un-


[ V ]


accompanied by any particulars such as those recorded or
invented in the Markandeya. The next subject is medicine,
compiled, avowedly, but injudiciously, from the Susruta. A
series of chapters on the mystic worship of Siva and Devi
follows ; and the work winds up with a treatise on rhetoric,
prosody, and grammar according to the Sutras of Pingala
and Panini.

It is extremely difficult to find out exactly the period

when this cyclopaedic work was written.

Date. . , , „ , , _

It was undoubtedly written long before

the Mahomedan invasion. “The chapters, twelfth to fifteenth,
in which a synopsis of the Ramayana and Mahabharata is
given, conclusively prove that the work was written long after
Ramayana and the Mahabharata and at a time when those
works had become very old and abstracts of them, were
likely to be prized by the general readers.’ This is the view
of Dr. Rajendra Lala Mitra. Besides many mystic rites,
mantras and ceremonies, with which this Purana teems and
many of which are entirely obsolete now and thoroughly
inexplicable clearly prove its antiquity. The mantras are
generally of the Tantric type. It may be that this work
might have been written after Tantric form of worship had
been introduced in this country. The likely inference is that
this work was written after the Tantric period and as the
author wanted to make a compilation of the history, mytho-
logy, rites, ceremonials, &c., of the Hindus for the informa-
tion of the general readers he gave an account of many
obsolete rites and mantrams that were in vogue in very
ancient time.

The numberless obsolete rites, ceremonials and mantrams

described in this Parana, are of no in-
Important topics , ^

terest to a general, reader. But the

chapters on medicine, materia medica and pharmacy as well

as those on the treatment of elephants and horse diseases

are highly interesting. Besides an exhaustive account of


[ Vi ]


Para- Vidya and the science of Brahma occurs In this
Purana. It is a very interesting account and will prove,
without doubt, highly useful. to the readers. The chapters on
Law-Courts, Judicial Officers, evidences, inheritance, boun-
dary and other disputes, &c., may not be very useful to those
who are .familiar with the law literature of the Hindus codi-
fied by Manu, Mitakarshara &c., but they will afford a very
profitable and interesting study to the general readers who
have not the time and patience to go through those volumi-
nous treatises. The subject of training in the use of arms and
armour is treated in tour chapters ; of these archery is prin-
cipally dealt with. These chapters are highly interesting
and their abstracts will be found in Dr. Wilson’s " essay on
the Art of War as known to the Hindus.” Dr. Rajendra
Lain Mitra thus writes on the subject of Gaja Ayurveda
and the veterinary art treated of in this Purana.

"The subject is named Gaja Ayurveda and is explained
by one called P&lakapya and the latter, instead of addressiog
Susruta, makes Lomapada, king of Anga, the receiver of
his instructions. At the close of chapter 291 Agni dis-
tinctly says that the instructions regarding horses had been
imparted by Salihotra to Susruta and those regarding ele-
phants had been communicated by Palakapya to the king of
Anga; ‘the obvious inference is that the two names indicate
not the same but two different persons.

In the next chapters Dhanwantari again takes up the
thread of the discourse and dwells at some length on the
value of the horse as a vehicle, and proper times and modes
of using the animal. He concludes by saying that he would
quote the words of SSlihotra on the good and bad points of
horses and on the veterinary art. Accordingly chapter 288th
is devoted to the quotation in question. Silihotra is said
to have been a Rishi of great renown who had acquired
the veterinary art from the celestial horse doctors the two
Aswins and had written the first book on |he subject for


C vii ]

human use. His work has not yet been met with, but an
abridgment of it by Nakula, the fourth of the Pandu brothers,
is still cut rent and veterinary art is in India indicated by
the name of the Rishi. The vernacular form in northern India
and also in Bengal is Saluten and the practitioner of the art
Saluter. In the reign, of Ghiasuddin Muhammad Shah Ghil-
zai, A. H. 783-A.B. 1381, a Sanskrit work, styled Salotar
appeared in a Persian dress under the name of Kurrat-ul-
tnulk and extended to 41 pages. Even before that, an Aarabic
version had appeared under the name of Kitabul Baitarat,
and subsequently in the reign of Shah Jahan a Persian trans-
lation was prepared of a Sanskrit work named Salotorai
which extended to 16,000 slokas. There is nothing however
to show whether the original of any of these three versions
was the work of Salihotra or a later compilation on farriery.
Seeing that the word Saloteri is now become a common
noun for farriery, I am of opinion, that the Persian versions
were not taken from the original work of Salihotra, but from
a later compilation, and this is confirmed by the fact of the
originals of the three veisions having been of very unequal
lengths. It is doubtful if the verses quoted in the Agni
Purana retain the ipsissima verba of Salihotra or are para*
phrases.”


CONTENTS.


Chapter I.— Customary Salutation. Conference between Suta and
Sanaka. Suta volunteers a narration of the Afcuipuranatn, as disclosed
to him by the holy Vyasa, who in his turn learnfd it from Vashista.
Enumeration of the different branches of learning' dealt with in the
present Puranam ... ... ... ... ... 1—9

Chapter II.— -The Fire-God narrates to the holy Vashistha, all
about the Fish-manifestation of the Supreme Vishnu ... 9—13

Chapter HI.—' The God of Fire describes the Tortoise incarnation
of Vishnu, and the incidents of his life on earth ... ... 13—20

Chapter IV. — The same continued ... ... 20 — : >5

Chapter V. — The Fire- God gives a summary of the Ramayanam.
The preparation of the sacrificial Payasha — The birth of Ram and
his four brothers— The sending out of Ram and Lakshmana by their
father to defend the sacrifice of the holy Vishvamitra against depre-
dations by Rakshases — Rama destroys the monstress Tadaka— •
Rama and Lakshmana accompany the holy sage Vishvamitra to the
bow-sacrifice of Janaka, the king of Mithila,— Rama breaks in twain
the redoubtable bow— Marriage of Rama and his brothers with the
princesses of that principality.— Their return to Ayodhya with their
newly married brides ... ... ... ... 25—34

Chapter VI.— Narada takes up the thread of the narrative.— Pro-
posed installation of Rama on the throne of Ayodhya. — The necessary
preparation for the inaugaration ceremony — Conference between the
queen Kaikeyi and her hand-maid Manthara— The evil counsels of
the latter — Kaikeyi asks Dasaratha to proclaim her son Bharata as the
crown-prince of the realm— Dasaratha is forced to comply with her
request as bound by a previous oath— Rama, Lakshmana and Sita
are sent in exile — Dasaratha relates to Koushalya the incident of his
killing a Muni's son in the forest, and of his curse.— The death of Dasa-
ratha — Bharat returns to Ayodhya — His expostulations with Rama in
the forest to lesume his birth-right— Rama's refusal— Bharata's stay at
Nandigram as the proconsul of Rama ... ... ... 34— 3$

Chapter VII.— Narada proceeds with the story— Rama receives
celestial weapons from the holy sage Agastya — He leaves the hermit-
age of the latter, and repairs to the forest of Dandaka — The monstress
Surpanakha meets Rama in the forest and courts his love— Her desire
to devour Lakshmana and the beautiful Sita — Disfigurement of her
person by Lakshmana— Surpanakha sees her brother Khara in her
disgrace— Khara attacks Rama with his Rakshases. and is killed —
Surpanakha plans revenge with her brother Havana, who sends Maricha
to entice away Rama from the cottage, in the form of a golden deer—
Havana carries awaya Sita in his island home in the interim — The bird-
king-Jatayu fights Havana on the way, and is killed— Rama kills
Kavandlta, who freed of curse, advises him to make a common cause
with Sugriva ... ... ... ... ... 38—41


a


CONTENTS


Chaptir VIIL-R*ma's lamentation on the banks of the Pampa —
His meeting with Sue rive — Rama pierces the seven Tala trees with a
single shaft, and kills Oundhuvt — Rams kills Vali and confers his wife
Tara and the kingdom of Kiskinda on Sugriva— The latter sends out
soldiers in all directions in quest of Sita — The monkey soldiers return
and disclose to Rama and Sugriva all they have gathered from Jatayu,
about the whereabouts of the beautiful Sita ... ... 41-41

Chapter IX.— Hanuraana leaps over to Lanka, and finds her out
in the forest of Ashoka — Conference between Hanumana and Sita, who
gives him a jewel as a memento— Hanumana sees Ravana and per*
petrates heavy damages to the city and her mango-groves— Hanumana
crosses over to India end communicates the news to Rama, with
Angada and others— Rama repairs, to the ocean -shore, gets a bridge
constructed with the advice of the Ocean -God, makes friend with Bibni-
shana, and enters Lanka with his troops ... ... 42 — 47

Chaptir X. — Rama sends Angada to Ravana demanding the sur*
render of Sita— Ravana declares war — The war described— Ravana,
in hk disaster arouses his brother Kumbhukarna out of sleep — The fail
of the Rakshasa-generals in succession — Ravana meets Rama in a single
combat- The fall of Ravana and the meeting of Rama and Sita — The
installation of Bibhishana on the throne of Lanka — Rama's return
to Ayodhya with Sita and Lakshmana in the aerial car, Pushpaka

47 — 5 *

Chapter XL — Agastya sees Rama and narrates to him a history
of the birth of Ravana and his brothers. Lakshmana slays the monster
Lavana — B ha rata slays the Gandharbha Shailathu— The exile of Sita —
The birth of the two sons of Rama— His accession to heaven ... 50—51

Chaptrr XII. — The God of Fire describes the birth of Krishna in
the womb of Devaki, — Krishna exchanged with the daughter of
Yoshada for fear of Kansa — The prophecy relates to Kansa about thft
growth of his future destroyer — Kansa sends Putana, a she-demon to
kill children all round— The childish freaks of Krishna and Valarama
in Goknl— Incidents illustrating the early prowess of Krishna— Krishna
destroys Putana, the serpent Kaliya, the demons Dhenuka, Gardhava,
etc. Krishna revives the Vedlc sacrifices— goes over to Mathura in
the company of Valarama-at the instance of the pious Akrura — Krishna
kills Kansa in a single combat, detests jarasandha, and annexes his
kingdom with the domain of.Vasudeva — krishna founds the city of
Dwarika, and marries sixteen thousand wives— Krishna forcibly car*
ries away from heaven the mountain of gems, and the Parijata tree,
and plants them in the garden of Satyabhama. — Receives lessons from
the holy sage Sandipani, and brings back to life the son cf the latter—
List of sons begot ten by Krishna and Valadeva— The marriage of Usha
and Aniruddha— The battle between Hari and Shiva— Balabhadra
draws to him the river Yamuna by force— The happy life ot Krishna
and Rukmini— Innumerable progeny of Krishna ... ... 52—57

Chapter XIII.— The God of Fire gives a geneology of the sever* •
eigne of the race of the Moon— The birth of the Kurus and Pandavas
—The early and wicked stratagems of Duryodhana- The marriage
of Draupadi— Arjuna receives a car and celestial weapons from the
Fire-God— The burning down of the forest of Khandava — The conquest
of new kingdoms by the Pandavas— Yudhisthira performs a Ra jasuya
sacrifice— The jealousy of Durjodh*n 4 «*The playing of a game of


CONTENTS,


iii


dice—' Yudhisthira stakes every thing in the play, and loses all, and
goes in exile— Yudhisthira with his brother and wile, lives imcogntto
in the house of Virata— Bhima kills Kichaka for insulting the modesty
of Droupaui,— Arjuna defeats the Kurus attempting to lift the cattle
of Virat — Abhimanyu, a son of Arjuna, marries Uttara, the daughter
of Virat.— Yudhisthira levies soldiers— The embassy of Krishna—
Krishna counsels war ... ... ... 57 — 60

Chaftbk XIV.— The armies of the Karas and the P*nd»»» meet in
the memorable field of Kurukshetra. — Krishna exhorts Arjuna to da his
duty by fighting out his consanguinous enemies.— The battle ensues with
varied .results to both the parties— The fall of Duryodhana— The assasi*
nation of the five sons of Droupadi by Ashvathaman— Arjuna's retalia-
tion— Cessation of hostilities— The survivors retire from the field of
strife — Yudhisthira performs obsequies to his deceased agnates; and
re ceives advice from Bhishma as to the duties of a king, and those
leading to Salvation — Yudhisthira confers his crown on the infant
Parikshit ... ... ... ... ... 61—63

Chapter XV.— The story continued— Dhritarastra takes to the
fife of a hermit — Death of Vidura.— The annihilation of aH the Kurus
and the Jadavas, the monsters incarnate — Death of Krishna and
Valadeva — Cowherds carry away the wives of Krishna— Arjuna
breaks the news of Krishna's death to Yudhisthira— Yudhisthira is
translated to heaven in the car of Indra ■ ... ... 64-69

Chapter XVI.— The God of Fire describes the incidents in the
life of the Buddha incarnation of Vishnu — Buddha, an incarnation of
illusion and nescience — The mission of his life was to wean the hearts
of demons, incarnate as men, from the true faith as revealed in the
Vedas — All distinction of caste wilt cease in the end of Kali Yuga —
Kalki, the last incarnation of Vishnu — The merit of perusing the life
histories of the divine incarnations ... ... ... 70-/3

Chapter XVII.— The God of Fire describes the creation of the
universe — Brahma is unrnanifest and self-existent— Creation of the
subtler principles of Maliat, Ahankara, ether. Mind, etc.,— Water is the
first material element created, in which the Egg of Brahma was afloat —
Creation of created time, speech, and menial propulsions with their
counterparts — Creation of the physical forces, Saddhyas, Devas, and
of the seven immortal sages— The splitting of Hie body of Brahma
{animated cosmic matter) into two— Origin of sex ... ... 75 — 81

Chapter XVIII. — The God of Fire describes the ancestry a»d
birth of Dhruva— Dhruva, metamorphosed into a star— The sons and
progeny of Dhruva — Birth of Pritbu, the founder of (he race of
Ksliatriyas— Milching of the Earth by Prithu— The sons and progeny
of Prithu — The birth of Daksha, the mind«born— Daksha's daughter
married to Dhmrma— The progeny of Dharma— The birth of stars—
The eight Vasus and their progeny— The birth of the Kudras— Maha-
deva begets sons on Sati ... ... ... 81—86

Chapter XIX.*— The sons of Kashyapa— -The birth of the twelve
Adnyu— The eon* of Ka.hy.pa by his wife Dili— Hiranyaka.hipe
Pralhada, Virochana, V all— The mo. of Hiranyak»ha— The birth of
Mrpenu— The Manila— Appointment of different gods to preside ovar
different things end being. ... ... ... ...86— S9


IV


CONTENTS*


Chapter XX.— The successive orders of erection, such is those of
Mahai* Tanmatra, etc.,— The creation of the sensible* and the senses —
The Nitya, Naimittika, and Dainandina Creations— The sons of Bhrigu
—The progeny of hell and vice— The marriage of Sati in her second
incarnation ... ... ... ... ... 89—91

Chapter XXL— The procedure of Vishnu-worship 91-94

Chapter XXII.— The rite of ceremonial ablution to be performed
before undertaking any sort of religious rite ... ... 94-95

Chapter XXIII.— Narada describes the mode of worshipping the
eod Vishnu— The rite of purification of the material principles of the
body of the votary, is described— The postures to be assumed in the
course of the worship— The Mantras and the articles, of worship— The
worship of the weapons and ornaments of the god —The rites of invo-
cation and farewell— The peculiarities of the worship known as the
Nava-Vyuha Archanain ... ... ... ... 96—98

Chapter XXIV. — The rite of fire— Dimensions and structure of
the firepit — The sacrificial spoon and laddie — Their dimensions— The
adjustment of the vessels and utensils around the sacred fire-pit — Their
purification — The rite of Garbadhanam to be done unto the infant (newly
kindled) Fire-god — The subsequent post-natal rites to the same— Pour-
ing of libations of clarified butter on the fire — The sacrificeof the
sacrificial animal — The rite of the worship of Vishvaksena ... 99 — 103

Chapter XXV.— Narada enumerates the Mantras, respectively
held sacred to the different manifestations of Vasudeva, such as San*
karshana etc., — The rites of Nyasa in connection with each of the Man*
tras— The sacrifice of Vishvaksena ... ... ... 103—107

Chapter XXVI. — The Mudras (the postures of the hands and
fingers) enjoined to be used in the course of a worship— Their structures
and merit ... ... ... ... ... 107— 108

Chapter XXVII.— The rite of initiation. — The preparation and
purification of the sacrificial ground— The special procedure of the
worship described— The prayer for the release, and spiritualization of
the animal propensities of his desciples— Th* transference of pure
spiritual principles into the body of his disciple, by the preceptor— The
rite of Adhivasa— The mode of completing the ceremony— The
Mantras to be used on the occasion — The mode of completing the
rite of initiation— The process of pouring out the final libation— The
mode of holding in perpetual check the animal propensities of the
disciple — -The rite of SaKala Diksha ... ... 108—116

Chapter XXVI 1 1 .— The rite of Abhisheka, preparatory to the
attainment of Siddhis— The merit of erecting Pitakas ... 1 16

Chapter XXIX.— The practice oc Mantra in a temple, subsequent
to a worship of the God Hari— Delineation of the mystic diagram
on the ground— Adjustment of the different Vijas in the chambers
of the diagram— The worship of Para-Bramha (the Supreme Being)
and of the Boar manifestation of Vasudeva, in the first lotus— Division
of the altar into a number of chambers ... ... 117—120

Chapter XXX.— The mode of worshipping the different deities
and spiritual beings in the differerent parts of the friystic diagram— The
worship of Vasudeva and the presiding deities of the ten organs of
iensc**The worship of the twenty* six forms of PuruihotUma in the


CONTENTS.


v


plant of the mystic diagram— The rite of Rajapata— Colouring
of the petals and causeways of the mystic lotus-shaped diagram.—
The Mantras of purification v etc., and the number of times they are
to be repeated on the occasion— The rite of Purvasiva— The rite of
Mantra- Puraschara and the monthly Vratas — The rite of Dhyanam
(meditation)— The forms of the God Hari, the gross, the Param (subtle)
and the Virat (universal)— The Vija sacred to the god, sdpposed to be
implanted in the heart in the form of a Kadamva tree — Dhyanam
means an unison of the thinking soul with the absolute spirit (Hari).-
Attainment of Siddhis, such as.Anima, etc. ... ... 120—113

Chapter XXXI.— The rite of Marjana (purification),— its pro*
cess— The Mantras and the prayer to be practised and recited in
connection with the rite ... ... ... ... 123—126

Chaptkr XXXII.— The forty-eight Sanaskaras, such as .'Garbha-
danam, etc., the seven Vratas. the eight Parvana-Shraddhas, the seven
Hari.yajanas — the seven Somasanstna, such as Agnisthoma. Hira-
nyamitra. etc., — The practice of eight cardinal virtues, — Number of times
the principal Mantras, such as the Soura, etc., to be repeated... 127 — 128

Chapter XXXI 1 1 . — The right of Pavitrarohana (investing the image
of the God Hari with the holy thread)— Its season and the characteristic
features of the holy thread — The prayer to be repeated on the occasion.
The Gayatri sacred to the god — The mode of offering the articles of
worship to the deity, and the Mantras specifically enjoined to be re*
peated on the occasion of restraining, by the votary, each of his twenty-
five- subtle principles of taste, sound, etc. — The rite of subsequent
Nyasa, and the purification of the body,— Prayer, the worship and the
Angapuja, the final investure, the rite of Homa, and the completion of
the ceremony ... ... ... ... ... 128—1331

Chapter XXX I V. — Decoration and purification of the sacri-
ficial Mandala — The rite of Dvara Yajna (sacrificial rites performed
at the doors of the Mandala) — Planting of different trees at the
different gates — The rites of Nyasa, purification, and protection against
evil spirits, and the worship of the guardian deities of the skies,— the
adjustment of sacrificial pitchers, the worship of Hari, and the rite of
final Homa ... ... ... ... ... 133—137

Chapter XXXV. — The rite of the Pavitradhivasanam — Consecra-
tion of the sacrificial pitchers, and the articles of worship, placed on
the different sides of the votary, through the energy of the different
manifestations of Vishnu— The worship of Vishnu, the concluding
prayer ... ... ... ... ... 137— *39

Chapter XXXVI. — The rite of Pavitrarohanam, sacred to Vishnu.
Collection of the offerings by the votary made by him on the previous
day^The preliminary rites— The Namittika worship — Consecration
ofthe pitchers and the Vardhini— Tlie rite of self-protection— Tho
offerings made to the minor gods — The final libations— The Prayer,
the Viskrjanam, and payment of Dakshina to the Preceptor ... 139—141

CHAPTER XXXVII. — A summary of the procedure to be adopted
in all rites of Pavitrarohanam— The rite of purifying the articles of
worship— Tho Invocation— The rite of format investure — The same
done unto the minor deitie* . u ... ... 141—142

Chapter XXXV!II.- 4 The merit of building and consecrating
temples to the gods— Yams eulogises the merit of such endcw.nents.


VI


CONTENTS.


and exhorts men to faithfully carry out his injunctions. The merit
of building golden temples ... ... ... 142—146

Chapter XXXI X. — Consecration of divine images — The Pun
charatra school of philosophy — Qualifications of a priest officiating
at such a consecration ceremony — The position of the divine images
at the time— Location of temples, dedicated to the different gods
in the different quarters of the town— The rules to be observed in build-
ing temples on grounds contiguous to each other— The rite of Bhupart-

? raha (taking possession of a plot for the purposes of a divine edifice)—
urification of the site selected, and the rite of the Bhutavali — The
standard of linear measurement ... ... ... 146 — 149

Chapter XL. — The procedure to be adopted in making Argha
offerings to the God— The history of Vastu Purusha— The construction
of the mystic diagram (Mandala) — The process of worshipping the
gods and the principles within its chambers — Description of offerings
to bo made to each of them— The location of Vardhini at the centre of
the diagram— The offering of the final Argha — The excavation of the
foundation of the would-be constructed temples — The rite of removing
tkeShalyo (charmed bone or metal) from underneath its site ... 150— 15 r

CHAPTER XL 1 . — Rules to be observed in laying down the founda-
tion of a divine edifice — Religious ceremonies attending on the act.
are described — The dimensions of the bricks or stone slabs to be used in
the construction — Hymns to the bricks — Hymn to the Earth Goddess—
Excavations and their measurements — The accompanying rite of Vastu-
yaga— The merit of building a temple — Doors and windows of temples
are to open on different quarters of the sky according to their
varied sites ... ... ...' ... ... 152—156

Chapter XLII.— The structure of a divine temple or edifice. The
plan of the ground-floor, the dimensions of the plinth, wall and the
cornices— The rules to be observed in constructing entrance halls
(Mukha Mandapas) and posterior chambers (Paschat Mandapas.)—
Dimensions of a temple, built according to the size of an idol to be
installed therein— The construction of the vault, dome, top platforms,
and the ornamental appendages of a temple — Construction of Gopuras
-—Proportionate measures of an idol and its pedestal— The Garuda
Mandap with its eight pinnacles ... ... ... 157 — 159

Chapter XL 11 L— The rite of installing an idol in a temple— Des-
cription of temples of different structures in which the images of
different deities are to be installed — Construction of a stone-image of
Vishnu— The rite of Sinha-Homa— The size of a stone-slab — Religious
ceremonies to be performed in the wood before sculpturing the image.

159—161

Chapter XL1V.— The essential points in an image of the god Vasu-
va or of any other deity— Rules to be observed in sculpturing such an
baage* The measures of its different limbs and parts ... 162 — 167

Chapter XL V.— The essential points of a divine pedestal (Pindika)
and its dimensions ... ... ... 167—168

Chapter XLV!.— The characteristic traits of the different classes
of Shalagrama stone ... ... ... ... 169—170

Chapter XLVII.—Tbe pr s e s a i of worshipping a Shabgiama.

171 — r?3


CONTENTS.


VII


CMimit XL VI II.— Hymn to the twenty*four manifestation* of the
God Vishnu ... ... ... ... 173—176

Ch after XLIX. — The ten incarnations of Vishnu, the charac-
teristic features of their images ... ... 176—181

Chapter L.— Dimensions of the images of goddesses — their deco-
rations, weapons and accompaniments ... ... 181—187

Chapter LI.— At* image of the $un»god, with those of his com-
panion deities— The different epithets of the luminary as he progresses
from one to the other sign of the Zodiac — The colours of the goddesses *
who represent the energy of the sun— The images of the regents of the
planets, and their characteristic features and equipments— The gods of
wind, fire and other elements, and the animals they ride upon— Des-
cription of Kshetrapalas and other minor gods ... 187 — 189

Chapter Lit. — The Yoginis and the characteristic features of their
images — The names of the Yoginis who preside over the different
quarters of the heaven — An image of Krittivasa and its distinctive
traits. Images of the Matrikas ... ... ... 189 — 191

Chapter LIII. — The essential points of a phallic emblem — Mode of
sculpturing a phallic emblem — Its dimensions— The different clasM*
of the emblem and their measures. The dimensions of the Peetha agd
its peculiarities ... ... ... ... 191 — 193

Chapter LI V. — The merit of worshipping phallic emblems made of
different substances— The different classes of phallic emblems, and their
dimensions described in detail, — phallic emblems made of precious
stones, their dimensions, and the mode of chiselling them ... 194 — 195

Chapter LV. — Pedestals of images — Their dimensions — Mode of
carving water passages into the pedestal — The region of halo and its
characteristics — Tlie measures laid down in connection with the images
of Vishnu and Lakshmi, are to hold good in the case of all other gods
and goddesses ... ... ... ... 196—197

Chapter LVI. — The rite of Dilcpala Yoga — The five divisions of
the ceremony— The mythical significance of putting an image on its
pedestal — The decoration of the doors of the sacrificial shed with the
twigs of trees, and the disposition .of priests at each of them — The
Mantras and rites of the sacrifice — The invocations and obeisances.

197—200

Chapter LVI I. —The rite of taking possession of the sacrificial
ground (Bhu-parigraha)— Its Mantris and rituals— Consecration of
sacrificial pitchers ... ... ... ... 200—203

Chapter LVI II.— The rite of eonsecratory ablution— The triumphal
leading of the idol from the sculpture's shed to the sacrificial chambers.
—The installation of the image in the Mandapa accompanied by repeti-
tion of the proper Mantras— Rituals in connection with the divine
toilette— The ceremonial ablution of the image— Its consecration— offer-
ings of fruits, Rowers, perfumes and wearing apparels, etc., to the
installed and imaged divinity. Exhibition of the divine insignia.
Such as umbrella, etc., by the Priest— The repose of the god in bed.

303—207

Chapthr L 1 X.— The rite of A dhivasapam (act of sitting close)—
The rite of merging by an act of spiritual abstraction, the fundamental
principles ef the universe one into the 'other— The origin of the soul end
universe described— The origin of the senses, and an enumeration ef


viit


CONTCNTS*


the names of the^ade who respectively preside over them— The ferine*
•ion of the material body of a man. and an enumeration of the Mantras
which represent tnoee material principles— The rites of Nvasa in con-
nection irith the Adhivasanam ceremony— The worship of Keshava and
the different manifestations of the God Vishnu— Offerings to the minor
deities—' The rite of Homa — Rites completing the ceremony 208—215

Cntrant LX*— Rite of installation of the pedestal of a divine imago
— Insertion of gems and bits of gold* in to the body of the same— The rite
of Homa — Cleansing of the inuge with Mantras and religious rites —
The construction of a Sthsndila (sand cushion for the sacnftdfcl fire)—
The stowing of the sacrificial pitchers into their places— The rite of
subsequent Home.— Sprinkling of the water of peace over the head of
the image— Women and Bramhanas are to pour out the contents of the
sacrificial pitchers over its head— The formal placing of the image
upon its pedestal— Washing of the idol with different substances —
Worship and invocation— The rite of Sannidhyakaranam (the act of
malting the deity reside in the image)— The subsequent rites of wor-
shipping the companion deities of the god— Nature of remuneration
to be paid to the Priest officiating at the ceremony— The merit of
installing and consecrating an image of Vishnu ... 215—220.

Chapter LXL— ' The rite of Avabhritha Snanam)— 1 The rite of
first Homa and worshipping of the spiritual preceptor — Worship of
Lakshmi and other divinities— Consecration of a temple with doors
previously consecrated— The rites of festooning and decorating the
temple — The merit of planting a banner On the top of a divine
temple— Rods and streamers are but the symbols of God and Nature,
and a temple is but the body of Vishnu— Analogy between a temple
and a human body— The rite of consecrating a temple by hoisting a
a flag from its top— The characteristic features of the flag— The
placing of Chakras (discus) and Kalasas (conical ornaments) over
the top pinnacle of a temple— The rites completing the ceremony.

2 20—226

CHAPTER LXIL— Rite of consecration of divine images in general.

, 226—217

Chaptsr l.XIll. — The rite of consecrating an image of Garuda,
of Bramha, of Narasinha, etc.— The Mantra sacred to each of them
should be used in the ceremqay — The Mantras peculiar to the above*
said gods— The Patalaksha Mantra sacred to the Narasinha mani-
festation of Vishnu— The characteristic features of an image of Garuda.
and the Mantra to be used in consecrating such an image— Ceremonies
attendant on consecration of books, and the mode of writing them—
The merit of giving a book to a Bramhana— The merit of presenting
books of the different schools of philosophy and sacred literature.

228—232

Cairn* LXIV.— Consecration of tanks and poods— The religious
ceremony, attendant on such an act, described-— Remunerations to
bo mado to the Priest— Nature of offerings to be made to the God
Vaiu m T he Adhhmsa ceremony in the night— The invocation and
tbo rite of Homa, and the Mantras to be recited in pounag dowipthe
■barton# The drMagof tbo sacrificial post (Yupa) mta tbo centre
of tht bod of the teak— Tbo Prayer to all created bangs to confer
htauUif an its water— Tbt nark af consecrating a tank era pond.


tt


Ciimt LXV.-Tht nodaef *aildmjr Cyra; tte-Tht —toe*
tion of site and the performance of the sacrifice of tho Homstead, kid-*
dental thereto— The models *fter which the Halb ane to be built—
The objectionable sites— The merit of such an endowment— The way
of constructing a Saptavoum Hall sacred to the god Hari (which is
similar to that of constructing a royal palace)— The dimensions and
characteristics of such edifice*—' The religious rites attending on the
first entrance into such a /mansion— Invocation to the earth goddess
to bless the mansion ... ... ... ... 337—939

Chapter LX VI. — Consecration of the images of gods and spiritual
beings, such as the sun. etc.— The construction 0# Jhe principal Mantras*
•acred to each of them— The Vow of thirty days fast— Hie rite of
accompanying Homa — The subsequent rite of worshipping the gods
Bramha, Vishnu,, and Isa-^Libations to, be offered to the souls of
mountains, rivers, and oceans— Gifts at the close of the ceremony—
Ano'her sort of penance, described— Endowment and consecration of
cattle paths, pasturages and fruit gardens— Their merit — The merit
of 'toqstructing monasteries and buildings for the use of public hi
general ... ... ... ... ... 239—943

Chapter LXV 1 I. — The rite of Girnoddharam (repairing an. old
image or replacing a disfigured idol by a new one) — The merit of per^
forming such a ceremony, as well as those of dredging or re-excavating
old wells, tanks, and reservoirs of water in general ... ... 244

Chapter LX VII I. — Description Of the feasts and the parrading
of an idol, etc., that are to be ' celebrated and made at the close of a
consecration ceremony — The time of their celebration — Religious rites
preceding such a Yatrotasavam (parrading)— The parrade and its
goal described — |'he merit of attending and gutting up such a pageant
—The immersion of the idol in a river and taking it back to the temple.

245—947

Chapter LXIX.— The rite of Avabritba Suanam and its rules—
Filling up of the sacrificial pitchers with difftfeeht substances and wheel-
ing them into their proper positions in tlieV shed of ablution— The
Homa, in connection with the ceremony, after the anointment of the
pitchers with clarified butter— The bathing of the god — H»e feast follow-
ing close upon the ceremony, and the merit of its performance — The
subsequent worship of the goddess of Gouri ... ... 247—249

Chapter LXX. — the rite of consecrating trees and fruit-gardens —
The merit of such a performance ... ... ... 250—251

Chapter LXXI. — The worship of the god Ganesha ... 251

CHAPTER LXXI I. — The lilcs of dnilv ablution and offering of liba
lions of water to Hie gods and preceptors — The sorts of ablution —

T heir process — The mes of Mala- Sn.i ram, Vashnia Su inam and Vidlu
Snanam, Agneya-Snannin and Mahcnd r a-Snanam— Occasions on wlitth
they are to be performed— The dilloetit forms of Sandtiya and the
Mantras with which they are to be performed— The riles of Sakali*
karanain and Piati.«y.*tma — The image 'of the goddess of Sasdltys

23*^257

Chapter LXXI II. —The worship of the Sun — Its religious merit.

?55-i6c.

Chapter LXXI V.— The worpbio of the god' Shiva— invocation of
his spiritual eye-sight by tbo votary previous to the worship the scaring


X


CONTENTS.


away of evil spirits inhabiting the uppermost layer of the earth’s
crust— The mode in which the votary would have his abhi|ion pre-
liminary to the worship— The rites of Samnrihi-Kgianam (invoc Uioil).
Nya$a and Pramvama (controlling of respiration) 2(10—272

Chatter LXXV. — The rite of kindling the sacrificial fire (Vanhi-
Sthapxnam) at me close of the preceding worship ... 273 — 280

Chapter LXXV I. —The method of worshipping the image of
Shiva ... » ... ... ... • ... ... 281

Chapter LXXVIL— The process of worshipping the cow

Kapil* ... ' ... ... ... ... ... 284

Chapters LXXVIM..TO LXXX. — The process of investing a divine
image with the holy thread ... ... ••• ... 286

Chapter LXXX!. — The rite of spiritual initiation ... 302

C ir \pter LXXX II. — Sankskaradiksha or the rite of purifying
initiation ... ... ... ... ... 314

Chapter I.XXXUI and LXXXI V.-The- process of illumi-
ning ... ... ... ... ... ... 318

Cl! \PTER LXXXV. — The union of the too fundamental principles of
the universe* ... ... ... ... ... 334

Chapter LXXXV I. —The union of the Vidya-KaU and Prachina-
Kala ... ... ... ... ... ... 340

Chapter LXXX VI I. — The union of a beatific knowledge and abso-
lute peace ... ... ... ... ... 343

Chapter LXXXVIIl. — The beatific principle of Sliantyatra

Kate ... ... - ••• ... .•.* 347

Chapter LXXX IX — The spiritual initiation of Tattviki ... 354

Chapter XC. — The rite of Abhisheka ... ... ... 355

Chapter XCL — The worship of Vishnu, the sun and other
gods '... ... ... ... ... ... 357

Chapter XCII. — The installation of a plialic emblem ... 358

Chapter XCII 1 . — The construction of the divine edifice. ... 366

Chapter XCIV. — The worship of Charaki and her compa-
nions ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 37 2

Chatter XCV and VL— The installation of the phalic emb-
lem ... ••• ••• 373

Chapter XCV 1 1 . —The purification of the component principles of
the body ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 39 ^

Chapter XCVIIL— ' The process of installing the image of
Gouri ... ... ••• ••• ••• ... 4°7

„ Chapter XC 1 X. — The process of installing an image of the

Sun-God ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 4°9

Chapter C.-rThe rite of consecration ... ... 410

Chapter Cl. — The process of consecrating a divina edifice ... 41 1
Chapter Cfi.— The consceratin of the pinnacle avid banner ... 413
Chapter aifa-Thl process of repairing or replacing a phalic
emblem ... • •••. ••• ••• ••• 4 *^


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER CIV.— ■The general characteristics of a divine edi-
fice ... ... ... ... ... 419

Chapter CV.— The worship of the god of the homestead .. 423
Chapter CVI. — The foundation of a city and the rite of worship-
ping the Vastu ... ... ... ... 429

Chapter CVI I.— The different continents *f the terrestrial globe.

43 *

Chapter CVtll. — The seven great island* ... ... 434

Chapter — The greatness of the sacrec Is and places 437

Chapter CX. — The sanctity of the river Ganges ... 440

Chapter CXI. — The sanctity of the confluence of the rivers Ganges
and Yamuna at Prayag ... ... ... ... 441

Chapter CXI I. — The sanctity of Benares ... ... 443

Chapter CXII 1 . — The glory of the sacred stream of Narmada 444

Chapters CXI V, CXV and CX VI. -—The glory of the sacred
^Igrimace of Gya ... ... ... ... ... 445

Chapter CXVII. — The process of performing the Sraddha cere-
mony at Gya ... ... ... ... ... 463

Chapter CXV II I. — The topography of Bha rata varsha ... 473
Chapter CXIX. — The topography of Jamvudwipa ... 474

Chapter CXX. — The extent of the surface of the glob* ... 477

Chapter CXXI. — The Science of Astrology ... ... 49*

Chapter CXX 1 1 . — The Svarodaya -Chakra by which the success
or failure of a particular undertaking should he first determined ... 492

Chapter CXX 1 II. — A Synopsis of the Science of Astrology ... 498

Chapter CXXIV. — The means of bringing about the death of
one's own enemy ... ... ... ... ... 502

Chapter CXXV. — The combination of good and evil asterisms 510
Chapter CXXVI. — Hie description of good and evil hours ... 514
Chapter CXXVI I. — The contrivance of astrological counting known
as the Kostlia Chakra ... ... ... 517

Chapter CXX VIII. —The collection of food-grains during the ap-
pearance of portends ... ... ... 519

Chapter CXXIX. — Physical phenomena taking place under the
influence of the different asterisms ... ... ... 520

Chapter CXXX.— The Astrological Wheel by which victories or
reverses in war can be foretold ... ... ... 522.

Chapter CXXXL — The Astrological Diagram for taking the nature
and amount of services one would get from his relation ... 524

Chapter CXXXIi. — The differentiating traits in the character of
an infant ... ... ... ... ... ... 528

Chapter CXXXII I.— The Mantra which is irresistible in the three
worlds ' ... ... ... ... .. 534

Chapter CXXXiV.— The incantation for obtaining victor** in the
three worlds ... ... ... ... ... 536


.. ••
XU


Chaptbr CXXXV.— The Anw% 1 fe 1 Pl u g— Jfc r ifel snah t s g th
suce«n or failure of a journey ... S 40

Chaptbr CXXXVL— The deetjf ^pestilence- bringingjcharm 541
Chapter CXXXV 1 1 . —The rix»vtts <* . charms ... ... 544

Chaptbr CXXXVIII.-~The stay different Sam vatswras and the
good or evil results thereof • a. Mi aaa mi 547

Chaptbr CXXXIX.— The drugs and articles of mysterious virtues

549

Chaptbr CXL. — The names of the thirty-six] polyglot medicinal
drugs • •• ••• ••• mi im mi 55 *

Chaptbr CXLL— The medicinal or curative incantations ... 553

Chapters CXLII and CXLIII.— The process of worshipping the
goddess Kuvjika ... ... ... ... ... 556

Chapter CXLIV.— The rites of Shodanyasa •aa aaa 563

Chaptbr CLXV.— Trifchandi Mantras ... ... 571

Chaptbr CXLVII.-.-riie rite of Shadanga Nyasa ... 578

Chapter CXLVIII.— The*penance which grants victory in war 580
Chaptbr 'CXLIX. — The different Manus and their periods .„ 582
Chaptbr CL — The tenets of faith and the laws of conduct during

different Man wan 4**03 ••• ••• see 5 W

Chapter CLI *—• ’>« pondupt of a Brahmana ... ... 589

Chapter CLIL and ceremonies of a house-holder 590

Chapter CLII 1 .— The various forms of marriage... ... 592

Chapter CLKV. — The various daily rites • n eee 595

Chaptbr CL V.— The substances for purifying house- hold]goods 598

Chapters CL VI and CL VI I. — The nature and period of impurity.

6oo

Chaptbr CLVIIL— The period bf*impurity upon a miscarriage of
a foetus ... ... ... ... ... 608


Chaptbr CL 1 X.-— The condition of a person after death aaa «'5
Chaptbr CLX.— The duties of a Yeti ... eae eee 617

Chapter CLXI.— The characteristic features r of the life o a Yati.

617

Chaptbr CLXI L— The various Codes of DhiRRswitrts ... 692
CttAPTB* CLXIII.— Sraddha Kalpa .*• 624

Chapters CLXIV and CLX V.— Sacnfi^ io tmhor of the guardian

deities of the planets *ee eea a... eee 639

' Chaptbr CLXVL— The five virtues of men ... 634

Chapter CLXVII — The process of performing Grfcha-Yajna 636
Chaptbr CLX VIII. — Interdicted rites and foods •a. ebb 641

Chaptbr clxix. — The atonement for SMS eir.e . eee 6.45

Chapter clxz.— The penance* for deadly sinners ... 649


Chaptbbs clszi and cuotUv— The mt aystarioua of the sin ex-
piating rites eee sen epa aaa aaa $54


too


VONIGIfra. liu

Chaptbr cumn.- Th. Afferent acts of auwmant ... 659

Cumt CZJCXIT. — Tk« atonement (or a nn he to m oatiadoa of
wdNMppmg an idol

• •• ••• Mt Ml «S

Chaptbr clxxv.— -T he fetes, cerenionies>»f«d peneneet ... <61

Chaptbr clxxv i. — Th# VreUs wnicn should be performed d at ing
the 6m phase of the Moon's wane or increase ooa ... *n

Chaftbr clxxvii— T he Vratas to be performed on the day of the
second phase of the Moon's wan* or increase — ... 677

Chaftbr outran.*— The Vratas whieh should be perfbrmsd on days
of the third phase of the Moon's wane or incraOie ... ... 679

Chaftbr clxxix— T he Vratas of the fowrth phase ... 664

Chaftbr clxxx^— ‘ T he" Pancharai-Vrata ... ... 665

Chaftbr Clxxxi. — T he Shasthi-Vrata ... ... 686

Chaftbr clxxxii.— T he Saptami-Vrnta ... ... 687

Chaftbr clxxxiii.— T he Asthami Vrata see see 687

Chapter clxxxiV. — T he worship of this Eight Matris on the eighth
day • •• ••• m« eoo *

Chaftbr clxxxv. — T he Vratas to be performed on the ninth plow

6gt

Chaftbr clxxxti. — T he Dashami VraUs ... ... 694

Chaftbr clxxxvii. — T he Vratas to be performed b days of the
eleventh phase ... ... ••• ... 695

Chaftbr clxxxviii. — T he Vratas to be performed days of the
Hrelfth phase ... ... ... ... a*. 696

Chaftbr CLXXXIX.— The Shrsvana Dvadashi Vrata ... 699

Chapter CXC. — The Vrata which is complementary to all other
Vratas ... ... ... ... ... 70®

Chapter CXCI. — Trayodashi Vratas so* ••• toe 70a

CHAprsR CXCI 1 . — The Vratas to bo performed on days of the
fourteenth phase ... ... ••• ... 704

Chaftbr CXCI! I.—' The ShWarotri Vrata ... ... 70s

Chapter CXCIV. — The MiiIh Purnima Vrata ... ... 706

Chapter CXCV.— ' Vrafe* #dar variooa asUrisms ... 70/

Chapter CXC VI. — The ' tshatra Vratas ... 709

Chapter CXCVJI.-— ‘ The ££*■*• Vratas (daring day) ... 713

Chapter ^XCVHF— Monthly vows ... ... 000 7*4

Chaftbr CXCIX.«-Rhu Vratas or Seaton vows ... ... 716

Chapter CC.—The vow for lllominatinR a divine edifice ... 718

Chaftbr CC 1 .— •' the ninefold Propitiation ... MS 7 «

Chapter CCfl. — Th. worship of Hari... M 714

Chapter CCIIl.— The fruits acquired by* mm far wirdHppjag
Hari . - ... m. ••• 7*7

Chapter CCIV.-The met of ■■atMy iwuag ••• 73 ®

Chapter CCV«— Ths kwc dial dM wot ... •• 73 *


CONTENTS.


Chaptbr CCVL— rThe worship of <he holy sage Agastya ... 734
Chapter CCVII. — The practical the Kotins uda Vrata ... 736

Chapter CCVIII.— The process of making gifts on the occasion
of Vratas ... ... ... ... ... 737

Chapter CCIX.— The piety accruing from making various
Vralas ... ... ... ... 739

Chapter CCX.— The sixteen great gifts ... ... 74S.

Chapter CCXI. — The gift of cows and buffaloes ••a • •• 751

Chapter CCXII.— The gifts made in different tflonths ... 758

Chapter CCXI If. —The gift of the whole earth ... 763

Chapter CCXIV. — Nadichalcra or the system of veins, nerves,
and arteries ... ... ... ... ... 765

Chapter CCXV. — The Omkar Mantra ... ... 769

Chapter CCX VI. — The Gayatri Mantra ... ... 775

Chapter CCX VI I.— The use of the Gayatri Mantra for worship-
ping the phalic emblem ... ... ... ... 777

Chapter CCXV 11 I. — The duties incidental to a sovereignty... 779

Chapter CCXIX. — The Mantras to b'e used on the occasion of the
installation of a king ... ... ... ... 783

Chapter CCXX.— The duties of a king ... ... 788

Chapter CCXXI. — The duties of the servants of a king ... 793

Chapter CCXXI I.— The sites and constructions of fort* 794

Chapter CCXX HI. — The system of administration ... 796

Chapter CCXXI V.— The duties of a king in the female apart-
ment ... ... ... ... ... ... 800

Chapter CCXXV. — The duties of a kine towards the roya. prince*

804

Chapter CCXXV I. — The acts of a man through the innate forces
of his nature ... ... ... ... .. 807

Chapter CCXXVII. — The Code of Criminal Laws ... 810

Chapter CCXXVII I.— The occasion for an expedition 818

Chapter CCXXIX.— The nature and significance of dreams 830
Chapter CCXXX.— The auspicious signs for an expedition .. 823
Chapter CCXX XI. -—Birds unfolding the gooa or the evil fate 825
Chapter CCXXXII. — Portends presaging danger to a besieging


army ... ... ... ... • ... •>. 829

Chapter CCX XX II I. —The conditions of journey ... 833

Chapter CCXXX! V.— The nature of penalties ... •'»!. 336

Chaptbr CCXXXV— The daily duties of a kin, ... 839

Chaptbr CCXXXVI. — The weekly duties prectdio, the day of

march ... ... ... SB# ••• 34 *

Chaptbr CCXXXVII.— -The prayer to Indra ... 848

Chapter CCXXXVIII.— The ttoyal duties as disclosed by Rama
to Lakshin ana ... ... eat ••• ®5®


CONTENTS.


XV


Chapter CCXXXIX. — The seven factors ol government ... 853

Chapter CCXL. — The balance of power. How to .treat with the
neighbouring kings ... ... ... * ... ... 858

Chapter CCXLL— The utility of diplomacy ... ... 863

Chapter CCXLIf. — Die arrangement of the various divisions of
the army ... ... ... ... ... 871

Chapter CCXLIII. — The* art of divining the character and the
good or the evil fate ... ... ... ... 880

Chapter CCXLIV. — The characteristics of women ... 883

Chapter CCXLV. — The formation of various roval implements

884

Chapter CCXLVI.— The Characteristics of the different classes of
gems ... ... ... ... ... ... 887

Chapter CCXLVII. — l he characteristics of a homestead ... 889
Chapter CCXLVI II. — The realization of heart-felt desires ... 893
Chapter CCXL 1 X. — The science of archery ... ... 894

Chapter CCL. — The worship of arms ... ... 897

Chapter CCL 1 . — The use of arms on horse*back and riding
animats ... ... ... ... ... 899

Chapter CCLII. — The thirty-two sorts of military art ... 900
Chapter CCLII!. — The institution of law-suits ... ... 902

Chapter CCLIV. — Debts and their repayment ... ... 910

Chapter CCL.V. — The citing of witnesses in a legal matter ... 915
Chapter CCLVL— The partition of properties ... ... 921

Chapter CCLVll. — The settlement of boundary disputes ... 926

Chapter CCLVIII. — The punishment for abusing the deformed
and for singing lampoons ... ... ... ... 932

Chatter CCL IX.— The rites and ceremonier described in the
Vedas ... ... ... ... ... 943

Chapter CCLX. — The verses of the Yajurveda and the rites where
they are to be used ... ... ... ... ... 954

Chapter CCLXI.— The rites and Mantras of the Sama Veda 966

Chapter CCLXI f.— The rites and Mantras of the Atharvan
Veda ... ... ... ... ... 9^8

Chapter CCLXI 1 1.— The Siiktas as contained in each of the
Vedas . ,im ... ... ... 97 ^

Chapter CCLXIV.— How to ward off the dreadful visitations of
Nature ... ... ... ... ... 976

Chapter CCLXV. — The ceremonial ablutions in general ... 979

Chapter CCLX Vf.— The ablution for exercising the malignant
epirit Vinayaka ... ... ... ... ... 982

Chapter CCLXVII.— Maheswara Ablution ... ... 984

Chapter CCLXVIIL— The celebration of the king’s birth-day 987


mi comm*

owm CCLXIJL— Tb* Mmm far Wnirl^ *i nyat
XMUblUllo 99 *

(um CCLXX.-TU incantation of Vishnu PanjaM 995
Chapter CCLXXL— The iw* divisions of the- Vodic Mantras 997
Duma CCLXXUw— An account of Brahma, Padraa, abd Varakia
Phaaann ••• r. • ••• ••• ••• 999

Curm CCLXXIII. — Th« dynutfe. of the solar and lunar non

1003

Curm CCLXXIV. — Tha mo* of ktag. .who belonged to the
iMMf IBCfl »•• ••• mi ««« #•• 1006

ClAmft CCLXXV.— An account of Yadu'a family ... 1009

CltfTU CCLXXVL— An account of Krishna'* family aad dosda.

1013

Ciamif CCLXXVII AND CCLXXV 111 . — The lunar root ooa-
thumd ... ••• ... ... »m wif

CliTTlft CCLXXIX.— The system of medicine propounded by the
My Dhanwantari ... ... ... tost

Chapter CCLXXX.— < Organic, Mental, Extraneous and Func-
tional diseases ••• ... ... left

Chapter CCLXXXI. — Indian Pharmacopeia ... ... 1033

Chapter CCLXXXI I. — Hygenic effects of different trees and
ohrubo planted around the dwelling of a man ... ... 1037

Chapter CCLXXXI 1 1 .— Medicines for infantile dysentry or for all
diseases brought about by the vitiated state of mother's milk ... 1038

CHAPTER CCLXXXI V.— 1 The Omkar Mantra giving longevity 1044

Chapter CCLXXXV.— Infallible celestial medicines as disclosed
by the Rishi Atreya ... ... ... ... 1046

CKApTtR CC LX XX VI. —Medicines which can avert death, or in-
crease the duration of life ... ... ... ... I054

Chaptrr CCLXXXVIL— Tho excellence of elephants and the
diaoaaea to which they are subject ... 1057

Chapter CCLXXXV 1 1 L— Diseases of horses and rules for manag-
ing them.. ... ... ... ... 1 060

ClkAPTEft CCUCXXIX. — The ominous marks in the body of a
horse ••• . • mi sea sea aae ••• 1065

Chapter CCXC. — The religious rites which should be performed
fer the good of the stud ... ... ... ... 1071

Chapter CCXCL— ' The rite for bringing peace on elephants... 1072
. Chapter CCXCII. — The rite which is beneficial to the cows ... 1075
Chapter CCXCIII.— The Mantras which grant ell creature

comforts m« eeo tea mi tee io8x

Chapter CCXCI Vv— The different species of snakes : tha time whoa
poison increases in. them ... ... ... 1087

Chapter -CCXC V.— The modi pf treatment by incantations in a
case of wafeB-luto ... ... ••• IOQ*


CONTENTS.


IVli

CflAmfc CCXCVL— The rite of five groups of ee r e moniee crit ed
Rudra Vidhanam /... ... ... ... 109$

Chapter CCXCVII.— The worship of Rudra ... ... 1100

Chapter CCXCVIIL— The treatment of Gonqsa snake-bite... 1102

Chapter CCXCIX. — The mystic rites which prevent the diseases
imperilling the life of a child in the lying-in-Chamber ... 1105

Chapter CCC. — The Mantras destroying the baneful influences
of malignant stars ... ... ... ... ... 1114

Chapter CCCI.— ‘ The worship of the various Ganas .., 1121

Chapter CCCII. — The principal Mantras sacred to the lord of
heaven • ee im ••• n «3

Chapter CCCII I. —The hour when the vital spark of a man would
be extinguished ••• ... ... ... ... 1127

Chapter ccciv.— The Mantras sacred to the God Shiva ... 1 130
Chapter cccv.— ' The recitation of the fifty names of Vishnu... 1134
Chapter cccvi.— The incantations for stupefying the faculties of
adversaries ... ... ... ... ... 1137

Chapter cccvii. — The Mantras by which the three worlds can be
enchanted ... ... ... ... ... 1140

Chapter cccviii.— The Mantram sacred to the goddess of fortune

IU5

Chapter cccix. — The Mantra for worshipping the goddess Tvarita
who grants enjoyment of earthly comforts and salvation after daath.

H5°

Chapter CCCX. — The worship of the goddess Tvarita by which one
can enjoy all comforts in this life ... ... ... 1153

Chapter cccxi.— The rite of initiation with a mystic diagram 1159
Chapter cccxii.— The incantations by which one can acquire
looming ... ... ... ... ... 1163

Chapter cccxm.— The process of worshipping the god Vinayaka.

1168

Chapter cccxiv.— ' The Mantras for the goddess Tvarita ... 1173

Chapter cccxv.— The. spells which stupefy the intellectual facul-
ties of a man ... . . ••• ... ... ... 1176

Chapter cccxyi.— The Mantra for realizing one’s all desires aae 1179
Chapter cccxvii — The Prasada- Mantra of Shiva ••• eea n8o

Chapter cccxvm.— Ths same Mantra continued •#0 ••• II84

Chapter cccxvix.— The worship of the Goddess of Learning ... 1186
Chapter cccxx. — The mystic diagram of Sharvato* Bhadra Man-

dil®® • •• mi eaa im u88

Chapter cccxxi.— The ceremony of Astra- Yajnam ...1194

Chapter cccxxii.— The Mist of tho same Mantra ... ... 1196

Chapter CCCXXUL— The Mantra for curing disoassa and w ardi n g 08

deHh eaa ^ eaa sea .n ... 1199


Xviii


CONTENTS.


Chapter occur. — The Rudraksha seeds ... ... tiog

Chapter cccxxvi . — The worship of the goddess Uma ... 121a

Chapter cccxxvu. — The worship of the regents of the religious
vows ... ... ... ... ... isif

Chapter cccxxvm.-~*The Rules of Prosody ... ... 1219

Chapter cccxxix. — The metre of the Divine Gayatri ... 1220

Chapter cccxxx.— The metre Jagati ... ... ... 1221

Chapter cccxxxi.— The metre Utkiiti ... ... ... 1223

Chapter cccxxxii.— Vrittas or metres regulated by the number and
position of syllables in each quarter ... ... ... 1226

Chapter cccxxxm. — Ardha-Sama Vrittam or half* equal metres.

1228

Chapter cccxxxiv. — Yati or the pause in reciting a verse ... 1229
Chapter cccxxxv.— Miscellaneous metres ... ... 1233

Chapter cccxxxvi.— The science of pronounciation and laws of
euphony ... ... ... ... ... 1234

Chapters cccxxxvii. to cccxxxi*— R hetoric, or figure of speech

1236

Chapter cccxl. — T he four different styles ... ... 1249

Chapter cccxu.— ‘The different parts and members of the body.

(MS

Chapter cccxlii. — T he characters and lessons of the drama ... 1251

Chapter cccxliii. — A nuprasa or a alliteration ... ... 1237

Chapter cccxliv. — T he figure of speech which is related to the
sense ... ... ... ... ... 1260

Chapter cccxlv. — T he artistic arrangement of words in a sen-
tence * ... ... ... ... ... 1270

Chapter cccxlvi. — T he point of excellence in a Poem ... 1272

Chapter cccxlvii. — T he defects of a literary composition ... 1275

Chapter gccxlviii. — L exicon of mono-syllabic words ... 1279

Chapter cccxux.— Different kinds of dissolution ... ... 1283

Chapter ceci..— Spiritual dissolution ... ... ••• 1287

Chapter cccli. — P hysiology ... ... ... 1291

Chapter ccclii.— H ells and the passage of the soul described 1294
Chapter cccliii.— T he eight auxiliary factors of Yoga ... 1299

Chapter cccliv. — T he process of Pranayama, See,, ... 1304

Chapter ccclv. — D hyanam or meditation ... 1306

Chapter ccclvi.— D harana or the faculty of retaining in the mind.

* 1310

Chapter ccclvii.— S amadhi ... ... ... 1313

Chapter ccclviii.— T he knowledge of Brahma ... ... 13*7

Chapters ccclix k ccclx. — TH fe atiributes of Btifthena . v > 3 M
Chapter cccxi.— Non- Dualism ... ... ••• 1336

Chapter ccclxii. — T he Synopsis of the Gseta ... ••• 1333-

Chapter ccclxiii.— T hs summery el Vans GetU ... >339

Chapter ccclx iv. — An account si Agni Parana sat see 13 ^


CHAPTER CLXXVII.


i^aid the God of Fire Now I shall describe the
Vratas, which should be performed on the day of the second
phase of the moon, and which grant enjoyment in this life:
and salvation in the next ( i ). For a year, the twin gods
known as Ashvinis should be worshipped on the Pratipad-
Tithis. The worshipper should live on flower-diets on the*
occasions, whereby he would be wealthy in this life, and
ascend heaven after death. The Yama Vrata should be
first undertaken on the day of the. second phase of the moon'
in the light fort-night of the month of Karticka. The god
of death should be worshipped on the occasion, and the
worshipper should observe a fast on all the subsequent:
Dvityl Tithis for a year, whereby he would be exempted
from visiting the hell (a).

Noiv I shell describe the process of performing the Vrata,*
known as the Ashunya, Shayanam (the Vrata of unlonely*
bed). The Vrata in question, should be performed on the:
DvitylTithi in the month of Shravana, and the following:
prayer should be made. • "O thou bedecked with the sigo-
known as the Srivatsa, O thou the husband of the goddess
Lakshmi, O thou the abode of all beaut./ and prosperity,
may my housebold uddcb g^yes rise to opportunities for the
cultivation Of - ptety, wde»h end enjoyment, be never des-
troyed. May the three fires never consume me, nbr the
gods; and the Pltris break my connubial bliss, 'by bring
ing about a parting of my wife and myself, As thbunever
leavest the side 4f fhy goddess Lakshmi, O lord, may! ne v e r
feel the panes of Seoaration from my wife. As the goddesr
Lakriimi VWavfc%ihceB : * thvbed ywith. ner celestial pra-
sence' f eo miv t not be doomed.Othou destrier of the '


•f* ACtttftmANAM,


demon Madhu, to toss about io. - agony in a wifeless, lonely

.Tbe goddess LaKstuni and tbe god 'Vishnu should be
Worshipped for a year, and beds and fruits should be gifted
■Affray.- Each month, tne penitent (Vrati) should offer to the
; Moon-god (Vishnu manifest in the shape of the Moon), the
Arghya offerings duly dressed up and consecrated wjtb the
following Mantra.

“Obeisance to thee, Oh Moon, who dost illumine the
courtyard of heaven, and who bast come out as a resultant
of the churning of the ocean of milk, by means of the
primordial Hydra. 1 make ooeisance to thee, Oh Moon,
who art the younger brother of .the goddess Lakshmi, and
who dost enjoy the starry quarters of the heaven, as a lover
onji^yskis lady love," as well as with the Mantras respec-
tivolyrunning as " Gham, Dbam, Bham, Mam obeisance to
the gpddess Lakshmi” and " obeisance to the great-souled
Ybdipu who has incarnated in ten different shapes” ( 3 — it).

In the night, libations of clarified butter should be
offered into the sacrificial fire, and gifts of beds and bed*
dothes'shoald be made to the Brahmanas. Umbrellas,


shoes, lamps, rice-plates, vessels, attd pitchers full of water
s^ouhLtw given to them as .well. Theman who , performs
with his wife the present Vra^ehjbys all the good things
pf tbeworid and attauwaalvatton after death (ta— 13).

How I sbaU describe th^-^pj^oims of^performing the
Vrita, known as tbe Kanri Vridl^^ilkdi .ribcwtfo be 'practised
in : WJ» : fortnight in '^J^articka. For a '


year, the performer shojiiid||ait
his mod in the night, on * the
Tithfe whereby his complexion
invigorated (14)1 £

■ ■ Now L, shall . diset^rseen.the;
Vis
ol»j


day, and take
pteachDvitFh
M end health


AGtti Tumanam. ®79

The performer should bathe -for four consecutive days,
commencing from the day of the second phase of the moonli
increase, in the month of Pousha. -On the first day,' he should
bathe with grains of sundried rice on his head, With the
seeds of black sessamum on the second, with the drqg known
as the Vacha on the third, and with the drugs known as the
Sarvoushadhi on the fourth. The drugs kno#n as the
Muramanshi, Vacha, Kustha, Shailaya, the two sorts of
Rajani, Shati, Champaka and Mustha, constitute the group of
the Sarvoushadhis. The god Vishnu should be worshipped
by mentioning such names of his, as Krisna (the destroyer Of
sin) and Hrishikesha (lord of the senses), and flowers should
be offered at the feet, navel, lyes and the head of the deity
in succession. Offerings should be made to the moon-god,, by
mentioning his names such as Shashi, Chandra, Shashfinka^
tndu, etc. The penitent should take his meal in the night
before the Ytaoon goes down (i5— 19).

The man, who performs for a year and a half the Vrsta
held sacred to the god of wind, attains whatever be sets his
mind upon. This Vrata .was used t6 be preformed in yore
by kings, ladies and the gods (so).

• 4 or . fire HOar - ike describe the

r^ ^^ Of ^e t&ltd phase c^ the moon’s mine or increase,
wrffe’; J|<^,me'd»s^wfse; on theGoari Vrata,whichsbould bfc
! oc<ih^^"..iof\^a ; LblitaTritye . Ontbb
' day f tbe third pha*e of them(^p>io«rtase ; thegod Hari .
tbaprrfed CSatati im the mtM^h 1 |i# ptefohner


«0 AONI PURANAM.


■of the Vrata, should bathe- with the seeds of sessamum on his
head that day, and worship Hara, and his goddess Gouri
alone with golden fruits etc. The feet of the divine pair
should be worshipped by repeating the Mantra which runs as
“Obeisance to Paula.” The calves of the god (Hara)
should be worshipped by repeating the Mantra “Obeisance
to Shiva," while those of the goddess should be worshipped
by repeating the Mantra '■ Obeisance to the goddess Jaya."
At the knee-joints of the god, the worshipper should offer
flowers, by repeating the Mantra “obeisance to Rudra and
tshvara,” while the corresponding parts of the image of the
goddess, should be worshipped by repeating the Mantra
which runs as “ obeisance to the goddess Vijaya." Similarly
the waist of the goddess, should be worshipped by repeating;
the Mantra, which runs as “Obeisance to the goddess Isha, the
'■corresponding part of the image of Shiva being worshipped
by repeating the Mantra “obeisance to Shankara.” The chest
of the god should be worshipped by reciting the Mantra
running as “obeisance to the god ; who is the soul of the
•universe," while the breasU of the goddess should be wor-
shipped by repeating the Mantra “ obeisance to the goddess
Ishani." Similarly the throat ot the god Hara should be
worshipped by repeating the Mantra running as “ obeisance
to Devatma,” while the corresponding part of the goddess
should be worshipped by repeating the Mantra which runs
as “ obeisance to Hradini.” The two hands of the god
. should be worshiped by . repeating the Mantra, running as
“obseiance to Mahadeva," while those of the goddess should


be.worshipped with the Mantra “obeisance to AnanU.”


Similarly the hands of the imaged Shivis, should be wor-
shipped by repeating the Mantra whicb ruhf as “ obeisance
to Mahadeva,” while the corresponding parts|.^ the images

bl the b* r^if ‘Ihe Mantra '

......... -

f.m


“obeisance to ' the wife

; diibb«wit' -I $


#ife ofi«; godKalabala (the


AcmroiUNAM. .. • 6«r

(lie god and the goddess, should be worshipped by rec&lhg
the Mantras, which respectively run as “ obeisance to the
goddess of good fortune” (Soubhagya), an d“ obeisance
to the god MahesKa.” The lower lips of the linages of the
divine pair, should be worshipped by repeating the Mantras,
tunning as “ obeisance to the goddess Who dwells amidst - die
hunches of juicy Ashoka flowers”, an^ “ obeisance to Ishvara.”
Similarly the faces of the divine Images, should be worshipped
by reciting the Mantras respectively running as “obeisance
to the wife of the fouirfaced deity,” and “ obeisance to the
god Sthanu.” Likewise the, noses of the imaged deities,
should be Worshipped by repeating the Mantras, respectively
running as “ obeisance to the god "who » manifest as half
man and half jroman ” and “ Obeisance to the goddess Amfc
tanga.” Similarly the eyebrows of the divine-pair, should
be worshipped by repeating the Mantras, respectively running
as " obeisance to the dreadful god, (Ugra)/* in the rase of",
the god, and “ obeisance to the goddess Lalka,” in the case of
the goddess. Similarly the palate of the imaged ga& should
he worshipped by repeating the Mantra which runs as u obei-
sance to the god Sarva,” while; the corresponding part of the
goddess, should be worshipped, by reciting the one, running as
“ obeisance to the goddess VSsanti.” Similarly the hairs of
the divine pair, should be worshipped by repeating the
Mantras, respectively pinning as “ obeisance to thO,goddess
who is the wife of Shrikanthanatha,” and “obeisahee to the
god Shitikantba,”the beadno£ the images beingrespectively
worshipped with tbe Mantras such as “ obeisance to tile
fierce and dreadful god (Bhimogra),” and.'* obeisance to the :
goddess who i» the paragon of beauty (Surupini) *' (a—'ia).

First, the eigfat goddesses, such as Soubhagya etc. and
after them, the pair UmaMaheshvara, should be ; worshipped -
with Jasmine, J Ashoka, lotus, Kumod, Tagara, Malat!,
Kadamva, Karavira, Yana, and Sindbuvara flowers, as well
as with fresh saffrons, in the different months of the year,
do


63x ACNI PURANAkt.' .

Clarified butter, cleansed saffron, jivaka, Taruraj, sugarcane
. and Shindhuvara should be placed before the group of die
eight goddesses of energy (Soubhagya etc.) stated above, in
the month of Chaitcp. The worshipper should live on
Shringodaka, and sleep before the images of the divine pair.
He' should bathe in the morning, and worship a married Brab-
mana couple. The eight articles enumerated above, should
be made over to a Brahmana, by repeating the Mantra which
runs as “ Be pleased with me, oh thou Lalita ” (13—16).

The leaves of Bel fruit, cowdung, Mandara, washings of
Shringai and the Wades of Kusha grass, curd, thickened
milk, and clarified butter mixed with water, should be
given in the month of Karricka, the diet of the penitent
being composed of clarified butter, the urine of a cow, black
sessarnum, and the composition known as the Pancbagavya,
in turn. Each of the eight goddesses of energy, should be
addressed as "Be pleased, oh thou Lalita; be pleased, oh
thou VijayR; be pleased, oh thou BhadrR; be pleased, oh
thou BhavRiii ; be pleased, oh thou KumudR ; be pleased,
oh thou ShivR ; be pleased, oh thou VSsudevi ; be pleased,
oh thou Gouri ; be pleased, oh thou MangalR, and be pleased
oh thou Sati," at the rime of making the gifts in the months
of Chaitra and others. At -thecloqe of the Vrata, fruits, a
holy thread, a bed, a quantity darified butter, as well as a
golden bull and a cow, and the golden images of UmR and
Maheshvara should be given to i Brahmana. The preceptor,
ias well as a Brahman husband snd a wife, should be propi-
tiated with presents of clothes, etc, w h ere b y the penitent
(Vrati) would enjoy all the comforts ofthi* worldand attain
salvation in the next (iy— so).

A man attain i good luck, health, beauty and hmgivity, by
performing the Vratam, known as the Stn^agjs Sbayanam,
which should - be performed on the day of thethird phase of
toe moon's inorease. The Vratam :sbot 4 l^||Meitakea cm
the da; of the third pteRjof the moon's iOC&Me, either in


ACNI PURANAM. ' 68 J

the months of Bhadra (Nabhasya), Vaishaka, or Mliga-
shirsha, whereon the goddess should be worshippedwith the
Mantra, running as " obeisance to Lalita.” Each fortnight,
the goddess should he worshipped an the day stated above,
and; a married Brahmana couple should be feasted and
propitiated with presents at its close. Twentyfour Brahmana*
should be sumptuously feasted on the occasion, whereby the
performer of the Vrata would enjoy all the - good things of
the world, and attain salvation after death (21 — 23).

Now I 'shall describe another way of performing the
above said luck-bringing (SoubhSgya) Vrata. The performer
should undertake the Vratam on the day of the! third phase
of the moon’s increase in the beginning of 1 the month of
Phalguna, and forego all salted food. Beds and rooms with
furniture, should be given to a Brahmana at its close,
and a married Brahmana couple should be feasted with
sumptuous repasts, and the performer should address the
goddess as “ Be propitiated, oh Bhav&ni ” (24—25).

Another way of performing the present Vrata, by
which the performer will be translated to the region of
Gouri, is as follows The Vratam should be practised on
the day of the third phase of the moon’s increase, either
in the months of Magh, Bhadra, or Vaishakha. The Vrata,
known as the Dainanaka-Trityl, is characterised by the
worship being conducted by means of a Damanaka plant.
The Vrata, known 04 the Atraa Trityi, should be under*
taken on the day of thy |bi|d phase of the moon’s increase
in the month 4 l>li 8 gb%r:‘ / *to goddesses, such as Gouri,
Kali, Um&, Bhadra, DurgjS, Kinti, Sarasvati, Vaishnavi,
Laksbmi, Prakriti, Shiyk and NSrayani, should be wor-
shipped from the aboves&id day fin the month of
M&gha, whereby the worshipper would be translated to
heaven ■ -


CHAPTER CLXXJX.


P>AID THE God OF Fire:— Now 1 shall describe the
process of performing the Vratas, which should be practised
on days of the fourth phase of the moon's increase (Chaturthi
Tithis), in the different months of the year, and which paint
enjoyment in this life and safcatidh in the next. On
sadi k day in the month of Msgba, the penitent (Vrati)
ahonld observe a fast and worship the god Gana. On thd
day following (Panchami), he should offer boiled rice mixed
with the seeds of aessamum orientate to the fed, whereby
he would live in felicity.'Theprincipal Mantra which
should be used in connection With the worship is " Gam
Svaha,” while all other acts^of psychic assignment {Nyasa) .
etc, shpuld be performed with^the "Gam” Mantra. Tbf.god-
should be invoked as " come, oti Ulka," while he sbOOM
be bid adieu, by repeating the Mantra which runs as "Depart,
oh thou Olka." The worship should be conducted by menes
of flowers and sweet-meats knowo as the Modalcas. The
Gyatri Mantra, sacred to the god and to be used in con-
nection with the Vrata under discussion, runs as- follows :^
" Om let us know the god Maholka, do we meditate upon'
his divine self, and may he lead us to do the same" (1—3).

- The man, Who performs the present Vrata, on the day
of the fourth phase of the moon's increase in the month
of Bbadra, goes to the region presided over by the god
Shiva. A man attains everything by wesshipping the god
Gana on such a Chaturthi TltbL' Stub X Tlthi, occurring
in the month of Phalguna, is called th<t.^i^inl (u».
obstructed). A man, by w«^ppmg Uie jpid Gana, on '
the fottrtlutty of the forif l xwath of Chaitra, becomes


CHAFFER CLXXX.


Daid the God op Fire Now I shall describe the
process of performing the Vrata, known as the Panchami
Vrata, which grants health, residence in. paradise, and
salvation. The serpents, such as VSsuki (the primordial
Hydra), Takshaka, Kalya, Maui, Bhadraka, Airivata, Dhrita-
rlshtra, Karkotaka, and Dhansnjaya should be worshipped
on the day of the fifth phase of the moon's increase, either
fa the. months of Shravana (Nabhas), Bhadra (Nabhasya)
Ashyina, or Karticka. These, when duly worshipped, grant
to their votaries, the boons of long life, erudition, fame,
and prosperity (i—a).


CHAPTER CLXXXt.


, Oaid the God of Fire Now I shall describe the
process of performing the Vrata, known as the Sliasthi
Vrata, and which should be practised in the months of
Karticka and others. The psnitent should live on fruits
on the day of the Vrata, land' perform it by offering Arghas
and other oblations, whereby be would attain salvation (i).

The Vrata, known as the Skanda Shasthi, should be per*
formed in honour of the Marshal of the heavens, on the
day of the sixth phase of the moon's increase in the month
of Bhadra. The Vrata, known as the Krishna Shasthi,
should be first undertaken on such a Tithi, occurring in the
month of MSgha. The penitent should observe a fait for


ACNI URANAM.


68 *

the whole of that day, and abstain from taking anything
on sudi Tithis throughout the year. The effect of practising
such a vow, is salvation after a happy and prosperous
career on earth (a).


CHAPTER CLXXXtl.


Daid THE GOD or fire :—Now I shall narrate the
process of performing a Saptami Vrata (Vrata practised on
the day of the seventh phase of the moon’s wane or increase),
which grants to all, enjoyment in this life and salvation in
the next. Grief can never touch a man, who worships the sun-
god with white lotus flowers on such a day, in the month of
Magha ; the result of such a worship on an identical Tithi in
the month of Bhadra, being the attainment of all wished
for objects. The man, who observes a fast and worships
the sungod on such a Tithi in the month of Pousha, becomes
purged of all sins. The fulfilment of all heartfelt desires
follows in the train of such a worship, held on the day of the
seventh phase of the moon’s wane, in the month of Magha.
Such a worship, performed on the day of the seventh phase
of the moon’s increase in the month of Phalguna,. is known
as the Nanda, and fills the votary with eternal felicity. A
man by worshipping the sungod on such a Tithi in the month
Of Magha, conquers all his enemies ; whereas a suppliant for
the birth of a child, should practise the Vrata on the same
day (i — 4).


chapter clxxxiii.


Said the GOD op FIRE Now I shall discourse oft
the process of perforating the Ashtami V rat as (vows
practised on the day of die eighth phase of the moon's wane
or increase), of which the one usually performed on such a
Tithi as the above, marked by the. asterism Rohini, beads
the list in respect of merit. Since, in the month of
Bhadra, Krishna was bom on the atiddight of such a Tithi,
marked by the asterism Rohini, the Tithi is known as the
Jyanti (victorious) Ashtami. By observing a fast on such
a Tithi in the month of Bhadra, a man becomes absolved
of all impieties, accumulated in the course of his seven
successive rebirths. The man, who fasts and worships
the god Krishna, on such a Tithi in the month of Bhadra^
marked by the asterism Rohini, attains salvation at the close
of a happy and prosperous career on earth. The worship
should be conducted by addressing Krishna and his relations
as follows “ I invoke the presence of Krishna as well as
that of Valahhadta, Devaki, Vasudeva, Jashoda, and of the
cows he used to take to the pasturage. I worship them nil
and make them obeisance. Obeisance to Krishna — the coos*
munion of the human soul wifh the eternal spirit, — to Krishna
the life and soul of isucfa a communion, and to Krishna who
Is the infinite Real, iperged in by die soul in the above wM
act. 1 make Ob c isjthce and obeisance to Govinda — the pro*
tector or the altf|iervading - spirit of the universe, who has
originally come into being, through an act of such blending
of the finite, and the infinite soul (Yogadisainbbava). Accept
these flowersand these perfumes' thou relishest and art load
of, and grant me all boons, oh.thou who, art worshipped by
the gods. I fumigate tbee with the fumes of these burning
incense-stkks, accept them, oh Hari, and. so ordain that


688 AGNITOAMA#.

people may bum incense before me, in awe and humility
[some editions read v so ordairi,, oh Hart, that people may
strew flowers in my path" (Pushpadhyam)}: Accept these
flames of lighted lamps, waived before thee by my humble
self, and lift me up towards fuller light and higher self, oh
thou light of light— Oh thou who shinest through all flames
and flashes. Obeisance to the lord whose embodiment is the
universe. I am a suppliant at Hie feet of the God, who evolves
himself out through the successive evolutions of the universe.
I make obeisance to Govinda (the protector of the universe),
and to the god manifest as absolute piety. Obeisance to the
lord of virtues and to the god who presides over all virtues.
Lie down (in this bed) who thou Govinda, who makest.thyself
manifest through all virtues. I make obeisance to the all, the
nil-pervading, and the all-ccfntrolliog deity. 1 offer this holy
thread unto the god Govinda. Accept this Argha offering.
Oh thou manifest as the mowagod and art accompanied by thy
queen Rohini. Accept .these Argha offerings, oh Moon, who
hast come into being through the churning of the ocean, and
hast sprung from the eyes of the holy sage Atri” ( 1—14).

The moongod, together with his wife Rohini, should be
worshipped on the sacrificial sand-cushion* Similarly Devaki,
V&sudeva, JashodS, Nanda and Vahtbhadra, should be wor*
shipped thereon; and jets of clarified butter and mollassea
should be let flow on the ground in the mid-night. Clothes,
gold, etc., should be given to the Brahmanas who should
be sumptuously feasted. The man, who. performs this
Jantnashtami Vrata (the celebration of .de birth day of
Krishna), becomes the father of many a good sons and goes
to the region of Vishnu. Each year; the Vrata should be
repeated with a view to beget children or to get rid of Ml
dangers by praying as follows. " Bless me with offsprings,
wealth, longevity, and health, 0 lord, ' d^^ s|ay nqr piety,
possessionaad fortune augment and iuerenssf^May I ascend
heaven a rid attain salvationhftef death " (15-^18),


CHAPTER CLXXXlV.


£>aid the God of Fire Since the god Brahma wor-
shipped the Matris on such a day, the eight Matris should
be worshipped on the day of the eighth phase of .the moon’s
wane in the month of Chaitra. By worshipping Krishna
on such a day in the month of Chaitra, a man becomes
the master of fabulous wealth (i).

Now I shall describe the process of performing the Vrata,
known as the Krisbna-Ashtami, which should be performed
on such a day in the month of Magha. In a pure spirit,
the penitent should fast in the night, by simply taking a
dose of the cow’s urine, sleep on the bare floor, and ' Wor-
ship the god Shankara. On such a day as stated above,
the penitent should worship the god Shambhu, in the
month of Pousha, by taking clarified butter; while he
should worship the god Mahesbvara in the month of Magha,
by living on a diet composed of thickened milk, on the day
of observance of the vow. Similarly the penitent should eat
the seeds of sessamum orientate on the day of the eighth
phase of the moon in the month of Phalguna, and worship
the god Mahadeva. The diet of the penitenton such a day in
the month of Chaitra, should consist Of barley, the manifesta-
tion of the god Hara to .be worshipped on the occasion, being
Sthanu. Similarly the penitept should worship the Shiva
manifestation of^egod,0n such a Tithi in the month
of Vatsh&ka, by taking only a handful of the washings of
Kusha grass. The manifestation of Hara to be worshipped
on such an occasion in the month of Jaistha is Pashupati,and
the penitent should drink only the washings of Shringa,
that day. In the month pf Ashida, the penitent shall
eat the' diing of a ecitv on a similar occasion, and-wor-
thip the Ugra manifestation of the deity, Sarva being the

• 1 y..f- vr- ?$ ;.u


690 AGNl PURAMAM<

deity to be worshipped on the day of thevow {Vrata) in tbe
month of Shravana, the diet of the observer consisting only
of Arka. Similarly the Vrati shall worship the Tramvaka
manifestation of the god, in the moath of Bhadra, eating
only the leaves of a Bet tree' on> the n%ht of observance
of the vow. The Vrati shall worship the. Isha mani-
festation of the god Hara, in'the month of Ashvina, eating
rice on the occasion of the Vrata, and the Rudra mani-
festation in the month of K&rticka, taking nothing else
than curd on such an occasion.' The Homa ceremony should
be performed at the close of the year, and the god should be
worshipped in tbe mystic diagram (Mandala), {where' by the
Vrata would be completed. Gifts of cows, clothes, and gold
should be made to the preceptor and the Brahmanas. A
man,' by doing as above indicated and making the necessary
prayer in connection therewith,' enjoys all the pleasures of
life and attains salvation after death. Tbe man who breaks


bis fast in the night on {he ’Occasion of all the Ashtami Tithis
in a year, and makes gifts of cows to Brahmanas at the
close of the Vrata; goes to the region of Indra (a— 8).

Now I shall describe the process of performing the
Sargati Vrata, which >houId3?e practised pa; tire occasion
©fan Ashtami TyHIu, on'- a- Wednesday ..either in

tue darker it 4b^tsight of a month. . ■■ The . Vrati

. : that

' jn the

kftow in

pre*


«f ^4*,>*0uld be
*■

fed


on mango-
tire blades
be wor-
aad
ticc mixed


AGN1 PUS A NAM.


* 9 '

with Karkati, after having heard from the preceptor the
.history of the origin of the Vrata, which is as follows:—
“Once on a time, there lived a Brahmana whose name was
Dhira. Dhira had a wife named RarrrbhS, a son named
Koushika, a 'daughter named Vijayi, and a bull named
Dhanada. Koushika, in the company of other cowherds,
used to take the bull to the pasturage every day. One day
while he was bathing in the Ganges, thieves came and
took away the bullock. On coming out of the water,

Koushika did not find the animal, and so he and his
sister Vtjayi. went on and on in its quest, until they
came unto a lake where they found the damsels
of heaven, diving and plunging in water in frolics
and sports. Whereupon, Koushika who was hungry and
fatigued with a long journey, asked the damsels for
*»«*, and they replied that as he was a guest, he would
hm food on his having performed the Vrata. Koushika
practised the Vrata as directed, regained the bull through
. its merit, nnd did ample justice to the victuals spread before
hint. Then Koushika and his sister VijayS went to Dhira
with the bull. Dhira gave Vijayi in marriage with the god of
death and died. Koushika in turn became the king of
Ajrodhya, through tbe merit of practising the Vrata in
question. Now it so happened, that Dhira and his wife
were doomed to suffer the torments of hell, on account of their
misdeeds in lile, and so^ wept for many a

sad ae4 discpnsoWie"‘ei^ t 'M|^orea 'her lord with many
a teats and we^in^ messes to liberate her sire from that
doleful r$g|9tii aad beholdher astonishment to find him, the
next dayv oht f hunting excursion. Vijaya asked him

. WherOupqn . the 'lord of . death
Dhira had jieeU fet at liberty from .
thft eobfines of h<i, jfti'^qugh ' the/ i^erit, of two Vratas,


ACN1 PURANAM.


691

of Koushika were translated to- heaven, and Vijayl in her
turn, .gladly undertook to practise the Vrata as well,- which
grants enjoyment of creature-comforts and an elevated
existence after death ” (9—20).

The man, who in the month of Ghaitra, drinks the wash-
ings of eight tender shoots of an Ashoka tree, on the day
of the eighth phase of the moon’s increase, marked by. the
asterism Punarvasu, becomes exempted from all griefs. Grief
can never approach nor affect a person, who performs the
present Vrata which should be practised by reciting the
following prayer — “ I drink the washings of thy tender
shoots, oh thou Ashoka tree— the fond offspring of glad spring-
tide, — the grantor of all boons. I, whose heart is rifling
with grief and anguish, drink the washings of thy spring-
born tender shoots. Make me free from grief for ever.” The
man, who worships the Matrikas on the day of the eighth
phase of the moon's increjase, in the month of Chaitra,
conquers all his enemies without any effort (21—23).


CHAPTER CLXXXV.


Said theGoij of Fire:— Now l shah describe the
iprocess of performing the Vratas, which should be practised
on days ottke ninth phase of the moon’s yrane or increase^
arid whk^lgfant enjdyment of crea|nre*comforts in this


nfeand


the next. The Vrtta, known as the


Gouri kav^ lii^d be practised on the d^ of ’the' ninth


’ v, ‘


^hmrease in the .41


m


i4ofAshvi»a,
known
be practised '

it* ■*-: ••


AON! PURANAM. <HJ$

on the same day as the above, marked by the presence
of the sun in the asterism Mula at the sign of the
Virgo, the practiser of the Vrata eating nothing else than
cakes that day. Of all the Navami Vratas, the greatest
b that which is known as the AghArdana (sin-expiating)
Navami. The goddess Nava Durga ( the image being
installed in a Mandapa or an Ekagriha explained before),
should be worshipped as possessed of eight, ten or
sixteen hands/ as well as the images of Anjana and
Damaru. Similarly the different manifestations of the
goddess, such as RudrAchandA, Prachanda, CliandogrA,
ChandanayikA, Chanda, and ChandAvati should be succes-
sively worshipped, the goddesses such as Ugrachandl,
Durgi, and Mahishamardini, having been worshipped in
course thereof. The Mantra with which the worship should
be conducted, runs as “ O/n obeisance to Durga and Durga,
who b the protectress oi the universe,” and consists of the
ten letters $$ tpmfT • The Mantras such as

“ Am Hring” should be used as well, followed by such terms
of obeisance, as Nainas, Syadha, Vashat, etc. ThTfc rite of
Anganyasa should be performed in the different parts of the
body, commencing from the tips of fingers. The man who
performs this rite of mysterious Nyasa, overcomes all impedi-
ments in life, and cannot be bound down by any -person. The
goddess should be worshipped, as carrying in her left hands
a skull, a Khetaka, a bell, a mirror, a -bow, a banner, a small
drum, and a Pasha, while %<||ger of one of \her left hands
should be contemplated as hehHb a pointing attitude. The
arms and weapons of the goddess, such as a spear, a dub,
a trident, a thunder-bolt, a sword, a kuntakam, a con c h-she l l,
a disens, ' and a rod rflould be worshipped ai well. The
Mantra running as “O kali, Kali, O thou goddepp of thunder
I make obeisance to the goddess carrying an ironed,” sho old
be repeate*) over the inimfd tp be killed' with thesword
Jets ofblood, gnshing out o ft he decapitated animal, as w$ll

Aabtfte Sod>ty. Caknm


694


■ MSNl PURANAM.

as its flesh, should be dedicated to Putaal at the south-
west, to the monstress of sin at the north-west, to the
demoness Charaki at the north-east, and to Vidarika at the
south-east, the flesh known as the Mahamansha being dedi-
cated to the fire-god. The king should bathe in front of
the image of the goddess, and cut in two the image of his
enemy, made of rice-paste. Offerings should be made to
Skandha and Vishika, and the goddesses such as Br&hmi etc.
should be worshipped in the dead of night, by repeating
the Mantra which runs as "obeisance to Jayanti (the goddess
of victory), Mangali (the goddess of bliss), Klli (the pre-
siding deity of the eternal time). Bhadrak&li, Kapftlini (the
goddess who carries a human skull), Durgft (the goddess
wno succors the distressed), Shiv! (the goddess of bljss),
Kshami (the goddess of forbearance), Dh&tri (the nune
of the universe), Svftha and Svadhl. The image of the
goddess should be bathed in the composition known as
the Panchamrita, and worshipped with oblations and offer-
ings. The man, who carries the image of Ibe goddess in a
car (performs the car-festival unto the goddess), offers
animal sacrifice, or plants a banner on the top of her temple,
enjoys all bliss ft— 15).


CHAPTER CLXXXVI.


i&AiD THE God •» . f lWt blejr. 'l shall dtscrfocthe
process 9 f performing the Dashami Viafapj, jrhjcb should be

(Vipti) should take s siagle rpeal on .jpg. sopite mid days.
Gifts ofteneowssheald beattleat the close ' of the Vrata,


ACNI PURANAM. 6$$

and remunerations in gold should be given to the Brah-
manas ; whereby the practis er would become their chief (i).


CHAPTER CLXXXVlI.


Daid the God op Fire .-—Now I shall describe the

/

process of practising the Vratas, which should be observed
on days of the eleventh phase of the moon’s increase of
wane, and which grant enjoyment of good things in life ana
salvation in the next. The observer of the vow should
abstain from taking animal diet and holding sexual inter*
course with women,and fast on such days both in the dark
and the light fortnight of the month. The god Hari should
be deemed as present in the blending of a Dvldashi and an
Ekfidashi Tithi. A man, by fasting on the occasion of
such a blending' and breaking his fast on the day of
Troyadashi, attains the merit of performing a hundred .horse*
killing sacrifices. Similarly a man by lasting on a day in
which the Ekldashi exists for a Kail only after which the
Dvadashi sets in, atid taking his meals on the day following,
acquires die same merits* in the preceding case. A man
must not fast on A day otlhdileh the mourn enters her twelfth
from her eleventh pbasc, such a lasting being held as pav-
ing One's way ' tar bell. A man having fasted oa the day
of the eleventh phase ofthe moon’s wane or increase, shanld


take his meats on the day following, by racking the following
prayer. r -

“I break my fast 1 , oh then lotus-eyed god, ob thou who


knowestno modifications, bs thou myhe)p.” AnJSUdasbi
in a light fortnight and maakid by thoaotorism


1*9$ . AGNI URANAM.

Pushyl, js known as the PapanSshiui (Sin-destroying). By
observing a fast on such a Tithi, a man becomes absolved
of all sins* An Ek&dashi or a DvSdashi marked by the
asterism Shravanl is known as 0 Vijaya Tithi, and grants
victory to the god's elect. Such an Ekadashi , occurring
in the month of Ph&lguna and marked by the asterism
Pushy 3 , is also known as a Vijaya Tithi, and is held as
possessed of millions and millions of virtues. A man, by
worshipping the god Vishnu on the day of the eleventh
phase of the moon’s wane or increase, becomes wealthy,
begets children, and is graced with a residence in the region
of Vishnu after death. Such a worship benefits a man in
innumerable ways (i — 9 ).


-: 0 :-


CHAPTER CLXXXVIil.


DaIO THE GOD OF FIRE : — Now I shall, describe the
process of performing the Vratas, which should be performed
on days of the twelfth phase of the moon’s increase or
wane (Dvadashi Vrata), and which enable a man to enjoy
the good tilings of the world and to attain salvation after
'death. The observer of the vow should either fast on the
day of its observance, or take a single, meal in the course of,
that day and night, or live on food obtained by begging*. In
the form known as the Madana Dpftdashi, the observer of
the now should worship the god Hari and tbe god of love, on
the day of the twelfth phase of the moon’s increase in the
mootb of Chaitra, the effect of such aaolpfllf vance being the
ncanuttien of all wished4?r nbjectf in tms jife and salvation


ACM PURANAM.

The form of the Vrata, known as the Bhima Dvadashi,
Should be practised on such a Tithi as the above, coming on
in the month of MSgha. The god NSrayana should be wor-
shipped on the occasion, by repeating' the Mantra which runs
as “Obeisance to N&r£yana,” whereby he Would be the happy
possessor of all earthly possessions; The form of the vow
known as the Govinda Dvadashi, should be practised on a
similar Tithi in the month of PhSlguna, while the form
known as the Vishoka Dvadashi should be practised in the
month of Ashvina, on the day of the twelfth phase of
the moon’s increase, wherein the god Hari • should be
worshipped. The man, who worships Krishna on such a
Tithi as the above in the month of Mtgha, and makes gifts of
salt to the Brahmanas, acquires the nerit of making gift*
of articles of all taste. In the form known as the 'Govatsa
Dvldashi, calves should be worshipped. The day of die
twelfth phase of the moon’s wane, coming on after the lapse
of the month of Chaitra, is known as the Tila DvSdashi
(Dvadashi of the sessamum oricntale). The observer of
the vow, should bathe with the seeds of sessamum orlentale
on his head, the Homa ceremony should be performed with
the same article, offerings composed of sessamum, should
be made to the god, libations of water containing , seeds of
sessamum orientate should be offered to the gods and the
Pitris, while lighted lamps, containing oil pressed out from
the sessamum seeds, ishotjrid be waived before the divine
image. Gifts of' sessamum/ Should be made to the Brah-
manas, and the observer of the vow will acquire the faH
merit thereof, by performing the Homa ceremony, while
fasting. The Mantra with which the worship should be
conducted runs as “ Om obeisance to the god who is the
son of V#sudeva.” The man who practises this vow of
111 Dvadashi, ascends heaven with the souls of all his friends
and relations (4-^fo).

The form known as the Manoratha Dvidashi, s hou ld be

«t


$9$ ACN1 URAltAM.

observed on the day of the twelfth phase of the moon's
increase in the month of Ph&lguna. The man, who worships
the god Vishnu, addressing him by such names of his
as " Keshava,” etc., on each , Dv&dashi throughout the year,
practises the Vrata known as the Nlma (name) DvSdashi.
The performer of such a Vrata, ascends heaven after death,
and is exempted from visiting the hell. The performer of
the Vrata, known as the Sumati Dv&dashi (the Dv&dashi
Vrata of good resolution) should worship the god Vishnu,
on the day of the twelfth phase of the moon's increase in
the month of Ph&lguna. The form known as the Ananta
Dv&dashi should be performed on such a Tithi as the above,
occurring in the month of Bh 9 dra. The performer of the
Vrata, known as the Tila Dv&dashi, should worship Krishna
on the Dv&dashi Tithi in the month of M 3 gha, marked by
the asterism Ashlesha or Mulft and perform the Homa cere-
mony by casting libations of clarified butter mixed with
sessamum orientate into the sacrificial fire, and by repeating
the Mantra which runs as “ obeisance to Krishna." The per-
former of the Sugati Dv&dashi (Vrata which secures a good
place^, in the next world) should first undertake the Vrata
on the day of the twelfth phase of the moon's increase, in
the month of Ph&lguna, and worship Krishna on all the
subsequent Dvftdashis of the year, by repeating the Mantra
running as 11 0 Krishna, O Krishna, I make obeisance to
thee,” while the Vrata known as the Sampr&pti Dv&dasbi
should be practised on such a Tithi as the above, coming on
la the month of Pousba (11—14).


CHAPTER CLXXXIX*


Daid THE God of Fire:— Now 1 shall describe the
process of. performing the Shift vaiia Dvftdashi Vrata, which
..should be performed on the day of the twelfth phase of the
moon’s increase in the month of Bh&dra. ■ By observing a
fast on the occasion of such a Dvftdashi, marked by the
asterism Shrftvana, a man performs the greatest of all the
Vratas. The full merit of the observance of such a Vrata,
would be derived, by bathing at the confluence of running
streams. By making gifts on the occasion of the conjunc-
tion of the Mercury and the asterism Shrftvana, a man ac-
quires the greatest merit that can be derived from gifts.
Though otherwise forbidden, a man should observe a fast
on the occasion of tjie Shravanft Dvftdashi, and take his
meals on the morrow {Trayodashi), . by reading the follow,
ing prayer. “ I worship thy golden image, O thou Dwarf
manifestation of Vishnu, in this pitcherful of water. I
shall take my meals on the next day and worship the
Dwarf manifestation of Vishnu, who weilds ft discus and a
conchshell in his hands, in this pitcherful of water,
covered over with a pair of white clothes, beside which
an umbrella and a pair of shoes have been offered to
thee. I wadi with pure, and holy water as well as with
the- washings of. Panchamrita, the image of Vishnu whe
carries a stick and ah &&&$&' Om obeisance and obei
since to VSraaria. I 'offer tils Argha to thee, oh thou god of
the gods, ind who art worshipped by all persons, worthy of
such Argha offerings. Grant me creature-comforts in abun-
dance and salvation. Bless me with sons, may-fame spread
over the world, 'in# brake me the master of allsortsof
wealth. I offer ttBr perfume with obeisance to the Dwarf
m a ntf citati on of VWhnn.” The Home ceremony ahonld be


700


ACMt fURANAM.

performed with the above said Mantra.. The head of die
Image of Kan, should be worshipped by repeating the
Mantra which runs as " Om obeisance to VAsudeva.”
Similarly the face of the god, should be worshipped with the
Mantra “Oin obeisance to Shridhara ” (the receptacle of all
beauty or prosperity). Likewise the throat of the divine
image, should be worshipped with the Mantra, running as
« Om obeisance to Krishna/’ In the same manner, the breast
and the hands of the imaged deity, should be worshipped by
repeating the Mantras, respectively running as “ Om obei-
sance to Shripati (the husband of the goddess Lakshmi) and
"Om obeisance to SarvastradhSri (the weilder of all arms)/'
Similarly the umbilical region of the image as well as its
.waist, should be worshipped by repeating the Mantras,
respectively running as "Obeisance to the all-pervading
deity" (Vyapaka) and " Obeisance to the dwarf manifestation
of Vishnu." Likewise the pubic region and the groins of the
imaged deity, should be respectively worshipped by repeating
the Mantras, running as " Obeisance to the progenitor of
the universe," flowers being offered at its feet with the
Mantra of " Om obeisance to the lord of aU" (i — 10).

Articles fried in clarified butter, as well as pitchers, full of
card, should be offered to the deity. A vigil should be kept
up in the night, and the performer of the Vrata should bathe
at a confluence of the rivers, on the day following. The
god should be worshipped with flowers and perfumes, and
the observer of the vow should recite the following prayer,
;by offering a handful of flowers to the deity- “I make
obeisance to thee, oh thou protector of the universe
(Govinda), who art but another manifestation of the Mercury
and the asterism Shravani in c o nducti o n- Destroy all my
sins, and bless me with the enjoyment of ay sorts of comforts.
Be phased, with me, .oh; Janardana»Atpi^^j|nyn^it of my
essence. The dwarf-m|nife»|atio» of V^miii is the coaa-
sellor and the giver of dt Articles of gift. It is the dwarf


46NI JOKAIUK. 7*f

manifestation of Vishnu, that takes gilts St my bands) M|
■ulses me the happy possessor of all things. Again and
again I make obeisance to him.” The Brahmanas should be
feasted and remunerations should be given to them, where-
upon the observer of the vow would break his fast (i i— 15).


CHAPTER CXC.


Said the god of fire : — Now I shall describe the
process of performing the Akhanda DvSdashi Vratam (VratSas
which is complementary to all other Vratas). The Vratam in
question, should be practised on the day of the twelfth phase
of the moon’s increase in the month of MSgha. The
observer of the vow, should fast that day, taking nothing else
than the composition known as the Panchagavya and bathing
in the same substance, and worship the god Vishnu. A
vessel-full of barley and Vrihi seeds, should be made over to a
Brahmana, and the following prayer should be read. *' Make
complete, Oh god, whatever has been done defective and
incomplete by me, in the course of my seven previous re-
births. As thou run nest through and formest the main stay
of this eptire universe, thus linking the phenomenal worlds
to one another, so graciously condescend to complete and
string together the isolated acts of piety (Vratas), lying
scattered oyer my previous existences ( 1— — 4.).

Thus each month, the Vratam should be repeated till the
lapse' of four months from the day of its first observance^
and a vessel-full of powdered barley should be given to a Brah-
man in the month of Cbaitra. The vow should be broken hi
the montb of Karticka, if commenced in the month of Shrft-
eiaaa. Such « Vratam, when duly fulfilled, makes goad ib*


JO$ AGNI PURAttAM.

’ s'

dffidency made in practising Vratas in the seven p cevioer
existences of a man, and confers longevity, health, good lock
and a kingdom on the performer (5—6).


CHAPTER CXCI.


Daio the God op Fire:— Now I shall discourse on
.the process of performing the Trayodashi Vratas. Pint I
shall narrate the history of the Ananga Trayodashi. The
Vrata was ‘first practised by the god of love, on the day of
the thirteenth phase of the moon’s increase, in the month of
Magha, by worshipping the god Hara. ‘Che Vrati should take
honey on the day of the observance, worship the god Hara,
and perform the essential Homa ceremony, by casting liba-
tions of clarified butter mixed with sessamum and sun-dried
rice into the sacrificial fire (1—2).

Thus by propitiating the god Yogeshvara with a Homa, 00
such aTithi in the month of Pousha, as well as hy worshipping
the god Maheshvara in the month of Magha after having
oaten no other thing than MoukUka, the penitent would
ascend heaven after death. Similarly a Vrati should take water
simply and worship the god Kikola on such a Tithi hi tile
month of PkMguna, and live on camphor and worship the
god Maheshvara on a similar Tithi in the month of Chafers,
whereby his fortune would take a better turn. Similarly,' the
penitent living on a diet of Jati fruits simply, should
worship the god Maharupa, on such a Hthi' in the month of
Vaishlka, while on a similar occasion, hhif^Mild worship
the god Praduianya in the asoath of doeas


AGNI PUKANAM. / 7#J

the husband of the goddess Unit in die month of Ashida,
and live upon the washings of sessamum orientate, on the
dap of observance, while he should take nothing but per*
fumed water on a similar occasion in the month of Shift vena
and worship the trident-bearing god (Shulap&ni). Similarly
the Sadyojftta manifestation of the god Mahadeva, should
be worshipped in the month of Bhtdra, and the penitent
should propitiate his spiritual preceptor as well, likewise
a Vrati should worship the lord of the' celestial# in the
month of Ashvina, and drink the washings of gold on the
day of its observance. The god Visheshvaia should be wor-
shipped in the month of Klrticka on a similar Tithi, and the
penitent should eat nothing else than the plant known as
the Madanaka, duly cooked and prepared. The Shiva mani-
festation of Shambhu, should be worshipped in the month of
Agrah&yana or at the dose of the rainy season, covered
over with the leaves , of a mango tree. Clothes and other
wearing apparels should be offered to the god on the
occasion, and gifts of cows, beds, umbrellas, pitchers, shoes
and juicy and luscious ^edibles, should be made to the
Brahmanas (3—9).

The Vrata, known as the Kimatroyodashi, should be
practised on the day of the thirteenth phase of the moon's
increase in the month of Chaitra a* follows. An image of
the celestial elephant known as Aahoka should be painted
with red lead, and the Vrati should worship the same at
each night fall throughout the year, whereby he would obtain
att his wished for objects if*lte ftol-


CHAPTER CXClt.


ijtolO tM« 600 O* -f IRE Now t shall describe the
process- of practising the Vratas, which should* be observed
on days' of the fourteenth phase of the moon’s Wane or
increase (Chaturdashi). A Vrati should observe a fast and
worship tiie god Shiva, • on such aTithiin the month of
KSrticka, by respectively observing and performing which
for a year, he would be longlived and able to enjoy all the
comforts which this World offers. Similarly a Vrati shobtu
practise self-control and live on fruits only, on days of the
third, eighth, twelfth, or the fourteenth phase of the moon’s
increase in the month of Magha, and worship the god Shiva,
subsequently foregoing the haste of all fruits till the com-
pletion of the vow, whereon fruits etc., should be given to
die Brahmanas. The Vrata thus practised, is known as the
Fala-Chaturdashi, preference being given to the latter Titbi
in respect of its observance' ( 1 — 3 ).

Likewise a penitent should fast and' worship the god
Shambhu;on the days of the eighth or the fourteenth phase
of the moon’s wane or increase, (night being the proper time
fbr its observance on both the occasions), whereby he would
be the happy possessor of all things worth-having in human
life, and secure an elevated existence «fter death. Poles
should be set up with streamers unfurled therefrom, in hoflour
of the god Mahendra (the great Indra), on the occasion of
the dark Chaturdashi in the month of Karticka, and the god
should be invoked and worshipped over the flagposts des-
cribed above. The Vrati should take special care in bathing
sad absolving himself of ilf impieties that dj^wbereby he
would attain eternal felicity. Subsequent to tterthe Ananta
manifestation 'of the god Halt, should be worshipped on the
day of the fo u rtee nth phase of the nwen’a increase in the


AGNilURANAM.


795

game month. The god, as well as the waters of the ocean
'Which forms his abode, should be represented by the blades
of holy Kushagrass, tied up in knots, and the penitent should’
prepare a cake with pasted Shali and powdered sun>dried
rice. Half 'of the cake should be given to a Brabmana,
while he should take the other half himself. The history of
the origin of the Vrata, should be recited and heard on the
bank of a pond and a string of thread should be tied round
the wrist or the throat of the Vrati, by reciting the following
distich. “ Lift me, ever sinking in this bottomless Ocean of
miserable births, oh thou Visudeva, whose image is but the
eternal time and infinite space. Break, oh break the fetters
that bind me down to successive rebirths, and I bow down
to thee, oh god” (4 — 1 1).

»!o:«

CHAPTER CXCIlf.


&AID THE GOD OF Fjre : — Now t shall describe the
process of practising the Shivarfttri Vrata, which makes a
man the envied possessor of all the good things of the earth,
and liberate him front the cycles of necessary existences.
The observer of the Tow.(yrati)j should observe a fast and
keep a vigil in the night eh 4 jSe occasion of a dark Chatur-
dashi, occurring between the months of MSgha and PhUguna^
and pray as follows 9 1 shall practise the Vrata, known as
the ’ “ShivaRatri Vrata,” fast on the day of its observance
keep a vigil in the night and worship the god Shiva, “ I in-
voke thy latter deity; Who 'blesses his votaries with earthly
prosperity and emancipates their souls after death. I make
obeisance to the godShiva, who' 'serves as a boat in taking
^e^bentylited souk krom this ffcmaM of life. Salutation

b


706 aghi puranam.

onto Shiva, the absolute pacific soul,— who increases the
progeny of men, and crowns their devotion with kingdoms
and principalities, success in life, health and erudition, and
opens the gate .of heaven to his votaries, Increase my
piety, augment my possessions, 0 lord, and may I have the
envied goods of the world in abundance and the capacity
to enjoy them. May I thrive in fame and happiness, and
may I ascend heaven and work out the liberatioi of my soul,
through the merit of my virtues, growing mere and more
everyday” (i — 6).


CHAPTER CXC1V.


U)aid the Qod op Fire Hear me discourse on the
process of practising the Ashoka-Purnima-Vrata, in which
the Bhudhara manifestation of the god Shiva, as well as
the eafth-goddess should be worshipped. The Vrata
should be first undertaken on the day of the full moon in
the month of Chaitra, and practised on the occasions, of all
subsequent Purnimas for a year. The rite of Vrisotsarga
should be performed on such aTithi in the month of Karticka.
The penitent should break his fast in the night, which should
be spent in vigil. By prictising such a Vrata, a man goes to
Ihe region of Shiva after deaths This is what is known at
the Vrisha Vrata. Libations of water and cakes of obsequis
offered to one's departed manes on the occasion of the
Amlvjud (day of the new mwn), knowu as thftPitri AmSvasi,
Mat them for eternity. ' By observing T4^;jM4 : )^pitiati|ig'

the souls of his departed ancestors for a — ■

purged efallsins and:

hr


ontheday #f


AGHI PUHANAM. ?#7

die full moon in the month of Magha, a man it able to
witness the fulfilment of all hit heartfelt desires (1—4).

Now I shall describe the way of. practising the SAvitri
Vrata, which should be observed on the day of the new
moon in the mouth of Jaistha. The female Vrari should
fast for three consecutive days on the occasion and worship
Slvitri the model of chastity, with the grains known as the
SaptadhSnya, underneath a Vrata tree, on the above said
TithL Damsels should job hands in a merry-go-round and
dance and sing round the Vata tree, fondly embracbg
(Kanthasutra)* and worshipping it with pasted saffron.

They should return home on the morrow, dress up and
dedicate platefulls of offerings by repearing the Mantra
" Obeisance to Sivitri and SatyavSna,” and make them
over to the Brahmanas. On the same day, the pious Brail*
man as should be treated with sumptuous repasts, and the
penitent shall break her fast. Farewell should be bid to that
model wife (Slvitri), by reciting the Mantra which runs as
"Be pleased, O thou goddess SAvitri.” A damsel practising
wch a Vrata becomes exceptionally fortunate (5 — 7).


CHAPTER CXCV.


Saio tub CtOft or FflU:— Now I shall describe the
practising the Vratas, which coming on the differ*


MfPd Vff! I


70* 4GN1 URANAW

ent days of the week or on days marked by fhe different
asterisms and astral combination* (Vara Vratas). By bathing
in the washings of the drugs known aa the SarvoushadhiX
under the auspicies ot the asterisms Hasta or Punas'*
vasu, a man is sure to attain bliss in this life. Similarly, by
performing Shraddba ceremonies in honour of one’s departed
manes, a man enjoys unbroken health in the course of
his seven successive rebirths. The Vrata known as the
“ Vrata after the heart of the Sun,” should be practised on
the occasion of the sun’s passing over to a new sign of
thexodiac on a Sunday. Such a Vrata should be ptac*
tised on each night marked by the asterism Hasta for
a year, whereby the penitent would be entitled to
enjoy all the comforts of the world. Similarly by seven
times practising the Vrata, which should be. observed bit
Mondays marked by the asterism Chitra, the life of a man
becomes a continuous run of pleasure and enjoyment
Likewise by performing the Vrata, which should be practised
on the nights ot scyen Wednesdays, marked by the asterism
Vishlkhl, a man pecomes able to get rid of the baneful
influences of planet^ and secures their good graces in return.
Similarly by worshipping the Jupiter, the preceptor of the
gods, on seven Thursdays marked by the asterism AnurJdha,
and by breaking bib fast son the nights of each of wch seven
days, a Vrati derives the same benifit as narrated in the
preceding instance* In the~saae manner; a man becomes
free of the evil influences cast Jyjoalign ant planpts, by wor-
shipping the Venus and the Saturn,<Sxi seven Fridays and
Satnfdays, respectively marked by the asterisks Jesthl and
Mida, and by breaking; hla fast in the night as laid down


CHAPTER CXCVI.


Said the God or Fire.*— Hear me, O Brahman, dts*
course on the' process of observing the Nakshatra Vratas,
(vows to be observed under the auspides of different
. asterims) which are as follows The god Hari should bo
worshipped during the ascendency of each of the twenty*
seven asterisms, by which the worshipper wouhfhave all his
objects and desires fulfilled and realised in life. The god
Hari, manifest as the Nakshatra Purusha (an imaginary
figure whose body is supposed.to be composed of the dusters
of asterisms, grouped so as to form its different parts) should
be worshipped in the month of Chaitra. The legs of the
god (Nakshatra Purusha) should be worshipped under the
auspides of the asterism Mull, while the regions of his groins
should be worshipped' under the benignant influence of the
asterism Rohfei. The knee-joints of the divine figure, should
be worshipped under the auspides of the asterism Ashvmi,
while the regions of its two thighs, should be worshipped
under the influence of the asterisms Ash&dls. The pubic
region of the divine Wage, should be worshipped under the


' auspides of the asterisms Purvas and Uttaras, while die
I region of the waist, should be worshipped under dfe in-
fluence of the asterisms known as the Krittikfts. Similarly
the rides of the figure, shOdd m worshipped during the
ascendency of the . jwferisms ^oawn as the two Bhldra*
pads*, while the regions of its armpits should be worshipped,
when the arterisMs knowa as the Revatis would ascend a
sfe dhl r altitude in the dries. The cardaic region of the
should be wurahipped nnder fee influence of the
known as the AnurSdhas, while its bade should
teriaf tbe ascendency of the asterisms
y : : di^W'dhWr--'d^w^ should be war- '


}!• AGNI PURANAM.

shipped, when the asterisms known ns the Vhhlkls would
be ascendent, while its figure should be worshipped under
the blissful influence of the asterisms, known as die Ponar-
vasus. Similarly, its finger-nails should be worshipped under
the auspicies of the asterisms, known as the Ashleshas,
while the region of its throat should be worshipped under
a similar condition of the asterisms, known as the Jesthas,
Likewise the ears, face, tips of teeth and mouth of Vishnu
should be respectively worshipped under die benignant
influences of the asterisms, known as the Shravant, the
Pushyl, the Svitis, and the Varunfi. In the same manner,
the nose, the eyes, the forehead, the hairs, and the com-
pletion of the divine image, should be respectively wor-
shipped under the auspicies of such asterisms as the Magbl,
the MrigashirS, the Chitri, and the ArdrS. The god should
be invoked and worshipped on a pitcher, full of molasses.
Gifts of beds, cows and money, should be given to the Brah-
manas as remuneration for their officiating as priests at the
ceremony or for attending the same as onlookers (i — 7).

Each month, the observer of the vow, known as- the
Sh&mbhavayaniya Vrata, should worship the god Vishnu,
manifest as the Nakshatra Jferusha (the astral figure}
who is but an incarnation of the divine essence of Shiva.
The Vrata should be practised in the month of Kbticka, and
Migha under the auspicies of the asterisms, known as the
Krittikt or MrigashirS, from which the months have respec-
tively derived their epithets, and address the god Hari by such
names as “Keshava,” “ Achyuta” etc, or by invoking his pre-
sence as “obeisance to Keshava 1 ' and “Obeisance to the god
who suffers no waste- (Achyuta). Tbe penitent should. redtj
the prayer, raining as “ I shall practlle the “ Sbimbhavaya-
nikam Vxat*m, by worshipping tbe god Hari, present in the
presiding asterism of the month, and^tfpis makes the fife
of its observer, a ran grant him

rakatk* death*, i, brake the praence of the god


, AGMI PVftANAM. Jtl

' . *>' '■ ■ . ; • • '

Hari, who contained in himself die water on which floated
the seeds of a potential universe, and who, though eternally
exist ant, suffers not the ravages of time,* and grants health
and longevity to his votaries. During the four months, com*
mencing from that of karticka ; boiled rice and potherbs
should be offered to the god, Krishara (rice and pulse boiled
together with spices) in the months such as Phalguna etc.,
While sweet porridge should be offered in the months of
Ashada., etc., The Naividyas, after being dedicated to the
deity in the night, should be made over to the Brahmanas.
The penitent should bathe in water saturated with the com-
position known as the Panchagavya, and live on the same
substance on the day of observance of the vow. An article
offered to a god and kept behind his image, becomes a
Naividya, while flowers etc, become Nirm&lyas, simultaneously
with their offering. The Vrata should be dosed with the
following prayer “ I make obeisance to thee, O lord— may
my sins grow more and more atenuated and my pieties grow
more and more, every day. O thou god who knowest no waste,
may my wealth, possessions and progeny suffer no decrease
and become unnumbered and endless instead. O Achyuta,
as thou art greater than the greatest of beings, as
thou art the Supreme Soul, absolve me of all impieties,
and may the Wishes of my heart take fruit in this
life. Be pleased, O thou the wasteless (Achyuta) pro-
tector of the universe, grant me the fulfilment of my
desires and make me . wasteless as thy own self, O thou
the immesurable spirituai^ght, 0 thou the best of beings.”
A man by worshipping the god as above indicated, for seven
consecutive years, enjoys all the comforts of the world and
becomes an emancipated spirit after death (8—17).

Now I shall describe the process of performing the
Ananta Vrata, whkh is one of the greatest of the boon.
confe|iag Nakshatfa (a*rai) Vratas. The god Hari should

of the astcrism filrigba


•• Km*##

tiiemonth^oi Ml rg as hfr«h, tfcf pe*itCTt grief m*
tjv uitorof a cow on the dayof its. observance. Tbe-fOdr
. |||nti (infinite)* grants infinite Merit and enjoyment in
nine next birth of the observer. _ Infinite merit is acquires
|y Hip observance of such a vow, and infinite enjoyment
iBfioum in its wake which knows no waste or satiety, and
tie heartfelt desires of the penitent are realised hundredfold
la his next existence. The Vrati should break his fast in
ttid night after the worship, and should not trice any thing
containing oil, the Homa being continuously performed
four months with libations of clarified butter. By
irtrinc nothing else than clarified , butter on the day of
•'ii observance, a Vrati ascends the region of the Rudca
manifestation -of the god Shiva after death. Likewise, the
Min who practises the Trjrltra/Vratas, (a Vrata or a ink
of three nights) each fortnight, by talring a single meal on
dkch day of its observance, becomes the master of un-
bounded wealth, Similarly by practising each month, ike
Yrfta as above indicated, a penitent goes to the reghfe
presided over by the god Ganapati. Thus by practiring
the Vrata in honour of the god Janhidana, a man is enabled
to five in the same region with Vishnu, in the company of
the soda of all his friends and relations.

J The penitent should first obsenrfe thd vow (Triritra
yimtn) on the day of the ninth phase of toe moon's increase
Iff the month of Mtghd; and hundred times repeat the
If antra, running as "Qm obeisance to titegod VBsudeva.”
Only a single meal should be taken on the eighth day of the
moon’s increase (on the day immediatety preceding the dny
of observance), then a fast should be for the next three days.
The god Vishnu should be worshipped Oh the day of the
twelfth phase of the moon’s increase in the menth ol Klrtkka,
and the Vrata should bvriuly practised on The

Homa should he perfarmed vrith libations Of t^imed butter, '
containing grains of Sbrii rite. wbfie fi Iti^dd coosist f ^


• AGM fVftANAJt ' '|||'

. iM-

ftiniified butter supply in a similar ceremony undertaken in
ibe month of Shriven*. By performing Horn* ceremonias
as above indicated, Iftndhltt was able, to perpetuate baa
Memory as the yenainble Jnvanlshva (i8—aa)v


CHAFTIR CXCVIt.


i^AID tHS Goo 0F FlkE Mow 1 shall describe the
frocen of performing the Divas* Vratas. First hear me db>
coarse on the process of practising aDhenu Vrata (a coir*
giving Vrata), which should be practised by making the gift of
0 co#, whose mouth and tail had been covered over with
plated gold. The penitent Should drink clarified butter only
on the day of its observance, whereby he would attain an
elevated station ip the next world. Similarly, by living
simply on clarified ^ butter for three consecutive days, and
by making the gift of a golden Kalpa tree, a map attains the
Supreme Brahma. By making the gift of a twentytwo
Pala weights of earth encased in a golden casket, a man
goes to the region of. Rudra. Brahman as should be feasted^
#nd gifts of dothes^ b^ddi^gs, seats, umbrellas, vessels,
had holy threads, sbbdd^bp-aade to them with the fol-
lowing prayer. “May aHtfcat which has been made defco*
thro ia this difficult Vrala, through my ignorance or (mua>
don, be remedied aadttode up, through your gradoon bene- .
diction" A man by practising such a Vrata, ascends tit*
region of Vishnu, after a long and prosperous career on


I: dull


?t4 AGNI PURANAH.

and salvation after death. The Vrati should eat ’ only the
composition known as the Fanchagavya, on the day of tho
tenth phase of the moon's increase in the month of K&rticka,
fast on the following day, and worship the god Vishnu,
whereby he would go to the region presided over by that
deity. By making gifts of five goats to a Brahmana and by
breaking his fast in the night for three consecutive days, a
man attains the highest felicity. In the Vrata, known as the
Krichachah Mthendra, the Vrati should drink milk only for
the first three nights, fast on the next three, and practise
the Vrata on the day of the sixth phase of the moon’s
increase in the month of KSrticka- Similarly in the form,
known as the Krichachah Bh&skara, the penitent should live
on curd on the day of the eleventh phase of the moOn’s
increase in the month of KSrticka, and drink milk on the
next live days, whereby he would acquire immense weattft
In the Santtpana Vrata, the diet of the penitent shouk
consist of wheat, articles made of wheat, potherbs, curd,
thickned milk, clarified butter and water, on the day of the
fifth phase of the moon (12— 16).


CHAPTER excvm.

Said the God of Fire:— -Now {shall describe the
process of practising the Mftsa Vratas fvpws which should
be observed in the different montb#ofth,eyear), which
gnat enjoyment in this life and salvation Seat- ■■ The

wise and the intelligent j^^l^l oirego ths ais4^| ojls and un-

of AsUUU Simikriy by foregotog lhe use of fiowers and


AGNI PURANAtf 715

salt in the month of Vaishlka, and making the gift of a tow
to a Brahmana, a man acquires a sovereignity in this life. A
man by observing a fast, extending over a period of month,
and making the gift of a cow to a Brahmana, should practise'
the Vrata known as the Bhimavrata. By bathing every
day in the morning during the month of Ashlda, a man be-
comes merged in the essence of Vishnu, the same result'
being obtained by making gifts of treacle and a cow in the
months of Chaitra and Vaish&ka. The greatest of all
observers of vows, the husband of the goddess Goori, prac-
tised the abovesaid Vrata of treacle, on the day of the
third phase of the moon. The man who practises the Nakta
Vrata (Breaking one’s fast in the night) in the month of
Mirgashirsha, goes to the region of Vishnu. The Vratas
known as the Vrata of a single meal each day (Ekabhakta),
the DvSdashi-Vrata, and the Tila- Vrata should be practised
for four consecutive months (i — 5 ).

By practising Vratas during the four months commencing
from the month of Shr&vana, a man is able to witness
the realisation of all his heart-felt desires. The resolution
of practising the ChiturmSshya Vratas spoken of before,
should be first solemnly made, by fasting on the day of the
eleventh phase of the moon in the month of Ash&da. The god
Hari, manifest as the sun god, should be worshipped under
the auspicies of the continuance of that Iuihinary in the sign
of cancer, and by ricittng th# following prayer “ I under-
take this vow, O lord, in thy presence, may this come to a
safe termination through thy gracious pleasure, O Keshava.
May this vow be deemed as complete even in the event of my
dying before it reaches its goal.” Thus 4 Brahmana should
abstain from taking all animal-food, forego the use of oils and
unguents^ and worship the god Hari for throe days by observ-
fog s fest’oA each a lterna t e day, whereby he would attain the
)fi|ioh’ Of''VWfom^A'Wiaa, by practising the vow ofsilearo
(Mooni-Ynta) and the oae known as the Chladrlyana, goes


7*6 A6NI PUMNAK.

V * . \ ..

to theregion of Vishnu and becomes aa emancipated spirit
la die end. Similarly, by practising the Vrata known as
the Prajlpatya, while living on a diet of powdered wheat pod
barley, a man ascends the heaven after death. Agavrtyr
drinking milk simply, or by living solely on the composition
known as the Pancbagavya or on roots and vegetables, a
man goes to the region of Vishnu after death. Similarly the
man who abstains from all meat, lives on a diet of barley, or
foregoes the use of all sweet articles, attains the god
Hari (6—13).

Now f shall describe the process of performing the
Koumuda-Vrata, which should be practised in an empty
Stomach in the month of Ashvina. The god Vishnushotrid
be worshipped in the Vrata, occurring on the day of the
twelfth phase of the moon’s increase. Lotus and other
water-flowers and Nhividyas illuminated by lamps of oil or
clarified butter, should be offered to the god. The god
YSsudeva should be worshipped with garlands of Mllati
flowers, and by reciting the Mantra running as ** Om obei-
sance to Visudeva.” Thus by practising a fast for a month
in connection therewith, a man acquires piety, worldly
prosperity, wealth and salvation, in short, every thing he seta
his mind upon (14—15).


CHAPTMt CXCIX.


TW Goo or FmB:— Now J abs# describe the
of practising the Riro-Vrntas, ypf^s pecoaar to


AGM MAtUM. pj

gote in nek of the four seasons such at the Robs, etc.,
mod by giviag A sow oad o quantity of clarified butter at
its dose, o B t a haw aa w said to practise the Agni- Vrata.
Similarly, the Semsvati- Vrata should be observed by prac-
tising absolute silence for a month, and by making gifts of
bells, clothes, sessamum oneatale aad pitchers, full of dart*
fied butter, to the Brahmanas at its dose, whereby the peni-
tent would attain absolute felicity. Thus by bathing for a
year, in the composition known as the Pancblmrita and by
making die gift of a cow to a Brahmana at its dose, a man
becomes a king b his next existence (1—3).

The pracdser of the Vishnu- Vrata, should offer edibles to
this God Vishnu, on the day of the-eleventh phase of the
moon’s increase b the awntb of Cbaitra, and observe a fast
on the day of its observance, whereby he would be able to
sit at the golden feet of that deity. The man who eats
porridge and makes the gift of a couple of cows to a Brah-
mana, is said to observe the Devi-Vrata, the result of such
an observance being the berease of wealth. The man who
practises for a year, the Vrata of eating his meals after
dedicating them first to the souls of bis departed manes,
becomes a king (4— 6).

' I have finished describing the process of practising the
Varsa-Vratas, now I shall discourse oh the ways of ob-
serving the Sankrlnti Vratas (Vratas to be practised on
the occasion of the sun’s passing over to a new zodiacal
sign.) The man wbo kCfps a vigil b the night of a San-
krlnti, goes td heavd*' after death, a similar result bang
obtained by worshipping the God Shiva and the sun-god,
on the occasion of a* Amtvasyt occurring on a Sankrlnti
day. Again by washing the image of the god Kesbava
with jets of ctarifisd butter on die day of the sun’s first,
appearance oh - the Tropic of CanceryTirdhe worshipper
becomes absolved of aff impieties, a twenty-two Pab
weight cf ctarifisd buuer bebg used b bat divine


7*8 AGNI URANAII.

ablution. A similar merit is acquired by performing the
rite of ablution unto the image of thegod Kesbava with
jets of thickened milk and clarified butter, on the occasions
of the sun’s twice passing over the equator (Vishuba)

(7-*-8.)

Now I shall describe the process of performing the Umi*
Vrata, which should be practised only by female penitents,
on days of the third or the eighth phase of the moon’s
increase. The Vrata consists in worshipping Umi and
Maheshvara, whereby a woman usually becomes lucky /and
is never subjected to feel the pangs of separation from her.
consort. The woman, who duly worships the sun-god, takes
birth as a man in her next existence (9—10),


CHAPTER CC.


Oaid the God of Fire: — Hear me, 0 Brahman,
course on the process of practising the Vrata of illuminating
n divine edifice with lighted lamps (Dipad&na Vrata), by
Observing which a man attains salvation after a prosperous
career on earth. By illuminating the house of a Brahmana
j oiwjmi imaged deity for a year, a man becomes possessed
of all his wished for objects. SimUariy by lighting such
edifices for four months continuously, or by illuminating
them in the month of K&rticka, a person goes to the
region of Vishnu or ascends heaven. no Vrata

which can or will ever excelthis rite of.^friaft^lighted
lamps, in respect ofinef&Jl^ wen*. jnitiKlpiiqciaatM a
"divine edifice as above in iiiW l t s d, beceaat,the. fatbetr of
a large And happy iaauiy, aodanjoys h e alth andgoed


AGNI POMMM.


f*0

fortune. Hi* eyes become keen and.fustrous while angels
throng to glorify his name in heaven on his sojourn
to that region after death ( r— ^3). .Out of a hundred
wives of the king Chftrudharml, the" ruler of the world,
Lalitl, the daughter of the king of Vidharba, was able
to win and monopolise the love of her husband, through
the merit of observing such a lamp-giving Vrata. Laliti
used to light up the divine edifice of Vishnu with thousands
and thousands of lamps, every night The co-wives of the
queen, asked her tot .describe the merit of practising such
a Vrata, whereupon she narrated as follows -

Lalita said : — “In by-gone times, the holy sage Maitreya
was a priest in the service of the king of Souvira, and he
caused a temple to be built and dedicated to Vishnu, on the
banks of the Devika. I was a she-mouse at the time, Ob ye
my beloved sisters, living in a hole in a sequestered nook
of the adytum of the temple. One day Maitreya caused a
lighted lamp to be placed in the interior of the temple,
which growing 'dimmer and dimmer every moment, Was
about to be put out. Out of my natural dread for cats
in that mouse-existence of mine, I came out of the hole,
nudged the wick of the lamp with the. tip of my nose, and
re-excited the faint light about to be blown out by the wind.
Even through the merit of such an involuntary act of piety,
behold me, metamofpbised into a princess and a favourite
with the king, my hpshudL.in my present existence. O ye
sisters, I enjoy thishigb iriibOn, these pleasures and riches
of royally as fruits’ of the pious act of illuminating the divine
edifice of Vishnu, though unintentionally done by me in my
previouS existence, and therefore it is, that each night I
cause thousand! and thousands of lamps to be lighted in the-
Vishnu teffiple,sin»pfy because I remember (jatwnara) the
tecoirds of my previOhs hirth (4 — 9).

••• rlfy ifivim* te»n^le jeiU! Irumpa^ mat tbe thy
■M thsek m inhaseof the moon. amranis ablts' to .tcsids ■


y»r : ■ ' Mn muMMi

MlwfaBy hr henvsOiThe itdtf of »di » lamp i» liiihf
with dumbness and tod!^ in his next rebirth, uhl

fti dMxnd to saflta: incessant Biatleu agonies in the dark
and bottwalt o ab)«s of perdition. The messengers of the
gOd of death, asked these miscreants mourning their fates
and fifing the confines of the nether regions withj wails and
doleful sounds, " IRat is die good, 0 thou benighted serib,
of waiting tew? What does it avail a being to cry his eyes
ont in 'hell, ever d& misdeeds and acts of inequity, foolishly
aqd wantonly committed by him in his human existence?
The human fife is die culminating stage of all animal exis-
tences on earthy and it is by going through thousand! and
thousands of necessary cycles of animal-existence, that n
being is evbived out as a man. Wherefore then, should a
man forget such a memorable fact of his existence?— •and
wherefore should he indulge in sensuous pleasures which
are nothing bit the cravings of the animal nature which he
could not very well cast off even then ? If the highest good in
human fife is fo secure as much creature-comforts as possible,
or to madly run in pursuit of those articles that pander only
to the- -senses, if its highest glory is to raise much sand and
dost in a wbrilgig of contending passions, — wailing and
wailing alone, needs must he the necessary corollary, the
inevitable sequel to such an existence, when transplanted to _
these regions. You are eating only die bitter fruits of your
own misdeeds on earth. Why did you not think at the time
of aedudqg other men's wives, that the fond and clandestine
'embrace oPa false wife, (dearer it might have been for the
very stealth), the warm and the fluttered up-heavings of a fair
but frail heart, bearing with the vibrations of hurried foot-
fctepa of a fugitive god flying tberefrom, U pnig|t have carried
tor. the dmo beinginto stagnant lift, a:flm^|^ flow of un*

• natuial stimulation, but were awn W9m

wood within them confine*? A moomnrt pleasure, a
. .. ------ — iMpr


ACNI mmANAW. ■’■■'•'lil

iBwM tad millions ofyearsof extreme agony indexcmdntt
Sag pain. Instead of crying “ Mother, O mother,” ta ugauh
tod darkness why don't yon sing the blessed name of Mari?
O yon the defilers of your neighbour’s beds ! Does the name
Be so very heavy oa your tongues ? As a ipiik of fire can
be always obtained from the tiny flame of a lighted lamp,
so a small lamp, lighted out of a love of god, goes much
way to illumine the path of a soul in the darkness of death*
An equal portion of misery falls to the lot of a man who is
wot inclined to offer sack lighted lamps to the god, and
steak them, dedicated by ethers, instead* Why should I
mourn now when I have offered thousands and thousands of
them ?” (to— 18 ).

Said the fire»god Having heard these worts from the
Kps of Lalitl, the co-wives of the queen began to illuminate
the temple of Vishnu in the night, and ascioded heaven
thnsugh its merit Tims by offering .lighted lamps to the ,
god, « man acquires great*? merit than by practising dm
Vrata (ip)*


CHAPtKa cct.


3*10 tHB GO 0 tm ftt|s^«bw I Shall describe the
procesa of performiaftha worship, known as die Nine-fold
propitiation (Ntvavyuhlrehaaam) es narrated by dm god
Mari to the holy sage Hindi. The gods Vbudeva ' aod
Shaakarsbtna togetkefWitfc the Vija Mantim a and
K (UR) sacred to them, should be worshipped at the eeutfo ol
, **• loduMhaped mystkdiagram. . The god- Pmdyamaya .


■iri.


:ii'


wfchtimVija Maatn W (%) m


fu ini mjkamaml

west, the Mantras running at “Om obeisance to
Nirlyana ” at its treat, “ Om obeitance to that ' Eternal
Brahma” at its north western petal, as well as the Mantra;
running as “Ksham Vishnu, Kshouin Nrisinhaka.” Similarly
the boar manifestation of Vishnu should be worshiped
in the petal at its north, as welt at at the doors of the
diagram, situate at its west and the north east. Similarly
the Mantra running as “ Kam, Them, Sam, Sham, Garut»
man Purvavaktra ** should be located and worshipped at
its south, the Mantra running as “ Kham, Chachahm, Vain,
Hum Fut," and “ Kham, Dham, Pham, Sham ” at its Worth.
Likewise the Mantra running as “ Vam, Nam, Mam, Ksham
Kshouin” and “ Dham, Dam, Bham and Ham " should be
located and worshipped in the Mandala. The Mantras run-
ning as “ Gam, Dham, Bham, Ham Pushti.” (the goddess of
health) and the Vija Mantras particularly sacred tol the god,
should be respectively worshipped on the north and the south
of the mystic diagram. The Mantras runn ing as “Dham Vana-
m&la” (the garland of wild flowers worn by the god Vishnu,
emblematic of the different worlds and solar systems), the
Shrivatsa-mark on the breast of Vishnu, as well as the gem
Koustbubha with the Mantra “ Sam, Ham, Lam, Chachahm,
Tam and Dam” held sacred to it, should be worshipped
on the west of the divine seat (Peetha). The ten Anga-
pujas of the god Vishnu* should be duly performed, while the
Ananta manifestation of the deity, should be worshipped
Mow the mystic diagram, by reciting the Mantra running as
" Obeisance to Ananta.” The goda such as Mahendra etc.,
^should be duly worshipped, and the ten Anga-pujas should
be respectively done unto them. The lour pitchers (Ghatas)


ACM FUltANAIf. 9*5

Mantra*, respectively known as the fire, the wind, aqd the
Moon Vijas (1—8).

Subsequent to that, the preceptor should contemplate
his psychic self as having pervaded the universal 'space, and
the Mantra known as the Atma Vija as dropping down
with the moon.beam, saturated- with the crystal drops of
'ambrosia, and entering his body from the above. Then he
should deem himself as the absolute subjectivity (Putusha),
evolved out of that mysterious Vija, and hold himself identi-
cal with the god Vishnu. Then he should contemplate the
twelve parts of his body, such as head, heart, the tuft of hair
on his crown, etc., as having been permeated with the essence
of that mystic Vija (Anga Nyasa), enveloping him as an
armour. Similarly the twelve different parts of his organism,
such as the breast, the head, the tuft of hair on his crown,
back, and eyes, should be again contemplated as assigned
to the Vija Mantras, sacred to the god and permeated with
their essence. The preceptor should similarly contemplate
his two hands, as assigned to and permeated with the Astra
Mantras sacred to Vishnu, and cause a similar Nyasa to be
practised by his disciple in his own body {9 — 12).

A mental worship of the god Hari, requires no flowers
or offerings like the one made on the mystic diagram
(Mandala). A strip of cloth should.be tied -round the eyes
of the disciples, and they should be asked to throw flowers
on the mystic diagram^ divided into petals or chambers on
which the names $€ fh% 4 $erent manifestations of Vishnia
had been previo.itdy^Wri^p.^’The disciples should jbe res.
pectively named ' after tie gods, qn wbhpe chambers the
flowers cast by them, would fall down. The preceptor
should cause the disciples to he seated on his left hand side,
and successively cast into the consecrated fire, hundred And
eight hbations of clanfied butter, containing the seeds of
' Vrihi gms and seSsamum orientate. Again a thousand
libations should be tiered into the sacrificial fire, for the


7*4 Acmru^Mib .

0 f t|>e tody o f 'the diedple. Similarly a hundred
libations should be offered for thy ^pftistl u a of the differ-
ent manifestations of the 7 god JKavavyuto, after which the
final libation should be cast ,ifato the Homn-cnvity. Thus
a preceptor should initiate {hiy disciples into the mysteries
of the spiritual world, while they, in their turn should wor ship
bias with presents and remunerations (p— 16).


CHAPTER CCII.


J)aid the Goa op Firs :—The god Hari is usually
. propitiated with flowers, perfumes, and oblations, and by burn-
log incense-sticks and waiving lighted lamps before big
/ image. Now I shall enumerate the names of flowers, which
the latter god is specially fond of.. The flower Malati heads
the list of flowers in that respect, while a worship made
with the flowers of Tamala, grants en joyment and salvation-
to the vof&ry. Similarly a Puja, made with MallikH (Jasmine)
lowers, absolves the worshipper of all sins, the one made
with Jufoikft flowers, ensures foe residence of ’the worshipper
ha the region of Vishnu, ihe flowers known as foe Phtall
" and’ the Atimukta respectively confering on turn the same
\ seSult as foe above. Again by worshipping foe god with such
> \ ffewen is foe Kairavira and the javi, a man goes to the region
of Vishnu, or.acqutre* piety. The flower known as foe
Kmvjaka offered to the god in foe course of a worship,
purifies foe worshipper; the TagunnndlfCarn
kid foe votary to the region >tif flowers.,

known as foie all rinf-

Tbe most elevated exista^Jn.foe next worn, m secured
. ly - w o r s hjpp fag foe gnfosdli'lnfo Lotus, the


ACN1 PURANAM. \

Ketaki and the Kundas. By offering such flowers as V&na
Varvara, and K&sha, a man becomes able to five .in the same
region with the god Hari (1—5). . ; :

A similar result is obtained by worshipping the god with
the bunches of such flowers, as the Ashoka, Tilaka,aod
Tarusha. The man, who wants the. emancipation of his
soul after death, should worship the god with the leaves of
a Bel tree, while an elevated station in the next world is
secured by offering the leaves of a Shami tree to that divinity.
Again by offering the petals of Bhringar&ja and Tamila
flowers, Kalhars, Lotus flowers, and the dark and the .golden
leaves of the two sorts of Tulaar (Mimossa) to the god
Vishnu, a worshipper is enabled to. live in the same region
with that deity. Similarly by wonhipping the god Hari with
the holy Lotus flowers,. Kokanadas, a garland of hundred
lillies, the flowers of Nipa, A r juna, Kadamva, the per-,
fumed Vakula, Kinshuka, Mani, Gokarna Nagakarna, San-
dhyl Ketaki, Kusha and K&sha flowers, and the scented
Uruvaka, a man is purged of all sins, and becomes an
empancipated spirit after a long and prosperous carrier on
earth ( 6 — -11).

By offering a flower to a god, the worshipper acquires a
merit, hundred times more than what he would have got by
making an offering of gold to that deity, while the merit of
offering a garland, should be deemed as a millions of times
more than that of the latter. Similarly by offering flowers
grown in the wUderoew,-*^ as much merit

as hy offering floWeta grovtta^ W or in those

of others. The ’god Vishnu should nptbe worshippedwith
flowers that have,hecome perched or dried, or contain petal*
more than vdmt they natnraUy possess, but never with such
flowers as the K&nchana, the Unmatta and the hill Karnika.
The presiding deityofheU shouldbe worshipped with such
flowers as - Kutstltt, --g^j^pfli|HiKiadl^ : and the Shhrisha. The

god Hari should be wa&ttppedwithsuch flowers as the


ASM! MJ*ANA*I.


•Mated Brahma-padmas and the blue lotuses, while the god
; Hara should be worshipped with the flowers, known as t&e
Arka, the MandSra, and the D^ustura. Flowers Such as the
Kutaja, the Karkati, and the Ketaki, should not be offered to
the latter deity, as well, as the flowers of gourd or of a Nimva
tree, nor flowers that are bereft of sweet odours (n — 15).

The best kind of flowers with which the god can be pos-
sibly worshipped; are the eight sentiments such as the cessa-
tion of all killing propensities, control of the senses, forbear-
ance, knowledge, kindness, etc. The first flower is the extinc-
tion of all cruel instincts (Ahinsa), the second is self-control,
the third is love and good will to all creatures, the flower par-
excellence, being the inward peace or contentment. The
virtue of gentleness is a flower with which the god Keshava
should be worshipped, the practice of austerities is another
flower, meditation and truthfulness forming the seventh
and the eighth of the list of flowers, which the latter
deity is specially fond of (16— 19).

Oh thou foremost of the sons of men,. there are other
external flowers, which being offered with love and devo-
tion to the god Vishnu, secure his good graces sis well.
Watej&flowers and the flowers of fields and meadows,
offerings of milk, curd, thickened milk and clarified butter,
lighted lamps and burning incense-sticks waived before-
his image,; offerings of -boiled rice, etc, flowfert and' fruits
of forests* blades and roots of Kusha-grass, perfumes and ‘


sandal-paste, a sincere and heartfelt love, and the eigbt
flowers of sentiment in special, are always’ pleasOnt to the
god Vishne. The seat and the five manifestnrions of the
god shotdd be worshipped at well, wflht^e eight mental
flowers spoken of "above;/ ;TFh#-.^i
Vishno ' are • Vtaudeva ete, those < 'yf..|li^'.';
mhina etc (ao*-a5); •"


CHAPTER CCHI.


Oaid THE God of Fire : — A man, by worshipping the
god, is exempted . from visiting the hell after death.
Hear me, Oh Gjrahman, enumerate the names of the
different hells, and the misdeeds for which souls are doomed
to visit each of them. The five vital winds of a man escape'
from his body at the close of his life, however fondly and
tenaciously he might have dung to it. The embodied
sprit (Dehi), leaves its earthly tenement, through one of
the following causes, such as drowning, burning by
Sire, poisoning, hurt, inanition, or fall from a mountain.

Simultaneously with its quitting the older body, the
soul of a man finds its abode in the new body of a creature,
arcordiog to his merit. lag- demerit in the previous existence.
The sum»(otal of the.: amoral acts of a man in his previous
existence, tends to determine both the nature of the
organism his Soul will enter iti the next birth, and the
environments amidst which he will be placed, so as to be in
the best situation for reaping the fruits of his former good or
evil deeds. All embodied existence should’ be deemed as


encircled witb pSih and raUery hi a more or less degree.
The evil-doers are doomed to iiuffehpain after death, „ while
the workers of' jp>od inylhe, ehj^ ethereal comforts. The
messengeri bf deceasidpersons to the

god who is the wifcliisr' w of lives (Vama). the'


god who is the whtder ol fb is bridge of lives (Yama). The
^Siiof the wicl«d:|re * by the southern gate .of his
manieR* dm pious are ushered

b'|^M;|s^;testeitt : ^id^^^J^ossessenger . of .

WfckedVV'lk _ hell-fire ‘ by the

’Ils


f*S ACNI UtANAH.

The to til of a cow-siealec is doomed to sc tf fori butt*
died thousand years* the torments of the hell fcoown as the
Mahivichi (the great foreshore), while the soulof a land-grub*
her or that of a Brahmana-killer, is respectively consigned
to the agonies of the hell, known as the Amakumbha (the
pitcher of undigested chyle). The murderer of a child, a
woman, or an old or imbecile person, is chained down to
the bottom of the hell, known as die Rourava, till the . ap-
proach of universal dissolution, or tiO the termination of the
respective sovereignities of the fourteen Indras. The soul of a.
man, who had burnt the fields of a preceptor in fife, is con-
sumed for a Kalpa, in the living flames of the hell, known as
the Mahfi Rourava. The soul of a thief is cast into the hell
known as the Hell of Utter Darkness, there to be perpetually
baslinoed for a more than one Kalpa by the warders of the
god of death, incessantly eaten . by worms, leeches, and
other water-parasites. For a similar period, the soul of a
matricide is tormented in /the hell known as the Asipatra-
Vanam (the forest having the leaves of sword-blades), and
is there fried with burning sands.

Similarly, the soul of a man who has alone eaten tho street-
meats In life, by depriving his dependants of their due shares,
is doomed to eat execrita, and the parasites that usually
infest the same, in the hell known as the KAkola. The soul of
a man, who had forsaken in life the performance pf the .five
sacrifices enjoined to bp practised every day (Psncba-Yajna),
is doomed to live on mood and urine, ;«%. the hell known
as the Knttala The srml of a man. who had eaten forbuUeii
food on earth, is doomed to drink blood only in ihe'iMfi .<)(
stench, The soul of a tyrant or at( oppresaor 6t mankind,'
as we.ll as -that of the murder. ilfho ,has taken"
' shelter under him, is. boiled as seeds of;seiuismum orientate
in. the hell of boiling oil. v l^e ’^ufof.'^ipi^: of wine on
' the occasion of . ire#

of gifts, 'is' doomed ttfaulSrile tonnentsof the hell known


AGNI PUKANAM. 719

1* the Nirocbchhftsha, while the soul of an jntrufjtful man,
is consigned to the torments of the hell, whose door* are .
barred with thunder-bolts.

The sods of the crooked ate cast into the hell of great
conflagration (Mahtjvila), while those of persons who had
visited the wives of their elders or superiors, or women who
were in the forbidden degrees of consanguinity in. life, ate
consigned to the torments of the saw-edged hell (KrakScha),
while the begetters of hybrid children and the destroyers of
other men’s virtues, are punished in the hell of boiling
treacle. The soul of the killer of any creature, is chained
down to the bottom of .the hell of alkali, that of an
encroacher on other men’s ground, is punished in the hell
edged with razors, while the souls of a stealer, of gold or'
a cow and the feller of a tree, are kept confined in dm
hells, respectively known as the Amvarisha and Vajra*
Shastraka. The soul of a honey-stealer is chastised in the
hell of perpetual repentence (Parit&pa), while that of a
stealer cf other men’s goods, is incarcerated in the one
known as the K&Ia Sutra. The soul of the man who was a
great meat-eater in life, is kept imprisoned in the hell, known
as the Kushmala, while the soul of a man who had neglected
to offer cakes of obsequis to the souls of his departed
manes on earth, is consigned to smell the filthy odours
of the hell, known as the Ugra Gandha (the hell of strong
odours). Tbo soul of a Klcha Vakshi, is cast into the hell
known as the Durdhara,jwh^e the soul of a vilifier of the
holy Vedas is punished in the hell of infamy (Apratistha).
Tha sonl of, a man who had borne false witness in life, goes
to the hefl, known as the Puti Vaktra, while the stealer of
other men’s raoney goes to the one known as the Pariluntha.
The. souls of the murderer of a child, a woman, , or an old or
fmbOGda person, as . well as that of an oppresser of the
firahmana* v tormeniad M the hell of dreadfulness
(KmSIa)^ Similarly, the sonl? ofBrahmaaa*, who bad taken
9 *


7)P AGNI PUftAfUM.

who in Ufa, to weft as that of a man who had created ifb
feelings : mad dissensions among friends are kept confined hi
the belts,, respectively known as the Vflepa and the great hell
of tooften copper . (Mah8-T8mra). Similarly the soul of a
man who Had defiled the beds of his neighbours in life, is
•objected in hell, to hold in a perpetual embrace, a molten iron
or a burning stone image of the seduced women, while the
soul of a woman, who had known many men in life, is forced
te clasp her bands round a thorny Sh&lmali tree of burning
fire, in the hell designated after the latter. The souls of
men, who had gone in their human existence* unto the
daughters of their own mothers, as well as the souls of uep
Who had looked on other men's wives with lustful eyes, or had
'uprooted the tongues of their fellow beings, are doomed to
igt ashes and cinders only in the hell, known as the Angttrflshl
(the hell of carbon food). The souls of thieves are always
cleft with the keen ends of razors, wMle those who had
taken meat in life, are subjected to eat their own flesh ini
hell. The man who observes a fast for a month as well as
the practiser of an Ekadashi or a^Bhishma Pancbaka Vrata,
becorties exempted from visiting the hell (20—23).


CHAPTER CCIV.


Oaid THE GOO op Fiat >— Mow 1 shall describe .the
process of observing the best of the Vratas of a month's fast
O thou holy sage, a man belodging to the orders of Yoti,
or Vinapiastha, as well as a widowed wiferihould practise
the abeyesaid Vrata, sfter having pe rfStotid thc sacrifice
known as the Vaishaava Yl(joa, and obtained permissioc of
hirer hit spiritual preceptor behatbshalf.The last should


AGNI FURANAM. frjr

ba observed under conditions, laid down under the head
of the Krichchha Vratas described before, or otherwise
as the observer would be capable, of. The Vrata should be
first undertaken on the day of the eleventh phase of the
moon’s increase in the month, of Ashvina, and thenceforth
the observer should go on fasting for thirty' days continu-
ously, by reciting the following verses. “ This day forward
I shall fast and worship thee, O Vishnu, for thirty days con-
tinuously till thy wakening in the month of Klrticka. May
this Vrata undertaken by me, be deemed complete, O lord,
in the event of my dying in the course of its observance
or before the d*iy of thy wakening." (1—5).

Each day, the practiser of the Vrata should thrice bathe
in the course of its observance, thrice woiship the god
Vishnu with offerings of flowers and perfumes etc., recite
the Gitl sacred to the god, and mediate upon his immutable
self. He should give up all profane talks, forego all pecuniary
concerns, keep himself a.sof of the company of all men not
practising a similar Vrata, nor engage in conversation with the
wicked And the evil-doers. The full term of _ its observance
(thirty days) should be spent in a divine edifice, and the
Brahmanas should be feisted at its close, on. the completion
of the worship on the day of the twelfth phase of the moon.
Then the observer of the vow should pay remunerations to
the Brahmanas and break his fast. A man by practising the
Vrata, as above indicated,, becomes entitled to enjoy the
pleasures pf heaven as kn emancipated spirit, for the
period of thirteen Kalpas. The ceremony, knoWn as the
Vaishnaba YajnA, should be performed at the close of the
Vrata, and ’gifts of a pair of cloths, a metal pot, a seat,
an umbrella, a prepared holy thread, a pair of shoes
and a Yogapatta, should he made to each of the theirteen
Brahmanas invited ion the occasion. A golden image
of the god Vishnu should be worshipped in a bed with
clothes etc. and a Brahmans should be addressed as followsc


*. 4**i ro* A * ,AI1,

“ Through the grace of Vishnu, I stand absolved of all sin, O
thou twice born one. I shall ascend the region of Vishnu,
and ultimately become merged in the essence of that
deity/' Then the Brahmana would reply as follows—
"Depart and Depart, O thou who art wise with (he wisdom of/
god. Go to the sinless region of Vishnu, and stay there,
shaped after the image of that God." Having thus addressed
the Brahmana, the observer of the Vrata, should make a gift
of the bed with the golden image, to his spiritual preceptor
(6 — 14).

The practiser of such a Vrata, redeems the souls Of his
relations, remove up to the hundredth degree, and carries
their souls with his ownself into the region of Vishnu. Even
the country dwelt in by such an observer of a month's last,
becomes blissful and sinless, not to speak of his Vandhus and
relations. Thickened milk and clarified butter may be
safely given to a penitent, falling down in a swoon while
observing the Vrata, without any fear of breaking or vitiating
his vow, since clarified butter permitted to be taken by a
Brahmana on such an occasion, does not detract its merit,
and sigee Vishnu, the maker of all medicinal remedies,
pardons the guilt of taking fruits, edible roots, thickened
milk and medicines administered by the preceptor in such
an emergency (15—13).


-! 0 >


CHAPTER CCV.


&AID THE GOD OP PlItB?— Now* I describe the

process of practising the king of ajr;^||fVVatas, ; via .
the vow of Bhishma Patic^akara, ' which should be prac-
tised , on the day of the £Mdbth phase of the Moon's


increase in the month of KArtkks. The penitent ^hooht
observe a vow of silence on the occasion, bathe thrice every
day and perform such a rite of ablution, for the five success
sive days from the day of the first observance of the vowj
and offer libations of water to the gods and his departed
manes, containing the seeds of five different sorts of Vrihi
and sessamum orientate (i — a).

The* rite of ablution should be done unto the image ©I
the god Hari, with the composition known as Hie Pancha-
gavya and the Panch&mrita. The body of die idol should
be smeared with sandal-paste etc., and crystals of scented
gum resin soaked in clarified butter, should be burnt before
it. Day and night, the lamps should be kept lighted 1 before
the image, and oblations , of sweetened porridge should be
offered to the god whom ' it represents. The Vrati should
repeat hundred and eight times the Mantra, running as
“ Obeisance to the god VSsudcva,” and cast into the sacrifial
fire, an equal number of libations of clarified butter, contain-
ing seeds of Vrihi and sessamum, by repeating the six-
lettered Mantra of the. god, followed by the term of obeisance
(Svaha). On the first day of its observance, the feet of the
god should be worshipped with lotuses, the regions of his
thighs and knee-joints on the second day, with the leaves
of a Bel tree ; the umbilical region on thd third day with
BhringarSja ; with the flowers of Vana and Javi and the
leaves of a Bel tree on the fourth, and with the Mfilati
flowers on the fifth day

The penitent should sleep on the bare floor during the
continuance of the Vratra, and take cowdung, the urine Of a
cow, curd, milk and the composition known 'as the Pancha-
gavya, respectively on the first (Ekadashi), second, third,
fourth, and the fifth day of its observance. He should break
bis fast in the night of the following Tull . moon, *hereby be
would be liberated from the trammels of l8e, after s hape*
aodprosperouicareer od earth. TbeVrita is foutied


734 agni puranam. '

the hero (Bhishma) who practised it in the by-gone age, am 1
attained the god Hari through its merit The supreme
Brahma is to be worshipped in all the Vratas, which has the
observance of a fast as its essential condition ( 8 — 9 ).

mmammrnm it#l!<maBm

CHAPTER CCVi.

Said the God op Fire The holy sage Agastyas
(epD BIC) should be deemed as an ’ incarnation of the god
Hari, and a man by worshipping this venerable sage, attains
the latter divinity. • The immortal Rishi should be worship-
ped during the three days and a three-quarter part thereof,
before the entrance of the sun info the sign of Virgo. The
worshipper should fast on the three days stated a bo remand
worship the sage with Argha offerings, etc., The white and
effulgent image of the sage, having complexion jike the hue
of a Kasha flower, should be invoked at night fall in A
fitcher, full of water, and the night should be spent in vigil,
after having addressed him as follows : — “Accept this worship
made by me in love, oh thou the greatest of the holy sages,
oh thou whose mind is always filled with the noblest
of thoughts, oh thou whose body is “resplendent as the mid-
day-sun.” Thus having invoked the presence of the holy
sage, the worshipper should offer him perfumes and sandal-
paste, and. worship him on the morrow with the Argha offer-
ings, on the bank of a pond, by recting *the following
Mantra.—" Obeisance co thee, O thou wj»P s e complexion
is . like the hue ot a Kltha flower, 0 thou born^of the essence
of wind and fire, O thqutheson of Mwra and Varans,
born in s pitcher. May that^ Agastyas, whpdevouredthe
demons At&pi and Vitapi and quaffed off the ocean in a


AtJNt WANAM.

stagledraught, appear before me. In die innermost r eccssrs
of ’ my heart and with my entire soul, I beseech the aid df
Agastya. I worship him with a view to secure an elevated
existence in the next world. Accept this sandal, 0
Agastya, which the gods are fond of, and whose trees
- grow in islands beyond the seas that bound our view, and
are held as the kings of trees. Accept this garland of
flowers, 0 thou holy sage, which destroys alt sins, is toe
receptacle of all virtues, pleasures, enjoyment, and salvation,
and which grants to the offerer, health, prosperity and fortune.
1 waive before thee, this burning incense stick. Accept it,
O lord, and may I have an unalterable faith in thy absolute
goodness, and may I lire to witness the fulfilment of all
my heartfelt desires, and silently practise virtues, by dint of
which a man becomes* able to secure an elevated existence
after death. { have offered thee, 0 thou the greatest of the
holy sages, and the grantor of all boons, this Atgha offer*
ing in the shape of a cloth vith bits of gold and seeds of
Vrihi tied in its corner. Accept it, O lord, whom the gods
and demons worship with such Argha offerings. Kindly
accept this Argha offering of flowers offered by me, O sage,
as a testimony of the fruition of my desire to invoke thy
presence on the occasion of this Vrata ” (t — is).

Similarly the princess Lop&mudra, the daughter of the
king of Vidarbha, and the wife of the sage, should be wor-
shipped by reciting toe following prayer : — “ Obeisance to
thee, 0 princess, O thoatoe wife of Jhe holy sage, who hast
undertaken the greatest vow of lifelong renunciation. O
thou goddess, O thou Lopkmudra of universal fame, accept
this' Argha offered by me.” The Argha to be offered to the
holy sage Agastya, should be composed of bits 'Of gold and
silver, the five gems known as the Pancfaaratoaa, a metal*
bowl containing the seeds and grains known as the Sapta*
dhanya, curd ind dindatpaste ; and which should bp offered
Without uttering any Vedic M anfras, where the penitent


$3* Atttt PURAKAM.

would belong to the Shudra community or to the opposite
sex. The worship should be closed , with the; followiag
prayer, — ''Accept this Puja made by me, O thou Agastya*
who greatest all boons — the greatest of all the holy sages
and resplendent as the sun, and depart in peace from this
place of worship" (13 — 17).

For life the penitent should forego a class of paddy,
a fruit or articles of a particular taste in honour of Agastya
Then the Brahmanas should be feasted with boiled rice,
porridge, articles fried in clarified butter, sweetmeats^ and
confectionaries ; and gifts of con's, clothes and gold should
be made to them. Subsequent to that, the abovesaid pitcher
of invocation, with a vessel full of porridge and clarified
butter and containing bits of gold being placed over its mouth,
should be made over to ^ Brahmana. By offering sudi
Arghas for a period of seven years, a woman becomes the
mother of many children and the mistress of a large fortune,
while a virgin becomes a princess by wedlock (18— > 30 }.


CHAPTER CCVI1.


£>aid the God op Fire Now l shall describe the
proce ss of practising the Koumuda Vrata, which should be
first undertaken by observing a fast on the day of the
eleventh phase of the moon’s increase -in the month of
Kftrticka, by reciting the Mantra which ; runs as— “Hence-
forth I shall practise the Koumuda Vrata, by pbserving a hut
and worshipping the god Hari for a moath^ U^febJf * *hafl
be fibentedfromtbe bonds rff lffe, after a |u|ppy and pw
’pwons earocron eartb.’’ Sipilariy Ifce fiujtgR *f v . Hp
<god hould ha amoar s d wtt anndnlpaate^^d pa^cd 1


ACM ftmAMAtt 73^

S affron and worshipped with the flowers of Kath*r, Mllati
and lotuses. The Vrati should observe the vow of absolute
silence during the continuance of the Vrata, cause oil-
lamps to be kept lighted before the god, day and night,
and offer oblations to him, consisting of porridge, cakes, etc,,
which should be dedicated to the god by reciting the Mantra
running as “Om obeisance to VIsudeva/* The Brahmanas
should be feasted, and the god should be worshipped on each
day of the month tilt the day of his wakening. A man by
observing such a row of fast, attains greater merit than
what is acquired by practising the preceding Vratas (» — 5).


CHAPTER CCVIII.


l^Ato THE Goo OF Firf.:— Now I shall describe the
process of making gifts on the occasion of practising all the
Vratas. The gifts. Vratas, penances etc., which should be
respectively made, observed and practised on days of the
different lunar phases such as the Pratipad, etc., on different
. days such as Sundays, etc., under the auspxcies of the differ-
ent asterisms and astral conditions such as the Krittik£s.and
Viskumbhas, or on the occasions of eclipses, or on the sup's
stay at the different ^igp^f^ the Zodiac, should be held as
sacred to the 'god Vishnu, manifest and named after that
Tithi, day, a^terism or the astral condition, etc. The gods
goddesses suchasthe Sun, Isha, Brahman, Lakshmi, etc*.
arsM tht different manifestations of Vishnu: A Vrata prac-
tised in honour of one of them, confers on its practiser all
tbe desirable boons iu life. The gifts and articles of war*
dioulff be ffedicateff'to the god, by reciting
^‘‘Corne, 0 thou lord iff the universe,

ir' v. '■ . -r . ' ■ ‘ ' ■


n 9- , ' ■ .

I make obeisance to thee, and dedicate thin aeat,tbia water
for washing thy feet, this Argba offering, this pup, fell of
honey, this water for rinsing thy month, this water for fhy
bath, this cloth, this perfume,, this flower, thfc. burning
incense-stick, this lighted lamp, these articles of food) to thy
blessed use" (£—5).

Now hear me narrate how the above-said articles' should
be made over to a Brahmana after the worship, and the words
which are to be .uttered on the occasion. " To-day I make
over these articles of worship, previously dedicated tO; the
god Vishnu, to such and such a Brahmana, belonging to shCh:
and such a family, or religious clanship of such and. sack -a
Rishi, with a view to get rid of all my impieties, to acquire
wealth, to enjoy good health, long life and a prosperous
career, and for the increase of progeny, wealth, virtue, and
comforts. I make this gift to you, O Brahmana, with a view
to perpetuate the memory of this my observance of the
vow, so that I may become an emancipated spirit after
death. Be thou propitiated with this my gift,. O thou lord
of all Bie worlds, bless me in return with fame, erudition
and the capacity of making such gifts and sacrifices, O thou,
the presiding deity of all the Vratas. Increase my piety,
augment my pleasures and grant me salvation, and may I
live to witness the realisation of my heart’s desires” (6— it).

The man, who reads every day the whole of the present
chapter of gifts to; be nmde’ofcthe occasion of different Vratas,
attains all his ends in life, and becomes an -emancipated
igtitit ifter death. The Viratas which should be practised
ohderthe auspides of different asterisme, astral combi',
nations, lunar phases and positions of the sun, should hot fee '
pnedsed by worshipptag tfce 0d Hari ia one and tho same
#ay(is)>


CHAPTER CCIX.


Oaid THE Goo op Fire I shall narrate the nature
of piety which follows on the acts of making different gifts
and endowments, whidh grant to their makers, both the
enjoyment of earthly pleasures in this life and salvation
in the next. By making the different sorts of gifts, such
as the Ishta, Purta, etc., the giver becomes entitled to all
sorts of bliss. The endowments of tanks, wells, divine
edifices, gratuitous feeding houses, gardens of fruits, and
caravansaries are known as the Purtas, and their endowers
enjoy an immunity from the cycles of rebirths (x — a). The
performance of an Agnihotra sacrifice, practice of austerities,
truthfulness, conformity to the rules of life laid down in the
Vedas, hospitality and the offering of oblations known as the
Vishvadevapindas, are known as the Ishta acts, which lead
their respective performers or practisers to heaven. Similar*
ly gifts made on the occasions of the eclipses of the planets,
On the passing of the sun to a new zodiacal sign, or on the
day of the twelfth phase of the moon’s wane or Increase,
are also known as the Purta acts. Likewise the merit of
a gift, made with a due regard to the status of its receipient.
Or to the nature of the time and place of its making, U in*


creased million times, such occasions being the appearance
of the sim on the tropics, the passing of that luminary over
thepoints Qfequinox(Vtya$»), the astral condition known
an the Vyatiplta, the waning of the duration of days,
tfce days of the commencement Of the different cycles of
time (Yugas), the pawing over of the sun to a' new sign of
the fodiac ; the days of the fourteen thphase of thei&MiiV


^jfe^or i^- :'ease < l the days of full moon* the ■: days qf the
«%htl or ti» i H phase of . the moon's,, wane or faeroose,

' or mrtiM: Htwnalio


7*0 ACM rURAMART.

the days marked by the astral ' condition known as. the
Vaidhrili Yogi or the occasion of having had an evil dream
in the night. Similarly a gift made on the occasion
ol a.Shraddha ceremony of one's ancestors, under the
auspicies of the sun's appearance on the tropics of cancer
or capricorn, or on the occasion of the passing of that
luminary over the twc equinoxial points respectively, carries
four or eight times the merit of making gifts on any other
occasion. Again a gift made on the occasions of the four
Yishnupadis, twelve Sankrantis, the entrance of the sun
into the signs of Virgo, Gemini, Pisces and Sagitariiis
respectively, carries sixteen times the merit of an ordinary
gift. A Sunday marked by the asterism ShravanS, Ashvini,
Onanist ha,- ArdrS, etc., gives rise to the astral condition
known as the VyatipAta Yoga (j— 13).

The cycle of time known as the Krita Yuga set in on
a day of the third phase of the moon's increase in the
month of Vaishakha, and that day was a Sunday The age
known as the Trcta Yuga commenced from a day of the
ninth phase of the moon’s increase in. the month of Karticka,
and that day was a Monday. . The age known as the
Dvhpara Yuga started from a day of. the thirteenth day
of the moon’s wane in the month of BhAdra, and that day
was a Thursday. The, present cycle of time (Kali Yuga)
has commenced to run its raco on a day of the full moon in
the month of MAgha, and that day was a Friday. The days
on which the abovesaid Yugas had been ; respectively started
“"are known as the Manvautaras. The days of the ninth
phase of the moon's increase in the month , of Ashvina, the
twelfth day of the moon’s increase in the- month of Kirticka
and thedays of the third phase oftbemoOn b the months
of Mlghn and Bh&dra, the day <*f the-pew moon in the
month of Phllguftt, the dsy of thed^^jP j^iase of the
moon ia tbe month the dajjP bflbetwelfth

phase of the moon b themonth of Ashtda, the seventh


AGNt rURANAJfc.

«*»y of the fortnight in the month of M&gha, the day pf
the eighth phase of the moon's wane, the day of the full
moon in the month of AshSda, as well as such Tithjs res-
pectively occurring. the months of KSrticka, Phllguna
and' Jautha (the three Ashtakas) are equally auspicious as
the days of Man vantaras ; and gifts made on the abovesaid
days - bear immortal fruits. A man should not wait to be
asked for anything at the holy places such as the city of
Gay&, the city of PraySga, the banks of the Ganges,
or at the holy shrines, .but voluntarily give alms and dole out
charities. The only gifts which are forbidden at those
places, being the impartment of knowledge and the giving
away of one's daughter in marriage. The giver should look
towards the east while making the gift, white the reeeipient
should face the north at the time of receiving it. The giver-
should mention the names of his Gotra' as welt as that of
the receiver and the names of their fathers, grandfathers
and great grand-fathers respectively (14—21).

Such a rule should be observed even at the time of
giving away a girl in marriage, whereby the giver would be
S long lived person and the duration of life of the taker
would not suffer any diminution. The giver shall bathe
before giving away a girl in marriage, and worship the
bridegrdom, with the G£yatri Mantras before actually
making over . the bride to him and then formally join their
hands by holding water in the hollow of his right palm.
Horses, gold, sessamum . orientate, elephants, slave-girls,
can, houses, reddish cows, as well as the articles which
constitute the ten great gifts, may be given to the bride-
groom with the bride. The money acquired by teaching, by
'valour, by practising austerities, by marrying one’s daughter,
by officiatingasapriestat the sacrifice of another, as well
as the wealth whicb comes froma disciple, is known as the
u Shulka (lit dues or duty). Similarly money earned by
-pnerieipg any trade or agriculture, dr by investing money


J4* AGNI PURANAM.

ha loan or received in lieu of services done to others, falls
'under the same category as the above. Even the money
acquired by gambling, theft or by engaging iq other hazard*
oue pursuits, is known by the same epithet, the merit of
making gifts of such money, partakes of the nature of
the means by which it has been acquired. The six kinds
of Stridhanam which form the: separate property of a
married woman, are the Adhyagni* (gift made to a woman
near the nuptial fire or at the time of marriage), the
AdhylvShnnikaf (gift made to a woman at the time of leaving
her father's house for her husband's), gifts made by her hus-
bands or friends, gifts made by her father, gifts made by her
mother and gifts made by her brother (2a — 27).

A Brahmana should accept only the gifts made by a
Brahmana, a Kshatra, and a Vaishya, and out of compassion
only, a gift made by a Shudra. Gifts of cows, maidens and
1 houses should not be made to many. A man by withholding
a gift promised to his gods, parents, and preceptors in
special, bars the salavation of bis seven generations of
relations. A man should make over to his fallen and
degraded fellow beings, the merit which he has assiduously
acquired by many acts of painful piety, while a gift made
with a view to have something in return, is invalid and
degrading. It is the spirit of sincerity and sympathy that
forms the backbone of virtue, and: even a small cup of water
! presented to the perched lips^of a thirsty man, out of a heart-
felt sympathy, brings imniortal merit to the offerer. A man
of knowledge, character and pietiy, who is above giving any
pain to any creature, if the true receptacle (Pttra) of a gift,


AGNJ VURANAM. 743

li It is he alone that protect* and saves the ignorant from the
evils- of life. A gift fnadt by a man to his own mother is
hundred times more meritorious than a gift made to
an outsider, while the one : made to one's father carries
thousand times more merit than, the latter. Similarly a
gift made by a man to his own daughter, brings him
merit which lasts for the eternal time, while the one
made to his own brother bears immortal fruits. Kindness
is the gift that should be made to creatures other than
man, while the virtue of equal treatment should be
extended even to the fallen and the sinful. . A gift made
to a man of hybrid origin and gifts, made to a Vaisbya,
a Kshatriya or to a Brahmans,, are respectively four, eight
and sixteen times more meritorious than an ordinary gift.
A gift made to a reader of the Vedas is hundred' times more
meritorious than One of the latter class, while infinite merit
is acquired by making a gift to a Brahmana who teaches ot
writes commentaries on the liply Vedas. A gift made to
one’s own priest or to a Brahmana whose profession is to
officiate as a priest at sacrifices undertaken by others,
bears immortal fruits like the one made to a man of indi-
gent circumstances or like the one made on the occasion
of a sacrifice (28—36).


: A gift made tq a Brahmana who dops not practise penances
, . jand austerities and fives by begging only, tends to ; luwer the
Status of the giver ^ift^the^.qext existence. The give* is
drowned by such a gift 'ln the abyss of perdition, as a
•fimmer is drowned by the lycight of the stone tied round
.hi* own neck. The taker, should bathe and hold water in
the cup of bishand before taking the gift, and the giver
^ shpuld recite the i&vitriMantra at the time of making it

,.Pf«4lM,,of'the,irft^e,''.of j .the


na should


'ff- z


744


agni htranam.


as well as his benediction and protection of the gods, utter
them in a small voice in the case of a Kshatriya, whisper
them into the ears of a Vaishjra gift-maker, and recite them
mentally when the giver is a Shudra (37— 39.)

Ground is sacred to the god Vishnu, while a maiden
slake, a bride and a slave are sacred to the god PrajSpath
The elephants and horses own the latter deity and the god of
death as their respective^ tutelar gods. Thus the mule is
sacred to the god Sarva, buffalo to the god of death, the
cancel to the god Nairita, the cow to the goddess Roudri, the
goat to the god of lire, the lamb to the god Apya, the wild
animals to the god of wind, a tank, a pond, a water pot or
a pitcher tb the god Vanina, seaborn gems, iron and gold
to the god of fire, and corn and grain 'whether cooked,
boiled, or in their natural state as well as sweetmeats made

I

of them, are sacred to the god Prajipati.

Perfumes and sweet scents are sacred to the god Praja-
pati, clothes to the Jupiter, birds to the god of wind, alt
knowledge, Brahma-Vidyas, with its different branches
and books to the goddess Sarasvati, and arts to the god
VishVakarma. Trees and giants of forests are sacred to
the god Hari, while an umbrella, a bedding, a seat, a
skin of a black antelope, a pair of shoes, and a carriage


be deemed sacred to the god Angira. Arms,
weapons and munitions of war should be deemed . as under
the protection of all the gbds. The god Vishnu is the tute-
• far deity of all the articles of gift enumerated above, and any
articles not mentioned in $he abovesaid list should be
deemed as sacred to the god Shiva, there being no other
goda who preside over the articles of gifts (40—49).

W*' T1(ti^rer should hold 'ipUw **» the^cup of his band,
toetitita the names of fjitt Article ' of v t*e jiFt ' and the god
whSebit is sacred andTfcftt utter the words, “ i make this
wift.** Thdrthe receiversiPifce gift shauldrocit e the dictum.
' & the artick


ACM VUlUNAM.

of gift. I accept It and give you the benidictiori in return.”
By practising the two relative virtues of receiving a gift arid
giving the necessary benidiction, a Brahmana becbaies on-
emancipated spirit after a long arid prosperous career oil
earth. A man should not nlake any gift without first pro*
pitiatidg the gods and his departed nianeS, nOr a Brdhritana
should take any gift fPool his servants arid preceptors, as
he would not have a pledSadt hereafter by sd doirig. A gift
of money-, made on the occasion of a Sacrifice undertaken
by a Shudra, is sacrifidal money ; *artd the vilehess Which
generally appertains to that community never attaches itself
to a gift by . its member. Even .an anchorite who has re»*
norinced the wdrld and its concerns, can Safety take such
articles as treacle, whey, juice Of sWeet trees and canes from
the hands Of a 9 hudra, without any fear Of being polluted
by such contaminatiou ; and a ferahjriana whO does hot live
by receiving gifts, can take them from people Of all caste and
colour. Brahmanas arri never degraded by their inability
to teach pupils Or to officiate Us priests at religious sacrifices,
taor by taking gifts at unwortHy bands, as they are like the
burning fire, incapable of Sin and pollution (30—54).

It was the custom in the golden age (Krita Yiigd) to
make a gift to a person by calling at his house. In the
'freta age, a Brahmana was used to be invited to the bouse
Of thh giver and sent honoured with a gift, in the llv&para
Vuga; it Was the custom to make a gift to a prirson Who had
asked fOr it, while in the! ptefeat kdti Yuga, gifts are made
tri persons who actually run after the giver* The giver
Should first think Of the recepient of the gift in his mind:
and then sprinkle drops of water over the ground. O Brah-
man, there may be opposite shores of these vast rind voice*
fui seas, limiting its expanse and flooding, but there is mr
limit to acts of gift and charity. A giver Should recite the
following verses before formally making ovOr the gift to ito
ftftpinii .■

d* '


MMIMtttANAM.


" To-day on the occasion of a solar or a limat eclipse
or on die occasion of the sun’s passing over to a new sign
of the zodiac, I make the gift at GayS, Praylga, -on the
|»d]» of the Ganges or at any other holy shrine, tosuch
and such a magnanimous Brahmana, belonging to such and
such M- Gotra, who is well versed in theholy Vedasand the
auzliary branches of divine knowledge, and is accordingly
a fit and worthy person to receive the same. I make this gift ,
composed of such and such articles, respectively sacred to
Shiva or to Vishnu, with a view to acquire fame, knowledge,
prosperity, longevity, enjoyment of all earthly pleasures,
a residence in heaven and salvation after death, liny 1
stand absolved of all impieties, and may I be blessed with a
i beantifitl wife and sons and grandsons in large numbers, t
make this gift to you, 0 Brahmana, may the gods Hari ahd
Shiva be pleased with me. May evils born of the sky, and
warth,, and the heaven never befal mejand may all my sins

linlessl


be purged off, and may I as a sinless! soul, bo- ultimately
merged in the essence of the Para Brahma through its merit.
I make over this bit of gold by way of remuneration to such
and such a Brahmana of such and such a Gotra, with a view
to consolidate this my act of gift (55 — 63).


CHAPTER CCX.


the GOD" or Fire:— N ow t shall enumerate the
names of alb sorts of gifts And of those known as the
slsteen great gif ts (Mahldinam). The ^known ' m Out
ToHpuruahahead* the list of siiteen sucAfteat gifts, ’the
etherfifteenbeing

nspectivelykaown as the Kalpavriksha, the MW*


tiammi cOW*,the.gtft of a goldenKlmadbenu, the gift of
a golden horse, the gift of agoldeo'car frith. a golden hone
put before it, the . gift of a golden . chariot with a golden
elephant yoked thereto, the gift known as the gift of five
ploughs, the gift of an adequate measure of ground to drive
the same, the gifts of VisbnuChakra, Kalpalat?, Sapta-
sftgaraka, Ratnadhenu, and the Mahlbhutaghata. The
above gifts should be made to the Bnhtnanas on' auspicious
days, after having worshipped the gods and the Pritria in the
shed of worship or on the mystic diagram (i— 6).

Hear me enumerate the names of the ten blessed gifts
known as the Meradfinam. The best sort of MerudSnam
consists of a thousand Drona measures of paddy, the nine
remaining sorts respectively consisting of a half measure Of
paddy less than the sort immediately preceding it in number.
The gift known as the LavanSchala (bill of salt) should (the
best of its kind) consist of sixteen Drona measures of
the same article, while the best of the class of gift known
as the Gudadri (the hill of treacle) should consist of ten
Bhlr measures of treacle, the middle and the inferior sorts
of the kind being composed.pf half the quantity of molasses
respectively given away in^the preceding instances. The gift
known Ss the Suvarha Meru should consist of a thousand Pala
weights of gold, the middlingAhd die inferior kinds of the class
consisting of five hundred and two hundred and fifty Paisa
respectively.: The gift, known as the Tilidri (hill of sessa-
mum orientate) should consiitof ten Drona measures of the
same article, the middling and the inferior sorts consisting
of five and three Drona measures of sessamum orientate
respectively, The gift known as the hitl of cotton should
consist of twenty BhSra weights of cotton, the middling and
the inferior sorts of the class respectively consisting of ten
and .five Efcariis. A first class gift of the kind known as
the GhriHchala (the hill of clarified butter) should consist
of twenty pitchers of the same subsUnce, while the


VGN1 FURANAM.


w»

middling and the inferior sorts should respectively consist
of ten and five pitchers, full of clarified butter. A first
class RajatSchala (hill of silver) should consist of ten
thousand Pafa weights of the metal. A first class SharkarS-.
chala (the gift of a hill of sugar) should consist of ten’
Bhara weights of the same article, a middling or an inferior-
gift of the kind respectively consisting of five and two and
a half BhSra weights (7 — 10).

Now I shall descrihe the gifts known as the Dasha Dheai%
(the gifts of ten cows). The first is Guda Dhenu (the cow
of treacle), the second is Ghrita Dhenu (the cow of clarified
butter), the third is Tila Dhenu (the cow of sessamwn
orientate), the fourth is Jala Dhenu (the cow of water), the
other Dhenus, being the gifts of cows made of thickened
milk, honey, sugar, curd, or sweetened juice. Pitchers,
full of liquid substances should be duly stowed in cases of
gifts such as Ghrita Dhenu, Madhu Dhenu etc, while solid
substances should he kept in piles as in-the case of Tila
Dhenu etc. The ground should be plastered with cowdung,.
and blades of sacrificial Kusha grass should be scattered over
it, over* which the skin of a hlack antelope to the extent of
four cubits should he spread, with its neck facing towards;
the East. A similar piece of skin should be kept beside the
former to represent the calf. The cow as above represented
by the skin of a hlack antelope should be made to look
towards the east with her calf, with her body stretching north
to south. A first class Guda Dhenu should be made of'
four Bhara weights of treacle, while its calf should be made
of a BhSra weight only. A Guda Dhenu of the middling
quality should be made of two BhSra weights of treacle
and its calf should be made of haK a BhSra. A Guda
Dhenu of the inferior class, should be mbjjb of a BhSra
weight of treacle, while its calf should be nt adfe of a quarter
weight of that article according to the quantity of treacle
gtlhe dhfKfsalolthe giver.


AMII PURANAM. 149

The treacle Images of both the cow and her calf should bo
covered over with pieces of white linen of thin texture.
Their ears, noses and legs should be made of mothers
of pearl. The eyes should be made of .pearls. The different
veins on their bodies should be shown by laying down
strings of silver thread; The humps on their backs should
be made of copper, while the hairs on their body should
be represented by pasting the hairs of a Chamari cow co
them. The skin should be made of white blankets, the
eye brow's of coral, and the udders of butter. The bunches
of hair at the end of the tails should be made of silk, miNe
should be represented by beads of bel-metal, while the
eye balls should be made of the gem known as thejndra-
nila. The horns should be plated with gold and the hoofs
with silver. The teeth should be made of diverse fruits
and the best of the Brahmana should worship the images
of the cow made as above, by reciting the following Mantra,

“ May that goddess, who is here manifest as the cow,
and who residing in the gods, beams through the bloom and
beauty of all sentient creatures, grant me peace. May
that goddess who dwells in the vital principle of man
and is known as Roudri — the beloved wife of Shankara,
and who has now assumed the shape of a cow, absolve me
of all impieties. May the goddess who lives in the bosom
of the god Vishnu as her own beloved Lakshml, and who
is but another manifestation of the goddess Sv3h3, the wife
of the god of fire, grant me boon. May the goddess, who
guised in different shapes* and as their own loving wives,
leads the Sun, the Mooiti and die gods of asterism in the
paths of their heavenly duties, grant me boon.

May the goddess who has assumed the shape of a cow
and who embodied as an idol of beauty and love augments
the connubial bliss of such gods as the four-faced deity, the
patron god of wealth and the LokapMas, and forms the
fountain source Of their respective divine splendours, grant


me boon* Ob cow, as thoa art Svadhfi to the Ktrf^
and doit tepresent the goddess of fire (Svaha) who
nukes her lord carry the libations pf sacrifice to the gods
who drink them, give rae peace” (is — 38).

The cow having been thus addressed should be given
to a Brahmana. The same rule holds good in making
gifts of all other imaged DhenuS, such as the Tib Dhenn ete,
whereby the giver becomes sinless and attains salvation
after a long and happy career on earth. A living milch-cow
vrith her horns plated with gold, her hoofs plated with silver
and her entire body covered with a piece of white linen
together with a milking bowl of bel-metal, should be
gifted to a Brahmana with a view to consolidate the above
net otgift Tbe-'giver of such a cow is sure to live in heaven
for as many years as the number of hairs on her skin. A
cow of the Kapila species given to a Brahmana as aboye
laid down, redeems the souls of seven generations of his
Vandus and relations. The horns and hoops of a Kapib
cow should be plated with gold and silver • respectively,
bef ore an act of forma] gift, which should be consolidated
by paying remunerations to a Brahmana as much as the means-
of the giver would admit of. The giver of a Kapib cow is
sure to enjoy both celestial and earthly pleasures for sa>
many Yugams as the number Of the hairs. > on its body.
The cow should be given according to rites described
above (39—33).

A man on the pointed death riwuld make the gift of n
with her calf, >y reciting the followiag Mantis “ I
nuke a gjft of this cowand her calf, for being safety taken
•cross the boiling stream of the Vaitarani, which runs below
tfm gates of the doTefnl mansion of tht: dreadful god of
death " (34). ,


CHAPTER CCXt.


:&Aib The God op Fire t-— The possessor of tea cow*
should make the gift of one, the master of a hundred should
make a gift of tea, while the master of a thousand cows
should make a gift of hundred cows, the} merit being the
same in all the cases. The giver of a thousand cows goes
to the region of golden palaces dwelt in by the Gandharvas
and ApsarSs, and bedecked with the lines of coloured
clarified butter known as. the VasudhlrS. By making the
gift of a hundred cows, the soul of a man is redeemed from
the infernal regions, while the giver of a cow is sure to bis
glorified in paradise. By making the gift of a cow. a man
becomes long*lived and prosperous, and ascends heaven after
death (1—3).

“ May the blessed she-butfalo which belongs to. the Loka-
p&las such as India etc., grant me the fulfilment of all my
desires through the merit of my gift of One of her 01m
sex and spedes. May the she-buffalo whose offsprings did
sudi signal service to the lord of virtue (Yama) and in
whose womb the dreadful MahishSshura took his birth, grant
me boon." By giving a she-buffalo or a buBock to a
Brahmans, a man enjoys earthly prosperity or goes to
heaven after death, Agism by making the gift known as
the Sanyucta Hslspsnchiurt ,a man attains all his wished for
objects. A Bala (plough) in the above instance should be
yoked with a pair of bullocks and measure ten footsteps in
length. The ploughshare should be plated with gold before
the. gift, whereby the giver weald be glorified in heaven*
Similarly by making the gift of a Kapils cow at the sacred
shrine known . as the great Pushlcata ( Jestha Pushkara ), a.
mil ac^MKi infinite merit like tbeonederived fiotn the
g^ift of a bollock, Hie bollock should be let loose by ridting


95* Aoni pummam.

the following prayer. “ You are the incarnation of the god
of fourfold virtue, O bullock; These are your own beloved
wives. I make Obeisance to thee, O thou Itfrd Of the god*
whom the Braiudanas worship* Obeisance to thee. Oh tbOii
the feeder of the physical forces, the Rishis add the departed
manes of med. Hay I attain the immortal region through
the merit Of my setting thee free, and may 1 thereby dis-
charge the debt* I respectively btfe to iny departed
ancestors, the creative Nature, and the Rishis. O tbod
virtue incarnate, may that sort of existence fall to my lot
in the nett world, which mett who stalk in thy path usually
attain" (4— it).

The b'uliOck should be let loose by reciting the above
said Mantra, and its body shotfd be branded with the mark
of a discos Or a trident. The soul of a man for whose
salvation such an at is let loose on the eleventh day after
bis decease, is redeemed from the nether regions within six
months or a year of the date of such liberation. The maw
who makes the gift of a cowhyde, fen cubits wide and
thirty cubits in length, spread over a hole of ten cubit in
circumference, become* absolved of all demerits. Similarly
by madcifog the gift of a cow, a plot of land and a bit of gold
tied in the end of a black coloured blanket, a man, however
sinful, is enabled to reside in the same region with Brah-
man. Again by making the gift of a vessel full of sessamum
orientate, and a bowl full of honey and a Prastha measure. of
black sessamum and Magadha, and a bed with all its appen-
dages to a Brahmana, a man attains salvation after a'
long and prosperous career on earth. The endowment of
a large building furnished with the golden statues of the
endower and his patron deity is rewarded in heaven with
an emancipation from successive rebirth*. : i^ fmakuig en-
dowments o( houses, mansions, public hatiaunfd cowsheds
a man becomes sinless and goen to heaven (si^i8).

A maa allowing himseMto. be decepitatiedt before the


Images of the gods Brahma, Han, Hari, and the messenger
of die god of death; ascends heaven. A wheel made o(
silver> should be heated and immersed in water and then
plated with gold. Such a wheel given' -to a Brahmana con-
stitutes the gift known as the Kklachakra. By making a gift
of iron to the weight of his own body to a Brahmana, a man
is exempted from visiting the hell. By giving an iron-rod
made of fifty Pala weights of iron and covered .with a piece
of linen to a Brahmana, a man escapes the chastising rod of
the god of dea th (Yamadanda). Fruits, articles of gift or
edible roots of the forest shoold be given away hi honour
of the god Mritunjaya, whereby the giver woald acquire
a sound health. Similarly an image of a tall man should
he made of sessamum orientate and represented as wedding
a sword in one' hand, clad in a red cloth, bedecked with
Javft Bowers and wearing n garland of beads made of conch-
sheila with his mighty legs encased in shoes. The eyes of
the Image should be made of gold and its teeth of silver
and its rides of black-coloured blankets. Such an image,
aa well as die one of the Kftlapurusha situate at its left,
abmdd be worshipped with perfumes and flowers, after which
they should be made, ova to a Brahmana. The worshipper
or the gifter of such an image would became a king and be
able to baffle death. The man who gives a cow or an ox
to a Brahmana, attains salvation after a happy career on
earth, a similar amt bd|g also acquired by making the gift
ef a golden image of a fo e tey decked with small bells. The
gmr of a golden horse knows no spiritual death. A giver
ef gold attains all hit wished-for objects la life. Silver
s|km 14 be paid as remuneration to a Brahmana in eider to
toaatthilte- an act of gokbgifd&g, while .gold, should be
by nay : -ejt-|ttPi®««th» (Oskshina) in connection
^ should be paid tea


• 754 ACNtPUKAMAM.

Remuneration paid in silver to a Brahmana on the occasion
of the Shraddha ceremony of one’s departed manes, brings,
pleasure and piety to the performer, while gold, silver,
copper, gems, pearls or money in any shape should be paid
to a Brahman a as remuneration by a man, who has. made
a gift of land. By making over the propietary right in a plot
of land to a Brahmana, a man is said to propitiate the gods
and the souls of his departed manes blissfully residing in
their respective regions. By making the gift of a town or
a village, a hamlet, a field in full harvest, or even a 1 (dot
of land to the extent of the hyde of a cow, a man attains
everything (25—34).

•The merit of making the gift of a plot of land grows
more and more every day like a drop of oil poured on under
which expands itself in larger and larger eddies. The merit
of all other gifts except those of villages, lands, and girls of
five years of age, takes fruit only in the next existence of
the giver, while the merit acquired by making the latter
follows him through his seven successive rebirths (35—36).

The man who gives away a girl in marriage, succours
the sodls of his three classes of relations, and goes to the
region of Brahml after death. By making the gift of an
elephant and by paying the necessary fee to a Brahmana to
consolidate the act, a mah becomes sinless and is rewarded
with a residence in paradise. By making the gift of, a horse,
a man becomes long-lived, healthy, prosperous andadweller
of the celestial regions. By making the gift of a feinale
slave to one of the foremost of the Brahmanas, a man be*
comes an inmate of the region OftheApasarts (nymphs).
By making the gift bf a copper--vftafel' t6 the weight' of
five hufcdred^Pxias, or oneof tha sdme metal weighing half
or -a- quarter ns moth,' a thebbads

oflife afthedosC at feirfb.'" By

a mao goes’ to ' hriTvenaftir tfceflifj; df a

'• ■ -■■■ ' ' ■' ££ /' v':' . .. ;


ACNIPURANAM. ff5

cloth, a man attains longevity on earth, and an eternal
residence in heaven after death. A man ascends heaven
- through the merit of gratuitous distributions of wheat,
barley, paddy, etc. Similarly the man who makes gifts of
seats, metal pots, salt, perfumes, sandal, incense-sticks,
lighted lamps, prepared betel leaves, iron, silver, gems, or
rare or valuable articles, is liberated from the bonds of
rebirths .at the close of a prosperous earthly career. Again
by making the gift of a metal vessel, full of sessamum orien-
tals, a man goes to heaven after death (37 — 43).

The merit of a gratuitous distribution of boiled rice among
the needy and the poor, stands unparalleled and has not yet
been, nor ever will be excelled by any other gift in future.
Gifts of all other sorts cannot even vie with a sixteenth part
of the merit of the latter. There is hope or salvation oven
for the blackest sinner if he doles out such charities to the
poor. Similarly the man who sets up a house on the road
side to supply gratuitously fresh water and light refresh-
ments to the way-farers, becomes an emancipated spirit at
the close of a happy life. Again by supplying; free of costs,
fire rod faggots to the journey-men on the road, a man
is sure to live in heaven, fondly attended upon by celes-
tial, beauties and damsels of the Gandharvas. By making gifts
<d clarified butter, oil and salt, a man attains all his wished-
for-objects, while the name of a giver of umbrellas, shoes,
and sandals, is gf^rified tp heaven. A great merit is ac-
quired by makinggifts fs-ifb- months of Cbaitraj, Aakvina,
and Vaishakha, after having worshipped the gods Hari, Han,
BtahmA and the Lokap&las. The endower of an orchard
for the use of the public or of gratuitous public feeding
bouses, roads, Wsting places on the road-side, paths, etc.,
is liberated frOm^he bonds of rebirths (44— -51).

The threegifWsuck as the gift of a plot of land, the impart-
nwat of knovvte^r t atid l|he gif t of books shottidj bedeOued
as equally meritorious. By impartial the knowledge of god or


756


AGNI PURANAM.

in books bearing upon that particular branch of knowledge,
to his disciple, a preceptor becomes sinless and is subse-
quently merged in the Parabrahma. The man who shelters
or succours a terrified being, is able to witness the realisation
of all his heartfelt desires. By causing books of Pourinic
literature such as the RSmSyanam, the Bhiratam, etc., to
be copied out and presented to a Brahmana, the soul of a
man is emancipated from the fetters of rebirths at the close
of a happy terrestrial existence. The man who teaches,
the holy Vedas or the arts of ringing and- dancing to his
disciples or pupils, goes to heaven. Gif! of money should be
made to an UpSdhyaya (teacher) for the purposes of defraying
the expenses of his pupils' messing. What mofe can be pos-
sibly given by a man who has made the preceding sort of
gift with a view to acquire virtues and the fulfilment of his
heart-felt desires (52 — 55).

A man by imparting knowledge (VidyadSnam) acquires
a merit equal to that of making gifts of the collective merit
of a thousand VSjapeya sacrifices. By reading out a book
(to a copyist) in a temple dedicated either to the god Shiva,
Vishnu or to the sun, a man acquires the merit of makingall
sorts of gifts. The four castes, the four religious orders, the
gods such as BrahmS, etc., have alt their seats in an act
of impartment of knowledge. Knowledge is the K2m&>
Dhenu (the celestial cow of plenty, yielding all desires) from
which all boons in life may be mitched. Knowledge is the
best of all vision or eyesight and the man who devotes
* himself to the cause of the diffusion of Upavedic knowledge
(knowledge inculcated in the auxiliary sciences of the
Vedas) lives in amity with the' Gandharvas in their Own
region. By making gifts of worksoo ihestx sciences and
arts known as the Vedtngas, (1. ShfkMi* W the science of
proper articulation and pronunciation, 4 . .^TlMindas or die
science (prosody, 3. V^uanam or 6rahMnar, 4. Nirukta
or the etymological explanation of dUBcuit vedic wpctU,


g. jyetiaba or the science of astronomy, 6. Kalpa, Ritual
or Ceremonial), t man goes to heaven after death, while by
making gifts of books known as the Dharma Shastras, the
sool of the giver lives in perpetual amity and in the same
region with the god of virtue. Similarly by distributing
philosophical works (Siddhintas) free of costs among the
man becomes an emancipated spirit after
death, the same merit being acquired by distributing books
as by imparting knowledge. The man who makes free gifts
of Puranas, gets all his wished for objects, while the
preceptor who teaches pupils acquires merits, a Padmna in
number (56—63).

The man who gratuitously teacnes another a craft or a
trade or settles upon him a property, whereby he earns his
livelihood, acquires infinite merit. A man should offer to
the souls of his departed manes, all the best articles of
comfort or food, and .especially those which he likes the
most The man, who having worshipped the gods such as
Rudra, Vishnu, Brahml and Ganesha or the goddess Durg8,
distributes the articles of worship among the Brahmanas,
becomes the happy possessor of all comforts in life, while a
similar result is obtained by building and consecrating temples
and divine images. The man who cleanses and washes every
day with purifying compositions, the courts and yard* of a


divine temple, is purged of all sins. The man who lays.
down many a mystic diagrams on the floor of a sacrificial
chamber, is rewarded suzeranity over many a feu>

dstorykings andyassals, ;J$jpFn|an who offers flowers, per*
fumes, clcliifty vlnMhse>stuks, lamps and Naividyas to a god,
becomes an emancipated spirit at the dose of his qarthljr
career, the sameresdt being obtained by circumambulating a
#rin < ^ isiM|ge;.or : , e|lfi9(b by sihging. qr playing on musical
instruments In a dtvine temple, or bysimplylooking at the


73* \ . AQW rUMMAM.

aalertted %Uh musk, Benosm, sandal, p arte, agolfochnm,
cwsapbor, MusU and scented gumresin to Its inmate Mf,
am lfe« occasion o f the sun’s passing over to a new sigh of
the sodiec, « man becomes tie happy possessor Of *11 Me
wished far objects in life. The rite of simple ablution Mf
•be fon unto an idol with a hundred Pula weights of dari*
Bed butter, the unguent should consist of twentyfiva Palh
weights, while tie rite of Mahlsnlnam should be perfohaad
with a thousand Pklas. The ten sins Of a otaa are absoftred
by bathing the image of a god in water, a hundred tf (Mb
tag it in thickened srilk, a thousand by bathing jt 4 a
milk, curd or clarified butter. By dedicating fem al e s har es ,
oanraats, ornaments, cows, lands, hones and ele ph an ts to
aaitoi a man acquires wealth and fortune aad goes to
heaved after death (63—74).

CHAPTER CCX 1 I.


Sato the Goo or Fire Now i shall enumerate the


Mates of gifts which are to be bade in the different Months
of the year, for the M^satfon of different objects had
desires (Klmysdlncm) aSd Which coalers On the ghrer aH
'aorta of ptesures a min t an aspire to. The Nhya Fiji*
sdeh to tbe daily toorsfaip of oneVtuteliry god or the


apfidteaf preceptor, tbotid he performed every dap, wMe Me
KtoayefH^ • df

-pi^bitad|fkty*acif firth* ebservawxt a* hep vbw^'-eleii,


Mm PUR ARAM.


m


goes to the region of tbe sun-god kfter ddtt. Tbeeff er-
iog of a cake carved out as an elephant aadmadf ter the
god la the month of Pousha, redeems the souls of the
twenty-one generations of tbe worshipper's r el a tions , By
offering » cake carved out as a car and a bone fa tbe
month of Mlgha tbe worshipper becomes exempted from',
visiting tbe hell for his inequities in life. Similarly by offer-
ing a cake baked in the shape of a ball in the month of
PhAlgurta. the offerer becomes a monarch in . his next exist-
ence after a blissful 1 stay at heaven. Again by offering a cow
of sugarcane in the month of Chaitra, accompanied by gifts
of slaves both male and female, a man is sore to reside
in heaven for a long time, and becomes a monarch in his
next incarnation on earth. 'By offering rim seven sorts of
gram known as the Sapta Vrihi ia the month of VaistAkha
the giver becomes permeated with the essence of the god
Shiva, while he is sure to become one with the latter
deity by making offerings and dedicating boiled rice etc.,
to the god in the month of Ashftda. A chariot made of
flowers weighing two hundred Pales should be dedicated
to the god in the month of Shravmaa, whereby the dedicator
would be translated to heaven, accempaniedbytbe liberated
sonla of his relations and departed menc^andbeeome n
monarch in his next mwdm nritmcb A similar merit


is acquired by offering scented
month of Bhldrx, triutt an


s to - thcgodk the
aP a vessel fall of
jgwiAvtbft month of

PP ■■ PP . PiP 1

it Wit-


760


AONI PURANAM.

be given as free gifts to a Brahmana on the occasion
of the gift making in the month of KSrticka. I shall now
enumerate the weights of the successive gem-represesta-
turns of the Merus. A first class gift of the kind should
consist of- twelve miniature representations of the mountains,
respectively made of diamond, ruby, saphire, turqois,. crys-
tal, topaz, emerald, and pearl, each weighing a Prastn
weight. The miniature Merus would weigh half aS modi is
a middling class of the abovesaid gift, while they should be
made to weigh a quartet as much in an, inferior kind of
Merudanam.

The Merus should be worshipped and located *t the
petals of the lotus-shaped diagram described under the
head of the Varsaparvatas, together with its tutelary gods
such as Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara, while the Mount
MalyavAna should be worshipped to the east of the Merus,
the mounts Bhadra and Ashvarakska being worshipped
to the east of the latter. The three mountains such as -die
Hemakuta, the HimavSna, and Nishadha should be worshipped
on the south of the Metu, the three other chains of hills such
as the, -Nila {Blue), the Shveta (white) and the Shringi
(Peaked) being worshipped on its north, while the mountains
such as the Vaikankha the Gandham&dana and the KetundUa
sbould be worshipped on its west The worshipper should
duly perform the rite of ablution and observe a fast on the
day of the gift making, and worship either Shiva or Vishnu,
ti>e two presiding deities of aU gifts. The above-said Merus
should be duly worshipped before the images of the gods
Shiva or Vishnu, and sbould be then made over to a Bfah-
mana asa free gift, by reciting the following Mantra*-—
M f make these gifts of miniature gem»E»Owatains (Rata*
Merus) sacred to die god Vishnu, to sochandauch a Btah-
man of such and such aGotra, whh a.view^^iit this Sfe

pated rp i rit sftrr dcath.


JUUM WjHAnAM - { fa

by the gods, and redeems the souls of men' any way itlated
looira, and sports In the blissful reaions of the gods fades,
Brahma, Shiva or mri (lo^ifil.

Gifts of Svarna Mena (Merit mountains made of goid},
each weighing a thousand Pale* of pare gold, may be made
Under the auspicies of the sun** changing a Zodiacal sign
or on other hallowed days of the year. • The images of the
'Hindu Trinity (Brahma, Vishnu and liaheshvara) should be
placed on the three peaks of the Meru, and the miniature,
representations of the mountain chains which lie encircling
the Meru, should be respectively made of a hundred Palm
Weight of . pure gold. The Uteru and the mountain chains
tint encircle it number thirteen in all. By making die
gift of a golden Meru to a Brahmana on the occasion of
the sun’s appearance on the tropics or on the occasion
df n solar or a lunar eclipse, before an image of the god
Vishnu after having duly worshipped- the latter deity, the
soul of a man is enabled to live for ever in the blissful
Vaikuntha. By making a similar gift of silver (Rajata
Hero), the maker successively becomes a monarch in his as
many rebirths as the number of atoms which the earth is
composed of. The aforesaid Rajata Meru should > be made
as tapering into twelve different peaks, and its giver should
make a formal resolution before hie god and the assembled
Brahmana* before actually making it over to one of their
asMptfty. 'The god Vishnu and the recipient ' Brahmana
(one^ edition roads Rttdra) should be duly Worshipped' by
the maker of thegift known as toe Bbumi Meru, which sort
Mats In nettfing a village, a hamlet or a Handaia on a duly
. qualified Brahmaaa,r*the merit of such a gift being identical
With tlnm described Ini connection with preceding
Mmn«dln>ins. The gift hnownaathe Hasti Mere consists in
' U gratuitous presentation Of nintfeen elephants to % Brahmana, .
rmgjuctl va ^ Upon by the iaages of the memben of the
; fto»iu;T iiijty;aad infink® merit Mowa upoi thfr attig

. ■ -V: 06 • 'J;


fh AQNI PUMA NAM.

of men i gift. The gift known as the Ashva Meru con-
sists in giving away twelve horses, after worshipping the god
Vishnu, wnereby its maker is stud to reign as a king in each
of Us successive re-births. In the gift known as the Go-Meru,
the same number of cows should be given to a Brahmans as
lajd down m'the case of an Ashva Mere (19— ad).

A Vastra Meru gift of the middling class consists of a
Bhira weight of silk cloth, while a first class gift of the
hind, would consist of sixteen pieces of the same article.
The gift known as the hill of clarified butter (Ghrita
Parvata) consists of five thousand Pala weights of the same
substance. Each, of the other mountains encircling the
Meru should be represented as to- have been made of a
five hundred Pala weights of clarified butter. The- god
Hari should be worshipped as seated on the summits of
each of these miniature mountains. The mountains shoiid
be given to a Brahmtfoa whereby the giver would go
to the region of Vishnu after death. The gift of a Khanda
Men (hill of candied sugar) should be made according to
rites and measures as laid down in the preceding instance*
wherebjrisirtiUar merit is accrued to the giver. A Dhinya
Meru (hfliofL rice) should be composed of five Khlra
measures ^a BJ»3ra=i6 Drones) of rice, while the other
. mountaiiis shduld consist of a. KhSra measure each. The
three peaks of the miniature Rice-Meru should be made of
goid,and the gods Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesbvara or the
gild Vishnu alone in their stead should be worshipped on
their sumrtrits.tlte maker of such agift acquire* infinite
merit The gift known as the Tila-Meru should consist
of right Drona measures of sessamum orientate. The peaks
of the mountain as well as those of- die - other twelve
mountains should be made of ’ gold as preceding .

instance. The man iriMaiiltes.thegift '

goes to the r^gbn efVl^ '


ACM PbRAMAM.


¥9

The different sorts of Meru gifts (the mountain supposed
to occupy the central part of the earth's surface, projected
like the upper section of a lotus) enumerated above should
be made and handed over to the Brahmanas by reciting
the following prayer : — “ Obeisance to the mount Meru, the
representative of Vishnu on earth. Salutation unto the
mpuntain which forms the main stay of the. earth. . I make
obeisance to the mountain situate at the centre of the earth,
and whose summits are resorted to by the gods Brahma,
Vishnu and Maheshvara. Obeisance to the lord of the
twelye mountain chains. Succour me, O thou gentle, sin*
destroying mountain, the devotee of the god Vishnu. May
I as a sinless spirit enter the region of the latter deity,
accompanied by the souls of my departed manes. The god
Hari is manifest in theei I btve established my identity
w*th Vishnu. I make a ffttk of thee to the god Vishnu
for the salvation of my soul and enjoyment of earthly
pleasures (33—35).

— — sos— —

CHAFFER CCX1II.

Said the God jOF Fm* :— Now I shall describe the
process of makingtbegiftkoown as the gift of the whole
earth, which admits of a three-fold division as the best; the
middling and die inferior short of earth-gift (1).

The entire earth’s surface which is drained by the seven
oceans, and which i* .divided into seven Dvipas or Conti-
nent^ covers an ^a^ thousand millions of yojanas.
The beat portion of /the- earth's surface is known as jimnb
dvipt or tte cootineottfllia In the heat- ip* of the
gift, the earth is to he mp wasnt o dhy shall of fvpdhtxa


fH • ACNI PyRANAM.

weight* of gold, while in the middling JConu) and the
inferior sort* of the gift^the balls should be repecthrefy
made of ajpalf and a third part of the ahovesaid weight,
of gold (4H-3).

A Kalpa Vriksha (a celestial tree yielding all sort* of
fruits or desires) should be soldered to the top of the ball,
all its trunk, branches, leaves and fruits being made of gold.
The (intelligent should represent the tree as spreading out
in five branches, and give it to a Brahmana aa a free gift.

The man who makes such a gift, blissfully resides in the
region of Brahma in the company of the souls of his depart,
ed manes, like the mao who makes the pit of a golden
image of a Kama Phenu (celestial cow) weighing five hundred
pnlas before a Sbalagrama. All the gods such as Brahms,
Vishnu, Meheshvara, etc., dwell in the body of a cow, and
the merit of making all sorts of gifts, is accrued to the giver
of a cow, who is sure to be translated to the region of
Brahman (4—7)*

The man who makes the gift of a Kapila cow before an
image of the god Vishnu, redeems the souls of all his re.
lation*. By making the gift of a damsel bedecked with
ornaments, a man acquires the merit of a horse-sacrifice.
Similarly (by making gifts of. a village or a hamlet or Of
afield in full harvest, a man enjoys heavenly felicity and
: witnesses the realisation of all hisCwuheddor objects.. The
aaan who lets loose a branded bull for the salvation . of the
-souls of Ids departed manes io the m onth of (Obtkkh
ccdecmsthe souls of all his relations ( 9 — 9).


CHAPTER CCX1V.


Oau> the God of Fire: — Now 1 shall describe the
system of veins, nerves and arteries (Nadi Chakra) which
are to be found in a human body, and a knowledge whereof
leads to a knowledge of the divine self of Hari. Hundreds of
thread-like fibres branch out from the bulb-like ganglion situate
below the umbilical region of a man. Seventy-two thou-
sand of such nerves are lodged in the umbilical region, thence
branching out all over the body. The ten principal nerves
are the Ida, the Pingall, the SushumnS, the Gandhari, the
HastijihvS, the Pritha, the Yasha, the Alambusha, the Huhu,
and the Shankhini. These ten nerves carry the mysterious
vital energy known as the Prlna (i — 5).

The ten vital winds (nervous energy) ares the Prana, the
Afina, the Samlna, the Udlna, the Vylna, the Nlga, the
Karma, the Krikara, the Devadatta and the Dhananjaya.
The vital wind called the Prana is the lord of the other nine.
It is the Prlna (wind) that being located in the heart of crea-
tures Inflates their lungs and thus gives rise to the process of
respiration so essential to vitality. Since it escapes from
the body (Praylnara Kurute) after short a span of stipulated
time, it is called the Prlna. The Aplna wind forces down
the food and drink intOf Jhe stomach of an animal, and thus
helps the prOtesets of degj^itatira, emission of flatus, execrata
urine and sehten, and hence the epithet. The wind Samlna
'is so called from the fact of its establishing an equilibrium
among the different principles? of blood, bile and phlegm,
generated by eating, drinking, smelling, etc. The wind
known as the Udlna, controls, the movements of lips, faceal
mu s cl es, die colouring of the conjunctivita jmd the up-
heaviegs of the heart. The action of the Vyana wind is
most apparent in aching of the limbs or in, the curvature of


. ACN1 nnUMAM.


7 «*

the body and the choking of the larynx. A disease is wa%
ushered in by a deranged state of this nervous energy
(Vyana). The wind known as the Nlga gives rise to eracta*

' tions, |The action of the Kunna wind is to control the open-
ing,. shutting and movements of the eyes, that of the Krikara
is to help the process of matriculation, that of Devadatta is
manifest in yawning, while the-wfnd known as the Dhanan-
jaya fattens': the system and arrests the shrinking of the
body even after death. Since vitality flows or escapes through
the channels of these ten veins and arteries tfjjjtjr ere cahed
Nidis (channels) (6 — 14).

All the conditions/ movements add situations of the w
such as the Sankr&nti, Vishuva, the succession of day and
night, changes of tropics, Adhimasha, Rina, Dhana and
Unar&tra, fare by analogy attributed to the different portions
and organic functions of the body. Hiccough is Unu-Rltra
(the first waning of the duration of nights), yawning is AdkU
mesa or Intercalary (lunar month), coughing has got the
mysticMesignation of Rina (see under the chapter of astral.
Rina* Dhana previously described) while the taking in of the
breath has been designated as the Dhana. The right side
of the body is called the north, and the left the south (with re-
gard to the magnetic polarties of those parts). The Vishuvas
or the equinoxial points are situated .on the Hne passing
through the nbiddle of the body, while the Sankrinti in the
present instance is the passing over of the psychic principle
from one occult nerve ganglion to the other. The oeodt
nerve known as the Sushumni runs through the middle
of the body. The occult nerve Ids. is situate attts left, whihr
the nerve PingalS lies at its right. ThsgPrlaa or 'the vitid
principle situate higher up is called the day, while die triad
Apftna is called the night. Thus the one j^ .die «u«e
vital mid (energy) serves ten different pqifiiiiliec ffite (ha
tan who controls the succession jrf 'day and night and the
happenbg of 'Uch phenomena (tea m ril) at the Ss^iInti,


AOttl CUftANAM. J*7

the march of the equinoxes, Una-R 5 tra, Adhimasa, etc.
(tj— 17 ).

Subjugation of the bodily principles is called the edipte
of tiie moon, while a comprehension of- the principle whioh
lies beyond the material plane, are called the eclipse of the
sun in the parlance of the Yoga. An act of Pr&nlytaa
consists in inflating the abdomen by taking in as much
breath as possible, while in its Kumbhaka form, the Yogi
should hold tight all the airpassages of his body so as to
guard against its least escape, and hold his Pr&na smooth
and unruffled like the water in a pitcher resting on ita
cushion. The Yogi who is well versed in the Mantras,
should let. out the whole wind by a single act of respiration,
after having attempted to push it upward to the region of
the brain (18— 23).

Since Shiva who resides in the bosom of all beings,
himself recites the “Han” “Sa” Mantras (sounds spon-
taneously produced in the heart of a man at the time of
respiration), even without the knowledge of that particular
individual, hence persons who are cognisant of extra corporal
principles, give the epithet of Japa (recitation of a Mantra)
to that paticular sound. Those sounds are produced twenty-
one thousand she hundred times in the course of a day and
night. Thus the lord of the Yogis, seated in all human
hmurts, recites this spontaneous Glyatri Mantra (Ajapfl
Gtyatri) permeatedwithtbeessence of the (Hindu) Trinity;
and' the man : u$g ;'san Mpjf .the door of his heart against
the evternaf. wo^aad Uiiiil fc es his whole soul and iadeniity
in this recrtatibn nf the Ajapa, knows no second birth
(34—20). ,

The occult* Kuudalini permeated with (he essence of the
sun,the moos andthe firs-godis located in the hearts of men,
shapcd like a maoe pfljgbt (Ankusha). The foremost of the
. spiritualist stoaM ^^ Jthe whole diverse as centred round
tlm Kundalini khb rara he >r»| S nd emended from his occult


968 Attttl VURANAM.

Organ of heaveii by a chord of mystic attraction. The Yog)
would see the universe thus illuminated with the light of his
own heart and as saturated with the drops of ambrosia cast
down from the heaven from which it is suspended. It is the
changeless, disembodied Shiva ivho recites the " Man ’*
“ Sa” Mantra in the bosom of each man. As oil lies latent
in sessamum, as purfume fills both the inside and the out-
side of the petals of a flower, so the god Shiva covers
both the interror and the exterior of a man. The god
Brahma has his seat in the hearts of all men, the god Vishnu
.around the throat, the Maheshvara at the region of the
. temple and god Rudra at the region of the palate.

O Brahmana, the god Shiva should be supposed as lying
'at the root of the vital principle, and the god Nlskala should
bO held as lying at its apparent break in this life (37—33)'.

The Yogi who constantly recites the Nlda Mantra in
that particular pitch of voice known as the PrasSda, attains
his ends within six months of the day of such first recitation.

’ Within six months of the day of its first practice, the Yogi
Would be sinless by his knowledge of the universe and
become^possessed of virtues'such as the Animft (super-human
power of becoming as small as an Anu or atom), etc.

A Nada Mantra admits of a threefold division, according
as it is short (Hrasva), long (Dirgha) or Plata (protracted
or prolated). A short ftada Mantra brings sin and misery
«to its repeater, a long Nada duly recited grants salvation.
The same merit accrues to the repeater of a Pluta Nada
Mantra furnished with the characteristic nasal phonetic
'symbol (Vindu) on its head. A Nada Mantra preceded and
followed by the Mantra “Fut,” should be. used in deadly in-
'cantations, while the same Mantra coupled trabove with the
. Hrid Mantra, should be used in spells priotijMI lor captivat-
ing the minds of others. The ipaage of thd ^rk hown as the
Dakshinl Marti shouM be O^templated «t tie time of repeat-
ing five hundred thousand times the abovciMid Mantrs after


AGNi PURANAM. • 7®9

ihich A ten thousand libations of clarifledbuttef should be
offered. The Mantra coupled as in tHe preceding case should
be repeated oil the occasion Of creating Animosity among
previously Attached pairs. The twice born Ode who under-
fctadds the nature Of the deity who knows no affliction olr
diminution And df Whom Absolute vacuum forms the upper,
the lower and the middle part (Tri Shunyd), is liberated from
the bonds Of necessary cycles of existence, "the preceptor
is unworthy of the epithet who does not know the full
import Of the five components Of the PrasAd Mantra
possessed Of the thirty eight sorts of beatitude; A Gdhi
Or a spiritual guide needs must fully understand the
significance And the mysteries of the Omkar And the Giyatri
Mantras as well as the nature of the divine selves Of Rudra
And other gods (33—41)-


CHAPTER CCXV.


daio THE Grid OP Fire .-— That man is hO other than
the ged Hari incarnate on earth, who fully understands the
mystery of the Omkar Mantra. Therefore it is incumbent
on a man to constantly recite the Pranava Mantra which
heads the list ofaHite icaiSpeers in respect of merit- and
Sanctity. All the other Mantras should be used preceded
by the PranAva Mantra. That rite or ceremony only should
be deemed as complete and properly done which has been
closed by repeating the Pranava Mantra. The three Vyahriti
Mantras of infinite virtues are preceded' by the holy
,< Omklr w as weU as.' the Tripadi and the S&ritri Mantra
Whkh bas emanated from the mouths of the fourfaced deity.

■ who having ' . subjugated . Ms senses, ‘ repeats

9f .


every day for a year the PraasvdMantr*i shakes off fab
mortal coil and i» converted into th« universal expanse of
ether which is but another manifestation of Para Brahma*
The Ekakshara (Om) is the Para Brahma himself and
Pr&nyama is the best of austerities. There is no better
Mantra than the G&yatri, and truthfulness is better than a
vow of silence. By seven times repeating the Ghyatri
Mantra, a man becomes absolved of all sins, while a ten
times repetition of the same Mantra leads a man to heaven^
The Mantra twenty times repeated lead* a man to the re*
gion of Isha, while through the merit of repeating
hundred and eight times the samt Mantra, the soul of a man
b safely borne across this ocean «tf life. The G&yatri Mantra
excels the 'Rudra and Kusbmtnda Mantras in merit and
sanctity. No other Mantra b better than the Gayatri as far
as the merit of repetition b concerned, and there is no better
Mantra to offer libations with than the Yyahritis. Even a
single foot or a single Rich of the GSyatri carries enough
sanctity to purge a man of impieties inoideotal to the com*
mission of such heinous crimes as the murder of a Brah^


mana, jinking of intoxicating liquors, theft of gold weighs
fog more than eighty Ratis or going unto the wives of his
elders or preceptors, or unto women who are in hfo for-


bidden degree of consanguinity (i— $).

On having . unwittingly py unwillingly committed any
lidfo! act, a man should repeat the Giy^fri Mantra and
perform the Horn* ceremony with the seeds of sessamum
Orieotale. In the alternative heshould »entaUy recite the


- Gtyatri Mantra and observe a, Mfttfef 1 :
a^i. ; Even the killer of a cow
*** » SWtric&k a defiler


Id: : Jib ' "tlb :


ile day and
«, a patri*
* persons,
sins fay


. abovcsatd

fy hatffeg fo water and


ACM! fUKAMUi.


77 *


bj repeating a kindred timet Ike Glyatri Mantra aider
its surface. Similarly by drinking s cup of water conse-
crated hundred times with the G&yatri Mantra, a man be-
comes absolved of all impieties. The Giyatri Mantra hun-
dred times repeated procures pardon for all light delin-
quincies, a thousand repetition of the same Mantra destroys
sins incidental to the commission of offences known as the


Upapi takas* (sins of the second degree), while a ten million
repetition grants all boons to the repeater and confers on
him sovereignty in this world and godhead in the next.
A similar result may be also obtained by repeating the
Glyatri preceded and followed !?/ the Omkar and running
as “Om Bhurbhuva, etc., Om” (10—15).

The Rishi who composed the Gayatri or the rhapsodist
who first sang its verse ^WUr^Virfva mitra. The metre of
the distich is GSyatri. Tjn pipding deity of the Mantra
fa the Sun-god, while it should far^ifaentally repeated (Japa)
or used (Viniyoga) in olpecfaa with casting libations of
clarified butter int« ; the sgsrificfal fire or on the occasion of
appeasing the wraths of gods. The gods which preside
over the different letters composing the distich, are the Fire-
god, the god of wind, tb# Sun-god, the Lightning, the god


of death, the god of the oceans, the Jupiter, the god of
rain (Parjaaaya), the kiag of the celestials (jndra), Gan-


dharva, Pushi, Mitra, Varena.Tvasta, the Vasus, the Marat,
rite -.Moon, the Angira, Vasava, Nasati, Ka,

Radio, Brri»|i ^j^ ^^ ^te west of the gods successively,
•M .; At _ the Omo MMPlrtff ltai Mdntra, . jointly wipe away
■' ■ flible ^famn ^ sori^ri the ••• repeater,;, engendered ■

either fffcrtNM of . toes, calves, legs, knee-

rg^rieb betly, breasts, beaft,

forehead, Bps


77 *


AGNI PUKANAM.


the sides, the head, or the mouth. The colours which wait
the body of the goddess Giyatri, are yellow, blue, brown,
emerald, flame-colour, golden, lightning colour, yellowish
Mack, black, blood-red, sapphire like, crystal, palegold, ruby,
golden, brown, reddish blue, blackish-red, gold-shade,
whilo, and blackish scarlet. The goddess shonld he con-
templated as having a complexion variegated by the above*
said colours. By meditating on the divine nature of the
goddess and by casting libations of clarified hutter into
the fire in her honour, a man becomes purged of all s an s


(16 — 24).

A Homa ceremony performed with lihathms of clarified
butter containing the seeds of seassamum orientate, and a
repit it ion the Gayatri Mantra, tends to absolve a man of all
sins, while the G&yatri Homas undertaken for the purposes
of peace making or for the prolongation of one's Hfe, shall
respectively consist of libations containing barley or clarified
butter simply. For the realisatioh of one's own ends, the
Giyatri Homa should be performed with sundried rice, while
the one undertaken with a view to. become merged m the
essence, of Brahman, should consist of Kbations of sweetened
porridge. A man inorder to have male issues should perform
the Giyatri Homa with libations of curd, while ’ m the one
performed for the increase of one’s wealth, oblations of Shall-
Rice should be cast btodhe sacrificial fire: Stems of Btlva
trees should be offered ait oblations in the one performed foe
the increase of one's wealth, while lotoses should be cast into.
4be fire in the one performed for the purposes of increasing
one’s personal beauty. A man desirous of getting rid of a


disease should perform a Giyatri Homa with bunches of gseen
grow, god, similar oblations should be-Offeredin. the one
undertaken with a view to quell allphysicnl.er social dis-


uadertaken, with a view to quell allphystt
iurhoace^. The oblations should consist
resi® igai ©fiet^oraedSHtha nttfw


good luck,


AGNI PURANAH. 1t$

ihoald perform a Gayatri Homa by offering libation* of
sweetened porridge. By casting ten thousand libations into
the sacrificial fire, a man becomes possessed of the above*
said superhuman powers (Siddhis), -while by offering such
hundred thousand, he will be able to realise all his heartfelt
objects. By offering a million libations a man is absolved
of the sin incidental to the murder of a Brahmana, becomes
able to redeem the souls of all his relations and finally
becomes one with the god Hari. The goddess Gayatri
should be invoked at the commencement of all sacrifices,
performed for the propitiation of hostile planets or for any
other purposes (25 — 30).

After that the performer of the Homa, should meditate
upon the mystic significance of the Omkar, and tie up into a
knot the tuft of hair on the crown of his head by once-
reciting the Gayatri Mantra. Then he should again rinse
his mouth with water- and touch the regions of his shoulders
heart and the umbilicus. The guardian saint (Rishi) of
the Omkar is Brahma, the metre of the verse is Gayatri
and its presiding deity is Agni. The Omkar is ParamStmA
(the Supreme Soul) himself and should be used in all sorts
of religious rites, The goddess adored in the three worlds,
should be contemplated as possessed of a white complexion
and seated on a full blown lotus flower and carrying a rosary.
The goddess should, be. invoked as follows Om thou
art the light, the sacrijkfe, the strength, the seventh sun,
the abode of the god*,., The universe is thy self and thon
fittest it with life and motion, Thou art the life of all and
the duration , of , all lives, Om to the Earth. Come, oh
thou goddess, who grantest boon to thy votaries, and stay
••jbngnsfiepgiit tiiy lwdyj n*me M (3i-*'34>* ,

Prajlpati is ths composer or the first singer of the seven

Mantra which represents
tlm seMnce of Bw* Brahma, occurs at the commencement

M befdce the


774


AGNI PURANAM.


collected Vyahritis running as a single Mantra. The presi-
ding gods pr patron saints of the successive Vyahritis, are
Vishviinitra, Jamadagni, BharadvSja, Gotama, Atri, Vas-
hishtha, KSshyapa, the god of fire, the Wind-god, the Sun-
god, the Jupiter, Varuna, Indra and Vishnu. The metres
of the Vyahritis are the GSyatri, Ushnik, Anusthupa, Vrihati,
Pankli, Tristupa, and the Jagati. The Vyahritis should be
made use of in practising a Pranyama or in casting libations
of clarified butter into the fire in connection with a Homa
ceremony (35—39).

The man who sprinkless upward eight drops of water,
by reciting the Mantras respectively running as “ Apohistha”
*• Apam,” " Drupadi," “ Hirna Varna” and Pivamlni, is sure
to purge off all sins committed by him from the very moment
of his birth. A Brahmana should repeat thrice under water,
the Aghamarshana Mantra and the Mantra running as
" Ritancha” etc. The Rishi who composed or first sang
the Rich running as “ Apohistft" etc, was $indhudvipa. The
metre of the Mantra is G&yatri and the water is its
presiding deity. The Mantra should be used at the time
of abltftion known as the BrahmasnSnam and in dashing
water over the body in a sacrificial bathing or at the -time of
bathing a horse in connection with a horse-sacrifice. The
Rishi who composed or first sang this Aghamarshana Sukta
(sin destroying verse) was 'Aghamarshana, the metre of the
verse is Anustap and its presiding deity is BhSvavritta.
-The Mantra running as “Apo Jyoti Rasa” etc, forms the
head of the Gayatri. The name of its Rishi is PrajSpati, no
metre being used in its composition, as Yajus'ls not met-
rical. The presiding deities of the verse' are Brahma, Agni,
Vayu, and the Sun. The whd if generated within the
body of the reciter by the suppression l ‘ tfUf breath, Yhich -
in its turn produces fire and out crf fire'^hliir is produced*
wherewith the reader of tb$ **rse* .hould Hotel*
the kUi who competed or first sang thb Man** fMftiaf •


AGNI PURANAM.


775


As "Udityam Jlta Vedasam” was Praskanna. The metire of
the verse is GSyatri, while its presiding deity is the sun-god.
The Mantra should be used on the occasion of an AtirAtra
sacrifice. Koutsa is the composer of or the first Rhapsodist
Vrho sang the Rich running as Chitram Dcvati.. The metre-
of the verse is Tristup and the sun is its presiding god
( 40 — 49 )-

CHAPTER CCXVI. •


Daid the God of Fire Thus having performed the
rite of his daily Sandhya, a Brahmana should recite the
GSyatri Mantra running as "Om Bhurbhuva Sva, Tat Savi-
turvarenyam Bhargo Devasya Dhemahi, Dheo No Prachodlylt
Om.” The Mantra is called the Gayatri (lit, an emancipating
song) from the fact of its delivering the singers and their
wives from the cycles of re-births. Since its essence serves
to illumine the sun (Savita) and forms the fountain source of
all light in the universe, it is also known as the SlvitrrMantra.
Since it first came as a word out of the mouth of the four-
faced deityj*it is also called the Sarasvati. The word “Bharga”
occurring in the middle of the Mantra represents the supreme
light, the essence- of the Para Brahma, from the root Bha
to shine and Rhrasja to cook or ripen, in which sense it has
been used many times in the Charidas (Vedas). The word
refers to that essence of the god which ' causes the
cereals to ripen in the harvesttimedj^dii^eU the gloom
of night Which enveloped the universe" before the dawn
of creation. : Supreme Being is

titir mightiest of all lights, and this self of the universal
Sfffrft is tbe-aibet sdered(Varenyamf oftf editences. In


j;6 'AGNI PURANAli.

the alternative it hiay mean that the divine self of th$
Absolute should be worshipped with i view to ensure a
heavenly existence. And since /the rOdt Vri Of the term
Varenyant may also mean “ to cover/’ it nece*sarily-~aigni-
lies, as used in the text, an existence which envelopes or
lies beyond the states of waking, sleeping, and dtehmihg and
hence a Being who is changeless, etetnal and absolutely
pure — the Universal God, the Absolute Purity, the Perfect
Knowledge; the Infinite Reality. For the emancipation of
my soul, I meditate upon the divine Self of that light which
is the god Vishnu, the origin of the universe. Some there
are who read “ Shiva,” Shakti,” “ Agni” (such as the Agni
Hotris) in the place of " light” in the text of the Mantras.
And since the term Vishnu has been described in the Vedas
and the other holy scriptures as synonimous with the sun
the fire, and the Rudra, it makes no essential difference, which
ever of these epithets lias been used. The divine-self of
that god, manifest as the sun or Vishnu, produces the
libations of clarified butter, and it is the self same god mani-
fest as the light, Prajanya (the god of rain), Vayu (the wind),-
Aditya (the sun) grows and nourishes the cereals and
vegetables by giving rise to heat and moisture, fdbations
of clarified butter cast into the fire are carried *o the sun
who creates the rain-clouds. Rain causes the stalks of food
grains (Annam) to shoot out and man is the offpring of food
(Annam) (i — ix).

The word “Dhimahi,” in the text may be also derived
from the root "Dha” to hold ; and accordingly the Mantra may
be intrepreted to mean " may we make a full comprehension
of the* god who is the creator of Jbe seven regions known
at the Bhuh, Bhubas, etc. The word Nas ^if;} is the postte>
sivejrivral form of|be persons} pron^t.^,” and the word
“ Bbaige” means dit)bi^r, or divioeesSMi^ ; and hence tho
latter part vf the Mantra f Wmrg o D«vnsyt........Pracbodyat) : •

meant j— "M ay that mmm ct'Ube god #islm* manifest


. ' flONI HJRANAII. ' . in

«» tike sun or the (ire-god, lead the minds of ns (all created
■beings) to dwell on his divine self m ail acts and under-
takings and at all times. Led by the god, the soul of a man
goes to heaven or falls into the pit of this material universe
which is nothing but the cavity oL the mouth of Hari.
A Brahmana should hold himself identical with the god who
sports on the fields of paradise. A Yogi bent on working
out the salvation of his soul, shall behold the essence of the
universal spirit reflected in the disc of the sun, at the sight
of which he would break the chain Of births and deaths,
and get rid of the three sorts of pain a man is usually heir
to and recite the following Mantra : — “ You are that eternal
Brahma, the infinite spiritual light, O thou who shinest in
the disc of the sun. I am identical with thee, O thou the
divinity of Vishnu 1 The states of waking, sleep, or dream-
ing do not constitute my self. I am beyond these. 1 am a
disembodied spirit filling the Universal space and running
through all sorts of life up to the Supreme Brahma. 1 deem
myself one with the absolute spirit, the Aditya Purusha.
i am the infinite and eternal “Om," whence flows out all
knowledge and good deeds" (ra— 18).


CHAPTER CCXVII.


S*fD


THE Goo or Fire -The holy sage Vashishtha
became an adept in Yoga by worshipping the phalic emblem
•f Shiva by recking the G&yatti Mantra, while the latter
and other sages attained salvation and became merged in
dlla Supreme Brahma by worshipping the same divine
VaahUdha propitiated the god with the


AGNI PURANAM.


17 *

prayer. "1 make obeisance to thy emblem of creation,
O lord, as manifest in gold (Kanakalinga, lit:-— a golden
phalic emblem), obeisance to thy emblem of creative energy
as unfolded in the holy Vedas, obeisance to thy supreme
emblem, obeisance to thy image as manifest in the universal
expanse of 'ether. Obeisance to thy divine essence em-
blematized by thousands and thousands of symbols. Obei-
sance to thy creative energy as manifest in the fire, obei-
sance to thy creative energy which manifests itself in the
composition of the Puranams. Obeisance to thy creative
essence which has embodied itself in the truths of the
Shrutis. Obeisance to thy creative potency as manifest in
the nether regions (PS talas). Obeisance to thy creative
emblem which is known as the Supreme Brahma. Obeisance
to thy mysterious emblem of creation which lies beyond the
ken of human beings. Obeisance to thy creative essence
which is spread all over the seven continents of the
world. Obeisance to thy creative essence symbolised by
the collective souls of the universe. Obeisance to thy
creative energy which is emblematised by the limbs and
organs of animals. Obeisance to thy emblem of creative
energy which lies latent in Nature. Obeisance to thy
creative essence symbolised by the process of intellection.
Obeisance to thy creative potency represented by the
egoistic senses of sentient creatures. Obeisance to thy
creative essence symbolised by the material principles.
Obeisance to thy creative energy of which the proper sen-
mbles are the ^yjnbojs. Obeisance to thy creative energy
which determines the subjective principles in individuals.
Obeisance to thy creative (potency manifest in the dynamical
forces of sentiments. Obeisance to thy creative potency
which is above the Virtue of Rajas (universaJ cohesion) and
is known as the Satva Guna. Obeisance to thy creative
agency manifest in nets of becoming. ^l j piwn ce to tfejr
creative energy manifest in the combined action af the


AGNt PURANAM. ~ ffc

three universal forces of Satva, Raja and Tama* (Adhesion,
cohesion, and disintegration). Obeisance to thy creative
energy represented by futarity (Probability). Obeisance to
thy creative energy Manifest in the shape of heat and light.
Obeisanoe to thy creative energy which works in regions
beyond the zone of atmosphere. Obeisance to thy creative
energy which has embodied itself in the mighty truths of
the Shrutis. Obeisance to thy creative energy represented
by truths inculcated in the Alharva Mantras and the psalms
of the holy Sama Veda. Obeisance to th; . restive essence
which manifests itself in the shape of a relig'ous sacrifice,
and the different rites (Yajnanga) constituting the same.
Obeisance to thy creative essence which forms the funda-
mental principles and the immutable truths of the universe.
Help ns, O God, in reaching the extreme goal of the Yoga.*
Bless me with the birth of a son equal to me in every res-
pect. May we attain the Supreme Brahma. ■ Alay the virtue
of self-control never I ave us, May there be not a gap
in die line of our descendants, and may our faith in religion
and in thy absolute goodness never be weakened" (t— i 1).

Said the God of fire The holy sage Vaf hishtha thus
propitiated of yore the self-origined deity on the summit of
the mountain Shriparvata, and the god gave him a boon and
went away pleased with his devotion (is).


-■ CHAPTER CCXVIII.

Said tub Gobok Fibs Oh Vasbishtha»now I shall
dwuttopon the dutief weidentaUo asoverejlgnty as disclosed
by Pushkin to ffeatf CO*


. ' AONI ftmANAM.

PuSHKARA said stal l now describe the essential

duties, * due discharge of which is obligatory on a king,-
out oithe hosts of other minor duties which belong to the
office of a sovereign. The king should give no quarter to
his eneinieSt should look after the welfare of his subjects
and administer even-handed justice to his people. Oh
Vashishtha, the king shall encourage all your honest pursuits
and help those who shall walk in the path of virtue. The
life of a king should be one perpetual vow of ameliorating
the condition of his subjects. After the lapse of a fully ear
from the date of accession, the coronation ceremony should
be performed at a proper time. The king should sled
his Sftmvatsara, the royal priest, his queen (who should
-be his wedded wife) and his ministers from men who are
well versed in all the branches of learning and well
acquainted with the workings of human heart. But if
the king dies before that, no time should be lost in.
duly putting the crown on the head of his successor
with all the paraphernalia of regal pomp and coronation- ...
rite, and the election of royal priests and ministers should
be simultaneously made therewith. The royal priest sball
put the seeds of sessamum orientate and sundried rice, on
the head Of the king, and then , pour water on hi^ bead
and cry victory to the king. Then the king seated. on hit
throne shall dectare protection to all and order the gates
of castles and fortresses to be opened out to the governors
of provinces (a — 6).

„.Prier to the rite of inaugeration performed by the royal
priest, the ceremony known as the Indra Shinti should be
performed, andon the same day the priest should observe
a fast and cast libations ofdarifled butter into the fire lit
at the centre of the sacrificial jpatfbnttj accompanied by the
rackattbn of’ sttch 'Maatras^aatiin V1s^te«%^|'Alndfe^ tta'
Saritra, the Vaiahvadaivata, the 8oaaqei/i^l&jr' k AiNiP^ : ’. ! '
The golden phcher stowed wn the - rjj0fr-liii<. litr oMm


AtttrUfctN AM. J*»

Sacriflcial fire and containing the residue! nfihe o$ string
should be worshipped with flowers and perfumes. The dasri»
fif ialfireli t on tHo occasionabouti be deemed a*. specialty
tgipKom in the event oi its limes rising up. is cusflqg
wreaths and assuming the hue of molten, gold bereft of
smoke and. spark* emitting a sweet smell, producing a
deep souodliko that of a cartwheel; or a thunderbolt, burn*
ing with a full bias* and curling in towards the priest in the
Skapeef a.maca ,7

Cat* birds and deem should not he allowed to pace
between the king and the sacrificial firs*. The head ef the
king should be nibbed. with .earth, obtained lion the mrinr
nritaofpenntain» the ears with that bronghli from fh« tap
of an ant-hill, the face pith, that obtained from a temple
of the god Keshaya, the neck with that brought, from a
templeof the god, Iadra, the breast with the earth obtained
from the courtyard of a royal palace, the right hand with
4he earth found stuck to the ends of an elephants tusk*
the. left-hand wifb that found adhered, to the- horns of * hoik
the hank with the daygobtained from the bank of a pqndt the
abdomen with, that obtained from the bed of a confluewc#
of risers, theside* with clay obtained, from, both the banks
of a pool* the waist with, that dug out from betyw the three*
hold ef a courtesan’s, house, the thighs with the- earth qb*
taiqed ftym a sacrificial shed, the knee-joiqta with- that
brought from the floor of a cow-sbed, the groins with that
obtained from * stable, white the legs of the king should to
rubbed with, ihe earth thjrt had stock to the wheel oft *
carriage- .The lead’ of tbfling seabed on his throne, should
be washed with the composition known as the. Panchf*

g*m

Then the ministers elected by the king sball pear water
od bis head out of fonr pitchers. The minister, if happens
to bo a Brahmans, Shall pour clarified buttfr out of d -
goddas pttcher os flfe head of tbekiogfrom gw cask A


jt» AGmnmAtiAu.

minister belonging to this Kshatriya community shall pour
thickened milk on the royal head out of « pitcher of silver
from the south, n Vaishya minister shed pour curd out of a
copper pitcher'from the west, while a Shudra minister shell
pour out the contents of an earthen pitcher full of water on
tbe.bead of his sovereign from the north (18—20).

Then a Brahmana who is a reciter of the Rikveda shall
pour out honey on the head of the king, while a Sama-Vedi
Brahmana shall sprinkle the washings of Kusba grass on
Ms bead on the occasion. The royal priest shall sprinkle
water out of the pitcher containing the residue of the
sacrificial offering over the heads of the ministers and
courtiers, after having exposed it for a while to the Ire
lighted on the sacrificial platform, and cause the Brahmifias
to ring in a chorus the Mantras which are usually recited in
a coronation ceremony. Then the royal priest shall stand
at the foot of the sacrificial platform, and pour out water
through a golden shieve on the annointed head of the king;
Then cereals should be scattered over the royal head bp
reciting the Mantra running as " Ya Oshadhi” etc. Similarly
perfumes and scented fluids should be poured on the head
of the king by reciting the Mantra running as Ratha etc.
White flowers and seeds should be scattered and washings
of the blades of Kusha grass should be poured on his. bead,
by reciting the Mantras respectively running as “Pushpavati"
“ Brahmana” and " Ratnairishu ShishBnascha” etc.. The
Brahmana* who are the readers of the Yujur or the Atharva
Varies, should touch the throat of, the king with the yellow
pigment Known as the Rochona, by reciting the " Gandha-
vtra M Mantra, while the Brahman as assembled on the occ%>
sion should sprinkle waters of the holy poolsover the royal
head. Then a pitcher containing all sort* .of cereal* shall be
placed before the king and the trumpete|*|jjj^lblow their
tr u mp e ts, and the bands oha)! play Sfd iM grocm* shall
Wdw the cbowries unto the king. Then the king shall wor*


A ONI PUR AN AM. 7^3

•hip the gods ' such as Vishnu, Ihdra etc., as well as the
presiding deities of the planets and shall then see his face
In the mirror and look at the flowers and a cup full of
clarified butter kept before him (a 1 — —a8).

Then the. priest seated on a bed over which a tiger-skin
had been spread, shall offer cups of honey to the gods and
cause the royal cushion to be spread on the throne. After
.tbit, the crown should be formally put 6n the hedd of th*
king,- his cushion consisting of the skins of five animals (a
goat, • bull, a wolf, a tiger and a lion). Then die warder
of the ceremony shall present the ministers to the king; and
presents of goats, cows, etc., shall be made to the royal priests
and astronomers, and the Brahmanas shall be sumptuously
feasted. Then the king shall circumambulate the sacrificial
fire and make obeisance to die preceptor. Then taking
bold of the baiter of a bull accompanied by a cow and her
calf, the king shall worship the royal steed in full caprison
and ride on it. Subsequent to that he shall similarly wor-
ship and mount on an elephant and then move round
his capital in pomp, followed by his armed forces and
ministers, after which he shall enter his palace casting costly
gifts all round and discharge the ministers in attendance
<ai— 34)-


chape ccxix.


J^USHKARA said:— Now I ahaU narrate the Mantras
Which are tu be used on the occasion of the installation of
a Meg of an idol, and which are potent enough to destroy
all sorts' of sin. This water on the occasion should be kept


.«j*4 AONI PUKANAM.

In pitchers and sprinkled over with the blades of Kush*
y S M, whereby all the putposes of ablution or washing would
be served. The Mantra runs as follows "May the gods such
ns Brahma, Vishnu, Maheshvara, VSsudeva, Sankarsbana.
Prhdumhya and Aniruddha, install you in full glory by pour*
ing water on your head. May the gods and celestial beings
inch as the Manus, the DikpSlas, Rudra, Dharma, Ruchi,
ShraddhS. lead you to victory. May the holy saints BhrigUi
Atri, Vashishtha, Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanat Kumara, Angirl,
Felasta, Pulaha, Kratu, Marichi, Kashyapa, the Prajapatis,
the god Klrtickeya and the Pitris known as the Agnishvattas
preserve you. May the demons (Kravyadas), Ajyapas, and
SukBlis preserve you. May the goddesses such as Lakshmt
and the .wives of the god Of virtue, as well as the consorts
<of Kushyapa, the father of many sons, of KrishJshva,
of Aristanemi, of Agniputra, Ashvini and the other wives
•f the moon god and the beloved wives of Pulaha pre*
serve you. May Aruna, the charioter of the sun and the
icelestial matrons known as BhutS, KapishS Danstri, Surast
Saramft, Danu, Shyani, Bh&si, Krounchi, Dhritarastri and
Shuki install you in full glory by pouring down water
on your head. May the goddesses Ayati (goddess of
futarity), fjliyati (fate), R&tri (night) and Nidrt (sleep) who
oxist for the advancement of the human race, as well as
(he goddess Um5, Monk, Shachi, DhumornS, Niriti, Jay 8,
Oouri, ShivS, Riddhi, Vel5, Avals, Asikni and Jyotsha, and
(ho Kalpas, Mabakalpas (cycles of time), the Manvan-
tares, the years, the Samvatsaras, the Yogas, the, move*
meats of the sun, the divisions of the year such as the
seasons, the months, the fortnights, the weeks, the day, the
evening, the days of the lunar months, the MuhurtBs (a
period of 48 minutes), the sun with his planets and sattilites,
preserve you. May the fourteen Manus suchas S&yam*
hhubn, Svtrochisha, Outtama, Tlraasa, Revata^ Xbakshusha,
Vaiwvnln, Bkvarna, Brahmaputra, Dfaaratiiij^


AGNI PtMANAM. jSj

Dakshaja, Roucbya and Bhoutya, and the principal gods,
such as Vishvabhuk, Vipatti, Shuchiti, Shikbi, Vibhu,
Manojava, Ojashvi, Vali, Adbhuta, ShAnti, Vrisha, Rita-
dharmA, Divasprik, KAma, Indraka/Ravanta, Kumar*, Vatsa,
VinAyaka, Vira» Chandra, Nandi, VishvakarmS, Purorava,
cone and take part in this thy coronation ceremony. May
the twin Ashvini Kumfiras — the physicians o t heayeu, the
eight Vasus (demi-gods) such as Dhruva, etc., the ten
Angirasas and the Vedas put the crown on thy head and
lead thee to victory. May the soul, duration of life, mind,
vitality, egoism, Rita and truth preserve thee. May Kratn,
Daksha, Vasu, Satya, KllakAma and Dhuri lead thee to
victory. May the gods, Pururava, MAdrava, Vishedevas,
Rochana, Angarakas, the Sun-god, Nirita, Yama, Ajaikapada,
Ahirvradhna, the comets, the Rudrajas, Bharata, the death,
JKapAli, Kinkini, Bhavana, BhAvana, Svajanas and their
wives, KratushravA, Murdha, YAjnatishana, Prasava, Abhaya
Daksha, the Bhrigus, the PrAnas, the nine ApanAa, Viti-
hotra, Naya, SAdhya, Hansa and N.ArAyana preserve thee.
May the superior members of the celestial heirarchy
ytrho are devoted to the good of the universe, such as
Vibhu, Prabhu, and the twelve Bhaskaras such as DhAtA,
hfitra, AryamA, Pusha, Shakra, Varuna, Bhaga, Tasta,
YhrasvAaa, SavitA and Vishnu, as well as Ekajyotis, Dvijyor
tis, Trijyotis, CbAturjyotis, Ekashakra, Dvishakra, Trisbfkra,
Mita, Sanmita, AaMit4 Ritajit, Satyajit, Sushena, Senajit,
Atimitra, AnuniUra, i#^unjitra, AparAjita, RitA. Rifajrak,
Phite, VidhAta, DhArana, Dhruva and Vidharama, the mighty
. colleagues of the king of the gods, preseiye thee (l-wSt)*

. May the holy Rishis who are the practisers of the moat
austere penances, such as ldrikaha,Adrjk*h*, Rtadriksha,
AmitAshana, Kndita, Sadriksh«, $faarahba, Dhayta, Dhuiya,
Dhuri, Bhima, Abhibhukta, Kskapasaha, Dhritj, Vasji, Anl-
(dhrishya, Rama, Kama, Jaya, Virata, as well a* the forty,
(In wind-gods preserve thee (341—34).


AGN1 SURANAM.


786

May the Gandharvaa such as Chitrangada, Chitraratha;
Chitrasena, Kali, Unlyu, Ugmena, Dhritarlshtra, Nan dak a,
HkhS, Huhu, NSrada, Vish&v&au and Tumvaru, install thee
in full. glory and lead thee to victory. May the celestial
beauties such as Anavadyi, Sukeshi, Menakl, Sahajanyl,
Kratusthali, Gritlchi, Vishvadri, Punjakasthali, Pramlochl,
Urvashi, Rambhi, Panchachudl, TilottamS, Chitralekhi,
Lakshin an 5 , Pundarikk, ,and Vtruni, as well as the demons’
Pralbada, Virochana, Vali, Vina and his sons and die
Rakshases come and install thee in full glory. May the
Siddhas, Yakshas, and the celestial geins, accompanied by
Naadana, Manibhadra, Scandana, Pinglksha, Dyutimlna,
Pusparina, Jayavaha, lead thee to victory. May the Ptsha-
chas led by their chiefs such as Urdhakesha, and the ghosts
#ho dwell in earth, come and take part in this inauguration
ceremony, following in the train of the Matris, Narasinha,
Mahlkala, Guha and tSkandha. May the celestial Garuda,
with other principal celestial birds such as Arana and Sam*
plti, as well as the primordial Hydra (Vftsuki) and die ser-
pents Takshaka, and the celestial elephants Airavata, Maha-
padma, Shankha, Puspadanta, Vftman^, etc., always protect
thee froth evil (35—49)

May the celestial swan die god Bndima rides upon and
the butt of ithe god Shankars, the lion of the goddess
Durga, .the buffalo of the god of death, the horse Ucchei-
Ann belonging to Indra, the celestial Kousthuva, the lord
of the conch shells, the thunder-holt, die celestial mace,
Jtiw discus, and other weapons preserve thee. May dm gods
Chitragupta, Danda, Pingala, Mrityu and Klla preserve thee
May the souls of Munis such as Vyasa, Vilmiki and the
Valakhilyas preserve thee. May the Soul|.ef departed kings
such as Prithu, Dilips, Bharata, Dushmantaj'Shakrajit, VaH,
Mails. Kukutatha, Ao«hS» 4 M*«d^


AGNI PURANAII. 78/


Machukunda sad Pururavk preserve thee. Key the gods
of the homestead tod the twenty-five fundamental principles
of the universe lead thee to victory. May the regions of
golden soil, sandy soil, blue soil, yellow soil, white soil, and
of yellowish fed soil, the Pltala, the Rash tala, the regions
known as the Bhu, Bhuva, lead thee to victory. May the
continents of Jamvudvipa, the Northern Kurt], Hiranyaka
Bhadrkshva, Ketum&la, Val&haka, Harivarsha, Kimpurusha*
Indradvipa, KasherumSna, Tamraparna, Gabhastimana, Nlga*
dvipa, Soumyaka, Gandharbha and Vanina preserve thee.
May the mountains known as the Himavana, the Hemakuta,
the Nishadha, the Nila, the Shvets, the Shrihgavana, the
Mem, the Milyavana, the GandhamSdani, the Mahendra,
the Malaya, the Sajhya, the Sbaktim&na, the Rikshavtna,
the Vindhya and the Paripltra grant thee peace (50—57).

May the holy Vedas such as the Rik etc., with their Ms
branches of kindred sciences, the books of history, the
PUtanas, the Medical sciences, the sciences of music and
mar, the sciences of proper pronunciation, ritual, grammar*
lexicon, astronomy and prosody, the six schools of phifosdpby
such as bhe Sankhya, the Yoga, the Mimansa, the Naya, etc.,
the schools of philosophy knownas the Pishupatam' and the
Pancharfttrum, the G&yatri Mantras respectively sacred to


grant thee peace. (5I — 6a.)

Majr the four oceans of sugarcane juice, clarified butter,
curd and mill^ as jrell a^ places- and pools such

as. tiho ;citiesl Pmhhlsa, the forest

of Naimisha, ths shtioe^ of Gayashirsha, Brahmasbinka, the ;

the Nandikunda, the land ..
of the five rivers, the Bhr^u Tirtha, the Amarakantakaa,
Jtwtbs Marga,th*henniUge of Mipla, the source of the .
Gasr».Kushavarts, ths Viodhyaka, the Nila Partita, the
tall. Modar, Radnie* .


988 AGNI PlMANAtf.

(h« Shri mountain, Purnrshottama, the vilfage Of Shltt-
grama, KaravirSshrama, the junctions of riven with the Seas,
the. river Phalgu, the Vindusara, the Ganges, the Sarasvati,
the Shatadru, the Gandaki, the Achchohda, the VipSshl, the
NischirS, the Gomati, the Para, the Charmanvati, the Rupf,
the Mandakini, the Mah£nadi, the Tapi, the Payoshni, the
Vena, the Gouri, the Vaitarani, the Godavari, the Bhimarathi
the TungabhadrS, the Prani, add the Chandrabhtgft, preserve
and install thee in full glory. (63—7*).


: 0 :— —

CHAPTE CCXX.


Jt* uSHKARA SAID A king thus crowned with hfs 1 Minis-
ters should attempt to conquer his enemies. The beat of
Monarchs is he who subjugates his hostile neighbours- A men.
her of the Brahmana or the Kshatriya caste should 6e elected
to fill the post of the comMarfder-in-chief of the kingdom,
While Men of noble descent, well acquainted with the pre-
cepts of Morals, should be appointed as porters at the doors
of the royal chambers. The ambassador sent to represent the
king at foreign courts, Should be a man of a vdry sharp intel-
feet, sweet-mouthed, possessing eloquence ofspeech and
well-versed in the arts of diplomacy, The beared of the
toyal betel-vessel May be either a man or a woman fondly
attached to the king, sweet-Mouthed and capable of enduring
farioue. The minister ofwit afld peace (iofri'go minister)
OMtdd a man wbounderB^ii #yB 4 *j expedient to be
Ufedby » kingb V^ifsthe Sandhi (alli-

ance),

(Halt), SaUshraya (duptidty).


AGNI eURANAM. ' 7*9

Soldier* appointed to guard the person of the king should be
Armed with swords, while the royal cbarioter should be «
man, capable of estimating the strength of a hostile army or
6f detecting its steak points, *f hd master of the royal kit-
chen should live in the house where the. royal food would be
prepared (Mafi&riasa), his essential qualificatiort being a
fond attachment to the king over and above his experience
!h the culinary att add the affairs of the world. The cour-
tiers should be all conscientious men, while the royal Writer
should be selected from men who have thoroughly mastered
the sciences of orthography (i— 8).

The royal treasurer should be a man who will be able to
ten' at a sight the prices of gems and precious stones, while ail
the offices of government should be filled with men who are
fondly attached and have swotn allegiance to the king. The
royal physician should be a man who has thoroughly mastered
the science of medicine (Ayurveda), while the keeper of the
royal elephants should be a man who can detect the points of
excellence in those animals as well as the symptoms of their
maladies. The keeper of toe king's stable should be '• nan
who knows all about the horses, the indespensible qualifica-
tion of those two functionaries being the capacity to work
iodifatigabiy in their respective fines. The masters of
castles and fortresses should be attached to the king, While
architects of established repute Should be employed to look
after the tOyal palaces. Persons employed by the Mug
tot gitiftg lessons in the alts of handling and using arm* and
munitions erf war, should be- devoted to the king and
be experts in using aflsdrtsof arms and weapons, Whether 1
projected by machine*, hurled of thtfrst with the hands, or
which are not entirety let off at the time of their dicharge,
Of are taken hold tif agaih dftef the throw (f — 8).

■ The Iitberers employed in the female apartn. fits of the
palace ' may be either male otTeirtale. If men t ey should
beAbOVe sevedtyi if women, at least fifty years did, And shall


790 AGNI PURANAft.

have free access every where in the royal household. Asleep*
less warder should be kept in the arsenel, and salaries of the
state-functionaries should be determined according to the
nature and importance of the offices they will be appointed to
hold. Men of Stirling, mediocoreor inferior talents and virtues
should be respectively employed to cariy out works requiring
such talents or virtues, and the king who aspires to hold a
paramount sway oyer the whole world, should enter into
alliance with kings and nations who are friendly to him.
Virtuous men should be employed in works requiring high
moral culture, while men of valour should be employed in
the army. Intelligent men should be employed where
money making is concerned, while in all sorts of works, the
king should appoint men who are above all corruption.
Eunuchs should be employed in places which are exclusively
devoted to the use of women, while ruffians should be
employed in doing deeds of violence. The king should
appoint a man to an office to which he is best suited
by his nature and acquirements. Virtuous men should be
employed in all works of state-revenue and common weal,
while men of small intellectual calibre should .be employed in
works which can be safely done by such men (9 — 14).

The king should employ in different works of the state,
wen whose fidelity has been .tested by constant attendance
and service. As a tame elephant is used to decoy the wild
ones, so a minister shall detect pvil-doers lurking in places
remote from the seat of the central government, by employing
men belonging to similar gangs of offenders. Experts should
be employed in their own lines, while servants who had been
serving the state from the times of the grand-father and the
father of the king, should be commissioned to do all sorts of
works, except in matters of adjudicating the rights of
contending UtUgants id royal courts ah 4 of partition of
estates (14—16).

Without any regard to their honesty or wickedness, the


AGNI PURANAM.


79 *


king should hospitably receive the foreigners arrived in his
court, with a view to live under his protection. Such new*
comers, happening to be wicked men, should not be trusted
at all, but the king should buy their submission with
annuities. Detectives should be employed to ascertain the
Characters of all new-comers and foreigners fn the state,
whom the king shall fill with honours in the event of their
being deserving recipients. A bad servant of the state
should be deemed as art enemy, or fire, poison, serpent and a
drawn dagger all combined. The spies are the king's eyes,
and men should be employed in' espionage and secret service,
without letting the public know that they had been so
employed, and care should be taken to prevent their mutual
recognisance They shoutd guise themselves as merchants,
physicians, astrologers, religious mendicants, and watch
the strength and armaments of foreign kings. The king
should not trust the statement of a single spy unless
corroborated by informations received on the subject from
different sources. The king should make use of the allegi-
ance, displeasures, merits and demerits of his servants;
as well as of good or bad deeds done by them, simply
as a means of consolidating his own absolute power. The
king should do such acts only as would attract the hearts of
his subjects and refrain from doing that which would create
hardships or displeasures. The strength of a king- is the
love of hi* subjects, and the epithet ((Raja) is derived
from the fact of bis pleasing (Ranja to please) the people


•CHAPTER CCXXt.


Jt'uSHKARA said : — A servant should carry out ttis
orders of his king (.the custodian of his country’s prosperity)
as a disciple does the biddings of his preceptor. He should
never disobey his commands, nor speak anything which
would be unpleasant to him or unfavourable to his interests.
A servant forced to Speak anything unpleasant to the king
for his good, should speak that in a private conference. He
shall not rob his master’s money, nor do anything whereby
his dignity will be impugned. A servant shall not wear
dresses similar to those put on by the king, nor modulate his
voice and speech in A manner so as to resemble those of his
royal master. Even a warder of the royal Zennana, being
dismissed or otherwise chastised, shall not walk abreast with
the king, nor violate the sacredness of his secret trusts.
He should not boast of having done any act of ingenuity
in the royal presence, but rather aieribe it to the kindness
of the king. He should not give publicity to any of the
secrets heard by him from the kfojjp He should express his
unwillingness and inability (lit t— say “what can I do ?”) to
comply with the request of a superior! officer pressing him
hard to disclose any. He should reverentially wear on his
person the ornaments and decorations obtained from the king
as marks of his highest regard, nor enter the royal chamber
without his special leave, .por visit him in an improper place.
Bodily functions savouring of ldw breeding, such as yawning
spitting, coughing, frowning and acts of eructations, emission
of flatus, or the assumption of an angry look should -not be
exercised or indulged in before a king. A servant should not
blow oo bio own horn in a royal assembly, but rather employ
other men to recommend' his special merit to the king. 4


AGNS PURANAM*


*95


person in the king’s service should be above all dishonesty
avarice, parsimoniousness, atheism, meanness and light-
heartedness. Self-communed and with love in liis heart
of heart, he should serve his country and sovereign to the
best of his light and ability, Such a service to the king
elevates both the master and the servant. A man should
always how down to the king, the royal princes, and the
king’s favorites and ministers. No faith should be reposed
in the smiles of king’s ministers, but a man should, always try
to please his sovereign.

A man having incurred the displeasure of a king should
abandon his services, while a man who pretends to under-
stand the patures of kings, should seek employment under
a sovereign who is pleased with him. A servant should not
speak until spoken to by the king, and should look after his
interests even in times of peril. Content and not garrulous
in the presence of his king, a servant should stand modest
and submissive and should disereetly avoid all attempts at
cutting jokes with him. The duty of a royal servant is to en-
quire of the health of his sovereign, and to spread the
cushion for him at the first interview. His ears should be
always eager to catch the words of his royal master, and he
should rejoice even at a reprimand from him. The servant,
who rejoices even at having received a small remuneration
and shows his gratitude therefor, in season and out of
season, is the only servant to be kept in the royal service,
while servants disposed otherwise should be summarily
dismissed (i — 14).


CHAPTER CCXXH.


f USHKARA said Now I shall describe the sites and
constructions o! forts, wherein a king should have his
residence. The forts should be largely peopled with the
members of the commercial and servile castes and of various
guilds of artisans, with a sprinkling of Brahmana popula-
tion. The fort should be situated in a country watered by
large rivers and not depending upon the atmospheric causes
for its water-supply. The country should be safe against
all foreign invasions ; abounding in grains, flowers and fruits,
not infested with thieves and robbers and impassable to inva-
ding columns. The mighty king should cause to be built, and
live in,, any of the six following sorts of forts, such as the
Dhanu Durga, Mahi Durga, Nara Durga, Aksha Durga,
Ambu Durga and the Giri Durga. The last sort of forts
(hill fort) is the best, as it can be. made easily invincible
and affords the best means of beating off an invading army.
Palaces, Barracks, divine temples, and shops should
be built within the ramparts of a fortress, which should
be kept, well furnished with arms, weapons, battering
machines, etc., surrounded by a moat of deep water (i — 6 ).

.Now I shall describe the means of healing the wounded
body of a king, kept confined within the walls of a castle,
The plants known as the Panch&nga and Shirisha pasted
with urine and applied over the body, neutralise the effects of
poison. The creepers Shatlyari, Chchihnna RuhS, and
Tandulyakam -are possessed of the same virtue like the
Kodbaiaki, Kalhlri, Brthmi, Chitra-PatolikS, Mandukaparni,
Varaha, Dhfttri, Anandakam, Uamldini, Somariji and
Ratnam (7—9).

A king residing in a castkposse sting ail tge fundamental
characteristics of a. homestead, should worship the gods,


AGNI PURANAM.


795

protect hie subjects, conquer the wicked and give presents to
the Brahmanss. The king who wrongfully takes possession
of grounds or articles dedicated to the gods, is tormented
in hell for the period of a Kalpa.

A king should support the divine temples erected in his
dominions and cause the images of gods to be installed
in them. The temples would be of clay, wood, burnt-bricks
or of stone, each one of the latter class excelling in merit the
one preceding it. Even by erecting a miniature temple, a
king attains salvation at the close of a prosperous earthly
career. The man who cause bands and dramatic perform-
ances to be played in a divine temple and bathes the image
of the god in oil, clarified butter, honey, milk or curd,
goes to heaven after death (10 — 14).

A king should worship, protect 3 nd supply the Brali-
manas with the necessaries of life, and should never deprive
them of anything they are entitled to or are possessed of.
The soul of a man who robs a Brahmana of a particle of
gold, of a cow, or of a plot of ground even to the breadth
of a single finger, is doomed to suffer the torments of hell
till the coming on of the universal deluge. A Brah-
mana leading the most wicked life and guilty of the most
heinous crimes, should not be hurt or killed, as the killing
of a Brahmana is the deadliest of all sins. The Brahmanaa
of mighty fate and blessed prowess, can work miracles and
invest ordinary persons with the attributes of divinity
and can reduce a god to the level of an ordinary mortal.
Hence a man should constantly bow down to a Brahm an a
The kingdom in which a forlorn Brahmana’s wife weeps and
suffers, is destroyed with all its subject people (15—18).

The king and the virtuous should protect the faithful wives
and they in their turn should help their husbands in matters
of house-keeping. A girl shall be clean in body and spirit,
frugal in her expenses and faithfully nurse the man she has
been given to by her father in marriage. The widow who


796 AGNI PUKANAM

practises self-control and austerities after the death of her
husband, goes to heaven. A widow shall never feel any
inclination to dwell in the house of a stranger, nor should
she be querelous in her disposition. A widow as well as the
wife of a man who is absent in a distant country, should never
decorate their persons, and live in a temple and worship the
gods for their husband’s good. A wife in the latter case shall
wear s few ornaments for the good of her husband, while the
widow who burns herself on the same funeral pire with her
husband also goes to heaven (19 — 23).

A house-holder should worship and cleanse the temple
of the goddess of fortune. Similarly he should worship the
god Vishnu on the twelfth day of the moon’s increase in
the. month of Karticka and make the present of a cow with
her calf to a Brahman a. Slvitri the 1 daughter of the king
-of Vidharva preserved the life of her husband by worship-
ping the sun-god on the seventh day of the moon’s increase
in the month of Margashrisha, as well as by observing a vow
of truthfulness. The woman who observes the vow and
worship the god as described in the preceding lines, becomes
a mother in no time and without the least shadow of a
doubt (24—25).


CHAPTER CCXXHt.


Jr USHKARA said : — The king should appoint to the head-
ship as of a single, ten or hundred villages and so on, each
of them to be known as the Grimidhipati ; Disha-(ten) Grim
(village) -Adhipati (lord), Shata-(hundre’d)-Gik » nldh ip a t i and
Visbajteihvara. Their stipeuds and ' salaries' should be
accorotfg to the impbrtufee' of their- {elective posts.


AGNI PURANAM.


797


Spies should be appointed by the king to report the nature
and out-turn of their daily works. The village-head shall
make good or remedy any want or irregularity affecting
the village under his direct control, or shall report the stole
to the head of ten villages in the event of his incapability
to cope with it successfully. The Dashapala (the head of
ten villages) on receiving the intimation, shall consult with
his subordinate officers (Gramcshas) as to the best means
of dealing with the case (i — 4).

From a well-managed state the king acquires wealth, merit
and piety. A wealthy man is to sure to witness the reali-
sation of all his wished-for objects and to enjoy all sorts of
earthly comforts. Works unbacked by wealth, are as ephe-
meral as a summer fountain. There js no difference between
the fallen and the poor. No man partakes of the boiled-rice
prepared by the morally degenerated, while the poor invito
no guests to their tallies. Vows of fasting etc., are equally
obligatory on the wives of the fallen and the poor. The
king, who oppresses his subjects and misgoverns his king-
dom, goes to hell after death. « A king, like a pregnant woman,
shall forego all pleasures of his own and only live for the
well-being of his charge. Practice of austere penances, 01
the celebration of a religious sacrifice, never avails a king
who fails to protect his people, The house of the monarch
who lives for the amelioration of the condition of his sub-
jects, is the heaven itself. Hell exists no where else than
in the house of a sovereign who neglects the good of his
subjects. The king takes as his own share a sixth part of
the income of his subjects good or bad, in exchange for
bis good government : and a king who protects them is
virtuous, while he commits sin by his inability to extend that
protection to all against cheats, swindlers, robbers and thieves.
The function of a beaign gove/nment is to enable tbe sub-
jectsHvibg^er. it, to peacefully cnjpjr their po—eeeieus
' uft ttfe trials 6f fheif booursi The. ling should safe-gunro


^98 AGNl PUtAMAM.

the interests of his subjects against extortions and oppress
sions by officers of the state, royal favorites and the usurers
(Kiyasthas).

The subject people guarded against such oppressions
and extortions, belong to the king ; while they fall an easy
prey to the rapine and greed of inconscientious place*
hunters and usurers, in the event of his inability to protect
them (5—13).

The king shall punish the wicked and the evildoers,
and in lieu of that the people shall justly pay him revenue.
Every day, half of the revenue collected, shall be stored in the
royal treasury, while the remaining half shall be distributed
to the Brahmanas. A hidden treasure having been found
out by a Brahmana of the foremost class, shall vest in him
in its entirety, while a Kshatriy, a Vaishya and a Shudra shall
respectively make over to the king, a sixteenth, an eighth,
and a quarter part thereof. Perjury shall be punished with
a fine equal to the eighth part of the money-value of the
entire estate of the perjurer (14 — r6).

The king shall keep an unclaimed property in his
custody for a period of three years, after which it will be
restored to the man who shall make good his claim to it, in
failure whereof the property shall rest in the sovereign for
good. The ownership of a property or an estate consists
in its being claimed by a person as his own, and the man
who can give a correct description or boundaries of a lost
article or property lying unclaimed for a considerable
time, should be deemed as its true and rightful owner. The
king shall be the custodian of the properties of an infant
or a minor, held by him in commonalty with his coparceners
till he attains the age of discretion. Similarly the king shall
manage the properties of a widow who is the mother of a
minor child or of those who have np legitimate guardians
or relations of their own to protect them in , their period*
of widowhood. Prop er tie s settle* on widow* who bad boo*


7 99


AGNI PURANAM.

faithful wives during the covertures of their marriage, and
who are unable, out of ill health or incapacity, to manage
their estates to their own benefit, shall also pass under the
wardenship of the sovereign ; and any attempt on the part
of their relations to rob or to. encroach upon a portion
thereof, should be meted with punishment like an act of
theft (17 — 21).

The king should make good to the owner, the price of an
article stolen by a thief, and on such an occasion the king
shall reimburse himself out of the salaries of his police
officers. The man who falsely gives out that he has been
robbed, should be punished like a thief and ex-communicated
from the country. The value of anything stolen by the
members of one’ own family shall not be recouped from the
royal exchequer (22— -23).

O thou twice-born one, the king should levy a duty on
goods manufactured in his own country equal to a twentyeth
part of the gross price. The duty to be levied on goods
imported from foreign countries, should be determined with
• regard to the actual cost of their manufacture, tlie wear
and tear they have suffered in the course of the transit, and
the actual profit derived by the merchant therefrom. The
duty in the latter case shall not exceed a twentyeth part of
the nett profit made by the importer, and an infringement
of the rule shall be visited with punishment. Freights and
tolls should not be collected from women and wandering
mendicants. In the event of the servants and carriers of
A merchant dealing in Sbuka Dbanya and Shimi Dhanya
attempting to defraud the king of his tolls and duties pay*
able at ferries or at the crossings of frontiers, the king should
confiscate a sixth and an eighth part respectively of the
abovesaid commodities. Duties payable on importing female
slaves into the country should be determined with a
dia regard to the country imported- f total and the theft of
tea import. The Mine payable on an i ma l s and gold


ACNI PUR AN AM.


Boo

shall bo a fifth and a sixth part of the original value, while
a sixth part of their value should be paid as the kings
dues on importing articles of perfumery, cereals, flowers,
roots, fruits, loaves, pot-herbs, hays, bamboos, hydes, wicker-
works, earthen-pots, stone vessels, honey, meat and clarified
butter (23 — 2g).

Even at the point of death a king shall not levy any tax
on the Brahmanas. The king dies, in whose realm a Brah-
man well-versed in the Vedas famishes for want of food.
Famine and pestilence devastate his dominions which become
a prey to thieves and robbers. The king should ascertain
the acquirements and occupation of each Brahmana residing
in his country, provide him with a decent annuity and
feed and protect him as his own begotten son. The merits
of religions ceremonies, performed by the Brahmanas living
under the protection of a king, tend to prolong his life And
to improve the condition of his subjects (30 — 32).

The artizans shall work for live king, a month in each
year free of charges, while the labourers shall work for
him without any remuneration, as long as they shall
be fed (33).


CHAPTER CCXXIV.


r USHKARA said Now I shall describe the rules of
conduct which a king should observe in the female-apart*
ments of the palace, and the virtues by practising which
he would be endowed with prowess and energy. The king
ehall pass his liesure hours in the company of the ladies of
hir hoose-bold. The royal ladies shall foster energy mi the
king and tl m ^ytl prpvMS shah protect them in its toft


ACNl PURANAM.


801

Virtue is the root of the tree of three-fold virtue (Trivarga),
object or purpose forms its bough, while the fulfilment of
one’s ends forms it fruit. A man by carefully fostering this
tree of Trivarga, witnesses the realisation of all his heart-
felt objects ( i — 2) .

Oh Rama, the fair sex is governed by desire and
women care much for pomp and pride. Hence a king should
collect gems for their satisfaction. Kings and persons,
ambitous of lofty stations in life, should not be excessively
fond of female company, nor visit them much. By ex-

cessively indulging in sleep, eating and sexual pleausres,
a man becomes a martyr to diseases. The king should
share his couch only with his darling and wedded
wives. A king should never visit a woman who does
not return his love, does him positive injury or does
not properly answers his words, mixes with his enemies,
walks in pride and insolence, takes away his face in
disgust when kissed, does not loolc happy or grateful
on the receipt of a present, sleeps before and wakes after
his waking, tosses her funds and limbs and folds her body
in two when touched, scarcely listens to discourses of love,
and even that with her face turned away, conceals her thighs,
turns pale at his sight, and neglects her toilet even at its
proper time. A king should avoid the company of such
an unloving wife and visit one who would be fondly devoted
to him. The wife whose heart leaps up at the sight of her
husband and who. casts .down heir eyes when looked at
by him, or casts her coy aad'tkiid glances aside at the time
of seeing her husband's face but still cannot take her eyes
away from it, and freely gives out all her little stores of secrets,
--the wife who is yielding both in body and mind to the wishes
of her husband, and nestles herself round her husband’s neck
on his first return to home and over-powers him with long and
loving kisses, speaks nothing but truth when asked about
anything, and feels a happy thrill running through her body
101


ZQ2


acn! pubanak.


at a simple touch of her husband’s hand which ultimately
resolves itself Into little dew-drops of love-perspiration,
dresses herself in neat but not costly costumes, shows signs
of superb satisfaction on receipts of small presents, deems it
a boon for her name to be uttered by her husband, places
on her bosom anything sent by him simply for the fact of
its having been hallowed with his touch, sleeps after finding
him reposiug in sweet sleep and wakes before his waking,
and rouses him up in sleep, if necessary, by gently pressing
his thighs, should be deemed as a loving wife ( 3 — 18 ).

O Rama, the flavour of clarified butter is improved by
boiling it with powders of Kapithva (wood apple), with
barley grains soaked in milk, or with the cream of curd. The
eight processes of making the body free of bad smell, are by
cleansing or washing, by gargling, by vomiting, by deco-
rating the body with flowers and garlands, by heating, by
burning incense-sticks, by fumigation, and by using scents
and perfumes. Purification of a thing consists in washing
it with water containing the leaves of wood-apple, Bela,
Mango, or Karavira trees, in absence of which the clean-
sing should be done with Water saturated with musk.
The twenty-one drugs to be used in an act of fumigation
are as follows, vis., Nakha, Kushtha, Dhana, Mansi,
Srik, Shaileyaja, Saffron, Shellac, Sandal, Agallochum,
Nirada, Sarala, Devaklstha, Camphor, KSntS, V2L15, Kundaru,
scented gum resin and Shrinivasa. These drugs should be
powdered together and pasted with the juice of a Shala tree
and then cut into sticks. In the alternative two of the above-
substances should be taken and pasted with honey con-
taining powders of Nakha, Piny&ka and sandal-wood. Oil
scented with Tvacha, Nidi, Phala (Nutmeg), Saffron, Cranthi,
Shailaja, TagarS, Krlntl, Chola, Camphor, Mansi, .Mura-
Mansi and Kustha, should be used by kingt before bathing.
Three of the above sUbstances,-dipped in oil saturated will)
musk, increases the potency of men. By using before baib


AGNI FURANAM.


S03

the oil scented with equal measures of Tvacha, Saffron,
Mura, Analada and Valaka weighing half as much as the
latter substances, the body of a person is sure to emit the
odours of the lotus. By dipping half of a Tagara in it,
the same oil will have the scent of Jati flowers, while mixed
with the powder of dried Vakula flowers it will smell as such.
A scented oil can be prepared by mixing ManjisthS, Tagara,
Chota, Tvaja, Nakha, and Vyaghranakha with any ordinary
oil C*9-r32).

O Rama, oil pressed out of the seeds of sessamum pre-
viously scented with any particular class of flowers, becomes
perfumed as them. A powder made of pulverised ela,
clove, Kakkola, nutmeg, camphor and Jatipatraka, may be
used for perfuming the mouth. O Rama, pills, each weigh-
ing a Kirshika and made of the drugs and substances such
as camphor, Saffron, KrSnti, Musk, Harenu, Kakkola, Ela,
clove, Jati, Koshoka, Tvakpatra, Truti, Musta, Lata-Kasturi,
the thorns of clove, the fruits and leaves of the Jati, all
being powdered together and pasted with catechu and juice
of the Mango tree, should be kept in t)ie mouth, whereby
alt its foul smell and diseases would be destroyed. Betel,
nuts soaked in the washings of the leaves of the five trees
known as the Panchapallava, and scented with as many of
the substances which enter into the composition of the
above pills as possible, should be used as a remedy for foul
breaths and bad tastes m the mouth. O Rama, the drugs
known as the Kutaka and the Dantakistha, soaked in the
urine of a cow for three days and perfumed as the above-
said Betel-nut, should be used for similar purposes as the
above. The equal parts of Tvaka and Phthya mixed with a
half part of the moon (camphor), should be kept in the
mouths by the damsels of the palace, whereby they would
have breaths scented as the flowers of the N3gavalli. Thus
the ladies of the palace should be protected and served. A
king should never trust them, especially those who are to-


*04 ACNl PURANAM.

mothers of children. A king should never pass the nighl
in die same mom with a royal lady, and any faith put in
them must be apparent and lip-deep (33 — 42).


-:o:


CHAPTER CCXXV.


JT USHKARA said A king should protect the royaf
princes and get them instructed in the science of war and
the arts of general utility as well as in the moral sciences.
Fine arts should be taught to them in the company of court-
fools and their trusted friends, while guards whose ostensible
duties would be to defend the persons of the princes, should
be appointed to watch their acts and movements. They
should not be permitted to mix in the company of angry,
greedy or degraded persons. The king should bind them
down in a prison of pleasures in the event of their refusing
to be educated. An obedient and submissive prince should
be appointed to superintend the works of all the depart-
ments of the state, and a king should give an early go by to
such luxuries of royalty as^ hunting, drinking, the dice-table
and the staking away of an empire. A king should not
sleep in the day time nor. make any idle bustle about trifles.
He should never use any scurrilous language to anybody
and hold himself aloof of all small talks and calumny. He
should temper justice with mercy and never inflict in-
ordinate punishments on any body, nor allow his own
interests to suffer. The interests of a lung are affected by
his recklessly exhausting the mines and mineral resources of
lus country, by neglecting the proper repairs of his forts
and strong-holds, by making gifts of money to unworthy


AGNI PURANAM


805

persons and at improper time and thereby helping the
furtherance of evils. Having subjugated the passions of
anger, lust, greed, vanity, false pride and boastfulness, a
king should proceed to bring his servants and officers under
his control. Then be should strive to win over the affec-
tions of his subjects and the citizens of his own capita)
city. Then he should subjugate his external enemies, who’
are usually divided into three classes, such as ancestral,,
raceal and artificial (enemies through conflict of self in-
terests). O thou of a lofty disposition, the friends or allies
of a king may be grouped under three similar heads such
as the ancestral, the feudatory sovereigns of an enemy, and
the artificial. O thou well versed in the precepts of morals
and religion, an empire consists of the seven factors such
as kingship, ministry, townships, fortification, punishment,
revenue and allies. The central figure in an empire is the
■king who is the fountain source of all laws and authorities.
Persons who rebel against the authority of any of the seven
factors of government should be mercilessly killed. The
king should rule his kingdom neither with too much
tightness nor with too much clemency, nor cut jokes with
bis servants. The servants soon get an upper hand of the
king whom they can pursuade to laugh or to enter into-
friendly conference with themselves (1 — 13).

The king should organise hunting parties and engage in
drinking bouts, etc., just to provide his subjects with
amusement. He would speak with a gracious smile to his
subjects so as to win their -hearts. A king, who is procrasti-
nating in his habits, cap never achieve any fame or success,
but procrastination is a virtue in matters of anger, boastful-
ness, vanity and quarrel and especially at the time of using
abusive language to others (14—16).

The king should secretly discourse with his counsellers
on measures of the state, as there is no danger from secret
counselling. The king whose plans arc matured in secret,


806 AOftl PURANAM.

•ltd Ace known only when they begin to take fruits ; rules
for A long time. ' The king should gather the real object of
A man from his gestures, postures ‘and the movements of
bis eyes and facial muscles. The king should not keep his
own counsel on a matter, nor consult a large number of his
ministers at a time on the subject, but he should hear their
counsels separately and see that none of his ministers would
disclose his secrets. The king should not trust in one and
the same minister in all matters and at all times. He should
counsel with many, but follow the decision of a single minis-
ter. The king who is discourteous is lost, while by polite-
ness a man may acquire a kingdom f *7— 2 1).

The king who subjugates his senses, carefully learns from
die Brahmanas well versed in the Vedas, the three sciences
of logic, punishment and money-making, and also acquires
A special knowledge of commercial undertakings of the
world, becomes able to keep his subjects under his own
control. The king should Worship the gods (images of gods)
and Brahmanas and make all sorts of gifts to the latter.
Who is there that does not upend or squander money in
trifling pursuits, whereas anything gifted to a Brahmana
bears immortal fruit. The . highest ; duties of a king are to
make gifts 10 the Brahmanas, to fight till death his enemies
in battles and to protect his • subjects, to feed the widows
tbA old, the imbecile And the friendless, and to provide the
practisers of Yoga with the necessaries of life. The . lung
should see that the different social orders of .his ‘ realm , are
pursuing their proper And respective vocations in life, and
adore and worship the Brahmanas who arc engaged in prac-
tising austerities. Without triaging any body, a king should
cause others to confide in him by thc uniiBpeacbablcness of
his prestige. The practisers of Yoga art the best friends of a
king, and be old trust them at all times and under all circum-
stances. Asking should ponder over the mean* of his sup-
plies like a heron, show his pfoyreMtike a Hon, pounce upon


AGNI HURANAM.

In. enemies null ilic lightness and ferocity of a wo[(,dait
forth from his strong holds with the swiftness of a hare,
and strike hard like a boar. He should move about in pomp
nnd splendour like a peacock, be faithful as a horse, sweet -
voiced like a cuckoo and suspicious as a crow while living
yndor the roof of a stranger ( 22 — 30).

A king should not partake of a food not previously tested
as to its harmlessness, nor use a bed which had trot lurch
recommended as safe. Similarly a king should not visit a
woman whom he had not know n before, nor get into a boat
hot previously examined and warranted as a safe. The king
who oppresses his subjects is soon deprived of the ofikr^ and
emoluments of a sovereign. It is only a capable, powerful
king of active habits who can bear the burden of sovereign*
ly, and O thoru possessed of a noble soul, a kingdom can only
flourish under the rule of such a king. All successes are
cither due to one’s own exertions or to the favours of
Providence, and a king should trust to the former foe. his
prosperity/ Whatever belongs to the king, O Brahman, be it
wealth, prosperity or the sovereignty of the world, belongs
to him by the sulTcrancc and the gopd will of his subjects
( 3 « — 33 )*


CHAPTER CCXXVI.


r USHKARA said -.—Those acts which a man, though a
tree agent i& a certain sense, is compelled to do through
the momentum of the Innate forces of bk nature, deter*
mined by his good or bad deeds in a previous existence,
are known as the Providential (Daiva) acts, though supposed
to be done by him, independent of any external agency.


8o8


AGNf PURANAM.


The wise men accordingly give greater preference to acts
done by a man out of his sheer will-force. Blessed is he
who can kill an adverse fate with his own untiring energy
(i — 3>*

O thou son of Bhrigu, a man may achieve success in
this life without any toil or effort whatever, simply as a reward
for his deeds of virtue and disinterestedness, done in a previ-
ous existence; and fate and exertion only are the two agents
to crown all human undertakings with success. All human ex-
ertions may succeed in a proper time by the grace of a favour-
able providence. As seeds in a well-cultivated field begin
to sprout when watered by rain, so the exertion of a man
bears fruit in a proper season, backed by a gracious fortune.
Fortune never smiles on the idle and the inert, and a king
should always endeavour to achieve success in his dealings by
applying such means as the Sama, the Danam, the Bheda etc.
The expedients to be used by a king in his dealings with the
foreign princes are seven in number, such as Sama (use of
friendly measures), Danam (payment of money), Bheda
(creating dissension among the allies of an adversary), Danda
(war), M>y& (strategem), Upeksha (indifference) and Indra-
j&Iam (deceit). The expedient of S&ma admits of a two-
fold division according as it is consisted of (i) true or (2)
untrue or exaggerated statements. Enemies of a noble dis-
position becomes annoyed at the use of the latter. The
king should use the expedient of conciliatary words for the
pacification of enemies who have acquired a perfect control
over their senses and who are of a religious turn of mind.
Low and ignoble enemies, such as the Rakshasa's etc., are
taken with an expedient of pleasant lies or they may be
imcified by enumerating the goods done to them (4 — 8).

A dissension can be easily created between two ruling
chiefs who are enemically disposed to or are afraid of each
other, or one of whom feels himself slighted or insulted by the
other, and a king should compel them to fall out with each


ACNl HjfcANAM.


<09

olheV Wen by showing threat. A king should secure the'
'cooperation of monarchs related to him by holding out hopes
of gain or territorial acquisition to them. In short, a king
should induce the rulers of his neighbouring countries to
desert the cause of his adversary, by threatening them with
evils they are respectively most afraid of. The man employed
to bring about such in'ternenice quarrels and who would
effect SUch a breach in the enemy's camp, should be pro-
tected by a king at all hazards. An invading king should
first bring about a quarrel among the sons and feudatory
chiefs of his adversary, and then attempt to exhaust his
treasures and to cut off the means of his supplies, and should
subsequently proceed to conquer him in an open battle-field

(9—t2).

The best of all sorts of expedients to be used by a king
in bis dealings with his adversary, is the expedient of D&nam
(payment of money)) whereby the giver attains bliss both
in this life and the next Who Is there in this world who is
toot susceptible to the charming power of money ? The king
who makes gifts of money, can sever the fastest al*
liances of sovereigns. By judiciously using the three ex-
pedients of D&nam (gift), Danda (punishment) and Krita
(benefit), a king becomes able to do the most absurd*
Every thing exists by the salutary effect of punishment, and
the king who punishes those who do not deserve punishment
and does not punish those he should punish, commits sin.

In the absence of punishment, the gods, the demons, the
serpents, the mortals, the Siddhas, the ghosts and the
birds shall overstep the boundaries of their respective
spheres of action. Wise men call punishment “ Danda 91
from the fact of its making the naturally virtuous, conform
to the laws of society, or for making the crooked natures
straight (13—16).

The king like the sun cannot be looked at with the
naked eyes for his splendour, but he sheds a mellow light
102


ACNI PURANAM.


Bio

like the moon in order that his subjects may be happy at
his sight. The king is the wind-god, since like the latter
deity, he roams all over the world in the persons of hit
spies. The king is the god of death (Yatna), since like
him, the king rewards the virtuous and punishes the wicked.
The king is the fire-god incarnate when he burns the
evil-disposed, and represents the god of wealth at the
time of making gifts. The king is the incarnation of
the god of rain since like him lie showers down wealth
on the poor and the deserving. The king is the primor-
dial hydra himself, since this, universe is poised upon
his infinite forbearance. The king is' the god Hari, since
like the latter deity lie protects his subjects with law and
military force (17 — 20 ).


CHAPtEft GCXXVfiL


Jt^USHKARA said : — Now l shall deal with the Code of
Criminal laws by enforcing which a kmg attains the most
elevated station in the next world,. 0 Rama, three Java-
weights make one Krishnal*, five Krishnalas make one
Mfsha- Six Krishnalas make one Kishardha. Sixteen
Mftshas make one Suvarna. Four Suvarnas make one Nishka.
Ten Suvarnas make one Dhiranf m. These weights should be
used in weighing gold, silver and copper. The coppersmiths
O Rama, also call the KSrshika weight , by the name of
Kirshipana. Two Panas and a half make a Sahasa. Five
Penas make a Madbyama, while a thousand panes is known
Ip Dm name of Uttama. The man who irithout being rob-
bed by a thief, gives himself out as being robbed, should be


Iiqni njhanam; III

budtd over to the king in order to be dealt according to
hie deserts, in the event of hie alleged loss having been
recouped out of the royal exchequer. The man who bears
false witness in a Court of Justice, Or deposes in a circum-
tbqacious way before any tribunal, should be doubly punished
by a king. Perjurers belonging to the three social orders of
Kshatriya, Vaishya and $hudra, should be punished with
corporeal punishment, while a Brahniana guilty of the; same
offence, should be excommunicated from the country. The
man who enjoys a property bequetlied by him in trust,
should be made to pay a fine equal to the double of its price ;
while the man who appropriates to his own use any thing
held by him in trust, as well as the maker of a trust properly
who wants to get it back, should be dealt as thieves or should
be made to pay a fine of ddtible of its price in lieu thereof.
Similarly a man who is entrusted with the custody of another
man’s clothes and who use them in the absence of their right-
fol owner, should pay such a double fine, whereby h« would
bo purged off of . all sins. The man who unknowingly
selis another man’s goods under the bona Jidc conviction
that such goods really b ong to him, commits no offence.
It is the guilty knowledge only in those transactions that is
punishable like an act of theft. The artisan who having
taken an advance of his dues, fails to do the work of his
employer, should be liable to punishment. The man who
fails to perform his part of the contract or agreement, should
be punished with the fine of a Suvarna. The servant who re-
fuses to ierye on receipt of wages should be liable to a fine
of eight Krishnalas. Similarly a master dismissing a servant
before the lapse of the term of service . stipulated for, should
be punished with a similar fine as in the preceding case. The
man who feele any remoarse after selling or purchasing any
article or property, should have the, sale or the purchase
cancelled or invalidated, if he would ask the ^endor or the
vendee to riconvey it to him wittiii ten days of such sale


AON! PUKANAtf.


of purchase, after which the transaction shoufd be deemed
as closed and the sale or the purchase as valid. Neither the
vendor shall be entitled to ask for its return, nor the vendee
shall restore the same to him after the lapse of the above-
said period of grace, and any person returning or taking
back such property after that time, should be liable to a fine
of six hundred Panas. The man who would negotiate
the marriage of a bridegroom, knowingly screening hi»
faults and defects from the guardians of the bride, should be
punished with a fine of two hundred Panas, no matter
whether such a marriage had been formally celebrated or
not. The man who would give in marriage to a man, a girt
who had been previously united with another in lawful wed-
lock, should be liable to a fineof twelve hundred and fifty
Panas (i — 17). ..jffe'

The man who having entered into a solemn compact with
another for the sale of a good, would sell it off to a differ-
ent person out of a greed for larger profit, should be
punished by the king with a fine of six hundred Panas.
The keeper of a cowshed, who would not make over the cow
to its rightful owner, on receipt from him of the cost of it»
up-keep should be liable to a fine of hundred Panas, which
should be extended to a Suvarnainthe event of his gross
negligence in tending properly (18 — 19).

The area of a village should be made to consist of a hun-
dred Dhanus, while a town or a city should respectively
include within them the areas of two hundred and three
hundred Dhanus. The towns and cities should be encircled
with walls of a height which a camel would not be able to look
over. The destruction of rice or paddy piled in the open or
not kept within proper enclosures in such a town or city,
wbuid give rise to no cause of action. The -man who would
disposses another of his house, field, tank,. or agarden by
threats or shows of violence, should.be punished With a fine
of five hundred Panas, while an unwilling and inadvertent


AGttt PDRAKART.


encroachment upon such sights and properties should be
let off with a fine of two- hundred Panas. The man who
would wilfully destroy or deface boundary pillars- or signs,,
with a view to invade the rights of his neighbours, should be
liable to the first or the lowest of the three degrees of fine
known as the Prathama Sfihasa (20—22).

O Rama, a Kshatriya by assualting a Brahmana should
be punished with a fine of hundred Panas, a Vaishya found
guilty of a similar offence should be liable to a fine of two-
hundred Panas, while a Shudra in a similar predicament,
should expiate his guilt by life. On the contrary a Brahmana
having used criminal force to a Kshatriya, should be
punished with a fine of fifty Panas, while the same should
be ruduced to twenty five and twelf Panas respectively. A
Vaishya having assaulted a Kshatriya should be punished
with a fine of the Prathama S&hasa class, while a Shudra
using force to a Kshatriya should have his tongue cut off. A
Shudra who would aspire to give moral instructions to a
Brahmana, should be punished by the king, while he should
be liable to a double fine by falsely preaching the doctrines
of the Shrutis, and by making wrong interpretations thereof.
By insulting men of good and respectable castes, the mis*
creants would be liable to fines of goodly sums ; whereas
half of the fine should be remitted in the case where the
crime would be committed through inadvertance or out of
a spirit of playful fiin. The punishment of such crimes as
assaulting one’s parents, elder brother, father-io-law, or the
elders or superiors in general^ or for obstructing the passage
of one’s spiritual preceptor, is a fine of a hundred Panas. The
member of a low caste should atone for his guilt, at the coat
of the organ with which he had offended against a member
•f one of the twice-born communities. The king should
flOMOthe Ups of a person to be cut off who would use abusive
fengeag* to a Brahifiaoa. Similarly the culprits who would
offend against a Brahmen* bjr pMsing urine or emitting


Bl4 AGNI PUAANAM.

flatas into his mouth, should be made to pay the pew tty
with the loss of his penis and the anus. The buttocks of a
member of an inferior caste should be lopped off is the
event of his occupying the seat of a member of his superior
caste. The man who would disable any organ or limb of
another, should pay for it with that particular organ or
limb of his (23 — 31).

The killer of a horse or a cow should have a hand and a
leg cut off by the officers of the crown. The man who would
wilfully make a tree barren, or destroy its fruit-bearing capa-
city, should be liable to a fine of a Suvarna. Having obliter-
ated the boundaries of a tank or a public thoroughfare, the
miscreants should be made to part with double the area of
ground actually encroached upon. A thief should restore
the article stolen by him, and pay a fine to the king in addi-
tion thereto. The thief who would steal the rope of a welt or
the metal pot attached thereto, or would wrongfully divert its
water into another channel, should be punished with im-
prisonment for a month like one who practises cruelty to
animals. The punishment for stealing more than ten pitchers-
full of paddy, is death, which may be commuted fora fine
equal to eleven times of the value of the latter. A stealer of
gold, silver, etc., as well as the man who kidnaps a man or a
woman should pay for his guilt with his life. Those organs
with which a miscreant would pilfer or encroach on other
men’s rights, should be cut off by the king without the least
compunction (32 — 38).

The Brahmans who picks up for his own use a small
quantity of pot-herbs, rice, etc., from a field without the
fcaowledge and consent of itfc rightful owner, should be
pardoned for the smallness of his crime ; but the mao who
weald steal anything specially set apart for the usa of cattle
or divine images, as well as the man who pounces upon a
num with a drawn sword in his haod, dfould be capitally
punished. A mao guilty of robbing another of hm house


AGNI PUHANAIf. *15

er fields, ss well as those who are the defilers, of other mens'
beds, or those who administer poison to others or are con*
victed pf the offence of incendiarism, should answer for
their crime with their lives. Similarly capital sentences
should be pronounced on offenders found guilty of adminis-
tering poison to cattle, as well as on miscreants who liabi-
tually perpetrate the crimes enumerated in the preceding
line (AtatSyin) (32*^39).

A man should not speak with another man's wife when
forbidden to talk nor should he commit adultery. A king
should not punish a girl who chooses her own husband ac-
cording to the rites of a Gandharva marriage, but he should
pass a capital sentence on a man of a lower caste found
guilty of holding incest with a woman of his superior caste.
The wife who wantonly breaks her faith with her lord, should
be caused to be torn to pieces by dogs specially trained for
the purpose. A woman defiled by one of the relations of
her husband, should lead a secludid life, taking only a morsel
of food each day. The woman defiled by a man of . her
superior caste, should simply shave her head by way of
penance. A Brahmana going unto a worpan of tho Vaishya
caste, as well as a Kshatriya and a Vatshya respectively
visiting the wife of a man of low caste, should be fined a
Prathama (the lowest order of fine) each. The courtesan
who having contracted to live with a man, goes to another
for greater profits, should refund to the man a sum equal
to twice the amount originally received from him and pay
a similar fine to the king (40—45).

A man should chastise his sons, brothers, cousins, • sons,
wives and slaves with a strong string of thread or a rope
'made of the blades of Vena grass. The rod should be
freely used On the back of a thief and not on his head, as by
so doing a man would commit a sin. The officers who would
be found guilty of extorting money from the king s subjects
whom it is hia dutv to protect, should be banished from


KGU\ FUR AN AM.


*l6

the country and all his estates should be escheated to
the king. Similarly the properties of those shameless
and undutifiil culprits Who neglect the works of their
employers, should be confiscated by the king. Likewise,
'the ministers and justices t)f the king’s courts found
wanting in their respective duties and betraying the trust
reposed in ‘them by their sovereign, or proving themselves
false to the salt they eat, should be exiled from the realm,
and all their belongings should be escheated to the crown.
The king should cause the mark of a female generative organ
to be branded on the forehead of a breaker of female chastity,
•and the 'mark of a wine bowl to be permanently put on the
fore-head of a drunkard while he should make a thief carry
a dog on his shoulders, and the killer of a Brahmana a skull
•on the top-end of his rod (46 — 50).

The king should pass capital sentences on Shudrii mis-
creants guilty of offences punishable with death, while he
should banish the Brahmanas from his country convicted
with the same offence. The properties and belongings of
a man guilty of any of the five deadliest sins (Mahapatakins)
should be dedicated to the use of the god of oceans
(Varuna). A king should kill the abettors of a thief as well
as those who would supply him with food and money in a
particular village. The feudatory chiefs or the governors
of provinces appointed to maintain order within their res- ,
pective jurisdictions, should be put to death in the event of
their behaving improperly to the state and the sovereign.
The king should cause those to sit on the pointed end of
a mace (Shula) and there to expire with their hands pre-
viously cut off, who would commit robberies and other acts of
depredation in the night, after having entered into a recog-
nisance for good conduct. The king should put to death
thnso/who woidd encroach, upon the vested ng^tol* public
teak; or \ divine temple. A karshftpana Is the fine for-
cMUMttta aafamne* on. a nuhifc thoroughfare, , a*d the


AGtjl fURANArt. S 17

'offender should be compelled to arrange for its removal at
his own erst, in the absence of any disease or the disturbed
state of the time to plead. A party to a contract failing to
perform his part of the agreement each month, should be
punished with a fine of five hundred Panas. Merchants,
dealing fraudulently with honest men either in respect of
quality or the price of a commodity, should be punished with
the lowest or the second degree of fine, and all his stores
should be confiscated by the king on the ground of their not
being up to the mark and hence of small value (11—57).

A king should separately impose the penalties of the
different degrees of fine such as the Sahasa, the Madhyamaand
the Uttama. The offenders who adulterate goods, as well as
persons dealing in imitation-articles as genuine ones, should
be punished with a fine of the second degree (five hundred
Panas), while practisers of frauds and traders dealing in
contraband articles of trade, should be liable to a tine o r the
Uttama class (one thousand Panas) A person having used
abusive language in a quarrel, to a man, slrould pay a fine
to thw aggrieved party and also one to the king. A Brah-
mana using any of the forbidden articles of food, should
pay a fine of thousand Panas, while a Shudra guilty of a
similar crime as the above, should be liable to a fine of a
Krishnala. Any person coming in contact with or having
dealings of whatsoever nature with a false and fraudulent
governor, with a dishonest trader or with a murderer, should
be punished with a fine of a thousand Panaj. The woman
who administers poison to her husband or sets fire to the
house of her ford, or any way injures the persons of her hus-
band, son, or her spiritual preceptor or that of a Brahmana
nowise related to her, should have her ears, nose, and lips
clipped and cut off and should be excommunicated from the
country. Such a demoness should be provided with a numhet
of cows in her exile, and it would be her duty to tend them
properly. A culprit gnilty of the offence of demolishing a


§10 . AdNI PURANAM.

house pr of destroying a forest or a field belonging to
another, as well as the man who would seduce the wife of a
king, should be burnt alive in fire. The man who omits to
copy out any portion of a royal edict or makes any addition
thereto, as well as the officer of the crown who wilfully suffers
a thief or a prisoner of war to make good his escape, should
be punished with a fine of the highest order. The man
who sits on the royal throne, or rides without permission
in any carriage or palanquin exclusively dedicated to the
use of his sovereign, should be liable to a tine of twelve
hundred and fifty PanaS. . T- he man, who though fairly de-
feated, deems or gives himself out as uaconquered, should
be called on to be beaten again in a fair contest and should
be also punished with a double fine of the lowest degree.
A procurator in a king's court unjustly prosecuting an inno-
cent man, should pay for his guilt with bis life. The jailor
or the person whose doty is to punish offenders with his
own hands, should pay the fine himself in the event of his
Suffering a criminal duly convicted and sentenced to escape
from custody (58—66).


CHAPTER CCXXVlll.


IT ushkara said A king should march out against his
Adversary, only when he would feel that he had been suffering
from a plethora of power, and that an out-let should be given
to the surplus military energy, surging and boiling among the
4anks and files of his army restive with its own consdous
aright. He should get out ontyat a time when, hf wo a id find
firit Ui NtiHlhNMimi Md iwttb tit ibh Mt aigbest


AGNI PURANAM. 819

stale of efficiency and that he was in a position to crush all
civic and internecine feuds that might make their heads dur-
ing his absence from the country. Under such a circums-
tance! a king should canip out with his army in the outskirts
of his capital and then march against his adversary. Or he
should proceed against his enemy without delay, when he
would find him in peril, his country visited wiih such visita-
tions of nature as Earthquakes etc, his army discontented,
its spirit chilled and its ardour cooled down — 4).

Dreams of good omen and the spontaneous movement
of the auspicious muscles of the body of the king at the
time of the start should be deemed as augering success in the
campaign, and an invading king or general should enter the
dominion of his enemy when birds which can predict future
events from the understood relations of things, would inform
the right moment of action by their peculiar cooings, or
twitters.

In the rainy season an invading army should largely con-
sist of elephants and infantry divisions, while it should be
composed of carwarriors and cavalry soldiers in winter or
at tits beginning. The four different divisions of an army
such as the cavalry, infantry, car-warriors and elephant-men,
should be mobilized in a campaign started in spring or
autumn. An army largely composed of foot soldiers usually
wins the day. The spontaneous throbbing of the muscles
of the right side of one’s (male) body should be deemed
as auspicious,. while a similar throbbing ih the left side of a
woman would indicate good litek. Similarly a v sudden palpi-
tation edihe heart,, appearance of moles or marks on the back
or btos or iprmr the region of the heart of a person should
be deemed inauspteftous (5^8/.


CHAPTER CCXXlX.


r ushkara said : — Now I shall describe the nature and
the significance of dreams and how to obtain a sound and
peaceful sleep unchequered by any bad dreams whatever.
Tht. dream in which a person sees that grass, mosses,
plants, 'anil creepers have grown all over his body,
except about the region of the umbilious, indicates evil.
The dreams in which a person thinks that he has shaved
his head, or sees that his head has been covered over
with the particles of bell metal or his body has been
bespattered .vith mud, or that he has been moving about
stark naked, or clad only in dirty and insufficient garments,
are bad. The dreams in which a man thinks that he has
been falling down from a great height, is swinging to and fro
in, a hammock, or playing on a harp or on any other stringed
instrument, augur evil. The dreams in which a man thinks,
that he is collecting ores of pig iron, or sees a dead serpent-
lying across his way, or sees a ChandSla or a tree blooming
with red flowers, should be deemed as the harbingers of evil.
Similarly ‘ the dream in which a man rides on a boar or a
dog, or an ass, or on a camel as well as the dream in which a
man thinks that he has been eating the flesh of a bird
or has been partaking of a fare composed of rice, pulse,
spices and oily substances, or sees that the sun and
the moon have been dislodged from their spheres in
heaven, or that the flag-post erected in honour of the god
Indra (Shakradhvaja) has been suddenly broken in the middle
is inauspicious. Similarly the dream in which a man thinks,
that he has again been converted into a human embryo, and
as such has again entered the womb of 'his mother, or has
ascended a burning funeral pile, should be deemed as in.


AGNI PURANAM.


ijl

auspicious. The dream in which a man sees that nature it
oppressed with such disturbances, as earthquakes, fall*
ing down of meteors etc, or that he has incurred the wrath
of his elders and superiors or of any other Brahmana, should ■
be deemed as foreboding evil. The dream in which a person
thinks that he has been drowned in a river or that he has
bathed in water saturated with cow-dung, or in cMd water, or
in water containing the solutian of the five substances known
as the Panchodaka, indicates evil. The dream in which a
man thinks that he has been holding an unmarried girl in his
embrace, or has been committing unnatural offence, or that
he has undergone amputation in any part of his body, or
that he has been purging or vomiting in. sleep, predicts evil
days. The dream in which a man thinks that he has been
out on a journey to the south, or has been afflicted with
fatal diseases, or that he has been plucking fruits or breaking
metal pots, or has been sweeping the floor of a room, on
that he has been playing with Pish&chas, or Rakshases,.
monsters or apes, or sees that the planets have been falling
down from their respective orbits, should be deemed as tbft
forerunner of evil times. The dream in which a man thinks
that he has been insulted by others, or that he has fallen
on evil days in consequence thereof, or sees himself clad
in red clothes or has been playing with the same, or has put
on a garland of red flowers or has been bespattered with-
the paste of red sandal, should be deemed as specifically
inauspicious, and it is better not to speak of them to- any
body (a— 14).

A man should .try to sleep arerthe effect* of such
evil breams, which should be also remedied by an act of
ceremonial ablution, by propitiating the Brahwanas,by peer-
ing libations of clarified buttef containing the seeds el
sessamum on the fire, by worshipping the gods Hari, Brah-
man, Shiva, Gana and the sun-god; or by reciting the Vedic
hymns of Purusha Sukta (15).


ABN! PURANAM.


8/2

A dream, dreamt in the first quarter of the night, takes
fruit, within a year, while those dreamt in the second, third
and the fourth watches of the night, produce their good or
bad effects within* six. three and a half month respectively,
the one dreamt at the time of dawn being realised within
ten days of its first having- Of two dreams dreamt in
the same night, the latter should be deemed as likely to
be realised, and therefore it is incumbent on a man not to
sleep again: after having had a good dream in a particular
night (16 — iq).

Now I shall describe to you, Oh thou twice-born one,
those dreams that usually foreshadow a better turn in
one’s fortune. Dreaming of having had climbed a hill or a
mountain, or of a walk over the terrace of a palacje, or of
having riden on a horse, on an elephant, or on a bull, as well
as the one of a tree of white flowers blooming in the
skies, and the one in which a man finds his body has been
overgrown with trees and shrubs except at the region of
the navel, should be deemed as auspicious. The dream in
which the dreamer fancies himself as furnished with a large
number of heads and arms, or sees that his hairs have been
tinged with grey, or that he has been clad in white gatw
ments, or has been decorated with garlands of white flowers,
are the harbingers of good fortune. 0 thou twicc-born one,
similarly those dreams which are filled With visions of eclipses
of the sun, the moon and the stars, of the fall or defeat of
one’s enemies, of victory in a war, in a contest or at the
dicetable, of one-being drenched in the rain, or of taking pos-
session of a plot of ground, should be deemed as indicating
the advent of good days. Dreams in which a man fancies
that he has been taking raw meat, drinking blood, porridge
thickened milk, wine pr spirituous liquor, or has been bathing
in blood, should be deemed as of happy efiens. Dreams of
making passes with swprds or of fencing on (he ground as
well as of sucking the udders of a cow, of a she-buflalo, of a


AONl (URARAII.


Wife, of a she-elephant or of a lioness or those filled with
the visions of benediction by the gods and the BrahmanasoT
by one’s elders, superiors and spiritual guides, or of being
sprinkled over with drops of water dropping down from the
tips of the horns of a cow, should be looked upon as fore*'
boding good (ao— *27).

O Rama, the dream in which a person fancies that he
has been dropping down from the horns of the moon, or foal
he has been decapitated or duly installed on a throne, are
realised with the. acquisition of a kingdom. Similarly dream*
filled with the visions of one’s death, of destruction of one’*
house by fire, of royal rewards, or of playing pn stringed
instruments, are highly auspicious. Dreams of a horse, of an
elephant, of gold, of a bull or of a royal visit, predict the in*
crease of one’s relations. Dreams in which a man fande*
that he has been riding on a bull, or on an elephant or climb*
ing a post or a tree or walking over the terrace of a bouse,
as well as that full of the visions of a clear sky, of a tree
bending down with the burden of fruits, or of a piece of white
cloth or of being robbed all over the body with execreta or
clarified butter pr of visiting a woman standing in one’s for*
bidden degree of consanguinity, should be deemed as of
happy augury (28 — 31).


-:o:-


CHAWER CCXXX.


IT*" uSHkAftA said : — Cereals, paddies except those of the
black species, cOtton, hay, cowdung and coins are auspicious
things and ensure the success of his mission, when looked at
by a man just at the time. of leaving his house. The eight of


AGttt PURANAM.


i*4

a Chandaia, treacle or of a Shal tree, or of men with shaved
heads, or of persons who have annointed their body with
oil, or of naked persons, bits, of iron, clay, hides of animals
and hairs, or of a mad man and a eunuch, should be care-
fully avoided at the time of the start. A pregnant woman,
a\widow, drugs such as the Pinyaka, etc., a Chandaia, a
member of the Shvapacha or any other vile caste, a butcher
or ‘a killer of birds, should be removed from the presence
of a man, about to start on a journey. Husks of grains,
MheB, skeleton, bits of bones, broken potteries, sounds of
musical instruments except those of the Bhairava Jharjhar,
are inauspicious sights and sounds at the time of the start
( 1 - 4 ).

Terms of welcome such as "Come, 0 Come,” should be
uttered in the front of a welcome guest, or relation and not
•t his back, whereas the terms of farewell such as "Depart
In peace,” should be uttered either by looking an out-going
friend in the face, or as he would cross the threshoid, or at
his back. Terms of dissuasion such as "where do you "go ?”
“Stay O Stay,” " don't go" " What’s the good of going
thW’ are inauspicious sounds and auger the death of the
gder, if accidentally used by his friends and relations at the
tjm> of his start. Incidents such as stooping down of the
ravenous birds on the banner, making of false steps by the
carriage animals, breaking of weapons, slipping off of wear-
in apparels, tumbling down of umbrellas, and beating of
the head against the door-heme, happening at the time of
"tiie going-out of the king, predict evil ; and the god Hari,
should be worshipped and hymnised to ward it off on the
happening of any of the abovesaid untoward occurrences
(5—8). ;

A king should enter his house on retunihig from a distant
journey, after having viewed at the door such tigbts as white
flowers^ fi^ll water-pots, meat,' fishes, anoli&man, a goat, a
cow i horse. an elephant, images o(jjods, a lighted fire,


ACNI PURANAM.


bunclies of green grass, a courtesan, silver, gold, {enij
Vacha, sun-dried rice, swords, weapons, an umbrella, a throiid
and other insignia of royalty, a dead body carried without
mourning, fruits, clarified butter, curd, milk, . a niirror, A
conch-shell, a sugar-cane, the deep rumblings of clouds,
panegyrics sung by court -panegyrists, Should be deemed AS
all auspicious ( 8 — 12).


CHAPTER cexxxi.


r USHKARA said ; — Birds unfold the good or the evil fate
Waiting a mail Staying at or leaving a particular country
or a town. The soothsayers deem all sorts of excited sounds
made by birds as augering evil, while their gentle cooings
and twitters are deemed as full of happy omens. The dte
(closures (sounds of augery) niade by birds may be group-
ed under six different heads, according to the time, the
direction, the place and the Karana of its making, as well .an
the nature of the sound made and the species of the bird
Making it. Each preceding item in the list should be deemed
as more potent than the one immediately succeeding it
Similarly a night-bird , screeching in the day, or a day-bird
Screaming in the night, should be interpreted to auger eVii
With a dead certainty like the sound made by them under
the malignant influence Of an unlucky asterism, planet or
Lagna. The quarter of the sky Which the sun moves toward*
at any particular time, should be known As the OhumitS
(Smoking), the quarter of it* stay as the Jvalitl (Burning)
and the quarter he has left back as the Ang&ritt (Burned)

(1— S)-

•04


AON! PUflANAM.


126

The agitated (Dipta) sound of a bird is divided iftto
three classes, while its gentle (Shanta) cooings admit of a
five-fold division. A bird making any sound in the quartef
of the sky which may fall under the denomination of Dipta
should be called an Agitated Bird . Similar epithets should
be given to wild birds making any sound in a village or a
town or to village-birds producing any note in a wilderness,
as well as to birds singing perched on a branch of any of the
inauspicious trees.

Even a bird of the most auspicious species should be
deemed as partaking of the evil of an inauspicious place, inf
the event of its making any sound therefrom. A bird be*
having in contravention of its own nature, should be deemed
as inauspicious by its action. A bird producing a pierced
or a hollow note, should be deemed as inauspicious by it*
sound, while a bird not habitually carnivorous, and picking
the flesh of a dead animal, should be deemed inauspicious
tor having violated the principles of its own nature, f have
described the circumstances under which a bird or an animal
otherwise auspicious partakes of the evil nature of its en-
vironments, as well as the sounds of good or evil augury of
animals who are both wild and domestic in their* nature
(6 — 9).

O Rama, now 1 shall deal with the blissful and malignant
natures of their sounds and positions in relation to a man
about to start on a journey. The cow, the horse, the ass,
the dog, the Sarika, the domestic Godhika, the Chatakaa
(Sparrows), the Bhosa, and the Turtle are all birds and
animals that usually live in a village, while the Ajavi, . the
elephant (tusker), the parrot, the Kola, the Buffalo and the
crow are both wild and domestic in their nature, the rest
being deemed as all wild birds or animals. The cat and the
cock are both wild and A domestic, their specific nature being
detected from their souncU. The birds that fly &bout in the
day, are the Gokama, the Peacock, the CHakraftva, the Khava,


AGNI PUR AN AM.


%» 1

the Hints, the Crow, the Kutaha, the Kukkubha, the Hawk,
the Pheru, the Khanjana, the Vanara, the Shataghna, the
Chataka, the Shyama, the Chasa, the Kapinjala the Tittira,
the Shatapatra, the Pigeon, the Khanjirataka, the Datyaha,
the Parrot, the Rajiva, the Cock, the Bharadvaja, and the
SSranga. The birds and animals that are noctarnal in their
habits are the V3guri, the Owl, the Sharabha, the Croyncba,
the Hare, the Tortoise, the Labhasik9, and the PingalikS.
The Swan, the deer, the cat, the Mungoose, the Serpents,
the wolf, the lion, the tiger, the camel, the village-boar,
the. man, the bull, the Shyavid, the Vrikari, the Cuccoo,
the Sarasa, the horse, the Koupinara, and the Gooha, roam
about both by day and night ( 10 — rg).

The abovesaid animals appearing before, or crossing the
way of or moving along side with an army on march, indi-
cate victory in war, the reverses of arms being predicted by
their lurking in the rear of an armed host. A Chasa coming
out of its nest and crying in the front of a king, fore-bodes
his humiliation at the hands of his adversary, while a similar
crying at his left hand side, indicates quarrel at the dinner-
time. A peacock seen by a person at his left, or in the
front, at the time of the start, predicts success of his errand,
while a shrill and pierced note of the same bird, augers
that he will be robbed by thieves in the road. O Rama,
a deer taking a bound in the front of a man out on a
journey, fore-bodes his death. A bear, a mole, a jackal, a
tiger, a lion or «. cat scudding away in an opposite direction,
as well as a mule braying violently, should be deemed as
forerunners of extreme misfortune. A Kapinjala seen by
a person either at his left or right or at his back, augers bad
luck. Similarly a Tittira seen in any of the above positions
in relation to a man, should be deemed as an inauspicious
sight. A deer or a boar seen scudding away from the left
to the right of a man out on a journey, predicts the advent
of good fortune, the reverse being the effect of seeing them


AGNI PL'KANAM


$28

in directions other than what has been enumerated above
A bull, a horse, a jackal, a tiger, a lion, a cat or an ass seen
passing from the right to the left of a person indicates the
fulfilment of his heart-felt objects. A she-jackal, a Shyama
oana, a Chacku, a Pingala, a domesticated sow, and a female
cuckoo seen at one’s left, are known as male omens, while a
Bhlaaka, an Usha, a’ monkey, and a Skrikarna seen in similar
positions, auger the loss of prestige and kingdom, and are
known as female omens. . The cries of a young bullock, of a
hare, of an alligator as well as the hissings of a snake heard at
the time of the start, should be deemed as auspicious sounds.
A monkey or a bullock seen bounding away in a different
direction at the time of the start forebodes evil. The
omens indicated by birds and Animals should be deemed as.
very potent and are sometimes realised on the day of their
occurence (20 — 30).

Oh thou twice born one, she-jackals solely concerned in
eating away the carcasses of a dead animal, or snarling or
quarreling over the division of their booty, do not. predict
any thing good or bad if heard howling! at the time of. the
march. The cries of a she-jackal howling alone or in groups
of twd three or four forebode good luck. The cries of a
pack of five she- jackals should be deemed! as. evil omens.
The cries of seven predict success, while the cries of packs
consisting of larger numbers should be deemed as positively
ominous. The cries of an Ulkamukhi (a kind of fox
whose mouth when opened casts a phospherescent light)
howling at the sun and filling the transport animals and the
soldiery with terror, predict the total annihilation of an army.
A deer first seen by an army oh/ its arrival at the enemy’s
country indicate victory. A deer fist seen by a man in the
first day of a year predicts his good fortune throughout its
course (31—36).


CHAPTER CCXXXth


iT USHKARA stud:— «A besieging army should lay siege
|o that quarter of a castle or a fortress over which the crows
enter or come out of their rooks within, as such a siege
usually ends in fall of the citadel. Extreme calamity or a
fatal catastraphy usually befals an army at the cawing of a
raven, that having taken Us abode in the line, flics about'
agitated and terror-stricken in its left. The man whose
shadow, or riding animal, or garments a raven pecks with
its heaks, is sure to die, which should be warded off by duly
worshipping the crow. A crow listlessly walking, to and fro
at the door of a house, predicts the return of some of its
absent inmates from a distant country. A red or a burnt subs-
tance thrown hy a crow into a house, augers its destruction by
fire. A red thing cast down by a crow in the front of a
person, signifies his incarceration in no distant time, while
yellow or white suhstances thurst at one’s threshold by the
bird, predicts Us gain in gold or silver. AnytUng brought
by a crow into one’s house indicates Us gain, whereas any
thing taken away foretells his loss. The sight of a crow
eating raw-meat in his presence, augers acquisition of wealth
to a man, while a bit of clay or a gem cast down *by a crow
in the house of a person predicU-him the gain of a landed
property or of a kingdom (i—y).

A man bid farewell to hy a favourable crow at the time
of Us start, is sure to accomplish the mission of his journey,
wUle a crow cawing hoarsely and hostilely at the time, is
sure to frustrate the ends of Us wandering. A crow, seen
approaching and cawing in the front of a*man about to start,
indicates a fruitless journey. A crow heard cawing at his left
by a man just at the lime of starting out, augers good, while


8)0


AGNI POKANAM


such a sound heard at one's right at the time, forebodes a
loss of fortune. A Crow accompanying a man in his left
should be deemed as the best of all good omens, while its
following him in his right should be looked upon as an omen
of middling success. A crow passing along the left of a man
from the direction of his journey, is said to dissuade him
from his errand. O thou son of Bhrigu, crows are said
to disclose to a man the good or evil of a projected journey
even at his own house. A crow resting on one leg and looking
at the sun with a single eye augers danger.

A crow, seen entering a crevice or a gap in the wall of a
house by a man, who has been projecting a travel to a distant
country augers danger. A crow with frost-beaten wings
is a bad cmen, whereas the one with wings bespattered with
mud, should be always deemed as an auspicious sight. A
crow, seen with its beaks filled with execreta or other
filthy substances at the time of the start, indicates the reali-
sation of all his heartful objects to the sojourner. Oh thou
son of Bhrigu, other birds seen under conditions or circums-
tances similar to those of a crow above described, should be
construed to indicate good or bad luck like the latter (8 — 13).

Dogs crying or howling to the right of a royal camp or
in the front of a temple dedicated to the god Indra, or at the
main entrance to a royal palace, indicate the death of
Brahmanas, of the king and of the steward of the palace
respectively. Similarly a dog howling in the interior of a
chamber is said to predict the death of its occupier. A dog
smelling the left side of the body of a man about to start on
a journey, augers him an all-round success, while its smelling
of the left hand or the right side of the body of a person
similarly circumstanced as above, should be deemed as
ominous of danger. A dog approaching a sojourner from the
direction of his front is said to prophecise the fruitless nature
of the journey, while its obstructing the way of a man pro-
ceeding on a journey, indicates that the road ahead Is in-


ACM PlJRANAM.


* 3 <

tested With thieves and robbers. A dog holding a piece o(
hone of rag, or a rope between its teeth is an inauspicious
sight at the time of going out on a journey, while the sight of
a dog carrying a shoe or a bit of flesh in its mouth, should be
deemed as a happy omen. A dog seen with its mouth
filled with loose hairs or any other ulthy substances, should
be also deemed as an inauspicious sight at the time of going
oUt Ort an etrand. A dog passing Urine while leading the
Way of a tfaveilor indicates danger ahead, while its follow-
ing the lead of a person and its urinating at holy spots, of
Against the sacred plants and substances in the interval*
predict his good luck (14—20).

O Rama, a jackal or any othef animal of the dog-species*
behaving similarly to a dog at places and predicaments
stated above, should be construed to auger similar good
or evil. The causeless lowing of a cow predicts trouble to
her master, tn the night it signifies the advent of thieves
into the house, While her wailing indicates the occurrence of
death in_the house at no distant date. A bullock bellowing
in the night brings good fortune to its master. An ox
breaking its tether and roaming at large in the night, pre-
dicts victory to the king. A cow eating filthy substances or
taking any food which has not been allotted to her by
Mature, or not taking -to her own young caif or to any belong-
ing to her, should be construed to predict the occurrence of a
miscarriage in the family of her master. A cow looking
happy in a Wet skin and digging the earth with one of her
fore-hoops, and bounding in joy with loose particles of
earth stuck to her horns, indicates the advent of better days
to her master. O Rama, these futes shall equally hold good
in the case of a sh e-buffalo (21—25).

A saddled horse ride n upon by a man other than its
appointed rider auger* evil, like its plunging into the water
or tumbling over the ground. A horse that sleeps without
good cause even at the rime of strolling predicts the hop*


AGNI MjRAKAI*.


& 3 *

gening of some untoward events. The sudden repugn a ncfe
shown by a horse to barley or at the Modaka (coin posed
of powdered barley, treacle, etc.,) or its breeding at the
mouth without any apparent cause, should be specifically
tooted as incidents of evil Omen. A horse playiiigtwith A
tierort or a pigeon or a Sarika, augers death. A horse
licking his leg with his tortgUC in teatfyl eyes gives warn*
Ing of Its death to its master. A horse, digging the earth
With its left fore-paw, Or sleeping iH the day on his left;
forebodes evil. A horse that passes urine ohce a day out
Of fright, Or looks drowsy without any Apparent cause,
Or becomes restive When attempted to be riden upon, or
frantically returns home if riden upon With difficulty, augers
the reverses of arms in an expedition, like the bhe always
biting its left side. A horse that bravely neighs ih the sight
Of the enemy and digs the earth with its forepAw, And madly
dashes through the enemy’s line at the single touch Of the
rein predicts victory (a6 — 31).

Ait elephant visiting his wife publickly in A village,
Indicates the depopulated of the country, whersaS a cow-
elephant, newly delivered of her child, augers the deatH
of tike king by running mad. Likewise An elephant that
does not stand trappling or runs home dr in a contrary
direction when riden upon, with ichor or the jtiice eteud-
ing from her temple* foretells the death of the Sovereign.
Ad elephant crossing his left fore-leg with the right or
ehtwining his trunk with his right tusk should be deemed
as an harbinger of good luck (3 i — =34).

A bull* a horse or an elephant, breaking through tile
enemy’s line should be deemed as a good omen. A passing
cloud suddenly breaking itself into a shower Of raid in an
otherwise clear sky, indicates the annihilation of the Whole
army. A tumbling down of the royal umbrella, aS well as
malignant positions of tj^e planets and the asterisms and a
wind blowing in the face of an armed host at the time of


Agni puRanam.


ks marching or hghting Augers danger. A contended army
thrilling with the prdspect of victory, arid the favourable
positions of the planets at the time of the march Or the
battle, predict victory. The east, the *West, the north
and the north-east are auspicious quarters for an army to
htarch to (35—37)-


tHAPiER ccxkxiii.


USHKara said:— Now 1 shall enumerate the condi-
tions under which all sorts of journeys should be undertaken.
A journey should not be made on the setting, descension or
occultation of the Venus Or during its stay in a hostile house.
Similarly a journey should not be undertaken under the malig-
nant influence of the receding Mercury, or of any other planet,
or of the presiding planet of the quarter to which the journey
would be undertaken, or of ainy other planet similarly circum-
stanced as above. A journey should not be undertaken
under the malignant influence of a Vaidhtiti, Vaytipata, NSga,
Shaktini, Chatuspada, or a Kintughna Yoga or Katana. A
journey made under the influence' of a Vipat, Nidhana or a
Pratyari star or of the asterism of one's nativity, as well as
Under the baneful influences of a Ganda Lagna or of a Riktl
Tithi, is sure to terminate in a fatal way. The East and the
North are quite alike in their virtues and influences, the same
being, the case with the south and the west. A Dikshula
(astral effect Acting as an inauspicious barrier and forbidding
journey towards a particular quarter of the sky) blocking the
North-west and the South-east quarters of the globe, should
not be scaled at all, as called in the parlance of astrology,
Sundays, Mondays and Saturdays are not auspicious for
»*5


AONI PURANAM.


*34

the purpose* of a sojourn in a distant country. The asterisms
known as the Krittikas appearing at the east, the Maghas
at the south, the Maitras at the other quarters of ths sky
and the VSsava at the west, are benignant asterisms, and a
journey under their auspicies may be safely made to the
directions they respectively preside over (i — 8).

Now I shall describe the auspicious Lagnas which should
he ascertained by the measure of the shadow cast by the sun
on the different days of the week, such as Sundays, etc. The
auspicious moment on Sundays, is just when the shadow
cast by a standard shadow-stick driven into the ground,
reaches the length of twenty fingerwidths, those on Mon-
days, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, Fridays and Satur-
days being the moments when the shadow will cover the
lengths of sixteen, fifteen, fourteen, thirteen, twtelve, and
eleven fingerwidths respectively. A man should not start
on a journey under the malignant influence of his natfil
Lagnam, nor to a quarter of the sky spanned by a rain-bow
A man meditating on the divine self of Hari and under-
taking a journey under the auspicies of the blissful Shakuni-
Karan, is sure to return victorious, laden with fame and
glory (9—1 1).

Now I shall describe the circle of twelve monarchs
(Mandalam) and the relation which an invading king should
bear to each of them, and the way in which they should be
grouped round his central authority. A kingdom or an
empire consists 'of the seven factors such as, the king or the
master (the central repository of ‘aH law and authority),
the Ministry, the fortifications, the Revenue, the pmishment
(law), the allies and the Townships. Rebels or miscreants,
any way interfering with the harmonious working of these
•even factors, should be killed without the least compunction of
the heart; and a king dmH endeavour to Increase the circles
a* his friends and (Mm. Thi kingdom or government over
which a king tacrcisM a dwset control, is known as the first


AGIO nilANAM


*JS

Mandala. The feudatory or the dependent estates of ap
empire should be known, as the enemies, while fondly at-
tached to. their paramount lord 'they should be regarded as
allies. Then the kings of the neighbouring countries should
be arranged as friendly, hostile to the friend of a friendly
monarch and so on, in succession, and a king should bear such
relations or enter into such compacts with them respectively.
This rule should be observed in relation to princes who are
the rulers of countries bordering on the dominion of a king
in the front, and* I shall now describe the order in* which
an invading king should create friends and enemies among
the rulers of contiguous countries lying on the rear of bis
own domain. A hostile king, whose kingdom lies bordering
on the posterior boundary of an invading sovereign, is called
a PSrshnigrkha. An invading king should enter into at.
alliance with a friendly monarch (Akranda) whose territory
would be contiguous .to the realm of the latter, who would
thus serve as a check against any combinat^m of his own
forces with those of his allies, in the event of a campaign
against his central kingdom. The hostile king, whose
dominions would be beyond those of an Akranda sovereign,
is known as the As&ra, who would be an ally of the PSrshni-
griha prince. The king, whose kingdom would be contiguous
to that of an AsSra monarch, is known as the Akrand^sSra,
an ally of the Akranda prince. The central monarchia!
authority (Madhyastha) should be capable of punishing or
rewarding his enemies pr allies. The paramount lord, able
to reward or punish his friends or foes, and capable of
wielding authority over the ruling heads of the world, is
known as the Udlshina or Neutral (13—19).

I have finished enumerating the names of the twelve
Icings of a monarchist circle (Mandala). No king become s a
friend or a foe without sufficient cause, or without a due
regard to his own interests, only for the sake of amity
or discord. Enemies are divided into three classes


AGNI FVRANAM


*j6

of ancestral, personal and artificial, each preceding
class being held as more dangerous than the one imme,
diately succeeding it. The P&rshnigr&ha of a hostile
king, as well as his enemies, should be deemed as
friends and allies by an invading monarch. A king
should endeavour to conquer his own P&rshnigrlha (hostile
king whose territories border on the rear of a monarch’s
kingdom) by means of political expedients other than that
of war. The ancient authorities on the science of politics
recommend the extinction of an enemy by an ally or a
frienldy monarch. A friend or an ally may turn inimical on
account of his enforced vassalage to an invading monarch
or from other causes. An invading king should exterminate
his enemies himself, if possible. Such a sovereign, if trusted
by all, and if not hard on any body, can exercise control over
the whole world (20—25).


-lo:-


CHAPTER CCXXXfV.


r USHKARA said 4 have already dealt with the poll,
deal expedients of concilliatory measures, of creating dis-
tensions among the ranks of the enemy, of buying off an
adversary, as well as of punishments to be inflicted by a king
on miscreants, perpetrating deeds of crimes within his
own- territory. Now I shall speak of the nature of penal*
ties to be imposed on persons lmng within the jurisdiction
of a foreign king. The punishment to be inflicted by a
king admits of a two-fold division, such asthe public and
the private. Publie punishment consists in looting villages
gnd destroying the towns elan enemy’s, country, or in public


ACNI POTANAM; *47

execution ot toes either by tiie or poison or in poisoning-
wells otherwise sweet and wholesome etc. ( t — 3).

I have finished describing the code of penalties. Hear
me, O Brahman, describe the conditions under which a king
would remain indifferent to ’the affairs of his adversary. A
king should make peace with his enemy, only when he would
find that his enemy would be able to do him injury in battle*
A king should be indifferent to his enemy, only when he
would fiind that iconcilliatory measures would simply extol
him to the skies, that the attempt at buying him off would be
nothing more than the squandering of good money, and that
in striving to create dissensions among his ranks, he would be
detected and punished. A king should remain indifferent to
the affairs of a hostile country, only when he would find that
war would not decide the supremacy of either of the parties
engaged in the contest, and under such a circumstance, a
king should wait for a better opportunity so as to avoid un-
necessary humiliation (4 — 7).

Now 1 shall describe the measures of illusion to be prac-
tised by a king in frightening away the hearts of a hostile
army, and to show that the God is on the side of his country-
men. O thou twice-born one, birds of strong and extensive
plumage should be reared in the camp and let fly over the
enemy’s line with lighted wicks attached to their tails, so
that the soldiers of the enemy might take them ta be so
many meteors falling down from the skies. Other physical
disturbances should be simulated to scare away the enemy.
The ascetics and astrologers should be appointed to pro-
claim the pre-ordained fall of the enemy. Thus an invading
monarch should put his enemies to utter rout, by proclaim-
ing that his cause had been favoured with the blessing of
the immortal gods, and that their wrath had alighted upon
the beads of his enemies. Moreover he should give out
that he had been reinforced by the opportune arrival of
fresh allies, whereby the enemy would be surely and


utterly ratted: War-whoops and jubilant shouts of victory
should be caused to be- raised, and it should be publicly
proclaimed that the enemy had been irretrievab ly beaten.
Thus a king backed by divine favour, and equipped with
die help of the gods, should met his enemy in battle, and
fill the minds of his enemy's forces with the fear of incurring
the wrath of tee gods, by practising tricks of magic in the
following way.— -An army consisting of the four essential
divisions of cavalry, carwarriors, footmen and elephant-men,
should be exhibited so as to delude the vision of the enemy,
and so as to make him believe that they had been sent by
the gods to strengthen the already victorious arms of the
invading monarch. Similarly the quarters of the enemy
should be denuded with showers of simulated blood, and
a similar severed head of the adversary should be exhibited
at tee terrace of the palace (8— 16).

I shall now deal with the six political expedients, which
are usually adopted by a king in bis dealings with a foreign
monarch, of which Peace and War are the most important.
The six expedients above referred to, are the Sandhi (Peace),
Vigraha (war), Ylna (expedition), Asanam (Halt), Sanshraya
(seeking shelter), Dvaidhi (duplicity). A Sandhi (Treaty)
consists in a compact entered into by two foreign, kings
regarding a point at issue, whereas war means the settle-
ment of a difference at the point of the sword. Yina means
the marching of a king against his adversary, and Asanam
consists in tee halt of a king with his army fully mobilised
in his own territory, before crossing over the border of his
enemy's country. Dvaidhi signifies the mobilisation of
half an army corps in an enemy’s country, whereas an
alliance with a king of the Udisina or the Madhyama
class is known as Sanshraya. A king should enter into
a treaty only with his equals, or with one more powerful
than be. A powerful king should make war with a king in-
ferior to him in armed strength, and in such a case a king


jtint nniANAH.


*39


should take to a stronger Oily fa the event of his not having
been hampered by any enemy In the rear. A king should
mobilise only half of his enemy, even when he would find
that he could easily intercept the supplies and movements of
his enemy, though threatened by a Plrshnigrlha enemy in
the rear. An alliance with another king is the worst of all
expedients, a king fighting with a stronger adversary is
generally compelled to resort to. An alliance otherwise
entails upon a king many a long and tedious marches,
disastrous expenditure, and a loss of many lives. A king
should take an ally only when the contrary would be the
result, and when he would find himself bereft of all means
and supplies though engaged in an uneven contest (17 — 25)


CHAPTER CCXXXY.


f'uSHKARA said:— Now I shall enumerate the 'duties
which a king should attend to every day in the year. A
king should leave his. bed about an hour (two Muhartas—
forty-eight minutes) before the break of dawn, at the songs
of the court-panegyrists. Then he should see his subject*
without being seen by them, and without being addressed
by any body, as *'0 king, all these people belong to thee. '
Then he should duly hear the report of his daily income
and expenditure, and then having eased himself, should enter
the bath-room. The king should bathe every day alter
having cleansed his teeth and then perform his daily rite of
prayer and worship the god Visudeva. Then he should
pour libations of clarified butter containing the blades of
holy Kusha grass on the lighted sacrificial fire, offer libations


AGNI PUltANAM.


'840

of water to his departed manes, and then make gifts ot coifs
with bits of gold to the Brahmanas and receive their bene*
diction in return. Then he should besmear his body with
the scented sandal-paste, decorate his person with valuable
ornaments and contemplate himself reflected in a mirror and
see his face in Clarified butter kept in a pitcher of gold.
Then he should hear the auspicious or the inauspicious
nature of the day, take the medicines prescribed for hint
by the royal physicians, touch the auspicious articles and
gems, make obeisance td his elders and Superiors, and then
enter his council chamber, There he should receive the
Brahmanas, the ministers and the officers of the court as
well as such of his people as would be presented by the
usheter of the Court. Then having heard the daily report
of Wotks, he should determine the routine Of business for*
the day and then proceed to adjudicate all civil matters, or
to consult his mihisters on weighty matters of the state.
A king should hot take the counsel of a single minister nor
of too many, nor of the ignorant and the untrustworthy,
hor should he disclose to his ministers, secrets which
he should better keep himself, A scheme or a measure
fully matured or threshed out in the council, should be given'
effect to with the greatest promptitude, so that the differ*
ent branches of the state may work together with the
greatest smoothness and harmony. A king should not be-
tray his secrets by looks and gestures. The wise gather
the meaning of others from their looks and signs; A king,
following the advice of his physicians and astrologers, reigns
in plenty and prosperity, as it is the two latter functionaries
Who are the custodians of the king’s health and fortune. 1
Having counselled with his ministers, a king should prac*i
tise gymnastics or take physical exercises by lifting heavy
weights or by fencing with his sword. Then he should
bathe again and see that the god Vishnu had been duly
worshipped, that the sacrificial fire had been duly lighted


AOt'ii VORANAM. •' 841

and proper libations had been poured on that, and that the
Br&hmanas tad been duly honoured With presents and gifts.
Then having decorated his body, he should take his meal
which had been tested before. After that he should chew
the prepared betel leaf, and rest for a while on his left side
and peruse the books of theology or any other religious
works. Then having supervised his treasury and witnessed
the parrade of his soldiers, he should perfom the rite of bis
evening prayer, send the spies on their different works and
then enter his seraglio, there to pass the night in music and
song ( t- — 1 7}.

CHAPTER CCXXXVl.


Y USHKARA said : — Now I shall describe the rites which
should be celebrated in the week preceding the day of the
march. The gods Hari and Shambhu should be duly wor-
shipped on the first day of the week, as well as the god
Vin&yaka who should be propitiated with- the offerings of
Modakas (sweetmeats). On the second day, the presiding
deities of the different quarters 3f the heaven should be
worshipped, and the priest should lie down in a bed pray?
ing the gods to inform him in sleep of the result of the
expedition as follows “ Obeisance to the three-eyed
Shambhu, who confers boon on his votaries and who is
also manifest as the invincible Rudra. Obeisance to the
dwarf-manifestation of Vishnu who is shapeless and who
presides over all dreams. Inform me, Oh thou lord of the
gods, Oh thou trident-weilding deity, of the good or evil
fate that awaits the present expedition, and may the im-
pressions which my mind has received in its waking state,
be alt oblierated” (1—5).

106


AONI PURANAM.


« 4 *

On the third day of the week, the presiding deities ol
the different quarters of the heaven, as well as the Rudras
and the lords of the different quarters of the skies, should
be duly worshipped. The planets should be propitiated on
the fourth day of the week, and the two Ashvinis on the fifth.
The gods residing along the road by which the expedition
would start, as well as the presiding deities of the rivers
and streams that are to be crossed or forded in the way, should
be worshipped, and offerings should be made to the gods
who dwell in', earth or in heaven, as well as in the space
intervening the two. The ghosts and malignant spirits
should be propitiated in the night, the god Visudeva should
be duly worshipped, and a conical mould of pasted rice
(Shri) should be made in honour of the goddess Bhadrak&li,
and all ’ the gods should be prayed as follows : — “ May
the gods VSsudeva, Sankarshana, Pradyumna, Aniruddha,
N&r&yana, Avja, Vishnu, the ,boar manifestation of the god
Hari, the primordial Narasinha, Shiva, Isha, Tat-purusha,
Aghora, Rlma, Satyayja, the Sun, the Moon, the Mars, the
Mercury, the Jupiter, the Venus, the Saturn, the Nodes, the
god Ganapati, the Kartickeya, the Commander-in-Chief of
the celestial armies, the goddesses such as ChandikS, UmS,
Lakshmi, Sarasvati, DurgS, BrahmSni, the Rudras, the Indras
the fire-god, the serpents, the celestial Garuda, and the
gods that dwell in earth and heaven lead me to victoiy.

I with my mother, children, and servants have taken shelter
under your benign protection, O gods, trample and trample
down my enemies in battle. I have offered you sacrifices.
O gods, attack my enemy’s forces from the rear, and I will
make more offerings to you all” (6 — 14).

On the sixth day, the Icing should perform die rite of
ablution of victory according to rites laid down under the
coronation ceremony. 'The god Trivikrama should be wor-
shipped on the day of the start and the arms and weapons
at well as the riding and transport animals should be


ACNI fURANAM.


wordiipped by repeating the Nirijana Mantra* [Mantras
used on the occasion of bidding farewell to a king about to
start on an expedition (NirSjana) against a foreign monarch)
and the following Mantras should.be repeated into the ears
of the king ' " May the gods who dwell in the earth and
and heaven give you a long life. May the success of the
gods wait on thy banner throughout the expeditidn which
you have started for the furtherance of their cause. May the
gods protect you from all evils and may you bear a charmed
life by their favour in battle.” Having heard the above
benediction recited by the royal priest, the king should order
his armies to move on. Then be should adjust his quiver
and lift up his bow by reciting the Mantra which runs as
Dhanurnlga," etc., and proudly place a foot on the face of
bis adversary delineated on the ground, by reading the
Mantra of “Tatvishnu etc.” Then he should move on thirty*
two paces in the different quarters of the globe, such as the
East, etc., by first lifting his right leg and ascend in succes-
sion an elephant, a car, a horse, and a litter. Then he
should move on with his armed hosts without casting a
single look behind, at the sounds of war-music, bid adieu
by the victorious shouts of his subjects, and halt at a place
only a couple of miles distant from bis captital, where he
should again worship the gods and propitiate the Brahmanas
before a final dash into the enemy's country (15—31).

The king should protect his own army and worship
the guardian deities of the places occupied by it in the
enemy's domain, and should take special care in order thy
might not be the least insulted by an infuriated soldiery,
nor their temples or properties dedicated to their enjoyment
be in the least interfered with. The inhabitants of an enemy's
territory should not be molested in any way, and the king en
his victorious return to his capital, should cause the richest and
most sumptuous offerings to be made to the gods, and gifts to
be distributed among the Bclhaiaaas and tb* Indigent'


*44


ACNl PURANAM.


The horses and elephants and other transport animats
should be bathed and the Nrishinha-manifestaliou of Vishnu
should be worshipped two days before the commencement
of actual hostilities, and weapons and insignias of royalty*
such as the umbrella etc, as well as the gods Ganas should
be likewise worshipped in the night. On the following morn*
ing, the god Nrisinba should be again worshipped together
with the riding and the baggage animals, and the king should
look at the sacrificial fire lighted by the priest, pour libations
Of clarified butter on it, and worship the Brahman as. Then
he should alight from the elephant with the bow in his
hand and walk on foot to ascertain, undiscovered, the nature
of the enemy he would have to deal with. He should cause
the front of his army to extend so as to have an extensive
line of action, while he should always try to avoid pitched
battles with large bodies of troops duly drawn up in a battle
array. A small army drawn up in the order known as the
Suchimukha (lit: mouth of a needle) can hold its own
against odds. Soldiers are usually drawn up in arrays,
resembling the structures of animals and things such as,
Makara the Vyuha, the Garuda Vyuha, (circle) the Ardha*
Chandra (semi-circle) the Vajra Vyuha (zic-zac or broken
line), the Shakata Vyuha, the Mandala Vyuha, the Sarvato*
bhadra and the Suchi Vyuha. An army drawn up in one
of the abovesaid arrays should be divided into five parts,
the two composing its two principal wings, the two forming
its sides to protect the wings and the one forming its
main body. Only a single division or two divisions of an
army should be brought into action at a time, the three
remaining divisions acting as reserves. A king should never
be in the fighting line, as his death would entail the anni-
hilation of the entire army. A king should remain
at the rear of his army and within two miles of the scene
of action, if necessary, so that a broken -'division might
again rally round his '-standard at the.spot. A general retreat


AGNI PURANAM.


8-13

should be ordered in the event of the breaking of the centre or
the main body of a fighting army. Soldiers should be drawn
up neither too close nor two apart in a battle array, and
care should be taken so that each soldier might freely
exercise his weapons without clashing with those of any
of his comrade at arms (24 — 35).

A general, attempting to break through line or the array
of a hostile force, should do that by attacking a portion of
it in a solid body, and contrarily a general should meet
such an assault with a compact mass of soldiers drawn up as a
solid wall. That division of a hostile army, out of the many
in the field, should be first attacked and broken through,
which the commanding general would think, would lead to
the fall of the rest or make it horse de combat for tlu
day (36).

O thou twice-born one, four soldiers should be engaged
lo guard an elephant, four Cavalry soldiers to protect a car-
warrior, four swords-men to defend a cavalry soldier, and
four bowmen to defend a shield-bearer. The swords-men
should be placed in the front of an army, after them the
bow-men, after the bow-men the cavalry, after cavalry the
car-warriors and after the car-warriors the elephant men. The
bravest of the foot-men, elephant-men, car-warriors and
cavalry soldiers should be placed in the front of their res-
pective lines. Cowards or timid men should not be placed in
the front which would only tend to add fresh laurels to the
crown of the enemy. Heroes or valorous persons placed
in the van, embolden the timid or the wavering in the line.
The personal characteristics of a heroe is, that he would be
of a tall stature, with an acquiline nose and large eyes
shaded over by a pair of blended eye- brows, and that he
should be contented though easily excitable and fond of
quarrel (37—43)*

The duties of Infantry soldiers are to carry the dead and
the wounded from the field to a place of safety, to procure


846 MM fUtUNMI.

water for tbe uae of the iqqr, and to carry arm* aa d
weapons to the fighting line. The duties of ms armed
with swords and shields are to defend the main body of
the army against an attack made upon it by a compact
squadron. The duties of bowmen are to engage the enemy
at a long range and to determine the fate of the day from
a distance. The duties of car-warriors are to carry the
wounded from the distance, and to threaten the rear of the
enemy's forces. The duties of elephant-men afe to break
through the line of the enemy's forces, or to break the
formation of a regiment or a squadron drawn up in a deep
array, or to demolish any wall, turret or battlement or to
break down the boughs of trees (44 — -48).

Infantry regiment should be maneuvered on an uneven
ground, cavalry and car-warriors on the even, while elephant-
men should be employed on swampy grounds or where the
nature of the soil would not admit of maneuvering any
sorts of troops. Thus having drawn up the soldiers in
n battle array, with their back turned towards the sun, and
with the Venus and the Saturn staying at favourable and
prosperous stations in the skies, the commander should
excite them by their names, and reminding them of the
glory and heroic traditions of the clans or families, they
respectively belonged to (49—51).

A hero enjoys the pleasures of life by victory or con-
quers heaven by death. A hero by conquering his enemy,
lives in pleasure, while a happy hereafter waits a man who
is killed in a battle. A soldier cannot better requit the
debts of .his sovereign than by sacrificing his life in his
cause and in battle, whereby the gates of heaven will bo
opened unto him. A soldier cannot wish for a happier sod
than a death in battle, whereby he is sure to attain an
elevated existence after death. Death in battle signifies the
death of a man besmeared with the blood of the brave^ and
hence it is the best of all sin-expiating penances for a


AGNI PURANAM.


«47


soldier. A battle it the best austerity for the brave,
wounds and blows inflicted in its course, require as
much fortitude to endure as any of the most painful of
austerities. Hundreds and hundreds of celestial beauties
attend upon a man, who sacrifices his life in battle in the
cause -of his king and country. A soldier, who ralliee a.
beaten or a retreating column, acquires infinite merit by
so doing. The soldier who deserts his comrades at arms
and flies in terror from the field of battle, incurs the sin pf
killing a BrShmana, and the gods forsake such a vile coward
for good. The soldier who prefers death to defeat, and
thinks it more honorable to die with his front to die enemy
than a safe but inglorious retreat, — the soldier who dies or
conquers and never shows his back to the enemy, acquires
the merit of a thousand horse-sacrifices (5a — 56).

A just and righteous king should cause men of equal
strength or valour to be engaged in a fair fight ElephapN
men should meet elephant-men in action. A soldier flying
away in terror of life, or otherwise wounded, fallen, or
weaponless, or asking quarter, should not be hurt or killed,
and the same rule should be observed in the cases of the
fatigued or those who would be asleep (57—58).

Strategic warfare should be conducted in forests and on
rivers or on cloudy days, when the enemy's forces would
be found half emerging therefrom. Then the shouts of
victory should be caused to be falsely raised all round, and it
should be proclaimed that the enemy had been utterly beaten
with bis ministers, officers- and allies, that the commander
of the enemy's forces had been slain, or that the hostile king
had hastely beaten an ign ominous retreat. An army dis-
persed or madly flying in utter confusion, may be annihi-
lated without any difficulty whatever {59 — 60).

O thou well-versed in the' tenets of religion, incense-
sticks possessing the virtues of stupefying the senses of the
enemy's forces, should be bant, and banners and other neces-


848


AGN1 PURANAM.


nary appurtenances of an army, permeated with the mystic
potency of terrifying the enemy, should be raised and ex-
hibited after the cessation of the general onslaught. Having
obtained victory in war, a king should worship the gods and
the Brithmanas. Gems and wealth acquired in a war con-
ducted even by the ministers of a king, should be held as
belonging to him by right of conquest. The wives of a
defeated king do not pass over to the victor, while on the
other hand, he should protect them and honor their virtues
as his own mothers. A king should treat a prisoner of
war, ransomed and liberated, as his own begotten son. A
defeated enemy should not be fought again, and the victor
should maintain and honour the customs and usages of the
country newly added to his kingdom. Then having return-
ed to his capital, a victorious king should enter his palace
under the auspicies of a blissful asterism, make offerings
to the gods for the victory and make such arrangements
for the provision of the families of (dead) soldiers, as would
be deemed expedient. A victorious king should cause the
spoils of war to be freely and fairly divided among his
servants. I have thus finished describing the process of
starting on a military expedition, a knowledge whereof
leads a king to certain victory (fii- — 65).


CHAPTER CCXXXVII.


Jt* USHRARA said : — O king, repeat every day, for victory
in war and success in life, the prayer with which the god
Indra propitiated and secured the good graces of the
goddess Lakshmi.

Indra said : — I make obeisance to thee, Q inou daughter
of the oceans and who dost protect the universe as a mother


&GMI PURANAM.


careth for his child. T make salutation unto thee, O goddess,
who art possessed of eyes like the wavering lotus buds first
waking after the night's repose. Salutation unto thee y O god-
dess, who dwellest in the bosom of thy beloved Vishnu. Thou
art success, the Svaha, and the Svadlia with which
libations are poured on the sacrificial fire, the embodied
image of two of the holiest Mantras of the Vedas, the
nectar or the ambrosia that keeps up and nourishes all
sorts of life. I make obeisance to thee, O goddess, who
dividest the day from the night and the night from the day,
as the rosy Dawn and the golden Eve. I bow down to thee,
who formest the holiest functions of human frame and
minds, such as beauty, memory, faith, speech, tlje supreme
knowledge, the occult light, the sacrificial knowledge and
the knowledge of the soul, and who as an ushering light of
beauty and faith, leads the souls of men to salvation and
freedom. It is thy divine self, O thou goddess of match-
less beauty, which has been hymnised in the verses of the
Rik- f the Saman-, and the Yajur-, Vedas, and which forms
the immutable truths of the Science of Soul and the funda-
mental principles of Criminal Jurisprudence. The Uni-
verse but shines with thy reflected light, and all beauty is
but a borrowed gleam of thy divine effulgence. Who can
cover the universe with a shroud of beauty save thy honoured
self? O goddess, who art the embodied image of all religious
sacrifices, and in whose body the heart of the mace-wield-
ing NSrayana has built itsr nest of happiness and peace—
N&r&yana whom the minds of the Yogins cannot compre-
hend in their meditations. Forsaken by thee, the primeval
night once again enveloped the face of this happy creation,
and it is only through thy favour, O goddess, ttat it has now
been reinstated to light and joy. At thy gracious smile,
wives nestle themselves round the neck of a man, children
in the bloom and innocence of infancy sit smiling on his
knees, friends flock at his gate and plenty fills his stores and
107


AGNI PUftANAK.


granaries. At thy blissful glance, the powerful antagonists
of a man are scattered away like dry leaves before the winter
wind, and health and prosperity become his portions in this
fife. What is there b this world which a man fails to ac-
quire on whom your smile descends? O goddess, thou art the
mother of all created bebgs as the god Hari is their father,
and thou fittest this universal space, O mother, with Vishnu,
thy consort. Never dost thou forsake, O thou who purifiest
all thbgs, my treasure, house, wearing apparels, wives,
sons, friends, live stock and ornaments, O thou goddess of
absolute purity, O thou who dwellest in the bosom of Vishnu.
Truth, fortitude, purity and good character leave a man,
the moment thou forsakest such an unfortunate being, while
in a single day, all those virtues again elevate him to god-
head in life at thy gracious sight. The man on whom thy
favour descends, is intelligent, erudite, brave, powerful and
adorable, and is even honoured with the distinctions of high
birth though born of a loW parentage. O thou darling wife,
of Viahau, O thou who dost minister to the wants and woes
of file universe, as a nurse doth to her infant ward, all
these good virtues are counted as positive defects in a man
on whom thou turnest thy back. Kven the tongue of a
Brahman cannot exhaust die countless boons and infinite
virtues that constitute thy blessed self. Never forsake us,
Q thou goddess of lotus like eyes ( i — r 7)

PuSHKARA saidt—Thus hymnised b\ t . the goddess
Lakshmi granted him die boons of per p i uni sovereignty
and victory in war. He, who recites ibis i.«alm or hears
it recited by a BrShmana, becomes ori - rnpated spirit
at the dose of a prosperous career ; and ■ •. it becometh
one to recite it constantly or hear u trutal by others


CHAPTKR CCXXXVIU.


V^aid THE God op Fire: — I have narrated to .you the
rules of conduct as laid down by Pushkara, now I shall deal
with similar rules as disclosed by Rama to Lafcshmana. A
strict conformity to these rules, leads a nun to victory, and
a knowledge thereof tends to add to his pieties (i).

Rama said : — A king should earn money by just and
honest means and take special care to accumulate and aug-
ment the same, and grant aid in money to none but the
deserving. These are the four monetary duties, perform-
ance of winch is obligatory on a king. Humility is the
natter of virtue, and humility springs from a perusal of
the scriptural literature. From humility follows the control
of the senses, and a king, who has acquired a mastery over
his passions and appetites, is the fittest person to rule the
world. A man who is possessed of such virtues as know-
Mge, wisdom, fortitude, perseverance, eloquence, retic-
ence, energy, wit, large-heartedness, purity, power, amity,
self-denial, truthfulness, gratitude, self-control, parentage,
and character, is sure to acquire a splendid fortune. The
mad elephant of heated passions, running uncontrolled in
the wilderness of the senses, should be kept in check by the
free use of the mace of knowledge. A king should give
up all personal greed, lust, anger, revelry, boast fulness and
pride, whereby he would be happy. A king should humbly
follow the principles and truths laid down in the codes of
punishment and in the threb holy Vedas or in the spiritual
science, and reduce them to practise in the works of his every
day life. The Annikshikis deal with the science t.f the soul ;
the three Vedas, with the virtue and vice ; the V4ry», with th *
art of money-making and the code of punishment (criminal?


Jk«NI PURANaM.


8 52

law) with the determination of crimes. Extinction of aft
killing propensities, truthfulness, purity, forbearance, kind,
ness, and honesty are the virtues which should be cultivated
by all Br&hmanas and good men. Compassion towards] all,
conduct of life according to the rules of one’s social order,
truthfulness, kindness, charity, and protection of the weak
and the indigent, are the factors that constitute the real self
of a truly honest man. A life of perfect good (Satpurusha
Vrata) is the only vow, which a man should try to to observe
at all hazards. Since this body, which is an abode of griefs
and maladies, is sure to be destroyed either to-day or a hun-
dred years hence, it is prudent that a man should practise
virtues only without caring to cater for the appetites of his
flesh. A king should never oppress the poor and the helpless
for the furtherance of his own interest, since the curse of the
poor is sure to confound or overwhelm him with ruin. A
king, seeking his own good, should speak to the wicked with
the same humble courtesy, as he would have done to his own
revered superiors. A man should speak civilly with his
friends and foes alike, since it is the gods only who are
honey-mouthed, and it is the brutes only who offend the ears
wi.th their harsh and discordant sounds. A man should wor-
ship the God in a pure and devotional spirit, revere his elders
or superiors as the gods, and look upon hi. friends as his own
selves. A man should please his superiors with hews, the
pious with true and sincere service and the gods with good
deeds. A very dear friend (Mitra) should be taken with
sentiments, a friend (Vandhu) with courtesy, a wife and
a servant with love and affection, and the rest with urbanity
(2—19).

A good man should not interfere with the workings of
his neighbours, but attend to his own duties without speak-
ing ill of any body. Kind words should be -spoken to the
poor, and the indigent and sweet words should be used in
conversing with all. A generous man sacrifices his own life


AON I PURANAM.


*53


for the good of a true and -tested friend, embraces a guest
at his door, succours the distressed to the best of his means,
endures all sufferings with the greatest reticence, does not
feel elated at this own success, nor envies his thriving neigh*
boars, nor gives up friendly conference with men though
insulted by them (20—22).


CHAPTER CCXXXIX.


Rama said : — The seven factors of government, such as
the king, the ministry, the government, the fortification, the
revenue, the forces and the allies are all auxiliaries to one
another. The monarchial office is the most important of all
the seven factors constituting a kingdom, and the means
which secures a good government to the people, should be
always kept in mind by a king. A king should be a man of
glorious descent, possessing an unimpeachable character,
quick in action, and young in years, and a man of exceptional
fortitude and urbanity. He must not unduly interfere with
other men's business, should honor the old and the wise,
never forget any benefit done to him nor mix with low syco-
phants or parasites. Always truthful, humble, pure and
virtuous, be should be capable of letting other people feel his
prowess, and should be a man of clear foresight and capable of
looking at a thing in its entirety at the first call, and secure
the. unfeigned love and allegiance of his feudatory; chiefs.
The virtues enumerated above should be also practised by all
honest own (1—5).

A king, seeking his own good, should select his servants
km 'ms. of noble parentage and ynimpfenchable honesty


354


AGNI PUR AN AM.


and who would be capable of pleasing or winning over the
people to the king's cause, if necessary. A minister should
be a nuRt of eloquence and confidence, strong in physique,
possessing a good retentive memory, with all his passions and
appetites put under a healthy check. He should be ingenu-'
ous, well-versed in the code of penalties* and the different
branches of fine arts, courageous enough to lisk public
censure for the good of his country, and full of resources
and capable of remedying all evils of the state. He should
keep a vigilant eye upon the affairs and doings of his neigh-
bours and be a man who would fully understand the prin-
ciples Sof war and treaty-making, able to read .the secret
counsels of the foreign courts, and capable of acting oppor-
tunely at an opportune time and place. He should never
allow any consideration of private grudge or personal gain to
mould his decision in the council of .the state, and shorn <; r all
hauter, ’pride, fickleness and bragging, he should bring \vth
him in the national assembly the experience of his mature
years and the charm of his majestic presence to decide the
momentous issues of his country, without any regard to
public ‘praise or censure, offending none with his greatness,
nor speaking ill of his compeers or opponents in the court.
He should be a man who would recognise talents as the
only passport to . the king's service, and pure in body and
mind, he should prove himself worthy of his noble parent-
age, and see that the king's laws are obeyed and respected
for their spirit of equity and justice throughout the realm
(6-ia).

In the alternative, a minister should be a man born of
noble parents in the province and having acknowledged influ-
ence in the realm, eloquent, energetic in action, ingenuous,
watchful, unassuming, unostentatious, grave, amiable, pbre,
of undoubted integrity and honesty and Capable of eadarl
lag hardships. He would be a man whose attachment to
the psnoa and the good of his so v er e i g n should buabfrre


/ ‘ ACiNI puranam. \

all suspicions, truthful, patient, persevering, wise, experienced
unmoved in difficulties, and who would be the last person to
create unnecessary animosities among the foreign relations
of his sovereign, and would be a competent judge of all
works of line art or artisanship. A good memory, prompt-
ness in acts conducive or material to the weal of his
country, the art of divining the thoughts of men, wisdom,
just and prompt dicision, perseverance and closeness of
counsel, are the essential qualifications of a minister of the
state (13 — 16).

The royal priest should be a Br&hmana, well versed in the
knowledge of three Vedas, such as the Rik, the Saman, and
the Yajus, and who for the welfare and benefit of the king,
should celebrate religious ceremonies and sacrifices accord-
ing to the procedures laid down in the Atharva Veda in the
company of other Brahmanas, his equals in virtue, knowledge
and integrity of character (17).

A king should himself test the two virtues of watchfulness
and proficiency in fine arts of his ministers, while he should
learn their parentage, influence and status in society from
their relations and friends. Similarly the three virtues such
as their smartness in service, knowledge and power of endu-
rance, as well as their amiablity and general ingenuity should
be tested. Their eloquence and truthfulness should be
examined by discussing with them a topic of genetal conver-
sation. Likewise their energy, prowess, power of enduring
hardships, attachment, comprehension, purity, devotion,
friendliness and calmness in moments of peril should be
judged from the incidents of their past lives. Similarly their
strength, health, character, depth of character and gravity
of disposition and calumnies, should be learnt from their
companions or colleagues. A king should judge their mean-
ness or gentleness from their acts in his presence, while
virtues practised by them at his back, should be judged by
their reap active fruits (18—23)'


AGNI PURANAM.


85C

A king should select for his kingdom a county which does
not depend on the pcrrenial rains for its water supply, fertile,
healthy and full of mineral resources (certain edition reads
loved by diggers or miners), wholesome to the cows, offer*
ing good pasturage, provided with abundant water supply,
dotted, over by holy cities, abounding in beautiful natural
sceneries, communicated by nets of water ways and abound-
ing in herds of elephants; as such a territory materially adds
to the weal of his subjects, brought about by a good and
benign government (24 — 25).

The provinces should be largely inhabited by the Shudras
artisans, and merchants, and alive with the bustle of manufac-
ture or commercial undertakings. The inhabitants of the
provinces should live by agriculture, ready to resist the least
encroachment by a foreign king, fondly attached to their own
sovereign and capable of enduring hardship. The provinces
should abound in ' cattle, dwelt in by a large concourse of
foreigners and presided over by erudite and virtuous officers
at the heads of their affairs (26 — 27).

The fortresses should be built on hills or in deserts and
forefts so as to cover a large area, guarded by deep moats and
encircled by walls with gates or arches at intervals. All the
six sorts of forts previously described should be filled with
grains and treasures, and provided with ample water supply,
so as to stand a . seige for a long time. The treasury should
be kept replete with bullions and ■ precious articles honestly
earned, accumulated or stored up from the ancestral times,
so that it might stand a heavy drain, if necessary, whereby
the collective virtues of the kingdom would be augmented.
The friends or relations of the king should duly receive
stipends settled upon them by his ancestors. They should
arm themselves with the complete suit of aims, keep in their
service armed retainers, supply the king " with horses, ele-
phants and arned men at the time of emergency, and other*
Wise pass their time b such pursuits as rearing ot birds and ,


AGNI PURANAM.


pigeons. Authorities on criminal law hold that the officers
who would execute the sentences of criminal courts, should be
recruited mostly from the members of the Kshatriya caste,
who had travelled in distant countries .and proved their
mettle in war and who would make no scruple at carrying
out such orders, however severe. A king should make
friends with men who are bom of noble parents, connected
with influential families in the realm, and who, true to a single
party and welkversed in the science of Yoga and spiritual-
ism, would never become political turn-coats. The bonds
of friendship are held tighter by a visit from a distant
country, by a pleasant and unambiguous conference, and by
lulfdment of promise. A man enjoys the three-fold bliss
of piety, prosperity and realisation of his heart-felt desires
* through friendship alone. Friends are divided into four
classes, sttch as, — (i) the son of a friend, (2) a newly acquired
friend, (3) an ancestral friend, and (4) a friend secured by
doing him a good turn. The essential conditions of friend-
ship are sincerity, truthfulness and a genuine sympathy in
weal or woe (28 — 37)

.1 shall now describe the commendable traits in the
character of a man who has entered the king’s seivice.

A servant should serve the king to the best of his ability.
Smartness, gentleness, perseverance, forbearance, capacity
for hard work and endurance, contentment, hemesty and
energy are the virtues that are deemed as ornaments in a
servant. A servant should serve the king to the best of his
ability and for the entire term of service originally agreed
upon, give up the habit of visiting the houses of his master’s
enemies, and should never assume a haughty, angry, ora
boastful look in bis presence. A servant should never argue
or exchange hot words with any of his superior officers,
nof disclose the secrets or the confidential schemes of his
matter, A friend or a relation of the king, entering the
service of the state, should continue hi it as long as he would
108


ACNI PURANAM.


8*8

Isnd' the king graciously disposed towards him, it being
held positively impolitic to serve a dissatisfied sovereign or
a master. Such a servant should dissuade his sovereign from
doing evil deeds, and persuade him to works that would keep
his memory sanctified for ever. Thus I have enumerated in
short the essentials of king’s service (38 — 41).

Thus a king, like the god of rain, should make himself
the source of food supply to all. Like the Sun-god, he
would take in a portion of each man’s earnings through
the channels of hb revenue, only to pour it down in
showers on the country for the furtherance of the com-
’ mon weal. A king should employ efficient officials to
supervise the workings of each department of the state.
A good kirig should protect or maintain, as the case might
be, the trade, the agriculture, the bridges and ways, the
forts, the mining industry and the helpless. The danger of a
king's subjects comes from the five quarters, such as, — the
soldiery, the thieves, the king’s officers, the royal favourites
and the cupidity of a foreign monarch (42 — 46).

A king should protect his subjects from these dangers
and collect rents from them, as they would fall due. v He
should always guard his personal safety, as well that of his
internal and external government. A king should punish
the offenders, cautiously protect his own person and
should never trust his., wives and sons at the hands of his
enemies (47 — 48).


CHAPTER CCXL.


Rama said : — A king should always contemplate the
balance of power existing among the twelve monarchs, con.
stitoting the circle of foreign sovereigns having bad dealings


AGN1 PURANAM.


*59


with his own government. The monarchs whose domains
would lie contiguous to each other in the front of an invading
sovereign (Vijigishu) should be treated by him as friends or
foes in the following order:— The (i) prince whose territories
would lie bordering on the domain of an invading king,
should be treated as an enemy, (a) the prince of the country
beyond that as a friend, (3) the prince of .the country beyond
that as a friend to the (1) enemy, (4) the prince of the
country beyond that as friendly to the (2) friend, and (5)
the king of the country beyond that as friendly to the
friend of the (3) enemy. These six monarchs, including the
invading one, constitute the first half of the Mandala. Simi-
larly an invading monarch should bear the following rela-
tions to those whose dominions would form the other or the
posterior half of the circle (Mandala). The prince (Plr-
shnigr&ha), whose dominion would lie immediately bordering
on the rear of the kingdom of such a monarch, should be
looked upon as an enemy, while the sovereign of the country
beyond that (Akrahda) should be treated as an ally, the
king of the country beyond that as a. friend (As&ra) of the
hostile Pirshnigr&ha, while the prince of the country be-
yond that (Akrand&sAra) should be treated ah an ally of the
friendly Akranda sovereign. The prince, whose territories
would lib between those of an invading monarch and his
enemy, should be known as the Madhyama. A king, remain-
ing outside the circle of these twelve monarchs and capable
of doing good to all of them combined, or of chastising any
one of them singly, is called the UdSshina or the Neutral
king (1—5).

I shall now deal with the principles of making treaties
and wars, and the conditions under which they should be
respectively entered into or declared. A prince, contending
with the one superior to him in armed strength, -should make
overtures of peace for his own good. Treaties are divided
into sixteen different classes* such as the Kapila, the Upa-


ft6o AGNI PUKANAM.

hara, the SantSna, the Sangata, the Upanyasa, the Pratikara, 4
the Sanyoga, the Purushantara, the Adrista Nara, the
Adista, the Atman, the Upagraha, the Parikrama, the
Chchinna, the Paradushanam and the Skandhopaneya.
The four principal treaties are those which are entered into,
'Out of a consideration of benefit reciprocally done and re-
ceived, or of mutual amity, or of being related to each other
by a tie of common affinity, or of being honoured with
presents or concessions as tokens of friendship. A king
should never enter into a treaty with a child, an old man,
an invalid, a man deserted by his friends and relations,
a coward or a terrified person, a greedy or a covetuous
sovereign, nor with persons who have renounced all worldly
.concerns . or are excessively fond cf earthly possessions.
Similarly, a king should never enter into an alliance with a
king who devises many schemes at a time and does every
thing in a half-hearted way, or with those who speak ill of
th|b gods and the Brahmanas, nor with a king whose terri-
tories have badly suffered from visitations of Nature, such
as famine, etcy, with an army discontented and mutinous,
nor with a king whose domain, long rent asunder with
civil dissensions, had regained its peace after a long time,
nor with kings who are void of all sense of religion and
truth. A compact of peace should not be entered into with
these twenty-one persons, who should always be attacked
and fought (6—14).

A war is the direct result of jnjurics done to each
other by two hostile monarchs. A king, aspiring to an
absolute sway over his contemporaries, or oppressed by a
stronger adversary, should resort to war at an opportune
moment, backed by the favourable spirit of the time and *
the place of action. The causes which ufcnally give rise
to a war, and the affronts which are osOally amended
through the Arbitration of thesword,, are th£ stealing away of.
a wife* encroachment upon the capital, kingdom, territory or


AGN1 PURANAM.


861


(he sovereign 'right of a king by hjp adversary, pride, over-
sensitiveness as to the points of honour, loss of fortune,
humiliation suffered by an ally or a friendly monarch* the
death of an ally and accretion to the domain, of a foreign
prince and hence a disturbance of the balance of power among
the monarchs of a circle. A man suffering any of the five sorts
of humiliation, such as, that suffered through the agency of a
wife or through the rivalry of a co-wife, or the insult suffered
ia one's own home, or the one of being abused by an enemy
or the one done by wav of retaliation, should have his *
honourable amends by using expedients other than that of
force. A king should not engage in any of the following -
sixteen sorts of war, such . as the one in which the result is
uncertain or the profit of victory is absolutely nil or very
insignificant, a war which affects the existing order of
things or vitiates the treaties in force at its dVitset and
proves fruitless in the long run, or the one which affects the
foreign relations of a king and brings on many a evil
both at the beginning and in the end, or the one in which
a foreign prince, of whose forces no correct estimate can
be made, threatens to mobilise his armies for the assault,
or war where ( the . contention is for the recovery of a
kidnapped woman or of the fame of an insulted ally, or a
long and tedious war with the Brahmanas. Similarly, a king
should not fight with an enemy backed by a mighty ally and
equipped with the good graces of an untimely providence.

A war that promises a little profit at the outset, but is sure* to
terminate in a wild goose chase as well as its contrary should
be avoided by all means (15 — 24).

Therefore at the first breaking of hostilities, a Icing
should adopt means so that the victory in the end might
be pushed to a better advantage. A king should take the
field only when he would find his friends and allies
(Milra Akranda, etc.,) deeply attached to his cause, an<Mus
armies in the perfect state of efficiency, and while his


AGN! PURANAM.


862

enemies would be contrarily circumstanced. A king should
start on a military expedition either as an open foe or.
as an ally of one of the beligerents, or as a neutral on-
looker to guard his own interests in the conflict between
tWo hostile kings, or simply to watch the latteral issues of
the, contest on the happening of a contingent event. A
halt , made by two hostile armies proceeding to meet each
other, signifies the falling in of the advanced pickets of
each,\tor that one of them is trying to ward off a direct
engagement with the other. A halt, like a march, may
be grouped under five different heads, according to
the exigencies of a battle or the intention of a halting
general. » A king or a commander leading an army corps
should inform his arrival to the commander of the stronger
of the two opposing armies, without siding with either of

them, but should wait unsuspected for the opportune moment,
with an eye to the movements of both, like the eye of a
crow which looks both ways without being detected by any
body, only to join forces with the winning battalion in the
event of the occurrence of actual hostilities. He should

then , come out with his forces and fall upon the party most
antagonistic to him, in the case where- both the parties, sus-
pecting his feigned neutrality, would avoid a general engage-
ment Z A king with his army annihilated in battle and shorn
of all resources and supplies, should make alliance with a
powerful monarch and practise truthfulness and the noble
virtues incidental to his birth. He should visit his ally
every now and then, remain by his side, see things in his
light hnd show his gratitude for the succour obtained from

him (25— 3*)’


-:o:-


CHAPTER CC'XLIi


Rama said: — Diplomacy should be held a9 better than
the expedient of war and energetic action. The god
Indra, following the counsel of his priest Vrihaspati, con-
quered Shukra, the preceptor of the demons, though pos-
sessed of vigour and promptness of action. A king should
never counsel with the foolish and the untrustworthy.
How can a scheme, which seems absurd qnd impossible
in its very conception, be made to bear fruits without enor-
mous toil and effort ? A royal deliberation (Mantra) may
be resolved into five different factors, such as, the (i) know-
ledge of things unknown, (2) ascertainment of the true
nature of a thing already known, (3) removal of doubt or
ambiguity on matters of politics and the drawing of a
conclusion beforehand, (4) determination of the right time
and place of action, and (5) deliberation on the means of
supplies and help, and the remedy of evils and danger. The
essential conditions of success in an action are, (1) a cheerful
disposition in its performance/ (2) an unalterable faith in
its ultimate success, ingenuity of work, co-operation and
energy. A plan, however secretly devised, is sure to leak
out through excessive mirth, through lust, through talking
in sleep and through trusting a woman with it at the
time of visiting her (1— 6),

A man, intelligent, ingenous, well-versed in the arts of
war and scriptural knowledge, and accustomed to the. work
of espionage and possessing a good retentive memory
and eloquence of speech, should be appointed as an ambas-
sador. The .classes of envoys, recognised by the ancient
authorities on the science of politics, are, (1) the envoy
entrusted with the management of an affair according- to


864


Agn.I , PURANAM. *

htaown light and discretion (NisnstSrttyO, (a) the envoy
charged with the execution of a mission according to the
directions received from his sovereign (hjitkrtha), and (3)
the envoy whose duty is to deliver the dqcisipn of his master
on a particular question (ShSsanh&raka), 'each preceding
class being less limited in authority than the one imme-
diately following it. The house of an enemy should not be
entered into, nor an interview should be asked for without
being previously acquainted with the ins and outs of his
mansion and his own secret counsels. A king or an envoy
■should bide his time and ascertain tlie right time of action
and. then fall -on the enemy or assume his true character
at the. opportune moment. The weak point of an enemy
should be ascertained, the state of his treasure, army and
allies should be accurately enquired into, and bis personal
like and dislikes should be gathered from his looks and
gestures (7— ioj.

While in an enemy's country, an envoy should eulogise
both his master ‘and his adyersary, so that he might judge the
true state of public feelings and ascertain the probable number
of allies his sovereign might get in the country in the event
of a war. He should live with his spies, disguised as men-
dicants, etc. An ambassador is but an open spy and a spy
ia but an envoy roaming about in' the enemy's country in the
guise of a trader,, a mendicant or a strolling physician. A
king should march against his adversary in the event of an
act of unsuccessful embassy in the latter’s court, when
he would find him overwhelmed with troubles and dangers.
A king should fall upon his antagonist Tn the event of civic
disturbances in his country or of a rebellion by his subjects,
^be term Vyasana (danger) is so called from the fact of its
signifying a disturbed condition of the common weal. The
physical disturbances with which a country is generally visi-
ted, are five in number such as, the conflagration ^ fire, flood,
breaking out of pestilential or epidemic diseases, famine.


mro itm Aw aw. *65

b

/I

anft ^lagoe, Hit *«dt ’being knew* u caused by human
wgeacjr («i— a#)-

A king should' pit forth additional energy te cepe. wjth,
•stamp eut, or remedy against such dreadful visitations and
- undertake peace-giving religious -rites for their subsidence as
well. Civic disturbances should be put down by means of-
•diplomacy and expedients. . The duties of a minister
consist in deliberating the measures of the state, in taking
steps for the snccess of any scheme sr measure, in acting
in a way ao as te forestall sH futare contingencies, in super*
vising the royal exchequer, in drafting civil and criminal
laws for the realm, in checking the encroachment of a
foreign enemy, ia taking Steps for arresting the progress of
■all disturbances and in protecting the king and his country.
A minister failing in his duties, robs his master *of treasure,
clothes, food-grain, and transport animals, while a rebellious
subject leaves all his possessions in jeopardy. A subject
rebellious or in danger, should be put down or protected by
means of {treasure or punishment. Citizens of the metropljs,
•or the domestic retainers or the members of the royal house*
bold, generally aide with the kiag ia perilous times; if their
Itolp or co-operation is asked for. The duties of feudatory
chiefs are to appease public feeling, to help the paramount
'‘Wsvereign . in times of war, to collect allies 'and auxiliaries,
•and to diatiaguiah frieads from disguised '.enemies. A king,
surrounded by rebeltioas dr discontented vassals, can never*
■extort such service from them. Treasure enables aldag
‘to pay off the wages sf his servants and soldiers, to grant
suds in money for the purposes of virtue or public weal, to
i win over the affection of his. friends and subjects, and to
attend to the repairs of forts and castles. A treasury, any
way affected, fails to discharge its proper fanctioa ia the
government of a country, since weahfi forms the root of
faoaarchial authority. Punishment or farce tends to estate
Irk a da and toes dike,, and en able s a kiag to acquire would*
09


866


AON) PURANAM.


to rule the world, to conquer his adversaries, to accoitipUsh
with despatch a work requiring time for its completion, and
any defect lurking in the organization of armed force in the
state is followed by a marked derangement of these func-
tions. The duties of an ally are to collect together all the
friendly princes and nobles, to destroy the enemies of his
friendly prince and to help him with men and money when-
ever necessary. An ally any way displeased or discontented
refrains from doing these services to a king. A king addict-
ed to the vices of royalty, is sure to make a confusion of the
whole affairs of the state. These vices are the use of harsh and
cruel words, infliction of cruel and inordinate punishments
spoliation of the sources of revenue, drinking, over-fondness
of female company, hunting and gambling, idleness, disin-
clination for all sorts of work and boastfulness. Irresolution,
and blunder, together with the defects stated above, are the
vices which should be studiously avoided by a minister of
the state. Drought, breaking of epidemics, or pestilential
diseases, famine or such other visitations of Providence are
the evils that usually befall a country. Silting up of the ditch,
tumbling down of its wall and battlements, rotten state of
the engines and battering apparatuses, an empty arsenal and
a small garrison are the defects of a fort (ij— 28).

A treasury nearly drained or not filled up with daily
storage 6r not kept up with a proper account, and situated
at a distance or scattered all over the country, and not
capable of easy conveyance, should be deemed as defective.
An army, any way obstructed, scattered, dishonoured, insult-
ed, or existing in name only ; pr disease-stricken, or fatigued,
or’newly recruited, or arrived from a distant country; or with
its ranks excessively thinned, or any way repulsed, or badly
disappointed in its hopes, or any way deceived ; or abounding
in pregnant wives or not conflicted with its base, or recruit-
ed with false enticements or bribed by a hostile king at the
tear (P&rshnigr&ha), should be deemed as dangerous. An


AGNI PURANAM.


867


ally overtaken by an adverse fate, or attacked by an enemy,
or indulging in impotent rage and void of all vigour and
energy, should be deemed as an enemy. The vices of a king
are the squandering of money or an indifference to bis own
interests out of anger, use or infliction of harsh words and
penalties, orginastion of hunting parties, gambling, drink*
ing and lechery. Harsh words and cruel punishments tend
to estrange the feelings of the public, and hence a king
should give up the habit of using them, as adverse to his
own interests. Thef people exasperated by cruel punish-
ments flock over to his enemy and increase the bulk of hir
army, thus proving a source of ruin to the foolish tyrant.
The acts by which the champs of revenue are blocked up,
or a large source of imperial revenue is given up as ex*
hausted, or the means of supplies becomes collectively
affected, are called by the authorities on political science,
as the defilers of the exchequer. A king addicted to the
vice of drinking loses all sense, while a prince who is
excessively fond of bunting in the wilderness, soon meets
his doom. A king should hunt in a forest of preserved games
by way of taking physical exercises or by way of making
himself enured to hardship. The vice of gambling is that
it gives rise to unnecssary quarrels, robs him of all his
possessions, blots out his pieties, and ultimately leads him to
the grave. Lechery involves loss of time, money, and
character, while by drinking a man loses all power of dis-
crimination and is ultimately led to an untimely grave
(29—41).

A king possessed of high discriminating power and
capable of reading the spirit of the time and of laying out
his capital in due order, is sure to conquer his enemies. The
quarters of the king together with his treasury should be at
the central part of the royal city, while the main body of his
army, together with its different columns, auxiliary divisions
and reserves and the lines 0! infantry, should be quartered


nmf At fOftf rbidtoce m> doe succession. THe p ws-
i— udti>>iprghief of the forces should cause the feararmjr
covpe to pamde round the capital every sight, and keep
him se lf informed of the affairs of foe neighbouring -state*
through the spies stationed at the borders of hit mas ter * *
dominion The spied should enter and tease the capital
undetected Jby any body. The spiee should be employed '
to execute the seven sorts of political expedients such a*
soncHiation, ransom or gift, dissension, punishment, mdiffer
once, illusion and nec rom a n cy (4*— 46).

Conciliation » effected by four aseane, such as, the es~
pMssion ef gratitude for benefit done by a foreign king,, the
recollection of the ties of relationship- existing between two
hostile princes, use of soft and lowly words in the presence
ef an antagonist, and surrendering himself and all bin
possessions by a king to his adversary in a format interna**
Similarly the expedient of appeasing, the wrath of a stronger
adversary by means ef gifts, consists of, (1) making pre-
sents of articles not previously offered to bim, (a) ef accept-
ing a thing by the tatter out of his own choice, (3) ef volun-
tarily inducing him to accept any thing, (4) of paying off
a tribute by a king due from him to ids enemy or paramount
sovereign, and (5) of setting at liberty, prisoners captured
in war. The authorities on the science of politics held tbo
expedient of dissension (Bheda) to consist of the th ref-
lectors of destroying amity or friendship between two per*
i sons, of producing a thrill of fear between two parties, or ef
inducing a party to betray the secret s confided m him by
the other. Punishment may be. divided into thiee classes
such aa death, fine or loss of money and infliction of corporeal
troubles. The enemies of the public good should bo pub-
. tidy killed, while other punishments m execution of toe
sentences of a Crhmnal Court should he inflicted in pr ivate^
Corporeal punishmenta ate pr ef err ed to execution' or decapi-
tations ef criminals on the gvoend of the h orr ib te nem er


MM nmAMML


fat irritating affect of the tatter on the minds of the people*
A maa should fink try to kill his enemies by practising
char ms or rites of tike black art, and lastly with weapons.
A Brahmana enemy or criminal should not be put to death,
but should be controlled by such expedients as concil ia tee y
measures, etc., while enemies belonging to any other caste
should be killed (47—53).

An honest man should speak sweet wolds to his listener
that would melt his heart, with his eyes feasting on the
countenance of the latter and taking in the beams of his
complexion like ambrosia. A division in the enemy's line
should be effected through men who had been duped with
false hopes or those who would sell their master's secret*
for money, or those who had been invited and insulted by
him, or those who would be found to be inwardly displeased
with their sovereign, or those who had been unjustly
superseded in rank and honor, or those who would be found
to have a very high estimate of their own virtues, or those
whose religious feelings had been hurt, or those whose wives
and possessions had been forcibly taken away by the king, or
those, though worthy of honour, had been insulted, or those
who would assume a calm exterior though injured by the
king, or thdse what had been unjustly deserted by the latter,
as well as the proud, the ambitious and the aggrieved. A
king should honour such persons coming over to his side
from the camp of his adversary, with presents and money and
pacify such discordant elements lurking in his own.

A dissension is usually created in the ranks of an
enemy by a proper and judicious use of conciliatory mea-
sures so as to win the affection of the aggrieved and the
discontented in his country, by threatening his
and by honouring and buying off the allegiance of the
principal men of his government. A prince, surrounded
by false friends, is destroyed like a piece of timber eaten
away by insects dwelling in holes incised into its body. A


AGNI PUKANAM.


* 7 *

icing possessed of the three sorts of regal pouter [Trishakti—
(i) the majesty or the pre-eminent position of the king
himself, (a) the power of good council, and (3) the power
of energy] and knowing how to act at an opportune place
and time, should subjugate his enemy by means of force..
A king should pacify the ruler of a neighbouring country
who does not wish him any injury in the event of his
being befriended by a large concourse of mighty allies. The
poor and the greedy should be pleased with money, and the
other allies should be controlled by showing them the danger
they might run into by holding themselves aloof cf the alli-
ance. The wicked should be kept in check by threats or
punishment, while sons and brothers should be kept under
proper control by means of conciliatory measures. A king
should bring under his sway the leaders of his own army and
men of the provinces of his realm, as well as bis vassals and
foresters, not pleasantly disposed towards him, by means of
money-gifts and by creating differences among them.
The gods and their images should be propitiated with a
sincere and heart-felt worship (57 — 63).

A hostile army should be frightened away by practising
such illusions as the apparitions of horrible ghosts and
Vetalas or of other shadowy male figures clad in female
costumes, by simulating the showers of meteors, blood, stones
and fire and the fall of columns of water from the skies, the
sudden obstruction of all light, the formation of clouds and
the wreaths of smoke, and such like physical phenomena.
Bhima killed Kichaka in the guise of a woman. UpekshS
(indifference) consists in not dissuading a man from an un.
fair battle, contest or gambling, as exemplified in the conduct
ot HidimvA who did not prevent her brother Hidimva from
measuring arms with her beloved 1 Bhima (64 — 66).

The expedient of Indraj&la (magic) consists in scaring
away the enemy’s forces with the sights of artificial clouds,
hills, or darkness, or by exhibiting them from a distance


AONI PtffARAtf.


871

the banners of « large, army a* if coming tp meet them in
battle, or a mirage-like picture of their future reverses, and
entire annihilation. Indraj&la should be practised to make
the soldiers of a hostile army dispirited and panic stricken
(67-68).


CHAPTER CCXLIf.


R A «A said:— Having worshipped the gods, a king
should march against his adversary by drawing up the sit
divisions of his army in the arrays of battle described
before. The six divisions of an army are the Moula (the
main body or the centre), Bhuta (the front, or the van-
guards), Shrouni (the rear), the Surliid (the auxiliary),
the Vishad and the Atavika (pioneer), each preceding
division being held as more important than the one im-
mediately following it in the order of enumeration, and
a similar importance should be attached to their reverses
or disturbed states. The commander-in-chief of the royal
forces should place soldiers of all ranks, such as the foot-
soldiers, cavalry, car-warriors and elephant-men duly drawn
up in the proper array, to guard the passes of mountains,
bends of rivers and the tracts of wilderness, wherefrom any
danger could be possibly apprehended. He should be per- '
sent in person at one of the abovesaid places of vantage,
accompanied by his counsellors and treasures. The officer
commanding the van-guards of an army should march at its
head, surrounded by picked men of the host, while the
women, the king, and the treasure, together with the secret
forces, should be placed in its middle. The flanks of an army


AGNI PURANAII.


87a

should be guarded by cavalry, while car-warriors should be
placed beside them on both sides. The elephant-men should
be placed on the both sides of the car-warriors, while the
pioneer should be placed beside the elephant-men. The
commander-in-chief should command the rear of an army
and go on encouraging the dejected and the march-worn
(1—6).

An army on march should be drawn up in the array
known as the Makara. Similarly it should be arranged in
the order resembling a hawk with up-drawn wings or in
those known as the Shuchi or the Viravaktra, in the event of
there being any danger ahead. An army should be drawn up
in the array resembling the structure of a carriage (Shakata)
in the case where its rear would be threatened, in the array
known as the Vajra, when side-attacks would be appre-
hended, while it should he drawn up in the order of Sarvito-
bhadra where dangers from all quarters would be appre-
hended. A commander should take special precaution to
guard the safety of his army while passing through any
defile, mountain pass or a forest, or at the time of crossing
or fording any river or stream. He should avoid long and
forced marches and see that his men had not been fatigued
with journey or afflicted with the pangs of thirst or hunger.
Proper steps should be taken to guard against the breaking
out of plague or other epidemics among the ranks of a
marching army 1 corps against the depredations by robbers
on its transports and commissariat and to protect it from dust
storms swampy or marshy grounds, and jnot allow it to be
excessively scattered or gathered together. He should post
sentinels to watch its safety during the times of meal or sleep
and should fall upon the enemy's forces, whenever found thus
unprotected and jeopardised as above described. An enemy
should be openly encountered only at placesiwhere the nature
of the ground as well as (he feelings of their inhabitants and
tbe lime of. engagement would eqsure a decisive victory,


AGN1 PURANAM.


*73

or otherwise a general should take to the guerilla sort ol war*
twe. A general leading an army in his own country, should
hang on the rear of a hostile army, cut off of all means of
supplies and fastly retreating from his own jurisdiction,
and order the foresters or border men owning allegiance
to his sovereign, to intercept its. flight and cut it off with
all its baggage and transport. In the alternative, he should
order a column of picked men to obstruct the vanguards of a
retreating army, demoralised by' fright and dissension, and
command a swift-moving column of picked soldiers to over-
take and attack its rear by forced marches. On the contrary,
the rear should be obstructed and columns of picked men
should be despatched to. attack it in the front. The two
sorts of tactics described above, together with those of side
attacks, should be adopted in a guerilla war. A mighty
general should fall on the rear of an enemy, where the
ground in its front would be found to be broken and undu-
lating, while its two flanks should be attacked where a
similar nature of the ground, both at its rear and in
the front, would not admit of attacks from those quarters
( 7 — * 8 ).

A general, leading an army-corps, should first engage
in action the pioneers or the vanguards of a hostile army,
destroy it while fatigued, beaten or cut off of all helps and
supplies, or annihilate it, while flying in utter rout and con-
fusion. In the alternative, he should himself feign a defeat
and fall back on the main body of his army, so as to draw
the enemy out . of his position of vantage, and then conquer
him unprotected, by means of good counsel or sound advice as
to its movements.' In the alternative, a hostile army should be
destroyed while caught resting unguarded in camps, barracks,
villages, or in the field, or among the subjects or vassals of its
own sovereign. The forces of the enemy should be killed by
delading them out of their own entrenchments, or by inducing
them to desert the high-way with a prospec of booty, or
no


AGNI PURANAM.


*74

should be annihilated, while caught reposing in steep id the
day time after a march of toil and fatigue, or when badly
wanting sleep after long bivouacs in the night. A general
should let loose wild elephants through the ranks of the
enemy's forces, confidently sleeping in the night or appoint
swordsmen to annihilate it in such an unguarded state
(19 — *3)*

The proper functions of elephants or elephant-men, are
to proceed in front of an army on march, to range and recon-
noitre forests and wildernesses, to assail and make a breach
in a compact column of closely drawn up soldiers, to serve as
a parapet under the cover of which a severed column may
again mend a gap made in its ranks, to scare away the enemy
from a distance, to protect the army-treasure and to batter
down doors and battlements of a castle. The duties of car-
warriors consist in making a dash through the enemy's lines
hitherto drawn up in compact arrays, and to effect a junction
of friendly forces. The proper functions of a cavalry are
to reconnoitre the forests, high-ways and the river shores
of an enemy’s country, to guard and supervise the transport
and the commissariat, to cover the rear of a retreating army,
to carry messages or to execute an order requiring the great-
est despatch, to chase a flying enemy and to disable the rear
of a hostile army, duly drawn up in the order of battle. The
infantry, equipped with the full suits of arms, should be
employed to guard the camps and to keep open the lines
of communication, to make it purged off of all scourges and
to clear the ground of bushes, underwoods or of anthills
(*4— *7).

An infantry should be maneuvered only on a ground
steady and not excessively rugged or undulating in its
nature, nor traversed by thick rows of trees, nor dotted over
by hills difficult to surmount. The grotgpd, which would
sanction the employment, pf a cavalry regiment, should npt
be sandy or swampy m its nature, where car-warriots


AQNI PURANAM.


*75


should be employed in an open field, clear of all trees and
hillocks and not swampy or muddy in its nature. A batta-
lion, entirely composed of elephant-men, should be employed
on hills of inaccessible heights, drained by streams and foun-
tains in large numbers, and shorn of all trees and shrubs
which an elephant could possibly trample down or tear
asunder (28 — 31).

The act of Pratigraha signifies the leading of an invading
army by a king, arrayed in columns and divisions named
after the parts of a human body, such as the head, the waist,
etc. An army, not composed of divisions, nor arrayed in the
order above enumerated, fails to carry out the design of its
master. An intelligent .king, wishing victory, should not
launch into a battle with an army not composed of its essen-
tial adjuncts and divisions, since the secret of a sovereign's
authority lies in the almighty force of treasure (32 — 34.)

On gaining a battle, a king should give ample rewards
to his soldiers and generals. Hundred thousand precious
articles should be given by a king as rewards to the general
of his victorious army on the death of his royal adversary,
half of that . on the fall of his son in the field of battle, a
quarter of that on the death of the commander-in-chief of the
enemy's forces, and a half of the latter on the destruction of
the war-elephants of his adversary. Otherwise, the cavalry, the
infantry and the elephant-men of the enemy’s forces should be
simultaneously attacked and engaged in action, but care should
be taken to oppose their co-operation in the field, so that
they might only act as severed and disordered bodies of sol-
diers, and so as to leave a line of retreat, if at all, extremely
narrow and involving much fatigue. (True) generalship con-
sists in maintaining order among the ranks of a fighting
cblumn, since confusion is fraught with danger and Ignominy.*
The elephant-men should be held as the mainstay of an army
in a melee, and they should be largely engaged in an action
when all distinction between the lines of friends and foes


AGNt PURANAM.


%j6

would be tost in a hand-to-hand encounter, and fighting
in platoons or columns would be found to be impossible
( 35 — 37 )-

Three infantry soldiers should be deemed as a fair match
for a hussar, while three such troopers should be employed;
to oppose a single elephant-man. Fifteen foot-soldiers
should be employed to guard each elephant-man, and infantry
soldiers, equalling the guards of nine such elephant-men
in number, should be engaged to defend each car-warrior.
The vulnerable or the assailable points of an army, duly
drawn up in a battle-array (Vyuha) are five, and it should
be arranged in the order as enumerated below. The.Uras or
the heart (van), the sides (Kaksba) andthe wings (Paksha) are
the three indispensible divisions of a fighting army. A regi-
ment usually consists of the seven parts, such as the heart,
the sides, the wings, the center, the back, the Parigraha and
the waist. The array known as .the Guru Vyuha consists of
the waist, the sides and the wings of an army, while the one,
divested of the wings, is known as the Shukra Vyuha.
The commanders should be at the heads of the divisions of
their respective camniands, surrounded by picked men
of the army, and should defend one another auu fight with'
an united purpose and aim, and act in concert The reserve
forces should be quartered at the central part ot an army.
The leader or the commander of an army is its life and soul,
and an ;army, bereft of its leader, should.be deemed as lifeless.
Soldiers riding on powerful elephants should be stationed
at the region of the breast of an army, the car-warriors
should be posted at its sides, while its wings should consist
of the squadrons of cavalry. Such a Vyuha or battle array
is called Madhyabhedi. An army composed of a squadron’
of cavalry at its center, of columns of car-warriors at its sides,
and of lines of elephant-men at its wfajPA if said to be
drawn up in the order known as the Antarvhedya.
The array which is formed by placing cavalry squadrons in


AGNI PURANAM.


877


the place /of the car-warriors in the preceding order,
and the infantry in the place of its cavalry, or in which
elephants are placed all round the army in want ol
a proper number of car-warriors, is known as the AvSdha
(38—48).

The array, known as the Bhoga, consists in drawing up
an army in a series of concentric circles. Now 1 shall des-
cribe the arrays which lay down the formation of columns
in curved lines or in segments of circles. In the array known
as the Mandala, the soldiers are to be dispersed in a perfect
circle, while in the Asanhata class, the soldiers should be
drawn up in concentric rings. The arrays in which
soldiers are usually drawn np in the battle field and which
ace named as the Pradara, the Asajhya, the Kukshi, the
Pratistha, the Supratistha, the Shyena, the Vijaya, the
Sanjaya, the Vishaya, the Vajra, the Shuchi, the Sthunakama,
the Chamumukha, the Sarpisya, and the Valaya, should be
deemed as the modifications of the invincible Danda, origi-
nated by an omission or addition of a wing or a column to
the latter on the one side only. Another sort of array which
is usually come across in practice, is formed by adding tw<
other wings to the one described above, while the array known
as the Pratistha is formed by adding a wing and an liras (a
line of vanguards) to the latter. The arrays known as the
Sthuna Paksha, Dhanu Paksha, etc., are but the modifications
of arrays laid out in two or four columns of soldiers, ana each
of them to be detected according to its differentiating features.
The arrays known as the Gomutrika (in which a column
is drawn up as terminating in a point by gradually taper-
ing from an inflated base, so as to resemble a jet of the
urine of a cow), the Ahi-Sanchari (in a sig-zag line so as to
resemble the movements of a snake), the Shakata, resem-
bling the structure of a square or a carriage, as well as those
known as the Pariplavangaka and the Malcara, are -but the
modifications of the class of. battle arrays, known as the


AGNI PUltANAIf.


878

Bhoga. The one known as the Yugarasya consists of two
wings drawn up in the array known as the Danda, which,
being drawn up in the inverse order, gives rise to the array
of Shakata. The Shesha is formed by increasing with lines
of elephant-men, the sides of the array known as the Makara.
The arf ys known as the Sarvato-Bhadra and the Duijaya
are but the modifications of the class, known as the Mandala.
The first should be known as closed on all sides, white the
second consists of eight Anikas. The arrays known as the
Ardha Chandraka and Urdhanga, are formed by combining
the different divisions of a Vyuha of the Vajra class. Those
known as the Karkata-Shringa, the K&kapldi, and the G6-
dhika are respectively formed by placing three, four and five
soldiers in different positions fag — 59).

Seventeen sorts of arrays may be formed by combining
together the different aspects of the class known as the
Danda, two out of the genus Mandala, six out of the order
Asanghata, and five out of the class known as the Bhoga.
The structures of the abovesaid battle arrays may be modi-
fied by omitting a wing or by taking away a squadron or a
column from the region of its breast and grouping it around
its Koti. A commandar leading a regiment, should charge
the enemy with one of its wings, while with the rest he should
try to scatter the enemy's forces into isolated knots. In the
alternative, he should engage the enemy with the part of bis
regiment known as its breast (van) and surround him with
its part known as the Koti (waist) and then attack with his
wings, the corresponding parts of the enemy's column,
destroy his Jaghana (a part in front of the rear) with
his, Koti and then obstruct it with his own Uras. The
routed soldiers of a hostile army, together with its reserves,
should be totally annihilated, and a good commander should
protect such portions of his own army, &. general should ,
attack and conquer the maip body of an enemy's regiment
with the main body of his troops, numbering double of Urn


MM PORANAM. 89$

former nrwfcfchi* tone* actually mihUe in die Add
*»■ WeH as Ids tttemi A hostile cdlumn, drawn up in a
compact body, 'should be severed aid' scattered by Irre-
sistible elephant-men. A general should quickly manouvre
bis soldiers in the array known as the Dandaka, in the
event of the flanks, Wings, and the front lines of the
enemy’s troops, having Wen found as drawn up in that
array. Similarly he should arrange his troops in the
order known as the Dridha, whenever he would find' his
enemy's troops to have been drawn up in the order of
Pradara, which is formed by adding new wings and flanks to
a regiment drawn up in ordinary columns (Danda).' Likewise
a regiment, arranged in the order known as the Asajhya,
should be opposed by a body of troops drawn up in the array
known as the Khttaka. The array known as the Yalaya
and which is sure to pierce the ranks of the enemy’s forces,
consists of two columes of soldiers, while the one known
as the Durjaya (Invincible) is composed of four such. The
arrays known as the Sarpach?lri, GomutrikS, and the carriage
shaped Shakata are formed by altering the arrangements of
troops in the van, wings and the flanks of the one known as
the Bhoga. The Amara is the reverse of a Shakata and is
deemed as .capable of conquering all enemies. In the Man-
date form of array, soldiers arc grouped in the same manner,
in its flanks, wings, etc., and the arrays known as the Chakras
and Padmas are but its modifications. Similarly the arrays
known as the Sarvato-Bhadra, Ardba-Chandra, Shringata
and Achate are but the different names of the Mandate,
fully or partially drawn up according to the exigencies
of a particular occasion. A general, wishing to gain
a decisive victory over his adversary, should draw up'
his regiment- in one of the arrays described above
(60 — 73).

Said thb God of Fire -O thou twice-born one, Rama
killed his antagonist Ravana in battle and regained the-


88 o


AGNI PUR AN AM.


kingdom of Ayodhya, and Lakshmana, following the maxims
laid down by his brother Rama, was enabled to kill his
adversary Indrajita in battle (73).

CHAPTER CCXLI 1 I.


Daid the God op Fire Now I shall deal with the
art of divining the character and the good or the evil fate
of a man or a woman, as disclosed by me to Rama and which
the Ocean had previously taught to the holy sage Garga.

The OCEAN said :--I shall now describe the unlucky
or the auspicious natures of the signs and marks, which
are generally found on the person of a man. or a woman.
O thou, who properly practisest all austere penances, a man
possessing the virtues, signs and features respectively sym-
bolised by the terms Ekadhika, Dvishukla (Two whites),
Trigambhira (three depths), Tritrika (Three triads or nine
virtues), Tripralamva (three elongated organs), Tribinita
(three bends), Trivali three folds of skin from qbesity)
and Trikalajna (knowing the proper time of practising three
virtues), should be deemed as born with the marks of .future
greatness.

Similarly a man, possessing the four marks on the four,
different parts of his body (Chaturlekha) or the foyr parts, of
whose body is broad or extended, or the man having the appro-
ved height and the four front teeth of the commendable sort,
and the four parts of whose body are of the dark black colour,
as specified below, and having sweet smeUs at the four specific
bends of bin body, and whose four specific organs are of a
short stature, or the five parts of whose body fro long and
slender, or the six parts of whose body are l^hi and elevated,
and the bones of the eight specific parts of whose body are


ACNt PURANAM.


ttt

strong and straight (Astavansha). the seven specific parts of
whose body are glossy (Saptasnigdha), the nine specific parts
. of whose body are clean (Nav 9 ma!a), the ten specific parts
of whose body have the colour of the lotus (Dasha Padmi),
the ten specific parts of whose body are full and well-round-
ed (Dasha Vyuha) and who possesses the features signified
by the term Nyagradha Paritnandala, to be explained below,
or the fourteen pairs of the members of whose body, are
equal, or the man who possesses sixteen eyes, snoulti be
deemed as a man destined to achieve great works in this
life ( i — 7).

The term Ekadliika stands for virtue coupled with
the due discharge of the duties of life and the enjoy-
ment of earthly comforts. The term Dvi Shutkla (white at
two places) signifies the whiteness of teeth and the balls of
the eyes. The term Trigambhira signifies the depth of one's
patience, ears and the umbilicus, while the term Tritrika repre-
sents the possession of nine virtues such as extinction of. envy
or cruelty, kindness, forbearance, doing good, purity, desire,
open-handedness and valour. The term Trilamva signifies
the marked length of one’s hands, testes and the lower part
of the spinal region, whereas the man whose fame has
travelled to the different quarters of the globe, and in
even acknowledged in his own country and by his
own kinsmen, is said to be a Trivyapin. The man, who
has got three-folds of skin in his abdomen, from obesity,
is called a Trivalimina, While the man, who is lowly to the
gods, the Brahmanas and his own elders or superiors, is
known as the Thrice Lowly (Trivinata). The man who
knows when and how to practise virtues or to follow the
pursuits of gain or enjoyment, is called the knower of three
times. Similarly the man, who has got a broad chest, a full
face and a broad forehead, is a Trivistirna (8—13).

The four parts of the body (Chaturlekha) such as the
two hands and two feet, impressed with the marks of
in


88s


AGNI PURANAM.

banners, umbrella*. etc., should be. deemed as auguring
an exceptionally good luge. Similarly the extended
nature of the back, the chest and the muscles of one’s fingers,
should be also deemed as auspicious signs. The commen-
dable. height, of a human figure is four cubits. ByChatur-
oanstra.is meant the pearly whiteness of the four front teeth
of a man, while the term Chatuh Krishna signifies the black*
ness of die, eye-brows, the hairs and the two pupils of the
eyes. The term Chatur Gandha signifies the absence of any
bad smell in .the nostrils, face, armpits and in the perspira-
tion of a man. The term Chatur Hrasva signifies the shortness
of one’s penis, neck and the knee-joints. Tall and slender
finger-nails, a -thin- skin and a luxurious growth of hairs,
are the lucky physical features of a man, 'while the term
Shadennata expresses the commendable nature of high
temples, cheek bones, nose and the space between the
breasts. The term Sapta Snigdba signifies the glossy sur-
face .or the pleasant nature of the skin, the hairs of
th^ head, the hairs on the body, the finger-nails and
the sight and the speech of a man. The term Asta-
vansba signifies the straightness of one’s nose, spinal
bone, the thighs and the knee-joints. By Nav&mala is
iqeapt the cleanliness of the mouth, the nostrils, the eye-lids,
thp anus, the face, the gender and the cavities of the ears of
a. person, while the term Dasha Padma signifies a rosate
hue of his .tongue, palate, nerves of the eye-balls, the palms,
the feet, the finger-nails, the glans penis and the cavity of
‘the mouth. A man having a full, round and well-shaped
face, neck, ears, chest, head, belly, forehead, hands, and
legs is sure to be respected by the whole world. The man
whose, trunk and the extremities measure equal in length,
when, standing with his arms extended, is known as a
Nyagrodha Parimandala. Tbs term Chaturdasha Sama
D van da means the equal measures of the pairs of such mem-
bers of a human body as the ankles, the cilves of legs , 1 the


AGNI PURANAM. 883

hips, the sides, the testes, the breasts, the eats, the lips,
and the inguinal regions.

The term sixteen eyes (Sodashaksha) signifies the profit
dency of a man in the fourteen different branches bf learn*
ing which serve as eye*sights, together with the pair of his
two physical organs of vision. A man with an extremely
dry and emaciated frame, smelling badly and chequered with
large and apparent veins, should be looked upon as a man
of exceptional misfortune. The voice of a lucky man is
sweet and his gait resembles that of an elephant. Two
hairs, growing from the same root on the body of a man,
augurs danger, which can be scarcely remedied by any earthly
means (14 — 26).


CHAPTER CCXLIV.


A WOMAN, beautiful both in the formation and develop*
Rent of her person, and walking with her full and rounded
thighs and hips, in the gait of a she-elephant in rut, and
possessing eyes agile and full of desire like those of a
pigeon intoxicated with the wine of youth, should be deemed
as specially fortunate. A woman, possessing a luxurious
growth of dark blue (black) hairs, a beautiful complexion and
a pair of elevated breast^ closely pressed against each other,'
and whose feet fall evenly on the ground, and whose body
is shorn of all superfluous hairs, should be looked upon as
lucky. Likewise a woman with the external stump of her
umbilical chord, involuted from the right to left, and whose
private part resemles an Asvatha-leaf in shape, and whose
ankles have a little dip in their middle, and the dip of whose
(naval measures the length of the head of the thumb, should
be deemed as a woman possessing commendable features.


88 4


AONI PUR AN All


A woman, having an elongated abdomen and covered over
with harsh and brown hairs, should be regarded as the
repository of all evils. Similarly a woman named after an
asterism, a plant, or a stream, or fond of quarreling with her
neighbours or relations, or excessively greedy or foul-mouthed,
should be deemed as a curse. A woman who loves her
husband with her whole soul, and the hue of whose cheeks
resembles that of the Madhuka flower, and whose arched
eye-brows do not meet each other over the root of the
nose, shoald be considered as a desirable bride, though
possessed of other objectionable features. The features
betray the soul of a man, and a woman whose small toe does
not touch the ground, should be shunned as death (i — 6),

CHAPTER CCXI.V.


O AID THE God OF Fire The handle of a royal Chowri
should be made of gold, while a royal umbrella should be
thatched either with the feathers of a swan, a peacock, a parrot,
or a heron or of any other bird, but never with mixed feathers.
An umbrella to he used by a Brahniana should of a square
shape, while the one to be used by a kinsr should of a round
or conical shape, and should be coloured white. The rod of
.the umbrella should be made to measure twenty-eight inches
in length, and its spokes, made of the branches of Kshira tree,
should be made to branch off from its top, each measuring
fifteen inches in length. The girth of the shed should mea-
sure three cubits in circumference, inlaid with plates of gold
And bung with pendents of pearls and gems ( v— 4).

O thou best of the twice-born ones, I' shall now describe
the three materials with which the rod of a bow should be
made; They should be, O Brahmans, respectively made


AGNI PUR AN AM.


<85

of iron, horn or wood. The strings should be made either
of the three substances, such as — the fibres of bamboo, twigs
or strings. The rod of a proper wooden bow of the regula-
tion pattern, should measure four cubits in length, while
those of the middling or the inferior class, should measure
a cubit less than the one of (he former class. Thick and
curved substances should be tied round the place of the
gripe, so as to give a greater elasticity and steadiness to the
bow and its shaft respectively (5—6).

O thou twice-born one, in a bow made of iron, the gripe
should be made as small as possible, its horns should be
covered with bark or skin, while its middle should be made
to resemble the blended eye-brows of a beautiful damsel
in structure. O Brahman, an iron bow should be made in
parts or together, and should be inlaid with round bits of
gold. A bow cracked, crooked, or with incisions made into
Its body, should be deemed as worthless.

The rod of a bow should be either made of' gold, silver,
copper, or of black iron. A bow made of horns of a bufflt^
rhinoceros (Sharabha) or a Rohisha, should be deemed AS
specially auspicious. A bow made of bamboo is the beat
of all sorts of wooden bows, whether made of sandal-wood,
Shala wood, cane, Kukubha, or Dhabala. The bamboo
is to be cut in the mild season of autumn, and should be
duly worshipped, after having cleared it of all knots, roots,
and branches, and by repeating either the Khadga or the
Trailokya-Mohana Mantras.

The arrows should be either made of iron or of bamboo.
The material selected, should be straight, or if bamboo, should
be well grained, possessed of good veins,, and of a golden
colour.' The arrows should be made well feathered and
matured with oil, with their points tipped with gold.

A bow with an arrow should be worshipped bn the occasion
of a royal inauguration, or before starting on a military ex-
pedition, an4 a king should cause bis astrologers to hold the


AGNI PUR ANA M.


m

banner and the royal arms in their hands on such an occashws

(7—13).

The god Brahman worshipped the iron-demon on the
summits of the Meru mountain and at the foreshore of the
celestial Ganges.

■ The god Brahman pondered over the obstructions thrown
by the demon in the way of performing religious sacrifices,
and behold, the god of fire appeared before him in the shape
of a man ot gigantic stature. The god bowed down to
Brahman and all the gods humbled themselves before him
as well. The jgod Hari took the sword Nandaka from the
hands of the Fire-god, and the whole heaven was jubilant
over the gift. The god Hari gradually unsheathed it out
of its scabbard, and the sword, blue in colour, and with its
hilt of gold, came into view. Thereupon the demon made
himself endowed with a hundred hands by magic, and, mace
in hand, attacked the gods in battle. The members of the
demon's body, severed with the sword (Nandaka) of the god
Hari, fell down on the earth and were converted into
iron with the touch of that celestial weapon. The god
Harr blessed those severed and hallowed limbs of the demon
as, “ Be you converted into weapons on earth.” The gad
Brahman was thus enabled to perform his religious sacrifices
without any hitch or disturbance, by the grace of the god
Hari, and he worshipped the latter deity with the perfor-
mances of many a sacrifice (14—2:).

Now I shall deal with the commendable features of a sword.
Swords manufactured in Khat or Khattura are celebrated for
their elegant appearance, while those known as the Karshiki,
are famous for their cuttfbg capacity. ‘Swords manufactured
in the country of Sorparaka, are noted for their strength and
endurance, while those manufactured in the country of Bangs
are commended for their Iceehess and the jpdwer of standing
blows, while swords manufactured in the country of Anga
(Bbagalpurj are noted for their keeness. A sword of the first


AON! PVRANAM. St f

class should measure fifty fingers in length, while the one of
the Madhyama class would measure half as much. A sword
measuring less than the latter, should not be used at all.
0 thou possessed of exemplary fortitude, a sword that is
ong and emits a sweet sound, like that of a small bell,
when struck, should be deemed as the best of swords. A
sword round at the tip, as well as a sword whose end re-
sembles the edge of a lotus or a Karavira leaf, and emits the
Smell of clarified butter, or is of a blakish colour, should
be also deemed as auspicious

A sword, measuring even finger widths in length, should
be deemnd as auspicious, while the good or evil characters
of spots and marks in its body, should be judged according
to rules laid down in connection with those of a phalic
emblem. A sword, measuring an odd number of fingers in
length and resembling the plumage of a crow or an owl in
colour, should not be used at all. A man should not see his
face reflected in the polished blade of a sword, nor touch it
without having cleansed his mouth after eating. The value, or
the origin (place of manufacture) of a sword, should not be
disclosed to any body, nor should a man sleep under a hang-
ing sword (22-— 27).


CHAPTER CCXLVI.


Said the God qf fire: — I shall now describe the
• characteristics of the different classes of gems, worn by a
king. 0 thou twice born one, gems such as pearl, Torquois,
sapphire, vaidurja (Lit,, produced m Vidura — Lapis Lazuli),
the Moonstone, die Suncrystal, the crystal, the Pulaka, the
Karkitanam, the Pushparaga (topaz), the Jyotirasa, the Raja-


tu


A ONI PUKANAM.


patta (a diamond of inferior quality) and Rajamaya respec-
tively bring prosperity to a person using them. Oh thou
foremost of the twice born ones, sulphur, conch-shell (stored
in the treasure room or obtained direct from the sea shore)
Gomedha, Rudhiraksha, and ValUtaka (Semicarpus anacar-
dium ), nitrate of copper, lead, Pilu, coral, the Dindibha, the
Bhramara, and the Utpala seeds, as wejl as gems found on
the hoods of snakes, mounted on gold and worn by a man
on his perlon, grant him success in life. A gem well
mounted, free from all impurities and shedding its character-
istic lustre from its inside, should be looked upon as an
escort of good luck. A gem any way cracked, fissured or
shorn of its lustre or presenting a rough or a sandy aspect,
should not be used at all ( i — 8).

A diamond of the first water, cut into the shape of a
crescent or a hexagon, and possessing brilliance like that of
the noon-day sun and not at all breakable, is only com-
mended for use. Similarly an emerald, pure, coot and
lustrous, and possessing the hue of the plumes of a parrot
and Containing crystals of golden grains in its inside, should
be considered as of the right sort. The gem known as the
Padmaraga is found in the mines of crystal, and is marked
by its extreme brilliancy and red colour. Tin (Vangfi) is
found in the country of Kuruvinda and also in the mines of
sulphur — i a)*

O thou holy sage, peafls found in shells are marked by a red
colour, while those found in conch-shells become pure *white,
and are regarded As better than the former species. Pearls
found in the knots A bamboos or in the .temple of an ele-
phant or a boar, or'm the brains of a fish, as well as those
which owe their origin to rain clouds, should be deemed
ais pearls of the best species. Whiteness, rotundity, trans-
parency and weight me the valuable traits in a pearl. An
Indraniia (Sapphire), dipped in a basin of milk and found to
tinge its contents with its own peculiar blue, should be


MM) PDRANaM


deemed as belonging toth* best sort, while beads of
Vaidttryas, both ired and blue, should be used in a necklace
<) 3 ~* 5 )-


CHAPTER CCXLVlt.


i^AID THe GOD of Fire : — Now I shall describe the charac-
teristics of a homestead on which a Brahmana should
build his house. A Brahmana should construct his dwelling
on a plot of ground composed of white clay, a Kshatriya oil
U plot consisting of red earth, a Vaishya on a ground of yellow
soil, while a Shudta should rear his hut on a ground com-
posed of black clay. A Bramhana should seek out for bis
house a site that would smell of clarified butter, a Kshatriya,
U plot of ground smelling of blood, a Vaishya a plot of
ground that would smell of boiled rice, and a Shudra a plot
of ground that would have the smell of wine. The plots of
land respectively selected by the members of the four social
orders, should have sweet, pungent, acid and bitter tastes.
The ground should be cleared of all shrubs, underwoods,
and grass ; and bones, skeletons, or other charmed bits of
stone or iron should be' dugged out of, and removed from, the
ground on which the building would be raised ; and a diagram
consisting of sixtyfour rectilineal chambers, should be
delineated on the same. The Bramhanas should be duly
worshipped and propitiated, aiid the god Brahman should be
worshipped within the four chambers at the centre of the
diagram. The god Aryama is the presiding deity of -the
cham bers situate to the east of the four abovesaid chambers
in the Mandala, the god Vivasvan is the guardian deity of
the chamber to the south thereof, while the god Mitra is
the patron saint of the chamber to their west. The god
ua


890 AOfcl PURAkAll.

Mahidhara is to be Worshipped fa the chamber situate at the
north of the latter. The gods Apas and Vatsa should be
worshipped in the chamber to its south-east ; and the gods
S&vitra, Savits, Jaya and Indra should be respectively
worshipped in the chambers situate at their west, and
south-west respectively. The god Rudra and the presi-
ding spirits of diseases should be worshipped in the
chamber at iis north-west, the gods Mahendra and the
Sun god in the chambers at the east and the- angular
points beyond the Mandata, while Bhrisha arid the god
Of truth, in the chambers respectively occupying the.
eastern and the southern sides of the diagram. The gods
Grihakshata, Aryama, Dhriti, and the Gandharvas should
be worshipped in the chambers occupying the western
side of the Mandala, while the spirits such as Puspa-
danta, the demons, the god Varuna, the Yakshas, as
well as the gods Bhaliata and Soma should be wor-
shipped in the north, together with the gods Dhanadx
and Aditi. The gods NSga and Karagraha should be
worshipped in the south-east, whereas the following
eight gods, who are the presiding deities of a household,
should be respectively worshipped in the eight angular points-,
of the mystic diagram. The god Parjanya heads the list Of
such deities, and the god Kargraha stands second in the list,—
the other gods being Mahendra, Ravi, Satya, Bhrisha and
Gagana. The god Pavana should be worshipped in the east, the
gods Antarilisha and Dbaneshvara in the south-east, and the
gods Mriga and Sugrivaka in the south west. The presiding
spirits of diseases should be worshipped in the north western
chambers of the diagram, and the gods Puspha and Vittada
as well as Grihakshata, Yama, Bhrisha, Gandharva and Naga-
Paitrika, should be worshipped in those occupying its southern
side. The gods such as Pushpadanta, th%*$lirit of water, the
demon, the warder-god and Shugriva, should be worshipped
m the west. The gods such as the spirit of Pthysis, Naga-


•AGN1 PURANAM.


-• 9 }


Rajaka should lie worshipped; in the norths and the gods
Mukhya, Bhallata, the Moon-god, Kuvera, Naga, the god of
fire, the Sun-god, and Indra, should be worshipped in the east.
. Jhe god .Grihakshata should be worshipped in the chambers
forming the south-side of the Mandala ; the god Sugriva in
the one situate at its west, and the gods such as Pushpadanta
and Bhallata, should be worshipped at the northern door of
the diagram. A brick or a stoneslab should be buried in
the ground by way of laying down the foundation of the
building to be subsequently raised; and the following prayer
should be read on the occasion, after which the gods
should be duly worshipped as laid down before. (Vide
Chapter 41.) “ Be thou pleased, Oh thou mother Earth, who
art the daughter of the holy sage Vasishta, and may beasts,
men and minerals, thrive and grow more in number, on thy.
glad, safe, and peaceful, lap. Victory to thee, who were
respectively owned by the sages BhSrgava and Angirasa in
former times. May plenty fill the stores and coffers of thy
inmates, men. Grant me the fulfilment of ends, Oh thou who
dost acknowledge the sage Angirasa as thy father. May
evil thoughts never arise in my mind, and dost 1 thou direct
the stream of my life into channels of absolute good, Oh
thou who dost contain in thy womb, all seeds, all gems and
all cereals. Rest in peace in this house, O thou beautiful
goddess who art the daughter of the god Prajapati, and who
wett formerly the- property of the holy sage Kashyapa.
Rest in peace in this quadrangle, 0 thou daughter of
Kashyapa. Oh. thou goddess of good fortune and gentle
demeanours, stay in this house, Oh thou bedecked with gar-
lands of celestial flowers and who art worshipped by all and
every-where, and increase my offsprings and possessions. I
establish thee, Oh thou brick who art the daughter of
the holy sage Angirasa, in a sound, full and unbroken
condition. May, I live to witness the realisation of my heart-
felt desires. May population thrive, and elenhants horses


* 9 * AGM rUMM**

and beasts in general increase in number, and may
we bave more and more wealth every day, by thy
gracious blessings, Oh thou who art jointly owned by
sovereigns, principalities* and the masters of house'
holds” (1—23).

A brick o t a stone slab should be similarly buried
in the ground by its master, on the occasion of hi*
first entering into a house, newly constructed. A Plaksha
tree, planted and grown 00 the north of a building
brings good luck to its master, whereas a Vata tree on its
east, an Qudumvara on its south, and an Ashvatba on
its west, are possessed of similar virtues.

The garden should be hud out on the left hand side of a
dwelling house, and trees planted therein should be watered
morning and evening during the summer months, on each
alternate day during the winter, and each night during die
rains, whenever the soil would be perched or excessively
dry. Ordinarily the trees should be sprinkled withcdld
water, containing a solution of Yidanga, (a medicinal plant,
considered of great efficacy as a vermifuge,) and clarified
butter. A solution of the pulverised Kulattha, Misha,
Mudga, sessamum or barley and cold water saturated with
clarified butter, should be sprinkled over a barren tree, to
make it laden with fruits and flowers. T rees watered- with the
washings of fish, soon grow to a large size. Offal matter of
a sheep or a goat, hot very finely powdered and mixed
with pulverised barley and sessarrinra, kneaded with the wash-
ings of beef, should be buried as manure around the
roots of all sorts of trees, whereby they would bloom and
bear fruits in abundance, and would soon grow to their
proper height. A mango tree should be watered with the
washings of fish, and an Ashoka tree would profusely bloom,
if touched by a beautiful damsel with her leg. Ordinary salt
is the best manure lor Dale Palau* and Cocoanut trees.


AOHI ruRANAM.


*93

while manure composed of powdered Vidanga and the wash*
ings of meat or fish, suit all trees exceedingly wett
(* 4 — 3 1 )*

Cl API SR CCXLVIII.


Oaio THE PIRK-God A man by worshipping the
god Vishnu, with the flowers specified below, is sure to wit-
ness the realisation of all his heart-felt desires. Tito
flowers with which a worship should be performed, aro
named as the Milari, the Mallika, the Yuthi, the Pfttall, the
Karavira, the Pivanti, the Atimukta, the Kuvja, the Tagart,.
the Nipa, the V#na, the Varvara Mallika, the Ashoka,
the Tilaka. the Kunda and the flowers of a Tamala tree

(« — 3 )-

The leaves of the Bilva trees, as well as those of Shatni,
Bhringar 9 ]a, Tulasi (Mimossa) both black and green, and
Vasaka are usually used in a worship. The leaves and
flowers of Ketaki, as well as the lotuses, both red and white,
should be deemed as pleasant to the gods, whereas a worship
made with such flowers as, the Arka, the Unmattaka, the Giri
Mallika, the Shllmali, the Kantakari or the Kutaja, it
sure to incur their, displeasure. A votary of Vishnu in
sure to ascend heaven after death, by bathing the image of
his titular god in a Prastba-maiure of clarified butter. Such
a bathing equals in merit the gift of a tens of millions
of milch cows, A mao becomes a king in his next birth
by bathing it in a Ada-masure of the same toibstance, where-
as a perpetual residence in heaven- is the reward for bathing
it witfc thickned milk and clarified butter (4—6).


CHAPTER CCXUX.


Oaio the God op fire :• — Now I shall deal with the
Dhanur Veda (the science of archery) which is divided into
four chapters ana ufhich includes within its scope the
training of the five (Classes ot warriors such as, the car-
warriors, the elephant, men, the cavalry, the infantry and the
Wrestlers. A battle Is Usually faught with one of the five
classes of weapons such as, those thrown or projected with
a machine (Yantramukta), or those thrown by hands, or those
cast by bands and retained in them after use, or those which
are permanently retained in thehand, and the hands them-
selves such as in wrestling. The weapons themselves are
again divided into two classes according to their straight or
curved shape. The weapons, that are usually projected by a
machine are arrows and missiles, while slings and Tomaras
fall within the sphere of the second class (Panimukta). The
weapons such as Pasas (nooses) are included within the third
ortheMukta Sandhlrita class, while swords form the class
of weapons which are retained by the hand in a fight, wrest-
ling beifig the only sort of fight which is possible between
two combatants divested of all arms and weapons ( i — 5).

A king or a general, who has accustomed himself to
all sorta of hardship, should arrange fighting matches
among men of equal strength and prowess. A battle
fought with bows and arrows should be deemed as the
most honorable sort of fight, the one fought with nooses is the
second best, the one fought with swords is the worst, while
that in which the combatants engage one another in
wrestling, should be considered as only an apology for
a figty (6—7).

A Brahmana or a Kshatriya tutor should; be engaged to
teach and drill soldiers in the art ahd tactics of the
Dhanurveda (science of war), which is considered as the
birth right of the first two orders, of societyvis, the Brahmanas


AONI PURANAM. 895

kjid the Kshatriyas. A member 01 the Sbudra community is
allowed to act as a soldier only in times of peril, and on the
event of his having acquired a general proficiency in the art of
Warfare by regular training and practice. People of. the mixed
castes should help the sovereign of their country, by
serving as soldiers in his army in times of war (8 — 9).

The position in archery known as the Samaplda,
consists in standing with the insteps, calves and legs closely
pressed against each other and with tlje palms and thumbs of
the two hands meeting each other. The position known as
the Vaishakha, consists in standing on the tips of toes, with
the two thighs held in a straight and immoveable posture, thfe.
space left between the two soles of feet measuring three
vitastis only. The position known as the Mandala, consists
in standing with the two thighs held in a bent or a curved
posture like the wing of a swan, wherein the two feet
would be held four vitastis apart. The position known as
the Alidha, consists in keeping the right thigh and knee-
joint in a fixed and immoveable position like that of a plough*
rod, with the left leg retracted, the space left intervening
between the two being five vitastis only, whereas the posture
known as the Pratyalidha, consists in standing with
the left leg advanced and bent in a curve and with the
tight leg held straight and retracted. The posture known
as the Sthanam, consists in standing with the calves and
two legs held five, finger-widths apart, the whole position
occupying not more than twelve finger-widths in breadth.
In the posture .known as the Nischala, the left knee-joint
should be held straight, while the right leg should be re*
tracted or the right knee-joint held in a bent attitude. The
one in which the right leg is held straight as a rod with a
space of. two cubits left between the two insteps, is Iroown
as the Vikata. The posture in which the two lees are
raised Upwards, and the two knee-joints are bent doable, is
known se the Samputn. The posture known as the


fiftfi MSNI PUfcANAIt.

Svastika, Constat* In standing with legs fully straightened Ottt
and fixed) and with the feet thurst outward leaving a space
of sixteen fingers between (id— ij).

O thou twice born one, a disciple should make obeisance*
to his military -preceptor in the posture described in the
preceding line. The bow should be weilded with the left
band and the arrow with the right, and the disciple, loving
h*s bow with a personal love, should string it, standing in
either of the postures of Vaishakha, etc., and by placing one
of its horns as Well as the barbed end of the shaft on the
ground. Then the bovr should be' raised in the same way,
and, O thou, the observer of blissful penances, the feathered
end of the arrow should be then put on the string, leaving
a space of twelve fingers between the rod and the string.
The string should be . made neither too large nor too short;
Then first having held the bow parallel to his navel and
slung the quiver on hilsbuttock, a Warrior should raise the bow
with his left hand, so as to hold it in the same line with the
ends of bis .eyes and the cavities of his ears. The shaft
should be then taken with the right fist to the tip of the right
breast, and quickly put on the string and then drawn to its
full capacity. The -string should not be stretched so fully as
to bring the shaft within the rod of the bow, or to leave the
greater part of it beyond, so that the shaft may not quiver 1
or ^eviate the least from, its straight course, or might not
touch the rod. Then having coveted the object antied-'tt
with the gripe, the. archer, with bis neck held firm, and
steady and his head poised erect as that of a peacock,
and with his chest bulged out and shoulders drooping down,
and bis whole frame bent in the shape of a triangle,
should discharge his arrow, his temple, nose, face and
shoulders being made like those of a horse (i9**ao>-

Ia shooting an arrow of ther first dftss^ a space of
throe fingers should be auuotained between one’s cfaia
aad ahoulda nbla d e, two finger-widths a-weld be the. : specs


*$*• mikKUAM. B$f

life between then* iii the base of A bow of the second class*
while the chin and the Sbotilder should be held a finger apart
in drawing a bow of the third class. The feathered end of,
an arrow should be taken' hold of with the thumb, the index,
the ring and the middle, -fingers bf the right hand, and should
be aimed as full as possible. In this Way an archer should
duly discharge his arrow, and an object lying in the horizon*
tal line of his vision and gripe, is sure to be pierced through
by a shaft. Then he should quickly turn his hand* to his
back. O thou the. practiser of all austere penances* the shaft
of an arrow of the hrst class, should, measure twelve Mushtis,
while those of the second and the third classes should measure
eleven and ten Mushtis respectively. A bow of the first class
measures tour cubits in length, one of the middling sort mea-
sures three cubits and a' half, while a third class bow usually
used by an infantry soldier, measures three cubits in length
A bow. may be used either by a cavalry or an elephant-soldier
and by a car-warrior as well (30 — 37).


-•r'-


CHAPTER CCL.


DaId THE GOD or FIRE Then a member of the ttrice-
born caste should place ih the sacrificial shed, the bow and
the weapons such as Gada, etc., washed with the washings
of -meat. Then haring Collected himself, he should gird up
Ins loins and tie up the quiver firmly in his right side. The*
arrow should be then taken out of the quiver with the right
hand,' fifea in the absence of any definite target to aim at. •
The i«e^fcrf the shaft sbould be placed within it withtheqrrow
andtheiowistobew kl de d w ith thelcftlHindoatheoceaaw.
«*3


898* AGNI PURANAM,

Then having made his mind divested of all cares and anxieties
he should place the feathered end of the arrow on the string.

Then the circular ring in the midst of the target, which
usually measures sixteen fingers in circumference, should
be hit with the arrow. Then having discharged such
an ordinary arrow,- he should practise with those, having
naptha dir any other combustible substance fixed to their
heads. Then he should practise with a square target and
learn simultaneously to aim at objects, arranged in a square
around him. Then he should practise with his bow, while
moving backward or whirling round in a circle, and learn
to quickly take aims at objects situated above or below the
line of his -vision. Of the sorts of objects aimed at by a
bow-man, two are known as the Dridba (requiring an excep-
tionally firm hand), two are known as the Dushkara (difficult
to hit at), and two are known as the Chitra-Dushkara (excep-
tionally hard). An object situated below the line of vision
falls under the category of Dushkara, as welt; as die one
situated above that line. An object aimed at and situated be-
tween the zenith and the head of an archer Or in the vertical
line above his head, is included within the group of Chitra-
Dushkaras, while an object which is not excessively polished
or sharp-edged, nor situated below the horizontal line of vision
of a bowman, is known as a Dhridha object of aim (1—14)-

Thus having acquired a proficiency in hitting at such
objects, both from the right and the left, a bowman should
ride on a horse and , go on with his practice, receding
more and moire from the target on each successive occasion.
Then he should practise to hit at whiding, moving or
fixed objects in succession. A bowman, well initiated in the
mysteries of Karma-yoga, should prices* Archery according
to rules laid down above. The ttaia, made the

vimon both of his menta)and physical eyes sttad^i CAR
conquer even the god of dea|)i (f$-*-i 9 ) • ■


CHAPTER CCLI.


Oaid the God of fire:— A warrior having acquired
a steadiness of hand, and learnt to concentrate his mind
on the point to be aimed at, and a proficiency in target-
practice, and having successfully passed the test, hied by
the preceptor, should practise the use of arms on horseback
or on riding-animals. A Pasha (noose) should measure ten
cubits in length, its end terminating in a loop and its face-
end should be retained in the hand. The string of noose
should be made either of cotton twists or threads or of ropes
of munja grass, of leather or of the sinews of animals. Or a
noose may be made of any other material,- measuring thirty
cubits in length and folded up in three coils or . rings. The
preceptor should look to the weapon (noos^ being placed on
the left side of the body of his disciple. The noose should be
taken hold of with the left hand, then taken over in the
right, and cast by whirling it round over the head, and then
again put into its leathern sheath. Then he should examine
his disciple in the art of casting a noose on the back of «
horse, running in fuU gallop, trot or a canter ( i— 6).

A sword should be hung from the belt on one’s left side.-
The left hand should be used in holding the scabbard firm,
while the sword should be unsheathed with the right The
armours are usually grouped itnder many heads, according
to the thickness ahd the' nature of the material used in their
forging. An iron rod should measure six fingers in girth
and seven cubits in length. A Laguda covered in a sheath
of leather, should be Wielded with both hand! tod then uplif-
ted and burled down: with ease on the head pf an adversary,
whereby he would meet his doom. In the alternative ft
should be lifted add toed with the right hud holy. The site-


9©o


AGNI PUKANAM.

cess in a club-fight consists in killing the antagonist at one
stroke and in a single combat. I have already dealt with the
manipulations of hands and arms in a fight (7—12)

CHAPTER CCLtl.


Oaid the God of fh?E -The thirty-two sorts of gait»
in which a soldier armed With a sword and a shield, should
move about before coming ' to actual blows, are known' as.
'.he Bhranta, the Udbhranta, the Abiddha, the Apliita, the
Vipluta, the Samapata, the Samudishyam, the Sheynapata, the-
Akulam, the Udbhuta, the Adabhuta, the Sajbya, the Dakshina,
the Avalakshita, tlie Visphota, the Karalendra, the Maha-
shakha, the Vikarala, the Nipata, the Bibhisana, the Vaya-
naka, the entire, the* half, the one-third, {he Pada and the
half-pada of Varijas, the Pratyatidha, die AKdha, the Varaha,,
and the Lulita (1 — 4).

The eleven ways of manipulating a noose, are known
as the Paravrittam, the Aparavrittam, the Laghu, the Urdhat-
Kshipram, the Saadharitam, the Vidharitam, the Sheynaptam,
the Gajapatam and the Grabagrajhyam. The magnanimous,
bold , that there are five ways of casting a noose such as the
ftijvayatam (extended in a straight line), the Vishalam (ex-
tended) and the Bhramita (whirling). The uses of a discus are
cutting, piercing, felting, whirling; and severing. The uses of
a Shula are slapping, thrashing, cleaving, intimidating,
incarcerating * and the sixth consists in felling down ah
adversary.''

Oh thott the foremost pf-'tbC‘twke-boro, a Tomara. should
he used in striking the eyes, artM, and the sides of an adver-
sary, and should be opposed with an arrow of straight feathers.


AGNI PURANAM.


901


The ways of manipulating a Gada, are known as the
Avritta, the Paravritta, the Padodhatam, the Avapluta,
the Hansamarda, and the Bimarda. The manipulations
of a Parashu are Karalani, Avaghatam, Dunsho-
paplutam, Kshiprahastam, Sthira and Shunyam. The
uses of a Bhindipala are battering, cutting, breaking
dealiqg strokes like those of a Laguda. 0 thou foremost of
the twice-born, the ends of a Vajra should be revolved
round in a fight by holding it in the middle, and a Pattisha
should be used in the same way as a Vajra. A sword
should be used for the purposes of cutting, piercing, thurst-
ing, and inflicting a blow or for the purposes of encourage
ing or leading on an army. The functions of a Kshepani
as well as that of an engine, consists in intimidating a hostile
army, in defending that of one’s own, in striking hard and in
helping a fighting column to open oat in an extended line.
The function of a Gada are to strike a blow, to make out
a way and to attack an enemy in the ways in which a lion,
an elephant or a boar meet their respective adversaries
in battle, to deal a blow from upwards, and to deal death
both right and left, dispersing the enemies’ soldiers in the
order known as the Gomutra. In wrestling a man should
touch the back of the hand of his adversary with his palm
or should seize him by his two arm pits in the event of his
having freed himself out of his gripe. A wrestler should
strike the head and the fore-head of his antagonist
with the corresponding parts of his own body, kick
him with his legs, and attempt to floor him down with all
his might and main. The functions of war-elephants and
elephant-men are to obstruct the passage of an enemy
flying through the jungles, etc., to trample down under their
feet the soldiers of a hostile army, and to clear the ground
of shrubs and underwoods, and to protect the warriors riding
on them by turning round their trunks over their head,— their
manouvres bein known as the sitting down on hind


AGN1 PURANAM


<K»

legs, clasping the forepaws, and to lie on one side on the
ground/ etc. Two soldiers holding gigantic maces in their
fands should be placed on the back of an elephant, one
should be placed on its neck, while two bowmen should sit on
the region of its shoulders, with two swordsmen to serve
them in tim6 of need. Three horse-men should be engaged
to defend each elephant-man or car- warrior, and three bow-
men should be employed to. defend each cavalry soldier,
and swordmen should be posted to protect each bowman from
harm. The man who goes to war, after having wor-
shipped his arms and weapons either with the Astra or the
Trailakya Mohan, (that which charms the three worlds)
Mantras, is sure to return victorious from the field, and to rule
the whole world (5—33).


CHAPTER CCLI1I.


i5a id THE God OF Fire : — Now I shall speak- all about
the institution of a law suit, and the procedure to be adapt-
ed by tribunals in adjudicating matters which form the
subjects of their contention. A suit is determined by a
reference to four things (Chatusp&da), is adjudicated with
die help of four factors (Chatuh-S5dhana), has its root in
the four places (Chatushthanam), proves beneficial to four
classes of men (Chaturhita), is connected with the four
different parties (Chaturvyapin) and benefits the society in a
four-fold way (Chatuskari). Similarly a law suit involves
the cooperation of eight persons (Astanga) at the time of
its trial, proceeds out of eighteen causes of; actions (Asat-
dashapada), is divided into hundred sub-divisions (Shata-
ahlkha), owes its origin to three different sources (Triyoni),


AGN1 rURANAM.


903


admits of two sorts of statements (Dvyuviyoga), is contested
by two parties (Dvi-Dvara), and is decided by the determi-
nation of two sorts of issues (Dvigati) (1 — 2).

A case or a law suit should be decided by referring to
the codes of law (both moral and positive), to the usages
or the established custom of a country, and also to the rules
of good conscience, which constitute the four matters of
reference. A suit has its scat in truth, in rules of good conduct,
and rests in the complainant (Plaintiff), the Defendant
and the Witnesses (Chatuh Sthanam). The four factors
which determine the adjudication of a legal case, are amicable
settlement, the collective decision of a community, the law,
and the king’s command (Chatush Sadhanam). The four
orders of society, such as the Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas,
the Vaishyas and the Sliudras, are all benefited by the decision
of a law-suit (Chaturhita), and since a law suit requires the
presence of the complainant, the defendant, the king and the
truthful witnesses, it is called the Chaturvyapin or involving
the four essential factors enumerated above. And similarly,
since the decision of a law suit affects the fame, property,
social status and the good conduct of a person, it is called
the Chatuskari or as affecting a person in his four
relations of the world. A tribunal should be composed of
the king, the judge, the jurors, the scripture, the astrologer,
the clerk, the gold, the fire and the water, and accordingly
they are known as the eight necessary or component parts
of the body of a law-suit (As&nga). Likewise since a man
resorts to a law court either through lust, anger or greed,
they are known as the three sources of litigation (Triyoni).
A complain is usually divided under two h€ads, according as
a wrong or a mischief is apprehended or is actually done and
happened. Apprehensions in their turn are a^ain grouped
under six sub-heads according to their mutual relation to
one another, while actual wrongs arc again sub-divided into
sU groups. The plaintiff and the defendant in a suit


ACNI PURANAM.


*4

form ho two doors. The plaintiff has the right to first
address the court, Whereas the defendant is entitled to be
heard in his reply. The two motions (Gati) of a law-suit,
should be deemed as consisting of ascertaining, whether a
point at issue is true or false (3— ra). The term debt
includes the money, admittedly a person to be legally due
from him, or denied by him to be at all due, or affirmed
by him as having been given to him as a free gift or by
way of performing a religious act. Any article belonging
to a person and put by him, out of trust, in the custody of
another, Is called a Trust article in the parlance of law. In
the placet where mercnants meet to carry on their respec-
tive trade, the system of counting known as Practice
(Shambhyu Sumulthana) should be deemed as the only
mode ot calculation. A man who tries to take back a thing,
after having iormally made it over to another is called
the withdrawer of a gift (DuttSpradanika), and such a
conduct gives rise to a cause ot action. The man who
having agreed to nurse or tend to another, refuses so to do,
nay be sued in a public court for the uun-periormance of his
part of 'the contract. The wages of a servant should be
deemed as falling under the generl head of debts, and a non-
payment thereof is actionable like any other sort of pecuniary
obligation. A man by selling an article entursted with him
by its lawful owner or by selling a lost article picked
up by him in the road, without the knowledge and in the
absence of its rightful owner, is called an Asvami Vikrya
(seller of another man’s goods) and is indibtable in a public
court The non-delivery of goods or the want of a formal
assignment of a property by the vendor, constitutes what is
technically known as the non-delivery of vended articles, and
gives rise to a cause of action. Similarly a vendee dissatisfied
as to the quality of goods purchased by him for proper value,
as well as a vendor not deeming the proceeds of his sale
as proper and adequate, shall have their redress in a royal


ACttfl PURANAW.


9°S

court of justice. Recognizances entered into by miscreants
and bad characters, to keep peace or not to misbehave them-
selves, is known as the Samaya, and the violation of such
surety-bonds by men who are bound under them, gives rise
to a case. A litigation, rn which the boundary of a bridge,
of a culvert, or of a plot of ground co/nprised within a field
forms the subject-matter of the contest, is known as a field-
suit, and such a suit instituted either by the owner of the
lesser plot or of the original field, shall lie in the royal
court of justice. A king’s court shall entertain suits in which
the legality of a marriage or the fulfilment of any condition
appertaining thereto, is contested or sought to be enforced
either by the husband or the wife, and such a suit shall be
denominated as a Marriage-suit. The instance in which the
several co-parceners of an ancestral property, want a parti-
tion of the same, or want allotments to be made to each
<of them, according to their respective shares, may give rise
to a cause of action, such a suit being called a suit for the
division of an ancestral estate.

A rash act done by a man out of exuberance of youth-
ful hauteur or arrogance, should be known as an indier-
able offence, and the person aggrieved or injured shall
have his redress in a royal court of justice. An abusive
language, regarding the caste, birth, family or the country of
a person, used by a man with angry gestures, should be
technically known as constituting the offence of Vak-Parush-
yam (use of abusive language), and similarly the offence of
assaulting a man with fists, kicks, fire or a weapon, is known
as the Danda P&rushya (assault or battery). Gambling
(divine) consists in playing with dice, rods and Vajra, while
the play known as human gambling, consists in playing the
game, known as the Panchakrid&. A non-conformity to the
king’s law or an act in direct contravention of a royal edict
«r order, constitutes an offence. These are the eighteen
different steps of a litigation [Astadhasa Pftda] (13—30)#

114


g06 AONI PURANAM.

Now t shall enumerate and describe the hundred
different branches of litigation (Shatash&kha), which admits
of such ramifications owing to the difference in men’s indi-
vidual habits and temperament. A king in the company of
the wise and erudite Brahmanas, shall preside at a tribunal ;
and he shall never allow the consideration of any personal gain
or greed to interfere with the adminislr Aicn of even-handed
justice. The Jurors, who shall be elected to help the king with
their opinion on legal matters, should be selected from among
men who would make no difference between a friend and a foe,
are well versed in the scriptural lore, are above all corruption,
and are void of all greed. The Brahmanas should be engaged
to fill such posts, when such men would not be forthcoming.

Judges or jurors acting in direct contravention of the
rules laid down in the codes of law (Smriti) should be
severally punished and be liable to a fine, double in value
of what ought to be paid in a case of quarrel. A case
consists in a complaint lodged by a person, handled in a way
other than what had been sanctioned in the books of Smritis.
The time, the month, and the day of the occurrence, as well as
the name, the caste and the marks on the body of the com-
plainant, should be recorded in the presence of the defend-
ant, and likewise the statement of the defendant should be
noted down in the presence of the complainant. Then the
complainant should ask the court to settle the issues, and
then lay before it the evidences by which he would prove
his allegations. Success in a law-suit means the corrobora-
tion of one’s statements before a competent tribunal and
the -establishment of the truth and justice of one's cause,
whereas the reverse should be deemed is a failure. These
are the four steps of a law-suit, as laid down by the law-
makers of old (31 — 37).

A court should neither entertain, nor hear a cross-suit or a
cross-case, without first deciding the original one, nor should
it take up a case or a suit dismissed or rejected another


ACNI PURANAM.


907


tribunal o! competent authority. Both the parties should be
required to furnish securities, where a cross-case or a cross-
suit should be lodged or instituted on grounds, considered
weighty and peremptory by a court of justice, as in a charge
of assault or rashness, so as to ensure their appearance in
court whenever required. In the case of absconding, the ab-
sent party should be made jto pay a penalty to the party
entering appearance, and an equal fine to the sovereign.

A man lodging a false complaint, or instituting a false
suit in a court of justice, should be liable to pay a double
fine, one to be paid over to the defendant, and the other
to be deposited in the royal treasury. Charges of rash and
negligent acts, use of abusive language, cursing, or of bring-
ing divine wrath on a person, as well as those of abduction
or elopement with a woman, should be heard and decided
on the day of the complaint, whereas the court may put off
for some other date for the hearing of complaints where the
charges would be different (38 — 41).

A complainant or a witness, becoming restless in the
court-room, or licking the ends of his lips with the tip of his
tongue, or perspiring in the forehead, as well as he whose
face turns pale, or whose voice sinks or becomes hollow at
the time of deposing in an open court, should be deemed
as an untrustworthy witness or a complainant. A witness
wilfully equivocating, or from whose lips drop down
words of ambiguous import, as well as the one voluntarily
coming forward and deposing to a certain set of facts,
without being summoned or called upon to do the
same, should be liable to a fine, where there would be any
chance of its being realised from him. The witness cited
by a plaintiff or a complainant should be first heard and
questioned in the event of the witnesses of both the
being present in the court, and the witnesses of the defen-
dant should be heard after the prosecution had been rimed.
Only the younger relative should he punished in the case


AGNI PUR At! AW.


908-

where persons related to one another by tlie tie of consan
guinity, would seek their redress in a court of justice.

A king should* cause the stake of a plky, be it money,
gems, or a whole fortune, won by unfair means in gambling,
to be the subject-matter of a law-suit. The king should con-
fiscate all such treasures found, or the entirety of the property
staked, pending the final hearing of the case; and all such
properties should not pass over to the sovereign by the law of
escheat, unless voluntarily offered by the parties (42 — 49).

A principle of equity should be deemed as a better au-
thority in the conflict of the tenets of the law codes on a
particular point, and a principle of good conscience should 1
have precedence o'ver an established usage of trade, or a*
principle of the science of wealth. The evidences recog*
nised by a court of justice are documents, actual posses*
sion or enjoyment, and the testimonies of witnesses,
and the absence of one of them should be made good by
the affirmation on oath by a person, who may be probably
acquainted with the matter. A greater weight should be put
on* incidents happening in the latter part of a quarrel, as-
they usually go a far way in determining the judgment in*
such cases, while in a gift, in a purchase or in a mortgage, the
preliminary proceedings should be taken into special consi-
deration (50*— 52).

The right of ownership in a person, in relation to a.
plot of ground,, forcibly taken possession of by another with
his knowledge, is exting hed after the Ikpse of twenty
years from the day of out in& while such rights to money
or accumulated treasures extend; up to the tenth year from
the date of dispossession. But such a rule shall not hold good
in the case of a mortgage or an encroachment, nor as regards
a property held in trust, nor apply to the properties belonging
to an idiot, to an infant, to a sovereign, to a woman, or to a
Shrotrya (a Brahmana well-versed in the Vedas). A mort-
gagor by selling a property previously hypothecated to an-


AGN! PURANAM.


909


other, shall pay the consideration in full to the mortgagee,
and shall be also liable to pay a penalty of equal value to the
king, or otherwise as his means would admit of. Possession
is title, even in the absence of a proof of continuous and un-
obstructed enjoyment, but Possession without the proof of
even an obstructed enjoyment, is no good or valid evidence
of title in law. A good and valid Possession, coupled with
enjoyment based on a good and sound title thereto,
is conclusive evidence of a right in taw ; whereas Posses-
sion and Enjoyment based on a prima facie defective title,
would never give rise to a presumption of rightful owner-
ship. The possession of such a land or property should be
recovered by suing the original tresspasser, and it would
be of no avail to prove that the present possessor had come
by it from the son, or the son's son of the original tress-
passer ; and the value of the property should be recovered
out of the estate left by him, in the event of his death
during the pendency of such a suit ; since Enjoyment without
any sound right of Possession does not constitute any good
and valid ownership in law. And it is the duty of the
king to guard against acts of encroachment by rich and
titled men of his kingdom, and to keep the fountain of
justice uncontaminated by any wrongful intrusion (53 — 59).

A legal act or transaction done or entered into by a child
a woman, a lunatic, an invalid, or by a man addicted to evil
habits or under the influence of liquor or threat, as well as
an act done without any apparent reason, or otherwise defec-
tive as to the procedure, should not be held as valid in
law. The king shall . cause the mortagagor to restore to
the mortgagee, the like of a property pledged or hypothe-
cated, if the restoration of one similar to it in every respect
is found to be impossible, in the event of its loss or destruc-
tion. Similarly the value of an article stolen, should be
handed over by a king to the head-man of a village, where
the theft had been committed (53—62).


910 ACNl PUR AN AM.

In a loan, the repayment of which has been secured by a
collateral security, interest which accrues or falls due from
month to month in a year, shall be charged at a rate per
cent., so as not to exceed or fall below an eightieth
part of the amount lent and advanced. Otherwise interest
shall run at the rate of two, three, four, and five per cent ,
respectively according as the borrower will be a Brahmana, a
Kshatriya, a Vaishya, or a Shudra.

A seventieth part of its original value increased seven
or eight times, will be the interest charged on any female
animal pledged, while in the case of wearing apparels, food
grain or gold, interest shall be charged at] the rates of four,
three and two per cent., respectively. Interest on money
lent to a person either residing in a village other than
that of the lender, or going across the sea, should be
charged at the rate of ten and twenty per cent., respectively.
Members of all castes are at liberty to negotiate loans on
terms and at rates of interest seemed most convenient to
them. A king by investing his money in loans on occasions
sanctioned in the scriptures, or by lending money to persons
who seek it, does not become amenable to censure. An
usurer shall become liable to a prosecution in a court of
justice, and his money shall be escheated to the king of his
country (63 — 66).


-:o:-


CHAPTER CCLIV.


l)aid THE GOD OP Fire : — Now I shall deal with debts
and the conditions of their repayment in general. It shall be
lawful for a debtor, on having borrowed money from a person,
to pay it in instalments. Of several creditors, a Brahmana


ACNI PUUANAM.


91 *


stall have the right of preference as regards repayment!
then the king, while the remaining ones shall have subse-
quent liens on the property of a debtor, encumbered with
debts duly marshalled out. A king shall cause the person
of a debtor to be arrested, or make him enter appearance
in a royal court, rt lise ten per cent., as his due on the
money advanced from an absconding debtor, and five per
cent thereon in the case of its having been fully paid and
discharged in the court. A debtor belonging to any of the
low or vile castes, and incapable of satisfying his debt, should
work for his creditor in lieu of repayment until the debt is
fully and finally discharged ; while a Brahmana debtor simi-
larly circumstanced as above, should have the indulgence
of the court in paying off his debt conveniently and in easy
instalments, as the money would be forthcoming. Money
should be deposited with an umpire, in the case where a
creditor would refuse acceptance, though repeatedly pressed
by the debtor in that behalf, and thereafter the money would
cease to bear any interest ( 1 — 4).

A son or any other person inheriting the property or th«
wife of a deceased person, stands under the obligation ot dis-
charging the debts incurred by him in his life time ; and simi-
larly in the case of a sonless person, the liability lies in the
partaker of his goods. A debt incurred by the members of
a joint-family for purposes conducive to its good, should be
discharged and satisfied by persons inheriting their properties
on their death, or after the dissolution of the jointure. A
wife is not bound to pay the debts of her husband or sons,
nor a husband that of his married wife, nor is it obligatory
on a father to satisfy a debt incurred by his son, unless and
until it is proved that the sum borrowed, had been actually
spent in some necessary acts connected with the up-keep or
the welfare of the family. The husband of a woman of the
Gopa, Shoundika, Shailesha or Rajaka caste, shall payoff
the debts of his wife, and the man with whom such a woman


fUSN! PURANAM.


<94*

lives, or gets her maintenance for the time being, should be
deemed as her husband. A wife or a husband is severally
bound to discharge the debt, jointly incurred by them,
but it is not so obligatory on her other co-wives not partici-
pating in the transaction. Similarly a husband is not bound
to pay the debts of his wife, in which he has not himself
joined. The sons and son’s-sons of a person, dead, or taken
to the life of a religious mendicant, or overwhelmed with
difficulties, should discharge his legal debts, as well as his
obligations incidental to his being a witness to a fraudulent
transaction. A son is not bound to pay off the debts of his
father incurred by him for immoral purposes, such as drink-
ing, wenching, gambling, illegahgifts, etc., or to pay off the
residue of a fine imposed on him by a criminal court.

A father or a brother living in commensality with a
son or a brother, should jointly take a loan, each of them
standing as a surety for the other. Suretyship consists
in being a witness to a bond, or in giving a guarantee to the
creditor as'regards the repayment of a debt. Even the sons
of a mortgagor knowingly pledging a property to which he
has no lawful right or title, or giving a false or a fradu-
lent security, are liable to satisfy and discharge the debts
of their father secured by such defective pledges. The
sons of deceased persons, who were sureties to, or had
bound themselves as guarantees regarding the repay-
ment of a bond, should not be held liable* for the money
secured under it, which should be realised from the
parties who had induced the creditor or the mort-
gagee to advance such sum. The joint-surities. to a
bond should be held liable to pay the money secured
thereby, rateably to their respective shares, and out of funds
severally belonging to them ; or in the alternative a creditor
shall have the choice of realising his dues from any of the
several sureties bound under a Joan-bond. A debtor shall
be liable to pay double the amount to his surety, in the event


AGNI PURANAM.


9*3

of the latter's ratifying the bond under which he was oound
with his express knowledge and consent’fs — 16).

Any female animal with her offsprings or paddy, any
way pledged or hypothicated, should be redeemed by paying
double their number or measure, as the case might be.
Similarly wearing apparels and sweetened juice of plants and
trees, or boiled sugar-juice or candied-sugar, should be re-
deemed by returning four and eight times their respective
measures or quantities to the mortgagee. A mortgagee shall
be at liberty to enforce his right of foreclosure, in the event
of the hypothicated articles enumerated above, having not
been redeemed by payment of double their value instead.
The right of redemption shall extinguish at the lapse of
the term of mortgage agreed upon at 'the outset, whereas
the right of foreclosure shall never acoioe in the case of
a mortgage iri Which the mortgagee is entitled to enjoy the
mesne proiits of the hypothicated property, under, and by
virtue of the terms of the compact. Interest shall not be
allowed in the c M* of an usufructuary mortgage, nor in the
case in which the mortgagee derives any benefit or enjoys
any relief from the mortgaged premises, which should be res-
tored to their original condition in the event of their des-
truction, otherwise than by the acts of god or the king
(17—18).

A mortgage becomes valid, just on the acceptance of the
hypothicated property by the mortgagee, and a fresh property
should be pledged in its place in the event of the original one
having suffered any deterioration in value ; or otherwise the
mortgagee shall enforce his right of payment. Money bor-
rowed by a mad on . simply pledging his credit or character,
should be repayed with the full amount of interest accrued
up to the date of such repayment, while money borrowed
on an oath or a solemn affirmation, should be returned
double (ao— fli).

A . mortgagee should be held as bound to return the mort-

115


9*4


AGNI PURANAkl.


gaged premises whenever asked in that behalf by the mort«
gagor within the term of the mortgage, and should be
liable to punishment failing therein. A money-lender be-
longing to one's own family, and advancing money on the
security of one of his coparceners, should be looked upon
as a mortgagee to all intents and purposes, whereas such
a property with its value determined according to the market
rate of the time and conveyed for consideration by its
rightful owner to such a mortgagee with the attestation of
witnesses, should be deemed as a mortgaged property with-
out any interest. A mortgagee shall be at liberty to enforce
his right of foreclosure, when the consideration money
together with interest, would double itself in course of time,
or sell if for a sum, double of the original amount advanced
on it (22 — 24).

A packet, the contents of which are in the danger of
being stolen, or forcibly taken possession of, or any way zeo-
pardised (Vyasanastha), and made over to another for safe
custody without letting him know of their nature or value,
is called a seated packet of deposit (upanidhika Dravyam),
which should be returned to him in a sound and unopened
condition. The custodian of such a sealed packet is not
bound to restore its contents to the depositor in the event
of the same being destroyed by the acts of god or the
violence of robbers or through a subversion of govern-
ment. The custodian shall be liable to refund twice the
value of the packet in the event of his seeking such deposit
and of returning the same after much harassing solicitation
A custodian as well as his legal representatives should be
liable to punishment in the event of their wilfully deriving
any benefit form such a deposit. The same rule shall hold
good even in the case of a trust property or a vested interest
(25—27).


CHAPTER CCLV.


Oaid THE God op Fire: — Three or five of such men
as those who practise the religious {penances, give alms and
charities to the poor, and who are truthful, born of noble
parentage, virtuous in their dealings, affluent in their circum-
stances, honest, straight forward, fathers, of children, and are
in the habit of performing the five daily religious sacrifices
(Panchayagna) should be cited as witnesses in a legal matter,
Witnesses should belong to the same caste or social order
as the parties by which they have been respectively cited
(I— a).

Persons who labour under the dissability of testifying
to any legal matter or to any fact in a lawsuit, are women
infants, the old, the invalid and the artful, the mad, the
lunatics, the drunkards, the hurt or the injured parti (in
a particular case), the professional actors, the iniquitous, the
swindlers, persons of impaired understanding and defec-
tive sense organs, a friend or a relation or an enemy of the
parties contesting, a professional thief as well as those who
take food at the hands of polluted or degraded persons,
whereas all people should be deemed as Capable of testi-
fying to facts connected with a case of theft, violence or
rashness. An honest and virtuous man may be cited as a wit-
ness by both the parties in a suit. A witness refusing to answer
questions in a case brought on loans or mortgages in which
interest at the rate of ten per cent, is allowed by law;
should be liable to pay into the king’s court, within forty-
six days of his ascending the witness box, the full amount
of consideration money and interest accrued thereon. The
rogue who would wilfully and obstinately refuse to depose to
facts which he is fully aware of, should be liable to same
punishment as an adjudged perjurer (3—7).


916


AGNI PURANAM.


The witnesses adduced by the Plaintiff should be heard
and questioned in the presence of the Defendant in a suit. A
man by wilfully perjuring or by knowingly making an untrue
statement therein, commits the same sin for which a deadly
sinner (Mahapatakin), a murderer of a wife or children, or
a man charged with incendiarism are usually punished, both
under the moral or the positive laws of a country. The
Imerit of a good and pious act, done by such a man even
before a hundred previous existences, is sure to prove as
of no avail (8— io).

In the conflict of evidences among several common
witnesses, the judgment should be given on the basis of
facts corroborated by several virtuous and respectable testi-
fiers, whereas the deposition of one, better in honour and
piety, shall have the greater credence in the event of a
variance between two respectable witnesses. The court shall
award a verdict in the favour of the party, the testimonies of
whose witnesses shall conclusively establish the truth of
his claim or right, whereas the party whose witnesses shall
differ in their statements, or make discripancies in their
testimonies regarding the material points at issue, shall be
returned as defeated or unsuccessful. But an apparent or
a manifest lie corroborated by several vulgar witnesses,
shall not be allowed to determine the judgment in a law
suit, and in the event of such statement being contradicted
in material points by virtuous and respectable witnesses,
the former set should be adjudged as perjurers, and should
be severally punished as such. A tutored witness, equivo-
cating in his deposition, should be fined double; the value
which that particular suit would be laid at, while a Brahmana
witness in the same predicament should be excommunicated
from the country. A witness wilfully absconding or keeping
out of the way to avoid the service of the (king's) summons
should be fined eight tunes as much, whereas a Brah-
mana accused of a similar offence, should be dealt with as


•AGNI PURANAtt. 9JJ

above described (exiled from the country). But a false state-
ment or perjury wilfully committed, is pardonable only in the
case where a Brahmana is in danger of being capitally
punished (n — 15).

Similarly a witness to a Deed of Mortgage or to a Bond
witnessing the agreement of a person or several persons
(thereunder bound) to repay a certain sum of money, lent
and advanced to him or them, should subscribe their names
thereto either voluntarily, or in consideration of fees, and in
the presence of one another and that of the mortgagee or
the creditor, in the way as follows : — The year, the date,
and the name of the place of transaction should be first
recorded, as well as the time of actual pledging or borrow-
ing.' Then the prevalent name as well as the spiritual deno-
mination, if any, of the debtor or the mortgagor should be
written in the Deed, together with those of his father and
the Gotra he belongs to. Then after inciting the purposes
for which the money is wanted, and the terms on which
the same would be repaid and realised, the debtor ee
the mortgagor should subscribe in his own hand bis name
thereto, as “I so ahd so, son of so and so, fully agree
to the terms and statements written above, the date
and the year above referred to.” Then the witnesses shall
respectively put their signatures to the Daed as “ I so and
so, son of so and so, have put my name and seal hereto
as a witness.” Similarly an unlettered debtor, shall cause
the writter of the Deed to^siibscribe his name and write his
assent thereto, and a witness, who does not know how to
read and write, should cause another witness to the Deed
to sign his name for him in the presence of other witnesses
thereto. Then the writer of the Deed shall put his sig-
nature thereto as follows " t so and so, son of so and so,
requested by both the parties hereto have engrossed this
Deed,” and then lie shall write his address, designation and
ether cssentials which font the writer's Jurat (16— ii>


9(8


AGNI PUHANAM.


A Deed written lip in the hand-writing of a mortgagor,
k good and valid in law, even without being attested by
•ny witnesses, except where compulsion and undue influence
would be presumed or set up as a plea. Even the son’s
■on of a. debtor should be held liable for the repayment of
a debt incurred by his grand-father under a Bond. A Mort-
gage remains in force until the pledge is not redeemed
A new Deed should be drawn up in substituting an old, torn,
or an obliterated one, or in the event of the original having
been illegibly written or stolen or destroyed, or taken away
ia a distant country. Lines explaining the meanings of
ambiguous terms or phrases oecurring in the body of a Deed,
•• well'as receipts, totals, instalments etc., and all subse-
quent acts, should be endorsed on the back of a Deed. The
debtor shall see that all his payments are endorsed on the
back of a Bond under the hand and seal of his creditor,
and the creditor shall endorse receipts of payments thereon.
A Bond discharged and paid up, should be destroyed and a
fresh Deed of Release should be executed by the mortgagee
or Jthe creditor, duly attested by witnesses, in the event
of the original one having been so drawn up in the pre-
sence of witnesses (22 — 27).

The divine tests are named differently as an accused,

M asked to pass through the ordeals of scale, fire, water, and
poison etc., for establishing his innocence. Trials by such
ordeals should be instituted only in cases of high treason,
or most culpable offences, while oaths and swearings should
be deemed as sufficient to establish one’s innocence in .
petty charges. Ordeals by means of the purifying elements
of Nature, should be instituted ia cases where the charges
would be the violations of the king’s rights. Ordeals by
scale, plough-share or poison should n$t be allowed in
cases where the value , of the subject-matter of the suit
would fall below a thousand coins. The office? presiding
at an ordeal should.give a verdict and a certificate of iano-


AONI PURANAM.


© 1 $

cence in the event of one's successfully passing through it,
whereas the accused found wanting in the test, shbuld be
liable to punishment (28 — 31). .

The accused should fast and bathe at sunrise with all his
clothes on on the day of the test, and pass through his ordeal
in the presence of the king and the Brahmanas. An old,
infant, blind, lame, invalid, or a ' female accused, should be
tested with the ordeal by scale, while the innocence of a
Shudra, should be ascertained by means of the ordeal by
fire, water, or the seven Yava (barley) weights of poison.
Then the persons efficient in measuring by scale, should
put the weight on its graduated arm so as to equibalance
the weight of the accused placed on the receiving pan of
the haUnce. The accused should begin his ordeal by pray-
ing as follows : —

" The Sun, the Moon, the Wind, the Fire, the Earth, the
Heaven, the Heart, (conscience) the god of Death, the Day,
the Night, the Morn, the Eve, and the god of Virtue, wit-
ness the good or the evil acts of a man. O thou Scale,
made of yore by the gods, and the abode of all truth, dost
thou speak the truth, O thou blissful damsel of heaven and
remove the doubt which men have entertained as to my
honesty and innocence. Lower me down, if I am truly guilty
of the offence charged against my name, otherwise lift me
up, 0 mother.” (3? — 37).

In the ordeal by fire, the palms of the accused, should be
first examined as to whether it had not been plastered over
with day. Then seeds of Vrihi grass should be strewn over
them and the seven leaves of an Ashvatha tree stiched
together with a string, should be spread over them. Then
the accused should address the Fire-god as follows : —

“ Thy seat is in the inside of all creatures,' O Fire,' and
thou art the witness of acts of merit and demerit. I have
held thee in my palms, spe*k truth,' Q god, ' as a witness of


ACNI PURANAtt.


9*0

my innocence.” Then a red hoi iron ball, weighing fifty
Palas should be placed on his palms, covered as above and
the accused or the person suspected, should be asked to
slowly walk over seven Mandalas or rings, each ring being
laid down sixteen fingers apart. The accused should then
throw off the fire from his hands, expose them to the inspec-
tion of the officer presiding and would pass off scottfree in
the event of his coming out of the ordeal unscathed. The
test should be repeated where the ball would drop down
before reaching the goal, or any doubt as to fairplay would
arise (38 — 42).

At the outset of an ordeal by water, the god^Varuna,
should be addressed as follows

O thou holy Varuna, O thou holiest of the holies, purify
me and protect me by truly testifying to my innocence.”
The accused should stand waist deep in water, and then
sit down on his hips. His innocence would be estab-
lished, if an archer simultaneously discharging an arrow over
his head, would find him fully dived down into the water
(43 — 45)-

In an ordeal by poison, the accused should first address
the poison to be imbibed as “O thou poison, the son of the
god Brahman, and who hast thy abode in truth and virtue,
dost thou deliver me from this accusation and be thou to
me as nectar.” Thus having addressed the poison (born of
• hill), he should imbibe the same In the presence of the
assembled Brahmanas. His innocence should be established,
If he could assimilate the pohoa safely without retching or
vomiting (46 — 471-

In the alternative a suspected person should drink three
handsful of the water used in bathing tbeimages of some
dreadful gods. He should bo deemed mdoeent, if nothing
harmful (rither physical orsedhl) bcfals him within fourteen
days of such drinking (46-4I).


MM MHANAftl*


9*1

to-’ fatten smaller offences, a suspected person should 1*
«eoc>' to . «ute the truth on oath, or to swear his innocence
by a riding animal, a cow, a weapon, seeds, gold,

consecrated temples and tanks, the image of agod or the
feet of his spiritual preceptor (49*^50).


-toi-


CHAPTER CCLVt.


5 a.d the God op Fire : — Afather wishing a partition
of his properties, should divide them either equally among
his sons, or settle uppn his eldest-born a greater portion
thereof. The mothers (father’s wives) not having received
anything from their husband or father-in-law by way of
their Stridhana, should have a share in the division, in the
event of equal allotments having been made to each of the
sons. A little should be given to the man claiming under
a woman having a share, and the division should be made
afterwards. Unequal allotments made by a- father should
deemed as binding. The sons should divide among them*
selves the liabilities of their own father, and the daughters
should take upon, themselves the debts incurred by their
mother her life-rime, in the event of their having had no
issues. The co-parceners of a person should not have any
claim to the property acquired by him with his own inde-
pendent exertion, without anyway destroying (selling) his
ancestral . estate, as, well as to those given to him by his
friends out of 'love, or. 00 the occasion of bis marriage at
dowry. The co-parceners of an estate should be entitled
to accretions or to properties newly acquired by one of them
with tha profits of the property held in common by them.

tt6


AGN1 PURANAM.


932

The sons ol different fathers, forming the members of a joint
and undivided family, should take according to the shares
of their respective fathers under whom they claim. Both
a father and a son are entitled, in equal shares, to] an estate
acquired by one’s grand-father, or to a property assigned by
him to a> definite and particular object (Nivandha). A son
born unto a man by a wife of his own caste (SavarnS),
even after the division of his ancestral estate, should take
a share, and a share should be allotted to him in the parti-
tion of the estate, if his advent in the world is reasonably
anticipated on the occasion, and even after the adjustment
of accounts. The co-parceners of one’s ancestral estate,
should not be entitled to any property acquired by his own
skill and knowledge or ingenuity, nor to a . lost property
recovered by him, even if it be ancestral.

The property given to a man by his parents is ins own,
while his mother should be entitled to an equal share with
the sons, in the event of the partition 'having been madfe by
his grand-father (1 — 10).

The married brothers are bound to provide for the
marriage-expenses of an unmarried daughter of their deceas-
ed ^father, and to give her a fourth part of a share. The
sons of Brahmana father should be entitled to four, three,
two and a single share respectively, according to the castes
of their respective mothers, or in other words, a son by a
’ Brahmana mother would take four, a son by a Kshatriya
mother would take three, a son by a Vaishya mother would
take two, while a son by a Shudra mother would take a single
share only. Articles found to have been wrongfully taken
possession of by another, should be again taken to the
hotch-pot and equally distributed among the co-parceners,
-as such is the practice ( 11 — -12).'

A son begotten by a sonless man in another man’s wife
under a Niyoga (authority to beget; offsprings), should inherit
the properties of both his natural lather and the husband


AGMI PtntANAM. $ 9 %

of hb mother, as such a son can offer cakes of obsequies to
both of them. A son begotten by a man m hb ofe.
married and lawful wife, is known as an Ourasa, while a.
Putriki Suta (a daughter’s son who by agreement, becomes
a son of her father) should be deemed as ranking equally .
with a son of the former class. A son begotten in the
wife of a man by one belonging to his own Got|ra, or by ■
any body else, is knoWn as a Kshetraja son, while a son
clandestinely begotten in the paternal house of a woman
b called a Guda-Utpanna (born in secret). A son born
In the womb of a maiden girl is called a K&nina, and
naturally belongs to the father of the girl (maternal grand*
father). A son born of a woman in her girlhood b called a>
KAnina. A son born of a married woman by another,
whether she (had menstruated or not, is known as a Poudar-'
bhava. A son given in adoption by his natural parents, b
called a Da ttaka, while a son his parents for value,
b known as .-a Krita son. A child filiated by a person is
called a Kritrima (artificial) son. A child voluntarily offer*
ing himself as a son to another, b called a Dattatman, while
a son born in the womb at the time of hb mother’s marriage
b called a Sahad’oja. A son deserted by one and filiated
by another, becomes an Apaviddha son to the latter. The
sons enumerated above are all competent to offer cakes
of obsequies and libations of water to their fathers, whether'
natural or adapted, and to inherit the properties respective^
left by them (13—19).

The rule, laid down above, shall apply to sons born of
mothers, belonging to the same castes as their husbands.
A son begot by a Shudra out of lust in a female slave,
should be entitled to a share in the property left by hb
deceased father. On the decease of hb father, hb brothers
shoutd allot a half share to him ; while such a person in the
absence of any brother or sister's son, should take the
entirety of the property left by hb deceased progenitor..


AGNI PURANAM.


9U

The wife, daughters, parents, brothers, their sons, persons
belong in g to the same G'otra, Vandhus, disciples (in the
case of a Brahmacharin), should be successively deemed as
heirs to such a soniess man and the each of these succeed-
ing relations should inherit his property in the absence of
one immediately preceding him in the order of enumeration.
This rule shall hold good in the case of the soniess of all
castes (so— 23).

The preceptor, the good disciple, a person belonging to
the same religious fraternity, or persons jointly visiting the
same shrine or resorting to the same place of pilgrimage,
should be successively deemed as heirs to a Yati, V&na-
prastha, or a BrahmachSrin. The co-parcener of a co-parcener
or the uterine brother of an uterine brother, should be deem-
ed as an heir to such a co-parcener or an uterine brother,
born but subsequently deceased. A brother living in com-
mensality with a brother not born of the same womb, should
inherit the property of the latter on his demise, while an
uterine brother, even living separate, should inherit the
property of a brother born in the same womb, aS his step-
brothers or brothers by different mothers, are held as dis-
abled to have any share therein (24 — 26).

A degraded son, as well as one born lame, blind, insane,
idiotic, as well as the one suffering from an incurable disease,
should be entitled to maintenance out of the ancfestral estate,
but not to any share therein. The sons of such disabled
sons should be deemed as competent heirs to the ancestral
property, if not otherwise labouring under any of the dis-
qualifications enumerated above. The daughters of such
disqualified sons should be entitled to maintenance until
marriage. The wives of such disqualified sons should be
maintained if not anyway misbehaving ^ themselves, or
not leaving the path of virtue, or going contrary to the
wkhes of their guardians by marriage, whereas they should


AGHI PURANAM. 9 3 S

be batiished and cut off without any provision in tile case
of actual adultery or infidelity (27 — 29).

The estates given to a woman by her father, mother,
husband, or brother, as well as those presented to her near
the nuptial fire, or those which fall under the denomination
of Adhibedanikas, are the four classes of Stridhana (lit.,
woman's property) recognised by law. The Vandhus of a
woman dying without any issue, should inherit the estate
. (Stridhana) presented to her by her friends and relations, as
well as those which are known as the AnvSdheyakam. The
husbands of all castes, should inherit the Stridhana left by
their respective wives dying without any issue, while their
daughters shduld be deemed as the legal heirs to such
properties in the event of their having any female child ;
otherwise the property would revert to the father of the
deceased. A man by taking back a property, or an estate
formally assigned and made over to his daughter, should be
liable to punishment, whereas he is bound to defray the
expenses incidental to her marriage and maintenance. The
interest of such a daughter vests in her father on her
demise, charged with expenses incurred under both the
abovesaid heads. A husband is not bound to repay or
restore to his wife an estate or a property forming her
Stridhana, which he has appropriated in the time of famine,
or sold for his medical treatment, 01 for the purposes of reli-
gious acts, or in the event of its being stolen by theives. A
husband marrying a second wife (Adhivinna) in the life-time
of the first, and without having assigned any separate proper-
ty to her as her Stridhana, should settle on her a Stridhana,
equal in value to what had been settled on his first wife, or
a half thereof in the event of the first wife having not been
similarly provided for. In a partition of one’s -ancestral
property, made under a Deed of Partition, duly attested
by one’s cognates, Vandhus and relations, the ancestral
house, the fields and the articles of dowry (Joutakas) should


926


AGNI PURAMAM.


be fairly portioned and distributed among the several co-
parceners entitled to them by law and right (30—36).


-:o:-

CHAPTKR CCLVII.


i^aid THE GOD of Fire: — A dispute regarding the
boundaries of two contiguous fields, should be settled by
referring to, and according to, the decision of the foresters
the cowherds and the elders of a village, as well as the
ploughmen tilling the ground about that border land. The
boundaries should be laid down and demarcated by means of
coal, husks, trees, ant-hills, culverts, stones, mounds, conical
pillars, or by burying bones and skeletons under it. Eight
or ten old men, either living in the same or different villages,
should be elected arbitrators in a suit of boundary-dispute,
and the surveyors, clad in red clothes and wearing garlands
of red flowers, should be engaged to lay down the boundary
line according to their instructions. Officers wrongly adjudi-
cating, or. doing any wilful injustice in such a dispute, should
be severally'punished with a fine, either of the Madhyama or
the Sahasha class. The king should himself demarcate the
boundaries of fields in the absence of men, who might be
acquainted with the land marks of old. The same rule
shall hold good in the case of fruit-gardens, temples, villages
wells, reservoirs of water, garden-land dwelling-houses,
and channels of rain-water (1 — 5).

Persons outstripping the boundary or wrongfully en-
croaching bn another man’s field, or obliterating the boun-
dary marks, should be respectively liable to a fine of the
first, second, or the third class. A slight encroachment


AGN1 PURANAM.


9*7


on another man s field for the purposes of a public bridge#
or for a well yielding a copious quantity of water and
occupying a considerably smaller area, should give rise to
no cause of action. The owner of a plot of ground, should
be entitled to the use of a bridge built on his land without
his knowledge, whereas the king should be entitled to such
an user in the absence of any rightful owner thereof. The
man who fails to cultivate a plot of ground, or to cause it
to be tilled by others, should be dispossessed thereof, and
his field of virgin soil, should be handed over to another for
cultivation (6 — 9).

The owner of a she-buffalo trespassing on another
man’s field, should be fined eight Mashas, that of a cow
four Mashas, that of a she-goat two Mashas, while they
should be liable to pay double the amount in cases where
they would sit by and see the animals grazing in their
presence. The owner of an ass or a camel should be fined
the same amount as prescribed in the case of a she-buffalo#
let loose on another man’s pasture-ground. The owner of
the field should .have the right to be reimbursed of as much
grain as had been destroyed by the straying cattle, and both
the keeper and the master of the animal, should be liable to
fines laid down above (10 — 12).

But the owner of an animal trespassing or grazing on a
field lying along the roadside, or on the outskrits of a
village, should not be punished as above. A man by wilfully
and wantonly creating mischief on another man’s field, or
pasturage, should be dealt with as an ordinary thief. The
keeper of a herd, abounding in pregnant or newly delivered
cows, or in animals let loose on the occasions of religious
sacrifices, or accidentally hurt or injured, should not be liable
to punishment by letting them enter or tread on another
man’s pasturage (13—14).

At evening, a cowherd or a keeper of a flock snouid
return the animals to their respective owners, consigned to


. AGNl RMtANAM.


pa8

his care in the morning. A paid Keeper is bound to restore
to its master the pnce of an animal tost or killed in his
keeping.

A cow-herd or a keeper of a herd of cattle, should be
liable to punishment, in the event of an animal being killed
in the flock' through his negligence or want of care, tinder,
the circumstance, he should be compelled to restore a
similar animal .to the owner, and also to pay a fine df
thirteen Panas to the king. The pasturage should be'
situated at a part of a village which its residents would
consider most convenient to set apart, or a common, com-
prised within the area of a village, should be made use
of for the purpose. A Bramhana is entitled to collect gnus,
fuels, or flowers from any plot of ground and belonging to
any man whomsover, as his own birth-right. The other field
which usually appertains to a village, should be made to
include an area of. one hundred Dhanus, while those apper-
taining to a hamlet or a town, should measure two hundred,
and four hundred Dhanus respectively (15—18).

A man should recover possession of an estate or a
property belonging to him and sold by another, in the event
of any flaw being detected in the purchaser ; whereas a
purchaser buying any estate from a party incompetent to
sell the same, and for manifestly inadequate consideration,
and without any definite description of boundaries, should
be dealt with as a common thief. A man having found out
a lost and stolen article belonging to him, should cause
the stealer to be apprehended, whereas he should himself
hand over the culprit to the proper authorities in the event
of his coming across the miscreant in a distant country and
at the expiry of a considerable time after the loss. The
purchaser of a stolen article should be let off on his having
named and exhibited the person from wbero he had pur-
chased the same, and the good or the article should be in
the custody of the king tin the final hearing of the case.


ABM PVAANAM.


m


Sadi a purchaser should' be entitled to ' A refund of the
purchase money realised from the seller in the transaction.
Reasonable allowance shqilld be made for wear and tear in
the course of natural use and enjoyment of an object, and a
five-fold fine should be paid 9 tfte king in a case where the
damage would exceed tnat-innit. A man. by recovering or
taking back a lost or a stolen article from another, without
giving an intimation to that ettect to the king, should be
liable to a fine of ninty-six Panas. Any lost or stolen
article' recovered either by a focal governor (SthSna P&laka)
or a Customs Collector of the king, should be kept in the
custody of the latter fer.a.vdar, after which it should bo
made over to its rightful: owaerJ( 19 — 24).

Four Panas should he deemed as the proper price of a
mule, five as that of a slate, two As that of a buffalo, a cow or
of a camel, and a quarter thereof as that of a goat. A man is
at liberty to make a gift of all his possessions except his
sons and wife, if that does riot create any hardship on his
dependents and relations, and if not objected to by any of
them. A man without any issue is at liberty to make a gift
of his whale fortune, or whatever else he has promised to
give. The acceptance of a gift should be made public,
especially the gift of an immoveable property. A man is
morally bound to ratify his promise as regards a gift, and
sho&d not take back a thing once given away. A man,
assigning his wife to another for the purpose of begetting
a son in her,, should wait for ten', or five weeks, or for a
month, or eighteen days at the least, for her return. Alloy
in a bar of pure gold tested in fire, is allowed at the rate of
two Palas for each hundred Pala weights, while in the case
of silver, lead, copper, and iron, or of goods made of wool
or cotton the same should be allowed at the rates of two,
eight, fifteen and ten Palas for each hundred Pala weight
respectively. Increase in goods made of middling or ex-
tremely thin texture, is allowed at the rate of five Palas

*17


930


AON I PURANAM.


per hundred. In an embroidered (KSrmika) drapery or
cloth of wool, a thirtieth part of the original weight should
be allowed for wastage, whereas no such Allowance for
natural wear and tear, should be made in the case of a
garment made of silk (Kousheya) or the bark of a tree.
The experts should determine the allowance to be made
for wastage through use in each particular case, with due
regard to the season, the climate of the place, and the
strength of the texture or the composing material of the
artioie which forms the subject-matter of the dispute
(35—32).

A faithful and devoted slave, who has saved the life of
his master, should have his liberty, if forcibly carried away
by robbers and again sold to him, even after his discharge
without a formal ransom. It shall be lawful for the mem.
bers of the four social orders of Brahmana, Kshatriya,
Vaisbya, and Shudra, to enter into the service of men be-
longing to their superior castes, inversely as specified in the
above-said order of enumeration and not othewise. An arti-
san, even having finished the work for which his services had
been engaged, should remain with his master or employer for
the residue of the time originally agreed upon, and do his
N biddings in lieu of fooding supplied to him by his employer.
In his own capital, a king should give free quarters to the
Brahmanas well-versed in the Vedas, settle upon them
decent annuities, and then ask them to attend to their proper
sphere of duties. The king should even protect a Brahmana
who would prefer to enter the king's service without neg-
lecting the duties peculiar to his own social order, as well
as the one whose services the king would like to retain
( 33 — 37 )-

The man who would rob a public property, as well as
the one who would dishonour and violate the decision of
the public assembly of his country, should suffer an exile, and
att hb goods and chattels should be confiscated. All ques-


AGNI PURANAM.


93 »

‘ tions of public utility should bo submitted to the decision
of the public assembly (Samuha-Hitavldi), and their decision
shall cariy the weight of law. Any one acting in direct
contravention of such a decision shall be liable to a fine.
A man deputed on A public errand by a public assembly
and gaining anything in connection therewith, should
deposit the earner in the public purse. In the alternative he
should be liable to refund to the public exchequer eleven
times of its value, if not voluntarily depositing the same.
The Executive Committee of such an assembly should consist
of men, pure in conduct and well-versed in the Vedas, and
who would be above all greed and corruption ; and the as-
sembly should carry out their orders without the least ques-
tioning. The same rule shall hold good in the case of trade
guilds, as well as in the guilds of artisans, or in the conncils of
men professing a religion,, other than the established one of
the country. The king should maintain the separateness of
these trade guilds, anet encourage the public assembly of his
realm (38—47).

A servant refusing service after having accepted his pay,
should be liable to a fine, double the value of his stipulated
wages, whereas on the contrary he should be punished with
a fine equal in value to the pay agreed upon. It shall be
lawful for servants to retain the livery given to them during
their service. Those who derive any benefit from trade,
animal or from grain, without taking a formal license from
the king, or without informing the authorities the extent of
profit made by him therefrom, should be liable to a fine,
equal in value to the tenth part of the income derived from
them. It is at the discretion of an employer to pay
an employee, who would do otherwise than what he
would have him do, or who would work beyond the time
and go beyond idle country for which his services had been
contracted for. The master or an. employer is morally bound
to pay mote wheie more services had been taken from the


S 3 *


AGN| PURAMAM.


employee. A servant or an employee is legally entitled to
wages for the actual period of his service in the case
where both the parties would find the situation as simply
untenable, whereas the rules laid down in the scriptures on
the subject, should be strictly adhered to where the reverse
would be the case (43 — 46).

A carrier is bound to exhibit to the owner a jar or a
packet, destroyed in the course of the transit, through a dis- *
turbance of government or through any other physical
causes. A public carrier, destroying a jar or a packet in
transit, should be liable to refund to its owner double the
carrying charges in the case where gross negligence or want
of due and sufficient care would' be proved against him.
A carrier dropping down his charge at the quarter, seventh,
or half the distance from its destination, should not be en-
titled to any carrying charges at all.

In duels or in gambling, the lyng shall receive five per
cent., of the fine imposed, while the king’s due is ten per
cent., on all fines realised from cheats and swindlers. Wit-
nesses wilfully perjuring themselves in courts of justice,
or gamblers winning any stake by foul play, should be
banished from the country, branded with the insignia of
the king (47—53).


-:o:-

CH AFTER CCLVIII.


dxiD THE Goo op Fire A man by singing lampoon;
abusing invalids of men of defective seAsctrbtgans, should
be liable to a fine of thirteen Panas, evfenwhere those
strictures would bc lruc aqd based on actnal facts. Swi. 1
laily a man abusing the mother or sister another, should


AGNI PUMNAM.


93 $

be punished with a fine not exceeding twenty-five Panas.
A man defiling a woman belonging to his superior caste,
should be liable to a double fine, while a man going unto a
woman belonging to a caste inferior to that of his, should
be fined half of the amount prescribed in the case of
adultery. The fine should be doubled or tripled as mem-
bers of the Shudra, Vaishya or the Kshatriya caste, would
seduce girls belonging to social orders respectively superior
to that of theirs (i — 4).

The fine to be imposed in the case of threatening,
where the complainant would be threatened with the loss
of a leg, nose, an ear, or a hand, should be half of what
should be imposed in a similar case where the complainant
would be intimidated with the loss of an arm, neck, an eye,
or a thigh. The above rule should be followed where there
would be any chance of the fine being realised from the
defendant, otherwise he should be let off with a fine of
fifteen Panas. The party who would be in a position to pay
such a penalty should enter into a recognisance for the safety
of the complainant’s person. The man who would falsely
accuse another of the commission of a crime for which social
ostracism is the punishment, should be liable to pay a fine
of the Madhyama class, while the punishment should be a
fine of the Prathama class where the charges would be the
perpetration of crimes falling under the class of Upapatakas,
or for the offences of villifying a Brahmana or a king.
For making blasphemies, the punishment is a fine of the
Uttama (first) dfcss, whereas the punishments for abusing
one’s relations, or for speaking ill of one’s country or native
village, are fines of the Madhyama (middling) and the Pra-
thama (third) class respectively (5—8).

In a case of murder the judge should administer justice
Wkb due consideration as to the marks, left on the spot, to
toe points at egress or ingress, and fay 'means of reasoning
and argument, where no witnesses, would he forthcoming


934


Hem puRanah}.


to help him with their testimonies, so that no false marks
might be made to put the authorities on the wrong scent.
A man by touching ashes, slime or dust, should be liable to
a fine of ten Panas ; whereas the punishment for touching
the dirt rubbed out of one’s palms or unclean things in
general, is a fine of twenty Panas only. A man by defiling
the bed of a person belonging to his own caste, should be
liable to a single fine, while the penalties for seducing
a wife of one’s superior or inferior caste, are fines, double
or only a moiety in value of the latter. Such offences com*
mitted by a man under the influence of liquor, or in an insane
state, shall not constitute any crime. The organ by which
a man other than a Brahmana, would oppress or give pain to
a-Brahmana, should cause to be amputated without the least
remorse. Such a man by uplifting a Brahmana from the
ground, shall be liable to a fine of the Prathama class, while
the punishment for simply touching the holy person of a'
twice-born one, is a fine, half in value of the latter. The
punishment for pulling at one’s clothes or feet, or for plock-*
ing out the hairs of a person, is 1 ten Panas only, while a I
person by forcibly dragging, or by taming a piece of ctot!r
round tbe person of another, Aall he liable to a fine of a
hundred Panas. A man by assaulting another with a club
or with a log of wood, should be liable to a fine of thirty-
two Panas in the case where no Mood 1 Would come out,
whereas the nne should he dbubled In the instance where
the reverse would happen. The punishment for the offence
of breaking one's bauds, fee% hose, oTteetby as well as far
those of grievous hurt, or- far bruising one's- wound,' or for
cutting away the organs of Mthninlw hearing; fa a fine of
the Madhyama class. SfarihafromrrtWhirivtwrt of the offeQ*
cos of breaking one's neck, «rm, Of thigh*, or o# plucking
out rim eye* of another or of • I m pntrinf pi organs of one’s
locomotion, digestion orape^it, shoot# he punished witp a
fine of the Madbyaoacfasa (O-Hpjh*


JKCMI PURAMAM.


MS

Each of the several persons jointly assaulting a man,
should be liable to a fine double in value of what had been
laid before. Articles stolen or forcibly taken away in the
course of a quarrel or affray, should be caused to-be returned
to their rightful owners, - while such stealers or takers
should be liable to a double fine. The aggriever or the
assaulter in such a case, should bear all the costs incidental
to the recovery of the wounded or the assaulted complain*
ant in addition to the fine imposed on him in that particular
ease. A ferry man taking, or asking for a road or land-toll,
shall be liable to a fine of ten Panas. A Brahmana attend*
ing a dinner party at the house of a Brahmana neighbour
without being invited thereto, shall be punished with a fine
equal in value to what had been said in the preceding fine.
For the offences of striking, or cutting the person of a mam-
as well as for that of house breaking, the punishment is a fine
of fifteen or twenty Panas respectively, or thrice as- much. A
man, by throwing an injurious or a fatal substance into the
house of another, should be liable to a- fine of sixteen Panas
and upward, while the abettor should be punished with a fine
of the Madhyama class. A man by roughly handling --.a
lower animal, or cutting one of the small appendages of
its body, should be liable to a punishment of two Panas,
whereas a similar fine should lie imposed on the offender
convicted with the charge of drawing blood o^' tiie body
of such a creature. A Aw, by. cutting away the genitals . of.
a lower aniiqal, should be punished with a fine of. Ike
Madhyama CIm* In- tisp case sihere the animal would dfo of
suchawouad, while a double fine should be the penalty
for a similar offence (lone in connection with any of the
higher animals. A fine of forty Panas is the.pnAfchasenfc
for lopptag off -the trunk, branches or the top< of a grey-
ing tree, espedaUyif it be such as to any way coatribute to-
the maintenance of oak’s family ( ($—95).

The ama who does pay rush or violent deed,, should.. he


AGHI PURANAM.


936

punished with a doable fine, whereas the man who induces
another with money, to commit such a dreadful atrocity would
be liable to a line double in value of the latter. Similarly a
man who attacks an elder or a superior, or does any
forbidden act, or lays hand on the person of a brother
or a wife, or withholds a promise, or breaks a custom house
situated at a sea-shore, or tries to estrange the feelings
of the subject and the feudatory chiefs of his sovereign,
should be punished with a line of fifty Panas. Like-
wise the man who visits a widow of easy virtues, or 'assaults
a man who cries for quarter, or assaults without any
reason at all, as well as a Chandala touching the holy
person .of Brahmana, or a Shudra participating, in a meal
prepared on the occasion of the ancestral or the divine
Shraddha ceremony of a religious mendicant, or the man
who takes an improper oath, or who though naturally,
incompetent to do any particular act, does that inspite of
all prohibitions, or the man who deprives a tree of its fruit-
bearing capacity, or castrates any of the lower animals, or
robs any thing belonging to the public, or destroys the
foettls begot by him in the womb of a female slave, or
deserts a father, a son, a sister, a brother, a wife, a pre-
ceptor, or a disciple not any way degraded in society,
should be liable to a fine of a hundred Panas, whereas any
of the relations not enumerated above, not helping or
maintaining the others in times of difficulty, should suffer the'
same penalty (26—32).

A washerman, wearing the clothes given to him for wash-
ing, should be punished with a fine of three Panas, whereas
the penalty should be extended to ten Panas in the case
where he would solicit others to purchase or take them on
here. A man having any deatings manufacturer of
false weights or with a counterfeiter tel eotue (Nftaaka),
should be punished witb a fine efthegfasteat prescribed
value (Uttama). The asaay«aumterof tbe tester ©{king's


*37


A0NI f^UNAM.

Coins, should be liable tea’fine-of the thk^class, .by {Musing,
off a spurious coin' as a genuine one* and vice versa.
A man, by falsely giving himself out as a physician of birds
and animals, should be liable to a fine of the third class,
whereas the penalties would be fines of the intermediate
and the first class respectively in cases, where the
patients would be human beings, or the officers of the
state. The officer, who keeps in custody a man who should
not- be at all incarcerated, or lets off a man who should
be kept in custody, or the man who suffers a criminal
Who has not been formally tried, to escape, should be
punished with a fine of the greatest value. A man, by
stealing an eighth part of the real weight of an article by
means ef a false scale, or fraudulent measurement, should be
i|able- to a fine of tbirty-two Panas, no matter, whether
by such stealing, the real weight has been increased or
diminished by that much fraction. A man . by adulterating
salt, treacle, or articles of perfume,. or by mixing inferior
stuff with paddy or medicinal drugs, should be liable to a fine
of sixteen Panas (33—39).

Artisans making any strike, or seriously interfering
with the business of their employer, to have their wages
increased or the time of work shortened, should be severally
liable to a fine of thousand Panas. A trader is bound to
sell an article at the price to be fixed for it by the king from
day to day, whereas his profit should .consist m purchasing, the
same 'at a lower or wholesale price. A trader should charge
his prpfit at the rate of five per cent., oh all. goods of indi-
genous manutacture, while his dues on foreign goods should
be allowed at tne rate ot ten per. cent. A.tcader should add
to toe price of . the goods to oe vended, the cost incurred
ttnder all other heads in connection, therewith, and then
settle its price with the purchaser or ithe seUer,. and ask him
the profit he. would aUowou su^.h ip^>sx v dwtIay. A tvader
by not delivering goods, t» A p— ciyeset height by him tor
lit .


938 AGHI PURANAftl.

value, should be liable with his progeny, to refund the same
even with the profits allowed on foreign goods, if made in
that particular case. A purchaser buying any goods and not
faking delivery of the same, shall be liable to make good to
the trader, the difference of price, if any, brought through
his being obliged to sell it for a second time, and at an under
rate. Goods destroyed or any way damaged through a
disturbance of government, or through any physical pheno-
mena, as well as a loss sustained through not delivering
the goods when asked for, should be laid against the account
df the seller or the consignee. A trader shall be made
to refund to the purchaser, the double of the price, charged
for damaged or apparently damaged articles sold by bis
'agent or employee.

A trader having purchased his stock without a knowledge
of its actual increase or decrease, should not be entitled to
reopen the negotiation, as otherwise he should be liable to
U fine equal in value of a sixth part of the whole stock in
trade purchased or indented for. A company or a corporate
body of traders, carrying on business in co-partnership,
should be entitled to profits or bear the loss, rateabty to their
respective shares ' in the capital, or as would be agreed upon
at the time of starting the concern. A partner or an agent
should make good the loss sustained through his folly, over-
sight, negligence, or through extending the authority vested
in him, or through his acting contrarily to directions received,
whereas a man (co-partner) should be entitled to. a tenth
part of the value of the goods saved by him from loss or .
destruction (40 — 50).

The king shall be entitled to *a twentieth part of the
value of abandoned goods as his due, whereas goods sold
and lying unclaimed should be escheated to" the rdyai
treasury. Similarly a thing fit for royal 'ase should 1 'go
to the king by bis right of sover eignty. A fraudulentsate-
mm or a dishonest purchaser, trjjng to iw|d tbe'klbj^b


*GN|. PVBANAM.


939


dues by giving out Use measures either at the toll office or
at the customs house, should be liable to a fine equal in value
to an eighth part of the entire price.

The Vandhus or the co-heirs of a person should inherit
the.properties on his death, or on his permanently settling in
a foreign country, whereas such properties or goods should
go to the king io the absence of any legal heir ( 51 — 53 ).

A priest should deny his duties to a wicked or an unpaying
Yajamana, or appoint others to work in his place, while a
ploughman should abandon a barren and unyielding soil, or
otherwise engage labourers to till the ground for him in the
event of his physical incapacity. Officers appointed foe
detection of crimes, and' constables (Gr&hakas) should ap*
prebend a thief by his booty, foot-prints, his past misconduct
and dirty clothes. Persons going by fictitious names or con*
cealing the true names of their parents and the families'
(Gotras) they belong to, as well as persons addicted to
gambling, wenching, or drinking without any ostensible
means, should be suspected and dogged in an enquiry in
connection with a theft. Persons turning pale or speaking
in * dry low voice on such an occasion, should likewise
be suspected (54— 5 6 )-

Persons dealing tin lost articles, or roaming about in
di«g"f«e, or eagerly enquiring about the progress of a police*
investigation, as well as those who are in the habit of
spending , largely without any ostensible means of income,
should be also .suspected And watched. A man failing to
satisfactorily- expiate himself of such a suspicion or access*,
turn, shell bp bound to restore the stolen articles, and shall
be dealt with as * common thief. Articles stolen should be
recovered from a person dnlv convicted, as a thief and he
thsU be put to depth. , in * way laid down 'by a tribunal of
competent authority. A Brahmens ccMWcted with the seam
ofieucc, should be branded with tfearofal aims end banished
from tee country (57—391-


$4®


AGNI PUR A NAM-


The owner or the headman of a village should be held
responsible for acts of rapine and murder committed within
its precints, especially where the perpetrator of the crime
would remain within his own jurisdiction, whereas the village
or the place where he would go to, should be brought
to account in the case where he would make good his
escape. Similarly five or ten successive villages lying
within a radius of two miles of the place of occurrence,
should be held responsible in the theft of a horse nr an
elephant (60 — 61).

Miscreants charged with murder or such like deeds of
atrocity, should be left to expire on the pointed end of a
Shula, while the hands of an uplifter of a human body or of
3 breaker of joints, should be wrenched out with a pair of
tongs. Or in the latter offence a hand and a leg of the cul-
prit should be cut off.

A man by knowingly putting a thief to death by means
of fire, water or incantations, should be liable to a fine of the
Uttama class. A man by bringing about the miscarriage
of a« feet us by means of a weapon, should be liable to a fine
of the' Uttama class, whereas a man by accidently killing
a woman, should be liable to a fine of the Uttama or the
Mandhyama class according to the superiority of her caste.
A woman accused of administering poison in the cup of a
man and bringing about his end thereby or otherwise, should
be fastly tied to a block of stone and cast into the water.

• The hands, ears, - nose and the lips of a woman administer-
ing poison to her preceptors or offsprings, or attempting
to put them to death by fire, should be cut off. Such
a woman should suffer disfigurement of her person, and
should be banished from the country with a herd of
cows. Persons charged with the offences of. burning fields
mansions, forests, villages or orchards, as tel# is those who
wou l d go unto a king's wife, should be burnt' in* pin of
boiKagoU (fio-fiy).


ACM PURANAM.


9 **


In a case of adultery, the mate accused, should be {Proved
to have lain side by side with the woman. Such an offender
should be punished with a fine of the Uttama class ii| the
event of the woman being of the same caste as his, whereas
the penalty would be a fine of the Madhyama class in the
case, where the woman would belong to a caste inferior to
that of his, while a person found guilty of defiling a woman
of his superior caste, should expiate his guilt by life. The
woman should be deemed as an abettor in the case, and
should suffer disfigurement of her person (cutting off of
her nose, lips, etc.). A man by forcibly taking away the
cover of the waist, breast, umbilicus, or of the braided hair
of a woman, or by forcibly exposing them to public view,
or by indecently twisting or pressing them, should be liable
to a fine of a hundred Panas. A woman conversing with a
person at a forbidden place, and on a forbidden topic, Should
be liable to a fine of a hundred Panas, while a man found
guilty of such an offence, should be punished with a fine
double in value of the latter. A man and a woman visiting
each other even after having been warned not to do so,
should be punished as laid down in the case of actual
adultery (68 — 71).

A man guilty of committing unnatural offence with a beast,
or with a cow, or of going unto a woman of any of the low
castes, should be punished with a fine of the Madhyama class.
Similarly by going unto a slave girl, or unto a maidservant
imprisoned for. that end, though not otherwise standing in
a forbidden degree of relationship, 'should be punished with
a fine of fifty Panas. A man by forcibly visiting a female
slave, should be liable to a fine of ten Panas. The same
punishment should be inflicted on a man, forcibly going
unto a. woman who has adopted the life of a religious men-
dicant 473—73).

A copyist oy adding to or omitting a line from a royal
edict, as well as a seducer of other men’s.wivcs should he


94* MMI r^pANAM. »

punished with a fine of the Uttaoja class. A man by mix-
ing forotdden articles of diet in the food prepared ior a
Brahmana, should be liable to .a fine of the Uttama class,
like the seller of artificial gold or a person vending meat
of unclean animals. The owners of horned-cattle or fanged
animals, should suffer disfigurement of persons, and should b 4
also liable to pay a fine of the Uttama class, in the event of
their letting loose such animals or cattle, though possessed
of the wherewithal to keep them penned or kennelled. A
man by quarreling on a public road, should be liable to a
fine Of the third class, whereas the fine should be doubled
in the case where he would create any nuisance, or make any
noise thereat. A man by calling an innocent person a thief,
should be liable to a fine of fifty Panas. The tongueof • a
man speaking ill of his sovereign, or preaching edition in
his kingdom, or laying rough hands on the person of his
preceptors, or dishonouring or mutilating a dead body, or
divulging the Mantra given to him by his spiritual guide,
should be cut away, and he should be banished from the
country as well (74 — 79).

A man having riden, or seated on a carriage or cushion
devoted to the use of a king, should be liable to pay a fine
of the Madhyama class. A man acting hostility to the
interests of a king, or carrying out his wishes in a hostile
way, should have his two eyes plucked out. A Shudra living
like a Bramhana and performing religious rites exclusively
belonging to the creed of the latter, should be liable to pay
a fine of eighteen hundred Panas. The man who having
been fairly defeated in a contest, would give himself out as
unbeaten^ should be defeated a second time, and Jet off
with a double fine. A king having unknowingly punished
an innocent person with a fine, should refund thirty times
of its value to the Brahmanas after having first dedicated
it to the god Varuna. The seven virtues of a king abiding
ty law and administering even-handed justice, are piety.


AGNI PURANAM.


943


wealth, bme, maintenance of social orders,' protection, the
loving regard of his people and a perpetual residence in
heaven (80 — 83}.


«:o>


CHAPTBR CCLIX.


Oaio the God op Fire I shall now deal with the
rites and ceremonies respectively described in the Rig,
Saman, Yajush, and the Atharvan, Vedas, as! narrated by
Pushkara to Rama. These Mantras made use of in a Homa
ceremony or in a rite of Japa, grant enjoyment in this world
and salvation in the next (i).

Pushkara said: — I shall now describe the religious
rites as described in each of the four Vedas. First hear me
discourse on the rites laid down in the Rig Veda, a due
performance whereof grants enjoyment of comforts in this
world and salvation in the next. The Giyatri Mantra
repeated by a man under waters, accompanied by a practice
of PrldSySma, as well as a Homa ceremony performed with
a repetition of the abovesaid Mantra, brings about a fulfil*
meat of all the heartfelt desires of the repeater or the per-
former. Oh thou twice-born one, the Giyatri Mantra re-
peated ten thousand times by a man who breaks his fast
in :; the night, or bathes many times in the day, is said to
destroy all his sins and impieties.

: The Pranava Mantra is held identical with tne supreme
Bramha, and a repetition of such a Mantra is sure to ex-
piate « map of ail sins. A man living on a Havisbya diet
each dajr, and repeating the Mantra a hundred thousand
times, ' is ' sure to attain salvation. A man standing in waist
deep water and repeating the Pranava Mantra a hundred


944


times, should drink draughts of the consecrated water*
whereby he would be purged off of all 'impieties. A Homa
ceremony performed by repeating the Maha Vyahriti Mantras
and by offering three libations of clarified butter to the three
Vedas, and. three such libations to the gods constituting
the Indian Trinity, and three such to the Fire-god, is sure
to destroy all sins committed by a man in Iris successive
incarnations in the seven regions (Saptaloka).

A man should mentally recite other the Praoava or the
great Vyahriti Mantras. Oh Rama, rhe Mantra known as the
Aghaauushana (Expiator of sins) should be repeated by
a man under waters ( 2 — 8>.

The Sukta (verse) running as Agnimidhe Purahitam (t
worship the Fire-god manifest in the shape of the priest)
is sacred to the presiding deity of that element, and a man by
reciting, all the year round, the abovesaid verse, while hold-
ing a pbt of living fire on his head, and by performing the
Homa ceremony by repeating the same Mantra, and by living
on alms, is sure to .blaze a light without fire. The seven
Riks, known as the Great Rik Mantras are sacred to die god
of Wind, and a man by reciting them mentally, becomes able
to witness the realisation of all his heart-felt wishes. A man
wishing to improve bis memory, should repeat the three
Rik Mantras running as Sadasanyam. The nine Riks begin-
ning as Anvyas Yanaibha, etc., are possessed of the virtue
of arresting death.

A man by reciting in solitude the Rik Mantra running
as Shuna Shepham etc., is sure to enjoy the pleasures of
unbrooken health, whereas a sick man is sure to get rid of
his ailment by repeating tbe same. A' man bent on wit-
nessing the realisation of all his wished ' for objects, should
recite the sixteen Rik Mantras running as . Mitram Rajnam
Purandaram etc. A man by mentally redting tbe Mantra
running as Hiranya StujNua, etc., is said to acquire an
ascendency over his enemies. A man proce edin g on n


AON! PUKANAM. 945

joerney, w sore lb safely reach the place of his destination,
by mentally reciting, on the road, the Mantra running as
«*Ya te Fantha, etc.” A similar result is obtained by worship*
ping every day, the god Ishana with the sixteen Roudri (Rik
Versts), A man by preparing sacrificial porridge every day in
honour of the god Rudra, is sure to enjoy unbroken peace
for all the days of his life (8-^l6).

By offering libations of water every day, with the verse
tunning' as " Udityudantam, etc.,” to the Sun-god, a man is
sure * to conquer all grief. Similarly by repeating, for seven
consecutive nights, the half Rik running as “ Dishantani
etc.,” a man is sure to create animosities between a pair of
fondly attached friends. An invalid wishing to get rid of
his ailment, should mentally recite the Mantra running as
“ Pmsannyosyottamam, etc.” The other half of the Rik may
be repeated by sitting in any posture (Assn am) whatsoever.
The Rik running as “Udayatayu, etc ,” should be repeated at
noon, whereas the Mantra running as " Dishantam, etc.,”
should not be repeated in the evening (17 — 20)

A man by mentally reciting the Sukta running as “ Na
Vayas, etc.,” is sure to acquire a supremacy over his enemies,
while a repetition of the “ Ekadasba Suparna,” crowns all
the efforts of its repeater with success. A man by mentally
reciting the Rik running as “Adhyatraika, etc.,” is sure to
attain salvation. Similarly by repeating the Rik running
as '’A No Bhadrfi, etc.,” a man is sure to enjoy a long life.
A man should hold the stems Of sacrificial trees and look at
the rising moon for nine consecutive nights by repeating the
Sukta running as “ Tvam Soma, etc.,” whereby he would be
the possessor of many a costly garment. A man seeking a
long fife, should constantly recite the Koutsa Sukta running
as " Imam, etc.” Similarly by worshipping the Sun-god at
noon with the Mantra running as “Apo Nah Shushucha” (the
water baa purified us) etc., a aaaa is sure to attain purifica-
tion, the very m o ment he entfa daifo the handful of
***


AGNI PUKANaM.


946

water used in rinsing his nostrils. A man, by reciting the
Rik running as *' Jatavedasa, etc.," is sure to have a safe
journey on the road, as well as a peaceful and undisturbed
hearth on his return. A repetition of the same Rik guards
against the advent of ail evils and dangers. The same
Mantra, repeated on the break of dawn, neutralises the
effects of all bad dreams dreamt in the- previous night
(31—26).

A repetition of the Rikrunning as “Pramandina, etc.,"
ensures the safe delivery of a woman undergoing the travails
of child-birth. A man by performing the rite of ceremonial
bath with the Mantra running as “Upannidram^ etc.,” and by
casting libations of clarified butter into the consecrated fire
with the seven Vaishvadeva Mantras, becomes absolved of
all sins and impieties. A man, by reciting the, Rik run-
ning as “ Imam, etc.,” is enabled to witness the realisation of
all his wished for objects and for eternal time, whereas the
man who fasts for two nights, and recites the Rik running
as V Ma Nostaka. etc.,” attains the purification of his spirit.
The man who performs a Homa ceremony, by cast ing. the
stems of an Oudumvara tree dipped in clarified putter, into
the sacrificial fire, is sure to break the trammels of death, and
to live up to a good old age, free from grief and disease. A
man having tied up the tuft of hair on his crown by repeating
die Rik, “ Nostoka, etc.,” should worship the god Sbambbu,
with uplifted arms, whereby he would be invincible to attacks
from all creatures. He should also worship the Sun-god at
moriiing, noon, arid evening, each day, in such a connection,
by repeating the.Rik runninga* “Chitram, etc.” Similarly
by repeating morn and noon eachday, the Rik fanning
as ‘iAtha Svapna, etc.” with the »t#ri»# of sacrificial trees in
his palms; ^ a mait is sure to become the magfe* of us wished
for wealto fSy— 33).

.. A repeater pf the Rfareeategat ” l Pauses, etc.,”
or Rathaghna, ete.,” ia snifttoset at oaugfat dp effects. .


AGNI PURANAM;


94 r


of bad dreams, and to get sumptuous repasts every day. A
man, by reciting the Rile running as "Ubha Vasa, gets” every
thing he sets his mind upon, whereas a repetition of the Rik
running as "Ma Syagan, etc.,” grants an immunity from (the
attackss of) one’s deadly enemies (Atatyain). By repeating
the Mantra running as “KathS Shubha, etc..” a man is sure
to be supreme over his own kinsfolks, whereas a repetition
of the “ Imam Nrisoma, etc.,” Mantra is sure to lead hint to
success and prosperity. A man by daily worshipping his
departed manes by repeating the Rik "Pitari, etc.,” is sure
to acquire wealth every day. A man about to proceed on a
journey, should perform a Homa ceremony by casting libations
of clarified butter with the Sukta running as “Agne Naya,
etc.” A man, by constantly repeating the “Sushloka” is sure
to be blest with a progeny of heroes. A man by reciting the
Sukta running as "Kankhato- Na, etc.,” enjoins an immunity
from the effects of poison. A man by repeating the Sukta of
!, Jata, etc.,” attains all his wished for objects. A repetition of
the Sukta, running as “'43an$n&m, etc..” procures a lot of
friends for a mahf The Rik running as ”Yo Me Rijannit,”
sets at naught the ill effects of a bad dream. A man, coming
across an enemy on the road, Should recite the Mantra run-
ning as “Kuvidanga Imam^^tse.” A man by repeating twenty-
two times the “Adhy5tmika : ;Si|kta” on the occasions of Parva
ceremonies (rites' performed'' on the occasion of a full or a
new moon), becepes the h^ppy possessor of all wished for
objects ( 33 — * 4 t). •• ' • .V ' /> v.;’’..

A man, havtiig practised «<dfi|tontrol, should cast liba-
tions of clarified butter into t&S/ sacrificial fires and repeat
the Sukta running as "Ktf auvshii, ate.,” whereby *he would
be able to Ids adversartoa^ren if they were demons
and monsteoa- A man, byrecitihjj eviry day the Rik Maatra
running as "Upatitthea Stf&iiufr- Vaabi Paiita" (toe fire
rose up fromfil aiideub eAc^ fi m^eto pass under tbu direct
protection of toe e^tversajl fire to^atitowugb tbe universe.


ACM FVMNW.


94*

A . man about to cultivate a field, should look In a pure spirit
at the sun by repeating the Mantra running as "Hansa
Shuchi Sat, etc.,” and offer five oblations of pot-boiled por-
ridge (SthSlipaka) with tbe Mantra of M Khani Svaha.” A
farmer before cultivating his field, should offer oblations to
the gods of the element, as ‘I offer oblation 'to Indra” (the
god of thunder), “ I offer oblation to Marut” (the god of
wind), “ I offer oblation to Parjanya” (the go£ of rain) and

offer oblation to Bhaga,” the sun-god (41—45).

The ploughman should then drive his plough made alter
the sanctioned pattern, and worship the abovesaid gods for
a good harvest of paddy, with garlands of white flowers
and perfumes and other articles of offering, after which the
god Sun&sbira (Indra) should be invoked and worshipped.
The above ceremonies should be conducted on the occasions
of transplanting or mowing down the rows of paddy plants,
or on the occasion of unfastening the plough-share or re-
moving the threshing plank, whereby a good harvest would
be gleaned and gathered home, and agriculture would
thrive (46—47).

A jnan by reciting the Sukta running as “Sumdrad, etc.,”
is sure to obtain many a blessing from the fire-god, whereas
by propitiating him with the two Riks running as “ Vishva-
nara, etc.,” a than is sure to get rid of all sorts of danger,
and to acquire unbounded wealth, fame and eternal victory.
Similarly by worshipping the fire-god with the “Agoi-Stvam,
etc.. Mantra,” a man b atfre to become tbe possessor of a
wished for fortune, whereas a man wishing to beget children
should every day recite the three Varunas (48 — 50).

Each morning, a man should teehe three “Sveeti
Mantras,” whereby dll his household would have the bless-
logs ef the gods. A man by reciting tbe ttentra running ae
“Svami Ptatfaa,” is sore to have a safe aod-pleasant journey.
A mau beot cw conquermg his enetisieK should recite the
Sukta funding as Wtatspati, etc., 1 ' whereby hie enemies


JtGNI PURANAM.


would be laid up with, ailments, whereas the same Mantra
used on the occasion of confinement of a woman quick with
child, would ensure a safe ushering in of the child into the
world. A man wishing to bring down a good shower of rain,
should recite the Sukta, running as "Acchavad, etc.” A man,
observing a fast and reciting the abovesaid Sukta in dry
clothes, is sure to be answered with a shower- of rain in no
time. A man, wishing an increase of his domestic animals,
should recite the Rik, running as “ManasA, Kama etc.,”
whereas, a man praying to be blest with the birth of a child,
should bathe with clay consecrated with the Sukta running
as " Kardamena, etc ,” a clean spirit in a clean body being
the essential condition of such a prayer. A man aspiring
to emoluments of sovereignty, should bathe by repeating the
Sukta running as “Ashvapurva, etc.” A Brahmana, on such
an occasion, should bathe by standing on a piece of deer-skin,
while a king, or a person belonging to the Vaishya caste,
should respectively use a tiger or a goat-skin on the occasion.
Ten thousand libations of clarified butter should be cast
into the sacrificial fire to complete the ceremony in ques-
tion (51—56).

A man, wishing to keep his herds of cattle perpetually
full, should worship and follow his herd of cows, — the wet*
nurse of the world,— in, and to, the pasturage, by repeating
the Sukta running as “AgAra, etc.” A king, by consecrating
the royal trumpet with the three Suktas, running as “ Upeti,
etc.,” would acquire strength, prowess and an ascendency
over his enemies. A mart having fallen amongst a gang of
robbers, should mentally recite the Sukta running as “ Rath-
oghnam, etc.,” with blades of grass in his palm. A man, by
repeating the Rik Mantra running as “ Ye Ke Cha Ushroan
etc.,” is sure to obtain a long life. A king should enchant
the persons of his soldiers in the field by reciting the Jimuta
Sukta, whereby he would gain an easy victory over bis
adversary (57- — 60).


AGNI PURANAM.


Is®

A man by repeating the three Suktas, successively run-
ning as “Agneya, etc.,” is sure to master an imperishable for-
tune. A man should enthrall the goblins and evil spirits by
reciting, in the night, the Sukta running as “Ami Vaha, etc.”
In peril, in difficulty, in (confinement), in liberation, at inac-
cessible heights or at uncanny places in general, a man should
mentally recite the preceding Sukta, whereby he would be
safe and {liberated. A man should observe a fast for three
successive days; prepare sweetened sacrificial porridge and
amt oblations composed thereof into the sacrificial fire in
honour of the god Mahadeva, by repeating the “ Tryamvaka
Rik,” whereby he would live up to his hundredth year, full of
joy. plenty, and prosperity. A man should bathe by repeat-
ing the Rik, running as “ Tachchakshu, etc.,” and worship
the Sun-god with the Rik, running as " Udyantam Madhya-
gam, etc.,” whereby he would be able to live up to a good old
age. A repetition of the Sukta running as Indra “Soma, etc.,”
tends to destroy all the enemies of the repeater (61 — 65),

A man who has inadvertently broken a vow, or who has
done so by keeping company with a class of men who have
lost their caste through the. non-performauce of a certain set
of ourifying rites (Samskaras) and are known as the Vratyas,
should observe a fast and cast libations of clarified butter
into the sacrificial fire, by repeating the Riks, running as
“ Tvam Agni Vratapa etc.,” (O thou fire, thou art the pro-
tector of the Vratas). A man by reciting the Rik, running
as “Aditya, etc.,” as well as that of “SapirAjam, etc.,” is sure
to return victorious from a contest, whereas a repetition of
the four Riks, commencing with “Mahi, etc.,” delivers the
repeater irom an imminent peril Similarly a man, by'
repeating, the same Rik. may become the possessor of all
desirable objects.

A man, by repeating forty-two times the “Aindra Rik,” ,
becomes able to destroy all Jhis - enemies. The repeater of
the Rik, running as “Vacham Mahi, etc.,” is enabled to enjoy


AGNI PURANAM.


951


the pleasures of sound and unbroken health f whereas a
man going on a journey after having taken his meal, would
be pure by reciting the Rik, running as “Shan no Bhava, etc.”
A man who touches the region of his heart with his hand,
enjoys an immunity from all diseases, while a man wishing
to teach a lesson to his enemies, should bathe by reciting
the Rik, running as “Uttamedam, etc.,” and by casting liba-
tions of clarified butter into the fire with the same Mantra
(66—70).

A man by casting libations into the fire by reciting the
Sukta, running as “Shanno Agna, etc.,” gets plenty of boiled
rice to eat every day, while by a Homa ceremony performed
with the Sukta of "Kannya Vararshi, etc.,” a man becomes
free of the evil influence of the quarter of his journey on
a particular day. A man, by mentally repecting the Rik,
running as “Yadatya Kavya, etc.,” is sure to charm the whole
universe, while, by reciting the Sukta. running as “Vacha
Vidam, etc.,” a man becomes favoured with correct pronun-
ciation. A man by constantly repeating the Sukta, running
as ‘‘Vach Vidam, etc.,” sure to have his words fulfilled. The
holiest of holies is the Rik, running as “ Pavamana, etc.”
The thirty Riks, known as the “ Vaikhinasas,” are the most
purifying ones. SO thou foremost of the holy sages, the sixty-
two Rik*, commencing with that of “ Parasva, etc.,” are
possessed of the same virtue. The Suktas, running as “Sv«t-
dista, etc.,” seventy-seven times repeated, tend to destroy
all sins of the repeater and to purify his innerself and fill
him with bliss (71- — 75*.

A repetition of the ten successive Riks as well as the
hundred and six Pavamanis should be deemed as possessed
of the virtue of warding off deaths A man standing in
water and reciting the Rik, running as “Apo Hista, etc.,”
becomes absolved of all impieties. A man, crossing a desert
or passing through a wilderness, should constantly recite
the Rik, running as “Pratidevam, etc." Similarly in the last


952


AGNI PURANAM.


moments of life, in sight of death and in the danger of
physical extinction, a man should mentally recite the Rik,
running as “Prabeyam, etc.” By reciting the Rile, running
as Ma “Pragama, etc.,” in the morning and with the rise
of the god of day, a man is sure to win in gambling, or to
find out a path, if he had lost his way on the road. A man
touched in the head by a friend, who had bathed by repeating
the Rile, running as "Yatteyam, etc.,” should be deemed as
having run out the tenure of his life (76—80).

A man, having recited the Rile, beginning as “Sahasra-
krit,” for five consecutive days, should attain a long life,
whereas the same result would be obtained by casting a
thousand libations of clarified butter in the sacrificial fire with
the Rik, running as “Idam Midhya, etc.” A man wishing an
increase of his wealth, or of domestic animals, should recite
the Rik, beginning as “Vayas Suparna, etc.,” either at the
crossing of four roads or at a pasturage, while by repeat*
ing the same Mantra, a man is sure to have a better turn
in his fortune. A man, by living on a Havishva diet and
reciting the same Mantra, is sure to get rid of an incurable
disease and gets flesh and rotundity of features. A repeti*
tion of the Rik, running as “Ya Oushadhya, etc.,” is the best
bliss-giving rite known, while a man wanting a good shower
of rain, should recite the Rik, beginning as “Vrihaspati, etc.,”
On all occasions a recitation of the Rik, commencing as
“Pratiratha, etc.,” should be deemed as the best way of
bringing god’s peace on an individual, while a man seeking
an increase of progeny should recite the Rik, known as the
“Sankashyapam” (81 — 85).

A man, by constantly repeating the Rik, running as “Aham
Rudra, etc.,” (I am Rudra) is sure to acquire an eloquence of
speech. A man by reciting the Rik, running as “Ratri, etc.”
in the night, becomes exempted from entering the mother’s
womb any more. A man, by reciting the "Ratri Sukta," (the
Rik verse sacred to the goddess of night) in the night, is


ACINI PURANAM.


953


tfnaoled to pass the night free from all harm, while by reciting,
every day, the Mantra running as Kalpayanti, etc., a man
is sure to destroy his enemies. The Sukta composed by
the great Daksha and known as the great DAkshayana,
increases one’s duration of life, as well as gives a healthful,
glow to his complexion ; whereas a repetition of the verses
tunning as Uta Deva etc., makes a man (observing a vow) free
from all diseases. In a fear of general conflagration by fire, a
taian should mentally repeat the Mantra, running as Ayam
Agni, etc., while in the darkness of a forest or in sylvan
gloom haunted by weird and fitful shadows, a man should
tecite the Mantra, running as AranySni, etc. (&6 — 89).

On the occasion of a Brahmi, a man should repeat the
two Suktas running Brahmi and Shatavari and cast
Separate libations of clarified butter with those two verses,
whereby his wealth and memory would be increased. A
Repetition of the Rik verses, running as Masam, etc., tends
to destroy one’s opponents and enemies in battle, while a
Bramhana repeating the Rik verses, beginning as Bramhano
Agni, etc;, never mourns any premature death or the death
of a child in the womb in his family. A man should mentally
tecite the Sukta, running as Apaihi, etc., in a pure spirit and
pure body, so as to counteract the evil effects of inominous
dreams dreamt by him in the night, whereas a man by men-
tally reciting the verse, beginning as Yenedam, etc., at all
times, is sure to attain salvation (90—92).

A repetition bf the terse, running as MSyorbhtiyat is the
i>est bliss-giving rite that tan be undertaken for the benefit
of one s flocks and herds, and is a potent safeguard against
All sorts of spells, charms, incantations and Sorcery (Shfltn-
vari). A man proceeding on a journey, should mentally
: pcite the terse* running as MahiUftnam* etc., for a safe and
ifftetentful journey, while he should repeat ttje one, running
is Agnaeya Vidvisham, in order^ to have histnemies totally


120


954


AGNI PURANAM.


The god of hearth (Vastu Devata) should be worshipped
with the Mantra, running as Vlstosyata, etc., and a Homa
ceremony should be duly performed by offering libations of
clarified butter on the fire with the same Mantra. After
that, remunerations should be given to the Bramhanas, and
another Homa should be performed for the expiation of sin.
The sacrificial fire should be bid adieu by casting in it bits of
gold and oblations, of boiled rice (93 — 96).

Blessings given by a Brahmana can never be barren,
while a Homa ceremony performed with oblations of paddy,
barley, white mustard, milk, curd, clarified butter, and the
stems of a Kshira tree, is supposed to grant all sorts of
boon. The Samidhas usually used in connection with a
Homa ceremony, are Kantakini, Rajika, blood and poison.
In an act of incantation performed according to the rules
of Rig Voda, the oblations or libations to be cast into the
sacrificial fire, should be composed of curd, Bhaiksha, fruits,
edible roots, powdered barley and poison found in hilla
( 91 — 99 )-


-:o>


CHAPTER CCLX.


f ushkara said : — 0 Rama, now I shall deal with t
verses of the Yajur-Veda and the rites in which they are
be respectively used, a knowledge whereof grants enjoy*
ment of good cheers in this world and salvation in the next.
The Mantras known as the great Vyahritts should be used,
preceded by a Pranava Mantra. The wise should worship
the gods by reciting the great Vyahritis, and cast a thousand
libations of clarified butter into the fire in connection with
the same, whereby all their sins would be expiated and


AGNI PUR ANA M.


955


all their objects fulfilled. 0 Rama, the verse running
as Manas! Kankhitam (what the mind craves for) etc.,
brings about the realisation of one’s heart’s desires, when
made use of in a Homa ceremony. Such a Homa under-
taken with a view to confer blessings on a particular indivi-
dual, as well as the one performed for the expiation of one’s
sins, should respectively consist of oblations composed of
barley and sesamum (i — 3 ).

Oblations composed of paddy or white mustard-seeds,
should be cast into the sacrificial fire, with the abovesaid
Mantras, whereby the performer of the Homa would attain
all his objects. Such a Homa performed with a view to
increase the number of one’s cattle or domestic animals,
should consist of oblations of the twigs of an Oudumvara, cast
into the fire with the same Mantra. A person, wishing to
have an uninterrupted supply of boiled rice, should perform
such a Homa with libations of curd, while a solicitor of
earthly peace, should do the same with libations of milk.
A man eager to have gold in abundance, should perform a
Homa with oblations composed of the twigs of an Ap9m!rga
plant. A man seeking a wife, should perform the Homa
with oblations of J&ti flowers, threaded together in pairs,
while a man praying for the proprietory right in a village,
should do the same with oblations composed of grains of
sesamum. O Bhargava, in an act of necromancy, the obla-
tions should consist of the twigs of a Shakhodha, a Vata or an
Apamarga plant, while in fatal incantations or charms, p'rac-
tised to bring disease on an individual, the libations should
consist of blood and poison mixed together. A man, enraged
and bent on bringing about the death of his adversary, should
duly perform the abovesaid ceremony, while a man try ing
fo subjugate the mind of his sovereign, should mak*
an effigy of the latter of the seeds of Vrihi grass,
and perform the abovesaid Homa with the preceding
Mantra, ty casting a thousand libations into the sacrificial


AGNI PUKANAltf.


95 e

fire. A man, praying for a full and varied wardrobe>,
should perform the Homa with flowers, while such a Homa
done with oblations of green grass, should be deemed as.
a panacea in its healing effect. In a Brahma-Varcha-Homa,
undertaken for the fulfilment', of a definite object (Sak&ma
Bramha-Varcha\ the libations should be scented with strong
odours, while in the Pratyangiras, the oblations should be
composed of husks, thorns or ashes. In an incantation
practised with a view to create animosities between a
deeply attached couple, the oblations should consist of
the wings of crows and owls stitched together and dipped in
clarified butter made out of the milk of a Kapila cow. Such*
a Homa should be performed under the auspicies of a lunar
eclipse and with the same Mantras as the above (4—1 1).

0 thou twice-born one, a man wishing to have his.
memory sharpened, should take every day a bit of Vacha
kept covered over with the powder of the same drug, and!
consecrated thousand times with the abovesaid Mantra. A
person wishing to distract the mind of his enemy, should bury
underneath the floor of his house, (a spike) either made of
iron or Catechu wood measuring eleven fingers in length, and
charmed with the Mantra running as Dvishato- Badhosi, etc.,,
(thou art death to my enemy). Oh thou twice-born one,,
the means disclosed to you above, is the most potent means,
of driving one's enemies mad or distracted (12 — 14).

A blind man would have his eyesight restored by con*,
stantly reciting the Mantra, running as Chakshushya, etc.
A repetition. of the Anuvak commencing as Upayunjata,.
etc., provides the repeateF with a copious supply of boiled
rice each day. A man by casting oblations of green
grass into the sacrificial fire* and by repeating on the
occasion the verse, panning as Tanup&gne Sat,, etc., is
sure to get rid of any physical derangement. A Homa
ceremony performed with libations of curd and clarified
butter and by repeating the Mantra running 9 # fihesajaoM


AGNt PUKANAM.


957


(thou art the medicine), tends to alleviate the physical
sufferings of one’s domestic animals, while a Homa per-
formed by repeating the verse, running as Tryamvakam
YajSmahe (we worship the three-eyed Shiva), is sure ta
give a better turn to one’s fortune. A man by mentally
reciting the Mantra, running as KanyH Nama, is sure to be
blest with a good wife, whereas by constantly repeating
the Mantra of Bhayesmin (in this danger) etc., a man is sure
come out unscathed of all difficulties. By performing a
Homa with oblations of Dushtura flowers, dipped in clari-
fied butter, a man is sure to attain all his wished-for objects,
while, O Rama, a Homa performed with oblations of scented
gum resin (Guggulu\ ensures an interview of the god
Shankara in one’s dream. A man hy repeating the Anuvak,
running as Yunjate Manas, is sure to live up to a good old
age, while a repetition of the one, running as Vishnoravitam,
is sure to remove all obstacles in one’s way.

A repetition of the verses, respectively known as the
Rathaghnam or the Jashasyam, grants victory, while the
verse Ayam No Agni (this our fire), etc., 'duly repeated,
brings victory to one’s standard in battle. A man repeating
the verses, lyam Apas Pravahat (this stream of flowing
water), etc., at the time of his bath, stands absolved of all
sins and impieties (18 — 21).

A man wishing a bride for himself, should bury under
the threshold of. her room, an iron spike of ten fingers
length and charmed with the Mantras Vishvakarmannan
Havishl, etc., so that she might not be wedded to any body
else. A Homa ceremony duly perfomed by repeating the
Mantra, running as Deva Savitas (Oh thou Sun-god), is sure
to bring boiled rice in abundance to the performer. O thou
foremost of the twice-born ones, a man wishing to have
offsprings of his loins, should perform a Homa ceremony by
casting oblations of rice, barley, sesamum and twigs of
Apaflilrga plant, and by repeating the Mantra Agnaye Svaba


95^


AGNI PURANAM.


(obeisance to the Fire-god). O thou foremost of the wise,
O thou twice born one, a man wishing to secure the good
will of others, should put on his nose a Tilak-mark made of
yellow pigment (Gorochana), consecrated a thousand times
with the proper Mantra. A repetition of the Rudra Mantras,
is sure to remove all sorts of misery, whether mental, physi-
cal or otherwise, whereas a Homa performed with the same
Mantra, is sure to bring about the realisation of all
desires, and is potent enough to work out peace under all
circumstances (22 — 25).

O thou son of Bhrigu, a Rudra Homa performed with
libations of sacrificial porridge or clarified butter, is the
most soothing agent in stamping out and arresting the
spread of plague or of any other, epidemics among goats,
horses, elephants, infants, women, men, kings or in checking
any other disturbance, disease or foreign aggression, threa-
tening or affecting a village, a town or a whole country.
O thou foremest of human beings, a Homa performed
with slices of gourd and clarified butter by a man, breaking
his fast in the night with powdered barley or wheat or
with things obtained by begging, tends to atone for all
sinful acts committed by him. A man practising for a
month, the ceremonial ablution known as the Vabis Snlnam,
is sure to be purged off of the sin incidental to his murder-
ing a Brahmana, whereas a Homa perfomed by repeating
the Mantras running as Madhu Via (May sweet winds
blow) etc., makes the performer, the blessed possessor of all
things. A man by casting libations into the sacrificial fire
by repeating the Mantras, beginning as Dadhikrlnna, etc , is
sure to be blest with children, while a Homa performed with
libations of clarified butter consecrated with the Mantras,
running as Ghritavati, etc., tends to increase the duration of
Hie life of the performer (a6— *31).

A repetition of the Mantra, running as Sastin Indra, etc.,
removes all barriers both material amt moral, standing in dm


AGN1 PURANAM.


959


way of an individual, whereas the verse, a>mmencing as
!ha Gava Prajiyadhvarti. (Be fruitful here, 0 ye cows), etc.,
duly recited by a mar., brightens his complexion and improves
his general health. By casting a thousand libations of clari-
fied butter into the sacrificial fire, accompanied by the same
Mantra, a man is sure to avert his ill luck, while the man who
perforins a Homa ceremony with oblations composed of
rice and the twigs of an ApSmSrga plant, by repeating the
verses, running as Sravana Devasya Pusti, soon recovers
his lost complexion and dispels the gloom settled upon
his person through the effects of an incantation. . A man by
performing a Homa with oblations composed of the twigs of
a Palasha tree and by reciting the verses, beginning as "May
Rudra protect, etc., (Rudra pitu), is favoured with the boon
of abundant gold. In a fear of general conflagration by
fire, a man should cast oblations of Vrihi grass into the
fire, by repeating the Mantra running as Shivo Bhaba (Be
pacified), etc., while a repetition of the Mantra, running as
Ya Sena, etc., acts as a safeguard against depredations by
thieves and robbers. A Homa performed by casting a
thousand oblations of black sesamum with the Mantra,
beginning as Yo Asmabhyam, etc., is a potent charm against
the ill-effects of incantations, and whereby the performer
would cast off the gloom settled on his person through that.

Similarly a Homa ceremony performed with oblations
of boiled rice and by reciting the Mantra, running as
Annapati (0 thou, the giver of boiled rice), etc., brings
in an abundant supply of food every day, whereas a
man by repeating, under water, the Mantra, running as
Hansha Shuchi Sat, etc., is sure to become absolved of
all iniquities. Similarly a repetition of the J verses, run-
ning as Chatvari Bhringa, etc., under circumstances men-
tioned above, produces the same result, while a man by
repeating the Mantra, running as Deva- Yajne, etc., is sure
to be made much of in the region of Brahma after death


A’GNI PURANAM.


960

A man by casting libations of clarified butter into the sacri-
ficial fire with the Mantra, running as Vasanta,’ etc., is sure
to get a boon from the Sun-god. Rites in which the verses.
Suparnasi, etc., are to be made use of, should be performed
in a way similar in all respects to what had been laid down
under the head of the Vyahritis (31 — 39).

A man, by seven times repeating the Mantra running
as Namas Svaha, is sure to be liberated from captivity. The
verses Drupuda' etc., being duly repeated under water,
destroys all sins of the repeater. The Mantra, running as
“May cows be fruitful here, etc., (Iha Gava Prajayadhvam),’*
sharpens the intellect of its reciter. A Homa ceremony
should be performed in its connection, by casting liba-
tions of milk, curd, clarified butter, thickened milk, or of
sacrificial porridge. A man, by casting oblations of ripe
fruits that have fallen from the boughs through their over-
mellowness, and by reciting the Mantras, running as Shatatd
Va, etc., acquires health, Wealth and longevity. A good
harvest is sure to be gleaned and gathered in by a man,
Who recites the Mantras, running as Oushadhi etc., at the
time of mowing or cutting. A Homa performed by repeat-
ing the verses, known as the Ashvavati, and with liba-
tions of sacrificial porridge brings God's peace on the
performer (40 — 45).

Similarly a due repetition of the Mantra, running as
Tasma, etc , acts as a powerful agent in bringing about one’s
freedom from confinement, whereas a man, by duly re-
peating the Mantras, running as Yuva Suvasa, becomes the
master of a splendid wardrobe. A man, praying for an
utter annihilation of his enemies, should recite the verses,
commencing as Manchantu Ma, etc*, while by casting into
the sacrificial fire oblations of sesamum dipped in clarb
fied butter and by repeating the Mantras of Ma Mam
Hinsi (you shall not injure me), etc., a man is sure to
keep his adversaries under a healthy control. A tloma


AGNf PURANAM.


961


performed with libations of porridge or clarified butter, and
by repeat* g either the Mantra, running as obeisance to
all the serpents, etc., (Namastu Sarva Sarpevyoh), or the
,one beginning as Krinudhvam, etc,, neutralises the effects
of all charms and incantations. Similarly, a Homa should
be performed with bunches of green grass, as well as with
the Mantra, running as K&ndAt Kanda, etc., to stamp out
or arrest the progress of a plague or of any other fatal
epidemic in a village. By such a ceremony an invalid is
sure to regain his former vigour and health, and a miserable
man to get rid of his misery (44 — 48).

O Rama, by casting a thousand oblations composed of the
twigs of an Oudumvara tree with the Mantras running as
Madhuman No Vanaspati (May our trees shed down
honey), etc., a man is sure to gain prosperity and victory irf
a legal contest. By. casting libations into the fire with
the Mantra running as Apam Garbham, etc., a man is sure to
bring down a good shower of rain, while] by performing a
Homa ceremony with the Mantra of Apas Piva, etc., a man
is sure to innundate the earth with a continuous downpour.
A repetition of the verses beginning as obeisance to Rudra
(Namste Rudra), etc!, destroys all ruffles that he might have
had, whereas ,a repetition of the Mantra running as Adhya-
vocha, etc., is sure to protect a sick man from a further
physical derangement. A recitation of the Rathaghnam or the
Yashyam, etc., by a man, heightens his complexion and in-
creases the duration of his life. A man by scattering mustard
•eeds on the road and by repeating the abovesaid Mantra at
the meeting of four roads, is sure to become a happy man
throughout the length of his days (49 — 53).

A man having practised self-control, should invoke and
worship the Sun-god every day with the Mantras run-
ning as Asou Yast&mra, whereby he would enjoy a long
and prosperous life, and an abundant supply of food
'every day. A repetition of the six Mantras running as

I2!l


AGNI FUR ANA M.


962

Pramuncha Dhanrtan, protects a man as an armour frtna
all harms, and especially in a field of battle, and such a
thing will come to pass without the shadow of a doubt.
O thou, who art fully conversant with the laws of virtue,
a repetition of the Mantra running as M9no Mah&nta, etc.,
is sure to cure diseases peculiar to child-life. A man pray-
ing for an utter annihilation of his enemies, should cast
libations of mustard oil mixed with Rajika into the sacri-
ficial fire, by repeating the seven verses (Anuv&k) beginning
as obeisance to the Fire-god (Namo Hiranya-Vahabe), etc. A
man, by performing a Homa ceremony with a hundred thou-
sand oblations of lotus flowers, and by repeating the Mantras
running as obeisance to Kirikas (Namo Kirikavyob),
is sure to be a minion of the goddess of sovereignty,
whereas by casting oblations of Bela fruits into the sacri-
ficial fire, a man is sure to obtain an abundant quantity of
pure gold. A Homa consisting of oblations of sesamum
offered with the Mantra Ima Rudra, etc., brings wealth to
its performer, while by a Homa performed with bunches of
green grass, a man is sure to get rid of the disease he has
been suffering from. O Rama, the verses running as Ashu
Pishana, etc., should be used in taking up arms before the
commencement of a battale, and an utter rout of the enemy’s
forces would result therefrom without any doubt whatsoever
454—60).

O thou foremost of the twice-born ones, O thou who
art fully acquainted with the rules of good conduct, a Homa
performed with five thousand libations of clarified butter and
by repeating the Raj Sama Mantra, ensures a radical cure
of an eye-disease. A Homa performed with the Mantras run-
ning as Shanno Vanaspati Gehe. (Stay in. this room, O thou,
the king of the forest', etc., tends to remedy all defects inci-
dental to one’s choosing a bad site for bis house, or to
his raising a structure on a plot of charmed or inauspicious
ground, wheixas.jny performing a Homa with libations of


AGNI PURANAM.


9<J

clarified butter and by repeating the Mantras running as
Agna Ayunshi, etc., a man becomes a favourite with every
body* else. A man by casting oblations of fried paddy into
the sacrificial fire, and by repeating the Mantra of Ap&m
Fena,* (foam of water) etc., is sure to achieve success in
life, whereas a man cursed with a defective sense-organ,
is sure to recover a full and unimpaired use of that by
repeating the Mantras running as Bhadrl, etc.

The best charm is cast by reciting the Mantra running as
the Agnischa, Prithivi, (the Fire'and the Earth,) etc., whereas
a man entangled in a cumbrous law-suit, is sure to win his
case by reciting the Mantra which runs as Adhvan, etc. The
Mantra beginning as Brahma R&janyam, etc., should be re*
peated at the fcommencement of all religious undertakings,
with a view to carry it to a safe and successful termination,
while a man by pouring a hundred thousand libations of
clarified butter on the sacrificial fire, enjoys a sound and
vigorous health to the end of his life (61 — 65).

A repetition of the Mantra running as Ketum Krinvas,
etc., ensures an easy victory in war, while an oath should
be taken for fair play in a contest, by repeating the
Mantra running as Indragni Dharma, etc. A bow should
be wielded by repeating the Mantra of Dhanva Naga, etc.,
whereas it should be charmed by reciting the Mantra run-
ning as Yajita, etc. Arrows should be enchanted with the
verses running as Ahiratha, etc., while a quiver should be
slung down with the Mantra running as Vanhinam Pitari,
etc., whereas, O Rama, horses should be harnessed with the
-Mantra of Yunjita, etc.

A military expedition should be started by repeating the
Mantra running as Ashu Pishana, etc., while a warrior should
ride in his car by reciting the Mantra running as Vishno
Krama, etc. The horses should be goaded to action by
repeating the Mantra, running as Ajankha, etc., while the
Mantra of Ya Sena Abhita should be repeated in the front


AGNl PURANAM.


9<W

of a hostile army, with a view to demoralise its spirit.
Trumpets to be blown upon in the course of a battle,
should be enchanted by repeating the Mantra running as
Dundubhya etc. Homa ceremonies should as well be per*
formed by reciting the abovesaid Mantras, and a hundred
thousand libations of clarified butter, should be poured on
the fire with the one running as Yaman Dattam, etc.,
whereby the offerer, or the person on whose behalf the same
would be cast would gain a sure victory in a battle. In the
alternative, a warrior should mount his war-chariot by
reciting the Mantra of A Krishna, etc., the ceremonies to
be performed before that, being everyway identical with
what has been laid down under the head of the Vyahrities
(66—72).

A man, by mentally reciting the Mantras sacred to the
god Shiva, after having taken a solemn vow to that end
(Shiva-Sankalpa-Japa), is enabled to annihilate his mind. A
man by pouring five hundred thousand libations on the
sacrificial fire with the Mantra, known as the Pancha Nadya
(the five Rivers), is sure to be the master of a splendid for*
tune. A man should put on his person a bit of gold conse-
crated thousand times by repeating the Mantra running as
Yada Vadhum D&kshSyanam, etc., whereby he would be
invincible to his enemies. A man should cast all round the
four corners of his dwelling house, bits of stone or pebbles
charmed with the Mantra running as Imam Jivahbyoh, etc.,
whereby all access of thieves and robbers into the house
will be barred for the night. The best means of gaining
ascendency over others, is a constant repitition of the
Mantra running as Parimag&manam, etc., so much so, that
even a man coming to kill the repeater, would be held spell-
bound by its mysterious potency, and would turn a devoted
ally. O thou who art fully initiated in the mysetrie* of
religion, prepared betie leaves, flowers, or any other edible*,
charmed with the above Mantra, and given to a man, are sure


AGNI PURANAM. 9&5

to act as potent charms in holding his minds in perpetual
thraldom (73 — 78).

A man, by constantly*repeating the Mantra, running as
Shanno Mitra, etc., shall have peace everywhere. A man, by
performing a Homa ceremony at the crossing of four roads
and by offering oblations of all grains into the fire thereat, as
well as by reciting the Mantras, running as Gananam, etc., is
sure* to enchant the whole universe. The Mantras running
as Hiranyavarna Shuchaya, should be made use of in con-
nection with a royal inauguration. A repetition of the
Mantra, beginning as Shanno Devi, etc., contributes towards
the attainment of one’s heart-felt objects, and brings God's
peace on the repeater, y performing a Homa ceremony
with libations of clarified butter offered in separate parts,
and by repeating the Ekachakri Mantra, a man is sure
to be free from the baneful effects of a malignant
planet. A man, by performing a Homa ceremony with
the two successive Mantras beginning as G 9 vo Bhaga, is
sure to have a large number of horned cattle. The Mantra
running as Pravadansha, etc., should be made use of in a
sacrifice undertaken for the propitiation of one's malignant
stars. Similarly, the Mantras running as Devabhyo Vanas-
pati etc., should be used in sacrifices known as the Drums-
yajnas (sacrifices connection with consecration of trees).
The Mantras running as Tad Vishnu Paramam Padam, etc.,
should be deemed as the sacred GSyatri to the god Vishnu,
a recitation whereof tends to absolve the reciter of all sins
and impieties (79—84).


CHAPTER CCLXf.


Jt'uSHKARA said:— I have done with the rites and
Mantras which appertain to the Yajur-veda, now I shall
describe those which belong to the Saman. A man, by
repeating the Sanhita known as the Vaishnabi, is sure to
witness 'the realisation of all his wished-for objects. O thou
of exemplary conduct, a man by repeating the Chhandasi
Sanhita, is sure to win the good graces of the god Shankara,
while by repeating those respectively known as the Paitri
and the Skandi, a man is sure to enjoy the greatest self-
complacence. A repetition of the Mantras running as In-
dram Bhajamahe (we worship the god Indra), destroys the
evil effects of dreadful incantations practised against a man.
A man in prison, would be liberated by repeating the Mantra
running as Agni Stigma, etc. A man having committed the
sin of selling improper articles, should repeat the Mantra
running as Ghritavati etc. A repetition of the Mantra
running as AySno Deva Savitri, etc., tends to neutralise the
effects of a bad dream ( r— 5).

O thou best of the sons of Bhrigu, a Woman suffering
from repeated miscarriages, should use clarified butter
consecrated with the Mantras running as Avodya Agni, etc.,
and by tieing a girdle of thread round her waist with the
Mantras running as Abhukshya, etc. the tuft of hair on
the (crown of a new-born babe, should be lied up with the
Mantra running as Somam Rajanam, whereby he would be
free of all diseases. A man,' ( hy constantly reciting the S«rpa
Saman, becomes safe, from snake - bites. A Brahmana, by
.casting a thousand libations of clarifid butter with the
Mantra of Medhya, etc., atid by tieing up the tuft of
hair 'on his crown with k, is sure to enjoy an immunity


AON I PWRANAM.


967


Iron sword-cuts, or from blows of weapons in general^
Similarly, by performing a Homa ceremony with the Mantra
known as the Dirgha Tamasorka, a man is sure to have
plenty of boiled rice every day. A man, by repeating
the Mantra running as Svamadbyanti etc., never dies of
thirst. Similarly, by repeating the Mantra running as
Tvamima Oushadhi, etc., never he falls . sick. A man by
practising the Prati Deva Vrata, is sure to get rid of
fears, while a Homa ceremony performed by repeating the
Mantras running as Yadindra- Munaye, etc., increases the
property of the performer. Collyrium applied along the
eyelashes by repeating* the Mantra running as Bhago No
Chitra, etc., is sure to give a better turn, O Rama, to the
fortune of the applier, and not the least doubt should be
entertained about the success of such a measure. A similar
result is obtained by repeating the Mantras running as
Indreti Vargam, etc., (6—13).

A man seeking the love of a particular woman, should
recite into, her ears the Samahs running as Paripriya, Hi
Vah Kirih, etc., whereby he would surely win her affec-
tions. A repetition of the Mantra running as Rathantaram,
or the Vamadevyam, increases one's faith in, and knowledge
of, the Supreme Qrahma, while by daily reciting the verses
known as Indramidgathinam, a man is sure to retaio in
his mind whatever yoold be spoken to him. By perfor-
ming a Homa ceremony with the Mamra running as
Rath&ntaram, a man ^ afire to be blest with the birth of
a son, while a repetition of the Mantra, running as Mai,
Shri, etc., brings more and more good luck every day to
its repeater. A man, by daily repeating the eight verses
known as the Vairupyas, is sure to become the master of
unbounded wealthy whereas by repeating the Saptashtakas*
a. man is enabled to witness the realisation of his heart-
felt desires. A rnan, having subjugated his senses, should
worship the cow*, each morning, with the verses beginning


968


AGNI PUR AN AM.


as Gavyashuna, etc., whereby he would have numerous
heads of cattle in his house.

A. man by casting oblations of vesselsful (Dronas) of
barley, soaked in clarified butter, into the fire, and by re-
peating the Mantras running as Vita Avatu, etc., is enabled
to cast.off all charms and incantations. A man by perform-
ing a Homa ceremony with oblations of sesamum and by
repeating the Mantras known as Pradeva Dasa followed by
Voushats, becomes an expert in all trades ( 14 — 20).

A thousand libations cast into the sacrificial fire with
the Mantras, running as VaskedhSma, etc., grants a vic-
tory in war. Effigies of pasted rice should be made of
horses, elephants, car-warriors and principal leaders be-
longing to the enemy’s forces, and should be cut with a razor
by repeating the Mantras running as Abhi Tva Shurananumo,
etc., after which the Brahmana engaged to practise the
charm, should offer them, in anger, as oblations on the sacri-
ficial fire, mixed with boiling oil. A performance of the
rite described above, is sure to grant an easy victory in war.
The Mantras known as the Garuda, the RathSntara, the
Vlmadevya and the Vrihadratha should be deemed as un-
doubtedly the best of sin-expiating Mantras (at— 24).

CHAPTER CCLXlt.


JT ushkara said I have done with the Mantras of the
Rik and the Sanaa Vedas, now I shall describe those which
appertain to the Atharva Veda, and are knonfe'as the Atharva
rites and Mantras. A naan* by performing a Homa cere-
mony with the Mantras running as Shantatyam Ganam


AGNI PURANAM.


969

’realises God's ’peace in life, while libations of clarified
batter cast with the Mantra, running as Bhaisajyam
Ganam, etc., bring about a recovery from all persistent and
lingering diseases, A man by pouring libations on the
sacrificial fire with the verses known as the Trisaptiyam
Ganam, becomes purged off of all sins. Similarly liba-
tions of clarified butter offered into the sacrificial fire with
the verses known as the Abhaya Ganam, should be
deemed as a safeguard against the advent of all evils s^nd
dangers, while, O Rama, a man by duly performing a Honia
ceremony with the same Mantra, is sure to suffer no
defeat in life. A man, by undertaking a Homa with the’
verses known as the Ayushya Ganam (Life-prolonging
Mantras), enjoys an immunity from a premature death,
while a Homa performed by repeating the verses known as
the Svastyanam Ganam, a man is sure to enjoy a blissful
peace in all departments of life (1 — 4).

A man, by repeating the Mantras running as Shreyascha,
etc., is sure to succeed in his practice of Yoga, while
a mental recitation of the same Mantra, tends to produce
the same result Defects incidental to one’s choosing a bad
or a forbidden Site for his dwelling-house, are remedied by
a Homa, performed by reciting the set of verses known as
the Vastospatya Ganam. A man, by casting libations of
■clarified butter, ia the sacrificial fire with the set of
Atharva verses known* as the Roudra Ganam, is sure to
make good, all defects and shortcomings on his part in life.
In a religious ceremony undertaken with a view to confer
God’s peace on an individual, the number of libations should
be increased ten or eighteen times of the number prescribed
for the abovesaid cases, according as the means of the per-
former of the Homa, or the person on whose behalf the same
would be performed, would admit of (5 — 6).

• The manifestations of divine’ energy respectively known
as the Goddess Vaisbnavi, etc., as well as the peace-giving
132


970


ACM rURAKAM.


rites respectively undertaken in their honour, and - known, as
the Vaislinabi Shanti, the Aindri Shanti, the Roudri Shanty
the Brahmi Shanti, the Vayavya Shanti, the Yaruni Shanti,
the Kouveri Shanti, (he Bhargavi Shanti, the Prajapatya
Shanti, the Tvasta Shanti, the Koumari Shanti, and the
peace-giving rites done in honor of the Fire-god (Vanhi
DeVata), the god of wind (Marut-Gana), as well as those
known as the G 9 ndhari Shanti, the Nairitiki Shanti, the
Yftmya Shanti (done in honor of the god of death), the
P&rthivi Shanti and the Angirasi Shanti, grant all sort of
boons to the performer (7 — 9).

A repetition of the Mantra running as Yastvam Mrityu,
on the occasion of casting libations of clarified butter into-
the fire, is sure to arrest the death of a person- laid up with
a fatal disease. A Hotna performed with the Mantras
running as Suparnastu, etc., grants an immunity from snake-
bites, while libations poured on the sacrificial fire with the
verses beginning as Indrena 'Dattam (given by the god
Indra), etc., should be deemed as possessed of the virtue of
removing all barriers or obstacles standing in one’s way.
A repetition of the Mantra running as [me Devi, etc., should
be deemed as possessed of a similar peace-giving virtue under
all circumstances, while a repetition of the one beginning as
Deva Marut, etc., should be held as the grantor of all
objects. A recitation of the Mantra running as Yamasya
Loka, etc., neutralises the effects of all evil dreams dreamt
by a man iii the night. A repetition of the Mantra running
as Indrascha Pancha Vanija (the god Indra and the five
Merchants) brings in a thriving trade. A Homa ceremony
performed by repeating the Mantras- beginning as Kama
Me Viji, etc., brings good luck to ladies for whose benefit
the same is undertaken. Libations poured pa the fire with
the Mantra running as Tubbyam Javiman, etc, as well as a
repetition of the Mantra beginning as Agne Gobhinna, etc,
enlarges one’s mind and sharpens one's intellect ( 10—14).


ftONI PUCANAM.


W*


A man by performing a Homa, and by repeating On the
occasion the Mantras running as Dhruvam Dhruvena, etc., be-
comes the owner of an immoveable estate, while a repetition
of the Mantras beginning as. Aiaktajiva, etc., ensures a
prosperous agriculture. A man seeking to improve his social
status or fortune, should constantly repeat in his mind the
Mantras running as Ahante Bhagna, etc., while a person any
way incarcerated, or rotting in jail, would be liberated or
set at large by repeating the Mantras, beginning as Ye
Me Pasha, etc., (the fetters that bind me). A man by re-
peating the Mantras, running as Sapatv&ham, etc., and by
pouring libations of clarified butter on the' fire with the
same Mantras, is sure to bring about an ut^er annihilation
of his enemies, while a repetition of the Mantras running
as Tamuttamam, etc., is sure to. increase one’s,, fame and to
give a better turn to one’s fortune (15— 17).

A repetition of the verses known as the Mrigamati, is
sure to give a better turn to the luck .of a woman. A repe-
tition of the Mantra, running as Ayante Yoni, etc., (this is
thy womb) is sure to impregnate a woman. Similarly a.
recitation of the Mantra, running as Shivi Shivabhi, etc.,
brightens the prospect of the repeater. A .recitation of
the Mantra, beginning as May Vrihaspati protect us (Vrihas-
patir No Patu) is the greatest peace-giving rite known,
while a repetition of the Mantra, running as MunchSmi Tveti,
acts as a safe-guard against all premature death. The man
who recites the Mantras known as the Atharva Shiras, is
sure to become absolved of all sins (18 — 21).

I have spoken of several principal rites, to be per-
formed according to the rules of the Atharva Veda. The
oblations to be cast into the sacrificial fire, should firstly
consist of the tender shoots of the sacrificial trees, while the
oblations or libations respectively composed of clarified
butter, Vrihi, white mustard, sun-dried rice, sesamum,
curd, thickened -milk, bunches of green grass, Bel fruit*


972 ACNI PURANAM.

and lotus flowers, should be deemed as the most bliss-giving.
O BhSrgava, O thou, foremost of the erudite ones, mustard-
oil, blood, poison and R&jika, should be cast as oblations
into the sacrificial fire, in cases of incantations and spells.
The names of the metre and the composers of the verses as
well as the purposes for which they are to be used, should.be-
mentioned at each instance (22 — 25).


CHAPTER CCLXIII.


USHKARA said : — Now I' shall describe the M'antras;
known as the Shri Suktas as contained in each of jthe Vedas,,
and a sepetition whereof is sure to increase the possessions
of the repeater. The fifteen Riks commencing as Hiranya
Varn& Harini, should be deemed as possessed of the same
vir|ue as the Shri-Sukta, while the four verses running as.
Ratheshvekshu would serve the same purpose in rites per-
formed according to the directions of the Yajurveda. The
verses running as Srayantiyam, should be used by Brahma-
nas who are the chaunters of the S&ma Veda, on occasions
and for purposes identical to what had been laid down above.
The verses of the Atharva Veda, known as the Shriyam.
Dhatarmaye, should be redted by a Brahmana, guided by
the same, and for purposes similar to the one occurring-,
in the immediately preceding line. A man by constantly
reciting the Shri Sukta, and by performing a Homa with the-
same, is sure to he a fond, darling of the goddess of - fortune.
Oblations composed of lotus flowers, Bela fruits, or sesantum
orientate, or libations of clarified butter, should be cast
into the sacrifidal fire on. the abovesaid occasion, and. an-


AGN1 PURANAM. 573

unbounded and imperishable wealth would follow there-
from as its inevitable consequence (1—4).

A single repetition of the Pourusha Sukta as contained
in each of the Vedas, would absolve the repeater of all sins
and impieties, and a single libation of water should be
offered after each such recitation.

A man having bathed with the same Mantra, and offered
a flower to the god Vishnu by repeating the same, is sure to
become absolved of all sins and iniquities. Similarly the man
who bathes and daily offers a fruit by repeating the above-
said Mantra, is sure to attain all his wished-for objects. A
man, who daily recites the Pourusha Shukta, is sure to be
pardoned for the commission of all deadly sins. The man
who bathes, repeats and performs a Homa ceremony every
day with the Kricbha Mantras, is sure to attain all his
objects. Of the eighteen verses possessed of the power of
conferring god’s peace on their reciters, the best are the verses
known as the Trisra Shanti. The eight protection-giving
Soumya Mantras, duly repeated, tend to pacify all disturb
ances. Similarly a repetition of the Amrita and Sarva-
Devatya Mantras, enables the repeater to witness the realisa-
tion of all his heart-felt desires.

O thou foremost of the sons of Bhrigu. the wristlet
in connection with a Manivandha ceremony, should be con-
secrated with the Mantra, running as Abhayaya Varunasya,
whereas a Mani made of conch-shell, should be purified
with the Mantra running as Shatakanda AmritSya and
Soumya, etc., while the ceremony should be closed by
repeating the same Mantras. The unusual and inauspicious
phenomena* occurring in Heaven, atmosphere or in earth, can
be subsided by repeating the Mantras sacred to the presiding
iieitiesof each of them (9— 1 1).

Now bear me discourse on the wqnderful phenomena
which occasionally make themselves visible in the regions
ennumerated above. The heavenly disturbances (Daiva


974 AGNI PURANAM.

UtpSt) are the strange and unnatural aspect of the stars
and planets, while those which coniine themselves to the
atmospheric region, are the meteoric glow, which sometimes
extends to the zenith of a place (Digdaha), the appearance
of mirages and fairy towns in the air, the gathering of rain
Clouds and the appearance of circular halos or rings round the
moon or the sun. The dangerous phenomena affecting this
terrestrial globe are the shaking of this solid Earth, firmly
fixed in her orbit.

A downpour falling within a week, tends to neutralise
the ill effects of these portentious appearances. Such
appearances, not remedied by a proper peace-giving cere-
mony, are sure to recur for three successive years. A
lloma should be performed in honour of the god Pr&japati
to avert the boding evils of a perilous time, fore-shadowed
by such incidents as the dancing, laughing, weeping, crying
or spontaneous burning of idols and divine images (12—16).

O thou son of Bhrigu, the country where fire burns with
roaring fury and without any natural exciting cause, or
where a fire duly fed with fuels, goes out without any
perceptible cause, should be deemed as to have been
harassed by a tyrannical sovereign. Such portentious
incidents should be remedied by a repetition of the Mantras,
sacred to the Fire-god. The god Shiva should be duly
worshipped, to avert the evils foreboded by trees blossom-
ing in improper seasons, or shedding gums of blood colour.
A famine should be ascribed to either of the two causes' of
absolute draught, or excessive rain. A downpour commen-
cing from the Anriti and lasting continuously for three days,
should be deemed as auguring evil. The god Parjanya,
the Sun and the Moon-god, should be worshipped to guard
against any disturbance affecting the annual rainfall of a
country. The Mantra sacred to the god Varuna, should be
repeated on the occasion of a river's changing its former
channel, or receding form, or encroaching upon the site of a


975


AGttt PUMNAM

village or a town, or on the occasion of a fountain, tank, pool
or any other natural reservoir of water having run dry. The
wives of Br&hmanas should be worshipped and propitiated,
whenever there would a case of premature delivery, or twin*
birth, or of sterility in a woman in the country, or whenever
; there would be anything amiss regarding the increase of
population and child-births. A cow, a mare, or a she-ele-
phant producing twin offsprings, or giving birth to any
sort of monstrosities, is sure to die within six months of
such delivery, and forebodes an invasion by a foreign mon*
arch. A Homa ceremony should be performed to avert the
evils foreboded by such unnatural phenomena, and the BrSh*
manas should be propitiated as well for the purpose. Simi*
larly peals of unearthly trumpet-sounds in the air, as well as
the refusal of carrying animals to take the harness, should be
deemed as protending great danger (17 — 26).

Wild animals or birds madly rushing into a town or
a village, or domesticated creatures flying to the wilder*
ness, or animals that are aquatic in their habits seeking
land and sheltering on dry ground and vice vena,
jackals roaming about and howling at the threshold of
a palace, cocks wildly crowing at nightfall, or jackals
howling in packs at morning, or howling at the midday
sun, pigeons rushing into the chambers of a palace, or
carnivorous birds stooping down upon its terrace, bees
bumming about in wreaths, and crows visiting their mates
in the sight of men, or tumbling down of walls and battle-
ments around the mansion of a king without any apparent
cause, should be deemed as auguring the death of the
king (27—30).

A country possessing an atmosphere excessively charged
with particles of dust, or laden with smoke, or which lies
under the inauspicious influence of the descending Nodes,
or from which spots in the discs of the sun or the moon
become visible, or in which stars and planets suffer dreadful


976


Atal puranau.

occultations, or present distorted aspects to the onlookers,
should be deemed as a doomed plkce. The country where
fire does not fully burn, and water-pitchers spontaneously
burst out, should be deemed as a country, soon to be invaded
by plague, pestilence and other visitations of Nature. The
gods and the Br&hmanas should be worshipped, and Homas
should be performed, and the peace-giving Mantras should be
repeated, with a view to avert the abovesaid evils (31 — 32),


-:o>


CHAPTQR CCLXIV,


Jt' ushkara said : — Now I shall describe the procedure
of worshipping the gods, whereby the dreadful visitations
of Nature can easily be warded off. A man having bathed
and washed himself, should offer ,the Argha-offering to the
god -Vishnu, by repeating the three Mantras running as
Apohista, etc., while, O thou, twice-born one, the water for
washing his feet (Padyam) should be offered with the three
verses beginning as Hiranya Varna. He should rinse his
mouth (Achamanam) with water by repeating the Mantra
running as Shanno Apo, while he should.sprinkle water over
his head with the Mantra, running as Idam Apo. The
perfume should be offered by repeating the three Mantras,
running as Rathe Akshe, etc,, while the cloth should be offered
by Repeating the Mantra running ias Yuvan, etc. Flowers
should be offered by repeating the Mantras known as the
Pushpavati, while the burning incense-stick should be
.offered with the Mantras, running as DhuposfcL The lighted
hasps should be waived before the image, and Madhuparkas
(small metel cups contaiaiag hpeuy; ' should be offered by


AGN1 RURANAU.


977

repeating the Mantras, respectively running as Tejoshi
Shukram and Oadhi etc., (1—4).

O thou foremost of human beings, the eight Rics begin*
nkig as Hiranya Garbhas, should be used on the occasion of
offering boiled rice, cordials, shoes, cushions or carriages, or
at the time of blowing chowries unto, or holding an open
umbrella over a divine image. The other articles of worship
should be offered to the deity by repeating the Savitra
Mantras. The verses known as the Pourusha Sukta, should
be mentally recited and made use of in connection with
a Homa Ceremony. In the absence of any image or idol,
the articles of worship, should be offered on the alter or
on the full sacrificial pitcher, or on the foreshore of a stream,
or on a lotus flower, whereby a votary would win the good
graces of the gorl Vishnu and attain infinite peace on earth.

Then the libations of clarified butter should be poured
on the blazing sacrificial fire, lighted on the cushion of s-uid
laid on the well cleansed ground, and spread over with the
blades of holy Kusha grass and sprinkled over with consec-
rated water. Then the self-controlled votary should poor
libations on the fire as, “ libation to the god Vasudeva
libation to the Deva, libation to the almighty god (Prabhu)
libation to the god who knows no change nor suffers any
diminution (Avyaya), libation to the god of fire, libation to
the Moon-god, libation to the gods Mitraand Varuna, libation
to the god Indra, libation to the gods Indra and Agni.” O
thou of a generous spirit, then the libations should be offered
in honbur of the gods, such as the Vishvas, the gods, and the
lord of the created beings. O Rama, the subsequent liba-
tions should be cast by addressing the goddess Anumati, the
god Dhanvantari, the presiding deity of households, the god-
dess of energy and the fire that created the universe. Then
offerings should be made to the abovesaid deities by address-
ing their names in the dative case, singular. Similar
oblations should be offered to Nerundhi, Dhumrinika, Asva-
133


#8 AGNl PUaANAM.

panti, Meghapatni and the goddesses of energy known as
Nandini, Subhaga, Sumangala, Bhadrakali, Sthuna, Shri,
and Hiranyakeshi, as wejj-as to the Vanaspatis (5 — 16).

Offerings should be made to the gods of good and'
evit at the threshold of the temple, to the god of eternal
truth (Dhruva) at its centre, to the god of death at
the outside, to the god of wealth at the path way, to
the god fndra, and his companion deities at the east, to
the god of death and his colleagues at the South, to
the god Varuna and his comrades at the west, and to the
Moon-god and his attendants at the north. Similarly
O thou son of Bhrigu, offerings should be made to the god
Brahma and his attendant deities at the centre of the
temple, and to the spirits that wander in the day light on
its floor, ceiling and altar, while in a night-worship, offerings
should be made to the spirits that roam about in the dark
(17—21).

The offerings should be made to the spirits, night
and morning at the outside of the temple, and since obla-
tions should be offered to one’s manes, one should take
special care to avoid the night fall. A man should offer
the first oblation to his deceased father, then to his grand-
father, then to his great grandfather, then to his own mother,
then to his father's mother, and then to the mother of his
grand-father. He should worship the souls of his departed
fathers on the tips of the Kushagrass spread out on his right
hand side (22—24).

Then oblations should be offered to the crows by repeat-
ing the Mantra running as “ May the crows who live in the
east, west, north west, south, and the south west, take and
accept tins feast, spread out foirthma/, Then similar oblations
should be offered to the dogs, by repeating the Mantra —
“ Two dogs were born in the family of this sun, one black
and one white. I offer them oblatbns, may they guard
my way to the next world." Then oblations should be


AGNI PURANAM. gjg

offered to the cows by repeating the following Mantra.”
“ Accept these oblations, 0 cows, who are the daughters of the
cetestia! Surabhi and are the mothers of the inmates of the
three worlds and who are holy, and given to the good of all,
and whose very touches are purifying” (35 — 37.)

Then having offered the above said oblations and doled
oat alms and charities to the poor, and feasted the assembled
guests, a man should perform a Homa ceremony as follows.
“Om, libation to Bhu, Om libation to Bhuva, On\, libation to
Sva, Om, libation to Bhu, Bhuva and Sva. Om, I pour this
ffbation which is an expiation for sins done to the gods. I
offer this libation which is an expiation of sin done to the
Petris. Om, I offer this libation which is an atonement for
sins done by me. Om, May the sins of mankind be par*
doned by the libation I pour on the fire. Om, May the sin
of sin be pardoned through my offering this libation. Om, I
pour on fire this libation of clarified butter which is an
atonement for sins wilfully committed by me. Om, I
pour on fire this libation to atone for sins unwittingly
committed by me. Om, obeisance to the Fire god who is
the creator of sacrifices. Om, obeisance to the lord of
created beings.” I have already dealt with oblations known
as the Vaishva- De va- Valis and the process of worshipping
the god Vishnu (38—39.)


CHAPTER CCLXV.

|l l| 1 1 II i n !■

DaID THE Fire God Now I aha)! deal with ceremonial
ablutions in general, a knowledge whereof is sure to prove
beneficial to mankind, ; The wise should bathe an image of
the god Vishnu or that of aoy of the planets, on the bank of a


9*0 AGNI PUKANAM.

stream. A man laid up with fever, should bathe it in a
temple, as well as a man labouring under the inauspicious
effect of a malignant star. A man wishing to acquire a profi-
ciency in his studies, or a man seeking victory, should
perform the ceremonial ablution on the banks of a lake, or at a
holy shrine, or at his own dwelling house. A woman suffering
from incessant miscarriage of foetus, should bathe an image
of god Vishnu placed on a lotus- flower. A woman, whose
issues die in childhood, should perform the rite under the
boughs of an Ashoka tree. A man praying for a profuse
blossoming in his garden, should bathe the image midst a
heap of flowers, while a person wishing to have an offspring
gf his loins, should bathe it in sea, whereas a person praying
for a general amelioration of his fortune, should perform
tlic rite near an image of the. Gnd Vishnu (i — 4).

The above-mentioned rite should be performed under the
auspicies of the asterisms, Revati, Pushya, etc. A person
having determined to do the same, should practise a vow
for seven days before the. day of its performance. A man
should rub his body with powdered Punarnava, Rochana,
Shatanga, Guruni, Tvacham, Maddhikam, the two sorts of
Rajanf, Tagara, Nagakeshara, Amvarisba, Mangista, Mansi,
Yasaka, Priyangu, Sarsapa, (Mustard), Kustha, Valam, Bramhi,
Saffron, Pacnhagavya and powdered barley, and then im-
merse his body in water. The gods Vishnu and Brahma
should be respectively worshipped in the right and the left
petals o( the lotus-shaped mystic diagram. Similarly the
gods Hara, Indra, etc., together with their respective
weapons and attendant deities should! be worshipped oh die
petals commencing from the east. Again the gods such *s
Vishnu, Brahma, Isha, Shakra, etc., shouldbe worshipped
in the petals occupying the angular poiats of the lotus, and
libations of clarified baper containing seeds of Sesamam
should be poured eight hundred times oh the sacrificial five
in honour of each of the abovfsaid divinities (5—6).


AGNI PURANAM.


981


O thou twice-born one, the sacrificial pitchers, respec-
tively known as the Bhadra, the.Subhadra, the Siddhartha, the
Amogha, the Chitrabhanu, the Parjanya, and the Sudurshana
should be duly stowed along the sacrificial shed in honour
of the gods Ashvis, Kudrus and the Maruts etc, with a view
to ensure good health to the bather.

The gods should be invoked within the pitchers by
reciting the Mantra running as " Rest in content in these
pitcners, O ye Vishedevas, O ye demons, O ye Vasus, O ye
gods, O ye holy sages whose pieties uphold the divine order
in the three worlds, and lead the universe in the path of
light And duty.” Then tbe cereals and drugs known as the
Jayanti, the Vijaya, the Jaya, the Shatavari, the Shatapushpa
the Vishnukranta, the Aparajita, the Jyotishmati, the Ativala,
the Sandal, the Ushira, the Kesbara, the Kasturika, the
camphor, the Valaka, the Patraka, the Tvacham, the Jati-
phalam, the Clove, earth and the composition known as the
Panchagavya should be put in them, and the Brahmanas
should pour water on the head of the performer of the religious
ablution, seated on the sacrificial platform, Then the Homas
should be separately performed in honour of the gods men-
tioned in )the Mantras prescribed for ablution in connection
with a royal inaugeration. Then the final libation should
be poured on tbe sacrificial fire, and remunerations should" be
paid to the preceptor and the priests officiating at the cere-
mony. The. god Indra having been thus bathed by bis
preceptor Vrihaspati, was enabled to kill the demons in
battle, and a performance of such a religious ablution rite in
honour of the presiding deities of the different quarters of
the heaven, is sure to grant an easy victory in war etc.
(n— 18).


CHAPTER CCLXV1.


IT USHKARA said : — Now I shall deal with the rite of
ablution which is to be performed for the purpose of exor-
cising a Vinayaka (a sort of malignant spirit).) The spirit
Vinayaka was placed by the gods Keshava, Isha and Bramha
at the head of the lesser and subordinate gods known as the
Ganas, his function being to baffle the ends of men and
to frustrate their efforts, in general. A man possessed by
Vinayaka, sees shaved heads, or fancies himself bathing, or
riding on the shoulders of demons or monsters in sleep. He
hears the sounds of unseen footsteps closely following his
heels in a walk. All his efforts dwindle into nothing at the
end, the mind becomes sad, dejected and vacant and loses
the power of concentrating itself on any definite subject,
and the body withers without any posititive ailment. Such a
person, if happens to be an unmarried girl, discards all offers
of marriage and prefers tp continue single, on the contrary
a married woman, taken by Vinayaka, refuses the bed of
her husband and lives sterile and separate to the end of her
life. A disciple: under a similar circumstance, becomes
averse to his studies and refuses the lessons of his preceptors,
whereas in the same predicament a trader foregoes all
profits, a cultivator becomes apathetic to his vocation, and
a monarch neglects the duties of his sovereignty (1—5).

Such a person should (idee his . seat on the sacrificial
platform and perform a rite of religious ablution under
the auspicies of the asterisws known aS the Hasta, the
Pushya etc., or of those presided over by the . Moon-
god, Vishnu, or on thS occasion of the sun’s passing
over tp a new zodiacal sign, known as the Ashvayuk.
He should rub his body with the cake ol white mustard


AGHI PURANAM.


983

and clarified butter, and rub his head with the ponder*
of drugs respectively known as the Sarvoushadhi and
Sarvagandha. Then the contents ef four pitchers of
water containing earth respectively obtained from a stable,
an elephant-enclosure, an ant-hill and a confluence of run-
ning streams, as well as Rochona, sandal and scented gum-
resin, and consecrated with the Mantras running as Saha-
sraksha, and Shatadharam Rishi etc., should be emptied
over his head. The Mantra which should be recited on the
occasion, runs as follows "I wash thee with waters obtained
from a hundred running streams, hallowed by the touch of
the holy sages and the . lord of the celestials. May such
waters purify thee. May Varuna, the sun-god, Vrihaspati,
Indra, the windgod and the seven immortal sages give thee
wealth and peace. May the evil fate that sticks to your
hairs and the ill luck that hangs over your brows and
blightens your eyesight, be removed by the efficacy of this
consecrated water” (6— is).

Then the preceptor having caught hold of a vessel of
Kusha grass, containing mustard oil, should pour out of that
on the head of the possessed person, ladiesful of the same
substance with his right hand, by repeating the Mantras
running as “ Libation to Mita, libation to Sanmita, Libation
to Shalaka, Libation to Tankata, Libation & Kushmanda,
and Libation to Rajaputra”, and the term obeisance (Svaha)
should be coupled .at the edd of each of them. Then obla-
tions composed, of rawfish, •Chitra flowers, cooked fish, boiled
rice, radish, cake, curd, thickened milk, Payasa, Modaka
and treacle should be Offered ph a winnow placed at the
crossing of four roads, and over a cushion of holy Kusha

(aa— 17). V :; V-

' ..Then the moti^^0f yint^^ ^d^d be invoked and
offerings of Durva/grass, muStard teeds and flowers, should
be made to her. Then the, final lihiktipn should bis , poured
on the sacrificial fire, and tbefellowiag praye$. should


984


ACNI PURANAM.


be read, " Grant me, O thou, goddess of good luck, the
boon of beauty, wealth, progeny and fulfilment of all
desires." Then the Brahmanas should be feasted and a
pair Of cloth should be presented to the ritualist, officiating
at the ceremony. A man by worshipping Vinayaka, be-
comes prosperous, and all his attempts are crowned with
success (18—20).


CHAPTER CCLXVII.


Jt'uSHKARA said:— Now I shall deal with the rite of
ablution known as the Maheshvara Snanam, which being duly
performed, brings victory to the standard of a sovereign, and
which was disclosed by the holy sage Ushana to Vali, the king
of the demons. The performer of the ceremony should be
bathed on the sacrificial platform before sun-rise, and the
following Mantra should be read on the occasion. “ Om
obeisance to the Rudra incarnation of the god and to Vala
the (powerful one), whose body is smeared with the ashes of
grey colour. Victory and victory thee, O god, trample down
all those who would act hostilely to so and so in the quarrel
or war that would break out with him. Om, trample down
and . trample down all comers that are fastly approaching
to attack. May die god of white-light, may the god of
thousand beams who would bum down the Universe to ashes
at the Millemum, accept this worship and protect thy life
May the god Shiva, the destroyer of the demon Tripura, and
who is possessed of the essence of all the/ oelestial beings,
and who, in his Samvarts manifestation, iseffolgent like the
god of Eire, protect yourlifp. Om obeisance, Likin, Likhi
Likhi," (se ver^ editkms readLtkhi, Lili, Khilij. Then having


AGNI ftjRANAM.


9*5

lathed as above indicated, the votary Should cast oblations
of rice and sesamum into the sacrificial fire, by repeating
the above-said Mantra, and bathe • the image of the god
Shiva with the composition know.n as the Panchagavya, and
worship him thereafter ( 1—3).

Now I shall describe the other sorts of religious ablutions
which grant success to their performers. A bath, after
having lubricated the body with clarified butter, tends to
increase the duration of life of a man, while by bathing
with cowdung, a man becomes a favourite with fortune. Simi-
larly, a bathing, done by rubbing the body with the urine
of a cow, makes the bather free from all impieties, while a
lubrication of the body with thickened milk before a bath,
tends to increase one’s mental and physical vigour. By
cabbing curd over his body before bath, a man is sure to im-
prove his complexion, while a bath in the washings of the
sacred Kusha grass, tends to absolve the bather of all ini-
quities. A man by using the composition of Panchagavya
at his bath, becomes possessed of all desirable goods, while
a bath in the washings of Asparagus (Shatamuli) or Shringa,
respectively ushers in a good fortune, or an unsullied con-
science. A bath in the washings of Palasha, Vilva, lotus
and Kusha grass, should be deemed as the harbinger of all
wished for goods, while the drugs known as the Vacha, the
two sorts of Haridras and the Musta, used by a man at his
bath, grant him an immunity. from the influences of malignant
spirits. A bath in the Whshings of gold, silver or copper,
grants longevity and increases the fame, piety and intellectual
capacities of the bather. A bath in the washings of gems
vouchsafes success in life, while an ablution in water
scented with the drugs known as the Sarvagandha (universal
perfume), is sure to give a better turn to one's fortune. A
daily immersion in a basin of water containing fruits, as well
as the use of pulverised Dhatri fruits at the’ bath, brings in
health and beauty. By cleansing the body with powdered
124


986 AGNI PURANAM.

sesamum and sun-dried rice at the time, of bathing, a nan
is litre to improve his complexion, while a. similar use of the
creeper Priyangu, ensures a daily expanding purse. A bath
in water saturated with the leaves of Kadamva, Padma and
Utpala, brightens one's complexion, while a similar use of
the washings of the VAIS plant, increases one's physical
strength (4—10). •

Of all sorts of bath, the best is that which is done in the
washings of the sacred feet of Vishnu. Alone, the bather
should pass an entire ^day in meditation, for the realisation of
a single object. He should tie round his wrist a bracelet made
of Kustha, Vacha, Shunthi, Conch-shell, or of iron, and by re-
peating the Shukta, running as Akrahdaya, etc., The gift
of all sorts of boons is in the hand of the god Hari, and by
worshipping him, a man becomes possessed of all wished-for
good (11—13).

By bathing the image of the latter deity in a compo-
sition of thickened milk and clarified butter, and by duly
worshipping it, a man is sure to get rid of all aorta of
bilious distempers, while an offering of the five species of
Mudga pulse, made to the same deity, should be deemed as
an unfailing remedy for all gastric complaints. An im-
mersion of the image of Vishnu in the composition known as
the Dvi-Sneha (water and clarified butter), is the best cure
for all -diseases incidental to a deranged condition of the
bodily phlegm. A bath of the abovesaid emblem in the
composition knowo as the Trirasa, signifies its immersion
in a mixture of oil, honey and clarified butter, while an
ablution in Dvi-Rasa means its bathing in water and clarified
butter only. A Samala Snanam expresses the fact oij its
being immersed in oil and clarified butter. The composition,
known as the Tri Madhuram (the three sweets), consists of
honey, juice of sugar-cane and thickened milk, and «
bathing of the divine image of Vishnu in it, should be
deemed as one of the beat of peace-giving rites. A mixture


AGNt PURANAM.


9«7


composed of oil, clarified batter and sugar-cane-juice, and
qstd for the same purpose as the above, confers pros-
perity on the performer of the ceremony. An unguent
made of the three white substances (Trishukla) via., cam-
phor, Ushira, and Sandal, as well as the one composed of
Sandal, Agollochum, Camphor, Musk, and Saffron, applied
by a votary on the body of an image of Vishnu, enables
him to witness the realisation of all his heartfelt objects
(14 — 20).

0 thou son of Bhrigu, the three cooling substances
usually made use of in a worship of Vishnu, and technically
known as the Trisheetas, are the Jati fruits, camphor and
sandal. O thou foremost of the race of Bhrigu, articles of
five different colours such as the yellow, the grey, the white,
the black and the red, are usually employed in the service of
the abovesaid deity. The three white articles are the
Utpala, the lotus and the Jati flowers. Saffron, the red
lotus, and the red Utpala flowers form the three red
and so on. By worshipping the god with lighted lamps
and burningi ncensc-sticks, a man is enabled to enjoy
god's peace in life. The Brahmanas should perform a Homa
ceremony in such a connection, in a quadrilateral fire-hole,
and respectively pour a hundred thousand, or a million liba-
tions of barley, sesamum, paddy and clarified butter on the
sacrificial fire, and thereafter worship the planets with the
Gayatri Mantra, whereby the greatest bliss would be
brought about (21—24).

CHAPTER CCLXVIII.


Jt uSHKARA said The celebration of the king's birth-
day, should be observed, each year, b the month of his


AGNI PUR AN AM.


988

nativity and on the day marked by his natal asterism. The
king should worship the Sun-, and the Moon-, god, each
month, on the occasion of the former’s passing over to a hew
sign of the zodiac. For four months, the god'Hari, manifest
in the shape of the holy Augusta, should be worshipped
with festivities, since the rising of the constellation of
that name, — the festivities continuously lasting for five
days only (1 — 2 ).

In the month of Bhadra (Prosthapad) and commencing
from the day of the first phase of the moon’s increase, a
mansion should .be caused to be built in honour of the god
Indra, to the east of the royal mansion, and a flagstaff should
be raised at an angle of the house, and the lord of the celes-
tials and his queen of immortal youth, should be worshipped
on the occasion. The post should be taken to its proper
place, on the day of the eleventh phase of the moon’s in-
crease, the performer of the ceremony observing a fast that
day. On the day following, the flag should be unfurled from
the top of the mast, and the lord of the celestials and his
beloved Shachi, should be invoked and worshipped in the
sacrificial pitcher, covered, over with a piece of doth, and
the following prayer should be recited. “ Thou hast come
into being in this pitcher, O thou god of the gods. O thou
the wielder of a splendid destiny, grow from day to day,
O Indra, in thy full vigour of immortal youth, O thou the
killer of the demon Vritra, — O thou who destroyest the
enemies of light. Thou art the eternal god,t he absolute
sovereign divinity given to the good of all created beings,
the infinite energy, the all pervading reality, the promoter
of fame and victory. May the eternal gods, O Sbakra,
strengthen thy arms and increase thy prowess which shows
itself in seasonable and goodly showers of rain. May the •
gods Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesha, Kartickeyi, Vinayaka, the
Adilyas, the Vasus,< the Rbdras, the Saihyas, the Bhrigus,
the quarters of the sky, the M&ruts, the Lokapalas, the


AGNl PURANAM.


9*9


planets, the Yakshas, the mountains, the rivers, the oceans,
the goddess of fortune, the Earth-goddess, the goddesses
Gouri, Chandika and Sarasvati, spread thy conquest and
glory. O Shakra, O thou the beloved husband of matchless
Shachi, may I be blest through thy victory, and may the
Brahmanas, kings and the people at large, be benefited by
thy conquest. Through thy grace, verdure covers the bosom
of this gladsome Earth, and corn grows in abundance in the
field. May peace reign supreme all over the universe and
the evil hide its face for good I” By worshipping the god
Indra with the abovesaid Mantra, a king is sure to ascend
heaven after death (3 — 13).

A picture of the goddess, Bhadrakali, should be worshipped
in the month of Ashvina, with a view to achieve success in all
departments of life. Similarly, the bow, the banner, the
umbrella, as well as the royal arms and other insignias of
royalty, ^should be worshipped on the day of the eighth
phase of the moon’s increase in the same month. The votary
should keep a vigil in the night following the day of worship,
which should be repeated on the morrow, and the goddess
should be addressed as follows : " O thou goddess Bhadrakali,
O thou Supreme Durga, O thou goddess Durga who deli-
▼erest all beings from dangers and difficulties, O thou the
invincible energy presiding over the three worlds, 0 thou
dreadful, undaunted energy of the supreme Absolute, grant
me victory” (14—^15).

Now I shall deal with the rite of Nirijanam, (a ceremonial
farewell to a king before r starting on a military expedition),
which should be performed in a chamber, situate at the
north-east angle of the palace. Three triumphal arches
should be erected before the chamber of ceremony, and the
gods should be constantly worshipped therein. The gods
Brahma, Vishnu, Sambhu, Indra, the fire-god, the Wind,
Viaayaka, Kumara, Vanina, Dhanada, Yarns, the Vishve-
devas, Vaishvanara, the eight celestial elephants who guard


990 AGNI PURANAM.

the eight approaches of the sky, such as Kumuda, Airavata,
Padma, Pushpadanta, tVamana, Suprita, Anjana, and Nila,
should be worshipped in the chamber, during the stay of the
sun atthe mansion of the asterism Svati, first commencing
from the day of the former’s leaving the asterism Chitra and
passing over to the sign of Virgo. The priest should pour
libations of clarified butter on the sacrificial fire, mixed with
oblations of sundried rice and sesamum orientate, worship
the sacrificial pitchers filled with consecrated water, and
stowed in due order on the sacrificial platform, and wash the
royal horses and elephants with the contents thereof.

The horses should be first bathed and then the elephant*
should be taken out of the royal stud through the portal arch
of the palace, but not beyond the first or the principal
gate-way leading to the palace, and should be paraded
within the enclosures of the palace-grounds. Then the
royal arms and the insignias of his sovereign authority
should be worshipped in the chamber of the castle (16—22).

The god of oceans (Varuna) should be worshipped under
the auspices of the asterism presided over Jby the same
deity, apd offerings should be made to the malignant spirits
on the night following the day of the worship. The king
should keep at his home during all the time the sun would
be at the asterism of Vishakha (the sixteenth lunar man-
sion), when the royal animals and vehicles should be decked
and decorated with ornaments. The . arms and insignias
of royalty should be worshipped on the occasion, and then
placed under the charge of the royal equerry and the com-
missioned custodians of the same. The royal astrologer
should then consecrate the royal arms and the emblems of his
kingly office, such as the elephant, the horse, the umbrella,
the sword, the bow, the trumpet, the banner and its rod,
and then place them on the back of the royal elephant.
The royal priest and the astrologer should then ride on the
elephant and drive out through the principal gate-way.


AGNI PURANAM.


99 »


Then the king, riding on a consecrated elephant, should
offer oblations to the gods, and circumbulate the palace
grounds, illuminated by flashlights shed by the fire works
round the horizon. Then the king', humble and self con-
trolled, should drive out on his elephant, accompanied by his
four army corps, the different regiments and squadrons
shouting victory to his self and standard. Thus having
returned home, he should offer libations of water to the gods.
The peace-giving rite described above, consists what is
technically known as the Nirajanam, which materially con-
tributes to the prosperity of a king, and inspires terror in
the hearts of his enemies and antagonists (23 — 30).


CHAPTER CCLXIX.


Jt'uSHKARA said: — Now I shall narrate the Mantras
with which the royal umbrella should be consecrated,
and victory is sure to follow from worshipping it with
them. “ May thy splendour and majesty grow from more
to more every day, with the dynamics of truth which is
the essence of the god Brahma, and the light and
energy that burns within the suns and moons, and the
force that moves in th€ spirit of the mighty Water god.
May thy paramount authority be consolidated more and
more every day, O thou the Royal Umbrella, the source/
Hie centre of all nobleness and lofty aspirations. May 1
the king repose in health and victory beneath thy bliss*
ful shade, as the earth rests in bliss under the shadow of
a pregnant rain-cloud. 0 thou grey-coloured emblem of law
and order, O thou whose lustre resembles the mellow bean


AGNI RURANAM.


99 *

of a snow-ball or autumn-moon, O tbou who art born of
the race of Gandharvas, mayst tbou never defile the race
of our sovereigns. Increase In majesty and splendour, O thou
the Royal horse, with the undying truth which is the self of
Brahma, with the immortal energy that burns in the sun
and moon and fire, with the pieties and penances that have
made their sanctuaries in the hearts of the holy sages, with
the annihilation of animal propensities that characterises
Rudra, and with the force that sets the winds in motion.
Recollect thy royal birth, 0 thou horse, the metamorphised
son of a sovereign, and the gem Koustabha that was churned
out of the primeval ocean with thy honoured self. The sin
that appertained) to a killer of a Brahmana, the sin that is
incidental to a patricide or matricide, the sin that sticketh
to the cursed throat of a liar, making a false claim to a plot
of ground, the sin that dogs the fugitive foot-steps of a
cowardly Kshatriya, showing his back to his enemies in
battle, may never lie on your lofty head, and may they fly
before thy bold and courageous front. In road, in battle, may
you never belie your noble origin and descent, and may
you kill the enemies of your royal master in battle, and live
happily with him in his service” ( 1 — 9 ).

“ I lay myself at thy feet, 0 thou lord of the celestial
birds, 0 thou Guruthmana of mighty pinions, 0 thou son
of Vinata who sittest perched on the standard of Narayana,
and movest like a banner before the armed hosts of the lord
of the celestials. Lead me to new victories every day, O thou
whose movements are swifter than those of the wind.
0 thou immense-bodied quaffer of divine ambrosia who
destroyed the serpent's and the enemies of god-head in
battle, and didst steal away the bciwl of nectar for the benefit
of the universe. Fill in the ranks of aby battled legions, O
thou god of matchless prowess. Never leave my lines, 0
thou invincible spirit of immense agility. Protect me and
my soldiers, clad in muled armours, O thou whom the


AGNI PURANAM.


993


supreme Vishnu appointed to shield the person of the
celestial king, and burn the ranks of my hostile forces”
(10—13.)

The eight elephants known as, Kumuda, Airavata, Padma
Pushpadanta, Vamana, Supritaka, Anjana and Nila, are of
divine origin. Their sons and sons’ sons such as, Bhadra,
Manda, Mriga, etc., multiplied themselves in the forests
of the earth. “ 0 you royal elephants, recollect your divine
progenitors and the celestial blood that courses in your
veins. May the Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas, and the
Maruts protect you all. O thou king of the elephants, pro-
tect thy sovereign master and rigidly discharge the obliga-
tion he has laid thee under. May the king of the gods
riding on his mighty Airavata (elephant), follow thee in
battle and guard thy rear. Win victory in battle and
enjoy perpetual health. May you wax as hot in battle as
thy divine cohort Airavata. May you acquire beauty from
the moon-god, strength from Vishnu, energy from the sun,
speed from the god of wind, steadiness from mountains,
victory from Rudra, and fame from the god Purandara.
May the divine elephants with their respective celestial
riders, protect thee in battle. May the Ashvinis, together
with the Muruts, the Gandharvas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the
immortal sages, the wind, and the moon-god protect thee
in all the quarters of the globe. May the Nagas, the
Kinnaras, the Gandharvas; the Yakshas, the ghosts, the
planets, the Pramathas, the presiding deities of malignant
spirits, and the Matricas.thegod Indra, the Commander-in-
Chief of the heavenly forces, and the god Varuna*. strengthen
thy limbs with their respective essences, and tburn down to
the battled hosts led by the enemy of tbisvictoiy-
seeking monarch " (14— **)• \

“Recollect the debt you owe (0 thy sovereign, O streamer,
float iu victory and gladness to-day, as thou tjidst flutter in
hmHUm w hich led tdthefallaof Kalaati, TripOjra, Hiiaaya-
1*5 ' *


994


' AGNI PURANAM.


Kashipu, and other demons. May the ornaments with which
the enemy's standard has been decorated, fall to the ground,
struck by thy unbearable energy. May the enemies of the
king be totally annihilated, affected by thy blue, and white,
colours. May pestilence and virulent epidemics break out in
the ranks of the enemy’s forces, and may Putana, Revati,
Lckha, K&lar&tri and other monstresses follow in their wake
and devour them all ” (34—28).

“ O sword, the god Sharva created thee of yore in the
great religious sacrifice known as the Mahayajna, and out
of the essence of the universe. The eight appellations by
which thou art known are, (1) Krishna, (2) Shrigarbha, (3)
Vijaya, (4) Dharmapala, (5) Asi, (6) Khadga, (7) Tikshna-
Dhara and (8) Durasada. O thou destroyer of the evil dis-
posed, O thou, who dost neutralise the effects of bad dreams,
O thou, whose colour resembles the hue of a blue lotus,
these are the eight epithets given to thee by the god Shambhu
of yore. Remember when thou wert manifest in the shape
of the god Nandaka, O thou, whose entire length exceeds
the measure of thirty fingers (Nistrinsha). Thy nativity is
marked by the asterism Krittika, the god Maheshvar is thy
preceptor, thy body is made of gold, and the god Janardana
is the presiding deity of thy existence. Protect the king, O
Sword, with all his household and subject-people and army.
Out of thee, the universe has evolved into its present
shape. I make obeisance to thee, O thou sinless one, O thou
who dost help thy votaries to bring a battle to a glorious
and happy termination. 0 thou, who dost protect the
soldiers as a mailed coat, save my honour, army and prestige
to-day* I am a fit object of thy pity" (39—^34).

"O thou trumpet, whose' diwadM/fiftpflf^e* strike terror
into the hearts of ooc^se*iiidis, doiri tiii^pijdcl to the signal
glory of , the royal arms^ iis the mightytuskers rejoice at
the deep rumbling sound of a nin-cloud, so may the thril-
ling peals of thy sod-stirring notes fill our men with joy,


AGNI PURANAM.


994


animation and a maddening thirst for martial glory. As a
timid and forlorn wife trembles in her lonely bed, at the clap
of thunder in a dark and drizzling night, so may our hostile
army tremble at thy fatal or death-dealing note ” (35—37).

Each year, the royal arms and insignias should be wor-
shipped by repeating the above-said Mantras, which should
be used as well on the occasion of a royal inauguration by
the king's astrologer. Similarly, the image of the god Vishnu
should be consecrated with the offerings of blankets, etc.,
dedicated to his divine use (38).


CHAPTER CCLXX.


Jt' USHKARA said : — O thou foremost of the twice-born
ones, the god Brahma employed the Mantra known as the
Vishnu Panjaram, for the protection of the god Shankara,
bent on killing the demon Tripura. Again the same Mantra
was used for a similar purpose by Vrihaispati, in connection
with Indra's setting out on a war against the demon Vala, in
which the latter was slain. Now I shall describe the real
nature of the incantation to be practised on the occasion, and
the Mantras that are to bo used in connection with the
same (1—3).

The god Vishnu, wielding a discus in his hand, should be
contemplated as occupying the eastern portion of the circle
of incantation (Mantra Chakra), the mace-wielding Hari as
situated at its south, the god Vishnu holding a bow in
his hand, as occupying the western part of the circle round
the warrior, the god Janardana with a sword In his hand in
the north, the god ffrishikesha at the angular points of the
circle, and the god Janardana as occupying their intervening


* r AGNI PUR ANA M.


996

spaces. Similarly he should contemplate the god Mahno,
manifest in the shape of Kroda, as filling in the ground he
stands, upon, and the god Nrisinha as pervading the span of
heaven above his head. Then the following Mantra should be
repeated : — The discus Sudarshanam, burning with the efful-
gence of the mid-day-sun, is revolving over my head. May
its scorching and unbearable light, kill the ghosts and
monsters that are conspiring to bring about my destruction.
May the mace of the god, resplendent as the sun of the
miliennim, or burning with the glow of living fire, kill the
demons, monsters, Pishachas and Dakinis that are concoct-
ing evils for my ruin. May the bow of the god Vasudeva,.
cast ruin .and confusion broadcast among the ranks of my
enemies, and men, and Kushmandas and Pretas and fiendish
creatures that are brewing mischief for my fall. May the
sworn brotherhood of demons be defeated, frustrated and dis-
persed by the moon-shine*lustre of the irresistible sword of
Vishnu, as serpents are routed by the mighty presence of
the invincible Guruthmana. May all the .Kushmandas,
Yakshas, Daityas, Nishacharas, Pretas, Vinayakas, wicked
men, Hbns, tigers, serpents and birds of prey, change their
vicious nature, and be amiably disposed towards me. May
all those who are practising dreadful incantations to obli-
terate my memory, or to deaden my intellectual faculties in
general, as well as the Kushmandas who are attempting to
deprive me of my comforts and enjoyment, or to screen my
signs of auspicious omen, perish root and branch, struck
by the almighty discus of Vishnu. May my body, mind and
senses harmoniously act in healthy unison, through the favour
of the ever-kind Vasudeva" (4 — 13).

" The god Hari is guarding me both at the back and the
front. The god Him is protecting me a£‘|fci$ north and the
sooth. Thou art the infinite, worshipfu&NiafigeteM god.
The man who bows down te thee, knows no affliction. The
gad Keshava is indentical with this supremellrahma. The


• ' Agto " 997

universe is the embodied self of the god Hari. I, with a
whole heart, ring the name of the god. May my three sorts
of sin be pardoned ” (14—15).

CHAPTER CCLXXf.


Y * USHKARA said : — The Mantras' as contained in the
Rile, Atharva, Saman and Yajur Vedas number hundred
thousands in all. They were divided into two main branches,
vis., Ashvalayana, and Voudhayana. The ten thousand
Mantras contain two thousand Brahmanas. The holy sages
Dvaipayana, etc., remembered the Rikveda. The Yajurveda
contains one thousand nine hundred and ninty-nine Mantras.
The ten thousand Brahmanas are divided into eighty six
branches, such as the Kanva, Madhyandini, Kathi, and
Madhyakati, etc. The Shakhas (branches) known as the
Maitriyani, Taittriya, Vaishampayanika, etc., belong to the
Yajurveda. The first Shakha, belonging to the Sama Veda,
is called the Kouthumi, the second is known as the Atharva*
nayani, and the four Ganas are the Aranyakas belonging to
it. The Ukthas and the ' Mantras such as the four Uhas
number nine thousand in all. The Brahma Sankatas num-
ber hundredand four inall, out of which twenty five apper-
tain to the Sama Vtda. fp^-8).

The sages, Such as Shounaka, Ptppalada, Muncha-
kesha, Sumanta, Javali, etc., were the first rhapsodists who
sang the verses of thi Atharva Veda. The holy Vyasa, an
incarnation Of the Supreme Brahma, divided the Vedas into
different groups or Sbakhas, each containing ten thousand
and six hundred liantrss\ and a hundred Upanishads. The
god Viaban, manifest in the shape of the holy Vyasa. also


998


AGNI PURANAM.


composed the books known as the Puranas and the
Itihasas. The six sages such as Suta, Lomaharsana, Sumati,
Agni-Varcha, Mitraya, Shanshapayana, Kritavrata and
Savarai, having received the Puranas from the holy Vyasa,
became his disciples. The sages, such as Sanshapayana, etc
made Sanhitas of the eighteen Puranas, such as the Brahma,
etc. The god Hari who is beyond all illusion, and of whom
has evolved out this illusory universe, and who though
shapeless, sometimes assumes a definite form, and who is
the fountain source of all knowledge, is the pervading spirit
of the present work (Agni Puranam). A man by worship*
ping and singing hymns in praise of the god (Vishnu), is
enabled . to enjoy all the creature comforts in this life, and
to work out his salvation in the next (g — 17).

The Almighty, ever victorious Vishnu, is manifest in the
fire and in the sun. As fire, he serves as the mouth of the
gods, by receiving the libations offered in the course of a
sacrifice. The god (Vishnu), as manifest in the shape of
the religious sacrifice, forms the theme of the Vedas and
the Puranas. The present work (Agni Puraftam) is the
best* of all shapes that had ever been assumed by the
infinite Vishnu. The god Janardana is the author and hearer
of the present Agni Pupanam. Therefore, the present work
is full of the essencjB of all the Vedas, and ranks supreme
among its sister comjtositions. The Agni Puranam is replete
noth all knowledge worth acquiring, is holiest of the holies,
and is great with the infinite greatness of the god Had.
One in quest Of wisdom, should read and hear the verses
of the present work recited, whereby he will gain proficiency
in learnings deice it (Agni Puranam) is but another mani-
festation of tbs god Hari running through all as imiversaf
soul. The seekers of beauty, wealth, kingdom, virtue, fame,
learning, cow r vjfiage and attributes of good fortune in.
g e n era l, are- suretoattelh their respective specks of se hci -
tation by a single perusal of the present work, the Agni


ACNI PVHANAIi;


999


Puranam grants salvation to those who earnestly strive for
liberation of their encaged souls, whereas by going through
it, the worst sinners may purge off the sins that lie thick on
their souls (1&--22).


CHAPTER CCLXXII.


if USHKARA said The Puranam, which the god Brahma
narrated of yore and which contains fifty thousand verses,
is known as the Brahma, and a man, seeking a residence in
heaven after death, should make a gift of it to a Brahmana,
together with the gift, falling under the category of Jala
Dhenu, on the day of the full moon in the month of
Vaishakha. The work, entitled the Padma Puranam and
which contains twelve thousand verses, together with a cow,
should be given to a Brahmana under the auspicies of a
similar moon in the month of Jaistha (1—2).

Thd holy sage Parashara narrated the Puranam known
as the Vaishnaba, dealing with incidents that occurred in the
cycle of time called the Varaha Kalpa, and containing
twenty thousand verses. A gift of the above-said work
together with the articles forming the gift of Jala-Dhenu
should be made over to a Brihmana on the day of the full
moon in the month of Ashada, whereby the giver would go
to heaven after death. The Puranam narrated by the god
of wind and known as the Vayaviya Puranam, which contains
fourteen thousand verses and deals with incidents of the
age known as the. Shveta Kalpa, and the virtues and rules
of conduct that ought to have been followed and observed
in that cycle of time, is a favourite work of (fee god Hart
lids sacred work should be caused to- bt copied out and


16 oo


ACNI PURANAM,


presented to a Brahmana, on the day of the full moon in the
month' of Shravana, together with the articles which form
the gift : of Guda Dhenu. The Puranam which begins with
the Gayatri* and contains eighteen thousand Slokas' and
Mantras which describes the fall of the demon Vritra and
the annals of the cycle of time known as the Sarasvati Kalpa,
and wherein the articles of faith and rules of conduct have
been fully discussed is known as the Bhagavatam. A copy
of the work should be presented to a Brahmana on the day
of the full moon in the month of Bhadra, (Prosthpad),
together with the gift technically known as the Golden
Lion (3—7).

The Puranam in which the holy sage Naiada discussed
the rules of conduct that prevailed in the cyle of time known
as the Vrihat Kalpa, and which contains twenty five thous-
and Verses in all, is known as the Naradeyam Puranam. A
min by making gift of a copy of such a Work, together with
«£6W to Bramhana, attains the highest religious merit in
life. A copy of the work, entitled the Markandeyam Pura-
nam« and which is composed of nine thousand verses, should
he presented to a Bramhana on the day of the fool moon in
the month of Karticka. The Puranam , which the . god of
fire narrated to the holy sage.Ya&hisbtha, and which contains
twelve thousand verses, is known as the Agni Puranam. A
copy of this wonderful work Which is 'replete with informs*
tionsonall subjects yrorth-knoving^ should be given ton
feotmhana under : P»oo»v *n ; - the month

of Magha, whereby the frfvier wouid attain all his heartfelt
objects. The Purrnm the Sun-god
and which Bbava ' . ^whlcb deals, in .

fourteen* thousand yei^^d^h'^e'^i^ebis which are to .
come, Is known as {the ' Ijhs^ya J^^^hl^ A copy of the
said work together n^ttiothy should be made

•' V ' ^ V* 7 i r 1 M "' ' 1


tool


ACNI roitANAM.

over to a Brahmana in the month of Pousha. The Puranam
narrated by Savarni to the holy sage Narada, and which
deals with the history of Rathantara and the Varaha-mani-
festation of Vishnu, is known as the Bramha-Vaivarta-Pura-
nam. A man by presenting a copy of the abovesaid work
to a Bramhana in the month of Phalguna, ascends the region
of Bramha, The Purunam in which the god Maheshvara,
wrapped up in the flame-manifestation of his divine self, laid
down t(|e rules of conduct to be observed in the fiery cycle
of time'(Agneya Kalpa), and which is composed of eleven
thousand verses, is known as the Linga Puranam. A copy
of the abovesaid work, together with the gift falling under
the category of Tila-Dhenu, should be made over to a Brah-
mana in the month of Phalguna, whereby the giver would
ascend the region of Shiva, after death. The Puranam nar-
rated by the god Vishnu, and which deals with, the doings
of the Varaha-manifestation of his own self on earth, is
known as the Varaha Puranam. A copy of the abovesaid
work, together with a golden image of the celestial Garuda,
should be gifted to a Bramhana in the month of Chakra,
whereby tiie giver would attain ihe beatitude of the god
Vishnu. The great Skanda Puranam was narrated by the
god Skanda, and contains eighty-four thousand verses. The
Vamana Puranam which is replete with the anecdotes of the
earthly life of the god Hari, is composed of ten thousand
verses. A copy of the work, dealing with all sorts of pious
a rt#, should be presented to a Bramhana on the occasion of the
sun's passingoverthepoiot of autumnal equgovc. The Kurauf
Pur anam narrated by the great tortoise-manifestation of the
god, contains eight thousand verses, and deals with the history
of the king Indradamnya. The Matsa Puranam narrated
by the fish incarnation of Vishnu to Manu in the cycle of
Tune known by the same epithet (Matsa Kalpa), contains
thirteen thousand Verses. A copy of the book should be
presented to a Bramhana under the auspices of Viskova
126


too*


AGNI PURANAM.


together with a golden image of the fish incarnation. The
Garuda Puranam narrated by the god Vishnu in the cycle
of Time known as ,the Tarksha Kalpa, 'contains eight
thousand verses and describes the birth of Garuda out of
the egg of the primordial universe. A copy of the wort:
should be presented to a Bramhana together with a Swan of
gold. The Bramhanda Puranam narrated by the god
Bramha and describing the glory of the universe, contains
twelve thousand verses, and copy of the work should be
presented to a Bramhana as well (n»— -23).

The reader of the Mahabharatam should be worshipped
with garlands, perfumes and wearing apparels as he would
finish reading each canto (Parva) of that great epic, and
the Brahmanas should be sumptuously feasted with Payasa
on the occasion, as well as cattle, gold and proprietory right
in lands and villages, should be given to the Brahmanas at the
end of each canto. The readers of the book (Mahabharatam)
wrapped in a silk cover and placed in a sacred receptacle,
should be worshipped at the end of its entire recital. Nara,
and the god Narayana should be likewise worshipped
on (he occasion with flowers, etc. The Brahmanas should
be propitiated with gifts of cow, boiled rice, gold, land,
and a sumptuous repast. The different sorts of gems as
well as the gifts known as the Mahadanam, should be made
over to the Brahmanas within the first two or thrie months
of the end of the recital. The Brahmanas who had been
present in the assembly of recitation and heard the entire'
work recited yofom beginning to end, should be presented
with gifts on the occasions of the sun's, changing its course.
O thou twice-born one, those who had beard it recited should
make gifts to the Shravakas (Listeners'. A man by making
gift of a' work of Itihasa, or of one belonging to the Pourtnic
literature, enjoys a sound and unbroken heaUh in life and
ascends heaven and attains salvation after death [ 24 -^ 29 ).


CHAPTER CCLXXill.


Oaid THE God OF Fire : — Now I shall narrate to you
all about the dynasties of kings and sovereigns who be-
longed to the solar or the lunar race. The god Hari begat
the lotus born Brahma, who in his turn begat the holy sage
Marichi, the father of the patriarch Kashyapa, — the god of
day being the son of that patriarch. The great luminary
married Sanga, Prabba, and the daughter of Raivata. He
begat Revantam on his last-named queen, Pravatam on
Prabha, and Manu aud the twins Yama (the god of death)
and Yamuna (the presiding goddess of the river of that
name). The shadow queen of the god (Chhaya' in her turn
gave birth to Vaivasvata Mann, Visti, 'the daughter named
Tapati, and Shani (the patron deity of the planet Saturn).
The Ashvinis on the other hand, were the sons of the sun-
god by his queen Sanga (i — 5).

The Vaivasvata Manu had eight sons, each of them, bis
peer in majesty and prowess who ruled the kingdom of
Ayodhya and were named Ikshaku, Nabhaga, Dhrista,
Sharyati, Narishyanta, Pranshu, Dista, Sattama, Karusha, and
Prishadra. Ila was the name of the daughter of Manu, and
Budha, (the presiding deity of the planet Mercury) begat
Pururava on her. After the birth of Pururava, Ila became
the wife of Sudumuna, Sudyumna begat the three kings.
Utkala, Gaya, . and Vinatashva on her. Utkala became
the king of the territory named after him, the country
of the west was allotted to the share of his brother
Vinatashva, while Gaya who ruled the different quarters of
the globe, established his capital in the city since memorable
after his name. Sudyumna obtained the kingdom of Pratis-
thanam by the advice of the holy Vasistha. Thereafter
Sudyumna made over the kingdum to Pururava (6—10).


1004 AON! PURANAM.

The Shakes were the sons of Narishyanta. Vaishnava and
Amvarisha were the sons of Nabhaga, whereas the race of
Dharashtaka first started from the king Dhrishta. The kings
Sankalpa and Anarta were the sons of Sharyati, while
Revata was the son of Anarta, who became the ruler of the
country named after him and established his capital in the
city of Kushasthali (i t — 12).

The virtuous Raivata Kukudmin was the eldest of the
hundred sons of Reva, and hence ascended the throne of
Kushasthali. Kukudmin in the company of his wife went
to hear the song of the great Bramhan, and his soul became
so deeply wrapt in music, that cycles after cycles of time
rolled on earth quite unheeded and all the time passed as
one moment. But the trance broke, and Kukudmin hastily
repaired to his capital, followed by the Yadavas. His capital
was at Dvaravati the city of many palaces (lit., doors), well-
guarded by Vasudevas and others at the head of the Bhojas,
the Vrishnis, and the Andhakas. Kukudmin gave his daughter
Revati, the virgin of spotless beauty, in marriage with Vala-
deva, and subsequently practised austere penances on the
summit of the mount Meru, whereby he ascended the region
of Vishnu (13 — 16).

The two Vaishya sons of Nabhaga took to the life of a
Bramhana, while the K&rushas, the sons of Karusha elected
to remain Kshatriyas and were invincible in battle. The
sons of Prishadhra who killed a cow of their spiritual precep-
tor, were degraded to the^Iow status of a Shudra. Ikshaklcu
the son of Manu, begat Vikukshi. who in time graced the
rpyal throne of heaven. Kukutstha was the son of Vikukshi.
His son was Suyodhana, His son was Prithu. His son was
Ayus. His son was the redoubtable Ynvanashva. His son
was Shiavanta and his capital was in $hravanti and his
capital was situated in' the east Hi* son was Vrihad-
ashva. His son was knvalayasbva. The latter prince
formerly known by the name of Dhundhu- was invested


ACNI ftJRANAM.


1005

with the dignity of a Dhundhumara. Dhundumara had three
sons, viz., Dridhashva, Danda and Kapila. Haryashva and
Praniodaka were the sons of Dridhashva (17 — 23).

Haryashva begat Nikumbha, whoste son was Sanhatashva.
His sons were Akrishashva and Ranashva. Ranashva
begat Yuvanashva whose son was Mandhata. Mandhata
had two sons, viz., Purukutsa and Muchukunda. Purukutsa
begat Trasadasyu and Sambhuta on his queen Narmada.
Sambhuta was the father of Sudhanva, who in his turn
begat Tridhanva. His son was Taruna. His son was
Satyavrata. His son was Satyaratha. His son was Harish-
chandra. Harishchandra begat Rohitashva, and Rohitasbva
begat Vrika. Vrika, begat Vahu. Vahu begat Sagara and
hb queen Prabha gave birth to sixty-thousand sons.
Bhanumati gave birth to Asamanja. The sons of Sagara
were killed by the god Vishnu, while engaged in excavating
the nether region. Asamanja begat Anshumana. Hb son
was Dilipa. Hb son was Bhagiratha who brought down the
Ganges on earth. His son was Nabhaga (23—30).

Nabhaga begat Amvarbha. Hb son was Sindhu-Dvipa,
Hb son was Shrutayu. Hb son was Rituparna. Hb 'son
was Kalmashapada who begat Sarvakarma. Sarvakarma
begat Anaranya, who begat Nighna, who begat Anamitra,
whose son was Raghn. Raghu begat Dilipa. Hb son was
Aja. Aja begat Dirgha Vahu and Kala, who begat Aja-
pala, whose son was Dasaratha (31—34).

Dasaratba had four aons, all born of the essence of the
Supreme Bramha and who were the incarnations of God.
Rama was the eldest of them all, and killed the demon king
Ravana of Lanka, and so became the foremost of his race.
Rama ruled, the kingdom of Ayodhya, and hb life forms
the theme of the immortal epic of Valmiki, composed at the
request of the holy Narada, Rama begat Kusha and Lava
on hb beloved SiU. Kasha begat Atithi whose son was
Nbhada. Nbluda was the father of Nala, whose son was


ioo6


uni pvrai4am.

Nabhoh. Nabhoh begat Pundarika, Pundarika begat Su-
dhanva. Sudhanva begat Devanika, whose son was Ahina-
shva who begat Sahasrashva. Sahas rashva begat Chandra*
loksu Chandraloka bega f Tarapida, whose son was Chandra
Gin. Chandragiri begat Bhanuratha, and Bhanuratha begat
Shrutayu. The kings enumerated above were the descendants
of- Ikshaku and'belonged to the Solar race (35—39).


CHAPTER CCLXXIV.


I^AID THE God OF Fire : — Now I shall enumerate the
names of kings who belonged to the lunar race, and a perusal
of whose history tends to absolve the reader of all impieties.
The god Brahma came into being on the mystic lotus flower
that sprang from the umbilical region of the Supreme Vishnu.
Brahma, begat 'Atri. Atri begat Soma (the Moon god) who
perforfned a Rajshuya sacrifice and made over his proprietory
. right to the three worlds, to the preceptor as his remunera-
tion (Dakshina) for officiating thereat. As the Moon god
was rising out of the primeval ocean, just having finished
his bath after 'the sacrifice, behold, the damsels of. heaven
(lit., the goddesses)' who were always eager to feast their eyes
With Ins matchless beauty, were smitten with the arrows of
Cupid at his -presence. Passion clouded their sense of dig-
nity, and they all surrendered their honour and matronly
virtues to the Moon-god. The goddess Lakshmi forsook
-the bed of Narayana and nestled herself round the neck of
the beautiful Moon. And so did Dyuti forsake her lord
Bhivavasu, and Pusti her wedded lord (the gotf of fate), and
Prabha her god of day, and Kuhu her fire-god and Kirti her


AGNI PURANAM.


XOO7


husband Jayanta, and Dhriti ber husband Nandi, etc., and
all bartered away their honour for the beafity of the god.
The Moon-god ravished them all, nor could the husbands
of the goddesses dissuade him from the act with their arm9
and curses, as ,by the merit of the Rajshuya sacrifice he had
paramount sway over the seven worlds (1—7).

But by a subterfuge, the gods managed to bring about
bis downfall.* Proud of his irresistible charms, the Moon-god
had taken a fancy of the beautiful Tara, the wife of the holy
Vrihaspati (Jupiter), the preceptor of the gods, and seduced
her away from the custody of her lawful husband. Jupiter
would have avenged the insult done to his house, had not a
war broke out between the gods and the demons, regarding
the possession of stars and constellations that had taken ad-
vantage of the interregnum that followed, and had made
head to an open revolt. The universe shook to its very
core, when the god Brahma intervened, pacified the wrath
of Ushana and gave the beautiful Tara to the holy Angirasa,
Vrihaspati, who had found her to be near her .time with 'the
child, asked her to be safely delivered thereof. Tara gave
birth to a male child, all effulgent with celestial beauty, who
gave himself out, on delivery, as the son of the Moon-god.
This son of the Moon-god is known as the Budha (Mercury).
Budha begat the king Pururava, whom the nymph Urvasi
bad elected to marry at the cost of an exile from heaven
(8—^12).

0 thou foremost of the holy sages, the king enjoyed
the beauty of the nympbfor five, six, seven, eight, nay for
fourteen thousand years together and the sacrificial fire,
which had been manifest in three different shapes, was then
reduced to one, a circumstance which ushered in the 'cycle
of Time, known as the Treta. Whereupon, the king began
to practise austere penances, and was ultimately merged in
the essence of the Supreme God. The king Pururava had
eight sons by hi9 nymph-queen, named Ayu, Dridhayu,


ioo8


AOKI FUK AHAH.

Ashvayu, Dhanayu, Dbritimaria, Vasu, Divigata, and Shatayn.
Ayu had five sons, vis., Nuhusha, Vriddha, Sharroa, Raji,
Darbha, and Vipapma. Raji, by the grace- of Vishnu had
a hundred sons known as the Rajeyas. In the war that
broke out between the gods and the demons, the gods asked
Raji for help, wherein he killed the demons.

The king Raji made over his own kingdom to the god
Indra and ascended the heaven thereafter to fight bis
demon-foes. In the interim the sons of Raji revolted and
ousted the lord of the celestials of his assigned territories ;
whereupon Vrihaspati, the spiritual guide of the celestials,
pacified the wrath of the malignant planets, recovered the
lost possessions of Indra. and made them over to him in due
time. The ‘sons of Raji were degraded in their social status
and took to demeaning professions (13 — 19).

Ring Nahusha had seven sons, vis., Yati, Yayati, Uttavna,
Udbhiva, Sharyati, and Meghapalaka. Yati led the life of
celibacy, and while yet a boy took to the wilderness, to
practise austere penances and afterwards became merged
in the essence of Hari. Devayani, the daughter of Shukra
(the planet Venus) was joined in lawful wedlock with Yayati.
The king Yayati was afterwards wedded to Sharmistha, the
daughter of Vrishaparva, on whom he begat three sons in
succession. Yadu and Turvasu were the sons of Yayati
by his queen Devayani, while Sharmista gave birth to
Druhya, Anu, and Puru, of whom Yadu and Puru became
the founders of royal dynasties (20—- ss).


CHAPTER CCLXXV.


Oaid the Goo op Fire : — Y adu bad five Mmi, named
Nilanjika, Raghu, Krostu, Shatanjit, and Sabasrajk of whom,
Saharsrajit . was the eldest. .Shatajit had three sobs, via.,
Hailieya, Yenuhaya and Hay a. Haibeya begat Dharma-netra
whose son was Sanhana. Sanhana begat Mahima whose
son was Bhadrasena. His son was Durgama. His son was
Kanaka. His sons were Kritavirjaya, Kritagni, Karaviraka,
and Kritanja. Kritavirja begat Arjuna, the memorable Karta-
virjarjnna of the Pouranic literature. Arjuna practised
austere penances and obtained the boons of sovereignty of
the seven continents of the earth, possession of a thousand
arms, and invincibleness in battle, on condition that he would
meet his doom at the hand of the god Vishnu in the event
of his living an unholy life. The king, (thousand-armed)
Arj una performed ten thousand religious sacrifices. The
very mention of his name was enough to hold the thieves
and robbers in check. His powerful hands could be per*
ceived everywhere in the realm, and a thing left on the road
was as much as safe as it would have been, if kept in a
strong room. In the merit of gift, in penances or in the per-
formance of religious sacrifices, in prowess, in learning or in
wisdom, no king can be reckoned a peer of the redoubtable
Kartavirjarjuna (j — -8). -

Of the hundred sons of Krita-Virja, the five named as
Shurasena, Shura, Dhrista, Krishna and-Jayadhvaja were the
most famous, and their names only have been handed down
to posterity. Jayadhavaja begat Talajangha. The sons of
Talajangha formed the race of the Haiheyas, which was
divided intp five main clans or branches, such as the Bhojas.
the Avantas, the Vitibotras, the Svayam-Jatas, and th
" 127 '' '•* •


1010


AGNI PURANAM.


Shoundikiyas. Vitihotra begat Ananta, and the name of hi*
son was Durjaya (9 — u).

Now I shall give you a history of the race of Krosta, in
which the god Hari was incarnated. Vrijinivana was the son
of Krostu. Vrijinivana begat Svaha, whose son was Rusudga*
His son was Chitraratha, who begat Shashavindu, who was
a staunch votary of the god Hari. Of the hundred
thousands sons of Shashavindu, all famed for their intelli-
gence, valour, personal beauty and generosity, the foremost
was Prithu-Shrava who begat Suyajnaka. The latter begat
Ushana. His son was Titikshu. His son was Marutta. His son
was Kamvala-Vahri. Whence followed a line of fifty kings,
known as the Rukma-kavachas (of golden mail,), and belong-
ing to the race of Rukma, of whom Havira, Jayamagha,
and Papaghna were the foremost. Jayamagha was over-fond
of his wife and was an oxorious sovereign. Vidarbha was the
Son of Jayamagha by his queen Shaivya. His sons, were
Kashika, Lomapada and Kratha. . Lomapada begat Kriti.
Chedi was the son of Koushika, from whom the race of kings,
known as ' the Chaidyas had sprung. Kratha the son of
Vidarbha begat Kunii, whose son was Dhristaka. His son
was Nidhriti. His son was Udarka (12 — 19).

Then Vyoma, the son of Dasharha became king, whose
son was Jinsuta. His son was Vikala. His son was Bhima-
ratha. His son was Avaratha. His son was .Dridha^Ratha.
His son was Shakuni. His son was Karambhaka. His son
was Deva-Rata. His son was Deva-Kshetra. . His son waa
Madhu. _ His son was Dravarasa. His son was Puruhuta.
His son was Jantu, whose son Satvta was a virtuous and
powerful monarch of the race of Yadu. Satvata had four,
sons named Bhayamana, Vrishni, Andhaka, and Dfcvavriddha,
from each of whose loins has started a longed mighty race
of kings (20—24).

Deva-Vriddha had a son named Vabhru, and the following
distich in his praise is still current among men. " The king


AGNI PURANAM.


1011


Deva-Vriddha is like the gods, and his son is the foremost
of human beings. His virtues are equally trumpted in
regions which acknowledge his sway, as well as in those
which are far remote. 11 The king Vabhru had four sons such
as Vasudeva-Kukkura, Bhajamana, Shini and Kamvaia-
Vaharisha. Dhrishnu was the son of Kukkura. His son
was Dhriti. His son was Kapotaroma. His son was Tirthi.
His son was Nara. His son was Chandana Dundubhi. His
son was Punarvasu. His Sons; were Shuka and Vahuka.
Shuka begat Devaka. His sons were Ugrasena, Deva and
Anupadeva. They had seven sisters who were given in
marriage to Vasudeva. Their names are Devaki, Shruta-
Devi, Mitra-Devi, Yashodhara, Shridevi, Satya Devi anti
Surapi. Kansa was the eldest of the sons of Ugra Sena, the
names of his other sons, being Nyagrodha, Sunama, Kanka,
Shanku, Satan u, Rashtrapala, Yudhamushti, and Sumushtika

(25—33).

Rathamukha and Vidu-ratha were the sons of Bhaga-
mana. The sons of Viduratha were Rajadhideva and Shura,
while the former begat two sons named Shonashva and
Shveta-Vahana. ’ Shonashva had five sons, such as Shami,
Shatrujit, etc. Shami begat Patithratra. His son was Bho-
jaka. His soft was Hridtka. . Hridika had ten sons such as
Krita-Varma, Shatadhanva.Devarha, Bhishma and others.
Devarha begat Kamvalavariu. His son was Asamanja.
The sons of Asamanja woreSudanshtra, Suvasa and Dhrista.
Dhrista married two wives Chradhari and Madri. Gandhari
gave birth to Sumitra, while Madri became the mother of
Judhajita. Dhristha had other sons such as Anumitra, Shini,
and another. , Anamitra begat Nighna. His son was
Pnsena, and Shatrajit (34—39).

Prasena obtained the gem known as the Samantaka from
the sun-god. One da/ while Prasena was walking in the
forest with the gem, a lion killed him and carried away the
- precious stood. The Hon in his turn was killed by Jambuvana,


1012


Aon kunam.

who met his doom at the hand of Hari. Han obtained
the gem from Jambuvana, as well as the hand of his daughter
Jaavuvati, and went with the gem and his newly married
spoose to the city of' Dvaraka. The gem was given 'to
Shatrajita, who was killed by Sbata-Dhanva.. Krishna killed
Shata-Dhanva and recovered the priceless jewel, and placed
it before Vala, the chief of the Yadus, through the hands of
Akrura. Thus Krishna was acquitted of the charge of
stealing the diamond Syamantaka. The mart who reads
these couplets, is sure to be cleared off of all false accusations,
and to ascend heaven after death. Shatrajita had a son
named Bhayankara, and a daughter named Satyabhama, who
was wedded to Krishna and became one of his most beloved
wives (40— 44V

Anamitra begat Shini. His son was Satyaka. His son
was Satyaki, while Dhuni was the son of Yuyudhana. His
son was Yugandhara, while Svajhya was the son of Yudha-
jit. His sons were Rishava and Kshetraka, while Shafatka
was the son of the former. His son was Akrura. His son
was Sudhanvaka. Vasudeva and others were the sons of
Shura, whose daughter Pritha (Kunti) was wedded to the
king Pandu (45 — 47).

The gods of virtues, wind, and Indra respectively begot
on Kunti, the queen of Pandu, three sons named Yudhis-
thira, Vrikodam. and , Dhananjaya, while Madri, the other wife
of the king, gave birth *0 Nakula and Sahadeva. Vasudeva
hegat Rama, Sarana and Durgama on his wife Rohini.
While by his other wife DeySki, he had six sons, named
Sushenaka (the eldest of them alt) Kritimana, Bhadrasena,
Jarunya, Vishoudesaka and Bhadradesha, all of whom her
brother Kansa put to' death. After that, Devaki gave birth to
Bala, Krishna and to a daughter named Bltadra in succession.
Chaiiideshna and Shamva and others? v«re the sons , of
Krishna by his wife Jamhayati (48—5!).


CHAPTER CCLXXVI.


i^aid THE Goi> OP Fire : — The patriarch Kashyapa was
incarnated in the shape of Vasudeva, while his wife Aditi
(the mother of the gods) took birth as the gentle Devaki.
Krishna, the supreme Bramha, manifest in the shape of a
man, was born in the womb of Devaki and owned Vasudeva
as his father. The manifold voice of the dumb but suffering
humanity, ushered in his advent on earth, as this poor planet
we live in, badly wanted a regeneration of her affairs. So
the lord came at last to protect the pious, to establish true
faith, to avenge the wrong, to remedy the evil, to extend
his own kingdom on earth, to strengthen the cause of divinity
and to destroy the demon of darkness (i — 2).

Krishna had sixteen thousand queens, of whom Rukmini,
Satyabhama, Satya, JTagnijiti, Gtndhari, Lakshana, Mitra-
vinda, Kalindi, Jambavati, Sushila, Madri, Koushalya and
Vijaya were his most beloved. Rukmini gave birth to
Pradyumna and others. Satyabhama was the mother of
Bhima, etc., while Shamva and others were born in the womb
of Jambavati, they all being the offsprings of the loins of
Krishna, and numbering hundred hundred thousand in all.
The Yadavas who had been living in peace under the security
of the prowess of Krishna, and protected by his all-conquer>
ing and ever-victorious arms, numbered eighty-four thousand,
in all. Pradyumna, a son of Krishna, begat the war-loving
Aniruddha on his wedded wife, the beautiful Vaidarbhi, while
Aniruddha in his turn was blessed with a number of mighty
sons like Vajra and others. Thus the mighty race of Yadu
(Yadavas) could boast of thirty million and six hundred
efficient, intelligent, and able-bodied sons, who had been
demons in their previous existence, and .awnmed tuman
shapes to. create mischief on earth (3—8,.


1014 agni pukanam.

The god Hari, comes into the worid in the shape of a
man, to set right the evil which has its ordained place in the
mechanism of the human society, and which being aug-
mented with the dust of successive ages, threatens to choke
up the fountain spring of all human action, and shakes the
structure of society to its very foundation. O thou the fore-
most of the sages, who by constant meditation, have been
able to realise the supreme bliss in their soul, the advent of
the god on earth, is only to bring into the surface, the god
in man, and to kill the demon of darkness that tries to
benight the human soul. The conflict between the good
and the evil, the light and the darkness, the gods and the
demons, had occurred many times ere this, the conflict was to
determine which of the two controversing principles should
prevail and reign paramount in the universe (9 — iq).

The first of these wars was fought by the god, incarnate
as the dreadful Nrisinha (a being, upper-half shaped as
lion, lower-half man), for the furtherance of the principle of
absolute and universal good ; the second war for the same
end was fought by the Dwarf-manifestation of the Supreme
Vishnu ; the third was fought by the Boar incarnation, the
fourth was fought on the occasion of churning ambrosia
(Amrita Manthana) out of the primeval ocean ; the fifth was
that in which stars and constellations darted at their fiery
neighbours and hurled destruction on one another, the sixth is
known as the Ajivaka ; the seventh and eighth were those in
which the demons Tripura and Andhaka were killed, the
ninth was that which witnessed the fall of the demon Vritra,
while the others in which the demon Shalva, Halahala,
Ghora, Kolahala, etc., were killed are named after the
enemies of the gods respectively killed in them (11 — is).

The god Hari, the protector of all the gods, was incarnated
in the shape of a creature, half-lion jpid half-man, and killed
the demon Hiranya Kashipa and placed his sen, the devoted
Pralhada, on his throne. The Dwarf-incarnation of god was


ACN1 PURANAM.


1015


bom in the womb of Aditi, and owned her husband Kashyapa
as his father, cheated the demon king Vali of his kingdom
of the three worlds, and restored it tQ Indra, the god of the
celestials. The Boar-incarnation of the god killed the demon
Hiranyaksha, the brother of the dreadful Hiranyakashipu,
and lifted up with his tusks, the earth, still then under the
waters of a universal deluge, and was worshipped by the
lord of the celestials. The mount Mandara was transformed
into a churning rod, and the trappings were made of the
hundred headed Hydra, and the gods and the demons began
to churn the primeval ocean. The god Hari made over the
whole measure of nectar thus churned out to the gods
( > 3 — ! 7 )*

In the war of the stars, the god Hari protected the gods
and killed the demons of anger, envy, etc. In the war that
witnessed the fall of the demon Tripura, the god Hara im-
plored the aid of the god Hari, the protector of the gods,
the destroyer of the demons, and he strengthened the arms
of his devoted Ishana who was riding a chariot of the earth-
goddess, driven by no less a charioteer than the eternal
Brahma, and was thus able to burn down the demon to ashes. #
The god Hari, fondly attached to his beloved Revati, killed
the demon Andhaka who afflicted the mind of his worshipful
Hara, by attempting to carry away his darling G<>uri. In
the war that broke out between the gods and the demons,
the god Vishnu, in the guise of a sea-foam, paved the way to
the fall of Vritra and thus upheld the supremacy of the
divine heirarchy (18—21).

Likewise the Parushu Rama-, (Rama wielding a battle-
axe in his hand), incarnation of Vishnu killed many a
demons, and exterminated the race of oppressive and
turbulent Kshatriyas, and thus fulfilled his divine mission
on earth. The god Hari killed the demon of poison, imbibed
by his devoted Maheshvara, which was churned out of the
primeval ocean at the last churning! and thus removed the


ACM PURANAM.


1016

painful anxiety felt by the god for the safety of the latter.
The demon Kolahala (uproar; who rent the skies with his
infernal roarings, when the armed hosts of heaven met in
battle the countless legions of fiends, drawn in martial
array, was also killed by the god Hari, who thus once more
vanquished the foe of eternal goodness, and preserved the
gods in heaven. The kings, the princes of the blood royal, the
holy sages, the Rishis, and the Munis should be all deemed
as the incarnations of god, whether their names occur in
the orthodox list of such manifestations or not (22—25).


-:o:-

CHAPTBR CCF-XXVII.


Oaid THE Fire God : — Varga was the son of Turvasu.
His son was Gobhanu. His son was Traishani. His son
was Karandhama. His son was Marutta, His son was
Dushmanta. His son was Varutta. His son was Gandira.
His sons were the mighty Gandhara, Kerala, Bhoja, Pandya
and Kola, who were the founders of five mighty races of
people, who ruled the five countries respectively named after
them, as above enumerated (1 — 3).

Babhrusetu was the son of Drujhyu. His son was
Purovasu. His son was Gandhara. His son was Dharma.
His son - was Ghrita. His son was Vidusha. His son
was Pracheta who became the father of a hundred sons,
of whom Anastreya, Sabhanara, Chakshu, and Parameshu
became the founders of royal lines. Anastreya begat
Kalanala. Kalanala begat Srinjaya. Srinjaya begat Puran-
jaya, whose son was Janamejaya. His son was Maha-Shula.
His son was Mahamana. O Bfamhan, tyaha-Mana begat
Ushinara and who alio begat Nriga on his queen Nrigt.


AGNI PURANAM.


1017


Nara on his queen NarS, Krimi on his wife Krimi, Suvrata
on his queen Dasha, and Shivi on his queen Drisbadvati
(4 — 8).

Shini had four sons, vis., Prithu Darbha, Viraka, Kaikeya,
and Bhadraka, whose prosperous territories are respectively
named after each of them. Titiksha was the son of Ushi-
nara, while Rushadratha was the son of Titikshu. Rusha-
dratha begat Paila. Paila begat SutapS, whose son was
Vali, the foremost of those who had practised asceticism.
Vali begat Anga, Vanga, Sajhyaka, Pundra, Kalinga and
Valeya, by ‘dint of his sheer psychic force. Anga begat
Dadhi-Vahana. His son was the king Divaratha. His son
was Dharma-Ratha. His son was Chitraratha. His son
was Satyaratha, who in his turn was the father of Lomapada
( 9 — » 3 >-

Lomapada begat Chaturanga. His son was Prithulaksha.
His son was Champa, who begat Haryanga. Haryanga begat
Bhadraratha, whose son was Vrihat karma. His son was
Vrihadbhanu. His son was Vrihatmabana. His son was
Jayadratha. His son was Vrihadratha. His son was Vishva-
jit. His son was Kama. His son was Vrisha Sena. His
son was Prithu Sena. These kings belong to the race of *
Anga, and now hear me narrate the race of Puru ( 14 — 16).


• :o>


CHAPTER CCLXXVIII.


Said the God of Fire:— Puru begat Janmejaya, whose
son was Prachinnanta. His son was Manashya. His son
was Vitamatha. His son was Shundhu. His son was Vahu-
viddha. His son was Sanyati. His son was Rahovadi. His
128


tot8


AGNI PUR AN AM.


son was Bhadrashva, who begat ten sons, vis., Richeyu.
Kusheyu, Sannajeyu, Ghriteyu, Chitreyu, Sthandileyu, Dhar-
meyu, Sannateya, Kriteyu and Matin&raka. Matinara begat
Tansurodha, Pratiratha and Pursta. Pratiratha begat Kanva.
Kanva begat Medbatithi ; white Tansurodha had four sons
vis., Dushmanta, Pravira, Su manta and Vira. Dushmanta
begat the illustrious Bharata on his queen Shakuatala,
whence this country has got the epithet of Bharata- Varsa.
Bharata was the first of the line of kings, known as the
Bharatas (i — 7).

The race of Bharata having been exterminated through
the wrath of his mother, the Maruts invited Bharadvaja, the
son of the holy sage Vrihaspati, to perform a religious sacri-
fice, whereby an heir might be born to the throne of Bharata.
Bharadvaja performed the sacrifice and did all that was need*
ful, and Vitaka was born in consequence who revived the
extinct race of Bharata and reopened the line of succession.
Vitatha in his turn begat five sons, viz., Sohotra, Sohata,
Gaya, Garbha, (several Puranas read Garga), Suketu and
the magnanimous Kapila. He had two other sons named
Koushika and Gritsapati. The sons of Gritsapati were the
Bramhanas, the Kshatriyas and the Vaishyas and Dirghatama,
from whom Dhanvantari came into being (8 — ii\

Dhanvantari begat Ketumana. His son was Hemaratha,
better known as Divodasa. His son was Pratardana. His
sons were Bharga and Vatsa. Vatsa begat Anarka. His
son was Kshemaka. His son was Varshaketu. His son was
Bibhu. His son was Anarta. Bibhu had another son named
Sukumaraka, whose son was Satyaketu (12—14).

Vatsa begat Vatsa- Bhumi, while Vrihat had three sons,
viz., Ajamidha, Dvimidha, and Purumidha. The invincible
Ajamidha begat Janhu on his wife Keshini. The mighty
Janhu begat Ajakashva, whose son wa^ Valatcashva. His
son was Kushika. His son was Gadhirindraka. Satyavati
was the daughter of Gadhi, while the .illustrious Vishvamrita


:<» i v.


AGNI PURANAM. .


tor 9

was an offspring of his own loins. The sons of Yishva-
mitra were Devarata, Katimukha, and Shtmah-sbepha, the
name of his other son being .Ash taka (15 — 18).

Ajamidha begat Shanti on his qqpen Nfiini. Shanti or
Sushanti begat Purujati, whose son was Vajhyashva. The
'jve sons of Vajhyashva, who became kings, were named
tfukula, Srinjaya, Vrihadishu, Yavanira, and Krimila, who are
jitter known in history as forming the group of five kings
(Panchalas). The sons of Mukula, known as the Moukuleyas,
were begotten on his wife by appointment. Panchashva
was the own begotten son of Mukula. Panchashva begat
Mithuna, Divodasa and Ahalya. Shatananda was the son of
Sharadvata by his wife Ahalya. Shatananda begat Satya-
dhrik, whose son was Mithuna (19—22).

Divodasa begat Kripa and Kripi, while Maitreya was the
son of Somapa. Shripjaya begat Pancha Dhami, whose son
was Somadatta. His son was Sahadeva. His son was
Soasaka. His son was Jantu. His son was Prishata. His
son was Drupada. His son was Dhristadyumna. His son
was Dhristaketu, Ajamidha begat Riksha on Dhumini. Riksha
begat Sanvarana. His son was Kuru who migrated from
the holy city of Prayaga and founded the kingdom of
Kurukshetra (23 — 26).

Kuru begat Sudhanva, Sudhanu, Parikshit and Arimejaya.
Sudhanva begat' Suhotra. His son was Chyavana. Seven
other sons were born unto the king by his queen Girika,
through the merit of propitiating the holy sage Vashishta.
Their names were Vrihadratha, Kusha, Vira, Yadu, Pratya-
graha, Vala and others. Vrihadratha begat Matsakali, and
Kushagra. Kushagra .begat Vrisbabha. His son was Satya-
luta. Sudhanva had a son named Urja. His son was Sambhava
His son was Jat a sandha. His son was Sahadeva. His sor
was Udapi. His son was Shratakarina. The virtuous Jana-
mejaya was the son of Parikshita (27—31).

Janamejaya begat Tiasadasyu.* Janhu bfgat Suratha,


1020


AGNI PURANAM.


Shrutasena, Ugrasena, and Bhimasena. Janamejaya had two
sons Snratha and Mahimana* Suratha begat Vidura. His
son was Riksha. Bhimasena was the son of Riksha, the
second. .His son wa^ Pratipa. His son was Shantanu.
Shantanu begat Devapi, Valhika, and Somadatta. Valihika
begat Somadatta, Bhuri, Bhurishrava and Shala. Shantanu
begat Bhishma on the goddfess Ganga and Vichitra-Virja on
Kali. The holy Krishna Dvaipayana' begat Dhritarashtr-
Pandu and Vidura on the wires bf Vichitravirja by appoint-
ment (32—37)-

Kunti, a wife of Pandu,’ gave birth to Yudhisthira, Bhima
and Arjuna, by the blessings of the gods, while his queen
Madri gave birth to Nakula and Sahadeva through a similar
divine agency. Arjuna begat Abhimanyu on Shubhadra,
while Parikshit was the son of Abhimanyu. Yudhisthira,
Bhimasena, Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva respectively be-
gat on Draupadi, the joint wife of the Pandavas, sons named
Pati, Vindha, Shatakirti, Shatakarma and Shatanika. Bhima-
sena on the other hand begat Ghatotkacha on his monstress
wife Hidimva. O Bramhan, {innumerable kings had sprang
from the line of Bharat. The eternal time is but another
manifestation of the god Hari, and as such, calls new princes
into being, to maintain law and order in the world, and hum-
ble them to dust who are found wanting in their kingly
virtues. O thou twice-born one, the god Hari should be
worshipped in spirit of all humility, and the self-controlled
votary should pour libations of clarified on the sacred fire,
to secure his eternal rest in peace and benediction ( 38 — 41 ).


*: 0 :-


jg, aAIaTIC SJJIETY.


COSMO PUBLICATIONS
