THE
RAMAYANA.
‘TRANSLATED INTO EnGuish Prost FROM THE ORIGINAL
Sanskrit oF VALMIKI.
—sore400—_
YUDDHA KANDAM.
EDITED AND PUBLISED 3Y
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M.A.
Rector, Keshub Academy.
PRINTED BY
GirisH CHANDRA CHACKRAVARTI,
Dxva Prass, 65/2. BEADoN STRERT,
CALCUTTA.
1893.
Al rights reserved.}
YUDDHAKANDAM.
SECTION.
Heaaina the words of Hanuman rehearsed properly,
Rama, exceedingly delighted, said —“By Hanuman hath
been performed a very great decd, rare on earth, and one
incapable of being even conceived by any other in the world.
Save Garuda and the Wind-god, and save also Hanuman,
him find I not who crosseth the wide ocean. Entering by
main force the city of Lank&, incapable of being subjugated
by the gods and Danavas and Yakshas, the Gandharbas,
serpents or Rakhas, and well protected by Ravana,—who,
living, cometh out (of it)? And who that is not the compeer
of Hanuman in strength and prowess, even entereth
into (Lanka), hard to subdue, and carefully guarded by the
Rakshasas? And having so put forth his strength commensu-
rate with his prowess, Hanuman hath also performed a
great act befitting a servant on behalf of Sugriva.* That
servant who, being entrusted with a hard task,—after having
accomplished it, doeth another work in pursuance of (the
prescribed business), is the best of men. That servant is
middling, who, deputed to any task,t doth not, albeit
capable, perform any other work which may be dear to the
* Having seen Sita—which was all that he had been commissioned to do
by Sugsiva, Hanumdn has destroyed Rakshasas and burnt Lank ; and this he
did of himself like a good servant.—T.
t i.e. performing the entrusted work.—T.
139


1106 RAMALANA.


king. And that servant who, entrusted with any work of
the king, doth not, although competent, heedfully accomplish
the same, hath been called the worst. Anent the order
(which he had received), Hanuman hath done the work
(and more). He hath not been humbled,*—and, further, he
hath pleased Sugriva. And by seeing Vaidehi, (Hanum&n)
hath, while reaping righteousness, saved me, the Raghu
race, and the highly powerful Lakshmana. And this paineth
my mind sore, that I cannot do a like benefit, returning
this dear office of his. Embrace expresseth the all (of the
Deity),t and, finding this occasion, I extend my embrace unto
the high-souled Hanum&n.” Having said this, Rama, with his
down standing on end in joy, embraced the self-controlied
Hanuman, who was present alter having finished his speech.
Then reflecting for a while, the best of the Raghus agaia
spoke in the presence of Sugriva, lord of monkeys,—
“Complete success bath been attained anent the search of
Sita. But when I think of the ocean, my mind is again sunk
in dejection. How can the assembled monkeys go over to
the southern shore of the vasty deep, difficult to cross?
This tidings thou hast related unto me touching Vadehi;
but what are the monkeys to do next about crossing the sea ?”
Having said this unto Hanum§n, that slayer of foes, the
mighty-armed Rama, agitated by anxiety, was then plunged in
thought.

© By the Rdbshasas—~T.

+ The commentator explains this obscure passage after his own orthodox


fashion. The gist is this, Delight is the essence of the Deity, and all His in-
eernations body forth this, Embrace is typical of this emotion —T,


YUDDHARENDAM. 1107


SECTION It.


"Tuen the graceful Sugriva spake words capable of
soothing sorrow, unto Dagaratha’s son, Rama, who was
wrought up with grief,—''Why, O hero, dost thou grieve, like
one that is base? Let not this be so. Chase away thy grief,
even as an ingrate resigneth amity. Nor, O Raghava, when
the whe eabouts of SitA hath been discovered, and when too
the abode itself of the foe hath been known, do I perceive the
reason of thy sorrow. Thou, O R&aghava, art intelligent,
conversant with learning, wise, and judicious. Do thou cast
away this sorry way of thinking, even as a self-controlled
(ascetic) casteth away any course of thought interfering with
the attainment of his purpose, Crossing over the ocean
swarming with gigantic alligators, we shall enter Lank& and
slay thy enemy. Of a person that is dispirited and poor in
pluck and that hath his soul overwhelmed with grief, every
interest droopeth, and he cometh by misfortunes (one after
another). All these heroes, these leaders of monkey-hordes,
who are ardent for thy welfare, are competent to enter into
fire itself. From their cheerful attitude I know this, and firm
is my faith. It behoveth thee so to arrange things that,
slaying the foe, Ravana of impious acts, we may bring hither
Sita by our own prowess. Do thou, O R&ghava, so order
matters that a bridge may be constructed (over the main),
and that we may behold the palace of the Kakshasa monarch.
We having seen the city of Lanka, established on the summit
of Trikuta, do thou for certain conclude Ravana as slain in
battle immediately after (we see her). Without throwing a
bridge over the ocean—the dread abode of Varuna—even
the Asuras and celestials with Indra (at their head) are
unequal to subduing Lank&. When the bridge over the
ocean hath been constructed up to near Lanka, and when my


1108 RAMAPANA.


forces have crossed (over the sea), consider victory as secured,
As these monkeys are heroic in fight, and able to wear
forms at will, O king, do not let thy intellect get stupified
and thus mar all interests. In this world, sorrow berefts
people of their prowess. Do thou do even what should be done
by a man--summon thy manliness ; for what an actor doeth
promptly, conduceth to his success. At this time, O eminently
wise one, do thou realise goodness through thy energy.*
Of heroic, high-souled, men like thyself, on their sustaining
an entire or a partial loss, grief undoeth every interest.
Therefore, the foremost of intelligent persons, and conversant
with every lore, thou shouldst along with councilors like me,
strive to beat thy foe. Find I none in the three worlds, O
Raghava,who can stay in fight before thee equipped with thy
bow. Thy business entrusted to these monkeys shall not
(anyway) suffer. And soon, crossing over the boundless
main, thou shalt behold Sita. Therefore, O king, renounce
thy sorrow, and call up wrath. Those Kshatriyas that
conceive no anger in respect of their enemies, have their
activily annulled ; and all fear furious persons. Drawing
nigh unto us, do thou, gifted with acute intelligence,cast about
for crossing over the dreadful deep—lord of streams—along
with us. On these forces getting beyond the ocean, do thou
take, it for certain that we have won ; and when my whole
host hath reached the further shore, do thou indubitably
conclude that we have obtained victory, These monkeys,
heroic and capable of assuming in fight forms at will, shall
slaughter those foes by showering rocks and trees. If i see
any means of crossing the ocean, Varuna’s abode, I shall, O
destroyer of foes, deem him as slain in battle. And what is
the use of dilating ? Every way thou shalt prove victorious.
And I see omens, and my mind is filled with delight.”


* ¢¢.as I understand this rather obscure passage, prove thou good through
thy wigors~secure victory to the cause of goodness through thy might —T


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1109


SECTION


Hearne Sugriva’s speech, reasonable and fraught with
high sense, Kakutstha accorded his assent to it and spoke
unto Hanuman, saying,—"By asceticism, or constructing a
a bridge, or drying up the ocean,—-competent every way am
I for crossing over this ocean. Of impracticable places, tell
me how many there are in (Lank&), which are incapable of
being come at. O monkey, as thou hast seen personally,
I wish to get acquainted with all this. And thou hast at thy
leisure duly noticed in Lanka the number of the army,
the inaccessibility (or otherwise) of the gates, the defence
of Lanka, and the dwellings of the Rakshasas. Do thou
faithfully relate this unto me, for thou art observant.”
Hearing R&ma’s speech, Hanuman, offspring of the Wind-
god, foremost of those conversant with speech, again spake
unto Rama,—“Hearken ! I will describe unto thee by what
method is the city of Lank& guarded and protected by the
Rakshasas, how loyal the Rakshasas are, the surpassing
prosperity of Lank&, the dreadfulness of the deep, the
divisions of the forces,and the number of the elephants,horses,
cars, efe.,” Having said this, that best of monkeys, knowing
the nature of things, went on,—~“Lank&, filled with mad
elephants, ever rejoiceth. She is great, thronging with cars
and inhabited by Rakshasas. Her doors are firmly established
and furnished with massy bolts. And she hath four wide
and giant gates. (At those gates) are powerful and large
arms, stones, and engines,whereby a hostile host approaching,
is opposed. At the entrances are arrayed and set in order
by bands of heroic Rakshasas,hundreds of dreadful sharp iron
sataghnis.®* She hath a mighty impassable golden wall,


7 A kind of fire-arms, or ancient Hindu rocket ; or a stone set round with
sharp iron spikes —According to Rémanuyz, Sort of mace about two yards in
length, with spikes —T.


1110 RAMAFANA.


having its side emblazoned in the centre with costly stones,
coral, lapises and pearls. Round about is a moat, exceedingly
dreadful, with cool water, eminently grand, fathomless, con-
taining ferocious aquatic animals, and inhabited by fishes. At
the gates are four broad bridges, furnished with machines and
many rows of grand structures. On the approach of hostile
forces, their attack is repulsed by these machines,and they are
thrown into the ditch. One among these bridges is immovable,
strong and fast established ; adorned with golden pillars and
daises. O Rama, albeit Ravana hungereth for fight, yet
is he calm; and he is vigilant and ever engaged in superin-
tending his army. And dreadful and resembling a celestial
citadel, Lank& cannot be ascended by means of any support.
She hath fortresses composed of streams, those of hills, and
artificial ones of four kinds. And, O Raghava, she is
situated on the other shore of the ocean having its limit far
away. And way there is none even for barks,—and all sides
are destitute of division. And that citadel is built on the
mountain’s brow ; and, resembling the metropolis of the im-
mortals, the exceedingly invincible Lank& is filled with
horses and elephants. And a moat and sataghnis and various
engines adorn the city of Lank&, belonging to the wicked
Ravana. And an ayuéa of Rakshasas, dart-handed, hard to
subdue,—aud all fighting at the front with their swords
protect the Eastern gate. And a xiyuta of Rakshasas with a
fourfold force, and with the flower of the soldiery—protect
the Southern gate. And a prayuta of Rakshasas, bearing
swords and shields, and skilled in all arms, protect the
Western gate. And an arvuda of Rakhas protect the
Northern gate. And car-warriors and horsemen—persons
honored and sprung from noble lines—by hundreds and
thousands,—and irrepressible goblins and ofs of Rakshasas,
protect the garrison. I have broken down the bridges and
filled up the entrenchment. I have burnt the city of Lank&
and laid the wall low. Let us by any way whatever cross


PUDDHAKANDAM. tn


over Varuna's abode. Do thou take it for certain that the
city of Lanka is subdued by the monkeys. What is the use
of thy reckoning the rest? Angada, Dwivida, Mainda,
JAmbavin, Panasa, Nala, and the general, Nila, bounding and
reaching Rfvana’s abode, and riving the same consisting of
woods and hills, moat and gateway, walls and dwellings,
shall, O Raghava, bring (hither) Sita. If this be so,* do thou
order the entire body of the army to be brought; and do
thou set out at the proper hour.”


SECTION Iv.


Haazine Hanuman’s speech duly from the begin-
ning, the exceedingly energetic Rama having truth for his
prowess, said,—“What thou sayest—‘I shall speedily destroy
the city of this dreadful Raksha,’—is true, 1 tell thee.
Therefore, at this very moment arrange for Sugriva’s march.
The Sun hath attained his meridian at this proper moment,
capable of conferring victory.t Let Ravana carry away Sita
(to his own country),—whither shall Ravana, living, repair?
Like a dying person who hath taken a death-dispelling
drug and drunk ambrosia, Sita, hearing of my preparations
for war, shall inspire hope of life. To-day the Northern
Phalguni (is in the ascendant); and to-morrow the moon
shall be in conjunction with Hast&.t O Sugriva, shall we set


* Ebam djndpaya ; RimAnuja reads sense into this passage. // thou wishest
the principal monkeys to go, bring them ; if thou mish the whole host to march,
call it hither, and march at the auspicious moment—T.

+ The moment is named adhijit—7.

+ Hast4 sprung from Punarvasu is the star of doom, portending death to
Ravana. The Northern Phalguni is Sitt’s natal star. The expedition begun
during the influence of this star, augurs deliverance to Vaidchi.—T.


Faery RAMAYANA.


out, surrounded by the entire host? The omens I witness,
augur, that, having slain Ravana, I shall bring back Janaki,
The upper lid of my eye throbbeth; and it betokeneth that
my desire hath indeed been had.” Then, honored by the
monkey-king as well as Lakshmana, the righteous Rama,
understanding the import of things, again said,—Surround-
ed by hundreds and thousands of fast-speeding monkeys,
let Nila go ahead of this force, for surveying the route. O
Nila, do thou, O general, expeditiously take the army by
apath furnished with fruits and roots, having cool waters
of the woods, and replenished with honey, The wicked
R&kshasas vitiate* fruits, roots and water along the way.
Thou, ever on the alert, shouldst preserve these from the
Rakshas, And, bounding down into hollow places, mountain-
fastnesses, and woods, let the rangers of the wilds, spy the
posted detachments of the enemy. Let those that are in-
competent, stay here, This business is dreadful, and we
should apply our best strength in conducting the same.
Therefore let the foremost moukeys gifted with prodigious
prowess lead forth the choice portion of the army, numbering
hundreds and thousands. And let Gaja resembling a hill,
and the exceedingly powerful Gavaya, and that monkey,
Gavaksha, master of the leaping ones,t like a haughty bull
among kine, go in the van of the monkey-host. And let
that foremost of monkeys, Rishava, go, protecting the right
wing (of the army); and let Gandha, irrisistible like
an elephant with the fragrant temporal juice trickling down,
and the vehement Gandbamfdana, go,} protecting the left
wing (of the monkey-army). And, cheering the army, |
myself, mounted on Hanumin, like the Lord (mounted) on
Airavata, shall march in the midst of the forces. And like


* By means of poison, ef.—T.

+ de, monkeys.—T.

The verb is singular, instead of dual, as also the qualifying epithet,
Pércamadishthits, But the sense is clear.—T,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1113


the lord of wealth and master of riches, mounted on
SSrvabhauma, let Lakshmana resembling the Destroyer,
march forth, mounted on Angada. And let that king of bears,
the long-armed Jambavan, Sushena, and the monkey,
Vegadargi, protect the rear (of the forces).” Hearing
Raghava’s words, that foremost of monkeys and lord of the
army, the exceedingly energetic Sugriva, issued his orders.
And anon those highly powerful monkeys issuing up
from caves and mountain-summits, began to bound (on all
sides). Thereafter, honored by the king of monkeys and also
Lakshmana, the righteous Rima, accompanied by his forces,
set out in a southerly direction. And he marched,surrounded
by hundreds and thousands, Kotis and Ayutas of monkeys
resembling elephants. And he marching was followed
by the mighty host of monkeys ; and all those maintained by
Sugriva were filled with joy and betrayed demonstrations of
delight, And bounding by way of guarding the flanks of
the forces, and leaping in front of the army for pioneering,
blustering, emitting feonine roars, and uttering cries, the
monkeys made towards the south. And some partook of
perfumed honey and fruits, and some bore mighty trees,
holding the sprouts. And some in pride (of strength)
suddenly raised others and threw them down. And some
fell and were anon up, and some brought others down.
‘We shall slay Ravana, as also all the rangers of the night’ ;
thus did the monkeys roar out in the presence of Raghava.
Before (the army), Rhrishabha, the heroic Nila, and Kumuda,
along with many monkeys, went on clearing the route, In
the middle were king Sugtiva, Rama and Lakshamana,
environed by innumerable powerful and terrible monkeys.
And the heroic monkey, Satavali, surrounded by ten Kotis
(of troops), alone on all sides protected that monkey host.
And accompanied by an hundred Kotis, Kesari, Panasa,
Gaja* and Arka, by meahs of many protected that host on


* Some other than the first-mentioned Gaja—T.
340


Peers RAMAYANA,


every side. And taking Sugriva before them, Sushena, and
Jambavan, surrounded by innumerable bears, protected the
rear (of the army.) And that foremost of rangers possessed
of excellence, and of restrained senses, the heroic Nila,
general (of the army), kept going round the ranks, And
Valimukha, and Prajangha, Jambha and the monkey Rabhasa,
went everywhere, urging on the monkeys, While thus
marching, breathing pride of strength,those tiger-like monkeys
saw that foremost of mountains Szkya crowned with
hundreds of trees, and watery expanses laughing with
flowers, and beautiful tanks. And knowing the order of
Rama of dreadful wrath, that terrible and mighty host,
exceedingly terrific and resembling the bosom of the deep,
cowed down through fear, leaving behind cities and villages
and provinces, went like the deep-sounding sea. And at
the side of Dagaratha’s son those heroic monkeys resembling
elephants, proceeded by bounds, like noble horses, spurred
on. And those foremost of men, mounted on the monkeys,
louked beautiful like the Sun and the Moon half eclipsed by
the two mighty planets, v’s., Kahu and Ketu, And (thus) did
the righteous R&ma proceed towards the South, accompanied
by his army. Then Lakshmana, furnished with consummate
sense and promptitude, who was mounted on Angada,
spoke unto Rama, inviting words, fraught with import.
“Speedily recovering Vaidehi, who hath been carried away,
and slaying Ravana, thou wilt, thy end attained, return
to Ayodhy&, who shall also have her desire. O Raghava,
1 see all the great auspicious omens on earth and in the sky,
signifying success unto thee. Mildly and grateful doth the
blessed breeze blow behind the army, inspiring pleasure,
And the birds and beasts are crying in sonorous voices.
And all the points (of the compass) appear pleasant; and
the lord of day is cloudless. Bhrigu’s son, Usanas, also
weareth for thee an auspicious aspect, and Dhruva is without
blemish. And all the r7sAis, pure and furnished with lustre,


PUDDHARANDAM. 1115,


go round Dhruba. And before us shineth the grandfather
of the high-souled Ikshwdkus ; the spotless R&jarshi Triganku;
with his priest.—-And stainless and free from disturbances
appeareth Visakh&. This is the racial star of us, the
high-souled Ikshwakus. And Nairita, the radical star of the
Nairitas, is sore affticted and, touched by the rod-bearing
Dhumketu is in trouble. All this is for the destruction of
the Rakshasas. Atthe fated time, those that are in the
clutches of Death, have their stars afflicted by the planets,
And the water is dear and tastes sweet ; andthe woods are
stocked with fruit. And the odorous gale doth not blow
strongly ; and the trees are furnished with all blossoms of
of the season. And, O lord, this host of monkeys appeareth
splendid to the height, as did the celestial host on the
occasion of the destruction of Taraka. Seeing all this,
thou shouldst, O noble one, fee! delighted.” Having
thus consoled his brother, Sumitr&’s son, feeling enlivened,
said this. The monkey-host went on, covering the
earth. And the mighty dust raised by bears, monkeys,
and tigers, having for their weapons nails and teeth,—with
the foreparts of their feet and hands, enveloped the world,
and the splendour of the sun was obscured. And as clouds
envelope the sky, the mighty monkey-host went on, covering
up the Southern quarter with its mountains, woods, and sky.
And as they marched covering many a yoyana, the streams
seemed as if they flowed in an opposite direction.* And
they, while proceeding, took rest by pools of clear water, on
mountains covered with trees, on plains and in forests
teeming with fruits. Some moving straight, some moving
askance, and some moving on the earth, that enormous


* Kataka remarks -—“As when clouds drift past, the Moon it is that seems
to seud accross the sky, as the monkey-army marched on, the rivera sesmed
to flow in an opposite direction”. RAmAnuya says that the waters of the
streams dashed by the monkeys, held an opposite course. The former inter-
pretation is hardly satisfactory, and Ram&nuya seems to be right-—T.


1116 aAMR ANA,


monkey-host went on covering the entire earth. And they
were all of delighted countenances and gifted with the
velocity of the wind. And these monkeys devoted all
their energy to the accomplishment of R&ghava’s work.
And they were displaying unto each other their joy, prowess
and energy. And influenced with the vanity of youth they
set up diverse cries. Some proceeded with speed,some leaped,
some set up cries expressing joy, some were uplifting
their tails, and some were striking the ground with their feet.
Some, stretching forth their arms, were breaking the hills,
and others the trees. And others were ascending the tops
of the hills. Some began to make terrible sounds, and others
made a tingling noise. And many others blasted the
creepers with the velocity of their thighs. And some were
engaged in sporting with trees and rocks. And thus was
the earth enveloped with millious and Zofis of fearful
monkeys. And thus the enormous monkey host went on day
and night. And all those monkeys, delighted, guided by
Sugriva, and taking delight in battle, went ou speedily, And
they did not take rest even for a moment, desirous of rescuing
Sita. Thereupon, getting at the mount Sazhya covered with
various trees and forests, those monkeys ascended it, And
Rama went on beholding the variegated forest, rivers and
fountains of the mount Sahya and Malaya. And those
monkeys broke down various trees—Champakas, Tilakds,
mangos, Prasekas, Sindubarakas, Tinigas and Karaviras,
Asokas, Kavanjas, Plakshas, Nyagrodhas, Fambukas and
Amalakas. And seated on picturesque rocks, various forest
trees, shaken by the wind, showered flowers on them. And
there blew in those forests filled with the smell of honey, a
wind of pleasant touch, cool as the Moon, accompanied by
the hummings of the bees. And that mount was richly
embellished with diverse metals. And dust issuing from
these metals and thickened by the air, enveloped on all sides
the huge monkey-host. There blossomed in that picturesque


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1117


mountain-vale Ketakas, Sindubaras, beautiful Vasantees,
Médhabis, Gandhapurnas, Kandas, Chiravilyas, Mahtkas,
Vanjulas, Vakulas, Ranjakas, Tilakés. Nagas, Chutas,
Patalikas, Kobidaras, Muchlindas, Arjunas, Singsapas,
Kutajas, Pintalas, Tinigas, Churnkas, Neepakas, Neela-
Sokas, Savalas, Ankolas and \otuses. And all these trees
were greatly disturbed by those monkeys, delighted with
their view. There were in that mountain many a picturesque
lake and pond filled with Chakravakas and Karandavas,ducks,
Chraunchas and the mount abounded on alt sides with boars,
deer, and terrible bears, lions and tigers and various other
fearful animals, and it was beautified with full blown lotuses,
lilies, Utpalas and various other fragrant trees growing in the
water, And various birds set up their musical choir on the
summit of that mount. And bathing and drinking, these
monkeys sported in the water. And ascending the mount
these monkeys continually bounded. And excited with drink,
they crumbled into pieces the ambrosia-smelling fruits, roots
and flowers of the trees. And those monkeys yellow as
honey, delighted, feasted on mangoes, long and measuring a
drona, Breaking down the trees, blasting the creepers,
bounding from one tree to another and making the mount
Sahya echo, those leading monkeys went on delighted and
excited with drink. Some ascending the trees, and others
drinking, the whole earth was enveloped with those monkeys,
and seemed as if beautified with ripe paddy crops. And reach-
ing the mount Mahendra, the large-armed Rama, having eyes
like lotuses, ascended the summit adorned with diverse trees,
And getting at the top, Dagaratha’s son espied the vast deep
filled with tortoises and fishes. Thereupon, passing by
the mounts Satya and Malaya and arranging their enormous.
host, they* by and by reached the roaring deep. And
descending therefrom, Rima, the foremost of those who
minister happiness unto all, accompanied by Lakshmana and


* The monkey leaders.—T.


1118 RAMALPANA.


Sugviva, entered the forest situate on the banks of the
ocean. And reaching the expansive banks having rocks there-
on and continually washed by the rising billows, Rama spoke
saying,—"O Sugriva we have arrived at the abode of Varuna.
Now hath arisen in my mind what I had not thought of
before. And this ocean, the lord of the streams, whose other
side is not seen,cannot be crossed over without some excellent
measure. Let the monkey-host be encamped here therefore,
and then concert a plan by means of which they might get
at the other side, And reaching the shores of the ocean, the
large-armed Rama, stricken with grief for Sita, ordered their
encampment, saying,~-“O foremost of monkeys, do thou
encamp thy host on the brink of the ocean, Now hath
arrived the hour for counsel, when we should devise some
plan for crossing over the main. I fear the Rakshasas at every
step, for they are greatly illusion creating—let the leaders
therefore go to their own hosts and let them not proceed any-
where else, renouncing them.” Hearing the words of Rama,
Sugriva along with Lakshmana, encamped the army on the
brink of the ocean,covered with trees. And stationed near the
main,the monkey-host in consequence of their resemblance in
colour with the blue contents of the deep,looked like a second
ocean. Thereupon, teaching the shore, those leading monkeys
engaged in concerting a plan to cross over the vasty deep.
And the tumult. of that monkey-host encamped there, was
heard above the roaring of the deep. And that huge
army of the monkeys commanded by Sugriva, and set up in
three divisions, were deeply concerned with the accomplish-
ment of Rama’s work. And reaching the shore of the vasty
deep, that monkey host, delighted, beheld the ocean moved
by the Wind. And they waited there beholding the deep.-of
unimpeded expanse, having its distant shore inhabited by
the demons, and thronged with various aquatic animals.
While upheaving its foam on the approach of eve, it
appeared laughirg and setting up its surges, it appeared to


PULDHAKANDAM. 11g


dance. It increased with the rising of the Moon and he
reflected himself on its breast. That abode of Varuna was in-
fested with gigantic sharks,whales and Z¥m:ngalas*, disturbed
with the fary of the Wind, filled with serpents having flaming
frames,and various aquatic animals and rocks,and was fathom-
less deep. It had picturesque fortresses on its marge and its
other shore was hard to get at. And the Makarast and
serpents living therein were moved by the Wind. The
waters, as if delighted, were rising and falling. And having
serpents of flaming frames underneath, it appeared as if
sprinkled with scintillations of fire. And that terrible
abode of the demons extended down to the regions inhabited
by the Nagas or serpents. The deep resembled the welkin
and the welkin the deep, and there appeared no difference
between them. The sky crested with stars and the deep
filled with gems resembled each other. The sky enveloped
with clouds and the ocean overflowing with surges presented
no contrast whatsoever. The waves of the mighty deep beat-
ing at each other continually, set up a sound resembling that
of a trumpet in the sky. It was filled with diverse gems
and its water was poisoned by means of the air. It was filled
with various aquatic animals, and upheaving its billows, it
appeared as if excited with ire. And there beheld those
high-souled monkeys the mighty main agitated by the Wind
and muttering as if with the upheaval of the waves. There-
upon, overwhelmed wth surprise, those monkeys, stationed
there, espied the main brimming with rolling waters and
moving as if (off its place).
* A large fabulous fish.—T.
+ A marine monster confounded usually with the crocodile and shark,—T.


1120 RAMAYANA,


SECTION V


——


Turre on the northern shore of the ocean the army was
encamped and arranged in order by Nila) And the two
leading monkeys Mainda and Divida patrolled about on all
sides to protect the monkey host. And the army being
encamped on the shore of the lord of streams and rivers,
R&ma, beholding Lakshmana by his side, spoke, saying—"I
know that grief abates as time passes by, but my sorrow
arising from the separation of my spouse, is increasing day
by day.. I am not sorry that she hath been stealthily taken
away by the demon—but my sorrow is that her end is
drawing nigh. O Wind, do thou go there where my dear
spouse is, and touching her person, do thou touch me, for I
shall then be happy stationing my looks in the Moon and
being touched by thee. Alas! my dear one cried ‘O
ford, O lord’ when she was taken away. Those words,
revolving burn me like poison. I am now being burnt down
day and night by the fire of desire,having separation from her
for its fuel and her thoughts for its flame. Leaving thee,
O Son of Sumitra, I shall jump into the deep and then
shall not this fire burn me any more. This is my only
consolation,for which I draw my vital breath—that myself and
she breathe on the same earth. Like unto a dry land drawing
water from a watered ground, I do live, hearing that Janaki still
survives. When shall 1, discomfitting my enemies, behold
Sit&, having a beautiful waist and eyes resembling lotus-
petals, as a victorious hero beholdeth the royal Grace. Like
unto the sick drinking the e/¢xzr of tife, when shall J, raising a
little her Iotus-like countenance having graceful teeth and
lips, imprint kisses thereon ? And when shall she, laughing,
embrace me with her rising breast resembling the palm
fruit? Alas that chaste dame having scarlet corners of the


2 UDDHAKANDAM. iar


eye, being encircled by the demons, is wishing for a protector
like unto one having no husband, albeit having a husband in
me. How fareth in the midst of the she-demons, that daughter
of the king Janaka, my beloved spouse, and the daughter-in-
law of king Dagaratha? And having those Rakshasas,
hard to repress, slain by me, truly shall she appear like
unto the rays of the Moon extricated from sable autumnal
clouds. Sit& is constitutionally slender, and forsooth, she has
been greatly reduced by sorrow, fasting and calamities
touching time and place.When shall I,piercing with my shalts
the breast of the lord of Rakshasas, renounce my mind’s
grief? And when shall my devoted Sita resembling the
daughter of a celestial, fling herself anxiously around my
neck and shed tears of joy? And when shall 1 renounce
this my sorrow arising out of Maithili’s separation, like
unto one casting off his soiled clothes?’ The highly
intelligent Rama bewailing thus, the day passed away and
the Sun, decreasing gradually, disappeared at last. And
consoled by Lakshmana,Rama,stricken with thought touching
Sita having eyes like lotus-petals, engaged in rites relating
to the worship of Eve.


SECTION VI.


Banorvixe in Lank& that dreadful and awe-inspiring
work performed by Hanuman like unto the high-souled
Sakra, the lord of Rakshasas, looking down with shame,
addressed them all, saying—‘That monkey alone hath
invaded and entered the city of Lanka bard to reach and
hath espied Sita, the daughter of king Janaka. He hath
shatlered the palace,and the altar of sacrifice,slain the leading


141


1133 RAMAYANA.


R&kehasas, and, in short, agitated the whole city of Lanka.
What shall I do now ? And what should you all do on this
occasion? It behoveth you all to give me such counsel as
decometh me and will conduce to my glory.” ‘Victory is the
outcome of consultation’—this do the sages* say. Let us,
therefore, O mighty ones, engage in counsel, relating to the
measures we should adopt towards Rama. There are three
orders of men on this earth—the superior the middling and
the inferior. This distinction cannot be perceived without a
knowledge of the signs, and so I shall relate unto you their
merits and demerits. He is said to belong to the superior
order, whose counsel contains the three signs (mentioned
below), or who engages in works after consulting duly with
friends capable or with persons having the same end in view,
and some times with others, and who serveth Providence.
He belongs to the middle order who consults his own self
only,depends on the Providence, and engages alone in works.
And he belongs to the inferior order who engageth in works
without ascertaining their merits or demerits, disregarding
the will of the Providence and saying, ‘I will do this’, and is
inactive (at last). And counsels are also divided into three
divisions like unto the three orders of men (mentioned).
That counsel belongs to the superior order in which the
counsellors with their judgment reinforced by a knowledge
of political ethics, are unanimous. That one belongs to the
middle order in which the counsellors after varied discussion,
arrive at unanimity in the ‘ong run. And that one is
the worst in which the counsellors differ from each other
and agree a little in the long run, with no good result.
You are all gifted with good intellects: do you all unani-
mously settle as to what becometh me and conduceth to my
well-being. Environed by a thousand of patient monkeys,
Rima, with a view to capture our city, is approaching
towards Lanka. Forsooth, shall he cross over the main along


* Manaswina, according to Rimtauya, means, hero—T°


PUDDHARAND iM. 1133


with his younger brother and a mighty host. He can by his
prowess dry up the ocean and do the other.* Rima ap-
proaching thus with a hostile intention along with the
monkeys, it behoveth you to devise such means as might
protect my city and army.


SECTION Vii.


——


Bane thus accosted by their lord, the highly powerful
R&kshasas, devoid of good sense and ignorant of sound
counsel, replied with folded palms, saying,—‘“Thou hast, O
king, enough of soldiers and weapons. Why art thou smitten
with sorrow then? Repairing to Bhagavati, thou didst dis-
comfit the serpents in battle. The God of Death, livin on
mount Kailaga, encircled by Vaéshas, was subjugated by
thee in a great battle. And that mighty lord of men, proud of
his friendship with Siva, was defeated by thee wrathfully in
battle. Discomfitting and slaying the band of Yakshas, thou
didst bring this flowery car from the mount Kailaga. O
lord of Rakshasas, desiring thy friendship out of fear, Maya,
the king of Danavas, offered thee his daughter} for thy
spouse. O thou of mighty arms, thou didst bring under thy
subjection the powerful and irrepressible D&navat for the
Pleasure of Kumbhinasi.§ And entering the region under
the earth, thou ‘didst defeat the serpents—and thus bring
under thy subjection Vasuki, Takshaka, Sankha, and Jati,
Those heroic Danavas, the Kalakeyas, were greatly powerful,


* 4. ¢. bridge over the ocean —T.
+ This refers to Mandodari, Ravana’s favocrite queea.—T.
This refers to Madhu.—T.

§ Ravana’s sister, who was married to Madhu.—T.


1124 RAMAYANA,


irrepressible, and proud of the boons conferred on ‘them.
And fighting with them perpetually for a year, thou didst
bring them under thy control, O lord, O slayer of foes, and
learn from them the science of varied illusions, O king of the
R&akshasas. O great hero, by thee were defeated in battle,
the heroic and powerful sons of Varuna, followed by a fourfold
division of their army. The dominion of Death is like the
mighty main, having his rod for aquatic animals, agonies
for the trees that cover its islands, the noose for the
billows, his attendants for the serpents and his terrible
fever for the dreadful attitude of the deep. And diving
into this terrible deep, thou didst, O king, discomfit Death
himself and win glorious victory. And every one was
pleased there with thy successful fight. , The Earth was filled
with various heroic Kshetriyas, resembling Sakra in prowess
as she is adorned now with various trecs. Raghava is not
their equal either in strength or prowess. And all those heroes,
hard to repress in battle, were slain by thee, O king. Do
thou wait here, O great king; thou needst not take any:
trouble. Indrajit alone shall slay all these monkeys. And
this one, O mighty monarch, having celebrated the
M&hegwara* sacrifice, hath obtained a noble boon, rarely
{attained by persons). Having agitated the ocean of celestial
hosts, having darts and lances [or its fishes, showering arms
for its oss, elephants for its tortoises, steeds for its frogs,
Rudra and Aditya for its ferocious animals, the Maruts and
Vasus for its mighty serpents, cars, horses, and elephants
for its volume of waters, and infantry for its spacious shore,
this one (Indrajit), taking captive the lord of the celestials
himself, had brought him into Lanka, Then, O king, liberated
agreegbly to the injunction of the Great-father, the slayer of
Samvara and Vritra, worshipped of all the celestials, went
{back) to heaven, Dothou, O great king, entrust Indrajit
with this business until he bringeth to destruction the


* Relating to Mahagwara—the great Lord, a designation of Siva—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 125


monkey-host along with Rama. O king, thou must not think
that this calamity, coming from an ignoble person is not in-
significant. Thou shalt slay Raghava.”


SECTION vilr.


"Turn that heroic general, the Rakshasa named Prahasta,
possessing the splendour of sable clouds, submitted
with joined hands—I am competent to baffle in battle
gods and D&navas and Gandharbas, ghosts, birds and
serpents,—what then is a couple of human beings ? Having
been negligent and confident (in our power), we have
all been deceived by Hanuman. But, I living, that ranger
of woods shall not (again) go hence with his life. All the
earth down to the ocean, containing hills, forests and woods,
shall be rendered free from monkeys. Do thou command me.
And, O ranger of the night, I shall deliver (the Rakshasas)
from the monkeys; and thou shalt not have to suffer in the
Jeast in consequence of thy transgression.”* Then the
Rakshasa named Durmukha, growing enraged, said,—'This
overpowering of all of us must not be forgiven—this flagrant
discomfiture of the metropolis of the auspicious lord of the
Rakshasas as well as of his inner appartment by the foremost
of monkeys. This moment marching alone (from hence) will
T exterminate the monkeys, even if they shall have entered
the dreadful deep, or the sky, or the subterranean regions.”
Then the exceedingly powerful Vajradanshtra, weilding up a
terrific bludgeon, stained with flesh and gore, wrathfully
observed,—‘‘Rima the irrepressible existing,and also Sugriva
with Lakshmana, what have we to do with the weak and

* 7. ¢. the ravishment of Sith —T,


1126 RAMAYANA.


wretched Hanuman? This very day, slaying single-handed
Rama with Sugriva and with Lakshmana, with this bludgeon,
shall I return, after having sorely troubled the monkey-host.
And, O monarch, if thon art minded, hear this other word
of mine! Verily he that is fertile in resources and ever
ready, compasseth success. Let thousands of Rakshasas,
heroic, terrible, fearful to behold, and wearing forms at will,
appointed by the lord of Rakshasas, presenting themselves
before Kakutstha in palpably human shapes, calmly say unto
that foremost of the Raghus,—‘Despatched have we been by
thy younger brother.” Hearing this, he (Rima), summoning
his forces without delay, shall come hither. Then, equipped
with darts, javelins and maces, and bearing bows, arrows
and scimitars in our hands, we shall swiftly and summoning
speed* set out (from hence); and statiouing ourselves in
the sky in bands, and slaughtering the monkey-army with
mighty showers of rocks and weapons, we shall lead it to
Death's door. Let us in this wise decoy Rama and
Lakshmana ; and if they fall into our design, they shall,
without doubt, lose their lives.” Then that hero,
Kumbhakarna’s son, named Nikumbha, endowed with
exceeding prowess, in high wrath remarked unto Ravana,
destroyer of worlds—“Do ye, all of you, stay here along
with the great king. I alone shall slay Raghava together
with Lakshmana, and Sugriva with Hanum§in, and all the
monkeys.” Then a Rakshasa, named Vajrahanu, resem-
bling a hill, in wrath lapping the corners of his mouth with
his tongue, said,—Do ye,casting off anxiety, engage yourself
as ye list. I alone shall swallow up that entire monkey-host,
Do ye,remaining at ease and without anxiety, drink Varunat
wine. I single-handed shall slay Sugriva with Lakshmana,
as well as Hanum§n with Angada,—and all the monkeys.

* Twarita—summoning speed—redundant—T.

+ Véruna wine, otherwise named Vérnni is prepared from bog-weed,
ground with the juice of the date or palm, and then distilled. —T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1127


SECTION IX


Tun, in fierce wrath seizing bludgeons, and paftigas,
lances and bearded darts and javelins, and axes, bows and
excellent shafts and swords, resembling crystelline water,
sprung up the Rakshasas, Rabhasa, and the mighty
Suryyagatru, aud Saptaghna,and Yajnakopa, and Mah&p&rgwa
and Mahodara, Agniketu the irrepressible, and the Rakshasa
Ragmiketu, and the lusty Indragatru, son unto Ravana—
and Prahasta, Virupaksha, and the exceedingly strong
Vajradanshtra,a—and Dhumraksha, and Nikumbha, and the
Raksha Durmukha. And, flaming in energy, they all addressed
Ravana, saying,—“To-day shall we slay Rama, and Sugriva
along with Lakshmana, and the helpless Hanuman, who hath
damaged Lanka. Then, preventing them, who had (thus)
equipped themselves with all kinds of weapons, and making
them sit down, Vibhishana, with joined hands, again spoke
unto them, saying,~~"The wise have asserted that an appeal
to prowess should be resorted to anent a business ¢hen only
when the end sought cannot be attained through the three
(other) means.* Prowess produceth fruit only in respect of
well-advised action dizected while carefully watching(enemies)
that are negligent, or captive,t or under Divine affliction.
But why do ye intend to discomfit (Rama), who is vigilant,
who desireth victory, who is strong in the Divine strength,
who hath subdued passion, and who is hard to subdue ? Who
had in this world ever thought of or reasoned about Hanu-
man’s career over the dread{ul deep, the lord of streams and
rivers ? O rangers of the night, the strength and prowess (of
the foe) being immeasurable, ye should by no means reck-
lessly disregard him. And what was the wrong that formerly

* Vis., conciliation, gift, and creating division.
+ In the hands of other enemics.—T.


1128 RAMAYANA.


had been done by Rima unto the king of the Rakshasas, that
he hath carried off from Janasth3na the spouse of that illustri-
ous one ? If Khara, who had trespassed into regions not his
own, hath been slain in battle by Rama, surely a creature
should to the best of his might preserve his life. It is for this
great fear that exerciseth us on the score of Vaidehi owing its
existence to this,* that she, having been ravished, should
(now) be given up. What is the use of acting so that quarrel
may be the consequence ? And (Rama), possessed of prowess,
yet ever abiding by morality, is incapable of initiating
hostilities for no purpose. Therefore, do ye give him his
Maithili. And before, he by means of his shafts riveth this
city together with her elephants and steeds, overflowing
with countless gems, do ye give him his Maithili. And before
the dreadful, irrepressible and mighty monkey-host blocketh
up this Lanka of ours, do ye give (back) Siti. This city of
Lank& shall perish as also all the heroic Rakshasas, if thou
dost not thyself make over R&ma’s spouse unto him, 1 exert
myself to pleasure thee, because of the fraternity (that
subsisteth between us). Do what I say. 1 say what is truth
and what also is for thy good. Do thou render (back) Rama’s
Maithili, Ere yet the king’s son, for compassing thy
destruction, showereth sure shafts resembling the rays of
the autumnal Sun, having shining heads and feathered parts,
and exceedingly hard, do thou render Maithili unto
Dagarathi. Forsake thy wrath at once, which destroyeth
happiness and virtue; and follow righteousness, which
enhanceth enjoyment and fame. Be thou propitious,—so that
we may live (at ease) along with our sons and relatives.
Render (back) Maithili unto Dagaratha’s son.” Having
heard Vibhishana’s speech, Ravana—lord of Rakshasas—
leaving all of them, entered his own chamber.


* The feeling of revenge for the slaughter of Khara and the rest.—T.


PUDDHAKANDAM. tag


SECTION x.


Tuer early in the morning, like the fiery and refulgent
sun entering a mighty mass of clouds, Vibhishana, fast to
virtue and interest, heroic and possessed of exceeding
splendour, playing a perilous part,* entered the apartment
of his elder brother, resembling an assemblage of mountain-
summits and elevated like the peak of a mountain, orderly,
divided into spacious rooms,—the resort of the great—
inhabited by august and intelligent persons attached (to
Ravana); guarded around by lusty Rakshasas in limited
numbers ; having the air agitated by the breath of mad
elephants ; with loud blares of conchs, and resounding with
trumpets ; embosoming numbers of beautiful damsels, with
its high-ways (overflowing with talk); furnished with doors
of polished gold; embellished with excellent ornaments ;
resembling the abode of the Gandharbas, or the mansion of
the Maruts; containing heaps of gems; like unto the
dwelling of serpents. And that one of exceeding energy
heard sacred and holy sounds uttered by Veda-versed
Brahmanas celebrating the victory of his brother; and that
highly powerful (hero) acquainted with Mantras and the
Vedas saw Vipras worshipped with vessels of curds, clarified
butter, flowers and fried paddy. And the mighty-armed
(Vibhishana) saluted the younger brother of the bestower of
riches,t seated there. And that one acquainted with
manners, after proper courtesy, sat him down on a seat
decked in gold, which was pointed out (by a royal glance).
And in retirement as also in presence only of his counsellors,


* The project he had conceived, vis., converting Ravana to his own policy
of pacification, was fraught with peril to himself, considering his brother's fierce
temperament,—T.

+ Kuvera,—Révana was Kuvera's younger brother.—T.


142


1230 RAMAYANA.


Vibhishana spoke unto the high souled Ravana words backed
by reason, and greatly fraught with his welfare. And
having, with soothing speech, pacified his elder brother and
extended towards him the due civilities, that one, who through
height of sentiment had noted excellence and the want of it,
addressed (Vibhishana) in words befitting the occasion and
the place,—'Ever since, O subduer of enemies, Vaidehi hath
come hither, are seen inauspicious omens. Fire, enveloped
in smoke at the time of its being ignited, and thereafter
throwing out scintillations, with its brightness obscured by
vapour, doth not increase adequately even on oblations
being poured into it with Mantras. Reptiles are discovered
in kitchens, sacrificial fire-chambers, and the places of
Vaidika recitations ; and ants {are found) in clarified butter.
The milk of the kine hath been dried up ; and the nobler
elephants are without the temporal juice. And horses,
albiet they have feasted on fresh grass, neigh distressfully.”
And asses, camels and mules, O king, with their hair
standing erect, shed tears ; and although they are ministered
unto medically, they do not return to nature. And crows in
numbers emit harsh cries on all sides, and are seen in
swarms at the tops of edifices. Vultures sit sadly and
distressed upon the roofs of houses. During the two twilights,
the jackals, coming in sight, utter ominous howls, And
wolves and other (ferocious) animals, as well as deer,
approaching the gate of the palace in swarms, are heard to
set up loud roars resembling the thunder. Things having
come to this pass, even this expiation, I fancy, is capable
of removing the evil omens. Do thou render back Vaidehi
unto Raghava. If I have said this through ignorance or
covetuousness, thou ought not, O mighty monarch, criminate
me. All Rakshasas and R&akshasis, as well as those be-
longing to palace and the inner apartment—shall have to


* The commentator remarks, evidently with justice—“That is, the horses,
having eaten their fill, still hunger."—T.


LTOLDHARANDAM, 113t


experience the evil consequence (of this act of thine), Alt
the counsellors have refrained from tendering this counsel
unto thee ; but surely I must tell thee what I have seen
or heard; and adopting proper measures, it behoveth
thee to act so.’* (R&yana’s) brother, Bibhishana, thus spoke,
unto his brother, the chief of Rakshas, in the midst of
counsellors, these words fraught with his good. Hearing
this beneficial, mild and pregnant speech, fortified by reasons
and capable of compassing (his welfare) for the present, past
and the future, (Ravana) who had conceived a passion
(for Sitd), getting into a rage, replied,—Fear find I none
whatever. R&ghava never shall have Mithila’s daughter,
Even if Lakshmana’s elder brother should be supported in
battle by the celestials with Indra (at their head), how can
he stay before me (in the field) ?” Having said this, that
destroyer of celestial hosts, the Ten-necked one, possessed of
mighty strength and of terrific prowess in battle, then
dismissed his brother Vibhishana, who had spoken truth.


SECTION xr,


Tue unrighteous king, overmastered by his passion (for
Sita), in consequence of his sinful act as well as the toss of
honor he sustained at the hands of his friends, became
reduced, And the occasion for war was wanting. Ravana,
possessed by lust, and continually thinking of Vaidehi,
conceived along with his counsellors that the time for entering
into hostilities had arrived. And sallying forth, he ascended
a mighty car furnished with golden network, adorned with
pearls and coral, and yoked with trained steeds. And having


* Ia accordance with my suggestion —T,


_ 1132 RAMAYANA.


ascended that excellent vechicle, having sounds resembling
those of mighty clouds, that foremost of Rakshas, the Ten-
necked one, drove towards the court. And as he coursed
on, Rakshasas, bearing swords and shields, and carrying all
kinds of weapons, went before the lord of the Rakshasas.
And (some of) these, wearing various frightful suits, and
decked with diverse ornaments, went, surrounding his rear
and flanks. And aftrathas went with cars, and superb mad
elephants, and sportive steeds; and bearing in their hands
maces and bludgeons; and darts and clubs. And as Ravana
marched towards the court, there arose the loud blares of a
thousand trumpet, and the uproarious sounds of conchs.
And that redoubtable and mighty car-warrior held his course,
suddenly making sides resound, and beautifying the high
ways. And the spotless white umbrella of the lord of
Rikshasas, being raised up, looked beautiful lit the Moon
at her full. On his right and left graced two crystal white
chowris furnished with threads of gold. And all those
Rakshasas standing on the ground with joined hands, bowed
down their heads to the foremost of Rakshasas who was seated
on bis car. Hymned by the Rakshasas with blessings of
victory, that exceedingly energetic chastiser of enemies
arrived at the court constructed (by Vigwakarma). And
that highly energetic one in person entered that court
paved with silver and gold, having its heart decorated with
crystal, and gracefully covered with silk, embroidered with
gold; excellently constructed by Vigwakarmi, and guarded
by six hundred ghosts. And Ravana sat down on a superb
and august seat consisting of lapises, furnished with a
pillow; and covered with a soft dear-skin. And lord-like
he commanded the envoys possessed of fleet vigor, saying,—
“Do ye speedily summon hither the Rakshasas. 1 fancy
some mighty effort hath to be put forth against our foes.”
Hearing his words, the envoys began to range Lanka; and
going to every house, they fearlessly collected the Rakshasas


YUDDH4KANDAM. 1133


from places of sport, bed-rooms, and gardens. Then some
set out, mounting cars, and some mounting proud coursers,
and some on foot. And like the welkin filled with fowls,
the city thronged with approaching cats, elephants and
steeds. And leaving their various vehicles and cars behind,
they entered the court on foot, like lions entering mountain
caverns, And taking the feet of the sovereign, and honored
by him (in turn), they sat them down, some on raised seats,
some on cushions of Kuga, and some on the floor. And
presenting themselves agreeably to the command of the
monarch, they sat them down each according to his position,
before the lord of R&akshasas, Ravana. And there came also
the learned and competent to arrive at infallible decisions,
and they sat them down in order of merit. And there alse
came courtiers endowed with virtues, versed in every thing,
and having intelligence for their eye-sight,~-and innumerable
heroes by hundreds also (arrived) at that court for ascertaining
the course that would prove beneficial. And then mounting
a large, noble and splendid car, having its parts decked with
gold, and yoked with horses, the magnanimous and renowned
Vibhishana went to the court of his elder brother. And
that younger brother (of Ravana), announcing his name,
bowed down at the feet of his elder brother. And Suka and
Prahasta were employed in giving to each a separate seat
befitting his rank. And from all sides in the court there
began to spread the odour of excellent agura and sandal and
wreaths belonging to the R&kshasas, decked in gold and
various gems, and clad in costly attires. And no one among
these present at court uttered any thing, or spoke any
falsehood, or conversed in loud accents. And having
completely attained their desire, al! of fierce prowess, gazed
at the face of their lord. And in the assembly of those
intelligent, and exceedingly powerful persons, equipped
with arms, the intelligent Ravana appeared splendid like the
Vajra-handed Indra among the Vasus.


1134 KRAMIFANA.


SECTION Xir.


Tren surveying that entire assembly, that conqueror in
battle delivered himself unto Prahasta,—general of the forces,
saying,—"O general, it behoveth thee so to order the
disciplined fourfold forces that they may successfully protect
the city.” Thereat, Prahasta, carefully carrying out the royal
behest, stationed all the forces within and without the city.
And having posted the army for the defence of the city,
Prahasta sitting down before the king, said,—~—“I have
stationed the forces belonging to thee who art possessed of
strength, inside as well as outside. (Now), without suffering
thy mind to be agitated with anxiety, speedily, do what
is in thy heart. Hearing the speech of Prahasta seeking the
welfare of the kingdom, Ravana craving for enjoyment,
spoke in the midst of his aderents,—"When virtue, or happi-
ness, or interest is in straits, it behoveth you to {know your
course) in relation to pleasant and unpleasant, happiness
and misery, profitable and unprofitable, and good and evil.
No business of mine which ye have set about after taking
counsel, hath ever miscarried. And like V&sava environed
by the moon, stars and plannets, and the Maruts, I surrounded
by you, have attained to plenitude of prosperity. I am, for
certain, going to employ you all. In consequence of his
sleep, I could not inform him of this matter. After having
slept for six months that one of prodigious strength—foremost
of those bearing arms—hath just risen. Janaka’s daughter and
Rama's beloved wife hath been brought hither from the forest
of Dandaka, the region ranged by Rakshas. That indolent
damsel wisheth not to ascend my bed ; nor is there any in the
three spheres, that to me is like unto Siti. She is slender-
waisted,and high-hipped,and her face is as the autumnal Moon
resembling a golden image. She is meek and looketh like the


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1135


hand work of Maya himself gifted with an infinite variety of
fascinations.* And behulding her dainty and tender feet with
roseate soles, and having coppery nails, my mind burneth
(with desire), And seeing ler resembling the flame of a
sacrificial fire and the splendour of the Sun himself; and
her fair face furnished with a prominent nose and elegant
eyes, I, having lost control over self, have come under the
sway of desire. And my passion, uninfluenced by anger and
joy, capable of producing pallor, and constantly causing
anguish and sorrow, hath rendered me pale. Expecting her
lord, Rama, the beautiful one having expansive eyes, hath
solicited for a year’s space; and I have pledged my fair
woods to her of graceful eyes. But tired am I on account of
my passion,—like a horse spent on the way. How can the
rangers of the woods, or the sons of Dagaratha cross over
the sea ungovernable and swarming with countless creatures
and fishes? On the other hand, a single month hath
troubled us grievously. Hard it is therefore to understand
the course of events. Do ye act, each as he thinks
Proper. And although no fear can come from mortals, yet
ye should deliberate (as to what ye should do). Formerly I
had gained victory with the help given by you; do ye in the
same way stand by me now. The king’s son, having learnt
that Sit& is on the other shore of the ocean, taking before
them monkey headed by Sugriva, reached Varuna’s abode,
Do ye so counsel that Sit& may be with-holden by me and
the sons of Dagaratha may be slain; but ye must prefer
certain counsel. No othert person in this world hath the
power to cross the sea along with the monkeys,—victory,
therefore, is undubitably mine.” {Hearing the sorrowful


* This reminds one irrisistibly of Cleopatra’s, The Bengali translators
evidently failing to understand Mayooa Mayanirmita,have conveniently—tras-
ferred the phrase in tact to their versions —T.

+ ] fail to understand anyasya, “no other petson” ;—nor does the commen:
tator helps me anyway.—T.


1136 RAMAPANA,


speech of (Ravana) afflicted with lust, Kumbhakarna grew
enraged, and said,—When just on seeing (Sita) of Rama
along with Lakshmana, theu didst by main force carry her
away, it plainly appeareth that thy mind, like the Yamuna
filling her bed, hath been possessed (by her).* O great king
all this (that thou hast done) is not worthy of thee. If thou
hadst at the outset consulted us in this matter, we would
have doue what was proper.t O ten-faced one, the king,
that arriving at certain conclusions, carrieth on his regal
affairs agreeably to justice, hath not to repent afterwards,
But those actions that are done without deliberation, like
unto clarified butter poured in an impure sacrifice, conduceth
only to harm. He doth not know what is proper and what
not, that performs prior actions afterwards, and posterior
actions first, Others spy holes in the actions of the volatile,
the latter may be possessed of great power,—like swans
passing Krauncha through the hole.$ By luck it is that
Rama hath not yet slain thee, who hath done this tremendous
thing, without reflection, resembling food mixed with poison.
But as thou hast entered upon a course of action which is
improper even in repect of foes, I will, O sinless one, perform
thy work by slaying thy enemies. And, O ranger of the
night, I will exterminate thy foe, Even if Sakra and the sun,
even if fire and the War-god, even if Kuvera and Varuna,
should range themselves against me, I will fight them.
Purandara himself shall be afflicted with fright when | having
my body measuring a mountain, and furnished with sharp
teeth, shall, setting up roars, fight with my huge bludgeon.
Before Rama shooteth a second shalt, to slay me, I shall
drink his life-blood. Be thou comforted by slaying Dagaratha’s
son, I will exert to secure blessed victory for thee. Having


* This passage is very obscure, and the commeatator's gloss does not at all
serve—T.

+ ie. me would have prevented thee—T.

3 The hole made by the dart of Kumara.—T.


FUDDHAKANDAM. 1137


killed Rama along with Lakshmana, I shall devour all the
principal monkeys. Do thou make merry at thy will, drink
the Varuni, and, with thy mind set at rest, conduct affairs
fraught with thy welfare. On Rama being despatched to the
mansion of Yama, Sita shall come under thy subjection for
ever and a day.”


SECTION xitt.


Szcine Ravana wrought up with wrath, the exceedingly
strong Mah&prcwa, reflecting for a moment. observed with
joined hands,—“The man that, entering the forest, abound-
ing with deer and ferocious animals, doth not drink honey,
maketh a fool of himself. O destroyer of foes, who is the
lord of thee, that art lord thyself? Enjoy with Vaidehi,
taking thy enemy by the hand. And, O thou endowed
with prodigious power, do thou exerting thy might lead thy
life, after the manner of hens, and invading Sita again
and again, do thou enjoy her and derive pleasure (therefrom).
And when thou hast attained thy purpose ; what fear can
succeed? Alike when on thy guard, and off it, thou shalt
provide against all exigencies. Kumbhakarna along with
us, as well the exceedingly powerful Indrajit, are competent
to chastise the thunder-bearing (Deity) equipped with his
thunder. Passing by gift, conciliation, and dissension, which
have been assigned by the wise as the means of success, I
relish the success in business which is attained through
chastisement. O highly powerful one, we shall, without
doubt, by the prowess of our arms, subdue all these enemies


143


1538 : RAMAYANA,


of thine that have come hither.” Thus addressed by
Mahaparcwa, king Ravana, honoring his speech, said,—‘O
Mahap4rewa, I will relate unto thee, who hast spoken (thus),
asecret matter relating to myself, which befell me long
since I saw Panjikasthala, like a flame in the sky, coursing
to the Great-father’s mansion. Her pace slackened, as soon
as she saw me, (turn) I feasted on her and deprived her of
her attire, Then she went to the Great-father’s place,
like a crumpled lotus. That high-souled one received in-
formation of all that I had done; and thereat, waxing
enraged, the Deity spoke unto me,—“If from this day, thou
ravish a female by force, thy head certainly sball be riven
in an hundred pieces. It is for this, that with my mind
afflicted with fear, I do not violently force, Videha’s daughter
Sit&, anent lying with her fair self. My rush is like that of
the sea, and my motion that of the wind. Dacaratha’s son
doth not know this, and therefore doth he approach sea, Who
wisheth to address a lion that is lying asleep in a cave,
resembling Death wrought up by wrath? Rama hath not
scen shafts shot by me, resembling two-tongued serpents,—
and therefore, it is that he approacheth me. Like a meteor
burning an elophant, I shall, with shafts shot from bow in
hundreds, resembling the thunder-bolt, consume Rama. And
as at the proper hour the risen Sun defeateth the splendour
of the stars, will I, surrounded by a mighty army, overpower
his strength. Neither the thousand-eyed V&sava, nor yet
Varuna, is capable of fighting me. By the might of this arm
did [ formerly conquer this city, governed by Vaigravana.”


PUDDHARANDAM. 1139


SECTION XIV


Hearne the words of the lord of Rakshasas, as well as
the thundering of Kumbhakarna, Vibhishana addressed the
Rakshasa chief, in a pregnant speech,fraught with his welfare,
—Thou hast been bound about thy neck by the mighty and
huge serpent, Sita, having her breast for its body anxiety for
its venom, smile for its sharp fangs, and her five fingers for its
hood. Thereforo before the monkeys, resembling mountain-
peaks,having teeth for their arms and nails for their weapons,
—subjugate Lank&, do thou render Maithili unto Dagaratha’s
son, And before the shafts shot by Rima, resembling the
thunder-bolt and having impetuosily of the wind, cut off the
heads of the foremost of the Rakshasas, do thou render
Mithila’s daughter unto the son of Dagaratha. Neither
Kumbhakarna nor Indrajit, neither Mahpargwa nor Mahodara,
neither Nikumbba nor Kumbha nor yet Atikaya, O king,
can stay in the field against Raghava. Living, thou, whether
thou art protected by the Sun or the winds, or throwest
thyself into the lap itself of Vasava, or enterest the sky or
the nether spheres, shall not escape death.” Hearing
Vibhishana’s words, Prahasta said —‘Fear know we none
whatever from the celestials, or Danavas, or Yakshas,
or Gandharbas, or huge snakes ; fear know we none in battle
with birds and serpents. How can fear at all afflict us
proceeding from the king’s son, Rama? Hearing Prabasta’s
speech, Vibhishana, seeking the welfare of the king, and
having his intellect grounded in virtue, interest and profit,
said words enfolding high sense,—"O Prahasta, like a sinful
person being unable to ascend heaven, what the king,
Mahoedara, thou, and Kumbhakarna, are saying with reference
to Rama, shall not prove true. As one without a raft cannot
cross over the mighty main, how can J, or thou, or all the


cis RAMAYANA.


Rakshas combined, cause death unto Rama, who, O Prahasta,
is versed in the sense of things. Even the gods become
stolid before the sovereign of the Ikshwaku race, having
righteousness for his principle quality, and being a mighty
car-warrior and of such a character, and who is competent
in action. As yet the Kanka-feathered, terrible and sharp
shafts shot by Raghava, have not pierced into thy body;
and therefore thou dost speak so. And, O Prahasta, as yet
the sharpened shafts, capable of destroying life and having
the impetuosity of the thunder-bolt, have not entcred into
thy body, and therefore thou dost speak thus, neither Ravana,
nor the exceedingly powerful Trigirsha. Neither Kumbha-
karna’s son Nikumbha nor Indrajit, is capable of bearing
in battle the son of Dagaratha, resembling Sakra himself,
And neither Devantuka* nor Narantaka,} neither Atikaya,t
uor the magnanimous Atiratha, nor the eqrily strong
Akampana, is competent to stay Raghava in fight. And the
king, naturally of fierce temper and Lhoughtless, through the
instrumentality of ye who appearing to be his friends are
in reality his foes, seeketh to destroy the Rakshasas. Do
ye take out and deliver the monarch, who hath through force
become subject to a dreadful and mighty, and thousand-headed
serpent bursting with immeasurable prowess. As a person
possessed by fearfully strong ghosts, is saved by his friends
pulling him by bis hair, attaining your desire ye should,
assembling together, rescue the king. This one is sunk in
the Raghava sea having excellent waters. Do ye speedily
coming together deliver him. He (the king) hath fallen into
the Kakutstha nether regions, I tell thee my full mind,—
fraught with the welfare of this city together with the
Rakshasas, as well of the king with his adherents. Do thou
make over Maithili unto the son of the king. He is a true


* Lit—destroyer of the Deity—T.
+ Lit—destroyer of men.—T.
$ Lit~-huge-bodied—T.


POUDDHAKANDAM. reat


counsellor who adviseth his master, after duly ascertaining
the strength, position, increase or destruction of the enemies
as well as of their own party.


SECTION XV.


Heanrine carefully the words of Bibhisana, gifted with
the intelligence of the lord of speech, the high-souled
Indrajit, the leader of demons, spake, saying,—“Why art
thou, © uncle, speaking these useless words like one
terrified ? He even, wha is not born in this race, cannot
speak or act in this wise. Only one man in this family, my
uncle Bibhisana, is weak in energy, strength, prowess,
patience, heroism and vigor. Why art thou O timid one,
afraid of them since any one of these Rakshasas is capable of
slaying those two princes, human beings as they ara? The
master of the three worlds, the lord of the celestials, has been
brought down by me as captive on this earth. And all the
celestials smitten with fear fled to different quarters. I
brought down on earth the loud-roaring celestial elephant
Airavata and uprooted by force its tusks. And all the
celestials were terrified at this. Am I not, who have shatter-
ed the pride of the celestials, afflicted the leading Daityas,
and am gifted with excellent prowess, capable of discomfit-
ting these two princess—very ordinary mortals as they are ?”
Hearing the words of (Indrajit) gifted with high energy,
irrepressible and resembling the lord of celestials, Bibhisana,
the foremost of those using weapons,addressed him with words,
fraught with high import,—“O my son, thou art a mere child
and of unripe intellect and hence thou art not capable of as-
certaining the propriety and impropriety of counsels. Thou art


1142 KFAMAYVANA.


therefore speaking thus like a maniac for thy own destruction.
Thou art known as a son unto Ravana, O Indrajit,but in sooth,
thou art his foe in disguise, since knowing of his destruction
from Raghava, thou dost not prevent him. Thou art brave,
childish and hast been impelled by thy silly understanding.
Thou shalt be slain along with him who hath brought thee
in this counsel chamber. ‘Thou art, O Indrajit, foolish,
imprudent, devoid of humility,of an irritable temper, of feeble
sense, vicious-minded and of a silly understanding. And
thou dost speak so, being impelled by childishness. Who
shall withstand in battle, the shafts, shot by Raghava,
resembling the rod of Death, the stick of Braman, flaming
like the Fire of Dissolution. Do thou render back Sita, O
king, unto Rama, with riches, jewels, excellent ornaments,
clothes and joms and we shall then be able to live hero
void of grief.”


SECTION XVI.


Boussuana addressing him with these excellent and
auspicious words, fraught with high sense, Ravana, impelled
by Death, again spake in harsh accents.—“‘It is better to live
with open enemies or enraged serpents than with those who
pass for friends but are in reality foes. I know well the
nature of kinsmen, in all the worlds, O Rakhasa,-one takes
delight in another’s misfortune. The kinsmen, O R&kshasa,
generally disregard him who is their king,* protecteth the
kingdom, educated and pious~-and they always try to discom-
fit him, if he be a heroe. These terrible enemies—the kinsmen,
hypocrite as they are, always take delight in one another's


* On account of the priority of his birth—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM 1143


calamity. Hear, I shalf relate what the elephants, in yore,
spoke beholding some persons with noose in hand—“We do
not fear, fire, weapons, or even the terrible noose—we fear
only the dreadful kinsmen, blinded with selfishness. They
alone unfold the means of our detection—there is not the least
doubt about it. Fear from kinsmen is therefore known as the
worst of all fears. In kine there is milk, in kinsmen, there is
fear, in women‘there is fickleness, and in‘Brahmanas, there is
asceticism. It doth not please thee, [ fancy, O gentle one, that
lam honored of the three worlds, the lord of riches, and the
subduer of my foes. As the drops of water do not last long
on the leaves of lotuses, so is the friendship with unworthy
persons. “As the autumnal clouds, albeit muttering, do not
pour forth water, so is the friendship with unworthy persons.
As a bee flios away after sucking up the honey so is the
friendship with unworthy persons, As a bee, after feeding
upon the Kaa flowers, doth not get honey so is (fruitless)
the friendship with unworthy persons. As an elephant,
after being bathed, covers its body again with dust, taking it
with its trunk, so is the friendship with unworthy persons.*
Fie thee, O monkey, O thou that bringest disgrace on the
family. Had any one else spoken thus he would have
ceased to live by this time.” Being thus accosted harshly,
Bibhisana, speaking truth, rose up along with four Rakshasas
having maces in their hands. ‘Thereupon, rising up in the
welkin, the graceful brother Bibhisana, worked up with ire,
addressed the lord of Rakshasas—Thou art mistaken, O king.
Do thou speak what thou wishest—thou art my elder brother,
adorable like unto father—thou dost not follow the track of
virtue. I cannot tolerate the harsh accents of thine, my
elder brother.—For thy welfare I spoke those well-meaning
words, O Ten-necked one, but thou didst not pay heed to
them being brought under the control of Death. O king, many
are the persons who speak sweet words, but rare are they


* They afterwards forsake their former friends.—T.


1144 RAMAYANA.


who can speak and hear unpalatable but well-meaning words
How can I disregard thy death like unto a burning house
bound as thou art by the noose of Death, the destroyer of al!
creatures. I do not wish to behold thee slain by the well-
sharpened shafts of Rama, feathered in gold and resembling
the flaming fire. Even the heroic and powerful persons, well
versed in the use of weapons, wear away like sands in battle,
being attracted by Death. Thou art worshipful unto me, do
thou forgive me for what I have said for thy welfare. Do
thou protect thyself and this city, abounding in Rakshasas.
May good betide thee! Iam going away and do thou be
happy without me. What, I spoke unto thee, O ranger of
the night, to prevent thee, for thy welfare, did not please
thee. Persons, whose lease of life is well-nigh expired, do
not pay heed to the well-meaning words of their friends.”


SECTION XVII.


Hanne addressed Ravana with these harsh words, his
younger brother, reached in no time, where R&ma along with
Lakshmana was. The leading monkeys, stationed on earth,
espied him on the welkin, resembling in size the summit of
the mount Meru, and burning like lightning in the effulgence
of his own persou. And his four attendants of terrible
prowess were adorned with excellent ornaments and armed
with armours and maces. He was like unto a collection of
clouds, powerful as the thunder-bolt, holding an excellent
mace, heroic and embellished with excellent ornaments.
And beholding him along with four counsellors, the highly
intelligent Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, engaged in medita-
tion along with them. And meditating for a while, he spoke


YUDDHAKANDAM. ees)


unlo the monkeys headed by Hanuman the following
excellent words—“Behold, there comes a R&kshasa, armed
with various weapons and followed by four demons to
slay us and there is not the least doubt about it.” And
hearing the words of Sugriva, the excellent monkeys, taking
up huge trees and crags, bespoke him,—“Do thou order us,
O king, to destroy these vicious-souled demons. These
shall crush them to death, limited as is the tenure of their
life.” They addressing each other in this wise, Bibhisana
descended from the sky on the northern shore. And
beholding Sugriva and all others stationed near him, the highly
intelligent Bibhisana accosted them, at the highest pitch
of his voice, saying,—‘Liveth thore the R&kshasa, Ravana,
the lord of demons, and perpetrator of many iniquitous
deeds. Iam bis younger brother known as Bibhisana. By
him, slaying the vulture YatSyu, was carried away Sita from
Janasthana. She is imprisoned, brought under his sway,
poorly, and being well guarded by the Rakshasees. With
various well meaning words and reasonings I pointed out
unto him, the necessity of rendering back Sit’ unto Rama.
And Ravana, possessed by Death, paid no heed to my well-
meaning words, like unto one, lying on the brink of doath,
neglecting the administration of medicine. Being reviled by
him and treated harshly like a menial, I have come to seek
Raghava’s shelter, renouncing my children and wives. Do ye
soon mention unto the high-souled Raghava, the refuge of
all creatures, that Bibhisana hath arrived.’ Hearing those
words the quick-paced Sugriva, excited with ire, spake unto
Rima, before Lakshmana, saying,—'Forsooth hath an enemy
entered secretly in our midst and he shall slay us getting
an opportunity like unto an owl killing the crows. O slayer of
foes, it now behoveth thee to be particularly careful about the
counsels, arrangement of soldiers, polity—civil and military
and spies of our own party as weil as those of the enemies.
These Rakshasas are heroic; they assume shapes at will,


344


1146 RAMAYANA,


always lie in ambush and secretly bring about others’ ruin—
we should not therefore place confidence in them. This.
must be the emissary of Ravana—the lord of Rakshasas.
Entering in our midst, he shall, in sooth, sow dissensions in
our camp, or he shall slay us when we are careless,
confiding in them, Avoiding the enemies, we should now
collect the foresterangers our friends and servants. O lord,
this man is a Rakshasa by birth and the brother of our foe
and sois he our enemy, how can we trust himy Ravana’s
younger brother, known as Bibhishana, hath come here with
four R&kshasas, to seek thy shelter. O thou the foremost
of forgiving persons, I consider this Bibhishana, who hath
been despatched by Ravana, worthy of being slain. Being
impelled by his wicked intention and commissioned by
Ravana, this Rakshasa hath come here and secretly by virtue
of his illussive powers he shall slay thee, O innocent one,
when thou shalt place confidence in him.’ Having thus
accosted Rama, skilled in the art of speech, that lord of the
army, Sugriva, well versed in speech, became silent. And
hearing the words of Sugriva, the mighty Rama spake unto
the monkeys, near him, headed by Hanum&n, saying,—"Ye
have all heard, the words well grounded in reason, the lord
of monkeys hath said, regarding R&vana’s younger brother.
‘It behoveth him, who desireth for perpetual wealth, and is
intelligent and capable of giving sound counsels, to advise
his friends in difficult matters.” Being thus addressed by
‘Rama (to minister unto him best counsels) all those monkeys,
intent upon encompassing his well-being, gave out their
respective opinions. “O Raghava, there is nothing beyond
thy knowledge in the three worlds. It is only to show
thy respect towards us, O Rima, that thou dost accost
aus in this wise. Thou art of truthful vows, heroic, pious, of
firm prowess, discriminating, recollecting and having implicit
confidence in thy friends. Let the intelligent and capable
counseliors deliver their reasonable opinions unto thee.” They


YUDDHARANDAM, 1147


speaking thus unto Raghava, the intelligent monkey Angada,
spoke as follows for sounding the intention of Bibhishana,—
“We should always suspect him since he has come from the
side of our enemies, and should not, all on a sudden, place
confidence in him. The wicked-minded always move about
hiding their real self, and bring about peoples’ calamity,
taking advantage of their weak points. And great is the
disaster thereof. It is always proper to engage in actions,
considering what is right and what is wrong. Virtues should
always be gathered and vices abondoned. Do thou renounce
him unhesitatingly, if dost thou find in himia source of a
great calamity and do thou embrace him if dost thou find
him crowned with many virtues.” Thereupon followed
Sarava with words fraught with high import,—“O best of
men, do thou speedily despatch emissaries to sound
Bibhishana. If dost thou, sounding him well through the
instrumentality of sharp spies, find him friendly, do thou win
him over to thy side.” Thereupon the wise Jambhaban,
arriving at conclusions by virtue of his knowledge of Saséras,
began with words, void of defects,—''Surely doth Bibhishana
come from the vicious lord of Rakshasas, dead set against
us ard bath arrived at sucha bad place and in such a bad
hour. We should always fear him.” And thereupon followed
Mainda, conversant with what is right and wrong, after duc
deliberation, with words pregnant with reason,—‘He is
Ravana’s younger brother, by name Bibbishana. Let the lord
of men ask him every thing at first in sweet words, Do
thou first ascertain, O foremost of men, with what intention
he hath come—evil or good—and then settle what course to
adopt.” Thereupon spake Hanuman, the foremost of the
counsellors and well versed in Sastras, in accents sweet,
glorious and fraught with a high value,—‘Even Vribaspati,
(the ford of speech) cannot excell thee, capable,* gifted with
the best of intellect and foremost of those skilled in the art


* Capable to ascertain the truth of all Sastras.—T.


1148 RAMAFANA.


of speech, as thou art. And what I know I speak, O king. I
do so, in the interest of Rama’s work and not impelled by my
skill in the art of speech, by the pride of being a counsellor,
by the vanity of being gifted with a high intellect or by the
desire of speaking for its own sake. What thy counsellors
have said for ascertaining the good or evil intention of
Bibhishana appeareth to me as most defective and productive
of no consequence whatever. It is impossible to sound him
without any command.* And even to command him now
for the same appears to me as improper. And as regards the
despatch of spies, anent what thou hast been advised by
thy ministers, I do not observe any utility. And what little I
have thought of,I have something to say (regarding Jambab&n’s
proposal) that Bibhishana hath arrived at such a bad place and
in such an evil hour. He has really come to a very good place
andin avery good hour. And truly has he performed a be-
coming and sensible action by coming here after duly ascer-
taining that Ravana is a vicious wight and thou art a pious
person—he is full of vices—thou art gilted with many virtues—
he is tyrranical and thou art powerful. And what they have
said, O king, as regards sounding him through secret spies,
appears to me as one requiring great wisdom. An intelligent
man, when questioned by any suddenly, suspects many things.
And if the new-comer be a friend and has come here for his
own happiness, how greatly shall his mind be changed by
such a course? Besides by a sudden questioning it is
impossible to ascertain the intention of a foreigner. Do thou
therefore thyself accost him and determine, by his voice, his
secret motive. I did not however mark anything of his
wickedness while he spoke; rather I did observe signs of
gladness on his countenance. So I do not suspect him. The
wily can never come fearless and undisturbed. Nor were his
words cunning. Sol do not suspect him. It is not very
easy to hide one’s real nature, It manifests itself by force.


To command to relate for what he has come.—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1149


So this action of Bibhishana is not out of place or season.
When accomplished it shall redound to his own interest.
Considering well thy preparations for war and R&vana’s vain
conduct, hearing of Vali’s destruction and Sugriva’s
installation on the throne, he hath, impelled by his good
sense, come here, desirous of gaining the kingdom, Taking
these into account, it seems prudent to take him to our side.
O thou the foremost of the intelligent, 1 have spoken thus
considering him sincere. It now behoveth thee to perform
what thou thinkest proper.”


SECTION xviii.


“Hlearie those words of the Wind-god's son, the
irrepressible Raima, conversant with all the Sastras, replied,
with words expressing his own opinion—"I have also thought
of some thing regarding Bibhishana. I wish you all,
interested in my well-being, to hear that. (Bibhishana) hath
come here as a friend so I cannot forsake him by any means.
And even if he has come with any evil intent it is not
culpable for the pious to afford him shelter.” Thereupon
hearing his words and considering them well, Sugriva, the
lord of the monkeys, replied in more auspicious* words,==
“Whether this ranger of the night is sincere or wicked, he
should never be offered any shelter, since he hath forsaken
his brother in the midst of these calamities. What reason is
there to believe that he shall not renounce us in our
difficulty 2” Hearing the words of the lord of monkeys and
casting his looks towards them, K&kutstha, having truth
for his prowess, smiling a little, spake, unte Lakshmana,


* More reasonable words.—T.


1150 RAMAYANA.


crowned with all the marks of piety, saying—"Without being
conversant with Sastras, and living in the company of old
men, none can speak such words as have been uttered by the
king of the monkeys, There appear unto me, however two
subtler reasons anent the difference between brothers,
amongst the kings—one is evident and another mundane.
There are two classes of foes—one consisting of the members
of the same line the other of the neighbours. And these
generally bring about our misfortune whenever any oppor-
tunity presents itself. And it is for this that he hath come
here. Those kinsmen, who do not think of one another’s
mischief, generally long for their respective well-being. But
even such well-meaning relatives are feared by the kings.
And hear, I shall relate, what the Sastras say regarding the
weak points thou hast mentioned as to the advisability of
taking the enemies to our side. We are not his kinsmen
and this Rakshasa hath come here with a view to gain the
kingdom. Even the Rakshasas are wise enough to ascertain
the proper course—so we must take Bibhishana. If the
brothers are confident and satisfied with each other they
generally live together, or efse they fear each other and
ultimately engage in a tumultuous war. And there hath
sprung up some difference with Ravana and therefore
Bibhishana hath come here. Nor are, O friend, all brothers
like Bharata, all sons like me unto their father, all friends
fike thee.” Being thus addressed by Rima, the highly wise
Sugtiva, along with Lakshmana, rose up and bending low his
head, said—“O thou the best of all forgiving persons, this
night-ranger hath been despatched by Ravana. I therefore
think it better to kill him. Being impelled by his vicious
sense that Rakshasa hath come here to slay us, O innocent
one,when myself,thou and Lakshmana shall! consider ourselves
secure. Therefore the large-armed Bibbisana, the younger
brother of the ruthless Ravana, deserves to be slain along
with his counsellors.” Having thus addressed (Raima) the


YUDDHAKANDAM. qI5t


foremost of Raghu’s race, skilled in art of speech, Sugriva,
the lord of monkey host, equally versed in the art of speech,
became silent. And hearing the words of Sugriva, and
weighing them, Rama again addressed the foremost of
monkeys with more reasonable accents—“Wicked or other-
wise, whatever this night-ranger may be, he shall not be able
to do me the least mischief. Pis&chas, Danavas,Yakshas or all
the Rakshasas on earth,—I can slay them all, if I like, with
the tips of my fingers, O thou the lord of monkeys. I have
heard of a pigeon adoring and entertaining with its own flesh,
an enemy who took its shelter. While a pigeon received so
friendly its enemy, the slayer of its mate, how can I then act
otherwise, O foremost of the monkeys? Do thou hear, 1
shall relate, a sacred story, narrated by the great ascetic, the
trathful Kandu, son of the ascetic Kanya. O slayer of foes,
even a wicked-minded enemy, if he, with folded palms
anda poor heart, craveth for thy shelter, should not be
slain. If an enemy, proud or terrified, seeketh shelter in
affright, he should be saved by a great man even at the risk
of his own life. One, who from fear, ignorance or wilfully
doth not protect him who seeketh his shelter, perpetrateth
a mighty iniquity, blamed of all. When a person is slain
before him whose shelter he hath taken he taketh away all
the virtues of his protector. So great is the sin in not
affording shelter unto those who seek for it; it standeth in
the way of going to heaven, bringeth in calumny and
destroyeth the strength and prowess. I shall therefore
follow the excellent words of Kandu—leading to piety, fame
and the attainment of the abode of the celestials. I always
declare ‘no fear’ unto all creatures, whenever any, approaching
me, says, ‘I am thine’ and seeketh my shelter. Even this is
my pious observance. O Sugriva, O foremost of monkeys, do
thou soon bring him here,whether he be Ravana or Bibhishana
and I shall declare unto him ‘no fear.’ Hearing the words
of Rama, Sugriva, the lerds of those who go bounding,


risa RAMAYANA,


over-flowing with friendliness, bespake Kakutstha—“What
wonder is there that thou wouldst speak these auspicious
words, O thou the foremost of kings, conversant with
morality, gifted with prowess and ever treading the pious
track as thou art, Truly doth my inner self regard Bibbisana
as devoid of any wicked intention. He has been well sounded
by signs and gestures. And let the greatly wise Bibhisana, O
R&ghava, be placed on an equal footing with us and gain
our friendship.” Hearing the words of Sugriva, the lord of
monkeys, the king of men (Rama) made instantly friends
with Bibbisana, like unto the conqueror of enemies’ cities
making friends with the king of birds.


SECTION xix,


Racuava thus declaring unto him ‘no fear’, Ravana’s
younger brother, the greatly wise Bibhisana, bending low his
head, cast his looks on the earth. And descending from the
welkin with his devoted attendants the virtuous-souled
Bibhisana, delighted, bowed unto Rama. And thereupon
touching his feet along with four Rakshasas, Bibhisana
addressed Rima,—with words, fraught with piety, befitting
the occasion and conducing to pleasure. “I am Ravana’s
younger brother and have been greatly insulted by him. I
have therefore come to seek thy shelter, the refuge of all
creatures, abandoning Lank& and renouncing my friends and
riches. My kingdom, life and happiness are all at thy
disposal.” Hearing his words Rama replied,—comforting
him with words and favouring him as if with looks. “Do
thou relate unto me truly the strength and weakness of the
enemies.” Being thus accosted by Rama of unwearied


PUDDHAKANDAM, 1453


actions,the Raksha,began to describe the strength of Ravana,
“QO prince, by virtue of the buon acquired from the
Self-Create, the Ten-necked one is incapable of being slain
by all creatures~Gandharbas, serpents, or birds. My elder
brother—the one next to Ravana—is the heroic and highly
effulgent Kumbhakarna—Sakra’s equal in battle. Thou mayst
have heard, O Rama, his commander is Prahasta, by whom
was defeated Manibhadra on the mount Kailaga. (His son)
Indrajit, equipped with invincible armour, bow and finger-
protector made of the skin of iguana, becomes invisible ia
fight. And, worshipping Fire and becoming invisible, that
graceful hero, O Raybava, slayeth the enemies in conflict,
having the contending parties vast and well arranged,
Mahodara, Mahp&rgwa and the Rakshasa, Akampana, are his
lieutenants, who equal the Lokapalas* in battle, His army
consists of ten thousand fof’s of Rakshasas, wearing shapes
at will, inhabiting the city of Lanka, and living on flesh and
gore, And with the Zoépd/as and the celestials, they were
all defeated by the vicious-souled Ravana.” Hoaring the
words of Bibhisana and weighing them in his mind, that
foremost of Raghu’s race said—"I understand well the
strength and prowess of Ravana, which thou hast depictelt
truly, O Bibhisana. Do thou hear truly that 1 shall slay the
Ten-necked one together with Prahasta and his sons, and
I shall make thee king. Whether he entereth the Rasdtalat
or the regions under the earth, or seeketh shelter of the
Grand-father of the celestials, he shall not be able to save
his life from me. Ido swear by my three brethern that I
shall enter the city of Ayodhya, after slaving in battle
R&vana with his sons, kinsmen and friends.” Hearing these
words of Rama of unwearied action, the virtuous-souled


* Divinities who protect the regions, or the Sun, Moon, Fire, Wind, Indra,
Yama, Varuna and Kuvera—T,

i The seven infernal regions under the earth and the residence of the Ndgas,
Asuras and Daityas. This is the lowest of the seven divisions of Patdla.—T.


145


1154 RAMAVANA.


(Bibbisana),. bowing bis head unto him, began—"1 shall lend
thee my might in slaying the Rakshasas and devastating the
city of Lank&, and shall be in the midst of Ravana’s army.”
Thereupon, embracing Bibhisana, who spoke thus, Rama,
deliglited, said unto Lakshmana,—“O my brother, do thou
bring water from the ocean. Sprinkling the greatly wise
Bibhisana, I shall make bim at once the king of the
R&kshasas, O conferer of honor; for I am greatly
pleased with him.” Being thus addressed, Saumitri, at the
command of tho king, annointed Bibhisana and made him
the king of the Rakshasas in the presence of the monkey-
host. Beholding Rama’s kindness (towards Dibhisana), the
monkeys eulogizud the high-souled one, exclaiming “Excel-
tent! Excellont !? 9 Thereupon, Hanuman and Sugriva
addressed Bibhisana, saying, Do thou tell us how we shalt
cross over the main—the abode of Varuna, along with the
host of the highly powerful monkeys. Do thou inform us
of the means by which we may cross over, along with our
army, the lord of rivers and streams—the abode of Varuna,”
Being thus addressed, the virtuous-souled Bibhisana replied,
-—It behoveth the king, Raghava, 1o seek refuge from the
Ocean. This measureless deep was dug out by (the king)
Sagara.* And the at Ocean shall surely help Raima
belonging to Sagara’s race.” Being thus accosted by the


wise Rakshasa, Bibhishana. Sugriva reached where Rama
with Lakshmana was. Thercupon, the bivad-aecked Sugriva
began to explain the well-meaning words of Bibhishana,
requesting Rama to seck the shelter of the Ocean. And
those words pleased Rama, pious by ature. And the
highly effulgent (hero) requested, smiling, the active Laksh-


viva to collect necessariesfor
his adoration. “O Lakslmana, this counsel of Bibhisana
appeareth to me as most sound, Sugriva is always greatly


mana and the monkey-chief Sug


~ Sreven was a sovereign of Ayodhy4, belonging to the same family with


YUDDUAKANDAM. , 1155


wise, and thou art greatly proficient in counscl. Du ye, hold-
ing a conference, intimate to me what you think becoming.”
Thus addressed, those two- heroes—Lakshmana and
Sugriva, spoke respectfully the following words fraught
with propriety,—“Why shall not the well-meaning words of
Bibhisana expressed now, please us, O Raghava, O thou
best of men? Without constructing a bridge over the deep,
the terrible abode of Varuna, even the celestials and their
lord (Indra) cannot get at the city of Lanka. Do thou
act on the genuine counsel of the heroic Bibhisana, and
without losing time, do thou engage the Ocean for this work,
so that we may with our army proceed to the city of
Ravana,” Being thus addressed Rama reached the shore of
the lord of rivers and streams, covered with Kuga, like unto
fire gelting into the sacrificial dais.


SECTION xx


Traerevron the greatly powerful Rakshasa, by name
Sdrdula, beheld the army of Sugriva arranged on the shore
of the ocean. And, beholding the army all busy, the emissary
of the vicious-souted Rakshasa—Ravana, entered the city
of Lank& and, approaching his lord, said,—“The army of
monkeys and bears hath approached Lanka. [i is immeasur-
ably deep as the ocean. And those two sons of the king
Dagaratha—the brothers Rama and Lakshmana, gifted with
great beauty, coming to rescue Sit&, have stationed them-
selves on the shore of the ocean, O thou of great efful-
gence. The army of Rama extends over the sky and ten
yoyanas. | have come, O great king, to acquaint thee with the
real truth. And, knowing everything, it behoveth: thy


2156 RAMAFANA.


emissaries, O king, to settle whether to render back Sita,
to adopt measures of conciliation, or to sow dissensions
in the enemy’s camp.” Hearing the words of Sérdx/a,
Ravana, the Jord of Rakshasas, being anxious to ascertain
his duty, addressed a Raksbasa by name Suka, the most
sensible of his counsellors, with the following pregnant words,
—Do thou go and communicate unto king Sugriva my
behest, in becoming and excellent accents, ‘Thou art born
of a great family and art the mighty son of the king of bears.
Jhave no dissension with thee. In fact } consider thee as
my brother, O king of monkeys. Though I have stolen the
spouse of the high-sonled prince (Rama), yet what is that to
thee, O Sugriva? Do thou return to Kishkindh3. The
monkeys shall not by any means be able to attack the city
of Lank&, Even the celestials and Gandharbas could not—
what of these men and monkeys? And being thus
commissioned by the lord of Rakshasas, that night-ranger
assumed the shape of a bird and, bounding, speedily reached
the sky. And, proceeding far over the deep and stationing
himself at the welkin, he spoke unto Sugriva all the words
with which he was addressed by the vicious-souled Ravana.
Hearing him speak thus, the monkeys leaped up quickly and
reached there with a view to chop off his wings or to slay him
with their clenched fists. On being seized vehemently by all
these monkeys, that night-ranger was brought down speedily
from the sky to the earth. And being assailed by the monkeys,
Suka said,—“O Kakutstha, it doth not behove (people) to slay
an emissary. Do thou therefore prevent the monkeys. He who
passing by his master’s behest, giveth out his own intention,
is not faithful; and he therefore deserveth to be slain,”
Hearing the piteous accents of Suka, Rima spake unto the
monkeys, who were about to kill him, saying, “Do not kilt
him.? And again stationing -himself on the welkin, that
night-ranger said,—"O Sugriva, O thou gifted withigreat
energy, O thou of great prowess, what shall I speak unto


VUDDRAKANDAM, "ang7


Ravana, dreaded by all people ?* Being thus addressed, that
mighty king of monkeys,the bull among them, of unwearied
onergy, spake unto that emissary—the night-ranger, Suka,
saying—"O Ravana, thou art not my friend or an object of
pity. Thow art not my benefactor, nor art liked by me. Thou
art Rama's enemy,and thou dost therefore deserve to be slain
by him like Vali along with thy friends and relatives. I shall
therefore slay thee, O king of night-rangers, together with
thy sons, friends and relatives. And I shall have the whole
city of Lank& reduced to ashes by my mighty force. Thou
shalt not be able to escape Raghava, O Ravana, O thou who
hast lost thy sense,even if thou art protected by the celestials.
And thou shalt with thy brother be slain by Rama, even if
thou dost fly into the sky, enter into the regions under the
earth, or seek shelter of Mah@deva. I do not behold any in
these three worlds—Pisacha, Rakshasa, Gandharba, or Asura,
who can protect thee. Thou hast slain the monarch of vul-
tures,who had grown decrepit through age.* Thou hast carried
off the large-eyod Sit4 from the vicinity of Rama and the
neighbourhood of Lakshmana ; but, having captured her, thou
understandest not (thy native strength). Nor dost thou
understand that foremost of Raghus, high-souled, possessed
of great strength, and incapable of being repressed even by
the celestials—who shall take thy life.” Then spake that
best of monkeys, Angada, son of Vali—“O highly wise one,
this is no emissary. This one clearly appeareth to me asa spy.
He hath come to form an estimate of thy entire army. Take
him, Let him not go (back) to Lanka. This is indeed what
1 would.” Thereat, commanded by the king, the monkeys,
springing up, seized (Suka) and bound him, as he burst out
bewailing like one forlorn. On being sorely handled by the


* The commentator has a queer and characteristic note on ¥ardoriddha—
decrepit through age. One that is old, may stave off decrepitude through some
drug, while a youthful person may come by the same in consequence of some
curse —T.


1158 RAB AYANA.


relentless monkeys, Suka cried unto the high-souled Rama,
son of Dagaratha,—"They by main force sever my wings,
and they pierce my eyes. If I lose my life, may all the evil
deeds that I have committed between the night when I was
born and the night when I shall die, be thine!’ Hearing
this pitiful cry, Rama prevented (the monkeys) ; and he said
unto them,—"Let go this envoy, who hath come here.’!


SECTION xxi.


Tren on the shore of the sea, Raghava, spreading
darbha, with his hands joined towards the great deep, laid
him down, with his face to the East. And that slayer of foes
(lay down), making his pillow his arm resembling the shining
form of a serpent; always dight with golden ornaments ;
full many a time pressed with the palms of beauteous
damsels,* decked with jewelled golden Keyuras and superb
ornaments studded with pearls ; smeared from above with
sandal and aguru ; (his arm) which formerly had been graced
in bed with the head of Sita ; like unto the bady of Takshaka
under the waters of the Ganga; resembling a yoke ; in
battle increasing the sorrow of foes and enhancing for long
the delight of friends ;—his left arm having its skin
destroyed by the strokes of the bow-string ; which was the
refuge of the entire earth ;—his right arm resembling a
mighty bludgeon,—the donor of thousands of kine,—making
this great arm his pillow (he laid him down), “To-day either
I shall die, or shall the Ocean.”—Having thus formed his


* The commentator appropriately remarks: As Réma was wedded to a
single wife, these damsels must mean nurses attending on kim.—T.


FOLDHAKAND A&M. 1159


resolution in respect of the great deep, Rama, restraining
his speech, with a concentrated mind lay down there
agreeably to rule, And as Rama slept on the earth on Kuga
spread over, without ever swerving from the rule, three
nights passed away. And while spending three nights,
Rama, learned in polity and attached to virtue, prayed unto
that lord of streams—-the Ocean. Yet the wicked Ocean,
albeit adored according to his deserts by Raima with his
mind concentrated, did not show himself. Thereat Rima
grew enraged and had the corners of his eyes crimsoned ;
and he spake unto Lakshmana of auspicious marks, saying, —
“Behold the hauteur of the Ocean in not presenting himself
before me. Calmness,forbearance, candour, and soft speech—
these virtues of the good are by the insolent taken for the
cflects of incompetency. The person* that is self-laudatory,
wicked, and badly-bold, publisheth his own praise,and meteth
out chastisemeat everywhere, is honored in tho world, By
moderation one cannot attain celebrity, by moderation one
cannot attain fame,~and, O Lakshmana, in this world by
moderation one cannot attain victory ou ‘the edge of battle.'}”
See, O Sumitra’s son, the abode of Makaras, with his waters
obstructed all around with Makaras destroyed by my shafts.
And, O Lakshmana, see the bodies here of serpents, and the
huge bodies of mighty fishes, and tho trunks of elephants,—
torn by my arrows. And to-day in terrible battle will I
dry up the Ocean with conchs and oysters, and fishes and
Makaras. This abode of Makaras taketh me, who is forbearing,
to be incompetent. Fie on forbearance towards such as he !
In consequence of my moderation, Ocean showeth not his
own form. O Saumitri, bring thou my bow, my arrows
resembling venomous snakes, [ will dry up the Ocean, and


+ The word, however, is naram (ac), man.—T.
t Le. indiscriminately. —T.
$ Rana murddkani,—The petitous edge of battle when it raged’
Par. Last., Bk. 1.


1160 RAMAYANA.


the monkeys shall go over on foot. And, being angered,
to-day, albeit incapable of being agitated, will I agitate the
deep. And by means of my shafts will I make Varuna’s
abode, surging with a thousand billows and having his
dignity maintained by his shores,—overleap his continents.
And I will agitate the deep harbouring numbers of mighty
Danavas.” Having spoken thus, Rama, equipped with his
bow, with his eyes dilated in wrath, ‘became exceedingly
irrepressible, like unto the flaming fire at the final dissolution.
And straining his dreadful bow, making the earth shake,
tremulously, he let fly fierce shafts like him of an hundred
sacrifices hurling bis thunder-bolt. Thereat, flaming up, those
vehement choice shafts surcharged with energy, enter into
the waters of the sea, with its serpents afflicted with fear,
And then great and exceedingly dreadful was the motion of
tho sea, with fishes and Makaras, and with the roar of the
winds (blowing there), And on a sudden the mighty deep
was heaving with mighty surges, with conchs scattered about,
and a smoke (enveloped) the ocean ; and the billows became
visible on all sides, And the serpents were distressed, with
their faces flaming and their eyes aglow; as well as the
D&inavas of terrific energy, and the dwellers of the nether
spheres. And billows of the sovran Ocean, resembling
Vindhya or Mandara, containing crocodiles and Makaras,
sprang up by thousands, And Varuna’s abode had its surges
whirling, its serpents and Rakshasas seized with affright, and
its ferocious aquatic animals borne all around ; and it seut
forth sounds. Then Sumitra’s son, springing up, said unto
R&ghava of fiery vehemence,as he sighed and kept stretching
his matchless bow.—“This must not be.” And he took away
his (Rama's) bow. “Without doing this unto the Ocean, thou,
supreme of heroes, mayst have thy work accomplished.
Personages like thee do not come under the influence of
passion, Do thou deliberately look about for some worthy
means (for compassing thy end.;” Then remaining invisible


YUDDHAKANDAM. 16


in the sky, Brahmarshis and Surarshis,* exclaiming,—"Well-
a-day !” and “Do’nt,” in loud acceats ejaculated,—(Oh ! and
alas !)


SECTION xxit.


Tren the foremost of Raghus addressed Ocean in stern
words, saying, —‘‘To-day will 1 dry up the Ocean alony with
the nether regions. And, @ Ocean, thy waters being burnt
up by my shafts, and thou being dried up, with thy (aquatic)
animals slaughtered, a mighty volume of dust shall arise
{from thy bed). And, O Ocean, in consequence of the arrowy
shower discharged from my how, the monkeys shall go over
to the further shore on foot. Having attained dimensions
in consequence of access of waters, thou knowest not my
manliness or my prowess, But, O abode of Danavas, grief
shalt thou reap at my hands.” Then fixing an arrow resembl-
ing the rod of Brahma with a Brahma Mantra, on the best
of bows, that exceedingly strong on drew it. And as Raghava
suddenly stretched his bow, heaven and earth seemed to be
riven, and the mountains trembled. And darkness covered
the world, and the cardinal points became invisible, And
at once the watery expanses and rivers were agitated. And
the stars appeared simultaneously with the Sun and Moon,t
And the sky was illumined with the rays of the Sun, and yet
it was overspread with darkness; and it burned with an
hundred meteors, And thunder-bolts sending forth sounds
surpassing all others, dropped from the firmament. And the


* Celestial saints.
+ The phenomenon, remarks the commentator, was owing to the heavenly
bodies obstructing cach other's orbit —T.


146


1162 RAMAYANA,


winds began to blow violently; breaking down trees and
momentarily scattering clouds ; damaging mountain-tops and
shattering summits. And then the dread and mighty thunders
possessing impetuous speed and emitting tremendous roars,—
coming together, produced lightning flashes. And those
creatures that could be seen, uttered sounds resembling the
thunder; and those that were invisible gave forth frightful
cries, And overwhelmed with fright, and quaking (for fear),
the creatures began to measure their lengths,—and they were
sore afhiicted, and bereft of motion through terror. And then
the mighty deep with its animals, and with its waters and
waves, and with its serpents and R&akshasas, was suddenly
wrought up with a violent motion. And albeit it was not the
occasion of the universal dissolution, the Ocean passed
beyond his shores for a full hundred yoyanas. And seoing
the elated Ocean—lord of streams and rivers—thus overpass
his bounds, that destroyer of enemies, Raghu’s son, Rama,
was not moved.* Then from forth the mid-sea arose Ocean
himself, even as the maker of day riseth from the mighty
ascending-hill, Meru. And accompanied by Pannagast of
flaming faces, the Ocean showed himself, appearing like cool
lapises, adorned with golden ornaments,—wearing a wreath
of gems and a jewelled vesture, with his eyes resembling
lotus-leaves, bearing on his head a noble garland containing
all flowers; decked with ornaments of polished gold; as well
with excellent ornaments of gems originating in himself, like
the mountain Himavin embellished with metals (sprung in
himself),—(the Ocean arose) with wave on wave whirling
around, and rife with winds blowing among clouds,—surrqund-
ed by streams, Gang4, Sindhu (and others). And approaching
the arrow-showering Rama, and greeting him fair, Ocean
spoke unto him with joined hands,—“O Raghava, earth, air,


* Nétichakrdma may also meao, (Rdma) did not discharge any more
arrews.—T.
+ Semi-divine serpents.—T,


YUDDHARANDAM. 1363


sky, water and fight,—these, O mild one, retaining their
“eternal course, maintain their (respective) natures. Mine
also is that nature whereby I am fathomless and incapable of
being crossed. The reverse of this is the having a bottom.
And for this reason I speak to thee (concerning the means),
Q king's son, not from desire, or covetuousness, or fear, or
anger, can I anywise deprive my waters abounding in
alligators of their (perpetual) motion. I will tell thee how
thou wilt pass (over me); and 1 will bear it. And no
ferocious aquatic animals shall do wrong so long as thy forces
have not crossed. And, O Rama, I will make as it were firm
land for the crossing over of the monkeys.” Then Rama
said,—“O Varuna’s abode, listen to me! This arrow (of mine)
must accomplish the end (intended). Where shall I let it
light ?? Hearing R&ma’s speech, and looking at the mighty
arrow, that exceedingly energetic one, the great Deep,
addressed R&ghava, saying,—‘There is a certain spot of mine
in the North, which is more sacred (than the rest). It is
famed as Drumakulya, even as thou art famed in the world.
There are there many robbers of ferocious forms and actions,
—wicked wights, headed by cow-herds,—who drink of my
water. These persons of unrighteous acts touch me, and
I cannot bear this sin. O Rama, do thou at that place render
this Lest of arrows successful.’ Hearing the words of the
high-souled Ocean, (Rama) immediately after,* let fly that
flaming shaft, And the place where the arrow resembling
the thunder-bolt and vajra in splendour, alighted, lath been
celebrated on earth as Marukantara. And hurt with the
dart, the Earth emitted roars; and in consequence of this,
water began to gush out at the mouth of the wound from the
subterranean regions. And this then became well-known
as Vrana; and there are seen the waters of the Ocean spring
up. And there arose a terrific report of riving. And owing


* © Sdgaradarcandt—may also mean, agreeably to the Ocean's instruc
tion—T,


1164 RAMAYANA,


to this,* as well as the incident of the arrow, the water that
existed in the tanks, was dried up. Having dried up
Maruk&nt&ra famous throughout the three regions, as well as
the reservoirs of water, Rama the son of Dagaratha, learned
and of god-like prowess, conferred a boon on the desert,
saying,—"This place shall be filled with food nourishing
beasts; and ailments shall be rare here. And the fruits and
roots shall be replete with relish ; and it shall abound in oi)
and overflow with milk ; and it shall contain various odorous
drugs.” Thus did the desert come to possess these attributes;
and from Rama’s bestowal of a boon, it attained a pleasant
aspect. On that place being burnt up, that lord of streams,
the Ocean, thus spake unto Raghava, versed in every branch
of learning,—"O mild one, this one is named Nala, son unto
Vigwakarma. He hath received a boon from his sire.
Vigwakarma’s son is well pleased with thee. Let this
monkey, surcharged with exhuberant spirits, build a bridge
over me. I will hold that up. This one is as his sire.”
Having delivered himself thus, Ocean «disappeared. Then
that foremost of monkeys, Nala, arising, spoke unto the
mighty Rama,—‘Resorting to my sire’s skill, } will build a
bridge over the spacious abode of Makaras. The mighty
Ocean hath spoken justly. In respect of the ingrate even
chastisement is supreme in this world,—this is my conviction.
Down with forbearance, or moderation, or gift | This dreadful
Ocean, this mighty deep, expecting to see a bridge (thrown
over him), hath granted depth unto Raghava—(Formerly) in
Mandara, Vigwakarma had conferred a boon on my mother :
‘O exalted one, thy son shall be like me.” Iam a son of his,
sprung from his loins, and I am like unto Vigwakarma. Not
having been asked by thee, I had not unfolded my qualifica-
tions, I also am capable of constructing a bridge over
Varuna’s abode. Therefore this very day let the foremost
monkeys construct the bridge.” Then directed by Rama, the


* ie. the sound,


YUDDHARANDAM 1165,


principal monkeys with alacrity entered the mighty forest in
hundreds and thousands. And themselves resembling
mountains, the foremost of the monkeys began to break down
trees and draw them towards the Ocean. And the monkeys
filled the Ocean with sdé/as, and apwakarnas, dhavas, bamboos
and Autajas, arjunas, palms, tilakas, tinigas, billakas,
saptaparnas, and blossoming sarnikdéras, mangoes, and
agoka trees. And those monkeys—the foremost of their
species—began to gather the trees, some with their roots,
and some without them,—carrying them like Indra’s ensign,
And those huge-bodied monkeys possessed of prodigious
strength, procured palms and pomegranates, cocoanuts and
Vibhitakas, Kariras, Vakulas, and Nimbas,—as well as rocks.
measuring elephants’ dimensions ; and uprooting crags, they
carried them by means of machines. And on rocks being
plunged into the waters, the latter, suddenly swelling up,
mounted to the welkin, and again subsided.—And (the trees)
dropping (into the deep), vexed it all around. And some
took lines (for insuring straightness unto the bridge). And
at the middle of the lord of rivers and streams, Nala made a
grand bridge measuring an hundred yoyanas. And then he
set about constructing the bridge with the assistance of
monkeys of dreadful deeds. And some took the measuring
rod, and others bore (timber to the sea), And by help of
hundreds of monkeys following Rama’s mandate, hued like
clouds or mountains, (they) constructed a bridge with grass,
and wood. And the monkeys made the bridge of trees with
blossoming tops. And (monkeys) resembling Danavas were
seen rushing all around with rocks resembling hills, and
mountain-summits. And tremendous was the tumult that
arose of crags thrown and rocks toppled down into the
mighty deep. And on the first day the elephant-like monkeys
full of spirits and exerting themselves vigorously, finished
fourteen yoyanas. And the exceedingly strong and huge-
bodied monkeys on the second day speedily disposed of


1166 RAMAY ANS,


twenty yoyanas. And on.the third day the huge-bodied active
monkeys did one and twenty yoyanas on the sea. And on
the fourth day the exceedingly impetuous monkeys, bestirring
themselves vigorously, did two and twenty yoyanas. Andon
the fifth day the fast-speeding monkeys accomplished three
and twenty yoyanas reaching unto the fair shore. And
resembling his sire, that best of monkeys, the lusty and
graceful offspring of Vigwakarm4, (thus) constructed the
bridge over the sea. And that bridge built by force over the
abode of makaras, looked graceful and splendid like the
Milky way in the firmament. And then the deities and
Gandharbas, the Siddhas and the prime saints, appearing
in the heavens, stood there, eager to behold this wonder.
And the gods and Gandharbas saw that bridge of Nala,
difficult of being made, having an area of ten yoyanas and
measuring an hundred in length. And the monkeys, leaping
and bounding and roaring, as well as all creatures, beheld
that building of the bridge on the ocean, inconceivable, and
marvellous, displaying skill past thought and capable of
making one’s hair stand on end. And those thousands of
Kotis of exceeding vigor, having constructed the bridge over
the ocean, went over to the other shore of the mighty main.
And spacious, skillfully constructed, graceful, well-paved and
nicely finished, the great bridge appeared like the line where
the hair hath been parted on the Ocean's head. Then on the
other shore of the ocean, Bibhishana,with the view of opposing
foes (that might advance), stationed himself mace in hand,
along with some councilors. Then Sugriva spoke unto Rama
having truth for his prowess,—“Do thou get upon Hanuman,
and let Laskhmana get upon Angada. O hero, vast is this
Ocean——abode of Makaras. These monkeys, rangers of the
sky, shall hold you up both.” Thereat the graceful and
righteous Raima along with Lakshmana, equipped with his
bow, set out in the van of the army in company with Sugriva.
And some monkeys proceeded along the middle, and some


FUDDHARANDAM. 1167


plunged into the deep, and some went by the road. And
some coursed through the air, bounding up-bird-like. And
that dreadful array of monkeys crossing over, with its
mighty uproar drowned the dreadful roar of the deep, which
had been arising. On the monkey-host having crossed by
the bridge of Nala, the king stationed it on the shore
abounding in fruits, roots and water. Beholding that work
of fkaghava incapable of being performed,the deities together
with the Siddhas and Chranas, and the Mabarshis, suddenly
«presenting themselves before Rama, sprinkled him one by
one with sacred water, and said,—"Mayst thou be victorious,
O human-divine one! Rule thou the Earth eternally !”
Thus in various auspicious words, did they pay homage unto
that one honored by the Brahmanas, Rama.


SECTION Xxill.


Havine seen omens, that one, Lakshmana’s elder brother,
conversant with them, embracing the son of Sumitra, said
these words,—"O Lakshmana, occupying (this tract) of cool
waters and woods affluent with fruits, will we, dividing and
arranging our forces, stay bere. Mighty is the fear that
1 see at handj—boding destruction to people and the
slaughter of the foremost heroes of bears, monkeys and
Rakshasas, The wind bloweth darkly, and the Earth
shaketh. The tops of the mountains tremble, and trees
topple down. And the clouds are ashen and roistering,
and roar roughly. And lowering, they shower portentous
drops of blood. And the twilight is terrible and looketh
like the red sandal. And a fiery circle droppeth from the
flaming sun. And on all sides birds and beasts, distressed,


1168 RAMAPANA.


uttering woe-begone notes, and grim-visaged, set up cries
against the sua, arousing great fear. And the Moon,
although not appearing* in the night, burneth, and with
dark and red rays riseth, as if it intended to exterminate
people. And the aspect (of the sun) is slight, rough, and
good;t and, O Lakshmana, a blue mark is visible on the
unclouded Sun, And the stars seem erased by a mighty
volume of dust, O Lakshmana, behold this sight disastrous
to people like unto the universal dissolution. Crows, and
hawks, and the inferior vultures, wheel all round. And
jackals are sending inauspicious yells, exciting great fear.
The earth shall be covered with darts and javelins, and
swords discharged by monkeys and R&kshasas, and be
turned into mire with flesh and gore. Surrounded by all the
monkeys, will we, using speed, this very day rapidly enter
into the city ruled by Ravana, incapable of being subdued.”
Having said this, that subduer in conflict, that lord, that
enchanter of men, Rama,{ equipped with his bow, proceeded
in the direction of Lank&. And all the principal monkeys—
Sugriva with Bibhishana—went on, setting up roars, for the
destruction of foes, who were determined to battle with them.
And consequently Raghu’s son was well pleased with the
fortitude and exertions of the powerful monkeys, for bringing
about what was dear unto Raghava. i


* The moon, it seems, doth appear, but does not took out clearly. —T,

t Pracasta] do not see the propriety of this epithet in this connection.
This may be a mistake.—T.

} The word Rdma occurs twice, one being the cognomen of the solar hero.
The other means, the enchanter of men—T,


YUDDHAKANDAM. . tr69


SECTION XXIV.


a


Ano with the presence of the king* that assembly of
heroes looked beautiful, as doth the autumnal night, garnished
with beauteous stars, with the Moon, And oppressed with
the bursting energy of the host resembling the ocean, the
Earth trembled. And then the rangers of the forest heard
a hubbub in Lanka, as well as the sounds of trumpets and
Mridangas, mighty and capable of making people’s down
stand on end. And at those sounds, the leaders of monkey-
bands were delighted beyond measure, and, resenting the
same, set up cries louder than those sounds. And the
Rakshasas alsq heard the roars of the monkeys, resembling
the rumbling of haughty clouds in the sky. Beholding Lanka
with variegated standards, and streamers, Dagaratha’s son
wentt to Siti with an aggrieved heart. ‘Here that one
having eyes resembling those of a young deer, is confined
by Ravana, like unto Rohini overpowered by the red-bodied
pianet."{ And, sighing hot and long, and looking at
Lakshmana, that hero spoke words fraught with his good
at that time-—“Behold, O Lakshmana, Lank& towering up
as if piercing the heavens; and, built by Vigwakarma on the
brow of the mountain, she seems to have been made by the
Mind. Constructed in time past with edifices thronging her,
Lanka looks like the all-encasing air, covered with pale
clouds. Lank& is embellished with groves resembling
Chitraratha, fair, and eloquent with the notes of various
birds, and fraught with fruits and flowers, Behold the
intoxicated birds, and the black bees blending (with the
blossoms), And the blessed breeze swayeth the trees vocal

* Rima.—T.
+ ie, mentally —T.
t Angfraka.—T.


1170, RAMAYANA,


with the coels.” Having divided his forces there agreeably
to the directions of the scriptures, Dagaratha’s son, Rama,
thus spoke unto Lakshmana. And he ordered that monkey
army, saying,—"Taking his own forces, let the puissant and
invincible Angada along with Nila, station himself in the
centre of the forces, And let the monkey, named Rishabha,
surrounded by numbers of monkeys, post himself at the
right of the monkey-army. And let the active and
irrepressible Gandham&dana, resembling an elephant fragrant
with the temporal exudation, stay, occupying the left of the
forces. 1 myself along with Lakshmana, shall heedfully stay
in the fore-front. And the monkeys, Jamvab&n, Sushena
and Vagadargi, the three high-souled, foremost bears,¥—
shall protect the interior (of the forces), And as the Sun,
surcharged with energy, protects the hind half of the globe,
Jet the monkey-monarch protect the rear of the monkey-
army.” And that army being skilfully divided into parts
and protected by great monkeys, resembled the welkin
covered with clouds. Then, taking up mountain-peaks and
mighty trees, the monkeys began to proceed towards Lanka,
burning to crush Lanka in battle. “We shall demolish Lanka
by hurling mountain-peaks, or with our clenched fists.” Thus
did the foremost of monkeys think in their minds. Then the
exceedingly energetic Rama addressed Sugriva, saying,—
“Our forces have been rightly marshalled,—let gu (now) Suka.”
Hearing Rama’s words, the lord of monkeys possessed of
great strength, liberated the envoy, Suka, at the command
of Rama. Liberated at the word of Rama, Suka, who had
been sore tormented by the monkeys, oppressed with
exceeding great fear, went to the lord of Rakshasas. There-
at, Ravana, laughing, said unto Suka,—‘‘Are thy wings
fettered? And thou seemst as if thy wings had been


* ‘The epithet ‘bears’ coming after ‘monkeys’ may look incongruous ; but, I
fancy, ‘monkeys’ is used in the general sense of being connected with the


monkey-host—T.


PUDDHARANDAM. 1171


severed, Why? Didst thou come under the control of the
volatile (monkeys) ?” Thereat, exercised with fear, Suka,
commanded by the monarch, answered the lord of Rakshasas
in this excellent speech, saying, —"Repairing to the northern
shore of the sea, I, pacifying (the monkeys) with mild speech,
communicated thy tidings clearly (unto Sugriva). Thereat,
as soon as they saw me, the monkeys flying into a wrath,
captured me, and attempted to clip my wings and slay me
with their clenched fists. They are insuseptible of being
spoken to. No doubt whatever can exist that, O lord of
R&kshasas, the monkeys are by nature wrathful and fierce.
The same R4ma that hath slain Viradha and Kavandha and
Khara, hath arrived (here) along with Sugriva, searching
for the whereabouts of Sita. Having thrown a bridge across
the brine and crossed the salt sea, Raghava, equipped with
his bow, stayeth here, setting the Rakshas at naught. And
the hosts consisting of thousands of bears and monkeys,
resembling hills and clouds, envelope the Earth, And peace
there can be none between the forces of the Rakshasas
and the hosts of the sovereign of monkeys, like unto the
deities and the Danavas. And they advance before the wall.
Speedily do one of these things—make over Sit& without
delay, or give (him) battle.” Hearing Suka’s speech, Ravana
with his eyes reddened in wrath, spoke, as if burging (Suka)
with them,—“Even if gods, and Gandharbas, and. Danavas
should array themselves against me, I will not from fear of
all creatures, render (back) Sita. When shail my shafts
pursue R&ghava, like maddened Bhramaras making towards
blossomy trees in spring? When by means of flaming shafts
shot from my bow shall I burn (Raghava) with his body
bathed in blood, even as a meteor (burneth) an elephant 9
And when, surrounded by a mighty host, shall I confound his
ranks, even as the Sun arising, (vanquisheth) the light of the
stellar spheres? My impetuosity like the Ocean's, my
strength like the Wind’s, Dacarathi doth not know,—and


1172 RAMAIRNA.


therefore it is that he desireth to fight with me. Rima hath
not seen my shafts resting in the quiver, resembling venomous
serpents,—and therefore it is that he seeketh to fight with
me. Raghava hath not in conflict formerly known my bow
representing my Vind sounded with my shalts; having
tremendous sounds proceeding from the strings; dreadful;
with the cries of distressed people for its mighty strains of
music; and resonant with the reports of Narchas and palms.
And, having bathed in the great field of battle representing
the river of hostile forces, I will in the encounter strike
(this Vind). Neither the thousand-eyed Vasava, nor Varuna
himself, can (cope) with me in battle; nor can Yama, or
Vaicravana’s self vanquish me in mighty conflict with the fire
of arrows.”


SECTION xxv.


ae


Ow Dagaratha’s son, Rama, having crossed the Ocean
with his forces, the graceful Ravana addressed his two
counsellors, Suka and S&rana, saying,—'The crossing the
entire ocean incapable of being crossed, by the monkey-
forces, and the building over the sea of the bridge by Rama—
all this had never happened before. The construction of a
bridge over the ocean cannot at all command credence, But
{however it be),I must enumerate the monkey-hosts. Entering
the monkey-army unobserved, it behoveth you to ascertain
the magnitude thereof, its strength, who are the foremost
monkeys, who are the councilors assembled there of Rima,
and who of Sugriva, who range at the head, whe among the
monkeys are heroic; how they have constructed the bridge
over the water of the ocean ; how the high-souled monkeys


}UPDHAKANDAM. 1173


stay there ; Rama’s, as well as Lakshmana’s purpose, prowess
and the arms (they fight with). And who is the commander of
those magnanimous monkeys ? Having learnt all this truly, ye
ought to return speedily.” Being thus commissioned, these
heroes, the Rakshasas, Suka and Sarana, assuming monkey-
shapes, entered into the hosts of monkeys. But Suka and
Sarana could not number that army of monkeys, incompre-
hensible and capable of making people’s hair stand on end.
The forces were on mountain-tops, by fountains and in caves.
And those rangers of the night beheld those forces, some
having already crossed, and some crossing, and some intent
on doing so; and some having sat down and some sitting—
that mighty army sending terrific roars,—that ocean of hosts
incapable of being disturbed. As they remained thus
disguised, they were discovered by Vibhishana, Thereat,
taking them captive, he unfolded (the fact) unto Rama,
saying,—"These are the counsellors of the lord of Rakshasas
—Suka and S&rana. O captor of hostile capitals, they have
come as spies from Lanka.” Seeing Rama,they were greatly
afflicted, and, despairing of their lives and exercised with
fear, with joined hands, said,—“O placid one, cammanded by
Ravana, we have come here, O son of Raghu, for the purpose
of gathering information concerning this army.” Hearing
their speech, Riama—son unto Dagaratha—ever engaged in
the welfare of all beings, laughing, remarked,—“IF you have
heedfully noted this entire array, or if you have done what ye
had been commanded to do, return in peace. If aught
remaineth unseen, do ye see itanew. Or Vibhishana will
again fully show it unto you. Having been taken, ye need
not fear on the score of your lives. Even if envoys happen
to be taken who are equipped with weapons, they should not
be slain. And albeit these night-rangers have come as spies
in disguise, with the view of creating division among their
foes, yet, O Vibhishana, let them off. Entering the extensive
Lanka, ye should say unto the king—younger brother unto


1174 RAMAYANA.


the Dispenser of riches—the words which I utter,—'That
force relying on which thou hast carried away my Sit&, do
thou as thou wishest, along with thy forces and friends,
display the same. On the morning of the morrow behold the
city of Lank& with her wail and gates, as well as the hosts of
Rakshasas, destroyed by me with my shafts. And as
Vasava equipped with the thunder-bolt hurleth the same
amidst the Danavas, will 1, O Ravana, on the morning of the
morrow pour down my dreadful ire upon thee along with thy
forces.” Thus directed (by R&ma), those Rakshasas, Suka
and S&rana, having saluted the righteous Raghava with
‘Victory !,' came (back) to Lanka and spoke unto the lord of
R&kshasas, saying,—"O lord of Rakshasas, having been
taken by Vibhishana for the purpose of being slain, we came
to be seen by the righteous-souled Rama of immeasurable
energy, and (finally) were liberated (by him). As these four
persons have combined—like unto the Lokapélas, heroic,
accomplished in arms, and of steady prowess—viz.,
Dagaratha’s son, Rima, the graceful Lakshmana, Vibhishana,
and the highly powerful Sugriva, resembling tlie great Indra,
these are capable of uprooting the city of Lanka—walls and
gateways—and replacing her (on her former site),—leave
thou the monkeys aside. Such is Rima’s figure and arms
that he shall alone demolish Laoka,—leave the other three
alone. And that host protected by Rama, Lakshmana and
Sugriva, shall become exceedingly hard to combat even by
the Asuras and gods.—And the army of the high-souled
rangers of the woods, eager for encounter, contains warriors
bursting with high spirits. No use of dispute. Be thou intent
on pacification. Do thou render back Maithili unto
Dagaratha’s son.”


YUDDHAKANDAS. 1175


SECTION xxvi.


Hearne Sarana's words, pregnant and truthful, king
Ravana addressed him, saying—‘“Even if the gods,
Gandharvas and Danavas should atlack me, Sita will ] not
part with from fear of all creatures. O amiable one, thou,
having been hard handled by the monkeys and distressed in
consequence, deemst it fit that Sita should be rendered back
this very day. What foe of mine is there who is competent
to conquer me in battle ¢’ Having uttered this rough speech,
the graceful Ravana—lord of the Rakhasas—desirous of
surveying (the monkcy-hosts),. ascended an edifice white like
snow, and elevated like many palms (placed oue upon another).
And transported with passion, Ravana in company with those
spies, saw the sea, mountuins and forests. And they beheld
the Earth enveloped with monkeys, and the mighty host of
monkeys, boundless and irresistible. And having seen this,
king Ravana asked SSrana,—“Who among these monkeys
are the foremost, who are the heroes, and who possessed of
great strength ? Who, bursting with spirits, stay all about
the fore? Whom doth Sugriva listen to? And who are
the leaders of the monkey-leaders ? O Sirana, relate thou
all this unto me. And what is the prowess of the monkeys ?”
Thereat, Sirana, knowing the chiefs (of the monkey-army),
spoke unto the sovereign of Rakshasas, who had asked (him),
as to who were the heads of the rangers of the woods, “This
monkey, that, selting up roars, stayeth in front of Lanka,
surrounded by hundreds and thousands of monkey-leaders,
by whose tremendous shouts Lanka trembleth with her wall,
gateways, hills, woods and forests, and who is posted in front
of the forces of the high-souled Sugriva—master of all the
monkeys—is the heroic leader of monkey-bands named Nila.
And that one, possessed of prowess, who,folding up his arms,


1176 RAMAYANA.


paceth the gound on foot, who, facing Lank’, from wrath is
frequently yawning, who resembles 2 mountain-peak and is
like the filaments of a lotus, who, enraged again and again,
soundeth his tail,and the ten cardinal points resound with the
sounds of whose tail,—is he who hath been sprinkled by
Sugriva~king of mookeys—the heir apparent,named Angada.
He challengeth thee to the fight. The worthy son of Vali
and ever dear unto Sugriva, he putteth forth his prowess,
as Varuna doth for Sakra. That that well-wisher of
R&ghava,the vehement Hanumn,hath seen Janaka’s daughter,
was owing to the advice uf this one. That powerful (hero)
is proceeding, taking innumerable hands belonging to
the lord of monkcys, for the purpose of beating thee by
means of his soldiery. Following V4li’s son, and surrounded
by a mighty force, stayeth in the field the heroic Nala,
the builder of the bridge. Those that with their limbs lying
inactive, and setting up roars and ululations, are following
this one,* are heroes dwelling in Chandana.t With his own
army alone, the silver-hued Sweta of dreadful prowess hopes
to subdue Lank&. Marshalling his monkey-forces and
cheering up his soldiers, that intelligent monkey, famed over
the three regions, having speedily met with Sugriva, is
retracing his steps. From days of yore on the banks of the
Gomati there is a mountain, (named) Ramya, (otherwise)
called Sanrochana. The mount abounds with various trees.
There that leader of bands, named Kumuda, governs his
kingdom. And he that cheerfully draweth after him
hundreds and thousands of monkeys, and the long grim hairs
of whose tail, coppery, yellow, sable and white, are cast
about, is the energetic monkey, Chanda, eager for encounter.
And he hopes to conquer Lank& by help of his own forces.


* The reference is prospective. It means the monkey, Sweta, in the next
sloka.—T.

t This may mean some wood of sandals; but the commentator is silent
over it—T,


FYUDDHARANDAM. 1577


And this one, resembling a lion, tawny and furnished with a
long mane, who, remaining apart, vieweth all Lank4 as if con-
suming her with his eyes, dwelleth for ever and a day in
Vindhya, the mountain Krisha, Sahya, and the mount
Sudargana, and, a leader of bands, is named Rambha, Three
hundred Kotis of the foremost of monkeys, dreadful and
fierce and possessed of terrific prowess, surrounding (him)
go in his wake for the purpose of demolishing Lanka by
their (native) might. And he that expandeth his ears and
yawneth again and again, who defieth the fear of death and
doth not move his forces, who trembleth for wrath and eyeth
frequently askance,—and behold the lashing of his tail !—and
who setteth up leonine shouts, O king, with great energy
and with fear cast off,—resideth in the romantic mount,
S&lweya, and, a leader of companies, is named Sarabha, To
him, O king, belong forty hundred thousands of powerful
leaders. And he that stayeth, like unto a mighty mass of
clouds covering up the sky, in the midst of the monkey-
heroes, as doth VAsava in the centre of the celestials, whose
lofty shout is heard (mingled with) the uproar set up by the
foremost monkeys, burning for battle, dwelleth in the excollent
hill P&rijitra ; and, ever irrepressible in fight, is named
Panaga, a leader of (monkey)-bands. Fifty /acs of leaders
with their forces arranged, environ this commander of
monkeys. He that stayeth gracing the dreadful array over-
flowing with talk, stationed on the shore of the ocean,—
resembling a second sea and like unto Durdara*—is the
leader named Vitata. And he rangeth, drinking of (the
waters of} the Vena,—best among streams—and his forces
are sixty lacs of monkeys, And the monkey, named Krathana,
challengeth thee to conflict. He hath (under him) powerlul
and vigorous generals, and forces well divided. And the
monkey owning that person of the hue of red chalk, and,
who, elated with strength, disregardeth all the monkeys,—is


* Name of a celebrated monkey-leader.—T.


148


3198 RAMAYANA,


named Gavaya, who approacheth thee wrathfully. Seventy
lacs (of troops) girt him round ; and by their means he hopes
to bring down Lank&. These are the heroes, incapable of
being borne, whose numbers cannot be enumerated. These
are the leaders and the heads thereof, as well as the forces
set in order of battle.”


SECTION xxvii.


As thou lookest on, I shall describe unto thee those
Jeaders who shall put forth their prowess for Raghava, and
lay down their lives (in his behalf) That one of dreadful
deeds the long hairs on whose long tail, coppery, and yellow,
and black, and white, thrown up, look like the rays of the
Sun, and are trailing over the ground, is the monkey, named
Hara; whom follow hundreds and thousands (of monkeys)
desperately upraising trees, intent upon (scaling) Lanki~the
leaders of the monkey-king and his servants present (in this
conflict.) And these whom thou beholdest present,resembling
mighty masses of sable clouds, like unto black collyrium,
of genuine prowess,countless and incapable of enumeration,-—
dwelling in mountains, provinces, and rivers,—terrible bears
approach thee, O king. Iu their amidst is their king, grim-
eyed and of fierce appearance, like unto Parjanya* encom-
passed by clouds,—who dwelleth in that best of mountains,
Rikkhavan, drinking of the Narmad&.—Behold this one
resembling a hill—younger brother of Dhumra, lord of all
the bears, He is equal to his brother in beauty, and of
superior prowess. This leader of redoubtable leaders is
named Jambavin. He is mild, obedient to his superiors and

* Indra,


FUDDHAKANDAM. 1179


fierce in fight. The intelligent Jambavan assisted Sakra
signally in the war of the gods and Asuras, and he hath won
many boons (in consequence). Ascending the tops of
mountains, these hurl down gigantic crags huge as colossal
clouds, nor doth (the fear of) death (ever) disquiet them.
And their bodies covered with hair, they resemble Rakshasas
and ghosts (in their conduct). This one of immeasurable
energy hath innumerable troops going about, who behold
this leader of leaders under unusual excitement leaping
and resting (by turns). This lord of monkeys dwelleth near
the thousand-eyed Deity ; and this leader of bands, gifted
with strength, is named Rambha. And he that going,
toucheth with his side a mountain situated at the distance of
a Yoyana, and, rising up, measureth the same length,—and
whose beauly is surpassed by none among quadrupeds,—is
known under the name of SannSdana, the grand-fathor of
the monkeys ;—this intelligent one battled with Sakra,*¥—
nor did he meet with discomfiture. This is that general
of the forces, And he whose prowess is like that of Sakra,
is this one begot by Fire on a Gandharva’s daughter, for
assisting the celestials on the occasion of the war of the gods
and the Asuras. And this graceful and powerlu! one—best of
monkeys—disporteth in that sovereign of mountains
inhabited by numbers of Kinnaras, where king Vaigravana
eateth rose apples, and which, O lord of Rakshas, ever
conduceth to the pleasure of thy brother. And this one who
never extolleth himself in battle, is named Krathana—leader
of hosts. Surrounded by a thousand Koti (of troops), and
stationed in the midst of the monkeys, he hopeth to subjugate
Lank& with his own troops alone. And he that roameth
about the Gang&, terrifying leaders of elephant-herds,
remembering the former hostility of the monkeys and the


* There is a word~rane, in battle—ia this line, left out on the ground of
pleonasm,—T.


1180 RAMALANA.


elephants, is this leader of bands, who, roaring, opposeth wild
elephants in mountain-caverns and crusheth trees, ~and
foremost of monkeys, and chief of the monkey-forces—like
Sakra himself in heaven, sporteth, resorting to Uciravija per-
taining to Mandara, best of mountains, on the golden river.*
A thousand lacs of monkeys, elated with vigor and prowess,
setting up roars and furnished with (long) arms follow him;
and this one is the leader of those high-souled monkeys.
And, O king, he whom thon seest resembling clouds uplifted
by the winds, is a leader named Pramathi. And his feet.
coursing soldiery are fiery, and volumes of red-hued dust are
scattered about him profusely on all sides, And these
wondrous strong and dreadful Golangulast numbering
hundreds and hundred thousands, seeing the building of the
bridge, surrounding, O mighty monarch, the leader named
Gav&ksha—a Golangula—set up shouts, intending to demolish
Lanka& with their prowess. Where the trees bring forth
fruits of every season and the black bees resort,—in the
mountain furnished with solar splendour, which the Sun
circumambulates, by whose radiance ever beam beasts and
birds with a like hue,—whose table-lands are never forsaken
by magnanimous Maharshis; where the trees yield every
object of desire and all are fraught with fruits; in which best
of mountains excellent honey is found,—there in the charm-
ing Golden hill, O king, sporteth this one—the foremost of
the principal monkeys, Kagari by name, a leader of bands,
There are sixty thousand charming Golden hills, In their
midst is that best of mountains,t even as thou, O sinless
one, art among the Rakshas. There in the inmost hill dwell
{monkeys) tawny-hued; and white—with coppery faces;
yellowish like honey; sharp-toothed ; having nails for their
weapons ; and four teeth like lions; irresistible like tigers


* Gangi.—T.
t Vide anti.
+ SAvarni Meru.—T.


FUDDHARANDAM. net


all equal to Vaigw4nara, and resembling flaming venomous
snakes ; furnished with long tails; like unto mad elephants;
seeming like gigantic hills; roaring like mighty clouds;
with eyes tawny and round; of terrific mein; and emitting
sounds,—and these are gazing at Lank&, as if devastating
her. And this powerful one staying in their midst, is their
leader, eager for victory ; and the puissant (monkey) always
looketh like the Sun himself; and this one, O king, is famed
on earth by the name of Satavali, And this heroic one,
powerful and mighty, established in his own prowess, hopeth
to devastate Lank& with his own forces, And for compass-
ing Rama’s desire, the monkey doth not cherish any kindness
for his life. Gaya, Gav&ksha, Nala, and the monkey Nila—
each of these is encompassed by ten 4ofis of warriors,
(Besides these), there are other choice monkeys dwelling in
the Vindhya mountain, but I cannot enumerate these
(monkeys) possessed of fleet vigor, in consequence of their
vast number. All these, O mighty monarch, are of exceeding
prowess,—all possess persons resembling mighty mountains ;
and all are competent in a moment to remove mountains and
scatter the Earth with them.”


SECTION XxvVul.


—


Havine heard the words of Sarana, who had described
the forces (of the monkeys), Suka, addressed Ravana, lord
of Rakshasas, saying,—“Those, O king, whom thou seest
stationed, resembling mad elephants, like unto myagrodhas*
belonging to the Gang&,—like unto Salas in the Himavin,——
are incapable of being borne,—they are possessed of


* Baniaas.


1182 RAMAYANA.


strength, and able to wear forms at will; resembling deities
and Danavas, and like the gods in conflict. These, numbering
nine, five, and seven thousand 4of’s and thousand sankus
and an hundred vrindas, are the ministers of Sugriva,

residing in Kishkindhi—monkeys begot by gods and

Gandharvas, capable of assumiug shapes at will. And those
two whom thou beholdest, staying there, of equal proportions
and endowed with god-like shapes, are Mainda and Dwivida,
—who have no equals in fight. Permitted by Brahma, they
had partaken of ambrosia. They hope to humble Lanka
by their prowess. And he whom thou seest staying like a
mad elophant, the monkey who, being enraged, can by his
strength agitate the deep itself, who, searching for Vaidehi,
had presented himself before thee, lord,—behold this monkey
come again !--whom thou hadst seen before !*—is the eldest
son of Kagari, known as the offspring of the Wind-god—
celebrated as Hanuman, who had bounded over the deep.

Capable of wearing forms at pleasure, that first of monkeys
is endeued with grace and strength,—and is of irresistible

impetuosity even as that lord, the Wind. Seeing the Sun
risen, (he) while a boy, resolving in his mind,—‘Coursing a
way measuring three thousand yoyanas, I will bring the Sun,
—my hunger is not appeased ;’ and he sprang up, elated with

strength. And, not getting that god, incapable of being sub-
dued by the deities, saints and Rakshasas, he dropped down
on the Ascending-hill. And thereat a jaw of that strong-
jawed one was a little fractured on the rock,—and he is called
Hanuman in consequence. I know this monkey and all his
previous history. I cannot describe his strength, beauty
or prowess, And this one alone hopes to lay Lanka low
by his energy. And why dost thou today forget the monkey,
who had flung flaming fire into Lank&’? And next to him
is the hero of dark-blue hue, having eyes like lotuses, the


* This distocation occurs in the original. These descriptions generally
are hardly amenable to a sound syntax.—T.


YUDDH4KANDAM. 4183


Atiratha among the Ikshw&kus—of prowess celebrated in
the world—in whom virtue never wavereth and who never
swerveth from righteousness; who knoweth the Brahma
Mantra and the Vedas,—the best of those versed in them—who
pierceth the sky with his shafts and cleaveth the Earth,whose

ire is like death, and whose prowess is like that of Sakra,—

whose wife, Sita, hath been carried away by thee from

Janasthana. And this is Rama, who, O king, advanceth to

encounter thee in conflict. And on his right side is one of
the splendour of pure gold, broad-breasted, having dark

curled hair—this one is named Lakshmana, ever mindful
of his brother's welfare. He is versed in polity as well as

warfare—the foremost of those learned in all the branches
of knowledge; wrathful, invincible, victorious, powerful,

conquering and strong,—the right arm of Rama and his own
life going about. For Raghava he careth not for his life. He

hopeth to exterminate all the Rakshasas in battle. He that
stayeth occupying the left side of Rama, and surrounded by

Rakshasas, is the king, Bibhishana, sprinkled as the king of
Lanka by the auspicious king of kings,—he, filled with wrath,
approacheth thee (for battle). And he whom thou seest
staying in the middle like a firm-based mountain, the lord
of all monkeys, of inmeasurable prowess,—and who in energy
fame, intelligence, strength, and lineage, is as superior to the
monkeys as the mountain Himavan overtoppeth all the mount-
ains, who in company with the principal monkey-leaders
dwelleth in inaccessible Kishkindh& hard to penetrate, and
dense with trees,and difficult of access, and denying approach
on account of rocks ; and whose golden garland consisting of an
hundred lotuses looks exceedingly elegant, which is the
desire of men and gods, and where is established Lakshmi—(is
“Sugriva). And Rima, having slain Vali, hath conferred this
garland, Tara, and the eternal monkey-kingdom on Sugriva.
An hundred of an hundred thousand is called a koti by
the wise. An hundred of a thousand 4o/i is called a Sanku.


1184 RAMAYANA.


An hundred of a thousand Sanku is known as a Mabcanku.
An hundred of a thousand Mah4ganku is here termed a
Vrinda. An hundred of a thousand Vrinda is known as a
Mahavrinda. A thousand Mab&vrinda is called here a
Padma, An hundred of athousand Padma is known asa
Mahapadma. An hundred of a thousand MahSpadma is
termed a Kharva. An hundred of a thousand Kharva
is termed a Samudra. An hundred of a thousand Samudra is
known as a Mahaugha. Thus backed by a thousand éoé1, and an
hundred Sanku, and a thousand Mahaganku, and an hundred
Vrinda,and a thousand Mahavrinda,and an hundred Padma,and
a thousand MabSpadma and an hundred ddarva, and an equal
Samaudra and an equal Mahaugha,—by 4o¢is of Mahaughas—
resembling the sea,—and surrounded by the heroic Bibhishana
as well as his counsellors,—that Lord of monkeys,always engirt
by a mighty force, and possessed of exceeding strength and
prowess, will encounter thee in battle. Observing this host,
that hath presented itself, resembling a flaming planet,
do thou, O mighty monarch, prepare thyself to the uttermost,
—so that victory may be thine, and that thou mayst not come
by discomfiture at the hands of the foe.”


SECTION Xxx.


Scene the leaders of monkeys as pointed out by Suka,——
the exceedingly puissant Lakshmana—Rama's right arm—and
his* brother Bibhishana staying near RAma, and Sugriva of
dreadful prowess—sovereign of al! the monkeys,—and the
strong Angada, grandson unto the thunder-handed one,t


* de, Ravana’s


+ Indra.—T.


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1185


and the powerful Hanumin ; andthe unconquerable Jambavan ;
and Sushena; and Nila; and Nala—best of monkeys,—
and Gaya; and Gavaksha; and Sarabha; and Mainda ; and
Dwivida,—Ravana, with his heart agitated a little, and his
wrath aroused,—when their talk had ended, rebuked those
heroes, Suka and Sarana. And he wrathfully spoke unto
them, standing in humble guise with theie heads hung down,
harsh words faltering with passion,—‘That counsellors
subsisting (on the wealth of their master and sovereign’,
should say aught disagreeable to him, whether they meet with
his favor or disfavor—is not meet. Without being questioned,
it is (proper) for you both to hymn the praises of a foe that is
opposed and that hath advanced for encounter ! Ye have in vain
worshipped your preceptors, aged people,and spiritual guides,
for ye have failed to appropriate the cream of Political
Science, which should be availed of. Or if ye had appropriated
the same, you have forgotten it afterwards ; and ye bear the
burden of ignorance. And itis owing to my good fortune
that, having such stupid counsellors, | have as yet held my
kingdom. Have ye no fear of death that ye use harsh speech
towards me, who am the ruler and whose tongue dispenseth
good and evil? Even trees may exist in the forest, coming
in contact with burning fire; but transgressors cannot
exist, visited with the chastisement of the monarch, I shall
slay these wicked wights, who praise the side of the enemy,
if my anger be not moderated, remembering their former
good offices, Avaunt! Go hence from nearme! I do not
wish to slay you, remembering your good acts, Slain ye
(already) are, who are ingrate and cherish no affection
for me.” Thus accosted, Suka and Sarana, seeing (how
things stood), covered with bashfulness, went out, saluting
Ravana by uttering ‘Victory Then that ranger of night,
the Ten-necked one, said unto Mahodara, who was present,
to summon some spies. Thus accosted, Mahodara speedily
ordered some spies (vo present themselves). Thereat, the


148


1386 RAMAPANA.


spies,hurriedfy arriving there at the mandate of the monarch,
and, presenting themselves, stood with joined hands, uttering
blessings of victory. Then the lord of Rakshasas, Ravana,
addressed the spies, who were heroic, faithful, calm, and
courageous,—"Go hence, and acquaint yourselves with the
exertions of Rama; as well as with those who, being the
custodians of Rama’s closest counsels, have gladly joined him
(here). How he sleepeth and how he waketh, and what he
engageth himself in—having deftly acquainted yourselves
with all this thoroughly, do you come (back here). The wise
king that gathers (a knowledge of) his enemy through spies,
can, putting forth a modicum of effort in conflict, neutralise
(his exertions).” Thereat the spies, saying—‘“So it is”,
taking Sardula to the fore, with delighted hearts went round
the sovereign of the Rakshasas. And, having gone round
the high-souled Rakshasa-chief, the spies set out for where
Rama with Lakshmana was. And repairing secretly to the
vicinity of the mountain bordering on the fair shore,* they
saw Rama and Lakshmana with Sugriva and Bibhishana.
And seeing that host, they were overwhelmed with fear.
And, while staying there, they, discovered by the righteous
lord of Rakshasas, Bibhisana, were sore harassed (by the
monkeys). And that wicked Rakshasa, Sardula, alone was
taken (before Rama). But Rama liberated him, who was
assailed by the monkeys. And Rama also, entertaining no
enmity against them, also liberated the others, (who
accompanied Sardula). And, on having been put to straits
by the powerful monkeys of fleet vigor, they,t breathing
hard, and with their consciousness Jost, again arrived at
Lanka’. Then those exceedingly strong spies, always ranging
outside, presenting themselves before the Ten-necked one,
informed him of the forces of Rama, stationed near mount
Suvela.


* Surelasye Sailasya—may also mean, of the mount Suveia.—T.
+ The spies, that is—T.


3 UUDHAKANDAM. 1187


SECTION xxx.


Vaen the spies communicated unto Lanka's lord news
concerning Raghava and his host stationed at the mount
Suvela. Hearing the words of the spies, that Rama,
accompanied by a mighty army, had arrived (there), Ravana
was a little agitated and spoke unto Sardula,—"Thy color
hath changed its natural aspect, and, O ranger of the night,
thou lookest poorly. Didst not come under the control of
the wrathful foes ?” Thus ordered by him, then (Sardula),
bewildered by fear, addressed that tiger of a Rakshasa,
saying,—"Those powerful monkeys, O king, puissant, strong,
and protected by Raghava, are incapable of being ranged
(hy us). And they cannot be conversed with or interrogated.
A}l around, the courses are kept by monkeys resembling hills.
As soon as I entered, and was scanning that host, 1 was
discovered. And forcibly taken by the Rakshas, I was
pulled by them hither and thither. And furiously assailed by
the monkeys with thighs, clenched fists, teeth, and palms, t
was dragged in the midst of the army by the enraged
monkeys. And, after having been taken all about, I was (at
Jength) taken before Rama, bloeding, with my limbs showing
sorry work, and my senses swimming and paralysed. And,
having been belabored by the monkeys, I, on craving his kind-
ness with joined hands, was, at his pleasure, rescued hy
Raghava, with, “Don’t, don’t'’! Having filled up the deep with
rocks and crags, Rama equipped with weapons, stayeth,
occupying the gate of Lanka. And, letting me off, that one
of suspassing vigor, surrounded by monkeys, and, arranging
his forces in the Garura fashion, advanceth upon Lanks. And
he draweth nigh to the wall. Therefore, do one ot ihese
things in preference to the other,—either render back Sita,
or give him battle.” Hearing this, Ravana, lord of Rakshasas,


1188 RAMAIANA.


then reflecting in his mind, spoke unto S&rdula these
pregnant words,—"Even if the gods, Gandharvas, and Danavas
should array themselves against me, Sitd I shall not give, from
fear of all creatures.” Having said this, that exceedingly
energetic one again said—‘Thou hast ranged this army.
Who here among the monkeys are heroic? And, O
amiable one, what is their potency? And what are those
monkeys that are hard to approach, likeg And, O thou
of [air vows, whose sons and grandsons are they? Truly
relate all this (to me). Having ascertained their strength
and weakness, I shall in this matter adopt my course. Those
who wish fur fight, certainly take account of all this.” Thus
addressed by Ravana, Sardula—best of spies—thus began
to speak in the presence of Ravana—"O king, that uncon-
querable one in fight, Jimbavan, is well known as the son
Gadgada, king of bears. The other son of Gadgada is the
son of Sakra’s preceptor. By which son, single-handed, was
done immense oppression to the Rukshas. And the righteous
and puissant Sushena is the son of Dharma.* And the mild
monkey, Dadhimukha, O king, is the sun of Somat And
Sumukha,Durmukha and the monkey, Vegadargin (resembling)
Death himself, were for certain begot by the Self-create in
the shape of a monkey.f And Nila himself is the son of the
bearer of sacrilici


itl oblations ;$ and Hanuman is famed as
the son of the Wind-god. And the irrepressible and youthful
Angada is the grandson of Sakra. And the lusty Mainda
and Dwivida are sprung from Agwi. And five are the
sons of Vaivaswata, resembling the Reaper himself—Gaya,
Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sarabba and Gandhamadana. But I can
not enumerate the rest, ten fefis of heroic monkeys—all


* Righteousness,
+ Moon.
$ Another meaning
the shupe of a monkey.
{ Fire,


“The monkey, Vegadaryi—who is Death himself in
But ! give the more acceptable sense.—T.


FUDDHAKANDAM, T18y


sons of deilies—burning for battle, And this is Dagaratha’s
son—this youth resembling a lion, who stew Dushana and
Kharca and 7riciras, There breathes none on Earth that is
like unto Rama in prowess, by whom was slain Viradha and
Kavandha, resembling the Destroyer. No person can on
earth describe the virtues of Rama; by whom have been
slain all those Raksbasas that had gone to Janasthana. And
here also is the virtuous Lakshmana, like unto the foremost
of elephants, coming in the way of whose shafts, even Vasava
doth not live. And here are Sweta and Jyotirmukha,
sprung from Vaskara's self; and the monkey Hemakuta is
the son of Varuna, And the heroic Nala—best of monkeys,
is the son of Vigwakarm&. And powerful and impetuous,
Durdhara is the son of Vasu. And that foremost of Rakshasas,
Bibbishana, thy brother, engaged in the welfare of Raghava,


hath laid seige to Lanka. Thus have [ described unto thee
the entire monkey host stationed in mount Suyela. As for
what remaineth to be done, thon art the master.”


SECTION XXX1.


Tuer the spies of the king informed him of the forces
of Raghava, incapable of being agitated, which had stationed
themselves on mount Suvela. Hearing the arrival of Rama's
mighty army from the spies, Ravana was a little agitated,
and he spoke unto the ministers,—"“Let the ministers speedily
present themselves, having their wits about them,—the
time forsooth hath come for counsel.’ Hearing bis mandate,
those Rakshasas, his counselors, swiftly presented them-
selves. And then he consulted with his Rakshasa counselors.
Having deliberated duly, that resistless one, dismissing


1igo KAMUALANA.


his ministers, entered his own abode. Then, taking with him
the highly strong Vidyujjibha,huge-bodied and gifted with the
powers of illusion, he entered where Mithila’s daughter was.
And the lord of Rakshasas said unto Vidyujjibha, skilled in
iNusion,—“'Do thou bring Janaka’s daughter under the sway
of illusion. And, O ranger of the night, do thou, taking an
ilusory head of Raghava, as well as a mighty bow with
the shaft (set), present thyself before me.” Thus accosted,
the night-ranger, Vidyujjibha, saying, “So be it,” displayed
that desired illusion unto Ravana. Thereat, the king, eager
to meet with Sia in the Agoka woods, well-pleased,
conferred an excellent ornament on him, Then the exceed-
ingly powerful lord of the Nuiritas, the younger brother of
the Dispenser of riches, entered (into thal place) and saw
(there Sita) distressed, albeit unworthy of distress,—with her
head hung down, overwhelmed with woe,—sitting on the
ground, staying at the agoka woods, engaged in the contem-
plation of her lord, conciliated by dreadful Rakshasis
remaining near. Then,drawing near Sita,Ravana, proclaiming
his exultation, said these haughty words unto the daughter
of Janaka,p—"O gentle one, he depending on whom thou,
being soothed by (me), slightest me—that slayer of Kbara,
thy husband, Raghava, hath fallen in battle. Thy roots
have been competely severed, and thy pride hath been
destroyed by me. In consequence of this calamity, O Sita,
thou shalt become my wife. O foolish (girl), renounce this
idea. What wilt thou do with him that is dead? O meek
(wench), be thou the mistress of all my wives. O thou of
slender religious merit! O thou whose object hath been
defeated! O thou that presumest to be wise! Hearken
unto the destruction of thy lord, like the dreadful destruction
of Vritra! Surrounded by a vast army gathered by the
sovereign of the monkeys, Raghava had presented himself
on the shore of the sea, for compassing my destruction. And
on the sun having set, Rama stationed himself with his


FUDDHAKANDA A, rigs


mighty army, oppressing the northern shore (of the sea).
Then at midnight (my) spies coming to that host, thus
stationed, fatigued from travel, and sleeping soundly (in
consequence),—first ranged it. Then my mighty forces led
by Prahasta slew his host overnight, where was present
Rama along with Lakshmara. And repeatedly upraising
pattigas and bludgeons, swords, rods and other mighty
weapons ; and (discharging) showers of arrows, and darts,
and daggers and maces and sticks and crows and bearded
darts and discuses and clubs ;—the Rakshasas discharged
these among the monkeys. And while Rama was sleeping,
the furious Prabasta by means of a mighty falchion, with
speed cut off his head clean. Bibhishana, who was flying
at his will, was taken captive. And Lakshmana along with the
monkey-army hath departed somewhere. And, O Sita,
Sugriva—lord of monkeys—hath his neck broken; and, O
Sita, with his jaw fractured, Hanuman hath been slaughtered
by the Rakshasas.—And Jambavn, endeavouring to spring
up with his thighs, was slain in the conflict; being severed
by bearded darts, even asa tree cut off. And the stalwart
Mainda and Dwivida--those foremost of monkeys—sighing
and lamenting, bathed in blood,—destroyers of foes—were
cut off with a sword. And Panaga is rolling on the earth like
a (veritable) Panaga.* And mangled by many iron arrows,
Darimukha lieth in a cave. And the exceedingly energetic
Kumuda, dumb, is slain by shafts. And torn by innumerable
(arrows) discharged on all sides by Rakshasas, Angada,
vomitting blood, lieth on the ground.t And the monkeys,
hard pressed by elephants, and others by networks of cars,
lie low in the field, having been agitated like clouds by winds,
And others afflicted with affright, flee, attacked (by the enemy)
in the rear, and followed by the R&kshasas, like mighty
elephants pursued by lions. And some have fallen into the


* The tree of that name.—T.
+ This sfoka has ‘Angada’ twice. One, of course, is left out.—T.


1192 KAMALANS.

sea, and some have taken refuge in the sky ; and the bears
have mounted up trees along with the monkeys. And on the
shore of the sea, and in mountains and woods many are the
tawny-hued monkeys that have been slain by Rakshasas of
frightful forms. Thus hath thy lord been slain by my forces,
along with his army ; and I have his head, washed in blood
and besmeared with dust.” Thereat, the exceedingly
irrepressible lord of R&kshasas, Ravana, spake unto a
Rakshasi, in the hearing of Sita,—"Bring (hither) the
Rakshasa, Vidyujjibba of cruel deeds, who hath personally
brought Raghava’s head from the field.” Thereat, Vidyujjibha,
taking the head along with the bow, bowing down the head
{unto Ravana), stood before him. Then spake king Ravana
unto the Rakshasa, Vidyujjibba of the long tongue, who was
staying by,—"Do thou at once hold before Sita the head of
Dagaratha’s son. Let her clearly behold the ultimate sad
plight of her lord.” Thus addressed, that Raksha, throwing
that graceful head before Sit&, swiftly vanished, And
Ravana cast down the mighty blazing bow, famed through
the three worlds, saying —“This is Rama’s, This is the
bow of thy Rama with the string fixed. © Slaying that man
over night, Prabasta brought it hither.”


SECTION xxx


Sexine that head and that exceilent bow, and (remember.
ing) the union of (Rama) and Sugriva related by Hauuman,—
and (seeing) those eyes, and the complexion of that face, and
that countenance like unto that of her lord,—and that hair
and that forehead; and that beautiful jewel forming the
crest ; and recognizing (Rama) by all these tokens combined,—


YUDDBARANDAM. 1193


(Sit), exceedingly aggrieved, rebuked Kaikeyi, lamenting
like a female osprey,—"O Kaikeyi, have thy wishes attained,
Slain hath been the son of the race; and the entire race is
exterminated by thee, partial to dissension. And what evil
had been done unto Kaikeyi by the revered Rama, that
along with me, he hadst been banished into the woods, with
rags given him (for his covering)?” Having said this,
Vaidehi, forlorn and trembling (all over), dropped to the
earth, like a plantain cut off. Then, recovering after a while,
and having regained her consciousness, the large-eyed onc,
placing the head in her front, gave way to grief. “Ah! Tam
undone, O mighty-armed one! O thou that didst follow stern
vows! From thy (death), I have come by this final plight,
having been rendered a widow. The greatest calamity (that
can befall a wotan), is said to be the death of her husband.
And, possessor of an excellent character, thou hast departed
before me, who have ever trod the path of the righteous; but”
who have come by a mighty grief and am plunged ina sea of
sorrow. And thou, who was engaged in delivering me,
hast thyself fallen! And my mother-in-law, Kaugaly&, ;
attached (to thee), through the death of thee, her son, at the
hands of Rakshasas, hath been reduced to the condition of a
cow that hath been deprived of her calf. O Raghava, even
the astrologers had predicted long life for thee. But their
words are false—thou,O RAghava, wast short-lived. Or
didst thy wisdom, wise and good as thou wert, come to
naughty For God, who is the origin of all beings, maketh
(every one) reap the fruit of his own acts. And why, versed
in polity as thou wast, didst thou come by death, unforeseen 7
Thou wast acquainted with the means of warding off mis-
fortune, and skilled in doing so. And having been brought
hither by me representing the Fatal Night, fierce and fell,—
after (being) embraced, and by force,—the Jotus-eyed one hath
met with his death. Here liest thou, O long-armed one, leay-
ing me lone,—and embracing the Earth like thy beloved fair.


150


1194 RAMAPANA.


Ever carefully worshipped with perfumed wreaths, this bow
of thine, O hero, embellished with gold, is dear unto me. oO
sinless one, thou hast surely gone to heaven, and (art there)
in the company of thy sire and my father-in-law, Dagaratha,
and all thy ancestors, Thou hast become a star of the
firmament as the fruit of thy great act.* Thou hast dis-
regarded thy righteous race of R&jarshis, O king, why dost
thou not look at me? And why is it that thou dost not
answer me, who am a girl, hardly arrived at youth,—and who
am thy wife and companion? That thou al the time of thy
espousing my hand hadst vowed—I will practise (righteous-
ness) with thee—do thou, O Kakutstha, recollect the same,
and take me, who am overwhelmed with distress. Why, 0
best of goers, hast thou gone from this world to that other,
leaving behind me, overwhelmed with distress? That
person of thine which, decked out with auspicious things, I
used to embrace, beasts of prey will for certain tear the
same, Having performed the Agnishtoma and other sacrifices
with Dakshinds (dispensed)—why hadst not thou attained
purity by means of the sacrificial fire? Kaugaly4, over-
whelmed with sorrow, shall only behold one of the three that
had gone away to distant lands,—come (back)—Lakshmana.
And, on being asked by her,he shall relate thine as well as the
deaths of thy friend’s troops over night at the hands of the
Rakshasas, And, O Raghava, hearing thee slain while asleep,
and me staying in the abode of the Raksha,she with her heart
cleft (in twain), shall cease to exist. And for the sake of me,
abjoct that I am,that sinless son of the king, Rama, possessed
of prowess, having crossed the ocean, hath been slain in the
footprint of a cow. I, the befouler of my line, who had been
wedded by Dagaratha’s son through want of discretion,
becoming the wife of the revered Rama, was (in reality) his
Death. Without doubt, in another birth I had abstained
from choice gifts,—and therefore it is that I sorrow to-day,


* The carrying out the command of thy sire—T.


YUDDHARANDAM. 95,


albeit being the wife of one that was (ever dear) unto guests.
Do thou, O Ravana, specdily slay me upon Rama; and,
bringing the wife to the husband, compass my best benefit.
Do thou join my head to his and my body to his body.
Twill, O Ravana, follow the way of my high-souled lord.”
Thus, burning in grief, did that large-eyed one indulge in
lamentations ; and Janaka’s daughter kept fast gazing at the
head and bow of her lord. And as the Rakshasa was by
while Sita was thus bewailing, there appeared before his
lord, with joined hands, the warder, saying,—“May the
worshipful one be victorious!” Aud saluting and propitiat-
ing him, (Ravana), he told him that Prahasta, general
of the forces, had arrived. “Prahasta hath come to thee,
surrounded by all the courtiers. And, O lord, I was des-
patched by him, desirous of seeing thee. O mighty monarch,
surely there is—and thou art forgiving from thy regal
sentiment®*—some work which is momentous; and do
thou see them.” Hearing these words of the Rakshasa,
the Ten-necked one, leaving the agoka wood, went to sce the
counselors. And, having decided his entire course of action
in consultation with his competent advisers, (Rivana),
entering bis court,—well knowing R&ma’s prowess, set about
bis work. And as soon as Ravana left that place, that head
and that bow vanished. Ant in company with the councilors
of dreadful power,(Ravana) decided his course with reference
to Rama. And then the lord of Rakshasas, Ravana,
resembling the day of doom, addressed his generals,—all
weil-wishers—staying hard by, saying,—“Do ye speedily
summon my forces with the beat of drums—nor do ye
give out the reason (of the summons).” Then assenting
to his speech with “So be it,” the envoys immediately sum-
moned that mighty force; and, when it had arrived, they
informed their master, eager for conflict, of its arrival.


* This dislocated period insinuates that Ravana, possessed of royal
wature, should forgive this untimely intrusion. —T-


1196 kAMA LANA,


SECTION XXXII}.


EING Sita overwhelmed with grief, a Rakshasi, named
Saram&, who was the beloved companion (of Sita), drew near
to his dear (friend), Vaidehi. And the mild-speeched Sarama
comlorted the exceedingly distressed Sita, who had been
bereft of her senses by the lord of R&kshasas. Sita, who was
protected there (by Sarama), had been made a friend by her.
And, protecting her at the command of Ravana, that kind.
learted companion, firm in vows, saw Sit&, deprived of her
consciousness. And she* comforted with a friend’s affection
that one of fair vows, who was rolling in the dust and rising
up from it like a mare.t “Having come to the solitary wood
for protecting thee, 1, renouncing all fear of Ravana, have,
remaining bid, heard everything that he addressed unto thee,
as well as what thou hadst replied unto him. For thee, O thou
of expansive eyes, I have no fear of Ravana, And, O
Maithili, 1, coming out, have also learnt welt as to why the
lord of Rakshasas hath gone out hence hurriedly. Rama,
acquainted with self, is incapable of being surprised in
sleep ; wor doth the slaying of that tiger-like one commend
iuself to me as probable. And the monkeys fighting with
trees, well protected by Raghava, like the gods protected by
the foremost of the celestials, are incapable of being slain.
And, possessed of arms long and rounded ; graceful ; broad-
breasted ; powerful ; accoutred with the bow ; and mailed ;
righteous; and famous over the earth; endowed with
energy; and along with his brother, Lakshmana, ever
protecting himself and others; of noble descent; and


* Sarama.—T.


{ The commentator intelligently remarks: As @ mare docs, to remove
Pittigue—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1197


versed in polity; the destroyer of the hostile ranks ;
and of inconceivable strength and manhood,—the graceful
Raghava, O Sita, slayer of foes, is not slain. This illusion
hath been spread around thee by that fierce, ilusion-creating
one, whose mind over runs upon improper acts and who
opposeth hiuself to all creatures.—All thy sorrow hath
departed, and thy good day hath dawned. Certainly
Lakshmi seeketh thee. And, O lady, hearken unto what is
dear to thee! Having crossed over the ocean, along with
the monkey-host, Rama hath encamped himself on the
southern shore of the sea. By me hath been seen the
complete Kakutstha along with Lakshmana, accompanied by
the forces, stationed on the marge of the main,—protected
(by his native might). Those Rakshasas of fleet vigor who
had been despatched by this one, have brought the news
that Raghava hath crossed.—And, O large-eyed lady, having
learnt this news, Ravana—lord of Rakshasas—is consulting
with all his counselors.” As the Rakshasi, Sarama, was
relating this unto Sita, she heard the leonine rears of the
army, emitted with the greatest energy. And, hearing the
mighty sounds of kettledrums produced by sticks struck
(thercon), the honey-tongued Saram4 spoke thus unto Sila,—
“These dreadful sounds of the kettledrum, O mother, call
to arms. And hark to the solemn notes of the kettledrums,
resembling the rumbling of clouds! The mad elephants are
caparisoned and the car-horses are yoked ; and thousands (of
warriors) are seen, mounted on steeds, with bearded darts in
their hands. And, as waters fill up the ocean, mailed
warriors of wonderful forms, vehement and roaring, by
thousands rush out on ail sides and fill the highways. And
mark the splendour spread around by the polished arms
and bucklers and mail,—and by the cars, horses and
elephants of the followers of the Rakshasa-chief,—consisting
of many hues sheoting up,—like unto the appearance of a
tire in summer, burning a forest,—and also mark the


1198 RAMAYANA.


excitement of the high-spirited and fast-coursing Rakshas !*
And hear the sounds of bells and the rattling of the
car-ewheels! And bear the neighing of the steeds and the
reports of the drums. And fierce is the excitement of these
Rakshasas—followers of the Raksha-chief,—with their hands
bearing upraised arms,—capable of making people's hair
stand on end. The sorrow removing Sree espouseth thee ;
and the fear of the Rakshas is come. And as Vasava did unto
the Daityas, the lotus-eyed Rama, thy Jord—of controlled
anger, and of inconceivable prowess,slaying Ravana in battle
and thus delivering thee, shall approach thee. And, as
Vasava put forth his prowess ainong his foes, in company
with the foe-destroying Vishnu, thy lord, along with
Lakshmana, shall display his prowess among the Rakshas.
On the enemy having fallen, 1 shall behuld thee, devoted to
thy lord, with thy desire attained, soon lying on the lap of
Rama. And, O Janaki, embracing (thy lord), thou shalt shed
tears of joy on his mighty breast. And, O Sit, soon shall
the highly powerful Rama lvosen this braid of thine reaching
unto thy hips, which thou hast been wearing for many a
month. And, O exalted one, seeing his face like the full
moon risen, thou shalt shed water begot of ruth, even as a
she-serpent casts off her slough. And, O Mithila's daughter,
speedily slaying Ravana in battle, that one worthy of
happiness shall reap felicity in the company of thee, his
beloved. And, loved by the high-souted Rama, thou shalt
be happy, even as the Earth furnished with crops brought
forth by plenteaus showers. Do thou, O exalted one, take
refuge with him,who, going round the foremost of mountains,
speedily assumeth a stecd-like circular movement ; for even
the maker of day is the source of people's joy and grief.”


™ This line of verse defies all attempts to make it fall into syntactical order
with the rest of the sentence. It is a hideous hiatus in the passage —T.


YUDDHAKANDAM 1499


SECTION Xxxrv.


‘Borsns wilh grief on account of those words,* Saramit
gladdened and cheered her, even as masses of clouds
(chcer up) the burning Earth. And then, desirous of doing
her good, (Sita’s) friend, conversant with season, and ever
preluding her speech with a smile, spoke unto her season-
ably,—“O thou having dark eyes, I can, secretly going to
Rama and communicating to him thy auspicious words, come
back clandestinely. Nor, when I course the supportless sky,
can even the Wind or Garura follow me.” As she said
this, Sila with her grief a little lightened, said unto Saram&
in sweet and smooth words,—


Thou art capable of even
going to the nethermost regions. But do thou on my behalf
that which is fit te be done by thee, If thou intend
dving me a good turn, and if thy sense be steady, | would
know what Ravana is doing after having left this place. That
guileful and wicked-minded one, Ravana, destroyer of
enemies, having powers of illusion, overwhelms me even as
the Varuni just drunk. Confining me here for ever and a
day, (Ravana) séts on dreadful Rakshasas to alike threaten
and scold me constantly. And | am agitated aud alarmed,
and my mind is (always) uneasy. And 1, dwelliug in the agoka
wood, is ever agitated {f there is any talk (of delivering
me;, of keeping me confined,—thou shouldst communicate
unto me the decision arrived at. This is the highest favor
that I seek (at thy hands).” Thereat, the mild-speeched
Saram&, wiping (Sita’s) face washed in tears, spake unto her,
as she said this,—"If this is thy wish, I will go, O Janaki, O
Mithil&’s daughter, having possessed myself of the intent
of the enemy, | shall come back.” Having said this, (Saram4),


* ie, the words of Ravana.


1200 RAMAYANA,


repairing to the Raksha, heard R&vana’s converse with his
counselors. And having heard of the decision of that
wicked-minded one, she, understanding decisions, swiftly
retraced her steps to the fair agoka forest. And then, entering
there, she saw Janaka’s daughter, expecting (her) like a
very Sri, bereft of her lotus. And, the fair-spoken Sarama,
on getting back (near her), Sita, embracing her affectionately,
herself gave her a seat. ‘Sitting down here at ease, do
thou relate to me faithfully all about the determination of the
wicked-minded and guileful Ravana.” Thus accosted by the
trembling Sita, Saram& related everything that had been
said by Ravana and his counselors. “O Vaidehi, the Raksha
lord was advised by his mother and the aged counselors in
pregnant words informed with affection, having thy deliver-
ance for their object. ‘Do thou make over Maithili unto the
king of men, paying him homage due. Thou hast in
Janasthana profusely witnessed wonderful instances (of his
prowess). The crossing of the ocean, Hanuman’s sight (of
Sitd,—and the slaughter of the Kakshas in fight,—-what
person is capable of doing all this in battle ?? Thus long
exhorted by his counselors as well as bis mother, Ravana
doth not make up his mind to emancipate thee, even as a
covetuous person is loath to part with wealth (appropriated).
And, O Maithili, without renouncing bis life in battle, he
doth not intend to liberate thee. Even this is the dermina-
tion which that cruel one hath arrived at along with his
advisers. This intent is in consequence of their coveting sur-
cease, He can not yield thee up from sheer fear ; nor is he
backward in battle, or shirketh his own destruction or that
of all the Raksha
in battle with s


s. O dark-eyed lady, slaying Ravana
p shafts, Rama shall take the back to
Ayodhya.” In the meanwhile there was heard a mighty
uproar occasioned by the whole host, and drums and conchs,
—which shook the earth, Hearing that hubbub of the
monkey-army, the servants of the Rakshasa monarch, ran


VUDDHAKANDAM. your


who were in Lanka,—growing dispirited,and bereft of energy,
with weakness overcoming thrir powers,—did not see any
good, in consequence of the fault of the ruler.


SECTION XXXV


AANp that captor of hostile capitals, the mighty-armed
Rama, was advancing (upon Lanka) with the sounds of drums
mixed with the blares of conchs. Hearing this noise, Ravana
—lord of Rakshasas—reflecting for a while, cast his eyes
upon his counselors. And addressing there ail those
counsellors, that afflictor of the world—-the crooked and
highly powerful lord of the Rakshasas, Ravana, making his
court resound,—running down (Rama’s) crossing the main,
as well as his vigor, strength and manhood,—said to them,—
“What ye have said touching Rama's (prowess), hath been
heard by me. And I also know ye to be of sterling valor in the
field. Yet why, knowing Rama’s prowess, do ye silently look
at each other ?” Then the maternal grand sire (of Ravana),
possessed of exceeding wisdom, named Malyavan, hearing his
words, said,—“The king that is accomplished in the various
kinds of learning,* and that followeth polity,ever commandeth
affluence and bringeth his enemies under his subjection. He
that seasonably concludes peace and carries on war with his
enemies,—and who advances his own party, attaineth great
affluence. A king should enter into peace, if he be an
equal or inferior of his adversary, and engage in war, if be
more powerful,—but an enemy should never be disregarded.


* The commentator says there are four and ten kinds of leatning : but
unfortunately he does not enumerate them.—T.


15t


1202 RAMAYANA,


Therefore, O Ravana, peace with Rama is what commends
itself to me ; and do thou render unto him that for which thou
hast beon invaded (by him), v#s., Sit&. All the Devarshis
and Gandharvas wish for (Rima’s) victory. Therefore, do
not enter into hostilities with him; but do thou bend thy
mind to the conclusion of peace with him. That possessor
of the six attributes, the Great-father, hath appointed two
courses, (respectively) for the Asuras and the celestials,
having for their proper objects righteousness and unrighteous-
ness. Righteousness, we hear, is the course of the high-souled
celestials, as, O Rakshasa, unrightcousness is that of Rakshas
and Asuras. During the Krita Yuga, righteousness swalloweth
up sin ; and during Tishya,* unrighteousness swalloweth up
virtue. Thou, ranging the three worlds, hadst extinguished
pregnant piety, and reaped unrighteousness ; and it is for this
that thy foes have waxed potent.t And, having grown
through thy neglect, unrighteousness devoureth us, and that
protector of the gods, (righteousness), is strengthening the
side of the celestials. Thou, addicted to carnal pleasures
and acting in defiance of duty, hadst aroused the high wrath
of the saints resembling fire. The power of these possessed
of souls sanctified through asceticism, and ever engaged in
invoking the aid of righteousness, is incapable of being
resisted and is like flaming fire. The twice-born ones engage
in contemplation with intent minds, offer oblations into the
fire according to the ordinance, and loudly recite the Vedas,
They overpower the Rakshas,uttering the Vedas ; and thereat
they fly in all directions like clouds scattered in summer. And
the smoke that ariseth from the Agnihotra sacrifices of saints
resembling fire, enveloping the energy of the Rakshasas,
spreads over the ten cardinal quarters. And the fierce
austerilies of vow-observing saints, performed at particular


* The Kali Yuga —T.
+ While ranging the three worlds on a career of conquest, thou didst,
disturbing sacrifices, ete, wrong righteousness, —T.


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1203


sacred spots, try (he Rakshasas sore. Thou hast obtained a
boon, conferring immunity at the hands of deities, Danavas
and Yakshas. But men and monkeys, bears and Golangulas,
possessed of enormous strength and endowed with vigor,
and of indomitable prowess,—coming here, are setting up
roars. Witnessing various and many dire portents,! perceive
the destruction of all the R&kshasas. Dreadful and terrilic
clouds, uttering harsh sounds, are showering blood all around
Lanka. And (live) vehicles are dropping profuse tears.
And all sides, covered with dust, do not appear bright as
formerly, And beasts of prey, jackals and vultures, are
emitting frightful cries, and, entering into the garden of
Lanka, form themselves into bands. And in dreams
mighty dark-hued women in front of dwellings, seizing at (the
furniture } thereof, and speaking inauspiciously, laugh
displaying their sable teeth. Aud in houses dogs are feasting
on the articles of worship. And cows bring forth asses, and
mungooses, mice. And cats are pairing with leopards, and
swine with dogs, and Kinnaras with Rakshasas and human
beings. And red-footed white sky-coursing pigeons, urged on
by Doom, are going about for the destruction of the
Rakshasas. And female-parrots in houses, wounded and
worsted by other birds delighting in discord, are drop-
ping down, emitting indistinct notes. And all the birds
and beasts are crying (distressfully) with their faces turned
tewards the sun. And at dusk a frightful, withered, tawny-
hued male figure, looking like Death himself, with his head
shaven, peereth into the houses (of people), These and
other evil omens occur. Rama I deem as Vishnu assuming
the form of aman. Raghava of steady prowess, for certain,
is no human being,—he that hath built a bridge over the
deep, must be an exceedingly wonderful person, Therefore,
© Ravana, conclude peace with Rama—king of men. Having
ascertained fit course, do thou act properly.” Having said
this! unto that vile one, and known the intention of the lord


1204 RAMAYANA,


of Rakshas, that strong Malyavan, of excceding prowess,
became silent, eying Ravana.


SECTION Xxxvt


Tor Ten-necked one, come under the control of Time,
did not brook the beneficial speech spoken by Malyavan.
Contracting his face into a frown, he, coming under the
masterdom of passion, with his eyes rolling in wrath,
addressed Malyavan, saying—"Tbe words which, deeming
the strength of the enemy as superior, thou hast harshly
spoken, considering it as beneficial, had never before
entered my ears. A (mere) man, and feeble, and alone, and
having monkeys for his support, why dost thou deem Rama,
who hath (further) been cast off by his sire, and hath in
consequence taken refuge in the woods,—as competent (to
cope with me)? And why dost thou consider me, who am
the lord of the Rakshas, and feared even by the immortals,—
as weak and reft of all power? Thou, I suspect, speakest
(thus) roughly either from jealousy of my heroism, or
for inciting me. And who that is wise and learned, ever
addresseth him roughly that is at once puissant and of (high)
station, if not to spur him on? Why, having brought Sita
like a Sri shorn of her lotus, shall I give her up, from fear of
Raghava ? Behold Raghava,environed by Kotis of monkeys,
with Sugriva and Lakshmana, slain one of these days! He
before whom even the gods cannot stay in the field,—how
can that Ravana ever come by fear? Better that I should
be riven in twain,—but bend I never will. This is my aative
fault; and nature is incapable of being overcome. And if
Rama hath at his pleasure constructed a bridge over the


PUDDHAKANDAM, 1205


ocean, what is the wonder in this that thou hast conceived
such a fear? And although Rama hath crossed the ocean
along with the monkey-army, yet I swear unto thee truly,
living, he shall not back hence.” When Ravana, wrought up
with passion, had spoken thus, Malyavan, knowing him
wroth, did not return a reply. And, duly tendering blessings


unto the king, Malyavaa, taking kis permission, went to
own abode, And the Rakshasa, Ravana, along with his
courtiers, having consulted together as to what was fit to be
done, set about the defence of Lanka. And he commanded
the Rakshasa Prahasta (to guard) the Eastern gate; and the
exceedingly powerful M:
the Southera gate ; and he ordered his son Indrajit.possessing
mighty powers of illusion, girt by innumerable RAkshasas,
to guard the Western gate. And he commanded Suka and
Sarana to defend the Northern gate. But he said unto the
counsellors, =I will myself go thither.”* And he posted
in the middle in the garrison the Rakshasa, Virupaksha,
endowed with exceeding prowess and energy, backed by
countless Rakshasas. Having ta
Lanka, the Rakshasa-chief, urged by Fate, deemed himself
as having achieved success, Having thus completely provided
for the defence of the city, he dismissed the ministers ; and,
honored by the counsellors with blessings of victory, (then)


pargwa and Mahodara (to guard)


en these measures in


entered his magnificent and splendid inner apartment.


SECTION xxxvil.


Prose kings, man and moukey, that monkey the Wind-
god’s son, Jambavan—sovereign of bears—the Rakshasa,


* i @ to defend the Northern gate—T.


1206 RAMAVANA,


Libhishana, the son of Vali, Angada, Sumitr3's son, the
monkey, Sarabha, Sushena along with his friends, Kumuda,
Nala, and Panaga, arriving at the dominions of the enemy,
assembled together, began to deliberate. “Yonder is that
Lank& ruled by Ravana, invincible even unto the celestials,
serpents and Gandharvas. Let us, keeping before us success
in the enterprise, consult together for the purpose of arriving
atadecision. We are here daily nearing Ravana, lord of
Rakshasas.” As they were speaking thus, Ravana’s younger
brother, Bibhishana, said in a pregnant specch free from
provinicialism,—‘Anala, Panaga, Samp&ti and Pramati—all
courtiers of mine—having gone up to Lanka, have come back
here. Wearing the forms of birds, they entered into the
hostile forces ; and, having seen the measures that had been
adopted (by them’, have come (back). QO Rama, hearken to
meas [tell thee truly anent the provisions which they have
related, made by the wicked-minded Ravana. In the Eastern
gate stayeth Prahasta along with his forces ; in the Southern,
the exceedingly powerful Mahapargwa and Mahodara; and
in the Western. Ravana's son, Indrajit, supported by innumer-
able Rakshasas, equipped patticas, swords and bows,
and bearing darts and maces in their hands,—surrounded by
heroes carrying various weapons. And, backed by many
thousands of Rakshasas weilding weapons, and accompanied
by R&kshasas conversant with counsel, Ravana himself, his
heart agitated to the height, guardeth the Northern gate of
the city, And VirupSksha with a powerful force accoutred
in javelins, clubs and bows,protects the garrison in the centre.
Having seen these hosts thus disposed in Lanka, my
counsellors have speedily come back here. There are ten
thousand elephants, an Ayuta cars, two of horses, and about
a koti of Rakshasas, powerful and strong, and equipped
with arms in conflict.* These night-rangers are ever the
favorites of the R&kshasa ruler. And, O king, a sof? of


* These are, remarks the commentator, the leaders.—T.


FUDDHAKANOAM 1207


forces accompany each of these Rakshasas in battle.”
Having conveyed this information concerning Lanka, which
had been communicated by his counsellors, the mighty-armed
Bibhishana showed (unto Rama) those Rakshasas themselves.
And in company with bis counsellors, Ravana's graceful
younger brother, ever striving for the welfare of Rama, by
way of answer communicated everything that was going
forward in Lank& unto Rama, having eyes resembling
lotus-leaves—"O Rama, when Ravana battled with Kuvera,
sixty lacs of R&kshasas marched forth (to meet him). Io
prowess, energy, vigor, excceding fortitude, and hauteur, they
resembled the wicked-minded Ravana himself. In this
matter, thou ought not to grow wroth,—I only arouse thy
wrath, and do not endeavour to frighten thee.* Thou canst
subdue even the celestials by thy prowess. Therefore thou,
environed by a mighty army, having arrayed the monkey-
forces in order of battle, shalt thrash Ravana (in battle).”
When Ravana’s younger brother had spoken thus, Raghava,
said these words with reference to his beating the foe——"Let
that foremost of monkeys, Nild, surrounded by an immense
number of monkeys, cope with Prahasta at tho Eastern gate
of Lanka. And, engirt by a mighty force, let Angada, son
of Vali, resist Mah&pargwa and Mahodara at the Southern
gate (thereof). And let that son of the Wind-god, Hanuman,
backed by innumerable monkeys, (beating the host stationed)
at the Western gate, find entrance (into the city). 1 myself,
determined to compass the destruction of the lord of
Rakshasas, who, waxing powerful in consequence of the boon
he hath received, hath brought about the destruction of
high-souled saints resembling gods and Danavas,—and who
goeth round alf regions, oppressing people,—will, along with
Sumitra’s son,smiting (the foe), occupy the Northern entrance,
where Ravana with his army is stationed. And let the


* 4. ¢, Thou ought not to be angry with me ; for I do not frighten thee, but
rouse thy wrath against Révana,”—T.


1208 RAMAYANA.


powerful king of monkeys, and the puissant sovereign of
bears, and the younger brother of the R&kshasa-chief, manage
the soldiery posted in the centre. And in this battle, the
monkeys need not assume the forms of human being. And
let this serve for a sign that the monkeys, in order to the
recognition of our own forces, appear with their proper
monkey-marks, We seven only shall battle with the foe
in human shapes,—evs., 1 along with my brother, the
exceedingly energetic Lakshmana, and my friend Bibhishana
counting for the fifth in company with his own following."
Having said this unto Bibhishana for attaining success in the
enterprise, that lord, the intelligent Rama, secing the sides
of Suvela more beautiful (than other places), intended to
ascend it, Then, environed by a mighty host, the high-
souled and magnanimous Rama, his features mirroring forth
high exullation,—oversbadowing the entire Earth (with his
forces), set out for Lanka, determined upon destroying
the onemy.


SECTION xxxvitl.


AO Rear been bent upon mounting Suvela, Rama,
followed by Lakshmana, addressed in sweet and excellent
words, Sugriva, and that righteous night-ranger, Bibhi-
shana, versed in counsel and conversant with precepts,
who was devoted to him,—saying,—‘We shall all ascend this
mount Suvela, bedight with metals; and pass this night
even here, And (from here) will we view the abode of that
Ra&akshasa who, foul of soul, hath carried off my spouse, to
bring destruction down on himself,--who kooweth nor
morality nor good conduct nor behaviour {conducive to the


VUDDHAKANDAM. 1209


dignity of his descent),—and who, in consequence of his base
propensity, hath committed himself to so heinous a course of
action.’ Having decided thus, Rama, filled with wrath at
Ravana, coming to Suvela, ascended its variegated plateau.
And Lakshmana, collected, went in his wake. And, upraising
bow and arrow, Sugriva, (ever) engaged in valorous acts,
accompanied with Bibhishana as well as his counselors,
following him, also ascended (the mountain). And all those
rangers of mountains, gifted with the vehemence of the Wind
in hundreds ascended mount Suvela, where Raghava was
stationed, And ascending the mountain in a short time, they
all beheld from its summit the city, appearing to be built on
the air. And the monkey-leaders beheld Lanka, exceedingly
splendid with noble gateways ; gracefully enclosed witha
wall; thronging with R&kshasas ; and defended by sable
Rakshasas. And the foremost of monkeys saw these appear-
ing like another wall (overtopping the one beneath). And on
secing the Rakshasas, the monkeys burning for battle set up
various roars in the presenco of Rama. Then the Sun,
crimsoned with Eve, ascended the Setting-hill ; and Night
came, illumined by the Moon at his full. Then the master of
the monkey-army, Rama, saluted and honored by Bibhishana,
accompanied by Lakshmana as well as the leaders of the
monkeys, sojourned happily on the breast of Suvela.


SECTION Xxxix.


— ae


Havxc passed the night in Suvela, the heroic monkey-
leaders surveyed woods and forests in Lanka. And seeing
those extensive (woods and forests}, mild, and charming, and
beautiful to behold, they were seized wilh wonderment.


152


1210 RAMAVANA,


Abounding in champakas, agokas, vakulas, galas, and palms ;
covered with famdlas and panagas,~—and environed all
around with trees,—and surrounded with Hintalas, Aryunas,
blossoming’ Saptaparnas , Tilakas, Karnikaras, and Patalas,—
trees with flowering tops, entertwined with creepers,—Lank&
looked exceedingly lovely, with various sights,—resembling
the Amardvati herself of Indra. And trees there, furnished
with variegated flowers having tender rosy leaves,—-and blue
lawns, aud rows of woods; and bearing odourous and
charming blossoms and fruits,—looked like men adorned
with ornaments. And there a delightful and pleasant wood
resembling Chaitraratha,and like unto Nandana itself—having
all the seasons present,—appeared beauteous to the view, with
black bees all around. And it had Datyuhas, and Noyasthivas,
and peacocks dancing; and the strains of the coels were
heard at the woodland rills. And the heroic and exhilarated
monkeys, capable of weuring forms at pleasure, entered those
woods and groves frequented by maddened birds and ranged
by Bhramaras,—tracts overflowing with the lays of coels,
and ringing with the voices of so:


ters,~-resonant with the
notes of Bhramaras—sovercigns of their species—and
eloquent with the cries of oxspreys. And as the exceedingly
energetic monkeys entered, there blew upon them the breeze
like unto life--redofent of perfume obtained from contact
with the blossoms. And others of the leaders among the
heroic monkeys, coming out from the bands, ordered by
Sugriva, made in the direction of Lank& crowned with
ensigns. And, terrifying the fowls and dispiriting beasts
and birds and shaking Vank& with their roars, those fore.
most monkeys sel up shouts. And they, endowed with great
impetuosity, went on, oppressing the earth with their
battle-array ; and clouds of dust suddenly arose from the
the march of the soldiery. And bears, and lions, and
buffaloes, and elephants, and deer, and birds, overwhelmed.
with affcight, made for the ten cardinal points. The graceful


PUDDHARANDAM. 1211


and lovely summit of Trikuta was entire, elevated, sky-
piercing, of golden splendour, measuring an hundred yoyanas,
clear-shining, level, inaccessible even to fowls, and incapable
of being ascended even in thought—not to say of actual ascen-
sion by people, Lanka, ruled by Ravana, was situated on
its* top,—ten yoyanas in width and twenty in length, And
that city was graced with lofty ornamented gateways
resembling pale clouds, and golden and silvern walls; and
Lank& was adorned with palaces and piles; like the skyt
graced with clouds on the approach of the rainy season.
And that palace, which was adorned with thousands of pillars,
and which, as if piercing the heavens, looked like a peak of
Kailéga—was the residence of the Sovereign of the
Rakshasas—the ornament of the city, (ever guarded by full
hundreds of Rakshasas. And Lakshmana’s auspicious and
puissant elder brother, beholding that flourishing and wealthy
city resembling the celestial regions,—charming to the mind,
made of gold, graced with mountains, and decked out with
mountains containing various metals,—resonant with the
notes of various birds; abounding in various beasts,—
furnished with various kinds of flowers,—and inhabited by
various orders of Rakshasas,—was struck with astonishment.
And Rama, surrounded by his mighty forces, saw that palace,
filled with diverse kinds of gems, adorned with rows of
edifices, and having huge engines and gateways.

* Trikuta's.—T.

+ Madhyamam Vaishnavam padam—the middie foot of Vishnu. When
Vishnu in his Dwarf-form took the conceit out of V4li, the renowned Asura


king,—he covered the earth with one pace, the sky with another and heaven
with the last —T,


3212 RAMAPANA,


SECTION xe.
oe


Tren Rama, accompanied by the monkey-leaders,
along with Suyriva, ascended the top of Suvela, measuring
a circumference of two yoyanas. And staying there fora
while and looking at the ten cardinal points, he saw Lank&
finely placed on the charming summit of Trikuta,—graced
with elegant groves; and (he also saw) the unconquerable
Yord of Rakshasas, stationed at the top of the gateway,
fanned with white chédmaras; graced with the umbrella
betokening victory ; smeared with red sandal ; adorned in red
ornaments ; resembling masses of sable clouds ; and apparelled
in golden attire,—his breast bearing scars from the tusk-ends
of Airavata; covered with a sheet hued like the blood of
hares; and appearing like clouds lighted up by the evening
sun. And on seeing the Rakshasa-chief, Sugriva suddenly rose
up in the sight of the lords of monkeys as well as Raghava.
And influenced by wrath, he, mustering strength and vigor,
rising from the brow of the mountain, bounded to the
gateway. And pausing for a while and eying the Rakshasa
intrepidly, he, slighting the Raksha, addressed him in harsh
speech, saying,"O Rakshasa, I am the friend as well as
the slave of Rama—lord of men. Me, backed by the energy
of that king of the Earth, shalt thou not escape to-day.”
Saying this, he, suddenly springing up, descended on him;
and snatching away his variegated crown, let it fall on the
earth. And sceing him come abruptly, the night-ranger
spoke to him thus,—"Thou that wert Sugriva beyond my
ken, shalt be neckless* near me.” Having said this, he


* The text has Ainagriva—neckless. There is a pun here, turning on the
word grité—neck. Ravana says: “Thou wert Sugriva (good-necked) in my
absence, —but now thou shalt be Ainagriva—neckless.""—T.


FUDDHAKANDAM. 1213


rose up swiftly and dragged him* down to the earth.
Thereat springing like pith, the monkey pushed down his
antagonist with his arms. And each having his body bathed
in sweat and his person covered with blood,each choking and
annuling the efforts of the other,—and resembling a Sd/malt’
or a Kinguka, and dealing blows and slaps, and hitting with
his arms and hands,—those exceedingly strong ones, the
lord of the R&kshasas and that of the monkeys, fought
wonderfully. And having for a long time encountered each
other in combat on the dais belonging to the gate,—they,
now lifting up their persons and now lowering them, went
down, each felling the other with his legs. And smiting
each other, they, their bodies fastened together, went down
between the wall and the moat,—and again stood upon the
ground. And heaving breath, they, resting for a space,
grappled with each other; and they fast bound each other
with their arms serving for ropes. And each fired with
wrath, and each having both strength and skill, they now bore
themselves in the lists like a tiger and a lion, furnished with
teeth; or like the young of the foremost elephants engaged
in encounter,—and restraining and pushing each other with
their arms, they simultaneously both came down to the
ground. Then starting again to their feet, they, vituperating
each other, ranged the lists, displaying feats expressive of
skill and strength. Nor did those heroes speedily come by
fatigue. And resembling mighty elephants, they, resisting
each other by means of their powerful arms like unto the
trunks of elephants, fought for a long while, swiftly wheeling
about the arena, And approaching each other, they strove
to slay each other, like unto two cats seated, momentarily
encountering each other over some food. And the
lord of monkeys and Ravana, accomplished in fight,
coursed the arena, displaying wonderful manda/as,t various


* Sugriva.
+A mandala is of four kinds,vis., chdvi,karana, khanda and makémandala,


r2qg REMALANA.


sthdnas,'a) curious gomutrakas,(b) gatapratydgatas, tiraschi-
nagatas, vakragatas, parimokshas, varjanas, paridhdvanas,
abhidravanas,'c) 4pldvanas{d) savigrahdvasthdnas,'e) pard-
vrittas,(f) apdorittas,(g) apadrutas,{h) avaplutas,1) apanyas-
tas(j) and upanyastas.(ki In the meanwhile the Raksha
attempted to put forth his power of illusion. Knowing
this, the king of monkeys shot into the sky. And Ravana,
overpowered by fatigue and out of breath, thus baffled by
the monkey-king, stood where he was. Thus the master of
the foremost monkeys, securing fame in fight, beat the night-
ranger, causing him to experience fatigue. And bounding
beyond the spacious sky, the offspring of the Sun came to the
side of Rima in the midst of the monkey-forces. And having
done that deed, the son of the Sun,—lord of monkeys—with
his heart surcharged with rejoicing, entered that host having
the speed of the wind ; enhancing the martial ardour of the
son of the foremost of the Raghus, and honored by the


monkeys.


Proceeding with one leg advanced is cri, with two alternately advanced is
tarana; proceeding after the manner of karana, with some special movements,
is Bhanda; and two or three Ahandas combined is a mahémandala—T.

(a) A particular adjustment of the steps successively ; awry, efe.—It is of
six kinds, vis, Vaishnava, Sampdda, Vaigdtha, Mandala, Pratydlirka and
Andlirha—T.

(8) A kind of motion resembling cow's urine flowing, as its name signifies,

(c) Swiftly fronting the antagonist,

{@) Proceeding ‘like a summer's cloud.’

{e) Standing before the adversary, after making others engage in combat,
‘What this means in the passage under notice is hard to divine,

(f) Turning away froma foe.

(g) Moving off from the side of the enemy.

(4) Movement with low posture for seizing at the thighs of the adversary.

(i) Going for a kick at the adversary,

(4) Distending the chest, so that the antagonist may not catch the arms,

(#) Stretching forth the arms for seizing those of the enemy.


FOUDHABANDASL 1205


SECTION XLI.


Scuine those ominous signs, Lakshmana’s elder brother,
Rama, embracing Sugriva, said,—“Without consulting with
me, thou hast acted thus rashly. But kings should uot act
in such a rash way. Placing in suspense, me, this army
and Bibhishana, thou, O hero, enamoured of daring deeds,
hast put thyself to all this trouble, But, O hero, henceforth,
do not act so, O subduer of enemies, if thou come by any
mischance, what shall Sit@ avail me; or Bharata; or my
younger brother—Lakshmana ; or Satrughna, O slayer of
enemies ; of, again, my own person? Ere thou hadst come,
I had arrived at this determination ; albeit, O thou that art
equal to the mighty Indra or Varuna, { knew thy prowess full
well. “Slaying Ravana in battle along with his sons, forces
and vehicles, and installing Bibhishana in Lanka, and placing
the kingdom in the hands of Bharata, I shall renounce my
body, O exceedingly powerful one!” When Rama had said
this, Sugriva answered,—"Knowing my own strength, how,
O Raghava, viewing Ravana, who had ravished away thy
wife, could | forbear, O hero ?” As that hero was speaking
thus, Raghava addressed Lakshmana having auspiciousness,
thus,—"O Lakshmana, occupying some tract furnished with
cool water and woods bearing fruits, we shall sojourn,
dividing and marshalling our forces. I see a mighty fear
present, destructive of people,—and boding destruction unto
the foremost heroes among the bears, monkeys and
R&kshasas. The winds ruffle ; and the earth is tremulous.
And the tops of mountains tremble, and the mountains
themselves send up loud sounds. And the clouds are
goblinish ; and fierce; and harsh-sounding. And wearing
terrific looks, they fiercely pour down showers mixed with
drops of blood. And the Evening resembles the red sandal,


1216 RAMAYANA,


and is fearful. And a flaming circle droppeth from the Sun.
And exciting great fear, inauspicious birds and beasts,
wearing cruel looks, and in distressful guise,—cry in piteous
accents, facing the Sun. And at night, the ominous Moon
with a black-red brim as at the time of universal wreck,
burneth. And, O Lakshmana, there is a crimson, rough,
slight, and graceful rim round the Sun; anda blue mark is
visible on his disc. And the stars do not course as formerly.
Behold, O Lakshmana, all these, prefiguring the Doom.
And crows and hawks and vultures drop down. And
jackals yell with loud inauspicious notes. The Earth,
converted into mud with flesh and gore, shall be covered
with darts and javelins and swords, discharged by R&k-
shasas and monkeys. This very day with all expedition
shall we, surrounded on all sides by the monkeys, march
towards the city governed by Ravana.” Having said this
unto Lakshmana, Lakshmana’s elder brother possessed of
exceeding strength, hastily descended from the top of the
mountain. And descending from the mountain, the righteous
R&ghava surveyed his troops, incapable of being beaten
by enemies. And after making the mighty host of the
monkey-hing cquip itself, Raghava versed in season, along
with Sugriva, at the proper hour, issued orders for battle,
Then in due time that one, accoutred with his bow, surround:
edbya mighty army, set out, with the intention of entering
the city of Lanka. And those two—Bibhishana and
Sugriva—and Hanuman, and Jamvaban, and Nala, and the
bear-king Nila, and Lakshmana, followed (Rima). Behind
them, the mighty array of bears and monkeys followed
Raighava, cevering a wide surface of land. The monkeys,
resembling elephants, capable of resisting foes, took
mountain-peaks and tall trees by hundreds. And in a short
time those repressors of foes—the brothers Rima and
Lakshmana—arrived at the city of Ravana; with pennons
streaming over her; charming; garnished with groves and


VYUDDHAKANDAM. 1217


woods; having variegated gatews sible ; and having
walls and gates. And urged on by Rama's commant,


the wood-rangers,* as commanded, blocking up (Lanka)


; inaces


incapable of being subdued even by the gods, stationed them-
selves. Coming to Lanka ruled by Ravana, that hero, Rama,
son unto Dagaratha, along with Lakshmana,remained stationed
at the Northern gate, where Ravana used to reside. None
saye Rama was competent to protect that dreadful gate,
where Ravana used to reside, None save Rama was
competent to protect that dreadful gate, guarded bv Ravana
himself, like the Ocean guarded by Varuna,—and protected
on all sides by terrible Rakshasas equipped with weapons
capable of striking terror into the weak, like unto the
nether regions guarded by Danavas. And (Rfama) saw there
many and various arms and mail of the warriors, ranged
together, And coming to the Eastern gate, that leader of the
monkey-army, the powerful Nila, along with Maina and-
Dwivida,—took up his post there. And the exceedingly
strong Angada, accompanied by Rishava, Gavaksha, Ciaya,
and Gavaya, occupied the Southern gate. And the mighty
monkey Hanum&n protected the Western entrance, And
Sugriva himself, with Prajangha, Tarasa and other heroes,
was quartered near the garrision in the centre. And
accompanied by all the foremost monkeys resembling Su-
parna or the Wind, twenty ot/s of renowned monkey-Jeaders,
blocking up all sides, stationed themselves near the monkey,
Sugriva. And at Rama's command, Lakshmana along witit
Bibhishana, went from door to door, i
kotis of monkeys. On the
with Sushena, followed by
hard by at the garrison in the middie. And those tiger-like
monkeys, furnished with teeth like unto tigers, weilding trees


uing instructions to


L of Rima, Jambavan aloug


nnumerable troops, remained


and mountain-tops, stood ready for fight. And all had their
tails curled up, and all were armed with teeth and nails, and


+ Monkeys.


183


1218 RAMAYANA,


all had chequered bodies,and all had frightful faces. And some
had the strength of ten elephants; and some had strength ten
times as much; and some of the monkey-leaders there had
the strength of a thousand elephants,—and some had the
strength of numbers (of elephants); and some had strength
hundred times as much, And others had immeasurable might,
And wonderful and astonishing was their meeting. And the
concourse at that place of the monkey-forces was like the
concourse of locusts. And the air was filled up, and the
earth was covered quite with the monkeys coursing towards
Lanka and dropping down into it. And hundreds and
thousands making up the army of monkeys, arrived at the
gate of Lanka; while others were pouring in from all sides
for encounter. And that mount was covered with monkeys.
And athousand ayuztas were going round the city. And
Lank&, blocked up everywhere with powerful monkeys bearing
trees in their hands, was incapable of being entered even by
the Wind. And the Rakshasas, sore pressed by thousands
of monkeys resembling masses of clouds, and like unto Sakra
himself in battle, were seized with amazement. And like
unto the roar of water on the ocean being riven, there arose
a mighty tumult in consequence of the forces surging hither
and thither. And with that sound the entire Lanka, with her
wall and gateways, her mountains, woods, and forests, began
to shake. And that army, protected by Rama and Lakshmana
as well as Sugriva, became all the more invincible even by
the Asuras and celestials. And having arranged his forces
with the view of destroying the Rakshas, Raghava, versed
in the resources of war,* taking counsel of the counsellors,
and deciding again and again his course of action, intending
to adopt further measures,--resolved to abide by the advice
of Bitthishanat, remembering the morality regulating


* conciliation, &c. 3
+ Which was,—° If Révana should scek thy succour, thou shouldst
vonfer on him his kingdom.""=—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1219


monarchs*, And then, calling V4li’s son, Angada, (R&ma)
said,—“O mild one, going to the Ten-necked one, tell him
in my words,—‘Bounding over the deep and casting off fear
and dejection,] have laid seige to the city of Lanka; and
have reft thee of thy prosperity and thy wealth; and
rendered thee moribund and senseless. Thou last, O night-
ranger, through delusion and pride injured saints and
celestials, and Gandharvas and Apsar4s, and Serpents, and
Yakshas, and crowned heads. But, O Rakshasa, thy pride
begot of the boon received from the Self-create hath gone
from thee, whose destroyer,¢ I, afflicted in consequence of
my wife having been carried off,—weilding the rod, have
sat down at the door of Lanka. O Rakshasa, thou shalt,
remaining steady in fight, attain the stale of celestials
and Maharshis and R&jarshis. And, O worst of Rakshasas,
do thou display that prowess of thine by which, aided by thy
power of illusion, thou hast forcibly carried off Sita,
disregarding me. I shall with my sharpened shafts render
this world free from R&kshasas, unloss rendering back
Mithila’s daughter, thou throw thyself on my mercy, And,
for certain, that foremost of R&kshasas, the righteous and
graceful Bibhishana, who hath joined us, shall obtain, without
having a thorn in his side, all this wealth of Lanka. For
thou, foolish, wicked, ignorant of self-knowledge, and having
dolts for counsellors, art not competent to unrighteously
exercise kingship for a moment. Fight thou, O Rakshasa,
summoning fortitude and heroism. On being slain with my
shafts, thou shalt attain peace.t O night-ranger, if thou
shouldst range the three worlds in the shape of a bird, thou,
coming in my ken, shalt not be able to preserve thy life. It


* In this connection, the principle referred to is: “If a king can accom-
plish bis purpose by conciliation, he should not employ punishment.” —T.

+ Dandadhara—\it.—rod-bearing, 2 name of Yama,—who is described as
aweilding a rod for chastising wrong-doers.—T.

¢ ie. attain heaven —T.


4220 RAUATANA


is all this for thy good ; do thou perform acts for the good of
thy body surviving death; and do thou see Lank& well;
for thy life is in my keeping.” Thas addressed Ly Rama of
untiring deeds, T4ra's son went through the welkin like the
cwbodied bearer of sacrificial offerings. And arriving
near that subduer of enemies, R&vana, in a moment, that
graceful one saw Ravana, sitting calmly in the midst of his
ministers. And dropping down in his vicinity like a flaming
fire, that best of monkeys, Augada, resembling a golden
bracelet,t stood there. And then introducing himself,
Angada delivered unto Ravana along with his ministers all
that Rama had excellently spoken unto him, neither
extenuating nor setting down aught of himself,‘ am the
envoy of the king of Kugala--Raina of untiring deeds ; and
Tam the sun of Vali—1 do not know whether thou hast
heard of me. And Raghw’s son, R&ma—enhancer of


Kaugalya’s juy-~hath said unto thee,—'Do thou, O fell one,
coming out, give me battle and prove thy prowess. Thee
shall [ slay together with thy ministers, and with thy sons
and relations and friends. And thou being slain, the three
worlds shall attain peace. And to-day shall I destroy the
enemy of the gods and Danavas, and Yakshas, of the
Gandharvas, serpents and Rakshasas,—~and the thorn (in the
ide of) the saints. And on thee being slain, all the wealth
1 be Bibbishan,
paying me homage, thou render back Maithili.””. When that
monkey-chief had spoken thus, the lord of the night-rangers
was wrought up with wrath. And coming under the sway of
passion, he commanded his counsellors, saying,—"Take
this one of perverse understanding, and slay him at once”,


s; unless, bowing down (unto me) and


* Fire.

+ This simile is hardly happy; but the Iure was even the name of the
monkey, Angada suggested kanaléngada—golden bracelet. This typifies the
tendency prevailing to this day of Hindu authors to exercise their ingenuity in
puns —T.


FUDDHAKANO AM. tazt


Hearing Ravana
seized (Angada) flaming in energy like fire itself, And
T&r&'s son suffered himself to be taken, in order that the
hero might then display his prowess before the Yaludhanas.*
Then Angada, taking them up, who were pressed againsl his
arms, like insects,—leapt up ona palace resembling a hill,


s speech, four grim-visaged night rangers


Thereat, in consequence of the impetuosily of his bound, the
Rikshasas, slipping off, [ellon to the ground in the very
sight of the Rakshasa king. Then the powerful son of Vali
with his legs attacked the top of that palace, elevated like a
hill,t of the lord of Rakshasas, And thereat, as formerly
the summit of the Himavan had been cleft by the thunder-
bolt, the palace, thus assailed, was split in the very presence
of the Ten-necked one. Having reft the top of the edifice,
and proclaimed his name, Angada, setting up a mighty
roar, sprang into the sky. And, aggrieving the Rakshasas
and rejoicing all the monkeys, he came back to the
side of Rama in the midst of the monkeys. Ravana was
transported with wrath in consequence of the breaking down
of the palace. And, finding his destruction (at hand), he
began to heave sighs, And Rama, surrounded by innumer-
able delighted monkeys setting up shouts,—anxious for
slaying his foc, prepared for battle. And at the command
of Sugriva, the exceedingly powerful monkey—Sushena—
resembling a mountain-summit, surrounded by a large number
of monkeys capable of assuming shapes at pleasure, began
to range from door to door ;} like the Moon ranging the sta
Seeing the lundred akshauhinis of the wood-rangers,
statiuned in Lanka, extending down to the sea, some of
the Rakshasas were struck with astonishment, while some


* Rakshasas.
+ The commentator, however, would make dadarca—saw—understood,
“Angada saw that the palace was high like a hill, efc." This is unne-


cessary—T,
t For protecting the entire army, as well as for procuring information of
the movements of the enemy.—T.


1222 RAMAPANA,


came under the influence of fear; and some experienced
delight from the (anticipated) delight of battle. And the
space between the well and the moat all was flooded with
monkeys. And the distressed Rakshasas saw the wall
thronging with monkeys ;* and thereat exclaiming “Alas”
“Alas,” the Rakshasas were extremely terrified, And on
that frightful uproar arising, the warriors of the Rakshasa
monarch,—R&kshasas—seizing mighty arms, began to patrol
about, like unto winds blowing at the time of the universal
dissolution.


SECTION XLII.


Tren those Rakshasas, going to that subduer of enemies,
Ravana, informed him that Rama along with the monkeys
had laid seige unto the city. Hearing the city beseiged, the
night-ranger was enraged. And, hearing that double arrange-
ments had been made (by Rama) in guarding the gateways,
(Ravana) ascended the palace. He saw Lank& with her
hills, woods, and forests, covered everywhere with innumer-
able monkeys eager for encounter. And he saw the entire
Earth tawneyed with the monkeys; and he reflected within
himself how he could destroy these. And reflecting for
long, Ravana having expansive eyes, assuming patience gazed
at Raghava and the leader of monkeys. Raghava with
his host was fast approaching (the wall); and Ravana saw
Lanka defended on all sides by R&kshasas. And Dacaratha’s
son, seeing Lanka crowned with variegated ensigns and


* A translator cannot help a feeling of disappointment at the difference—to
the disadvantage of English—between Sanskrit and English. The original for
‘thronging with monkeys’ is a verbal attributive—vdnarikrita—lit.monkeyed.—T.


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1223


standards, mentally went to Sita, with a sad heart. “For my
sake, here that one, Janaka's daughter, having eyes resembl-
ing those of a young deer,—is undergoing affliction ; and
lieth down on the ground.” And aggrieved at the thought
of Vaidehi, the righteous Rima speedily commanded the
monkeys to compass the destruction of the enemies. As
Rama of untiring deeds said this, the monkeys, filling (the
air} with leonine roars, began to press forward furiously.
“We shall cleave Lank& with mountain-peaks, or with our
blows’ —thus thought the leaders within themselves. And
the monkey-leaders stood, raising up gigantic mountaio-
peaks and tops of mountains, aud rooting up various trees.
And for doing what was dear unto Rama, that army,
divided into separate parties, in the presence of the Rakshasa-
chief commenced sculing Lanka. And those copper-faced
ones of golden sheen, who had consecrated their lives to
the service of RAma, equipped with trees and rocks, began
to throng upon Lanka. And the monkeys with trees and
hill-tops and blows crushed countless gates and tops of
walls; and they filled the moat containing crystal water
with dust, tops of crags, straw, and wood. Then leaders
of thousands and fofis and hundreds of dofis began to scale
Lanka. And the monkeys crushed golden gateways; and,
breaking down gates resembling the Lops of the summits of
Kail&ga, bounded roaring, some towards the wall and some
all around. And resembling gigantic elephants, they rusbed
towards Lanka, “Victory to the mighty Rama, and Victory
to the exceedingly powerful Lakshmana, and Victory to
king Sugriva, who is protected by Raghava.’ Thus shouting,
those monkeys, wearing forms at will, sending up roars,
rushed amain towards the wall of Lank&. And Viravhu,
Suvahu, Nala and Panacga—leader of monkeys—breaking
(a portion of) the wall, took up their post there. In the meaa-
time, (they) arranged the forces in order of battle. And the
strong Kumuda, surrounded by ten Zo¢/s of victorious monkeys,


1224 RAMAYANA.


stood obstructing the Eastern gate. And for hacking him,
there remained the monkey, Prasabha, as also the long-armed
Panaga,surrounded by monkeys. And obstructing the Southern
entrance stood the strong and gallant monkey, Satavali,
surrounded by twenty dofrs. And the strong sire of Tard, the
powerful Sushena, obstructed the Western gate, backed by
kotis upon ott's (of monkeys). And obstructing the Northern
gate,remained the puissant Rama himself along with Sumitra’s
son, as well as the king of monkeys—Sugriva, And that
huge-bodied and dreadful Golangnla—the mighty and powerful
Gavaksha—surrounded by a foff, remained by the side of
Rama. And that destroyer of foes—the exceedingly mighty
Dhumra of the bears of terrific wrath, remained by the side
of Rama—where, surrounded by vigilant counsellors, and
bearing a mace in his hand, stood the exceedingly strong
Bibbishana, endowed with wonderful powers, in complete
panoply. And Gaya, and Gavaksha, and Gavaya, and
Sarabha, and Gandham&dana, protected the monkey-army,
coursing all around. And then, his soul wrought up with
wrath, R&vana—lord of Rakshasas—speedily ordered the
whole host to sally out. Hearing those words, which came
out from Ravana’s mouth, all of a sudden the night-rangers
sent up a dreadful yell, Then awoke the kettle-drums,
having moon-like pale faces,—-sounded by means of
golden sticks. And conchs by hundreds and by thousands,
capable of producing loud blares, filled wilh air proceeding
from the mouths of dreadful Rakshasas,—were winded,
And with conchs placed in their mouths, those night-rangers,
having bodies blue like those of Cusas, resembled masses of
clouds, with lightning and cranes. And, commanded by Ravana,
the troops cheerfully issued forth like the onrushing of the
mighty main filling all at the time of the universal dis-


solution, And then the monkey-army gave a roar, spreading
all around; and it seemed as if the sound filled all Malaya
with its sides and caves. And sounds of conchs, and drums,


FUDDHAKANDAM. 1225


as well as the feonine shouts of the impetuous (warriors),
made the earth, air, and ocean, resound; and these mixed
with the roars of elephants, the neighing of steeds, the
rattle of the car-wheels, and the tread of the Rakshasas’
feet. And in the meantime there commenced a mighty
encounter between the Rakshasas and the monkeys, like that
which took place of yore between the gods and the Asuras,
And displaying their prowess, they* began to slaughter
monkeys with maces, and darts, and adzes. And the vehe-
ment monkeys (on their side) slaughtered R&kshasas with
trees and tops of crags as well as with their nails and teeth.
And a mighty sound arose of 'Victory unto king Sugriva !"
and ‘Victory unto thee, O king,’—each army taking the
name of its king. And then other dreadful Rakshasas that were
stationed upon the wall, dropping down, pierced the monkeys
with darts and éhindipdias. And (thereat) the monkeys,
flying into fury, descending to the earth and bounding,
brought down the Rakshasas with their arms. And that
encounter of the Rakshasas and the monkeys was mighty
and wonderful, and the ground became wet with flesh and
gore.


SECTION XLIil.


Ano as the high-souled monkeys and R&kshasas fuught
on, their wrath vastly increased at sight of each other's
forces. And furnished with steeds in golden trappings ; and
elephants resembling flames of fire ; and cars appearing like
(so many) suns ; and shining armour,—the valiant Rakshasas
issued, making the ten cardinal points resound. The


* Rakshasas,


154


1226 RAMAYENA,


Rakshasas of terrific exploits were burning for victory on
behalf of Ravana.—And the mighty monkey-army also, eager
for victory, darted against the host of the Rakshas of dread-
ful deeds. And in the meanwhile, as either party assailed
the other, there took place single combats between the
Rakshasas and the monkeys. And as Andhaka had combated
with the Three-eyed (deity),* Lhat Rakshasa, the exceedingly
energetic Indrajit, faught with Angada, son unto Va&li.
Sampali, hard to bear, engaged with Prajangha; and the
monkey, Hanum&n, entered into conflict with Jambumiili,
And Ravana’s younger brother, Bibhisbana, fired with wrath,
encountered Satrughna, endowed with exceeding impetuosity.
And the highly powerful Nila engaged with Nikumbha. And
Sugriva—lord of monkeys—undertook Praghasa, and the
graceful Lakshmana was engaged with Virupaksha. And the
exceedingly irrepressible Agniketu and the Rakshasa—
Ragmiketu-and Mitraghna and Yajnakopa, were engaged
with Rama. And Vajramushthi encountered Mainda, and
Aganiprabha, Dwivida. And those foremost of monkeys
faught with those dreadful Rakshasas,—the heroic and
terrible Pratapana, incapable of being overcome in battle,
was combating with Nala of terrific force ; and that lusty son
of Righteousness, well-known as Sushena,p—a mighty
monkey—battled with Vidyunmali. And other fearful
monkeys encountered other Rakshasas ; and many were the
encounters that took place. And great and fierce was the
engagement that took place between the heroic R&kshasas
and monkeys burning for victory, capable of making people’s
hair stand on end, And from the persons of the R&kshasas
and the monkeys there flowed a river of gore, having hair
for grass (growing on its banks),and the bodies of the warriors
for pieces of planks fluating (adown the current). Indrajit,
growing enraged, with his mace dealt a blow at that tearer
of hostile ranks, Angada,—like him of an hundred sacrifices


* Siva, fabled to have three eyes.—T,


YUDDH4sKANDAM. 1227


striking with his thunderbolt. Thereat, that graceful monkey,
Angada, gifted with vehemence, with his mace crushed his
car decked in gold, together with the steeds and the
charioteer. Samp&ti was pierced with three arrows by
Prajangha ; and the former {in his turn) slew Prajangha on
the edge of battle with an Agwakarna.* And Jambumili,
mounted on a car, possessed of prodigious strength, fired
with wrath, with all the access of force derived from his car,
wounded Hanuman between his paps. Thereat, getting at his
car, Hanumin—son unto the Wind-god—with a slap speedily
crushed his adversary's vehicle along with the Raksha. Then
the terrific Pratapana, roaring, rushed at Nala; and thereat
Nala, with his body pierced with sharp shafts by that swift-
handed Raksha, plucked out Pratapana’s eyes, and cast them
to the earth. And that lord of monkeys, Sugriva, with a
Saptaparnat swiftly slew Praghasa, who appeared to be
devouring up the troops. And, tormenting the Rakshasa of
dreadful form with a shower of shafts, Lakshmana slew
Virupaksha with a single arrow. And the irrepressible
Agniketu, the Rakshasa Ragmiketu, Mitraghna and Yajna-
kopa, with their arrows rendered Rama aflame. Thereat,
Rama, growing wroth, in battle severed the heads of those
four by means of four shafts, dreadful, and resembling the
tongues of a flame. And Vajramushti was slain in conflict
by Mainda with a clenched fist ; and down came he to the
ground along with his car and horses, like a turret toppling
{headiong). And Nikumbha in fight wounded Nila resem-
bling a mass of blue collyrium, with sharpened shafts,—as
the Sun pierceth clouds with his rays. Again with an hundred
arrows, that light-handed night-ranger pierced Nila in the
field; and Nikumbha laughed thereat. At this, even as
Vishnu did in battle, Nila with a wheel of hisf car, cut off in


* Akind of tree.
+ A tree.


1228 RAMAYANA.


conflict Nikumbha’'s head together with that of his charioteer.
And Dwivida, possessed of the touch of the Vajra and thunder-
bolt, in the presence of the entire Rakshasa host hurled a
mountain-peak at him that was endowed with the splendour
of the thunder-bolt. And Aganiprabha in encounter pierced
that foremost of monkeys, Dwivida, with shafts resembling
thunder-bolts. Thereat, beside himself with wrath, with his
entire body wounded with arrows, Dwivida with a sé/a des-
troyed Acaniprabha along with his car and horses. And
Vidyunmali, mounted on a car, assailed Sushena with shafts
decked with gold, and began to shout momentarily. Seeing
him mounted on his car, Sushena—best of monkeys—taking
up a huge crag, swiftly brought his car down to the ground,
Thereat, endowed with lightness, that night-ranger, Vidyun-
mali, at once extricating himself from his car, stood on the
ground with a mace in his hand. Thereupon, that foremost of
monkeys, Sushena, growing furious, taking up a gigantic
crag, rushed at the night-ranger. And as he was descending,
the nigkt-ranger, Vidyunmili, with his mace swiftly hit at
the breast of Sushena—greatest of monkeys. Thereat,
without thinking at all of the terrific hit of the mace, that
best of monkeys in mighty conflict brought down that* upon
hist head. And, assailed with the crag, the night-ranger,
Vidyunmali, having his chest crushed, fei] down to the earth,
deprived of tife. And, like the celestials warring against the
Daityas, the heroic monkeys warred on and confounded the
valiant rangers of the night. And frightful was the field of
battle, with darts, and other arms ; and clubs, and javelins,
and lances, and other weapons ; and with broken cars, and
war-horses, and mad horses slain, and monkeys and
Rakshasas ; and wheels and afshas.t and yokes and
standards,—broken and scattered over the ground; and


* The crag, which he had at first hit—T.
+ Vidyunmdli’s.
$ A part of a wheel.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1229


swarms of jackals began to range on all sides of the monkeys
and the Rakshasas ; and Kavandhas* began to rise in that
terrific encounter, resembling the encounter of the gods and
the Asuras. Thus destroyed by the foremost of monkeys, the
rangers of night, beyond themselves with the smell of
blood,—-eagerly wishing for the setting of the Sun,t again
made active preparations for a renewal of the fight.


SECTION xLiv


A S$ the monkeys and the Rakshasas thus faught on, the
sun set, and the fatal Night came. And then commenced a
night-engagement between the dreadful Rakshasas and the
monkeys of fixed hostility, each party burning for victory,
And in that profound darknesss, the monkeys and the
R&kshasas began to slay each other, exclaiming,—‘Thou art
a R&kshasa,’ and ‘Thou art a monkey.’ And in that army
there was heard a mighty uproar of ‘slain,’ ‘rive’ ‘come!’
‘why fliest? And, dark-hued, the Rakshasas, equipped in
golden mail, in that deep darkness appeared like elevated
hills clad with woods of flaming medicinal herbs. And in
that limitless gloom, the Rakshasas, transported with wrath,
advanced with impetuous speed, devouring monkeys. And,
fired with terrible wrath, they,t bounding up, with their sharp
teeth tore up steeds caparisoned in gold, and standards
resembling venomous serpents. And the lusty monkeys in
battle agitated the Rakshasa host,—and, waxing furious, with


* Spectres having bodies without heads.

+ This was because, as intelligently remarks R&mdnuja, night-rangers
grow powerful at might —T.

t 4. ¢ the monkeys, as appears from the context—T,


1230 RAMAPANA,


their teeth pulled and bit elephants and the riders thereof,
and cars furnished with flags and standards. And Rima and
Lakshmana with shafts resembling venomous serpents,
slaughtered the foremost among the Rakshasas—both those
that were seen and those that were not.——And the dust of
the earth arising from warring combatants, and from the
hoofs of horses and the wheels of cars, choked up eye and
ear. And as the mighty encounter, capable of making
people's hair stand on end, went on, there flowed a fearful
river of gore. And the sounds of kettle-drums and
Mridangas and Panavas, mingled with those of conchs and
car-wheels,—were wonderful (to hear). And the sounds of
steeds neighing, and R&kshasas (roaring), and monkeys,
rejoicing,—were something tremendous. And, with able
monkeys slain; and darts and javelins and axes; and
slaughtered R&kshasas wearing forms at pleasure, lying
mountain-like,—the field of battle, seeming to have offerings
of arms representing flowers,—became difficult to recog-
nise, and inaccessible ; and the earth was drenched with
streams of blood. And that Night, destructive to monkeys and
Rakshasas,—was dreadful, and difficult of being out-sped
by all,—like unto the Fatal Night of beings. And in that
profound darkness, the Rakshasas with great vivacity
attacked Rama with a shower of shafts. And the roars of
those beings as they advanced, sending up shouts in anger,
resembled the dashing of the Ocean at the time of the
universal dissolution. And in the twinkling of an eye, Raima
by means of six shafts resembling tongues of flames,
struck six of the night-rangers ; viz., Yajnagatru, irrepressible
{in fight)—and Mahap&rcwa, and Mahodara, and the huge-
bodied Vajradanashtra,—and those two—Suka and Sarana,
And, pierced in their vitals with Rama's shafts, they, having
only their lives left to them, disappeared from the field. Then
in the twinkling of an eye, that Mah3ratha rendered all sides
clear (of all gloom) by means of arrows resembling tongues


PYUDDHAKANDAM. 1231


of fire; and those other heroic Rakshasas that were in front
of Rama, were destroyed on approaching the place, like
insects approaching a fire. And with shafts plated with
gold lying in all directions, the night resembled one in
autumn decked with fire-flies. And in consequence of the
uproar occasioned by the Rakshasas, and the sounds of
drums, that night, already dreadful (in itself), became all the
more so. And on that sound attaining dimensions on all
sides, it seemed as if the mount Trikuta, containing numerous
caverns, had been speaking. And huge-bodied Golingulas
of equal lustre with darkness itself,* binding fast the
night-rangers with their arms, began to swallow them up,
And Angada was present in the encounter, for slaying foes.
And Indrajit, fairing sadly at the hands of Angada, abondon-
ing his vehicle, and having his horses as well as his charioteer
slain, vanished then and there. And that feat of Vali’s
son, worthy of being honored, all the celestials with the
saints and both Rama and Lakshmana lauded to the
height. All beings were acquainted with the might of
Indrajit in battle ; and, therefore, witnessing his discomfiture,
and seeing that high-souled one, they rejoiced exceedingly.
And, seeing the enemy vanquished, all the monkeys with
Sugriva and Bibhishana, experiencing high delight,exclaimed,
~-"Excellent !” “Excellent!” And, beaten by V&li’s son
of dreadful deeds, Indrajit was fired with a mighty wrath.
And, being handled hard in battle, and having vanished from
the field, the heroic and wicked son of R&vana, who had
received a boon from Brahma, transported with passion
remaining invisible, began to discharge sharpened shafts
of the splendour of the thunder-bolt. And worked up into
tage, he in the conflict pierced Raghu’s sons, Rama and
Lakshmana all over their bodies, with terrific arrows
consisting of serpents. And himself engirt with illusion, that
night-ranger, given to fighting in crooked ways,—remaining


+ krovy.


1232 RAMAYANA,


invisible to all creatures,—stupified the descendants of
Raghu in battle; and by means of his shafts bound the
brothers, Rama and Lakshmana. And then in the sight of
the monkeys, those heroes and foremost of men were suddenly
overpowered with shafts by the enraged (Indrajit). And
when the son of the Rakshasa monarch felt himself in-
competent to cope with them* openly, then that impious one,
resorting to illusion, bound those princes (by that means),


SECTION XLV.


Tarn, anxious to ascertain hist course, the king’s
son possessed of prowess, and endowed with exceeding
strength, R&ma, ordered ten of the monkey-leaders. And
that repressor of foes ordered Vali’s son—Angada, the
vigorous Sarabha, Dwivida, Hanuman, the mighty SAnupras-
tha, Rishabba and Rishabhaskandha. Thereat with alacrity
those monkeys, weilding mighty trees, shot up into the sky,
and began to scour the ten cardinal points. And Ravana's
son, skilled in arms, resisted the impetuous march of those
vehement ones by means of a powerful weapon as well as
arms more forceful (than the force of their rush). And the
exceedingly vehement monkeys, cut and mangled with
ndrdchas, saw him in the dark like the sun enveloped in
clouds, And that conquerer in battle, Ra&vana’s son, with
shafts sorely pierced the persons of Rama and Lakshmana.
And both Rama and Lakshmana had their bodies entirely
covered by the angry Indrajit with shafts turned into serpents.
And from their wounds blood began to gush out in streams ;


* Rama and Lakshmana.
+ Indrafit’s.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1234


and they looked like flower-crowned Avugukas. Then that
one having red corners unto his eyes and resembling a mass
of crushed collyrium, R&vana’s son, said unto the brothers,
as he vanished,—“When ft fight remaining invisible, even
Sakra—the lord of the celestials—cannot see or approach
me,—and who are ye? And I, with my soul surcharged with
wrath, shall, assailing them with showers of weapons
furnished with Kanka feathers, send Raghu’s sons to the
abode of Yama.” Having spoken thus unto the brothers—
Rama and Lakshmana, cogniz int of righteousness—(Indrajit)
—pierced them with sharpened shafts, and shouted in joy.
And stretching his large bow, that one sable like unto a mass
of crushed collyrium again discharged terrific shafts in
battle. And that one versed in the inner sense of things,
with whetted arrows pierced the vitals of Rama and
Lakshmana and shauted momentarily. And fast hound by
the shackles of shafts on the edge of battle, they* could not
attain respite for a moment. Then with their persons
pierced with shafts and darts, and resembling the flgs of the
Great Indra let loose from the cords and trembling {in the
air)—and with their bodies bristling with arrows,—those
heroes and mighty bowmen—lords of the earth—tormented
in consequence of their vitals having been pierced, dropped
down to the earth. And those heroes, bathed in blood, and
their persons covered with arrows,—pained and suffering
terribly, lay down as became heroes. And there was not so
much room unpierced in their persons as could be measured
by a finger; and they were wounded with arrows up to the
fore-parts of their hands.t And they being wounded by that
fati one capable of assuming shapes at will, blood violently
gushed out of their bodies like water from a spring. And Rama
fell first, pierced in the vitals with the shafts. And the same


* ie, Rama and Lakshmana.
+ This sloke is rather obscure, and the Bengili translators have convenient-
ly passed it by !—T.


155


1334 RAMAYANA.


Indrajit who had formerly wrathfully routed Sakra,(now) pierc-
ed (Rama) with x4réchas knotted with gold,and having polish-
ed heads; swift-speeding ; and resembling dust carried about by
the wind; and half-ndérdchas; and darts resembling anjalis ;*
and vatsadantas ;+ and sinkadanshtras ;$ and razors; and,
resigning his stringless bow decked in gold and curved in
three places,—with its part for grasping shattered—he§ lay
down like a hero. And seeing Rama—foremost of men—
down within arrow-range, Lakshmana despaired of his life,
And seeing his brother, Rama, having eyes resembling lotus-
petals and ever delighting in battle, himself the refuge of
others,—lying down in the field ; (Lakshmana) began to weep.
And the monkeys also, seeing him, were plunged in sorrow;
and they, their eyes flooded with tears, began to cry in
grief of heart. And when they had been bound and had laid
themselves down as become heroes, the monkeys stood
around them,—and, conversing with one another, they,
headed by the son of the Wind, were seized with extreme
sorrow.


SECTION XLVI


Ano the rangers of woods, gazing at the earth and the
sky, at length cast their eyes on the brothers—Rama and
Lakshmana. covered all over with arrows, And after that
Rakshasa had gone away having performed his work, like
the God|| going away, after having showered,—there came


* The hands joined at the lower sides, with the palms hollowed.—T.
+ Weapons resembling the teeth of a calf.

$ Weapons resembling the fion’s teeth

§ Rama,

\) Indra.


FUDDHARANDAM. 1235


to that place Bibhishana with Sugriva. And, mourning
Raghu's sons, there also came in all haste Nila and Dwivida
and Mainda and Sushena and Kumuda and Angada in
company with Hanuman. And moveless; breathing low,—
covered with blood,—pierced all over with net-works of
shafts ; dumb; they* were lying on the field. And they were
sighing like serpents; and were inert; and deprived of
prowess ; and washed in blood ; and looking like unto golden
standards. And as they lay moveless, as become heroes, the
leaders of monkeys environed them with tear-charged eyes.
And seeing the sons of Raghu lying, covered with showers
of shafts, the monkeys, with Bibhishana, were pained
(exceedingly). And the monkeys, surveying the sky as well
as all directions, could not see R&vana’s son in battle
enveloped with illusion. And then Bibhishana by means of
illusion saw his brother’s son staying before, hidden by
illusion, And Bibhishana saw that hero of incomparable
deeds, who had no compeer in the field and who had energy,
fame and prowess,—as he remained invisible in consequence
of the boon received from Brahma, And Indrajit, seeing his
own feat and them lying at length, spake in excess of joy,
gladdening al! the Rakshasas,—"The brothers—Rama and
Lakshmana, possessed of great strength, who had slain Khara
and Dusbana, are themselves slain with my shafts. And all
the celestials and Asuras assembled together with the saints,
are incompetent to emancipate these from the fetters of my
shafts, He for whom my father was exercised with anxiety
and tormented by grief, for whom my sire used to spend
nights without pressing his bed,—for whom this entire Lanka
had resembled a river turbulent in the rainy reason,—that
same evil sticking by the root of all, hath been dispensed his
quietus by me. And like clouds of autumn, the prowess of
Rama and Lakshmana as well as that of all the rangers of
the woods, hath been rendered useless.” Saying this ia
* Rama and Lakshmana,


1236 RAMAYANA,


the presence of all the Rakshasas, Ravana’s son—destroyer
of foes—menacing the monkey-leaders, hit Nila with nine
arrows, and hurt Mainda and Dwivida each with three power-
ful shafts. And piercing Jambavan with an arrow in the
chest, that mighty bowman discharged ten at Hanuman.
And Rivana’s son possessed of exceeding impetuosity,
pierced in the conflict with two shafts each Gavaksha and
Sarabha of immeasurable vigor. And Ravana’s son, summon-
ing celerity, pierced the king of Golangulas and V4li’s son,
Angada, with innumerable arrows, And the powerful son
of Ravana, endowed with might, piercing the foremost
monkeys with shafts resembling tongues of flames, set up
shouts in the field of bate. And Lormenting the monkeys
with volleys of shafts and striking terror into them, that
mighty-armed one, bursting out into a laugh, said,—Let the
Rakshasas behold these brothers, lying fast bound with
dreadful arrows in front of the forces.” Thus addressed,
those Rakshasas--wily warriors ali—resembling masses of
clouds, witnessing that deed (of Indrajit), struck with
wonder and rejoicing (greatly), set up tremendous roars,
And thinking that Rama was slain, they honored Ravana’s
son. And seeing the brothers—Rama and Lakshmana—
motionless, and lying inert on the ground,—they took them
for slain. And, experiencing excess of joy, Indrajit—
conquerer in conflict—entered the city of Lank&, rejoicing
all the Nairidas. Seeing the bodies as well as the limbs of
Rama and Lakshmana, covered entirely with arrows, fear
took possession of Sugriva. Thereat Bibhishana said unto
that lord of monkeys, staying in woe-begone guise, with a
tearful countenance, and his eyes wild with wrath,—'"Do not
give way to fear, O Sugriva. Restrain thy rising tears !
This is the way of warfare: victory is not (always) sure.
But, O hero, if Fortune ultimately smite upon us, this stupor
shall go off from these high-souled and exceedingly powerful
ones. Therefore,Q monkey, do thou cheer me, who am


YVUDDHAKANDAM. 1237


fortorn.” Saying this, with his hand Bibhishana washed
Sugriva’s graceful eyes with water. And taking water,
the righteous Bibhishana by means of his knowledge,
washed Sugriva’s eyes therewith. And washing the face of
the intelligent monkey-monarch, Bibhishana spoke these
words, seasonable and sedate,—"O foremost of monkey-kings,
this is no time for being overcome with stupor. At this
hour, even immoderate affection may lead to destruction.
Therefore, casting off stupor, which tends to mar all work,
do thou bethink thee how thou mayst serve this army headed
by Rama. Or do thou protect Rama so long as he doth not
regain consciousness ; and when the Kakutsthas shall have
regained consciousness, all our apprehension shall vanish,
This is nothing to Rama, and Rama is not dying. And
Lakshmi,* who is incapable of being attained by those that
are doomed, shall not forsake this one, Therefore do thou
comfort thyself, do thou also cheer up thy own forces,—
while I am engaged in composing all the troops. O best of
monkeys, these with distended eyes, come under the
yovernance of terror, are, stricken with panic, whispering
into each other’s ears. But seeing me, let the forces rushing
about, cheered up,—as well as the monkeys,—cast off all
fear, like a wreath that hath been used before.” Thus
comforting Sugriva, Bibhishana—lord of Rakshasas—again
instilled spirits into the flying forces, of monkeys. And
Indrajit—worker of mighty illusions—accompanied by his
troops, entered the city of Lankd and presented himself
before his father, And approaching Ravana and saluting
him with joined hands, he informed his sire of the welcome
tidings that Kama and Lakshmana had been slain. And
hearing that his foe had fatlen, Ravana springing up in the
midst of the R&kshasas, with great joy embraced his son,
And scenting the crown of bis head, (Ravana) with a delight-
ed heart, asked (Indrajit as to all that had taken place). And
"* ‘The goddess of prosperity.


1238 RAAMAFANA,


on being asked, he (Indrajit) truly related unto his sire how
(Rama and Lakshmana) had been rendered senseless and
lack-lustre by being fastened with shafts. Thereat, with
rapture surcharging his inmost soul, Ravana, hearing the
speech of the mighty car-warrior, banished his fear of
Dagaratha's son,—and rising up, honored his son with glad
words,


SECTION XLvVit.


Wren Ravana’s son entered Lanka, after having
accomplished his purpose, the foremost monkeys protected
R&aghava, surrounding him on all sides. And Hanum&n,
and Angada, and Nila, and Sushena, and Kumuda, and Nala,
and Gaya, and Gavaksha, and Panasa, and Samprastha—a
mighty monkey--and Jambavan, and Rishava, and Sunda,
and Rambha, and Satavali, and Prithu,—alt forming them-
selves into array, and equipped with trees on all sides, and
remaining vigilant,—the monkeys kept gazing at all sides,
awry and upwards; and even when a straw stirred, they
thought it to be a R&kshasa. And Ravana, on his part,
experiencing the height of exaltation, summoned the
Rakshasis engaged in guarding Sit&.—And thereat the
Rakshasis—Trijata and others—presented themselves at
his command. And then the lord of Rakshasas, delighted,
addressed then the Rakshasis, saying—Tell Vaidebi that
Rama and Lakshmana have been slain in batUle by Indrajit.
And taking her on Pushaka, show her (R&ma and Lakshmana)
lying slain on the field of battle. That one depending on
whom she had proudly set her face against me,—that
husband of hers, along with his brother, hath heen slain in


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1239


conflict. And then Mithila’s daughter, her fear gone off
with her anxiety, and herself losing all support,—Sita—
daughter unto Mithilia—decked out in all ornaments, shall
seek me. And today beholding Rama with Lakshmana,
come under the sway of Time, she, finding no other way,
shall desist from her present course. And seeing no other
resourse, that one of expansive eyes shall of herself seek
me.” Hearing those words of the wicked-minded RAvana,
the Rakshasis, saying,—‘‘So be it,’—went to where
Pushpaka was. Then taking Pushpaka, the Rakshasis at
Ravana’s command went to Maithili staying in the agoka
woud. Then, taking Sita, who was overcome with grief for
her lord, the R&kshasis, placed her on the car, Pushpaka.
And placing Sition Pushpaka along with Trijaté, Ravana
took her all around (Lanka) crowded with ensigns and
standards. And the lord of Rakshasas jubilantly proclaim-
ed in Link’, —“Raghava as well as Lakshmana have been
slain by Indrajit in battle.” And going about with Trijata,
Sit4 saw all the monkey-troops slain. And she found the
flesh-eaters elated in spirits, and the monkeys afflicted with
extreme grief at the side of Rama and Lakshmana. Then
Sita beheld both Lakshmana and Rama lying in the field,
sonseless and bound with arrows. And those heroes
were lying on the earth, their mail torn, their bows cast off,
their bodies mangled all over and thickly pierced with shafts.
And seeing those brothers,—foremost of heroes and best
of men—having eyes resembling white lotuses, and them-
selves like unto Kumfras,—lying in the field,*—the fire-
sprung one, Sita, striken with grief, began to weep piteously.
And that black-eyed one of an excellent person, Janaka’s
daughter—seeing them roll in the dust, broke out into
lamentation. And with her eyes shedding plentiful tears,


* Virén nararshabhin—heroes and best af men—occuts again,—left out on
the score of redendancy.—T.


1240 KAMALANA.


she seeing those brothers, endowed with god-like prowe:
concluded them to be dead; and overwhelmed with grie


spoke as follows.


BECTION xtviis.


App seeing her husband, as well as the exceedingly
powerful Lakshmana,—slain, Sit& afflicted with grief, burst
into bitter lamentation. "The soothsayers had said that I
should have sons, and should never be a widow. But on
Rama being slain, it seems now that those ones, possessed
of knowledge, had spoken untruthlully. And those also, who
having celebrated sacrifices and rites, had said that [ should
become the queen (of R&Ama),—on Rima being slain, seems
to-day to have spoken a falsehood, although they.are
possessed of knowledge. And they also asserted that I
should be honored of the wives of heroic kings as well as of
my lord,—but on Rama being slain,they seem tohave uttered
a falsehood, althongh possessed of knowledge. And those
twice-born ones that in my hearing had said auspicious words,
on Rama being slain, seem to-day to have spoken a falsehood,
although they were pussessed of knowledge, These lotus-
marks on the feet, betokening unto gentlewomen possessing
them, that they are to be installed in the kingdom in company
with their husbands—who are kings,—are on me. And
those marks find I none on me by which women of rare fortune
come by widowhood—but I find that in me these good
tokens are nullified. Those marks that are pronounced
infallible by those versed in such knowledge, on Rama being
slain, are nullified in me. My hairs are fine, equal, and blue ;
my eye-brows touch each other ; my hips are devoid of down


YODDHARANDAM, 1241


and round ; and my teeth are close. My temples, and eyes,
hands, feet, ankles, and thighs are equal. And my fingers are
furnished with round nails, and are plump and even in the
middle. And my breasts are close and firm and developed,
and have their nipples sunk. And my navel is depressed,
with high sides. And my chest is swelling. And my
complexion is like the hue of yems,—and my down soft.
And they said that I was furnished with twelve auspicious
signs. And my hands in the middle parts of my fingers
contain wheat-marks ; and in the spaces between the fingers,
have no uneven corners. And my feet also partake of the
general complexion. And my laugh is a gentle smile. And
(hose versed in marks of women knew that I was
possessed of such marks. And those Br&hmanas skilled
in telling fortune said that I should be installed in the
kingdom along with my husband; but all that hath been
falsified. Having purified Janasthana (of Rakshasas),obtained
tidings of me, and crossed the Ocean* incapable of being
agitated, those brothers have been slain in the footprint of a
cow! The descendants of Raghu had obtained Varuna and
Agneya and Aindra and Vayava and Brahmagiras weapons.t
Through illusion have those lords of me, who am forlorn--
Rama and Lakshmana, resembling Vasava himself in battle, —
been slain. Coming in battle within ken of Raghava, a foe,
even if he be endowed with the fleetness of thought,—doth
not go back, living. There is nothing which is too hardg for
Time ; and the Destroyer is incapable of being overcome ;
inasmuch as Rama along with his brother Lakshmana hath
fallen in fight. And I do not so much mourn Rama or the
mighty car-warrior—Lakshmana—~or, for that matter, self,-—
as I do the wretched Mother-in-law of mine. She ever
thinketh of the period of the promise. ‘When shall [ behold


* The commentator assigns a metaphorical sense to ocean,—but this is


hardly necessary.
t And did they not remember this now ¥ completes the sense—T.


1242 RAMAYANA,


Sita and Lakshmana with Raghava?’” As she was th
lamenting, the R&akshasi, Trijat3, said,—“O exalted lady
do not weep thus. Thy lord liveth. And, O dignified one
I shall unfold unto thee potent and probable reasons why th
brothers Rama and Lakshmana live. When their leade
falleth, the countenances of the warriors in battle are not
averspread with passion, or display cheerfulness and vivacity
And, O Vaidehi, if those had lost their lives, this celestial
chariot, named Pushpaka, would not have held thee. An
army that hath its heroes and chiefs slainmbecoming dispirit-
ed and drooping,rangeth the field, like a vessel on water that
hath lost its helmsman. But, O lorn one, these troops, be-
traying neither agitation nor anxiety, are guarding the
Kakutsthas. This I tell thee of them out of affection. Do
thou, at this conclusion bringing in joy, take comfort; and
behold the Kakutsthas unslain. This I tell thee from affection.
I never told thee unteuths heretofore; nor, O Mithila’s
daughter, will I tell them unto thee now. Thou by virtue
of thy character conducive to delight, hast found an acess
into my heart. These even the celestials and Asuras with
Indra (at their head) are incompetent to quell, Seeing
such sight, | speak to thee as to their being alive. And
behold, O Maithili, this mighty wonder! These are lying
insensible with arrows; but of these Grace hath not taken
leave. It generally happeus that the faces of persons dead
and gone, are unsightly to a degree. Therefore, O Janaka’s
daughter, leave off grief and sorrow and stupor. For the
sake of Rama and Lakshmana thou canst not today put a
period to thy existence.’ Hearing her words, Mithila’s
daughter—Sita --resembling the daughter of a celestial, with
hands joined, said,—°May this be so!” Then turning
away the car Pushpaka fleet as the mind, the distressed
Sitd entered Lanka along with Trijat& Then in company
with Trijata, alighting from Pushpaka, she along with the
Rakshasis entered the gota wood. And entering that


YUDDHsKANDAM 1243


sporting-ground of the Rakshasa lord abounding in woody
tracts, Sita, having beheld those princes and reflected on
them, became subject to a mighty grief.


SECTION Xutx


Bouno up terribly with shafts, Dagaratha's sons, lying
down bathed in blood, sighed hard like unto serpents. And
all those foremost monkeys, along with Sugriva, possessed
of exceeding strength,—overwhelmed with sorrow, remained
surrounding those high-souled ones. In the meanwhile, the
powerful Rama, albeit fast bound by the shafts, awoke by
virtue of the exceeding toughness of his person, as well as
his might. Then, seeing his brother, having a distressful
countenance, covered with blood, feeble, and fast bound by
the shafts,—Rama, greatly aggrieved, began to mourn. “Of
what use unto me is the recovery of Sita, or life either,
when to-day I see my brother vanquished in fight and lying
down in the field? Seeking in the world (of men), I may
light upon a woman like Sita; but never on a brother, ora
helper, or a warrior like unto Lakshmana. If that enhancer
of Sumitra’s joy have met with his end, my life I must
renounce in the sight of the monkeys. What shall I say unto
Kaugalya: and what shall [ say unto Kaikeyig And what
shall [ say unto mother Sumitr&, eager for a sight of her son?
And if I go (back) without him, haw shall I soothe her, like
unto acow reft of her calf; and trembling ; and resembling
a mourning Kurari? And how shall f say unto Satrughana
and the illustrious Bharata,—'He went with me to the forest;
but I come (back) here without him?’ I shall not be able to
bear the rebuke of mother Sumitra. Therefore even here


1244 RAMAYANA.


shall | renounce my person; for certainly I dare not live.
Fie on me, who am wicked and base ; for me this Lakshmana,
brought down, lieth in the field of battle, like one that is
without life. OQ Lakshmana, thou ever comfortest me when
lam dispirited. But to day, having lost thy life, thou canst
nat speak to me,who am afflicted. Thou, O hero, who hadst in
hattle slain innumerable Rakshasas lying around, hast (at
length) thyself been slain in the field with shafts. And
lying down in the battle-field, bleeding, and covered with
arrows, thou appearest like the Sun when he hath gone up the
Setting-hill. And in consequence of shafts piercing thy
vitals, thou canst not speak; but thy visible expression,
albeit thou art dumb, betokens pain. O thou endowed with
exceeding splendour, even as thou didst follow me into the
forest, will I follow thee unto the mansion of Yama. Thou,
having dear friends, and ever following me, hast come by
this plight in consequence of my reprehensible conduct. 1
do not remember having heard any harsh speech from the
heroic Lakshmana, even when he bad happened to be
exceedingly wroth. He that could discharge at one shot hve
hundred shafts,—that Lakshmana is superior to Karttaviryya
himself in that weapon—the bow. He that with his arms
could resist the arms of Sakra himself,—that one worthy of
a costly couch—lieth down on the ground, slain. And that
false babble shall now, without doubt, consume me; for by me
hath not Bibhishana been made monarch of the Rakshasas.
Do thou, O Sugriva, this very moment retrace thy steps.
Bereft of thy strength through me, thou wilt be worsted by
Ravana, And, O Sugriva, placing Angada to the fore, do
thou, taking thy host as well as the equipage, in
company with Nila and Nala, cross over the Ocean, By
thee hath been achieved a mighty feat incapable of being
done by another in battle. And pleased am I with the king
of bears, and the lord of GolAngulas ; and Angada hath quit
himself nobly, as also Mainda and Dwivida. And Kegarin


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1245


and Samp&ti have both faught terribly. And Gavaya, and
Gaviksha, and Sarabha, and Gaja,—and other monkeys
have faught as others are incapable of fighting,—determined
to lay down their lives (for me). But, O Sugriva, man
cannot overrule Destiny. Thou, my friend, fearing righte-
ousness,* hast done what lay in thy power. And, Ye
foremost of monkeys, ye also have acted as becometh friends.
Now, with my permission, go ye whithersoever ye are
minded.” Hearing Rama's lament, the monkeys—those
dark-eyed and others—began to shed tears from their eyes.
Then Bibhishana, quieting the army, taking a mace in his
hand, swiftly went to where Raghava was. And seeing him
fast making his way, resembling a mass of dark collyrium,
the monkeys taking him to be Ravana's son,t began to run
away.


SECTION L


Tren out spake the highly energetic and exceedingly
mighty king of monkeys,—“Why is this host agitated like
abark driven hither and thither by the wind?” Hearing
Sugriva’s speech, V4li’s son said,—“Dost thou not see both
those heroes—sons of Dagaratha—Rama and that mighty
car-warrior—Lakshmana—covered with arrows? And (dost
thou not see) those high-sould ones lying in the field of
battle, covered with blood ?” Thereat, the lord of monkeys,
Sugriva, spake unto his son,t Angada—‘ 1 do not deem it


* Dharma-bhiru—fearing righteousness—is the epithet generally applied to
persons fearing not in fact righteousness, but unrighteousness. This may be
taken as an idiotism in Sanskrit —T.

. t Indrajit, Such was the fear he had spread by his redoubtable deeds !—T.

t His step-son, for Sugriva had married Angada’s father's wife, after Rima
had slain Vali in Kishkindh&—T.


1246 RAMAPANS,


without cause. This may have come to pass through sheer
fear, These monkeys with sad faces, leaving their arms
behind them, are flying in all directions, their eyes distended
in affright. And they are not ashamed of each other, and
they do not cast their looks back. And they hug each other,
and go leaping over the fallen.” In the meanwhile, that
hero, Bibhishana, bearing a mace in his hand, (approaching),
greeted Sugriva as well as Raghava with blessings of victory.
And Sugriva, seeing Bibhishana, capable of inspiring fear
in the monkeys, spoke unto the high-souled sovereign of
bears, who stood by,—'This is Bibhishana that hath come
hither, seeing whom the foremost among the monkeys, from
fear of Ravana’s son who, they apprehend, ke is,—are fleeing
away seized with a panic, Do thou at once stay these agitated
with fear and scampering all around; and proclaim,—'This
is Bibhishana, who hath come here.” Thus directed,
Jambavan—king of bears—restraining those that were
flying, composed the monkeys. Hearing the bear-king’s
words, and seeing Bibhishana, the monkeys, renouncing
fear, desisted (from thei
Bibhishana, viewing Rama’s as well as Lakshmana’s body
pierced with arrows, was exceedingly aggrieved. And wash-
ing theie eyes with water, he, with his mind overpowered
with grief, began to weep and broke out into lamentation,—
“The Rakshasas, fighting in wily ways, have brought to this
pass these ones endowed with prowess and possessed
of every perfection and gifted with might (of arm). And
with his guileful mind, that brother’s son of mine, wicked-
souled and an evil son (unto me),—hath deceived these ones
of straight prowess. Pierced with innumerable shafts, and
covered with blood, these are lying on the ground like
Salyakas*. Those depending on whose prowess, | had
sought eminence, those foremost of men, sleep here soundly
for renouncing their bodies. Living, today I am in distress ;
* A tree. 3


flight), Then the righteous


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1247


and my desire of dominion is annihilated ; and my foe,
Ravana, hath ais promise fulfilled and his aim crowned with
success.” As Bibhishana was thus lamenting, the lord of
monkeys—Sugriva—endowed with strength, embracing him,
spoke unto him,—"O thou cognisant of righteousness, thou
wilt here in Lanka obtain empire: no doubt of this; and
Ravana along with his sons will be disappointed in their
expectations. Both these—~Rama and  Lakshmana—are
under the egis of Garura; aud, casting off their stupor: they
will in battle slay Ravana along with his adherents.” Hav-
ing thus soothed and comforted the Rakshasa, Sugriva
addressed his father-in-law, who was at his side, saying,—
“Do thou along with numbers of heroic monkeys, taking
those repressors of foes, the brothers—Rama and Lakshmana
~-when they shall have regained their consciousness, repair
to Kishkindha. And I, slaying Ravana along with his sons
and friends, shall bring back Mithila's daughter, even as
Sakra recovered the lost Sri." Hearing the words of the
monkey-king, Sushena said,—"I had witnessed the war of
yore between the gods and the Asuras. Then tho Danavas,
enveloping themsclvcs, momentarily destroyed the deities,
albeit versed in arms and accomplished in weapons. And
they, their senses lost, and their lives departed, Vrihashpati
treated by means of his knowledge of mantras, as well with
medicines. Let Sampati, Panaga, and other monkeys
speedily hie to the Milky Ocean for the purpose of bringing
those medicines. And the monkeys well know that mighty
mountainous medicine—divine and capable of reviving the
dead,—and made by the deities themselves—vizalyd. There
are {the mountains) named Chandca and Drona: where
the ambrosia was churned, there is that supreme drug. And
those mountains have been placed by the deities in the mighty
deep. And, O king, let the son of the Wind-god go thither,”
Ta the meanwhile, the wind arose, and masses of clouds
appeared along with lightuing. And the wind blew, agitating


1348 REMAPANA,


the waters of the deep, and shaking the mountains. And
mighty trees of the ocean-islands, broken down by the
terrible wing-raised wind, began to topple head-
long into the salt waters. And the serpents dwelling
there were seized with affright ; and speedily all the aquatic
animals dived deep into the salt sea, And then in a moment
the monkeys saw Vinata’s son,possessed of terrific strength,—
like unto a flaming fire. And seeing him come, the serpents
began to dart away,—those exceedingly powerful ones that,
turning into shafts, had bound those persons.* Then, touching
the Kakutsthas and saluting them, Suparna rubbed with his
hands their countenances furnished with the splendour of the
Moon. And their wounds, on being touched by Vinat&’s son,
were (immediately) healed ; and the bodies of both speedily
became cool and shone with an excellent complexion, And
they attained immense energy and prowess ; and a double
share of strength, and of rational and perceptive powers, and
of memory. And then raising them up, the exceedingly
energetic Garura, resembling Vasava himself, embraced both
joyfully. And then Rama addressed (Garura), saying,—"By
thy grace we have through means survived the mighty
calamity that had sprung from Ravana’s son; and we have
also speedily been rendered strong. And my heart is
delighted on having thee, like unto my father, Dagaratha, or
my grand sire, Aja. Who art thou, furnished with beauty,
and bearing wreaths and unguents (on thy person) ; clad in
stainless attire ; and adorned in noble ornaments?” Unto
him spake the exceedingly energetic son of Vinat& endowed
with great strenyth,—the lord of birds, with a pleased heart,
and his eyes wild with glee,—‘O Kakutstha, I am thy
friend—thy life ranging externally—Garutman. I am come
hither for aiding you. Neither the highly powerful Asuras, nor
the exceedingly strong monkeys, nor the celestials along with
the Gandharbas, having him of an hundred sacrifices at their
* Réma and Lakshmana.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1249


head are,—capable of delivering (any one) from these
dreadful arrowy bonds, which had been forged by Indrajit
of tortuous deeds by help of illusion, These serpents
—offspring of Kadru—are sharp-fanged and venomous ; and
had bound thee as arrows through the potency of illu-
sion. O Rama having truth for prowess, thou art for-
tunate,—along with that destroyer of foe in fight, Laksh-
mana. Hearing this, 1, summoning energy, have come
hither swiftly. And I, doing by thee asa friend, have from
affection at once set you free from these dreadful arrowy
bonds. But thou shouldst always be on thy guard, By nature
the Rakshasas have cunning shifts in fight and thou, who wt
heroic and of a pure spirit, canst but rely on thy simplicity
alone for strength. Therefore thou must not trust the
Rakshasas in the field of battle. By this one instance (thow
must know) that RAkshasas are ever deceitful in fight.”
Having said this, the wondrous mighty Saparna, embracing
Rama) tenderly again), said,—“My friend Raghava, O thou
who even cherishest affection for thy foes, permit me thou.
2 shall go at pleasure. And, O Raghava, entertain no
curiosity as to our friendship.* When, O hero, thou shalt
have achieved success in battle, thou shalt kuow all about
this friendship of ours. And with the surges of thy shafts,
making Lank& contain only children and aged, and slaying
thy foe, Ravana, thou shalt recover Sita.” Having spoken
thus, Suparna, endowed with fleet vigor, having rendered
Rama hale in the midst of the monkeys,—having gone round
them and embraced them also,—that one possessed of
Prowess,—set out, covering up the sky, like unto the wind,
And seeing Raghu's sons rendered hale, the monkey-leaders
set up leonine roars, and began to flourish their tails. And
then beat the kettle-drums and the drums struck up. And
conchs were cheerfully blown ; and shouts were sent. And
others struck at their arms with their hands. And the


* ie how it happened,
157


1250 RIMAY ANA,


monkeys, accustomed to battle with trees, uprooting them,
stood by hundreds and thousands. And emitting tremendous
roars and thereby frightening the night-rangers,the moukeys,
eager for encounter, approached the gate of Lank&. And
that mighty and dreadful din raised by the monkeys,
resembled the terrible rumbling of the clouds at midnight
about the end of Summer.


SECTION LI.


Turn Ravana heard the tumult raised by the highly
energetic monkeys roaring in company with the Rakshasas.
And hearing that low and solemn noise—that prodigious
uproar—Ravana said in the midst of his counsellors,—"From
mighty roars that are heard of in innumerous delighted
monkeys,—resembling the roar of clouds,—it is evident,
beyond a doubt, that there is great rejoicing there. And the
salt Ocean is vexed with these thundering noises. The
brothers—Rima and Lakshmana—have been fast bound with
sharp shafts; and here this uproar is exciting my alarm.”
Having spoken thus unto his ministers, the lord of the
Rakshasas addressed the Nairitas present there, saying,—
“Do you speedily acquaint yourselves with the cause of
rejoicing that hath arisen of these monkeys on this mournful
occasion,” Thus accosted, they hurriedly mounting up on
the wall, surveyed the forces maintained by the high-souled
Sugriva as well as those exalted ones—Raghu’s sons—
emancipated from their terrific arrowy fetters and arisen
(now). Thereat, with their hearts wrought up, grim-visaged
Rakshasas descending from the wall, appeared before the
Rakshasa-lord with pale faces. And then with woe-begone


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1251


faces, those R&kshasas, skilled in speech, faithfully informed
Ravana in full of that unfortunate circumstance. “Those
brothers—Rama and Lakshmana~who had in battle been
bound up in arrowy fetters by Indrajit,—and whose arms
lay moveless,—having been emancipated from the arrowy
bonds,are seen in the field of battle ; and those ones like unto
the foremost ef elephants in strength, seem like elephants
that have snapped their fetters.” Hearing those words of
theirs, the exceedingly powerful lord of the Rakshasas was
wrought up with anxiety and anger, and his countenance lost
its complexion. “Indrajit, having routed them in conflict,
had bound them by means of irrisistible and terrible arrows,
resembling venomous serpents, and like unto the Sun
himself,—which had been conferred on (Indrajit) as boons.
But if my enemy.having actually been bound by the weapons,
can have been liberated, all this strength of mine I see placed
in peril, And those shafts resembling Fire in fierceness,
which had in hattle deprived my foes of their lives,—have
forsooth been rendered fruitless.” Having said this in high
rage, Ravana, sighing like a serpent, addressed a Rakshasa,
named Dhumr&ksha, seated in the midst of the Rakshasas,—
“O thou ef dreadful prowess, surrounded by a mighty force,
do thou march forth to compass the destruction of Rama
along with the monkeys.” Thus accosted by the intelligent
lord of the Rakshasas, Dhumraksha, turning about, issued
out of the abode of the king. And speedily sallying forth
from the gate of (Ravana’s) residence, he said unto the
general of the forces,—“Do thou speedily move off thy
forces. Why should a warrior linger ?" Hearing Dhumraksha’s
words, the general of the forces, following them, at the
command of Ravana forthwith made the army ready. And
those powerful and dreadful night-rangers, bursting with
high spirits,—with bells tied to their arms,—set up shouts,
and surrounded Dhumraksha. And bearing various weapons
in their hands, and wielding darts and clubs, and


¥252 RAMEVANS.


equipped with maces and bearded darts and rods and
iron bludgeons and parighas and bhindipdlas and \ances
and nooses and axes,—thuse terrific Rakshasas sallied out,
roaring like unto clouds. And othets, accoutred in armour,
with cars; adorned with banners ; furnished with golden
networks, and mules having various faces, and extremely
swift steeds, and lusty elephants in rut,—tiger-like Nairitas
incapable of being subdued, even as tigers,—sallied out
(thereafter). And then Dhum&ksha bimself ascended a
superb car, bearing faces of deer and lions decked with
gold,—and sending forth aloud clatter. And the highly
powerful Dhumraksha, surrounded by Rakshasas, cheerfully
issued out of Lhe Western Entrance, where Hanuman was
posted. And thereat, fell fowls of the air forbade that
exceedingly dreadful Rakshasa of a fearful form, as he went
out ascending an excellent car, yoked with mules,and sending
sharp sounds, And an exceedingly terrific vulture alighted at
the crest of the car; and forming themselves into lines, vul-
tures began to drop down about the top of the banner. And
emitting a frightful cry,(a headless trunk) dropped down before
Dhomraksha. And that god* showered down blood ; and the
earth shovk. And the wind blew awry with a sound
resembling thunder. And every side, covered with darkness,
appeared dim. And witnessing those dreadful inauspicious
omens at the outset, fraught with fear unto the Rakshasas,
Dhumraksha was greatly aggrieved; and the R&kshasas
marching before him, were stupified. And then as that strong
and fearful one, eager for encounter, surrounded by in-
numerable night'rangers, issued out (of the city), he beheld
that monkey-host, protected by the arm of R&ghava,—
resembling the deep at the time of the universal dissolution.


* Endra—cloud-compeller.


YUPDHAKENDAN 3253


SECTION Lil.


Scene the Rakshasa—Dhumraksha of dreadful prowess
—issue out, the monkeys, rejoicing greatly, eager for
encounter, set up roars. And then there took place a terrific
conflict between the monkeys and the R?kshasas, charging
each other with fearful trees, and darts, and maces. And
the Rakshasas began to scatter the dreadful monkeys on all
sides; and the monkeys (on their part) felled the R&kshasas
with trees. And the Rakshasas, growing enraged, began
to pierce the monkeys with slraight speeding sharp shafts
winged with Kanka plumes. And riven by the Rakshas
with dreadful clubs and bearded darts, daggers and maces
and terrible and curious bludgeons and grasped javelins,—
the exceedingly powerful (monkeys), their anger aroused,
began with alacrity to perform deeds of intrepid valour. And
those monkey-leaders, their bodies pierced with shafts and
their persons riven with darts, took up trees and crags,
And those monkeys, endowed with terrific vehemence,
sending up shouts, and proclaiming their respective names,
set about tossing the brave Rakshasa ranks, And that
conflict between the Rakshasas and the monkeys, waged
with diverse rocks and innumerable trees, waxed exceedingly
furious, And some among the R&kshasas feeding on gore
—on being agitated by the monkeys burning for victory,
began to vomit blood. And some were severed along their
flanks ; and, some, slain with trees, were heaped up; and
some were crushed with crags; and some were torn with
teeth. And some being broken down by means of broken
standards, and some by means of fallen swords, and some
crushed down by cars,--the rangers of the night suffered
sorely. And (anon) the earth was covered with huge
elephants measuring mountains, and mountain-tops, and


1254 RANT VANA.


steeds crushed, and the riders thereof,—all borne down by
the monkeys. And bounding again and again, the vehement
monkeys endowed with terrific prowess, with their finger-
nails tore up the Rakshasas by the mouths. And with woe-
begone faces, and with hair dishevelled, (the Rakshasas),
stupified with the smell of blood, saught the earth, And
other R&kshasas endowed with dreadful vigor, waxing
wond rous wroth, dealt the monkeys slaps with hands having
the touch of the thunder-bolt. And, gifted with greater
impetuosity, the monkeys felled the impetuous (R&kshasas)
with blows, and feet and teeth; and some were slain with
trees. And seeing the forces fleeing away, that foremost of
R&kshasas—Dhumraksha—flying into fury, began a terrific
conflict with the monkeys desirous of encounter. And some
of the monkeys, sore assailed with prégas, began. to bleed;
and some, wounded with maces, dropped down to the
ground, And some were beaten hard with bludgeons; and
some were cleft with bA¢ndipdlas. And some, on being
assailed with bearded darts, became insensible and lost their
lives. And some among the monkeys lay slain on the
ground, drenched in blood. And some, fleeing away from
the field, were slaughtered by the infuriated Rakshasas. And
some, having their breasts pierced, lay on their sides. And
some were riven with tridents; and the entrails of some
had come out, And that mighty and dreadful encounter of
the Bakshasas and the monkeys, was waged with countless
weapons and rocks and trees. And that battle hecome a
tmnusical entertainment* mellifluous with bow-string for Vind,t
having the neighing vf chargers for its measure, and with


* The veader has already perceived that the catrying out of a simile to
a number of details is a characteristic as much of Valmiki as of his rival in
the epic sphere—Vydsa. But the comparisons are never on all fours, as in
the case before us-—T.

+ Acclassical Hindu musical instrument, having metallic strings, with «
pair of gourds at one end for the sounding-board. Vide Yantra-Koga by Sit
Saurindra Mohan Tagore, Mus-Doc—T.


YUDDHARANDAMN. 1255


the cries of Ma:ndus* for its strains. Then in the field,
Dhumraksha bow in hand, laughing, pursued the monkeys ia
all directions with showers of shafts. And seeing the forces
hard beset by Dhumraksha and distressed thereat, the Wind-
god’s offspring, waxing enraged, seizing a huge crag,
approached (the R&kshasa). And with his eyes doubly
reddened in wrath, that one, like unto his sire himself in
prowess, brought down the crag upon Dhumraksha’s car. And
seeing the crag, (Dhumraksha) upraising his mace hurriedly,
leapt down in vehemence, and stood on the ground. And
having shattered his car, that crag fell down to the earth.
And thereat letting go the car furnished with wheels, Kuvaras
and a face, as well as a banner; in which Dhumraksha
had left his bow,—Hanum&n—son unto the Wind-god—iaid
about him right lustily for destroying the Rakshasas,with trees
having branches long and short. And thereat some Rakshasas
with their heads shattered, lay drenched in blood; and
others, struck with trees, dropped down to the earth, And
then Hanumin—son unto the Wind-god—charged in full
career against the R&akshasa army ; and, taking a mountain-
peak, he rushed against Dhumraksha, And as Hanuman
was descending, the powerful Dhumr&ksha, upraising a mace,
and giving out a shout, made towards him speedily. And
then Dhumrdksha enraged, brought down that mace studded
with innumerable pricks, on the head of Hanum&n fired with
wrath, And thus assailed with the mace of fearful impetu-
osity, the monkey endowed with the strength of the wind,
without at all heeding that blow, let fall a mountain-top
right against Dhumraksha’s head. And on being assailed
with the mountain-peak, Dhumraksha, having his entire hody
mangled, suddenly fell to the earth, like unto a toppling hill.
And seeing Dhumraksha slain, those night-rangers that
survived the carnage, in extreme agitation began to pour
into Lank&, attacked by the monkeys. And that high-souled


* A species of elephants.


1256 RAMAYANA,


offspring of the Wind-god, having slain his foes, and come
under the influence of fatigue incident to his slaughtering
his enemies,-—having caused rivers of gore to flow (in the
field), — experienced the excess of joy on being honored of the
monkeys


SECTION Lil.


“Haarine Dhumraksha slain, Ravana—lord of the
Rakshasas—overwhelmed with a mighty rage, began to sigh
like a serpent. And collied with passion, and sighing hot
for a long time, he addressed a crue] Rakshasa—the exceed-
ingly strong Vajradanshtra,*—"Go thou, O hero, Go out,
environed by the Rakshasas. Slay Dagaratha’s son—R&ma—
and Sugriva along with the monkeys.” Thereupon hastily
answering “So be it,” that foremost of the Rakshasas skilled
in illusion, marched forth surrounded by many a leadert of
armies, furnished with elephants and steeds, mules and
camels,—with his mind concentrated; and adorned with
innumerable variegated flags and banners. And then decked
out with curious eyuras and a tiara, and wearing armour, he
rushed out with his bow in his hand, And then going round
his flaming vehicle, adorned with pennons and garnished
with gold, the king} ascended the same. And equipped with
slender swords and curious fomaras and smooth maces and
bhindipélas and bows and darts and pattizas and scimitars
and discuses and clubs and sharpened axes, the multiform
infantry march bearing arms in their hands. And all those
powerful and flaming R&kshasas wore variegated raiments,


* Lit.—the thunder-toothed.
+ Valai—torces—is interpreted leaders by the commentator.
} Vajradanshtra—T.


YUDDHARANDAN. 1257


And heroic elephants in rut resembling mountains in motion,
marched, being led by those well-skilled in battle carrying
fomaras and hooks in their hands. And mighty steeds
bearing auspicious marks, marched, ridden by heroes. And
that entire Rakshasa army, as it marched forth, resembled
clouds in summer roaring with lightning. And (the Rak.
shasas) sallied forth through the Southern Entrance, where
that leader of herds—Angada—was stationed. And as they
went out, evil omens appeared. From the cloudless yet fierce
sky meteors began to shoot. And throwing up flames from
their mouths, dreadful jackals began to emit cries. And fright-
ful beasts betokened the destruction of the Rakshasas in battle.
And warriors began to tumble down in an ominous way.
Witnessing these evil omens, the exceedingly powerful and
energetic Vajradanshtra, assuming patience, set out, eager for
encounter, And seeing them flee away, the monkeys,
burning for victory, set up tremendous shouts, filling all the
ten cardinal points. And then there came on a terrific
encounter of the monkeys and the Rakshasas, dreadful, of
terrific deeds, and wishing for each other’s death. And
warriors fraught with high spirits, springing up, dropped
down to the earth, their bodies and hands riven, and all their
persons bathed in blood. And some approaching each other,
with bludgeons in their hands, without turning away from
the field, discharged various weapons at each other, And
there were heard soun'ls of trees and rocks and weapons,—
mighty and dreadful and capable of striking terror into the
heart. And dreadful and mighty were (he sounds of car-wheels,
and conchs and trumpets and drums. And some, casting
off weapons, engaged in ahand to hand combat by means of
slaps, and kicks, and bones, and trees. And some Rakshasas,
having their bodies broken, were killed by means of thighs,
And some were crushed with crags by Ddanavas invincible
in battle. And Vajradanshtra, resembling the noose-handed
Destroyer, frightening the monkeys, ranged in that field


1258 RAMAYANA.


fatal to people. And Rakshasas, possessed of strength;
equipped with various weapons, transported with passion,
slew the monkey-forces. And then in the conflict the proud
Wind-god’s son, influenced by twofold wrath, spread havoc
among the Rakshasa ranks, like the Fire at the universal
dissolution. And the energetic Angada possessed of the
prowess of a lion, with his eyes coppery with wrath, upraising
a tree, began to spread terrible destruction among the
Rakshasas, even as a lion destroyeth tiny deer. And
attacked by Angada there, the Rakshasas of dreadful vigor,
with their heads riven, fell down like unto trees that have
been uprooted. And the earth became frightful (to behold),
being covered with variegated cars and standards and steeds
and the bodies of monkeys and of Rakshasas and streams of
blood, And adorned with chains, and Aeyuras, and attires,
and umbrellas, the field of battle looked tike an autumnal
night. And agitated by Angada’s impetuosity, that mighty
army of R&kshasas began to shake, even as water trembleth,
moved by the wind.


SECTION Liv.


Hinoine his own army destroyed by the might of
Angada, the exceedingly powerful Rakshasa—Vajradanshtra
—was overcome with rage. And stretching his dreadful
how of the splendour of Sakra’s thunder-bolt, he began to
shower shafts among the monkey-ranks. And the foremost
among the heroic Rakshasas also, stationed on cars, furnished
with various arms, warred on in the encounter, And the
heroic monkeys also—foremost of their kind—with rocks in
their hands, faught around in united strength. And in that


FUDDHs4KANDAM. 1259


conflict, the Rakshasas began to incessantly shower ayutas
ofarms among the flower of the monkey-army. And the
monkeys,—pre-eminently valiant, and resembling mad
elephants, kept showering over the Rakshasas mountain-trees
and mighty rocks. And then took place a hot contest among
heroic warring monkeys and Rakshasas, eager for encounter.
And some, with their heads unbroken, had their arms and
legs torn; and thir bodies pierced with weapons, and laved
in blood. And moukeys and Rakshasas lay down in the
field,—thronged with numbers of Kankas, and vultures; and
swarming with flocks of jackals. And striking affright
unto the timid, on the earlh started up (spectral) headless
trunks,—with their arms and heads torn, aud their bodies
riven all over, And monkeys and Rakshasas began to drop
down to the earth, And the army of night-rangers, being
sadly handled by the monkey-hosts, broke up at every point
in the very sight of Vajradanshtra. Aud seeing the
R&kshasas, distressed with fright and harassed by the
monkeys, the powerful Vajradanshira, with his eyes crimson.
ed with choler, entered the arena, bow in hand,—frighten.
ing the monkey-forces. And he begaa to pierce the monkeys
with straight-speeding shafts winged with Kanka feathers ;
and he pierced simullaneously seven, eight,nine, fiveymonkeys
(in the field). And the exceedingly powerful Vajradanshtra,
transported into a towering passion, began to cleave the
hostile ranks, And thereat terrified, the monkeys, with
their bodies cut with arrows, rushed towards Angada, like
creatures resorting to the Creator. And finding the monkey
ranks disordered, Vali's son in a rage cast his eyes on Vajra-
danshtra, who also was eyingjhim. And Vajradanshtra and
Angada faught fiercely with each other over and over again ;
ranging the field like a tiger #nd a mad elephant®, Then
(Vajradanshtra) with hundreds and thousands (of shafts)


* Harimattagajdviea—lit, like a lion and a mad elephant. The com-


mentator however, remarks, that the contest of a ion with an clephant is in-


1260 RAMAYANA.


resembling tongues of flames, pierced the powerful son of the
monkey in the vitals. Thereupon V&li’s son of mighty strength
and tremendous prowess, with his body covered all over with
blood, hurled a tree at Vajradanshtra. And seeing the tree
in full career, the Rakshasa without betraying any agitation,
severed it in pieces ; and the tree, thus assailed, fell to the
earth. And seeing that feat of Vajradanshtra, that foremost
of monkeys, taking up a huge crag, hurled it (at his foe) and
sent up shouts. And seeing this descend upon him, that
powerful one, calmly leaping down from his vehicle, stood on
his feet on the ground. And the crag discharged by Angada,
covrsing on in the field, dashed to pieces the car along with
the wheels and. the Axzvara as well as the horses. And then
the monkey, taking up another prodigious peak crowned with
trees, let it alight on Vajradanshtra’s head. Thereat vomitting
blood, Vajradanshtra, deprived of his senses, for a moment
overcome with stupor, stood embracing his mace, sighing.
And then the night-ranger, recovering his senses, with his
mace, in high rage hit at the breast Vali’s son staying in the
field. And thereupon, giving up his mace, he entered into
a boxing encounter (with Angada). And hitting each other
thore, they both—the monkey and the Rakshasa,—began to
vomit blood, and were overcome with fatigue consequent on
the thrashing each sustained ; and they endowed richly with
prowess, appeared like Angaraka and Budha.* Then the
exceedingly energetic Angada—best of —monkeys—uprooting
a tree, stood there, covered with flowers and leaves. And
(Vajradanshtra) took a shield composed of ass’s hide,t and
a sword broad and sightly, covered with bells, and graced
with a leathern sheath. And the monkey and the
Rakshasa displayed curious and graceful movements. And


compatible in the nature of things, for even an elephant dreaming of a lion,
gives up the ghost |—T.

* The asterisms so called.

+ What could this weapon b¢ like 2—T


YUDDHARANDAM. 1a6t


attacking each other, they gave shouts, eager for victory.
And with blood flowing from their wounds, they looked
beautiful like blossoming Kingukas. And warring, both,
overcome with fatigue, went to the ground on their knees.
Anon in the twinkling of an eye, that powerful monkey—
Angada—started up, with his eyes glowing,—like unto a
serpent that hath been smitten with a rod. And (at length)
with his stainless and sharpened sword, Vali’s son, endeued
with exceeding strength severed Vajradanshtra’s huge head.
And the graceful head of that one having his body covered
with blood, cut off by the sword, falling to the ground with
its eyes rolling, was severed in twain. Seeing Vajradanshtra
slain, the Rakshasas, overwhelmed with fear and exceedingly
agitated, in pitiful plight, with woe-begone faces and heads
hung in shame,—fled towards Lanka, attacked (all the while}
by the monkeys. Having compassed Vajradanshtra’s
destruction, the powerful son of V4li, endowed with
exceeding strength, in the midst of the monkey-army
experienced great joy on being honored by the monkeys,
like the wielder of the thunder-bolt—the thousand-eyed
(Deity}—surrounded by the celestials.


SECTION tv.


Heaaine Vajradanshtra slain by the son of Vali, Ravana
said unto the general of his forces, standing before him with
joined hands,—"Let invincible Rakshasas of dreadful
prowess, march forth, placing before them Akampana, skilled
in all weapons and arms. He is capable of chastising foes
as well as of protecting his own and leading them; and he
is excellent in warfare. And he is always desirous of my


1262 RAMAYANA,


prosperity, and always loveth warfare. He will conquer the
Kakutsthas, as well as Sugriva endowed with exceeding
strength, and, without doubt, slay all the other dreadful
monkeys.” Taking Ravana’s command, that highly powerful
one endowed with fleet vigor, marehalled those forces. Then
equipped with various arms, the foremost of Rakshasas,
having dreadful eyes (in their heads), and of dreadful forms, -
marched forth, urged on by their general. And, ascending
a large car, adorned with burnished gold, Akampana,
possessed of the splendour of clouds,* and cloud-hued,
and furnished with a voice resembling the roar of clouds,
went out, environed by Rakshasas of terrific forms. And
Akampana, resembling the sun in power, was incapablet
of being shaken in fight by the very gods, and of being
beheld by them.{ And as, burning for battle, he rushed
out in wrath, the steeds drawing his car suddenly lost
their energy. And the left eye of that one delighting in
encounter, began to throb. And his countenance grew pale,
and his voice faltered. And in a lair day, it looked foul with
the wind breathing roughly. And fierce and frightful beasts
and birds hegan to emit cries. And that lion-shouldered
one like a tiger in prowess, without heeding these ominous
occurences, marched forth into the field. And as that
Rakshasa was setting out along with the Rakshasas, he set
up mighty roars as if agitating the deep. And the mighty
army of monkeys was seized with trepidation at that sound,
And then there took place a mighty encounter of the
Rakshasas and the monkeys equipped staying in fight with
trees and rocks; who had given up all concern for their
selves in behalf of Rama and Ravana. And each side desirous


* There is a pun here on the word Akampana—lit—one incapable of being
shaken—T.

+ Possessed of a person measuring, according to the commentator, a mass of
clouds. I give the apparent sense, which answers.—T.

¢ Monkeys.


POUDHARANDAM. 1263


of slaying the other, the monkeys and the Rakshasas were ex-
ceedingly strong and heroic and like unto mountains. And each
party storming at the other, in that conflict were heard loud
cries emitted by those swift-speeding ones in anger. And fear-
ful was the dust red-hued that was raised incessantly by the
monkeys and the Rakshas ; and it enveloped the ten cardinal
points, And in the field of battle, each enveloped with that
dust raised, pale as silk, could not be discovered by the other.
And in consequence of that dust arising, neither standard,
nor ensign, nor shield, nor steed, nor weapon, nor car could
be seen. And the fierce cries alone of those roaring and
rushing were heard in that dreadful battle ; but their forms
were not visible to the sight. And in that conflict in the
dark thon monkeys enraged slew monkeys, and Rakshasas
Rakshsasas. And monkeys and Rakshasas slaying (indis-
criminately) friends and foes, made the earth wet with
blood, and miry. Aud then with showers of blood the dust
was layed ; and the earth was covered with corpses. And
Rakshasas and monkeys fast slew each other vigorously with
trees and darts, maces and précas, rocks, bludgeons and
domaras, and by means of their arms resembling bludgeons,
coped with their adversaries appearing like hills. And
in the encounter monkeys slew Rakshasas of dreadful
deeds. And in their turn Rakshasas, wrought up with
passion, bearing in their hands prdpas and tomaras
destroyed monkeys wielding dire arms. And that leader
of the forceAkampana—growing wroth, inspired with
cheerfulness all the Rakshasas endowed with dreadful vigor.
And the monkeys forcibly snatching away the weapons (of
the Rakshasas), began to rive the Rakshasas with mighty
trees and giant crags. In the meanwhile those heroes among
the monkeys—Kumuda, Nila and the exceedingly exasperat-
ed Mainda, summoned the utmost impetuosity they were
masters of. And those foremost of monkeys and redoubtable
able warriors without much ado began to spread quite a


3264 #aMALANA.


carnage in the van of the Rakshasa army, and by means of
various arms terribly beat the Rakshasas.


SECTION LVI.


AXNp witnessing that mighty exploit of the foremost of
the monkeys, Akampana waxed furious with wrath, And
transported with passion, he, twanging his mighty bow,
seeing that feat of his foe, addressed his charioteer saying,—
“O charioteer, swiftly conduct thou the car to that same
place. These powerful ones are slaying innumerable
R&kshasas in fight. And all those vigorous monkeys of
dread{ul deeds stay before me, armed with trees and rocks.
Those, pluming themselves overmuch on their martial
worth, I iatended to slay in battle. And all this Rakshasa
force appeared to be harassed by these.” Then ona car
drawn by moving steeds, Akampana from a distance
attacked the monkeys with showers of arrows. And
thereat the monkeys could not so much as maintain their
ground in the field—and how could they fight? And broken
by the arrows of Akampana, they began to fly. And the ex-
ceedingly strong Hanuman, seeing his kindred come under
the masterdom of Death and follow the course pursued by the
shafts of Akampana, advanced (to the conflict). And seeing
that mighty monkey, all those heroic prime monkeys together
surrounded (Hanuman) in the field. And those best of
monkeys, seeing Hanuman stay, grew strong by relying on
that strong one. And even as the great Indra showereth down
rain, Akampana showered shafts ‘on Hanuman resembling a
mountain-summit in grandeur. And without casting a
thought on the showers of arrows poured on his person, that


PUUDHAKANDAM. 285


monkey gifted with exceeding strength, set his heart on
compassing the death of Akampana. And laughing, that
exceedingly energetic offspring of the Wind-ged rushed after
that Raksha, as if making the Eurth herself tremble. And
the form of that one roaring and flaming up in energy, was
irresistible, like unto the appearance of a flaming fire. And
thinking that he was unfurnished with any arms,that foremost
of monkeys, waxing wroth, vehemently rooted up a hill. And
taking that huge hill, the Wind-god’s soa endowed with
prowess, sending up a tremendous roar, began to whirl it
with a single arm. And as of yore Purandara had in
encounter pursued Namuchi with the thunder-bolt, (Hanuman)
pursued that best of Rakshasas—Akampana. And Akampana,
seeing that uplifted crag, from a distance cut it off with
mighty crescent-shaped shafts. And finding that mountain-
top severed by the shafts of the Raksha and scattered in
pieces, Hanuman was seized with a mighty wrath. And that
monkey, wrought up with rage and pride, grasping an
Agwakarna elevated like unto a hill, at once uprooted it.
And taking that broad-shouldered Agwakarna, that one
furnished with high splendour, with great glee whirled it
above the ground, And thereat rushing amain vehemently,
(Akampana) speedily broke the trees.¥ And (seeing this),
Hanuman, transported with passion, rived the earth with his
kicks. And Hanum&n slaughtered elephants, and the riders
thereof, and cars with their riders, and dreadful Rakshasas,
aud footmen. And seeing the enraged Hanuman resembling
the Finisher armed with trees and destructive, the Rakshasas
began to fly fast. And seeing that one enraged, terrific unto
the Rakshasas, the heroic Akampana was agitated greatly
and sent up shouts. And Akampana pierced Hanuman
endowed with exceeding prowess with four and ten shafts,
sharpened and capable of cleaving the bodies of people.
And thus covered with iron arrows and whetted darts, that


* Why plural ? So it is, however, in the text.—T.


159


1266 RAMAYANA.


hero—Hanum&n—looked like a hill covered with trees. And
that hnge-bodied one endowed with wondrous prowess and
great strength, appeared like a flowering Agoka or a fire
without smoke. And then uprooting another tree, (Hanum&n)
summoning up his best impetuosity, swiftly hit Akampana—
foremost of Rakshasas—on the head. And slain with that tree
by that high-souled monkey-chief wrought up with passion,
that Rakshasa fell down and died.* And seeing that fore-
most of Rakshasas—Akampana—slain (and lying) on the
ground—the Rakshasas were extremely aggrieved, and
(appeared) like trees in an earthquake. And those Rakshasas
defeated, leaving their arms behind, made for Lanka in fear,
pursued by the monkeys. And with their hair flowing loosely,
(the Rakshasas), afflicted with affright, and despirited and
beaten, fled fast, with the water of fatigue running down their
persons. And crushing down each other, they entered the
city in a panic, momentarily casting their looks behind them.
When the Rakshasas had entered Lanka, the exceedingly
mighty monkeys, assembled together, paid homage unto
Hanuman. And Hanuman, gifted with strength, honored
the seniors each as he deserved in consideration of his
lineage. And the monkeys eager for victory shouted with
might and main, and began to drag the Rakshasas with the
view of taking their lives. And that mighty monkey—son
unto the Wind god—having destroyed the Rikshasas and
arrived (in the midst of the host),attained heroic glory,—even
as did Vishnu, having slain that destroyer of enemies—the
mighty and dreadful Asura possessed of exceeding strength,
—stationed in the van of the forces. And then the deities
and Rama himself and the highly powerful Lakshmana, and
also the monkeys headed by Sugriva, and Bibhishana
endowed with great strength, honored that monkey.


* This sentence, “And slain...... and died” reads foolish. But the original is
answerable for—in logical parlance-—this identical proposition —T.


FUDDHARANDAM. 1267


SECTION LVil


Hearne that Akampana had been killed, the lord of
Rakshasas, overwhelmed with anger, with his face somewhat
fallen, cast his eyes on his counsellors. And then pondering
and reflecting for a while, in the forenoon he went round the
city of Lanka for inspecting the barracks. And the king
surveyed the city guarded by the Rakshasas, covered with
innumerable barracks, and crowned with ensigns and
standards. And seeing the city beseiged, Ravana—lord of
the Rakshasas—seasonably spoke words of welfare unto
Prahasta skilled in fight,—"Save battle,deliverance find ] none
for the city suddenly beleaguered and put to straits. And
this strain must be borne by these versed in warfare—me
or Kumbhakarna or thee—my general—or Indrajit or
Nikumbha.* And therefore do thou from this place, speedily
taking this force, march to where the monkeys are, for
securing victory (in the encounter). And as soon as thou
settest out, the monkey-forces, hearing the roars of the
foremost Rakshasas—speedily selting themselves in motion,
shall flee away. And volatile and haughty and of fickle
minds, the monkeys will not be able tu bear thy shouts ; even
as elephants are incapable of bearing the roaring of a lion.
And on that monkey-army running away, Rama in company
with Sumitra's son, deprived of his power and shorn of
support, shall, O Prahasta, come under thy subjection, In
this matter, thy being slain is uncertain, but victory is
certain. Now do thou, as thou weighest our welfare, declare
thyself for or against this course.” Thus addressed by
Ravana, Prahasta—general of the forces—said unto the
Rakshasa-chief ; like Upanas addressing the lord of Asuras,


* Grammatically faulty such is the sentence in the original —T.


1268 Raia ANA,


—"O king, before this we had deliberaled together with wise
counsellors, and then we disputed with each other in our res-
pective views. And I had declared myself for giving up Sita
as fraught with our welfare ; and we saw war involved in
witholding her. 1 have ever been honored by thee variously
with gifts and regard and soft speech. And what is thy good
for which I shall not be at the pains? My life I do not care
to keep,—nor yet my sons or my wife. Behold ! for thee will
] offer up my life into the sacrificial fire of conflict.” Having
said this unto his master—Ravana—the general, Prahasta,
addressed his generals staying before him, saying,—‘‘At
once bring up the mighty host of Rakshasas. To-day in the
field of fight will I entertain the flesh-feeding fowls of the
forest with the bodies of the foes slain with my resistless
shafts.’ Hearing his speech, the highly powerful leaders
arrayed the army in that abode of tlre Rakshasa. And ina
moment Lanka swarmed with heroic and terrific Rakshasas
equipped with various arms,—as if with elephants,—as well
as with people worshipping Fire and bowing down unto
Brahmanas. And the perfumed breeze blew, laden with the in-
cense of sacrificial offerings. And the Rakshasas, inspired with
martial ardour, put on diverse garlands, consecrated with
scriptural formula ; and donned on their armour. And
furnished with their bows and wearing their armour, the
Rakshasas, on seeing king Ravana, leaving (their vehicles),
stood, surrounding Prahasta. Then greeting the monarch,
Prahasta, furnished (with all appliances of battle),—winding
his dreadful trumpet, ascended his car ; having all sorts of
weapons ; yoked with wondrous fleet steeds; driven by a
competent charioteer,—excellently furnished ; sending up
sounds resembling the rumbling of mighty masses of cloud,—
appearing like the very Sun or Moon; invincible with a
serpent-standard ; having a defence as well as a portion
exceedingly handsome; netted with gold all round; and
seeming to be laughing in grace. And then, ascending this


YUDDHAKANDAM.


1269


car, Prahasta, whom Ravana had entrusted with authority,
surrounded by a vast host, swiftly went out of Lank§. And
then there were heard the sounds of kettle-drums, resembling
the roars of Parjanya,—and the sounds of musical instruments,
as if filling the Earth, And on that general of the forces
marching, sounds of conchs were heard (ul! around) ; and the
R&kshasas of dreadful forms and huge bodies, going before
Prahasta, advanced, emilting tremendous roars. And
Narantaka,* Kambhahanu, Mahanada,t and Samunnala,t—~
Prahasta’s counsellors all of them—~went on, surrounding
him. And he went out by the Eastern entrance, environed
by this exceedingly dreadful array, resembling troops of
elephants. And resembling the Destroyer—Yama himself—
Prabasta in rage went out surrounded by that mighty
host resembling the sea. And at the tumult raised. by
their exodus, as well as the roars of the Rakshasas, all
creatures in Lanka began to cry in preternatural tones.
And swarming under the cloudless welkin, birds feasting on
flesh and gore began to gyrate at the right hand of the car.
And dreadful jackals, emitting live flames from their mouths,
set up cries. And stars began to shoot from the firmament ;
and the winds to ruffle. And enraged at each other, the
planetary bodies were shorn of their brightness. And clouds
emitting sharp sounds,showered down blood upon the car, and
those marching in front were washed therewith. And alighting
at the topof the standard,a vulture set up cries,facing the south,
and began to prick both its sides,-- thereby depriving (Prahasta)
of his grace. And from the hands of his charioteer and his
driver conducting the steeds,never given to turning away from


* Lit. destroyer of men, Almost all the names of the Rékshasas are thus
significant names. This assigning of names, embosoming some harmonising
image, has by Sir Francis Palgrave, justly been considered as betokening a
high poetical faculty.

+ Lit—toud-throated.

t Lit tofty. .


1270 RAMAYANA.


the field, the goad began to drop again and again. And
the auspiciousness that was bright and rare when the army
set out, was clean gone in a moment,—and the steeds began
to stumble on even ground. And as Prahasta of renowned
worth and valor marched, the monkey-army equipped with
various arms, presented themselves before him, And loud
was the tumult that was raised by the monkeys. And mighty
was the din that was heard of those, uprooting trees and
taking up ponderous crags, of the Rakshasas roaring and the
monkeys storming in both the exhilarated armies of Rakshas
and wood-rangers,—of vehement and able (warriors) eager for
slaying each other, and challenging each other to fight. And
like an insect falling into a flame, the wicked-minded Prahasta,
for obtaining victory, increasing his impetuosity entered into
that host of the monkey-king.


SECTION Lviii.


Scene Prahasta sally, ready for encounter, that chastiser
of foes—R&ma—with a smile said unto Bibhishana,—“Who is
this huge-bodied one that armed with impetuosity, advanceth
to the encounter? And what is his power and prowess like?
O mighty-armed one, tell me this concerning this powerful
night-ranger.” Hearing Raghava’s words,Bibhishana answered,
—In Lanka this is the general of the lord of Rakshasas—
the Rakshasa named Prahasta, surrounded by a third of the
forces. He is possessed of prowess and is of distinguished
gallantry. And that mighty army of strong monkeys,
wrought up with wrath, and roaring at Prahasta, saw him
dreadful and of terrific prowess and huge-bodied,—-surround-
edn all sides by the R&kshasas,—and setting up roars,
marching. And the Rakshasas, eagerly desirous of victory,


YUDDHAKANDAN, 1271


pursued the monkeys, wielding swords and darts and rishdis,
and javelins and shafts and maces and clubs and bludgeons
and prdgas and various axes and curious bows. And the
monkeys on their part, eager for encounter, took up flowering
trees and hills and huge and broad crags, And each party
approaching the other, great was the encounter that took
place. And innumerable (monkeys and R&kshasas) kept
showering rocks and arrows. And many R&kshasas in
conflict slew many a powerful monkey, and the monkeys on
their part slaughtered many a Rakshasa. And some were
pierced with darts and with (other) powerful weapons ; and
some were wounded with bludgeons ; and some were hewn
with axes. And some rendered senseless, dropped down to
the earth ; and some hit with weapons, had their breasts riven,
And some, severed in twain with swords, dropped to the earth
lifeless. And monkeys were hewn in their sides by heroic
Rakshasas, And numbers of Rakshasas all around were
beaten to tho ground by infuriated monkeys with trees and
mountain-peaks. And some smitten sore with slaps having
the touch of the thunder-bolt, began to vomit blood from
their mouths, with faces and eyes turned pale. And great
was the uproar that arose in consequence of Rakshasas and
monkeys emitting distressful cries and sending forth leonine
roars. And monkeys and Rakshasas wrought up with wrath,
engaged in treading the path of heroes,—looking terrific with
their faces moving about,—performed deeds of intrepid
courage. And Narantaka and Kambhahanu and Mahinada
and Samuunata—all counsellors of Prahasta—set about
slaughtering the rangers of the woods. Of these doing swilt
execution among the monkeys, Dwivida, taking up a
mountain-peak, slew one—namely Nardntaka. And then the
monkey, Durmukha, rising up afresh, armed with a mighty
tree, killed the light-handed Rakshasa—Samunnata. And
Jambavan endowed with energy, waxing enraged, uplifting
a giant crag brought the same down on Mahanida’s breast.


1292 RAMAPANA.


And there speedily assailed by Tara, with a mighty tree, the
powersul Kumbhahanu gave up the ghost in the conflict. And
not brooking that feat, Prahasta, mounted on a car, taking
a bow in his hand, fell to spreading a dreadful havoc among
the rangers of the woods. And then there the two hosts
mingled into almost a vortex ; and the sounds that arose from
those infuriated ones of immeasurable might, resembled the
roar of the ocean. And in terrific encounjer the enraged
Rakshasa irresistible in battle drove the monkeys to sore
straits with showers of arrows. And the earth was covered
quite with the terrible bodies of monkeys and Rakshasas ;
and it looked as if covered with mountains, And the earth
drenched with streams of gore locked as if swarming
with Llossoming paldgas in the month of spring. And
as leaders of elephant-herds cross a lotus-tank covered
with lJotus-dust, those Rakshasas and choice monkeys
crossed that river flowing in the field of conflict incapable
of being crossed; having for her banks hosts of heroic warriors
slain ; for her mighty trees broken arms; for her volume of
waters showers of blood ; coursing to Yama resembling the
Ocean; with livers and spleens for her vast slime; with
scattered entrails for her moss; with riven bodies and heads
for her fish; limbs for her lawns ; swarming with vultures
for her swans; with Kankas for her cranes; filled with fat
representing ber foam; with the roars (of warriors) for her
sounds,—incapable of being crossed by cravens,—and resem:
bling a real river swarming at the end of the rains with
cranes and swans. Then all of a sudden Nila saw Prahasta
stationed on his car, discharging vollies of shafts and
harassing the monkeys therewith, And mounted on a sun-
bright vehicle, that leader of the army—-Prahasta—seeing
Nila advance towards him amain in the encounter, like the
wind in the sky scatlering a mighty mass of clouds,—
rushed towards Nila. And that leader of forces—Prahasta
—foremost of bowmen, stretching his bow, began to shower


UDDHAKANDAM. 1293


arrows on Nila. And having pierced Nila sore and wounded
him, those shafts sought the earth like enraged serpents.
And that mighty moukey—Nila—endowed with energy,struck
with those sharpened shafts resembling flames,—uprooting
a tree, assailed therewith the irrepressible Prahasta-—who was
rushing against him. And thereat, that foremost of Rakshasas,
on being attacked, flaming up into fury and altering roars, —
poured showers of arrows on the monkey-leader. And not
being able to resist the arrowy vollies of that wicked-minded
Rakshasa, (Nila) bore them, even as a bull beareth with
closed eyes a fast-descending autumnal shower. Andin the
very same way did Nila with his eyes closed suddenly sland
the mighty arrowy buffet of Prahasta incapable of being
withstood. And wrought up with rage, the exceedingly
strong and mighty Nila with a giant Sd/a slew the steeds of
Prahasta. And then his soul surcharged with wrath, Nila
swiltly shattered the bow of that wicked-minded one, and
then shouted again and again. On being bereft of his bow,
Prahasta, general of forces, taking a terrible mace, leapt
down from his car, Aud the redoubtable leaders endowed
with activity, bearing hostility to each other, their persons
bathed in blood, stood (ou the ground) like two elephants
(with their temples) riven. And they kept tearing each other
with their teeth like a tion and a tiger, and also striving
like a lion and a tiger. And endowed with victorious vigor,
thuse heroes, never knowing to desist from fight, were eager
fur fame, even like Vritra and Vasava (figlting, Aad then
Prahasta putting forth his dearest effort, bit Nila on the
temples with a mace ; and the blood began to fluw. And
then the mighty monkey, with his person drenched in blood,
—wrought up with passion,discharged a tall tree at Prahasta's
breast. And without caring for that hit, he, taking up
a mighty mace, furiously rushed against the moukey—
Nila. And witnessing that enraged jhero) rushing against
him with exceeding impetuosity, that redoubted munkcy
160


1274 RAMAYANA,


endowed with vehemence, took up a tremendous crag. And
in the encounter Nila at once let that crag alight right on the
head of Prahasta, eager for encounter and fighting with the
mace. And burled by that foremost of monkeys, that huge
and terrific crag then shattered Prahasta’s head in pieces.
And then bereft of life and shorn of nerve and devoid of
senso,he suddenly dropped down to the earth like a tree whose
roots have been severed. And even as fountains flow from
the sides of a hill, blood flowed profusely from the person of
that one, whose head had been riven. On Prahasta being
slain by Nila, that mighty army of Rakshasas,never trembling
(from fear),—retreated towards Lanka. And like waters
rushing (through a breach in} a dyke, the Rakshasas
could not stand their ground, on their leader being slain,
And on that head of the hosts being killed, the Rakshasas,
gtowing dispirited, repairing to the residence of the lord of
Rakshas, remained plunged in thought, without speaking
anything. And plunged in that sea of sorrow, they seemed
as if they had been bereft of their senses. And then the
highly powerful and victorious Nila,leader of forces, on being
extolled with gracious offices, and on being joined by Rama
and Lakshmana, looked exceedingly exhilarated.


SECTION LIX.


—~—


Ano on the leader of the Rakshasa host being slain in
battle by the foremost of monkeys, that army of the Rakshasa
monarch, resembling the ocean in violence,—furnished with
dread{ul weapons, began to scamper away. And going to
the lord of the Rakshasas, they apprised him of the dealth of
his general at the hands of the Fire-god’s offspring. And
hearing those words of theirs, the Rakshasa lord was over-


YODDHAKANDAM. 1275


come with rage. And hearing that Prahasta had been killed
in battle, (he), exercised with passion, with his heart
influenced with grief, addressed those foremost of the
Rakshasa hosts, even as Indra addresses the chiefs among
the celestials, saying,—“That foe should no longer he dis-
regarded that hath slain along with his followers and elephants
that leader of my hosts that had destroyed the forces of Indra
himself. Therefore, without taking thought, will I, for com-
passing the destruction of the foe, myself march to that marvell-
ous field of fight. And to-day, even as a flaming fire burneth
down a forest, will I with showers of shafts burn up that
monkey-army, and Rima and Lakshmana.” Saying this, that
enemy of the sovereign of the immortats asceuded a flaming
vehicle of dazzling sheen yoke to rows of excellent steeds,—
displaying itself gloriously and having a glowing body. And
eulogized with sacred hymns, the sovereign of the Rakshasa
rulers then set out to the sounds of conchs and trumpets and
panavas ; and in the midst of those produced by persons
striking at their arms, with their hands, and of the sounds
defiance, and leonine roars. And like that lord of the im-
mortals—Rudea—surrounded by ghosts, the foremost of the
Rakshsa monarchs was surrounded by bands of flesh-feeding
(Rakshas) resembling cliffs and clouds,—with eyes glowing like
fire. And at once issuing from the city, that one endowed with
high energy saw that fierce array of monkeys, extended as the
ocean ora mighty mass of clouds,—with arms upraised with
rocks and stones, And seeing that terrific host of Rakshasas,
that eminently auspicious one, followed by the forces, having
arms resembling the lord of serpents—Rima—spoke unto
Bibhishana, foremost of those bearing arms,—"Whose is this
force furnished with various ensigns and standards —and
equipped with frdécas and swords and darts and other arms,
—consisting of intrepid (Rakshasas), and having elephants
resembling Mahendra® itself.” Then hearing Rama’s speech,


* The mountain so named.


1296 RAMAYANA.


Bibhishana, possessed of the prowess of Sakra himself, in-
formed R&ma anent that foremost of hosts consisting of that
flower of high-souled Rakshasas,saying,—"O king,him do thou
know to be Akampana, who, possessed of a high soul, is on
the back of that elephant,—whose face looks like the sun new
risen, and who approacheth making the head of his elephant
tremble (with the splendour of his person).* And that one is
named Indrajit—foremost by virtue of the boon (that he hath
obtained), who ascending a car and having a lion for his
ensign,—twangeth his bow like the very bow of Sakra
displayed,—and who with his terrific round teeth appeareth
like an elephant. And that one of a gigantic person is named
Atikaya, that, like unto the Setting-hill of Vindhya, fur-
nished with the bow and stationed on a car,—highly heroic,
stretcheth his bow of unparalleled proportions, And that high-
souled hero is named Mahodara that, furnished with right
coppery eyes resembling the sun new risen, and ascending
a@ car resonant with the sound of bells, shouteth shrill.
And that one having the vehemence of the thunder-bolt is
Pigicha, that, mounted on a steed in variegated golden
trappings, and having the aspect af a mass of evening clouds,
or a mountain,—(appeareth) with a prdca furnished with
effulgence. And that one is the famed 7rigiras,t that,
grasping a whetted dart endowed with the splendour of
lightning and having the speed of the thunder for its minister,
approacheth, riding a bull—the best of his species—and
having the appearance of the Moon himself. And that one
looking like a mass of clouds, that, having a broad and beauti-
ful breast and a banner surmounted with the king of serpents,
goeth in collected carriage, stretching his bow is Kumbha.
And that one is Nikumbha of wondrous valorous deeds (in


* This meaning is the commentator’s.
+ Some other than the celebrated hero slain by Rima atthe very outset of
his sojourn in Dandaka —T.


VUDDHAKANDAM. 1277


battle) that, grasping a flaming and smoky* bludgeon
embellished with gold and diamonds,cometh—a very banner of
the entire Raksha host. And that one is Narntaka, fighting
with mountain-peaks,—that appeareth before us, mounted
on a car flaming like fire, furnished with pennons and
equipped with bows and swords and shafts. And that crusher
of the hauteur of even the celestials,—that surrounded by
various spectres of dreadful forms having faces of tigers, or
camels, or powerful elephants, or deer, or horses,—and with
their eyes rolling,—where the white umbrella resembling
the Moon,—shineth, graced with slender ribs—the high-
souled sovereign of Rikshas appeareth like Rudra himself
environed by spectres,—the sovereign of the Rakshas decked
with a diadem, with his countenance graced with pendulous
ear-rings—with a person resembling that monarch of
mountains—even Vindhya himself,—that humbler of the pride
of Indra the Great and Yama,—shineth like the Sun.” Then
Rama—repressor of foes—answered Bibhishana, saying,—
“Alas! Ravana—lord of the Rakshasas—is of exceeding
glowing splendour; and Ravana shineth in glory, and is in-
capable of being gazed at like the Sun himself. And his grace,
being enshrouded in his own splendour, I cannot view plainly.
And the persons of celestials appear splendid as doth
the person of the Rakshasa-chief. And all the warriors
of that high-souled one are like mountains and fight with
crags; and all are equipped with flaming weapons. And
environed by glowing ghosts of dreadful forms and fierce~
looking and furnished with material tenementst,—the king of
Rakshasas appoareth imposing like the Destroyer himself.
And by luck it is that to-day the wickea-minded one hath
come within the range of my vision; and to-day will I vent


* Qn account of lapises set on it,

+ Having, according to the commentator, goodly persons. But dehavadvi
is literally having bodies ; and this sense, with reference to spirits, I fancy,
fits in with the context,—T.


1278 RAMAVANA,


my wrath incident to the ravishment of Sita.” Having said
this, Rima endowed with prowess, ever followed by
Lakshmana, stood, taking up his bow and pulling out
a powerful shaft. And then that high-souled lord of
Rakshasas addressed that mighty host, saying,—“Do ye
casting off fear stay at ease, at the gateways, high ways, and
the edifices (in Lanka). Taking note of this lapse,—v7z., that
ye have all come hither with me, the wood-rangers in a body,
subduing the empty city incapable of being withstood,—shall
suddenly put (all) to straits.” Then leaving those counsellors,
(R&vana\, on the Rakshas having departed agreeably to his
injunction, dived into that ocean of monkeys, like a mighty
fish diving into the waves of over brimming deep. And
seeing the lord of Rakshasas, furnished with flaming a bow
and arrows,—suddenly rushing,—the king of monkeys, uproot-
ing a mighty mountain-top, darted against the sovereign of
the Rakshas. And taking up that mountain-peak having its
sides covered with innumerable trees, he hurled it at the
night ranger. And seeing it descend swiftly, (RAvana) in
battle severed the same by means of gold-knobbed shafts.
And on that gigantic peak furnished with fair sides filled
with trees, falling to the earth, severed in pieces,—the lord of
Rakshasas took up an arrow, resembling a mighty serpent
and having the splendour of the Destroyer himself. And
taking that shaft endowed with the vehemence of the wind,
flaming like a fire aglow, and having the impetuosity of the
great Indra’s thunder-bolt, (Ravana) hurled it in rage to
compass the destruction of Sugriva. And even as the fierce
dart discharged by Guha* had pierced Krauncha,t that shaft
shot by Ravana, rushing in violence at Sugriva possessed of
a person having the touch of Sakra’s thunder-bolt, pierced it.
Thereat, agonised by the shaft, that hero, with his senses
bewieldered, dropped down to the ground with shrieks. And


* The generallissimo of the celestials.
+ The mountain so named,


YOUDHARANDAM. 1279


seeing him down on the earth bereft of his senses, the
Yatudhanas were filled with rejoicing. And then Gaviksha
and Gavaya, Sushena, Rishabha, Jyotimukha and Nala, up-
rooting crags and magnifying their bodies, rushed against the
lord of Rakshasas. And the lord of Rakshasas with hundreds
of shafts having sharpened heads, rendered their strokes
fruitless. And then he rived those foremost of monkeys with
showers of arrows having variegated golden knobs, and
covered those fierce monkey-ranks with networks of arrows.
And on being sore assailed and falling in consequence, those
heroes, the monkeys, pierced with terrific arrows, and
distressed with the shafts of Ravana, emitting cries, sought
the shelter of Rama worthy of being sought. Then the
high-souted and excellent bowman—Rama,—taking his bow,
at once sallied forth, And thereat, Lakshmana, approaching
Rama, with joined hands addressed him words couching
prime import. “O noble one, [alone am fit to compass the
destruction of this wicked-minded one. I will slay him. Do
thou, O master, permit me.” To him replied Rama of
exceeding energy, having truth for bis prowess,—Go then,
© Lakshmana, and put forth thy utmost exertions in the
encounter, R4vana is forsooth endowed with mighty energy,
and his prowes in battle is wonderful. Without doubt, when
enraged, he is incapable of being borne by this triple world.
Do thou keep an eye on his shortcomings as thou shouldst
watch thine own failings. Being always on the alert, thou
must with thy eyes as much as thy bow protect thyself.”
Hearing Raghava’s speech, Sumitra's son, embracing Rima,
and saluting him and paying him his respects, went forth to
battle. And (going unto the field), he found Ravana,erdowed
with arms resembling the trunks of elephants,—wielding his
dreadful and flaming bow, and covering with showers of
arrows those monkeys, whose bodies had been swarming with
shafts. And seeing Ravana,the exceedingly powerful Hanuman
son unto the Wind-god—resisting that downpour of


1280 aA iraNa.


arrows,charged him vehemently, And coming at his car, the
intelligent Hanuman, uplifting his right arm and terrifying
Ravana, said,—" Incapable of being slain by gods, Danavas or
Gandharvas, Yakshas or Rakshasas,—Fear hath (at last) found
thee, coming even from monkeys. This my upraised right
arm furnished with five fingers, shall rob thee of thy soul long
resident (in thy body).” Hearing Hanuman’s speech, Ravana
possessed of dreadful prowess, with his eyes reddened in
wrath, said these words,—‘Strike thou swift maugre fear ;
and acquire lasting renown. And, O monkey, having (at
first) taken the measure of thy might, will J finish thee.”
Hearing Ravana’s words, the offspring of the Wind-god
said,—"(First) remember thou thy son—Aksha—slaughtered
by me!” Thus addressed, the exceedingly energetic lord of
the Rakshasas possessed of prowess dealt a slap unto the
offspring of the Wind-god. And struck with his slap, be
shovk momentarily. And staying for a4 moment and calling
up fortitude, that magnanimous one administered a slap uate
the foe of the immortals, And hit by the high souled
monkey, the Ten-necked one trembled, as trembleth a
mountain during an earthquake. And witnessing Ravana
struck wilh a slap (by Hanumaa saints and Siddhas and
celestials and the Asuras shouted in glee. Then attaining
a lille respite, Ravana said,—Well dune, O monkey. Ia


prowess thou art a foe I pride in.
Ravana, the Wind-god’s son said,—'Fie on my prowess,
seeing that thou breathest yet, O Ravana. Strike at
the same time, O perverse one. Why dost thou bluster ?
And then my blow shall despatch thee to the mansions of
Yama.” And at the speech of the Wind-god's son, his ire
flamed up. And then that one endowed with prowess,
clenching his right fist carefully, let it alight amain on the
monkey’s chest. And hit at his spacious chest, Wanuman
shook over and over again. And secing the mighty
Hanuman overwhelmed, that powerful car-warrior ascended


Thus addressed by


PUDDHAKANDAM. 128%


on his car, approached Nila. And the powerful lord of
Rakshasas—the Ten-necked one—made that general of forces
-~Nila—aflame with dreadful shafts entering into the vitals,
resembling snakes. And assailed with shafts, Nila—leader
of monkeys—with one arm took up a mountain-top and
hurled it at the lord of Rakshas. And the energetic and
high-minded Hanuman, attaining respite, eager for encounter,
seeing (the fight between the R&kshasa and the monkey),
wrought up with rage, said—"It is not meet for me to attack
Ravana--lord of R&kshasas—engaged with Nila.” And the
highly powerful Ravana, by means of seven shafts with
sharpened points, hit at the mountain-top; and shivered in
pieces, it fell (to the earth). And seeing that mountain peak
shattered, that general of the monkey-forces—slayer of hostile
beroes—flamed up in wrath like the fire at the universal
wreck. And in that encounter Nila discharged Acwakarna
trees, and Sé/as, and mangoes in full flower, and various
other trees. And Ravana, getting at the trees, severed them
(by means of his arrows), and poured on the Fire-god’s son
terrific showers of shafts. And assailed with fearful showers
of arrows as with a mass of clouds, that one endowed with
eminent strength, decreasing his dimensions, dropped on the
top of Ravana’s banner. And seeing the son of the Fire-god
descend on the top of his banner, Ravana was fired with ire,
and Nila shouted (thereat), And seeing the monkey (now)
at the top of the banner, and (now) at the end of his Low,
and (now) at the crest of his tiara, Lakshmana and Hanuman
and Rama were struck with astonishment. And also Ravana
endowed with exceeding energy, astonished at the lightness
of the monkey, took up a wonderful flaming fiery weapon,
And the monkeys seeing Ravana bewildered, and delighted
thereat, set up shouts. And Ravana enraged at the shouts
of the monkeys, with his heart overwhelmed with agitation,
could not address himself to any affort. And then taking a
fiery shaft and setting the same on his bow, the night-ranger
161


1282 RAMAYANA.


gazed at Nila. And the exceedingly energetic Tord of the
Rakshasas said,—"O monkey, by virtue of thy skillin
iWusion, thou art furnished with lightness. But, QO monkey,
if thou canst, preserve thy life. Thou transformest thyself
into many shapes. Yet this shaft of mine discharged from
my weapon, shall deprive of thy life thee that art preserving
it.” Having said this, the m


ty-armed Ravana—lord of the


Rakshasas—fixing his ton his bow, shot it at the general.
And Nila, struck at the chest with that arrow, which had been
shot (by Ravana), burning, suddenly fell down to the earth,
And by virtue of the greatness of his sire and also of his own
energy, he went to the earth on bis knees, but was not
utterly diprived of life. And secing the monkey deprived
of his senses, the Ten-necked one, eager for encounter,
riding a car emitting a rattle resembling the rumbling of
clouds, darted against Sumitra's son. And entering into the
arena of fight and posted here Raming, the powerfal lord of
the Rakshasas, baling (the foe’, kept stretching his bow,
And as thal one of immeasurable prowess kept stretching his
bow, Sumitra’s son of unfligging mettle, addressed him,
saying,--°O lord of night-rangers, do thou to-day try me in
encounter. Thou ought not to strive with the monkeys.”
And hearing Saumitri’s speech ultered in a full voice, as well
as the terrific twangs of his Low-string, that Riksha—the
king—approaching Sumitra’s


on slay


ng in the field, spoke


unto him wrathfully,—“O Ragha’s son, by my luck hast thou
of perverse sense, finding thy fate come within the range


of my ken. This very instant, tormented with the springes of
my shafts, thou wilt repair to the regions of Death.” Thereat,
Sumitia’s son, without being overwhelmed with wonder (on
witnessing Ravana’s prowess), addressed that one furnished
with large and sharp teeth,—setting up roars,—‘O king,
those who are (really) endowed with prowess,do not storm. O
prince of sinners, in vain thou yauntest. O lord of Rakshasas,
I know thy prowess and strength and energy and vigor. Here


: FUDDHARANDAM. 1283


am I stationed, bow and shafts in hand. Come thou. What
is the use of vain-glorious self-laudation 2?” Thus acccsted,
the Raksha monarch, growing wroth, discharged seven shalts
furnished with knobs. Thereupon Lakshmana split them up
with sharp-pointed arrows having variegaled golden knobs.
And they suddenly severed like powerfui serpents cut off,


Lanka's lord came under the sway of passion, and discharged


other whetted arrows. And R&ma’s younger brother poured


showers of arrows from his bow ; and, planting himself at his
post, cut off those arrows (of his adversary) by means of
razors, and crescents, and excellent dvrres and darts. And
secing his arrowy net-works rendered ineffectual, that enemy
of the cclestiais—the king—was seized with wonderment, and
again shot sharpene. arrows. And Lakshmana also,rosembling
Tudra the Great, setting on his bow sharpened, sharp-pointed,
flaming, and luminous shafts, endowed with the dreadful
vehement impetus of the thunder-bolt, discharged (them), lo
compass the destruction of the lord of Rakshas. And thereat
the Rakshasa sovereign cut off those whetted arrows; and
smote Lakshmana in the forehead with an arrow resembling
the Fire of Duoms-day in energy,—which had been conferred
on him by the Self-create. And Lakshmana, tortured with
Rayana’s arrow, shook, loosely holding his bow; and then
recovering his consciousuess after undergoing extreme agony,


he severed the buw of the foe of the foremost of celestials,
And having cut off Ravana’s bow, Dagaratha's son hit (him)
with three sharp-pointed arrows. And the king smarting under
ined lis consciousness. And


the shafts, with much ado reg
ihe enemy of the immortals of terrific power with his bow
severed, and himself hit with shafts, and his body covered
with fat,and himself washed in blood, took up a dart conferred
on him by the Sclf-create. And the sovereign of the
Rakshasas and their lord in that encounter hurled at Sumitra's
son the dart resembling smoking fire, sending up living
flames,and striking terror into the monkeys. And as it coursed


1284 RAMALANA,.


on, Bharata’s younger brother resisted it with arrows resembl-
ing a sacrificial flame. Yet the dart pierced into the broad
arn* of Dagaratha’s son. And smit with the dart, that hero
of the Raghu race, although possessed of strength, was
aglow. And the king at once with his arms seized that one,
who had been deprived of his senses. But he that could with
his arms wield Himavan or Mandara or Meru or the triple
world itself along with the immortals, could not (for all his
strength) lift up Bharata’s younger brother. And hit at his
chest by the dart of Brahm&, Sumitra's son remembered that
he was verily a portion of Vishnu himself. And pressing bard
Sumitra’s son—that humbler of the hauteur of the Daityas,
that thorn in the sides of the celestials—could not move him
{from his place). And then the Wind-god’s offspring waxing
wroth rushed at Ravana, and overwhelmed with rage smote
athis chest with his clenched fist resembling the thunder-
bolt. And boxed (by Hanumana), Ravana—lord of the
Rakshasas—went down to the ground on his knees, and
shook aud dropped to the earth. And blood gushed out in
streams from his mouths and eyes and arms; and staggered
and senseless, he sat down on the platform of his car. And
he was rendered insensible with his senses lost ; and he knew
not where he was. And seeing Ravana endued with terrific
prowess, rendered insensible in the encounter, saints and
monkeys and gods with the Asuras set up shouts. And then
the energetic Hanuman taking Lakshmana racked by Ravana,
with his arms brought him before Raghava. And albeit
incapable of being moved by the foes, (Lakshmana), on
account of the friendship of the Wind-god’s offspring as well
asthe high reverence in which he was held by Hanuman,
became extremely light to the monkey. And then that dart,
renouncing Sumitra’s son vanquished in fight, again sought
its place in Ravana’s car. And the exceedingly powerful
Ravina, recovering his consciousness in that dread encounter,


* Bhujdntaram is vague. It may also mean the chest—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1285


took up whetted shafts and seized a mighty bow. And that
finisher of foes—Lakshmana—recovered the exercise of his
senses, and had his entire person perfectly healed,—on his
recalling that he verily was a part and parcel of Vishnu
himself. And witnessing the mighty army of the monkeys
and the redoubted heroes brought down in the conflict,
Raghava rushed at Ravana. Thereat drawing near to him,
Hanuman said unto him,—“It behoveth thee to chastise the
foe ascending my back, even as Vishnu chastiseth the
enemies of the immortals, riding Garutman.” Hearing the
words spoken by Hanumin, Raghava at once got up on that
gigantic monkey; and that master of men beheld Ravana in
battle. And seeing him, that highly powerful one darted
against Ravana, even as the enraged Vishnu had rushed
against Virochana’s son,* upraising his weapons. And he
sharply twanged his bow-string sounding like the terrific
crash of thunder ; and then in solemn tones, Rama addressed
the lord of Rakshasas, saying, —“Stay, stay, having done me
such wrong. Repairing whither, shalt thou, O powerful
Rakshasa, attain respite? Even if thou shouldst seek Yama
or Indra or the Sun—son unto Vivagwan—or the Self-sprung
or the Fire-god or Sankara himself,—or go to the ten cardi-
nal points in ten portions,—yet shalt thou not, so resorting,
attain deliverance. And (Lakshmana), going forth to the fight,
hath been wounded with the dart and hath suddenly been stupi-
fied. But, O king of the Rakshas,to-day in conflict Death shall
claim for his own thee and thy sons and grandsons. By me
with my shafts have been slauglitered four and ten thousand
Rakshas residing in Janasthana, wielding excellent weapons,”
Hearing Raghava's words, the exceedingly strong Jord of the
Rakshasas, overwhelmed with a mighty wrath, recalling en-
mity agone, with burning shafts resembling the fire of Doom
hit in encounter the exceedingly impetuous offspring of the
Wind-god, who was bearing Raghava. And although struck


* The Asura—Vali.


1286 RAMAYANA.


and resisted by the Rakshasa with arrows, the energy of that
one, endowed by nature with prowess—increased greatly.
And the exceedingly energetic Rama, on seeing that fore-
most of the monkeys wounded by Ravana, was mastered by
wrath, And Rama, closing with his enemy, by means of
whetted arrow-points severed in pieces his car logether wilh
the whecls and the stceds, the banner, the umbrella, and the
Majestic streamer, as wellas with the charioteer and the
thunder-bolts and darts and swords. And then as the reverend
Indra cleaveth Meru with his thunder-bolt, (Raghava) swiftly
smote on Ravana’s spacious and shapely chest with a shaft
resembling Vajea and the thunder holt, And—that the king
hero—who had not smarted nor shaken under the impetus
of Vajra and the thunder-bolt,—assailed with the arrow of
Rama and agonised in consequence, shovk and lost hold of
his bow, And seeing him overwhelmed, Rama took up a
flaming half-moon, and with the same al once severed the
sun-bright tiara of the high-souled sovercign of the Rakshasas,
And Rama in the encounter addressed the lord of Rakshasas,
resembling a serpent berelt of venom, shorn of his splendour,
like unto the sun shrouded (in mist),—-without his wonted
grace, and having his entire tiara riven—saying,--"Thou hast


(in battle) performed high and dreadful deeds,—~and hast also
(in the conflict) slain my foremost heroes. And therefore I
know thou art fatigued. And for this reason it is that I will
not with my shafts bring thee to the door of Death, Go thou.
I know* that thou art worn out with fight. Therefore, O king
of night-rangers, enter Lanka’. Having a little respite, do
thou depart on thy car along with thy bowmen. Afterwards,
mounted on thy car, shalt thou behold my power’. And
thus addressed, the king, with his pride and joy defeated,
with his bow severed, and his steeds and charioteer killed,
himself smarting under shafts,—and having his crown splin-


* Fdudmi—lit. J know. The commentator says that here this word
means J permit, But the literal sense answers —T.


FUDDHAKANDAN. 1287


tered,—speedily entered Lanka. And on that foe ofthe
deities and the Danavas—the puissant ford of the night-
rangers—entering (into Lanka), Rama rendered the monkeys
along with Laksbmana hale in that fierce confiict. And
at the break-down of that foe of the immortals, the celestials
and the Asuras, the ghosts and the Cardinal points,and all the
mighty serpents together with the oceans and the creatures
inhabiting earth and water, felt exceedingly delighted.


SECTION LX'


Ano entering the city of Link&, the king afflicted with
the fesr of Rama's arrows, with his pride humbled, was
undergoing great torments. And overpowered by the high-
souled Raghava, the king resembled an clephant defeated by
a lion ora serpent defeated by Garura. And remembering
Raghava's arrows resembling a comet risen at the universal
wreck, and of the splendour of live lightning. the Rakshasa-
chief was aggrieved. And seated on a superb golden
sgat, Rama, eying the Rakshasas, spoke,—"Forsooth all
the austere asceticism I have perfurmed  gocth for
nothing, for although resembling the redoubtable Indra, I
have been overcome by a mortal, And this dire speech of
Brahnia also reverts to my remembrance,—'Know thou that
thy fear cometh from a human being. Thou arl incapable of
being slain by deities and Danavas, Gandharvas, Yakshas,
R&kshasas and serpents, But thou hast not asked for im-
munity from men.’ And I deem even this son of Dugaratha
asthe occasion of my fear. And I was formerly cursed by
that lord of the Ikshwaku line—Anaranya—saying,—'O
worst of Rakshasas, a person shail spring in my race, who,


1288 RAMA rawva.


O wicked-minded one, shall slay thee in battle along with
thy sons and courtiers and forces and horses and charioteers.’
And I was also cursed by Vedavati, who was formerly out-
raged by me. And she is (perchance) born as the exalted
daughter of Janaka. And what had also been uttered by Uma
and Nandigwara and Rambha and Varuna’s daughter,* hath
come to pass.t And taking note of this, ye should strive
(to the uttermost.) And let the Rakshasas be posted at the
gateways, highways, and the walls. And do ye wake up that
destroyer of the pride of the deities and the Danavas—
Kumbhakarna,endowed with unparalleled gravity,overwhelmed
with the curse of Brahm4.” And seeing himself worsted and
Prahasta also slain, that Raksha endowed with dreadful power
issued his orders to that fearful force. “Do ye vigilantly
guard the gates and mount the wall. And do ye wake up
Kumbhakarna come under the sway of slumber. And
deprived of his senses through lust, he sleepeth secure. And
the Rakshasa sometimes sleepeth nine, seven, ten, or eight
months away. Of measureless might he hath slept for nine
months, And foremost of all the Rakshasas in fight, that
long-armed one shall speedily slay the monkeys as well as
the princes. He is a very banner in battle, and the crown of
all the Rakshas. But intent on common pleasure, Kubha-
karna, with his senses stupified, sleepeth ever. 1 have been
worsted in fierce fight by Rama ; but on Kumbhakarna being
awakened, my grief shall go. If he doth not help me in such
high peril, what shall I do with his strength resembling the


* Punjikastbalé.

+ Punjikasthala cursed Ravana that he shauld come by death if he should
‘use violence on a woman against her inclination. RAvana had not been cursed
by Rambhd herself, but by Nala Kuvera in Aer interest. ‘Thy head shall be
sundered in seven when thou forcest a female against her will’ UmA had
cursed RAvana that fora woman he should meet with death on the shaking of
the peak of Kailéga—Nandigwara had cursed him that as he had slighted
and scoffed at him, he should find his fate at the hands of the monkeys, being
emanations of himself.—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1289


strength of Sakra himself?” Hearing the speech of
the lord of the Rakshasas, the Rakshasas, bestirring them-
selves, went to the abode of Kumbhakarna. And desired by
Ravana, those feeding on flesh and blood went off hurriedly,
taking perfumes and wreaths and a mass of food. And
entering Kumbhakarna’s charming cave having a wide
gateway, measuring a yeyana breathing around perfumes
of flowers—those highly powerful ones, pushed off by
Kumbhakarna’s breath, with the utmost energy they could
summon up stood their ground and entered the cave. And
then entering that charming cave having floors paved with
gold and gems, those Nairitas endowed with great strength,
saw that one of dreadful prowess, lying down, And then
they together set about waking up the slumbering Kumbha-
karna looking like a hill extended,—and sunk in profound
slumber ; with his body having its down standing on end;
lying down ; like a sighing serpent ; rolling people* with his
powerful breath,—reposing ; possessed of dreadful prowess;
having a huge nose ; of a person vast as the nether sphere ;
lying stretched at length ; smelling of fat and blood ; decked
with golden angadas ; and waring a diadem endowed with the
splendour of the Sun. And (they) saw that subduer of
enemies and foremost of Nairitas—Kumbhakarna. And then
they piled up Meru-like animals for conferring rare gratifica-
tion, and heaps of deer and buffaloes and boars. And the
Rakshasas made an astounding heap of rice. And then the
enemies of the immorlals put up before Kumbhakarna jars of
blood and various kinds of food, and smeared that repressor
of foes with excellent sandal, and made him inhale perfumes
and the aroma of wreaths. And they made (the place) rife
with the incense of dhkupa, and extolled that smiter of
enemies. And then the Yatudhanas roared around here and


“ Aninstance of the material sublime unsurpassed in all literature,
Kumbhakarna himself is the emblem of the material as contrasted with the
spiritual typified by Réma—T.


162


1290 RAMAYANA.


there like clouds. And they winded conchs beaming
moon-like. And they incapable of being beaten shouted
in full chorus. And the night-rangers shouted and struck
at their arms with their hands and began to pull him,
And for rousing Kumbhakarna, mighty was the din that
they raised. And hearing those loud sounds of conchs and
drums and panavas ; and those proceeding from persons
striking at their arms with their hands ; and leonine roars,—
rushing on-all sides and riving the very heavens,—birds
suddenly dropped down. And when the high-souled Kumbha-
karna sleeping soundly did not awake at that terrific tumult,
the Rakshasas took up Bhuskandis* and maces. And then
the Rakshasas, drawing near, smote Kumbhakarna sleeping
sweetly in the chest with mountain-peaks, maces and clubs,
But the R&kshasas could not stay before Kumbhakarna owing
to the hurricane heaving at his breath. Then tightening
their clotht {about their waist), those Rakshasas of dreadful
prowess sounded mridangas and panavas, conchs and
kumbhas. And ten thousand Rakshasas together surrounded
that one resembling a heap of dark-blue collyrium and fell


to rousing him. But albeit assailed with shouts and smit
with weapons, he did not wake up. And when they succeeded
not in rousing him, they more than ever exerted themselves,
And then they smote him with horses and camels, and mules
and snakes, rods and lashes and hooks, and with might and
main sounded kettledrums and conchs and mridangas. And
they struck his body with innumerable huge blocks of
wood. And summoning up their dearest energy, they dealt
him blows with maces and clubs, And at that mighty uproar,
entire Lanka was filled with her woods and hills; yet he
did not wake up. And then they simultaneously sounded a
thousand kettle-drums beaten with sticks of polished gold.


* A variety of the mace.
+ Another reading is, Tatak prapuritéh gdrham—then densely filling the
cave—T,


YOUDHAKAND AM. Tagt


And coming under the sway of the curse,* when that one sunk
in slumber did not wake up, the night-rangers were wrought
up with wrath. And overcome with choler, they endowed with
dreadful prowess addressed themselves vigorously to awaken-
ing him ; and others put forth their energy. And others smote
the ketile-drums, and others set up loud cries. And others
cut off his hair, and others bit his ears. And others poured
into his ears a thousand vessels of water. But Kumbhakarna
come under the spell of a mighty slumber did not wink, And
others—strong ones—armed with poniards (éutas) and maces,
made their poniards and maces alight on his person. And
struck with sa¢aghnis bound with cords,t that huge-bodied
one did not wake up. And then when a thousand elephants
tushed against his body, recovering his consciousness, he
awoke. And assailed with mountain-peaks and trees descending
on his body, he, without minding those tremendous blows,~-on
sleep having been dispelled, suddenly got up, yawning, —
suffering the pangs of hunger. And then that night-ranger
resembling an elephant or a serpent or a mountain-peak,
casting about his arms superior in force to the thunder-bolt
itself, and opening his deformed mouth like unto that of a
mule, yawned (again and again). And as he yawned, his
mouth resembling the subterraneous regions, looked like the
Sun stationed at the summit of Meru. And that night-
ranger possessed of unwieldly strength woke up, yawning.
And the breath that he breathed resembled a storm raging in
aountain, And then as he sat up, Kumbhakarna's form
appeared like that of the Destroyer himself at the universal
wreck,—intent upon consuming all creatures, And the large
eyes of that one, resembling a live fame and endowed with
the splendour of lightning, appeared like a pair of glowing
planets. And then they pointed unto him all those heaps of


* Brahmé had cursed him, as will appear afterwards.—T.
+ What does this mean ?


1292 RAMAPANA.,


edibles, various and profuse,—bears and buffaloes,—-and that
powerful (Rakshasa) fell to. And hungering, he fed on flesh
and althirst, drank blood. And then that enemy of Sakra
drank vesselfuls of fat and blood. And concluding that he
was replete, the night-rangers came up; and bowing down
their heads, stood circling him on all sides. And then with
his eyes discolored and drooping from drowsiness, he casting
his eyes around, addressed those night-rangers. And that
foremost of Nairitas cheered all those Nairitas ; and surprised
at his having been roused—spoke unto the Rakshasas,—
“Why, being honored, have I been awakened by you? Is it
well with the king? Or hath any fear sprung up here? Or
hath a mighty fear presented itself forsooth from among
others ; for which I have been speedily awakened hy you?
This very day will I uproot quite the fear of the sovereign of
the Rakshasas. I will split up the great Indra himself,—or
make Fire himself give up his heat. One doth not awaken
my like for a light cause. Therefore do ye give the real
truth of the cause of your awakening me.” Thereat a
minister of the king, named Yup&aksha, with joined hands said
unto that humbler of foes—Kumbhakarna—wrought up with
wrath, who was thus speaking,—“No fear anywise springs to
us from the Deities. But, O king, a great fear doth cross
us, coming from a mortal. And never fear so cometh unto
us anywise from Daityas or Danavas, as it hath arrived from
a man, O king. This Lanka hath been hemmed in by
monkeys resembling mountains. And terrific is the terror
that cometh even from Rama scorched with fire springing
from the ravishment of Sita. Ere this by a single monkey
was this splendid city burnt down. And the prince Aksha
hath been slain along with his following and elephants. And
that thorn in the sides of deities, that lord of the Rakshasas—
Pulasta’s son himself—hath been set free in conflict by Raghava
endowed with the splendour of the Sun,—saying—'Go thou.’
And what had been done unto the king by neither the gods


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1293


nor the Daityas nor yet the D&navas, hath been done
by Rama; and he hath been set free, having come to a pass
impetilling his life.” Hearing Yupaksha’s speech and hearing
of the defeat of his brother, Kumbhakarna, with his eyes
whirling, spoke unto him, saying,—‘To-day, O Yupaksha,
after vanquishing in battle the monkey-army together with
Lakshmana and Raghava, shall I see Ravana. And I shall
regale the Rakshasas with the flesh and blood of the monkeys,
and myself drink the blood of R&ma and Lakshmana.”
Hearing his words as he haughtily spoke thus with his spirit
of insolence magnified by much, that foremost of the Nairita
soldiers, Mahodara, with joined hands observed,—"O long-
armed one,having at first heard Ravana’s words and considered
their justice or otherwise, thou wilt afterwards defeat the
foe in fight.” Hearing Mahodara’s words, the exceedingly
energetic and mighty (Kumbhakarna) surrounded by the
Rakshasas, prepared to depart. And having roused from his
slumbers that one of terrific prowess having dreadful eyes,—
the Rakshasas speedily arrived at the residence of the
Ten-necked one. And presenting themselves before the
Ten-necked one seated on a superb seat, all the night-rangers
spoke with joined hands,—“O lord of the Rakshasas, thy
brother, Kumbhakarna, hath been roused. Shall he march
from there; or wilt thou see him come here?’ Thereat,
Ravana, pleased, spoke unto those R&kshasas who had
presented themselves,—"I wish to see him here, and do ye
honor him fittingly.” Thereat, saying ‘So be it’, the Rakshasas,
directed by Ravana, going back, spoke unto Kumbhakarna,—
“That foremost of all the Rakshasas—the king—wisheth to
see.thee. So mind thou going, and gladden thy brother.”
And the irrepressible Kumbhakarna possessed of prodigious
prowess, learning the mandate of his brother, saying,—‘So
be it,’--rose up from his bed. And washing his face, and
having bathed, that one, feeling refreshed and enjoying
exceeding exhilaration of spirit——wishing to drink, urged (the


1294 KAMAYANA,


Rikshasas) to bring the nerve-conferring draught. And then
the R&kshasas, at the command of Ravana speedily procured
wine and various kinds of viands. And having drunk two
thousand vessels (of wine), he prepared to go. And slightly
swolen and flushed,Kumbhakarna, attaining access of strength
and fire, waxed wroth,and resembled the Doom and Destroyer
~-Yama himself. And striding to the residence of his
brother backed by the Raksha force, Kumbhakarna shook
the earth with his tread. And illuming the highway with
the splendour of his person, like the thousand-rayed (Sun)
discovering the earth with his rays, (Kumbhakarna) went on,
engirt around by joined hands resembling wreaths,—like
Satakratu* going to the abode of the Self-sprung: And
suddenly seeing that slayer of foes of immeasurable
prowess, resembling a mountain-summit,—walking along
the highways, the wood-rangers stationed outside (the
monkey-camp), along with the leaders of bands, were seized
with affright. And then some sought the shelter of R&ma,
worthy of being so sought ; and some, stricken (with panic),
dropped to the earth ; and some, suffering (from fear), fled to
the carindal points ; and some through stress (of apprehen-
sion) lay down on the ground. And seeing that one
resembling a very mountain-peak, decked with a diadem,
seeming to touch the Sun himself with his energy, of colossal
altitude, and wonderful to behold,—the wood-rangers, tor-
mented with fright, began to scamper on all sides.


© Lit. him of an hundred sacrifices—an appellation of Indra—T.


YUDDHAKANDAS. 1295


SECTIONLXI


Ano then the exceedingly energetic Rama possessed of
prowess, taking his bow, saw Kumbhakarna, having a huge
body and decked with a diadem. And seeing that foremost of
Ra&kshasas looking like a mountain ; filling all the heavens as
formerly N&rZyana bad done; resembling clouds charged with
rain ; and adorned with golden angadas,—the mighty army of
monkeys began to run away at the top of its speed,
Seeing the army scamper and the Rakshasa swelling, Rama
struck with surprise, said unto Bibhishana,—"Who is that
tawney-eyed one, decked with a diadem, and looking like a
bill?) And in Lank& the hero appeareth like a mass of clouds
embosoming lightning. And alone he seemeth like an ensign
of the Earth; and seeing him the monkeys dart away hither and
thither. Tell me who he is,—whether a Raksha or an Asura.
The like of him mine eyes had never before lighted on.”
Accosted by the king’s son—R4ma of untiring deeds—the
exceedingly wise Bibhishana said unto Kakutstha,—"By whom
in battle Vivasewata’s offspring* and Vasava bimself had been
vanquished, this is he—the wondrous powerful Kumbhakarna
—son unto Vigravan. No Rakshasa is there that equalleth this
one in size. O Raghava, this one in battle hath brought down
D&navas and Yakshas and Serpentst and flesh-feeders and
Gandharvas and Vidyadharas and Pannagast by thousands.
The immortals themselves thinking the dart-handed and fierce-
eyed Kumbhakarna possessed of great strength, as the Des-
troyer himself,—were overwhelmed with stupor and were
foiled in their exertions to slay him. The exceedingly power
ful Kumbhakarna is mighty by nature: the strength of other


* Yama—son of Vivagwata or the Sun.
+ Bhujangth ;—semi-divine serpents.
+ Sami-divine serpents.


1296 - &AMATANA,


redoubtable Rakshasas is owing to boons obtained by them,
As soon as this high-souled one was born and was a babe, he
began to devour up countless creatures by the thousand.
And on these having been devoured, creatures, afflicted with
affright consequent on those having been eaten up, sought
the shelter of Sakra and told him what had happened. And
thereat the great Indra, waxing wroth, smote Kumbhakarna
with the whetted levin. And hit at with Sakra’s thunder.
bolt, that high-souled (hero; shook, and in wrath set up roars,
And hearing the roars of the Rakshasa—Kumbhakarna—as
he kept crying, creatures, seized with fear, were greatly
agitated. And thereat, enraged with the great Indra, the
mighty Kumbhakarna plucking a tusk of Airfvata, hurled it
at V&sava’s chest. And with blood overflowing his person,
Vasava looked as if aflame. And thereat, all of a sudden tho
gods and the Brahmarshis and the D&uavas were dispirited.
And then they informed the lord of creatures touching the
ravages of Kumbhakarna, and informed the gods about
Kumbhakarna’s devouring up creatures, destroying asylums
and outraging others’ wives. “If this one devour creatures
constantly, in a short space the world would be empty of
any.” Hearing Vasava’s speech, the Great-father of all
called up* the Rakshasas and saw Kumbhakarna (before him).
And seeing Kumbhakarna, Prajapatit was seized with
exceeding great fear. And then, pacifying Kumbbakarna,
the Self-sprung addressed him, saying,—Forsooth for com-
passing the destruction of creatures, hast thou been begot by
Paulasta.} Therefore from this day forth,thou shalt lie down
as one dead.” Stricken with the curse of Brahma, Kumbha-
karna fell down before the Lord. Then, extremely agitated,
Ravana said,—"Thou bewest down a golden tree when about
to bear fruit. O lord of creatures, thou ought not to curse


* By reciting a certain scriptural formula.—T.
+ Lit—lord of creatures.
t Vigravé.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1297


thus thine own grandson. Thy words will never go for
naught ; sleep he will, without doubt. But do thou appoint
a time for his sleeping and one for his awaking.” Hearing
Ravana’s speech, the Séf-sprung said,—"Having slept for
six months, he shall wake for one day. And for a
single day, that hero, coming under the influence of hunger,
shall range the earth, opening his mouth wide open, and
devouring people like a fire that hath spread far and
wide. And now king Ravana struck with terror at thy
prowess, encompassed with peril, hath waked up Kumbha-
karna. And that hero possessed of dreadful prowess,
wrought up with high wrath, sallying forth from his
camp, rusheth about, eating up monkeys. And soon as the
monkeys see Kumbhakarna, they fly away. And How
can they resist in battle the enraged Kumbhakarna? Do
thou tell the monkeys this is an uplifted engine. Thus
assured, the monkeys shall take heart.” Hearing Bibhishana’s
words informed with reason and tending to the good (of the
monkeys), Raghava then addressed general Nila, saying,—
“Let you, monkeys, equipped with weapons and holding hill
tops in your hands,—and furnished with mountain-summits
and trees and rocks, stay, occupying the highways and the
bridges.” Thus instructed by Raghava, that powerful
monkey, Nila~general of the forces—accordingly issued his
orders to the monkey-hosts, And then Gavaksha and Sarabha
.and Hanuman and Angada, themselves endowed with the
splendour of mountain-summits, taking up mountain-tops,
drew towards the gateway. And hearing Rama’s words,* the
heroic monkeys inspired with intrepidity, fiercely fell on the
foe with trees. And then that dreadful army of monkeys,
upraising crags aud holding trees in their hands, appeared
like mighty masses of scowling clouds bordering a mountain.t


* Namely, “that is an uplifted engine.”
+ This is apt, seeing that Lanké was situated on a hill.—T.


163


1298 RAMAYANA,


SECTION LXii.


Ano that tiger-like Rakshasa possessed of prowess,
(still) under the influence of slumber, strode along the pictur.
esque highway. And that exceedingly unconquerable one,
surrounded by thousands of Rakshasas, went on, showered
with blossoms from the houses (standing by), And then he
saw the grand and graceful residence of the lord of the
R&akshasas, having golden networks and sun-bright to behold,
And entering the mansion of the Rakshasa sovereign, like
the sun entering into a mass of clouds,he saw his elder brother
seated ata distance; even as Sakra sees the Self-sprung
seated. And Kumbhakarna surrounded by numbers of
Rakshasas, entered bis brother's abode, making the very earth
tremble with his tread. And arriving at the abode and
passing the entrance, he saw his superior anxiously seated on
the car, Pusphaka, Seeing Kumbhakarna come, the Ten-
necked one, exceedingly rejoiced, raised him up and drew
him near himself. And then the exceedingly mighty
Kumbhakarna saluted the feet of his brother and said,—“What
dost thou say?’ Thereat, delighted, Ravana, springing up,
again embraced (his brother). And embraced (by his brother),
and duly greeted by him, that brother (of Ravana)~—
Kumbhakarna seated himself on a shining and superb seat.
And seating himself on that seat, the wondrous powerful
Kumbhakarna, with his eyes reddened in wrath, addressed
Ravana, saying,—"O king, why, honoring me, hast thou
awaked me? Tell me, whence springeth thy fear? And
who shall be a ghost?’”* Thereat, Ravana, waxing wroth,
and with his eyes rolling in rage, said unto Kumbhakarra,
seated, —''O highly powerful one, thou hast slept away a long’


* Having been stain by me.


FUDDHAKANDAM. 1299


space of time. And having been asleep, thou dost not know
the great fear of mine springing from Rama. This graceful
son unto Dagcaratha possessed of strength, along with
Sugriva, having crossed the ocean, is destroying our race.
Alack! see in own Lank&, woods and forests have been
flooded with an ocean of monkeys coming without any ado
by the bridge (which they have constructed). Those
Rakshasas that were prime, have been slain in battle by the
monkeys ; but I find no destruction of the monkeys in fight.
Nay, the monkeys have never been before even vanquished
(by the Rakshasas) in battle. And therefore bath this fear
sprung up (in my heart), Save me from this, O exceedingly
powerful one. Do thou now destroy these. It is for this
that I have roused thee. Do thou, favoring me, whose
exchequer is empty, save this city of Lanka, having only
young folks and the aged left. And, O long-armed one, do
thou perform thy dearest acts in behalf of thy brother. And,
O subduer of enemies, I had never before said so unto my
brother. In thee is my affection and great is the probability
of thy succeeding. In the wars of the celestials and Asuras,
O foremost of Rakshasas, countless were the celestials that
thou as an antagonist hadst beaten. Therefore, O thou of
dreadful strength, summon thy entire energy. Him find I not
among all beings, who is thy peer in prowess. And, O lover
of battle ! O dear ynto friends, as thou likest, do this beloved
good office, this prime benefit, unto me. By thy own energy,
smite the hostile hosts, even asa mighty and strong wind
(scattereth away) autumnal clouds.


1300 KAMA YANA,


SECTION LXIIl.


“Hears the lament of the king of Rakshasas,
Kumbhakarna, laughing, said—‘That evil which on the
occasion of the conclave we had seen, hath befallen thee, who
hast passed by what was fraught with thy good. Even asa
sinner reapeth perdition, verily hath the fruit of thine
unrighteous act found thee. At first, O mighty king, thou
didst not povder over this course of conduct ; nor, from pride
of prowess, didst thou at all take note of the evil thereof.
He that doeth last what should be done first, and first what
should be done last, is ignorant of what is prudence and what
not. Acts not performed in harmony with season and place,
like unto acts performed counter to season and place, are the
occasions of misery, and resemble clarified butter poured
into fire that bath not been sanctified. He stayeth well in
the path that, in consultation with his counsellors,ascertaineth
the five ways touching the three kinds of action.* The king
that aided by his own intelligence as well as his counsellors
acteth after reflection in consonance with the science of
polity, that distinguisheth his friends from his foes), and, O
lord of the Rakshasas, that seasonablyt pursueth righteous-
ness, or profit, or desire,—or any two, or all these combined,
—truly hath understanding.{ But the king or the. heir-


* The five ways are (1) the means of commencing an act (2) person, thing
and wealth, (3) division of season and place, (4) providing against mischance,
(5) success. The three kinds of action are treaty, war, efc. All this is
nebulous ; and the commentator is sadly reticent over this extremely important
passage.—T.

+ Religion is to be sought in the morning, profit in the afternoon, and
desire at night,—so the commentator.—T.

+ One is at sea in the midst of these formless generalities. The tantalizéd
intellect makes a desperate attempt to grasp the body of the shadow seeming
substance, but the empty air mocks bis pains. A translator, however, is fast
bound to the car and must pull on, will be, nil he—T


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1301


apparent, that, having heard what is prime among the three,
doth not understand, hath spent his time in vain on his
erudition. He that, controlling his own self, consulteth
with his counsellors seasonably touching gift, forbearance,
difference and prowess, as well as virtue, profiit and desire,—
doth not in this world come by calamity. Perceiving the fair
fruit (of a line of action) accruing to him here, a king should
‘act in consultation with counsellors endowed with intelli-
gence and versed in the import of things. Not understand-
ing the sense of the scriptures, persons possessed of beastly
intelligence, entering into the heart of their counsellors,
are inspired with a desire of speaking out of sheer volubility.*
Albeit uttered heedfully, the speech of those that are ignorant
of learning and the knowledge of the sense of things,—and
who are intent upon attaining abounding affluence,—should
not be acted upon, And those—spoilers of business—who
from recklessness talk of pernicious as if profitable,—should
certainly be rejected as counsellors. Some counsellors=
destroyers of their masters—joining intelligent enemies (of
their lords), act in a way opposed to their interests in this
world. Their lords, at the hour of consultation, by their
behaviour should know these counsellors—enemies in the
guise of friends—who have been won over (by the opposite
party). Even as the fowls of the air enter the hole in the
Krauncha,t enemies find an easy entrance into the short-
comings of him that is ficklet and that rusheth into act
without heed. He that disregarding his foe, omitteth to
guard himself, cometh by disasters and loseth his place, Even
what had been advanced by thy beloved§ and my younger


* The sense is obscure, and the commentator does not help me.—T_

+ The hole indented by Skanda the celestial generallissimo in the mountain
named in the text.—T.

t Chapala—fickle. The commentator, however, reads between the lines.
Accarding to him the epithet means—he that is pleased with speech immediately
agreeable. But the received sense answers.—T,

§ Ravana’s principal queen, Mandodari.


1302 HaMATANA.


brother, is fraught with our welfare. Do thou now what thou
wishest.” Hearing Kumbhakarra’s words, the Ten-necked
one knit up his brows, and, wrought up with wrath, said
unto him,— I am worthy of being honored by thee, like thy
superior. What needs this verbal travail ? Do thou what is fit.
Vain is the mention now of what I did either through stupor
or delusion or pride of prowess, Now bethink thee of what
is proper. Do thou through thy prowsss assuage the sorrow
of mine springing froni‘my impolitic conduct, if thou cherishest
any feeling for me,if thy strength stayeth,and if thou deemest
this business of mine as by far more momentous unto thee,
He is a friend that succoureth one fallen in distress and is
undergoing affliction; and he acts friendly that helpetha
person lapsing from the path of morality.” As he was
speaking thus in words sedate yet severe, Kumbhakarna,con-
cluding that Ravana was delighted, made his remarks mildly.
And seeing his brother extremely sorry, Kumbhakarna,
pacilying him, gently said,—“O king, intently hear my words,
O repressor of foes! O lord of Rakshasas, banish this
sorrow, and casting away thy wrath, return thou to nature.
And, O king, so long as [ live, thou must not suffer thy heart
to fare thus. Him will I slay for whom thou grievest. But
whatever condition thou mayst be in, I must tell what is for
thy welfare; and therefore from sentiment of friendship as
well as from fraternal affection I have spoken thus unto thee,
O king, And what a friend from affection should do at a
time like this, I shall do the same. See the havock I spread
among the foes in fight. And, O long-armed one, behold, on
R&ma having been slain by me on the edge of battle along
with his brother, the monkey-army in headlong flight. And
to-day seeing Ra&ma’s head brought by me from the field, be
thou, O long-armed one, happy; and let Siti be overwhelmed
with woe. And let those R&kshasas in Lank& who have had
their kindred slain (in battle), see that dear sight—Rama
slain (in fight}, And to-day shall | slaying the enemies in


YUDDH1AKANDAM. 1303


battle, wipe the tears of those who mourn their friends slain
and are overwhelmed with grief. To-day behold the lord of
monkeys—Sugriva—resembling a mountain or a mass of
clouds lighted up by (the living) sun,—lying stretched on the
field. But why, O sinless one, albeit comforted by these
Rakshasas eager for slaying ,Dagaratha’s son, as well as by
me,—dost thou persist in thy sorrow? Raghava forsooth
shall slay thee after slaying me. But, O lord of Rakshasas,
I cannot come by grief* (at Raghava’s hands). O repressor
of foes, do thou now command me, O thou of unparalleled
prowess, thou needst not thyself face the foe in fight, { shall
abolish thy foes endowed with redoubted might. If even
Sakra himself, and Yama, and the god of Fire, and the god
of Wind, and Kuvera, and Varuna—shall range themselves
against me, them shall I encounter in fight. Purandara
himself is seized with fright at sight of me, having a body
measuring a mountain,—equipped with sharpened spears,—
furnished with sharp teeth,—and setting up shouts. And who
wishing to save himself shall be able to stay before me as I
casting away my weapons keep pounding my enemies with
celerity ? No need of the dart, or the mace, or the sword, or
whetted arrows. 1 shall with my bare arms alone slay (R&ma)
along with the thunderer himself. If Raghava bear the impetus
of my blows, then shall the vollies of my shafts drink his life-
blood. Why, O king, while I remain, dost thou burn in
anxiety ? And I am ready to sally out for compassing the
destruction of thine enemies. Cast off all terror of Rama. I
shall slay in battle Raghava and Lakshmana and the exceeding-
ly powerful Sugriva and the Raksha-destroying Hanum&n,
who made Lanka blaze, I shall eat up the monkeys present
in the encounter. And signal is the celebrity that I shall
confer on thee, And, O king, if thy fear springs from Indra


* Santdpam gachchheyam—come by grief. According to the commentator
santdpa meas fear; and the sense is; / entertain no fear (on account of
Réma)—T.


1304 RAMAFANA.


or the Self-create, even the immortals shall measure their
lengths on the earth when I am wrought with rage. And I
shall subdue Yama himself and devour the God of Fire. And
I shall bring down the very welkin garnished with stars, And
I shall slay Satakratu and drink up the abode itself* of
Varuna. And I shall crush the mountains and rive the earth.
And to-day let all creatures as they are being eaten up,
witness the prowess of Kumbhakarna, alter he hath slept for
along time. Even the celestial regions do not suffice for me
as my fare. I go for securing felicity ushuring in pleasures
plenteous flowing from the destruction of Dagaratha’s son.
And slaying Rama along with Lakshmana, I shall eat up all
the foremost of monkey-bands. Make merry,my king ; to-day
drink Varuni. Enjoy pleasures, banishing sorrow. And
to-day on my having despatched Rama to the mansion of
Yama, Sit& shail come under thy control for good.”


SECTION Lxlv.


Fearne the speech of the huge-bodied, Idng-armed and
mighty Kumbhakarna, Mahodara said,—‘O Kumbhakarna,
although sprung in a noble line, thou art wondrous haughty
and of a vulgar form; and thou art not everywhere
competent to discern thy course. It certainly cannot well
be that ‘the king cannot distinguish between proper and
improper ; but thou hast from thy youth upwards been insolent ;
and thy joy is in talking perenially. But the foremost of
the Rakshasas is versed in place and increase and injury,—
and knoweth the duties touching season and place,—and how
to advance his own party and lower that of the foe. But what


* Ocean,


FUDDHAKANDAM. 1305


person ever acteth according to what is proposed feebly* by
one having strength, yet of inferior intelligence, and who
hath never respected the aged? And thou art not naturally
competent to understand what thou thyself sayest touching
the opposed virtue, profit and desire. Verily action is the
spring of all agencies of happiness or misery ; and it is only
those that act either well or ill that reap the results of their
acts, Virtue,t and interest{ bring about emancipation as
well as heaven and prosperity. But evil cometh from
unrighteousness and harms spring therefrom.§ People reap
the fruit of their acts in this world or the next ; but the fruit
of desire is reaped readily. Therefore should a king set about
attaining his desire. And this also had we advised thee with
our soul, And what is the harm that one should display his
prowess before a foe? Dost thou show the reasons for thy
taking the field alone ? But I shall point thee out what is
improper and unreasonable in this (proposed) course. How
shalt thou alone vanquish that Raghava who formerly routed
in Janasthana innumerable Rakshasas possessed of exceeding
strength ? Dost thou not to-day in the palace behold those
prowerful Rakshasas that had been beaten in Janasthana,—
cowed down in fear? Alas! thou wishest to awake Rama,—~
son unto Dacaratha—knowing full well that he resembles an
enraged lion or a sleeping serpent. But whom doth it behove


* Vaktum agakyam—incapable of saying. But what sense can be attached
to—"What man acteth according to what is sot advanced ay one having
strength.....aged ?” I therefore venture to render the passage—feebly
proposed—i.e. proposed with vascillation or half-heartedly.—T.

+ The maxims enunciated by this counsellor are hardly all of a piece.
‘Phe text may have been tampered with —T.

} Artha means sacrifices, gifts, &., which are capable of being performed
with wealth, ‘Sacrifice, gift, and asceticism purify the pious.’ The Lord's
word.—T.

§. Dharma,remarks Ramanuja, is here used for contemplation and recitation
of scriptural formula performed without regard to happiness as the fruit of
those actions. This is what hat! been termed aish&dm dharma—disinterested
piety.—T.


164


1306 RAMAPANA,


to confront him ever flaming in energy, difficult of being
approached when enraged,—and unbearable even like Death
himself? On approaching the foe, this whole host itself shall
be imperilled ; and therefore, my child, thy marching alone
doth nowise recommend itself to me, Who is there that, albeit
weak bent on renouncing his life, wisheth to bring under
subjection a foe that is powerful—as if he would act with
reference to one that is inferior ? O foremost of Rakshasas,
why dost thou wish lo fight with him whose peer there is
none among men, and who is equal to Indra and Vivagwata
himself?” Having said this unto Kumbhakarna wrought up
with wrath, Mahodara addressed that destroyer of creatures—
Ravana—in the midst of the R&kshasas,—“Having already
obtained Vaidehi, why dost thou delay? If thou wishest it,
Sit& shall come under thy control. Ihave perceived a way
as to how Sité may smile upon thee. Do thou listen ; and
should it please thee, act thou accordingly. Do thou proclaim
it about that I and Dwijibha and Sauhradi, and Kumbhakarna
and Vitardana—these five—are marching for compassing the
destruction of Rama. And we, marching out, shall battle
with Rama, putting forth our uttermost. And if we succeed
in securing victory, no expedient need we resort to (or
bringing Siti round). But if our foe live after fight and we
also having favght the fight, then shall we do what I conceive
in my mind. We shall come hither from the field, bathed in
blood, and having our bodies cleft with arrows marked with
the name of Rama, And we shall give out that both Rama
and Lakshmana have been eaten up by us. And then we
shall hold thy feet, saying,—'Do thou gratify us.’ Then, O
king, do thou through Gajaskandba publish it all round that
Rama hath been slain along with his brother and the army.
And, O repressor of foes, (pretending to be) well pleased, do
thou dispense—viands, and servants, and objects of enjoy-
ments, and wealth unto thy retainers; aud unto the many
heroes and warriors distribute wreaths and attires and


YUDDHAKINDAM. 1307


unguents. And do thou (simulating) delight, drink. And on
this report—name that Rama hath been eaten up by the
Rakshasas along with his friends,—having spread round and
round and entering (the agoka wood), and soothing and
pacifying SitA in solitude, allure her with corn and riches and
gems, By this deceit, O king, working powerfully through
Sita’s sorrow, she, albeit unwilling, shall, having lost her lord,
come under thy control. Losing her charming husband, she
from despair and female frailty, shall come under thy sway.
Having formerly been brought up in bappiness, she, although
worthy of felicity, (ultimately) had come by misfortune. And
now finding happiness to be in thy custody, she shall
unreservedly come over to thee. In my opinion this is the
properest cours: to follow. As soon as thou seest Rama,
evil shall befall thee. Remain here. Do not wish (to go to
the field). By refraining from fight, thou shalt acquire great
good. And, O lord of people, by conquering the foe without
battle, thou without losing thy forces and putting thyself to
peril, thou, O lord of earth, shalt attain fame and high reli-
gious merit, and prosperity and renown for ever and for ever.


SECTION LXV.


Trvs addressed, Kumbhakarna rebuking Mahodara, said
unto that foremost of Rakshasa—his brother—Ravana,—
“Even I shall remove thy great fear by slaying the wicked-
minded Rama. On thy foe having been slain, attain thou
ease, It is not for naught that the heroes roar, like unte
clouds containing no rain.* Behold thou their roaring
resulting in action in the field! Heroes do not vaunt ; bat


* i.e, autumnal clouds and which roar but do aot pour—T.


1308 RAMBVANA,


without boasting of their prowess in speech,they perform feats
difficult of being achieved. O Mahodara, what thou sayest
is ever acceptable only to kings that are incompetent, and
foolish, pluming themselves on their knowledge. All the
affairs of the monarch have been wrecked by you—cravens in
fight,—sleek-tongued,—following the king (fawning) ye have
made Lank& contain only the king, the treasury is lean ;
and the forces have been slain. By the king ye have done
like foes in the guise of friends. For repairing in mighty
conflict the wrong that ye have perpetrated, I am about to
set out for battle for routiog the enemy.” Thus addressed
by the intelligent Kumbhakarna, the lord of Rakshasas,
laughing answered,—"Sure this Mahodara is affrighted at
Rama. And therefore, my child, O thou versed in warfare,
he doth not relish battle. Like thee have I none either in
friendship or strength. Therefore, Q Kambhakarna, go for
destroying the foe and securing celebrity. I have waked thee
up that wast lying down, in order that thou mightst destroy
the enemy. O subduer of foes, perilous is the time for the
Rakshasas. Go forth, grasping thy spear, like the nuose-
handed Destroyer himself. Do thou devour up the monkeys
as well as the princes possessed of the energy of the Sun
himself. On seeing thy form, the monkeys shall flee away ;
and the breasts of Rama and Lakshmana shall be riven,”
Having spoken thus unto Kumbhakarna endowed with
prodigious might, that foremost of Rakshasas—the exceed-
ingly energetic Ravana-felt as if he had received life over
again. And well acquainted with Kumbhakarna’s might, and
knowing his prowess, the king felt delighted, Irke the
cloudless Moon.” Having been thus accosted, that highly
powerful one, went out cheerfully.* And hearing the king’s
speech, he made ready for fight. And he took a whetted
dart, destructive to foes on account of its impetuous


* He did not, however go yet awhile—T.


FUDDHARANDAM. 1309


vehemence ; entirely made of black iron ; Aaming ; decorated
with garniture, of shining gold ; looking like Indra’s aganz ;
ponderous as the thunder-bolt; capable of destroying gods
and Danavas, Gandharvas, Yakslas and Pannagas ; adorned
with festoons of crimson flowers ; and belching forth flames.
And taking that huge dart decked with the blood of foes;
the wondrous energetic Kumbhakarna spoke unto Ravana,
saying,—'"I shall go alone: let this mighty host remain here.
To-day hungry and enraged, I shall devour up the monkeys.
Hearing Kumbhakarna’s words, Ravana said,—‘Go thou,
surrounded by the forces bearing darts and maces in their
hands. The monkeys are high-souled, heroic and well-skilled
in battle; and if they find thee alone or unwary, they may
slay thee with their teeth. Therefore do thou exceedingly
irrisistible, go, environed by the forces; and destroy the
entire party of the foes, who are bent upon doing harm unto
the Rakshas.” Then starting up from his seat, the exceed-
ingly energetic Ravana hung on Kumbhakarna’s neck a
wreath stringed with gems in the centre. And Ravana
also decked that high-souled one with azgadas, and finger-
fences, and noble ornaments, and a chain resembling the
Moon. And Ravana adorned his person with garlands
gorgeous and fragrant, and set ear-rings to his ears. And
adorned with golden angadas and Keyuras and other
ornaments of gold, the large-eared Kumbhakarna appeared
like a fire fed full of sacrificial libations. And with his great
dark girdle he seemed like the Mandara fastened by the
serpent on the occasion of the churning of the sea. And
donning on his impenetrable golden mail,splendid like lightn-
ing, and shining in its own brilliance, Kumbhakarna appeared
like the monarch of mountains enveloped with evening clouds.
Having all his limbs adorned with ornaments, and bearing a
dart in his hand, the Rakshasa resembled N4rSyana in elation
of spirits, when he covered heaven and earth and the nether
regions with three paces. And then embracing his brother


1310 RAMAYANA.


and going round him and bowing down the head unto him,
that exceedingly powerful one went out. And Ravana sent
him with choice benedictions,—while he caused kettle-drums
and conchs to be sounded and forces equipped with excellent
weapons, to accompany Kumbhakarna. And high souled
mighty warriors followed that foremost of heroes with
elephants and steeds and chariots sending out rattle resembl-
ing the rumbling of thunder, And mounting serpents and
camels and asses and tions and leopards and deer and birds,
{R&kshasas) followed the grim Kumbhakarna endowed with
tremendous strength. And strewn with blossoms, and, with
an umbrella held over him, that exceedingly terrible enemy
of the Deities and the Danavas, wielding a dart in his hand,
—went out, maddened with the smell of blood. And
countless footmen wondrous powerful and mighty and dreadful
and fierce-sighted Rakshasas,carrying weapons in their hands,
went in his wake. The Rakshas measuring each many a
vwydma and red, eyed, and resembling masses of dark-blue
collyrium,—went out upraising darts and swords and
sharpened axes and dhindipélas and parighas and maces and
huge tdlaskandhas and irrisistible Xshapanis. And the
exceedingly energetic Kumbhakarna endowed with prodigious
strength sallied forth, assuming another form terrific and
dreadful to behold. And the gigantic huge-faced and fierce
Kumbhakarna, measuring an hundred bows in breadth and
six hundred in altitude, having eyes resembling car-wheels,
and resembling a towering hill, or a mountain burnt,—
marshalling the Rakshas, said with a complacent countenance,
—"Like fire consuming insects, shall I to-day, wrought up
with wroth, burn up one by one the bands of the flower of
the monkey-forces. But the wood-ranging monkeys have
not transgressed anywise unto the like of us. That species
is the ornament of the gardens attached to our residences.
The cause of the seige of the city is Raghava along with
Lakshmana. He teing slain, all are slain. Therefore shall


FUPDHAKANDAM 13ir


Istay him in battle.” As the Raksha—Kumbhakarna—was
speaking thus, the R&kshasas sent up terrific shouts, as if
making the very sea shake. As the intelligent Kumbhakarna
sallied out speedily, dreadful were the omens that presented
themselves on all sides. Clouds containing meteors and
lightning looked dark like asses. And the earth shook with
her oceans and woods. And fierce jackals began to cry,
opening their flaming mouths. And birds began to wheel at
the left. And as he marched a vulture alighted on his dart.
And his left eye throbbed and his left arm shook. Anda
meteor dropped down with a tremendous crash. And the
sun was bedimmed, and the air did not blow, enhancing
pleasure. But without heeding these mighty omens that
took place, capabale of making people’s down stand on end,
Kumbhakarna went out, urged on by the force of the Finisher,
And leaping over the wall with his legs, that one resembling
a mountain saw the wonderful array of the monkeys,
resembling clouds. And seeing that foremost of Rakshasas
resembling a hill, the monkeys began to disperse in all the
ten cardinal directions like clouds driven by the wind. And
seeing that terrific host of monkeys scattering in all directions,
like clouds broken through (by winds), Kumbbakarna
possessed of the splendour of clouds, from joy, emitted roars
like clouds, Hearing those terrible shouts like unto the
roaring of clouds in the welkin, innumerable monkeys dropped
to the earth even as sé/a trees that have their roots severed.
And issuing forth for destroying the foe, the high-souled
Kumbhakarna, equipped with a tremendous bludgeon, struck
extreme terror into the monkey-ranks, like unto the Lord
armed with the Fatal rod at the Universal wreck.


1332 RAMAYANA,


SECTION LxvI


Hawine leapt over the wall, the exceedingly powerful
and gigantic Kumbhakarna resembling a mountain-summit,
speedily went out of the city, And then he sent up a mighty
shout making the sea resound, and as if drowning the roar of
the thunder and riviag mountains. And seeing that fierce-eyed
one, incapable of being vanquished by Maghavan or Varuna or
Yama, the monkeys began to fly away. And seeing them
scamper, the king’s son—Angada—said unto Nala and Nila
and Gavaksha and the mighty Kumuda,—“Forgetting your
lineage and prowess, whither do ye, exercised with fear,
fly,—like inferior monkeys ? Ye amiable ones, desist. Why
should ye save yourselves? This Raksha doth not come to
fight,—this is only a great phenomenon to affright. We
shall by our vigor destroy this fearful phenomenon of the
Rakshasas that hath presented itself. Therefore, let the
monkeys desist. Cheered with much ado, the monkeys
rallying, took up trees and advanced to the field of fight.
And ceasing from flight, the wood-rangers waxing enraged,
began to assail Kumbhakarna, like unto elephants in rut.
And the exceedingly strong* Kumbhakarna, attacked with
towering mountain-peaks and crags and trees with flowering
top, did not shake. And countless crags descending on his
person, were shattered ; aud trees with flowering tops, being
broken, fell down to the earth. And incapable of containing
himself (through rage), Kumbhakarna on his part fell to
agitating the ranks of the powerful monkeys, even as a fire
breaking out burneth down a forest. And many a prime
monkey, crimsoned and drenched (with blood) lay down (on
the ground) ; and many, resisted dropped to the earth, like
trees bearing coppery flowers. And without looking before


* Mchavaldh— plu—evidently a misprint for mahavaiah—sing —T.


PUDDHAKANDAM, 1313


or after, the monkeys bounded and rushed. And on being
attacked by the Rakshasa with ease some of those heroes
dropped into the deep, and some entered the wilderness.
And some ran by the same way by which they had crossed
the ocean; and some with pale faces darted into downs.
And some of the bears ascended up trees, and some took
shelter in mountains. And others dropped* down ; and some
ranon, And some fell down to the earth, and some lay
insensiblet as if dead. Seeing the monkeys break down,
Angada addressed them, saying,—‘‘Stay we shall fight. Desist,
ye monkeys, Going round this Earth place find I none where
ye may rest. Stop ye all. What is the need of preserving
your lives, Ye poltroons, if ye fly away leaving your arms
behind, your wives shall deride you; and that is more painful
to honorable persons than death itself. Born in long and
noble lines, whither go ye, suffering from fear, like abject
monkeys ? When renouncing your prowess, ye fly away in
fear, forsooth ye are base. Where now is gone that talk of
yours anent your nobility and the welfare (of your king)
which you had held in society. He that liveth, despised (of
all), hear the reproach of being a craven. Therefore do ye
follow the way frequented by the worthy, and cast off fear.
We will either lie down on the earth, being slain in conse-
quence of our shortness of days, and thus attain the region
of Brahma incapable of being attained by dastards; or
achieve renown by slaying the foe in fight and slain in battle,
we shall enjoy the wealth of the region of heroes. Like an
insect coming to a glowing and flaming fire, Kumbhakarna,
seeing KAkutstha, shall not away hence living. If we save
our lives by flight, and if the many are brought down by one,
we shall lose our fame utterly.” As Angada decked in golden
angadas was saying this, the monkeys, flying away spake
unto that hero words not worthy of being spoken unto an


* For fighting, remarks the commentator.
+ Suptdh—sleeping ; but here, I presume, it means senseless.—T.


165


134 HaAMALANA,


hero,—-Great is the havoc that the Rakshasa—Kumbhakarna
—hath spread amongst us. ’Tis not the time to stay : life is
dear unto us.” Havirs said this the monkcy-bands darted
to the ten cardinal points ; as they saw that dreadful and
gtim-eyed one approach. And as those flower of the forces
were on the flight, those heroes were made io desist by
Angada with words of comfort and hope pointing to the
future. On being cheered by the intelligent son of Vali, all
the monkey-bands stood expecting his commands.—


SECTION Lxvi


Ano having desisted on hearing the words of Angada,
those huge-bodied ones, regaining calmness, became (again)
intent on fight. And attaining energy at the exhortation (of
Angada), and summoning up their prowess, they stayed in
the field agreeably to the words of the powerful Angada.
And inspired with spirits, the monkeys, determined to face
their fate, rushed into the conflict, and, casting away all care
for their lives, entered into a furious fight (with the foe).
And speedily upraising trees and gigantic crags, the huge-
bodied monkeys charged Kumbhakarna. Thereat the mighty
Kumbhakarna possessed of a prodigious person waxing wroth,
taking up his mace let the same alight on the enemies.
And attacked by Kumbbakarna, seven, eight hundreds and
thousands of monkeys measure their lengths on the earth.
And casting about his arms, he rusheth on, devouring sixteen,
eight, ten, twenty or thirty. And he devoured (the monkeys)
like Garura swallowing up serpents And then cheered up with
much ado,“the monkeys meeting together, and taking trees
and rocks in their hands, stood their ground in the van of


YUDDHAKANDAM, 1315


battle. Then uprooting a crag, Dwivida—foremost of
monkeys—resembling an extended mass of clouds rushed
against (Kumbhakarna) having the aspect of a mountain-
summit. And uprooting it, the monkey hurled it at
Kumbhakarna, And without descending on him, the crag fell
down amidst the army, and smashed steeds and elephants and
cans and choice chargers. And then taking another
mountain top, Dwivida hurled it at other Raksbas. And
smit with the impetus of the peak, Kumbhakarna had his
chargers and his charieteers slain; and the terrific field
overflowed with the bluod of Rakshas. And Rakshasa
car-warriors by means of arrows resembling the Destroyer
himself, cut off the heads of the foremost monkeys who had
been setting up roars. And the high-souled monkeys also,
uprooting giants trees, destroyed cars and horses and
elephants and camels and Rakshasas—And remaining in the
sky, Hanuman discharged at Kumbbakarna’s head mountain-
peaks and rocks and various trees. And all those mountain-
tops he cut off with his dart ; and the mighty Kumbhakarna
also baffled the shower of trees—~Then grasping his
sharpeved spear, Kumbhakarna darted against that terrific
array of monkeys, And as he charged them, Hanuman
armed with a mountain-peak, stood before him. And waxing
enraged (Hanuman) vehemently smote Kumbhakarna with
a gigantic crag. And overpowered by that, Kumbhakarna
experienced great torments, and his body was covered with fat
and blood. And then as Guha had pierced Krauncha with his
fierce dart, Kumbhakarna the mountain-like smote the Wind-
god’s son in the chest with his dart resembling lightning or
like a glowing mountain-summit. And having his mighty chest
pierced in the mighty encounter, Hanuman, overwhelmed, and
vomitting blood,—transported with wrath, set up roars re-
sembling the roaring of the clouds at the universal disruption.
And then, beholding bim in torments, the Rakshas suddenly
rejoiced, emitted shouts; and the monkeys aggrieved and


116 Kiudrana.


overcome with fright, began to fly Kumbhakarna in battle.
And then the powerful Nila, arranging his forces, discharged
a mountain-peak at the intelligent Kumbhakarna, And
seeing it descend, he dealt it a blow; and struck by the blow,
the mountain-top was shattered in pieces; and dropped to
the earth glowing and shooting living flames. And then
Rishabha and Sarabha and Nila and Gavaksha and
Gandhamadana—these five terrific monkeys—rushed against
Kumbhakarna. And in the encounter those mighty monkeys
began to sorely assail the huge-bodied Kumbhakarna with
crags and trees and slaps and kicks and blows. But those
blows seemed to him like touches* and did not at all pain
him, Then he fastened the vehement Rishabha with his
arms, And agonised on being fastened with Kumbhakarna’s
arms, that foremost of monkeys, the dreadful Rishabha, fell
down to the earth, vomitting blood by his mouth. And then
the enemy of Indra smit, Sarabha with blow, and Nila,
in the conflict with his thigh, struck a slap at Gavaksha,
And suffering great pain in consequence of the blows (dealt
by Kumbhakarna those monkeys), deprived of their senses
and bathed in blood, dropped down to the earth like
Kingukas that have been cut down, And on those high-
gouled and mighty monkeys falling down, thousands of
monkeys rushed at Kumbhakarna. And ascending a mountain-
summit, those foremost of moukeys,t possessed of the
splendour of a mountain-peak, sprang upon him and tore
him with their teeth. And those foremost of monkeys
attacked the long-armed Kumbhakarna with their claws and
teeth and blows and arms. And then with thousands of
monkeys on him that extraordinary one that fearful Rakshasa
~-resembling a hill,—looked like a mountain with trees on
it. And like Garura eating up serpents, that wondrons


* Like the feel, remarks RamAnuja, of wreaths, unguents, etc —T.
+ Plavaganshavh—foremost of the monkeys occurs twice—one is left out
in the translation.-- T.


YUDDHAKANDAIA 1317


strong one, wrought up with rage, devoured those monkeys,
seizing them with his arms. And cast by Kumbhakarna into
his mouth resembling the nether regions the monkeys
emerged from his nose and ears. And eating up the monkeys,
that foremost of Rakshasas resembling a hill, growing wroth,
and fired with rage,* began to break the monkeys down.
And transported with passion, that Rakshasa, making the
earth miry with flesh and blood, spread among the monkey-
ranks like unto the fire at the,time of the Universal dissolution.
And in that encounter, Kumbhakarna armed with his dart
in his hand, resembled the thunder-handed Sakra, or the
noose-handed Destroyer himself. And as a conflagrationt
burneth up a withered forest in the summer, Kumbhakarna
burnt that host of the monkeys. And thus beaten (by
Kumbhakarna), those monkeys, with their ranks destroyed,
the monkeys,f racked with anxiety, began to cry in unnatural
tones. And having innumerable monkeys slain by Kumbha-
karna, the monkeys, aggrieved and their hearts riven with
sorrow, sought the shelter of Raghava. Seeing the monkeys
broken in the terrific encounter, the son of the thunder-
handed,§ darted impetuously sgainst Kumbhakarna, And
taking up a mighty crag, he momentarily setting up roars,
and thereby terroizing all the Rakshasas—followers of
Kumbhakarna, he discharged the mountain-peak right against
Kumbhakarna’s crown,—And struck with that mountain.
peak, Indra’s enemy—Kumbhakarna—flamed up in fierce
wrath. And the loud-throated Kumbhakarna, terrifying all
the monkeys vehemently darted against the enraged son
of Vali; and then that wondrous strong one hurled his dart


* Sankrudha—infuriated, and Kradha, angered—this pleonasm is in the
text.—T.

+ The text has ptvaka—fre—T.

¢ Plavangamdh and canardh—both mean monkeys. One is left out—T.

§ The thurtder-handed is Indra—his son is VAli; and VAli’s son is Angada,
who is meant in the text.—T.


1318 RAMAYANA.


at Angada. And as the dart descended, that foremost of
monkeys endowed with strength,* and skilled in battle,
evaded the weapon from his fleetness. And then swiftly
sptinging up, he slapped (his antagonist) in the chest. And
thereat that one resembling a hill, lost bis senses. And
recovering his senses, that exceedingly strong Rakshasa,
dealt a blow at Angada; and the latter dropped down
senseless, And on that powerful monkey falling down
insensible, Kumbhakarra, taking his dart, rushed against
Sugriva. And seeing the exceeding stout Kumbhakarna
approach, the hervic king of monkeys—Sugriva—sprang up ;
and taking a mountain-top that one possessed of great
strength darted against the mighty Kumbhakarna, And
seeing that monkey, Kumbhakarna, stretching his limbs, stood
before the lord of monkeys. And seeing Kumbhakarna, with
his body laved in the blood of monkeys; and eating up
mighty monkeys, Sugriva addressed him, saying, —“Thou hast
felled heroes done deeds difficult of being performed, and hast
devoured the warriors; and thou hast thus attained renown.
But let go now the monkey-army. What shalt thon do with the
ignoble? Dothou,O Rakshasa bear the descent of this
mountain.” Hearing those words of the monkey-king instinct
with strength and fortitude, that terrible Rakshasa—
Kumbhukarna—said,—''O monkey, thou stormest, because
thou art the grandson of Prajipatit and the son of the king
of bears; and because as such thou art endowed with fortitude
and prowess.” Hearing Kumbhakarna’s speech, Sugriva
whirling that mountain-peak, suddenly let it go; and with
that rock resembling Vajra or the thunder-bolt, smote
Kumbhakarna in the chest. And on coming in contact
with his wide breast, that mountain-peak was at once
shattered in shivers. And thereat the monkeys grew


* Valavdn—strong occurs twice.
+ Rikskarajas—the father of Sugriva, was produced from the yawning of
Prajpati or Brahma —T.


YUDDHsKANDAM. 1319


dispirited and the Rakshasa's ranks shouted in joy. And
struck with the mountain-summit, Kumbhakarna was fired
with wrath; and roared, expending his face, And then,
whirling his dart resembling lightning displayed, he hurled it
for compassing the destruction of the master of monkeys,
Then swiftly bounding up, the Wind-god's son, resisting that
whetted dart fastened with golden chains,—with his bands
violently snapped it in twain. And placing the same on his
thighs, (Hanuman) snapped that ponderous and terrible dart
composed of black iron, and thereat the monkeys waxed
delighted. And seeing the dart severed by Hanuman, the
monkey-army, growing delighted, set up countless shouts and
rushed in all directions. And the Rakshasa was seized with
fear and turned away (from the field.) And the monkeys
excessively delighted, set up loud shouts, and finding the dart
broken, poured forth thanks to the Wind-god’s son. Tien
the mighty-minded lord of Rakshasas seeing the dart thus
severed, uprooted a peak from the Malaya and with it smote
Sugriva. The king of monkeys struck wilh the mountain-
peak fell senseless upon the field, and the demons finding
him in this plight shouted out in great joy. Then
Kumbhakarna coming to the wonderfully mighty master of
monkeys, took him up and stole away from the field, as a
violent gust of wind stealeth away a patch of cloud. Kumbha-
karna, who resembled a mountain in loftiness of stature,
while taking him away like a mass of cloud appeared like
Sumeru overtopped with lofty peaks. Thus the lord of
R&kslasas went on hearing thanks (from the Rakshasas) and
shouts from the lords of the heavens, wondered at the capture
of the foremost of monkeys. Thus taking him captive, that
mighty one resembling Indra in puissance, thought his death
would destroy the entire host of the opponents together with
Raghava. Then Hanum4a,the shrewd son of Maruta, finding
the whole host of monkeys scattered in all directions, as well
as Sugriva captured by Kumbhakarna bethought himself—


1320 - RAMAYANA,


“What ought to be done by me now that our king has been
captured ? I will doubtless do as befits me now—let me assume
the shape of a mountain and kill the Rakshasas. Let me kill
the mighty Kumbhakarna, splitting his body with my strong
fist and thus relieve the master of monkeys—thus let the
whole host of monkeys become delighted. Or, even when
captured by the whole host of gods or Asuras or serpents
he is mighty enough to extricate himself. Meseems, the
lord of monkeys struck with dart in battle by Kumbhakarva
has not yet recovered his senses. Else in a moment he
would do the needful for himself as well as the monkeys.
Should the relief of the mighty-minded Sugriva come from
me, I should be incurring bis displeasure and it would
certainly lead to the loss of his reputation for ever; then I
must wait a moment and see his own might displayed by
himself when relieved. Meanwhile let me cheer up the
monkey-host.” Thinking thus within himself, Hanumfn, that
son of Maruta, began to stay the mighty host of monkeys,
In the meantime Kumbhakarna entered Lanka with Sugriva
trembling, being honored with the showering of beautiful
flowers from the sky, the buildings on the main roads and the
town-gate, Then the mighty one (Sugriva) slowly recovered
his senses with the shower of fried paddy and sweet scent
and the sprinkling of water as well as with the coolness of
the streets. Then that mighty-minded (Sugriva), caught in
the arms of the powerful Rakshasa, having with difficulty
come to his senses and surveying around him the streets of
the towa bethought himself :—“When thus within the grasp
of the enemy how can I take revenge? Or let. me do what
will be acceptable and advantageous to our army.” Then
advancing all on a sudden, he with his nails and sharp teeth
cut off the ears and nose of that lord of the enemies of the
gods and split both his sides with the blow of his feet. And
Kumbhakarna losing his ears and nose and having his sides
split with nails and teeth grew angry, and becoming all


YUDDHAKANDAM. gat


covered over with blood, threw Sugriva to the ground and
pressed him. Thus pressed upon the ground with main
force and severely struck by the enemies of gods, he flew to
the skies like a ball-rolling, and once more joined Rama.
The mighty Kumbhakarna having lost his nose and ears
and drenched in blood, appeared like a mountain covered all
over with streamlets. That huge-bodied Rakshasa, younger
brother of Ravana, terrible in appearance, resembling a mass
of deep black collyrium, and covered all over with blood,
appeared like an evening cloud; and (once more) made
up his mind to appear in battle. Sugriva having thus
escaped, that dreadful enemy of the king of the celestials
in wrath again rushed to battle; and finding himself
destitute of arms took up a fearful mace. And then that
mighty-minded one, the Raksha Kumbhakarna, issuing out
of the city began to devour the terrific host of monkeys, as
doth the mighty fire eat up people at the end of a Yuga.
On entering the mighty host of monkeys,the hungry Kumbha-
karna, hankering after flesh and blood,ate up the monkeys,and
with them,devoured, many a Rakshasa and Pis&cha by,mistake.
Thus, as Death devoureth creatures at the end of a Yuga, he
destroyed the mighty monkeys. And he in wrath,taking up with
one hand the monkeys along with the Rakshasas, hurriedly
threw them into his mouth,—one,two three,or many at a time.
And blood and fat flowed copiously down his body; and though
struck by the monkeys with peaks of mountains, the mighty
one devoured ail those monkeys. And the monkeys as they were
being devoured, saught the shelter of Rama, And Kumbha-
karna wrought up with wrath, chased amain hundreds of
monkeys, eating up seven, eight, twenty, or thirty, And
fastening (the monkeys) with his arms, he, devouring them,
rushed on. And resembling the Destroyer of prodigious
dimensions at the end of a Yuga, that one furnished with
extremely sharp teeth, having his body covered with fat,
marrow and blood, and coiling entrails about his ears, began


166


1322 Hama raNa,


to discharge darts. And at this moment, that subduer of
hostile hosts and captor of the capitals of foes—Sumitra’s
son—Lakshmana, growing enraged, entered on an encounter
with the enemy. And Lakshmana endued with prowess
shot seven shafts at Kumbhakarna’s body ; and next, taking
up other arrows also discharged them (at his antagonist).
And thereat that Rakshasa, smarting under the wounds
inflicted by that weapon,* cut it off (by means of a weapon).
Thereupon grew enraged the powerful Lakshmana—enhancer
of Sumitra’s joy. And then as the wind overspreadeth
evening clouds, he with his shafts covered hist shining and
graceful mail entirely made of gold, And smit with arrows
dight with gold, that one resembling a mass of dark-blue
collyrium appeared beautiful like the ray-furnished Sun
surrounded by clouds. Then that dreadful Rakshasa voiced
like masses of clouds, scornfully addressed the enhancer of
Sumitra’s felicity, saying,—"By dauntlessly fighting with me,
who have without ado brought down the Destroyer himself in
battle, thou hast established thy heroism. Even by staying
before me, who am equipped with arms in this encounter, and
who in mighty conflict resemble Death himself, thou
deservest to be honored, What shall L say of thy fighting ?
Not even that lord —Sakra himself—mounted on his Airavata,
and engirt by all the immortals,—had ever before stayed
before me in the field. But to-day, O Sumitr4’s son, albeit a
boy, thou hast gratified me with thy prowess. Now taking
thy leave, J wish to go to Raghava. And as I have been
well pleased in battle with thy vigour and strength and
enthusiasm, I now wish to slay R&ma alone, who being slain,
all are slain. On Rama being here slain by me, the rest
remaining in the encounter—them shall 1 undertake with my
all-crushing vigour.” When that Raksha had spoken thus,


* But Lakshmana had nof discharged a single weapon only against Kumbha-
karna.—T.


+ Kumbhakarna’s.


YODDHAKANDAM. 1323


(Lakshmana), Sumitri’s son,present in that contest, answered
him laughing in terrible words,saying,—‘‘That thy prowess is
incapable of being borne by Sakra and other celestials,—is
true. It is not otherwise, O hero, To-day I myself have wit-
nessed thy prowess. Yonder is Dagaratha’s son—R&ima—stay-
ing like a moveless mountain.” Hearing this,that night-ranger
—Kumbhakarna—possessed of immense might, disregard-
ing Lakshmana and passing beyond Sumitra’s son, rushed
against Rama, making the earth tremble. Thereat Dagaratha’s
son, Rama, employing a terrific weapon, discharged sharp-
ened shafts at Kumbhakarna’s breast. Thereat flames mixed
with live embers shot out from the mouth of that enraged
one suddenly rushing (against Rama),—as Rama pierced him
{with his arrows). And on being frightfully pierced by Rama’s
weapons.that foremost of Rakshasas,roaring wrathfuliy darted
against Rama, and pursued the monkeys in the conflict. And
those shafts adorned with peacock’s plumes, alighting on
( Kambhakarna’s ) chest, his mace, escaping his hand,
dropped to the earth ; and alt his (other) arms also were scat-
tered on the ground, And when that exceedingly powerful
one saw himself deprived of ali his arms, he began to spread
a huge havoc by means of his clenched fists and hands.
And with his body entirely covered with arrows and bathed
in blood, he began to bleed like a hill overflowing with
fountains. And fired with wrath and maddened with blood,*
he rusheth on, devouring monkeys and Rakshasas and bears.
And that redoubtable one possessed of dreadful prowess,
resembling the Reaper himself, whirling a mighty mountain-
peak, hurled it aiming at Rama. Thereat Bharata’s elder
brother, the righteous Rama, ere that prodigious peak had
alighted, severed the same by means of seven straight-
speeding shafts wrought with gold. Intent on finishing
Kumbhakarna, the virtuous Lakshmana, revolving many a
means, (at last) spoke unto Rama —*O king, this one


* Perhaps with the smell of blood. —T.


1324 RAMAYANA.


knoweth not monkeys and Rakshasas,—maddened with the
smell of blood, he eateth up his own as well as his enemies.
Now let the foremost monkeys, putting forth their best,
mount on him; and let the leaders of bands according to
their rank, stand surrounding him. And then to-day this
wicked-minded R&kshasa, oppressed with a mighty weight,
will no longer be able to eat up any more monkeys.” Hearing
the words of the intelligent prince, those exceedingly
powerful monkeys with alacrity ascended Kumbhakarna.
And Kumbhakarna mounted by those monkeys, waxing
exceedingly enraged, shook them vehemently, even as mad
elephants shake the drivers thereof. And Raghava seeing
them shaken, ‘and concluding the Raikshasa to be wroth,
furiously sprang forward, taking his bow. And with his eyes
crimsoned with cholor, the gentle Raghava, as if burning up
the Rakshasa with his eyes, rushed forth vehemently, sum-
mooning up all his impetuosity, thereby cheering up the leaders
of bands that bad been sore tried by the might of Kumbha-
karna, And equipped with an excellent quiver and arrows,
Rama cheering up the monkeys sprang forward, taking a
bow, resembling a serpent; terrific; having a stout string;
and enibellished in gold. Then surrounded by exceedingly
invincible monkey-bands, that highly powerful hero, followed
by Lakshmana, marched forth. And he saw the redoubtable
and high-souled Kumbhakarna, with his body drenched in
blood, and with blood-shot eyes ; rushing against all, like unto
an infuriated elephant of the cardinal points; pursuing the
moukeys ; wrought up with wrath; environed by Rakshasas ;
appearing like the Vindhya or the Mandara; decked with
golden angadas; bleeding from his mouth; like clouds
pouring showers ; licking at the corners of his mouth laved
with blood; smashing the monkey-ranks; and resembling
Yama the Destroyer. And that best of persons, seeing that
foremost of Rakshasas having the splendour of a living fire,
stretched his bow to its full bent. And fired with wratle at


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1335


the twang of his bow, that foremost of Rakshasas, inflamed
with wrath—not brooking that report, rushed against
R&ghava. Thereat, the gentle Rama, endowed with arms
resembling the body of the sovereign of se-nents, in that
encounter addressed Kumbhakarna, like un:> an elevated
cloud and possessed of the splendour of a mountain,—as he
darted forward, saying,—Come, O king of Rakshas! Let
no grief be thine! Here I stay, taking my bow in my hand.
Know me for the destroyer of the race of the Rakshasas—~
thou who in a moment shalt be deprived of thy senses.”
Kowing that this was Rama, (Kumbhakarna) laughed in
frightful accents; and then, wrought up with wrath, rushed
against the monkeys in the encounter. And as if riving the
breasts of all the monkeys (present),the exceedingly energetic
Kumbhakarna, laughing frightfully and in a terrific manner,
—resembling the rambling of clouds, addressed Raghava,
saying,—‘‘Take me not for Virddha, or for Kavandha, or yet
for Khara. Iam not Vali or Maricha. I am Kumbhakarna,
that am come. Behold my dreadful and mighty mace entirely
made of iron. By help of this I had formerly brought down
deities and Danavas. It doth not behove thee to scorn me
in that my nose hath been severed. I do not feel any the
smallest torment in consequence of wy ears and nose having
been cut off. O tiger of the Ikshwaku line, O sinless one,
dd thou witness the prowess that is in my frame. And
thereafter, when thou shalt have displayed thy prowess and
power, shall I devour thee up.” Hearing Kumbhakarna’s
words, Rama discharged (at him) shafts furnished with knobs.
And smit with these having the impetus of the thunder-
bolt, the foe of the celestials did not feel any pain or smart,
And those shafts which had severed the seven stately sd/as,
and, to boot, had slain Vali—best of monkeys,—they resembl-
ing the thunder itself—could not impart any pain to
Kumbhakarna’s body, And drinking up in his body those
arrows resembling a shower, the enemy of the great Indra


1326 RAMAYANS.


whirling his mace possessed of fierce vehemence, put out the
arrowy discharge of Rama. Then that Raksha whirling his
mace washed in blood, capable of striking terror into the
mighty hosts of gods and Danavas, and possessed ol fierce
impetus,—made the monkey-army take to its heels. Then
Rama, taking a mighty Véyavya weapon, used the same against
the night-ranger; and cut off his arm with the mace. And
having his arm cut off, he set up tremendous roars. And
his arm with the mace, resembling a mountain-peak, cut off
by RAghava’s arrows, fell in the midst of the army of the
monkey-king, and destroyed that army,* Thereat the
monkeys remaining after those broken and slain,—dispirited,
and having their limbs wounded,—moving aside, looked on
the dreadful encounter between the Raksha and the lord of
men, And then Kumbbakarna, having his arm severed,
resembling the foremost of mountains with its crest hewn
away by a mighty sabre, tore up a tree with his (remaining)
arm and in the conflict rushed against the monarch of men.
Thereupon with a shaft plated in gold, set upon a weapon of
Indra, Rama cut off his uplifted arm with a palm tree, look-
ing like the body of a pannaga. And that arm of Kumbhakarna,
being severed, dropped inert on the earth, like a hill, and
crushed trees and rocks and crags and monkeys and Rakshasas.
And Rama, seeing that one shorn of his arms suddenly spring
up, roaring,—took up two whetted crescents, and in the
contest cut off the legs of the Rakshasa, And thereupon
those legs (of his), making all sides and quarters and rocks
and caves and the mighty main and Lank& herself and the
army of the monkeys and the Rakshasas,—resound,—dropped
, down (on the ground). And having his arms cut off and his
legs also severed, (Kumbhakarna), opening wide his mouth
resembling in sheen the mouth of a mare, roaring swiftly
darted against Raghava,—even as Rahu pursueth the Moon
in the firmament. Then Rama stuffed his mouth full of


* This, of course, is not to be taken literally. —T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1327


sharpened shafts having their feathered parts furnished with
gold. And having his mouth filled, he could not articulate ;
but with extreme effort uttered indistinct accents and
swooned away. Then R&ma took an arrow of Indra
whetted and knobbed, impetuous as the wind, resembling tha
effulgence of the Sun, and like unto the very banner of
Brahmi, or the Destroyer himself ; and fatal to foes, And then
Rama barled it at the ranger of the night, And thereat that
weapon hurled by Rama’s arm, resembling a smokeless flame,
lighting up the ten cardinal points with its own glory,—saught
him that was possessed of the dreadful energy of Sakra’s
thunder-bolt. And therewith he (Rama) cut off the head of the
lord of Rakshas resembling a mountain-summit, furnished
with prominent teeth,—from which the ear-rings had fallen off,
even as formerly Purandara had cut off the head of Vritra.
And then Kumbhakarna’s huge head deprived of the ear-rings
appeared like the Moon seated in the midst (of the heavens)
on the rising of the Sun in the morning.t And struck with
Rama's arrow, the head of the Raksha resembling a hill fell
down to the earth ; and (in its fall) crushed edifices on the
highways and gateways ; and elevated walls also it bore down
to the ground. And then that Raksha of gigantic proportions
and vast to the view plunged into the deep; and crushing
huge and mighty fishes and serpents, saught the depths.
And on that enemy of the Brihmanas and gods, endowed
with immense strengtb,—having been slain in battle, the
earth shook and the mountains also; and from excess of joy
the celestials shouted aloud. And those deities and saints and
Maharshis and Pannagas,and celestials and (other),beings and
birds and Guhyakas, together with Yakshas and Gandharbas,
—all these who had stationed themselves in the welkin,—were
rejoiced at the prowess of Rama. And at his (Kumbhakarna’s)
great destruction, the intelligent adherents: of the king
of Nairitas,—aggrieved exceedingly, began to cry at the sight


+ This stoka is wanting in many texts. —T.


1328 RAMAYANA,


slain Kumbhakarna in battle. And countless monkeys
experienced the very height of delight ; and on (their) foe of
terrific strength having been slain, they with countenances
resembling awaked lotuses paid homage unto the king’s
son—R&ghava—the sharer of good fortune. And as the
monarch of the immortals bad rejoiced on slaying the mighty
Asura—Vritra—Bharata’s elder brother rejoiced on having
in battle slain that smiter of celestial hosts, Kumbhakarna ia
mighty conflict, never (before) vanquished in renowned
encounters,


SECTION uxvit.


Sczine Kumbhakarna slain by the high-souled Raghava,
the Rakshasas conveyed the tidings to the lord of the
Rakshasas—Ravana ; (and addressed him, saying),—"O king,
that one resembling the Destroyer himself, urged on by
Death,—having scoured the monkey-army and eaten up
monkeys,—and for a while displayed his prowess, hath met
with his quietus at the hands of Rama exerting his energy.
And with half his body immersed in the dreadful deep, thy
brother, Kumbhakarna, with his nose and ears cut off, and
blood besmearing his body,—with his head and limbs hewn
away, and his body uncovered,—mountain-like blocketh
up the gate of Lank& with his person,—and resembleth a tree
that hath been consumed by a forest-fire.’ Hearing the
mighty Kumbhakarna slain in battle, R&vana burning in


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1329


grief, swooned away and dropped to the earth. And hearing
their uncle slain, Trigiras* and Atikdya—destroyers of gods
and men,—began to weep, oppressed with sorrow. And
Mahodarat and Mab3pargwat hearing of their uncle slain by
Rama of untiring deeds, were overcome with grief, Then
regaining his senses with extreme exertion, that foremost of
Rakshasas, distressed in consequence of the destruction of
Kumbhakarna, mourned with his senses overwhelmed,
saying,~—"'O hero! O humbler of the pride of the foe! O
mighty Kumbhakarna! Leaving me, thou through Destiny,
hast gone to the abode of Yama. O exceedingly powerful one,
leaving me (lune) whither dost thou wend, without extracting
my dart as well as that of thy friends ? Now really I am not,
inasmuch as my right arm hath dropped. Backed by this
one, I would not fear celestials and Asuras. How to-day
forsooth hath such a hero—crusher of the hauteur of gods
and Danavas—resembling the Fire arisen at the hour of
universal wreck,—been slain in fight by Raghava ? He who
could not be harmed by the concussion of the thunder-
bolt itself{—how can be, smitten with Rama’s arrows, sleep
soundly on the earth? These gods stationed in the sky
along with the saints,—beholding thee slain in battle, are
shouting in glee. Surely to-day the monkeys overjoyed,—
finding occasion, will scate all the gateways and fortifications
of Lanka. Ihave nothing to do with empire. And what
shall | do with Sita ? And deprived of Kumbhakarna, I do
not even wish to live. If Ido not slay in encounter that slayer
of my brother—Raghava,—certainly death is even that which
is good for me,—otherwise, this life is useless. This very
day will I repair to that place where my younger brother is.
Forsaking my brother, I forsooth dare not live for a moment ;
for the gods shall laugh on seeing me, who had formerly


* Three-headed.—T.


+ Huge-bellied —T.
$ Mighty-flacked.—T.


167


1330 RAMAL ANA,


wronged them. But, how, O Kumbhakarna, thou having
been slain, shall I conquer Indra? Now the beneficial words
of Bibhishana have been verified. And as through blindness
I did not accept the advice of that high-souled one, Kumbha-
karna and of Prahasta, this disaster arisen, shameth me sore.
And as I had disgraced the virtuous and graceful Bibhishana,
this peril producing grief, hath been the consequence of my
conduct.” Having thus piteously and long lamented
Kumbhakarna, the Ten-necked one, with his inmost soul
overwhelmed with sorrow, and sore distressed in consequence
of grief,—fell down, knowing his brother—the enemy of
Indra—slain in battle.


SECTION LxIx.


Hearne the lamentations of the wicked-minded R&vana,
overwhelmed with grief, Trigiras addressed him, saying,
"O Sire, this second uncle unto us possessed of mighty
prowess hath* forsooth been slain in fight, But, O king,
heroes never indulge in grief as thou doest. O lord, thou
certainly alone art competent to conquer the triple world.
Wherefore then dost thou vent such sorrow like an ignoble
one? Thou hast thy dart conferred on thee by Brahm ;
and thy mail and thy weapon—the bow—and thy car yoked
with a thousand asses, sending forth clatter resembling the
rumbling of clouds. The deities and the Danavas have by
means of thy arms been terrified over and over again. And
furnished with all arms, thou ought to chastise Raghava.
But stay at thy pleasure, O mighty sovereign, I will go out


* Evameva—forsocth, as \ render it, The commentator, however, says it
means such as thou hast lescribed him —T.


FUDDHAKENDAM. 1330


to battle; and even as Garura captureth serpents, will 1
capture thine enemies. And as Samvara was vanquished by
the lord of the immortals, or Naraka by Vishnu, will I bring-
ing down Rama in battle make him sleep (in the field).”
Hearing Trigiras’ words, Ravana—lord of R&akshasas—urged
on by Fate, considered himself as having regained his life.
And hearing the speech of Trigiras, Devantaka, and
Nar§ntaka, and the energetic AtikBya also, were wrought up
with «tartial enthusiasm. And then those foremost of
Nairitas—the heroic sons of R&vana—endowed with the
prowess of Sakra himself—roared out, 'I will go, ‘I will go,
And all could range the sky, and all were skilled in illusion,
and all were crushers of the pride of the immortals ; and all
were irrisistible in encounter. And ail of them were endowed
with superior strength, and all had achieved wide celebrity,
They had never Leen heard of as having been beaten in fight
even by the gods along with the Gandharvas, or the mighty
serpents accompanied by the Kionaras. And all were skilled
in weapons and heroic ; and all were versed in warfare. And
all were possessed of the higher knowledge ; and all had ob-
tained boons. And then the king surrounded by those sons of
his,appearing like celestials,—capable of injuring the force and
fortune of the foe, —looked splendid like Maghavan environed
by the immortals,humblers of the hauteur of mighty Danavas,
And embracing his sons and adorning them in ornaments,—
he sent them to the ficld with his best benedictions. And
Ravana sent the brothers—Yudhyonmatia and Matta—for
protecting the princes in the field. And then, saluting the
high-souled Ravana—destroyer of creatures,—and guing
round him, those huge-bodied ones marched forth, And
furnished with every description of medicinal herbs and
perfumes, these six Nairitas—foremost of their kind—
endowed with great strength,—burning for battle, march-
ed forth,—Trigiras and Atikaya, and Devantaka and
Narantaka, and Mahodara and Mabapargwa.went out,


1332 RAMAYANA,


urged on by Fate. Then Mahodara mounted the elephant—
Sudargana—sprung in the race of Airavata, and resembling
dark-blue clouds. And accoutred in every weapon, and»
decked with quivers, he Jooked splendid on his elephant like
the Sun ascending the crest of the Setting-hill. And
Ravana’s son—Tricgiras—ascended a car yoked with excellent
steeds, and furnished with every variety of arms. And
having ascended the car, Trigiras bow in hand appeared
beautiful like a mass of burning clouds having tigbtning and
meteors, and crowned with Indra's bow.* And dight with
three diadems, Trigiras looked spiendid in that superb car,
like the monarch of mountains Himavan—with the three
golden hills, And then that foremost of all bowmen—the
powerful Atikdya—son unto the lord of Rakshasas—ascended
the best of cars, having excellent wheels and aéshas, and
yoked with excellent stceds,—and furnished with bottoms
and holes; flaming with quivers and bows ; and bristling
with prégas and swords and blugdeons. And adorned with:
a crown plated with wrought gold and (other) ornaments,
he looked like the Meru swimming in its own splendour.
And that powerful son of the king surrounded by the Nairitas
looked lovely on that car like the thunder-handed (Deity)
engirt by the immortals. And


Antaka mounted a white
steed resembling Uchchaigrava, caparisoned in gold, having
a large frame and endowed with the velocity of the Wind,
And taking a prdpa, Nurantaka appeared like the energetic
Guha mounted on the peacock, grasping his dart. And
taking a bludgeon decked in golden ornaments, Devantaka
resembled Vishnu at the time of the churning of the ocean,
holding the Darbhy&,t and staying burthening (the earth).
And the powerful Mahapargwa endowed with terrific energy,
taking his mace, appeared like Kuvera holding in his hand a


* The rain-bow is called sometimes /udra's bow and at others Réma’s
bom.—T.
+ The mountain Mandara which served as the churning-stick.—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1333


mace in the encounter, And like immortals issuing out of
Amar&vati, they marched out with elephants and steeds and
cars sending out clatter resembling the rumbling of clouds.
And them fullowed high-souled Rakshasas equipped with
mighly-arms. And those sun-bright high-souled princes
decked with diadems appeared splendid like burning planets
in the firmament. And the various gorgeous attires which
they had worn resembled rows of cranes in the sky, looking
like autumnal] clouds. Resolved on dying or conquering the
foe in fight, those heroes sallied out seeking encounter. And
those high-souled ones, incapable of being repressed in fight,
roared and shouted and discharged shafts and held them.
And the earth shook as they sent up leonine roars and struck
at their arms with their hands; and the sky seemed riven
with the leonine roars of the Rakshas. And issuing out
cheerfully, those foremost of Rakshasas endowed with great
strength beheld that monkey-army staying with upraised
rocks and stones. And the highsouled monkeys also
saw that mighty host of Raksbasas thronging with elephants,
horses and cars, and ringing with hundreds of bell-lets ;
resembling dark-blue clouds ; upraising mighty arms; and
environed on all sides by Nairitas resembling flaming fire.
And seeing that force advance, the monkeys, finding
opportunity, upraising giant crags,smomentarily set up shouts,
And thereat, the Rakshasas, incapable of bearing those
shouts, shouted in reply unto the monkeys. And again the
monkeys shouted unto the Rakshas, who were unable to put
up with that cry. And hearing that loud shout of the
monkey-leaders, the mighty Rakshas incapable of bearing
that noise expressive of exhilaration,—-shouted still more
dreadfully. And then diving into that dreadful Rakshasa
army, the monkey-leaders began to range it with uplifted
rocks,—like unto mountains. And equipped with trees and


stones, the monkeys enraged, ranged the Raksha army, now


rising into the sky, and now coming down to the earth. And


1334 KAMAY ANA,


some among the powerful monkeys went about taking
broad-shouldered trees. And the encounter that took place
between the thronging Rakshas and monkeys was some-
thing terrific, And (the monkeys) began to pour a wonderful
shower of trees and rocks and cliffs. And the monkeys
of dread prowess were resisted with vollies of shafts,
And in the contest the monkeys and Rakshasas emitted
leonine roars. And monkeys crushed Yatudhnas with rocks,
and, wrought with rape, (they) in the encounter slew
(Rakshasas) covered with armour and ornaments ; and some
slew heroes muunted on cars and elephants and steeds.
And the monkeys on a sudden stew heroic Yatudhanas, And
smit with mountain-peaks on their persons, and with their
eyes falling off, the foremost of Rakshasas moved, dropped
down, ot roared in the scene of conflict. And the Rakshasas
(on their part) pierced the foremost of monkeys with
sharpened and keen darts and clubs and scimitars; and slew
them with darts and prdcas. Aud, eager for bringing down
each other, the monkeys and the Rakshasas with their
persons washed with the blood of their antagonists felled
each other, And ina moment the earth was covered with
crags and swords discharged by moukeys and Rakshasas,
—and was drenched in gore, And the field was blocked
up with scattered mountain-like Rakshas influenced by
martial arduur,—mangled by their enemies. And the
monkeys thrown down and felled by means of broken crags
and monkeys* and arms and legs,—waged a wonderful war.
And those foremost of Nairitas slew monkeys with (the dead
bodies of monkeys); and the monkeys smote Rakshasas
with (the dead bodies of) R&kshasas; and the Rakshasas
slew (the monkeys), hurling rocks and crags. And snatching
away their own arms by main force, the monkeys finished
Raks'
and also wounded each other. And the monkeys and


; and they slaughtered them with mountain-peaks,


* Le. the carcusses Lhercof,


YUDDHAKANDAM, 1335


Rakshasas emitted leonine roars in the encounter. And the
Rakshasas, slain by the monkeys, having their mail and
defence for the body rent, bled like unto trees exuding
sap. And in that encounter, some among the monkeys
destroyed cars with cars, elephants with elephants, and steeds
with steeds. And the Rakshasas rived the trees and rocks
of the foremost monkeys by means of Kshurapras and
crescents and sharpened Bhallas and arrows. And in
that encounter, the earth became impassable, having been
scattered with crags baffled and severed trees and (warriors)
slain by monkeys and Rakshas. And those monkeys, equipped
with various weapons, and with their vigor unworn, entering
upon the conflict casting off fear,—cheerfully putting forth
efforts springing from pride of spirit, warred on with the
R&kshasas. And in that fearful conflict, which was being
waged, on the monkeys having been exhilarated and the
R&kshasas having been brought down, the Maharshis and the
deities sent up shouts. Then mounted on a charger endued
with the celerily of the Wind, and grasping a whelted dart,
NarGntaka entered into that fierce army of monkeys, like a
fish diving into the deep. And that hero by means of an
effulgent bearded dart pierced seven hundred monkeys ; and
at one time the high-souled enemy of Indra slew the army of
the foremost of monkeys. And the Vidyadharas and
Maharshis saw that high-souled one mounted on horseback,
ranging the monkey-ranks. And his course was discovered,
miry with flesh and blood and blocked up with mountain-like
monkeys fallen. And when the monkeys set their hearts on
displaying their prowess, NarAntaka, baffling them, pierced
them with shafts. And he consumed the monkey-army, like fire
burning a forest. And when the wood-rangers uprooted trees
and crags, they slain by bearded darts dropped down like
mountains riven by the thunder. And raising a glowing préga,
the powerful Narintaka began to range about in the rear®


+ Sangrdménte, \ presume, means rear of the forces; although literally it


1336 RAMAT ANA,


of the forces; dashing everywhere {against the foe) in
fight, like the wind in the rainy season. And the heroes could
not appear prominently, or keep their posts. And how
could they then move freely? And that one endued with
prowess pierced everyone, whether springing, or staying,
or moving. And broken through by a single prdga, resembl-
ing the Reaper, and furnished with solar effulgence,, the
monkey-ranks began to roll on the earth. And the monkeys
were ill fitted lo bear the impetus of that prdga having the
touch of thunder itself; and they raised a loud cry. And
the appearances of those monkey-heroes falling were like
mountains toppling, having their summits riven with the
thunder-bolt, Those high-souled and powerful monkeys that
formerly had been brought down by Kumbhakarna,—having
recovered, were present with Sugriva in this encounter.
And Sugriva, looking around, saw that monkey-army flying
in all directions, agitated with the fear of Narantaka. And
after seeing the army in flight, he saw Nar&ntaka himself,
advancing, wielding a prdga, and mounted on a sleed. And
as soon as he saw (that hero), the exceedingly energetic
lord of monkeys—Sugriva—addressed the heroic prince
Angada, endowed with strength equal to that of Indra,
saying,—"Go against this heroic Rakshasas that is mounted
ona stced; and speedily deprive of life that one who is
devouring up the ranks of his foes.” Hearing his master’s
speech, Angada descended from that host resembling clouds,
like the powerful Sun himself. And resembling a mass of
crags, Angada—foremost of monkeys—adorned with Angadas,
appeared beautiful like a mountain with metals on it. Aud
weuaponless himself, and furnished only with nails and teeth,
Vali’s son attacking Narantaka, said,—‘Stay! What shalt
thou do with these inferior monkeys? This préga, having
the feel of the thunder-bolt, do thou hurl at my heart itseli.””


means, at the conclusion of the conflict —because this interpretation would not
be proper, the battle being now at its hottest.—T.


Y UDDHARANDAN. 1337


Hearing Angada’s words, Narantaka was fired with wrath.
And knav-ing his upper lip with his teeth and sighing like
aserpent, Narantaka, wrought with wrath, approached VAli's
son. And then whirling his pré@7, he suddenly discharged
that flaming (weapon) against Angada. And then it was
snapped on the breast of Vali’s son, resembling the thunder-
holt, and dropped to the earth. And seeing the frdga
broken in pieces, like a powerful snake severed by Suparna,


Vali’s son, raising his hand, dealt a slap at the head of his
(NarAntaka's) steed. Thereat, with his legs sinking down
and his eye-balls coming off and his tesgue hanging down,
and wearing the look of 2 mountain,—on heing smit with that
slap, Narfntaka’s steed fell down to the ground, with its
head lying at random, And Narantaka seeing his charger
slain and fallen, was seized with a furions wrath, and raising
his clenched fist, that one endowed with exceeding great
energy tn that conflict hit Vali’s son onthe head. Thereat
Angada having his head wounded by that blow, warm blood
gushed out plentifully. And momentarily burning and
momentarily swooning, he, regaining his senses, was amazed.
Then V&li’s son, the high-souled Angada clenching his fist
into a blow resembling Death itself in energy, and like unto
a mountain-peak, let it descend on the chest of Narantaka,
Thereat, with his breast riven and broken down, vomitting
flames and having his body bathed in blood, Nardptaka
dropped down to the earth, like a hill shattered by the
impetus of the thunder-bolt. Andon Nardntaka of exceeding
prowess having been slain by Vali’s son in battle, there
arose a tremendous uproar in the firmament from the wood-
rangers and the foremost of celestials. And Angada having
performed that difficult deed of prowess, capable of delighting
the mind of Rama, was seized with amazement ;* and that
one of terrific feats in fight was again inspired with delight
in the encounter.


* Probably, af hie own prowess.—T. «


168


1338 RAWAY ANA,


And seeing Nar&ntaka slain, the foremost of Nairitas
—including the thre-headed Devdntaka and Pulastya’s
descendant, Mahodara,—began te cry (in chorus). And then
the vehement Mahodara, mounted (on horseback), rushed
against Vali’s son endued with energy. And aggrieved in
consequence of the calamity that had befallen his brother,
the strong Devantaka grasping a dreadful bludgeon, darted
against Angada, Aad ascending a car resembling the Sun
yoked with superb steeds, the heroic Trigiras rushed against
Vali’s son. Then charged by those three powerful Rakshasas
crushers of the hauteur of immortals, Angada uprooted
a tree furnished with gigantic branches. And as Sakra
hurleth the mighty flaming thunderbolt, that hero—Angada
—at once hurled against Devantaka that mighty tree having
giant branches. And Triciras cut off that tree in pieces by
means of shafts resembling serpents. And seeing the tree
severed, Angada darted up; and* then that foremost of
monkeys showered crags and trees. And all those Trigiras
wrought with wrath cut off by means of whetted arrows ;
and Mahodara snapped those trees with the end of his
bludgeon. And then Trigiras rushed against that hero—
Vali’s son—with shafts ; and Mahodara chased him, mounted
ou an elephant; and struck Angada in thechest with fomarvs
resembling the thunder-bolt. And Devantaka, enraged
advancing, hit Angada with his bludgeon, and then, endowed
with velocity, he swiftly turned away. And attacked
simultaneonly by those three powerful Nairitas, the exceed-
ingly energetic son of Vali possessed of prowess, did not
feet any pain. And that impetuous one incapable of being
sonquered, summoning his utmost vehemence, rushing on,
pealt a slap at hist mighty elephant. And thereat the
elephant fell down in his very sight and expired. And then


* The text has Angada, avoided for euphony.
+ The text has Vali's son,
 Mahodara’s.


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1399


pulling out his tusks, the highly powerful son of V&li, darting
against Devantaka, dealt him a blow therewith in that en-
counter, And thereupon that strong one overwhelmed like a
tree buffetted by the wind,began to discharge blood profusely,
looking like the hue of lac. And then cheering him, the
exceedingly energelic and powerful Narantaka, violently
whirling bis bludgeon with might and main, hit Angada with
it. And albeit strack with the bludgeon, the son of the lord
of monkeys, going down on his knees, again darted up. And
as he sprang up, Trigiras hit at the temples of the son of
the king of monkeys with three straight-speeding terrific
shafts. And seeing Angada assailed by the three redoubt-
able Rakshasas, Hanum4n and Nila proceeded (to his rescue).
Then Nila hurled a mountain-top at Triciras; and thereat
that son of Ravana severed it with sharpened arrows. And
that mountain-top oo being riven, dropped down, aflame
and shooting out sparks of fire. Aad seeing him* yawning
in joy, the stalwart Devantaka in that encounter pursued the
Wind-god’s son with bis bludgeon. And as he rushed on,
that foremost of monkeys—Hanum&n—dealt on the crown
of his head, a blow resembling the thunder-bolt itself. And
the mighty and heroic son of the Wind-god hit (at his
antagonist); and that redoubted monkey also with his roars
made the R&kshasas tremble (in fear). And thereat with
his head crushed and cleft, and his teeth and eyes falling out,
and his tongue hanging down, that son unto the sovereign
of the Rakshasas suddenty dropped to the earth, deprived
of life, Oa that fierce and mighty Rakshasa warrior—that
foe of the immortals—having fallen in fight, the Three-
headed one, waxing wondrous enraged began to shower
terrific sharpened shafts on Nila’s chest. And Mahodara,
getting enraged, again swiltly mounted an elephant Jike the
ray-furnished (Sua) mounting Mandara. Then even as a
mass of roaring clouds poureth down showers enwhecled with


© Trigiras.


1340 RAMAYANA.


levin on a mountain, he showered arrows right on Nila’s
breast. Thereat showered with those shafts, that leader of
monkeys Nila with his person pierced, had his body riven
and was stupified by that exceedingly powerful one. Then
that (monkey) possessed of tremendous vehemence, having
regained his senses, uprooting a crag with a whole tract of
trees, struck it at Mahodara’s head. And struck by that
mighty enemy, Mabodara, broken down by the impetus of
that ruck, deprived of his senses, dropped down dead on the
ground, like a cliff smit with the thunder-bolt.

Sceing his uncle slain, Trigiras took up his bow; and
inflamed with fury pierced Hanuman with whetted arrows,
And thereat the Wind-god's son, enraged, hurled a mountain-
peak (at his adversary). And Trigiras by means of keen
arrows severed the same in shivers. And seeing the


mountain-peak baffled, the monkey in the encounter began to
shower trees on Ravana’s son. And Trigiras endowed with
prowess by means of sharpened shafts cut off that descending
arrowy shower in the sky and shouted (in delight). Thén
Hanuman flying into a fury, bounding to the welkin, with his
nails ript the steed of Trigiras,even as a lion cleaveth a power-
ful elephant. Then taking a dart even as the Destroyer
employeth the Fatal Night, Ravana’s son—Trigiras—
discharged it at the offspring of the Wind-god. Thereat
catching the dart of resistless course as it descended from
the sky, the powerful monkey snapped it and then shouted.
And seeing that dreadful dart broken by Hanuman, the
monkeys, transported with delight, sent up shouts, even as
clouds rumble. Then upraising his sword, that foremost of
Rakshasas—Trigiras —brought it down on the breast of the
monkey-chief, Overpowered with the sword-blow, Hanum&n
~-son unto the Wind-god,—endowed with energy, dealt the
Three-lheaded one a slap on the head. And smitten with that
slap, the highly powerful Trigiras, withhis hands and attire
dropping off,fell down to the earth, deprived of consciousness.


PUDDHAKANDAM gar


Then that mighty monkey resembling a hill broke his sword
as he fell, and roared, terrifying all the Rakshasas. But not
brooking that uproar, that night-ranger sprang up; and
springing up, he dealt a blow at Hanuman. And at that
blow, the redoubtable monkey was wrought up with wrath ;
and inflamed with rage, he smote that foremost of Rakshasas
about his diadem. And then with a sharp sword the Wind-
god’s son cut off his heads decked with diadems and furnished
with ear-rings ; even as Sakra had severed the heads of
Tashtri’s son.*  Thereat-even as burning stars, loosened,
drop down from the course of Indra, the large organs of
sense, and eyes flaming like glowing fire, and heads of that
foe of Indra, dropped down to the ground. On Trigiras—
enemy of the immortals—having heen slain by Hanuman
endowed with the prowess itself of Sikra, the monkeys
shouted, the earth shook, and the Rakshas began to fly on all
sides. And seeing Triciras and Yudhyonmatta slain and
seeing also the irrepressible Devantaka and Nar&ntaka slain
{in the encounter), that highly irascible and powerful
R&kshasa—Matta—~was transported with passion, and then
took up a flaming mace entirely wrought with iron inlaid
with gold ; frothy with flesh and gore; mighty to behold ;
gratified with the blood of foes; with its end flaming in
splendour ; decked with red wreaths ; and capable of striking
terror into Airfvata and Maba&padma and Sarvabbauma.t And
flaming up like the Fire arisen at the end of a Yuga, that
foremost of Rakshasas—Matta—wrought with fury,—rushed
against the monkeys. Then the mighty and powerful monkey
—-Rishabha—springing up before R&vana’s son, stood
before the hosts of Matta. And seeing that mountain-like
monkey staying before (him), Matta, enraged, dealt him a
blow on the breast. And smit with the mace, that foremost
of monkeys, with his breast riven and trembling, began to


* Vigwarupa.
+ Elephants of the cardinal points —T.


1342 RAMAYANA,


bleed copiously. And regaining his senses after a long while,
Rishavbha—lord of monkeys—inflamed with wrath, pouting
out bis upper lip, gazed at Mahaparcwa.* And then
impetuously approaching the R&kshasa, that foremost of
hervic monkeys resembling a hill, endowed with vehemence,
clenching his fist, suddenly smote him with a blow on his
breast. Thereat like a tree whose roots have been severed,
he suddenly dropped on the ground, covered with blood.
And thereupon, (Rishabha) swiftly snatched his dreadful
mace resembling the rod of Yama himself; and shouted,
Only for a moment did het remain like one dead. Recovering
his senses, the enemy of the immortals, looking like evening
clouds in hue, suddenly springing up, attacked the son of the
king of waters. And thereat, he dropped down to the
earth, senseless. In a moment regaining his consciousness,
he again bounded up,—and whirling the mace resembling a
peak of the foremost of mountains, in that encounter dealt
(Matta) a blow therewith, And descending on the body
of that dreadful one—the enemy of deities, sacrifices and
Vipras—that terrific mace rived his breast ; and he begaa to
bleed profusely, even as the lord of mountains discharges
minerals and water. And taking the terrific mace of the
high-souled (Matta) and swinging it again and again,
(Rishabha) rushed {against the Ra&kshasas), And that
high-souled one began to slaughter Matta’s forces in the field.
And broken down by his own mace, Matta dropped down
Tike a hill, with his teeth and eyes shrivelled up; and he
dropped to the earth deprived of strength and life, with his
eyes paling. And on that Rakshasa falling, the Rakshasa
forces began to fly, And on that brother of Ravana having
been slain, that host of Nairitas appearing like the ocean in


* Otherwise called Matta.—T,
+ Matta.
+ Varuna,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1343


grandeur, leaving its arms behind,—solely for life rushed
away, like unto the deep riven (by the winds).


SECTION LXXI.


Sree in sore straits his own mighty forces capable of
making people’s down stand on end,—~and seeing his brothers
resembling Sakra in prowess, routed; and seeing also his
uncles brought down in battle, as well as his brothers—
Yudhyonmatta and Matta~foremost of Rakshasas, that
crusher of the pride of deities and Danavas—the exceedingly
energetic Atikiya—resembling a hill, who had obtained from
Brahm& a boon in battle, was fired with wrath. Ascending
a car effulgent like a thousand suns mingling their rays into
a burst of brilliance, that enemy of Sakra, charged the
monkeys. And stretching his bow, (Atik’ya) decked with a
diadem and wearing polished ear-rings, proclaimed his name
{among the monkey-ranks) and shouted in lofty tones.
And with his leonine roars and the proclamation of his name,
and the tremendous twang of his bow-string, he struck terror
into the monkeys. Seeing the magnitude of his person, the
monkeys thinking that it was Kumbhakarna who had come,
~and affrighted thereat, sought the shelter of each other,
And seeing his form like unto that of Vishnu when he
displayed his threefold energy, the monkey-warriors seized
with fear, began to scour on all sides. And on Atikadya
appearing before them,the monkeys, stupified in that conflict,
sanght the shelter of Lakshmana’s elder brother. And from
a distance Kakutstha saw the mountain-like Atikaya
mounted on the car and equipped with his bow, like unto roar
ing clouds (seen) on the occasion of the universal disruption.


1344 RAMAYANA.


And seeing that huge-bodied one, Raghava struck with
surprise, comforting the monkeys, addresse:) Bibhishana,
saying,—‘“Who is this one resembling a mountain, furnished
with a bow and having leonine eyes, that is stationed on
a large car yoked with a thousand steeds—he that with efful-
gent sharpened darts and keen prégas and tomaras, shineth
like Mahegwara environed by spectres—he that displaying
his fatal tongue, appeareth splendid, surrounded with darts
in his car; like a mass of clouds graced with lightning. And
his bows adorned and backed with gold all over, beautify his
car even as Indra’s bow beautifyeth the firmament. And who
is this foremost of Rakshasas and best of bowmen that
embellishing the field of battle, approacheth on a car glorious
as the sun; who, displaying the ten cardinal points with his
shafts resembling the rays of the sun, appeareth handsome
with his peak of a banner bearing the figure of Rallu—whose
bow bent in threo places, emitting rors resembling the
tumbling of clouds, and plated with gold, looketh like the
bow: itself of Satakratu? And his mighty car furnished with
a banner and ensign and bottom, and having clatter
resembling the roaring of clouds, hath four horsemen
{attached to it). And there are on the car eight and thirty
quivers and dreadful bows and yellow-golden bow-strings.
And there are (in that car) two effulgent swords at his side,
illumining it,—their hafts measuring four hands and their
blades ten each. And that calm (warrior) wears red garlands
about his neck, and resembles a mighty mountain. Anda
very Destroyer, he hath a mighty mouth, appearing like that
of the Destroyer himself; and he looketh like the sun
stationed on clouds. And with his arms adorned with golden
angadas, he appeareth splendid like that best of mountains—
the Himavan with its towering summits. And with his pair
of ear-rings, his charming yet terrific countenance shineth
like the full Moon entering into Punarvagu.* O mighty-armed


* The seventh lunar asterism.—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1345


one, tell me all about this foremost of Rakshasas, seeing
whom the monkeys, overwhelmed with fear, fly away in all
directions.” Asked by the king’s son—R4ma of immeasurable
prowess—the exceedingly energetic Bibhishana spoke unto
Rama, informing him,--“The highly powerful king, Vaigra-
vana’s younger brother of dreadful deeds, the high-souled
Ravana—is the sovereign of the Rakshasas. This one is
his mighty son, like unto Ravana himself in strength. He
serveth the aged, is of wide celebrity and is the prime of those
versed in all branches of knowledge. And he is competent
to ride horses and elephants, to wield the sword or draw
the bow,—or in sowing dissensions, or giving away, or in
counsel,—he reposing in whose arm Lank& hath cast off fear.
Know him to be Alikaya, son unto Dhanyamali. Having
adored the pure-souled Brahm& with austerities, he hath
obtained weapons, and hath defeated his foes (in‘fight).”
‘Thou shalt be incapable of being slain by celestials and
Asuras'—was the boon conferred on him by the Self-sprung ;
and he also gave him this celestial mail and this car resembl-
sing the effulgent Sun himself. He hath vanquished (in
battle) hundreds of deities and Danavas ; and he hath (always)
protected the Rakshas, and destroyed Yakshas. And this
intelligent one resisted the thunder-bolt itself of Indra;
and in encounter baffled the very noose of the king of
waters. This one is Atik’ya—foremost of Rakshasas; and
that son of Ravana is the humbler of the hauteur of deities
and D&navas. Therefore, O best of persons, do thou
endeavour thy best. This one with his shafts slaughtereth
the monkey-hosts before {us).” And then the powerful
Atikiya entering that monkey-force, stretched his bow and
shouted again and again. And the high-souled principal
monkeys, seeing that (hero) possessed of a dreadful person,
that best of car-warriors—stationed on his car, rushed
forward. And Kumuda and Dwivida and Mainda and Nila
and Sarabha dashed on at one time with trees and mountain-
169


1346 RAMAYANA.


peaks. Thereupon that foremost of those skilled in weapons,
the exceedingly energetic Atikadya, severed those trees and
rocks by means of shafts dight with gold. And in that
encounter that powerful one possessed of a gigantic person,
skilled in arms, pierced all those monkeys staying before him
with arrows entirely made of iron, And agonised, having their
persons pierced in that mighty conflict by that arrowy shower,
they were incapable of resisting (he same. And the Rakshasa
terrified that host of monkey-heroes, even as an enraged lion
priding in his youth terrifyeth a society of deer. And in the
midst of those bands of monkeys, that lord of Rakshasas did
not slay anyone without battle. And then springing up
before Rama, that one furnished with his bow and quiver,
addressed him in haughty words, saying,—'Stationed in
this car holding the bow and arrows in my hands, I will
not fight any that is ignoble. Him that hath strength,
and that also understandeth this business,—let bim to-
day speedily give me battle.” Hearing his speech, that
slayer of foes—Sumitra's son—was fired with wrath. And
not bearing him, he sprang forward disregarding his anta-
gonist’s words, and took up his bow. And flying unto fury,
Sumitrf’s son, darting up, took out arrows from his quiver,
and stretched his mighty bow in front of Atik’ya. And
filling the entire earth and the sky and the ocean and all the
cardinal quarters,—the terrific twang of Lakshmana’s bow
struck terror into the (hearts of the) night-rangers, And
hearing the dreadful twang of the bow of Sumitra’s son, the
exceedingly energetic and powerful son of the lord of
Rakshasas was struck with surprise. Then Atikaya, enraged,
seeing Lakshmana advance, taking sha:pened shafts, spoke
unto bim,—'"Thou art a boy, O Sumitra’s son ; and as such
knowest not how to display prowess. Go thou. Why
wishest thou to fight with me resembling Death itself. Not
Himalaya itself or the firmament or the earth is capable of
bearing the impetuosity of shafts shot by my arms. Thou


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1347


wishest to rouse a fire slumbering sweetly. Leaving alone
thy bow, do thou return. Do not lose thy life by coming in
contact with me, Or it may be that thou art proud; and,
therefore, bast no mind to return, Stay then. Renouncing
thy life, thou shalt go to Yama’s mansion, Behold my whetted
arrows—crushers of the insolence of foes—resembling the
weapon itself of the Lord,*—~adorned with burnished gold.’
And even as a tion enraged sheddeth the blood of a mighty
elephant, this arrow of mine resembling a serpent shall shed
thy blood.” Having delivered himself thus, he fired with wrath
set his shaft on his bow. Hearing in that encounter Atikdya's
wratbful speech fraught with hauteur, the highly powerful
and intelligent son of the g possessed of exceeding
grace, was transported with passion, and he said —Thou
canst not attain pre-eminence solely by virtue of thy speech.
One cannot be 2 worthy person simply by say. O wicked-
minded one, do thou display thy strength on me equipped
with the bow and holding arrows in my hands. To-day shall
my shaft. decked in gold, drink thy blood fowing from thy
person and issuing out of wounds inflicted by my arrows
resembling daris.—‘This one is a boy’, thinking this, thou
ought not to slight me. Whether I am a boy or an oldt man’
—death shalt thou know in the conflict. It was as a boy
that Vishnu had overpowered the triune world with his
prowess.” Hearing Lakshmana’s words, fraught with reason
and high sense, VidyAdharas and ghosts, deities, Daityas and
Maharshis, and the high-souled Guhyakas then beheld that
marvel.{

Then Atikdya, enraged, setting his arrow on his bow, shot
it at Lakshmana, as if devouring up the welkin. Thereat,
Lakshmana—slayer of hostile heroes—with a crescent scver-


* Isvava—Siva.—His weapon is the trident.—T.
+ The commentator says the passage means~-"'Thou knowest (me) Sor
death itseli', I prefer the sense given.—T.
} The encounter that ensued between Labshmana and Atikaya—T,


1348 RAMAYANA.


ed that sharpened shaft resembling a venomous serpent, as it
was descending. And seeing the shaft severed Jike a serpent
having its person cut off, Alikiya waxing exceedingly
enraged,took up five arrows ; and the night-ranger discharged
them at Lakshmana. Thereat Bharata’s younger brother cut
off the approaching arrows with whetted shafts. And having
severed them with sharpened shafts, Lakshmana—slayer of
hostile heroes—took up a sharpened arrow, as if flaming in
energy. And taking it, Lakshmana set it on his excellent
bow ; and drawing the latter, vigorously discharged the shaft.
And that hero endowed with prowess hit that foremost of
Rakshasas in the forehead with that shaft having bent knots,
discharged from his bow drawn to its full bent.—And that
arrow piercing the forehead of that dreadful Rakshasa, and
smeared with blood, appeared like the lord of serpents in a
mountain. And the Rakshasa, smarting under Lakshmana’s
shaft, showered, like the dreadful gateway of Tripurd
battered, by Rudra. Then recovering himself and reflecting,
he said,*—‘ Excellent well! By this discharge of thy shaft,
thou approvest thyself as a foe in whom I can well glory.”
Having spoken thus candidly, he, folding his hands at
ease, and seated on the platform of his car, began to range
in it. And then that foremost of Rakshasas began to take
up, set, and shoot one, three, five, or seven shafts. And
those shalts resembling Fate itself, plated with gold at the
feathered parts,—and looking like the Sun himself (in
splendour),—discharged from the bow of the lord of Rakshasas,
lighted up the heavens. Thereat Raghava’s younger brother
by means of many a sharpened shaft calmly cut off all those
volties of arrows shot by the Rakshasa. And finding all
those arrows riven in the encounter, that enemy of the lord
of the immortals, Ravana’s son, was fired with wrath, and
took up a whetted shaft. And then aiming that arrow, that
highly powerful one suddenly shot it; and with that, rushing


a Chintayd mdsa—thought, | apprehend, means said in this connection,


VUDDHAKANDAM. 1349


on, hit Sumitra’s son in the chest. And struck in the encounter
by Atikaya, the son of Sumitr& began to bleed copiously,
like a mad elephant discharging the temporal juice. And
then that lord at once extricated the arrow ; and then took
up a keen shaft and fixed the same on his weapon.*
And then he set a shaft (on his bow-string) reciting a formula
for the Agneyat weapon; and thereat his arrow as well as
bow flamed up. Then the highly powerful AtikAya took up
a Raudrat weapon; and thereon fixed a shaft plated with gold
at the feathered part, and resembling a serpent in sheen.
And even as the Reaper hurleth his rod, did Lakshmana burl
that weapon inspired with divine energy, dreadful and
aflame,—at Atikaya. And seeing that shaft set upon an
Agneya weapon, that night-ranger discharged a Raudra
arrow set upon a Solar weapon. And there like a pair of
infuriated serpents, those arrows with their heads flaming
in energy, baffled each other in the sky. And burning each
other, the shafts fell on the earth; and those best of arrows,
shorn of brilliance and reduced to ashes, were deprived of
their splendour. And having blazed in the welkin, those
two fell down to the earth reft of their lustre, Then Atikaya
wrought up with wrath discharged an arrow called Aishika
dedicated to Tashtri. Thereat the powerful son of Sumitra
severed that shaft by an Aindra§$ weapon. Seeing Aishika
baffled, that Prince—son unto Ravana—fired with rage, fixed
an arrow on a Yamyal| weapon; and then the night-ranger
shot that weapon at Lakshmana. And Lakshmana resisted
it by a Vayavya] weapon. And then as a mass of clouds
poureth down showers, Lakshmana, enraged, poured volleys


* ie, the bow.
+ Belonging to the god of Fire.
4 Relative to Rudra.
§ Belonging to Indra.
1 What could this be like ? The commentator is silent over this import-
ant point—T.
4] Belonging to the Wind-god.


1350 RAMAYANA.


of shafts on R&vana’s son. Thereupon, hitting Atik&ya,
those arrows coming in contact with his mail, had their barbs
broken, and fell down to the earth. And seeing them baffled,
that slayer of hostile heroes—the renowned Lakshmana—
began to shower shafts by thousands. And albeit showered
with those arrows, that Rakshasa—the mighty Atikaya—in

that encounter was net pierced by them on account of his
impenetrable mail; and that best of men failed to hurt him
in the contest, Then approaching him, the Wind-god spake
unto him, saying,—“This one hath received a boon from
Brahma, and is covered with an impenetrable mail, Pierce
him with a Brahma* weapon. He cannot otherwise be slain,
This one clad in mail and endowed with prowess is forsooth
incapable of being slain by others.” Hearing the words
of the Wind-god, Sumitra’s son like unto Indra in prowess.
took an arrow endowed with fierce impetuosity, and at once
set it on a Brahma weapon. And on that sharp-headed
best of arrows being fixed on that foremost of weapons, the
cardinal quarters and the Moon and the Sun and the mighty
planets and the sky were seized with affright; and the
earth shook. And inspiring that arrow furnished with a
feathered part and resembling an emissary of Yama himself,
and fixing the same on his bow, Sumitra’s son in that
encounter discharged that shaft like unto the thunder-bolt
atthe son of the enemy of Indra. And in that conflict
Alikéya beheld that shaft fair-feathered and having its
feathered part dight with splendid diamonds, acquiring
enhanced vehemence arising from its having been discharged
by Lakshmana,—and hissing and rushing on with tremendous
impetuosity, And seeing it, Atikaya swiftly resisted it with
countless sharpened shafts, But endowed with the energy
of Suparna himself, that shaft vehemently went to him. And
seeing that shaft flaming and resembling the Fatal Destroyer
himself,—coming, he, exerting himself to the utmost resisted


+ Belonging to Brahma.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1351


it with darts and rishtis and maces and adzes and javelins
and arrows. But beating down all those weapons of wonder-
ful forms, that arrow alive with flames, coming to the
diadem-decked head of Alik&ya, severed the same (in twain)
And that head furnished with a corsalet, cut off by
Lakshmana's arrow, suddenly dropped to the earth, like a
summit of Himav&n toppling (to the ground). Seeing him
rolling on the earth, with his attire and ornaments scaltered
about, those night-rangers that survived were overwhelmed
with grief. And with pale forces and distressed, they,
fatigued in consequence of the thrashing they had undergone,
suddenly began to cry in frightful accents. And on their
leader having been slain, those night-rangers that were about
(Atikaya), without waiting any longer,—overwhelmed with
panic, rushed towards the city. Andon their foe endowed
with terrific prowess and incapable of being confronted,
having been slain, innumerable monkeys filled with excess
of joy,and displaying countenances resembling blown lotuses,
paid homage unto Lakshmana working out their welfare.


SECTION LXX}il.


Hearine Atikaya slain by the high-souled Lakshmana,the
king was filled with exceeding great anxiety and spoke thus,
—"Dhumraksha exceedingly wrathful,—best of those equipped
with all arms—and Akampana and Prahasta and Kumbha-
karna —all these exceedingly mighty heroes—Rakshasas ever
seeking warfare, conquerers of the forces of foes, and never
defeated by antagonists, have together with their hosts been
slain by Rama of untiring feats. And other Rakshasas
having gigantic bodies and skilled in various arms,—countless


1352 RAMAYANA.


high-souled heroes—have also been brought down. These
brothers were formerly bound by my son Indrajit of renowned
strength and prowess with terrific shafts, obtained as boons.
And I do not know by what power or superhuman virtue or
stupifying energy did those brothers—Rama and Lakshmana~
liberate themselves from those dreadful bonds,which could be
loosed neither by celestials nor the highly powerful Asuras
combined nor Yakyas, Gandharbas and Pannagas. And all
those heroic Rakshasa warriors that marched forth at my
bidding, have been destroyed by monkeys of marvellous
might. Him see I not that can now slay Rama with Lakshmana,
—that hero together with his forces and Sugriva and
Bibhishana. Alack ! mighty must be Rama and wondrous. is
his strength of weapon—he coming in contact wilh whose
prowess, these Rakshasas have met with their deaths. Now
let this palace be everywhere guarded by a vigilant garrison,
—as also the agota wood where Sita is being guarded. We
should always be acquainted with the ingress and egress (of
every person). And do ye, surrounded by forces, remain
where there are garrisons. And the night-rangers should in
the evening,at midnight and in the morning always watch the
movements of the monkeys, The monkeys should by no
means be slighted. And ye should know whether the enemy
putteth forth (fresh) efforts,—and whether they advance or
remain stationed where they at present are.”’—Thereupon
those exceeding mighty Rakshasas did as they had been
desired. And having directed them, Ra&vana—lord of
Rakshasas—bearing the dart of ire (in his heart), in forlorn
guise entered his own mansion, And with the fire of his
rage blazing up, the exceedingly powerful sovereign of the
night-rangers, absorbed with the danger that had befallen his
son, began to sigh momentarily,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1353


SECTION uxxii-


Those Rakshas that remained after the others had been
slain, swiftly informed Ravana that all those foremost of
Rakshasas—Devantaka and the rest, Triciras, Atik&ya and
others—had been slain. And suddenly hearing them slain,
the king with his eyes charged with brine, thinking of the
disastrous destruction of his sons and brothers,was extremely
agonized. Thereupon, seeing the king afflicted, and sunk in
a sea of sorrow, that foremost of car-warriors—-son unto the
Rakshasa king—Indrajit, addressed (his sire), saying,—“O
father, it doth not behove thee to be overcome with this
excessive grief, inasmuch as, O lord of Nairitas, Indrajit yet
breaths. Smit by the enemy of Indra, (Raghava) can by no
means save his life in encounter. To-day behold Rama along
with Lakshmana with their bodies torn with my shafts
lying down lifeless on the ground, having their persons
covered with my sharpened arrows! Hear this vow of the
foe of Indra, never swerving and instinct with prowess and
divinity,—this very day will I with unfailing shafts slay
Rama along with Laksmana. To-day let Indra and
Vaivagwata and Vishnu and Rudra and Sadhyas and Vaigwas
end men and the Sun and the Moon, behold my immeasur-
able prowess, terrific like that of Vishnu at the sacrificial
ground of Vali,” Having spoken thus, that foe of the lord
of celestials endowed with exceeding energy, taking the king’s
permission, ascended a car having the velocity of the wind
itself, yoked with asses, and furnished with every variety of
weapons. And ascending the car, resembling the car of
Hari himself, that exceedingly powerful repressor of enemies
at once set out for the field of battle. And as that high-souled
(hero) marched, he was followed by countless mighty
(Rakshasas) breathing spirits ; bearing bows in their strong


170


1356 RAMAYANA


hands. And some of those, resembling mountains, were
mounted on elephants, and some on superb steeds, and
some on bears, and some on beasts of prey, and some on
lions and jackals,—and some of the Rakshasas endowed
with dreadful vigor were mounted on crows, and some on
swans, and some on peacocks,—they were equipped with
prégas and maces and mistringas and axes and clubs. And
all sides were filled with the blares of conchs and the sounds
of kettle-drums. And then that enemy of the lord of celestials
marched forth with impetuosity. Aod with an umbrella hued
like the Moon, that destroyer of enemies appeared like the
full Moon stationed in the sky. And that hero garnished
in golden ornaments—that furemost of all bowmen—was
fanned by an excellent and graceful golden chowri, And
with Indrajit furnished with the splendour of the Sun
himself, and possessed of peerless prowess, Lanka looked
beauteous even as the firmament graced with the glorious
Sun.

Arriving at the scene of conflict, that highly powerful
repressor of foes arrayed his forces aound the car. And then
that foremost of Rakshasas with choice mantras duly
offered libations unto Fire* And that powerful lord of
Rakshasas there worshipping Fire with fragrant wreaths
and fried paddy, sacrificed unto it. And arms served for
Kéga and Bibhitakas for fuel; and there were red cloths and
a ladle muie of black iron. And spreading Fire there,
with fomaras representing Aéga, he seized the neck of a
living goat. And then the kindled smokeless fire blazing
up brilliantly, displayed signs betokening victory. Thereat,
with his right tongue whirling, the Deity of Fire
himself louking like one made of gold,—arising, accepted
the offering. And then that (Rakshasa) skilled in weapons
acquired a Brahma weapon (from that Deity), and inspired
his bow and car with mantras. On that weapon baving been


* Hutabhokttram—eater of sacrificial offerings~a designation of Fire,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1355


invoked,* and on (the god of Fire) also having been
worshipped, the firmament furnished with the suns and stars
and planets was afflicted with affright. Having worshipped
(the god of Fire), that one endowed with the splendour of
Fire itself, that one possessed of the prowess of the great
Indra and gifted with inconceivable vigor, accoutred in
bows and arrows and swords and having steeds and cars
and darts,—-disappeared in the sky. Then burning for
battle, setting up roars went out the Rakshasa ranks, throng-
ing with steeds and cars, and graced with pennons and
standards, And they fell to slaughtering monkeys in the
engagement with countless shafts, sharp, variegated and
decorated; as alsa with fomaras and hooks. And Ravana’'s
son, fired with wrath, seeing those night-ranyers, addressed
them, saying,—“Do ye, burning with a desire to destroy the
monkeys, fight cheerfully.” Thereat all those Ra&kshasas,
eager for victory, smitting roars, covered the dreadful
monkeys with showers of shafts, And environed by Rakshas
in that encounter, het poured on the monkeys #é/ikas and
nardchas and maces and clubs. And trembling in the
encounter, those monkeys armed with trecs at once began to
shower rocks and trees on Ravana’s son. Then the exceed-
ingly powerful Indrajit, son unto Ravana, endowed with
wondrous energy, pierced the bodies of the monkeys (with
arrows). And fired with wrath, that (hero) rejoicing the
Rakshasas with a single shaft pierced nine and seven monkeys
in that encounter. And that invincible hero in that coflict
mangled the monkeys with shafts resembling the Sun,
decked with gold. And their persons pierced in that contest,
and the mselves pained with those arrows, they began to fall
down, giving up all intention of fight, like mighty Asuras smit
by the celestials. And then waxing highly enraged, those
considerable monkeys in that conflict hotly pursued (Indrajit)


+ i.e. on the deity presiding over that weapon, being invoked.


+ Indrajit.


1356 RAMAYANA.


resembling the Sun himself and having terrific arrows for
his rays. And all the monkeys, with their bodies riven and
deprived of their senses, and bathed in blood and writhing
in torments,—pursued (Indrajit) And putting forth their
prowess in behalf of Rama, those monkeys, equipped with
rocks in the encounter, who had set apart their very lives
(for him), paused,shouting up loudly. And they in that conflict
showered trees and crags and mountain-tops on Ravana’s
son. And that destroyer of foes—the exceedingly energetic
son unto Ravana—resisted that mighty shower of trees and
stones capable of compassing destruction. Then that Lord
pierced the monkey-hosts in the encounter with shafts
resembling fire or venomous serpents. And piercing
Gandhamadana with eight and ten sharp arrows, he wounded
Nila stationed at a distance with nine shafts. And that one
endowed with redoubtable prowess pierced Mainda with
seven shafts capable of piercing into the pith; and he
pierced Gaja with five shafts in the encounter, And he
pierced Jambavan with ten and Nila with thirty. And then
with dreadful sharp shafts obtained as boons, he rendered
Sugriva and Rishabha and Angada and Dwivida (almost)
lifeless. And transported with passion, and resembling the
Five arisen at Doomsday, Indrajit, harassed other principal
monkeys with countless arrows, And in that terrific conflict,
he agitated the monkey-hosts with swift-speeding shajfts,
resembling the Sun himself, deftly discharged (from his bow).
Then in that encounter, leaving his army, Indrajit became
suddenly invisible unto the monkey-hosts,—and began to
shower fierce arrows, like dark clouds pouring rain. And
with their persons torn by the arrows of the conqueror of
Sakra,~slain by his power of illusion—with their teeth
uprooted, those mountain-like monkeys fell down in the
field, emitting frightful cries—Jike a mountain smit with
Andra's thunderbolt. And in the conflict they could only
see sharp-pointed shafis among the monkey-ranks; but


VUDDHAKANDAM. 1357


that foe of the celestial chief—the Rakshasa, hidden by
virtue of illusion, they could not discover there. And then
the high-souled lord of Rakshas covered all sides with sharp-
pointed shafts resembling the rays of the Sun; and he rived
the foremost monkeys. And whirling darts and nistraizas
and axes, flaming and having the effulgence of Fire,—and
furnished with flames shooting forth sparks,—he discharged
them furiously at the forces of the sovereign of monkeys.
And the monkey-leaders struck with Sakrajit’s shafts resembl-
ing flames, appeared like laughing Kincukas. And some
looking at the sky were struck at their eyes. And they
gradually began to hide themselves in each other and drop to
the earth, And that foremost of Rakshasas—Indrajit—with
précas and darts and whetted arrows, inspired with mantras,
pierced all those powerful monkeys,—Hanuman and Sugriva
and Angada and Gandham&dana and Jambavan and Sushena
and Vegadarcin, and Mainda and Dwivida and Nila and
Gavaksha and Gavaya and Kesari and Hariloman and the
monkey Vidyutdanshtra and Suryy&nana and Jyotimukha
and the monkey Dadhimukha and Pavakaksha and Nala and
the monkey Kumuda. And having pierced those foremost
monkeys with golden-hued maces, he showered on Rama
and Lakshmana arrows resembling the rays of the Sun.
And showered with those vollies of arrows, Rama, with.
out heeding that discharge resembling a very downpour,
—teflecting, spoke unto Lakshmana,—“O Lakshmana, this
lord of Rakshasas, this foe of the lord of celestials, having
obtained the Brahma weapon,—alter having brought down
the monkey-hosts, are assailing us with sharpened shafts.
And that high-souled heedful one, having beengiven a boon
by the Self-sprung, hath rendered his dreadful body invisible.
How can we slay him, who is fighting with upraised weapons,
but who hath hid bis body. The reverend Self-sprung, I
deem, is incomprehensible. And this is his weapon, embody-
ing his energy. Therefore, O intelligent one, do thou to-day


1358 RAMAYANA.


along with me calmly bear this. And let this foremost of
them all—this lord of R&kshasas—cover all sides with the
showers of his shafts, And in consequence of this, the army
of the monkey-king with its greatest heroes fallen, doth not
appear to advantage. And seeing us also fallen senseless,—
and desisting from fight with our joy and anger gone off from
us, for certain will the enemy of the immortals, taking the
Fortune of fight seek his home.” And assailed by Indrajit
with networks of arrows, they were then sore distressed in
the fiell. And having struck them with saduess, Indrajit
from joy shouted in the encounter. And having thus worsted
in battle that monkey-army and Rama along with Lakshmana,
he speedily entered the city ruled by the hand of the Ten-
necked one. And extolled by the Yatudhanas, he, filled with,
delight, related everything unto his sire.


SECTION LXXIV.
err hi


Ano they* were rendered inert in the field; and the
army of the monkey-leaders was stupified, with Sugriva
and Nila and Angada and Jimbavan,—and they did not show
any signs of activity. Thereupon, secing them dispirited,
that foremost of intelligent persons —Bibhishana—cheering
them up with his peerless speech, said, —“Ye. heroes of the
king of monkeys, do not give way to fear. This is not the
time to indulge in grief at this place; for the sons of that
noble one,t—inactive and depressed, and seeming to be
wounded with the showers of Indrajit’s shafts,—are in reality


+ ae Rama and Lakshmana,
+ Dagaratha.


YUDDHAKANOAM. 1359


in this plight, for showing reverence unto the words* of the
Self-sprung one—On him the Self-sprung hath conferred the
mighty Brahma weapon of unfailing power; and the king’s
sons are doing honour to it by lying down on the field of
battle. Why then do ye grieve now ?” Hearing the words
of Bibhishana and honoring the Brahma weapon, Hanuman
spoke as follows :—"The host of the quick-paced monkeys
hath been slain by this weapon. Let us go and console them
who are still living.” And those two great heroes—Hanuman
and that foremost of the Rakshasas, with fire-brands in their
hands, began to range to and fro in the battle field. And
they beheld there the earth strewn on all sides with monkeys
lying down like so many bills and various shining weapons.
And some of these monkeys were deprived of their tails,
some of their hauds, some of their thighs, some of their legs,
some of their fingers, and some of their heads. And blood
was gushing out from the persons of some, and others were
urinating out of fear. And Bibhishana and Hanum&n be-
held there Sugriva, Angada, Nila, Gandhamadana, Jambavan,
Sushena, Vegadarshin, Mainda, Nala, Jyotimukha, and
the monkey, Dwivida,—almost slain. And Bibhishana and
Hanuman saw in the field seven and sixty dotis of fleet.
footing monkeys slain (in battle) at the fifth part of the day
by the darling of the Self-sprung. And surveying that
host worsted, dreadful like the surges of the sea, Hanuman
and Bibhishana began to search for Jambavan. And finding
that heroic son of Prajapati, afflicted with natural decrepitude,
aged, and resembling smouldering fire,—wounded with
hundreds of shafts, Pulastya’s son said~-“O_ noble one, hath
not thy life been destroyed with those sharp shafts ?”
Hearing Bibbishana’s words, Jambavan—best of bears—
evoking utterance with extreme effort, said,—"O foremost
of Nairitas, endowed with exceeding prowess, I know thee by
thy voice. Having my person pierced with sharp shafts, I


* Mantra,


1360 RAMAYANA.


cannot see thee with my eyes. Doth he through whom
Anjani as well as Matarigwa* are blessed with fair offspring, —
doth that prince of monkeys—Hanuman—live 2” Hearing
Jambavin’s speech, Bibhishana said—'Why, passing by the
son of the high and mighty,t dost thou enquire after the
Wind-god’s offspring ? O noble one, thou dost not show that
overflowing affection either for king Sugriva or Raghava that
thou showest for the son of the Wind-god.” Hearing
Bibhishana’s words, Jambavan said,—"Hear, O foremost of
Rakshasas, why I enquire after the Wind-god’s son. While
this hero is alive, this force, albeit destroyed, liveth ; but if
HanumAn is reft of life, although living, we are destroyed. O
child, if the Wind-god’s offspring, resembling his sire himself
or (the deity of) Fire in prowess, is alive,there is hope for our
lives." Then approaching that aged one, Hanum&n—son
unto the Wind-god—saluted him humbly, holding Jambavan's
feet. Hearing Hanum&n's voice, that foremost of monkeys,
with his senses sorely smarting, deemed himself as having
regained his life. Then that exceedingly energetic one
addressed Hanuman, saying,—"Come, O powerful monkey.
It behoveth thee to rescue the monkeys. There is none else.
Endowed with profuse prowess, thou art the greatest friend
of these. This is the hour when thou shouldst display thy
might. Any other see I not. Do thou cheer up this host
consisting of bears and monkeys ; and do thou also heal the
wounds of these two tormented by them. Bounding sheer over
the main, thou, O Hanumin,shouldst repair to the Himavan—
foremost of mountains. There thou wilt see that best of
mountains—the golden Rishabha of terrific aspect, and, O
smiter of foes, the peak also of Kailaga. Lying in the lap
of these two, thou, O hero, O powerful monkey, wilt see
the mountain of medicines, fraught with healing herbs of ali
kinds. On its summit thou wilt find four medicinal herbs


* The Wind-god,
+ Vide Ramlet.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1361


flaming ard illumining the ten cardinal quarters—-wis.,
Mritasanjivani,* Vicalyakarani,t Suvarnakarani,} and the
mighty medicine, Sandhani. O Hanum4n, providing thyself
with these, thou shouldst come hither without delay. Da
thou, O offspring of the Wind-god§ bringing back lives
unto these monkeys, cheer them up.” Thereat Hanuman
filled himself with energy, even as the Ocean heaveth with
the force of the winds (blowing on its breast). And ascend-
ing the summit of that mountain,j and hurting it with his
tread,that hero—Hanuman—appeared like a second mountain,
And crushed under the tread of that monkey, the mountain
was dispirited ; and sore distressed, it could hardly contain
itself. And the trees on it began to topple to the earth ;
and on account of the vehemence of the monkey, they famed
ap. And smilten by Hanuman, its peaks were scattered
around. And monkeys conld no lenger dwell on that fare-
most of mountains, which, being hard pressed (by Hanundin),
was trembling all aver, with its slopes covered with broken
trees and rocks. And with her giant gateways shaking, and
the doors of her edifices broken, that night Lanka, over-
whelmed with fright, seemed to be dancing. And the


offspring of the Wind-god, resembling a mountain itself,
bringing that mountain to sore straits, agitated the entire
earth with her Oceans, And hurting the mountain with his
tread, he, opening wide his mouth resembling that of a mare,
sent up loud shouts, terrifying the night-rangers. And
hearing those tremendous roars as he kept emitting cries,
the powerful Rakshasas were quite stupified. And bowing
down unto the Ocean, that subduer of encmies, the Wind-
god's son, endowed with dreadful prowess, began to ponder


* Lit. reviving the dead.

+ Lit, healing wounds inflicted by darts,

+ Lit. transmuting any thing to gold.

§ Gandhabahdtanaya—tit., son unto the bearer of smcll—-a designation of
the Wind in Sanskrit —T.

1 Trikuta.


1362 RAMAYANA.


over the mighty mission with which he had been entrusted
in the interests of Raghava—And, then upraising his tail
resembling a serpent, bending his back, contracting his ears,
and opening his mouth looking like that of a mare, that one
possessed of terrific impetuosity, bounded into the sky.
And with the vehemence of his rush,—he carried away in his
wake whole tracts of trees, and rocks, and crags, and inferior
monkeys ;* and alter having been carried away some
distance by the vehemence of his arms and thighs, they, at
length losing their velocity, fell into the waters (of the Ocean.)
And stretching his arms resembling serpents, the son of the
Wind-god endowed with the prowess of Garurat coursed on
towards the monarch of mountains, as if making all the
quarters tremble, And seeing the sea with its hosts of
billows roliing furiously, and with the confideracies of aquatic
animals bewildered by the angry waters, he coursed on
rapidly, like the discus discharged by the hand of Vishnu.
And surveying hills and birds and pools and rivers and tanks
and splendid cities and flourishing provinces, that one equal
to his sire himself in celerity, held his way. And that hero—~
Hanum&n—like unto his father in prowess, and incapable of
being fatigued, vigorously proceeded along the orbit of the
San, And that powerful monkey possessed of the speed of
the Wind itself, and having mighty impetuosity, careered,
making all sides resound with his roars. And remembering
Jambavan’s words, that redoubtable monkey, son unto the
Wind-god, possessed of terrific prowess, and resembling a
mountain, suddenly saw (before him) the Himavan;
furnished with countless cascades and numerous caves and
rivulets; with splendid summits appearing like massess of pale
clouds ; and graced with various trees. And arriving at that
lord of mighty mountains, furnished with excellent towering
golden summits, he saw the great sacred asylums {of the


* Residing in the Trikuta mountain.
t+ The text hus, she Foe of serpents—an appellation of Garura


YUDDHARANDAM. 1363


ascetics), inhabited by the flower of celestial saints.
And he saw Brahmakoga() and Rajatalaya() and Sakralaya
and Rudracgarapramoksha@) and Hay&nana() and the flaming
Brahmagiras,(/) and the servants of Vaivagwata(e) And
he saw the abode of the Fire-god, and the abode of Vaigra-
vana and the effulgent Suryyanivandhana,@) and the abode
of Brahma,@) and the bow of Sankara, and the navel of the
Earth.G) And he saw Kailaga of terrific aspect,and the stone(
of Himavan, and that bull, and the golden mountain, and
that foremost of mountains furnished with all
herbs, flaming, and illuminated with every kind of medicinal
plants. And beholding that flaming mass of fire, the offspring
of Vasava's(™) emissary wondered. And bounding up to the
lord of medicinal mountains, he fell to searching for the
drugs. And that mighty monkey--the Wiad-god’s son—
leaving behind a thousand yoyanas, began to range the
mountain containing the divine remedies in its entrails. And
those potent medicines,in that foremost of mountains, knowing
(before-hand) that one was coming seeking for them, rendered
themselves invisible. And not seeing them, the high-souled
Hanumin was angered; and from wrath he set up roars.


(a) The place of Hiranyagarbha.

(® The place of Rajatandbha—silver-naveled—another form of Hiranya.
garbha.

(©) The abode of Salera,

(a) The place wherefrom Rudra discharged his arrow on the oceasion of
the destruction of Tripura.

(2) The place of the Horse-necked.

(A) The place of the deity presiding over the Brahma weapon.

() An appellation of Yama.

(4) The spot where the suns meet.

(i) The place of the four-faced Brahma,

(J) The spot of Prajapati.

(@) On which Rudra sat when engaged in asceticism.

() Which had been mentioned by Jambavdn,

(m) The emissary of Vasava in his cloud-form is the Wind driving the
cloud ; and the passage refers to Hanuman.—T,


1364 RAMAYANA,


And not brooking that, (Hanuman) with eyes resembling
glowing fire, addressed that foremost of mountains, saying,—~
What is this that thou hast decided on, that thou showest
no compassion for Raghava? But, O Jord of mountains,
to-day witness thyself, overpowered by my arms and torn in
pieces!” And (anon) on a sudden, he violently rooted up its
summit with trees and elephauts and gold, and furnished with
thousand varieties ‘of ore,—-having its tops dorn and its
slupes aflume. And uprooting it, he sprang into ((he bosom
of the air), terrifying the worlds coutaining celestials and
the lurds thereof, And bymaed by countless rangers of the
air, that one endowed with the terrific impetuosilty of Garura
himself, taking that summit furnished with the splendour
of the Sun, went along the orbit of the Sun, And near the
Sun, that Sun-like one seemed to be another Sun. And
with that mountain, the offspring of the bearer of perfumes
appeared surpassingly grand, like very Vishnu equipped with
the flaining discus having a thousand edges. And seeing
him, the monkeys shouled—and he also, seeing them,
shouted in delight. And hearing their tremendous cheers,
those residing in Lank3 shouted still more dreadiully. Aud
then the bigh-souled one dropped on that best of mountains in
the midst of the moukey-forces; and, bowing down unto
the principal monkeys there, he embraced Bibhishana. And
then those sons of that king of men, smeliing the perfume
of that mighty medicine, were then and there healed of theie


wounds; aud the heroic monkeys also sat up. And all the
hervic monkeys were instantly heated and cured; and those
also that were slaia (in battle), through the smell of that best
of deugs, sat up, like persons risen alter sleep at break of
day, Ever since the munkeys and Rakshasas had begun to
fight, for maintaining honor, all those Rakshasas that were
slain there by the mighty monkeys, were thrown into the sea.
Then that monkey, the offspring of the bearer of fragrance,
endowed with terrific speed, took that medicinal mountain


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1365


(back) unto HimayGn aod again presented himself before
Rama.


SECTION LXxv.
eae


Tren the exceedingly energetic lord of monkeys,Sugriva,
said unto Hanuman these words fraught with import,—
“Inasmuch as Kumbdhakarna hath been slain as also the
princes,* Ravana can no longer defend the city-t Now let
those principal monkeys that are endowed with great strength
and that are furnished with flectness, taking fire-brands
(in their hands) rapidly rash towards Lanka” Then when
the Sun had set and at the terrific front of Night, those
foremost of monkeys marched towards Lanka, equipped with
fire-brands. And charged at all points by numbers of
monkey's armed with fire-brands, those fierce-eyed (Rakshasas)
that guarded the gates.{ suddrniy fled away. And thereat,
(the monkeys) delighted set fire to gates and upper apart-
ments and spacious bigh-ways and varivus by-way3 and
edifices, And the fire$ burnt their{] mansions by thousands ;
and mountain-like superstructures toppled headlong to the


earth, Aad there burat agurz, and sweet sandal, and pearls,
and sheeny gems, and diamonds and corals. And there


*  Nishuditéh—slain, lelt out for euphony.

+ Upanirhiram is a contested term. Kataka gives the sense adopted by
me, Tirtha says it means ‘Ravana cannot give battle in the open field’
According to others, it means ‘Ile cannot offer truce to us —T,

$ Avakshdh—according ta some means gates, According to others, a
gulma or division of an army—T.

§ Hutabhuk—tit, eater of sacrificial offsprings—a designation of Fire.

4 According to the commentator this refers to the fire lighted by the
monkeys. 1 differ—T.


1346 RAMAYANA.


burnt linen and fine silk and dvckas and various kinds
of woolen cloths; and vessels of gold, and weapons ;
divers kinds of furniture, trappings and ornaments of
steeds ; cords for tying elephants ; burnished ornaments for
cars ; armour of warriors ; and hides of horses and elephants,
And swords and bows and bow-strings and arrows and
tomaras® and ankugast and darts. And blankets and chowri's
and tiger-skins and musk and other things. And pearls and
excellent gems ; and edifices all around. And there the fire
burneth heaps of various kinds of arms, And then the fire
burnt various kinds of curious structures, and the dwellings
of Rakshasas and all househulders, And there the fire
flaming up again and again burnt down by hundreds and
thousands the houses of the denizons of Lanka,—clad in
curious golden mail; and wearing wreaths and ornaments and
altires ; having their eyes wildly moving in intoxication ;
reeling in drink; those whose paramours were dressed
in fluwing apparels; or those wroth with their foes; or
bearing maces and darts and swords in their hands; or
engaged in eating or drinking ; or asleep with their beloved
on costly couches ; or who, agitated with fright, were hastily
going taking their sons with them.—And that fire burnt down
firm-based rich dwellings furnished with innumerable apart-
ments, and garnished with golden Moons and crescents,—
and mansions having graceful crests; and variegated
windows and daises raised there, embellished with rubies
and Japises, and seeming to touch the Sun; and piles
resembling mountains in grandeur,—and resonant with the
cries of Kraunchas and peacocks and the tinklings of
ornaments. And the flaming gateways all round appeared
Tike clouds in the rainy season lighted up by lightning, or
like the peaks of a mighty mountain ablaze with a forest-


* An Iron club.—T. -
+t The hook used to drive an elephant,—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1367


conflagration. And superb damsels asleep in lolty edifices,*
being burnt, cast away their ornaments and shrieked. And
consumed by the fire, buildings began to drop down like the
summits of a mighty mountain smit with the thunder-bolt
of the thunderer, And those burning, appeared from a
distance like the peaks of Himalaya aglow. And in
consequence of those tops of the edifices burning and of the
living flames, that night Lank@ looked as if swarming with
flowering Kingukas. And with elephaut-riders, and elephants,
and steeds let loose, Lanka appeared like the Ocean at the
hour of Universal tumbling,—with its ferocious aqnatic
animals whirling in wild chaos. Sometimes, an elephant
seeing a steed let loose,—was flying away in fear; and
sometimes a horse seeing a frightened elephant,was stopping,
himself seized with fear—And on Lanka burning, the mighty
main with the reflection (of the conflagration) looked like au
Ocean of red waters. And ina short time that city set on
fire by the monkeys, looked like the earth glowing at the
time of the Universal dissolution. And the cries of the
females amidst the drift of smuke, heated by the flames,
could be heard from an hundred Yoyanas. And as Rakshasas
haviug their bodies burnt came out of houses, monkeys eager
for encounter on a sudden sprung upon them. And the shouts
of the monkeys and the cries of the Raksbasas made the ten
cardinal quarters and the ocean and the Earth resound.

And on those high souled ones—both Rama and
Lakshmana—having been cured of their wounds, possess-
ing themselves in calmness, took up their excellent bows.
And Rama drew that best of bows. And thereat there
was heard a tremendous twang striking terror into the
Rakshasas. And drawing his redoubtable bow, Rama
appeared like the reverend enraged Bhava, drawing his bow
having sounds and instinct with Brabma energy. And the
twang of -Rama’s bow, drowning the roars of both the


* Fimdua, accordiog to Raminuya, is a seven-storied edifice—T.


1368 RAMAYANA.


monkeys and the Rakshasas,—was alone heard. And the
ululations of the monkeys and the cries of the Rakshasas and
the rattle of Rama’s bow—these three filled the ten cardinal
quarters. And with the shafts discharged from his bow, the
gateway of the city resembling the summit of Kail&ica was
crushed in pieces, scattered around on the ground, And
seeing Rama's shafts in cars and dwellings, the preparations
for conflict were pushed on with great vigor. And in conse
quence of the foremost Rakshaxas preparing for fight, and
emitting roars, that night appeared like the Fatal Night
itself. Aud the foremost monkeys were directed by the
high-souled Sugriva, saying,—"Ye monkeys, do ye fight,
approaching the gate lying at hand, But he that flyeth from
his ranks, should be slain by main force’, As the principal
monkeys stationed themselves at the gate, equipped with
fire-brands, wrath took possession of Ravana, And as he
yawned, the wind (blowing) from his mouth), filled the ten
cardinal regions ; aud his wrath resembled that appearing in
the person of Rudra. And wrought up with a mighty rage,
he sent forth Kumbha and Nikumbha—both sons of Kumbha-
karna—in company with innumerable Rakshasas.—And
in accordance with Ravana’s command, Yopaksha and
Sonitiksha, and Prajangha, and Kampana_ went with
Kambhakarna’s sons, And, setting up leonine roars, he
commanded all those highly powerful Rakshasas, saying,—
“Do ye go this very day for battle.” Thus directed, those
heroic Rakshasas, equipped with flaming weapons, went out,
roaring again and again. And the firmament was illuminated
with the splendour of the ornaments of the Rakshasas and
the splendour of their persons and the fire kindled by the
monkeys. And there the light of the Moon and that of the
stars and the brilliance of their ornaments,—combined, lighted
up the welkin.—And the beams of the Moon and the brilliance
of the ornuments and the flaming splendour of the planets
emblazoned all round the forces of the monkeys and


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1363


Rakshasas. And the
on the restle!


ht of half-burnt houses, again, falling
ripples of the sea, made it w


an extremely
And those dreadful Rikshasa hosts,


excellent swords and paracwadhas,*
nd elephants rife with paths,t and
flaming darts and clubs and scimitars and yrdsas and fomaras
and bows ; bearing blazing prdsas; ringing with the tinklings
of hundreds of balls; with their arms encased in golden
networks ; flourishing axes ; whirling their mighty weapons ;


terrific steeds and cars


fixing shafts on their bows; making the air swoon away


ith the perfmes of their wreaths; extremely terrific;
swarming with heroes ; sending out sounds like those of the
sea. And seeing the army of the Rakshasas incapable of
being coped with advance, the monkey-forces began to move
and send up loud cheers, And thereat that array of
Rakshasas vehemently sprang forward before the force of the


fue, like unto insects plunging into a fiame. And whirling


with their arms bludgeons and @caa/s, that army of Rai
appeared exceedingly grand. And the monkeys, cager for


encounter, darted forward like maniacs; and began to
despatch the night-rangers with rocks and trees and clenched
fist. And FR
whetted urrows swiftly cut off the heads of falling monke
And the Rakshasas ranged there, with their ears torn with
teeth, or heir heads broken by blows, or their lintbs crushed
with the discharge of crags. And in the same way other
gtim-visaged night-rangers slew with sharpened swords
the foremost of monkeys on all sides. And one about to
slay another was himself slain by the latter; and one, about


hasas possessed of dreadful prowess with


to bring another down, was himself brought down (by his
adversary, and one that was railing at another, was in turn


* A platoon consisting of one chariot, one clephant, three horse and five
foot—T.
+ Akind of sword,


272


1370 RAMAYANA,


rebuked by his enemy; and one who was going to bite his
foe, was himself bitten by him. And one was crying ‘Give,’*
and his adversary anon giveth; and another, again said,—
‘Iwill give. Why puttest thyself to trouble? Stay.” Thus
there did they accost each other. And there was waged a
terrific encounter between the monkeys and the Rakshasas,—
in which arms lay scattered about ; and armour and weapons
strewn around; and mighty prdcast were upraised; and
which was faught with blows and darts and swords and
Kuntalas.t And in that conflict the Rakshasas slaughtered
monkeys by tens and sevens. And then the monkeys
hemmed in the Rakshasa-forces, with their apparels falling
off and with their mail and standards strewn around.


SECTION tXxVi.


Ox that furious and destructive carnage proceeding,
Angada, eager for encounter,approached the heroic Kampana,
Thereat, challenging Angada in wrath, he assailed him with
impetuosity. And Kampana dealt a blow to Angada with
his mace; and thereat, wounded with it, he reeled. Then
regaining his senses, that energetic one burled a mountain-
top. Borne down by the blow, Akampana dropped down
to the earth, And secing Kampana slain in the conflict,
Sonit&ksha mounted on a car, iutrepidly rushed against
Angada, And he then impetuosly pierced Angada with
sharpened shafts, keen and capable of cleaving the body


* Battle.

+ A bearded dart.

$ What could this be like? The commentator is mute. Wilson has
Kuntalika—butter-knife or scoop. Kuntala may, however, mean a plough, —P.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1371


and resembling the Fatal Fire itself in appearance,—with
Kshuras(@) and Kshurapras() and Narachas@ and Vatsa-
dantas@ and Siliumkhas@® and Karnis(/) and Salas(s) and
Vipatas,4) and countless (other) whetted arrows. And the
powerful son of Vali—Angada—endowed with prowess having
his person pierced with arrows suddenly smashed (his
adversary’s) car and arruws and dreadful bow. And thereat,
Sonitaksha swiftly took up his sword and shield; and without
reflecting for a moment, that vigorous one sprang forward.
And the powerful Angada, speedily bounding up, seized
his enemy’s sword and holding the same with his hands
shouted, And then hitting at (Akampana’s) shoulder-blade,
that powerful monkey—~Angada—hewed him in twain, his
blow going obliquely down like the sacred thread, And
taking that terrific sword, and shouting again and again, in
the field, V4li’s son rushed against other enemies. And then
strong and heroic Yupaksha accompanied by Prajangha,—
mounted on a car, wrathfully approached the mighty son of
Vali. And taking an iron mace, that hero, Sonitaksha,
adorned with a golden angada,—attaining a little respite,
advanced against Angada. And that redoubtable hero, the
powerful Prajangha, also, accompanied by Yup&ksha, fired
with wrath,equipped with a mace,advanced towards the son of
Vali endowed with exceeding prowess, And placed between
those two—Sonitaksha and Prajangha—that foremost of
monkeys appeared like the full Moon placed between the
Visakbas.@ And Mainda and Dwivida defending Angada,


(@) Arrows having razor-like edges,

() Crescent-shaped shafts,

(0) Arrows made entirely of iron,

(a) Arrows resembling the tecth of calves.

(@) Arrows resembling the feathers of the Kanka.

(f) Arrows furnished with two sides resembling cars,
(g) Arrows with short leads.

(A) Arrows resembling the tops of Karaviras—Tirtha.
(i) The asterisks so named,


1372 RAMAYANA.


remained beside him, desirous of witnessing the encounter
between those two (combatants). And fired with fury, those
huge-bodied Rakshasas endowed with dreadful prowess,
equipped with swords and shafts and maces,—being on their
guard, fell upon the monkeys. And the encounter that touk
place between those three lords of monkeys combined (on
one side), and the three redoubtable Rakshasis (oa the other),
was dread{ul and capable of making people’s down stand on
end. And they,* taking up trees, hurled them in the conflict
(against their antagonists); and the powerful Prajangha
resisted af] those with his swords. And (the monkeys) in the
contest showered rocks and trees on the cars (of their
enemies: and the exceedingly strong Yupaksha cut them
off with vollies of arrows. And the powerful Sonitaksha,
endowed with prowess, with his mace severed in the middle
the trees which Dwivida and Mainda had uprooted and
discharged. And summoning speed, Prajangha darted against
Vali's son, upraising a huge scimitar capable of piercing
into the vitals of trees. And seeing him approach, that lord
of monkeys possessed of exceeding strength and great
truck him with an Agwakarna tree ; and with a blow
smote his antagonist on his arm holding a xéséringa, And


prowe:


seeing the sword resembling a mace droppe to the earth,that
exceedingly mighty one clenched his fist into a blow like
unto the levin ; and that one,endowed with wondrous energy,
smote in the forchead that foremost of monkeys possessed
of redoubtable prowess, And thereat he for a moment was
staggered, And then recovering his senses, the energetic
and powerful son of Vali by meaus of his clenched fist severed
Prajangha’s head from his body. Thereat Yupaksha, seeing
his uncle slain in battle, with his eyes filled with tears,
finding his shafts exhausted, swiftly descended from his car
and took asword. And fiuding Yupaksha charge, Dwivida,
waxing wroth, speedily smote him on the breast; and that


* The monkeys,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1373


powerlul one also seized him. And finding his brother taken,
the highly energetic Sonitaksha then dealt the mighty
Dwivida a blow in the chest. And overcome by that blow,
that one endowed with great strength, shook; and Dwivida
seized his antagonist’s upraised mace. In the meanwhile
Mainda came to the side of Dwivida. And Sonilaksha and
Yup&ksha, bestirring themselves, began to vehemently and
forcibly drag and pull those (two) monkeys. And Dwivida
with his nail tore Sonitaksha’s face ; and that powerful one
violently bringing him down to the earth, pressed him with
might and main. And fired with wrath, Mainda—foremost
of monkeys—grasped Yupaksha with his arms; and that one
dropt down dead on the earth, And thereupon the force of
the lord of the Rakshasas, having its foremost heroes slainy—-
and aggrieved thereat, went to where Kumbhakarna’s son
was. And then cheering up the flying forces, that best (of
Rakshas)—the energetic Kumbha—seeing that Raksha host
with its mighty heroes slain by highly powerful monkeys
crowned with success, began to perform difficult feats
in tho encounter. And heedfully taking his bow, that first
of bowmen discharged shafts resembling venomous serpents
capable of piercing the body. And his excellent bow with
shafts shone resplendent like the very bow of Indra himself
affluent with the splendour of Airivata and lightning. And
then drawing his bow to its utmost bent, he hit Dwivida with
a feathered shaft knobbed with gold. And suddenly wounded
with it, that best of monkeys having the splendour of Trikuta,
fell down senseless to the earth, stretching his legs wide.
And Mainda, seeing his brother, broken in mighty encounter,
furiously rushed forward, taking a gigantic crag; and that
one possessed of great strength, hurled it at the Rakshasa.
And thereat Kumbha severed that crag with fire shafts
discharged (from his bow). And then aiming other fair-
headed arrows resembling venomous snakes, that exceedingly
energetic one smate Dwivida’s elder brother in the chest.


1374 RAMAYANA,


And struck (with those arrows), that leader of monkey-
bands, Mainda, with his marrow pierced therewith, fell down
tothe earth, deprived of his senses. And Angada seeing
his uncles* endowed with exceeding prowess, overpowered,
darted vehemently at Kumbha staying with bow upraised,
And as he descended, Kumbha pierced him with fire shafts ;
and as one pierceth an elephant with éomaras, he also pierced
(Angada) with three other arrows. And the powerful
Kumbha pierced Angada with a great many arrows, sharp-
pointed, whetted, keen and ornamented with gold, And Vali’s
son Angada, albeit pierced all over in his person, did not
shake; and he kept showering on hist head stones and trees,
And the graceful son of Kumbhakarna cut off and cleft ail
those (stone and trees) discharged by Vali,sson. And seeing
him spring up, Kumbha pierced that monkey-leader on the
ground with shafts, even as one assaileth an elephant with
fire-brands, And blood gushed out of his closed eyes.
And then covering his eyes with his hand, Angada with
another took a sdé/a that was hard by. And placing
on his breast the sdé/a furnished with shoulders, and
pulling its branches and bending its top, he cleared it of
its foliage, in that mighty encounter. And then in the sight
of all the Rakshas he violently discharged that tree resembl-
ing the very banner of Indra and appearing like Mandara
itself. And thereat het severed it with seven sharp shafts
capable of piercing the body. And Angada experienced a
sharp pang and fell down deprived of his senses. And seeing
the invincible Angada down like ebbing sea, the foremost
monkeys informed Raghava of it. Aad Rama, hearing that
Val’s son had come to grief in terrific fight, directed
the principal monkeys, headed by Jambavan. And hearing
Rama’s command, the monkeys, fired with wrath, charged


© Maternal uncies,
+ Kumbha’s.
t Kumbha.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1375


Kumbha, staying with his bow upraised. And those powerful
monkeys, with their eyes crimsoned with choler and bearing
rocks and trees in their hands, were engaged in defending
Angada, And Jambavan and Sushena and the monkey,
Vegadargi, wrought with wrath, darted against that hero—son
unto Kumbhakarna, And seeing them spring forward; he
covered up those exceedingly mighty lords of monkey, with
showers of shafts, even as a crag obstructeth the course of a
current. And even the great deep cannot see his own
shores, those high-souled lord of monkeys, coming within the
tange of his arrows, could not even see. And seeing those
monkeys sore distressed by the shafts, the king of the
monkeys, Sugriva, in that conflict taking his brother's son
on his back, rushed against the son of Kumbhakarna, even as
a powerful lion rusheth at an elephant ranging on the slopes
of a mountain. And that mighty monkey, uprooting many
an agwokarna and other mighty trees of various kinds,
discharged them (at the foc). And by means of his sharp
arrows the graceful son of Kumbhakarna cut off that down.
pour of trees covering the welkin; and incapable of being
resisted. And being baffled those trees louked like gataghunis.
And seeing that shower of trees riven by Kumbha, the
graceful lord of the monkeys endowed with exceeding strength
and prowess, did not feel any mortification. And suddenly
attacked, he bearing those arrows, seized Kumbha’s bow
resembling in resplendence the very bow of Indra. And
swiltly bounding up and performing that feat difficult of being
achieved, he, exceedingly enraged, addressed Kumbha
resembling an elephant shorn of his tusks, saying,—“O elder
brother of Nikumbha, marvellous are thy might and the
force of thyself as well as the modesty and prowess that are
thine and Ravana’s. And, O thou equal unto Prahrada or
Vali or the slayer of Vritra or Varuna or Kuvera! thou alone
walkest in the wake of thy yet mightier father. As mental an-
guish doth not dog one that hath controlled his senses,—the


1396 RAMAYANA,


celestials cannot cope in conflict with thee alone, D repressor
of foes, O of mighty arms, bearing thy dart in thy hand, O
thou of high intelligence, put forth thy prowess! and do thou
also witness my work, It is only by virtue of the boon he
hath received, that thy uncle can bear the deities and the
D&navas, But Kumbhakarna copeth with the immortals and
Asuras by means of his native might. And in the bow
equal to Indrajit himself and in power equal to Ravana, thou
now in might and energy art the foremost of Rakshasas.
And to-day let all creatures witness the mighty and
wonderful encounter in conflict between thee and me, like
unto the meeting of Sakra and Samvara. And unparal-
leled is the feat thou hast performed; and thou hast
displayed thy skill in weapons. And heroic monkeys
endowed with dreadful vigor, have been brought down by
thee. And, O hero it is only because of the apprehension*® of
censure of the people that I do not slay thee who art fatigued
fn consequence of the acts that thou hast performed. And
reposing from fight, do thou see my strength!" = And being
thus honored (by Sugriva) with fair speech, (Kumbha) flamed
up like a flame into which oblations have been poured.
And then Kumbha seized Sugriva by the arms, And like
two elephants in rut, they sighing momentarily, fastened on
each other’s person, and possessed each other,—and from
fatigue emitting from their mouth flames mixed wilh vapour.
And with the stamping of their feet, the earth was rent into
rivers, and the main was waxed, with its billows surging
furiously. Then Sugriva lifting up Kumbha clean, vioiently
plunged him into the salt wash, making his eyes acquainted
with the locality of the deep. And in consequence of
Kumbha’s plunge, the waters heaving up, rolled on all
sides like the Vindhya or Mandara, Then springing up,
and bringing Sugriva down, Kumbha, transported with wrath


* ie, Lest people should censure me, saying,—'Sugriva slew Kumbha
when he was fatigued in fight—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1377


dealt a blow on his chest, like unto the levin. And thereat
his skin was rent, and blood began to gush out,—and the
impetus of that blow broke Sugriva’s bones. And the
vehemence (of the blow) caused a great fire to blaze up at
that spot; even as the thunder-bolt smiting the mountain
Meru, maketh place blazed. And the mighty Sugriva—
foremost of monkeys—-sorely handled by him, fastened his
fingers into a box resembling the thunder-bolt, and furnished
with all the effulgence of the solar disc having a thousand
rays. And then that powerful one made that blow descend
right on Kumbha’s breast. And agonised with that stroke,
Kumbha reft of his senses, dropped like unto a fire that hath
lost its brightness. And overpowered by that blow, the
Rakshasa anon dropped down, like unto the bright Lohitanga
dropping from the firmament urged on by Destiny. And the
aspect of the falling Kumbha with his breast broken by the
blow, appeared like that of the Sun routed by Rudra.
And on his being slain, in encounter, by the foremost of
monkeys endowed with terrific strength, the earth with her
hills and woods, shook; and a mighty fear took possession
of the Rakshas.


SECTION uxxvii.


Sune his brother slain by Sugriva, Nikumbha, gazed
at the lord of the monkeys, as if consuming him with his
passion. And then that one endowed with calmness, grasped
a bludgeon entwined with wreaths, and furnished with an
iron ring measuring five fingers, and resembling the top of
the Mahendra ;* plated with gold and embellished with


* The mountain. so named,


173


1378 RAMAYANA,


diamonds and lapises;—and looking like the rod of Yama
himself ; dreadful, and capable of removing the fear of the
Rakshas. And whirling this, that highly powerful one,
resembling the banner itself of Sakra in energy, Nikumbha
possessed of terrific strength, with his mouth wide open, set
up shouts. And with gold adorning his breast, and angedas
placed on his arms and a pair of curious and variegated ear-
tings, Nikumbha, with his ornaments and that same bludgeon,
appeared beautiful like a mass of roaring clouds laughing
with lightning and fucnished with the iris. And the head of
that huge-bodied heroe’s parigha undid the conjunction of the
Seven* Winds and appearedf like a noiseless and smokeless
flame. Along with the gyration of Nikumbha’s. parigha
the whole welkin, together with the excellent cityt of the
Gandharbas, and the planets, stars and the moon, began to
whirl. And Nikumbha was hard to approach like unto the
fire of dissolution, being resplendent with the brilliance
of parigha and other ornaments and having his anger for
its fuels, And the Rakshasas and monkeys did not dare
stir even out of fear. And the heroic Hanuman, spreading
his breast, stood before him. And thereat the powerful
(Nikumbha) having long-arms§ threw his parigha resembling
the Sun at the breast of that powerful one. And falling
on the firm and spacious breast of Hanuinan it was broken
into hundred pieces. And the broken portions, being
scattered, appeared like hundreds of fire-brands in the sky.
Like unto a mountain standing still even at the time of an
earthquake that mighty monkey was not moved albeit
struck with the parigha. Being thus hurt that highly powerful
Hanumin, the foremost of the monkeys, with great velocity
clenched his fist. And with this, the powerful (monkey)


* This indicates the length of the Parigha.
+ This might refer to Kumbha as well.

t Some say Vitapabati and some say Alaka,
§ Lit. arms resembling parighas.


VUDDHARANDAM. 1379


gifted with great impetuosity, and resembling the wind in
prowess, struck Nikumbha on his breast. And with that
fist, his (Nikumbha’s) armour* was riven and blood gushed
out, And a light rising out of his breast suddenly disappeared
like unto lightning disappearing in a mass of clouds. And
being struck with his (Hanuman’s) fist Nikumbha was greatly
moved and restoring himself attacked the mighty Hanuman
and pulled him up. And beholding in conflict the terrible
and powerful Hanuman pulled up by Nikambha, the
residents of Lanka began to shout with joy. Being thus put
to shame by that Raksha, Hanum&n the son of the Wind,
struck him with his iron fist. And releasing himself from the
gtasp of Nikumbha, Hanuman the Wind-god’s son instantly
planted his foot on the earth. Inflamed with ire, he, throwing
down Nikumbha, began to crush him ; and gifted with vehe-
mence, he, with great impetuosity, leaped up and sat on the
breast (of the Raksha). And holding his head with two hands,
he, emitting loud roars, displaced his head. Nikumbha being
thus slain in conflict by the Wind-god’s son, there ensued
a terrible conflict between the highly enraged armies of the
son of Dagaratha and the lord of Rakshasas. And Nikumbha
being deprived of his life, the monkeys began to shout—as if
resounding all the quarters. And with it the whole earth
moved and the abode of the celestials dropped down. And
the Rakshasa-hosts were greatly terrified.


* Some texts read charma (skin) in the place of Barma—(atmour) 4. e, his
skin was rent—-This equally indicates Hanumdn's strength —T.


1389 RAMAYANA,


SECTION LXXVIIi.


Benouoine Kumbha and Nikumbha slain, Ravana was
excited with ire like unto flaming fire. And being beside
himself, simultaneously with wrath and grief Ravana* spoke
unto MakarSksha, Khara’s son, having spacious eyes, saying,
—"O child, do thou proceed at my command with the
army and destroy Raghava and Lakshmana with all the
monkeys.” Hearing the words of Ravana, Khara’s son,
Makaraksha,proud of his own prowess, delightedly spoke unto
the night-ranger, saying, “Be it so.” And saluting and
circumambulating the Ten-necked one, that hero, at Ravana’s
behest, issued out of the house. And Khara’s son spoke
unto the commander who was near him, saying,—Do thou
speedily bring the chariot here and all the soldiers.” And
hearing his words, that commanding night-ranger, soon led
before him the army and the chariot. And going round the
chariot and addressing the charioteer that night-ranger
(Makaraksha) said,—''O charioteer, do thou soon drive the
chariot.” And Makariksha addressed those Rakshasas,
saying,~=""O Rakshasas! do ye all fight before me. 1 have
been commanded hy the high-souled Ravana, the lord of
Rakshasas, to slay both Rama and Lakshmana in conflict. [
shall slay to-day, O night-ranger, with my excellent arrows,
Rama, Lakshmana, Sugriva and all other monkeys. Like
unto fire consuming dry fuel, shall I to-day slay the host of
monkeys with my darts.” Hearing those words of Maka.
raksha, the mighty night-rangers, (addressed themselves for
fight), They were armed with various weapons, cautious ;
assuming shapes at will, crooked,having fearful teeth,coppery
eyes; roaring like elephaots, having dishevelled hair and


* Nairita is another name of Ravana,


YUDDHAKANDAM. + 1381


terrible: And encircling the huge-bodied son of Khara, those
gigantic (Rakshasas) began to ‘proceed, delighted and
moving the earth (with the weight of their persons), There
arose a terrible noise on all sides from the sound of conches,
and thousands of bugles, and from the moving of the arms of
the heroes. And all on a sudden the reins slipped off (the hands
of) the charioteer and. the flag of the Rakshasas dropped
down, And the course of the steeds was thus slackend and
they began to move slowly and poorly with their heads droop-
ing down. There blew a terribly rough wind mixed with
dust when the fearfully wicked-minded Makaraksha’s issued
out for battle. Those powerful Rakshasas neglecting those
bad omens proceeded towards where Rama and Lakshmana
were. They were all black like unto clouds, elephants and
buffaloes, and had marks of swords and maces on their
persons, And all those night-rangers were skilled in the
art of warfare and began to range to and fro (in the battle
field) saying, “I shall go first.”


SECTION LXXIX:


Benoroine Makaraksha out for battle, those foremost
monkeys, leaping on a sudden, addressed themselves for fight.
Thereupon ensued a terrible conflict, capable of making
one’s down stand on end, between the night-rangers and the
monkeys like unto one between the celestials and Danavas,
And those monkeys and night-rangers crushed each other
down with trees, darts, maces and parighas. And those
night-rangers began to assail those foremost of monkeys
with sakéi,* swords, maces, #untas, tomaras, pattigas,


* A short atrow thrown from the hand or shot through a tube.—T,


1382, RAMAYANA,


Vindipalas,* arrows, nooses and clubs. Being thus assailed
with fearful arrows by Khara’s son, those monkeys, stricken
with fear, fled away. And beholding the monkeys fly away,
the victorious Rakshasas began to roar like excited lions.
The monkeys thus fying away to all quarters, Rama with
a downpour of shafts assailed the Rakshasas. And beholding
the Rakshasas thus overpowered, the night-ranger Makaraksha,
excited with the flame of ire, said—“Stay, O Rama, let us
both fight with each other; I shalt take thy life with
sharp arrows discharged off my bow. Thou didst slay my
father in the forest of Dandaka, Remembering thy action
and finding thee before, my ire is excited. O Raghava! O
Vicious souled one! My limbs are being burnt (with wrath)
for I did not see thee then in that mighty forest, O Rama,
by my good luck, I have got thee to-day, like unto a hungry
lion desiring to have other animals. Being despatched by
my arrows to the world of devils, thou shalt live with those
heroes, who had been killed by thee before. What is the use
of speaking more, O Rama, do thou hear my words. Let all
the people behold thy as well as my prowess in the battle-
field, Either with weapon or with clubs, in whatever thou
art expert, do thou fight with me in the battle-field,O Rama.”
Hearing the words of Makaraksha, Rama, Dagaratha’s son,
smiling, replied to the words of the babbler. "O Raksha, what
is the use of idle prating ? None can achieve success in a
battle with idle words—but with fighting. I slew in the
forest of Dandaka thy father with fourteen thousand
Rikshasas, Trigira and Dushana. O vile one, thou being
slain to day, with thy flesh, vultures and crows, having sharp
beaks and nails, and jackals shall be satisfied.+ Being thus


* An Iron spear or dart—T.

+ Here is another sloka, which is to be found in all N. W. P. texts and
in one or two texts published in Bengal—but it has been omitted by many for
it conveys the same meaning as the previous sloka; the meaning is —And the
birds drinking thy blood shall fy away to various quarters.—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1383


addressed by Raghava, the mighty Makaraksha, began to
dart sharp arrows towards him in the battle-field. And
Rama, with his shafts, sundered into several pieces, those
arrows. And being thus rendered useless those arrows,
feathered in gold, fell down on the earth, Then there arose
a terrible conflict between the Rakshasa Khara’s son and
Dagaratha’s son. And there were audible in that battle-
field, the outcry of the heroes and the twang of the bows
stretched by their hands, like unto the muttering of the
clouds in the sky. And to beheld that wondrous conflict,
the celestials, Danavas, Gandharbas, Kinnaras and the mighty
serpents stationed themselves in the sky. They were wounded
with the arrows discharged by each other and their strength
was doubled, And they began to fight in that battle-field
one attacking and the other withstanding the attack. And
in that conflict the Rakshasa sundered the shalts discharged
by Rama. And likewise Rama severed into several pieces the
arrows shot by the Rakshasa. All the quarters were covered
with arrows and nothing on earth or in the sky was visible.
Thereupon being excited with ire, Raghava of long arms
sucdered his (Rakshasa’s) bow in conflict and with eight
Nérachas picrced the charioteer. And with arrows Rama
sundered the chariot and killing the horses brought them
down, And the night-ranger Makaraksha was brought dowa
on the carth from the chariot. He then again rose up with
a dart in his hand creating terror unto al! creatures and
resembling the Fire of Dissolution in resplendence. It was
a terribly huge dart conferred on him by Siva, shining
in the sky in its native brilliance and like unto another
weapon of destruction.* And beholding which dart even
the celestials fly away in fear to different quarters. And
taking up that huge flaming dart, the night-ranger, being
excited with ire, hurled it at the high-souled Ra&ghava.


* This refers to the weapon used by Siva for destruction—for Siva, ac-
cording to the Hinda Mythology is the God of destruction —T.


1384 RAMAYANA.


And Raghava, with four shafts, sundered that dart, in
the sky, flaming and hurled at him by the son of Kara.
And that flaming dart, feathered in gold, being splintered
into several pieces hy Rama’s arrows fell down on earth like
a huge fire-brand, And beholding that dart baffled thus
by Rama of unwearied actions all those, stationed in
the welkin began to shout, “Well done! Well done!!.""
And beholding his dart thus sundered, the night-ranger
Makar&ksha clenching his fist spoke unto Kakutstha, saying,
"Stay! Stay !" And seeing him advance thus, the
descendant of Raghu, smiling, fixed a fiery arrow on his
bow. And with that arrow the Raksha was slain by
Kakutstha in battle. And having his heart pierced he fell
down and died. And beholding Makaraksha thus slain
all the Rakshasas, being afraid of Rama’s arrows, proceeded
towards Lanka. And seeing that night-ranger, the son of
Khara, slain by Rama's arrows, like unto a “mountain clept
by a thunder-bolt, the celestials were greatly delighted.


SECTION Lxxx.


Hearne of the destruction of Makaraksha, the heroic
Ravana, being excited with ire, began to grind his teeth,
Being thus angered, and thinking within himself what steps
to take, he ordered his son Indrajit to proceed to the battle-
field. “O hero, gifted with great prowess as thou art, do
thou, hidden (in clouds) or appearing before them, slay the
two heroic brothers Rama and Lakshmana. Thou didst defeat
in conflict Indra of unequalled prowess. Shalt thou then
neglect to slay men as they are?’ Being thus addressed
by the lord of the Rakshasas and obeying his father’s


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1385


command, Indrajit proceeded towards the sacrificial ground
to satisfy Fire (with oblations). There came some she-demons
with crimson turbans and waited respectfully where Ravana's
son was offering oblations unto Fire. In that sacrifice the
weapons were the leaves of sara,* dibhkutakst were fuels,
and there were brought crimson clothes and sruvast made
of black iron, And spreading fire on all sides with sara
leaves and ¢omaras, (Indrajit) caught a living goat, all black,
by the neck. And the fire, with oblations of sara, became
greatly blazed and devoid of smoke. And there were visible
many good omens indicating victory. The flame of the
fire was like unto gold, and moving Southwards began
to receive offerings of clarified butter. And thus offering
oblations unto fire and unto celestials, D&navas and
Rakshasas, he ascended an excellent car and soon disappear-
ed. It was drawn by four horses and a huge bow, set
with sharp acrows, appeared beautiful on that excellent car.
The chariot was brilliant with its own native resplendence,
adorned with gold and painted with the figures of deer and
acresent. It was encircled on all sides with golden bracelets,
adorned with flags made of va:durja and was like unto the
flaming fire. And being thus well protected with Brahwna
weapons resembling the Sun in brilliance, the mighty
son of Ravana became invincible. And offering oblatious
unto Fire in accordance with demonaic incantations and
thus obtaining the power of hiding himself, that hero, ever
victorious in battle, issued out of the city and said,—"Slay-
ing these two brothers in battle, who have uselessly wandered
away into the forest, shall I crown my father Ravana with
victory. Destroying Rama and Lakshmana, and clearing
the monkeys off the earth, shall I satisfy my sire greatly,”


_ * Saccharum—a reed or grass.
+ Belerie myrobalan,
f A ladle with a double extremety or two oval cullateral excavations made
of wood to pour gee upou the sacrificial Fire —T.


174


1386 RAMAYANA.


Saying this, he disappeared from their view. Thereupon
that fearful foe of the lord of celestials appeared in the battle-
field, excited with wrath, armed with bow and sharp
Narachas and commissioned thus by the Ten-necked one.
He beheld there those two heroes discharging flaming arrows
and surrounded by the monkeys like unto the fearful three-
hooded serpent in the midst of other serpents. And thinking
"these must be Rama and Lakshmana,’ and stretching
his bow he began showering arrows like unto clouds. He
was seated in a car in the welkin and hidden from the human
gaze and began to assail Rama and Lakshmana with
sharp shafts. And being hurt with the arrows, Rama and
Lakshmana, fixing arrows on their bows, began to discharge
celestial shafts. And those two highly powerful heroes
could not even touch his person with their arrows resembling
the Sun albeit they covered the whole welkin therewith.
And clouding the whole sky with smoke that effulgent one,
enveloped in frost, hid himself from their gaze. There
was not audible the twang of his bow,the sound of the wheels,
or the noise of the steeds. Nor was he seen by any. In
that terrible darkness of clouds that one of mighty arms
began to make a downpour of Narachas and arrows like
hail storms. And in that encounter, Ravana’s son, inflamed
with ire, wounded Rama, with shafts, resembling the Sun
and obtained by him as a boon. And being hurt with
N&richas, like unto mountains wet with rain, those two
foremost of men, began to discharge shafts feathered in gold.
And reaching the son of Ravana in the sky and soaked in
blood those golden arrows, fell down on earth, And those
two best of men, hurt with his arrows, became more efful-
gent and baffled the shafts discharged by the Rakshasa.
Thereupon Rama and Lakshmana began to aim their
sharp shafts to the direction whence the arrows came down.
And stationed in his chariot that mighty car-warrior
disturbed all quarters with his arrows and pierced Dagaratha’s


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1387


‘sons with sharp shafts won by him. And being greatly hurt
with those sharp-pointed and terrible arrows Rama and Laksh-
mana appeared like blossoming #ixgsukas. Like unto the
sun hidden in clouds they could see neither his counte-
nance and motion, nor his bow and arrows. And being
wounded with those arrows hundreds of monkeys died
and fell down on the earth. Thereupon Lakshmana, being
excited with wrath, spoke unto his brother, saying—To
slay all the Rakshasas shall I discharge to-day Brahma
weapon.” Thereupon Rama spoke unto Lakshmana, gifted
with auspicious marks, saying—“It doth not behove thee to
clear all the Rakshasas off the earth for the folly of one indivi-
dual, Thou shouldst not slay him,who hath retired from battle,
hath hiddea himself, hath sought thy shelter, hath stood
before thee with joined palms, hath fled away or who is
bewildered. O thou of mighty-arms, let us try to slay him
(Indrajit). And to accomplish it I shall use the weapons
gifted with great impetuosity and resembling the serpents.
He is hidden from the public gaze so we must slay him—
had he been fighting openly the leaders of the monkey hosts
could have slain that Rakshasa. Truly he shall be burnt to
death with my shafts and fall down on the earth albeit he
entereth the regions under the earth or the abode of the
celestials.” Having said these words pregnant with a high
significance, the high-souled and heroic descendant of Raghu,
being surrounded by monkeys, began to concert various
plans for the destruction of that terrible Rakshasa of wicked
deeds.


1388 RAMAYANA.


SECTION LXX xt.


“Havine read the intention of that high-souled Raghava,
he retired from the battle-field and entered into the city of
Lank&. And remembering the destruction of many a quick-
paced Rakshasa, his eyes were rendered coppery with ire ;
and that hero,the son of Ravana, issued out of the city again.
And that highly powerful, Indrajit, a descendant of Pulasta
and an enemy of the celestials, issued out, encircled by the
Rakshasas, by the western gate. And beholding the heroic
brothers Rama and Lakshmana prepared for fight, Indrajit
spread illusions, And placing an illusory figure of Siti on
the car, encircled hy a huge army he began to make arrange-
ments for her destruction. And desiring to charm all with
his illusions, that one of wicked intent, preparing himself
to slay Sita,proceeded towards the monkeys. And beholding
him thus proceed, the monkeys, inflamed with ire, desirous
of fighting and with crags in their hands, moved on. And
preceded them all, Hanuman, the foremost of the monkeys,
with a huge mountain-top in his hand. He beheld there, on
Indrajit's car, SitA, deprived of all joy,poorly, greatly reduced
with fasts and wearing a single braid. And Raghava’s be-
loved spouse wore a piece of soiled cloth, and though
highly beautiful, the grace of her person was greatly
spoiled with dirt. That daughter of Janaka, was not seen
by him for a long time. And beholding her and deciding
instantly that she is the daughter of Mithila, (he became
greatly sorry). And seeing her on the car, innocent, poor,
deprived of joy and brought under the influence of the son
of the lord of Rikshasas that great monkey thought within
himself—~‘What must be the intention of Indrajit ? and
accompanied by heroic monkeys advanced towards the son
of Ravana. And beholding that monkey host, Ravana’s son


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1389


became beside himself with ire and unsheathing his weapon
Nistrinsha, caught her by the hair. And that Rakshasa
addressed himself to strike her in the presence of all those
monkeys, and that illusory figure of Sita began to bewait
saying, “O Rama! O Rama!” And seeing her thus caught by
the head, Hanum&n, the son of Maruta, greatly sorry,began to
shedtears. And beholding that beloved spouse of Rama,
having a tender and beautiful personshe addressed angrily the
-son of the lord of Rakshasas with harsh words, "It is for thy
destruction, O Vicious-souled one! that thou hast touched
her hair. Being descended from that great Brahma ascetic
thou art born as a Rakshasa. O! cursed art thou, since thou
hast cherished such a desire and engaged in such a vicious
deed. O vile! O wicked 1 O cruel and dishonorable wight |
QO thou having vice for thy prowess! O shameless! Art
thou not ashamed of perpetrating such an irhuman deed.
What hath Maithili done by thee, O cruel one! that thou
art ready to slay her—She hath been banished from
her home, territory and hath been separated from her lord.
© thou worthy of being slain, destroying Sita, thou shalt not
live long as thou hast been brought under me. Thou shalt
after the death reach the place which is occupied by those
who murder women—a place which is avoided even by those
who commit every sort of crime punishable by law.” Saying
this Hanuman, accompanied by monkeys armed with weapons,
and excited with ire, proceeded towards the son of the lord
of R&kshasas. Beholding the highly powerful monkeys
advance thus the Rakshasas, inflamed with wrath, obstructed
them. And assailing the monkey-hosts with thousands of
arrows, Indrajit spoke unto that foremost of monkeys,
Hanuman, saying—‘'To-day I shall slay before you all
Vaidehi,for whom thou,Sugriva and Rama have come. Slaying
her, O monkey, I shall afterwards kill thee, Rama,
Lakshmana and Sugriva and the dishonorable Bibhisana.
And, O monkey, about not destroying women, of which thou


1390 RAMAYANA. .


wert speaking (I might say) that we must always do
what pains our enemies.”* Saying this, Indrajit with a
sharp sword, himself killed the illusory Sit& thus bewailing.
And being sundered by him obliquely in a way in which a
sacred thread lies on one’s own person, the innocent (Sita)
having a beautiful countenance fell down on the earth, And
slaying her Indrajit spoke unto Hanum&n, saying,— Behold
Thave slain (before thee) with my sword Rama’s beloved.
And Vaidehi being thus slain, all your labours have been
rendered useless.” And destroying her with his own hand
by means of a huge sword, Indrajit, greatly pleased ascended
his car and began to emit dreadful roars. And the monkeys
stationed near heard that terrible roar and saw him enter
the castle.t And slaying Sitit that wicked-minded son of
Ravana became greatly pleased. And beholding him thus
delighted the monkeys being greatly sorry fled away.


SECTION Lxxxil,


“Hearine that dreadful uproar resembling the sound of
Indra’s thunder-bolt, the monkeys, casting their looks on
all sides fled away. Thereupon Hanuman, the son of Maruta,
spoke unto them, poorly, terrified and of a sorrowful counte-
nance, saying,—"‘ O monkeys, why do ye look so melancholy


* There is one s/oka intervening according to some texts—but it has been
omitted by many- The reasons for this omission are best known to them.
‘The purport is:—“Why did Rama slay Tarak4 before ? AndJ shall therefore
slay bis spouse the daughter of king Janaka.” Hearin Indrajit attempts
to justify himsclf and wants to prove that RAma is equally blameable for
this.T.

+ The castle built by Indrajit by means of his illusory power in the
air—T.

}. This refers to the figure of Sith made by illusion —T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1391


and why are you flying away? Why have ye renounced
your earnest desire for fight? And where is your heroism
gone? Doye remain behind me, I shall go first in the
battle.’ Being thus addressed by that highly intelligent son
of the Wind-god, they were greatly excited .with wrath and
being pleased took up trees and crags in their hands. And
roaring thus the leading monkeys advanced towards the
Rakshasas and stood encircling Hanuman in the battle-field,
And being surrounded on all sides by leading monkeys,
Hanuman began to burn down enemy’s host like unto fire
spreading its flames, And being encircled by monkey-hosts
that mighty monkey resembling Death himself began to
grind the Rakshasas. And being overwhelmed with grief
and wrought up with ire, that monkey Hanum§n, threw a
huge crag on the car of that son of Ravana. Beholding that
crag about to fall down on the car, the charioteer moved
his horses and it was speedily brought at some distance.
And not reaching Indrajit stationed on the car and the
charioteer, that crag, uselessly hurled, fell down on the earth.
And that crag falling down many of the Rakshasas were
crushed. Thereupon hundreds of huge-bodied monkeys,
emitting cries and taking up crags and trees proceeded
towards him (Indrajit) and hurled them athim. And the
monkeys gifted with dreadful prowess began to make a down-
pour of crags and trees. They thus assailed the enemies and
frequently emitted cries. And the grtim-visaged night-
rangers were thus assailed with trees in that field by the
terrible monkeys. Beholding his army thus distressed by
the monkeys, Indrajit, excited with wrath, and taking up his
dart, proceeded towards the enemies, and encircled by his
soldiers showered terrible shafts upon them. And that one of
dreadful prowess slew many a leading monkey by means of
darts, Aganis, swords, paftigas and clubs. And the highly
powerful monkeys destroyed his retinue, with crags, stones
and trees having strong trunks. And Hanuman thus crushed


1392 RAMAYANA,


many a R&kshasa of terrible deeds. Obstructing the
Rakshasas (for some time) Hanuman spoke unto monkeys,
saying,—"Stay, we should not fight now, That daughter
of Janaka bath been slain, for whom we have engaged in
fight, renouncing all hope of life and desiring to accomplish
Rama’s satisfaction. Let us now go and inform Rama and
Sugriva of it. And we shall do as we ehall be commanded
by them. Saying this and desisting all the monkeys from
encounter that foremost of monkeys proceeded undaunted
and heroically. And beholding Hanum&n proceed thus where
Raghava was that wicked-minded one (Indrajit) with a view
to offer oblations unto Fire entered the sacrificial altar
Nikumbhilé. And reaching there Indrajit lighted up fire and
began to pour oblations therein. And the Fire blazed up
receiving oblations of blood, and being satisfied assumed the
appearance of the setting sun. And Indrajit conversant
with all ceremonials, offered oblations in due form for the
welfare of the Rakshasas. And they all stood there watching
the result and desirous of ascertaining the success of the
battle.*


SECTION Lxxxiil,


Heaarine the terrible war-cry of the Rakshasas and
monkeys Raghava spoke unto Jambavan, saying :-"O gentle
one, forsooth hath Hanum&n performed some mighty act-—
for hear the dreadful sound of the weapons. Do thou
therefore proceed speedily, O lord of bears, with all thy
soldiers to assist that foremost of monkeys.


* This sloka hath been left off in some editious,—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1393


Thereupon, saying, ‘So be it,’ that king of bears, surround-
ed by his forces, approached the Western gate, where the
monkey, Hanuman, was stationed. And then the lord of
bears saw Hanum&n approach,surrounded by monkeys sighing
hard, who had faught the fight. And seeing on the way
that host of bears dreadful and resembling dark clouds, on
the march, Hanuman made them desist, And that illustrious
one along with that force, speedily presented himself (before
Rama), and with a heavy heart addressed him, saying,
“As we were fighting the field, Ravana’s son, Indrajit in oue
very sight slew Sit&, crying (in distress), Q@ subduer
of enemies, seeing her (in this plight’, I, with my senses
bewildered, have been overwhelmed with grief. Therefore
[ have come unto thee to inform thee of what hath befallen.”
Hearing these words of his, Raghava, overwhelmed with grief,
dropped down to the earth, like a tree whose roots have
been severed. Seeing the god-like Raghava down on the
earth, the foremost monkeys from all sides rushed forward
and came to where (he was). And with water scented with
lotuses,* they fell to sprinkling that one resembling a furious
firet that hath suddenly arisen. Thereat Lakshmana, over-
come with sorrow, embracing Rama, spoke unto him words
fraught with reason and import,—“Profitlesst virtue is
incapable, Q noble one, of delivering from calamities thee,
who hast subdued thy senses, and who ever abidest in the
good path. Beings and the mobile as well as the immobile
cannot have that direct perception of virtue which they have
of happiness. Therefore, I ween, virtue is a non-entity.
Inasmuch as the immobile (albeit devoid of any regard foc


* Padmotpalasugandhibhih—water scented with padmas—lotuses proper,
and utpalas—blue lotuses—(Nymphea cerulea)—T.

+ 'R&ma,' remarks the commentator, ‘wasa fire lighted by his grief for
Sitt!—T.

£ ‘Profiticss,’ although apparently an epithet of virtue, is really the
predicate of the sentence. ‘Virtue, incapable of delivering thee.......0is
brofitless)—P.


175


1394 RAMAYANA.


virtue) are nevertheless happy. ‘and as the mobile also are
so, this virtue cannot lead to happiness. (If it were
so), one like thee would have not been placed in peril, If
unrighteousness would bring unhappiness on creatures,
Ravana should hence to hell, and thou possessed of virtue,
shouldst not come by misfortune, And seeing that he is free
from danger, and thou art in it, righteousness and its
opposite are found to have tendencies the very reverse of
those assigned to them respectively (by the Vedas), And
if by means of virtue, one attaineth the felicity attached to
it, and by means of unrighteouness, one reapeth its
proper fruit, then let those that are unrighteous reap the fruit
of their impiety,—nor let those that set their face against sio,
be deprived of the fruit of their righteousness ; and let those
that walk in the way of virtue reap the fruit of their piety.
But as prosperity attendeth those that are established in uno-
righteousness, and as those regardful of righteousness fare
Jamentably,—these* have not the senses assigned to them (by
the scriptures). If, O Raghava, (it is contended that)unright-
eousness cutteth off the wicked,then whom shall Unrighteous-
ness, himself slain by the act of slaughter of the destroyer, ——
slay in his turn? Or if it is said that one is slain or slayeth
another by ordinance, then it is Destiny, which is touched by
the sinful act and not he, O chastiser of foes, incapable of
meting out retribution,t—unmanifest itself, and non-existent,
how can virtue, even if we grant its existence, find out the
person that should be slain? If, O foremost of the good, it
had existed, thou wouldst not have come by any misfortune.
But inasmuch as thou hast fallen into this plight, there is no
such thing as virtue, Or itself feeble and impotent, it taketh
refuge in manliness. And being powerless and bereft of
dignity, it should, I deem, by no means be followed. And
if virtue is a property of manliness, then carefully forsake


* Virtue and vice,
7 ‘In consequence,’ remarks RamAnvja, ‘of their being deviod of consciousness,’


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1395


ing virtue, do thou follow strength as thou hast hitherto
followed virtue. But, O subduer of enemies, if truthfulness
be virtue, art thou not bound by that departing from
which the king lost his life ?* And, O chastiser of foes, if
virtue must be practised above all, or if prowess must have
Precedence,—then the thunder-handed Satakratu would not
have celebrated his sacrifice, slaying the ascetict O
Raghava, virtue aided by prowess, destroyeth enemies.
Therefore, O Kakutstha, people, for compassing their ends,
fesort to both virtue and prowess. This, sire, is my opinion :
this, O R&ghava, is virtue. But thou, having then
renounced the kingdom, hast laid the axe at the roott of
righteousness, Like streams issuing out mountains, all acts
spring from wealth flowing from various regions and
attaining magnitude. Like a shrunken stream in summer,
all the acts of that foolish person who hath been divorced
by wealth, are annihilated.—He that renouncing riches
within his reach,§ bankers after enjoyment,—being carried
away by his overmastering desire, taketh to getting at wealth
by sinful acts ; and then he incurreth guilt. Unto him that hath
wealth are friends, unto him that hath wealth are acquaint~
ances,—he that hath wealth is an individuatity in this world,
and he that hath wealth is a learned person. He that hath
wealth is powerful; he that hath wealth is intelligent; he
that hath wealth is mighty-armed ; and he that hath wealth
is full of all graces. All these that [ have cnnumerated are
the evils of forsaking fortune. ({ cannot divine) what made
thee, renouncing the monarchy, to adopt such a course.—


* Explains the commentator,—' King Dagaratha lost his life, because he
did not observe his word of installing thee in the kingdom. Act thou not
bound by his word as well ?’—T.

+ The Logic is all ina jumbie; but such is the text, The ascetic was
Vigwarupa, The meaning, according to the commentator, is that, prowess is
first and virtue next. Indra first used force, and then acquired merit.—T,

t ‘Root’, remarks Raminuja,—'which is interest

4§ The commentator would have ‘gottex riches.”


#396 RAMAYANA.


He that hath riches, hath virtue and desire attending on
him, and hath everything auspicious. That one without
wealth, that seeketh it, cannot secure the wealth of prowess,
without riches and desire. And, O lord of men, cheerfulness,
and desire, and pride, and piety,and anger, and self-restraint,
and self-control—all these come from wealth. As the planets
are not discovered on a stormy day, that wealth, the want of
which renders this world naught even unto the ascetics
practising righteousness,—is not visible in thee. O hero,
thou having abode by the words of thy superior and having
come (to the forest), thy wife dearer then life itself hath been
ravished by Rakshas. But, O hero, to-day, O Raghava, by
my acts will I remove this huge sorrow that hath been heaped
upon us by Indrajit. Therefore, rise thou up. Rise up, 0
foremost of men, O long-armed one, O thou who observest
vows. Why dost thou not understand thyself as the Supreme
Soul ?* And, O sinless one, urged on behalf of thy welfare,
I, waxing wroth on hearing of the slaughter of Janaka’s
daughter, shall with my shafts entirely raze to the ground
Lank& with cars and elephants and steeds and the foremost
Rakshas.”


SECTION LxXxxIv.


As Lakshmana devoted to bis brother was comfort-
ing Rama, Bibhishana, posting his forces at their
proper quarters, came there, surrounded by four heroes
accoutred in various arms, resembling masses of colly-
rium or leaders of elephant-herds. And approaching
the high-souled Raghava, overwhelmed with grief, he saw


* Rama is conceived as an incarnation of Vishnu.—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1397


the monkeys with tears in their eyes. And he saw that joy
ofthe Ikshwaku race—the high-souled Raghava—stupified
with grief, lying on the lap of Lakshmana. And seeing
Rama cast down and inflamed with grief, Bibhishana, inly
pained, said,—'What is this? Thereat,gazing at Bibhishaua’s
countenance as well as all those monkeys, Lakshmana, with
his eyes flooded with tears, said these words pregnant with
dire import,—~O placid one, hearing from Hanuman’s lips
that Sita hath been slain by Indrajit-Raghava hath been over-
come with stupor.” As Sumitra’s son was speaking thus,
Bibbishana, preventing him, addressed the stupified Rama in
these pregnant words,—"O king, all that Hanum4n in distress-
ful guise had communicated unto thee I deem as improbable,
like unto the drying of the deep. 1 know the intent of the
impious Ravana with reference to Sita, O mighty-armed one.
Her he will not slay. I, seeking his welfare, had besought
him much, saying,—'Let go Vaidehi’,—but he did not
act up to my speech. Neither by conciliation, nor by
gift, nor by dissension—and where is war?—nor by
any other means is one capable of obtaining the very
sight of Sita Having bewildered the monkeys, the
Rakshasa hath gone back; and, O mighty-armed one, know
her to be the illusory daughter of Janaka. To-day, going
to the sacrificial ground (called) Nikumbhila, he will offer
oblations into fire; and there the deity of fire will present
himself along with Vasava and the (other) divinities, And
then Ravana’s son shall be invincible in battle. Indubitably
that illusion hath been wrought by him, to deceive (the
monkeys), so that they might not through their prowess
disturb him there. Thither will we go before he hath
furnished his (sacrifice). O foremost of men, shake off
this vain sorrow that hath overcome thee! Seeing thee
smitten with grief, this entire host is dispirited. Here, with
thy heart composed, do thou stay, summoning thy strength,
Send Lakshmana along with us and the flower of the forces.


1398 RAMAYANA,


This foremost of men by means of sharpened shafts will
make Ravana's son give up his rites; and then shall he be
capable of being slain by us. These keen and sharpened
shafts of his,attaining access of velocity through the feathers
of birds, and themselves resembling fierce fowls, will drink
his® blood. Therefore, O mighty-armed one, do thou in
order to the destruction of the Rakshasa, commission
Lakshmana, even as the wielder of the thunder-bolt com-
mandeth the same. And as to-day no time should be lost,
therefore do thou send Lakshmana for campassing the
destruction of the foe, even as Mahendra sendeth the thunder-
bolt for bringing about the destruction of the enemies of
the immortals, If that foremost of Ra&kshasas can finish his
rites, he shall be invisible to both celestials and Asuras ; and,
he fighting after finishing his sacrifice, the celestials them-
selves shall be placed in great jeopardy.”


SECTION LXXXV.


Hearne his speach, Raghava, overwhelmed with grief,
could not perfectly comprehend what was said by the
Rakshasa. Then, summoning up patience, Rima—captor of
hostile capitals—spoke unto Bibhishana, seated near the
monkeys,—"'O lord of Nairitas, I once more wish to hear
what, O Bibhishana, thou hast said.” Hearing Raghava’s
words,Bibhishana, skilled in speech,again spoke these words,
saying,—“O mighty-armed one, I have stationed the forces, O
hero, agreeably to thy directions. The entire force hath been
divided around ; and the leaders have also been placed proper=
ly. Further, O mighty master, listen to what I have to say. Oa


= Indrajie’s.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1399


thy having been causelessly aggrieved,we all of us were seized
with grief, If this anxiety of thine conduceth to the joy of
the enemy,do thou cast it off. And, O hero, bestic thyself,—
and summon up spirits. If thou art to have Sil’, and if the
night-rangers are to be slain by thee, do thou, O Raghu’s
son, listen lo my profitable speech. Let Sumitra’s son go
forth, environed by a mighty force, for slaying in battle the
son of Ravana, who hath gone to Nikumbhila; with shafts
resembling venomous serpents, discharged from the round*
of his bow. By virtue of his austerities, that hero, from a
boon conferred by the Self-sprung, hath obtained the
Brahmagiras weapon, together with steeds coursing at their
will. Now he with his army hath gone to Nikumbbil& ; and
when, having finished bis rites, he gets up, know that all of
us are slain. ‘When not reaching Nikumbbila, and not
having finished thy offerings unto fire, thou, equipped with
arms, art slain by a foe,—O enemy of Indra, that is thy
death.’—Thus, O mighty-armed one, did the ford of all
creatures confer a boon (on Indrajit), and, O king, thus was
the death of this intelligent one ordained, O Rama, for
compassing the destruction of Indrajit, do thou commission
a mighty force. On his being slain, know that Ravana along
with his retainers are slain.”—Hearing Bibhishana’s words,
Rama said,—"O thou having truth for prowess, I know the
illusion of that fierce one. Without doubt, he is skilled in
the Brahma weapon, is potent in illusion and, is possessed of
exceeding strength. In conflict, he depriveth of conscious-
ness even the celestials with Varuna (at their head). And
as that illustrious (one) goeth about in the welkin on his
chariot, none, O hero, can perceive his course, like the course


‘of the Sun when the sky is covered with clouds.” And
Raghava, being well acquainted with the illusive energy of


his wicked-minded foe, addressed the renowned Lakshmana,


* The bow drawn to its full stretch, becomes circular—T.


1400 RAMAYANA,


saying.—“Environed by the entire host of the lord of
monkeys,-accompanied by the leaders, O Lakshmana,
headed by Hanuman,—with Jambavan—king of bears—and
girt round by the forces,—do thou slay this son of the
Rakshasa, possessed of the strength of illusion. And
accompanied by his counsellors, this high-souled night-ranger
shalt follow at thy back, in this engagement with that one
skilled in illusion.” Hearing Raghava’s words, Lakshmana
endowed with dreadful prowess, with Bibhishana,—took up
another excelent bow, And donning on his mail, and putting
on his armour and his sword, and furnished with arrows,
and a bow in his left hand —Sumitra’s son, touching
Rama's feet, feeling elated, addressed Rama, saying,—
“To-day the shafts discharged from my bow, piercing
Ravana's son, shall fall into Lank&, even as swans drop into
a tank. This very day shall my arrows, shot from my
redoubtable _bow-string, rive the body of that terrific one.”
Having spoken thus, the effulgent Lakshmana, eager to slay
Ravana's son, went before his brother. And having saluted
at the feet of his superior and went round him, Lakshmana
set out for the sacrificial ground (named) Nikumbhil3,
protected by the son of Ravana. And accompanied by
Bibhishana, that powerful son of the king—Lakshmana—after
his brother had offered up prayers in his behalf,—set off:
with all speed. And surrounded by thousands of monkeys,
Hanuman as well as Bibhishana together with his counsellors
—speedily went in the wake of Lakshmana. And strongly
encompassed by that mighty monkey-host, (Lakshmana) saw
the forces of the bear-king stationed on the way. And
having proceeded far, Sumitr4’s son—enhancer of the delight
of friends—from a distance discovered the forces of the
Bakshasa-monarch, drawn up in battle-array. And that
subduer of enemies—Raghu’s son—bearing his bow in his
hand, coming upon him whose martial might lay in illusion,
—stopped (there) for conquering his foe agreeably to the


YUDDHAKANDAM. r4ot


ordinance* of Brahm. And accompanied by Bibbishana,
the heroic Angada, and the Wind-god’s offspring, the
powerful son of the king dived into the forces of the foe,
various, blazing with burnished arms, dense with standards,
and thronging with mighty cars,t capable of striking terroe
(into the hearts of the spectators), instinct with immeasur-
able energy, and resembling darkness.


SECTION LXXXvIe


Wes things were in this condition, Ravana's younger
brother addressed Lakshmana in words fraught with evit ta
foes and conducing to the welfare (of his own party),
saying,—-"Do thou without delay bring on an engagement
between this cloud-black R&kshasa army, which thou be-
holdest, and the monkeys having rocks for their arms. O
Lakshmana, do thou exert thyself to break through hist
mighty-army ; and when the ranks are broken, the son of
the Rakshasa-lord shall be visible. And scattering among
the foes shafts resembling Indra’s thunder-bolt, charge him
while he hath not yet finished this ceremony. Slay, O hero,
this wicked one, this son of Ravana, given to illusion, and
of terrific feats—the fear of all the worlds.” Hearing
Bibhishana’s words, Lakshmana graced with auspicious
marks began to shower arrows on the son of the Rakshasa-
chief. And bears and monkeys, given to fighting excellently
with trees, in a body rushed towards that army (of Rakshas)


* The ordinance was that Indrajit should be slain while remaining outside
Nikumbhilf, his rites not yet finished —T.

+ Mahérathai (ab) may also mean with mighty car-warriors.—T.

£ Indrajit’s, that is.


176


1402 o RAMAYANA.


drawn up there. And the Rakshasas (on their part) burning
to slaughter the monkey-forces, rushed in the encounter with
sharpened shafts and darts and fomaras. And there took
place a tremendous onslaught of the monkeys and the
Rakshasas. And Lank& resounded all around with that mighty
tumult ; and the sky was covered with weapons of various
shapes, and whetted arrows and trees and dreadfal upraised
moutitain-tops. And Rakshasas having frightful faces and
arms, plying their arms among the foremost monkeys, began
to spread terror (there). And in the same way the monkeys
in the conflict fell to slaying and wounding the Rakshasas
with trees and hill-tops. And great was the terror that was
spread among the warring Rakshasas by the flower of the
bears and monkeys, possessed of gigantic persons and
endowed with prodigious strength.

Hearing his own army hard beset by the enemies, and
drooping,—the unconquerable one, ore yet he had finished
his rites, rose up. An®@ issuing from the gloom of the trees,
RaAvana’s son, fired with wrath, ascended his car, which had
already been well yoked (with steeds) And accoutred ina
dreadful bow and arrows,—that one resembling a mass of
collyrium, having a red face and eyes, looked dreadful like the
Reaper—Death. And soon as they saw him mounted on his
sar, that Jiost of Rakshas possessed of dreadful impetuosity,
eager to engage with Lakshmana, stood on their ground. At
this time that subduer of enemies— Hanuman—resembling
a mountain, uprooted a giant tree incapable of being handled.
And in that encounter, the monkey, consuming (the forces)
like the fire risen at Doomsiay, made that army of Rakshasas
insensible with innumerable trees, And finding the Wind-
god's son, Hanuman, suddenly spreading devastation among
the Rakshasas by thousands, (they) showered (shafts) on
him. And approaching on all sides that one resembling a
hill, those bearing whetted darts attacked him with darts ;
those bearing swords in their -hands, with swords; those


YUDDHAKANOAM. 1403


bearing javelins in their hands, with javelins ; with pattipas,
those equipped with pattigas; and with bludgeons, and
maces and graceful fuatas; and with hundreds of setaghnis,
and iron clubs ; and with terrific axes; and with dhindipdlas ;
and with boxes like unto tl:under-bolts; and slaps resembl-
ing the aga’, And fired with fury, he (on his part) spread
a huge havoc among them. And Indrajit saw that foremost
of monkeys, resembling a hill, the offspring of the Wind-
god—possessing hims:'¥ in calmness, while destroying his
foes, And thereat, he* addressed his charioteer, saying,—
“Go where the monkey is. Being disregarded by the
R&akshasas, he makes havoc among us.” Thus accosted by
him, the charioteer went where the Wind-god's offspring was,
carrying the exceedingly invincible Indrajit seated on the
car, And rushing forward, that irrepressible one—the
Rakshasa—began to shower on the monkey's head arrows
and swords and fatfigas and scimitars and axes. And
bearing all those dreadful arms, the Wind-god’s offspring,
overcome wilh a mighty rage said,—“O wicked-minded son
of Ravana, if thou art. hicro, fight on. Combat with me with
thy arms. If in the encounter, thou bearest my impetus,
then,O thou of perverse sense, thou indeed art the foremost of
Rakshasas.” Then Bibhishana pointed out unto Lakshmane
the son of Ravana, who with his bow upraised, was eager to
slay Hanuman. “This one that, mounted on his car, is eager
to slay Hanuman, is the son of Ravana that hath vanquished
Vasava himself (in battle). Do thou, O son of Sumitsa,
with peerless shafts capable of resisting enemies,—dreadful,
and competent to finish the lives (of foes),—slay the son. of
Ravana.” Thus accosted by Bibhishana terrific unto foes, that
high-souled one saw (Indrajit) of dreadful prowess, difficult-t6


get at, and resembling a hill,—stationed on his car.


*  Indrajit.


1404 RAMAYANA.


SECTION Lxxxvr


Havre spoken thus unto Sumitra's son, Bibhishana
experienced delight, and taking (Lakshmana) bearing a bow
in his hand, hurriedly went off. And proceeding some way
and entering the mighty wood, Bibhishana pointed out unto
Lakshmana the (place of) sacrifice. And the energetic brother
of R&vana showed unto Lakshmana the Nyagrodha, dreadful
to beliold and resembling a mass of sable clouds, “Here
offering presents onto the ghosts,the powerfu} son of Ravana
afterwards engages in conflict. Then the Rakshasa becomes
invisible to all beings ; and he slayeth his enemies in battle
and fastens them with eacellent shafts, Do thou, ere he
hath passed beyond the Nyagrodha, with flaming arrows
destroy the powerful son of Ravana along with his car and
steeds and charioteer.’ Thereupon saying,—'So be it,’ the
exceedingly energetic son of Sumitri—that delight of his
friends—took up his post there, stretching his variegated
bow. And Ravana’s son Indrajit, endowed with strength,
mailed, and armed with a sword, and {urnished with a banner,
was scen mounted on a fire-hued chariot. And the highly
powerful Lakshmana addressed Pulastya’s son, never know-
ing defeat, saying,—“T challenge thee to the encounter, Do
thou give me battle, exerting thy utmost.” Thus addressed,
the exceedingly energetic and intelligent son of Ravana,
seeing Bibhishana there, spoke unto him harshly, thus,—
“Born and bred in this (Rakshasa race) thou art the very
brother of my father. Why, O Rakshasa, being my uncle,
dost thou range thyself against thy son? But neither
kinship, nor emity, nor race, O wicked-minded one, nor
co-birth, can, O destroyer of righteousness,avail to make thee
discern thy duty. O thou ol perverse understanding, thou
art indeed to be pitied ; as thou art worthy of being


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1405


reproached by the virtuous; since, renouncing thine own,
thou hast espoused servitude under another. Neither by
thy character nor yet thy understanding dost thou perceive
the mighty difference that lieth between living with one’s:
own kindred, and taking refuge with the base. If one that
is not our own, be furnished with every grace, and if one’s
own be void of all merit,--one’s kindred, albeit unworthy,
is preferable ; and he that is not ours, is even always such,
He that, forsaking his own party, serveth that of another, is
destroyed even by the latter,when his own party is destroyed.
O night-ranger, such is this thy relentlessness, that, O
Ravana’s younger brother, thou being a kindred, art capable
of displaying thy manliness (as no other person can do so).”
Thus addressed by his brother’s son, Bibhishana answered,—
©O Rakshasa, why dost thou speak as if in ignorance of my
character? O impious son of the R&akshasa-chief, do thou
forego the roughness which thou assumest on behalf of my
dignity.* Albeit born in the race of Rakshas of cruel deeds,
yet having regard to the first of principles pertaining to men,
my character is not that of a Rakshasa. I do not take
pleasure in the terrible ; nor dol revel in unrighteousness,
But how can a brother, although differing from his brother
in character, be renounced by the latter?¢ One renouncing
a person, lapsing from viitue and bent on sinful acts,
attaineth happiness, even as one doth by shaking off a
venomous snake from his hand, The wise have called that
impious one given to stealing others’ goods and violating
others’ wives,—as worthy of being forsaken, even like a
house that is aflame—Robbing others’ property, outraging
the wives of others, and inspiring fear among friends,—these
three vices lead to destruction. The dreadful slaughter of sages,


* Or, on account of thy heroism,

+ Some read Vishamagilana. Then the sense would be: 'How else could
a brother bearing a difference in character, renounce his brother ? meaning
Ravana.—T,


1406 RAMAYANA.


rebellion against all the gods, overweening conceit, anger,
long-continued enmity, and running amuck of counsel,
these sins are sapping the life and fortune of my brother ; and
they have hidden his virtues even as clouds cover a mountain.
Itis on account of these vices that my brother, thy sire,
hath been deserted by me. And this cily of Lanka will
not be, nor thou, nor thy father. Thou art proud,and haughty,
anda boy, O R&kshasa. Thou art fettered by the noose
of Fate. Do thou say unto me whatever thou likest. To-day
thou hast addressed harshly me, who have fallen on evil
days; but, O worst of Rakshasas, thou canst not pass this
Nyagrodha, Having smitten the Kakutstha, thou canst not
live. Fight with that man-god, Lakshmana, in encounter.
Being slain, thou shalt serve the deities in the abode of
Yama. Displaying thy own prowess, do thou spend all thy
weapons and all thy shafts. But coming within the ken of
Lakshmana’s arrows, thou wilt not to-day go hence, living,
with thy forces.”


SECTION LXXXVIII.


Hearne Bibhishana’s words, the son of Ravana,
deprived of his senses by passion, spoke harshly, and rushed
forward in wrath. And with upraised weapons and scimitars,
he, resembling the Destroyer himself, was mounted on a
mighty car yoked with black steeds, and ornamented (on all
sides). And that one endowed with terrific strength up-
raised a huge, gigantic, strong and powerful bow, and shafts
gapable of destroying foes. And that mighty bowman
and slayer of foes—the powerful son of Ravana—adorned
(with ornaments) and mounted on his chariot, saw him


VUDDHAKANDAM. 1407


dight (with bis own splendour), And fired with wrath, (Indrajit)
addressed Sumitra’s son, who, mounted on Hanumin’s
back, like unto the risen sun in splendour—accompanied
Bibhishana ; and he also addressed all those principal
monkeys, saying,—"Do ye behold my prowess! To-day do
yeinthe conflict bear my arrowy shower shot from my bow,
incapable of being approached, and resembling the down-
pour in the sky. To-day my shafts discharged from my
mighty bow shail mangle your limbs, even as fire burneth up
aheap of cotton. To-day with your persons pierced with
sharp shafts, with darts, and javelins, and r7shé‘s and arrows,
shall I despatch you all to the abode of Yama. Who shall
stay before me, fleet-handed, creating an arrowy shower in
the field, and roaring like unto clouds? Formerly in a
night-engagement, with my shafts resembling the thunder-
bolt and zajra, ye two along with your foremost adherents,
were rendered insensible and laid down on the earth by
me. But, perhaps, thou hast forgotten it. As thou hast
presented thyself for battle before me, fired with wrath and
resembling a venomous serpent, it is evident thou wilt go to
the region of Yama.” Hearing the vaunt of the Rakshasa-
chicf, Raghu's son, inflamed with rage, with an undaunted
countenance, spoke unto Ravana’s son,—"O Rakshasa, hard
is the achievement of the task that thou hast mentioned.
He that compasseth business by act is aiune intelligent. —
But thou, O wicked-minded one, incompetent as thou art to
bring about thy end, attaining thy arduous aim by words
only, deemest thyself as crowned with success. That thou
hadst rendered thyself invisible in the field of conflict, was
the work of a thief—and not the way of a here. Coming
within the range of thy shafts, I stay here,—do thou display
thy prowess. What dost thou say in words?” Thus
addressed, the mighty Indrajit—conquerer of enemios—stretch-
ing his dreadful bow, showered sharpened shafts. And
discharged by him, those exceedingly impetuous arrows,


1408 RAMAYANA.


resembling the venom of serpents, hitting Lakshmana, fell
down like unto hissing snakes. And in that encounter,
Ravana’s son—Indrajit—possessed of eminent impetuosity,
pierced Lakshmana, graced with auspicious marks, with
vehement shafts. And pierced with those arrows and bathed
in blood, the graceful Lakshmana appeared like a smokeless
fire. And seeing his own feat, Indrajit, coming forward, and
setting up a tremendous cry, said,—'O son of Sumitra, my
feathered and sharp-edged shafts shot from my bow, capable
of destroying life, will to-day finish thee up. To-day, O
Lakshmana, swarms of jackals and hosts of hawks and
vultures shall alight on thee lying lifeless, having been slain
by me. This very day shall the exceedingly wicked Rama
behold thee, who art the friend of Kshatriyas and devoted
unto thy brother,—and who ever bearest thyself ignobly,—
slain by me; to-day see thee, O Sumitr’s son, slain by me,
with thy armour fallen off thy person, thy bow broken, and
thy head severed.” As Ravana’s son was speaking thus
harshly, Lakshmana conversant with the import of words,
replied in a reasonable speech, saying,—"Leave off thy
strength of tongue, O thou of perverse sense, O R&kshasa,
O thou of crooked ways! Wherefore dost thou speak thus ?
Bring all this to pass in worthy deed. Why, O Rakshasa,
without doing (what thou sayest), dost thou simply say it ?
Do the deed,—so that I may have regard for thy utterances.
Mark ! without speaking anything harsh, without censuring
thee in the least, without venting any brag, shall, I, O
cannibal, slay thee.” Saying’this, Lakshmana drawing his bow
to its full bent, hit at the Rakshasa’s chest five nérdchas—
wondrous impetuous arrows. And those arrows resembling
flaming serpents, with their velocity accelerated by the
feathers (with which they were furnished), blazed on the
Nairita’s breast like the rays of the Sun. And wounded with
those shafts, Rivana’s son, fired with wrath, pierced
Lakshmana with three arrows discharged (from his bow).


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1409


And exceedingly dreadful was the encounter that took place
between those leonine man and Rakshasa, each eager to
conquer the other. And both powerful, and both endowed
with strength and possessed of prowess,—and -both exceed-
ingly invincible; and both having unparalleled might and
energy,—-those heroes faught like two planets in the welkin ;
or like Bala and Vrita, irresistible in conflict; and those
high-souled ones faught like two lions. And showering
countless shafts and displaying many maneuvers, that fore-
most of men and that of Rakshasas, faught on cheerfully.


SECTION Uxxxix,


Trex sighing like an enraged serpent, that chastiser of
foes, Dacaratha’s son, setting shafts (on his bow-stting)
showered them on the Rakshasa-chief. And hearing the
twang of his bow-string the ford of R&kshasas, with his
countenance fallen, gazed at Lakshmana. And then Bibhi-
shana spoke unto Sumitra’s son as he was fighting, “I
find (inauspicious) signs in R&vana’s son. Do there-
fore hasten on,—broken he is, without doubt.” Then
fixing arrows (on his bow) resembling venomous snakes,
he let go those keen shafts, like unto serpents furnished with
poison. And smit by Lakslmana with arrows having the
touch of the tevin, (Indrajit) for a while was stupified and
had his senses overwhelmed. And eying ‘that hero—son
unto Dacgaratha—present in the encounter, (Indrajit) with
his eyes crimsoned in choler, drew near Sumitra’s son. And
coming up to him (Lakshmana), he again addressed (that
hero) in a harsh speech, saying,—‘Dost thou not remember
my prowess at that first encounter, when thou along with thy


177


3410 RAMAYANA,


brother was bound up,—that now thou art discharging arms
(at me}? Forsooth ye two in mighty encounter, with shafts
tesembling the thunder-bolt and vajra, by me were first
laid down on the ground, deprived of your lives, along with
your principal adherents. Either this hath escaped thy
memory or I fancy, thou plainly wishest to go to the abode
of Yama,—inasmuch as thou hast set thy heart on beating
me. If at the first encounter thou hast not witnessed my
prowess, to-day shall I show it unto thee. Do thou now
stay, summoning thy Attention.” Seeing this, he pierced
Lakshmana with seven shafts, and Hanuman with ten keen-
edged excellent shafts. And then, fired with double fury,
that powerful one pierced Bibhishana with an hundred
arrows, powerlully discharged (from his weapons). Seeing
this act of Indrajit, that foremost of men, R&ma’s younger
brother, Lakshmana, with an undaunted countenauce, fired
with wrath without minding the same,—and saying with a
laugh,—'This is nothing’—taking dreadful arrows, in the
conflict, discharged them at the son of Ravana. “O night-
rangers, heroes, coming to the field never discharge (such
shafts as these). These arrows of thine are light and of
slight strength, and they conduce to my comfort, Heroic
warriors, eager for encounter, do not fight thus.” Speaking
thua, (Lakshmana) accoutred with his bow showered vollies
of shafts con his adversary). And at his arrows (hitting),
(Indarjit's) mighty golden mail fell off his person, and
dropped to the platform of his car like a cluster of stars
dropping from the welkin. And with his armour dropping
off, that hero—Indrajit—was wounded with ndrdchas, like
the Sun at dawn. That hero—Ravana’s son—endowed
with dreadful prowess, in that conflict, pierced Lakshmana
with a thousand shafts. And thereat Lakshmana’s gorgeous
and mighty mail was rent in pieces. And each rushing
forward was engaged in dealing blows-and harrying them.
And sighing again and again, they faught furiously. And


YUDDHAKANDAM. T4tT


with their persons cut all over, and laved in blood, for a long
while the heroes kept cleaving each other with sharpened
shafts. And those high-souled ones versed in warfare, and
endowed with terrific prowess exerted their utmost ia secur-
ing victory. And covered with volties of shafts, with their
armour and banners rent, they drew each other's warm blood
flowing like water from a fountain. And they discharged
dreadful showers attended with tremendous sounds, like the
sounds of black clouds at Dooms-day* pouring torrents
in the sky. And a long time went by as they faught. Nor
did they turn away fram the encounter, or know fatigue.
And those foremost of those acquainted with weapons
repeatedly displayed their weapons; and their long and
short shafts enveloped the welkin. And the skill that
they displayed was perfect, and showed lightness, variety and
grace; and both man and the Rakshasa carried on fearful
and terrible conflict. And the dreadful and tremendous roars
of each were audible (at that place); and terrific like the
levin, they made the hearts of hearers tremble (in terror).
And as they faught with might and main, the sounds that
they sent resembled the deep rumbling of clouds in the sky.
And pierced with xéréchas knobbed with gold, those power-
ful and illustrious (warriors) with their hearts set on
celebrity, bled profusely. And in that engagement gold-
knobbed shafts hitting each other's person, pierced the same
and covered with gore, entered the earth. And other shafts
were resisted in the sky by sharpened weapons; and some
were snapped, and thousands of their arrows were clelt
(in the sky). And in that field, the voilies of their shalts
were dreadful to behold like unto a heap of Kuga aflame in
a sacrifice. And the wounded frames of those high-souled ones
appeared beautiful like a leafless; flowering Kinguka and
Salmali in a wood. And each eager to vanquish: the other,


* Kalamaghuye (gen). The commentator says the word means (black
clouds ;’ but I prefer tha sense given —T.


r4lz RAMAYANA.


indrajit and Lakshmana momentarily discharged tremendous
and tertific showers (of arms). And Lakshmana smiting
Ra&vana’s son, and Ravana’s son smiting Lakshmana,—they
did not experience any fatigue. And with net-works of
arrows deeply entering their persons, those vehement and
exceedingly powerful ones resembled mountains topped (with
trees). And all their limbs, drenched in blood and covered
with arrows, looked Sike a blazing fire. And a great while
did they fight ; yet they neither turned away (from the fight),
nor did they experience any exhaustion. Then to remove
(Lakshmana’s) fatigue from fight, the high-souled Bibhishana,
working the weal of Lakshmana staying in front of the field,
came forward in the encounter and took up his post.


SECTION LXL.


Scene the man and the R&akshasa engaged in battle, with
their whole soul, each eager to beat the other,—like unto
elephants with the temporal juice trickling from their
temples,——desirous of beholding their encounter, R&vana’s
mighty and heroic brother, bearing an excellent bow, stood
in front of the arena. And taking up his post, he stretched
his great bow and shot terrific sharp-pointed shafts at the
Rakshasas. And even like thunder-bolt cleaving mighty
mountains, those shafts furnished with peacock’s plumes
falling powerfully (upon the foe), rent the Rakshasas. And
those foremost of Rakshasas, Bibhishana’s followers, also,
in the encounter discharged darts and scimitars and pattigas
at heroic Rakshasas. And surrounded by those Rakshasas,
Bibhishana, then in the midst of his followers, appeared like
an elephant in the midst of young ones. Then inciting the


YODDHARANDAM. 1413


monkeys, whose dear object was to slay R&vana, that one
versed in time, the foremost of Rakshasas, spoke seasonably
thus,—"This one that stayeth (in the field) is the sole and
mighty support of the R&kshasa-chief ; and this is his remain-
ing force. Why then do the monkey-chiefs remain inactive ?
On this wicked Rakshasa being slain on the edge of battle,
the remnant of his army, with the single exception of
Ravana, is destroyed. That hero—Prahasta—hath been slain,
and Nikumbha possessed of wondrous strength, and
Kumbhakarna, and Kumbha, and the night-ranger
Dhumriksha, and Jamvum&li, and Mah3m4li, and Tikshna-
vega and Hemaprabha, and Suptaghna, and Jajnakopa, and
the R&kshasa Vajradanstra, Sankradi, and Vikata, and
Arighna, and Tapana, and Manda, and Praghasa, and
Prajangha, and Jangha, and Agniketa, and Durdharsha, and
the powerful Ragmiketus and Viddujjibha, and Dwijibha,
and the R&kshasa—Suryyagatru, and Akampana, and
Supargwa, and the Rakshasas—Chakramali, and Kam-
pana, and Satwavanta, and Devantaka and Nar&ntaka.
—Having slain these many powerful Rakshasas endowed
with excess of might,—having crossed the sea with your
arms, do ye cross, this foot print of a cow. This is the
remaining force which you monkeys must conquer ; all those
Rakshasas, that had come forward, elated with the pride of
strength, have all been slain. It is not meet for me to slay
the son of my brother, yet, casting off compassion will I for
R&ma slay him.* Tears surcharge the eyes of me who
seeketh to slay him. Let therefore Lakshmana administer
him his quietus. Ye monkeys, do ye in a body (first)
slaughter those that are beside him (Indrajit.)” Thus
exhorted by that illustrious Rakshasa, the monkey-chiefs
were exhilarated and began to flourish their tails. And
then those mighty monkeys roared again and again, and
sent up various shouts, even as peacocks cry on seeing


* The text bas ‘brother's son.’


T4ty 7 RAMAYANA.


clouds, And then Jambavan surrounded by his own forces,
assailed the R&kshasas with rocks and with their nails and
teeth. Thereat Rakshasas,endowed with exceeding strength,
equipped with various weapons reproaching the lord of
bears, as he was engaged in smiting (the foe),—and
renouncing fear, with shafts and sharp axes and pattigas and
yashtis, and tomaras, in the encounter assailed Jambavan,
who was engaged in beating the Rakshasa forces. And that
conflict between the moukeys and the Rakshas, waxed
furious, like unto the tumultuous encounter of the immortals
and the Asuras fired with wrath. And the magnanimous
Hanum4n incapable of being approached growing wroth,—
uprooting a mountain, and. putting down Lakshmana from
his back, began a great carnage among the Rakshasas by
thousands. And fighting a furious fight with his uncle, the
powerful Indrajit—slayer of hostile heroes—again rushed
against Lakshmana. And then there took place an encounter
between those heroes in the field,—Lakshmana and the
Rakshasa—discharging vollies of shafts and smiting each
other; and those mighty and impetuous ones repeatedly
covered each other with networks of arrows; like unto the
sun and the moon covered by clouds at the expiration of
Summer. And on account of their light-handedness, neither
discharge of arrows, nor the drawing of the bow; nor the
setting of the shaft on the bow-string ; nor the taking of the
bow; nor the selection of shafts; nor the clenching fast of
their fists ; nor the hitting of aims,—could be perceived as
they faught on. And in consequence of the sky being covered
with networks of arrows all around, discharged powerfully
from their bows, the forms (of objects) could not be
discovered. And Lakshmana having at R&vana’s son, and
Ravana's son having at Lakshmana, critical was the
huggermugger that ensued* in the encounter between cach
other. And they both kept ceaselessly showering feathered


* ¢. in consequence of all sides being covered with arrows, neither the


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1415


and sharpened shafts, the firmament was engulphed with a
deep darkness. And in consequence of countless keen
arrows alighting in hundreds, all sides and all the cardinal
quarters were swarming with shafts. And all being over-
spread with gloom, a mighty fright took possession {of
creatures) when the Sun having ascended the setting-hill,
and darkness environing all objects. And that day* mighty
torrents of blood flowed in thousands of streams ; and fierce
beasts of prey set up terrific yells (al! around), And at that
hour the wind did not blow, and fire did not blaze ; and the
Mabarshis said, —'Fair befell creatures.’ And the Gandharvas
along with the Chfranas grew exceedingly agitated. Then
Sumitrf’s son pierced the four black steeds of the leonine
Rakshasa,caparisuned in gold. And then he hit at (Indeajit’s)
charioteer with another yellow and sharpened javelin
splendid, furnished with feathers; and resembling the
thunder-bolt of the great Indra. And through his fleet
handedness the graceful son of Raghu with the thunder-bolt
of his shaft, resonant with the sound of his palm, separated
the (charioteer's head) from his trunk. And on his charioteer
having been slain the exceedingly energetic son of
Mandodari, himself began to perform the function of a
charioteer, and took up his bow. And this in the encounter
was wonderful to behold. And then as (Indrajit) was
eagerly engaged in managing the steeds, (Lakshmana) pierced
him with sharpened shafts; and when (Indrajit) was eagerly
wielding his bow,(Lakshmana) discharged shafts at his steeds,
Aud on his steeds having been torn with shafts, Sumitra’s—
foremost of fleet-handed—in the encounter assailed (Indrajit)
doubtlessly ranging the field. Seeing his charioteer slain
in the contest, R&vana’s son forewent his martial ardour,
and was cast down. And seeing the Rakshasa with bis


Rakshas nor the monkeys could distinguish their several parties in the
encounter, and the blows that each dealt were misdirected in consequence.—T.
* Aliya to-day in the text.


1416 RAMAYANA.


face fallen, the leaders of monkey-bands, were exceedingly
delighted and rendered homage unto Lakshmana, And then
those monkey-chiefs—Pramathi, Rabhasa, Sarabha and
Gandamadana, not brooking (their foe) summoned their
impetuosity, And suddenly springiog up, those highly
powerful monkeys endowed with terrific prowess descended
upon those four best of steeds. And on those chargers being
assailed by those monkeys resembling mountains, blood
gushed out of their mouths. And then the steeds were
smashed and sent to the ground. And having slain the
steeds, and smitten the mighty car-warrior,* again by a
vehement bound, came to the side of Lakshmana. And
springing down from his car whose steeds had been slain,
Ravana’s son, his charioteer having been pounded, charged
the son of Sumitra with arrows. And then’ Lakshmana
resembling the great Indra, on (Indrajit’s) best of chargers
having been despatched, in the encounter began to terribly
rive with arrows discharged (his foe) footing on the earth and
showering excellent sharpened shafts.


SECTION LXLI.


Have his steeds slain, the night-ranger—lIndrajit.
standing on the ground, waxing fiercely angered, flamed up
in energy. And armed’ with bows, they, desirous of slaying
each other with shafts resembled an elephant and a bull ina
forest, came out for securing victory-in encounter. And


* Mahavotham (ac.) may also mean mighty car. By the way the samasa
or junction called Tatpurusha is a frequent source of obscurity in Sanskrit,
specially where the geader of the word without samdsa is the same with that
of the thing aignified by the samdsa, as in this case. —T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1417


slaughtering one another, the R&kshasas and the wood-
tangers, rushing this way and that, did not (for a moment)
leave their lords. Then Ravana’s son, gladdening all the
Rakshasas, and himself feeling cheered, addressed them in
words of praise, saying,—"‘All sides are entircly enveloped
in this gloom,—so that, O foremost of Rakshasas, here we
do not know who belongeth unto us and whe not.—Do ye
fight fearlessly for stupifying the monkeys; and I too,
mounted on a car, shail come hither into the conflict. Do ye
so act that the high-souled rangers of the woods may
not attack me as { enter the city.” - Saying this, that
slayer of foes—Ravana’s son, deceiving the wood-rangers,
entered the city of Lanka for providing himself with a
(fresh) car, And embellishing a chariot, graceful and
adorned with gold, furnished with prdgas and swords and
arrows, yoked with superb steeds, and driven by a charioteer,
knowing horses and possessed of instructions (anent his
art),—-that victor in baltle—the exceedingly energetic son of
Ravana—ascended it. And that lero, Mandodari’s son, urged
on by the force of the Finisher, went out of the city,
surrounded by the foremost Rakshasas ; and drawn by fast-
speeding steeds, he presented himself before Lakshmana
along with Bibhishana, And seeing RAvana’s son seated on
the car, the son of Sumitré and the exceedingly powerful
monkeys and the R&kshasa—Bibhishana—were highly
amazed at the lighthandedness of that intelligent one. And
Ravana's son, waxing furious, in that contest began to bring
down monkeys by hundreds and by thousands. And that
victor in battie—Ravana's son—fired with wrath, summoning
all his celerity, slaughtered monkeys, drawing his bow into
acircle. And slaughtered by ndréchas of terrific impetuo-
sity, the monkeys saught the shelter of Sumitr4’'s son, like
creatures seeking the refuge of their Lord. Then the son of
Raghu, flaming up in martial wrath, severed his* bow,


© Indrajit’s.


178


4s RAMAYANA.


displaying his fleethandedness. Thereat, taking another bow,
(Indrajit) hurriedly fastened the string to it. And this bow
also did Lakshmana cut off by means of a brace of arrows.
And when (Indrajit) had. his bow severed, Sumitra’s soa
pierced the son of Ravana with five shafts resembling the
venom of a poisonous serpent. And the shalts discharged
from his* mighty bow, piercing hist person, dropped to the
earth like unto powerful red serpents. And having his bow
cut off, Ravana’s son, vomitting blood by his mouth, took up
a superior bow powerful to a degree and having a stout
string. And then aiming at Lakshmana, he, summoning his
utmost celerity, showered arrows, as showereth Purandara in
the season of rains. Thereat Lakshmana, subduer of
enemies, retaining his calmness, resisted that powerful
arrowy shower shot by Indrajit. And then that exceedingly
energetic one, Raghu's son, possessing himself in calmness,
displayed (his prowess) unto the son of Ravana; and this
was wonderful (to behold). And then displaying his lightness
in the use of weapons, Lakshmana, growing furious, pierced
the Rikshasas with three arrows each in that mighty
encounter; and the lord of Rakshasas struck him with
showers of shafts. And pierced sore by that powerful
enemy—slayer of foes—he incessantly sent innumerable ar-
rows after Lakshmana. And ere they reached their destination,
that slayer of hostile heroes severed them with whetted
arfows ; and in the encounter that righteous one and
foremost of car-warriors with a dart having bent joints, cut
off the head of his charioteer mounted on the car. And
deprived of their driver, there the steeds, retaining their
calmness, began to go in rounds,—and this was wonderful.
Then Sumitri’s son of steady prowess, fired with anger, in
that contest, frightening all, pierced his horses with arrows.
And not brooking that act (of his adversary), Rivana’s son


* Lakshmana’s,
+ Indrajit's


YUDDHAKANDAM. T419


in the encounter pierced with ten shafts Sumitri’s son capable
of making people’s down stand on end. And his shafts resemb!-
ing thunderbolts, and like unto all varieties of venom, touch-
ing (Lakshmana’s) mail having a golden splendour, were
reduced to naught. Thereat considering Lakshmana as clad
in an impenetrable armour, R&vana’s son—Indrajit—growing,
furiously enraged, displaying his lighthandedness in arms,
pierced Lakshmana in the temples with three well-knobbed
shafts. And with those arrows lodged in his temples,
Raghu’s son, delighting in battle, appeared beautiful in the
field like a mountain furnished with three summits. Albeit
thus smitten in the contest by the Raksha with shafts,
Lakshmana swiftly smote him in turn with five arrows ; and
in the encounter Lakshmana drawing his bow, pierced with
shafts Indrajit's face graced with elegant ear-rings. And
those heroes—Lakshmana- and Indrajit—equipped with
exceedingly powerful bows, and endowed with heroism and
dreadful prowess, wounded each other with sharp arrows,
And both Lakshmana and [ndrajit, with their persons bathed
in blood in that encounter, appeared like unto flowering
Kingukas. And approaching each other, those bowmen, each
setting his heart on victory, wounded each other all over the
body with tecrific shafts. Then Ravana’s son, carried away
by martial rage, pierced Bibhishana in his handsome face
with three arrows, And piercing the lord of Rakshasas,
Bibhishana, he with three iron-headed arrows, pierced the
monkey-leaders each with a shaft. Thereat, enraged at
him more furiously than ever, the exceedingly energetic
Bibhishana with his mace despatched the stceds of the
wicked-minded son of Ravana. Then jumping down from
his chariot with its horses slain, (Indrajit), endowed with
great energy, who had his charioteer pounded, discharged a,
dart at his uncle. And seeing it descend, the enhancer of
Sumitra’s joy severed the same with whetted arrows: and
brought it down in ten fragments to the ground. And


1420 RAMAYANA.


Bibbishana of a tough bew, growing enraged, discharged
at (Indrajit), who had his steeds slain, five speeding shafts
having the touch of the thunder-bolt.—And those arrows
furnished with gold at the feathered parls, riving his person,
were bathed in blood, and resembled mighty red serpents.
Thereat wroth with his uncle, Indrajit took up an excellent
shaft—bestowed on him by Yama himseli—endowed with
terrific [orce,-the flower of shafts among all the Rakshas.
And seeing that mighty shaft; set by him (on the how.
string), the highly powerful Likshmana, possessed of
dreadful prowess, (in his turn) took up another arrow,
bestowed by Kuvera himself of immeasurable soul in a
dream,—unconquerable, and incapable of being borne even
by the celestials and Asuras with Indra at their head. And
on their best of bows being powerfully drawn with their
arms resembling bludgeons, they set up cries like unto
Kraunchas, And on those foremost of shafts set on those
excellent bows of those heroes, being drawn, flamed up in
exceeding splendour. And those flaming arrows, discharged
from the bows, illumining the welkin, with vehemence struck
at each other’s head. And a concussion took place of those
arrows of terrific aspects; and a furious fire sprang up
thereat, with embers shooting around. And dashing against
each other like unto mighty planets, they, reduced to an
hundred shivers in the encopnter, saught the earth, Seeing
their shafts baffled, Indrajit and Lakshmana, staying
on the edge of Lhe battle, were seized with shame and wrath.
Thereat Sumitr&'s son, flying into a fury, took up a Varuna
weapon. And the conquerer of the great Indra intent on
battle, in the encounter discharged a terrific Riudra weapon;
and the exceedingly wonderful Varuna weapon was baffted
by him. Then, waxing wroth, that’ victor in battle—the
wondrous energetic Indrajit—as if annihilating the world,
discharged a fliming Agneya weapon. And the heroic
Lakshmana resisted it with a Solar weapon. Seeing his


YUDDHAKANDAM. : tqat


‘weapon resisted, R&vana’s son, transported with passion,took
up an Asura arrow, capable of rending foes. And from that
weapon issue@ daggers and clubs and darts and dhugundis
and maces and swords and axes.* And in the conflict,
seeing that dire and dreadful weapon, irrisistible to all
creatures aud capable of riving all arms, the effulgent
Lakshmana baffled it with a Mahegwarat weapon. And the
encounter that took place between them was wonderful and
capable of making people's down stand on end. And beings
stationed in the sky surrounded Lakshmana on all sides. And
in that terrific encounter of the monkeys and the Rakshasas
resounding with dreadful roars, the welkin was covered
with innumerable beings seized with wonderment. And
saints and /7¢r7s and deities and Gandharbas and birds and
serpents, placing Satakratu in their front, protected Laksh-
mana in the conflict. And thea that hero,Raghava’s younger
brother, fixed (on his bow) another superior shaft, having
the feel of fire itself,and capable of riving the son of Ravana ;
furnished with fair feathers ; tapering ; having elegant joints ;
symmetrical; and plated with gold,—an arrow capable of
finishing the body; irrisistibla; dreadful; terrific unto
Rakshasas ; resembling the venom of poisonous serpents ; and
worshipped by the celestial hosts ; by which the exceedingly
energetic and wonderful Lord riding the horset—Sakra—
of old in the war between the celestials and the Asuras had
defeated the Danavas. And Sumitra’s son, Lakshmana,graced
with auspiciousness, drawing on his best of bows that
foremost of shafts—the Aindra weapon—invincible in conflict,
Spoke these words, tending to bring about his success,§—


* This arrow resembled somewhat the bomb-shells in modern European
watlare.—-T,

+ i. belonging to Mabegwara or Siva,

$ The celestial steed, Uchchsigrava, sprung from the ocean on the
occasion of the churning of the deep.—T.

{Words addressed to the deity presiding over the weapon,


mn RAMAYANA,


“If Dagaratha’s son—R&ma—is righteous and truthful, and
if in prowess be hath no rival, then slay this son of Ravana.”
Saying this, the heroic Lakshmana in that conflict, drawing
the straight-speeding arrow up to his ear,* discharged it at
Indrajit. And shooting the Aindra weapon, that destroyer of
hostile heroes—Lakshmana —severing from its trunk the head
of Indrajit with its corslet, graced with burning ear-rings,
brought it down tothe ground. And the mighty severed
head of the R&kshasa’s son, resembling one made of gold,
was seen covered with blood. And slain, Ravana's son
dropped to the earth, with his armour and corslet on, and his
bow fallen (from his grasp). And then all the monkeys with
Bibhishana set up cheers, even as the immortals cheered
at the destruction of Vritra. And in the sky there arose the
victorious shouts of all beings and high souled saints, and
also of Gandharbas and Apsaras. And knowing (Indrajit)
fallen (in fight), the mighty army of R&kshasas, attacked by
monkeys burning for victory, fled in the ten cardinal
directions. And assailed by the monkeys, the Rakshasas,
pursued (by their foes), with their senses lost, rushed towards
Lank&, leaving their arms behind. And overwhelmed with
fright, R&kshasas fled in an hundred directions, all renounc-
ing their arms—bearded darts, and swords, and axes. And
harassed by the monkeys, some hurriedly entered Lank&,
and some plunged into the sea, and some ssught shelter ia
the mountains. And seeing Indrajit slain and lying down on
the field of battle, thousands of Rakshasas fled away. As
when the Sun sets, bis rays remain no longer, on that
Rakshasa having fallen, the Rakshasas dispersed in the ten
cardinal quarters, like unto the Sun when his rays have been
rendered mild, or fire which hath been extinguished. And
the mighty-armed (Indrajit) was utterly reft of life. And
on the son of the Rakshasa-chief falling, the world, having
its foe slain, with its huge affliction gone off, experienced


* Ge. drawing the bow to its utmost stretch.


YUDDHAKANDAN. 1423


the height of joy. And on that unrighteous R&kshasa
having been slain, the reverend Sakra together with the
Maharshis was filled with delight, And sounds of kettle-
drums were heard in the sky proceeding from the celestials.
And blossoms were showered by dancing Apsaris and
high-souled Gandharbas. And this was wonderful (to behold.)
And on that Rakshasa of fell deeds having been slain, the
dust was laid, the water became transparent, the sky looked
bright, and the deities and Danavas were filled with
rejoicings. And on that Dread of all creatures having been
slain, the gods, Gandharbas and Danavas, assembled together
in joy, said,-—‘Now let the Brabmanas who have their sins
removed, with their anxiety gone off, range about.”
And then the monkey-leaders, seeing that foremost of
Naicitas of unparalleled prowess slain in battle, began to
gladly pay homage (unto Lakshmana). And Bibhishana and
Hanum§n and Jambavan~leader of bears—saluted and
hymned Lakshmana on the score of his victory. And
shouting and. bounding and roaring, the monkeys at this
hour of high joy stood surrounding Raghu’s son.* And
flourishing their tails and striking the earth (with them), the
monkeys shouted,—'Victory unto Lakshmana{’ And embrac-
ing each other, the monkeys with delighted spirits began fo
converse in various ways touching Raghava’s welfare. And
beholding that deed, difficult of being done, performed by
their beloved friend—Lakshmana—and hearing their foe—
Indrajit—slain (in battle), the celestials attained the summit
of joy.
* Descendant, that is.


1424 RAMAYANA,


SECTION ext,


Havine in the conflict slain that conquerer of enemies,
Lakshmana graced with auspicious marks, with his body
bathed in blood, experienced delight. And then supporting
himself on Bibhishana and Hanumin, the exceedingly
powerful Lakshmana endowed with prowess, taking
Jambavin, Hanum&n and all the monkeys with bim, speedily
went to the place where Sugriva and Raghava were. And
then going round R&ma and saluted him, Sumitra’s son
stood before his brother, like Indra’s brother staying before
Sakra, And approaching with a look which of itself was
significant,* the heroic Bibhishana described unto the high-
souled Raghava the dreadful destruction of Indrajit. And
then the delighted Bibhishana related unto Rima how
the high-souled Lakshmana had cut off the head of Ravana’s
son. And as soon as that exceedingly powerful one heard
of the destruction of Indrajit by Lakshmara, he experienced
a huge accession of joy, and thus delivered himself,—
“Excellent, O Lakshmana! Pleased am I (with thee). Thou
hast performed a difficult feat. The son of Ravana having
been slain, know for certain that we have been victorious,”
And then smelling the head of the bashful Lakshmana,
enhancer of fame, (R&ma) endowed with prowess, from
affection forcibly hugged him into his lap. And making him
seat on his lap, and overpowering him with embraces,t
(Rama) again and again tenderly eyed his brother, Lakshmana,
And moved with grief, that best of persons, Rima, smelling
the head of Lakshmana, wounded with darts and having
his person pierced (with arms), sighing.and breathing hard —


* i.e. of the destruction of Indrajit,
+t Avapiritam—(ac) pained, RAmAnuya says this epithet cefers to
Lahshmana’s having been wouaded in the encounter. I differ from him—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1425,


and nursing his body with his hand, addressed Lakshmana,
soothing bim,—‘To-day his son having been stain, I deem
Ravana himself as slain in fight. On that wicked-minded
enemy of mine having been destroyed, 1 am victorious (in
encounter), By luck, O hero, hast thou in conflict severed the
right arm of the fell Ravana. Verily he (Indrajit) was his stay.
Both Bibhishana and Hanuman have done mighty deeds in
battle, In three days and nights, (my enemy) hath been
brought down. To-day have £ been made foeless. Now
Ravana will for certain march forth backed by a mighty
phalanx, - Ravana will for certain sally out, hearing his son
Drought down. That unconquerable lord of Rakshasas,
aggrieved for the destruction of his son, marching out,
shall I slay, environed with a mighty force. O Lakshmana,
the conqueror of Sakra having in batile been slain by thee—
who act my lord—Sit& and the (entire) earth are not
incupable of being obtained by me.” Having thus soothed
and embraced his brother, Raghu's sou—Rama—highly
rejoiced, calling Sushena, said—'Do thoa so act that this
highly wise son of Sumitr&, devoted to his friends, may be
healed and he eased, Do thou without delay heal Sumitr’’s
son, attached to his friends, of his wéunds. And do thou also
carefully relieve all those heroes in the army of bears
and monkeys fighting with trees,—as well as others, who
have been wounded and have got sores (in conscquence).”
Thus addressed by Rama, the high-souled monkey-leader
administered a potent medicine to the nose of Lakshmana,
And smelling the same, he got healed ; he was relieved of
lis pain and his outgoing vitality was shut up. And at the
mandate of Raghava he likewise treated his friends headed
by Bibhishana and all the principal monkeys. And res-
tored to his nalural condition, Sumitri's sen, healed, and
with his exhaustion removed, and his suffering gone off in a
moment, experienced exhilaration of spirits. And Rama and,
the monkey-king and Bibhishana aud the powerful lord of


179


1436 RAMAYANA. .


bears along with their hosts, seeing Sumitr&'s son risen
hale, rejoiced greatly in delight. And the high-souled son
of Dagaratha honored exceedingly that exceedingly hard feat
of Lakshamana; and the monkey-king, hearing that the
-conquerer of Sakra had fallen in fight, was filled with joy.


SECT+¢ON LXLII,


Tuen the counsellors of Pulastya’s son, hearing of
Indrajit having been slain, speedily conveyed the tidings
unto the Ten-necked one, who was ignorant* of the same.
“O mighty monarch, in our very sight thy exceedingly
effulgent son hath been slain by Lakshmana with the help of
Bibhishana, And that hero confronted by the (other) bero,
hath been vanquished in fight. And the hero, thy son, the
conquerer of the celestial chief, hath also been slain by
Lakshmana. And having gratified Lakshmana with his
shafts, he hath repaired to the supreme regions.” Hearing
of that mighty terror, vis. the rueful and dreadful
destruction of bis son, Indrajit, in battle, he straightway
swooned away. Then regaining bis consciousness alter a
long while, that foremost of Rakshasas—the king—over-
whelmed with grief for his son, and distressed, burst into
lamentations, with his senses wildered,—thus,—"O foremost
inthe Rakshasa army! O my child endowed with high
might! Having conquered Indra himself, wherefore to-day
hast thou come under the sway of Lakshmana? Doubtless,
thou enraged could pierce with thy arrows the Destroyer of
Time himself, and the summit of Mand&ra,—what shall I

© Avajudys, Rim&nuya says it means “ignorant of the same.” Tirtha


anys it means, ‘Seeing’ Then the sense would be, ‘the counsellors, having
firat seen Indeajit slain, informed Ravana of it’ —T.


YUDDHARANDAM. 1427:


of Lakshmana in encounter ? To-day king Viwagwata hath
raised himself immensely in my estimation, for to-day he,
O. mighty-armed one, hath brought thee under the law of
Time. But this is the way of capable warriors as
well as celestials. He that fayeth down his life for his
lord, repaireth to heaven, To-day seeing’ Indrajit slain,
the deities and the guardians of the worlds, and the
mighty saints, their fear gone off, shall sleep peacefully.
This triple world and this entire earth with her woods,
reft of one—Indrajit—appear to me as vacant. To-day
shall I hear the cries of the daughters of the Nairitas
in my inner apartment, like unto the roars of she-elephants
in a mountain-cavern. Renouncing thy state of an heir-
apparent, and Lank& and the Rakshas, Q subduer of enemies,
and thy mother, and me, and thy wife—whither hast thou
gone, (leaving) us ally O hero, 1 having gone to the region
of Yama, thou ought to have performed my last rites, but
thou standest in a relation the very. reverse of this.* And
Sugriva living and Lakshmana and Raghava, without extract.
ing my dart, whither hast thou gone, leaving us ally And
then arising from the disaster that had befallen his son, a
mighty wrath overcame the lord of Rakshasas—Ravana, at
he was thus indulging in lamentations, And even as in
summer, the (Solar) rays flame up the Sun, the destruction
of his son flamed up all the fiercer, him, who was naturally
jrascible. And as he kept yawning in passion, a flaming
fire with smoke darted from his mouth, even as it did from
the mouth of Vritra. And burning in grief for the destruction
of his son, and coming under masterdom of passion, that
hero--Ravana—reflecting (awhile) in his mind, resolved upon
slaying Vaidehi. Aud naturally red, and reddened (still
more by the fire of wrath, Ravana’s glowing eyes were
dreadful (to behold). And his form, terrific by nature, in


* te, have to perform thy last rites, thoy having fallen in fight while f
am alive—T.


1428 RAMAYANA,


consequence of the fire of his wrath having possessed it
entirely, resembled the form of the euraged Rudra. And
from the eyes of that infuriated one fell drops of tears as
drop from a flaming lamp drops of burning oil. And as he
grinded his teeth, the gnasbing resembled the sounds sent by
the machine® drawn by the Danavas and churning the deep.
The Rakshasis durst not approach that one eying round
and resembling the Destroyer himself, intent on devouring
both mobile and immobile. Then exceedingly enraged,
R&vana—lord of Ra&kshasas—spoke in the midst of the
Rakshasas, inciting them to battle,~"I practised severe
austerities for thousands of years; and gratified the Self-
sprung at times. Neither-from Asuras nor from celestials
can any fear spring to me. My mail conferred on me by
Brahm4, which in effulyence resembles the Sun himself, was
not broken by blows like unto thunder bolt at the war
between the deitics and demons. To-day who will come
forward against me in battle accoutred in that and mounted
onacarin the conflict? Not even Purandara himself, Do
ye, beating hundreds of drums, to-day raise that mighty and
dreadful bow of mine which, with arrows, had been bestowed
on one by the gyatified Self-sprung at the war of the gods
and Asuras,—so that f may therewith compass the destruc-
tion of Rama and Lakshmana in mighty battle.” Burning
(in grief) for the destruction of his son, the fell Ravana,
coming under the influence of anger, reflecting (in his mind),
resolved to slay Sitd And eying round, that copper-eyed
and dreadful one of a terrific aspect, distressed, in a piteous
voice addressed all the night-raugers, saying,—"By his
power of illusion, my beloved child, for deceiving the wood-
rangers, slaying something (else), had shown it unto them
as Sid. Now will I do that “good office myself,—
Vaidehi-will I slay—even her that is devoted to that friend
of. Kshatriyas.” Having spoken thus unto his counsellors,
* Meaning the mountain Maadara,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1429


he swiltly took up a sword; and raising it, of excellent
temper and of cerulean hue, he rushed out vehemently,
surrounded by his wives and counsellors. From grief for his
son, Ravana with his consciousness wildered, taking up 2
sword, in rage, rushed towards the place where Mithila’s
daughter was. Seeing the R&akshasd rising on, some,
emitted leonine roars, and seeing the R&kshasa enraged,
embracing each other, said,—"To-day those two brothers,
secing this one, will be exceedingly pained. By this one,
influenced with passion were the four guardians of the
worlds conquered ; and many other foes were brougiit down
in battle. Procuring gems from the three worlds, Ravana
enjoyeth them. Neither in strength nor in prowess is there
any one on earth who is his compeer.” As they were
spenking thus, Ravana, reft of his senses by wrath, rushed
against Vaidehi, who had taken up her abode in the Agoka
wood. And dissuaded by his friends endowed with good in+
telligence,he, wrought up with high wrath,darted (agaist Sita),
even as an enraged planet* rusheth against Rohinit in the
firmament. And the blameless daughter of Mithila protected
by the Rakshasis, saw the infuriated Ravana bearing that best
of blades in his hand, Seeing (Ravana) approach, sword in
hand, despile the earnest entreaties of his friends, Janaka’s
daughter, Sitd, pained and overcome by grief, said, weeping,
—‘From the way in which, wreught up with wrath, this
wicked-minded one ix rushing on at me personally,it appears
that he will slay me, who have a lord, as one who hath not,
He did urge me much ever devsted to my lord, saying ‘Be
thou my wife ;’ but forsouth I disregarded him. And plainly
in consequence of my refusal, he hath given way to despair.
And overcome by anger and passion, he is ready to slay me,
Or it may be that to-day for me those foremost of men, the
brothers—Rama and Lakshmana—have been slain in
encounter by this inglorious ane, 1 heard a furious and


* Roja, ete. + Hesperus.


tag0 RAMAYANA,


fearful uproar raised by countless RAkshasas rejoicing,
and expressing their delight—Alas| O fie! For me those
princes have met with destruction. Or it may be that’ not
without slaying R&ma and Lakshmana, this terrific
R&kshasa, having his heart set on sin, from grief for his son,
will slay me. Fool that I am, I did not then act agreeably
to Hanumfn’s words. If I had gone away seated on his
back, without waiting for the victory (of my lord), I
devoted to him, placed on his lap, should not have come by
this repentance. When Kaugaly8, having an only son, wilt
hear of her son slain in battle, I fancy, her heart shall burst.
And, weeping, she will remember that high-souled one’s birth
and boyhood, and youth and pious acts and loveliness. And
that one berelt of her consciousness, filled with despair, after
having performed his sréddha,* will doubtless enter into
fire or water. Shame on the unchaste and hump-backed
Manthar&, having her heart fixed in sin, for whose sake this
grief shall exercise Kaugalya!” Seeing the distressed
daughter of Mithila lament thus, like unto Rohini come
under the sway of a planet in the absence of the Moon,. in
the meanwhile hist pure and good courtier, named Supargwa,
endowed with intelligence, albeit prevented by other
courtiers, spoke unto Ravana, foremost of R&kshasas,—-
“Wherefore, O Ten-necked one, O thou who art the very
younger brother of Vaigravana himself, Dost thou desire
to slay Vaidehi, forsaking righteousness? Why, O hero!
© lord of Rakshasas! having led the Brahmacharyya mode
of life, studied the Vedas, and returned from the house of
thy spiritual guide, and ever engaged in religious acts, to-day
dost thou intend to slay a woman? Do thou, O king, now
stay expecting Mithila’s daughter endowed with loveliness ;


- ™ Fapereal rites performed in accordance with the injunctions of the
Hinds Scriptures ~T,

+ Ravana's!

$ Explains the commentator : “tilt thou slayest Rama in battle.”-—T.


YUDDHAKAND4M. 143t


and do thou along with us vent thy wrath on him.* To-day
being the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, do thou this
very day prepare for conflict ; at amdzvasyd,t environed with
thy forces, do thou march for victory. Heroic, and intetli-
gent, a mighty car-warrior and swordsman, thou, mounted on
a car, slaying the redoubtable son of Dagaratha, wilt obtain
Mithila’s daughter.’ Fhus exhorted by his friend, the
unrighteous Ravana accepted his virtuous speech ; and then
that powerful one went (back) to his house, and, surrounded
by his friends, entered the court.


SECTION LxLiv.


F ——


Enwreeine his court, the king, distressed, and exceed-
ingly aggrieved, sat him down on the foremost seat sighing
like an enraged lion, And strickeo with grief in consequence
of his son’s death, that highly powerful Ravana, with folded
hands, addressed all the heroic Rakshasas, saying :—"'Do
ye all proceed to battle with elephants, horses and cars,
And encircling Rama only and discharging shafts at him,
delightedly, like unto clouds, in the rainy season, pouring
water, do ye slay him, Or I shall slay him to-morrow in the
presence of all, wounded by you fn the mighty encounter
with sharpened arrows.” Hearing the speech of their lord
the Rakshasas, with a huge army and a host of cars, speedily
issued out for battle. And they all threw at the monkeys
life-destroying Parighas, Pattigas, arrows, daggers and
Parashwadhas. And the monkeys too threw crags and trees
at the Rakshasas. Thus on the eve of sun set there arose
a terrible conflict between the Rakshasas and the monkeys.


* Raha, + 4 ¢, to-morrow,


14g RAMAYANA.


And they struck each other in the conflict with clubs, chetras,
Prasas, daggers and Paraskwadhas. The conflict being thus
carried on, there arose a mighty dust which was again
destroyed by the current of blood gushing out of the persons
of the Rikshasas and the monkeys, Elephants and cars
were like the banks of that river of blood, the arrows were
fike the fishes, and the flags were the trees on theic banks
and the corpses were like planks afloat there, Being thus
wounded and assailed by the Rakshasas, those hervic
monkeys leaped and broke down the flags, armours,
cars, tiorses and other weapons. And with their sharp
teeth and nails they scratched the hair, ears, forcheads
and the noses of the Rakshasas. Like unto vultures
falling upon a felled tree, hundreds of monkeys fell upon
one R&kshasa in that encounter. And the R&kshasas
resembling mountains, with huge clubs, prdsas, daggers and
pardshwadhas, struck the monkeys (in their turn), Being thus
assailed by the Rakshasas, the mighty host of monkeys
took refuge of Rima, the sen of Dagaratha, the worthy refuge
of all creatures. Thereupon the highly effulgent and power.
ful Rama, taking up his bow, entered the Rakshasa host
and began to make a downpour of arrows. And Rama
entering the field, those terrible Rakshasas, being burnt with
the fire of his arcows, could not stand before him like unto
clouds disappearing before the Sun in the welkin. Aod
the night-rangers only espied the dreadful feats performed
by Rama and which were above the power of others.
Except when guiding the huge army or driving the cars they
could not see Rama like unto the wind invisible in a forest,
They ali beheld the Rakshasa force scattered, wounded,
burnt down with arrows, broken aod assailed with weapons,
by Rama, but none could see the quick-moving Rama. As
people cannot see the soul which governs all objects of
sense su they could not see Rama, who was thas ioflicting
wounds oa thea. “It is he who is destroying the soldicts


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1433


riding the elephants,it is he who is breaking down the mighty
cars, and it is he who with sharp arrows is slaying the
cavalry—rider and horse.” Thus saying those R&kshasas, in
that conflict and in the very presence of Rama, highly
enraged, began to slay each other. They were all bewildered
by the huge Gandharba weapon discharged by the high-
souled Rama and so they could not see Rama, who was thus
burning down their force. And the R&kshasas sometimes
beheld thousands of Rama in the battle field and again saw
one Rama only, They at times saw the quick-moving golden
end of the bow of that high-souled one, resembling a circular
fire brand but they did not behold Raghava. And he
looked like £4/a chakra, having his middle body as its navel,
his own strength as its lustre, the arrow for its radius or
spoke, the bow for the circumference, the twang of the bow
for its sound, his power and intelligence for its brightness,
and the aim of the celestial weapons for its limit. And
in the eighth division of the time by Rama alone with
arrows resembling the flame of fire were destroyed ten
thousands swift-coursing cars, eighteen thousand elephants
fourteen thousands horses and riders and two million
R&kshbasa infantry assuming shapes at will. And those night-
rangers, who were still left, having their horses killed, cars and
flags broken, fled in fear of life to the city of Lank&. And
the battle field, filled with slain horses elephants and infantry,
looked like the high-souled and enraged Rudra’s arena of
sports, Thereupon the celestials with Gandharbas, Siddhas
and the great ascetics glorified the wonderful feat of Rama.
And the virtuous-souled Rama addressed Sugriva, Bibhishana
the monkey Hanumn, the leading monkey Jambavan, Mainda
and Divida who were near him, saying—“This is the power of
my weapons and as well as that of Rudra.” The high-souted
Rima, equalling Sakra in prowess, thus slaying the huge
host of the lord of R&kshasas and assailing them with shafts
and weapons—the celestials, delighted, sang his praises.


180


1434 RAMAYANA


SECTION LXLV.


BR. Rama, of unwearied actions, with flaming arrows
feathered in burning gold, were destroyed thousands of
elephants—-many horses with their riders, many a car crested
with flaming banners ; thousands of heroic Rakshasas assum-
ing shapes at will, engaged by Ravana, and armed with
clubs and parighds ; and golden pennons. Beholding and
hearing of this the remaining night-rangers assembled and
were greatly bewildered, poorly and stricken with anxiety.
The widows and those who had lost their children or
kinsmen approached those Rikshasas and overwhelmed
with grief, bewailed piteousty,—“Alas ! why did the aged and
grim-visaged Surpanakh&, having her belly extending down-
ward, behold in the forest Rama graceful like Kandarpa,
And beholding him of great beauty and prowess, ever
engaged in the welfare of all creatures, that ugly one, worthy
of being slain by people, was excited with lust. Why
did that ugly-faced she-demon, devoid of all qualities, address
Rama, having a beautiful countenance, gifted with many
virlaes and great effulgence ? Alas for the misfortune of the
Rakshasas, the aged Rakshasce brought before hin such a
vile proposal, hated of all and worthy of creating laughter,
For the destruction of Khara, Dushana and other R&kshasus
that ugly one approached Raghava with such a vile intention,
It was for her that Ravana created enmity (with Rima)
and Sit@ was carried away by the Ten-necked Rakshasa,
But he could not spread his influence upon Sita the daughter
of king Janaka and deep rooted and eternal became the
enmity with the highly powerful Raghava. And beholding
the Rakshasa Bir&dha slain by Raima alune—(Ravana)
wishing Vaidehi should have regarded that as a sufficient
proof of his prowess. And fourteen (housand Rakshasas of


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1435


terrible deeds were slain by him in JanasthEna with shafts
resembling the fame of fire. Khara, Dushana as well as
Trigira were slain by him in conflict with arrows resembling
the Sun—this was a sufficient proof (of his power).
Yoyanabahu and Kavandha, drinking blood, were slain hy
him, roaring with wrath—this too was a sufficient proof of
his power, R&ma slew the powerful Vali, the son of the
thousand eyed one, resembling the cloud—that too was the
sufficient proof of his prowess. By him Sugriva, poorly and
living in the mount Rishyamukha, having all his desires
frustrated, was placed on the throne—that too even was
the sufficient proof of his power. He (Ravana) from foolish-
ness did not like the becoming specch of Bibhishana
conducive to the acquirement of piety and wealth and
securing the welfare of the Rakshasas, Had the younger
brother of the lord of wealth (Ravana) observed the words of
Bibhishana, Lank& would not have been overwhelmed with
grief and reduced to the state of a cremation ground,
Hearing of the destruction of the highly powerful Kumbha-
karna by. Rama, of the irrepressiblo Atikaya by Lakshmana
as well as of his belove sun Indrajit, Ravana did not come
to his senses.* There is audible in every house of the
Rakshagas, the cry,—'My son, my brother, my husband is
slain in battle’ In conflict have been destroyed by the
heroic Rama, thousand cars, horses, serpents and infantry.
Perhaps Rudra, Vishnu, Mahendra or the performer of
hundred sacrifices, or even Death, in the shape of Rama,
is slaying us. By Rama all the heroes have been slain—
despair has taken possession of our minds—we do not
behold the end of our terror and are bewailing being


* One sloke has been omitted here by some of the editors, which
when translated stands thus —When one monicey only Hanumdn killed the
prince Akshaya and reduced the whole city to ashes with the fire of his tail
Ravana should have come to his senses,


2436 " RAMAYANA,


deprived of our lords. Does not the Ten-necked hero, who
has obtained boons (from Bralim&) perceive that a mighty
disaster shall befall him from Rama? Neither the celestials,
Gandharbas, Pigachas nor Rakshasas shall be able to save
him from R&ma in conflict. In every battle many an
accident befalls Ravana—this bespeaks of his destruction at
the hands of Rama. The great Patriarch, being pleased,
conferred upon Ravana the boon that no fear would proceed
unto him from the celestials, the Danavas or the Rakshasas
—but he did not beg of him, security from men. Forsooth,
he is that fearful man who shall slay Ravana and the
Rakshasas. The celestials, being thus oppressed by Ravana,
who had obtained the boon, worshipped the great Patriarch
with severe austerities. And being propitiated with them,
the high-souled Patriarch, for their welfare, addressed the
celestials, with the following pregnant speech. ‘From to-
day shall the R&akshasas and Danavas roam for ever,
afraid of the celestials.’ Thereupon the celestials headed
by Indra engaged in propitiating Mah&deva, the slayer of
Tripura, and who rides upon a bull. And being pleased,
Mahadeva addressed them, saying,—‘For your welfare there
will be born a woman who shall be the cause of the destruc.
tion of the R&kshasas.” As hunger, being engaged by
the celestials, did destroy in olden time, all the Danavas,
so shall she (Sita) the root of the extinctiun of R&kshasa
race destroy us all with Ravana. Alas! for the foolish-
ness of the vicious-minded and insolent Ravana destruction
has faced us and we are overwhelmed with grief. We
do not see any such being in the world who can afford
us shelter. R&ghava has attacked us like unto the fire of
dissolution. There is no refuge for us who have been
stricken with fear as no help reaches the elephants in a
forest beset with fire. The high-souled Bibhishana did the
just thing in proper time—he took shelter of him from whom
he expected danger.” Thus bewailed pieteously and loudly


YUDRHAKANDAM. 1437


=the she-demons holding each other by the neck and being
stricken with fear and grief.


SECTION LXLVI.


"Puerevron Ravana heard in every house of Lank& the
piteous cries of the she-demons possessed by sorrow. And
sighing hard he engaged in meditation for some time. And
terrible-leoking as he was, Ravana was greatly worked up with
ire. Having his eyes reddened with anger,and gnashing his
teeth and biting the lips, that one, irrepressible by other
Ra&kshasas, looked like the‘fire of dissolution incarnate. There-
upon the lord of Rakshasas,in anger,as if burning down every-
thing with his look,addressed the Rakshas who were near him
—Mahodara, Mahap4rsha,Birupiksha—‘"Do ye speedily speak
to the soldiers that they should sally out for battle at my
command. Hearing his speech—those Rakshas, possessed
hy fear, asked by the command of the king, the Rakshasa
soldiers to be ready. And thereat all those grim-visaged
Rakshasas saying ‘so be it’ and performing benedictory
ceremonies proceeded to the battle-field. And those mighty
car-wartiors, worshipping Ravana, and desiring the victory
of their lord, stood before them with folded hands, Thereupon
Ravana, beside himself with anger, laughing, adddressed
those Rakshasas, Mahodara, Mah&parsha, and Birup&ksha,
saying—"To-day shatl I despatch both Rima and Lakshmana
to the abode of Death with arrows resembling the sun at the
time of dissolution, discharged off my bow. And slaying
the enemies I shall repair the loss of Khara, Kumbhakarna,
Prahasta and Indrajit. The atmosphere, the quarters the
sky and the deep being enveloped with the cloud of arrows


1438 RAMAYANA,


shall become invisible. I shall slay to-day all the herofe
monkeys with my winged arrows. Ascending my car gi‘ted
with the velocity of the wind shall { churn today the
monkey host with arrow-like waves coming fram the ocean-like
bow. I shall like an elephant distress to-day the monkey-like
pools having. their countenances for the blown lotuses, and
the lustre of their bodies for the filaments. To-day in the
encounter, the leaders of the monkey hosts, with their heads
transfixed with arrows, shall cover the earth, like unto lotuses
with their stalks. J shall to-day with a single arrow, cleave
hundreds of heroic monkeys fighting with trees in their hands,
T shall wipe to-day the tears of those whose brother or son has
heen stain by destroying their foe. In the encounter to-day
[ shall, with the monkeys deprived of their breath and clept
with my arrows, #0 cover the earth that it may not be seen
by any. I shall satisfy to-day with the flesh of the enemies
slain by my shalts, the crows, vultures and others who live
upon flesh. Get ready soon my car and bring my how. And
let the remaining night-rangers follow me in battle.”
Hearing his words Mabaparsha addressed the leaders of the
army who were near him, saying —"Get your soldiers ready.”
And the commanders too quickly went round all the houses
in Lank&’ and asked the R&akshasis to be ready soon. .
Thereupon began to issue out in a moment terrible-looking.
Rakshasas, emitting roars, having dreadful faces and with
various weapons in their hands—daggers, Pattigas, maces,
clubs, furrows, sharpened saétis, traps,various rods, sharpened
chakra, paraskwadhas, vindipalas, satdghnis and various
other excellent weapons. Thereupon at the command of
Ravana the commanders brought one Mijufa (a hundred
thousand) cars, three Vijuéa elephants, sixty million horses,
asses and camels and rcumberless infantry. They arranged
the soldiers before the king and in the interval the charioteer
brought the car—filled with excellent celestial weapons—
richly gdorned, containing many an armour, girt with a


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1439


network of tinkling ornaments, crested with various jewels,
having jewelled pillars and a thousand golden jars.
Bebolding the car the Rakshasas were greatly astonished.
And Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, rising up all on a suddea,
ascended that car, brilliant bke the Miming fire and the
aggregate rays of a million sun, quick-coursing, having a
charioteer, drawn by eight horses, huge and shining in its
native lustre, Thereupon proceeded Ravana, encircled by
many a Rakshasa as if rending the earth with the excess
of his prowess, There arose a huge sound of bugles
accompanied with that of Mridavgas, drums, conchs, and
haldpas. The lord of the Rakshas—wicked, the slayer of the
Brahmins—the thorn of the celestials, and who hath brought
away Sit& by stealth, has came with his umbrallas and
chowries to fight with the foremost of Rag hus—this cry
was heard everywhere. And with his tremendous roar the
earth shook, And hearing all on a sudden that sound, the
monkeys fled away in fear. And the highly effulgent
Ravana, having huge arms and surrounded by his ministers,
came there being certain of gaining victory. Being command-,
ed by Ravana, Mahaparsha, Mahodara and the irrepresible
Birupaksha ascended the car. They, desirous of winning
victory, issued out emitling dreadful roars in delight and
as if rending the earth therewith, Thereupon the highly
effulgent (Ravana) resembling Death, with uplifted bow,
sallied out for battle along with the army of Rakshas. Aud that
mighty car-warrior, went out in his chariot drawn by quick—
coursing steeds by that gate which led to where Rama
and Lakshmana were. Thereat the sun lost its brilliance
~-the quarters were ensliruuded with darkness ; the birds sent
forth dreadful cries and the earth shook. The celestials
poured down bloody rains—the course of the horses was


slackened—the vultures sat on the banners and jackals
emitted inauspicious cries. His left eye and the left arm
began to shake—his countenance became pale and his voice


1440 RAMA’ YANA. 0


grew harsher. The Ten-neeked Rakshasa thus going out for
battle there appeared many had omens indicating his destruc-
tion. From the sky fell a fire-brand accompanied with the
sound of thunder; vultures and crows emitted inauspicious
cries, Disregarding these dreadful omens which appeared
then, Ravana, incited by death, foolishly went out to slay
his (enemies). And by the wheel-sound of the chariots of
the great Rakshasas the host of monkeys calling each other,
excited with anger and willing to gain victory, addressed
themselves for fight. Thereupon the Ten-necked one,
enraged, with his arrows feathered in gold, made a‘ dreadful
slaughter of the army of monkeys. And some of those
heroic monkeys were beheaded by Ravana—some had their
hearts rent and others were shorn of their ears. Some had
their breath choked, some were killed and others had their
sides broken. Some had their hands cut off and others had
their eyes put out. And wherever in the encounter, the
Ten-headed Rakshasa, whirling his eyes in ire, went in his
car—the monkey leaders could not stand the vebemence of
his arrows.


SECTION LXLVvIl-


Turre the earth was covered with monkeys whose bodies
were rent with the arrows of the Ten-necked (Ravana), As
the flies cannot stand before the flaming fire so they could
not bear the vehemence of Ravana’s shafts. Being thus
assailed with pointed arrows they fled away crying, like unto
elephants being burnt by fire. And Ravana with his arrows
pursued in conflict the course of clouds. Thus slaughtering
the monkeys the lords of R&kshasas speedily reached in the


YUDDHAKANDAM. 144


encounter where Righava was. And beholding the monkeys
assailed and afraid Sugriva placing Sushena in charge of a
gulma* addressed himself for the battle.’ And placing
that heroic monkey, his equal in prowess, in that command
Sugriva sallied out with a tree in his hand to meet the
enemy. And followed him on all sides the leaders of the
monkeys ‘with huge crags and Various trees. The heroic
Sugriva emitted terrible roars in the conflict and assailed the
heroic Rakshasas and many others. The huge-bodied
monkey-chicf crushed the Rakshasas tike unto the wind
uprooting the trees at the time of dissolution. He began to
make a downpour of crags at the R&kshasa host like unto
the cloud pouring down hailstorms at the birds in the forest.
And being beheaded by the crags discharged by that monkey
chief the Ra&kshasas fell down like unto mountains cleft.
The Rakshasas being thus attacked and shattered by Sugriva
and roaring and failing down on all sides, an irrepressible
Rakshasa, skilled in archery, by name Birup&ksha, pronounc-
ing his own name, got down from the car and mounted an
elephant. And mounted on the elephant that highly
powerful Birupaksba sent forth leonine roars and dashed
against the monkeys. Exciting the joy of the Rakshasas
and removing their anxiety he discharged dreadful shafts at
Sugriva and his army. And being assailed by the’ pointed
arrows of that Rakshasa that lord of monkeys roared in
anger aud made up his mind to destroy him. Thereupon
uprooting a tree the heroic monkey, skilled in warfare, leaped
and struck that huge elephant down in his presence. And
being assailed greatly by Sugriva that huge elephant
proceeded a little within the range of the bow and roared
and died. And being greatly enraged on the destruction of
that elephant the highly powerful Rakshasa dashed forward
to face the enemy. That one of quick movements took up

© The division of an army ; body of troops consisting of nine platoons or
nine elephants, nine chariots, twenty-seven horses and forty-five foot.

18s


442 RAMAYANA.


his dagger and armour and viling, approached Sugriva. And
beholding his movement Sugriva took up a huge crag
resembling cloud and hurled it against BirupSksha. That
highly powerful leading Rakshasa, finding the crag about to
fall, turned a little away and struck the monkey with his
dagger. And being assailed with dagger by that powerful
Rikahasa the monkey remained senseless for sometime on
the ground. And rising up all on a sudden he, clenching
his fist, struck that Rakshasa in the mighty encounter on his
breast and got him down. Being struck with the fist the
night-ranger Birupaksha greatly enraged cut down with his
dagger Sugriva’s armour and tumbled him down with his
feet. And the monkey rising up again was about to deal
him a blow, hard as a thunder-bolt, with a dreadful sound,
And receding a little, he baffled its aim and returned one on
Sugriva’s breast. Finding his aim baffled and himself struck
in return by the Rakshasa, Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, was
excited with anger. And the monkey-chief was now on the
look-out for an oppurtunity to strike Birup&ksha, And
immediately in anger he struck him down with a blow on
his forehead. And being thus assailed with the fist
resembling the thunder-bolt of Mahendra, he fell down on
the earth bathed in a pool of blood. And blood gushed out
of the person of Birup&ksha like unto water issuing out of
a fountain. And the monkeys beheld their enemy(Birupiksha)
with his eyes disfigured in anger, bathed in a foam of blood,
his whole body discoloured, trembling, rolling and crying
piteously. Thereupon those too armies of the monkeys and
Rikshasas, being ready to engage in the encounter, began to
roar like unto two miglity oceans having their banks broken.
And observing that highly powerful Rakshasa, of discoloured
eyes, slain by the king of monkeys, the moukeys and
Rakshasa forces engaged in fight and looked like the rising
Ganges.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1443


SECTION LALVIIIL.


Lie unte a pond in the summer both the armies became
gradually reduced. Beholding his own army and Birup&ksha
slain, Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, was doubly excited with
ire. And observing his army reduced and slain by the
heroic (monkeys) he perceived ill omens in the fight and was
accordingly pained at heart. And he addressed Mahodara,
who was near him, saying, “O thou of great arms, all my
hopes of success are now centered in thee. Do thou slay
the enemy’s force, O hero, and display thy prowess. Now
hath come the time of returning the favours of thy master.
Do thou fight bravely.” Being thus accosted that Rakshasa-
chief Mahodata, saying ‘‘so be it” entered the enemy’s army
like unto a fly entering into a flame. Excited by his master’s
command and empowered by his own prowess that (Rakshasa)
gifted with great strength, began to assail the monkeys. And
the highly powerful monkeys too taking up huge crags dashed
against the dreadful army of the enemies and crushed all the
Ra&kshasas. And Mabodara, greatly angered, severed in that
mighty encounter, with his arrows feathered in gold, the
hands, feet and thighs of the monkeys, Then the monkeys,
in fear of the Rakshasas, fled away to different quarters and
some sought shelter of Sugriva. And bebolding his powerful
monkey force thus assailed in the conflict, Sugriva dashed for-
ward and fronted: Mahodara. And taking up a huge and dread-
ful crag resembling a mountain,the monkey-king hurled it with
gteat vehemence to slay him. Thereupon finding that crag
about to fall; ‘Mahodara fearlessly severed it with his arrows.
And being sundered into a thousand pieces by the arrow
of that Rakshasa, it fell down on the earth like unto a band
of vultures. And beholding that crag thus severed, Sugriva


1444 RAMAYANA


was béside himself with ire; and uplifting a sf/a tree hurled
it; and the heroic R&kshasa, the slayer of enemy’s force,
severed il into several pieces with his arrows, Thereupon
excited with wrath he saw a parigha on the ground. And
hurling that flaming parigha and displaying his (light-
handedness) he struck his excellent horse therewith.
And having his horse slain, that hero—the R&akshasa
Mahodara, ascended his car, and in great anger took
up his club, Those two heroes, with club and parigha
in their hands, engaged in battle, roaring like two bulls or
clouds accompanied with lightning. Thereupon the night-
tanger Mahodara, inflamed with ire, hurled at Sugriva, the
club flaming like the Sun. And beholding that dreadful
club about to fall the highly powerful “Sugriva—the lord of
monkeys, uplifting his parigha struck it therewith, And
parigha, being sundered, fell quickly down on the earth.
Thereupon the effulgent Sugriva picked up from the ground
musala made of iron and ornamented with gold. Taking
that mxsa/a up he hurled it at the Rakshasa and who again
hurled a club ; and both of them being severed fell down on
the earth. Having their weapons baffled thus,those two heroes,
gifted with great prowess and effulgence and resembling the
burning fire, were ready to interchange blows. They,
emilting roars again and again, struck each other down on
the earth with their clenched fists. And rising up speedily
they again assailed each other. Thus those two heroes,
unsubdued, struck each other with their arms. Thereupon
both of them, highly. proficient in fighting with arms, were
greatly exhausted. Thereupon they took up daggers. And
uplifting them, (those two heroes) with their persons tremb!-
ing in ire, proficient in fighting and skilled in the use of
weapons, dashed on roaring. And both of them enraged with
each other and anxious to score success, moving in circle
on each other’s right side, addressed themselves for
action. Thereupon the vicious-minded, heroic Mahodara,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1445


gifted with great vehemence and proud of his own heroism,
flung his dagger at (the monkey's) armour. And as he was
about to extricate his dagger from the armour, that foremost
of monkeys severed with his dagger that Rakshasa’s head
with helmet aod Ausdalas. And beholding the Raikshasa-
chief fa!l down on the earth with his head off, his forces
fled away from the field. And slaying him that monkey-chief,
delighted, began to roar along with other monkeys. There-
upon the Ten-necked one became highly enraged and
R&ghava greatly delighted. And all the Ra&kshasas, with
their hearts broken and countenances rendered poorly and
stricken with fear fled away to different quarters. Slaying
and striking down on earth Mahodara like unto a portion of
a mighty hill severed, that son of the Sun appeared
resplendent in his own effulgence and became irrepressible
like unto the Sun, And winning victory in the action that
lord of monkeys was espied by the celestials, Siddhas and
Yakshas along with all creatures on earth, having their
eyes flushed with joy.


SECTION LXLIX.


Manovara being thus slain by Sugriva, the highly
powerful Mahaparshwa, having his eyes reddened with ire,
looked towards him. And the Rakshasa, with his weapons,
assailed the dreadful army of Angada as well as the Seading
monkeys, The Rakshasa severed the heads from the bodies
of the monkeys like unto the wind throwing away the
fruits from trees. And he cut off, with his arrows, the arms
of some and some were deprived of their sides. The
monkeys were thus assailed by Mahaparshwa with a shower


1446 RAMAYANA.


of shafta, All the monkeys were thus stricken with grief
and rendered senseless. And hearing of the anxiety of his
own army thus assailed by the Rakshasa, Angada, gifted
with great vehemence, taking his parigha made of iron
and resembling the rays of the sun, dashed on like the rising
deep during the lunar half of a month. And that foremost
of monkeys encountered Mahaparshwa, who, thus struck by
the monkey, became insensible with his charioteer and fell
down on the earth, Thereupon leaped on the battle-field
the highly powerful and effulgent lord of bears, having the
liue of red collyrium, with his army resembling the cloud.
And excited with ire, he, taking up a huge crag resembling
the summit of a mountain, speedily struck down his horses
and broke down his car. And regaining his senses in a
moment the highty powerful Mah&parshwa, again assailed
Angada with many arrows. He struck Jamvabin, the
lord of bears, on his breast with three arrows and assailed
Gabiksha with many shafts. And beholding Jamvabin and
Gab&ksha overwhelmed with arrows, Angada, beside himself
with ire, took up a dreadful parigha. And holding with
two hands that parigha made of iron and bright like the
rays of the sun, Angada, the son of V&li, with his eyes
reddened in wrath, hurled it at Mahiparshwa who was
stationed at a distance, to slay him. And being hurled by
the highly powerful (Angada) the parigha, struck down from
his hands the bow with arrows and the helmet of the
Rakshasa, And approaching him vehemently, V4li’s son,
gifted with great prowess, in anger, struck him, with
clenched fist, on his ears having excellent kundalas. There
upon Mabdparshwa gifted with great vehemence and efful-
gence, highly angered, took up in his hands a huge
parashwodha, sharpened with oil, bright and hard as iron
and discharged it at Vali’s son, and struck him therewith on
hin left shoulder, And Angada baffled that parashwadhe.
Thereupon that hero, powerful ike his own father, clenching


YUDDHAKANDAM. "447


his fist, hard as thunder-bolt and resembling even Indra’s
acani, dealt it, in great anger, upon the Raksha’s breast, And
being struck with that fist the R&kshasa’s breast was shattered
and he fell dowa on earth. He falling down on earth slain,
his soldiers were greatly sorry and Rfvana attained to as
excess of ire in the conflict. The noise set up by the
delighted monkeys like unto a dreadful leonine roar, as if
rending the city of Lank& abounding in edifices and gates,
resembled the great roar of the celestials along with Indra,
And hearing the noise of the celestials and monkeys, the lord
of Bakshasas, the enemy of the gods, in great auger, again
ptoceeded towards the battle field.


SECTION C.


Bexorowe Mahodara, Mah&parsha and the higlily
powerful Birup%ksha slain in the encounter Ravana attained
to an excess of ire. And ordering his charioteer to hurry on
he gave vent to the following words—"All my courtiers
have been slain and my city is shut up—1 shall remove my
gtief consequent on ail these by slaying Raima and
Lakshmana. {shall destroy Rama-like tree in the conflict
whose flower is Sita and whose branches are Sugriva,
Jambavan, Kumuda, Nala, Divida, Mainda, Angada,
Gandhamidana, Hanuman and ail other leading monkeys.”
And resounding the ten quarters with the sound of his
chariot wheels that mighty car-warrior proceeded quickly
towards R&ghava. With that sound all quarters were-filled,
and the earth, with rivers, mountains and forests shook and
all the lions, deer and birds were terrified. He created a


1448 RAMAYANA.


dreadful darkness with the discharge of his sharp weapons
and burat down the monkeys who fled away to different
directions, Dust was raised on the ground hy those monkeys’
assailed and flying to various directions, They were unable
to withstand the power of that weapon made by Brahm&
himself. Beholding his own army, assailed and cut into
hundred peices by the excellent weapons of Ravana,
Righava dashed forward. And assailing the monkey-host,
that foremost of Rakshasas espied Rama, unconquered, at a
distance with bis brother Lakshmiana like unto Basava with
Vishou, holding a huge bow like one painted on the sky,
having expansive eyes like lotus-petals, long arms, and
always subduing the enemies. Beholding the monkeys slain
in the encounter and R&vana approach, the heroic and highly
powerful Rima, with Sumitré’s son in his company,
delightedly set arrows on his bow. And as if rending the
whole earth with that dreadful sound he began to draw the
string of his excellent bow. With the sound of Ravana’s
arrows and the twang of Rama's bow hundreds of
R&kshasas fell down on earth. And coming within the range
of the arrows of those two princes, Ravana appeared like
R&hu in presence of the sun and the moon. And desiring
to fight with him first Lakshmana setting sharp arrows on
his bow, discharged shafts at him resembling the flame of
fire. And the highly powerful Ravana too with his arrows
stopped the course of those shafts in the.sky as soon as
they were discharged by Lakshmana, skilled in archery.
And displaying his light-handedness, he, with ‘one arrow,
severed Lakshmana’s one, with three his three and with ten
his ten. Surpassing thus the son of Sumitri, Ravana, ever
victorious in battle, confronted Rama in the encounter,
standing like another hill, And approaching Raghava,
Rivana the lord of Rakshasas, with his eyes reddened in
ire, began to make a shower of arrows. Thereupon beholding
the arrows shot off. Ravana’s bow fall on ail sides, Rima


VUDDHAKANDAM. 1449


speedily took up a val/a.* And R&ghava sundered with his
sharp valle his dreadful arrows flaming and resembl-
tng poiscnous serpents. With various sharpened arrows
Raghava assailed Ravana, and he again assailed Rama in
return. And forming a circle, they passed each other by
the right side. Uprooting the earth with the vehemence of
their arrows, irrepressible by each other, fighting equally
discharging arrows, they looked dreadful like Death himself
—and created terror in all creatures. The sky was filled
with, tlfeir Garious weapons, like unto clouds in the rainy
season accompanied with lightning. And the welkin
appeared full of windows with that shower of arrows, sharp-
ened, shot with great vehemence and winged like vultures.
The earth was stricken with darkness caused by these arrows
like unto clouds appearing after sunset. There took place a
dreadful conflict between them, desiring to slay each other,
having their prowess unknown and fighting like Vitra and
Vasava. Both of them were proficient in archery, skilled in
the art of conflict and foremost of those conversant with
the use of weapons, And they began to veer round the
battle-field. And wherever they went, there appeared arrows
like unto waves of the deep roused by the winds, Then that
destroyer of creatures—Ravana—with his hand engaged
in discharging shafts, shot at Rama's forehead a network of
atrows. And thereat Ramaon his head bore that shower
of shafts shot from his terrific bow, having the lustre of
the petals of blue lotuses ; nor did he experience any pain.
And then reciting a formula, the exceedingly energetic
Rama endowed with prowess, wrought up with wrath,
engaged in incessantly shooting his shafts, taking his Raudra
weapon and again seizing his arrows, discharged them at
that lord of Bakshasas. And alighting at the impenetrable
mail of the Rakshasa-chief, resembling a mass of mighty
clouds, those arrows did not then occasion him any pain.


‘* An arrow with a crescent shaped head,


- 182


1450 RAMAYANA,


Again Rama skilled in all weapons, from a powerful
weapon discharged arrows at the sovereign of the R&k-
shasas mounted on his car. And piercing Ravana, those
like unto five-hooded serpents, resisted by him, entered
the earth, hissing. Having baffied Raghava’s weapon,
R4vana, transported with passion, took up a dreadful Asura
weapon; and discharged sharpened shafts having the faces
of tions and tigers, and the faces of Aankas and kokas*
and the faces of vultures and hawks, and the faces of jackals,
and the faces of wolves,—with gaping mouths,—and terrific
of aspect; five-mouthed and red-hued. And that highly
powerful one, enraged, sighing like a snake, by his power of
illusion shot at Rama other keen arrows having the faces
of mules and the faces of bears, and the faces of dogs and
cocks, and the faces of makarast and venomous serpents,—
these as well as others, Covered with that Asura weapon,
that foremost of the Raghus, himself resembling fire, dis-
charged an exceedingly vigorous weapon informed with fire ;
and shot various shafts having faces filled with live flames,
and faces like wnto suns,—and hued like unto planets and
stars,—-and furnished with faces resembling mighty meteors,
or resembling tongues of lightning. And those terrific shafts
of Ravana, resisted by Raghava’s weapon, were annihilated
‘in the sky, and destroyed (monkeys) by thousands, And
seeing that weapon (of Ravana) destroyed by Rama of
untiring deeds, all those heroes, the monkeys—headed by
Sugriva, capable of wearing forms at will, shouted, surround-
ing Raghava. And the high-souled son of Dagaratha—
Raghava—having by his might destroyed that weapon
discharged by Rfvana’s arms, was delighted; and the
monkey-chiefs, filled with glee, began to emit shouts.


* Koha—a ruddy goose. It may also mean a lizard, a chamaleon, a wolf.
+ A marine monster, generally confounded with the alligator and the
shark ; but really a fabulous animal.—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 4st


SECTION Cl


On that weapon of his having been baffled, Ravana—
lord of the R&kshasas—was fired with double fury, and the
highly effulgent Ravana from wrath set about discharging
at R&ghava a dreadful Raudra weapon, which had been
conferred on him by Maya. And from his bow began to
issue forth in large numbers darts and maces and clubs,
flaming and having the might of thunder; and various kinds
of sharp clubs and daggers and nooses and flaming thunder.
bolts began to descend like unto the winds at the universal
tumbling. And thereupon the graceful and exceedingly
effulgent Raghava—foremost of those accomplished in noble
arms—resisted that weapon with a powerful Gandharva
weapon, On that weapon being baffled by the high-souled
Raghava, Ravana, with his eyes rendered coppery with
passion, took up a Solar weapon. Thereupon from the bow
of the wondrous vehement and intelligent Ten-necked one
rushed out discuses flaming and mighty. And the firmament
all round blazed up with those impendent (arms), as blaze up
the cardinal quarters on the Sun and the Moon and the
planets dropping down, Thereat Raghava in the van of
that army by means of ‘vollies of shafts cut off Ravana’s
wonderful weapons and discuses. And seeing that weapon
destroyed, Ravana—lord of Rakshasas—with ten arrows
pierced Rama all through his vitals. And pierced by Ravana
with those ten shafts discharged fram his mighty bow, the
exceedingly powerful Raghava did not so much shake,
Then Raghava—victor in fight—waxing wondrous wroth,
with countless shafts pierced Ravana ail over his person. In
the meanwhile Raghava’s younger brother, the mighty
Lakshmana—destroyer of foes-——growing enraged, took up
séven arrows. And with those highly impetuous arrows


1452 RAMAYANA.


that exceedingly effulgent one severed the human-headed
standard of Ravana. And the mighty and graceful
Lakshmana with a shaft cut off the head of the Nairita’s
charioteer, ilumined with ear-rings. And then with five”
sharpened arrows Lakshmana severed the bow of the
R&kshasa-chief, resembling the trunk of an elephant. And
Bibhishana, bounding up, with his'mace despatched R&vana’s
excellent steeds, resembling hills or dark-blue clouds.
Thereat, leaping down from his mighty car, whose horses
had been slain, Ravana was fired with high wrath against his
brother, And the powerful lord of Rakshasas endowed with
immense strength, hurled at Bibhishana a dart resembling
the flaming thunder-bolt. And ere the dart had reached its
destination, Lakshmana severed it with three shafts; and
thereat in that mighty conflict there arose a mighty uproar
from the monkeys. And the dart dight with networks of
gold fell down in three fragments, as droppeth a migh ty
meteor from the firmament, flaming and shooting out
scintillations. Then (Ravana) took up a huge dart, glowing
in its own energy, celebrated as being irrisistible, and
incapable of being borne by the Destroyer himself. On
being whirled by the impious and strong Ravana, the dart
possessed of exceeding energy, flamed up. In the mean-
while the heroic Lakshmana swiftly came to the side of
Bibhishana,* whose life was placed: in peril. And in order to
eave him, that hero—Lakshmana—drawing his bow, covered
the dart-handed Ravana with showers of shafts. On being
covered with arrows shot by that high souled one, Ravana,
with his prowess baffled, made up his mind to let (his
brother) go, And seeing his brother delivered by Lakshmana,
Ravana, facing Lakshmana, spoke these words,—"O thou
proud of thy prowess! as Bibhishana hath this wise
been delivered by thee, passing by the Rakshasa, this dart,


* The commentator explains: “Himself coming before the dart,
Lakshmana-saved Bibbishana.”—T,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1453


discharged from my bludgeon of an arm, will depart,
depriving thee of thy life.’ Having said this, Ravana,
waxing furiously enraged, discharged at Lakshmana that
dart forged by Maya with his power of illusion,furnished with
eight bells, having mighty sounds,—incapable of being
resisted,—competent to finish foes ; and flaming In energy,——
and shouted simultaneously. And hurled with terrific force,
the dart sending sounds resembling that of Vajra or the
thunder-bolt, vehemently alighted at Lakshmana in that
encounter. ‘Thereat, as the dart descended, Raghava
addressed* it, saying,—-"Peace be to Lakshmana! Be thou
fraustrated ; and let thy energy go out of thee.” But the
dart discharged in the encounter by the enraged Ravana,
resembling a venomous serpent, dived into the dauntless and
heroic Lakshmana ; and (the dart) exceedingly splendid and
blazing, possessed of dreadful impetuosity, and resembling
the tongue of the king of serpents, smote Lakshmana in his
mighty chest. And with his breast riven by the dart,
driving deep through the force of Ravana, Lakshmana fell
down to the earth. Aud R&ghava, standing by, seeing
Lakshmana in that plight, had his heart overspread with
sorrow, But reflecting only for a while, he, with his eyes
aurcharged with tears, was filled with greater martial ardour,
and resembled the fire risen at the universal dissolution,
Then thinking—'This is not the time to indulge in grief ;’
he, gazing at Lakshmana, entered into a terrific encounter,
resolved upon slaying Ravana, laying under contribution his
dearest energies. And Rama saw Lakshmana with his
chest riven by the dart in the mighty conflict, lying drenched
in blood, and resembling a hill with serpents present in
it--And in spite of all their efforts, the foremost monkeys
failed to extract the dart which had been hurled by the
powerful Ravana.—And, further, they were (all the while)
sore assailed with showers of shafts by the foremost


* $e, as RémAnuya remarks, addressed the deity presiding over it—T.


1454 RAMAYANA.


Rakshagsa of them all. The dart, having pierced Sumitr&'s
son, had entered the earth, In the encounter the mighty
Rima, grasping the dreadful dart with his hands, extracted
the same and wrathfully snapped it.* As he (Rama) was
engaged in pulling the dart out, the mighty Ravana kept
pouring marrow-piercing shafts all over his person, Think-
* ing nothing of those arrows, Rama, embracing Lakshmana,
spoke unto Hanum&n and the mighty monkey, Sugriva,—
Ye foremost of monkeys, do ye stay here, surrounding
Lakslimana. The opportunity for putting forth my prowess
which I had sought, is present. I shall slay this wicked-
minded Ten-necked one, who is resolved to pursue the
course of unrighteousness, Even as on the expiry of summer
the Chitaka is eager for the sight of clouds, I had long been
eager to obtain a! sight of (Ravana) Ye monkeys, this, I
swear unto you,—this very hour not long after ye will see
this ‘world without Ravana or Rima, To-day having slain
Ravana in battle, J shall renounce all sorrow arising from the
loss of my kingdom, from my sojourn in the woods, from
my wandering in Dandaka, from the ravishment of Vaidehi,
from encounter with the Rakshas,—all the terrible evils that
I have suffered, and all the troubles resembling hell, He
for whom I have brought over the monkey-forces, made
Sugriva king, slaying V&li in battle, for whom I have crossed
the ocean and constructed a bridge over the deep—the
same hath been come at by me in conflict, and the same
hath come within the range of my vision.—And having come
within my ken, Ravana will not live, even as one coming
within ken of a serpent of poisonous sight, doth not live ;
or even as a serpent doth not live, coming within ken of
Vinat&’st son, Do ye. ye irrepressible ones, ye foremost of
* The commentator has a characteristic note. This dart, having pierced
the foe, used always to return to Ravana. But Rama, who was the Lord
himself, having spoken to it as he did, it could not this time go back; acd
Rama snapped it, which none else could do,’ |—T.
+ Garura,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1455


monkéys, seated at the brow of the mountain, behold the
battle betweea me and Ravana, To-day let the three
worlds with the Gandharvas, and the Siddhas, and the
Charanas, see that for which Rama is Rama. To-day [ shall
do a deed of which the worlds with the mobile and the
immobile and the gods, shall speak as long as the Earth’
sustaineth (creatures.)” Having delivered himself thus,
Rama, concentrating his attention, began to charge the Ten-
necked one in encounter with whetted arrows decked with
burnished gold. Andin the same way Ravana showered
on Rama great #4rdchas and clubs, even as clouds pour
down showers. Aid there arose a tremendous uproar of
mighty: arrows discharged by Rama and Ravana, smiting one
another, And the shafts shot by Rima and Ravana, severed
and scattered, with flaming heads dropped to the Earth.
And the mighty twangs of the bow-strings of both, terrifying
all creatures, were wonderful to behold.* And then even as
clouds disperse on being trampled by the Winds, Ravana,
covered with showers of arrowy networks by that high souled
one and reduced to sore straits by that one (Rama) of a glow-
ing bow, fled away in fear.


SECTION Ci.


Szzine the heroic Lakshmana brought down by the dart
discharged by the powerful Ravana, and lying drenched in
blood, he (Rima) after having fought furiously with the
wicked-minded R&vana—and having showered vollies of
shafts, addressed Sushena, saying,—“This heroic Lakshmana


| % Addhutadargana—wonderful te bekold,—wonderful to witness is the
sense.—T.


1456 RAMAYANA.


brought down to the earth by the prowess of Ravana, lieth
like a serpent, enhancing my sorrow. Seeing this hero,
dearer lo me than life, what power have I, with my soul
overwhelmed with dole, to fight 2. [f this brother of mine
graced with auspicious marks, delighting in battle, breathe.
his last, what-shall life avail me or happiness? My prowess
is ashamed; my bow falleth off from my hand; my arrows
droop ; my sight is dimmed with tears; my limbs weaken
as do those of men ina dream; thought racks me; and |
even desire death.” Sceing his brother wounded by the
wicked-minded R&vana, crying in preternatural accents,
and sore stricken in his vitals, (Rama) overcome by a mighty
sorrow, lamented with his senses wildered. “Seeing my
brother, Lakshmana, wounded, and lying over the dust of the
field, even victory, O hero, doth not seem to me sweet. If
the Moon is hid from the sight, whom doth he then delight ?
What have 1 to do with battle? What have I to do with
life? 1 have no more to do anything with fighting, seeing
that this Lakshmana wounded, lieth in the field of battle.
As this shighly effulgent one had followed me into the
forest, so will I in the same way follow him to the abode of
Yama. Ever secking my welfare and ever devoted to me, he
hath been reduced to this pass by Rakshasas fighting in
crooked ways. in land after land one meets with wives, in
land after land one meets with friends, but .country find
1 none where a uterine brother may be met with. What,
O irrepressible one, shali | do with the kingdom without
my Lakshanana ? And what shail {say unto mother Sumitra,
fond of her son? And | shall never be able to bear the
reproach Sumitr& shall cast upon me. And what shall I say
unto Kaugalya, and what unto mother Kaikeyi? And what
shall {say unto Bharata, and what uato the exceedingly
powerlul Satrugbnag ‘Thou hadst gone to the woods with
him. Why then dost thou come (back) without him? ’Tis
better (for me) to renounce my life here, instead of bearing


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1457


the censure of friends. What a sin had I committed in
another birth, seeing that my virtuous brother, staying before
me, hath been slain? Ah, my brother! Thou best of men!
O master, who wert the foremost of heroes! Why, forsaking
me, dost thou repair to the other regions. Wherefore,
brother, dost thou not speak to me, who am lamenting ? Get
up, See! Why dost thou lie down? Look on me with
thine eyes. O mighty-armed one, in the woods and mountains
thou didst ever use to cheer me, tried by grief and pining in
despondency, with my mind overwhelmed (with woe).” As
Rama was speaking thus with his senses overwhelmed
with emotion, Sushena, soothing him, spoke these pregnant
words,—"O foremost of men, cast off this train of thought
tending to overwhelm thy understanding,—this anxiety giving
birth to grief, and resembling the shafts of foes in the van of
the embattled forces. Lakshmana enhancer of auspiciousnesa
is not dead. His face is not distorted or blackened, Do
thou look at his countenance, which is beautifully bright and
cheerful, His hands have palms resembling lotus-petals, and
his eyes are pleasant. O king, one dead doth not look thus,
(Therefore), O hero, do not grieve. O subduer of enemies,
this one is instinct with life. As he is lying down on the ground,
stretched at length, his heart, O hero, trembling momentarily,
testifieth to his: respiration.” Having spoken thus unto
Raghava, the highly wise Sushena thus addressed the mighty
monkey, Hanum&n, saying,—"O placid one, hicing hence to
the mountain, Mahodaya, which, O hero, had formerly been
mentioned unto thee by Jambav4n, bring hither the mighty
drug sprung at its right summit—Vigalyakaranf by name, and
Savarnyakarani,* and Sanjfvakaranf, O hero, and the potent
medicine—Sandh&nf. Do thou bring (these) in order that the
hero—Lakshmana—-may be revived.” Having been thus in-
structed, Hanuman, répairing to the Medicinal mountain, was
wrought up with anxiety, not knowing the drugs. And then


* Lig—that which restores the former complexion.—T.


183


1458 RAMAYANA,


the thought sprang up in the mind of the Wind-god’s offspring
of immeasurable prowess,—‘I shall go, even taking this
{entire} summit of the mountain. In this very summit must
that delightful drug have sprung. This I infer, inasmuch as
Sushena had forsooth said so, If I fail to take Vicgalyakarani,
T shall come by disgrace,—and if I spend much time (in
thought), that would be fraught with evil.’* Having reflected
thus, the exceedingly powerful Hanuman, foremost of monkeys,
—swiftly drawing up to that best of mountains, and giving
three shakes to the mountain filled with various flowering
trees,—raised it up with his hands, And taking that summit
of the mountain resembling dark-blue clouds charged with
rain, Hanuman from the earth bounded up into the sky, And
arriving (at his quarters), that wondrous vehement one, put=
ting down the mountain-peak,and reposing for a while, spoke
unto Sushena,—"I did not find the drug, O best of monkeys ;
and therefore have I brought this entire summit of the
mountain.” When the Wind-god’s offspring had spoken
thus, that foremost of monkeys—Sushena—praising him,
uprooted the herb aad secured it. Seeing Hanum&n’s feat,
incapable of being done by even the celestials, the choicest
of the monkeys were amazed. Then crushing the healing
herb, that best of monkeys—the exceedingly effulgent
Sushena, made Lakshmana smell the same. And thereupon
the wounded Lakshmana,—slayer of hostile heroes—smelling
it, cured of his wound and ailments, speedily rose up from
the ground. Seeing Lakshmana rise up from the earth, the
monkeys, exceedingly rejoiced, honoring Lakshbmana,
exclaimed, “Excellent! Excellent!” “Come!” said that
slayer of hostile heroes—Rama—and with his eyes filled
with tears, he deeply embraced Lakshmana. And having
embraced Sumitra’s son, Raghava then addressed him,


* Explains the commentator: ‘If I take any other medicine by mistake,
I shall make a fool of myself; if I spend much time in thought, Lakshmana
may die’—T, :


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1459


saying,—"By good fortune it. is that, O hero, I see thee
returned from (the mansion of} Death.—Verily my life, or
Sit&, or Viclory is worthless (without thee). And thou being
dead, what is my life worthy’ When the high-souled
Raghava had spoken thus, Lakshmana, agerieved on account
of the words (of Raghava) expressive of infirmity of purpose,
said,—"“Having bound thyself by that vow, it doth not, O
thou having truth for prowess, behove thee to speak like one
fickle and feeble. Those speaking the truth, never falsify
their promise: the mark of a great one is even observance
of vow. O sinless one, do not suffer thyself to be overcome
by despair on my account. Do thou to-day by slaying
Ravana, make thy promise good. Thy foe coming within
the sway of thy shafts, will not hence, living, even like a
mighty elephant coming before a sharp-toothed roaring lion.
I wish the speedy destruction of this impious one, ere the
maker of day, having performed his work, has ascended the
Setting-hill, If thou wishest to slay Ravana in battle, if thou
desirest to recover the princess, then, QO noble one, O hero,
to-day speedily set about what I say.”


SECTION Cit.


Hearne the words uttered by Lakshmana, that slayer
of hostile heroes—-Raghava—endued with prowess, taking
his bow, set shafts on it, and in the brunt of battle began to
discharge dreadful arrows at Ravana. And mounted on
another car, Ravana—lord of R&kshasas—rushed against
Kakutstha, even as Swarbh&nu rusheth against the Sun,
And even as amass of clouds poureth down torrents on a
mighty mountain, the Ten-necked one, mounted on his car,


1460 RAMAYANA,


smote Rama with shafts resembling? thunder-bolts. And in
the encounter Rama, concentiating his thoughts, showered
on the Ten-necked one arrows embellished with gold and
looking like living fire. And celestials and Gandharvas and
‘Kinnaras declared that there had been no other battle like
unto the encounter of Rama stationed on the ground and
the Raksha mounted on his car. Then the foremost of
celestials—Sakra—hearing their ambrosial speech, summon-
ing Ma&tali, said,—“Taking my car, hie to the best of the
Raghus. And reaching the earth, do thou, welcoming (him),
bring about great good unto the gods.” Thus accosted by
the sovereign of tho celestials, M&tali—celestial charioteer
—bending down his bead, addressed that celestial, saying,—
"Speedily shall 1 go, O lord of the celestials; and J shall
also do the office of a charioteer (unto Raghava).” Then
yoking with steeds that best of cars, curiously wrought with
gold; adorned with hundreds of small bells; resembling the
Sun new risen ; having its pole studded with lapises ; yoked
with excellent horses caparisoned in gold ; furnished with white
chowris,—drawn by steeds resembling the Sun; decked with
golden net-works,—and provided with a golden standard,—
the graceful car of the sovereign of the celestials,—M&tali,
commanded by the king of the immortals, ascending the car,
went out of the celestial regions and came to Kakutstha.
And with his hand holding the reins, the charioteer of the
thousand-eyed (Deity) with joined hands addressed Rama,
saying,—“O Kakutstha, in order that thou mayst obtain the
victory, the thousand-eyed (god) hath sent thee this car.
And, O exceedingly powerful one! O graceful (hero)! O
thou that slayest thy foes! this is the redoubtable bow of
Indra,—-and this is the mail resembling fire,—and these are
the arrows looking like the very Sun ; and this is the dart
shining and fraught with fair fortune. Ascend thou this car,


* This conversation between Rama and Lakshmana took place, says the
commentator, on the first day of the lighted fortnight.—T.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1466


© hero. Slay the Rakshasa—R&vana, with me as thy
charioteer, even as the lord of the celestials slayeth
Danavas.” Thus addressed, Raima, going round the car
and saluting it, ascended the same, illumining the worlds
with his splendour. And the encounter that took place
between the two cars with the mighty-armed Rama (on one
side),and the Raksha—R&vana—(on the other), was wonderful
to behold. And Raghava highly proficient in weapons with
aG4ndharva weapon resisted the Gandharva weapon of the
Ra&kshasa king, and with a celestial weapon, his celestial
weapon, And then that lord of Rakshasas—the night-ranger
—fired with high rage, again discharged an exceedingly
dreadful Rakshasa weapon. And the gold-decked shafts
shot from R&vana’s bow, becoming furiously venomous
serpents, covered Kakutstha. And vomitting living flames,
they of terrific aspect, having flaming faces, showered over
R&ma with gaping mouths. And those flaming venomous
serpents, having the feel of Vasuki himself, covered al’ sides
and enveloped all quarters. And seeing those serpents
descending in the encounter, Rama employed a dreadful
Garura weapon, And discharged from R&aghava’s bow, those
arrows plated with gold at the feathered parts, and furnished
with the splendour of peacocks, becoming golden birds—
began to range (the field of battle) as the enemies of the
serpents. And the shafts of Rama capable of wearing forms
at will, turned into birds, destroyed all the exceedingly swift-
coursing arrows having the forms of serpents. On his
weapon having been baffled, Ravana—lord of Rakshasas—
waxing wroth, poured tremendous showers of shafts on
Rama. And smiting Rama of untiring deeds with thousands
of shafts, (Ravana) pierced M&tali with vollies of arrows.
And with an arrow, Ravana severed the standard; and
having brought down the golden standard on the floor of the
car, Ravana wounded even Indra’s steeds with a net-work
of arrows, And seeing Rima hard pressed, celestials and


Rahu of Ravana, that bringer of evil unto creatures—Budha
-—stood, assailing the Pray&patya star—Rohini—beloved of
the Moon. And the enraged Ocean, heaving with smoking
surges,and flaming as it were,swelled up,seeming to the touch
the Sun. And the Sun was blackened and assumed a stern
aspect, with his rays dimmed. And he was seen with a head-
Jess trunk on his lap, and he was in conjunction with a comet,
And that star of the Kogalas, relating to the deities—Indra
and Agni—Angaraka—stood in the sky, attacking Vic&kha.
And the Ten-necked one, having ten faces and twenty arms,
equipped with his bow, looked like the mountain—Mainaka,
And Rima reduced to sore straits by the Ten-necked Raksha,
could not discharge his arrows in the conflict. And then the
enraged R&ma with his eyes slightly red, flew into a
tremendous passion, as if burning up the Rakshasas,
Seeing the face of the enraged Rama endued with under-
standing, all the creatures were overwhelmed with fear and
the Earth herself shoot, And mountains abounding with
lions and tigers began to tremble, and trees to shiver. And
even the deep—lord of streams—was wrought up wondrously.
And rough and terrific clouds in the sky sent forth fierce roars,
And stormy clouds rumbling went about the heavens, And
seeing Rima wrought up with a mighty passion, and the
fearful disastrous omens, all creatures were possessed by
fright and Ravana was struck with dismay. And then
stationed in the sky, celestials and Gandharvas and mighty
serpents and saints and Danavas and Daityas and those
related to Garura—fowls—beheld that-conflict like unto the
universal tumbling, as the two heroes faught on with various
dire arms, And as they looked on the mighty encounter, the
celestials and the Asuras, who had come to the conflict, from


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1463


feeling of regard,* cheerfully spoke (these words), And the
Asuras staying there said unto the Ten-necked one, ‘Be
victorious ;' and the celestials again and again said unto
Rama, ‘Be victorious! In the meantime, the impious
Ravana, desirous of slaying Raghava, from wrath took up a
mighty weapon, fraught with the essence of the thunder-
bolt ; sending terrible sounds; capable of destroying all
foes,—furnished with forks resembling mountain-peaks ;
tending to strike terror unto mind and sight; sharp-pointed,
resembling the smoking fire risen at the hour of universal
dissolution ; exceedingly terrible ; irrisistible (in battle); -
unbearable even by the Destroyer,—the terror of all
creatures—terrific ; and competent to rive (all . things),
Flaming up with wrath, Ravana took this dart. And fired
with furious wrath, that powerful one took the dart in the
encounter, surrounded in that contest by many heroic
Rakshasas. And uplifting (the dart), the huge-bodied
R&vana, with his eyes reddened in passion, emitted mighty
roars. And the shouts of the Rakshasa sovereign made the
earth and the sky and the cardinal quarters and all sides
tremble. And at the roars of that wicked-minded and
huge-bodied one, all creatures were struck with terror, and
the sea was vexed.¢ And the exceedingly energetic Rivana,
taking that mighty dart, and sending up furious shouts,
addressed Rama in a harsh speech, saying—“O Rama, I
in wrath uplift this dart having the strength of the levin.
This will utterly deprive of life thee who art assisted by thy
brother. O thou that delightest in battle, to-day swiftly
slaying thee, I shall make thee even with those heroic
Rakshas slain in the van of the forces, Stay now. O
R&aghava, thee shall I slay with this dart.” Saying this, the
lord of the Rakshasas hurled the dart. And discharged from
R&vana’s hand, (the dart), surrounded with garlands of


™ i.e. each party out of regard for the warrior to whom it wished well—T,
+ ‘The still-vexed Bermoothes,’—Zempest.


rapa HAMA YANA.


lightning, furnished with eight bells, sending mighty roars,——
rising to the sky, looked exceedingly splendid. Seeing the
dart, flaming and of terrific aspect, Raghu’s son—R&ma—
endowed with prowess, drawing his bow, discharged arrows,
And with vollies of shafts Raghava resisted the descending
(dart), even as Vasava extinguisheth the fire of doomsday
with his showers, Then even as a flame consumeth insects,
the mighty dart of Ravana burnt up those shafts shot from
the bow of Rama. Seeing those shafts reduced to ashes and
crushed on coming in contact with the dart, as they were
coursing in the sky, Raghava was transported with passion.
And then waxing wondrous wroth,—Raghu’s son—Raghava
—took up a javelin, liked by V&sava himself, brought by
M&tali. And on being wielded by that strong one, the
javelin, resonant with bells, made the welkin blaze up, like
a burning meteor on the occasion of universal rack. And
when hurled, it alighted on that same dart of the Rakshasa-
chief. And thereat, with its splendour lost, the mighty dart,
riven, dropped (to the earth.) Then Rama, shooting
straight-speeding arrows, pierced his (RAvana’s) exceedingly
fleet steeds. Aud then he pierced Ravana in the chest with
whetted arrows. And the energetic Raghava hit (Ravana)
in the temples with three feathered shafts, And thereat with
all his limbs pierced (with arrows), and his body laved ia
blood, the lord of R&kshasas furnished with many limbs,
looked like a flowering Agoka. And with his person pierced
with the shafts of Rama, the lord of night-rangers having his
body drenched with blood, was stricken with sadness in the
midst of his forces,—and was also overwhelmed with terrific
wrath.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1455


SECTION Civ.


On being greatly harassed by K4&kutstha in anger,
Ravana, detightiug in battle, came under the sway of a
towering passion. And with his eyes aglow, that powerful
‘one from wrath and fury assailed Raghava in mighty
encounter, And even as clouds pour down from the sky ona
pool, Ravana showered thousands of arrows on Raighava.
And covered with vollies of shafts discharged from (R&vana’s)
bow in the conflict, Kakutstha like unto a mighty mountain
did not shake. And that one endowed with prowess stood
in the field, resisting those networks of arcows, aad took up
shalts resembling the cays of the Sun. Then tha fleet-handed
night-ranger, fired with rage, discharged a thousand arrows
at the chest of the high-souled Raghava.—And thereat ia
that encounter Lakshmana’s elder brother, with his body
bathed in blood, appeared like a mighty Kinguka tree in a
forest. And with his ire aroused by the blows he received,
the exceedingly energetic Kakutstha took up arrows
resembling the Sun riscn at the time of the universal
dissolution, And in the darkness spread by the arrows
(discharged), Rima and Ravava both fired with wrath could
not be discovered of each othec. Then that hero—Dagaratha’s
son-~Rima, overcome with weath, addressed Ravana,
laughing, in a harsh speech, saying,—“Thou vilest of
Rikshasas, in consequence of having through lack of sense
carried off my wife from Janasthana and brought her under
thy subjection, thou hast been deprived of thy prowess.
Having forcibly carried away Vaidehi staying in that mighty
forest, forlorn and without me, thou thinkest—‘I am a hero!
Outraging the helpless wives of others,—doing this craven
deed, thou thinkest—'I am a hero.’ O thou having thy dignity

184


1466 RAMAYANA.


destroyed! O shameless wight ! O thou of volatile character,
having through thy violence brought destruction on thyself,
thou thinkest,—‘] ama hero.’ A great and famous act hath
been performed by thee,—a hero, and the brother of the
Bestower of riches, surrounded with thy forces! To-day
receive the mighty frait of that infamous act done through
pride, productive of evil.¥ QO wicked-minded one, thou
thinkest of thyself—I am a hero 7’ but thow that hast taken
away Sith like a thief, hast no feeling of shame. Hadst theu
forcibly outraged Sit& in my very presence, thou, slain by my
shafts, wouldst have seen thy brother—Khara, By tuck,
O thou of an evil soul, thow hast come within the range of
my vision, To-day by means of sharp shafts shall I bring
thee to death’s door, To-day beasts of pray will drag thy
head having burning ear-rings, severed by my shafts and
covered with the dust of the battle-field, O Ravana, vultures
will alight on thy breast, as thou wilt lie low on the ground ;
and, athirst, they will drink the blood gushing out from thy
wounds. To-day fowls of the air will keep pulling at thee
pierced with my shafts, and lying lifeless, as birds do
serpents.” Having spoken thus, that slayer of foes—Rama—
showered arrows on the lord of Rakshasas, staying before.
And the prowess and strength and spirits and force of arms
of R&ma burning for the destruction of his foe, were doubled.
And all the Weaponst presented themselves before that one
cognisant of self; and the fleet-handedness of that
exceedingly powerful one increased immensely from
exhilaration of spirits. Seeing all these auspicious omens
coming of themselves, Rama, finisher of Rakshasas, set about
smiting his foe more energetically than ever. And assailed
with stones by the monkeys and showers of slialis by
Raghava, the Ten-necked one felt his heart undergoing a


* Remarks RamAnuya, ‘here and in the next world,
+ 0, the presiding deities of them.


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1467


revolution.* And when through the stupifaction of his inner
self, he could not discharge any weapon, or draw his bow, or
put forth his prowess, (R&ma} did not persist in smiting
him. And the shafts and various arms discharged by him
betokened his death; and his last moments were present.
And his charioteer, driving his car, perceiving this, calmly
took the car away from the field of fight. And then, seeing
the king shorn of prowess, and dropt, his charioteer, struck
with fear, swiftly turned away his dreadful car having the
clatter of clouds, and went away from the field of battle.


SECTION CV.


Arie gradually regaining his senses, R&vana, urged on
by the force of the Finisher, getting into a furious passion,
with his eyes reddened in wrath, addressed the charioteer,
saying.—"O thou of perverse sense, disregarding me as
devoid of prowess, and incompetent, and bereft of vigor,—
as cowardly, tight, nerveless and shorn of energy,—and
as divorced by the power of illusion and debarred by
arms,—thou actest on thine own understanding. Wherefore
disregarding me, and not minding my purpose, hast thou
taken away my car from before the presence of the enemy ?
Q abject one! by thee have my long-earned renown and
energy and prowess and credit beew brought to naught. In
the very sight of an enemy of renowned prowess, and one
capable of being gratified with valorous deeds, hast thou
made me, burning for battle, look as if I were a coward. As,
O wicked-minded one,thou dost not even through heedlessness,


* Vighwrnahridayeh : had his heart paralysed, according to the comment-
ator. I prefer the sense given as more graphic.—T.


2468 RAMAYANA,


take the car to the field of battle, I infer for certain that thow
hast been bribed by the foe. Fhe act that thou hast done,
doth not appear as that of a friend seeking our welfare ; but
to-day thou hast aeted tike an enemy. If thow hast been
maintained by me, if thou rememberest my merit, do thou
swiftly turn the car before my enemy has departed.” Thus
admonished by him of stender sense, the charioteer possessed
of intelligence, humbly spake unto Ravana words fraught
with good,—°I am not afraid, nor stupified, nor have I been
bribed by the foe, nor am } negligent. And F have not
forgotten thy affection or thy good offices. And studious of
thy welfare, P have saved thy fame; and with a mind over-
flowing with affection 1 have done (unto thee) this unpalatable
good, Omighty monarch, for this, thou shouldst not, like
a frivolous and base one, criminate me that am ever engage?
im what is good and dear unto thee. Listen! I shall render
thee reason why I turned away from the field the car, rushing
like a river when the sea is swelled up.* E knew that thou
hadst been fatigued in consequence of thy mighty exertions
in the fight. And I could not perceive that thy prowess
then stood superior (to that of the foe)t And the steeds
of my car were worn out by carrying it; and they were
battered, and helpless, and perspired like kine in a shower,
And bad omens fast sprang up before us. And on these
occurring, I perceived that things would go against us. O
thou endowed with exceeding might, a charioteer should be
conversant with season and place, with omens, and the
expressions of emotions; as also with depression of spirits,
exhilaration, and grief. And he should have a knowledge of
Jow, level and uneven grounds, and the time for conftict,
and he should be able to perceive the shortcomings of the
enemy. And acharioteer mounted ’on a car, should know


© On the ascension of the Moon,
4 Two negatives in this verse amounting to an affirmative. This is the
only instance of dauble nogatives in Valmiki.—T,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1469


when to draw sear an enemy, when to.turn away from him;
when to stay; and when to turn round from before the foe—~
all these (he should know). What I, for bringing respite
unto thee as well as the horses of the car, have done by way
of removing the terrific exhaustion, is proper. T did not, O
hero, turn away the car of my own sheer will. What ] have
done, O lord, had been dictated by my affection for thee.
Command me. What thou sayest, O destroyer of foes, 1 will
do every way, O hero, with my whole soul.” Thereat, well-
pleased with the speech of the charioteer, Ravana, eager
for encounter, after praising him in various ways, said,—"O
charioteer, do thou swiftly take the car towards Raghava.
Without slaying his foe in fight, Ravana turneth not away
{from the field).” Speaking thus,Ravana—lord of Rakshasas
—gave the charioteer on the car an excellent ornament for
the hand. Hearing Ravana’s words, the charioteer drove the
car. And urged on by the speech of Ravana, the charioteer
drove on the steeds,—and in a moment the mighty chariot
of the Rakshasa-chief appeared before Rima in the field of
battle.


SECTION CVI.
ee


Tuen the revered Agastya, who, desirous of witnessing
the fight, had along with the deities come there,—seeing
Ravana spent with the toil of conflict, staying in the field
plunged in thought, and stationed before Rama for engaging
in encounter,—addressed Rama,drawing near to him, saying,
—‘Rama, Rima, O mighty-armed one, hearken to the
eternal secret, whereby, my child, thou wilt conquer all foes
in fight,—Aditya-hridaya* sacred, capable of destroying all


* Lit— The beart of the Se1—the ecsigration of a Vedic Hymn,


1470 RAMAYANA,


foes, bringing victory—the recitation, enduring and tn-
destructible,—and supremely good ; fraught with all welfare,
removing every sin,—-chasing away anxiety and grief, bring-
ing length of days; and excellent. Do thou worship
Vivagwata’s offspring—the Sun—lord of the world, furnished
with rays,—who maketh people engage in work, and who is
bowed down to by deities and Asuras. This effulgent one,
producing rays, is instinct with the spirits of all the deities;
and he with his rays ruleth all creatures—and the hosts of
celestials and Asuras. This Sun is Brahma and Vishnu
and Siva and Skanda(¢) and Prajapati,@ and Mahendra and
Dhanada@ and the Destroyer—Yama—and Soma(@) and the
Lord of waters; and the Pitris,@ and the Vasus, and the
Sidhyas(/)and the two A¢winis() and the Maruts and Manu,(4)
and the Wind-god and the God of fire and the creatures and
the Creator of life and the seasons. And he is Aditya() and
Saviti@ and Suryya® and Khaga( and Pushai(m) and


(a) The celestial generallissimo. The commentator gives a spiritual
interpretation, ‘He that by means of his rays openeth up the five organs
of perception.’

@) The lord of all creatures, by virtue of his bringing forth all beings
through his energy.

(©) Dispenser of riches, a name of Kuvera.

(@ Furnished with splendour, a name of the Moon, According to some
‘endowed with energy.’

(€) Li. the ancestral manes, Here the generator of everything.

() Anorder of semi-divine beings. Here, ‘He who is adored by the
spiritual?

{g) In virtue of his omaipresence and his being the healer of all ailments.

@) All-knowing and being the primeval sovereign.

(‘He from whom all derive sustenance.’

Q) ‘The producer of heart and the spiritual faculties by heat, and corn, etc,
by showers ’

() ‘Coursing alone, according to the commedtator, It may also means—
‘He that sets people to work.

() ‘Coursing the highest heavens,’ or saya the commentator ‘th heavens
of the heart.’

(m) ‘The maintainer.’


YUDDHARANDAM. w4a7t


Gavastiman,(@) and the Golden-looking and BbSnuf) and
Hiranyareta@ and Divakara.(@) And he is Haridagwa(e and
Sahasrarchi@? and Saptasaptie) and Marichim§n.@) And
he subdueth darkness, and he is Sambhu@® and Tasht&(/ and
Martandaka( and Angumin. And he is Hiranyagarbha,(™)
Sicira,(*) and Tapana,() and Abaskara@) and Ravi,(@) and
Agnigarbha,@) and Aditi’s son,() and Sankha,) and
Siciranigana,™) Byoman&tha,) and Tamabheda,(#) the one
proficient in Rik, Yajus and Sama ; and Ghanavrishti,@) and


(a) Gavastimdn—'Ray-furnished, or having the all-permeating Spirit of
Auspiciousness.’

@)  Bhanu—'having brightness.’

(co) Hiranyaretd—‘instinct with the cosmic energy.’

(a Divdkara—‘maker of day!

{¢) Haridarwa—'pervading all sides)’ or ‘having black steeds.’

(f) Sakasrdrchi—'thousand-rayed. The commentator explains spiritually,
He whose cognition points in infinite directions.’

(g) ‘He from whom proceed the seven organs of sense of people,’ Or ‘he
who has seven steeds.’

(A) ‘Having raya!

() ‘He from whom proceed the several sorts of happiness’

()_ ‘He who removes the misfortunes of hia votaries.’

(#) ‘He that infuses life into the lifeless mundane egg.’

(‘Having rays.’

(m) The cause of the creation, preservation and destruction of the
Universe,

() ‘Good-natured?

(0) Tapa—means ‘wealth, Tapana—the possessor of all riches.

(2) Ahas—day and Kara—maker.

(@) Rawti—teacheth—Ravi—ke that teacheth,

() Lit. fire-wombed, He that carries the fire of doom within himself,

(3) Aditi—without destruction'—means ‘Brahma knowledge.’

(Supreme happiness,

(u) ‘The remover of intellectual stapor or evil-mindedness.

(@) Lord of the welkin.

(@) Dispeller of darkness.

(®) He from whom floweth the fruit of acts: or he from whom come
downpours. The latter epithet is justified on grounds of Physical Geography,
rain being ultimately dependent on solar heat,


way RAMAYANA,


the friend of the Apas,@ and he that swiftly courseth in the
Vindhya way. And he is Atapi® andMandali@ and Mrityu.(@
And he is Pingala,@ and the destroyer of everything, and the
Omniscient, and he having the universe for his form,U) and
the exceedingly energetic one,and the beloved of all,and that
one lording it over all kinds of actions, And he is the lord(s)
of stars and planets and constailations, and the origin of
everything, and the one powerful pre-eminently of powerful
things,@)—and the one having twelve forms.()-1 bow unto thee
(having these forms and functions). Salutation unto the
Eastern mount and the mount of the West. Salutation unto
the lord of the stellar bodies and salutation also unto the lord
of day. Salutation and salutation unto him that bringeth
victory, and the joy that springeth up from victory ; and unto
him of yellow steeds. Salutation,salutation,O thousand-rayed
one | Salutation and salutation unto Aditya. Salutation unto
him that keepeth his senses under subjection ; Salutation
and salutation unto the Hero,() and unto Saranga() and unto
him that awakenest the Lotus. And (salutation) nnto thee,
O fierce one. Salutation unto the Lord himself of Brahm4,
Ig&na(™) and Achchyuta,() and unto Sura and unto him


(a) Apas may mean cither ‘the good,’ or ‘water.’ Vindhya way mean
either the way kaowa as Brahmandri or the orbit of the San,

(3) He that is intent on creating the cosmos,

(Q Ray-crowned or adoraed with gems.

{@) The bringer of death,

(©) The motive force of the blood-tube called Pingalé.

Y/) Or the ornament of the Universe.

{g) i. ¢, the controller of them, remarks RémAnuja.

@) Such as, observes the commentator, as fire,

@) 4. the months of the year,

G) Him that leadeth the senses, and that is endowed with the prowess of
slaying Tripura ete, :

@) Him that deservest the granada, the holiest formula in all Hindu
Scripture.

(That awakenest the external lotus as well as the lotus of the heart,—

(m) Siva. (=) Vishnu, 0) The sun,


YUDDHARANDAM. 1473


that constitutes the knowledge of Aditya, and unto him that
unfoldeth me and not-me; and unto the devourer of all, and
unto the form of the destroyer of the darkness of ignorance.
Salutation unto the destroyer of darkness, and unto the
destroyer of enemies, and unto him of immeasurable Soul,
and unto the destroyer of the ingrate, and unto the deity,
and unto the lord of all stellar bodies. And salutation unto
him that boasteth of the splendour of burning gold, unto the
destroyer of all mental obscurity,—and unto the maker of the
universe. Salutation unto the remover of darkness ; unto the
illuminator of the Soul ; unto the all-beholding one of all the
worlds. The lord createth everything and verily destroyeth
it. Aud with his rays he sucketh up, and destroyeth and
createth (everything). When all are asleep, this one waketh,
and he is resident in the hearts of all creatures. This one
is both Agnibotra as well as the fruit reaped by the sacrifices
thereof, And he constitutes the gods and the sacrifices and
the fruit also thereof ; and he is the lord of all acts that are
performed by creatures. If a person recites this (hymn), he,
O R&aghava, doth not come by misfortune, when he is in peril
of his life, or is ill, or in a lonely place, or in fear. Do thou,
with concentration, worship this god of gods, this lord of the
universe. By reciting (this hymn) instinct with the three
virtues, thou wilt obtain victory in battle. This very instant,
O mighty-armed one, thou wilt conquer Ravana.” Having
said this, Agastya went whither from he had come. Hearing
this, that exceedingly energetic one had his grief gone.
Then, well pleased, Raghava, exerting himself, contemplated
(the hymn). And reciting this, he beholding the Sun, :
attained excess of joy. And sipping water again and again,
and becoming purified, that powerful one, taking up his bow,
and viewing Ravana, advanced with a delighted heart, to
obtain victory. And be became intent on his death with his
dearest energies. Then exceedingly delighted, and filled
with rejoicings, the Sun, in the midst of the celestial hosts


485


1474 RAMAYANA,


knowing that the destruction of the Sovercign of the
night-rangers was at hand,—spoke unto Rama "Bestir


thyself.”


SECTION CVIL


Tren the charioteer fully drove with speed R&vana’s car,
capable of bringing down the hosts of foes, resembling in
form a city of the Gandharvas, having elevated streamers,
yoked with surpassingly superb steeds, engarlanded in gold ;
stocked with war-like implements ; furnished with ensigns
and standards ; appearing to devour the welkin ; making the
earth herself resound; destructive to hostile hosts; and
filling its own party with delight. And as it ‘speedily
descended, the monarch of men beheld that Rakshasa-king’s
resounding vat, having huge standards, yoked with black
chargers, and endowed with fierce splendour; as if flaming
in the firmament; having the resplendance of tho Sun
himself ; with thronging lightning pennons ; displaying the
glow of Indra’s weapon ;* showering arms ; and resembling
rain-charged clouds. Seeing the enemy’s car resembling a
mass of clouds having a chatter resembling the sounds sent
by a cleaving mountain rived by the thunder, Rama,
vehemently drawing his bow curved like the infant moon,
addressed Méatali~charioteer unto the thousand-eyed
(deity ),+ saying,—“O Matali, behold the enraged chariot
of my foe as it courseth on. Krom the furious speed
with which he is again wheeling at my right, it appeareth
that he hath set his heart on slaying me in encounter. Do


" The rain-bow.
t Indra,


VYUDDHAKANDAM. 1475


thou. therefore heedfully drive the car right against the
vehicle of my foe. 1 wish to destroy this one even as the
wind scattereth clouds that have appeared, Do thou with
all thy wits about thee, without trepidation, and holding thy
heart as well as thy eye in calmness, swiftly drive the chariot
tuled by the reing, Worthy of Purandara’s car, thou ought
not to be taught by me. Desirous of encounter and my
whole soul bent on fight, I simply remind thee—not teach
thee.” Pleased with these words of Rama, the excellent
celestial charioteer—Matali—drove the car. Then leaving
RAvana’s mighty car on the right, be enveloped Ravana with
the dust raised by the wheels, Thereat the Ten-necked one,
enraged, with his eyes coppery and dilated (in passion),
covered with arrows Rama staying in front of his car.
Enraged at the smiting, Rama, with his ire aroused, but
summoning up patience, took up in the encounter the bow
of Indra endowed with exceeding vehemence ; as well as
highly impetuous shafts having the resplendance of the
solar rays. And then there began a furious encounter
between those (two) eager for slaying each other ;
confronting each other like unto flaming lions. And then
desirous of destruction of Ravana,—celestials with
Gandharvas, and Siddhas and supersaints assembled to go
to behold the encounter taking place between the two cars.
And for the destruction of Ravana and the success of
Raghava, there occurred round about the cars terrible bode-
ments capable of making people’s down stand on end. The
god poured down showers of blood on the car of Ravana ;
and a violent tornado eddied on his right. And a mighty
swarm of vultures, wheeling in the heavens, pursued the car
wherever it moved, And Lanka was enveloped with evening
resembling the red javd flowers and even in day appeared
ablaze. Lightnings and firebrands accompanied by a terrible
sound began to fall down on all sides. And beholding these
-emens inauspicious unto Ravana all the Rakshasas were


1476 RAMAYANA.


greatly sorry. And wherever Ravana moved the earth shook
and the hands of all the Rakshasas fighting were as if
paralysed. The copper coloured, the yellow, the red, and
the white rays of the sun falling before Ravana appeared
like melted metals of a mountain, And the jackals
followed by vultures, vomitting forth fire and casting their
looks at him, began to emit inauspicious cries, And in that
battle-field the unfavourable wind began to blow raising dust
and obstructing the vision of the king of R&kshasas, On
the Rakshasa host on all sides dreadful lightnings were
showered without the sound of the clouds, All the quarters
were enshrouded with darkness and the welkin became
invisible being covered with darkness. And setting up a
dreadful quarret hundreds of terrible Shavikas* began to fall
down on his chariot. The horses emitted forth sparks of fire
from their hips and tears from their eyes. These and various
other dreadful omens arose there announcing the destruction
of Ravana. And there appeared on all sides many an
auspicious and good sign intimating the approach of Rama’s
victory. And beholding all those auspicious marks announe-
ing Ra&ma’s success, Lakshmana was greatly delighted and
considered Ravana as slain, Thereupon beholding all those
auspicious signs, Raghava, well qualified to decipher them
attained an excess of delight and became anxious to display
a greater prowess.


* Akind of bird (Turdus Salica, Buch).


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1477


SECTION CVIIt.


Taerevron there ensued a mighty and dreadful encounter
of two cars between Rama and Ravana, creating terror
unto all people. And the army of Rakshasas and the mighty
host of the monkeys, although they had weapons in their
hands, became stupified (for the time being). And beholding
them (Rama and Ravana) fight, all the R&kshasas and
monkeys, having their minds agitated,were greatly surprised.
With various weapons and hands uplifted for fight, they,
greatly wondered, stood there beholding them and did not
address themselves to fight with each other. The Rakshasas
beholding Ravana, and the monkeys beholding Rama with
wonder-stricken eyes, the whole army appeared like a
picture. And espieing all omens Raghava and Ravana
began to fight, undaunted, firm, resolute and unagitated by
anger. And determining that Kakutstha would win victory
and Ravana would die, they began to display their own
prowess. Thereupon the highly powerful Ravana, selting
his arrows in anger, discharged them at the pennon stationed
on RAghava’s car. Those arrows reaching the flag staff
of the Purandara chariot and perceiving its might fell down
onthe earth. Thereupon the highly powerful Rama, wroth,
stretching his bow, made up his mind to return the blow.
And aiming at Ravana's flag staff he discharged a sharpened
shaft flaming unbearably by its own lustre like a huge
serpent, And the effulgent Rama discharged a shaft aiming
at (Ravana’s) banner which, piercing the Ten-necked demon’s
flag fell, down on the earth. And beliolding his flag staff
thus broken down the highly powerful Ravana became ablaze
as if burning down every thing with his unbearable ire
And being possessed by wrath he began to make a downpour


1478 RAMAYANA,


of shafts. Ravana then, with flaming arrows, pierced Rama's
steeds. The celestial horses were not bewildered thereby
nor their course was slackened. And they remained
thoroughly unagitated as if they were stricken with lotus
stalks, Beholding the steeds thus unmoved Ravana was
again exercised with wrath and began to discharge afresh
his various weapons—gadés, parighas, chakras and musalas,
mountain tops, trees, darts and parashus and thousands of
other shafts by virtue of his illusive powers., And unmoved
was his energy. And that downpour of various weapons
became huge and terrible in the conflict creating terror and
making a dreadful noise. Thereupon leaving aside Raghava’s
car he began to assail the monkey-host and enveloped the
sky with a continual discharge of arrows. The Ten-necked
demon let loose many a weapon even at the risk of his own
life. And beholding Ravana in the encounter thus actively
engaged in the discharge of arrows, Kakuthstha, smiling, set
up pointed shafts, and discharged them by hundreds and
thousands, Beholding them Ravana again filled the welkin
with arrows—and thus with shafts discharged by them both
another flaming sky was created. None (of the arrows)
missed the aim, none of them failed to pierce another and
none of them was fruitless. And the arrows discharged by
Rama and Ravana stricking each other fell down on the
earth, And they standing: on. their right and left began Lo
make a continued downpour of arrows and enveloped the
sky entirely. And they opposing each other, Ravana slew
Rama’s steeds and Rama in his turn slew Ravanan’s, They,
thus enraged fought with each other and for sometime there
ensued a terrible encounter capable .of making ones
down stand on end. And the highly powerful Ravana and
Rama* fighting with each other in'the conflict by means of
sharpened arrows, the lord of R&akshasas beholding his


* The epithet in the text is Lakshmana’s elder brother,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1479


flag staff broken down became enraged with the foremost of
Raghus.


SECTION CIX»


Rasa and Ravana thus opposing each other in battle,
all the animals beheld them, stricken with astonishment,
And those tio great heroes, highly angered, began to dash
towards and assail each other; and being determined to
slay each other they looked greatly dreadful. And their
charioteers drove the cars on, displaying their skill by
moving in circles, in rows and diverse other ways. And
those two excellent heroes, discharging their shafts and
influenced by illusions, assailed each other proceeding and
receding, Rama attacking Ravana and Ravana withstanding
him, And these two cars coursed the earth for sometime like
clouds accompanied by showers, And displaying many a
movement in the conflict they again stood facing each
other, the forepart of one car touching that of the other and
the heads of the steeds touching each other ; and the pennons,
stationed on one touched those of the other. Rama, with
four-sharpened arrows, shot off his bow, removed the flaming
horses of Ravana to some distance. And finding his steeds
thus removed he was exercised with wrath. And the
Ten-necked one discharged sharpened arrows at R&ghava.
And he was pierced by those. arrows coming from the
powerful Ten-necked demon. He was neither overwhelmed
nor pained therewith and he again discharged arrows
resembling the thunder-bolts. And the Ten-necked demon
again discharged arrows at the charioteer, which fell with
great velemence on the person of Malali, Matali was not


1480 RAMAYANA.


the least pained or overwhelmed in that encounter. And
beholding his charioteer thus assailed Rama was excited with
wrath and overwhelmed his foe with a net of arrows, And
the heroic Raghava showered on his enemy’s chariot shafts by
twentys, thirtys, sixtys, hundreds and thousands, And the
lord of Rakshasas, Ravana, who was stationed on the car,
wroth, attacked Rama in the conflict with maces and
Musalas. And there again ensued a terrible conflict capable
of making one’s down stand on end, And the seven oceans
were overwhelmed with the sound of maces, musa/as,
Parighas and gold-feathered arrows. And those inhabiting
the regions under the agitated oceans, all the Danavas and
thousands of Paxnagas were greatly pained. And greatly
shook the earth with her mountains, forests and gardens,
The Sun was shorn of its resplendance and the wind blew
very rough. Thereupon the celestials, with Gaadharbas,
Siddhas, great saints, Aznnaras and serpents,were all worked
up with anxiety. And beholding the dreadful encounter
between Rama and Ravana capable of making people's down
stand on end, the celestials with ascetics began to pray,—
“May good betide the Brahmins and cows, may people live
in peace and may Raghava defeat Ravana, the lord of
Rakshasas, in the conflict.” And the crowd of Gandharbas
and Agsaras beholding that wonderful battle between Rama
and Ravana, said,—"The ocean resembleth the sky and the
sky resembleth the ocean—forsooth this encounter between
Rama and Ravana-befits them only.” Thereupon Rama of
long-arms, the enhancer of the glory of Raghu’s race, enraged,
set his arrow, resembling a serpent, on his bow, and cut
assuuder R&vana's head wearing shinning Kunda/as. And
that head in the presence of the inhabitants of the three
regions fell down on the earth. Instantly there arose
another head resembling the former; and it was speedily
cut off by the light-handed Rama. As soon as the second
lead was chopped off in the encounter by means of shafts


YUDDHAKANDAN. 148


another appeared again. And that was again severed by
Rama's shafts resembling thuader-bolts. And thus were
severed hundred heads all equal in brilliance. But the end
of Rivana’s life was not seen by him. Thereupon ths heroic
Righava,conversant with the use of all weapons,the enhancer
of Kaucaly&’s joy, began to reason within hisself in various
ways,—'Verily these are the arrows by which Maricha
was killed, and Khara with Dushana was slain—Viradha was
destroyed in the forest of Krauncha—the headless demon
in the forest of Dandaka—Salas and mountains were broken
—-the ocean was agitated—and V&li was killed ;—I do not
perceive the reason, why they are becoming fruitless when
discharged at Ravana.” Thinking thus Raghava made himself
teady in the conflict and began to shower arrows on Ravana’s
breast. Thereupon .RAvana too, the lord of; Rakshasas,
seated in a car and highly enraged, assailed Rama in the
conflict with a downpour of maces and Mwsalas. That
dreadful and huge conflict, capable of making hairs stand on
end, continued for seven nights before the eyes of the
celestials, Danavas, Yakshas, Pisdchas, Uragxs and serpents
stationed in the sky, on the earth or on the mountain-tops,
Neither for the night nor for the day, nor for a moment did
the fight between Rama and Ravana cease. And beholding
the conflict between Dagaratha’s son and the Jord of
R&akshasas, and Raghava’s victory, the high-souled charioteer
of the lord of the celestials spake speedily unto Rima engaged
in the conflict.


186


1488 RAMAYANA.


SECTION CX.


Tuereveon M&tali,reminding him,spake unto Raghava—
“Why dost thou, O hero, as if not knowing, fear him? Do
thou, O lord, discharge at him the weapon obtained from the
great Patriarch. The time for (his) destruction, as described
by the celestials, hath arrived.” Being reminded by those
words of MA&tali, Rama took up the flaming shaft, breathing
as if like a serpent, The great Rishi Agastya first conferred
this upon him. This is a huge and dreadful shaft
given by Brahm& and highly useful in battle. It was
made by Brahm& of undecaying prowess for Indra and
conferred by him upon the Lord of celestials desirous of
acquiring victory. In its wings there is wind, in its head
there is fire and the Sun, in its body there is the sky
and in its weight there are the (hill) Meru and Mandara,
It is resplendent by its own lustre, well feathered and
adorned with gold—made of the essence of all objects and
bright as the rays of the Sun. It is like the fire of
dissolution enveloped in smoke—like the flaming serpent,
capable of piercing men, serpents and horses and was
swift-coursing. (It can) rend the gateways, Parighas
and hills—is soaked in blood, dipped in marrow, and
extremely dreadful, ‘ft is hard as the lightning—producing
a dreadful sound, assailing various (divisions of the) army,
creating terror unto all, dreadful and (as if) breathing like a
serpent. It is terrible as the Death in the conflict and
provides food always for the herons, vultures, cranes,
jackals and the Riakshasas, it is the enhancer of the
monkey-leaders’ joy and the repressor of the Rakshasas and
is feathered like unto a bird with. many a picturesque wing.
And the highly powerful Rama, consecrating in accordance
with the mantras laid down in the Vedas, that huge shaft—
the foremost of all in the world, removing the fear of the


YUDDHAKANDAM, 1483


Ikshwaku race, destroying the fame of the enemies and
conducing to the joy of its own party, set it on his bow. And
that excellent arrow being mounted on his bow by R&ghava
all the animals were stricken with fear and the earth shook.
And (Rama) highly enraged, and greatly wary, suppressing
(his breath) discharged that shaft at Ravana—piercing to
the vitals, (That Brahm& weapon) irrepressible as the
thunder, dreadful as the Death and discharged by Rama, fell
down on R&vana’s breast. And that shaft, capable of
bringing about death and gifted with velocity, when
discharged, cleft the breast of the vicious-souled R&vana.
And that body-ending arrow, bathed in blood, stealing away
the life of Ravana, entered the earth. That shaft, slaying
Ravana, soaked in blood and successful, again entered the
quiver* humbly. And from his hand, who was deprived of
his life, fell down instantly on earth his shafts and bow.
And fell down on the earth from the chariot, the highly
effulgent Ravana, gifted with dreadful velocity and shorn of
his life. And beholding him thus fallen down, the remaining
night-rangers, deprived of their lord and stricken with
terror fled away to various quarters. And beholding the
destruction of the Ten-necked (demon) and the victory of
Raghava, the monkeys, fighting with trees, pursued them on
all sides. And being assailed by the monkeys and having
their countenances full of tears in consequence of their lord
being slain they fled away to Lank& in fear. Thereupon the
monkeys being greatly delighted roared out the victory of
Rama. The celestial bugle was sounded in the sky and
there blew the excellent air carrying the celestial fragrance.
Flowers were showered upon Rama’s car which was
covered therewith. The celestials in the sky began to
chaunt the glory of Rama and praise him. And Ravana, the
dread of all people, being slain, the celestials with the


* In some texts there is “napunarabishet” 4. ¢. did not enter the
quiver.—T.


1484 RASA YANA.,


Charanas were greatly delighted. And slaying that foremost
of the Rakshasas,Rima satisfied the desire of Sngriva,Angada
and Bibhishana. Thereupon the celestials attained their
peace, the quarters were delighted, the atmosphere was
clear, calm air began to prevail al! over the earth, and the
Sun appeared in its full rays. Thereupon Sugriva,
Bibhishana and Lakshmana, welcomed Rama, of unmitigated
prowess, singing his glory. And there appeared beautiful
at the battle-field Rama of firm promise, slaying his enemy
and encircled by his army and friends, like unto the Lord of
the celestials surrounded by the gods.


SECTION CXI.


‘Benorowe his brother defeated, slain and lying down
on the battle-field, Bibhishana, overpowered with the weight
of his grief, began to lament—“O hero, well-known for thy
prowess, wise and conversant with polity, thou wert used to
excellent beds, why dost thou lie down on the earth,
spreading (on the earth) thy long and actionless arms,
always adorned with Angadas and being shorn of thy helmet
having the resplendance of the Sun? O hero, thou hast
come by what I had anticipated and what did not please thee
who wert possessed by delusions. Prahasta, Indrajit,
-Kumbhakarna, Atikfya, Atiratha, NarZntaka, yourself and
others—none of you paid heed, out of haughtines, fo what I
had said which hath now been brought about. Oh! thé
bridge of the pious hath been brokén, the figure of the virtue
hath been spoiled, the refuge of the strong and powerful hath
disappeared and thou hast attained to the state of the
heroes! Tue sun hath fallen down on the earth, the moon


VUDDHARANDAM. 1485


hath beén shorn of its lustre, the fre hath beér extinguished
and virtue hath desisted from its action, this heroe, the
foremost of thode using weapons, falling down on the earth.
O thou the foremost of the Rakshasas lying down in the dust
on the battle field like one asleep, whom else have these
remaining (B&kshasas) deprived of their power and energy,
got? The huge treé, of the Jord of Rakshasas, having
patience for ifs leaves, velocity for its flowers, the power
of asceticism and heroism for its firm roots, hath been
uprooted by the Réghava wind. Mad-elephant-like Ravana,
having prowess for its tusk, family rank for its back bone,
anger for its legs, and delightedness for its trunk, hath been
laid low on the ground by the lion of the Ikshw&ku race,
The powerful Rakshasa-fire, having prowess and enesgy for
its rays, angry breath for its smoke, own strength for its
power of burning, hath been extinguished in battle by Réma-
like cloud. The R&kshasa bull ever defeating others and
powerful as the wind, having Rakshasas for its tail, hump
and horns, and fickleness for its ears and eyes, hath been
slain to-day by Réma-tiger.” Hearing these words,pregnant
with sound reasonings from Bibhishana and beholding hin
overwhelmed with grief Rama said,—'(This lord of
R&kshasas) of dreadful prowess hath not been slain in battle
disabled. He is gifted with great prowess and energy and
devoid of the fear of death.* The heroes abiding by the
virtues of the Ksbatriyas, who fall at the battle field for
enhancing their glory, when dead, should not be mourned
for. This is not the time to mourn for him although
possessed by death, by whom gifted with intellect, Indra
with the three worlds was terrified in conflict. Besides
success in battle is not perpetual ; either ove slays his enemy
or meets with his destruction at his hands in the conflict.
This procedure of the Kshatryas was laid down by the


* i, e he has accidentally met with death.


1486 RAMAYANA,


ancient preceptors that a Kshatrya, when slain in battle
should not be mourned for. Beholding this to be certain
and attaining calmness, do thou be freed from thy sorrow
and think what should be done now. Thereupon
Bibhishana stricken with grief addressed the powerful
son of the king speaking thus with words tending to
his brother’s well-being. “Thou hast, like the ocean
breaking down its banks, broken him down, who had not
been ere this even defeated by Basava and the celestials. By
him were conferred many a gift on those who wanted them,
were'enjoyed many a luxury,were maintained many a servant,
distributed wealth unto friends and slain the enemies. He
propitiated. fire, performed great austerities, was conversant
with the Vedas and the great performer of sacrifices, 1 desire
to perform, by thy instructions, his becoming obsequies.”
Being thus addressed by Bibhishana with piteous accents,
the high-souled son of the lord of men, gifted with great
energy,ordered him to perform his obsequies and said. “With
death our enmity hath terminated and our object hath been
accomplished : he is as dear unto me as unto thee : perform
(therefore) his funeral rites.”


SECTION CXIt.


Besorome Rivana slain by the high-souled Righava
Rikshasees, stricken with grief, issued out of the inner
appartments. Stricken with grief and with dishevelled hairs
they rolled in the dust albeit prevented again and again like
unto cows separated from their calves. And coming out by
the northern gate along with the Rikshasas, entering the
dreadful arena of batile and searching their stain lord the


VYUDDHARANDAM. 1487


she-demons cried piteously—“O ford, O husband, O our
all” and moved along the battle field soaked in blood and
filled with headless corpses. With eyes full of tears and
overwhelmed with the grief of their husband they began to
move about like she-elephants without the lord of their herd.
Thereupon they beheld there on the earth the huge-bodied
and the highly powerful and effulgent Ravana slain like red
collyrium, And beholding their; lord lying down on the
battle-field they all fell on his body like creepers torn
assunder. Some wept embracing him respectfully—some
holding his feet and some placing themselves around his
neck. And some taking up his hand rolled on the ground
and some were beside themselves (with grief) beholding the
slain (Ravana’s) countenance. And some placing her head
on his lap, and beholding his face, wept, bathing it with tears
like a lotus enveloped with snow. Seeing their husband
Ravana thus slain on the earth, they stricken with grief,
bewailing again and again in sorrow, wept profusely. He
by whom the king Vaisribana was deprived of his flower
car, who terrified the high-souled Gandharbas, ascetics and
the celestials in battle field, who did not know of any
fear from the Asuras, celestials and the Pannagas, hath now
been overpowered by a man. He, whom the celestials, the
Dinavas and the Rakshas could not slay, hath been slain
in conflict by a man walking on foot. He, who was incapable
of being killed by the celestials, Yakshas and Asuras, hath
met with death like one devoid of prowess at the hands of
amortal.” Speaking in this wise, the she-demons, over-
powered with sorrow, wept and bewailed again and again
(saying),-—“Not hearing (the counsels) of thy friends, always
pointing out thy welfare, thou didst bring Sit& for thy
destruction as well as that of the Rakshasas. Although thy
brother Bibhishana addressed thee with words pregnaat
with thy welfare—thou, for thy own destruction, out of thy
misgivings, didst_ excite his anger and hast (now) seen (the


1488 RAMAYANA.


result thereof}, Hadst thou returned Sith the daughter of
the king of Mithila to Rama, this mighty and dreadful
disaster, destroying the very root, would not have befallen us.
Rama's desire would have been encompassed—his friends
would have been successful (through Bibhishana)—we would
not been widowed and our enemies would not have got
their desires fulfilled. By thee, Sith was kept by force in
captivity in a rathless manner, and the Rakshasas, ourselves
and thyself—all three equally have been slain. © foremost
of the R&kshasas, forsooth this is not thy own folly—it is
Accident that uniteth all things and it is Accident again
that bringeth about destruction. O thou of huge arms—the
destruction of the monkeys and the R&kshasas as well as
that of thyself hath been brought about by Accident. When
the course of accident is about to bring about result—wealth,
desire, prowess or command—nothing is capable of with-
standing it.” Thus wept piteously the wives of the lord of
Rakshasas like unto so many she-elephants—rendered poorly,
stricken with grief and with tears in their eyes,


SECTION cx,


Tae foremost of the wives of the R&akshasa (kivg)
ewailing piteously cast her Jooks poorly towards her
thusband. And beholding her Ten-necked hushand slain by
Rama of inconcievable actions Mandodati bewailed there
piteously,—-"O thou of huge arms! O younger brother of
Baishtavana! Even Purandara feared to stand before thee
when enraged. The great Rishie-—the far-famed Gandharbas
and the Chdeanas, fled away to different quarters in thy fear.


VODDHAKANDAM. 1489


And then (how) hast thou been overpowered in battle by Rama
who isa mere man?) Why is it that thou art not ashamed
of it, O king, O lord of the Rakshasas ~ Conquering the
three worlds with thy prowess thou didst attain thy glory;
and it is unbearable, that a man, ranging in the forest, hath
slain thee. Thou, who art capable of assuming shapes at
will, hast been slain in conflict by Rama, in the city of
Llank& unapproachable by men. I[ do not believe that thy
destruction, —who hadst always been crowned with succear,
before the forces, is work of Rama. (Methinks) Death
(himself) came there in the shape of Bama and spread
illusions unconsciously for thy destruction, O thou of great
strength, Or thou hast been slain by Vasava—(no) what
power has he got to face thee in the conflict gifted with great
strength, prowess and energy and an enemy of the celestials
asthou art ¢ [tis evident that the great ascelic Vishnu,
having truth for his prowess—the soul of all heings.ever exist-
ing. without beginning, middle or end, greater than the great,
the Preserver of the Nature, holding conch, discus and club,
having Sribatsa* on his breast, always beautiful. incapable
of being conquered, without destruction, devoid of end,
and the lord of ail men, assuming this shape of a man and
enciecled by the celestials, assuming monkey shapes, hath
for the behoof of mankind, slain (thee) the dreadful
enemy of the gods with all (thy) family and Rkkshasas,
Subduing all thy passions, thou didst conquer the threr
worlds—remembering their grudge they have now over-
powered thee. Rama is not a man since he slew at Janasthana
thy brother Khara encircled by many a Rakshasa, We were
sore-distressed when Hanuman, by his own prowess, entered
the city of Lank& incapable of being approached even by the
celestials. And I prevented thee from creating enmity with


* A particular mark usually said to be a curl of hair on the breast of
Vishnu, The emblem of the tenth jine ar the mark above ascribed to Vishnu
or Krishna.


187


1490 RAMAYANA.


Righava, but thou didst not pay heed to my words and
this is the result (thereof). O foremost of Rakshasas—O
thou of a vicious understanding, for the destruction of thy
wealth, thyself and thy relatives, thou didst suddenly cherish
amour for Sit&, greater than (even) Arundhuti and Rohini.
Forsooth thou didst perpetrate an unbecoming deed by
distressing the adorable Sit& ever devoted unto her lord, an
earth* even unto Earth herself and a Sreet even unto Sree
herself, And having brought in a false guise from the solitary
forest the sorrowful and chaste Sit, having a blameless
person, thou didst bring on the destruction of thy family,
Thou didst fail to encompass thy desire for the company of
Sits. But now, forsooth, OQ my lord, thou hast been burnt
down by her devotion who is devoted unto her husband.}
Thou wert not burnt down when thou didst captivate that
middle-statured (damsel) whom fear all the celestials headed
by Indra and Agai.§ O husband, (proper) time appearing
the perpetrator gets the result of his vicious deeds : there
is not the least doubt in this. The performer of the good
receives good (result)—the perpetrator of the vicious (deeds)
meets with bad (result). Bibhishana hath attained to happi-
ness and thou hast met with this thy end, There are damsels
in your seraglio far more beautiful than she but thou
possessed by cupid couldst not perceive this. Maithilee is
not my equal nor superior either in birth,beauty or accomplish-
ments, but thou didst not perceive this by thy misgivings,
Death doth not always visit all men without any cause—and
Maithilee is the cause of thy death. And death, in consequence
of Maithilee, hath taken thee far away. And she, shorn of


* ‘The Earth is an emblem of patience but Sita is more patient than the
Earth—T. ; ‘
“+ Sree is the goddess of wealth and good fortune—but Sitd is more
fortunate than fortune herself—T.
% ie, that thou wert not burnt down there and thea shows her greatness of
aaind,—T, § The god of Fire.


YUDDHARANDAM. 1agt


ail sorrow, shall enjoy in the company of Rama, and I, of
limited piety, am now sunk in the the ocean of grief.
Roaming at large with thee in a car unequalled in beauty
on the hill Kailaga, Mandara, Maru, in the garden of Chaitra-
ratha and all other celestial gardens, beholding many a
country, wearing variegated clothes and garlands, I have
been deprived of all pleasures and enjoyments, O hero,
by thy death, And I am a widow now. O fie on
fickle fortune! O king, in lustre of countenance thou art
like the Sun, in grace like the Moon, in beauty like the lotus ;
thou art graceful, O thou having excellent brows ; thou hast
got excellent skin, high nose and thy countenance is graced
with a brilliant crown and Kundalas. Oh how beautiful,.
thou didst look with various gartands when thy eye
whirled with intoxication on the drinking ground and how
beautiful were thy smiles, O lord. Thy countenance doth not
shine now—being severed with R&ma’s shafts, bathed in a
pool of. blood, having thy back-bone and brain deranged and
covered with the dust raised by the wheels of the chariots.
Alas! by my ill-luck I have attained to that after state
making me a widow which [ did never think of. My father
is the king of Danavas, my husband the lord of Rakshasas,
and my son the subduer of Sakra. I was greatly proud of
this and always confident that my protectors were undaunted,
dreadful,repressors of the enemies and famous for their strength
and manliness. O ye foremost of the Rakshasas, how could
tliis fear from man overwhelm you all who were so powerful 7
(This thy body) is cool, green like /ndraneela, high like
abhuge mountain, and adorned with Keyura, Angada, jewels
and garlands of flowers. 1t was graceful in places of enjoy-
ments and incapable of being looked at in the field of battle.
It was brilliant, being decked with ornaments like unto clouds
accompanied by lightnings. And this thy person hath been
pierced with shafts to-day ; (and knowing) that it is not
easy of attainment for me 1 am incapable of embracing


tag RAMAYANA,


{it}, covered with'shafts piercing through the very vitals. O
king (this thy body) greett-hued (but now) blood-red is now
tying on the ground like unto a mountain shattered with
thundet-bults. That thow wouldst be slain by Rama was
tike a dream, but it hath proved true! Thou wert like death
auto Death himvelf, why hast thou been possessed by him
then? Thou wert the enjoyer of the three worlds’ wealth
and dread unto them ; thou wert the conqueror of the deities
presiding over various quarters ; thou didst-shake Sankara
(himself)—thou wert the subduer of the proud and thy
prowess was well-known ; thou didst repress the people and
slay ntany a pious man—thou didst, by thy prowess, use to
give vent to haughty words hefore the enemies; thou wert
the maintainer of thy kinsmen and servants and the slayer
of many perpetrating dreadful deeds ; thou wert the destroyer
of thousands of celestials, Danavas and Yakshas; thou wert
the subbuer of Aivata Kavachas in the encounter; thou
didst hinder the performance of many sacrifices and wert the
protector of thy relatives; thou wert the obstructer of pious
observances, creator of illusions in conflict and thou didst
bring away from hither and thither the daughters of the
celestials, demons and mer; thou didst aggrieve the wives
of thy enemies ; thou wert the leader of thy own men, the
protector of the island of Lanka and the performer of many
a dreadful deed ; thou didst confer upon us the enjoyment
of many a pleasure—and wert the foremost of car-warriors,
Behotding such a hushand slain by Rama, | am, deprived
of my dear lord, still’ maintaining my being; (forsooth)
my heatt Is very hard. O lord of Rakshasas, used ere to
many a valuable bed, why art thou sleeping on earth
covered with dust ¢ When my son Indrajit was slain by
Lakshmana in conflict I was greatly pained —but to-day I am
slain. Deprived of my friends and relatives, separated from
thee O my lord,deprived from tlie enjoyment of many pleasures
I shall lament fur thee perpetually. Thou hast, O king,


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1493"


reached the way, long and hard to be treaded—do thou take
me, who am stricken with grief and who shall not be able
to tive without thee. Why dost thou wish to go leaving me
behind who have been rendered poorly? Why dost thou
not welcome me, unfortunate and poor, who am hewailing ?
Why art thou not angry, O lord, heholding me, having put off
my veil, walk out on foot by the city-gate ? O beloved of thy
wives, do thou behold thy wives—who have thrown off their
veils. Why art thou not angry seeing them all come out (of
the city)? I was thy companion in sports, O my lord ; I
long for having thee; why art thou not consoling and
welcoming met O king, being imprecated by those damsels,
not one, devoted to their husbands, pious and ever engaged
iu attending upon their superiors, who had been widowed
by thee, thou hast been overpowered by thy enemy. The
curse, proceeding fram them who had been ill-treated by thee,
hath borne [ruit. O king, the saying, that the tears of chaste
damsels do not uselessly fall on the ground, hath been
verified (here) forsooth. © king, conquering the worlds with
thy prowess, how couldst thou, always honored by the king,
cherish the vile desire of stealing away women? Taking
away Rama and Lakshmana from the hermitage by an illusion-
ary deer, thou didst steal away Rama’s spouse. [ remember
to have never heard thee lament in battle. Forsooth; it is
our misfortune and the sign of impending death (that thou
didst do thie) conversant as thou art with the past, present
and future. Beholding the daughter of the king of Mithila
brought (in the city of Lanka) what, thy younger brother
Bibhishana, thinking and sighing, said, hath now proved
true, O thou of long-arms. This destruction of the leading
Rakshasas hath proceeded from the disaster arising from thy
anger and lust. , For thy (vicious) deeds all our good fortune
is lost—(and from them) hath proceeded the great disaster
exterminating the race. And by thee all the Rakshasa families
have been deprived of their lerds, Thou, well-known for thy


{a4g4 RAMAYANA.


strength and manliness, art not worthy of being grieved by.
me. Onaccount of my effeminate nature my understand-
ing is possessed by sorrow. Carrying thy pious and
iniquitous deeds thou hast attained to thy own state—I am
only lamenting for me who have been sorry for thy destruc-
tion. O Ten-necked one, thou didst not hear the words
of thy friends and brothers, who spoke those well
meaning words out of affection. Thou didst not obey the
words uttered by Bibhisana, duly and mildly, pregnant with
meaning and reasoning and tending to thy welfare. Madden-
ed with thy own prowess thou didst not hear the words of
Macicha, Kumbhakarna as well as those of my father—and
this is the result thereof. O thou resembling the red clouds,
O thou wearing yellow cloth and excellent Angada, stretch-
ing thy person on the gronnd why art thou in the long run
bathed in blood » Why dost thou not, like one asleep, welcome
me who am stricken with grief? Iam the grand-daughter
of the highly powerful Rakshasa Sum&li who never flies away
from the field of battle: why dost thou not welcome me?
Rise up! rise up! why dost thou lie down (on this occasion
of) new discomfiture? To-day have the rays of the Sun
entered fearlessly the city of Lank&. The Parigha, by which,
brilliant as the rays of the Sun, thou didst distress the
enemies in conflict, which was always adored by thee like the
thunder of the wielder of thunder-bolt, which slew many in
battle, and which was adorned with golden nets, now lieth
shattered into thousand pieces by arrows. Why dost thou
tie on the battle-field embracing her like your beloved
spouse ? Why dost thou not wish to welcome me like one
-not beloved unto thee? Oh fie on this heart of mine which
is not sundered into thousand (pieces) albeit distressed with
the grief of thy death |" Bewailing thus, she, with profuse tears
in her eyes, and with ber heart overflowing with affection,
became senseless. And being beside herself she flang herself
’ on Ravana’s breast, like unto the bright lightning appearing


YUDDHAKANDAM. ~ 1495


on red evening clouds. Thereupon the other wives, of
Ravana,greatly distressed and weeping,and rasing ber up who
was greatly weeping, began to console her saying :--"Dost
thou not know, O worshipful dame, that the life of beings is
very uncertain, and with adverse circumstances even the royal
fortune becometh fickle?” Being thus accosted she again
wept aloud, bathing with tears her breast and beautiful
countenance. In the meantime Rama said to Bibhisana,——
“Do thou perform the funeral ceremonies of thy brother and
console his wives.” Whereto the intelligent Bibhisana
replied with the following words-—pointing out wealth and
piety, and judging by his understanding what is proper. “I do
not think it proper to perform his cremation ceremony who
had renounced all pious deeds,was wicked, cruel, liar and who
had ravished others’ wives, He is my enemy in the shape
of a brother ever engaged in doing injury unto others—
and Ravana is not worthy of my adoration albeit he is
adorable by virtue of his being my elder brother. O Rama,
perhaps people of this earth will call me cruel but they will
again recognise my act as good when they will hear of
his vicious deeds.” Hearing those words, Rama, the foremost
of the pious and conversant with the skill of speech,
greatly delighted, spoke unto Bibhishana (equally) skilled
in speech,—“It behoveth me to encompass thy welfare
since by thy help I have gained the victory. O lord of
Rakshasas, forsooth, thou shouldst heir my well-meaning
words, Although this night-ranger perpetrated many vicious
and impious deeds still he was ever powerful, heroic and
strong in warfare. have heard that this high-souled Ravana,
gifted with strength and a dread unto all people, was not
defeated (even) by the celestials headed by the performer of
hundred sacrifices. Enmity extendeth up to death—so it
hath ended; there is no necessity (of carrying it on). Do
thou (therefore) perform bis cremation ceremony—he is unto
thee as he is unto me. © thou of fong-arms #t_behoveth thee


1496 RAMAYANA:


to perform, speedily .with due rites and religious ceremonies,
his funeral ceremony—thou shalt be the object of praise
{unto people).” Hearing the words of Raghava, Bibhishana
hastened on and began to make arrangements for the crema-
tion of his slain brother Ravana. And entering the city of
Lankf, Bibhishana, the lord of Rakshasas, speedily got out
Rivana’s Agathotra,* carts, brass utensils, fire, (and brought)
¥Fajakas.t sandal-wood, other woods, essences, Agura, other
fragrant substances, precious stones, pearls and corals.
Thereupon arriving immediately accompanied hy Rakshasas
and Malyavana he engaged in the performance of cremation
ceremony. Thereupon the twice-born ones, with tears in
their eyes, covered the Rakshasa-king Rfvana’s body, with
a silken cloth and placed it on a golden celestial litter. With
the sound of various bugles they began to chaunt his praise.
And taking up this litter adorned with various charming
paintings and flags and carrying fire woods, all the
Rakshasas headed by Bibhishana proceeded towards the
South.~ The Brahmins, versed in Yayur Veda and with burn.
ing fire in their hands, proceeded and were followed by the
attendants. And the damsels of the seraglio followed
speedily leaping (being ever unused to walking). And
placing R&vana on the cremation ground, they, greatly
stricken with grief, prepared the funeral pyre according
to due rites with sandal-woods, Padmakas,$ Ushiras|| and
sandal and spread an antelope-skin thereon. They (then)
performed the excellent obsequies of the manes of the lord
-of Rakshasas. And raising an altar at the south-east corner
they placed fire at the proper place. They then poured curd
and clarified butter upon (R&vana’s) shoulders. And placing


* A pot for preserving sacred fire.
+ The Brahmins who perform obsequies.

+ Cremation-place.

$A sort of drug commonly called Padmakar.
| The root of = fragrant grass.


YODDHAKANDAM, 1497


Sakata on his legs, U/ukkala* on his thighs, and the brass
untensils, Arunis and Musals in their proper places, they
celebrated (the obsequies of his manes). Thereupon slaying
beasts according to the rites laid down in Séstras and
pointed out by the great saints, the R&kshasas (made a
coverlet dipped in their marrow and clarified butter) and
placed it on the face of the lord of Rakshasas. And decking
Ravana with fragrant garlands and various clothes, the friends,
of Bibhishana, with depressed heart and tears in Lheir eyes,
showered dried paddy (on his person). And Bibhishana
according to due rites put fire to his (funeral pyre). Bathing
and with wetted cloth, offering duly linseed and sacrificial
grass mixed with water and consoling (Ravana’s) wives again
and again, he entreated them to go back. They then entered
the city. And those damsels having entered the city,
Bibhishana, the lord of Rakshasas, approaching Rama, stood
by his side gently. And Rama too, along with his army,
Sugriva and Lakshmana, was greatly delighted after slaying
his enemy like unto the wielder of thunder-bolt after slaying
(the demon) Vitra. Thereupon leaving aside his bow with
arrows, and the huge armour conferred by Mahendra and
renouncing ire after the destruction of his enemy Rama
assumed gentle mein.


SECTION CxIv.


Benoroie the destruction of Ravana the celestials,
Gandharbas and Danavas ascending their respective cars
went away chanting this excellent theme, And talking
of Ravana’e dreadful destruction, Raghava’s prowess, the


* A wooden mortar used for cleaning rice.
188


1498 RAMAYANA,


excellent warfare of the monkeys, the counsels of Sugriva,
the devotion and prowess of the Wind-God’s son and
Lakshmana and Sita’s devotion unto her husband, those high
souled ones, delighted, repaired to their respective quarters,
And Raghava, having long arms, permitting the charioteer to
take back the celestial car bright as the sky sent by Indra,
honoured him greatly. And being commanded by Raghava
Matali, the charioteer of Sakra taking the celestial car,
rose up in the welkin. And that charioteer rising up into
the celestial region, Raghava, the foremost of car-warriors,
greatly delighted, embraced Sugriva, And embracing
Sugriva, bowed unto by Lakshmana and worshipped by the
monkey he repaired to the camp of his suldiers. Thereupon
Kakuthsha spoke unto Lakshmana—the son of Sumitr&
gifted with auspicious marks who was near him—“O gentle
one, take this Bibliishana to the city of Lanka ever devoted
and attached unto us, and who had done us good. This
is my great desire that I may behold Bibhishana the younger
brother of Ravana installed on the throne of Lank&.” Being
thus addressed by the high-souled Raghava, the son of
Sumitré, saying—"So be it” and greatly delighted, brought
a golden jar. And placing that jar at the hands of the lord
of monkeys, that one, gifted with great energy, ordered them
to bring water from the Ocean. And repairing speedily
these excellent monkeys came back with water from the
ocean. And taking that jar and placing him on an excellent
seat Saumitri with that water spriakled Bibhishana as king
of Lank& in the presence of all the Rakshasas, at Rama’s
command. And (Lakshmana) encircled by friends sprinkl-
ing him according to rites Jaid down in the Vedas, all the
Rakshasas, devoted unto him, his counsellors and the monkeys
attaining incomparable delight, sang the glory of Rama.
And beholding Bibhishana the lord of Rakshasas installed
in the city of Lanka, Raghava along with Lakshmana
attained to an excess of delight, And consoling his subjects


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1499


he went to Rama. And the monkey citizens, delighted,
brought him curd, fried grain, sweetmeats, fried paddy
and flowers. And taking all those things indicaling auspi-
ciousness, he, irrepressible and gifted with energy, conferred
them upon Raghava and Lakshmana, And beholding
Bibhishana crowned with prosperity and success, Rama
accepted them all for his satisfaction. Thereupon Rama
spoke unto the heroic monkey Hanumfn, resembling a
a mountain and standing before him humbly with folded
hands, saying—O gentle one, obtaining permission from the
king Bibhishana, do thou enter the city of Lanka and
enquire after Maithili’s welfare. Do thou, O foremost of
monkeys, inform Vaidehi of the destruction of Ravana in
conflict after communicating unto her mine health as well
as that of Lakshmana and Sugriva. O lord of monkeys, it
behoveth thee to return with the tidings of Vaidehi alter
informing her of this pleasant news.


SECTION Cxv.


Bane thus commanded, Hanuman, the son of Maruta,
worshipped of the night-rangers, entered the cily of Lanka,
Entering the city with Bibishana’s permissiom, Hanuman,
again permitted, entered the Briksha Vatika.* And entering
there duly, the monkey, who was already known to Sili,,
espied her, having her person not cleansed, like Rohini,
oppressed by R&hu, sitling at the foot of a tree, devoid of
joy and encircled by she-demons. And approaching her and
bowing unto her, he stood there humbly and unmoved. And
beholding the highly powerful Hanuman arrived there the


* A garden in the city of Lanké.—T.


3500 RAMAYANA,


worshipful dame stood silent for sometime and then
recognising him became greatly delighted. And beholding her
gentle countenance, Hanum&n, the best of monkeys, began
to relate unto her what Rama had said—"O Vaidehi, it is all
well with Rama Sugriva and Laksbmana, He hath enquired
after thy welfare. He hath accomplished his end subduing
his enemies—and his enemy is slain. O worshipful dame, the
powerful Ravana hath been slain by Rama, helped by Bibhi-
shana and accompanied by the monkeys and Lakshmana.
1 do relate unto thee this pleasant news, O worshipful dame ; 1
do again delight thee ; it is by thy grace, O thou conversant
with piety, O Siti, victory hath been gained. Do thou be
consoled and relieved of thy anxiety, The enemy Ravana
hath been slain and the city of Lanka hath been -brought
under submission. (Rama said),—‘For discomfitting thy
enemy a bridge was constructed over the sea by me who
was determined and who did not sleep (for days) and thus
my promise hath been fulfilled. Do thou not be afraid for
living in R&vana’s abode for I have placed at Bibhishana's
hands the sovereignty of Lank& Do thou be consoled
thinking as if that thou art living in thy own house. To
behold thee, Bibhishana, delighted, shall soon proceed.”
Being thus accosted the worshipful Sita, having a moon-like
countenance, and her voice choked in delight, could not
utter any thing. And bebolding Sit& incapable of replying
the foremost of monkeys said,—‘What art thou thinking of,
O worshipful dame? Why art thou not welcoming me?”
Being thus addressed by Hanuman Sit, ever treading the
paths of morality, greatly delighted, replied with words
suppressed by tears. “Hearing this pleasant news concern-
ing the victory of my husband—and being brought under
the contro} of joy I am speechless for sometime. O monkey,
I do not perceive any such thing which I can confer
upon thee, in return, for this pleasant news. ¥ do dot see
any such thing on this earth which can match thy pleasant


VUDDHAKANDAM. 150k


tidings and bestowing which upon thee I ‘may be happy.
Silver, gold, or diverse jewels or the kingdom of the three
worlds—nothing is a becoming return for thy speech.” Being
thus addressed by Vaidehi the monkey replied—folding his
hands with delight and stationed before Sita—O blameless
damsel, forsooth this excellent speech becometh thee, who is
ever engaged in the welfare of thy husband and ever desirous
of his victory. I do consider, O worshipful dame, these words
of thine, far greater than the wealth, jewels or even the
sovereignty over the celestials. Forsooth I have gained the
kingdom of the celestials and other things since I have
beheld Rama, slay his enemy, victorious and peaceful.
Hearing those words of (Hanuman) Maithili the daughter
of king Janaka spoke unto the Wind-god’s son far
more excellent words Thou art capable of speaking
words, chaste, pleasant and significant of eight sorts of
knowledge. Thou art the praise-worthy son of the Wind-
god and greatly virtuous; strength, prowess, heroism,
knowledge of Séstras, noble-mindeduess, energy, forgiveness,
patience, endurance, humility and many other excellent
qualities crown thee.” Thereupon not being elated the least,
he again, humbly folding his hands with delight and
stationed before Sita, said—“Tf dost thou permit me I may
slay all these she-demons who had tortured thee before,
distressed thee in the forest of Agoka, stricken with grief of
thy lord, and who are cruel, have grim eyes and who
perpetrate always dreadful deeds. O worshipful. dame, 1
have heard that these grim-visaged she-demons distressed
thee greatly with harsh words at the command of R&vana.
I desire ta slay all these dreadful, crooked, ugly (she-demons)
having fearful eyes, meting out unto them various punish-
ments. .] wish to slay all these she-demons, who had used
harsh words and. had always offended thee, stricking
them with fists, fingers, arms, dreadful knee-joints, teeth,
chopping off their ears and noses, and pulling them by their


3502 RAMAYANA.


hairs: do thou confer upon me this permission. O far
famed lady, I shall slay them by these various means, by
whom, dreadful as they are, thou hadst been distressed
before.” Being thus addressed by Hanuman, she, ever kind
unto the poor, thinking and meditating, said to him—
“O foremost of monkeys, why art thou angry with these
she-slaves, who subject as they are to the command of their
lord, have done this in accordance with another's order. For
my adverse fortune and vicious deeds perpetrated in another
birth I have been subject to such a plight and been suffering
the consequence thereof. Do thou not speak thus, O thou of
huge arms. Such is the course of Fortune. Forsooth by my
ill-luck [ have met with (this misfortune). I forgive, out
of pity, all these she-servants of Ravana ; they used to torture
me at the command of that Rakshasa. And he being slain
they shall not repress me any longer, © son of the Wind-
god. Do thou, O monkey, hear of a Svoka, related in a
Purdna and pregnant with religious import, which was
uttered by a boar to a tiger. ‘No one taketh upon himself
the iniquity of a perpetrator of vicious deeds. So it
behoveth the pious crowned with an excellent character to
observe the rules (of piety). So it is proper to show compas-
sion even upon those who perpetrate crimes and are worthy
of being slain. Who is there who doth not commit a
crime? It is not proper to act cruelly even by them who
take delight in killing men, although they commit various
iniquitous deeds.” Being thus addressed by Sits, Hanuman,
skilled in speech, spoke unto the blameless Rima’s spouse,
saying—"Thou art the worthy spouse of Rama, religiously
wedded and crowned with many qualities, Permit me,
O worshipful dame, to proceed where Raghava is.” Being
thus accosted by Hanuman, Vaidehi, the daughter of king
Janaka, said,—I wish to see my lord, ever fond of those
who are devoted unto him.” Hearing these words, the
high-minded Hanuman, the son of Maruta, pleasing Maithili


YUDDHAKANDAM, 1503


satd—“Thou shalt behold Rima, having a countenance like
the full moon, with Lakshmana, surrounded by his friends
and having his enemies slain as Sachi beholdeth Indra the
king of the celestials.” Addressing these words unto Sit
appearing like Sree herself the highly effulgent Hanuman
returned where Raghava was. Thereupon Hanuman, the
foremost of monkeys, related duly all what did the daughter
of king Janaka say unto Raghava resembling the lord of the
celestials,


SECTION cxvi.


Trerevron bowing unto Rima, the foremost of bow-
men, having eyes, resembling lotus-petals, the highly wise
monkey said,—"It behoveth thee now to see Maithilee,
stricken with grief for whom thou didst initiate all these
works and the fruit whereof bath now been attained. Hearing
of thy victory Maithilee, possessed by grief and having
eyes full of tears, expressed her desire to see thee. And
1 was told by Ler,confident of her previous trust, with profuse
tears in her eyes,—‘I wish to sea my husband.” Being
addressed by Hanum&n, Rima the foremost of the pious
being bathed in tears, engaged instantly in meditation,
Thereupon sighing hard and casting his looks upon
the ground he spoke unto Bibhishana resembling clouds,
who was near him. “Do thou speedily bring Sita here
the daughter of the king of Mithili—bathed, sprinkled
with celestial paste and adorned with celestial ornaments.”
Being thus addressed by Rama, Bibhishana hastened on
and entering the inner appartment sent information unto
Siti through the female attendants. And beholding the


or RAMAYANA,


great Sit8, the graceful lord of Rakshasas—Bibhishana,
humbly and placing his joined palms on his crown, said—
“© Vaidehi, may good betide thee ; sprinkled with celestial
paste and adorned with celestials ornaments do thou ascend
this car; thy husband wisheth to see thee.” Being thus
addressed Vaidehi replied unto Bibbishana——"O lord of
Rakshasas, without bathing even I wish to see my husband.”
Hearing those words Bibhishana replied,—"It behoveth thee
to do what thy lord Rama hath said.” Whereto the
chaste Maithilee, regarding her lusband as God and filled
with devotion unto her husband, replied saying “So be
it.” Thereupon placing Sit&, bathed, performing the due
tites wearing valuable clothes and adorned with valuable
ornaments, on a palanquin, carried by many a capable
Rakshasa,brought her (unto Rama). Thereupon approaching
the high-souled Rama, who, being informed of (Bibbishana’s
approach) was engaged in meditation, Bibhishana bowing
down and delighted communicated unto him the arrival of
Sita, And hearing of her arrival who had lived long in
the abode of the Rakshasa Raghava, the slayer of enemies
attained (simultaneously) to anger, delight and depression.
And considering Sita, who was in the palanquin, over-
whelmed with grief, Raghava delighted addressed Bibhishana
with the following words. ‘O lord of Rakshasas, O gentle
(king), O thou ever engaged in encompassing my success,
do thou speedily bring Vaidehi nearer to me.” Hearing
these words of R&aghava, Bibhishana, conversant with piety
speedily cleared (the people out of that place). And
attendants with armours and head-dresses on and with cane
and drums in their hands began to move about driving
away the crowd thereform. And the crowds of bears,
monkeys and Rakshasas being driven on all sides began to
fly at a distance. And they being thus driven there arose a
huge noise resembling that of the ocean when agitated by
the wind, Beholding the monkeys driven on all sides and


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1505


troubled, Raghava out of anger and compassion prevented
him. And thereupon as if burning (every thing) with his
angry eyes Rama addressed the highly intelligent Bibhishana
with the following angry words—“Why dost thou insult me
by destroying all these ? Do thou remove their anxiety-—they
are all my own men. Neither the houses, clothes, walls nor
feception like these are the veils of women. There is no
sin consequent upon seeing women in danger, difficulty, war,
Svyambara® sacrifice and marriage. She is now iu great
danger and difficulty—tkere is no sia in seeing her specially
im my presence. Therefore teaving behind the palanquin
fet her come here on foot and let the monkeys behold
Waidehi in my presence.” Being thus addressed by R&ma,
Bibhishana,being sorry,humbly brought Sila near him. There-
upon hearing R&ma’s accents, Lakshmana, Sugriva and the
monkey Hanuman were greatly sorry. As if hiding herself
in her own person in shame Maithiti, following Bibhishana,
approached her husband. And she, having a gentle
countenance and always regarding her husband as her god,
fixed her looks upoa her lord's face out of surprise, joy and
love. And beholding the gentle countenance of her dearest
lord, resembling the full moon she removed her mental


distress. Thereupon she appeared (beautiful) having the
countenance of the clear moon.


* It is a form of marriage ia which the bride selects a bridegroom for
herself,


189


1506 RAHAYANA,


SECTION CXVII.


Besounwe Maithili standing humbly by him, Rama
began to give vent to his pent-up feelings—"O gentle one,
destroying all the enemies in the arena of battle I have
subdued thy enemy—I have done all that can be accomplished
by manliness. Ihave reached the other énd of my anger,
rubbed off (the insult) for my spouse being taken away by the
enemy and have killed simultaneously my disgrace and
enemy. My manliness hath been displayed to-day, my labour
hath been crowned with success and to-day I have fulfilled
my promise by my own prowess. That accidental misfortune,
under the influence whereof thou wert carried away by the
fickle-minded R&kshasa in my absence, hath been subdued
to-day by me,a man. What is the use of his manliness,
who when insulted, cannot remove it? Even if he be a great
man he may be called mean. The praise-worthy works of
Haoum§n—the crossing of the deep and the devastation of
Lank&, have been crowned with success to-day. The labour
of Sugriva with his army, who displayed valour in the
encounter and gave me good counsels, hath borne fruit
to-day. To-day also the labour of Bibhishana hath borne
fruit—who renouncing his brother, devoid of all good
qualities, came to my side.” Hearing those words of Rama,
Sit& began to look wistfully like a hind,with eyes full of tears.
And beholding his beloved spouse near him and afraid of
popular ignominy his heart was broken into two. Thereupon
he spoke unto the exquisitely beautiful Sith, in the midst
of the monkeys and Rakshasas, having eyes resembling lotus-
petals and black and curling hairs, saying, "As the southern
quarter, incapable of being got at by the people, was
conquered by the self-controlled great ascetic Agastya, so


YUDDHARANDAM. 1g07


for thee slaying Ravana, I, (always) anxious to have honour,
have removed my insult—as is the duty of aman. May
good betide thee—do thou know that all my labour, in the
batile-field, backed by the prowess of my friends, is for thee,
To uphold the dignity of my well-known family, to remove
the ignominy consequent upon thy being stolen away as welt
as to wipe off my own insult I have encompassed this. I
have suspected thy character; thou, (therefore) standing
before me,art distressing me like unto a lamp before one who
is subject to an eye-desease. Do thou therefore proceed,
O daughter of king Janaka, wherever thou likest to one of
these ten quarters. I permit thee, O gentle one. I have
nothing to do with thee. What powerful man, born in a
high family, take back his wife considering her as friend
out of lust, who hath lived long in another's house? Thou
wert taken by Ravana on his lap, beheld by him with sinfut
eyes ; how can IJ, taking thee back, bring disgrace upon my
great family? The object, with which I have gained thee
back, hath been accomplished. I have got no attachment
for thee—do thou go wherever thou wishest, O gentle one.
I speak these unto thee impelled by my sense of duty. IE
thou wishest thou mayest live with Lakshmana, Bharata or
Satrughna or with Sugriva or Rakshasa Bibhishana. Do
thou settle, O Sit, where you may find thy own pleasure,
O Sita, ([ do not think) Ravana hath overlooked thee, who
lived in his house, beholding thee so graceful and beautiful,”
Thereupon hearing those unpleasant words from her beloved
(husband) Sita, always sensitive and who had never heard
‘such unpleasant words, trembling like a creeper torn by the
trunk of an elephant,began to weep shedding tears profusely.


3508 RAMAYANA,


SECTION cxvitt,


Bane thus addressed by Raghava, enraged, with those
harsh words Sit’ was greatly pained. And hearing those
words of her lord, unheard of, before the great assembly
Maithili was greatly humiliated with shame. As if entering
unto her own person (with shame} and greatly pained witl
these arrow-like words the daughter of king Janaka began to
shed tears. Thereupon wiping the tears off her countenance,
she with sorrowful words, addressed ber husband— “Why
dost thou, O heso, like a common man addressing an ordinary
woman, make me hear these harsh and unbecoming words
painful unto ears? O thou of long arms, I am not what thou
hast taken me to be. Do thou believe me—I do swear by
my own character. Seeing the ordinary women thou art
distrusting the whole sex. Do thou renounce this suspicion
since thou hast tried me. O lord, though my person was
touched by another—but it was not in my power ; nor was it
an wilful act (of mine); accident is (o blame in this, My
heart is under my controt and that is in thee ;—and what
could 1 do of my body which was subject to another and of
which ] was not the mistress. O thon the conferrer of
honour—our affection towards one another was increased by
our living continually for a long time ; even then if thou hast
not been able to understand me I am ruined for ever. O
king, when the great hero Hanuman was despatched by thee
to Lanka to see me why didst thou not renounce me then ?
Hadst thou deputed the monkey with that message I would
have renounced my life there and then, O hero. Thos
wouldst not have been required to undergo this toil at the
risk of thy own life and giving unnecessary: trouble to thy
friends, O foremost of kings, being subject to ice—thou


VYUDDHAKANDAM. 1509


dost not perceive anything but womanhood in me, like an
ordinary man, Although I am known to have a father but in
fact] am born of the earth. Thou dost not sufficiently
honour my character, O thou conversant with characters.
Thy marriage with me in boyhood shall be disproved and
thou art not sufficiently considering ali my devotion and
good conduct unto thee.” Saying thus with accents choked
in tears and weeping Sith spoke unto Lakshmana, poorly
and engaged in meditation.. “Make a funeral pyre for me,
O Saumitri, that is the only remedy for this disaster. Being
thus branded with an unfounded stigma J do not like to keep
my life. To adopt the proper course for me who had been
renounced before this assembly by my disaffected husband
I shall enter this.” Being thus addressed by Vaidehi,
Lakshmana, the slayer of enemies, being possessed by anger,
Jooked towards Raghava. And understanding R&ma's
intention by gestures and at his command the powerful
Saumitri prepared a funeral pyre. None dared there request,
speak with or even look at Rama like unto Death at the
time of dissolution, Thereupon circumambulating Rama,
standing with his head down,Vaidehi approached the burning
fire. And bowing unto the celestials and Br&hmanas,
Maithili, with folded lands, spoke before the fire :—"As my
heart hath never gone away from Raghava, may thow protect
me, O fire, the witness of the people. As Righava
considereth me vile, who have got a pure character, may
fire, the witness of the people, protect me on all sides,”
Saying this and going round the fire, Vaidehi, with undaunted
heact, entered the fiaming fire. The great assembly there,
young and old, overwhelmed with grief, saw Maithili enter the
flaming fire. And (Sit3) resembling the burning gold entered
the flaming fire in the presence of all people. All beheld
Sita, having expansive eyes, enter fire like unto a golden
altar. The ascetics, celestials and Gandharbas saw that
great damsel enter fire like unto a {ull objation in the sacrifice.


tgt0 RAMAYANA. -


And beholding her fallen into the fire like unto Vasudhdré,
eanctified by Mantras in a sacrifice, all the females began to
weep. And the three worlds—the celestials, Gandharhas
and D&navas saw her fallen like unto a celestial from the
heaven when imprecited. She having entered the fire,
lamentations, unheard of before, rose from all sides from
the Rakshasas and monkeys.


SECTION cxix,


Hrearine the lamentations (of the R&kshasas and
monkeys) the virtuous-souled R&ma, with a poor heart and
having his eyes full of tears, engaged in meditation for some
time. Thereupon the king Vaisrivana, Yama with his
progenitors, the thousand-eyed lord of the celestials, Varuna,
the lord of water, the three-eyed graceful Mah&deva—the
rider of bull, Brahm& the creator of the world and the
foremost of those conversant with the knowledge of Brahma
—all these arriving at the city of Lank& in their cars bright
asthe rays of the sun, approached R&ghava. Thereupon
raising up their huge hands, decked with vatious ornaments
and folding them, those foremost of the celestials said unto
Raghava—"O lord, thou art the preserver of all the worlds
and the foremost of the wise, why dost thou neglect Sita
entering into fire? Why dost thou not understand thyself
the foremost of the celestials? Thou wert before the
Patriarch of all Vasus,* by the name of Kratadhima, And
thou art thyself, O lord, the creator of the three worlds.
Thou art the eighth of the Audrest and the fifth of the.

* A kind of demi-god of whom eight are enumerated.


+ A demi-god—an inferior manifestation of Siva: they are eleven in
number. .


VUDDHAKANDAH. IS


Sédhyas ;* the Agwinis are thy two ears and the sun and the
moon are thy eyes. O slayer of enemies, thou appearest at
the begining and the end of the creation. Why dost thou
neglect Vaidehi like an ordinary man?” Being thus
addressed by the deities presiding over quarters, Raghava,
the lord of people and the foremost of the pious,
spoke unto those leading celestials, saying:—‘l know
myself to be man—R&ma, the son of Dagaratha. Let
the great Patriarch tell me, who I am and whence I
have come.” Thereupon Brahma, the foremost of those
conversant with the knowledge of Brahma, spoke unto
Kakutstha, who had spoken thus, saying,—"Do thou hear
my true words, O thou having truth for thy prowess. O
Jord, thou art the great and effulgent, Nar&yana holding
discus and mace ; thou art the boar having one tusk; thou
hast conquered the‘past, present and future ; thoy art undecay-
ing and without end, O Raghava; thou art the great virtue
of the pious~thou art the propounder of all laws and art fours
armed ; thou art the holder of bow of time—the subduer of
senses—the execilent Purusha (person), unconquerable by
sins; thou art Vishnu holding dagger, Krishna and of
incomparable strength ; thou art the army, the minister—the
aniverse-—-the understanding, forgiveness and contro! of
passions ; thou art the creation and destruction; Upendra and
the slayer of (demon) Madhu; thou art the creator of
Indra; thou art Mahendra; thou hast a lotus-like navel and
thou art the slayer of enemies. The celestials and the great
saints style thee as the refuge of those who seek for
shelter. Thou art the foremost of Vedas with its thousand
branches and hundred regulations. Thou art thyself the
creator of the three worlds, O lord. Thou art the refuge of
the Siddkast and Sadhyas, thou art the Purvaja,t the

* An inferior deity or demi-god, one of a class of twelve.

4 Saints of accomplished piety.

2 Produced or appearing before creation.


1gts RAMAYANA.


sacrifice, Vashatkar,* Omt and Parétpara.t No one is
conversant with thy birth and destruction—-thou art manifest
in all creatures—cows and Brahmins—in all quarters, in
the sky, in the mountain, and in the river. Thou art gifted
with thousand legs, thousand heads and thousand eyes.
Thou dost uphold all creatures, the earth and all the
mountains. Thou appearest like the great serpent in the
water underneath the earth, Q Rama, thou dost uphold
three creations—the celestials, the Gandharbas and the
Danavas. © Ra&ma—l am thy heart, the worshipful
Swaraswati (Goddess of learning) is thy tongue and all other
celestials, O lord, created by Brahmf are thy down, The
closing of thy eye is the night and the opening is the day.
The Vedas are significant of thy desire and the control
thereof—none hath got independent existence but thee. The
whole universe is thy body, the earth is thy patience, the
fire is thy anger—the sun and the moon are thy delight ;
thou hast got Sreedatska (a peculiar curl of hair); thou didst
before tread the three worlds with thy three foot steps;
thou didst get the dreadful B&li bound and make Mahendra
king; Sita is Lakshmi and thou art Krishna and Vishow
the Preserver of people, For R&vana’s destruction thou hast
assumed the human shape. Thou hast accomplished that
work of outs, O thou the foremost of the pious. O Rima,
Ravana hath been slain. Do thou go up to heaven delighted.
Sure is thy godly energy and never goes for nothing thy
prowess. O Rima, never is fruitless thy view and the
chanting of thy glory. And always successful shall be these
persons on earth.who shall be devoted uate thee. Those


* Barat offering, oblation with fire—from the exclamation used on the
occasion.

+ Om-~the first term of the Mantra, Om or Ombkéra is well-known as a
combination of letters invested by Hindu mysticism with peculiar sanctity.

$ Gueatest of the great.


YUDDHARANDAM. 1513


who shall be devoted unto thee atone with Pardna* and
the excellent Purashka,t shall attain all their desires both in
this’ world and the next. Those persons shall never be
unsuccessful both ia this world and the next who shall chant
this theme—excelleut, instinct with the knowledge of Braliaa
and describing the old history.


SECTION CxX.


Hearne those excellent words uttered by the great
Patriarch rose up Brbkdéasut with Vaidehi on his lap
shaking the funeral pyre. With the daughter of the king
Janaka, the receiver§ of sacrificial offerings, being incarnate,
rose up. And carrying on his lap Vaidehi, wearing a red
cloth, resembling the newly risen sun, adorned with
ornaments of burning gold—having black curling hairs and
decked with fresh garments, Bibhdbase gave her unto Rama.
Thereupon the Deity of Fire, the witness of the people,
spoke unto Rama, saying—“O Rima, here is thy Vaidehi—
no sin hath visited her, Neither by words,mind,understanding
nor eyes, she, good-natured and beautiful—hath deviated
from thee who hath got a good character and is heroic. She
was in the solitary forest separated from thee, poorly and
having no control over herself and hence she was carried
away by the Rakshasa Ravana having enough prowess in
him, Although shut up in the inner appartment—well
protected and guarded by the dreadful she-demons she had


* A clats of writings considered sacred by the Hindus,

+ Great or supreme spitit—Puraske meaning (hat which abides or is
-quiesent in body.

t The Deity of Fire.

§. Fire.


‘190


IStg RAMAYANA.


always her mind in thee and was devoted unto thee.
Although tempted in many a way and remonstrated with
she did not think of that Rakshasa in her inner mind, Her
heart is pure and she is not spoiled with sin—do thou
therefore take back Maithili, Do thou not speak other-
wise—I do command thee,” Thereupon hearing those
words—the virtuous-souled Rama, the foremost of those
skilled in speech, with his eyes agitated with delight,
meditated for sometime. Being thus addressed, the highly
effulgent and intelligent Rama, of unmitigated prowess—
the foremost of the pious, spoke unto that best of celestials
saying—‘'Beautiful (Sit) lived in the inner appartment of
Ravana for a long time so she needs this purification in the
presence of all people. If I would take the daughter of
Janaka without purifying her, people would say that- Rama
the son of king Dagaratha is lustful and ignorant of the
morality of the people. I know it full well that Maithili,
the daughter of king Janaka, hath her mind devoted unto
me and hath not given it to any one (else), As the ocean
cannot go beyond its banks so Ravana could not approach
her having expansive eyes protected by virtue of her own
chastity. The greatly vicious-souled one could not even by
his mind get Maithili, who was beyond his reach like unto
the burning flame of fire. Her mind could not have been
moved although she lived in the inner appartment of
R&vana--she belongs to none else ; Sit& is mine as the rays
belong to the Sun. Maithilimthe daughter of Janaka hath
been purified before the three worlds—So I am incapable
of renouncing her as a self-controtled person cannot forsake
his (own) reputation. It behoveth me to carry out the well-
meaning words of you all—the lords of people who have
spoken them out of affection.” Saying this, the victorious,
highly powerful, well renowned Raghava, worthy of enjoying
happiness, and having his praise chanted in consequence of
his noble action, regaining his spouse, attained to happiness.


YUDDHARANDAM, 15t5


SECTION CXXI.


Flearine those excellent words uttered by Raghava,
Maheswara (Siva) spoke far more important words—“O
thou having lotus-eyes, O thou having huge arms and a
spacious breast, O thou the slayer of enemies, O thou the
fore most of the pious—it is a good fortune that this hath
been done by thee. It is by good fortune, O Rama, the
dreadful and increasing darkness—the fear of all people
-—-Ravana, hath been removed by thee in the encounter.
Consoling the poor Bharata and the famed Kaugalya,
beholding Kaikeyi and Sumitra the mother of Lakshmana,
obtaining the kingdom of Ayodhya, pleasing all thy friends,
establishing the prestige of thy family, O thou of great
strength, performing horse-sacrifices, attaining fair fame and
conferring riches upon the Brahmins do thou repair. to
heaven. This king Dagaratha stalioned on the car is thy
father. He was thy superior on this earth, O Kakutstha,
Obtaining thee as his son, that graceful (king) hath
repaired to the region of Iodra. Do thou bow unto
him with thy brother Lakshmana.” Hearing the words of
Mahadeva, Raghava, along with Lakshmana, bowed unto
their father who was seated on the top of the car. He with
Lakshmana beheld their father shining in his own effulgence
and wearing an unsullied cloth. Thereupon beholding his
son dearer than his life, attaining great delight (in
consequence thereof) placing him on his lap and embracing
him with his arms, the great king Dagaratha, having long
arms and seated on an excellent seat in the car, said—“}
am now ia heaven and am equal with the celestials, but
without thee, O Rama, I do not like it~-this is true~-I do
swear by thee. O thou the foremost of those skilled ia
speech, I have still in my mind the words which were uttered


¥516 RAMAYANA,


by Kaikeyi for sending thee away to the woods. Beholding
thee alt well and embracing thee with Lakshmana I am now
shorn of grief like unto the sun, devoid of dues, | have
heen emancipated, O my son, through thee-a good and
high-souled son, as the virtuous-souled Brahmana Kapila
was by Asthabakra. O gentle one, ¥ have heard from the
celestials, (that thou art) the excellent Purusha in the guise
(vf a man) for the destruction of Ravana. Blessed is
Kaugaly2, O Rama, who shall be greatly delighted, on
beholding thee, the slayer of enemies, gone home from the
forest. Blessed are those men, O Rama, who shall hehold
thee installed in the city as the king of the world. I wish
to behold thee reconciled with Bharata, devoted powerful,
pure and performing pious observances, O gentle one, thou
hast spent fourteen years in the forest with Sita and
Lakshmana. The term of thy exile is over—thy promise
hath been fulfilled ; and slaying Ravana, in the conflict thow
hast pleased the celestials. Thou bast performed a mighty
deed and attained to excellent fame, O slayer of enemies ;
and placed in charge of thy kingdom do thou with thy brothers
attain a long life.” The king speaking thus Rama spoke
unto him with folded hands saying,—“O thou conversant
with piety, do thou be propitiated with Bharata and Kaikeyi.
Thou didst imprecate Kaikeyi, saying,~"I renounce thee
with thy son’.—may not that dreadful curse visit her aud
her son,” Saying “‘s0 be it” unto Rama with folded hands and
embracing Lakshmana the great king said to him :—"U thou
conversant with piety and fame on this earth, thou shalt
attain to heaven and excellent state there. O thou the
enhancer of Sumitra’s joy—do thou attend upon Rima;
may good betide thee ; Rama is ever engaged in the welfare
of ail beings. All these celestials headed by Indra, Siddhae
and Great saints, bowing unto this high-souled and excellent
Purusha, worship him. Rama, the subduer of foes, is the
indescribable and undecaying letter Grakma, which has been


YUDDPHARANDAM. 1517


described (in the Vedas) as the heart and secret of the
celestials, For serving him along with Sita, the daughter of
king of Videha, thou hast attained piety and excellent fame.”
Addressing Lakshmana thus, the king spvke unto his
daughter-in-law, who was standing before him with folded
hands, saying :—tt doth not behove thee, O Vaidehi, to be
enraged (with Rama) for renouncing thee; for purifying
thee this was done by him ever wishing thy welfare. What
thou hast performed, O daughter, to establish the purity of
thy character, is hard to perform. What thou hast done,
shall glorify all other females. Though there is no necessity
for giving thee any instruction as regards thy duty towards
thy husband-still I should say that he is thy great god.”
Having thus insteucted his two sons and Sit&, he repaired, in
his car, to the region of Indra, Having advised his two sons
along with SitS, ascending the car, and shining in his
effulgence, that excellent king, greatly delighted, repaired
to the region of the king of celestials.


SECTION cxxit.


Dasaratia having repaired, Mahendra greatly delighted
spoke unto Raghava, stationed there with folded hands,
saying :—"O Rama, O foremost of men, this our presence
here, must not be fruitless, we are pleased—do thou ask for
what thou wishest.” Being thus accosted by the high-
souled Mahendra—delighted, Raghava spoke, with a pleased
heart—“O lord of the celestials, O thou the foremost of those
skilled in speech, if thou art propitiated with me, I shall pray
for (my wished-for-object) ; do thou grant it. Let all these
highly powerful monkeys, who have been despatched to the


1518 RAMAYANA,


abode of Death, on my account, regaining their life, stand
up. O thou the conferror of honour, I wish to see all those
delighted monkeys, who were separated from their wives and
children on my account. O Purandara, do thou revive all
these heroic and powerful (monkeys) who did not care for
death, and who worked hard and were distressed (for me).
May all those, by thy favour, who were ever devoted unto me
and did not care for death (even) regain their life—this is the
boon I pray for. O conferror of honour, I wish to see all
these monkeys, Golangulas and bears, pale and hurt, unheart
and gifted with strength and prowess like before. Let there
he flowers, fruits and roots, even out of season wherever
these monkeys shall live-and let rivers there be full of clear
water.” Hearing those words of the high-souled Raghava
Mahendra replied with words instinct with delight—‘O my
boy, O foremost of the Raghus, mighty is the boon thou hast
prayed for—-my words shall never be falsified, so let them be
be fulfilled. Let all those bears and Goléngulas rise up who
were slain in the conflict by Rakshasas and had their heads
and arms severed. Let the monkeys gifted with their
pristine strength and prowess rise up unhurt and healthy as
if after the end of eleep. And being reconciled with their
friends, relatives and kinsmen let them attain to excellent
joy. O thou the weilder of a huge bow, all the trees stiall be
filled with flowers and fruits and all the rivers shall be filled
with water even out of season (wherever they shall live).”
Thereupon all these leading moekeys who had their persons
wounded but now healed up, rose up like those asleep. And
all those monkeys were greatly wondered, saying, “What
is it?’ And beholding K&kutstha of accomplished end and
eulogizing Rama and Lakshmana, all the celestials, greatly
delighted, said —“Do thou, O king, repair to Ayodhyl—~
despatch all the monkeys—console the famed Maithilee,
ever devoted unto thee—behold thy brother Bharata observ-
ing ascetic vows in consequence of thy grief—and the


3 UDDHAKANDAM. 15tg


high-souled Satrughna and all thy mothers, O slayer of foes.
And being installed on the throne do thou conduce to the
joy of all citizens.” Having thus addressed Rama along
with Lakshmana, the thousand-eyed Deity, delighted, went
away along with the celestials, in their cars resembling the
Sun (in brilliance). And saluting all the celestials, Kakutstha,
with his brother Lakshmana, ordered the encampment of
the army. Thereupon that famous and well-pleased huge army
of the monkys protected by Rima and Lakshmana, appeared
resplendant on all sides like unto a night beautified with the
rays of the Moon.


SECTION cxxilt,


Rama having spent that night happily and risen up the
next morning, Bibhishana, chanting his victory, spoke unto
that slayer of foes, with folded hands, saying: “Here
are various articles for bathing, pastes, clothes, ornaments,
sandal and various excellent garlands. And here are
present women having eyes like lotuses and conversant with
the art of decking. Let them perform their duty, O
Righava.” Being thus accosted K&kutstha replied unto
Bibhishana, saying:—'Do thou invite all these monkeys
headed by Sugriva to bathe. The virtuous-souled Bharata,
having huge arms and ever used to comforts, is greatly
distressed on my account. Without Bharata the son of
Kaikeyi, ever performing pious rites, Ido not value bathing
orthese clothes and ornaments. Do thou so manage that
we may go to the city of Ayodhya speedity. For difficult
is the way leading to Ayodhya.” Being thus accosted


1520 RAMAYANA.


Bibhishana relied unto Kakutstha,—"O son of the lord of
earth, may good betide thee, I shal! soon take thee to that
city. The car Pushpaka resembling the Sun, belonging to
my brother Kuvera, was brought by the powerful Ravana.
O thou of unequalled prowess, that celestial and excellent
car, going everywhere at will, since the destruction of
Ravana in battle, is ready for thee. And that car resembling
the cloud is in the city of Lanka, in which thou shalt,
relieved of thy anxiety, repair to Ayodhy’. If 1 am worthy
of being favoured by thee, if dost’ thou remember any
accomplishment of mine—if thou hast any friendship for
me, do thou, O wise one, wait here with thy brother
Lakshmana and spouse Vaidehi till I accomplish all my
desires by worshiping thee. And then thou shalt go (to
Ayodhy&) O Rama. I shall worship thee with great delight
and do thou, O Rima, with thy friends and army, accept that
adoration. O Rama, out of love, honor, and brotherly
feeling, I do crave thy permissinn. I am a servant I cannot
command thee.” Being thus addressed, Rama replied unto
Bibhishana in the presence of all the R&kshasas and
monkeys, saying:—‘I have been worshipyed by thee, O
hero, with thy excellent counsels,with thy earnest endeavours
and with thy great friendship. Do not think, O lord of
Rakshasas, that [ do not comply with thy request——my heart
hastens me to behold my brother Bharata, whu, to take me
back, did come to the mount Chitrakuta, who laid low his
crown at my feet and whose words I did not keep. (Iam
anxious to see) Kaugaly&’, Sumitr’, Kaikeyi, with my friends,
citizens and villagers. Do thou regard me, O Bibhishana,
O gentle one, as worshipped. O friend do thou be not
angty—I request thee. Do thou speedily being the car for
me, O lord of Rakshasas—my work is done—how can I wish
ta live here long.” Being thus addressed by Rama,
Bishishana the lord of Rakshasas, speedily brought the car
resembling the Sun. -


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1522


Thereupon arrived there the car adorned all over with
gold paintings, altars crested with Bazdurja jewels,
having upper rooms, silvered all over, adorned with white
flags and flagstaffs, beautified with gilt lotuses, adorned
with golden houses, covered with a network of girdles,
having windows made of pearls and jems, girt on all
sides with a net of bels, giving forth melodious sound,
resembling the summit of the mount Meru, constructed by
Vigwakarmd (the architect of the celestials) adorned with huge
apartments beautified with silver and pearls—having its
base crested with crystal, containing excellent seats made
of Batdurja, abounding in valuable coverlets and immense
wealth, incapable of being broken down and coursing at will.
And communicating unto Rama (the arrival of that car)
Bibhishana waited there. Beholding that flowery car,
coursing at will and resembling a huge mountain, Rama, of
a generous spirit, along with Saumitri, attained to an excess
‘of astonishment.


SECTION cxxIv


“Havre brought that car Pushpaka, adorned with
flowers and having stationed himself at a distance, Bibhishana
the lord of Rakshasas, being incited to hurry on, humbly and
with folded hands, spoke unto Rama, saying, ‘What shall
I do, O Raghava?” Hearing those words the highly
powerful Raghava, in the presence of Lakshmana, gave vent
to the following accents out of affection—"All these
monkeys and bears have brought about the accomplishment
of my work with great care. Do thou, satisfy them, O
Bibhishana, with diverse jewels and riches. With these and


rgt


1522 RAMAYANA.


thee, I conquered the city of Lank&, O Jord of Rakshasas,
They alt fought with a delighted heart, having renounced
all fear of life and who did never go away from the battle-
field. Do thou, with a gift of riches and jewel, make good
the work of these monkeys and bears who encompassed the
accomplishment (of my end). Being honoured and delighted
by thee grateful, all these leading monkeys shall repair (to
their respective quarters), (If thou art found to be)
sacrificing, self-controlled, compassionate and (the just)
collector of revenues, all shall be attached unto thee. For
this I do address you (thus). © lord of men, the soldiers,
disgusted, renounce that king who is void of all royal
accomplishments, and who uselessly slays soldiers in the
conflict.” Being thus accosted by R&ma, Bibhishana, with
a distribution of jewels and riches, honoured all those
monkeys. And beholding all those leading monkeys
worshipped with jewels and riches Rama ascended that
excellent car, taking the bashful, and high-minded Vaidehi
on his lap and accompanied, by his powerful brother
Lakshmana, a skilled bowman. And being stationed on the
car K&kutstha honouring all the monkeys, the highly
powerful Sugriva and Bibhishana, said—-"O foremost of
monkeys, ye have performed a friendly service—it hath
heen appreciated by me~—do ye repair to your wished-for
quarters. O Sugriva, thou, ever afraid of impiety, hast
performed all that a loving and well-wishing friend should
do, Do thou, encircled by thy army, proceed towards
Kishkindha, Do.thou, O Bibhishana, live in thy kingdom,
Lank&, conferred upon thee, by me. Not even the celestials,
headed by Indra shall be able to assail thee. I wish to return
to Ayodhy&, the’capital of my father’s (kingdom). I wish to
obtain your permission (and for this) I have invited you all.”
Being thus addressed by Rama, all the leading monkeys
bears as well as the Rakshasa Bibhishana said with folded
hands—"We._ wish all to goto Ayodhy&. Do thou take us.


YUDDHAKANDAM, 1533


We shall all range with delight at forests and gardens.
Beholding thee installed and bowing unto Kaucalya, we
shall soon return to our respective homes, O foremost
of kings.” Being thus accosted by the monkeys with
Bibbishana, the virtuous-souled Rama, spoke unto them
and Sugriva and Bibhishana, saying—"Dearer than the
dear, I shall attain to, when returning my city, along
with you all, I shall enjoy in the company of all my
friends and relatives. O Sugriva, do thou soon ascend
the car along with the monkeys. Do thou ascend too, O
Bibhishana, lord of Rakshasas, with all thy courtiers,”
Thereupon ascended that celestial car Pushpaka, Sugriva,
greally delighted with the monkeys and Bibhishana, with
his courtiers. Andthey all having got up, the excellent
car, of Kuvera at the command of Raghava, rose up in the
welkin, Andin that car coursing at will and drawn by
effulgent ganders, Rama greatly delighted appeared like
Kuvera (himself), And all the monkeys, bears and the
highly powerful Rakshasas sat in that celestial car un-
obstructed and at their pleasure,


SECTION ecxxv.


Bane commanded by Rama, that excellent car, drawn
by ganders, with a huge noise, rose high up in the welkin:
And casting his looks on all sides, Rama, the descendant
of Raghus, spake unto Sila, the daughter of the king of
Mithila, having a moon-like countenance, saying,-‘O
Vaidehi, do thou behold Lanka, situate on the summit of
the mount Chitrakuta, resembling that of Kailaga and
constructed by Vigwakarmd. And behold, O Sit, that


agzq RAMAYANA.


huge arena of battle, bathed in the blood and flesh of the
monkeys and Rakshasas. Do thou behold, O thou having
expansive eyes, Ravana, the tord of Rakshasas, the repressor
of people and who obtained a boon, lying there, slain by
me on thy account. Kumbhakarna was stain there, the
night-ranger Prahasta, as well, and Dumr&ksha, were stain by
the monkey Hanum&n. Bidyutm&li was slain there by the
high-sowled Sushena—and [ndrajit, the son of Ravana, was
slain there in the entounter, by Lakshmana. The R&kshasa
named Bikata was slain there by Angada—and Birupiksha,
hard to look at and Mahaparsha and Mahedara. And the
powerful Akampana was slain (there) and all other
Rakshasas—Trishir&, Atik&ya, Devantaka and Narantaka—
and the two teading and powerful Ra&kshasas, mad after
conflict—the sons of Kumbhakarna—Nikumbha and Kumbha,
Bajradanstra, Danstra and many other Rakshasas were slain
and the irrepressible. Makar&ksha was slain (there) by me
in the conflict, Akampana was slain—and the powerful
Sonitaksha, And Yup&ksba and Prajangha were destroyed
{there) in the great conflict. The grim-visaged Rakshasa
Viddutsjmha was slain there—and Yajndsatru and the highly
powerful Suptaghna. (And there was slain) Sury&satro
and Brahmasatru. (And there bewailed for Ravana) his
spouse Mandodari, surrounded by his thousand other wives.
O thou having an excellent countenance, do thou behold
the descending place of the ocean, where I spent the night
after crossing the deep for thee. O thou having expansive
eyes, for thee, this difficult construction of the bridge was
made by me over the deep by the help of Nala. Do thou,
O Vaidehi, behold the unagitated deep—the abode of Varuna,
appearing as if without the other end, roaring and abounding
in conchs and pearl oysters. O Maithili, do thou behold the
golden mount, which rose above the deep for affording a
resting place unto Hanum&n, And on the bank of this
ocean I halted with my soldiers. And here Mah ddeva, the


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1525


lord of the celestials, was propitiated with me. It behoveth
thee to behold this descending place of the high-souled
Ocean, known as Setubandha,* worshipped of the three
worlds, highly sacred and destroying even the worst sin,
There, Bibhishana, the king of R&kshasas first came
to me. Do thou behold,O Sitd, Kishkindba, having beautiful
gardens, the pleasant city of Sugriva, where Vali was slain
by me.” And beholding the city of Kishkindha, ruled over
by Vali, Sita, incited by her love, addressed Raima, with
worthy words, saying—“O king, I wish to repair to Ayodby&
thy capital with thee, in the company of TAr&, the dear wile
of Sugriva.as well as of the wives of other leading monkeys,”
Being thus addressed by Vaidehi Raghava replied—saying,
“this shall be done” and getting at Kishkindh& be stopped
the car. And having beheld the car stationed he spoke unto
Sugriva, saying—"O foremost of monkeys, do thou speak
unto all the leading monkeys that they may go to Ayodhya
accompanied by their wives. O thou of great strength—
they may all go with Sit& Do thou hurry them on, O
Sugriva. We shall (soon) go, O thou the lord of monkeys.”
Being thus addressed by Rama, of unmitigated prowess—
the beautiful lord of monkeys, encircled by them, entered
speedily the inner apartment and beholding T&r& there,
said—"O dear, at the command of Raghava and the kind
desire of Sita, do thou soon go, taking with thee the wives
of all the bigh-souled monkeys. We shall see Ayodhy& and
the wives of Dagaratha.’? Hearing the words of: Sugriva,
Tara, having a pecfectly beautiful person, assembling all the
wives of the monkeys, said—“You have been ordered by
Sugriva to repair (to Ayodhy&)with the monkeys ;—to behold
Ayodhy&, is also a dear object of mine. (‘I shall behold)


* This is still to be seen in the shape of a delapidated bridge near
Rémesoar a place of pilgrimage. Pilgrims go there Via Madura, a district
in South Madras. The Raja of Ramnud in whose Zemindari it is situate is
called Setupati—T.


1526 RAMAYANA.


Rama enter the city with the citizens and villagers and the
wealth and riches of the wives of Dagaratha.” Being thus
commanded by T&r&,the wives of the monkeys, putting on all
their ornaments and circumambulating (her) ascended the car,
with a view to behold Sita. And beholding the car going
up with them all, Raghava again spoke unto Sita, near the
mount Rishyamuka, saying,—"Do thou behold there, O Sita,
the huge and foremost mount Rishyamuka abounding in
gold and various metals, like unto clouds accompanied with
lightnings. There I was joined by Sugriva, the lord of
monkeys. And there I entered into an agreement, O Sita,
for the destruction of Vali. And there is (the lake) Pampa
abounding in lilies and skirted by picturesque forest where
separated from thee, I bewailed piteously. Andon its bank
T beheld the pious Savart. And there I slew Kavandha and
Yoyanavéhu. Behold there, O. Sité, a beautiful tree, in
Janasthana, where, O thou ever used to luxuries, for thee,
the highly powerful and energetic Yathyu, the foremost of
birds, was slain by Ravana. Do thou behold there, O thou
of a beautiful person, O thou of auspicious looks, our
hermitage and the beautiful cottage of leaves, wherefrom:
thou hadst been carried away by force by the lord of
Rakshasas. Do thou behold there the beautiful and sacred river
Godaveri having clear water and the hermitage of Agastya,
surrounded by plantain trees. Do thou behold there,
O Vaidebi, the great hermitage of Savadhanga, where came
the thousand-eyed, Sakra, the subduer of enemies’ cities.
O worshipful dame, O thou having a middle stature—amongst
all those ascetics, thou beboldest, there lived Atri, the lord of
our family—resembling the fire of the Sun. There was slain
the huge-bodied Biradha by me. There thou didst behold,
O Sit&, the female asteclic (the wife of Attri) ever performing
pious observances. There cometh in view, O thou having
a beautiful person, the king of mountains, Chitrakuta, where
to propitiate me, came the son of Sumitra. Behold the


J UDDHARANDAM. 1927


Seautiful Yamuna, having picturesque forest on its bank and
the pleasant hermitage of Varadwaya. Behold there the
sacred river Ganges, dividing itself into three branches.
Behold there the city of Sringabera, where I made friendship
with Guha. Behold there, O Sit, the capital of my father.
Do thou bow unto Ayodhy3, O Vaidehi.” Thereupon all
the monkeys and Rakshasas along with Bibhishana rose up
delightedly and saw the city, Thereupon the monkeys and
Rakshasas beheld the city abounding in white houses having
spacious compartments, filled with elephants and horses and
dooking like Amaravati, the capital of Mahendra.


SECTION CXXVI1.


Havine completed the fourteen years (of exile), the self-
controlled elder brother of Lakshmana, arriving at the
hermitage of Varadwaya on the fifth day, saluted the ascetic.
And bowing unto Varadwaya, having asceticism for his
wealth, he said—“O thou gifted with six sorts of wealth,
hast thou heard of the prosperity and well being (of my
city)? Is Bharata still engaged (in guarding the people) »
Are my mothers living ?” Being thus addressed by Rama the
great ascetic Varadw4ya replied, delighted, and smiling,
unto that foremost of Raghus,—‘Abiding by thy command
and with matted locks, Bharata is waiting for thee, always
honoring thy sandals. And all others are well in thy house.
O subduer of thy enemies, I was greatly pained, when I saw
thee before entering the huge forest, wearing bark, three
with thy wife,* deprived of thy kingdom for piety only,

* i. thyself, Lakshmana and Sitd.


1528 RAMAYANA.


walking on foot, renouncing every thing, obeying the
command of thy sire, deprived of all comforts, like a celestial
banished from heaven, deprived of thy kingdom at the
words of Kaikeyi, and living on wild roets and fruits ; but
beholding thee now of accomplished end, with all thy
friends having vanquished the enemy, I have attained to
highest delight. O R&ghava, I am apprised of immense
griefs and happinesses which befell thee when thou didst
live in Janasthana. Thy blameless spouse was carried away
stealthily by Ravana engaged as thou wert in the behoof
of the Brihmanas,and in the protection of all the ascetics. The
view of Maricha—the carrying away of Sita,—the beholding
of the headless demon—thy going to (the lake) Pamp3,—
thy friendship with Sugriva, where V&li was slain by thee,—
the enquiry of Vaidehi undertaken by the son of Wind-god,—
the construction of the bridge by Nala after the whereabouts
of Vaidebi had been known—the conflagration of Lank& by
the delighted and the leading monkeys—the destruction,in the
conflict, of Ravana proud of bis own strength, along with
his sons, friends, courtiers, army and steeds—the arrival of
the celestials on the destruction of Ravana, the thorn of
gods and the grant of boon by them—I have known all these
by virtue of my asceticism, O thou fond of virtue. My
disciples used to go hence to that city to bring tidings. [
shall even now grant thee a boon, O foremost of those using
weapons. Do thou accept my Argkya* and then repair
to Ayodhy& to-morrow.” And respectfully abiding by his
words, that effulgent son of the king, delighted, begged of
him the boon. “QO thou gifted with six qualities, on my way
while proceeding to Ayodhy4, let all the trees, bearing fruits
out of season,and producing honey,bear many a nectar-smelling
fruit.” No sooner he replied saying,—Thy promise shall be
fulfilled” than all the trees there became like those of heaven. ©


* Arrespectful oblation to gods or venerable men of rice, durea grass,
Aowers é&ic with water in a small boat-shaped vessel.


YUDDHAKANDANM. 1529


Trees without fruits were filled therewithal and trees
without flowers were covered with them, All the trees,
whose leaves were dried up, were enveloped with foliage
and all of them began to pour honey, The way to Ayodhy&
for three Voyanas was thus filled all over (with trees). There-
upon thousands of monkeys, living, at pleasure and delightedly,
on various celestial fruits, thought as if they were in heaven.


SECTION CXxvh.


"Tcrevron beholding Ajodhy8, Rama, the descendant
of Raghu, of light movements and desirous of affording
delight unto others, thought of welcoming (them). Think-
ing thus the intelligent and effulgent (Rama) cast his
fooks towards the monkeys and spoke unto Hanum4n,
saying,-"'O foremost of monkeys, speedily reparing to
Ayodhy4 do thou learn of the welfare of all people in the
palace of the king. Arriving at the city of Sringavera,
do thou communicate unto Guba, the king of Mishadhas*
having the forest as his kingdon, my well-being, at my
command. Hearing that I am hale and hearty and relieved
of all troubles, Guha, my friend like my own self, shall attain
to delight. And Guha, the ford of Mishadhas, delighted,
shall inform thee of the way to Ayodhy& and the well being
of Bharata. Do thou ask of Bharata his well-being at my
words, and communicate unto him my (arrival) with Laksh-
mana and my spouse after having made good the vow


* A low caste aboriginal Hindu corresponding to our Chandélas always
living in the forest. The Raja of Ramnud in the district of Madur4 in Madras
traces his descent from this Guba.


192


1530 RAMAYANA.


(of my sire)—the carrying away of Siti by the powerful
R&vana—the friendship with Sugriva and the destruction of
Vali in the conflict—the search of Maithili instituted by
thee having got over the huge lord of rivers—the advance (of
the monkeys) to the banks of the deep—the view of the
ocean, the construction of the bridge—the destruction of
Ravana,—the grant of boon by Mahendra,Brahm& and Varuna
—my meeting with my father by the favour of Mahadeva.
Do thou, O gentle one, communicate unto Bharata, my
arrival here with the lord of R&akshasas and king of monkeys.
(Tell him) ‘vanquishing his foes and attaining to excellent
fame Rama hath arrived at the gate of the city with his
valiant friends, having satisfied the vow (of his sire).'’ Thou
shouldst read the signs expressive of joy or sorrow that
Bharata shall display on hearing this and infer therefrom
his attitude towards me, Thou shouldst know, from the
colour of his countenance, his looks and his words, all the
movements and actions of Bharata. Whose mind doth not
change obtaining such an ancestral kingdom, filled with all
prosperity and abounding in elephants, horses and_chariots ?
If the effulgent Bharata, the descendant of Raghu, ruling
over it, wisheth the kingdom for himself, let him lord over
the entire earth, Therefore, O monkey, it behoveth thee to
come back speedily apprised of his intention and movements,
before we proceed further.” Being thus commanded,
Hanum&o, the son of Wind-god, assuming a human shape
speedily proceeded towards Ayodhy&. Hanum§n the son of
M&ruta rose up in the welkin with velocity like unto Garuda
ready to fall upon a huge serpent. Then crossing the Wind-
path and the abode of the birds, getting over the terrible
confluence of the Ganges and Yamuni, reaching the city of
Sringavera and meeting Guha, the energetic Hanum&n,
delighted ,(addressed him) with the following excellent
wotds—"Thy friend Rama, the descendant of K&kutstha,
having truth for his prowess, with Sita and son of Sumitra,


YODDHAKANDAM. 153


hath enquired of thy welfare. Having spent five nights*
till to-day, he, having obtained permission from the ascetic
Varadwéja, shall proceed to-morrow.” Having said this the
highly energetic monkey, not caring for the exhaustion of
travel, greatly delighted and with hairs erect, rose up with
great velocity, Beholding the holy river sanctified with the
name of Parasurima, the rivers—B&lukini, Baruthi, Gomati,
the huge forest of Sd/a trees, the various countries populated
with thousands of people, and proceeding a great distance
speedily, that foremost of monkeys got at the trees near
Nandigrémt like unto those of Chaitraratha, the garden of
the lord of celestials the flowers whereof were being plucked
off by many a damsel accompanied by their children decked
in various ornaments, He saw at a distance of one cros@
from Ayodby& Bharata wearing the skin of an antelope,
poorly, greatly reduced, living in a hermitage, wearing matted
hairs, having his body covered with dirt, greatly pulled down
in consequence of his brother’s disaster, living on roots and
fruits, self-controlled, living the life of an ascetic, observing
pious observauces, with a bundle of clotted hairs on his
head, wearing bark and deer skin, having control over his
passions and senses, effulgent like Brakmarshis, ruling the
earth always placing the sandals before him, protecting
people of four Varnas against all fear, with courtiers, priests
leading a holy life and soldiers all wearing red clothes,around
him. All those citizens, fond of piety, did not like to use
good clothes bebolding the prince use bark and deer skin.
Thereupon Hanuma, the son of Maruta spake with folded
hands unto him, conversant with piety like virtue incarnate,
saying—"Kakutstha, living in the forest of Dandaka with
bark and matted hairs, for whom thou art lamenting, hath


* Having spent five nights after the expiry of fourteen years of exile he is
living at the hermitage of Varadwija, He shall leave that place to-
motrow—T.

+ The country of Bharata’s maternal uncle—T.


1532 RAMAYANA.


enquired after thy welfare. Do thou, O worshipful size,
speak out thy welfare and renounce the dreadful grief.
Thou shalt in this moment be reconciled to thy brother
Raima. Slaying Ravana, and regaining Maithili, Rama,
having accomplished his end, hath arrived here with his
valiant friends. The highly effulgent Lakshmana and the
famed Vaidehi (have also come). Sita fareth well with
Rama like unto Sachi in the company of Mahendra.”
Being thus addressed by Hanuman, Bharata, the son of
Kaikeyi, delighted, fell down all on a sudden in a swoon of
joy. Thereupon rising up in no time, and welcoming him,
Bharata, the descendant of Raghu, spake unto Hanuman
communicating the pleasant tidings, the following words.
And embracing the monkey respectfully the graceful Bharata
sprinkled him with profuse tears not out of grief but of
joy. He said,—‘Art thou a man or god who hast kindly
come here? O gentle one, I shall confer upon thee, who
hast communicated unto me this pleasant tidings, hundreds
and thousands of kine, hundreds of prosperous villages,
sixten young wives, pious, wearing excellent Kundalas,
golden-hued, having beautiful noses and breast,having moon-
like countenances, decked with all ornaments and born of
respectable [amilies.” And hearing from that leading monkey
of that wonderful return of Rama, the son of the king,
delighted became anxious to behold him and again addressed
joyously Hanuman with the following words.


JUDDHAKANDAM. '533


SECTION cxxviil,


“T HEAR the tidings of my brother affording me great
delight who hath been living in the huge forest for many 2
year. The saying of the people appeareth to me as instinct
with well meaning that a man, if alive, may attain to joy
even after a century. Do thow relate truly unto me, how
and in what country the union between Raghava and the
monkeys was brought about.” Being thus accosted by the
Prince and seated on Kuga, he, thereupon, began to describe
R4ma’s life in the forest. ‘How Rama was exiled, the two
boons conferred upon thy mother, how king Dagaratha
died in consequence of (his) son’s grief, how by emissaries,
O lord, thou wert brought up from the house of thy maternal
uucle, how thou didst not wish for the kingdom having
entered Ayodhy4, how thy brother, the repressor of enemies,
was solicited by thee for accepting the kingdom, reparing
to the mount Chitrakuta, who hast ever wended the track
of the pious, the renouncement of kingdom (by him) abiding
by the words of the king, thy return after taking the sandals
of thy revered (brother)—all these, O thou of long-arms,
are known to thee. I shall relate unto thee all that happened
alter thy return. Thyself having returned thence, all the
birds and animals were overwhelmed with terror and that
forest appeared as if distressed. Thereupon he entered the
solitary and huge and dreadful forest Dandaka distressed
by the elephants and abounding in lions, tigers and deer.
And they entering the dense forest there appeared before
them the powerful Biradha* emitting a dreadful sound. And
taking him up roaring aloud like an elephant Rama threw
him with his arms upwards and face downwards into a pit.


A demon of that name.


1534 RAMAYANA.


Having accomplished that difficult work the two brothers
Rama and Lakshmana, arrived in the evening at the pleasant
hermitage of Sarabhange. And Sarabhanga having attained
to heaven, Rama, having truth for his prowess, saluting
all the ascetics, repaired to Janasthina. And by the high-
souled Raghava, living there, fourteen thousand inhabitants
of Janasthina were slain. In the company of one person
only and at the commencement of the fight, by Rama, within
the one fourth part of a day, were exterminated all the
highly powerful and valiant inhabitants of the forest of
Dandaka always putting obstructions in the way of the
ascetics, All the Rakshasas were grinded (to death) by
Raghava. Khara was slain in the conflict ; Dushana being slain
first Trishird was slain thereafter by him. Thereafter (a
she-demon) named Surpanakh’, came to the side of Rama.
Thereupon being commanded by Rama, the highly powerful
Lakshmana rose up all on a sudden and taking a dagger
chopped off her ears and nose. Being thus insulted by him
that she-demon came to R&vana. Thereupon a dreadful
Rakshasa named Maricha—an attendant of Ravana, assum-
ing the shape of a jewelled deer, allured Vaidehi. And
beholding it, Vaidehi spake unto Rama, saying,—'Do thou
catch it; with it when caught our hermitage shal! be more
charming.’ Thereupon Rama, with bow in his hand, pursued
that deer and with one shaft destroyed it. O gentle one,
Riaghava going out on hunting, and Lakshmana having
issued out of the hermitage, the Ten-necked (demon) entered
therein. And he speedily got hold of Sita, like unto Rohini
possessed by the planet in the sky. Thereupon slaying
the vulture Yatdyu in the conflict desirous of rescuing her
and getting hold of Sita that Rakshasa speedily repaired
(to his capital). Thereupon some monkeys resembling
mountains, stationed on the summit of a mountain, stricken
with wondrous fear and astonishment, beheld Ravana, the
lord of Rakshasas proceed with Sit. Ascending the car


YUDDHARANDAM. 1535


Pushpaka, going at will, with Vaidehi and hastening his
course that highly powerful Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas
entered Lank&. And entering the huge and excellent golden
palace Ravana consoled Maithili with (diverse) words,
But she regarded that foremost of Rakshasas and his words
as straw. And Vaidehi was placed in the forest of Asoka.
Thereupon returned Rama after having slain the deer in
the forest. Having returned and seen the vulture, dearer
than his father,slain, Rama, the descendant of Kakutstha was
pained. And searching Vaidehi and ranging at the banks
of God&veri and forest-lands covered with flowers, Rama
with Lakshmana, met in that huge forest a Rakshasa named
Kavandba. Thereupon at the words of Kavandha, Rama,
having truth for his prowess, repairing to the mount Rishya-
muka, was united with Sugriva. There had grown mutual
fove in them before they were known to each other. Sugriva
was driven away by his angry brother Vali. And informed
of each other’s affairs their friendship grew closer. There-
upon slaying the huge-bodied and highly powerful Vali in
the conflict by virtue of the strength of his own arms Rama
obtained (for Sugriva) his own kingdom. And being placed
on the throne with all the monkeys, Sugriva promised unto
Rama the enquiry of the Princess (Sit#). Being commanded
by the high-souled Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, ten
Aotis of monkeys repaired to (various) quarters. Among
them some of us lost our way in a cavity of the Vindhya
mountain, and were striken with great terror—and accord.
ingly much time was lost. The powerful brother of the
king of vultures named Samp&ti communicated unto us the
residence of Sit& in the palace of Ravana. Thereupon
removing the grief of my relatives stricken with sorrow and
resorting to my own prowess, I jumped over hundred
yoyanas and beheld her placed in the forest of Asoka,
wearing a red cloth, pale, deprived of all joy and observing
strict penances. And then nearing her and beholding her


1536 RAMAYANA,


of a perfectly blameless person | bestowed upon her an ensign
aring with R&ma’s name engraven on it. And obtaining a
jewel as an ensign, I, with my object accomplished, returned.
And having returned I presented Rama of unwearied actions
with that ensign of a brilliant gem. And hearing (of the
news of Vaidehi) Rama regained his life like one on the
verge of death regaining his being after drinking nectar.
And exciting (his soldiers) for making preparations like unto
Fire about to destroy all people he made up his mind for
the devastation of Lanka. Thereupon arriving at the banks
of the ocean he had a bridge constructed by Nala by which
the army of monkey-heroes crossed (the deep). Nala
destroyed Prahasta, Raghava slew Kumbhakarna,Lakshmana
killed the son of Ravana and Rama himself slew R&vana.
He was then met by Sakra, Yama, Varuna, Siva, Brahma’
and Dagaratha. And that graceful descendant of Kakutstha,
the slayer of foes, obtained the boon from them as well as
from the saints assembled there—(celestial and otherwise).
Having obtained the boon he, delighted, met the monkeys
and in the car Pushpaka reached Kishkindha. Again reach-
ing the Ganges he is living with the ascetic; it becometh
thee to behold him to-morrow under tle auspices of
of Pushya,* without any hindrance.” Thereupon being
delighted with the sweet accents of Hanumfn, Bharata
addressed him, with folded hands, with words affording
delight, saying,—“After a long time my desire hath been
falfilled.”


* The lunar asterism comprising three stars of which one is the Cancer.


§ UDDHARANDAM. 1337


SECTIGN CKX4X.


Hearine those words affording great delight, Bharata,
‘the slayer of enemies, having truth for his prowess, delighted,
ordered Satrughna, (saying),—“Let all people being purified
worship all the deities and altars of the city with fragrant
garlands and diverse music. Let all the bards conversant
with the chanting of the pedigree, the flatterers, all those
‘conversant with music, the dancing girls, the queens, the
courtiers, the soldiers with their wives, Brilimanas,
Kshatryas, and peopte of all other castes, issue out to behold
the moon-like countenance of Rama.” Hearing the words of
Bharata, Satrughna, the slayer of enemies, divided the work
amongst the servants, (saying),—Bo ye level the high and
low ground from Nandigr’m to (Ayodhy4). Do ye perfectly
water the ground with cold water. Thereafter sprinkle all
the places with flowers and dried paddy; hoist up flags all
over the city; decorate all the houses, before the ‘rising of
the moon with garlands, jewels, flowers of gold and things
of five other colours. Let hundreds of men watch the thorough-
fares.” Hearing the command of Satrughna, issued out
with delight Dhristi, Jayanta, Vijaya, Siddartha, Arthasa-
dhaka, Asoka, MantrapSla and Sumantra. Thereupon issued
‘out men on horse back and in cars with thousands of mad
elephants well-decked with pennons and she-elephants with
golden seats (on their back). And some heroes proceeded
-encircled by thousand excellent steeds and persons carry
ing Sakti, Risthi, maces and -pepnons and thousands of
infantry, Thereupon proceeded Sumitra and all other wives
-of Dagaratha placing Kaugalya before them and seated in
excellent conveyances. And hearing of the return of his
brother and attaining te delight, the high-souled and

193


1538 RAMAYANA.


pious Bharata, reduced with fasting, poorly, wearing bark and
skin of an antelope and conversant with religion, issued
out to teceive back Rima in the company of his counsellors
and encircled by the lwice-born ones, the people of diverse
castes, his own relations and kinsmen and ministers with
gatlands and Afodaka* in their hands, eulogized by tie
bards, having his arrival announced with the sound of conchs


and bugtes and placing the sandals of his worshipful
brother on his head and taking white umbrella adorned
with white garlands and white Chowries decked with gold
and worthy of being used by the kings. Thereupon with
the sound of the horses’ hoofs and cars, conchs and
hugles the earth shook, And the whole city went to
Nandigram. And beholding the Wind-god’s son, Bharata
said,—"“Didst thou not resort to the usual fickleness of the
monkeys? We do not behold the worshipful Rama, the
descendant of Kakutstha--the slayer of foes. Nor do we
behold the monkeys assuming shapes at will”? Having
been addressed with those words, Hanuman replied, commu-
nicating unto Bharata, having truth for his prowess, the truth,
—"Having reached the trees, covered by the favour of Vara-
dwaja, with fruits and flowers and pouring honey,the monkeys
are emitling noise like maddened black bees, O slayer of
foes, this boon was granted him (Rama) by V&sava.
(Varadwaya) is treating him with his army with all hospitali-
ty. Hear the dreadful noise of the delighted monkeys.
Methinks the monkey host hath crossed the river Gomati.
Behold the hvge upheaval of dust towards the Sd/a forest.
Methinks the monkeys are agitating the graceful Sd/a forest.
Behold there at the distance the car resembling the Sun,
This celestial car Pashpaka, constructed by Bralma’s mind,
was obtained by the high-souled (&ma) after having slain
Ravana with his friends. This celestial car, resembling the
wewly risen Sun, coursing at will and carrying Rima (was


* A kind ef sweet meat,


VUDDHAKANDAM, 1539


gained) by the favour of the Giver of wealth, (here a
the two heroic borthers—the descendants of Raghu with
Vaidehi, the highly effulgent Sugriva and the Rakshasa
Bibhishana. Thereupon with the sound of “there is Rama”
there arose a joyous noise reaching the abode of the celestials
from among women, children, the young and the old,
Thereupon descending upon the earth from chariots,
elephants and horses all people beheld him (Rama) stationed
onthe car like unto the moon in the sky. And facing
Raghava and with- folded hands Bharata delightedly
worshipped him with agreeable words, Arghya and water to
wash his feet. There appeared in the car constructed by
Brahma’s mind the elder brother of Bharata having expansive
eyes like the immortal weilder of thunder-bult. Thereupon
Bharata bumbly saluted his brother Rama seated on the top of
the car like unto ihe Sun ou the summit (of the mount Meru).
And commanded by Rama that excellent car drawn by ganders
got down on the earth with great velocity. And ascending
that car, Bharata, having truth for his prowess, reaching
Rama, delighted, again bowed unto him. And raising
Bharata up who had been seen after a long time and placing
lim on his lap Kakutstha, delighted, embraced him. There-
upon Bharata, the slayer of fues, bowel unto Vaidehi and
welcomed Lakshmana. And the son of Kaikeyi (then iu turn)
embraced Sugrtiva, Jambabana, Augada, Mainda, Dwivida,
Nila and Rishava, And he then embraced Sushena, Nala,
Gab&ksha, Gandham&daua, Sarabha, and Panasa. Aud
assuming human shapes, those monkeys, assuming shapes
at will, delightedly enquired after Bharata’s well-being.
And embracing Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys, the
highly effulgent prince Bharata, the foremost of the
pious, said—“ O Sugriva, thou art our fifth brother,
From brotherliness groweth friendship and doing injury
is the sign of an enemy.” And Bharata then address-
ed Bibbishana wilh soothing words—“‘It is by fortune that


#540 R44 YANA,


through your help he hath accomplished such a difficult
work.” Thereupon the heroic Satrughna saluting Rama and
Lakshmana, respectfully bowed unto Sit3. And having
approached his mother, pate and pulled down with grief,
Rama humbly touched her feet and enhanced her delight.
And thereupon saluting Sumitr4, famed Kaikeyi and all his
mothers he approached the priests. Thereupon all the
citizens with folded hands welcomed him saying—"Welcome
att thou, O thou of long arms! O thou the enhancer of
Kavgalya’s joy !’ And the elder brother of Bharata observed
the folded hands of the citizens like so many blown lotuses.
And himself taking the sandals of Rama, Bharata, conversant
with piety, placed them at the feet of that lord of men.
Thereupon Bharata with folded hands spoke unto Rama,
saying—This all thy kingdom, which thou didst leave to
my care, I] return thee. Blessed is my birth to-day and
accomplished is my desire, since I behold thee again as king
in Ayodhy& after thy return, Do thou examine thy wealth
treasury, palace and army. By thy favour I have increased all
these ten fold.” Hearing Bharata speak in that wise and
beholding him devoted to his brother all the monkeys and
the Rakshasa Bibhishana shed tears, Thereupon placing
Bharata, in delight, on his lap, Raghava, with his army in that
car, proceeded towards Bharata’s abode. And reaching
Bharata’s palace Raghava with bis army descended upon the
earth. Thereupon R&ma said to the excellent car—*Do
thou (now) goto Vaisrévana—I do permit thee.” There-
upon being thus commanded by Rama, that excellent car,
proceeding towards the north, reached the abode of the Giver
of wealth. That celestial car Pushpaka had. been taken
away by the Rikshasa (Ravana); but now at the words
Rama it reached (again) the Giver of wealth. And touching
the feet of his priest the powerful Raghava sat on a separate
and excellent seat like unto Sakra, the lord of immortals
(by the side of} Vrikashpats.


YODDHAKANDAM. sat


SECTION cxxx.


Thereupon having placed her palms on his head
Bharata, the enhancer of Kaikeyi’s joy. spoke unto his elder
brother Rama, having truth for his prowess, saying, —" Abid-
ing by my mother’s request thou didst confer this kingdom
upon me; Ido return thee the kingdiom thou didst give
me. Like unto a young one unable to carry a heavy burden
thrown off by a powerful bull I am unable to carry this buge
burden (of the kingdom). I do consider this kingdom
infested with thieves, difficult to govern, as it is difficult to
re-construct a bridge broken down by a powerful current
of water. As an ass cannot follow the course of a horse and a
crow cannot follow that of a gander, so am _ unable, O hero,
O slayer of foes, to follow thy footsteps. Ifa tree, planted
inthe inner appartment of a house, growing huge with a
big trunk and many branches, is dried up as soon it
blossoms without bearing fruits, bis object for whom
it is planted, becomes fruitless, And this simili, O
thou of Jong-arms, shall prove good in thee, if dost thou
not, our master, govern us, O lord of men, who are thy
servants. Let the world, O Raghava, behold thee installed
(to-day) like unto the powerful mid-day Sun burning in
effulgence. Do thou sleep and rise up with the sound of
stringed instruments, womens’ girdles and MNupuras and
charming songs. Do thou govern the people as long as the
solar system exists and as far as the earth extends,”
Hearing the words of Bharata, Rama the conqueror of
enemies’ cities, saying, —"So be it” sat on an excellent seat.
Thereupon at the command of Satrughna, expert, skilful
and quick-handed barbers gathered round Raghava. At
first, Bharata, the highly powerful Lakshmana, Sugriva the


1542, RAMAYANA.


lord of monkeys, and Bibhishana the lord of Rakshasas
bathed. Thereupon shorn of his matted hairs, bathed, with
paste excellent garlands and precious clothes on, he
appeared there shining in grace. The valiant and graceful
Satrughna, the upholder of the dignity of Ikshwaku race,
himself got ready the dresses for Rama and Lakshmana.
And all the high-minded wives of Dagaratha with their own
hands decked Sit& with various charming (ornaments).
Thereupon Kaugaly&, dolighted and fond of her son, herself
with great care, decorated the wives of monkeys, Thereupon
at the words of Satrughna, the charioteer by name Sumanira
got ready the perfectly beautiful car, And beholding that
celestial car, bright as the fire of the sun, stationed before
him, Rama, having long-arms, the conqueror of enemies’
cities, ascended it. Sugriva and Hanuman, graceful like
Mahendra, bathed, dressed in celestial clothes and wearing
excellent Kundalas, proceeded (to view the city), And
then went Sit& and all the wives of Sugriva decorated with
all ornaments and wearing excellent Kundalas, anxious to
behold the city. All the ministers of king Dagaratha in
Ayodhya began to held consultation respectfully with the
priest, Asoka, Vijaya and Siddbartha, with undivided mind,
consulted with each other about the welfare of Rama as well
as that of the city. (Thereupon they ardered the servants)
saying,—''Do ye collect materials necessary for the auspicious
installation of the high-souled (Rama) worthy of being
crowned with victory”. The priest and the ministers having
ordered thus all speedily issued out of the city to behold
Rama. Like unto the thousand-eyed Indra in his car drawn.
by horses the blameless Rama, seated in his car, proceeded
towards the excellent city. Bharata took up the reins,
Satrughua held the umbrella and Lakshmana began to fan
mun on the head with Chowrtes. And Bibhishana, the lord of
R&kshasas standing on one side, took up the white Chowrte
shining like the second moou, There was audible the sweet


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1543


encomium of Rama chanted by the crowd of ascetied in
‘the sky, the celestials and the Marutas. Thereupon the
highly effulgent Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys, got up
upon an elephant named Satrunyaya resembling a mountain.
And riding nine thousand elephants proceeded the monkeys
assuming human shapes and adorned with various ornaments.
And with the music of conches and bugles that foremost
of men entered the city abounding in houses. (And the
citizens) beheld Raghava enter the city with a graceful person
and seated in the car. And they having ‘bowed unto that
descendant of Kakutstha- were welcomed by him. And
they followed that high-souled one encircled by his brothers.
And surrounded by his courtiers, Brahmanas and subjects
‘Rama appeared beautiful like unto the Moon encircled
by stars. And he went preceeded by men who play on
stringed instruments, by people with Karataf and Sustika
in their hands and by men chanting delightedly auspicious
songs, Persons with Adshaga and gold in their hands, kine,
girls, Bralimanas and persons with Modaéa in their hands
went before Rama. Thereupon before the ministers Rama
began to describe the friendship of Sugriva, the prowess of
the Wind-god’s son and the works accomplished by the
monkeys, And hearing of the works of the monkeys and
the prowess of the Rakshasas, the inhabitants of the city of
Ayodhy& attained to astonishment. Having related thus
{the works of the monkeys) the graceful Rama encircled by
the monkeys entered (the city of) Ayodhy& abounding in
delighted and plump persons. Thereupon the citizens
hoisted up flags upon every house and he reached the pic-
furesque abode of his ancestors inhabited by the descend-
ants of Ikshwaku. And having reached and entered his
ancestral palace and bowed unto Kaugalya, Sumitra and
Kaikeyi, the high-souled prince, the enhancer of the joy of
the descendants of Raghu, addressed Bharata the foremost
of the pious, with sweet words instinct with meaning, saying,


1532 RAMAYANA


—"Do thou set apart for Sugriva my huge and excellent
palace abounding in pearls and Vaidurjas.” Hearing those
words, Bharata, having truth for his prowess, taking Sugriva
by the hand, conducted him to the palace. And commanded
by Satrughna, (servants) speedily entered (that palace) with
oil, lamps, bedsteads and beddings. Thereupon the highly
effulgent younger brother of Raghava spoke unto Sugriva,
saying,~-""Do thou, G lord, order some (to bring water)
for Rima’s installation.” And Sugriva conferred upon four
leading monkeys” four golden jars crested with diverse
jewels and said to them,—"Do ye so conduct, O monkeys,that
ye may return by the dawa with the jars filled with the
water of the four oceans.” Being thus addressed by the
high-souled (Sugriva) the monkeys resembling the elephants
speedily rose up in the welkin like unto quick-coursing
vultures. Jambavana, Hanum&n, the monkey Vegadarshi and
Rishabha brought the jars filled with water from five hundred
tivers. Sushena, gifted with prowess, brought that jar
crested with gems, filled with water from the Eastern Ocean.
And Rishabha speedily brought water from the Southern
Ocean, And Gabaya brought, from the great Western Ocean
‘in that golden jar, water perfumed with the fragrance of
red sandal and camphor. And the virtuous-souled Wind-
god’s son, gifted with all accomplishments and the prowess
of Garuda and Wind-god, brought, speedily from the
Northern Ocean, water in that jewelled jar. And beholding
water thus brought by the leading monkeys for the installa-
tion of Rima, Satrughna, with his ministers, communicated
that unto the leading priests and friends. Thereupon
the selfcontrolled Vasishtha, striken in years, along with
other Bralimanas placed Rama with Sité on a jewelled
seat. Vasishtha, Vijay&, JavSli, Katyiyama, Goutama and
Bamadeva, sprinkled that foremost of men, with clear and
fragrant water as Vasus did the thousand eyed Vasava.
(He was then sprinkled by) the R:#tigas, Brahmanas, maidens


PUDDHAKANDAM. 1545


ministers, soldiers and the merchants all delighted. (Thefe-
upon) with the juice of Oskadhis* (he was sprinkled by) the
celestials stationed in the sky, the deities presiding over
» four quarters and all other celestials collected. And having
placed him on a seat crested with various jewels in the arena
decorated with gold, various jewels and rich parapbarnalia,
(he placed on his head) the jewelled crown made by Brahma,
brilliant and with which in the days of yore Manu and other
kings, born in his race, were installed. And being decked
by the high-souled Vasishtha with that crown, Raghava was
afterwards dressed with the celestial garments by the Ritiigas.t
And Satrugbna held the white and excellent umbrella and
Sugriva the lord of monkeys took the white Chowrte. And
Bibhishana the lord of Rakshasas took up another Chowrie
resembling the moon. And the wind commanded by Vasava
conferred upon R&ghava, a garland of hundred golden
totuses, shining in their native lustre. And the wind com-
manded by Sakra conferred upon that lord of men a jewelled
garland crested with diverse gems. The intelligent and
worthy Rima being installed the celestials and the
Gandharvas sang and the Apsaras danced. The earth was
filled with crops, the trees with fruits and the flowers were
fragrant on the occassion of R&ghava’s installation. And
that foremost of men conferred upon the twice-born ones
one million of horses, hundred thousand cows and hundred
thousand bulls. ‘And R&ghava again conferred upon the
Brahmanas thirty crores of golden coins and diverse costly
ornaments and clothes. Thereupon that lord of men conferr-
ed upon Sugriva a celestial garland brilliant like the ‘rays
of the Sun and crested with gold and jewels. And he, gilted
with intelligence, conferred upon Angada, Vali’s son, two
Angadas{ brilliant as the rays of the moon and made of
* An annual plant or herb—one that dies after becoming ripe.


+ A domestic chaplain—a family priest.
$ A kind of ornament worn on upper arms.


194


1546 RAMAYANA,


Baidurja. And Rama conferred upon Sit& an excellent pear!
necklace crested with precious jems, celestial clothes and
various excellent ornaments. And taking off the necklace
from her person Vaidehi, the daughter of king Janaka,
conferred it upon the Wind-god's son remembering the
services (rendered by him) and cast her looks again and again
upon her lord and the monkeys. And beholding that (Rama)
capable of reading the gestures, spoke unto the daughter of
king Janaka, saying—"O fortunate and beautiful lady, do
thou confer this necklace upon him with whom thou art
pleased.” Thereupon the lotus-eyed (Sit) conferred that
upon the Wind god’s son. And Hanuman, the foremost of
monkeys, in whom perpetually exist, energy, forgiveness,
fame, skillfullness, prowess, humility, tactics, manliness,
valiance and intellect, appeared with that necklace like a
mountain beautified with the rays of the moon and white
clouds. And all other elderly and leading monkeys were
respectively honoured with clothes and ornaments, And
being honoured by Rama of unwearied actions with enough
of jewels and other wished-for objects, Bibhishana, Sugriva,
Hanum&n, Jambhab&n and other leading monkeys, delighted,
returned to their respective habitations. Thereupon, the lord
of earth and the slayer of foes conferred,all wished-for things,
upon Dwivida, Mainda and Nila. And beholding (the
instatlation of Rama) the high-souled monkeys, taking
leave of the lord of earth, went to Kishkindh&. And be-
holding the inauguration of Rama, Sugriva, the foremost
of monkeys, honored by Rama, repaired to the city of Kish-
kindhi. And having obtained his own kingdom, the
greatly famous and virtuous-souled Bibhishana, with all the
Rakshasas, repaired to the city of Lanki. Having slain
his foes, the highly generous and glorious Rima, ruled in
great delight, the kingdom extending all over the earth.
And Rima, fond of the pious, spoke unto Lakshmana, con-
versant with piety,saying—“O thou conversant with piety, do


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1547


thou with me and four-fold forces, govern this kingdom, miled
by our predecessors. Like unto our ancestors do thou now
carry the burden of an associate in the throne.” When the son
of Sumitra did not accept the heir apparentship albeit solicited
earnestly again and again, the high-souled (RAma) conferred
upon Bharata that dignity. And that son of king performed
various sacrifices such as Paundartka,*Aswamedhat, Bajimedha
and others, And governing the kingdon for ten thousand years
Raghava porformed ten horse-sacrifices with excellent horses
and profuse presents, And that highly powerful Rima,baving
his arms extended up to the knee-joint, having a spacious
breast and Lakshmana as his attendant,ruled the earth (in this
wise). And obtaining that excellent kingdom, the virtuous-
souled Raghava performed many sacrifices with his sons,
brothers and friends, And Rama governing the kingdom,
the widows were not distressed and there was no fear from
voracious animals or from diseases. The people were saved
from the thieves and there was no other trouble. And the
old were not constrained to perform the funeral ceremonies
of the children. All were delighted and devoted to pious
observances. And beholding Rama they did not envy one
another. And Rama governing the kingdom, (people) lived
for thousand years and had thousand children—they were
freed from diseases and sorcow. And the trees bore fruits
and flowers perpetually—there were showers at will and
the wind blew pleasant. And the people delighted engaged
in their respective works and the subjects grew pious and
truthful, under Rama’s regeme, and were devoted to the
observance of all pious works and gifted with all auspicious
marks. And R&ma ruled-the kingdom for ten thousand
years. And this sacred Epic, the first of its kind, affording
piety, fame, and long life, and describing the conquest of
the kings, was composed by Valmiki in the days of yore,


* Akind of sacrifice.
+ A kind of sacrifice in which a horse is slain.


1548 RAMAYANA,


He, who on this earth, shall hear (this story) shall be divested
of sins. People, wishing for children, shall obtain the same
and those, wishing for riches, shall get by them. Thus
people on this earth shall attain to their wished-for objects
hearing of this Rama's installation—the king may conquer
the earth and subdue his foes. Females may obtain sons
(in the same way) as Kaugaly& gave birth to Rama, Sumitra
to Lakshmana and Kaikeyi to Bharata. Hearing the story
of this work describing the victory of Rama of unwearied
actions one may attain to along life. He, who with devo-
tion and having his anger subdued, shall hear the story of
this epic written by Valmiki in the days of yore sball get
over all troubles. And hearing the story of the Epic
composed by Valmiki in the days of yore, one living in
foreign countries, shall return home and enjoy in the
company of his friends. Hearing this people shall
secure all their wished-for objects from R&ghava and
the celestials shall be greatly delighted. When this book
is kept in a house it becomes free from the disturbance
of evil spirits. Hearing this a king may conquer the earth,
and one living in a foreign country fareth well. If a
female, during her monthly course, hears the story, she shall
give birth to an excellent son. By reading and worshipping
this ancient history people are freed from all sins and
attain to a long life. The Kshatryas, bending low their heads,
should hear this daily from the Brahmanas, Hearing or
reading the whole of Ram&yana, forsooth shall people get
sons and riches. Rama is ever pleased with him. He is the
ever-existing Vishnu—the first God, the huge-armed Hari,
Narayana and Lord. This ancient work produceth such
fruits, May good betide ye. Do ye openly declare that
Vishnu's prowess may increase. The celestials shall be greatly
delighted for reading or hearing this story of Rama and the
Progenitors shall be always pleased. Those, who shall
write this story of Rama first recorded by the Rishi (Valmiki)


YUDDHAKANDAM. 1549


shall reach the region of Brahma. Hearing this people
attain to, on this earth, multiplied relations, increased
wealth and crops, beautilul wives, excellent bappiness, and
the accomplishment of all desires. They attain to long life,
health, fame, intellect, prowess, and good brothers, Therefore
it behoveth those good men, who wish fur prosperity, to hear
this story perpetually.


THE END OF YUDDHAKANDAM.
