VOL. V. PARTS XVI-Xx.
THE .
RAMAYANA. .
Transtatsp inTO Encuisu Prost From Time onrcivat
Saysxait ov Vatu.
ZD{TED AND PUBLISHED BY
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A.
Rector, Keshub Academy.
PRINTED BY
Girish CHANDRA CHACKRAVARTI,
‘Deva Press, 65/2, Beano Stxeer.
CALCUTTA.
1982,
FOR THE COMPLETE SET IN ADVANCE, INCLUDING POSTAGE.
Iw fpta Rs. 16, In Eurore £ 2.
THE
RAMAYANA.
TRansLaTED.InTO Excrist PRosz FROM THE ORIGINAL
SANSKRIT OF VALMIXI. |
—etetoo—
SUNDARA KANDA™M.
SDITED AND PUBLISHED BY
.
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A.
Rector, Keshub Academy.
PRINTED BY
GirRISH CHANDRA CHACKRAVARTI,
Deva Press, 652, BEADoN STREET.
CALCUTTA.
1892.


[All vights reserved.)


RAMAYANA.


SUNDARAKANDAM.


SECTION I.


‘HEN that repressor of foes* resolved to follow the path
of the Chfranas, in quest of the place where Sita was carried
off by Ravana. And bent on achieving a hard task, in
which he bad no help-maté and none to withstand,the monkey,
with his neck and head raised, resembled the lord of kine
And frightening fowls, and crushing trees with his breast,
and slaughtering numbers of beasts, that exceedingly power-
ful, intelligent and staid one began to range ateease in lapis-
hued lawns resembling water, like a lion bursting in energy.
And on the level of that foremo}ggpemountains, filled with
nonpareil Nagas, and embellished with natural and unmixed
metals, red. and dark-blue, and black ard pale; and pale-red,
and Iotus-hued, and variegated ; and crowded with god-like
Yakshas and Kinnaras and Gandharvas and Pannagas,
excellently attired,-Hanuman stationing himgelf, resembled
a Naga in a lake. Then joining his hands to the Sun,
Mahendra, Wind,t the Self-create, and all Beings, he set his


* Hanumin—-T
+ Bull.—T, .
$ Pavana. The commentator takes this worg in its literal meaning, He
that purifieth contemplative spirits by imparting knowledge, R&intouya wild
°


110


84 RAMAP ANA,


heart upon his journey. Then having,with his face to the East,
§oined his palms to his Sire, that blessed one began to attain
Proportions for journeying towards the South. And sure
as the sea increases on the occasion of a Parva, (Hanuman)
determined on his leap, experiencing exhilaration, began, in
the midst of the foremost monkeys, to increase for the behoof
‘of Rima. Attaining measureless magnitude, he desirous of
crossing over the ocean, pressed the mountain with his arms
and jegs. And roughly handled by the monkey, the mountain
anon shook for a while; and all the blossoms showered down
from the tops of the trees. And covered all over with heaps
of fragrant flowers thrown off from the trees, the entire
whountain wore one floral look. And afflicted by that one of
first-rate prowess, that mountain shed water, like an elephant
in rut. And hard beset by that powerful one, the mountain
Mahendra put out the golden, silvern and collyrium sheen
(that appertained thereto). And the mountain began
to cast forth huge crags contaiiting red arsenic; and its
middle resembled smoke embosoming a sparkling flame.
And sore tormented by the monkey engaged in harassing
them, all the creatures] dwelling in the caverns cried in
frightful tones. And that mighty chorus® of the creaturea
consequent on the mountain's agony filled the entire
earth, all the cardinal :pSints, and the groves. And snakes
bringing out their spacious hoods marked with blue streaks,
vomitting jefce fire, began to bite at the rocks with their
fangs. And those gigantic crags, bit at by those enraged.
(snakes) of virulent venom, flamed up with fire and were
shivered unto 4 thousand fragments. And those medicinal
herbs that grew there, albeit endowed with the virtue of
neutralizing poison, could not tame the fierceness of the


interpret the epithet as meaning Rama. This is reading into the author a
segse which the passage does not plainly yeild —T.
* Another reading is: segnakdsaiwasanndda—The clans of thase mighiy


SUNDARAKANDAM. s 875


venom of those serpents. Then, conceiving that the mountain
was being riven by Brahma Rakshasas, the ascetics, becom-"
ing agitated, aa well as the Vidyadharas together with their
females, began to flee away. And forsaking their golden
seats and cans on the drinking grounds, and costly vessels,
and water-pots plated with gold, and diverse suckable yiands
and meats of various kinds, and bucklers of bull hides, gold-*
hafted swords,—beings with wreathes on their necks,inebriate,
bearing red garlands and unguents, having red eyes resemb!-
ing lotuses, flew into the firmament. And fair ones decked
in chains and bangles and Keyuras and, bracelets,* struck
with amaze, with a smile rose in the sky along with their
paramours. And witnessing this mighty phenomenon;
Vidyadharas and Maharshis, mounted into thésky, gazing at
the mountain. And they heard the words of spirit-pervaded
ascetics, and Ch&ranas, and Siddhas, stationed in the azure
sky: “This mountain-like Hanum&n, son of the Wind, en-
deucd with exceeding vehemence, is anxious to cross over
the main—abode of Varuna. And undertaking an arduous
task in the interests of Rima and monkeys, this one wishes
to go to the other shore of the sea hard to reach.”
Hearing this speech of the ascetics, the Vidy&dharas saw
in the mountain that foremost of monkeys of immeasur-
able might. And that one resemblfhg fire shook and bristled
his down; and he set up a tremendous roar resembling a
mighty (rumbling) cloud. And springing up, be lashed his
tail furnished all over with hair and folds, like the king of
birds handling a serpent. And the tail of that one endued
with exceeding impetus, bent and brandished, seemed like
a gigantic serpent carried off by Garura. And the monkey
planted his arms resembling mighty clubs, fast (on the mount-
ain); and his waist became slender; and his legs were


* Porikdra, according to Kataka, implies efcellence, Tirtha says it means
deacelets, 01 follow hima—T.


876 . RAMA FANA.


contracted, And contracting his arms* and neck, that
‘Graceful and powerful one summoned energy, and strength,
physical and mental. And looking at his way from a distance,
Hanuman, raising his eyes up, and fixing his gaze at the
sky, suspended his breath in his breast. And planting his
feet ficmly, that one endowed with mighty strength, Hanuman,
foremost of monkeys, contracting his ears up, sprang forward;-
and that best of monkeys spoke unto the monkeys, saying,—
“As a shalt shot by Raghava, courses like the wind, so will
I course to Lanka ruled by Ravana. And if E£ fail to find
Janaka’s daughter m Lanka, I shall with the self-same speed
repair to the regions of the celestials. And if I do not find
Sita io Lanka, after taking so much trouble, J shall bring
the Rakshasa king bound, Either attaining complete success,
I shall come hither (back) ; or uprooting Lank& with Ravana
jn it, I shall carry it hither.” Having observed this, the
monkey Hanumi§n, foremost of monkeys, endowed’ with
speed, without pausing for thought, suddenly sprang up.
And that powerful monkey deemed himself like unto Suparna.
And as he flew up, the trees situated in that mountain, in
consequence of his violent rush, shrinking their boughs, rolled
over on all sides. And drawing up blossoming trees filled
with maddened lapwings, by ‘the vehemence of his flight,
he coursed on in the clear sky. And those trees borne up
by the vehemence of his flight, followed the monkey for
a while, lik@ friends "following a friend that hath set out for
afar country. And pulled up by the impetus of his (rushing)
thighs, Sd/as and other mighty trees followed Hanumin,
as an army folfows its monarch. And surrounded by innumer-
able trees having their tops crested with flowers, Hanuman
wearing @ mountain-like appearance, was wonderful to
behold. And those trees that were more ponderous, plunged
into the salt sea, as plunged the mountains into Varuna’s


* Above his shoulders.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 7 877


abode, afflicted with the fear of Mahendra.* And strewg
with various sprouts and buds and blossoms, the monkey
resembling a mass of clouds, looked lovely like a hill filled
with glow-worms. And uprooted by the force of his rush,
those trees, their flowers fallen off, plunged into the sea,
like friends returning lo their homes (after having accompa-,
nied their friend some way). Aud blown by the wind caused
by the monkey, the various variegated flowers of the trees
in consequence of their lightness, showered down on
the sea. And covered with heaps of fragrant flowers of
diverse hues, the monkey rcsembicd’a mass of clouds
embellished by lines of lightning. And the waters (of
the ocean) strewn with-blossoms carried off aby his niotion,
appeared like the sky garnished with charming stars (cresting
the same), And his arms stretched in the sky, seemed like
five-hooded snakes issuing from a mountain. And he ap;
peared as if he was drinking up the mighty deep with its
multitudes of waves, or as if that redoubtable monkey was
desirous of sucking up the sky itself. And as he coursed
the orbit of air, his eyes flashing like lightning, resembled
two craterst aglow on a mountain. And the eyes of that
foremost of tawny-hued ones resembled the sun and the moon
stationed in a vast yellow aureola. | And beside his coppery
nose, his face looked coppery, as looks the solar disc on the
approach of eve. And the uplifted tail of the Wind-god’s
offspring engaged in bounding, appeared beautiful in the
sky like the raiscd standard of Sakra. And the exceedingly
wise son of the Wind, Hanuman, having white teeth, with


“ The legend is that Indra or Mahendra—i. e, Indra the Great—once took
it into his head to clip the pinaions of all the mountains. Hence the
fright.—T. '

+ Parvatasthdvivinalam—like two fires on a mountain. It evidently means
two active craters in a mountain. At least this rendering, without missing
the scase, imparts a material sublimity to the passage rarely paralleled in
literature. The commentator, however, takes the word to mean forest-con-
flagration. £T,


878 : aeAwAraNna.


his tail coiled up, looked handsome like the sun with his
disc. And on account of his waist being deeply coppery,
that mighty monkey appeared like a mountain running a
mighty torreut mixed with minerals and red chalk. And
the wind that had got into the armpits of that leonine monkey
grho whs crossing over the main, roareth like clouds. Aud
as a meteor consisting of many smaller ones, darting from
above falleth down (to the earth), rushed on thet f-remost
of monkeys. And then that stalwart monkey resem.ing
the careering sun, resembled a mad elephant fettered by
the middle, whose bulk has increased immensely. And
as he coursed above, on account of the reflection cast by
his botly (on the bosom of the deep) the monkey* looked
like a bark swayed by the breeze. And wherever that mighty
monkey went about the sea, the state of things appeared to
wndergo a violent convulsion owing to impetus imparted by
his body. And that mighty monkey possessed of exceeding
speed, rushed on, raising multitudes of surges on the sea
by his breast resembling rock. And the wind begot of the
monkey as well as that of the clouds, issuing out, made the
dread-sounding ocean roll violently. And pushing up
multitudes Of high-heaving billows from the salt waters, that
tiger-like monkey rushed on, separating earth and heaven,
And that one endeved with vehement speed passed over
surges in theemighty main resembling Mandara or Meru; as
if counting themt. And the waters lashed up to the clouds
by the force (of his speed), looked like autumnal clouds
overspreading the sky. And then whales and alligators and
fishes and tortoises appeared plainly visible, like the persons
of individuals, when the cloth hath been taken off them. And
Bea-serpents, seeing that tiger-like monkey proceeding in
the sky, took him for Suparna himself. And the shadow of the
leoping monkey, measuring ten yojanas in width and thirty
° ‘© Under water.—T,
t by his progress.—T. bd


SUNDARSEANDAM. > 879


in length, seemed the more handsome in consequence of his
speed. And that shadow resembling masses of white clouds,
falling on the salt waters and following the wind-god’s son,
secmed exceedingly beautiful. And that exceedingly energetic
mighty monkey possessed of a gigantic body, appeared
spleidid in the unsupported arial way, like a winged mount-
ain, And the deep beside the course that was being”
vsnemently pursued by that elephantine monkey,was suddenly
tarned into a water-course.* And coursing through the regions
¢: fowls like the monarch of the feathered race, HanumSa,
pushing away masses of clouds, resembled the wind himself,
And collossal clouds scattered by the monkey, pale and crim-
son and blue and mangistha-hued, looked exceedingly lqvely:
And now entering into the clouds, and now emerging from
them, he looked like the moon, sometimes hid and sometimes
visible, And beholding that monkey engaged in boundi
with celerity, gods, Gandharbas and D&navas began to strew
blossoms (on him). And as He was leaping,the Sun did not burn
him ; and the Wind ministered unto him, for the success of
R&ma’s work, And the saints hymned his praises, as he was
leaping on in the sky. And applauding the ranger of forests,
they raised the voice of song. And sagas and ¥akshas, and
various (races of) Rakshasas, eulugized (him), on beholding
that tiger-like monkey, Hanum&n, if the act of bounding.
And Hanuman, that lord of monkeys, being engaged in the
act of bounding, the Ocean, wishing glory unto the race of
the Ikshwakus, thought within himself, ‘Truly shall I be
blamed of all persons if I do nut assist this lord of monkeys—
Hanuman. Reared Ihave been by Sagara, the foremost of the,
race of the Ikshwakus—-and this monkey is their counsellor.
It therefore doth not behove me to tire him out. It becometh
me to do that by which the monkey may take rest in me and,
relieved, may happily traverse the remaining way.” Having
. 3


* The sense is hard to hit. The commentator says,that agitated by Hanumfin'
speed, the clouds began to pour down showers on the ocean.—T,


BBo . RAMAYANA,


acrived at this wholesome resolution, the Ocean spake unto
“that best of mountains, Mainaka, hued in gold and situate ia
the waters, saying, “‘O lord, thou hast been placed here by the
king of celestials as an outer gate against the Asuras inhabit
ing the region under the earth, Thou too, from then, hast
been qvaiting at this gate, unapproachable by the Asuras,
rising up again and again and whose prowess is well-known
(unto the Lord of celestials). O mountain, thou art capable
of expanding thyself upwards, downwards and on thy sides.
Tdo command thee therefore, O best of mountains, to rise up.
That best of monkgys, the energetic Hanum&n, the performer
‘of mighty deeds, engaged in R4ma’s service, worn out with
“fatigne, waiteth above thee. Beholding the exhaustion of
that leader of tuonkeys, it behoveth thee to rise up.” Hearing
the speech of the Ocean, the golden mountain Mainaka,
«covered with tall trees and creepers, rose up instantly from
his watery bed. Like unto the Sun of bright rays rising out
of the watery expanse, he uplifted himself from the Ocean,
Being thus commanded by the Ocean, the great mountain,
covercd on all sides with water, immediately brought forth
his peaks. The sky was as if cleft by these golden summits
like unto tite rising of the Sun, inhabited by Ainnaras and
large Serpents. The golden summits of that mountain being
thus lifted up, the dark®blue sky assumed the golden hue,
And by thgse highly resplendent golden peaks that best of
mountaingassumed the brilliance of a thousand suns. Beholding
-before him that up-heaved mountain in the midst of the salt
“Ocean, Hanuman regarded it, as abarrier for aye. Like unto
Wind dispersing clouds, that mighty monkey with great velo-
city crushed down those up-lifted peaks with his breast. Being
thus crushed down by that monkey, the best of mountains,
being apprized of his prowess, began to shout with joy.
Thereupon, with a glad heart assuming the semblance of a
min ‘and stationing thimself upon his own summit, that
“mountain-chief addressed Hanum§n, saying, “Q best of


SUNDARAKANDAM. . 88:


monkeys, forsooth hast thou been engaged in this arduous
task. Coming down on my peak do thou take rest. This’
acean was reared by one born inthe family ef Raghus, And
beholding thee engaged on Rama's behoof ke is worshipping
thee. The best and everlasting virtue consists in returning
benefits unto one who hath benefitted us. Bent on retyrning
benefiis unto Raghu's race, he deserveth respect from thee.”
And to welcome thee properly I have been despatched by
him with the message—‘Traversing over a hundred yoyanas
this monkey hath been wora oat with fatigue ; let him voyage
to the remaining way after resting for a while on thy summit,
Do thou therefore, O best of monkeys, remain here and take
rest. And feasting on fhese many fragrant and sweet fruits
and roots, O foremost of monkeys, do thou “relieve thyself
of the toil and proceed. Q leader of monkeys, my relation
with thee is replete with many virtues and known all over
the three worlds. O Son of Maruta, Q best of monkeys, id
know thee to be the foremést of all monkeys. Even an ordi-
nary guest should be adored by him who abideth by virtue,
what of thee great as thou art ? O thou lion among monkeys,
thou art the son of Maruta, the foremost of celestiats and
art his equal in speed. Thou that art conversantewith virtue,
being worshipped, Maruta himself receiveth offerings, Thou
art therefore worthy of my adoration. Hearken, there is
another reason for it. O worshipful one, in olden times,
the mountains, gifted with wings, began tb range all quarters
with velocity like unto Garuda. They moving thus, the celes-
tials, the ascelies, and all creatures became almost faint with
fear of their falling down, Highly enraged sherefore, the
thousand-eyed Deity, the performer of hundred sacrifices,
sundered with his thunderbolt, the wings of hundreds and
thousands of them. When with his thunderbolt, the Lord
of celestials, wroth, approached me, 1 was all on a sudden
thrown down by the high-souled Wind? O best of monifeys
Iwas thus cast down in this salt ocean and preserved unhurt


Coarr


3s . RAMAYANA,


by thy ancestors having my wings hid. I shall therefore
‘adore thee and thou art object of my worship O Méruta!
And this my relation with thee, O foremost of monkeys, is
regnant with many virtues. The time for returning benefita
having arrived, O high-souled one, it behoveth thee to afford
ine and the ocean, satisfaction with a blessed heart. O best
“ot monkeys, relieve thyself of the fatigue and accept my
affectionate offerings, who am worthy of thy respect.*
Happy am I to see thee.” Being thus accosted by Main&ka,the
best of mountains, Hanum&n, the foremost of monkeys said,
saying :—"Pleaseé am I and thou hast shown me enough of
hospitality. Dothou give up thy wrath.t Business wants
‘me to go soon and the time is well-nigh spent. Besides I
have promised’ that I shall not halt at any intermediate
place.” Thereupon touching the hill with his hand: that
Jighly energetic monkey wended, smiling, his zrial way.
Thereat the ocean and the mountain respectfully looked to-
wards him and adored and welcomed him with blessings
worthy of the occasion. Leaving the mountain and the
ocean and rising high up, be proceeded in the clear welkin
traversing the zrial way.f Rising high up and casting his
look down én the hill, that foremost of monkeys proceeded
by the unsupported zerial track, Beholding this singularly
arduous work of Hanuma, the celestials,the Siddhas and the
ascetics all, praised him, All the celestials and others living
on its sunfmit, were highly pleased with the mountain arrayed
in gold and having beautiful sides. And the thousand-eyed
Vasava was also pleased. And greatly pleased that highly
intelligent SAchi’s lord, himself, addrassed that best of moun-
tains having picturesque sides, saying :—"Greatly delighted
am I, Q ford of mountains, O thou having golden peaks, ‘No


* For his relationship with Wind whose sou was Hanuman.—T.
¢ Wrath in consequence gf his inability to accept bis offerings —T.
© ¢ Pitupanthanam—the text means “his father's path” —Wind Pi Hanv-
‘min’s father the passage means—“zrlal way."—T.


SUNDARAKINDAM. 2 883


fear’ I do declare unto thee. Proceedest thou therefore, at
thy ease, O gentle one! Greatly bast thou helped Hanuman,
crossing fearlessly und unceasingly, over hundred yoyunas
so that he migt: not jall in danger. This monkey, is goin,
in the interests of Rima, Dacaratha’s son—and thou hast
welcomed hin to the best of thy might. Therefore J am
greatly pleased with thee.” Beholding that lord of celestiala
the performer ot an hundred sacrifices, highly gratified, that
+ best of mountains attained to an excess of joy. And having
received boons (from Indra) the Mountain occupied again
its pristine place. And Hanuman in a short time crossed
over the main. Thereupon the celestials along with Gan-
dharvas, Siddhas and the ascetics, spake unto Surast, the”
mother of serpents, resembling the Sun, #aying :—"The
highly effulgent son of Wind named Hanumin is crossing
over the main. Thou art required to throw obstacles in his ,
way fora while. Assuming therefore the semblance of a
terrible, grim-vieaged R&kshasa, resembling a huge mountain
and having terrible teeth and a face with coppery eyes,do thou
touch the welkin. We are anxious tolearn if he defeateth
thee by some means or cometh by grief.” Thus addressed the
worshipful Surasi, having been honored by the* celestials,
deformed and horrible and capable of exciting the fear of all
beings, and obstructing Hanum&in a3 be was coursing on,
said,—“O foremost of monkeys, thou hast been ordained as
my fare by the gods themselves. I will eat*thee up,—do thou
enter my mouth, Even this is the boon that was conferred on
me by the Deity.” Having delivered herself thus speedily,
she opening her mouth wide, stood before thee son of the
wind-god.’’ Thus accosted by Surasa, (Hanuman) with a
glad countenance, said—“‘Rima, son unto Dacaratha, had
entered the Dandaka forest in company with his brother,
Lakehmane, aud his wife, Vaidehi. He having created
hostility with the Rakshasas, Lis illustrious wife, Siti, ‘while
he was engrossed in some work, was carried away by Ravana.


At Rama’s command, I go to her as his envoy. Ii beboveth
"thee, living in (RAma’s) dominions, to lend him thy help.
Or having seen Mithila’s daughter, as well as Rama of
untiring deeds, I will enter thy mouth. This I promise thee
truly.” Thus addresse¢ by Hanuman, Suras&, capable of
"wearing forms at will, said,—None shall pass me without
being devoured by me,—even this is the boon that I have
received.” Then seeing him go away, the mother of the
Nagas, Surast, derious of essaying the strength of Hanum&n,
spoke. “O best of monkeys, thow shalt have to go, to-day,
after entering my mouth. Even this is the boon that wae
(conferred on me by the Deity.” Having said this. swiftly,
“she sextending her capacious mouth wide, stood in front of
the wind-god’s son. Thus addressed by Surasi, that ‘fore-
most of monkeys, waxing wroth, said,—"Extend thy mouth so,
that thou mayst contain me.” Having said this unto Suras&,
having her mouth measuring ten yoyanas, Hanuman enlarged
himself as many yoyanas Theredt-Suras& enlarged her mouth
twenty yoyanas. And beholding her* extended mouth with a
Jong tongue, wondrous dreadful, like unto hill itself, and re-
sembling clouds, measuring twenty yoyanas, the intelligent
son of the wind-god, Hanuman, enlarged, made himself
‘measure thirty yoyanas. Threat, Suras&, extended her
mouth forty yoyanas, and thereupon the heroic Hanumin
attained the altitude of fifty yoyanas, And Surask enlarged
her mouth sixty‘yoyanas; and the heroie Hanum&n anon
heightened himself seveuty yoyanas. And Surasd widened
her mouth eighty yoyanas; and Hanumfn like unto Fire
“raised himself ninety yoyanas. And Swrasd enlarged her
mouth an hundeed yoyanas. Thereat diminishing his person
Tike unto a eloud, the wind-god’s son at that moment
measured one thumb only. Then entering her mouth and
toming out of it, that exceedingly powerful and graceful


“Tra Tat dristed—Sering’ this, occurs twice in this passage, I render it
only—T, C


SUNDARARANDAM. 885


one, stationing himself in the sky spoke thus. "O des-
cendant of Daksha, 1 have entered into thy mouth. b
bow down unto thee. I will repair to where Vaidehi is. Thy
boon hath proved true. Seeing him out of her mouth like
the Moon out of the mouth of R&hu, the venerable Surasé
spoke unto the monkey in her native form, saying,-—"For
“compassing thy end, go, O foremost of monkeys, O mild.
one, at thine ease. And bringing unto Vaidehi tidings
touching the high-souled Raghava do thou meet her.”
Witnessing that third act* of Hanum{n’s hard to perform,
all beings extolled the monkey exclaming, ‘Excellent!
Excellent!” Then he, resembling the wind in rush, arrived
at the irrepressible ocean—abode of Varuna—went on, enve+
loping the welkin, on the zrial way, visited by showers,
ranged by fowls and Gandharbas, graced by the iris ; embelli-
«shed by shining vehicles rolling on, drawn by lions, or
elephants, or tigers, or bird-serpents; presided over by
eminently pious and righteous persons who have won
the regions of heaven; and therefore appearing as if
adorned by the (five) Fires; of the touch of Agant or Vayra;
(ever) served by Fire bearing sacrificial oblations; garnished
by planets and stars and astral luminaries, and the Sun
and the Moon; thronged with Maharshis, and Gandharbas
and N&gas, and Yakhas; and pure, and specktess ;—the
support of the universc—inhabited by Vigwivasu; lorded
over by the elephants of the king of the Celestials; the
orbit of the Sun and Moon, endowed with auspiciousness
constituting the canopy of this live world; blameless; and
made by Brahma; crowded with countless heroes, and
Vidyadharas. And the wind-god’s son Hanumin, scattering
clouds like the very Wind himself, coursed on in the arial
way like Garuda. And mighty clouds, hued like Kd/dgurut

* The third feat, remarks RamAnuya, is Hanuman's issuing out of Surasd's
mouth. The preceding two are not mentioned.~T, ‘°

+ A kipd of alco or agailochum—Witson.—T. a


886 RAMAYANA.


red, and yellow and sable, on being dispersed by the monkey,
durst into brilliance. And again and again entering into
the clouds and emerging out of them, he resembled the Moon
during the rains mow entering (into clouds) and uow isauing
Oat of them. And everywhere Hanum&n, son unto the wind-
god coursing through the unsupported sky, looked tike
tthe monarch of mountains furnished with wings. And it
came to pass that beholding him in the act of bounding, a
Rakshasi named Sinhik&, of great age, and capable of wea-
ring forms at will, thought within berself,—"Today after a
long tapse of time 1 shall have my fare. This mighty creature
hath after a long time come within my power.” Having
thought thus in her mind, she seized (Hanumfn’s) shadow.*
On fis shadow being secured, the monkey reflected, —“As
a mighty berk is retarded in its course in the sea by
adveise wind, have J, my prowess paralysed, been suddenly
ébstructed in my career.” Then tooking above and below
and sideways, the monkey saw<a mighty creature arisen
from the salt waters. And seeing that one of a distorted
countenace, the wind-god’s son thought—"This one is,
without doubl, the creature of wonderful form, possessed of
exneeding prowess,—given to securing its prey by meaus
of its shadow,—which had been described by the monkey-king.
And concluding her to be:Sinhik& from her act,f the intelli-
gent monkey attaining a gigantic body, increased himself,
like a mags‘ of cleuds during the rains. And seeing the
enlarged body of the mighty monkey, she extended her
mouth measuring the sky and the nether regions. And roac+
‘ing like unto a mass of clouds,she rushed against the monkey.
Thereat, that ‘intelligent and mighty monkey marked her
deformed and huge mouth, her bedy and its asticulated mem-
bers. And the redoubtable monkey hard as the thunderbolt,


‘Brahma had confersed on her a boon that she showkd secure her prey by
pulling att by means of its Shadew—T,
4 te, of securing kis shadow —T. Pa


SUNDARAKANDAM. : 887


contracting himself in a moment, threw himself into her,
mouth. And the Siddhas and Charanas aaw him sink in her
mouth, as the full Moon is taken by R&hu during a Parva.—
Thea tearing her limits by means of his sharp claws, the
monkey, endowed with the celerity of thought, vehemently
eprang forward. ‘Then slaying her by his acuteness of,
sight, endurance and skill, that heroic, self-controlled monkey
again began to swell himself amain. Her heart having been
crushed out by Hanum&a, she, rendered lifeless, fell into
the water. The self-create had created him for compassing
her destruction. And seeing Sinhik& speedily slain by the
monkey, and fallen, creatures ranging the sky addressed,
that foremost of monkeys, saying,—‘'Terrible is the deed
that thou hast performed to day. Mighty was the creature
that hath been slaughtered by thee. Compass thou thine
wished-for end without let, O foremost of monkeys. He, Q,
chief of monkeys, that, like, thee, is endowed with endurance,
sharp sightedness, sense, and ability, doth not feel depressed
in action.” Honored by these and wished well as to bis
purpose, that monkey, worthy of being honored, set out,
enveloping the sky, like him that subsisteth on serpents.*
And it came to pass that as he had almost afrived at the
other shore (of the ocean), he looking, about on all sides at
the end of an hundred yoyanas saw a range of woods. And
as he went on, that best of monkeys saw, an iskand decked
with diverse trees, and groves pertaining Malaya. And he
surveyed the sea, and lands bordering thereon, and trees
gtowing on the sea shore, and the countenances of the
spouses of the Sea, And surveying his own person resem-
bling a mighty mass of clouds, and as if closing up the sky,
that self-possessed one ascertained his course of action.”
Soon as the Rakshasas eball behold my enlarged body and
the vehemence of my motion, they, shall be seized with
curiosity concerning me.” Thus thought that magnanimous


ge


* Garuda.


888 . REMAFANA.


one. Thereat diminishing that person of his resembling a
mountain,that self-possessed one, purged of ignorance, resum-
ed his natural shape. And diminishing that form into the
qmallest compass, Hanum&n remained in his native form,
like that depriver of Vali’s prowess, Hari, after he had placed
_ his three steps. And thus wearing various graceful forms,
that one, acting after reflection, having come to the other
shore of the ocean incapable of being reached by others,—
on looking over his (immensely magnified person), reduced
his body (to its former size), And that high-souled one
resembling a closdy pavilion, alighted on the (foremost)
summit of the splendid mountain, Samva’; crested with
picturesque peaks ; and abounding in Aetakas, udddlakas and
cocoanuts. Add reaching the shore of the sea, and beholding
Lanka on the top of that foremost of mountains, the monkey,
srenouncing his native form, fell on that mountain, agitating
birds and beasts. And having by main force bounded over
the ocean heaving with surges, and rife with Danavas and
Panagas, he alighting on the shore of the mighty main, be-
held Lank like unto Amaravati.


SUNDARARANDAM. . BB,


SECTION Ww


.

Havine crossed over the ocean incapable ot being
vepressed, that one endowed with great strength, stayiag at,
the plateau of Chitrakuta, and having refreshed himself, cast
his eyes on Lanka. And covered with showers of blossoms
poured down by the trees, that monkey possessed of prowess
then appeared there like Pushpamaya.* And having cleared
an hundred yeyaxas, that monkey gifted with first-rate
prowess, did not heave sighs or feel auy fatigue. “I am
competent to bound over many hundreds of yofanas, What
then is this end of the ocean measuring an hifhdred yojanas
only ?” And that foremost of those endowed with energy
and the prime of monkeys,—gifted with speed, went to,
Lank&,{ having crossed over the mighty main. And sceing
blue lawns, and perfumed woods, replete with honey and filled
with mountains, he held his way by the central thoroughfare.
And that foremost of monkeys, the energetic Hanum&n, went
by hills filled with trees, and ranges of blossoming woods.
And stationing himself in that mountain, the offspring of the
Wind-god beheld woods and groves and Lank& established
at the brow of the mountain. And that elephant of a monkey
surveyed Savalas, and Karzskdras, and dates ig full flower,
Piydlas, Muchulindas, Kutajas and Ketakas,«Piyangus’
warm with aroma, and Nipas, and Sapiachchhadas ; Asanas,
Koviddras, and flowering Karaviras, and trees bearing
blossoms, filled with swans and Xérandavas,eand covered
with lotuses and lilies ; and charming sporting hillst and:
various watery expanses; and extensive tracts covered


* A monkey so named.—T,
+ Descending, remarks the comentator, from the mountain-summit-~T
+ Sporting hills according to Kataka. According to others, divira ineans @
grove in gengral.—T. =
“12


90 . RIMAPANA.


with diverse trees bearing flowers and fruits at all seasons,
‘and gardens exceedingly beautiful to behold. And drawing
near unto Lank& embellished with lilies and environed by
a moat filled with lotuses, that one graced with auspicious-
ness, that graceful monkey, Hanumas, beheld Lank& vigilantly
guarded by R&vana, in consequence of Sit& having been
“carried away,—with Rikshasas bearing fierce bows ranging
all around,—that mighty and captivating capital surrounded
by a golden wall, filled with edifices resembling cliffs and
looking like autumnal clouds, and elevated yellowish high-
ways; abounding ip hundreds of banners mounted on the
walls, and beautified with pennons and streamers ; with noble
golden gateways painted with plants 5 and resembling the
metropolis of the very sovereign of the celestials. And that
graceful monkey saw Lank& situated on the top of the
mountain, filled with splendid yellow-white palaces, like unto
a city stationed in the sky: ruled by the lord of Rakshasas
and reared by Vigwakarm& himself. And the monkey, Hanu-
mio, beheld Lank&, as if moving in the sky: with her walls
furnished with daises for her hips, the immense waters and
woods for her cloth, Sa¢aghnis and darts for her hair-ends :
and pennors on her walls for ear-rings,—built as if by the
agency of the Mind ; and constructed by Vigwakarma himself.
And arriving at the Nortitern gate resembling the mansion
of Kailica, and cleaving, as it were, the welkin, and as if
holding the firmament with lofty and glorious edifices, and
observing the sea; his dreadful enemy, R&vana ; the city
teeming with poisonous snakes,—as well as the method of
defence (displayed in it)h—the monkey reflected,—“Even if
the monkeys came here, they should fail to achieve success ;
for Lank& is incapable of being taken in battle by the celes-
tials themselves, Even if the mighty-armed Raghava should
reach this terrible-looking and impregnable Lank® reared by
R&sana,what could he go ? Opportunity find I none either for
éonciliation with the Rakshasas, or for (winning them over) by


SUNDASRARANDAM. ; Sqx


gifts, or for sowing dissensions among them, or for conquers
ing them in fight. Of all the monkeys, four only endowed
with (exceytional) celerity,—viz. Vali’s son, Nila, the
intelligent king, and myself, have the power to come over
here. WhenI have ascertained whether Vaidehi is alive
or not, I shall, after interviewing Janaka’s daughter?think,
about this.” Then that elephantine monkey, stationed on
the summit of that mountain, for a while bethought himself
as to the success of Rama.* “I cannot in this form succeed
in entering the city of the Rakshasas, guarded by wily and
powerful Rakshasas. I should, while engaged in searching
for Janaki, deceive all the strong and highly energeti¢
Rikshasas gifted with prowess. For attaining this nvighty
object, it behoveth me to enter Lank& at night in a shape
invisible yet well suited to the end in view.” And beholding
the city in that state, difficult of being subdued by the
celestials and Asuras (combined), Hanum&n, sighing moment-
arily, thought within himself,—“How can I, without being
discovered by the impious lord of R&kshasas, Ravana,
succeed in seeing Janaka’s daughter, Maithili? How can
the work of Raima cognizant of self (be so managed
that it) may not be brought to naught? How’ can I see
Janaka’s daughter singly in secret? Actions on the very
eve of success, on being obstructed by adverse season
and place, and through the agency of unreflecting envoys,
come to nought, even as darkness is dispelled on sun-
rise. And in respect of what should be undertaken
and what not, even the certain decision (of a master assisted
by his counsellors), because of a heedless messenger,
doth not appear in all its beauty: messengers (foolish) yet
proud of their knowledge, bring every business to nought.
How can I so manage that my business may not suffer?
How can I avoid recklessness ?_ How cah my bounding, over
the deep bear fruit? On my being Seen by the Rikehasas,


§ * About rescuing his wife—T.


Sige RAMAYANA.


the work of R&ma cognizant of self, desirous of the destruc.
‘tion of Rfvana, shall be marred. Even if I wear a Rakshasa
form, I cannot anywhere remain undiscovered by the
Rikshasas. What shall I say of any other form? Even the
wind, I conceive. doth not stray here, unpereeived. Nothing
whatever is here that is unknown to the R&kshasas of
“redoubtable deeds. Should I stay here embodied in my
native form, I shall come by destruction; and the interest
also of my master shall suffer. Therefore, diminishing myself,
Fshall at night, for compassing the welfare of Raghava,
enter Lank& in my own form. Entering at night Ravana’s
capital difficult of access, I shall, obtaining entry into every
‘dwelling seek Janaka’s daughter.” Having made ‘up his
mind thus, tife heroie Hanum&n, extremely eager to see
Vaidehi, wished for the setting of the sun. On the sun
having set, at night the Wind-god’s son, contracting
his person, reducing himself to the dimensions of a cat,
became wonderful to behold. And at dusk, the powerfud
Hanumin, springing up, entered the charming city of Lank&
with its well divided highways; furnished with rows of
edifices having golden pillars, and net-works,—-resembling
the metropolis of the Gandharbas, And he saw that splendid
city containing seven-storied and eight-storied edifices,
studded with crystal ahd adorned with gold. And the
dwellings of the R&kshasas were embellished with these
fornaments). And* graceful golden gateways belonging to
the Rikshasas everywhere lent splendour unto Lank&
adomed all over. Beholding Lank&, wonderfel and of
inconceivable: loveliness, the mighty monkey, desirous of
beholding Vaidehi, became depressed and delighted at the
same time, And he (entered Lank’) engarlanded with yellow
edifices joined together, with the ornamented arches of her
gateways furnished with nets of precious gold; famed (all
‘evér the world); ruled by the arm of Ravana, and vigilantly
guarded by, night-rangers of dreadful strength. . And as


SUNDARAKINDAM. « 8935


if minietering unto him,* the Moon furnished with many
thousands of rays arose with the stars in the midst of the sky,
spreading lurar light over all creatures. And that heroic
monkey beheld the Moon possessing the sheen of a conch,
and hued like milk or the lotus-stalk, arisen and affoat (in
the welkin), like a swan swimming in a tank. e


SECTION 111.


°

Asssumine the quality of goodness and energy on
mount Lamva furnished with elevated summits, and, re-~
sembling long masses of clouds, Hanumfn, son unto thé
Wind-god capable of concluding in harmony with season,
possessed of exceeding strength—an elephant among
monkeys—entered Lanka by night, affluent with charm-
ing woods and waters—the city governed by Ravana;
beautified with edifices resembling autumnal clouds; sound-
ing like unto Vitapivatit herself—with infuriated elephants
(stationed) at her graceful gateways ; containing white gates
with ornamented arches ; resembling the handsome Bhogavati
inhabited and protected by serpents. And suddenly coming
to that (city) resembling Amarfvat?, scattered with clouds
charged with lightning, having hosts of luminaries, and
tumultuous with the roars of blustering blasts, —girt round
by a mighty golden wall,—ringing with the tinklings of tiny
bells ; and embellished with pennons,—he growing exceedingly
exhilarated, made towards the wall. And beholding the city
all round, furnished with golden doors; having quadrangular
courts composed of lapises; ornamented with plastered
jeweled pavements studded with all gems, crystals, and
pearls; with mad elephants :of burnished: gold and speckless

+ Alakajthe city of Kuvers, King of Yaksbas.—T. :


Ey ar KAMAPANA.


white silver; with stairs of lapises,—(doors) devoid of dust
* with their centres composed of crystal and with stately halls;
elegant,—and adjoining mansions seeming as if reaching up
to the heavens; resounding with Kraunchas and peacocks; fre-
“quented by swans; and everywhere resonant with the sounds
of tgumpets and ornaments. And then beholding the city
Lank&, resembling VaswokasSra,* and appearing to mount to
the welkin, the monkey Hanumfin was filled with rapture.
And seeing the delightful, divine and prosperous city of
Lank& belonging to the lord of Rakshasas, that one endowed
with prowess thought within himself,—"This city protected
by the forces of Ravana with their hands holding upraised
* arm, is incapable of being forcibly subdued by any other.
This place cat be easily entered by Kumuda, and Angada, as
well as by that mighty monkey, Sushena ; and also by Mainda
, and Dwivida, And there is way also for the offspring of
“the Sun, and that monkey, Kugaparva, as well as of that
foremost of monkeys, Rikshya, and myself.” And haviog
witnessed the prowess of Righava, as well as the vigor of
Lakshmana, the monkey was filled with joy. And that
redoubtable monkey beheld the metropolis of the monarch of
the R&aksbasas; having for her cloth’ the sea; for her pendants,
cow-stalls and stables; for her breasts, turrets mounted on
the walls for discharghfg missils,—decked out like a damsél ;
with her darkness dispelled by bright lights and the mighty
planets. And as*he was entering, that tiger-like mighty
monkey son unto the Wind-god was met by the city in her
native shape. And seeing that best of monkeys, Lank&, ruled
by Ravana, arising of herself with her countenance rendered
deformed, stood before the heroic son of the Wind; and,
emitting a tremendous roar, addressed the offspring of the
Wind-god, saying, —“O thou that hast the woods for thy home,
who art thou? And on what errand hast thon come hither?
Tell me while yet thou hast thy vital powers left in thee.


SUNDARAKANDAM, . 895


O monkey, for certain thou art unable to obtain entry into
this Lanka, protected by the forces of Ravana, and carefully
guarded on ajl sides.” Thereat, the heroic Hanumin spoke
unto her staying in front of him,—*I shall tell thee all about
that anent which thou questionest me. Who art thou that
having deformed eyes stayest at the gate of this city? And
what for, O frightful one, dost thou rail at me in wrath ?”
H sing Hanuman’s speech, Lank&, capable of wearing
forms at will, waxing wroth addressed the Wind-god’s
offspring, saying,—“I, who am incapable of being repressed,
abiding by the mandate of the high-souled sovereign of the
Rakshasas, protect this city. Thou art unatle to enter this
city, passing me by. Thou shalt to-day, losing thy life
and slain by me, sleep ‘(the sleep of death).. O monifey,
Tam the City of Lank& myself. I every way guard (all
that is here.”) Hearing Lank&’s words, Hanuman, son
unto the Wind-god,—foremost of monkeys—exerting him-
self (to secure victory), stoodJike another hill, And seeing
her appear in the form of a deformed female, that foremost
and best of monkeys endeued with intelligence, possessed
of prowess, said,—"'I will behold the city of Lanka, crowned
with turrets, walls and ornamented arches. It 3s for this
that [ have come here. Great is my curiosity. I come for-
sooth to see the woods and groves and gardens of Lank& here,
as well as her principal edifices.” Hearing these words of
tis, Lanka capable of wearing forms at will,, againtaddressed
him in a speech fraught with disonant letters: “O"thou of
perverse understanding, O worst of monkeys, without (in the
first instance) vanquishing me, thou canst not to-day behold
this city ruled by the monarch of the Kakshasas.” Thereat
that tiger of a monkey said unto that female ranger of the
night,—"After seeing this city, O geatle one, I shall go away
even us [have come.” Thereupon, setting-up a mighty and
terrible roar,Lanka filled with vebemence, struck at Hanymaa
with her palm, And that tiger-like monkey, the energetic


Bg6 RAMAYANA,


offspring of the wind-god, on being lustily struck by Lanké,
emitted a tremendous roar. And (Hanum&n) fastened the
fingers of his left hand into a box, and transported with rage,
dealt it unto her. And considering that she was a female,
‘he did not give way to excessive wrath. And struck at (by
Hanumin), that ranger of the night, of a deformed face, her
body overcome, suddenly dropped to the earth, And the
energetic and heroic Hanum&n, seeing her measure her
lengtb,—in consideration of her being a female, was filled
with compassion. Thereat, exceedingly agitated, Lanka
addressed the moukey, Hanuman, in humble words, with
their letters faltering, — “O mighty-armed one, be propitious
‘unto me ! Do thou save me, O best of monkeys, O placid one.
Those that are gifted with strength’ and are endeued with
exceeding vigor, ever bear regard unto the dignity of the
scriptures, By thy prowess, O monkey, hast thou, O hero,
*O thou gifted with wondrous strength, vanquished me myself,
who am the City of Lank&. Listen to this narration, which_I,
O foremost of monkeys, deliver unto thee ; as to how the
self-create Himself conferred a boon on me.‘ When a certain
monkey shall by his prowess, bring thee under his sway, then
shalt thou understand that a fear ig come unto the Rakshasas’,
And that time, O placid one, hath come unto me, in conse-
quence of my meeting with thee. The truth ordained by the
self-create kooweth no turning. The destruction of the
unrighteous king Ravana together with all the Rakshasas,
hath come about in consequence of Sita (having been carried
away). Therefore, O best of monkeys, do thou enter the
city ruled by Ravana; and accomplish such tasks as thou
wishest to. Entering this splendid city lying under an im-
precation, governed by the chief of the Rakshasas, do thou
at thy will happily repairing every where,search for the chaste
- daughter of Janaka.”


SUNDARAKANDAM. P 897


SECTION tv.


Flawec by his vigor vanquished the excellent City of
Lank& capable of wearing forms at will, that exceedingly °
energetic foremost of monkeys, Hanumfin, eudeued with
prodigious prowess, leaped sheer over a wall, where door-
way there was none; and that elephantine monkey gifted
with great strength entered Lank& by night. And entering
the city of Lanka, that one (ever) compassing the welfare
of the monkey-king, set his left foot on the heads of his*
foes.* And entering ih by night, the offspring of the
Wind-god furnished with strength, proceeded along the
high-way strewn with blossoms. Aud the monkey held his
way in the charming city of Lanka, resounding with grateful®
sounds mixed with layghter, and ringing with trumpet
blasts. And with multitudes of mansions marked with the
thunderbolt and the hook, and adorned with diamond win-
dows, the charming metropolis looked splendid, like the
welkin with clouds. And then Lank&, with hagdsome and
variegated mansions of Rakshasas, resembling white clouds
and arranged like lotus-leaves ; and adorned on all sides with
structures superscribed ‘Vardhamina,’ shone forth in all its
glory. And that graceful one serving in jhe intérests of the
king of monkeys, ranging for Rama’s behoof, beheld {Lauk&)
adorned with variegated wreaths ; and was highly delighted.
And moving from house to house, that foremost of monkeys
observed on all sides various dwellings of diverse forms and


* The literal meaning is that, leaping over the wall, Hanuman Srst set his
felt foot on the hostile soil; and this act of his, as tending to the discomfture
of the foe, is looked upon by the author in the light of Hanumdn setting his left
foot on the heads of the Rakshasas, The setting gf the left foot on amenemy’s
dominions, is considered by the scriptares as very inauepicioes—T.


113


898 RAMAYANA,


color, and heard charming songs chanted in‘the three octaves*
“by damsels maddened with amour, resembling celestial
Apsaris. And he also heard the jinglings of zones and the
clash of bangles ; and sounds of footsteps on stairs of edifices
belonging to high-souled ones; and sounds proceeding from
clapping hands; and the roaring of lions here and there. And
* (Hanumfn) heard there in the mansions of the Rakshas, Man.
tras recited by persons engaged therein, and those occupied in
Vaidika studies. And (Hanumin) saw goblins and Rakshasas
storming and eulogizing R&vana; and mighty swarms of
Rakshas stationed, covering the highway. And in the
central courtyard, hc found innumerable spies of the Rakshasa
«(Ravana), some initiated, some bearing matted locks, some
with their heads shaven, and some clad in cow-skins, some
in cloths and some going stark naked; and (he found there
persons) carrying handfuls of dardha for their weapons, and
(having) the sacrificial fire-place for their arms ; and those bear-
ing in their hands clubs and concealed weapons,t or holding
rods as their arms, or having a single eye or a single com-
plexion,t or baving a single breast dangling down ; and those
looking dreadful with uneven attire ;§ and dwarfs frightful to
behold; and bownien; and swordsmen ; and (warriors) carry-
ing sataghnis and clubs for their arms; those bearing
excellent parighas in ,bheir hands, or blazing in curious
mail; persons not exceedingly fat, or exceedingly lean;
not unduly® tall, pr unduly short; not extremely fair, or
extremely” dark; not unduly crooked, or unduly dwarfish;
and those deformed, or many-formed, or endowed with


* The three octaves referred to are Mandra or the base tone, Madhyma
or the middle tone, and 7dra or the bigh tone. These constitute the entire
diapason of Hinda Music.—T.

+ Kuta, The commentator says the word stands for a particular kind of
weapons, Wilson has concealed weapon for its English equivalent.—T.

+ £ The same complexion gives sense, Bat I reader the passage literally.—T.

& Bhugnavastran.—Perhaps the text is corrupt, Bhugnavaktran—persons of
deformed faces—would render seuse.—=T. .


SUNDA RAKANDAM. + 899


beauty, or possessing splendour; standard bearers; and
flag bearerg. And (Hanuman) saw also various weapons;
and those having for their arms darts and zrtkshas, or
bearing pattigas and asanis, or having Kshepanis* and _
nooses in their hands, saw that mighty monkey, or wearing
wreaths, or having their persons daubed wilh pastess or
adorned with noble ornaments, or clad in various kinds of
raiment; and many a one ranging wherever he listed;
and those holding sharpened javelins; and mighty ones
bearing Vajras; and hundreds and thousands of warriors
garrisoned in the central conrtyard and engaged in vigilantly
guarding the interior,—having been directed by the lord
of the Rakshas,~saw the monkey. And having seen that
edifice situated in front of the inner appdttment, that
mighty monkey saw the famous mansion of the Rakshasa
chief, pinnacled on the mountain-top, with huge golden
arches over the gateway; surrounded by a moat enriched
with pale lotuses; and completely guarded by a wall;
resembling heaven itself; magnificent; resonant with grate.
ful sounds; resounding with the neighing of horses and
wondrous steeds; and adorned with cars and vehicles,chariots
and dainty horse: elephantst; and four-tusked *elephants
resembling masses of white clouds ;-—and possessing graceful
gateways, And the monkey entered the palace protected
by the Rakshasa chief,—guarded by maddened beasts and
birds, and thousands of goblins endowed with exceeding
great prowess. And he (Hanumi4n) entered Rfvana’s inner
apartment girtround with a wall consisting of blazing gold
and ¥démvunada ;} having its top decorated with costly gems
and pearls; and worshipped with excellent black Agure
and sandal.


* A short arrow thrown from the hand, or shot thtough a tube, Wilson.—7.
+ Elephants of the size of horses.—T. :
+ $émeunada isa kind of gold having sixteen @iverse colora=-T °


goo RAMAYANA,


SECTION V.


.ND as if ministering vate him (Hanum&n), arose the
mary thousand-rayed Moon in the midst of the stars, enfold-


” ‘ng all creatures with his fuminous canopy. And that highly


heroic monkey beheld the Moon hued like the sheen of conch,
or milk, or lotus-stalk, arisen and afloat (in the heavens),—~
like a swan swimming ina pool. And that intelligent one
from the earth beheld the Moon arrive at the mid-heavens ;
momentarily beaming out in lunar light; appearing (sptendid)
as Jf in conjunction with the Sun himself,—and like a bull
loitéring in Ms stall. And he saw the mild-rayed (Moon),
chasing away the remorse of all; swelting the sea; and
displaying all creatures,—attain the middle of the sky. And
that Lakshmi who on earth remains on Mandara, at eve in
the sea, and on the lotus on watér, looked exceedingly lovely,
stationed beside the charming Moon. Like a swan in a silver
cage, like alion in a cave in Mandara, like a hero on a haughty
elephant, appeared the Moon in the middle of the sky, And
with (the mark of) the horn,* the Moon resembled a sharp-
horned bull, or a mighty white-hued hill with towering
summits, or an elepltdnt with his horns plated with gold.
And, with his dirt composed of particles of cool water
removed,; ‘and tlre darkness dispelled in consequence of the
vicinity of the mighty planet ;t and with his spots appearing
clear because of his shining appearance, appeared (the hare-
marked:{ worshipful Moon in full splendour. And like alion on
coming out of his cavern,or a lordly elephant on entering into
the thick of a mighty encounter, or a monarch on obtaining


_ akingdom,—appeared the Moon in full splendour. And now


cf The su, Itis a planet in Hindu cosmogony.—T.
‘+ The spots are fabled us the marks of hares on the lap of the Moon,—T.


SUNDARAEANDAM. . got


appeared the revered Mid-night, chasing away darkness with,
the Mogn displayed—whea flesh-eating (Rakshasas) lend
full liberty to theie vicious appetite for flesh; and when
disputes between lovers cease,*—and which bringeth down
heaven itself.t The sounds of strings sweet unto the ear
spread around; females sleep beside their husbands§ and,
night-rangers, given to astounding and terrible acts, are, in the
same way, out, indulging in their sports. And the intelligent
monkey saw mansions crowded with (Rakshasas), some in-
ebriate with wine and others with wealth ; and abounding in
cars and horses and golden seats ; and fraught with the grace
got of heroism. And (Rakshasas) were parleying,-moving
about their plump arms,+—railing at each other ; and throwing
intemperate speeches at each other. And (Hanum&n saw)
Rakshasas striking at their chests (by way of challenge),
sinking on the persons of their beloved, wearing diverse,
habiliments, or stretching their tough bows, And (he) saw
debonair damsels daubing their frames with pastes; and
others, again,sleeping,—and fair-faced wenches smiling —and
others sighing bard under the influence of anger. And with
gigantic clephants roaring, (the place), honored by pious
persons,—with its heroes heaving sighst—looked’ exceeding-
ly beautiful like a lake in which serpents are sighing forth.
And in that apartment (Hanum&n) saw persons of commanding
understandings,§ endowed with a soft tongue,—igstinct with
the spirit of reverence—the foremost men’ of all this world,--
and bearing euphonious appelations,and clad in diverse attires.
And beholding those well-formed people, whose conduct was
of a piece with their many virtues, (Hanum{in) rejoiced exceed-


* 4.4. in consequence of sleep.—T.

+ A beautiful characterization of sleep, reminding one powerfully of
“Macbeth hath murdered sleep,” &.—T.

} In expectation of an access of warriors—T, 3

§ According to the commentator, Vaddhipradhdndn menos persons panest-
ing many viytwes, 1 differ from bin.—T. ;


gos * wEMAPANA.


dngly. And he saw some having beautiful forms; and others
deformed,—and both possessed of splendour. And (HanumGn)
saw there their wives worthy of noble ornaments and endow-
ed with eminent beauty; of spotless character ; possessing
great potency; {ike unto stars in point of excellency of con-
«duct,displaying side-glances and other tokens of dalliance,
—engaged in dear drinking, And at dead of night Hanumin
saw some females blazing in beauty,affected simultaneously with
bashfulness and bliss, on being embraced by their para-
mours, like birds embracing their mates. And the sensible
Hanum&n saw thefe other females seated in stately .balls,—
dying in happiness on the laps of their lovers,—beloved of
their’ lords—intent on virtue,—married women,—under the
influerice of Madana. And Hanumin saw some without
sheets, like unto golden streaks,—-paragons among women—
‘of the hue of molten gold,—and some of a moon-like com-
plexion, endeuved with loveliness—bereft of their beloved.
And that exceedingly heroic monkey saw females in their
homes experiencing the height of joy in the company of their
beloved dear unto their souls; charming with blossoms;
filled with Peace ; and enchaining the hearts of their lords
with their loveliness. And Hanuman saw crowds of faces
like unto the Moon displayed,—with elegant eyes furnished
with lovely lashes, and side-long looks; and multitudes of
ornaments cesembling beautiful lines of lightning. But
Hanuman‘ saw not Sit8, of the highest lineage,—ever
abiding by the way of righteousness; born in a royal
line,—like unto a delightful and  well-begot plant,—
of a slender frame,—sprung from the mind (of Brabm& him-
self); established on the eternal road (of chastity); having
her gaze fixed on Rima; always engrossed in the contem-
-plation of Rama,—the mind itself of her lord,—who had
entered through and through into the heart of her graceful
jord,—ever superior fo all other women; oppressed with
the grief of separation; and having her throat afflicted with


SUNDA RAKANDAM. . 903


the vapour of grief; who formerly had her throat graced |
with that best of- ornaments—the mishka; of excellent eye-‘
lashes ; hdving a mellifluous voice; like untoa peahen ranging
in the woods; (now) like unto an indistinct lunar lining,
ora streak of gold covered with dust, or the color of a
sore-scur, or a gold-leaf broken off by the wind. And not
finding, (after so long a search) the Sita of the lord of men,—
the spouse of Rima; best of those skilled in speech the
monkey, deeming himself as having suddenly lost his skill in
search, was overwhelmed with sadness.


SECTION vi.


Winona about at will on the roofs of seven-storied
edifices, that monkey capable of assuming any form that he*
chose, began to range Lank® with speed. And (at length)
that auspicious one arrived at the mansion of the Rakshasa
chief, surrounded by a shining wall hued like the Sun;
protected by terrible Rakshasas, like a mighty forest by lions.
And as that foremost of monkeys saw the magsion, with
fretted arches plated with silver and embellished with gold,-—
beautifully abounding in splendid tourts and gateways;
containing elephant-drivers, and heroes knowing no fatigue;
ever coursed by irrisistible steeds drawing cars, and curious
vehicles, covered over with skins of lions and tigers, resouad-
ing with bells hung thereon, and embosoming effigies of
ivory, gold aud silver,—the locality of mighty cars, and the
home of mighty car-warriors; filled all around with many
thousands of divers beauteous and dainly birds and beasts; well
Protected by meek Raksha warders at the outskirts; thrung-
ed about .with magnificent dames of the first otder;
containing gems of joyous damselsg—the abode of the
foremost R&kshasas—sounding like the sea with the sounds *


904 RAMAYANA.


of superb ornaments; affluent with regal insignia and
* excellent sandals ; crowded with mighty ones, like a vast
forest with lions ; reasonant with trumpets and drums; and
ringing with the blares of conchs ; where the ever adored
offspring of the Parvas was always worshipped by the
Rakghasas , solemn like the sea; and resounding like the
* ocean itself,—the mighty mansion of the high-souled(RAvana) ;
clad in costly jewels ; scattered with precious gems—as that
mighty monkey beheld (Ravana’s residence), he set about
searching for Sita.* And that mighty monkey concluded, “This
is the ornament of Lank& bodied forth beautifully to the view,
covered with elephants, steeds and chariots.” And there
“in the vicinity of Ravana’s mansion,t Hanum&n began to
cange the dwellings of the Rakslasas from one to another,
as well as all the gardens (located there). And without
experiencing any agitation, he observing (everything), ranged
“the palaces. Then that one endowed with wondrous motion,
with a bound entered Prahast’s palace; and then with
another,that (monkey) possessed of energy entered the abode
of MahSpargwa. Then tliat mighty monkey entered into
the abode of Kumbhakarna, resembling a mass of clouds ;
and thereafter that of Vibhishana; ahd then that of Maho-
dara, and then that of Virup&ksha; and then the abode of
Vidyujjibha, and then tRat of Vidyunm&l& ;—and then that
mighty monkey with a bound entered into the abode of
Vahudanslitra. «And then that leader of monkey-bands
gifted with great speed leapt into the abode of Suka, and
next into that of the intelligent Sarana, and next into that
of Indrajit. And that foremost of monkeys went to the
mansion of Jambumala, and of Sumala,—and (then) to


* The syntactical co-herence is, as is natural in so colossal a sentence,
grievously loose here, I have, however, tried my best to supply the /acune
in the passage.—T

© + RamAouja says that Manumdn began to range the dwellings about the
© wall environing Révana’s mansion,—T,


SUNDARAKANDAM. . 995


the abode of Rashmiketu, and Suryyasachu. And (next)
that powerful monkey ieapt into the mansion of Vajrakiya {
and (next) the Wind-god’s offspring entered the house
of Dhumraksha, and (next) that of Sampati, and the
gtim Vidyudrupa, and Phana, and Vighana, and Suka-
nibba, and Chakra, and Satha, and Kapatha, and Hraswa-
karna, and Danshtra, and the R&kshasa Lomasa, and”
Yudhyonmatta, and Matta, and the horseman, Dhwaja-
gviva, and of Vidyujjibha and Vijibha,fand of Hastimukha,
and of Kar&la, and Vicala, and of Sonitaksha. The illustrious
offspring of the Wind, Hanumf&n, one after another, leapt
into all these noble edifices. And that redoubtable monkey
observed the affluence of ail these (Rakshasas, posspssed
of prosperity. And having bounded over the mansions of
all situated around, that one blessed with; auspiciousness,
at length came to the very mansion of the monarch of the
Rakshasas. And that tiger-like monkey—the best of his
species—ranging around, ‘saw Rakshasis offrightful eyes,
alternately mounting sentry over the couch of Ravana—
bearing darts and maces in their hands, and equipped with
javelins and clubs. And (there) in the residence of that
lord of the Rakshasas, he beheld various bands of Rakshasis,
as well as Rakshasas of gigantic frames, upraising various
kinds of weapons ; and steeds of E&ceeding fleetness, red,
and white, and black; and first-rate elephants, possessed of
eminent grace, capable of crushing hostile eleppants, and
well trained ia arts relative to their species—like Airavata
himself in conflict. And there in that mansion he saw (all
these elephants), destroyers of hostile hosts—tike unto pour-
ing clouds, or hills, sending up fountains, rumbling like
unto clouds, and invincible in battle by fees. And that
monkey, son unto the Wind-god, saw in the mansion of the
lord of R&kshasas, Ravana, hosts by thousands; aod cars
of various forms of glittering gold, fernished all over With
golden get-works, resembling the risen sun ; and graceful


114


906 ° RAMAYANA.


grots ; and picture galleries ; and sporting saloons, mount-

*ains composed of wood,* captivating structures dedicated to
dalliance, and dwellings for day-dalliance,}—saw he in the
mansion of the Rakshasa monarch. And he beheld that charm-
ing mansion resembling Mandara, filled with places for pea-
cockst; thronged with pennons and flagstalfs,—a very mine

° of countless gems,—a field of treasures spread around,—where
persons of intrepid calmness were engaged in acts tending to
the safety of the treasures,—resembling the mansion herself
of Kuvera. And on account of the lustre shed by the
gems, as well as the energy of Ravana himself, that mansion
appeared splendid like the ray-furnished Sun in all his glory.
“And the chief of monkey-bands saw bed-steads and seats
of gold ands white vessels. And’ Hanuman entered the
mighty mansion, containing clay formed by Afadha§ and
Asava;\| filled with gemmed cans; charming; free from
“impediments; resembling the mansion herself of Kama,—like
the abode of Kuvera,—resonant with the sounds of bangles and
the tinklings of zones, as well as with the beat of mridanga-
hides and other eloquent musical instruments; with palaces
close on each other ; thronged with hundreds of females (like
unto) jewels ; and containing capacious enclosures.


® Designed for sport—T.

+ The conception of day-éMftiance met with in Vidya Sundara of Bhtrata
Chandra Roy, the Bengali poet, is found to have first originated with VAl-
miki—T.  *

t Sportife peacocks,

$ Spirttuous liquor distilled from the blossoms of the Rassia latifulia.
According to some, a spirit distilled from grapes.—T.

| Spirit distilled from sugar or molasses.—T.


SUNDARARANDAM, 7 907


SECTION VIL.


AAND that one endowed with strength saw that row of
structures fitted up with golden windows, studded with lapis «
fazulis, and containing birds ; like unto a mass of clouds in
a season of great rains, crowned with lightning, and fraught
with fowls. And he saw various structures close to one
another. to which excellent conchs, arms aud bows lent lustre;
as well as huge and splendid towers belonging to edifices
resembling mountains. And the monkey beheld mansions,.
treasuring various kinds ef wealth, which were held in regard
by both gods and Asuras,—devoid of every’ defect ; and
which bad been won (by Ravana) through his own might.*
And (Hanum§n) saw the mansions of the lord of Lanka,.
located in strict conformity with esthetic laws,—appearing as
if they had been constructed by Maya himself,—which had
on the earth beneath every excellence. And then he
saw the mansion of the lord of Rakshas himself, surpassing
the best structures ; like unto a mass of towering clouds;
captivating ; boasting of a beauteous golden appearance ;
worthy af his own power,—and of incomparable loveli-
ness; appearing as if the celestial regions had drop-
ped down on the earth; blazing in beauty ; teeming with
countless gems ; like unto the brow of & mountatn strewn
with the blossoms and the dust thereof of various trees ; and
illumined by the foremost females,—appearing like a maas
of clouds containing lightning, or the witching welkin
furnished with grace, afloat with excellent swans. And
(Hanum&n) saw the car variegated with countless gems ; like
untae the top of a mountain variegated with innumerable
metals ; or like the firmament garnished wi with the moon and the

—_—__


© Seuvalendrjitam,—Another meaning is: (mansions) info whick Hanuman,
Sound entry Pirongh his own might —T.


908 : RAMAYANA.


splanets,—or like clouds of diverse hues fused into a homo-
geneous whole. The place in the car designed as the seat of
the many, was filled with rows of hills ;* its hills were filled
with trees ; its trees were filled with flowers ; and (finally) its
flowers were filled with leaves and filaments. And (in it),
«where white mansions were reared, there were tanks filled
with fair flowers ; and lotuses furnished with filaments ; and,
picturesque woods ; and liquid lapses. And the mighty
monkey beheld there the great chariot going alter the name
of Pushpa, appearing beautiful, wheeling round in the splen-
dour of the gems-which had surpassed-even the cars pertain-
sing to the abodes of the celestials. And (in that car) were
birds made of Japis lazulis ; and (other) birds composed of
silver and coral; and variegated serpents made of various
precious metals ; and fair-bodied steeds resembling those of
esuperior breeds; and there were constructed birds having
graceful mouths ; and fair, tapering, playfut and contracted
plumage, bearing blossoms made of coral and gold,—like unto
the very plumage of Kama himself. And there were elephants
possessed of graceful trunks, bearing fillaments ; and with
their trunks bearing lotus leaves,—engaged (in showering
water on Lakshmi) ; as well as the goddess, made with fair
arms, seated on a pool with a lotus in her hand. Thus enter-
ing that graceful mansion, like unto a mountatn containing
charming caverns, (Hanuman) was seized with wonderment.
And onceagain (entering that charming mansion), like unto
a taking and fragrant tree during spring furnished with holes,
Hanum&n was seized with wonderment. Then ranging
by bounds that honored city ruled by the arms of the Ten-
faced one, he, not finding the highly regarded and extremely
distressed daughter of Janaka, who had won over her grief
by contemplating the virtues of her tord,—(was affected with
sorrow). And, not seeing Janaka’s daughter, then the heart
of that high-souled ote, honored for his character by the


* Composed of gold and gems.—T,


SUNDARAKANDAN. <= geg


entire world, of schooled self, ever ranging by the way chim-
ng in with morality, and having the scriptures for his eye-
sight,—as he ranged about —was oppressed with grief.


(SECTION Vit.
. 0:0


Sravixe in that mansion, that intelligent monkey, the
offspring of the Wind-god, beheld that splendid aerial car,
beauteous with excellent jewels, and furnisHed with windows
of burnished gold. And the car, embellished with transcend-
entally beautiful figures+-belauded by Vicwakarm’ hinthelf
as constituting the acme (of his art),—which, mounting the
welkin, looked like a mark of the Sun’s orbit,—appeared
resplendent. And there was nothing in that car which was:
not made skilfully ;—nothing that did not look like a precious
jewel (sprung spontaneously on its person),—and the style
displayed in its various parts surpassed anything that could
be found in the cars of the celestials themselves,—and every-
thing in that car was executed in the highest style of excel-
Jence,—(that car) obtained (by Ravana) in virtue of prowess
sprung from asceticism and contempjation (of the Deity);
capable of repairing wherever (the owner) wished to wend;
displaying various kinds of constructive skill; composed of
materials procured from diverse sources,—such as wefe worthy
of a celestial car; fleet-coursing in consonance with the
wish of its master; incapable of being approached ;* equal
unto the wind in celerity; the source of happiness unto
illustrious, high-souled, and pious ones—possessors of
‘riches fineless’t and high rapture; coursing through the
firmament in a variety of ways,—the congeries of all wonderful


*-By the impious. Another reading is durawaram—iocapable of being
withstood by fhe enemy.—T, .
t Vide Otheilo.—T.


gio RAMA FANA,


things,—adorned with ranges of chambers ; captivating to the

" mind ; stainless as the autumnal Moon ; furnished with splendid
summits, like the crest of a mountain; which was borne by
rangers of the night, given to mighty meals, ranging the
sky, with faces graced with ear-rings; and by thousands of
ghosts possessed of terrible speed, having expansive, winkless
and rolling eyes. That heroic first of monkeys saw that
excellent car, beauteous with vernal blossoms,—fairer than
the month of spring and furnished with flowers.


SECTION IX.
oo


.ND located within that excellent mansion, Hanuman,
*son unto the Wind-god, saw a superior and grand structure,
stainless and spacious; half a ywojana in width and one in
length,—belonging to the lord of the Rakshasas, and abound-
ing with many a palace. And searching for Videha’s daughter,
the large eyed Sit8, that slayer of enemies, Hanuman, ranged
all through, (this edifice).” And Hanuman beheld the goodly
edifice where the Rikshasas used to dwell in common.
And (at length) that ona. came upon the mansion itself of
the lord of R&kshasas, having three-tusked and four-tusked
elephants, ‘and protected by persons with upraised arms,
and covéring a capacious area. And (H&numan beheld) the
residence of R&vana, thronged with his Rakshasi wives,
as well as with princesses forcibly brought thither (by him),—
like unto the sea teeming with alligators and makaras, abound-
ing in timingiles and fishes and snakes, and agitated by
the force of the wind. The same enchanting splendour that
is in Vaigravana or the ray-riding Moon, remained ever
coastant and abiding in Rivana’s abode. And the pros
eperity of king Kuvera, or Yama, or Varuna, was here present
in the house of the Raksha,—or even surpassed by the pros-


SUNDARARANDAM. . om


perity (of Ravana). In the midst of that mansion the
Wind-god’s offapring found another,* excellently constructed,
having innumerable mad elephants ;—that noble car embell-
ished with all gems, entitled Puskpaka, which had been
constructed in heaven by Vigwakarm& for Brahm& himself,—
which Kuvera obtained from the Great-father through high
austerities,—and which, yanquishing Kuvera by his prowess,
the Rakshasa chief got possession of. And the mighty monkey
ascended the splendid car Pushpaka, containing figures of
wolves,—made of Kérttaswarg and Airanya; geaced with
ranges of goodly pillars ; as if blazing in splendour ; through-
out garnished with narrow secret rooms and saloons, piercing
the heavens, and resembling Meru or Mandara, and like uato
the flaming Sun; skilfully reared by Vigwaltarma; with
golden staircases and graceful and grand raised seats, rows of
golden and crystal windows, and daises composed of sapphires,
emeralds and other superb gems; embellished with noble
vidrumas, costly stones, and round pearls, as also with
plastered terraces; pasted with red sandal, like unto gold,
and furnished with a sacred aroma; and resembling the sun
new risen. And stationed thereon,t Hanum4n smelt the rich
odour of viands and drinks that was spreading on alt sides ;—
and like one dear friend smelling another, he also smelt
the mighty Air, impregnated with arom’, which seemed like
embodied Odour. And (the Air) said unto Hanumin,—"Come
here, where that Ravana is.” Then (descending form Push-
aka and repairing to that sleeping apartment of Rivana),
Hanuman saw the same, grand and graceful; belonging to
Rivaua ; of transcendent beauty; comely like unto a lovely
lady ; diversified with jewelled staircases ; illumined with heaps
of gems; with its terraces constructed of crystal ; having


“* The car Pushpaka, according to Tirtha, whose view is accepted by
Réméouja. According to Kataka, Verma ‘means a bedchamber of sushend
and wife—T,

+ 4, e on Bushpaka—T,


gms RAMAYANA.


statues of ivory, pearls, diamonds, coral, silver and gold ;
adorned with jewelled pillars ; and embellished al! round with
pillasters ; and upheld on all sides by straight, elevated and
gorgeously ornamented pillars of equal dimensions, resem-
bling prodigious wings,—(the mansion) appearing to tower
todhe sky; containing spacious and parti-colored woolen
cloths bearing the marks of the Earth*; extensive as the
Earth is, with kingdoms and dwellings ; resounding with the
roars of infuriated elephants ; redolent of divine fragrance ;
furnished with gay canopies; inhabited by the sovereign of
the Rakshas; cloudy with ogurn and dhupa; spotless ;
of a swan-like whiteness ; engarlanded with flowers and
leaves like unto the dappled and brilliant cow (of Vasishtha) ;
bringing deiight unto the heart; and enhancing the grace
{of all creatures); removing sorrow ; noble; and the generatrix
of Grace herself. And as soon as Hanum&n entered the
mansion protected by Rivana, it like a mother regaled his
senses with their proper objects. “This must be swarga, or
the region of the immortals, or the city of Amarfvati, or the
supreme Siddhi—”+ thought the Wind-god’s offspring. And
he saw the golden lathps (shorn of their brightness),f like
unto gamblers worsted at dice by others exceedingly skilful,
and, in consequence, plunged in thought. And (Hanumfn)
conceived that (RAvana’s sleeping apartment) was in a
conflagration, on account of the display of the lamps,
Ravana‘s energy, and the splendour of the ornaments. And
when the night bad been half spent, (Hanuman) saw thousands
of superb dames, adorned in various attires, and bearing
apparels of diverse hues, and wreaths,—who having given
up sport, and come under the influence of wine and sleep,—


* i.e fouscornered, The Earth, in Hindu cosmogony, is « flat surface
having four corners.—T.

+ Smarge is the region where persons reap the fruit of Jyotisbtoma, fc,
Siddhi is Wasion spread $y Gandharbas—T,

+ By the superior splendour of Révana.—T.


SUNDARAKINDAM. + gr.


were fast asleep on woolen sheets. And in consequence of |
the silence that reigned (in that apartment) embellished
with (ornaments), it resembled a large lotus-grove, where
the swans and the black bees are silent. And the Wind-god’s
offspring beheld the countenances of those beauteous women,
with closed eyes,—~—having their lashes shut through langyor ; is
and odorous with lotus-perfume. And their faces appeared
like lotuses blowing on the expiry of night and closing
their petals by night. “These lotus-faces like unto very lotuses
themselves, ever the six-footed ones* seek once and again.”
Thus thought with discrimination the graceful, mighty
monkey ; and on account of their perfections, he confessed
those countenances to be equal to water-sprungf (lotuses). ;
And that apartment, in” consequence of being graced by
those women,appeared splendid, like the autumnal,complacent
sky decorated with the stars. And surrounded by them, |
the Rakshasa chicf resembled the fair Moon encircled by
the stars. “Those stars that drop from the firmament on
their virtue deteriorating, have assembled here in a body,”
thus thought the monkey at (hat time. And the shine, form,
and splendour of those females resembled, forsooth those
of magnificently displayed, noble and lustrous stars. And
on account of their having been bereft of consciousness
through sleep, induzed by fatigue brought on by drink (and
dance), their hair was dishevelled, and their full wreaths
and goodly ornaments lay scattered abput. Aga some
of those paragons had got their beauty-spots, smudged ; and
some, their bangles loosening off ; some, their chains running
toone side. And others had their pearl necklaces burst,~—
and their cloths getling away (from their persons), and the
chains of their zones straying irregularly ;—resembling way-
worn mares. And others again*were without their ear-rings,
and had their garlands torn and crushed ; and resembled


ee eet ae We
* Shatpada—six-footed—a name of the black b&.—T.


+ Satiledbipear,—water-sprung—a name of the lotus—T.


ut RAMAYANA.


blossoming creepers, trodden down in a vast forest by mighty
“elephants, And the pearl chains of some shining females re-
sembling moon beams, having got topsy-turvy, was lying like
sleeping swans between the breasts of the damsela. And the
lapis chains of some resembled water-crows ;* and the fine
golden chains turned upside down of others appeared like ruddy
“ geese. Aud those ladies resembled rivers having hips
for banks; containing swans and KGrandavas, and heautified
with ruddy geese. And those sleeping females appeared
like streams ; having Ainéints for their ripples; and large
gold lotusest ; marks} of amorous encounter on their persons
for ferocious aquatic animals; and perfections,§ for their
“banks. And on the tender frames, as well as on the tops
‘of the breasts, of some graceful scratches consequent on
pressure, appeared like ornaments. And the scarf-ends of
, some stirred by the air that was blowing about their faces,
* flapped on them again and again. And at the nether part
of the faces of Ravana’s wives, they (the scarf-ends)appeared
beauteous like uplifted streamers of exceeding elegance,
composed of many-hued golden yarn. “And the ear-rings
of some dames possessed of a pleasant sheen, stirred by
the air that was breathing about theic faces, were undulating
gently. And the sweet breath of their faces, naturally
fragrant, and redolent Of sugar and dsava, was then regaling
Ravana, And out of fear sprung from sleep and intoxication,
some of Ravana’s wives were agaiy and again smelling the
faces of those, co-wives with them, taking the faces to
belong to Ravana. And from their hearts being firmly
fixed on Ravana, those excellent women, having their sense


* Kadamva~a drake ; of, ye to some, @ teal; a gander; or the
species gallinule porphyria.—t.
+ ie, the faces of the females are meant. Another meaning is, gold for large
totuses.—T,
“f Vidésa may also meanarch displays by way of coquetry.—T,
« i Yase, according to some, here means grace.—T.


SUNDA RARANDAR. - oy


of separateness removed, (albeit thus dealt with), did what
was dear unto them.* And other females, making’
their gay scarf-ends (for their sheets), and making their
arms, their pillows, were lying down there. And some were
tying on others’ bosoms; and others again, on the arms of
the latter. And some lay on the faps of others ;, and
others, again, on the breasts of thelatter. And they reposed®
on each other’s thighs, flanks, waists, and backs; and
coming under the influence of wine and amour, they lay
on each other's persons. And those femaies having elegant
waists, receiving pleasure from the contact with others’
persons, were sleeping there, with their hands fastened by
each other, And that garland of females strung by the threads’
of their hands, appeared beauteous, like a cealewreath strung
on a thread, with maddened black bees (seated thereon).
And that multitude of females in a medley appeared like an
assemblage of blooming plants ia the month of Chaitra,t with
its wreaths formed in consequence of their coming in contact
with one another, and of its clusters touching each other,
or account of the breeze blowing ;—with the plants encie-
cling the graceful (necks of the trees)—and rife with
Bhramaras chasing each other.—And although the ornaments
of those women wearing ornaments, attires and wreaths,
were put on proper places ; yet (on“&ccount of the profusion
of the ornaments themselves, as well as because of the cir-
cumstance of the dames’ sleeping,fit was tifficult tp ascertain
which ornament belonged to one damsel and which to another.
And it seemed as if, Ravana having attained rest (through


© Tho sense is very imperspicuous only by reason of the unskilfel ase of
the pronouns. The demevls dissed did not cesent the act ; bset hissed the Musere
dn tura—tT. ot

+ March-April

In consequence aleo, remarks the commentater, of the sete running
through the ormaments, as well as of the closg contact of the persons af the


‘dadies.—T. ae}


a6 . RAMAYANA.


aléep), the flaming golden lamps furnished with various rays,
“were gazing at the girls with winkless eyes. Daughters of
Rijarshis, of Vipras, of Daityas, of Gandharbas. and of
Rakshasas, having come under the influence of desire, had
become his wives. And allthose women had been procured
by Ravana because he sought fight (with their relations)
and some haughty dames, rapt with desire, had of themselves
come to this place. And there was no woman there, who
had been won by force by (Ravana), possessed as he was of
prowess ; but they had all been subdued by his qualities.
And save the syrpassingly worthy daughter of Janaka, no
female (had been brought), who had set her heart on another,
“or who had known any other before. And there was none
who, being bis wife, was not of high extrattion ; none’ who
was defective in grace ; none who was not of sterling merit ;
none who was not decked out in ornaments and attire ; and
none who was infirm; and none who was not an object of
desire of her lover. And the tord of monkeys endowed with
uprightuess of sense, thought,—“If the righteously wedded
wile of Righava were as gne of the wives of the king of the
R&kshasas, it would well for him?’ Again reflected he,
“Sith is crowned with chastity and other virtues; and the
powerful lord of Lank&, assuming an illusory form, hath
with much ado perpetratéd this ignominious act.”


SECTION X.


Ayo there Hanuman employed in looking around, saw
a grand dais made of crystal; and embellished with jewels ;
comparable to one belonging to the celestial regions; furnish-
ed with superb and costly sofas, having their parts painted |
and composed of ivory, gold, and lapis lazulis ; with highly
precious canopies. At one place thereof he saw.a white


SUNDARARANDAM. * giz


umbrella, adorned with beautiful wreaths, resembling the
lord of the stars himself. And Hanum4n saw a splendid
sofa garnished with gold, bearing garlands of azoéa blos-
soms,—flaming like fire ; around which persons kept waving
with their hands chowris furnished with hair*; rife with
perfumes of various kinds ; odorous with rich dhupa, spread
with excellent sheets; covered with the skins of rams 7
and decked on all sides with chaplets of gorgeous flowers,
And that excellent and mighty monkey beheld therein the
heroic sovereign of the R&kshasas, Ravana, resembling a
mass of clouds ; with flaming and brilliant ear-rings ; having


reddened eyes ; of gigantic arms ; wearing a cloth composed .


of golden threads; his person daubed with fragrant Ped
sandal ; looking like a crimson cloud at eve fraught with
lightning ; covered with noble ornaments; endowed with
eminent grace ; capable of wearing forms at will ; resembling
Mandara affluent with trees and woods and shrubs ;~sleeping,
having given up sport at night ; adorned with elegant orna-
ments; dear unto the daughters of the R&kshasas,—the
source of happiness unto Rakshasas ;—who had ceased from
drinking,—asleep on a shining bedstead,—and respiring like a
(hissing) serpent.t And reaching there, Hanuman, waxing
wondrous agitated, shrank back, as if in fear. And then arriv-
ing at the staircase, the mighty monkey, stationing himself on
adais in the middle of the stairs, gazed at the inebriate,
Rakshasa, resembling a tiger. Aad as the sovereign® of the
Rakshasas was sleeping, his graceful bed resembled a grand
cascade, beside which stands an elephant breathing odour.
And Hanum&in saw the arms of the huge-bodied lord
of R&kshasas, fastened with bracelets,—stretched (there),—
like unto the banners of Indra ;,;which had been wounded


* The commentator throws out aconjecture that artificial figures are here
meant; which mechanically performed the function hein assigned to them —B.
+ The commentator, however, interprets: ke on elephant. Serpent ot


g1B _ > RAMAYANA.


by the’ tusk-ends of Alravata, whose plump parta had been
tiven by vajra ; and which had been torn by the discus of
Vishnu ; well developed ; having equal and elegant parts ;
with bard joints ; fraught with strength ; with thumbs having
nails bearing auspicious marks; having rings (on the fingers);
covered ; formed like bludgeons; round ; resembling the trunks
“of elephants ; cast on the white bed like unto five-hooded
serpents; smeared and adorned with cool, fragrant, and
excellent sandal resembling the blood of hares; pressed
by paragons; odorous with incense ; resisting (in battle)
Yakshas, and Pannagas, Gandharbas, gods and D&navas ;
and the monkey saw his arms resting on the bed, lite
unto two beautiful and mighty .serpents sleeping in the
entrails of “Mandara, And with both those well developed
arms of his, the lord of Rakshasas resembling a hill, looked
handsome like Mandata with its summits. And breath
bearing the aroma of the mangoe, and the Panndga, the
sweet scent of the Vakula, the savour of viands fraught
with the six kinds of tastes, and the perfume of wines, came
out of the mighty mouth of the sovereign of the R&kshasas,
Gilling, as it were, that eftire chamber. And (Hanum{n) be-
held (Ravana), with his countenance, aglow with ear-rings
and decked with a gojden diadem embellished with pearls
and jewels ; daubed with red sandal; and adorned with ;
an elegant chain 5 having a large, broad, and full- developed
breast { with a white silken cloth on, falling off his person ;
furnished with blood-red eyes ; covered with costly yellow
sheets ; appearing like a mass of unrighteousness ; breathing
like a serpent, or an elephant asleep in the mighty Gangl
during the rains ;—four lamps set on the golden pilars
illumining four sides ; even as lightnings display the entire
surface of a mass of clouds. (And Hanumf&n) also saw in
fhe mansion of the Raksha chief, the wives of that huge-
bodied one dear finto his wives,—lying at his feet. And
that protector of monkey-bands saw them, haviag counten-


SUNDARARKANDAM. 919 .


ances resembling the Moon displayed; decked out with
elegant eat-rings; bearing unfading garlands* by way of
ornamentation ; lying on the arms and lap of the lord of the
Rakshas. And the monkey saw women bearing noble
ornaments,lying down. And he saw golden bracelets and
ear-rings at the nether ends of the women’s ears,—set with
diamonds and lapises. And with their fair countenances
resembling the Moon, graced with comely ear-rings, that
terrace looked beautiful, like the welkin embellished with
stars. The slender-waisted wives of the sovereign of the
Rakshasas, overcome with languor consequent on drink and
amorous encounter, were fast asleep at the very places where
they were seated. And another transcendentally beautifut
damsel possessed of lovely limbs, skilled in dance, was fast
asleep, betraying comely movements (during sleep). And an-
other was seen asleep, embracing a vind,—like a totus with
spreading petals, resting by the side of a raft. And another
dark-eyed wench was asleep with her mudduéat on her lap,
like a loving mother having a boy. Another damsel possessed
of graceful limbs and a shapely bust, was lying down,
hugging her kettle-drum,—like a woman embracing her
lover, obtained alter a long time. And one lotus-eyed female
was asleep, embracing her vind; like an amorous damsel
bugging her fair paramour. And*anvther girl of res-
trained self, given to dancing, had come under the sway
of sleep, embracing her vipanchst like sa female sleep-
ing with her lover. And another having inebriate eyes,
was fast asleep, embracing her mridanga with her
charming, plump, and tender limbs, resembling gold.
Another female of [aultless features, endeued with a slender
frame, having been overcome by lassitude consequent oa:
drink, was asleep,with her ganada on the ends of her lower
* i. ¢. celestial femalee—T.


+ A kind of musical instrumerg.—T. 2
4 A kind of Vind.—r.


920 RAMALANA.


garment, held fast with her hands. Another woman was
sleeping soundly, embracing her déxdima,* with another
bound at her back; like a female taking both her lover
aad her child. Another damsel having eyes resembling lotus-
petals, having come under the influence of liquor, was asleep,
firmly holding her aeramvarat with her hands. Another
woman, intoxicated by wine, was discovered asleep, with her
water-vessel upset; and,in consequence, appearing like a well-
washed variegated wreath in spring. Another, coming under
the masterdom of slumber, was sleeping, holding with her
hands her twin breasts, resembling golden jars, And another
lotus-eyed and moon-faced fair one, coming under the governs
ance of slumber, (was asleep), embracing another furnished
with shapely hips. And eminently beautiful dames were
asleep, embracing musical instruments ; like wenches press-
ing lustful overs), with their breasts. And that monkey saw
“that lady, endeued with beauty, lying down apart in an
excellent hed; adorned with ornaments containing pearls and
jewels; and as if decorating that charming mansion with
her grace. And the monkey saw there the yellow-hued
Mandodari, having the splendour of gold; the object of
(Ravana’s) desire; beautiful exceedingly,—the mistress of the
inner apartment,—lying down. And seeing (Mandodari)
adorned with ornamedts, the offspring of the Wind-god
guessed,—~''This one endowed with the wealth of youth and
beauty might be Sits.” And demonstrating great joy, that
leader of” monkey-bands rejoiced exceedingly. And thereat,
(Hanum&n) struck at his arms with his hands, kissed his tail,
exhibited signs of glee, frolicked, sang, darted towards the
pillars, shot up to the top thereof, and jumped down to the
earth,-~-manifesting his monkey-nature.


* Akind of musical instrument.—T,
¢ A kind of musical instrament.—T.


SUNDA RAKAN DAS, gat


SECTION Xt.


es


Tren resigning that line of thought,* that mighty
monkey, regaining his equanimity, set out in another dfrec- «
tion of thought touching Sita. “Separated from Rama, that
Jady is incapablet of sleeping, or eating, or decorating
{her person), or drinking. And she is incapable of asso-
ciating with any other person, although he were the
sovereign of the celestials himself, And even in all heaven
there is none who is equal to Rima. She is some other.” «
Assuring himself of this, that foremost of monkeys, eagef to
behold Sith, again began to range in that place set apart
fur drinking. Some were tired out with sporling ; some with
singing; some with dancing; and some were fast asleeps
through intoxication, And some supported themselves on
murajas, mridangas, or chelikas; and some women were
sleeping on excellent sheets. And that leader of monkey-
bands saw (that place of drinking) filled with thousands of
women, adorned with ornaments engaged (in their sleep)
in depicting each other's loveliness ; and explaining’ the sense
of songs; conversant with season, and place; under-
standing the meanings of words chiming in with season and
place ¢; and skilful at play. And at other placas also he
saw thousands of superb and youthful dames fast asleep,—
employed in talking of each other's beauty. And that leader

* of monkey bands saw (women) versed in season and place,
and understanding the meanings of words consonant with
season and place. And in the midst of them all, the lord of
the R&kshasas looked splendid like an ox in a spacious stall


't fe, that Mandodaci was Sitt. :
+ The text has na saptum arkati; lit, it bekovety (Sitd) wot to sleep. The

sense, however, is as yiven above.—T. z
} All this, fomarks RAmfauja, appeared from their talk daring sleep.—T.


ye RAMAYANA.


in the midst of stately kine. And surrounded hy them, the
Rakshasa chief appeared beautiful like a gigantic elephant in
aforest, surrounded by female elephants. And in the abode
of the huge-bodied Rakshasa chief, that tiger-like monkey
saw that place of drinking, furnished with every object of
e desite. And in that place set apart fur drinking, he saw heaps
of the flesh of buffaloes, deer, and boars, arranged separately.
And that tiger-like monkey saw in capacious golden vessels
flesh of fowls and peacocks, which remained (after the repast).
And Hanuman saw the flesh of boars, and Vddhrinasas*
Sulyas, deer. and peacocks, seasoned with curds and Sauvar-
« chala;t and Krikalas,t and goats of various kinds,—flesh of hare
, balf-fed \—-Ekagalyas; §and buffaloes,—all chopped and dressed;
and lickable and drinkable viands sharp and mild ; and edibles
sharp and mild; and Rdgakhéndavas|} containing sugar and
«acid, capable of improving a vicious palate. And with large
and costly stray bangles and bracelets ; and scattered cans,—
and diverse kinds of fruit; and wreaths of flowers, the pave~
ment attained exceeding beauty. And with elegantly jointed
‘bedsteads, arranged (around), the scene of wassail “appeared
aflame without fire. And with meat consisting of many
‘ingredients, fraught with diverse tastes, seasoned with many
substances, and dressed by skilful cooks,—arranged seneraes
ly in the scene of revel; and with noble and pleasant wines,
natural aad artificial, —dsavas trom sugar; and Mddhvika Sand
savas ftom flowers and fruits; and impregnated separately


* Aspecies af birds, having, according to Vishnudharma, datk throats,
ted veins, and white wings. According to others, a kind of goats.—T,

+ A kind of salt—T.

f A kind of partriges—T.

§ Akind of fish—T.

I According to some, a preparation of the juice of grapes and pomegran-
ates, mixed with sugar, ef, According to others, Wack cakes having six
kinds of relishes.—T.

€ Natural wines—such as Kédamvari etc, which require no preparation.——T.

8 From honey. According to some, from grapes.—T. .


SUNDARAKINDAM. . oer


with different kinds of fragrant dust,—the pavement, furnish-
ed with inuumerable garlands, surrounded with golden water:
vessels and crystal bowls, and golden water-puts, looked
exceedingly beautiful. And the monkey saw that foremost of
all places set apart for drinking, conlaining silvern and golden
jars. And that mighty monkey saw golden wine-vessels
studded with gems, all filled with wine; and some with
half full of liquor, some with their wine entirely exhausted,and
some full of liquor, And (at some spots) he saw various.
kinds of viands, and at others wines ranged in rows,
and at others the wine-vessels remaining half full, And
there wete many bedsteads belonging to fair ones, remaining,
vacant; and at some places excellent women were sleeping
touching cach other. And at one place, a female, borne
down by the force of sleep, forcibly possessing herself of
another's cloth, and wrapping herself therewith,—went to tle,
bed of that one, and was indulging in sleep—And with their
breath, their variegated wreaths and the cloth on their persons
were stirring gently, as if with a mild-blowing breeze.
And laden with the odours of cool sandal,and of sweet-tasting
Sidhu ;* and of diverse wreaths and flowers, and with perfum-
es of vecjous kinds,—and entranced with (the aroma of sandals
suitable for use after ablution, and of dhupas, the air, im-
pregnates with excellent scent, was thére breathing around the
ear Pushpaka. And in the residence of the Raksha, there
were some wenches sable, yet cxeeedinkly witching; and
some were dark-hued; and the frames of some were of a
golden brilliance. And their beauty, in consequence of their
coming under the governance of sleep, and their being bereft
ef their senses by Madana, resembled that of lotuses ina
sleep, Thus that highly energetic monkey saw everything


“


* Spirit distilled from mollasses.—T.

+ Murchchkita—The commentator says, means sp-eading. 1, however,
here presume to go by my own light, feeble as tat may be. Entranced Sill,
3 dare say, ragommend itself to the poctical.in especial —T, .


924 : RAMAFANA. 7


Moroughly in the inner apartment of Rivana,—but he saw
not Janaka’s daughter. And seeing those females, that
mighty monkey, apprehending loss of righteousness, was
seized with an exceeding great fear*. “Beholding a female,
who is the religiously wedded wife of another, while she is
~asleept, verily causeth loss of righteousness. My sight
surely never seeketh others’ wives; but I have beheld this
one that hath ravished another's spouse.” And that in-
telligent one, intent on attaining a knowledge of thin
capable of being arrived at on grounds of judgment, again
reflected effectively as to his course of action: ‘All these
.unsuspecting wives of Ravana have been beheld by me; yet
there are no signs that my mind hath undergone any altera-
tion. In respect of the enlistment of the senses on behalf
of any course of action good or evil, it is verily mind which
eis the cause; and hercin my mind is righteously disposed.
And I could not search for Vaidehi elsewhere; for in the
matter of search, people always search for women even among
women. And people search for creatures among the species
to which they happen to belong : none searcheth for a lost
lady among female deer. Therefore have I with a pure
heart expl3red the entire inner apartment of Ravana; but
Janaka’s daughter I seq not.” And Hanuman endowed with
prowess saw the daughters of gods, and Gandharbas, and
Nagas; byt he saw not Janaki. And not seeing her, that
hero, having beheld other magnificent dames, coming out of
that place, set about searching for Sit (afresh). And leaving
the place of wassail, the graceful offspring of the W:ud-god,
taking extreme care, again began to search for Silf all about
(another quarter).


* Remembering, says the commentator, the injunction of the scriptures,
“None should see a nude female."—T.
t And therefore presumably incapable of taking care of herself.—T.
«


SUNDARAKANDAS + 93s


SECTION XI.


Ano remaining in that mansion, (Hanuman) desirous of
getting a sight of Sita graced with a fair presence, went
into bowers, and picture galleries, and night-houses ;* but
her he did not find. And nat finding the beloved (spouse)
of Raghu’s son, that mighty monkey reflected,—"Surely Sit&
is not alive,—for although I have searched (through and
through), yet Mithila’s daughter I have failed to find, And
that girl *solicitous for the preservation of her chastity, and
staying in the prime path of virtuous woman,-that chaste
one—hath, for certain, been slain by this ¢hief of the
Rakshasas, (ever) finding delight in iniquity. And seeing
the wives of the Ra&kshasa monarch,—of frightfal forms,—
monstrous ; of lurid hue ; having huge faces ; with large horrid
eyes,—the daughter of Janaka hath given up the ghost
from fright. Failing to see Sita, and (thereby) annuling
my prowess, and having long spent the appointed space
in company with the monkeys, way have I none to present
myself before Sugriva, that monkey being puigsant and
given to meting out sharp chastisement. Having searched
the inner apartment through, and séen the wives of the
R&kshasa, I do not see the chaste Sita. Therefore vain is
the trouble that I take. What, alas! sh4ll the monkeys
assembled tell me when [ shall go (to them)? ‘O hero, tell
us what thou hast done, repairing there” And not having
seen Janaka’s daughter, what shall I answer? The term
fixed (by Sugriva) having been past, certainly meet it is that
I should fast to death. And what shall the aged Jambhavan,
and what shall Angada, say? “And what, again, shall the
assembled monkeys say to me when [ shall have crossed over
the main? But perseverence is the soi of good fortunes;


©” © Intended for stay at night. S


96 REMATANS,


and perseverence bringeth about supreme happiness. Search
again I will, where I have not yet searched. Perseverence,
for certain, ever lringeth people to alt profitable objects.
Whatever one doeth with vigor, beareth fruit. Therefore, wilt
I put forth fresh dear efforts vigorously. 1 will search such

places held by R&vana as I have not yet seen. I have
ngain searched the picture-galleries and the sporting-strac-
tures, and edifices, and roads passing through gardens, as
well as the cars,” Having thought thus, Hanum&n again set

about searching the subterranean abodes, religious buildings,

and many-storied mansions, And flying ap, and coming

down, and staying, and going at places, and opening doors, ,
and shutting others, and entering and issuing out, and

falling dowh as if darting up, that mighty monkey began to

range on all sides, There was not even space measuring

four fingers in that inner apartment of Ravana, to which the
monkey did not repair. And he saw the abodes of the

nobility, the daises, the trees by the crossings, the holes, and

the tanks, And Hanum§n saw there Rakshasas of various

forms, frightful and deformed; but he saw not Janaka's

daughter. And Hanumfin saw there the wives of Vidy&-

dharas ; ‘but he saw not R&ghava’s beloved. And Hanum§n

saw there transcendentally beautiful women—daughters of

N&gas—having countenances resembling the moon; but he
saw not Janaka’s daughter. And Hanumn saw there
‘daughters of Nigas forcibly brought by the lord of the:

Ra&kshasas ; but he saw not Janaka’s daughter. Having seer
other beauteous females, and mot seeing her, the mighty-

armed son of the Wind-god was oppressed with sadness.
Seeing that the endeavours of the monarch of monkeys. as
welt as the bounding over the main, hadcome to nought, the
offspring of the Wind-god was plunged in thought. Descend-
ing from the zrial car, Hanumio, son unto the Wind-god, his
senses deprived by* sorrow, was again wrought up with
anxiety. a


SUNDARAKANDAN, - 937


SECTION xin.


Aucntine from the car, Hanum&n possessed of vigorous
activity, —leader of monkey-bands—nearing the wall, looked
like lightning within a mass of clouds.* And having gone
round the mansions of R&vana, and not seeing Janaki, the
monkey Hanuma said,—‘Striving after R4&ma's welfare,
Thave again searched through Lanhi; but I do not see
Videha's daughter, Janaki, having all her tinsbs endeued with
loveliness, And I have explored pools, and watery expanses,
and tanks, and rivers, and streams, and marshes, and woods,
and citadels, and mountains, yea,—all this earth’; but Janaki
Ido not find. The vulture-king Samp&ti had told that Siti
was in the mansion of Ravana. But why do I not see her
(here) ? Or doth Maithili Sita, daughter unto Janaka,t sprung
in the Videha line, forcibly carried off (by Ravana), and
completely in his power, abide by the mandate (of that
monarch)? { conceive that while taking Sita, the Raksha
darted upward, he being influenced by fear of R&ma’s shafts ;
(and accordingly losing control over his movements), she fell
off by the way. Or I fancy that while, that noble lady was
being carried away along the way ranged by Siddhag, she
lost her life on beholding the ocean. Or I think that on
account of the vehement speed assumed by Ravana, and also
oppressed with his arms, that large-eyed noble lady hath been
bereft of her life. For certain, while (Ravana) was soaring
higher and higher, Janaka’s daughter, rolling (on the car),
dropped down into the sea, Alas! trying to preserve her
chastity, the forlorn Sit&, pragtising self-mortification, hath
‘been devoured by this abject-minded Ravana, Or that dark-
was of entire sapphire—T.

t Knowinge Brahma, remarks Riminoja—T


939s RAMAYANA.


" ing my senses, and staying at the foot of trees. Preparing
a funereal pile on a tract bordering on the sea, abounding
in fruits, and flowers, and water, I will enter into flaming
fire.. And as I sit to fast, and for effecting the separation of
self from my body and centering my identity in the spirit
crews and beasts of prey shall feed on my hody. And
I think the sages have enjoyed another way of exit. I
shall, failing to. see Janaki, enter into water. My illustrious
and exalted garland of fame, begot of excellent acts, hath
perished for good in consequence of my not seeing Sit&.*
Or restraining myself, I shall become an ascetic living under
neath trees; but return I will not, without obtaining a sight
ofethat dark-eyed damsel. If I return without seeing Sitd, all
the monkey§ with Angada shall cease to exist. Iucalculahle
are the ills of my putting a period to my existence; (on the
other hand) if 1 live, I may come by good. Therefore my
life I will maintain. If 1 live, it may conduce to happiness.”
Having thus indulged in a variety of harassing thoughts in
his mind,that foremost of monkeys could not cross over to the
other shore (of the sea of distress). Then summoning energy,
that elephantine monkey endeued with fortitude reflected,—
“Or I shall slay the Ten-necked Ravana possessed of great
strength. Sit& hath been carried off; but by this I shall avenge
myself, Or throwing him repeatedly into the sea, 1 (shall take
him) and present him to Rama, even as one presents a beast
unto Pgcupat.’’*Reflecting thus,the monkey, not finding Sita,
agitated with sorrow and anxiety, thought,—"So long as I
do not find the illustrious spouse of Rama, Sit&, I will explore
the city of Lank& again and again. Hf in consonance with
Samp&t’'s speech, I bring Rama hither, Raghava, not seeing

* Tirtha reads chiraratriyam for chirardtrya, Then the sense is. This
lustrious live-long fait-rooted and auspicious night crowned with a garlan
fame, hath borne no fruit, in consequence of my not seeing Sité. The comm\ a
ator, I presume, refines a Jittle too mpchs-T,

+ Ac appellation of Siva~lit. ford of deasts—in allusion to animal sacrifices:


to Slva—T. -


SUNDARAKANDAM. g3r


his wife, shall burn all the monkeys. (Therefore) even here
{shall stay, restraining my fare and mortifying my senses.
All those principal monkeys ought not to lose their lives
because of any act to which I may commit myself. This is
the asoka wood, extensive and containing mighty trees.
This 1 shall explore, as it hath not yet been searched py
me. And saluting the Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas, the
twin Agwins, (and R&ima and Lakslmang), I enhancing‘
the sorrow of the Rakhas, shall go into it. Having vanquished
the Rakshas, I will bestow on R&ma the lady of the Ikshwaku
race like the fruit of asceticism conferred on an ascetic.”
Having thus reflected for a space, the mighty-armed
offspring of the Wind-god, his senses agitated with anxiety,
arose. “I bow unto Ra&ma with Lakshmana, and unto the
revered daughter of Janaka, I bow unto Rudra, and Indra,
and Yama, and Wind-god, and I bow unto the Moon, unto
Fire and unto the Maruts.” Having bowed unto them all,
as also unto Sugriva, the offspring of the Wind-god, survey-
ing all the cardinal points, mentally entered the Asoka wood.
Having mentally entered the Asoka wood, that monkey, son
unto the Wind-god, reflected as to what he should do next.
The sacred Asoka wood, sanctified with every purifying rite
and abounding in woods, needs must be full of Rakshas.
And warders, directed there to, forsdoth, protect the trees;
and that worshipful Soul of the universe* does not breathe
here vigorously. I contract my person in the interests of
Rama, and in order that Ravana may not seeme, May
all the deities along with the saints confer success on me.
And may the revered self-create Brahm&, and the deities,
and the.ascetics, and Fire, and wind, and the much invoked
bearer of the Vajra,t and the noose-handed Varuna, and
the Moon and the Sun, the hightouled Agwinis, and all the
Maruts—{confer) success (on me}! And alt beings, and the
: *Thewind—T. © : he
oy + Indra —T,


937 RAWAYANA. * :


lord of them all,* and others that, albeit not specified in the
scriptures, are yet visible in the way,—will confer success
on me, When shall I behold the blameless face of that noble
lady,—with its protruding nose; having luminous smiles,
having eyes resembling lotus-petals; and bright as the
complacent lord of stars? Ah! to-day how shal} feeble foriorn
one that hath been borne down by the force of the mean,"
abject and grim-visaged (RAvana), fierce yet wearing (at the,
time of the rape), a dress tending to inspire confidence,
come in my sight ?”


SECTION XIV.


Hayne reflected for a while, on mentally met with
her, that highly energetic one lee from the wall of
Ravana’s mansion on to that (of the -.. ote wood). And
all his frame filled wjth delight, that mighty n.onkey, station-
ed on the wall, saw various trees having their <ops furnished
with flowers through spring and the other seasons,—sa/as
and asokas, bhavyas, champakas, udalakas, and ndgas, and
those bearing fruits sesembling the mouths of monkeys;
and those relative to mango woods,—with hundreds of plants.
And (Hanum&n) Jeapt into the garden like an arrow let go
from tle bow string. Entering into the grove, variegated
all over ; resonant with the notes of birds; filled on all sides
with golden and silvern trees; many-hued with birds and
beasts ; contaiuing dainty tracts of trees like unto the risen
Sun,—the powerful Hanum4n saw the place surrounded with
various kinds of trees, havipg fruits and flowers , frequented
by maddened coels and d4ramaras, with creatures expressing
happiness by theic movements, birds and beasts overflowing


tT.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 933


with spirits ; echoing with the cries of peacocks; furnished
with various species of fowls. And as he was searching for
that surpassingly beautiful and blameless daughter of the king,
that monkey awakened the monkeys that were sleeping
sweetly, And blown against by the wind caused by. the wings
of the birds as they flew upwards, various and variegated
trees showered down blossoms. And in the midst of the’*
Asoka wood, Hanuman, son unto the Wind-god, covered over
with flowers, looked lovely like a hill strewn with blossoms.
And all creatures, beholding that monkey embosomed among”
trees and darting on all sides, took him for spring. And
strewao with several masses of blossoms Idosened from the
trees, the Earth appeared beauteous like a damsel dight with:
ornaments. And shaken in diverse ways by the motich of
the light fleeting monkey, the trees showered many-hued
flowers. And with their leaves and tops torn, and their flowers
and fruits shrivelled up, the trees looked like worsted gamb+,
Jers bereft of their clothes. And shaken by Hanumin
vehemently moving about, those excellent trees crowned with
fruits, speedily cast off fruits, flowers and foliage. And
moved by the Wind-god’s offspring, the trees with their trunks
left, and forsaken by the fowls were incapable of harbouring
any creatures. And like youthful fair ones with hair dis-
hevelled, their paste worn off, their upper lips with fair teeth
sucked of their moisture; and having their persons torn with
nails and teeth; appeared the Asoéa wood with its trees
shattered ; and itself ground with the tail, bands and legs (of
Hanum4n), And that monkey with his vehemence scattered
the clusters of shrubs, like the wind violently scattering
clouds in the rainy season. And ranging there, the monkey
saw beautiful pavements, jewelled, silvern aud golden. And
che saw there various pools @lled with excellent water and
having steps crusted. with jewels. Their sandy soil was
filted with pearls and corals, and the ground inside was made
of crystal. Aad their banks were decked with diverse golden


934 ’ Raw yANA.


trees. They were beautified with full blown lotuses, water-
lilies, Chakvavakas and Natyukas* and filled with the notes
of swans and Sérasas. They were encircled on all sides
with big tanks having trees on their banks and water, clear
and sweet like unto nectar. They were entwined with
hundreds of creepers, covered with Santénat flowers and filled
«with diverse groves and Xaraviras serving the purpose of
windows.~ And thereupon that foremost o. monkeys beheld
there a mountain—the most picturesque in the world, resem-
“bling clouds, having high summits, covered on all sides with
peaks and filled with hilly abodes and various trees. And that
monkey beheld there a river falling down from the * . untain
‘like unto a damsel falling down from the lap of her beloved,
‘And the branghes of the trees touching the water (of the
stream) resembled a fair damsel prevented by her.dear com-
panions ‘from forsaking the company of her beloyed). And
s‘that great monkey beheld further down the stream turning
back like unto the damsel, pleased, going back to her dear
one. And that foremost of monkeys, Hanumin, the son of
M&ruti, beheld, at some distance, ponds filled with lotuses
and various birds. And he saw a big artificial pond full of
cool water having stairs crusted with excellent jewels and its
sandy banks filled with pearls. It was embellished (on all
sides) with various animals, diverse trees and big mansions
made by Viswakarm4§ himself. It was adorned all around
with artificial forasts and all the trees there bore flowers and
fruits, spteading their branches like unto umbrellas and
having golden and silvern pavements under them. And that
great monkey beheld there one golden Singsapal| tree
* A gallinale.—T.
+, One of the trees of beaven,—T.
$ Literally the passages means “making a gap in that forest thickly filled
with trees.” But Rémasuja interprets thus and we have adopted his interpre-
tation—T. © A
# The son of Brahmé and artist of gbda—T.
1 A tree (Dalbergia Sisa).—T. :


SUNDARAKANDAM. 935,


surrounded on all sides with golden pavements. Andhe
saw the ‘glebe, the bill streams and many 2 golden tree
* resembling fire. By the lustre of all those trees that heroic

monkey appeared as if made of gold like unto the Sun
by'the touch of the mount Sumeru. And having seen those
beautiful golden trees, shaken by the wind and makisg a
sound like that of a Xindins ;* having flowery tops and new
leaves he was greatly amazed. And climbing that Singsapa
tree enveloped with leaves that monkey, gifted with velocity,
reflected—“Perchance I may see Vaidehi, exercised with
gtief, anxious to behold Rima and wandering hither and
thither at her pleasure. Certainly this is the picturesque
Asoka forest of that vicious-souled one, embellished with
sandal, Champakas and Vakulas. Here is a beautiful pond
abounding in lotuses, thronged with birds and forsooth shall
that royal spouse Janaki repair hither. She is the beloved,
queen of R&ghava and expert in walking inthe garden, And
separated from Rima, certainly shall Janaki repair hither,
Or she having the eyes of a young antelope and adept in
roaming in the forest, exercised with thought touching Rima,
shall come here. Or she having beautiful eyes aud fohd of
ranging in the forest, racked with sorrow in consequence of
Rama’s separation, doth always frequent this forest.t Ere
this, the chaste and worshipful spouse of Rima—Janaka’s
daughter, used to love always the birds and animals of the
forest. (The morning hath set in) and serely the beautiful
and graceful daughter of Janaka fond of performing morning}
ablutions, shall come to this river of pure water to perform
them. Truly is this beautiful forest of Asoka the worthy

* A kind of tlokling ornament—T.

+ The commentator, Raméauja interprets this aloha as explaining the cause
of Sidt's frequentiug the Asoka forest —T.

t Sandays literally means the polat of time which connects day and night,
It however, generally means the period after sunset and before the night sets
in, “But here with reference to the speech which Asnumda began by the Soa.
of alghe, it yeans the morning —T,


936 RIMATANA.


abode of the beloved and chaste spouse of Rama, the lord
of men. [f that one of moon-like countenance breathes,
forsooth shall she come to this river of cool water.” Having
arrived there and anxiously expecting the appearance of the
spouse of that lord of men, the high-souled Hanuman hiding
himself (on the Singsapa tree) enveloped with flowers and
leaves, beheld all. ‘


SECTION XV.


Havine stationed himself on the tree, casting his
looks all aréund in quest of Sit& and looking down on the
carth he surveyed the entire forest of (Asoka). It was beauti-
fied with Santdnaka creepers and various trees, fragrant
with celestial odours and was embellished on all sides. It
resembled Nandana or the celestial garden, and was filled
with various animals and birds, palaces and mansions;
resounded with the notes of Ko&z/as; adorned with the ponds
abounding in silvern water-lillies and Jotuses; filled with
many seats and coverlets and various houses having spacious
courtyards; adorned with beautiful flowers of all seasons and
trees bearing fruits. And the beauty of the blossoming
Asokas resembled the effulgence of the Sun. And stationed
there Mfruti belield trees as if devoid of leaves on account
of the hundreds of birds, adorned with various flowers,
resorting there. And-he saw there the earth touched by
Asoka trees, the removers of grief. having flowers growing
from the roots and lowered down with their weight. And
the entire quarter was as if ablaze with the beauty of the
flowery Karntharas and Kingsukas. And there appeared in
beauty many flowery Punnagas, Saptaparnas, Champakas,
atd Udalakas having deeply expanded roots. And there
‘was a thousand of Asoka trees, some of whom were like


SONDARAKINDAM. 9n7


gold, some were like the flame of fire and some were like
dark-blue collyrium. It was like the garden of Naadana or
like that of Kuvera or perhaps it surpassed the both in excel-
lence. And enveloped in charming, celestial grace beyond
conception and having flowers for stars that forest appeared
like a second sky. And covered with hundreds of pearl-fike
flowers the forest looked like the fifth ocean. And that
garden was embellished with flowers of all s€asons and honey-
smelling trees, and filled with diverse notes and various
animals and birds. And that fragrant garden was rendered
more charming with various other fragrahces. And that
foremost of monkeys beheld in that garden of Asoka, a round
palace, situated at a distance, fragrant as the GandhamAdéna
mountain and high as the lord of mountains. (The
palace) was white as the Kailaga hill and built on
thousand pillars. All its stairs were made of coral
and its pavements made of burning gold. Its beauty
was as if burning all along and stealing the vision of the
lookers-on. It was spotless and on account of its height
touched the welkin. And thereupon he beheld there (Sit)
wearing a soiled cloth, poorly, greatly reduced by fast, sigh-
ing again and again and encircled by a band of Rikshasees.
She was (however) spotless like unto the rays of the moon
on the first lunar day. And her graceful beauty could with
gteat difficulty be perceived like unto the flame of fire:
enveloped with smoke. And wearing a shattered and soiled
yellow cloth and divested of all ornaments she appeared like
a@ lotus stalk without lotuses.* Oppressed, racked with grief,
weakened and chaste as she was, she appeared like Rohini
possessed by Kefu. She was greatly reduced by fast,
stricken with grief and anxioys thoughts, disturbed with
sorrow and was poorly and her eyes were always full of tears,


——
* This passage bes another meanlng—Padmyal bes two meaninge®
(4) lotus (a) Lotshe or the goddess of wealth. The goddess of weak ls:
generally descrifed as sitting on a lotus.—T.
3


938 RANEYANA.


Separated from her kith and kin’ and not beholding Rima and
Lakshmana* but the R&kshasees, she appeared like a hind
surrounded by dogs. Her braid of long hair resembling a
black serpent falling on her back it appeared as if the Earth
was filled with dark-blue forests on the disappearance of the
rains. She was worthy of happiness only and never knew
of misery and therefore she was (now) greatly oppressed with
sorrow. And beholding that one of expansive eyes rendered
pale and feeble, Hanum&o, by various conclusive arguments
reflected within himself ‘She must be Sit&, for this damsel
looks just like ‘her, whom I saw, when she was ravished by
Rivana, assuming shapes at will, Having the countchance
of the full-moon, beautiful eye brows, round breast, she is as
if dispelling the darkness from all quarters by virtue of
her grace. Her throat was. yellow, and her lips were like
Bimbas.t She was of middle stature and her limbs were all
well built. She had eyes resembling lotus petal and was
like the beloved wife of Manmatha—Rati and was adorable
unto the whole creation like the rays of the full-moon. That
one having a graceful person was seated on the earth like a
female agcetic having her senses restrained. And she was
sighing again and again like the timid daughter-in-law of
the lord of serpents.t Entangled by a mighty web of grief
her grace was greatly lessened and she appeared like the
“flame of fire enveloped in smoke. She was like unto Smriti
of doubtful meanings, fallen wealth, lost respect, hope with-
out any desire for gain, Sidhe§ of many troubles, sullied
understanding and fame soiled with false rumours. That
innocent one was greatly distressed for not being able to


© Priydjanom—titeraily means dear oner—but here it refers to Rima and
Lakshmana—T. .

+ A cleurbltuceous plant with red fruits. —T.

$ The epithet has a special significance because through her the destruction
ek the race of Rakshasas wes bronght about.—T.

§ Yoga or asceticism by virtue of which final emancipation from existence
leeffected.—T. °


SUNDARARANDAM. 93>


attend upon Rama, and she having the eyes of a young hind,
being oppressed by the R&kshasees was casting her looks
hither and thither. And with a displeased countenance, hav+
ing dark-blue and curling eye Jashes,and eyes full of tears, she
‘was sighing again and again. Worthy of wearing ornamesnt
but now without any, poorly, crusted with execrations, she
appeared like the rays of the stars enveloped by dark-blue
clouds, And beholding Sit& in that pitiable plight like unto
learning for want of practice, (Hanumin) was puzzled with
doubts. And seeing her without ornaments he could with
great difficulty make her out like unto words,having different
meanings without the knowledge of grammar. And behold.
ing that blameless daughter of the king, having expansive
eyes, Hanuman, by various reasonings, reflected—'Forsooth
she must be Sit& I see at her person all these ornaments,
of which Rama mentioned unto me at the time of my depar-
ture. I behold on her ears excellent ear-rings and nicely
placed Svadangstras* and on her arms jewelled ornaments
rendered dark-blue by dirt for constant use. Verily these
are the ornaments Rima mentioned unto me. I do not
perceive them which had been cast off by her. But these are
the rest there is not the least doubt about it. The monkeys
had seen, her excellent yellow cloth made of golden fibres,
on the hill. They had seen also her excellent ornaments,
which cast off by her, fell on the earth with a sound. Her
cloth hath been shattered by constant use but her grace hath
not been rendered worse than its color. This one having a
golden countenance must be the beloved queen of Rama, who,
albeit separated [rom him, hath not disappeared from his mind.
This is that damsel on whose account R&ma being simultane-
ously burnt by affection, pity, grief and amour,—affection in
consequence of his beloved spouSe being ravished, pity for
his inability to protect one dependent on him, grief for the
Joss'of his beloved wife and Amour for his dear one. Verily


@ * A kind of ornament worn on the ears.—T.


geo RAMAPANA,


it appeareth from the grace of her person, from her well
developed limbs and from Rama’s beauty that this worshipful
damsel having dark-blue eyes must be his spouse. She has
her mind fixed in him, and he in her and it is for this that
she and the virtuows-souled (R&ma) have been still main-
taining their being. Indeed my master Rama hath performed
a mighty task for breathes he stil! in her separation, without
consuming himself in grief.” Ana having beheld Sita in
this plight, that son of the Wind-god approached Rama in
mind and showered praises on his master.


SECTION XVI.


2 having eulogized Sit&, worthy of being praised and
Ruma, endeared by accomplishments that foremost of mon-
keys again engaged in meditation. And having reflected
for some time, the powerful Hanuman, having his eyes full
of tears bewailed on Sit&’s account (in the following strain)
"No one can withstand the course of destiny since Sit8,
being the spouse of the worshipful brother of Lakshmana,
ever obedient unto his elders, hath been overwhelmed
with grief. The worshipful damsel is cognizant of the
prowess of R&ma and the intelligent Lakshmana and for
this she is no€ entirely depressed like unto the river
Ganges at the approach of the rainy season. As regards
their character, age, conduct, family and other auspicious
marks they ate equal and hence Raghava deserveth Vaidehi
and this one of dark-blue eyes is his.” And having seen her,
gold-hued and conducing to the happiness of the people
like unto the Goddess of wealth, Hanum&n approached
Rama in his mind and said s—"For this (damsel) was killed
the mighty Vali a@d Kavanda—Ravana‘s equal in prowess.
For her (too) was destroyed in battle, the terribly powerful


SUNDA RARINDAM. oar


Rikshasa—Viradha,by Rima,putting forth his energy,like unto
Shambara killed by Mahendra. (It was for her) that fourteen
thousand Rakshasas of terrible deeds were destroyed at
Janasthana with arrows resembling the flame of fire. And
Khara was killed in battle, and Trishar& was discomfitted and
the mighty Dushana by Rama, knowing his ownself. Ang it
was on her account that Sugriva, known all over the world,
came by the wealth of the monkeys hard to acquire and
amassed by V&li. And it is for this (damsel) of expansive
eyes that I have crossed the effulgent lord of rivers and have
seen this city. And methinks it would have,been all proper
bad Rima turned on her account the whole earth bounded
by oceans. If the kingdom over the three worlds and the
daughter of Janaka be compared together, the former is not
equal to one hundredth part of Sits. This Sita, the daughter
of the high-souled Janaka, the pious King of Mithila, firmly
attached unto her husband, rose, covered with dust, out of
the earth, in a field delved by a furrow. She is the well-
known eldest daughter-in-law of the king Dagaratha, of
an adorable character and unchecked prowess. And She is
the beloved spouse of the pious and grateful Rama, know-
ing his ownself, and has been brought under the control of the
Rékshasees. Renouncing all Juxuries, and considering not
the least about miseries, she actuated by her husband’s love
entered the solitary forest. And satisfied with fruits and roots
and ever engaged in her husband’s servicé, she lived in the
forest as much delighted as she was in her house. And
that one of a golden hue, never used to afflictions and who
was wont to converse always with a delighted countenance,
hath now been suffering incomparable miseries. Like unto
a thirsty wight longing for an abode where he might get
a drink, Raghava panteth after seeing her, gifted with an
exalted character and oppressed by Ravana. As a monarch
who had lost his kingdom, is greatly delighted when fe
wegainethe it, forsooth shall Ra&ghava, in like manner,


942 ' RANE PANS.


be pleased when he shall come by her. She too hath been
maintaining her being in the hope of seeing Rama again,
separated as she is from her friends and deprived of al?
comforts and luxuries. These Rééshasees, and these trees
enveloped with fruits and flowers—forsooth she doth not
behold, but is engaged with all her heart in medidations
only touching Rama, Husband enbanceth the beauty of
a female more than the dress (an* fherefure Sit&) beautiful
as she is, doth not appear graceful, in her hushand’s absence,
Forsooth my master Rima hath performed a difficult act for
he hath been stilt keeping up his life in her separation
without consuming himself in grief. My heart js greatly
pained knowing that she, having dark-biue eyes, resembling
lotus petals, worthy of happiness, hath been possessed by
grief. She, patient as the Earth, having eyes resembling
lotuses, who was ere this protected by Raghava and
Lakshmana, is now being guarded by R&kshasees having
terrible eyes, under the trees. Being harassed with continued
miseries, the daughter of Janaka hath lost all her beauty
like unto a water-lily crushed with frost, and hath come by
a miserable plight like unto a doe seperated from her mate.
The branehes of the Asoka trees, lowered down with flowers
are as if enhancing her gricf as also the Moon of many
thousand rays, at the expiry of the winter.” Having reflec-
ted thus and arrived at the conclusion that she was Sit8,
that powerful leader of monkeys gifted with velocity stationed
himself on that tree.


SUNDARAKENDAM. 943


SECTION Xvil.


Trerzvron the Moon, white as water-lily and of clear
appearance proceeded far down the welkin like unto, a
goose traversing the blue waters. With a view to befriend
him, the Moon of clear rays, spriikled the Wind-God’s son,
with cool beams. And thereupon he beheld Sila, having a
moon-like countenance, plunged in grief like unto a laden
boat sunk in water. While beholding Vaidehi, Hanumin,the son
of M&ruta,observed at some distance,a number of grim-visaged
R&kshasees. Some had one ear, some one eye, some had hig
ears some was without ears ; some had formideble ears and
some had a nose projecting upwards, And some had the
upper part of their bodies unusually long and bulky, some had
along and slender neck, some had dishevelled hair, and
some one's person was so thickly covered with hairs, that she
appeared to have been cloaked in a blanket. Some had long
¢ars some had a long forehead, some had a long belly, some
had long breasts ; some had long lips ; some had their lips and
chins stuck together, some had a long countenance and some
had long knees. Some one was of short stature, some was
tall, some crooked, some gtim-visaged, some dwarfish, some
one was of terribly dark colour ; some had a disfigured coun-
tenance ; some had coppery eyes and a feafful face, Some
were terrible-looking, some copper-colored, some black, some
angry and some fond of quarrelling with each other; and
some had iron darts, hammers and mallets in their hands,
Some had a face like that of a boar, some had a face like
that of a deer, some like that of a tiger, some like that ofa
‘buffallo, some tike that of a goat, and some like that ofa
jackal ; some had legs like those of a camel, some had those
of an elephant, some those of a Morse and some hdd
their heads placed on their breasts. Some one had only one


rr RIMLLANA,


hand some had only one leg. Some had ears like those of a
horse, some like those of a cow, some like those of an ass,
some like those of an elephant and otbera had ears like those
ofalion, Some had very big noves, some had crooked
and others were without any ; some had noses like those of
anselephant and others had their noses on their foreheads.
Some had their legs like those of elephants some had very
huge legs ;_ some had like those of a cow, some bad on their
legs locks of hair like unto pillars, some had a terribly huge
head, some had big breasts and others had spacious bellies,
Some had faces and eyes beyond ordinary proportions.~ Some
bad a long face and tongue. And some had the face of a
goat, some that of an elephant some that of a cow, some
that of a béar some that of a horse and some that of an ass,
Some of the Rakshasees were grim-visaged and some hot-
» natured, quarrelsome and had darts and maces in their hands,
And some terrible Rakshasees of disfigured countenances,
had smoky-coloured hairs. And they were all continually
drinking wine—always fond of liquor and meat, and all
their bodies were sprinkled with blood for their tiving
on gore and flesh.’ And that foremost of monkeys
found afl these grim-visaged Kakshasees seated around
that mighty tree enveloped with branches. And the grace-
ful Hanum&n observed at the foot of that tree that worship-
ful and blameless daughter of the king Janaka. She
was bareft of" all effulgence, racked with grief and alt
her hairs were soiled with dirt. She appeared like a star fallen
down on the earth on the wane of virtue. And famed though
she was all over the world for her chastity, it was difficult
for her now to see her husband. She had no excellent orna-
ments—her attachment unto her husband was the only
ornament. She was imprisoned by the lord of R&kshasas
and separated from all her friends, she appeared like a she-
efephant separated fr8m her-band and bound and attacked
by a lion, and like the rays of the Moon enveloped with


SUNDARAKANDAM. os


clouds at the expiry of the rainy season. Her beauty was
greatly faded (in consequence of her husband's separa-
tion) like unto a stringed instrument for want of a player.
And ever engaged in her husband's welfare she was
thoroughly unwogthy of being brought under the control
of the Rakshasas. Beiag sunk in the abyss of griefand
encircled by those R&kshasees she appeared in the forest
of Asoka like unto Rohini possessed by Rahu. And Hanu-
min beheld her there like a creeper divested of flowers.
And having her person soiled with dirt and shorn of alt
ornaments she appeared in her hidden grace like untoa
lotus covered with clay. And the monkey Hanum4n, beheld
that damsel, having the eyes of a young antelope, clothed
with a soiled and shattered cloth. And thoggh the coun-
tenance of that worshipful one was shorn of all grace, her
heart did not foose its loftiness in consequence of her,
husband’s prowess, And Sit&, of dark-blue eyes, was protected
by virtue of her own character. And beholding Sit%, having
the eyes of a young antelope, and terrified and casting her
looks hither and thither like a hind and burning down the
trees enveloped with leaves by her breath ; like unto a mass of
grief and an upheaval of sorrow ; having well-préportioned
limbs, and appearing graceful without ornaments, Maruti
attained to an excess of delight. And bebolding her having
inebriete eyes, Hanumin shed tears of delight and bowed
unto Righava, And having offered his obefsance unto Rima
and Lakshmana the powerfal Hanumin, greatly delighted
in seeing Siti, remained there hidden.


11g


Bt) RAMAYANA,


SECTION xviii.


Ano beholding the fores ~Glied with fowery trees and
desiring to have a full view of her, he, well-nigh,-spent the
. night, And at that late hour of the night, he heard the
chantings of the Vedas by the Rakshasas, conversant with
the eix supplementary parts of the Vedas,* engaged in the
performance of sacrificial rites and knowing Brahm&. And
thereupon the mighty Ten-headed Rakshasa,having huge arms,
awoke with the sounds of those auspicious i¢struments,
pleasant unto ears, And awaking, that great and powerful
Jord of Rikehasas, having his cloth and garlands loosened,
" began to think of Vaidehi. And that Rikshasa, puffed up
With pride, was passionately attached unto her and so ha
could not restrain his amour in him. And so adorned, with:
all ornaments, he, casting his looks on the roads contafaing
jewelled and golden gates and appearing in gtace,entered the
forest of Asoka, filled with various trees containing fruits and
flowers of all seasons and with ponds ; beautified with various
flowers ; variegated with inebriete and wondrous birds; filled
with various beautiful wolves ; thronged with various deer
and covered with fruits fallen on the earth, And one hun-
dred damsels followed in the train of the son of Pulastyat
like unto the damsely of the celestials and Gandharvas
following Mahendra. And among those fair Ones, some
cartied chowrtes and some fans. And Some carrying water
in golden jars headed the train while others carrying the
golden throne covered with a coverlet followed it. Anda
favourite damsel carried in her right hand a jewelled drink.
ing bowl filled with wine. And another carrying the white


Grammar, Prosody, astronomy, prapounclation, the meaning W& the
anueual terms and the ritual®£ the Hiade religion —T, tay
+ Refers to Ravana, Pulastya being his fathes—T,


SUNDARAEENDAR. - 98%:


‘embrefia having golden ribs resembling the full moon ‘and*
goose, followed in the train. And in this wise the excellent
wives, of Ravana, having their eyes rendered sleepy with’
sleep and wine, followed their heroic husband like unto light-:
aings following the cloud. Their necklaces and keyuras were
displaced, paste faded, hair dishevelled and they bad drops
of sweat on their faces. With sleep and intoxication, were:
reeling those fair ones of beautiful countenances, having:
their hairs with garlands disbanded and their persons wet
with per: tion. And in this way those beloved wives, (of
R&vana) having inebriete eyes, followed, put of amour and
reverence, their husband. And their mighty husband, brought
under the control of amour and having his mind firmly at-
tached unto Sit&, proceeded slowly. And that monkey, son
of Maruta, heard the sound of danchees and nupuras of those
excellent damsels. And the monkey Hanumin also beheld
Ravana, of extraordinary deeds and of inconceivable”
prowess and strength, at the gate. His whole body wus.
seen on all sides by the light of the lamps lighted with
perfumed oil and carried by the Rakshasces before. He waa
inflamed with amour, pride and haughtiness and his expan.
sive eyes were coppery and idle. And he appeared like
Cupid himself just appearing in view, leaving behind his
bow and arrows. And holding his excellent robe, covered
with flowers, washed, set with jewels and white as the
foam of the churned nectar, he placed it ia its proper place.
And Hanum&n,hiding himself on the tree, inthe midst of matiy
leaves and flowers, tried to recognise him as he approach-
ed. And beholding him, that foremost of monkeys saw that-
highly famous king R&vana, surrounded by his excellently
beautiful and youthful wives, enter that forest of enjoyment
filled with birds and animals. ‘Fhere was a warder by name
Sankukarna in that forest—highly powerful, wearing various
ornaments and addicted f drinkings And ‘by him was.
seen that lord of Rakshasas—the son of Pisravase. And .


948 _ RAMAPANS.


that highly energetic monkey beheld that effulgent (R&vana)
sarrounded by excellent damsels like unto moon encircled
by stars, And beholding him the monkey reflected—“This
must be Rivana—for he is the person whom I saw sleeping
in an excellent apartment in that city.” Thinking this, that
highly effulgent son of Maruta—Hanumin loaped-(high upon
another branch). And effulgent as he was, that highly
intelligent monkey hid himself on a branch covered with
leaves, being unable to stand before the effulgence of that
Rakshasa. And Ravana proceeded in that way, being anxious
to behold the blue-eyed Sita, having spacious breast, excel-
Jent hips and a lock of black hair.


SECTION XIX.


Ano thereupon beholding Ravana—the lord of Rikshsas-
as, gifted with youth and beauty and adorned with an
excellent dress, that excellent and blameless daughter of a
king, Vaidehi, trembled like unto a plantain tree shaken by
the wind. And having covered her belly with her legs
sand her breast with her hands, that one, having charming
colour and expansive eyes, cried aloud. And arriving there
the Ten-necked one beheld Vaidehi, guarded by the
Rakshasees, poorly,racked with grief like unto a boat sunk in
an ocean, Subject to hard Penances, she, seated on the
bare earth, appeared like a branch of a tree fallen on the
ground. Her limbs, wheré he used to wear ornaments, were
covered with dirt and albeit worthy of ornaments, appeared
without any like unto a lotus covered with clay and therefore
shining very indistinctly. And she was proceeding as it were
unto that lion of a king—Rama, knowing his own-self, in her
mind’s charriot drawg by the hofses of resolution. And not
beholding the end of her grief, that damsel, attaghed unto


SUNDARARANDAM. 949


Rima, was keeping alone and reduced to a skeleton and
overwhelmned with anxious thoughts and grief. And she
was troubled like unto the daughter-in-law of the lord of
serpents, of impeded course hy means of incantations, and
atricken with grief like unto Rohini, possessed hy Xefu. And
although born in a pious family, well behaved and godd-
natured and married according to their rites, she appenred
to have been sprung from a low race and wedded according
to their base ceremonials. She seemed like mighty fame
disappearing, like respect disregarded, like intellect waning
and hope disappointed ; like a sacred alta’ trampled, like
royal mandate disobeyed, like the quarters bnrat by a fire-
hrand ; like offerings unto God soiled; like the afise of the
full-moon stricken with darkness, a lotus distressed, an armv
without a leader; like the ravs of the moon enveloped with
gloom, like a river of shallow water, like a sacrificial altar
possessed by an outcast, like the flame of fire extinguished ;
like water fowls terrified and lotuses disturbed and petala
crushed by the trunks of elephants. And her grace greatly
famished by the absence of her husband she appeared like a
river whose liquid contents were dried up. And ngt clean-
ing her limbs she appeared like a dark night. And that one
of graceful limbs, tender and worthy of living in a jewelled
abode, being stricken with grief, seemed like a dried lotus-
stalk just extracted from its bed. And she like the daughter-
in-law of the lord of elephants,caught,separated from her band
and tied to a pillar,was overwhelmed with grief and was sighing
again and again. A long lock of dark-blue hair, taken not the
least care of, was on her.back; and with this she appeared like
unto the earth covered with dark-blue forests at the expiration
of the rainy season. With fasts and grief, anxiety and fear,she
was greatly weakened and reduced and gave up eating and
took recourse to asceticism only. Stricken with grief, she
seemed to have been offering prayers unto that foren.ost
of Raghus fér the destruction of the Ten-necked one, like


950 " RAMAPANA.


those unto the deities with folded hands. Aad beholding that
blameléss Maithilee, having expansive eyes with beautifuk
eyo lashes, greatly attached unto R&ma, and weeping,
Ravana tempted her for his own destruction.


SECTION XX.


Tersveow R&vana, with sweet words and gestures, ex-
pressed his own desire unto Sit&, poorly, deprived of joy,
encircled by Rakshasees and leading the life of an ascetic:
“thou having thighs like the trunks of elephants, while
thou hast, beholding me, hidden thy breast and belly, perhaps
thou art afraid of exposing thy person unto me. I do long
for thee, O thou having expansive eyes; do thou esteenr
me, © my dear one, O thou gifted with all accomplishments
and pleasant unto all persons. O Sita, here is no human
being or any Rakshasa assuming shapes at will, do thow
therefore renounce ali fear from me. O timid damsel,
for certgin it is the virtue of the Rakshasas that they always
visit others’ wives or come by them by force. In spite of
this, O Maithilee, I do not touch thee for thou art not under
the influence of amour—but for me, Iam completely under
its sway. Do nat fear me, O worshipful damsel, confide in me
O my‘ beloved one, and become attached unto me. Do
mot give way to grief. A single lock of hair, to lie down
on earth and useless faat—~these do not become thee, Attain-
ing me, O Maithilee, do thou enjoy excellent garlands,
sandal, -ornaments, costly wines, beds, seats, songs, danc+
ing and ‘music. Thou arte a jewel of a female; do thou


not therefore remain in this guise. Put on thy ornaments


therefore, How . : shaigthou, gemain unadorned obtaining
me, O thou of & “Apeausifyl figure? This thy béautifut


. youth is passing away, ‘which ike the current of a river


: SUNDARAKANDAM ‘gst


when. once gone, doth not turn back. O thou of a fair look,
having created thee, the artist of Gods, the maker of
celestial beauties, hath’ ceased from his work, for a match
of thy beauty 1 find in none. Who is there, O Vaidebi,
‘avho can withstand the influeace of amour, getting thee,

gifted with beauty and youth? (What of others) evén
Brahm, the grand-father of the celestials, is moved. O
thou having a moon-like countenance, and well-developed ‘
hips, whatever limbs of thiae, { behold, I find my gaze fixed
‘therein. © Maithilee, do thou become my spouse, and
renounce this delusion. Do thou become the foremost queen,
of all my excellent wives. O timid one, all the jewels that.
{ have collected from the three worlds, and all m kingdom

I shall coufer on thee. O sportive damsel, for thy satisfaction,

TU shall conquer the whole earth, engarlanded by many cities,
and bestow it upon Janaka. Find I none on this earth
who can withstand my prowess. Do thou behold my
matchless prowess in battle. The celestials and Asuras.
are incapable of withstanding me, defeated as they were
by me in battle and their pennons struck down, Do thou
therefore desire me to-day, dress thyself in excellent robes
and adorn thyself in beautifully brilliant ornaments. °T shalt
behold thy dazzling beauty when adorned with ornaments. -
For pity unto me, do thou embellish thyself with ornaments,
O thou of a graceful countenance. O timid damsel, do thaw,
at thy pleasure, enjoy all sorts of comforts and lunaries,
and do thou, as thou desirest, confer wealth and land
others, Do thou confiding in me, ask for thy wished-fag:
objects and do thou command me like unto an unmanaégly.
damsel. Thou shalt, by asking favours from me, satisfy. the
desires of thy friends. O gengle lady, O thou of
renown, du thou observe my prosperity. “What .
thou do with Rama, wearing bark, U thou of

presence, Rima hath ceased from bis endeavours for, 3
victory, He hath fost all his beauty, lives in the Fong


ost RAMAFANA,


engaged in observances and always lies down on earth. 1 fear
whether he is living still. O Vaidehi, Rima shall not be
able to see thee like unto the rays of the moon covered
with blue clouds preceded by Va/akés.* Raghava shall never
get thee back from my hands, like unto Hiranyakasipu


>" yable to regain his wife Keerti from Indra. O thou of


beautiful teeth, O thou having beautiful eyes, O sportive
damse!,O timid One, thou dost steal my mind like unto Garuda
catching serpents. Beholding thee, wearing a shattered
silken cloth, slender and without any ornaments, I do not find
any attachment ‘in my own wives. O daughter of Janaka,
do thon exercise, thy supremacy, over all my wives, living
in my seraglio and gifted with all accomplishments. O thou
having black hair, all my wives are foremost in beauty
over the three worlds. And they shall all attend thee like
unto Apsaras waiting upon the Goddess of wealth. O thou
having beautiful eye brows and well-developed hips, do
thou, along with me, enjoy at thy pleasure all the wealth
and riches of Kuvera.t O worshipful damsel, in asceticism,
strength or prowess, wealth or fame, Rama is not my equal.
Do thou therefore at ‘thy pleasure drink, enjoy and eat,
I shall confer on thee wealth and the whole earth, Do thou
satisfy all thy desires in me, O fair damsel, and let thy friends
be satisfied in thee. And adorned with a beautiful golden
necklace, O timid lady, do thou at thy pleasure, range
with me, in the forests, situated on the bank of the ocean,


and filled with flowery trees and black bees.”
eee


* A kind of crane—T, -
+ The God of wealth or Pluto in Greek myth.—T,


SUNDARAKANDAM. 958


SECTION xxI.


Heat those words of that terrible Rakshasa, Sita,
‘stricken with grief and of feeble voice, slowly replied—
Racked with grief, engaged in asceticism and weeping,
Sit’ began to tremble. And that excellent damsel, devoted
unto her busbaad, began to think of him. Placing a twig
before, that one, of beautiful smile, said—“Do thou take back
thy mind from me and place it in thy own wives. Like unto
a sinner unworthy of praying for final emancipation, it doth
not behove thee to expect to come by me. Devoted unto ohe
husband 1 shall never perpetrate such an inquiticus act,
I am born in a high and have been married in a pious
family.” Having accosted Ravana thus, the well-known
Vaidehi, turning her back, again spake unto him, saying—
“[ should not live with thee since I am another's wife
and chaste. Have thy eyes always on religion and do thou
follow in the track of piety. Like unto thine own wives,
others’ are worthy of being protected by thee, O ranger of
the night. Making an example of thee, do thou chjoy with
thy own wives. Forsooth those vicious-minded, those of
agitated senses, who are not satisfied with their own wives,
ate brought to misery by others’ wives. (Methinks) there
are no pious men here and even if there be ahy thou gost not
follow him since thou hast such an adverse understanding,
against human practice and usage. Or the considerate people
have spoken the truth, but thou, for the destruction of the
race of the R&kshasas, considering that false, hast not
followed it. Wealth, kingdom and cities—all are brought to
naught when they are placed“at the hands of a vicious and
illiterate king. Obtaining thee, (therefore) as her king and
for thy folly only, this cit}*of Lank&,sabounding in jewels,
shall soon be ruined. O R&vana, every one delighteth in

120


954 RIMIPANA.


the destruction of that inconsiderate being, who bhringeth
about his own destruction and is engaged in the perpetration
of evil deeds. And in this way, thyself, the perpetrator of
vicious acts, meeting with thy end, those persons who had
been tyranized by thee, shall, delightedly, say—"'Oh ! blessed
are we since this terrible (Rakshasa) hath met with his end.
With wealth or riches thou shalt not be able to tempt me,
As the rays of the sun belong to him, so } am Raghava’s
only. Having laid my head on the beautiful arms of that
Jord of men, how shall | place it again on another's ? Like
unto the knowledge of one God monopolized by tle Brahma-
nas only,f am the spouse of that Jord of earth only, cognisant
of* higher truths and marrying me according to the pious
ceremonials. May good betide thee, O Ravana. Do thou
take me unto Rama, stricken with grief as I am, like unto
a she-elephant anxiously waiting in the forest brought to the
lord of elephants. It hehoveth thee to make friends with
Rama, that best of men, if dost thou desire to maintain thy
empire and dost not wish to bring about thy own destruction,
It is known to the world, that Rima knoweth well the
sanctions of religion’ and is kind unto them who seek his
shelter. “Do ihou seek his friendship, if dost thou wish to
maintain thy life. Do thou propitiate him therefore who is
kind to his dependents and it becometh thee to take me
respectfully uoto him. Thou shalt meet with thy well-being
if dost thou in this wise confer me on that best of Raghus.
And mighty is the disaster that shall befall thee, if dost thou
follaw any other procedure. Thunderbolt, even, when hurled,
may leave thee, Death himself may overlook thee—but there
is no safety for thee, if Raghava, the lord of men is enraged.
Thou shalt hear the terrible sound of the twang of Rima’s
how, like unto the sound of the thunderbolt hurled by Indra.
Soon shail arrows,bearing the names of Rama and Lakshmana
and having fiery h@ads like Those of snakes, alight here.
And covered with danka leaves they shali undoubtedly cover


SUNDARAKANDAM. 955


the whole city and devastate it by destroying all the Raksh-
sas. Like unto Garuda pulling up the snakes, the Garuda-
like Rama shall pull up thy snake-like Rakshasas. And
like unto Vishnu recovering the effulgent Sree (the Goddess
of wealth) from the Asuras, by crossing over the three worlds
with three foot-steps, my husband, the conqueror of foes, shall
recover me from thee. Janasthana hath been devastated,the host
of Rakshasas Lath been killed, and thou hast been disabled.
Truly thou hast perpetrated an impious deed. O R&kshasa,
those two lions among men going out to enquire about the
illusive deer, 1 was ravished by thee, entering the empty
hermitage, O vile wight. And like unto a dog incapable
of standing before a tiger, it would have been impossible
for thee, to wait there in the presence of Rima and Laksh-
mana. If dost thou engage in conflict with them, thy
wealth and friends shall be of no avail unto thee (and
thou shalt be dis-comfitted) like unto one-handed Asura
Vitra by the two handed Indra.* Soon shall my husband,
with the assistance of Lakshmana, draw out thy life with
arrows, like unto the sun drying up, by his rays, shallow
water, Whether dost thou repair to the abode of Kuvera,
or whether dost thou, terrified, take refuge unto the assembly
of Varuna, thou shalt, for certain, be destroyed by the son
of Dagaratha, like unto a mighty tree broken down by
thunderbolt.


© The allusion is—the mighty Asura Vitra fought with Indra for a long
time even after he had his one hand chopped off.--T.


956 RAMAFPANA.


“SECTION XXET.


those harsh accents, that lord of Rakshasas,
replied unto Sita, of comely presence, With the following
unpleasant words’—"It is generally found ou earth that
the more a woman is courted by a man, the more she is
brought under his influence. (But for thee) the more kindly
Thave been behaving towards thee, the more roughly I have
been treated, Tculy doth my love for thee keep in control
the wrath like ‘unto a good charioteer restraining the
swerving stead. O mighty is @mony unto men, for on
whom this eour falleth, albeit she is an object of wrath,
becomes an object of kindness and affection. O thou of
fair countenance, it is for this reason, that | do not destroy
thee, although thou, who art engaged in false asceticism, art
worthy of being killed and dishonored. O Maithilee, for each
and every one of all those harsh words which thou hast
used by me, dost thou deserve death.” Having spoken
thus unto Vaidehi, Ravana, the lord of R&akhasas, having
his wrath subdued, again bespake Sit&: I shall wait
for those two months, of which I have made a contract,
after which thou shalt have to share my bed, O thou of a
comely presence. And even then if thou dost refuse to regard
me as thy husband, my cooks shall mince thy limbs with
steel and serve thee for my morning meal.” Beholding
the lord of R&akshasas_ remonstrate with the daughter of
Janaka in this wise, the daughters of the celestials and
Gandharbas became exceedingly sorry. Some with lips, some
with eyes, and some with gestures of their faces, they all con-
soled Sit&, thus distressed by that R&kshasa. And thus con-
soled by them, and being proud. gfher good conduct and her
husband’s heroism, ‘Sitd thus addressed R&vana, the lord


of Rakshasas, “Forsooth there is no person im this city


SUNDARAKANDAM. 957


who desireth thy welfare and therefore preventeth thee from
such an impious deed. Who is there in the three worlds,
who even desireth me in mind, who am the spouse of the
virtuous-souled (Rima) like unto ‘Indra’s Sachee. O thou
the vilest of the R&kshasas, for using those vicious words
towards the spouse of Rama, of immeasured prowess, repajr-
ing whither shalt thou escape vengeance? Like unto
an infuriated elephant encountering a hare in, the forest, thou
shalt O Vile! a hare as thou art, meet with that elephant-
like Rama, Thou art not ashamed of railing that lord of
Ikshwakus, #0 long as dost thou not come within his ken.
O base! why do not thy grim, terrible, coppery eyes, looking
so viciously at me, fall down on earth. O vicious wreteh,
Tam the spouse of that virtuous-souled (Rama) and daughter.
in-law of Dagaratha—using these vile words towards
me, why dost not thy tongue fall off? O Ten-necked
one, I can instantly reduce thee to ashes but for Rama’s
mandate and my ascetic observances. Thou couldst not have
ravished mé in the presence of the highly intelligent Rama.
And undoubtedly for thy destruction this hath been brought
about by God. Thou art heroic and Kuvera’s brother and
great in prowess, why didst thou then take me by stealth
after despatching Rama away from the hermitage?” Hear-
ing those words of Sit&, Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas,
whirling his grim eyes, looked towards the daughter of Janaka.
He was like unto a mass of blue clouds and his arms and
necks were long and spacious. He was gifted with elephan-
tine gaits and his tongues and eyes were sharp and flaming,
The. top of his crown was shaking and he had charming
garlands around his neck and his person sprinkled with paste.
He had crimson-coloured garlands and clothes on and his
charming arms were adorned with ornaments. Encircled
with a sword-belt around his waist he appeared like unto
Mandara, entwined by a Shake at thetime of the churning
of the ocean, With his two plump arms, that lord of


-958 RAMA FANA,


Rakshasas appeared like unto the hill Mandara with its two
huge summits. And adorned with a pair of Kundalas* resembl-
ing the newly risen Sun he looked like a hill covered with
two Asoka trees enveloped with crimson flowers and leaves.
He was like unto Kalgat tree and spring incarnate.
Apd albeit adorned, he looked terrible like unto a Castyat on
the cremalion-ground, And having his eyes red hot with ire,
sighing again gnd again like unto a snake and casting his
looks upon Sit, Ravana addressed her again, saying,—"O
thou following asceticism, this thy vow is without any
meaning and beyond the pale of morality. Even shall I
destroy thee to-day like unto the Sun dispelling darkness
with his rays.” Having thus addressed Maithilee, the ini-
mical king Ravana cast his looks towards the grim-visaged
Ra&kshasees, And amongthose Rakshasees, some had huge
ears, some had ears like those of kine,some had ears as long as
arms, some had Jong ears and others were withont any. And
some had legs like those of an elephant ; some had like those of
a cow and some had legs covered with hairs. And some had
one eye, some had one leg, some had capacious legs and some
were without any. And some had huge heads and necks and
some had breast and belly beyond proportions and some had
faces and eyes above human size. Some had huge tongues
and nails. And some were without noses. And some had
leonine faces, some had faces like those of kine and some
had those of Woars. And casting his look towards such
R&kshasees, he said—"Ye Rakshasees, do ye all endeavour
to bring Sita, the daughter of Janaka, under my control.
By good or bad conduct, by conciliation or gift, by threat or
blandishment, do ye so endeavour as Vaidehi’s soul might be
bent unto me.” And having ordered thus again and again,


* A kind of ornament worn on ears.—T.

+ A fabulous tree granting everything desired —T.

$ A monument or scwpture raised in bonor of a deceased porson;on the
site of a faneral pyre.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM 959


that lord of R&kshasas, stricken witl amour and ire, address-
ed Sit&, roaring fiercely, And thereupon approaching speedily
and embracing the Ten-necked one, one Rakshasee named
Dhdayamalini bespake him :—"Do thou sport with me.,
O great king. What shalt thou do with her ?—O lord of
Rakshasas—a human being,poorly and of a pale countenanee.
O great king, forsooth, the celestials have not destined for
her enjoyment all those objects which theu hast procured
by thy prowess. And agaiu he who desireth for an unwilling
dame burneth his own person—and he who desireth for a
willing damsel, attaineth excess of delight” Having said
this, the Rakshasee took away Ravana by force. And that
Rakshasa too, resembling a mass of clouds, laughing, turnéd
back. And that Ten-necked one, strode away as i®shaking the
whole earth and passed within (his queen's) abode resembling
the effulgent Sun. And encircling Ravana those daughters
of celestials Gandharbas and Nagas, entered into an excel-
lent abode. And having remonstrated with and left behind,
the firm and pious Sita with a trembling person, R&vana,
possessed by amour entered into his own palace.


SECTION xXiit.


“Haawine spoken thus unto Maithilee and commanded the
host of the Rakshasees, Ravana, a terror unto his enemies,
went away. And after that lord of Rakshasas had gone
away and entered his inner apartment, the hideous Raksha-
sees drew near Sit& And approaching Sita that terrible
host, almost faint with ire, addressed Vaidehi with the
following’ harsh words—“Thou dost not regard it highly,
Sit, that thou shalt becom’ the cho¢en wife of that high-
souled, and.great Ravana, the Ten-necked son of Pulastya.”


960 RAMAYANA.


Thereupon another Rakshasee named Ekjat&, with eyes
rendered coppery with ire, addressing Sita. having a small
navel, said,—'Pulastya is the fourth of the six Prajapatis,*
amind-bora son of Brahm& and celebrated in the world,
And the glorious ascetic, by name Bishrava was the mind-
born son unto Pulastya, effulgent like unto Prajapatis. O
large-eyed damsel! Of Visrava came Ravana terrible unto
his enemies. Aud it behoveth thee to become the consort of
that lord of Rakshasas. Scorn not the words I say unto thee,
O thou of comely presence.” Thereupon another Raksha-
see named Harijat’, having the eyes of a cat, and whirling
them with ire, said—*It becometh thee to be the wife
o& that lord of Rakshasas who smote the thirty three
celestials ang theic lord in battle. Dost thou not desire to
be hia wife, who is heroic, fof indomitable prowess and
who doth not turn back in battle? And turning away in
scorn from his beloved wife, highly esteemed, the mighty
king Ravana, desireth for thee. And leaving his inner
apartment enriched with thousand of females and adorned
with various jewels, Ravana shall adore thee.” And then
followed another RAkshasee by name Bikati—The king,
who by lais terrible prowess subdued the Gandharbast and
N&gas,t in battle, hath stood by thee. O-foolish damsel,
why dost thou not wish to be the consort of that high-souled
lord of R&akshasas—Ravana, gifted with wealth and riches.”
And then followed another Rakshasee named Durmukhee.—
“Why ‘dost thou not approach him, O thou having expansive
eyes, by whose fear, the sun doth not shine, and the wind
doth not blow. O dame, why dost thou not wish to be the
consort of Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, at whose command
the trees shower blossoms and the hills and clouds pour
down water. Why dost thoi not make up thy mind to be


* Prajapatis are the lords of the created beings first created by Brahma —T.
+ Heavenly singors ard musicians who belong to the heaven of Indra—T.
+ Serpent-gods who dwell in the regions uuder the earth,


SUNDARAKANDAM. — gt


the wife of Ravana? O damsel, O worshipful dame, we
have spoken thus for thy welfare. Do thou comply with
our request or thou shalt surely die.”


SECTION XXIV. «
—


Tuerevron all those Rakshasees, having terrible faces
again and again pursued Sit& with reproaclres rough and
rude.—“Why dost thou not desire, O Sita, to live in hts
inner apartment, liked by all and aboundihg in costly bed-
steads. O woman, thou regardest highly to be the wife of
a man. Do thou turn back from Rama—thy, desire shail
never be satisfied. Do thou spend happily thy days with
our lord—Ravana, the Ra&akshasa chief, who makes his own
the treasures of the three worlds. Thou art a woman, O
thou of comely presence, and therefore doth thy fancy cling
to Rama, O thou of a blameless countenance, who is a man,
deprived of his kingdom, overwhelmed with disasters and
hath his desires frustrated.” Heating the words of those
Rakshasees, the lotus-eyed Siti, with her eyes full of tears
said.—"What ye have all said and which is against human
usage and vicious, doth not find place in my mind. A
woman cannot be the wife of a Rakshasa. Eat me up if
you will, I will never follow your words. Poor or deprived
of kingdom, he who 1s my hunband, is my. preceptor, [ am
ever devoted unto him, like Subarchal&* unto the Sun. Like
unto the great Sachi standing by Sakra, Arundhuti by Vas-
hishta, Robini by the Moon, Lopamudra by Agastya, Sukanya
by Chyabana, Sabitree by Satyabana, Sreematee by Kapila,
Madayantee by Sandasa,Keshinge by Segara and Damayanti
the daughter of the king Veema by her husband Nala, I shall
ever remain devoted to my bygband Rama, the foremost of
the descendants of Ikshawku.” Hearing the words of Sita, all
eS The wife of the sun—T.


ral


ys RABAYANA.


those Rakshasees despatched by Ravana, almost beside Lheme
selves with ire, again covered her with reproaches rough and
tude. And Hanum&n remained all along speechless and
hidden on the Shingshapa tree. And that monkey heard all
those demons remonstrate with Sité in this way. And those,
. ‘influenced with ire, approached the trombling Sit% and
encircling her, licked again and again their long and burning
lips. And taking up instantly spears, they exceedingly wroth,
menaced her, saying—'She is not worthy of having Ravana, the
dord of the R&kshasas, as her lord.” Being thus remonstrated
. with by those terrible R&kshasees, that excellent damsel,
whedding tears, neared the Singshapa tree. And the large-
eyed Sit&, encircled by the Rakshasces, remained there sunk
in grief. And all those hideous demons, showered reproaches,
from all sides, on her, greatly reduced, of a poorly counten-
«ance, and wearing a soiled cloth. Thereupon a grim-visagrd
demon, angry, having hideous teeth and a huge belly extending
downwards, by name Vinat&, spake, saying :—"O Sita, thou
hast shown enough of attachment towards thy husbarfd.
But, O gentle dame, excess of any thing tends to evil. We
are satisfied. And may good betide thee! Thou hast acted
worthily fike a woman. Do thou hear, O Maithileo, what
1 say for thy welfare. Do thou accept, Ravana, the lord of
the Rikshasa host, as thy husband. He withstands power
fully his enemies like unto Vasava, the lord of the celestiala,
charitable, kind’ unto all, and swect-speeched. And for-
saking Rama, a poor wight, do thou take Ravana (as thy
husband), Having-+thy person sprinkled with celestial paste
and adorned with excellent ornaments, do thou from to-day
O Vaidehi, O thou of comely presence, become the queen of
all the worlds, like unto Sachee of the lord of the celestials
and sudda* of the fire. What sbalt thou do with R&ma,


* An exclamation used jn making ancéolation to the Gods. A_ personifica-
tion of the preceding as the wife of fire and Goddess presiding over barat


offerings —T. ©


SUNDARAKENDAM. 963


© Vaidebi, poor and of limited life? This is what I say
and if dost thou not follow it we shail all instantly banquet
on thee.” And thereupon another R&kshasee named Vikatd,
having her breast. hanging long, exercised with ire, amd
clinching her fist, addressed, roaring, Siti—O foolish daugh-
ter of the king of Mithilé, we have put up with all thy
foolish words only out of compassion, and because thou art
a feeble being. It will not lead to thy well-being if thow
dost not frear our words. Thou hast been brought here, the
other side of the ocean, difficult of being approached by
others, Thou hast come within the terrible abode of Ravana
© Maithilee, and hast been shut up in his room guarded by
us all. And even, Purandara’s® self cannot save you. Do
thou therefore hear, O Maithilee, my well-meaiing words.
Why dost thou shed tears? Renounce thy useless grief..
Do thou become happy and delighted, renouncing thy conti-
nued melancholy. Do thou sport, O Siti, at thy pleasure,
with the lord of the Rakshasas. We know, for certain, O
timid damsel, that the youth of the females, is very transient..
And so long as thy youth doth not fade, do thou pass thy days
happily, O thou having inebrite eyes, with the lord of
Rikshasas, in picturesque gardens, and mountaid forests.
Do thou take, O fair damsel, Ravana, the lord of the Raksh-
sas, for thy husband, and Lhousands of females shall be placed
at thy service. If dost thow not follow, what I say, O
Maithilee, I shall taking out thy heart, banquet on i>
Thereupon another grim-visaged R&kshasee, named,
Chandodor&, shaking her terrible spear, said—'Bebolding
this Sita having the eyes of a young antelope and her breast
trembling with fear, my earnest desire, as I am enciente,
hath been to banquet on her large eyes, lever, ‘ee hey
plump hands, heart, other limbs and head.” jereupon
another Rikshasee named Eraghacs said—E shall grind
the throat of this cruel woman. What ate you doing, silting


* Aflothar name of Indra—the ford of the celestialn-—T.


964 RAMAYANA.


here? Ye shall then rclate unto the king that the woman
jis-dead. And undoubtedly he shall say ‘Do ye eat her up.”
And thereupon another Rakshasee named Ajimukhee said
“— do not like quarrels. Let us all divide her into equal
portions. Bring soon ovr favourite drink and various
garlands.” Then followed another Rikshasee by name
Surpanakha,—‘I do fully concur with what Ajamukhi hath
said. Bring soon wine, the remover of all griefs. Banquetting
on human fiesh I shall dance before the queen Nikumbhila.””
Being thus threatened by those grim-visaged Rakshasees
Sitd, resembling,the daughter of a celestial, renouncing pati-
ence, began to weep.

‘


SECTION xxv.


Avo those hideous Rakshasees thus threatning her with
reproaches rude and rough, the daughter of the king Janaka
began to weep. And being thus addressed by those Raksha-.
sees, Vaidehi, of subdued soul, being greatly terrified, said,
having htr voice choked with vapour,—“A woman can never
be the wife of a Rakshasa, Eat me up if you will, I shall
never follow your words.” And being surrounded by the
Rakshasees and threatened by Ravana, Sita, resembling the
daughter of a celestial, stricken with grief, could not console
herself. And trembling, she shrank from their presence like
unto a strayed fawn surrounded by wolves. And resorting
to a flowery branch of an Asoka tree, she sunk in grief,
thought upon her lord. With tears she bathed her beautiful
breast and oppressed with woe, she could not reach the other
bank of the ocean of grief. Like a plantain tree shaken by the
breeze, she shook and fell down trembling (on the earth).
And being afraid ofthe Rakshisees, her cheeks forsook their
native hue. And herself trembling, her pretty Jong lock of


SUNDARARANDAM. 985


hair also shook and appeared like a serpent moving this way.
and that. Overwhelmed with grief and beside herself with
ire, the daughter of the king of MithiiA, wept and exclaimed
sorrowfully,—"'O mother Kausaly8!O queen Sumitra ! true
is the saying of the wise that death doth never approach uns
timely the male or the female. Or else 1 would not have lived
for a moment, separated from Rima and ‘oppressed by the
Rakshasees as I am. Limited is my virtug, and therefore f
am to die the death of a poor deserted thing ‘like unto a
bark driven by the blast in the midst of the ocean, Debarred
from my husband's sight and tortured by the, hideous demons,
I shall sink, oppressed with woes, like unto the banks of a
river, washed by the water. Oh blest are they who have
been resting their eyes upon my grateful and sweet-speeched
lord of leonine gaits, having eyes resembling lotus petals!
And separated from Rama of subdued soul, it is as difficult
for me to breathe as for. him who hath drank up virulent
poison, What mighty: iniquity had I perpetrated in my
previous existence that I have met with this terrible disastert
1 wish to renounce my life under this load of grief—-but alas!
Tam surrounded by the Rakshasees and cannot meet Rama.
Qh! cursed ‘is this. subject human life, that they cannot
renounce it even at their pleasure” t


SECTION XXVIL


: Saye this, the daughter of the king Janaka, bathed her
countenance with tears and hanging down her head began
to lament. .And she began to roli on the earth like unto
‘a colt as if she was mad, possessed by a devil and had lost
her sense. “I, the spouse of Rama, who was drawn away.
at a distance by the RafShasa (Masicha) assuming shapes -
at will, was seizéd'and borne away by Ravana. A captive


966 RAMAYANA.


of the Rikshasas, subject to their terribte threats and taunte,
sunk in grief and anxiety,—I desire not to keep my life. Of
what avail are wealth, ornament and life unto me, who am
living in the midst of the Rakshasas and separated from
Rima, of the mighty car? Forsooth my !ife is made of
atqne, imperishable and immortal since it is not riven asunder
even by this mighty grief. Woe to me! who am unchaste
and vile and my life is vicious, since breathe TI still in the
absence of my lord. What of fixing nly fancy on that night-
ranger, my meaner foot even shall not touch him? That
(demon) who is,courting me in this terrible way, doth
not know himself, his own race and that I loathe him so
thach, What more shall I speak unto you, | shall never
consent to Ravana’s prayer, I might be rent from limb to limb
or burnt in fire. R&ghava is grateful, true, wise and kind.
i fear it is through my ill-luck that he doth not feel pity for
me. . Will he not take me back who alone slew the thou.
sands of the Rashasas in JanasthSna? I have been captured
by Ravana, a R&kshasa of feeble prowess. Forsooth my
lord is capable of slaying this Ravana in conflict. Wilf
not that Rima regain-me, by whom was killed in the
forest of ‘Dandaka, Viradha, the foremost of the R&kshasa
crew? Although situated in the midst of the ocean, Lank&
is unapproachable by others, but Raghava’s arrows shall also:
reach here. (I am at a loss to ascertain) why Rama of
firm prowess, déth not regain me, his beloved spouse who-
have been borne away by the] Rakshasa. Methinks Rama
doth not know that I am here, or else, powerful as he is, he-
would not have put up with this insult. That lord of vultures,
who could have informed R&ghava, of my being borne away
by the Rikshasa, was killed by Ravasa in the battle. O
great was the work done by him, who, old as he was, for my
sake, addressed himself to bring about R&vana’s destruction.
ff Righava could kow that |‘ was here, he, exceedingly
wroth, would have cleared the earth with his arrows, of the


SUNDARIKANOAM. 67


R&kshasas, He would have then burnt down the city of Lank&,
dried up the deep and bloited out the name and fame of
“Ravana, And from each ruined home would have risen the
Rikshasa widows’ groans and cries like unto those of mine.
And instituting enquiries, along with Lakshmana, he shall
soon reduce Lanka to this plight. And observed by them
the enemy shall not live for a moment. And in no time,
shail Lank&, assume the appearance of a cremation ground,
having all her high ways enveloped with smoke issuing out of
the funeral pyres, and filled with valtures. And soon shall this
desire of mine be fulfilled. All these words of mine do sound
improbable now but they all indicate your misfortune. Besides
from these bad omens, that are to he seen here, it appeareth,
that Lank& shall soon be shorn of her grace. Th® lord of the-
Ra&kshasas, the vicious Ravana being killed, forsooth shatl
Lanka, divested of wealth, appear likea widow. This Lanka,
which is now full of pious ceremonies, shall, on the death of
the Rakshasas and their master, appear like a busbandlesy
woman. For certain, shall 1 soon hear the cries and groans
in every house, of the daughters of the Rakshasas worn with
grief. Ifthat heroic Rama, having dark-blue eyes, comes to
know that I am in the abode of the Rakshasas, the city of
Lank& shall be burnt down with his arrows and shall be
stricken with darkness and shorn of grace and all the fore-
most of the Rakshasas shall be destroyed. The time which
was appointed by the vile and cruel Ravana, hath arrived.
And that vicious wretch hath resolved to destroy me now,
‘Fhere is no crime which cannot be perpetrated by those
vicious demons. Mighty is the disaster that shall arise on
account of this crime—the Rakshasas who live on flesh do
not know what virtue is. Forsgoth shall the Rakshasa serve
me for his morning meal. What shall Ido without my lord
of comely presence? Debarred from my husband’s presence,
stricken with grief and not befolding Ratna, having dark-blue
eyes, I shall soon meet with death. Rima, tbe elder brother


968 . Raa YAN,


of Bharata, doth not know that I am still alive or else he
and Lakshmana would have ransacked the whole world for
me. Or renouncing his body on this earth fur my grief, the
heroic elder brother of Lakshmana, bath repaired to the
celestial region. Blessed are the celestials, Gandharbas,
Siddbas and mighty ascetics who are beholding my heroic
lotus-eyed Rama. Or that hig intelligent royal ascetiz
desirous of securing piety and treed from the troubles of
life, hath no need of a wife like me. Or people have fancy
for what they see and which disappeareth as soon as the
object is out of sight. The ungrateful are capable of renoun-
cing their love, but not Rama, Or there might be some
fotly in me. Or on the wane of my good luck have
sbeen separfted from the excellent Rima. Death is more
preferable unto me than life since 1 have been separated
trom the high-souled heroic Rama, of unblemished character
and the slayer of foes. Or those two brothers, the foremost
of men, laying aside their weapons, and living on fruits and
roots, have been wandering in the forest. Or those two
heroic brothers Rama-and Lakshmana, have been, by trea-
chery, put to death, by the vicious-souled Ravana, the lord
of Raksh&sas. At this time of distress, I do with all my heart
long for death,—{but alas 1) even death is not approaching
me in this my misery. Oh blessed are those high-souled,

* great ascetics abiding by truth and having their senses in
control, who have no objects of love or displeasure. They
are not distressed with misery for their objects of love or
grief for them whom they do not love. They ace freed from
them and I do bow unto those high-souled ones. Being
forsaken by the beloved Rama, knowing his ownself, and
brought under the control. of Ravana, J shall renounce
my life.”


SUNDARARANDAN. 959


SECTION XXVIII.


Bane thas addressed angrily by Siti, some of those
Rakshasees, beside themselves with ire,proceeded to relate this
unto the vicious-souled Ravana. And approaching Sit@
those grim-visaged demons again addressede her with words
rude and rough. “O vile Sits, O thou bent on committing sin,
we Rakshasees shail to-day devour thy flesh to the best ofour
satisfaction.” Beholding those vile demovs threaten Siti, a
R&kshasa matron, wise and old, named, Trijat& cried—"O
vile demons, do ye eat your own persons*® but do not devbur
Sid, the daughter of Janaka and the esteenfed daughter-
in-law of the king Dagaratha. I dreamt a terrible dream
last night which made my down stand on their end. And,
in that dream I foresaw the overthrow of the Rakshasa race
and the conquest of her husband.’ And being thus address-
ed by Trijata, those demons, exercised with wrath and
terrified, accosted her with the following words,—“Do thou
relate (unto us) what sort of dream didst thon dream last
night.” And hearing those words proceeding* from the
mouths of the Rakshasees, Trijati began to describe the
dream she had at the latter end of the night,—"I saw Rama,
wearing garlands and cluthed in white, ride in a celestial
charriot, along with Lakshmana, made of ivory, traversing
the etherial regions and drawn by a hundred steeds. I saw
in my dream to-night, that Siti, clad in the purcst white,
appearing on a snow-white hill beaten by the waves of the
ocean, had at last, met RAma, hke unto light joined to the
Sun, And I again saw Rama and Lakshmana appear in
-effulgence, seated on a huge elephant, having four tusks
and resembling a bull. Thereupon those two (brothers),

(ana EP

©The proper expression, 1 think, should be—®Eat me.” The commenta-

tor RimAnuja explains démanawe as your own bodies.—T. :


132


970 RAMAYANA,


resplendant like unto the San by their own effalgence, and
wearing white garlands and clothes, appeared near Jaoaka's
daughter. And the lotus-eyed Janaki, on the top: of the hill
situate on the welkin, first fell on the lap of her husband
and then stationed herself on the neck of the elephant
guided by her husband. Then I saw Sit& rubbing the Sun and
the Moon with her two hands., And then that best of the
elephants, with those two princes and the large-eyed Siti on
him, stood high above Lanka. I again saw R&ma, clad in
white, and adorned with garlands, ride along with Lakshmana
in acharriot drawn by eight white bullocks. I again saw
that highly energetic, best of men—Rama, having truth for
his*prowess, along with his brother Lakshmana and Sit flee
to Northern*?ealms, ascending a celestial flowery charriot
resembling (in brightness) the Sun, And I saw Ravana too,
Shaved and shorn, besmeared with oil, wearing a crimson
cloth, drinking honey, wearing a garland of Karavira flowers,
fall down on earth from the flowery charriot. And dragged
by a’ woman, shaved, wearing a red cloth and garlands
and sprinkled with crimson paste, Ravana was again seen
by me riding in a charriot drawn by asses. And quaffing oil,
laughing amd dancing, that one of agitated senses, forgetting
himself sped on the charriot to the South.* And I again
saw Ravana, the lord of the Ra&kshasas, stricken with fear,
fall, headless, down on the earth. And then rising all ona
sudden, and uttering obscene and inconsistent words like unto
a maniac, Ravana, overwhelmed with fear, and amazement,
and intoxicated, fell into a mass of dirt, stinking and
tesembling the very hell. And again proceeding to the
South he entered into a lake devoid of mud and water. And
adartk woman, clad in a crimson cloth, and bedaubed with
mud, dragged the Ten-necked demon, entwining herself


* In the south is the regfon of Yama,the God of Death and hence his going
to the south is not an auspicious siga—T.


SONDARAKINDAX, 97t


around his neck. Then followed the mighty Komvakarna®
and all the sons of Ravana, shaved and shorn and besmeared!
with oil, And they all proceeded southward—the Ten-necked
demon on a boar, Indrajitt on a porpoise, and Kumvakarna:
on a camel, I saw only Biveesana, with a white umbrella
and accompanied by four courtiers, range in the welkin,
And there was audible in the large assembly sound of music:
and stringed instruments. And all the Rakshasas wearing
crimson clothes and garlands, were quaffing oil. §
saw the royal and picturesque city Lanka with her steeds,
cars and elephants, drowned in the ocean, having her gate-
ways and ornamented arches broken. And in Lanki, covered
with dust, Rakshasa women, laughing, and making terrible
sound, were engaged in quaffing oil. I saw all the leading.
Rakshasas—Kumvakarna and others, dark-bued and wearing
erimson clothes, emerged in an abyss of cow dung. Do ye
therefore fly at some distance, and will find that Righava”
shall regain Sit’. And exercised with ire he shall destroy
you ail along with the R&kshasas. Raghava shall never
brook, his esteemed and beloved spouse, living in the forest,
being taunted and threatened by you. No more with rough
words therefore ;do you console the lady and humbly pray
her to forgive you. This 1 think proper. Surely shall she,
divested of misfortune, be reconciled to her beloved
and excellent husband, regarding whom, in her misery, F
have dreamt such a dream. Ye R&kshasees! You have
threatened ler, do ye implore her forgiveness—no more
with harsh words. Forsooth, from R&ghava shatl proceed
the mighty disaster of the Rukshasas. If Maithilee, the
daughter of the king Janaka, be pleased with you (for
your imploring her forgiveness) you might be saved from
the mighty disaster, I do not perceive any inauspicious


* Ravana’s brother.—T.
* + Révana’s son—the same signifM® the conquerpr of the lord of the cele
taln—T,


Cred ° RRR Ae.


mark on the person of this large-eyed dame. It appears
from the paleness of her countenance that she hath been
overcome by misfortune. And I saw (in my dream) this
worshipful dan.sel, unworthy of any misfortune, stationed
in the welkin. Verily I do perceive, before me, the satisfaction
of Vaidehi’s end, the destruction of the lord of the Rakshasas
and the conquest of Raghava. Behold there, her left eye,
spacious, as a lotus-petal, is dancing to hear this pleasant
dream announcing the satisfaction of her own end. And her
teft arm $s also dancing with joy, all on a sudden. And her
excellent beautiful left thigh, resembling the trunk of an
elephant, is also dancing as if indicating, that she shall at
nadistant date, be reconciled to R&ghava. And the birds,
again and ggain, entering their nests, and highly delighted
are pouring forth their notes announcing the advent of a
happy occasion.” Thereupon that modest dame, greatly
delighted in the prospective conquest of her husband, said—
“IE this be true I shall save you all.” .


SECTION XXVIILe


Hrearine those unpleasant words of Ravana, the lord
of R&kshasas, Sit’, racked with sorrow on account of her
hushand, became terrified, like nnto a she-elephant, worsted
by a lion on the skirt of a forest. Threatened by Ravana
and encircled by the Rakshasees, that timid damsel bewailed
like a girl cast off in’a lonely forest. “Truly the sages say
that death in this world doth not come untimely. Or else


* The sections 28 and 29 are not found in all the texts, ‘They are found in
Bengal edition. Gorreasio translates it and remarks—"I thick the chapter
XXVIlI—The auspicious signs—is an addition, a later interpolation by the
Rhapvodists. It has no bond of connection either with what precedes or follows
it and may be struck out without injury." We have however thought it proper
to give a full version—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 973


would ! have, vicious as 1 am, lived for a moment, being
thus sorely threatened, Forsooth, my mind, divested of
happiness and full of misery, is firm or else why is it not
broken in sunder like unto the summit of a hill clapped’
by a thunderbolt. Nor am I to blame for this—I am worthy
of being killed by this demon of uncomely presence. As a
Brahmana cannot impart instructions in Vedas unto the people
of other castes so I shall not confer my mind on Ravana.
If that lord of the people doth not come within the appoint-
ed time, forsooth shall that vile lord, of the Rakshasas, mince
my limbs with his arrows like unto a surgeon cutting off
the limbs of an embryo.* Two months shal! pass away in
no time and I shall have to suffer the pain of death, over-
whelmed with sorrow as I am, like unto a thief, eonfined in
stocks, at the command of the sovereign to receive death the
next morning. O Rama! O Lakshmana ! O Sumitra ! O Rama’s
mother! O my mothers! I am worsted in this ocean of
gcief, like unto a bark, driven hither and thither by the
blast, in the midst of an ocean. Verily for me, those two
powerful, lion-like sons of the king. have been killed by
(this demon) effulgent like the lightning and assuming the
semblance of a deer. Unfortunate as 1 am, forsoeth I was
tempted then by death wearing the shape of a deer and
thus foolishly lost Rama and Lakshmana, the sons of the
worshipful sire. O Rama, O thou of truthful vows, O thou
of tong arms, O thou having the countenance of a full moon!
O my life! engaged as thou art in Lhe welfare of the people,
dost thou not perceive that I am about to be killed by the
Ra&kshasas, Alas! this my devoledness unto my hucband, my
forgiveness, my lying down on the bare earth, my observance
of religious vows, my wife-like virtues, are fost like uate
service done for an ungrateful wight. In vain are my
pious rites, and in vain is my devotedness unto my


: -1~——_——
* This passage clearly indicates that there wer proficient and skilled sur-
geoos at the time when Réméyana was writteo.—T.


974 RIMEYANA.


hhusband—since I do not behold thee, am pate and feeble in
thy absence and have given up all hopes of seeing thee. And
duly satisfying thy sire’s command, and returning success-
“fully from the forest, thou shalt fearlessly sport with many
a damsel having large eyes. (But for me} O Rama, I was
for my own destruction, devoted, soul and heart, unto thee.
Oh! fruitless is my asceticitm and wifely virtue! Oh fie
on me! I shall renounce this my unfortunate life. I desire
to do away speedily with my being by means of poison
orasharp weapon. But there is mo one in this city of the
R&akshasas, who bringeth me this poison or weapon.” Bewail-
ing thus in various accents, and remembering Rama with
alt her heart, Sit8, having her countenance dried up, and
trembling, got at the biggest tree enveloped with flowers,
And thinking thus, Sitd, stricken with grief, took up in her
hand, her braid of hair and thought—“I shall soon hang
myself with this braid and reach the abode of Death. And
that one of tender person reached the tree, and holding a
branch, began to think of Rima, Lakshmana, and the glory
of her race. And on her person were perceived many
auspicious tacks, well-knowd in the world, removing grief,
fostering, patience, and announcing the advent of future
welfare.


SECTION xxtx.


——00'———


Lie unto servants waiting upon a wealthy persot
various auspicious omens waited upon Siti of a blameless and
comely person, racked with grief and divested of joy. Aud
the large left eye of that danfe having graceful hairs, having
dark pupils, white ends and thick eye-lashes, began to dance
like a lotus shaken sby a fish!*, And her beautiful, round,
plump ieft hand, which, ere this, sprinkled with costly agurw


SUNDARAKANDAM. 975


and sandal, used to serve fora pillow unto Rama, began to
dance now again and again afler along time. And her well
built plump left thigh, resembling the trunk of an elephant,
dancing, announced that she would soon behold Rima.
And the gold-hued cloth, now covered with dust, of that
damsel of a comely person, having teeth like pomegranate
seeds, slipped a little off its place. And being enlivened by
those and various other auspicious omens, she attained joy
like unto a seed, spoiled by the wind and the sun, growing
afresh in the rainy season, And her countenance, having
lips red as Biméa fruits, beautiful eyes, eye-btows extending
to ears, curling eye-lashes and white teeth, again appeared
graceful like unto the Moon released from the full grasp of
Réhu.* Her grief and exhaustion were removed—sorrow was
pacified and her heart was filled with joy. And she with her
countenance appeared beautiful like a lunar night beautified
by the rays of the Moon,


SECTION xxx,
—0o— .


Ano the powerful Hanumana, heard from the beginning
to the end (the bewailings) of Sit&, the story of Trijata’a
dream and the threats of the Rakshasees. And beholding the
worshipful damsel, living in the forest of Asoka, like unto a
celestial damsel in the garden of Nandana, the monkey-
entered in a maze of anxious thoughts. ‘At length my
watchful eyes have seen her, whom have been seeking in
vain, the thousands and millions of the monkeys in all direc-
tions and quarters. Truly have I seen her to-day, engaged

* Like the Moon when full eclipse is just over—In mythology Rabu is the
son of Sinik@, @ daitys, with the tail 6f a dragon whose head was severed from:
his body by Vishnu, but being immortal this head and tail retalned their sepa-


rate existence and being transferred to the stellar sphere, became the authors
ef eclipses.—T.


976 adud van.


as I have been as a spy to estimate the strength of the ememy
and am ranging secretly everywhere. I have seen minutely tha
city of the Rikshasas, and the strength of Ravana, the lord
of Rakshasasas. It now remains to console the spouse of
Rama of incomparable power, and kind unto all, who panteth
for her lord. { shalt console this damsel, having the
countenance of the full moon, who had never seen grief
before, and who shat! not soon reach itsend. And if I go
away without evothing this chaste lady, who is almost sense-
less with grief, I shall be blamed of neglect of duty. And if
I go away, the foyal daughter, the famed J&naki, fiading né
qpeans of safety, shall, (or cectain, renounce her tife, She is
worthy of being consoled like unto the great armed (R&ma)
having the countenance of the full-moon and anxious to
behold Sitf. It is not proper to speak before the Rakshasas—
What shall 1 do then? J am in very great difficulty, If
I do not console her at this latter end of the night, surely
shall she renounce her life. How shall I answer Rama,
without consoling Sil& of comely stature, when he will
ask me “What message from my Sita?’ And if I speedily
repair hence without any information regarding Sita, surely
shall Kakuthstha scorch me lifeless with the fire of his angry
eyes. And if I urge my lord the king (Biveeshana) to bring
his hosts here fur Rama, in vain shall be his toil*. And
seizing the occasion when she shall be free from her demo-
naic guards, 1 shall console her in her dire distress, And
@ puny monkey as { am, I shall speak in Sanskritt which men
delight to use. And if I speak Sanskrit like a Bralmana, Sita
shall be terrified considering me Ravana, Must I therefore
use the language of a common man or else J shall not be able
© For before that Sita shall renbunce her life—T.

+ The language refined by the strict rules of grammar.—T,

4 This passage clearly indicates thgt Skuatrit if not spoken by men, and
women of the upper diasses of the time when Rémdyana was written, was at
least understood by them, and was comnionly spoken by men of priestly class
and other educated persons.”—T. _


SUNDARASANDAR. er


to console the dame of a blameless person. And bebolding
my monkey sliape and hearing my human language she might
be afraid again, terrified aa she had been before by the band of
the Rakshasas, And considering me Ravana weariag shapes
at will, that large-eyed and high-minded dame, shall cry pite-
ously forhelp. And Sith making a sudden noise, thore terrible
Rakshasees resembling Death himself and armed with various
weapons, shall at once arrive there. And thereupon castiog
their looks alt around and finding we out, those highly power-
ful and grim-visaged demons shall try to kill or catch me.
And beholding me leap from branch to branch and trank to
trank of big trees they shall be greatly alarmed. And espying
y appearance while ranging in the forest, those Rakshasdes
greatly terrified, shall fill the wood with their*wild shouts.
And then they shall call(to their assistance) all those Raksha»
sees engaged in guarding the abode of the lord of the
Rikshasas, And they, greatly agitated, shall with vehemence
acrive here, armed with dirts, arrows, scimitars and various
other weapons. And being surroanded by them on all sides,
I do kill that host of demons, tired, I shalt not be able to
bound. over the main. And if that host of skilled demons,
succeed in making me a cuptive,{ too shall be in théic hands
and Sith shall remain ignorant of my object. Or the Raksha-
gas, pernicious as they are, shall kill the daughter of Janaka,
and there shall the great work of Rima and Sugriva, be
spoiled. And Janaki liveth in this secret place, girt by the
ocean, guarded on ail sides by the Rakshasas,difficult of being
got at and having all avenues to it shut up. If I am kilfed or
captured by R&kshasas in battle, I do not find any who can
help Rima ia his enterprise. Myself killed, { do not find
any monkey who can leap a hundred leagues across the sea,
{am capable of destroying thousands of Rikshasaa, but I
shall not then be able to get at the other shore of the great
ocean, Victory or defeat 1% uncertaimin a battle—I do cat
‘{cherefore) like to engage ia such an uncertain (act). What
$23 a


78 ald ana.


wise man merges certainty in uncertainty? It is a great sin
$n me (1 own) to talk with Siti—But she will die if {do not
talk with her, Works, almost accomplished, when entrusted
to an inconsiderate emissary, are generally spoiled, out of
season and out of place, like unto darkness driven by the
‘apfpearance of the sun. All those works, which are generally
taken in hand after duly deliberating over their propriety and
impropriety, areegenerally spoiled by those emissaries who are
proud of their learning. What shall f do, by which my work
is not injured, 1am not blamed of foolishness and my cross~
ing over the maia doth not become fruitless ?. What shall Ido
so, that Sila might listen to me without being terrified ?” Think-
inig over this, the intelligent Hanuman arrived at a conclusion.
“] shall no€isturb her, speaking (alton a sudden) about
Rima of unwearied actions, dear unto her and to whom.
she is firmly attached. Uttering the name of Rima, the
foremost of the ikshawkus, and of subdued soul and lauding
hia piety and fame in sweet accents, I shall so manage that
Sité might hear and believe them.” Bebolding the spouse
of that high-souled lord of the earth and engaging in this
train of thoughts, Hanumén, stationed on a branch of the tree,
spoke the following sweet words.


SECTION XXX,


Meorrarine thus the highly intelligent-monkey’ spoke
in accents, sweet and in such a tone as they might be,
heard by Vaidehi, ‘There reigned a noble and pious king
named Dagaratha, highly glorious amongst the Ikshawkus,


the lord of the warrior-cars, steeds and at ee


Devoid of envy, high-minded, kind, Having truth for
prowess, the foremost of the awku race, wealthy ani.


the enhancer of wealth; gifted with royal marks; highly,


SUNDA RARANDAM. 979


beautiful; the foremost of the kings; famous all over
the world of many oceans; the conferrer of happiness and
himself happy. His eldest and most beloved son was the Moon-
bright Rima, wise and the foremost of those who know the
science of the bended bow. He was the protector of his own
character, of his own kinsmen, of the whole world of creation
and of virtue and subduer of foes. And banished by his old
and truthful sire’s commands, that hero, along with his wife
and brother (Lakshmana) repaired to the forest. And while
roaming a-hunting in the forest he slew many a heroic Rak-
shasa wearing shapes at will. And having heard of the degtruc-
tion of the Rikshasas of Janasth4na and of Kiara and Dushana,
the illusive Ravana, assuming shapes at will, beguiling Raima,
in the forest, stole away his consort—the Janaka’g daughter.
And roaming the country around in quest of the blameless
and. worshipful Sita, Rama found a firm friend in Sugriva.
And bringing about the destruction of Vali, Rama, the con-
queror of others’ cities, conferred the monkey-kingdom upon
the high-souled Sugriva. And by Sugriva’s decree, thausandy
of monkeys, wearing shapes at will, have been searching that
worshipful dame in various directions. And by Sampati’s
counsel and for that large-eyed dame, I have leapt a hundred
leagues across the deep. I have at last got her. And such
were the form, grace and the marks that Raghava mentioned
unto me.” Having said this, the foremost of the monkeys
ceased. And greatly wondered was Sita hearing those
words, Thereupon that timid dame, having good curling
hair, raising up her face covered with hairs, tooked up to
the Singshapa tree. And hearing the words of the monkey
and casting her eyes to all directions and quarters, Si
‘attained an excess of delight, being engaged in thoughts
concerning Rima. And looking around her aud upwards,
she beheld,tike unto the rising sun,the Wind-god’s son, gifted
with inconceivable intellectyp—the minister of the king of
monkeys. é : on


gto RIMATANA.


SECTION xxxtr


Ano beholding that tawny-colored monkey like unto a.
mass of lightnings and wearing a white cloth, hidden on the
tree, Sitt’s mind was greatly agitated. And she saw there
the humble, sweet-spesched monkey, appearing graceful like
unto a collection of full-blown Asoka flowers and having eyes
resembling burning gold. And observing that foremost of
the monkeys, sitting humbly, that daughter of the king of
Mithila, again greatly amazed, thought —'‘This monkey ia the
mést terrible of his race and therefore hard to he got at
and looked at.” Thinking this she again sank in fear. And
stricken with grief she again bewailed in piteous accents
exctaiming—"“O Rama! © Lakshmana!” And she wept

* silently and lowly. And then beholding that best of monkeys
approach her bumbly, the fair daughter of the Mithila’s
king, thought,—"Is thie a dream mine eyes have seen 7”
And she again looked towards that Wind-god’s son, the
foremost of the monkeys, the beat of those gifted with
intelligenge, having a huge disfigured countenance, highly
accomplished and wearing a dress mentioned before. And
beholding him Sit& was almost out of breath with fear. And
regaining soon her sense the large-eyed damsel again thought,
-—“I have seen a very inauspicious dream to-day—to see a
monkey in a dream is reckoned inauspicious by the sages.
May good betide Rama, Lakshmana and my Sire the king of
Janaka. It is no dream, | have not slept, worn with grief
and trouble as I 4m. Apart from my lord having the counte-
nance of the full-moon, I} have no happiness. Thinking of
Rima always and uttering bis name, each sight I ses and each
sound I bear brings him to my eye orear. And therefore
bis form eppearing ig, my mind és distressing me to-day, who
am entirely sunk in bis thoughts. And thinking of him


SUNDARAKANDAH. ‘ gs


always I see him before me and hear his words. Methinks
this is but a phantom of the mifd. And thiokiog this T atitt
behold the same. But an imaginary object can never have
a form. And I still find a distinct form addressing me.
Be glory to Vachaspati, Indra, the self existent Brahmi, the
lord of fire and may they so grant that the creature whe hath
spoken before me, be real and not imaginary.”


SECTION xxxult.


.
00


Turreveox coming down from the tree, Hanumfn, the
highly effulgent son of Wind, having a coral-red &duntenance
and attired in a humble guise, approached Sita and joining
reverentially his palms, addressed her with the following
sweet words,—~"“Who art thou, O thou having eyes like lotus
petals and wearing a soiled silken cloth, who art waiting there
holding a branch of the tree? Why are the tears of sorrow
flowing from thy eyes like unto drops of water falling from
lotus petals? Who art thou, O most fair of face, amongst
the celestials, Asuras, Nagas, Gandharbas, Rakshasas, and
Yakshas and Kinnaras? Do the Rudra’s* claim thy birth
O thou fair damsel? Or the swift gods who ride the storm?
Or the Vasus?t Thou appearest to me as of a celestial race.
Art thou Rohini, the best and most accomplished of the
stars, who, reft from the Moon, hath fallen down from the
abode of thé celestials? Who art thou O- blessed dame,
O thou having blameless eyes ? Art thou, O lotu’-eyed damsel,
‘the blessed Arundhuti, who hath fled in. wrath or jealous
ptide from the side of her lord  Vashishihe) Or O lovely”
* © The Rudras are manHestations of Siva—T,

+ A kind of demi-gods of whom six are enumerated sis, .Dhava, Deeva.


Soma or the Moon, ‘Vishos; -Asila or 3F wind, Analasor fire, Prabhosa asd he
aT.


gts RAMAYANA, F


damsel, who is the son, father, brother or husband gone
from this world for whom thou art weeping? Yet by thy
tears and sighs, by the earth thou art treading and by calling
on a monarch’s name it appears that thou art not a celestial.*
But from the marks pn thy person it appeareth that thou
art either the consort or the daughter of a hing. Art
thou that Sit&, I do ask thee, who had been stolen and borne’
away by Riivana from Janasthinay May good betide thee!”
From thy wretched plight, thy unrivalled beauty and thy
ascetic garb, thou art, I ween, for certain, the queen of Rima.”
Hearing those words of Hanuman and greatly delighted at
Rama’s name, Vaidehi spoke unto him—"I am the daughter.
if-law: of Dagaratha, knowing his own self, the foremost of
the kings ef the world and the slayer of the enemy's bost,and
the daughter of Janaka the high-souled king of Videha. My
name is Siti and ! am the consort of the highly intelligent
Rama. | tived twelve years in Righara’s abode, enjoying
every earthly comfort and satisfying every desire. And
at the beginning of the thirteenth year the king, advised by
his priest, arranged for, the installation of the descendant
of Ikswakus (Rama) onthe throne. And while the articles
for the fastailation were being collected, the queen Kaikeyi
addressed her lord saying—‘I shall not drink or eat for days
and this shall be the end of my existence if Rima be installed.
J€ thou dost not wish to falsify the vowt thou made unto
‘me, O best of kings, let Rima then repair to the forest.”
‘The monarch was truthful and.remembering his vow and
hearing the unpleasant and vile words of Kaikeyi lost him-
self (in grief}. And thereupon the old king abiding by
ruth, weeping, begged of his elslest son, the kingdom. The
graceful Rima liked his sire’s. command more than the
installation, and resolving in bim, promised to obey hie

“She clonal cover shed tar ng louch Ber grocod whee thay wall.

+ This cefers to the v8w which Dasaraths made uate Kalkeyl at the time
sf the war going on betwoes the celestials and the Asuras.—T,


SUNDARAKAND AM, 983


words, Rama, having truth for his prowess, never, for his
life, takes back what he gives, never speaks an untruth and
always speaks trath. And: leaving aside his costly attire, the
highly glorious (Rima) renounced with all his heart the king-
dom and gave me over to his mother. But myself wearing the
gatb of an ascetic, repaired speedily before him. Separated
‘from him, I do not like to live even in the celestial region.
And the great son of Sumitrd, the enhancer of friends’ joys, to
follow his elder brother, dressed himself in bark and Auss,
And thus abiding by our sire’s bebest, and taking firm vows
we entered a dreary forest never seen before. While that
one, of unmitigated effulgence was thus living in the forest
of Dandaka, 1, his consort, was stolen by the vicious-soull
R&kshasa—Kavana. He hath kindly allowed me two months’
respite after which I shall be slain.


SECTION XXXIV.


“Hearne those words of Sit& stricken with grief, Hanu-
man, the foremost of the monkeys, replied in soothing words,
“O worshipful tady, by R&ma’s decree I come as a messenger
unto thee. He is safe and sound, O Vaidehi, and has asked
of thy welfare. O worshipful dame, Rama, the son of
Dagaratha, the master of the Vedas, and tlhe foremost. of
those conversant with Vedas hath enquired of thy welfare,
And the highly effulgent Lakshmana, the beloved
follower of thy husband, worn with giief. bows his reverential
dhead unto thee.’ Hearing of the welfare of those two lions
among mea, the worshipful dame, with all her frame worked
up with rapture, again spake unto Hanuma, saying—"Verily
‘the wise saw of the people appears to me to be true that
‘nce in a hundred years true joy appears to a living man”.
Sit, at that time, attained a wonderful joy, as would
have been acquired by her in. the company (of Rama and


gis: + REwkraya,


Lakshmana}, © And they confidingly. conversed: with each.
other. Hearing those words of Sit8,racked with sorrow, Haau-

mis, the son of the Wind-god drew 2 little nearer to. her,

The more Haoumin approached her the more Sint suspected
him. as R&vana, “Alas! Alas! why have I spoken to
him? It is the Ravana, who hath appeared agait in. a oew
disguise.” And leaving off the Asoka branch, that one having
a blameless person, overwhelmed with grief, sat down on,
the earth. In the meantime the mighty-armed monkey
bowed unto Janaka’s daughter, but she, worked up with fear,
did not cast again her looks towards him. And beholding
thm how unto her, Sit&, having a moon-like countenance,
wighing, spake unto that monkey in sweet accentse—*If thou
art that R&¥ana’s self, who, changing thy shape by magic. art,
want to distress me again-—this thy vile deed doth not. be~
hove thee. Thou art surely that Ravana, whom I saw at
Janasthfina, in a mendicant’s guise, renouncing his own
shape, O night-ranger, O thou wearing shapes at will!
it doth not behove thee to distress me who am poorly and
famished with fasts. But no, thou canst not be (the fiend)
whom I suspect, since I have such joy from seeing thee. And
may good betide thee if thou art Rima’s messenger. I do
ack thee, O foremost of monkeys, something about Raima that
is pleasant unto me. O monkey, do thou relate the glories
of my dear Rima, Thou art (thus) shaking my mind O gentle
one, like unto water breaking down the banke of a river,
Alas ! this dream has afforded me immense pleasure since,
I, who have been separated from my lord for so long a time,
have beheld this monkey sent by Righava. I do not sink even
if t can behold in dream the heroic Righava along with Laketi-
menua—but dream even is jealous of my well-being.. Nor
do LE regard’ this as dream.. To bebold a monkey.in a dream
doth: not lead to prosperity—whereas I have attained
“~* Bhere prosperiiy moans joy—Sita attained aa lmmmene tconrare of 1
behalding Rama's aesecnger—Hanmaiin—T, ith


SUNDARAKANDAM : g8s


is it mentat derangement? Or have I been possessed by
adevil? Orhave lrun mad? Or is it the sultry vapour
noating over ands and appearing at a distance like water ?
No, it is not madness—for derangement of mind is the sign
of madness—I have not lost sense and I do distinctly perceive
me and the monkey.” Thinking thus in many a way ard
‘ascertaining the strength (of the monkey and the R&ksbasa)
Sita took him for the Jord of the Rakshasas, *wearing shapes
at will. And having arrived at this decision, Janaka’s daugh-
ter—-Sit8, ceased from talking with that monkey. And
apprised of Sitt’s thought, Hanumaa, the Wind-god's
son, (replied) in words sweet unto her and enhanci
her delight—“Bright as the sun that lights the sky
and dear as the moon to every eye, be pleases all his subjects
with bounties like unto those of Vaisrabana.* He is gifted
with prowess like unto the greatly famed Vishnu, truthful and
sweet-speeched like unto Vachaspati.t Graceful, grateful to
the eye and beautiful like unto Kandarva’s} self, he displays
his wrath in a proper quarter—the foremost of men and of
a mighty car. The whole world of creation (liveth safe) in
the shadow of the arms of that high-souled one.. Thou shalt
soon see the consequences he shall reap by whom, assuming.
_ the shape of a dear, Raghava was taken away from the her-
mitage and thou wert stolen away from that lonely place.
And soon shall that powerful (hero) destroy Ravana in the
battle, with fiery arrows, discharged angrily. J have been
sent by him as a messenger to thee. Worn with grief in thy
separation be hath enquired of thy welfare, as well the highly
effulgent Lakshmana, the enhancer of Sumitra’s joy, bowing
reverentially unto thee. The king of monkey husts, by name
-Sugriva—Rama’s friend, hath alsg enquired of thy welfare,


* Another name of Kuvera, the god of gold.—T.

+ The god of speech_—T. ”

{ Cupid or the god of love in Hindu mythology described as the most
beautiful of the celestial —T.


986 ' RAMAYANA,


© worshipful dame. Rama, Sugriva and Lakshmana, have
thee always in their minds. Blessed are we, O Vaidehi, that
thou dost still live, subject as thou art to the R&kshasees.
Thou shalt soon behold Rama, and Lakshmana of a mighty
car, and Sugriva of unmitigated prowess in the midst of
the million of monkey hosts. I am Sugriva’s minister, by
name Hanuman. Ihave entered this city of Lank& after
crossing over the great main. And by means of my prowess
and placing my feet on the head of the vicious-souted Ravana,
Thave come here to see thee. I am not he (R&vana) for
‘whom thou art: taking me, O worshipful dame. Do thou
fenounce thy suspicion and rely on my words,”


- SECTION xxxv.
—+00-—


Fearinc the tale of Rama from that best of monkeys,
Vaidehi, spoke in sweet accents, soft and low,—"Where didst
thou meet R&ma, how didst thou come to know Lakshmana f
How did the monkeys and men meet on terms of
brotherhood? Do thou again relate unto me, O monkey, the
regal signs that deck the persons of Rama and Lakshmana—,
and [ shall then relinquish all grief. Do thou relate unto
me the form and grace of Rama, his thighs and arms and
as well as those of Lakshmana.” Being thus addressed by
Vaidehi, Hanum&n, the Wind-god's son, began to give an
exact description of Rama. “If dost thou, by my good luck,
O Vaidehi, O thou having eyes like lotus-petals, knowing me
{as his messenger) ask me to describe thy lord’s person as well
as that of Lakshmana, I shall relate them unto thee. Do thou
hear, O large-eyed dame, what regal signs I have marked on
the persons of Rama and, Lakshmana. O daughter of
Janaka, Rima hds eyes like lotus-petals and a countenance
tesembling the full-moon and is gifted with great beauty and


SUNDAR4KANDAM. 987


goodness. In effulgence he is like the Sun, in patience
like the earth, in intellect like Vrihaspati* and in fame like
Vasava.t He is the protector of the world of creation and
his own kinsmen. He, follows right in all his ways and
never swerves from his royal duties and is the slayer of foes.
O dame, he upholds the dignity of the people of four-castes—~
he confers honors on the people and preserves them. He is
worshipped by all like the Sun, observes ascetic vows, knoweth
well the time when the saints should be honored’ and is
conversant with the nature and procedure of actions, He is
well acquainted with royal duties and abideth by the com-
maudments of the Brahmanas—is wise, gifted with a good
character, humble and the slayer of foes. He is the mastd}
of Yayur Vedas and is adored by those who are,well-versed
in Vedas—is proficient in the science of bended bow, Vedas
and Veddéngas.t He is broad-shouldered, large-armed,
has a conch-like neck and a beautiful countenance. His
throat is plump and his eyes are red—and he is famed
all over the world under the name of Raima. He has the
voice of a bugle, is of a cool hue and highly powerful,
has equally proportioned limbs and a green colour. His
three limbs (thigh, fist and wrist) are hard and three
others (brow arms and scrotum) are long; and three
(tops of the hairs, scrotums and knee-joints) equal and
three (navel, abdomen and breast) high. And three (the
‘angles of the eyes, nails and palms) are copper-colored~
three are cool and three (voice, mavel and gait) are
grave. His belly and throat have three folds of skin. The
‘sole of the foot, the lines thereon and the nipples are


* The god of wisdom.—T.

+ The lord of celestials—T.

$°A sacred science considered as subordinate to and in sothe sense a part
of the Vedas—six sciences come under this denomination—Stkska (pronouncia-
tion); Xalpa (religions rite) VyakaraX2 (grammar) Ghandes (prosody) Fyetish
(astronomy) aad NirsAéi or explanation of dificult words.—T. P


equally bended. His neck, eyes and back are short. He
has three locks of hair on his head. He has four tines on
his thumb indicating his proficiency in the four Vedas.
His body is four hands tall; arms, thighs and cheeks are
plump; eye-brows, the hollows of the nose,, eyes, ears,
lips, nipples; wrists,» knee-joints, scrotums, hips, hands
feet are all equally proportioned. Four teeth by the side
of each row, are gifted with auspicious marks of the
Sdstras. His gaits are like those of a lion, tiger, elephant
orabull. His tips and jaws are fleshy and elevated. His
nose is long; words, countenance, nails, down and skin
are all cool; Nis two arms, two little fingers, two thighs
afid two legs are long; his face, eyes, mouth tongue,
lips; palate, nipples, nails and feet are liké lotuses, his
breast, forehead, neck, arms, navel feet, back and ears are
spacious. He is gifted with grace, fame and effulgence.
His paternal and maternal race are pure. His armpit,
belly, breast, nose, shoulders and forehead are high ; his
fingers, hairs, down, nails, skin, beard, eye-sight and
intellect are thin and sharp, R&ghava, with a due division of
his time is engaged in acquiring piety, wealth emanicipation
and desires. He is truthful and graceful, amasses wealth
and thereby. protects his subjects. He is cognizant of the
divisions of time and country and dear unto all. His step-
brother Saumitri is gifted with incomparable prowess and is
his equal in attachment, beauty and accomplishments. The
person of that graceful one is gold-hued whereas that of the
highly famous Rama is green. And those two lions among
men had no other delight but seeing thee. And they
ransackiog the whole world in quest of thee met us in the
forest. And ranging the earth for thee they beheld Sugriva,
of comely presence, the lérd of monkeys, at the foot of the
mount Rishyamuka covered with trees, banished hy hieelder
brother and resorting there in Mis fear. And we were serving”
that truthful Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, driven from the:


SUNDARAKANDAM. 989


kingdom by his elder brother. And beholding those two best
of men, wearing bark and with bows in theisbands, that best
of monkeys, stricken with fear, leaped above and stationed
himself on the crest of the bill, He then sent me to them.
And thereupon by Sugriva’s decree I, approached with
joined palms, those two foremost of men gifted with beauty
and royal marks. And they were pleased by me, being
informed of the real facts. And then plgcing those two
best of men on my back J arrived at the top of the hill and
communicated the truth unto the high-rouled Sugriva. And
conversing with each other those two lords of men and
monkeys attained great delight. And they consoled e:

other narrating their respective misfortunes. And Rama
then consoled Sugriva, driven away by his greatly powerful
elder’ brother Vili on his wife’s account. Thereupon
Lakshmana related unto Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, the
grief, of Rima of unwearied actions, in consequence of thy
being borne away (by Ravana). And hearing Lakshmana’s
words, the lord of monkeys became pale, like unto the radiant
Sun’ possessed by Rabu. And collecting all those ornaments
which were thrown off by thee on the earth, when thou wert
borne away, the leaders of the monkey hosts, delighted
brought them before Rama. But they could not make out thy.
whereabouts. And all those ornaments, which were handed
over to Rama, were collected by me when they fell tinkling
on the ground, Rima being beside himself with grief. And
placing them on his Jap, the god-like Ruma bewailed in
various accents. And they inflamed the more Dagarathee’s*
grief. And being overwhelmed with grief that high-souled
one laid himself low on the ground. And consoling him in
various words, I raised him up, again. And looking again
and again with Saumitri, at those costly ornaments, Righava
handed them over to Sugriva. R&ghava burns in grief, O
swocshipful dame, in thy ‘absence, like unto a volcanic
, : * Son of Desarathe—Rima—T. ,


990 RAMAYANA.


mountain burning with a perpetual fire. For thee, sleeptess-
ness, grief and anxiety are distressing R&ghava like unto
three fires,* burning down the fire temple. Raghava is
moved by thy separation like unto a huge mountain shaken
by a terrible earth-quake. O daughter of a king, he is
rapging at large in many a beautiful forest, river and
fountain—but he finds delight nowhere. O daughter of the
king Janaka, bringing about the destruction of Ravana, with
all his kith and kin, R&ghava, the foremost of men, shall
soon regain thee. And thus Rima and Sugriva entered into’
a friendly covenant, to eucompass Vali’s destruction and to
institute enquiries about thee, And thereupon returning to
K&hkindhs with those two heroic princes, the lord of monkeys
killed Vali inebattle. And destroying V&li by his prowess
in, battle, Rama made Sugriva king over all monkeys and


bears. And in this way, O dame, the alliance between Rima


and Sugriva was made. And know me as Hanumin, their
messenger who hath come to thee. Regaining his own
kingdom, Sugriva summoned all the mighty monkeys and
despatched them in various quarters in quest of thee, And the
highly powerful monkeys, resembling mountains, commanded
by that lord of monkeys, proceeded to all the regions of the
earth. And terrified by Sugriva’s decrees, those monkeys,
since then, have been ransacking the whole earth for thee.
And I am one of them. And the beautiful and mighty son of
Vali, by name Angada,hath proceeded with three armies under
him. And many were the days and nights that we spent, over-


, whelmed with grief and having lost our way on that best of


mountains Vindkya. We gave up all our hopes for the
accomplishment of our end and our appointed time was
well-nigh spent. And in fear of that Jord of monkeys we
addressed ourselves to put ‘au end to our lives. Ranging
the mountain strongholds, rivers and fountains and not


ig
+ The aggregats of thé three fires: maintained ed the Brahman house-
helder—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 998


finding thy reverence, we were ready to do away with our
existence. And on the crest of that hill we took to fasting.
And beholding those foremost of monkeys engaged in fasting
Angada, sunk in grief, bewailed, O Vaidehi, mentioning thy
rape, the destruction of Vali in that way, our fastings and
Yatdyu's death. While we were thus waiting, ready for death
and giving up all hopes for the fulfillment of our master's be-
hest, there appeared,as if the cause of our success, the mighty
and powerful vulture,the brother of Yatdyu, by name Sampiti.
And hearing of the destruction of his brother, he in wrath,
said—'By whom and where hath my younger brother been
killed? I wish to hear this from you, the foremost Jof
monkeys.’ And Angada related unto him verily Yatdyu’s
destruction at Janasth&na, for thee, by that grim-visaged
Rakshasa. And hearing of Yatdyu's death, Aruna’s son
became afflicted with sorrow and informed us, O thou exqui-"
sitely {fine damsel, of thy stay in the abode of Ravana. And
hearing those words of Sampiti, enhancing our delight, we
all, headed by Angada, left that place. And leaping from
the crest of Vindhya mountain we reached the excellent brink
of the Ocean. Being greatly anxious to behold thee and
delighted, those plump monkeys headed by Angada, arrived
at the banks of the main. And worked up with a strong
desire to see thee, they again engaged in auxious thought.
And beholding the ocean, the monkey hosts lost their heart.
And removing their fear, I leaped a, hundred leagues across
the deep and entered Lanki, at night, infested with demions.
“J have seen Rfvana, and thee stricken with grief. O
thou of a blameless person, I have related all unto thee in
regular order. Do thou speak to me, O worshipful dame,
Tam Dagarathee's messenger. Bo thou know me as the Wind-
god’s son, the counsellor of Sugriva, who am engaged in
Rama’s service and have come here for thee. It is all well
with thy Kakuthstha, the foremost of those using weapons,
as well ae with Lakshmana, O worshipful dame, gifted with


992


RAMAYANA.


auspicious marks, engaged in the worship of his superiors


cand in the well being of thy lord. By Sugriva’s decree,


alone have reached here. And I, ranging alone and wear-
ing shapes at will, have come to this southern quarter, to
find out thy whereabouts. By my good luck I shall be able,
with thy news, to remove the grief of those monkey hosts
who are lamenting for thee. By my good fortune, my cros-
ing over the ntain, hath not become fruitless. I shall be
praised there, O worshiful dame, for I-have been able to see
thee. And the highly powerful Raghava shall soon regain
thee, destroying,«with all his sons and friends, Ravana the
kine of Rakshasas. There is a hill, O Vaidehi, named

lalyabina, the foremost of all the mountains. There tives
imy father, the great monkey Kesari. Being commanded by
the celestial ascetics, he once repaired thence to the mount
Gokarna and at the holy watering place of the lord of the
rivers he brought about the destruction of (the Asura)
Samvashdana. QO Vaidehi, 1 was born, on the field, of that
monkey. And I am known all over the world as-Hanum&n
by my own actions. To create thy confidence, O Vaidehi,
T have related thy lord's accomplishments. And forsooth,
thou shalt soon be taken, O worshipful dame, by Raghava.”
Having her confidence formed by these reasonings and various
marks, Sita, worn with grief, took him (for Rama’s messen-
ger). And Janaki attained an excess of delight and shed
tears of joy from her eyes. having curling eye-lashes.
And the beautiful countenance of that large-eyed dame,
having spacious eyes, appeared like the Moon released from
the hold of R&hu. She then took him for a real monkey
and none else. Thereupon Hanumin again spoke unto her,
having a comely presence," bave related unto thee all
this, Do thou be consoled, O Maithilee! Teil me now,
what am I to do and what dpst thou like. I shall soon repair
hence. When the Asura Samvarddana was destroyed in con-
flict by that -best of monkeys at the desire of the celestial


SUNDARAKANDAM. 993


usctetics, I was bora of the Wind, O maithiles. [louk likea
monkey but aut his equal in prowess.” :.


SECTION xXxxvi.


’
Tare highly effulgent son of the Wind-god, Hanum&a,
to create Suds confidence, again addressed ber with the
following words:—"O great dame, I am a monkey, the
messenger of the highly intelligent Rima, Behold this
precious ring with Rama’s name engraven gn it, given by
thy high-souled lord and brought as a token to create th
confidence. Du thou take heart and may good betide thi
there will be an end of thy grief soun.” And taking the
ring that used to deck her lord’s finger and looking at it,
JAnaki seemed to have actually got her lurd. And her
graceful countenance, having large eyes, looked, with
delight, like unto the Moon released from the possession
of Rahu. Aad greatly delighted at her husband's news
that modest damsel, affectionately welcoming Hanamin, ap-
plauded that great monkey—“O foremost of monkeys, thou
art brave, powerful and wise, since thou bast alone smitten
this abude of the R&kshasas. Thou hast, with thy laudable
prowess, leaped, a hundred leagues, across the ocean,
the abode of marine monsters, taking it for Goshpada.*
O foremost of monkeys, [do not consider thee as an ordi-
vary monkey, since thou dost not care or fear Ravana. O
best of monkeys,.thou art worthy of my welcome, since
thou hast been despatched by Rama, knowing self. Rima,
hard of being got at, bath not sent thee, specially to me,
without a trial of thy prowess. By my good luck, is it alt
well with the virtuous'souled and truthful Rama and the
highly powerful Lakshmana the enhancer of Sumitra's joy?
And if Kakuthstha lives untouched by ill, then why does
* A measure as much ua & cow's footstep will bold.—T-


125


996 RAWAYANA,


he not burn the earth, encircled by the ocean, with his ire like
unto the fire of dissolution? “Or they are capable of dis-
comfitting the celestials in a battle but me-thinks by my
ill-luck, the end of my miseries hath not arrived as yet.
Is Rama greatly pained? Dues he grieve? Is that foremost
of men making preparations for my rescue ?° Has he forgotten
his work being overwhelmed with fear and poorliness of
heart? Is thateson of the king performing still his manly
duties? Is that slayer of foes, desirous of acqiiring victory,
pleasing his friends still with forgiveness and gifts ‘and
dealing his enemies with punishment, sowing dissensions
apnongst them, and with other expedients ? Ls he still gaining
friends anid are friends gathering around him ? Is he welcoming
his friends ahd are they honoring him the more? Is that
son of the king invoking the blessings of the celestials ?
Hath he attained manliness and assistance from the celestials?
Hath R&ghava lost all his affection for me for my living at
a distance from him? Will he save me [rom this disaster ?
Hath not Rima, ever used to happiness aud unused to
misery, been enfeebled, by this disaster? Is he informed
always of the welfare of Kauslaya, Sumitra and Bharata?
1s not Raghava, worthy of honors, beside himself with grief
in my absencey Will not Rama rescue meg Will not
Bharata, ever devoted to his brother, send out one Aksauhini
of terrible soldiers under the command of his ministers for
my rescue? Will not the graceful Sugriva, the lord of the
monkeys come to help me with hosts of monkeys having huge
teeth and nails? Will not the heroic Lakshmana, the
enhancer of Sumitra’s joy, conversant with the use of wea-
pons, burn down the Rakshasas with his shafts? Shall |
not behold soon that Ravana with his kinsmen hath been
destroyed in battle by Rama with tertible weapons? Is not
the gold-hued and lotus-smelliag countenance (of Rima)
dried up ia my absence like unfo lotus dried up by the rays
of the sun in shallow water? Does he still hold patience


SUNDARARANDAMN, + 995


in his heart,who,renouncing his kingdom for virtue and repair-
ing, on foot with me even to the forest, was not stricken with
fear and grief? His love for his mother, father or any other
person is not greater than or equal to his love forme, QO
messenger, ! shallkeep my life so long [ do not hear anything
about my dear one.” Having addressed that lord of monkeys
with these highly sound and sweet accents, thal gracefal
and worshipful dame ceased, with a view to hear again from
him pleasant tales regarding Rama. And hearing the words
of Sita the terribly.powerful M&ruti, placing his joined palms
on his head said,—‘The lotus-eyed Rama doth not know that
thou art here, and hence he hath not been able to rescue thee
like unto Purandara regtining Sachee. And hearing about
thee from me soon shall R&ghava come assisted byea large army
of monkeys and bears. And impeding the course of the unagi-
tated deep and building,by means of his terrible shafts,a bridge
across it, KAkuthstha, shall divest the city Lanka of alt
the Rakshasas, And forsooth shall Rama destroy them, ever
if the celestials, or Death himself stand-in his way. O
worshipful dame, stricken with grief in thy absence, Rama
is restless like unto an elephant smitten hy a lion, I can
swear, O worshipful dame, by the mounts Mandara, Malaya,
Vindya, Sumeru, Dardura and all the fruits and roots, that
thou shalt behold like unto the rising of the full moon, the
countenance of Rama having benutiful eyes, graceful,
Bimba-like lips and beautified with beautiful éundadas.
Thou shalt soon behold, O Vaidehi, Rama, on the
mount Prasravana, like unto the performer of hundred
sacrifices seated on the back of the elephant (Arravata).
R&ghava doth not take meat nor drink honey—he takes
every day in the evoning boiled rice and such wild fruits
as are sanctioned by the SaS¢res. His heart is so much
attached unto thee, that he does not drive away even flies,
insects and snakes from his*body. R&gais always engaged
in meditations, overwhelmed with grief, and he has


$96". RAMAYANA.


no other thought but seeing thee. Rama hath no sleep and
even when asleep that best of men awakes exclaiming in sweet
accents, ‘O Siti !. He always welcomes thee sighing and say-
ing “O my dear love!”, whenever he beholds any fruit, flower
or any object liked by the ladies. © worshipful. dame, he is
always lamenting, exclaiming ‘O Sita! and that high-souled
‘gab of the king, to regain thee, hath resorted to ascetic
observances." On hearing about Rama, Sit was greatly
delighted and she was equally grieved on hearing of his
sorraw. And it appeared like the rising of the moun and
the appearance of the clouds at the same time in an autumnal
night. Pies


BECTION XXXVIF,


Hanae those words, Sita having a moon-like counte-
nance, again spoke unto Hanum4n,words, sound and pious :—=
“O monkey, what thon hast said that Rama is not attached
unto any other thing and if worn with grief,is like nectar mixed
with poison, Whether in the enjoyment of vast riches, or
emerged in the abyss of miseries, Death is pulling a man,
binding him roughly with a chord. O best of monkeys, people
cannot thwart the course of destiny. Behold me, Rama and
Saumitri, therefore sunk in miseries. I do not know when
shall Raghava get at the other end of the ocean of grief,
by displaying his prowess, like unto one, swimming across
the ocean when the boat is sunk. I do not know when shall
my lord see me, destroying the Rakshasas, killing Ravana
and devastating the city of Lank&. Do thon tell him to
come hefore this year expfres for till then I shall live,
-This is the tenth month and two months stil! remain,
Q. monkey and that is th@* time appointed by the
cruel Ravana. He was entreated very much by his


SUNDARAKANPAM 997


brother Bivishana to restore me but he paid no need ta
his requests. Ravana doth nof desire to restore me (unto
Rima) for he has been brought under the influence of
Death who is seeking him in battle. Bivishana’s eldest
daughter, O monkey, by name Kala, hath related this unto
me, being appointed by her mother. There is a leading,
steady, old, intelligent and educated Rakxhasa, gifted witha
good character, named Abindhya and highly respected of
Ravana who told him that the destruction of the Rakshasa race -
would proceed from R&ma, but the vicious-souled one paid
no attention to his well-meaning words. I ope, O foremost
of monkeys, that my hushand shall soon regain me for pure
is my soul and he is gifted with many accomplishmentt.
R&ghava hath in him, O monkey, energy, manline&s, strength,
kindness, gratitude and prowess, He brought ahout without
his brother's aid, the destructicn of the fourteen thousand
Rakshasas at Janasthina. What enemy is not troubled at
this? The disaster-creating Rakshasas can never be com-
pared with that best of men. I am cognizant of his prowess
as Sachee is of Indra's. QO monkey, Rima the Sun, with
his arrow-like rays, shall dry up the water—the inimical
R&kshasas.” Saying this she was overwhelmed with grief
on Rima’s account, and Hanuman again spoke unto her
having her countenance bathed in tears,—-No sooner shall
Ra&ghava hear from me than he shall speedily repair hither
followed by a huge army of monkeys and bears. Or I shall
.Telease thee even to-day from the grasp of that Rakshasa
and these miseries. Do thou place thyself on my back, O thou
of a blameless person. And having thee on my back I shall
leap over-the main. I am capable of carrying the
city of Lank& even with Ravana. I shall restore thee to-day,
O Maithili, unto Raghava on the ‘mount Prasravana, like unto
fire carrying unto Indra, the sacrificial offerings. Thou shalt
behold to-day, O Vaidehi, Rama along with Lakshmana,
making preparations (for the destruction of his enemy) like


998 RAMEY ANA,


unto Visnu, esgaged in the destruction of demons, (And
_ thou shalt observe) that highly powerful one, enxious to
behold thee and seated like unto Purandara on the summit
of that foremost of mountains, Do thou place thyself on
my back, O worshipful dame, do thou not neglect it, O beau-
téful lady, and be thus reconciled unto Rama like unto Rohini
restored to the Moon, By the time, that we will take in
talking thus, theu shalt reach Rima like Rohini restored to
+the Moon. Mo thou therefore place thyself on my back and
T shall cross the ocean sailing by the etherial way. O fair
one, carrying thee from this place, none amongst the inhabi-
tants of Lanka slrall be able to follow me. dn the same way
f have come here I shall return by the welkin, O Vaidehi
placing thet on my back.” Hearing those surprising words
from that best of monkeys, Maithilee, having her entire frame
_ worked up with joy, again bespake Hanuman—"Hanumin,
how darest thou take me to such a long distance? O lord
of monkey hosts, this attests to thy monkey hood, O fore-
most of monkeys, little-bodied as thou art, how dost thou
desire, to take me hence to my husband the lord of men ?”
Hearing the words of Sild, the graceful son of the Wind-god
Hanum&n reflected aside—~"This is my first insult, The
lotus-eyed dame is not cognizant of my prowess or strength.
Vaidehi should therefore learn that I can assume shapes at
will” Thinking thus, Hanuman, the foremést of the monkeys
and the slayer of foes, showed himself unto Sitd, in his true
shape. And leaping down from the tree, that best of mon-
keys began to increase himself to create Sitf’s confidence.
His person appeared Jike the hill! Mand&ra and the flaming
fire. And that best of monkeys having a copper-colored
countenance, thunder-like nails and teeth and mountain-like
huge body, appeared before Sit& and said—“I am capable
of carrying this Lank& with her lord, the mountains, forests
gardens, buildings? walls and gate-ways, Do thou therefore
confide in me, O worshipful dame, and be not suspicious,


SUNDA RAKANDAM. : 999


And O Vaidehi,- de thou remove Rima’s grief as welt as
Lakahwana’s.” Beholding the Wind-god’s own begotten
con,Hanumaa, resembling a huge mountain, Sit&, the daughter
of Janaka, having eyes resembling lotus-petals, said——"O
great monkey, | kuow thy strength and bravery, thy air-like
motion and thy wonderful fire-like energy. What ordinany
man can come here crossing the incomparable ocean, O
lord of monkey hosts, I understand that thou art capable
of returning and thou shalt be able to carry me. But I
should consider now how the work might be accomplished.
O foremost of monkeys, I should not go with, thee, Perhaps:
I might lose my sense with thy airlike Velocity. When
moving terribly thou shalt proceed high up in the welkit,
perhaps 1 shall then fall down, No sooner I shail fall down
into the ocean infested with fish and other animals than I
shall be an excellent food unto them. O slayer of foes, I
shah not be able to accompany thee. ‘For secing thee carry
a woman, they shall surely suspect thee. And finding me
stolen, those terribly powerful Rakshasas commanded by the
vicious-souled Ravana, shall follow thee. O hero, carrying
me aud encircled by those heroic Rakshasas with maces aud
darts in their hands, thou shalt be beset with dangers.
And on the sky the Rakshasas shall be armed with
weapons and thou shalt be without any. How shalt
{hua be able to fight and protect me at the same time.
And when thou shalt be engaged ‘in conflict with those
Rakshasas of terrible deeds, I, O foremost of monkeys,
stricken with fear, shall fall down from thy back. O fore-
most of moukeys those terrible and powerful Rakshasaa
shall be able to defeat thee a little. And when thou shalt
be defeated in battle I shall fall down and those
vicious R&kshasas shall carry me away from thy
hands or destroy me. Victory or defeat is uncertain ia a
dattle. ‘I shall thus be distreused by those RSkshasas selling
up terrible roars and thy endeavours shall be fruitless, O best


1000 adadrana.


of monkeys, ‘Thou art capable of destroying the Rakshasas
“very easily (I admit)—but Rama's fame shall then be soiled
if dost thou bring about their destruction. Or the Rakzhasas
taking me away shall keep me in such a secret place, that
neither the monkeys nor Raghava shall be able to ascertain
ty whereabouts, And all thy preparations for n.e shall thus
be useless. And mighty shall be the result of Rima’s coming
with thee. O lasge armed one, the life of Raghava of unmiti-
gated prowess, those of Lis brothers and of thy reyal race
are all subject to me. And when they shall give up their
hopes of releasing me, they, worn out with grief and anxiety
shall renounce their lives along with the mdnkeys and bears."
@ monkey, being guided by my love for my husband, I do not
like willingl} to touch any body's person but Riina's, When
Ravana, by furce touched my person, I had no other help, for
1 was then without my lurd and therefore was subject to
another person. If Rama can take me away from here, des-
troying the Ten-necked one with all the Rakshasas—he shall
then perform the worthy action. I have heard of and myself
seen the prowess of the highly-souled (Rama) unconquerable
in a battle. There is none’ amongst the celestials, Gandharbas,
Nagas and the Rakshasas who can match him in a conflict,
Beholding that highly powerful Raghava, in a conflict, like
unto Vasava in prowess, holding a wonderlul bow and
followed by Lakshmana, who can withstand his prowess
resembling the flaming fire? O foremost of moukeys, wha
cao withstand Rayhava in a conflict, followed by Laksh-
mana moving like au tafuriated elephant and showering
shafts like unto the rays of the sun at the time of Dissolu-
tion? O best of moukeys do thou speedily bring here my
dear one along with Lakshmgna and the lord of monkey hosta,
O heroic monkey, do thou soua satisfy me, who am stricken
with grief in consequence of my, jong sepatatiun from Rama. ©


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1008


SECTION XXXVIIT.


Hearne those words, that foremost of monkeys, skilled
in speech, was greatly delighted and again addressed
Sit& in the following words,—“O worshipful lady, O thou
of an auspicious presence, what thou hast said, speaks well
for a feminine nature and the modesty of a chaste damsel.
And because thou art a female, thou art not capable of
crossing on my back, the main extending over a thousand
leagues. The second argument—I shall*not touch any
other person’s body than Rama’s, which thou hast produced)
O Janaki ! O thou gifted with modesty! truly becqmeth thee,
who art the spouse of that high-souled one. Who else than
thee, O worshipful one, can give expression to such words ?
Truly shall Kakutstha hear from the beginning to the end,
O worshipful dame, of thy actions before me, and all thou
hast said. For many reasons, I gave vent to such words,
O lady,—I am anxious to compass Rama's end, and my
heart is melted with affection. It is very difficult to enter
this city of Lanka, it is equally hard to cross over the main
bat I am capable of doing all these, and hence I gave
utterance to all those words. I wish to take thee even to-
day to the descendant of Raghu. It is for my devotion
unto him and regard for thee that 1 said so and for nothing
else. If thou dost not wish to go with me, O thou of a blame-
less person, do thou give me such a token as might create
Righava's confidence.” Being thus accosted by Hanumin,
Sitd resembling the daughter of a celestial, spoke,gently,words
with their letters strung on the vapour of grief,—‘Do thow
mention unto my dear lord (in my tvords) what had happenet
.ttato me while living in the hermitage at the foot ef the mount
Pratyanga, sitaate on the northttast of Chigrakuta, abounding ©
in roots, fruits and water. ‘At no distance from that place {re~


136


RAMAYANA.


1002


quented by the ascetics flowed the sacred stream Mand&kini.
While ranging in that woodland fragrant with the odour of
many flowers, thou, having thy person wet in consequente
of thy sport in the water, didst sit on my Jap. A crow, at
that time, longing to feed en my flesh, tore my breast with
its beak. And IJ throatened it with a pebble. But it con-
tinued tearing my breast as if it sat there'to feed on my
flesh and therefore did not fly off. Being enraged with that
bird, as I tried fo tighten the cloth around my waist, it gave
way a little, and thou, rising up from thy seat and looking at
me, didst laugh over it. And I was greatly enraged with
thy laughter anf ashamed, and, being wounded by the crow,
J approached thee. Thereupon, tired as 1 was, I sat on thy
lap, and, exercised with ire, I was consoled by thee laughing.
Now J, having my countenance bathed in tears, gently
rubbed my eyes. And I was seen by thee, O my Jord, in that
wise, greatly enraged with the crow. O Raghava, I slept
for sometime, at thy lap, out of exhaustion, and thyself
in turn, slept at mine, O elder brother of Bharata. In
the meantime, that crow again suddenly approaching,
‘tore my breast witlf its beak, as I awoke and was
ising up from thy lap, O Raghava.’ Thereupon Raghava
-awoke with the shedding of blood. Beholding my breast
wounded, that larged-armed hero wroth like a serpent, sigh-
sing, said,—O thou having thighs like the trunk of an
elephant, by whom bath thy breast been wounded? Who
«wants to play with an angry five-hooded serpent?—Thereupon,
casting his looks around, he espied the crow, sitting in my
front with its claws besmeared with blood. That crow,
.fbest of bicds, wae the son of the lord of the celestials
in disguise. And gifted with air-like velocity, he speedily
entered inside the earth. Thereupon that large-eyed
hero, best of the intelligent, with bis eyes whirling with
ire, resolved to destroy that crow. And taking a blade of Kuga
off his seat, he tied it to a Brakma weapon. - And that


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1003


blade, facing the bird, appeared with its flaming face, like
the fire that would destroy the world. And he hurled that
burning blade at the crow. And it pursued the crow high
up in the welkin. Being thus pursued, that crow, in order
to save himself, traversed various regions. And being
then renounced by his father (Indra) and the great ascetics,
he, ranging the three worlds, at last resorted to his (Rima’s)
shelter. And, placing himself on the earth, he sought his
shelter, and Kakutstha, out of mercy, sawed him, albeit
worthy of being killed, And he spoke unto him, greatly
famished, of a pale countenance and lying on the earth,—It is
impossible to render this Brahma weapon fruitless. There-
fore, do thou speak (as to what is to be done,)—He then
destroyed the right eye of the crow. Having given up hf
eye, he saved himself. Then bowing unto Rama as well
as king Dacaratha, the crow, liberated by that hero, went
to his own abode. ‘Thou hadst on my behalf discharged
the Brahma weapon even at a crow. Why then, O lord
of earth, dost thou forbear him who had carried me off from
thee? O foremost of men, do thou dispense unto me thy
kindness capable of inspiring hope. O lord, possessing a
lord in thee, I (now) appear as if I had none. That kind-
ness is a prime virtue—I have heard even from thee; and I
koow that thou art exceedingly energetic and possessed of
great strength and high courage,—unfettered by consider-
ations of time and space, incapable of being agitated, thou in
gravity resemblest the ocean, and like unto that lord of the
earth furnished with seas—V&sava. O Raghava, being thus
the foremost of those acquainted with weapons, powerful,
and possessed of strength, wherefore dost thou not direct
thy weapon against the R&kshasas’y Neither Végas, nor
Gandharbas, nor the gods, nor the Maruts, are competent to
resist the onset of Rima in battle. . If that-puissant one still
fetains any regard for me, why,goth he not by means of sharp-
ened shafts make root and branch work #@ith the R&kshasas¢


3004 RimiraNa:-


Aad why, taking the permission of his brother, that repressor
of foes, the heroic Lakshmana gifted with great strength, doth
not deliver me? If those foremost of men be indeed equal
to Indra and the Wind, and incapable of being repressed
even by the celestials, wherefore do they disregard me?
‘Surely I must be guilty of some great crime, since although
capable, those subduers of enemies do not look. at me.’
Hearing Vaidehi’s piteous words uttered with tearful eyes,
that leader of smonkey-bands, the exceedingly energetic
Hanumia, said,—"O exalted one, I swear by truth, Rima
turneth away his countenance (from every work) in conse-
quence of grief for thee. And Rama being seized with
sorrow, Lakshmana burns in grief. Now that I have been
ble to obtain a sight of thee, this is no season for sorrow.
© auspiciots one, even now thou shalt witness the end of
this woe. Filled with hope from my sight of thee, those
foremost of persons, those mighty princes, shall reduce the
worlds to ashes. And, O thou of expansive eyes, slaying
in battle the wicked Ravana with his allies, Righava shalt
take thee back to his palace. Now tell me what J shall
communicate unto Righava, and the highly powerful
Lakshmana, and the energetic Sugriva, and all the assembled
monkeys.” Thus addressed, Sit’ again spoke unto him,
saying,—Do thou on my behalf, bowing down the head,enquire
after the welfare of that protector of men whom Kaucaly4 hath -
brought forth. Dothouon my behalf, and on account of
my words, enquire after the welfare of him, who, renouncing
wreaths and gems of all kinds,and beloved damsels possessed
of transcendent beauty, and wealth such as is difficult to
obtain on this spacious earth ; and who, honoring and bowing
unto his father and mother, followed Réma,—in whom
‘Samitré hath an excellent ,son,—of that righteous one, who,.
espousing the cause of his brother, renouncing choice
happiness, followeth his brother to the forest, ministering
unto him ; who is ion-shouldered, long-armed, intelligent,


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1005


and of a prepossessing presence; who beareth himself to-
wards Rima as if he were his sire, and towards me, as ‘if I
were his mother ; of that heroic Lakshmana who did not
know when I was ravished away ;—the servant of the elders,
crowned with auspiciousness,—who is competent and reineth
in his tongue ; who is the foremost of those dear unto the
king’s ‘son,* and worthy of my father-in-law ; who is deartr
{unto Rima) than even my own self ; of Lakshmana, brother
unto Rima; that energetic one who undertaketh even such
tasks as he is not equal to, and seeing whom Raghava hath
forgotten his deceased siret,—-him for the sake of my words,
thou must ask as to his welfare. Lakshmana is always mild
and pure, and dear unto Rima. Do thou speak to him so,
that, O best of monkeys, he may remove my miseries. xe)
leader of monkey-bands, do thou bring about success on this
undertaking. From this preliminary endeavour of thine,
Righava shall take pains on my hehalf.—This also shalt thou
say again and again unto that hero—my lord,—O son of
Dagaratha, I shall keep on this life for another month; and
this I swear unto thee by truth that I will not live beyond
this month. O hero, even as Vishnu rescued Kaugiki from
the nether regions,} it behoveth thee to rescue me, who have
ignominiously been confined by the impious Ravana.”—~
Thereupon, saying,—‘Hand this unto R&ghava,” Sité gave
to Hanum&n a noble and excellent jewel for the head§,
which was tied up in her attire. Then taking that
best of gems, the hero tried to fix it on his finger; but


* Rima.
+ In consequence of the fatherly care of Lakshmana.—T,
$ According to Kataka, Kauciki is Earth, who was rescued by Nirtyana
from the- subterranean regions. According to Tirtha, Kaugiki is Indra's Aws-
plcloasness, who on tha occasion of the destruction of the Asura, Vritra, took
refuge in the nether regions, and was brought back by Vishnu.—T.
1 ¥ Chuddmani. According to thetcommentator, the word means « gre
worn in the head.—T.


1006 aimi Pana.


> it did not enter into it.* And taking the gem, aud bowing
unto Siti and going round her, that foremost of monkeys
remained by her side io humble guise. And experiencing
rapture in consequence of his seeing Sith, he mentally
- presented himself before Rama, and Lakshmana graced with
auspicious marks. And taking that costly and superb gem,
which by virtue of some power, king Janaka’s daughter had
managed to hide.(from the gaze of the Rakshasis), Hanumiin,
feeling delighted like one, shaken by the wind blowing on
the top of the foremost of mountains, and then getting away
from it, prepared to set out,


SECTION xxxIx.


Hasine made over the gem, SitS said unto Hanumin,—
“This sign is very well known to Rama. Seeing this gem,
that hero, Rama, shall recollect three persons,—his mother, -
myself, and king Dagaratha, Thou, O foremost of monkeys,
wilt again be commissioned on this business. Do thou
bethink thee as to what thou wilt do afterwards, when thou
hast been entrusted with this task. O foremost of monkeys,
thou art capable of compassing this work. Therefore, think
as to what course of his (Rama's) shall remove (my) misery.
O Hanumin, undergoing toils, be thou instrumental in
removing my misery.” Saying, “So be it,” the Wind-god’s
offspring of terrible prowess, bowing down the head, prepar-
edto depart. Seeing that (Hanumfn) was about to set out,
that exalted one, Mithil&’s daughter, addressed that monkey,
son unto the Wind-god, in words choked by the vapour. of
grief,—-"“O Hanumfn, do thou communicate good ‘news to
both R&ima and Lakshmana, to Sugrive with his counsellors,


* Another meaning is,—“But fearingediscovery on account of the brillianos
pe the jewel, he desisted."T.


SONDARAKANDAM. 1007


aud to all the aged monkeys." And, O best of monkeys, in
consonance. with righteousness, communicate good tidings
(unto Rima). And it behoveth thee to. strive so that. the
mighty-armed Righava may rescue me from this sea of
sorrow. And, O Hanuman, do thou speak so that the illus-
trious Rima may deliver me while I am atill alive; and
thereby do thou reap righteousness. Ever breathing high
spirits, Dacarathi,* hearing my words, shalt attain an access
of manliness for my deliverance. Soon as Raghava shall hear
words couching tidings of me, that hero shall duly resolve
on displaying his prowess.” Hearing this speech of Sita,
Hanum&n, son unto the Wind-god, with, his joined hands
raised to his head, said,—Soon shall Kakutstha come,
surrounded by the foremost monkeys and bears; and, vah-
quishing the foe in fight, shall remove thy grief. Find I
none either among men, or Asuras, or celestials, that dares
remain before him as he discharges his shafts. For thee, in
especial, he can stand in conflict even the Sun, Indra,
nay—Yama himself, that offspring of the Sun. For thee, he
prepareth himself to conquer the Earth hounded by the
main ; and victory, thou daughter of Janaka, shall be Rama's.”
Hearing his words excellently spoken and thoroughly true,
Janaki honored them highly, and-spoke (as follows). And
gazing at him once and again as he prepared to go away,
Siti from affection honored the speech which had been
uttered (by Hanumiin) out of attachment unto his master—
“IE thou wish it, O hero, do thou, O subduer of enemies, stay
here for one day. Having rested in some hidden nook, thou
wilt depart to-morrow. O monkey, -(if thou dost remain),
thy vicinity shall for a moment remove the huge grieé of
me of slender luck. But even if thou go (passing today
here), I have, O tiger-like monkey, doubts as to thy return;
and, accordingly, doubt, certainly, as to my life. And the
gtief incident to my not.secigg thee shall burn me greatly,
a a eae


* Dagaratha’s son.—T


1008 . RAMANA.


even, O monkey, as grief buracth one that ia already
consumed by sorrow over and.over again. And, O hero,
O lord of monkeys, this doubt is also before me. How,
alas! shall the mighty lord of monkeys, albeit backed
by the monkeys and bears, cross over the mighty main hard
to cross,—and (how shall) those forces consisting of bears and
monkeys or those sons of the best of men (cross over the
same) ? In all the three worlds, Vinat&’s offspring, thyself,
and the Wind-god, have alone the power of crossing over the
deep.—Then, for the accomplishment of this work, difficult to
compass, what, O hero, O thou best of those conversant with
business, what wey dost thou see as to its success? Or thow
alone, O destroyer of hostile heroes, art quite enough for the
fflfilment of this purpose ; and thou shalt reap, in the shape
of fame, the*fruit of thy achievement. But if (R&ma) himself
together with all his forces, conquering Ravana and (recover-
ing me) in battle, returned victorious to his own city,—this
would be worthy of himself. If blocking up Lank& with his
army, that afflictor of hostile hosts, Kikutstha took me
(hence), that would be worthy of him. Do thou, therefore,
adopt such means that the. high-souled heroic warrior may
bave an opportunity of putting forth prowess :” Hearing
those words fraught with sense and reason and informed with
affection, Hanuman,by way of reply said mildly,—O revered
lady, that foremost of monkeys—the lord of bears and mon-
keys—Sugriva, possessed of truth, hath made up his mind on
thy behalf. That destroyer of Rakshasas, O daughter of
Videha, environed by thousands of millions of monkeys,
will come hither without delay. And excesdingly powerful
‘and mighty monkeys possessed of prowess, and specding far
with the rapidity of thought, are in his command. Nothing
can impede their courses, either upward, or downward, or
tending in both directions ; and those ones of measurcless
energy never experience deprggsion im the most arduoup
undertakings. Bracdd by their exalted spirits, these, resort-


SUNDARAKANDAM. souy


ing to the aerial way, have many 2 time and oft circumambe-
lated the Earth containing mountains and meads. There
ate (ia that army) rangers of woods, some equal and some
superior to me. And near Sugriva there are none who are
inferior to me. And since even Ihave reached this place,what
shall I say of those ones endowed with immense might ? Nor
are superior (monkeys) sent on errands ; it is only the inferi-.
or ones that are sent. Then, O exalted one, thou needst
not grieve: let thy sorrow depart. Those leaders of monkey-
herds will come to Lank&’ by one hound; and, like unto
the risen Sun and Moon, those leonine men, having large
fumbers to back them, will come to thy side, rjding my back.
Those heroes and foremost of men, R&ma and Lakshmana
both, coming to the city of Lank&,shall destroy her by means *
of their shafts. And slaying Ravana together >with his
adherents, Raghu’s son, taking thee, O paragon among .
women, shall retura to his own city. Therefore, do thou take
heart, good betide thee! Do thou remain, eagerly wishing
for the time. It wil! not be long before thou shalt behold
Rama resembling flaming fire. On the lord of R&kshasas
being slain along with his counsellors and friends, thou
shalt meet with Rama, even as Rohini meeteth with the
Moon. O worshipful one, speedily shalt thou behold the
other shore of thy misery, O Maithili; and thou shalt see
R&vana slain by Rima by might of arm." Having thus
solaced Videha’s daughter, Hanum&n,son unto the Wind-god,
again spoke unto Vaidehi, saying,—"Soon shalt thou behol¢
that destroyer of foes, Raghava of subdued soul, and the
bow-bearing Lakshmana also, come to the gate of Lanka.
And soon shalt thou behold the assembled heroic monkeys,
endowed with the prowess of lions and tigers, and the splea-
dour of the monarch of monkeys, and having nails and teeth
for their arms. And thou shalt, O noble one, behold ingumer-
able companies of choice monkeys, resembling hills snd
glouds—roaring om ‘the plateaus of Malzya iv Laks.
127


1010 RAMAPANA.


Like an elephant tormented by a lion, Rima afflicted in the
vitals by the dreadful shafts of Manmatha, doth not attain
ease. Do not weep, exalted one, in sorrow. Let not fear
take possession of thy heart! Even as Sachi meeteth with
Sakra, shalt thou, O auspicious one, meet with thy lord.
Who is greater than Rawa ? And who is equal to Saumitri **
And these brothers resembling Fire and the Wind, are thy
help. O revered one, thou wilt not have to dwell long in
this extremely, dreadful place inhabited by the Ri&kehasas.
The arrival of thy beloved one is not distant, Just remain
expecting (as best thou may), during the time that elapses
between this and my meeting with Rima.”


SECTION XL,


Hearwe the speech of the bigh-souled offspring of the
Wind-god, Sit& resembling a daughter of the celestials, said
in words fraught with her welfare-—‘Even as the Earth
with corn hali-way towards harvest is gladdened on receipt
of showers, have I, O ‘monkey, been gladdened on seeing
thee that speakest sweetly. Do thou so dispense thy
kindness unto me that, with my desire attained, I] may touch
that tiger-like one with my body reduced by grief. And,
O foremost of monkeys, present this sign unto R&ma,
and -tell him also for a sign that he had in ire hurled the
dart which destroyed a single eye of the crow. And tell
him also,t—'Oa my (first) tiZaka having been wiped out,
thou didst paint beside my cheek another made of red arsenic
—this thou shouldst remember. Why, O thou endowed
with prowess, resembling Indra the Great or Varuna, dost
thou disregard the ravisiied Siti, ‘sitting in the midst of


* £0, Samitrt’'s son, Lakshmana—T,
af Sith wishes Hasaagin to ase her"Gwa language to Riaa—T.


SUNDARAZENDAM. Torr


Rakshas? This jewel for the head { had preserved with-
‘care. In my misfortune, O sinless one, I used to inspire
cheerfulness by a sight of this, resembling thyself. This
graceful water-sprung (gem) I part from. Hereafter, overd
whelmed with grief, I shall not be able to live. For thee
only do I bear insufferable miseries, heart-cleaving: speech;
and companionship with Rikshasas, O destroyer of enemies,’
for a month longer will I maintain being. Beyond that,’
O king’s son, bereft of thee, I will not live. This Rakshasa
king is dreadful. (This being so), if I hear thee tarrying, I
-would not live for a moment.” Hearing Vai speech
pathetic and uttered with tears,the highly energetic Hanum&a,
son unto the Wind-god, said,—"My revered one, I swear uato |
thee by truth itself that Rima neglecteth every business
because of grief for thee. And Rama being overwhelmed
with woe, Lakshmana burneth in grief. Now that I have
succeeded in seeing thee after no end of ado, this is no time
for lamentation. © fair one, this very moment thou shalt
witness the end of thy woe, Those blameless princes—
foremost of men, gathering courage from my sight of thee,
shall reduce Lank& to ashes, And, O thou of expansive
eyes, slaying in battle Ravanz along with his friends,Raghu’s,
sons shall take thee back to their own palace. Now, O
faultless lady, thou ought to give me such a sign as Rima
shall certainly recognise, and as shall more please him by
far.” “Ah]” (answered Sitd), “I have already furnished.
thee with an excellent sign. This ornament, O Hanumiia,
when carefully examined by Rima, O hero, shall render
thy words credible.” Thereupon, taking that best of gems,
that graceful foremost of monkeys, bowing down the head
unto that exalted one, prepared to depart. Seeiug that
monkey-leader intent upon leaping up, and .surcharged
with energy,—with bis person enlarged, Janaka’s daughter,
with a tearful countenance, spake in yoe-begone guise,
hes accents choked with the vapour of grief,—"O Hanuman,


1cis -» RRULPANA,


communicate tidings of my good health unto those lion-like
brothers, Réma and Lakshmana, to Sugriva along with his
counsellors, and to all (the monkeys). And it behoveth
thee so to compass things that the mighty-armed Raghava
may rescue me from this sea of sorrow. Do thou, going
to Rima, make known to him the fierce current of my grief,
as well as the railing of these Rakshasas. Good fortune be
thy portion, thou exceedingly heroic monkey!” Thus
furnished with-the intentions of the princess, the monkey,
having gained his object, and, growing exceedingly exhila-
rated in his heart, reviewed the small work that yet remained
for him, became bent upon proceeding to the north.


SECTION Xt.


Havine been honored by her (Sit) in excellent words,
the monkey proceeding, left that place, thinking,—‘‘A small
work it is that remains. Beheld have I this dark-eyed lady.
Passing by three means, 1 see that I shall have to resort
to the fourth. No ¢reaty with Rakshas can answer the end,
Neither can gifts prevail with the wealthy. Nor is it possible
to sow dissensions among persons proud of their strength.
Then, display of prowess appeareth to me applicable in this
case, Without resorting to prowess, way find I none for
ensuring success in this matter. If the Rakshas find their

‘foremost heroes fallen in battle, they may temper their
{martial ardour). He that, having compassed his. (principal).
purpose, accomplishes many more without. marring’ the
prime one, is entitled to act. He that doeth a email work,
is certainly not a worker,-ne it is that knoweth to bring
about success in diverse ways, is alone capable of securing


SUNDARAKANDAM. 10fg


the same.* Although my sole commission’ was to effect
this much,t yet if I repair to the abode of the lord of
monkeys after having ascertained the strength of our
ownselves and that of the foe in the field, then I shall have
done the mandate of my master. How can my arrival (at
this place) be made to bring forth good fruit?’ How can I
forcibly bring on engagement with the Riakshasas ? And
how can the Ten-necked one in battle be made to form a just
estimate of the respective strength of myself and his
forces? Coming in contact with the Ten-necked one,
with his three orders, forces and charioteers, I shall, reading
the intention that is in his heart, as wefl as his strength,
happily return from hence. This grove of the fell (fiend)
resembling Nandana itself, containing variqus trees and
plants, and captivating to eye and heart,—will I destroy ;
even as fire destroyeth a dry wood. This grove being ravaged,
Ravana shall get into a fury. Then the R&kshasa monarch
shall summon up an army consisting of horses, elephants,
and mighty cars, equipped with tridents, iron axes and
other arms,—, and mighty shall be the encounter that shall
take place, And I with unimpaired prowess battling with
those terrific Rakshas, and annihilating that host despatched
by Ravana, shall merrily journey to the abode of the monkey-
king.” Then furious like the Wind, the offspring of the
Wind-god possessed of dreadful prowess set about knocking
down the trees with impetuous violence. Then that hero,
Hanum&n, devastated that garden of the damsels, resounding
with the-roars of mad elephants, and filled with diverse trees
and shrubs. And with its trees crushed and its tanks dam-
aged, with its fair peaks shattered in fragments and its pools


* © The commentator explains this passage thus —"He that by great pains
accomplishes a small work, cannot be: a great actor; but be that beiageth
sont hie wed ln a varity of nye through the ain of ellert isthe
iT.
wh he we Ste,


reg RAMA FPANA.


eloquent with the notes of birds, riven all over, with coppery
and withered sprays cast about (in all directions), and with
its trees and plants shorn of their fiveliness,—that wood was
no longer beautiful,—as if it had been burnt up by @ forest-
fire ; and its plants resembled damsels with their apparel
falling off. And that magnificent wood, with its arbours and
its ‘picture-gallerys destroyed, and its ferocious animals,
beasts and birds crying in distressful accents,—and its rocky
structures and other mansions broken down, was bereft of
its loveliness. And that grove of the inner apartment belong-
ing to the damsels* of the Ten-necked one, with its numbers
of agoka trees and plants cast about disorderly, was, in very
\soqth, through the might of the monkey, rendered a sight
composed of plants, e¢c., tending to awaken the regret of the
spectator.t Then having done what was wondrous disagrée-
able unto the mind of the magnanimous lord of the world,
that monkey desirous of coping alone with a vast host, stood
by the main entrance, flaming in effulgence.


SECTION XLII.


Tas on account of the cries of birds and the sounds of
breaking trees, all the denizons of Lank& were seized
with trepidation im consequence of fright. And agitated
with fear, birds and beasts hurried (on all sides) ; and omens”


© Promadéeanaya—gen.—occurs twice in this passage. The commen-
tates, as usual, refines on the word,—to ane he assigns a literal sense; anothed
he oxplalne—w the grove belonging to the protector of the females,~—i. 0. the
wood, which, by arousing their desire for Révana, assured thelr stey
there —T. iy +

t There is a pun on the word soka—occuring twice, Oce of these;
originally spots, bat entering into a vowg) combination with the preceding
word, is the nama of a trea fand Soka means sorrow. The acohe trees ‘belong
whattered, inspired the enlocker with sela—sorrow.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. * yORS


boding evil unto the Rakshasas, began to appear (every-
where). And grim-visaged R&kshasis, awaking from their
sleep, saw that wood devastated, and that heroic mighty
monkey. And observing them, that mighty-armed and
powerful monkey endowed with immense strength, maguified
his dimensions, capable of striking terror into the Raksha-
sas. And beholding that exceedingly strong monkey resembi-
ing a mountain, the Rakshasis asked Janaka’s daughter,
saying, “Who is this? And whence, and wherefore, hath
he come here? And why did he carry on converse with
thee? Tell us this, thou of expansive eyes. O lucky
one, entertain no fear. And, O thou shaving eyes with
dark outer corners, what is the talk that this one hath held
with thee ?’ Thereat, the chaste Sith, having all her parts
perfect, answered,—"What is my power to re4d R&kshusas
capable of wearing forms at will? Ye know who he is and
what he doeth. Serpents, without doubt, know the way of
serpents. And, furthermore, I am very much frightened,—
nor know I who that one is. I take him to be a Rakshasa—
who hath come here through his capacity to put on any
shape.” Hearing Vaidehi’s words, the R&kshasis swiftly
took to their heels. Some remained,—and some departed
to inform Ravana of the matter. And before Rfvana, the
Rakshasis of deformed visages informed him of the hide-
ous and dreadful monkey. “O king, in the heart of the apoka
wood there is a monkey of a terrific body, who, possessed
of immeasurable might, stayeth, after having carried on a
conversation with Janaki. Nor, albeit questioned by us many
a time and oft, doth Janaka’s daughter, Sita, baving the eyes
of a deer, intend to tell us who the monkey is. He may be
the emissary of Visava, or of Vaicravana ; or he may have
been seat by Rima himself frgm eagerness to get at the
whereabouts of Sitd. And he it is that, wearing a wonder-
ful form, hath destroyed thy charming arbour of the interior,
filled with beasts of various kinds—*And quarter there is


3016 RAMAY ANG,


none which hath not been destroyed by him ; and only that
_place where the exalted’ Janaki is, remaineth uninjured by
him,—-whether for preserving Janaki, or from fatigue—it
doth not appear. But what is his fatigue? She it is that
hath been preserved by him. And that overgrown Singap&
tree, affluent with elegant foliage, under which Sit& herself
hath (always rested), hath been spared by him. It behoveth
thee to order sharp chastisement to be inflicted on that one
of a fierce form, who, having carried on converse with Sita,
hath laid thy wood waste. Who, O Sovereiga of the
Rakeshasas,that hath not his life severed from him,—converseth
with Sit, who hath captivated thy heart * Hearing the
speeches of the R&akshasis, Ravana, lord of Ri&kshasas,
‘ with his eyes rolling in rage, flamed up like the fire of a
funeral pyre. ‘ And as fall drops of lighted oil from a flaming
lamp, fell drops of tears from the eyes of the enraged Ravana.
And that highly energetic one ordered his_heroic servants,
resembling himself, to punish Hanum&n. And from that man-
sion speedily issued eighty thousand of those retainers, carry-
ing ia their hands maces and mallets*,—having huge
bellies, and large teeth, of dreadful forms, and possedsed of
unwieldy strengtb,—all eager to engage in the conflict and
take Hanumin. And having come near that monkey staying
atthe main entrance, those swelling spirits rushed on, even
as insects rush into aflame. And equipped with variegated
maces, and bludgeons, and golden angadas,t and arrows re-
sembling the Sua, they approached that foremost of monkeys.
And accoutred in maces,axes,and javelins; an@ bearing beard~
ed darts and lances in their hands, they suddenly surrounded
Hanumin and remained before him, And the graceful and
energetic Hanum&n also; resembling a hill, flourishing bis
tail over the ground, seat up.tremendous roars. And attainr
seeenibling a Yommer—T._ . ec -
vy A Weaalet worn on tsb appor om-—. Do sux adhe ied Som


SUNDARARANDAM ; r0r7


ing ‘mighty proportions, Hanumin, son unto the Wind-god,
brandished -his tail, filling Lank& with sounds. And at the
sounds of his flourishing, as well as with those resounding
ones set up by himself, birds began to drop downs from the
sky. And he loudly proclaimed,—“Victory to the exceedingly
strong Rima and to the mighty Lakshmana! And victory
unto king Sugriva, protected of Raghava! Iam the eervaiit
of the Sovereign of Kogala, Rima of untiring deeds,—
(lam) Hanum&an, the destroyer of hostile hosts, offspring of
the Wind-god. And a thousand Ravanas cannot cope with
me in conflict, when I shall hurl crags and trees by
thousands, In the very presence of all the Rakshas, shall
1, having desolated the city of Lank& and paid ™y
reverence to Maithili, go away, my end being compassed.”

They were struck with affright at his roars; and they beheld
Hanumin elevated as an evening cloud. And now knowing
for certain that the monkey had been despatched by his
master, the Rakshasas commenced assailing him with various
kinds of dire arms.* Environed on all sides by those
heroes, that exceedingly powerful one, staying by the main
entrance, took up a terrific bolt. And taking that bolt, like
Vinat&’'s offspring handling a darting serpent, he slew those
rangers of the night. And grasping (the bolt), the Wind-
god’s son began to range the welkin and destroy (the
Rikshasas), like the thousand-eyed(deity)slaughtering Daityas
with his thunder-bolt. And having slain those Rikshasas,.
who were the retainers of Ravana, the heroic offspring of
the Wind-god—foremost of heroes—desirous of fight, stood
at the gate. Then certain Rikshasas, getting off from the
field in fear, informed R&vana of the destruction of all his

servants. Hearing that a mighty host of the Rakshasas had

been ene the king, with his éyes whirling in ire, ordered
Révans az to his firm resolor—1.2. they @Aishasas oust Aah with Hanumén,
however desperate the undertaking might prove—T. °

128


Jo18 RAMAYANA,


Prahasta’s son of incomparable prowess, and invincible in
battle.


SECTION XLtlt,


Havine slaughtered the servants, Hanuman, having
reflected awhile, thought,~"I have broken down the wood;
put have not destroyed the edifice dedicated to the deities
of the Rikshasas. Therefore, this very day will I demolish
this structure.” | Having thought thus in his heart, that
foremost of monkeys, Hanuman, son unto “the Wind-god,
@isplaying his strength, bounded unto the Chaitya* building,
elevated like a summit of Meru. And having ascended the
edifice resembling a mountain, that leader of monkey-bands,
possessed of wondrous energy, looked like another Sun
risen (in the sky). And having broken down that superb
edifice, the irrepressible Hanum4n, flaming in auspiciousness,
resembled (the mountain) Pariyatra. And magnifying his
dimensions through his energy, the offspring of the Wind-
god fearlessly fell to striking his arms with his hands,and thus
filling Lank&i with the sounds, And at those sounds of
striking arms, capable of striking deafness into the hearer,
birds began to drop down there, as well as the warders of the
religious mansion, with their senses overwhelmed, “Victory
unto Rama versed in arms} And unto Lakshmana endowed
with immense strength! And victory unto king Sugriva,
who is protected by R&ghava! Hanum4n, son unto the
Wind-god, destroyer of hostile hosts, is the slave of Rama
of untiring deeds. And not a thousand Ravanas can cope
with me in conflict as 1 hurl stones and trees by thousands,
Having destroyed the cit? of Lapk& and paid my respects
to Mithila’s daughter, I, my object gained, shall depart in the


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1019


presence of all the Rakshasas.” Having spoken thus, that
one of a prodigious person, seated on the Chastya, emitted
tremendous roars, striking terror into the Rakshas. In con-
sequence of that mighty cry, an hundred guards attached to
the Chattya sallied out, taking various weapons—bearded
darts, scimitars and axes; and they surrounded the Wind-
god’s offspring, as he went on increasing his body. And
they encountered that foremost of monkeys with various
maces, and axes, and golden Angadas, and arrows resembling
the Sun. And those numbers of Rakshas, encountering that
best of monkeys,resembled an extensive and mighty whirlpool
in the Ganga. Thereat, the Wind-god’s"son, the mighty
Hanumin,*waxiog enraged, violently uprooting a huge piller of
the edifice, plated with gold, and having an hundred borders,
began to whirl it (in the air).t And the fire generated
there thus, ‘burnt down the entire edifice. Seeing that
edifice in flames, the graceful monkey-leader, having slain
the hundred Rakshasas, like Indra slaying Asuras with his
thunderbolt,—remaining in the sky, said,—' Thousands of
strong, high-souled and foremost monkeys like myself,having
been created, and remaining under the command of Sugriva,
—including ourselves as well as other monkeys—are ranging
all over the world. Some are endowed with the strength of
ten elephants, some with the strength of an hundred, some
have the prowess of a thousand elephants, and some
the strength of elephants numbered by herds. Some are
equal in strength to the Wind,—and there are there some
monkey-leaders who have no limit to their strength. Sur-
rounded with monkeys of this sort, having nails and teeth for
their arms,—in hundreds and thousands and defis and
ayutas, cometh our Sugriva—the slayer of all (foes).


© Marutatmaya--son unto the Wind-god, left out om the score of ro.
dundeacy.—T.

+-The reader is powerfully remind@bof a like feng of Manoab’s nen—'the
Herealean Samson,’—T.


ror0 + REMAYANA,


Neither this city of Lank&, nor you, nor yet Ravana, shall
exist,~having created hostility with that high-souled hero
of the Ikshwiku race.”


SECTION XLIV.


'by the lord of R&kshasas, Prahasta’s son,
the powerful Jamvumali, having large teeth, went out bow
in hand. And he wore a red wreath and attire, with a
garland hung round his neck, and elegant ¢ar-ringa ; and

‘ y was huge, and terrible, with his eyes whirling,—invincible
in encounter. And he impetuously stretched a graceful bow,
resembling the bow of Sakra, and roaring like vajra and the
thunderbolt.* And the entire welkin, and all sides and

- quarters, were suddenly filled with the mighty sounds of that
bow as it was being stretched. And seeing him approaching
ia a car yoked with asses, Hanum&n endowed with vigour
both rejoiced and shouted. Thereat, the highly energetic
Jamvumili pierced with whttted shafts that mighty monkey,
Hanum&n, who was seated on an awry plank at the gate
serving as a perch for pigeons.t He pierced that lord of
monkey’s face with half-moon (shaped) arrows, his head with
one having its head made like a hook and his arms with ten
ndrdchas.t And pierced by the arrows, his coppery face
looked beautiful like a blown autumnal red lotus shot at by the
solar rays—-And his naturally red countenance being painted

+ with blood, looked lovely like a majestic red lotus in the sky,
washed with the honey of the red agoka.—Wounded by the
shafts, the redoubted monkey grew enraged. And he espied


[© Fordistinetion between the two, wide ante—T. nee
t This teal thar can make of the comsmestator's gle on forenei


Tron arrows—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1038


a huge and gigantic crag beside him. Thereat, at once up-
rooting it, that one endowed with celerity and strength hurled
it (at his foe). And the enraged Rakshasa oppoeed it by ten
shafts. Witnessing his action rendered fruitless, the energe-
tic Hanumln of terrific prowess, uprooting a large sé/s,
began to whirl it (in the air). Seeing the exceedingly strong
monkey whirling the sé/a tree, the highly powerful Jamvumati
dischanged a many shafts’ And he severed the sé/a by
means of four shafts, and wounded the monkey in the arm
with five, in the chest, with one, and with ten, between the
teats. With his body covered all over with shafts,(Hanumlla)
getting into a furious passion, taking up the-same bolt, again
began to swing’ it with rapidity. And that terrific one
gilted with exceeding impetuosity, having whirled the bolt
with wondrous rapidity, let it light upon Jamvum{ti’s spacious
breast. And (anon) there was neither seen there his head, nor
his arms, nor his thighs,nor his bow, nor his car, nor his steeds,
nor his arrows at that place. And that mighty car-warrior,
Jamvumili, speedily slain, fell down to the earth, like a
tree whose trunk hath been crushed. Hearing Jamvumili
as well as his exceedingly powerful servants slaughtered,
Ravana became transported with anger, and his eyes became
reddened in wrath. And on the mighty son of Prahasts
having been slain, the lord of the night-rangers, with his
reddened eyes rolling in rage, speedily commanded the
sons of his counsellors, endowed with vast energy and
prowess, (to encounter Hanumin in battle.)


1023 RAMIPANA


BECTION XLV.


——


Ten ordered by the lord of Rakshasas, the sons of his
counsellors, seven (in number), in splendour resembling fire,
issued forth from that mansion. And surrounded by a mighty
army, furnished with bows, endowed with wondrous strength,
and accomplished in arms—the foremost of those acquainted
with weapons--each burning for victory, with mighty cars
yoked with steeds, covered with golden net-works, bearing
pennons and stagdards,and having sounds like those proceed-
ing from clouds,—exultingly stretching with immeasurable
frowess bows decked with gold,—resembling clouds surcharged
with lightniag,—those warriors sallied out. Learning that the
servants had been slain, their* mothers, along with their
friends and kindred, were overpowered with grief. And
vieing with each other in eagerness, those (warriors) decked
in ornaments of polished gold, confronted Hanum&n staying
at the gate. And with their cars sending roars, the Rikshasas,
pouring showers of shafjs, ranged (the field), resembling
clouds during the rainy season. And cavered with those
arrowy showers, Hanum&n had his person concealed, like the
monarch of mountains hidden by a downpour. And that
swift-speeding monkey, coursing the cloudless sky, evaded
those shafts of those heroes, as well as the, impetuosity of
their cars. And that hero, playing pranks with those bow-
men, appeared like the masterful Wind playing tricks with
the bow-bearing clouds.t ‘And sending up a dreadful shout,
and thereby filling that vast host with fright, the energetic
Hanuman rushed on that Rakshasa army. And that subduer
of enemies slew some with slaps, and some he rived with
mails, and some he killed “by blosvs, and others with (the


* é.¢, the mothers of the sons of tha,qpuncillors.—T,
t 4.¢. having the iria-£T,


SUNDARAKINDAM., 3033


Pressure of) bis chest. And some dropped down on the
ground at the very same spot at the sounds that be emitted.
And on their being slain or falling on the earth, that army,
afflicted with affright, began to fly in all directions. And the
elephants roared in frightful tones, and the steeds fell down
on the earth.—And the Earth was covered with broken boxes,
-flagstafis, and umbrellas, (belonging to the cars), as also with
the cars themselves—And rivers running gore were seen on
the way, and Lank4 uttered various frightful cries. And having
slain those overgrown Rakshasas, that exceedingly powerful
and heroic monkey of terrific power, desirous of again coping
with other Rikshasas, retraced his steps to the self-same
entrance.


SECTION xivi.


Liearninc that the sons of the counsellors had been
slain by the high-souled monkey, the Ten-necked one sup-
pressing the apprehension that was in his heart, restored the
balance of his mind, And he directed five of the foremost
leaders of his forces, the heroic Virup&ksha, Yupaksha, the
R&kshasa Durdharsha, Praghasa, and Masakarna, versed in
polity, endowed with the speed of the Wind in conflict and
alert on every occasion,to take Hanum&n captive.“Ye generals,
do ye taking a mighty host with steeds, elephants and cars,
chastise that monkey. And coming to that dweller of the
woods, ye had better act heedfully, and should accomplish
this work in consonance with place and season. Having
regard to his acts, I do not take him to bea monkey. He
is a great being endowed with. extraordinary prowess every
way. My mind is not satisfied that he is a monkey. He
may have been brought into being by Indra, through ascetic
might, for injuring us. ked by you, I have defeated


1e84 RIMATANA,


(deities), and Nagas, and Yakshas, and Gandharbas, and
Asuras, and Maharshis. And, for certain, they have herein
tried to do us some wrong. Therefore there is no doubt
about this,—do ye by main force take him. And, ye generals,
go ye, taking a mighty force with steeds, elephants and
cars, Do ye chastise this monkey. This monkey of deli-
Berate prowess should not be disregarded by you. I have
seen* monkeys of immense prowess,—-Vali with Sugriva
and the exceedingly powerful Jambavln, and Nila the
general, and others with Dwivida at their head. Their speed
is not dreadful, nor their energy, nor their prowess, nor
their intelligence, nor their strength, nor their courage, nor
their capacity to change shapes. Therefore ye should know
fhim as some great being staying in the form of a monkey.
Exerting ourself to the uttermost, do ye chastise him.
These three worlds combined, with Indra, celestials and
mortals, are incapable of long staying before you in the field
of battle. Still a person versed in polity, albeit anxious to
secure victory in battle, should carefully preserve self, as
success in war is unstable.” Thereupon, they, possessed of
the energy of fire, accepting the words of their master,rushed
forth vehemently, accompanied with cars, mad elephants,
fleet steeds, sharp and whetted weapons,—and forces of all
kinds. Then those heroes saw that effulgent mighty monkey,
shining in his native splendour, like unto the risen sun,—
possessed of great strength and immense speed, and magnani-
mity of mind,—seated at the gate. And soon as they saw
him, they, frightened at his appearance, assailed him with
their respective terrible weapons, And Durdhasa discharged
at Hanumln’s head five white iront arrows with yellow
hea and possessing the lustre of Jotus-leaves. Having


* There is a word—sighra, scomin this sloke, of which J fail to perceive
the relation.—T, ‘

+ This may rather look an incongrgess mixture of images; but the fron
arrows may have been sifered over —T.


SUNDARARANDAM. 1035


been pierced in the head with those shafts, the monkey,
roaring, leapt into the sky, making the ten cardinal points
resound. Then the exceedingly powerful and heroic Durdhara,
mounted on a car, with bis bow stringed, came forward,
showering innumerable arrows by hundreds. Thereat, even
as the wind driveth away rain-pouring clouds at the end of
the rainy season, the monkey, remaining in the sky, resisted
(his antagonist) as he kept on pouring his shafts. And sore
beset by Durdhara, the Wind-god’s son again emitted cries,
and that puissant one also increased himself. Then darting.
far up in the air, the monkey suddenly descended on the
car of Durdharca with extreme vehemegce, like unto a
masa of lightning alighting on a mountain.—-Thereat his
eight steeds gotting mangled, and the wheels and pole ot
his car having been broken, Durdhara leavingthe car, fell
down to the earth, deprived of life. Seeing him down on the
earth, those: irrepressible subduers of enemies, Virupiksha
and Yup&ksha, waxing wroth, sprang up. And springing up
suddenly, they by means of maces, dealt blows on the chest
of the monkey, who was staying in the unclouded sky.
Thereat resisting the furious rush of those gifted with ebullient
energy, that exceedingly powerful one descended to the
earth with the violence of the Fair-feathered (bird).* Then
getting at and uprooting a sé/a tree, that monkey, the
Wind-god's offspring, slew both of those heroic R&kshasas.
Learning that those three had been slain by the monkey
gifted with speed, the mighty and onrushing Praghasa
laughing in scorn advanced (in the encounter). And the
energetic Bhisakarna also came forward in rage, taking a
dart. And (they) meeting together, Praghasa assailed the
famous, tiger-like monkey with a sharp-edged axe, and
Bh&sakarna (attacked) the elephantine monkey with a javelin.
And with his limbs wounded ty them, and his hair wetted
with blood, that monkey resembling in splendour the infant
@ — 22


* Suparna—a name of Garura’—T.
* 129


gror - RAMAFANA.


sun, grew furiously enraged. And that elephantine monkey,
the heroic Hanumin, uprooting a mountain-peak, with beasts,
snakes, and trees (in it), slew those Rakshasas ; and, crushed
by that mountain-summit, they were reduced to powder. On
those five generals having fallen, the monkey slew the
remaining forces. And as the thousand-eyed Deity destroyed
Asuras, the monkey destroyed steeds with steeds, elephants
with elephants, warriors with warriors, and cars with cars,
And with horses and elephants, swift steeds, with broken
wheels and mighty cars, and R&kshasas slain, all the ways
were blocked up, And having destroyed in battle the heroic
generals with al] their forces and vehicles, that hero in
the same way rested at the gate like Kila himself engaged in
destroying people, when he hath gained respite.


SECTION XLVEI.


Hearne that the five generals had been slain by
Hanuman alone with their vehicles and followers, the king,
“gazing at prince Aksha, who was ready and eager to go to
battle, commanded him to take the field. And that puissant
one of a bow decked with gold, on being commanded (by
R&vana) with a glance, started up, like unto fire on being
fed by clarified butter by foremost regenerate persons on the
sacrificial ground. And that best of Nairitas* possessed of
Prowess, ascending a car resembling the infant sun in
effulgence, and surrounded all round with networks of
burnished gold, sallied forth in quest of that mighty monkey.
And (that warrior) in prowess resembling an immortal,sal lied
out ascending that car,, obtained with long-continued
asceticism, embellished with a network of glowing gold,


RAxshasas,


SUNDARARANDAM. 1037


furnished with pennons,having a standard studded with gems,
nicely yoked with eight excellent steeds having the fleetness
of thought, incapable of being overpowered either by
celestials or Asuras,competent to course over uneven ground,
of the lustre of fightning, sky-ranging, completely
garnished, equipped with quivers, with swords fastened to
the banners in eight directions, with darts and lancdés
arranged in proper places, splendid with every object in full
measure, bearing golden threads, wearing the brilliancy
of the sun and moon, and possessing the effulgence of the
sun, And filling the firmament and the earth containing
mountains with sounds proceeding from steeds,elephants and
mighty care,—he, accompanied by his forces, Presented
himself before the capable monkey, who was seated at the
gate. And coming before the monkey, Akshd, having the
gaze of a lion,with eyes betokening regard, gazed at Hanuman
resembling the Fire on the occassion of the universal dissolu-
tion at the end of a yuga, intent on destroying creatures, and
who was seated and was influenced alike by surprise aod
regard. And seriously considering the impetuosity of the
high-souled monkey as well as his prowess in relation toa
foe,—as also his own strength, he increased (in strength) like
the Sun on the expiration of a Yuga. And growing enraged,
(Aksha), staying calmly in the field, with concentrated soul,
challenged Hanuman difficult to resist in conflict and of
prowess worthy to witness, with three whetted shafts. And
finding the monkey proud and untiring, capable of vanquish-
ing his foe, and possessed of exalted spirits, Aksha took up
bis bow and held his arrows in his hands. And wearing
a golden corslet, angadas, and earings, and possessed of
fiery vigor, he closed with the monkey; and their meeting
was something unparalleled on this earth,—and was galculat-
‘ed to raise the respect* even of the celestials and the
fear—t.


1028 RAMAPANA.


Asuras. And witnessing the mighty comflict of the prince
and the monkey, Earth emitted cries, and the Sun did not
burn, and the Wind did not blow, and the mountains shook,
and the welkin sounded, and the main was vexed. And
that hero, skilled in aiming, fixing and discharging arrows,
shot at the monkey’s head three fine-headed feathered shafts
plated with gold near the feathers, and resembling venomous
serpents. And with his rplling eyes washed with blood in
consequence of’ the shafts having alighted at his head,
Hanumin, resembling a new-risen Sun having arrows for its
rays, looked splendid like the light-engarlanded Sun. And
seeing in-battle*that son of the foremost of monarchs, with
pis excellent weapons upraised and his beautiful bow, that
best of the counsellors‘of the lord of monkeys, rejoiced, and
intent on encounter, increased himself. And with his ire
heightened, that one endowed with energy and prowess, like
unto the ray-decorated (Sun) on the crest of Mandara,* began
to burn with the fiery rays of his eyes, Aksha, along with
his forces and vehicles. And as a mass of clouds showereth
rain on a high hill, the arrow-showering Rakshasa resembling
clouds, having the bow for his rain-bow, discharged shafts
at that foremost of monkeys, representing a mountain. And
then the monkey, having sounds like those of clouds,
beholding in battle Aksha of terrific prowess in conflict,
and strong in energy, strength and shafts, sent up shouts
from elation of spirits. And as an elephant approacheth a
deep pit covered over with grass, (Aksha) from a spirit of
childishness elated in conflict with his prowess, with his ire
heightened, and eyes resembling blood, drew near the
monkey in the fleld. And as Aksha went on hastily pouring
shafts, that one uttering roars resembling the rumbling of
clouds, dooking terrible in censequence of his arms and thighs
flung about, darted into the sky with exhuberant energy. And


* The Sun is on Mendara in mid-day; therefore the meridian Sun is
meant here.—T,


SUNDARARANDAM. 1029


as he leapt up, that strong and powerful one—foremost of
Rakshasas—that car-warrior and the best of choice car-
warriors—rushed at (Hanum4n), showering arrows on him,
like a cloud showering hail-stones on a mountain, And
dashing in the midst of the arrows like the wind, and thus
baffling them, the heroic monkey of dreadful prowess in
conflict, aud endowed with the speed of thought, began fo
range the path of the air. And witnessing Aksha with
regardful eyes, as that one intent on conteststaking his bow,
was covering the sky with various excellent arrows, the
Wind-god’s offspring was plunged in thought. Wounded in
the arm with shafts by that high-souled, noble prince, that
mighty-armed one, capable of adequately appreciating the
nature of actions, thought on (Aksha’s) prowess in battle.
“This exceedingly powerful one, endowed with the splendour
of the infant sun, is doing dire deeds incapable of being
done by a boy; and I am loth to slay one that hath shown
himself equal to every martial feat. This one is high-souled,
mighty in energy, of concentrated self, and capable of bearing
extreme hardships in war; without doubt, by virtue of
his actions, he is worthy of being honored by N&gas, Yakshas
and ascetics. With his mind braced by prowess and hope,that
foremost of heroes eyeth me staying in the fore-front. The
prowess of this light-handed (one), I ween, maketh even
the hearts of the celestials and Asuras tremble. If I
disregard him, he shall certainly vanquish me, for his
prowess in battle increaseth (fast). Therefore I must even
slay him: it is not proper to suffer an increasing fire.” Thus
reflecting on the strength of his foe and having ascertained
his line of action, that puissant one endowed with great
strength, summoned energy and set his heart on slaying
him (his antagonist). And rersaining in the. path.coursed
by the air,that heroic morkey, the offspring of the Wind-god,
with his slaps slew his eight powerful gad excellent steeds,
capable of bearing pressure and trained to diverse circular


1030 RAMAYANA.


movements. And successfully assailed by the councilor
of that lord of monkeys, the car with its seat smashed, and
its pole broken, and deprived of its steede, fell to the earth
from the sky. Thereat, forsaking that car, the mighty car-
wartior sprang up into sky with his bow and holding his
sabre,—and (resembled) an ascetic of fierce energy conse«
quent on austerities, going up to heaven, renouncing his
body. Then the monkey possessed of the energy and vigor
of the Wind, approaching him as he was ranging thé air
coursed by the king of birds, the Wind and the Siddhas, at
length fast caught hold of his legs. And as the foremost of
birds, Garwra taking a mighty serpent, whirls it, that foremost
qf monkeys, resembling his sice in prowess, whirling Aksha
in the conflict, violently dropped him on the earth. And
with his arms, thighs and chest crushed, bleeding, (having
his bones and eyes smashed, his joints riven, and his tendons
snapped, the Rakshasa lay on the earth,slain by the offspring
of the Wind-god. And tormenting him (Aksha) on the earth,
that mighty monkey caused great fright unto the ruler of the
R&kshasas ; and he was gazed at by the assembled Maharshis
and the orbit-coursing dnes and all beings with Yakshas
and Pannagas, come to see him. And on the prince
being slain, that monkey was gazed at by the celestials with
Indra, who had been seized with extreme wonderment.
And having slain in battle prince Aksha resembling a son
of the celestials and possessed of blood-red eyes, the hero
(again) neared the same gate, and waited there like Kila
bent upon destroying all creatures.


SUNDARAKANDAM. rogt


SECTION xLvull


Jn prince Aksha having been slain. by Hanum&n, the
magnanimous monarch of the Rikehasas,wrought up by wrath,
repressing his feelings, ordered Indrajit resembling ‘a
celestial, (to take the field against the foe.) “Thou art the
foremost of those bearing arms; and thou hast afflicted
even the gods and Asuras (in battle) ; thy deeds have been.
witnessed by the celestials with Indra; and thou hast pro-
cured a weapon* even from the Great-father. And coping
(in conflict) with thy might of arms, all the celestials with
the Maruts, headed by the lord of celestials himself, could
not stay in the field. And there is none in these three worlds
(save thyself), who doth not come under the influence of
fatigue in battle. And thou art preserved by the prowess
of thy arms, and protected also by thy ascetic merit; and
being skilled in the knowledge of season and place, thou,
methinks, art the foremost of them all in intelligence. And
there is no deed which thou canst not perform in the field ;
and there is nothing in counsel capable of being arrived at
by arguing on the lines prescribed by the scriptures, which
thou art not equal to; and there is none in all the three
worlds who doth not know thy strength and prowess in arms.
And thy ascetic energy is like unto mine, as well as thy
prowess and might in arms in battle. And having thee
in the conflict, my mind assured (of victory), doth not expe-
rience sorrow. Slain have been all the servants, as also
Jamvumili, and those five generals, the heroic sons of my
councilors, and the swelling forces including steeds,
elephants and cars, And low lieth Mahodara, and prince
Aksha hath also been slaii. O destroyer of foes, my mind


* vis. the Brahma weapon.*T.


1033 : RAMAYANA.


did not feel the same confidence in them that I do in thee.”
And seeing this mighty host slain, as well as the prowess
and energy of the monkey, and the taking into consideration
thine own strength, do thou put forth thy energy according
to thy strength, And on nearing the scene (of conflict),
do thou, O foremost of those bearing arms, seeing thine
dwn strength and that of the foe, so exert thyself that the
latter, (now) resting quietly in consequence of having created a
carnage (on the dostile hosts), may wax enfeebled.t O hero,
army can serve no purpose here; for hosts fly (before)
Hanumin or are reduced to nothing. Neither can it avail
to use arms of terrific power and resembling the thunderbolt.
Nothing can resist the rush of the Wind-god’s offspring ;
find this one like unto fire is incapable of being slain with
weapons. Revolving well (in thy mind what I have remarked),
do thou in order to the attainment of success, with an
intent mind remember the divine virtue of this bow, and
repairing (to battle) strive to vanquish the foe, baffling his
attacks. O foremost of intelligent ones, (that I send
thee to battle) is certainly not proper; yet this course of
action is endorsed by’ Kshatriyas and those following
the morality of kings. O subduer of enemies, one should be
versed in various branches of learning as well as be masterful
in war.§ He that craves victory in fight, should be acquaint-
ed with various branches of knowledge. ||

* According to another reading, the meaning would be~-"O best of
wartlors, do ‘thou, considering thy own strength and that of the enemy, 10
exert thyrelf that “he may no longer infict tervible losses on our army.”
(Tirtha).—T,

+ Another meaning is: Looking om thyself, and (not on my forces), as
constituting my main stay, put forth thy prowess-—T.

$ One should know in what branches of knowledge one’s enemy is proficient,
and, understanding this, one should strive for victory.—T.

§ Accirding to a different reading,the megning would be, ‘Thou art comnpe-
tent to fight agreeably to the rales.”"—T. .

I The Sloss is very, dificult ant> Sncapable of interpretation without at
places meanings being read into it.—T.


SONDARAKANO1H. : 1035


Hearing the words of his father, (Indeajit) gifted with
"celestial prowess, determined to fight, instantly circumambu-
lated him, Excited with a desire for fight and worked up
with energy, Indrajit, eulogized by the friendly Rikshasas,
set out for battle. And that highly effulgent and graceful
son of the lord of the Rikshasas, having expansive eyes
resembling lotus-petals,—issued out like unto the cising of
the ocean during a garza.* Thereupon Indrajit of unbear-
able prowess, equal to the lord of the celéstials, ascended
acar drawn by four horses, having sharpened teeth and
resembling Garura in velocity. And that master of a car and
foremost of bowmen, conversant with the use of al? weapons
the best of those using swords—procceded soon in his cas
where Hanumfn was. And hearing the sound of bis car and
the twang of his bow, that heroic monkey attained an excess
of delight. And taking up « bow and sharpened darts,
Indrajit, versed in the rules of war, proceeded towards
Haoumin. And as he issued out for battle, greatly delighted,
with arcows in his hands, all the quarters became dark,
and jackals began to set up terrible cries. And there
arrived the Nagas, the Yakshas, the Maharshss, the planets,
and the Siddhas, and the birds, covering the welkin, and,
greatly delighted, began to make a noise. And beholding that
car having a flag like that of Indra, approach very quickly,
the monkey began to emit terrible roars and increase
himself. And Indrajit too, seated on the cclestial car and
having a painted bow, began to stretch it, emitting a sound
resembling that of thunder. Thereupon closed in conflict
those two greatly powerful (heroes)—gifted with swift move-
ments and fearless in bettle—the monkey, and the son of the
lord of Rakuhasas, like unto the lords of celestials and Asuras.
And baflling the shafts of that herd of a mighty car, au ‘accom-
plished bowman and a finished warrior, the immeasurably
* A name given to certain days in the lunar mont at the full and change

of the moon, and the Sth and 14th of each half month.—T,


mn


1034 : RABIAP ANA,


powerful monkey increasing himself began to range in
the ‘welkin.* Thereupon the heroic (Indrajit)—~slayer’ of
foesbegan to discharge incessantly shafts, large, sharp,
welt-feathered, painted in gold and swift-coursing tike unto
thunder. And hearing again the noise of his car,the sounds of
qrums, bugles, and war-drums, and the twangs of the bow, he
again leaped up (in the sky). And bafffing the aim of (Indrajit),
who had always an eye on it, that great monkey rangéd at
a distance from those shafts, And again facing the arrows
and stretching his hands, the Wind-god's son again leaped'up.
And those two heroes,gifted with swift movements and versed
in the art of war, engaged in a combat, admired of all
beings. And Hanum&n could not find out the short-comings of
the Rikshasa, nor could that high-souled one detect the
weak points of the son of the Wind-god. And these two
gifted with celestial prowess, engaged in conflict, became
unbearable unto each other. And seeing him unburt though
aimed at with infallible arrows, the high-souled (Indrajit), con-
(rolling his senses, engaged in deep and devout meditationt
(to realize the true identity of Hanuman). Thereupon, that
son of the lord of ‘Rakshasas pinned his thoughts upon
that foremost of monkeys, and, finding him incapable of
being slain, he began to devise plans how he could be bound.
Aud that hero, foremost of those versed in the use of
weapons, discharged at that best of monkeys the highly
powerful weapon conferred on him by Brahmf’, the Great-
father of the celestials. And knowing him incapable of being
slain, Indrajit conversant with the use of weapons, bound


* Literally it means the passage of his father. “Hangma's father being
the Wind, it means the sky.—T.

+ According to Hinde Philosophy, one by virtue of yoga nnd’ self-control
can realfce cuany great things which are, beyond ordinery bumes ooosep-
tion, Beholding Hantmin unhurt though assailed incessantly with teritble
ts, Indrajit at once jgesped at thotconcluslon that he must be # great splcit
in a monkey-form. To realize who he in realty was, be engaged in gape
or devout meditation,—T.


SUNDARARKANDASS 1035


that large-armed son of the Wand-god with that wrapon.
Aad being -bound up by that -Rikshasa. with the weapon,
the munkey became motionless aud fell down on the’ earth.
Aad thinkiog that be was bound up with a Brahma weapon,
he did. not feel the least pain in consequence pf
Brahmi’s blessing. And that heraic monkey began to
thipk of the boons conferred on bim by the Great-father
of the celestials. And thinking, that the weapon was
conferred by the Self-create and consectated by sacred
‘Mantras, Hanumfin began to think of boons ‘conferred
hy the Great-father. “In consequence of the power of the
Lord of creation | am incapable of extricating myself
from these bonds.” (Knowing this by means of devout meditay
tion,he reflected again,)—"This has been ordained by Him,and
f must pat up with this pain for sometime.” Revolving well
the power of the weapon, the boon of the Great-father, and
his own prowess to extricate himself from the bonds, the
monkey followed the Great-father’s behest,—I do not fear
though bound by this weapon, since [ am being protected by
Bram’, Indra and the Wind-god. It will be better if I an
carried off by the Rakshasas, for I shall reap very
grout benefit by my conversation with the lord of Rakshasay.
Therefore let the enemies carry me.” Having resolved
this, the considerate (monkey)--slayer of foes—remained
coctionless. And being ruthlessly bound by the foes
and remonstrated with by them, he began to moan piteously.
And beholding that slayer of foes motionless, the Rikshasas
bound him up with cotton and bark, And he gladly
allowed himself to be tied up aud rebuked by his enemies,
thinking that be might converse with the lord of the
R&kshasas, if he, out of curiosity, should like to nea him.
.Being bound with bark, that powerful. (monkey) got
himself freed from the binding of the weapon, forthe binding
force of a Brahma weapon*tecomes null when there is
any other binding. And behulding that best of monkeys tied


1036 Kasra Ana.


up with bart and liberated from the binding of the weapon,
Sadrajit reflected that the binding force of the Brahma ‘weapon
became powerless when there was apy other binding. “Alzs,
(those Rakshas) have rendered my mighty deed fruitless.
They know not the action of Mantras.* And-on the
Brahma weapon being baffled, any other weapon cannot effect
anything ; and thus we’ have all been placed io a critical
predicament.” On being yeleased from the weapon, Hanumin
did not betray ‘any signs of his liberation, albeit he was
pulled by the Rikshasas and pained by the bonds they had
bound bim with. And the monkey, Hanuman, was pulled by
those cree! Rakshasas having fatal boxes, in the direction of
the lord of Rikshasas. And secing (Hanumfn) freed from the
(Brahma) weapon yet bound by the bark of trees, he (Indrajit)
showed the exceedingly powerful and highly heroic monkey
unto the king along with his adherents, And the Rakshasas
related unto the. ruler of Rakshas everything touching that
foremost of choice monkeys, resembling a mad elephant
who was in bonds. “Who is he? And whose son? And
wherefrom ¢ And what's his errand? And by whom is he
backed ?"—-thus did the heroic R&kshasas converse on
beholding Hanum&n. And others said,—Kill him,” “Bura
hin," —"Eat him up.” The Rakshasas, growing enraged, thus
said unto each other.—Having passed some way, that
magnanimous one saw there old servants sitting at the feet
of the lord of Rakshasas,—as well as a mansion embellished
with countless jewels. And the exceedingly energetic
Riivana saw that foremost of monkeys dragged hither and
-thither by Rikshasas of frightful forms. And that best of
‘monkeys too saw that lord of R&kshasas, endowed with
Strength and energy and resembling the resplendent sun.
And with his reddened: eyes rolling, the ten-necked one,
“gazing at that monkey, ordered his principal counsellors,


a pl ey
* That the action ef a Brahma mantra upon one Is nullified if one is
bound physically —T.


SUNDARARANDAM. 1037


boasting of high pedigree and noble- character, (to
interrogate the incumer). And by turns questioned by them
as to- his ‘mission and purpose, as well as the fundamental
occasion (of his inroad), that foremost of monkeys replied,
“A messenger, | come (from Sugriva.’’


SECTION


Ano atruck with his* deed, that one of dreadful vigor,
Hanuman, his eyes reddened in wrath, steadilyrlooked at
the lord of Rakshas ; flaming in gorgeous and precious gold,
with a splendid diadem studded with pearls; (adorned
with) excellent ornaments, containing diamonds and costly
gems,—seeming to have been forged by the mind; appareled
in costly linen; smeared with red sandal paste, and
beautifully painted with various and variegated devices ;t
looking splendid with his sightly yet terrible eyes; having
sheeny, sharp and long teeth,—with banging lips ;—and
that hero (saw) that one of great energy, radient with
ten heads ; like unto Mandara with its summits containing
serpents ; resembling a mass of blue collyrium; with his
breast graced by a chain ; with his countenance possessed of
the lustre of the moon ; looking like a cloud beside the new-
risen Sun ; with bis dreadful arms bound with keywras, and
graced with excellent sandal paste, brilliant with angedas,
and resembling five-headed serpents; seated on a superb
seat,—upon a spacious, variegated, and gay sheet embellished
with crystals, and studded with gems ; ministered on all'sides
by gorgeously adorned damsels,bearing hair-furnished fans,—
the strength-elated one, surrouhded by four ees

* Indrajit’s—T.

+ e.g. the three horizontal marks painted on the forehead by Safeas and


1038 RAsdrana”


counsellora. versed in the mystery of counsel,—vis,,
Durdhara; Prahaste,the Raksha MahSp&rgwa, and the minister.”
Nikembha,—like the entire world girt round by the four
-seas-—and encouraged by other counselors, faic of
forms and versed in counsel, even like the sovereign of
celestials by the celestials. And Hanumfn beheld the
immensely energetic, ford of R&kshasas surrounded (on all
sides by his advisers), dike. a cloud containing wafer on a
summit of Meftu. And undergoing exceeding trouble at
the hands of the Rakshas of dreadful prowess, (Hanuman)
struck with mighty amaze, gazed at the lord of Rakshas,
And seeing the sovereign of Rakshas, appearing splendid,
Hanumin, bewildered by his effulgence, mentally reflected :
“Ah! the form ! Ab { the patience! Ah! the strength ! Alt
the splendour! Ah{ the entire auspiciousness of the king
of Rakehasas ! If the lord of Rakshasas were not impious unto
‘the height, this one could well be the protector themselves
of the celestial regions with Sakra. But in consequence of
the fell and remorseless acts of this one, which are the
aversion of every one, all the worlds with gods and demona
hold him in fear. This dne, being angered, dares to convert
‘this carth into. one entire ocean.” Beholding the potency
of the Rikshasa king of immeasurable prowess,the intelligent
monkey thus indulged in a variety of thought.


SECTION L.


° eee


Serine the tawney-eyed one staying before him, the
mighty-armed Rivana, affrighter of (the worlds), wae over-
whelmetl with fierce wrath. * And gazing at that foremost of
monkeys girt with power, and with his soul exercised with
apprehension, lre (thought),—Ts this the worshipful Nandi,
come hither in person, by whom J, on my jeering at-him,-had


SUNDARACKENU AA. £039


formerly been cursed in Kailica f* Or is this one wearing
the. shape of a monkey Vali’s son, Vina?’ -..Aad with-his
eyes coppery with rage, the king asked his. foremost
counselor, Prahasta, in words fraught with senee and suiting
the season,—"Ask this wicked-minded one, whence is he?
And what led him to ravage the grove, and what was his
object in brow-beating the Rikshasas ? And what hath beed
his purpose’ in entering my metrgpolis incapable of being
subdued ; and what for did he also fight (with my retainers ?)
Do thou ask the wicked-minded one about this.” Hearing
Ravana’s speech, Prahasta said,—“Take heart! Fair fortune
to thee! Thou needst not be alarmed, O monkeye If thou
hast been sent to Ravana’s residence by Indra, tell us truly
everything. Let no fear, O monkey, be thine. Thou shalt
be Tiberated. If thou belong to Vaigravana, or'to Yama, or
to Varuna, and hast entered into this city of ‘ours disguising
(thy proper shape),—or if thou hast been despatched by
Vishnu: burning for victory, (tell us this traly). Thy prowess
is certainly not that of a monkey,—thy form alone is that
ofa monkey. Unfold this (unto us) faithfully—O monkey,
and thou shalt get (back) thy liberty. But if thou shouldst say
aught untruthful, thy life shall pay dear for it. Or tell us
wherfore thou hast entered into Ravana’s mansion.” Thus
addressed then, that foremost of monkeys said unto the lord
of R&kshasas,—I am not Sakra’s, nor Yama’s, nor Varuna’s.
Ihave no friendship with Dhanada,t nor have I been des-
patched by Vishnu. This is my race; and I have come
hither a monkey for obtaining a sight of the Rikshasa
chief. And it is to attain a sight of the R&akshasa lord that I
have destroyed his peerless grove; and it is for this that, the
powerful R&kshasas seeking for fight, I for the preservation
of my person have resistgd them*in conflict. [ am ifcapable
of being slain with weapons even by- the celestials and -the
© Ravana had formerly laughed at Nandi for his*monkey-face.—T.
+ Lit.—giver of wealth—a designation of Kuvera,—T,


2040 RAMAYANA,


Asuras themselves. This -hoon I also* keppen te have
received from the Great-father. his because I was desirous
of seeing the king that.I have suffered this weapon to restrain
me. Although the Rikshasas have brought me (hither thus),
yet I am free from any weapon (restraining me). I come
near thee on a certain business of Rima. Knowing me for
& messenger of Raghava endowed with measureless prowens,
do thou, O lord, listen $o my words, calculated to work
thy profit.” °


SECTION LI.


SRRING ‘the Ten-necked one of mighty energy, that
foremost of monkeys, endued with strength, calmly spoke
unto him words containing sense,”—-I have come unto
thee at the command of Sugriva, O lord of R&kshasas, Thy
brother, the king of moukeys, enquires after thy welfare.
Listen to the desire of thy brother, the high-souled Sugriva,
and his words fraught ‘with righteous sense and capable of
working one’s good here and hereafter. King Dacaratha,
master of cars and elephants and steeds,—is the friend of
all like unto their father, and is furnished with the splendour
of the sovereign of celestials. His eldest son,—mighty-armed,
and masterful, the darling (of his sire), hath, in accordance
with his father’s order, entered the forest of Dandaka with
his brother Lakshmana and his wife Siti. His name is
Rama, and he is exceedingly energetic, and ever abideth
on the path of virtue. His spouse, the cclebrated Sit&,
daughter unto Videha, the high-souled king Janaka, either
died orewas carried off in Janasthina. Seeking for that
exalted lady, the king’s son, accompanied by his younger
brother, arriving at Qhrishyamaka, met with Sugriva. And
Pek Daria eed Sek ete ay ect bre eae ala ca


* like thyself,


SUNDARARANDAM. To4t


Sugriva promised that he would undertake the search for
Sita,’ and R&ma (on his part promised) that he would confer
on Sugriva the kingdom of ‘the monkeys. And, thereupon,
slaying Vali in battle, the king’s son established Sugriva
as the lord of the monkeys. Thou formerly hast known
that foremost of monkeys, Vali. That monkey was slain
in battle by him (Rama) with a single shaft. And, thereupony
the lord of monkeys, Sugriva, true to his vow, eager for
searching SitS, despatched monkeys’ in all directions. Aad
thousands and hundreds and styutas of monkeys are explor-
ing all sides, below and above in the sky. And some are
like Vinata's offspring,* and some like the Wind; their
course is incapable of being resisted; and those heroic
monkeys are endued with strength and celerity. I, Hanuman’
by name, am the son of the Wind-god. For SitA,I, desirous
of seeing her, have come hither, bounding over the main
measuring a full hundred Yoyanas. And as I was roving, I
came to see Janaka’s daughter in thy house. Thou art
cognizant of righteousness and interest, and hast attained
prosperity through thy asceticism. Therefore, O eminently
wise one, thou ought not to confine another's wife. Actions
opposed to righteousness, and bringing on countless evils,
and causing extermination,—ill become persons of thy sort.
Who fs there even among celestials and Asuras that is
competent to stay before the shafts shot by Lakshmana and
Rama in wrath? There is none, O king, in all the three
worlds, that is capable of attaining ease, after inflicting
injury on Raghava. Treading the path of virtue and profit,
do thou pay heed unto my speech fraught with good for
three times ;t and do thou return J&naki unto that fore-
most of men. Seen have 1 this exalted lady,—which was
difficult to compass. As for what remaineth to be done,
Rama himself shal! bring #t about. That Sita I have’ beheld


* Garura.—T?* ‘
+ Present, past, and future.—T.


“1843 AAMAPANA.


overwhelmed with grief, whom, albeit ‘resembling a five-
hooded serpent in thy mansion, thou knowst not, And
even as food thoroughly mixed with poison, being taken, is
incapable of being digested,this one is incapable of being sub-
dued even by the celestials and Asuras. It is not proper to
destroy religious merit reaped by undergoing extreme
mortification, as well as access of life (attained by the same
means).* Thou deemst thyself by virtue of thy asceticism
incapable of being destroyed by the celestials and Asuras;
and herein thy great merit (incident to thy austerities) is
the cause.—But Sugriva is not a god or a Yaksha or a
Rakshasa, Raghava, O king, is a mortal and Sugriva is
the lord of monkeys. How canst thou, O king, save thy-
fife from them ? [Je that, confiding in his strength,committeth
himself to foul 2:oceedings, cannot count upon.his righteous
deeds, but kis e-if ones follow him. Virtue destroyeth vice,
(yet vice like i'.* 12 destroyeth all virtue).t Thou,without doubt,
hast obtained the fruit of thy righteousness, and the fruit
also of this iniquity thou shalt reap without delay. And
taking to heart the carnage in Janasth&na and the slaying
of Vali as well as the friendship of Rima with Sugriva, do
thou understand thine own good. I, alone that I am, can at
my will destroy Lanka with her steeds and elephants and
cars; but he whose envoy I am hath not yet decided on
this point. R&m& hath in presence of the tawny-eyed (ones)
forsooth promised the annihilation of the foe by whom Sit&
hath been sore oppressed. On wronging Rama, Purandara
himself cannot escape scot-free, what shall I say of persons
like thee? Her whom thou knowest as Sit staying in thine
abode—know her for the Fatal Night that shall bring
destruction down on all Lank&. Therefore, beware of thyself
turning about thy neck the fatal noose in the shape of Sith!
= _aar
* By such an iniquitous act as this—T. *


+ The parenthetical part is the commentater’s Giling in of the dificlency
in the sentiment.—T. ¢ i


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1043 *


Do thou rather study thy welfare. Thou shalt behold this
city crowned with edifices and stalls, in flames fed by the
wrath of Rima, and consumed by the energy of Siti. Do
not bring to destruction thine friegds and ministers, and
kindred, and brethren and sons, and thine entire welfare,—
thine enjoyments and wives and this Lank&. O sovereign
of the Rakshasas, do thou faithfully listen to these words
of me, a monkey and the servant and envoy of Rima.
Abolishing all the worlds with their creatures mobile
and immobile objects, the illustrious Rama is capable of
creating these anew. Neither among celestials nor Asuras,
Yakshas, Rakshas, nor serpents, VidySdharag, Nagis,
Gandharbas nor beasts, Siddhas, the foremost Kinnaras,
nor all birds,—nowhere among any class of beings in all
time breathes he who can cope with Rima equal'to Vishnu's
self in prowess. Having done such a wrong unto the
foremost of all creatures—even unto that lion of a monarch,
Rama, thy life is in high peril. Neither deities nor Daityas,
nor the foremost night-rangers, nor Gandharbas and
Vidy&dharas, nor Nagas,nor Yakshas, can stay in fight against
R&ma—the leader of these three worlds. And neither
Brahm, self-create, having four countenances, nor the three-
eyed Rudra, destroyer of Tripura, nor the august Indra,
the generallissimo of the celestials, can stay in fight before
Rama.” Hearing the distasteful yet exceilent speech of the
bold and matchless monkey, the ten-necked one, with his eyes
whirling in wrath, ordered the destruction of that mighty
monkey. .


5044 RAMAPANA.


SECTION Lii.


Heaaine the words of the high-souled monkey, Ravana,
bereft of his senses by wrath, ordered that he should be put to
‘death. Oni the death of that one who had proclaimed his own
position of being an envqy,having been ordered by the wicked.
minded Ravana, Vibhishana did not agree (with the decision).
And knowing that the lord of Rakshasas was wroth and that
that affair® was at hand, Vibhishana, resolved to act aecording
to justice, began to reflect as to what was to be done.
«Having arrived at a decision, that one skilled in speech,
paying homage unto that conqueror of foes, his elder brother,
spoke unto him in words eminently good—‘O lord of
R&kshasas, forgive me and renounce -thy wratht Extend
thy favor unto me, and hear these words of mine. Lords of
the earth, endowed with integrity and knowing high and
low, never put messengers to death. The taking the
monkey’s life, O king, is opposed to morality and repugnant
to social usage; and it is also unworthy of thyself. Thou
understandst morality, art grateful and versed in the morality
of sovereigns, and canst distinguish between high and low
among beings, and even thou knowst the prime sense of
things.If discerning persons like thee come under the govern-
ance of passion, mere toil is the pains thaf-are undergone to
master the scriptures. Therefore, O destroyer of enemies,
be pacified. O lord of. Rakshasas, difficult to approach,
consider what is proper or otherwise, and then do thou mete
out punishment to the envoy.” Hearing Vibhishana’s speech,
Ravana lord of Rikshasas, overcome with a mighty wrath,
answered,~—"O slayer of foes, to slay the sinful doth not

© The destruction of Hanumén—T.


+ The commentator ‘Sqr, the passaged means,—'Give up thy premise (to slay
Hanumén) and abate thy anger—T.


SUNDARARANDAM. : 1045


cause sin. Therefore shail I slay thia monkey, worker of
iniquity.” Hearing these words grounded in unrighteousness,
evil every way, and worthy of the base, that foremost of
intelligent ones, Vibhishana, spoke words couching supreme
import,—"O lord of Lank&, be propitious. O Sovereign of
Rakshasag, listen to speech containing the significance of
virtue and profit. O king, an envoy is pot to be put to death
on the occasion of his discharging his proper functions.
This righteous people say everywhere unto*all. Surely this
is an overgrown enemy; and he hath perpetrated immense
injury (unto us). But say the good, envoys are not to be
slain, albeit many are the punishments that have been
assigned for messengers. Disfigurement of the body, stripeg,
shaving of the head,—one of these or all combined,—these
are said to be the punishments that should be inflicted on
envoys. But I have not heard of the punishment of death
being a penalty of the envoy. Why doth one like thee,
having one’s intelligence rendered meek as respects righteous-
ness and profit, and capable of proceeding on certain
decisions on the merits or otherwise of things,—come under
the sway of passion? Those possessed of power never
give way to anger. Neither in religious discussion, ‘nor in
social concerns, nor in appropriating the right sense of
ithe scriptures, is there any that can approach thee, O hero.
Verily thou art the foremost among celestials and Asuras. In-
vincible to the gods and Asuras themselves gifted with
prowess, high spirits and intelligence, thou hast in battle
oftentimes put to the rout the chiefs of celestials and
monarchs. Those heroes that have heretofore mentally
entertained enmity against such a one as thou, foe of deities
and Daityas,—heroic and valient and unconquerable, have
not been deprived by thee of their lives.* Nor. do J see any


There isa particle api, even, Which stands inghe way of this slots fitting
in with the context—Zven those heroes who have mentally etc’—is a lame


1046 RAMAFANA.


good that may likely accrue to us from the slaying of this
monkey. Let thy vengeance descend on those that have
despatched the moukey. Whether honest or otherwise, this
one hath been commisgioned by others. Advocating interest
not his own and identifying himself with another, an envoy
doth not merit the being putto death. O king, if this one
be slain, no other sky-ranger whatever would show himself
unto us, Therefore, O captor of hostile capitals, do not seek
to slay this one“ Thou shouldst spend thyself on celestials
with Indra (at their head). On his being killed, another sce
I not who, O thou that !ovest warfare, can move those
haughty sens of & king to take up arms against thee. And,
O bringer-in of joy unto the heart, it is not proper for thee,
invincible to celestials and Asuras gifted with prowess, high
spirits and intelligence, to disappoint the Nairitas (as to their
eagerness for encounter). They are devoted to thy good,
and are heroic and intent on thy well-being, born in lines
having high and fiery virtues, and endowed with intelligence,
-~the flower of those bearing arms—and have been main-
tained by thee. Therefore let a portion of the forces, having
received thy order, march to-day, and bring (hither) those
foolish princes, It is meet that thou shouldst display thy
prowess before foes.” Thereat, the lord of the night-rangers,
that potent enemy-of the celestials and the foremost of
Rikshasa monarchs, lending free play to his intellect,
accepted the excellent words of his younger brother.


reason why Hannmin, who had wronged Ravana so outrageously in overt
acta, should be let of —T.


SUNDARARANDAM. O47


SECTION etl.


Hearne those words of his, thethigh-souled ten-necked
one spoke unto his brother a speech consonant to season
and place,—“Properly hast thou spoken,—to slay a messenger
is improper. But tet him be punished with any chastisement
save slaying. Certainly the tail isa darling ornament toa
monkey. Therefore let his tail be set’on fire anon;
and this having been consumed, let him go away. Then
shall his best friends and kindred and acquaintances see
him crest-fallen, with his, person deformed.” Affd the lord
of Rakshasas ordered,—“With his tail in flames, let this one
be taken all round Lank& containing terraces.” Hearing
his words, the Rakshasas, cruel through wrath, cover up his
(Hanumf&n’s, tail with worn pieces of cotton cloth. Thereat,
even as fire in a forest increaseth on getting dry fuel, the
mighty monkey grew in dimensions on his tail being wrapped
up. And having soaked (the cloth) in oil, they set fire to
it. Thereat with his soul overpowered with rage and
hatred, and his countenance like the risen sun, he lashed
them with his flaming tail. And those—rangers of the
night—those Rakshasas—old and young and females—again
bringing that foremost of monkeys, grew exceedingly glad.
Aad that hero (being bound), entertained a purpose in
harmony with the season. “Albeit bound, the Rakshasas
cannot forsooth cope with me. Snapping these bonds, I
shall, darting up, again slaughter these. Although agreeably
to ‘the mandate of their master these wicked-minded ones
have bound me, yet have they not been able to clear scores
with me. I can slay al! these R&kshagas in battle; but I
suffer this (maltreatment) for not fharring ‘the (pure felight)
Rama shall derive from my deed.* I shall once more range


This, as interpreted by Riménuya; but the sense isnot satisfactory.


1048 RAMAYINA.


around Lank&. Let this beso. At night I could not satis.
factorily examine the fortifications.* For certain, by me is
to be beheld Lank& when night hath departed. Let them
bind me anew. The R&kshasas pain me by setting fire to
my tail; but my mind doth not tire.” Then the R&kshasas,
rejoicing greatly, went off, taking that mighty monkey
endowed with strength, an elephant (in prowess) among
monkeys. And blowing qonchs and trumpets, and bruiting
it abroad by various actions,t those Rakshasas of cruel deeds
took (Hanum&n) about the city (of Lank&). And led by
those Rakshasas, that subduer of enemies, Hanumfin, experi-
enced delight, atid going about the mighty metropolis of
the, Rakshasas, the redoubted monkey surveyed variegated
cars, enclosed court-yards, well-ordered terraces, streets
thronged with edifices, crossings, by-ways, and the interiors
of dwellings. And on terraces and highways the R&kshasas
proclaim the monkey, saying—‘“This is a spy.” On
Hanumin’s tail being in flames, Rakshasis of frightful eyes
related unto that exalted lady{ tidings of this great mishap.
"“O Sith, the copper-faced monkey with whom thou hadst
held talk, is being led around with his tail flaming.) 4) Hearing
these cruel words, like unto loss of life, Vaidehi, burning in
grief, approached the Fire. And wishing for the welfare of the
mighty monkey, that farge-eyed lady with an intent mind
began to pray unto that bearer of sacrificial offerings,—°If
Ihave served my lord, if 1 bear a character, if I have ascetic
merit, if [have @cen the wife of one alone, then prove thou
cool unto Hanuman.” Thereat; as if communicating the
welfare of the monkey unto that one having eyes like those
of a young deer, the Fire flamed up,—and Hanumfn’s sire,


How Haqumin’s resistance would have anywise marred Rima’s joy, is not
easy to understand.—T.
* Another meaning is —Its places inacessible on account of work —T.
Publishing Hanumép’s penalty.+1. "
+ Sita—T.


SUNDARAKENDAM. 1049


albeit furnished. with fire and a tail, blew ice-cold before that
worshipful one, breathing health (unto Hanuman). On his
tail flaming, the monkey reflected,—“This fire is flaming,
Why doth it not then burn me all over 2 I see it of exceeding
brightness, yet it paineth me not. (On the contrary), at the
end of my tail it seemeth like a mass of ice, Or this is
clearly due to Ra&ma’s power, even likg the wonder (that I°
witnessed) while bounding over the main—the mountain
under the lord of streams.* If the Ocean and'the intelligent
Main&ka could show such regard for Rama, what may not
the Fire do (for him?) Fire doth not burn me for Sit&'s
(absolute) guodness, for Raghava’s prowess, and, for (his)
friendship with my sire.” Then the elephantine monkey ,
again reflected for a while—‘Why should one like me
suffer one’s self to be bound by vile Rakshasas? Therefore
it is meet that I should, displaying my prowess, avenge (this
wrong).” Thereat that vehement and mighty monkey
snapped his bonds, and furiously springing into the sky, the
terrible monkey uttered a shout. And then the graceful son
of the Wind-god arrived at the gate of the city resembling
a hill, where Rakshas there were none. And after having
attained the magnitude of a mountain,anon that self-controlled
one diminished himself and cast off his bonds. And having
freed himself, the graceful one again became mountain-
like ; and eying around, he saw a bolt standing against the
gate. And that mighty-armed one, the Wind-god’s son,
taking up that bolt of burnished iron, again slaughtered the
guards. And having slain the warders, that one of terrific
prowess crowned with a luminous wreath forged from his
flaming tail, and appearing like the sun garlanded with glory,
once again cast his eyes over Lauk&. .
* Mgindia—T,


132


1050 RAMAYANA,


SECTION Liv.


JASTING his eyes on Lank&, the monkey, his wish
attained, increasing his person and bursting with spirits,
“considered as to ow to give the coup de grace to his
exertions. “What recently is to be done by me here to finish
this business, that may afflict them the more? I have
ravaged the wooed, and slain the choice Rakshasas, and
destroyed by main force a portion of the army. Now it
remains gto demolish the fortifications. On the fortifications
« being destroyed, my work shall have its toils crowned with
joy. By undergoing slight labor in this business, shall have
my pains furnished with fruit. That bearer of sacrificial
offerings* who flameth on my tail,—~it is my duty to
propitiate him with these excellent edifices.” Thereat that
mighty monkey, with his tail aglow, and resembling a cloud
(luminous)with lightning,began to range before the dwellings
in Lank&. And that monkey with a calm mind, eying (all
round), ranged one house from’ another, and gardens, and
stately piles. And that one gifted with exceeding vehemence,
and in strength resembling the Wind, bounding up set fire
unto the dwelling of Prahasta. Then Hanum&n endowed
with prowess, leaping up, set unto Mah§pirgwa's mansion
fire resembling that at the universal dissolution, And (then)
the mighty monkey darting up, set fire unto Vajradanshtra’s ;
and (then) that highly energetic.one set fire unto Suka’s and
unto the intelligent Sarana’s. And the leader of monkey
bands in the same way burnt down Indrajit’s mansion ; and
then he burnt the abodes of Sumli and Jamvumili; and
Ragméketu’s mansion and.Suryyacatru’s, and Hraswakarna's,
and the Rakshasa Romaga’s; and fhe houses of Yuddhonmatta,
and Matta, and the Rakshasa Dwajagriva, and the calm


* Vide ante—T, ”


SUNDARIKANDAM. rost


Vidy ujjibhwa, and Hastimukha ; and of Kardla, and of Vigtila,
and of Sonitiksha; and Kumbhakarna’s mansion, and
Nikumbha’s, and the residence of Yajnagatru, and of
Brahmagatru. And leaving alone the dwelling of Vibhishana,
that exceedingly energetic one—foremost of monkeys—by
and by burnt (all the houses there). And in those costly
mansions and dwellings, that famous one, that foremost of
monkeys, burnt all the wealth of those affluent persons.—
Having passed the dwellings ofsall, that powerful and auspi-
cious one approached the residence of the lord of Rakshasas,
R&vana. And in that foremost of mansions, adomed with
various gems, resembling Meru or Mandara, gfaced with
diverse auspicious things, he set unto the same, fire
flaming at the end of his tail. And the heroic Hauuman
roars, resembling a cloud (appearing) at the end of a Yuga.
And assisted by the wind, that highly powerful and vehement
one (Fire) flaimed up, like fire at the wreck of all, and
the fire attained energy. And the wind spreading the
flaming fire all round those dwellings, those mansions
furnished with golden networks ; and containing pearls and
gems; enjewelled and magnificent, were shorn of their
splendour. And cracked edifices began to topple down to
the ground, like the mansions of Siddhas falling from the
firmament on the exhaustion of their righteousness. And
there arose a mighty uproar of those R&kshasas, as, bereft
of their good fortune, despairing of preserving their abodes,
they rushed in all directions,—‘‘Forsooth it is Fire himself
that hath come hither in the form of a monkey.” And
females crying with babes on their breasts, suddenly plunged ~:.
{into the fire). And some fair ones with hair dishevelled
and surrounded on all sides with fire, as they fell down from’:
dwellings, looked lovely like lightning from the *welkiat
And he (Hanumin) saw various kinds of metals, mixed sith
diamonds, and coral, and lapifés and pearls and silvers fun-
ing down in streams from the mansions. And as Find ot,


1052 : RAMAPANS


cloyed with wood and straw, Hanuman never at all felt
satiety on slaying those foremost of Rakshasas. And the
Earth could not contain the R&kshasas slain by Hanum4n.
And as Rudra had burat down. Tripura, the vehement and
high-souled monkey, Hanumin, burnt down Lank&. And
rising to the brow of Lank&'s moupt,* the fire of terrific
energy kindled byethe impetuous Hanum4n, spread wide
his tongues. And with the Wind assisting him, the smokless
Fire in the dwellings, with kis flames feeding on the bodies
of the R&kshasas representing sacrificial offerings, spread
his magnitude, touching the horizen—resembling the con-
flagration kindled at the universal dissolution. And possess-
ing, the fierce energy of a 4of# suns, the mighty Fire
completely encompassing the entire Lank&, increased (ia
volume), riving the mundane Egg with various sounds
resembling thunder-claps. And the Fire of terrific might,
having his flames resembling Kinguka blossoms, rising up to
the sky, clouds caused by volumes of smoke arising from
extinguished fire, in hte resembling blue lotuses, louked
exceedingly beautiful. ‘Either the thunder-bolt-bearing
Indra the Great—chief of celestials, or Yama himself, or
Varuna, or the Wind-god, or the Fire generated by Rudra’s
third eye, or the Sun, or Dhanada, or Soma, This is no
monkey,—this is verily Ad/at himself. Or is this the
R&kshasa-annihilating Fire of Brahm& himself—the Great-
sire of all, the four-faced Disposer of the world’s destinies,—
come hither, wearing the form of a monkey? Or is this
Vishnu’s Energy, inconceivable, ufiutterable, infinite and sole,
and of surpassing power,—now come hither in its own
illusory nature, assuming a monkey-form?” Seeing that city
suddenly consumed, with her souls, dwellings, and trees,
R&kshafas of note, assembléd together, thus talked unto each
other. And then Lank&, suddenly consumed with Rakshasas,


—e4
* rAkute on which Lanké rested—T.
+ A name of Yama.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1053


horses, cars, serpents, crowds of birds, beasts and trees, began
to bewail tumultuously and loud in forlorn guise—“O
father! O son! O love! O friend! O lord of my life and
frame ! afl our religious merit is abolished.” Indulging in
various lamentations, the Rakshas thus created a mighty and
frightful uproar. And with the flames encircling her, and
her foremost heroes fallen, and her® warriors destroyed,
Lank§, overcome by the might of Hanum4an’s wrath, became
as if she had been blighted*y an imprecation. Then the
mighty-minded Hanuman beheld the R&akshasas in terror and
trepidation and castdown, and Lank& marked by fire and
bright flames,even as the Self-sprung eyeth the wold destroyed
by his rage, And devastating the forest filled with many
excellent trees, slaying many a terrible Rakshasa in conflict,
and burning down the city of Lank& filled with picturesque
houses, the monkey, Hanuman, Wind-god’s son, stationed
himself there. And destroying many a Rakshasa, felling
many trees in the forest and setting fire to the houses of the
Ra&kshasas, the high-souled (moifkey) became engaged in
thoughts touching R&ma. Thereupon all the celestials
praised highly the high-souled, excellent and mighty san of
the Wind-god, foremost of heroic monkeys, gifted with the
velocity of the Wind. And all the celestials, the foremost
ascetics, the Gandharbas, the Vidhyédharas, the Pannages,
and all other great heroes, attained excess of delight. And
having devastated the forest, slain the Rakshasas in conflict
and burnt the grand city of Lanka, the great monkey appear-
ed there. And seated on the variegated top of a splendid and
high mansion, the foremost of monkeys,spreading the rays of
his burning tail,looked like unto the sun of many rays. And
having consumed the city of Lanka, the great monkey
quenched the fire of hjs tail*in the ecean. Thereupon
beholding -Lank& burnt down, the celestials along with
Gandharbas, Siddhas, and fife great acelin were struck
with wonder. -


1054 RAmAraNna,


SECTION LV.


Benouowe Lank& burnt down and devastated and the
demons terrified,the monkey Hanumiin began to reflect. And
worked up with fear and remorse,he reflected,—“What a mighty
iniquity have I perpetrated by burning down Lanka of my own
accord ? Blessed ‘are those high-souled ones who control their
wrath by dint of their own good Sense,like unto fire quenched
by water, What iniquity is there which cannot be perpetrated
by the angry? THey can even slay the worshipful and vilify
the pious with harsh words, The angry cannot decide what
should be spoken and what not. There is no vice which
cannot be committed by them, and there is nothing which
cannot be spoken by them. He is the proper person who can
subdue his rising ire by means of forgiveness as a serpent
leaves off his worn skin. O fie on me who am vicious-minded,
shameless and the perpetrator of a mighty iniquity. Not
thinking of Sith, I have slain my master with fire. Forsooth
hath the worsbipful Janaki been burnt, since the whole city of
Lanka hath been devastated with fire. And she being burnt,
foolishty have I spoilt the work of my master. I have defeated
the great object for which 1 have laboured so much, In burn-
ing down Lankd, I have not saved Sita. To have burnt down
Lanka is assuredly a trifle, but in my ire I have lost my great
object. Forsooth hath Jinaki been consumed, since I behold
no spot in Lank& which is not made desolate with fire—
‘in fact the whole city hath been reduced to ashes, As I have
committed such an injury under the influence of my perverse
understanding, it behoveth me to relinquish my life here. I-
shall judip into this flame br into q submarine fire, or I shall
vesign my mortal frame to the animals that infest the ocean.
For, living, I shall mot be able'fo face that lord of monkeys,
and how shall I, having spoilt their work utterly, show myself


SUNDARAKANDAM} 2 1055


“ unto those foremost of men ? I have through my culpable
passion furnished an illustration of the reckless monkey-
nature, which is well known over the three worlds. Fie on
this activity, born of (the quality of) passion, which is the
source of incompetence and rashness'; since although capable,
1 did not protect Sita. On Sita having met with destruction,
both of them* shall cease to exist ; and on their ceasing *to
exist, Sugriva shall die along with his friends, And hearing
these tidings, how shall the right&ous Bharata, attached unto
his brother (Rima), along with Satrughna, live? And on
the virtuous Ikshw&ku race being extinct, without doubt, all
the subjects shall be overwhelmed with, grief Therefore,
1 of curst luck hath had my harvest of virtue and profit
taken away ; and being under the influence of baleful passion,
I am the cause of the destruction of creatures.” As he was
reflecting thus, he bethought him of auspicious omens which
he had witnessed since. “Or it may be that one of charming
limbs hath been preserved by her proper energy. The
blessed one may not have met with her end, for fire doth
burn fire. And Fire should not touch the spouse of that
virtuous one of immeasurable energy,—who is protected by
by her own character. And that bearer of sacrificial offerings
hath not burnt me, is owing to Rima’s power and the virtue
of Vaidehi. And why should she that is a very goddess unto
the three brothers, Bharata and the others, and that hath
enchanted the mind of Rima, meet with destruction? And
when that everywhere unspent Lord, having burning for
his office, hath not consumed my tail, why shoud he burn the
exalted lady ?” Then HanumSn with wonder again thought
of the sight of the golden mountain under the water.t ‘By
virtue of her asceticism, veracity, and devotion unto her lord,
she it is that can consume Fire,,but Fire cannot byrn her.’’

* Rama and Lakshmans—-T.
+ Remembering the incident of tis seeing the mountain Mainilea through
Sité, Hanuméa was put ingmind of Sité’s superhuman power.—T.


1056 RAMAYANA,


And as Hanuman was thinking of the magnitude of that
revered lady’s religious merit, he heard the converse there
of high-souled Chfranas. “Ah! hard is the feat that
Hanuman hath forsooth achieved. He hath created a tertific
and fierce conflagration {n the abode of the Raksha. The
females of Rakshas accompanied by boys and old folks, are
flying amain ; and in consequence of the hubbub it seems as
if (Lank&) is in lamentation through her mountain-caverns.
Burnt is this city pf Lanka‘ with her turrets, walls and gate-
ways; and we are astonished ,that Janaki is not burnt.”
These words resembling ambrosia Hanuman heard (at that
time) 5 and his migd was filled with joy. And what through
the auspicious omens that he had witnessed, and what
thtough the speech of the saints, Hanum4n was delighted
(beyond measure). Then the monkey, with his end attained,
knowing that the king’s daughter was unhurt, became bent
upon returning after seeing her once again.


SECTION LVI.


Tuen seeing Janaki seated at the foot of the Sinsapa
tree, (Hanumn) saluting her said,—'By luck it is that I see
thee unhurt.” Then eying him again and again as he was
on the point of departing, Sit4 said unto Hanuman in words
informed with affection for her husband,—“If, my child, it
liketh thee, do thou, O stainless” one, stay here today in
some retired spot. To-morrow having refreshed thyself, thou
shalt set out, Thy vicinity, O monkey, for a while beguiles
.me of slender luck of my meagureless grief. Thou wilt go,
O powerful monkey ; but ere thou geturn, it is, O foremost
of monkeys, doubtful whether I, shall Jive. And, O hero,
the not seeing thee shall try me sorely, who have fallen from


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1057


one misfortune into a greater one, and who, my mind
distracted, have been- exercised by sorrow. And, O here,
this mighty doubt is (ever) present before me. How shall
that exceedingly powerful one or that host of monkeys or
those two sons of that man of men, albeit backed by mighty
monkeys, cross over the ocean incapable of being crossed ?
Three beings have the power to hound over the deep ;-—
Vinat&’s offspring, thou, and the Wind-god, Then in this
business at hand hard to accolmplish, what means dost thou,
versed in business, see, whereby the end may be attained ?—
O slayer of hostile heroes, thou alone art’ quitecompetent
to perform this task ; and thou shalt attain fame through thy
rising prowess. But if blocking up Lank& with his forces,
that afflictor of enemies, Kakutstha, taketh me (from hence,)
then that shall be worthy of him.—Therefore do thou so
order things that that powerful and high-souled hero
in conflict, may act as becomes himself.” Hearing
cher resonable, affectionate and* pregnant speech, that
hero, Hanuman, answered,—“O noble lady, that lord and
foremost of monkeys, Sugriva gifted with strength, is
determined on thy behalf. And that master of monkeys,
Sugriva, O Vaidehi, surrounded by thousands and Kotis
of monkeys, shall speedily come here (for the purpose).
And those best of men, those heroes, Rima and Lakshmana,
coming together, shall afflict Lank& with their arrows. And
slaughtering the R&kshasa with his own adherenfs, Raghu’s
son, O exceedingly fair one, shall ere.long take thee back to
his palace.—O gentle damsel,do thou console thyself. Remain,
expecting the hour. Soon shalt thou see Ravana slain in battle
by Rama. On the lord of Rakshasas being slain along with
his sons, councilors, and friends thou shalt meet with Rama
as Rohini meeteth with the Moon. At once shall Kakutstha
come, accompanied by thé*foremosteof monkeys,—who,
conquermg (Ravana) in conflict, shall remove’ thy grief.”
Having thus consoled Videha’s daughter, Hanuma, son unto


1058 RAMAYANA.


the Wind-god, setting his heart upon departure, saluted
Vaidehi. And having soothed Vaidehi, and displayed his
surpassing strength, faving rendered the city disconsolate,
and baffled R&vana, exhibited his terrific might, and saluted
Yaidehi, Hanuman became bent upon returning, crossing over
the mid-sea, Then that repressor of foes, the powerful
monkey, anxious to seg his master, ascended Aristha, fore-
most of mountains ; (as if cavered) with a sheet consisting
of blue woods of tall padmdkas, and clouds lying in the
interspace between peaks,—and displayed from love by the
glad light of the Sun; appearing to be beholding with the
«minerals scattered about serving for its eyes ; seeming to be
reciting aloud in consequence of the solemn sound of waters,
to be carolling clearly through its many fountains, and to stay
with uplifted arms by means of devadarus ; appearing to be
crying distressfully on account of cascades sounding all round ;
seeming to be trembling in consequence of verdant autumnal
woods waving, and to:be piping on account of Aichakas
vocal through the breeze; eloquent; with the foremost
poisonous serpents appearing to be sighing forth ire;
appearing to be sunk in contemplation on account of caverns
covered with snow and looking solemn in consequence ;
as if moving about by means of hills looking like
its cloud-legs; seeming to yawn in the sky with peaks
towering heavenwards,—scattered with summits, and graced
with innumerable caves; surrounded with sdé/as, palms,
tamélas, Karnas, and bamboos ; graced with spreading and
flowering underwoods ; abounding in various beasts, and
decked with mineral streams,—containing numerous rills,—
thronged with collections of crags ; frequented by Maharshis,
and Yakshas, and Gandharbas and Kinnaras and serpents ;
impracticable in consequence of plants and trees; with
caverns harbouring lions; ‘filled with tigers and other
(ferocious beasts); and furnished with trees having tasteful
‘fruits and roots. And the Wind-god’s offspring—foremoat of


SUNDARAKINDAM. 1059


monkeys—ascended that mountain. Aud on the lovely level
of that mountain, the crags, crushed with sounds under the
tread of that one burning to behold Rama and wrought up
with excess of joy, were scattered all found. And ascending
that Jordly hill, the mighty monkey magnified himself,
desirous of going from the southern to the northern shore
of the salt waters. And getting to the tép of the mountain,
that hero, son unto the Wind-god, cast his eyes upon the
dreadful main inhabited by, ferrible snakes. And that
foremost of monkeys, offspring of the Wind-god,* (mentally)
went from the south to the north, as if it were the air. And
then that best of mountains, sore pressed by the monkey,
began to emit cries,and with various creatures (on it), entered"
underneath the Earth, with its peaks tottering and its trees
toppling. And borne down by the violence of his thighs,
trees bearing flowers, being shattered, as if destroyed by
Sakra’s weapon, fell to the ground. And the dreadful yells
of mighty lions in pain, inhabiting caves, entered the ear,
piercing the heavens. And Vidy&dharis with their attires
falling off and their ornaments disordered, suddenly rose
from the mountaint unto the sky. And exceedingly powerful
and mighty snakes of virulent venom,—having flaming
tongues, with their hoods and necks tortured, began to roll
(on the earth). And Kinnars and serpents, Gandharbas,
Yakshas and Vidydharas, forsaking that foremost of
mountains in affliction, took refuge in the sky. And that
graceful mountain also, tormented by that powerful one,
entered the nether regions with its tall trees and summits.
And that mountain, which (heretofore) had measured ten
yoyanas in area and thirty in height, became level with the
earth, And desirous of crossing over the salt waters, with

* Méruta—this term is used twice in this siobe, once for Hanumin, and
wext for the Wind-god. One of those, is left out oc the score of redun-
dency.—T. F .

+ Dharanidhartt.—ab—from the holder of the Earth, the latter being
supposed to rest on @ mountain.—T.


1060 RAMAYANA.


their shores menaced by sounding (waves), the monkey rose
to the sky.


e
SECTION CVII.


Ano springing up tike unto a winged hill, that one
endowed with energy, the ustiring Hanum§n, began to swim
on the ocean of the firmament having for its blown lotuses and
lilies, snakes, Yakshas and Gandharbas ; with the Moon for
its comely ‘Kumuda ;* and with the Sun for its Kérandaves ;
charming to behold; having Tishya and Sravana for its
swans, clouds for its mosses and grass, Punarvasu for its
mighty fish, the red-bodied one t for its huge aquatic animal,
Airivata for its spacious island, Sw&ti for its sportive.
swan, breezes for its billows, and moonlight for its cool
waters. And as if swallowing up the welkin and touching
the lord of stars, abolishing the sky decorated with stars and
the solar disc, and eleaving the clouds, the unfatigued
Hanumfin began to cross over that sea, And (on all sides)
mighty masses of clouds, sable, crimson, blue, Mangis-
tha-hued, and green-red, looked exceedingly beautiful. And
now entering into clouds and now imerging from them, he,
again and again becoming visible and lost to sight, looked
like the Moon. And that one clad in white raiment, coursing
through diverse clouds, the hero’s body was (alternately)
visible and invisible, like unto the Moon inthe sky. And
the Wind-god’s son went on in the sky, scattering the clouds
and descending again and again. And sending up mighty
sounds, that exceedingly energetic one gifted with a power-
ful voide like that of the cl5uds, having slain the foremost
Rikshasas and rendered his name famous, having filled the


* Lily—T.
+ Bhima—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1061


city with lamentations and afflicted Ravana, having distressed
the mighty heroes and paid obeisance unto Vaidebi,—again
held his course along the mid-ocean. And touching
Mainika—foremost of mountains—that one endowed with
prowess proceeded amain like an iron dart let go froma
string. And from a distance approaching and beholding that
mighty mountain, Mahendra, resenfbling clouds, that
redoubted monkey began to roar. »And having a lusty voice
reaembling that of clouds, that monkey, “roaring, filled all
quarters with his lofty shouts. And arriving at that place,
he, eager to behold his friends, emitted tremendous rvars,
and began to flourish his tail. And as he "went on roaring
in the path ranged by Suparna, the firmament with the solar
disc seemed to be rent by his shouts. And (it came to
pass that) those powerful and heroic (monkeys) that had
formerly stationed themselves on the northern shore of the
Ocean, anxious to see-the Wind-god’s offspring, heard the
sounds proceeding from Hanumfiin’s vehement speed, resem-
bling the rumbling of clouds agitdted by the winds. And
all those rangers" of woods, (staying) dispirited, heard the
roars of that foremost of monkeys, like unto the roaring of
rain-pouring clouds. And hearing those sounds as he kept
crying, those monkeys (sitting) around, eager to see their
friend, became extremely anxious, And that best of
monkeys, Jambav&n, with a joyful heart addressing all the
monkeys, said,—“Hanum&n hath succeeded completely.
There is no doubt about this, If he were unsuccessful, he
would not utter shouts as these.” And hearing the sounds
produced by the violent movements of the arms of that high-
souled (hero), as well as the shouts of that magnanimous one;
the monkeys, filled with delight, leapt up on all .sides. Aud
they, eager to have a aight of Hanum{a, joyfully Went from
mountain-top to mountain-top and from peak on to peak.
And influenced by joy, the monkeys remained holding a
bough at the top of a tree, and waving their clean


1062 RAMEPANA


apparels, And as the wind roareth in a cavern, roared the
powerful Hanum&n, son unto the Wind-god. And seeing
that mighty monkey resembling a mass of clouds, alighting,
those monkeys stood fuining their hands. And then the
vehement monkey resembling a hill, having leapt up from
that mountain, alighted on the top of that (other) mountain*
filled with trees. And bursting with delight, (Hanuman)
dropped near a fountain, like uato a hill whose wings have
been clipped. Then with oyful hearts, all the principal
monkeys stood encircling the high-souled Hanuman. And
surrounding him, they experienced excess of delight, and
drew near “the newcomer with joyful faces. And bring-
ig fruits and roots, the monkeys honored that chief of
motkeys, the offspring of the Wind-god. And some, filled
with delight, sent shouts, and some raised ululations ; and
the foremost monkeys fetched branches of trees.t And that
mighty monkey, Hanum4n, saluted his superiors and the aged,
headed by J&mbavin; as well as Prince Angada, And
honored by the monkeys, as he very well deserved to be,
and gratified by them, (he) briefly said—Seen have I the
exalted lady.” And taking Véli’s son by the hand, he sat
him down in a charming tract of the woodland belonging
to the mountain Mahendra.—Then asked (by them),
Hanumfin addressed those foremost monkeys,—“I have seen
Janaka’s daughter in the Agoka woods. That blameless
one is guarded by dreadful Rikshasis. The girl weareth a
single braid of hair, and burneth to attain a sight of R&ma.
She is faint in consequence of fasting, and dirty, weareth
matted locks and is emaciated.” Hearing the words, “I
have seen” from the Wind-god’s offspring resembling
ambrosia, all the monkeys were filled with rejoicing. And
thereupoh, some of mighty ones rpared, and some shouted,
aad some blustered, and some raised ululations, and others
© Mehehdre—T. >
: + To serve for a seat for Hanumia.—T.


SUNDARAKANDAM. S 1063


stormed (in return). And some elephantine monkeys in joy
upraised their tails, and some lashed with their long and
broad tails. And others, transported with joy, bounding up
to the mountain-summit, touched that foremost of monkeys,
the handsome Hanum&n. And when Hanum&n had ended,
Angada said these excellent words in the midst of the heroic
monkeys,—'There is none, O monkey, that is like unto
thee in strength and prowess, AS having bounded over the
spacious main, thou hast eome back (here), thou art, O
excellent monkey, the only giver of our lives. By thy
grace it is that, our end attained, weshallemeet with
Raghava. Oh for thy fidelity! Ohfor thy prowess} Ob
for thy fortitude! By luck hast thou seen that exalted
one, the illustrious wife of Rama, by luck it is that Kikutstha
shall forego his sorrow in consequence of separation from
Sita.” Then surrounding Angada,Hanumf&n, and Jambavan,
the monkeys, exceedingly rejoiced, sat down upon a spacious
stone. And having sat them dowa on the spacious rock,
the monkeys became eager to hegr of the bounding of the
main and of (Hanumfn’s) seeing Lank4,Sita and Ravana. And
they stood with joined hands,looking wistfully into Hanum&n’s
face. And the graceful Angada was there, surrounded by
many monkeys, and honored by them, even as the lord of
celestials is honored in heaven by the celetials. When the
famous and renowned Hanuman, and Angada with bracelets
on his arms, had sat down,the elevated and mighty mountain-
summit was illuminated with splendour.


1064 RIMAPANA,


SECTION tvir


‘ Tren on the summit of the mountain, Mahendra, those
powerful monkeys, héaded by Hanumin, rejoiced excecdingly.
And when the high-souled;delighted monkeys had sat them
down, Jimvaban, glad at heart, asked that offspring of the
Wind, the happy Hanum4n, all about his proceeding: “How
hast thou seen the worshipful one? How doth she fare
there? Artd how doth the cruel Ten-necked one bear him-
self towards her? Do thou truthfully relate all this unto us,
O ‘mighty monkey. How couldst thou track the exalted
Jady 7 And what did she say in reply (to thy querries)?
‘Having learnt the real state of things, we shall decide what
is to be done. And do thou also tell us what we, repairing
there, shall unfold unto that one of controled self and what
we shall keep to ourselvés.” Thus directed by him, that
one (Hanum&n) with his down standing on end, bowing down
the hend unto that revered ‘one, Sitd, replied,—“In your
sight, 1 bounded up with a concentrated mind, eager to reach
the southern shore of the ocean. As I voyaged on, a great
impediment occurred in the way. I saw a goodly’ and noble
golden peak, standing, obstructing my way. I found the
mountain as an obstacle to my course. Nearing the grand
and splendid golden mount, I thought within myself,—'I will
rive this.’ And the sun-like summit of that mighty mountain,
Prahasta, was cleft in a thousand fragments by my tail,
Seeing his own condition, that mighty mountain, gladdening
my heart, addressed me with the sweet speech,—‘O son,
know mé for thy uncle. I 4m a friend unto the Wind,—
famed as Main&ka, and living in the great deep. Formerly
all the foremost mouttains were furnished with wings. And
(once on a time) they began to range the earth at will,
committing devastations. Hearing of the conduct of the


SUNDARARANDAM. 1065


mountains, that possessor of the six kinds of riches, Indra
the Great, the swayer of Puke, with bis thtinderbolt cut of
by thousands the pinions of the mountains. At that time,
my son, I, having been delivered by thy sire, the high-souled
Wind-god, was cast into the abode of Varuna. O repressor’
of foes, I shall have to assist Righava. Rima is the fore-
most of the righteous, and possessed 8f prowess like that of
Mahendra himself.” Having heard this frgm the magnani-
mous Mainika, I apprised the’ mountain of my mission, and
my thoughts held their course. Having given me his per-
mission, the magnanimous Mainaka, the mountain that had
puton the form of a man, vanished, and, assuming his
mountain-form, went into the vast sea. And I, summoning
my best celerity, began to journey the remainder of my way.
And having swiftly proceeded long in the path, I saw the
exalted lady, Suras&, mother of the serpents. And that
worshipful one stationed in the sea, said,—'By the celestials
hast thou, O best of monkeys, been assigned as my food.
Therefore shall 1 eat thee up. Thou hast been ordained as
mine by the gods.’ Thus addyessed by Surae&, I, remaining
in humble guise with joined hands, and with my countenance
turned pale, I uttered these words,—‘Rima, the graceful
son of Dagaratha, repressor of foes—hath entered the woods
of Dandaka, in company with his brother Lakshamana and
Siti. His wife Sita hath been carried off by the wicked
Ravana. At R&ma’s mandate I goto her as an envoy. In
this business, thou, O chaste one, shouldst help Rama. Or
having seen Mithila’s daughter, as well as Rama of untiring
deeds, 1 shall come to thy mouth,—this I promise unto thee
truly’ Thus accosted by me, Suras, wearing forms at her
will, said,—‘None is able to escape me, Even this is the
boon that I have received.’ Having been thus addressed
by Surasi, I attained the magnitude of ten yoyanas; and then
anon I dilated to another ten. But sie opened her mouth
wider than my magnitude. Seeing her stretched mouth, I


134


1656 RAMAYANA.


again diminished myself, and on the instant again reduced
myself to the measure of a thumb. And speedily entering her
mouth, I immediately came out. Then the exalted Surast
again spoke unto me in heer native shape,—'Thy end having
beet attained, go, O mild one, O foremost of monkeys,
according to thy pleasure. Bring about the meeting of
Vaidehi with the high- -souled Raghava. Be thou blessed, O
mighty-armed one. I am Well I pleased with thee, O monkey.’
Then I was praised by ail deings, with,—‘Excellent !’
‘Excellent’ Then like unto Garura I again sprang up into
the air. Bytnow. my shadow was overtaken by somebody,
though I saw no one. And my velocity being deprived, f
looked at the ten cardinal points; but [ found there naught
which could deprive me of my speed. Then I thought,
‘What is this obstacle that hath suddenly arisen in respect
of my course? No form find I here? And as 1 stood
tiggrieved, my glance fell downwards. Then I saw there a
dreadful R&kshasi suping on the flood. And laughing
(scornfully), that grim one said these inauspicious words
unto me, who was inert, although undaunted, —"Whither
art thou bound, O thou of a gigantic body? Desired by
me, who am hungry, do thou becoming my food, gratify this
body deprived of diet for a long time.’ Saying, ‘Well? I
accepted her speech, increasing my body at will more
than the capacity of her mouth; and her huge and
dreadful mouth extended wide to oat me up. She did not
understand me,* nor that I had altered my shape. Then in
‘the twinkling of an eye contracting my vasty shape, I,
extracting her heart, darted into the sky. Thereat, throwing
about her arms,that terrific one dropped into the salt waters.
‘On that chaste one, resembling a hill, having her heart torn,
{ heard the meek speech of magnanfmous pérsons, who had
come there of themselvesex-'This dreadful R&kshasi,
Stahika, hath been swiftly slain by Hanuman.’ Having


SUNDARAKINDAM. 2067


slain her, I again, remembering the delay that had occurred
touching my work, set out on the great road, and at length
saw the southern shore of the sea, covered with mountains ;
where is situated the city of Lanki. On the sun having set,
Tentered the city of the Rikshasas—their home—unnoticed
by the Rakshasas of terrific. vigor. I had entered in when a
certain female casting forth violent laughter, and wearing
the splendour of clouds at the eid of a Kalpa, presented
herself before me. And sétiking with my left clenched fist
that exceedingly dreadful (form), having flames for her hair,
who had sought to take my life,—and vanquishing her (thus),
T entered (LankS) at dusk. Then that one affrighted
addressed me, saying,—‘I, O hero, am, the city of Lank&.
Vanquished have I been by thy prowess, Thou shalt
everywhere conquer all the Rikshasas’. There I wandered
alt the night (seeking for Janaka’s daughter) and (at
length) entered Ravana’s inner apartment; but that one
of a Diity waist I found not. And hot finding Sit& in
Ravana’s abode, I was cast in a sea of sorrow; nor found I
how to cross over it. Andeas I was sorrowing, I saw a
mansion with a charming grove encircled by a wall of
excellent gold, And leaping over the wall, I saw a grove
rife with trees; and (at last) saw in the midst of an afoka
wood a great Singapd. And ascending the tree, I saw a golden
tract of plantains; and hard by from the Simpapd tree I
espied that transcendentally beautiful one, dark-blue, having
eyes resembling lotus-petals, with her face faded in conse-
quence of fasting, clad in the same single piece of cloth, her
hair covered with dust,—her limbs emaciated by the heat
of sorrow and grief,—Sita, ever engaged in the welfare of
her lord; surrounded by cruel, and deformed Réakshasis
living upon blood and flesh,—like unto deer environed by
tigresses. And I managedetoo swiftly to present myself
before that one, menaced momentarily in the midst of the
Rukshasis, wearing a single braid of hair; - woe-begone;


1068 RAMAYANA,


ever thinking of her lord; her limbs discolored by lying
down on the ground, like unto a lotus on the approach of
winter,—having eyes regembling those of a young deer, who
had turned her face away from all the enjoyments offered
by Ravana, and who had resolved to put a period to her-
existence. Seeing that lady the illustrious wife of Rama in
that condition, I seeing heg remained even on that Singapd
tree. Then I heard in Ravana’s mansion loud and solemn
sounds mixed with the tinklings Sf zones and bangles, There-
at exceedingly agitated, 1 changed my proper shape; and
remained like a bifd in a dark part of the Stnpapd tree. Then
the wives of Rivana along with Ravana himself of
exceeding strength came to that place where Sit& was. And’
seeing the lord of Rikshasas the exceedingly beauteous
Sit contracted her thighs and covered her full breasts with
her arms, And seeing Sita flurried and extremely excited
and casting about her gladness up and down, not finding any
relief and trembling forlérn, the Ten-necked one said unto
her undergoing extreme anguish,—‘Without saying any-
thing, I fall down (here). © dair one, do thou regard me.
If, O haughty one, thou do not honor me from pride of heart,
I shall, O Sit, two months hence, see thy blood.” Hearing
these words of the wicked Ravana, Sité, growing exceeding
wroth, spoke these excellent words,——'O worst of Rikshasas,
having used improper speech towards the wife of Rama of
measureless prowess, and the daughter-in-law of Dagaratha,
lord of. the Ikshwaku line, why hast thou not thy tongue
fallen off? Fie upon the prowess of thee that, O wretch,
hast carried me off while my husband was away; and not
being seen of that high-soiled one. Thou art never like
Rima,—thou art not even ft to be his slave. Ra&ghava is
invincible, truthful, heroic and (even) hungering for warfare.”
Thus addressed in harsh speech*by Janaki, the Ten-necked
ene famed up in wrath, like Fire in a funeral pyre. And
with his wicked eyes whirling in rage, he raised the clenched


SUNDARSKINDAM. 1069


fist of his right band to slay Mithila’s daughter; but then
the females set up a cry of “Oh” and “Alas.” And rising
up in the midst of the females, the wife of the wicked-
minded one, the excellent one, named "Mandodari, prevented
him. And she spoke soft words unto him influenced by
lust,—“O thou that resemblest Indra the Great in proweam&
Do thou to-day sport with me. J&naki is not superior to me.
And, O lord, do thou sport with thé daughters of celestials
and Gandharbas, and with athe daughters themselves of
Yakshas, © What wilt thou do with Siti?” Then that
exceedingly powerful ranger of the night wqs speedily raised
up and taken (back) to his residence. On the Ten-necked
one having departed, the R&kshasis of fearful faces
fell to railing at Siti in cruel and rough words,—But
Janaki heeded their speech as a straw; and their fury was
_Jost upon Sit&. Desisting from their unavailing railing, the
flesh-feasting Rikshasis imparted unto Ravana the mighty
intent of Sit& Then, they all failing in their hope and
deprived of energy, and tired, came under the sway of sleep.
And on their sleeping, Sit intent off the welfare of her lord,
lamenting piteously, in forlorn guise, and striken with
extreme sorrow, mourned profusely, Then sitting up in their
midst, Trijat® spoke,—"“Do ye without delay fall to your ows
selves ; but never (eat up) the dark-eyed Sita, the chaste
daughter unto Janaka and the daughter-in-law of Dagaratha.
In truth 1 have seen a dismal dream capable of making one’s
hair stand on end ; (presaging) destruction unto R&kshasas
and victory unto the husband of this one. For protecting
us, Rakshasis from Raghava, let us solicit Vaidebi. Even
this ia relished by me. If we relate such a dream unto the
aggrieved one, she, being freed from her diverse woes, shal
attain the height of joy. Propitiated by our bowing down,
Janaka’s daughter, Maithili, «hall rescue the Rikshasis frem
a mighty fear.” Thereat, that bashful "maiden, rejoiced at
the prospect of her husband’s victory, said,—'If all this prove


1070 RAMAYANA,


true, then for certain, (ye shall) meet with succour at my
hands. Witnessing such a bard condition of Sith I began
to reflect ; nor did my my mind attain ease or freedom from
thought. And I cast &bout for finding means of addressing
Janaki. And I began by extolling the Ikshw&ku race.
Hearing the words that I uttered, embellished with
descriptions of thé virtues of R&jarshis, that exalted lady
replied with her eyes covered with tears. “Who art thou?
And how hast thou, O forentost, of monkeys, found thy way
here ? And what is thy delight in Rama? This it behoveth
thee to relate unto me.” Hearing her speech, I too said,—
‘O revered” one, thy husband, Rama, hath found a help-
“mate in a one endowed with terrific strength, named Sugriva
—redoubtable, the highly powerful lord of the monkeys.
Do thou know me as Hanuman his servant, despatched here
by thy spouse—Rama of unwearied actions. O famed damsel,
that highly effulgent son of Dagaratha—the foremost of men,
hath sent as a token this ring. I desire to know, O worshipful
dame, what behest of thine may I obey now. Shall I carry thee
to Rima and Lakshmana‘on the northern shore of the Ocean ?”
Hearing this and revolving within herself Sits, Janaka’s
daughter, replied—"Discomfitting Ravanamay Raghava him-
welf carry me hence.’ And bowing my bead unto that worship-
ful and blameless dame, I wanted of her a token as might
conduce to Raghava’s pleasure. Whereto replied Sit#—‘O thou
-of mighty-arms do thou take this exellent jewel for which thou
shalt be highly regarded by Rama’. Having said this that best
of fair ones gave me the" excellent jewel, and wrought up
with anxiety, related unto me the | story of crow (for Rama's
information). Thereupon bent on returning here, I, with
a fixed mind, circumambulated and bowed unto that worship-
ful damé. And revolving within berself she again replied —
‘Hanum&n, do thou relate this ynto Righava in such a wise"
that the heroes Rima and Lakshmana, along with Sugriva
might instantly come here. Or else there remain two


SUNDARARANDAM. 1071


months more of my life. Raghava shall not see me and[
shall quit my life like one having no husband. Hearing those
piteous accents I was worked up with ire and at once resolved
upon destroying the city of Lank&. *Thereupon my body
increased like unto a mountain and desirous of entering into
conflict I began to lay waste the forest. The whole forest
was devastated—the birds and deer strafed away in fear and
the Rakshasees, having terrible faces, awaking, beheld all
that. And beholding me in the "forest, they all, gathering,
instantly conveyed the message unto Ravana. O King, O
thou of mighty prowess, this thy forest and castle has been
broken down by the vicious-souled monkey not khowing thy
strength. O King, he has been impelled by his vicious*
sense, to do thy mischief. Do thou order for his head so
that he might not return. Hearing this the lord of the
Rakshasas despatched a chosen band of demons named
Kinkaras® | despatched with my mace in no time eighty
thousand of them no sooner than they entered the forest
with darts and maces. And the few, who were saved,
Proceeded very quickly unto ,R&vana and related unto him
the destruction of the soldiers by me. Thereupon | thought
of destroying the Chaityat palace and destroyed with the
pillar all the Rakshasas stationed there. fxcited with wrath
I destroyed that palace, the best in the whole city of Lanka,
Thereupon (Ravana) despatched Fambhuméit, the son of
Prahasta, With my fierce mace I destroyed that mighty
R&kshasa, versed in the art of war, along with his retinue and
surrounded by a band of terrible and grim-visaged demons.
Hearing this, Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas sent the highly
powerful sons of the ministers followed by a regiment of
infantry. But I despatched them to the abode of Death by
means of my dart. And hearing Of the destruction fh battle
"* Literally it means servants—hers ¢ means his own personal attendants


who were brave dod heroic.
+ A place of sacrifice or religious worship.—T.


1072 RAMAYANA.


of the ministers’ sons of feeble prowess Rivana sent five
heroic commanders. But 1 slew all of them along with
their hosta. Thereupon the Ten-necked demon sent his
highly powerful son cdéske in the battle followed by a
number of Rikshasas. No sooner the princely son of
wMandodari, versed in the art of war, rose high up in the
welkin than I got hold of his legs and whirling him for
hundred times ground him to the dust. And hearing of the
discomfiture of “Aksha, R&vdng, exercised with ire, sent his
second son, the highly powerful Indrajit incapable of. being
repressed in battle. And discomfitting that best of
R&kshasa¢ with his host I attained to an excess of delight.
«That hero of great prowess and mighty-arms with a number
of other proud heroes was despatched by Ravana in great
confidence. And beholding my unbearable prowess and
his own soldiers slain, speedily he went away fettering me
with his Brahma weapon. Thereat the other Rakshasas
bound me up with a rope and carried me to Ravana. And
thereupon I was welcomed by the vicious-souled Ravana
and was asked why 5 did come to Lank& and slay the
Rikshasas. Whereto I replied —"I have done all this for
Siti. To behold her I have come here, O hero. I am the
monkey Hanum4n, the own begotten son of Maruta. Do
thou know me as R&ima’s ambassador and the minister of
Sugriva. And on Rama's embassy have I come here before
thee. Do thou hear of my mission—I do relate unto thee,
O lord of Rakshasas, the message which the monkey chief
hath commanded me to communicate unto thee. O great hero,
Sugriva hath asked of thy welfare and hath desired me to
-communicate unto thee these well meaning words, conducing
to the acquirement of piety, wealth and desires. ‘While I
lived dh the mount Rislhyamuka covered with huge trees
I made friends with Raghava dreadful in conflict. He hath
spoken to me, O King, ‘My spouse hath been taken away by
a Rakshasa, It behoveth thee to promise me thy heip in this.”


SUNDA RAKANDAM. 109%


And in the presence of fire, R&ma, along with Lakshmana,
contracted friendship with me who had been deprived of his
kingdom by Vali. And he hath made me lord over all the
monkeys after slaying V&li in conflict with a single shaft,
It therefore behoveth us to assist him by all means. And
by virtue of this contract I have despatched Hanumfin unto
thee as an envoy. Do thou therefore speedily bring back
Sit& and return her unto Raghaya before the heroic monkeys
discomfit thee. Who knoweth not the prowesd of the
monkeys who in the days of yore used to visit the celestials
invited ? With these words the king of the mpnkeys hath
despatched me unto thee. And thereupon he eyed me as if
burning me with the looks of his angry eyes. And the
vicious-souled demon—R&vana, of terrible deeds, orderedgt
for my destruction, not knowing my prowess, Thereupon
Bivishana, the high-souled brother of that lord of the
Rakshasas interceded on my behalf itt the followimg strain—
‘© thou foremost of the R&kshaems,, do-thou alter thy
resolution. The way, thou art followitig, is beyond the pale
of royal policy, The destraction of an envoy is not
sanctioned by the royal morality, O Rakshasa, They
communicate simply the mandate of their masters. O thou
Of incomparable prowess, there is no sanction for the destruc.
tion of a messenger albeit he perpetrateth a mighty iniquity.
Sometimes they have however been disfigured.’’ Being thus
accosted by Bivishana, Ravana ordered all the demons, say-
ing “Burn down this monkey’s tail.’ Hearing his mandate,
the R&kshasas, of well-protected armour and terrible prowess,
enveloped my tail with the fibres of cotton, silk and jute.
And then striking me with their clenched fists they put fire
to my tail. Although bound and fettered with magy ropes
I did not feel-the least 2nguish for I was very much anxious
to behold the city during theday. And thereupon fettering
me and putting fire to my tail and announcing me in the public
streets those heroic Rakshasas got at the city gate. And


135


1074 RAMAYANA.


thereupon contracting ‘again my huge person and relieving
myself of the fetters I stood again in my pristine state.
And taking up iron darts I slew all the Rakshasas there.
And leaping over with great velocity the city gate, I, with
my burning tail, burnt down the whole city from the palace
té its outer gate like ynto the fire of dissolution devastating
the entire creation. ‘And I was not the least flurried at it.
‘Forsooth hath Janaki been destroyed—for behold I nothing
in Lank& which hath not bdgn burnt down-=—indeed the
whole city hath been reduced to ashes. For certain have I
burnt down Sits, while burning the city Lank&—and I have
thus baffled the great work of Rama.’ While I was reflecting
thus, being overwhelmed with grief, I heard the auspicious
accents of the Charanas, exciting my wonder, ‘Janaki hath
not been burnt down.’ Hearing those wonderful words I
regained my sense. [was then convinced by an auspicious
sign that Janaki was not burnt down, for I was not
reduced to ashes albeit my tail was burning. My heart was
excited with joy and the wind spread its delicious fragrance.
And by virtue of those manifest omens, by my confidence in
the prowess of Rama, and Sit&, dnd the voice of ascetics, I
was greately delighted at heart. And beholding Vaidehi again,
Ileft her. And thereupon ascending the mount Aristha I
began to leap, desirous of bcholding you. And following
the track of the Wind, the son, the Moon, Gandhbarbas,
and Siddhas Ihave beheld you all. By virtue of Rama’s
grace and your prowcss I have satisfied the charge of
Sugriva. I have thus related unto you, what I had
performed in Lanka, and it now remains with you to fulfill
the rest.” ~ €


SUNDARARANDAM. - 1075


SECTION CX.


Havine related all, Hanuman, the Wind-god’s son
began again, saying—‘Fruitful is Raghava’s endeavour and
Sugriva’s energy—for greatly please& have I been with
Sitd’s-conduct. O heroic monkeys, Sita hath been keeping
the life of a highly chaste damSel. She can maintain the
animated creation by virtue of her asceticism and burn it
with ber ire. Ravana, the lord of the» Rakshasas is also
highly advanced in asceticism by virtue wherfof he hath
not been ruined albeit he hath touched SitS’s person. Eve
the flame of fire cannot do, although touched by the hands,
what Janaka’s daughter can bring about by her ire. I have
related .unto you what had happened. It now behoveth us
to behold Vaidehi along with those two sons of a king, after
commanding all the monkeys headed by Jambavan and
others, I am alone capable of destroying the city of Lanka
along with the Rakshasas and their lord—Ravana. What
more can I achieve if I am accompanied by the heroic
monkeys like ye, powerful, having control over their own
minds, wellearmed, able and desirous of winning victory
I shall slay R&vana in conflict along with his sons, brothers
army and retinue. I shall destroy all the Rakshasas and
baffle all the weapons of Indrajit conferred on him by
Brahm, Rudra, Wind and Varuna albeit they are invisible
in battle. Without your permission my prowess hath been
brought to a stand still. Hills and mountains, uprooted and
discharged by me continually, cgn destroy even the celestials,
what of those night-rangers ¢ Even if the ocean overfloweth
its banks, the Mount Mandara moveth off its place, the
enemy’s host cannot frighten Jambayan in conflict. And
specially the heroic monkey, VAli’s son, is alone capable of
destroying the whole host of the Ra&kshasas. Even the


ws RAMAF ANA.


mount Mandara is weakened by the velocity of the thighs
of the high-souled monkey Neela—what of the Rakshasas
in conflict? What hero is there amongst the celestials,
Asuras, Yakshas, GanSharbas, serpents and birds who can
equal Manida or Divida in battle? I do not ‘find any
one who can oppose in the battle field the two best
monkeys, the sons of °Asvi gifted with great velocity. By
me alone hath the city«Lank& been devastated burnt
down and reduced to ashes... And I had announced in
the public streets there—“May victory crown the highly
powerful Ram and Lakshmana, and may the king Sugriva
vadvance in prosperity being protected by Raghava. I am the
strvant of the king of Kogola, the own begotten son of the
Wind-God and my name is Hanumn. I have announced thus
everywhere. (And I beheld there) in the Asoka forést.of the
vicious-souled Ravana, at the foot of a Singshapa tree, the
chaste Siti waiting very poorly. She was encircled by the
Rikshasees, worn out with grief and anxiety and was like
unto the rays of the Moon shorn of their brilliance being
enveloped with clouds. ‘And ,Vaidehi, having a beautiful
waist and devoted unto her husband, did not care for Ravana
proud of his prowess and was accordingly confined by him.
And that graceful daughter of the king of Videba was by
all means devoted unto her lord and had all her thoughts
centered in him like unto Poulomi* devoted unto her lord
Porandara. And } saw her in that garden, wearing a single
piece of cloth soiled with dirt, surrounded by the R&kshasees
and remionstrated with now and then by those ugly
demons. Having a single braid of hair, poorly, engaged in
thoughts touching her lord, she was lying on the earth
shorn of all grace like unto lotus on the appearance of
_the winter. She had not thé least attachment for Ravana
and was resolved upon putting an end to her existence.
4


* The wife of Indra the lord of the cclestials who was confined by the king
Nahwa—T,


SUNDARAKANDAM. - 1077


And somehow creating her confidence J addressed that
damsel having the eyes of a fawn and related unto her the
whole story. And hearing of the friendship between Rama
and Sugriva she attained to an excess of delight. She is well-
behaved and devoted unto her lord par excellence and blessed
is the high-souled.and ten-necked demon that ahe hath ndt
destroyed him (yet). AndRdama shall become an instrument
only in bringing about his destryction. Shehath really been
greatly reduced and worn afit by the separation of her lord,
Her person hath been shattered like unto learning waning
by its prosecution on the first day of a lung fortnight.
Thus liveth there the great Sita worn out with grief, Dg
ye now perform what you think proper.”


SECTION LX.


Heaanine his words, V&li’s son Angada spoke, saying,
“These two monkeys, the sons of Asvi, are very powerful
and gifted with great velocity and are specially proud in
consequence of the boon conferred on them by the Great
Grand-father. Formerly to honor Asvi the Frand-father, of-
all the worlds, made these two monkeys incapable of being
slain by any. And crushing the mighty host of the celestials,
these two heroes gifted with great prowess, and maddened
with haughtiness in consequence of the boon, drank up
nectar. And these two, if worked up with ire, are capable
of. destroying the whole city pf Lanka with hes horses,
chariots and elephants. What of other monkeys, I, myself,
am capable of destroying *soon the gity along with the
R&kshasas and the mighty Ravana! And there is not the
least wonder about it if 1 am aided by powerful monkey


1078 RAMAYANA.


heroes like you, having control over themselves, well armed,
capable and desirous of winning victory. I have heard,
that, by Wind-god’s son | alone Lanka was burnt. Ye are. all
famed for your manliness, it doth not behove you to speak
before R&ma. ‘We have seen the worshipful dame but
have not been able to bring her.’ Ye foremost of monkeys,
there is none amongst the celestials or Asutas who can equal
you either in leaping or in prowess. And therefore winning
Lanka, slaying Ravana along‘ awith his R&kehasa host in
conflict and-taking Sit&, let us go, delighted and having our
ends accomplished, What else is there for us to perform
than bringing the daughter of the king Janaka when the
Rakshasa crew shall be slain by Hanumin? And we shall”
place Janaka’s daughter between Rama and Lakshmana.
What is the use of putting the other residents of Kishkinda
into trouble? It therefore behoveth us alone to go to Lank4
and after slaying the best of the Ra&kshasas, to see Sugriva,
Rama and Lakshmana.’ Thereupon Jambavina, the
foremost of the monkeys, greatly delighted spoke unto
Angada, who was thus resolved,the following pregnant words,
—O great monkey, O thou of best understanding, what
thou hast spoken, is, (I think) not proper, for we have been
despatched by them to ransack the southern quarter, but
we have not been commanded by the king of the monkeys
and the highly intelligent Raima to bring her. And it shalt
not please him even if wé rescue her. And mentioning his
own lineage, that best of the kings, R&ghava, promised
before all the leading monkeys, that he would himself
rescue Sita. How-would he now falsify his own saying?
‘What is the use of uudertaking this work for nothing which
shall nog conduce to his pleasure? And useless shall be
the display of your prowess, O ye, féremost of the monkeys.
Let us therefore progeed where:Rima, with Lakshmana, and
the highly effulgent Sugriva is, and-relate unto them our
Proposed work. What thou hast judged, O prince, is liked


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1079


by us. And still you should look to Ra&ma’s resolution and
bring about his end.


SECTION LXIT


. the heroic monkeys, headed by Angada and the
great monkey Hanumfn, approved highly of ¢he words of
Jambavan. And these leading monkeys headed by the Winds
god's son proceeded leaping from the summit of the Mount
Mahendra. And these highly powerful ones, having huge-
persons, resembling the Mount Mandara, covered the welkin
as if like ‘so many mad elephants. They carried, as it were
with their own looks, ihe highly powerful Hanumin, gifted
with great velocity, having contfol over his own self, and
adored by the Siddhas. They werg resolved upon satisfy-
ing R&ma’s end and acquiring glory for themselves. Their
desires were satisfied and mind elevated in consequence of
their beholding Sit and burning down Lanka. Ali of them
were anxious to communicate this pleasant news, to enter
into conflict and were resolved upon bringing about Rama's
wellbeing. And leaping and ascending the sky they got at
the Madhuvana,* preserved by Sugriva, resembling the
celestial garden, covered with many trees, picturesque and
incapable of being divastated by any. And the monkey-
chief Sugriva’s maternal uncle, the heroic and high-souled
Dadhimukha always guardeth tRat picturesque and spacious
garden of the lord of monkeys. They were greatly* worked
up with anxiety. And Beholding that large orchard, those
yellow-coloured monkeys wért greatlysdelighted and beg-
ged honey of the prince. And the “prince respectfully


1080 RAMAYANA.


allowed these elderly monkeys headed by Jambavan to
drink honey. And being thus commanded by the intelligent
prince—V6li’s son, those monkeys ascended the trees
infested with bees and feasting on fragrant fruits and roots,
were greatly delighted and intoxicated. And thereupon those
monkeys, beside themselves with joy for being allowed to
drink honey began to dance hither and thither, Some sang,
some laughed, some danced, some bowed down, some read,
some walked hither and thither, some leaped and some
talked at random. Some Sprang upon one another, some
quarrelled with dne another, some leaped from one tree
to another, and some jumped down on the’ earth from
the tops of the trees. Some rose up with great velocity from
the earth to the tops of the huge trees—some sang, others
approached them laughing—some wept and others approach-
ed them weeping. Some were stricking with their nails
and others struck them in return, And thus the entire monkey
host were bewildered with intoxication, There was none
amongst them who was pot drunk and none who was not
excited with pride. Theretpon beholding all the fruits
eaten up and the trees divested of teaves and flowers, the
monkey Dadhimukha was worked up with ire and attempted
to prevent.them. And that heroic, elderly monkey, the
guard of the garden, was in return remonstrated with by
them who were greatly intoxicated. Thereat the highly
spirited monkey again made up his mind to protect the
garden from their devastations. He used harsh words,
undauatedly towards some, struck the weak with his palm,
quarrelled with some, and consoled others with soothing
words, They were greatlf excited with drink, and being
preventéd forcibly by Dadhinukha, they giving up al} fear,
began to pull him. And striking him with their nails, biting
him with teeth, crushing him #fth their palms and feet, they,
being drunk, almost reduced him to death and devastated
the mangoe forest.


SUNDARARANDAM. ~ 408k


SEGTION uxii.,


Tucesuron Hanum&n, the foremost of the monkeys,
spoke unto them, saying—“O monkeys, do ye undisturbed
drink honey. I shall myself thwart them who will obstruct
you.” Hearing his words, Angada, the best of the monkeys,
delighted, said—'Drink hongy, O monkeys, we must follow
Hanumiin’s advice, who hath already been crowned with
success, We must follow him even if he -leadegh us to an
unworthy action, what of this which is most becoming ?”
Hearing these words from Angada, the leading monkeys

"attained to an excess of delight and eulogized him again and
again, And adoring Angada—their prince, those monkeys
proceeded by the way leading to the Madhuvatia like unto
trees carried by a stream. And entering that orchard they
forcibly attacked the waiters there, Hanum&n saw Maithilee,
and others heard of her from him—and those monkeys;
renouncing all fear in consequence ‘and obtaining permission,
drank honey and feasted on various sweet fruits. And they;
given to the drinking of honey, attacking the guards who
were approaching by hundreds, gave them a sound beating.
Some monkeys,collecting honey with their hands measuring a
Drona,* drank it ; others collecting themselves delightedly
into a band spoiled it; while other yellow-coloured monkeys
drank and sprinkled it. And some, being beside themselves
with intoxication, struck others with the remaining quantity;
while others waited at the foot of the trees, holding their
boughs. And some, being exhausted with drinking, spread
leaves and laid themselves therepn—and some beipg drunk
and delighted struck others down in mad fury. And some
lost their steps. Some roared and sope delightedly set up

™ Fn common use a measure of thirty-two seers or rather more than sixty:
four Ts. quadrupeds.—T. :
136 -


1082 RbuUaY ANA.


the music of the birds. Some of the monkeys, inebriete witht
honey, slept on the earth; some laughed at others
impudently and some cried aloud. Some spoke contrary
to what they had d&ne—and others put a different
construction thereon. And all the waiters of the garden
and the servants of Dadhimukha, were repressed by those
terrible monkeys with censure and thrown up in the sky by
their knee-joints. And terrified, they fled to different
directions, And being wotked up with anxiety, they
approached Dadhimukha and said—~'Commanded by Hanumin
the monkeys have forcibly devastuted the Madhuvana and
we were thrown high up by them in the sky.” Hearing of
tlie destruction of the orchard, Dadhimukha, being greatly
enraged, consoled all the monkeys. “Proceed ye before,
1 shall soon follow you and repress by force all those
monkeys, greatly excited with pride and the drinking of the
excellent honey.” Hearing these words from Dadhimukha
those leading and heroic monkeys proceeded with him towards
Madhuvana, And Dadhimukha proceeded with great velocity
in their midst taking up a‘huge tree ia his hand. And all
bis atlendants, taking trees, mpuntain crags, proceeded,
wroth, where those leading monkeys were. And biting their
lips in wrath and remonstrating with them again and again,
those monkeys’ began to suppress them by force. And
beholding -Dadhimukha greatly enraged, all the monkeys,
headed by Hanum4n, approached him with great vehemence,
And as the mighty Dadhimukha of huge arms,was proceeding
towards them vehemently with a huge tree, Angada, wroth,
caught him by the hand. He ‘was beside himself with
intoxication and therefore did not show him the least mercy,
albeit he, (Dadhimukha) was worshipful unto him. And
accordingly with great vehemence ha ground him to the dust,
His arms and thighs were broken.and his countenance was
disfigured and that gréat heroe, the foremost of the monkeys,
bathed in a pool of blood, remained senseless for sometime.


SUNDARARANDAM. 1083


And thereupon releasing himself from them by some device
that leading monkey, proceeded to a nook, and addressed his
attendants, saying—"Let us all proceed there where our
Jord, the spacious-necked Sugriva liveth with Rama. I shall
relate unto him all the unfair dealings of Angada
and “forsooth shall that wrathful king punish all thtse
monkeys, The picturesque Madhxvana is the most favourite
orchard of the high-souled Sugrita. It wae enjoyed by his
forefathers and is not ewén approached by the celestials,
And meting out punishment unto thése monkeys, eager to
drink honey and almost half dead, Sugriva ghall slay them
as well as their friends and relatives. Those vicious-souled
ones are worthy of being slain since they have transgressed
the royal mandate, And. then shall my wrath, arising
‘out of impatience, bear fruits.” Having thus spoken unto
the guards of the forest the highly powerful Dadhimukha
leaped high up in the welkin and went away with them.
And in no time he reached where the highly intelligent
monkey Sugriva, the offspring of the sun, was, And
beholding Rama, Lakshmaaa, atid Sugriva and the level
ground he descended from the sky. And descending from
the sky that great and heroic Dadhimukha, lord over all the
monkeys engaged in protecting the forest, placing his folded
palms on his forehead and with a poorly countenance, laid
low his crown at Sugriva’s feet,


SECTION exiil.


Ano beholding that monkey plag his crown at his" feet
the monkey-chief, with an anxious mind, accosted him,
saying—Rise up, rise up, why hast thou lain thyself at my


1984 RAMAYANA,


feet? I declare thou hast no fear, speak out the truth,
From whose fear hast thou come here? It behoveth
thee to suggest the becoming proceedure. Is it all well
with my orchard MadMevana? I long to know every-
thing, O monkey.” Being thus addressed hopefully by
the high-souled Sugriva, Dadhimukha, gifted with an intel-
ligence of a very high order, rose up and spoke—“Neither
thyself, nor Vali, the lord of ¢he monkeys, O king, allowed
that orchard to be freely used’ ay the monkeys—but that
hath been now laid waste by them. I prevented them
along with these attendants, but disregarding me, they drank
and feasted there at their pleasure. They were prevented,
O ford, in their act of devastation, by these guards, but those
monkeys, without caring for me the least, feasted there.
Some of them went beyond the pale of good conduct, others
ate at their pleasure, and all frowned (at us). And when
these attendents, being insulted by them, were greatly
wroth, they were driven out of the garden, by those powerful
and enraged monkeys. And they were greatly assailed by
those many thousand heroie monkeys, worked up with ire
and having reddened eyes. Some had their arms broken,
some had their knee-joints crushed and some of them were
thrown up in the sky. Thyself their lord living, these
heroes are beaten, and the entire Madhuvana is being freely
enjoyed by them.” The highly intelligent Lakshmana,
the slayer of foes, addressed Sugriva, the foremost
of the monkeys, while he was thus being informed,
gaying—“O king, why hath this monkey, the guard over
the forest, come to thee, and what sorrow hath led him to
give vent to these expressions 9” Being thus addressed by the
high-souled Lakshmana, Sugtiva, skilled in the art of speech,
replied, —' —'b worshipful Lakshmanay the heroic monkey
Dadhimukba speaks that the war-like monkeys headed by
Angada have drunk honey. They would not have engaged in
quch an unfair proceeding had they been unsuccessful in


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1085


their mission. They have surely achieved success while they
have thus been bent upon devastating the orchard. For this
the warders were atruck on their knee-joints for obstructing
their revelry and for this they went so far as to disregard
the powerful monkey Dadhimukha. 1 myself appojnted
this monkey the lord of my orchard. Forsooth hath*
Hanumfn espied the worshipful Sith and” none else. There
is none else but Hanum&n who ‘is the jnstrumental of
this work, for that best,’ of monkeys hath in him
a high intellect, knoweth the art of success, is gilted
with courage, strength and prowess ands is gonversant
with Sastras, That work is sure to succeed whose leading
spirits are the mighty Jambavana and Angada, and worker is

Hanumfin. Forsooth that orchard hath been laid waste by these
heroes headed by Angada. And ransacking the southern
quarter, those leading monkeys have come back and delight-
edly entered the Madkuvana, Aod the whole orchard has
been explored and enjoyed by those monkeys and the
attendants beaten and wounded on their knee-joints. To com-
municate unto me this intelligence, this monkey of known
prowess, and sweet accents, named Dhadimukha, hath come
here. © thou of mighty arms, O son of Sumitrl, forsooth
they have beheld Sita, since the monkeys, just on their return,
have engaged in drinking honey. O best of men, they are all
well-known monkeys and without espying Vaidehi they would
not have engaged in the destruction of that orchard con-
ferred on us as a gift by the celestials.” Hearing these words
from Sugriva, pleasant unto ears, the virtuous-souled Laksh-
mana along with R&ghava, was greatly pleased. And bearing
this from Dadhimukha, Sugriva, greatly gratified, addressed
that lord ofthe forest, again, saying,~“Greatly pleased I-am,
since, they, being successfil, have explored:this forest. And
the insulting procedure of the successfubis also pardonable.

Do thou soon go there and protect that orchard, and send
here all those monkeys headed by Hanumin. Along with


7086 RAwApana,


these two descendants of ‘Raghu, I long to know soon
from these monkeys headed by Hanum&n, and proud like
lions. what they have settled for the regaining of Siti. And
beholding these two princes greatly delighted and their eyes
expanded with joy, the king of the monkeys, thought that
‘the accomplishment,of the great work was near at hand, and
was accordingly greatly, delighted.”


SECTION LXIVv.


‘ Shy

Bane thus addressed by Sugriva, the monkey Dadhi-
mukha, delighted, bowed unto him, Raghav and Lakshmana.
And adoring Sugriva and the highly powerful descendants of
Raghu, he along with other heroic monkeys, leaped up in the
sky. He went away with tho same speed with which he
came and leaping down on'the earth from the sky, entered
the orchard. And entering that forest he beheld all the leaders
of the monkeys spending the hours delightedly, having passed
urine, the outcome of honey. And approaching them, the
heroe, with folded hands and delighted, addressed Angada,
with the following words—“O gentle one, do thou not take
offence, for these monkeys, protecting the garden enraged,
unweetingly prevented thee. O thou of great strength, thou
art worn out with thy long journey, do thou drink thy own
honey, thou art our prince and the master of this garden.
It behoveth thee to forgive us for our wrath arising out of
ignorance. Like unto thy:sire before, thyself and Sugriva
are the lords of these monkey ‘hosts, O thou foremost of
them, and none eke. O inuocent prince, I have related all
about this unto thy uncle. When I described unto him, the
arrival of all these forest rangefs, as well as of thine


SUNDARAKANDAM, 108


accompanied by them, and the destruction of this garden by
you all, he was not the least offended, rather delighted,
And worked up with joy thy uncle Sugriva, the lord of earth
and monkeys, said “Send them all hese speedily.” Hearing
those words from Dadhimukha, Angada, the foremost of the’.
monkeys and skilled in speech, addressed them all, saying—“Q,
ye leaders of the monkey hosts, I fear, Réma hath heard all
about this, Dadhimukha relates evegything joyfully and hence
l infer this. And our work finiglted, O slayer of foes, it doth
not bebove us to remain here (any langer). You have all
drunk honey at your pleasure and there is nothing left and
you should now go where the monkey king Suftiva is. O
leading monkeys, I shall follow what you will in a band»
desire me to do. In actions I am surbordinate unto you all,
1 am not justified to command although I am a prince. You
are all of accomplished actions, it is not proper to repress
you forcibly.” Hearing those sweet words of the prince
Angada, the monkeys delightedly replied, saying—"O king,
© foremost of monkeys, who elss can speak thus being a
master? Any one else, we think, ig proud of his wealth.
Such like words become thee” only and none else. Thy
humility speaks of thy future greatness. We are all anxious
to go there, where Sugriva, the king of the monkeys, is.
Verily we speak unto thee, O foremost of monkeys, that
without thy permission, none amongst us, is capable of
advancing a single step.” They addressing him thus, Angada
replied—“All right, let us all go.” Saying this he leaped
up in the sky and was followed by all those monkeys,
clouding the welkin as if with stones thrown up by a tool.
And placing before them Angada and Hanumfn, the
monkeys leaping vehemently up in the sky roared like unto
clouds driven by the wigd. Ad Angada nearing, Sugriva,
the lord of the monkeys, spoke unto the ‘lotus-eyed Rama,
‘stricken with grief, saying—-"May gdbd betide thee. Do
thou console thyself, The worshipful dame. has been found


1088 - RAMAPANA.


out ; there is mot the least doubt about it: Or else they
would not have come as the time is already past. I (further
more) infer this from Angada’s joy, O thou of auspicious
presence. Without ‘being successful in his mission, the
“large-armed prince, Angada, the foremost of the monkeys,
«vould not have come to me. If the monkeys had engaged
in such an unfair “proceeding without + being successful
in their mission, Angadt would have looked poorly and his
mind would have been bvez-whelmed with grief and
forgetfulness. And ‘without beholding the daughter of the
king Janaka they would not have dared to destroy
Madhuvana obtained and preserved by my forefathers. Do thou
‘console thyself, O Rama, by whom Kaugaly& hath become
the mother of a good sop. O thou, rigidly observing any
religious vow or obligation, forsooth hath Hanumf&n beheld
the worshipful dame and none else. Wo other wight is so
qualified an instrument in encompassing this end. QO thou
of excellent intellect, Hanuman knoweth the art of success,
is gifted with intellect, perseverance and courage -and is
versed in Sastras. That work caunot fail, which is worked
out by Jambavan und Angada and presided over by
Hanum&n, Be not laden with anxiety, O thou of unmitigated
prowess. These monkeys have come here excited with
pride and drink. They would not have come with such a
grandeur had they been but unsuccessful. From their
breaking down the orchard and drinking honey I inferred
so. Thereupon he heard in the sky the joyous sounds of the
monkeys proud on account of Hanum§n’s work, proceeding
towards Kishkindh& and as jf announcing their success.
Thereupon hearing the nojse of these monkeys, Sugriva,
their chjef, being greatly delighted, uplifted his tail. And
placing Angada and Hanum&a before them those monkeys
proceeded to behold Rima. And those heroes headed by
Angada, delighted and intoxicated, descended before Raghava
and the lord of the monkeys. And the mighty-armed


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1089


Hanumfn, lowering his head, related unto R&ghava, Sita’s
spiritual and physical well-being. And hearing from
Hanumiin the sweet words that he had beheld Sita, Rama
and Lakshmana were greatly Gelighted. .And being
vonfirmed thos by the Wind-god’s son, Lakshmana, greatly
Pleased, respectfully looked towards Sugriva. And Righava
too, the slayer of foes, worked up with joy, cast respectful
looks towards Hanuman. °


SECTION


Tirereveon getting at the Mount Prasravand surrounded
by a variegated forest, lowering their heads unto the mighty
Rama and Lakshmana, placing before them their prince
(Angada) and bowing unto Sugriva, the monkeys began to
relate the story of Siti. And they described unto Rima,
the confinement of Sita in Ravana’s seraglio,the remonstrances
of the sheedemons, hér unfinching attachment in her lord
and the time appointed (by the R&kshasa for her destruction).
And hearing of Vaidehi’s well-being Rama said—"O monkeys
where liveth the worshipful Sita ? And how is her attachment
unto me? Do ye relate everything unto me.” Hearing thos¢
painful words of Rama, the monkeys desired Hanumf&n,
conversant with the whereabouts of Sit&, to describe every
thing unto him. Hearing their words, Hanum&n, the Wind-
god’s son, versed in the art of speech, lowering hit head it
Sita’s name and towards the southern direction (where she
liveth) began to relate fow he°sucteeded in behdiding Siti.
And conferring on (Rama) ),the heavonly ‘jewel set on a golden
leaf and burning with its own effufgence, Hanuman, with
folded hands, began—"‘Anxious to behold Sits, the daughter


137


1850 RAMAYANA.


of the king Janaka, I, ploughing over the main extending over
a hundréd yoyana, wended my way and by and by reached
Lank§&, the capital of the vicious-souled Ravana, Lanka is
situated on the southerf bank of the southern occean, And
I saw there Siti, in the inner’ appartment of Rivana.
Centering all her thoughts in thee, breathes that damsel, O
Rima. I saw her reviled by the she-demons again and
again. She is being guardéd in that garden by the grim-
visaged Rukshasees. And that Sprshipful dame, O hero, ever
used to happiness, is ‘how stricken with grief in thy absence.
Confined in, Ri&vana’s inner apartment, well protected
by those she-demons, wearing a single braid of hair and
poorly, she is engaged only in thoughts touching thee. She
in lying on earth, shorn of all grace like unto a lotus on the
appearance of the winter. She hath not the least attachment
for Ravana and is resolved upon putting an end to her
existence. O K&kutstha, O innocent prince, after enquiring
for sometime, | found that worshipful dame devoted unto
thee, and’narrating the glories of the Ikshw&ku race, O fore-
most of men, I created» her .confidence by and by, and
addressing her I related everything. And hearing of the
friendship between thee and Sugriva she was greatly
delighted, And she has her respect for thee unshaken and
all her actions are for thee. O great man, O thou best of
men, I beheld the daughter of Janaka in this plight, engaged
in hard austerities and ever devoted unto thee. O thou of
great intelligence, O Raghava, offering me (this jewel) as a
token, she wanted me to relate unto thee, the occurrence at
the mount chitrakuta regarding the crow. And Janaki
addressing me said—‘O Wing-god’s son, do thou describe
everything of what thou hast seen here, unto Rima. And
relating everything beforé Sugriva, do thou present him with
this jewel which has been preserved by me with great care.
Thave kept with gregt care this excellent jewel of great
effulgence. Do thou remind him of the mark which he made


SUNDARAKANDAM. 1091


on my forehead with red arsenic. O innocent monkey,
greatly deJighted am I on beholding the brilliant jewel
which he has sent through thee. Breathe shalf I only
for a month, beyond that I*shallenever live, subject as
1 am tothe demons.’ Thus was I accosted by Siti, reduced
to a skeleton,observing pious observances, shut up in Rivana’s
inner apartment and having eyes lite those of ahind. I
have described unto thee evergthing, O Righava, do thou
make arrangements for bridging over the ocean.” And
considering those two prinées greatly consoled, the Wind-
god’s son handed over that token unto Raghava and
described everything from the beginning to the*end.


SESTION XVI.


Baie thus accosted by Hapumfin, Rama, the son of
Dagaratha, placing that jewel on his breast, wept with
Lakshmana. And beholding that excellent jewel, Raghava,
stricken with grief, with eyes full of tears, spake unto
Sugriva, saying,—"Forsooth my heart melteth on beholding
this jewel as milk trickleth down from the udders of a cow
on beholding its calf. This jewel was conferred on Sith
by my father-in-law at the time of our wedding, and to
enbance its beauty, she wore it on her head. And this
jewel, obtained from the bed of the ocean, was conferred on
him (Janaka) by the intelligent Sakra, greatly’ delighted
for being adored ina sacrifice, O gentle one, this bringeth
back to my mind, the memory of mg father, and father-in-law
the king of Videha. This excellent jewel appeared beautiful
on the crown of my dear ot, and nftthinks, on beholding
it, I have as if got back my beloved spouse. Do thou relate


logs RAMALANA.


wnto me again and again, O gentle one, what Vaidehi hath
said, aa if sprinkling me with the water of her words like
unto one rendered senseless. What greater grief can there
be, O Saumitri, that 1°behofd the jewel obtained from the
ocean but not Vaidehi ? Truly doth Vaidehi live for a long
time if she breathes for a month. But O hero, ¥ cannot live for
a moment even without that one having dark-blue eyes. Do
thou take me there where thou hast beheld my dear spouse. I
cannot live for a moment whild P have received intelligence
about her. How liveth that timid damsel, having a beautifut
waist, being terrjfied, amidst the terrible and grim
Riakshasees 7° Truly her countenance is not appearing
béautiful tike unto the autumnal moon, enveloped with clouds,
although cleared off the darkness. Do thou relate unto me
in sooth, O Hanum&n, what Sit& hath spoken unto thee. 1
shall live by these words, as the sick are cured by medicine,
O Hanum&n, what hath my dear wife, sweet-speeched, and
highly beautiful, spoken uno thee, being separated from me ®
How breathes she going through a series of calamities ?”


SECTION LXVIPb.


Bene thus addressed by the high-souled Raghava,
Hanumiin, related unto him all of what Sita had said,—"O
foremost of men, the worshipful Janaki, related as a token,
all the incidents at the Mount CAstrakuta from the begin-
ning to the end. Sleeping happily with thee, Janaki one day
awoke béfore, and in the tneantige, a crow wounded her

_ breast with ite beaks. © Rama, thou wert then asleep on
Sita’s lap and that crbw again Sdticted the worshipful dame.
And it again wounded her. And being bathed in blood and


SUONDARARANDAN, ‘t098
suffering terrible pangs, that. worshipfud dame aroused thee.
O slayer of foes, O thou of mighty-erms, seeing her breset
wounded, thou, wroth like g serpent, didet spenk saying—-
‘O timid’ damsel, who, with hie eails, hath wounded thy
breast? Who hath played with an angry serpent having five
faces?’ Aad casting thy looks around thou didst behofl a
crow faciag the worshipful dame with sharpened nails
besmeared with blood. That gréw, the beat of the birds, was
Sakra’s son. And it entered speedily into the earth with
the velocity of the wind. Thereupon, thy eyes roiling with
ire, thou, O mighty armed hero, O foremost of ghe intelligent,
didst resolve to destroy that crow. And taking a Auge off
thy seat thou didst set it on Brahma weapon. And it flamed
like unto the fire of dessolution before that crow. And.thou
didst let off that burning 4xpa towards that bird. And there-
upon that burning dupa followed the crow. And being forsaken
even by the celestials, who were terrified, and ransacking
the three worlds it did aot get a refuge. Thereupon it again
came to you, O subduer of foes. And seeking thy shelter
it laid itself low on the ground. And O Kakutstha, thou
didst save it albeit it was worthy of being slain. And
thinking it improper to baffle the aim of the weapor, thou
didst, O Righava, destroy the’right eye of the crow. There-
upon bowing unto thee and the king Dagaratha, that crow,
bidding adieu, went to its quarter. O Raghava, thou art the
foremost of those skilled in the use of weapons, powerful and
gifted with an excellent character, why dost thou not
discharge weapons towards the Rikshasas? |The celes-
tials, the Gandharvas, the Asuras, the Marutas—none of
them is qualified, O Rama, to equal thee in conflict.” ‘If thou,
gifted with great prowess, hasteany, affection for me, do thou
speedily, with well-armed shafts, destroy Rivaaa in conflict.
Aad obtaining the behest8*of his Wrother, why doth not
Lakshmana, the subduer of.foes and best of mea, protect me,
© Riighava? Those two best of men, gifted with the


“nop ~ Raardrana,


.¢ffulgence.of Wind and Fire,and incapable of being repressed
even by the celestials, are disregarding me. Forsooth have
I perpetrated a mighty, iniggity since those two slayers of
foes, being capable, a6 not protect me’ Hearing those
sweet and piteous accents of Vaidehi I again spoke unto
that worshipful dame, gaying—Forsooth can I swear by thee,
O worshipful dame, that Rima is sorely stricken with grief
in thy absence. -And Laishmana too relenteth heavily
beholding him laden with sorroWe It doth not behove thee
to relent any mote as I have succeeded in finding thee out,
Thou shalt atthis very moment behold the end of thy grief.
And those two princes, the foremost of men and slayers of
foes, actuated with energy on hearing that Ihave seen thee,
shall, reduce Lank& to ashes. And slaying in conflict the
terrible Ravana, with his kith and kin, Raghava, in sooth, O
excellent damse!, shall take thee back to his own city. O
thou of a blameless person, do thou confer on me such a
token, as might be recognised by Rama and conduce to his
pleasure.’ Thereat, casting her looks around, she took out
an excellent jewel from her cloth, worthy of being set on her
braid and conferred it on me, O thou of great strength.
And O thou, the most favourite of the Raghu race, taking for
thee that gem with my hands and bowing unto her, I
addressed myself speedily for departure. And thereupon
beholding me ready to depart and increase in bulk and
about to leap up in the welkin, Sitd, the daughter of the
king Janaka, poorly, bathed in tears, overwhelmed with
sorrow and having her voiée choked with grief, spake,
saying—'Blessed art thou O great monkey, since thou shalt
behold the large-armed andthe lotus-eyed Rima and the
highly famed Lakshmana;.my.lord’s younger brother” And.
being thus accosted by Maithili, I said—'Do thou speedily
place thyself on my back, O wdrihipful dame, O thou the
daughter of king Janaka, and I shalt soon show thee, O great
dame, O thou having dark blue eyes, thy lord along with


SUND4RAKANDAM. 1098


Sugriva and Lakehmana.’’ Whereto she replied—This is
not the pious course, O great monkey, O thou the foremost
of thy race, that f shall, of my own accord, place myself on
thy back. And although befdte thi9 I was touched by the
demon, O hero, it was because I could not help otherwise
subject as I was to circumstances. Do thou thyself repair,

“O foremost of monkeys, where those tWo princes are.’Address~
ing me with these words she again said—'O Hanumin, do
thou relate my well- -being @tto Rima and Lakshmana of
leonine prowess, and Sugtiva accompanied by his followers.
Do thou so describe as the large-armed, Raghava may save
me from this ocean of grief. Do thou narrate fnto Rama this
my terrible sorrow and the affliction by the she-demons. Muy
good betide thee, on thy way, O foremost of the monkeys.’
Thus the worshipful Sith gave vent to these piteous accents.
Hearing these words do thou believe that it is all well with
her.”


SECTION Lxvirt.


“TT reneveon, O foremost of men, out of thy love ‘and
adoring me for thy friendship, that worshipful dame—~
addressed me again, saying—“Do thou thus speak every
thing unto R&ma, the son of Dagaratha, so phat he might
soon take me hence, slaying” Ravana in battle. O heroe,
O slayer of foes, if it pleaseth thee, thou mayst relievé thyself
of the toil by living in a séeret nook and then proceed
to-morrow. O monkey, in thy company, I do siomentarily
forget the weight of my grief, unfortunate asI am, O thou
gifted with great prowess, thyself dep&rting, I shall wait for
thy return, but doubt I very much whether I shall live till


1096 RAMAYANA,


then. Burnt I shall be with the fear of not beholding thee
again, wretched and striken with grief as Iam. And so I
shall be, hereafter, overwhelmed with a- mightier grief. O
hero, besides, I entertainsa gre%e doubt about thy assistants,
the monkeys and bears, 1 do not know how shall the host of
mopkeys and bears and those two princes cross over the
mighty main? O innocent monkey of all the creatures
three only are qualified to regs over the acean,thyself,Garuda
and the Wind. O thou foremost,of those skilled in speech,
what hast thou settled about the a&complishment of this hard
work ? True it is that thou art alone qualified to accomplish
this work, O tifeu the slayer of inimical heroes—but such
manifestation of thy prowess shall increase thy glory only.
But if Rima, obtaining victory, can take me hence to his
own city, it shall redound to his glory. It doth not behove
the heroic Raghava, to take me away by stealth, like unto
‘ Rivana capturing me from the forest under a disguise.
Truty it shal! be bis becoming work, if K&kutstha, the
repressor of enemy's host, can take me away, enveloping the
city Lanka with his army. .Do thou therefore initiate that
work as becometh that high-souled hero and may display
his prowess."Hearing these sound reasonable and affectionate
words I gave her the last reply, saying—~'O worshipful dame,
Sugriva, the foremost of the monkeys, the lord of monkey
and bear hosts and gifted with manliness, hath resolved upon
rescuing thee. He hath under his command a number of
mighty and courageous monkeys gifted with great prowess
and quick-coyrsing like imagination. Their course is never
thwarted—whether going upwards or dgwnwards—or moving
tortuously. Théy are. never exhausted in their actions—
highly courageous: and of mefsureless prowess. And those
gteat and Powerfal monkes, doursing in the air, have again
and again circumambulated the earth. Sugriva hath many
monkeys—my equal—thd greater than 1, but none of inferior
strength. While I have crossed over the main—what of


these mighty heroes ¢ “The ieeding herods ate never sent
2 mission but only those of inferior merit., No tore
bewailing, O worshipful game, Do thou remove thy gi
And with one leap these leaders of monkey-hasts shaft:
reach Lanké. .O great damsel, these two princes,. placing

themseives on my back shall come to thee like unto the.
rising Sun and Moon. Thou shalt goon behold before’
Lanks’s gate Raghava the elayer of fées resembling a fica

and Lakshmana with a Bow in his,hand. And thou shalt soon”
observe in a band the heroic monkeys,gifted with the strength.

of lions and tigers, and having nails and teeth for theit
weapons, And thou shalt soon hear the roaring of the leading

monkeys on the summit of mount Malaya, resembliag

the muttering of the clouds. And thou shalt soon behold

Raghava, the slayer of foes, installed along with thee on the

throne of Ayodhya after returning from the forest.” And that

daughter of the king of Mithila although heavily laden with

sorrow in thy absence was grektly comforted and pleased by

my auspicious words boding thg fulfilment of her desire.


END oF BUNDARAKANDAM,


rah
