This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.
It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.
Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.
Usage guidelines
Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:
+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.
+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.
+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.
+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.
About Google Book Search
Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web
at http : //books . qooqle . com/|
Digitized by VjOOQ IC
Digitized by VjOOQIC
Digitized by VjOOQ IC
Digitized by VjOOQIC
Digitized by VjOOQ IC
Digitized by VjOOQIC
Digitized by VjOOQ IC
Digitized by VjOOQIC
\
THE

RAMAYANA.


Translated into English Prose from the original
Sanskrit of Valmiki.


UTTARAKANDAM.


M ra Oe r ii > m


EDITED AND PUBLISHED

Vt

MANMATHA NATH DUTT, MA.


CALCUTTA.
1894.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


Sri Patmanabha Dasa Vynchi Bala Sir Rama Varma
kulasekhara klritapatl manney sultan maha-
RAJA Raja Ramraja Bahabur Shamshir Jung
Knight Grand Commander of most Emi-
nent order of the Star of India.

7gK afjaraja of ^xavancoxe.


THIS WORK IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED
BY

MANMATHA NATH DUTT.

In testimony of his veneration for His Highness and in
grateful acknowledgement of the distinction conferred upon
him while in His Highness* capital, and the great pecuniary
help rendered by his Highness in publishing this work.


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


I


Digitized by VjOOQIC


^ 3oVkAotC

UTTARA KlAlND^M,


SECTION I.


\Jn the Rakshasas having been slain, all the ascetics, for
the purpose of congratulating Raghava, came to Rama as
he gained (back) his kingdom. Kau^ika, and Yavakrita, and
Gargya, and Galava, and Kanva — son unto Madhatithi, —
. who dwelt in the east, (came thither) ; aikl the reverend
Swastyastreya, and Namuchi,and Pramuchi, and Agastya, and
the worshipful Atri, aud Sumukha, and Vimukha, — who dwelt
in the south, — came in company with Agastya.* And
Nrishadgu, and Kahashi, and Dhaumya, and that mighty
sage — Kau^eya — who abode in the western "quarter, came
there accompanied by their disciples. And Vasishtha and
Ka^yapa and Atri and Vicwamitra with Gautama and
Jamadagni and Bharadwaja and also the seven sages,t who
. (or aye resided in the northern quarter, (came there). And
on arriving at the residence of Raghava, those high-souled
ones, resembling the fire in radiance, stopped at the gate,
with the intention of communicating their arrival (to Rama)
through the warder. And that foremost of ascetics— the
righteous Agastya — versed in various branches of learning
and cognizant of the Vedas along with their branches, —
addressed the warder,saying, — "Do thou say unto Dacaratha's
son that we — the sages — have come (here)," Then at the

* The name of Agastya had before been just specified among the in-
comers ; but so it is in the text. — T.

f Ursa Major t or the great bear, the seven stars of which are the souls
of as many saints,~Marichi, Atrai, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and
Vasistha.— T

195


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


1554 RAM AY ANA.

words of Agastya, the gate-keeper quick* and swift presented
himself with celerity before the high-souled Raghava. And
that one versed in polity and emotional expressions, of
worthy ways, possessed of ability.and endowed with patience,
swiftly seeing R&ma resembling the full moon in brightness,
communicated unto him the arrival of that supreme of
saints — Agastya. Hearing of the arrival of the anchorets,
possessed of the effulgence of the sun new-risen, he answer-
ed the warder, saying,— "Do thou usher them in, having
regard to their comfort." And seeing the ascetics before
him, R§ma with joined hands worshipped their feet with
arghyas, and with regard consecrated a cow unto each,—
and saluting them with a collected mind, he ordered seats
(for the saints). And having, according to their rank, seated
themselves on gorgeous and superb seats of Ku^a or deer-
skins embroidered with gold, those foremost of sages — those
mighty saints, versed in the Vedas, — along with their disciples
and leaders,having (previously) been asked as to their welfare,
addressed RSma.saying, — "O son of Raghu. O mighty-armed
one, complete welfare is ours. By good luck it is that we see
thee fortunate, with all thy foes finished. By good luck it is
that,0 king.Ravana — destroyer of creatures — hath been slain
by thee. Sure,0 Rama.it was no great matter for thee (to slay)
Ravana along with his sons and grandsons. Furnished with
thy bow, thou canst, without doubt, destroy the three worlds
themselves. By good fortune it is, O Rama, that Ravana
along with his sons and grandsons hath been slain by thee.
By good fortune it is that to-day we see thee victorious
along with Sita, and, O righteous-souled one, with thy
brother, Lakshmana, (ever) compassing thy profit. (By good
fortune it is) that, O king,, to-day we behold (thee) in
company with thy mothers and thy brothers. By good

* Turnam — according to the commentator, is mental celerity, and
drutam— physical. This distinction, however, is seldom, if ever, observed by
Sanskrit authors. — T.


>


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1555

fortune it is that those night-rangers, Prahasta, and Vikata,
and Virup&ksha, and Mahodara, and the unconquerable
Akampana, have all been slain (by thee). By good fortune
it is, O Rlma, that he than whose proportions there are no
other's greater on earth, — even Kumbhakarna, was brought
down (by thee). By good luck it is, O Rama, that those
highly powerful night-rangers, Tri^iras and Atikaya and
Devantaka and NarSntaka, have been slain by thee. By
good luck it is that thou hadst been encountered in a hand-
to-hand combat with that foremost of Rakshasas, incapable
of being slain by the celestials themselves ; and achieved
victory (ultimately). To defeat Ravana in battle was (for thee)
a small matter ; but jt is a piece of good fortune that
Ravana's son, who had confronted thee for combat, hath
been slain (by thee) in battle. By good fortune it is that thou,
O mighty-armed one, hadst been liberated from (the bonds
of) that foe of the celestials whose course resembled that of
Time ;* — and that thou also hadst secured victory. Hearing
of the destruction of Indrajit, we congratulate thee (on thy
success). He was incapable of being slain by all creatures,
and in battle possessed mighty powers of illusion. Hearing
that Indrajit slain, amazement hath seized us all. Having
conferred on us this holy freedom from fear, O Kakutstha
O repressor of enemies, thou through good fortune, wilt
grow in victory." Hearing the speech of the ascetics of
sacred souls, Rama, coming under the influence of a mighty
wonder, said with joined hands, — "Ye worshipful ones

wherefore, passing by those exceedingly powerful ones

Kumbhakarna and the night-ranger, R§vana — do ye praise
Havana's son ? Wherefore, passing by Mahodara, and
Prahasta, and the TUkshasa — VirupSksha— and Matta, and

Unmatta, and the irrepressible DevSntaka and Narantaka

redoubtable heroes all — do ye extoll Havana's son ? And

wherefore, passing by Atikaya and Trigiras and Dhumraksha,

* i. e. surpassing perception. — T.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


155& RAMAYANA.

— that night-ranger — all endowed with exceeding prowess, —
do ye extoll Ravana's son ? What was his prowess ? And
what his strength ? And what his might ? And by virtue of
what cause did he surpass Ravana ? If I can well hear the
same, (do ye tell it me). I by no means command you. IE
the thing can bear disclosure, I would hear it. Pray,
speak out. How was Sakra vanquished by him, and how
also did he obtain the boon ? And how was the son power-
ful, — and not his sire — Ravana? How could that Rakshasa,
surpassing his sire, conquer Sakra in mighty encounter,
and how did he obtain the boon ? O foremost of anchorets,
do thou to-day unfold all this unto me, who ask (for the
same)."


SECTION ir.


Hearing those wards of his, the exceedingly energetic
Kumbhayoni spoke as follows, — "Having regard to his
(Indrajit's) energy and might, I shall relate unto thee the
history of his race, in the light of which thou wilt perceive
why Ravana's son had been capable of slaying his enemies,
but could not himself be slain by them. I shall, O Raghava,
describe unto thee Ravana's race and birth, as well as the
boon that had been conferred on him.

''Formerly in the Krita age, O Rama, there was a
Brahmarshi — lord (of creatures) — son unto Prajapati, and like
unto the very self of the great-father* His virtues, springing
from righteousness and excellency of character, are past all
delineation ; I can only say that, forsooth, he went by the
name of Prnjapati's son. Verily on account of his being the
son of Prajapati, he was the darling of the deities -, as by
virtue of his spotless perfections, that magnanimous one was


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1557

loved of all creatures. And on a religious mission that
foremost of ascetics, repairing to the asylum of Trinavindu
at the side of the mighty mountain, Meru, took up his abode
there. And with his senses centered on the study of the
Vedas, that rightcous-souled one, going to the hermitage,
carried on austerities ; but his religious rites were disturbed
by certain girls. And daughters of sages and Pannagas
and those of Rajarshis, — as well as those of ApsarSs, sporting,
arrived at that quarter. And on account of every season
being genial at that spot and also of the loveliness of
the wood, the damsels, repairing to this place, ever dis-
port there. And on account of the beauty of that region,
those wenches, coming to where that twice-born one, Pulastya
was, used to sing, to play on instruments, and to dance ;
and thus those blameless beauties disturbed the rites of that
anchoret practising austerities. Thereat, the mighty ascetic,
waxing wroth, said,— 'She that comes within my kin, shall
conceive.' Hearing the words of the high-souled one, (the
damsels), afraid of a Br&hmana's curse, ceased to haunt that,
place. But Trinavindu's daughter had not heard anything
of all this ; and, going to the asylum, she ranged it fearlessly.
And she did not see there any of her associates come to that
spot. And at that time that exceedingly energetic and
mighty sage, Praj&pati's son, with his soul sanctified through
asceticism, was engaged in the study of the Veda. And,
hearing the sounds of Vaidika recitation, and seeing that
storehouse of asceticism, she had her body turned pale, and
signs of pregnancy displayed themselves. And, seeing that
evil befall her, she was wrought up with anxiety ; and,
understanding matters, she said, — c What is this 7 And,
going to her father's hermitage, stayed there. And, seeing her
in this condition, Trinavindu said, — 'Wherefore is the person
that thou bearest unlike what it used to be ?' Thereat, in
woe-begone guise, with joined hands, his daughter replied
unto that one having asceticism for bis riches,— 'O father,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1558 RAMAYANA.

cause know I none whereby I have come by this appearance.
But, searching for my associates, 1 had ere this alone repaired
to the noble asylum of the Maharshi Pulastya of a purified
spirit. But associate found there I none, that had come
thither. And seeing this change for the worse of my form,
I from fear have come hither.' Thereat the RSjarshi,
Trinavindu, having a. live effulgence through asceticism,
entered into contemplation, and saw the consequence of the
safe's act. And coming to know that curse of the Maharshi
of a purified spirit, he, taking his daughter, went to Pulastya
and said, — c O worshipful one, O mighty sage, do thou accept
this daughter of mine, adorned with her native perfections,
who of herself hath come to thee as alms.* She will,
without doubt, constantly tend thee, practising asceticism,
and having thy senses fatigued.' When that virtuous (sage),
had said this, the twice-born Rajarshi, desirous of accepting
the girl (after due nuptial rites), said unto the former,—
'Well !' Having given away his daughter, the king went
.(back) to his asylum ; and the girl stayed there, gratifying
her husband with her virtues. And that best of ascetics was
gratified with her character and behavior. And well pleased
(with her), that highly energetic one said,— 'O thou of
shapely hips, well-pleased am I with thee with thy wealth
of worth, and therefore, O exalted one, I will to-day confer
on thee a son like unto thyself, who will perpetuate both
the lines* — being celebrated as Paulastya. And as thou hadst
heard the Veda recited by me, so, without doubt, he shall be
named Vigravd.'^ Thus addressed, that noble damsel with
her soul wrought up with delight, in a short time brought
forth her son Vigrava, famed over the three worlds and
furnished with virtue and fame ; versed in the Vedas, of an

* Compare Lear : — ' Let your study Be to content your lord who hath
received you At fortune's alms. 1 — Act I., Sc. I., lines 67—69.
t i. e. maternal and paternal lines.
% From the root, Sru — to hear.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1559

impartial spirit, and ever engaged in observing vows. And
the ascetic, Vifravd, was furnished with asceticism even like
his sire.


SECTIO N III.


jf\.ND Pulastya's son — that prime of ascetics — Vi^rava —
in a short time was engaged in asceticism like his father.
And he was truthful, and of excellent character and controlled
senses ; was ever engaged in the study of the Vedas ; and was
of a sanctified spirit ; and he was not addicted to any of the
pleasures of life, and was always studious of religion.
Learning of his ways, that mighty ascetic, Bharadwaja, gave
unto *Vi9rava for his wife, his own daughter, Devavarnini.
And having religiously wed Bharadwaja's daughter, that
foremost of ascetics, Vi^ava, conceiving the highest delight,
began to reflect on the welfare of his offspring with an
intelligence concentrated on them. And on her that one
cognizant of righteousness begot a child, exceedingly wonder-
ful, endowed with energy, and adorned with all Brahma*
qualities. On his having been born, his grand-father was
rejoiced, and, marking the profitable intelligence (of the boy,
he thought that) he would be the lord of riches. And well-
pleased, (Pulastya) in company with the Devarshis (thought),
—'Inasmuch as this is Vigrava's offspring, and as he
resembles Vi9rava himself, so he should be known by the
name of Vai^ravana. And then the exceedingly energetic
Vai9ravana, repairing to the wood of asceticism, increased
(in power) like unto a fire fed by sacrificial oblations. And
as he was staying in the hermitage, that high-souled one

* Such as self-control, asceticism, purity, etc.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1560 RA MAYAN A.

thought, — i shall practise prime righteousness : verily virtue
is the supreme way.' And for a thousand years, he, having
his senses controlled, practised rigid austerities in that
mighty forest, observing (all the while) the most rigorous
restrictions. And on a thousand years having been numbered,
he by turns observed the rules relative to each term ; (at
first) living on water, (then) on air, and (last) going absolute-
ly without any fare. Thus passed away a thousand years
like one. And then the highly energetic Brahmsi along
with Indra and the celestials, coming to that asylum, addressed
(Vai9ravana), saying, — *0 child, I am well-pleased with
thee for this act of thine, O thou of excellent vows. Do thou,
good betide thee, ask for the boon (that thou wouldst have),
for, O magnanimous one, thou art worthy of a boon.' Then
Vai9navana said unto the great-father, who was present,—
'O reverend one, I crave for the power of maintaining and
protecting people.' Thereat, BrahmS along with the deities
gladly said in a gratified spirit, — 'Very well ! I am about
to create the fourth of the Protectors of creatures — Yama,
Indra and Varuna, — the position which is sought for by thee.
Do thou, O thou cognizant of righteousness, attain the same ;
do thou receive the position of the lord of riches. Thou
shalt be the fourth among Sakra, the lord of waters, etc.
And do thou take for thy vehicle this car, named Pushpaka,
resembling the Sun himself) and thus raise thyself to an
equality with the celestials. Good betide thee ! We shall
(now) go whither we had come, having, my child, done my
duty and bestowed on thee the couple of boons/ Having
said this, Brahma along with the celestials went to his own
quarters. On the deities with Brahma at their head, having
departed for the heavenly regions, the self-possessed lord
of wealth of subdued senses with joined hands spoke
unto his sire, saying, — 'O reverend one, I have received
the wished-for boon from the great-father, but the exalted
lord of creatures hath not fixed any abode for me. Therefore,


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1561

O lord, do thou seek out some dwelling (u» mir, where no
creature whatever can come by misfortune. ' Thus accosted
by his son, that best of ascetics, Vicrava, spoke, O righteous
one, — 'Listen ! O excellent one. On the shore of the
Southern sea there is a mount named Trikuta. On its brow
is a beautiful and broad city built by VicwakarmS, named
Lanka, resembling the city itself of Indra the great, designed
for the abode of Rakshasas, — like unto the Amaravati of
Indra. There in Lanka, do thou, forsooth, reside. That
romantic city is surrounded with a golden wall and a moat,
and is furnished with engines and weapons ; and hath gate-
ways of gold and lapises. Formerly she was renounced by the
Rakshasas afflicted wiih the fear of Vishnu ; and was empty
of swarms of Rakshas, who had gone to the nethermost
regions. Now Lanka is vacant, — and there is no one that
lords it over her. Do thou, my child, for abode, at thine ease
repair thither. Thy stay there shall meet with no rub, and
no manner of disturbance shall occur there.' Hearing the
righteous speech of his sire, that virtuous-souled one along
with thousands of delighted and joyous Rakshasas, began to
reside in Lanka stationed on the top of the mount. In a
short time (Lanka), through his sway, abounded (in wealth).
And that foremost of Nairitas, the righteous son of Vicrav5,
well-pleased, abode in Lanka having the Ocean for her
entrenchment. At times the righteous-souled lord of riches,
mounted on Pushpaka, in humble guise visited his father and
mother. And hymned by hosts of deities and Gandharbas,
having his mansion graced with the dancing of Apsaras, and
floating on rays like the sun himself, that ruler of riches
went to his sire."


196

Digitized by VjOOQ IC


'5*2 RAMAYANA.


SECTION IV.


.CLEARING the words uttered by Agastya, RSma

wondered as to how formerly RSkshasas were generated

in Lanka. And then shaking his head, he, struck with

wonder, momentarily eying Agastya, addressed Agastya

resembling fire, saying,— "O worshipful one, hearing thy

words that formerly LankS had been in the possession of the

flesh-eaters, I have been seized with great amazement. We

had heard that the Rakshasas had sprung in the race of

Pulastya. But now thou hast said that they owe their origin

to a different source. But were they more powerful than

Ravana and Kumbhakarna and Prahasta and Vikata and the

sons of RSvana ? Who was their progenitor ? And what was

the name of that one of terrific strength ? And through what

transgression were they driven out by Vishnu ? AH this, O

sinless one, do thou tell me in detail, and do thou dispell my

curiosity even as the sun dispells darkness. ,,

Hearing Raghava's words, fair and fraught with polished
phrase and period, Agastya, struck with surprise, said unto
RSghava, — "The lord of creatures sprung from water, first
created water. And the lotus-born one generated creatures
for protecting that element. And thereupon those creatures
humbly presented themselves before the creator, saying,—
'Whait shall we do ? We are sore tried by hunger and thirst.'

The lord of creatures, laughing, addressed them, saying,

'Ye men, do ye carefully guard this (water)/ Thereat some
said 'Rakshama/* and others 'Yakshama.'t Thus accosted

by those afflicted with hunger and thirst, the creator said

'Those among you who have said 'Rakshama/ shall be


* i. e. we shall protect
t We shall worship.


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1563

R&kshasa? ; and those among you, who have said 'Yaksli&ma,'
shall be Yakshas. And there sprang the brothers— repressors
of foes — Heti and Praheti— lords of R&kshasas, resembling
Madhu Kaitava himself. Praheti, who was righteous, went
to the wood of asceticism. And Heti exerted himself to the
utmost to get himself wived. And that magnanimous one of
immeasurable soul married the exceedingly terrific sister of
K&la, named Bhaya.* And on her Heti— foremost of
R&kshasas and best of those having sons— begat a son,
known as Vidyutkefa. And Heti's son, the exceedingly
energetic Vidyutke^a; possessed of the splendour of the sun,
grew up even like a lotus in water. And when that night-
ranger arrived at proper youth, his sire turned his attention
towards his marriage. And that best of R&kshasas — Heti—
in the interests of his son asked for the hand of Sandhy&'s
daughter, like unto Sandhy&t herself in potency. SandhyS,
reflecting that she needs must have to be given away
by her, bestowed her on Vidyutke^a, O R&ghava.
Having obtained Sandhy&'s daughter, the night-ranger,
Vidyutke^a, sports with her even as Maghav&n doth with the
daughter of PulomS. And it came to pass that after a length
of time, O Rama, Sal a KatankaUk was filled with child by
Vidyutke^a, as the clouds are furnished with water by the
Ocean. And then repairing to Mandara,the Rakshasi brought
forth her child, having the splendour of rain-charged
clouds ; even as Gangft had delivered herself of the child
begotten by Fire.J And having delivered herself of her
offspring, she again became bent on disporting with
Vidyutke$a. And then forsaking her son, she began to sport
with her husband ; and the child having sounds resembling
the rumbling of cloud*, was renounced (by his mother). And
forsaken by them both, the infant furnished with the bright-

* Fear.

t The evening Twilight — spouse of the Sun.— T.

% Mahefwara.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1564 RAM AY ANA.

ness of the autumnal sun, entering his clenched fist into his
mouth, began to cry slowly. And it so fell that, journeying
with PSrvati, Siva, Tiding his bull through the aerial regions,
heard the sounds of weeping.. And along with UmS, he
saw the Rakshasa's" son, as he was crying. And sent by
Parvati, whose heai was moved by compassion, Bhava —
destroyer of Tripur5-^-made that RSLkshasa's offspring attain
the age of his mother, and conferred on him immortality.
And for compassing PSrvati's pleasure, Mahadeva, in-
destructible and undeterrorating, granted (the RSkshasa) the
power of ranging the air. Ami, son of the king, Um& also '
bestowed a boon : 'Henceforth the RSkshasis shall cbriceive
in a day, bring forth (child) in a day, and the child shall in
a day be furnished with the age of its mother.' And then
the great and magnanimous Sukeca, puffed up with the
receipt of the boons, having obtained auspiciousness at the
hands of the lord, Hara-, began to range everywhere, even as
Purandara did on having obtained heaven."


SECTION v.


OEEING Sukeca righteous and furnished with the boon,
a virtuous Gandharvi, named Gr&mani, of the effulgence of
fire, who had a daughter, called Devavati, like unto a second
Sri herself, famed over the three worlds, and endowed with
beauty and youth, — bestowed her on Sukeca as if he had
bestowed the goddess of fortune of the Rakshas. And like an
indigent person on obtaining wealth, Devavati, on obtaining
her beloved husband, affluent in consequence of having
received the boon, was (greatly) delighted. And in hrr
company, that night-ranger appeared graceful, even as a


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTA RAKANDAM. 1565

mighty elephant sprung from Anjan** doth in the company
of a she-elephant. In good time Suker^a, O RSghava, begot
(on her) three sons, resembling the three Fires. And that
lord of R&kshasas begot (on her) three sons, resembling his
three eyes— the Rakshasas, Malyav&n; Sum&li and that
foremost of the strong — Mali ; all resemblingthe three worlds
possessing themselves in calmness ; like unto the three Fires
established ; fierce like unto the three mantras,— -dreadful
like three diseases springing respectively from morbid Air,
Bile and Phlegm.t And the sons of Suke9a, having the
energy of the three Fires, grew up like a disease which hath
been disregarded. And learning that their father had
received a boon by virtue of his power proceeding from
asceticism, the brothers, firmly resolved, went to Meru for
practising penances. And adopting rigid restrictions, the
Rakshasas, O best of kings, entered upon austerities, terrible,
and capable of arousing the fear of all beings. And practis-
ing penances rare on earth with truth and candour and
self-control, they afflicted the three worlds with gods, Asuras
and human beings. Then that lord— the four-faced one-
stationed on a superb car, addressed Suke<?a's sons, saying,—
'I am for conferring boons (on you). 9 Knowing that Brahma
surrounded by Indra and the other celestials was ready to
bestow boons, they, with joined hands, said, trembling like
trees, 'O god that hast been adored through asceticism,

* The designation of an elephant.

f The entire edifice of Hindu Pathology is based on the three-fold division
of the morbid humours into Air, Bile and Phlegm. This division, albeit it
may appear crude and unscientific to Europeans, taken all, in all, wonderfully
answers its purpose. The tact displayed by Hindu physicians in diagnosing
diseases on this method is wonderful From feeling the Pulse alone, a Hindu
physician, getting at the predominance of one or more morbid humours of the
system, can accurately ascertain a patient's health. The infallibility with
which predictions of death are generally made, attests the scientific sound-
ness of the division in question, and renders superfluous any elaborate
argument in its defence.— T.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1566 RAMA YANA.

if thou dost intend to confer on us a boon, let us be
invincible, capable of slaying foes, immortal, lordly, and ever
devoted to each other. 1 Thereat, saying 'So be it/ unto the
sons of Suke9a, the lord Brahma, (ever) cherishing BrShmanas
with affection, went to the Brahma regions. O Rama, having
obtained the boons, those night-rangers, rendered intrepid
in consequence of having the boon conferred on them, began
to disturb celestials and Asuras. And like unto men abiding
in hell, the celestials, Charanas and hosts of sages, being
harassed (by Rakshasas),did not find any deliverer. And then,
O foremost of the Raghus, the Rakshasas, assembled together,
joyfully said unto the undeteriorating Viswakarma — prince
of artists, — 'Thou by thy own energy art the architect of the
great gods, endowed with energy and prowess and strength.
Do thou, O magnanimous one, construct a fabric for us after
our heart hard by Himavan, or Meru, or Mandara. And do
thou erect a magnificent mansion for us resembling the
mansion itself of Mahe^wara.' Thereat Vigwakarma— the
mighty-arm of the Rakshasas — spoke of a building like the
AmarSvati of Sakra, 'On the shore of the Southern sea is a
mountain named Trikuta. A second atao is there called
Suvela, ye lords of Rakshasas. On the midmost peak of that
mountain resembling clouds, inaccessible even to the
fowls of the air, all the four quarters have been hewn with
bones.* If I am desired by you, I can construct the city of
Lank5 (there), having an area of thirty Yayanas, and
measuring an hundred in length j surrounded with a golden
wall and furnished with golden gateways. In her do ye
dwell, ye irrepressible ones, ye foremost of Rakshasas ; even
as do the celestials with Indra, approaching Amaravati.
And occupying the citadel of Lanka, backed by innumerable
Rakshasas, ye will be invincible to foes and capable of
destroying them.' Hearing Vi^wakarma's speech, those
foremost of Rakshasas, accompanied by thousands of

* Tar ^a— may also mean a hatchet or a sword. — T.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARARAftDAM. 1567

followers, went to the palace and set up in the same, having
a strong wall and a moat, abounding in hundreds of golden
edifices. And obtaining Lanka, the night-rangers, exceed-
ingly delighted, began to dwell therein. At this time, O
Raghava, there lived at her pleasure a Gandharvi, named
NarmadS. O son of Raghu, she had three daughters,
resembling Sri, Hri, and Kirti in splendour. And albeit no
Rakshasi herself, she, beginning with the eldest, gladly
married, to the R&kshasas her daughters having faces
resembling the full moon. And under the influence of the
star, Bhagadaivata, those three exalted daughters of a
Gandharvi were respectively conferred by their mother on the
three several Rakshasas of eminence. And having wedded,
O Rama, Sukesa's sons began to sport with their wives, like
celestials sporting with Apsaras. Malyav&n's beautiful spouse
was named Sundari. On her he begot, do thou understand,
whom ; — Vajramusthi, and VirupSksha, and the Rakshasa—
Burmukha, — and Suptaghna, and Yajnakopa, and Matta and
Unmatta ; and, O Rama ; there was also born a lovely
daughter of Sundari, Anala. And Sumali's wife, of face like
the full Moon, named Ketumati, was dearer to him than his
life itself. O mighty king, do thou, gradually, know the
offspring that were begot by Sumali on Ketumati, — Prahasta,
and Kampana, and Vikata, and Kalikamukha, and Dhum-
raksha, and Danda, and the redoubtable Suparcwa, and
Sanhradi, and Praghasa, and the Rakshasa, Bhasakarna, and
Rak&, and Pashpotkati, and Kaikasi of luminous smiles,
and Kumbhinasi — these are known as the offspring of Sumali.
Mali had for wife a graceful Gandharvi, having eyes
resembling lotus-petals, of a lovely look, and like unto the
most magnificent Yakshi of them all. Do thou, O master,
listen to me as I mention to thee,0 R&ghava,the offspring that
Sumali's younger brother begat on her, — Anala, and Nila,
and Sampati. These night-rangers — sons unto Mali — were
the courtiers of Bibhisana. And those three foremost of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1568 RAMAYANA,

Rakshasas, accompanied by .hundreds of sons — night-rangers
all — elated on account of their measureless prowess, began
to worry the sages and serpents and Yakshas, and celestials
with Indra (at their head). And incapable of being confronted
(in battle), these resembling Death himself in energy,—
wondrous elated in consequence of the boon having been
conferred on them, ranging the world like unto the Wind,
were ever engaged in disturbing the sacrifices (of the sages)."


SECTION VI


"T,


HUS afflicted, the deities, sages, and ascetics, wrought
up with fear, sought the protection of that god of gods—
Mahecwara — creator and destroyer of the cosmos, — unborn,
of an unmanifest form, the stay of all creatures, worthy of
being adored, — and the supreme preceptor (of all). And
coming to that enemy of Kama* and foe of TripurS— the
three-eyed (Deity), the gods, with their voices faltering
through fear, represented with joined hands, — c O reverend
one, the creatures of the lord of creatures are being (sorely)
troubled by the sons of Suke^a, given to harassing their
foes, — swolen with insolence on account of the boon conferred
on them by the great-father, Our asylums, — constituting
our refuges,— have been divested of their power of granting
shelter; and driving off the deities from the etherial regions,
they are sporting there like the immortals. 'I am Vishnu,' *I
am Rudra/ 'I am the king of the celestials,' 'I am Yama/ 'I
am Varuna/ 'I am the Moon/ 'I am the Sun/— flattering

* The Hindu Cupid. Mahadeva had burnt to ashes Kama, when he had
the fool-hardiness to disturb the contemplation of the former. By the way,
Kalidasa has reared his faery fabric,entitled Kumara Sambhava, on the basis of
this legend.— T.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1569

themselves in this fashion, Mali and Sum&Ii and the R&kshasa
— Malyavln— as well as those going before them, are
annoying (the gods), breathing exhilaration of martial spirits.
Therefore, O god, it behoveth thee to liberate us from fear,
who have been greatly tormented by it Do thou, assuming
thy terrific form, slay the thorns of the celestials.' Thus
addressed by the immortals in a body, that lord, Kaparddi
of red-blue hue, reflecting that it would be wrong for him to
destroy Suke^a (with his own hands), spoke unto the gods,—
4 I shall not slay them, ye gods ; they are incapable of being
slain by me. But I shall unfold unto you the way in which '
they will be destroyed. Do ye, ye Maharshis, in the heat of
this affair, seek the shelter of Vishnu. That lord will slay
them.' Thereat, saluting Mahe^wara with the sounds of
J ay a, (the celestials) afflicted with the fear of the night-
rangers, presented themselves before Vishnu. And bowing
down unto the god holding the conch, discus and mace, and
paying him high homage, they, greatly flurried, addressed him
about the sons of Suke^a, saying, — 'O god, by virtue of the
boon (that hath been bestowed on them), resembling the
three fires, Sukeca's three sons, assailing us, have deprived
us of our abode. There is a city named Lank&, stationed on
the top of Trikuta, (extremely) difficult of entrance. Taking
up their station at that place, the night-rangers in a body
pursue us. Do thou, O slayer of Madhu, destroy them for our
welfare. We have sought thy shelter. Become our refuge,
O foremost of celestials. Do thou dedicate to Yama the
lotuses of their faces, severed (in pieces) with thy discus.
Save thee, we have none who can, while tormented with
fright, inspire us with courage. Slay in encounter the elated
Rakshasas along with their adherents ; and even as the sun
drieth up dew, do thou dispell this fear of ours.' Thus
accosted by the deities, that god of gods — Jan&rddana — who
bringeth fear unto foes— cheering up the celestials, said unto
them, — 'I know the RSkshasa, Sukeya, as flushed with the

197


Digitized by VjOOQIC


157° RAM AY ANA.

boon bestowed by Ic5na. And I also know his sons, of whom
MalyavSn is the eldest. Those worst of R£kshasas that have
over-riden your dignity will I, wrought up with wrath, slay
(in battle) ; therefore, ye gods, be of good cheer/ Thus
addressed by the mighty Vishnu, the gods, highly rejoiced,
went to their respective quarters, extolling JanSrdana.

"And hearing of the activity of the celestials, the night-
ranger — MalyavSn — addressed his heroic brothers, saying, —
'The immortals and sages, going to Sankara, spake these
words, desirous of our destruction, — The terrific sons of
Sukeca, puffed up, and swollen on account of their strength
flowing from the boon, are crossing us at every step. We
have been overpowered by the R&kshasas. And, O lord of
creatures, from fear of those wicked-minded ones, we cannot
remain in our own homes. Therefore, to do us good, do thou,
O three-eyed one, destroy them ; and, O best of consuming
ones, do thou with thy roars, burn them up. — Thus addressed
by the deities, the slayer of Andhaka, hearing their speech,
said, shaking his head and hands, — Ye gods, Sukeca's sons
are incapable of being slain by me in battle. But I shall tell
you the means whereby they may be slain. Do ye seek the
shelter of him who holdeth the discus and mace in his hands,
and who is clad in a yellow attire, — of JanSrdana, Hari, even
of the auspicious Nar5yana.— Having received this counsel of
Hara, they, rendering reverence unto that enemy of Kama,
came to the abode of NarSyana and communicated everything
unto him. Then NSirSyana spoke unto the celestials with
Indra at their head, — I will slay those foes of the celestials.
Ye gods, cast off all fear ! — O foremost of Rakshasas, Hari
promised unto the frightened celestials that he would slay
us. Therefore do ye think as to what is fit. Hiranyakacipu
hath met with death (at the hands of Hari), as also other
enemies of the immortals. And Namuchi and K§lanemi, and
that foremost of heroes, — SanhrSda — and Radheya, and
VahumSyi, and the virtuous Lokapala, and Yamala, and


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1571

Arjuna, and H3rdikya, and Sumbha and Nicumbhaka, —
Asuras and DSnavas endowed with strength and possessed of
terrific prowess— all these, who, having come to the field, had
never been heard of as worsted, who had performed hundreds
of sacrifices, who had been well skilled in illusion, who had
been versed in every branch of knowledge, and who were
the terrors of their foes — have by hundreds and by
thousands been destroyed by NSrSyana. Learning this, it
behoveth you to do what would conduce to the behoof of
all. It is a sore task to defeat NSrSyana, who wisheth
to slay us.' Thereat SumSli and M£li, hearing the words
of Malyavan, said unto their eldest brother, like the
Acwins addressing Vasava, — 'We have studied, performed
sacrifices, practised charity, and obtained riches ; and attain-
ing long health and long life, we have established sterling
righteousness in our path. And with arms plunging into the
sea of celestials, we have conquered our unrivalled enemies.
Therefore, we have no fear touching death. Even Narayana
and Rudra, Sakra and Yama, ever fear to stay before us (in
the field). And, O lord of Rakshasas, there is no occasion for
Vishnu's displeasure of us. The mind of Vishnu hath wavered
in consequence of the evil caused by the celestials. Therefore
will we even avenge ourselves on the gods, from whom hath
sprung this wrong. 1 Having taken counsel together, those
powerful ones conciliated their forces. And proclaiming (their
order) that preparations were to be made, all the foremost
Nairitas sallied forth for battle, like unto those led by Jamva
and Vritra. And, Rama, having thus taken counsel
together, with all the preparations complete, those huge-
bodied and redoubtable Rakshas marched forth for conflict,
mounted on cars, and elephants, and horses resembling
elephants, and mules, and kine, and camels, and purpoises,"*
and serpents, tnakaras, and tortoises, and fishes, and fowls

* How purpoises could be pressed into the service passes my tonception,
unless Sigumdra have any other meaning. — T.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


5 57* RAMA Y ANA.

resembling Garura himself, lions and tigers and boars and
Srimaras* and CMmaras.f And puffed up with pride of
prowess, the Rakshas march, leaving Lanka, and the enemies
of the celestials went to the heavenly regions for battle. And
perceiving the destruction of Lanka at hand, those deities
that had taken up their quarters there, everywhere were struck
with fear and felt their spirits depressed. And mounting
the best of cars, the Rakshasas by hundreds and thousands
with intent minds swiftly sallied forth for the celestial
regions. And the deities (aforementioned) followed the tract
of the Rakshasas. And at the command of K5la, terrible
evil omens foreshadowing the destruction of the Rakshasa-
chiefs began to arise on the earth well as in the sky. The
clouds showered down bones and hot blood. The oceans
overleapt their continents ;J and the mountains shook. And
jackals of terrific forms, having voices resembling the roar-
ing of clouds, — bursting out into a horse-laugh, began to
emit cries frightfully. Creatures were one after another
seen to drop down ; and mighty swarms of vultures, with
mouths belching forth flames, began to wheel over the
Rakshasa, like unto Kala himself. And blood-footed pigeons
and Sarikas§ darted off (around). And crows and two-legged
cats began to cry in loud accents. But fast bound with
the noose of Death, the Rakshasas, proud of their strength,
disregarding these omens, march on, and do not stay their
course, — Malyavan and Sumali possessed of prodigious
strength, going before the Rakshasas, like flaming fires. And
even as the gods take refuge under Dhata, the night-rangers
take refuge under Malyavan resembling the mountain,
MalyavSn. And under the command of Mali, that host of

* Wilson gives the meanings : (i) 'a kind of animal,' and (2) 'a young
deer.— T.

+ Bos Gvunn\ens, t

% Used in the Shafcespercan sense : Vide Macbeth,

§ A species of harlot.


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1573

Rakshasas, roaring like mighty clouds,inspired with the desire
of victory, went to the celestial regions. And the lord
N&rfyana, hearing of the preparations of the Rakshasas from
a celestial messenger, set his heart on fight. And equipped
with weapons and quivers, he mounted on Vinati's offspring *
And donning on his mail furnished with the effulgence of a
thousand suns, fastening his spotless quivers filled with shafts,
being engirt with his waist-band and bright falchion, and
equipped with his conch, discus, mace, Sarngaft sword,
and other superior weapons, that lotus-eyed lord, seated on
Vinata's offspring like a very mountain, set out speedily for
compassing the destruction of the Rakshasas. And seated
on Suparna'sJ back, the blue-brown Hari clad in yellow
attire resembled a mass of clouds on the crest of the golden
mountain, with lightning playing through it. And hymned
by Siddhas and celestials and sages and mighty (semi-divine)
serpents and Gandharvas and Yakhas, the enemy of the
Asura hosts presented himself, bearing in his hands the discus,
sword, that weapon — Sarnga — and the conch. And the
Rakirbasa- hosts, struck by the wind produced by the wings
of Suparna, with their pennons swinging to and fro and their
weapons scattered about, quaked like the blue summit of a
mountain with its crags tossed about. Then the night-rangers,
hemming in Madhava,§ began to pierce him with thousands of
excellent sharpened weapons dyed in flesh and blood, and
resembling the fire of Doomsday."

• Garura, Narftyana's vehicle.

t The bow of Vishnu is so named.

% Lit. fair-feathered — a name oC Garura.

S One of the many designations of Vishnu,


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


1574 RAMAYANA.


SECTION VII.


ik A

jtXND as clouds assail a mountain with showers, then

the Rakshasas, representing clouds, setting up shouts, began
to assail Nariyana representing a mountain. And Vishnu of
a bright brown-blue hue, being surrounded by the flower of
the night-rangers with dark visages, resembled the mountain,
Anjana, on which the clouds pour down. And as locusts
(flood) a field, knats (throng) about a flame, gad-flies (cluster)
around a pot of honey, or makaras (range) the deep, so the
shafts shot by the bows of the Rakhas, having (the energy of)
the thunder-bolt and endowed with (the velocity of) the
wind or thought, pierce Hari as if at the universal dissolu-
tion. And those mounted on cars (assailed him) with their
cars, and those mounted on the backs of elephants (assailed
him) with their elephants, and those riding horses (assailed
him) with their horses, and the foot-soldiers attacked him,
stationed in the sky ; and the foremost of Rakshasas resembl-
ing mountains, by means of darts, rishtis and tomaras
suspended the respiration of Hari even as the prdnaydma*
doth that of a twice-born one. On being sore tried by the
night-rangers, like the great Ocean by the fishes (residing in
it), that invincible one, taking his Sdrnga, showered shafts
among the Rakshasas. And with sharpened arrows resembl-
ing the thunder, and endowed with the velocity of the wind,
shot from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch, Vishnu cut off
(Rakshasas) by hundreds and by thousands. And dashing
away (the Rakshasa ranks) with his arrowy shower, even as
the wind aroused dasheth away a downpour, that best of
male beings blew his mighty conch— Panchajanya. And

* The practice of regulating respiration and finally suspending the same.
This is practised by the Yogis of India, who attribute wonderful virtues to
it.— T.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1575

winded by Hari with his utmost might, that water-sprung king
of conchs, endowed with terrific blares, roared, as if afflicting
the three worlds. And the sounds of that king of conchs struck
terror into the R&kshasas, even as in a mighty forest a lion
(strikes terror into the hearts of) elephants in rut. And
thereat the horses could not keep their ground, and the
elephants were reft of their temporal flow, and shorn of their
virtue at the roars of the conch, heroes began to topple down
from their cars. And dight with dainty feathered parts having
heads, the shafts discharged from the Sdrnga, resembling
thunder-bolts, riving those Rakshas, entered the earth. And
in that conflict, pierced by the arrows discharged from
NSrSyana's arm, the R&kshasas began to drop to the ground
like mountains struck with the thunder-bolt. And the wounds
on the persons of the foes inflicted by the discus of Vishnu
discharge blood in streams, like mountains discharging
streams of red chalk. And the sounds of that king of
conchs, as well as those of the Sdrnga, combined with the
roars emitted by Vishnu himself, swallowed up the roars of
the R&kshasas. And Hari by means of his shafts cut off their
necks, and arrows, and standards, and bows, and cars,
and ensigns, and quivers. And like fierce rays streaming
about from the sun, like torrents dashing from the ocean, like
elephants coming adown a mountain, or like showers descend-
ing from clouds, the shafts shot by NdrSyana pursue (the
foes) by hundreds and by thousands. And even as an
elephant pursueth a tiger, a tiger a wolf, a wolf a dog, a dog
a cat, a cat a snake, or a snake a rat, so the mighty Vishnu
pursueth the R&kshasa host ; and others, (struck down by
him), measure their lengths on the ground. Then, having des-
patched thousands of R&kshasas, the destroyer of Madhu blew
his water-sprung (conch), even as the sovereign of the celes-
tials filleth clouds (with rain). And agitated by the arrows of
Niriyana, with their senses bewildered by the blares of the
conch, the broken RAkshasa forces made for Lanka. And on


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1576 RAMAYANA.

the Rakshasa army having been broken in consequence of the
beating it got at the hands of Narayana, Sumali with showers
of shafts resisted Hari in the encounter ; and as a mist
envelopes the Sun, he envoloped him (with his arrows).
Thereat, the Rashasas again summoned up their fortitude.
And fired with rage, that Rakshasa, inflated with insolence
on account of his strength, setting up a tremendous roar,
darted at his antagonist in the conflict, thereby seeming to
revive the Rakshasas. And as an elephant flourishes its
trunk, that Rakshasa, lifting up his arm adorned with
ornaments, began to roar from rapture, like a mass of clouds
lighted up with lightning. And (Vishnu) cut off the head
flaming with ear-rings of the charioteer of the shouting
Sumali ; and thereat the horses of that Rakshasa aimlessly
strayed hither and thither. And with his bewildered steeds
Sumali wanders like a person deprived of patience, whose
senses are under a hallucination. And on Sumali's car being
drawn at random by his steeds, Mali, taking his bow and
equipped therewith, darted at Vishnu's car and assailed that
mighty-armed one as he was descending on the field of fight.
And like birds entering the Krauncha,* the arrows discharged
from Mali's bow, graced w r ith gold, hit Hari and entered
(into his body). And thereat, as a person holding his senses
under subjection is not thrown out of his mental balance,
Vishnu, assailed in that encounter with thousands of arrows
shot by Mali, was not disturbed ever so little. And then that
creator of all beings, the reverend Gadadhara,t twanging his
bow-string, showered vollies of shafts on Mali. And getting
at Mali's body, the arrows furnished with the luminousness of
lightning, drink his blood, like unto serpents drinking nectar.
And baffling Mali, the holder of the conch, discus, and mace,
brought down Mali's crown, standard, bow and steeds. And
then that foremost of night-rangers, on being deprived of his

* The mountain so named.

\ Lit. the holder of the mace, a name of Vishnu.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTaRAKANDAM. 1577

car, sprang forward, mace in hand, even as a lion bounds up
from the brow of a hillock. And he with his mace smote at
the forehead of that lord of birds, even as the Destroyer had
smitten Icana,* or as Indra smiteth a mountain with his
thunder-bolt. On being severely struck by Mali with his
'mace, Garura, writhing in torments, moved the god away
from the field of battle. On the god having been removed
from the field by Mali as well as Garura, there arose a mighty
din of Rakshas roaring (in chorus). And hearing the
cheers of the Rakshas, Indra's younger brother, the reverend
Hari, sitting awry on that lord of birds, albeit moved off from
the scene of conflict, waxing enraged, from a desire of slaying
(Mali) hurled his disc at him. And thereat the disc, possessed
of the splendour of the solar disc, and resembling the wheelf
itself of Kala, flooding all the heavens with radiance, brought
down Mali's head to the ground. And that head of the lord
of Rakshasas, terrific to behold, on being cut off (by Vishnu),
vomitting blood, fell down before (the Rakshasas), as formerly
Rahu's head had fallen. And then the deities experiencing
excess of joy set up leonine cheers with might and main,
crying, — 'Excellent, O god/ Seeing Mali slain, Sumali and
Malyavan, burning in grief, fled precipitately towards
Lanka along with their forces. And Garura, being cheered,
turned round, and growing enraged, as before drove the
Rakshasas with the wind of his wings. And (some) with their
lotus-faces cut by the discus, (some) with their chests crushed
with the mace, (some) with their necks torn off by the plough,
(some) with their heads riven by the club, and some hewn
by the sword, and others pierced by arrows, the Rakshasas
began to drop fast from the sky into the waters of the ocean.

* There took place an encounter between Rudra and Yama in the Sweta
forest, for the protection of Markandeya and a certain king. In this battle,
Yama had smitten Rudra. This is narrated in the Puranas. — T.

t The wheel of Kala or Time, representing the Reaper consists, remarks
Ramanuja, of days, months, years, decades, centuries, ceons, etc. — T.

198


Digitized by VjOOQIC


] 5 73 RAMaYANA.

And as the thunder-bolt with lightning (riveth) a mighty
mass of clouds, NSrSyana by means of the thunder-bolts of
his arrows discharged from his bow, rived the night-rangers
with their hair dishevelled and streaming (in the wind). And
the forces having their umbrellas rent, their arms falling off,
their goodly garments scattered, their entrails coming out and
their eyes rolling, — became incapable of distinguishing their
own party from that of the foe. And even like (the roars and
the vehemence) displayed by elephants on being attacked
by lions, the roars and the vehemence of the night-rangers
and their elephants, sore assailed by the Primaeval Lion,"*
were equal. And driven by Hari's networks of arrows, and
discharging (all the while) their own showers of shafts, those
night-rangers resembling the clouds of doom, are driven like
the veritable clouds of the universal dissolution drifted by
the wind. And hewn in twain with swords, the foremost
Rakshasas fell like unto hills (toppling headlong). And the
£arth was seen to be (covered) with night-rangers resembling
dark clouds, adorned with jewelled necklaces and ear-rings,
— falling down, — as if covered with dark mountains dropping
down."


SECTION VI U.


**,


V_/N that host being sore pressed at its back by Padma-
n&bha,t Malyavan turned back even as the ocean doth on meet-
ing with its shore. And with his eyes reddened, that night-
ranger waxing wroth, shaking his head, addressed that prime

* • Vishnu as a man-lion had formerly taken the conceit out of Hiranya-
kacipu — the Asufa king — and slain him, to rid his devotee — Prahlada — of his
mortal foe in the form of a father. — T".

f Lit. the lotus-navel ed — a name of Vishnu.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTA R A KA NDAM. 1579

of male persons — Padmanabha, — saying, — ( Narayana, thou
art ignorant of the time-honored morality of Kshatriyas ; and
therefore like a base wight thou slayest us, desisting from
fight and exercised with fear. O lord of the celestials, he
that commits the crime of slaying one that desists from
fight, cannot go to the celestial regions as the fruit of
meritorious acts. If thou art bent upon battle, O holder of
the conch, the discus and the mace, taking up my post (here),
1 shall see (thy strength). Do thou show (me) the same/
Seeing Malyavan resembling the mountain, Malyavan, stay,
the powerful younger brother of the sovereign of the celestials
spoke unto him,~ r I have removed the fear of the deities,
affrighted at you, by promising that I will make root and
branch work with the Rakshasas ; and that same promise I
am now fulfilling. I should always lay down my life for
serving the celestials ; and you I will slay even if ye should
go to the nethermost regions. 1 As that god of gods having
eyes resembling red lotuses was speaking thus, the lord of
Rakshasas in high wrath pierced his breast with a dart. And
hurled by the hand of Malyavan, the dart resonant with bells,
appeared graceful on Hari's breast like lightning embosomed
in clouds. Thereat drawing out the same dart, that one
dear unto the Wielder of the Dart,* having eyes resembling
red lotuses, aiming at Malyavan, hurled it at him. Thereat
the dart discharged by the hand of Govinda like unto the Dart
discharged by the hand of Skanda,rushing towards the Rakshasa
like a meteor coursing towards the Anjana mountain,
descended on the spacious chest of the lord of Rakshasas
decked with the weight of a chain, even as the thunder-clap
bursts at the summit of a mountain. And on having his mail
rent, Malyavan was utterly deprived of his senses ; but
(anon) reposing for a while, he again stood like a moveless
hill. Then taking up a javelin made of black iron girt with
many a thorn, he furiously smote that deity on the chest.

* A name of K&rtikeya — the cclcMial gencidltaijirao.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


15 S° RAMAYANA.

And that night-ranger delighting in battle, dealing a box at
Vasava's younger brother, moved away to a distance measur-
ing a bow's length. And now there arose a mighty tumult
in the sky of 'Excellent V 'Excellent !' And having struck
Vishnu, the Rakshasa also hit Garura. Thereat Vinata's son,
growing enraged, drove the Rakshasas away with the wind
of his wings, even as a lusty wind bloweth about sere leaves.
And seeing his elder brother driven by the wind produced
by the wing's of that bird, Sumali along with his forces, made
for Lank§. And pushed off by the violence of the wind of
(Garura's) wings, the Rakshasa Malyavan also, joined by
his own forces, departed for Lanka, covered with shame.
Thus, O Rama, O lotus-eyed one, (the Rakshasas) had
innumerable warriors beaten down and their foremost leaders
slain. And albeit inflated with pride, they, incapable of
coping with Vishnu, leaving Lanka, went to the nether
regions with their wives for dwelling there. O best of the
Raghus, these Rakshasas of celebrated prowess, related to
the race of Salakantankata, remained under the leadership
of the Rakshasa Sumali. All those exalted Rakshasas going
under the name of Paulastya that had been headed by
Sumali, Malyavan and Mali, were stronger than Ravana. No
other than the god Narayana, holding the conch, the discus
and the mace, could slay those Rakshasas — foes to the
celestials and thorns in the side of the deities. And thou art
that eternal god — the four -armed Narayana, — the lord,undeteri-
orating and unconquerable, sprung to exterminate Rakshasas.
The creator of beings— that one ever cherishing those seek-
ing his refuge — appeareth at times to compass the destruction
of marauders, bringing the religion of people to rack and
ruin.* Thus, O lord of men, to-day I have truly related unto

* This tallies wonderfully with the corresponding view given in the BiWe.
Great men appear in the fulness of time to bring about reforms in
religion, when, as was the case before the birth of Christ, men have wandered
^\ farthest from the true path.— T


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1581

thee at length the origin of the R&kshasas. Again, O foremost
of the Raghus, do thou understand the matchless birth and
potency of Ravana and his sons related in detail. And that
powerful Rakshasa, Sumali, afflicted with the fear of Vishnu,
along with his sons and grand-sons for a long time ranged the
nether regions, and the lord of riches resided in Lanka."


3 E CTIO N IX.


" A

jCXFTER a while the Rakshasa named Sumali, coming up

from the nether regions, began to range all over the earth.
And resembling dark clouds, that lord of R&kshasas decked
in car-rings of burnished gold, taking his daughter like unto
Sree herself without her lotus, and wandering over the earth,
saw the lord of riches journeying in his Pushpaka, going to
see his sire — that lord, the son of Pulastya. And seeing
that one resembling an immortal and like unto fire, journey-
ing on, (Sumali) struck with amazement, entered the nether
regions from the earth. And that mighty-minded one
reflected thus, — 'By adopting what measure may the welfare
of the R&kshasas be brought about, and how can we increase
(in power) ?' And that great-minded lord of Rakshasas,
resembling dark clouds, decked in burnished ear-rings of
gold, then began to reflect. And then the Raksha addressed
his daughter, named Kaikasi, saying, — 'O daughter, the time
hath come when I should give thee away. Thy youth is about
to be passed. (Kept back) by the fear of refusal, no suiter
hath sought thee (up to this time). But desirous of acquiring
religious merit, we are striving our best in thy interests. My
daughter, thou art furnished with every perfection like unto
Sree herself. The being father to a daughter is misery to


Digitized by VjOOQIC


>


1582 RAM AY AN A,

every one that seeketh honor. O daughter, one doth not
know who shall ask for one's daughter. Wherever may a
daughter be conferred, a daughter stayeth, placing in
uncertainty the three races* to which she is related. Do thou,
my daughter, seek for thy husband that best and foremost of
ascetics sprung in the line of Prajapati — Pulastya's son, —
Vicrava, and of thyself accept him (for thy lord). And then,
O daughter, even as is this lord of riches, so thou wilt, without
doubt, have sons resembling the Sun himself in energy.' Hear-
ing that speech of his, the daughter for the sake of the dignity
of her sire, going to where Vicrava was practising penances,
stood there. In the meanwhile,0 R3ma,that twice-born one —
Pulastya's son — was performing the Agnihotra, like the fourth
Fire itself. And without minding that terrific time, (Kaikasi),
having regard to the dignity of her sire, coming up before
him, stood (there) hanging her head down towards his feet
and throwing up the earth with her great foe. And seeing
that one of shapely hips, having a face fair as the full Moon,
(that exceedingly high-minded ascetic) flaming in energy
accosted her thus, — 'O gentle on, whose daughter art thou ?
And whence dost thou come hither ? And what is thy
errand ? And for whom (dost thou come) ? O beauteous
(damsel), truly tell me this.' Thus addressed, the girl,
with joined hands, said, — 'O ascetic, thou art competent to
get at my intent by virtue of thy own power. Yet, O
Brahmarshi, know me as having come here at the mandate of
my sire. My name is Kaikasi. The rest do thou read
thyself.' And thereupon, the ascetic, entering into contem-
plation, said these words, — 'O gentle lady, I have learnt the
purpose that is in thy heart. O thou having the gait of a
mad elephant, there reigns a powerful desire in thee for
having offspring. Inasmuch as thou hast come to me at this
fierce hour, hearken, thou amiable one, as to the kind of
offspring that thou shalt bring forth. Thou shalt, O thou of
* The races respectively of her father, mother and husband.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKAXDAM. 15S3

graceful hips, bring forth terrible and grim-visaged Rakshasas

delighting in frightful friends, and of cruel deeds.' Hearing

his speech, she, bowing down, said, — '() reverend (ascetic),

such sons of terrific ways seek 1 not from thee that followcst

the Veda. Therefore it behoveth thee to favor me.' On

being thus besought by the girl, Vicrava — best of ascetics—

again addressed Kaikasi, like the full Moon addressing

Rohini,* — *0 fair-faced one, the son that thou bringest forth

last, shall be like unto my line, — he shall, without doubt — be

righteous-souled.' Having been thus accosted, the girl, O

Rama, after a length of time brought forth a very terrible and

hideous offspring having the form of a Raksha, — having ten

necks, furnished with large teeth, and resembling a heap of

collyrium, with coppery lips, twenty arms, huge faces, and

flaming hair. On his having been born, jackals with flaming

mouths and other ferocious beasts began to gyrate on the

left. And that god showered down blood ; and the clouds

uttered forth harsh sounds. And the Sun was deprived of his

splendour ; and meteors began to dart to the earth. And the

earth shook ; and the wind swept away violently. And that

lord of streams — the ocean, which was calm before, became

agitated. And his sire resembling his grand-father named

him, (saying),— 'As this one hath been born with ten necks,

he shall be called Ten-necked.' After him was born

Kumbhakarna endowed with prodigious strength, than whose

proportions there are none other's on earth. Then was born

she that, having a frightful visage, gocth under the name of

Surpanakha ; the righteous Bibhishana is the youngest son of

Kaikasi. On that one endowed with great strength having

been born, blossoms were showered down from heaven ; and

celestial kettle-drums were sounded in the heavenly regions.

And then there arose the sounds of 'Excellent !' 'Excellent !'

And in that extensive forest those exceedingly energetic ones

— Kumbhakarna and the Ten-necked one grew up, — and

* Hesperus.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


t 5 84 RAMAYANA.

became the sources of anxiety to people. And Kumbhakarna,
maddened to the height, devouring mighty saints devoted to
religion, constantly ranged the triune world in a dissatisfied
spirit. But the righteous Bibhishana, ever intent on piety,
dwelt there, studying the Veda, restraining his fare, and
controlling his senses. And it came to pass that after a
length of time the god, Vaicravana — lord of riches — came to
see his sire, mounted on Pushpaka. Seeing him, the
Rakshasi — Kaikasi — flaming up in energy, coming to the
Ten-necked one, represented to him, — 'O son, behold thy
brother, Vaicravana, enfolded in effulgence ; and, albeit of
equal fraternity, behold thee in this plight ! Therefore, O
Ten-necked one, O thou of measureless prowess, do thou so
strive that thou also, my son, may be like Vaicravana himself. 1
Hearing that speech of his mother, the powerful Ten-necked
one was wrought up with exceeding great ill-will,and he vowed
then, — 'I truly promise unto thee that I will be equal to my
brother (in energy), or excell him in it. Therefore do thou
cast off this sorrow that is in thy heart/ And influenced by
that passion, the Ten-necked one with his younger brother
began to perform rigid acts, with his mind fixed on asceticism.
*I must through austerities have my wish/ thus fixed and
resolved, he for compassing his end, came to the sacred
asylum of Gokarna. And there the Rakshasa of unrivalled
prowess along with his younger brother carried on austerities
and thus gratified that lord — the great-father. And being
gratified (with him), he conferred on him boons bringing on
victory."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1585


SECTION X.


JLhen R£ma spoke unto the ascetic, — "0 Brahmana, how
did those exceedingly mighty brothers carry on austerities
in that forest; and what kind of penances was theirs?"
Thereat there Agastya said unto Rama of a complacent
mind, — "The brothers severally observed the morality proper
to each. And Kumbhakarna, putting forth his best energies,
constantly abode in the path of righteousness. And remain-
ing in the midst of five fires in summer,he practised austerities,
and in the rainy season, soaked in water (poured down) by
clouds, he sat in .the heroic attitude.* And in winter he always
remained in the water. Thus passed away ten thousand
years of that one putting forth exertions in behalf of religion,
and established in the path of honesty. And the virtuous
Bibhishana, ever intent on virtue and pure of spirit, remained
standing on one leg for five thousand years. And when he
had completed (his term* of restriction), swarms of Apsar§s
danced, and blossoms showered, and the deities hymned
(him). And for five thousand years, he adored the Sun, and
with his mind concentrated in the study of the Veda, remained
with his head and hands raised up. In this wise Bibhishana
like a deity in Nandana passed away ten thousand years,
observing restrictions. And the Ten-necked one passed ten
thousand years without fare. On a thousand years being
complete, he offered his own head as a sacrifice to Fire. In
this way he passed away nine thousand years ; and nine of
his heads entered into Fire. And as in the tenth year he
intended to strike off his tenth head, the Great-father present-
ed himself at that place. And well-pleased, the Great-father
came there along with the celestials. ( Ten-necked one,'

* Hindu Yogis practise various attitudes, which are favorable to the
regulation of respiration. — T,

199


i

Digitized by VjOOQIC


1586 RAMA YANA.

said (the Great-father), 'I am well-pleased with thee. Do thou,
O thou cognizant of righteousness, at once ask for the boon
that thou wishest to have. What wish of thine shall I realize ?
Thy toil must not go for nothing. 1 Thereat, the Ten-necked
one, bowing down his head unto the deity,said with a delighted
heart, — his words faltering with ecstacy, — 'O Reverend one,
creatures have no other fear than (that of) death ; and enemy
there is none that is like unto death. Therefore immortality
is even what I crave for.' Thus accosted, Brahma spoke unto
the Ten-necked one, — 'Thou canst not be immortal. Do thou
therefore ask of me some other boon.' Thus addressed by the
creator, Brahma, the Ten-necked one, O Rama, standing
before him with joined hands, said, — 'O lord of creatures, I
would, O eternal one, be incapable of being slain by birds and
serpents, Yakshas, Daityas, Danavas and Rakshasas, and the
deities ; for, O thou that art worshipped by the immortals,
anxiety I have none from any other beings. Indeed, I deem
as straw creatures such as men etc! Thus accosted by the
Raksha — the Ten-necked one— that righteous-souled one, the
Great-father, along with the celestials, said, — «0 foremost of
Rakshasas, what thou sayest shalj come to pass.' Having,
O Rama, said this unto the Ten-necked one, the Great-
father (again spoke), — 'Hear ! I, having been gratified, will
confer on thee a fresh boon. O Rakshasa, O sinless one,
those heads of thine which have been offered as sacrifices and
which have sunk into the fire, shall again be thine. And,
O placid one, I shall also confer on thee another boon difficult
of being obtained, — The form that thou shalt wish to wear,
shall instantly be thine.' As soon as the Ten-necked Raksha
iiad spoken thus, the heads that had been offered as sacrifices
into the fire, rose up again. Having said this unto the
Ten-necked one, the Great-sire of all creatures addressed
Bibhishana, saying, — 'O Bibhishana, gratified have I been by
thee, whose intelligence is established in righteousness.
Therefore, my child, O righteous-souled one, O thou of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 15S7

excellent vows, ask for the boon that thou wouldst have. 1
Thereat the virtuous Bibhishana spoke with joined hands, —
'O reverend one, since the spiritual preceptor of all creatures
himself (is pleased) with me,— I (deem myself) as furnished
with every perfection, even as the Moon is environed with
rays. If thou wilt bestow on me a boon with pleasure, then,

thou of excellent vows, hear of the boon that I would have.
May my mind remain fast fixed on righteousness, even when

1 shall happen to fall into high peril ; and may I attain
Brahma knowledge without any instructions ! And may every
sense of mine sprung during the observance of particular
modes of life, be in unison with righteousness, — so that I may
practise the form of religion (in harmony with any particular
mode of life !) O exceedingly noble one, this best of boons,
is even what is sought for by me, for nothing in this world is
incapable of being attained by those attached to righteous-
ness.' Then the lord of creatures, being again delighted,
spoke unto Bibhishana, — 'As thou art virtuous, so all this shall
come to pass on thy behalf. And inasmuch as in spite of thy
having been born in the Rftkshasa race, thy thoughts, O
destroyer of enemies, do not originate in sin, I confer on the
immortality/ Having said this, he intended to grant boons
unto Kumbhalcarna. Thereat the celestials in a body
represented to the lord of creatures with joined hands, — 'On
Kumbhakarna thou shouldst. confer no boons, since thou
knowest in what manner doth this wicked-minded one frighten
people. And, O Brahman, seven Apsar&s in Nandana, ten
attendants of Mahendra, as well as sages and human beings,
have been devoured by this one. Considering what this RSkshasa
did when he had not obtained any boon whatever, if he obtain
one now 4 he shall eat up the three worlds. Do thou then,
O lord having immeasurable prowess, pretending to give him a
boon, give stupifaction (instead). Thereby the welfare of people
would be secured, and the honor of this one too shall be main-
tained/ Thus addressed by the celestials, BrahmS, the Lotus-


Digitized by VjiOOQlC


1588 RAMAYANA.

sprung one, pondered. The goddess, Saraswati, who was by his
side was also agitated with anxiety. And remaining by him,
Saraswati with joined hands observed, — *0 god, I have come
here. What work shall I accomplish V And the lord of
creatures, on having her, spake unto Saraswati, — *0 Vani !*
be thou the goddess of speech of this foremost of Rakshasas,t
favorable unto the deities. Having said, — 'So be it/ she
entered (within Kumbhakarna's throat) ; and Prajapati
said, — *0 Kumbhakarna, O mighty -armed one, do thou ask
for the boon that thou wouldst have. Hearing those words,
Kumbhakarna said, — 'O god of gods, my wish is that I may
sleep for a good many years/ Thereupon, saying, — 'So be it,'
Brahma along with the celestials went away ; and the goddess,
Saraswati, also again left the Rakshasa. And on Brahma
accompanied by the deities going to the celestial regions, he
was renounced by Saraswati, and then he regained his
consciousness. And then the wicked-minded Kumbhakarna
sorrowfully thought, — 'What is this speech that has to-day
come out from my lips ? Meseems I had then been stupified
by the deities that had come.' Having thus obtained the
boons,the brothers endowed with flaming energy, going to the
Sleshmataka wood, began to dwell there peacefully/'


• Lit. word, a designation of Saraswati.

t t. «. preside oyer Kumbhakarna's speech while asking for the boon,—
and let him, through thy power, ask for s*ch a gift as may turn out profitable
to the gods.— T.


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1589

SECTION XI.

JjEARNlNG that these night-rangers had obtained boons,
Sumali with his followers, casting off fear, rose up from the
nether regions. And wrought up with exceeding great wrath,
the counsellors of that Raksha — Maricha and Prahasta and
Virupaksha and Mahodara — also rose up. And accompanied
by his counsellors — foremost of Rakshasas — Sumali presenting
himself before the Ten-necked one and embracing him, ad-
dressed him,saying, — 'By good fortune it is,0 child,that through
thee we have had the wish that was in our heart, inasmuch
as thou hast received the best of boons from him that is the
foremost in all these three worlds. O mighty-armed one, that
great fear arising from Vishnu, from which leaving Lanka,
we had gone to the nethermost abysses, hath been removed.
Full many a time, brought down by that fear, we, on being
pursued (by our enemies), forsaking our homes, had gone to
the nether regions along with all those (related to us). This
Lanka was our city, inhabited by Rakshasas. (Now) it is
inhabited by thy brother— the intelligent lord of riches. O
mighty-armed one, if thou canst through self-control or charity
or by a sudden display of prowess, repossess thyself of the
same, a (great) thing shall have been achieved ; and then,
O child, thou shouldst, without doubt, be the lord of Lanka ;
and this Rakshasa race, which hath stmk,shaH have been raised
up by thee. And, O thou endowed with prodigious strength,
thou shalt be the lord of all/ Then the Ten-necked one
addressed his maternal grand-father, who was present, saying,
—'The lord of riches is our superior ; therefore thou ought
not to speak thus.' On that dignified Rakshasa-chief having
through moderation thus passed it by, that Raksha, under-
standing his intent, did not then say anything more. And
it came to pass that when R&vana had resided there for


Digitized by VjOOQIC


>


1590 RAMAYANA.

a time, Prahasta addressed him in a humble speech, — 'O
Ten-necked one, O long-armed (hero), it doth not behove thee
to speak thus. Fraternal feeling there is none among heroes.
Listen to t-iese words of mine ! There were two sisters—
Aditi and Diti. And mutually attached to each other, those
(damsels) endowed with surpassing beauty, became the wives
of that lord of creatures — Kacyapa. And Aditi brought forth
the gods,— who are the lords of the three worlds. And
Diti gave birth to the Daityas, — offspring of Kacyapa. O
thou cognizant of righteousness, formerly this earth, O hero,
having the ocean for her garment, and furnished with
mountains, belonged to the Daityas ; and (gradually) they
grew very powerful. And then this undeteriorating triune
world was brought under the dominion of the celestials. So
that thou art not the only one that would act inimically (to
thy brother) ; but this course had formerly been pursued by
both the celestials and the Asuras. Therefore do thou act in
conformity with my word.' Thus exhorted, the Ten-necked
one, with a delighted heart, reflecting for a moment, said,
'Very well/ And wrought up with delight, the Ten-necked
one endowed with prowess the very same day went to the
forest, accompanied by the night-rangers. And arriving at
Trikuta, that one skilled in speech— the night-ranger, R&vana
—sent Prahasta in the capacity of an ambassador : *0
Prahasta, hie thee ; and tell the foremost of Nairitas— the lord
of riches — in my words informed with mildness, — This city
of Lanka, O king, belongs to the high-souled RSkshasas ; but
thou hast established thyself in her. This, O sinless one, is
not proper for thee. Therefore, O thou of unrivalled prowess,
if thotf shouldst render the same (back), I shall be highly
gratified ; and righteousness also thou wilt maintain. — ' There-
upon, repairing to LankS, well-protected by i the giver of riches,
Prahasta communicated these words unto the highly generous
ruler of riches, — '0 thou of excellent vows, I have been sent
to thee by thy brother, the Ten-necked one. O long-armed


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1591

one, foremost of those versed in all branches of learning,
do thou listen to my words, O lord of wealth, — and what the
Ten-faced one says,— This beautiful city, O thou furnished
with expansive eyes, was formerly inhabited by Rakshasas of
dreadful prowess headed by Sum ali ; and for that reason, O
son of VicravS, he asks thee this. Do thou, my child, grant
this unto him, who is humbly begging for it.' — Hearing" these
words from Prahasta, the god Vaicravana, best of those
skilled in speech, answered the former, saying, — 'My father
had given this unto me, when it had been emptied of night-
rangers ; and, O Raksha, I have inhabited this place,
furnished with charity, honor, and other virtues. Go and tell
the Ten-necked one, as this city and this kingdom are mine,
so they are thine, O mighty-armed one. Do thou enjoy this
kingdom without a foe. May my kingdom and wealth never
undergo division when thou art present !' Having said this,
the lord of riches saught the side of his sire, — and, paying
him reverence, he communicated Ravana's wish unto -him :
'My father, this Ten-necked one had sent a messenger to' me,
saying, — Give (back) the city of Lanka, which had before
been inhabited by hosts of Rakshas. — Now, O thou of
excellent vows, do thou tell me what I should do. 1 Thus
accosted, that foremost of ascetics, the Brahmarshi — Vicrava
— spoke unto the lord of riches (standing) with joined hands,
— 'O son, listen to my words. The mighty-armed Ten-necked
one had (once) spoken in^my presence (to that effect). There-
at I greatly rebuked that wicked-minded one ; and I said
again and again in anger, — Thou disregardest (thy religion
and honor). Do thou listen to my words fraught with religion
and profit. Of a wicked heart, thou, with thy understanding
spoilt in consequence of the granting of the boon, canst
not distinguish between those deserving honor and those not ;
and, further, through my curse, thou hast come by a fierce
nature;. Therefore, O mighty-armed one, go to the mountain,.
Kailaca. Do thou, along with thy retainers, for the purpose


>


Digitized by VjOOQIC


159* -TllMAYANA.

of dwelling there, take up thy quarters (there). There floweth
the Mandakini — best of streams, with her water covered with
golden lotuses resembling suns, as also with lilies and blue
lotuses and various other fragrant flowers. And coming
there frequently, celestials with Gandharbas and Apsaras and
serpents and Kinnaras, ever sport there, O.lord of riches,
thou ought not to enter into hostilities with that Raksha.
Thou knowest how he hath obtained a great boon/ Thus
addressed, Vicravana, for the sake of his father's dignity, with
his wives and sons, with his counsellors and his vehicles
and wealth went (to Kailaca). And Prahasta, going (back),
joyfully spoke unto the high-souled Ten-necked one, (seated)
with his counsellors and his younger brothers, — The city
of Lanka is (now) empty. Renouncing her, the bestower of
riches hath gone out of her. (Now) entering into her, along
with us, do thou there maintain thine own religion. ' Thus
addressed by Prahasta, the redoubtable Ten-necked one
entered the city of Lanka with his brothers and forces and
followers. And then even as the lord of the celestials
ascends heaven, that foe of the immortals ascended
Lanka well- divided by highways, — which had been for-
saken by the lord of wealth. And having been installed,
that night-ranger — the Ten-faced one — dwelt in that city ; and
that city teemed with night-rangers resembling dark clouds.
And the lord of riches, for the sake of his father's dignity,
dwelt in a palace situated on the hill bright as moon-light,
graced with ornamented superb piles ; even as Purandara
dwells in Amaravati."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTT ARaKANDAM, i 5 . y3


SECTION XII.


X HE lord of Rakshasas was installed along with his
brothers. And then he thought of the giving away in
marriage of his RAkshasi sister. Then that Rakshasa
bestowed his sister, the FUkshasi SurpanakhS, on that lord of
the Danavas and king of the Kilakas — Vidyujjibha. And
having given her away, the Raksha was wandering about for
the purpose of hunting, when, O R*ma, he happened to sec
Diti's son, named Maya. And seeing him accompanied by
his daughter, that night-ranger — the Ten-necked one — asked
him, saying, — ' Who art thou that ( wanderest ) alone in
this forest devoid of men as well as deer ? And art thou
accompanied by this one having the eyes of a young deer ?'
Thereat Maya, O Rama, answered that night-ranger, when
he had asked this, — 'Listen. I shall tell thee all about this.
Thou mayst ere this have heard of an Apsar* named Hem9.
She like unto the Paulomi of Satakratu was bestowed on mc
by the gods. And I passed a thousand years, being devoted
to her. Thirteen years have passed away since she had gone
on a business of the celestials, as also the fourteenth year.
Then I through my extraordinary skill constructed a golden
palace, adorned with diamonds and Iapises. There I dwelt,
aggrieved and sorrowful on account of her separation. From
thence, taking my daughter, I have come to this wood. This,
() king, is my daughter, grown in her womb. I have come
hither with her, seeking for her husband. Verily being father
to a daughter is misery to every one that seeketh one's honour.
A daughter, forsooth, stayeth, ever placing the two lines*

9 The lines, namely, of her father and mother. The line of a mother at
distinct from thai of a father would be impossible under the present economy
of Hindu society inasmuch as, as soon as a girl is married, she by that
ceremony leaves her father's line and becomes incorporated with that of her

200


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1594 RAM AY AN A,

in uncertainty. And on this wife of mine I have also begat
two sons ; — the first is MiySvi and the next Dundubhi. Thus
have I truly related everything unto thee that hadst asked for it.
But, my child, how can I know thee now ? Who art thou ?'
Thus addressed, the Raksha humbly said, — 'Ten-necked by
name, I am the son of the ascetic, Paulastya, who was born
as the third son of BrahmS.' Thus accosted, O Rlma, by that
lord of R&kshasas, that DSnava and foremost of DSnavas,
Maya, learning that he was the son of the Maharshi,Paulastya,
there desired in his heart to give away his daughter to him.
And taking her hand with his own, Maya — lord of Daityas —
laughing, said unto that lord of the RSkshasas, — 'This
daughter of mine, O king, borne by the ApsarS, Hem*, this
my daughter named Mandodari do thou accept as thy wife.'
'Weir thereupon the Ten-necked answered him, O R&ma«
And lighting a fire, he took her hand. Maya, O R&ma, knew
the curse of the sage touching him.* Knowing this, he gave
away his daughter, having regard to the race of R&vana's
paternal grand-father ; and he also conferred on him an
exceedingly wonderful dart acquired through the most rigid
austerities, — by which he wounded Lakshmana. Having thus
wedded, that master — Lanka's lord — going (back) to that city,
married his brothers. And R&vana married the grand-daughter
of Virochana (on the maternal side) named Vajrajw2l&, to
Kumbhakarna. — And Bibhishana obtained for his wife the
righteous (damsel) named Sarami— daughter unto the high-
souled —Sailusha— sovereign of the Gandharvas. (Saram&)
was born on the shores of the lake, MSnasa. And while the
lake, M&nasa, was swollen with water on the arrival of the
rains, her mother, hearing her cries, affectionately said,—
Saromivarddhata — 'O lake, do not swell/ and from this
circumstance, her name became SaramSL Having thus

husband. But this seems to have been otherwise in ancient times. This opens
up an interesting social problem for the research of orientalists.— T.
* Respecting his birth.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTa RAKA NDA M. 1595

wedded, those RSkshasas, taking each his wife, set about
sporting there, like unto Gandharvas sporting in Nandana.
And then was born Mandodari's son — Meghantda. Him ye
call Indrajit. As soon as he was born, Rtvana's son, formerly
crying, emitted a tremendous roar resembling the rumbling
of clouds. And, O RSghava, Lank* was petrified at his
voice ; and (accordingly) his sire himself kept his name,
Meghantda. And, O Rama, remaining hidden like a fire by
fuel, R&vana's son, rejoicing (the bosoms of) his father and
mother, grew up in R&vana's elegant inner apartments.'


SECTION XIII.


'%


L ND once on a time it came to pass that, despatched by
the lord of creatures, Sleep in her (native) form powerfully
overpowered Kumbhakarna. And then Knmbhakarna spoke
unto his brother, who was seated,— 'O king, Sleep obstructs
me. Do thou, therefore, have my mansion made. 9 And,
thereupon, employed by the king, architects resembling
Vi^wikarmt constructed an edifice beautiful to behold,
measuring the smooth space of a Yojana diagonally and two in
area ; graceful to the view,and having no obstruction (to hide its
beauty). And the R&kshasa caused a splendid and delightful
pile to be built, adorned all round with pillars decked with
gold and crystal,— -having stairs composed of lapises,furnished
with networks of small bells, set with ivory gateways, and
containing daises dight with diamonds and crystal,— elegant
throughout, and enduring,— like unto a goodly cave of
Maru. And there, overcome with slumber, the wondrous
strong Kumbhakarna, lying down for many thousand years,
did not wake up. And while Kumbhakarna was overpowered


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1596 RAM AY AN A.

by sleep, Dacanana* without let began to destroy Devarshls,
Yakshas and Gandharbas, — and going to graceful gardens,
Nandana, etc, he devastated them (ruthlessly). And that
Rakshasa spread destruction, even as an elephant sporting
agitates a river, as the wind bringeth down trees, or as the
thunder-bolt riveth mountain-peaks. Hearing of the doings
of Dacagriva,t and remembering his conduct chiming in
with his race, the righteous lord of riches — Vaicravana —
showing his fraternal affection, despatched a messenger to
Lanka, seeking the welfare of Dacagriva. And going to the
city of Lanka, he presented himself before Bibhishana. And
having received him with honor, he asked him as to the cause
of his visit. And having enquired after the welfare of the king
as well as his kindred, Bibhishana, showed him unto DacSnana
seated in his court. And seeing the king there flaming in
his own energy, he (the messenger), saluting him (Ravana)
with the word — Jaya% — stood silent. And the envoy address-
ed Dacagriva seated on a superb couch, graced with a costly
coverlet, — r O king, I shall tell thee all that thy brother hath
said, worthy of both the character and race of your father and
mother, — Enough of wrong-doing. Now thou shouldst mend
thy ways. If thou canst, stay in righteousness. I have seen
Nandana ravaged ; and I have heard of the sages slain, and
O king, of the preparations the deities are making against
thee. I have been utterly disregarded by thee ; but even if a
boy should transgress, he should for all that be protected by
his friends. Self-restrained and controlling my senses, I,
adopting a terrific vow, had gone to the breast of the HimavSn
for practising righteousness. There I saw that lord of the gods
in company with Uma. There I happened to cast my left

* Henceforth we shall use this significant surname of Ravana, meaning
Ten-faced,

f Ten-necked.

% Jaya may mean (1) victory and (2) all the deities of the Hindu
pantheon. — T.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1597

eye on the goddess, for knowing, O mighty king, who she
was, — and not for any other reason. RudrSni was staying
then, wearing a surpassing form. Thereupon through the
divine energy of the goddess my left eye was burnt and
seemed to be covered with dust, and its lustre became tawny.
Then I, going to another spacious peak of the mountain,
became engaged in silently observing a mighty vow. On
my term of restraint having been complete, that lord of the
gods — Mahe£wara — with a gratified heart addressed me,
saying, — O righteous one, O thou of fair vows, I am weH-
pleased with this asceticism of thine. I also had observed
this vow ; and thou also, O lord of riches, hast done the same.
A third person there is none that practiseth such a vow.
This vow is hard to perform, and formerly it was I that
introduced it. Therefore, O mild one, O lord of riches, do
thou contract friendship with me. And thou hast conquered
me by thy penances. Therefore, O sinless one, be thou my
friend. And this thy left eye hath been burnt through the
energy of the goddess, and hath turned tawny in consequence
of having seen the grace of the goddess ; so thy name shall
ever be Ekikshipingali. — Then at Sankara's command I have
obtained the privilege of companionship (with him). Having
come here I have heard of thy evil designs. Do thou then
desist from this impious course, tending, to sully thy line.
The celestials along with the sages are pondering over the
means of compassing thy death. — ' Thus addressed, the Ten-
necked one, with his eyes reddened in wrath, rubbing his
hands and knashing his teeth, said,— 'O messenger, I have
leamt what thou hast uttered. Neither thou nor this brother
of mine by whom thou hast been despatched, (shall live) ;
nor doth the keeper of riches say what is for my good. And
the fool makes me hear the circumstance of his having made
friends with Mahefwara. I shall never forgive what thou
hast said. Up to this I had borne him, considering that he,
being my elder brother and as such my superior should not


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


1598 RAMAYANA.

be slain by me. But now hearing his (utterances), even this
is my resolve. Depending upon the might of my arms, I
shall conquer the three worlds. On his account solely I
shall on the instant despatch the four Lokapllas to the abode
of Death/ Having said this, Lanka's lord killed the emissary
with his sword and made him over to the wicked RSkshasas
for being eaten. Then, having performed Swastyayana,*
RSvana, ascending his car, went to where the lord of riches
was, bent on conquering the three worlds. ,,


n


SECTION XtV.


Ct 4

JCX.CCOMPANIED by his six counsellors — Mahodara and

Prahasta, Maricha, Suka and Sarana, and the heroic
Dhumr&ksha — eager for encounter — the graceful RSvana,
elated with his strength sallied out, as if consuming all
creatures with his wrath. And leaving behind cities and
streams and hills and woods and groves, he in a moment
came to the mountain — Kail§9a. And hearing that wicked-
minded lord of Rakshasas, breathing high spirits, had arrived
at the mount in company with his counsellors, the Yakshas
could not stay before that Raksha, — and knowing 'This one
is the king's brother/ — went to where the lord of riches was.
Going to him they in full related all about the doings of his
brother. And on being permitted by the bestower of
treasures, they went out for battle. And then, like unto the
agitation of the ocean, there took place a mighty ferment of
the forces of the Nairita king, as if making the piountain

* A religious ceremony performed for propitiating any deity or malign
star, and so warding off an impending disaster, or bringing luck to any under-
taking. This has obtained to this day in Hindu society. — T.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1599

tremble. And then there took place an encounter between

the Yakshas and the Rakshasas ; and therein the councillors

of the R&kshasa were smitten fiercely. And finding his forces

in that plight, Dafagriva set up full many a cheerful shout

and in wrath began to speak. Of the councillors of the

RAkshasa-chief, each coped with a thousand Yakshas. And \

then struck with maces and clubs and swords and darts and

tomaras, the Ten-necked one dived into (that deep) of a

host. And rendered inert and sore assailed, Da^nana was

deprived of his movements with vollies of weapons remembl-

ing torrents of rain. And albeit drenched with blood

streaming down in hundreds of torrents, he like a mountain

flooded with a downpour, being wounded with the weapons

of the Yakshas,— doth not betray any smart. And that high-

souled one, raising up his mace resembling the rod itself of

Time, entered into that army, despatching Yakshas to the

abode of Yama. And as a flaming fire burneth up an

extensive sward of grass stocked with dry fire-wood, he

began to consume that Yaksha army. And as the wind

scattereth clouds, the small remnant of Yaksha army was

scattered by the redoubtable councillors (of Rtvana) —

Mahodara, Suka, etc. And some were wounded, and (some)

broken down, and (some) measured their lengths on the

ground in the encounter, and other Yakshas deprived of

their arms in the field, being fatigued, sank down, embracing

each other, even as banks drop down, on being worn away by

water. And no room was left (in the sky) in consequence of

its being thronged by hosts of sages ; and warriors, wounded

and rushing for conflict, and (finally) ascending heaven.*

And finding the foremost Yakshas endowed with great

strength give way,the mighty-armed lord of riches despatched

(other) Yakshas. In the meantime, O Rftma, a Yaksha named

9 The idea of the author is : 'The welkin was thronged with sages as
well as warriors, who • we Hod the ranks of the sages stationed in the sky, by :
ascending heaven after having fallen in fight." — T.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ifoo A AM Ay ANA.

Sanyodhakantaka, accompanied by an extensive force and a
large number of vehicles,— on being despatched, rushed (on
the foe). And wounded in the conflict (by Sanyodhakantaka)
with his discus, as if by Vishnu hismself, M richa toppled
down to the ground from the mountain, like unto a planet
whose merit hath waned, And in a moment regaining his
consciousness and resting (for a while), that night-ranger
fought with the Yaksha ; and thereat, on being defeated, he*
fled. Then (Ravana) entered within the gate way (of the
palace), garnished with gold, and decked with lapises and
silver, And thereat, O king, the warder named Suryyabhanu
prevented the night-ranger — Dacagriva — as he was entering
And albeit prevented, the night-ranger entered in. And
when, O Rama, that Rakshasa was prevented, he did not stay
And then struck by that Yaksha with the gate- way uprooted,
he, discharging blood in streams, looked like a hill with
minerals running on it. And hit with that gate-way resembl-
ing a mountain-summit in splendour, that hero did not sustain
any injury, on account of the boon he had received from the
Self-sprung. And on being struck by the same gate-way,
the Yaksha ceased to be seen, his body having then been
consumed to ashes. And witnessing the prowess of the
Raksha, all began to flee ; and then they afflicted with affright,
fatigued, and with pale faces, entered into rivers and caves,
leaving their arms behind."

• The Yaksha, that i».


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1601

SECTION XV.


"s.


jeeing the foremost of the Yakshas by thousands
undergoing trepidation, the lord of riches spoke unto a mighty
Yaksha — Manichara, — 'O foremost of Yakshas, slay the wicked
Ravana, set on sin ; and do thou (thus) become the refuge of
those heroic Yakshas, who are carrying on the conflict/
Thus addressed, the mighty-armed and invincible M&nibhadra,
surrounded by four thousand Yakshas began the fight, And
attacking the Rakshasas with maces and clubs and bearded
darts, and with darts tomoras and bludgeons, the Yakshas
rushed at (their adversaries). And fast safely whirling about
like hawks, they fought fiercely. And (some) said, 'Well, give
me battle/ and (others), 'I don't want/ and (others, again),
'Let me have (fight)'. And then the celestials and the
Gandharvas and the sages studying the Vedas, beholding the
great encounter, were filled with mighty amazement. And a
thousand of the Yakshas were slain by Prahasta in the
conflict ; and another thousand of capable warriors were slain by
Mahodara. And O king, in the twinkling of an eye Maricha,
waxing wroth and eagar for encounter brought down two
thousand (of enemy's soldiers). Where is the candid-coursing
fight of the Yakshas and where the fight of the Rakshas by
help of the power of illusion; and therefore in that battle
the advantage was on the side of the Rakshasas. And Dhumra-
cksha, confronting Manibhadra in the mighty conflict hit him
at the chest with a bludgeon ; but he did not move thereat.
An™ then Manibhadra dealt the Rakshasa a blow with his mace ;
and thereat Dhumracksha smit at the head fell down- senseless
(on the ground). And seeing Dhumrackhsa wounded and
down, bathed in blood, the Ten-necked one rushed at Mani-
bhadra in the encounter. And then that foremost of Yakshas
hit Da^anana with three darts as he was rushing in wrath.
Ajid on being thus hit, (Ravana) struck at Manibhadra's

201


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i6o2 RAM AY AN A.

head ; and at that stroke his crown was depressed at one
side. And from that day forth that Yaksha remained with
his head hollow on one side. And on the high-souled Mani-
bhadra having been baffled, a great uproar, O king, rose in
that mountain. And then at a distance, the lord of riches,
mace in hand, accompanied by Sukra and Praushthapada
and Padma and Sanka saw (Ravana) in the field. And
seeing his brother in the encounter with his glory obscured
through the curse (he had ere this come by), the intelligent
(lord of Yakshas) spoke in words worthy of the line of his
grand-father, — ( As, O wicked-minded one, thou desistest
not, albeit forbidden by me, thou shalt, afterwards attain-
ing the fruit of this, and repairing to hell, know (the
fate that followeth thee). That perverse one, that through
ignorance having drunk poison, neglects to adopt proper
measures, knoweth the consequence of his act ultimately.
The gods have set their face against thee on account of
a certain misdeed of thine ; and having for this, been
reduced to this condition, thou dost not understand things.
He that dishonoreth his father and mother* and spiritual
preceptor, reapeth the fruit of his act on coming under the
sway of the sovereign of the dead. Having regard that
this body is uncertain, that foolish person, that doth not
acquire asceticism, dying goeth the way that he deserveth.
The mind of a perverse man doth not willingly incline
towards good ; and he reapeth as he soweth. In this
world people, making their own good fortune and beauty,
strength, sons, wealth and valor, gain these by virtue of
their pious acts. Being given to such iniquitous Vets,
thou wilt go to hell ; and thy designs being such, I w r ill not
hold parley with thee. Honest people should act carefully
in connection with the wicked/ — Thus reprimanded by him,
his (Ravana's) councillors, headed by Maricha, on being
struck, took to their heels. Then Dacagriva on being
* Unless he serveth his parents, his heart doth not incline to piety.


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1603

struck in the head with the mace by the lord of Yakshas,
did not move from his place. And then, O Rama, the Yaksha
and Rakshasa, smiting each other in mighty encounter,
did not get bewildered or experience fatigue. And then
the bestower of riches discharged a fiery weapon at him ;
and thereat the lord of Rakshasas resisted it with a Varuna
weapon. And then the Rakshasa king entered upon
Rakshasi-illusion ; and began to assume a thousand
shapes for compassing the destruction (of his adversary).
And the Ten-necked one (successively) assumed the shapes
of a tiger, a boar, a cloud, a hill, the ocean, a tree, a
Yaksha and a Daitya. Thus he wore full many forms and
he was not visible in his native shape. And then, O Rama,
seizing a mighty weapon the Ten-necked one, whirling
the same, brought that redoubtable mace down on the head
of the bestower of riches. Thus smitten by him, the
lord of wealth, baffled, toppled down to the earth covered
with blood like an agoka whose roots have been hewn
away. Thereat Padma and other Nidhi deities, sur-
rounding the granter of wealth,, raised him up and brought
him to the Nandana wood. Conquering the bestower of
wealth, the lord of Rakshasas, with a delighted heart, posses-
sed himself of his Pushpaka, the car, as a sign of victory ;
furnished with golden pillars, gateways set with lapises,
covered with networks of pearls, having trees yielding
the fruits of all seasons, endowed with the celerity of thought,
ranging everywhere at will, wearing forms at pleasure,
capable of coursing in the sky, with golden and jewelled
staffs, and daises of polished gold, — the vehicle of the gods —
undeteriorating, bringing delight to the mind and sight ;
wonderous exceedingly : painted with images designed to
fill the mind with reverence, — constructed by Brahma,
containing all objects of desire, charming and nonpariel
not cold and not yet hot, granting gratification in every
season, and graceful to the view. And ascendiug that


Digitized by VjOOQIC


>


i*04 RAM AY AN A.

(car) coursing at will, won by his prowess, that utterly
wicked one, out of swelling insolence, deemed himself master
of the three worlds. And having vanquished the deity
Vaicravana, he descended from KailSca. And having by
his energy obtained the victory, the powerful night-ranger
wearing a bright diadem and necklace, and seated on that
puperb car, — appeared radiant in his court like Fire himself,"


SECTION X.VI.

\J Rama, having, vanquished his brother, the lord of
riches, the king of Rakshasas went to the great wood of
reeds, where Mahasena was born. And the Ten-necked
one saw the great golden wood of reeds. Furnished with
networks of solar rays, and appearing like- a second Sun,
and ascending the mountain, he was surveying the heart
of the forest, when, O Rama, Pushpaka was (suddenly) de-
prived of its motion. And the lord of Rakshasas, could
not comprehend how the car which had been so made as to
course in accordance with the wish of the rider, could
have its course impeded ; and thereat he in company with
his councillors thought, Wherefore doth not this Pushpaka
course at my desire over this mountain ? Whose act is
this ?' Thereat Maricha — foremost of intelligent ones — said,
—That Pushpaka doth not course cannot, sire, be without
cause ; or it may be that in consequence of PushpakiJnot
having borne any other than the bestower of riches, it
hath ceased its course not having the lord of wealth for its
rider. 1 As they were speaking thus, that attendant of
Bhava, Nandi, terrific, of — yellow black hue, dwarfish,
L frightful, with his head shaven, having short arms, and stout,
^Ncpmmg up to them, said ( this). And the lordly Nandi,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1605

undaunted, addressed the sovereign of the Rakshasas,
saying : 'Desist thou O Ten-necked one ; Sankara sporteth
in the mountain ; and (nowj He is incapable of being
approached by every one — birds, serpents and Yakshas ;
gods, Gandharvas and Rakshas ?' Hearing Nandi's speech,
(Ravana), wrought up with wrath, his eyes coppery, and his
ear-rings shaking, leapt down from Pushpaka. And saying, 'who
is this Sankara ?' he came down to the base of the mount, and
beheld there Nandi stationed at the side of that deity, support-
ing himself on his flaming dart, resembling a second Sankara.
And seeing that one having the face of a monkey, the Rakshasa,
deriding him, burst out into laughter, and seemed as if a mass
of clouds were sending roars. Thereat, growing enraged, the
reverend Nandi — Sankara/ s other body — spoke unto that Ra-
ksha — The Ten-necked one — present there ; 'As O Da^anana,
deriding me for my monkey-form, thou hast indulged in a
laughter resembling the bursting of thunder, so monkeys endow-
ed with prowess, and possessed of my form and energy shall
be born for compassing the destruction, of thy race. And
armed with teeth and claws, and fierce and furnished with
the fleetness of thought, and mad for encounter, and bursting
with vigor, and resembling moving mountains. And being
born, they shall crush thy high pride and power along
with thy courtiers and sons. But, O night-ranger, I can
even now end thee quite ; yet I must not slay thee for thou
,hast ere this been slain by thine acts/ When that high-
souled god had spoken thus celestial kettle-drums sounded
and a blossomy shower rained from the sky. But without
hefting Nandi's speech, that highly powerful one — Da£an-
ana — coming to the mountan, said, — ' O Gopati, I will even
uproot this mountain, for whom Pushpaka was deprived of
its motion as I was journeying. It must be known by what
influence Bhavaswara sporteth here king-like. He doth not
know that an occasion of fear hath presented itself ?' Having
said this, O Rama, Ravana seizing the mountain with his*


Digitized by Vj.OOQ IC


1606 RAM AY AN A.

arms, lifted it up at once ; and then the mountain trem-
bled greatly. And in consequence of the mountain shaking
the attendants of the deity (dwelling in it) also shook. And
Parvati also trembled and embraced Mahecwara. And then,
O Rama, Mahadeva — foremost of the deities — even Hara,
as in sport pressed the mount with his great toe. And thereat
his arms, resembling blocks of stone felt the shock and
then there the counciilors of that Raksha were struck with
amaze. And the Raksha, from wrath and the pain felt in
his arms, set up a shout that shook the entire triune world.
And his councillors considered it as the concussion of the
thunder at the universal disruption. And then the celestials
with Indra at their head shook on their way; and the sea
was wild and the mountains shook. And Yakshas and
Vidyadharas and Siddhas asked, * What is this.' ( Do
thou propitiate Uma's lord — the blue-throated Mahadeva ; for,
O Dacanana, save him thy refuge see we none in this matter.
Bowing thyself down, do thou seek him as thy shelter.
Then the kind Sankara, on being gratified, will confer on thee
his favor.' Thus accosted by his councillors, the Ten-
faced one, bowing down to him having the bull for his
standard, began to hymn him with various soma hymns ; and
the Raksha passed away a good thousand years in
lamentations. And thereat that Lord Mahadeva, pleased,
set free the hands of Dacanana stationed at the top of the
mount, and O Rama, addressed him, saying, ( O Dacanana,
pleased am I with thee on account of thy hymns. And as
in consequeuce of thy arms having been hurt by the mountain,
thou hast uttered a terrific yell, which struck horror Vnto
the three worlds and put them shaking, therefore, O King,
thy name shall be Ravana. And deities and men and Yakshas
and others living on earth shall call thee Ravana — terror to
creatures. So, O Paulastya, which way thou wishest, and
permitted by me, O Lord of Rakshasas, go thou/ Thus
accosted by Sambhu, Lanka's lord said of himself. ' If thou


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1607

art pleased with me, grant me a boon, who ask thee for
it. I have already obtained a boon, bestowing on me im-
munity from death at the hands of gods, Gandharvas and
DSLnavas; and Rlkshasas and Guyhakas and Nagas; and
others also that are of more than oridinary strength. Man
count I not O god : They, I deem, are insignificant. I have
also, O destroyer of Tripura, received a long lease of life
from Brahma. Now I wish to pass the reira : nder of my
days in peace: and do thou grant me a weapon.' Thus ad-
dressed by him, (Rlvana,) Sankara gave him an exceedingly
effulgent sword, famed as Chandrahasa ; and the master of
spectres then also granted him peace for the rest of his life.
And making (the sword) over to him, Sambhu said, — 'Thou
must not disregard this. If disregarded, it will for certain
come (back) to me ?' Having thus received his name from
Mahe^wara, Rlvana, saluting Mahadeva, ascended Push-
paka. And then, O R&ma, Rjivana, began to go round
the earth. And opposed at places, by the heroic Kshatriyas en-
dowed with energy and irrepressible in fight, who refused
submission, he exterminated them along with their retainers;
while other men of wisdom, knowing the Raksha to be invin-
cible, said unto the Rakshasa elated with strength, — " We have
been conquered?''


SECTION XVI


jt\.nd then, O King, the mighty-armed Rlvana rang-
ing the earth, came to Himav&n and began to go round it. And
it came to pass that there he saw a damsel wearing a dark
deer-skin and matted locks, leading the life of a saint,
an 1 flaming like a celestial. And seeing the girl observing
high vows, endowed with beauty, he, with his soul overwhelmed


Digitized by VjOOQIC


,i6o8 RAM AY AN A,

with lust asked her, laughing. f How is it, O amiable one>
that thou actest thus contrary to thy youth ? This course
of life surely doth not befit thy beauty. Thy loveliness,
O timid one, is peerless, capable of maddening folk with
desire. It doth not behove thee to lead an ascetic mode of
life, — this would suit an old person. Whose daughter art
thou, O gentle lady ? And what is this (vow) that thoa
practisest ? And O fair faced wrench, who is thy husband ?
He who hath thee for his wife, is, O timorous one, hath
religious merit on earth. Tell all about this to me who ask for
it. For whom dost thou put thyself to trouble ?' Thus ac-
costed by Ravana, that illustrious girl, having asceticism for
wealth, having received him hospitably in due form, said,
'My sire is named Kucodwaja — a Brahmarshi of immeasurable
energy, son unto Vrihaspati, endowed with grace, and like
unto Vrihaspati himself in intelligence. And while that high*
sould one was engaged in the daily study of the Vedas, I
was born as his word-impregnated daughter, named Vedavati.
When the gods and the Gandharvas and the Yakshas, Raksha-
sas, and Pannagas, coming to my sire asked for me,
O foremost of Rakshasas, my father did not bestow me on
any one of them. And I shafl tell thee the reason thereof ;
listen, O long-armed one. My father's intended son-in-law
was even Vishnu — sovereign of the celestials, and the lord
of the triune world ; and my father would not bestow me on
any other. And hearing this, a certain king of the Daityas,
named Sumbhu — proud, of his prowess was wrought up with
wrath, and one night as my sire was on bed, that wicked one
slew him. Thereat my forlorn mother, of exalted righteous-
ssen embracing my father's body entered into fire. Then
wishing to realize my father's wish touching Narayana, I have
fixed my heart even upon him. Having made this promise, I
have deen carrying on rigid austerities. Thus, O foremost of
R ikshasas. I have related unto thee everything. Narayana
si my husband, and not any one else than that best of male


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1609

beings ; $md desirous of having N&r&yana I have adopted
severe restraints. I know thee, O king. Go thou, O son
of Paulastya. By virtue of my asceticism I know all that
takes place in these three regions.' Thereat descending from
the front of his car, R&vana, afflicted with the shafts of Kan-
darpa, again addressed that girl, observant of a mighty vow,
' O thou of shapely hips, in as much as such is thy intent,
thou must be very proud*. O thou having the eyes of a
young antelope, accumulation of religeous merit suits old
people. Thou, furnished with every perfection, should not
talk thus. Thou art the paragon in these three worlds. Thy
youth waxeth away. I am the lord of Lanka, O gentle lady,
known as Da^agriva* Be thou my wife, and enjoy pleasures
according to thy desire. Who is he whom thou callest Vishnu ?
O mild one, neither in prowess, nor in asceticism, nor in en-
joyment, nor in strength, is he my equal, whom, O damsel,
thou seekest.' Thus accosted, Vedavati said unto the
night-ranger 'Do not say so* in respect of Vishnu, lord
of this triune sphere, bowed down unto by all creatures.
Save and except thee alone, who, that is intellegent, crieth
down (NirSLyana), O King of Rlkshasas.' Thus addressed
there by Vedavati, the night-ranger seized the girl by the
hair. Thereat Vedavati, wroth, cut off her hair with her
hand transformed into a sword. And then, flaming
up in ire and as if consuming the night-ranger, she, pre-
paring a funeral pyre, hastened to make away with herself.
"Thou abject, having been outraged by thee I wish not to
live. Therefore, O Raksha, I will enter into fire in thy very
pre* nee. And as I have in this world been dishonored
by thee thou art nefarious. I shall .again be born to com-
pass thy destruction. It lieth not in a female to slay
a male intent on sin ; and if I utter a curse, it shall cost my
asceticism. But if I have done anything, given away any
thing, offered obtations unto the fire, then I shall be the
chaste daughter of some virtous person, albeit unborn of
202


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i6io RAM AY AN A.

any female vessel.' Having delevered herseif thus, she
entered into the flaming fire ; and thereat a celestial shower
of blossoms rained all around from heaven. O Lord, this
is she that hath been born as the daughter of king Janaka, —
thy wife, O mighty-armed one. Thou arttbe eternal Vishnu.
The enemy, endowed with the splendour of a hill, formerly
that had been slain through the wrath (of Vedavati), hath
now been slain by her, by help of thine superhuman prowess.
And this one of eminent righteousnesss would again spring
up on earth like a flame from a field furrowed by the
plough. This one named Vedavati was born in the Krita age ;
and in the TreUi age, for compassing the destruction of that
Raksha, she was born in the Maithila line of the high-souled
Janaka."


SECTION XVIIf.


W hen Vedavati had entered into fire, R&vana, as-
cending Pushpaka, began to range the earth. And
coming to U^iraviga, RSvana saw a king (named)
Marutta, sacrificing along with the deities. And a righ-
teous Brahmarshi named Samvartta, the very brother of
Vrihashpati, officiated at the sacrifice accompanied by the
deities. And seeing that Raksha invincible by reason^of
the boon he had received, the deities, apprehensive of
being worsted by him, assumed the forms of beasts. And
Indra became a peacock and the king of righteousness,
a crow, and the bestower of riches a lizard, and Varuna
a swan ; and, O slayer of foes, others also became other
beasts. And then Rivana entered into that sacrifice


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 161 1

like an unclean dog. And then coming up to the king,
Ravana — lord of Rakshasas — said : 'Give me battle, or
say, — / am defeated.' Whereat king Marutta asked,
him — Who art thou' ? And Ravana laughing in con-
tempt said, — 'O king, I am delighted, that lacking curio-
sity, thou dost not dishonour Ravana, younger brother
unto the bestower of riches. What other man is there
in these three regions that knoweth not the might of
me, who, conquering my brother, has got possession of
this car.' Thereat Marutta spoke unto Ravana, saying, —
'Blessed forsooth art thou, by whom thy elder brother
hath been • vanquished in fight; and a person so praise-
worthy there is not in the three worlds. An act, that is
divorced from righteousness and that is reprehended by
people, can never be praiseworthy. Having committed
a foul act, plumest thou upon thy having vanquished thy
brother ? An-d practising what piety hadst thou a-fortune
received the boon ? I had never before heard the like of
what thou sayest. But O perverse one, stay now. Living
thou shalt not back. To-day with my sharpened shafts
shall I despatch thee to the abode of Yama.' Then taking
up his bow and arrows, that king of men went out for
encounter ; but Samavartta stood in the way. And that
great sage said unto Marutta words informed with affection
'If thou hear my speech, thou shouldst not fight. If this
Mahecwara-sacrifice should remain incomplete, it wil
burn up thy dynasty. Where is the fight of one initiated
in a^sacrifice ? And where is the passion of one ini-
tiated in a sacrifice ? And victory is ever uncertain ;
and the Rikshasa is difficult to vanquish. And
thereupon, the lord of Earth — Marutta — desisted in con-
sonance with the instructions of his spiritual preceptor ; and
composed addressed himself to completing the sacrifice,
giving up his bow with the arrow set. And thereat consider-
ing him as defeated, Suka proclaimed this all round; and


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ifri2 RAM AY ANA.

from delight cried aloud, 'Victory unto Ravana !' And then
devouring the Maharshis that were present at the place of
sacrifice, Ravana, satiated with their blood, again went to
the earth. On Ravana having departed, the deities, inhabiting
the etherial regions — Indra etc. — assuming their proper
forms, addressed those creatures. And from joy Indra spoke
unto the purple-plumed peacock, — 'Pleased am I with thee
thou righteous one. No fear shall spring to thee from
serpents ; and thy plumage shall be furnished with an hundred
eyes. And when I shall shower, thou shalt be filled with glee
as a token of my satisfaction with thee.' Thus did Indra-—
chief of celestials, confer a boon on the peacock. Formerly,
O king, the peacock's wings had one unvaried blue. Having
received the booh, the peacock departed. Then O Rama,
the king of righteousness said unto the crow, seated in front
of the sacrificial apartment 'O bird, I am well pleased with
thee. Listen to my words as I utter them. As I have
been pleased with thee, thou shalt without doubt, enjoy
immunity from the various ailments to which the birds
are subject. And O bird, from my curse fear of death
shall not approach thee ; and thou shalt exist so long
as people do not slay thee. And those men residing in my
dominion, being smitten with hunger, shall be refreshed
along with thy relations, when thou hast eaten and
been refreshed.' Then Varuna addressed that lord of birds
the swan ranging the waters of the GangSL,*—' Listen to my
words fraught with joy, thy hue shall be charming, mild,
and like unto the lunar disc ; and it shall be beautiful, Tremb-
ling the sheen of spotless foam. And approaching my
person thou shalt ever be beautiful to behold ; and thou
shalt, as a sign of my gratification, attian unparalleled
complacence.' Formerly, O Rama, swans had not a hue
of one unvaried whiteness. Their wings ended in, blue,
and their breasts wore the spotless hue of tender grass. And
then Vai^ravana addressed the chameleon as it was stationed


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1613

at the mountain : ' Thy hue shall be gold-gleaming. Pleased
am I with thee. Thy undeteriorating head shall be ever
gold-hued. And this golden hue of thine shall proceed from
my gratification ?' Having thus conferred boons on them at
that festal place, the celestials, along with the king, ( on
the sacrifice ) having ended, went to their abode.


8ECTION XIX.


XXaving vanquished Marutta, that lord of R&kshasas—
the Ten-faced one— eager for encounter, began to range the
capitals of the foremost monarchs (of the earth). And
coming to the most powerful crowned heads ( in the world )
resembling Mahendra and Varuna, the Rlkshasa king said :
' Give me battle ; or declare — we have been defeated. This
I am resolved upon. Otherewise there is no escape for you V
Thereat those wise kings, possessed of great strength, and ever
abiding by righteousness, being frightened ( at Rlvana's in*
timidation ), took counsel of each other. And knowing the
superior strength of the foe, they said, — 'We have been defeated. 1
Dushkanta, O child, and Suratha, and G&dhi, and Gaya
Md king Pururavl — all these kings said : ' We have been
crefeated.' And then R&vana — sovereign of the R&kshasas—
presented himself before AyodhyH, governed by Anaranya, like
Amar&vati ruled by Sakra. And coming to that foremost of men
—king like unto Purandara himself in prowess, R&vana said,—
1 Give me battle ; or say I have been defeated. This is
my mandate/ The lord of Ayodhya, on hearing the words of
that wicked-minded one, Anaranya, enraged, addressed the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1614 RAMAYANA.

Rakshasa-chief, saying,— 'O king of RSLkshasas, I will give
thee combat, stay thou. At once prepare for fight, and I also
shall go and prepare myself/ And when he had heard everything
( regarding RSvana ), the forces of that foremost of kings
that had been intended, for conquering (Rlivana), sallied
forth ready for bringing about the destruction of the Raksha, —
ten thousand elephants, a niyuta horse, and many thousands
of cars and infantry, O best of men ; and, that host
consisting of infantry and cars, marched for encounter,
covering up the earth. And then, O thou proficient in fight,
there took place a mighty and wonderful encounter between
king Anaranya and that lord of RSLkshasas. And that host, of
the king encountering the forces of Ravana, were extinguished
like unto clarified butter thrown into the ( sacrificial) fire. And
having faught valorously for a long time, the remnant of
the royal forces, suddenly coming in contact with the flaming
Rakshasa ranks, were destroyed like unto swarms of locusts
entering into fire. And he saw the mighty army of that power-
ful monarch destroyed by the (adversary), like unto a hundred
streams absorbed by an approaching ocean. And then himself
drawing his bow resembling the bow itself of Sakra, that
foremost of sovereigns, beside himself with wrath, approached
Ravana. And brought down by Anaranya, his ( Ravana's )
councillors — Maricha, Suka, and Sarana with Prahasta, — took
to their heels like unto dear. And then that son of the
Ikshaw&ku race discharged eight hundred arrows at R&vana's
head. And like unto showers pouring down on the top of
a mountain, his shafts did not inflict any wound (on RSLvana)^-
And then the king, smitten on the head with a slap by tne
enraged king of R&kshasas, dropped down from his car.
And the king, deprived of his senses, fell down on the earth,
with his body trembling all over ; as falls in a forest a sila
scathed with heaven's fire. And thereat the Raksha, laugh-
ing, spoke unto that IkshwSku, lord of the 'earth, — * What
is this that thou hast gathered as the fruit of thy encounter


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1615

With me. O king, there is none in this triune sphere that
can combat with me. Having hitherto been sunk in lunacy,,
thou hast not heard of my strength.' As he was speaking
thus, the king, whose sounds were fast running out said :
1 What can I do in this matter. Verily time is incapable of
being controlled. I have been overcome by Time ; thou art
merely an instrument. What can I do now, when I am going
to lose my life ? I never turned away . from fight ; I have
been slain fighting. But, O R&kshasa, I shall tell thee
something in consequence of the disgrace that the Ikshwfiku
race has met with (to-day). If I have practised charity, if
I have offered oblations into fire, if I have carried on pious*
penances, if I. have governed my people well, then be my-
words verified I There shall spring in the line of the high-
souled Ikshw&ku, one named Rlma — son unto Da^aratha,
who shall deprive thee of thy life.' As he uttered this
imprecation, the celestial kettle-drums sounded like the
roaring of clouds ; and blossoms showered down from the sky.
And then, that best of kings, went to heaven*; and when that
king had gone to the celestial regions, the R&kshasa ( also )
wentaway.


SECTION XX.

^ a a it — •

£ij$ the lord of R&kshasas was ranging the earth
frightening everyone, Nftrada — foremost of ascetics, came to
that wood mounted on a cloud. And thereupon saluting
him, the night-ranger Ten-necked one— enquired after his
welfare as well as the occasion of his visit And that De-
varshi— the exceedingly energetic NSrada of immeasurable


Digitized by KjOOQ IC


i6i6 RAM AY AN A.

splendour, seated on the back of the cloud, addressed
Ravana, who was stationed in Pushpaka, saying, — ( lord
of Rakshasas, O placid one, O son of V^ravS, stay. I am
well pleased with thy prowess and fame. And even as
Vishnu had pleased me by destroying the Daityas, thou pleased
me by harassing the* Gandharvas and serpents. I will tell
* thee something. If thou wouldst hear what I have to say
then, O child, listen heedfully as I unfold it. Why, my child,
dost thou slay these* ; thou art incapable of being slain by
even the celestials. All these (men) are. subject to death, they
are verily slain- The world of man is unworthy of being
afflicted by thee who art incapable of being destroyed by
Deities, Danavas Daityas, Yakshas, Gandharvas and
Rakshas. Who should slay creatures, who are ever stupid
in respect of their welfare, environed by mighty
dangers, and encompassed by decrepitude and hundreds of
ailments ? What sensible person can set his heart on
slaying human beings . who are everywhere beset with", a
perrennial stream of evils. Do not thou enfeeble those
beings who are already enfeebled and smitten by .Divinity^
with hunger, thirst, old age etc. and who are overwhelmed
with sorrow, and grief. O mighty-armed one, O lord of
Rakshasas, behold man, albeit having their sense stupified,
engaged in the pursuit of various interests, and themselves
not understanding their own ways ;t some pass their time
merrily with dancing and playing on musical instru-
ments while others weep distressfully with tears streaming
from their eyes down their cheeks. And down fallen on
account of their attachment for their mothers and fatherd^ind
sons, and of their desires touching their wives and friends
they set small store by labours having the hereafter as their

* i. e. human beings.

•j- Q a ti — according to the commentator, means the time of employment
and suffering. — I think the ordinary meaning answers, and give it according-
ly.-T.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARAKANDAM, 1617

object. What then is the usie of afflicting a race that is
brought down ever by its own infatuation. O placid one,
this world is verily conquered by thee. These for certain
will have to repair to the abode of Varna. Therefore, O
Paulastya, O captor of hostile capitals, do thou put down
Yama. On him being conquered, all will doubtless be Con-
quered by thee.' Thus addressed Lanka's lord, flaming in
native energy, addressed N&rada, laughing and saluting him,
'O thou that delightest in the sport of gods and Gandharvas,
and that takest pleasure in warfare, I am ready to go to the
nethermost regions for the purpose of conquest. And con-
quering the three worlds, and bringing under subjection ser-
pents and celestials I shall for ambrosia churn the nether
regions.' Then the reverend sage Narada spoke Unto the
Ten-necked one, — '.Who save thee can forsooth go on that
journey ? Verily, O irrepressible one, O destroyer of foes,
the way leading to the city of the lord of the dead
is difficult of access.' Thereat laughing, the Ten-faced
one said to the saint resembling a mass of white clouds,
'This is done. Therefore,* O great Brahman, intent upon
slaying the Vaiva^wata's son, I will go by this way which
leadeth to the king — the offspring of the sun. And, O
master, from wrath I have vowed that I will, eager for en-
counter, O reverend one, conquer the four Lokap&las. Then
here go I to the city of the lord of the Pitris ; and I am
determined to compass the death of him that visiteth creatures
with smart.' Having delivered himself thus and saluted the
sage, he, entering the southern way with his councillors,
profbeded along. And the exceedingly energetic NSrada —
best of Brahmans — resembling a smokeless fire, remaining rapt
for a while, began to reflect ; — 'How can (R&vana) conquer
Time who, when its life waneth, righteously visiteth with
affliction the time, sphere with Indra, fraught with mobile

* 1. e As thou hast commanded me.
203


Digiti^d by VjOOQIC


i6i8 RAM AY AN A.

and immobile. How can this lord of Rakshasas, of himself,
go to him who, resembling another fire, beareth to the
gifts and acts (of persons), — that high-souled one of whom
attaining consciousness, people put forth their activity ; and
afflicted with the fear of whom these three worlds fall away ?
How can (Ravana) subdue him who ordaineth things both
great and small, whc meteth rewards and punishments for
good and bad acts, and who himself hath conquered the three
worlds ? Resorting* to what other means shall Ravana secure
(victory) ? I am curious about it : To Yama's abode shall I
go for witnessing the encounter between Yama and the
Rakshasa."


SECTION XXI.


" JJLAVING reflected thus, that foremost of Vipras endowed
with fleet vigor, bent his steps towards the abode of Yama,
for the purpose of relating to him all that had taken place.
And there (he) saw that god — Yama — sitting in front of fire
and offering into it the good and evil fruits of their actions.f
And seeing the Maharshi NSrada arrive there, Yama
offering him arghya according to the ordinance, addr#sed
him saying, when he was seated at his ease : 'O Devarshi,

* Explains the commentator : ' Time hath every thing under its controL
Like the all-enclosing space, time pervades all that is. This being so, resort,
ing what transcending Time, shall Ravana obtain victory over it."

f Ordaining happiness and misery to the live* of people according to
their acts.' — T.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARVKANDAM. 1619

is it well with thee ? And doth virtue deteriorate.'* And,
why, thou honored of deities, and Gandharvas, dost thou
come ?' Thereat the reverened sage, NSLrada, said ; Hearken.
I shall tell (thee) ; and (after hearing me out) do thou
what is fit. O king of the Pitris, here cometh the night-
ranger named ten-necked, for bringing thee under his sway
— thee who art incapable of being conquered. And,
O master, for . this reason it is that I have come hither
hastily, — doubtful what shall befall thee who hast the rod
for thy weapon. In the meanwhile they saw the Raksha's
car approach from afar, flaming and like unto the ray-
furnished (one) risen. And dispelling the gloom of that
region with the effulgence of Pushpaka, that exceedingly
powerful (R&kshasa) came forward. And the mighty-armed
ten-necked one all arqund saw creatures reaping the conse-
quences of their fair and foul acts. And there he saw Yama's
soldiery along with Yama's followers, fierce-forms, grim-visaged
and terrific. And he saw coporeal beings undergoing tor-
ments and pain, and emitting loud cries and sharp shrieks ;
preyed on by worms and fell dogs : and uttering words
capable of striking pain and terror into the heart (of the
hearer) : and people swimming in the Vaitaraini profusely
running blood ; and momentarily burning with hot sands ;
unrighteous wights pierced in a wood of asipatra t (plunged)
in Raurava, in the river of borate of soda ; and (cut) with
razor-edges ; asking for drinks ; and afflicted with hunger
and thirst ; converted into corpses, lean, woe-begone, and
pallid with hair flowing loosely ; having dust and filth (on their
bodres), and running about distressfully with dry forms ; — on


* The original has: "Doth not virtue wane." This in English would imply
the very reverse what Narada intends to say. He says : 'Doth religion deterio-
rate V — i.e. 'I hope, religion doth not deteriorate.' This is an idiom and
natural usage accounts for it, although that usage must in the nature of
things be based on a subtle ground of reason. — T.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i620 RAM AY AN A.

the way saw R&vana by hundreds and by thousands. And
R£vana also saw some in front of houses engaged in merry-
making with songs and strains of instruments, — as the fruit
of their pious acts; and (saw) the giver of kine regailing
themselves with milk ; the dispenser of rice, feeding on the
same, the bestower of abodes, enjoying mansions, as the
fruit of their several acts ; and persons living with dam-
sels decked with gold and gems and jewels ; and other
pious folks, flaming in their native energy, all these saw
R&vana lord of Rakshasas. And by his might that mighty
one delivered those that were being tormented by their
wicked acts. And on being liberated by that Raksha — the
ten-necked one, those creatures in a moment began to enjoy
their release, that had come to them without thought or
suspense. And on the dead being delivered by the magnani-
mous R&kshasa, the guards of the dead, getting enraged,
rushed at the R&kshasa sovereign. And there arose a mighty
tumult from all sides ; from the heroic warriors of the king of
righteousness, rushing (all around.) And those heroes by
hundreds and by thousands assailed (Pushpaka) with pr& fas,
and bludgeons, and darts and maces, and spears and to mar as.
And swiftly swarming like bees, they began to break the
seats, blocks, daises and gateways (of the car.) And in that
conflict Pushpaka presided over by divine energy, incapable
of being destroyed by virtue of Brahma power, being broken,
resumed its former shape. Countless were the soldiers of
that high-souled one consisting hundreds and thousands of
heroic warriors, (ever) forward for fight. And according
to the measure of their might his (RSvana*s) councillors-
great heroes all, as well as the ten-faced one himself with
might and main, faught with trees and crags and hundreds
of blocks of buildings. And those councillors of the lord
of Rakshasas, assailed with every kind of weapons, with
their persons bathed in blood, faught fiercely. And O large-
armed one the exalted councillors of Yama and R&vana sore


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1621

assailed each other with arms. And leaving the councillors
alone the highly powerful warriors of Yama rushed against
Da^&nana* with a shower of spears. And then pierced through
and through by those weapons, with his person covered with
blood, the R&kshasa king appeared like a flowering Kin^uka
in Pushpaka.f And thereat that powerful one, by virtue of
his mastery over weapons, began to hurl darts and maces,
prdgas and spears and tomaras and crags and trees. And
that terrific shower of trees, rocks and arms, alighted on
the army of Yama (fighting) on the earth. And snapping
those weapons and resisting (those vollies of) arms, they
smote at the Rakshasa fighting alone by hundreds and thou-
sands. And encompassing him even as clouds encompass
mountain, they rendered (Rlvana) inert by means of
Bhindip&las and darts. And with his mail torn open, his
anger raging fiercely, and covered with blood streaming over
his person, he, forsaking his car, stood upon the ground.
And then furnished with his bow and holding his shafts,
(R&vana) regaining his senses in a short time, increased in
energy and stood in the field like the finisher. And now
fixing the divine P&£upata on his bow, and saying unto
them, 'slay! slay V he drew that bow. And enraged, (R&vana)
resembling Rudra himself, in fight drawing his bow to his
car, discharged that shaft even as Sankara had discharged at
TripurSL And the appearance of the shaft was like an ex-
tinguishing fire in summer with smoke with flames,
burning up a forest. And garlanded with glory that shaft


• Ravana.

t This simile is peculiarly appropriate and beautiful. Pushpaka, the name
of Ravana's car, means composed of flowers; and this signification shining
askance, as it were, over the direct sense of the sentence, heightens the
delight the reader feels on imagining the principal figure. 'Ravana seated in
Ftuhfaka, covered with blood, looked like a blossoming Kinsuka.' — T.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1622 RAM AY AN A.

followed by ghosts,* in that encounter ; rushed on, burning to
ashes the loose bushes and trees lying in its way. And burnt
up by its energy, the most of Vaivaswata fell down in the
field like unto banners of Mahendra. And thereat the
Rakshasa of terrific prowess along with his councillors began
to set up tremendous shouts ; as if making the earth tremble.


SECTION XXII,


H.


EARING his mighty shouts, that lord Vaivaswata knew
that his adversary had gained the day and that his own
host had been destroyed. And knowing that his forces had
been slain, he, with his eyes crimsoned with passion hastily
spoke unto his charioteer, 'Bring thou my car.' And there-
at the charioteer brought the noble and mighty car and stood
(there) and then that exceeding energetic one mounted the
car. And in front (of his car) stood death, equipped with
pragas and maces in his hands, who makes nothing
of this entire triune world ; incapable of deterioration. And
beside (him) was the rod of Time in its native from — the divine
instrument of Yama like unto a flaming fire on account of
its own energy. And then on beholding Time, infuriated,
tending to strike terror into all creatures, was agitated %he
triune universe, and trembling over took the denizpns of
heaven. And the charioteer urged on the steeds posses-
sed of graceful splendour ; and arrived where the lord of
Rakshasas was posted. And in a moment those horses

* The instrument being Siva's, it naturally was followed by ghosts, as his
attendants. — T.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1623

like unto thought (in celerity,) and resembling the steeds
themselves of Hari, took Yama where the warfare had already
begun. And seeing the frightful car in that aspect with
Death present in it, the ministers of the R&kshasa monarch
at once took to their heels. And in consequence of their
being comparatively inferior in point of strength they were
deprived of their senses, and afflicted with fear ; and saying,
'Here we are not equal to fighting* they went their way.
But seeing that car capable of striking terror into folks, the
Ten-necked did not experience any agitation, nor did fear
enter his heart. And approaching Ravana, Yama, enraged,
discharged spears and tomaras, and began to pierce RSvana's
marrow. But Ravana, without at all feeling any smart,
began to shower arrows on Vaivaswata's vehicle, resembling
a downpour caused by clouds. And again at his spacious
breast, that Rakshasa who had undergone slender injury,
could not resist, (Yama's arms) with hundreds of mighty
darts hurled. And in this way that destroyer of foes — Yama
fought for seven nights with various arms ; until at length
his enemy was driven back and deprived of his senses. And
then, O hero, there took place mighty onset between Yama
and the Rakshasa both eager for victory and both never
tiring of fight. And celestials and Gandharvas and
Siddhas, and the supreme saints, placing Praj&pati at their
head, presented themselves at the fight. And the en-
counter that then took place between that foremost of
of Rakshasas and the lord of the Dead was like the univer-
sal upheaval. And stretching his bow resembling in splean-
dour the thunderbolt of Indra, he discharged arrows covering
up the sky. And he smote Death with four, the (Yama's)
charioteer with seven, and swiftly struck Yama in the marrow
with hundreds and thousands of shafts. And then from
forth Yama's mouth there issued darted flames with his teeth
mixed with smoke, the fire of his fury. And witnessing
this wonder in the presence of the deities and Danavas,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1624 RAM AY ANA.

both Death and Time were fired with wrath and were
filled with delight. And the Death, growing still more
wroth, addressed Vaivaswata saying ; — "Let me go. I shall
slay this sinful R&kshasa. Even this is my native might
this Rakshasa will be no more. Hiranyakacipu, the
gracaful Nemuchi, and Shamvara, Nishandi and Dhumketu
and Virochana's offspring Vali, and the Daitya Shamvu
that mighty monarchs, Vritra and Bana ; and RVjarshis
versed in all branches of learnings and Grandharvas, and
mighty serpents, and sages, and Pannagas and Yakshas,
and swarms of Apsaras and the Earth herself containing
vasty oceans and mountains and rivers and trees, at the
unrolling of a Yuga — all these, O mighty monarch
have I brought to dissolution. All these and many more
endowed with strength and incapable of being overcome,
were at the very sight of me compassed with peril,-^
and what is this ranger of the night ? Let me go. O thou
cognizant of righteousness, — I shall slay this one. There is
none that, albeit strong, can survive after having been seen
by me. Verily ^this is not mine strength, — this might per-
taineth to me by nature. O Time, if seen by me, he won't
live for a moment' Hearing these words of his, the puissant
king of righteousness spake there unto death, — 'Do thou stay.
I myself shall slay him.' Then with his eyes reddened that
lord, Vaivaswata, wielded with his hand the infallible
dart of time ; while by him lay the redoubtable noose of
time and the mace in its native shape resembling fire and the
thunderbolt. He, who by his very sight draweth away the
lives of creatures, — what should be said of its touchingQand
being hurled at people ? And touched by that powerful one,
that mighty weapon, engist with flames, attained access of
energy, and seemed to consume the Rakshasa. And in the
field of battle, every one afflicted with fear, ran away from
it. And beholding Yama with his rod uplifted, the celestials
were agitated. And on Yama being desirous of slaying


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1625

Havana, the great-father manifesting himself spake unto
Yama: 'O Vaivaswata, O mighty-armed one, O thou of
immeasurable prowess, this certainly must not be; Thou
shouldst not with thy rod slay the night-ranger ; for, O
foremost of celestials, I have conferred a boon on him ;
and thou shouldst not render false the words that I have
uttered. Verily he, that, whether a god or a human being,
shall falsify my words, shall render this triune universe
false. There is no doubt about this. If this terrific weapon*
capable of affrighting the three spheres, be discharged alike
at friends and foes, it will destroy creatures. This rod of time,
of immeasurable might and incapable of being resisted by
creatures, was created by me as having the power of com-
passing the death of all beings. Therefore, O mild one>
thou forosooth shouldst not bring it down on Ravana's head. If
this alights on any one, he doth not live for a moment.
Whether on this weapon allighting, the ten-necked does not
die, or if he does do either way falsehood is the consequence.
Therefore do thou keep thy uplifted weapon off Lanka's
lord. If thou have any care for these worlds do thou
establish my truth. 1 Thus addressed, Yama then ansewred,
'I rastrain this rod. Thou art our Lord. But as
I can not slay this one who hath obtained a boon, what
then shall I do now in the field ? Therefore shall I disappear
from the sight of this Raksha.' Having said this, even
there did he vanish with his car and horses. And naving
vanquished him and distinguished his name, he again ascended
his Pushpaka and went out of the abode of Yama. And
witjp a delighted heart Vaivaswata along with the deities
headed by Brahma — as well as that mighty ascetig-Narada,
went to the celestial regions."


204


Digitized by


Google


1626 RAM AY AN A.


SECTION XXIII.


JJLAVING vanquished Yama, the foremost of celestials,
Ravana delighting in warfare, saw his adherents. And seeing
Ravana, with his person bathed in blood, bettered by the
weapon discharged at him, they were seized with surprise.
And hailing him with victory, the councillors headed by
Maricha, having been encouraged by Ravana, ascended Push-
paka. And then the Raksha entered the regeon
of waters — the abode of Daityas and serpents, well protected
by Varuna. And arriving at Bhogavati — the city governed
by Vasuki, he brought the serpents under subjection and
then, delighted, bent his course to the palace — Manimayi.
There dwelt the "Nivatakavachas, who had obtained boons.
Those Daityas were possessed of prowess and endowed with
strength, — carrying various weapons, breathing high spirits and
invincible in battle. And the Danavas and Rakshasas
growing enraged fell to raving each other with darts and
tridents, Kuli£as and axes and fattigas. And as they faught
one entire year passed away and neither side obtained
victory or was worsted. And then that way of the triune
sphere, that God, the undeteriorating Great-father, swiftly
presented himself on the scene mounted on his excellent
car. And making the Nivatakavachas desist from battle
the ancient great- father spake in clear words — 'Even
the celestials and the Asuras are not able to «^n-
quish this Ravana in battle ; nor can the Danavas
backed by the gods can destroy you. Do you therefore
turn your minds to making friends with the Rakshasa.
.11 interests are forsooth the common possession of friends.'
hereat Ravana made friends with the Nivatakavachas
*HJj£ presence of Fire ; and then rejoiced greatly. And duly


A


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAAf. 1627

honored (by them) Dac&nana passed there a year, without
any feeling of that place being different from his own home :
and spent his time agreeably. And having learnt there
an hundred sorts of illusion, he directed his course to Ras&-
tala, searching for the city of the lord of waters. And then
going to the city named Acma ruled by the K&lakayas,
(Rivana) slew the KSLlakayas endowed with terrific
striength ; and then with his sword cut off his brother. in-law,*
the husband of SurpanakhS, the mighty Vidyutjibha possess-
ed of terrific strength ; as that R&kshasa in the encounter was
licking (the limbs of RSvana's followers).f Having vanquished
him, he, in a moment, destroyed four hundred Daityas. And
then the lord of R&kshasas saw the grand abode of Varuna
resembling a mass of white clouds, and effulgent like
unto KailSLca itself ; — and also saw the milk-conserving
Surabhi stationed there ; from the streams of whose milk
was produced the ocean named Kshiroda.J And there
Rivana saw the mother of kine and the foremost of bulls ;
from whom springeth that maker of night the mild-bea-
ming-moon ; taking refuge under whom subsist the prime
saints and those living on froth, the froth§ (of milk) ; and
wherefrom sprang ambrosia as well as the Swadha of Sw&dha-
subsisting onesH, even her that goeth with human beings
under the name of Surabhi, Having gone round this


• Cyald means a wife's brother, Vidyujjibha was however, the husband of
his sister.— T.

W This explanation is the commentator's.

% Lit, the sea of milk.

$ A typical instance of the lengths which the self-denial of the Hindu
sages went is furnished by the case of a certain class of ascetics, who, abstain-
ing from every other kind of food, lived solely on the fruth of milk, falling
of! from the udders after the calf had drunk it. This froth-drinking, in
preference to drinking the milk itself was dictated by a motive cf charity — uz,
nut to deprive the calf of her legitimate fare. — T

* The ancestral manes.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1628 RAM AY ANA.

wonderful (cow), Ravana entered the exceedingly dreadful
abode of Varuna) guarded by various kinds of forces. And
then he beheld Varuna's splendid mansion, streaming with
hundreds of torrents, resembling a mass of autumnal clouds,
and always wearing a delightful aspect. And killing the
generals of the forces, after having been resisted by them,
he addressed the warriors, saying, — 'Do you speedily acquaint
your king with this " Ravana hath come here seeking
battle.'* ; Do thou give him fight, or say with joined
hands. 'I have been defeated by thee, and then thou
hast no fear whatever V In the meantime the sons and
grandsons of the high-souled Varuna, as well as those of
Pushkara issued forth. And they, endowed with every
virtue, accompanied by their own forces, yoked cars
furnished with the effulgence of the rising Sun, and coursing
at the desire of their riders. And then there took place a
mighty encounter capable of making people's down stand
on end, between the sons of the lord of waters, and those
of the intelligent Ravana. And in a short while that entire
host of Varuna was brought down by the highly powerful
councillor of that RaLkshasa Dacagriva. And seeing their
own forces brought to straits in the conflict and driven
back in the fight with networks of shafts, and down
on the ground and seefng Ravana in Pushpaka, Varuna* s
sons swiftly shot into the welkin with their fleet-footing cars.
And after they had attained a station of equal vantage
(with Ravana) in the sky,* great was the encounter that then
took place in the sky, resembling the encounter offlhe
deities and the Danavas. And turning away Ravana in>
the conflict by means of shafts resembling fire, they, ex-
ceedingly rejoiced, emitted various shouts. And then
Mahodara, eneraged on seeing the king sore pressed, casting

* Ere this Ravana was fighting on Pushpaka, while Varuna's sons (ou£ht
on the earth.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1629

off fear, and wrought up with rage, began to ' go around,
eager for fight. And smit with his mace by Mahodara,
Varuna's sons coursing* at will and resembling the wind (in
velocity), dropped down to- the ground. And- having slain
those warriors and also those horses of Varuna's Sons
(Mahodara) seeing them lying down deprived of their cars
swiftly sent up a tremendous cheer. And destroyed by
Mahodara, their cars and horses together with their fore-
most charioteers, lay low on the earth. And then forsak-
ing their cars, the sons of the high-souled Varuna, stationed
in the sky, did not experience any pain* by virtue of their
native power. And having stretched their bows they pierced
Mahodara, and then, all together they greatly angered
prevented R&vana. As the clouds, with a thousand torrents
cleave a mountain, so they, with dreadful shafts, resembling
thunderbolts and discharged off the bows, pierced him.
Thereupon the Ten-necked (demon), excited with wrath like
the fire of dessolution, pierced them to their very vitals
with highly dreadful arrows. And stationed above, he
showered on them variegated maces, Valldsf Pdtticas, saktis
and huge Sataghnis.

Thereupon with .the arrows the infantry were greatly
exhausted like unto young elephants six years old, fallen
In mire. Beholding Varuna's sons thus worn out and over-*
whelmed the highly powerful R£vana roared in delight
like unto clouds. Thereupon emitting loud cries the
Rakshaha, like unto a cloud, with a downpour of diverse
sha&s, destroyed the offspring of Varuna. Thereupon they
were all defeated and fell dead on the ground and all their
followers fled away from the field of battle to their homes*
R£vana spoke unto them. — "Do ye communicate this to


* By virtue of their immortal origion.
\ Aq arrow with a ceresent-shapcd head.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1630 RAM AY AN A.

Varuna." Whereto his minister Prahasta replied unto
R5vana saying — "0 great king — Varuna's sons are slain
and the lord of waters, whom thou art inviting for battle,
hath gone to tjie region of Brahma, to hear songs. While
the king is away, what is the use of taking trouble, O hero ?
And all these heroic sons (of Varuna) have been vanquished."
Hearing these words and spreading his own name the lord
of Rakshasas expressing sign of joy, issued out of Varu-
na's abode. And returning by the way by which he had
come, the Raksha, stationed in the welkin, proceeded towards
LankS,"


SECTION XXIV.

^ND again journeyed in the city of Acma (the followers of
Ravana) dreadful in fight. There the Ten-necked demon beheld
a highly picturesque house — adorned with networks of pearls,
having gateways crested with Vaidurjas, golden pillars and
abounding in pavements. And the stairs, of that picturesque
house resembling the abode of Mahendra, covered with
girdles, were made of crystal. Beholding that excellent house
the highly powerful Ravana thought within himself — " Whose
is this beautiful house, resembling the summit of Meruit Go,
O Prahasta, and learn quickly whose house is this. " Thus
ordered, Prahasta entered that excellent house — and finding
none in one appartment he entered another and thus entering
seven apartments he at last saw a flame of fire. There was
a man in that flame, who, when seen, laughed aloud. Hearing
that dreadful laughter Prahasta's down stood on their end.
There was another man in that flame, as if in a swoon,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 163!

engarlandcd with golden lotuses, incapable of being looked
at, like the sun, and resembling the Yama's self. Beholding
that the night-ranger speedily issued out of the house and
communicated it unto R&vana. Thereupon, O RSLma, having
descended from Pushpaka, the Ten-necked demon, black as
collyrium, entered that house. (Immediately) obstructing the
door there stood a huge-bodied man, dreadful like Siva — his
tongue was all flame, his eyes were red, rows of teeth
beautiful, lips like Bimba, his form was handsome* nose
dreadful, neck like a shell marked with three lines, jaws
were spacious, beards thick, bone fleshy, teeth huge and his
Appearance was all dreadful. And taking up an iron mace
he stood at the gate. Beholding him, Da£&nana's hairs
stood on their end — his heart and body trembled. And
seeing these bad omens, O R£ma, he began to think within
himself. He thus meditating that man said — 'What art
thou thinking, O R&kshasa ? Tell me all in confidence. I
shall confer upon thee the hospitality of fighting, O hero,
O night-ranger.' Having said this he again spoke unto
Rlvana, saying — ' Dost thou wish to enter into conflict with
Bali, or what else is thy intention ?' RSvana was so over-
whelmed that his hairs stood on their end ; but resorting to
calmness he said — ' O thou foremost of those skilled in
speech, who residest in this house ? I shall fight with him ;
r ,speak out what thou wishest.' He again said (to R&vana) —
"The lord of Dinavas lives here — he is highly generous,
heroic, and hath truth for his prowess. He is gifted with
many qualities, resplendent like unto Yama with mace
in 0»is hand or the newly risen sun and incapable
of being defeated in conflict, impetuous, invincible, victorious,
powerful, a veritable ocean of accomplishments, sweet-speech-
ed, supporter of the dependants, fond of preceptor and
Brahmans, always waiting for opportune hours, gifted with
high powers, truthful, of a handsome person, skilful, gifted
with all accomplishments, heroic and engaged in the study


Digitized


le


1632 RAM AY AN A.

of the Ved&s. He sometimes walks on foot and moves about
like the wind — he shines like fire and spreads heat like the
sun. He travels with the gods, spirits, serpents and birds. He
does not know fear ; dost thou wish to fight with him ? If thou
dost wish to fight with Bali, O lord of Rakshasas, O thou gifted
with great energy, do thou speedily enter (this house) and
engage in the encounter.' Being thus addressed the Ten-
necked demon entered where Bali was. Beholding the. lord
of Lanka, the foremost of Danavas, resembling the flaming
fire, and hard to look at like the sun, laughed. And taking
that RSkshasa by the hand and placing him on his lap he
said. ' O Ten-necked lord of Rakshasas, O thou having
long arms, what desire of thine may I satisfy ? Do thou tell
me what for thou hast come hither/ Being thus addressed by
Bali Ravana said — *I have heard, O illustrious sir, that
formerly thou wast bound by Vishnu. Forsooth I am cap-
able of releasing thee from the bonds/ Hearing that Bali
laughed and said — ' Hear, I shall relate to thee what thou
hast asked, O R&vana. The red-hued man, who stands always
at the door — by him formerly all the leading Danavas and
other powerful lords were brought into subjection — by him
I was also bound. He is invincible like unto death ; who is
there on this earth that can deceive him ? He, who stands
at the door, is the destroyer of all beings, creator and preser-
ver and the lord of the three worlds. Thou dost not know
him nor do I. He is identical with past, future and present
and is the lord. He is Kali and he is Time — the destroyer
of all beings. He is the destroyer and the creator of the
three worlds — and he slays all beings mobile and immobile.
And that lord of all gods again creates the universe without
beginning or end. O night-ranger, he governs and preserves
all sacrifices,* gifts and oblations to fire. Forsooth he is the
creator and : je preserver of the universe — there is none so
wonderful in I „*he three worlds. O son of Pulasta, He hath
been guiding the former Danavas, myself, yourself like so


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1633

many beasts hound with ropes. Vitra, Danu, Suka, Sainbhu,
Nishumbha, Sumbha, Kalanemi, Prahlada and others, kuta,
Vairochana, Mridu, Jamala, Arjuna, Kansa, Kaitabha, and
Madhu used to impart heat like the sun, appear resplendant
like the rays, move about like air and pour showers like
Indra. All of them celebrated many* a sacrifice and were
engaged in austere penances. All of them were high-souled
and considered the practice of Yoga as a great virtue.
Having got by an immense accession of wealth they enjoyed
many pleasures, made many gifts, celebrated many sacrifices,
studied (many lores) and governed their subjects. They were
all protectors of their own kith and kin and slayers of ene-
mies ; and in battle, there was none equal to them in the
three worlds. They were all heroic, of a high pedigree, versed
in all sacred writings, proficient in all branches of learning and
indomitable in warfare* Having defeated thousands of
celestials in conflict, the high-souled ones conquered the
regions. They were always engaged in those works which
were not liked by the celestials and used to maintain their
own men. They were all inflated with pride and haughtiness
and effulgent like the newly-risen sun. The glorious Hari,
the lord Vishnu, knoweth only how to bring about their
destruction who perpetually assail the celestials. He creates
all these and He, bringing about their 3cstruction,
rxisteth in Himself at the time of dissolution. These
highly powerful and high-souled DSnava chiefs, assum-
ing shapes at will, have been destroyed by the glorious God.
Besides, all these heroes, who have been heard of as being
irrepressible and invincible in warfare, have been dis-
comfitted by the wondrous power of Kritanta." Having
$aid this the lord of Danavas again spoke unto the lord of
R&kshsas — l O hero, O thou gifted with great strength, take
that flaming discus which thou beholdest and come to my
side. I shall then relate to thee the means of eternal
liberation. Do what I have told thee, O thou having long
205


Digitized by VjOOQIC


*634 RAM AY AN A.

arms. Delay not Ravana." Hearing this the highly
powerful Raksha proceeded, laughing, O descendant of Raghu,
where that celestial kundala was. Ravana,proud of his prowess,
easily took it up but could not move it by any means. And
being ashamed that higly powerful one again attempted.
As soon as it was uplifted the Rakshasa dropped down on
ground, bathed in a pool of blood, like unto an uprooted
Sala tree. In the meantime there arose a sound from Push-
paka, and the councillors of that lord of Rakshasas cried
aloud. Regaining his sense that Raksha rose up in a moment
and lowered his head in shame. Bali said to him — "Do thou
come, O foremost of Rakshasas and hear my words. O heroe,
the kunda/a ,crested with jew r els, which thou didst assay to take
up, is an ornament for the ear of one of my forefathers.
This fell here on the ground, O thou gifted with great
strength ; another kundala was thrown on the summit
of the mountain. Besides these kundalas his crown
was also cast off on the groud before the altar during the
encounter. Formerly none bore enmity towards my ancestor
Hiranya Kasipu — Time death, or illness. He had no death
during the day, night, evening or morning. O foremost
of Rakshasas, he did not experience death from any
weapon whatsoever. He created a dreadful enmity
with Prahlada. This conflict having taken place with the
high-souled and heroic Prahlada there rose up a dreadful figure
of man-lion — a terror unto all, O foremost of Rakshasas.
And that terrible figure casting his looks about, all the worlds
were over-whelmed.

Thereupon taking him up with his arms he destroyed
him with his nails. The person, who is standing at the door,
is this supreme Vasudeva, void of passion. I shall now
relate to thee the words of that supreme God ; do thou
hear, if thy heart is filled with spiritual thoughts. The
person, who is standing at the door, hath brought into sub-
jection, in thossands of years, a thousand of Indras, an


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1635

Ayuta of gods and hundreds of great Rishis." Hearing
these words Rlvana said — " (I have seen) Kritanta, the lord
of spirits with Death himself, with hairs standing erect.
Serpents and scorpions are his hairs — his tongue is hard as
the lightning, his teeth are dreadful — his eyes are red and
he is gifted with great velocity and a terror unto all beings.
He is incapable of being looked at like unto the sun, uncon-
querable in battle and is the chastiser of the sinners. He
even was defeated by me in conflict. There I did not feel
the least pain or fear, O lord of Danavas. I do not know
(this person) — it behoveth thee to give me an account."

Hearing the words of Ravana Bali said — "He is the
lord Hari — Narayana — the protector of the three worlds.
He is Ananta,* Kapilat JishnuJ and the highly effulgent Man-
lion. § He is Kratudhamalf Sudhima|| and hath the dreadful
mace in his hand. He is like unto the twelve Adityas,
Purina and the excellent Purusha ; ho is like unto the red
clouds — the lord of gods and the best god. O thou having
long arms, he is encircled by flames, a great devotee and fond
devotees ; this lord preserveth the universe and hath created
it. And he, gifted with great strength, brought about des-
truction in the form of Time ; and this Hari, with a discus
in his hand, is sacrifice and is being worshipped in sacrifices.


• Lit, eternal, endless. Here it is the name of Vishnu.

t A celebrated Muni or saint, the founder of the Sankhya system of philo-
sophy ; the son of Kardama by Devahuti and according to some an incarna-
nation of Vishnu.

J Lit — victorious, or triumphant, a name of Vishnu.

f Sarasinha — a name of Vishnu. When prayed for by Prahlada to ap-
pear from a pillar Vishnu came out in the shape of man-lion and slew Hiranya-
Kasipu — the king of Datyas and father of Prahlada.

% Protector of sacrifices — a name of Vishnu.

'i Here it is evidently one of the names of Vishnu. In Vishnu Purana.
Book 1, Chap. X. we find another account, Vircya>, married to Gauri, had
Sudaman, a Loka pala, or ruler of the east quarter, a* his son


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1638 RAM AY AN A.


■\


SECTION XXVI.


H<


_AVING spent the night on the picturesque summit of
the mount Meru and thinking (for some time) the powerful
lord of Lanka went to the region of the moon. (And
he saw a person) proceeding, seated on a car, sprinkled with
heavenly unguents and attended upon by Apsaras. And
worn out with the satisfaction of desire he was being kissed
there. Seeing such a person his curiosity was greatly excited.
And beholding a Rishi there he said to him — " Welcome thou
art, O celestial saint. Indeed thou hast come at a proper
season. Who is this shameless wight that is going seated
on a car and attended by Apsaras ? Does he not perceive
his object of fear ?" Being thus addressed by Ravana, Parvata
said — " O my child, O thou gifted with great intellect — Hear
I shall describe to thee the truth. By him all the w r orlds
have been conquered and Brahma hath been propitiated.
And he is now proceeding to that excellent region full of
bliss for obtaining final liberation. As all the worlds hav&
been conquered by thee by virtue of thy asceticism, O lord of
Rakshasas, so is he going, undoubtedly performing many pious
actions and drinking Soma juice. O foremost of Rakshasas,
thou art heroic, and hast truth for thy prowess. The powerful
are never offended with the pious." Thereupon he espied an
excellent, huge car, filled with all radiance and effulgence and
the sound of musical instruments and singing. (And Ravana
said) — " O great Rishi, who is that person, gifted with great
effulgence, who goeth surrounded by charming songsters,
dancing-girls and Kinnaras?" Hearing his words Parvata,
the foremost of saints, again said — "He is heroic and a great
warrior — he never returneth unsucessful from a battle-field.
Having performed many heroic feats in battle, and slain many
enemies, he hath been assailed with many wounds in fighting


>


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1639

and hath renounced his life for his master. Having destroyed
many in battle, he hath at last been slain by his enemies and
is perhaps now going either to the region of Indra or to some
such place. This best of men is now being entertained by
these well-versed in the art of singing and dancing."

Rlvana again said — "Who goeth there effulgent like
unto the sun ?" Hearing the words of R&vana, Parvata
said — " The person, resembling the full moon and wearing
diverse ornaments and cloths, whom thou beholdest, O great
king, in the golden car abounding in ApasarSs, distributed
gold. He, gifted with great effulgence, is now going in a
swift-coursing car." Hearing the words of Parvata, R&vana
said — "O foremost of Rishis, do thou tell me, who, of these
kings going, if prayed for, may offer me the hospitality of a
battle ? For sooth thou art my father ; do thou point out (such
a man to me) O thou conversant with piety." Being thus
addressed, Parvata again said to RSvana — " O great king t all
these kings wish for heaven not for battle. I shall point
out such a man, O great one, as shall enter into conflict with
thee. There is a highly powerful king — the lord of seven
islands, well known by the name of M&ndh&ta ; he shall
enter into an encounter with thee." Hearing the words of
Parvata, Ravana again said — '* Do thou tell me, O thou of
great devotion, where this king resides. I shall go where lives
this foremost of men." Hearing the words of Ravana, the
sage again said — " The son of Yuvanaswha hath conquered
the world consisting of seven islands begining with the
sea ; M&ndhSta, the foremost of kings, is just coming to
meet him." Thereupon (Ravana) having long arms, proud
of the boon conferred upon him in the three worlds, beheld the
heroic MSndh&ta, the lord of AyodhyS and the foremost of
kings. The kingof seven islands proceeded in agolden and well-
painted car resplendant like that of Mahendra, shining in his
beauty and sprinkled with celestial unguents. The Ten-
naked demon said to him — " Do thou give me battle."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1640 RAM AY AN A.

Being thus addressed, he, laughing, said to the t en-necked
demon — " If thy life is not dear unto thee, do thou fight with
me, O Rakshasa." Hearing the words of Mandhata, Ravana
said — " Ravana did not experience any affliction from Varuna
Kuvera or Yama ; why should he experience fear from thee,
who art a man ?" Having said this, the lord of Rakshasas
as if burning in ire, ordered the Rakshasas irrepressible in
battle. Thereupon the ministers of the vicious-souled
Ravana, highly enraged and well-skilled in warfare, began
to make a downpour of arrows. Thereupon the highly
powerful king Mandhata, with sharpened shafts, assailed
Prahasta, Suka, Sarana, Mahodara, Birupaksha, Akampana
and other foremost heroes. Prahasta covered the king with
his arrows-r-but before they had approached him, that foremost
of men shattered them into pieces. Like unto fire burning
down grass, the host of Rakshasas were burnt down by the
king Mandhata by means of hundreds of Bhushundis, Vallas,
Vindipdlds and Tomaras. As Kartikeya, the son of fire,
sundered the mount Krauncha with his shafts so Mandhata,
enraged, pierced Prahasta with five Tomaras gifted with
great velocity. Then hurling his mace again and again
resembling that of Yama, he struck, vehemently, Ravana's car
therewith. That club, resembling the lightning, vehemently
descended (upon Ravana' s car)and Ravana, like Sakra's banner,
was speedily upset by that. Like unto the rising of the
waters of the salt ocean on the full moon, the king Mandhata's
joy and strength were greatly increased. Thereupon the
entire Rakshasa host, emitting loud cries, stood encircling on
all sides the lord of Rakshasas. Thereat speedily regaining
his sense, Ravana, a terror unto all people, the lord of Lanka,
greatly assailed the person of Mandhata. And beholding
that king in a swoon, the highly powerful night-rangers were
greatly delighted and emitted leonine roars. Regaining his
sense in a moment the king of Ayodhya beheld his enemy
worshipped by the courtiers and night-rangers. He was


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTRAKANDAM. 1641

instantly worked up with ire ; and assuming a person resplen-
dant like that of the sun and the moon he began to slay the
Rakshasa host with a dreadful downpour of shafts. With
his arrows and the noise thereof the entire Rakshasa army
were overwhelmed like the agitated deep. Thereupon there
arose a dreadful conflict between men and demons. And
those two heroic, high-souled and foremost of men and
R&kshasas seated on warriors' seats and holding bow and
daggers entered (the field). And possessed by great anger
they began to assail one another with shafts — Mfcndhita
Rlvana and he again the king. They, being assailed .by one
another, were both wounded. And setting the Raudra shaft
upon his bow Rlvana discharged it and M&ndhata baffled it
by means of his fiery shafts. The Ten-necked demon took
up the Gandharva weapon and the king Mandhata the Brahma-
weapon stricking terror unto all. Rivana then took up the
celestial Pasupata weapon, dreadful and increasing the fright
of the three worlds, obtained by him from Rudra by virtue of
his rigid penances. Seeing this all animals, mobile and
immobile, were stricken with terror. Thereupon trembled
all the three worlds consisting of mobile and immobile beings
— the celestials and all the serpents became inert. Being
apprised (of this conflict) by virtue of meditation the two
foremost of ascetics Pulastya and Galava remonstrated with
them in many a way and prevented the king (Mandhata) and
the foremost of Rakshasas. Thereupon that man and demon
being reconciled with one another went back by the ways
they had respectively come.


206


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


1642 RAM AY ANA.


section xxvir.


X HOSE two brahmans having departed, Ravana, the lordf
of Rakshasas, proceeded, at first, by the aerial way, ten
thousand leagues. He then went to the excellent uppper aerial
fegiorr where live perpetually ganders gifted with many
accomplishments. The extent thereof is also counted by ten
thousand leagues and there are stationed closely three classes
of clouds* namely Agneya, Pakshaja and Brahma. He.thea
proceeded to the third excellent aerial region where perpetual-
ly reside the high-minded Siddhas and Charanas and the
extent whereof is also ten thousand leagues. O slayer of
enemies, he then speedily proceeded to the fourth aerial
region where perpetually dwell the goblins and Vinayakas.
He quickly went to the fifth aerial region which also extends
over ten thousand yoyanas where exist Ganga, the foremost of
rivers, and the elephants headed by Kumuda, who pour down
waters. They sport in the waters of the Ganges and pour
down her holy waters. And those waters, parched by the
rays of the sun and softened by the wind, pour down holy
waters and dews, O Raghava. Thereupon that Rakshasa
went to the sixth aerial region, O thou gifted with high
radiance, which also extends over ten thousand yoyanas and
where .dwells Garuda perpetually respected of his kinsmen


* The three classes are (i) Agnija or produced from fire (2) Pakshaja or
produced in a fortnight (3) Br&hma or produced from Brahma.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1643

and friends. He then went to the seventh aerial region which
is ten thousand leagues above and where dewell the seven
Rishis And again going up ten thousand leagues he reached
the eighth aerial region where Ganga, known as the Ganges
of the sky, having strong currents and sending high roars,
and upheld by air, is situated on the sun's way. I shall now
describe the region higher than that where resides the moon,
and the extent whereof is counted by eighty thousand leagues.
There dwells the moon encircled by stars and planets from
whom proceed hundreds and thousands of rays which light up
the worlds and conduce to the pleasure of all animals.
Thereupon beholding the Ten-necked demon the moon as if
burnt (him) down speedily with his cold fiery rays. And
stricken with the fear of those rays his councillors could not
stand them. Thereupon exclaiming his victory Prahasta said
to Rivana — "O king, we are destroyed by cold, so we must
go away from here. The Rakshasas have beeu terrified by
the rays of the moon ; O foremost of kings, the cold rays of
the moon have the natural property of fire in them." Hear-
ing the words of Prahasta, Ravana, beside himself with wrath,
having uplifted his bow and twanged it, began to assail him with
Narachas. Thereupon BrahmS came speedily to the region
of the moon and said — "O Ten-necked one, O thou having
mighty arms, O direct son of Visravas, O gentle one, do thou
repair hence speedily — do not oppress the moon — (for)
this highly effulgent king of twice-born ones wisheth
well-being unto all. I shall communicate to thee a mystical
incantation ; He who recollects it at the time of death, does
not come by it." Being thus addressed the ten-necked
demon, with folded hands, said — "If thou art pleased with me
O god ! O lord of the worlds, O thou of great penances, if
dost thou wish to communicate that incantation, do thou
impart it upon me, O thou of great piety ; reciting which, O
great one, I may be released of the fear of the celestials.
Forsooth, by thy favour, O lord of the celestials, I shall


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1644 RAM AY A^ A.

be invincible by all'. the Asuras, Danavas and birds." Being
thus accosted Brahma said to the ten-necked demon — a O
lord of Rakshasas, do thou recite it at the time of death and
not every day. Taking a string of beads, thou shouldst recite
this holy incantation, on which, thou, O lord of Rashasas,
shalt be invincible, And if dost thou not recite it thou shalt
not meet with success. Hear, I shall communicate to thee
the incantation, O foremost of Rakshasas, reciting which
thou shalt obtain victory* in the en:ounter. 'Salutation unto
thee, O god, O lord of gods, O thou worshipped of the celes-
tials and Asuras. O thou identical with past and future, O
great god, O thou having red eyes — thou art a boy albeit,
thou assumest the form of an old man ; thou wearest tiger-
skin. O god, thou art worthy of being worshipped, and the
lord of the three worlds. Thou art Hara, Haritanemi,
Yugantadahaka and Valadeva. Thou art Ganesha, Loka-
Sambhu, Lokapala, and of huge arms ; thou art great, the
holder of a huge dart, having dreadful teeth, and the greatest
of gods. Thou art time, the strength and hast blue neck and
a large belly ; thou art the destroyer of the celestials — the
foremost of the ascetics and the lord of all created beings.
Thou art the holder of a dart and hast the bull as thy
emblem, art the leader, protector, the destroyer and the
preserver; thou hast beared locks, art Mundi, Sikhandi, hast
a crown, and art greatly illustrious. Thou art the lord of
sprites and goblins, the soul of all, the protector of all, omni-
scient, the destroyer of all, the creator and the eternal pre-
ceptor. Thou art lord, earnest a kamandalu* in thy hand,
art the holder of a Pinakaf and DhurjatiJ thou art, worthy


* An earthen or wooden water pot used by the ascetic and religious student,
t The bow of Siva. A trident or three-pronged spear.
% A name of Siva from dhur, a burden and Jati, a collection ; who collects
or bears the burthen of the three worlds.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1645

of veneration, the most excellent OM, the first chanter of
Saman, the death, the element of death, P&rijatra* and
observant of penances. Thou art an ascetic, livest'in a cave
and earnest a Vin&t PanavaJ, and quiver in thy hands ;
thou art immortal and art like the newly-risen sun to behold.
Thou livest in a cremation ground, art the illustrious lord of
Umi and above all blemishes Thou didst uprootthe eyes of
Vagadeva and teeth of PushlL Thou art the destroyer of
fever, boldest mace in thy hand' and art (the very) dissolution
and time. Thou hast got a fire-brand in thy mouth, hast fire
as thy emblem, art highly resplendent and lord of men.
Thou art mad, makest people tremble, art the fourth, and
most respected of men ; thou art a dwarf, V&manadeva and
the dwarf who circumambulates the east. Thou art a beggar,
wearest the semblance ot a beggar and art by nature
crooked ; thou didst assail Indra's hands and the Vasus.
Thou art, the season, the maker of seasons, time, honey and
hast honeyed eyes. Thou art a tree bearing fruits and
blossoms, hast arrows as thy seat and worshipped by people
of all conditions perpetually. Thou art the protector and the
creator of the universe, the Purusha, eternal and certain ; the
lord of all religions, Virup&ksha, the three qualities and the
protector of all beings. Thou art three-eyed, assumest many
forms and brilliant as the Ajuta suns ; thou art the lord of
all celestials, the foremost deity and wearest bearded locks
having the impressions of the moon ; thou art connected with
Brahman, worthy of being resorted to and identical with all
created beings. Thou blowest all bugles, severest all ties ;
thou dost charm and bind (all) and dost always bring about death.
Thou hast flowery teeth, art a division, the foremost and the


• The name of a mountain, apparent!/ the central or western portion of
the Vindkya chain.

f A kind of stringed musical instrument.

I A sort of musical instrument ; a small drum or tabor.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1646 RAM AY AN A.

destroyer of all ; thou .hast dreadful beards, boldest a bow,
art- fearful and gifted with dreadful might.' These eight
hundred holy and excellent names have been uttered by me
which remove all iniquities, are holy and afford shelter to
those who seek for it ; if do thou recite them, O ten-necked
one, thou shalt be able to destroy thy enemies. 1 '


SECTIONXXVIII


H AV1NG conferred this boon upon Ravana the grand-
father, sprung from lotus, speedily returned to the region of
Brahman. And having obtained the boon Ravana too came
back. After a few days that Rakshasa Ravana, the dread of
all people, arrived at the banks of the western Ocean with
his councillors. And on the island a person was seen bright as
fire under the name of Mahajambunada, seated there alone.
He had a dreadful figure and was like unto the fire at
dissolution. And beholding that highly powerful person
amongst men like unto the chief of gods amongst the celestials,
the moon amongst the planets, the lion amongst the Sarabhas,*
the Airavata amongst the elephants, the Meru amongst the
mountanis, and the Parijata amongst the trees, the ten-necked
demon said — " Give me battle." Thereat his eyes became
agitated like unto planets and from the clashing of his teeth

• A fabulous animal supposed to have eight legs.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1647

there arose a sound like the clapping of thunder-bolts. And

the highly powerful Das&nana too roared with his councillors.

And with darts, Saktis, Rishtis and Patticas he again and

agarn assailed that highly effulgent person, havingSlong arms,

a dreadful appearance, huge teeth, a grim figure, a conch-like

neck, spacious breast, a belly like that of a frog, a countenance

like that of a lion, legs like the mount KailSsa, red palms,

red hands, emitting dreadful roars, huge-bodied, gifted with

the velocity of mind and air, dreadful, carrying quiver, bells

and chowries, encircl cd by a burning flame and emitting a

sweet note as a net-work of Kinkini does, having a garland

of golden lotuses hung round his neek, appearing graceful

like unto the Rig-Veda, be-decked with lotus garlands,

resembling the Anjana and golden mountains. As the

lion is not moved by the attack of a wolf, the elephant by

that of a bull, the Sumeru by the king of serpents and the

great Ocean by the current of a river, so that great personVas

not agitated and said to the ten-necked demon — " O vcious-

minded night-ranger, I shall soon remove they desire for a

battle." O Rama, the might of that person was a thousand

times greater than that of RSvana which was dreadful unto

all the worlds. Piety and asceticism, which are at the root

of attaining to every thing in the world, are at his thighs ;

Cupid is his male organ, the Viswadevas are at his waist

and the Maruts are at the sides of his Basti ; the Vasus are in

the middle portion of his body, the oceans are in his belly, the

quarters are on his sides, the Maruts are at his joints — the

manes are one his back and the grand-father has taken shelter

in his heart ; the pious acts of making gifts of kine, gold and

lands are his downs ; the mounts Himaylaya, Hemkuta,

Mandara, and Meru are his bones ; the thunder-bolt is his

palm, the sky his body ; the evening and watery cloud*

are on his neck, the creator, the preserver and the Vidya-

dharas are on his two arms. Ananta, VSsuki, Visalaksha

Ira vat, Kamvala, Aswatara, Karkotaka, Dhananjaya the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1648 RAM AY AN A.

venomous Takshaka, and Upatakshaka, have taken shelter
under the nails of his hands, in order to vomit forth* their
venom. The fire is in his mouth, the Rudras are on his
shoulders, the fortnights, months, years and seasons are on
the rows of his teeth ; the lunar half and the dark half of the
month are in his nostrils — and the airy currents are in the
pores of his body. Saraswati, the goddess of words, is his
neck, the two Aswins are his ears, the sun and the moon are
his two eyes. O Rama, all the divisions of the Vedas,
Yagmas, the whole host of stars, good words, energy, asceti-
cism — all these are being supported by his body, assuming
*he shape of a man. Thereupon that Purusha easily struck
Ravana with his hands hard as thunder. Being assailed
thereby Ravana immediately fell on the ground. Beholding
that Rakshasa fallen and having distressed others that huge
person, like unto the Rig-Veda, resembling a mountain and
be-decked with lotus garlands, entered the region under the
earth. Ravana addressed his councillors thus — "O Prahasta,
O Sukasarana and other ministers, where hath that person
suddenly gone ? Do ye tell me this." Hearing those words
of Ravana the night-rangers said — "That man, who crusheth
down the pride of the celestials and demons, hath entered
hither."

As Garuda goes speedily taking a serpent so that vicious-
minded Ravana arrived quickly at the entrance of the den.
And Ravana, having no fear, entered therein. And having
entered there he saw males resembling the red collyriuxn,
wearing keyuras? heroic, be-decked with red garlands, past-
ed with red sandal and adorned with diverse golden orna-
ments and jewels. He saw there three millions, of such
high-minded persons, devoid of fear, pure, radiant like fire,
dancing being mad after festivities. Beholding them the
Ten-necked demon, of dreadful prowess, was not the least

• A kind of ornament used on arms.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1649

terrified, and rather saw their dance, standing at the gate.
They were all like the male being he had seen before. They
were all of the same colour, same dress, same figure and
equally gifted with great energy. They were all gifted with
four arms and great energy. Beholding them the down of the
Ten-necked demon stood erect though a boon had been con-
ferred upon him by the Self-born and he speedily issued out
of that place. And he again saw another huge person lying
down on a bed. His house, seat and bed were all white and
valuable and he was sleeping enveloped by fire. And there
sat gracefully with a fan in her lotus hands, the goddess
Laksmi — most beautiful in the three worlds — (as if) the orna-
ment thereof, chaste, adorned with celestial garlands,sprinkled
with excellent sandal paste, be-decked with rich ornaments
and clad in a precious raiment. Having entered there with
out any councillor the vicious Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas,
on beholding that chaste damsel with sweet smiles seated on
a royal seat, being possessed by desire, grew anxious to hold
her by the hand, as one, under the influence of death, catches
a sleeping serpent. Beholding that lord of Rakshasas with
loose cloth and understanding him as desirous of holding (her)
the deity, having huge arms, asleep and enveloped with
flames, laughed aloud. And scorched suddenly by his
energy, Ravana, the dread of all people, fell down on earth
like unto an up-rooted tree. Beholding that Rakshasa fallen
he said the following words : — "Rise up, O foremost of Raksh-
asas, thou shalt not meet with death today ; thou shalt live
and be protected, O Rakshasa, by the great Patriarch's boon.
Do thou therefore go away, O Ravana, with confidence — thou
shalt not experience death just now." Regaining his sense
instantly RAvana was stricken with fear. And being thus
addressed, that enemy, of the celestials, stood up and with his
down erect, said to that highly rcsplendant deity — " Who art
thou gifted with great energy and like unto the fire of dissolu-
tion ? Tell me, who art thou, O deity and whence thou hast
207


Digrti^d by G00gk


1650 RAM AY AN A.

come hither." Being thus accosted by the vicious-souled
Ravana, the deity, smiling, replied in words deep as the
muttering of clouds, saying — " What shalt thou do with me
O ten-necked demon ? Thou art not to be slain by me now"
Being thus addressed the Ten-necked demon, with folded
palms said — " By the words of the Patriarch (Brahma) I shalt
nottread the path of death; there is none born amongst men, or
the celestials who can equal me, and disregard; by virtue of
his prowess, the great Patriarch's boon. His words can never
be falsified — every great exertion is weak before them ; I do
not behold any such man in the three worlds who can render
that boon useless. O foremost of the deities, I am immortal — I
do not fear thee ; and even if I meet with death, I may have it
from thee and no one else, O Lord. My death from thee is
both glorious and praise-worthy." Thereupon Ravana, gifted
with dreadful prowess, beheld within the bod} of that deity,
all the three worlds with mobile and immobile creations.
The Adityas, the Maruts, the Sidhas, the two Aswins,
Rudras, the manes, Yama, Kuvera, the oceans, mountains,
rivers, all the divisions of the Veda and knowledge, fire,
planets, stars, sky, Siddhas, GandharbdS, Chararias, the
ascetics conversant with the knowledge of Vedas, Garuda
and the serpents, the other deities, Yakshas, Daityas and
Rakshasas, were all seen in their incorporeal forms, on the
person of that great Purusha, lying down. Thereupon the
virtuous-souled Rama said to Agastya, the foremost of Munis
— " Who is that male being stationed in the island ? Who
are those three kotis male beings ? And who is this person
who crusheth down the pride of the Daityas and Danavas? ,>
Hearing Rama's words Agastya said — "O thou existing eter-
nally, O god of gods, hearken, I shall relate (it) unto thee.
The person stationed in the island is the illustrious Kapila.
All those dancing persons are the deities equalling that
intelligent Kapila in energy and power. And that Rakshasa,
bent on sin, was not seen by him with angry looks, and there-


Digitized by VjiOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 165 1

fore, O R£ma, Ravana, was not there and then reduced to
ashes. And he, resembling a mountain, with his person
pierced, fell on the ground. As a wily wight goes through a
secret so he pierced (Havana's person) with his shaft-like
'words. Having regained his sense, however, after a long
time, that Rakshasa, of great prowess, returned where his
councillors were.


SECTION XXIX.


w.


HlLE thus returning the vicious-souled Ravana,
with delight, carried away stealthily, on his way, the
daughters of the royal saints, celestials and Danavas.
And whatever beautiful damsel he saw, married or unmarried,
that demon held them captive in his car, having slain all their
friends and relatives. In this wise he got on his chariot
many a female of the Nagas, Rakshas, Asuras, Yakshas,
Danavas and of men. And they, all afflicted, shed tears, hot
as firey flames, caused by fear and fire of grief. As the ocean
is filled with the currents of the rivers so that car was flooded
with their tears originating from fear and sorrow. And wept
there in the chariot, hundreds of the females of NSgas,
Gandharvas, of great ascetics, Daityas and of Danavas. They
had long airs, graceful persons, countenances resembling the
full-moon, rising breast, slender waist like that of a black-bee
and were graceful with back like the pole of a car. They were
like the females of the celestials and the burning gold and
were all afflicted by grief, sorrow and terror and were young.
And the car was ablaze on all sides with the sighings of those


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1652 RAM AY AN A.

damsels and Pushpaka looked like the chamber where fire is
kept perpetually. The countenance and eyes, of those
beautiful damsels, brought under the subjection of the ten-
necked .demon, and afflicted with sorrow, looked poorly like
a hind attacked by a lion. Some thought — "Will he eat me
up" and another, stricken with sorrow, thought — "Will he
destroy me ?" Thus remembering their mothers, fathers,
husbands and brothers, all those females, overwhelmed with
grief and sorrow, bewailed, some exclaiming — ''What shall
befall my son in my absence ? Alas ! into what ocean of
grief my mother or brother is sunk ? Alas ! what shall my
husband do in my absence ? Therefore, O death, I propitiate
thee, do thou take me, who am subject to miseries. Alas !
what an iniquity did I perpetrate in my former birth in
another body ? Therefore, we all, overwhelmed with grief,
are sunk in the ocean of sorrow — and I do not behold the end
of my miseries. Oh ! fie upon humanity ; there is none more
vile than a man for they are weak. As the stars disappear
with the rising of the sun in time, so our husbands have been
destroyed by the powerful Ravana. Oh ! highly powerful is
this Raksha and he is mad after devising the means of destruc-
tion. Alas ! being engaged in such vile actions, he does net
consider himself cursed ; he is as powerful as he is vicious.
And though the ravishment of another's wife is a greats in,
still that vile Rakshasa is enjoying us who belong to others.
Therefore this vicious-minded one shall meet with death, by
his own actions." As soon as these words were uttered by those
chaste damsels, bugles were sounded in heaven and flowery
showers fell on earth. Being thus imprecated by those chaste
females, devoted to their husbands, he became shorn of energy
and effulgence and appeared like one divested of mind.
Hearing their lamentations thus and being honored by the
night-rangers that foremost of Rakshasas entered his city
Lanka. In the interval, Ravana's sister, a dreadful and grim-
visaged she-demon, suddenly fell down on the ground. An 1


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1653

having raised up his sister and consoled her Ravana said —
"Tell me speedily, O good sister, what you wish to say."
Thereat that she-demon, having blood-red eyes, closed with
tears, said : — "O king, by thee, powerful as thou art, I have
forcibly been made a widow. Fourteen thousand demons,
under the name of Kalakeyas, have been destroyed by thee,
O king, in the battle and amongst them was my highly power-
ful husband — dearer than my life. He has been slain by
thee, O dear one, an enemy — a brother only in name. I have
been killed by thee, O king, who art my brother. For thee,

king, I shall enjoy the word 'widow !* My husbandf
should have been saved by thee in the battle. But he was
slain by thy ownself in the battle ; art thou not ashamed of
this ? M Being thus addressed by his bewailing sister, the Ten-
necked demon, consoling her in sweet words, said : — "Of no
avail is thy lamentation, dear sister; thou needst not be afraid
of any of thy relatives. I shall please thee studiously by gifts,
honors and favours. Being mad after war-fare and desirous of
acquiring victory,! was continually makinga downpour of shafts,
so I could not distinguish in the conflict between my own men
and enemies, — and thus unwittingly I did hurt thy husband.
And thus, sister, thy husband was slain by me in the conflict ;

1 shall now do whatever shall conduce to thy well-being. Da
thou ever reside by the side of thy rich brother Khara and
he shall be the lord of fourteen thousand R&kshasas. That
highly powerful one shall give food and clothes to all those
R&kshasas. He is thy cousin and that night-ranger shall
always carry out thy orders. Let that hero now speedily go
to protect the Dandaka forest and the highly powerful
Dushana shall be the commander of his forces. And the


• This is the literal translation of the passage — i.e. for thee, I shall for ever
be known as widow.

f The word in the text is Jdmata % which literally means son-in-law — but
here perhaps it must mean husband for she was his sister.


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


X


i6 5 4 RAM AY AN A.

heroic Khara shall always obey .thy words and be the lord of
Rakshasas assuming shapes at will." Having said this the
Ten-necked demon issued orders to his army — fourteen thou-
sand highly powerful Rakshasas. Being encircled by those
grim-visaged .Rakshasas, Khara, undaunted, speedily cam-; to
the Dandaka forest. There he goverened without thorns and
Surpanakha too also resided in the forest of Dandaka.


SECTION XXX.


H<


^AVING thus given the command of a huge and dread-
ful army to Khara and. consoled his sister the Ten-necked
demon was satisfied and freed from anxiety. Thereupon
that highly powerful lord of Rakshasas with his followers
entered an excellent garden in Lanka named Nikumbhila.
And there, he saw, filled with hundreds of sacrificial posts
and altars, a sacrifice being celebrated, as if burning in its
lustre. And he beheld his fearful son Meghnada too, clad in
an antelope skin and holding Sikha and Kamandalu. Having
seen him (there) and embraced him by his arms the lord of
Lanka said : — "What are you after, O my child ? Tell me
the truth. " Thereupon that foremost of twice-born ones
Usanas* of austere penances, wishing the prosperity of the
sacrifice, said to Ravana — the Rakshasa chief : — a Hear,I shall
relate to thee everything, O king ; thy son hath met with


* Another name of Sukra. Indrajit took the vow of silence so he thought
it improper to disturb him.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTRAKANDAM. 1655

the fruits of many a sacrifice — Agnistoma,* Asvamedha,t
Bahusubarnaka,t Rajsuya,§ Gomedha|| and Baisnaba.1T And
being engaged in this Maheswara sacrifice, which is incapable
of being celebrated by men, thy son hath obtained boon from
Pasupati$ himself.

He has also obtained illusory powers — which create darkness
or ignorance — namely of ranging in the sky, of being eternal,
of ascending a celestial car which curses at will and of creating
darkness. O lord of Rakshasas, these illusory powers being
usued in a conflict, even the celestials and Asuras shall not
be able to perceive his course. Besides he has obtained a
quiver, the arrows whereof shall never be exhausted, a bow,
which is hard of being got by and a dreadful weapon which
destroys enemies in a conflict. Having obtained these boons
thy son, O thou having ten faces, and myself, the sacrifice
being finished, have been waiting to behold thee." Whereto
the Ten-necked demon replied — " You have not done well
as you have worshipped, with diverse articles my enemies —
Indra and others. However, what is done is done ; there is
virtue in this — no doubt ; come,0 gentle one,we shall go to our
house.' 1 Thereupon going there with his son and Bibhishana,
the Ten-necked demon got down all those damsels,speechless
with tears, gifted with auspicious marks,the precious females of
the celestials, Danavas and Raskshasas. Perceiving his vicious
desire for those damsels, the virtuous-souled (Bibhishana)

• A sacrifice or rather a series of offerings to fire for five days to be cele-
brated in the spring.

t The actual or emblematic sacrifice of a horse, this sacrifice is one of the
highest order, and performed a hundred times, entitles the sacrificcr to the
dominion of Swarga or paradise.

% A sacrifice in which profuse gifts of gold are made.

4 A sacrifice in which all the tributary chiefs pay homage to the Lord
Paramount.

f The offering or sacrifice of a cow.

% A sacrifice relating to Vishnu.

$ A name of Siva


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1656 RAM AY AN A.

said : — "Thou dost (still) follow thy own whims, knowing that
people are injured by these actions which destroy piety,
wealth and fame. Having slain their kinsmen thou hast
brought these beautiful damsels hither, but disregarding thee,
O king, Madhu hath carried away Kumbhanasi."
Ravana said : — "I donot understand all this. Who is that
Madhu, who has been named by thee ?" Worked up with ire
Bibhishana said to his brother : — "Hear, the fruit of thy vicious
actions hath arrived. There was an old Rakshasa, celebrated
for his wisdom, named Malyavan,the elder brother of Sumalin,
our maternal grand. father. His grand-daughter is Kumbha-
nashi and is born of our maternal aunt Anala ; so she is
virtually our sister. Thy son being engaged in the sacrifice
and myself being under waters she was stolen away, O king,
by the powerful Rakshasa Madhu. Kumbhakarna, O great
king, was then asleep. Having slain all the powerful Raksh-
asas and thy councillors, he had stolen her away, O king, who
was in thy inner apartments. Hearing this even, O great
king, we have pardoned and not slain him ; an unmarried girl
should be given away to her husband by her brothers, but
that has not been the case — this is merely the result of thy
vicious actions — wicked-minded as thou art. And this thou
hast met with instantly — so the people say." Hearing the
words of Bibhishana, Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, became
agitated like an ocean, by the recollection of his vicious
deeds. And engaged, with blood-red eyes the ten-necked
demon said — "Get my chariot ready soon and let all the
heroes of our party be prepared. Let my brother Kumbha-
karna and other leading night-rangers, armed with various
weapons, ascend their conveyances. Having slain today in
the encounter that Madhu, who is not afraid of Ravana, I
shall, encircled by my friends, and desirous of battle, proceed
to the region of the celestials." Thereupon issued out for
battle leading Rakshasas four thousand Akshauhini strong
taking various weapons. Commanding them Indrajit preceded


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1657

the army, R&vana went in the middle and Kumbhakrna
was in the rear; the virtuous-souled Bibhisana remained
in Lanka, being engaged in pioUs observances. And the
rest of the leading Rakshasas proceeded towards the city
of Madhu. And all the Rakshasas went covering the sky,
some on asses, some oil camels, some on horses, some on
quick-coursing porpoises and some on huge serpents. And
beholding Ravana proceed, hundreds of Daityas, inimical
to the celestials, followed him. Having arrived at the city
of Ma\dhii and entered there the ten-necked demon did
not behold Madhu but espied his sister. Thereupon being
afraid of the king of Rakshasas, Kumbheenashi, with folded
palms, touched his feet with her ciown. Having
raised her up the Rakshasa-chief Ravana said " No
fear, what can I do for you ?" Whereto she replied — "O king,
O thou having long arms; if thou art pleased with me, do
not slay my husband to-day, O corfferrer of honours. It is
said there is no other fear like this for damsels of high
pedigree. The greatest ol fears is that of being a widow. Be
thou truthful, O king of kings — do thou look towards me,
who am thus begging* Thou hast thyself said, O king; " no
fear." Being thus addressed Ravana said to his sister there :—
•' Do thou tell me speedily where is thy husband. I shall go
with him for conquests to the region of the celestials. Out
of pity and loVe fdr thee I refrain from slaying Madhu.'!
Being thus accosted; that Rakshasi, being pleased, got her,
sleeping husband, the night-ranger, up and said : — " Here i»
my brother, the highly power Dacagriva. Being desirous
of conquering the region* df the celestials he prays for thy
help. Do thou therefore proceed to his help, O Rakshasa,
with all th£y friends. It behoves thee to help him, who out
of affection for me, hath prayed for thy help." Hearing
those words Madhu said : — "So be it." And approaching a
little he beheld that foremost of Rakshasas and duly welcomed
Ravana. Being thus honoured the highly power Dacagriva
208


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1658 RAM AY AN A.

spent one night in Madhu's house and then, addressed
himself for departure. Thereupon reaching the hill Kail^a,
the abode of Baisravan, the lord of Rakshasas, resembling
Mahendra, encamped his army.


SECTION XXXI.


^/V-FTER sunset the highly power Ravana encamped his
army there. And the clear moon, brilliant as the mountain,
having risen, that huge army, armed with diverse weapons, be-
came asleep. And lying down on the summit of the mountain,
the highly powerful Ravana espied the caves beautified with
the rays of the moon and the trees. And the interior of the
forest was beautified with the brilliant groves of Karnikar, with
Kadamba and Vakula trees, groves of full blown lotuses, the
waters of Mandakini, with Champaka, Asoka, Punnaga,
Mandara, mangoe, Patala, Lodra, Pryangu, Arjuna,
Ketaka, Tagara, Coconut, Pyala, Panasa and

various other trees. And there sang the Kinnaras,
possessed by desire, and having sweet voice, enhancing the
delight of the mind. And there danced mirthfully, with their
damsels, the Vidyadharas, inebriete and having their eyes
reddened with drink. There was audible in the house of
the lord of riches, the sweet music of the assembled Ap-
saras like unto the sound of the bell. And being shaken by
the wind the nectar-smelling trees made the hill fragrant
with the shower of flowers. And carrying the fagrance
rendered salutary with honey and filaments of flowers, the
excellent wind blew enhancing Ravana' s desire. Being pos-
sessed by desire through songs, richness of flowers, coldness
of air, beauty of the hills, and the rising of the moon in


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1659

light, the highly powerful R&vana espied again and again
the moon with heavy sighs. At this time passed by that way
the foremost of ApsarSLs, Rambhi, adorned with excellent orna-
ments and having a countenance like the full moon. Her
person was sprinkled with excellent sandal paste — her hairs
were decked with Mand&ra flowers — her body was beautified
with other flowers and her movements tended to increase
desire. Her eyes were beautiful and her waist was high,
adorned with Mekhala* and was as if the refuge of Ratif.
Her forehead and other parts of the countenance were
painted with the marks of red sandal and adorned with
ornaments of flowers growing in six seasons. Rambha
appeared like second Sree, in grace and beauty, natural and
artificial. She wore green clothes resembling the clouds ; her
face was like the moon, eye brows like excellent bows, thighs
like the trunks of elephants and palms soft as leaves. She
was seen by R&vana as proceeding in the midst of soldiers.
Having got up and been influenced by lust he took her,
shameful as she was, by the hand and smiling said : —
"Where art thou going, O beautiful damsel? Whom art
thou going of thy own accord to satisfy ? Whose prosperous
time hath appeared, with whom thou shalt enjoy? Who
shall be satisfied with drinking the nectar of thy mouth
smelling like lotus? Whose breast, O fare damsel,
thy rising breast beautiful like two golden pots closely
placed, shall touch ? Who is there so beautiful as I — Indra,
Vishnu, or two Aswins that thou art passing by me ? Do thou
take rest upon this excellent rock, O thou having charming
waist. There is no other lord, save me, in the three worlds.
And Da9&nana, the lord of the lords of the three worlds,
thus begs thee, with folded palms. Do thou therefore seek
me." Being thus addressed, RambhSL, trembling, with folded

* A kind of ornament used on the waist.

t Wife of Kama — the god of Io?e in Hindu mythlogy.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


? 66o RAM AY AN A, %

palms, said : — "Be thou propitited ; it doth not behove thee
fo speak thus, who art my superior. Rather shouldst thou
protect me if any body else trieth to oppress me. Virtually
I am thy daughter-in-law. I speak to thee the truth." There-
upon the Ten-necked demon said to her, standing with her
face downwards, and her down standing erect at his very
sight. •' Hadst thou been the wife of my son, thou would-
st have been my daughter-in-law." Whereto Rambha
replied: — "Truely it is ; I am, by virtue, the wife of thy
son, O foremost of Rakshasas. Thy brother Vaisrabana
hath a son, dearer than his life, celebrated in the three
worlds under the name of Nalakuvara. In virtue he is like
unto a Brahmin, in prowess he equals a Rshatrya, in anger
he is very fire and in patience he is like the e^rth. I have
been thus directed by that Lokapala's son. For him I
have adorned my person with these ornaments. I am not
attached to any body else but him. O king, O slayer of
foes, by virtue of (this relation) it beboveth thee to save
me. And that virtuous-souled one is anxiously expecting
me. Thou shouldst not put obbtacle in that; it behoveth thee
to let me go ; do thou, O foremost of Rakshasas, wend the
way treaded by the pious. Thou art worthy of being revered
by me and I am an object of thy protection." Being thus
addressed Dacagriva humbly replied :— " I am daughter-
in-law," as thou hast said, is worthy of being said by one
who is the only wife. This is the everlasting law of the
celestials that the Apsaras have no husband ; they cannot
be the wife of one husband." Having said this, the Raksha
ravished her. Being released from his grasp Rambha became
divested of her ornaments and garland and became like the
river agitated by the elephants. Her hairs were dishevelled
and her hands were trembling. Like unto a blossoming
pfeeper shaken by the wind, she, trembling and bashful
and with folded hands, went to Nalakuvara and fel}
flown at his feet. Having seen her in that plight the high-


Digitized by VjiOOQIC


UTTARA KAN DAM. 166 !

souled Nalakuvara said — " fair one, what is this ? Why
hast thou placed thyself at my feet ?" Sighing heavily and
and trembling she, with folded palms, related to him every-
thing from the beginning to the end. O lord, on his way to
heaven, Da^agriva hath arrived here and hath spent the
night with his army. While I was coming to thee, O slayer
of foes, I was seen by him. Then holding me he said — "Where
art thou going?" I related to him everythig truly. But
being possessed by lust he did not pay heed to my words.
He was again prayed by me, O lord, saying *i am thy
daughter-in-law." But neglecting that he ravished me. O
thou of firm vows, it behoveh thee to forgive me for this
folly. O gentle one, a woman's strength can never
equal that of a man." Hearing of this ravishment
Vaisravana's son was greatly enraged and entered into
meditation. Having ascertained the truth within a moment
Vaisravana's son, with eyes reddened with ire, took water
in his palms. Having taken this and rinsed his mouth duly,
he imprecated a dreadful curse upon that lord of Rakshasas.
" O fair one, since thou hast been ravished by him despite
thy unwillingness he shall never be able to get by an
unwilling damsel. Whenever he shall, stricken by lust,
ravish a reluctant damsel, his head shall be sundered into
seven pieces. As soon as this curse, like unto a burning
flame, was uttered, the celestial bugles were sounded and
a shower of flowers fell from heavens. Being apprised of
the plight of people (brought about by him) and of the
4eath of that Rakshasa the patriarch Brahma and other
gods were greatly delighted. Hearing of that curse capable
of making the down erect, Dacagriva abstained from enter-
taining lust for unwilling females. And hearing of the curse
imprecated by Nalakuvara all the chaste damsels, that were
)cept captive, attained to great delight.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i66i RAM AY AN A.


SECTION XXXII


X1AVING crossed the mount Kaila^a, the highly powerful
Ten-necked demon, with his army, reached the region of
Indra. And there arose in the region of celestials an uproar
from the Rakshasa army, like unto the sound of the agitated
deep. Hearing of the arrival of Ravana, Indra shook on his
throne and said to the assembled gods, Adityas, Vasus,
Rudras, Sadhyas and Maruts — " Prepare yourselves, for
fighting with the vicious-souled Ravana." Being thus ad-
dressed by Sakra, the celestials, his equals in the encounter
and gifted with great prowess, armed themselves for tight.
And Mahendra, afraid of Ravana, poorly went to Vishnu and
gave vent to the following accents : — " How shall I, O Vishnu,
withstand, the Rakshasa Ravana ? The highly powerful
Rakshasa hath come here for battle. It is by virtue of the
boon that he is powerful, not for any thing else. It is proper
to make the words uttered by Brahma, truthful. As resorting
to thy prowess I destroyed Namuchi, Vitra, Bali, Naraka
and Samvara, so do thou make some arrengements (for his
destruction). There is no other excellent refuge but thee in
the three worlds, mobile and immobile, O lord, O god of gods,
O slayer of Madhu. Thou art the graceful, ever-existing
Narayana, having a lotus navel. By thee the worlds have
been settled and myself and Sakra, the lord of the celestials.
Thou hast created the three worlds, the mobile and immobile,
and in thee all these shall, O glorious deity, end at the time
of dissolution. Do thou tell me, the truth, O god of gods,
that I may myself fight ; or do thou, with thy sword and
discus, vanquish Ravana." Being thus addressed by Sakra
the lord Naranaya ; said : — " Do not fear, hear what I say.
He is invincible by virtue of the boon, and that vicious-souled
one is incapable of being vanquished even by the celestials


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1663

and Asuras. Irrepressible by virtue of his prowess, that
Rlkshasa, with his son, shall accomplish a mighty object.
O lord of celestials, even if I am requested by thee, I shall
not withstand the Rakshasa, Ravana in the conflict. Without
slaying the enemies in the encounter, Vishnu doth never go
back — but it is hard to fulfill my desire from Ravana, well
protected by the boon. However I do promise before thee,
O lord of the celestials, O performer of hundred sacrifices, I
shall, soon become the cause of this Rakshasa's death. I
shall soon destroy Ravana with his family in due time and
afford delight unto the celestials. I speak the truth unto
thee, O king of the celestials, O lord of Sachi ; do thou
divested of fear, fight, O thou gifted with great strength,
along with the celestials." Thereupon having issued out of
the city, Rudras, Adityas, Vusus, Maruts and Aswins well-
armed with mails, appeared before the Rakshasas. Mean-
while at the latter part of the night there was audible the
uproar of Ravana's army fighting on all sides. Having
got up and cast their looks upon one another the highly
powerful Rakshasas waited there for the battle, delighted.
Thereupon beholding that inexhaustible huge army at the
commencement of the battle the celestial host lost heart.
Thereupon there ensued a conflict, setting up a terrible
sound, with various weapons between the Rakshasas and
gods. In the interval issued out for encounter the heroic
and grim-visaged Rakshasas — Ravana's councillors. And
encircled by Maricha, Prahasta, Mahaparswa, Mahodara,
Akampana, Nikumbha, Suka, Sarana, Sanghrada, Dhumaketu,
Mahldangstra, Gathodara, Jambumali, Mahahrada, Viru-
paksha, Suptaghna, Yajnakopa, Durmukha, Khara, Trisira,
Karaveeraksha, Suryyasatru Mahakaya, Attkaya, Devantaka,
Narantaka, — all those gifted with great prowess, there entered
the battle-field, the highly powerful Sumalin, Ravana*9
maternal grandfather. And with various sharp-pointed
weapons, he, highly angered, began to assail the celestial host


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1664 RAM AY ANA.

like unto the winds scattering clouds. Being thus distressed
by the night-rangers the host of the gods fled away into
diverse directions like a herd of deer attacked by a lion. In
the meantime, entered the battle-field, the heroic and brave
Savitra, the eighth Vasu, encircled by soldiers and stricking
terror into the hearts of the enemies. And the two Adityas,
the highly powerful Tushtha, and Pusha united and undaunted,
entered the arena. Thereupon there arose with Rakshasas
a terrible encounter* of the celestials unable to bear their
fame in battle. Then the Rakshasas, with thousands of
terrible weapons, began to belabour the deities in the
encounter. And the celestial**, as well, began to send the
redoubtable, powerful and terrific Rakshasas, with the stroke
of blameless weapons, to the abode of Death. In the interim,
O Rama, a Rakshasa, Sumalin, by name, getting enraged,
and with diverse weapons, ran amock of the soldiery. As
the winds scatter clouds, so, he, under the influence of rage,
with various sharpened weapons, committed a havoc amongst
the celestial soldiers. Thereupon being assailed by a down-
pour of huge shafts, maces, Prasas and diverse dreadful
weapons, the celestials could not keep their ground upon the
field of warfare. The celestials being thus distressed by
Sumalin the eighth Vasu Savitra stood there enraged. And
encircled by his own car-warriors that highly powerful one/
with his prowess, repulsed the stricking night- rangers. There^
upon there arose a terrible encounter, capable -of making
down erect, between Sumalin and the Vasu, who did uot
retire from the field of battle. His chariot drawn by
serpents was pulled down and destroyed by the high-souled
Vasu by means of his huge shafts. Having destroyed his
car in the warfare with hundreds of arrows Vasu took up
mace in his hands for his destruction. Having taken up that
mace having a burning head and resembling the rod of Death
Savitra struck Sumalin on his head therewith. Having fallen
on his head that mace shone like a fire-brand as the thunder-


Digitized by VjiOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1665

bolt, discharged by Indra, falls roaririg on the summit of a
mountain. By the stroke of that mace his person was re-
duced to ashes and therefore there was not seen in the battle
field either his bone, head or flesh. Having beheld him slain
in the warfare the RSkshasas bewailing ran about on all
sides and being distressed by Vasu they could not stay in the
battle field.


SECTION XXXIM.


JJEHOLDING Sumalin slain and reduced to ashes by Vasu
and being assailed by the deities the Rakshasa host fled into
diverse directions. And collecting all the Rakshasas stood
there the highly powerful Meghanada, enraged, the son of
Rivana. Like unto flaming fire approaching towards forest
that great car-warrior encountered the enemies in a precious
car coursing at will. And as soon as he, armed with various
weapons, entered the field the celestials, at his very sight, fled
away to all directions. None could stand before him, well-
versed in war-fare. Thereupon beholding the deities terrified
and pierced with shafts, Indra, the king of gods, said — " Be
not afraid, O ye celestials ; do not fly away ; come back to the
battle ; this my son, who has never been vanquished, goes to
battle." Thereupon Sakra's son, known as divine Jayanta,
proceeded towards the field of action in a wondrous car.
And having encircled Sachi's son and encountered RivanS's
son the deities began to assail him. And the encounter
between Mahendra's son Jayanta and RSvana's sonMeghanSda,
and that between the deities and Rakshas was like one
between gods and demons. Thereupon RAvana's son began to
209


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1 666 RAM AY AN A.

assail, with shafts feathered in gold, his (Jayanta's) charioteer
Gomukha, M&tali's son. Sachis' son too, enraged, assailed
on all sides, Ravana's son and his charioteer. And the
powerful Ravani, stricken with ire and with eyes expanded,
covered Sakra's son with arrows. Thereupon Ravana's son
struck the celestial host with thousands of huge mountain
summits, Sataghnis, maces, P rasas, clubs, daggers, Parashus
and various other sharp pointed weapons. Ravana's son
thus striking Indra's army the quarters were enshrouded
with darkness by his illusory power. Being overpowered
with arrows on all sides the celestial army, leaving aside
Jayanta, became restless. The deities or the Rakshasas — they
could not recognize one another — and being distressed they
ran about on all sides. Being enveloped w r ith darkness and
having their senses bewildered the celestials killed their own
kith and the Rakshasas their own men — and others fled away.
In the interim a heroic and powerful Daitya-chief — PulomS,
by name, taking Sachi's son disappeared. And taking his
own grand-son he entered into the ocean — Puloma was his
grand-father for by him Sachi was begotten. And thinking
that Jayanta was slain all the deities greatly sorry and
distressed fled away on all sides. Thereupon Ravana's son,
enraged and encircled by his own powerful followers, pursued
the celestials emitting loud cries. Not beholding, his son and
observing the flight of the deities the king of the celestials
said to Matali — "Bring my car." By Matali was brought,
the celestial, highly dreadful, huge and quick-coursing chariot,
that was ready. (And he having) ascended the car, the huge
clouds, with lightnings, being driven by winds, began to emit
forth loud mutterings before the chariot. And the Gandhar-
bas began to play on various instruments and the Apsaras
began to dance. And taking up various weapons, Indra, the
king of divinities, set out for the field of action, in the
company of Rudras, Vasus, Adityas, the two Asvvins and
Maruts. He, having set out for battle, the winds began to


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAAf. 1667

blow high, the sun was divested of its brilliance and the huge
fire-brands began to send out flames. In the interval the
heroic and the highly powerful Da^agriva ascended the
celestial car, constructed by the Architect of the deities,
encircled by the huge-bodied serpents capable of making
down erect and by whose breath the battle-field was ablaze.
Surrounded by demons and night-rangers and with the
celestial car he encountered Mahendra in the battle-field.
And having desisted his son he himself stood there. And
having come out from the field of action RSvana's son too
stood silent. Thereupon there arose an encounter between
the R&kshasas and the deities and there began a downpour of
weapons in the conflict like clouds. And the vicious-souled
Kumbhakarna armed with various weapons came there —
but he did not know,* O king, with whom the conflict was
going on. And by him enraged, the celestials were assailed
with his teeth, feet, arms, hands, Saktis, Tomaras and clubs
or any weapon whatsoever. Thereupon the night-ranger
engaged with the highly powerful Rudras and was wounded,
in the conflict, with incessant strokes of weapons. There-
upon the Rikshasa army began to fight with Maruts
and they were overwhelmed in the encounter with
the stroke of various weapons. Some fell down on earth
slain and torn and others became insensible on the back
of their carriers in the battle. And they all stood there in a
half-sensible mood, some holding the car, some elephants,
some asses, some camels, some serpents, some horses, some
porpoises, some boars, some Pisa^a-mouthed animals and some
embracing the Pannagas. And other night-ranges, having
their bodies sundered by the deities gave up their being. The
Rakshasas being slain and lying down on earth the action ap-
peared wondrous like a painting. And there issued out in the
battle-field a river from weaponb having blood for its silent

• For he was asleep till then so he was not acquainted with the particula rs
war- {are. He used to sleep for six months at a time.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1668 RAM AY AN A.

waters and infested with crows and vultures. Having beheld his
own army slain by the deities the highly powerful Da^nana,
enraged, entered the ocean of celestial army and slaying the
deities in the conflict confronted Sakra. Thereupon Sakra
took up his huge bow by the twang where-of the ten quarters
Were filled. Having unstrung his huge bow Indra struck
Ravana, on his head, with arrows resembling the flame of
fire and the rays of the sun. And the Rlkshasa-chief Da^a-
nana, having long arms, also assailed Indra with hundreds
of shafts discharged off his bow. They having been thus
engaged with each other with the downpour of dreadful
Shafts, all the quarters were filled with darkness and in-
consequence thereof nothing was visible.


SECTION XXXIV.


X HEREUPON darkness having set in all the celestials and
Rakshasas, maddened with their strength, began to fight
crushing one another. And in that darkness — Indra, Ravana
and MeghanSLda — these three were not possessed by the
influence of illusion. Beholding his whole army slain in a
moment, R&vana, worked up with dreadful ire, sent out
terrible roars. And in anger, that irrepressible one said to
the charioteer, stationed on the car — "Do thou take me to
the other end of the enemies' host." I shall soon with the
stroke of various weapons despatch the deities to the abode
of Death. I shall slay Indra, Kuvera, Varuna and Yama —
what to speak of more — I shall soon destroy all the deities
and place myself above them. Be not sorry ; do thou soon
drive my chariot. To-day I have told you twice to take me


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAAT. 1669

to the end of the enemy's army. We are now waiting near
the Xandana grove — do thou take me to the hill whence the
son rises." Hearing his words tRe charioteer drove the
steeds, coursing at will through the enemies' host.
Thereupon being apprised of his intention, Sakra,
the king of the celestials, stationed on car, said
to the deities, in the field of battle — "O ye deities — hear
my words, what appear to me best. This Ten-necked
demon must be vanquished by us while alive. Ascending his
car, gifted with the velocity of the wind, the highly powerful
one is proceeding amongst the army like unto the deep with
waves rising during Parva. It is not possible to slay him
r.ow — for he shall not meet with death in consequence of
the boon. So let us make him captive — and we should all
exert to that end. Bali being held captive I am enjoying
the three worlds — and I think proper to obstruct the course
of this vicious-souled one. " Having said this and left aside
Ravana, Sakra went to another side, O King, and fought
terrifying the Rakshasas in the conflict. Dacagriva, in-
capable of being thwarted, entered by the northern route
and the performer of hundred sacrifices by the southern.
Thereupon having entered into the army up to a hundred
leagues — the lord of Rakshasas overpowered the celestial
host with a downpour of shafts. Thereupon beholding his
own army slain Sakra, returned fearlessly and obstructed
the Ten-necked demon. In the interim beholding Ravana
brought under his grasp by Sakra the demons and Rakshasas
cried aloud. " Alas we are slain." Thereupon ascending
his car Ravana's son, beside himself with rage, entered the
dreadful flank. And having resorted to the illusory powers,
conferred upon him in yore by Pacupati he entered into the
enemies' camp and belaboured them. Having left behind all
other deities he pursued Indra and the highly effulgent
Mahendra too espied his enemy's son. And albeit assailed
by the highly powcrfuf deities, Ravana's son, divested of


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


I670 RAM AY AN A.

mail, entertained no fear. Having overpowered the approa-
ching charioteer with many excellent arrows he covered
Mahendra with a downpour of shafts. Thereat having left
his car and charioteer Indra mounted his elephant Airavat
and ran about in search of Ravana's son. Being invisible
in the welkin by virtue of his illusory powers and having
brought Indra under the influence thereof he struck him
with hundreds of arrows. When Ravana's son came to
know that Indra was exhausted he, having bound him up
by virtue of illusion, proceeded towards his army. And
having seen Mahendra carried away by force from the
battle field the deities thought 'What is this?" That
conqueror of Sakra and subduer of enemies, conversant
with illusory powers, was not visible, by whom, Indra,
although master of many illusions, was carried away by
force. In the meantime, the celestials, all enraged, covered
Ravana with a downpour of shafts and belaboured him.
And being worn out in the encounter with the Adityas
and Vasus he was not capable of fighting any more.
Beholding his father thus distressed and assailed in war-
fare with strokes, Ravana's son, although invisible, said — "Do
thou come O father, our work in the battle field is finished ;
know, we have achieved victory ; be thou consoled and divest-
ed of agonies. By virture of my illusory powers I have
made Mahendra captive — the lord of the three worlds
and of the celestial host and have crushed down the pride
of the deities. Having subdued thy enemy by virtue of thy
prowess do thou enjoy the three worlds at thy pleasure.
What is the use of labouring again ? And useless it is to
fight again." Hearing the words of Ravana's son the
deities retired from the battle field, and went away without
Sakra. And hearing the sweet words of his son, the lord
of the night-rangers, the enemy of the celestials, having great
prowess and wide spread fame, desisted from fighting and affec-
tionately said to his son — " Thou hast enhanced the glory of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 167 1

our race displaying thy prowess like a highly powerful
man. Thou hast vanquished the celestials and their king
of unequalled might. Do thou set out hence for the city,
taking Indra on thy chariot and surrounded by soldiers. I
shall, soon, delighted, follow thee with my councillors."
Thereupon having returned home with his army and
chariots and taking the king of the celestials, the powerful
son of Rlvana dismissed the victorious warriors.


SECTION XXXV.


X HE highly powerful Mahendra being thus defeated by
Rlvana's son, all the celestials, taking the patriarch Brahma
before them, went to Lanka. Having obtained RSvana
encircled by his sons and brothers the Patriarch, stationed in
the welkin, calmly said — "My son, R3vana, I have
been pleased with thy son in the conflict. Oh ! what
wonderful prowess, what strength— equal or greater than
thine. Thou. hast, by thy own prowess, conquered the three
worlds — thy promise hath borne fruits — I have been pleased
with you — both the father and son. O R&vana, this thy son
is highly powerful and gifted with gieat strength and he shall
be celebrated in the world under the appellation of 'Indrajit'
or the conqueror of Indra. And that R&kshasa shall be


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


16/2 /RAM AY ANA.

powerful and "irrepressible, by whose help, O Icing, Che
celestials have been brought under thy subjection. Do thou
therefore, O thou having long arms, release Mahendra, the
chastiser of Paka and forgetting him free what do thou want
from the celestials ?" Thereupon the highly powerful Indrajit
— the subduer of enemies, said : — "If dost thou say so, O god,
I pray for immortality." Thereat the highly powerful
patriarch said to Meghanada — "There is none perfectly
immortal on earth amongst created beings — birds, quadrupeds
and other highly powerful beings." Hearing the words
uttered by the grand-father — the highly powerful Meghanada
said to the eternal lord — "Hear, then, what I want in exchange
for releasing Sakra. May a chariot with horses rise up from
fire when I shall offer sacrifices unto it, being desirous of
vanquishing my enemies in the conflict. And may I be
immortal as long as I shall remain on that car. This is the
boon I have resolved upon praying for. May I meet with
destruction, O deity, whenever I shall engage in fight without
finishing my offerings unto fire. All others, O god, attain
to immortality by virtue of devout penances but I shall acquire
that by dint of my own prowess." Whereto the grand-father
replied saying "so be it." Thereupon Meghanada released
Indra and the celestials returned to their own abode. In the
interval, O Rama, Indra became poorly, divested of his
immortal brilliance, stricken with anxiety and pensive.
Beholding him in that plight the grand-father of the deities
said : — "O performer of hundred sacrifices, why didst thou
formerly perpetrate that mighty iniquity ? O Chief of the
immortals ! O lord !, some creatures were created by me
by dint of my understanding — they were all of the same
colour, same speech, and same appearance. There was no
difference visible in their appearance or marks. Thereupon,
with whole-minded-ness, I began to think of these created
beings. And I created a female distinct from them. Collect-
ing all those limbs that were most excellent amongst the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1673

'reated, I made a female under the r.ame of Ahalya. Hal
means ugliness — one born from Hal is called Halya. That
female was known as Ahalya because she had nothing
blameable in her. I gave her that name. Having created that
female I was thinking, O king of the celestials ! O foremost
of the deities !, on whom I should confer her. Being proud of
dignity, O Sakra, O lord, O Purandara thou didst regard her
in thy mind as thy spouse. I placed her under the care of
the high-souled Gautama and he rendered her back after
many long years. Thereupon considering the patience and
accomplished asceticism of Gautama I married her with him.
And that virtuous-souled, great ascetic enjoyed her company ;
and for my thus conferring her upon Gautama all the
celestials were disappointed. But being enraged and possess-
ed by lust thou didst repair to the hermitage of the ascetic
and see her resplendant like the flaming fire. Maddened
with lust and ire thou didst ravish her and thou wast seen in
that hermitage by the great ascetic. Thou wast then impre-
cated by him, enraged and gifted with great effulgence saying,
*0 lord of the celestials, thou hast attained to a change of
circumstances — for which, O Vasava, thou hast fearlessly
ravished my spouse. Thou shalt, therefore, O Sakra, go
under the arms of the enemies, in conflict. And this vile
desire, O thou having a vicious intellect, which thou hast first
created, shall undoubtedly spread in the world of mortals.
Whoever shall commit this crime, shall be half responsible
for it and the other half shall descend upon thee ; and for-
sooth thy position shall not be permanent. And whoever
shall be the lord of the celestials, shall not have his position
secure. This is the curse I give, which I have communicated to
thee.' And having remonstrated with his wife that one of
devout penances said to her — 'O vicious one, let thy beauty
be spoiled in the vicinity of the hermitage. Thou art gifted
with beauty and youth but thy mind ie fickle ; so thou shalt not
continue as the single beautiful damsel in the woild All crcat-
210


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1-674 RAM AY AN A.

ed beings shall participate thy beauty ; thy matchless beauty has
brought about this mischief.' Thenceforward all created beings
were gifted with beauty. Thereupon she propitiated the
ascetic Gautama saying, "O twice-born one, I was unwittingly
ravished by Indra, assuming thy form. I have not committed
this willingly, O ascetic — so do thou be propitiated with me."
Ahalya having said this, Gautama replied : — "In the race of
Ikshwakus, there shall be born a highly effulgent and mighty
car-warrior, known in the world as Rama ; for performing
the rites of a Brahman, the mighty-armed Vishnu, assuming a
human form, shall repair to the forest. Thou shalt be purified
when thou shalt behold him,0 fair damsel. He shall be able to
purify thee from the iniquity perpetrated. Having treated him
as a guest when thou shalt come to me again, thou shalt
live with me, O thou having a fair countenance. ,, Having
said this that ascetic returned to his hermitage. And
thenceforward the wife, of that ascetic chanting the
themes of Brahman, engaged in austere penances. Thou
hast met with all this in consequence of the imprecation
of that ascetic. Therefore, O thou having long arms, do
thou think of thy past iniquity. For that curse and
nothing else, O Vasava, thou hast been brought under the
grasp of enemies. Having controlled thy senses, do thou
soon undertake a sacrifice in honor of Vishnu. Thou shalt
be purified by that sacrifice and go to heaven ; and thy
son, O lord of celestials, hath not been destroyed in the
conflict. He hath been taken into the ocean by his grand
father." Hearing this and having celebrated the sacrifice
in honor of Vishnu he again went to the region of celestials
and reigned there as their king. I have thus described
to thee the strength of Indrajit — what to speak of others
he vanquished even Indra — the king of the celestials."
Hearing the words of Agastya, Rama, Lakshmana, Vanaras
said " wonderful it is" ; and Bibhu
' the side of Rama, said : — "After a


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1675

long time, the old recollections have come to my mind."
Thereupon RSma said to Agastya — "All, thou hast said, is
true." And Agastya said " Rama, Ravana, the thorn of
people, then grew in power, by whom, in the company
of his son, Indra, the lord of the celestials, was defeated.


SECTIOIN XXXVI.


JL HEREUPON having bowed unto Agastya the foremost of
ascetics, the highly effulgent R&ma again surprisingly said*: —
" O Brahman, O foremost of twice-born ones, when that
cruel Ravana journeyed over the earth, was it void of people ?
Was there no king, or prince on earth to administer punish-
ment unto him ? Were all the kings then shorn of
their strength and prowess? And many kings I (hear) were
vanquished and driven out by him with various excellent
weapons.' Hearing the words of RSLghava, the ascetic
Agastya, having six sorts of wealth, laughing said, like unto
BrahmS, speaking to Rudra — " O R§ma, O lord of earth,
traversing the earth, Ravana arrived at the city of Mahismati,
resembling the city of the celestials, where lived perpetually
the deity of fire. There reigned a king named Arjuna, efful-
gent like fire which was kept perpetually in a well covered
with Sara. One day the highly powerful Arjuna, the king
of HaihayaSt repared to the river Nerbuda, with his wives to
sport. At the very same day, R&vana, the lord of Rakshasas,
arrived there and asked his councillors saying. " Where is


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1676 RAM AY AN A.

the king Arjuna ? Do ye speedily tell me; lam Ravana,
I have come to fight with your king. Do ye, at first, com-
municate unto him the news of my arrival." Being thus
addressed by Ravana, the learned ministers informed the
lord of Rakshasas, of the absence of the king. Hearing of
the absence of the king from the citizens Visrasraba's son
came out of the city and reached the Vindhya mountain
resembling the Himalayas. He espied the mountain exten-
ding over the welkin like unto clouds and rising up as if
riving the earth and obstructing the sky. The mountain had
a thousand summits and the lions were residing in the caves
and hundreds of fountain were falling from it ; the mountain
was -as if laughing aloud and the celestials, Gandharbas,
Apsaras and Kinsaras were sporting there with their females ;
and it appeared (in consequence thereof) like the region of
celestials ; and rivers, with waters transparent like crystal,
were flowing. And it therefore appeared like a thousand
serpents having trembling tongues. And casting his
looks upon Vindhya mountain, resembling the Himalayas
and having huge caves* Ravana, the king of Rakshasas,
reached the river Nerbuda, of holy waters and going
rapidly to the western ocean. Her waters were being
agitated by buffaloes, deer, tigers, lions, bears and elephants
distressed by heat. Having covered her, Chakrabakas,
Karandavas, swans, water-cocks and Sarasas, maddened, were
emitting notes. The charming Nerbuda appeared like a
beautiful damsel — having blossoming trees for her ornaments f
Chakrabakas for her breast, wide spread forest for her waist,
the row of swans for Mekhala, filaments of flowers for paste,
watery foams for white silken cloth, the pleasure of descending
into water for the pleasure of touch and full-blown lotuses
for white eyes. Having descended from his car and bathed
in the waters of Nerbuda, the foremost of streams, resem-
bling a fair one, Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, with, his
councilors, sat on her coast resided by many an ascetic-


Digitized by VjiOOQIC


UTTARAKAXDASt. 1677

Delighted at her beauty and having spoken highly of Xerbuda
like unto Ganges he addressed his ministers Suka and Sarana
with gestures, saying : — "Behold, having rendered the earth
pale, with his many rays, the sun, emitting parching
heat, is in the sky. But seeing me here seated,
his rays have become cool like those of the moon.
At my fear, even the wind is blowing carefully, being
cold and fragrant by the touch of the waters of the Nurbada
and removing our toil. This charming Nerbuda, abounding
in crocodiles, fishes and birds, though a natural stream, is
standing still like a terrified damsel. Being wounded in
conflicts with many a king your persons have been pasted
with blood. Therefore like unto Sarvabhauma and other
infuriated elephants going down into the water of the
Ganges, do ye descend into the water, of Nerbuda conferring
suspiciousness and health. Bathing in this stream you shall
be cleansed from sins. I shall, also on the coast of this river,
like the rays of the autumnal moon, reTerentially worship with
flowers Mahadeva, holding PinSLka in his hands." Hearing the
words of Ravana, Prahasta, Suka, Sarana, Mahodara, Dhru-
maksfaya and other councillors descended into the waters
of Nerbuda. And she was agitated by those elephant-
like leading Rakshasas like unto the Ganges by Vamana,
Anjana, Padma and other elephants, Thereupon having
got up from the waters the highly powerful Rakshasas
culled flowers for Ravana's offerings. And in a moment
the Rakshasas collected heaps of flowers on the pic-
turesque banks of Nerbuda, resembling the white clouds.
Flowers being thus collected, Ravana, the king of Rakshasas
descended, into the Nerbuda for bathing like a
huge elephant into the Ganges. And having bathed he got
up, reciting excellent incantations. Thereupon having left
off his wet cloth he put on a white one. And to find out
place for worshipping, he, with folded hands, proceeded
towards the banks. And the Rakshasas too, like unto so


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1678 RAM AY AN A.

many moving mountains, followed him. And wherever
Ravana went the golden Siva Linga was brought.
Thereupon Ravana placed that upon a heap of sands
and began to worship it with various nectar-smelling
flowers and sandal. And having finished the worship of
Siva, the foremost of deities, having the moon on his
crown, the conferrer of boons and the remover of miseries,
the night-ranger danced with uplifted hands and sang
before it.


SECTION XXXVIi .


Ai


>


jr no distance from where on the banks of the
river Nerbuda, that dreadful lord of Rakshasas collected the
flowers, Arjuna, the King of Mahismati, and the foremost
of the victorous, was sporting with his wives in the water.
And being encircled by them the king Arjuna appeared
like a leading elephant surrounded by a thousands of she
elephants. In order to measure the strength of his thousand
arms the King of Haihayas obstructed the course of
Nerbuda. Being obstructed by the arms of Karta-
virjarjuna and having flooded the banks with her pure
waters, Nerbuda flowed in an opposite direction. And
the currents, rising high as during the rainy season
flowed with fishes, and crocodiles. And that stream, as if


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKASDAM. 1679

driven against Rivana by Kirtavirjarjuna, carried away his
collection of flowers. And having given up his worship which
was half-finished Ravana looked towards Nerbuda looking
like an unwilling damsel and saw that she, with rising currents,
was flowing towards the east from the west and the waters
beyond that were in a natural state like a quiet lady and the
birds were seated there without any anxiety. Thereupon being
anxious to learn the cause of the rise of the river, the Ten-
necked demon, with his right finger, hinted Suka and S&rana.
Being commanded by Ravana, the two brothers, the heroic
Suka and Sarana proceeded towards the west by the aerial
way. And going half a league, the two night-rangers espied
a man sporting in the waters with some females. He was huge
as a S&Ia tree, his hairs were floating on the water, he was
inebricte and his eyes were reddened in consequence thereof.
Like unto Sumeru holding the earth with his thousand feet
he obstructed the current of the river with his thousand arms.
And he was surrounded by a thousands of beautiful damsels like
an elephant by a thousands of she-elephants. Beholding that
dreadful spectacle, the R&kshasas Suka and Sarana came
back and approaching Ravana communicated (all) unto him.
**0 lord of R&kbhasas, an unknown person, huge as a S&la
tree, is sporting with females obstructing the course of
Nerbuda like unto a dam. And being withheld by the
thousand arms of that man the waters of Nerbuda were
continually throwing up high waves." Hearing the words of
Suka and Sirana, RSvana exclaimed "This is Arjuna" and
proceeded to fight with him. Ravana, the lord of R&kshasas,
having set out with a hostile intention against Kirtavirjarjuna,
the wind mixed with dust began to blow high with tumultuous
sound. And the clouds began to mutter with a downpour of
rain. And the lord of R&kshasas proceeded against Arjuna
with Mahodara, Mah&parswa, Dhrum&kshya, Suka and
Sirana. Within a short time the dreadful R&kshasa, power-
ful as the elephant Arjuna, reached the banks of Nerbuda


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i68o RAAfriYANA.

and espied there Arjuna encircled by females as an elephant
surrounded by she-elephants. At the very sight the eyes of
the lord pf Rakshasas, prpud of his prowess, grew red and
addressing the councillors of the king Arjuna he said "Do
ye communicate unto the king of Haihayas that Ravana, the
lord of Rakshasas, hath come to fight with him." Hearing
the words of Ravana, the ministers of Arjuna stood up with
arms and said :— "O good Ravana, thou art well cognizant
Of the proper time for fighting. Now our king is drunk and is
sporting with the females in the waters. And now dost thou
wish to fight with him. Therefore, O Ten-necked one, do
thou spend the night here, if thou art bent upon fighting. Or
even if thou art anxious to enter speedily into conflict with
Arjuna do thou slay us all at first, and then fight with the
king." Thereupon the hungry councillors of Ravana, slew-
some of the ministers of the king and devoured some. There
arose a dreadful uproar on the banks of Nerbuda, of the
councillors of Ravana and Arjuna. The warriors of Arjuna
assailed Ravana and his ministers with hundreds of arrows,
Pracas, darts, Tomaras, thunder-bolts and Karpanas. The
warriors of Arjqna became dreadfully furious and emitted cries
like the roaring of the deep infested with crocodiles, fishes
and other marine monsters. Thereupon being enraged and
displaying their own prowess Suka, Sarana and other
ministers of Ravana began to destroy Arjuna's soldiers.
Thereupon the emissaries, stricken with fear, went to the
sporting king and communicated unto him the proceedings of
Ravana and his ministers. Hearing those words and saying
unto the females"Do not fear^he rose up from the waters like
an elephant. The eyes of that fire-like Arjuna were reddened
with ire and he shone dreadfully like the fire of dissolution.
And taking up speedily his club, that one, always using
golden clubs, pursued the Rakshasas like unto darkness
following the sun. Holding up the huge club and hurling
it with his arms, Arjuna, resorting to the velocity of Garud<i.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


WFTARAKANDAM. i68i

went on. Thereupon stood there obstructing his course
Rakshasa, worked up with anger and with a mace in his
band, like unto the Vindhya range standing in the way of
the sun. And throwing down off his hand the iron mace,
be, in anger, began to roar, like Yama. And the top of the
mace was ablaze like the tips of Asoka flowers. Not the
least agitated on beholding that mace, the king Arjuna, by
his club, baffled its action. Thereupon uplifting the huge
club, five hundred hands long, the king of Haihayas pursued
Prahasta. And within a short time being struck down by
that club gifted with great velocity Prahasta fell down on
earth like unto the summit of a mountain clapped down by
the thunder-bolt of Indra. Beholding Prahasta fallen,
Mlricha, Suka, Sarana, Mahodara and Dhrumakshya fled
away from the battle-field. All the councillors having thu3
fled away and Prahasta being slain Ravana speedily pro-
ceeded towards Arjuna, the foremost of kings. Thereupon
there ensued a terrible encounter capable of making dowrt
erect between the thousand-armed Arjuna, the king of men,
and the twenty-armed Ravana, the king of Rakshasas.
And taking up their clubs Arjuna and Ravana began to
fight with one another emitting cries like the mutterings
of clouds, like unto two huge bulls fighting for a cow, two
agitated oceans, two moving mountains, two effulgent
Adityas, two burning flames, two proud elephants, two
proud lions and like the very Rudra and Kala* As the
mountains suffer many clappings of thunder-bolts so did
they bear many strokes. And all the quarters were re-
sounded with the sound proceeding from the stroke of
their clubs like unto the sound of thunder-bolts. Being
placed against the breast of Ravana Arjuna's club rendered,
for a moment, the welkin look like the burning gold as does the
lightning. And striking again and again against Arjuna's breast
Havana's club looked Jike a huge fire-brand. Arjuna was
not worn out nor was RSLvana. And the conflict went on

211


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1682 RAM AY AN A,

between them like the encounter between Bala and
Vasava in the days of yore. The King of men and the
King of Rakshasas assailed and wounded one another
with their clubs like unto two bulls striking one ano-
ther with their horns and two elephants with their
tusks. Thereupon worked up with rage, Arjuna, with
his full might, smote Ravana on his breast, with his club.
But Ravana was well protected by the boon of the
celestial, so the club fell on earth sundered into two
pieces like one hurled by a weak wight. Still wounded by
the mace of Arjuna, Ravana, shedding tears, ran away at a
distance of four feet and sat there. Beholding Ravana
thus over-Whelmed Arjuna sprang up and . caught him
like Garuda holding a serpent and Vishnu binding Bali.
Da9agriva being thus bound, the Siddhas, Charanas and
the celestials exclaiming "Well done ! Well done !! ,f shower-
fed flowers upon Arjuna. And the king emitted leonine
roars again and again as a tiger joyous roars like a
cloud, holding a deer under his grasp. Regaining his sense
and beholding Ravana bound, Prahasta, in great anger,
pursued, the King of Haihayas. And the Rakshasa force
grew tempestuous like unto the rising of the ocean during
rains. Thereupon exclaiming repeatedly " Leave him off !
Leave him off !! Wait ! Wait !!" The Rakshasa host hurled
hundreds of Musalas and darts in the battle-field. Not the
least moved thereby the king Arjuna, the slayer of enemies,
bore those weapons of the enemies of the celestials. There-
upon baffling the weapons of the Rakshasas by means of
manv a dreadful and excellent one, Arjuna, the king of
HaihayaS) drove them away like winds scattering the clouds.
Having thus struck terror unto the night-rangers, he, encircled
by his own kinsmen, repaired to his own city with Ravana,
carrying him bound like unto Indra carrying Bali bound.
Thereupon flowers and fried paddy were showered upon him
by the Brahmanas and citizens.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKAXDAM. 1683


SECTION XXXVIII,

X HEREUPON Pulastya heard from the celestials of the
capture of Ravana like unto the holding of the wind * And
having been moved by the love for his son, the highly efful-
gent, great ascetic, proceeded to see the king of Mahishmati.
Proceeding by the aerial way, that twice-born one, gifted
with the velocity of wind and the flight of mind, reached the
city of Mahishmati. Like unto Brahma entering Indra's
Amaravati, he entered the city resembling the capital of
ladra and filled with delighted and plump citizens. And
beholding that dreadful Rishi approach like unto Aditva
walking on foot, the warders communicated the intelligence
unto the king Arjuna. Understanding from their words that
Pulastya was coming, the king of Haihayas, placing his
folded palms on his crown, proceeded to welcome him. Like,
unto Vrihaspati preceeding Purandara, the royal prests went
before him carrying, Madmpark* and water to wash feet. And
beholding the ascetic resembling the rising sun arrived, the
king Arjuna bowed unto him reverentially like Indra saluting
Mahideva. Thereupon offering him Maduparka % cow and
water to wash feet, the king of Haihayas, in accents
obstructed with delight, addressed the ascetic saying: —
" Reverend Sir, thine visit, it is hard to obtain. On behold-
ing thee my city Mahishmati hath been turned into Amaravati.
To-day have I obtained all auspiciousness,0 lord ; to-day hath
my religious observance been fruitful ; to-day hath my birth
proved blessed and to-day hath my devout penance been
crowned with success, for I bow unto thy feet, which have
been worshipped by the celestials. This my kingdom, these

* As it ii impossible to hold the wind in a short compass so it was im.
poss ible to bind Ravana aud lead him captive.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1684 RAMAYANA.

my sons, this my wife and myself are all at thy disposal-
do thou order me, O Brahman, what I may do for thee."
Thereupon having enquired of the king about his piety,
offerings and the well-being of his sons, Pulastya said to
Arjuna, the king of Haihayas : — "O foremost of kings, O
thou having eyes like lotus-petals ! O thou having a count-
enance like the full moon ! When thou hast vanquished
Ravana, thy prowess is matchless in the triple world. Thou
hast bound up my invincible son in the conflict at whose fear
the wind and the ocean stand still. Having drunk up the
glories of my son thou hast announced thine own ; so I do
say, O my son, do thou release Dacanana." Hearing this
cpmmand c?f Pulastya, the king Arjuna did not utter a single
world and set, most delightedly the king of Rakshasas, free.
Having released that foe of the celestiAls,worshipped him with
celestial ornaments and garlands and established friendship
.removing all enmities with Ravana before fire, and
bowed unto Pulastya, the son of Brahma, he repaired to his
pwn house. And being released by the influence of Pulastya,
the highly powerful Dacanana, the king of Rakshasas,
accepted his hospitality and being embraced by him, return-
ed home ashamed. And having set Dacagriva at liberty
Pulastya, the son of Brahma and the foremost of Munis
repaired to the celestial region. O Rama, in this wise, the
highly powerful Ravana was defeated by Arjuna and releas-
ed by Pulastya. Observe therefore, O descendant of Raghu,
there is a mightier man than the mighty ; therefore, one,
desirous of his own well-being, should not disregard another.
Having acquired friendship with the thousand-armed Arjun^,
DacAnana, the king of Rakshasas.began again to journey over
the world distressing the kings.


>


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1685


SECTION XXXIX.


R


^ELEASED by Arjuna, and yet not conceiving any shame,
RAvana, the king of Rikshasas again began to traverse the
earth, R&kshasas or men, of whom the proud RAvana heard
to be powerful he used to appoach and summon them
for fight. After some time he arrived at the city of
Kishkindha reared by Vali and invited him, wearing golden
garland, to fight. Thereat, TSLra, her father Sushena
and the Prince Sugriva said to the king of
Rlkshasas — " O lord of Rakshasas, he is not present here,
who shall be able to withstand thee. What monkey else
is capable of standing before thee ? However, O Rivana, V§li
shall soon return after performing the Sandhyi rites at the
confluence of the four oceans ; therefore wait here for a
moment. Behold, O Da^Snana, there lie the bones of all
those, like conch, who came ere this to fight with the power-
ful king of monkeys. O R3Lvana, O RSkshasa, even if thou
hast drunk nectar, thou shalt at this very moment loose thy
life, when the encounter with V&li shall take place. O
Vaisravana, do thou observe the variegated universe now—
wait for a moment after which it will be hard for thee to
keep thy life. Or if thou dost wish to meet with death do
thou speedily repair to the southern ocean and thou shalt
behold there V2tli like unto fire placed on earth." Hearing
those words, Rlvana, the aggrandiser of the triple world,
remonstrated with Tiri and ascending his flowery car went
to the southern ocean and espied Vali, having red counte-
nance like the rising sun, engaged in SandhyS rites with
whole-mindedness. Thereupon having descended from his


Digitized by VjOOQIC


*686 RAM AY AN A.

Pushpaka car he with silent steps approached Vali to bring

him under his grasp. Casting his looks at pleasure, Vali saw

him. Albeit apprised of his evil intention, he was not the

least moved. And he did not care for him as a lion is not

moved on beholding a hare and Garuda on beholding

a serpent. He then thought within himself— "This vicious-

souled Ravana is approaching to catch me ; holding him

under my arm pit I shall journey over the three great oceans.

Everyone will behold the enemy Ravana, under my arm pit

as a serpent possessed by Garuda, with his thighs, arms and

clothes loosened." Having thought thus Vali remained silent

for sometime and reciting incantations he waited there like

a mountain. Thereupon the king of monkeys and the

lord of Rakshasas, proud of strength, essayed to catch one

another. Vali was seated with his back (towards Ravana) ;

still from his footsteps he perceived that he had come within

the grasp of Ravana's army and he at once caught hold of

him like unto Garuda holding a serpent. Getting hold of

Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, desirous of catching him,

(Vali) and placing him under his arm-pit Vali vehemently

rose high up in the welkin. And he went away carrying

him, scratching him again and again with his snails like

unto winds scattering clouds. The Ten-necked demon being

thus carried away, his councillors, to release him, pursued,

exlaiming,Vali, in the welkin. They thus following him, Vali,

appeared in the sky like the sun in the midst of clouds. The

Rakshasas could not catch Vali but were rather exhausted

by the stroke of his arms and thighs. What to speak of

animals made of flesh and blood anxious for their lives even

the mountains make way when Vali goes. Rising high np

into the sky where even the birds cannot reach, Vali, the

lord of monkeys and gifted wirh great velocity, by and by

finished his Sandhya rites above the oceans. Being

worshipded by the aerials their lord, with Ravana, first

proceeded to the western ocean. And having finished


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1687

there Sandhyi prayers and recited incantations he, with
Daf&nana, went to the northern ocean. And having
journeyed over many thousand leagues that huge monkey,
with his enemy! finished his prayers there and then proceeded
to the eastern ocean. And having recited his prayers there
also, Vili, the son of Indra, and the king of monkeys,
carrying R&vana, returned to the city of Kishkindha. Having
gooe through his Sandhyi rites at the four oceans and
carrying R&vana, that monkey-chief was greatly exhausted
and (therefore)descended into the gardens of KishkindhS.
Having got out R&vana from his arm-pit, the foremost of
monkeys, laughing again and again said : — " Whence art
thou coming?" Thereupon being surprised greatly, Da£&-
nana, the king of R&kshasas, with eyes, shaking with
exhaustion, said to the king of monkeys : — " O king of
monkeys, resembling Mahendra, I am R&vana, the king of
Rakshasas ; I came here to fight : but I have beeen defeated
by thee. Alas ! What strength is thine ! what prowess !! What
gravity !!! Holding me like a beast thou hast journeyed over
the four oceans. O hero ! What heroic wight is there who
is not exhausted by carrying me so vehemenly ? O monkey,
mind, wind and Garuda — these three are gifted with the
velocity. Undoubtedly thou hast got the same velocity.
Thy prowess hath been sufficiently displayed. But now
I wish, O king of monkeys, to make friends with thee for ever
before fire. O king of monkeys, from to-day, wife, sons,
city, kingdom, enjoyment, cloth and food shall be our
common." Thereupon having lighted up fire the king of
monkeys and the king of R&kshasas, embracing each other,
became friends. Thereupon holding each other by the
arms they entered the city of Kishkindhi like unto two lions,
entering delightedly a cave. There like Sugriva R&vana
spent a month. Afterwards his councillors, desirous of des-
troying the triple world, took him away. O lord R&ma, I
have thus related to thee the previous history. Having


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1688 RAMAYANA.

thus belaboured Ravana Vali at last made friends with him
before fire. O Rama, Vali had unequalled and great strength.
Like unto fire burning down locusts thou didst burn down
Vali.


SECTION X L.


-00-


J_ HEREUPON Rama, being stricken with curiosity, with
folded palms and humbly accosted Agastya, residing in the
southern quarter, with pregnant accents, saying : — " Thou
sayest that Ravana and Vali had unequalled strength but
methinks theirs can not equal that of Hanuman. Heroism,
liberality, strength, patience, intellect, knowledge of laws
and means, prowess and energy all exist together in Hanu-
man. When the monkey host lost heart on beholding the
ocean, Hanuman, consoling crossed over the deep extending
over a hundred leagues. Having discerated the presiding
goddess of Lanka and on beholding Sita there, he consoled
her. What to speak of more, Hanuman, single-handed,
slew Ravana's commander-in-chief, the minister's son, his
servants and his one son. Being released from the Brahma
weapon Hanuman remonstrated with Ravana, and reduced
Lanka into ashes like unto fire burning down earth. What I
have seen myself performed by Hanuman in the conflict is
above the power of Kala, Vasava and even the lord of riches*
It is by the strength of the arms of that Wind-god's* son I have
obtained Lanka, Sita, Lakshmana, Victory, kingdom and
my friends. What more, had not Hanuman, the friend of
the king of monkeys — Sugriva, been in my company who


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1689

could have brought Site's intelligence ? Why did not HanumSLn,
although wishing welfare unto Sugriva, reduce V&li to ashes like
so many creepers on the occasion of his quarrel with Sugriva ?
Methtnks, Hanum&n was not cognisant of his own prowess
then ? And therefore he did stoop to witness the miseries
of Sugriva — the king of monkeys who was dearer than his
life. O thou worshipped of the immortals, do thou truly
describe unto me this action of Hanum&n." Hearing those
well-meaning words of R&ghava, the ascetic Agastya said to
him in the presence of Hanum&n. "O foremost of Raghus,
what, thou hast said regarding Hanumftn, is all true. As
regards, strength, velocity and intellect there is none who
can equal Hanum&n. O represser of enemies, in the days of
yore Hanum&n was imprecated by the ascetics, whose curses
never become fruitless, to the effect that he would never be
conscious of his whole strength. I am not capable of describing
to thee the wondrous childish feat which Hanum&n did
perform in his boyhood. But if thou art, O R&ghava, greatly
anxious to hear it, I shall relate — do thou hear with a quiescent
mind. Hanum£n's father Keshari reigned in the mountain
Sumeru which resembles gold by the influence of the sun.
Keshari had a well-known wife by the name of AnjanSL to whom
he was greatly attached. The deity Wind begot on AnjanSi an
excellent son. Repairing to a dense forest for collecting
fruits, the excellent damsel gave birth to Hanum&n resembl-
ing the tip of a Sala tree and went away. Being distressed
with hunger on account of the absence of the mother,
H^numSn, just born, cried like Kartikeya, the commandcr-in-
•liief of the celestials, in the forest of Saras, At this time
the sun resembling Yavd flowers, having risen, HanumSin,
to get a fruit, sprang up. Being desirous of holding the
newly risen sun, Hanum&n, resembling it, began to leap in
the middle of the welkin. The child HanumSn having thus
ascended the sky, celestials, Danavas and Yakshas surprising-
ly exclaimed "The velocity, with which Marut's son is going,
212


Digitized by VjOOQIC


>


1690 RAM AY AN A.

is not possessed even by the Wind, Garuda and mind. If he
has got such vehemence in his boyhood what great strength
he shall have in his youth." His own son thus leaping, the
wind, becoming cool by the touch of snow, began to follow
him proceeding in the sky lest the rays of the sun might
scorch him. Rising high up in the sky on account of childish
freaks and traversed many thousand leagues by the help of
his father Hanuman neared the sun. Considering that he
was a mere child and therefore not tarnished by any sin and
that a great divine work would be accomplished by him in
future the sun did not burn Hanuman. At the every day
when Hanuman sprang up to hold the sun, Rahu too essayed
to possess him. Having reached the top of the sun's car
Hanuman touched Rahu ; so he, the represser of the moon's
rays, accordingly went back on beholding the sun thus
possessed. And repairing to the house of Indra, Sinhika's
son, in wrath and with frowns, said to him encircled by the
celestials : — "O Vasava ! O slayer of Bala and Vitra — to
remove my hunger thou didst give me both the sun and moon ;
why thou hast then given them to another ? On account
of the Parva I came to devour the sun but another Rahu
came and possessed him." Hearing the words of Rahu,
the King of the deities, wearing a golden garland, having
his understanding bewildered, proceeded, on the back of
his elephant-chief Airavat, huge like the summit of the
Kailasa hill, with temporal juice always trickling, having
four tusks, roaring, and adorned with golden bells, towards
Hanuman and the sun with Rahu before him. Having left
behind Indra, Rahu quickly went there but fled away o*
beholding the huge-bodied Hanuman resembling a mountain
summit. Thereupon leaving aside the sun and being desirous
of holding Rahu, the son of Sinhika considering him as a
fruit, Hanuman again sprang up into the sky. Beholding
Hanuman approach renouncing the sun, Rahu with his
countenance only visible, desisted and went back. And


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTA RA KA NDA Af. 1 69 1

considering Indra as the saviour he again and again cried
aloud "Indra! Indra !!" Understanding everything by the
piteous accents of Rahu Indra said, "No fear, I shall soon
slay him." Thereupon beholding the huge-bodied Airavat and
considering him as a bigger fruit Maruti ran towards him.
Proceeding thus tempestuously when he rose above the head
of Indra, Han uman, looked in a moment dreadful like the fire
of dissolution. But not greatly enraged the thousand-eyed
lord of Sachi, with the thunder-bolt in his hand, struck the
running Hanuman. Belaboured by the thunder-bolt of Indra
Hanuman fell down and broke his left jaw. He being thus
overwhelmed by the stroke of Indra's thunder-bolt, the
Wind-god became displeased with the king of celestials and
was determined upon bringing about mischief unto all created
beings. The all-comprehending wind, not spreading him-
self, entered into a cave with his son. Like unto Vasava
distressing all creatures by putting a stop to the showers,
the wind too put all animals into unbearable suffering by
obstructing all execrations. On account of the anger of the
Wind-god their breath was completely obstructed, and the
joints — as if pierced, became hard as wood. S&dhya
Vaiatkdr and all the religious observances of the triple world
were put a stop to by the anger of the Wind-god. So the
three world appeared as if stricken with sorrow. Thereupon
the afflicted celestials, Gandharbas, Asuras and men repaired
to the Patriarch Brahma with a view to bring about the
well-being of created beings. And with their bellies swollen
for the obstruction of the wind the celestials with folded
hands said : — "O lord of created beings, thou hast created
four classes of beings and thou hast given us wind to preserve
our lives. But we do not know, why the wind, the lord of
our beings, is distressing us, by obstructing our movements like
unto females confined in an inner apartment. Being thus
distressed by the wind we have come to seek thy shelter,
thou the remover of miseries — do thou remove our afflicj-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1692 RAM AY ANA.

tions consequent upon the obstruction of the wind." Hearing

those words of the created beings, their lord (the Patriarch

Brahma) again said "Hear, why the wind, being enraged,

has obstructed the course of all beings. Hearing the words

of Rahu, Indra, the king of the celestials, hath belaboured

the Wind-god's son. It is for this that he hath been offended.

Preserving the bodied, the wind, having no person, passes

through them all. Without wind the body becomes like

wood. Therefore the wind constitutes the life, the happiness

and the whole universe. Renouncing the wind the world

cannot attain to happiness. Being cast off by the wind and

having their breaths obstructed, behold, the world, to-day

appeareth like dried wood. Let us therefore go there where

the wind, the giver of our afflictions, waiteth. If we do not

please the son of Aditi we shall all meet with destruction,"

Thereupon the Patriarch Brahma, the celestials, Gandharbas,

serpents, Guhyakas and other created beings went where the

wind was waiting with his own son belaboured by the king of

the celestials. Thereupon beholding that boy, on the lap of

the Wind-God,resembling gold and Baisvanar,the four-mouthed

Brahma, the celestials, Gandharbas, Rishis, Yakshas and

• Rakshasas were all moved with pity.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1693


SECTION X LI.


11 EARING the whole history, Rama, the discendant of
Raghu, said to Agastya " O Reverend Sir, Riksharaja is the
name of the father of Vali and Sugriva but thou hast not told
me the name of their mother. However I am curious to
learn who was their mother where was their residence and
how they had been named so— do thou favour me with
the account." Rama having said this Agastya said: — "O
Rama, I shall relate to thee everything in short of what
I had heard from Narada when he came to my hermitage.
Once on a time whilst travelling that highly pious ascetic
arrived at my hermitage ; I duly worshipped and welcomed
him ; and when I asked him out of curiosity, he, seated at
pleasure, said :— " Hear, O great ascetic, the foremost of
the pious ; there is a mountain named Meru, higly picture-
sque, made of gold and greatly charming. The middle
peak is much liked by the celestials, on which is situate the
beautiful assemblage hall of Brahma extending over a hundred
leagues. The four-mouthed deity, sprung from lotus, always
resideth there. And from his eyes while going through the
Yoga practices tears trickled down. No sooner the Patriarch
Brahma, with his hands, wiped them off into the ground
than a monkey originated from those tears. O foremost of
men, as soon as that monkey was produced, the high-souled
Brahma consoled him in sweet accents and said — "Do thou
proceed to that leading mountain where the celestials
perpetually reside. O foremost of monkeys, living upon
many a fruit and root in that picturesque mountain thou
shouldst always live by me. And while thou shall live in
this wise for some time thou shalt be crowned with auspicious-


Digitized by VjiOOQIC


1694 RAM AY AN A.

ness." Brahma having said this, O RSghava, the foremost
of monkeys saluted that god of gods, placing his head at his
feet and said to that Primaeval deity, the creator of beings
and the lord of the universe. "O god, thou art pla.ing me
under thy behests — verily I shall follow them." Having said
this to Patriarch that monkey immediately went to a forest
abounding in fruits and flowers. There living on fruits and
collecting honey and various flowers, he, every day, used
to come to Brahma in the evening. O Rama, in this
wise he used to make an offering of excellent fruits and
flowers at the feet of Brahma, the god of gods. Journeying
in this way over the mountain he spent many long years.
Some time having elapsed in this way, O Raghava,Riksharaja r
the foremost of monkeys,being distressed with thirst, repaired
to the excellent mountain Meru. There is a pond of pure
water, resonant with the notes of various birds. Having
shaken his manes with a delighted heart, Riksharaja saw his
reflection in the waters. Beholding his own image there
that monkey-chief, stricken with anger and anxiety
thought — "What arch-enemy of mine is living in the waters ?
I shall destroy the excellent abode of the vicious-souled one."
Thinking thus within himself, that monkey, out of fickleness,
jumped down into the lake. And he again sprang up there-
from. And at the time of rising, O Rama, that leading
monkey found himself metamorphosed into a female form,
which was highly charming, graceful and beautiful. Her
waist was spacious, eye-brows beautiful and hairs were black
and curling ; her countenance was beautiful and smiling,
breast high and beauty matchless. And there appeared
charming on the banks of the lake, lighting up all quarters that
female, agitating the mind of all, and beautiful in the triple
world like unto simple Sastilatd, Rama, without lotus, pure
rays of the moon, Parvati more beautiful than even Lakshmi.
At this time was returning by that way, Indra, the leader of
the celestials after having worshipped the feet of Brahma.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTA RA KA NDA J/. 1 69 «>

And the sun too journeying arrived there. They both
simultaneously espied that female form and were possessed
by desire. What more, their whole body, as soon as they
saw her, was moved and the firmness of the mind shaken.
Thereupon Indra begot on her a son named Vali for he
originated from her hairs and the sun begot on her another
son, who was named Sugriva for he originated from her neck.
Thus the two highly powerful monkeys being born, Indra went
hack to his region having conferred upon Vali an un-ending
garland of gold. And having engaged Hanuman, the Wind-
god's son in the service of Sugriva, the sun too went back to
the sky. O king, the sun having risen after that night
Rikshaxaja again obtained his own real monkey shape.
Having thus regained his monkey form he made his two
highly powerful sons, — leading monkeys, assuming shapes at
will and having twany eyes, drink honey like nectar.*
Thereupon taking them, he came to the abode of Brahma.
Beholding his son Riksharaja with his sons, Brahma, the
grand-father of the celestials, consoled him in diverse ways.
Then he ordered the celestial messenger saying — "At my
behest, O emissary, do thou proceed to the highly picturesque
city of Kishkindha. That golden, big and charming city is
worthy of Riksharaja. There live many thousand monkeys
besides others assuming shapes at will. It abounds in various
jewels, invincible, is inhabited by four Varnas> holy and
sacred. At my command Viswakarma has constructed the
celestial and picturesque city of Kishkindha. Do thou place
there Riksharaja, the foremost of monkeys, with his sons ;
and having invited the leading monkeys and others and
received them courteously do thou install him on the throne.
On beholding this monkey-chief, gifted with intelligence they
shall be all subject to him." Brahma, having said this, the
celestial emissary, with Riksharaja before him, proceeded to
the highly picturesque city of Kishkindha. And having
entered there with the velocity of the wind, he, at the com-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1696 RAM AY AN A.

mand of the Patriarch, crowned the leading monkey Rik«ha-
raja as king. And being sprinkled according to the
ceremonies of installation, and adorned with a crown and
various other ornaments he, with a delighted heart, engaged
in governing the monkeys. All the monkey, residing on earth
consisting of seven insular continents and bounded by
ocean, came under his subjection. Thus Riksharaja was
both the father and mother of Vali and Sugriva. May good
betide thee. The learned who listen to and make others
hear this story, conducing to the enhancement of their de-
light, get all their desires and objects accomplished. I
have duty described to thee at length all events and have
recounted the stories relating to the birth of the Kings of
monkeys and Rakahsasas.


SECTION X Llll


XXEARING this excellent Pauranic theme in the company
of his brothers, Raghava was greatly surprised. Thereupon
hearing the words of the Rishi he said*:—" By thy favour I have
listened to the highly sacred theme. O foremost of Munis,
I was greatly worked up with curiosity in this matter. 1 am
not the least surprised to learn, O twice-born one, that those
two sons of the celestials would be two highly powerful leading
monkeys since their origin is divine." Rama having said this
Agastya said :— "O thou having long arms, thus in the days
of yore the birth of Vali and Sugriva was brought about
king, I shall now again relate to thee another divine theme.
O Rama I shall now describe to thee why did Ravana steal


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAAf. 1697

Sita. Do thou hear it attentively. O Rama, in the golden
age, having bowed unto the Patriarch's son, the truthful Rishi
Sanatkumar, highly effulgent, resplandent like unto the sun,
shining in his native brilliance and seated at his own place,
Rlvana, the lord of R&kshasas, said : — "Who is now amongst
the celestials brave and powerful, by whose help the
celestials can vanquish their enemies and whom the twice-
born ones daily worship and the devotees meditate upon.
O thou having piety for wealth, O thou gifted vith six sorts
of wealth, do thou describe this to me kindly." Being
apprised of Rivana's intention, the saint Sanatkumar, who saw
every thing through his devotion, said to him out of
love — " Hear my son. The learned duly, in their sacrifices,
worship that Hari, respected of people and drinking nectar,
who is the lord of the universe, whose origin we do not
know, who is daily worshipped by the celestials and Asuras,
who is highly powerful N&rSyana from whose navel has spurng
Brahmi, the creator of the world, and who has created the
universe consisting of mobile and immobile beings. The
Yogis maditate upon him and celebrate sacrifices in his
honor according to the Puranas, Vedas, Panchardtra and
and other rituals. He always vanquisheth in encounter Daityas
Dinavas, RAkshasas and all other enemies of the celestials
and every one of them worships him." Hearing those
words of the great ascetic Sanatkumar, RSvana, the lord of
Rikshasas, bowing, replied : — "Being slain by Hari to what
station do the Daityas, Danavas and R&kshasas attain ? And
why doth Hari destroy them ? " Whereto Sanatkumar
replied : — " Whoever are slain by the celestials do eternally
reside in their region. And being banished therefrom, they
again take their birth on earth. Thus by the misery and
happiness acquired in their pristine existence, they go
through births and deaths. O king, all the monarchs, slain
by Janarddana,holding discus and the lord of the triple world,
attained to his own region ; even his anger becomcth like a
213


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1698 RAM AY AN A.

boon." Hearing those words given vent to by the great
ascetic Sanatkumar the night-ranger Ravana, being worked
up with delight and surprise, began to meditate how he should
enter into conflict with Hari.


SECTION XLIV.


J_ HE vicious-souled Ravana thinking thus the great
ascetic again gave vent to accents. " O thou having long
arms, what thou hast desired in thy mind shall be encom-
passed in the great encounter. Be thou happy and wait
for some time." Hearing this the long-armed (Ravana)
again said to the ascetic . — " Do thou tell me at length what
are his marks." Hearing the words of the lord of Rakshasas,
the ascetic replied : — " Hearken, I shall relate to thee every
thing, O foremost of Rakshasas. That great deity pervadeth
all, is minute, invisible ever-existing, and manifest over the
universe consisting of mobile and immobile creations. He
is present in the celestial region, in the earth, in the region
underneath the earth, on the mountains, in the forests, in all
stationary objects, in all rivers and in all cities. He is Om,
truth, Sabitri and earth. He is known as the deity Dhara-
dhara (holder of earth) and Ananta. He is day, night,*
morning and evening, Yama, the moon, Kala, the wind,
Brahma, Rudra, Indra and Water. He makes the world
manifest and shine ; he creates them, destroys them and
governs them. He sporteth, is eternal, the lord of men,
Vishnu, Purana and the only destroyer of the world. What


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1699

r the use of speaking more, O Das&nana, He comprehends
the three worlds, the mobile and immobile. Wearing a
tcIIow raiment like unto the filaments of lotus, N£r£yana,
resembling dark-blue lotus in colour, is resplendant like unto
clouds in the welkin accompanied by lightning. And
covering his person, Lakshmi, in the shape of warfare, lies
stationed in his body like unto lightning in the clouds. The
rrlestials, Asuras or N&gas — none is capable of casting his
looks upon him. He alone can see him with whom he is
pleased, O my son ; neither by the fruits of sacrifices, asceti-
cism, self-control, gifts, sacrifices, nor by anything else can
one behold the Illustrious Deity. Those alone can see
Him, who have devoted themselves, their life and being, unto
Him and who, by virtue of discriminative knowledge, have
got their sins burnt If thou art willing to behold him. hear,
if thou dost like, I shall describe everything at length. At
the end of the golden age and the beginning of Treta Yuga
the deity Nlr£yana shall assume a human form for the
benefit of men and celestials. A son by the name of Rama
shall be born unto Dasaratha, of the Ikswaka race who
•hall govern earth. R&ma shall be highly effulgent, highly
powerful and in patience like unto earth — and the enemies
in the encounter shall not be able to eye him as they cannot
the sun. In this wise the lord NSrayana shall appear in a
human form. At the behest of his sire, the pious and the
high-minded R&ma shall sojourn in the forest of Dandaka
in the company of his brother. His spouse the gracious
Lakfhmi, shall be celebrated under the appellation of SiUL
She will be born as the daughter of Janaka,the king of MithilS,
and will come out of earth. In beauty she shall be matchless on
earth and be gifted with auspicious marks and shall always
follow R£ma like a shadow as the rays follow tho moon. She
will be graced with a good conduct, chaste and patient ; and
SitS and R2ma shall always appear together like the rays of
the sun. R^vana, I have thus related to you everything about


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1700 RAM AY AN A,

the Narayana, the great Brahman, eternal and incomprehensi-
ble." O Raghava, hearing those words, the highly powerful
lord of Rakshasas began to concert plans for entering into
conflict with thee. Meditating again and again over Sanat-
kumar's words and delighted he began to journey for battle. ,,
Hearing those words,Rama,with his eyes expanded in surprise,
was greatly wondered. And being delighted he again said
to Agastya, the foremost of the wise : — "Do thou recount the
ancient stories."


SECTION X LV.


-00-


J_ HE highly effulgent and illustrious Agastya,sprung from
a vessel, again addressed the humble Rama as the great
Patriarch sprung from lotus spoke unto the Great Deity.
He said to Rama, having truth for his prowess : — "Do thou
hear." Saying this, the highly effulgent Agastya began to
narrate the last portion of the story. The high-minded saint,
with a delighted heart, described unto Rama all he had heard
and narrated." O high-minded Rama, having long arms, it is
for this reason that the vicious-souled Ravana stole away
Janaki, the daughter of king Janaka. O thou having long
arms ! O thou of many glories ! O thou invincible ! Narada.
recounted this storyunto me on the summit of the mountain-
chief Meru. O Raghava,the highly effulgent one narrated unto
me the last portion of this story in the presence of the
celestials, Gandharbas, Siddhas, ascetics and other great men.
O lord of kings, O conferrer of honors, do thou listen to that


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1701

story which rcmoveth monstrous iniquity. Hearing this,
O thou having long arms, the Rishis, and the celestials with
delighted hearts, said to the ascetic Narada "He who shall
reverentially listen to this story every day, shall be blessed
with sons and grandsons and be honored in the region of the
celestials.


SECTION X LVI.


X HEREUPON being desirous of achieving victories,
Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, proud of his strength, began
to journey over the earth in the company of the heroic
Rakshasas. Whoever, amongst the Daityas, Danavas and
Rakshasis was reported to him as being powerful he used to
invite for battle. O king of earth, having thus traversed the
whole world, the ten-necked demon saw the saint Narada
returning to his own region from Brahmaloka. Like the
second sun he was proceeding through the clouds. Ravana,
with a delighted heart, neared him and addressed the celestial
saint Narada with folded palms, saying : — " O thou gifted with
six sorts of wealth, thou hast seen many a time all creations
from Brahma down to an insect. Do thou tell me, O great
one, the inhabitants of which, world are more
powerful ? I wish to fight with them according to my desire."
Whereto, thinking for a moment, the celestial saint Narada
replied: — "O king, there is an insular continent near the
milky ocean. AH the inhabitants that live there are gifted
with strength— effulgent like the rays of the moon, huge-


Digitized by VjiOOQIC


iyo2 RAM AY AN A.

bodied,highly powerful and have a voice deep as the muttering
of the clouds. They are all greatly beautiful, patient and
have huge arms. king of Rakshasas, I have seen in
Swetadwipa such powerful men, as thou dost want to see
on this earth." Hearing the words of Narada, Ravana said : —
"0 celestial saint, why are the inhabitants of Swetadwipa
powerful ? And how did those high-souled ones come to
live there ? O lord, do thou relate to me everything at length.
Thou dost observe the whole universe like a myrobalam in
in thy palms. " Hearing the words of Ravana, the celestial
saint said : — "O lord of Rakshasas, the inhabitants of
Swetadwipa are perpetually devoted unto Narayana with
whole-mi ndedness and earnestly worship Him. They have
always their hearts and minds devoted unto Him and are all
high-souled. Having rendered their lives and souls unto
Narayana, they have been blessed with their abode in Sweta-
dwipa. Those, who are slain in the encounter with his bow
bent by Vishnu — the holder of discus and the preserver of the
world, attain to the celestial region. Neither by sacrifice,
devout penance, self-control nor excellent gifts may be
obtained the celestial region full of bliss." Hearing the
words of Narada, the Ten necked demon was worked up
with surprise and meditating for some time said " h shall
enter into conflict with him." Thereupon inviting Narada
he proceeded to Swetadwipa. Thinking for a long time and
being curious to witness that wondrous encounter, Narada
speedily went there. He was ever fond of sport and warfare.
Filling all the quarters with dreadful leonine roars Ravana with
all the Rakshasas moved towards the Swetadwipa. After
Narada had reached there, the illustrious Dacanana went to
that insular continent beyond even the reach of the celestials.
Being struck by the radiant heat of that insular continent,
the Puspaka car, of the mighty Ravana, could not standi there
like clouds scattered by the wind. Having arrived at that
dreadful insular continent the councillors of the lord of


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1 703

Rikshasas, fearfully said to Ravana. "0 lord, we are all
ftsptfied and beside ourselves with fear. We cannot any
Wv stand here ; how shall we fight ?" Saying this the
Rikshasas fled away into all directions. And Da^anana too
tent away his golden car Pushpaka with them. Having thus
sent away his chariot and assuming a dreadful figure he alone
entered Swetadwipa. At the time of his entering he was
icen by the females there. One of them holding him by the
hand and smiling said "Why hast thou come hither ? Who
art thou ? who is thy father? and what for hast thou come here ?
Do thou definitely say." Hearing those words, O king,
Rlvana, in anger said : — "I am the son of the ascetic Visrava,
I am Ravana by name ; I have come hither being desirous
of fighting ; but I do not behold anyone here." The vicious-
tooled Ravana having said this all the young damsels laughed
gently. But one of them, being enraged, took up Ravana,
like a child, as if in sport and hurled him amongst her
companions. And addressing another she said : — "Behold,
1 have caught this black Ravana, having twenty arms and
ten faces, like a small insect. Thereupon Ravana, being
worn out with hurling, passed from one one hand to another.
Being thus hurled the learned and powerful Ravana, in anger,
severely bit the palms of that fair one. Being overwhelmed
with pain that damsel let him off. Thereupon, another,
taking that Rakshasa-chief, rose up in the welkin. Ravana,
again waxing wroth tore her with his nails. And being
left off by that damsel, the terrified night-ranger fell down
into the waters of the deep. The females, inhabiting that
insular continent again and again in this wise hurled Ravana.
Beholding him thus distressed the highly effulgent Narada
danced in joy and surprise. O.thou having long arms, being
apprised of this, the vicious-souled Ravana stole away Sita
with a view to meet death at thy hands. Thou art Narayana,
holding discus, conch and club ; thou hast in thy hands the
bow, a lotus, thunder-bolt and other weapons ; thou art


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i;04 RAM AY AN A.

worshipped of all deities ; thou art graced with the mystic
mark Sribatsa,. adored by all celestials, hast a lotus navel,
art a great ascetic, and Hrishikesha declaring fearlessness
unto all devotees. Thou hast assumed a human form to bring
about the destruction of Ravana. Dost thou not recognise
thyself as Narayana ? O great one, do not forget thyself ;
do thou recollect thy real self. The Patriarch Brahma said
that thou art subtler than the subtle. Thou art the the three
qualities, the three Vedas and the regions — that of the
celestials, of the mortals and the region under the earth.
Thy work is manifest in time, past, present and future ; thou
art the observer of three Vedas and the destroyer of the
enemies of the celestials. With thy three steps, thou didst,
in the days of yore, traverse the three worlds. Thou wert
born of Aditi, as the youngest brother of Indra for binding
Bali. Thou art the eternal Vishnu. To extend thy favours
unto humanity thou hast been born as man. O foremost of
the celestials, the work of the deities hath been accom-
plished. The vicious Ravana, with his sons and relatives,
hath been slain. The Rishis, having piety for their wealth
and all the deities have been pleased. O foremost of
gods — all this hath been brought about by thy favours ;
and the whole universe hath been pacified. Sita is the very
personation of Lakshmi, sprung from earth. It is for thee
that she hath been born in the race of Janaka. Bringing
her into Lanka Ravana protected her with care like his
mother. Rama, I have thus related to thee the entire
story. Hearing this from the Rishi Sanatkumar, the long-
lived Narada described this unto me. Dacanana, to a
letter I followed the instructions of Sanatkumar. Who ever
listens to this story at the time of Sraddha, the rice, offered
by him, becoming, inexhaustible, reaches his manes. " Hear-
ing this celestial theme, the lotus-eyed Rama along with
his brothers was greatly surprised. And having their eyes
expanded with delight the monkeys, with Sugriva, the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1705

Rlkshasas with Bibhishana, the kings with their councillors,
and all other assembled pious Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas,
and Sadras, delightedly espied R&ma. Thereupon the highly
effulgent Agastya said to RSma : — "0 Rama, we have all
seen thee and been honoured ; now we shall depart." Say-
ing this, they, being honored, repaired to their respective
habitations. The sun set, Rama, the foremost of men, gave
farewell to monkeys and their king and duly went through the
Sandhyi rite. Gradually night set in and he entered the
inner appartment.


SEICTION X LVII.


K-


JUCUTSTHA, knowing himself, being thus duly installed,
the first night,enhancing the delight of the citizens, was spent.
At dawn, the prisoners, to wake up the king, arrived at the
palace. And those songsters, well trained and having a
musical voice like the Kinnaras, began to eulogize the heroic
king, to the increase of his joy. "Awake, O gentle hero,
increasing Kausalyi's joy, O foremost of men. Thyself being
asleep the whole universe will be laid up with sleep. In
prowess thou art like Vishnu,in beauty thou art like two Aswins,
in intellect thou art like Vrihaspati and in the capacity of
governing thou art like the Patriarch Brahma. Thy patience
equals that of earth, thy effulgence equals that of the sun, thy
velocity equals the wind and thy gravity resembles the deep.
Thou art stable like a stake, gentle like the moon. No king
like thee had flourished before — no other shall follow. O
214


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1706 RAM AY AN A.

foremost of men, thou art irrepressible, ever pious and
engaged in bringing about welfare unto thy subjects. Fame
and wealth shall never renounce thee. O Kakutstha, in thee
are perpetually stationed grace and wealth." Thus did the
panegyrists eulogise him in various sweet accents and RSghava
got up. Like unto Hari rising up from the bed of serpents
Rama, thus eulogized, rose up from his bed covered with a
a white coverlet. Taking white vessels full of water,
thousands of well-trained survitors stood waiting before the
high-souled (Rama). Washing his mouth, being purified and
offering oblation unto fire, he entered the holy room of the
tutelary deity much honored by the Ikshwakus. And there
having worshipped duly the celestials, manes and the
Brahmins, he, encircled by men,came to the outer appartment.
And there arrived the leading priests headed by Vasishtha
and ministers all resplendant like unto fire. And there sat
around Rama the Kashatrya kings hailing from various
provinces as the celestials sit encircling their lord Indra.
The illustrious Bharata, Lakshmana and Satrughna began to
worship him and he appeared like a sacrifice conducted by
Vedic hymns. And the servants, with their eyes shut, sat
around him. The twenty heroic monkeys headed by the
highly powerful Sugriva also began to worship him. As the
Guhyakas worship Kuvera so Bibhishana, accompanied by
four R&kshasas, waited upon him. All those who were
advanced in the study of Vedas, born in respectable families,
and learned, bowed unto the king lowering their heads.
Like unto the celestial-king Indra worshipped by the saints
the king Rama was being perpetually honored by the effulgent
saints, kings, monkeys, and Rakshasas. He appeared more
beautiful than Indra at that time. And religious themes were
recited in that assembly by persons conversant with the know-
ledge of Puranas.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. # 1707


SECTHON XLVIII.


X HUS did the long-armed R£ma spend his days looking
into all administrative works relating to the city and
provinces. Some days having elapsed, he, with folded hands,
said to Janaka, the king of Mithila, "Thou art our only
refuge — we have been reared by thee and by the help of thy
dreadful prowess we have been able to destroy Ravana.
O king, the relation between the families of Ikshwaku and
Mithila, Is unequalled and delightful. Taking the jewel, do
thou proceed to thy own city and Bharata as a help shall
follow thee." Saying "so be it" the king Janaka bespoke
Rama "O king, I have been delighted with seeing thee and thy
courteous manners. The jewels collected for me, I do confer
upon my two daughters." The royal saint Janaka having
gone away, R£ma, with folded hands and humbly said to his
maternal uncle Kaikeya — "O king, this kingdom, myself.Bharat
and Lakshmana are all at thy disposal. The old king might
have been grieved for thy long absence. It therefore behoveth
thee, O king, to go there to-day. With immense wealth and
various jewels let Likshmana follow thee. Agreeing with
his request Yudhajit said, " O Rftghava, let jewels
and wealth be be inexhaustible with thee." Thereupon,
Rama, at first saluted and went round him and then
Yudhajit, the son of Kekaya, went away to his kingdom in
the company of Lakshmana like unto Indra (leaving for home)
in the company of Vishnu on the destruction of the Asura
Vitra. Having bade adieu unto his maternal uncle R&ma
embraced his friend Pratardana, the undaunted king of
Kashi and said : — "Thou hast displayed thy brotherly feelings
and delight by making arrangements for my installation in


Digitized by VjOOQIC


>


1708 RAMAYANA.

the company of Bharata. O king, do thou now leave for thy
city Baranushi, highly picturesque, well-guarded, girt by
strong walls on all sides and having well-decorated gate-
ways." Saying this, Rama, the descendant of Kakutstha
rose up from his seat and embraced him cordially. Having
taken farewell from Rama enhancing Kausalya's delight, the
king of Kashi, with his followers, fearlessly and speedily
proceeded to his own city. Having bade adieu to the king of
Kashi, Rama, with a smiling countenance and sweet accents,
said to the three hundred assembled kings : "Being well
protected by your own prowess, you have all displayed your
great love for me. By your piety, truthfulness, sagacity and
strength, the vicious-souled Ravana hath been slain. For-
sooth, I am merely the instrument in the destruction of
Ravana — he hath been slain by your strength. Hearing that
Sita, the daughter of Janaka, had been stolen away from the
forest the high-minded Bharata did bring you all — but
fortunately you were not constrained to go through miseries.
High-minded as you are, you were all prepared for this
work. Long since you have come here. I think it
better that you should proceed to your respective
habitations." Whereto the kings, greatly delighted, replied :
" O Rama, it is by thy good fortune that thou hast
come off victorious and been installed on the throne ; it is
by thy good luck that thou hast got back Sita and the
enemy Dacanana hath been vanquished. That we behold
thee, O Rama, victorious and freed from all enemies, is our
great benefit and delight. The encomiums, thou hast
showered upon us, are natural with thee. Thou art Rama,
who always pleases people. Thou art worthy of being
praised but we do not know how to praise thee. With thy
permission we shall now leave for our respective provinces
but thou shalt always reside in our hearts. O thou having
long arms, O great king, mayst thou have that love for us
perpetually that we may find place in thy heart." Whereto


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAXf. 1 709

Rlma replied saying "so be it.' Thereupon the kings, highly
delighted and desirous of going, bade farewell unto Rama,
with folded palms and being honored by him, left for their
respective kingdoms.


SECTION X LIX,


XXAViNG agitated the earth with thousands of elephants
and horses the kings proceeded to various quarters. And
being prepared to help R&ma many Akshauhini soldiers with
many steeds waited at Ayodha at the command of Bharata.
Those kings, proud and powerful, spoke to one another — " We
did not face R&vana — the enemy of Rlma; Bharata did
uselessly invite us after the destruction of R&vana. Had
they brought us earlier, we would, forsooth, have slain him.
We would have, on the other side of the ocean, well protec-
ted by the prowess of Rlma and Lakshmana, and freed from
all disturbances, fought at pleasure. 1 ' Being thus delighted,
all those assembled princes proceeded to their respective
kingdoms, dwelling on these and various other topics. And.
having arrived at their celebrated cities, unscathed,
abounding in delighted people, wealth, crops and jewels
they sent various presents of jems to R&ma for his satisfac-
tion. Besides this they made over to him innumerable horses,
conveyances, infuriated elephants, sandal, excellent orna-
mants, jewels, pearls, corals, beautiful female servants and
various cars. And taking all those jewels, the highly power-


Digitized by VjiOOQIC


i?io RAM AY AN A.

ful Bharala, Lakshmana and Salruglina returned to their
own city. Having arrived at the picturesque city Ayodhya
those foremost of men, made presents of various jewels unto
Rama. Having delightedly accepted those gifts Rama in
return made presents of them unto the successful king
Sugriva, Bibhishana and other Rakshasas and monkeys
by whose help he had achieved victory. And those highly
powerful monkeys and night-rangers wore on their heads
and arms those jewels conferred on them by Rama. Having
placed on his lap the long-armed Angada and Hanuman, the
mighty car- warrior — the lotus-eyed RSma said to Sugriva
"Angada is thy good son and Hanuman is thy wise
councillor. O Sugriva, these are always engaged in my well-
being and in giving me good counsels. For thee, therefore,
O king of monkeys, I should honor them in various ways."
Having said this, the illustrious Rama took off from his arms
valuable ornaments and adorned Angada and Hanuman
therewith. Thereupon having welcomed and casting loving
looks upon the highly powerful and leading monkeys such
as Neela, Kesarin, Kumuda, Gandhamadana, Sushena,
Panasa, Mainda, Dwivida, Jambavan, Gabaksha, Dhumra,
Baleemukha, Prajaghna, Saunada, Dareemukha, Dadhimuka,
Indrajanu and others, he addressed them all in sweet accents,
saying: — " You are all my friends like unto my limbs and
brothers. O ye inhabitants of forests, you have saved me
from the ocean of danger. Blessed is the king Sugriva and
blessed are the friends like yourselves". Saying this Rama,
the foremost of men, conferred upon them duly many
precious clothes and ornaments and embraced them all. The
monkeys lived there all happily feasting on fragrant honey,
well-cooked meat and various fruits and roots. In this way
they spent more than a month — but it appeared to them as
a moment on account of their devotion unto Rama. He, too
also spent his time happily with monkeys assuming shapes
at will, the highly powerful Rakshasas and the mighty


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 171 i

bears. In this way the delighted monkeys and Rakshasas
spent the second winter month. Enjoying delight they thus
spent their days happily in the city of Ayodhya working to
the welfare of Rama.


SEC TION XLX.


J_N this wise, the monkeys, bears and Rakshasas spent
their days in Ayodhya. Thereupon the highly effulgent
Rama, the descendant of Raghu said to Sugriva : — " O gentle
one, proceeding to the city of Kishkindha, hard to be got at
by the celestials and Asuras, do thou reign there undisturbed
with thy councillors. O thou having long arms, always look
towards Angada, with loving eyes. Do thou, O Sugriva,
protect lovingly the highly powerful Hanuman, Nala, thy
father-in-law Sushena, the mighty TSlra, irrepressible Kumada,
the powerful Neela, the heroic Satabali, Mainda, Dwivida,
Gaya, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sarava, the irrespressible and
powerful king of bears Jamvaban, Gandhamadana, valiant
Rishava, Supatala, Keshan, Sarabha and Sumbha — these
and other heroic monkeys who dedicated their lives to my
service. Do thou never act to ther displeasure." Having
said this and embraced Sugriva again and again Rama
addressed Bibhishana with sweet accents. " I know, thou
art cognizant of piety ; the citizens, thy councillors and
thy brother Kuvera also love thee ; do thou therefore
go and govern LankSt piously, O king; never cherish
any vile intention ; the honest kings always enjoy


Digitized by VjOOQIC


I7»2 RAMAYANA.

the earth. And my only request to thee, O king, is
that thou mayst with love remember me and Sugriva. Do
thou now proceed, divested of sorrow." Hearing the words
of Rama, the bears, monkeys and Rakshasas repeatedly
exclaimed glory unto Rama and said " O Rama, having long
arms, thy understanding resembleth that of the Self-Sprung,
thy prowess is equally wonderful and thy beauty is also
par excellence. 19 The monkeys and Rakshasas having
said this, Hanum&n bowing, said unto Rama "May my
loving reverence be always in thee, O king ; may
my devotion unto thee remain unshaken, O hero ; and may
my mind be not attached unto any other thing. May my
life remain in my body as long as the stories of Rama shall
be in currency on earth. Let not this prove otherwise.
foremost of men, O descendant of Raghu, may the Apsaras
make me always hear of thy themes. O hero, as the winds
scatter the clouds so I shall remove my anxiety by listening
to thy nectar-like themes." After Hanuman had said this,
Rama rose up from his throne and having embraced Hanu-
man affectionately said, "O foremost of monkeys, what thou
hast said, shall undoubtedly be carried out into action. As
long as my stories shall be current on earth thy fame shall
exist and life shall be in thy body. And as long as the world
shall exist my themes shall be related. I cannot, even at
the sacrifice of my life, release myself from the debts of one
good service out of the many, thou hast done for me, O
monkey ; and I shall for ever remain indebted to thee for
thy last benefaction. Or let them wear out in me, for men,
at the time of danger, become worthy of having their benefits
returned/ 1 Having said this, Rama took off from his
neck a chain set with sapphires brilliant as the rays of
the moon and placed it round the neck of Hanuman.
Like unto the mountain Suineru beautified by the rising of
the moon on its summit, Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys,
appeared graceful with the chain placed on his breast. And


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1713

bearing the words of RSghava, the highly powerful monkeys,
one by one, saluted Rima, touching his feet and went away.
Both Sugriva and the virtuous-souled Bibhishana embraced
Rlma and three of them were beside themselves with tears.
And other monkeys and Rakshasas were all moved with
tears and sorrow to take leave of Rama. Having received
favours thus from the high-souled Raghava the monkeys
went away to their own houses like-unto bodied creatures
leaving off their bodies. Thereupon the Rakshasas, bears,
monkeys, having bowed unto Rama, the glory of the Raghu
family and with their eyes full of tears consequent upon his
separation, went away to the countries from which they had
hailed.


SECTION LU


XXAV1NG bade adieu unto bears, monkeys and Rakshasas
the long-armed Rama began to live happiiy in the com-
pany of his brothers. Thereupon he and his brothers
beard from the air the following sweet accents : — " O
gentle Rama, do thou with a delighted countenance
behold me. O lord, know me as Pushpaka coming from
the abode of Kuvera. O foremost of men, at thy com-
mand I did go there to carry him. But he said to me : —
4 Having slain the irrepressible Ravana in battle the high-
souled Rama, the foremost of men, hath conquered thee. I
have greatly been delighted on the destruction of the
vicious-souled Ravana, with his relatives, sons and friends.
215


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1714 RAM AY AN A.

gentle one, the great Rama hath conquered thee in LankS ;

1 permit thee, therefore to convey him. Thou art the fit
conveyance for traversing all regions. But my earnest
desire is that thou shouldst take Rama, the descendant of
Raghu. Do, thou therefore go there at pleasure without
any sorrow/ Hearing this command of the high-souled
Kuvera I have come to thee. Do thou fearlessly accept
me. I am above the conquest of all the worlds. At the
command of Kuvera I shall valiantly traverse all regions
carrying out your behests ,, Hearing the words of Push-
paka, the highly powerful Rama said to the returning
car stationed in the welkin : — " O foremost of cars, Push-
paka, if such be the case, do thou come here ; while the
lord of wealth hath commanded thus, I. will not be
blameable for bad character." Having said this and
worshipped it with dried paddy, fragrant flowers and in-
cense, R3ma, having long arms, addressed Pushpaka — "Do
thou go now and come here whenever I shall remember thee.
While proceeding by the welkin, O gentfe one, be not
sorry for our separation. And be not obstructed in thy
cmirse whilst traversing all the quarters." Having been
adored by Rama and saving ' so be it' Pushpaka proceeded
towards its wished-for direction. And the holy Pushpaka
car having thus vanished, Bharata, with folded palms, said
to Rama, the delight of Raghus — u O hero, during thy
divine administration, we have seen many inhuman creatures
and objects speak like men. During all these months
since thy installation subjects have not suffered from any
disease. Even the most aged animals have not met with
death. The female, without any risk, have been giving birth
to children and all people are plump and delighted. The
delight of the citizens hath been greatly increased, O
Icing. Indra hath been pouring nectar-like showers in
due time. The wind is always delightful and wholesome.
O king of men, the inhabitants of the city and province*


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 171 5

arc all saying u we may have for ever such a king." Hear-
ing those sweet accents given vent to by Bharata, Rlma,
the foremost of kings was greatly delighted.


SECTION LIK


xJL AV,NG scilt away the golden Pushpaka, the highly
powerful RSma entered the Asoka forest beautified by
sandal, Agura, Mangoe, dark sandal and Debadaru trees,
and covered with Champaka, Aguru, Naga, Kesara, Madhuka,
Panasa, Sarja, P&rijita, resembling smokeless fire, Sodhra,
Neepa, Arjuna, N5ga, Saptaparna, Muktaka, MandSra,
Kadalee and various creepers, abounding in Priyanga,
Kadamba, Vakula, Jambu, pomegranate, and Kadali trees,
containing various flowers, picturesque, having many fruits,
fragrant, decorated with new leaves and adorned with various
other trees. There were many a tree, having profuse foliage
and flowers and covered with maddened black bees as if
constructed by architects. The forest-land was variegated
and beautified by cuckoos, the ornaments of mangoe trees,
black-bees and various birds of various colours. Amongst
the trees beautifying the forest some were gold-hued, some
were radiant as the flame of fire and some were like red
collyrium. There were various flowers, spreading fragrance
and making garlands. And there were various ponds filled
with pure water. The stairs of those ponds were made of
corals and the ground was of crystal. And they were all
filled with lotuses and lilies. Thry were beautified with


Digitized by VjOOQIC


>


i 7 i6 RAM AY AN A.

Chakrabakas and the banks were graced with variegated
trees and flowers. And the forest was encompassed by
stone walls and in the inside were dwelling many a Sardula
bird resembling Vaiduryas. All the trees in the forest were
filled with flowers. And the rocks there, covered with flowers
falling down from trees, appeared like welkin beautified
with stars. And Rama's Asoka forest was like unto
Indra's Nandana and Kuvera's Chitraratha made by Brahma.
Having entered the rich Asoka forest abounding in many
seats and houses and creepers Rama sat on an excellent
seat covered with a beautiful coverlet and well constructed.
Like unto Purandara with Sachi he took Sita by the hand,
made her sit and drink the wine distilled in the province
of Mira. And in no time the servants brought for him well-
cooked meat and various fruits. Being inebriete the
beautiful Apsaras, well-skilled in the art of singing and
dancing, began to dance before Rama in the company of
Kinnaris. The virtuous-souled Rama, the foremost of those
who know how to please, satisfied those beautiful damsels
adorned with various ornaments. And Sita sitting by him,
he appeared like the effulgent Vasishtha in the company of
Arundhati. Being greatly delighted the celestiaMike Rama
pleased every day Sita resembling a celestial damsel. Sita
and Raghava thus spent their days happily. And thus was
spent the delightful winter giving all enjoyments. Enjoying
various things the high-souled Rama and Sita spent ten
thousand years. Once on a time, having performed all the
religious ceremonies, in the fore part of the day, Rama, to
spend the evening, entered the inner apartment. Sita, too,
having performed all religious ceremonies, at first attended
to the service of her mothers-in-law. Thereupon wearing
a beautifully coloured cloth and being adorned with various
ornaments Sita appeared before Rama like unto Sachi
approaching the king of celestials in heaven. And beholding
the auspicious signs of pregnancy in his spouse Rama


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 17 17

attained to excessive delight. Thereupon he said to the
beautiful Sit* resembling a celestial damsel : — "O
Yaidehi — signs of pregnancy are manifest in thee.
What desires of thine can we satisfy ?" Smiling
a little the daughter of Janaka said : — "0 Raghava, I wish
to behold the holy hermitages. I wish to salute the
greatly effulgent Rishis living on fruits and roots and
residing on the banks of the Ganges. I greatly desire, O
Rama, that I may spend even one night in the hermitage of
the Rishis living on fruits and roots." Whereto replied
Rama of unwearied actions, saying 'so be it. 1 Believe me,
O Vaidehi, that thou sha.lt undoubtedly go there to-morrow."
Having thus addressed Maithili, the daughter of Janaka,
Rama, the descendant of Kakutstha, then issued out of the
inner apartment and entered the middle one filled with his
friends.


SECTION LIN.


Xv\MA having taken his seat there, the experienced
councillors encircling him began to dwell upon many amusing
stories. Bijoya, Madhumatta, Kasyapa, Mangala, Kula,
Surajni, Kalya, Vadra Dantavakta, Sumagadha — all
delightedly began to introduce many amusings talks before
the high-souled Rama. Thereupon Rama incidentally ad-
dressed them saying — " O Vadra, how do the inhabitants of
the city and provinces talk about Sita, Bharata, Lakshmana,
Satrughna and the mother Kaikeyi ? The kings, when they


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i7»8 RAMAYANA.

deviate from the paths of justice, become objects of censure in
the houses of men and even in the forests as well." R&ma
having said this, Vadra with folded hands replied : — "0 king,
the citizens speak many good things about thee ; besides
they dilate upon many things in their own houses regarding
thine conquest acquired by the destruction of the Ten-necked
demon." Hearing the words of Vadra, Rama said : — "Without
hiding any thing, do thou relate every thing from the be-
ginning as they are ; what good and bad things have 6een
given vent to by. the citizens. Hearing the good and bad
opinions of the citizens I shall desist from bad actions and
engage in good ones. Whatever vicious actions of mine
are talked of by subjects in cities and provinces do thou
relate unto me confidently and fearlessly. " Hearing the
sweet accents of Rama, Vadra, with a quiesceni mind and
folded palms, said : — "Hear, O king, I shall relate to thee all
those unpleasant things frequently dwelt upon by people in
court-yards, markets, public roads, forests and, gardens.
Indeed Rama hath accomplished a wonderfully hard work ;
our ancestors, the celestials, the Danavas — none heard of
constructing a bridge over the ocean ? R&ma hath slain
the irrepressible Ravana with his army and brought over
the monkeys, bears and Rakhasas to his own side. Having
discomfitted Ravana, in the encounter Rama hath released
Sit&, but not being the least enraged or account of her
being touched by Ravana he hath brought her to his
own city. RSvana did forcibly place SitSL on her lap;
how can then Rama enjoy delight in her company?
Having taken her to the city of Lanka, Rivana did keep
her in the Asoka forest and SitSL was brought under the
control of Rakshasces. Still Rlma hath not been worked
up with hatered by Sita. From now we shall also brooke
the bad conduct of our wives — for the subjects always
tread the footsteps of their King. O King, the subjects
thus talk of many things in cities and provinces." Hear-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 17T9

ings those words of Vadra, RSghava was greatly sorry
and asked his friends saying "Do the subjects thus talk
about mc?" Thereupon lowering their heads and saluting
him they all said to Raghava, of a depressed mind —
w For sooth, the subjects thus talk about." Thereupon
Kakutstha, the slayer of enemies, hearing all those words,
dismissed his friends.


SECTION LIV,


IL


^AvlNG sent away his friends and determined what
to do, Rama, the delight of the Raghus, commanded the
warder, who was seated hard by, saying : — " Do thou
speedily bring here, Lakshmana the son of Sumitra and
gifted with auspicious marks, the great Bharata and the
irrepressible Satrughna." Hearing the words of Rama and
placing his folded palms on his head the warder reached
the bouse of Lakshmana and unobstructed entered therein*
And having saluted him, with folded palms he said to
the high-souled Lakshmana *, — " The King wishes to be-
hold thee — do thou soon go there. " Thereupon being
apprised of Raghava's command and saying 'so be it/ Saumitri
ascended his car and went speedily towards Rama's
abode. Having beheld Lakshmana's departure the warder
humbly went to Bharata and having blessed him with
folded hands said : — ,# The King wishes to see thee. ,f
Hearing of the command of Rama from the warder, the
highly powerful Bharata at once got up from his seat


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i 7 20 RAM AY ANA.

and proceeded on foot. Seeing Bharata's departure the
warder speedily went to Satrughna and with folded hands
said :— " Do thou come, O foremost Raghus, the King
wisheth to behold thee." Hearing the words of the warder
Satrughna lowered his head and rising up speedily pro-
ceeded to Rama. Thereupon returning, the warder, with
folded hands, communicated unto Rama, the arrivals of
his brothers. So long Rama was engaged poorly in
anxious meditation with his crown bent downwards. In-
formed of the princes' arrival he commanded the warder,
" Do thou soon bring the princes here. My. life depends
upon them. They are my dearest life." Having obtained
Rama's command, the princes, clothed in white raiment,
entered there, with folded palms and quiescent mind.
Having entered there they saw that Rama's countenance
was shorn of beauty like unto the moon possessed by
Rahu, the setting sun and the withered lotus and his
eyes were full of tears. Having approached him quickly,
and saluted his feet they anxiously sat there.
Thereupon having wiped off his tears and embraced them
with his arms he raised up the princes and pressed them
to take their seats. Thereupon he said^-"You are mine
all ; you constitute my life ; O princes, I am governing the
kingdom gained by you ; you are all learned, pious and
intelligent. Do ye follow the duties I point out." Rama,
the descendant of Kakustha having said this, they, with
anxiety and attention, awaited the orders of the king.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1 7 2 1


SECTION LV;


X HE princes were all waiting with a poorly heart when
R2ma, with a dried countenance, addressed them, saying: —
•• May good betide you — do not act against my desire. Hear,
what the citizens have been talking about me and Sit§. The
citizens as well as the inhabitants of provinces have beett
showering censures upon me. I have been pierced to the very
vitals by those accusations. I have been born in the illustrious
family of the high-souled Ikshawkus. Sita hath been born
also in the holy family of the great Janaka ; gentle Lakshitfana,
thou knowest how in the solitary forest of Dandaka, Sita
was stolen away by Rivana and how have I slain him. At
that time even I was stricken with anxiety regarding Sita
that how 1 could take her home since she had resided in the
house of the Rakshasas. To secure my confidence, Sit*,
in your very presence, entered fire* At that time, O Saumitri,
fire, carrying sacrificial oblations and the wind of the sky
declared Sila's innocence before the celestials. In the pre-
sence of all the Rishis and gods, the Sun and Moon an-
nounced the innocence of the daughter of Janaka. Indra,
the king of the celestials, himself handed over the chaste
Sita unto me in the island of Lanka. My mind knoweth
Sita as chaste for ever. So, at that time, I came back to
Ayodhya with Sita. But now a great sorrow consequent
upon the censure ef the citizens and villagers hath pierced
my heart. Hi% who is notorious on this earth and as
long as that notoriety remains current, is classed amongst
the vile. Even the celestials speak ill of bad name
—-whereas fame is adored in all the regions. There-
fore the bigli-souled exert their best to acquire reputation.
atO


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1 722 RAM AY ANA.

O foremost of men, what to speak of the daughter of
Janaka — I can even renounce my life and yourselves in
fear of a bad name. Do ye therefore perceive into what
great abyss of sorrow and ill-fame I have fallen. Up to
this time I have never experienced such a mighty grief.
Do thou, O Lakshmana, ne*t niorriing, ascending the car
driven by Sumantra, take away SitSL to another cfcuhtrjr.
There is a picturesque hermitage of the high-souled
V&lmiki situate on the TamasS on tfie fcther side of the
river Ganges. Do tbou, O delight of Raghus, soon come
back, leaving behind Sita in that lovely place. Do thott
carry out my words* Do thou ndt speak anything regarding
Sita's Banishnient; O Saumitri, if dost thou request me
to desist from this, it shall be the more unpleasant unto
hie. For my life and arms, do ye not proffer any request
unto me regarding this, If So, you shall only endanger
iny well-being and I shall ever regard you as my enemies.
|f you obey my behests; do ye honor my words now.
Do ye take away SitS from here. Ere this Sit* had
communicated her intention of beholding the hermitages
of ascetics on the banks of the Ganges. Let tnat desrrcf
of hers be rtbw satisfied." While saying tnis, the eyes of
the virtubus-souled Rama were covered with tears. Sigh-
ing hard like unto an elephant, he, with a heart stricken
ivith grief, departed to his own quarter in the company of
his brothers.


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. *w


SECTION LVI


Xhe night being over, Lakshmana, with a poor heart
*qd dnfd countenance, addressed Sumantra, saying:— -i'Q
charioteer, do thou soon yoke quick-coursing steeds to aij
excellent chariot, and for Sita place an excellent seat on
the car. At (he command of the King, I shall take Sita.
to the hermitage of the ascetics ever engaged in pious
actions. Do thou soon bring the chariot here." Obeying the
mandate, and bringing a beautiful and holy car drawn by first-
rate steeds and having excellent seats, he said to Saunjitri, the
enhancer of fri*n<}«' honor "O lord, here is the chariot ready— r
do thou now satisfy thine desire. 11 Hearing the words of
Sumatra, Lakshmana, the foremost of men, approached Sita
in the inqer apartment and said : — "O queen, thou didst
request the king to show thee the hermitage — the king toq
did promise — he hath now commanded me to take thee
there. Do thou therefore follow me, at the command of the
king. ( shall, at his behest, take thee to the forest where
dwell many an ascetic." Hearing the words of the high-
souled Lakshmana, J&naki attained to excessive delight and
became anxious to go. Taking various jewels and costly
clothes she said to Lakshmana. on the eve of her departufa—
"I shall confer these ornaments, these cqstly clothes and
riches on the female ascetics. 4 ' Saying 'we shall do the same'
he made 6iU ascend the car and remembering Rama's
command proceeded, being carried by quick-coursing steeds.
Thereupon SitJ s*id to Lakshmana, the enhancer of
prosperity : — "O descendent of Raghu, I behold many
inauspicious omens. My right eye and body are trembling.
My mind is growing depressed. It is stricken with


Digitized by VjOOQIC


>


1 724 RAM AY AN A.

anxiety and I have accordingly grown restless. I behold
the earth as void of all happiness. O thou fond of brothers —
hath thy brother met with any calamity ? Are all my
mothers-in-law and subjets well ?" Saying this Sita, with
folded hands, began to pray unto gods. Hearing this
Lakshmana bowed unto her touching the ground with his
crown, and though gpeatly sorry, said as if delighted "All
well." Thereupon having arrived at the hermitage situate on
the banks of Gomati Lakshmana spent the night there. There^
upon at dawn he rose up and asked the charioteer to get
the chariot ready, saying, "Like unto the powerful Mahadeva
we shall hold the waters of the Bhagirathi on our head." There*
upon Sumantra yoked the horses, gifted with the fleet course
of the mind, to the chariot and with folded hands said to
Sita "Do thou ascend the car." According to the request of
the intelligent charioteer, Sita, with Lakshmana, ascended that
excellent conveyance. In no time the daughter of Janaka,having
expansive eyes, arrived at the banks of the Ganges removing
all sins, Reaching the currents of Bhagirathi before noon
Lakshmana, on beholding her, cried aloud. Thereupon be-
holding Lakshmana thus distressed, Sita, conversant with
piety, waxing anxious said. "Why art thou weeping,
Lakshmana? I have reached the banks of Janhavi, for which
I have so long desired. So this is the time for rejoicing and
do not give me pain at this time. O foremost of men, thou
dost spend thine days and nights in the company of Rama,
Thou hast left him for two days only — art thou sorry for
this ? Lakshmana — Rama is also dearer than my life — but
I am not sq sorry — do thou not be therefore overwhelmed
with grief. Do thou take me to the other side of the Ganges
so that I may behold the ascetics an,4 cqnfer upon them
clothes and ornaments. Thereupon saluting them duly and
spending a night we shall return to the capital. I am also
anxious to see Rama, having eyes like lotus petals,
fcreast like that of a lion and foremast of men." Hearing


L


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAAf. f 725

the won Is of Sill and wiping his beautiful eyes, Lakshmana,
the slayer of enemies, sent for boatmen. As soon as they
were called, with folded hands they said. " The boat is
ready/' Having then brought a boit to cross the holy Ganges
Lakshmana, with a quiescent mind, took her to the other
side.


SECTION LVII


n


.AVING at first conducted Sit* to the spacious and
well decorated boat plied by fishermen Lakshmana himself
got up. Thereupon he ordered Sumantra to wait there with
the chariot, and being beside himself with sorrow ordered the
sailors to move on. Thereupon having reached the other side
of Bh&girathi, Lakshmana, with subdued voice and folded
palms, said to SU& — "O daughter of the king of Videha, this.
hath pierced my heart like a dart, that my brother, by making
me the instrumental of this action hath made me th©
object of censure in the world. The death and the
pain consequent upon it arc better than the action I am
engaged in. Be thou propitiated, O beautiful damsel, do
not hold me responsible for this." Saying this, the humble
Lakshmana began to weep and pray for death. Beholding
him thus overwhelmed, SitA said "What is the matter,
Lakshmana ? I do not understand anything. Do thou
speak out everything plainly unto me. I find thee beside
thyself (with grief) ; is it all well with the kingdom ? In
the name of the king, do thou give out unto me, the cause


Digitized by VjOOQIC


!736 RAM AY AN A.

of thy sorrow.*' Sita having addressed him thus, Lakshmana.
with a poorly heart and suppressed tone, said °0 worshipful
queen; I h^ve kept within my heart all those words, which
the king said, before he entered his palace, rendered sorry
and impatient on hearing in the assembly the report of
censure regarding thee, O daughter of king Janaka. All
those words are indeed above description and so I desist.
J only say so much, that afraid of the calumny oj \\\e citizens
he hath renounced thee although thy purity was sufficiently
proved befqre me. But for that, do not consider thyself
in any way guilty. R^ma hath commanded me to leave thee
near the hermitage on the pretext of satisfying thine desire
^s thou art big with a child. Do not uselessly give vent to
sorrow any more. There is the holy hermitage of the saints
pn the banks of Janhavi. There lives V&lmiki, the foremost
of saints, a great friend of our sire Dacaratha. O daughter
of Janaka, approaching that high-souled saint, do thou spend
thy days happily keeping Rama always in thy mind. Do thou
satisfy the deities, O chaste damsel. This shall crown thee
with auspiciousness."


6ECTI0N LVIII.


X1EARING the ruthless words of Lakshmana,the daughter
of Janaka, greatly sorry, fell down on earth. And remaining
senseless for some time, Sitft, wiih her eyes full of tears
said to Latehmana : — "Forsooth, O Lakshmana, the great
Dispenser hath created this body to suffer-miscries ; and


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTtARAKANbAti. i)2j

all my afflictions are manifest in form to-day. Methinks;
I committed a mighty iniquity in my pristine existence or
brought about separation between a husband and wife and
for that Rama hath teridiiriccd me albeit I am pure and
chaste. O son of Sumitra, the affliction of residing in the
forest appeared to me as pleasure ere this for I knew that
I would he able to serve Rama's feet. But how shall 1; O
gentle one, live in the herttiitage being divorced from all my
kith and kin ? And being afflicted td whom shall I express
my sorrow ? What reply shall I offer unto the ascetics
when they shall ask me "Child, why hath the high-souled
Raghava renounced thee ? What sin hast thou committed ?'
O Saumitri, I shall just renounce my life in the waters of
Jahnavi ? But I desist from this for it shall bring about the
termination O my husband's race. O Saumitri, do thou
carry out the orders thou hast received. By renouncing
this wretched wight do thou satisfy the King's orders*
But hear, what I say. Without making any distinction*
do tboti) in my name) with folded hands, bow unto my
mothers-in-law and then ask the well-being of the king-
dom. Thereupon saluting the pious King do fliou address
him, in my name, saying :— " Thou knowestj O Raghava*
that Sita is pure, ever devoted unto thee and engaged
in thy well-being. She knows it full well, that afraid of
a bad name thou hast renounced her. It is her duty to
put a stop td thy ill-name and cerisiire ; for thou art
her excellent refuge.' Do thou tell further-more that
king established in righteousness to treat the citizens ad
his brothers, to acquire piety by protecting his subjects
duly — for this is the greatest morality and by this may
be acquired excellent fame. Tell him that I am not sorry
for my person — my greatest sorrow is that the citizens
have vilified me. Husband is a woman's god — her friend
and spiritual guide. It is proper therefore to work out
husband's well-being even at the sacrifice of life. Do


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1728 RAM A VAN A.

thou, Likshmana, conlniiinicate it in short unto
Rama, in my names Do thou go now and behold
the signs of pregnancy are manifest in me." Sita
having said this, Lakshmana, with a bewildered heart, saluted
her touching the ground with his head. He could not speak
more. Thereupon bewailing aloud and circumambulating
her, he, meditating a little, said. "What art thou speaking
unto me, O worshipful dame ? O thou having no sin, up td
this time 1 have not seen any portion of thy beautiful person
but feet. This is a solitary forest and besides the worship-
ful Rama, is not present here — under these circums-
tances how can I cast looks upon thee ?" Having addressed
SiiS in this wise Lakshmana again sent for a boat and
ascending it ordered the boatmen to go. Thereupon having
reached the other side and being beside himself with sorrow
and grief he speedily ascended the car. And casting his
looks behind while proceeding he espied that Sita, on the
other side of the Ganges, was roving wildly like one having
none to look after her. Looking again and again when
Sita saw that Lakshmana and the chariot have gone beyond
the range of her vision, she became overwhelmed with
anxiety and grief. Being sunk in grief and pressed down
with the weight of sorrow on not beholding Rama, the fore-
most of the illustrious, the chaste SitSL began to cry aloud
in the forest resounded with the notes of peacocks*


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1729


SECTION LlX


B«H<


fOLDING SitS. thus wailing, the sons of the Rishid
there speedily approached the great V3Llmiki, well-established
in asceticism. And saluting him they all communicated
onto him Sitl's be waitings and said, " O great sir, we
do not know the wife of what great man, beautifnl
like the very Lakshmi, and not seen before, is crying aloud
very poorly ? It is better that thou shouldst see her once.
That beautiful damsel, like a goddess falling from heaven
being bewildered, is waiting on the banks of the river. We
saw her alone crying aloud being overwhelmed with sorrow
and grief as if she had none to look after her. A
damsel like her should not be subject to such a con-
dition. She did not appear to us to be a woman. Do
thoa receive her duly. She is near the hermitage and
so hath come to seek thy shelter. O illustrious Sir, she
i* on the look out for a protector — do thou protect hen"
The pious V&lmiki could perceive every thing by virtue
of his asceticism ; and ascertaining the truth of the words
of the Rishi boys by the power of his understanding, he,
with quick steps, approached SiUL And the disciples
followed that high-minded ascetic* Thereupon proceeding
a little on foot with Arghya in his hands, the wise V&l-
miki reached the banks of the river and saw that
Rlghava's spouse was bewailing like Sl helpless woman.
Having gladdened a little the aggrieved Sita by virtue
of his own effulgence the great ascetic V&Imiki addressed
her in following sweet accents " O chaste damsel, thou
art the daughter-in-law of Da^aratha, the beloved wife
of Ritna and the daughter of Janaka ; thy coming here is
217


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


1730 RAM AY AN A.

auspicious. I am apprized, by virtue of asceticism and
meditation, of the object of thy coming here. O great lady,
I am also fully aware that thou art by all means chaste.
In fact I am conscious of all the incidents in the three
worlds. By the eyes of asceticism, I perceive, O daughter
of Janaka, that thou art innocent. Thou hast come under
my shelter, O Vaidehi — be thou consoled. O child, the
pious ascetics live around my hermitage. They shall
daily take care of thee as their daughter. Do thou accept this
Arghya now, and confiding in me do thou remove thy grief.
Be not sorry for anything; consider that thou hast come
to thy own home." Hearing the wonderful words of the
great ascetic, Sita humbly touched his feet and said " Thy
desire shall be fulfilled." Saying this, she, with folded
hands, followed the ascetic. Beholding the great ascetic
and Sita approach, the wives, of the Rishis, delighted
neared them and said : — " Do thou come, O foremost of
Rishis, thou hast arrived here after a long time. We all
bow unto thee — do thou order what we shall do," Hearing
their words the great Valmiki replied in worthy accents—
" This Sita is the wife of the intelligent Rama, the daughter-
in-law of Dacaratha and the daughter of Janaka. She has
now come to our hermitage. She is* chaste and innocent,
still her husband hath renounced her. So we should all pro-
tect her. She is worthy of your reverence — specially while
such is the order of mine— your preceptor. So, do ye all,
take care of her with great affection." Having consigned the
charge of Sit5 unto the hands of the female ascetics,
the great and illustrious ascetic Valmiki, followed by his
disciples, speedily proceeded towards his holy hermitage.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. i 7J i


SECTION LX.


B-


►EHOLDING the great ascetic VSlmiki thus conduct-
ing Sita into his own hermitage Lakshmana* s heart was
bewildered with grief. Thereupon he said to the expert
charioteer Sumantra. " Do thou perceive Rama's grief
consequent upon the separation from SitS. His spouse —
the daughter of Janaka, is perfectly pure ; what can be
more painful than that RSma is living alone having renounced
her ? It is clear unto me, O Sumantra, that this separation
of Rama, hath been brought about by the influence of
destiny — for it is hard to g£t over accident. Even that
RJLma, who, when enraged, is capable of slaying the celes-
tials, Gandharbas, Asuras and Rakshasas, hath been engaged
in the worship of destiny. Formerly did Rama go through
miseries, residing in the forest of Dandaka, at the com-
mand of his sire for fourteen years. But this banishment
of SitS appears to me as exceedingly painful and most ruth-
less. O charioteer, the opinion of the citizens is by no
means just; consequently what shall we gain by perform-
ing such a bad action for fame as the exile of Sita ?"
Hearing those words of Lakshmana, the wise Sumantra
reverentially replied : — " Be not aggrieved for Siti, O Sau-
mitri Formerly in the presence of thy sire the Brah-
mananas related this account of Site's exile. Rama shall
be deprived of all happiness and be separated from his
dear wife ; what more, the virtuous-souled Rama, having
long arms, shall, under the influence of time, renounce thee,
SitS, Satrughna and Bharata. O Lakshmana, when Durbasa
was addressed by the king Da^aratha as to thy future he
replied in the above fray. I have told thee the same. Do thou


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1732 RAM AY AN A.

not communicate this unto Satrughna, Bharata or any body.
O foremost of men, Durbasa said this unto Da9aratha before
me, Vasishtha and other great men. Hearing the words
of Rishi, Da^aratha, the foremost of men, said unto me,
"O charioteer, do not reveal this secret to any body/' O
gentle one, it is not proper by any means to falsify the words
of the king Da9aratha. I shall always, very carefully, carry
out his orders. It is not proper to reveal this mystery
before thee. Still I do so for thy curiosity hath been greatly
excited. Though this mystery was communicated formerly
by the king Da^aratha and though it is not proper to reveal
it to any body, still I express it before thee that thou mayst
not, on hearing it, be worked up with sorrow ; for destiny
is hard to be got over. And it is by the influence of that
destiny that thou hast met with such a sorrow and grief.
However, do thou not reveal this secret unto Satrughna and
Bharata." Hearing these grave and important words of
Sumantra, Lakshmana ordered him to relate.


8ECTION LXi.


B*


>EiNG thus requested by the high-souled Lakshmana,
Sumantra began to reveal the mystery of Durbasa's account.
"In the days of yore the great ascetic Durbasa, the son of
Atri, resided for a year in the holy hermitage of Vasishtha.
At that time thy sire, the highly effulgent and illustrious
Da^aratha, with a view to see his high-souled priest
Vasishtha, repaired there. He saw the great ascetic Durbisa,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1 733

Warning like the sun in his effulgence, seated on the right
hand side of Vasishtha. Thereupon he humbly saluted those
two leading ascetics. And they too, welcoming him, received
him duly with seat, water to wash feet, Arghya, fruits and
roots. Then he lived there in the company of the ascetics.
Thereupon during the noon, all those ascetics, seated there,
began to dwell upon various pleasant topics. During an
interval Da^aratha, with folded hands and uplifted arms, said
to the high-souled soft of Atri — Durbasa, having asceticism
for his wealth. "O illustrious Sir, how long shall my family
remain in existence ? What is the extent of the lease of life
granted to Rama and my other sons ? How long shall the
descendants of Rama live ? And what shall be the end of
my race ? Do thou relate all this unto me." Hearing the
words of the king Da^aratha the highly effulgent Durbasa
replied : — "Hear, the early history, O king. During the
encounter between the celestials and Asuras, the demons,
being remonstrated with by the celestials sought shelter
of the wife ©f Vrigu— thy priest. Vrigu's wife having
promised them help they lived there fearlessly. Having
beheld the demons thus helped by Vrigu's wife, Hari, ths
king of the celestials, enraged, chopped off her head with
his sharp discus. And angry on beholding his wife slain,
Vrigu, imprecated a curse on Vishnu, the slayer of enemies'
race, saying — "Being beside thyself with anger thou hast slain
my wife, not worthy of being killed ; therefore, O Janarddana,
thou shalt be born in the region of mortals. And there
thou shalt remain separated from thy spouse for many long
y ears." Having imprecated this curse, Vrigu was greatly
pained and being propitiated by his adoration, Vishnu, fond
of disciples, said :— ''Having slain Ravana and others, I shall
be, for the behoof of mankind, subject to this imprecation."
O bestower of kings, the highly effulgent Vishnu, thus
imprecated by Vrigu in the days of yore, hath been born as
thy son in this birth and hath been celebrated under the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1734 RAM AY AN A.

appellation of Rama. O conferer of honors, for sooth shall
Rama partake of the fruits of Vrigu's curse. He shall reign in
Ayodhya for a long time. All his followers shall be happy and
prosperous. Having reigned for eleven thousand years-
Rama shall repair to the region of Brahma. None shall
be able to vanquish him. He shall celebrate many a
horse-sacrifice with profuse gifts and shall establish many
royal families. He shall beget on Sit& two sons."
Having thus related unto Dacaratha .the past and future
of his family the highly effulgent great ascetic Durbas&
became silent. He being silent — the great King Dacaratha,
having bowed unto the two high-souled ascetics, again
returned to his city Ayodhya. I had heard there all these
words of the great ascetic Durbasi. Up to this time they
are lying in my heart. Rishis* words shall never prove
fruitless. According to the words of Rishi Rama shall
install two sons of Sita in Ayodhya, not anywhere else.
Under these circumstances, O Lakshmana, thou shouldst
not grieve for Sita or Rama ; in their interest do thou
become patient." Hearing those wonderous words of the
charioteer Sumantra, Lakshmana became greatly happy
and eulogised him again and again ? They thus convers-
ing with one another oh their way back, the sun set*
They accordingly spent that night on the banks of Kesini.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTAkAKANDAM. 173?


SECTION LXI I 1


— 06 —


a


AVWG spent the night on the banks of Kesini,
the mighty car-warrior Lakshmana, got up early in the
morning and again proceeded on his journey (home)
and reached in the noon the city of AyodhyJl filled with
various jewels and delighted and plump citizens. ' fiut the
high-souled Lakshmana became greatly sorry stricken with
the thought as to what he should relate oh approaching
the feet of R&ma. Whilst proceeding with this thought
he saw the highly picturesque palace of R&ma resembling
the rays of the moon. Having descended from his car
at the palace-gate, Lakshmana, the foremost of men, with
his face downwards and a distressed heart, unobstructed,
entered the palace. Having entered there he saw his
elder brother R&ma seated poorly on an excellent seat
with his eyes full of tears. Being greatly pained at the
sight, Saumitri touched his feet and with folded palms
said: — "O worshipful sir, having obeyed thy behests 1
have left the daughter of Janaka at the holy hermitage
of Vllmiki near the banks of the Ganges. Hiving left
that illustrious pure lady at the skirt of the hermitage
I have again come to serve thy feet. Do thou not grieve*
O foremost of men, for such is the course of time. The
intelligent people like thee do not grievei Where there is
growth there is decay, where there is prosperity there is ruin,
and where there is birth there is death. Therefore attach-
ment unto wife, sons, friends and riches is not proper, for
surely shall be brought about separation with them. Whilst
thou canst control thyself and thy mind, shouldst thou not


Dig^dby VjiOO<


1736 RAM AY AN A.

be able to bear this trifling pain of separation ? Leading
men like thyself are never overwhelmed by all these things.
O RSghava, thou shalt again be blamed by the people. In
fear of this calumny, O sing that thou hast renounced
Maithili. And if dost thou grieve for that spouse thy
calumny shall undoubtedly be deep-rooted in the kingdom.
Therefore do thou restore thyself patiently, O foremost of
men. Do thou give up this weakness and be not sorry.' 1
The intelligent Lakshmana, the son of SumitrS, having said
this, RSLma, the descendant of K§kutstha and fond of
friends, with great delight said : — "Thou hast spoken the
truth, O Lakshmana, O foremost of men. 1 have been
greatly delighted, O hero for thy carrying out my orders. O
gentle Saumitri, my grief and sorrow have been removed
for those pleasant words of thine."


SECTION LXIIf.


—00-


XXEARINC those wondrous words of Lakshmana Rlma
Was greatly delighted and said " thou having an auspicious
look, thou art gifted with great intellect and after my heart ;
a friend like thee is rare at such a time. But O beautiful
Saumitri, do thou, apprised of my intention, carry out my
words. O gentle son of Sumitra, for not looking to state
business for these four days 1 have been pierced to the very
vitals. Do thou therefore call here men, or women, priests
or councillors who have come for business. For sooth do


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VttARAKANDAM) 1737

a ttmg falls into the dreadful hell where the wind doth not
blow, who does not daily look into his state affairs. I have
heard, O forenftost of men, that there lived in the days of
yore a highly illustrious, truthful and pure-minded king, ever
devoted unto the Brahmanas, by the name of Nriga. Once
on a time at the sacred pilgrimage of Pushpaka that king
conferred upon the Brahmanas one Koti of kine with
calves adorned with golden ornaments. Acci-

dentally on that occasion, a cow with calf belonging
to a poor Brahman, living upon low means, was given
away along with other kine. Undergoing hunger and thirst,
the master of that lost cow travelled for a long time
in many places in search of it. Thereupon having
reached the province of Kanakhal he espied his own
cow in the house of a Brahmana. The cow was well kept
and the young one was grown up. Thereupon the Brahman
called the cow by the name given by him saying " Savala,
come." The cow heard that and recognizing the voice of the
Brahman followed him. And he preteded her burning like fire.
And the Brahmana, in whose house the cow so long remained,
speedily pursued her and approaching the ascetic said.
•'This cow is mine. The king Nriga cbnferred this upon
me. M So there arose a great quarrel between the two
(earned Brahmanas. And thus quarreling they .both ap-
proached hint who had given away the cow. And though
they waited for a long time at the gate they did not obtain
permission to enter the palace. Thereat both of them were
greatly engraged and imprecated dreadful curses, saying
11 Since thou hast not granted us an interview though we
have been waiting here for a long time, thou shalt, by our
curse, remain invisible, being a lizard. Thou shalt in this
state live in a den for many hundred and thousand years.
When Vishnu assuming a human person shall be born in the
Vasudeva family of Yadavas and enhance their glory he shall
liberate thee from the curse. Immediately befere the advent
218'


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1738 & a may an a.

of the Kali Yuga the Rishi Nara Narayana gifted with great
prowess shall descend upon earth to relieve her of the burden.
" Having thus imprecated the curse upon the king the Rishisr
became silent. The cow was old and weak so they both*
with mutual consent, conferred that upon another Brahman,
O Lakshmana, the king Nriga is still suffering from that
dreadful curse. It is the king's fofly that is manifest from
the mutual disagreement of the workers. Do thou bring
them all speedily to me who have come for business. For,
sooth shall the kings profit by the just administration.
Do thou therefore go in person, O Lakshmana and see
Who hath come for business/'


Section lxiV,


-00 —


H.


EARING the words of the highly effulgent Rlmat,
Lakshmana, conversant with discrimanative knowledge,
replied with folded hands, saying : — " O Kakutstha, it is
for a very simple folly thatt the two Brahnrarias impre-
cated that curse upon the king Nriga, dreadful as the
rod of Varna. May t ask thee, O foremost of men, what
did that King say unto the Blrahmans when he was
thus imprecated ?" Whereto R3ma replied saying : — " O
gentle one, hear, what the king Nriga said when impre-
cated. Hearing of the departure of the Brahmanas he
for his priest, minister, the citizens and subjects and
lied with sorrow said : — " Do ye all hear attentively


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1739

my words. Having imprecated a dreadful curse upon me
the jolly saint Narada and the ascetic Parvata have speedily,
like the wind, repaired to the region of Brahma. Do ye
therefore, even today, place the prince Vasu on the
throne, and let the architects prepare a pleasant den for
me. Living therein I shall waste the curse of the Brahmans.
Let the architects dig one den to protect me against the rains,
one against the affliction of the winter and one against the
distresses of summer. Let them enhance the picturesqueness
of those dens by planting many trees having profuse
branches and fruits and flowers. As long as time shall not
change so long I shall spend my days happily in th* den.
For half a league on all sides around me let flower trees ■
be planted." Having made those arrangements and placed
Vasu on the throne the king Nriga said : — " Do not swerve
from the path of morality, O my son, and do thou duly govern
the subjects according to the custom of the Kshatryas.
Thou hast seen, with thine own eyes, the curse that the
Brahmanas have given me being enraged for a very trifling
folly of mine. Do thou not repent for me. My son, time
is the lord of happiness and sorrow ; it is by the influence
of time that I have fallen into such a disaster. Creatures
must meet with what is kept in store by destiny ; they must
go where they are bound for and they must ac-
quire what is set apart for them. Pristine actions are the
root of all these; so, be not sorry, O my son." O
foremost of mea, having given this advice unto his son, the
highly illustrious king Nriga proceeded to live in the sweet
fragrant den. Having entered the den filled with many
jewels the high-souled king began to spend his days in the
satisfaction of the curse imprecated by the two Brahmanas."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i74q RAMAYANA.


SECTION LXV.


"t

1_ HAVE thus given unto thee in account of the curse
imprecated on Nriga. Listen, if dost thou wish to hear of
any other theme." Rama having said this Lakshmana
replied : — " \ am not satiated with the account of those
wonderful stories, O king." Hearing the reply of Laks-
mana, Rama, the descendant of fkshawku, began again
with themes instinct with morality : — " There lived a highly
pious and powerful king by the name of Nimi. He was
the. twelfth of Ikshawku's sons. That powerful king made a
picturesque city like *that of the celestials near the
hermitage of Gautama. The name of that beautiful city
was Vaijayanta and the highly illustrious royal saint
flse.4 to live there. Having thus reared a hrghly
picturesque city he thought of worshipping the deity by
Celebrating a sacrifice for the satisfaction of his
sire. Having thus resolved and invited his sire Ikshawku
the son of Manu, he first welcomed the celestial saint. Nimi,
the descendant of Ikshwaku, then welcomed the saints Atri,
Angiras and Vrigu having asceticism for their wealth. There-
upon Vasishtha said to Nimi, the foremost of royal saints — ■
" I have already been engaged by Indra. Do thou therefore
w r ait as long as his sacrifice is not finished there." After
the departure of Vasishtha the great Gautama engaged ia
the satisfaction of Vasistha's duties. And the high-souled
Vasishtha too engaged in Indra's sacrifice. On the
other hand having united all the Brahmans the great
king began to celebrate the sacrifice extending over five
thousand years near his city by the side of the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAAf. 1 74 j

Himayala. Thereupon having finished the sacrifice of
Indra there came to the King, the blameless and the
illustrious Rishi Vashishtha. Finding Gautama engaged
in his room he was exceedingly enraged. Thereupon
be waited there for some time to see the King. On that
day the royal saint Nimi was deeply asleep. And not
beholding the King the high-souled Vasishtha was greatly
angry and said : — " Since thpu hast, O King, engaged
another neglecting me, thy body shall remain senseless."
Thereupon hearing the curse of Vasishtha, the king got up.
There beside himself with ire \\e said — " I was unconscious
in sleep— still soiled with anger thou hast hurled the fiery
curse against me like the second rod of Yama. There-
fore, O ascetic, thy person shall remain senseless for a
long time. That king and the ascetic having thus impre-
cated one another under the influence of anger, tfyey imme-
diately were deprived of their bodies.


SECTION LXVI.


— 00r


XI EARING the words of the effulgent R£ma, Lakshmana^
the slayer of enemies, said with fqlded hands : — "Having
thus cast off their bodies how did that Brahman worshipped
of the celestials and the king regain them ? M Having been
thus accosted by Lakshmana, Rama, the descendant of
Ikshwakus and the foremost of men, replied : — "Having
renounced their persons both Nimi and the pious Vasishtha,
having asceticism for their we^Hb, were metamorphosed intot


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1742 RAM AY ANA.

air. Thereupon being thus deprived of his body the highly
effulgent and great ascetic Vasishtha went to the Patriarch
Brahma with the object of acquiring from him another.
Being merged in the air, he, conversant with religion,
bowed unto his father and said : — (i O illustrious god of gods \
O thou lotus-sprung ! by the imprecation of Nimi I have
been now deprived of my body and been converted into
air. O lord, the state of being bodiless is highly painful
to all. The bodiless cannot perform any work ; do thou,
therefore, by thy favour, grant me another body. "Where-
to the self-sprung Brahma, of unmitigated prowess, replied.
"O great one, do thou enter into the vital energy of Mitra
and Varuna; and even then, O foremost of twice-born ones,
thou shalt not be born of a woman and being greatly pious
shalt attain to the rank of a patriarch." The Patriarch
Brahma having said this, Vasishtha, saluting and
circumambulating him, repaired to the region of Varuna.
At that time Mitra in conjunction with Varuna was reigning
in Varuna's kingdom being worshipped by all celestials.
Meanwhile encircled by her mates the leading Apsara arrived
there at her pleasure. Beholding the frolicsome and
beautiful Urvasi, Varuna attained to an excess of delight.
Thereupon he expressed his intention of living with that queen
of Apsaras, having a moon-like countenance and lotus-eyes.
Thereat Urvasi, with folded hands, said — "O lord of celestials,
Mitra himself has already invited me for the same." Being
stricken by desire Varuna said to Urvasi "I shall discharge
my vital energy into this pot if thou dost not wish to live
with me." Hearing those sweet words of the Patriarch
Varuna, Urvasi was highly pleased and said : — "Do what
thou hast said. Now my body is under the possession of
Mitra — but my mind is attached unto thine and thou art
equally attached unto me." Urvasi having said this, Varuna
discharged his vital energy into the pot. Thereupon Urvasi
approached Mitra. And thereat highly enraged he said to


Digitized by VjOOQIC


t/TTARAKANDAAt. 1743

ker "I invited thee first ; O thou of vicious actions, why hasti
tkou, renouncing me, secured another. For this vile action,
tkou sbalt, by my curse live in the land of mortals for some
time. The royal saint PuruvftrS, the king of Kasi, is the
son of Budha. Do thou go to him, thou of a vicious
tctellect ; he shall be thy husband." Thereupon being thus
placed under the influence of cur9e Urvasi went to Puruvara,
The king Puruvara was the begotten son of Budha. He
reigned in the foremost of cities Pratishtaro. He begot on
Urvasi a highly powerful and beautiful son by the name of
Ava. Nahusha, powerful as Indra, was the son of Ayu,
When Indra, the king of the celestials, was assailed with
thunderbolt by the Asura Vitra,Nahusha governed his kingdom
for a hundred thousand years, fn this wise Urvasi, having
beautiful teeth, eyes and brow, remained on earth for many
years and then returned to the region of Indra after the
period of curse had been over.


SfeCTION LXVU.


H.


. earing this wonderful and heavenlv theme Lafesn-'
tnana was highly gratified and said to Rama " O Kakuthstha,
how did that twice-born, one worshipped by the celestials
and the king regain their bodies, after being bodiless."
Hearing the words of Lakshmana, Rama, having truth for his
prowess, began to relate the story of Vasishtha. " O foremsot


Digitized by VjOOQIC


>


1744 & AM AY AN A.

of Raghus, there spang up two fdreniost Brahmin saintsj
from the vital energy discharged by the high-souled Mitral
and Varuna into the pot. At first therefrom rose up the:
illustrious Rishi Agastya and saying ' I am not thine son"
went away leaving Mitra. Before the vital energy of
Varuna was thrown into the pot Mitra discharged his bwn ori
Urvasi's account which was trie source of Agdstya's birth.
Into the pot in which Mitra' s energy was discharged Varuni
also put his owrt,arid bdth the energies were mixed up. There-
upon after some time from the energies of bbth Mitra* ana
Vafiina sprang up the efifuIgeHt Vasisntha— the priest of Iksh-
awkus. O gentle one, the highly effulgent Ikshawku Appoint-
ed that blameless feishi as the f>ribst bf our family as soon as
he was born. I have thus described to you the story of
Vasislitha's birth possessing a wbnderful body. Hear now
what befell the kirig Ninii. And Betibidirig the king Nimi
bodiless the intelligent Rishi initiated Him into the rites
of sacrifice. And those leading twice-born ones, with as-
sembled citizens and s ervants, began to protect that body
with unguents, garlands and clothes. Thereupon at the end
bf the sacrifice Vrigu said " O king, I am propitiated witH
thee ; I shall restore thee to senses." Thereupon the celes-
tials, highly pleased, addressed the cotiscibtisrtesis of Nimi
saying "O royal Saint, do thou accept boons ; where shall we
JDlace thy consciousness ?" Thereupon being addressed by
the celestials the consciousness said "I. may live iti the eyes
bf the celestials." They agreed to it and said "O lord of
earth; for thee, their eyes shall be influenced within a moment.
The exhaustion, that their eyes shall experience on account
bf thy moving about as the air, shall be removed within this
moment." Having said this the celestials repaired to their
respective quarters and the high-souled Rishis having
conveyed Nimi's bbdy to the sacrificial ground and dedicated
it as an edy began to churn it with great energy accom-
panied by ihcahtatibhs. They being thus engaged in


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1745

chortling the edy for the purpose of having a son of Nimi
there sprang up a son of devout austerities. He was called
Mithi for he originated from Manthana ; he was called
Janma for his having sprung up* from Janan and Vaideha
from having been born from Videha. In this wise Janaka,
the first king of Videhas, was born. His other name was
Jftthi and his family were celebrated as Maithilas.
gentle one, I have thus related unto thee the wondrous births,
in consequence of the curse, of the great ascetic Vasishtha
and the royal saint Nimi.


SECTION LXVIII


— 00 —


J^VAMA having said this, Lakshmana, the slayer of
enemies, burning in his native effulgence, said : — "O fore-
most of kings, this ancient account of the ascetic Vasishtha
and the king Nimi is highly surprising and wonderful. But
Nimi is a Kshatrya king and a hero — besides although
initiated he did not forgive the high-souled Vasishtha."
Being thus accosted RSma, the Kshatrya-chief, said to the
effulgent Lakshmana conversant with all Sastras — "O hero,
forgiveness is not to be seen in all men, O Saumitri, do
thou hear attentively, the unbearable angor which was
forgiven by the king Yayati resorting to the quality of good-
ness. Yayati, the enhancer of the prosperity of cities, was
the son of Nahusha. He had two beautiful wives, one of
whom was SarmishlhS, grand daughter of Aditi, the daughter
of Brishaparva. She was the more beloved of the two ; his
219


Digitized b\


google


i 7 46 RAM AY AN A.

other spouse was Devajani, grand daughter of Usanas. She
was not liked by her husband. Both of them gave birth to a
son each and both the sons were beautiful and attentive. Puru
was born of Sarmishtha and Yadu of Devajani. Puru was
the favourite son of the king, both on account of his mother
and of his personal graces. Thereat Yadu, greatly sorry,
said to his mother : — " Born in the race of the illustrious
Vargava of unwearied actions, thou art going through mental
afflictions and unbearable insults ; therefore, O mother, let us
both enter into fire. Let the king spend many nights with
Sarmishtha — the daughter of a demon. Thou mayst withstand
the insults but I shall never brooke them. Permit me, I shall,
in sooth, renounce my life." The son having, weepingly and
distressingly, said this, Devajani was greatly enraged and
thought of her father. As soon as he was thought of
by his daughter Vargava speedily came there and
beholding her senseless and deprived from joy said
"Daughter, what is the matter ?" The effulgent
father having addressed his daughter repeatedly in this
wise, Devajani, enraged, replied : — "O foremost of ascetics,
I shall either enter into fire water or drink poison — by no
means I shall preserve this life of mine. Thou dost not
know of the miseries and insults I have been subject to.
Brahman, when a tree is neglected, those who live thereon
are also distressed. The king having disregarded me,
forsooth thou hast also been neglected." Hearing the words
of his daughter, Vargava, enraged said to the king Yayati .—
"Thou art vicious-minded, O son of Nahusha ; thou hast
dishonored me and therefore in thy youth thou shaltbe subject
to decrepitude and infirmities of age." Having thus impre-
cated the curse and consoled his sorrowful daughter the
highly illustrious rishi Vargava repaired to his own habitation.
Having thus conferred solace unto his daughter, that leading
Brahman, effulgent as the sun, returned therefrom.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. ' 1747


SECTION LX1X.
— 00 —

X AY ATi, the son of Nahusha, was greatly distressed on
hearing of the ire of the preceptor Sukra. Thereupon meet-
ing with the infirmities of age by the imprecation of the
saint he said to his son Yadu : — "O Yadu, thou art cognizant
of religion, do thou therefore take this decripitude for me ;
I shall satisfy myself with various enjoyments. O foremost
of men, I have not been yet satiated with worldly enjoy-
ments — I shall therefore again take upon myself this decrepi-
tude after having enjoyed all objects of sense." Hearing
those words of YaySti, the foremost of men, Yadu replied : —
"Let thy most favourite son Puru take upon himself this
decrepitude. O king, thou hast deprived me from all
things — what more, thou dost not allow me to come near thee.
Let that Puru take this, with whom thou dost eat and live."
Hearing the words of Yadu, Yayati said to Puru : — "O thou
having large arms, do thou take the decrepitude for me."
Hearing the words of YaySLti, Puru, with folded hands, said : —
"I am always ready to satisfy thy commands ; and I have
been favoured and honored by this command of thine."
Hearing those words of Puru YaySti was highly pleased and
attained to an excess of delight and then transferred his
own decrepitude to him. Thereupon regaining his youth
the king reigned in earth for many thousand years celebrat-
ing thousands of sacrifices. Thereupon after a long time
YaySti said to Puru "O my son, do thou bring the decrepitude
I have kept as deposit with thee — let it now assail me. I
transferred it to you as a deposit. For this I shall take it
back ; be not sorry for this. I have been greatly pleased
that thou hast satisfied my behests. I shall, now pleased,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1748 RAM AY ANA.

install thee on the royal throne.'' Having thus addressed
his son Puru, the king Yayati angrily said to Yadu, the son
of Devayani : — 'Thou, vicious Rakhasa, art born of me in
the snaps of a Kshatrya, or else why shouldst thou disobey
my orders ? For this thou shalt never be a king. I am thy
father and preceptor and still thou hast disregarded me.
Thou shalt be the father of dreadful Rakshasas, O vici-
ous minded ; thy descendants shall be degraded from the
lunar race and thy children shall be equally vicious-minded
like thee." Having thus imprecated Yadu, the royal saint
Yayati honored Puru, the enhancer of the prosperity of the
kingdom, with installation and then retired to woods.
Thereupon after a long time he breathed his last and went
to the abode of the celestials. The highly illustrious Puru
reigned piously in the foremost of cities Prathishtan. Yadu
begot thousands and thousands of Rakhasas and being
degraded from the royal family reigned in a city named
Kraunchavana, hard to be got at. In this wise, according
to the custom of the Kshatryas the king Yayati took upon
himself the imprecation of the preceptor Sukra, but he did
not forgive him. I have thus related unto thee everything.
O gentle one, we shall follow the examples of these illustrious
men. And in that case we shall not be degraded like the
king Nriga." While Rama, having a moon-like countenance,
was speaking thus, the stars became fewer in the welkin, and
east, stricken with the early rays of the sun, appeared like
damsel, clothed in a raiment coloured with the dye of
flowers.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


r


UTTARAKANDAM. 1 749


SECTION LXX.


X HEREUPON having performed the morning rites the
loins-eyed R£ma, in the early morning, sat on his royal throne
and in the company of Brahmanas and citizens enaged in
looking into state affairs. The assembly consisted of the
priest Vasishtha, the saint Kashyapa, ministers well versed
in politics, other religious preceptors, moralists, members
and kings. The assembly of R&ma, of unwearied, actions
appeared like that of Mahendra, Yama and Varuna.
Rima said to Lakshmana, gifted with auspicious marks "O
O Saamitri having long arms, do thou proceed to the city-
gate to receive those who have come here for business."
According to R&ma's command Lakshmana, gifted with
auspicious mark, arrived at the gate and called those who had
come there for business. But none said that he had been
brought there by any business. For there was neither
desease nor proverty in the kingdom. During R&ma's regeme,
the earth was filled with corns and Asadhis. Children
youngmen and middle-aged people did not meet with death-
The earth was governed piously so there was no obstacle.
Thus during the administration of Rlma none was seen who-
wanted justice. Lakshmana, with folded hands, said to R&ma,
"None has come for business." Thereat, Rlma, with a
delighted heart, replied • — "Do thou go, O Saumitri, and see
if any one has come for business. Royal policy if properly
adopted, impiety can stand nowhere. It is for the fear of the
king that people protect one another. And although laws,
instituted by me are protecting the subjects like so many
arrows, still, thou having long arms, do thou be engaged in


Digitized by^OO*


1750 RAM AY AN A.

governing the subjects." Being thus addressed Lakshmini
issued out of the house and saw that a dog was waiting at
the gate. Casting its looks around it was again and again
barking. Beholding it in that plight the valiant Lakshmana
said "O generous sir, what business has brought thee hither
— do thou relate it confidentially/' Hearing the words of
Lakshmana the dog replied — "I wish to relate it unto Rama,
of unwearied actions,who is the refuge of all creatures and who
declares fearlessness unto all. Hearing the words of the dog
Lakshmana entered the beautiful palace to relate it unto
Rama. And having communicated it unto Rama he issued
out and said to the dog : — "If thou hast anything true to
speak thou mayst come and communicate it unto the king."
Hearing the words of Lakshmana the dog said — "We cannot
enter into the houses of divinities, kings and Brahmanas nor
can we go there where is fire, Indra, the sun or the wind,
for we are the vilest born ; so I cannot enter there. For king
is the personification of virtue and specially the king Rama
is truthful, well versed in the science of fighting and ever
engaged in the welfare of all beings. He is perfectly cogni-
zant of where the six qualities are to be applied — master of
morality, knoweth all, seeth all and the best of beautiful. He
is the moon, death, Yama, Kuvera, the giver of riches, fire,
Indra, the sun and Varuna. O Saumitri, do thou go and
communicate unto the king protecting his subjects that
without his permission I do not wish to go there." There-
upon the highly effulgent and noble-minded Lakshmana
entered the palace and said to Rama : — "O thou having long
arms; O thou the enhancer of Kausalya's joy — I have
communicated thine orders — I shall relate shortly everything
regarding that ; do thou hear. That dog, as a beggar, is
waiting at the gate for thy commands." Whereto R&ma
replied : — "Bring him speedily here who is waiting at the
gate for business"


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1 75 1


SECTION LXXI.


— 00 —


H.


.EARING the words of Rama the intelligent Lakshmana
immediately sent for the dog and informed Rama, who,
on beholding it, said — "Do thou communicate thy desire
unto me ; be not afraid." Thereupon beholding the king
R£rna, the dog, having his head cut off, said "The king is
the protector of animals and their lord. The king is
awake when the subjects are asleep and he protects them.
By administering the laws properly the king protects piety.
Without his shelter the subjects meet with destruction. The
king is the lord and father of the whole universe. He is
time, he is Yuga and he is the creation, mobile and immobile.
He is called Dharma because he holdeth all. It is Dharma
(virtue) that upht>ldeth all mankind. It is by Dharma that
the three worlds are being preserved. It is Dharma or virtue
that thwarts the enemies. It is virtue that governs the
subjects duly. It is for this that virtue is called Dhirana
or the holder. The virtue of preservation is the greatest and
confers fruits in after life. There is nothing like virtue hard
to acquire in this world. Charity, kindness, honoring the
pious and innocent conduct constitute the chief virtues ; for
by those the well-being of this life and the next is brought
about. O Raghava, O thou of firms vows — thou art an example
of examples. Thou art cognizant of the conduct of the pious.
Thou art like an occean, the refuge of all virtues. O fore-
most of kings, out of ignorace, I have spoken unto thee so
many things. With my head downwards, I beg for thy satis-
faction. Be not offended with me." Hearing those wise words
of the dog, Rama said :— "What shall I do for thee ?


Digit^d by G00gk


1752 RAM AY ANA.

Do thou mention it confidentially/' Whereto the deg re-
plied, saying : — " It is by piety that a king governs his
kingdom — it is by virtue that a king protects his subjects,
becomes a refuge unto all and removes the fear of his men.
Keeping an eye on this, O Rama do thou hear, what I .'say.
In the house of a certain Brahman there lives a beggar by
the name of Sarvarthasiddha (i.e., who has got all his
desires satisfied). And although I am innocent, he has for
nothing hurt me.'' Hearing those words Rama sent his
messenger who brought Sarvarthasiddha, master of all
subjects. Thereupon beholding Rama in the assembly that
effulgent and leading twice- born one said : — " O blameless
Rama, tell me what I shall do for thee." Whereto Rama
said — " O twice-born one, thou hast hurt this dog. What
offence did it commit by thee that thou didst strike it
severely with a rod. Anger is an enemy which taketh away
lfe. Anger is a sweet-speeched enemy in the garb of a
friend. It is the foremost of passions and like unto a sharp
dagger. And it is anger that stealeth away every thing. It
pilfers all that is acquired by asceticism, sacrifices and gifts.
It is proper therefore by every jneans to kill anger. Passions
are running amock on all sides like so many exceedingly
wicked steeds. Being satiated with of all objects of enjoy-
ments it is better to govern them by patience. By mind,
actions, words and eyes a man should engage in the well
being of people. He should not injure any body and be
not addicted to any thing. The harm, that a mind not
under control, can accomplsh, is beyond the range of a sharp
dagger, trodden serpent and of an enemy always enraged.
Even the nature of one, who has learnt humility, cannot be
trusted. He, who hides his nature, himself reveals his true
self." Rama, of unweared actions, having said this, Sarvartka,
siddha i the foremost of twice-born ones, said : — "Knocking
about whole day for alms I was highly enraged and struck
this dog. It was sitting in the mid-way and I asked


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1753

it again and again to move away. Thereupon, moving away
and standing with reluctance, it stood fearfully en the road-
side. O descendant of Raghu, I was at that time stricken
with hunger, and struck it for its vicious conduct. O king
of kings, I am guilty in this, and thou must punish me. O lord
of kings, do thou administer punishment unto me, — I shall
then be released from the fear of hell." Thereupon, Rama
asked all the ministers, saying : — "What is to be done now ?
What punishment is to be inflicted on him ? We can protect
subjects, if we can administer punishment proportionate to
crime." Thereat, Vrigu, Angiras, Kutsa, Vasishtha,
K&shya and other ascetics, the leading preachers, the
ministers, the citizens, and other sages conversant with
Sastras, present there, said : — "A Brahmana should not be
punished with death." The sages conversant with lawg
having said this, the ascetics addressed Rama, saying : —
"O Raghava, a king is the governor of all — specially thyself.
Thou art the chastiser of the three worlds, the eternal
Vishnu." They all having said this, the dog began : — "Thou
didst solemnly say What shall I do for thee ?' Therefore*
if tho'i art gratified with me, and if thou dost wish td
confer boons on me, do thou appoint this Brahmana as the
head of family." Thereupon, having been thus honored and
pleased and ascending an elephant, he proceeded to occupy
his new dignified station. At this, the councillors of
Rama, surprised, said : — "O thou of great effulgence, he has
not been punished. Rather thou hast conferred on him a
boon." Hearing the words of ministers, Rama said : — "You
do not know the real truth of the whole thing — the dog
knows it well." Being accosted by Rama, the dog
said : — "O Raghava, I was the head of the family of
Kalanjava. After the worship of the deities and Brahmana
and the feasting of the servants, male, and female, I used to
take my food. I used to parcel out things duly, and my mind
was not in the least attached to sin. I used to preserve with
220


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1754 RAM AY AN A.

great care the articles belonging to the tutelary deities, was
humble, good-natured and engaged in the well-being of all
animals. Still I have fallen into this dreadful and wretched
condition. O RSghava, this Br&hmana is angry by nature,
and impious, injures others, and is impatient, cruel, harsh in
words and ignorant, and therefore shall degrade his seven
generations up and down. He will by no means be able to
discharge the duties of a head of a family. He, whom thou
wishest to take to hell with her son, beasts and friends, should
be engaged in the serving the Brahmans and kine. For all his
good actions, he is slain who steals the wealth of a Brahmana,
a deity, a woman, and a boy, and the riches given away by him.
O R&ghava,one who pilfers the riches of a Brahmana or a deity
falls into a hell called Vichi. Even he who thinks in
his mind of stealing it,goes once and again into hell." Hearing
the words of the dog, the eyes of the effulgent R&ma were
expanded with surprise. The dog went back from where it
had come. In its pristine birth the dog was high-minded —
it is now cursed for being born in a degraded state of
existence. Thereupon, repairing at last to V&rSnasi the dog
took the vow of fasting.


SECTION LXXi I.


X HERE lived for a long time a vulture and an owl on
a mountain expending over the banks of a river, resonant
with the notes of cuckoos and filled "with lions, tigers and
various birds, situated in a pleasant forest abounding in trees


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1755

near the city of Ayodhyi. Once on a time the vicious
vulture alleging that the nest of the owl was his own, tegan
to quarrel with him. O worshipful Sir, thereupon they both
said : — "The lotus-eyed Rama is the king of all people ;
let us go to him and he will decide to whom the nest
tx lo.igs." Having thus settled the vulture and the owl,
being impatient with rage, quarrelling with one another,
appeared before R&ma and touched his feet. Behold-
ing that lord of men, the vultureVsaid : "O preserver of
humanity, thou art the foremost, of celestials • and Asuras.
O thou of great effulgence, thou art gifted with intelligence
and learning more than Vrihaspati and Sukrich&rya. Thou
art cognisant of the good and bad conditions of creatures.
In beauty thou art like the Moon and art irrespressible like the
Sun. In glory thou art like Himalaya, in gravity like the
Ocean, in prowess like the Patriarch, in patience like the
Earth, and in velocity like the Wind. O Raghava, thou art
the preceptor of the mobile and immobile creation, gifted
with all sorts of wealth, illustrious, devoid of a revengeful
spirit, unconquerable, victorious, and master of all S&stras
and laws. O foremost of men, hear. I have an application
to thee. O Raghava, I had built a nest for myself ; this
owl is now occupying it as his own ; therefore, O king, do
thou save me." The vulture having said this, the owl
began : — "True, it is, O king, that in him are the portions
of the Moon, Indra, the Sun, Kuvera and Yama, but there
b in him also a portion of man. But thou art thyself the
omnipresent deity, N&rayana. Thou, impelled by thine own
self, dost judge all creatures impartially ; therefore, a
portion of gentleness is well manifest in thee and therefore
do people call thee, a portion of the Moon. O patriarch, in
anger, punishment, gift and fear, thou art our giver, destroyer
and protector, — it is for this that thou art called Indra. In
energy thou art like fire irrepressible unto all creaturef, and
because thou dost spread thy lusture upon all creatures, that


Digitized by VjOOQIC


175° RAM AY AN A.

thou art called the Sun. Thou art the very lord of riches
or art even superior to Kuvera ; like Padma unto the lord of
riches, Sri is always by thee. Because thou dost discharge
the functions of Kuvera, thou art the giver of wealth unto
us. O Raghava, thou lookest upon all creatures, mobile
and immobile, with an impartial eye — thou dost regard thy
friends and foes with impartiality, and thou art duly protecting
thy subjects. O Raghava, death pursues him with whom
thou art offended — and it is for this reason that thou art
styled by people 'the highly powerful Yama.' O foremost of
kings, because thou art forgiving unto all creatures and
a kind king that people sing thy glories as of a man on earth.
The king is the strength of the weak and helpless and he
is the eye of the blind and the refuge of those who have no
shelter. Thou art also our king ; therefore do thou listen
to our petition. O king, entering into my nest, this vulture
is oppressing me. Thou only, O foremost of men, art the
divine chastiser of mankind." Hearing those words, Rama
sent for his councillors. The ministers of Dacaratha
and Rama, Vrishthi, Yayanta, Vijaya, Siddhartha, Rashtra-
varddhana, Asoka, Darmapala the highly powerful
Sumantra and others were well versed in laws, high-minded,
conversant with all the Sastras, intelligent, born in respect-
able families, and adepts in counsel. Having invited them
all and ascending his Pushpaka car, he went to the place in
question, and, descending there, asked the vulture, "How long
has this nest been made ? Tell me, if thou remember
it." Whereto the vulture replied : — "From the time when
mankind were first born and spread over the four quarters
of the globe have I been living in this nest." The owl also
-^^ said : — "At the time when the earth was (first) adorned with
^^k trees that this-nest of mine was constructed." Hearing these
\pords, Rama said to the councillors : — "That assembly is not
p assembly where there are no friends — nor are they old
hen who do not dwell upon religious topics. That religion


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM, 1757

is not a religion where there is no truth
and that truth is not the truth where there is
hypocrisy. Those councillors are liars who do not give
proper replies in time on the subjects they are well-informed
on. He who does give reply to a question under the
influence of passion, anger or fear, binds himself with
a thousand nooses of Varuna, and at the expiration of full
one year he is released from a single sin." Hearing these
words, the ministers said to RSma : — "O thou having a large
mind, what the owl has said is true — the vulture has not
spoken the truth. Thou art the evidence this, O great
king — for the king is the last refuge of all — the root of the
subject and the eternal religion. He who is punished by
the king, is not doomed to a degraded state. He is, in
truth, saved from the fear of hell and reaches a better state."
Hearing the words of the ministers, RSLma said : — "Hear
what is mentioned in the PurSnas. Formerly the Sun, the
Moon, the welkin with the stars, the earth with the mountains
and forests — the three worlds, the mobile and the immobile,
were under water. At that time only N&rSyana existed as
th* second Sumeru. In NUrSyana's belly was stationed
the earth with Lakshmi. Having destroyed the
creation and entered water, the highly effulgent Vishnu,
identical with the souls of creatures, lay asleep there for
many long years. Beholding Vishnu asleep after the
destruction of the universe and knowing Vishnu of obstruct-
ed breath, the great ascetic BrahmS entered his abdomen.
Thereupon, when a golden lotus sprang from Vishnu's navel.
That great lord, ascetic Brahm&, originated therefrom and
was engaged in austere penances for the purpose 6f creating
earth, air, mountains, trees, men, reptiles and all animals
born from womb or egg. At that time from the ears of
N&r&yana originated two valiant and dreadful demons under
the name of Madhu and Kaitabha. Beholding the Patriarch,
there they were greatly enraged, and pursued him. Thereat,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


>


175S RAM AY AN A.

the self-born cried aloud hideously. Awakened by that sound,
Narayana engaged in fighting with Madhu and Kaitabha, and
slew them with his discus. And with their gore the whole
earth was deluged. Thereupon, purifying the earth again,
Hari, preserver of the world, covered it with trees.
And various drugs were also created. And the earth
was called Medini because it was filled with Medas
marrow of Madhu and Kaitabha. It is for this that I hold,
O ministers, that this house does not belong to the vulture,
but to the owl. Therefore, this vicious vulture
should be punished — for this wicked, vicious-minded one,
robbing another's nest, is oppressing him." In the interval
a voice was heard in the sky stating the true facts : —
•'O Rama, do not slay the vulture, — for it has already been
reduced to ashes by the force of Gautama's asceticism.
O lord of men, this vulture, in its pristine birth, was a heroic
truthful and pure king by the name of Brahmadatta. Once
on a time a Brhamana, by the name of Gautama, the very
personification of Kala, came to the house of Brahmadatta
for food and said : — 'O king, I shall feed in thy
house for more than a hundred years/ Thereupon, offering
that effulgent Brahmana, with his own hands, water to wash
his feet the king Brahmadatta,made arrangements for his meal.
Accidentally flesh. was mixed with the food of the high-
souled Gautama. Being enraged thereat, the ascetic
imprecated him with a dreadful curse and said: — r O king,
thou become a vulture.' The king said : — 'Be propitiated,
O thou of great vows ; do not imprecate me thus. I have,
out of ignorance committed this offence. O great one,
O blameless one, do thou act so that this curse
may find termination/ Thereat understanding that
this offence was committed by the king unwittingly, the
ascetic said — 'O king, in the race of Ikshawkus a king shall
be born under the name of Rama. O foremost of men, thou
alt be released from the curse when he shall touch thee/


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1759

Hearing the voice in the sky, Rama touched Brahmadatta.
Thereupon renouncing his venture from and assuming a
beautiful body smeared with celestial perfumes, he praised
Rama and said : — "O thou conversant with piety, by thy
favour have I been saved from the dreadful hell — here hath
coded my curse."


SECTION LXXIM


,/TLS Rama and Lakshmana were (daily} engaged in
conversing thus, the vernal night, neither hot nor cold, came
on. And it came to pass that one bright morning, after
having performed his first diurnal rites, Kakutstha, under-
standing the ways of the citizens, became anxious to present
himself at a spot whence he could observe the citizens. At
this time Sumantra, entering, addressed him, saying, — "O
king, stopped at the gate, some ascetics stay there, —
Afaharshis, led by Bhargava and Chyavana. And, O mighty
monarch, eager for a sight of thee, those dwellers on the
banks of the Yarnuna, well pleased, have despatched mc
(hither), O tiger among men." Hearing his words, the
righteous Rama answered : " Let the exalted Dwijas enter."
Thereat, honoring the royal mandate, the warder with joined
hands brought those ascetics difficult of being approached.
And numbering over an hundred, flaming up in their native
effulgence, those high-souled anchorets entered the royal
residence. And they presented Rama with various fruits in


Digitized by VjOOQIC


tj6o RAM AY AN A.

profusion and vessels filled with sanctified waters
of* all holy spots. Thereupon, accepting the waters of the
holy places as well as the various kinds of fruit, that mighty-
armed one spake to the mighty ascetics : "Do ye agreeably
to desert take these seats." Hearing Rama's speech, all
the Maharshis sat down on those graceful and elegant
golden seats. And seeing the saints seated there, that captor
of hostile capitals, Raghava, restraining himself, with joined
hands, observed :" What is the reason of your visit ? What
shall I needfully perform for you ? I am worthy of being
commanded by the Maharshis ; and I must without demur
compass every pleasure of theirs. And this entire monarchy,
and the life that is resident in my heart, — all these are for the
regenerate ones. This I tell you in the name of truth."
Hearing his words, the sages of fierce austerities inhabiting
the banks of the Yamuna, broke out into a peal of plaudits.
And those high-souled ones, exceedingly rejoiced, said :" On
earth, O crown of men, this can only be expected from thee
and nobody else. Many kings wielding great. power have
passed away who, having regard to the (possible) gravity
of the undertaking, could not bring themselves to promise
anything befoiehand. But, without knowing he task, thou
hast bound thyself by a promise for the glory of the Bramanas.
And thou, without doubt, wilt succeed in effecting the work ;
and it behoveth thee to deliver the sages from a mighty
f right."


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1761


SECTION LXXXV.


"W


HEN the sages had spoken thus, Kakutstha said : " O
ascetics, tell me what is the work which I shall have to accom-
plish in your behalf. Your fear shall be removed. "' As
Kakutstha was speaking thus, Bhargava remarked ! "O lord
of men, do thou hear of the origin of the fear that threatens
our country. O king, formerly in the Krita age, there was
a magnanimous offspring of Diti, the mighty Asura, Madu,
eldest son of Lota. He was well disposed towards
Br&hmanas, kind to those seeking his refuge, and gifted with
high intelligence. The exceedingly generous deities delighted
in him greatly. And by way of honoring him, Rudra con-
ferred a wonderful boon upon Madhu endowed with prowess
and ever intent on religion. And extracting a dart from*
his own, possessed of terrific energy, endowed with great
force, and furnished with exceeding splendour,that high-souled
one, well pleased, made it over (to Madhu) and spoke to him.
Thou hast practised excellent and unrivalled righteousness,
which hath won my good graces., and (therefore), I, highly
gratified, bestow on thee this choice weapon. So long as
thou, O mighty Asura, dost rot assail celestials and Vipras,
so long shall this be thine, — otherwise it shall come to naught.
Reducing to cinders the person that shall rashly enter upon
conflict with thee, this dart shall return to thy hand." Having
thus obtained the boon from Rudra, the mighty Asura, again
bowing to Mahadeva, addressed him, saying : "O reverend
one, may this excellent dart be the possession of my family
O god, thou art the lord of the immortals/ Thereat the lord
of all beings, the mighty deity Siva, answered Madhu, when
he had spoken thus : 'This will not br. But in order
221


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i 7 62 RAM AY AN A.

that thy prayer may not go for nothing, I graciously say in
thy behalf that one of thy sons shall sway this dart. So
long that dart-handed one shall be incapable of being
destroyed by any creature. 1 Having obtained this
wonderful boon from the god, Madhu — foremost of Asuras — •
caused a splendid city to be constructed. His beloved wife
the exalted and majestic Kumbhinasi is the offspring of
Vicwavasu by Anal*. Her son, the highly powerful wicked,
and fierce La van a, ever since his boyhood, gave himself up to
a sinful course of life. Seeing his son, committed to an
impious course Madhu was overcome with grief, but he did
not say anything to him. And forsaking this world, he
entered the region of Varuna ; and making over the dart
unto Lavana, communicated to him all about the boon he
had obtained. And by virtue of the power of the dart, he
oppresseth the three worlds in especial the ascetics ; such is
the power of Lavana, and such is his dart. Hearing all this
O Klkutstha, thou art capable (of righting our wrong.)
Thou art our chief resource. O R£ma many a monarch hath
been already sued by the sages, O hero, to deliver them from
this fear, — but we have not yet found a deliverer. Hearing,
O child, that R&vana together with all his forces and vehicles
hath been destroyed (by thee), we know that there breathes
not another king on earth capable of delivering us.
Therefore our prayer is that thou mayst deliver us afflicted
with the fear of I*avana. Thus, O R£ma, have we acquainted
thee with the occasion of fear that hath arisen. Thou art
capable of coping with the same. Do thou of undeteriorated
prowess, do the needful."


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1763


SECTION LXXVi.


-00-


J.HUS accosted (by the sages), RSma answered them
with joined hands : " What doth he live on ? What are
his ways? And where doth Lavana live?" Hearing
Righava's words, the sages informed him of the way in
which Lavana increased in power. His food is every creature
specially ascetics ; his manner of life is regulated by ferocity
and his constant home is Madhuvana. Slaying constantly
thousands on thousands of lions and tigers and deer, and
birds and huaian beings, he provides his daily food (with
their flesh.) And like the Destroyer on the occasion of the
universal dissolution, that one possessed of gigantic strength
feeds on other creatures as well." Hearing this, R&ghava
spoke to the mighty ascetics : " I will slay that Raksha. Let
your fright depart." Having thus bound himself with that
promise to the asetics of fierce energy, Raghu's son along
with his brothers spoke : " What hero shall slay Lavana ? Do
you decide this. On whom shall devolve this duty ? Whether
the mighty armed Bharata or the intelligent Satrughna shall
(do this work ?)" Thus addressed by R&ghava Bharata
remarked : " I will slay this. Let this task be entrusted to
me." Hearing Bharata's speech instinct with fortitude and
valor, the younger brother of Laksbmana stood up, leaving
his golden seat. And Satrughna, saluting the king
represented: "The mighty-armed second son of Raghu
hath already achieved a grand worjc : he formerly
governed Ayodhya empty of the noble one,* bearing
in his heart the grief connected with his • return.

* Rama.


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


1764 RAM AY AN A.

Undergoing many a hardship, king, that illustrious one
passed his days, fying down on a bed of sorrow, and living
on fruits and roots, and wearing rags. Having suffered such
misery, Raghu's son should not be suffered to undergo
trouble, while, O king I his servant is by." On Satrughna
saying this, Raghava again said : " Let this be so. Do thou
do my bidding. I shall install thee on the graceful city of
Madhu ; or if thou wish without and entrust Bharata with
this task, O long-armed one. Heroic, and accomplished, thou
art cometent to found a city on the Yamuna as well as
flourishing provinces. He that, having people's

dominion, doth not furnish it with a king, goeth to hell. So
if thou accept my words, then slaying Madhu's son, the
sinful Lavana,rule the kingdom righteously. O hero, thou must
say anything after what I have spoken. Without doubt, a
youthful younger brother must obey the injunctions of his
elder brother. Do thou, O Kakutstha, accept the installation
which I confer on the, preluded by the prescribed religious
formulae uttered by Vipras headed by Vasishtha." —


SECTION LXXVH.


-00-


X HUS accosted by Rama,the exceedingly energetic Satru-
ghna was powerfully wrought up with bashfulness, and replied
slowly: "O lord of men, this doth not appear to be in
consonance with morality. Wherefore, an elder brother
existing, wouldst thou install a younger one ? I must, O


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1765

best of men, do thy behest ; for, exalted one, thy mandate
can never be passed by me. O hero, I have heard from thee
as well as from the Sruti (touching the morality concerned).*
When ray second brother had already vowed (that he would
slay Lavana), I ought not to have returned the answer I
actually have. I saying, — 'I will in battle slay the dreadful
Lavana/ I have been guilty of an unrighteous speech. And
it is for this transgression that, O powerful one, 1 shall have
to undergo this improper process. But, albeit this course
is unrighteous and entails perdition, yet desired by my eldest
brother, I certainly ought not to make any answer. And, O
Kikutstha, a second answer I would not return ; so that,
O bestower of honor, I may not, by a second reply, render
myself liable to a fresh punishment. In this matter, O chief
of men, I will even do thy desire. Do thou, O descendant
of Raghu, so order that sin may not be mine (in having
obeyed thy mandate.) ,, Thus addressed by the heroic and
high-souled Satrughna, R&ma, delighted, spoke unto Bharata
and Lakshmana, — "Do you carefully provide the things
necessary for the coronation : this very day shall I install
that foremost of men, the descendant of Raghu. And by
my order do you summon the Purodhasas, O K&kutstha,
and the citizens and the Ritwijas, and the councillors."
Having received the royal behest, the mighty car-warriors
did accordingly. And the Kshatriyas and the Brahmana*
entered the royal mansion with the priest as well as the
requisite things for the installation. And then commenced
the auspicious sprinkling of the high-souled Satrughna,
gladdening (the hearts of all in) the palace of R&ghava. And
on being installed K&kutstha resembled the Sun ; and he
like Skanda formerly installed by the celestials led by Indra.
And when Satrughna had been installed by R&ma of untiring


1. e. of being installed as a king during the life of my elder brother.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


*766 RAM AY AN A.

deeds, the citizens as well as the BrShmanas of vast Vedic
attainments experienced excess of joy. And Kau^alyi
and Sumitri and Kaikeyl and the other wives of the king
set up festal salutation in the palace. And on Satrughna
having been installed the high-souled sages dwelling
on the banks of the JamunS, thought that Lavana had been
slain. Then placing the installed Satrughna on his lap,
R&ghava, extolling his prowess, addressed him sweet words:
" O captor of hosti le capitals, this divine arrow never missing
is thine. With this, O son of Raghu, thou, O splacid one,
wilt slay Lavana. O K&kutstha, this shaft was forged when
invisible by celestials and Asuras the divine self-sprung
and invincible (deity) reposed on the mighty main, and
when creation was oppressed by Madhu and Kaitabha as
well as other Rakshasas. He, overwhelmed with rage desir-
ous of creating the three worlds, created this best of arrows
invincible to all beings, for the destruction of the wicked
ones ; and destroyed them in battle by means of this very
arrow. And having with this foremost of shafts finished
Madhu and Kaitabha, they set about creating the worlds.
When, O Satrughna, formerly I sought to slay Ravana, I
did not discharge this arrow, thinking that if discharged, it
would inflict great havoc on creatures. Keeping in his abode
that great and redoubted which had been bestowed on Madhu
by the high-souled Tryamvaka, for the destruction of foes,—
and worshipping the same ever, Lavana goeth about and
secureth excellet fare (for himself) when one challenged
him, desirous of reducing him (his antagonist) to ashes.
Therefore, O foremost of men, thou shouldst, before entering
the city, stand at the gate obstructing his course. O thou
having long arms, thou shouldst invite him for battle when
he shall be weaponless and in that way wouldst be able
to destroy him. And by no other means he is to be slain.
If thou canst encompass this, he shall forsooth be slain. O
my son, I have thus to d thet the way in which the dart


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1767

should be thwarted. It is impossible to surpass the prowess
of the graceful Nilkantha.


SECTION LIXVnl


H-


_AVING thus addressed Satrughna, R&ma again and
again praised him and said : — a O foremost of men, let four
thousand horses, two thousand chariots, one hundred excellent
elephants, shops with various articles and songsters follow
thee. O foremost of men, O Satrughna, do thou proceed
with Nijuta gold and silver coins and necessary riches and
conveyances. Do thou so act, O hero, that soldiers might
be well-fed and delighted and be not annoyed with thee.
Do thou please them with sweet words, for the servants,
when they face enemies, have not with them friends or wives
— and so they are pleased, O R3ghava when they receive
sufficient food and presents. O Satrughna, having sent
before a huge and well contented army do thou proceed
afterwards to Madhuvana. Thou shouldst proceed so fear-
lessly that Madhu's son Lavana might not know that thou
wert going for encounter. O foremost of men, he shall not
be slain by any other expedient than that I have acquainted
thyself with. If he can perceive before, whoever that enemy
might be, Lavana shall forsooth destroy him. When ra ; ns
shall set in after the expiration of the present summer thou
shouldst slay him for that is the proper time for destroying
that vicious-minded one. For he shall then fearlessly


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i;68 RAM AY AN A.

move about leaving off his dart understanding that no on<*
would come to fight with him during rains. Let the soldiers
only now proceed with ascetics before them ; the summer
hath not as yet fully expired and this is the time, when they
shall, without any trouble, be able to cross the Ganges.
Afterwards having encamped thy army on the other side of
the Ganges thou shouldst alone proceed speedily with thy
bow." Hearing those words of Rama and summoning all
his highly powerful and leading warriors Satrughna said
"Do ye all proceed and halt at those places which are well-
known to you. Do not oppress any body.'' Having thus
ordered the powerful warriors the highly powerful Satrughna
bowed unto Kaucalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi. Thereupon
having circumambulated with folded hands Rama, Laksh-
mana and Bharata he reverentially saluted the feet of the
priests. And then with Rama's permission and having gone
round him the highly powerful Satrughna issued out. Having
thus depatched before a huge army consisting of selected
elephants and horses, Satrughna, the enhancer of the glory
of Raghu's race, took farewell from Rima. And all showed
him proper respect.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTaRaKaNDAM. 1769


SECTION LXXVII1.


00—


XXAVING thus despatched his army and waited at
AyodhyS. for a month Satrughna, the slayer of enemies,
proceeded alone. Having spent two nights on his way he
arrived at the holy and picturesque hermitage of the great
ascetic Valmiki. And having bowed unto that high-souled
Muni he, with folded palms, said : — r< illustrious Sir, I wish
to wait here this day ; I have come here for some business
of our master RSma. To-morrow morning I shall proceed
to the dreadful West." Hearing the words of the hi^h-
souled Satrughna, V&lmiki, the foremost of ascetics, replied
saying : — "O thou of great renown, do thou wait here
without any hesitation. O gentle one, this hermitage belongs
to the descendants of the Raghu race. Do thou fearlessly
take thy seat and water to wash thy feet." Thereupon taking
water to wash his feet and feeding upon fruits and roots Satru-
ghna attained to great delight. And afterwards he asked the
great ascetic Valmiki saying : — "O great ascetic, to whom
belong the articles of sacrifice in the east near this hermit-
age ?" Whereto Valmiki replied "Satrughna, hear I shall
tell thee, whose sacrificial ground was this in the days of
yore. There was a king by the name of Saud&sa— one of
thy ancestors. His son Virjashaha was a highly powerful and
pious king. The heroic Saud&sa was fond of hunting from
his boyhood. Once on a time while a-hunting, he espied
two Rikshasas in the forest. He had heard about them
many times before : they were in the shape of tigers and of
a dreadful figure and were not satiated with devouring
many thousand deer. King Saud&sa saw those two

222


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i77o RAM AY AN A.

Rakshasas and found the forest divested of all creatures.
And enraged in consequence thereof he slew one of them.
Having slain him and been at ease, Saudasa, the foremost
of men, began to eye that Rakshasa. His mate, greatly
aggrieved, said to him : — "0 vicious one, thou hast, without
any fault, slain my companion — I shall therefore mete out
becoming punishment unto thee." Having said this the
Rakshasa vanished therefrom. Thereupon in time the prince
Virjashaha became king. Saudasa engaged in celebrating
a mighty horse-sacrifice in the vicinity of this hermitage.
Vasishtha officiated as a priest at that sacrifice. It continued
for many Ayuta years. For immense riches the sacrifice
appeared like one performed by the celestials. Thereupon
when the sacrifice w T as about to be finished the aforesaid
Rakshasa, remembering his former enmity, assumed the shape
of Vasishtha and said to the king Saudasa :— "O king, to-day
the sacrifice shall end ; do therefore, without any delay,
feed me with meat." Hearing the words of the Rakshasa in
the guise of a Brahman, the king ordered his expert cook?,
saying : — "Do ye soon prepare such dishes of meat as may
satisfy my preceptor Vasishtha." Having been ordered by
the king the cooks reverentially went away and the Rakshasa
assuming their shape brought before the king dishes. The
king and queen offered those dishes unto the ascetic
Vasishtha, who, after being treated to them, perceived that
they were of human flesh and, terribly enraged, said : — "O
king, let this be thy food which thou hast offered me ; this
shall not prove otherwise." Being enraged on hearing it
the king Saudasa took water in his palms and was about
to imprecate Vasishtha, when his queen, preventing him
said : — "O king, the illustrious great ascetic Vasishtha is
our preceptor and priest and so thou shouldst not imprecate
him." Hearing those words of his queen, the king Saudasa,
threw off that powerful water on his own feet which at once
became dark. From that time the illustrious king Saudasa


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKAXDAM. 1771

became also known by the name of Kalasmp&da. There-

spon the king with his spouse again and again bowed unto

Vasishtha's feet and informed him of what the Rlksbasa

had done under the guise of a Brihmana. Hearing the

words of the king and being apprised that this vile act had

been done by the Rikshasa, Vasishtha said, "O V' n & cvcn

what I have said angrily shall not prove futile. However

I confer upon thee this boon that after twelve years thou

shall be freed from this curse, and by my favour thou shalt

cherish no recollection of thy condition extending ever those

twelve years." Having thus suffered the consequences of

the curse, Saudlsa, the slayer of enemies, again obtained his

kingdom and governed his subjects. O descendant of

Rlghu, the sacrificial ground of which thou hast asked me,

belongs to the king Saud&sa.*' Having thus heard the

dreadful story of the king Saudisa and saluted the ascetic

VUmiki, Satrughna entered a thatched cottage.


SECTION LXXiX.


— 00-


yjs the same night Satrughna housed himself in a thatch-
ed cottage Sita gave birth to twin sons. In the midnight
the Muni boys came to V&lmiki and communicated unto him
this auspicious intelligence, saying " O illustrious Sir, the
beloved spouse of Rama hath given birth to two sons ; do
thou so protect them that evil spirits might "not injure them.' 1
Hearing those words the highly effulgent Yalmiki went there


Digitized by VjOOQIC


177* RAM AY ANA.

and attained to great delight on beholding those two highly
effulgent sons, resembling the newly risen sun and the celes-
tials. Thereupon he made arrangements against the oppres-
sion of ghosts and goblins. Thereupon taking Kusa ( the
upper part of the grass) and Lava (the lower part) the great
ascetic V&lmiki made those arrangements. And giving
Kusa sanctified by Mantras unto the hands of elderly women
he said, "do ye rub the person of the elder boy with these" ;
and giving them Lava he said "do ye rub the person of the
younger brother with this. And according to this 1 shall
name the first Son Kusa and the second Lava ; and by those
names they shall be celebrated on earth." Thereupon reveren-
tially taking from the hands of Valmiki and Kusa Lava, the
means of protection, the elderly ladies engaged in guarding
them. Hearing that Sita without any trouble had given birth
to two sons and elderly female ascetics had been engaged in
protecting them and hearing the chanting of Rama's glories in
the midnight, Satrughna thought within himself. " Blessed it
is that Sita hath given birth to two sons." And with this joy
the live long night of Srabana passed away in no time.
Having performed the morning rites after the expiration of
the night and taken farewell from the ascetic Valmiki,
Lakshmana proceeded towards the west. And having spent
seven nights he at last arrived at the hermitage of the pious
Rishis living on the banks of the Yamuna. Taking
shelter there he engaged in pleasant conversation with
Chabanya and other ascetics. Having remained there for
the night and talked with those ascetics the high-souled,
heroic Raghu prince Satrughna was greatly delighted.


>


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1773


SECTION LXXX.


X HEREUPON when the night set in Satrughna accosted
VrigiTs son Ch&banya saying, "O Brahman, how powerful is
Lavana ? And what is the strength of his dart ? What
persons before had been destroyed by this dart in conflict ?"
Hearing the words of the high-souled descendant of Raghu,
— Satrughna,the highly effulgent Ch&banya replied saying . —
" O descendant of Raghu, Lavana hath accomplished many
works by this dart ; amongst them, hear, what Mandh&ta,
born in the race of Ikshawku, did. The early king of Ayodhyi
was known over the three woi Ids under the name of Mftn-
dhita. He was the son of Yavanishwa, highly powerful and
strong. Having brought the whole world under his subjec-
tion the king Mandh&ta engaged in the conquest of the
celestial region. He having been engaged in making prepa-
rations to conquer the world of gods — the celestial chief
India with other immortals was greatly terrified. With this
promise, the king M&ndh&ta went up into the celestial region
that he would occupy the half of Indra's throne and kingdom
and the celestials would adore him. Being apprised of this
vicious intention of his, Indra, the slayer of P&ka, consoled
him in sweet words, saying : — " O foremost of men, even
in the land of men, thou hast not been able to become the
real king. Without perfectly subjugating the earth how
dost thou wish to lord over the celestial kingdom ? If the
whole world is under thy subjection, O hero, be thou, with
the whole host of thy servants and soldiers, installed on the
celestial throne." Indra having said this, the high-souled
M&ndhata replied; — " O Sakra, who on this earth, hath dis-
obeyed my commands ?" Whereto Indra replied "O sinless


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1774 RAMAYANA.

one, the night-ranger, Lavana, Madhu's son, living in Madh-
uvana, is not under thy control." Hearing those dreadful and
npleasant words from Indra, the king lowered his head in
shame and became silent. Thereupon ,having welcomed
Indra in that way, he, left there and returned earth. O slayer
of enemies, with an angry heart, army and conveyance he
went to subjugate Madhu's son Lavana and sent an emissary
inviting him to battle. The ambassador, having gone there,
addressed many unpleasant words unto Lavana and the night-
ranger devoured him. On the other hand rinding the delay of
his return tke king Mandhata, enraged, began to assail the
Rakshasa Lavana with arrows from all sides. Laughing wild
Lavana took up the dart in his hand and discharged it to
destroy the king with his followers. Thereupon growing
powerful the dart reduced the king with his servants and army
into ashes and returned to Lavana. In this wise the high-
souled king Mandhata, with his huge army, was slain. O
gentle hero, incomparable and great is the strength of the
dart. Forsooth thou shalt slay Lavana next morning. Certain
is thy victory if Lavana cannot take up his dart. People
shall be at ease if thou canst bring about the destruction of
Lavana. O foremost of men, I shall then deseribe unto
thee the imcomparable and dreadful prowess of the vicious-
souled Lavana and his dart. O king, with great exertions
did Lavana slay Mandhata and not easily. O high-minded
one, next morning thou shalt surely destroy Lavana. He
shall issue out for flesh without taking his dart. And at that
time, O lord of men, thou shalt, for sooth, be crowned with
victory."


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1773


SECTION lxxxi.


X HEY being thus engaged in conversation regarding his
achieving victory without any danger Satrughna in no time
passed the night. The clear morning having arrived, the
heroic Lavana issued out of his city to collect food. In the
meantime having crossed the river Yamun&, the heroic
Satrughna, with bow in his hands, stood at the gate of
Madhu's city. Thereupon returning in the noon with many
thousand animals, the night-ranger Lavana, of dreadful
actions, espied Satrughna standing at the gate with a weapon
in his hand. Thereupon he said : — "What shalt thou do with
this weapon ? O vile wight, enraged I have devoured many
thousand persons holding weapons like thee. I now perceive
thou hast also been possessed by K&la. O vile man, I am
fully fed. How shalt thou, of thy own accord, enter into my
mouth ?" Lavana having said this again and again laughing
the great hero Satrughna shed tears in anger. The high-
minded Satrughna being beside himself with rage, from all
his person issued burning lustre. Greatly enraged he said
to the night-ranger "O thou of a vicious intellect, I wish to
enter into a dual encounter with thee. I am the son of the
great king Da^aratha, brother of the intelligent R&maand my
name is Satrughna. 1 slay all my enemies and have come here
to destroy thee. I wish now to fight with thee — do thou enter
into a dual conflict. Thou art the enemy of all animals.
Thou shalt not be able to survive at my hands " He having
said this, the R&kshasa, laughing aloud, replied unto that
foremost of men : — "Thy understanding is bewildered.
By the influence of destiny thou bast come under my control.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1776 RAM AY AN A,

The Rakshasa Ravana was the brother of my aunts, o tbou
of vicious understanding, O vile wight, it is for his wife
that RSma did slay him. It is out of hatred that I have*
tolerated the destruction of Ravanas family and havt-
pardoned you all. You are all vile men ; I have slain and
defeated all of your family that have passed away and shall
destroy all that are living and shall come into existence.
O thou of vicious intellect, if thou wishest I shall fight with
thee. Do thou wait here so long I do not bring my
weapon. Do thou remain here as long as I with that
shall not kill thee." Whereto Satrughna immediately
replied "Where shalt thou go while I am alive ? The
practical men should never let off the enemies who come
out of their own accord. He, who inviteth an enemy into
battle under the influence of perverted understanding, is
slain like a coward. Do thou behold this world of creature*
to thy hearts' content for I shall by various sharp weapons
despatch thee to Yama's abode who is the enemy of the three
worlds and Raghava."


8ECTION lxxxii.


W EARING the words of the high souled Satrughna
Lavana was greatly enraged and again and again asked him
to wait. And clashing his hands and grinding his teeth be
invited that foremost of Raghus, Satrughna, to fight. And
Satrughna, the slayer of celestial's enemies, said to the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1779

dreadful Lavana, giving vent to those words : — "Satrughna
was not born when thou didst defeat other kings ; do thou
therefore proceed to Death's abode being assailed by shafts.
O thou of a vicious soul, as did the celestials behold RaVana
slain so shall the Rishis and learned Brahmans behold thee,
destroyed by me. O Rakshasa, forsooth shall good crown
cities and villages when thou shalt fall down burnt by my
arrows. As the rays of the sun enter into lotus so shall
arrows, hard as lightning, discharged by my hands, shall
enter into thy heart." Being beside himself with ire on
hearing those words of Satrughna, Lavana threw a huge tree
against his breast And Satrughna too sundered it into a
hundred pieces. Beholding his own action baffled the
Rlkthasa again took up many trees and hurled them at
Satrughna, who, with three or four hundred bent arrows, cut
them all, one by one, into pieces. Thereupon when the
powerful Satrughna assailed him with arrows the Rakshasa
was not the least pained. Rather laughing aloud the valiant
Rakshasa uprooted a tree and struck him with that on the
head. With that stroke he was wounded and slain. And
that hero falling there arose a terrible uproar amongst the
Rishis, celestials, Gandharbas and Apsaras. Thereupon
considering Satrughna slain the night-ranger did not enter
his house albeit he got the opportunity ; and moreover behold-
ing him fallen and destroyed he did not take up his dart.
He then began to carry his collected food. Regaining his
sense within a moment, Satrughna, with a weapon in his hand,
stood at the city gate and the Rishis began to praise him.
Thereupon, he having taken up an excellent arrow of unfail-
ing aim the ten quarters were filled with its native brilliance.
Its face was like lightning and its velocity the same and it
looked like Meru and Mandara ; its joints were all bent.
None could defeat it in battle. It was pasted with red
sandal resembling blood and its feathers were beautiful.
Beholding that dart like unto the fire of dissolution, and
223


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1780 RA MAYAN A.

dreadful like unto the lords of DSnavas, mountains and Asuras,
the creatures were greatly terrified. What more, being
disturbed, the celestials, Asuras, Gandharbas, saints and
Apsaras and all other creatures of the world approached the
Great Patriarch, the conferrer of boons and said : — "The
fear of the celestials and the destruction of the creatures
hath arrived/' Hearing those words the Patriarch BrahmS
replied "Although it is a source of great fear still it is not
dreadful unto the celestials." Thereupon with sweet accents
he said : — "Hear, O ye celestials, Satrughna hath taken up
this arrow for the destruction of Lavana. By the energy
thereof we have all been overwhelmed. This effulgent, ever-
existing arrow was made by the Primeval, Deity, Vishnu —
the lord of creatures. My children, the burning arrow, of
which you are afraid, was made by the high-minded Vishnu
for slaying the demons Madhu and Kaitabha. And Vishnu
alone is cognizant of its energy. Th»s Satrughna is the first
portion of Vishnu's person ; do ye all go hence and behold the
destruction of the foremost Rakshasa, Lavana, by the high-
souled, heroic Satrughna, the younger brother of R£ma: f
Hearing the words of the Patriarch BrahmS, the celestials
arrived at -the battle-field of Satrughna and Lavana and saw
that the arrow, held by Satrughna* s hands, was burning like
the fire of dissolution. Beholding the welkin covered by the
celestials, Satrughna, the descendant ef Raghu, emitting
leonine roars, again and again looked towards Lavana. And
being again excited by the high-seuled Satrughna and
enraged Lavana arrived for encounter. Thereupon expanding
his bow up to ears, Satrughna, the most accomplished
archer, discharged his arrow against the spacious breast of
of Lavana. And piercing his heart that arrow entered
speedily into RasStala And having entered Ras&tala that
arrow, hpnored by the celestials, again came to the descendant
of Raghu. And being pierced by that shaft the night -
ranger Lavana fell down on earth like a mountain clapped


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1781

by a thunder-bolt. The R&kshasa being slain that celestial,
huge arrow came into the possession of Rudra before the
gods. Having removed the fear of the three worlds with
one shaft, that heroic Raghu, Satrughna — younger brother
of Lakshmana, holding excellent bow and arrow, appeared
like the Sun of thousand rays removing darkness. There-
upon chanting the glories of Satrughna, the celestials, Rishis,
Pannagas, Apsaras, said "O son of Da^aratha, it is really
fortunate, that thou, renouncing fear, hast acquired victory
and that the R&kshasa Lavana hath been vanquished like a
serpent."


SECTION LXXXIII.


I jAVANA being slain the celestials headed by Agni and
Indra said in sweet accents to Satrughna the represser of
enemies : — "O child, fortunate it is that thou hast been
crowned with success after slaying the R&kshasa Lavana.
Do thou, therefore, O foremost of men, O thou of firm vows,
accept boons. O thou having long arms, all those who can
confer boons have arrived here ; they all wish for thy
victory ; seeing us doth not go without fruits." Hearing the
words of the celestials the large-armed and self-controlled
Satrughna placed his hands on his head and said . — "Let
this picturesque and charming city of Madhu, built by the
celestials, be my capital ; this is the only excellent boon I
can beg." The celestials, with a delighted heart, said to the
descendant of Raghu. — 'Thy desire shall be fulfilled and


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1782 RAM AY AN A.

forsooth shall thy city be turned into a picturesque capital under
the name of Surashena." The high-souled celestials having
ascended the welkin saying this, the highly effulgent
Satrughna brought the soldiers there, that were encamped
on the banks of the Ganges. When the soldiers arrived there
on hearing the commands of Satrughna he engaged in
making encampments in the month of Sraban. In this wise
the fearlessness of the celestial host, taking the shape of a
country, that beautiful and picturesque city was reared in
the course of twelve years. All the fields there were filled
with crops and Indra began to pour showers in due season.
And being protected by the strength of Satiughna's arms
all men there became valiant and were freed from deseases.
That city on the banks of Yamuna appeared beautiful like
the half moon and was filled with yards, shops, streets
beautiful houses, men of four orders and various articles of
trade. Satrughna now engaged in beautifying the spacious,
white houses that were made by Lavana before, with various
ornamental works. Beholding the city interspersed with various
excellent gardens, pleasure grounds and prosperously filled
with celestials and men and diverse articles of trade and mer-
chants hailing from various countries, Satrughna, the younger
brother of Bharata, attained to the satisfaction of desire and
excess of delight. Having thus reared the beautiful city
he resolved within himself "The twelfth year has come. I
shall now behold the feet of Rama." Thereupon having set
up the city resembling the region of the celestials and filled
with various men, the king Satrughna, the enhancer of
Raghu's race, determined on beholding Rama's feet.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM 1 783


SECTION LXXXlV.


X HEREUPON on the completion of the twelfth year,
Satrughna, with few servants, soldiers and followers, desired
to proceed to AyodhyS. protected by Rama. Having prevent-
ed his minister and leading generals he proceeded with one
hundred chariots and cavalry. And having counted seven
baiting stations on his way, the highly illustrious descendant of
Raghu — Satrughna, arrived at the hermitage of Vilmiki. Ani
having bowed unto the feet of the leading Muni, that foremost
of men took from his hands water to wash feet and Arghya
and accepted his hospitality. The great ascetic V&lmiki
addressed to the high-souled Satrughna many sweet words.
Having referred at first to Lavana' s destruction, he said :—
"Having slain Lavana thou hast performed a very hard work.
O gentle one, O foremost of men, Lavana had slain in conflict
many- hundred highly powerful kings with their army and
conveyances. And thou hast easily slain that vicious-souled
RJLkshasa, Lavana. By thy prowess the whole world hath
been divested of fear. With great difficulty Rima had slain
Rlvana — but without any trouble whatsoever thou hast accom-
plished this mighty work. Lavana being slain, the celestials
have been greatly delighted — what more the well-being of
the whole universe and all creatures has been brought about.

Rlghava, O foremost of men, being present in the assemblage
of Visava — I duly witnessed your combat. O Satrughna,

1 too have been greatly delighted — I therefore smell thy crown
for this is the best expression of love." Saying this the high-
minded V&lmiki smelted his crown and made arrangements for
his reception as well as that of his followers. After meals,
Satrughna, the foremost of men, listened to themes


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1784 RAM AY ANA.

relating to Rama and set in musical notes. Those themes
were composed describing the early actions of Rlma.
They were composed in Sanskrit, set to the tune of a
musical instrument, adorned with all the marks of vocal music
and arranged in accompaniment with notes. Satrughna, the
foremost of men, heard them from the beginning to the end,
pregnant with truth and composed of those words. And
on hearing it he was beside himself with joy and his eyes
were full of tears. And remaining stunned for some time
and regaining his sense afterwards he began to breathe hard
out of excess of surprise. He heard, in that song, of past
events as things passing on. And hearing it, his followers,
with their heads down and sorrowfully said : — " Wonder" ; and
saying this they began to converse with one another : —
"Alas ! Where are we ? Is this a dream ? We have been
hearing at this hermitage what we had not seen before. What
wonder, that in a dream we hear such an excellent song."
Being in this wise greatly surprised they said to Satrughna : —
" O foremost of men, do thou ask particularly, about this,
V&lmiki, the foremost of ascetics." They being all thus
struck with curiosity, Satrughna said : — "It is not proper for
us,0 Ye soldiers, to question him in this way. There are many
such wonders in the hermitage of this ascetic. It is not
therefore becoming to ask him about this out of curiosity."
Having thus addressed the soldiers and bowed unto the
ascetic, Satrughna, the desendant of Raghu, entered his own
quarter.


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 17*5


SECTION LXXXV.


X HEREUPON going to bed, Satrughna began to meditate
apoo. that excellent theme relating to Rama and treating of
diverse subjects and did not enter into sleep. In sooth the
high-minded Satrughna spent the night in no time listening to
that charming song set in musical notes. The night being
orcr, he first went through the morning rites and then with
folded hands addressed the foremost of ascetics, Valmiki,
saying : — "O illustrious Sir, I am anxious to see Rama, the
enhancer of the delight of the Raghu race. And my desire
is that thou mayst with other illustrious Rishis, grant me
permission on this." Satrughna, the slayer of enemies,
having said this, the great ascetic Valmiki embraced and
bade him farewell. He was greatly anxious to behold Rama
and saluting the foremost of Munis he speedily preceeded to
Ayodhya. Thereupon having entered the highly picturesque city
Ayodhya, the graceful descendant of Ikshwakus, Satrughna,
reached where the long-armed and the highly effulgent Rama
was waiting. He espied there Rama in the midst of the
councillors like Indra amongst the immortals burning in his
own effulgence. And having bowed with folded hands unto
R2ma, having truth for his prowess, Satrughna said : — m O
great king, I have carried out all thine behests ; I have slain
the vicious Lavana and filled his city with subjects. O
descendant of Raghu, twelve years have passed away without
thee — t do not wish to live any longer separated from thee.
Do thou therefore, O Kakuthstha of unmitigated prowess,
have compassion on mc. Without thee, I cannot live for ever
in a foreign province like a motherless child." He having
said this, Rama embraced him and said : — "Be not sorry,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1786 RAM AY AN A.

O hero. This is not a becoming action for Kshatryas. The
kings, O RSghava, are never tired of .living in a foreign
land. According to the morality of the Kshatryas, their
greatest duty consists in governing the subjects. O heroic
and foremost of men, do thou, at intervals, come to Ayodhyi
to see me and return to thy own city. Forsooth thou axt
dearer than my life. But it is an incumbent duty to govern
the kingdom. Do thou therefore, O K&kutstha, live with me
for seven nights, and afterwards return to thy city with
thy servants, army and conveyances." Hearing those moral
and charming words of Rama, Satrughna poorly replied,
saying : — "Thy command shall be carried out." Thereupon
Satrughna, well-skilled in the use of bows, remained with
R&ma for seven nights and then addressed himself for
departure. Thereupon having invited Bharata and Laksh-
mana, the high-souled Rama, having truth for his prowess,
speedily went for his city in a huge chariot. The high-souled
Lakshmana and Bharata followed him on foot for some
distance.


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1 787


SECTION lxxxvI,


XjLaviNG bade adieu unto Satrughna, Rama, the descen-
dant of Raghu, was greatly delighted by governing his
subjects piously in the company of Bharata and Lakshmana.
Some days having passed in this wise — a villager, an old
Brahman, arrived at the palace gate with a dead body. That
Brahman, stricken with affection, again and again bewailed
in various piteous accents, exclaiming "What henious crime
had I committed in my pristine birth that I have been
constrained to witness the death of my son. My son, thou
hast not as yet completed fourteen years. To my misery thou
hast met with untimely death. Forsooth, for thy grief, O
my son, myself and thy mother shall soon be snatched away
by death. I do not remember to have ever uttered a false-
hood, or injured an animal or perpetrated any other crime.
Therefore for some other sinful action, this boy, without
performing the son's duties towards his parents, has gone
to the abode of death. Save under the regeme of R&ma,
I have never seen or heard of the dreadful death of such a
boy who hath not attained the age. Forsooth, Rama hath
perpetrated a mighty iniquity for which boys, during his
administration, have been meeting with untimely death. In
other governments boys have no fear of such an untimely
death. Therefore, O king confer life upon this dead child.
Or else with my spouse I shall renounce my life at this gate
like one having no lord. O Rama, soiled by the sin conse-
quent upon the destruction of a Brahmana, do thou live long
happily with brothers. O thou of great prowess, up to this
time we have lived happily in thy kingdom. And now, O
Rima, under thy subjection we are being troubled with the
224


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


1788 RAM AY AN A.

sorrow of our son's death. We have been brought under
the influence of Kala ; so in thy kingdom there is not the
least happiness for us. Having attained Rama as its lord,
the kingdom, of the high-souled Ikshw&kus, hath attained to
the condition of one having no master, where during Rama's
regeme the death of a boy hath been brought about. For
being impiously governed by a king, for his sin, the subjects
meet with calamities. And a king following evil tracks and not
governing the subjects righteously people meet with untimely
death. Therefore, when a king doth not suppress the crimes
committed by people either in cities or provinces the fear,
of untimely death, comes in. Evident it is therefore that
undoubtedly the sin of the king hath appeared in cities and
provinces. And for that reason this boy hath met with
death." Being overwhelmed with sorrow that old Brahman
again and again remonstrated with the king in these piteous
words and afterwards covered the death body (of his son).


S E CTION lxxx v 1 1 .


JlLEARING those sorrowful words of the Brahman, Rama
was greatly sorry and sent for Vasishtha, Blmadeva, his
brothers, citizens and councillors. Thereupon having entered
the apartment in the company of Vasishtha, eight Brahmans
blessed the king Rama, resembling a celestial, saying 'may
victory crown thee.' Markandeya, Maudgalya, Bamadeva,
tCashyapa, K&tySyana, Javali, Gautama, and Narada — these
eight leading Brahmanas having taken their seats, R&ma,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM 1 789

with folded hands, saluted them. And he showed due
civilities towards bis minister, citizens, Rishis and all others.
Thereupon all the highly effulgent Rishis being accomodated
with seats Rama narrated duly before them the account of
the Brahmana and said. "This Brahman is waiting at the
Palace-gate." Hearing those words of the poorly king,
Klrada, in the presence of all other Rishis, replied : — "Hear,
king, why this boy hath met with untimely death. And
hearing this, O descendant of Raghu, do thou settle what
thou thinkest proper. king, in the golden age, only the
Brabmans used to engage in asceticism. At that age,save the
Brahmanas no other caste used to lead the life of an
anchoret. And for this, the Brahmans were the highest caste,
effulgent in asceticism, shorn of ignorance, above death and
conversant with three ages. Thereupon at the end of the
golden age, Brahmana's understanding became loose and
the TretS Yuga set in. At this age Kshatryas, gifted with
the power acquired by pristine asceticism, were born. And
those men, intent upon austere penances, that were born in
the Treti age, were more powerful and greater devotees than
those in theformerage. In the golden age the Brahmanas were
more powerful than the Kshatryas. But in the Tretl age the
Brahmanas and the Kshatryas were equally powerful. Thus
in the Tret* age, not beholding prominence of the Brahmanas
greater than that of the Kshatryas, Manu and other religious
leaders of the time composed the Sastra describing and
setting in the four divisions of castes. In this wise the Treti
age was prolific with virtues of the four Varnas, and many
pious sacrifices* and was shorn of iniquities. But
being attacked a little with iniquity, one portion of sin
appeared on earth. And growing impious people lost their
strength. And for houses and farms that were the property
of the former age, people of the Tret* Yuga were possessed
by envy, the outcome of the quality of darkness. And with the
treading of impiety on earth during Treti, the soiled bin of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


179° RAM AY AN A.

untruth appeared. And this iniquity stretching one footstep,
the lease of people's lives, for sins, became limited. And
the sin of untruth descending on earth, people, to avoid the
extinction of life in consequence thereof, became truthful
and engaged in many pious observances. During the Treta
age the Brahmanas and Kshatryas engaged in austere
penances and the Vaisyas and Sudras engaged in serving
them. And the greatest piety of the Vaisyas and Sudras
at that time consisted of serving the Brahmanas and
Kshatryas and specially for the Sudras the highest religion
was to serve people of alKVarnas. O foremost of kings, at
the end of the TretS age, Vaisyas and Sudras being fully
overpowered by the sin of untruth, the Brahmanas and the
Kshatryas also grew feeble. And the second foot of
impiety being ushered into the world the Dwapara age
set in. O foremost of men, during this age two legs of
piety being cut off, impiety and untruth multiplied. And in
Yuga named Dwapara the Vaisyas engaged in devout
penances. In this wise in three ages the three Varnas
gradually engaged in ascetic performances. The piety of
asceticism by Yugas gradually became established in three
Varnas. But, O foremost of men, in these three Yugas the
Sudras were not entitled to the virtues of devout penances.
O foremost of men, the degraded caste — the Sudras, during*
thy regeme, have engaged in aubtere penances. And in the
Kali Yuga asceticism shall be established in the Sudras. O
king, even in the Dwapara, devout penances for Sudras were
considered as impiety, what to speak of the Treta age. O
king, one Sudra, under the influence of vicious understanding,
has begun devout penances within thy kingdom. And for
that reason this boy hath met with death. Calamity sets ii>
that kingdom where a vrcious-minded person commits ai>
iniquity and that vicious wrght and the king forsooth speedily
repair to hell. The king, who piously governeth his subjects,,
receiveth the sixth portion of theirstudy,asceticism and good


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1791

actions. While the king is entitled to the sixth portion of
everything why should he not fully, protect his subjects?
Therefore,0 chief of men, do thou bring all informations of thy
kingdom. And be then studious to repress vices wherever
thou shalt find them. And by that, O foremost of men, the
piety of the subjects shall be increased, the lease of their
life shall- be prolonged and this boy shall regain his life/ 9


SECTION LXXXVIII.


H.


.EARING the sweet words of the celestial saint NSrada
Rlma was greatly delighted and addressing Lakshmana
said : — "O gentle one, do thou console that foremost of twice-
born ones and place the dead body of the boy in a jar full of
oil. Let this body be protected by sweet-scented oil so that it
might not be soiled by any means. See that it is not
disfigured, its joints are not loosened and the hairs do not fall
off." The highly illustrious R&ma, the descendant of
Ikshw&kus, thus commanded Lakshmana, gifted with
auspicious marks, and thought of his car and desired it to come
soon. Understanding his intention the golden car appeared
before him in no time and saluting him said : — " O thou of
long arms, thine chariot hath come." Hearing the sweet
words of Pushpaka the king Rama saluted the great ascetics,
ascended the car with his burning bow, quiver and dagger
and left Bharata and Lakshmana in charge of the city. And
searching that Sudra devotee here and there R&ghava pro-
ceeded towards the west. And not beholding him there


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1792 RAM AY AN A.

he went to the North bounded by the Himalyas. And even
there he did not espy the Sudra ascetic and even the smallest
iniquity was not seen there. Thereupon returning from that
quarter the king journeyed the whole of east. And having
sat on the Pushpaka car he saw that the eastern quarter
was transparent like a looking glass and there was not the
best touch of sin. From the east R&ghava proceeded to-
wards the south and espied a big tank by the side of the
Saivala mountain. On the banks of that pond one ascetic
was performing the most austere penances with his legs
upwards and head downwards. Thereupon approaching
him, Rama said — " O thou of good vows, blessed art thou ;
I do ask thee, now, O thou highly effulgent and grown old
old in asceticism, in what Varna thou art born. I put this
question out of curiosity. I am the son of king Dacaratha
and my name is Rama. For what art thou going through
such hard austerities ? Is it heaven or anything else that
thou prayest for ? O ascetic, I wish to hear, of the purpose
for which thou art performing such hard penances. Art thou
a Brahman, or an irrepresible Kshatrya or the third caste
Vaisya or a Sudra? Do thou speak the' truth and thou shalt
be crowned with auspiciousness." Hearing the words of
Rama, the ascetic, whose face was downwards, gave out his
degraded birth and communicated unto him for what he
was performing ascetic observances.


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAAf. 1793


SECTION LXXXV.


XI EARING the words of R&ma of unwearied actions, the
ascetic, with his face downwards, said : — " O highly illustrious
Rlma, I am born in the race of Sudras; and with a view to
reach the region of the celestials with my body I am going
through these austere penances. K&kuthstha, I shall
never utter a falsehood since I am willing to conquer the
the region of gods. I am a Sudra and my name is Sambuka."
The Sudra ascetic having said this, R&ma took out of
scabbard a beautiful sharp sword and chopped off his head
therewith. And that Sudra being slain, Indra, Agni and
other celestials praised him again and again and showered
flowers. And being greatly delighted, the celestials said to
Rlma 4 having truth for his prowess: — "O thou of a great
mind, thou hast nicely performed this god-like work.
O slayer of foes, do thou now crave a boon. O des-
cendant of Raghu, being slain by thee this Sudra
hath been able to attain to the abode of the celes-
tials/' Hearing the words of the deities, Rama, having
truth for his prowess, said with folded hands to Purandara,
of a thousand eyes : — "If the celestials are pleased, I beg for
this boon that the son of the twice-born one may be restored
to life. Do ye confer upon me this boon ; this is my wished-
for object. It is for my iniquitous conduct that this only son of
the Brahman hath met with untimely death. Do ye restore
him to life. I have promised before that leading twice-born
one that I would restore his son to life — do ye therefore,
make not me a liar." Hearing the words of R&tna the
leading celestials delightedly said : — "Do thou return, O
Klkutstha. The Brahmin boy shall immediately gain back


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i?94 RAM AY AN A.

his life and be united with his father, mother and friends.
O Raghava, with the death of the Sudra the boy has regained
his life. Be thou at ease ; may good betide thee.
foremost of men, we, too, return with delighted hearts.

Raghava, we desire to behold the hermitage of the great
saint Agastya. Having been initiated, that highly effulgent
Brahman saint hath lived within waters for twelve years ;
his vow hath now terminated. O Kakuthstha, we shall now
go to welcome that Muni. Do thou also follow us to see
that saint." Saying 'so be it* to the words of the celestials
that descendant of Raghu ascended his golden car Pushpaka.
And having ascended spacious cars the celestials proceeded
to the hermitage of Agastya born of a Kumbha. Rama
too also followed them. Thereupon beholding the celestials
present the virtuous-souled Agastya, the jewel of asceticism,
welcomed them particularly. Having accepted his worship
and adored in return that great Muni,the immortals, delighted,
proceeded to their abodes with their followers. The celestials
having departed Rama descended from Pushpaka and
saluted that effulgent and foremost of Rishis Agastya. And
having received due hospitality he sat there. Thereupon
the highly effulgent and leading ascetic Kumbhajoni said : —
"O Raghava, I have been greatly delighted with thy coming.
By my good fortune I have seen thee to-day. O Rama,

1 love thee because thou art gifted with many qualities.
king, thou art my worshipful guest. I was thinking of thee.
The celestials informed me that thou wert coming having
slain the Sudra ascetic. Thou hast observed piety and hast
given back life unto the dead child of the Brahman. Do
thou spend this night with me, O Raghava. Thou art the
graceful Narayana. In thee the whole universe is establish-
ed. Thou art the lord of all creatures and the eternal
Purusha. Thou shalt go to thy city next morning in thy
Pushpaka car. This ornament, O gentle one, hath been
made by the architect of the celestials ; its make is very


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1795

beautiful and it is dazzling by its own lustre. By accepting
this. O Kakutstha, do thou satify my desire. It is said, that
one attains to best fruits if he makes present unto his deity,
of best articles he gets from another. Thou art the only
worthy person to use this ornament. Thou art alone capable
of conferring best fruits. Thou dost protect Indra and other
celestials. Therefore I do duly present thee with this
ornament. O king, flo thou accept it." Thereupon meditat-
ing upon the duties of the Kshatryas, the heroic Rama, the
foremost of the intelligent, said : — "O illustrious Sir, the
B-ahmanas only can accept presents — how can the Kshatryas
do ? To take gifts is the function of the Brahmanas — for
Ivshatryas it is a source of censure. Besides, to receive
presents from a Brahmana, is highly culpable. Do thou
therefore tell me, how I may accept this ornament. "
Hearing the words of Rama, the great saint Agastya replied
saving : — "O RSma, O son of Dacaratha, at the beginning
of the golden age, people had no king; but Vasava was the ruler
of the celestials. Therefore to obtain a king, men approached
Brahm&, the god of gods and said "O deity thou hast placed
Indra as ruler over the celestials ; therefore, O lord of
creatures, do thou also confer upon us a king who shall be
foremost among men ; by worshipping him we shall be freed
from all sins. We shall not live without the king — even
this is our firm resolution.*' Thereupon the Patriarch
Brahma sent for Indra and other deities and said : — "Do ye
all give a portion of your respective energies." Thereupon
the deities gave each a portion of their own energies. There-
upon BrahmS made a Khshupa or sound and therefrom
originated a king under the name of Khshupa, And in
his person Brahm& placed in equal proportions the energies
of the deities. Thereafter he made Khshupa the foremost
* king of men. By virtue of the portion of Indra's energy
the king Khshupa brought the earth under his control ; by
that of Varuna's energy he fostered his own body ; by Kuvera's
225


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1796 RAM AY AN A.

portion he conferred riches upon his subjects ; and by that
of Yama he governed them. Therefore, O Rama, by virtue
of Indra's portion, do thou accept this ornament and confer
upon me the salvation. " Hearing the words of the Muni, Rama
took from him that brilliant celestial ornament burning like
the rays of the Sun. And having taken that excellent
ornament, Dacarathi asked the great saint Kumbhayoni,
saying : — "Whence hast thou obtained this celestial ornament
of a wondrous make ? Who hast given thee this ? O
Brahman, I do accost thee thus out of curiosity. Thou
art the mine of many wonders." Whereto Agastya replied,
saying "Hearken, O Rama, how I did obtain this ornament
in the Treta apfe."


SECTION XC.


\J Rama, in Treta age, there was a huge rforest ex-
tending over hundred Yoyanas divested of animals and men.
In that forest I used to perform my austere penances. Once
on a time I began to roam all over the forest being willing
to see well every nook and corner of it. And I saw that
it was impossible to ascertain how very pleasant that forest
vas. In every place there were trees with profuse sweet
r its and roots. In the middle I espied a pond extending
;- a Yoyana. There was no moss in that deep, calm,
- w: -ind sweet water; there were lotuses and lilies and
-,.*■••'.::--., Karandavas, Chakravakas and many other w r ater
iowIs were playing in the waters. O lord of creatures, at no


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM 1797

distance from that pond I saw an old, holy hermitage but
there was no creature or animal around it. It was summer
and I spent that night in that hermitage. Next
morning leaving my bed I arrived at the banks
of the pond and saw a plump dead body in the waters.
None of its limbs was pale and its beauty was not spoiled.
Beholding it and standing on the banks I began to meditate
upon it. And thought I "What is this ?' In a moment I
espied a beautiful car, swift-coursing like the mind and
drawn by ganders. And I saw in that chariot a celestial
person. He was being attended by Apasaras adorned with
celestial ornaments and having lotus-eyes. Some of them
were singing, some dancing and some playing on Mridanga,
Vina and other musical instruments and some were fanning
his lotus-like countenance with valuable, golden chowries,
dazzling like the rays of the moon. O Rama, the foremost
of Raghu's race, like unto the moon renouncing the summit
of the Sumeru mount that celestial wight got down from
his seat in the car and engaged in devouring the dead body.
And having taken enough flesh he got down into waters and
duly performed ablution. And thereafter that heavenly
being again addressed himself for ascending the car. O
foremost of men, beholding that heavenly being about to
get up I accosted him, saying 'Who art thou ? I see, thou hast
a celestial firm, then why hast thou taken such an abomina-
ble food ? O thou adored of the immortals, persons like
thee should not take such meals. O gentle one, I have been
striken with great curiosity and wish to hear all. Thine
living upon dead body doth not appear agreeable unto me./
O king, plainly and out of curiosity I put to him these
questions. And hearing them, the celestial being related
everything unto me.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1793 RAM AY AN A.


SECTION cxr.


o


RAMA, hearing my words pregnant with sound
reasoning, that heavenly being, with folded hands, said : —
" Hear, O Brahman, from what unavoidable cause hath
proceeded this happy and again painful incident. There
flourished in the days of yore a highly illustratious and
powerful Vidarbha king under the name of Sudeva known
over three worlds. He was my father. His two queens gave
birth to two sons. My name is Svveta and the name of my
youngest brother was Suratha. After the decease of my sire
the subjects installed me on the throne and I governed them
piously and carefully for a thousand years. By some reason
I was informed of the extent of my life. And when I
perceived that the lease of my life had well-nigh expired
I entered into the life of Banaprasta. And having placed
my brother Suratha on the throne I entered into a dense
forest devoid of men and animals at no' distance from this
pond to perform devout penances. And I performed aus-
terities for a long time near this pond. Having performed
hard penances in this forest, for three thousand years I at
last attained to the region of Brahma. And albeit I had
reached the Brahma region I was still being assailed by
hunger and thurst. And gradually I grew tired therewith.
Thereupon approaching the patriarch Brahma, the lord of
three worlds, I said : — " O Brahma, here there is no hunger
or thirst ; still why have I been brought to their control ?
Of what iniquity of mine is this fruit? O deity, tell me
upon what I shall live." Whereto the patriarch replied :• — .
"O son of Sudeva, do thou live upon sweet savoured meat
^ every day. O Sweta, thou didst only look to the growth of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKA&DAM. i 709

thy person when thou didst perform rigid penances. O thou
of a great mind, nothing grows, when nothing is sown.
Thou didst only perform ascetic penances, but thou didst not
make any gift of charity. It is for that reason, O my son,
that thou art, even in heaven, being assailed by hunger and
thirst. Thereupon do thou now live upon thine own dfead body
fostered by various food. By this thou shalt keep up thy
being. O Sweta, thou shalt be relieved from this affliction
when the irrepressible, great Saint Agastya shall reach that
forest. O gentle one, even unto the immortals he can give
salvation ; what wonder it is that he shall relieve thee from
the miseries of hunger and thirst. O foremost of twice-
born ones, from the time of hearing those words of the great
Brahma, the god of gods, I have been engaged in this cursed
work of feeding upon my own . dead body. O Brahman,
for many long years I have been living upon this corpse
still I have not done with it. O Saint, I, too, derive satis-
faction from it ; I now understand that thou art the illustrious
Agastya born of a Kumbha ; for none else is capable of
coming here ; do thou therefore save me from this pain, who
am afflicted with great miseries. O foremost of twice-born
ones,0 gentle one, do thou take this ornament ; may good betide
thee. Do thou be propitiated with me. O Brahman, I do
confer upon thee, gold, riches various clothes, eatables,
excellent ornaments and diverse other objects of desire and
enjoyment O foremost of Munis, do thou with compassion
save me." Hearing those words of the heavenly being,
exciting pity, I accepted this ornament for saving him. And
as soon as I took this ornament that human body of the
royal saint disappeared. And the body being dissolved, the
royal saint Sweta, greatly delighted, happily went to the
land of immortals. It is for this reason, O K&kutstha, that
royal saint, resembling Indra, conferred upon me this
wondrous, celestial ornament. M


Digitized by VjOOQIC


iSoo RAM AY AN A.


SECTION CXM.


H.


| EARING the wondrous words of the great saint Kum-
bhayoni, Rama, out of great curiousity and importance of the
subject, again asked him, saying : — "0 Brahman, why was
that dense forest, in which the king Sweta used to perform
hard penances, divested of birds and animals? And how
did he proceed to that forest devoid of men and anin^als
for undergoing penances? I wish to hear the truth." Hear-
ing the words of Rama stricken with curiosity, the highly
effulgent saint Agastya said: — " O Rama, formerly in the
golden age, Manu was the king. His son was Ikshawku.
Having installed the irrepressible Ikshawku, Manu said: —
' Be thou the lord over creatures. 1 Saying "so be it" Ikshawku
accepted the command. Thereupon greatly delighted Manu
said to his son : — ' I have been highly pleased with thee.
For sooth thou shalt become a very liberal prince. Thou
shalt govern the subjects meting out proper punishment
unto them, but do not punish them without any fault. H
the punishment, which a king inflicts upou the guilty, be
just it becomes the instrumental in taking the giver to
heaven. Therefore,0 my son having large arms,be particularly
studious as regards punishment for thereby thou shalt
acquire great piety/ Having in this wise advised Ikshawku
Manu delightedly repaired to the region of BrahmSL After
Manu's departure, the effulgent Ikshawku thought of the
means for creating progeny. Thereupon performing many
pious rites Manu's son engendered a hundred sons. O
descendant of Raghu, the youngest of all those sons became
stupid and ignorant and did not respect his elder brothers.
And thinking that he should therefore be punished he


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARA KAN DAM. 1801

named this son * Danda.' Thereupon finding no other
province worthy of Danda he allotted the region between
Vindhya and Saivala to him. Danda became king of that
picturesque valley. And having reared a fine city there he
named it as Madhumanta and appointed Sukracharja of
firm vews as his priest. Having thus established his kingdom,
Danda, with his priest, began to lord over it filled with
healthy and delighted people like unto the lord of relestials
in their region. O Rama, like unto Mahendra governing
his kingdom of heaven under the guidance of Yrihaspati,
the preceptor of celestials, Danda, the grand-son of Manu,
governed his own kingdom with the help of UsanSs."


SECTION XC II


— 00-


H,


.AVINC related this story unto R£ma the great saint
Agastya again said : — O K&kutstha, having subdued his
passions, the king Danda, reigned undisturbed in this wise
for many long years. Thereupon during spring, in the
month of Chaitra the king arrived at the pictu-esque her-
mitage of the preceptor Sukra. At that time, Sukra's
daughter, matchless in beauty and grace, was walking in the
forest. The king saw that jewel of a girl, and being
stricken with lust and growing restless he approached her
and said : — " O thou having a beautiful waist, O fair lady,
whose daughter art thou ? O thou having a moonlikc coun-
tenance, I have been assailed by the arrows of Cupid and
hence I do accost thee thus." Hearing the words of the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1802 RAM AY ANA.

vicious-souled Danda, maddened with lust, Sukra's daughter
humbly said : — ' O king of kings I am the daughter of the
preceptor Sukra of unwearied actions and my name is Arajas.
1 am living in this hermitage — O king, do not touch me
forcibly for I am a maid and hence under the guardianship
of my father. Besides my father is my preceptor, and thou
art also his desciple. Being enraged he shall imprecate thee
with a curse. O foremost of men, if thou dost cherish any
desire for me, do thou honestly and piously pray for it unto
my sire. Or else thou shalt suffer dreadful consequences
in the long run. When worked up with ire, my father can
reduce even the three worlds to ashes. O thou of a blame-
less person, if thou dost pray, my father may make me over
unto thy hands." Arajas having said this, the king Danda,
maddened with lust, placing folded palms on his head, said : —
14 Be thou propitiated with me, O thou having a graceful
person ; do not tarry even for a moment. My heart bursts
out for thee, O thou having a moon -like countenance. For
acquiring thee I can even take upon myself my own des-
truction or dreadful iniquity. Do thou seek me, O fair lady —
I am beside myself for thee." Having said this the king
forcibly ravished her. Having perpetrated such a mighty
iniquity he speedily returned to his own city Madhumanta.
Arajas cried aloud in forest at no distance from the her-
mitage and waited for her sire who had been away on vUi-
ting the celestials.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARAKAtiDAM. l$8J


scetioN xciv


JL HEREUPON having heard everything about Arajfts frdrfi
& desciple, he, surrounded by his pupils, Arrived at his owrt
Wrmitage and beheld her there podrly, soiled with dust and
like unto the rooming rays Of tht moon possessed by a
planet He was stricken with hunger and Was greatly in*
ceased oft beholding his daughter ih that wretched pl1ght>
xs if burning the thrfte worlds with rage. Addressing his
f>apils he said . — " Do y& witness today the dreadful calamity,
arising Out of my flaming ire, of the vicious Danda treading
the path of immorality. This vicious wight hath placed his
Hands in the burning flame so he shall, along with followers,
meet with destruction. Since that vile being hath perpe-
trated such a dreadful crime he shall forsooth softer the con-
sequence thereof. Within seven nights, the wicked and
Vicious Danda, with his son, soldiers and retirtue, shall meet
with death. Showering dust Indra shall destroy,
to the extent of a hundred Yoyana, the territory of
this vicious king. And all creatures mobile and immobile,
wherever they might be, shall be destroyed with this down-
pour of dust. All animals as far as this Dandas > territory
extends, shall be destroyed within seven nights. 1 ' Having
said this, with eyes reddened with ire, Usan&s, Vrigu's son*
said to the inmates of his hermitage :— " Do ye all go and
wait outside this kingdom." Hearing the words of the
preceptor Sukra, the inmates left the hermitage and lived
at a place beyond the limit of Danda's territories. Having
thus addressed the inmates of the hermitage the great saint,
said to Araj&s. " O unfortunate girl, with a devoted mind
do thou .wait at this hermitage. Without any anxiety,
226


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1 883 RAM AY AN A.

O Arajis, do thou wait for the time at the picturesque banks
of this pond extending over a Yoyana. Within seven nights
whoever shall approach thee, shall be destroyed with this
downpour of dust." Hearing the words of the Brahmana
saint and preceptor Sukra, A raj is sorrowfully said to her
father 'it shall be done.' Thereupon Sukracharjya went
away and lived elsewhere. According to the words of the
saint, the entire kingdom of Danda, with servants, army,
and conveyances, was destroyed within seven nights. O
RSma, in the golden age, the province between the moun-
tains Vindhya snd Saivala comprising Danda' s territories,
imprecated by the Brahman saint, in consequence of the
iniquity of the vicious souled, was reduced into a desert.
From that time it passes by the name of Dandaka forest.
And it is otherwise called Janasthina because the ascetics
used to perform austerities there. O Rftghava, I have
thus related unto thee, all thou didst ask of me. O hero,
the time for performing evening rites hath come. Behold O
foremost of men, having performed ablution, the great saints,
on all sides, with jars full of water, are worshipping the
sun. Having accepted adoration in the shape of Vedic
hymns chanted by Brahmans, well-versed in Vedas, the illus-
trious Aditya is about to be set. Therefore, O R&ma, do
thou perform the ceremony.


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


VTTARAKANDAM 1884


section xcv.


XX bARING the words of the great saint, Rlma, to per-
the evening adoration, went to the pond filled with
Apsarls ; and having performed the worship he again retured
to the hermitage of the high-souled Agastya. Thereupon
the great ascetic offered him as food many substantial
Kanda, roots, Oshadis and the holy S&li rice. And taking that
nectar-like cooked rice, Riraa, the foremost of men, was
greatly delighted and spent the night there. Having got up
in the morning and performed the necessary ceremonies he
approached the ascetic to bid farewell, and saluting him
•aid :— " O great Rishi, I do crave for thy permission to go
to my own habitation. Do thou permit me. O high-souled
one, I have been highly favoured and blessed by beholding
thee. I shall come again some other time to free myself
from sins." Hearing those wondrous words of R&ma, Agastya
having asceticism for his wealth, delightedly said :— "O Rima
these words, set in charming letters, are highly wonderful.
O descendant of Raghu, thou art the purifier of all creatures.
O Rlma, one, who beholds thee, even for a moment,
becomes pure and worthy of repairing to heaven. Even the
leading deities worship him. Those on earth,who cast dreadful
looks on thee, are immediately brought under the control
of Yama and are constrained to go to hell. O foremost of
Raghus, thou art the purifier of all creatures ; people become
perfect even if they only chant thy glories. Kftkutstha,
do thou now go with ease and fearlessly, and govern thy
kingdom righteously. O Rama thou art the refuge of the
world." Hearing the words of the great and truthful Rishi
the wise R&ma, with folded bands, saluted him and other


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1885 RAM AY AN A.

Rishis,and with serene air ascended the golden car Pushpaka*
Like unto the immortals welcoming the Chief of the deities, the
Risbis showered blessings upon R5ma from all sides while
he was proceeding. And seated on car, he appeared like
the moon, after the expiry of the rainy season. Thereupon
being welcomed by the villagers on his way he reached
Ayodhy& at noon and descended at the middle apartment*
And having permitted the charming chariot coursing at will*
to go away he said : — 'Do thou now go; may good betide
thee. ,, Thereupon he said to the warder* l( Do thou speedily
go and having communicated my arrival unto Lakshma,ns*
and Bharata bring them here*"'


SECTION CXVK


^/V-CCORDING to the command of RSma of unwearied
actions, the warders went to the princes and communcated
unto them (the arrival). Beholding Bharata and Lakshmana
present, R£ma embraced them and said : — "I have, as pro-
mised, performed the work of the excellent twice-born one,
I wish now to perform a Rajshuya sacrifice, the source of
religious glory, the destroyer of all sins, inexhaustible and
un-ending. Therefore, with you like my own self, I wish
to engage in the most excellent and eternal Rajshuya sacri-
fice. O slayer of foes, by celebrating Rajshuya, Mitra
attained to the dignity of Varuha. And having celebrated
the same sacrifice, Soma, conversant with piety, established
eternal fame in the three worlds. Do ye therefore consult with


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1886

me even today as to what is proper. Do ye consider care*
folly and tell me what is auspicious and productive of well-
being in the long run." Hearing the words of Righava,
Bharata, well-skilled in the art of speech, with folded
hands, said "0 pious Sir in thee are established
piety, earth and fame. O thou of unmitigated
prowess, as the deities honor the patriarch so other kings
bold thee in reverence. O king, all creatures mobile and
immobile consider thee as their father. O thou of great
strength,thou art the refuge of all animals and of the universe.
Therefore of what use is such a sacrifice unto thee ? In
such a sacrifice all the royal families meet with ruin. All
those kings, who are proud of manliness, being incensed with
great ire on the occasion of this sacrifice, shall bring ruin
upon all. O foremost of men, the whole earth has been
brought under thy subjection so it is not proper to devastate
it." Hearing those sweet accents of Bharata, Rama, having
truth for his prowess, attained to incomparable delight, an<|
addressed the enhancer of Kaikeyi's delight with kind words A
saying : — "O thou freed from sins, I have been greatly
delighted with thee. O foremost of men, for the preservation
of eartb,thou bast given vent to words, without any hesitation!
pregnant with manliness and piety. O thou conversant with
piety, according to thy wise counsels, I refrain from celebrat-
ing this Rljshuya sacrifice. The wise should never undertake
all those works which give affliction unto people. O elder
brother of Lakshmana, it is proper to take wise counsels even
from a boy."


Digitized by VjjOOQIC


1887 RAM AY ANA.


SECTION CXVI I.


jf^FTER the conversation between Rama and Bharata
had been over, Lakshmana, with reasonable words, said to the
former . — "O worshipful Sir, amongst sacrifices Aswamedha
is the best and the remover of all sins ; it is my prayer there-
fore that thy desire might be turned towards this great and
highly purifying sacrifice. It is said in this Purinas, that
Purandara, sullied by the sin consequent upon slaying a
Brahmana, was again purified by celebrating a horse sacrifice.
O thou having long arms, formerly, during the war between
gods and demons there flourished a highly honored Asura
under the name of Vitra. The breadth of his body was a
hundred Yoyanas and the height thereof was three hundred
Yoyanas. Considering all under his subjection he used to
regard them with affection. He was pious > grateful and used
to perform nothing without proper deliberation. .. And tread-
ing pious tracks he used to govern his subjects very carefully.
During his administration earth produced all wished-for
objects; roots and fruits were . tasteful and flowers
were fragrant. Without being cultivated earth used to yield
crops. In this wise for many long years he governed a
prosperous and wonderful kingdom. Thereupon he deter-
mind upon performing a hard penance. He considered
asceticism as the best of all and regarded all other things
as mere illusions. Having resolved thus and placed his son
Madhureswara on the throne Vitra engaged in austerities
creating terror unto all deities. He being thus engaged in
asceticism, Indra, greatly terrified, approached Vishnu and
said : — "O thou having long arms, by virtue of his asceticism
Vitra is about to conquer all the worlds. He is pious, so I


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1888

cannot subdue him. illustrious Sir, if his ascetic powers
grow more • we shall be constrained to live under
his control for ever from the creation. Do thou there*
fore not neglect any longer this highly generous Asura.
Thyself being enraged, O lord of deities, Vitra shall not live
even for a moment. O Vishnu, from the time he succeeded
in propitiating thee, he hath obtained the sovereignty of the
three worlds. Do thou, therefore, be propitiated now ; save
thee none can free this world from thorns and bring it at
rest. O Vishnu, all the deities are waiting for thee ; do thou
help them by slaying Vitra. O thou having a large mind,
thou art always the help of these high-souled deities. It is
impossible for any one else to accomplish the present work.
Thou art the refuge of the helpless/'


SECTION XCVIII,


H earing the words of Lakshmana, Rftma, the slayer
of enemies, said : — "O thou of firm vows, do thou at length,
describe the destruction of Vitra. 11 Hearing the words of
Rlghava, Lakshmana, the enhancer of Sumitr&'s delight, again
took up that theme. "Hearing the words of Indra and other
deities Vishnu replied : — 'From before I am bound with the
high-souled Vitra by the ties of friendship. For this, even
for your satisfaction, I shall not (myself) slay him. Again
I am to afford excellent felicity unto you. I shall myself divide
you into three classes and then forsooth your king shall be
able to destroy Vitra. Of those three portions the first shall


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i88g RAM AY AN A<

be able to slay him." Vishnu, the god of gods, having said
this, the deittes] replied, saying : — "O slayer of demons*
Undoubtedly* what thou liast said, shall pr&Ve true ; may
victory crown thee ; we proceed now to slay Vitra. O highly
generous deity, do thou now make Vasava powerly by infus-
ing thy own energy^ Thereupon the highly poweiful im-
rnortals headed by Indra entered the forest where the great
Asura Vitra was performing austerities. Arriving there
they observed that the leading AsUfa was spreading rays
all over— -the outcome of his own effulgence, as if devouring
the three worlds and burning down the quarters^ Beholding
that foremost of Asuras, the deities were greatly terrified
and began to think of plans by which they would be able
to slay him and not be defeated. While they were thus
thinking, Indra, of thousand eyes, taking up a thunderbolt)
hurled it against Vitra's head. That dreadful burning
thunderbolt, like unto the fire of dissolution, falling on Vitra' s
head) the three Worlds were agitated. Thereupon thinking
that he has perpetrated an iniquity by slaying Vitra engaged
in asceticism, Indra, out of fear, fled to the other side ot
Lokaloka>> perpetually enshrowded with darkness. And the:
sin, consequent upon the destruction of a Brahman, pursuing
him vehemently> entered into his person. In this wise Indra
became subject to dreadful afflictions. Beholding the enemy
slain and Indra fled, the deities headed by fire again and
again chanted the glories of Vishnu— the lord of three
worlds, saying :— "O great god, thou art the refuge of the
three worlds. Thou art the first-born and the father of the
universe. For protecting all creatures thou hast assumed
this Vishnu form. Thou hast slain this Vitra but the sin of
slaying a Brahman has visited Indra. Therefore, O excellent
Purusha, do thou so arrange that he may be freed from sins.' 1
Hearing the words of the celestials Vishnu said— "Let youf
Chief celebrate a sacrifice in my honor— and by that he shall
be cleansed off the sin. If the slayer of Paka celebrates a


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM 1890

horse sacrifice, he shall again fearlessly be installed as the
chief of deities/' Having addressed these nectar-like words
to the deities and being glorified by them, Vishnu, the god of
gods, returned to his abode.


SECTION XCIX,


H AVING thus described at length and finished the story
of Vitra's destruction Lakshmana said : — 'The mighty Vitra,
the terror of the deities, being slain, and the slayer Indra,
being assailed by the sin of Brahmanicide, was bewildered
and at a loss to ascertain hi s duty. Being at his wit's end
he repaired to the other side of the Lokaloka mountain and
remained there for some time like a coiled serpent. And
again in consequence of Indra's separation, the whole world
was agitated, the forests grew dried and the earth was
devoid of water. On account of the rivers being dried up and
want of rain all creatures grew impatient. In this wise, the
time of the destruction of creatures having arrived, the
celestials being stricken with anxiety, according to the
previous command of Vishnu, engaged in celebrating the
sacrifice With Rishis and Ritwikas they fearfully approach-
ed Purandara ; and beholding him assailed by the sin of
Brahmanicide, they with him, at their head, engaged in
celebrating a horse-sacrifice. After the sacrifice the
sin issued out of Indra's person and addressing the high-
souled deities said "Do ye all ascertain, where I shall go
now." Thereupon highly pleased the deities replied : — "Do
227


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1891' RAM AY AN A.

thou divide thyself into four portions/' Hearing the words of
the high-souled celestials she divided herself into four parts,
and wishing for a separate habitation said : — "By one portion,
I shall at my pleasure, live in rivers full of water during
rains and shall obstruct people from going there. By my
second portion I shall live perpetually on lands as Ushara ;*
I tell you the truth. By my third portion I shall for three
nights every month live in youthful women proud of their
youth — so that men might not live with them. And by my
fourth, portion I shall enter into the persons of those who
shall slay innocent Brahmanas." Hearing those words the
deities said "What thou hast said shall be carried out Do
what thou wishest." Thereupon the celestials, delighted,
adored their Chief divested of sins and crowned with victory.
And V&sava being installed again on the throne, the whole
universe was at rest. Thereupon Indra worshipped Vishnu
in the shape of that wonderful sacrifice. O descendant of
Raghu, such is the power of a horse-sacrifice." Hearing the
charming words of Lakshmana, the energetic and high-souled
king, R&ma, powerful like Indra, was greatly delighted.

* A spot with saline soil


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 189*


SECTION C.


H EARING the words of Lakshmana and smiling, the
highly effulgent descendant of Raghu, Rama, skilled in the
art of speech, replied : — "Lakshmana, foremost of men,
thou hast truly related the story of Vitra's destruction and
the fruits of horse-sacrifice. O gentle one, I have heard,
that formerly in the province of Valheeka, the graceful king
Ila, the son of the patriarch Kardama, was highly pious. O
foremost of men, having brought the entire earth under his
control, the highly illustrious king Ila used to govern his
subjects like unto his own sons. O descendant of Raghu,
being terrified, the generous deities, the rich Daityas, the
highly powerful N&gas, the irrepressible R&kshasas, Gan-
dharbas and Yakshas used to adore him perpetually. The
high-souled Ila being enraged, the three worlds used to be
convulsed with terror. And albeit so very powerful the
highly illustrious king of Valheeka never swerved from the
path of morality nor neglected his deities and rather intelli-
gently used to administer all business. Once on a time in
the picturesque season of spring the mighty-armed Ila, with
his army and conveyances, entered into a charming forest,
and on the pretext of hunting, slew hundreds and thousands
of deer. With slaying deer only the high-souled king
was not satisfied. He slew millions of diverse other
animals. In this way being engaged in hunting the
king Ila arrived where Kartikeya was born. At that time, in
that hilly fountain there was sporting in the company of his
followers, the irrepressible god of gods, the three-eyed deity
with the daughter of the Chief of mountains. Being desirous
of satisfying the goddess UmS, her lord, whose emblem is


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i8g3 RAM AY AN A.

bull, was sporting under the guise of a female. In that forest
land, all male animals or trees were metamorphosed into
the other sex at that time. A-hunting, the king Ila, the son
of Kardama,arrived at that place and saw all animals and trees
changed into female forms. And immediately the king,
and his army were changed into similar forms. Finding him-
self in that plight the king Ila was greatly sorry, and thinking
that the misfortune was owing to the influence of the god
of gods — Umli's lord, he was greatly terrified. Thereupon
with his followers and army the king took shelter of the high-
souled and red-throated deity. Thereupon the great god,
the conferror of boons, with the goddess, smiling said : —
"Rise up, O son of Kardama, O thou of great strength, O
gentle one, do thou beg of me any other boon than that of
obtaining thy manhood." Being thus disappointed by the
great deity, the king Ila, metamorposed into a female, became
greatly sorry and did not pray for any other boon. Being
stricken with great sorrow, the king, with whole heart, saluted
the daughter of the mountain-chief and said : — "O goddess,
thou art the protectress of all — thou dost confer boons on all ;
seeing thee doth not become fruitless. Do thou therefore
have compassion on me." Thereupon, cognizant of that
king's intention, the goddess, with Hara's consent, said : —
"Half of the boon, that thou shalt beg of us both, shall be
granted by Mahadeva, and the other half shall be granted by
me. Do thou therefore beg of me the half." Hearing of
that excellent and wondrous boon the king became greatly
delighted and said : — "If thou art pleased with me, O god-
dess, do thou confer upon me this boon, that I may be for
one month, a female gifted with wonderful beauty in the
three worlds and for another month I may be a male."
Thereupon understanding king's desire, the beautiful goddess
PSrvati, mercifully said : — "The boon, according to thy
desire, shall be granted. O king, when thou shalt attain
to the male figure, thou shalt not remember anything of thy


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1894

female form. And when thou shalt assume the charming
female figure thou shalt forget everything of thy male state."
O Lakshmana, by virtue of this boon, the king Ila for one
month used to become a man and for the next used to be-
come a female, charming in the three worlds under the name
of 115.


SECTION CI.


H,


.AVING heard of the story of the king Ila from Rama,
Lakshmana and Bharata were greatly surprised. And with
folded hands they, requesting the noble king R&ma,for further
particulars, said :— "How could the king Ila subject himself
to those afflictions in the shape of a female ? And how did he
use to behave himself in his male form ?" Hearing those words
begotten of curiosity,R5ma engaged in relating the whole story
as he had heard before, saying : — "In the first month, assum-
ing his female form having lotus-eyes and charming the three
world, he used to sport in the forest abounding in groves, in
the company of his companions metamorphosed into the
same form. Having sent away all his conveyances he used
to sport in the mountain vale. Thus roaming, I1& one day
espied Budha, a bundle of rays, resembling the full moon in
a picturesque pond filled with birds at some distance from the
mountain. Having compassion for all creatures Budha, at
that time, was performing, hard, glorious and wished-for
austerities within waters. O son of Raghu, on beholding him
I1& was greatly surprised, and with her female companions


Digitize^ by VjOOQIC


1895 RAM AY AN A.

began to agitate waters. As soon as Budha saw her he was
assailed by the arrows of Cupid. Not being able to control
himself he grew impatient within waters and thought "This
damsel is far more beautiful even than the celestial girls.
I have never seen before a like beauty amongst the celestials,
N&gas, Asuras and Apsar&s. If she has not been married
before then she is my worthy spouse." With this resolution
Budha got up from the waters, and repairing to his hermitage,
sent for the fair ones. They all saluted him. Thereupon
the virtuous-souled Budha accosted them saying : — "Whose
daughter is this graceful girl amongst you and for what she
has come here ? Do not delay — tell me soon." Hearing
those sweet words of his, the females said : — "This fair damsel
is our supreme lady. She has no husband. Journeying she
has come here with us." Hearing those plain words, Budha
thought of the learning by which one can perceive everything.
And being informed of all regarding the king II& thereby he
said — "Do ye all live in this mountain being Kimpurusas ; do
ye make your respective habitations here. I shall give you
always fruits and roots. O ye females, y#u shall have all
Kimpurusas as your husbands." According to the words of
Budha they lived in that mountain as Kimpurusas. In this
wise many Kimpurusa-Budhas were procreated.


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1896


SECTION CM


H-


_AV1NG heard of the origin of Kimpurushas, both
Bharata and Lakshmana said to R&ma : — " This is a wonder-
ful story/' Thereupon the highly illustrious Rama, the fore-
most of the pious, again began with the story of Ha, the
son of the patriarch. "Beholding the Kinnaris repairing to a
distance, Budha the foremost of ascetics, smilling said, to
the beautiful 1121 : — " O thou of a graceful presence, I am the
most favourite son of the moon ; O fair one, do thou, with
delight, cast looks upon me." Hearing the words of the
highly effulgent and beautiful Budha in the picturesque forest
land divested of men and animals, I1& said : — " O gentle
one, I am not subject to any body ; I surrender myself unto
thee out of my own accord. O son of Soma, thou mayst
command me whatever thou wishest." Hearing those wond-
rous words, the son of moon, possessed by lust, began to live
with her. And living in the company of I12L ; having a grace-
ful countenance, Budha, possessed by desire, spent the entire
month of Madhu like a moment. Thereupon after the expiry
of a month, the graceful king 11a, son of the pariarch, awoke
from sleep and beholding Budha, the son of Soma, engaged
in* austerities with uplifted hands in the midst of waters,
said : — 'O illustrious Sir, with my followers I entered this
dense forest — I do not see them now anywhere. Where have
they gone ?" Hearing the words of the royal saint, who had
lost all recollection, Budha, with sweet words consoled him
and said : — "All thy followers have been destroyed by a
downpour of huge rocks ; thyself, being afraid of the storm,
was also asleep in the hermitage. Thou hast no fear now.
Therefore, O hero, being consoled and renouncing all anxiety


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1897 RAM AY ANA.

do thou live here happily living upon fruits and roots. "
Being comforted by those words, the high-minded king Ha,
striken with distress in consequence of the destruction of
his servants, poorly replied : — "O Brahman, I shall renounce
my own kingdom. Separated from my servants, I shall not
be able to live even for a moment. Do thou give me
permission in this. O Brahman, my eldest son, the highly
illustrious Sasabindu, the foremost of the pious, shall be the
owner of my kingdom. O Brahman, renouncing my servants
and wives of the country I shall not be able to wait here.
Therefore, O highly effulgent one, do thou not give me such
an unpleasant command of remaining here." Hearing those
wonderful words of the king Ila, Budha consoling him,
said : — "Do thou wait here. Be not aggrieved, O highly
powerful son of Kardama. If thou dost live here for a year,
I shall render thy well-being." Hearing the words of Budha,
of unwearied actions, the king Ila desired to live there.
Thereupon becoming a man for the next month he began
to perform ascetic penances. Thereupon in the ninth month,
Ila, having a beautiful waist, gave birth to a highly effulgent
son, under the name of Pururava, born of the loins of Budha,
and equally graceful like him. And she handed over the
highly powerful son unto his father Budha. Thereupon after
a year Ila having regained the male form, Budha by means
of various words afforded delight unto him.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1898


SECTION cm.


R<


l,AMA having thus described the wonderful birth of
Pururava, the illustrious Bharata and Lakshmana asked him
again saying: — "O foremost of men, tell us what did Ha
afterwards do after living in the company of Soma's son
for a year." Hearing their sweet words Rama again began
with the story of Kardama's son and said : — " In turn, the
heroic Ila, having regained his manhood, the highly illustri-
ous and intelligent Budha, well-informed of birth and well-
skilled in the art of speech, sent for the highly liberal
Sangbarta, Vrigu's son Chyavana, Aristhanemi, the foremost
of Munis, Durvisa, capable of affording delight, and other
friends gifted with patience and said : — "Ye all know welI,how
this mighty-armed Ila,Kardama f s son, attained to this peculiar
condition." Thereupon while those high-souled ones were
conversing upon this subject, the highly effulgent Kardama
arrived at the hermitage. Pulastya, Kratu, VashatkSr and
the highly effulgent OmkSra came there following him.
Being greatly delighted for their arrival they all gave out
their individual opinion for bringing about the well-being of
the king of VSlhakee. For the welfare of his son,the patriarch
Kardama said : — "Hear, O twice-born ones, how the well-
being of the king 11a may be secured. For this desease I
do not find any other good medicine but Umi's lord. And
save Aswamedha there is no other sacrifice more favourite
unto the high-souled deity. Let us all therefore celebrate
that hard sacrifice on behalf of this king." Thereupon
Sambarta's desciple, the royal saint Marutha, the conqueror
of enemies' cities, collected all articles for the sacrifice.
Thereupon in the vicinity of Budha's hermitage that mighty
228


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1 899 RAM AY AN A.

sacrifice was celebrated. And by that the Great Rudra
attained to delight and said to the twice-born ones, in the
presence of the king Ha : — "O foremost of twice-born ones,
I have been greatly delighted with this sacrifice and your
devotion. Tell me now, what I can do for this king of
V&lheeka." Hearing the words of Mahadeva, the Brahmanas,
having propitiated him with great devotion, prayed for Ila's
manhood. Thereupon delighted the highly effulgent Maha-
deva, having conferred upon him manhood, disappeared. In
this wise the horse-sacrifice being finished and Mahadeva
having disappeared, the far-seeing and leading twice-born
ones repaired to their respective hermitages. And having
placed his eldest son Sasavindu as the king of the country
of V2Llheeka, the king Ila reared another city in the middle
country. In time Ila attained to the excellent Brahma
region and his son Pururava obtained that Pratishthana
kingdom. O foremost of men, such is the power of the horse-
sacrifice, that the king Ila, though converted into a female,
regained manhood by virtue thereof."


SECTION CIV.


*N


JLLAving thus addressed his both brothers, Rama, the
descendant of Kakuthstha of unmitigated prowess, again said
to Lakshmana, in words pregnant with morality : — "O
Lakshmana, having invited Vasishtha, the foremost of twice-
born ones, conversant with all the rites of Aswamedha,
Vamadeva, Javali, and Kashyapa and consulted with them


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1900

duly I 5hall set free a horse gifted with all marks." Hear-
ing the words of R&ma, Lakshmana, of unmitigated prowess,
invited all those Brahmanas and approached RSLma. Seeing
them, R&ma saluted them touching their feet. And the
Brahmanas too, beholding the irrepressible celestial, like
R&ghava, welcomed him with blessings. Thereupon R&ma,
with folded hands, asked of those leading twice-born ones,
questions regarding the Aswamedha sacrifice. And hearing
the words of R&ma, they, too, saluting the deity Rudra, began
to speak highly of the ceremony of horse-sacrifice. And
being informed from the Brahmanas of many unheard of
virtues of Ashwamedha, R&ma was greatly delighted. And
according to their desire he said to Lakshmana : — " O thou
having long arms, do thou soon send an emissary to the
high-souled Sugriva, communicating unto him • Do thou
come here to enjoy festivities in the company of all those
highly powerful monkeys and bears, under thee ; may good
betide thee.' See that Bhibhishana of unequalled prowess,
the king of R&kshasas, encircled by his followers, coursing
at will, may be present at the horse sacrifice. Let the great
kings, wishing my welfare with their followers, be present
at the sacrific. O Lakshmana, do thou also invite carefully,
for witnessing the ceremony,other pious foreign kings who are
friendly unto me. O thou having long arms, do thou also
invite the Rishis, having asceticism for their wealth and
other pious Brahmanas living in various provinces. Do thou
also invite actors and songsters. Do thou order that a
spacious, sacrificial ground may be made on the banks of the
river Gometi in the Naimisha forest. O thou having long
arms, that part of the country is best suited and holy. And
let ceremonies, invoking peace, be celebrated everywhere.
O thou conversant with piety, do thou soon invite hundreds
of subjects, so that they all, having witnessed the ceremony
in the Naimisha forest, may return delighted and honored.
O thou having long arms, let Bharata go before with a


Digitized by VjOOQIC


igoi RAM AY AN A.

million of beasts carrying rice, sessamun seed, Kindney bean,
Chickpea, pulse, Masha (a sort of Kindney bean) salt, oil,
clarified butter and a hundred koti of silver and golden coins.
Let merchants, to set up shops on the way, actors, dancers,
cooks, and many youthful females follow Bharata. Let
soldiers go before him. And let the highly illustrious Bharata,
with children, old men,Brahmanas, citizens, servants, cashiers,
mothers, wives and the golden image of my wife to be
initiated at the sacrifice, go before." According to the com-
mand of Rama, Bharata, with Satrughna, made arrangements
for highly valuable quarters, food, drink and clothes. And the
highly powerful monkeys with Sugriva and Brahmanas
engaged in the work of distribution. And Bibhishana,
surrounded by various Rakshas and females, engaged in the
service of the high-souled Rishis intent on hard penances.


SECTION CV.


JLJ AVING speedily despatched before all articles of
sacrifice, Bharata' s elder brother Rama set free a black horse,
gifted with all marks and worthy of the sacrifice and placed
Lakshmana with Rittwigas in charge of it. Thereupon the
mighty-armed Kakuthstha, in the company of his soldiers,
proceeded to the Naimisha forest and beholding the
wonderful sacrificial ground attained to an excess of delight
and said : — 'It has become highly charming." And while
he remained in the Naimisha forest, all the kings sent him
presents and Rama also made returns. And diverse food,
drink and clothes were offered to the kings when they
arrived there with profuse presents. Bharata, with Satrughna,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM 190*

engaged in attending upon the kings. The high-souled
monkeys, with Sugriva, being self-controlled engaged in
attending upon the Brahmanas. Bibhishana, in the company
of many Rakshasas, with a collected mind, began to serve
the Rishis, having asceticism for their wealth. And the
highly powerful Rama, the foremost of men, set aside
raluable houses for the accomodation of the high-souled
kings. Under these proper arrangements the horse-sacrifice
commenced. Lakshmana engaged in looking after the
sacrificial horse. In this wise R&ma, a lion amongst the
kings, undertook the celebration of the horse-sacrifice. And
in that Ashwamedha of R2Lma presents were given unto
people as long as they were not satisfied. There was no
other sound audible at that time save that of 'Give ! Give !!."
In sooth at the horse-sacrifice of the high-souled Rim a, to
their fullest satisfaction, sweets and other things were distri-
buted unto people. Indeed before words came out from
the lips of the beggars, monkeys and Rakshasas satisfied
them with gifts. And all the ascetics living for ever
and having asceticism for wealth that were present there,
could not think of any other sacrifice, accompanied by so
profuse presents, they had seen before In that sacrifice,
those, who wished for gold, obtained it, those who wished for
property got it and those, who longed for jewels, received
them. In this wise before all, enough of gold, jewels, and
clothes were given away. The ascetics said : — " We have
never seen before a sacrifice like this, Indra's, Soma's,
Yama's or Varuna's. And being present everywhere the
Rakshasas and V&naras gave away enough of riches and
clothes even unto them who did not want. And though this
sacrifice, gifted with all marks, of Rama, a lion among kings,
continued for a year still his accumulated treasure was not
exhausted, but rather was increased.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1903 RAM AY ANA.


SECTION CVI.


JL HAT sacrifice, the like of which was never seen before,
having been undertaken the illustrious ascetic Valmiki, with
his desciples, came there. And beholding this wonderful
sacrifice resembling that of the celestials, his followers, the
Rishis, made charming cottages in a solitary corner and at no
distance. Inside the highly charming cottage of Valmiki they
placed his picturesque car full of fruits and roots. Thereupon
Valmiki said to his desciples, Lava and Kusa . — "Do ye care-
fully and delightedly sing the whole of Ramayana in the
highly holy hermitages, of the Rishis, in the homes where
perpetual fire is kept up by the Brahmanas, in streets and
palaces, at the gate of Rama's house, in the sacrificial arena
and before all Ritwigas. And eating all those sweet fruits
that are on the summit of the mountan near our hermitage,
do ye engage in chanting the sweet Ramayana. If you
begin singing after taking all those sweet fruits you shall
not experience exhaustion in singing nor you shall forget
measure. If Rama, the lord of earth, invites you to sing
the Ramayana, you may fearlessly sing it there in due notes
and measures before the assembled ascetics. During the
day do ye sing, in your sweet voice, twenty sections out of
many I have laid in the Ramayana consisting of many
slokas. Do not cherish the least longing for riches. Of
what avail is wealth unto ascetics living perpetually on fruits
and roots ? If Rama asks you about your father you may
say, " We are both desciples of the high souled Valmiki.
O Kusa and Lava, in your proper mood do you sing the
sweet song with charming Murchana accompanied by the
sweet notes of Vina. Before you begin with the song, with*


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1904

out disregarding the king, do you bow unto him reverentially.
Morally the king is the father of all. Do you therefore
both, delightedly and with a collected mind, early in the
morning, sing the theme in a sweet voice and accompanied
by the music of the stringed instrument." Having in this
wise given counsels, the highly generous and great ascetic
Vilmiki, son of Pracheta, became silent. Being thus com-
manded by the ascetic, J&nakis' sons, Lava and Kusa, the
slayers of enemies, issued out therefrom saying. ' So we
shall do.' Like unto the two Aswins following the moral
precepts of Sukra, the two princes, placing those wonderful
counsels of Vilmiki in their minds, spent the night with a
heart stricken with curiousity.


SECTION CVI I.


X HEREUPON the night being over, having bathed and
performed the Homa, both Lava and Kusa, in consonance with
Rishi's command, began the song. That song was composed
by the first preceptor(Valmiki) neverheard of before,consisting
of sounds originating from six places, containing all metres,
many proofs and set in accompaniment with the music of a
stringed instrument. Hearing such a song from the boys
Rima was striken with curiosity. Thereupon taking leave
from business for some time and inviting the great ascetic
Vilmiki, kings, learned men, persons well-versed in Nyaya,
Puranas and science of words, all old men, twice-born ones,
those conversant with the signs of music, Brahmmas desirous


Digitized by VjOOQIC


I90S RAM AY AN A.

of hearing the Ramayana, persons deep read in palmistry,
Gandharbas, citizens, all those who have mastered the use
of words, letters and Samasas, those who have studied well
metres, those well informed in the science of music, those
well-versed in astronomy, those who are well up in the
knowledge of rites and ceremonies, those expert in the des-
patch of business, logicians whose fame has spread far and
wide, those well-versed in reasonings and arguments, poets,
historians, Vedic Brahmanas, painters, and songsters Rama
resquested Lava and Kusa lovingly to sing the song before the
assembly. The audience being seated there and engaged in
conversation with one another those two Muni boys began
with the song enhancing the delight of all. Wondrous and
charming was their song and the audience were not by any
means satiated with the hearing thereof. Greatly delighted
the highly effulgent ascetics and kings again and again
looked towards them as if drinking them up with their eyes.
And they all attentively said to one another — "Both of them
take after Rama, like unto a bubble resembling the one it
rises from. There would not have been perceived the least
difference between them and Rama had they not been
cloathed in bark and used clotted hair." The citizens and
villagers speaking thus with one another Kusa and Lava
chanted twenty sections beginning from the first, pointed
out by Narada. Having heard up to twentieth section,
Rama, fond of his brothers, said to Lakshmana in the after-
noon, "O Kakutstha, do thou soon confer upon these two
high-souled ones eighteen thousand gold coins and all other
things they wish for." Thereupon when Lakshmana address-
ed himself in no time to give them gold coins separately
Kusa and Lava, not accepting them and surprisingly said : —
"We are dewellers of a forest, living upon roots and fruits—
what shall we do with them (coins) ? Therefore living in
the forest what shall we do with the gold ?" Hearing those
words Rama and the audience were greatly worked up with


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1906

curiosity and surprise. Thereupon being anxious to learn
of the origin of the poem, the highly effulgent R&ma asked
the two Muni boys, saying. "What is the proof of the story
of this poem ? How great is his fame who has composed it ?
What leading ascetic is the author of this great poem ?"
Rama having thus asked them those two Muni boys said : —
"The illustrious Vftlmiki is the author of this poem. He has
described in this poem thine endless story. He has of late
come to thy sacrifice. The great ascetic Vftlmiki has com-
posed this poem consisting of a hundred stories and twenty
four thousand slokas. O king, that high-minded ascetic is
our preceptor. He has described thy actions in six books
beginning with the first consisting of five hundred sections.
All good actions performed by thee since thy birth have been
recorded in this. O mighty car-warrior, O king, if thou dost
wish to hear the whole of it, do thou, at thy leisure, hear it
delightedly in the company of thy younger brothers."
Saying 'so it shall be* Rama bade them adieu and they too,
delighted, repaired to where Valmiki, the foremost of Munis
was. Thereupon having heard that charming song in the
company of ascetics and kings the high-minded Rftma repaired
to the place of business. He heard the Ramayana. sung by
Kusa and Lava, gifted with musical characteristics, consisting
of sections, vowels, and consonant and enchanted in accom-
paniment with the music of a stringed instrument.


8ECTION CVIII.


R


jAMK heard that highly sacred theme for many long
days in the company of ascetics, kings and Vanaras. And
understanding from the story that Kusa and Lava were Janaki's
229


Digitized by VjjOOQ IC


1907 RAM AY AN A.

sons, Rama mentioning her name said before the assem-
bly : — " Send a good emissary unto the illustrious
Valmiki and let him communicate unto the ascetics that if
JSLnaki is sinless and has lead a pure life in the forest ; let
her give proof of purety by the great ascetic's permission.
Let the emissaries learn well the intention of the ascetic in
this and if Sita is at heart willing to bring in proofs. To
uphold her as well as mine purity, let Maithili, the daughter
of Janaka, swear before the assembly." Hearing those
wonderful words ef Rama, the emissaries speedily went to
VSlmiki and saluting the high-souled (ascetic) burning
in his effulgence and of incomparable lustre, communicated
unto him, in sweet words all what Rama had said. Hearing
the words of the messengers and understanding Rama's
intention the ascetic said : — l What Rama has said
shall be satisfied. May good betide you. Husband
is the greatest god for women. So Sita shall carry out
his behests." The great ascetic having said this, the highly
powerful emissaries, approaching Rama, communicated unto
him what the Muni had said. Hearing the words of the high-
souled Valmiki, Rama was greatly delighted. Having ad-
dressed the assembled Rishis and kings he said : — " The
Rishis with their desciples, and the kings with their followers
and all others willing shall see Sita swear here." Hearing
the words of the high-souled Rama, all the high-souled
Rishis began to speak of him in high terms and said : "O
foremost of men, such an action becomes thee not any one
else." Thereupon having settled that Sita would swear
next day, Rama, the slayer of enemies, dismissed them all.
And having made arrangements that Sita would go through
the trial next day, the high-minded, generous king Rama
bade adieu unto all kings and Rishis.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1908


SECTION ClX,


J^l ExT morning Rama, being present in the sacrificial
ground and having sent for the Rishis, Vasishtha, Vamadeva
Javali, Kashyapa, Viswamitra, carrying on penances for a
long time, Durvasa, Pulastya of hard austerities, Salastri,
Vargava, Markandaya living long, the highly illustrious
Madgalya, Gargya, Chyavana, Satananda, conversent witW
religions, effulgent VaradwiyS, Agnis'son Vasuprava, NSrada r
Parvata, the great Gautama and other ascetics of firm vows r
assembled with mwids possessed by curiosity. The highly
powerful R&kshasas and monkeys also came there out of
curiosity. Besides thousands and thousands of Kshatryas^
Vaisyas, Sudras and Brahmans of firm penances, also hailed
there from various parts to witness Site's trial. Having
arrived there they all sat down motionless like mountains.
Thereupon, Valmiki, the foremost of ascetics, speedily came-
there accompanied by SitSL. With her face downwards, folded
palms, eyes full of tears and meditating upon Rama in her
mind, SitS, following the Rishi, came before the assembly.
There arose a great uproar of eulogy from the assembly when
they saw Sita following Valmiki like unto Sruti following
Brahmft. Thereupon members, stricken with sorrow, made
a tumultuous sound. Amongst the visitors some praised
Rama, some praised Sita and others eulogised both of them.
Thereupon having entered that huge assemblage in company
of Sita, the great ascetic Valmiki addressed Rim a, saying : —
" O son of Dacaratha, in fear of calumny, thou didst renounce
her near my hermitage, albeit Sita is pure and follows the
ways of morality. O Rama of firm vows, thou art afraid of
the censure of the people. SitJL has becoming willing to
give testimony (of her purity) for removing the calumny of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1909 RAM AY AN A.

the public ; do thou mercifully give her permission in this.
I tell you the truth, O Rama, that these irrepressible twin
brothers are your sons, O descendant of Raghu. I am
the tenth son of Pracheta, so, far from speaking untruth
it does not even spring up in my mind. I therefore
know the truth that these twins are thy sons. I have
performed austere penances for many thousand years ; I now
swear before thee, that if this Maithili is found touched
by any sin I shall not reap the fruit; of my ascetic observances
extending over many thousand years. I have never perpe-
trated before a crime, either in my mind, body, or speech.
If Maithili is found divested of sin I may then partake of
the fruits of piety. O descendant of Raghu, finding Sita
pure in mind and five elements of body I took her near the
spring in the forest. Besides this Sita, of pure ways, divested
of sins and ever considering her husband as deity; shall give
testimony this day. Thou hast been afraid of the public
calumny. O son of a king, thy mind being possessed by the
fear of public scandal, thou didst renounce this Sita of a pure
character and always regarding her husband as a god ; I
came to know this by virtue of my discriminative knowledge.*'


SECTION CX.


A*


.FTER the great Rishi Valmiki had said this, Rama, on
beholding the daughter of Janaka resembling a celestial, in
the midst of the assembly, with folded hands, said : — "O
great one, thou art conversant with piety. By thy words
shorn of sin, I have been convinced that Janaki is of pure
ways. Still, O Brahman, what thou hast commanded shall
be carried out ; let Sita produce testimony of the purity of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM 1910

her character. Because Vaidehi formerly underwent a trial
in the city of Lanka before the celestials I brought her home.
O Brahman, vilification of the people is very powerful.
Although I know that J&naki has not been touched by any
sin still I have renounced her. Do thou therefore forgive
me. I know that these twin brothers Kusa and Lava are
my sons. Yet if Jftnaki gives evidence of her own purity
before the assembly I shall be greatly satisfied." Being
apprised of Rama's intention as to Sit&'s trial the celestials
all came there on the occasion. The Adityas, VaSus, Rudras,
Viswadevas, Maruts, S&dhyas, Siddhas, N&gas and Rishis
placing Brahmft before them, all came there. And beholding
the celestials and Rishis assembled there R&ma again said to
V&lmiki : — "O foremost of Munis, the words, of the high-
souled Rishis, are divested of sin ; therefore on thy words
only I shall consider SiUL as having pure ways. Still all have
come here being anxious to witness Sit&'s trial. I shall
therefore be greatly delighted if J&naki gives in before them
any testimony of her pure character." As soon as those
words were uttered, sweet, fragrant, cold air, the witness of
virtue and vice, blowing mildly, excited the joy of the assem-
bly. People, hailing from various countries, with all attention
began to witness this wondrous and unthought of event.
In the golden age only the celestial wind used to blow — and
it oow blew even in the Tret& Yuga and forsooth it was a
matter of exceeding surprise. Thereupon beholding all
people assembled there, Janaka's daughter, wearing a red
cloth, with her face and looks downwards and folded palms
said : — "I have never thought of any other person in my
mind but Rlma ; by the strength of this virtue let the god-
dess Vasundhar& give me room. I have always with my
mind, body and words prayed for R&ma's well-being and by
virtue hereof may the goddess Vasundhari give me room
in her womb. 11 As soon as Sitft swore in this wise a wonder-
ful incident took place. From inside the earth a celestial


Digitized by VjOOQIC


igi I RAM AY AN A.

and excellent throne rose up. It was carried on head by the
Nigas of unmitigated prowess, having celestiaf persons and
adorned with celestial jewels and ornaments. Having
stretched out her arms and taken Maithili, the goddess earth
welcomed her and placed her on the throne. And while
seated on the throne she was entering the earth, she was
covered with the continued showers of celestial flowers.
Eulogising her at that time, the celestials said : — u Oh I highly
praiseworthy is thy conduct, O SitfL" Being present in the
welkin .and beholding Sita enter into the Earth, the celestials
again and again eulogised her in various words. The Rishis,
kings and other leading men present in the sacrificial arena
repeatedly expressed their surprise. Beholding Sita's censure
thus removed all animals, animate or inanimate, either on
earth or in the sky, were greatly delighted. Some cried aloud
in joy, some remained silent, and some motionless espied
Rama or SitSL In this wise beholding Sita's entrance into
the Earth the ascetics were greatly delighted. They all
attaining to the same state of mind, the whole universe, for
a moment, was possessed with the state of equality.


SECTION CXI.


s.


"N


MTA having entered Rasatala, all the monkeys and
Rishis repeatedly eulogised her before R&ma. Stricken with
sorrow and grief and lowering down his head, Rama, with
eyes full of tears, face downwards, and a dejected mind, sat
down. And being possessed by grief and anger and shedding
tears he wept for some time and then said : — "My mind is
about to be possessed by grief, which I had never experienced


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1912

before, for in the very presence of mine the graceful Janaki,
like Lakshmi herself, hath disappeared from view. Formerly,
in my absence, Janaki was once carried away into the city
of Lanka, on the other side of the great ocean and I brought
her back ; what wonder it is that I shall get her back from
Patala ? O goddess Vasudha, do thou soon bring Sita in
my view, or else, worked up with ire I shall give thee the
fruits of thy negligence. Thou art my mother-in-law, since
the royal saint Janaka obtained Sita from thy womb while
cultivating thee with plough share. Do thou therefore bring
back my Sita or give me a region of the celestials, I wish to
live with Sita. I am beside myself for her : do thou therefore
bring back Sita. If thou dost not render back Sita unto me

Vasudha, I shall deluge the earth with waters, having
assailed, destroyed and drowned into water thy huge com-
pass with mountains and forests." Rama, having given vent
to those accents under the influence of ire, the patriarch
Brahma, with the consent of the celestials, said : — " O Rama
of firm vows, O slayer of enemies, thou shouldst not grieve
thus. Recollect thy former state of Vishnu and the counsels.

1 would not have reminded thee of this secret but for the
present necessity. Do thou now once more remember thy
birth from Vishnu. By nature, Sita is pure, chaste and ever
dependent upon thee. And by virtue of her ascetic depen-
dance upon thee she has gone to the region of Nagas. Thou
shalt again meet her in heaven. Hear, what I communicate unto
thee before the assembly. Thou shalt be informed of every*
thing by listening to this excellent poem describing thy own
actions, O hero. Valmiki has described herein all miseries and
joys thou hast experienced since thy birth and what shall
happen in future after Sita's entrance into Patala. O Rama,
this first epic poem, Ramayan, has been composed describing
thy works. None but thee is worthy of the fame of this
poem. O Raghava, O highly illustrious one, do thou hear with
the Rishis, Uttarakandam, the last portion of this poem. O


Digitized by VjOOQIC


?9i3 RAMAYANA.

descendant of Raghu, this is not worthy of being heard by any
but those who art the foremost of the royal saints/' Having
said this, the deity Brahma, the lord of the three worlds, with
other deities, repaired to the region of immortals. The high-
souled and the highly effulgent ascetics, living in Brahma's
region, who were present in the assembly, obtaining Brahmas
permission, waited there, to hear Ramas future carreer in the
Uttarakandam. Hearing the words of the great Patriarch
instinct with well-being, the highly effulgent Rama said to
Valmiki : — " O illustrious sir, the Rishis living in Brahmas'
region have grown desirous of hearing my future history.
So let it be taken up next morning. ,, Having thus settled
and taken with him Kusa and Lava and sent away the assem-
bled people he entered his palace and spent the night
mourning for Sita.


SECTION C X II.


"N


JL HE night being over and having invited the leading
ascetics, Rama told his sons to sing the poem fearlessly.
Thereupon the high-souled Rishis having taken their seats
Kusa and Lava began the last / portion of the Uttarakandam.
Siti having entered PStala by the strength of her vow, and
the sacrifice having terminated, RSma grew poorly in spirit.
In Janaki's absence the whole world appeared to him as
blank. Now being overwhelmed with grief he lost all mental
peace. Having conferred various gifts upon the kings,
Rakshasas, monkeys, and leading Brahmanas, Rama sent them
away and meditating upon Sita's absence entered Ajoydhya.
And from the time of Sita's entering into Pat&la he did


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1914

not take any other spouse. And having made a golden image
of SitH he engaged in the performance of various sacrifices.
In this wise for thousand years he celebrated many Horse-
sacrifices, many Bajpeyas with profuse gold, Agnisomas,
Atiritras, numberless Gomedhas and various other sacrifices.
Rama being engaged in governing the kingdom and per-
forming many pious rites long time passed away. And
being under his subjection, bears, monkeys, Rakhasas and
kings always afforded delight unto him. On account of
showers in proper time there was enough of food in his
kingdom. The quarters were pure and delightful. The
citizens and villagers were happy and heakhy. None
met with premature death. In fact, in his regime all cala-
mities were removed. Thereupon after many years, the
illustrious, Kausalya, Rima's mother, surrounded by her sons
and grand-sons, breathed her last. Performing many
pious observances Kakeyi followed her and obtained peace
in the land of immortals. Those noble ladies, being united
with the king Da^aratha, in heaven, were greatly delighted
and obtained all virtues. Besides, having worshipped the
deities and manes on the occasion of his father's Sridha
ceremony the high-souled Rama distributed many jewels
and engaged in the performance of a very difficult sacrifice.
In this wise having performed many sacrifices and multiplied
pieties he spent many thousand years in happiness.


SECTION C X III.


\J NCE on a time Yudhajit, the king of Kekaya, sent
unto the high-souled Rama, Gargya — son of his own pre-
ceptor Angeras — a Brahmin saint of unmitigated prowess;
230


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


>»


i6i5 RAM AY AN A.

and with him he sent, as tokens of affections, gifts of ten
thousand horses, numberless blankets, various jewels, diverse
clothes and well washed coverlets. Hearing of the arrival
of the great saint Gargya with above valuable presents sent
by his material uncle Yudhajit, the intelligent Rama, with
his brothers, proceeded about a Krosa to receive him and
adored him particularly likely unto the lord of celestials
honoring Vrihaspati. Having thus welcomed that foremost
of Rishis and accepted the valuable presents sent by his
maternal uncle he asked the ascetic about his welfare in every
thing. Thereupon the great Rishi being seated, he iaid :—
" Thou art the foremost of those skilled in the art of speech
like the very preceptor of the celestials. Since thine own self
hath come here my uncle must have commissioned thee with
a very important message." Hearing those words of Rama
the great saint communicated unto him the object of his
coming, saying. — "O thou having long arms, if thou dost
like, hear what loving words thy maternal uncle Yudhajit,
the foremost of men, has said. The Gandharvas, holding
weapons and expert in warfare, guard that beautiful province
abounding in fruits and roots on the banks of the river"
Sindhu. O hero, those Gandharbas are Sailuska's sons — highly
powerful and three kotis in number. Having hoisted thy
flag of victory and conquered that highly picturesque city
of Gandharbas do thou include that kingdom within thine
well-established territories. None can enter there. O thou
having long arms, I do not request thee for any harm of thine.
Let that highly charming country be liked by thee." Hearing
the words of the maternal uncle communicated by the great
saint, Rama, with delight, said : — " What you have commanded
shall be satisfied." Saying this he looked towards Bharata
and delightedly and with folded hands said to the Rishi " O
Brahmarshi, these two princes are Bharata's sons and their
names are Taksha and Pushkala. Being well protected by
uncle Yudhajit and preceded by Bharata with army and


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1916

followers they shall, subjugate the Gandharbas and divide
the kingdom between them. Having established two king-
doms and installed his two sons there Bharata, the foremost
of the pious, shall come back to me.

Having thus said to the Brahmarshi, Rama commanded
Bharata and welcomed the two princes. Thereupon under
the auspices of favourable stars, having placed Gargya before
them, Bharata with the princes and army, issued out of the
city of Ayodhya. And Rama's army unconquerable eveiv
by the celestials went on for a month, from the city like a
celestial host nnder the command of Indra. Animals, living
upon flesh and huge-bodied Rakshasas longing for blood
followed Bharata. Besides many thousand birds, moving
in the sky, lions, tigers and boars went before the army.
The army, consisting of delighted and healthy subjects spen-
ding half a month in the way, arrived at the Kekaya kingdom
in good health.


SECTION ICXIV.


Jj. EARING of the arrival of the Bharata with the army
Gargya and Yudhajit, the king of Kekayas, were greatly
delighted. And with a huge army they speedily went out for
conquering the Gandharbas. Thereupon the highly power-
ful and light-armed Bharata and Yudhajit, with the soldiers
and followers, arrived at the city of Gandharbas. Having
heard of the coming of Bharata the highly powerful Gan-
dharbas gathered round and sont up leonine roars. There-
upon began the battle capable of making down erect and
continued for a week. On neither side there was victory


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i 9 i7 RAM AY AN A.

or defeat. On all sides there flowed streams of blood
and there were afloat human bodies. Daggers, Saktis and
bows were like the banks of the river. Thereupon enraged
Bharata, Rama's younger brother, discharged a dreadful
arrow named Sangharata resembling the fire of dissolution
against Gandharbas. Having bound them all with the noose
of death and sundered them with Sangharata, Bharata des-
patched all the Gandharbas to the abode of death. Ever*
the celestials could not recollect if such a dreadful encounter
had happened before. In a moment the huge Gandharba
host was slain. After the destruction of the Gandharbas,.
KaikeyPs son Bharata set up two excellent and prosper-
ous cities in the province of Gandharba. And he placed
Taksha in Takshasila and Pushkala in Pushkalabati.
Both the cities were filled with profuse riches and jewels
and covered with various gardens. As for many orna-
ments both of them as if vied with one another. By just
purchases and sales, and by the conduct of the people
the cities grew highly charming. Both of them were filled
with gardens and conveyances. Rows of shops were well
arranged by the streets in both the cities. Both of them
were adorned with many excellent fancy articles, picturesque
houses, charming palaces and many beautiful and high Tala,.
Tamala, Tilaka and Vakula trees. Having reared up those
two cities within five years, Rama's younger brother, the
mighty armed Bharata, son of Kaikeyi, returned to Ajodhyav
And like unto Vasava saluting Brahma he adored the high-
souled Raghava the very personation of virtue and com-
municated unto him duly the destruction of the Gandhar-
bas and the establishment of the two cities. And hear-
ing the words of Bharata, Rama attained to an excess of
delight.


N


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1918


SECTION CXV.


XjLearing the wonderful words of Bharata both Rama
and Lakshmana were greatly delighted. And then Rama
said to Lakshmana : — " Saumitri, thy two sons, Angada
and Chandraketu are well-versed in religions, perfectly
qualified in governing the kingdom and highly powerful.
I shall therefore install them on throne. O gentle one, do
thou find out such a country where these two skillful archers
may unobstructed roam about. And where if a kingdom is
established it might not disturb the peace and happiness of
other kings." Rama, having finished his speech Bharata
replied : — " The country of Karupada is highly picturesque
and freed from all thorns. Let the city for Angada be
established there. And let the beautiful country of Chandra-
dyuti be the kingdom of Chandraketu/' Rama approved of
the words of Bharata and having brought the country of
Karupada under his subjection gave it to Angada. He
reared a beautiful and well-protected city for Angada.
And in the country of Mallya he reared a city for
Chandraketu, named Chandrakanti highly picturesque and
like unto the city of celestials. Thereupon greatly de-
lighted Rama, irrepressible in battle, Lakshmana and
Bharata, having performed the ceremony of installation
ordered them to go their respective cities. Angada started
towards the West and Chandraketu towards the North.
Sumitra's son Lakshmana went with Angada and Bharata
accompanied Chandraketu. Having spent a year in
Angada's city and finding his son well established in the
kingdom Lakshmana returned to Ayodhya. And Bharata,
according to his desire, having spent more than a year in the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1919 RAM AY AN A.

city of Chandrakanti, came back to Ajodhya and saluted
Rama's feet. The pious Lakshmana and Bharata — both the
brothers, were greatly attached unto Rama ; and though they
spent their days in another place they did not experience
any pain in consequence of separation from their sons-
Observing all virtues in this way, Rama, the foremost of
the x pious, Bharata and Lakshmana governed the subjects
for ten thousand years. Having spent their days in the
city of Ajodhya, the very city of virtue, the three brothers,,
appearing graceful like the burning fire receiving oblations
in a great sacrifice, attained to joy in the fullness of 'time-


SECTION CXVI.


XN this wise the virtuous Rama having spent some time
Kala, assuming the shape of an ascetic, arrived at the
palace gate. And beholding the intelligent Lakshmana at
the door he said : " Do thou communicate (unto Rama)
that for some important business I have come here. I am
the messenger of the great saint Atibala of incomparable
effulgence. O thou of great strength, for a particular busi-
ness, I have come here to see Rama." Hearing the words of
the great saint, Saumitri speedily went to Raghava and com-
municated unto him the arrival of the ascetic, saying: —
" O tkou of great effulgence, observing the royal duties*
mayst thou acquire victory in both the worlds; one ambas-
sador radiant like the sun by virtue of his asceticism, has
come here to visit thee. ,, Hearing the words of Lakshmana
Rama said : — " Do thou speedily bring here the highly
effulgent ascetic bringing in a message." Thereupon say-
ing " So be it," Saumitri conducted, the effulgent ascetic unto


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM 1920

Rama's house. And having approached Rama the foremost ?
of Raghus, the ascetic, burning in his own energy, said to him,
in sweet accents : — " O great king, may prosperity crown
thee." And having welcomed him with water and Argya
the highly effulgent Rama asked him about his well-being.
Being asked by Rama as to his welfare, that foremost of
ascetics, skilled in the art of speech, sat on a golden seat.
Thereupon welcoming him Rama said: — "Do thou commu-
nicate unto me his words by whom thou hast been sent."
Being thus addressed by Rama, a lion amongst kings, the
ascetic said: — "If dost thou wish to bring about the well-
being of the celestials, my earnest desire is that we
may talk over it in a solitary; place. And if thou hast any
regard for the words of that foremost of ascetics, do thou
so order that whoever shall hear or see us, when we shall
converse in a solitary place, shall be slain by thee. There-
upon Rama promised that it should be done and said to
Lakshmana : — " O thou having long arms, sending away the
warder do thou wait at the gate. When I shall talk with
this ascetic in this solitary room whoever, shall hear or
see us, shall be slain by me." Having thus placed
Lakshmana at the gate Rama said to that Rishi : — " O great
saint, tell me what he has communicated unto thee. O
Muni, what is thy intention and by what high-souled Rishi
thou hast been sent here. Tell me all this without any fear.
I have become anxious to hear it."


SECTION CXVll.


± HEREUPON the great saint said : — " Hear, O king, O
thou gifted with great energy, for what I have come here.
O thou of great strength, the great Patriarch has sent


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1921 RAM AY ANA.

me to thee. hero, I am thy son. Thou didst, in thy
pristine birth, beget me on Maya— I am Kala, the des-
troyer of all. Lord Brahma, the father of all creatures, has
said that thou didst promise to preserve the three worlds.
Formerly when having slain all animals by thy Maya
thou wert asleep in the waters of the mighty deep I was born.
Thereafter thou didst create the huge-bodied Ananta, living
in the waters as the king of serpents. Then thou didst
create two highly powerful Asuras named Madhu and
Kaithabha. At that time the bones of those two Asuras
having been scattered far and wide this earth containing
many mountains was named Medini. Having procreated
me in thy lotus navel, dazzling in celestial brilliance
thou didst employ me in the work of generation. I took the
charge and procreated men ; but finding no other means to
preserve them I worshipped thee, the lord of the universe and
said : — O lord, thou shouldst protect the creatures, for thou
art my father and giver of energy and therefore irrepressible.
Thereupon for concerting means for the preservation of
creatures, thou didst renounce thy irrepressible shape and
assume Vishnu form. And.taking thy birth from Aditi's
powerful son, thou wert engaged in enhancing the delight of
my brothers. Thou didst use to protect the deities whenever
they were assailed by any calamity. O lord of the universe,
it is for that reason, on beholding the destruction of creatures
thou wert born on earth to slay the Ten-necked demon.
And at that time thou didst promise that thou wouldst live
in the land of mortals for eleven thousand years. Thereupon
thou didst assume a human form to carry out thine desire.
Now that period is ripe and this is the proper time to inform
thee of it. O great king, do thou wait in this land of mortals
if dost thou wish to govern people for some time more.
And if dost thou wish to repair to the region of immortals,
do thou again lord over the deities in thy Vishnu form and
let them be freed from anxiety. O Hero, the Patriarch hath


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARAKANDAM. 1922

sent this intelligence unto thee/ 9 Hearing those unequalled
words of the Patriarch from the mouth of K&la, the destroyer
of all, Rftma smiling said : — " I have been greatly pleased
mod happy for thy coming here, O my son. I descended on
earth to bring about the well-being of the three worlds. May
good betide thee. I shall now repair to from where I have
come here. I was thinking of this when thou didst come
here. Therefore, I have no doubt in this. O lord of destruc-
tion, the immortals are dependent on me, so I shall be with
them in all works. The Great Patriarch has said the truth.' 1


SECTION CXVIII.


¥.


HlLE R3ma and Kftla were thus conversing with one
another, the great ascetic Durv&sft arrived at the gate for
seeing Rftma and approaching Lakshmana said :— " O
Saumitri, do thou soon take me to Rama ; my time goes away,
so do thou take me first." Hearing the words of the ascetic,
Lakshmana, the slayer of enemies worshipping the feet of
that high-souled one, said :— " O illustrious Sir, kindly men-
tion thy business. What is thy object ? Order me what I
am to do. Rftma is engaged in some business so kindly
wait here for some time/' Hearing those words that fore-
most of Rishis, Durvftsft, impatient with rage, said with
blood-red eyes : — " O Saumitri, if dost thou not go even
this very moment and communicate unto Rima my arrival,
I ihall impricate thee, Rftma, Bharata, Sutrughana, your
sons and grand-sons. I shall curse also thy kingdom and
cities. I cannot any longer restrain my growing ire. 1 '
231


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1923 RAM AY AN A.

Hearing those dreadful and resolute words of the Rishi,
Lakshmana thought within himself : — " My own destruction
is far more desirable than that of all." Having thus re-
solved Lakshmana approached R&ma and communicated
unto him the intelligence. Hearing the words of Lakshmana
and having bade adieu, unto K&la, Rama soon came out and
saw Atri's son. And having saluted that great and powerful
ascetic he with folded hands, said " What is thine business."
Hearing the words of R§ma, the highly powerful Durv&sa,
the foremost of Munis, said. " Hear, O R&ma fond of virtue.
For a thousand years I have carried on the vow of fasting.
It has terminated to-day, so do thou give me food as much
as possible." Hearing those words R£ma was greatly
delighted and gave proper food unto that ascetic. And
feasting .on that .nectar-like sweet food, DurvSsS, the foremost
of Rishis, thanked Rama and repaired to his own hermitage.
Thereupon remembering the words of Kala, Rama was
greatly sorry. And thinking of those dreadful words he
was overwhelmed with grief. And with a poorly heart, and
face downwards he remained silent for some time. There-
upon thinking of Kala's words and determining that every
calamity would befall him, that highly illustrious descendant,
of Raghus, summoned patience.


SECTION C XIX


X HEREUPON beholding Rama with his head down-
wards and poorly like unto the moon possessed by R&bu,
Lakshmana, delightedly and with sweet words, said ; — •• Be
not aggrieved for me, O thou having mighty arms. Such is


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM 1924

the course of time ; the movements of creatures are destined
by their pristine actions, good or bad. O gentle one, do
thou satisfy thy promise slaying me without any hesitation.
O Kakuthstha, those, who cannot carry out their promises,
repair to hell. O great king, if thou hast any love or affec-
tion for me, do thou satisfy thy promise by fearlessly slaying
me." Hearing those words of Lakshmana Rama's mind
was greatly moved. Thereupon having invited his priests and
ministers there he communicated unto them his promise and
Durvasa's arrival. Hearing it the ministers and priests re-
mained silent. Thereupon Vasishtha, of unmitigated efful-
gence, said : — "O highly illustrious and mighty armed Rama,
I knew before by virtue of my asceticism, of this thy present
destruction and separation from Lakshmana. Time is power-
ful ; do not falsify thy promise. Promise not carried out,
brings on the destruction of virtue. And on the wane of
virtue, forsooth, the three worlds, with celestials, saints,
mobile and immobile creations, shall be destroyed. Therefore,
O foremost of men, do thou protect, the universe by suffering
separation from Lakshmana, in the interest of the preservation
of the three worlds." All other ministers and priests agreed
with Vasishtha's words. Thereupon hearing their moral
counsels, Rama said to Lakshmana before the assembly :—
" O Lakshmana, it is not proper to act against morality, I do
therefore renounce thee ; for the pious hold that destruction
and renounciation are all the same." Rlma saying this,
Lakshmana did not go to his own house, but with eyes full
of tears specially repaired therefrom. Having reached the
banks of Saraju and rinsed his mouth he stood there with
folded palms. And having obstructed all passages he did not
breathe any more. Lakshmana, the younger brother of
Rama, being thus engaged in penances, having obstructed his
breath, Apsaras, Indra and other deities and Rishis showered
flowers on him. Thereupon beyond the sight of men,
having taken the highly powerful Lakshmana within his body.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1625 RAM AY AN A.

the king of celestials entered his own city. Thereupon be-
holding Lakshmana, the fourth portion of Vishnu arrived at
their city the celestials were greatly delighted and engaged
in his worship.


SECTION CXX.


H-


.AVING forsaken Lakshmana and being stricken with
sorrow and grief Rama said to his citizens and ministers : —
11 Having placed the pious and heroic Bharata on the throne
of Ayodhya I shall to-day repair to woods. Do ye, with-
out any delay collect there all articles of installation. I
shall follow the way which has been wended by Lakshmana."
Hearing the words of Raghava, the subjects with their heads
downwards remained motionless like so many dead bodies.
Hearing Rama's words Bharata was also stupified and speak-
ing ill of the kingdom, said : — "O King, I swear by truth, that
far from kingdom I do not wish to live in heaven even with-
out thee : O King, of these two princes, Kusi and Lava do
thou place Kusi in Kosala and Lava in North Kosala : And
let quick-moving emissaries go to Satrughna and communi-
cate unto him the intelligence of our going there." Hearing
those words of Bharata and beholding the subjects stricken
with sorrow having their heads downwards, Vasishtha
said : — " Behold, O Rama, the subjects have placed them-
selves on the ground. Do thou, therefore ; apprised of their
intention, satisfy their desire." Raising up the subjects
according to the words of Vasishtha Rama said : — " What
good can I do for you ! " Hearing Rama's words they
said : — " O King, we shall follow thee wherever thou shalt


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARAKANDAM. ' 1926

go. If thou hast any love or affection for the citizens do
thou permit them that they may follow thy good path with their
wives and children. O lord, if thou dost not forsake us, let
us all go wherever thou wilt, — be it a forest, an intractable
tract, a river or an ocean. O great king, by this we shall be
greatly delighted. We pray for this boon only. Our delight
consists in following thee in everything." Observing such a
firm devotion of the citizens Rima agreed to that. There-
upon having gone through his duties he installed Kusi in
the kingdom of Kosala and Lava in the northern country.
Having thus installed the high-souled and heroic Kusi and
Lava and conferred upon each of them thousand chariots,
Ajuta Nigas, Ajuta horses and various jewels and riches
he established them in their respective kingdoms. Having
thus settled the princes he despatched an emissary to
Satrughna.


SECTION CXXI.


H-


b AV!NG been despatched by Rima, quick-moving
emissaries speedily arrived at Mathura. Continually travelling
for three nights and days, they arrived there and communi-
cated unto Satrughna the intelligence. Having informed
him of the renouncing of Lakshmana, Rima's promise and
the following of the citizens they said :— " The intelligent
Rima has reared for Kusi the spacious city of Kusavati
at the foot of the Vindhya range. The city of Sravanti
has been reared for Lava, and the mighty car-warriors
Rima and Bharata, making Ajodhya void of men, have
addressed themselves for repairing to heaven." Having


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1927 RAM AY AN A.

speedily communicated unto him this intelligence the emis-
saries took rest. Thereupon they asked Satrughna to pro-
ceed soon. Observing the dreadful destruction of his race,
Satrughna sent for his subjects and priests and informed
them of everything. He also communicated unto them his
own destruction with his brothers. Thereupon the king
Satrughna determined upon installing his two sons in the
kingdom. Suvahu was placed on the throne of Mathura and
Satrughati became the king of Vidisha. Having thus estab-
lished Suvahu in Mathura, and Satrughati in Vidisha, the
great hero Satrughna ascended his car and went to Ajodhya.
And there he saw the great Rama, clothed in silk raiment
burning like fire in the midst of the ascetics. Thereupon
remembering his duty he saluted Rama, conversant with
piety and with folded hands said : — " I have placed my two
sons on the throne of my kingdom. I have now resolved
upon following thee, O King. O hero, do not.command me
otherwise. I pray only that I may not neglect thy com-
mand." Thereupon understanding the firm resolution of
Satrughna, the descendant of Raghu agreed. Immediately
after Rama had said this, monkeys assuming shapes at will
bears and Rakshas, began to assemble there. Apprised
of Rama's determination of going to heaven, monkeys, born
of the celestials, Rishis and Gandharbas taking Sugriva
before them, came there to see Rama. And they all said : —
" O Rama, O foremost of men, if thou dost repair to heaven
forsaking us all, it will be hurling Yama's rod upon us." The
highly powerful Sugriva too saluting Rama said : — iC O lord
of men, having placed Angada on the throne I have come
hither. I have determined upon following thee, O King."
Hearing the words of monkeys, Rama said that their desire
would be fulfilled. He then said to Bibhishana the king of
Rakshasas : — " As long as people shall breathe, O Bibhishana,
iO highly powerful lord of Rakshasas, thou shalt* preserve
by body in LankJ. As long as the moon, the sun and the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1928

earth shall exist and as long as my story shall remain current,
thy kingdom shall be in existence. Thou didst, out of friend-
ship, carry out my behests and perform my works. Do
thou piously govern thy subjects. I should not speak any
thing else. What shall I say more unto thee, O highly power-
ful lord of Rakshasas. Worship Jagannath (the lord of
the world), the presiding deity of the Ikshawku race."
Having thus addressed the king of Rakshasas always
obeying Raghava's command, Kakuthstha said to Hanu-
m&n : — " It is settled that thou shalt live forever, do thou,
now observe thy promise. As long as my history shall run
current in this world do thou at my command live happily/'
Being thus addressed by the high-souled RSghava Hanuman
attained to great delight and said: — " As long as the sacred
theme shall pass current in this world I shall live here
carrying out thy commands." Thereupon he said to the
J&mbhuv&n, Brahma's son, Mainda, Dwivida and five others
in his company: — "As long as the Kali Yuga exists do
ye all live." Having thus addressed them all Kakuthstha
said to bears and monkeys. " Do ye come all with me."


SECTION CXX II.


A.FTER the night had expired the highly illustrious
Rftma having a spacious breast and eyes like lotus petals said
to the priest : — " Let the brilliant .umbrellas Agnihotra, and
B&japeya go with the Br&hmanas before, which look well in
the great road." Thereupon the highly effulgent Vasishtha
arranged duly all the ceremonies necessary for going to the
next world. Thereupon wearing a thin cloth, holding kusa
grass by his fingers, and reciting Vedic hymns he proceeded


i


1929 RAM AY AN A.

to the banks of Saraju. Having given up all actions of
senses, and suffered the pains of going on foot he issued
out of the city speechless like unto the burning sun. On
his right hand side was the lotus-handed Sree, on his left
hand side was the goddess Earth and before him was the
power of destruction. Various arrows, huge bows, and dag-
gers, assuming forms followed him. And also went with
him the four Vedas in the shape of the Brahmanas, the all
protecting Gayatri, Omkara and Vasatkara. The high-souled
Rishis and great Asuras followed the high-souled Rama to
the open gates of heaven. All the female servants, old and
young, the damsels of the seraglio accompanied by servants
having no manhood, Bharata and Lakshmana accompanied
by their wives, followed him with Agnihotra. All those
high-souled ones, assembled there with Agnihotra and follow-
ed Kakuthstha with their wives and children. The minis-
ters and the servants, with their sons, beasts and friends,
followed Rama delightedly. Thereupon all the subjects
healthy and delighted went after Raghava, attracted by his
accomplishments and cleansed of their sins. All the females
and males, with their beasts, birds and friends, delightedly
followed Raghava. Bathed and delighted all the monkeys,
healthy and joyous following Rama, created a continued tumult.
There was none poorly, aggrieved or miserable — all of them
appeared wonderkilly happy and i delighted. When Rama
issued out of the city, whoever came to see him followed him
being desirous of going to heaven. Bears, monkeys and
Rakshasas and all the citizens, followed him with great
devotion and collected minds. And all other animals, that
were beyond the view of all in the city went after Raghava
proceeding to heaven. All creations mobile and immobile,
"akuthstha followed him. All beings in
breathe a$d are very minute, accom-


Digitized by VjOOQ IC


UTTARAKANDAM. 1930


SECTION cxx ML


H-


_AViNG thus gone for more than a half Yoyana, the
descendant of Raghu espied Saraju of holy waters flow-
ing towards the west. And having crossed that river of
rising waves to some extent, R&ma, with his followers
arrived at the place where he should give up his person.
Thereupon at that moment, Brahma, the grandfather of. all
encircled by all high-souled deities and with hundred kotis
of celestial cars, arrived there where K&kuthstha had ad-
dressed himself to repair to heaven. The aerial way was
full of lustre but its brilliance was increased the more
by the native effulgence of the inhabitants of heavens,
always performing pious actions. There blew the holy,
fragrant and delightful winds and there fell profusely
celestial flowers from the bands of the deities. The place
was rilled with the noise of hundreds' of bugles sounded by
Gandharbas and Apsaris. And then R&ma prepared him-
self to descend to the waters of Saraju. Thereupon the
Patriarch gave vent to the following accents from the
welkin ; — " Come O Vishnu ; may good betide thee ; by our
good fortune thou art coming here ; O R&ghava hear — O
thou having mighty arms, do thou enter here with thy
brothers, resembling the celestials in brilliance in whatever
form thou likest— either in that of the sky or in thy own
Vishnu form. Thou art the refuge of the creatures — nobody
knoweth thee. Thou art above the range of thought ; great
immortal and imperishable ; nobody knoweth thee save
Mftyi, having wide eyes, thy former spouse. Do thou enter
here thyself in whatever effulgent form thou likest." Hearing
the words of the Patriarch and determining everything
the high-minded Rlma entered there bodily with his brothers
in his Vishnu form. Thereupon all the celestials Sidhyas

232


Digitized by VjOOQIC


193 1 RAM AY AN A.

Marutas, headed by Indra and Agni worshipped that deity,
Vishnu. So did all the celestial Rishis, Gandharbas Apsar£s,
Suparnas, Nagas, Yakhas, demons, Danavas and Rakshasas.
Thereupon eulogising him the celestials said : — " Our region
is now freed from sins and all here have been delighted
and all their desires have been fulfilled/' Thereupon the
highly effulgent Vishnu said to the Patriarch Brahma :—
11 It behoveth thee, O thou of good vows, to allot to
those people their proper regions. These illustrious ones
have followed me out of love. They are worthy of my
respect for they are my devotees and have renounced
their persons for me." Hearing the words of Vishnu, the
lord Brahma, father of all creatures, said : — All these
people who have come here shall go to the region named
SantSnaka. This region is intended even * for him, who
though born in the most degraded state, thinks of all ob-
jects as Vishnu. There is no question about their attaining
to this region who, out of devotion, have followed thee and
renounced their persons. This region has all the attributes
of the Brahma region and is next to it. The monkeys and
bears shall enter into their respective celestial forms. They
shall enter into the deities from whom they had respectively
originated. Sugriva shall enter into the Sun's region. And
they shall obtain their respective fathers' forms among the
celestials present." The lord of the deities having said this,
all those who were present at the holy pilgrimage of Gopratra
descended into the waters of Saraju with eyes full of tears
of joy. Having bathed there, given up their lives delightedly
and renounced their human forms they ascended the celestial
cars. And having obtained the waters of Saraju, hundreds
of those that were born in the race of birds attained to the
land of immortals obtaining the respective celestial forms
(they had before). And in those celestial forms, they looked
effulgent like the deities. And going to the waters of Saraju
all. objects, mobile and immobile, having bathed there, repaired


Digitized by VjOOQIC


VTTARARANDAM 1932

to the excellent celestial region. Having renounced their
bodies in the water thereof all the bears, monkeys, and
Rakshasas attained to the land of deities. Having thus set-
tled in heaven all those arrived there the father, of creatures
with the deities, delighted and happy, repaired to the highest
heaven.


SECTION CXXlV.


JL HIS Story ends with the UttarS. It fc held in reverence
by Brahm& composed by V&lmiki and passes as the foremost
of all under the name of the RSmayana. Thereupon as
before, Vishnu, who compriseth the three worlds and all
objects, mobile and immobile, again established himself as
before in the land of immortals. Thereupon the celestials
the Gandharbas, the great Rishis used to hear happily every
day in heaven this poem of R&mayana. At the Sarddha
ceremony the wise should chant this R&mayana sacred like
the Vedas, removing sins and increasing life and prosperity.
Reading even a single verse of this poem, one who hath no
son, obtaineth him ; one having no riches, gets by them — and
people are freed from all sins. By reading even one slokar
people are freed from all sins which they commit every day.
Clothes, cows, and gold should be conferred upon him who
chants this poem, for he being pleased all the deities remain
satisfied. Whoever reads this story of R&mayana, conferring
a long life is honoured in this world along with his sons
and grand-sons and as well as in the land of the dead. Who-
ever shall read this R&mayana either in the morning, noon,
or evening, shall never be wearied. The picturesque city of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i 9 33 RAM AY AN A.

Ayodhya remained devoid of men for many long years but
was again peopled under the regeme of the King Rishava.
Pracheta's son Valmiki composed this, poem, conferring long
life, together with the future story of the diety and the Uttara-
Kandam. Even Brahmi admitted this.


■ »»• < -


THE END.


i
