VIII
CONTENTS.
the names of the god« who respectively preside over them— The forma-
tion of the material body of a man, and an enumeration ofthe Mantras
which represent tnose material principles— The rites of Nvasa m Ooo-
nection with the Adhivasanam ceremony— The worship of Keshava ana
the different manifestations of the God Vishnu— Offerings to the minor
doities— The rite of Homa— Riles completing the ceremony 208— 215
Chaptcr LX.— Rite of installation of the pedestal of a
—Insertion of gems and bits of gold-mto the body of the same— The rite
of Homa— Cleansing of the image with Mantras and religious rites-
The construction of a Sthandila (sand cushion for the
The stowing of the sacrificial pitchers into their ptaces-The rite of
subsequent Roma, -Sprinkling of the water of peace « v ^ n t t h * l ^ d th °‘
the imare— Women and Bramhanas are to pour out the contents of the
sacrificial pitchers over its head— The formal placing of th e image
upon its pedestal— Washing of the idol with different ,n ***j*"”* .
Worship and invocation— The rite of Sann.dhyak.ranamjthe actof
makine the deitv reside in the image) — The subsequent ntes of wor
shipping 1 the companion deities of the god— Nature of
tcZ paid to the Priest officiating at the ceremony-The merit of
installing and consecrating an image of Viahnu ... 5 .
rusrruR LX 1 .— The rite of Avabhritha Snanam) — The rkt ot
first Homa and worshipping of the spiritual preceptor— Worship of
? 7 Umi ^d oth« Sitifs-ConsecVation of a temple with doors
pm^iously*cons«crated— The rite, of festooning and de^tlnjAe
temple — The merit of planting a banner on l ^ e P, .
frnm itV tOD— The characteristic features of the flag- The
* f rhakras^Tdiscus) and Kalasas (conical ornaments) over
ST'S P in“d« ‘r SfSSAtl- completing 0»
CbafTIR LXII.-Riteof consecration of divine image* in agent.
r 1 Vim The rite of consecrating an image of Garuda,
CBtmt i‘A * 1 , mt Manin sacred to each of them
of Bramha, of Naras.nha, etc—The Mantra h »bove-
* tt-g II. .h.c..«mo o,- roe »£» £
i*s5sa25S:
and the Mantra to be used in cons ?* the m(K | ( of writing thorn-
attendant on consecration of ^o!; hana— The merit of preaenting
The merit of aivihg a book to a . ^ acre( i literature,
books of the different schools of philosophy and sacred uteratu
Craptbr LXIV.— Consecration Remuneration* to
coremony, attendant on such • n * c ’ . t ^ ma d e to th« God
be made to the PriSst— Nature of offerings to o«_ . d
Varuna-The Adhivasa ceromony m the nigh^Tim mvoca^^
the rite of Homa, and the Me wtra e 0 (YupaT^into the centre
libftlions— The driving of tM «*cnfie..l poegYU^»
of the bed of the laA-Tto Praj^w » •» ^jat . pond.
blMttng on it* water— The merd el contecrawg 932—237
CONTENTS.

is


Chaptir LXV.«— The mode of building Gopiras^ etc. — The selec-
tion of site and the performance of the sacrifice of the fiomstead, inci-
dental thereto — The models after which the Halls are to be built—
The objectionable sites — The merit of such an endowment— The way
of constructing a Saptavoum Hall sacred to the god Hari (which is
similar to that of constructing a royal palace)— The dimensions and
characteristics of such edifices — The religious rites attending on the
first entrance into such a Mansion — Invocation to the earth goddess
to bless the mansion ... • •• • •• 237““* 2 39

Chapter LX VI. — Consecration of the images of gods and spiritual
beings, such as the sun, etc.— The construction ofthe principal Mantras,
sacred to each of them — The Vow of thirty days fast— The rite of
accompanying Homa— The subsequent rite of worshipping the gods
Bramha, Vishnu,, and Isa— Libations to be offered to the souls of
mountains, rivers, and oceans— Gifts at the close of the ceremony—
Another sort of penance, described — Endowment and consecration of
cattle .paths, pasturages and fruit gardens — Their merit — 1'he merit
of caintrucling mohAsteriesr and buildings for the use of public in
goaoral ... ... ... ... 239—243

Chapter LXVIL— The rite of Girnoddharam (repairing an. old
image or replacing a disfigured idol by a new one^— 1 he merit of per^
forming such a ceremony, as well as those of dredging or re-excavating
old wells, tanks, and reservoirs of water in general ... ... 244

Chapter LXVI II.— Description of the feasts and the parrading
of an idol, etc., that are to be celebrated and made at the close of a
consecration ceremony — The time of their celebration— Religious rites
preceding such a Yatrotasavam (parrading) — The parrade and its
goal described —The merit of attending and getting up such a pageant
—The immersion of ti e idol in a river and taking it back to the temple.

245—247

Chapter LXIX.— The rite of Avabriiha Suanam and its rules—
Filling up of the sacrificial pitchers with different substances and wheel-
ing them into their proper positions in the shed of ablution— I lie
Homa, in connection with the ceremony, after the anointment of the
pitchers with clarified butter— The bathing of the god— I be feast follow-
ing close upon the ceremony, and the merit of its performance the
subsequent worship of the goddess of Gouri ... ... 24 7 249

Chapter LXX. — The rite of consecrating trees and fruit-gardens—

The merit of such a performance ... 250— 25 I

Chapter LX XL— The worship of tbe god Ganesha ... 25*

Chapter LXXJL— The rncs ofnd lilv ablution and offering of liba
tions of water to the gods and preesptors — The sons of ablution —
Their process — The nlcs of Mala-Sn jm*m. V ishma-Snanam and \
Snanam, Agneya-Snanam' and Mahcndia-Snanam— Occasions on which
they are to be performed— The dihcient forms ot Snnrifcya and the
Mantras with wMch they are to be performed— The nits of Sakali*
karanam and Prnnayama— The image ‘of the goddess of handhy*.

25«r-257

Chapter LX X II l.— The worship of the Sun— Its religious merit.

• • 255— 2w.

Chaptir LXXIV.— -The worship of the god- Shiva^-RvoCation of
his spiritual eye-sight by the votary previous to the worship the scaring


ii3*


AGNl PURANAM.


different petals of the psychic lotus-cushion spread in his
heart for receiving the imaged divinity as follows “Om,
obeisance to the goddess Varna, seated on the eastern petal
of the lotus of the heart. Om, obeisance to the goddess
Jestha seated on the southern petal. Om, obeisance to the
goddess Kali seated on the south western petal. Om,
obeisance to the goddess Kalavikarini seated on the western
petal. Om, obeisance to the goddess Valavikarini seated on
the north-western petal. Om, obeisance to Valapramathini
seated on the northern petal. Om, obeisance to Sarva-
Bhutadamani seated on the north-eastern petal, and Om,
obeisance to the goddess Manonmayee seated at its centre.”
Then the goddesses of light such as Shveta, Rakta, Sita,
Pita, Shyama, Vanhinibha, Krishna and Aruna, should be
worshipped in succession (12 — 22).

Then having brought the image of the evoked divinity out
of the psychic lotus in the heart, the exterior lines of which
are formed of the essence of the sun and the moon, etc., the
preceptor, should contemplate it as placed on the external
mystic diagram, laid out on the ground. Then he should
practise the rite of Murtinyasa on the petals of the lotus as
follows. — “ Om, obeisance to Tatpurusha, who is of a white
complexion. Om, obeisance to Aghora, who is possessed of
eight hands and a black complexion. Om, obeisance to the
four-faced and four-handed deity, and Om, obeisance to Sadyo-
jata at the west, etc.” Then the different manifestations of
the god, such as Vamadeva, Strivilashi, Panchasya, Ishana,
Ananta, and Sukshma, etc., should be worshipped in succes-
sion. Similarly the gods, such as Siddheshvara, Ekanetra,
etc., should be worshipped in the east, while the gods such as
Ekarudra, Trinetra, Shrikantha, and Shikhandi, as well as
the regents of the cushion, such as Shveta, Pita, Sita, Rakta,
Dhumra, etc., should be worshipped at its angular points
(27—28)

Then the four h*nds of the god, together with the trident,


AGNI FORANAM.


It3J

tht' thunderbolt, the bow, and his four ^ faces, and the
manifestations, such as Umesha, Chandesha, Nandi, Isha,
Mahakala, Ganeshvara, the bull, Bhringi, Skanda, etc.,
should be also worshipped. Then the thunderbolt, the spear,
the club, the sword, the noose, the banner, the trident, and
the discus, should be worshipped, after having worshipped
the god in the east (29 — 31).

Then the disciple, duly fasting and consecrated, should be
told to take nothing but Panchagvya that day. Then having
rinsed his face, the preceptor should look steadfast at the
eyes of his disciple, and cause it to be tied up (fastened)
with the essence of the Netra-Mantra. Then having entered
the disciple through the gate of the sacrificial shed, he should
cause him to occupy a Darbha-seat on his right hand side,
previously purified. Then having evoked the different prin-
ciples of ether, etc., and the entire phases of beatitude in the
innerself of the disciple, he should cause them to be merged
in the principle of the Supreme Bramha, subsequently evoked
therein by an act of Nyasa. Then he should cause the
disciple to circumbulate the sacrificial shed. Then having
entered him again through the western door of the Maijdala,
he should cause him to throw handsful of flowers on the
ground. The spiritual name of the disciple should com-
mence with the first letter of the name of the thing, the first
flower would fall upon (32 — 36).

Then having lighted the fire in the sscrificial fire-pit
provided with a rim and An aperture for outflow, and excava-
ted beside the sacrificial ground, the preceptor should con-
secrate it with the Shiva-Mantras, and worship it conjointly
with his disciple. Then having again evoked the above
said principles in the order of their previous merging, he
should cause them to permeate the blended palms of his disci-
ple, on which he should spread the blades of consecrated
I£usha-grass. Then he should cause libations of clarrified
better, ta be poured on the sacred fire, a hundred timer in


PURCHASED


THE

AGNI

PURANAM


VOLUME IV


AGNI PURANAM.


*«34

in honour of the principles of Earth, etc., by repeating the
Hrid-Mantras. Then having again performed the Homa
with a repetition of the ether-Vija, he should close the
ceremony with the final libations consecrated with the Astra*
Mantra, and which are known as the Homas of expiation.
Then having worshipped the water-pitcher stowed at the
centre of the sacrificial shed, he should cause the disciple
to be bathed with its contents, and dictate the rules of
conduct to be observed by the latter. Then the preceptor
should worship his own Guru with offerings of gold, etc.
Thus the rite of spiritual initiation, known as the Pancha-
kshari Diksha, should be performed. The procedure laid
down above, would hold good in cases of initiation, where
the tutelary gods would be Vishnu, etc., (37 — 41).


CHAPTER CCCV.


Said THE god OF fire : — A man, by reciting tbe
following fifty names of Vishnu, would attain greater merit
than by repeating the Mantras held sacred to that divinity.
These names recited at holy pools and sancturies, prove eight
times more meritorious. The Pundarikaksha (lotus-eyed)
manifestation of the god, should be contemplated at the holy
shrine of Pushkara, the Gadadhara (club-wielding) manifesta-
tion at Gaya, the Raghava manifestation on the summit of
the mount Chitrakuta, the Daityasudana (demon-destroyer)
man ifestation at Prabhasa, the Jaya (the .victor) manifestation
at Jayanti, the Jayanta manifestation at the holy city of
Hastinapura, the Varaha (boar) manifestation at Bardhamana,
the Chakrapani (the discus-wielding) manifestation in Cash-
mere, the Janardana (the slayer of Jana) manifestation at


AGNI PURANAM.


1IJS

Kuvjabhra, the Keshava (who lies on the water of first cause)
manifestation at Mathura, the Hrishikesha manifestation at
Kuvjabhraka, the Jatadhara (the one with the clotted hairs)
manifestation at the spot where the Ganges empties herself
into the sea; the Mahayoga manifestation in the village of
Shalagrama, the god Hari on the holy mount of Govardhana,
the Chaturvahu (four-armed) manifestation at Pindaraka,
and Shankhi (wielder of a conch-shell) manifestation at
Shankhadvara (i— 5).

Similarly, a man should recite the name of the dwarf
manifestation while staying within the holy precincts of
Kurukshetra, contemplate the Trivikrama manifestation on
the banks of the Yamuna, the Vishveshvara manifestation
on the banks of the Shona, and the Kapila incarnation of the
god at the shores of the Eastern sea. Likewise, a man
should recite the name of Vishnu at the shore of the great
ocean, as well as at the estuary of the Ganges. The Vanamala
(the god with the garland of wild .flowers) manifestation
of the god, should be meditated upon in the country of
Kishkindhyat the Deva at Raivataka; the Mahayoga mani-
festation at Benares, and the Ripunjaya (the victor of
enemies) manifestation at Viroja, the Ajita (invincible)
manifestation at Vishakayupa, and the Lokabhavana mani-
festation at Nepal. In the same way, a man should contem-
plate the god Krishna at Dvaraka, the god Madhusudana
•t Mandara, the god Ripuhara (killer of enemies) at
Lokakula, and the god Hari at Shalagram. The Purusha
is the deity which should 4 be meditated upon at the holy
shrine of Purusha Vata. One should contemplate the god
Jagatprabhu (lord of the universe) at Vimala, the god Ananta
(Infinite) in the forest of Saindhava, the god Sharngadbari
(the wielder of a bow) in the forest of Dandaka, the god
Shouri at the shore of the whirlpool known, as the Utpala-
vartaka, the god Shriya-pati (the husband of the goddess
Lakahmi) at the banks of the Nermada, the god Damodara


I PORCHAScb

REDISCOVERING INDIA


AGNI PURANAM


DUTT M.N.


Vol. 8 (iv)


cosmo Publications


AGNI PURANAM.


1136

on the summit of the holy Raivataka, the god Jatasflayin at
Nandaka, the god Gopishvara (the lord of the milk, maids) at
the shore of the Sindhvabdhi, the god Achyuta on the top of
the holy hill Mahendra, the god of the gods on the peak of
the mount Sajhya, and the god V aikuntha in the forest of
Madhava (several editions read Magadha ( 6 — 12).

The all-sin-expiating epithet of the god should be reci-
ted on the summits of the Vindhaya mountains, the Puru-
shottama epithet in the country of Orissa, while the uni-
versal soul should be deemed as running through the hearts
of all. The man who recites, in an earnest spirit, the epithets
enumerated above, would be able to enjoy all comforts in
this life and to attain salvation in the next. Wherever there
is a Vatatree, the Fire-god should be deemed as lying inherent
therein. The god Shiva should be deemed as present in all
walled quadrangles, the Rama manifestation of Vishnu as
presiding over all hill-tops, while the god Madhusudana
(the slayer of the demon Madhu) as pervading the
whole universe. A man by meditating on Nara mani-
festation on earth, and on the god Garudadhvaja in heaven,
and on the godiVasudeva at all places, is sure to be blest
with all earthly possessions, and salvation after death. A
man by repeating the abovesaid epithets of Vishnu, be-
come entitled to all bliss. Acts of Shraddha, gifts, or of
mental repetition of a Mantra, become a million times more
meritorious, if practised and performed at the holy shrines
and sanctuaries mentioned above. A man, by departing this
life in any of the above said places, is sure to be merged in
the essence of the Supreme Bramha. The man, who perso-v
11 ally repeats these epithets, or hears them repeated by
others, becomes pure in spirit, and ascends heaven after

death (13—17)-


ew

K3I?

v g

f \A


First Published 1904
This series 1987


Published by

RANI KAPOOR (Mrs)

COSMO PUBLICATIONS

24-B, Ansari Road, Daryaganj
New Delhi 110002 (India)


Printed at
M/S Taj Offset
New Delhi


THE ASIATIC SOCIETY

CALCUTTA- 700019

AM.No 4?77Z___

•■fc— ~ L' 3 .l -•


COMPUTERISED


CHAPTER CCCVI.


3aid the God oE Fire : — Hear me discourse on the
Mantras, which are to be made use of in incantations,
which are practised either for stupefying the faculties of one’s
adversaries, or for the purpose of creating dissensions
between a hitherto fondly attached couple, or with a view
to bring out one’s death, or in order to drive a man distracted
and crated from his own hearth and home, or for the object
of bringing disease upon one’s enemy, as well as on those

that can set them at nought (t).

“ Om obeisance to the god Rudra, dancing In a frantic rage.
Stupefy and stupefy the senses of such and such a person.
Make him quit his hearth and home, and roam about as an
aimless vagrant Threaten him and threaten him. Hurl and
hurl him aloft with thy fierce energy. Hrum. Fut. Tha. Tha.”

The above Mantra repeated by a man at midnight in a
cremation ground, followed by three hundred thousand obla-
tions of Dhurta twigs, soaked in clarrified butter and poured
on the biasing fire of q burning funeral pile, tends to drive
a person crazy from his home, against whom such an in-
cantation is practised. An image of the enemy, should be
made of the clay known as the Hemagairika, which should
be pricked along the throat, or the heart, with a needle,
charmed with the abovesaid Mantra, whereby bis death would
be the result. A philter composed of the ashes of a cremation
ground, powered Brahmadandi, Markati, and Kharavala,
Ch armed with the above Mantra, and strewn over the head, or
dcr the housetop of one’s enemy, would send him distracted
•lid mad (a— 4>.

The rite of Nyasa should be practised with the Vijas,
known as the Bhrigu, the ether, the fire, the Bhrigu, the
BfC, and the Varuna Vijas, in the following way “ Hrung,
>43


DfTRODTJCTIOK.


THE Parana which describes the occurrences of the
Isana Kalpa and was related by Agni to
Tfca subject matter. y a# jgtha, is called Agneya. It consists

of sixteen thousand stanzas distributed in three hundred
and eighty-three chapters. The Puranas have obtained the
name of Panchalakshana because their contents generally
embrace five topics namely (I) Primary creation, or cosmo-
gony, (2) secondary creation, (3) genealogy of gods and
patriarchs, (4) reigns of the Manus, (5) history ot the solar
and lunar dynasties. The definition does not however neces-
sarily signify that the Puranas exclusively deal with these
topics only. On the contrary, every Purana dwells at length
on one or more particular subjects and in some, these five
primary topics occupy a very subordinate position. Our re-
mark is particularly applicable to Agni Purana more than
three-fourths of which have no connection however with
the five principal topics. In the introduction Suta describes
the subjects of knowledge, and therefore, the subject matter
of this Purana, is two-fold— namely Pardvidya, sacred
knowledge or theology and A pari Vedya , profane know-
ledge or the arts and sciences known to the people. The
subject matter of the Agni Purana is thus described in the
Introduction

Agni said Vishnu is the fire of universal dissolution
and 1 am Rudra. I will communicate unto thee the essence of
learnings, the Purana, that is the cream of all sciences and
the cause of all ; (13) [Containing an account of] creation
and dissolution, of various families, periods of Manu and
geoealogies. The Lord Vishnu assumes the forms of fish,
tortoise &- There are two sciences, superior and inferior.
O twice-born one, the Vedas, Rik, Yayusb, Soman and
1


1 13! AGNI PUftANAM.

Fut to the Achakra revolving over the reigon of the Sahas-
rara, ( corpora quadrlgamina). Obeisance to the god Shiva
who is the regent of the psychic ganglion situated at the heart.
Obeisance to the Chakra revolving over the tuft of hair on
my crown. Obeisance to the Sanchakra which serves me as
a weapon.” The rite of Nyasa should be practised as before
in connection with the Jvala-Chakra. The weapons of the
god Vishnu, such as the bow, known as the Sharanga, and
the discus, Sudarshana, should be deemed as the neutralisers
of all fell charms and incantations. The votary should
imagine the component letters of the Chakra Vija, as
severally located in his head, eyes, face, heart, arms, and
the legs.

Then the rite of Murtinyasa, should be practised as
follows “ The god with a set of fierce and diabolical teeth,
should be contemplated as seated on the nave of the fiery
circle, and as wielding in his four arms, such flowers and
Weapons, as ,the conchshell, the discus, the mace, the lotus,
•the spear, and the bow. The eyes and the hairs of the god,
should be contemplated As of a da^k amber colour, and his
cushion should be imagined, as radiating coluiAns of fire
and energy along its spokes, which are dealing destruction
to all sorts of diseases and malignant planets. The discus,
should be contemplated as made of a yellow light, the mace
of a dark red, while the succeeding arms, should be alter-
nately contemplated as of a »ky blue tint (5 — 9)-

The exterior periphery h.f the discus, fhould he con tern*
plated as made of a consolidated dazzling white light,
gradually modified in a brown, and ultimately merging in a
dark black colour. The two inner peripheries should be
contemplated as burning with a sky blue lustre. Then
having brought a pitcherful of a water, and seen the might/
discus (Sudarshanami reflected therein with the aid of the
inner eye, the preceptor should offer libations to that celes-
tial weapon at the south.


[ K ]

Atharvan, the six auxitliaries of the Vedas, namely (Sikshl),
the science of proper articulation and prononnciation,
(Kalpa) ritual or ceremonial, (Vyakarsna) grammar,
(Nirukta) etymological explanation of difficult Vedic words
(Jyotish) astronomy, (Chhandas) science of prosody,
(AbhidhSna) lexicon, MimSnek, Dbarma Sastras, Pura*
nakas, Nyaya, medical science, musical science, the science
of archery and Political economy— these all are the inferior
sciences. The superior science is that by which Brahma is
comprehended (14 — 17). I will describe unto thee the great
Purana, Agni, containing the great and eternal science of
Brahma, that which is invisible, incomprehensible, stable and
eternal ; and is the cause of fish and other forms, recounted
unto me by Vishnu and unto the celestials in the days of yore
by Brahml (18—19).

In the general treatment of the subjects the author, how-
ever, does not stick to the five principal

Ths fenenl character. . _

topics which should constitute a Purana.

He even loses right of the twofold knowledge, divine and
secular set forth by him originally in the introduction. He
lias introduced a number of topics, useful to men, without
any system or method. His work is more like ao Encyclo-
paedia, containing a vanity of useful topics bearing on later

Sanskrit learning for Vedic rituals are seen no where in the

. .

book.

The contents of this Purana dearly show that H has no
sectarial leaning. It impartially treats of Vaishnava, $afva,
find Sakta forms of worship. It is more a compendium of
Sanskrit learning than the advocacy of any particular form
Of religion. It is classed among the Tamtsg or the delusive
division of the Puranas. Professor Wilson thus remarks on
the general character of this Parana.

“ From this general sketch of the Agni Purana it is evi-
dent that it is a compilation from various works; that conse-
quently it has ae claim i> itself to any great antiquity,


ACNl VUMANAM.


*»3ft

The libations should consist ot clarified butter made out
of cow's milk, and of sacrificial porridge containing the twigs
of an Apamarga plant, sun-dried rice, sesamum, and mustard,
and should be poured on the sacrificial fire to the number
of thousand and eight. The preceptor should then again
pour Into the pitcher the remnants of the offerings in due
order, and locate therein the energies of the gods, such as
Vishnu, etc. by an act of psychic attraction.

“Obeisance to the deities who attend upon the god
Vishnu, and who are the givers ojf all and universal peace.
Accept these nfferings. Obeisance to the goddess of peace."
The final ohlatipn should be consecrated with the abovesaid
Mantra, and cast with the remnant of the abovesaid water
of libation (io — 14).

The Homa ceremony, should be performed at the four
cardinal points of the mystic diagram with jets of Pancha-
gavya, poured on the fire with the branches of a Palasha
or a Kshira tree, previously kept immersed in pitchers con-
taining the same substance. The Brahmanas who would
officiate at the ceremony, should be rewarded with satis-
factory remunerations; and both these Homas should be
deemed as very effective neutralisers of spells and incanta-
tions, The Homa should be performed with the bunches,
of Durva grass, where the ceremony would be undertaken for
increasing the duration of one’s life. The oblations of lotus, ,
flowers, should be cast in the sacrificial fire, for the increase
of one's possessions, while the Homa should be performed
with the twigs of an Oudumvara tree for the birth of a son.
The libations should be poured on the fire in a cattle bouse,
where the general increase and multiplication of the horned
species would be desired, while in Homas performed for
the expansion of one’s intellect, the twigs of all sorts of
trees, should be used for casting the libations (15— * 7>-

“ Om, Kshoum, obeisance to the god Narasinha, burning

with his owa scotching effulgence, and whose eyes poor


[ Hi ]


although from the absence any exotic materials, it might be
pronounced earlier, with perhaps a few exceptions, than the
Mahomedan invasion. From the absence also of a contra*
versial or sectarial spirit, it is probably anterior to the
struggles that took place in 8th and 9th centuries of our era
between the followers of Siva and Vishnu. As a mere com-
pilation however, its date is of little importance, except as
furnishing a testimony to that of the materials of which it is
composed. Many of these may pretend no doubt to con-
siderable antiquity, particularly the legendary accounts of
the Avataras, the- section on regal policy and judicature and
genealogical chapters, how far the rest may be ancient is
perhaps questionable, for there can be little doubt that the
Purana, and comprehending such incongruous admixtures,
is not the entire work as it at first stood. It is not unlikely
that many chapters were arbitarily supplied about 8 or 9
centuries ago, and a few perhaps even later, to fill up the
chasms which time and accident had made in the original
Agneya Purana."

He again remarks in his introduction to the Vishnu
Purana

The cyclopaedical character of the Agni Purana, as it is
now described, excludes it from any legitimate claims to be
regarded as a Purana, and proves that its origin cannot be
very remote, It is subsequent to the Itihasas, to the chief
work on grammar, rhetoric, and medicine, and to the intro-
duction of the Tantrik worship of Devi. When this latter
took place, is yet far from determined ; but there is every
probability that it dates long after the beginning of our era.

The materials of the Agni Purana are, however, no doubt,
of some antiquity. The medicine of Susruta is considerably
older than the ninth century; and the grammar of Panini
probably precedes Christianity. The chapters on archery
and arms, and on regal administration, are also distinguished
by an entirely Hindu character, and must have been written


1140


AGNI PURANAM.


forth torrents of living fire, matched only by the gbfft ft
his burning diabolical teeth. Obeisance to the deauoyer
of all demons, to the slayer of all ghosts, to the destroyer
of all sorts of fever. Burn and burn, cook and cook, pre-
serve and preserve. Hrung-Fut.*’

The above Mantra, sacred to the god Narasinha, should
be deemed as the remover of all distempers. The above
Mantra, duly repeated, tends to set at naught all sorts
of spells and charms and the evil influences of malignant
planets, as well as the causes which give birth to epidemics
or pestilential diseases. By rubbing over the body the
marrow of a frog, consecrated with the above Mantra, one
is sure to walk unscathed through fire (18).


:o:-


CHAPTER CCCVII.


Said the God of Fire: — Now I shall narrate to you
the Mantra, or the means by which the three worlds can be
enchanted, and a due repetition of which leads to the attain-
ment of the fourfold bliss (Chaturvarga).

“Om, Hreem, Shreem, Hreem, Hrum. Om, obeisance.
O thou, who art the best of beings, the prototype of the
grandest subjectivity, and in whom the goddess of beauty
and plenty (Lakshmi) has her abode, O thou, who dost
agitate the whole universe and openest the hearts of all
maidens, and dost intoxicate the inmates of the three worlds
with the wine of love, dost thou heaten and heaten, agitate
and agitate, attract and attract, rend asunder and rend asun-
der the hearts of the gods, mortals, and the fair maids of the
universe. O kill and kill, stupefy and stupefy their senses,


t « ]

long anterior to the Mahomedan invasion. So far the Agni
Parana is valuable f as embodying and preserving relics of
antiquity! although compiled at a more recent date.

Professor Wilson gives the following summary of the
contents of this Purana which will give
our readers some idea of the numerous
subjects treated of in this work.

The early chapters of this Purana describe the Avataras 9
and in those of Rama and Krishna, avowedly follow the
Ramayana and Mahabharata. A considerable portion is
appropriated to instructions for the performance of religious
ceremonies; many of which belong to the Tantrik rituals
and are apparently transcribed from the principal authorities
of that system. Some belong to mystical forms of Saiva
worship, little known in Hindusthan, though perhaps, still
practised in the south. One of these is the Diksha or inita-
tion of a novice: by which with numerous ceremonies and
invocation, in which the mysterious monosyllables of Tantras
are constantly repeated, the disciple is transformed into a
living personation of Siva, and receives, in that capacity,
the homage of his Guru. Interspersed with these are chapters
descriptive of the earth and of the universe, which are
same as those of the Vishnu Purana ; and Mahatmyas or
legends of the holy places, particularly of Gaya. Chapters
on the duties of king9 and on the art of war then occur,
which have the appearance of being extracted from some
older work, as is, undobtedly, the chapter on judicature,
which follows them, and which is the same as he text of the
Mitaksbara. Subsequent to these we have an account of the
distribution and arrangement of the Vedas and Puranas and,
in a chapter on gifts, we have a description of the Puranas,
which is precisely the same and in the same situation, as the
similar subject in the Matsya Purana. The genealogical
chapters are meagre lists, differing, in a few respects, from
those commonly received, as hereafter noticed, but un-


ktm mjranam.


illumine Aeir hterts with the light of love and screw op their
desires to the highest / pitch. O thou the most bountiful
giver of all good fortunes, the granter of all boons, kilt and
kill such and such a person with thy°mace, sword and discus,
hit him with all thy arrows, whril and whril him round with
thy dreadful nooze, strike and strike with thy spear. Come,
O come, why dost thou tarry ? Dost thou bide the time,
till I attain my success with this incantation? Hrung, Fut,
Obeisance . 91

The rite of Nyasa in connexion with the Mantra, should
be practised as follows : — *‘Om, O thou the best of men,
the maddener of the three worlds. Hrung, Fut, Obesiance
to thee, located in my heart. Dost thou attract and attract,
O thou god of matchless prowess. Hrung, Fut and obesiance
to thee who art to me as a weapon. O thou lord of the three
worlds, strike and strike, cleave and cleave the mind of all,
and bring them under my absolute control, Hrung, Fut,
(obeisance) to thee who dost permeate my eyes. O thou
charmer of the three worlds, O thou Hrishikesha, O thou,
the matchles spirit, O thou who attractest the hearts of all
women. Come and come, O god, I make obeisance to
thee. The rites of Anganyasa, etc., should be practised
like the one described in connexion with the principal
Mantra ennumerated above 99 (i).

Then having repeated it a five hundred times, and prac-
tised, a thousand times, the rite of Abhisheka in connexion
therewith, the preceptor should prepare the sacrificial por-
ridge on the fire kindled in the sacred firepit, and pour on
it a hundred libations, consisting of clarified cow butter.
Libations consisting of curd, clarified butter, thickened milk,
sacrificial porridge and milk, should be separately poured
on* the sacred fire. Twelve libations should be cast into
the fire, by repeating the principal Mantra, and a thousand
tsnch, after that, containing sesamum and son-dried rice.
.Subsequent to that, oblations composed of barley, the three


C V ]


accompanied by any particulars such as those recorded or
invented in the Markandeya. The next subject is medicine,
compiled, avowedly, but injudiciously, from the Susruta. A
series of chapters on the mystic worship oi Siva and Devi
follows ; and the work winds up with a treatise on rhetoric,
prosody, and grammar according to the Sutras of Pingala
and Panini.

It is extremely difficult to find out exactly the period
^ when this cyclopaedic work was written.

It was undoubtedly written long before
the Mahomedan invasion. “The chapters, twelfth to fifteenth,
in which a synopsis of the Ramayana and Mahabliarata is
given, conclusively prove that the work was written long after
Ramayana and the Mahabharata and at a time when those
works had become very old and abstracts of them, were
likely to be prized by the general readers.' This is the view
of Dr. Rajendra Lala Mitra. Besides many mystic rites,
mantras and ceremonies, with which this Purana teems and
many of which are entirely obsolete now and thoroughly
inexplicable clearly prove its antiquity. The mantras are
generally of the Tantric type. It may be that this work
might have been written after Tantric form of worship had
been introduced in this country. The likely inference is that
this work was written after the Tantric period and as the
author wanted to make a compilation of the history, mytho-
logy, rites, ceremonials, &c., of the Hindus for the informa-
tion of the general readers be gave an account of many
obsolete rites and mantrams that were in vogue in very
ancient time.

The numberless obsolete rites, ceremonials and mantrams
described in tbis Parana, are of no in-

ImDortant topics

terest to a genera), reader. But the
chapters on medicine, materia medica and pharmacy as well
as those on the treatment of elephants and horse diseases
are highly interesting. Besides an exhaustive account of


AON! PUMNAff.


114 *

sweets, fruits and flowers, should be cast into tbe fire by
way of completing the ceremony (a-— 4).

The votary should take himself the residue of the sacri~
ficial porridge, poured on the fire in the course of the Homa.
The preceptor and the Brahmanas should be feasted and
made happy with remunerations, whereby the incantation
would take effect 1 hen having bathed and rinsed his mouth
in the orthodox fashion, the votary should observe a vow of
silence, enter.the chamber of sacrifice, sit with crossed legs in
the posture known as the Padmasanam, and then practise the
rite of Bhutashuddhi (purification of the material principles
of the body). The celestial discus, Sudarshanam, should be
contemplated as guarding the different quarters of the sky,
and, as such, barring the intrusions of the .interrupting ghosts
and malignant spirits on the sacred precincts of the chamber
of sacrifice. Then the rite of Nyasa should be practised as
follows : — The votary should contemplate the Vija-Mantra
Ram, which burns with a fierce dusky glare, as located in
the region of his umbilicus, by which his body would be
absolved of all sins and impieties. Similarly, the Vija-
Mantra Ram, should be imagined as located in the lotus of
the heart (solar pelxus), and as darting rays of fire in all di-
rections, and consuming the impious principles of the body.
The ambrosia shed down from the lotus of the brain, should
be contemplated as dropping down by the Way of the mystic
nerve Sushumna, and permeating the whole body.

Thus having purified the body, the votary should prac-
tise the rite of Pranyam described before, by thrice repeat-
ing the Mula-Mantra. Then having brought down the
psychic energy from the effulgent mystic ganglion of the
brain, and located it in the different parts of his body as the
arms, the neck, the heart, the sides, in short, all through Tiis
body, the votary should meditate upon the universal soul, by
repeating the Pranava-Mantra, as follows ; —

“ We know the charmer of the three worlds, let our mind


[ VI ]


Para-Vidya and the science of Brahma occurs in this
Purana. It is a very interesting account and will prove 9
without doubt, highly useful. to the readers. The chapters on
Law-Courts, Judicial Officers, evidences, inheritance, boun-
dary and other disputes, &c., may not be very useful to those
who are .familiar with the law literature of the Hindus codi-
fied by Manu, Mitakarshara &c., but they will afford a very
profitable and interesting study to the general readers who
have not the time and patience to go through those volumi-
nous treatises. The subject of training in the use of arms and
armour is treated in four chapters ; of these archery is pYin-
cipally dealt with. These chapters are highly interesting
and their abstracts will be found in Dr. Wilson’s “ essay on
the Art of War as known to the Hindus. 9 ’ Dr. Rajendra
Lala Mitra thus writes on the subject of Gaja Ayurveda
and the veterinary art treated of in this Purana.

“The subject is named Gaja Ayurveda and is explained
by one called P&lalcapya and the latter, instead of addressing
Susruta, makes Lomapada, king of Anga, the receiver of
his instructions. At the close of chapter 291 Agni dis-
tinctly says that the instructions regarding horses had been
imparted by Salihotra to Susruta and those regarding ele-
phants had been communicated by Palakapya to the king of
Anga; 'the obvious inference is that the two names indicate
not the same but two different persons.

In the next chapters Dhanwantari again takes up the
thread of the discourse and dwells at some length on the
value of the horse as a vehicle, and proper times and modes
of using the animal. He concludes by saying that he would
quote the words of S&lihotra on the good and bad points of
horses and on the veterinary art. Accordingly chapter 288th
is devoted to the quotation in question. S&libotra is said
to have beeo a Rishi of great renown who had acquired
the veterinary art from the celestial horse doctors the two
Aswins and had written the first book on |he subject for


AbNI Kjkanam. fMi

meditate On his divine self, may Vishnu lead our minds to
dwell on that” 5 — 1 1).

Then having finished the soul-worship, the votary should
sprinkle water on the vessels of -divine service, and the
articles to be used in its course. After that, the soul should
be drawn out by ah act of psychic abstraction* and he should
place and formally worship it on the sand-'cushion, spread out
on the ground, the Pitha or the cushion of the god, con-
sisting of the contrary principles of virtue and vice, etc.*
should be imagined as grown over by a gigantic lotus flower,
on which the god, manifest in the shape of a youth of beauti-
ful form, and glowing with the gladsome light of yduth and
beauty, with large red-striped eyes rolling with the intoxica-
tion of love and desire, and smiling with the smiling flowers
of the heaven that had been threaded into a garland that
dangles over his celestial garments, dipped in the yellow haze
of an autumn mdrnirtg, should be imagined as seated and
attended upon by his divine companions, 'f he god should be
imagined as effulgent like the combined lustre of a thousand
suns, extremely beautiful, compassionate towards all, wielding
the five specific darts of Cupid in bis two or four hands, and
surrounded on all sides by A bevy of celestial beauties, with
his eyes rivetted On the fair face of his beloved Lakshmi
(12 — 16).

The specific weapons of the god, such as the discus, the
donchshell, the bow, the sword, the spear, the Mushula, the
club, and the hoose, should be worshipped. The goddess
Lakshmi, should be imagined as seated on the left thigh of
the god, and entwining her hands round his neck, and hold-
ing a full-blown lotus-flower in her hand, and clinging close
to the bosom of her beloved husband with her full developed
breast, and bedecked ,with the diamond Kousthubha. The
ring like curls, known as the Shrivatsa, should be worshipped
conjointly with the god liari, clad in yellow garments, wc*i-


C vii ]


human use. His work has not yet been met with, but an
abridgment of it by Nakula, the fourth of the Pandu brothers,
is still cutrent and veterinary art is in India indicated by
the name of the Risbi. The vernacular form in northern India
and also in Bengal is Saluten and the practitioner of the art
Saluter . In the reign of Ghiasuddin Muhammad Shah Ghil-
zai, A. H. 783- A.B. 1381, a Sanskrit work, styled Salotar
appeared in a Persian dress under the name of Kurrat^ul-
mulk and extended to 41 pages. Even before that, an Aarabic
version had appeared under the name of Kitabul Baitarat,
and subsequently in the reign of Shah Jahan a Persian trans-
lation was prepared of a Sanskrit work named Salotorai
which extended to 16/XX) slokas. There is nothing however
to show, whether the original of any of these three versions
was the work of Salihotra or a later compilation on farriery.
Seeing that the word Saloteri is now become a common
noun for farriery, I am of opinion, that the Persian versions
were not taken from the original work of Salihotra, but from
a later compilation, and this is confirmed by the fact of the
originals of the three veisions having been of very unequal
lengths. It is doubtful if the verses quoted in the Agni
Purana retain the tfisissima verba of Salihotra or are para-
phrases. 19


ACNl PUKANAM.


**44

|ng a garland of wild flowers, and wielding in bis hands A
conchshell, a discus, etc.

“Oum, O thou Sudurshana, O thott king of all the Quoits,

0 thou who art the dread to the evil-doers, cleave and cleave,
cut and cut, rend asunder and rend asunder the mighty
incantations practised by others. Devour and devour them.
Eat and eat them up, curse and curse them. Hrung Fut,
obeisance to Jalach&ra. O thou, keen-edged SWord, cut and
cut. 1 make obeisance to the great sword. Hung-Fut
(obeisance) to the bow Sharanga, stretched with its arrow.
Hung-Fut

“ We contemplate the nature of the concourse of physi-
cal forces. We meditate on the principle of the fourfold
attributes. May the supreme Bramha lead our mind to
dwell on the same.’*

“ O Samvartaka, come neighing in thunder, reverse the
order of Nature, make her stand aghast, and recoil on
her visible material self, Hrung-Fut. I make obeisance to
thee. 0 thou Mace, bind and bind, attract and attract.

1 have subdued thee with the potency of the Hrung-Vija,
cut and cleave with the spear, as thou art under my control
by the agency of the same Mantra. The weapons imagined
as wielded by the god in his four arms, should be worshipped
with the abovesald Mantras, respectively held sacred to
them" (17—19).

“ Am, obeisance to the king of birds (Hrum-Fut.)"

The celestial bird, Tarksha who carries the god on his
shoulders, as well as the Anga Devatas, should be worshipped
with the abovesaid Mantra In the different petals of the
mystic, lotus. The goddesses of energy, such as Pita.
Lakshmi, Sarasvati, Rati, Prill, Jaya, Sita, Kirti, Kantl,
Shyama, Tusti, Pusti, Smarodita, as well as the Lokapalas
(the regents of the different worlds), should be wor-
shipped in the mystic diagram, specifically held sacred
to the god, in which the Tarksbas should be imagined as


MW *URA«UM»


IMS

Mowing tbownes unto that divinity. A worship of Vishnu,
made as above indicated, should be performed for the perfect
fruition of the charm. The Mantra, running as “ Om Shrirn,
fCrim, Hxeem, Hum obeisance to Vishnu, who is the charmer
of the three worlds," should be mentally repeated after the
worship j and the rites of subsequent Homa and Abhisheka,
should be performed with the same Mantra. A man, by
worshipping the god, as above indicated, becomes entitled
to all sorts of bliss. The goddess of charm should be
propitiated, every day, with libations of water and offerings
of flower, till the spell would take effect, and by repeating
the abovesaid Mantra. The abovesaid Vija-Mantra, should
be repeated three hundred thousand times, and a hundred
thousand libations of clarified butter containing the twigs
of a Vilva tree, should be poured on the fire by repeating
the same. Libations containing rice, fruits, perfumes, or
the blades of Durva grass poured on the fire, as iu the one
described in the preceding line, would increase the duration
of the life of the votary, as similar rites of Homas and
Abhishekas are always crowned with the fulfilment of one’s
desires.

“ Om obeisance to the boar manifestation of Vishnu, the
lord of the regions of Bhu, Bhuba Sva, etc. Grant me the
universal sovereignty as my heart desires. 1 make obeisance
to thee.” A man, by repeating ten thousand times, every
day, the abovesaid Mantra, is sure to be crowned as the king
of bis country (a© — afi).


CHAPTER CCCVIII.


3 aid ,ie God of Fire The Vija-Mantra, Shreem, in
£Kre4 to the goddess of fortune, and grants to its repeat
144


CONTENTS.


•:o:-


Chapter L— Customary Salutation. Conference between Suta and
Sanaka. Suta volunteers a narration of the Afenipuranam, as disclosed
to him by the holy Vyasa, who in his turn learned it from Vashista.
Enumeration' of the different branches of learning' dealt with in the
present Furanans ... ... ... ... ... 1—9

CaAFrut II.— The Fire-God narrates to the holy Vashistha, all
about the Fish-manifestation of the Supreme Vishnu ... 9 — 13

Chatter III. — The God of Fire describes the Tortoise incarnation
of Vishnu, and the incidents of his life on earth ... ... 13 — 20

Chapter IV. — The same continued ... ... ao— *5

Chapter V. — The Fire-God gives a summary of the Ramayanam.
The preparation of the sacrificial Payasha — The birth of Ram and
his four brothers— The sending out of Ram and Lakshmana by their
father to defend the sacrifice of the holy Vishvamitra against depre-
dations by Rakshases— Rama destroys the monstress Tadaka— •
Rama and Lakshmana accompany the holy sage Vishvamitra to the
bow-sacrifice of Janaka, the king of Mithila, — Rama breaks in twain
the redoubtable bow — Marriage of Rama and his brothers with the
princesses of that principality.— Their return* to Ayodhya with their
newly married brides ... ... ... ... 25 — 34

Chapter VI. — Narada takes up the thread of the narrative. — Pro-
posed installation of Rama on the throne of Ayodhya. — The necessary
preparation for the inaugaration ceremony — Conference between the
queen Kaikeyi and her hand-maid Manthara— The evil counsels of
the latter — Kaikeyi asks Dasaratha to proclaim her son Bharata as the
crown-prince of the realm — Dasaratha is forced to comply with her
request as bound by a previous oath— Rama, lakshmana and Site
are sent in exile— Dasaratha relates to Koushalya the incident of his
killing a Muni's son in the forest, and of his curse. — The death of Dasa-
ratha — Bharat returns to Ayodhya — His expostulations with Rama in
the forest to tesume his birth-right — Rama's refusal — Bharata's stay at
Nandigram as the proconsul of Rama ... ... ... 34—38

Chapter VII. — Narada proceeds with the story — Rama receives
celestial weapons from the holy sage Agastya — He leaves the hermit-
age of the latter, and repairs to the forest of Dandaka — The monstress
Surpanakha meets Rama in the forest and courts his love — Her desire
to devour Lakshmana and the beautiful Sita — Disfigurement of her
person by Lakshmana— Surpanakha sees her brother Khara in her
disgrace — Khara attacks Rama with his Rakshases, and is killed —
Surpanakha plans revenge with her brother Havana, who sends Maricha
to entice away Rama from the cottage, in the form of a golden deer—
Havana carries awaya Sita in his island home in the interim — The bird-
fcing-Jatayu fights Ravana on the way, and is killed — Rama kills
Kuvandlia, who freed of curse, advises him to make a common cause
witlrSufriva ... ... ... ... ... 38—41


1146 agni puranam; 4 *

all success in life. The Mantra runs as " I make obeisance
to the great goddess of beauty, the goddess of complete
victory and success, and to the deity who is effulgent
as the flash of lightning/ 1 The rite of Anganyas, which
consists of nine Mantras in the present case, should be
practised in its entirety, while any of the said Mantras should
be repeated.” The Mantra runs as : — “ Obeisance to the
goddess Shree, who is the goddess of victory. Bind and
bind down (my enemies), O thou possessed of mighty
prowess. I make obeisance to thee, Hrung. O thou pos-
sessed of an enormous body and who dost wield a lotus flower
in thy hand, Hrung-Fut, I make obeisance to thee. O
thou goddess of beauty and wealth, Fut (obeisance) to the
goddess Shree. Obeisance to Shree, and Fut to the principle
of splendour which she represents. Obeisance to Shree and
to the grantor of beauty, S*aha, Shree, Fut” (i).

The above Mantra should be counted a hundred thousand,
or three hundred thousand times on a rosary of Aksha
or lotus-seeds, whereby the repeater would grow richer every
day. The goddess Shree should be worshipped with the
abovesaid Mantra, either in a temple dedicated to Vishnu,
or in one consecrated with the presence of her own image,
by which the possessions of the worshipper would grow
more and more every day. A person, wishing to subjugate
the mind of the sovereign of his country, or an all-round im-
provement of his social status, should pour on the sacrificial
fire kindled with the twigs of a Catechu tree, a huudred
thousand libations of clarified butter containing grains of
sun- dried rice. The rite of Abhisheka performed with the
washings of Mustard seeds, and a repetition of the above-
said Mantra, would neutralise the baneful influences of
all malignant planets and harmful incantations. A hundred
thousand twigs of a Vilva tree soaked in clarified butter, and
poured on the sacred fire by repeating the same Mantra,
would give a better turn to one’s fortune (2-5).


u


CONTENTS.


Chapter VIII.— Rama's lamentation on the banks of the Pampa —
His meeting with Sugrivs — Rama pierces the seven Tala trees with a
single shaft, and kills Dundhuvi— Ratna kills Vali and confers his wife
Tara and the kingdom of Kiskin da on Sugriva— The latter sends out
soldiers in all directions in quest of Sita — The monkey soldiers return
and disclose to Rama and Sugriva all they have gathered from Jatayu,
about the whereabouts of the beautiful Sita ... ... 41—42

Chapter IX.— Hanumana leaps over to Lanka, and finds her out
in the forest of Ashoka— Conference between Hanumana and Sita, who
gives him a jewel as a memento— Hanumana sees Ravana and per-
petrates heavy damages to the city and her mango-groves— Hanumana
crosses over to India and communicates the news to Rama, with
Angada and others— Rama repairs. 10 the ocean-shore, gets a bridge
constructed with the advice of the Ocean-God, makes friend with Bibhi-
shana, and enters Lanka with his troops ... ... 42 — 47

Chapter X. — Rama sends Angada to Ravana demanding the sur*
render of Sita — Ravana declares war — The war described — Ravana,
in hi* disaster arouses his brother Kumbhukarna out of sleep — The fail
of the Rakshasa-generals in succession — Ravana meets Rama in a single
combat. The fall of Ravana and the meeting of Rama and Sita — The
installation of Bibhishana on the throne of Lanka — Rama's return
to Ayodhya. with Sita and Lakshmana in the aerial car, Pushpaka

47— 5®

Chapter XI. — Agastya sees Rama and narrates to him a history
of the birth of Ravana and his brothers. Lakshmana slays the monstar
Lavana — Bharata slays the Gandharbha Shailashu — The exile of Sita—
The birth of the two sons of Rama — His accession to heaven ... 50—51

Chapter XII. — The God of Fire describes the birth of Krishna in
the womb of Devaki, — Krishna exchanged with the daughter of
Yoshada for fear of Kansa — The prophecy relates to Kansa about the
growth of his future destroyer — Kansa sends Putana, a she-demon to
kill children all round— The childish freaks of Krishna and Valarama
in Gokul — Incidents illustrating the early prowess of Krishna — Krishna
destroys Putana, the serpent Kaliya, the demons Dhenuka, Gardhava,
etc. Krishna revives the Vedtc sacrifices— goes over to Mathura in
the company of Valarama -at the instance of the pious Akrura — Krishna
kills Kansa jn a single combat, deteats jarasandha, and annexes his
kingdom with the domain of. Vssudeva— Krishna founds the city of
Dwarika, and marries sixteen thousand wives— Krishna forcibly car*
ries away from heaven the mountain of gems, and the Parijata tree,
and plants them in thf garden of Satyabhama. — Receives lessons from
the holy sage Sandipani, and brings back to life the eon cf the latter —
List of sons begot ten by Krishna and Valadeva— The marriage of Usha
and Aniruddha— The battle between Hari and Shiva— Balabhadra
draws to him the river Yamuna by force— The happy life of Krishna
and Rukmini — Innumerable progeny of Krishna ... ... 52—57

Chapter XIII.— The God of Fire gives a geneology of the sover* *
eigne of the race of the Moon— The birth of the Kurus and Pandavae
—The early and wicked stratagems of Duryodhana — The marriage
of Draupadi— Arjuna receives a car and celestial weapons from the
Firs- God— The burning down of the forest of Khandava— The conquest
•f new kingdoms by ths Pandavas — Yudhisthira performs a Rajasuya
sacrifice— The jealousy of Durjddhan*«»The playing of a game of


nmiutAiii


Then the Votary should imagine that an ppen halt of
Rectangular structure) had been erected in the region Of his
heart) with a door or an opening on each of its four sidesi The
goddesses of energy, such as Valaka, Vamana, and Shyama*
etc., should be imagined as guarding the eastern entrance of
the hall, and dancing with uplifted hands, car rying in tfiem
the festoons of white lotus flowers. The goddess Vanamalini
should be imagined as possessed of a snow-white complexion
and as carrying red lotus flowers in her hands, and dancing
in same posture at the door at the south. The goddess
Vibhishika, should be contemplated as possessed of a green
complexion and carrying white lotus flowers in her hands,
and dancing in the same posture at the door at the west.
Lastly the goddess Shankari, should be contemplated as
guarding the door at the north, in the manner similar to
what has been described in the case of her sister goddesses*
A mystic lotus of eight petals, should be imagined as to
have sprung from the centre of that hall, and the different
manifestations of Vishnu, such as Vasudeva, Sankarshana,
Pradyumna, and Aniruddha, should be contemplated as
wielding the conch shell, the discus, the mace and the lotus-
flowers in their hands, and as seated on the four petals of the
lotus respectively pointing towards the four cardinal points
of the sky. The celestial elephants, who guard the eight
apertures of the heaven, such as Anjana, Kashmira, Surasa,
Kshira, and Kuruntaka etc., s hould be contemplated as carry-
ing golden pitchers with their trunks, and blocking the regions
of heaven with their massive silver frames ( 6 — 11)

The goddess Shree, should be contemplated as seated oiv
the bed of polens of the lotus, and as possessed of a golden
complexion and four arms, the two right and the two lef^
being imagined as bent in the attitude of encouragement
and benediction. The goddess, should be further contem- r
plated, as clad in a while garment of an extremely, white ttxm
tare, and scented with lotus flowers.


CONTENTS.


iii


dice— Yudhisth ira stakes every thing in the play, and loses all, and
goes in exile— Yudhisthira with his brother and wile, lives incognito
in the house of Virata — Bhima kills Kichaka for insulting the modesty
of Droupadi, — Arjuna defeats the Kurus attempting to lift the cattle
of Virat — Abhimanyu, a son of Arjuna, marries Uttara, the danghter
of Virat. — Yudhisthira levies soldiers— The embassy of Krishna—
Krishna counsels war ... ... ... 57—60

Chaptbr XI V.— The armies of the Kurus and the Pandu* meet in
the memorable field of Kurukshetra. — Krishna exhorts Arjuna to do his
duty by fighting out his consanguinous enemies. — The battle ensues with
varied. results to both the parties — The fall of Duryodhana — The assasi-
nation of the five sons of Droupadi by Ashvathainan — Arjuna's retalia-
tion— .Cessation of hostilities — The survivors retire from the field of
s t r i( e — Yudhisthira performs obsequies to his deceased agnates; and
receives advice from Bhisiima as to the duties of a king, and those
leading to Salvation— Yudhisthira confers his crown on the infant
Parikshit ... ... ... 61 — 63

Chapter XV. — The story continued— Dhritarastra takes to the
life of a hermit — Death of Vidura. — The annihilation of all the Kurus
and the Jadavas, the monsters incarnate — Death of Krishna and
Valadeva — Cowherds carry away the wives of Krishna— Arjuna
breaks the news of Krishna's death to Yudhisthira — Yudhisthira is
translated to heaven in the car of Indra ... ... 64—69

Chapter XVI. — The God of Fire describes the incidents in the
life of the Buddha incarnation of Vishnu — Buddha, an incarnation of
illusion and nescience — The mission of his life was to wean the hearts
of demons, incarnate as men, from the true faith as revealed in the
Vedas — All distinction of caste will cease in the end of Kali Yoga —
Kalki, the last incarnation of Vishnu — The merit of perusing the life
histories of the divine incarnations ... ... ... 70—75

Chapter XVII. — The God of Fire describes the creation of the
universe— Brahma is unmanifest and self-existent — Creation of the
subtler principles of Maliat, Ahankara, ether, Mind, etc., — Water is the
first material element created, in which the Egg of Brahma was afloat —
Creation of cheated time, speech, and mental propulsions with their
counterparts — Creation of the physical forces, Saddhyas, Devas, and
of the seven immortal sages — The splitting of the body of Brahma
(animated cosmic matter) into two— Origin of sex ... ... 75 — 81

Chapter XVIII. — The God of Fire describes the ancestry and
birth of Dhruva — Dhruva, metamorphosed into a star— The sons and
progeny of Dhruva — Birth of Prithu, the founder of the race of
Kshatriyas — M itching of the Earth by Prithu — The sons and progeny
of Prithu— The birth of Daksha, the mind-born— Daksha’s daughter
married to Dbarma— The progeny of Dharma — The birth of stars—
The eight Vasus and their progeny— The birth of the Kudras-Maha-
deva begets sons on Sati ... ... ... ... 81—86

Chapter XIX.— The sons of Kashyapa— The birth of the twelve
Adttyas— The sons of Kashyapa by his wife Dili— Hiranyakashipe
Pralhada, Virochana, Vali— The sons of Hiranyaksha— The birth 0/
serpents— The Maruts— Appointment of different gods to preside over
different thiugs and beings ... ... ... ...86—89


ACM ro*Afl*tf,


114*

The man, Who Worships the goddess and her totttpnm&d
divinities, becomes possessed of alt good things in this life.
The votary should never put on his head, such flowers, etc.,
as the lotus, the Drona, and the leaves of a Vilva tree.
Further he should recite the vedic vefses known as the
Shri»shuktas from the eighth or the twelfth day of a lunae
month, taking nothing but the sacred Payasha during the r
entire period of recitation. The god, should be worshipped
With the rites of invocation and farewell, and libations
consisting of the twigs of a Vilva tree and lotus flowers, and
Payasha, should be separately poured on the fire in honour
of the goddess (ta-^16).

The Mantra known as the t)urga-Hridaya, runs as
follows “ Om, If reem, to thee, O goddess, who hast slain
the great buffalo-demon in a single combat, Tha, Tha, to
thee, who art his sworn enemy. O thou, the enemy of the
buffalo-demon, disperse and disperse. (Hung-Fut Tha, Tha,) 1
the buffalo-demon, over-power and overwhelm him with ruin.
Hung, kill and kill the buffalo, Hung, O thou goddess who hast
slain the buffalo, Fut ” The goddess should be worshipped
by repeating the abovesald Mantras, as well as those which
are known as the San gas, after having performed the rite
of cushion worship. Om Hreem, obeisance to thee, O
Durga, who art the protectress of the three worlds.
Obeisance to Durga. Then the rites of worship should be
performed on the different petals of the mystic diagram as
follows .-—Obeisance to Varavarni, obeisance to Arya.
Obeisance to Kanakaprabha, obeisance to Krittika, obeisance
to Abhayaprada. " Obeisance to Kanyaka, and obeisance ta
Krittika. Obeisance to the goddess who removes all causes
of fear, obeisance to Kanyaka, and obeisance to Sarupa. ,r
These divinities should be worshipped on the petals of the
mystic lotus, and by repeating the Vijas, wltich are respec-
tively held sacred to them. The weapons of the goddess,
should be worshipped, as obeisance to the discus, obeisance


CONTENTS.


IV

Chapter XX. — The successive orders of creel ion, such as those of
Mahat, Tanmatra, etc., — The creation of the sensibleo end the senses —
The Nitya, Naimittika, end Dainendine Creations — The sons of Bhrigu
— The progeny of hell and vice — The marriage of Sett in her second
incarnation ... ... ... ... ... 89—91

Chapter XXI. — The procedure of Vishnu-worship ••0 91-94

Chapter XXtI. — The rite of ceremonial ablution to bo performed
before undertaking any sort of religious rite ... ... 94 -95

Chapter XXII I. — Narada describes the mode of worshipping the
god Vislmu— The rite of purification of the material principles of the
body of the votary, is described— The postures to be assumed in the
course of the worship — The Mantras and the articles, of worship— The
worship of the weapons and ornaments of the god —The rites of invo-
cation and farewell — The peculiarities of the worship known as the
Nava-Vyuha Arch an am ... ... ... ... 96—98

Chapter XXIV. — The rite of fire— Dimensions and structure of
the firepit— The sacrificial spoon and laddie — Their dimensions— The
adjustment of the vessels and utensils around the sacred fire-pit — Their
purification — The rite of Garbadhanam to be done unto the infant (newly
kindled) Fire-god— The subsequent post-natal rites to the same — Pour*
ing of libations of clarified butter on the fire — The sacrifice of the
sacrificial animal — The rite of the worship of Vishvaksena ... 99—103

Chapter XXV.— Narada enumerates the Mantras, respectively
held sacred to the different manifestations of Vasudeva, such as San*
karshana etc., — The rites of Nyasa in connection with each of the Man*
tras— The sacrifice of Vishvaksena ... ... ... 103 — 107

Chapter XXVI. — The Mudras (the postures of the hands and
fineers) enjoined to be used in the course of a worship — Their structures
and merit ... ... ... ... ... 107—108

Chapter XXVII.— The rite of initiation.— The preparation and
purification of the sacrificial ground — The special procedure of the
worship described— The prayer for the release, and spiritualization of
the animal propensities of his desciples — Th«* transference of pure
spiritual principles into the body of his disciple, by the preceptor — The
rite of Adhivasa— Th* mode of completing the ceremony— The
Mantras to be used on the occasion — The mode of completing the
rite of initiation— The process of pouring out the final libation — The
mode of holding in perpetual check l He animal propensities of the
disciple — The rite of SaKala Dikslia ... ... 108—116

Chapter XXVI 11 . — The rite of Abhisheka, preparatory to the
attainment of Siddhis— The merit of erecting Pitakas ... 1 16

Chapter XXIX. — The practice 01 Mantra in a temple, subsequent
to a worship of the God Hari— Delineation of the mystic diagram
on the ground— Adjustment of the different Vijas in the chambers
of the diagram— The worship of Para-Bramha (the Supreme Being)
and of the Boar manifestation of Vasudeva, in the first lotus— Division
of the altar into a number of chambers ... ... 117— no

Chapter XXX.— The mode of worshipping the different deities
and spiritual beings in the differerent parts of the tnystic diagram— The
worship of Vasudeva and the presiding deities of the ten organs of
sense^The worship of the twenty-six forms of Purushottama in the


ACM PURAftAMe


it49

to the condi-shell, obeisance to the mace, obeisance ter
the sword! obeisance to the bow, and obeisance to the
arrow. The goddess Durga, who is the greatest of all peace*
making divinities, should be worshipped on the eighth da^
of the increase of the moon's phase. A worship of the
goddess Durga, leads to victory, and increases the duration
of the life of the worshipper, and makes him a favourite
With his master (17—19).

A rite of Homa performed with the 9 usaddbya-Mantra
sacred to the god Ishana, and with libations of clarified
butter containing sesamum, should be deemed as the best
of charms. Similarly, the rites of Homa performed in con-
nection with the abovesaid worship, and with oblations of
lotus-flowers poured on the fire, are sure to lettd the per-
former to victory and fame, while those performed with
the oblations of Palasha twigs, or the bunches of Durva
grass, should be deemed as the peace-givers, and the fulfillers
of all desires. The Homa in connection with the above
Worship, and in course of which oblations of crow’s wing*
are poured on the fire, is sure to bring death and confusion
to the person against whom it should be practised. A repe-
tion of the Mantra, running as,— “ Om obeisance (Sv^ha) tor
the goddess Durga, to the goddess Durga who is the pro-
tectress of all creatures/’ should be deemed as a safeguard
against all sorts of incantations and the evil effects of malig-
nant planets. The goddess, should be contemplated as
possessed of a bluish complexion and four arms, respec-
tively wielding in them a conch-shell, a discus, a lotus, a
spear, a sword, and a trident, and looking fierce and dread-
ful in a fit of bursting rage. The above manifestation of
the goddess, should be worshipped before commencing a
battle, together with her swords and other engines of
warfare, by which the votary is sure to be crowned with
Victory (20—23).

“ Qm Obeisance to the goddess Jvala-Malini (glowing with


CONTENTS.


V


plant of the mystic diagram— Tho rite of Rajapata— Colouring
of the petals and causeways of the mystic lotus-shaped diagram.—
The Mantras of purification, etc., and the number of times they are
to be repeated on the occasion— The rite of Purvasiva— The rite of
Mantra- Puraschara and the monthly Vratas— The rite of Dhyanam
(meditation)— The forms of the God Hari, the gross, the Param (subtle)
and the Virat (universal)— The Vija sacred to the god, supposed to be
implanted in the heart in the form of a Kadamva tree — Dhyanam
means an unison of the thinking soul with the absolute spirit (Hari).-
Attainment of Stddhis, such as.Anima, etc . ... ... tao-123

Chapter .XXXI.— The rite of Marjana (purification),— its pro-
cess— The Mantras and the prayer to be practised and recited in
connection with the rite ... ... ... ... 123—126

Chapter XXXII.— The forty-eight Sanaskaras, such as 'Garbha-
danam, etc., the seven Vratas, the eight Parvana-Shraddhas, the seven
Hari-yajanas — the seven Somasanstna, such as Agnisthome, Hira-
nyamitra, etc., — The practice of eight cardinal virtues,— Number of times
the principal Mantras, such as the Soura, etc., to be repeated... 127—128

Chapter XXXIII. — The right of Pavitrarohana (investing the image
of the God Hari with the holy thread) — Its season and the characteristic
features of the holy thread— The prayer to be repeated on the occasion.
The Gayatri sacred to the god — The mode of offering the articles of
worship to the deity, and the Mantras specifically enjoined to be re-
peated on the occasion of restraining, by the votary, each of his twenty-
five- subtle principles of taste, sound, etc. — The rite of subsequent
Nyasa, and the purification of the body,— Prayer, the worship and the
Angapuja, the final investure, the rite of Homa, and the completion of
the ceremony ... ... ... ... ... 128—139

Chapter XXXlV. — Decoration and purification of the sacri-
ficial Mandala — The rite of Dvara Yaina (sacrificial rites performed
at the doors of the Mandala) — Planting of different trees at the
different gates — The rites of Nyasa, purification, and protection against
evil spirits, and the worship of the guardian deities of the skies,* —the
adjustment of sacrificial pitchers, the worship of Hari, and the rite of
final Homa ... ... ... ... * 33 — *37

Chapter XXXV.— The rite of the Pavitradhivasanam— Consecra-
tion of the sacrificial pitchers, and the articles of worship, placed on
the different sides of the votary, through the energy of the different
manifestations of Viihnu— The worship of Vishnu, the concluding
pwyer ... ... ... ... ... 137—139

Chapter XXXVI.— The rite of Pavitrarohanam, sacred to Vishnu.
Collection of the offerings by the votary made by him on the previous
diynThe preliminary rites— The Namittika worship— Consecration
of the pitchers and the Vardhini— The rite of self -protection— The
offerings made to the minor gods— The final libations— The Prayer,
the Vishrjanam, and payment of Dakshina to the Preceptor ... 139— 141

Chapter XXXVII.— A summary of the procedure to be adopted
In all rite, of Pavitrarohanam— The rite ol purifying the article* of
worship — The Invocation*- The rite of formal invest ure — The tame
done onto the minor deities ... ... 141—14,

Caama XXXVIII.— The mer it af building and cenaccrating
temples to -the gads— Yema eulogises the merit of such oidnrjMit


AGNI PURANASf.


its*

the tongues of living fire) who is surrounded by a patft
jackals and vultures, etc. Obeisance and obeisance (Tha, Thai!
to the protectress.” The above Mantra, should be repeated
before marching out in a 'battle, by which the votary Would
return victorious and laden with glory (24)*


-‘(V.


CHAPTER CCC 1 X.


Said THE God of Fire Now I shall describe thd
mode of worshipping the goddess Tvarita, who grants to hef
votary, the enjoyment of earthly comforts and salvation after
death.

« Om obeisance to the divine energy which pervades all
receptacles (Adhara-Shakti). Om Hrum, Pum, Pum, obei*
sance to the great lion. Om, obeisance to the lotus flowers.
Om, Hreem, Hrum, Khecha, Cheksha, Hrum, Kshaim Hrum
Fut, obeisance to the goddess Tvarita, Khecha, obeisance to
the heart. Chechha, obeisance to the head, Cheksha, obeisance
to the tuft of hair on the crown, Kshapustri, obeisance to the
energy of the Mantra that protects me as an armour. Hrum,
Hrum, obeisance to the eyes. Hrum, Kshaim obeisance to
the Astra (weapon!.

The Gayatri Mantra which is specifically sacred to tht
goddess runs as follows : —

“,Om, we know the Tvarita Vidya, let us meditate on the
Turna Vidya. May the goddess lead our mind to dwell on
the same.” Obeisance to Shripranita, obeisance to Hrungkara,
Om, Khi Cha, obeisance to the heart. Obeisance to the
goddess Khechari. Om, obeisance to Chanda, obeisance to
Chhedini, obeisance to Kshepani, obeisance to Strt and


VI


CONTENTS-


and exhorts men to faithfully carry out hit injunctions. The merit
of building golden templet ... ... ... 142—146

Chapter XXXI X. — Consecration of divine images — The Pun*
charatra school of philosophy — Qualifications of a priest officiating
at such a consecration ceremony — The position of the divine images
at the time— Location of temples, dedicated to the different gods
in the different quarters of the town— -The rules to be observed in build-
ing temples on grounds contiguous to each other— -The rite of Bhupari-
graha (taking possession of a plot for the purposes of a divine edifice)—
Purification of the site selected, and the rite of the Bhutavali — The
standard of linear measurement ... ... ... 146—149

Chapter XL.— -The procedure to be adopted in making Argha
offerings to the God — The history of Vastu Purusha— * The construction
of the mystic diagram (Mandala)— The process of worshipping the
gods and the principles within its chambers — Description of offerings
to be made to each of them— The location of Vardhini at the centre of
the diagram — The offering of the final Argha — The excavation of the
foundation of the would-be constructed temples — The rite of removing
the Shalyo (charmed bone or metal) from underneath its site... 150— I5r

Chapter XLI. — Rules to be observed in laying down the founda-
tion of a divine edifice — Religious ceremonies Attending on the act.
are described — The dimensions of the bricks or stone slabs to be uaed in
the construction— Hymns to the bricks — Hymn to the Earth Goddess-
Excavations and their measurements — The accompanying rite of Vastu-
yaga — The merit of building a temple — Doors and windows of temples
are to open on different quarters of the sky according to their
varied sites • • . oi • ••• • • • ... 152—156

Chapter XLI I. —The structure of a divine temple or edifice. The
plan of the ground-floor. the dimensions of the plinth, wall and the
cornices— The rules to oe observed in constructing entrance halls
(Mukha Mandapas) and posterior chambers (Paschat Mandapas.)—
Dimensions of a temple, built according to the size of an idol to be
installed therein— The construction of the vault, dome, top platforms,
and the ornamental appendages of a temple— Construction of Gopuras
—Proportionate measures of an idol and its pedestal— The Garuda
Mandap with its eight pinnacles ... ... ... 157— 159

Chapter XLI II. — The rite of intfallifif an idol in a temple— Des-
cription of templas of different structures in which the images of
different deities are to be installed — Construction of a stone- image of
Vishnu — The rite of Sinho-Homa— The eict of a stone-slab — Religious
ceremonies to be performed in the wood before sculpturing the imago.

159—162

Chapter XLI V. — The essential points in uwimage of the god Vasu-
dbva or of any other deity — Rules to be o b s e rve d in sculpturing sueb^sn .
image. The measures of its different limbs and parts ... 160—167

Chapter XL V.— The essential points of n divine pedestal (Piitdiba)
and its dimensions ... ... ... 167—168

Chaptsr.XLVI.— T he characteristic treks ef the diffseent classes
ef Sbalagraeaa stone ... ... ... ... 169—170

Ci»wn XL VII. —The prscs os «f worship ping * S h ria gra mn.

Ill— 173


AGNt PURANA&f.


Ilji

ftrungkari, obeisance to the goddess of compassion, obei-
sance to the goddess of success, obeisance to the goddess
of victory, obeisance to Kinkara. Protect and protect me.
Om, stay here and be steadfast as commanded by the god-
dess Tvarita. Obeisance. The goddesses who preside over
the present form of incantation, are known as Totala, Tvarita,
Turna, etc., (i).

Then the votary should contemplate the component letters
of the Mantra, as located in the regions of his head, eye-
brows, neck, heart, navel, arms, thighs, knee-joints, and
egs by an act of Nyasa.

The goddess should be contemplated as possessed of
a golden complexion, and dressed as a huntress of the
mountainous regions. She should be contemplated as clad
in a garment of leaves tied round her waist, with a
crown of peacok’s feathers set on her graceful head.
She should be further contemplated as seated on a
throne, shaded over by an umbrella of peacock’s plumes,
and wearing a garland of wild flowers. The bracelets
and anklets of the goddess, should be imagined as made
of snakes. Having thus contemplated the presence of the
goddess, the votary should repeat, a million times, the Mantra
held sacred to her. The god Isha became a hunter in an-
cient time, and so his goddess used to' dress herself in the
guise of a huntress. The man who worships, or meditates
upon the divine huntress, or repeats the Mantra specifi-
cally held sacred to her, is sure to be successful in all his
undertakings. Such a worship is calculated as an active
counteracting agent in all cases of poisoning or snakebite,
etc., (2— .7).

A lotus shaped diagram, containing eight petals, should be
inscribed in a square delineated on the ground, each side of
which would contain a door or an aperture. The Vija, Hrung,
should be written on each of the eight petals, while the

Vija, Hring, should be written on the centre. Then the rite


CONTENTS.


Clirm XLVIIL— Hymn to the twonty»foor muiifesutlont rf M
God Vishnu ... ... ... ... 173 -MjP

Chapter XL 1 X. — The ten incarnations of Vishnu, the chav**,
teristic features of their images eoe i<« ••• 17 ^— *f«

Chapter L. — Dimensions of the images of goddesses — their 4000 -
rations, weapons and accompaniments ... ... 181—1*7

Chapter LI.— Ah image of the sen -god, with those of his com-
panion denies— The different epithets of the luminary as he progresses
from one to the other sign of the Zodiac — Tha colours of t!«e goddesHfi *
who represent the energy of the sun— The images of the regents of the
planets, and their characteristic features and equipments— The gods djf .
wind, fire and other elements, and the animals they ride upon— Des-
cription of Kshetrapalas and other minor gods ... 187—189

Chatter LI I. — The Yoginis and the characteristic features of thtjut
images — The names of the Yoginis who preside over the different
quarters of the heaven — An image af Krittivasa and its distinctive
traits. Images of the Matrikas ... ... ... 189—191

Chapter LIU. — The essential points of a phallic emblem— Mode of
sculpturing a phallic emblem— Its dimensions — The different classes
of the emblem and their measures. Tbs dimensions of the Pee tha and
its peculiarities ... ... ... ... 191 — 193

Chapter LIV. — The merit of worshipping phallic emblems made of
different substances— The different classes of phallic emblems, and their
dimensions described in detail, — phallic emblems made of precious
stones, their dimensions, and the mode of chiselling them ... 194 — 195

Chapter LV. — Pedestals of images — Their dimensions— Mode of
carving water passages into the pedestal — The region of halo and Me
characteristics — The measures laid down in connection with ilia images
of Vishnu and Laltshmi, are to hold good ia tha com of all other godfc
and goddesaea ••• ••• ... 1*8—1 97

Chapter LVI. — Tha rite of Dikpafa Yoga— Tha five division* u(
the ceremony — The mythical significance of putting an image on its
p ed e s ta l — The decoration of the doors of the sacrificial shed with the
twigs of trees, and the. disposition of priests at each of them — The
Mantras and rites of the sacrifice— The invocations and obeisances*

mm

Chapter LV1I.— Thi rde af taking possession of the saerjAshd
ground (Bhu-parigrohs)»f<!lls Mantras and rituals Ceueecration of
sacrificial pitchers ... ... ... 300— tog

Chapter LVI 1 1.—' Tha rile of eonsecratory ablution — The triumphal
lauding of the idol from the sculpture's shed to the recrificsal chambers.
— The installation of the image in the Mandape accompanied by rtaeii
tmu of the proper Mantras— Rituals in connection with the divine
t e dettu— The ceremonial ablution of the image— Its consecrati on » offer*
trigs of fruits* Hewers* perfumes and wearing apparels, etc.* to the
installed and i mag e d divinity. Exhibition of the divine insignia,
inch as umheoOa, etc** by the friett— The repots of the gad in bed.

* 03 — *07

Chasm* LIX.— The rite of Aahivasanam fact of sitting does)—
Tha rato of merging .by art act of nifiual abstr act io n , dm fundamental
principles of the universe one into the ether* The origin of the soul and
universe described— The origin of iho senses, and aa saumcraiiea of


ACM PURANAM.


««s*

of Sadanga worship, should be performed on the petals,
commencing from the one at the east, and by repeating the
Mantras, such a6 obeisance to the Gayatri and the heart, and
*o on. The goddess Fatkari, wielding a bow and an arrow
in her hands, should be worshipped outside the gate of the
Yantra, the goddesses Jaya and Vijaya, should be worshipped
at the gates, while the Kinkaras, each wielding a club, etc.,
should be worshipped outside the border line of the mystic
diagram.

Libations should be poured on the fire kindled in a fire-pit,
shaped like the female organ of generation. Oblations of
Arjuna twigs, should be cast into the fire, where the rite would
be undertaken for the gain of gold, while the rite of Homa
should be performed with oblations of wheat, or rice, where
a general bettering of one’s health and complexion, would
be desired. Oblations composed of barley, rice and sesamum,
and poured on the fire, as above indicated, should be deemed
as the grantors of all success. Oblations consisting of Aksha
seeds, or libations of blue vitrol, would bring about the
destruction of one’s enemy. Similarly the twigs of a Shal-
mall tree, used as oblations in a Homa of the above sort,
would cut the thread of life of one’s adversary. Oblations
of Jamvu fruit6 would be crowned by the attainment of
wealth and rice, wbile oblations of blue lotus flowers would
establish a perpetual peace in one’s household. Oblations of
red lotus flowers, would be rewarded with a general ameliora-
tion of one’s health and fortune. Oblations of ^ Kunda
flowers would be rewarded with the elevation of one’s status
in life (8— 13).

Similarly, oblations of Jessamine flowers should be deem-
rid as powerful agents in creating unrest and discord in a
household, while oblations of Kumuda flowers, would win for
one the affections of his community. Oblations of Aslioka
flowers would be rewarded with the birth of a son, while
'oblations of Patala flowers, would win for the votary the


AGN1 PURANAM.


1*33

hands o( a fair maiden. Oblations of mango fruits, would
increase the duration of the life of the votary. Oblations of
sesatnum seeds, would give a better turn to one's fortune,
while oblations of Bael and Champaka, would be followed
by a blessing of increased wealth aftd beauty. Oblations of
Madhuka flowers, would be rewarded with the realisation of
one's desires, while by oblations of Bael fruRs the votary
would become an omniscient being. By repeating three hun-
dred thousand times the abovesaid Mantra, or by pouring
three hundred thousand libations on the fire with same
Mantra, or by simply meditating on its symbolised prin-
ciple, a man may attain to all his objects. The worship,
should be conducted on the Mandala, and twenty-five
libations should be poured on the fire, by repeating
the Gayatri, by way of completing the ceremony. Three
hundred libations of clarified butter, should be poured
on the fire, by repeating the principal Mantra. The rite
of initiation should be couducted with the Pallava Mantras.
The votary should take Panchagavya before the worship,
and live on the sacrificial porridge during the day of
ceremony (14 — 17).


CHAPTER CCCX.


Said the God of Fire:— Now I shall narrate to
you the process of worshipping the goddess Tvarita, by
which a man is enabled to enjoy all the comforts which
this life may possibly offer to an individual, and to attain
to salvation after death. The image of the goddess,
should be delineated with the specific dusts on the
ground, inside a mystic diagram of the Vajra class. The
diagram, should be embellished with corridors, and gates
*45


*'54


AGNI PURANAM


The goddess, hould be contemplated as possessed of
eighteen hands, with her left knee-joint bent double and
placed on the back of a lion, while the right one should
be imagined as placed on the divine cushion. The
goddess, should be further contemplated as embellished with
the ornaments of’ snake. The nine right hands of the
goddess, should be imagined as respectively armed with
a thunderbolt, with a hollow vessel (Kunda), with a sword,
with a discus, with a club, with a trident, with an arrow,
and with a spear, the last being imagined as bent in the
attitude of benediction. The nine left hands of the
goddess, should be contemplated as armed with a bow,
with a noose, with an arrow, with a bell, with a conch-
shell, with a spear, and with a thunder-bolt, respectively ;
the index finger of the fifth ban,- being Imagined as held
straight and pointed ; and the eighth hand being contem-
plated as bent in the attitude of benediction (1—5)

Having worshipped the goddess, manifest in the shape
as described above, a man should be able to kill his ene-
mies and to win a kingdom at ease. Such a worship, in-
variably grants longevity to the worshipper, who becomes
possessed of supernatural powers, and performs miracles in
testimony of his superhuman attainments. Such a man is
invincible in the seven nether regions, such as the Tala,
etc., and reigns supreme and is almighty in the world like the
fire, that would consume the universe on the day of the
millenium (6 — 7).

Now I shall describe the mode of stringing together the
Mantras that are held sacred to the goddess, and which con-
sists in a process of elimination and coupling. First the
vowel letters of the alphabet should be written on the ground,
and then the palatal consonants such as the Ka Vargas.
The third letter in the order of arrangement, should be
those which belong to the group known as the labio-
palatal. The fourth letter should be a dento-palatal on*


X


CONTENTS.


% away of evil spirits inhabiting the uppermost, layer of the earth’s
crust — The mode in which the votary would have his ablution prr-
limjnary to the worship — The rites of Snmidhi-K.Af auam (inviv* ^tinu).
Nyas* and Pranayama (controlling of respiration) 2fin — 272

Chapter LXXV. —The rife of kindling the sacrificial fire (Vanhi-
Sthapsnam) at the close of the preceding worship ... 273 — 2S0

Chapter LXXVI. — The method of worshipping the image of
Shiva ... ... ... ... ... ... 281

Chapter LXXVI I. — The process of worshipping the cow

Kapil* ... ... ... ... ... ( ... 284

Chapters I. XX VI II to LXXX. — The process of investing a divine
image with the holy thread ... ... ••• ... 286

Chapter I. XXXI. — The rite of spiritual initiation ... 302

Chapter LXXXII.— ' Sankskaradiksha or the rite of purifying
initiation ... ... ... ... ... 314

Chapter LXXX III and LXXX IV. — The process of illumi-
ning ... ... ... ... ... ... 31S

Chapter LXXXV. — The union of the too fundamental principles of
the universe ... ... ... ... ... 334

N Chapter LXXXVI.— The union of the Vidya-Kala and Prachina-
Kala ... ... ... ... ... ... 340

Chapter LXXXVff. — The union of a beatific knowledge and abso-
lute peace ... ... ... ... ... 343

Chapter LXXXV III. — The beatific principle of Sliantyatra

Kata ... ... ... ... ... ...' 347

Chapter LXXX 1 X — The spiritual initiation of Tattviki ... 354
Chapter XC. — The rite of Ahhisheka ... ... ... 353

Chapter XCL — The worship of Vishnu, the sun and other
gods ... ... ... ... ... ... 357

Chm'TRR. XCIL — The installation of a plialic emblem ... 358

Chapter XCIll. — The construction of the divine edifice. ... 366

Chapter XCIV. — The worship of Charaki and her compa-
nions ... ... ••• ... ••• ••• 37 2

Chapter XCV and VI. — The installation of the phalic emb-
lem ... ••• ••• ••• 373

Chapter XC VI 1 . — The purification of the component principles of
the body ... ... — ••• — ••• 39 ^

Chapter XCV 11 L — The process of installing the image of
Ootiri ... .*• ••• 4*>7

• Chapter XC 1 X. — The process of installing an image of the
Sun- God ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 4°9

Chapter C.—Thc rice of consecration ... ... ... 410

Chapter Cl. — The process of consecrating a divine edifice ... 411
Chapter CI L— The consceratin of the pinnacle and banner ... 413
Chapter Cll^r-TIp prottaa, of repairing or replacing a phalic
emblem ... ■ ••• ■ •••. ••• ••• ••• 4 *^


AGN! PURANAM


»*55


while the fifth should be a Dentilabial. The sixth Vija
in the order of enumeration, should consist of eight letters.
The letters of the seventh should belong to the group of
Misra Varnas, arranged in the way technically known
as the Sampata, while those of tlie eighth Vija should
belong to the class, known as the Ushma Varnas. The
entire Vija Mantra should be then constructed. The
first Vija should begin with the sixth vowel letter of the
Sanskrit alphabet, and end with the one of the Ushma
class, coupled with the phonetic symbol of the nasal
Chandravindu. The second set of the letters ( Vijas ),
should belong to the group of palatals, coupled with the
eleven vowel letters of the alphabet. The first letters
of the second set should consist of letters solely belong-
ing to the labio-palatal sounds, while those of its latter
half, should be selected from the same group. After
that, the letters of the palatal group, should be arranged
commencing from its very beginning and respectively and
successively coupled with the eleven vowel letters. After
that should be written the second letter of the Ushma
group successively coupled with the eleven vowel letters
of the alphabet as before, and counted from the latter end
of the list. The first letters of the next set of Vijas, should
consist of two labio-dental sounds, counted from the
latter end of the o group, its latter part being composed of
letters of the Mishra group, counted from its opposite end.
The letters of the second group, should consist of the letters
of the palatal group coupled with the fourth vowel letter
of the alphabet, the lattter part of the set being composed
pf the second letter of the Ushman class coupled with the
eleven vowel letters in succession. The Mantra, thus com-
posed and so strewn together, should be repeated by appen-
dingit to the Pranava Mantra, and by affixing the term
Svaho (obeisance) to it, in all acts of pouring libations on the
sacrificial fire (8 — 18).


CONTENTS


Cuk?' 1 ''** CIV.— The general characteristics of a divine edi-
fice ... ... ••• ... ... 4*9

Chapter CV.— The worship of the god of the homestead 423

Chapter CVI. — The foundation of a city and the rite of worship-
ping the Vast u ••• ... ... ... 429

Chapter CVI I. —The different continents of the terrestrial globe.

432

Chapter CVIll. — The seven great island* ... ... 434

Chapter CIX. — The greatness of the sacrec * U and places 437
Chapter CX. — The sanctity of the river Ganges ... ... 440

Chapter CXI. — The sanctity of the confluence of the rivers Ganges
and Yamuna at Prayag ... ... ... ... 44K

Chapter CXII. — The sanctity of Benares ... ... 443

Chapter CXII I. — The glory of the sacred stream of Naimada 444

Chapters CXIV, CXV and CXVI. — The glory of the sacred
pilgrimage of Gya ... ... ... ... ... 445

Chapter CXVI I. — The process of performing the Sraddlia cere-
mony at Gya ... ... ... ... ... 463

Chapter CXVIII. — The topography of Bharatavarsha ... 473

Chapter CXIX. — The topography of Jamvudwipa ... 474

Chapter CXX. — The extent of the surface of the glob£ ...
Chapter CXX I. — 'Hie Science of Astrology ... ...

Chapter CXXII. — The Svarodaya-C hakra by which the success
or failure of a particular undertaking should he fust determined ... 492

Chapter CXXII I. — A Svnopsis of the Science of Astrology ... 498

Chapter CXXIV. — The means of bringing about the death of
one's own enemy ... ... ... ... ... 502

Chapter CXXV. — The combination of good and evil asterisms 510
Chapter CXX VI. — The description of good and evil hours ... 514

Chapter CXX VII. — The contrivance of astrological counting known
as the Kostlia Chakra ... ... ... ... 517

Chapter CXXVIII. — The collection of food-grains during the ap-
pearance of portends ... ... ... 519

Chapter CXX IX. — Physical phenomena taking place under the
influence of the different asterisms ... ... ... 520

Chapter CXXX. — The Astrologicsl Wheel by which victories or
reverses in war can be foretold ... ... ... 522.

Chapter CXXX I. — The Astrological Diagram for taking the nature
and amount of services one would get from his relation ... 524

Chapter CXXXll. — The differentiating traits in the character of
an infant ... ... ... ... ... ... 528

Chapter CXXXll 1 .— The Mantra which is irresistible in the three
worlds / ... ... ... ... .. 534

Chapter CXXX IV.— The incantation for obtaining victor^ in the

three worlds ... ... ... ... ... 53$


AGNI PURANAM.


1 15®

The rite of Nyasa, in connection with the Mantra,
should be performed as follows : — Om, Hreem, Hrum, Hrum,
Hah (obeisance) to the region of the heart, permeated with
the essence of these Mantras. Hrum, Hah (obeisance) to
the region of the heart, permeated with the energy of the
preceding Vijas. May the tuft of hair on ray crown be
permeated with the essence of the Mantra, running as
Hrum, burn and burn. May the energy of the two Kulva
Vijas protect my body as a coat of mail. May the energy
of the Vija Mantra, Hreem, Shreem, Ksham, permeate the
region of my eyes, both physical and spiritual. Kshoum,
Hum, Khoum, Hum fut (obeisance) to the spiritual weapon
composed of the essense of these Mantras. The rite of
Guhya Nyasa in connectioh with the Mantra, should be
performed before the preceding one.

I shall presently narrate to you, the Mantras that are to
be used in connection with the worship of the goddess
Tvarita, as well as those that are known as the Vidyangas.
The two Hrid-Mantras should be imagined as located in the
region of the heart, twelve as filling in the region of the
head, the Tara-Mantras as premeating the region of the eyes,
the fifth and the sixth Vijas of the entire Mantra as pre-
meating the tuft of the hair on the crown, and the seventh
and eighth as protecting the body as a coat of mail. The
name of the goddess which is to be mentioned first in con-
nection with the above Mantra, is Totala, the next divinity, in
relation to whom, the next rite should be practised, being the
goddess with thunderbolt in her lips (Vajratunda) The latter
rite should be performed with the Mantra consisting of the
Vijas, and which runs as : — Kha, Kha, Hum, obeisance to
the goddess Vajratunda. Then the rites of the subsequent
Nyasa, should be performed as, Kha, Kha, Hum, obeisance
to the goddess Indradutika (maiden messenger to the god
Indra). Kha, Kha, Hum, obeisance to Kbechari, Kha, Kha,
Hum, obeisance to Jvaliqi, Varcha with (obeisance) to the


CONTENTS*


xii

Chapter CXXXV— The AstmfcpM dbtermimaf the

— ccess or failure of a journey ... ••• ... 540

Chapter CXXXVI. — The death or pestilence-bringingjcharm 541
Chapter CXXXV I L— The six »u«uibt . charms ... ... 544

Chapter CXXXVIII.— The sixty different Sam vats wras and the
or evil results thereof ••• ... ••• ... 547

Chapter CXXXIX.— The drugs and articles of mysterious virtues

549

Chapter CXL. — The names of the thirty-six] polyglot medicinal
drugs ... «•• ... mi m. ... 551

Chapter CXLI. — The medicinal or curative incantations ... 553

Chapters CXLI! and CXLI 1 1 . -—The process of worshipping the
goddess Kuvjika 4 »•. ... ... ... ... 556

Chapter CXLlV-^xThe rites of Shodanyasa ... •*« 563

Chapter CLXV. — Trifchandi Mantras ... 571

Chapter CXLVII - -The rite of Shadanga Nyasa ... 578

Chapter QCLVIII. — Thejpenance which grants victory in war 380
Chapter CXLIX. — The different Manus and their periods ... 58a

Chapter CL —The tenets of faith and the laws of conduct during
different Manwantffas ... ... ... ... 586

Chapter CLI —Tin conduct of a Brahmana ... ... 589

Chapter CLII. - Tip rites and ceremonies of a house-holder 590
Chapter CLIII. — The various forms of marriage. .. Ml 59 *

Chapter CLIV. — The various daily rites ... ... 595

Chapter CLV.— The substances for purifying house -lioldf goods 598

Chapters CLVI and CLVII. — The nature and period of impurity.

600

Chapter CLVII!.— -The period of*impurity upon a miscarriage of
a foetus ... ... ... ... ... 608

Chapter CL 1 X. — The condition of a person after death ... 615

Chapter CLX.— The duties of a Yati ••• ••• ••• 617

Chapter CLXL— The characteristic features r <*f the life o a Yati.

617

Chapter CLX 1 I. — -The various Codes of DhattaeiiMftras ... 69*

Chapter CLXIII. — Sraddha Kalpa ... M» 6*4

Chapters CLXIV and CLXV.— Sacrifi^hilMor bf the guardian
deities of the planets ... ... ... 629

Chapter CLXVI.— The five virtues of men H .... 634

Chapter CLXVI I — The process of performing Grhha-Yajna 636
Chapter CLXVI If. — Interdicted rites and foods ... ... 641

Chapter clxix. — T he atonement for sins ■>; ... ... 645 '

Chapter clxx.— T he penances for deadly sinners ... 549

Chapters clxxi and CLixii.— The nost mysterious of the sin ex-
piating rites ... .«■ IM ... **. $54


AGNI PURANAM.


*«5 7

Shara Vibhishini (the one threatening with a fierce arrow).
Kha, Kha, (obeisance) to the goddess Shavari, (the divine
huntress), Chhe (obeisance) to Chhedini. Chhe to Karalini
(the dreadful one), Che Kha and Kha to Karali, Shreem
to the goddess Shrava-Drava-Plavani, Kha Kha to the
goddess Duti-Plava. Strim to the goddess who has created
the eternal time. The same Vijas should be contem-
plated as located in the specific parts of the body as the
prototypes of the goddesses known as Dhunani and Vasana-
yegika. Laugh and laugh, O thou goddess Kapila, who art
also known by the epithets of Kshepaksha and Dutika. Hung
to the goddess of energy and light. Hung to the goddess who
is the wife of Rudra. Hung to the goddess Matangi and to
the goddess who is the maide messenger of the goddess
Roudri. Kha Kha to the sword wielded by the mighty
Tvarita, and Fut to the goddess who serves as the maiden
envoy to the Supreme Brahma (19 — 27).

The votary should first imagine his body as fully per-
meated with the essence of the Hrid-Mantra, and subse-
quently with that oLthe one known as the Netra, from the
head to the foot, and from the foot to the head. He should
contemplate the members of his body, such as the legs, the
knee-joints, the arms, the navel, the heart, the throat, the face,
and the upper regions of the brain, as permeated with the
energy of the principal Vija-Mantra, both along the ingoing
and out-going currents of vitality. Then he should perceive
the psychic hale, mellow and effulgent as the rising moon, as
coming downwards from the lotus of the brain, and shedding
ambrosia and carrying eternal life all through his body.
The votary should locate the effulgent images of the
principal Vija- Mantras in A the different parts of his body,
such as the head, the face, the throat, the heart, the
navels and especially at the tips of his two index-
fingers, by an act of psychic abstraction. The man, who
perceives the moon in his head and the pyschic lotus


CONTENTS.


xiii


Gutter clxxiii.— T he different acts of Atonement ... 659

Chapter cxxxiv. — T he atonement for a sin due to an omission of
adhhippinf an idol ... ... ... ... 665

Chapter clxxv. — T he fasts, cere t yon ies^utd penances ... 668

Chapter clxxvi.— T he Vratas which should be performed during
the first phase of Hie Moon’s wane or increase ... ... 675

Chapter clxxvii — T he Vratas to be performed on the day of the
second phase of the Moon's wane or increase ass 677

Chapter cxxxviii.— *T tie Vratas which should be performed on days
of the third phase of the Moon's wane or increase ... .M 679

Chapter clxxix — The Vratas of the fourth phase ... 684

Chapter clxxx.— T he Panchami-Vrata ... ... 685

Chapter Ctxxxi. — The Shasthi-Vrata ... ... 686

Chapter clxxxii.— T he Saptami* Vrata ... ... 687

Chapter cxxxxiii. — T he Asthami Vrata ... ... 687

Chapter clxxxiV.— T he worship of the Eight Matris on the eighth
day ... ... ... . ... . ... ...

Chapter clxxxv. — T he Vratas to be performed on the ninth ph.«»

69s

Chapter clxxxti.— T he Oashami Vratas ... ... 694

Chapter clxxxvii.— T he Vratas to be performed It Jays of the
eleventh phase ... ... .. ■ ••• ... 695

Chapter clxxxviii. — T he Vratas to be performed days of the
twelfth phase ... ... ... ... ... 696

Chapter CLXXXIX.— The Shravana Dvadashi Vrata ... 699

Chapter CXC. — The Vrata which is complementary to all other
Vratas ... ... ... ... ... 7®®

Chapter CXCI. — Trayodashi Vratas ... ... ... 70a

CHAprER CXCII.— The Vratas to be performed on days of the
fourteenth phase ... ... ... ... ... 704

Chapter CXC II I. —The Shivaratri Vrata ... ... 705

Chapter CXCI V.— The Aahoka Pumtma Vrata ... ... 706

Chapter CXC V.— VraMJt aider various Rsterisms ... 707

Chapter CXCV I, —The vshatra Vrgtas ... ... 709

Chapter CXCVII. — The Divas* Vratas fdiiring day) ... 713
Chapter CXCVIIT — Monthly vows ... ... ... 7*4

Chapter CXCI X.~-Riiu Vratas or Season vows ... ... 716

Chapter CC.— The vow for illuminating a divine edifice ... 718
chapter CC I. — The nine-fold Propitiation # ... ... 721

Chapter CCTf . — The worship of Hari... ... 724

vu after CCII 1.— The fruits acquired by rf roan for worshipping
Hari ... ... *** Ml ••• 727

Chapter CC I V.-*The vow of monthly fasting ... ... 730

Chapter CCV«— The king of all the vows 73*


AGNI PUKANAM.


1I5 8

situated at the lower part of his trunk, and knows his
body as permeated with the essence of the congery of the
abovesaid Mantras, knows no death or disease. Even the
man, who meditates upon the divine self of the goddess as
above indicated, or repeats her name, at least, a hundred and
eight times, after having prue iscd a rite of Nyasa in the way
above enumerated, is rewarded with a similar fate (28 — 33).

Now I shall describe the different postures of the hand
with which the presence of the goddess (Tvarita), is to be
invoked before the commencement of the actual worship and
which are known as the Pranitas, etc. The latter-named
Mudra admits of a five-fold division. The first sort consists
in firstly out-stretching the palms of the two hands, and in
then putting them on the hesd, with the two index-fingers
attached thereto, after having bent in two, the two thumbs
and the two middle fingers. Two such folded palms carried
down from the head, and placed on the region of the heart,
with the little and middle fingers turned upward, and the
index-finger placed beneath the latter, are known as the
Savijas. The one in which the tip of the thumb is placed
beneath, or at the root of the middle finger, is known
as the Vedini (piercer) Mudra. The palm, folded in the
same way, with the only distinction of the two up-lifted little
fingers, is known as the Karali, the greatest of all the
Mudras, and which should be carried up to the region of
the heart, at the time of repeating any particular Mantra.
The same Mudra, with the distinction of the- two up-turned
thumbs, is known as the Vajra, and should be placed on
the part of the body, having the same designation. The
Mudras, known as the Danda (club), the sword, the discus,
and the mace, should be made to resemble in shape, the
abovesaid weapons in reality. The Mudra known as the
Trident, is formed by placing the thumb at the roots of the
first three fingers, held in an upright position, while the one
known as the spear, skould be made by lifting up the two


CONTENTS.


*tv

Chapter CC VI.— The worship of «he holy sago Agastya ... 734
Chapter CCVII. — The practice of the Koumuda Vrata ... 73 6

Chapter CCVII I. — The process of making gifts on the occasion
of Vratas ... ... ... ... ... 737

Chapter CCIX.— The piety accruing from making various
Vratas ... ... ... M . ... 73 9

Chapter CCX.— The sixteen great gifts ... ... 74 ft.

Chapter CCXI. — The gift of cows and buffaloes... ... 75*

Chapter CCXI I. — The gifts made in different $onths ... 758

Chapter CCXIII. — The gift of the whole earth ... 763

Chapter CCXI V.— NadichaUra or the system of veins, nerves,
and arteries ... ... ... ... ... 765

Chapter CCXV. — The Omkar Mantra ... ... 769

Chapter CCXV I. — The Gayatri Mantra ... ... 77 5

Chapter CCX VII. — The use of the Gayatri Mantra for worship*
ping the phalic emblem ... ... ... ... 777

Chapter CCXV 11I.— The duties incidental to a sovereignty... 779

Chapter CCXIX. — The Mantras to be used on the occasion of the
installation of a king ... ... ... ... 783

Chapter CCXX. — The duties of a king ... ... 788

Chapter CCXXI. — The duties of the servants of a king ... 79a

Chapter CCXXI I. — The sites and consMctions of forts, 794

Chapter CCXXI!!. — The system of administration ... 796

Chapter CCXXI V.— The duties of a king in the female apen-
ment ... ... ... ... ... ... 8bo

Chapter CCXXV. — The duties of a kino towards the roya prinoeu

80*

Chapter CCXXV I.— The acts of a man '.hrougli the innato forces
of his nature ... ... ... ... .. 807

Chapter CCXXVII. — The Code of Criminal Laws ... 810

Chapter CCXXV II I. — The occasion for an expedition 81S

Chapter CCXXIX. — The nature and significance pf dreams #*h>
Chapter CCXXX. — The auspicious signs for an expedition .. P0.3
Chapter CCXXXI. — Birds unfolding the gooa or the evil fate 825
Chapter CCXXXI I. — Portends presaging danger to a besieging


army ... ... ... ... . ... *•> 839

Chapter CCXXX 1 1 1 . -*-The conditions of journey 833

Chapter CCXXXI V.— The nature of penalties $36

Chapter CCXXXV.— The daily duties of a king ... 839

Chapter CCXXX VI. —The weekly duties preceding the day pf
march ... ... ••• ... Mi ••• 34*

(.'■after CCXXXVII. — The prayor to India ... 8,8


Chapter CCXXXV 1 11. -THr Royal r> ditctaad by Rama

• ‘ ... 851


000


agni pxjranam.


V

*< 59 ,


middle fingers only. The palm is usually enfolded in twenty-
eight different postures or Mudras, such as the arrow, the
hand of benediction or encouragement, the bow, the noose,
the bell, the weight, the conch-shell, the mace, and the eight
sorts of lotus. The five Mudras, known as the Mohini, the
Mokshini, the Jvalini, the Amritamaya, and the Pranita,
should be made use of, in the course of a rite of Homa, or
worship (34 — 43).


CHAPTER CCCXI.


Said the God OF Fire : — Now I shall describe the
rite of initiation, which should be performed with the aid of
a mystic diagram, furnished with an image of the divine lion
and drawn with the lines, known as the Vajra Rekhas.

“ Hey, Hey, Ho, O thou, mighty lion, whose teeth are
made of the essence of thunderbolt, roar and roar, and
disport and disport here, in thy wonted vigour and freedom.
Obeisance to the cushion of the goddess which rests on the
back of the divine lion."

The Yantram, or the diagram, which should be used in the
present form of initiation, should be constructed as follows
Four parallel and perpendicular straight lines should be
divided into nine chambers, by drawing four parallel straight
lines of equal length .across them. The chambers situated
at the four artgular points of the quadrilateral figure, thus
constructed, should be so destroyed as to convert it into a
perfect circle, with' the exception of the four chambers
occupying the four cardinal points of the figure. In the
chambers thus destroyed, two lines should be drawn, in each,
from the points of intercession to the circumference of the
inscribed circle. The two middle lines of the original paratlel


CONTENTS.


XV


Chapter CCXXX 1X.— Tip *even factors of government ... 85,$

Chapter CCXL. — The befemce of power. How to treat with the
neighbouring kings ... ' ... ... ... ... 858

Chapter CCXLI. — The utility of diplomacy ... ... 863

Chapter CCXLI!. — The arrangement of the various divisions of
the army ... ... ... ... ... 871

Chapter CCXLI II.— -The art of divining the character and the
good 01 the evil fate ... ... ... ... 880

Chapter CCXLI V. — The characteristics of women ... 883

Chapter CCXLV. — The formation of various roval implements

884

Chapter CCXLVI. — The characteristics of the different classes of
gems ... ... ... ... ... ... 887

Chapter CCXL VII. — l'he characteristics of a homestead ... 889

Chapter CCXLVI II. — The lealizalion of heartrfelt desires ... 893

Chapter CCXLIX. — The science of archery ... ... 894

Chapter CCL. — The worship of arms ... ... 897

Chapter CCLI. — The use of arms on horse-back and riding
animals ... ... ... ... ... 899

Chapter CCLI I. — The thirty- two sorts of military art ... 900
Chapter CCLIII. — The institution of law-suits ... ... 902

Chapter CCLIV. — Debts and their repayment ... ... 910

Chapter CCl.V. — The citing of witnesses in a legal matter ... 915

Chapter CCLVL— ITie partition of properties ... ... 921

Chapter CCLV 1L— l*he settlement of boundary disputes ... 926

Chapter CCLVI II. — The punishment for abusing the deformed
and for singing lampoons ( ... ... ... ... 932

Chapter CCLIX.— The rites and ceremonier described in the
Vedas ... ... ... ... ... 943

Chapter CCLX.*— The verses of the Yajurveda and the rites where
they are to be used ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 954

Chapter CCLX I. —The rites and Mantras of the Same Veda 966

Chapter CCLXII.-— The rites and Mantras of the Atharven
V ed a ... ••• ... ... ... 968

Chapter CCLX 1IL— The Suktas as contained in each of the
Vedas «*• ... ... ... ... 97^

Chapter CCLX 1 V.— How to ward off the dreadful visitations of
Nature ... ... ... ... ... 97^

Chapter CCLXV. — The ceremonial ablutions in general ... 979

Chapter CCLXVI.— The ablution for exercising the malignant
spirit Vinayaka • •• ••• Ml Ml •••

Curm CCLXVII.— Mahesmra Ablution ... ... 984

Cumt CCLXVIII. — The celebration of the king’* birth-day 987


«|60 AGN1 PURANAM.

perpendiculars, should be extended, double their length,
beyond the circumference of the circle, and should be bent
double in the shape of a shepherd's hook. A lotus, contain-
ing eight petals, should be drawn in the chamber about
the. centre of the circle,' and its petals should be coloured
bright yellow. The celestial weapons, such as, the thunder-
bolt, the sword, etc., should be delineated inside the
Yantram, with black dust. The interior quadrilateral, should
be provided with four doors, one on the outer side of each
of the chambers, made by the four intersecting chords of the
inscribed circle, and each of them should be adorned with the
signs of the thunder-bolt. The chambers around the central
lotus, should be made of equal dimensions, like the four
angular apertures, bounded by t\yo lines, drawn from
each of the point of intercession to the circumference of
the inscribed circle. Polens of red colour, should be drawn
to mark the centre of the inscribed circle, and even women
may he initiated by means of the abovesaid Mandalam.
A monarch, by worshipping the goddess on the abovesaid
mystic diagram, is sure to conquer the territories of other
crowned heads, or to recover the possession of a lo$t prin-
cipality (i — 8).

O thou twice-born one, the goddess, in the present form
of the worship, should be represented, in the mystic diagram,
by the Vija r Mantra Hrung, illuminated with the sacred
Pranava (Om) The goddess, should be worshipped on the
petals' of the mystic lotus, with the wind and the ether Vijas
contained in the entire and original Mantra, sacred to the
goddess. Similarly, the goddess, should be worshipped on
the petals round the centre of the lotus-shaped diagram,
once with each of the component Vijas of the Mantra. The
Vidyangas, should be located in the different petals of the
lotus, such as, the Netra-Mantra at its centre and the Astra-
Mantras at the petals pointing towards the angular points of
the compass. The Hutis, situated around the poltns of the


KVt


CONTENTS


Chapter CCLX 1 X.— The Mantras for co ns ec rati ng the royal
umbrella • •• ••• ••• ««« MS m

Chapter CCLXX.— The incantation of Vishnu Paujaram ... 995
Chapter CCLXXI.— The two divisions of the- Vedic Mantras 997
Chapter CCLXXll.— "An account of Brahma, Padtna, and Varaha
Puranams ... ... ... ... ... 999

Chapter CCLXXIII^— The dynasties of the Solar and lunar races

1003

Chapter CCLXXI V. — The names of Icings who belonged to the
lunar race ... ... ... 100S

Chapter CCLXX V.— An account of Yadu's family ... 1009

Chapter CCLXX VI.-— An account of Krishna's family and de eds .

1013

Chapters CCLXXVII and CCLXXVUL— The lunar race con-
tinued • •• ••• see ••• eae 1016

Chapter CCLXX IX.— The system of medicine propounded by the
holy Dhanwantari • li . ... ... ... 1021

Chapter CCLXXX. — Organic, Mental, Extraneous and Func-
tional diseases ... ... ... ... ... 1028

Chapter CCLXXX I. — Indian Pharmacopeia ... ... 1033

Chapter CCLXXXII. — Hy genic effects of different trees and
shrubs planted around the dwelling of a man ... ... 1037

Chapter CCLXXXII I. —Medicines for infantile dysen try or for all
diseases brought about by the vitiated state of mother's milk ... 1038

Chapter CCLXXXI V. — The Omkar Mantra givj tag longevity 1044

Chapter CCLXXXV. — Infallible celestial medicines as disclosed
by the Kishi Atreya ... ... ... ... 1046

Chapter CCLXXXVL— Medicines which can avert death, or in-
crease the duration of life ... ... ... ... 1054

Chapter CCLXXXVII. — The excellence of elephants and the
diseases to which they are subject ... ... ... .1 057

Chapter CCLXXX VI I L— Diseases of horses and rules for manag-
ing them,. .*.* ... ... ... - ••• 1060

Chapter CCLXXXIX. — The ominous marks in the body of a
horse ... ... IM ... ••• ... 1065

Chapter CCXC. — The religious rites which should be performed
for the good of the stud ... ... ... ... 1071

Chapter CCXCI. — The rite for bringing peace on elephants... 1072

. Chapter CCXCIL — The rite which is beneficiano the cows ... 1075

Chapter CCXC 1 II.— The Mantras which . gfant »M creature
comforts ... ... ... 1081

Chapter CCXCI Vv— The different species of sntijtes : the time when
poison increases in them ••• a. I ... ••• 1087

Chapter ~CCXC V. — The irnkte pf treatment by incantations in a
case of snakebite ... ... ... ••• ••• IOQ2


AtiNI PUHANAM.


I Iff 1


tains, in the order of five on the right, aiid five on the
left, should be worshipped by repeating the Mantras, res-
pectively held sacred to them. The regents of the eight
quarters of the sky, should be invoked oi. the periphery of
the inner circle, and the H rum -Mantra, coupled with the
fifteen Vijas, should be repeated by respectively prefixing
them to the name of each of them. The goddess, should
be worshipped with flowers and perfumes, both invoked in
a cone of pasted rice (Shree), and on the back of the


delineated lion <9 — *4>- . .

Then the whole diagram, should be surrounded by a

chain of nine water pitchers, eacK consecrated by repeating
hundrded and eight times the principal Mantra. Then having
repeated, a thousand and eight times, the abovesaid Mantra,
libations, numbering a tenth part thereof, should be poured
on the sacrifice fire. The rite of Homa, should be performed
in a fire-pit of the specific shape. The sacred fire should be
brought by repeating the Mantra held specifically sacred to
the fire-god, while it should be cast into the pit by repeating
the Hrid-Mantra. The goddess of energy should be invoked
in the tongue of the sacrificial fire, and libations of clarified
butter, should be poured on the fire, by way © per
ming the rites of antinatal and postnatal ceremonies, to
the new born fire-god. Then having poure a un
libations on the fire, by recHing the Hnd-Mantra
should kindle the sacred fire by repeating the <*}»»£ 8
Mantras. The sacred fire should be
tiated into the essence of the divine energy of Shiva,
and the final oM.ti.na of completing *b«
should 'be poured on the fire, by repea ing
^ Mantras ancrod to the goddess). The rite of Bom. should
be performed with the Male-Mantras, »rrd a tenth part of he
entire libations poured on the fire, should be e tea e
goddese. Then the disciple, should be ushered rnto the seen-
Li shed. The rite ol Tadana, should be done unto hrm,


COHTlBfVflj*


Xtii


Chaptb ft CCXCVI. — The rite off five groups off eeremoniee caM
Vtaeirm Vidhanam /... ... ... ... 1098

CaAPTBR CCXCV 1! •—The worship *>f Rudra M . ... noo

Chapter CCXCV I II.— The treatment of Gonqsa snake-bite... 110a

CsmiR CCXCIX.— The mystic rites which prevent the diseases
imperilling the life of a child in the lying-in-Chamber nag

Chapter CCC. — The Mantras destroying the baneful inlssKss
of malignant stars .. M ... ... ... 1114

Chapter CCCI.— The worship off the various Ganas .., list

Chapter CCC 1 1. — The principal Mantras sacred to the lord ef
heseen ••• ... ... »»*,. 1193

Chapter CCCIII.— The hour when the vital spark of a man would
he extinguished ... ... ... ... ... 1137

Chapter cccrr.— The Mantras sacred to the God Shiva ... 1150
Chapter cccv.— The recitation off the fifty names off Vishnu... 1134

Chapter cccvk — T he incantations for stupefying the faculties of
adversaries

... ... ... ... ... *137

Chapter cccvn. — The Mantras by which the three worlds can be

enchanted

... ••• ... ... ... 1140

Chapter cccviii. — T he Mantram sacred to the goddess off fortune

1*45

C hapter cccix. — T he Mantra for worshipping the goddess Tvarita
who grants enjoyment off earthly comforts and salvation after death.
/ 1150

Chapter cccz. — T he worship of the goddess Tvarita by which one
CRReafoy all comforts in this life ... ... ... 1153'

Chapter CCCXi. — The rite off initiation with a mystic diagram 1 159

Chapter ccczii.-— The incantations by which one can acquire
lowing ... ... ... 1165

Chapter cccxm. — The process off worshipping the god Vinayaka.

1168

Chapter cccxiv.— The Mantras for ther goddess Tvarita ... 1173.

. Chapter cccxv.— The spells which stupefy the intellectual ffacul-
lm A man ... ... ... ... 1x75*

Chapter cccxvi.— **The Mantra for realizing one’s all desires ... 1179
Chapter cccxvii.— T he Prasada* Mantra off Shiva... ... 1180

Chapter cccxnir.— The same Mantra continued ... ... 1184

Chapter cccxvix . — The worship of the Goddess off Learning ... 1186
Chapter cccxx. — The mystic diagram of Sharvato-Bhadra Man*
*1*® ... ... ... ... 1188


Chapter ccczxi.— The ceremony of Astra- Yajnam ... 1194

Chapter cccxzxi. — The bliss of the same Mantra ... ... 1196

Chapter coczxiti.— The Mantra for caring diseases and warding ef

••• ••• ; ... ... ■••• SI*

Chapttr cccxm.— Th. pttea>giricg rim «i Sfaira*Shanti ... tao 4 .


•11


AGNI PUftANAM.


Il6 2

by repeating the A*tra-Mantras, and the rite of Gujbyang*'
Nyasa, should ,be performed, as before described* Then the
component letters of the Mantra of Vklyangas, should be
contemplated as located in the different members of the
body of the disciple, by an act of Psychic Nyasa. The
preceptor, should cause the disciple, to scatter flowers, con*
secrated with the same Mantra, and bring into the sacrificed
chamber the reservoir of the sacred fire (15— -2©).

Subsequent to that, a hundred oblations composed of
barley, rice, and sesamum, all soaked in clarified cow»butter,
should be poured on the sacrificial fire, by repeating
the principal (Mula) Mantras. By the rite of the first Hontai*
the disciple, should be supposed to have attained a vege-
table existence, a reptile existence by the next one, and
then to have been metamorphoised through bird, mammal
and human existences in succession, by the performance of
each of the subsequent Homas. After that, fresh oblations, as
above, should be cast into the fire, with a view to help on the
soul of the desciple in its progress from the plane of mundane
existence, through higher phases of disembodied life, such as
tho$e represented by the divine selves of Bramha, Vishnu,
etc., to the essence of the god Rudra, the acme of soul bliss,
which should be deemed as the outcome of pouring the
final oblation on the fire, in connection with the present
ceremony. The disciple should be supposed to have been
initiated, after the pouring down of the first libation on the
fire, by which he should be deemed as fully entitled to peep
into the higher mysteries.

Now hear me discourse on the method, by which a man
would be able to work out the salvation of his own soul.
The votary should carry up his true self (soul) to the mystic
nerve ganglion in his brain, which is ever sanctified by the
presence of the god Sada Shiva, and merge it in the infinite
essence of that divinity. Then he should pour a thousand
libations of clarified butter on the sacred fire, after having


xviai


CONTENTS.


Chapter cccxxv — The Rudraksha seeds

Chapter cccxxvi. — The worship of the goddess Unea

Chapter cccxxvn. — The worship of the regents of


Chapter cccxxv hi.-— The Rules of Prosody
Chapter cccxxix. — The metre of the Divine Gayatri
Chapter cccxxx. — The metre Jagati
Chapter cccXxxl.— The metre Utkriti

Chapter cccxxxii.— Vrittas or metres regulated by
position of syllables in each quarter

Chapter cccxxxm. — Ardha-Sama


... 1209
... 1212
the religious
... 121/

... 1219
... 1220
... 1221
... 1223
the number and
... 1226


Vrittam or half-equal metres.

i»8

Chapter cccxxxiv. — Yati or the pause in reciting a verse ... 1229
Chapter cccxxxv. — Miscellaneous metres ... ... 1233

Chapter cccxxxvi. — The science of pronounciation and laws of
euphony ... ... ... ... ... 1234

Chapters cccxxxvi 1. to cccxxxix — R hetoric, or figure of speech

123 6

Chapter cccxl. — T he four different styles ... ... 1249

Chapter cccxli. — T he different parts and members of the body.

1250

Chapter cccxlii. — T he characters and lessons of the drama ... 1251

Chapter ccCxliii. — A nuprasa or a alliteration ... ... 1257

Chapter cccxliv. — T he figure of speech which is related to the
sense ... ... ... ... ... 1260

Chapter cccxlv. — T he artistic arrangement of words in a sen-
tence ... ... ... ... ... 1270

Chapter cccxlvi. — T he point of excellence in a Poem ... 1272

Chapter cccxlvii. — T he defects of a literary composition ... 1275

Chapter cccxlviii. — L exicon of mono-syllabic words ... 1279

Chapter cccxlix. — D ifferent kinds of dissolution ... ... 1283

Chapter cccl. — S piritual dissolution ... ... ... 1287

Chapter cccli. — P hysiology ... ... ... 1291

Chapter cccli 1. — Hells and the passage of the soul described 1294
Chapter cgcliii. — T he eight auxiliary factors of Yoga ... 1199
Chapter occuv. — The process of Prmnayama, Ire., ... 1304

Chapter ccclv. — D hyanam or meditation ... ... 1306

Chapter oocLvi.-^Dherana or the faculty of r etain i ag in the mind.

1310

Chapter ccglvii.— S amadhi ... ... ... 1313

Chapter txtfJLVtu.— The kno wled g e of Br ahma •eo eee ij »7

CtMptMrs cccliX St CccuL. — Th. atiribttM il flNtoaa -v * 3 **

ccoju.— >«i

ClwyMr cccuii.- Hi. SfMf t m ti dwGwh ... >333

Chapter cc&juii.— T h. main of Yw* Onto ... (339

Chapter cccLxnr. — An Mwnt Of Agni PnM ... • ... 134*


AGNI PURANAM.


1163

descended into his wonted animal existence, and for the
obliteration of all active impulses of his mind, whether
good or bad. Then the final libations should be cast into
the sacrificial fire, by which the votary would be fully
initiated into the mysteries of Yoga. The influences of virtue
and vice, fail to affect his state of continuance in this soul-life,
and the votary (who has) thus attained his salvation can
never descend within the zone of the momentum of mundane,
life. As water poured into a larger mass of that element
loses all traits of distinction, so the votary, once merged in
the essence of the Supreme Brahma, becomes one in spirit
and principle with the latter (21 — 25).

The rite of Abhisheka should be performed by emptying
the content of a similarly consecrated sacrificial pitcher,
whereby he would be able to acquire a kingdom, and to
conquer all opponents and oppositions in life. The different
manifestations of the goddess, such as Human, Vaishnavi,
Brahmani, etc., should be worshipped, and the priests and
preceptors officiating at the ceremony, should be propi-
tiated with their sacredotal fees. The worship should be
conducted once each day, and the Mantra, sacred to the
goddess, should be repeated a thousand times, at least, on
each such occasion. The goddess, should be propitiated by
pouring libations of clarified butter and containing seeds
of sesamum, on the fire whereby she would confer wealth on
the votary, and make him the blessed possessor of innumer-
able articles of enjoyment, or of anything he would set his
mind upon. The same Mantra, repeated a hundred thousand
times, would confer a principality on the repeater, whereas by
doubling or tripling the number of repetition enjoined in the
preceding line, a man 'would be respectively entitled to the
honours of sovereignty, and to the unbounded love of celes-
tial damsels (Yakshini), who would go round the world to
satisfy even his most insignificant whims or desires. 1 he same
Mantra, repeated four thousand times, would confer upon the


CHAPTER CCLXXIX.


I^AID THE God OF FfRE : — Now I shall deal with the
system of medicine, as propounded by the holy Dhanvantari
to his disciple Sushruta, and which contains remedies that
are potent enough to bring the dead again to life.

SUSHRATA said : — Describe me incantations and medi-
cinal remedies which are infallible in curing maladies,
peculiar to men, horses and elephants, ahd those remedial
measures also which act as elixirs of life and Are possessed
of the virtue of reviving lost vitality, or of bringing the dead
again to life.

Dhanvantari said ; — A physician, attending a patient
laid up with fever and fasting in consequence, should pres-
cribe for him' such inocuous diet, as Manda of fried paddy
(fried paddy boiled and made into a sort of gruel) and boiled
water, so as to keep up his strength.

Boiled water alone is sufficient in many cases, to allay
thirst and heat. In a case of s : mple intermittent, or inflama-
tory fever, not marked by any complications, the physician
should prescribe a potion, composed of the decoctions of
Musta, Parpataka, Ushira, Sandal, Udichi, and Nagara, or
a mixture composed of the three official barks, known
as the Tritvacham. At the subsidence of symptoms which
tnark the peculiar deranged humour which had brought
about the paraeysih, thephysician should cause the proper
medicated oil to be rubbed over the body of the patient, or
prescribe purgatives for the cleansing of his system, as the
case might be. Old and matured grains of Nivara, Yastika,
red Shali, Prainodakas, or barley in any shape, a* well as the
pulse Mudga, Masura, Gram, Kulafthajcooked with Kustha,
mid such fruits and ' vegetables as pomegranates, Patolas,


AGNI PURANAM


1 164

votary the divine status of a Brahman, whereas by counting
it a five hundred thousand times, he would be one with the
divine essence of the Supreme Vishnu. By repeating it six
hundred thousand times, a votary wo^rd achieve the highest*
success in connection with his penance, whereas it should
be repeated a hundred thousand times only, where a perfect
purification of spirit would be the object in view. For the
purification of the material principles of his body, the votary
should repeat it ten times only, whereas by repeating it, a
hundred times, he would acquire the merit of bathing in
a sacred pool (26 — 30).

An image or a picture of the goddess Tvarita, should be
the object of worship in the present instance, or her pre-
sence should be simply invoked on the sacred cushion, on
such an occasion. The rites of Japa and Homa should be
performed a hundred thousand, or a ten thousand times, in
connection with each worship, or a hundred thousand liba-
tions should be poured on the fire, after having repeated the
Mantra, as above indicated. The libations should contain
the particles of buffalo, sheep, or human flesh, or handsful of
barley, sesamum, fried paddy, or Vrihi soaked in the washings
of wheat, or should consist of clarified butter containing
the slices of a Bael fruit (31 — 33).

Then the penance should be practised in the follow-
ing way : — At midnight, the votary should fully equip himself
with the implements of war, such as the sword, the bow and
the quiver, and stir out, clad in a single piece of cloth
coloured dark blue, or red and yellow, or red and black.
Then having worshipped the goddess, as described before,
he should walk towards the south, and then sacrifice, with a
single stroke, the beast of offering, by repeating the Duti-
Mantra. The sacrifice should be made either at the threshold
of his own house, or in a cremation ground haunted by the
presence of a single tree. The man, who worships the
goddess as above indicated, is sure to witness the realisation


tOM


AGNI PURANAM.


Nimvas, Narakas, Karkotas, Katholvakas, nu^be safety nseSf
by a patient laid up. with fever, both during a paroxysm and
at his convalescent (1—7).

In a case of internal hcemorrbage (such as Haemoptysis
or Haematemesis) emetics should be prescribed, where, the
seat of the . complaint would be situated above the region of
the waist ; Whereas purgatives should be prescribed where
the (seat of the disease would be .anywhere below that line.
A potion composed of the drugs known as the Sadangas
with the exception of Shunti, may be given for internal
use as well, and the patient should live on a .diet composed
of powdered barley, wheat, fried paddy, barley, Shali rice,
Masura pulse, Muga, and Chanaka treated with the drug
Kustha (8— -10).

Small grapes dressed in milk and clarified butter, as well
as Vrishorasa mixed with honey, are safe cures for £ ases
of chronic dysentry, in which grains of old and matured
Shali rice, should form the staple food of the patient. ^ man,
suffering from any of the intestinal tumours, should carefully
avoid wet, though boiled rice, as well as articles that vitiate the
vital wind. His food should be composed of hot and boiled
rice, mixed with the decoctions of Lodhra-bark. Likewise a
man suffering from any sort of abdominal dropsy, should eat
Valya with thickened milk, or Vastuka fried in clarified
butter, the diet for such a person being rice boiled of Shali
paddy and preparations of wheat and barley in general,
and such articles as wheat, Shali rice, Mudga pulse, and
Braniharaksha, Catechu, the Nimva fruits, Dhatri and Nutmeg.
Patola, juice of Matulanga, lime, JatLfruits, dried radishes
and Saindhava salt, should largely entast into the composition
of food intended for a leper, while his drink , should consist
of the washings of Catechu. Likewise a leper should largely
drink of a potion containing .tic Mudga, or

Masura pulse, or such nutritious beverage, as essence of
m*est with the juice of Nimva and Parpata herb. A paste


ACIW FtMtAIMW.


tl<5

of at! his desires, and become* the undisputed sovereign of
the whole world (34 — 36).


CHAPTER CCCXII.


Said the God of Fire :■ — Now T shalT enumerate the
Vidya Prastara Mantras, and the rites of incantations which
should be practised with them for the attainment of object*
mentioned under each of them. The man, who knows these
Mantras severally and in entirety, as well as their arrange-
ments in the different mystic triangular diagrams, or is con-*
versant with their mode of repetition both in* due and inverse
orders, is 9ure to achieve the highest success in (connection
with) his penances (i — 3 .

Many are the books of scriptures, and innumerable are
the congeries of Mantras which are to be found in them, and
therefore it is most difficult to master their modes of applica-
tion, or to find out the occasions on which they are to-
be applied. The first letter of the Mantra, has a long
sound, which should be dealt with later on. First I shall
describe the mystic diagram, in the chambers of which
the component letters of the Mantra, are to be arranged.
Four parallel straight lines are to be drawn across, four
perpendicular parallels, so as to give. rise to a quadrilateral
figure, divided into ijine chambers. Then a circle is to be
described around the middle chamber, and the different
— letters of the Mantra, should be written in each of them.
The man, who knows all about this mystic diagram, and of
the Mantras written in its different chambers, should deem
all sorts of supernatural powers as lying at his fingers ends.
Such as a man is sure to Receive the homage of the tbrtf t


AGNt PUR AN A II.


1023


composed of Vedanga, Muricha, Musta, Kustha, Lodhra,
Suburchika, Manashila and Valeya add the urine of a cow,
should be deemed as the one of the best remedies for this
dreadful scourge of human body (11 — 16).

Apupa, Kustha, Kulmasha and barley are beneficial to a
man suffering from an attack of Gonarrhoea, while his diet
should consist of Mudga pulse, Kulattha, preparations of
barley, and matured Shali rice. Similarly the diet of a con*
sumptive patient, should consist of pot herbs that are bitter
and moisture-soaking in their effects, as well as oil pressed
out of the seeds of sesamum, Shirgruka, Vibhitaka, Ingudi,
Mudga, barley, wheat, boiled rice made from grains matured
in the granary, at least for a year, and the juice of Jangala.
The asthmatic should take Kulattha, and Mudga pulse pre-
pared with Rasna and bird’s flesh, or bird’s flesh (Viskiras)
cooked with curd, pomegranate, honey, juice of Matalanga,
lime, and grapes, and wheat, barley, or boiled Shali rice, with
all husks and extraneous matter carefully exempted (17 — 21).

A decoction of the drugs, known as the Dasha Mula,
Vala, and Rasna boiled with Kulattha, should be adminis-
tered in a case of hiccough or difficult breathing. A
man, suffering from an aedematous swelling (shotha) in any
part of his body, should take dry radish, and roots of Kulattha
boiled in the juice of Jangala, and live on a diet composed
of preparations of barley, wheat and matured Shali rice ;
treated with Usbira. In the alternative, , he should take a


food in whose composition treacle would largely enter, or
treacle aqd Nagara together. Whey and Chitraka, taken
together, should be deemed as one of the surest cures for an
; attack of Chronic Dyspepsia (Grahini). Old wheat, Shali
rice, essence of meat* Mudga pulse, Amalaka, Date fruits,
grapes, jujubes, clarified butter^ mi)k, the bitter aoup known
As tbe Shuktajj Niilva, Parpataka, Vrisha, whey and Garlic,


are alwaya beneffi^d to a patient, laid up with Gout or
(aa—afr). • •


1,66 AOMI MWAIMMt

regions, and to exercise sovereign powers over the nine con-
tinents of the world (4 — 8).

Having written the Siva Mantras all over the forehead of
a human skull, the votary, should walk out and collect a piece
of a deadman’s cloth from a- cremation ground. On it he
should describe the mystic diagram sacred to the goddess
as before described, and write the name of his antagonist
in each of the petals of the lotus or circle, described about
its middle chamber. Then he should fumigate the linen
with the fumes of burnt Catechu wood, and hold under his
feet, at the time, a piece of Bhurja bark, whereby he would
be able to charm the three worlds with their inmates within
seven days of practising such an incantation. In the alter-
native, the name of one's antagonist should be written at
the centre of the lotus-shaped mystic diagram, provided with
twelve petals and marked with the impressions of thunder-
bolts (and the letters of the Sada-Shiva- Mantra, and the
necessary incantation should be susequently practised thereon,
whereby the moving tongue of an accuser, would be paralysed,
the lifted arm of an aggressor would be held spell-bound in the
air, apd the movements of an invading army, would be retar-
ded. The same incantation may be practised by writing the
name of the antagonist Hi pasted turmeric, either on a slab
of stone, or on the rim of the sacrificial fire-pit (9 *2).

The intelligent votary should write the name of his enemy
in blood and poison, on a piece of deadman’s rag picke
up from a cremation ground, where the incantation should be
practised, with the help of the hexagonal mystic diagram,
held sacred to the goddess of the abovesaid Prastara, and be-
decked with the mark of Danda, and written all over with
the Shakti-Mantra, by which the enemy would meet his doom
in no time. The same incantation, practised by writing t e
name of one’s royal enemy on the blade of the discus, would
be followed by political revolutions in his kingdom, which
would ultimately bring about his death and ruin. The eame


1024


AGNI PUR ANA II.

Purgatives should be given to patients suffering from
diseases of the heart, while preparations of Pipul should be
administered to those who are afflicted with hiccough, through
the medicine of cold water and washings of whey. In dis-
eases which are the outcome ot an excess of wine, wine mixed
with Souvarcha salt, should be given in small, but repeated,
loses. A man, suffering from an ulcer, should take milk con-
taining honey and washings of shellac. A man suffering from
any sort of wasting diseases, should take special care to
improve his appetite, and take essence of meat every day,
whereby he would get rid of his malady. The diet in such
a case should consist of Shali rice, seeds of Nivara and
such like ligbt-food at the beginning (37—29),

A similar diet should be observed by a patient suffering
from piled, and washings of whey should be substituted
for his ordinary drink. The patient should take decoction of
Musta every day, and plaster the polypus over with a paste
of Haridra (turmeric) 'and Chitraka, while the diet should
largely consist of ' preparations of barley, Shali rice, and
Souvarcha salt. Thickened milk mixed with clarified butter
and juice of Sugar-cane, and Esvaru, should be given in the
: case of a renal stricture, while Mandas containing mild
: wines may be given as drink. Fried paddy, powdered
barley, honey, meat roasted on a stick, bringel, gourd,

! Shikhi, and wine are anti-phlegmatic in their effect, and are
: good medicines 'for an attack of simple cold. Boiled rice
made of Shali paddy, or a mixture of milk and water made
lukewarm, or boiled, should be deemed as the best al layer of
'thirst, while a ’pill made of treacle and pasted Musta kept in
the mouth, would produce the same effect, (30—34).

Cakes made of barley, together with dried Radishes,
Patolas. Pot-herbs, and seeds of common caues/ should
form the diet of."* man afflicted with Ap absMSS on his
femoral region, ^ 'mau suffering from < gb^pa lus, ' -should
live on n diet dom^oked of jtfadga, Adaka,Masura, prepared


AGNI PimAIUM.


1167

incantation, practised by writing the name of one's enemy
with the ashes, collected from a cremation ground, and on
the blade of a sword, and vitalised by throwing charmed
and charred remains of a human body over it, should be
deemed as the most powerful agent in bringing about the
death of one's enemy, and in creating dissensions in his
camp* The present incantation, is sure to be crowned with
the acquisition of a kingdom, within seven days of its practice
03 — 17 )

The Mantras known as the Netras and the Tarakas,
should be used in incantations practised for the' prosperity
and general welfare of a person. Such an incantation is
known as the Dahanadi-Prayoga, and is potent enough to
captivate even the mind of a Shakini. The mystic diagram,
containing the Varuni-Mantra at its centre, and coupled with
the one sacred to the god Vakratunda, should be deemed
as a safe and certain cure for all sorts of epidermic diseases
such as Leprosy, etc. The same diagram, containing the
Karali-Mantra at its begining, centre and the end, should
be deemed as the breaker of all fetters, and a man wearing
such a Yantram, is sure to be released from all places of
incarceration. The votary should not divulge his own secret
Mantra, even if the god Shiva himself would try to wrench it
out of him. A nte of Nyasa performed with the Varuna-
Mantras, is a positive cure for all sorts of cough and febrile
distempers. A mystic Yantram, containing the Soumya-
Mantras at the centre and the end, imparts greater weight
to one's body, while the one containing the same Mantra
at its beginning, middle and end, makes it light as a
featl\er(i 8 — 21).

The abovesaid mystic diagram, bedecked with the marks
of thunder-bolt, delineated in Rochona on a piece of
Bhurja bark, and put in an amulet of gold, should be
worn round the arm, by which all evils that would other-
wise have invaded the body, would be averted. Such aa


AANI PUKANAM.


■ toi$


with lemon juice, Saindhava salt, clarified butter, juice
of grapes, Shunthi, Amalaka, Kolaja, old wheat, barley and
Sbali rice, refined sugar, small grapes, and pomegranates.
Similarly in. a case of Rheumatism', the diet should consist
of red Yasthika, wheat, barley, Mudga, Kakumachi, the
tender shoots of cane creepers, Vastuka, Souvarcha salt,
honey and distilled water. Clarified butter prepared with
die juice of Durva grass, may be administered in all diseases
which affect the cavities of the nostrils, while oil prepared
with the juice of Bhringaraja or that of the Dhatri, should
be taken as snuff in all diseases of the head (35—40).

O thou twice-born one, the man who suffers now and then
from painful toothache, or whose gums swell and bleed at the
feast pressure, should make it a point not to take anything
hot, but wash his mouth with a handful of sesamum-oil
every morning, which would set the teeth, even if moving and
loose, firmly in their sockets. Similarly, powder of Vidanga
taken with the urine of a cow, should be known as a strong
vermifuge. Clarified butter mixed with the juice of Dhatri
fruit (Umbalic Myrobolam) is the best unguent known for all
sorts of headaches and diseases of the head. The diet in
such cases should consist of warm but soothing substances.
Similarly the urine of a' goat should be deemed as the best
remedy for suppuration of the ears, while the warm essence
of oysters, should be used in all sorts of painful inflamation
the inner ear (41—44). -•*

Buds of Mallika, shellac, sandal, and Girimrit should be
plastered over a piece of linen, which should be inserted
into an open wound or ulcer, for its gradual 61 !ing up.
The Vybsha ' mixed with the drugs known as the Triphala,
nitrate of copper, and water, as Well as Rajanjanam, should
he deemed as a panacea for all ocular complaints. The
same substance fried in clarified butter and pasted on a
slab of stone with shellac, Kansika And Saindhava salt, should
be deemed as beneficial to all sorts of eye-diseases, charac-


AGNI FUftANAM.


<lM

amulot is * safeguard against death, brings good luck to the
wearer, aad prevents the recrudescence of all evils and im-
pediments. The wearer of such an amulet, is sure to return
victorious from a battle, or from a gambling table, and a barren
woman wearing such a one, is sure to be big with child in no
distant time. Such an amulet should be looked upon as
nothing short of the mystical gem known by the name of
ChinUmanL The Mantra, running as Streem, Kshem, Hum,
Fut, should be repeated a hundred .thousand times, whereby
the* repeater would conquer the dominion of a foreign king,
and win the sovereignty of the world (a a — 25?.


CHAPTER CCCXIH.


Said the God of Fire :-Now I shall describe the

process of worshipping the god Vinayaka. The presiding
deity of the divine cushion, should be first worshipped to-
gether with the eight paradoxical principles of- virtue and
vice, contemplated as situated therein. The lotus with its
stem and petals, and its three rows of polens, as well as the
three fundamental principles of Satva, Raja and Tamas,
should be also worshipped therein. The goddesses, sue as
Jvalini, Nanda, Suyasha, Tejavati and Vindhyavas.n. should
be invoked and worshipped at the outset. The different
manifestations of the god Gana, such as Ganapati, Gana-
murti, should be contemplated in connection with the subse-
quent rite of Nyasa as follows Obeisance to Ganamurti
and Ganapati situated in the region of- «hy heart. Obeisance
to the dreadful one, armed with a single tusk, with whose
essence the region of my brain is permeated. Obeisance to
the one with immoveable ears (Achalakarai), who is situated


AGNI PUN A NAM.


1036

tensed by profuse taciymation and obstruction of vision in
its consequence. A plaster of Girimrit, and sandal should be
applied over the external eye, where the derangement would
be local, and confined to that part of the organ only. Inter-
nally the washings of Tripbala may be administered conjointly
with the local remedies prescribed above (45—48).

A man seeking a loifg life, should take a mixture of
honey and clarified hotter every night. Similarly thicken-
ed milk and clarified butter, boiled with the juice of Shatavari,
are known to act as a strong elixir of vitality. Similarly
Kalamvikas and Masas taken with thickened milk and clari-
fied butter, act as a potent nerve-tonic. The same drugs
used with the juice of Madhuka, bring vigour to an used up
frame and arrest premature old age, and vouchsafe a com-
plete cure of all senile decay. Oil prepared with Rasna and
Sahachara is beneficial to persons suffering from a fever,
due to deranged condition of the vital wind. Cold food
should be carefully avoided by a person suffering from an
abscess, while his diet should consist of articles that do not
give rise to excessive phlegm by their chemical reaction
( 49 ^ 33 )-

, Poultices of fried barley as well as Amla> should be ap-
plied over a boil or an abscess, to bring it to a definite head,
gild to accelerate the process of ' suppuration and spontaneous
bursting. Pulverised Nirova leaves should be used to dress up,
and set up a process of granulation in, an incised wound or
boil. Needles should be used to sew any incision requiring
its use, and the cicatrix left after its healing, should be treat-
ed with the pulverised Nirava leaves as above. Leaves of
Palmyra and Nimva trees are the best hair vigours, while the
same effect may be brought about by an useof the medicated
clarified butter prepared witfi barley, etc;

A fumigation of the part with the _|m ^i : o< the juice of
1 .Shikhi leaves, as well asa, plaster of PakjShaseeds pasted
in the juke of Adta or S|ri|chi piaat, should be deemed


*cm TimxnAiR.


ut59

tn Ithe toft of hair on my crown, and Hrwn, obeisance to the
the elephant-faced one (Gajavaktra), who is protecting my
body as a coat of mail” (i — 4).

The gods, such as Mahodara, Dandahasta, etc., should be
worshipped at the cardinal points of the lotus-shaped mystic
diagram, such as the east, etc., and also at its centre. Then
the different manifestations of Gana, should be wordlipped
as follows : — Hung obeisance to the big-bellied one. Hum,
obeisance to Jaya. Hum, obeisance to the lord of the Ganas.
Hum, obeisance to the leader of the Ganas. Hum, obeisance
to the god of the Ganas. Hum, obeisance to the one with bent
proboscis. Hum, obeisance to the one with a single tusk.
Hum, obeisance to the dreadful one. Hum, obeisance to the
elephant manifestation of the deity. Hum, obeisance to the
elephant-faced one. Hum, obeisance to the fierce-mouthed
one. Hum, obeisance to the remover of all impediments.
The gods, such as Dhumravarna (the dusky one), Mahendra
and Vighnanashana, should be worshipped outside the mystic
diagram, with which the ceremony should be closed
( 5 - 6 ).

Now I shall deal with the mode of worshipping the
goddess Tripura. The manifestations of Rudra, such • as
Asitanga (the black-coloured one), Ruru, Chanda (the Iras-
cible one), Krodha (the angry one), Unmatta, (the infuriated
one), Kapali (the one wielding a human skull), Bhishana (the
dreadful one), Samhara (the god of dissolution), and Bhairava,
as well as the different manifestations of the goddess of ener-
gy, such as Brahmi, Mukhya, Hrasva, Brahtnani, Shanmukha,
Dirgha, etc., should be worshipped at the angular points of
of the mystic diagram, such as the south-east, etc. The
gods, such as Samayaputra, Vatuka, Hetuka, Kshetrapala,
Tripuranta, Agni, Vitala, Agni-Jibva, Karali, Kalalochana,
Ekapada, Bhimaksha, and the god Shiva, the prototype of
the lifeless cosmic matter, and forming the cushion of the
goddess, should be worshipped by repeating the Mantras'
*47


AGNI PURANAM. '' IO27

u a very effective cure for t scorpion-bite. The drugs'

known as the Krishna or Shiva may be added to the
receipe above laid down* according to the virulence
of the poison retained in the wound, and the dreadful
nature of the bite. A draught composed of treacle,
Patola, sesamum-oil, and the juice of Arka plant, should
be administered to a man bitter, by a rabid dog, which
would arrest the development of all subsequent symptoms
peculiar to Hydrophobia. Similarly powdered roots Of
Tanduleya, administered through the medium of clarified
butter, should be deemed as an effective remedy for bites
of spiders and poisonous insects. Even cases of snake-
bites had been successfully treated with the abovesaid
potion, and the most virulent snake-poison had been known
to have been entirely eliminated from the system, by means
thereof. A paste composed of Sandal, Padmaka, Kustha,
Satamvu, Ushira, Patola, Nirgunthi, and Shuriva, is a potent
remedy for all sorts of insect-bites (57 — 6t).

O thou twice-born one, treacle with Nagaraka should be
deemed as a strong eliminator of phlegm, accumulated around
the forehead, or in the region of the cranium. Oil or clari-
fied butter should be used in injections or in passing enemas.
Fire is the best sweating agent known, while water, is.
the best benumber or arrestive. Enema, Syringe, emetics,
and purgatives should 1 be respectively used in complaints
marked by a preponderance of wind, bile and phlegm
(6a<«-63).


AGNt PURANAW.


»I70

AingKAem. The goddess Tripura, seated on a fufl Mown
lotus flower, springing from the naval of the lifeless Shiva,
should be worshipped, by repeating the the Mantras running
as Aing, Hrim, Hrim. The goddess, should be contemplated
as bending her first hand in the attitude of giving encourage-
ment, and wielding a book in her second right hand, while
her two left hands, should be contemplated as respectively
wielding a rosary, and bent in the attitude of giving bene-
diction (7 — 12)-

The goddess should be worshipped by repeating the^Mula
Mantra. The rite of Nyasa in connection with the worship,
should be also performed with the same Mantra. The effect
of the present form of worship, is to send one’s enemy
crazy and distracted from home, so that he might not find
place anywhere in the world. The incantation should be
practised as follows :-The name of the enemy should be
written both at the centre and the eight petals of the
mystic diagram, or the same should be written, with the
charred bone of a burnt corpse, on a piece of linen collected
frpm a cremation ground. An effigy of the enemy should be
made of the ashes of a cremation ground and the linen, thus
charmed, should be inserted into the belly of the image,
the whole being tied with a blue coloured string of thread

( 13 — * 4 )

Om obeisance to the goddess whom the vultures perpe-
tually wheel round in circles, and whose body is composed of
the tongues of living fire. The man, who recites the above
said Mantra, before starting out on any military expedition,
is sure to return victorious, and laden with the spoils and
trophies of war.

Om, Shreem, Hreem, Kleem, Obeisance to the goddess
Shree. The goddess, Ghrini, Surya, should be worshipped
at the four petals of the mystic diagram, commencing from
the one at the north. The divinities, such as the Adilyas,


CHAPTER CCLXXX-


Dhanvantari said: — Diseases are usually grouped
under the following heads, — such as Organic, Mental, Extra*
neous and Functional. Diseases, such as Fever and Leprosy
fall under the first head of ailments, while anger, envy, etc,
are classed as mental derangements. Diseases which owe
their origin to any extraneous cause, such as hurt, etc., are
known as the Agantukas, while the functional disorders are
such as may he best illustrated by thirst, or any other sort
of Inflamatory Fever (i — 2).

O Sushruta, treacle, clarified butter, salt, bits of gold and
Cakes should be given to a Bramhana on a Sunday, for the
prevention of all organic and extraneous diseases. Similarly
by making over to a Bramhan, a vesselful of unguent on
a' Monday, a man is sure to enjoy an immunity from all
sorts of diseases. Vessels, full of oil, should be given to a
Branihana on a' Saturday in the month of Ashvina. The
giver should also provide a feast for the Bramhanas, com-
posed of boiled rice and clarified butter, and bathe the
phalic emblem of -the god Mahadeva, in a composition of
water and clarified butter, whereby he would ’.be free of all
ailments, and enjoy a sound health to the last day of his life.
Bunches of Durva grass, dipped in the composition known
the Tri-Madhu, should be cast as oblations into the sacri-
ficial fire, by reciting the Gayatri Mantra. The patient, after
the period of his convalescence, should bathe under the
auspices of the asterism under which he had contracted the
disease, and offer oblations to the gods, A, Recitation of the
psalm, known as the Vishnu Stotra, shoutd be deemed as an
efficient cure for all sortrof mental aberrations (3—6).

0 Sushruta, hear me discourse on the three cardinal


Mm ttflUNAM.


1171


Prabhavati, Hemadri, Madhura and Shri, should be worship-

ped in succession.

Om, Hreem, Obeisance to Gouri. The Mantra, sacred to
the goddess Gouri, should be deemed as the fulfiller of all
desires The Mantra should be fructified and made effective
by performing the rite of necessary Homa and Japa. The
goddess should be contemplated as possessed of a red com-
plexion and four hands, respectively wielding in two of them
a noose and a spear, one left and one right hand being con-
templated as respectivey bent in the attitude of encourage-
ment and benediction. The man who worships such a goddess
and stands a suppliant at her feet, is sure to enjoy a hundred
summers on earth, and retains his intellectual faculties in
perfect vigour even to the last day of his life, and free from
depredations by thieves and freebooters. A single draught of
water, consecrated with the abovesaid Mantra, is sure to
increase one’s intellectual perception, and to pacify a furious
temperament. Collyrium, consecrated with the abovesaid
Mantra and applied by a man along his eyes, as well as a
Tilak mark similarly consecrated and put on the nose
by a person, should be deemed as possessed of the virtue of
charming the whole world. Poesy places her throne on the
tongue of the person, who recites the abovesaid Mantra.
The same Mantra, repeated by a man or a wife at the time
of sexual intercourse, would cap'tivate his or her mind for-
ever. A man, fondly looking at the nudity of a woman, or
touching her while repeating the Mantra, is sure to enthrall
her mind for good. Libations of clarified butter, containing
seeds of sesamum and poured on the fire by repeating the
abovesaid Mantra, should be deemed as the fulfillers of one’s
all desires. The man, who eats boiled rice every day, seven
times consecrated with the abovesaid Mantra, becomes a
minion of fortune. The Mantra should be deemed as identi-
cal with the divine-self of the god Ardha-Narishvara. The
abovesaid Mantra should be deemed as the prototype of the


AGNI PUR AN AM.


io«9


principles of human system, known as the Vata (wind).
Pitta (bile) and Kapha (phlegm), and the seven component
principles which enter into the making of the human frame.
The food (Annam) taken by a man, Sifter being fully digested
in the intestimes, serves two distinct and different purposes.
A part of the assimilated chyle contributes to the formation
of urine, perspiration, foeces, and the slimy . mucus that is
formed . within the nostrils, etc., whereas the other part is
transformed into the serum, the anterior condition, of blood.
The serum then in its turn, is again transformed into blood,
out of which tissues of muscles or flesh, are made. Similarly
fat is made out of flesh, out of fat bone, out of bone semen,
and out of semen strenghth and attachment are made (7—9).

A physician in attending tOi a patient, should, take into
consideration the nature of the country, the season during
which the disease had been contracted, the strength, stamina
and'the peculiar temperament of the patient, as weU as the
nature . of the disease he has been suffering from, and the.
virtues and potency of the remedial measures to be used .in
that particular case. The treatment should be commenced
under the auspices of favourable asterisms, .and days marked
by violent planets and baneful stars, should be carefully
avoided. O thou, the wise one, .the god ..Hari, the sun, the
moon, the gods, and the pow, should he worshipped before
administering the medicine ; and the following, prayer should
be read. “ May the god* Bramha, Daksba, the Ashvios, the
Rudras, Indra, the Earth-goddess, the sun, the moon, the
wind, the fire, the -hdly sages, the medicinal drugs, the
ghosts, and malignant spirits preserve thee. May the medicine
act as . the vital elixir (Rasayana) prepared by the Rishis, as
the nectar (used by the celestials, and as the ambrosia eateq
by the good. serpents " (to— *14).

A -country abounding in-tree* swamps, or marshy pools,
is known as an Anupy country, a residence wherein produces
a. deranged Condition of the vital ' humour*,* known as tt^f


*cm rtitANAM.


god Vishnu and the goddess Lakshmi, made one through at
process of spiritual fusion. The companion deities of the
goddess, such as Anangarupa, Madanatura, Pavanavega,
Bhuvanapala, etc., should be propitiated with offerings, etc.,
and worshipped at the centre and the angular petals of the
mystic lotus. The rite of Nyasa should be performed with
the Kring-Mantra, coupled with the different rowel letters
of the alphabet. The Mantra should be written on a pitcher,
or inside the mystic hexagonal diagram, and repeated by
covering it over with the palms of the hand, whereby the
person against whom the incantation is to be practised, would
be surely charmed (15 — 23).

Now I shall disclose to you the Mantras, sacred to the
goddess Nitya, and which runs as Om, Hreem, Chha», O
thou ever splitting goddess, who art always moist with fer-
menting exudation. A right of Sadanganyasa should be per-
formed in connection with the abovesaid principal Mantra*
The attendant goddesses, such as, Dravini, Hladakarini,
Kshovini, Gurushaktika, should be worshipped inside the
triangular mystic diagram of a dark red colour. The goddess
Nitya should be worshipped both at the centre and the
angular points of the mystic lotus, together with the mythical
Kalpa tree, and the red-coloured harp, etc. The goddesses,
such as, Nitya, Abbaya, Mangala, Navavira^ Mangala, Dur*
bhaga, and Manomani, etc., should be worshipped at the
different doors of the divine cushion, commencing from the
one at the east (24—26)1

Om, Hreem, Obeisance to the disembodied spirit o i love
Om, Obeisance to. Srriara, the god of love, Om, Hrum*
Obeisance to Maamatha. Ora^ Hrum, Obeisance to Mara.
Om, Hrum, Obeisance to Kama. The god of love and. his
different manifestations, should be contemplated arnaed
with bows and arrows. The goddess of .tyve (Rati) with
her maidens Virati (non-attachment), Priti (pleasure), Vipriti
(displeasure). Mali (thought), Dhriti (comprehension), iVidhriti


1030 AGNI PURANAM.

wind and the phlegm. A country possessing features con*
tray to what hare been described in the preceding line, is
called a Jangala, while a country containing woods and waters
in a moderate proportion! is called a Sadharana (ordinary)
country. A country of the Jangala class, should be deemed
as an excessively billious one (15 — 16).

Things which are dry and cooling in their effects, tend to
promote an accumulation of vital wind in the system ; while
things that are hot, such as the three sorts of astringents,
tend to promote a copious secretion of bile, whereas things
that are sweet, cooling and non-irritant, tend to augment an
accumulation of phlegm. These humours are increased by
using articles that are possessed of like virtues, while they
are abated by using things of contrary virtues. Things which
have a saline or acid taste, should be deemed as phlegm-
making and accordingly pacifiers of the deranged or increased
humour of wind, similarly articles which have a pungent,
acid or a saline taste, should be deemed as bile-making, while
things that are bitter, sweet, or astringent (Kashaya) in their
taste, should be deemed as antibillous. The virtues ascribed
to each of 'the individual tastes above referred to, do not
belong to them per se, but are produced by their chemical
change or reaction (17 — 20).

O Sushruta, things that are hot and stimulating in their
effects, are antidotes for a deranged condition of wind and
phlegm, while things that are cooling in their properties
serve as antibillous. Drugs exert their peculiar virtues not
according to their tastes, etc., but according to their essential
nature (21).

Phlegm is accumulated in winter, reaches its climax
and makes itself manifest in spring, and is subsided
in the summer months. Similarly, O Sushruta, wind is ac-
cumulated in summer, exhibits its peculiar symptoms mostly
in the nights of the rainy season, and is subsided in autumn.
Bile is accumulated during the rains, produces its charac-


NMMmt


►►73


(son-comprehension), Pushti (health), should he contemplated
as enjoying the company of the god of love and his attend-
ants, and should be worshipped as well.

Om, Chham, O thou ever splitting goddess, moist with
exudation of love. Am, Am, A. A. R. E .. U. Uo. Re. Ree
Li. Lee. A. Ai. O. Ou. Ka. Kha, Ga. Gha. Unga. Cha.
Chha. Ja. Jha. Enga. Ta. Tba. Oa. Dha. Na. Ta. Tha. Da.
Dha. Na. Pa. Pha. Va. Bha. Ma. Ya. Ra. La. Wa. Sha, Sha,
Sa. Ha. Ksha. Om, Chham, O thou eversplhting goddess
moist with exudation of love. The regent of the divine
cushion, the lotus, the divine lion, etc., should be worshipped
by repeating the Mantra, running’ as Am, Hrum, (obeisance)
to Gouri, the beloved wife of Radra, Hung, Fut, Obeisance
(37— aS).


CHAPTER CCCXIV.


ib aid the God or Fire Om, Hrum, Kbe, Chhe, Ksha,
Strim, Hrum, Kshe, Hreem, Fut, Obeisance to the goddess
Tvarita. The goddess should be contemplated as possessed
of two or Boar pairs of hands, and should be duly worshipped'
after having’ performed the cite of Nays*. The regent of
universal receptivity (Adhara Shakti), as well as the lotus-
cushion of the goddess, and bee divine lion, should be wor-
shipped m succession, and the rite of Sadanganyasa
should be subsequently performed. The goddess, Gayatri)
should be worshipped at the eastern petal of the mystic lotus,
and the attendant divinities, of tbe goddess, such as Hunkara,
Khecharit Chanda, Cbhedtni, Kahepani, Kshemanbari and
Futkari,. should be worshipped at the central part sf the
mystic diagram, by eshibitnig the* Fiank»-Medra& The two-
hand-maids of the goddess, known as Jay* and Vijaya,


MNI PURANAM.


1031


(eristic symptoms in autumn, and is subsided in fore- winter.
The three seasons such as the Rain, etc., should be deemed
as the Visargas. The moon during the three seasons, such as
the rain, etc., materially affects the earthly sap, and produces
the juice of different tastes, such as acid, saline, and sweet.
Similarly during the three successive seasons 'of autumn, etc.,
h affects the earthly sap and gives rise to different tastes in
different articles. As the duration of night increases, the
intensity of each of the tastes increases in succession, and
the strength of men increases in conjunction therewith ;
whereas it wanes with the waning of the duration of night.
The three successive stages of the life of a man, as well as
those of the entire length of the day (inclusive of night), is
respectively marked by the preponderance of the three vital
humours, such as the wind, the bile and the phlegm. These
humours are supposed to have been accumulated before the
time of their preponderance (when they exhibit their charac-
teristic symptoms) and to have been subsided thereafter
(22 — 30).

0 thou twice-born one, all diseases are either to an over-
loading of the stomach, or to an absence or insufficiency of
food/ as well as to an artificial restraining of the impulses of
eructation, micturation, etc. Only a two-third portion of
the entire cavity of the stomach, should be crammed with
food, the rest should be left empty for the working of the
humour of wind. A remedial measure is nothing but an agent
(drug etc.,) which operates contrarily to a cause or to a set of
causes, that has or have engendered the disease (31 — 34).

O Sushruta, though die parts of the body which are above
or below (he umbilical region, as well as the regions of
the pelvis and the anus, are ordinarily supposed to be the
repositories of the humours of wind, bile and phlegm, still
tbe wind courses freely all through the system. The heart
is situated in the upper part of the trunk, and is supposed to
be the seat of the mind. A man of windy temperament,


U 74


AGNI PURANAM


should be worshipped at the door of the diapim, the Kin-
karas having been worshipped in their front (I— -3**

Subsequent to that, oblations of sesamum should be cast
into the sacrificial fire by repeating the Vyahriti-Mantras, by
which the votary would be able to obtain all he would ask
for. Libations of clarified butter, should be poured on the fire,
in honour of each of the undermentioned snake ornaments of
the goddess, as follows : — Oblations with obeisance (Namah)
Svaha to the primeval Hydra (Anantai, oblation with obei-
sance (Namah Svadha) to Kulika, oblation with obeisance
(Svaha) to Vasukiraja. Oblation with obeisance (Voushat) to
Shankhapala. Oblation with obeisance ( Vashat) to Takshaka.
Oblation with obeisance (Namas) to Maha-Padma. Oblation
with obeisance (Svaha) to the serpent Karkata. Oblation
with obeisance (Fut) to the serpent, Padraa.

After that, the votary should lay down the diagram of in-
cantation, known as the Nigraha Chakra, and which consists
of eighty-one terms, either on a piece of Bhurja bark, or on
a stone slab, or on a piece of prepared canvas, or on a piece
of linen, or he should curve it into the bough of a Vata tree.
The name of the enemy, or the antagonist, should be written
in the middle chamber of the diagram, or in those occupying
its four cardinal points, in case where it would be delineated
on a piece of prepared canvas. The Mantra, which should
be recited in connection with the present incantation, runs
as, Om, Hreem, Kshum, set down and set down the four
thorns and draw close the veil of the night of death (4—8).

The mystic verse which should be written within the
diagram of spell, and beyond the border of which the region
of Pluto should be imagined as lying with all its horrors
and monstrosities, runs as follows : —

Kalinara-ranalika-neena, Moksha Kshamonanee.
Mamodita Tadomoma Rakshatasva Svatakshara,
Yamapatha thapamaya Matha motha-thamotharaa.
Vamobhuri ribhumova tha tha rishfa Shvari tha tha.


1032


AGNI PUKANAWk


becomes garrulous with a thin, wry frame, and scanty haiity
and of regular appetite, such a man fancies himself as coursing
through the wind in sleep. A man of billious temperament
becomes irritable, perspires copiously, is overfond of sweets,
and sees flames of fire in dreams. The hairs of. such a man
become untimely tinged with grey. A man of phlegmatic
disposition, is a man of regular build, with glossy hairs and
clear complexion, and sees large sheets of clear water in
s, eep f35~ 39)-

O thou foremost of human beings, men of different Lom-
peraments are again sub-divided into the three classes of
Satvika, Rajasika and Tamasika, according to their indivi-
dual propensities (40).

The disease known as the Haemoptysis (Rakta Pitta) is
usually ascribed to excessive seminal waste by coition, or
to an attempt to lift a heavy load which is beyond one's
capacity. A mess of sordid rice, as well as an indulgence in
grief, is sure to be followed by a derangement of the wind.
O thou twice-born one, a long journey, partaking of food
which is alkaline in its reaction, and fear, are followed by
a deranged condition of the bile. Similarly the phlegm of
a man who is in the habit of drinking water in large quan-
tities, or o r sleeping after meal in the day time, or of taking
boiled rice soaked in water, or of leading a sedentary life
is sure to be deranged. The characteristic symptom^ of
deranged wind, are pain in the joints, bitter 'taste in the
mouth, dryness of the lips, perched condition of the region
of the palate, yawning, and goose-flesh. Similarly a de-
ranged state of bile is marked by yellowness of the eyes,
nails, and veins, bitter taste in the mouth, thirst, heat, and
a burning sensation of the skin. Similarly a disordered
state of phlegm* is followed by a general sense of langour,
heaviness of the limbs, shivering, sweet taste in the mouth,
and a longing for heat or warm touch. Warm rice, lubri-
cation, emollient food in general and draughts of oil woald be


ACNI FURANAM.


i»75


Water sprinkled over this region of Pinto, and consecrated
with the Vam-, Tam-, Mantras, should be deemed as the bar-
binger of death.

The verse should be written with a pen of crow’s quill, and
in a composition made of collyrium, the gum of a Nimva tree,
poison, and the marrow and blood of a human victim. A
cremation ground, or a crossing of four roads, should be the
place where the spell should be secretly practised. The
charm should be either placed underneath a pitcher, or depo*
sited inside an anthill, or should be hung on the bough of
a Vibhitaka tree. The spell, in question, should be looked
upon as the destroyer of one’s opponents of all denomina-
tions (9 — 12).

Now I shall deal with the charm, which woula counteract
the baneful effects of the one described [in the -preceding
paragraph], and which is known as the circle of grace.
(Anugraha Chakram). Both the spell, and its constituent ver-
ses, should be either written on a white leaf, or on a piece
of Bhurja bark, and in a solution of shellac or saffron, or in
sandal or fchalk paste, as might be available. The Om Junsa
Mantra should be written within the central chamber of the
diagram, and in the left one counted from the east, and along
its boundary walls, as well as on its ground plane, and also in
the chamber at its west. The Mantras, known as Lakshmi
Sloka (Shri Sukta) should be written all round the diagram,
in the direction of south-east to the south-west. Then the
myttic verses running as —

Sreeh Simiyi Y&m&si Shreeh Sinon YSjne JneylnonsS

M&yi Lili Lalee Yimi Yijne Nalee Leena JneyS.

The abovesaid lotus circle, should be worshipped in the
middle of a lotus flower. Such an incantation is a safeguard
against death, and should be regarded as the greatest of
all peace-giving rites, and also as a grantor of the highest
•rtune (I3*— 1 ?)’


AGNI PUAANAM.


*°33


deemed as effective cures for deranged wind, while the use
of clarified butter, and thickened milk and basking in the
moon beam, should be deemed as antibillious in their effects.
Physical exercise, medicated oil of*" Triphala, and honey,
should be deemed as the antidote of a deranged condition of
phlegm. A recitation of the hymn to Vishnu, should be deem-
ed as a safe cure for all sorts of distempers (41— 48).

CHAPTER CCLXXXI.


OhANVANTAr! said : — Now I shall deal with the nature
of the herbal extracts, which are usually used in the pre-
parations of our Pharmacopeia. A physician who under-
stands well the properties of these herbal extracts, as well
their potency and the altered virtues which they acquire
through chemical reaction, should be employed to attend to
a king. The extracts having a sweet, acid, or saline taste,
should be deemed as belonging to the Somaja Class, where-
as those that are pungent, bitter, or brackish, should be
deemed as appetisers. O thou possessed of powerful arms,
a thing may acquire three different tastes by a process of
chemical reaction, such as the bitter, the acid, and the saline.
Drugs are again divided into two classes according as they
exert stimulating or soothing virtues (Ugra and Shita)
(i“3).

O thou foremost of the twice-born ones, the potency of
the medicine should be considered; in each individual case,
and the dose should be regulated accordingly. Things which
taste sweet, brackish, or bitter, should be deemed as soothing
in their properties, the rest being Ushnavirja (stimulating).
A Drug, though possessed of a taste, which is soothing in its
effect, may, like the bitter Guduchi, exert a stimulating virtue
130


xi66


ACNI FUftANAM.


In dreadful incantations, the mystic chamber is to be
-divided into eleven (Rudra) chambers. The Vijas beginning
with Ora, and ending with Hang Put, should be written in
chambers at both the extremities of the diagram, the Adi*
varnas having been inserted in their middle. The Vidya-
varnas, ending with the Vasat-Vija, should be inserted below
the line of the abovesaid Mantras, and below them should
be written the Vijas, considered as Pratyangis to those men-
tioned in the preceding line. Such a diagram should be
looked upon as the most powerful agent in bringing about
the realisation of one’s all desires. The circles of grace and
oppression (Nigraha-nugraha Chakras), should be written with
the eighty-one terms, mentioned above, and respectively held
sacred to them. The Mantra, running as Kreem Sah Hum
Fut, and known as the Amriti Vidya (incantation of reviving
life), should be surrounded with -three circular chains of the
Hrung-Vijas. Such an incantation, repeated by depositing the
mystic diagram in a water-pitcher. is sure to kill all the ene-
mies of the votary, and to confer upon him all sorts of boon.
Being whispered into his ear, the incantation is sure to
destroy »U venom in a person, bitten by a venomous snake
or animal, or exhibiting symptoms of malicious poisoning


CHAPTER CCCXV.


Said the God op Fire : — Now ! shall deal with the
spells that tend to captivate, stupify, distract or control the
intellectual faculties of a person, as welt as with those
that are practised for bringing about the death of one's
Antagonist, or for the purpose of neutralising the effects of
venom mid poison (i).


*034


KGNl PUR AN AM.


in combination with any other bitter drag. Similarly a drug
of a heat-making or Kashaya taste, may exert a soothing in-
fluence through a process of chemical change. Meat which
is ordinarily sweet, may exercise a stimulating effect. Drugs
or articles of a saline or a sweet taste, exercise a soothing
effect through reaction, while acid substances become heat-
making when they undergo a chemical change (4 — 7).

In preparing decoctions (Kashyayas), the drugs should be
boiled in water, sixteen times their actual weight, and should
be kept boiling until a quarter part of the water is evapora-
ted. This rate should be followed where no special measures
would be given. In preparing medicated oils, the decoction
of drugs should be mixed with oil instead of water, which
should measure four times the weight of the oil under
preparation. Then the decoction should be kept evaporating
until the oil is entirely freed of the last particle of added
water (decoction), and then the drugs (such as Gandha
Dravyas) should be gradually, mixed with it (8 — 11).

O Sushruta, I have dealt with the process of preparing
pills and medicated oils. The medicines which are applied
on the tongue, as well as expressed juice of drugs should be
transparent, and administered in small doses, while decoc-
tions prescribed in our Pharmacopeia, should be possessed
of the same qualities as regards clearness, etc., as any herbal
extract. Pulverised drugs should be administered in doses,
weighing four'Pala weights for each official dose of decoc-
tion. Such a dose is called a dose of the middling class. O
Sushruta, no hard and fast rule can be laid down as regards
doses, which are to be determined according to the age,
strength, the state of appetite, and the residence of the
patient, as well as the nature of the seasqn, In each particular
case (ra — 15b

Articles possessing tastes falling under the category of
Soumya, should be moftly deemed as tonics, while sweet
articles in general, should be deemed as endued with the


AGN1 PURANAN1.


« 11

The image o'f a tortoise shoald be delineated on a piece
of Bhurja bark to the extent of six fingers, after having
performed the rite of Tadanam on it. The twice-born one,
should write the Mantras with an act of Nyasa, in the
■different chambers drawn on its inner side. The Kreem
Mantras should be written within the four chambers drawn
•pn the region of its legs, the Hreem Mantra in the region
of its mouth, the Vidya Mantras in its belly, and the name
•of the antagonist, or of the person against whom the
incantation would be practised, should be written on its
back. The diagram should be encircled with a chain of the
letters, known as the Mala-Mantras, after which it should be
placed on a brick. Then the whole picture, should be covered
over with a human skull, and the Mantras peculiar to the
spell, should be read over it. Then having worshipped the
great tortoise-manifestation of Vishnu, the votary should
scatter around the water, offered to the deity for absolving
his feet, and kick seven times, with his left foot, against the
ground, and think as if he had been kicking the enemy,
whereby the enemy would remain tongue-tied to the last
day of his life, and all his intellectual faculties would be
paralysed (a — 6).

Then having attired himself in the garb of Bhariva, he
should write the Mala-Mantra as follows :

Om, O thou who dost stop the mouth of one's enemies, O
thou who dost agitate the whole universe, and art the embodi-
ment of desire. Hreem Phem, O thou Phetkarini, gag the
mouths of my enemies, which the gods have given them at
their births, paralyse apd paralyse the tongues,, of all my
enemies. O stop and stop their mouth. Om, Hum, Phem,
obeisance to Phetkarini, Fut. The Mantra, should be written
on the specific stone slab, as laid down before, and the votary
shohld silently repeat it in his mind. The mighty weapons
of the deity, such as the trident, etc., should be written on
the -right hand side of the votary, and the Mantra, sacred to

148


AGN! PURANAM.


same virtues. Deranged humours arfe much more deranged
by using drugs and articles, which are possessed of similar
pathogenetic properties, while they are subdued by articles
that exert contrary virtues under similar circumstances. The
•three physical functions of eating, sleeping, and coition, are
essential to a healthy condition of life ; but a man should
neither entirely abstain from, nor excessively indulge in
them, as both such conducts are harmful and injurious to
health. A system, any way exhausted or used up, should be
built up by means of restoratives, while a person afflicted
with obesity, should use depletives to reduce the inordinate
bulk of his frame. A man who is neither too fat nor too
lean, should take special care of his health, just as he would
exhibit symptoms, of losing flesh. These are the rules which
should be observed in keeping three, different types of
constitution in normal health (16—19).

Entire abstemiousness, or an over-gratifaction of physical
propensities, are the two main sources of all ailments, and
hence a man should practise moderation in his food, drink
and general habits. The remedial measures in their turn
are again grouped under five different heads, such as Rasa
(juice), Kalka (cakes or poultices), Shrita (distilled extracts)
Shita (cold-drawn juice) and Phant. O thou foremost of
human beings, Rasa signifies juice of drugs pasted in a suit-
able pestle and mortar. Kalka signifies drugs duly cooked
and pulverised in a heating pan. Shrita means juice of a
drug or a plant distilled out through a process of heating.
Shita means a potion, cooled by keeping itl exposed to the
night wind, while phant means decoction made by boiling
a drug on the same day it is administered (20 — 23).

There are hundred and sixty different modes of rubbing
or shampooing the body of a patient, which are equally
efficacious in their effects as positive remedial agents,
whether mineral or vegetable, and the man (Vahu-Shoun-
dika) who is well skilled in them, may bid fair to be match-


AGNI PUKANAft),


II7I

the god AghoVa, should be looked upon as possessed of the
virtue of stupetying the senses of one's enemies, if written
any where within the village he would live in (7'.

Om obeisance to the goddess Bhagamalini, agitate and
agitate, and bestir and bestir thyself, O thou ever-splitting
goddess, put forth and put forth thy wonted slimy exuda-
tion, Om Hrum, Sah, obeisance to thee, who art the embodi-
mt.it of the principles represented by the Mantra, Kreem.

Om Phem, Hum, Fut to the goddess Phetkarini. Hreetn
burn and bum, charm and charm the three worlds, obeisance
to thee, O thou goddess, Gujhyakalika. A tilak mark
consecrated with the abovesaid Mantra, and put on the nose
by a person, should be deemed as a powerful spell in sub-
jugating even the mind of a sovereign. The menstrual blood
of a woman, mixed with pulverised Sataka flowers, and the
dirt collected from the body of an ass, and charmed with the
abovesaid Mantra, and scattered on the bed of a hitherto 1
attached pair, is a very potent incantation in creating dis-
union between them. Similarly, the horns of a cow, the
hoofs of a horse, and the head of a snake, charmed as above
indicated and thrown into the bouse of a person, would dis-
turb the domestic peace of his household. The flowers
known as the Karavira, and the yellow Shipha, mixed with
grains of sun-dried rice, and charmed as above, should be
looked upon as the most powerful spell in bringing about the
deqdh of one’s antagonist. Similarly, the blood of a Vyala,
together with that of a mole, and powdered Karavira flowers,
should be considered as possessed of a similar virtue- Oil
prepared with the pulverised remains of a Saratha, of a
bee, ef a crab, or of a scorpion, would give rise to lepra-like
eruptions on one’s skin. (S-H 13).

Om obeisance to the nine planets, kill and kill, and affect
and affect, and strike and strike all my enemies. Am, Sans,
Mam, Vum, Oum, Shum, Sham, Ram, Kera, Om, obeisance.
The planets should be worshipped in a cremation ground-


AON! nillANAM.


X036

less, as far as the art of healing is concerned A‘ man
abonld observe a regimen of diet wuidh is at once, clean,
light and wholesome, so that his appetite might not be
impaired. A good appetite is the root of strength and
sound health. A lubrication composed of Triphala, Sifldbu,
Jangala-juice, curd and clarified butter, should be pres-
cribed for a patient suffering from a disease, marked by a
highly deranged state of the humour of wind (24—26)

Shampooing of the body is beneficial during the months
of summer, while in winter an equilibrium should be tried
to be maintained among ther different vital humburs by
means of harmonising medicinal remedies, while in the
spring, the unguent above referred to, should be rubbed in
the fashion known as the Ulvana. The skin should be first
rubbed and lubricated, then the limbs, then the unguent
should be rubbed so as to reach down into the tissues covering
the bones and the muscles. Then the muscles of the
shoulders, arms, thighs, knee-joints, back and the breast, should
be firmly rubbed. The joints should be gently expanded, and
not pulled out with a rough and violent jerk (27 — 30).

A man should not take any physical exercise, so long as
the food would remain undigested in his stomach, nor just
after having drunk water or taken a full meal. A man
should not practise gymnastic after the lapse of a quarter part
of the day, nor bathe in cold water just after having come
out of his gymnasium. Tepid water removes fatigue. A
man should never try to suppress his breath. Gymnastic
exercises remove cold. Shampooing of a limb subdues the
deranged condition of the vitiated local wind. A bath is
antibillioua in its effect. Warm clothes should be used after
A' bath. Men who practise gymnastics become enured to
hardship, and can stand a considerable amount of beat and
fatigue (ji~33).


1179


4GN1 PUKANAM.

by offering a hundred Arka flowers to each of them, and by
repeating the abovesaid Mantra. The images of the planets
should be either drawn on a piece of Bhurja bark, or should
be made of clay, and such a worship would undoubtedly lead
te the fall and ruin of one’s enemy/

Then the nine Matrikas, should be invoked as follows
Om Kunjari, Om Bramhani Om Manjari Maheshvari, Om
Vetali, Koumari, Om, Kali Vaishnavi. Om, Aghora Varahi,
Om Vetali Indrani. Om Urvashi-Chamunda. Om Vetali,
Chandika, and Om Jayani Yakshini. O you nine Matrikas,
take and take piy enemy. The name of the enemy should
be written on a piece of Bhurja bark, and the rite of
necessary worship in connection with the incantation should
be performed in a cremation ground, which would bring
about his death (14 — 15).


-:o>


CHAPTER CCCXVI.


3aid the god of fire : — The Mantra which begins with
the Hung Vija, and runs as Hung Khi, Chhi, Ksha, Streem
Hung (rtV), Ksbi, Fut, should be deemed as the realiser of
one’s all desires, and an efficacious eliminator of all venom
or poison from the human system. The Mantra running
as Om, Kshi Chhe, should be used in reviving a person bitten
by a deadly snake. The Mantra, running as Om,
Hrim, Ke, Ksha, should be used in incantations, prac-
tised for neutralising the effects of poison, or for the
purpose of bringing discomfiture of one’s enemies. The
Mantra, running as Streem, Hum, Fut, should be used in
charms, possessed of the virtue of curing distempers due to
due’s sinful conduct; while the Mantras, Khi, Chha, should


CHAPTER CCLXXX1I.


Dhanvantari said : — Now I shall deal with the hygenic
effects of different trees and shrubs planted around the
dwelling of a man. The trees known as-the Plakshas, should
be planted to the east of a ^ w ^tling house the vataS oik tttfe
east, the Mangos on (he South, and the AshvatVos o* the
west. Thorny shrub should be so planted as to edge
the Southern, boundary of the ground of a house. The
flower garden sty ou jd be laid out adjoining a dwelling house,
or blooming plants of sesamum orientale should be culti-
vated therein. The trees should be planted after having j
worshipped - the Brahmanas and their sovereign, the nkoon-
.god, and under the auspices of the asterisms presided Over
by the wind god, Prajapati, and the god Vishnu respectively,
or of those known as the Mula, the Hasta. and the Dfubhas
(i—4)-

Tanks should bq excavated in the garden, and arms of
rivers should be made to run into the same. The excavation
of tanks, or of artificial reservoirs of 'water, should be first

* • * J*

commenced under the auspices of the asterisms known as
the Hasta, the Magha, the Pushya, or under those presided
over by the Maitras, {he Varunas, apd the three Uttaras.
The gods such as Varuna, Vishnu, and Parianya, should be
first worshipped and propitiated before the excavation
would be taken in hand. Trees such as Aristha, Ashoka,
Plantain, Punnaga, Shirisha, Ja’mvu, Vakula, and Pome-
granate, or any other trees carefully planted in. a garden,
should be watered, each morning and evening, dating the
summer months, on e$ch alternate day during winter, dn<f
at the break of dawn daring the mins wljen the earth would
be dry and require watering (5-8).

Irftit** Society. Calcutta


AGNt PURANAM'v


tlSO

be deemed as the removers of all impediments to one’s success*
The Mantra, running as Hrum, Streem, Om, should be
recited in charms, practised for winning the affections of a
woman, while the Mantra, running as Khe, Streem, Khe,
should be used in spells brewed for the death of an enemy,
who has nearly gone through the natural term of his life. The
Mantras, running as Ksha, Stree, K shah, should be used in
spells of victory and subjugation. Aim, Hrum, Shretm,
Sphem, Kaim, Kshoum, O thou goddess Amvica (mother)
Kuvjika, Sphem, Om, Bham, Tam, bring (such and. a such
person) under my control. Obeisance to thee, 0 thou dreadful
mouthed one, Vram, Vreem, Kili, Kili, Vichcha, Sphoum,
Haim, Sphrum, Shreem, Hreem, Aim Shreem. These Mantras,
sacred to the goddess Kuvjika, should be deemed as
possessed of the virtue of imparting all sorts of boon. Now
I shall disclose to you the Mantras which are held sacredi
to the god Isha (Shiva), and which were formerly revealed
to the god Skanda (i — 5 )’

— — :o:—

CHAPTER CCCXVII.


The God said o Guha, the Mantra sacred to the
god Shiva, aad known as the Prasada (Hroum), admits of a
division into eight different classes, such as the Sakala (with
the phases of beatitude), Niskala (without the phase of
beatitude), Shunyam tthe Mantra of absolute vacuum),
Svamalankritam (adorned by bis self), Kshapanam (Mantra
of emanation), Kshayani (the Mantra of dissolution), and
Kantoshtam. The letters of the alphabet required in writ-
ing the term Sadashiva should be deemed as the fountain
source from which all sorts of success regarding penances,
and austerities, da emanate (!*•*)•


AGNI PURANAM.


Trees planted in rows, twenty cubits apart, should be
deemed as the be'st planted, while those having a space of
siiteen or ten cubits left intervening between them, should
be deemed as ranking second best in respect of fruitfulness.
Trees should be transplanted twelve times, nor should they
be planted too close or adjoining each other, in which case,
the branches that touch one another, should be lopped off
with a chopper, as otherwise they would bear no fruits.
In case where barrenness would be apprehended, the leaves
.and branches .of a tree should fe e sprinkled over with a
solution of cold water, saturated with Vidanga, clarified
butter, pulverised Mudga, Masha and Kulattha pulse.
Similarly a tree sprinkled with a solution o'? co ^ water, and
clarified butter, becomes laden with abundaftt fruits and
blossoms. A similar result is obtained by mari1* r * n g the
soil 'with powdered barley, sesamum, and the offal matter of
a goat, mixed together and soaked in washings of beef,
seven consecutive nights. A good growth of trees is secured
by sprinkling them with the washings of fish. Fish and meat,
powdered and mixed with a quantity of pulverised Vidanga,
should be sprinkled over a tree by way of a pregnancy-
present, or for the purpose of curing it of all distempers
( 9 — * 3 )-


CHAPTER CCLXXXI1I.


Dhanvantari said : — A decoction of Sinhi, Shathi, the
two sorts of Nishi, and Vatsaka, should, be deemed as a
sure cure for all types of infantile dysentry, or for all dis-
eases brought about by a vitiated state of its mother’s milk.
A paste of Shringi and Ativisha mixed with honey, or honey


AGN» PURANAM


»»«t

The rite of Nyasa in connection with the Mantra, should,
be performed by imagining the effulgent images of all the
letters of the alphabet from A to Ksha, as located in the
different parts of the body, together with the images of the
following manifestations of Shiva, who are their respective
tutelary divinities. The gods that preside over each of the
letters are, Kamadeva, Shikhandi, Ganesha, Kala, Shankara,
Ekanetra, Dvinetra, Trisbikha, Dirgha-Vahuka, Ekapada,
Ardha-Chandra, Valapa, Yoginipriya, Shakitishvara, Maha-
granthi, Tarpaka, Sthanu, Dauntura, Nidhisha, Nandi,
Padma, Shakunipriya, Mukhavimva, Bheeshana, Kr^anta,
Prana, Tejashvi, Shakra, Udadhi, Shrikantha. Sinha, Shas-
hanka, Vishvarupa, Ksha, and Narasinha (3 — 8).

Then the rite of Pancha-Murti Nyasa, should be per-
formed as follows Houm, obeisance to the god Ishana
located in my brain. Hero, obeisance to the Tatpurusha
manifestation of the god. Hum, obeisance to Aghora, per-
meating the region of my heart, Herrt, obeisance to Vama-
deva, situated at the region of my arms, and Ham, obeisance
to the Sadyojata manifestation of the god, permeating the
region of my legs. All the Mantras, should be preceded by
the Pranava, which should end with the name of each of the
gods invoked in the dative case ending with the term Nama*
(obeisance) appended thereto (9 — 11).

Then the rite of Karan^anyasa should be performed by
appending the terms of obeisance, such as Namas, Svaha,
Vasht, Hum, Fut, and Voushat to each of the proper Mantras,,
enjoined to be repeated on those occasions, together with the
names of, the different manifestations of the god, such as
Sadyojata, Ishvara, etc., who are the regents of those parts
of the human body.

Then the rite of subsequent Nyasa, should be performed
with the comoponent letters of the Shiva Mantra, as
follows : — Ora obeisance to the heart, Nam obeisance, to the
head, Mam obeisance to the tuft of hair on the crown, Shim


AGNI PURANAM. IO39

And pulverised Ativisha alone f should be applied ou the
tongue of a child, suffering from cough, catarrh or frfam
inflamatory fever incidental thereto. Similarly, extracts of
Yastika and Shatapushpi, administered to a child through
the vehicle of milk, oil, clarified butter, or thickened milk,
tends to improve its complexion, speech, and memory, and to
increase its duration of life (1 — 4).

A decoction of the drug known as the Krishna, treated
with the cake of Mridvika, should be known as a strong vermi-
fuge, which proves specially efficacious in a case of infantile
worm. The expressed juice of Triphala, and Bhringa, may
be added to the receipe above enumerated, and may be ad-
ministered to a child, suffering from worms in the intestines,
through the medium of honey and clarified butter. The
expressed juice of Durva grass used as a snuff, is the best
specific for bleeding of the nose. Similarly, the expressed
juice of garlic, should be administered in all cases of inflama-
tion of the ear. A decoction of Tulam, Ginger, and Jatya,
acts as a specific for intestinal colic, and as an absorbent
in cases of incarnation of the lower lip. An oil prepared
with the decoction of Jatipatra, Phalam, Vyosha, Mutraka,
and Nisha boiled in milk, or in the Kalka of Abhaya, should
be deemed as the best cure for all diseases of the teeth. A
person suffering from tonsilitis, or from an enlargement of
the uvula, should gargle his mouth every day, with a decoc-
tion of paddy, cocoanut, urine of cow, and Vishva. A
person suffering from a scrofulous inflamation of the glands
about the neck, or from glandular swellings in general,
should snuff every day a quantity of oil, prepared with the
cake of Langali and the expressed juice of Nirgunthika. A
person suffering from a skin disease, should rub the affected
parf with a solution composed of cow's urine, and saturated
with the juice of Arka, Pallava, Sinhi, and , Putika. A con-
tinuous exhibition of the medicine, composed of Vakuchi
and sesamum for a year, may prove a successful cure for


agni puranam.


1182

obeisance to the armour, Vam, obeisance to the three
..yes, and Yam obeisance to the weapon (*»— 'V-

Then the Vija-Mantras, known as the Shikhas, coupled
with the phonetic symbol of the crescent, and followed by the
term of obeisance, Fut, should be looked upon as no less than
the mighty trident (Pashupata) of Shiva, and as the scourge
of all evil-doers. I have finished saying all about the Sakala-
Mantras, sacred to the god Shiva, now hear me discourse on
those which pass by the denomination of the Nishkalas.

The Nishkala, or the Panchanga Mantras, sacred to S iva,
consist of the Vijas known as the Oushadha, Vishvarup a,
Rudra, Surya, and the half-moon, coupled with the Nada
Mantra, Om. A man, by repeating these Mantras, becomes
entitled to all the pleasures of this life, and to salvation in

the next (18— 21).

The Mantras, which are known as the Shunyas, consist
of the Vijas, known as the Anshumana, preceded and fol-
lowed by the one ol the Vi.hv.rup. cUss, and divested of
those which are grouped under the category of the Beam,
hangas. The Mantra should be made use of by boys a
dull persons in general, whereby all impediments to their
acquisition of knowledge, would be removed.

The Mantra known as the Kaladhya, consists of the Vijas
known as the Anshumana, coupled with the Vishvarupam
placed over the one known as the Uhaka. All the essential
rites of worship, should be conducted in the same way,
as laid down in a worship with the Sakala Mantras.

The Mantras known as the Svamalankritam, should consist
of the Vijas known as th. Natasinha, coupled, with the
Kritanta, and followed by the Anshuman, coupled with the
one of Uhaka class. The rite of Nyasa in connection with the

Mantra, should be performed with the Mantra, composed of

the half moon, the Pranava, the Bramha, the Vishnu, the

Udadhi, and the Narasinha Vijas, all other rites being done

.as in the preceding instances (aa— a6).


'1 040


ACN1 PURANAM.


lepiosy. Similarly) the oil of Bhallataka, as well as the oiled
Gtida-Pindi, is a safe cure for that dreadful disease. A
man afflicted with condylomatous growths about the
region of the amis, should use a potion composed of whey,
saturated with the essence of Jutika, Vanhi, Rajani, Triphala
and Vyosha, or should take treacle and Abhaya every day
until the polypus would fall off, or become dead or inert. A
man suffering from any of the minor sorts of urethral
discharges, should drink the decoction of Phala, Darvi, and
Visha, or the expressed juice of the Dhatri fruit mixed with
the boiled essence of Rajani. The essence of Vasa taken
through the medium of Castor oil. is a very efficacious
remedy for the form of disease known as the Vata-Rakta*
while the drug Pippali should be known as possessed of the
virtue of curing enlarged spleens (5 — 16).

A man suffering from any sort of abdominal dropsy,
should drink goat’s milk, boiled with the essence of Chavya,
Danti, Agni, Vidanga, and Vyosha. Similarly, medicated
clarified butter prepared with whey, essence of meat,
Granthika, Ugra, Abhaya, Krishna, and Vidanga, should be
prescribed in cases of diarrhoea, piles, Jaundice, worms and
abdominal tumours in general. A decoction of the drugs,
known as the Triphala, Vasa, Amrita, Chireta, taken with
honey as an anxiliary potion, should be deemed as a very
reliable remedy in a case of Jaundice with oedema. A man
suffering from Haemoptysis, should take with honey a potion
composed of the essence of Vasa, Shunthi, Vari, grapes,
Vala and Surasa, or the essence of each of the abovesaid
drugs separately pressed out and administered (17 — 20).

A man suffering from Phthisis, should take with honey
and clarified butter, a pulverised compund of the drugs,
known as the Vari, the Vidari, the three Valas, the Vasakam,
and the Shva-Danstra. A man suffering from any sort of
erysipilatous ulcer should take Shigru, Karan ja, Arka with
% Sindhu (Vitex negundo), and honey. In a case of fistula


agni puhanam.


1184

Then the Oja Vijas should be first coupled with those
known as the Anshumats, and which should be followed by the
Anshumats coupled in their turn with the Anshus. The third
Vija, should consist of those known as the Anshumana and the
Ishvara, and the Mantra, thus framed, should be deemed as
the grantor of salvation to its votary. The next Mantra
should be composed in the following order : — First the Vija
known as the Uhaka, should be written, coupled with an
Anshu, which should be followed in due succession by a
Varuna, Prana, Tejasha and a Kritanta Vija. The seventh
Varna, should consist of the Anshumana, the Uhaka, the
Prana, the Padma, the Indu, and the Nandisha Vijas, followed
by the one of Ekapadadarik.

The Mantras, known as the Kshapana, should consist of
these ten Vijas, from the beginning. The third, fifth and
the seventh feet of the Mantra, should respectively consist
of Mantras, numbering half as much. The ninth foot, should
consist of the Vija, held sacred to the Sadyojata manifesta-
tion of the god, while the second foot, should consist of the
Hrid-Mantras. The Mantras, consisting of the abovesaid
ten Vijas, should end with the Fut, and which should be
considered as the Astra-Mantra in the present case (*7 3 1 )*

The rites of the Anganyasa in connection with the pre-
ceding Mantra, should be performed by appending the term
Namas to the names of the eight Vidyeshvaras, such as
Ananta, Isha, Sukshma, Shivottama, Ekamurti, Ekarupa, or
Trimurti, Shrikantha and Shikhandi. The images of the
manifestations of the god counted from that of Shikhandi to
that of Ananta, should be considered as the images of the
regents of the Mantra (3a — 34).


AGN1 PURANAM.


104 1

in hho, the ulcerated part should be covered over with A paste
of Trivrita (Teori), Jivati, (i) Danti, (.2) Manjistha, (3) Tur-
meric Daruharidra, (4) Tarkshaja, and the pulverised leaves
of the Nimva tree. A limp saturated With a paste of
ftudhata, Rajani, pulverised shellic, hbney and Vasa, should
be insetted in an incised wound or ulcer for antiseptic
purposes, as well as for. the purpose of arresting its spread.
Oil, boiled and distilled with Shyama, Yasthi, Nisha, Shellac,
Padma, Utpala, Sandal wood and pepper mixed with thicken-
ed millc, should be applied over a boil, or an ulcer, to bring
it to a definite head, and to accelerate a process of healthy
suppuration (2 1^24).

Burnt ashes of Shri, Karpasha, Data mixed with pul*
verised turmeric, Phala, and Uplavana, should be made into
a paste or a ball) and then boiled in oil in a copper vessel.
The oil thus prepared, should be deemed as the most unfailing
remedy for ulcers in general. Kumbhisara soaked in water,
should be burnt in fire and the ashes should be applied over
a wound or an ulcer, which might be also cured by an
application of clarified butter prepared With the polens of
cocoanut flowers (23 — 27)1

A man suffering from dysentry, should drink whey and
boiled water containing the essence of Vishva, Ajamoda,
Sindhuttha, Chinrha, Tagmi, Sama, and Abhaya^ A man suffer*
ing from a chronic type of dysentry in which the stool is
consisted of blood or' bloody mucus only, accompanied by
much straining and severe intestinal colic, should drink water
saturated with the essence of Musta, Vatsaka, Ativfsha,
Vishta and Vilva. A man suffering from any sort of colic,
should drink warm water saturated with the ashes of burnt
Sindhu, or take a mixture composed of Sindhu, . Asafoetida,
and Abhaya. A paste composed of fried paddy, Katuruha,
Kana and Atanka, and kept in a small sac,' and sucked
every now and then, aUays thirst. A man suffering from
any of the diseases affecting the cavity pf the moutitj
* 3 *


CHAPTER CCCXVIII.


The God said; — Place the Vishvarupa-Vija on the one
known as the Tejasha, place the Narasinha Vija below that,
and the Pranava-Mantra below that, and the Uhaka-Vija
below that and the Anshumana-Vija below that, and below
that the Hakara and the Pranava. The first four letters
should end with the term Namas, and the Brahmangas, should
be constructed as laid down in the preceding chapter (i — 'j).

First, take out the Pranava-Vija from the row constructed
as above, by the process of elimination and coupling, known
as the Mantroddhara, and then meditate upon the self of the
god ks a dreadful luminosity. Then divide the term Chata
into two different parts, the term Daha in two, as well as
the terms “ Varna ” and “ Ghata," and append thereto
the terms Hung Fut. The Mantra thus framed, should be
considered as the Astra-Mantra sacred to the Aghore mani-
festation of the god. Now I shall disclose to you the Gayatri
Mantra, which is sacred to the same divinity, and which runs
as follows : — We know the true self of the god Mahesha,
who is the real and underlying substratum of the universe.
We meditate on the divine sslf of the Supreme god (Maha-
deva), and may the blissful one (Shiva) lead our mind to that*
This Gayatri grants all boons to her votaries (4 — 7J.

The mystic diagram, should be divided into twelve rectili-
near chambers, and the divinities, such as, Gana and Shree,
should worshipped to the east of a quarter pkrt of the entire
figure. The worship should be made with a view to ensure
the success of a mission, and by a person, before starting
out on the same. A triangle should be inscribed within the
mystic quadrilateral figure, and a lotus with three rows ot
petals should be drawn within the former, On the centre


AGNI PURANAM.


should gargle his mouth ev'eltjr day with a decoction of Pathdj
Darvi, Jati-leaves, grapes, and Triphala, mixed with hooey
(at — 3*)-

Similarly a decoction of Krishna, Ativisha, bitter Indra,
Dahi, Patha, Payomuch, mixed with the essence of Kshoudri
boiled in cow’s urine, should be deemed a* a specific for all
disease* of the thorax. A mah suffering from a stricture of
the urethra, or any sort of renal ObsthiCtiOfa, should drink
a decoction of Pathya, G'okshUra, Dursparsha, Raja-Vriksha,
and Shilabhida, mixed with honey. A mail suffering' from
stone in the bladder, or any sort bf ttehal stricture; should
drink a decoction of the scrapings Of Bamboo skin, and
Varuna-bark, while a man suffering fibtn Elephantisi* should
drink a decoction Of Shakotdka mixed With honey. Oil pre-
pared with the Mas pulse arid the bark of the Arkd plant, as
well as Saindhava salt mixed With honey, prove good specific*
for diseases that confine thems Ives tb the region Of the leg
Medicated clarified butter ptepdred with Shunti, Sbuvarchd
salt, and Asafoetida, or the expressed juice of Shunthi boiled
with clarified butter, is ah infallible remedy for that peculiar
erythematous disease of the leg and soles, which is known
as the Jalakukkuta. A decoction of the drug known as the
Shunthi, prepared in a sealed pot in a slow fire, may prove
alike efficacious in a case of the preceding type of the disease
( 33 — 37 )-

A man Suffering from a tumour in the intestine, should
drink a decoction of whey; Souvarcha salt, Agni, Asa-
foetidd; Dipyaka, or a potion composed of whey, Vid, and
Dipyaka. A mail laid up with Erysipelas, should take
clarified butte* with the decoction of Dhatri, Patola, and
Madya. A decoction of Shunti, Daru, Punafnava, Kshira,
Vyosha, Phalam, alkali, mixed with Ayoraja and the urine
of a cow, should be deemed as a specific for all sorts of
oedematous swelling. A similar effect is obtained by using
treacle, Sbigrti, and Trivrid mixed with the particles of Sain-


AGNI PURANAM.


I1S5

e! the lotus steps and causeways, should be delineated, upon
which the platform (Vedi), should be constructed to the
height of a Bhaga only. The Mandala, thus constructed,
should be furnished with doors and windows, with a lotus
flower delineated at its centre. Such a Mandala, should be
looked upon as a safeguard against all sorts of harms and
evils that would otherwise have befallen the performer of
the worship (g — 11).

The lotus at the centre of the platform, should be
coloured dark red, as well as the one, enclosing it within its
circumference. The cause-ways should be coloured white,
while the doors may be painted in any colour the votary
would like. The petals, as well as the polens of the lotus,
should be coloured yellow. The present Mandalam is
named as the Vighna-mardham (the remover of all im-
pediments), on which the worship, should be commenced by
making offerings to the god Ganapati. Then the gods,
such as Indra, etc., should be worshipped by repeating the
Tapturusha Mantra preceded by “Om,” and followed by
the term Namas (is — 14).

Then the gods, such as Gaja, Gaja-Shirsha, Gangeya,
Gana-nayaka, Triaravarta, Gaga, Nag?! and Gopati, should be
worshipped on the eastern step of the Mandalam. Then the
twelve gods, such as Vichitransha, Mahakaya, (the big-bodied
one), Lamvoshtha (the god with the protruding lower lip),
Lamvakarna (the long-eared one), Lamvodara (the big*
bellied one), Mahabhaga (the generous-hearted one), Vikrita
(the perverted one ), Parvatipriya ( the beloved of the
daughter of the mountain), Bhayavaha (the one portending
evil), Bhadra (the gentle one), Bhagana, and Bhayasudana
(the remover of all dangers), should be worshipped on the
ten steps of the Mandalam. The god Devatrasa (the terror
of the celestials), should be worshipped in the west.

Subsequent to that, the gods Mahanada (the god of dread-
ful roar)! Bhasvara (the effulgent one), Vighnaraja (the king of •.
149


1043


&9N1 rUtANAM.

dhava. A decAotjon of Trivrid and Pfaalam taken with
common treacle, operates as a purgative, while a decoction
ot Vacha, and Phalam, taken with cold or warm water, acts
as an emetic (38—41),

A man by using a syrup (Lejhya) containing a hundred
Pala weight of pulverised Triphala boiled with the essence
of.Bhringaja, ten parts of powdered Vidanga and purified
Oxide of Iron, hundred and twenty Pala weights of
fihatavari, Guduchi and Agni with honey, clarified butter and
Tilaja, knows no old age and retains the natural hue and
gloss pf his hair to the last day of his life, and lives up to
the mature age of hundred years in the full and sound pos-
session of his senses and faculties. The drugs known as the
Triphala, taken with honey and sugar, act as a panacea for
all known farms of diseases which afflict human frame. The
man who wishes to live a triple life on earth, of an average
duration of a hundred years each, should take, eyery day, a
regular course of the Elixir composed of Sita, Krishna, Tri-
phala, Pathya, Chitraka, Shunthi, Guduchi, polens of Mushali,
apd treacle, administered through the vehicle of honey, and
clarified hutter (42—46).

The petals of a Java flower, dried and mixed with oil, im-
part a milk-lik? colour to the latter. A portion of the same
petals, grounded, moistened and made into a stick, and lighted,
deranges the vision of the feline species, which is restored by
fumigating them with the vapours of Makshika. The man
Who- would walk barefooted on a bed of living fire, should
tynueti the soles of his feet with a paste, composed of cam-
phor, concbshell, and the oil (marrow) of a frog, mixed with
the expressed juice of the Patali roots. The proper scope of
the sdeneeof medicine may be grouped under six different
heads, as . it deala with antidotes of poison, influences of
malignant stars, positive ailments, violent deaths, minor ail-
meats and sexualelixirs. The man, who peruses every day- -
the tak that contains medicinal charms, healing praye|%> .


AGNI PURANAM*


lit*

impediments^, Gaaadhipa (the lord of the Ganas), Udhbbat*
Uhe great sun), Svanabha (the self-originating one), Chanda
(the irascible one), Mahashanda (all the powerful one), and
Bhimaka (the dreadful one), should be worshipped in succes-
sion. The deities, such' as Bramheshvara, Vrajhya, as well
as the regents of the intellectual faculties, together with the
principles of merging, both partial and absolute, and the gods
such as Loulya (the greedy one), Vatsala (the affectionate
one), Vikarna (the earless one), M-mmatha (the agitator of
the mind), Madhusuda, (the destroyer of Madhu), Sundara
(the god of beauty), Bhavapusta (the one feeding on the
sentiments), Kritarita (the god of death), Kaladanda (the
measurer of eternal time), should be worshipped in the north
of the Mandala, together with the sacrificial pitcher as
described before (15 — 20).

The Mantra, sacred to the god, should be repeated
ten thousand times at the close of the worship, and libations
numbering a tenth part thereof, should be poured on the
sacrificial fire, kindled on the occasion. Ten libations should
be subsequently poured on the fire, by way of completing

the ceremony, after which the final libation should be cast;>

and the worship should be terminated by ten times repeating
the Mantra. The rite of Abhisheka should be performed
subsequently, whereby the votary would attain all he would
.$et his heart upon, and become the possessor of horse*,
elephants, and propietary rights in real property (ai — aa)


CHAPTER CCC1X.


T HE COO SAID -Now I shall deal with the process of
worshipping the goddess of learning ( Vagish van i and the
mystic diagram, to be used in course thereof. The Mantj*


AGNI FURANAIt.


1044

medicines and the process of practising Mudras and reli-
gious sacrifices, goes to heaven after death (47*— 5*)-


CHAPTER CCLXXXIV.


Ohanvantari said : — The Mantras such as the OmfcarS,
etc., grant health and longevity to those who recite them, and
which lead them to the deathless region of paradise after death.
Omkar is the greatest of all the Mantras and the most potent
of all incantations. The man who repeats this mystic Omkar,
conquers death. The man who repeats the mighty Gayatri
Mantra, attains salvation after a happy and .prosperous
career on earth. The Mantra which .runs as “ Om obeisance
to Narayana,” grants all wished for blessings to the person
who recites it. A suppliant for any sort of boon, would do
well to repeat the Mantra which runs, as “ Om, obeisance to
the god Vasudeva.” No medicinal agent can pretend to a
greater healing virtue than the Mantra which runs, as “ Om
Hrun, obeisance to the god Vishnu." The gods became im-
mortal by constantly repeating the same Mantra, which is
the most powerful remedy in exorcising evil spirits (1 — 4).

The man who wants to attain moral excellence, or to con-
form his life to the standard of perfect purity, should men-
tally recite the Mantra, running as “ O thou absolute purity,
the abode of all piety and the practiser of virtuous deeds,"
whereby his soul would rest in eternal purity. A repetition
of the Mantra, running as “ O thou lord and grantor of all
prosperity, O thou in whom perfect beauty and primal light
have got their abode," confers wealth and prosperity on the
reciter. The names of the god Hari, such as the Suppliant,
the Sup lication, and the Grantor of boons, the Joy, and the


AGNI PURANAM.


H87

Aim, should be held as sacred to the goddess. The goddess
should be contemplated as possessed of a complexion,
resembling the blended colours of the moon and a snowball,
of three eyes, decorated with a garland of large, round
pearls, and carrying a book and a rosary in her two hands,
the other two being bent in the attitude of encouragement
and benediction. The Mantra, sacred to the goddess, should
be repeated a hundred thousand times, at the dose of the
worship. The votary should perform the rite of Nyasa
by contemplating the effulgent images of the letters of the
alphabet from A to Ksha, as located in the different parts
of his body, from head to foot (I — 4).

The Yantram, (the phylactery) and the Mandalam, which
should be used in the course of the worship, should be cons-
tructed as follows: — The Mantra, running as Hesou, should
be written at the petals of the lotus-shaped diagram, which
should be inscribed within a circle, the latter in its turn, being
inscribed within a square. The preceptor, should make use of
the diagram under description, on the occasion of initiating-
a disciple in the mysteries of spiritual existence. The
diagram should be provided with gates, doors, ?nd cause-
ways. The outer quadrilateral figure, should be furnished
with the pictures of eight lotus flowers. The nine lotuses
should be painted white, and the polens of a variegated
colour, whereas the petals should be dyed with the colour of
pure gold. All the lines, except the one known as the sky
line of the diagram, should be painted black, whereas the
doors should he painted yellow (5 — 8).

The goddess Sarasvati should be contemplated as seated
on the central lotus, and the goddess Vagishvari on the one at
the east. The goddesses, such as Hrillik'.ia, Chitra, Vagishi,
Gayatri, Vishvarupa, etc., should be worshipped on the rest of
of the lotus flowers. The goddesses, Such as Rati, Mali,
etc., should be worshipped on the occasion, by repeating the
Mantras, respectively held sacred to them, a ad-appended to


Agni PUKANAftf.


Lord of tight,” make their reciters the happy possessor* oi atl
wished for objects. A man seeking victory and conquest,
should repeat the names of Vishnu, such as Rama, P&rashu-
Rama, Nrisinha, Vishnu, and Trivrikrama (invincible in thei
three worlds). A pupil should mentally repeat the Purushot*
tama epithet of Vishnu, with a view to acquire a proficiency
in learning. A repeater of the Damodara epithet of Vishnu,
is sure to regain his lost vision as well as by repeating the
(Pushkaraksha) name of the god (5 — 9).

In preparing or administering medicines, the Hrishikesha
epithet of the god, should be first invoked, as it vouchsafes
safety against all evils. A battle should be commenced by
crying aloud such names of the god as the Achyuta (the
changeless one), etc. Similarly a man, sailing across a river or
a sea, should invoke the Nrisinha epithet of the god for a safe
and happy voyage, or journey, while a man seeking his
general welfare, should recite such names as the Chakrl
(the wielder of a discus), Khadgi (the wielder of A
sword), the Gadi (the mace-wielding god), and Sharngl
(the wielder of the bow Sharnga). The Narayana epi-
thet of the god, should be repeated on alt occasions,
While the name Nrisinha removes all causes of fear. A
repetition of the Garudadhvaja epithet of Vasudeva, neu-
tralises the effects of poison, while the Annanta and Achyuta
epithets of the god, should be repeated on the occasion of
stocking corn in the granary, or for the purpose of having
auspicious dreams. The Narayana epithet of the lord, should
be repeated after.a bad dream, while the name Jalashayin
would put down a conflagration by fife. A man seeking
proficiency in learning, should recite the Hayagriva epithet
of the lord, while a man seeking progeny, should repeat the
divine name of Jagat-suti (the progenitor of the universe).
The Valabhadra epithet of the lord, should he invoked in
acts of valour, and thus I have given you the significance of
the different epithets of the god (10—13).


•188


MM PURANAM.


the H ring Vija, Libations of clarified butter, made out' of
tbe milk of a Kapila, should be poured on the fire, whereby
the votary, would be skilled in versifying with eaae aod ele-
gance both in Prakrit and Sanskrit, and acquire a general
mastery of all the branches of learning (9— 10).


CHAPTER CCCXX.


T HE God SAID : — Oh Guha, I shall now describe the
mode of delineating the mystic diagram known as the
Sarvato-Bhadra-Mandalam. Tbe intelligent votary should
first' worship the goddess of energy in the east, on the occa-
sion of the sun’s first appearance on the equator, or on the
occasion of a wished-for religious ceremony. Such a cere-
mony should not be undertaken on days marked by the
asterism Chitra, or tbe Svati (1 3)*

The mystic diagram, known as the Sarvato-Bhadra-Man-
dalam, and which forms the theme of the present disserta-
tion, should be constructed in the way as follows First
a square should be drawn, which should be divided into
nine chambers, by drawing two straight lines accross it,
running from the east to west, and two straight lines drawn
from north to south. The number of such lines, should
be gone on increasing, till a quadrilateral figure of hundred
and fifty chambers should be inscribed within the greater and
the exterior square. Then the four corner* of the exterior
quadrangle (Pitha-Kshetra), should be marked down, each
such corner having been made to consist of three of the
abovesaid interlinear chambers. The Vithi* or the cause-
ways of the mystic quadrangle, should be toade to en-
4ead over iwo lines bsyond the exterior boundary of tMe


CHAPTER CCLXXXV.


UhanVANTARI said :—Again I shaft narrate to you re-
Cetpes of infallible (Siddha Yogas)' medicinal virtues of
celestial concoction, as disclosed to me by the holy Atreya,
and which can successfully cope with all sorts oi distempers.

Atreya said A decoction of the five roots, such as
those of Vilva, etc., is beneficial to a patient laid up with
fever due to a deranged state of the wind, while the ex-
pressed juice of the root of Fippati, Guduchi or Vishvaja,
heated and administered, may he substituted in its place.
The drugs Krishna, Vanhi, Adhaya, Amalaki, Vilva, Agni-
mantha, Shyonaka, Kashmari and Parata, used in combina-
tion, form the best febrifuge, and may be safely given in all
types of the disease. A decoction of Trikantaka, Prishni-
parni, Vrihati, Kantakari and the roots of Kusha grass, is
a good specific for cough with pain at the sides, which char-
acterises old age (i — 4).

A decoction of the five drugs known as the Pancha-
bhadra, and which consist of Guduchi, Parpati, Musta, Kirat,
and Vishva, should be given in fever, brought about by a
deranged condition of the wind and the bile. A decoc-
tion of Trivrid, Vishala, Katuka, and Triphala, is a specific
for all types of fever. A decoction of Devadaru, Vala, Vasa,
Triphala, Vyosha, Padmaka, Vidanga, and pulverised Shita,
should be deemed as a very efficacious remedy for cough
with expectation of yellow mucus. Likewise a person,
suffering from cough, diarrhoea, pain at the sides, hiccough
and difficult respiration, should take a decoction of the drugs
known as the Dashamuli, Shathi, Rasria, Pippali, Vilva,
Poshkara, Shringi, Amlaki, Bhargi* Guduchi, Nagavalli, and
the ears of barley (5—9)*


agni ruranam. nty

Mandalam, which should be made to occupy a space of two
padas, reckoned in proportion to the entire area (3 — 6).

The lotus delineated within the inscribed quadrilateral,
should be marked with white powder, the petals with yellow,
and the polens with a variegated hue. The Vithi or the cause-
way, should be marked with red coloured rice powder, while
the door should be shown with the same substance, coloured
like the complexion of the god Lokesha. Both in the rites
that are enjoined to be performed every day, and in those
that are occasionally undertaken for the fruition of any
particular desire, the corners of the mystic figure should
be marked with dark-red rice powder. Now hear me speak
about the lotus at the centre.

The lotus may be delineated with its petals touching
the circumference of the described circle, or they may be
shown as not to extend to that length. These two sorts of
inscribed lotuses, should be looked upon as the grantors
of earthly prosperity, and salvation after death. Persons,
who have renounced the concerns of life, and are bent on
working out the salvation of their souls, should use the
diagram with the picture of the lotus with untouched petals,
whereas the one with petals touching the rim of the
described circle, should be divided into three classes, such as
the infant (early), the Yuva (middling), and the Vriddha
(late), according to the time which they respectively take in
bringing about the fruition of the object of the votary (7-= — 9)-
Lines should be drawn across the planes of the
lotus, from both the cardinal and angular points of the
chambers. The five circles, thus formed by joining the
ends of the lines, should be made to equal one anothet
in all dimensions. The first part of the plane of these
circles, should be set apart for the Karbikas composed
of nine Pushkaras. The part beyond that, should be
set aside for the Kesharas, which should number twenty,
four in .all In the case of a lotus with uncontiguous petal*.


a&ni PutttWJUL 1647

H»i three sdrts o\ silt, as' Weil «i the compounds, HttiSt 44
the hfadhuka with honeyi'lhe' : Pipp4H wiffisdgar 4dd. the
Nagara with common treacle, - ihbold be deniwlt certain
Cures fofc all tyjJes d( hiccough; bfoi^ht dbddt bjr iw a owef
causes, 'the drugs known a*‘ the Karavyst, AjdjvPepper;
Pomegranate with Soilvarcha adit, honey idd treacle, dHoiild
be given to tHdse whose appetite is ini paired, drid with Whoni
all foods disagree, Or to tHoSe Who find Ud relish tor food.
The expressed jiiice of Shrirtgdvera, takeit With horiey, should
be deemed ds an infallible teoiedy for cold, £atardH, ioSs of
appetite, arid Asthma. A person suffering front cold and
Characteristic thirst should take a decoction of Vald, Shringi,
Shela, Lodhra, Pomegranate, and hfadhiika mixed with
honey and .wdshings Of rice. Fever, accompanied by
thirst, and cough with ekpefctoration Of blood, is sure to yield
to a decoction df Quduchi, Vasaka, Lodhra, and Pippalij
taken with honey. Likewise the expressed juice Of VasakOj
mixed with Honey, the extract Of Tamraja add pulverised
pepper boiled With the juice of Shirisha flowers. Should bcL
prescribed in a case marked by symptoms indention! with
What had been laid down in the preceding line (io-^-15).

A decoction of the Masura pulse, should be deemed as
efficacious in ail sorts of complaints, while the washings of
Hce should be considered as antibilioiis in their effects;
The drUgs kncfwn as the Nirguntbi, Shariva; Sheiu and
Ankdla, are the antidotes of all s0rt9 Of poison. A petson
Suffering from Epileptic fits, or Delirium Tremens, should
drink a potion composed of the decoction of Mrita,
Kshoudra, Pushkara, and Granthika mixed with Kana.
Clarified butter, prepared With Asafcetida, Souvarcha salt, and
Vyosha, each weighing two Pala weights, and boiled with tbe
urine of a cow weighing four times their quantity, is the
best specific for insanity. Tbe drugs Shatapushpi, Vacha,
and Kushtha, boiled with tbe expressed juice of Bramhi,
should be prescribed in a case of chronic convulsion, or


itgo,


AGNI PUHANAM.


the petals should be arranged by leaving apart two divisions
of the entire plane of the lotus. The petals should be
arranged along the extended lines of intercessions, both on
the right and the left. Thus a lotus of the Vriddha class,
should be constructed. In the alternative, a semicircle
should be drawn around it with the point of intercession as
its oentre. The lotus, thus formed, is called a Vala, A lotus
of the Vriddha class, should be drawn in a religious
ceremony, which would be undertaken for the salvation of
one’s soul, whereas a lotus of the Vala or the Yuva class,
should be used in spells and incantations (io — 16).

Now I shall deal with the Nava-Nabha diagram, which
should be delineated in the following way First, a
square should be drawn on the ground, which should
be divided into sixty-four rectilinear chambers by draw-
ing straight lines across them, both from north to
south, and from east to west. A lotus should be deli-
neated at its centre, so as to occupy four chambers formed
by the intersections of the straight lines about it. The
whole diagram should be made to measure nine cubits
divided into as many parts as its name indicates. Four
Vithis or causeways should be marked around the central
lotus. The diagram should be furnished with rims and
borders, technically known as the Kanthas and Upakanthas,
and its entire surface should be divided into five lotus-planes
or chambers, containing the pictures of the mystic lotus-
flowers, measuring equal in all dimensions. The three
chambers at the corners of the figure, should be provided
with doors, while the one situate at the north-east, should
be impressed with the mark of a Vajra. The lotus at the
centre, should be made with white rice powder, while
the rest should be respectively coloured yellow, red, and
blue. Th6$e respectively coloured yellow, red, dun, red,
Dt yellow*, should be looked upon as the grantors of
jatVatiOn ’(if— **)•


ACM HMAtihu-.


\ 04 *

long-stAnding insanity. The medicine Is tetktthfcd ah one bf
the best preparations for improving one’s memo ry. Similar*
ly clarified butter, prepared, with the composition known as
the Panchagavya, and taken with pOwdered Abhaya, acts
as a specific for all sorts bf leprosy. Likewise the drug
known as die Vajraka, and boiled With the drugs known as the
Patola, the Triphala, the NimVa, the Gudlithi, the Dhavani, the
Vrisha. the Karanja, and clarified .batter, proves equally effica-
cious in a cue of Ieucodetma like the receipe just above
enumerated. ( 16-^0).

Take ten Pala weights Of powder of each of the following
drugs, sqch as the Nimva, the Patola, the Vyaghri, the
Guduchi, and the Vasaka, and boil them with a Drona
measure, of water, till a three quarter part of .the liquid is
evaporated; Then take a Prastha measure of clarified
butter and boil it with the stones of Triphala) and the
decoction thus obtained; The inedi'c&ted Ghee thus pro-
pared, is known as the Panchatictam) which should be
prescribed in a case of leprosy. The medicated ghee
is alike efficacious for eighty sorts of ailments due
to a deranged state of the vital wind, for forty sorts of
distelhpers which owe their Origin to a disordered
state of the bile, and for the twenty ailments which ate
usually brought about by a vitiated state of the phlegm, and
these disorders vanish before the potency of the medicated
ghee, as vanishes darkness before the rising sun (ai — '23).

A decoction of the drugs, known as the Triphala, mixed
with the expressed juice of Bhrihga-raja, should be used in
washing a syphilitic ulcer. The leaves of Patola and the
bark of pomegranate, should be grounded with Gaja
and Triphala and boiled with oil saturated with the
essence of Triphala, Yasthi, Markava, Utpala, Sain-
dhava salt and pepper. The oil thus prepared, should be
used in lubricating the body of a patient suffering, from cold.
A snuffing of the oil prepared with Kshira, the expressed juice


AGN! PURANAM. "'V 1

The gods, such as Shiva, Vishnu, etc., should be worship-
ped inside the lotuses, occupyiug the eight points of the sky.

1 he Prasada Mantra at the centre, while the regents of the
different quarters of the heaven, should be worshipped m
their petals. I'he man, who would worship the god Vishnu
with his celestial weapons in the external Vithi of the mystic
diagram, would attain the merit incidental to the per-
formance of a horse-sacrifice (23—24).

The mystic diagram, known as the Great Mandalam
(Mahamandalam), should be delineated on the occasion of
a Pavitrarohana Ceremony (the ceremony of investing an
idol with holy thread). A plot of ground measuring eight
cubits in length, should be divided into twelve rectilinear
chambers. The lotus flowers, to be delineated at its
centre, should be made to measure two pada measures
of the entire figure, while the Vithikas. should be made to
measure a pada only. Eight lotuses should be delineated
at the eight points, and should be coloured blue. The plane
of the figure, should be divided into thirty lotuses, each
equal in all demensions to the one situate at the centre-
The blue lotuses delineated in the diagram should be
represented without joining petals. The Vithicas, should be
.delineated beyond them, and the Svastikas should be painted
higher beyond.

O Guha, in the Mandalam, known as the Sarvakamaprada
'the fulfiller of all desires), the eight Vithikas, should be
drawn across the figure, and the Svastikas should be painted
therein as above. The doors, lotuses, and rims, should be
delineated as in the preceding case, with the exception that
the corners should be painted red, the causeways (Vithis)

yellow, and the lotuses blue (25— 29).

The Mandalam, known as the Panchavjam, should e
made to measure five cubits in length. The plane of the
figure, should be divided into nine equal parts. Four lotuses
should be delineated in the chambers, situate at the four


AGNI PUR A NAtf.


1049


of Markava, Madhuka. Utpala and Kuda. would arrest a
premature old age, and an untimely whitening of the hairs.
The oil in the present case, should weigh two Prasthas
only (26 — 29).

T he compounds respectively consisting of Nimva, and
Patola, Triphala and Guduchi, Catechu and Vrisha, Chireta
and Pathai Guduchi and red .SandaL wood, form the best febri-
fuge, and may b* successfully administered in cases of fever
accompanied by Erysipelas or Leprosy. A fever due to an
erysipelatous ulcer, is sure to prove amenable to a decoction
of the drugs known as the PatolA, Amrita (Atonite), Chireta,
Vasa, Ristak, Parpata, and ' Khadira. Similarly an 'oedema*
tous swelling of the limbs, accompanied by fever incidental
thereto, as well as an erysipelatous ulcer, is sure to yield to
a decoction of Dashamuli, Chhinna-ruha, Pathya, Darn,
Punarnava, Shigru, and Vkhvajit. A paste composed of
Madhuka, and the leaves of Nimva, should be applied over an
ulcer foi antiseptic purposes, while a decoction of Triphala,
Khadira, Darvi, Nyagrodha, Ativala, Kusha, Nimva and
Mulaka leaves, should‘ v be used in washing a wound or an
ulcer. The expressed juice of Karanja, Aristha, and
Nirgunthi would kill parasites which usually infest a neg-
lected, phagedenic ulcer. Clarified butter prepared with the
essence of Dhataki, Sandal wood, Vala, Manga, Madhuka,
Utpala, Darvi, and Meda, should be deemed as possessed of'
the special virtue of setting up a process of easy granulation
in an ulcer, and its consequent healing. Similarly clarified
butter prepared frith the essence of Guggulu, Triphala,
Vyosha, and Manshi, acts as a specific for all sorts of sinus,
ulcer, and fistula-in-ano. (30—36).

A man suffering from an excess of wind and phlegm,
should take each morning, oil, salt, and, Haritaki boiled in the
urine of a cow. Similarly a decoction of the drugs known
as the Trikatu, and Triphala, mixed with salt and alkali, acts
as a mild aperient . in systems, marked by a preponderance -
132


AGNI PURANAM


I *9*

cardinal points of the figure, which should be drpwn at itA
centre. Rims and cause-ways, should be drawn along the
lotus-planes, to the extent of two padas only. The centra!
lotus should be coloured white, the one at the cast yellow,
the one at the south like the gem Vaidurya, the one at the
west greenish, the one at the north like the colour of a conch-
shell, while the remaining should be made of a variegated
colour (30—335.

I shall now describe another sort of the Sarva-Kamaprada
Mandalam, in which the plane of the diagram, should be
made to measure ten cubits in length, made into a quadrila-
teral figure, divided into equal parts, the doors of the
Mandalam, occupying only two pada measures of the en-
tire area.

The Mandalam, known as the Vignhadhansam (the des-
troyer of all evils), should be made to measure four cubits
in all dimensions, with a single lotus flower delineated at its
centre. The figure should be coloured red to the extent of
two cubits, along its sides. The cause-ways, should be made
to measure a cubit only, and the figure should be furnished
with many an impression of the Svastika. The doors should
be made to measure a cubit only, while the whole plane of
the diagram, should be chequered with the images of five
lotus flowers, all coloured white, at the central one of which
the god Nishkala, should be worshipped. The Hrid-Mantras
should be worshipped at those occupying the cardinal points
of the diagram, while those known as the Astras, etc., should
be worshipped in the lotuses situate at the angular points of
the diagram, the god Brahma having been worshipped in all
the five, as previously described (34 — 38).

Now I shall describe the one, known as the Vudhyaram.
The entire plane of the diagram, should be divided into
hundred and thirty one equal parts, and the pictures of eight
phalic emblems and lotuses, should be drawn to adorn the
chambers situate at both its cardinal and angular points.


ACNI PUftANAM.


lOjO

of wind and phlegm, and also as a specific for simple cold.
A man suffering from an attack of Urticaria, should take
each morning, a draught composed of the decoction of
Pippali, Piphali-root, Vacha, Chitraka, and Nagara. A man
suffering from Rheumatism, Gout, or pain in the joints,
should drink a potion composed of the essence of Guduchi,
castor seed and Devadaru, or a decoction of the drugs
known as Dashamula, with the washings of Nagara, or a
decoction of Shunthi, and Gakshura may be substituted in
its place. Similarly the oil prepared with the essence of
the leaves and the roots of the plant Prasarini, is efficacious
in A case of rheumatic paralysis, or in rheumatic pain at the
waist. A decoction of Guduchi and Svarasa, or a compound
of the levigated powder of the above two substances, taken
for a considerable time, cures Rheumatism, or any other sort
of Uric-acid Diathesis. Compounds of Pippali and Vardha-
man a, Pathya and treacle, Patola and Triphala, and Katuka
treated with the expressed juice of Aconite, should be
respectively deemed as possessed of the efficacy of curing
a case of Rheumatism, characterised by a burning sensation,
on the very day it is administered. Similarly a case of
Rheumatism, where the patient complains of alternate burn-
ing and shivering, is sure to yield to a decoction of Guggulu,
Guduchi, washings of the drugs known as the Triphala,
Vala, Punamava, castor seed, the two sorts of Vrihati, and
Gakshura, taken with salt and Asafcetida (37 — 46).

Pills composed of Karshika, roots of Pippali, the five
sorts of salt, the Pippali, the Chitraka, the Shunthi, the
Triphala, the Trivrita, the Vacha/ the two sorts of alkali, the
Shadvala, the Danti, the Svarna Kshira, and the Vishanika,
each weighing a Karsha in weight, should be prescribed in
a case of abdominal dropsy, the auxiliarly potion with which
the medicine should be taken, being a solution of the
Souvarcha salt. Kshira taken with Nagara, Varshabhu, and
Darubaridra, prove efficacious in swelling of the limbs.


AGNf PURANAM.


lT 93

Both the surrounding platforms at the rim, should be made
to measure two pada measures of the entire area, while
the arabesques and decorations should be made according
to the dictates of the preceptor. The Mandalas, or the
mystic diagrams, which are held sacred to the sun-god, to
the goddess of energy, and to the gods Hari, and Shambhu,
number fourteen hundred and forty in all.

Now hear me discourse on the arabesque works, which
should decorate the planes of the phalic symbols. In the
chambers, occupying the four cardinal points of the chamber,
eight, out of the fifteen cross or transverse lines (see above),
should be destroyed, to give place to that ornamental border.
The temple of the phalic emblem, should be delineated to
occupy the upper plane of the figure, to the extent of two
pada measures between the two lateral chambers of the
diagram. A lotus, measuring two pada measures, should be
depicted at the centre, while a lotus should be drawn on
each side of the falic emblem. The six lines of the arabesque
decorations, should be severally destroyed, in the manner
above indicated, whereby the lateral Shovas peculiar to the
worship of the god Hari, would be constructed. The upper
space of the diagram, should be destroyed to the extent of
two padas only, in laying down the Bhadrastakam sacred
to the god Hari. The Shova should be constructed by
dividing the ( Rashmi ) lines into four parts. Twenty-hve
lotus flowers should be delineated to embellish the plane of
the diagram, both inside, and beyond, the divine seat proper
(Pitha). The two chambers should be kept on each side,
so as to give rise to tho eight Upashovas. In the diagram,
sacred to the goddess, four Bhadras should be delineated
in the corner. The Mandalam should consist of thirteen
padas, and hundred and six petals (39 — 48).


ACNI nNUUMM:


fOSf

Similarly a fomentation of the affected part witha decoc-
tion of Nimva, Varshabhu, and Arka, may also prove bene-
ficial to the same disease. By a steady use of the clarified
butter prepared with the essence "of the pulp of Vyosha,
thrice treated with the washings of the burnt ashes of the
Palasha, a pile would become inert and drop off without the
least inconvenience. Similarly salt, treated with the essence
of Vishvaksena, and Nirgunthi may prove alike efficacious
in the same malady (47—5 1).

The drugs known as the Vidanga, Anala, Sindhuttha,
Rasna, Agra, Alkali and Daru, boiled with oil or water weigh-
ing four times their actual weight, and saturated with the
essence of the drugs, known as the Katudravyas, should be
prescribed in a case of Scrofula, or in scrofulous swelling
of the carotid glands. The body of the patient should
be lubricated as well, with the oil or decoction thus pre-
pared. A potion consisting of the levigated powder of
Vasu, and the decoction of Shathi, Kunaga, Valeya com-
pounded with the expressed juice of Kshira, Pippalli and'
Payasi, is sure to prove beneficial to a patient suffering
from any sort of wasting diseases. A compound made of
Vacha, Vit, Abhaya, Shunthi, Asafoetida, Kustha, Agni, and
Dipayaka, mixed in the proportion of two, three six, four,
one, seven, and a fiftieth part respectively, should be deemed
as a safe and certain cure for tumours in the abdomen, for
abdominal colic, or for the harassing cough, which is one of
the invariable concomitants of the disease. Pills made of
powdered Patha, Nikumbha, the drugs known as the Trikatu,
and Triphala treated with the essence of Agni and the
urine of a cow, often prove beneficial to patients laid up with
an abdominal tumour, or with an enlarged spleen. A de-
ranged state of the wind and the bile, is sure to be remedied ,
by arcompound of the drugs, known as the Vpsa, the Nimva,
the Patola and the TripbaUu A person suffering from pre-
sence of worms' in his intestines, should lick a syrup


CHAPTER CCCXXI.


The GOD SAID: — The ceremony, known ar- the Astr:
Yajna, should be performed in all ritee undertaken for ensur-
ing worldly success. The weapons, sacred to the god Shiva,
should be worshipped at the centre, while the weapons, sudi
as the Vajra, etc., should be worshipped in the differenl
directions of the Mandala, commencing from the east. The
five discuses, and the ten arms of the god, should be wor-
shipped with a view to ensure success in battle. The planets
should be worshipped in connection with the ceremony,
whereby they would exert the same blissful influence, as they
do when they are in the eleventh sign from that of one’s
nativity (I — 3).

Now I shall deal with the rite of Astra Shanti, by which
physical disturbances are quelled, epidemics are subsided,
diseases, incidental to the malign influences of the baneful
planets, are cured, and the enemies of the performer are
annihilated. The Mantra, sacred to the Aghora manifestation
of the god, and which is an infallible remedy for all diseases
which owe their origin to the baneful influences of the
Vinayakas, should be repeated, a hundred thousand times, in
the beginning of the ceremony, whereby the evil influences
of the planets would be removed. In cases of disturbances
in Nature, libations, containing seeds of sesamum, and num-
bering a hundred thousand in all, should be poured on the fire,
in succession, while phenomena portending evil, and restrict-
ing themselves to the sky, would vanish at the performance
(of a Homa) consisting of libations, numbering half as much
as in the preceding instance. Similarly, a hundred thousand
libations of clarified cow-butter, poured on the fire, would
quell all physical disturbances, which are peculiar to the


AGNI PURANAM.


105*

composed 'of pulverised Vidanga and honey. A decoction of
Vidanga, Alkali, Haritaki, Shallaki, Vadari, Jamvu, Piyala,
Mango bark, and Souvarcha salt, and taken with honey
and Kshira, arrests all ncemorrhage. A decoction of Vilva,
Dhataki, Patha, Shunthi and Mocharasa, would cure the
most obstinate type of dysentry. Jn Prolapsus Ani, a decoc-
tion of Angeri, Kola, washings of curd, Nagara, alkali, whey,
and comnnn treacle, would act as a charm. Dysentry
accompanied by an oedematous swelling of the limbs, would
yield to a potion composed of Vidanga, Ativisha, Musta,
Daru, Patha, Kalinga, and pepper, mixed with clarified
butter. A similar result would be obtained from the com-
pounds of Sindhu and Shanthi, sugar and Krishna, and honey
and treacle (52 — 62).

A man, wishing to live up to the good old age of hundred
years, should take two Haritakis, every day, with the auxi-
liaries enumerated in the preceding line. A husband of
many wives, should lick with his tongue, every day, a syrup
composed of Triphala, Pippali, honey, clarified butter, and
pulverised Amalaki treated with the expressed juice of the
same fruit, and then drink water. A man, using a com-
pound of Masha, Pippali, Shali, wheat and barley, mixed
in equal parts, would be able to visit women ten times a
day, like a sparrow. Clarified butter mixed with Manga,
Dhataki flower, Lodhra, and blue lotus* should be given
to a woman, laid up with leucorrhoea (63 — 67).

A woman suffering from incessant miscarriage of the
womb, ‘should drink a potion composed of Vija, Kurantaka,
Madhuki, white sandal-wood, Padma, roots of' Utpala, and
sesamum, mixed with honey and sugar. A paste composed
of Devadaru, Nabha, Kustha, Nalada, and Vishva pasted with
Kanjika, and mixed with oil, should be deemed as the best
cure for All sorts of headache. The expressed juice of
Sindhu, made lukewarm and soaked in a piece of linen,
should be pressed into the cavities of the ears, by which the


agni puranam.


* *95


earth. A rite of Homa, performed with libations of scented
gum resin soaked in clarified cow-butter, should be deemed as
the pacifier of all disturbances, whether physical or political.
A rite of Homa, performed with libations of clarified cow-
butter, containing grains of sun-dned, rice and bunches of
Durva grass, should be deemed as an infallible remedy for
all sorts of bodily distempers. A thousand libations of
clarified cow-butter, would undoubtedly neutralise the ill
effects of bad dreams, dreamt in the night. Likewise a ten
thousand libations of clarified butter, containing the Java
flowers, would propitiate the hostile planets and asterisms,
whereas the same number of libations of clarified cow-butter,
would cure all diseases that are incidental to the evil influ-
ences of the Vinayakas, and the malignant spirits. A Homa,
performed with a ten thousand oblations of scented gum resin,
would cleanse a spirit possessed by ghosts, and Vetalas, and
a like ceremony should be gone through, on the occasion
of a sudden falling off of a tree, of the class known as the
Maha-Vrikshas, or of a perching down of a Vyala-Kanka on
one’s house-top (4 — 9).

Libations, consisting of clarified cow-butter, containing
grains of sun-dried rice and bunches of Durva grass, should
be poured on the sacrificial fire by a person, before entering
a virgin forest. Libations, consisting of clarified cow-butter
and the seeds of sesamum, remove all evils portended by
earthquakes and meteor-falls. A ten thousand oblations of
scented gum resin, would neutralise the ill effects of a tree,
shedding blood, while a similar rite should be performed
on the occasion of a tree blossoming, or bearing fruits in
an improper season, or at the breaking out of an epidemic
or of a political revolution. Similarly, a fifty thousand liba-
tions, consisting of sesamum seeds and clarified cow-butter,
would stamp out an epidemic affecting the bipeds only,
whereas the ceremony should be repeated at the breaking
out of a pestilential disease, or on the occasion cl aa


AGN1 PUR ANA M.


1^53


local incarnation would be instantaneously subsided! In the
alternative! the expressed juice of garlic, ginger, or shigru,
or that of a plantain tree, should be separately pressed into the
ears, for the subsidence of the local inflamation and aching.
A man of impaired eye-sight, or any way suffering from
an obstruction of vision, should take; the medicated gheet pre-
pared with the essence of Vala, Shatavari, Rasna, Amrita,
and Triphala mixed with Souvira salt, whereby he would
fully regain his eye-sight. Ghee prepared with the essence
of Triphala, Vyosha and Sindhuttha, should be deemed as
the best purgative, and an infallible remedy for deranged
vision and diseases incidental to cold or phlegm (6£ — 72)*

A collyrium prepared with the petals of blue lotus, once
treated with the expressed juice of Go, is beneficial to
persons who cannot see either in the day or in the night. A
decoction of Yasti Madhu, Vacha, Krishna seeds, and Kutaja
boiled with the levigated powder of the Nimva bark, should
be deemed as a good emetic. A gruel made of barley and
taken cold, operates as a very mild purgative. The gruel
should not be taken in any other way, as it would thereby
impair the appetite and give rise, to a sense of fulness in the
stomach. A pulverised compound of Pathya, Sanidhava and
Krishna, should be taken with warm water* for a thorough
cleansing of the intestines. The purgative thus prepared,
is a specific for all soits of distempers, and is called the
halverd of disease. The recipes as laid down above, were
disclosed by the holy.Atreya.to his brothers in devotion, and
are the infallible, remedies for diseases against which they
are mentioned (73—77).


AGNI PUHANAM.


II96

clephantess developing a pair of tusks, and portending evil
to the state. The evil consequences of an elephantess,
exuding serum from her temple, would be warded off by
a Homa of ten thousand libations, whereas an epidemic of
miscarriages of the womb, or of deaths of new-born infants
in a community, would prove amenable to a similar Homa,
consisting of as many libations (10 — 13).

Evil omens seen, by a person about to start on a journey,
should be atoned for by a performance of a Homa of ten
thousand libations, whereas the libations should consist of
sesamum and clarified cow-butter, and number one hun-
dred thousand in all religious ceremonies, undertaken with
a view to confer the highest supernatural powers on the
votary, the libations respectively numbering a half and a
quarter thereof as the attributes (Siddhis), would belong to
the middling and the lowest class. An equal number of
Japas and Homas, should be performed for victory in battle.
A votary should repeat the Aghorastra-Mantra, after having
performed the rite of Nyasa, and also after having medi-
tated on the Panchasya (five-faced) manifestation of that
divinity (14—15).


CHAPTER CCCXX 11 .


The God said: — Now 1 shall describe the rites of Jap«
and blissfulness, which are to be performed by repeating
the Astra-Mantra, known as the Pashupata. The component
terms of the Mantra, should be repeated by appending the
term “ Fut” to each of them. The Mantra runs as follows
“ Om obeisance to the God, the great Pashupata, who is
possessed of matchless strength, prowess, and glory, and


CHAPTER CCLXXXV1.


JDhanvantari said : — Now I shall narrate to you re*
cipes of medicines, by using which death can be averted,
and which invariably increase the duration of life, and are
the best safeguards against all sorts of distempers. The ex-
pressed juice of the drugs known as the Triphala, taken
with honey and clarified butter, operates as an elixir of life
and a preventive of death. A man, by snufhng the medi-
cated oil known as the Vilva Taila, as well as by taking a
pala or a half pala weight of Triphala, every day, for a period
of six months, is sure to be acknowledged as a poet in
his country. The oil of Bhallataka arrests senile decay,
premature old age, and even death. Leprosy is sure to yield
to a decoction of pulverised Vakuchi, and the five drugs
known as the Panchanga, boiled with the washings of Cate-
chu. A man by using the powder of blue Kuruntha with honey
and thickened milk, or with milk and treacle, may expect to
live up to a hundred years. The man who takes Shunthi
with honey and clarified butter, each morning, knows no
physical death, whereas by taking pulverised Manduki with
cow's milk, every day, a man is sure to retain the strength and
vigour of his youth to the last moment of his life ( i — 5).

The man, who drinks, every day, a Karsha weight of
Uchchata and honey, or takes Nirgunthi with honey, clarified
butter and milk, is sure to conquer death and disease. By
taking a Karsha weight of the oil of Palasha, each day,
through the medium of honey or milk, a man may expect
to witness five hundred, or a thousand suminers on earth.
Similarly, the expressed juice of the leaves of Jyotishmati,
as well as the essence of Triphala, or the pulverised plants of
Shatavari and Phalam, taken with honey, milk or clarified


AGNI PURANAM.


1197


whose face is shining with fiften eyes — obeisance to the god,
who assumes varied forms, and is armed with various sorts of
weapons and whose body, sable like pasted tamblack. is en-
livened with jets of blood, and who is fond of the company of
ghosts and Vetalas that frequerit the cremation grounds.
[Obeisance to] the remover of all impediments, to the grantor
of all boons and successes in life, and to him who is always
kind and benignantly disposed to his votaries. [Obeisance
to] the god who is possessed of innumerable hands, feet, and
mouths, to the perfected success, to the terroi of all Vetalas,
to the one who creates sorrow in the hearts of the Shakinis,
to the healer of all diseases, to the purifier of all sinful
souls, to the one, whose three eyes are the Sun, the Moon,
and the fire,— to the phylactery sacred to the god Vishnu, to
the wielder of swords and thunderbolts, to the wielder of
the club of death and the trident of Varuna, to the trident
of Rudra, to the one with the burning tongue, to the piercer
of all diseases, to the oppressor of malignant planets, and to
the annihilator of the whole race of malicious serpents. Ora,
obeisance to the black and the yellow one. Fut (obeisance)
to Humkarastra. Fut to the wielder of thuuderbolts. Fut to
the goddess of energy. Fut, to the club. Fut to the god
of death. Fut to the sword. Fut to the sword. Fut to
the god Nairita. Fut to the god of ocean (Varuna). Fut
to the noose. Fut to the banner. Fut to the mace. Fut
to the god of wealth. Fut to the trident. Fut to the^club.
Fut to the discus. Fut to the lotus. Fut to the serpent
weapon. Fut to the weapon Khetaka. Fut to the weapon
Munda. Fut to the mace. Fut to the weapon Kankala.
Fut to the weapon Pichhika. Fut to the weapon Kshurika
(razor). Fut to the weapon Bramhastra. Fut to the weapon
of Shakti. Fut to the weapon saerdd to the Gartas. Fut
to the weapon Pilipichhi. Fut to* ike weapon, sacred to
the Gandharvas. Fut to the Weapon of the Murva.
Fut to the weapon known as the Dakshina. Fut to the


AGNI PURANAM.


1055


butter, should be deemed as possessed of the virtue of pre-
venting death. The fruits of Mushali, pulverised and taken
with honey and clarified butter, as well as the pulverised
Nimva r bark and the Panchangas, boiled with the washings
of Catechu, and taken with a Karsha weight of the expressed
juice of Bhringaraja, should be deemed as capable of impart*
ing immortality, and a consequent immunity from all decay
and distemper, to the man who uses it (6— io).

The man, who takes Rudantika with honey and clarified
butter, and drinks milk after that, every day, should never
fear any annihilation of his life. Similarly, by taking, every
day, a Karsa weight of powdered Haritaki treated with the
expressed juice of Bhringaraja, a man is sure to live up to
three hundred years, and to enjoy an immunity from all bodily
ailments. Likewise, a pill weighing a Karsha only, and con-
sisting of Varahika, Shatavari, and purified oxide of iron
treated with the expressed juice of Bhringa, and taken with
clarified butter, should be supposed as possessed of the virtue
of extending the duration of life to five hundred years.
Shatavari, powdered Karta treated with the essence of
Bhringaraja, Mrttam, Copper, Sulphur, and Kumarica, treated
with Rasa, should be made into pills, each weighing two gunjas
only. Such a pill should*be taken with clarified butter, each
morning, whereby the user would be able to see five hundred
summers. A man by taking Ashvagandha and oil of Phalam,
with treacle and clarified butter, would live a full life of
hundred years. A pala weight of pulverised Punarnava,
taken with honey and clarified butter, or a pala weight of
pulverised Ashoka-bark taken with honey, milk, and clarified
butter, acts as prophylactic against all distempers (n — 15'.

By using every day, as snuff, a handfull of sesamum oil,
and honey, a man would retain the natural hue and gloss of
his luurs to the last day of his life, which would have a
duration of hundred yean. Similarly by taking a Karsha
weight of Aksha with honey and clarified butter, each day,


AGNI PURANAM.


(198

weapon, called tl>e Vama. Fut to the weapon, known as
the Paschima. Fut to the weapon, known as the Mantrastra.
Fut to the weapon of the Shakinis. Fut to the weapons
of tha Yoginis. Fut to the club. Fut to the great club.
Fut to the weapons of the Nagas. Fut to the weapon of
the mighty Shiva. Fut to the weapon of the god Ishana.
Fut to the weapon of the god Purusha. Fut to the weapon
of Aghora. Fut to the weapon of Sadyojata. Fut to the
weapon of the Hridaya. Fut to the Mahastra. Fut to the
weapon of Garuda. Fut to the weapon of Rakshasa. Fut
to the weapon of the Danavas. Fut to the weapon sacred
to the Nrisinha manifestation of Vishnu. Fut to the weapon
sacred to the god Tvastra. Fut to all the weapons.

Nah.Fut, Vah Fut, Pah Fut, Phah Fut, Mah Fut, Shree
Fut, Pheh Fut, Kram Fut, Krom Fut, Bhuh Fut, Bhuva Fut,
Sva Fut, Fut to the region Maha, Fut to the region Jana.
Fut to the region Tapas. Fut to all the regions. Fut to
all the nether regions. Fut to all the fundamental principles
of the universe. Fut to all the principles of vitality. Fut
to all the the veins and arteries. Fut to all the causes. Fut
to all the gods. Kreem Fut, Hreem Fut, Shreem Fut, Hum
Fut, Srum Fut, Svam Fut, Lam Fut. Fut to the spirit of

indifference to the concerns of life. Fut to the weapon of illu-
sion. Fut to the weapon, which is composed of the principle
symbolised by the Mantra Hum. Fut to the Weapon-Mantra,
sacred to the god of day. Fut to the Weapon-Mantra, sacred
to the Moon-god. Fut to the weapon, sacred to the god, who
is the remover of all impediments. Goum, Goum Fut. Khrom
Khoum. Fut, Hroum, Houm Fut. Cause (him) to roam
and roam about, Fut. Eclipse and Eclipse [his soul], lift
and lift (him) by the heel. Fut, threaten and threaten
(him). Fut, Fut, revive and revive. Disperse and disperse,
Fut. Destroy and destroy all sins, Fut (1).

A single repetition of the abovesaid Mantra, would purge
a man of all sins committed by him in life, whereas a hun-


AGNI PURANAM.


1056

a man may expect to live up to the good old age of a
hundred years. A man, by taking Abhaya with treacle, honey
and clarified butter, as well as by taking rice with boiled
milk, may expect to live a young man in all acceptance of
the term, to the last day of his life. By taking a pala
weight of pulverised Kushmandika with honey and clarified
butter, a man is enabled to live up to a thousand years.
Similarly by taking pulverised Shaluka, treated with the
expressed juice of Bhringa-raja, through the vehicle of
honey and clarified butter, as well as by using, as snuff, a
Karsha weight of the oil prepared with the essence of the
bitter Tumvi gourd, each day, a man is sure to enjoy a life of
two hundred years' duration. Similarly a potion composed
of the expressed juice of Triphala, Pippali, Shunthi and
Guduchi should be considered as possessed of the virtue of
extending the life’s duration of a man to one hundred years.
The drug known as the Shatavari and used in combination
with the drugs, enumerated in the preceding line, enables a
person to live up to a thousand years (16 — 20).

O Brahman, the drugs known as the Chitraka Shatavari,
Shuuti, Vidanga, and purified oxide of iron with Bhringaraja,
Vala, and the five bitter drugs known as the Nimva Panchakas,
and Catechu, Nirgunthi, Kantakari, Vasaka and Varsabhu,*
pasted together and treated with the expressed juice of the
last named drug, and made into pills, should be deemed as
the best of the vital elixirs. The medicine should be conse-
crated before use with the Mantra running as Om, Hrum, Sa.
This medicine can give immortality to persons using it, and
should be deemed as the best preventive of death and
disease, and, as such, was used by the gods and demons of
yore. Now I .shall discuss with that part of the science of
medicine, which relates to diseases peculiar to elephants, and
which was narratediby the holy sage Palakapya to the king
of Anga (21—24).


AON! PURANAM.


Il 59


dred recitation would quell all disturbances in his country,
and grant him victory in war. The Homa in connection with
the ceremony, should consist of libations of clarified cow-
butter saturated with the scented gum resin, whereby the
most utopian schemes of its performer, would be realised.
A single repetition of this Astra-Pashupata-Mantra, should
be deemed as the best of all peace-giving rites (2 — 3).

CHAPTER CCCXXII1.


The God said: — 0 thou six-faced one, the Mantra run-
ning as Om, Hrum, Hansa, is possessed of the virtue of
curing diseases and warding off death. The Homa, in con-
nection with the Mantra, should be performed by pouring
out a hundred thousand libations of clarified butter, contain-
ing bunches of Durva-grass, on the fire, whereby the health
and general peace of the life of the performer would be
increased. In the alternative, weird and portentious pheno-
mena occurring in the sky or in the earth, or those which owe
their origin to the agency of the gods, as well as auguries of
evil omen, such as the unnatural blossoming of trees, etc.,
should be atoned for by repetitions of such Mantras as the
Pranavas, the Maya, etc., (i — 2).

Om obeisance to the goddess Ganga. O thou Kali, Kali;
O thou supreme Kali, 0 thou Supreme Kali, O thou, who
livest on flesh and blood, and whose face, sable as that of
the night, is blazoned by streaks of blood, bring all men
under my control, obeisance Om. The Mantra should be re-
peated a hundred thousand times, and libations, numbering
a tenth part thereof, should be poured on the fire. A man
by repeating the Mantra, and doing the necessary Homa,


CHAPTER CCLXXXVlt.


JT alkapya said O Lompada, O thou king of the
country of Anga, now I shall describe the points of excellence
in an elephant, and the diseases they are subject to, in their
domesticated condition. The elephants that are of good
height, capable of enduring a large amount of fatigue, pos*
sessed of twenty or eighteen footnails, and exude a sort of
cool and transparent exudation from their temples even
in winter, and whose right tusks are more elevated than the
left ones which invariably attain to a large size, with large
And well-developed flapping ears marked by a net of little,
dotlike marks, and whose colours resemble that of a pregnant
rain cloud, should only be kept in the royal stud, where-
as those that are short-statured and constantly require the
use of the goading mace should be rejected. Elephantesses
should be employed to decoy stupid and amorous wild
elephants into the trap ( 1—4) .

The colour, the strength, the general build, the speed,
the roundness of figures, the combative propensity, and
the power of endurance, are the seven points of excellence
that are to be observed in purchasing an elephant, and the
man who is possessed of such a noble animal, is sure to
conquer his enemy in battle. The elephants form the best
decorations of a royal camp, and a monarch cqp achieve
any amount of military success by means of his elephants
alone. The grooms should be anointed with oil and clarified
butter, and the site of the stud should be so chosen, as to bar
nil possible derangement of the vital wind in the animals.
The, shoulders of the beasts should be lubricated with the
Composition enumerated in the preceding line. O thou twice
born one, an elephant afflicted with jaundice, should be treat-
ed.with the medicated clarified butter, prepared with the urine
*3


ftSNI PUKANAIT.


1*06

would subjugate the mind of the lord of the celestials, not
to speak of mei.. By means of the abovesaid Mantra, a
votary would b able to remain invisible to all men. It is
the best of alt charms, and is potent enough to bring one’s
enemies under control, and to paralyse all their intellectual
faculties. The Mantra, seven times repeated, should be
looked upon as same as the celestial milch-cow (Kama-
Dhenu (3 — 5).

Now I shall narrate to you the king of the Mantras, the
safeguard against depredations by thieves and robbers. Id
peril, and during the prevalence of pestilential epidemics,
the Mantra, worshipped by the mighty Shiva, should be re-
peated a hundred thousand times, and libations numbering
a tenth part thereof, should be poured on the fire.

Now hear me narrate the Mantra of universal succour,
and which runs as :-Om, O thou, who dost wield a trident,
come and come, preserve me with the truths that form the
essences of the gods Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra, Om, obei-
sance to the god Vacheshvara (Svaha).

Since the goddess succours men from distressed con-
ditions (Durgas), she is called Durga. The Mantra, sacred
to the goddess, runs as follows Om, Chanda-Kapalim,
dost thou gnash and gnash thy teeth. Fut, Hreem. Grains
of nee, should be consecrated with the preceding Mantra,
and should be given to the suspected thief for chewing.
The innocence of the man would be established in the event
of the ejected cud having retained its nature* whiteness
( 6 — 8 )

Om, O thou with a pair of burning eyes and the clotted
and dark-brown hairs on whose head, burns with terrific fire.
O thou stupefier and piercer of the three regions of beings,
cut and cut, roam about and roam about, attract and attract,
break and break, twist and twist, Dura and burn, cook and
cook, thus what Siddha-Rudra commands. I shall bring thee
down even though thou be at this hour in the fields of


AGN1 PURANAM.


1058

of a cow and the essence of the two sorts of Rajani ; while
a lubrication with oil, and a fomentation of the part with the
medicated ghee enumerated above, should be held beneficial
in a case of obstinate constipation of the bowels. Varuni
wine saturated with the five sorts of salt, as well as morsels
composed of Vidanga, Triphala, Vyosha, and Saindhava,
should be prescribed in the case a swoon or fainting, and
washings of honey should be substituted for its ordinary
drink (5—9).

In headache, its head should be lubricated with oil, or
the animal should be made to sunff-oil through its proboscis.
In all diseases affecting its legs, the parts should be lubri-
cated with oil, and then washed with a decoction of levigated
sesamum powder for antiseptic purposes. The essence of
peacock, Titteri, or Lava, mixed with pepper and Pippali,
should be administered to an elephant suffering from cons-
tant shivering. A morsel composed of Vilva, Vala, Lodhra,
Dhataki, and Sita, should be given to an elephant, suffering
from an attack of acute dysentry. Similarly in paralysis
or numbness of the proboscis, the animal should be made to
use as snuff, a composition consisting of salt and clarified
butter. In the form of the disease known as the Utkarana, a
compound of Magadhi, Nagaraja, and Ajaji, mixed with
wheat and barley, should be given. Similarly the expressed
juice of Varaha, Dashamula, and Kulattha, treated with Amla
and Kakamacbi, and boiled with oil saturated with the es-
sence of Bbusana, should be deemed as a certain cure
for all sorts of hoarseness of voice, and inflammation of the
thorax (10—15,

In retention of urine, a draught composed of clarified
butter saturated with the eight sorts of official salt ; or a
decoction of the seeds of Traposha, may be given with good
result. In skin diseases, a pulverised compound of Nimva and
Vrisha, or a decoction of the same drugs, should be given to
the afflicted animal. Similarly the presence of worms in the


AGNI PuRANAM.


1301


Elysium, or in the region of the higher gods, or wantonly
sporting on the summit of the mount of felicity. I make
offerings to thee, dost thou accept them !

Thus having made oflerings to the god tisnetrapala, the
votary should practise the rite of Graha-Nyasa, whereby
he would bring the whole world under his control. The
enemies of such a person, would meet their doom, and his
antagonists would be carried away in battle (9).

A man, having performed tne "'te of Nyasa with the
Hansa-Vija, should procure three sorts of poison, and mix
them up with the powders of the drugs, known as the Agaru,
the Sandal, the Kushtha, the Saffron, the Nagakesharam,
the Nakha, and the Devadaru, taken in equal parts, and
made into a paste with honey. Then he should fumigate
the clothes of an idol with the vapours thereof, whereby
he would meet with good luck in quarrels, charms, and
literary disquisitions. The same fumigation should be
consecrated withe Maya-Mantra, where the object would be to
win a bride. A Tilak mark made of Gorochana, Nagapushpa,
Saffron, and Manahshila, and put on the forehead of
a person, consecrated with the Hreem-Mantra, would act
as an irresistible charm. Pulverised Shatavari, taken with
milk, helps a man in begetting a male child, and the same
result is also obtained by taking the powders of Nagakeshara
boiled in clarified cow-butter, or the washings of Palasha
seeds, simple and ilone (10— 14 )

Om, rise and rise, O thou goddess Chamunda, overtake
and overtake, charm and charm, such and such a person, and
bring him under my control, obeisance (Svaha). The Mantra,
which is infallible in its efficacy, should be repeated twenty-
six times over a lump of clay brought from the bank of a
river. An image should be made with that of the wished-
for lady. Her name should be written in the juice of the
Unmatta plant on an Arka leaf, and the image should be
placed thereto. Then the votary should pass water over

15 *


AGN1 PUftANAH.


fosgf


intestines, would indicate- the medicine, consisting of cow’s
urine and pulverised Vidanga. The ' potion-' consisting
the distilled essence of Sringavera, Kana, Grapes and Sugar,
should be prescribed in all wasting ^diseases, together with
extract of Meat, and the food should largely ' consist of
Mudga pulse mixed with Vyosha and Tumaruch. Oil pre-
pared with the essence of Trivrid, Vyosha, Agni, Danta,
Arka, Shyama, Kshira and Gajapippali, would prove remedial
to all sorts of intestinal tumours, and should be used where a
purgative would be necessary, as* also for the purpose of
lubricating, or passing an Enema, and should be deemed
as a specific for all sorts of diseases attendant on an unskil-
ful management of a syringe, or on an unsuccessful attempt
at moving the bowels (16—21).

A potion consisting of the expressed juice of Jastika,
soup of Mudga, and Sharada, or a plaster of Vala and Vilva,
should be deemed as beneficial to that class of diseases
which is known as the Katu Roga. An elephant suffering
from any sort of colic pain in. the abdomen, should be treated
with a morsel, composed of Asafoetida, Vidanga, Indrayava,
Sarala, and the two sorts of Rajani. The morsel should be
given the first thing in the morning. The best food for an
elephant is' that which consists of Yashka, Vrihi and Shali
rice. The one composed of wheat and barley, should be
deemed as ranking second in regard to its nutritive proper-
ties, while the other sorts of food, should be considered as
belonging to the inferior sort. A course of barley and
sugarcane would form the best strength-giving diet for an
elephant, while a course of dried barley alone would
derange the seven cardinal principles of its organism. A
copious quantity of milk, should be given to an elephant,
wanting vigour and boyuancy of spirit ; whereas 'extract or
meat mixed with the essence of stimulating drugs .in general,
should |>e also [given to one in the same predicament as
before (22—26).


1202


AGNI PURANAM.


the charm, and repeat the preceding Mantra, whereby he
would have the lady drawn to his side.

Om, Kshum, Sah, Fut. This Mantra, known as the great
Deathc-onquering one, should be made use of in Homas
and chanted at regulated Stimes, by which the health and
beauty of the votary would be increased.

Om, Hansah, Hrum, Hum, Sa, Hrah, Soum. The Mantra
consists of eight letters, and is known a9 the Reviver of
life. The Mantra should be repeated with a view to obtain
victory in war (15—17).

The god fshana is the presiding divinity of all the
Mantras, and is the lord of the Brahmanas, and of all the
created beings. May the god Sada-Shiva confer eternal bliss
on rue.

Om, may I know the divine self of the god Tat-Purusha,
may I meditate upon h»s divine self, and may Rudra lead it
to dwell thereon. Om, obeisance to the Aghoras, to the
Ghoras, to the Ghora-Ghoras, and to all.tbe manifestations of
Rudra, and on all sides.

Om, obeisance to Vamadeva. Uoeisanee to Jestha. Obei-
sance to Rudra. Obeisance to Kala. Obeisance to Kalavi-
karana. Obeisance to Valavikarana. Obeisance to Vala-
i Pramathana. Obeisance to the controller of all created
things and beings, and obeisance to the god who agitates
the minds of all.

Now I shall narrate the Sadyojata-Manira, which runs as
follows : — Obeisance to Sadvojata Obeisance to the god of
being. Obeisance to the god of eternal being. Be manifest
in me, O tbou god, who hast proceeded out of the eternal
being, and dost control the process of infinite becoming.

Om, obeisance to the supreme soul, to the supreme one.
Obeisance to the grantor of all desires, obeisance to the
supreme god, obeisance to the god of self-communion,.
Obeisance to the god who proceeds out of the process of sen-
communion, obeisance to the doer of all, do and do and be


io6 o


AGNI PIMANAM.


In famine! in war, or In times of scarcity, the essence ok
the flesh of ravens, owls or of dogs, mixed with honey, might
be given as food to an elephant. A fumigation of the body
of a war-elephant with the vapour of the Katu fish, Vidanga,
alkali, washings of Koshataki, and turmeric, ensures victory
in .battle. A liniment composed of Pippala, oil, rice,
Madhvika and Makshika, and applied along the eyelids of an
elephant, sharpens its eyesight. A paste made of the fecal
matter of a sparrow or a pigeon, and the gummy secretions
of a Kshira tree, and applied as collyrium along the eyelids,
would make an elephant happy, A collyrium prepared as
above, and applied along the eyes, would make an elephant cut
bold capers in a battle. A paste composed of the petals of
blue lotus, Musta, and Tagara, and pounded in the washings
of rice, is tlrebest cooler of an elephant’s eyes. A fomenta-
tion with oil, is the best cure for an enlarged or a broken
nail. The bed of an elephant, should be strewed with ashes
and powdered cowdung, and its body should be lubricated
or fomented with oil in summer and autumn (27—33).


CHAPTER CCLXXXVIII.


Dhanvantari said Now I shall deal with the diseases
that are peculiar to, and the rules that are to be observed
in managing, a fcorse. The horses should be purchased
and collected for the purposes of virtue, enjoyment, and
furtherance of earthly possessions. A horse should be first
ridden under the auspices of the asterisms, known as the
Hasta, and the three Uttaras. The seasons, such as the
winter, the spring, and the forepart of the cold months, are
the most favourable to a ride, whereas in summer and


AGNI PURANAM.


1203


manifest and be manifest, O thou, who dost control the
process of eternal Becoming. Be propitiated, O thou Vama-
deva, the doer of all acts, the expiator of all sins, O thou, the
ever blissful one. Obeisance to thee and obeisance.

The Hrid-Mantra in connection with the above, runs as
follows : — Om Shivah, obeisance to Shiva. Om obeisance
to the flaming energy situate in the region of my heart.
The Shikha-Mantra, in connection with the present Nyasa,
runs as Om, O thou . supreme energy proceeding out of the
divine essence of Shiva, O thou omniscient being, O thou
lord of all, be evolved out, O thou matchless dreaded being,
and O thou, who wearest long, brown and clotted locks on
thy head. Obeisance to thee, O thou great armour, O thou
who wieldst bolts of subtle thunder, and art equipped with
nooses of lightning, and bows and arrows of the same fierce
fluid, dost thou enter my body, and bind and bind, crumble
down and crumble down, whirl and whirl round, and stupefy
and stupefy the hearts of all malicious creatures. Stupefy
and stupefy all malignant beings, Hum.

The present phylactery (Kavacliam) consists of a hundred
and five letters. The Astra-Mantra, sacred to the Aghora
manifestation of the god, runs as Om obeisance to the
dreadful energy (Ojas) of the god, permeating the region
of my eyes. Om, be thou effulgent and effulgent, O thou
whose essence is too subtle to be perceived by the senses.
Let thy wrath and anger fill in this infinite space of the
universe. Kill and kill, cut and cleave and vomit and
vomit forth fatal fire. Hrung, Fut (18—20).


•:o:


AGN1 PURANAM.


*66l

autumn, a horse should not be harnassed, nor ridden upon.
The whip should be most sparingly used, nor a horse should
be mercilessly beaten at an improper 'or a Vulnerable part
of its body (1*— 4).

A rider, not knowing the temper of his steed, and riding
it in a ragged and undulating country, or in a common of
sandy soil and abounding in bones and pitfalls, without
saddle and bridle, is most likely to come to grief, although
some there are, such as the professional keepers of horse
manage, or expert equestrian players, who can ride a horse
better and with greater comfort and freedom, without the
stirrup and the bridle. A rider should first coniecrate the
body of his own horse by getting it bathed in a stream or
a pool, and by invoking the presence of the different deities
in the different parts of its body, with a repetition of the
Mantras respectively sacred to them, preceded by an " Om n
and followed by a “ Nainas” (obeisance). The horse should be
kept standing with its face turned towards the east, and the
following prayer should be recited : " May the god Brahma
take his seat in thy heart, the god Vishnu in thy strength,
and the celestial Garuda in thy prowess. May the Rudras
protect thy flanks, the divine preceptor expand thy intellect,
and may the Vishvedevas protect the vulnerable joints of
thy body. May the sun and the moon-god preserve thy
eyesight^ and may the Ashvinas protect thy ears. May the
fire-god preserve thy appetite, and take his abode in the
cavity of thy stomach, his queen Svadha in thy prespira-
tion, the goddess of speech in thy tongue, and the wind god
.in thy speed. May the heaven protect thy back, and the
mountains, the foreparts of thy hoofs. May the stars take
their abode in the pores- of thy hairs, the phases of the moon
in the region of thy heart, the fire-god in thy dashing fire,
the goddess of love in thy buttocks, the lord of the universe
in thy temple, the planets in thy neigh, and the primordial
Hydra ia.the region of thy breast” (j— -11).


CHAPTER CCCXX1V.


The God said : — Now I shall describe to you the peace-
giving rite known as the Shiva-Shanti, and the Mantra called
the Aghorakalpa, which forms the pith and marrow of such
a ceremony. The rite in question absolves even the killer ol
a Brahmana, of all sins incidental to such an act, is the
abode of all the three sorts of penitential successes, and is
the healer of all distempers that afflict the human flesh or
mind. Phenomena that portend evil, are subsided under the
pacifying influence of the ceremony, whether they appear
in the sky or heaven, or are brought about by the direct in*
tervention of the gods. Fatal influences of dreadful poison
or (malignant stars and spirits, are known to have yielded
to its effect. The rite is the best atonement for all sins, is
the most powerful agent in giving a better turn to one's
fortune, and is the best dispeller of all gloom that hangs
over the mind of a man (i — 3 ).

The rite of Nyasa, .in connection with the ceremony,
should be performed, by mentally assigning the different
parts of one's body to the Eknetra manifestation of the god,
after which the votary, should meditate upon the divine self
of the five-faced one. The faces of the god, should be con-
templated white, in all religious ceremonies, undertaken with
a view to confer peace and prosperity on a person, red or
yellow in charms, brown in acts where the object would be
stupefication of one's intellectual faculties or organic func-
tions, while they should be imagined dark black in fatal or
maddening incantations. The faces should be imagined as
burning with a twany or flaming hue in incantations of
oblivion, or of attracting the mind of a man towards one's
seif. The Mantra consisting of thirty-two letters, should


AONI FURANAM.


io6f

The rider should then whisper Into the right ear of his
horse, the Mantra running as follows, and observe a vow of
fast that day. “ Hear me, O thou Horse, who wastiheson of
a Gandharbha sovereign inothe existence provious to thy final
metempsychosis, hear me, and recollect thy noble blood, and
betray not thy glorious descent. Recollect thy noble birth
and the energy of truth, the strength, and the glory which the
Bramhanas, the Mnon-god, the celestial Garuda, the Rudras,
Varuna, the wind and the fire-god, contributed to the forma-
tion of thy self, and which ushered in thy glorious advent into
being. Remember thy divine blood, O thou metamorphosed
son of a sovereign, and recollect the promise you made
when the gods and the demons began to chum the primeval
ocean, of universal water, and when the damsel Varuni,
and the diamond Kousthava, were evolved out. Beest thou
my sole and absolute friend, O thou horse of divine lineage,
O thou the metamorphosed son of a sovereign.”

" Hear me, O friend, and do my behests in battle, win for
me fresh laurels of victory every day, and prove. your self an
invincible beast of conveyance in war. The gods conquered,
the demons on thy back, and on thy back, I expect to con-
quer the armed hosts of my enemies” (12 — 19).

Then having repeated the abovesaid prayer into the ears
of his steed, a trooper should saddle him, and join a fighting
or a marching squadron, whereby he would return safe and
laden with trophies of victory. Many congenital defects
are found, in a more or less marked degree, in an unbroken
horse, and a horseman should have them corrected by his own
exertion. Many are the virtues which are found in a good
horseman, while a bad trooper invariably mars the points
of excellence which naturally belong to a horse. One knows
the good points in a horse, the other can detect the blemi-
shes only, that man is truly rare who combines in himself the
qualities of a detector and a critic of the virtues of a horse,
whereas a stupid rider knows not the points of excellence


agni puranam.


taos

be first worshipped, and then repeated a thirty lakhs of time.
Libations of clarified cow-butter, and numbering a tenth part
of the latter, should be poured on the fire. Such libations
consisting of the essence of gum-resin, and poured on the
fire as stated in the preceding line, convert a novice into an
adept in the spiritual mysteries, and help him in attaining
whatever he sets his mind upon. The Aghora-Mantra grants
both worldly good and salvation of the soul, and there is no
other Mantra which can vie with it in that respect. By
repeating it, a man, who is not an ascetic, acquires the fullest
merit of asceticism, and a man who has never gone through
the vow of religious ablution, becomes a Snataka (a religious
bather) in every acceptance of the term. The Aghora-,
and the Aghorastra-, Mantras are the two kings of the
Mancras. The rites of Homa, Japa, and worship in con-
nection with the Mantra, if duly performed, would enable a
man to annihilate his enemy's army in battle (4 — 8).

Now I shall describe the ever blissful rite of Rudra-Shantii
which confers upon its performers, whatever he has an eye
to. Barren women become mothers, malignant planets be-
come friendly, and diseases become scarce under the benign
influence of the present ceremony. Famine forsakes a
country, pestilence never visits its shores, and evil dreams
never oppress the sleep of its inmates, where the ceremony
in question is performed. Kingdoms and armies own him as
their lord, who performs it, and his enemies are overwhelmed
with ruin. The rite should be undertaken when evil times
would be prophesied by the unnatural blossoming of
trees, or by inauspicious dreams in the night. The term
Namas, should be appended to the Mantra in a worship,
while it should terminate with a Svaha, a Vashat, and a
Voushat respectively in rites of Homa, pacification and pros*
perity. The term “Cha” should be used in the second place,
as illustrated in the following example: —

Om, coeisance to Rudra and (Cha) to thee. Om obeisance


AGN! 'ftmANAM.


1063

fior defects. Even a good judge, who is rash and or ad ex-
tremely irritable temper, and knows not how to act on
an emergency, and otherwise unacquainted with the general
manage of a horse, should not be entrusted with tile break-
ing of a good One (at>— *24).

A good rider who knows the temper of horse, and ffll
of contrivances and resources uuder difficulty, and is well
acquainted with it general management, is sure to cure all
vicious propensities, and to detect fresh points of excellence
every day. Then having taken the horse in his hand, the
horseman should ride his steed, either from his right or
left. A horse should not be abruptly ridden, nor should be
suddenly whipped just as one would take a firm seat on the
saddle. A horse would bolt away in fright, if suddenly
whipped, and fright may usher in a fatal swoon. A horse-
man should run his horse in full gallop in the morning and ,
drive it with a loose reib, while in the evening, he should run
it with a light rein and in a mild trot (25 — 28).

The four sorts of political expedients such as Concilia-
tion, Division, Punishment and Gift— may be metaphorically
extended to hold good in the mangement of a horse, where
conciliation whould mean stroking, and the use of cheering
terms, Division would signify isolation from his companions
of the stud, Punishment would include whipping, etc., while
gift would signify long sufferingness, or an act of biding
time. Each succeeding measure should be adopted on the
failure of the preceding one. In the case of a riding horse,
the reins should be attached to the rings of the bridle lying
about the tips of its jaws, and the horse should be allured to
take in the bridle into its mouth. In the case of an ulcerated
lip, the curb or the string restraining the tongue of the animal,
should be omitted. The curb. should be retained until the
horse would give up the vicious habit of jumping. The curb
should be fastened tighter in the case of a horse, that throws
up its face on the least noise, and shies and tries to bolt >*t


1206


AGNI PUHANAM.


to the bull. Obeisance to the unemancipated one. Om,
obeisance to the unborn one. Obeisance to the infinite per-
sonality! and (Cha) to the worshipful Ishana, the infinite
prowess.

The following five manifestations of the god (Rudra),
should be worshipped to the north of the mystic diagram as
follows Obeisance to the one whose aspect is the universe.
Obeisance to the dreadful one. Obeisance to the one of
distorted features, and Om, obeisance to the one who knows
no change. The worship should be conducted at the south-
ern, and the south-western, points, of the mystic diagram in
the principles of water and illusion.

Obeisance to the god Eka-Pingala, to Shveta Pingala,
and to Krishna-Pingala. Obeisance to the god Madhu-
Pingala, invoked in the principle of predestination. Obei-
sance to the eternal one, to the moist (compassionate) one,
to the withered (merciless) one. and to the god Payogana,
invoked in the principle of eternal time. Obeisance to the
thousand-headed one, to the thousand-mouthed one, to the
thousand-handed and thousand-footed divinity, and to the
thousand-phallased one invoked in the southern petal of
the lotus-shaped diagram (9 — 13).

Obeisance to the god with a single braid of clotted hair.
Obeisance to the god with a couple braids ot clotted hair.
Obeisance to the god with three braids of clotted hair.
Obeisance to Kara. Obeisance to Akara. Obeisance to
VashabKara, and lastly, obeisance to the six Rudras. O
Guha, the offerings are to be made to the aforenamed
divinities, invoked in the principle of dissolution, and sup-
posed to be present at the south-eastern point of the mystic
diagram.

Obeisance to the lord of the world. Obeisance to the
lord of all the created beings. Obeisance to the goddess Uma
and to the lord of eternal time. The offerings are to be made
in the spiritual principle, presided over by the god Sadasbjva.


1064 *ONI PURANAM.

the of an unfamiliar object, and the rider should be
always on the alert to detect Us such like attempts as early
as possible. The left foreleg should be tied with the rein
to the left-hind leg of ahorse of mischievous habit, which
should be driven by means of the left rein (99**37)>

It is the nature of a horse to turn his face, every now and
then, and it should not be ascribed to the tleing of bis legs
as above laid down. Having found a trusted horse, and hav-
ing taken a firm seat on the saddle, the horse should be made
to touch his leg with his face, such a posture being known
as the Lokana, whereas the posture known as the Vakkanam
consists in firmly clasping the two legs round the waist of
a horse.- Tadana consists in binding the legs with the rein
or a rope, and then letting it go, so as to leave the fore-legs
free. The horse whose legs do not touch the ground, should
be restrained by means of the fastenings known as the
Mothanas and Vakkauam.

A paste composed of cow-dung, Salt, and a decoction
of Mrit, should be used in rubbing the body of a horse,
as a safeguard against the bites of flies and insects. The
posture known as the Grajhya kantakapaneyam consists in
striking a horse in its flanks, and in then holding the rein
with the feet. The horse that is in the habit of raising its
fore-faws, should be restrained by means of the fastening
known as the Khalikar (38—45).

Gahan consists in striking with a stick the leg of a horse,
pot making footfalls in a desired way, while running in one
of thfe three sorts of paces, such as the trot, the gallop or
the canter. Ucchasanam consists in leading a horse to a
different place, with its mouth restrained by means of a
quadrilateral briddle. It is the nature of an -unbroken horse
to turn his face towards die place bom which it has been
taken out, which should be gradually corrected. A horse
should be gradually broken into a ring, etc., (46—50).


AGNI PURANAM.


l 2<>7

and supposed to have been invoked at the eastern petal of

the mystic diagram (14).

Obeisance to the goddess Uma who assumes dreadful
shapes. On), come and come and hasten and hasten, O thou
Rohini, who art but another manifestation of the god Rudra,
the lord of the celestials. Kill and kill, burn and burn.
Cook and cook. Trample down and trample down. Come
and come, and hie thee and hie thee to the mission of the
present rite of Rudra-Shanti. Obeisance to the black and
brown coloured one, obeisance to the universal god who
is the lord of the Akala Pishachas, as well. The god
Maheshvara with his consort Uma should be worshipped in
the spiritual principle sacred to Shiva, and invoked for per-
meating the polens of the lotus-shaped mystic diagram.

Om, obeisance to the spirit, filling in the space of the uni-
versal ether. Om obeisance to the god whose body is the
infinite heaven. Om, obeisance to the all-pervading Shiva, to
the eternablordless Shiva, who does not depend on any thing
for his support.

The following seven terms are the epithets of the sky-
pervading Shiva, and offerings should be made, O Guba, by
addressing each of these names, in the eastern petal of the
mystic lotus, permeated with the spiritual principle, presided
over by the god Sada-Shiva, as follows : Om, obeisance to
the eternal being who feeds upon the contemplation, and
who is the eternal Yogin, and is eternally present in the cir-
cle of yoga. Om obeisance to Shiva, the five-faced one, the
lord of all, the absolute subjectivity, the chief of the Ishanas.

The following manitestations of the god, should be wor-
shipped in the principle of Homa invoked in the south-eas-
tern petal ot the lotus diagram, and in the two principles of
knowledge invoked in the one at the north: Om obeisance
and obeisance to the heart of the illusionless one, to Uie
mystery of Vamadeva, and to the Sadyojata manifestation
of the god. Om obeisance and obeisance to the mystery


AGNI PURANAW


I0$5


A horse that lifts up both its head and forepawsi would
take time to be fully broket into the harness. The breaking
of a horse should be taken in hand, while the animal would
be yet light in its limbs. A horce that is light at the face,
fleet and flexible in its joints, and pliant at the neck, should
be deemed as fully broken, and under the control of the.
horseman. A horse that does not kick up its hind legs,
shduld be deemed as gentle and docile, and should be then
drawn forward by the rein, or its forelock. A horse that lifts
up its head with flanks outstretched, and eyes fixed to the
sky, and does not move when thus drawn, but jerks his body
and swings its neck, should be restrained by means of a rein
and a bridle (51 — 56).


-:o>


CHAPTER CCLXXXIX.


I^HALIHOTRA said : — O Sushruta, I shall now deal with
the ominous marks that are usually found in the body of a
horse, and the diseases it is usually afflicted with. A horse
possessing a lesser number of teeth than usual, or the one
entirely divested of them, as well as the one possessed of a
black tongue, or palate, or the one that has a frightful look,
or a twin-born horse born without the testes, or the one hav-
ing cleft-hoofs, or with a horn on the region of its forehead,
o.' a tricoloured horse, or the one coloured like a tiger, or an
ass, as well as an ash-coloured, or a flame-coloured horse, or
the one with abnormally developed palate, or the one
whose skin is marked by 'patches of Psoriasis, or any other
diseases affecting the epidermis, and in consequence is con-
stantly ridden upon by crows, as well as the one whose voice
*34


AGNI PURANAM.


I20S

of all mysteries, to the preserver, to the deathless one, to
the subject of all Yoga, and to the primal light.

The following manifestations of the god, should be
worshipped in the principles of illusion and eternal time,
respectively situate at the north-western, and the western,
petals of the lotus Obeisance to the supreme god. to the
conscious and unconscious one, to the sky-pervading one,
and to the light of the first light.

Om, O thou deathless one, O thou Shiva who art born of
death, O thou all, O thOu supreme soul, O thou great god, O
thou infinite energy, O thou, the lord of good feelings, O thou,
the presiding deity of all yoga, dost thou emancipate and
emancipate our soul,— Om, O thou all, Om, O thou the lord
and product of all becoming. Om, O thou who givest felicity
to all creatures. This Mantra should be worshipped in the
principles of fatality and subjective freedom, respectively
invoked in the north-western, and northern, petals of the
the lotus.

Hie thee, and hie thee, O thou spirit who dweHest near
all, and art worshipped by Bramha, Vishnu and Rudra, 0 thou
who art above all hymns and worship, and dost witness
all actions in the universe. Come and come, O thou,
the sun, the fire, the knowldge, the sound, the subtle
principle, come, O thou blissful one, the giver of all, and
grantor of all, felicity. Om obeisance to Shiva, Om, obei-
sance. The worship should be made with the preceding
Mantra in the principle of Nature, invoked in the north-
eastern petal of the mystic diagram. The ceremony should
be closed with the rites of necessary Homas and Japas,
whereby all desires would be fulfilled, and all diseases inci-
dental to the malign influences of planets, would be cured

<* 5 — * 7 )-


:o:


AGNI PURANAM.


1066

resemble* the braying of an ass, or the one whose eyes
resemble those of a monkey, or the one possessed of black
iH fiwi, or the one, the region of whose <tnus is marked by
a b l a c k colour, or the one whose nostrils possess a black
hue, or the one resembling a Tittira bird in colour, or the
one whose legs are unequal and are marked by patches of
white, as well as the one divested of those ring-like curls,
which are known as the Avartas, or the one that, on the
contrary, has them at inauspicious parts of its body, and
wrongly involuted, should be scrupulously rejected from the
stable (i — 5>.

The locks of curling hairs which are deemed as *he
most auspicious in the body of a horse, are ten in numbeF,
and are those that appear in couples on the head, on the
chest, on the forehead, on the flanks, and the sides of the
animal. Similarly such rings appearing about the root of the
ears, at the forehead, at the root of the forelegs, or at the
neck, or about the tips of the jaws, should be deemed as-
equally auspicious, whereas those that appear in other parts of
the body, should be deemed as auguring evil. A horse having
the gloss and colour of a Shuka, Indragopa, gold or a raven,
should be deemed as the best of the species in respect of
colour. All expectation of victory should be banished from
the mind, where the belligerent prince would be possessed of
horses that are broad-necked, short-eared, and are possessed
of large and deep-set eyes. A horse or an elephant possess-
ing signs, enumerated above, should be kept in the stud,
whereby the progeny and possessions of its master, would be
increased, whereas horses and elephants, divested of those
signs of happy augu .y, would bring misfortune and disaster
on their masters. The horSe is the holiest of beasts, and,
as such, is sacrificed on the occasion of the ceremonial rite
known as the Ashvamedba (6-— u).

A morsel composed of Vrisha, Nimva, Vrihati, Guduchi,
Makshika, Sinha, and Gandhakari, as well as a fomentation


CHAPTER CCCXXV.


1 he God said A man should wear Rudraksha seeds,
even in number, and firmly threaded together. The seeds,
should be possessed of a single mouth, or of three or five
mouths, as available. Those having two, four, or six mouths,
with thorns on the surface all unbroken and fully developed,
and not having been marked by any fissure, or eaten into by
worms, should be deemed as the most auspicious. A four-
mouthed seed should be worn by a person, either on his right
arm, or tied to the tuft of hair on his crown. By this, the
wearer, if not observing the vows of asceticism (Brahma*
charya) will acquire the merit of leading such a pious life,
or a man, not observring the vow of religious ablution, will be
clean, as if he has fulfilled that vow. The class of Rudraksha
known as the Haimis, should be worn by consecrating them
with the Shiva Mantra. The Rudrakshas are divided into
four classes (Gocharas), such as the Shiva, the Shikha, and
the Savitra. Gochara means a particular class of the Rudra*
kshas, a hundred thousand counting of which grants success
with a Mantra. The Rudrakshas, known as the Prajapatyas,
the Mahipalas, the Kapotas, and the Granthikas, belopg to
the genus Shiva. The Rudrakshas, known as the Kutilas,
the Vetalas, the Padma-Hans^s belong to the genus Shikha.
The seeds known as the Dhritarastras, the Vakas, the Kakas,
and the Gopalas, belong to the genus Yoti, while those known
as the Kutikas, the Saratas, the Gutikas and the Dandinas,

belong to the genus Savitra (l — 7)*

NOW I shall deal with the diagram known as the
Siddhi-Saddhysi, a knowledge whereof grants the highest
success in coR«*tion with a Mantra. The letters of the
alphabet, known as the Matrika Varnas, should be written on

152


ACNI PURANAM.


IO67

flt the heed, or a decoction of Asafoetida, Pushkara-root,
Nagara, sour Vetasa, Pippali, and Saindhava salt, made luke-
warm, should be administered to a horse suffering from an
attack of acute dysentery. A decoction of Nagara, Ativisha,
Ananta, Musta, and Vilva leaves, would prove remedial in the
same complaint. A potion composed of goat’s milk, Priangu,
Shariva, and a profuse quantity of sugar, would prove a good
beverage to a horse, just returned from a long journey, and
would remove all sense of fatigue in the animal. A morsel
Composed of pomegranate bark, Triphala, Vyosha and treacle,
would prove beneficial to a horse suffering from a paroxysm
of harassing cough. Similarly a case of the same complaint
would yield to a decoction of Priyangu, Lodhra, and the
expressed juice of Vrisha, taken with honey as an auxiliary
potion. A decoction of Kshira and the five drugs known as
the Panchakola, would cure an attack of the same malady
(ia — 18)*

In All sorts of diarrhoea, or in diseases attecung the
process of digestion, or assimilation, emetics and purgatives
should be first used, whereas in cases of fever, snuffing and-
anointing* with medicated oil, should be first prescribed, so
as to eliminate the phlegm through the nostrils. A paste
composed of Lodhra, Kandhara-root, Matulanga, Agni,
Nagara, Kushta, Asafoetida, Vacha and Rasna, should be
deemed as a good remedial measure for all sorts of swelling
of the limbs. A horse passing blood with the urine, should
be treated with a potion composed of Manjistha, Madhuka,
grapes, Vrihati, red sandal wood, roots and seeds of
Tryapusha, Shringataka and Kasheruka, boiled with goat’s
milk, and made cool and saturated with a quantity of
sugar (19 — 22 )

A lubrication of the affected part with the medicated
oil known as the Katu taila, should be made in all cases of
lock-jaw, or in paralysis of the jaw or cheekbones, or in a
case of swelling affecting the. throat of a horse. In all


1210


AGN1 PURANAM.


the ground, excepting those that are known as the Kuta-
Shandas. The component letters of the Mantra, should be
separately written on the ground, while the signs of the nasal
phonetic sound (Anusvaram), should be eliminated therefrom.
The component letters of the name of the votary, should be
separately written as well on the ground, and the letters of
the name of the votary, should be both prefixed and suffixed
to the Mantra. The letters composing both the Mantra and
the name of the votary should be counted in the order, of
Siddha (successful), Sadhya (capable of being converted
intoaSiddha or successful one), Susiddha (successful at
the least effort), and Ari (Hostile). A Mantra beginning
and terminating with a Siddha letter, grants success to Us
repeatero and fills him with supernatural powers, even
with a single repetition. A Mantra, beginning and ending
with a Susiddha Mantra, produces the same result. A Mantra
beginning and ending with a hostile letter, should be for-
saken from a distance. The Siddha and the Susiddha
Mantras should be us'ed in ceremonies of the same nature,
and the same rule should be observed as regards the An
and the Sadhya. A Mantra beginning and ending with
Siddha letters, but composed of hostile letters in the middle,
does not lofe its efficacy, nor is it vitiated by such an un-

favourable combination (8*— 13)*

The Mantras, such as the Pranava, the Maya, and the
Prasad are indivisible, and as such, their parts do not fall to
the portions of the gods they are respectively held sacred to.
The Mantras, known as the Brahma-vidyas, are presided over
by the God Brahma, while those called the Vaishnava-Mantras,
are sacred to Vishnu. The Rudra-Mantras are called the
Viras- The Indranshas are sacred to the God Ishvara. The
Mantras sacred to the Nagas, exercise a peculiar influence
over the serpents. The Mantras sacred to the Yakshas, are
fond of ornaments, while those presided over by the Gan-
dharv.is. make their vtarics proficient in the arts of singing


ftONl PURAftAM.


diseases affecting the throat of a horse, and giving rise to
a sort of numbness of the part, a , swelling is always ob-
served around the seat of th e-disease, which would yield to
a snuffing of a decoction composed of the flowers of
Pratyaka, Vanhi, Saindhava, the expressed juice of Sourasha,
Krishna, and Asafcetida. In paralysis or numbness of the
tongue, a paste composed of Nisha, Jyotishmati, Patha,
Krishna, Kustha, and Vacha with honey or treacle, should
be applied over the affected organ. Similarly clarified butter
prepared with the essence of sesamum, Yasthi, turmeric,
Nimva leaves, or a paste composed of the abovesaid drugs
mixed with honey, would prove a specific for all sorts of
ulcers (S3 — 27).

A horse maimed by a stroke of the whip, or limping on
account of an excruciating pain in its legs, should have the
affected part fomented with oil, whereby the pain would be
relieved. In case of a hurt, or in an extremely deranged
state of the vital humours of the affected part, unattended by
symptoms of local suppuration, a treatment similar to a
case of an open ulcer, should be adapted. A decoction of
the barks of Ashattha, Oudumvara, Plaksha, Macjhuka and
Vata, boiled with a copious quantity of water, should be used
in washing a wound, and for antiseptic purposes in general.
Oil prepared with a decoction of Shatahva, Nagara, Rasna,
Manjistha, Kustha, Saindhava salt, Devadaru, Vacha, the two
sorts of Rajani, red sandal wood, and the expressed juice
-of Guduchi, should be used for the purposes of healing,
snuffing, and for the purpose of passing an Enema, and in
cases where anointment Would be necessary. The oil may
be used in cases of bleeding, or in diseases affecting the
ends of the eyes of a horse, incidental to a bite by leeches,
or by any other water parasite. Such a wound may be wash-
ed with a decoction composed of the washings of catechu,
Oudumvara, Ashattha, Dhatri, Duralabha, Ticta, and the
fldwfets of Priangu. In a case of bad foot, or tombing over


AGNI PURANAM.


1 21 1


and dancing. The Mantras presided over by the Rakshasas
are dreadful in their effects, while those, of which the demons
are the regents, prove efficacious in wars and hostilities.
The Mantras, sacred to the Vidyadharas, confer aristocratic
dignity on their votaries. The Mantfas, of which the Pisha-
chas are tne regents, are filthy in themselves, and make their
votaries forget the common rules of cleanliness. From a
single Mantra ending with Fut, there are Vidyas that consist
of fifty letters. The Vala-Vidya consists of twenty letters, the
Rudra-Mantras consist of twenty-one, while the Mantras
which consist of more than that number of letters, are called
the Vriddhas, and they count nearly three hundred in alf
(14— 18).

The letters, both the consonants (from Ka to Ksha,)
and vowels of the Sanskrit alphabet, excepting the Anus-
varas and the Visargas, represent the different phases of
the moon, both increasing and waning. The shcfrt sounds
are the emblems of the increasing phases, while the long
sounds, should be deemed as symbolical of the waning ones.

The incantations undertaken for confering peace on an
individual, should be practised with sounds that are emblema-
tic of the waxing phases of the moon, the rites of subjugation
with sounds symbolising the waning or retarding ones,
the rites of maddening and distraction with sounds that
represent the points of intersection in the lunar courses,
while the spells of stupefication, should be practised, when
that luminary would suffer occultation. The peace bringing
spells should be practised by a man, when he would breathy
through his occult nerve, known as the Ida, the spells of
attraction when the breath would flow out through his
occult Pingala, while deadly incantations should be prac-
tise, d when the breath would be in the occult Vishuva. The
predominance of the earth principle (Prithvi-tattva) in a
person, should be inferred from the passing off of the breath
wind through his lips, that of the lire or light principle


AGNI PURANAM.


IO69


a block of stone, or in gradual decaying and withering of the
hoofs, the levigated powder of Guduchi should be used. In a
case of a fast-growing derangement of local humours in the
wound, ; t should he scraped out the very day the gangrenous
process would be detected. A paste composed of Go, Sarjika,
Kustha, Rajani, sesamum and mustard, pestled with the urine
of a cow, would prove beneficial to all sorts of itches,
or itching sensation of the skin (28 — 36).

A case of Hcemoptysis in a horse, would prove amenable
to a decoction of the drug known as the Ashvakarna, mixed
with honey and sugar, and administered through its nostrils.
Salt should be administered to a horse on each seventh day,
and the wine known as the Varuni should be given to it
on the occasion, as an additional drink. In winter, a de-
coction of Jivarieya, Mridvika, sugar, honey, petals of lotus,
and Pippali, should be given instead of wine ; while in winter
the beverage would be a potion consisting of the boiled
juice of Vidanga, Pippali, Dhanya, Shatahva, Lodhra, Sain-
dhava salt and Chitraka. In spring, the beverage would
consist of a decoction of Lodhra, Priyangu, Musta, Pippali,
and Vishva, mixed with honey, .whereby a preponderance
of phlegm in the animal, would be destroyed In summer,
wine mixed with treacle, and the expressed juice of Priangu,
Pippali, Lodhra, and Yasthi, should be given to a horse as *a
stimulant, while in the rainy season, it should be substituted
by a potion consisting of the extract of Lodhra stick, salt,
Pippali, Vishva, and Bhesajam, mixed with oil (37 — 43).

A horse suffering from a bilious distemper in summer,
from a plethora of blood in autumn, or from a constipation
of the bowels, in the rainy season, should drink clarified
butter. In a disease marked by a preponderance of wind
and phlegm, oil should be administered in place of
clarified butter. A horse suffering from a disease brought
about by an abuse of oil, or by a presenee of an excess of
oily matter in the system, should be treated with a course


1212


AGNI PURANAM.


from the ascending of the same towards the upper regio
of the cavity of the nose, while the ascendency of the wate
principle, is to be inferred from the passing out of the breatl
wind through the region, intervening.

The ascendency of the wind principle is to be inferrec
from the beating of the breath wind against both the wall
of the nasal cavity, during its outflow, while the god Mahes-
vara, should be deemed as the regent of the wind permeating
the rest of the body.

A spell of stupefication should be practised during the
ascendency of the earth principle, a peace-giving incantation
during that of the watery one, a subjugating charm during
the predominance' of fire, while that of driving a man
crazy from his hearth and home, should be practised during
the prevalence of the principle of wind. The spells should
be practised in proper and auspicious moments (19 — 23).


CHAPTER CCCXXVI.


The God SAID: — Now I shall deaf with the process of
worshipping the goddess Uma, which gives a better turn
10 one's fortune, and grants enjoyment in this life and
salvation in the next. I shall describe to you the Mantras,
the process of meditation, the mystic diagram, the Mudras,
and the rites of Homa, etc , which should made use of in the
course of the worship.

The Mantra consists of Vijas technically known as the
Chitrabhanu, Shiva, Kala, and the Maha Shakti Vijas. The
other forms of the Mantra, are stringed together with the
Vijas known as the Dvarakas, while the principal one runs
as Om Hreem, Sah, Goum, obeisance to Geuri.


AGNI PURANAM,


IO7O

of drying meals, which would be best served by giving it,
for three days, a course of barley soaked in whey. In
autumn and summer, the syringe should be passed with
clarified butter, with oil in winter and spring, as well as
in rains and the forepart of winter. A horse that has
taken oil, should not be bathed, or made to take heavy and
fatiguing physical exercise, nor should be so exposed as to
give rise to a deranged condition of its bodily phlegm, or
wind (44—47).

During the rains, a horse should not be bathed and given
any water-drink on the same day, during which a horse should
be provided with a single drink, each day. In a season of
blended heat and moisture, a horse should be provided with
two drinks and a single bath each day, whereas in summer,
a horse should be bathed thrice daily, and that for a con-
siderable time at a stretch. Each meal of a horse should
consist of four Adaka measures of barley, free of husks and
mixed with gram, Vrihi, Mudga and Kalai pulse. In whole
day and night, a horse should consume ten and a half Tula
weight of barley, and eight Tula weights of dried Vyusha.
Durva grass destroys all bilious distempers of a horse, while
a meal consisting of barley alone, would prove beneficial
to a horse, suffering from an attack of cough, whereas a meal
of Vyusha alone would give rise to an accumulation of phlegm
in the animal. A course of Arjuna leaves would cure all dis-
eases affecting the process of respiration in a horse, whereas
Mana would prove fatal to its strength and dashing vigour.
A horse, living on a meal of Durva grass, would enjoy an
immunity from all diseases that are usually ushered in by
a deranged state of the wind, bile and phlegm; A vicious
horse should be tied by means of two tight ropes, one on each
aide, while its hind legs should be tied by means of ropes
two posts, driven into the ground at a distance. Horses
should be stabled in a well ventilated house, and its floors
should be strewn dverwifh dried hay or straw, and fumigated


AGNt PURANAM.


1213


The Asanam should be spread out for the deity with a
repetition of the Pranava-Mantra, while the rite of Murti-
nyasa should be performed by repeating the H rid- Mantra.

I have already enumerated to you the Jamala-Mantra, hear
me discourse pn the one, known as the Ekavira-Mantra, and
in connection With which, the rite of Vyapaka-Nyasa should
be performed with the Mantra, consisting of Vijas, known as
the Srishti, the Vanhi, the Maya, the Krishanu, the Shiva, and
the Shakti, exclusive of the one called the Hrid (i* 6 — 7).

The goddess Gouri, should be worshipped in an image
made of gold, or of wood, or of stone. The five manifestations
of the goddess, should be likewise worshipped at the centre ;
and the four corners of the mystic diagram. The companion
goddesses of the deity, such as I^alita, Subhaga, Gouri and
Kshovana should be worshipped at the angular points of the
mystic Mandalam, commencing from the south-east. The
goddesses, such as Varna, Jestha, Kriya, and Jnana, should be
worshipped at the cardinal points of the circle commencing
from the east. The subtle presence of the God Shankara
should be worshipped to the left of the proper cushion of the
Goddess, who should be represented as possessed of two eyes,
two or four hands, and riding on a lion or a leopard, placed
on the lotus-shaped diagram. In the alternative, the Goddess
should be contemplated as possessed of eighteen hands,
wielding in them an arrow, a bow, a rosary, a garland of
flowers, a book, a prepared betel-leaf, a club, a Kamandalu,
(water-pot), a mirror, etc., one of the hands having been con-
templated as bent in the attitude of encouraging her votaries.
The deity should be invoked in the shape of an old woman
with wrinkled cheeks (8 — 12).

In the alternative, both the manifest and the invisible
selves of the deity should be worshipped. The votary should
invoke the presence of the goddess by blending his palms
in the attitude known as the Padma (lotus-shaped) Mudra,
and, spread out the cushion for her. to sit upon. He should


AGNI PURANAM.


107 f

with the vapours of vermifugous drugs. Goats, monkeys, and
Krikvaks, should be kept in the stable, which should be well
guarded, and lighted with lamps in the night (48 — 55).


-:o:-


CHAPTER CCXC.


OttALlHOTRA said : — O Sushruta, now I shall describe
the religious rites which should be performed for the good
of the stud, and which would admit of a three-fold division,
according as they are undertaken daily, disinterestedly, or
for the realisation of any particular object. The god Hari,
together with the goddess Lakshmi, and the celestial steed
Uchchaishrava, should be worshipped on a day of blissful
asterism, and libations of clarified butter, should be poured
on the sacrificial fire, with the repetition of the Gayatri
Mantras. The money should be paid to the Brahmanas by
way of their Dakshinas, whereby one’s stud will be in-
creased (1 — 3).

Similarly in the month of Asfivina, and on the day of the
fifteenth phase of the moon’s increase, the water-god Varuna
should be worshipped in a mystic diagram, laid out outside
the stable. The image of the goddess should be then deli-
neated on the ground, surrounded on all sides by the tender
shoots of the sacrificial trees. Pitchers, full of liquids of
all taste, should be stowed at all angles of the compass,
covered over with pieces of linen, and the gods and the
Ashvis, should be worshipped, and oblations, composed of
barley and clarified butter, should be poured on the sacrificial
fire. Then the Dakshinas should be paid to the Brahmanas,
by way of completing the ceremony (4 — 6).


AGNI PURANAM.


blend his palms in the shape of a phallic emblem in invoking
the presence of the God Mahadeva, while he should twis
them together in the shape of a female sexual organ (yoni
in invoking the presence of his divine consort. Both these
sorts of Mudras, should be used in course of the present wor
ship, as occasion' might require.

The Mandalam, or the mystic diagram, to be used in the
ceremony, should be ’a square-shaped one, being one of the
.class, technically known as tbe Chatarasra-Mandalam. The
Mandalam should measure four cubits, furnished with the
image of a three-petalled lotus, drawn to embellish its centre,
and occupying the four rectilinear chambers described about
the same.

Libations of clarified butter, should be poured on the
sacrificial fire, kindled in a fire-pit of any of the following
structures. The first, or the Chatarasra-Kunda, is but a
square divided into five equal parts. The second or the
Yoni (shaped like a vagina) Kunda is formed by describing
a triangle on the base of the fourth of such parallel, dividing
lines. Then the two sides of the original square, should be
produced downwards to double their extent, and their
extremities should be joined together. Another equilateral
triangle should be described on the latter straight line,
and two such should be described on the aforementioned
fourth line of division, so that their apexes might be in
the opposite direction but in the same straight line. A
Kunda thus formed is called the Yoni-Kunda. In con-
structing the third or the Trasra-Kunda, divide a square
into four equal parts by drawing three parallel straight lines
across it. Produce the base of the square equally on both
sides, and describe an equilateral triangle on the same.
Similarly in constructing an Ardha-Chundra-Kunda, a square
is to be drawn, and the three fourth of its plane should be
divided into ten equal parts by drawing nine parallel straight
lines across it. The lowermost line of division, should be


toys


AGfrt’POftANAM.


Now I shall describe the 'incidental (Nahnittikh) form of
the rite, which should be performed during tile stay of the
sun at the sign of the Capricorn, and the god Vishnu and his
wife Lakshmi should be worshipped at the centre of the lotus-:
shaped diagram, while the gods such as the moon, Brahma
Shankara, the Ashvins, Reventa, Uchchaishrava, and the
guardian deities of the different quarters of the sky, should
be worshipped at its petals. A pitcher, full of water,
should be dedicated to each of the above-said divinities.
Oblations composed of sesamum, sun-dried rice, and clarified
butter, should be poured on the fire lit on the sacrificial
platform, and a full hundred times in honour of each of the
gods. The performer of the ceremony, should observe a vow
of fast that day, whereby bis horses would continue in sound
health (7 — 8).


CHAPTER CCXCI.


I^HALIHOTRA said : — Now I shall describe the rite of
bringing peace on elephants, a performance whereof would
grant them an immunity from all diseases, The divinities
such as Vishnu, Lakshmi, the 'celestial elephant Airavata,
Brahma, Shunkar, Indra, Vaishravana, Yama, the sun, the
moon, Varuna, the wind, the fire-god, the earth, the heavepj
the primordial Hydra, the mountains, the celestial elephants
that guard the bpenings of the sky, the celestial beings, the
elephants of the heaven, such as Kumuda, Airavata, Padmaj
Pushpadanta, Vamana, Supritika, and Anjana, should bo
propitiated with oblations of clarified butter, and then the
Dikshina should be paid to the Brahman as. The elephants,


AGNt PURANAM.


1215


equally extended on both sides, and an elipse should be
described around it. In the alternative, the sacrificial lire
might be kindled on an ordinary Sthandila, or sand cushion.
In the alternative, the mystic diagram should contain the
figures of a Tasra (triangle) and an Ardha-Chandra (semi*
circle) within it, to the extent of two Pada measures of
its entire area. The doors, rims, and side borders, should
be duly delineated, each preceding one measuring double in
length of the one mentioned immediately following it. The
Goddess might be worshipped simply on a diagram of the
Bhadrk class, in the absence of one of the preceding type
(13 — x 7)*

The votary should worship the Goddess with the compc~
sition known as the Pancha-Gavya, and make offerings cf
red flowers to it. Then he should sit with his face turned
towards the north, and pour down the customary libations.
The man, who can manage to pour down the fiqal libation
in connection with the present Homa, is sure to attain the
highest Siddhis* (supernatural powers)

* Attainment of one’s all wished for objects is the principal trait
of penitential success (Siddhi), the other traits being, vision of the gods,
the power of bringing the dead to life, the power of entering another’s
body, the power of sailing oyer the skies, the power of healing the sick
by toucfi, the power of associating with the aerial beings, omniscience,
compassion towards all, indifference to all earthly concerns, non-at* *
tachment to every thing, the power o| controlling the minds of all.

vnr mroniKiHUfliii h
TORrcftsra grnturt tot i

f* snsrgt *if?n n

tfrmres set fh miwhaa i n

aifinn jrawinr 1


AGNI VURAWAM. 1073

thus sprinkled over with the water of peace, would increase
in number ( •—-5).

Now I shall describe the incidental form of the worship.
The lotus-shaped mystic diagram, should be delinaated out-
side the city wall, at the centre whereof the god Vishnu and
the goddess Lakshmi, should be worshipped, and the gods
such as Bramha, the Sun, the Earth, Skanda, Avanta, the
heaven, Shiva, the Moon-god, and Indra, together with
their respective weapons, should be worshipped at its petals.
The celestial weapons, such as the thunderbolt, the spear,
the rod, the Tomara, the Pasha, the club, the trident and the
lotus, should be worshipped on the periphery of the outer
circle of the diagram. The Sun and the Ashvins should be
worshipped at its centre. The gods, such as the eight
Vasus and the Sadhyas, should be worshipped at the petals
situate at the southern and the south-west portions of the
disc, while the gods and the holy saints, such as Angirasa, the
Ashvis, the Bhrigus and the Wind-god should be worshipped
at the petals occupying its western portion. The Vishvedevas
should be worshipped at the southern petals, and the Rudras
at those that are situate at the north-east angle of the dia-
gram. The gods should be invoked and worshipped on the
periphery of the exterior circle. The holy sages who com-
posed the verses of the immortal Vedas, together with the
spirits of streams .and mountains, should be worshipped at
the angular points of the diagram, commencing from the
east. The great spirits should be worshipped at the angular
points, such as the north-east, etc. The celestial emblems
Should be invoked to guard the four portals of the sacrificial
shed, at each of which a pitcher full of water should be
stowed^ while banners should be planted at each of its an-
gular points (6—12).

The celestial elephants, such as Airavata, etc., should be
invoked to defend the four doorways- of the Mandat. The
Ctntlf of ceteatiol virtue, should be worshipped at the


agni puranam.


Ill(

Thn having made the animal offering to the deity, he
T w^.u provide a sumptuous repast for three or eight un-
married girls, and distribute the offerings, previously dedi-
cated to the divinity, among the votaries of the God Shiva.

Subsequent to that, he should take hU daily meal of boiled
rice. By performing the ceremony in question, a man wish-
ing to have a wife, is sure to get one, a man wishing to have
a Lie issue, is sure to be blest with a son, a woman not
nn the good graces of her husband, is sure to win his affec-
tions, and a king, ousted of his kingdom, is sure to recover
its possession. A man, reciting the abovesaid Mantra, eight

hundredthousand times, would captivate the minds of the

Gods. Hie votary, should not partake of the <>ffenogs
without having dedicated them to the deity with his left

describe to ,ou the proce» o( wor,hippi»g

the God Motonjaya (venqersher oi de«h), *

» the third, eighth, or the fourteenth da, of the
moon's wane. The worship should he held in the ' tns.de , o
a sacrificial pitcher. The Mantra consists o ^he first tw
Padas of the Gayatri, coupled with the second Pada (foot) o
the Mantra sacred to the God Tramvaka, followed by he
third foot of the Gayatri appended to the thud foot of t e
Tramvaka-Mantra. The Kumbha-Mudra should be used
invoking the presence of the God, and the principal Mantra,
coupled with Voushat, should be recited on the occasion.
The Homa should be performed with libations of danfiec

cow-butter, containing twigs of Punarnava, Arnrita, blades

ol Durva Grass, and thickened milk. Subsequent to that,
th. votary should prepare the Purodasba Payasba, and re
p«t theMantra, a ten thousand times. The god shouldbe
Contemplated as possessed of four faces and four hands
bolding two pitchers in two of them, while the other tw «
^mdd be imagined as bent in the attitude of eocourag.n,

hi, vnb^Thc votary should bathe by exhibiting the


r©74


AGNI PURANAM.


cardinal points of the heaven. The celestial elephants
should be worshipped, and a 'hundred libations of clarified
butter should be poured on the fire, in honour of each of
the divinities invoked on the occasion. Then the performer
of the ceremony, should circumbulate the celestial elephants
invoked on the diagram, as well as the Naga and the Fire-
god, and then go home, and pay Dakshinas to the Bram-
hanas, and the physicians to the elephants. Then the priest,
who should be a man well-acquainted with the mysterious in-
fluences of stars and the momentous auspices of blissful
moments, should ride on a female elephant, and whisper
into her ears the Mantra running as, " O thou the queen of the
elephants, I have performed this immortal peace-giving rite.
O thou elephant, the king has made thee the chief of his
stable, and he shall further worship thee with flowers,
garlands and edibles. The people, according to his dictate,
shall also worship thee in their turn. Dost thou protect
the king both at home and in battle. Forego thy animal
nature, and recollect thy divine origin and assume thy
celestial intellectual capacities. The gods created the
celestial elephant on the occasion of the war that broke
out between them and the demons. Arishta was the son
of Airavata, the first created elephant of the gods, and
Inherited the strength and sagacity of his divine father.
Mayest thou acquire all those virtues, and dost thou protect
our king in battle (13 — 20).

Thus having addressed the elephant, the king should ride
on its back, and thousands of elephant-warriors fully equip-
ped, should follow in his train. Again a mystic diagram
should be laid out on the ground of the elephant-house, and
the presiding deities of the different quarters of the globe,
should be worshipped at its centre, and the earth goddess,,
the goddess Sarasvati, Vala and Naga at Its petals. Thel
hand-drum should be worshipped within the periphery ofj
the Mandala, with the offerings of flowers, garlands andj


AGNI PURANAM.


IAI7

Kumbha Mudra. A repetition of the abovexiid Mantra
should be deemed as the best of all healing agents, and the
grantor of health, wealth, and longevity. A contemplation
of the god, arrests premature death, whereas by worshipping
him, a man may work miracles (18 — 26).


CHAPTER CCCXXVII.


The God said:— -The gods who are the regents of
teligious vows, etc., should be invoked and worshipped in the
heads of a rosary. Then the votary should address the rosary,
and charge it with the fulfilment of the vow of repetition of
his Mantra. A rosary stringed with beads of gold or pre-
cious gems, should be counted for the betterment of one’s
status, while the one made of the teeth of a dead C h a n da l a ,
and technically known as the Maha-Shankha, should be. used
in incantations practised for the death of one’s adversary. A
rosary consisting of beads of conch-shell, should be counted
in love charms, while a rosary of pearls, properly told, would
increase the progeny of its counter. A rosary of crystals
increases one’s progeny, while a rosarv of Rudraksha seeds
emancipates the soul of its teller. A rosary, consisting of
Rudraksha seeds to the size of a Dhatri fruit, should be re-
garded as the best of its kind (1— 3).

A rosary, whether with or without the Mem (the top
knot) should be counted by a man with his thumb and
third finger, in the case of a mental recitation of a Mantra,
while in an audible repetition, the thumb and the index
finger should be used, care being taken not totonat over
fhe top-knot. The Mantra should be repeated Atro hundred
imes in the event of the rosary having bet* accad&tally
ipped down from one’s grasp (4—5)-


AGNI PURANAM.


1075


perfumes. Libations of clarified butter should be poured on
the fire, in honour of the gods, and the pitcher containing
the sweetened juice, should be made over to a Brahmana.
The astrologer, the groom and the superintendent of the
elephants should be worshipped, and the consecrated hand*
drum should be made over to the latter, who would beat it
with his palm and fingers, and hail his king. with the beatings
which would resemble the deep rumbling sound of a pregnant
thundercloud (21—24).


CHAPTER CCXCU.


DhANVAjHIari said : — A king should preserve the breed
of cows in his country, and now I shall deal with the rite,
a performance whereof, is beneficial to the horned cattle in
general. The cows are holy and blissful, and the universe
owes its existence to the bovine species. Bad luck never
sticks to fthe place, which has once been sprinkled over with
the urine of a cow. Even a particle of water, dropped down
from the horn of a cow engaged in scratching her body,
is possessed of the virtue of expiating all sins. A man
having had a bad dream in the night, should take a com*
position, consisting of the dung and the urine of a cow, as
well as of curd, cream, etc., prepared out of the thickened
milk of a cow, mixed with the substance known as the
Rochona. The urine of a cow is endued with the efficacy
of neutralising til sorts of poison, and of keeping off the
undesired intrusions of demons and monsters on the house*
hold. The man, who gives morsels of food every day to a
cow, is sure to ascend heaven after death. The man. who pro*
▼ides a cow, even belonging to another, with similar morsels


AGNI PURANAM.


I2l8

O Skanda, a bell should be looked upon, as containing in
its peals the sounds of all sorts of musical instruments, and a
tolling of bells by a person increases his earthly possessions.
A phallic emblem should be cleansed with water, ashes, the
dung and urine of a cow, and earths collected from an ant-hill
and the threshold of a courtezan’s house. O Skanda, the
Mantra, which consists of five letters, and runs as obeisance
to Shiva, brings about the fruition of one's all desires. A
song, in the Vedas, is composed of five letters, while in
ordinary practice, it usually embraces six. The god Shambhu
is inherently situated in the end of the Pranava-Mantra, like
the seed of the universe, which has subsequently evolved out
into being. All the other Mantras have proceeded out of
this six lettered one of " Om obeisance (Namah) to Shiva,”
by way of 'gloss, as it were. The phallic emblem (Lingam)
should be worshipped by repeating the preceding Mantra,
as it is in the Lingam the god exists, out of compassion
to men, — the god (Shiva) who emancipates the soul of strug-
gling humanity, and delights in the fruition of its noblest
desires and aspirations (6 — 11).

Virtue forsakes a man for good, who fails to worship
the sacred Lingam, while on the other hand such a worship
invariably leads him to wealth, piety and the final liberation
of his soul. Therefore worship ye the Lingam, as long as
ye continue in this life. Better it is to. die than to partake
of any kind of food before worshipping the Lingam. By
worshipping him, a man becomes a Rudra. A votary of
Vishnu is ultimately merged in the essence of that deity.
A worshipper of the sun-god becomes identical with his tute-
lary divinity, after death, whereas a devotee, of the goddess
(Shakti), becomes one with her in spirit at the close of his
earthly career (12 — 13).

A man by installing and consecrating a phallic emblfem,
gets a million times more merit in the eyes of heaven, as
there b in the performance of all the religious sacrifices! or


A9H! nWANANU


Wf

of food, merits a similar elevation, while the man who deea.-'
anything for the welfare of the hovine species in general/
goes to the region of Brahman, after death (1—5%

The man who makesjhe gift of a cow, or sings any hymn
in her praise, or rescues her life from jeopardy, or from immi*
nent peril, ensures the salvation of all souls, any way related
to him in life. Hallowed is the touch of a cow, and bal-
lowed is the ground which she stands upon. No sort of
blight strikes the ground, which is purified by the breath of
a cow. A single day’s fast on a diet of the composition,
consisting of the dung and urine of a cow, and the curd and
Kshira prepared out of her milk, is enough to absolve
the most abject sinner like a Chandala, from all impieties.
The observance of the vow, known as the great Santapanam
Vratam, and in which the diet is enjoined to be composed of
the secretions and evacuations of the body of a cow, as well
as of the different preparations of her milk, was advised by
the gods of yore, for the expiation of sins of whatsoever
nature. The vow in question should be observed for three
consecutive days, whereby the observer would be blessed
with all sorts of benediction, and become the happy pos-
sessor of all wished-fpr objects. In the vow known as the
Krichchhati-Krichchham, and which should be consecutively
observed for twenty-one days, th e diet should consist only
of the milk of a, cow, during that entire period. The great
ancients practised this penance in yore, whereby they at-
tained purity and ascended the region of the gods (6—9).

In the form of the penance known as the Tapta Krich-
chham, the practiser should live on the warm urine of a cow
for the first three days, on warm clarified butter for the
eecond three days, on warm milk for the third three days,
and on air for the last three days. A practice of such a pen-
ance grants an absolute purification, and leads the practiser
to the region of Brahman. The penance, in which the diet
la enjoined to he composed- of the same substances, taken


AGNI PURANAM.


IJI9

in bathing in all the sacred pools, or in resorting to all the
holy shrines, or in the perusal of all the Vedas. The man,
who constructs a phallic emblem of clay, and worships it
thenceforth every day, with the leaves of a Vilva tree, suc-
cours his manes, to thejhundred and tenth remove, from the
shades of Haydes and ultimately sports amidst the splen-
dours of Elysium.

Therefore a man should build a temple to the god, and in
a style as his means would admit of. The rich and the poor,
like a meagre or a splendid temple, count equally in the eyes
of the god. And since this life is transitory, devote ye two-
thirds of your income to the purposes of virtue, and a third
part only to your actual wants in life (14 — 17).

The man, who builds a temple to a god, succours the souls
of his deceased relations, even to the twenty-first degree of
consanguinity. Temples, built of [stone, of wood, or of clay,
rank differently in respect of merit, each succeeding one being
a million times more meritorious than the one immediately
preceding it. The man who builds a divine temple, even with
eight pieces of bricks, goes to heaven after death. There is
merit in piling up dust in the shape of a temple, even in
play (18—19).


CHAPTER CCCXXVUI,


Said the God of Fire:— Now I shall deal with the
rules of Prosody together with the symbols of syllable or
syllabic instants of each, as laid down by Pingala. [A
stanza is a combination of four Padas or quarters, which
are regulated either by the number of syllables or syllabic
instants] A syllable is either Laghu (short) or Guru (long),


AftMl rvH4HAH>


coldi it known «i the ShUa-kriehehbam, *nd * practise
whereof ip rewarded by n similar elevation after death*
A man should wa»h hi* body with the urine of a cow,
live on a diet consisting of the preparation* of her milk,
tend to a herd of cow*, lead them to fresh pasture*
every day, and eat his meals after the sow* bad been fed;
A man, by leading *uch a life, is said to practise the
penance of Go-Vrata. The penance should be continuously
practised for a month, whereby the practiser would bo.
absolved fromyill sins, and ascend heaven and ultimately hmm
access to the beatitude of the most holy Golak* (the region
of Vishnu), Similarly by constantly repeating the verses,
known as the Gqmati Vidya, a man is sure to be rewarded
with a similar elevated station in the next world. The man
who joins the cows in their dance of wild ecetacy, is
sure to enjoy the fruits of heaven in the company of celes*.
tial dancing girls. The body of a cow is always fragrant*
The body of a cow always emits the perfume of the scented
gumresin. All animals depend on the cow for their svtSr
tenance. A cow is a locomotive benediction, since it serve*
the gods with the food they live upon, and which solely GO in-
sists of libations of clari$ed butter offered to them in the
course of a religious sacrifice. The cow is the sole purify?
ing principle in relation to- all other animal*. Th* god* in
heaven are pleased with the libations of clarified butter pyre*:
pared out of the milk of a cow, and offered in the course
of a sacrifice, consecrates with a repetition of the. Veda
Mantra*. Thus the cow is ultimately connected with the rites
of Homa, performed by the holy sages in eonnectfoe with in.
Agni Hotra sacrifice. The gods speak in - response te the-
Mantras repeated during a religious sacrifice, end shower
ambrosia on earth, in return for the libation* .of cinrified
butter offered to them in the course thereof (ip-m-f 7), .

Cow* offer the best sustenance to all sorts ef .neimnin*
The cow* are the holiest of the hoJi**,tbs best <rf *b aux


1220 '


agni puranam.


according as its vowel ,is short, or long. A short vowel
becomes long in prosody, when It is followed by an
Anusvara or a Visarga, or a conjunct consonant. The
last syllable of a Pada is either long or short according-
to the exigence of the metre. Similarly the Jihvamuliyas,
and the aspirate Visargas before the letters Pa and Pha,
should be regarded as long, [one instant or Matra is
allotted to a short vowel and two to a long one]. The
Indian Prosodies have devised eight different Ganas, or
syllabic feet, each consisting of three syllables, and known as
i Ja or Bacchius (short— long— long), 2 Ra or Amphimacer
(long— short— long), 3 Ta or Antibacchius (long— long—
short), 4 Bha or Ductylus (short— long— long), 5 Ja or Amphi-
brachys (short, long, short), 6 Sa or Anapcestus (short, short,
Jong), 7 Ma or Mofossus (long, long, long), and 8 Na or
Tribrachys (short, short, short). Similarly the letter La is
the symbol of a short syllable, while the letter Ga stands for
a long one. The eight symbols are used both in the Vedic
and the pseudo-vedic verses alike (1 — 3)-


CHAPTER CCCXXIX.


Said the God of FrttE: — In Prosody the metre known,
as the divine (Daivi) Gayatri, consists of a single syllable,
the one. known as the Asuri (Demonic) Gayatri, consists of
fifteen syllables, while the one, known as the Prajapatya,
consists of eight syllables or varnas. The metre, as used in
the Yajur Vedas, consists of six syllables, while the Samagas
add two syllables more to its foot. The metre, as used
in the Rik Vedas, consists of eighteen syllables, while the
chaunters of Saman, add two syllables more to its quarter.


MSN! VWtANAlIl


lO^ff

pieiwli nghtoi The com «« the step-stones to heaven,-*-
the most blessed sisters to. eternity. Obeisance to the cows,
the abodes of all beauty, the daughters of the celestial
Sorabhi. Obeisance to o the cows, the holiest daughters of
the god of creation. The cows' and the Brahmanas form
the two bifurcated branches of the same family. The
Mantras reside in the Brahmanas, the libations abide in the
Cows. It is the gods, the Brahmanas, the cows, the holy
sages, and the chaste wives that form the mainstay of the
universe, and hence they are the objects of the most devout
worship. The pools whereof a cow would drink, should be
deemed as, a sanctuary. The sacred streams, such as the
Ganges, etc., should be deemed as all lying in the body of
g cow (iff — 23 ).

I have dealt With the greatness of the cow, now hear
me discourse on the mode of treatment which should be
•adapted in diseases that afflict the bovine species. Oil
prepared with a decoction of Shringavera, Vala, powdered
Mansa and Makshika, would prove beneficial to a disease
affecting the horns. In a case of aching inflammation of the
ears, oil boiled with the essence of Manjista, garlic, Asafoetidh
and Saindhava salt, would prove an unfailing remedy.' A
plaster composed of*the rbots of Vilva, Apamarga, Dhataki,'.
Patala, and Kutaja, applied over the gums, would prove
beneficial to a case of toothache (23—25).

O Rama, drugs mentioned under the preceding malady,
should be used in diseases affecting the cavity of the mouth,
boiled with an adequate quantity of clarified butter. The same
mixed with Saindhava salt, should be prescribed in diseases
of the tongue. In inflammation of the throats, in cardites, in
lumbago, in rheumatic complaints in general, and in general
atrophy of the muscles, the remedy should consist of the
essence of turmeric, Daruharidra, and the drugs known as
the Triphala. - The expressed juice of Triphala and Ghrita*
mitre, 'should be mixed with the drink of a cow, while the


AGNl FURANAM.


tail


nt wi n. Three syllables are usually over-allotte«l to the
foot of a Rich, four to the foot pf a Prajapati, and so on,
while a syllable is always excluded from the foot of, an

Asuri (i — 3)- . . .. ..

Tire metres such sw the Ushnika, the Anustupa, the Vnbati,

the Pankti, the Tristupa, the Jagati, etc., are formed by com-
binations and permutations of the syllables allotted to the
quarter of the original Gayatri,— syllables, which in groups of
three, may count op to sixty-four in each quarter (4 5)‘


CHAPTER CCCXXX


Said the God op Fike : — I hare already dealt with
the syllabic incidents which form the metre Gayatri, such
terms as Yas, etc., occurring in its quarters, should be
deemed as used simply with the object of making up the
metre and saving the verse. The metre, known as the Jagati
consists of twelve syllables, the Virat of ten, and the Tris-
tubha of eleven syllables only. The metre Gayatri consists
of a single quarter, or it may consist of three quarters or
feet, of seven syllables each, or occasionally of four quarters,
composed of seven letters in each. The metre Gayatri is
formed as stated in the preceeding line. The metre Ati-
Gayatri is composed of three quarters of six syllables each.
The metre Vardhmana is composed of twenty-one syllables,
and the Nagi of twenty-four. The metre Varahi is com-
posed of twenty-seven syllables. The third metre ennsists
of two or three quarters, according to the option of the versi-
fier, each quarter being composed of twertty syllables of
Trastupa (i — 5 ).


AGNt PURANAM.


*® 1 $

Paths and the two sorts of Haridra, should be deemed bene-
ficial to a cow, suffering from an attack of acute dysentery.
In all diseases of the digestive organs, as well as in maladies
affecting the pulmoniry capillaries, a*id in cough and astlima 9
the expressed juice of Shringavera and Bhargi should be
admin istered ( 26 — 29) .

feroken bones will be set right by a plaster of salt and
the expressed juice of Priangu, while oil, which is a good
antidote of a deranged state of the hnmour of wind, would
successfully cope with any sort bilious distemper of a cow,
if prepared and boiled with the drug known as the Madhu-
Jasti. An attack of cold would prove amenable to the
expressed juice of Vyosha, administered through the medium
of honey, whilb a case of persistent catarrh would yield
to a decoction of Vyosha mixed with powdered Pushtaka.
A calf would marvellously thrive on a food consisting of
Masha, pamum, wheat, clarified butter, and the cream of
goat’s milk. Fumigation of a cow-house with the vapours
of Visha plants tend to neutralise the evil effects of malign
nant stars thereon, and make the cattle strong in limbs.
A fumigation of the cow-house with the vapours of Devadaru,
Vacha, Mansi, Guggula, Asafcetida, and Mustard seeds,
mixed together, would act as a safeguard against the breaking
out of those diseases among its inmates, which are usually
ascribed to the eyil effects of malignant planets (30—34).

The bells to be hung round the neck of a cow, should be
fumigated as well with the vapours of the drugs enume-
rated above. Morsels composed of the severed sticks of
Ashvagandha and sesamum, should be given to a cow for the
purpose of increasing her milk. A Pinyaka tree should be
planted in each cow-house, with a view to improve its general
sanitary condition. The goddess of fortune should be wor-
shipped with the dung of a cow on the fifth day of the
Ipnar month, and the god should be worshipped on th^
occasion as well with flowers and perfumes. Now I shill.


IMf


AGNI PURANAM.


The metre, known as the Ushinka, consists of eight letters
as often found in the Vedas. The metre, known as the
Kukubhushnika, consists of three quarters of twenty-eight
syllables. The quarters of a verse of the metre Pura*
Ushnika follow the same rule as regards scanning, as the
quarters of the Jagati, while the metre, known as the Parosh-
nika, consists of four quarters of seven syllables each. An
Anustupa consists of four quarters of eight syllables each.
The metre Vrihati consists of quarters of thirty-two syllables.
Of the three Jagatas formed, form the original Gayatri, the
second is called the Nanku-Sarini, which the third is called the
Pathya. The Maha-Vrihatis are formed by the three Jagatas,
as well as the Sato-Vrihati of Tandin. The metre Pankti con-
sists of four quarters of forty syllables. The metres, which
are hut the modifications of the original Pankti, are the
Satah-Pankti, the Prastara- Pankti, the Astara-Pankti, the
Vistara-Pankti, the Sanstara-Pankti, etc. The metre Pathya
consists of five Gayatris, and the Jagati of six. The other
Vedic metres such as the Virat, the Svarat, the Shankumati,
the Kukumvati, etc., will be dealt with later on (6 — 14).

The presiding deities of the metres, should be deter-
mined from their first quarters. The divinities, such as the
Fire-God, the Sun, the Moon, the Jupiter, the Ocean-God and
Indra, and the Vishvedevas, are the deities who are the regents
of metres, belonging both to the Vedic and the secular
literature. The Gamut of sound, such as the Sadaja, the
Gandhara, the Madhyama, the Panchama, the Dhaivata
and the Nishada, respectively belong to them. The white,
the fawn, the brown, the black, the^ blue, and the red,
are the colours which mark the complexions of the spirits
of those metres. The spirit of the metre Gayatri is a gold
complexioned one. The complexion of the spirits of
different classes of Kritis are like that of Gorochona
(yellow), while that of the spirit of the metre Jyotishmati is
blue. The Gotras to which the different Vedic metres belong,


tote


AtfWf >0*1**#.’


dertl with other rite* which confer pe ace Art the tW. tWP
god Hkti should be worshipped on the fifteenth duy of the
moon’s increase in the month of Ashvtni. The goes Rudra,
Aja, the sort-god, Lakshmi end the«god of Fire, should bo
worshipped with libations of clarified butter. The worw
shipper should take curd only on the day of the worships
worship the cow* and cirCurtibulate the sacrificial fire. The
ceretnony should be closed With song, music, and a bull fight;
After that salt should be given to the cows and DakshirtaS
should be paid to the Brrthnianas (35**-39).

In the Naimittika form of the rite, the ceremony should'
be ushered in with a worship of the god Vishnu at the
centre of the mystic diagram, laid out on the ground, on the
occasion of the sun’s passing over to the sign of the cancer..
The gods should be worshipped on the different petals tit
the pictured lotus flower. The Ocean, the gods auch as
Aja, the sun-god, Vahurupa, etc., Should be worshipped on
the periphery of the exterior circle ; and . offerings should
be made to each of them. The gods of heaven, the Vishva*
rupas, the Siddhis, the Riddhis, the goddess of peace, and
the regent of the asterism Rohini, and the cows that guard
the different quarters of the’heaven, should be worshipped at
the different sides of the Mandala, starting from the East.-
The god Ishvara should be propitiated with oblations of
rice and pulse boiled together. The regents of the different
quarters of the sky, should be worshipped as well, and sticks
of sacrificial Kshira tree, dipped in clarified butter, should, bd
poured on the sacrificial fire in their honour. Handsful of
sun-dried rice and mustard seeds should be mixed with
the clarified butter in which the sticks should be dipped.
Hundred Pala weights of gold aud bell metal should be
gifted to the Brahmanas. The cows should be feasted on
food soaked in thickened milk.

said THE GOD or Fire The holy Shali-hotra disclosed
to Sushruta that branch of mditol science which relates to


AGNI PURANAM.


iasj


are Agniveshya, Kashyapa, Goutama, Angirasa, Bhargava,
Koushika and Vashishta (15 — 20).

CHAPTER CCCXXXI.


Said the God of Fire : — The metre Utkriti consists
of hundred and four syllables (*. e ., twenty-six syllables in
each quarter). Thus by dropping four syllables as well as
the prefixes Abhi, Sam, Vi, Am, Pra, etc., from them we
get the metre Kriti, and the other classes of metres, such
as the Kriti, the Ati-Dhriti, the Dhriti, the Atyasti, the Asti,
the Ati-Shakvari, the Ati-Jagati, and the Jagati, and w^ich
are usually come across in secular literature. The metres,
such as the Tristupa, the Pankti, the Vrihati, the Anustupa,
and the Ushnika, etc., owe their origin to the Vedic Trais-
tubha (1 — 3).

The metres, such as the Gayatri, the Supratishta, the
Pratishta, the Madhya, the Atyuktha, and the Uktha, are all
convertible into one another, a preceding metre being convert-
ed into the succeeding one, simply by dropping a letter or a
syllable. A Pada (quarter) is the fourth part of a metrical
stanza ; and now I shall deal with the Ganas Chhandah (metre
regulated by syllabic instant), and begin with the Arya.

The first and the third quarters of the metre respectively
contain twelve syllabic instants of Matras, such as (first
quarter) short, short — short, short — long (®2 short) short
short — long, long,) (third quarter) short, short — short, short,
long, short, short, — short, short, long, (second quarter)
consisting of eighteen syllabic instants — (long, short, short,
long, long, short, long, short, long, long, long), and the
fourth quarter consisting of fifteen syllabic instants, (as tonp


AfiNI PURANAII.


iolr

the diseases of horse, while the holy Palikapya, narrated to
the king of Anga, therapeutics on the diseases of elephants
( 40 — 44 )*


CHAPTER CCXCttt.


i^AiD THE God op Fire : — Now listen to me discoursing
on the congcry of Mantras, a knowledge whereof grants to
their respective votaries enjoyment of all the creature com-
forts in this life, and salvation in the next. O thou twice*
born one, the Mala-Mantras consist of more than twenty
letters. The Vijas in order to be classed as Arvak-Mantras,
must consist of more than ten letters. The Arvak-Mantras
constantfy repeated, bear fruits at their old age, *>., they grant
salvation to their reciters at the lapse of the full period for
which they are enjoined to be repeated. The Vija-Mantras
which generally consist of less than ten letters, fructify at
the middle of their enjoined time, i.e., at their youth. The
Mantras which consist of more than five and less than ten
letters, may bear fruit at any time of their ordained period of
repetition (1 — 3).

The Mantras are usually reckoned as belonging to mascu-
line, feminine, or to the neuter sex. The feminine Mantras
invariably end with the term Svaha, the name of the wife of
the Fire-god, while those that are of the neuter sex, end with
term Namas (obeisance), the rest being held as masculine.
The . Mantras of the male sex, should be used in charms, or
in those mystic practices which tend to distract the minds of
one's enemies. The feminine -Mantras should be made use
of in acts of little moment, or in those which are under,
taken with the sole object of bringing found health on them
Y 136


AGN1 PURANAM.


13*6

in nature all other species of its kind, and which is confined
to that supreme category, and can only express itself by its
own name, is called the knowledge of Brahma. A man, in-
capable of meditating upon the shapeless Self of Vishnu,
which is composed of pure'and supreme knowledge, should
try his prentice hand in Yoga, by contemplating some
imaged manifestation of that disembodied being. Gradually
permeated by the essence of the Supreme Being, his notion
of distinction would vanish, the image would disappear, and
the mind would be able to dwell on that supreme and disem-
bodied spiritual entity. Distinction is due to Ignorance only
(29—32).

CHAPTER CCCLXl.


3aid THE Fire God :— * Now I shall deal with that sort

of knowledge of the one and the secondless (Advaita)
Brahma, as revealed to the world by the holy sage, Bharata.
The said Bharata was devoted to the worship of Vasudeva,
and practised Yoga in the forest of Shalagrama. As ill luck
would have it, the holy sage, living in the company of a
deer, became fondly enamoured of him, and departing this
life with the thought of his pet animal, he was born as a
deer in his next re-birth. But as the memories of his pre-
ceding existence were not obliterated in his succeeding incar-
nation, he thought of the evils of companionship and quitted
bis life while deeply absorbed in Yoga. With a view only to
annihilate the effect of acts (Karma I in his preceding life,
and not to contract fresh ones in the ensuing one, he was
bom as an inert person, scarcely fond of locomotion even,
though internally he was a beholder* of the Secondless


iWI MJRAttfttt.


id®*

6* *b6M behalf they Are practised. The MmtM ttieti
We reckoned as belonging to the Female Sex, should be used
in all other sorts of charms. The Mantras are again grouped
under the two more broader sub-divisions of Soumya, (sooth-
ing), and Agneya (fiery). The Vijas known as the Tara,
should be appended to both the Soumya-, and the Agneya-
Mantras. The Agneya-Mantras usually end with a Tara-
Vija. The Soumya-, or the Agneya-, Mantras, should be used
in an act which is of a nature quite in conformity with the
meaning of either of them. An Agneya- Mantra may be
ten vett ed into a Soumya one, by adding the term Fut (obei-
Mnet) to its end (4 — 7).

A Mantra which is asleep, or has beeft just roused out
of its state 6f slumber, does not bear fruit, though ardently
repeated in rapid succession, and for ages and ages together.
The sleeping state of a Mantra should be ascertained from
toe | rapid and fluttered emission of breath through both the
nOstrilS, while its waking should be judged from the calm
and uniform passing of the wind through the left. An-
Agheya-Mantra may be converted into One of the Soumya
class, by’repeating its component letters in an inverse order.
The state of waking of both these Mantras, should be care-
fully ascertained, and letters or Vijas which are presided over
by battfefd planets and asterisms, should be scrupulously
excluded threform. In acts of charm, practised for the acqui-
sition of a kingdom, or for the benefit of an individual, the
vetirnl tetters which are inimical '-to the component letters
of his name, should be first arranged in due order. The
Mantras are to be ascertained from computations made on
the table on which the Gopal- Mantras are calculated, or by
means of a Nakshatra Chakra. The letters of the alphabet
from A to AS {excepting the two §Us and the two Lis],
should be arranged under the . different asterisms from
Ashvioi to Robert, or the different chambers of the former
diagram should he matted as toe Siddha [successful, such


AGNI PUI


* 5*7


Brahma. But the people called him the inert Bharata, none
the less for that (i — 3V

One day a servant of the king of Souvera, roaming about
in quest a bearer for the royal palanquin, forced him to
the royal camp, and engaged him to carry the regal convey-
ance. No v Bharata did, as commanded, for the extinction
of acts in his preceding life. The swift legs of the other
carriers acquitted themselves creditably. But Bharata was
slow of locomotion, and so he could not keep pace with his
fellow-carriers of the palanquin. The king marked that he
was decidedly lagging behind, and asked him as follows

The king said, — you have been carrying my palanquin.
Are you tired after so short a run ? Cert^nly you ought not
to have felt exhausted. Do you not look stout ? (4 6).

The Brahmana said : — I am neither stout, nor do I carry
your palanquin, O lord of the world, neither do I feel tired
or exhausted, nor your majesty is being actually carried by
these lacqueys. My legs are surely on the ground, and the
legs are in their turn, soldered to the knee-joints. The knee-
joints are but the lower extremities of my thighs and
they but enter into the trunk of my body. The hands and
shoulders again are supported by the trunk. The palanquin
thus rests on the shoulders. How can it affect me ? You say
that you are riding this palanquin, but it is simply your body
that is seated within it— your body that reflects only the
effulgence of your true Self. These bodies, are supposed to
be our real personalities, but which are, in fact, nothing but
our seeming or apparent selves, and are even so called by
common convention. Then, O kin*, you and I and others
are really carried by matters only, and never by the actual
selves of men (7—10).

The body which is moving, O king, is moved by the
conglomeration of attributes, which have enveloped the real
Self through the workings of Karmas. The attributes, O king,
are the results of Karmas, accumulated through Nescience.


Acm nnuMAM*


10I3

as *inth, the first and the fifth chamber], Sadbya
[soopwM in time, such as the sixth, the tenth and the
ascend chamber], the Sasiddha (extremely successful, such
as the third, the seventh and the eleventh chamber], and
the Ati (Hostile, such as the fourth, the eighth, and the
twelfth chamber], and the character of each Mantra an
relation to the name of the individual to whom it should
be imparted, should be calculated therefrom. A man, by
s im ply repeating a Siddha-Mantxa, attains salvation, while
a Sadhya-Mantra requires the performance of the rites,
of Homa and worship, to be at all fruitful. A mere con*,
temptation of a Susiddha-Maatra, is enough for the salvation
(attainment of absolute knowledge] of its votary. A repeti-
tion of a hostile Mantra, is sure to lead its votaries to the
grave. A Mantra, full of forbidden or baneful letters of the
alphabet, should be carefully avoided (8 — 15).

A man, having been duly initiated into the mysteries of
a Tantric worship, and having been duly blest with the rite
of final Ablution (Abhisheka) by his religious preceptor,
should repeat the Mantras, obtained from him. A Brahmana
who is scrupulously truthful, pure, intelligent, possessed of
god-like fortitude, given to Japa and meditation, fully con-
versant with the books of Scripture, practises penances, and
is capable of elevating or chastening his disciple, should .be
acknowledged as a Guru. A disciple, on the other hand,
should live on a purely vegetable or Havishya diet, cultivate
liberal setiments, never allow his mind to be ruffled by any
consideration of the world, practise self-control and live
the highest intellectual life possible, and should be -a man.
always eager to learn fresh spiritual laws, heartily devoted
to the service of his Guru, whom he should help with money,
if necessary. A Guru, having imparted a Mantra to hi
disciple, should repeat Jit ten thousand times for its p erfec
fruition (16— 19).

A disciple stands in the relation 0 a son to bis Gun


13*8


AGNl PURANAM.


The self, in a human organism, is the only factor that is
pure, knowing, actionless, devoid of attributes, and, hence
superior to Prakrit!. One and permeating through all
created beings, the Self knows no variation. It does not
admit of growth, nor does it suffer decay. Then what reason
there is of your calling me stout ? (n— 14).

O king, as the earth, the legs, the thighs, the waist, are
all connected with the belly, so this palanquin is upheld
by the shoulders, and therefore it is that you carry a burden
of equal weight with my alleged Self. O king, the rest of
the created animals fare no better in this respect. Burdens of
trees, of mountains, of households, of existence on earth, etc.,
other than that of the palanquin, are borne day and night
by all created beings. As the Purusha or Self is absolutely
unconnected with physical causes, how is it, O king, that
I should be carrying any weight at all ? This palanquin is
categorically the same as the whole range of physical or
material principles which we call our own bodies or selves,
through a mistaken or perverted notion of egoism.

The king having heard him discourse as above, asked his
name by falling down at his feet, and enjoined him to
withdraw his shoulder from the rod of the palanquin and en-
treated him to give a true account of his birth and station in
life (15—19).

The Brahmana said Hear me, O king, that I am un-
able to say who I am. I roam all over the universe for the
purpose of enjoying either good or evil, begotten by virtue
or impiety, and which determines the environment amidst
which a Self is to take birth in its next existence ( 20 — 21).

The King said :—0 Brahman, why will it be not con-
sistent to say that I am whom you see as existing (standing)
before you. O thou twice- bom one, it is not improper to
apply the term " 1” to one's own self.

The Brahmana said Certainly it is not wrong, O
king, to apply the term “ I” to one's own self, but it is


AGNI PUMNAM.


I084

A Mantra heard at random, or obtained by force or stratagem
from a Guru, or any Mantra found written on a leaf, or im-
parted in the form of a gatha (a peculiar metre of ballad
poetry), should be looked upon as absolutely barren. The
man wbo bad nearly perfected a Mantra with rites of Homa
and worship in a previous existence, is sure to work out his
salvation in his next or succeeding birth, with a little labour
upon the same ( 20 — 22 ).

There is nothing, which a person who has perfected
even a single Mantra, is not capable of doing, not to speak
of the man who has spent his life in perfecting many. Such
a man is no less than the god Shiva himself. A Mantra
consisting of a single Mantra, bears fruit after being repeat-
ed a million times. A Mantra consisting of a good many num-
ber of letters, should not be repeated so many times, while a
Mantra consisting of letters, numbering twice or three as
much as its Vi ja -Mantras, should be repeated in the way of
a Rosary-Mantra. A Mantra should be repeated hundred
and eight, or a thousand, times, -where no definite number
of repetition would be mentioned, and in alt cases, libations
of clarified butter numbering a tenth part of the number
of Mantras repeated, should be poured on the sacrificial*
fire. Libations should consist of clarified butter alone, where
no particular substance would be enjoined in that behalf,
A man, incapable of performing the rite df necessary Homa,
should further repeat a tenth part of the number of the Mula-
Mantras, originally recited. The presiding deity of each
Mantra, duly evoked, is pleased with the final ceremony of
Homa, worship and meditation, and grants the wished-for
boon to the votary (23 — 27).

A Mantra repeated in a small voice, should be deemed -
as ten times more meritorious than the one repeated in a
loud tone, whereas the one repeated in a voice scarcely
audible, but which is only judged from the constant move-
ments of the tongue, is hundred times more efficacious than


AftNl PURANAM.


extremely fallacious to desiynate that which is not Not-Self
with that word. As there is only one Purusha (Real or
Spiritual Self) running through all animated organisms, how
can you make any such distinction, as you, I, or he ? O
king, you and this palanquin, and these men engaged in
carrying the same, together with the very world you live
in, are alt subject to mutability (Asat). 0 king, the tree that
grew in the forest, gave the wood out of which this palanquin
has been made, but what has become, O king, of its deno-
minat.on of a tree or wood ? Seeing you riding in a palan-
quin, no sensible man, O king, would say that you are
seated on a tree, nor any one seeing you seated on a log
of wood, would say, that you are riding in a palanquin. The
wood is a palanquin only when it undergoes certain modifica-
tions at the hand of a skilful artisan, or, in other words, only,
when a certain shape or structure is imparted to it by the
latter. O you the greatest of all sovereigns, then look out
for the palanquin only in the distinctive structure or frame

(J2 28).

“ Male, female, cow, horse, elephant, bird, tree, are but
the names of organisms, which are but the results of Karma.
The tongue, with the help of the .lips, the teeth and the
palate, utters the word “ I.” But the “ I ” or Self does not
lie in those organs, as they are but organs or arrangements
for articulating speech. What reasons there are for supposing
that I am identical with speech ? Still it is equally wrong,
and falacious to say that speech is not me. O king, as the
Purusha is different from the body possessed of head, arms,
etc., it is not reasonable to call any part of it as Self. O thou
the greatest of the rulers of earth, discrimination is possible
only when you assume the existence of two entities such as
the Self and some thing other than the Self. In fact, it is one
and the same Self, that reveals himself both in the mobile and
the immobile, such as trees, animals, human beings, etc., the
ouly barrier being that of the body which is the effect of Karma.

l67


AGNI PURANAM.


168 $

the latter, while a mental repetition of the Mantra, afcoald
be deemed as a thousand times more fruitful than that. A
votary should repeat the Mantra, sacred to his tutelary
got), with his face turned either tb the north or to the east.
All Mantras should be repeated by prefixing the Pranava
Mantras to them. The votary should be a man, not given to
much talk, nor addicted to unholy drink and unclean diet.
With his tongue fully controlled, and appetites fully subju-
gated, he should take his seat, at the lonely shore of a lake or
a river, or amidst the sanctified solitude of a temple or open
field, and there repeat his Mantras, without making any
distinction between the person of his Guru and that of his
tutelary god. For the absolute fruition of the Mantra, the
votary should live on a Havishya diet, or take wheat-cakes
soaked in milk, on the day of its repetition. The regent of
the Mantra should be worshipped under the auspices of the
eighth or the fourteenth day of the moon’s wane, or on the
occasion of a solar or a luner eclipse (28 — 32).

The gods, such as, Dasra, Yama, the fire-god the god of
fate, the moon, the Kudras, the regent of the planet Jupiter,
the heavenly serpents, the Pitris, Vaga, Aryaman, the sun,
Tvasta, the Maruts, Indra, the fire-god, the Mitras and Indra,
Niriti, the water-god, the Vishvadevas, Hrisikesha, the winds,
the god of ocean, Ajaikapad, Ahirvadna, Pusha, the Ashvins,
the Adi-devatas, the fire-god and Asra, Uma, Nighna, the
Nagas, the moon-god, the sun, the Matris, Durga, the
guardian deities of the different quarters of the sky, Krishna,
Vaivasvata, and Shiva, should be deemed as the presiding
deities of the different days of a lunar month, whereas the
days of the week should be respectively held sacred to the
deities such as Hara, Durga, Guru, Vishnu, Brahma, Lakahmi
and Dhanesvara (33—37).

Now I shall deal with the rite of Lipinyasa, or the mystic
act of contemplating the- different parts of the body, as
permeated with the esseace’ of the divinities represented


AGN1 PWANAIS.


133 ©

You are a king m relation to your liege subjects, a son* t&
your father, an antagonist to your enemy, a husband to your
queen, a father to your children, but who among these is
your real Self ? Are you the head ? Do not the head and the
belly belong to you? Are you the resultant of the harmonious
working of the different members and organs of your body?
Are you not something other than that? O king, think
but gravely who you are, and try to detect your real self.
Having heard these words, the king thus addressed the
twice- born anchorite who was an incarnation of the god
Had” (29 — 38).

The King said : — “ O thou twice-born one, once I en-
deavoured to ascertain from the holy Kapila, that which is
beneficial to a man of the world. I know you to be an incar-
nation of that holy sage. For my sake illumine the world on
the subject. Let loose upon the beach of the world that surf
of the ocean of knowledge that would cast only the beneficial
upon it.”

The Brahmana said : — O king, why do you repeatedly
enquire about that which is only beneficial and not the high-
est good (Paramartha) in itself. O thou lord of the earth,
hundreds of things which are opposed to the true summum
bonum of life, may prove beneficial to a mind worldly dis-
posed. O thou lord of men, men there are who worship
the gods for the boons of wealth, property, sons, kingdoms,
etc. But what benefit do they actually derive from such
things that are fraught with evil and are alike transitory in
their character ? The wise hold the communion with the
Supreme Being as the only good. Such an union does not
involve the performance of religious sacrifices, nor is reward-
ed with the boon of wealth and articles of enjoyment. In the
union of the ; self with the Supreme Self, the latter is the on!)
entity sought for. The [Supreme Self jwho is one, all per-
vading, without any modifications, pure, void of all attributes,
superior to nature, and shorn of birtb, growth, etc., knows no


ACM NMWM


by «eb Uttar of the alphabet (Matrika Varnas)* The letters
constituting the five groups or Vargas of Consonants, [such
as the Ka Varga, the Cha Varga, the Ta Varga, the Tha
Varga, and the Pa Varga], should be contemplated as per*
meeting in couples, the region of the scalp, of the eyes, of
the ears, of the nose, of the eheeks, of the lips, of the teeth,
of the head, of the mouth, of the back, of the sides, and
the region of the umbilicus, and so on, with the energy of
their symbolised divinities. The region of the heart should
be made permeated with the essence of the letters such as
Ya, etc., which should be driven deep into the seven cardinal
principles of life, such as the serum, the blood, the flesh,
the fat, .the bone, the marrow and the semen. The regent of
the letters are Srikantha, Ananta, Suksbma, Trimurti, Ama-
rishvara, Agnisha, Bhavabhuti, Tithisha, Sthanuka, Hara,
Dandisha, Bhoutika, Sadyojata, Anugrahishvara, Akrura, and
Mahasena (38—41).

Then the names of the different manifestations of Rudra,
such as, Krodhisha, Chanda, Panchantaka, Shivottama, Rudra,
Kurina, Trinetra, Chaturanana, Ajesha, Sarva, Somesha,
Lart$;ali, Daraka, Ardhanarjshvara, Umakanta, Ashadi, Dandi,
Atri, Mina, Mesha, Lohita, Sikhi, Chhagalanda, Dviranda
Mahakala, Vaii, Bhujanga, Pinaki, Khadgi, Vaka, Shveta,
Bhrigu, Lagudisha, Aksha and Samvartaka, should be con*
templated as written in fire inside the different parts of the
body, each followed by the term Nainas (42—47).

The votary should locate the Anga*Mantras, in the differ*
ent "parts of his body, with the principal ones. The Anga-
Mantras, such as, the Nainas, the Svaha, etc., should be located
in the following order, the term Nainas should be content*
plated as situated at the region of the heart, the term Svaha
at the tuft of hair on the crown, the Mantra Hrum, as protec*
ting the body of the votary as an armour) the Mantra Vou-
sbat, as occupying the region of the eyes, and the Mantra
Fut as a weapon in the hand of the votary. Oblations


AGN! PURANAM.


^31

tjecay, is inherent in all, is the highest knowledge, is unaffect-
ed by virtues and species, and is the lord of all ” (39—44).

"Othou twice-born one, hear me narrate to you the
discourse between Nidhagha and Ribhu. Ribhu was the son
of Brahma and was wise in the wisdom of the Supreme Being.
The son of Pulasta was his disciple. Nidhagha acquired
knowledge from the latter and lived in the town of Vaipura,
Ribhu, walking along the banks of Devika, thought of his
pupil Nidhagha. At the lapse of a thousand years of celes-
tial cycle, Ribhu went to pay a visit to Nidhagha. He found
Nidhagha enjoying rest after his mid-day meal. After the
performance of the Vaishva-Deva sacrifice, he asked his
preceptor the following questions Has your appetite been
satisfied ? Those who give satisfaction to the created beings,
live in the region of eternity. ,,

Ribhu said : — “O Brahmana, he who feels hungry, is satis-
fied after a meal. T never feel hungry. Why do you ask me
at all about the appeasing of hunger? O thou twice-born
one, thirst and hunger are the virtues of the body, and as such
cannot affect me (my self), and so in answer to your query
I can only say that happiness and satisfaction are natural
to my self. I am the Purusha, the only subjective Reality,
all-pervading and lying inherent in all like the universal
expanse of ether, and accordingly I am the ever-wakened
self. How could I be restricted to such finite /hankerings? f
neither go nor come, nor am I like sky the confined to a parti-
cular place. You and I are virtually the one and the same
entity, and there is no other entity beside myself. As a house
built of clay is strengthened by a plaster of earth, so this
body, earthly in its essence, is held fast by atoms of material
substance. I am called Ribhu, and stand in the relation
of a preceptor to you through teaching. I have come here,
and shall depart from this place, as soon as the highest good
will be. evoked in you. Learn that there are no two things
in the universe, and all distinctive notion is but illusion.


consisting of sesafnum seed*, dnddbi OHt iattf (ht sacri-
ficial fire, ia honour of the goddess of learning, who should
ho contemplated as bolding a rosary and a pitcher in her
two right hands, and a book and a lotas hi her taro left.
The goddess, thus worshipped, fills her rotary with the fire
of poesy. The rite in question, should he performed at the
beginning of a ceremony, for the fructification of the object
of its undertaking. The Mantras become spotless when pre-
ceded by such a rite of Nyasa (48—51).

CHAPTER CCXCIV.


Oaid the God of Fire : — Now 1 shall enumerate the
names of the different species of snakes, and deal with the
time of their preponderance, the venomous nature of their
bites, the ten joints of the body where such strokes prove in-
variably fatal, their period of incubation, and the diagnosis
of a particular case from the demeanour of a messenger,
sent to call in a snake-doctor and so on. Shesha, Vasuki,
Takshaka, Karkata, Avja Mahamvuja, Shankhapala and
Kulika, are the names of the first eight serpents created by
the God, and they are regarded as belonging to the race of
Bramhana, Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra respectively in
couples. From them, five hundred different species of serpents
came into being, who in their turn gave birth to innumerable
groups of reptiles, such as are characterised by sanguine, bili-
ous or phlegmatic temperaments, not to speak of the count-
less hybrid species such as the laddie-shaped or spoon-headed
snakes possessing venoms partaking of the vitiated humours
peculiar to their parents. The hoods of the species «e


agni ?uranam.


133a

This universe, O son, is ;but the manifestation of the setf of
Vasudeva.” Ribhu again visited Nidhagha after the lapse of
a thousand years, and found him staying at the, precincts of
that town, and asked him, "why are you passing your time
in solitude, O son ?" (48 — 55) ”

Nidhagha said “ O Brahmana, there is a rumour afloat
that the king would ride in the streets of this town to-day,
and personally inspect the condition of its people. I ana
loitering here only to have a look at the king.” Ribhu
said Who is the king, O son, and who are bis subject*
people ? Tell me all about these things, O thou best of the
Brahmanas, as you are conversant with these matters.”
Nidhagha said The animal mad with the exuberance of
youth and a plethora of youthful vigour, and which obstructs
our vision like the sable peak of a mountain, is the royal ele-
phant, and the person who is seated on its back, is the king.
Then Ribhu again asked him, O son, where is the king, and
where is the elephant ? Go down on all fours, O my son,
■Stud let me ride on your back. Now I am the king and you
are the elephant. As there is no difference between you
and me, so the kibg and his elephant are virtually one.” -

“Then Nidhagha, having made obeisance to his preceptor,
said, O lord, you have imparted to me the knowledge of the
one and the secondless Brahma. Ribhu replied, you have
come into the world, O son, for the acquisition of that know-
ledge, and l have led you to the highest good, the one

without a parallel” (58 — 62).

The Brahmana (Bharata) said : — “Nidhagha, in his turn
became a devotee of the Brahma without a second. All hii
notion of distinction vanished, and he witnessed in his self,
the whole of the universe as one and whole without th«
distinctive categories of name, body and species. He be-
came an emancipated being, and your self, O king, shall be
similarly liberated from the trammels of life. You and I» and
all other things are Vishnu who runs through all. A*


to88 MM RHUUUI.

marked with tbe.signs of cartwheels, ploughshares, umbrellas,
Svastikas aad maces. The Gonases, are usually slow at
locomotion, and invariably attain a long and elongated body,
marked with ring-like impressions. The Rajilas, on the other
hand, lode glossy and beautiful in their multicoloured stripes,
and can stand erect on the tips of their tails, and are cap-
able of darting at the prey at an angle. The bodies of the
hybrid offsprings of the Rajilas, are marked with stripes and
rings peculiar to both the parent stock (i— 6).

The sixteen classes of Gonases are grouped under four
broad generic heads, according to the constituting principles
of their venom, such as the earthy, the windy, the fiery and
the watery, and are divided into twenty-six minor classes
according to the difference of their shape and structure. The
Rajalis admit of a division into thirteen different species,
while]the same maybe extended to include another twenty-one
species, if their progeny by intermixture is taken into consi-
deration. The snakes that take birth in a season other than
their natural time of pairing, should be deemed as hybrids.

The female snakes are impregnated during the four
months of rain, and lay eggs at the close of that season, num-
bering in average from two hundred to two hundred and
•forty at a time. The snakes eat their offsprings as soon as
hatched out of their eggs, without any regard to their sex.
The eyes of an infant black snake (Krishna) open within
seven days of its being first hatched out of the egg. On the
twelfth day, its faculties are fully developed, while it becomes
capable of stirring abroad on the thirteenth day of its birth.
The fangs appear, on the moment an infant snake sees the
sun. The four fangs, two in the upper and two in the lower
jaws, appear from within twenty-one to thirty-two days of
its infantile life. The four fangs known as the Karali (the
Dreadful), the Makari, the Kala-ratri (tile night of death,)
and the Yamadutika (the maiden envoy' of death), are
arranged in couples in the right and left jaws (7— la).


agni puranam.


1333


the colours, yellow, blue, etc, ^ ^ distinct

illusory, so the appearance of the created being

^ separate -tities^rs due to ^ ^ ^

Said the Fire God .-rhe ki g ^ upon the

Bharata, and became a liberate k ledge 0 f that absolute

Self of the S,preme Brahma A knowleog of

entity is the woodfire that burns towns
Nescience (63 — 66).


-:o:'


CHAPTER CCCLXI1.


Q„„ thb Fike-GOD : — Now I shall sive you » synopsis
the Geeta, as narrated by Krishna to Arjnn. and 1 also I 0< a
metaphysical treatise of that name discovered by

D ' THE GOO said : — The birth less Self, whether imprisoned
in anorganic frame or not, o, whether sUyinf^ «
quitting it, cannot be a subject of mourning. The S
above all death and disease, and cannot be cut
through. Therefore renounce grief. The subjeCtS
tated upon by the self, keep him a sort o occu
pany. From company is originated lust or desir .
desire emanates anger. From anger gemmates, °" s oi
From ignorance proceeds loss of memory,
memory originates Death. Evil is the result of evil company.
While a company of the good leads to the annnhlatlon of dm
sires and the liberation of the self. A man who I has I destroy
his desires, and is absorbed in the contemplation of the se ,
is called a Sthira-Prajna (a man of undeviating min )•
man, who has practised self-fontrol, sees that to e n, *> *

Nesceince which common people hold as life and wa gr


iftwr fllKUMM


1089

Thd different days of tho week are amled oy the res-
pective influences of the seven snakes, while the joints of
time, such as Dawn and nightfall, are under the direct con-'
trol of the species Kulika, with - the concurrent influences of
cither Shsnkha or Mahavja. A bite by a snake at a time
controlled by the latter, is sure to end in- death of the victim.
The malignant asterisms* and -baneful lunar phases, and
astral combinations, in connection with a snake-bite, are the
Krittika, the Bh*rani, the Svati, the Muta, the three Purvas,
the Ash via t, the Vishakha,1he Ardva, the Magha, the Aslesha,
the Chitra, the -Shravana, the Rohine, the Hasta, and Satur-
days, Tuesdays, the fifth, the sixth, the eighth, and the
fourteenth, days of a tonal month, the fpur- meetings of day
and night, and the malignant yogas. The planets- that are
of a malignant nature, determine in many cases the virulence
ef the poison. The spot affected, is marked by a single dr
a couple of pio-like iacistowt, os (present the aspect of- a
cleft, or an open wound (iyrit).

In a case of false or apprehended bite, the characteristic
punctures are not visible, while in a case of actual Into, there
appear two or three such incisions, accompanied by pain and
profuse bleeding, which form its four characteristics. A bite
at the leg in night, accompanied by a tortoise like swelling
of the affected part, with burning sensation in the wound, *
like the bite by an; ant, and a choking sensation in the throat,
is sure to terminate in death.

A bite by a snake, though accompanied by symptoms of an
unvenomout character, should be held as fatal, if marked by
knot-like indurated swellings around the affected part. A
mao bitten by a snake at a temple, or in a deserted hoase,
or near an ant-hill, or at the orfice of a hole in a garden,
or at the crossings of roads, or at a cremation ground, or
in the bed of a river, or at the confluence of streams, or
in an island, or at a spot where four roads meet, or
over the terrace of a building, or oa the summit of a hill,
*37


AGNf PUR A HAM.


*334

and calls that day or life which commonly passes by the
denomination of Night or Death

The doings of a man who is contented in the thought
of his own self, and does not concern himself with any
thing that properly belc.igs to Npn-self, are as unscrutinable
as those of a god. O thou possessed of mighty arms, for
such a man there is no duty, no act which, undone, leaves
him in the rank of the weak or the defective. Possessed
of true knowledge, he sees that attributes belong to the attri-
butes alone and not. to the self, and accordingly does not
participate in their works. By the help of this internal light
he baffles (all temptations that lure others to destruction.
O Arjuna, it is the fire of true knowledge that reduces all
acts to ashes. As the petal of a lotus flower is not drenched
by the water it rests upon, iso the effects of acts or deeds
cannot implicate a man in their sinful effects, who rest them
in the supreme Brahma, and do them only under the
notion of being actuated by that supreme Entity. Equitable
to all, such a Yogin finds the universe in his own self and
his own self in the universe (7 — 11).

O my darling, the man who is vanquished in his attempts
at practising Yoga, is incarnated after death in the family
of the good and the prosperous. He who does what is good
and blissful, can never meet with any discomfiture in life.
This Nescience which is a necessary category in My universal
self, baffles even the scrutiny of the most illumined beings ;
and only those who will attain to me, shall be able to cross
this illusion of attributes (12 — 13).

O thou best of the race of Bharata, the miserable, the
truth-seeking, the solicitors of wealth, and the wise, are the
four classes of men who worship Me in life. The wise
behold Me by holding a spiritual communion with My own
eternal self. Brahma is supreme or perfect knowledge, and
Nature is spiritual in her essence. The knowledge <wr
consciousness! which takes cognisance of the external wotSd


or near, an «M well, or at the outside of a longstanding
hole, or in an old and dilapidated building, or by the side
Of a moat, or near an old ruin, or by a snake, come out
of a hole* in a Jamvu, or |p a Vata tree, or out of a crevice
in an old and tumble-down wall, or at any vulnerable part
of bis body, such as the throat, the palate, the neck, the
head, the chin the navel, or at the legs, is sure to meet his
doom {19—34).

The fatality of a ease of snake-bite, can be ascer-
tained froth the demeanour of the messenger sent to call
U:h snake-charmer. A messenger, who speaks well, is pure
ajt 4 self-possessed, and comes in with a flower in his hand,
f M in clean and white . clothes becoming of his sex and
augurs a favourable termination of the case, while the
one who enters by a back~or a side-door, clad in dirty linen,
or. equipped frith, a full set of arms, or stands with down-
cast eyes, and speaks ig a broken voice, or the one who
takes bold of a piece of dry wood, just on bis entrance into
the chamber of the snake-charmer, or the one who comes
in, in wet clothes, with garlands of black and red flowers
entwined round hts head, or the .one who comes in, pressing
the seeds of seaanmm in his palms, or the one who rubs his
breasts, <?r bitea his nails ia the presence of the charmer,
or the one who .writes on the ground with his foot-nails, as
we|l as the 0114 who casts off loose hairs, or cuts a dry grass
in two, with his teeth or finger nails, should be deemed as
the express envoy of death (35 — a8).

The sex of the person bitten, should bn determined from
the emission of breath wind through the left, right, or both
the nostrils of the snake-charmer and the messenger, deputed
to call him in. If the wind comes out forcibly through the
left nostril of the snake-charmer, the patient should be judged
a. femaU, while the opposite should be the conclusion, where
x % messenger would breathe througbhis right nostril. The
pntifatr shpgjd be judged. a susucb> iri>*re ft*, charmer and


AGNl PURANAW.


•335


and sensations begotten by it, is originated by Karma. The
knowledge or consciousness which is restricted to t e wor
and its objects, is finite or limited, while the knowledge or
consciousness of the self, is spiritual and infinite. O thou
best of the embodied beings, I am inherent in the religious
sacrifices performed by men of Karma-Yoga. He who depart*
this life, meditating upon My eternal self, is undoubtedly as-
similated in my essence. A man gets that after demise w ic
he meditates upon at the time of death. The man who
having concentrated his self on an occult point situate
between the eye-brows, departs this life with the sacred 0*
rolling on his tongue, is merged in My supreme soul after

death (14 — *8).

All things and beings, from the invisible atom to the
creator of the worlds, are but the attributes of My universal
energy. Those who are prosperous and possessed of mighty
prowess in life, are but the parts and parcels of My infinite
energy. He who beholds the universe as reflection of My
own self, is emancipated from the bonds of re-births.

The human body is called the Kshetra (/*., the field of
consciousness), and he who possesses this knowledge is
called a Kshetrajna. The knowldge which a Kshetrajna
derives from the Kshetra, carries my sanction as true
knowledge. When composed of primary material pnncip es,
sense of egoism, the invisible process of intellection, the ten
senses, the five objects of sense-perception, will, desire,
envy, pleasure, pain, the concourse of sensations and their
mutual antagonism and comprehension, etc., it is called the


qualified Kshetra.

Absence of pride and vanity, cessation of hostile pro-
Tensities, forbearance, straightforwardness, simplicity, ve-
neration for one’s preceptor, purity, fortitude, control of the
senses, non-attachment to objects of the senses, indifference
to the concerns of life, annihilation of egotistic feelings, spirit


MNI nMNAM.


1091

the messenger would breathe through both the nostrils. The
bite should be supposed at that part of the body of the
patient, which the messenger would first inadvertently lay
hand on, of his own person. A„ messenger who fitfully
moves his legs just on his arrival at the house of a snake*
charmer, augurs evil, while the one who sits there with lifted
or updrawn legs, foretells a safe and easy cure. Any animal
entering the room of the snake-charmer in the company
of a messenger, should be deemed as a good omen, while
an animal listlessly pacing the ground at the time, would
forebode the contrary. The speech of a messenger, full
of long-drawn, or flat vowel sounds, should be deemed in-
auspicious, while on the contrary, the case inflections used in
his speech, would indicate the time the venom would remain
operative (29 — 32).

The letters of the alphabet, should be arranged in two
chambers. The vowel letters are auspicious, and are known
as the Vasumana Varga, while the four letters, of each of the
five groups of consonants, should be deemed as respectively
sacred to the gods, such as of the wind, the fire, Indra, and
the god of water. The fifth letter of each group, should
be held as inauspicious and belonging to the neuter sex,
their presiding deities being the regent of the planet Venus,
and the god Amvuyoni. Letters sacred to the wind-, or
to the fire-, god and ocurring in the speech of a messenger,
should be deemed as portending of evil, while those sacred
to the god Hari, should be looked upon as tolerably good.
The letters belonging to the neuter sex, should be con-
sidered as most fatal, while those who own the water-god
as their tutelary divinity, should be deemed most auspicious,
if ocurring in the speech, of a messenger (33 — 35).

A conversation entered into by the messenger with the
snake-charmer, on the road to the house of the patient, fore-
tells a successful cure, while the roaring of an elephant, or
the deep rumbling sound pf a rain cloud, heard at the time of


AGNI fURANAM.


>336

of finding fault with the body as subject to birth, death,
old age, decay, disease and pain, non-attachment to one’s
sons, wives and domestic affairs, equanimity ,that cannot be
disturbed by the happening of favourable or unfavourable
events, unflinching devotion to My self, resorting to places
of solitude, aversion to company, cultivation of spiritual
knowledge, perception of the fundamental truth, are but
the components of right perception or knowledge, while
things other than the preceding ones, are included in
Nescience (19 — 27).

Now I shall narrate to you that, a knowledge whereof
leads to the emancipation of one’s true self. 1 he supreme
Brahma is without a beginning. He is identical with the
quality of Sattva. His hands and feet extend all over the
universe. His eyes and head are distributed all over the
infinite space. His ears are everywhere, and he stands
enveloping all. He is devoid of all sense organs, yet he is
the master of their functions. Though unconnected, he
supports all; though shorn of all attributes, he enjoys every
one of them. He moves though immobile. He is both in and
out of animal organisms. He is both near and remote, and
invisible through his extremely subtile essence. Though
indivisible in reality, he stands divided among creatures.
He is both the progenitor and destroyer of all created
matter. He is the lord of all, and the only thing to be
known. He is the light of the luminous bodies and the culmi-
nating point of darkness with the excess of his spiritual efful-
gence. He is knowledge, knowable, ?nd an entity that can
be comprehended by knowledge alone, and as such resides
in the hearts of all. Some behold him reflected in their
selves in the course of a spiritual meditation, some there are
who see him only with their soul or pyschjc light. Some
know him with the aid of Sankhya Yoga. Some attain to
him by performing religious sacrifices (Karma Yoga). Others
comprehend Him not, but worship him hearing of Him from


the start, should be deemed asimaeteuepfcieus- Similarly, the
journey should be started by drcumbolating^a fruitful tree.
The sound of a Vasa from the bough- at such a (me, as well
as a song and music heard at the time of the journey* indi-
cates good luck. A wailing sound, a false talk arid a .sneezing
heard at the right, should be deemed as a bad omen. A
courtesan, a king, a virgin, a cow, an elephant, a flute, a
banner, as well as pots of curd, thickened milk or clarified
butter, a conch-shell, an umbrella, a vessel of water, a
trumpet, a fruit, rice, gold, and silver, should be deemed as
auspicious sights, if seen in front in the course of his journey.
Similarly, the sight of a burning log, of an artisan clad in dirty
clothes, of a vulture, of a jackal, of an owl, of a human skull, pf
cowries, or of cotton, on the road, should be deemed as de-
sisting the snake-charmer from proceeding further,, while
ashes and burnt cinders seen by him in his journey, should be
looked upon as foreboding certain death (36—40).

The venom of a snake affects the seven different organs
of the body, as it invades in succession the seven cardinal
principles of vitality. Simultaneously with the bite, the
poison goes up to the region of the forehead, then affects
the eyes, then pervades over the whole face, then affects
the organs of articulation, and then the deeper principles of
of life in succession (41).


CHAPTER CCXCV.


diUB the Gap or Fire s— Now I shall deal with the
mode of .treatment by charms and incantations, which should
be adopted in a case of snake-bite. “ 0m obeieeeee to the
Uue-threated god, ( Nilakautba)." This Monti* defer


AGNI PURANAM.


*33j


Others : Even men of the latter type can cross the Ocear
of Death, through their faith in the words of the Scripture*

Knowledge originates from the quality of Sattva, Greed
from Rajas, Nescience, and wrong notions from Tamas.
This is the path of attributes or qualities ; and he who walk-
in this path, attains to Brahma. He who is similarly disposer
to friends and foes, and is alike insensible to honour and dis-
honour, is said to be devoid of the three fundamental qualities
The tree of knowledge is the eternal Ashvattha, that branches
out of its root in the heavens and grows with its head or top
hung down. The Vedic metres or chhandas are its leaves
He who knows this mystic tree of knowledge and harmony,
knows it alone. Roads from this life lead to two super-
human regions or Sargas, the one is called divine, the other
demonic. Forbearance, long sufferingness, etc., are the attri-
butes of the divine region, while impiety, impurity, etc., are
the characteristics of the other. Lust, anger and greed lead
to hell, and therefore a man should shun these three vicious
propensities in life. The practice of penances and charities
and the performance of religious sacrifices originate from
the quality of Sattva ; and a diet of boiled rice, characterised
by that quality, increases one’s strength, virtue, health and
duration of life. A course of food, consisting of boiled
rice which is strong, and has the specific quality of gener-
ating abnormal heat in the body, is called the Rajasam
and begets pain and grief in the partaker thereof. A course
of boiled rice, which is dry, sordid, and emits a fetid smell,
or which has been partaken of by another, is called the -
Tamasam (36 — 42)

A religious sacrifice which is undertaken without any
interested motive, is called the Sattvika, whereas that
which is performed for the fruition of any particular object,
is called the Rajasika. A sacrifice performed out of a spirit
of bravado, is called the Tamasika. Annihilation of alj.
iW


A«NI PUftANAM.


109 ^

repeated, aots as an antidote of snake-p*ison, and hae been
known to preserve life in many fatal cases. Hon&y taken
with clarified butter, acts as an antidote of poison, which
admits of a division into two classes, such as the animal

4

and the vegetable. The venom of saakes and moles belong
to the former class, while the drugs known as, the Shringi,
etc., belong to the latter. The seft vowels ocurring in
the Mantra, should be deemed as symbolical of the ged
Bramhan, while the Pada-Mantras, technically known as
the Lohitas, should be deemed as emblematic of the divinity
of Shiva. This Mantra, which is called the Veati-Mantra,
and consists of letters sacred to the celestial bird (Garuda),
runs as follows

"Om burn, O thou god of mighty intellect.” This
Mantra should be located in the region of the heart.
"Obeisance to Garuda, — to Garuda, the crested-bird of
heaven.” This Mantra should be contemplated as occupy-
ing the tuft of hair on the crown. " Oh thou neutraliser
of all poison, O thou who dispersest the hosts of the
demons, frighten and frighten, and trample down.” This
part of the Mantra should be contemplated as protecting the
body as an armour. " O thou whose sway none can dis-
pute, Vam, Hum, Fut.” This part of the Mantra, should
be contemplated as a weapon. " Obeisance to thee, O thou
of dreadful appearance, O thou, dreaded by all, frighten all,
and burn them down to ashes.” This part of the Mantra
should be located in the region of the eyes.

The mystic lotus, consisting of the different letters of
the alphabet, and the petals of which, pointing towards the
eight cardinal points of the sky, are tipped with the energy of
the gods represented by their prototypes, the vowel letters,
and whose polens represent the seven states of beatitude,
the Sapta-Vargas, should be contemplated in the region
of the heart, which the snake-charmer, by an act of psychic,
transposition, should bring down into the palm of his.


AGNI PURANAM.


* 33 *

killing propensities, worship of the gods performed with
Mantras and according to regulated procedure and practice of
penances, are called bodily Tapas. Speaking of words that
are absolutely true, and that do not cause any grief to
others, together with recitation of the Vedic verses and
Mantras, are called the oral Tapasya. Subjugation of the
senses, observance of a vow of silence, and purification
of one's own mind, constitute what is called the mental
Tapasya. A Tapas of the Sattvika type is practised without
any interested motive, while a Tapas of the Rajasa class, is
practised for the realisation of a definite object. A Tapas,
which is practised with the view of inflicting injury on
others,, is called the Tamasa (43 — 47).

Om Tat (that) Sat (eternal), are the three denominations
of Brahma. Deeds, such as doling out of charities, per-
formance of religious sacrifices, etc., grant both earthly
prosperity and the final liberation of one's self. The effects
of acts may be grouped under three leads, such as the good,
the evil, and *he mixed. Those who have not practised
renunciation, are not shorn of the necessity of assuming a
subtile shape after death for enjoying the fruits of their
worbs in life, while those who have practised such renun-
ciation, do not stand under such an obligation. All human
acts, whether of the Tamasa, Rajasa, or Sattvika class,
originate from one of such five causes, as contact with
other persons' acts, ignorance, pain, fear, and non-desire*
The subject (karta) the instruments (such as the senses),
the three stages of motion or attempt, and the receptacle
of the act, are the four usual factors involved in an act,
the fifth element being the spiritual or the providential
one. The knowledge of oneness of ail things, is called the
Sattvika. The knowledge which demonstrates the separate-
ness of things, is called the Rajasika, while false or wrong
knowledge is called the Tamasika. A Sattvika act, is an
act done without a motive. A Rajasika act is an act


atm rmtAMiai


*•94

left-haMl. He should locate the different letters, representing
the beatific rays of the Ve&ti- Mantra, at the tips of the
fingers of his right hand. The rays, expanded in the form of
a quadrilateral figure, shquld be contemplated as of a yellow
colour, and as partaking of the nature of the quintessence of
earth, sacred to the god Indra. The second halo, or Mandala,
in the form of a semicircle, like a lotus flower cut in two,
should be contemplated as of a white colour, and partaking
of the nature of the quintessence of water, sacred to the
god Varuna. The next beatific halo, should be contem-
plated as of the shape of a cross inscribed within a triangle,
and as composed of essential fire, presided over by the
regent of that element. The last, or the exterior Mandala,
should' be contemplated as a rim of black or dusky colour,
composed of the quintessence of ether, sacred to the god
of wind (i— 6).

Then the principal letters of the Veati-Mantra, should
be located in the phalanges of the different fingers, which
are held as their proper chambers, encircled by a serpent
of golden light. The four letters of the Mantra, of a colour
uniform to that of their own portion of the halo, should
be contemplated as located in the halo of quintessence
ether around fingers, and in the halo of a principle which
fathered this universal expanse of heaven, and which knows
no form, and is only characterised by the Draper sensible of
hearing. The first letter (A), should be contemplated as
located in the middle phalange of the little finger. Similarly,
the first and the last letters of the term Naga, should be
psychically located within their spheres in the halo. The
letters presided over by ghosts and malignant spirits, should
be located in the tips of the fingers, such as the right
thumb, etc., (7 — 10 ).

Then the letters, emblematic of the five proper sensible*,
should be, as well, located in the other phalanges. A single
touch of hand, thus charged with the energy of the mighty


AGNI PUR AN AM.


1339


done with an object. A Tarnasa act is an act done through
ignorance or illusion. A doer of the Sattvika class is not
affected by the success or failure of his undertaking like
a Rajasika subject, while a Tamasika actor or doer, is
marked by laziness and craft. Equanimity belongs to the
quality of Sattva, Sensations of pleasure or pam to the
Rajas, while grief, etc., belong to the Tamas. A Sattvika
act is marked by happiness throughout its continuance. A
Rajasika act is crowned with happiness at the end, while
a Tamasika act is attended with pain both at the outset
and the conclusion. Therefore a man should worship the
god Vishnu with his own good deeds, and success would
attend his undertaking. The man who knows that the
whole of the phenomenal universe, from the minutest atom
to the mightiest Brahma, is but the reflection of the eternal

essence of Vishnu, is the only true devotee of the god, and

is blest with success in connection with his penances, etc.,

<48-58).


CHAPTER CCCLX1II.


Said the Fire God:— Now I shall give you a sum-
mary of the Yama-Geeta, as related to Nachiketa. He
who reads this Geeta, or hears it recited by another, is
blest with earthly prosperity, and liberation of self after

death. .

YAMA said A man, not even certain of his brief lease

of life, desires for the possession of seats, beds, carriages,
clothes, houses, etc., as if he is an immortal being. What
more wonder can there be ? The holy Kapila sang of yore,
that the power of beholding one’s own self, is a higher


AGNI PUHANAII.


1095


and divine Tarksha, is sure to destroy all poison. Then in
the beatific halos (Mandalas), charged with the essence of
the component letters of the Veati-Mantra, and located in
the phalanges, and in the region of his umbilicus, the votary
should contemplate the fiery image of Garuda, to the length
of two thumb-heads. The god should be contemplated as
possessed of a golden colour from knee-joints to the navel,
coloured like a snow-flake from the navel upwards, and pos-
sessed of a colour like saffron, around the region of the neck,
the hairs being raven-black. His pinions should be contem-
plated as co-extensive with the infinite sky, reflecting the hue
of his blue and dreadful beaks, and from around whose neck,
the serpent, known as the moon, dangles down like a neck-
lace. This description of the celestial Garuda, should form
the principal incantation of a charmer, in the treatment of a
case of snake-bite (11—15).

A blow with a fist, thus charged with the Tarksha-Mantia,
is sure to act as an antidote of all sorts of snake-poison. A
single pass with the five fingers, charged as above, and over
the spot of bite, would arrest the further spread of the
venom. The Mantra, which should be recited, simultaneously
with the making of passes, runs as follows : — “ The Bhu-Vija-
Mantra which is the lord of the Mantras, and consists of five
letters, has descended from the skies. May all excess poison
be destroyed by the strength of this incantation. 19 The
patient, sprinkled over with water consecrated with the above
Mantra, is sure to sit erect on his bed. Even the sound of
a trumpet, or of a conch-shell consecrated with the present
Vatyaya-Mantra, would rouse up a patient out of a
state of apparent death, through the energy of the Bhu Vija
Mantra contained in the mighty Veati. Then the Mantra,
divested of its component principles of earth and wind,
would attack the poison, and destroy it with its remain-
ing principles of light, fire and water (16—20).

The charmer should practise this incantation with the


AGNt PURANAM.


1340

privilege in a man than the capability of gratifying his senses
at will. The holy sage Panchasikha, inculcated the truth
that equal conduct to all, equal estimate as regards all things
at all places, annihilation of all desires, renunciation of all
company, are the highest good in human life. A true know-
ledge of the miseries of .birth, youth and old age, is the
highest good in life, according to the doctrines of Ganga-
Vishnu. According to Janaka, the summum bonum of life
consists in guarding against the recrudescence of the three-
fold evil, known as the Adhyatmika, etc. According to
Brahma, highest happiness consists in perceiving the one-
ness of the Supreme self, though simultaneously manifest m
different individuals. According to Jaigishavya, the highest
good consists in discharging one’s duties according to the
directions of either of the Saman, Rik, or Yajur, as laid down
for the spiritual clanship he belongs to. According to Devala,
the highest felicity is incidental to destruction of one’s all
acts or propensities. According to Sanaka the knowledge
which proceeds out of one’s renunciation , of all desires,
leads one to Brahma, or the highest good (1 10).

Karnapura lays down that of the two modes of operation
and non-activity, the latter should be deemed as identical
with Hari, the Supreme Self. O thou best of beings,
the knowledge which is restricted to the Purusha, does not
perceive any separate or discontinuous existence m the
universe, and beholds the oneness of the Supreme Soul.
By dint of Tapas a man may acquire theistic tendencies,
perfect knowledge, good luck, personal beauty, or anything
he sets his mind upon There is nothing superior to Vishnu
as an object of contemplation, and there is no higher
penance than the vow of fasting. There is no boon which
can equal the bliss of a sound health, and there is no river

equal in sanctity to the Ganges.

A man can have no better friend than Vishnu, the adored
one in the universe. The god Hari, is both the inside of A


greatest poanUt caution, and recite tho Mantra, after
having psychically located it in its proper beatific sphere,
of the quintessence of water. He should think himself,
on the occasion, as tally permeated with the energy of
the celestial Garada, and contemplate himself as looking as
fierce and dreadful as that celestial enemy of the serpents.
Water consecrated with the Vijas, known as the Jana, the
Dandi, and the Indu, and coupled with the Srt-Vija followed
by the term Svaha, should be given to a person bitten by a
snake, whereby he would he safe and rally, and be out of
danger, and get rid of the fever which invariably marks the
sequel to such cases. The Mantra spoken of above, runs
as follows Obeisance to the bird, to the bird, to the
great bird, to the great bird, Vi and vi. Obeisance to the
bird, to the bird, to the great 'bird, to the great bird, Kshi,
Kshi, Svaha." These two mighty Mantrap, sacred to the
celestial bird, are possessed of the efficacy of successfully
coping with all cases of snake-bite. The Gayatri-Mantra,
sacred to Garuda, is as follows : —

“ We contemplate the divine nature of the bird. We
meditate on his divine self, and may our mind be led to
dwell on the divine personality of the mighty Garuda"
(21—24).

The charmer should locate the images of different mani-
festations of the god Nilakantha, such as K*Ia, Langali, etc.,
in the different parts of his body, such as the heart, the neck,
etc., as follows “ Obeisance to Hara, Hara, at the heart.
Obeisance to Kapardi situated at my head. Obeisance to
Nilakantha at the tuft of hair on my crown. Svaha to th«
devourer of the poison, Kalakutha, who protects me as my
armour. Obeisance to the three -eyed Krittivasa, occupying
the region of my eyes."

The faces of the god, considered from the east in a round,
should be contemplated as of different colours, such as
the white, the yellow, etc-, while hie two left heads should


A'GNI PURANAM.


» 34 *

min, and lies at his outside also. He is both in the front
and the back, and at the extremeties of all senses and in all
minds ai.d all organisms. The man who departs this life
contemplating the omnipresence of Hari, is assimilated in

his divine essence after death (H-*-l6).

The god Vishnu is situated in the hearts of all, in the
shape of god, or of Supreme Brahma. Some invoke his pre-
sence in his capacity of the lord of sacrifices. Some in-
voke him as Hari, some as Hara, some as Brahma, some as
Indra, some as eternal time, some as the sun, and some as
the moon. All created beings from the smallest protozoon
to the mightiest creator of worlds, are but the manifestations
of that Supreme Self. He who has once attnined to Vishnu,
never reverts to life. A man may acquire duch a state either
by such great gifts, as gifts of gold, etc., or by ablutiops in
sacted pools, or by means of meditatiofts, or by hearing of
sacred texts (17 — 21)

The self is the king in the chariot of the body. Intellect
is the driver or the charioteer, the mind is the rein, the senses

are the horses and their objects are the whips. The self m

conjunction with the mind and the senses, is the enjoyer.
He who is not wise, thinks only of th’e objects of sense-grati-
fication, and thus fails to attain to the Supreme Divinity of
Vishnu, and reverts to life and its miseries. He, who is truly
wise, constantly meditates upon that Supreme Being, and is
elevated to a state from which there is no retrogression into
life. The man who employs his intellect as his charioteer
and places the reigns of mind irt his hand, travels to the end
of his journey and gets into the region of the supreme es-
seince of Vishnu (23—26).

Desires are higher than their respective organs of grati-
fication the mind is higher than the desires. Intellect is
higher than the mind. Self is higher than the intellect. The
Mabat is greater than the Self (Jivatma). The latent or
potential energy (A vyahta) is greater than the phenomenal


AGN4 PUftANAM.


1097


be eonteraplated as equipped with a bow, and the Hydra, and
the two right, should be contemplated as bent in a posture,
which says benediction, and “dread not/ 9 The goddess Gouri,
should be contemplated as seated beside his holy thread,
which owns the god Rudra, as its tutelary divinity (24— *-27).

The charmer, should then project, by an act of Nyasa,
the component letters of the Mantra, into the regions of the
legs, knee-joints, arms, navel, heart, neck, face and the head
of the mental picture of the contemplated deity. Then from
the phalanges of his fingers, he should withdraw the energy
of the component letters of the Mantras located therein,
by an act of previous Nyasa, and concentrate them on the
tips of his two thumbs, and therein attract all the energy
of the deity meditated upon, by means of a Shulamudra.
The left-hand should be used in making passes for neutra-
lising the effects of snake poison, whereas the right-hand
should be used on all other occasions. The poison, without
doubt, will be destroyed by the rite of Sanmarjana (rubbing),
wherein the following Mantras should be used. “Om
obeisance to the god Nilkaotha. Tha. Om obeisance to the
clear-necked deity. Tha. Om, obeisance to Sarvajna-Kanthfe
Tha. Cast down, Om obeisance, Om obeisante to the clear
and blue deity, who is the destroyer of more than one, nay
all sorts of poison. Om, obeisance to the Mantras sacred
to the god Rudra, obeisaitce to him. The blue-throated
Maheshvara, should be worshipped according to tha rites
of Rudra Vidhanam, whereby the venom will be elimin$te 4
from the body of the patient (28—31).


AGN1 MJRANAM.


*342

Mahat, and Purusha or Brahma is the highest of them all.
There is nothing greater than the Brahma. He is the culmi-
nating point of all perfection. This hidden Self or Brahma
(Gudatma) reveals himself in all created beings. Men of per-
fect vision, beholds him with their spiritual eyes, and the Su-
preme Self in its turn, fills the mind of the see" with perfect
peace and perfect knowledge. The man who is cognisant of
the communion between his Self and his Supreme Proto type,
is sure to be merged in Brahma by means of Yama, etc.
Tl|e practices which lead to a knowledge of the Brahma, are
annihilation of all killing propensities, truthfulness, non-
atealing, celibacy, refraining from receiving all alms, self-
control, regimen of conduct, practice of Asanas, reading of
the Vedas, practice of Panayama, control of the vital winds,'
abstraction of mind from the external world, Dhyan^yn and
Oharana. As the space or sky enclosed within the cavity
«f a pitcher, lapses into the universal sky after the destruc-
tion of the pitcher, so the Self or the Jivatman liberated
-from the fetters of life, is merged in the Supreme Brahma.
The Jiva (animated personality) deems himself Brahma only
through knowledge. A liberated Jivatma* experiences the
•fact of its'immunity from death and decay.

SAID* the Fire GOO O Vashistha, I have finished nar-
wating. the Yama Geeta, a perusal whereof grants prosperity

and liberation from life (27—37)*

CHAPTER CCCLX1V.


3a1D the Fire god I have finished narrating to yon
the Agni Puranam, which is but a manifestation of the Su-
preme: Both the Para and the Apara kinds of knowledge


CHAPTER CCXCVI.


Oaio the Goo op Fire j— -Now I shall deal with the
tile of Rudra Vidhanam, which consists of five groups of
ceremonies, and a performance whereof, is potent enough to
granf all sorts of bliss.

The rite of Nyasa, in connection with the Mantra, should
he perfo r med as follows :■ — The Mantra known as the Shiva-
Sahkalpa, should be contemplated as permeating the region
Of the heart, the Vedic verses known as the Pourusha Sufcia,
should he deemed as its Shiva, or the presiding deity, the
Mantra known as the Sambhrita Sukta, as permeattSg the
tuft Of hairs on the crown, the Mantras known as the Ashufc
as serving the purpose of an armour. These together with
the Shata-Rudriya Mantras form, as it were, the five mem-
bers of the body of the Rudravidhanam (i~ *3).

Having practised the rite of Nyasa as above indicated,
the votary, should repeat, in |due succession, the different
Mantras sacred to the god Rudra, the first of which Consists
of the Sukta running as Yajjagrata, etc., and of the Riclw
such as the Yadriqham Manasam Vidu, etc. The Rishi, or
the composer of the verses, is Shiva-SbanUalpa, and its metre
is Tristhebha. The Rishi of the Suktas running as the
hundred-headed Shiva (Shiva-Sahasra Shirsha), etc., is
Narayan. The metre of the verses is Anusthup, End its
presiding deity is Purusha. The Rishi, or the composer of
the verses running as Abhyashra-Sambhritam, etc., is Uttarn
Gonara, while as regards metric composition they belong ,
to the class of Traisthubha (4 — 6).

The metre of the first three verses is ^Tristupa, while the
other two belong to the Anustapa .class of metrical composi-
tion. The last verse follows the rules of the Traisthubha,


AtifU iOJRANAM.


1343


liave been dealt with in the present work. The first includes
such matters as a description of the contents of the Rik, the
Yajur, the Saman and the Atharvan, Prosody, laws of pro-
nunciation, the. Grammar, the Lexicon, the Astronomy, the
Dharma Shastras, the philosophic^ such as the Mimansa,
Nyaya, etc ., the science of medicine, the science of war and

archery, the science of music, painting, sculpture, etc. The

second group embraces doctrines of the Vedanta philosophy,
and~the knowledge that leads to Brahma (1—4).

Kali never approaches a man whose mind is filled with
the thought of the universal Vishnu, even though he refrains
from the performance of such rejigious rites, as the offering
of annual obsequious cakes to his departed manes. The
man who meditates upon the divine self of Krishna is in-
capable of sin. By contemplating the divine nature of
Krishna, a man otherwise addicted to sin, is liberated
from the trammels of life. A speech which treats of
Krishna, a contemplation which embraces Krishna as its
Subject, an act which consists in serving his divine purpose,
are the true speech, contemplation and act. He is not
a father that does not impart the knowledge of Brahma
to his son. He is not a preceptor who fails to fill his
disciple with this knowledge. O thou twice-born one, sons,
wives, friends and riches are all available in this life, but rare
is tfiat instruction which leads one to Brahma. Of what avail
to a man is his wife or son ? Such an instruction is his only
friend that makes him an emancipated being. Beings who
depart this life, usually go by the two paths after death. The
one, called the divine (Daivi), is open only to the devotees
of Vishnu, the other is called the demonic, or the course
reserved for the sinners (6—12).

The present Puranam, is the most blessed and the holiest
of the holies among its sister compositions. Disturbances
fly from the house in which it is kept transcribed. What
is the good of performing sacrifices, or of resorting to in-


A6M1 mHANAkl.


«nd owns the god Purushe, as its tutelary divinity. The
twelve verses, front the one commencing as Ashurindra, etc.,
belong to the Traistuva class of metrical compositions, while
the name of the Rishi, or the rhapsodist, who first sang the
Suktas, known as the Saptadasharchika is Pratiratha. The
verses are presided over by different deities, while the god
Puruvid should be deemed as an Angadevata. The verses
which are sacred to the remaining divinities, belong to the
Anustapa class of metrical composition. The latter god, to-
gether with Yama, Indra, Bhabitri, etc., are the tutelary gods
of the verses, which are controlled by the rules of the metre,
known as the Pankti. Each of the Vedic verses of the chapter
known.as the Rudradhyaya, has its own Rishi, such as Praja-
pati, etc., while the three verses of Koutsha, lay claim to no
lens than divine authorship (y — n).

The god Rudra is the tutelary divinity of the two verses
running as Manas etc., while the first Anuvak,' should be
considered as under the direct control of the god Eka-Rudr*.
The metre of the first verse, is Gayatra, while the next three
Rikas belong to the Anustup class of metrical composition.
The metre of the next three is Pankti, while the rest belong
to the Anustup class. The metre of the two of the verses
of .the Anuvaka, is Jagati, while the five Riks, such as the
Heranya Vahana, etc., own the god Rudra, as their presiding
deity. The presiding deity of the verses which constitute
the twentieth division of the Shukta, is Rudra. The metre
of the first of these verses is Vrih&ti, the second is a Rik,
followed by three verses of the metre Jagati, while the
third belongs the . Thristubha class of metrical composition,
followed by the four Yajur Mantras of the Anustup metre.
-The man who is conversant with these Rik Mantras, and
Aryas, attains-, all $orts of supernatural power, and acquire
A perfect control over the elements (12—15).

The Trailokya Mohana (charmer of the three worlds)
Mantra which was as, u log, Shrim, Hrim, Hruin, obeisance


1344 ' AGNI PURANAM. •

accessible sacred pools and shrines, when the' merit of pern*
sing the present work dxcels those of the aforesaid acts ? The
merit of hearing even a single Sloka of the present Puranam,
exceeds the merit of making gifts of Prasta measures of
sesamum, and a Masha weight of gold, every day. A
perusal of it is more meritorious than making a gift of cows^
Even the very inclination of hearing it, absolves a man of
all sin, committed in the course of day and night. The
merit of perusing the present Puranam is the same as that of
making gifts of a hundred Kapila cows at the shrine, known
as the old Pushkara. 0 Vashishta, "the man who devoutly
hears it even recited by another, is absolved of all sins
(13^-20).

Miscarriages of fetus,, and premature births nev^r take
place in the house where a copy of the present Puranam
is kept. Thieves and burglars never intrude upon its prc-
cincts. A Brahman*, devoutly listening it recited, becomes
conversant with Vedic knowledge, a Kshatriya becomes the
lord of the world, a Vaishya becomes fabulously wealthy, aujl
a Shudra becomes strong in limbs and muscles. Physical,
political or internal disturbances never affect the household,
in which this Puranam is kept. The man who hears it re-
cited in the forepart of winter, and worships it with flowers,
perfumes, and sweetmeats, acquires the merit of perform-
ing an Agni-Sthoma sacrifice, while in winter, ; n spring,
in summer, or in the rains, its merit respectively equals
those of a Pundarika, Ashvamedha, Vajapeya^and a Raja-
suya sacrifice. He who devoutly recites it before the god
Hari, and worships it with the essential articles £f a Puja,
enjoys all creature comforts in life, an<| becomes an nmanci?
pated being after death. O Vashisbtt, you shall disclose,
this Puranam dealing with two sorts of knowledge to the
pious arid the devout (21 — 31).

Vasiiishta said : — O Vyasa, you have narrated to me*
this Ag ni Puranam, dealing with the two sorts of knowledge'


AGNI PURANAtf.


tit*

to Vishnu, the charmer of the three worlds/ 1 isfilediffrd
endhcd with the efficacy of destroying venom, and healing
the sick. The same result may be obtained by s repetition
of the Nrisinha Mantra, which belong* to the Aouetup
class of metrical composition, and runs as follows ^Om,-
Ham, Ham, I make obeisance to 1 the fierce and dreadful
Maha- Vishnu, bvrrning as a cone of living fire, and whose
open mouth has obstructed all the apertures of the heaven/
I make . obeisance to the great Vishnu, who is all gentleness,
and the destroyer of death." This Pan'changd Mantra, is
the fulfiller of all objects. These two Mantras, respectively
consisting of eight and twelve letters, am sure to act -as
antidotes of all sorts of venom and distemper. The
manifestations of the Supreme Goddess, Such as Ktvjfita,
Tripura, Gouri, and Chandrika, Should be worshipped for
the subsidence of effects of all sorts of poison In the s y stem ,
and similarly the Mantras respectively sacred to them, of
those held specially sacred to the Sun-God, or to the Rudies/
or to the .Vinyakas, should deemed as possessed of fiktf
virtues (16 — 19).


•:o>


chapter ccxcvii.


£)aid the Gdb of Fire : — "Om, obeisance .to the god
Rudra, to the deity who wields an aze of Jiving fire in his
hand. Cut down, and cut down the venom, Om, obeisance
to the god Rudra, who has manifested hidiself, in the .Shape .
of the mighty Garuda, rouse and rouse up this Snake-
bitten person, out of his comatose sleep, Make him shivel
and shiver, fill and fill his mind again with cogitation/
O thou great Rudra, dost then advance, take {raid of him.


AGNI PURANAM.


1345


The man who reads it, or hears it recited or makes a copy
of its contents, or gets them transcribed by another, becomes
an emancipated being. Therefore the present Puranam,

O Vyasa, should be discussed with such holy sages as Shuka,
etc., or such others as are eager t6 hear it. The present
Puranam, read, recited, or meditated upon, leads to the
liberation of self. Obeisance to Aghi, who has narrated this
Puranam (32 — 38).

VvASA said O Suta, Va^hishta sang of yore, the
Puranam which I have just recited to you. The Supreme
Self consists of two sorts of knowledge, F ara and Apara.
It is specially the favoured ones that can assume the fiery
shape of Brahma. Those who meditate upon the teachings
of the present Puranam, attain to Hari, the Suprema Brahma.

" By that means, a sonless man, is sure to be blest with a son,
a student with the boon of profound erudition, a poor man
with wealth and good fortune, while those who want libera-
tion of their selves, would have it by a mere contemplation
of its contents. Let a man keep it transcribed in his room,
and he will be rich and prosperous in life. O Suta, hear
it dropping from the lips of Shuka and Paila, and you shall
be a free and emancipated being. Narrate this Puranam,
O Suta, to those who are pious and devout and to your own

disciples (39—43)- , . ,,

Suta said By, the favour of Vyasa, f have fondly

heard the present P’uranam recited within the holy shade*
of the forest of Naimisha. The Agni Puranam, is but a
manifestation of the Supreme Brahma. You and Sanaka
and othe holy sages who dwell in this sacred forest, are
animo .a your that the Agni Puranam a*

1 rated by the God , and dealing with the two

ranches of knowledge, is quite in harmony with the teach-
gs of the Vedas. Nothing can be richer in substance than
he Agni Puranam. Considered as a literary composition
ere is no work that can vie with its excellence. It is the
169


ABM fcfft/tNfAtf.


dot


life hitri round, tad lift Uni from the deep Of death. Scare?
away and scare away, strike and strike with your fist, cut
and cut down, trample add trample down the Venom, that
has clouded his faculties; Tha. Tha.”

Thus invoked, the celestial Garuda, the god Rudra mani-
fest in the shape of that mighty bird, destroys all poison.

"dm, obeisance to the god Rridra. Destroy all sorts of
poisOn, Whether natural Or artificial, ahimal Or vegetable,-
primary or secondary, destroy the venom which still remains
Operative in the System of the patient, stricken by a snake.
Stir up, arid stir up, subdue and subdue, and eject andfejfect
the poison that is still active in his system. Cast the light
Of day with the obscurest gloom, draw in, packs of sable'
Cloud, and roar in thunder and lightning. Destroy and
destroy, advance and advance, neutralise and neutralise the
poison, jrist eliminated through the agency of the present
incantation. Om, throw it away. Om, throw it away, Svaha;
Dm, Hram, Hrim, Khim, Sah, ThandrOn, Hrim, Thah.”

A charmer, by Repeating the abovesaid Mantra, will bind
down the snakes (i).

The same result Will be obtained, even by a rephtitiori of i
Single, two, three, or four Vijas belonging to the circle of the
five component parts of the Krishna Mantra, or the Mantra
Which runs as, “Obeisance to the beloved of the milk- maids,’ 4
should be recited in its entirety. “ Om obeisance to the god
fcudra, manifest in the shape of a golden grasshopper, obei-
Sarice to Rudra, the lord of the brotherhood of ghosts. Roar,
and rear, whirl round and whirl round, cast down and cast
down, remove and reriiove, attack and attack, overpower and
bverpower, the venom. This is at the command of the
golden grasshopper. Tha. Tha.”

The above is called the Patala Mantra, a single repetition
bf which tends to destroy all venom, which otherwise im-
perils the life of a person bitten by a snake. A person -•
bitten. -by a make, should cauterise the affected part witn


> 34 ^


AGN1 PURANAM.


best of the Scriptures, the best of the Smritis, the best of
knowledge, the best of philosophies, the best of t^he Vedanta
compositions, and deals with the best means of working out
one's own salvation. It deals with matters which have been
fully set out in the contents. Out of its hundred million shjokas
sung by the gods in heaven, only fifteen thousand have been
disclosed in earth for the benefit of mankind. It has been
abridged by the god of Fire for the good of the human rae6e,
O you Shounaks, O you holy sages, know all to be Brahma.
The present Pi ranam is permeated with the essence of that
Supreme Self ir 11 its lines; and *acrording!y it should lie
read, or 1 ard, or sung as coil \ n( l!t The reader of this
Puranam should be worshippol with w >thes and ornaments,
etc , at the end of his recitation, and the Brahmanas should
be treated to a sumptuous repast. Such a man is sure to
ascend to the spotless heaven after death. Even he whe
contribirtes towards the cost of purchasing the bindis&
chord, or leaflets, etc., of this book, is sure to be made muc
of in the region of Brahma. Disturbances fly from h»$
presence and he becomes a* emancipated being at the cIo5l
of a happy and prosperous earthly career. Therefore co
template you this Agni Puranam, which is, a manifestatic
of the Suprcm Occh Suta was worshipped by the holy sag
for his trouble in reading out this Puranam ta them, and
the rest of the sages such as Shounaka, etc., attained. to

Hari (44— r 0 -

THE ptfD


limn mi inn tun mu in, m,


ttoi


AONI riMANAM.


A red hot stone, or with a burning log, or with a burnt to*
konadm.

A potion composed of Arka-flowers, seeds of Shirisha,
Kshira seeds, and the dru^s known as the Trikattt, should be
deemed as beneficial in a case of snake-bite. A plaster, com-
posed of the same drbgS pasted together, and applied over
the affected part, or a collyrium prepared of those substances
and applied along the eye-lids of the patient, have beea
known to bring many a difficult and hopeless case to a
favourable termination. Similarly, a potion composed of the
essence of -pepper, treated with the expressed juice of
the Shirisha flowers, may be administered with advantage
to a person bitten by a snake, or the same may be stuffed
into his nostrils as snuff. A potion composed of Koshataki,
Vacha, Asafcetida, Shirisha, Arka, and the Trikatus, pasted
with milk, and the washings of Mesha, should be deemed as
a powerful anti-venOmous agent, which may be used as
a plaster,' or for snuffing as well. Similarly a snuff com-
posed of Ramatha, and all parts of Ikshaku powdered
together, and pills composed of Indravala, Agnika, Drona,
Tulasi, Shirisha flowers, Devika and Trikatu, treated with
the expressed juice of the latter, should be deemed as pos-
sessed of the same virtue, if prepared on the fifth day of the
moon’s wane (a— 8).


-so:-

CHAPTER CCXCVIII.


&A1D THE God op Fire O Vashisbtha, hear me dis-
course on the mode of treatment which should be adapted
in the case of a bite by a snake, known as* the Gonasa.
A snake-charmer, by eating a betel consecrated with the


MM PUIAWW.


M03

Manta, raoninf u Hrim, Hrim obeisance to the white*
winged bird, is sure to cure a patient bitten by a Gonasa.
A potion composed of the expressed juice of Lashuqam,
Ramatha fruit, Kushtba, Agni, Vyoshaka, and milk, should be
deemed as possessed of a similar efficac£ In a case of a bite
by a Rajila, the remedy should consist of Krishna, Saindhava
salt, clarified butter, and honey, mixed with the washings of
Puritati. A Modaka composed of Krishna, treacle, milk,
clarified butter, honey, Vyosha, tail and the bones of a cat,
and the nails of a mungoose, may be given with advantage
in a case, similar, in every respect, to the one mentioned in
the preceding line. A fumigation of the affected part with
the vapours of a burning stick, composed of Nirgunthi,
Kola, Varna and Lashuna, pasted with the milk of a sheep,
would make it free of all venom (1 — 5).

A potion composed of the sweats of Manipatra, treated
with Kanjika, and mixed with the expressed juice of Kar-
pasha, should be given to a man bitten by any of the sixteen
kinds of moles. The flowers of the Phalini boiled with oil,
should be applied over the spot bitten by a mole, while
treacle mixed with Nagara, should be given as a cure for
the deranged state of appetite, that marks the sequel to such
a case (6—7).

Twenty different medicines are known for bites by
venomous spiders, insects, and scorpions. The drugs known
as the Padmaka, Patali, Kusha, Ushira, sandal-wood, Nir-
gunthi, Shariva, and Sheji pasted with water, should be
applied over the spot bitten by a Luta. Similarly a plaster
composed of Gunja, Nirgunthi, Kankola leaves, Shunti, and
the two sorts of Rajani pasted with the seed and pulp of
Karanja, may be used in substitute of the one mentioned in
the preceding line. A plaster composed of Manjistha, San-
dal-wood, Vyosha flower, Shirisha, and Koumuda, should be
applied over the part bitten by a scorpion (8 — 10).

“Om, obeisance to the god Rudra, Chivi Chivi, rend and


tut 4


mm nmhttAtt


«end asunder. Kiri Kiri, cut and cut with the sworrii fierce
with thy trident, sever and sever with thy discos. 'Om, Hram,
F ut. J ’ This incantation should be practised iff the case of a bite
by an ass. A potion composed of the essence of Triphala,
Ushira, washings of Musta, Mansi, Padmaka, and sandal*
wood, mixed with goat's milk, should be held beneficial in a
case lof the same nature. A potion composed of the five
drugs, such as the Vyosha, the Shirisha flowers, etc., and
known as the Shirisha Panchangara, should be held remedial
to venom of the centipedes. Similarly a plaster composed of
Kandhara, and Serisha seeds pasted together, should be held
as antidotal to the venom of a mole, escaped from the fangs
of a poisonous snake. A case of the same nature would
yield to a liniment composed of mustard ’oil, and the roots
and branches of the Vyosha pasted together. The venom
of all sorts of poisonous insects, would prove amenable to a
plaster composed of alkali, Vyosha, Vacha, Asafoetida,
Vidanga, Natam, Sandhava salt, Amvasta, Ativala, and
Kustha. A -potion composed of Yasthi, Vyosha, treacle, and
thickened milk, should be held as a certain cure for a bite by
a rabid dog ( 1 1 — 15).

*'Om obeisance to the ocean. Om obeisance to the god*
dess of beautiful glow. May the drugs and herbs, culled
by men in an informal way, may retain all their natural and
original virtues, through thy grace, to which end thou hast
been advised by the god Brahman." Then the charmer, 'should
make obeisance to the herb, and throw ten handsful of bar*
ley to the deity, and ten times repeat tho abovesaid Mantra.
Then the herb should be addressed as follows : — “ I cull thee,
O thou, whose eyes constantly look upward." After which it
should be administered to the patient with a repetition of
the following Mantra : — " I make obeisance to thee, O thou
Gopaia, O thou foremost of human beings. Thou bast
entered into a solemn compact with ’men to the effect, that
whosoever shall take thy name, shall softer no defeat. By


*GNI fURANAli.


HOST

virtue of that compact, I invoke thy aid. May the patient
rally, and may I achieve success in the treatment of the case
I have undertaken. 11 (16 — 19).

“ Obeisance to Vaiduryya Matri. May she preserve me,
and all, from the fatal efficiency of all poison. Obeisance
(Svaha) to Gouri, to Gandhari, to Chandalini, to Matangini,
and to- the illusive energy of the god Hari.”

The above Mantra, should be repeated, before adminis-
tering medicine in a case of apparent death by vegetable
poison. Padmakam, mixed with cold water, should be
given to the patient, where symptoms of poisoning would
be detected, immediately on its having been taken, and
where there would be grounds to infer that the poison
was still retained in the stomach ; while honey mixed with
clarified butter, should be prescribed in eases where further
elimination would be necessary (20 — 21).

-:o:-

CHAPTER CCXCIX.


&AID the God of Fire : — Now I shall deal with the
mystic rites which tend to successfully cope with diseases
that imperil the life of a child in the lying-in-chamber, and
which are ascribed to the baneful influences of ghosts and
malignant planets. On the day of its birth, a child is very
susceptible to the baneful influence of the monstress
(Grahi). A child possessed by such a spirit, refuses all food,
tosses about its head, and writhes in agony, for which
offerings composed of fish, meat, wine, edibles, perfumes,
garlands of flowers, lighted lamps, and burning sticks
of scented resin, should be made to the monstress. The
body of. the child should be plastered with a paste composed
*39


AGNt PUR AN AM


II 06

of Dhataki, Lodhra, Manjistha, Tala and sandat-wood.
The monstress Bhisliani, who invariably possesses a child
on the second day of its birth should be exorcised by ourn-
ing Dhupas of the substance known as the Mahishaksha.
A child possessed by Bhishani, is oppressed with a fati-
guing cough. The respiration becomes difficult, and the
child constantly writhes and tosses about in the bed in
agony (1—4)-

The body of the child should be washed with goat’s urine*
A paste composed of Apamarga, and sapdal-wood, should
be applied on its tongue at intervals, and the lying-in -cham-
ber, should be fumigated with the vapours of Goshringa,
Godanti, and hairs ; and offerings should be made to the
monstress as before. A child is subject to be possessed by
the monstress Ghantali on the third day of its birth. The:
child cries incessantly and startles in fear. The body under-
goes convulsive contortions, and all appetite vanishes The
body of the child should be smeared with a preparation,
composed of Kshira, Anjana, Godanta and scrapings of
ivory, pasted with goat’s milk. The chamber shpuld be
fumigated with the vapour of Naka, Raji, and the leaves of
a Vilva tree, and offerings should be made to the monstress
as before. Similarly, a child is subject to be possessed by
the monstress Kakoli, on the fourth day of its birth. The
disease is marked by such symptoms, jls . the jerking of
limbs, loss of appetite, foaming at the mouth, and up*
turned position of the dilated pupils. The remedy consists
in smearing the body of the child with an unguent, com-
posed of the scrapings of ivory, the c ast off skin of a snake,
and the urine of a horse The chamber, should be fumigated
with the vapours of Raji and Nimva leaves, fanned with
loose hairs, while offerings made of Masa pulse, or Kulmasha,
should be made to the menstress (5 — 9).

The monstress Hansadika may take possession of a child
on the fifth day of its birth. The child breathes with long


MNI mUMM.


and npdrawn breaths, and stretches its hands, and closes Its
fists. Offerings of fish should be made to h^r, and the body
should be smeared with an unguent, composed of Mesha-
Sbringi, Vala, Lodhra, Shila, and Jala. The monstress,
Shasthi, may possess a child on the sixth day of its birth.
The disease usually ascribed to her malignant influence, is
ushered in by the following symptoms : — The child cries with*
out any apparent cause, starts up in fright, refuses all food,
and suffers from convulsive contortions of limbs. Offerings
of fish, should be made in honour of the monstress, and the
body of the child, should be smeared with an unguent,
composed of Raji, Guggula, Kustha, and scrapings of ivory,
etc., and fumigated with the vapours of the same drugs, and
substances. A child possessed by Mulctakeshi, on the
seventh day of its birth, develops the following symptoms
The body emits a peculiar fetid smell. Yawning and lassi-
tude supervene, and indicate a low state of vitality. The
child cries, refuses to be consoled, and is oppressed with a
harassing cough. The remedy consists in smearing the body
with powdered tiger-nails pasted with water, which should be
fumigated with the vapours of the same article (10—13 •

A child possessed by the monstress, Shri-Dandi, on the
eighth day of its birth, should be treated with a paste com-
posed of Vacha, and the dung and the urine- of a cow. The
disease is marked (jy constant protrusion and movements of
the tongue of the child, that constantly looks round with
a sort of vacant gaze. The child cries, and seeks respite
from the oppressive cough. Offerings should be made to
the monstress as before, and the body of the child should be
fumigated with the vapours of Vacha, sun-dried rice, and
garlic. The disease which ails a child on the ninth day of
its birth, is ascribed to the malignant influence of the
monstress Mahagrahi. The child looks agitated, draws long
and up-drawn breaths, and eats its two closed fists. The
remedy consists in smearing the body with a paste of red


If of fcfttf tURANikir;

sandal-wood, Kustha, etc., and in a fumigation with tktrapom
of the hairs of a monkey. The malady that afflicts a child
on the tenth day of its existence, is ascribed to the baneful
influence of the monstress, Rodini. The .child knows no
rest, and cries incessantly. The body changes colour, turning
blue, etc., in succession, and emits a sweet odour. The treat-
ment consists in fumigating the body with the vapours of
Nimva leaves, or in smearing it with an unguent composed of
R*ji, and the milk of a Sarja tree. Offerings composed of
Kutma-shaka, should be made to the monstress, as above in-
dicated (14 — 18).

The fumigation should be continued till the thirteenth
day pf the child’s age. The montress Putana, attacks a
child that has just completed its first month of life. The
disease which is ascribed to her, is ushered in by the following
symptoms ‘ The child moans like a crow. The respiration
becomes difficult. The body emits a smell like that of urine,
and the eye-lids remain completely closed, or half-shut.
The remedy consists in washing the body of the child with
the urine of cow, and in fumigating it with the vapours
of Godanta. The monstress, should be propitiated with the
offerings of a yellow clothes, garlands of red flowers, and
lighted oil-lamps. The three sorts of Payasha, together with
wine and the four sorts of meat prepared with sesamum,
should be dedicated to the monstress, for seven days conse-
cutively, and should be offered at the south. The monstress,
Mukuta, possesses a child, on its completing the second
month. The disease is marked by cold, running at the nose,
and the parched state of the lips and the cavity of the mouth.
Offerings of flowers, perfumes, clothes, flour-cakes mixed
with sugar and spices, lighted lamps, and burning incense-
sticks, should be made to the monstress, whereby the child
would be cured (19 — 23).

The monstress, Gomukhi (the cow-faced), attacks a child
in the /third month of its existence. The possessed child


AGN1 PURANAII.


tlOf

remains drowsy all day long, and urine and evacuations of
bowels are entirely stopped, accompanied by groaning
and moaning. Offerings of barley, Priyangu, Palalam, pot-
herbs, and Kulmasha, should be made to the monstress.
Libations of thickened milk, should be given to her in the
fore-part of the day, while with lighted oil lamps, she should
be propitiated at noon. The disease peculiar to the fourth
month of a child's life, and which is ascribed to the evil eye
of the monstress Pingala, proves amenable to a bath with
the composition known as the Panchagavya. The form of
the disease, in which the skin becomes white, and emits a
a fetid smell, accompanied by loss of flesh, is sure to end in
death (24 — 26).

The monstress, Dalana possesses a child on the fifth month
of its existence. The disease is ushered in with lassitude,
accompanied by vomiting of blood. The child refuses milk,
and does not take to the breast, while the complexion be-
comes shallow, turning pale yellow with the progress of the
disease. Offerings composed of fish, etc., should be made
to the monstress at the south. The disease which afflicts
a child in the sixth month of its existence, and in which
the child cries and moans in an unnatural voice, is ascribed
to the evil eye of the monstress Pankaja, who should be
propitiated with offerings of fish, meat, wine, edibles,
flowers and perfumes. The monstress Nirahara (inanition)
possesses a child on the seventh month of its life. The
disease is characterised by all the symptoms, which attend
a process of painful dentition : — the gums swell, look
inflamed, and emit a fetid smell. The remedy consists in
propitiating the monstress with offerings of meat, cake,
wine, and prepared meat-dishes. The disease which is
ascribed to the malignant influence of the monstress
Yamuna, and which attacks a child in the eighth month of its
Existence, is marked by appearance of boils, and erysipe-
latous vesicles all over the body. The disease baffles all;


1 110


A<lNf ftltANAM.


medical ingenuity, and it is better that no treatment
should be attempted in such a case. The monstress, Kumbha-
karni (pitcher-eared), possesses a child in the ninth month
of its existence. The disrase is ushered in with the char-
acteristic crying, catarrah, and febrile symptoms, the remedy
being a propitiation of the monstress, with meat, Kulmasha
and wine (27 — 30).

The monstress, Tapasi attacks a child in the tenth month
of its existence. The child, under her influence, foregoes
all food, and remains in a sub-comatose state with close-
shut eyes. A propitiation of the monstress with small
bells, banners, cakes, meat and wine, would be followed
by the recovery of the child. The monstress known as Eka-
dashi, possesses a child in the eleventh month of its exis-
tence. The disease is confined to the organs of vision,
and no* medical aid should be resorted to for its cure. The
monstress, Chanchala, casts an evil eye on a child, that has
just completed its twelfth month. The child is afflicted
with painful respiration, and starts up in fright. The
offerings of Kulmasha and sesamum, etc., should be made
to the monstress for its cure, both at the forepart and the
middle of the day. The monstress of pain Yatana), pos-
sesses a child that has entered the second year of life. -
The disease ascribed to her baneful influence, is charac-
terised by crying, and pain. Offerings of sesamum, meat,
and wine should be made to the monstress, and the rite of
bathing, etc., should be done as before. The monstress
Rodani (crying), afflicts a child in its third year. The charac-
teristics of the disease, ascribed to her baneful influence,
is crying, shivering, and the passing of blood with urine.
The monstress should be propitiated with the offerings of
treacle, sesamum cakes, etc. The image of the mons-
tress should be made of pasted sesamum seeds. The child,
should be bathed with water containing seeds of sesamnm,
and its body should be fumigated with the vapours of the


AGNi tUftANAM.


ml


five kinds of leaves, known as the Panchapatra, and the
bark of the Rajaphalam (31—36).

The monstress, known as Chataka, casts an evil eye on
a child of four years. The disease is characterised by fever
and pain all over the body. The remedy consists in ap-
peasing the wrath ot the monstress with the offerings of meat
and edibles, and in fumigating the body with the vapours
of Mesha-Shringi. The monstress Dhavani, should be
imagined as wielding the branch of a Palasha, Oudumvura,
Ashvattha, Vata, or that of a Vilva tree in her hand. A
child of six years, suffering from a disease ascribed to her
baneful influence, develops symptoms, such as loss of
flesh, pain all over the body, and a gradual discolouring
of the complexion. The offerings, should be made for
seven consecutive days, which should be preceded by
the necessary act of fumigation of the child's body, and
the rite of the bath of convalescence. The monstress, Yamuna
attacks a boy of seven years. The disease ascribed to her
malignant influence, is marked by catarrh, loss of speech,
or fits of laughter and weeping. The monstress should be
propitiated with meat, Payasha, and wine, etc., for its cure,
accompanied by the acts of necessary fumigation, and bath.
The monstress, who possesses a boy of eight years, is called
Jataveda. The disease, due to her influence, is marked by
weeping, and a desire to forego all food. The wrath of the
monstress, should be appeased with the offerings of Krisbara
(rice and pulse boiled with spices), cakes, and curd, and acta
of bathing and fumigation, should be done as before (37—41).

The disease, that afflicts a child at the ninth year of its
life, the year of transition from infancy to boyhood, is as-
cribed to the baneful influence of the monstress Kala. The
disease is marked by such symptoms, as constant throwing
of the arms, roaring, 0 and fright. The offerings in the
present case should consist* of Krishara, cakes, barley-
powder, Kulmash*, and Payasha. The monstr fss Kalahari


uia


AGNI rUKANAM.


possesses a child of ten years! The disease, due to
her influence, is marked by a burning sensatibn of the skin,
emaciation of the body, and fever. The remedy consists in
propitiating the monstress with the offerings of Poutika
cakes, curd and boiled rice, for five consecutive days. The
monstress, known as Devaduti possesses a child of eleven
years. The child raves and talks cruel and incoherent
words under ner influence. The remedy consists of plas-
tering its body, and making offerings to the monstress, as
laid before. The monstress Valika, possesses a child of
twelve years. The child suffers from difficult respiration,
which should be treated in the process laid down in the
preceding line. The monstress Vayavi, possesses a child
of thirteen years. The disease due to her influence, is
characterised by inflammation of the face, and pain in the
limbs. The monstress should be propitiated with blood,
boiled rice, scent, and garlands of flowers. The body of the
child, should be washed with the washings of the leaves,
known as the Panchadala, and the body of the child, should
be fumigated with the vapours of Raji, and the leaves of a
Nimva tree. The monstress Yaskhini possesses a child of
fourteen years. The disease due to her baneful influence,
is characterised by fever, colic and a burning sensation of
the skin. The remedy consists in appeasing the wrath
of the inonstress, with the offerings of meat and edibles,
whereas acts of the bathing and fumigation, etc., should be
done as in the preceding case (42 — 47).

The monstress Mundika, possesses a child at the fifteenth
year of its existence. The disease, ascribed to her malig-
nant influence, is characterised by vomiting of blood, the
remedy being a propitiation of the Matrikas. The ‘mon-
stress Vanari possesses a child of sixteen years. The
child under her influence, remains drowsy, refuses to open
its eyes, and suffers from incessant paroxysms of fever. The
monstress, should be propitiated with offerings of Payasha


AGNI PURANAM.


11*3

etc., for three consecutive nights, which would lead to a
recovery. The baths, etc., should be performed as laid
down before. The monstress, Gandhavati possesses a child .
at its seventeenth year. The disease, due to her influence,'
’s characterised by weeping, and pain in the limbs aad
joints. The remedy consists in propitiating the monstress,
with the offerings of Kulmasha, etc., and the baths, etc,
should be performed as before. The monstresses, such as
Putana, etc., afflict a child during the days of the first month
of its life, while those known as Sukumarika, may possess
it, as it grows from year to year, until it is safe beyond the
period of their influence (48 — 49).

“ Om obeisance to all the Matris. break and break the.
combined influences, that have afflicted the child. O ye
Matris, attack and attack, sever and sever, overpower and
overpower, and cast down, and cast down, the malady that
is due to the baneful influence of the monstress. Set right
the distemper, that is afflicting this boy, girl, man, or
weman. Make him or her, whole and sound from the at*
tack of all malignant planets. This is at the command of
Siddharupa.”

“ Obeisance to thee, O thou goddess Chamunda. Om,
Hrum, Hrum, Hrim, drive and drive away all the malig-
nant planets. Hrum, let the Gujhyakas go elsewhere, and
by another route. This is what Rudra commands/'

These Mantras, should be used for the cure of all dis-
tempers that are peculiar to child-life (50).

“ Om, obeisance to the goddess Chamunda. Leave, and
leave this boy or girl. Victory and victory to thee, stay
and stay here, and accept these offerings.” This Mantra
should be used on the occasion of offering the aforesaid
oblations.

The following Mantra, should be recited for the purpose
of ensuring the ifhmunity of the child from further molesta-
tions by the monstresses. “ May the gods Brahrqa, Vishnu,
140


* 1*4


AGNI PURANAM.


Shiva, Skanda, and Ganas, and the goddesses such as
Lakshmi, Gouri, etc., preserve the child. May fever and
distempers, leave the child for good" (51).


:o:—


CHAPTER CCC.


^aid the God of Fire : — Now I shall narrate to you
the Mantras, that tend to destroy the baneful influences, cast
down by malignant planets. Five different types of insanity
have been noticed in actual practice, which are originated by
excessive joy, by a strong but unfulfilled desire, by un-
clean food, or by a diet composed of substances that are
incompatible to one another, or by tbe wrath of gods anti
preceptors, or are ushered in through a deranged state of
all the three vital humours, as well as the one, that is due
to an external cause, such as a blow, or a hurt (1 — 2).

The gods, terrified at the wrath of Rudra, disguised them*
selves in the shape of the planets (Grahas), who possess a
man, found alone, and loitering about the solitary shores of
a lake, stream, or a river, or at the confluence of streams,
or treading his way along the solitary brow of a hill, or
taking bis rambles in a lonely garden, or walking over a
bridge, or crossing a moor or a field, the monotony of which
is broken by the presence of a single, haunted tree, or
staying at a lonely or a deserted house. The conditions
under which a woman is likely to be possessed by one of
such malignant planets, are, that she would be in the family
way, or sleeping under the naked sky, or in an open room,
with dishevelled hairs, and disarranged garments, or that *
she would be a girl, about to be converted into a woman.


ACNI PURANAM. tt|5

or A maiden in her flow, bathing in utter nudity after the
period of her uncleanness (3— 5).

The evil influence of a malignant planet on a person,
is marked by vicissitudes of fortune, loss of prestige, and
the hostile conduct of his former friends. Such a man
docs not hesitate to impugn the dignity of his elders, and
superiors, outstrips the boundary of decency or decorum,
and acts in direct contravention of the rules of his
religion and society. He is furious, and frantically brushes
his hairs with both the hands, listens to the evil counsel of
lonely mountain-summits, and yields to the temptation of
ending his life, by a leap therefrom. Fits of weeping
are followed by paroxysms of weird laughter. The victim
looks agitated, tosses his head in agony, while his blood
shot-eyes, mark the highly congested state of the brain.
All appetite vanishes, or at times the patient complains
of thirst and hunger, or of a colic pain in the abdomen,
and a burning sensation of the skin. At times, he is
compassionate, or thinks himself a god, and asks for offerings,
of whomsoever he comes across.

, A woman, in ■ such a predicament, becomes excessively
fond of flowers, perfumes and articles of luxury in general,
and takes constant ablutions. She is fond of the company of
the stronger sex, knows no satiety, and exhibits all the
symptoms, peculiar to Nymphomania. The Mantras sacred
to the celestial discus (Sudarshanam), to the all pervading
Vitapanasa, to the goddess Cbandi, or to the redoubtable
Narsinha, are possessed of the virtue of neutralising the
effects of all active poison, or of exorcising the baneful in-
fluences of malignant spirits and planets. The regent of
the sun, should be contemplated, as a deity fond of
Prishni, Asafoetida, Vacha, and Shirisha flowers, and wield-
ing a noose, a mace, a khattanga, a lotus, a rosary, a
human skull, and a spear in his hands. The god should be
contemplated, as possessed of four faces, and seated on n


AGNI PURANAH


lll6

full-blown lotus flower, that waves on the blue, etheria!
constituent of the solar disc. The god should be wor-
shipped with his companion Adityas, and offerings should be
made to him, as soon as the solar disc would be visible
above the horizon at dawn ( 6 — 12).

The regent of the planet Venus, should be contemplated
as a Brahmana, seated before a reservoir of sacrificial fire,
sunk into the ground, and attended by his Vijas, Shvasa,
Visha, Agni, etc. The offerings, should be made to the
regions of the Bhu, Bhuva, Sva, etc., in connection with the
worship of the sun-god, and to the energy of light (Jvalini)
as well, which serves as a mace to that deity. The god
Arun, the precursor of the glow of day, should be contem-
plated as a god of red colour, clad in vermil-tinted garments,
and 'seated on a full-blown lotus flower, accompanied by
the god Vishvaka, and the goddess of light. The regent of
the moon, should be contemplated as a god, compassion-
ately disposed, extremely beautiful in person, richly embel-
lished with ornaments, and attended upon by the god
Vishvaka, and the goddess of glow (Dyuti). The god, should
be imagined, as attended upon by a number of celestial youths
of matchless beauty, all wielding lotus flowers in their hands,
and engaged m blessing the world with divine benediction.
The regent of the planet Mars, should be contemplated as
possessed of a vermil-red complexion, and clad in a garb of
lightning. The regent of the planet Mercury, should be
contemplated as possessed of a white complexion (sic.), while
those of the regents of the Jupiter and the Venus, should
be respectively deemed as yellow and white. The regent
of the planet Saturn, is possessed of a dark blue (Krishna)
complexion, while those of the nodes, both ascending and
descending, are like charcoal and smoke respectively. Their
left hands, should be contemplated as placed on their respec-
tive left thighs, while the right hands, should be imagined as
bent in a posture, which says, " Dread ndt ,# (13—16).


AGNI PURANAM.


Ill}


The priest should purify the palms of his hand* by
psychically locating therein, the effulgent energy of the Astra
Mantra, and project, by an act of Nyasa, into the regions
of his eyes and thumb-tips, the energy of the Hrid Mantra
coupled with the Vijas, the first letters of their respective
names. He should contemplate his own self, as fully per-
meated with the essence of the latter Mantras. Then having
performed the rite of Nyasa, with the three principal and
the Anga Mantras, he should wash the vessel of divine
service, by repeating the Astra Mantra, and by pouring down
water with a repetition of the principal ones. The flowers,
sun-dried rice, sandal paste, Durva-grass, and the Akgha
offering, should be consecrated with the same Mantra. Then
he should sprinkle the consecrated water over his own body,
and purify therewith the articles of worship, spread before
him. Then having meditated upon the self of the absolute,
infinite, and perfect purity, which is the underlying substra-
tum of infinite and unchangeable felicity as weli, he should
contemplate the cushion of the god (Pitha), as formed of
the essence of the Hrid Mantra, — the cushion, spread out in
the form of a full-blown lotus flower, its petals pointing
towards the eight cardinal and angular points of the sky,
offering seats to the eight companion goddesses of energy
(17—31).

The eight goddessesi should be worshipped with theTVija
Mantras, sacred to each of them, as follows .‘-—Vam, obeisance
to the goddess of light, Veem, obeisance to the goddess
of latent energy, Vum, obeisance to the goddess of
victory, Vuum, obeisance to the solar energy, that is blissful
to the world, Vem, obeisance to the divine energy of tire
sun, Vaim, obeisance to the Vimala energy, Vom, obeisance
to the electric flash that emits from the sword-strobe bf the
sun-god, Voom,, obeisance to The solar energy that pervades
all space, Vam, obeisance to the throne of the sun-god,
and Vah, obeisance to the sun himself. The priest, an


•itS


AGNI PUAANAM.


•dept in practising penances, should then invoke the sun.
god, and worship him with a repetition of the Hrid Mantra,
and with the six essential articles (Sadanga) of worship,
such as the water for washing the feet, and rinsing the
mouth, etc.

The Hrid, sacred to the sun.god, consists of a concourse
of celestial spirits, such as the two Khakaras, the two
Chandas, the spirit Jaradvahu, the goddess Mansa>Dirgha,
etc., and grants all boons to. the votary, when duly worship-
ped. Similarly the Hrids, respectively sacred to the god of
fire, the Maruts,.and the lord of the Rakshas, should be
worshipped at the angular points of the Mandala, with the
Mantras sacred to each of them. The planets, such as the
Moon, the Mercury, the Jupiter, and the Venus, should be
worshipped at the four cardinal points of the Mandala. The
drugs known as the Patha, Pathya, Vacha, Shigru, Sindhu,
mad Vyosha, should be separately pasted with the urine
of a goat, and the compound thus prepared, should be used
either as a snuff or a collyrium, whereby the evil influences
of malignant planets would be removed. Ordinary cow.
butter, boiled with the thickened milk of a she-goat, should
be deemed as possessed of a similar efficacy. A decoction
cpmposed of the drugs, known as the Vrischik, Ali, Phali,
Kustha, salts and Sharngakam, would prove beneficial to
• person suffering from that peculiar type of Hysteria,
which is ascribed to the evil influence, exerted by a malig-
nant planet* A decoction composed of the expressed
juice of Vidari, Kusha, and Iksbu, as well as clarified butter
boiled with Yastika and the essence of Drona, and Kush-
Banda, or clarified butter mixed with the Panchagavya, may
be given with advantage to patient, suffering from a similar
Idad of mental aberration (22 — 29).

Now, hear me discourse on the treatmient to be adapted


* Several editions read, 1 in ail sorts of ailment*.’ — Editor.


Mill HURANAM-


*»»$

h a cue of fever, doe to such a cause u above indicated.
The Gyatri Mantra, sacred to the spirit of fever, and which
runs as “ Om, let us know the nature of the deity, whose
strength reduces all beings to ashes. Let us meditate on
the divine self of that single-tusked god. May fever lead
our mind to dwell on that,” should be devoutly recited for
He subsidence.

In the alternative, a paste composed of Krishna, Ushana,
Nisha, Rasna, oil pressed out of grapes, and treacle, should
be applied at intervals, on the tongue of the patient. A
case of sucflp fever, accompanied by cough and other bron-
chial troubles, would yield to a paste, composed of Bhargi,
Yasthi, honey, and clarified butter, or Patha, Ticta, Kana,
Bhargi and honey, administered as in the preceding case.
A paste, composed of Dhatri, Vishva, Sita, Krishna, Musta,
Kharjura, Magadhi, and honey, and taken as above,
would prove beneficial to such symptoms, as hiccough, etc.,
that are developed in the course of the disease. In the
alternative, a paste composed of any of the three substances,
enumerated in the preceding line, should be licked with
honey, by a man, suffering from a swellings of the
limbs, in the course of such fever. A person, afflicted
with jaundice which invariably marks the sequel to such
a malady, should be treated with a decoction, composed of
the expressed juice of Jiva, Manduki, Nisha, and Dhatri,
while any sort of cough, would prove amenable to a powder,
composed of Vyosha, Padmaka, Triphala, Vidanga, Deva-
daru, Rasna, common treacle, mixed in equal propor-
tions (30—38).


CHAPTER CCCI.


Oaid the Gqd of Fire The Pitha of the god, should
be contemplated as consisting of the deities, known as
Dandi, Ajisha, Pavaka, and Chaturanana. The Vija-Mantra,
which should be recited on the occasion of offering oblations
to the god, should be deemed as potent enough, to grant
all sorts of boon. The five Vija-Mantras, sacred to the
god Gana, and which begins with long vowels, and consists'
of Vindu, Kala, Visha, etc., together with their respective
Anga-Mantras, should be deemed as of palpable and infinite
merit. ' The god Gana. should be worshipped as follows
" Obeisance to Jaya. Obeisance to the single-tusked deity.
Obeisance to the god of immovable ears. Obeisance to
the elephant-faced divinity. Obeisance to the god with a
. protruding abdomen.” The worship should be conducted
with the five essential articles of divine service (Panchanga-
Puja), and success will be attained by repeating the Mantra,
a hundred thousand times ( i — 3).

Subsequent to that, the different manifestations of tbe
god (Gana) should be worshipped on the petals of the lotus,
shaped mystic diagram, and with the five above-said essen-
tial articles of worship, as follows : — “ Obeisance to the lord
of the Ganas. Obeisance to the supreme god of the Ganas.
Obeisance to the chief leader of the Ganas, and obeisance
to the god Ganakridha.” Then the regents of the different
regions, and the other manifestations of the god, should be
worshipped, as above, on the petals of the lotus delineated
on the ground, and pointing both towards the cardinal and
the angular points of the compass, as follows Obeisance
to the bent-lipped god. Obeisance to . the single-tusked
divinity. Obeisance to the god with a protruding abdomen.


torn fuiunam.


liar


Obeisance to the elephant-faced god. Obeisance to the
dreadful one.' Obeisance to the god, who is the supreme
maker of all hindrances. Obeisance to the smoke-coloured
one. The votary should insert his two thumbs between the
two index and middle fingers of his closed fists, and the
Mudra (posture of the hands) thus formed, should be used
in invoking the presence of the deity (4—5).

The god should be contemplated, as possessed of four
hands, wielding in them, a club, a noose, a spear, etc. He
should be further imagined, as possessed of a body fattened
on an ample supply of Modakas, and engaged in the act of
munching a red lotus flower, held steady between his mighty
jaws by means of a noose and a spear. This manifestation
of the lord of the regions, may be worshipped every day,
and should be worshipped with special rites, on the fourth
day of a lunar month. Oblations composed of the roots of
an Arka tree dipped in melted cow butter, or libations of
clarified butter containing seeds of sesamum, should be cast
on the sacrificial fire in connection with the worship, where-
by the votary would be entitled to attain all sorts of com-
forts in this life. Similarly oblations of sesamum, soaked in
clarified butter, and offered to the god, should be deemed as
attended with the same effect. Oblations of sundried rice
soaked in a composition, consisting of curd, honey and
clarified butter, should be considered as harbingers of good
luck. By offering such oblations to the deity, the votary
would be able to acquire an ascendency over the three
worlds. The Mantras sacred to the Sun-god (Martanda
Bhairabha) and which runs as Hroum Uum, should be
coupled with the Vimba Mantra (Thrim) in the following
order -Thrim Hroum, Uum Thrim. The combined Mantra
thus formed, and used in the course of a worship of the
Sun-god, should be deemed as the promoter of virtue f
possession and enjoyment, The rite of Murtinyasa should
ho practised fay repeating the five Hrasvadya Vijas as
<41


1122


dttn ptmAftAtir.


follows ‘ Thranv obeisance to the Sun-god imagined a* situ-
ated at the tips of my two thumbs. Threem, obeisance to
the maker of light (Bhaskara) imagined as situated at the
tips of my two index fingers. Thrum, obeisance to the
god Bhanu, contemplated as located in the ends of my
two middle fingers. Thraim, obeisance to the god Ravi
imagined as permeating the tips of my two ring-fingers, and
Throum, obeisance to the god of day, contemplated as
evoked at the tips of my two little fingers.” The god Ravi
(sun) possessed of a vermil-red complexion, and the right
half of whose body is a male god, the left half being his god-
dess wife, should be worshipped at the north-east angle of
the mystic diagram, while the planets, such as the Moon,
the Mars, etc., should be worshipped at its other angular
petals, commencing from the one at the south east (6 — io).

The votary, should first take a bath, and then duly wor-
ship the sun-god with Argha offerings, etc. The garland
of flowers should be dedicated to the Yama manifestation
of the Sun-god at the south-east, and the lighted lamp
should be waived before his imagined image. A vessel
full* of Rochona, saffron, cold water, red sandal paste,
bunches of green grass, seeds of Bamboo, barley, Shali
rice, Shyama seeds, sesamum, Rajika and Java flowers,
should be dedicated to the Sun-god, and the votary should
hold it on his head after it had been duly consecrated. He
should go on all four, and dedicate the Argha offering to
the sun-god (n — 14).

The planets should be worshipped with the contents of
nine water-pitchers, consecrated with their respective Vija
Mantras, before making the Argha offering to the Sun-god,
Such an offering is sure to neutralise the evil influences
cast down by the malignant planets. A rite of ablution,
and a due repetition of the Vijas sacred to the Sun-god,
would be rewarded with all sorts of enjoyment. The votary,
should locate in the different parts of his body, from head


.1113


to loot, the VSja Mwtru; as welt w tbosfr taowa M-tim
Agni, Dosha, and Vindu. The rites of Auganyasa should be
duly practised as well, and the votary should contemplate
himself as fully permeated' with the essence of, and identical
with, the Sun-god. The god should'be contemplated as of a
yellow colour in all acts of incantations practised for the death*
or for the paralyzation of the faculties of one’s adversary,
white in charms, .black in the acts of creating dissensions,
and of a rainbow-colour in all acts of stupefication. The man,
who practises the rites of ablution, meditation, worship, and
Homa, becomes invincible in battle, is always victorious,
and becomes possessed of a resplendent complexion. A
prepared betel, or a paste of Ushira charmed with the
above Mantra, should be given to a person with a hand
consecrated with the same, whereby he would be charmed at
its very touch (15 — 18).


-:o:-

CHAP1ER CCCII.


Oaid THE God OP Fire : — The principal Mantra sacred
to the lord of heaven, consists of the Vijas known as the
Vak, Karma, etc., and ends with the one known as the Huta.
The Mantra should bo repeated a hundred thousand times,
whereby the intellect of the repeater is sure to be expanded.
The Hrid Mantra sacred to the god Indra, consists of Vijas,
known as the Atri, Agni, Varna, Akshi and Vindu. The
god should be contemplated as possessed of a yellow com-
plexion, and wielding a thunderbolt and a lotus flower in
his hands. Ten thousand libations of clarified butte?, con-
taining seeds of sesamum, should be poured on the sacred


1134


AGNI FURANAM.


fire in honour of the god, and his image should be bathed
with the Panchagavya, whereby a king, dispossessed of his
kingdom, would recover its lost possession, or a man not
blest with any children, would be the founder of a happy
family. The Sakti Mantra, consisting of Dosha, Agni, and
Danda Vijas, should be repeated on the eighth and the
fourteenth day of a lunar month, with a view to secure the
salvation of one’s own soul. The goddess should be contem-
plated as wielding a discus, a noose, and a mace in her
three hands, the fourth being imagined as held in the at-
titude of giving encouragement, or saying benediction. The
worship should be concluded with a rite of Homa, in course
of which ten thousand libations of clarified butter, should
be poured on the sacrificial fire, whereby the votary would
be rewarded with a poetic genius and the birth of an
heir (i — 6).

"Om, Hrim, Om Obeisance to the god of desire who is
good to all sentient creatures, and who charms the hearts of
all, and is effulgent as the living fire. Bring, O Bring the
hearts of all under my control, Om.”

Having duly repeated the above said Mantra, a man
would acquire ascendency over the things and inmates of the
whole universe.

“ Om, Hrim, 0 thou Chamunda, burn and burn, cook and
cook such and such a person, and make his mind subservient
to that of my own, Tha, Tha.”

The above Mantra sacred to the goddess Chamunda,
should be deemed as the best of charms. A wife, should
wash her Vagina with the expressed juice of the drugs known
as the Triphala, whereby she would be able to win her hus-
band’s affections for good. Similarly a wife should apply over
her private parts, a paste composed of Ashvagandha, barley,
turmeric, camphor, Pippali, the eight sorts ;*>f grain known
as the Ashtadbanya, Vrihati, and twenty black pepper,
who would thereby retail! the affections of her husband


tONt RltAMtM.


if #5

to the last da y of her life. A paste competed of p ow d e r ed
Kathira roots and honey, should be deemed as possessed oi
the same virtue, and should be used by a woman in the
way mentioned in the preceding line. A liniment composed
of camphor, Magadhi, honey and the expressed juice of
the Kapitthaka, should be used both by the husband and
the wife with a view to increase their loving and affectionate
regard for each other. A liniment composed of sugar at 4
the expreseed juice of Kadamva, and applied along the
passage of child birth by a woman, would make her a doted
favourite with her husband. A compound, consisting of
powdered Sahadevi, Mahalakshmi, Putrajiva, and Kritanjali
should be strewn over the head of a person for the same
end (7 — is).

A prastha measure of the decoction of Triphala and
sandal wood, and two kudava weights of Bhringa, Hem rasa
and Dosha, and an equal weight of honey, Chunchaka,
and turmeric, should be boiled with clarified butter and dried
in the shade. The powder thus prepared, should be deemed
as the best of all love, mixtures. By eating every day a
quantity of Vidari, Ucchata and Masha, with sugar and
thickened milk, a man would feel strong enough to visit
a hundred women in a single night.

A woman, eager to be the mother of a child, should take
every day, a quantity of thickened milk saturated with powder-
ed Gulma, Masha, sesamum, and Vrihi grass, and the ex-
pressed juice of the roots of Vaishnavi, Shri, Bamboo, Darbha
and Ashvattha. A similar result would be obtained by using
the expressed juice of the roots of Durva and Ashvagandha,
taken through the medium of thickened milk. A potion
consisting of thickened milk and clarified butter, and treated
with the essence of Kounti, Lakshmi, Shipha, Dhatri, Vajra,
Lodhra, and the tender shoots of a Vata tree, should be
used by a woman during her menses, whereby she would
conceive and give birth to a male child. Similarly a quantity


1126


ACN1 PWUNAII


of thickened milk, treated with the expressed juice of Bael
roots and of the tender shoots of a Vata tree, should be
taken by a woman each day, until she would be in the family
way. In the alternative, she should use as snuff, or take a
quantity of the expressed juice of the Devi and the tender
shoots of a Vata tree, or a quantity of thickened milk boiled
and prepared with the expressed juice of the lotus roots
and the tender shoots of an Ashvattha The same effect
would be produced by a compound, consisting of ordinary
cow’s milk boiled and prepared with the fruits and branches
of a cotton plant (Karpasha), or by the expressed juice of the
flowers of an Apamarga plant administered through the
the vehicle of the milk of a she buffalo (13 — 19).

A woman, in the imminent danger of a miscarriage of the
womb, should be treated with a potion consisting of the es-
sence of Utpala, Puspaksha, Lodhra, sandal- wood, and Shariva,
administered with ordinary sugar and the washings of rice.
A paste composed of Laja, Jasthi, Sita, Draksha, Shiva,
honey, and clarified butter, should be applied constantly on
her tongue, simultaneously with the preceding remedy, until
symptoms of decided improvement would set in. A plaster
composed of pasted Arudhashak, Langali, Kakamachi and
Shipha, or of any one of these drugs, and applied over the
region of womb of a pregnant woman suffering from the
labours of child-birth, would ensure a safe and speedy deli-
very. The expressed juice of a red or a white Java flower
should be held as a very efficacious remedy for a case of
leucorrhoea, either with a red or a white discharge. A composi-
tion consisting of the expressed juice of Keshara, Vrihati-
roots, Gopi, Yasthi, Trinam, and Utpalam, taken with oil and
goat’s milk, should be deemed as a very good restorer of
hair. The same medicine should be used in a case of
decay or falling off of the hair, where it would act as an
elixir, and give fresh vigour to their growth. Oil prepared
with the essence of Dbatri, Bhringa, Jasthi, Anjana fruits


ACNI PORANNM. (It;

'tnd afrAriaki m&asui'e of thickened milk.Woold marvellously
kelp. Wife growth of hairs and eye-lashes (so-^-ad).

“ Oift Obeisance to the three-eyed ' deity. Preserve aad
preserve, grant and grant |>eaee to the herds of cattle in this
Village, subdue and subdue, sever and sever, disperse had
disperse the epidemic diseases that breakout among the
‘horded cattle. Hrum Put to the god, who wields n trident
Wnd n discus, and lives surrounded by the bovine species.

May the mighty bell-eared manifestation of Shiva (Ghae-
takama), who is the leader of a Mighty beetj and- who is
« hero and as such successfully combats with, and destroys
the epidemic diseases that does havoc- among the hernod
cattle, preserve me. - The above two cattle-pre»ervh»g
Mantras, as well as the two present couplets, should be made
use of in the rite of Nyasa, practised for the welfare of the
bovine species in general (27 — 28).

CHAPTER CCCIII.


d aid the God Fire: — The vitaf spark of a person
Would be extinguished, when the moon would be at his, or
her natal aster ism, and when the sun would remain at the
seventh sign from that of his or her nativity. The person,
whose throat and Kps simultaneously move at the time of
respiration, or whose tongue has become black, and the
nose has assumed a bent shape, cannot expect to live more
than a week.

Such a man, should devoutly worship the god Narayana,
who can alone rescue him from the peril of death. The
Mantra, which is held sacred to the god, and which consists
of 'eight lettfcfcfe, runs As '“Ota, Obeisance to Narayana. - The


UNI rUKANAM.


11)1

rite of Karanganyasa, should be practised as follows:-*
“ Obeisance to Kruddhplka situated at the tips of my two
thumbs. Obeisance to Maholka situated at the ends of my
two index fingers. Obeisance to Virolka situated at the
tuft of hair on my crown [mV] . Obeisance to Atyulka
situated at the tips of my ring fingers, and lastly obeisance
to Sahasrolka, situated at the tips of my little fingers." Then
the votary should again practise the rite of Sadanganyasa
with the component letters of the Mantra, which should
be imagined es written in fire inside the phalanges of the
different fingers of his hands, as follows : — “ Obeisance to the
region of my heart permeated with the essence of the Oni-
Obeisance to the region of my head saturated with the
essence of the Vija, Nam. Obeisance to the tuft of hair
on my crown effulgent with the energy of the Vija, Manv
Obeisance to the energy of the Vija, Nam which shields my
body as a coat of mail. Obeisance to the three eyes, whic h
burn with the essence of the Vija, Ram. Obeisance to my
pyschic weapon which is made of the essence - of the Vi ja
Yam." These letters should be imagined as located in the
corresponding parts of the body of the imaged divinity
excepting the two hands, and as respectively possessed of
crimson, golden, dusky and green colours, three being of
the white hue (i — 8).

The letters, imagined as located in the region of the he Jit.
should be worshipped with flowers and perfumes. Then
the votary should imagine the accompanying celestial prin-
ciples of the deity, such as virtue and vice, etc., as located in
the members of his body, as well as in the cushion spread or*
for the diety. Then he should make himself fully permeated
with the different principles of the universe, such as fhe
water, the light, the ether, the intelligence, etc. represented
by the Vijas, such as Vam, etc., and thenworshiy the god-
dess .of energy invoked on the peripheries of the three circles
which form the exterior boundaries of the cushion, and whic'->


AGN! PURANAM.


1 1 29

should be imagined, as made of the essence of the sun and
the moon respectively, and of the principles of the sex, non-
action, beatitude, rage, etc., as follows : — Om, obeisance to
Vimala. Om, obeisance to Utkarshini. Om, obeisance to
the principle of pure knowledge. Om, obeisance to the
principle of action, and Om, obeisance to the principle of
Yoga, etc. (9— *12).

Then having worshipped the Yogapitha, described above,
he should invoke the presence of the deity in the psychic
lotus-cushion located in his heart, and offer to him, in succes-
sion, the five essential articles of worship, such as the water,
etc., for washing his feet, the Argha offering, the Achamaniyas,
a piece of saffron*tinted cloth, and ornaments. The prin-
cipal (Mula) Mantra, should be once repeated before offering
each of the abovesaid articles, and the four different manU
festations 6f the god, such as Vasudeva, etc., should be wor-
shipped at the four cardinal petals of the lotus-shaped
diagram, while the divinities, such as the goddess of wealth,
the goddess of learning, the goddess of love, and the goddess
of peace, should be worshipped at its angular points. Then
the weapons and pjrnaments of the god, such as the conch-
shell, the discus, the mace, the lotus flower, the club,
the bow, Sharanga, and the garland of wood-flowers, should
be worshipped in succession. The celestial Garuda,
should be worshipped outside the Mandala, the god Vish-
vaksena in front of the image, while the god Somesha, as
well as the regents of the different quarters of the sky, such
as Indra, etc*, should bfe worshipped outside the covering
of the cushion. By worshipping the god Vishnu ift the way
above indicated, a man is sure to attain all wished«for
objects in his life (13—16).


CHAPTER CCCIV.


Da id THE God of Fire The Mantra, sacred to the
the god Shiva, consists of five letters in the original, and
runs as, " Obeisance to Shiva,” and which is sure to confer
the god's own bliss on the votary. The man, who worships
any of the manifestations of the god, such as Taraka, etc., is
sure to be merged in the Supreme Brahma. The votary
should contemplate the Supreme Brahma, who is the perfect
knowledge, and the highest intelligence, as identical with the
divine seif of the mighty Shiva. Bramha and the other
gods are but the different manifestations of Shiva. The five
letters of the Shiva Mantra, have given birth to the five
forms of the original cosmic matter. The senses proper, and
the five proper sensibtes have emanated from the essence
of those five mystic letters. The five vital winds, the fire
senses of cognition, as well as the five senses of action, are
but the reflection of those five letters. These letters, as
well as the Mantra consisting of eight letters, should be
deemed as the prototypes of the supreme Brahma ( i — 4).

The place of initiation should be washed with a composi-
tion of the five substances, that are prepared out of the
milk of a cow, and consecrated with th* god's own Mantra.
Then having taken all the essential articles of worship to the
place, the preceptor should practise the ritefs of Murtinyasa
and Anganyasa, and scatter handsful of consecrated rice all
over the spot. Subsequent to that, he should cook the sacri-
ficial porridge, and divide it into three equal parts. The
first part should be dedicated to the god, with the second
he should perform the Homa ceremony, while the third
should be reserved for him and his disciple. Then having
rinsed his mouth with water in the orthodox fashion, and
evoked the different phases of beatitude in the body of hie


hem nnuiuii.


1131

dn^ple, Ae preceptor should make over to him, a twig of Ae
Kshira tree, to brush his teeth with. Then having cleansed
his teeA and washed his mouth, he should throw down Ae
twigs on the floor of the sacrificial shed. Then the precep-
tor should tie up the tuft of hair on the crown of his disciple,
and exert a psychic preservative influence on him. Then
the disciple, should lie down on the kusha mattress,
spread on the sacrificial platform, with the preceptor. Then
at dwan, the preceptor should inform him of the omens he
had dreamt in the previous night. Then the Mandala
laid out in Ae form known as the Sarvatobhadra-Mandalam,
should be worshipped, for the realisation of all objects
( 5 — •”).

Then having practised the rite of ablution with clay, and
consecrated the body with the Shiva-Mantra, the disciple
should convert bis hand into what is technically known as
Ae Shivatirtha, and bathe by repeating the Aghamarshana
(sin-absolving) Mantras. After that, he should commence the
site of worship, and sit in th^ posture known as the Padma-
sanam, by repeating the principal (Vija) Mantra. The rites
of Puraka and Kumbhaka, should be practised with repeti-
tions of the same Mantra, and he should merge his whole
personality in the soul-light that pervades the upper region of
Ins brain, to the extent of twelve fingers. Then having purified
his own physical hpdy, already burnt down with Ae essence
of Ae Agni-Mantra, he should bathe his innerself with Ae
flow of ambrosia that would result from a practice of Ae
abovesaid Pranayama.

. Then having evoked his true divine self within his body,
Ae preceptor should practise the rite of Anganyasa with
Ae component letters of the Vija-Mantra, which are possess-
ed of black, white, golden, red, and yellow colours respec-
tively. Then having performed the rites of Murtinyasa and
PiAanyasa as before, be should practise the rite of Nyasa
in honour of Ae goddesses of energy presiding over Ae


AGNI PURANAU.


iiM

long, short, short, long, short, long, ? long). The Aietre
Vipula should be scanned as follows : — The first quarter con*
sisting of eighteen syllabic instants, such as -(long, long,
short, short, long, long, long, short, short, long, long). The
second quarter consisting of twelve syllabic instants, such as
(long, short, short, short, short, long, long, long), the third
quarter consisting Of fourteen syllabic instants such as (long,
short, short, short, long, short, long, long, long.) The fourth
quarter consisting of thirteen syllabic instants, such as
(long, long, long, short, long,- short, short, long). The metre
Chapala consists of the following syllabic instants. First
quarter of is. S. I.* (short, short, long, short, long short,
long, long). Second quarter of 18 S. 1 . (short, long, short,
long, long, short, long, short, long, long, long. Third quar*
ter of is S. I. (long, lotfg, short, long, short, long, long)
and the fourth quarter of 15. S. I. (short, long, short,
long, long, short long, long, long). The Mukha-Chapala
consists of the following S. I. First quarter of 12 S. I.
(long, short, short, short, long, short, long, long). Second •
quarter of 18 S. I. (short, long, short, long, long, short,
long, short, long, long, long), the third quarter of 12 S. I.
(long, short, short, short, short, long, long, long). Fourth
quarter of 15. S. I. (long, short, short, long, long, short,
short, short, short, short, long). In the metre Cbaplaiya,
the, .first half of the second quarter consists of syllabic
incidents peculiar to the Jaghana-Chapala. A comb inati on
of these two classes of metres, gives rise to what is called
the Maha-Chapala. The metre Arya-Giti consists of the
following syllabic incidents. First quarter of 13 S. I. (Long,
long, long, short, short, short, short, long). Second quar.
ter, of 20 S. I. (short, long, short, long, long, short, long,
short, long, short, short, short, long, long). The third
quarter of ta S. I. (long, long, long, long, long, long), the


Stands for syllabic instants.


Agni puranam.


IMS


fourth quarter of eighteen S. I. (long, long, long, long,
short, long, short, short, short, long, Abort, long) (4— u).

In the metre Vaitalydm (sometimes treated as a Vritti) it
is necessary that the syllabic incidents in the even quarter,
should not be all composed Of short syllables, or' long sylla-
bles, and that the even syllabic ihsuuits in each quarter
(the and, 4th and 6th) should not be formed conjointly with
the third, fifth and seventh. In the case of an Oupachban-
dasika, the rule is same as in the preceding instance, except
that at the termination of each quarter, there should be a
Ra-Gana and a Ya-Gana instead of a Ra-Gana, and a La and
a Ga only. The quarters of a Patalika end With Bha, Ga
and Ga, Ganas. The metres known as the Charu-Hasini,
and Apdrantika, fall to the! class of Ayuk. The metre called
the Matrasamana consists Of four quarters, each of six-
teen syllabic instants. The metre Vanavasika is but a
modification of the preceding one, in which the ninth and
the twelfth moments are formed by short syllables, and the
fifteenth and the sixteenth by long ones, the rest being
optional. Similarly the, same metre is called the Chitra,
if the fifth, eighth, and ninth, are formed by short syllables,
and the fifteenth and the sixteenth by long ones.

In the Upa-Chitra, the fifth, the eighth, the ninth, and
the tenth are short, and the fifteenth and the sixteenth are
long, and if the fifth, eighth and twelfth are short, and the
fifteenth and the sixteenth are long, and the rest indefinite,
the metre is called the Vishloka. Sometimes two or more
of these varieties combine to form a new metre (Padakulaka)
which does not obey any other restriction save that each
quarter would contain sixteen syllables (12— 18).


CHAPTER CCCXXm


&AID THE Fire GOD: — Now I shall deal with the three
sorts of Vrittas (Metres regulated by the number and position
of syllables in each quarter) such as f the Sama-Vritta, the
Ardha-Sama-Vritta, and the Vishama-Vritta. In the Sama-
Vrittas, the Padas or quarters are all similar. In the Ardha-
Sama-Vrittas the alternate quarters are similar, while in the
Vishama-Vrittas the quarters are all dis-similar.

The metre Pramani consists of four Ga and La, and the
same syllabic instants arranged in an inverse order, would
give rise to the Vitanakam. The metre Vaktram consists of
eight syllables in each quarter, like the metre Anustupa, which
should be scanned as follows — First quarter (long, long, long.,,
long, shprt, long, long, long). The second quarter is identical
with the first in respect of syllabic arrangement. The third
quarter should be scanned as long, short, long, long, short,
long, long, long, and the fourth quarter as four longs then
one short, followed by three long syllables. The metre
Pathyavalctra which is but a modification of the preceding
one, consists of four quarters of eight syllables each. The
first quarter being composed of one long and one short
syllable, followed by one long and two short, succeeded by
two long and one short syllables. The second quarter should
be scanned as (iong 9 long, short, short, shof*; long, short,
long). The third quarter (three long, one short, three long).
Fourth quarterns three long, two short, one long, one short,
one long (1—3).

The syllabic arrangements in the quarters of a Chapala
are as follows : — First quarter (short, short, long, short, long,
long, long), second quarter (short, long, short, long, long,
short, long, short, long, long, long). The third quarter (long,


AGN! PURANAKf.


1 %Vf

long, short 9 long, short, long, long). Fourth quarter (short,
long, short, long, long, short, long, long, long). Similarly a
verse of the metre Vipula, should be scanned as follows: —
First quarter dong, long, short, short, long, long, long, short,
short, long, long). Second quarter dong, short, short, short,
short, long, long, long.) Third quarter (long, short, short,
short, long, short, long, long, long). Fourth quarter (long,
long, long, short, long, short, short, long). The metres
Apida and Pratyapida follow the same rule as the Vaktram,
except that the former ends with two Las and the latter
\vit,h two Ga-Ganas. The metres Manjari, Amriladhara, etc.,
are formed by inversion of syllabic arrangements in the
first quarter of the preceding one (4 — 7).

Now I shall deal with the syllabic arrangements in the
quarters of an Udgata, which are as follows : — First quarter
of twelve syllables, (short, short, long, short, long, short, short,
short, long, short). The second quarter of twelve syllables
(short, short, short, short, short, long, short, long shorty
long). The third quarter of fifteen syllables (long, five shorts
long, two shorts, long). The fourth quarter of fifteen sylla-
bles (two shorts, long, short, long, three short, long, short,
long). Similarly the following syllabic arrangements should be
observed in composing a verse of the metre Sourabhakam
First quarter of ten syllables (two short. long, short, long,
three short, long, short). — Second quarter of ten syllables
(five short, long, short, long). Third quarter of ten sylla-
bles (long, short, long, three shorts, long two shorts,
long), fourth quarter of thirteen syllables (two short,
long, short, long, three short, long short long short,
long). The metre Lalitam consists of four quarters ob-
serving the following rules : — First quarter of ten syllables
(two short, long, three short, long, shorts Second quarter
of ten syllables (five short, long, short, long, short, long,
short). Third quarter of twelve syllable's (eight short,
long, two short, long), and the fourth quarter of tliiitcen


AGNI PURANAH.


1*2 8

syllables (two short, long, short, long, three short, long
short, long). The syllables constituting the quarters of 4
verse of -the metre Pracbupitam, are represented by the
symbols Ma, Sa, Sa,, Ja, Bha, Ga, Ga, Sa, Na, Ja, Ra, Ga,
Na, Na, Sa, ffa, Na, Na/ ja, Ja. The metre Vardbamanam,
called the pore Virat (Shnddha Virat) in the Vedic prosody,
consists of Na, Na, Sa, Na, Na Sa, Ta, Ja and Ra (§ — jo).


CHAPTER CCCXXXII|.


Oaid THE Fire god : — Now I shall deal with the metre
known as the Ardha-Sama-Vrittam (half equal metres). The
metre Upa-Chitra consists of syllables represented by the
Ganas Sa, Sa, Sa, La, Ga, in its odd quarter, and by the
Ganas Bha, Bha, Bha, Ga, Ga, in its even. Similarly the
odd and even quarters of a verse of the metre Druta-
madhya, respectively consists of syllables represented by the
Ganas (symbols) Bha, Bha, Bha, Ga, Ga and Na, ja, Ja, and
Ya. The odd quarter of the Vegavati consists of syllables
symbolised by Sa, Sa, Sa, and Ga, while the even quarters
consist of Bha, Bha, Bha, and Ga. Similarly the odd and
even quarters of the Bhadra Virat respectively consist of
syllables represented by Ta, Ja, Ra, Ga, and tyla, Sa, Ja, Ga,
and Ga. The Ketumati consists of Sa, Ja, Sa, and Ga, in
its odd quarter, and Bha, Ra, Na, Ga, and Ga, in the even.
Similarly the Akshyaniki consists of Ta, Ta, Ja, Ga, Ga, in
its odd quarter, and Ja, Ta, Ja, Ga, and Ga in its even
( * — 3 >-

Similarly the metre Harina-Vallabha respectively consists
in its odd and even quarters, of syllables represented by Sa,
Sa, Sa, La, and Ga, and of Na, Bha, Bha, and Ra. The


AGNI PURANAM,


1 229


metre Apara-Vaktra (also called Vaitaliya) consist? in its odd
quarters of syllables symbolised by Na, Na, Ra, La, and Ga,
and in its even quarter by Ganas, represented by Na, Ja, Ja»
and Ra. The metre Pushpitagara, consists in its odd quarter,
of syllables represented by the Ganas Na, Na, Ra, and Ya t
and in its even quarter of the Ganas Na, Ja, Ja, Ra, and Ga.
The Pushpitagra is also called the Oqpachhandasika, which,
is the same as the Vaitalya with a long syllable attached^
to the end of each quarter. The metre Shiklia consists qf
Ra and Ja in its odd quarter and of Ja, Ra, Ja, Ra, and Ga,
in the even. Twenty-eight different sorts of half-equal metre?
are known, of which the even quarters end with La and
Ga, and thirty, there are of phg$e, whose even quarters end
simply with the La, Ganas. l^etres observing rules con r
trary to those above-mentioned, are called the Khanjas, and
and now I shall deal with those ip which the Padas or.
quarters are all similar (4—6).

CHAPTER CCCXXXIV.


i^aid THE Fire God : — Yati (Ccesura) is the pause that
may be made in reciting a quarter or verse. The metre
Tanu-Madhya (Metre? described in the present chapter,
are all Sama-Vrittas or metres of equal quarters), con-
sists of the Ganas called the Ta and Ya. The metre
Kumara-Lalita consists of Ja, Sa, and Ga. The metre
Chitrapada consists of Bha, Bha, a n 4 Ga, and Ga, the
Vidynumala of Ma, Ma, Ga, and Ga, the Manavaka-Kridita-
kam of Bha, Ta, La, Ga, and the Halamukhi of Na, Na, Sa.
The metre Bhujanga-Shishu-Suta consists of syallables re*
presented by (the G^nas NafNa, and Ma, the Hansarutam,


I*3» AGN! PUR A NAM.

of Ma, Na, and Ga, whereas each quarter of the metre
known as the pure Virat (Suddha- Virad-Vrittam) consists of
Ma, Sa, Sa, Ja, and Ga (1—3).

The metre Panava consists of M&, Na, Ya, and Ga, the
Mayura-Sarini of Ja, Ja, and Ga, Ga, the Matta of Ma, Bha,
Sa, and Ga, and the Upasthita of Ta, Ja, Ja, and Ga. The
metre Rukmavati (also called the Champakamala) consists of
Bha, Ma, Sa, Ga, the Indra-Vajra of Ta, Ta, Ja, Ga and Ga,
while the Upajatis begin with Ja, Ta, Ja, Ga and Ga. The
Dodhaka consists of Bha, Bha, Bha, Ga and Ga, while the
Shalini is composed of syllables represented by Ma, Ta, Ta, '
Ga and Ga. The Vatormi is composed of Ma, Bha, Ta,
Ga and Ga, the Caesura being at the fourth and the seventh
syllable; The Bhramara-Valasita consists of Ma, Bha,. Na,
La, Ga. The Rathoddhata consists of Na, Na, Ra, La, and
Ga, the Caesura being at the seventh or the fourth. The
Svagata consists of Ra, Na, Bha, Ga and Ga, and the Vritta
of Na, Na, Sa, Ga and Ga. The Sheyni consists of Ra,
Ja, Ra, La, and Ga, and the Bhadrika of Na, Na, Ra, La,
and Ga (4 — 8).

The metre Vansanstha which belongs to the genus Jagati,
consists, of Ja, Ta, Ja, Ra, the Indravansha of Ja, Ja, Ja, Ra.
The Totakam consists of four Sas, while the Druta-Vilamvita
is composed of Na, Bha, Bha, Ja, Ra. The Shriputa con.
lists of Na, Na, Ma, Ya, the Jaloddhatagoti of Ja, Sa, and
and Ja, Sa, and the Rasartava of Na, Na, Na, Ma, Ra.
The Kusuma-Vichitra consists of Na, Ya, Na, Ya, while the
Chanchalakshika is composed of Na,.Na, and Ra,< Ra. The
metre Bhujanga-Prayata consists of four Yas, while , the
Sragvini is composed of four Ras. The Pramitakshara con.
lists of Sa, Ja, and Sa, Sa, while the Kantotpida is com-
posed of Bha, Ma, and Sa, Ma. The Vaishvadevi consists
of Ma, Ma, Ya, Ya, as 'well as the Panchashva and the Nava.
Malini, while the Pratipadam consists of Na, Ya, Ya, Bha,
and Ya- ( 9 — *3)*


AGftl PVKAHAM.


Now I shall deal with the metres Which belong to the
genus Ati-Jagati. The Praharshini consists of Ma, Na, Ja*
Ra and Ga, the Caesura being at the third and the tenth
syllable. The Ruchira consists of^ Ja, Bha, Sa, Ja, Ga, thei
pause being at the fourth and the ninth syllable. The
Matta-Mayuram consists of Ma, Ta, Ya, Sa, Ga, the Caesura
being at the fourth and the ninth syllable. The Gouri con-
sists of Na, Na, Na, Sa, and Ga* the Asamiradha of Ma, Ta#
Na, Sa, Ga, Ga, the Caesura being at the fifth, and the ninth '
syllable.

The metres which belong to the Genus Shakvari are
Aparajita consisting of Na, Na, Ra, Sa, La, Ga, the pause
being at the seventh syllable* The next metre of the group
is Praharna- Kalita which consists of Na, Na, Bha, Na, La,
Ga, the pause being also at the same syllable as in the *
preceding one. The Vasantatilaka which is also known as
the Sinhonnata or the Uddharsini of the sages, consists of /
Ja, Bha, Ja, Ja, Ga, Ga, the pause being at the eighth and
the sixth syllables. The Chandra-Vartma consists of Ra,
Na, Na, Na, (Bha, Sa), while the Mani-Guna-Nikara, consists
of fourteen short syllables with a long one attached thereto,
the Caesura being at the eighteenth and the seventh syllable.
The Malini consists of Na, Na, Ma, Ya, Ya, the pause being
at the eighth and the seventh syllables. The metre Rishva
Gaja-Vilasitam Consists of Bha, Ra, Na, Na, Na, and Ga,
the Caesura being at the seventh syllable. The Shikharini
consists of Ya, Ma, Sa, Na, Bha, La, and Ga, the pause being
at the sixth and the eleventh syallabies. The Prithvi consists
of Ja, Sa, Ja, Sa, Ya, La, Ga, the Caesura being at the ’
eighth and. the ninth syllable, as formerly narrated by the
worthy Pingala (14— 19).

The metre Vansha-Patra-Patitaro, consists of Bha, Ra, Na f
Bha, Na, La, Ga, the Caesura being at the seventh and the '
tenth syllable, while, the Harini is composed of syllabhc*
represented by Na, Sa, Ma, Ra, Sa, JLa t and Ga, the pause


AGNI PUItANAM.


iJ3*

being at tbe sixth, fourth and the seventh syllable. The
metre Kusuma-Lata-Villitd consists of Mai, Ta, Na, Ya, Ya,
Ya, the Caesura being at the fifth, sixth and the seventh
syllable, while the Shardula-Vikriditam, is composed of Ma,
Sa, Ja, Sa, Ta, Ta, and Ga, the metrical pause, being at the
twelfth and the seventh syllable (20 — 22).

The metre Suvadana Which belongs to the genus Kriti
(twenty syllables) consists of Ma, Ra, Bha, Na, Ya, Bha, La,
and Ga, the Cssura being at the seventh, seventh and the
sixth syllable. The metre Sragdhara (of the genus Prakriti
of twenty-one Syllables), is composed of Ma, Ra, Bha, Na,
Ya, Ya, Ya, the metrical pause being at the seventh, Seventh
and the seventh syllable, while tbe metre Madraka is com-
posed of Bha, Ra, Na, Ra, Na, Ra, Na, Ga, the Caesura
being at the tenth and the twelfth syllable. The metre
Ashva-Lalitam is composed of Na, ja, Bha, Ja, Bha, Ja, Bha,
La, and Ga, the metrical pause being at the eleventh syllable.
The metre Matta-Krida is composed of Ma, Ma, Ta, Na,
Na, Na, Na,' La, and Ga, the metre being at the eighth and
the fourteenth syllable. The metre Vrittam (of the class
Kriti) consists of twenty syllables arranged in the order
of long and short (Ga, and La), the Cxsura being at the
seventh and the fourteenth syallable. The metre Tanvt
consists of Bha, Ta, Na, Sa, Bha, Bha, Na, and Ya, the
Caesura being at the fifth, seventh and the twelfth syallable,
The metre Krounchapada is composed of Bha, Ma, Sa, Bha,
Na, Na, Na, Na, and Ga the Caesura being at the fifth, tenth,
eighteenth and tbe twenty-fifth syllable. The metre Bhu-
janga-Vijrimbhitam consists of Ma, Ma, Ta, Na, Na, Na,
Ra, Sa, La, and Ga, the metrical pause at the eighth, nine-
teenth, and the twenty-sixth syllable (23 — 27).

The metres of the class Dandaka consists of twenty-
seven syllables, the most common examples of the group
being the metre known as the Chanda-Vristi-Prapatah, each
quarter of which _is composed of two Na-Ganas followed by


Atttti PuftANAii.


**33

Ri-g&tiai or Ya-ganas, or all the feet niay be Sa-gattas. The
metre Arnava consists of thirty-three syllables, the Vyala of
of thirty-six, the jimuta of thirty-nitte* and the Prachitaka
of twenty*seven syllables (s8 — aq).


CHAPTER CCCXXXV.


£>aid Tile Goo of Fire Metres which do not belong
to any of the groups described in the preceding/ Chapter are
known as the Gathas, in which each quarter of the stanza
differs in the number of syllables* The quarters in a verse
of such a metre may number other than four. The stanzas
may belong to the class, Ardha-Samavritta, or Vishama-
Vritta according to the option of the versifier. The quarter
may be composed of all long vowels. As for the Prastara
(tabular representation of the long and short vowels of a
metre with all possible varieties), the first or the preceding
r quarter may consist of all Ga Ganas, followed thereafter by.
the La Ganas. In a Ardha-Sama-Gatha, the odd quarters
should consist of long syllables, or in a metre of nineteen
syllables of the class, the order might be inverted, the
quarters being made to commence with the La Ganas. For
other sorts of metre of this class, the reader is referred to ;
what is laid down under Udgatha, Sourabhakam, Lalitam,
etc. (1—4).


CHAPTER CCCXXXVI.


lDaid the Fire Go 6 : — Now I shall deal with the science
of proper pronunciation of words, and the laws of euphony.
The letters (both in the Sanskrit and Prakrita alphabet)
number sixty-three, or sixty-four (according to others) in all.
There are twenty-one vowel letters, while the Sparsha varnas
number twenty-five in all, the Yadis eight, and the Yamas
four. The Anusvaras and the Visargas like the x SE Jg
are pronounced in conjunction with other letters, and hence
they are called the dependent ones (Parashraya). The Likara
is called a protracted or prolated vowel, and requires a slight
touch or action of the tongue (Dushprishta •

The soul', through the medium of intelligence, collects the
concepts, and charges the mind with the desire of speaking.
The mind affects the internal (bodily) fire, and the fire in its
turn, sets the wind in motion inside the body. The wind
coursing through the region of the heart, gives rise to the
sound known as the Mandram, in which is recited the metre
Gayatri at the tinte of the morning ablution ceremony.
The same wind, coursing through the larynx, gives rise to
the sound Madhyamam, in which is recited the metre Trais
tubha, at the time of the noon tide ceremony. The wind
ranging upward, and coming out from the region of the
head, gives rise to the sound Tara, in which the Jagata
metres are recited during the rite of Turiya Savanam, in the
evening. The wind, thus carried upward, strikes against the
brain, and is emanates through the cavity of the mouth,
and gives rise to sounds represented by the letters of the
alphabet, which in their turn are grouped under five different
heads, according to their articulation, period of utterance,
place of articulation, ^efforts made in pronouncing them, and
their order of articulation ( i— 8).


AGNI PUR AN AM.


1235

The sounds are divided into three classes, such as the
Udatta (Highly accentuted), Anudatta (the grave accent), and
the Svarita (the intermediate). The vowel letters are dis-
tinguished as the short, the long, and the protracted.

The parts of the body from which the sounds emanate
are eight in number, such as the breast, the throat, the head,
the 'tip of the tongue, the teeth, the nose, the lips, and the
palate. The Ushma Varnas (Sha, Sha, Sa, and Ha), have
eight different sorts of pronunciation, such as the Obliava,
the Vivritta (hiatus), and the Jihvamuliya (proceeding from
the root of the tongue (9 — 12).

A man incurs sin by speaking anything without observing
the rules of pronunciation, or by articulating letters from
their wrong places of articulation, or by speaking anything
in a high tone, or in a chewing manner. Contrarily, the man,
who articulates in his speech, the letters from their proper
places, and speaks them out with cadence and harmony,
or the man, in whose speech the letters follow each other in
mellifluous succession as in the Vedas, is sure to be glorified
in heaven. Letters of harsh and grating sound, should be
avoided in a speech which should be uttered in a distinct
voice, carefully avoiding the nasal, as well as a large concourse
of broken or labial sounds. Only such letters as are not in-
distinct, or not any way hampered in articulation, should be
made use of in a speech, and such a speaker is sure to be
glorified in heaven (13 — e6).

The sounds A, and Tha, originate from the throat. The
letters A, Bha, U, Ya, and Sha, are called the palatials. The
letters Va, U, Pa, are labials. The letters Re, Ra, Ta, Tha,
Da, Dha, and Na, and Sha, are called the cerebral or lingual,
while the letters Li, Ta, Tha, Da, Dha, Na, La, Sa, are
called the dental. The letters, Ka, Kha, Ga, Gha, and Unga,
are called the guttarals. The letter Va, is called the labio-
dental. The letters A, Ea, and A ; are called the guttaro-


1*36 ACINI PURANAM.

palatial. The letters O and Ou are called the guttaro-Iabial
(Kaothostha) (17—21),


CHAPTER CCCXXXVU.


Said the Fire God : — Now I shall deal with the figures
of speech and the rules of Rhetoric in general, which are used
to embellish the subject-matter of a poem or a drama The
science rof Rhetoric admits oi three main divisions such as
the Dhvani (Division of poetry in which the implied or sug-
gested sense of a passage is more striking than the expressed
sense, or where the expressed sense is n'ade subordinate to
the suggested sense), Vakyam or a sentence (complete utter-
ance of a thought) and the Fadam (a complete or inflected
word). All these three divisions of Rhetoric are usually found
in works of positive science or narration, pre-eminence is
given to terms (Shavdas) in works of science (Shastras), to
the culminating point of narration in books of story, while in
books of poetry, the Avidha* (denotation or literal meaning
of a word) draws the greatest attention, and hence poetry is
differentiated from the two preceding sorts of works ( 1 — 2).

Human life is a rare prerogative, and doubly difficult it
is for a man to acquire knowledge in this life, A taste for
poetry is infinitely a rarer gift in human existence, and
rarer than this, than that, than all, is the gift of poetical
genius. Erudition is rare in this life, and true knowledge is
still more a rarer commodity. It is not given to every man
to master any or every science, even with proper seal and
diligence.

* Avidha conveys to the understanding the meaning which belongs
to the word by common consent, or convention.


AGWI PURANAM.


« 3 ?


The first Varnas are the most important, the second divi-
sion ranks next in respect of importance, while the third
(the inflected forms of verbs and nouns) forms the life, as it
were, of poetry.

Poetry is a sentimental statement, expressed in rhetorical
terms, which should number only as many as are ncessary
for giving the fullest utterance to an idea, and in the shortest
possible way without any faulty rhetoric. Poetry has its
origin in matters, Vedic, or in known facts and incidents of
actual life. A poem dealing with a subject not of worldly
celebrity, nor sanctified by the Vedas, is understood only from
the import of the words used in its composition. Sansktit
is the language which should be put in the mouth of a god
any way helping the theme of a poem, while the three classes
of Prakrita, should be the vehicle of thought in the case of
human characters. Poetry is generally divided into three
classes, as it is written in prose, or verse, or which consists
of a combination of both verse and prose (3 — 8).

Prose is bereft of metrical feet or quarters, and consists
of a collocation of complete statements, usually divided in
its turn into three subheads, such as the Clmrnan, the
Utkalika, and the Vritta Sandhi. In the class of composition
known as the Churnakam, all words possessing harsh sounds,
as well as long grammatical compounds, are avoided. A
Churnakam, abounding in long grammatical compounds, is
^called the Utkalika, while a prosaic composition, loosejy and
remotely observing the rules of a metrical stanza (Vriftam',
is called the Vritta-SandhL

The prose Kavyaro is divided into five sub-divisions, such
as the Akshyayika, the Katha, the Khan da Katha, the Pari-
katha, and the Kathanika. A work, in order to be included
under the sub-head Akshyayika, must deal with an eulogistic
narration of the ancestry of the hero* as well as with abduc-
dons or elopements of maidens, wav. deceit, teverses, etc.,—
the style and execution belonging to the class Dipta, and in


1*38 AGNI PURANAM.

which the story, divided into chapters, or Ucchases, should be
put into the mouth of the hero, or that of a • different person.
The class of work, which usually begins with a short sketch
in verse of the family history of the .author, and in which
another episode is introduced to enliven the monotony of
the original story, and which does not admit of a division
into chapters, or in which, on the contrary, the whole thread
of narrative i.s brought to a finale at the end of the book,
is called the Katha. A Katha interspersed with the Chatus-
padis, becomes a Khan dha- Katha. A minister of state, a
merchant, or a Brahmana usually becomes the hero of these
two sorts of compositions (Khanda and Pari-Katha). The
Rasa or the sentiments which mark these sorts of composi-
tions, are the Karuna (pathetic), and the four sorts of Vipra-
lambhas. The story, in the first of these, two sorts of works
are not brought to a finale at the end, but the incident is
left incomplete. The class, called the Parikatha, is nothing
but a combination of the peculiarities of the classes Katha
and Akshyaika (9 — 19).

The class of composition known as the Kathanika opens
with a manifestation of the Bhayanaka Rasa (the horrible).
The story deepens in pathos in the middle, and ends with a
tinge of the supernatural (Adbhuta). The import of the play
i$ Suklipta, and not Udatta (20).

O Kashyapa, a verse consists of four feet or quarters, and
is called the Vrittam or the Jati, according as it is regu-
lated by nuniber and position of its syllables, or syllabic in-
cidents. According to the divisions of Pingala, a verse is
called eirher the Sama Vrittam (of equal feet), Ardha Sam a
Vrittam (Half equul metres), or the Vishama- Vrittam (Dis-
similar metre). A knowledge of . their rules and composi-
tion, Serves him as a boat to cross the ocean of poetry, who
seeks tp visit its opposite shore.

Kavyam or poetiy admits of a five-fold division, such as
ths Maha- Kavyam (Epic), the Kalpa, the Paryoga-Vandha


AGNI PURANAM.


12.39


the Visheshakam, the Kulakam, the Muktakam, and the
Kosha.

A Maha-Kavyam is usually divided into cantos (Sargas).
It is to be written in pure Sanskrit, and in no other dialect.
Some historical incidents, or some characters of celebrity
should form the theme of a Maha-Kavyam, or some super-
natur.il events might be as well immortalised in its pages.
Such political incidents, as councils of state, sending of
embassies, as well as the marching out of soldiers in battle
array, should be incidentally touched upon, and care should
be taken not to encumber its majesty with a dull monotomy
of detailed descriptions. The metres, to be used in it^
composition, are the Shakkari, the Ati-Jagati, the Ati-
Shakkari, the Trishtubha, and the Pushpitagra. The cantos
shall deal with different incidents of the same story, and
they should not be too short or succinct. Over and above
tfiese, it shall contain glowing and graphic descriptions of
cities, oceans, mountains, seasons, the sun, the moon, and
the hermitage. The forest, the garden, the sporting with
maidens in water, the drinking assembly, the festivities of
love, the conduct of wanton girls, the emissaries of love,
should be all described and inserted therein. All sentiments
with their accessories, should be touched upon, and all style*
of composition and rhetoric should enter into the making o
an epic poem. An epic posesses the above-said character
i sties, and the composer of a Maha-Kavyam, is called s
Uaha-Kavi (24 — 32).

One predominent sentiment, should run through the entire
length of the poem, even in the midst of such a diversity o;
topics discussed therein. It is the sentiment that forms the
oul of an epic, the different topics only serve to bring it out
to a greater prominence. The poet, in the character of his
nero, unrolls the whole universe, as it were, with its four-folo
knowledge, to the vision of his readers. In the Kalpa class
•it poetry the same metre is invariably used throughout the


AGNI PUR A NAM.


K240

length of the poem, the style, generally adopted, being known
as the Koushiki. Kalpakam consists of three couplets, the
Visheshakam of four, and the Kulakam of many. The Mukta*
kam consists of single stanzas, all severally composed) and
with a special view to the excellence of each. The type of
verse known as the Kosha, is composed of fine pearls of
poesy, as it were, but not linked to each other by any special
spontaneity of idea. The rediculous pieces are generally the
best specimens of this sort of composition. The type Pra-
karanam, in which the cantos or divisions are composed with
different metres and sentiments, is divided into two groups,
viM., the audible poem, and the Dramatic play (33 — 38).


-:o:-


CHAPTER CCCXXXV1II.


j^aId THE Fire God : — The different varieties of Drama
are called the Nataka, the Prakaranam, the Dima, the ll.a- '
Mriga, the Samavakara, the Prahasanam, the Vyoga, the
Bhana, the Vithi, the Auka, the Trotaka, the Natika, the
Sattakam, the Shilpakam, the Kama, the Lapa, the Dur-
mallika, the Prasthanam, the Bhanika, the Bhani, the Gosthi,
the Hallishakam, the Natya, the Rasa, the Ullasaka, the
Ullapakam, and the Prenkhanam. These varieties number
twenty- seven in all. A drama is possessed of two sorts of
motion, as the Samanya, (the general; and the Visbesha
(the special) (1—4).

The general motion embraces the whole plot of the
Drama, whle the special movements are restricted to its
special parts. After the prologue having been finished, the
unity of time and place, the sentiment with their accesories


AGNI PURANAM.


1241


Rhd the Anubhavas (feelings', the play, or rendering of the
Work, the divisions and acts, should be included in the general
movement of the Drama. The special motion (Visheslia-gati)
should be confined only to its specific parts.

The Drama fulfills the threefold interests of the human
race. A prologue opens with one of the thirty-two sorts
of introductoriesj such as the Nandimukhas* etc. It is the duty
of the manager of the play to open the prologue either with
a salutation, unto the deities, or with a panegyric of the
elders and* preceptors, or with a benediction to kings,
Brahmanas, and the cows (universe) (5—9).

Now I shall deal with the procedure to be adopted in the
Rupakas. The^prologue in such compositions opens with an
applause of the ancestry, the family, and the previous achieve-
ments of the poet, together with a narration of the object of
the play, and the occasion which gives birth to it.

The form of prologue in which the wife of the manager
(Nati), the clown (Vidushaka), or the attendants, converse
with the manager on a present topic, so as to skillfully usher
in the main story of the play, is called the Amukham, which
is also called by the learned as the Prastavana, which in its
turn, is classed under three sub-heads, such as the Pravrit-
takam, the Kathoddhata, and the Prayogatishaya, rising up,
as it were, from the seed-parts of the Drama (10 — 13).

The form of prologue, in Which the manager remarks on
the character of the contemporaneous time, and which leads
to the entrance of a character of the plot, is known as the
Pravrittakam. The variety, in which the word, or the im-
port of the statement of the manager, serves as a clue to a
character of the plot to enter, who makes his appearance
by taking up that clue, and speaking in answer to that
Word or statement, is called the Kathoddhata. The form
in which the mana'ger dwells on the plot of the drama, and
then enters his characters, is called the Proyogatishya.

156


ag nt mjRArMM,


242

Historical incidents from tlie body (Shari fa of M ft af f
which is divided into two classes, according as the story is
taken from a book of scripture (Shastram), or invented by the
imagination of the poet (Srishtain). .The five Artha Prakritis
of a Drama, are the Vijam (the seed;, Vindtf (central point),
the Pataka (episode), the Prakari (interlude),? the Karyam
(denouement). Tire five Chestas (motion) of a /pfay, are
the Prarambha, (beginning) the Prajatna, the Prapti, the
Sadbhava, the Phalaprapti, and the Phafa-Vbga. The
five links or joints (Sandhis) of a Drama, are the ltfukham,
(Prologue), the Prati-Mukham (Epilogue), the Garblias (inter-
lude during an act), the Vlmarsha (a change in the successful
progress of a dramatic plot, or that of a love 6tt>ry, through
a curse, etc.), and the Nivarhanam (catastrophe of the last
stage) (14 — 2t).

An idea which is partially hinted at ii\ the out- set, and
which vegetates and spreads in Varied directions with the
progress of the story, and is crowned with its natural success
in the end, is called the Vijam, and the drama in which the
Vijam is originated by means of a variety of ideas and
sentiments, and follows the main incidents of the plot, is
called the Mukbam. The Drama, in which the mystery is
not solved after the curiosity of the reader has once been
fairly started, is not worth the name. An untimely
disclosure of what should not be disclosed a t the time,
the act of making too patent what should be the moral
of the Drama, and the delineation of an absurdity, are tfi$
natural blemishes of a Dramatic composition. A book
abounding in such faults, does not rank high in respect of
merit, like the mutilated person of a man though other-
wise beautiful (22 — 25).

Since no incident can be supposed to have taken place
without 4 taking into consideration the factors of place and
time, hence it is necessary, at the outset, to state explicitly the
time and place in wliijph the story of the Drama occur*. The


AGNI PURANAM.


1 J 43

Bee n e of Action shotild-be -always laid in )he continent of India,
( Bharat* Var aha), the time being any of the three ages, known
as Abb Satya, Dvapara, etc. The action of the Drama should
bi$ made to possess human interest, and to be replete with
the joy and sorrow, struggle and - suffering of the human
race. Glimpses of heavenly regions, or super-natural inci-
dents, may be introduced in the middle of a drama, without
taking away anything from its merit (26 — 27).


CHAPTER CCCXXXIX.


- Said THE Fire Goo : — The Supreme Brahma is indes-
tructible, eternal, knows no birth and is the lord of all. In
tlie books of Vedantas, He is represented as identical with
the eternal God, the original light, the absolute conscious-
ness. Infinite felicity is the natural exponent of his absolute
existence, which, however, partially dawns upon the soul or
the consciousness per se of man, and of which the latter
(Cliaitanyam) is but the effulgence or patent condition. The
sense df Ego in its turn, is but a modification of the latter
pure . consciousness, through which a 'sense of personality
(Egoism) pervades, and reigns supreme in the three worlds
(*— 3 ).

Out of egoism, has proceeded attachment, which becomes
stronger with the process of time, and is ultimately de-
generated into the sentiment of love, of- which the sexual
sentiments, as well as those of the ridiculous, etc., are but
the modifications, each characterised by its specific sort of
speech. The different human sentimeuts have originated
from the different attributes of the supreme soul, such as
.the Satva, etc. The sentiment of love has its root in the sH-


AGN! PURANAM.


124P4

embracing love (Rajas) of the divine soul, the sentiment
known a9 the Roudra (sentiment of furiousness) has emanated
from bis infinite irascibleness, the sentiment of valour (Vira)
has its counterpart in his perfect type of heroism, while his in-
finite aversion has fathered the human sentiment; of Vibhatsam
(the nuaseous or repulsive sentiment). The ridiculous has
its root in the sentiment of love, the pathetic has emanated
from the terrible (Rudra), the wonderful has come out of
the sentiment of valour (Vira), while from the horrid (Bhima)
the horrible (Bhavanaka) has come into being. The sentiments
are called the ,'^nngara (sexual), the Hasya (ridiculous), the
Karuna (pathetic), the Roudra (terrible), the Vira (heroic),
the Bhayanaka (norrib)e), the Adbhuta (wonderful), and the
Shanta (the pious or the peaceful) (4 — 9).

Poetry, like the goddess of wealth (Lakshmi\ is detected
only by manifestation. The poet is the God Prajapati amidst
this vast and shoreless ocean of poetry. Like Prajapati (the
lord or creator of beirigs) he alters the aspect of the universe
(throws new light upon the visible nature), any way he
likes to do the same. A new universe of love is born
afresh in his poem, when the poet deigns to sing of that
delicious sentiment, while a poet who' has renounced the
world, or sits loose upon its concerns, necessarily fails to
infuse any life into his song.

•There is no sentiment (Rasa) without an idea (Bhava), and
thereis.no idea which is entirely divested of a sentiment.
There is a reciprocity of suggestion (indication) between
a Rasa and a Bhava. The eight permanent classes of ideas
are known as the Rati (love), etc., with their modifications,
such as the Stambhas, etc. Rati may be defined as the
pleasurable feeling, which a person invariably experiences
in the contact or contemplation of a thing, in which his mind
naturally takes delight. The laughing idea is that which
affects the mind with the sensation that precedes its physi-
cal exponent of laughter. Shoka or grief may be defined


ACNI PURANAM.


**451

as the overwhelmed state of the mind brought about by any
loss. Anger (Krodba) is the sharp and awakened state of the
mind y as it were, due to the hostility of a person, kindly done :
unto. Utshaha is the unusual energy, put forth by the mind )
for the realisation of, * a definite object The overwhelmed |
state of the mind due to one’s coming across a strange or ;
dreadful object, is called Fear (Bhaya). Yugupsa is the \
repulsive feeling, which affects the mind in the presence of
abominable objects or incidents, while Vishmaya (wonder)
is a mental surprise produced by the sightgpr a supernatural
phenomenon (io — 16).

The eight states of the mind, such as the Stambha, etc.,
respectively emanate from temperaments, such as the Sattva,
the Tamas, and the Rajas. Stambha is a paralysed state of ;
mind brought about by excessive fear or love, and in which
all mental efforts are suspended or brought to a standstill.
Perspiration of the body is usually attributed to such physi-
cal or mental conditions, as fatigue, over-powering love, etc.,
in which the inner man is greatly agitated. Pulaka (shiver
or appearance of goose flesh on the skin) is brought about by
excess of joy, etc., and is usually accompanied by such
internal organic conditions as the heaving of the heart
(Uchchhasa), etc. Broken speech is attributed to a sense of
sudden or excessive joy, while a hoarse voice is attributed
to fear. A general tremor of the body, so as to require a
prop or support, is exhibited in some violent agitation of
the heart, while palor or loss of complexion is the insepa-
rable companion of a settled grief (Vishada). Tears are the
signs of either joy or sorrow, and swoon, stupor, or a sudden
collapse of the senses, are the natural effects of an assault
or an affront. Despair or a sense of physical langour, or
lassitude, are the outcomes of some deep-seated mental
agony (17—21).

Suspense (Utpreksha) is a condition of the mind brought
about by the sense of some impending danger, while envy


AGNI PUR A NAM.


1246

is called Matsara in the parlance of Rhetoric. Mada
(inebriety) is the condition of mind produced by wine or
any other intoxicating drug, while Shrama (fatigue) is an
exhausted state of both mind and body, incidental to over-
work f or extreme mental* cogitation. On the contrary, an
apathetic state of the mind, in which a person becomes averse
to love or lovemaking, and to all sorts of works, is called
the Alasyam (ennui). Dainyam (misery) is a mental state
in which the mind loses its perspecuity as the result of a
constant brooding over some harrowing thought, while Moha
(bewilderment) is the state in which a person is at a loss
to determine his proper course of conduct. Smriti (memory)
signifies the reflection of a thing, felt or experienced before,
on the mind of a person. Mati (contemplation) consists in
brooding over: in mind, on a fond subject, while Vridha
(coyness) means a natural recoil or falling off the mind from
a person or thing, due to love or precocious attachment.
Chapalata (fickleness) means a gay or thoughtless conduct,
while Harsha (joy) signifies a pleasurable state of the mind.
A Vega (motion) means a mental phenomenon brought about
by a disturbance of the equilibrium of the mind, while Shaya
consists in an anguished state of that entity. Jadata (stupi-
dity) consists in one’s inability to determine the proper line
of conduct, on a particular occasion, while Dhriti (self-
command) implies the self-control of a person under an
affluent fortune, or at the realisation of a longed for object.
Pride signifies an exaggerated opinion of one’s own ex-
cellence, and an unduly poor estimate of other men’s virtues
(23—28).

Melancholy signifies a state of the mind brought about by
the toss of one’s cherished hopes, or dear relations, due to
either of one of the three classes of catastrophes, such as the
D>iva (acts of god), etc., while Outsukyam (curiosity) means a
"fickle or mercurial state of the mind, eager to know about an
unknown or bidden truth. Apasmara (swoon) means a stupe-


AON! FURANAM.


**47

fled state of out** senses* Pear is a mental state btotfght
about by a sense of an impending physical or moral injury,
while Vipsa signifies a wondered state of the mind* Amarsha
(malice) is cherished anger, while Pravodha (waking) means
a return of the state of self*consciousnes9. A secret, badly
kept and revealed by gestures, etc., is called the Avahityam,
while Ugrata (hot temperednes9) is inferred from the use
of high words and abusive language* Uha (inference) is
the cogitation of the mind in deducing a general principle
from particular incidents, or it is simply an attempt at arguing
out a probability from an antecedent proposition. Distemper
means a diseased condition either of the body or mind, while
incoherent talks which mark a case of insanity, or love-sick-
ness, are called the Pralapa (ravings), Shama (pacification),
on the contrary, means a pacified state of the mind brought
about by a knowledge of the immutable truth (29—33).

The poets should link the ideas with their appropriate senti-
ments in their works. The causes which give rise to a Rasa,
(sentiment) such as the Rati (sexual sentiment), etc., are called
the Vibhavas, which in their turn are grouped under two
sub-heads, such as the Alamvanam (/i 7 «, that which serves as
the proper support of a sentiment — hence a person or thing
with reference to which a sentiment naturally arises), and
Uddipakam (the exciter of a sentiment). The male characters
who are the natural abodes of these Vibhavas, are divided
into four different classes, such as the Dhirodatta (noble
and brave), DUiroddhata (brave and haughty), Dhiro-Lalita
(noble and sweet), and Dhira-Prashanta (noble and self-con-
trolled), while a Nayaka may be either Anukula, Dakshina,
Shatha, or Dhrishta. The three varieties of a Vidushaka,
are Pilha-mardha, Vita, etc., who act as friends and helpers
in the armours of the hero, and generally talk with him on
pleasant and playful topics. The eight varieties of para-
sites are Pitha-Mardha, Samvalaka, Shreemana, Vitha,
Vidushaka-and Vaihasika (34 — 39).


AGN1 PURANAM.


1248

The eight varieties of heroine in a Dramatic or poetical
composition, are the Sakiyas (one's wedded wife), Parakiya
(other man’s wife), Punarbhu (a re-married widow), Samanyas
etc., alt teeming as it were, with the different varieties
of the Uddipanam. These classes of heroines respectively
give rise to these sorts of Vibhavas, both Alamvanam and
Uddipanam.

The sixty-four Kalavidyas are divided into two main
divisions, such as the Song and the Dramatic action. The
Vibhavas, such as the Alamvanam and Uddipanam, are ex-
hibited by such means as stratagem, remembrance, memory
or longing, etc. Acts both physical and mental always mark
and accompany the feelings (Anubhavas) of the characters.
The incidents in which mental acts predominate, are called
the . Mano-Vyapyara-Bhuistam.

The temperaments which mark the acts of a male
character in a Drama, are divided into eight divisions such
as the Shobba, Vilash, Madhurjyamr (sweetness), Sthairjyam
(fortitude), Gambhirjyam (gravity), Lalitam (aestheticness),
Oudarjyam (catholicity of sentiment), and.Tejas (strengtlrof ’
character).

Shourjyam (nobleness) implies a contempt for the ignoble,
and an emulation of nobleness. Shova signifies a strong
predilection for abstract virtues, which adorns the life of a
man, as ornamental decorations add to the beauty of a house.
The Vibhavas which are usually commended in the female
characters of a Drama, are, sentiment, Hava (coquettish
gestures calculated to excite amorous sensations), Hela
(amorous sport or dalliance), Shova (religiousness), Kanti
(beauty), Dipti (lustre), Madliurjyam (sweetness), Shourjyam
(nobleness of disposition), including contempt for the
ignoble), Pragalvam (wit), Udarata (catholicity of sentimeht).
Sthairjyam (patience), Gambhirata (depth of character).
Bhava (sentiment), mixed with a sort of merry lasciviousness,
is called the Hava. The speech of a dramatic character


AQNI PURANAM.


1249


admits of twelve sub-divisions, such as the argumentative
discoursei etc. Alapa (conversation) signifies the act of in-
viting another to a friendly talk, while Pralapa means a
long and varied discourse. Vilapa signifies a doleful speech,
whereas Anutapa means a repetition or tautology. Santapa
means a sort of speech in the shape of questions and replies,
whereas Apalapa means concealment of a fact in the course
of a conversion, or evasion in general (40—50).

Sandesha means the sending of a'news concerning oneself
to another, while Nirdesha signifies the fact of carrying the
same into effect. Tattva means anxious enquiries regarding
the welbeing of a person, or the progress of an event, while
Atidesha means transfer or assignment. Apadesha means a
statement adducing an Upadesha, which in its turn signifies
anything spoken to another for the instruction of the latter.
Vyapadesha means a pretext for eulogising the conduct of a
person, in terms which convey other sense than their literal
import. For a better understanding of these subjects of
Vakvidya (art of speech) the intelligent are referred to its
three main divisions, such as the Riti (style), the Vritti and
the Pravritti (51 — 53).


CHAPTER CCCXL.


&AID THE Fire God In respect of our knowledge of
the art of speech (Vak-Vidya), the style is to be considered
as of primary importance. There are four different styles of
literary composition, such as the Panchali, the Goudi, the
VaidArbhi, and the Lathaja. In the Panchali class, the sen-
tences are usually short, the language used being soft and
metaphorical, while the Goudi Is characterised by long gram-
matical compounds. The sentences are long and loosely strung
*57


1250


4GNI pur an am.


together, marked by an incompleteness in the statement
expressed. The Vaidharbhi class is marked by a little, or an
absolute absence of, metaphor, the language used being not
excessively soft, and the sentences run'on smoothly without
any stop or restraint Whatever. The Lathaja is marked
by terms explicit and unequivocal in their import (several
editions read, not excessively soft), while the sentences are
not spun out to an inordinate length, embellished with a
large series of metaphor ( 1—4).

The Vrittis which vary according to the action of the
plot, are four in number, such as the Bharati, the Arabhati,
the Koushiki, and the Satvati. The style Bharati, which was
first invented by Bharata, is characterised by a marked predo-
minence of the number of male characters in the story. The
female 'personages speak the Prakrita form of dialect, and the
greatest attention is paid to the words. The main divisions
of the Bharati style of composition, are the Vithi, the Praro-
ehana, and the Vithyangas. The Prahasanas always open
with a Vithi, while the regular Dramas (Natakas) are ushered
in by Prorochanas. The thirteen Vithyangas (the varieties
of Vithi) are called the Udghatakam, the Lapitam, the Asat-
pralapa, the Vak-Shreni, the Natika, the Vipana, the Vyahara,
the Strimatam, the Chhala, the Avaskanda, the Ganda, and
the Mridu. The Arabhati abounds in scenes of spells,
battles, and witty aphorisms (5—10).


■:o:‘


CHAPTER CCCXLt.


£>AM> the Goo. of Fire The different parts and mem-
bers of the body which an actor is required to call into play,
to give a greater verb to his feelings, are called the Lila, tbr


AGNI PURANAM.


I*5 f

Vilasba, the Vicchitti, the Vibhrama, the Kilakinjitam, the
Mottayitam, the Kuttamitam, the Vibvoka, the Lalitam, the
Vikritam, the Kriditam, and the Keli (1—3).

Lila means the simulation of the acts of a beloved person
out of a diseased memory, while exhibition of some special
favours, is called by the learned, as the Vilasam. A combi-
nation of weeping and laughter is called the Kilakinchitam,
while Vibvoka means a haughty indifference towards one’s
beloved. Lalitam means gracefulness of gait, or any languid
or amorous gesture, The head, ; the hands, the breast, the
sides, the waist, the feet are called the limbs, (Angas),
while the eye-brows, etc., are called the Pratyangas. The
postures and gestures of a dramatic performer, should be
as natural and graceful as possible, and any effort detected
in assuming them, takes away the merit of the performance.
Natural or erect posture of the head, etc., is not be the
general rule;in a play. On the contrary, the limbs should be
cast in a bent or slanting attitude, to suit the action to the
sentimenti The thirteen attitudes in which an actor might
cast his head, according to the exigency of his part, are
called the Akampitam (shaking), the Kampitam (moved), the
Dhutam, the Vidhutam, the Parivahitam, the Adhutam, the
Avadhutam, the Achitam, the Nikunchitam, the Paravrittam,
Utkshiptam, the Adhogatam (hung down) and the Lalitam
(graceful) (4—9).

The seven different postures of the eye-brows, are called
the' Patanam (hanging down), the Bhrukuti-mukbam (frown-
ing), t while the three others are called the Sthayi, Sanchari,
etc., after the name of the sentiments requiring their play.
Eyes which speak of anguish, are again divided into
thirty *mx sorts, while those discoursing love, are divided
into eight. The pupils in their turn, are divided into nine
classes, such as looking askance, or the rolling of eye-ball,
etc. The nose might as well be cast into six different atti-
tudes, while the act of respiration admits of nine different =


AGNI PURANAM.


l»5»

classifications. The lips nay be called into play In six
different ways, the chin in nine, while the face might wear
six different expressions, such as the Kalusham (melancholy),
etc., while the attitudes in which the neck might be possibly
held, number nine in all (10—12).

The arms either folded, or unfolded on the ground,
admit of being held in various attitudes. The possible
postures of the unfolded arms are called the Pataka, the
Tripataka, the Kartari-mukha, the Ardha-Chandra, the Ut-
Karala, the Shuka-tunda, the Musthi, the Shikhara, the
Kapithva, the Khetakamukha, the Suchyasya, the Padma-
Kosha, the Ahi-Shira (the serpents head), the Mriga-Shirsha-
ka (the deer’s head), the Kanmula, the Kala-Padma, the
Chatura, the Bhramara, the Hansasya (the swan’s mouth), the
the Sandansha, the Mukula, (the bud), the Urnanabha (the
spider), and the Tamra-Chuda (the cock). These attitudes
number twenty four in all.

The attitudes in which an actor may be called upon to
cast his joined or blended hands, are the Angali (the blended
palms), the Kapota (the pigeon), the Karkata (the crabpos-
ture), the Svastika (the cross), the Kataka, the Vardbamana,
the Apyasanga, the Nishada, the Dola, the Makara, the
Gajadanta (the elephent’s tusk), the Vahih-Stambha, etc.
The breast admits of being bent or held in five postures, such
as the hollow, etc., in connection with dancing. The belly
might be cast in three different postures, such as the Durati
Kshmam (extrememely slender), the Khanda (bent in two),
and the Purnam (full). In a dramatic performance sides may
be called into play in five different ways, the thighs in five,
and the legs in a variety of manners (13—20).


CHAPTER XL1I.


Oaid THE Goo OF Fire : — The play, or the rendering
of a dramatic composition- serves to bring to the front the
characters of the dramatis persons, as well as the lessons
of the Drama into full relief. The four factors which are in*
eluded in the performance of a part : are the (i) Sattva (mind
or temparament), (a) the Vale (speech), (3) the Anga (gestures
and postures), and (4) the Aharanam (intellect). The Sattva
or the mental element, includes the act of feeling one with
the character represented under, a particular circumstance and
evoking into mind such mental phenomena, as the Stambha
etc. Speech or Vak, signifies the . articulation and delivery
of the sayings of a particular role. The Angika, or the
bodily element in a play, consists of the postures and gestures
to be assumed by an actor in a particular character, while
the Aharanam, signifies a full moral or intellectual sympathy
with its feelings, and hence the fact of establishing a com-
plete identity with it (1 — a).

I shall now deal with the application or exhibition of
different sentiments, characterised by the personal traits of
each man. It is imposible to draw a line between the
workings of eachnof these .sentiments without the differentia-
ting element of personality. The sentiment of $hringara
(sextual sentiment) admits of a twofold division, such as the
Sambhoga (sextual union, 01 the union of a pair of lovers^
and the Vipralambha (sextual sentiment in separation). The
latter, in its turn, b divided into four subdivisions, *such as the
Purvanuraga (Incipient love, or the love that springs between
two persons before their actual meeting). Mana, (anger
excited by jealousy), Pravasa (separation, or residence of
the parties in difierent countries), and Karuna (grief or
sorrow). Conditions other than those included under the


AGN1 PURANAM.


**54

lour preceding subheads of the Vipralambha, are called the
Sambhoga, which invariably moves in the four abovesaid
grooves, and does not lapse into a fifth stage.

Rati means a consummation of the sexual instinct
arising in the minds of a*man and woman, which is attended
by all the ‘ physical -accessories of a patent emotion except
those of palour and swoon (j — 7).

The sentiment of love is enhanced by feelings of piety,
gain, sexual union, or salvation, according to the different
nature of the person or object which first gives rise to it.
The Shringara is grouped under two sub-heads, according to
the difference in speech and dress, used and assumed by a
particular actor.

Laughter is divided into six differen sorts, such as the
Smita, the Hasitam, the Vihastim, the Upahasitam, the
Apahasitam, and the Atihasitam. Smita means a soft and
gentle smile, in which the teeth of the person cannot be seen.
The Hasitam means a laugh exposing only the tips of the ■
teeth to view. Vihasitim means a laughter in which the eyes
join in union. Upahasitam means a loud lough at the ex-
pense of another, and with the object of lowering him down.
A loud laugh is simply called the Apahasitam, while Ahasti-
tarn means a laughter without any noise (8 — 1 1).

The sentiment, known as the Karuna (pathetic) 1 , admits
of being divided into three sub-heads, such as pathos due
to the invasion or extinction of one’s virtues, (a) pathos,
incidental to- the loss of one’s fortune, and (3) pathos of sex--
tual grief or sorrow. -One grief perpetuates another, and a
pathetic -sentiment makes it .fellow a more lingering guest.
Similarly the sentiment of Roudra (terrible) is divided into
three classes, according to the gestures, speech and garment,
used and assumed by an actor, which is expelled (Nivartaka)
by ffie sense of Anger, sorrow, shivering, and tremor. Three
distinct types of heroes are usually found in dramatic works,
such as the Dana-vira(Hero in charity), Dharma-vira (hero in)


AGN! PURANAM.


I2'55

piety or self-abnegation), and the Yuddha-Vira (hero in
battle), who always exhibit the sentiment of valour (vira) due
to an exuberance of moral, spiritual, or animal energy. A
sentiment of valour, or heroism gives rise to a similar senti-
ment in the onlookers. The sentiment of Bhayanaka (hor-
rible) usually gives rise to the sense of fear. The senti-
ment of Vibhatsam is divided into two sorts, such as the
Udvejana and the Kshovana. The Udvejana is exhibited by
leaps and jumps, while the Kshovana is manifested by blood.
The sentiment is generally ushered in by the sentiment of
Jugapsa, which always terminates with its characteristic phy-
sical symptoms (Sattvokanksha) (ia — 17).

I shall now deal with the figures of speech which serve
to embellish the body of a poem, (which are divided into
three classes;, either by a peculiar combination of words
(Shavdalankara), or by a peculiar mode of expressing the
sense (Arthaiankara), or by the combinded process of the two
former divisions. Those who can embellish a poem by means
of .peculiar combination of terms, and their peculiar deriva-
tions or etemology, are called Rhetorist. The nine methods
of decoration or rhetoric, are called the Chhaya, the Mudra,
the Ukti, the Yukti, the Gumpbana, the Vakovakyam, the
Anuprasa, the Chitram, the Dushkarraan.

Chhaya means an imitation (Anukriti) of an idea, not
explicitly stated, and is divided into four- classes, such as
the Lokechha, la, Arbhakokti, and Mattokti. A popular
statement is called the Lakokti, and is common to all, and
that which a Lakokti follows, is called the Chhaya by the
learned. Chheka signifies an insinuating speech, commonly
known in Rhetoric, as double Entendre, and the poets call
that Chhekokti Chhaya which reflects that sort of enten-
>dre. Similarly the speech of a person, not proficient in
grammer or idiom, is called the Arbhakokti, (lit : a child s
prattle), and any speech or statement attempting to imitate
that style of language, is called the Arbhakokti-Chhaya.


1336 ^AGNI PURANAM.

A staggering speech, full of low, vulgar, or inelegant toms,
is the characteristic of a drunken swine, (Mattolcrit, and
a speech 'framed in its imitation, is called the Mattokti-
Chhaya (18—25'*

The devise, Which agpordirig to the’desire of the poet,
dearly exhibits the peculiar traits of his genios, and hence
creates new joy in the mind of his readers, is called the
Mudra, the repository of the public plaudits. Hence the
peculiar style of speech or composition, known as the Ma-
drokti, is that which abounds in sense and reason (Upapatti),
and hence becomes endearing to the hearts of the wise, as
it invariably helps them in their regulation of life. Similarly
the six factors of Vidhi (Precept), Nishedha (Prohibition),
- Niyama (Rule), Aniayama (Irregularity), Vikalpa (Alterna-
tive), and Parishanka are also the different elements in the
general style of a literary composition (Ukti).

Reasoning or argument consists in establishing a cohe-
rent union or affinity between two apparently unconnected
or (disjointed propositions. The six essential factors of
Yukti (syllogism) are the terms (Padam), the Padartha
(subject), the Vakyam (statement) the Vakyartham (sense
or significance of a word), the Vishaya (Proposition), and the
Prapancha. Gumphana signifies the act of adjusting words
and their senses in a goodly way (concord), such as (1) ad-
justment according to the euphonistic similarity of words, (2)
adjustment according to logical or natural sequence of sense,
(3) or adjustment according to natural order of succession.
A dialogue is usually divided into two classes, according as
it is Riju (Plain), or Vakrokti (evasive or ambiguous oneX
A simple speech may eitheir be a Purva Prasbnika (the first
objection to an argument), or Prasbna-Purvika (a question
or an interrogatory). A Vakrokti on the other hand admits
of a two-fold division, as an ambiguity by gesture, or an
ambiguity by voice, or though intoxication (26— 33 ).


CHAPTER CCCXLlll,


2 )aio THE PiRB God Anuprasa or alfiterabon mtu a
successive, or repeated occurrence of the same letter (sound)
in a passage, and is divided into two classes, according as the
repetition is restricted to a single letter, or embraces too
many. The single lettered alliteration, in its turn, gives rise to
five distinct groups of the same figure, such as the Madhura,
the Lalita, the Proudha, the Bhadra and the Parasha (i— a).

The Mudhura class ends with Va and Dha coupled with
the Nakaras, and separated from each other by Ra and Na,
disjointed by short Vowels. The Varga-varnas (letters oe* <
longing to any of the five groups of consonants known as
the Vargas) should not be repeated in more than five ways.
The Lalita form abounds in the use of such letters, as Va,
and La. The Proudha form is marked by the occurrence of
letters belonging to the Pa, Na Vargas coupled with Repha
on their head, excepting the letters belonging to the Ta
group, and the fifth letters of each group.

The rest of the letters are alliterated in the form known
as the Bhadra. In the form known as the Purusha, the'
Uahma Varnas, coupled with the above letters, are repeated in
dose succession. All the vowel letters, excepting the Akara,
occur in large numbers in the present form of alliteration.
Likewise the Anusvaras and the Visargas, the letters, Sha,
Sa, and Sha, coupled with the Rephas, as well as the Akaras,
and the Hakaras separated from one other by the Antasthas,
largely mark the present figure (3—9).

The five Antashtha letters coupled with the Ushma-Varnas,
respectively mark the Karnati, the Kountali, the Kounkani,
the Vanavasika, the Dravani, and the Madhavi.

* 5 ®


AGNI PtRANAM.


1*58

The figure of speech, in which a large number of letters
is alliterated, so as to produce a similarity of sounds, but
diversity of meaning, is called the Yamakam, which i9
divided into two classes as the Avyapetam and the
Vyapetam. The former occurs, where the letters repeated,
follow one other in* close succession, and the latter is the
case when they are placed at a distance. Out of the corn-
bination of these wo varieties of Yamakam, four other
sorts have come into being, according to the occurrence
of the alliterated wards in the different places and quarters
of the composition. These in their turn, may again give
rise to a large concourse of Yamakams, of which the follow-
ing ten, known as the Padanta-Yamakam (Yamaka or alli-
teration occuring at the end of each quarter), Kanchiya-
Yamakam, Sansarga-Yamakam, the Vikranta-Yamakam, the
Padavi Yamakam, the Amreditam, the ChaturVyavasitam,
and the Mala- Yamakam are the most important, and are
largely found in general practice.

The learned hold that there are two ways of alliterating
the Padas, such as the Svatantra and Anyatantra Yamakam.
The former is the name of a particular kind of figure in which
words possessing the same sound, but differing in meaning,
are repeated. The Yamakam is divided into two classes,
such as the Vyapetam and the Avyapetam, according as the
recurring words follow one other in close succession, or
are kept considerably apart. The places in which they
usually occur, are the beginning, the middle, or the latter end
of the quarters of a metrical stanza. The unmixed-first part-
Yamakam (Avimishrita-Adhibhaga-Yamakam) admits of a
division into four groups, as the Yamakam which occurs In
the first, in the second, in the third, or in the fourth part of
a stanza. The Vim ishra- Yamakam, on the other hand, is
divided into the following sub-heads, according; as the words
of similar sound but of different import, occur in the begin-
ning, middle, and the end, or in the middle and the end, or in


AGNf PUB AN AM.


**59

the -middle and the beginning, or in the beginning and the end
of the quarters of a stanza. The first of the four preceding
sub-heads, is divided into three classes, according as the
Yamakam is found in the first and the second, or in the .first
and the third, or in the first and the ‘fourth term of the quar-
ters. Similarly the second class is divided into further sub-
divisions, according as the Yamakam affects the second and
the third, the second and the fourth, or the third and the
fourth term of the quarters of a stanza. Ten different classes
(sic) of Yamakam* are usually come across in literary com-
positions, such as the Padanta-Yamakam, the Kanchiya-
Yamakam, the Sansarga-Yamakam, the Vikranta-Yamakam,
etc., (to— 16).

Such words may recur, as blended into a single term, or
they may recur separately according to the option of the poet.
The blending is usually effected by means of the Samasas,
while the separation is effected by the absence of any such
compounding (17 — 18).

I shall now deal with the figure of speech, known as the
Alliteration, as far as space would admit of. Alliteration
of letters may occur in all sorts of verses, and generally
they tend to augment the effect of a sentiment expressed
therein.

Chitram (lit : a picture) signifies a peculiar artistic arrange-
ment of words in the shape of a lotus, sword, etc., in which
the letters situate at the petals occupying the cardinal points
of the compass, suck as the North, South, East and West,
will convey one meaning when read in the natural order of
rotation, and may signify quite a different meaning when read
in an inverse order etc. The letters or words written, in the
angular petals of the diagram, will be unequivocal in their
significance. The effect of such a composition is to stir up


* Several fthetorists held eleven, vid* Kavyadanha by Mahakavi,
Afiharyeya Dandin, Chapter III., Slobes 1 and a with gloss*


curiosity in the and of the hearer, and to affect it with a
■ewe of wonder and joy (19-41).

PraheGka (lit: a riddle or conundrum) is not a. figure of
speech in itself, but consists of an ingenious mode of asking
a question, and generally for the amusement of an assembly,
-—the answer itself, in many cases, lies hidden in the latter.
Prahefika is ■ divided into there classes (sixteen according
to Dandin, Vide Kavyadarsha, 96—1x4), according as a letter
is added to, or ommitted from, the intended answer ; or
the one in which a letter is both added and omitted. It is
either Sbavdi, (pertaining to the sound), or Arthi (related to
the sense).

The sixteen different kinds of the Prahelika, are the
Samagata, in which the meaning becomes obsdbre owing to
the close succession, or a long compounding of, the two adje-
cent terms of the riddle, (s) The Vanchana consists in using
a word of multifarious meaning in one of its less known signi-
ficance. The third (known as the Vyutkranta in the parlance
of the later day rhetoric) arises when the two closely con-
nected words in a conundrum, lie wide apart, and the mean-
ing becomes obscure from defective construction of the
sentences. (4) The Pramushita is a string of words, whose
meanings are hard to make out. (5) The Samana-Rupa
consists of words which can be interpreted in either of the
way. 6. The Parusha consists of a hidden meaning othei
than the general meaning of a word, and only twisted out ol
it, by a licensed stretch of a grammatical rule. (7) Th<
Sankbana arises out of an equivocal use of a numeral, or o!
a term signifying a numeral. (8) The Prakalpita consist!
in putting an interpretation upon the words of a conundrum
other than the apparent meaning; the rest being known as
the (9) The Namantarita, (10) The Nibhrita, (11) The
Samana-Shavda, (is) The Sanmudha, (13) The Pariharika.
(14) The Ekachhanna, (15) The Ubhaya-Chhanna, and (i6>
the Sankirna (21—30)


AGNJ KKANAM.


l4l

The Samasjt, though requiring much poetical ingenuity,
is somewhat stale and unintelligible, but is much appreciated
by the wits and huasourista, Samasya admits of a division into
three sub-classes, according as it is a Niyama, a Vidarhba, or
a Vandha. The Niyama varies according to the recurrence
of the numbers of vowels, and consonants in the foot of a
verse of the same kind, or according to their position in the
different quartos of the same. Thus it is divided into three
different classes, in addition to the forms in which the re-
curring sounds occur in the Prmtiloma or the Anuloma order
C3*~ 34)-

The first of the class of artistic metrical arrangements
which fall under the group of Duskara Yamakam, is Gomu-
trika, named after the fact of its resembling a jet of Gomutra
(cow’s urine). The peculiarity of the construction, is that each
alternate letter, as well- as the last three in the two halves of
the stanza, will be the same. The half portion of the four
quarters of the same metrical arrangement, read in the Anu-
loma order, would give rise to the Ardha-Bhrama, whereas the
same read both in the Anuloma and Pratiloma order, would
make a Sarvatobhadra. The other modifications of the afore-
said Gomutrika, are the Amvujam, th» Chakram, the Cha-
krayjakam, the Danda, and the Muraja.

m ff mf*i

«i * *i wt fw w * m w«i & ff m f*n

<IT 4T * HT * W * 1ft >1 ^ ft

in «! it m i * wi fti

(Kavyadarsha by Dan din, Chap. III. 1 8 .


AQNI PURANAM


1263


(Sarvato Bhadram).


m

m

*x

nr

— — 1

m


nr

m

w

XX

m

*rr

•

W[

u

nr

m

m

*T

TT

XX

*T


TTT

nr


TT

HT

m

XX

m

■

in

HT

m

TT

ITT

m

XX


in

m

*tt

■TT

XX

xx

*T

•TT

m

m

*T

SIT

m

<Err


*T

m

m

m


m

WT

*n

ITT

m


Ibid, 82 .

In framing an (1) Amvujam, a lotus of eight petals,
should be first drawn on the paper, in which the first
letters of the quarters, should be written in twos. Shlista
(double meaninged letters in couples), should be written in
the petals of the diagram, occupying the four cardinal points
The first exit should be by the eastern petal, while the en-
trance would be at the end of the Shloka. Then the entrance
and exist should be both made by the western petal. Then
the entrance would be by those counted from the south
eastern, by the north western petals of the diagram, while
the exit would be from the south western, by the north east-
denr ones,

msft uftnmrn: ! TOnrmrrmfon 1
wfwiwr, wt *!$. ** 3 nw »

K^vyt Prakflshft (Mamatha Bhatta) 7.


1*64


AGNI PURANAlf.


The artistic composition known as the (a) Khadga*
Vandha, is so called from the fact of its resembling a sword
(Khadga) in structure. The verse should be so composed
that the first letter of the opening quarter, would be iden*
tical with the last ones of .the three succeeding feet, as well
as with the first letters of the third and the fourth, and the
last of the first line would be the same with the finst of the
second quarter. The order of arrangement is as follows
First the diagram of a two quilloned sword should be drawn
on paper, and the region of its blade should be marked with
a leaf like figure, so as to have two curved spaces at the
sides for the letters of the verse. The first letter of the
first line, should be written at the central part of the upper
quillon.. Then the remaining letters of the first quarter,
should be written, either within the upper or the lower side*
space, left by the leaMike figure in the blade. Similarly, the
letters of the second quarter, should be written in the upper
or the lower space, as to have its first letter on the tip of
the blade, so that the first letter of the first quarter of the
verse, would form the last letter of the second toot so
written. Then the first half of the third foot, should be
written in the left upper quillon of the dilineated sword,
and the other half in the right, so that the letter written at
the central part of it, would form .the first and the third
letter of the third quarter. Then the first quarter of the
fourth foot, should be written in the part of the bilt between
the upper and the lower quillon, so that the letter written at
the central part of the upper quillon, would as well form its
first} letter. The two other quarters should be written in the
two lower quillons, and the last syllabic instance on the grip
of the sword.

qiW (Khadga Vandha).


AtjNi Putt An AM.


I265


mtitt 5mr*rt farat mffc* *Nj?rr \

m**nr, ^wprt, n

Kavya Prakasha (Mammatha Bhatta) IX Ullasha 69.

in the Muraja Vandha, the four quarters of the verse,
Should be Written one below the other. The letters should
be so arranged as to read identically, if read in the following
order:— The first letter of the first foot, the second letter of
the second, the third of the third, the fourth of the fourth, the
fifth of the fourth, the sixth of the third, the seventh of the
second and the eighth letter of the first foot, should be read
together. Then the first letter Of the second foot, the second
of the first, the third of the first, the fourth of the second, the
fifth of the second, the sixth of the first, the seventh of the
first, and the eighth letter of the second quarter, should be
read together. Then the first letter of the third quarter, the
second of the fourth, the third 6f the fourth* the fourth of the
third, the fifth of the third, the sixth of the fourth, the seventh
of the fourth and the eighth of the third, should be read
together, and lastly the order of reading would comprise the
first letter of the fourth foot, the second of t^e third, the third
of the second, the fourth of the first, the fifth of the first, the
sixth of the second, the seventh of the third, and the eighth of
the fourth quarter.

(MuRAjA Vandha;.


t

*

*

8

¥


x


*

.*

*BT

W


m

X

XX

*

t

8

*

1

8

X

X

IT

*

m

&

x

xn

X

XI

*

8

X


x

8

X

m

X

m

*

*

m

H

Xf

B'l

*

l

X

t

X

<

8


*

MT

n

1

xn

IT

m


Katya Ptakasha (Mammatha Bhatta), IX. 68 .


*59


AGNI PUR A NAM


iiflfi

The other forms of Cliitra-Varidna usually made use ol
by the poets and recognised by the Rhetorists, are the Vana
(arrow), the Vanasana (Bow), the Vyoma (the sky), the
Aludgara (club), the Shakti (Spear), the Ratha (Chariot), the
Naga (the elephant), the Pushkarni (the tank) and the Asi-
putrika, so-called from their structural resemblance to arrow,
boWj etc., respectively (35 — 63'.

-:o>

CHAPTER CCCXLIV.


i^aid THE Fire Qod : — Now I shall deal with the
figure of speech which is related to the sense, (Arthalankara,
as opposed to the sound, and without which the sweetest
and most melodious term's, Ore insipid, and fail to pleasure*
ably atffect the m'ind. Void of this OrtramOnt, the goddess of
speech (Sarasvati) is like a widowed virgin. Emotions of
feelings (Bhavas), as manifest itf a literary Work, resort to
one Of the eight natural expedients Which the human mind
takes recourse to, in conceiving an idea, and in giving ex-
pression to it, and which are known as the Sv&rtfpam (self)
the Sadrishyam (similes), the Utpteksha, the Atishaya (Hy
perbole), the VibhavSna, the Virodha (Antithesis or paradox)
the Hetu (reason or inference) and the Samam.

The figure Svabhavokti consists in artistically describing
the true condition of a tiling or iucident, and in bringing
to prominence those traits of a thing, which are not usual)*
observed by ordinary me'O. These traits may be eith<
natural (N)jam) to the thing described, , Or purely accident
or extraneous (Agantuka). The other four figures of speed
are the Sadrishyam, the Upama, the Rupaka, the Sahok
and the Arthantara-Njrftsa (1—5).


AGNI PURANAM.


1307

An Upama consists in detecting artistic 1 similarities in the
attributes of two objects of cq-extensive predication, so as to
establish an identity between the two. The simile is called the
Puma (cpmplete), w$en the identity between the attributes
of its two factprs is complete, and tb.e Lupta , where it is
partial or defective. Then it is either Shrouti, qr Arthi. A
simile is called Shrouti, when it becomes patent at the first
hearing, — Arthi, where it can be recognized only by carefully
examining the sense. Again the two preceding classes
are divided into three classes, as they consist qf Samasas,
Taddbits and Vakyas. Thus the different forms of the Puma
Upama number eighteen in all, while the Lupta admits of as
many as nineteen subdivisions (6 — 9).

In the case where the simile is detected both from the
recognition of similarity of attributes, or from the similarity
qf the objects themselves, the simile is called the Pharma-
Vastupoma. The case, in which the factors (objects) of a
simile, reciprocally reflect as it were, the virtues held by
them in common, and each of them stands as a simile for
the other, the figure is called the Parashparopama , while it
is called the Viparitopoma, where the natural order of liken-
ing (Prasiddhi) is reversed. Niyamopama consists in liken-
ing an object to a single particular object only, in exclusion
qf all other possible objects of similar attributes. Aniya-
mopoma consists in likening an object to a specified, and also
to an unspecified object. Similarly the figure is called the
Samuchchayopama, where the similitude is brought about by
the action, virtue, . and specific attributes of the Upam.ana.
The figure is said to be the Atishayopama in tb.e case,
where one object, through exaggeration of its virtues, is
likened to another situate in a different place or receptacle,
whereas hlalopoma consists in likening an object to a multi-
tude of others; possessing some traits in common with the
former (10— 14).

Yikriyopoma consists in likening an object to another


AGNI PURANAlf.


1269

of contrary effect. The Adbhutopama consists in assigning
a virtue or attribute to an ohject, which it does not naturally
possess, and in likening it to a thing possessed of such (the
modem rhetorists include it within Atishayopoma), Moho-
poma consists in first establishing an identity between the
Upatneya and the Upamana, and then mistaking (Moha) the
one for the other. The case in which the mind is at a loss to
make out the Upameya from the Upamana. owing to a per-
plexing similarity of their attributes, is said to be an instance
of the Sanshayopama.

The figure, in which the mind gets rid o| all doubt as to
the identity of the subject compared (Upameya) through
the excellence of its attributes, which the standard of com-
parison, as an inferior agent, does not possess, is called the
Nischayopoma. Similarly, the case in which a complete
identity is established between the Upameya and the
Upamana. by means, of terms, which denote attributes, co-
extensively predicative of bol. , should be deemed as an
instance of the Vakyarthopoma. The simile in which the
object of comparison excels in virtue the standard of com-
parison to which it is usually compared, and therefore
stands as its own similitude, is called the Asadharanopama
(Ananvaya according to the modern Rhetorists). The simile
where the object of comparison is applauded more than its.
usual standards of [comparison, by depreciating the attributes
of the latter, is called the Nindopama, whereas the case,,
where the excellence of the object of comparison, is increased
sjy extolling the attributes of the standards usually likenedj
io it in verse, should be considered as an instance of Pra*.
*hansopama (belauding sjmile) (15 — 21).

The figure, where from the similitude of attributes, the
nature of the standard of comparison is ascribed to its object,
is called the Rupakam, (Metaphor). Sahokti consists in-
artistically describing (by means of a single verb, and the
usmri interjections of companionship); the common action


AGNI PURANAM.


tafigt

of two difietent objects possessed of similar virtues or attri-
butes. The figure of speech, in which a general principle
or proposition is cited to support a particular instance, or
a particular instance to support a general one, is called the
Arthantara-nyasa. It is simply an inference from general
to particular, or from particular to general. Utpreksha
consists in supposing the standard of comparison (Upamana)
and its object (Upameya) as similar to each other in some
respects, and in indicating, either in an express or implied
way, a probability of their identity founded on such similar-
ity. The Atishaya (Hyperbole) consists in an exaggerated
description of the attributes of an object, as found in common
experience, which is of two kinds according as the descrip-
tion implies probability, or a prima facie absurdity. The
figure of speech, in which an effect is described as not taking
place even in the existence of an usual necessary cause,
is said to be the Vishesha. It is of three kinds according
as genus, attributes and the effects of a cause go otherwise.
Ccpitrarily, the figure of speech in which an effect is des-
cribed as taking place even in the absence of. its natural
cause, is called the Vibhabana (22 — 27).

An apparent incongruity, which is mere verbal, and can
be explained away by properly construing the passage, is
called the Virodha (Virodhabhasa according to modern
Rhetoric). It consists in representing objects as paradoxical
or antithetical to one other, though they are really not so
in common experience, of in representing things as being
together though they are otherwise in real nature. The
figure ol speech (regarded not so by some rhetorists) in
which a reason is stated for establishing a point under
discussion, is called the HetU. It is divided into two sub-
classes such as the Karaka (instrumental) and the Jnapaka
(Indicative). The former consists in representing the facts
which are the natural precursors of, and irresistibly lead to,
the proof of another fact wished to be established 01


f'aja AGNl PURANAM.

{demonstrated, while the latter represents the incidents which
follow on the wake of a particular one, and indicates it
accordingly. The indicative form is again divided into three
{classes inasmuch as it signifies the relation of cause and
effect, pp a natural relation, qr i$ brought about by the res T
frictive effect of any particular limiting rule. The form,
where the cause and the effect cannot be separated from
pach other, as iq the case of a flooding river and tfie flppd
(hfadipura) is called the ^vinqbbava (28—32).


•:o:«


CHAPTER CCCXLV.


Oaid the Gqd of Fire:— As a necklace and the
youthful breast of a maiden equally contribute to her heauty,
so the Shavdalanlfara (Rhetoric as related to. the artistic?
arrangement qf words in a sentence), and the Arthalankara
equally add to the charms qf a literary composition. The
six main divisions qf Rhetoric which relates to. the sound
and sense (Shavdartha) are, the Prashasti (excellence ot
eminence) a Kanti (Attic beauty), 3 Sankhepa (brevity), 4
Quchityam (propriety), 5 Yavatartbata (use o.f no more
Words thaq are necessary to convey the meaning) and h
Abhivakti (explicitness).

Prashasti signifies the virtne of pleasurably affecting the
minds qf others, and is usually grouped under two subheads,
such as the Premokti, and the Stu.ti. The two preceding
forms are used, in turn, in extolling the virtu.es of an object
or person, whereas Kanti consists* in writing in a style,
pleasant to the public and the art-critics alike, and which
qffers no difficulty or ambiguity,, as regards the sense awf
construction (of a passage) (2 — 4).


Agni puranAm.


ii 7*

Ouchityaiti (propriety) consists in opening a work in at
vigorous but unexcited way. Sankhepa consists in expres-
sing maximum sense with the minimum number of words.
Yavatartha consists in using only as many words as are
hecessary to convey the meaning, Without even a word
too much dr too less. Abhivykkti signifies explicitness or
directness in 4 literary composition!. This gxplicithess in
conveying the meaning is due to either of the three powers'
bf a word, which are known as Vachikatva, Lakshana, and
Vyanjakatva. In other words, a word is either a Vachaka,
A Lakshanika, or a Vyanjaka. A word generally assumes
tlie meaning of another, inordet to help the general con-
veyance of meaning (Akshepai. The meaning is either
Miikhya (principal), Oupacharikd (secondary), or Paribhasikd
(technical). Abhidha (denotation or the literal power or sense
Of a word) conveys to the understanding, the meaning which'
belongs to the word by common convention,' While Sankbta
signifies that which primarily made it a word at alt. Lakshana
denotes the power of a Word to signify the probable and po-
pular (Prasiddha) meaning, in exclusion of its primary accept-
ance, which is absurd or improbable under the circumstance. 4

Lakshana is divided into two classes, Such as the Suddha,
and the Gouna. The former is again grouped under two sub-
beads i such as the Lakshana (proper) and the Upadanafn.
The Lakshana has been defined before, while the Upadanam
signifies the case in which a word gives Up' its own meaning,
and assumed that of another, in order to help conveying the

* The aphorisms of Rhetoric, as contained in the Kavyaprakasha,
were first Constructed by the sage Biiarata, on the basis of the rules
laid down in ,the present PUranam. Mam'mata Bhatta, the famous
Khetorist, thus defines Lakshana. in his Kavya Prdkasha.

gqrrcfanl wfowni i

Kavyaprakasha,


AQNI PUftANAM.


trji

general sense. Saropa-Lakshana consists in the fact of H
word’s having an alien meaning (Apahnuti) super-impressed
upon it, while the contrary is called the Sadhyavasanika.
The case, where the relation of cause and effect, is capable
of being established, the ’meaning expressed by a Word im-
porting such a relation, should have the category of Gounata
(secondary acceptance) (5 — 18).

-sol"

CHAPTER CCCfcLVI.


5a, D THfi. GOO OP FlRE : — A poem embellished with
different rhetorical figures, should not be defective as to the
other essentials of poetry. Rhetoric encumbers a bad poem,
as ornaments prove simply as burdens to a homely figure.

The points of excellence in a poem, are such figures of
speech as the Shlesha, etc,, while such traits as Gudarthata
(hidden meaning), should be branded down as faults.

Guna or excellence in a poem is that, which imparts a
lustre to its theme, and enhances the beauty and sweetness
of the descriptions (1—3).

Guna is usually divided into two classes, such as the
Vaisheshika (specific) and the Samanya (General). The
excellence, which is common to the several components
of a poem, is called the Samanya, while that which confines
itself to any specific part or feature, is called the Vaisheshika.
The Samanya or General Guna, in its turn, is classed under
three subheads, according as it appertains to the sound, or'
to the sense, or to both of them combined. The Gunas,
which are restricted to the words which form, as it were, the
body of a poem, are seven in number, such as the Shlesha,


CHAPTER CCCXLVII.


Daid THE Fire-God .—Those traits in a literary com-
position, which prove positively unpleasant to the wise, should
be deemed as Defects (Doshas) ; which are classed under
seven sub-heads according as they are incidental to the
defects ot the author, the subject, and the style, Defects
which may be directly attributed to the fault of an author,
are four in number, according as the author is found Sandi-
hana (Doubtful or dubious), Abinata (proud or iihmodest),
Sannajna (man of little learning or information) and Jnanta
(over-learned).

Defects in their turn are again grouped under two broad
sub-divisions, such as those that relate to terms or words
only, and those that appertain to sense or sentences. The
two primary defects which are usually found in connection
with words, are the Asadhutvam, and the Aprajuctvam.
The former consists in using a word which is not to be
found in a lexicon, while the latter signifies the use of a
term to express a sense to which it does not apply, and
the derivation of which the wise cannot rightly account
for. The five other defects are Chhandasatvam, A-Vispastat-
vam, Kastatvam, Asamayaikatvam, and the Gramyatvam.

The defect of Chhandasatvam (metricalness) cannot be
found in prose compositions, whereas that which is not
explicit is called the Avispashtatvam. The latter is divided
into five classes, such as the Gudarthata, Viparyastarthata,
and the Sanshayitarthata. Gudarthata (covert meaning) im-
plies a case where the meaning is collected with the greatest
difficulty. Viparyastarthata consists in using a term which
rightly conveys a meaning other than the intended one.
Sanshayarthatvam consists in using a word of ambiguous
import (4 — 10).


AGNf PURANAM.


**74

hard and difficult sounds, as well as any dullness, and
looseness of structure, is an instance of Sukumarata. That
quality in a literary composition, which makes patent the
greatness of its subject at the first hearing, is called the
Udarata. Weighty reasons adduced to substantiate the sub*
ject of a discourse, usually mark the pompous or elevated
style of composition, known as the Proudhi. Samayikata
consists in making out the sense of two different and indepen*
dent statements, or categories by the means of setting up
a connection between them either internally or externally
(13—18).

The attribute of Udarata is divided into six different sub-
divisions, such as the Prasada, Sobhagyam, Yatasyakhyam,
Prashastata, Paka and Raga. Prasada consists in using terms
which' convey explicit and unequivocal meaning to the
readers, with the greatest perspecuity. The quality of style
which discloses a noble trait in the subject at the first ins-
tance, is called the Soubhagyam. Yatashankhyam* consists in
establishing a mutual concordance between a series of
subjects and their respective predicates which follow them.
Prashastam consists in describing a horrible subject with
the best elegant terms possible. Paka consists in describing
a noble fruition of a particular theme of discourse. The
Paka, Kke the accumulation of water within the shell of p
cocoanut, may reach its perfection through four differen
stages of formation. Where the Paka begins or ends wit)
words of sweet import (Sourasyam), it is called the Mridvika
Paka, whereas the Raga is usually marked by a peculia
eulogy in the style (19 — 24).


• juror, iron

Chandr. 5,197.


CHAPTER CCCXLVU.


I^Ain THE Fir E-Go n Those traits in a literary com-
position. which prove positively unpleasant to the wise, should
be deemed as Defects (Doshas) ; which are classed under
seven sub-heads according' as they are incidental to the
defects of the author, the subject, and the style, Defects
which may be directly attributed to the fault of an author,
are four in number, according as the author is found Sandi-
hana (Doubtful or dubious), Abinata (proud or immodest).
Sannajna (man of little learning or information) and Jnanta
(over-learned).

Defects in their turn are again grouped under two broad
sub-divisions, such as those that relate to terms or words
only, and those that appertain to sense or sentences. The
two primary defects which are usually found in connection
with words, are the Asadhutvam. and the Aprajuctvam.
The former consists in using a word which is not to be
found in a lexicon, while the latter signifies the use of a
term to express a sense to which it does not apply, and
the derivation of which the wise cannot rightly account
for. The five other defects are Chhandasatvam. A-Vispastat-
vara, Kastatvam, Asamayaikatvam. and the Gramyatvam.

The defect of Chhandasatvam (metricalness) cannot be
found in prose compositions, whereas that which is not
explicit is called the Avispashtatvam. The latter is divided
into five classes, such as the Gudarthata. Viparyastarthata,
and the Sanshayitartbata. Gudarthata (covert meaning) im-
plies a case where the meaning is collected with the greatest
difficulty. Viparyastarthata consists in using a term which
rightly conveys a meaning other than the intended one.
Sansbayarthatvam consists in using a word of ambiguous
import (4—10).


AGNI PURANAM.


I3)r6

Defects there are of other sorts, which are attributed to
causes other than those of creating unpleasant feelings in
the wise (readers). These Defects usually go by the epi-
thets of Asukhocharyayamantvam, Kastatvam, Samayacchuti,
Asamayikata, etc. Gramy&ta signifies the use of an obscene
or inelegant term or expression.

The obscenity or vulgarity in its turn, is divided into
three sub-heads according as it is brought about by a term
specifically denoting a vulgar thing, or by a term which may
vaguely suggest an inelegant meaning, or by a term which
by association, gives rise to a vulgar idea.

The defects which are restricted to the misuse of words,
are again grouped under two heads, such as the Pratisvika
(specific) and the Sadharana (general). The latter denotes
a fault which extends over the entire range of words, used
in a particular stanza or division of a book, and is divided
into five sub-classes, such as the Kriya-Bhransha, Karaka-
Bhranslia, Visandhi, Punaruktata, and the Vyasta-Samvan-
dhata. The first embraces instances where the verb is
omitted, while the second is applied to cases where the rules
of case-inflexion are infringed, or are but partially observed.
Visandhi is found in cases where the compounding is
defective. The latter, in its turn, is grouped under two
sub-heads, according as the compounding of words, is defec-
tive, or is entirely dispensed with, and According as the
interpretation becomes hard and obscure, or contrary and
bad. Punaruktata (tautology) consists in dealing afresh with
an idea, already finished and discussed, and is divided into
two sub-heads, according as it is restricted to, a repetition
of a sound, or a sense (Arthavritti). Arthavritti, in its
turn, is usually grouped under two sub-heads, according as
the repetition or recurrence of the sense, is brought about
by means of a separate word, or of S- word importing an
innate reduplication of the original sense (11—19).


AGNI PURANAM.


1*7 7


Vyasta-Sambhandhata embraces instances, where a pto-
per relation cannot be established between the attributes,
predicative of subjects, which are complementary to each
other, and is divided into three classes. Asamarthata. on thu
other hand, signifies the inability of a word to establish the
truth of a statement, about to be demonstrated. Similarly,
other the defects are enumerated such as the Viruddhatvam.
anachronism, defective- unity of time and place, etc. {-0 — ?jX

Defects, which are ordinarily detrimental to the merit of
a poem, may prove as positive excellences under peculiar
circumstances, and, hence the eleven classes of Nirarthata are
not to be knocked down as demerits in the Pushkara style.
Similarly, the defect of hidden meaning (GudarthataX i* a
mark of excellence in a composition marked by the senti-
ment of Roudra. Likewise. Gramyata (inelegance) is some-
thing otherwise than a defect, while occurring in a speech
of a vulgar or illiterate person, or when a word of vulgar
origin imports a meaning which is recognised by the general
convention of the erudite and scriptures (Shastras). A
faulty compounding of words, is not to be censured in a
case, where a difficulty of construction or interpretation, is
intended by the author. Similarly, a Kriya-Dhansa is not
a defect, where a complete action is otherwise denoted
by means of Adhyahara. In an aliterated stanza, a repe-
tition of terms, or a defect otherwise placed under the
category of Vyasta-Samvandhata, adds to the merit of the
composition. Lastly, where no difficulty is experienced in
detecting the characteristic coincidence of the name, number,
and case-ending of the object and standard of comparison,
one Upamana may be likened to a host of Upameyas, with-
out any prejudice whatever (24—30).

A theory or usage (Samudachara). adopted bv poets in
general, is called the Satnaya, which may be grouped under
two broad heads of distinction, as the Samanya, and the
Vishishta. The theory of spontaneous concepts, embtacii-


I278 AGNI PURANAM.

all categories in the field of self-conscious, and unanimously
believed by its followers without any qualification, is called
the Samanya. On the other hand, some there are who hold
that the ideas or concepts are scintillating in close and conti-
nuous succesion from consciousness, though only few of
them may appear in the region of the self-conscious (from
the subliminal field below). Others, on the contrary, hold
that there is a break or interval between the rising of one
idea and that of the other, so as to allow the mind to be
cognisant of their own individual difference in unity, while
another sage maintains that knowledge or concept consists
in an act of judgment or discrimination. Other sages (like
the Bouddhas) hold that our conscious state consists of a
series of sensations which perish, as soon as they are
born. Others there are, who maintain that the living soul,
imprisoned in animal organism, projects the concepts (the
components of his real nature) in the mind (result of such
combination) of the animal, and which vary according to the
intrinsic capacity of each individual, while others, sincerely
believe that it is the word (nomen) who gives rise to a
correspondig concept in our mind (31 — 35).

The four religious orders of Shakta, Shaiva, Soura, etc.,
hold Brahman to be the first cause of the universe. The
Sankhyas hold that the universe has come into being through
the working of the Pradhanam. These three categories
freely moving about in the region of eternal knowledge
(Sarasvati Loka), may form combines, and such a combination
of two of those fundamental categories, is called the Dvaita
(two-blended). This duality may be entirely divested of the
Asat or Nescibnce, or it may be fully permeated, or pene-
trated into by the Sat or the Real, and hence is governed
by a duality of motion. A category whose existence cannot
be detected by such proofs, as Pratyakshai (positive sense-
experience^ is called the Asat, or unreal, and the poets and
seers, hold that (Asat, nescience, or unreal) to be the factor


4GNI PUR A NAM.


tm

which science or knowledge illumines. That which acts
and abides for good, is called the Sat (Real). The Brahman,
the absolute knowledge, though qualified by Nescience
( Avidya, the limiting point of human knowledge),* is the only
reality. The god Vishnu is the embodiment of sentiments
and poetry, and hence he is the cause that leads human soul
to the region of elysian felicity. Knowledge is of two
kinds, Para, .and A para, and the latter leads to a cessation of
the necessary cycles of existence (36 — 41)


-:o>


ClIAPIEK Cf Cl. XXXIV.


Oaid THE FlKE-GOD : — Now I shall deal with the
lexicon that consists of monosyllabic words. The word 'A 1
means the god Vishnu and restraint. A means the god
Brahman and speech, and also signify a boundary line. The
same word when used as an interjection, is an expression of
anger, disgust and pain. *Ih’ signifies the goddess of wealth,
and attaehment. ‘llh* stands for the god Shiva. The long
‘Uh 1 denotes the monsters and other infernal spirits. *Ri'
denotes a word. The long # Ri* signifies the deity Aditi. The
‘Lri/ long and short, respectively signify the deities Dili and

* Then the question would no doubt be asked once more how can
there be Nescience affecting the Supreme Soul, which is AH-in-AII... 7...

But there is a point in every. system of philosophy where a confession
of ignorance, is inevitable, and all the greatest philosophers have had
to confess that there are limits to our u nd er st a nding the world, nay
this knowledge of the limits of our understanding has, since Kant's
criticism of Pure Reason, bec ome the very foundation of all critical
philosophy .— Vide MaxMiiller’s Vcdmntm Pkilmtophj t pyy


late AGNI PURANAM.

Guha. The letter or word "E" (as jin “ bend ") dgtifitt
the goddess. ‘Ai’ stands for a Yogini. ‘O' signifies the god
Brahman. ‘Oo* stands for the god Maheshvara* ‘Am’ means
desire. ‘Ah* signifies that which is commendable. *Ka' stands
for the deities such as Brahman, etc., *Ku’ expresses anything
bad or ugly. *Kham’ means the heaven, the senses, a
sword, a Gandharbha and the god Vinayaka. The word ‘Gam*
denotes a song. 'Go' signifies the act of singing, where*
as ‘Gha’ signifies the mouth and the small bells (kinkinis).
The letter TJnga’ signifies the act of beating or striking, a
subject, a desire, and the god Bhairabha. *Cba’ means any-,
thing pure or a wicked person, while ‘Chha’ signifies the act
of cleaving; or wearing out a thing *Ja' denotes a song— *
•Jha,’ anything commendable, while 'Unga' ;is expressive of
strength in general (i— 6).

'Tab' signifies the act of singing, *Tha,' a circular ring or
halo round the disc of the moon, or the expanse of ether or
the god Shiva, or the act of binding. *Dah’ means a sound,
fear or the god Rudra, while ‘Dhah’ denotes a sound or a
drum. ‘Na’ (murdhanya) means determination, and Niskarsha.
*Ta’ signifies a thief, or the inner down of a bird. Tha' means
the act of eating, or cleaving a thing asunder. ‘Dah’ denotes
the act of bidding, or ornamentation. ‘Dhah' means the god
of fate, and the Dhustura flower. ‘Na’ signifies a collection,
or the act of being in the right place. ‘Pa* signifies an arti-
ficial wood, or a flower garden, or famous,- when used an
adjective. ‘Phah* means a thunder storm. ‘Fhah’ denotea
the act of blowing with the mouth, as well as abortiveness, or
disappointment. *Vah’ signifies a bird, and ‘Bbam,* a star.
‘Ma,* means the goddess of wealth, beauty, measure. *Ya'
means a religious sacrifice, a pilgrim. 'Rob' means fire, ‘Lab*
the god India, *Loh’ the god of fate, and “led” or ‘‘actuated"
when used an adjective. 'Vah' means the act of analysing,
and the god of oceans. ‘Shah* means a lying down, ‘Sham'
nmans happiness. ‘Shah* signifies “noble," ‘Sr,’ a trial. *Sa/


AGNI FUKANAM


f28»

the goddess of fortune, whereas 'Sam* means hair. 'Ha’
means holding or comprehension, whereas 1 Ksha* means a
letter of the alphabet, or a man of the Kshatriya caste
(7— ia).

Lastly the term 1 Kshoum* denotes the gods Nrishinha,
flari and Kslwtrapala respectively. A Mantra, consisting of
a single letter only, should be looked upon as identical with
the deity of which it is the symbol, and grants earthly good to
its votary, and ultimately destroys the fetters of his life. The
Mantra, running "as obeisance to Haihayashira,” endows all
sorts of gifts on the votary. The Mantras, beginning with
the Akaras, etc., are called the Matrika-Mantras, and as such
they are the best of the species.

The deities such as Bhagavati, Katyayani, Kousliiki,
Chandika, Prachanda, Sura-Naiyka, Ugra, and Parvati, should
be worshipped with the goddess Durga, on a mystic diagram 1 ,
of the Eka-Padma class.

"Om, may we know the goddess Chandika, let us meditate
upon her divine-self, and may Durga lead our miml to that."
Then the worship should be conducted with all the essentials,
mentioned under the bead of a Shatlanga-I’uja, and the
different manifestations of the goddess, such as Ajita, Apara-
jita, Jaya, Vijaya, Katyayani, Uhadra-Kali, Mangala, Sidrfhi,
and Revati, together with the Ganns and the gods, such
as Hetuka, Kapalika, Eka-pada, Bhimarupa, and the guardian
angels of the quarters of the heaven, should be worshipped
as well 13—18.

Then the Mantra, running as “ Hrum, obeisance to Durga,
—to Durga, the protectVess,' 1 grants access in connection
with a Mantra. The goddess Gouri, should be worshipped with
tile deities, such as Dharma, Skaiula, etc*, and tho goddess
of energy, as follows s— "Hrum, obeisance to Prajna, Hrum,
obeisance to Jnana. Hrum, obeisance 10 Kriya (goddess of
action). Hrum, obeisance to Vacha (the goddess ol speech).

Il riiiu, obeisance to Vagishi (the goddess of speech). Hi nm.

161


AGNI PURANAM.


1382

obeisance to Jvalini (the goddess of fire), tieattt, obeisance
to Vama(the goddess of womanhood), Hrum, 'obeisance to
Roudri ((he goddess of fierceness), and Gam, obeisance to
Gouri” (io — 20).

“OM Hrum, Sah obeisance to Maha-Gouri, the beloved
wife of the god Rudra.” The divine energies of knowledge,
action beauty, sweetness and love, together with the guardian
deities of the sky, such as Indra, etc., should be worshipped
in connection with a repetition of the aforesaid Mantra.

The principal Mantra in connection with a worship of the
god Ganapati, runs as "On (yarn, obeisance." The different
manifestations of the deity, such as the elephant, the red
and white, the Samodaka, the great Ganapati, together with
the exponents of his divinity, such As the tusk, etc., should be
worshipped as well. Then the god should be worshipped by
uttering the following Mantras : — "Obeisance to Kushmanda.
Obeisance to the single-tusked one, who has killed the demon
Tripura in battle. Obeisance to the black-teethed one
whose dreadful laugh startles the universe. Obeisance to
the one with a face provided with a long and protruding
nose. Obeisance to ’the one who holds a lotus flower in his
tusk. Obeisance to Megholka. Obeisance to Dhumolka.
Ofieisance to the one with {the crooked lips. Obeisance to
th|e remover of all impediments. Obeisance to the fierce, and
dreadful one. Obeisance to the one whose gait resemDles
that of a lordly elephant. Obeisance to' the one from whose
neck dangles down the coils of the serpent Vasuki in the
form of a necklace. Obeisance to the one who wields the
moon, and obeisance to the lord of the Gan as.”

Oblations of sesamum should be offered to the deity by
uttering each of die abovesaid Mantras, whereby the wor-
shipper would be able to realise Ml his desires. In the alter-
native, the god should be worshiped by uttering the Vija-
Mantra with Has, etc., prefixed to it, and followed by the
term Nainas (obeisance) (31—24).


CHAPTER CCCXLIX.


&AID the Fire God Now I shall speak all about the
four different kinds of dissolution such as the Nitya, the
Naimittika, the Prakrita, and the Atyantika. By the first,
we understand the constant and continuous dissolution
(death) of beings, as is witnessed in our every day world.
The Naimittika dissolution, on the other hand, signifies a
dissolution of all created or phenomenal appearances, and
their final merging in Brahman, the ultimate receptacle of all.
The Prakrita, which comes on at the close of four thousand
Yugas, denotes the dissolution of the physical universe, while
the Atyantika Laya means the merging of the human
soul (Jivatman) in the Brahman (Supreme Soul) through a
perfection of knowledge and the annihilation of the obstruct'
ing Nescience (i — 3).

I shall narrate to you the nature of a Naimittika disso-
lution, which takes place at the close of a Kalpa. The
earth becomes exhausted, after a thousand of each of the four
Yugas is successively buried in the womb of eternity. Thus
for a hundred years, the bountiful showers of rain never en-
liven this perched and desolate planet. All animals perish in
want of food and.water. Then Vishnu, the lord of the uni-
verse finds his lodgement in the seven rays of the sun, and
drinks up the contents bf the earhny oceans, as well as all
waters contained in the bowels of earth and the nether
regions. After that, the sevefi'rays of the sun, feeding upon
these waters, grow in volume and weight, and are trans-
formed into seven majestic globes of light and heat like their
parent luminary, and burn to ashes the three worlds, with
the nether regions as well. 0 thou twiceborn one, the-
surface of the earth undergoes a change. It becomes


AGNI PURANAM.


ia$4

considerably flattened and assumes the shape of the back of
a tortoise (4 — 7).

Then the Are of dissolution, which is but a manifestation
of the god Rudra, is made more scorching by being blended
with the poisonous breath of the primordial Hydra, and
reduces to ashes all the nether regions. Thence the final
fire (Vishnu) attacks the upper layers of the earth’s crust,
and then the surface of the earth, and thence invades the
region of heaven. Then the three worlds appear like one
blazing mass (Amvarisha) and the inmates of the two
worlds, oppressed with the intolerable heat, ascend in sue*
cession to the regions of Maha and Jana (8 — IO).

Then the fire of dissolution which is but another man!*
festation of the god Rudra, burns down the universe, while
from the breath of the god Hari, are generated packs of sable
cloud chequered with the bands of lightning, and pour
down torrents of perpetual rain, and put down the fire that
has consumed the 'universe for a hundred years.- • Then
when the water rises up to the place where the constel.
lation of the seven sages (Saptarshi*Mandala) has been,
the breath of the god Hari gives rise to those final storms
which disperse those clouds. Then the god Hari, after
having taken in the breath that produced those clouds,
lie down on the surface of the ocean of universal water, in
the shape of the god Brahman, and the Siddhas and the
holy sages, who reside in the ocean at the time, wait upon
him with hymns and panegyrics. The god Madhusudana
thus bides his time on the surface of the universal water,
enveloped in his divine attribute of Yoga.Nidra (psychic
sleep), which is nothing but a phase of bis own illusive
Nescience, and represents the suspension of his will as man'll
fest in the universe. Thus lies down he« contemplating on
his divine self which is known as Vasudeva, And does not stir
himself till before the lapse of a Katpa (11—14).


Agni puranam.


1285

After that the god rises from his sleep, and creates, the
universe afresh. Then for the period of two Parardham,
the universe lies latent in the womb of the cosmic nature
(Piakiti) to be subsequently evolved out. O thou twice-born
one, the Prakrita dissolution, on the other hand, is brought
about by a conflagration of the universe due to an utter absence
of rain. Then the modifications of the Mabat (phenomenal
principles) are reduced one into the other, through a work-
ing of the will of Krishna. The water first swallows up
the principle of earth together with its characteristic attri-
bute of smell. Then the earth, divested of its differentiating
trait of smell (Gandha), tends towards annihilation. Then
the attribute of Rasa (Rasatanmatra) which characterises
water in general, is eaten up by light with its watery re-
ceptacle, and after the destruction of water, the fire reigns
supreme in the universe. Then the wind eats up the suns
with their attributes of colour and light, and then the Akasha
(ether) eats up the air with its attribute of touch. The
Akasba in its turn, is merged with its attribute of sound in
the principle of universal space (kham), and then the Mahan
swallows up the material principles as well as the universal
space with its attribute of Abhimana [egoism] (15 — 23).

fThe arth is reduced to water. The water is dried up
by heat The heat, in its turn, is destroyed by the wind.
The wind, in its turn, is gathered up in the womb of space.
The space is merged in the principle of self or mind. This
egoism or Abankara is swallowed up by the principle of
Mahat, while the latter find its final resting place in the
breast of the universal nature (Prakriti). The Nature or
Prakriti or animated cosmic matter, has two aspects, the one
visible and the other invisible. The visible part or aspect
is merged in the invisible one. The Purusha or the subjective
element, which is pure and absolute consciousness, is a part
of the supreme soul. Both the Purusha and the Prakriti,
in their turn, are finally merged in the supreme soul. The


1286 AGNI PURANAM.

supreme soul is unconditioned by name, species, etc. He is
supreme knowledge, the perfect soul contained in an entity
Of knowable soul (14—27).


CHAPTER CCCL.


Oaid the FiRS God Now I shall deal with the aspect
of dissolution which is known as the Atyantika Laya (spiritual
Dissolution), A man is said to attain to that stage, when
through a knowledge of the Adhyatmika torments which fall
to the. -lot of every one in life, he renounces the world and
its concerns, and is able to merge his soul in its supreme
prototype. The pains known as the Adhyatmika are grouped
under two subheads according as they are restricted solely
to the body or to the mind. O tbou twice-born one, the
bodily ills are varied in their character (1 — a).

The human soul (Jivatma) after having left the sensual
body in which it had been incarcerated, again takes its birth
in the maternal womb, the choice or selection of its next
bodily parents being determined by his deeds in his previous
existences- Q thou twice-born one, the Ativahika body,
(wbichjs peculiar to man alone) is the body which the soul
assumes after physical death, and is taken away by the
orderlies of Yaraa (the king of death), after the dissolution
pf his gross earthly body. O thou,- the best of the twice-born
ones, the same body is taken away by the servants of
Yama, along the path over which he wields the uncontrolled
sway. This is the specific lot of humanity, as contra-
distin guished from his fellow animals. Then he is made
to whirl rauQd in the womb of the hell pf Sadjati which
resembles a Qhata-Yantra in structure (3 — $).


AGNl ftjftANAlrf.


0 Brahmaha, this world is a World of deeds, whereas the
next world is a world thete Soots are dealt with according
to their deserts, The god of Death determines the belt
to Which a soul is to be committed to Undergo! pUnishtrient, or
to the Womb in Which he is to be born in his next existence,
according to his deeds iA the previous life, 'the god of
t)eath witnesseth the human souls being poured into the
Wombs of their mothers in the form of essential air. The'
Warders of Death lead the souls of men to their appointed
places in the kingdom of their master, the virtuous they
adore, while the souls of the Wicked they oppress, and the
god Chitragupta draws up an inventory of the good at evil
deeds done by them ini life (6—9).

The departed soul staying in the Ativahilca body, re-
ceives the funeral oblations offered to him by his relations
in this world, and then ascends to the region of the Pretas
and assume an astral shape. Thirst and hunger oppress them
at this point of transition in their progress upward, and they
delightfully partake of the oblations and libations of water
offered to them by their friends on this side of life. With-
out such oblations and offerings, a soul cannot pass from his
Ativahika body to the astral plain. Then after the lapse of
a full year from the date of his death, and after having
witnessed the Sapindakarana ceremony done for his Welfare,
the soul of a man, renounces his Preta body and assumes
one (Bhoga-Deha) that makes him capable of enjoying the'
fruits of his work, which might be either good or bad. Then
having enjoyed the fruits of his deeds done in a previous life, a
soul is again cast down by the Law of Karma, and the body
assumed by him in the time of such enjoyment, is eaten up
by the spirits of the night. The soul of a man, who was
not wholly free from sin in his mundane existence, first reaps
the fruits of bis good deeds in paradise, and is then com-
mitted to the pangs of hell in a body which the souls of
the wicked assume. The soul that suffers hell at the outset


A&Nl PUttANAM.


tsis

Artd is thus purified, rises Up to heaven to enjoy the fruits of
his preponderant good in life, and takes its re-birth, after the
appointed time, in a pure and prosperous family. The solit
of an otherwise virtuous man, but tinged with the shadow
of an accidental sin, suffers penances in order to purge off
that much of evil, and assumes a beautiful shape after the
necessary purification. A soul is liberated from hell even
when a small residue of his previous Karma still exists, and
takes birth in the wombs of animals {10— iff).

Hie Human soul, even after making its entrance into its
mother's womb, assumes a gelatinous body, which becomes
denser and more consistent in the second month of gestation*
The limbs and members of the body begin to appear in the
third month, and the bones, the flesh, and the skins are formed
In this fourth. The hairs grow up in, the fifth. The heart is
formed in the sixth, and the foetus becomes sensitive to painful
or pleasurable sensations in the seventh. The child remains
in the womb, covered all over with the placenta, with his two
hands blended and placed on his forehead. Thus the child is
ensconced in the womb pressing upon the abdominal region
of its mother, and with its face turned towards her back*
boots. He fully recognises the person in whose womb he
has been placed, and recollects all the incidents that marked
his career in a preceding life from the day of his birth, in
the seventh month of gestation, the child participates in the
essence of food assimilated by its mother, and becomes res-
tive throughout the eight and ninth month of pregnancy.
It suffers extremely at the coition -of its mother, and any
fatiguing bodily exercise on her part, produces a similar
exhausting effect upon it. It takes ill with any ailment
that troubles its mother, and a moment of agony seems
a century in its dark and cheerless incarceration. TBe
Karmas of its previous existence trouble him sorely and give
not a moment of respite. The child forms resolutions for the
emancipation of its soul, and prays, “Om Brahman, let me


fcGNl PUftANaii.

be free this time, and I shall do my best to work out my
own salvation" (19 — -a6).

Then when fully developed, the wind inside its mother’s
womb which begins to move at the time of partition,
casts it out through the vaginal candl. in the first month
of its infantile life, even the slightest contact gives it pain.
The , Ether with its attribute of sound, gives rise to its
auditory organs, and the sense of hearing, as well as to its
notion of space or extension. The wind gives rise to its
organ of respiration, and the organs that are Involved
in that particular process,, as well as to the capacity of
turning on its side. The fire gives rise to its bile; sight,
complexion, ( and organs of digestion. The clouds give rise
to its colour, strength, etc. From water are formed its taste,
perspiration, slime, mucus, fat, blood, semen, urine, and
phlegm. The earth gives rise to its sense of smell, hairs,
nails, weight, etc. (27 — 30).

The maternal or anabolic element contributes to the
formation of its heart, skin, flesh, hue, umbilicus, sthne, fat,
stomach and pancreas, while from the paternal factor
(katabolic) are. formed such bodily and mental principles, as
veins, arteries, nerves, semen, etc. The mental attributes
which are ascribed to the virtue of Tamas in a man, are, lust,
anger, fear, joy, susceptibility to virtue or vice, complexion,
features, error, ignorance,- idleness, thirst, hunger, secretion,
vanity, grief, etc. Factors which are looked upon as expo-
nents of a Rajasika temperament are desire, anger, valour,
desire for celebrating sacrifices, egotism, and slight estima-
tion of others. O thou great sage, a will to do right, a
a desire for the final emancipation of the soul, extreme
veneration towards god, compassion, oneness of purpose,
are the virtues that adorn a man of Sattvika tempara-
ment (31 — 36).

A man who is restless, irritable, garrulous, shy, contem-
plates himself as ranging the skies, in sleep, and is otherwise
162


1290 AGN! PUR ANA M.

addicted to the vices and temptation of Kali, should be
considered as a being in whom' t^e wind preponderates.
A man possessed of a bilious temperament, always betrays
an irascible disposition. His hairs become untimely grey.
Such a man shows u great zeal for learning, and becomes
a depository of sound knowledge, dreams of fires and con-
flagrations in his sleep, and is very combative in spirit. On
the other hand, a man possessed of a phlegmatic tempera-
ment, dreams of vast sheets of water in sleep, and is sure
to be kind and constant in his dealings and pursuits (37—39).

The serum exhibits itself in the organism of a man, in
forms of blood and watery exudations. The Lepanam
contributes to the formation of flesh, and helps the processes
of soothing and secretion. Dharanam is restricted to the
bones and the marrow imbeded in them, while Puranam
means augmentation of semen. Semen is formed from Ojas
(albumen), and in albumen vitality is said to lie inherent.
The external layers of the skin, together with the one that
contains blood, are seven in number. The first or epidermis
is the external layer, then is the layer that contains blood,
and then is the layer that contains the vilasas. Then lies the
one which is the seat of tickling sensation. The fifth layer of
skin from the outside, is the seat of erythematous diseases-.
The sixth fold is> called the seat of life, or the skin proper,
the true organ of tactual sensations. The seven sheath?'
are the sheath of flesh, the viscus of blood, the viscera ot
liver and spleen, the sheath of fat, 'the sheath of bones, the
viscera of phlegm, excreta, or fatty matter situate in the
abdomen. The two sacs (Dhara) are known as the sac of
bile, and the seminal sac, or the Shukrasbaya (40—45).


:o:


CHAPTER CCCLI.


Oaid THE Fire (JOD : — The sensibilities of sound
(hearing)! touch, sight, taste, and smell, are the attributes of
such sense organs, as the ears, the skin, the eyes, the
tongue, and the nose ; while the remaining principles of an
animated human organism, are the intellect, and the sky.
The arms, the genitals, the hands, the feet, and the tongue,
are the organs which are the material embodiments of the
principle of kham (sky), and the functions of ejection
(utsarga), exhilaration (Ananda), handling, locomotion and
speech are their effects. The organs are grouped under
two sub-heads, as those of operation and intellection, and
they number five in each of the groups. The five material
elements are the objects of the five organs of sense-percep-
tion, which serve as five channels, through which the
knowledge or information of the external world reaches the
mind, the lord of them all. The soul is the supreme sub-
jectivity which is imperceptibile by the senses, and which lies-
amidst the twenty-four Tanmatras (fundamental material
principles), as a fish floats in water, untouched by it, though
sporting therein (1-^—4).

The qualities of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, attach them-
selves to this invisible factor (Avyakta), while the inner
being is called the Purusha (the soul), which is a part of the
eternal cause, the Para Brahman (the supreme soul). He
who knows this supreme Purusha, attains to the highest
station in eternal life (5 — 6).

There are seven sacs or receptacles in the body, such as
the receptacle of blood, the receptacle of phlegm, the recep-
tacle of undigested food, or stomach (Amashaya), the recep-
tacle of digestion, the receptacle of wind, and the receptacle
of urine, while a woman- has got an additional sac« or poucfv


AGN1 PURANAM.


1191

in the shape of the womb. The bile in the digestive sac
(Pakvasbaya) is due to the action of the internal fire.
The uterus is opened up during the period of menstruation,
and produces a dilatation and a flushed condition of the
vagina, which is so helpful to fecundation. The uterus is
shaped like a lotus flower, which expands during the menstrual
period, and retains the semen, affixed to the ovum, and floating
about in the catamenial blood. The semen, to which is due
the body of the foetus, chases the ovum out of a sort of psychic
affinity, and is subsequently evolved out in the shape of a
child. During the menses, the vagina is filled with phlegm,
bile and wind, which leads to a dilatation of the uterus, so
that fecundation might not otherwise prove abortive (7 — 10).

O' thou of a mighty heritage, then the viscera, such as
the heart, the liver, the spleen, and the other, are formed io
due succession. O thou who art cognisant of all virtues, t$e
serum, fully matured, gives rise to the organs. From the
froth of . the hlood the Pukkasas are generated. The blood,
in its turn, is converted into bile, and is then called the
Tandaka. The heart is evolved out from a matured and
expanded conglomeration of blood and fat, while the Antras
or the intestines, are formed out of a similar combination of
flesh and blood, and which measure three Vyamas (a measure
of length equal to the space between the tips of the fingers of
either hand, when the arms are extended) and a half in men,
and three Vyamas only in women, as ascertained by the holy
sages conversant with the Vedas (11 — 15).

The heart, owing to an expanded condition of its in-
herent phlegm, assumes the shape of a lotus bud, and is
embued with a sort of constant moisture, and dangles with
its head downward. The Jiva or the Soul, which is evolved
out through a combined action of the blood and wind,' is
seated in the cavity of the heart, and consciousness, with its
exponent of feelings and ideas, are necessarily ensconced in
that. The spleen is situated on the left of a line, imagined


AGNI PURANAM.


1393


as passing through the heart, while the liver is situated on
its right. The lungs (Kloma) are situated on the right side
of the aforesaid lotus (heart). The veins and arteries
(Srotansi) which carry the phlegm, blood, etc., give rise to
the senses or Indriyas, which are the doors to our percep-
tion of the objective world (16 — 19).

The' white of the eye (conjunctiva) ows its origin to the
paternal element in the child, and is the direct product of
phlegm, while the black spot in the organ is the product of
its maternal element, and is evolved out by the action of the
vital wind. The skin, which is the product of bile, should
be considered as an exponent of both the parental principles.
The tongue is a product of flesh, blood and phlegm, while the
testes are formed by a combined action of the fat, blood, and
flesh. The ten abodes of life, are the head, the heart, the
umbilicus, the throat, the tongue, the semen, the blood, the
pelvis, the anus, and the calves of legs. The tendons
which are sixteen in number, are arranged as follows : — two
in the hands, two in the legs, four in the back and the throat,
while the Jalas (Membranes) which are sixteen in number,
are distributed all over the of body from the feet to the
head. The flesh, sinews, arteries, and bones, are firmly
blended together, about the regions of wrist, calves, etc.
The wise have ascertained that there are six kurchas
separately over the hands, and feet, as well as over the neck
and the penis. The four tendons or ropes of flesh which are
situated about the spinal column, are held in their places
by means of ninety (navati) muscles. The Siranis number
seven in all, five of them being situated in the region of the
head, and the remaining two in the tongue and the penis
respectively (ao — 27).

The bones which form the foundation of a human
organism, number sixty-three in all, or sixty-four including
the cartilage. The nails number twenty in all. The bones
of the upper and lower limbs, are arranged in four different


1294 AGNI PURANAM.

groups, in the following order six (sic) form the bones of
fingers, two form the bones of the upper arms, four, of the
lower, and similarly the thigh bones are two in number,
while the bones of the lower legs (tibia and fibula) number
four in all. The bones of the hip are two in number, which
are connected with the sacrum which terminates in the coccyx.
The cranium consists of six pairs of bones and four others.
The face consists of six pairs of bones, and two others (the
vomer and the inferior maxillary). xThe bones of the body,
or trunk, consists of thewertibrae, the breast bone, and the
ribs. The neck consists ot seven bones. The bones which
form the vertibrae, (both dorsal and lumbar) number seven-
teen in all. The veins and arteries, considered both accord-
ing to their up-coursing or down flowing directions, as well as
those which turn inward, number as above described, and
supply the whole organism with blood, serum, and healthful
moisture, just as artificial fountains and water courses in a
field, serve to bring On a deposit of nutritious slime. There
are seventy-two chambers or cavities of fat, marrow, blood,
bile, urine, phlegm, scrum, etc., as well as the one set apart
for ovum in women. O thou great sage, this corporeal body
is nothing but a depository of dirt and filth (28 — 43).

CHAPTER CCCL 1 I.


Oaid the Fire GOD:— I have already described the
roads of Yama. The bodily heat of a person augmented and
diffused all through his system, through the action of the
deranged wind, obstructs the free and spontaneous elimination
of the diseased humours. The humours, thus choked up
in. their respective lodgings, generate heat in their turn,


AGN1 PURANAM.


1*95


which leads to the disintegration of’the limbs and organs,
known as the Pranasthanas (seats of vitality) and Marinas
(vital organs).

The vital wind thus agitated by the exalations of the
deranged phlegm, naturally seeks an aperture for its exit,
which, in the case of a wise and virtuous person, choses one
of the eight upward fissures of the body, such as the ears, the
eyes, the nostrils and the cavity of the mouth. A wicked
soul, on the contrary, makes its exit through one of the down-
ward fissures of the body, 'such as the anus, the urethra,
etc. The soul of a person, who had been a Yogin in life, is
seen to make its passage good through the aperture in the
cranium. Immediately before the moment of final sever-
ance is arrived, high spiritual activities are perceived as
going on in the brain-cells of a Yogin, which seem to be
dilated to their greatest capacity, and thus let out the im-
prisoned soul in its flight of light and joy ( 1- — 5).

In the case of an ordinary mortal, the winds known
as the Prana (Breath) and Apana (abdominal wind), com-
bine just before the advent of the critical moment, in con-
trariety of their situation and direction in health and
life. Darkness and the principle of Nescience creep over
the organs of life, and the Self-conscious lapses into
unconsciousness. The real Self of the dying (Jivatma),
thus dislodged from its seat above the umbilicus, draws
within itself the essences of eight fundamental attributes
of vitality from their material counterparts (the sense-
organs), .and quits the body through one of its upward or
downward apertures, according to its deeds in life. The
gods and the Siddhas (liberated beings) witness, with their
spiritual vision, the separation between the body and the Self
of a person, as described before, as well as its subsequent
birth or bodily evolutions in the shape of a foetus, in the
womb of its mother in the next existence (6— -g).

Immediately on its lea ving the Corporeal frame, the Self


AONI PURANAM.


1196

or the Atman of a person, assumes a Shape which is known
as the Ativahild, and which is composed of the essences of
the five gross or material principles which enter into the
composition of its earthly prison house. Thus the Purusha
or the Jivatman clothes itself in a garb which is composed of
the occult or unseen essences of ether, air, light, water and
earth, in the same way and in the same proportion, as the
dead body which it leaves behind, and resembles it exactly
in all its essential features. The warders of the god of Death,
lead these spiritual bodies on to their places of destiny, who,
in the course of their journey, partake of the oblations, etc.
offered to them by their friends in life.

Dreadful are the routes which lead to the mansion of
Death, and they extend over a space of eighty-six thousand
Kroshas«(Krosha=>a miles). The wicked souls, having been
ushered into his dreadful presence, are sent at once to the
particular hell, in which each one of them is to be tortured,
according to the dictates of Chitragupta, his secretary. The
souls of the good are led by pleasant and auspicious routes,
to the beauties of heaven (10— 12 ).

The hells to which the wicked souls are committed, num-
ber twenty-eight in all, and are situate beneath the down-
most stratum of the seven nether regions. The cosmography
of hell, would be best understood by conceiving twenty-eight
globes . or regions, one lying above the other, and each of
them is divided into hundred and forty-four sub-divisions;
or departments of torture. The names of hells counted from
the top, are the Gbora, the Sughora, the Atighora, the Maha-
ghora, the Ghora-rupa, the Taralatara, the Bhayanaka, the
Bhayotkata, the Kalaratri, the. Mahachanda, the Chanda, the
Kolahala, the Prachanda, the Padma, the Naraka-nayika,
the Padmavati, the Bhishana, the Bhima, the Karalika, the
Vikarala, the Mahavajra, the Trikona (the Triangular hell),
the Pancha-cona (the five corniced hell), the Sudirgha (the
elongated), the Vartula (elliptical), the Sapta-Bbumg, the


AGNI PURANAM.


1*97

Sabhumika, and the Dipta (the burning one)! and in these
the souls of the wicked are punished and purified. Each of
these places of torture, is presided over by five warders,
or angels of punishment The departments or subdivisions
of hell are named as the Rouravas, the Tamisram, the Andha-
Tamisram, the Maharouravas, the Asipatra Vanam (the forest
whose leaves are sword blades), the Loha-Bharam, the Kala-
Sutram, the Maha-Nadakam, the Sanjivanam, the Sanghatam,
the Sakakolam, the Kudmalan :Cthe Puti Mirttikam, the
Louha-Sharakam, the Rishijam, the Pradhanam, and the
Shalmalinadi (13 — 21).

These hells are all dreadful to behold. The miscreants
and evil thinkers are cast into one of these dreadful places of
punishment, or into several of them at a time. The warders
of these dreadful confines, who are possessed of faces like
those of cats, owls, jackals, vultures, etc., cast the essential
bodies of men in caldrons of boiling oil, and then light up
a fearlul fire under them. Several souls are left to be burnt
in frying pans ; some are boiled in caldrons of molten copper
or iron, while others are left to die on the tips of pointed
pikes. The warders of death torment the wicked souls with
stripes of lashes, or heavy bastinados, who are made to drink
of vessels full of boiling metals, or of noxious solutions of
urine and other human excreta (22 — 27).

Some of the wicked souls are broken on the rack, while
their bodies, which are made of quintessence of material
principles, are cast asunder to be devoured by vultures and
other rapacious beasts of the infernal regions. Here and there,
may be seen by the blue light of hell, the souls of the wicked
being boiled in caldrons of boiling oil, or wailing, or mourn-
ing those nameless hours on earth, in which they were
tempted to commit sins, for. which they are now punished.

The wicked having gone through their full term of
imprisonment in hell, are again born on the surface of the
earth. The soul of a murderer of. a Brahmhana is born again
163


AGNI PUftANAM.


I398

in the womb of a she deer, a bitch, a sow or a sne camel. The
soul of a drunkard takes its re-birth in the womb of a woman
of a Pukkasha or Mlechcha class. The soul of a man, who
had stolen a prohibited weight of gold in hi9 previous
existence, is born to trail the ground in the shape of a earth-
worm, insect, or any other vermin. The killer of a Bramhana
is punished with Pthysis in his next existence. Similarly, a
drunkard is cursed with the disease known as the Shyaba-
danta (a peculiar type of dental complaint in which the teeth
assume a yellowish brown hue and undergo gradual decay);
The stealer of gold is afflicted with the malady known as the
Kunakhava (bad nails) for his crime in a preceding life, while
the man, who had defiled the bed of his superior in an
antecedent birth, is tormented with lepra, or any other sort of
skin disease in his present one. The agents or organs of
sins, in such cases, are usually found to be disfigured or
distorted, while in certain instances, they are found to be
branded on the forehead of these evil-doers, in their succes-
sive births (28 — 33).

The man, who steals any quantity of boiled rice belong-
ing to another, is sure to be born as a sorcerer in his next
incarnation. The destroyer of the power of speech or articula-
tion in a man, shall be born dumb in his next birth. The man,
who steals any measure of paddy in this life, is sore to be
born with abnormal bodily appendages in the next. A miser
will be re-born as a man with a flat or depressed nose. The'
man, who robs another man's property, or carries away a
woman lawfully wedded to another, shall be born as a Bramha-
Rakshasa, and shall roam about in the deep solitude of
dreadful wildernesses. The stealer of blood shall take his
birth in the family of a man of vile cast. The stealer of
perfumes shall incarnate as a mole in his next existence. A
stealer of leaves and potherbs, shall be re-born as a peacock,
a stealer of paddies as a mouse, a stealer of a domestic
animal as a goat, a steatlr of milk as a crow, a stealer


AGNI PURANAM.


1399


of a cart or any other vehicle as a camel, a stealer of fruit?
as a monkey, a steater of honey as a fly, a stealer of rags
as a rook, a stealer of clothes as a man diseased with
Psoriasis, a stealer of sweetened juice as a dog, and a
stealer of salt as a cricket (34 — 38).

The three sorts of pain, which afflict all men in a more
or less degree, are called the Adhyatmika, the Adhi-Bhoutika
and the Adhi-Daivika. The first is the direct product of
mind and its faculties, the second is caused by material
instruments, such as weapons, etc., while the third is attri-
buted to the effects of such physical phenomena, as thunder,
lightning, etc , or is due to other acts of god. The wise,
should annihilate this threefold evil by means of know-
ledge, perfected through a process of Yoga, or by observances
of vows, or by practising penances and worshipping the god
Vishnu (39— 40).


CHAPTER CCCLI1I.


n

k^aid the Fire God : — Now I shall deal with the eight
auxiliary factors of Yoga. Knowledge is that which leads
to a true conception of Brahma, the highest knowledge that
illumines the universe. Yoga consists in concentrating the
mind or attention on a definite subject, by abstracting or
withdrawing it (Sensorium Commune) from all other objects
of sense-perception, and in bringing about a communion
between the human self (Jivatman) and its supreme proto-
type (Brahmatman). The five factors of discipline or self-
control (Yama) are: — (1) Cessation of all killing propensities,
(j) Truthfulness, (3) Uncovetousness, (4) Self-control, or*
subjugation of the senses, and (5) Renunciation of all*
desires for gift or gain. These, together with the Niyama


46NI PURANAHl


IjtIO

(regulation of life) lead to all that can be desired in fife,
and ultimately to the final liberation of the Jivatman, or the
true Self of a man. Purity, contentment, practice of
austerities, and a desire to serve god at all times and under
all circumstances, are the virtues that are to be cultivated
by a journeyman on the road to self-knowledge. Ahinsa
means clemency to all created beings and annihilation ot
all killing or pain-giving propensities. O thou twice born
one, this non-oppressiveness (Ahinsa) is the best of all
virtues. As the peculiar sort of gait known as the Gajapada,
includes all other gaits of a journeyman, so other phases of
piety are included within this particular factor (i — 4).

Thus all virtues proceed out of this specific one of non-
oppressiveness. Hinsa or 'oppression includes within its
meaning all acts which cause anxiety, or positive mental
pain, or bodily hurt to others, or spill blood from their
bodies, or make them miserable, or permanently obstruct
that which might have otherwise proved beneficial to them,
or cleaves their hearts, or interferes with their liberty of
movements, or destroys their comfort for good. These are
known as the ten elements of hurt or killing. Truthfulness
consists in speaking a fact, which actually exists, or has
really happened at a time and place, and which, if known
or communicated, will be of service to the whole human
species (5 — 8).

Speak truth that is pleasant. Refrain from speaking an
unpleasant truth, nor do you speak a pleasant thing that
is untrue. This the wise aver to be the eternal virtue.
Brahmacharyayam consists in abstaining from all sensual
acts, such as actual coition, fond remembrance of a beloved
woman, mental re-capitulation of her several charms and
virtues, amorous dalliance with one's own beloved, longfully
eyeing of her person, conversation with herein solitude, deter-
mination to visit her, endeavours to that end, and the final
consummation of one’s amours. - Brahmacharyayam forms


AGNI PURANAM. 13©t

(he basis of all acts of piety, without which they fail to
produce their desired effect.

Even the elders in age and wisdom, such as Vashishtha,
Chandrama, Shukra, Vribaspati, the preceptor of the gods,
and the divine Brahma, ' were dupes of women's love and:
female charms. The three kinds of wine are called the Goudi,
the Paishti, and the Madhvi, the fourth sort of wine being the
woman. It is the wine of woman’s love that alone can in-
toxicate the three worlds. Wine only when drunk, produces
intoxication, whereas a woman, simply being looked at,
may madden the senses of a man, and enshroud his con-
sciousness in the darkness of Nescience. Hence a man should
refrain from even beholding a woman, as she is wine to his
eyes. The man, who forcibly, or otherwise robs another
man’s goods, or stealthily takes a full draught of the clarified
butter, set apart for the purposes of a religious sacrifice, is
sure to take birth in the wombs of lower animals, in his
successive re<-births (9 — 15).

A mendicant may collect such articles of daily use and
apparel, as a covering for his loins, a cloth, a quilt or a pair cf
sandals. Beyond these he must not covet. A covering or a
garment is necessary for the preservation of the body, a safe
and healthy continuance of which is to be guarded with the
strictest vigilance. Bodily health is the primary virtue, that
makes all other ac{s of piety possible in this life. Purifica-
tion of a man may be brought about in two ways, the one
external and physical, such as the cleansing of the body with
clay, water, etc., the other mental or internal. The man, who
is purified in both of these ways, is alone pure, and no other.
Contentment signifies the fact of resting satisfied with any
thing that may be obtained without the least exertion. Tapas
means the concetration of the mind and the senses on a
definite object. The highest virtue lies in subjugating one’s
senses. Tapas may be classed under three heads, such as
the oral, the mental and the physical.


1302


AGNIPURANAM.


The oral Tapas consists in truthfulness and a constant
repetition of a Mantra, held sacred to the tutelary divinity
of the penitent. The mental element of the act, embraces
the extinction of all desires, while the bodily or physical
factor, consists in dedicating one's own body to the service
of the eternal deity (1 6 — 20).

The Vedas are founded upoh the Pranava. They begin
with it, which should be regarded as the summum-bonum of
speech. Therefore, ye should all repeat that sacred syllable
Om, which is composed of A, U, and Ma, the latter being
pronounced as a half syllabic instant. The first three Matras
(syllabic instants) of the Mantra, are emblematic of the
three Vedas, and represent the three worlds of Bhu, Bhuva,
and Sva. The attributes of the Mantras are the three con-
ditions of waking, dreaming, and dreamless sleep (Sushupti)
and are presided over by the gods of the Hindu Trinity
(Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara). The divine selves of
Vasudeva Pradyumna, etc., have proceeded out of the essence
of that mystic Om. The god Shiva, as represented by one
of the components of the 11 Om,” held sacred to him, bereft
of its proper syllabic instant, is the dispeller of the illusion
of duality. The fourth Matra of the Mantra is known as
the Gandhari, and represents the transcendental or super-
sensual state of human consciousness, known ’ as the
Turiya (21-— 25).

The Supreme Brahma, who is beyond the sphere of the
three states of human consciousness, is accordingly called the
Turiyam, and is ensconced in the mystic nerve ganglion situate
over the region of the human heart, shining all through life,
like a lamp placed inside the cavity of a pitcher. A man
should do well to meditate upon this constant light, illumin-,
ing the petals of the lotus of his heart. The Pranava is
like a bow furnished with an arrow, And the Supreme
Brahma is the target to hit at. A man with all assiduity and
calmness, should shoot the arrow of his mind at this target


AGNr PURANAM. I303

t >f Brahma, so chat like a. shaft it might be driven into and
kept fast and invisible in the latter. Brahma is the only
knowledge and this mystic (Om) syllable is his only
exponent. The man who has fully understood the import
of this monosyllable, has attained everything worth obtain-
ing. Gayatri is the metre of this mystic Om, the name of its
Rishi is Antaryami (the knower of hearts), and its presiding
deity is the Supreme Self* The Mantra should be made
use of for the attainment of both eatthly prosperity and
final liberation of the Soul (26 — 29).

The rite of Nyasa, in connexion with the Mantra, should
be performed as follows. "Obeir ance to Om 'Shu/ per-
meated with the essence of the Fire-God, situated in the
region of my heart. Obeisance to ‘ Bhuva/ permeated with
the essence of the god Prajapati, situated in the region
of my head. Obeisance to ‘Sva/ filled with the energy of
the Sun-God, situated at the tuft of hair on my crown.
Obeisance to 1 Bhu, Bhuva and Sva/ which protect my
body as a coat of mail.” Then having performed the rite
of Nyasa, as above indicated, the votary should worship
the god Vishnu, whereby he would be possessed of all
creature comforts in this life and would be able to work out
the emancipation of his own self in the next. The worship
hould be closed with oblations of sesamum seeds soaked
in clarified butjter. The man who repeats the name of the
god, twelve hundred times each day, is able to attain
to the Supreme Brahma at the lapse of twelve months.
By repeating a hundred thousand times the same Mantra,
a man is sure to develop in himself the miraculous powers
of a Yogin, such as Anima, Laghima, etc., (30 — 33).

The god Hari should be worshipped in the course of
a sacrifice, performed in one of the three ways, known as
the Vaidika, the Tantrika, and the mixed (a combination of the
two preceding procedures). The votary should lay himself
prostrate, as a stick, before the propitiated divinity, and end


AGNI PURANAM.


«3<>4

his puja with a final act of obeisance. Even the perfor-
mance of a hundred horse-sacrifice in succession, fails to
confer that elevated spiritual status on their celebrator,
which this simple process of worship, grants to Its votary.
The man who has ' the same reverence for his spiritual pre-
ceptor as for his tutelar deity, is only entitled to practise
the self control etc., as above indicated, bv right of the
commonalty of the high-minded (34— *36).

-:o:-

CHAPTER CCCLIV.


Oaid the FirE God : — A man should sit in the pos-
ture called the lotus-seat, as described before, and meditate
jpoti the Supreme One amidst pure and ennobling environ-
ments. The seat (Asanam) should be spread over a firm
and even ground, and should not be made too low
or elevated, and would be made of such materials as
Cloth, ‘ or skin, toppled with a layer of Kusha grass. Thus
seated on the platform, and with the mind and senses fully
controlled and restrained, the Yogin should practise the
the Yoga for the purification of his innerself. The head
should be held firm and errect and in the same perpendicular
with the neck and the back-bone. The sight is to be fixed
on the tip of the hose without being directed to any other
quarter of the sky. The penis and the testes are to be
pressed with |the heels, and the Yogin should place bis two
bands, a little slantingly on his two thighs, the back of the
right palm being placed in the palm of the left hand (1— 5).

Then gently lifting his face he should protrude and open
his lips a little and gently take in his breath. Pranayama
signifies the suppression of the breath wind,-. and consists in


AGNI puranam


I305

(he three factors, Rechanam, Puranam and Stambhanam. In
Rechan am, one of the nostrils should be pressed with the
fingers, and the wind in the stomach should be slowly let out.
Puranam consists in taking in a long breath, in the way in-
dicated in the preceding line, whereas Stambhanam consists
in retaining the wind inside the stomach,' as in an inflated
water-drum. Again the act of Pranayama is divided into
three classes, such as the Uttama, the Madhyama, and
the Kanyasa, According as its duration lasts so long as one
can ordinarily count thirty-six, twenty-four, or twelve.
A perfect Pranayama of the Uttama class, is followed by
shivering and a copious flow of perspiration, etc. One should
not tread on untrodden grounds in connection with the
practice of Pranayama, as such an attempt may be attended
with such dreadful consequences, as Ashthma, hic-cough, etc.
Pranayama, rightly practised, serves to maintain a healthy
equilibrium among the vital forces of a man, and brings on
lightness of gait, clearness of voice, and a general bettering
of his strength and beauty (6 — 13).

A Prayanama is called either an impregnated or non-
impregnated one, according as it is, or is not accompanied
by a repetition of a Mantra. An impregnated Pranayama
should be practised for the subjugation of senses. The man
who has conquered his senses by knowledge and non-at-
tachment to the worldly concerns, and by practising the
Pranayama as well, has made the only real conquest in the
world. The senses are the roads to hell and heaven, and
hence by restraining or unbridling them, enter heaven or
hell as you please. This corporeal body is like a chariot,
the senses are its horses, the Pranayama is the whip, and the
mind is the charioteer. Knowledge and non-attachment,
instead of illusion and Nescience, should be the reins in
his hand (14—18).

The man, who drinks drops of water with the blades of
Kusha grass, derives the same benefit as in practising the
*64


AGNI PURANAM,


1306

Pranayama. Pratyahara (abstraction) consists in withdraw*
ing the senses from their respective objects of enjoyment.
Succour the soul, carried away by the torrents of the rivers
of enjoyment, and drowning miserably in the ocean of the
world, by fastly clinging 19 the tree of knowledge (19— 21;.

CHAPTER CCCLV.


i^aid THE Fire God -.—The word Dhyanam is derived
from the root “Dhyai” to contemplate and denote the act
of one’s constantly meditating upon the divine self of the
God Vishnu, without the least digression of mind. Or in
other words, Dhyanam means the communion of the self
which is unconditioned by any category, with the Supreme
Being (the Brahma), brought about by an act of will, and
a voluntary application of attention. Or in other words
Dhyanam denotes the state mind, in which the mind, at first
making use of an artificial or imaginary concept, as its stay
or support, and making itself believe that it has really found
a tangible category to rest on, ultimately loses the notion
of its imaginary character,— believes it to be real, and does
not wait for further proof of its (concept’s) actual existence,
there and at that time. Such a conviction and the consequent
merging of the mind in the thing meditated upon, as real and
self-existing objectively, is called Dhyanam or Meditation.
The man, who departs this life in such a state of mind, is
sure to succour the souls of his friends, relation and cognates,
and ultimately becomes one with the divine essence of the
god Hari. The merit of thus constantly and devoutly medi-
tating upon the self of Vishnu, . far exceeds the collective
fruits of the performance of sill the great sacrifices (iv-6J«


AGNI PURANAftt.


* 3°7

Therefore, a man of wisdom and true philosophy, should
first learn all about the nature of meditation, meditator, and
the thing meditated upon, and then devote his whole soul to
the practice of Yoga. From the practice, of Yoga results the
liberation of one’s own Self, and the acquisition of those
miraculous powers, which are known as the Aishvaryayam.
The essential qualifications of a Meditator, are knowledge,
non-attachment to all worldly concerns, faith, forbearance,
devotion to the god Vishnu, energy, and active habits.
Though the Supreme Bramha has really no shape of his
own, and is omniscient and perfect knowledge, still for
the convenience ot the Meditator in his rudimentary
attempts, the Supreme Bramha may be contemplated as
possessed of a shape and attributes. And since meditation
leads to the acquisition of superhuman powers and to the
ultimate emancipation of the Self, and since the god Vishnu
always rewards such meditations with the fruition of their
initiative purposes, therefore waking or asleep, moving or
at rest, think ye of the god. Think ye of the god, at ail
times and at all places, no matter whether you remain with
your eyes shut, or open,— -no matter whether you think
yourselves, clean, pure, or otherwise (7 — 13).

Then having mentally ensconsced the god Keshava in-
side his body, the Meditator, should- worship him by means
of Dhyana-Yoga^ on the cushion of the occult nerve gang-
lion situate over his heart. The sacrifice of meditation
(Dhyana-Yajna) is the greatest of all religious sacrifices,
and, a> such, incapable of all blemishes. By meditation
alone, men can be free,— free from life and its fetters, and
not by vows, and penances, nor by perfprmance of sacrifices
and cleansing of the body. Meditation leads to the entire
Cessation of all evH propensities of the mind, such as envy,
.malice, etc, and is therefore the only real purifier. The rite
of . meditation (Dhyan-Yajba) is the greatest of all rites.
It opens to the Meditator toe gates of heaven. Therefore


ftGNI PURANAIt.


1308

renounce, jt all, the performance of esternal' rife* had ■•ori-
fices, which arc transitory in theit effect, and devote yodf
whole soul to tbo practice of Yoga

The Meditator should first imagine bis heart, as succeS*-
' lively permeated with the three fundamental attributes of
Sattva, Rajan and Tmmh. The latter should be covered ever
with the virtue of Rajas, while the Rajas, in its turn, should
be buried underneath the attribute of Sattva. Then three
circular concentric ring* of Mack, red, and white, should be
imagined as delineated on the palin of that cardaic radiance,
and over them the twenty-five fundamental categories
(Tanmatras), and the Parasha Or the Jivatma as placed over
them all. These are the mortal factors in the universe, and
consequently a contemplation of them leads but to what is
transitory. Therefore the Meditator should abstract bis mind
from such like thoughts, and fix it upon what is pure perfect
and eternal (17 — 19).

Then be should contemplate a lotus flower, having a
girth of twelve fingers, as sprang from the umbilical cord Of
that Purusha or Jivatman, The stem of the lotus should be
imagined as measuring eight fingers in length. The lotus
itself, should be imagined as furnished with eight petals,
each emblematic of the eight Yoga-begotten powers of Atiima
(capacity of assuming a shape smaller than an atom), etc..
The polens and other inner appendages of the occult flower,
should be imagined as composed of the principles of know-
ledge, Non-attachment, etc., the first half of the bulb being
imagined as made of the attributes of the divinity of Vishnu
(Vishnu-Dharma), the other half having been supposed as
emblematic of the bredicative virtues of the divine-self of
Shiva.

Then having contemplated the occult lotus in its full
bloom, as occupying the upper central space of his heart, and
constructed as above indicated, he should imagine the
Supreme Soul, manifest ia the shape of an Om, effulgent


AGNf ruKAHAM.


w

with a white light, and measuring about eight fingers in
height, as seated amidst the polens of that mystic flower.
The light radiating from this occult Omkar, should be
seen with the mind’s eye, as spreading like the shoots of
a Kadamva flower, all over the infinite space which serves
as its background. Behind this effulgent Omkara, and as
inherent in it, the Pradbana, the absolute subjectivity, should
be imagined as lying, and accordingly the miad should be
kept permanently fixed upon it (20—35).

The Meditator should repeat the holy Pranava- Mantra,
while thus engaged in meditating upon the Absolute in his
heart. These gross Or sensuous concepts, should be looked
upon as mere makeshifts, assumed only for the permanent
concentration of the mind. When that is attained, they
vanish of their own accord, and the mind remains rivetted to
the thought or idea per se and suffers no distraction.

The next centre'of thought-concentration, in this gross,
Or with-image-contemplation (Salamva-Dhyanam), is the root
of the umbilicus. In the occult nerve ganglion situated
over the latter, the Meditator should imagine a full blown
lotus flower, possessed of eight petals, twelve fingers in
circumference, and resting on I a stem of eight fingers
in length. The flower- should be imagined as beaming
with the essence of the Sun-God, Moon, and the Fire-God,
and on it should be contemplated the god Vishnu, possessed
of four or eight arms, respectively wielding in them a bow
(Sharanga), a rosary, a conch-shell a discus, a mace, a
lotus flower, a noose, or a club. He should be further
contemplated as possessed of a golden or white complexion,
with a necklace of gold or wild flowers dangling from
his neck. His spacious chest, should be imagined as
ornamented with the gem Koustubha, and overgrown with
ringlets of hairs, known as the Srivatsas. Ringlets bedecked
with gems, should be imagined as decorating the lobes of


ACNf PURANAUi,


J 3 lp

his ears, and sending rival flashes against the lustre ot gold
coloured silk robe, and the golden crown on head (46—31).

Simultaneously with his contemplation, the Meditator
should repeat the Mantra, running as "I am Brahnta, the
Infinite effulgence, the eternal soul. I am free, I am one
•with the god Vasudeva.” Fatigued with meditation, be
ahould repeat the preceding Mantra,* whereas he should
devote himself to meditation, whenever he would feel weary
of repeating the Mantra. The god Vishnu is soon pleased
with the person, who thus devotes himself alike to medi-
tation and repetition of the Mantra. The merit of perform-
ing all other sacrifices, does not equal a sixteenth part qf
that ot repeating the abovesaid Mantra. Cares and diseases
never approach tne man, who repeats the same Mantra. By
repeating it, a man may conquer death, and be enabled to
work out the liberation of his self, at the close of a happy
and prosperous earthly career (32—36).

CHAPTER CCCLVI.


i^aid the Fire God:— Dharana (collectedness, or thp
faculty of retaining m the mind) denotes the resting of ; the
mind in the thing contemplated, or meditated upon, and. since
it is but another factor of the aforesaid Dhyanam, it like
the latter, is grouped under two sub-heads, according as it does
(Murtta) or does not (Amurtta) involve an image. . Dharana
in a person continues for the same length of time,, as bp
can keep his sight or attention fixed to an external object.
In other words, Dharana 'signifies the continuous resting qf
mind, as conditioned by time and space, upon an intern?)


AGNi PURANAM


I3I«

or mental vision or image, without suffering the least devia-
tion. A Dharana, twelve times extended, amounts to a
Dhyanam. The length ot time occupied by each act of
Dhyanam, twelve times extended, amounts to a Samadhi.
The man, who departs this life, while mentally engaged in
an act of Dharana, succours the souls of his relations, even
removed to the twentieth degree of consanguinity, and
nltimately enters the blissful region of paradise fi — 5).

A Yogin, accidentally suffering from any of the bodily
ailments, should transfer (the whole energy) of his mind
to its physical locality, and cover it by a stroke of will, with
any of the fundamental principles of fire, water, destruction
Or ambrosia. He should imagine his whole frame (from top
of the toe to the line of forehead;, as internally permeated
with a sort of brilliant effulgence (magnetic light), the rays
of light, like the pointed teps of spears, shooting forth
upward through the inter-neural, or inter-arterial passages
and cavities. O thou the greatest of the holy sages, the best
Yogins, or practisers of occult Science, should, imagine them
as darting from below upwards, and in all directions inside
his body. He should burn down with that spiritual fire, all
the gross, sinful elements, accumulated in his body through
his daily contact with the world. By this means, the twice
born ones manage to destroy the sins, and preponderant
phlegm^- etc., accumulated in their organisms. Then having
undeviatingly concentrated his mind on the pure psychic
principle, he should bring down from the region of bis brain,
showers of life-giving ambrosia, and permeate his whole inter-
nal organism with the essence thereof. Thereby the whole
universe . would appear to him as saturated with that elixir
of Hfe. Then from the expanded cavity of his encephalon,
he. would bring down, by the way of the occult nerve,
Sushumna, the principle of water to the region of the full
moon, thereby laving the internal organs, previously saturated,
with ambrosia, with the principle of essential water. Tben :


ACMNRAfMK


ijia

the Yogin, hitherto afflicted with the torments of hanger
and thirst, and liable, in common with the rest of his species,
to the cravings of flesh, should retain that principle of
essential water (Varuni-Tattvam) for the permanent cure of
these distempers (6—15).

I have dealt .with the process of firing the mind on the
principle of water, now hear me discourse on the method
of practising with the principle of Ishana. After hairing
brought about a perfect cessation of the workings of the
vital winds, known as the Prana and the Apana, the Yogin
should meditate upon the Prasada-M&ntra within the sphere
of his occult nerve ganglion, permeated with the principle
of Ether and the essence of the Supreme Brahma, till that
thought itself would be annihilated, and till the mystic crescent
moon would appear from the mouth of his preceptor, illumin-
ing the serene, supreme, and illusionless principle of truth*
Just then, this visible universe, which had hitherto appeared
to him as so very real, substantial and everlasting, would
suddenly bide its face, and vanish as the enchanted creation
of a sorcerer. At the sight Qf that supreme principle, the
Whole universe, with its inmates, from the lowest protoroon tc>
the highest Brahma, the creeds with their proofs, arguments,
and subjects of demonstration, the religious rites and sacri-
fices, such as the rites of . Homa, Archana, etc., would* appear
as so many toys devised for beguiling the tedium of an
infant's life ( 1A—20).

Now I shall deal with the mode of thought-concentration ,
known as the Amritadharana. In the occult nerve ganglion
situate over the spot in the brain from which the thousand
strings of communication seem to radiate in all directions,
the Yogin should contemplate a white light, resembling the'
beams of the full moon. And scintillating with the unheard
roar of infinite benediction, which can be detected, as it were
by the sight. A similar mystic lotus should be imagined as


AGNI PURANAM.


> 3*3


well in the region of the heart, and the Yogin would medi-
tate upon an ethereal miniature of his own corporeal body
By means of Dharana, a Yogin can acquire a bodily state
which knows no fatigue (21 — 22)

CHAPTER CCCLVII.


Oaid The God op Fire : — Samadhi denotes a state ot
mind in which the consciousness! appearing in its spiritual
aspect, remains calm and self-contained in itself like a paci-
fied lake or sea, and ceases to be operative in the physical
and intellectual plains. A Yogin, whose mind deeply
absorbed in meditation, remains steady and unflickering
like the flame of a lamp kept in a windless chamber or
receptacle, is said to have attained to the spiritual state of
Samadhi. In this existence a Yogin usually loses all his
faculties of sense-perception. He hears not, sees not, smells
not, feels not when touched, thinks not, but is inert and in-
operative as a log of wood, and spiritually rests in the
bosom of the Supreme Brahma, steady and stationary like the
unflickering lamp light in a windless room (1 — 5).

Miraculous powfers, and celestial attributes spontaneously
develop themselves in a Yogin, absorbed in meditating upon
the Universal Soul symbolised by the god Vishnu, and thus
unmistakably indicate his success in connection with his
practice of Yoga. The gods wait upon him with the offer-
ings of articles which they themselves enjoy in heaven. The
Ydgin sees, with unaided eyes, unbounded treasures lying
concealed in the bowels of the earth, and hears the music
of celestial spheres swelling in eddies around his person.
Kings and rich men seek his favours by the gift of enormous.

165


13H


AGN! PURANAM.


wealth. The Vedas, the books of scripture and science^
as well as Poetry and celestial alchemy, reveal to him their
respective secrets and voluntarily furnish him with all know-
ledge contained in them. He becomes a healer of maladies
and a skilful artisan without going through the necessary
term of training. Beautiful virgins of Paradise hail him
with their overtures of unsolicited affections. But a true
Yogin must discard all these as so many trifles ; and with
such a man alone the god Vishnu is pleased (6— io).

The attributes of Anima, etc., are the virtues or powers
which a Yogin necessarily acquires in the course of practising
hi? penances. The preceptor, having developed true know-
ledge in the mind of his disciple, should abandon his home,
rise above the plain of mere physical or animal existence, and
live in the soul in perfect knowledge and supreme felicity, in
other words, in nothing short of the Supreme Brahma,
itself. As a mirror clouded by a deposit of aqueous vapour,
fails to reflect any image, so a mind defiled by the thoughts
of the world, becomes incapable of shining back the light
of the .Self. As this human body is intimately connected
with the things of nature, and has a subtle sympathy with
things which lie in the physical plain, the embodied self or
person necessarily feels pain at the least disturbance of
equilibrium in their normal state. Hence a Yogin should
Kve a life higher than the mere physical one, so as to be free
from all pain that visits this human existence. As the one
and unbounded expanse of heaven (sky) fills in the cavities of
all receptacles on earth, and as the one and the same moon is
reflected in the bosoms of hundred different streams of water,
ao it is the one soul that runs through the organisms of all the
animals. The Brahma, the sky, the air, the light, the water,
the earth, the metals, etc., in fact, the whole universe, are
’ but the modifications of the soul. As a potter makes pitchers
etc., with the aid, of his rod, wheel, and clay,*~&s the person
builds hi? houses with bficks* wood, stone slabs, etc., so. the


* 3*5


AttMl PURAriAfct.

soul cohsttutts the materials (or his body or organism, ac-
cording to the necessities of the peculiar womb (existence)
in which it is to be bom The soul is fettered by its own
faults and illusions. Through knowledge alone, it can be
liberated. It is his virtue tiiat wards off the maladies of a
Yogin. A$ a wick fnade of linen and soaked in oil, serves to
keep up the combustion in a flame, so the body is organised to
serve the same purpose in connection with the vital energy ;
and even as a lamp full of oil, may be blown out before its
time by anything that obstructs the process of combustion,
so the life may escape even when the body is otherwise
strong and vigorous (n— 19S

Infinite are the rays of light that burn in the cavity of
the heart, some white; some black, some golden coloured,
some brown, some yellow, and some red. One of these rays
may penetrate through the disc of the sun and enter into
the region of Brahma. The Yogin whose heart-ray makes
such a journey, is sure to Attain to the Supreme Brahma.
Hundreds of these rays are sometimes seen to ascend upward,
and the person in whom this takes place, goes to the dwell-
ing place of the gods. The man in whom these rays are
comparatively less brilliant, and are pointed downward, is
ordained to take birth again for reaping the fruits of his own
works in life (20 — 23).

The 0 intellect, the senses (both intellectual and operative)
the wind, the sense of egoism, and the physical principles
of earth, etc., enter into the composition of the human
individuality. This body is called the Kshetra {lit, field) and
the invisible soul is called the Kshetrajna (the knower of the
fields the lord of all beings, and is combined of two factors,
both finite' and infinite. Intellect proceeds out of a source
which is invisible, and cannot be perceived by the senses.
Out of the faculty of intellection germinates the sense of
egoism. Out of this egoistic feeling are evolved the
principles of space, etc., which are respectively characterised


AGN1 PURANAM.


1316

by the attributes of sound, touch, sight, taste, smell, etc., and
they ultimately merge in the physical principles by which
they are respectively worked upon in life. Tne soul under
the influence of the fundamental virtues of Rajas and Tamas,
is whirled round through the cycles of successive re-births.
The Purusha or the ,Jivatman is both finite angl infinite,
finite in the plain of individuality, and infinite in the region of
psychic continuity. Determined by the senses and sexuality,
it undergoes modifications (24—19).

From this modified, or embodied Jivatman, have emanated
all the Vedas, the Puranas, the Vidyas, the Upanishadas, the
Slokas, the Sutras (Aphorisms) the Bhasyas, etc., in short, all
that can be read, recited or uttered. The souls of those who
practise the peculiar sort of ‘religious sacrifices known as the
Agni-Hotras, and desire to propagate children in life, go along
the path in heaven, known as the Pitri-Yana, while the souls
of those who are possessed of the eight cardinal virtues, and
practise charity, as well as the souls of those who perform
sacrifices at home and the souls of the eighty thousand
holy sages, who are the law-givers of the several cycles of
time, and are to be used as seeds in the next revolving order
of creation, go to a space in heaven which lies between the
Saptarshi Mandala (Ursa Major) and the constellation known
as the Ashlesha. All the 'Rishis have practised cessation
of activities, and are held fast in their respective spheres,
till the dissolution of the universe, by theip penances and
virtue of non-companionship (30—35).

Recitation of Vedic verses, performance of religious
sacrifices, practice of penances, celibacy, self-control, faith
and fastings are held to be the sources of true know-
ledge. The twice-born ones are enjoined to seek, hear of,
and concentrate their mind on, the Self (Atman) by all the
aforesaid means combined, or by any one- of them. Those
Brahman as who live in forest, and walk in the aforesaid ways
of knowledge, and worship Truth with the sincerest devotion,


AGNI PUKANAM.


* 3*7


successively become light, day-light, fortnight, the white
Ayanam (summer solstice), thence pass into the region of
the gods and thence go right through the lightning-belted
body of the sun, and thereafter in company of the inmates
of the pegion of Brahman, enter the Supreme Soul. Never
do they return to the recurring series of existence. The
souls of those who have won paradise by dint of their
charities and sacrificial merits, successively become vapour,
night, dark fortnight, Winter-solstice, and descend through
the region of the Pitris. the moon, the sky, the air, and the
water, on the earth and are ultimately born again in the plain
of animal life (36—41).

He, who does not know the distinction between these
two paths of the soul, is re-born as a worm or an insect in
this world. The occult light that burns within the hearts of
men is Brahma. Man may annihilate his animal existence
by means of meditation (Dhyanam) alone. Even the soul of
a householder, who is truthful and hospitable, and is a seeker
of true knowledge, performs the Shraddha ceremonies for
the benefit of his departed manes and lives contended with
his honest earnings, is liberated after death (42—44).


-:o:-


CHAPTER CCCLVIII.


^AID THE Fire God : — Now I shall speak about the
knowledge of Brahma, which dispells the gloom of worldly
illusion. The Cense 'that I am the Soul, the Supreme Being,
leads to salvation This body is only a receptacle, and is not
identical with the Soul, since a man retains the knowledge
of his own separate personality, when he is asleep, and


AGNI PURANAM.


; « 3»8


even when the bodily functions are brought to a temporary
standstill. The Self (Atmaq) is not identical with the body*
since the latter undergoes modifications, such as birth, growth*
and decay, whereas the Self knows no change. The Soul
is not identical with the sense organs, such as* the eyes, etc.,
since the latter are mere instruments of knowledge and are
not at all self-conscious. The mind, however calm and pas-
sionless, is not Self, since like the senses, it is not self-con-
scious, and only serves like a reflecting lamp, to throw light
upon the vision of self, or in other words, to represent to the
Self, the conceptions or images that are presented to it.
The Self is not identical with life, since even m a dreamless
sleep (Sushupti), one loses all consciousness, though his
Self (remembers after waking that he had been asleep. Con-
sciousness, as manifest in states of sleep and waking, is too
narrow to be considered one with the Self of a man,
since there are states of consciousness of which we are
perfectly unconscious, even when awake (subliminal cons^
ciousness). Nor is the sense of egoism t Individuality) can be
reasonably considered as identical with the Self, since the
former undergoes modifications like the body it dwells in.
The Self is then something other than all these preceding
categories, and is ensconced in the heart of each individual
(1—7).

The Self is the seer and enjoyer of all, and is effulgent
as a lighted lamp in the night. The Sage thus contemplates
at the preliminary stage of his psychic or spiritual trance
(Samadhi) : — The space or Aka3ha has emanated from the
supreme Brahma. From space the universal expanse of
ether has originated. From .ether the air has come Into
being. From air fire has beei| produced, from fire, water,
from water, earth, and front .earth the subtle or essential
body of a man. Out of the non-combihed state of the five
essential matters, the gross or material body has come into
existence through a process of . fusion or concretion. , A


AGN1 PURANaM.


* 3 ! 9


Yogin contemplating his gross or exterior body, should
merge it in the Supreme Brahman, by mentally disintegrating
its five material components (Apanchi-karanam). This gross
or tangible body, both as regards the universe and its
microcosom man, is the result of the combination of the
five maternal principles (Panchi-karanam). The wise con-
sider this gross material organism, as determined by the
knowledge of the Self, and the senses only furnish it' with
information of the external object (/* 7 ., sensations and its
accompanying perceptions)' and the state in which the mind
can fully decipher the messages of the senses, is called
waking (8 — 12^.

This universe always refers itself to the Self, which in
connection with the senses and the state of waking, are
represented by the letter A of the Pranava. The non-
combined states of the five material principles contribute
to the formation of the subtle or essential body (Linga
Shariram) by means of the seventeen possessions. Dream
is nothing but a reflection of the experience made by the
mind in its waking state, which condition is brought about
by the testimony of the objects of sense perception. All
proofs or testimonies refer themselves to the Self. Self is
the catse of both the gross and the subtle body, through the
non-appearance or non-expansion of the principle of light
(Taijasha). Adhyahar means the supplying of an ellipsis,
or a discovery of an additional truth by a sudden flash of
psychic light. The Self did not commence to exist at
any definite time, nor can it be said that it is existing here
and at present, clad in the garb of a human organism, nor
does it take any shape when it goes out of the body It is
both connected and unconnected with the body. The non-
discrimination of this fact is the cause of this world and
the incarceration of Self (13 — 16).

This secondless Brahma can be attained to only by intelli-
gence and not by performance of religious sacrifices and rites.


1330


AGNI PUR ANA M.


Tbe senses, which are but instruments of external know-
ledge, are to be annihilated by all means ; and the intellect
is to be lodged in the receptacle of perfect sleep, before the
Self can catch the faintest gleam of its Supreme Prototype
(Brahma). Both the senses'and intellect refer to the Self,
and these three are represented by the letter Ma in the
composition of the sacred Om. The three component letters
of this mystic syllable, vie., A, U and Ma are but symbols
of this all-intelligent Self. 1 am but pure-eonsciousness, a
mere witness to the states of waking, sleep, and dreaming. I
am no way connectedL with Ignorance or Illusion, the cause of
this phenomenal world- Om, I am Brahma, the free one, the
supreme light, the pure, the eternal and the infinite. I am per-
fect knowledge, perfect liberty, perfect truth, perfect happi-
ness, and one and without a second. I am Brahma, knowledge,
the remover of all obstacles that stand in the way of Samadhi.
I am Brahma, the infinite joy, the eternal soul, the eternal
truth. I am what is represented by the aphorism Yo'i are
That. My preceptor has woke my latent Self into life.
I am Self, identical with the Aditya Purusha and the mystic
Om. He who knows Brahman, is freed from the fetters of
life and becomes Bramhan at the end (17 — 24).


-:o:-


CHAPTER CCCLIX.


&AID THR Firs Goo : — I am Brahma, the supreme light
bereft of earth and fire. I am. Brahma, the supreme light,,
divested of air and space. I am Brahnia, the supreme light,
devoid of all primary or” initiative undertakings. 1 am
Brahma, the supreme light, devoid of Soul and gross body.


AGNI PURANAM. 13a!

I am Brahma, the supreme light, bereft ot waking and loca-*
tion (1—3).

I am Brahma, the supreme light, shorn of all feelings of
universality. I am Brahma, the supreme light, void of shape
and distinguishing traits. I am Brahma, the supreme light,
devoid of speech, hands and legs. I am Brahma, the supreme
light, devoid -of anus and penis. I am Brahma, the supreme
light, divested of ears, skin and eyes. I am Brahma, the
supreme light, void of taste and sight. I am Brahma, the
supreme light, void of all smells. I am Brahma, the supreme
light, void of tongue and skill. I am Brahma, the supreme
light, void of touch and sound (4 — 7).

I am Brahma, the supreme light, void of mind and in-
tellect. I am Brahma, the supreme light, void of intellec-
tion and the sense of egoism. I am Brahma, the supreme
light, void of the two vital winds, known as the Prana and
the Apana. I am Brahma, the supreme light, void of the
vital winds known as the Vyana and the Udana. I am
Brahma, the supreme light, void of the vital wind of
Samanam.

I am Brahma, the supreme light, void of old age and
death. I am Brahma, the supreme light, void of grief and
ignorance. I am Brahma, the supreme light, void of thirst
and hunger. I am Brahma the supreme light, void of all
B odifications of sound. I am Brahma, the supreme light,
beyond the influence of Hiranyagarbha. I am Brahma, the
supreme light, void of sleep. I am Brahma, the supreme
light, void of the modifications of heat and .light (8—13).

I am Brahma, the supreme light, void of all modifications.

I am Brahma, the supreme light, void of all secondary or
derivative knowledge. I am\Brahma, the supreme light, vend
of the capacity of abstraction. I am Brahma, the supreme
light, shorn of the virtue of Sattva. I am Brahma, the
supreme light, void of the sense of good or evil. I am
Brahma, the supreme light, void of all limbs. I am Brabma,
166


13*2


aONI PURANAM.


the supreme ight, void of ell sense of distinction. I am
Brahma, tne supreme light, void of the state of Sushupti
(perfect or dreamless sleep.) I am Brahma, the supreme
light, void of complete sensation I am Brahma, the supreme
light, void of alt transits. 1 am Brahma, the supreme light,
void of the standard of measurement, and beyond, the measur-
able. I am Brahma, the supreme light, void of measurement
(reason, or discourse) and the measurer (discourser). I am
Brahma, the supreme light, beyond all evidence and testi-
mony. I am Brahma, the supreme light, void of all acts of
witnessing ( 1 4— -20) .

1 am Brahma, the supreme light, void of all connection
of cause and effect. I am Brahma, the supreme light, void
of body, senses, mind, intellect, life and egoism. I am the
highest Brahma, void of the states of waking, sleep, and
Sushupti. I am the Eternal Brahma, pure, free, liberated,
perfect truth, and perpetual felicity. I am Brahma, Brahma
I. am, the Omniscient* Self-consciousness^ Om, Om. I am
Brahma, the supreme light, the grantor of salvation through
the process of Samadhi (21 — 22).


-:or-

CHAPTER CCCLX.


Oahtthe Fire God :-^A performer of religious sacri-
fices, ascends fo the region of the gods he worships in those
sacrifices. By penances an ascetic attains to the region of the
Virat. The man who has renounced aR actions and pursuits,
is ultimately merged in the Supreme Brahma, whereas the
man who sits loose over all things in life (Vairagi) is finally
absorbed in the body of the inanimate Nature.


AGNI PURANAM.


* 3*3


By means of knowledge alone, a man may attain to the
state, known as the Kaivalyam. The five Gads, or ways are
the cessation or renunciation of pleasure, pain, misery and
non-attachment. Sannyasa denotes the act of renouncing
all acts or works, contemplated, or already undertaken.
Knowledge consists in a discrimination between true know*
ledge and Nescience. The Supreme Brahma is the recep-
tacle of all, and is called the Supreme God. In the Vedas
and in the books of Vedanta philosophy, he is invoked and
hymnised by the epithet of Vishnu. Those who follow the
path of active religious sacrifices, undertaken for the fruition
of any desired object, worship him in the course of religious
sacrifices, by the name of the lord of holy rites, while
those who pursue the path of. renunciation, beholds him as
perfect knowledge by means Of the Jnana-Yoga (i— 6).

O thou great sage, sounds, such as long, short, etc., are
but the manifestations of the Supreme Brahma, and know-
ledge is the only means of attaining to him. Knowledge
is of two sorts, the one derived from the perusal of scrip-
tures, the other from the contemplation of the littleness of
all worldly concerns. The aspect of Brahma, known as the
Shavda Brahma (Brahma of speech or sound), may be at
tained to by perusing the scriptures (Agamas) while ]the Para
or the Supreme Brahma only reveals himself to a man, who
is wise 4 in the knowledge of the nothingness of the world.
The knowledge inculcated in the Vedas, is eternal, and hence
identical with the Supreme Self. The texts of the Vedas are
the words of God, and accordingly they should be followed
and worshipped. The term Bhagavana {Jit., the lordly one,

God), is composed of the letters, Bha, Ga, Va and Na. The
letter Bha, in the aforesaid term, stands as an abbreviated
dorm of the term Bharta, (protector, leader) from the fact
of His protecting and leading the universe. The letter Ga
in the term, has the double sense of " Creator” and “Mover.”
The term Bbaga means attributes, or virtues, and denotes


ACNI PURANA*.


13^4

the six out of infinite divine attributes ot all-pervadingness,
strength, fame, wealth or prosperity, knowledge, and non*
attachment, etc. All the beings live in the body of Vishnu,
which is consisted of the three factors, represented by the
gods of the trinity. But by usage the term Bhagavana refers
to Him alone. The Being who knows fully of the birth and
death of all created beings, and of their elevation or degrada-
tion after death, and finally of true knowledge and Nescience,
is called the Bhagavana. The term Bhagavana, signifies
unbounded prosperity, infinite strength, and eternal felicity
in exclusion of all that is hateful (7—14).

The yoga which Kushi-dhvaja narrated to Khandikya-
Janaka, is as follows : — The fruit which the tree of illusion
bears, has two seeds, the one consists in holding as Self
what is Self, the other is the mistaken notion of holding the
body and Self as identical. The Self, imprisoned in a cor-
poreal frame, and possessed of a self-conscious personality,
deems the body as the true-self, as one with himself, and ex-
tends such terms of personal possessives as "my” and "mine”
to sons and son’s sons, begotten of his own body. Even the
wise make such blunders, and labour under the delusion
of benefiting the self by attending to the general welfare
of the body. The self is incarcerated, as soon as it takes
a body, while the self which is the fire of knowledge leads
to emancipation. The sensations of pain and evil, rite attri-
butes of impiety and illusion, belong to the mind or tempera-
ment, and not to Self. As fire and water, though of con-
trary virtues to each other, can be kept connected by
means of a holding or intervening receptacle j so pain and
illusion, though foreign to the nature of the Self, seem to
be experienced by the latter, only through the medium of
a material body. O thou great sage, the sounds, such ae
Ka, etc., are but the results of such a combination, which
causes the notion of self-conscious personality to be pro-
jected upon 'soul or self. The self seems to partake of all


AGN1 PURANAM.


* 3*5


the physical or bodily attributes in the company of the body,
whereas, existing separately from, and independent of, the
body, *t is eternal and incanable of undergoing any modifica-
tion. The contact of the mind with the external things, leads
to birth and bondage, and, therefore, a man should withdraw
his mind from the things of the senses, keep it merged in
his faculty of intellection, and meditate upon the god Hari,
the symbol of Supreme Brahma. By this the embodied
Self of the Yogin will be trans-substantiated into the essence
of Brahma. As magnet attracts a bar of iron, and clothes it
with its own native virtue, so the Supreme Brahma, draws
towards itself the mind meditating upon its seif, and converts
it into his own essence.

The direction of the mind in the proper channel and ulti-
mately to Brahma, requires self-exertion. Yoga signifies the
union of the mind with Brahma. The mind, steady and
unflickering in a state of Samadhi, attains to the Supreme
Brahma. Having practised the rules of self-control and
withheld the senses from their respective objects, and having
controlled the vital winds by means of Pranayamas, a Yogin,
should concentrate his mind on the ever blissful receptacle of
thought. The receptacle of mind is the Supreme Brahma,
and meditation is classed under two heads, according as it
is accomplished with or without a mental image. The holy
sages; such as Sanandana, etc., have attained to Brahma, by
meditating upon' the thought or idea of His eternal and all-
pervading presence, while the gods and the created beings
have acquired their* elevated status by means of Karma
(?4 — a8).

In kings, such as Hiranyagarbha, etc., the process of
spiritual elevation, is due to both knowledge and Karma,
(performance of religious ceremonies). The objects of spiri-
tual meditation may be resolved into three factors, such as
the universe, the Brahma, and the special tutelary god of
a Yogin or a meditator. The knowledge which transcends


COSMO PUBLICATIONS
